WHereas you write, my fortunes and my birth
Made above yours, may be a real cause
That I must leave you, know thou worthiest man,
Thou hast a soul, whose plenteous wealth supplies
All the lean wants blind Chance hath dealt to thee.
Yet could I think, the Gods from all their store,
Who ne'er knew indigence unto their will,
Would (out of all their stock of Virtue left,
Or out of all new graces they can make)
Make such another piece as Scudmore is,
Then might he justly fear; but otherwise,
Sooner the Masculine Element of Fire,
Shall flame his Pyramids down to the Earth;
Sooner her Mountains shall swell up to Heaven;
Or softest April showers quench fires in Hell;
Sooner shall Stars from this Circumference,
Drop like false fiery exhalation,
Then I be false to vows made unto thee;
In whom, outh ne'er a fault: I ne'er could see,
But that you doubted once my constancy.

If (what I feel) I could express in words,
Methinkes I could speak joy enough to men,
To banish sadness from all love, forever:
Oh thou that reconcil'st the faults of all
That froathy sex, and in thy single self
Confin'st, nay hast engrost Virtue enough
To frame a spacious world of virtuous women;
Had thou bin the Beginning of thy sex.
I think the Devil in the Serpents skin,
Had wanted Cunning to overcome thy goodness,
And all had lived and dyed in Innocence
The white Original Creation.
Whose there? Come in.

What, up already Scudmore, near a Wench with thee? Not thy Laundress?


Good-morrow my dear Neuill.


What's this? A Letter; Sure it is not so,
A Letter written to Hieronimo!

By Heaven you must excuse me; Come, I know
You will not wrong my friendship and your manners to tempt me so.

Not for the world my friend,
Farewell, Good-morrow.

Nay Sir, Neither must you
Depart in anger from this friendly hand:
I swear, I love you better then all men,
Equally with all Virtue in the world:
Yet this would be a Key to lead you to
A prize of that importance.

Worthy friend,
I leave you not in anger: What de'e mean?
Nor am I of that inquisitive Nature framed,
To thirst to know your private businesses:
Why, they concern not me; If they be ill
And dangerous, 'twould grieve me much to know em.
If good; they be so, though I know em not:
Nor would I do your love so gross a wrong,
To Covet, to participate affairs
Of that near touch, which your assured love
Doth rhinke not fit, or dares not trust me with.

How sweetly does your friendship play with mine,
And with a simple subtilty, steals my heart
Out of my bosom. By the holiest Love
That ever made a Story, you're a man
With all good so replete, that I durst trust you
Even with this secret, were it singly mine.

I do believe you, farewell worthy friend.


Nay look you, this same fashion does not please me,
You were not wont to make your visitation.
So short and careless.

Tis your Jealousy
That makes you think it so, for by my soul
You have given me no distaste, in keeping from me
All things that might be burdenous, and oppress me.
In troth I am invited to a wedding,
And the Morn faster goes away from me,
Then I go toward it: and so Good-morrow.

God-morrow Sir, think I durst show it you.

Now by my life I not desire it Sir,
Nor ever loved these prying listening men,
That ask of other states and passages,
Not one among a hundred but proves false,
Envious and slanderous, and will cut that throat
He twines his arms about, I love that Poet
That gave us reading, not to seek our selves
Beyond our selves, Farewell.

You shall not go,
I cannot now redeem the fault I have made
To such a friend, but in disclosing all.

Now if you love me, do not wrong me so,
I see you labour with some serious thing,
And think (like Fairies Treasure) to reveal it,
Will cause it vanish; and yet to conceal it
Will burst your breast, tis so delicious,
And so much greater then the Continent.

Oh you have pierced my entrails with your words.
And I must now explain all to your eyes,
Read, and be happy in my happiness.

Yet think on it, keep thy secret, and thy friend
Sure and entire; Oh! give not me the means
To become false hereafter; or thy self
A probable reason to distrust thy friend,
Though he be near so true, I will not see it.

I die by Heaven, if you deny again,
I starve for Counsel; take it, look upon it;
If you do not, It is an aequall plague,
As if it had been known and published:
For God-sake read, but with this Caution,
By this right hand, by this yet unstained sword,
Were you my father flowing in these waives,
Or a dear son exhausted out of them,
Should you betray this soul of all my hopes,
Like the two brethren (though love made em Stars)
We must be never more seen both again.

I read it fearless of the forfeiture,
Yet warn you, be as Cautelous, not to wound
My integrity, with doubt, on likelihoods,
From misreport, but first exquire the Truth.

Read, whilst I tell the Story of my love,
And sound the Truth of her heroic Spirit,
Whom eloquence could never flatter yet,
Nor the best tongue of praises reach unto.
The Maid there named, I met once on a Green
Near to her Fathers house, me thought she showed,
For I did look on her, indeed no eye
That owed a sensible member, but must dwell
Awhile on such an object.
The passing Horses, and the feeding Kine
Stood still, and left their journeys and their food,
The singing Birds were in contention
Which should light nearest her; for her clear eyes
Deceived even men, they were so like bright skies.
Near in a Riuolet, swum two beauteous Swans,
Whiter then any thing, but her neck and hands,
Which they left straight to comfort her: A Bull
Being baiting on the Green for the Swains sport,
She walking toward it, the vexed savage beast
Ceased bellowing; the snarling Dogs were mute,
And had enough to do to look on her,
Whose face brought Concord, and an end of jars,
Though Nature made em ever to have wars.
Had there bin Bears and Lyons, when she spake
They had bin charmed too: For Graecians Lute
Was rustic Music to her heavenly tongue,
Whose sweetness even cast slumbers on mine eyes,
Soft as Content, yet would not let me sleep.

Yours through the world, to the end of time. Bellafront.
Which, Bellafront Rich, Sir Iohn Wordlies Daughter?

She is the food, the sleep, the air I live by.


Oh heaven! we speak like Gods, and do like Dogs.


Where means my


This day, this Bellafront the Rich Heir,
Is married unto Count Fredericke,
And that's the wedding I was going to.

I prethie do not mock me, Married?


It is no matter to be plaid withal,
But even as true as women all are false.

Oh! that this stroke were Thunder to my breast,
For Neuill thou hast spoke my heart in twain,
And with the sudden whirlwind of thy breath,
Hast ravished me out of a temperate soil,
And set me under the red burning Zone.

For shame return thy blood into thy face,
Know not how flight a thing a woman is?

Yes, and how serious too: Come I'll t'the Temple,
She shall not damn her self for want of Counsel.

Oh! prithee run not thus into the streets,
Come dress you better, so: Ah! as thy clothes
Are like thy mind, too much disordered.
How strangely is this Tide turned? For a world
I would not but have called here, as I went.
Collect thy Spirits, we will use all means
To check this black fate, flying toward thee; Come,
If thou miscarriest, tis my day of doom.

Yes, now I'm fine, Married? It may be so,
But women look too't, for if she prove untrue,
The Devil take you all, that are his due.

Is Sir Iohn Wordly up, Boy?


No my Lord.


Is my Bride up yet.


No.


No, and the Morn so fair.


Good morrow my thrice honoured heroic Lord.


Good morrow your Lord and Master you might say, for brevity sake.


Thou'ast a good Taylor, and art very fine.


I thank your Lordship.


I you may thank his Lordship indeed.


Foregod this Doublet sits in print my Lord.
And the Hose excellent; the Pickadell rare.

Heel praise himself in trust with my Lords taylor,
For the next S. Georges suit.

Oh, Good-morrow Taylor, I abhor bills in a Morning.


Your Honour says true; their Knavery will be discerned by day-light,
But thou may watch at night with bill in hand,
And no man dares find fault with it.

A good jest Efaith, Good-morrow to your Lordship, a very good jest.


I wonder my invited guests are so tardy, What's a clock.


Scarce seven my Lord.


And what news Pendant?
What think thou of my present marriage?
How shows the Beauty to thee I shall wed?

Why to all women, like Diana among her Nymphs.


There's all his reading.


A beauty of that pureness and delight,
That none is worthy of her but my Lord,
My Honourable Lord.

But then her fortune
Matched with her beauty, makers her up a match.

By Heaven vnmatcheable, for none fit but Lords,
And yet for no Lord fit, but my good Lord.

And that her Sister then should love me to,
Is it not strange?

Strange: No, not strange at all,
By Cupid, there's no woman in the world
But must needs love you, dote, go mad for you;
If you vouchsafe reflection; Tis a thing
That does it home: thus much reflection
Catches em up by Dozens, like wild foul.

Now ye shall taste the means by which he eats.


Nature her self having made you, fell sick
In love with her own work, and can no more
Make man so lovely, being diseasd with love.
You are the worlds Minion, of a little man;
I'll say no more, I would not be a woman,
For all has been got by them.

Why man, why?


Hart, I should follow you like a young rank whore,
That runs proud for her love, pluck you by 'th sleeve,
Who ere were with you, in the open street,
With the impudence of a drunken Oyster-wise,
Put on my fighting waistcoat, and the Ruff
That fears no tearing, batter down the windows
VVwhere I suspected you might lie all night,
Scratch faces, like a VVilde-Cat of Pict-hatch.

Pendant thou't make me dote upon my self,


Narcissus by this hand, had far less cause.


How know thou that?


They were all one my Lord.


How do I know, I speak my Conscience.
His beauties were but shadows to my Lord,
Why Boy his presence would enkindle sin,
And longing thoughts in a devoted Nun:
Oh foot, Oh Leg, oh Hand, oh body, face,
By Jove it is a little man of wax.

You are a rare Rascal; Tis not for nothing
That men call thee my Commendations.

For nothing, no, he would be loath it should.


Good Morrow, and good welcome Captain Pouts.


Good Morrow to your honour, and all joy
Spring from this match, and the first year a Boy,
I commend these two verses a purpose, to salute your Honour.

But how haps it Captain, that your intended marriage with my Father in Laws
third daughter, is not solemnised to day.


My Lord tells you true Captain, it would have saved meat.


Faith I know not, Mistress Kate likes me not, she says I speak as if I had a
pudding in my mouth, and I answered her, If I had it was a white pudding, and
then I was the better armed for a woman; for I had a case about me, so one
laughed, and the other eried fie: the third said I was a Bawdy Captain, and
there was all I could get of them.

See Boy, if they be up yet, Maids are long liars I perceive.


How if they will not admit me my Lord:


Why should not they admit you my Lord, you cannot Commit with em my Lord.


Marry therefore my Lord.


But what should be the reason of her sudden alteration, she listened to thee
once: Ha,


Have you not heard my Lord, or de'e not know.


Not I, I swear.


Then you know nothing that is worth the knowing.


That's certain, he knows you.


There's a young Merchant, a late Suitor, that deals by wholesale, and Heir to
Land, well descended, of worthy education, beholding to Nature.


Oh, tis young Strange.


Is't he that looks like an Italian Taylor? Out of the laced wheel, that
wears a Bucket on's head?


That is the man, yet believe me Captive, it is a noble sprightly Citizen.


Has he money?


Infinitely wealthy.


Then Captain thou art cast, would I had gon for Cleeueland; Wordly loves
money better then I love his Daughter,

I'll to some Company in Garrison, God b'wy.

Nay, ye shall dedicate this day to me,
We speak but by the way man, ne'er despair;
I can assure you, she's yet as free as Air.

And you may kill the Merchant with a look,
I'd threaten him to death: my honoured Lord
Shall be your friend, go too, I say he shall,
You shall have his good word, shall he my Lord?

Sfut, he shall have my bond to do him good.


Law, Tis the worthiest Lord in Christendom:
Oh Captain, for some fourscore brave Spirits, once
To follow such a Lord in some attempt.

A hundred Sir were better.


Here's more Guess.


Is that Man and Wife?


It is Sir Innocent Ninne, that's his Lady,
And that M. Abraham their only son.

But did that little, old, dri'de Neats tongue, that Eele-skin get him.


So tis said Captain.


Methinkes, he in his Lady, should show like a Needle in a Bottle of Hay.


One may see by her Nose, what Pottage she loves.


Is your name Abraham; Pray who dwells in your Mothers backside, at the sign of
the Aqua-vitae bottle.


Gods precious: Save you Mistress Wagtail.


Sweet M. Pendant.


Gentlemen, I desire your better acquaintance, you must pardon my Father, he's
somewhat rude, rude, my Mother grossly brought up, as you may perceive.


Young M. Abraham, cry ye mercy Sir.


Your Lordships poor friend, Sir Abra: Ninny
The Dubadub of Honour, piping hot,
Doth lye upon my Worships shoulder blade.

Indeed my Lord, with much cost and labour, we have got him Knighted; and
being Knighted, under favour my Lord, let me tell ye, hee'le prove a sore Knight
as ere run at Ring. He is the one and only Ninnie of our house.


He has cost ^s something ere he came to his: Hold up your head Sir Abraham.


Pish, pish, pish, pish.


De'e hear how.


Oh, my Lord.


I had well hoped she could not have spoke, she is so fat.


Long may thou wear thy Knights-hood, thy spurs
Prick thee to Honour on, and prick off Curs.

Sir Abraham thanks your Honour; and I hope, your Lordship will consider the
simplicity of Parents, a couple of old fools my Lord, and I pray so take em.


Ha, ha, ha.


I must be fain to excuse you here, you'll needs be coming abroad with me;
if I had no more wit then you now we should be finely laughed at.


Berlady his worship says well wise, wee'le troble him no longer; with your
Honours leave, I'll in and see my old friend Sir Iohn, your Father that shall be.


I'll in to, and see if your Bride need no dressing.


Sfut as much as a Triple I think, hast them I pray. Captain, what think
thou of such a woman in a long Sea Voyage, where there were a dearth of
Victuals?


Venison my Lord, Venison.


I faith my Lord, such Venison as a Bear is.


Hart, she looks like a black Bombard, with a pint pot waiting upon it.


What Countrymen, were your Ancestors S. Abra.


Countrymen, they were no Countrymen, I scorn it, they were Gentlemen all, My
Father is a Ninnie, and my Mother was a Hammer.


You should be a Knocker then by the Mothers side.


I pray my Lord, what is yon Gent. he looks so like a Saracen, that as I am a
Christian I cannot endure him.


Take heed what you say Sir, he's a Soldier.


If you cross him, he will blow you up with Gunpowder


In good faith, he looks as if he had had a hand in the treason, I'll take my
leave.


Nay good Sir Abraham, you shall not leave us.


My Lord shall be your warrant.


My Lord shall be my warrant: Troth I do not see that a Lords warrant is
better then any other mans, unless it be to lay one by the heals. I shall
stay here, and ha my head broke; and then I ha my mends in my own hands, and
then my Lords warrant will help me to a plaster, that's all.


Come, come, Captain, pray shake the hand of acquaintance with this Gentleman,
he is in bodily fear of you.


Sir, I use not to bite any man.


Indeed Sir, that would show you are no Gentleman, I would you would bid me be
covered: I am a knight, I was Knighted a purpose to come a wooing to Mistress
Lucida, the middle Sister, Sir Iohn Worldlyes second daughter; and she said
she would have me, if I could make her a Lady, and I can do it now; Oh here
she comes.


My Bride will never be ready I think: heer are the other Sisters.


Look you my Lord; There's Lucida wears the Willow Garland, for you; and
will so go to Church I hear: and look you Captain, that's the Merchant.


Now doth the pot of Love boil in my bosom; Cupid doth blow the fire; and I
cannot Rime to bosom, but I'll go reason with her.


You'll make her jointure of that five hundred you say, that is your
inheritance, M. Strange?


Sir I will.


Kate, you do love him?


Yes faith Father, with all my heart.


Take hands, kiss him, her portion is four thousand. Good-morrow my son
Count, you stay long for your Bride; but this is the day that sells her, and
she must come forth like my Daughter, and your Wife.

I pray salute this Gentleman as your Brother,
This morn shall make him so; and though his habit
But speak him Citizen, I know his worth
To be gentile in all parts. Captain,

Sir.


Captain, I could have been contented well You should have married Kate.


So could not Kate.


You have an honourable Title; a Soldier is a very honourable Title: A
Captain is a Commander of Soldiers; But look you Captain, Captains have no
money, therefore the Worldlies must not match with Captains.


So Sir, so.


There are brave wars.


Where?


Find them out brave Captain,
Win honour, and get money by that time;
I'll get a Daughter for my Noble Captain.

Good Sir, good.


Honour is Honour, but it is no money,
This is the Tumbler then must catch the Coney.

You're an old fellow: Are you a Merchant Sir?


I shame not to say yes? Are you a Soldier Sir?


A Soldier Sir; Oh God I, he is a Captain.


He may be so, and yet no Soldier Sir: For as many are Soldiers, that are no
Captains; so many are Captains that are no Soldiers.


Right Sir: and as many are Citizens that are no Cuckolds.


So, many are Cuckolds, that are no Citizens.
What aisle you Sir, with your robustious looks?

I would be glad to see for my money, I have paid for my standing.


You are the Nobler Captain Sir:
For I know many that usurp that name,
Whose standings pay for them.

You are a Peddler.


You are a Pot-gun.


Merchant, I would thou had an Iron Tale Like me.


Fie Captain, you are too blame.


Nay, Gods will, you are too blame indeed, if my Lord say so.


My Lord'san Ass, and you are another.


Sweet Mistress Luce; let you and I withdraw, this is his humour.
Send for the Constable.

Sir, I'll beat you with a pudding on the change.


Thou dare as well kiss the wide mouthed Canon
At his discharging, or perform as much
As thou dare speak: For Soldier you shall know,
Some can use swords, that wear em not for show.

Why Captain, though ye be a man of war, you cannot subdue affection; you
have no alacrity in your eye, and you speak as if you were in a Dream, you
are of so melancholy and dull a disposition, that on my Conscience you would
never get Children; Nay nor on my body neither: and what a sin were it in
me, and a most pregnant sign of Concupiscence, to marry a man that wants the
mettle of Generation; since that is the blessing ordain'de for Marriage,
procreation the only end of it. Besides, if I could love you; I shall be heer
at home, and you in Cleeueland abroad; I among the bold Britains, and you
among the hot shots.


No more puffing good Captain; leave batteries with your breath, the short is
this:
This worthy Count, this Morning makes my Son;
And with that happy Marriage this proceeds:
Worldly's my Name, Wordly must be my deeds.

I will pray for Civil wars, to cut thy throat without danger Merchant,
I will turn Pirate, but I'll be revenged on thee.

Do Captain do, a halter will take up our quarrel then.


Zoones, I will be revenged upon ye all.
The strange adventure you are now to make
In that small Pinnace, is more perilous
Then any hazard thou could undergo,
Remember a scorned Soldier told thee so.

Go walk the Captain good sir Abraham.


Good faith Sir, I had rather walk your horse, I will not meddle with him, I
would not keep him Company in his drink for a world.


But what good do you Sir Abraham on my daughter,
I could be c'ne content, my Lucida
Would skip your wit, and look upon your wealth,
And this one day let Hymen Crown ye all.

Oh no, she laughs at me; and scorns my suit
For she is wilder, and more hard withal,
Then Beast, or Bird, or Tree, or stony wall.

Ha, Godamercie old Hieronimo.


Yet might she love me for my lovely eyes:


I but perhaps your nose she doth despise.


Yet might she love me for my dimpled chin:


I but she sees your Beard is very thin.


Yet might she love me for my proper body:


I, but she thinks you are an arrant Noddy.


Yet might she love me, cause I am an heir:


I, but perhaps she does not like your ware.


Yet might she love me in despite of all:


I, but indeed I cannot love at all.


Well Luce, respect Sir Abraham I charge you.


Father, my vow is past: whilst the Earl lives
I near will Marry, nor will pine for him:
It is not him I love now, but my humour.
But since my Sister he hath made his choice,
This wreath of Willow that begirts my brows,
Shall never leave to be my Ornament
Till he be dead, or I be married to him.

Life my Lord, you had best marry em all three, They'll never be content else.


I think so to.


These are impossibilities; Come, Sit Abram. A little time will wear out this
rash vow.


Shall I but hope?


Oh, by no means. I cannot endure these round Breeches, I am ready to sound
at em*


The Hose are comely.


And then his left Leg: I never see it, but I think on a Plum-tree.


Indeed there's reason there should be some difference in my Legs, for one
cost me twenty pound more then the other.


In truth both are not worth half the money.


I hold my life one of them was broke, and cost so much the healing.


Right hath your Lordship said, twas broke indeed, At footeball in the
University.


I know he is in love, by his Verse vain.


He cannot hold out on it: you shall hear.


Well since I am disdained; off Garters blew;
Which signifies Sir Abrams love was true.
Off Cypress black, for thou befits not me;
Thou art not Cypress, of the Cypress Tree,
Befitting Lovers: Out green Shoo-strings out,
Wither in pocket, since my Luce doth pout:
Gush eyes, thumpe hand, swell heart, Buttons fly open,
Thanks gentle Doublet; else my heart had broken.
Now to thy Fathers Country house at Babram,
Ride post; There pine and die, poor, poor Sir Abram.

Oh doleful dump.


Nay you shall stay the wedding, Hark the Music, Your Btide is ready.


Put Spirit in your Fingers; Louder still,
And the vast Air with your enchantments fill.

THus for my friends sake have I taken orders,
And with my reasons and some hire besides:
Won the known Priest, that was to Celebrate
This Marriage, to let me assume his place:
And here's the Character of his face and beard.
By this means, when my friend confronts the Maid,
At the Church door (where I appointed him
To meet him, like my self: for this strange shape
He altogether is unwitting of)
If she (as one Vice in that sex alone
Were a great Virtue) to inconstancy past,
Join impudency, and slight him to his face,
Showing a resolution to this match.
By this attempt it will be frustrate;
And so we have more time though but till night,
To work to speak with her, or use violence,
(For both my blood and means are at his service.)
The reason too, I do this past his knowledge,
Is that his joy may be the more complete;
When being resolved she's married and gone,
I can resolve him otherwise: Thus I know,
Good deeds show double, that are timely done,
And joy that comes past expectation.
Yonder he comes, dead in his melancholy:
I'll question him, and see if I can raise
His Spirit from that, it restless rests upon:
He cannot know me. Ho, Good-morrow Sir.
Good-morrow to no living thing but one,
And that is Neuill: Oh, the Vows, the Vows,
The protestations and becoming Oaths
Which she has uttered to me, so sweet, so many,
As if she had been covetous, not to leave
One word for other Lovers, which I pitied.
She said indeed I did deserve em all;
Her lips made swearings sound of piety.
So sweet and prettily they came from her:
And yet this Morn she's married to a Lord.
Lord, Lord, how often has she kissed this hand,
Lost her self in my eyes, plaid with my have,
And made me (a sin I am not, subject too)
Go away proved, emproued by her favours,
And yet this Morn she's married to a Lord.
The Bells were ringing as I came along.

Yes Sir, tis for the great Marriage twixt


Pray hold there, I know it too well.
The Tokens and the Letters I have still:
The dangers I have past for her dear sake,
By day and night to satisfy her wishes;
That Letter I so lately did receive,
And yet this Morn she's married to a Lord:
Oh memory, thou blessing to all men,
Thou art my curse and cause of misery,
That tel'st me what I have bin in her eyes,
and what I am: as it is impossible
To find one good in the whole word of women:
But how I loose my self, and the remembrance
Of my dear friend, who said he would meet me here.
What is this Priest that walks before the Church?
Why walk you here so early, Sir?

I am appointed,
Here to attend the coming of the Brides,
Old Sir Iohn Worldyes Daughters.

Are there two?


Yes Sir, the eldest marries Count Erederick.


Oh.


The middlemost wears willow for his sake,
The youngest marries the rich Merchant Strange.

He is right worthy, and my well known friend.
But Parson, if you marry Bellafront,
The horror of thy Conscience shall exceed
A Murderers; Thou shalt not walk alone,
Nor eat, nor sleep, but a sad Lovers groans
and curses, shall appear and fright thy soul:
I tell thee Priest, they're sights, more terrible
Then Ghosts or Sprights, of which old wives tell Tales,
Thou shalt run mad, thou shalt be damned indeed.

Now God foresend, the reason Sir I pray?


She is contracted Sir, nay married
Unto another man, though it want form:
And such strange passages and mutual Vows,
'twould make your short hair start through your black
Cap, should you but hear it.

Sir, I'll take no notice
Of things, I do not know the injured Gentleman,
May bring em after inro the Spiritual Court,
and have a fair pull on it, a poor Gentleman,
(For so I take him by his being deceived)
Against a great Count, and an old wealthy Knight.

Thou Pancridge Parson; Oh, for my friend Nevil,
Some wile or other might remove this Priest,
and give up breathing to cross their intent.

Alas my dear friend.


Sir, do but you refuse To join em.


Upon what acquaintance Sir?
They are great persons, and I mean to rise,
I hope in time to have three livings man,
and this were not the way I take it Sir.

Why look thee, there is Gold.


Oh by no means.


I seldom knew't refused, yet by thy Coat;
But where it would have bin a cause of good.

But look ye, you shall see I'm a Divine,
Of Conscience quite opposite to a Lawyer,
I'll give you Counsel Sir without a fee:
This way they are to come, if you dare do it,
Challenge her as your own, at the Church door,
I will not hinder you.

Oh hark they come,
Neuill my friend, well I must something do:
Oh, why should Music, which joys every part,
Strike such sharpe killing discords to my hart?

THey that for Worldly wealth do wed,
That buy and sell the Marriage bed:
That come not warmed with the true fire,
Resolved to keep this Vow entire.
To soon find discontent,
To soon shall they repent.
But Hymen these are no such Lovers,
Which thy burning Torch discovers:
Though they live then many a year,
Let each day as new appear
As this first; and delights
Make of all Bridal Nights:
Io: Hymen give Consent,
Blessed are the Marriages that ne'er repen^.
How now, who's this?


Young Scudmore.


Tis young Scudmore.


Can thou this holy Church enter a Bride,
And not a Coarse meeting these eyes of mine.

Yes, by my troth, what are your eyes to me,
But gray ones, as they are to every body,
The Gentleman I do a little know:
He's frantic sure, forward a Gods name there.

Sister, this is not well, and will be worse.


Oh hold thy Thunder fast.


What is the matter?


I'll ask my Lord: What is the matter Sir.


Some idle words my Lord, t'may be have past
Twixt Scudmore, and my Daughter heretofore,
And he has dreamt em things of consequence.

Pish, nothing else; set forward.


By your leave.


Can there be such a soul in such a shape.
My Love is subject of such misery,
Such strange impossibilities and mis-fortune,
That men will laugh at me, when I relate
The Story of it, and conceive I lye.
Why Madam that shall be, Lady in Posse, do Titles,
Honours, and Fortunes, make you so forgetful?

You are insolent, nay strangely saucy Sir,
To wrong me in this public fashion.

Sirrha, go too, there's Law.


There is indeed,
And Conscience too, old Worldly thou hast one;
But for the other, wild Virginia,
Black Affricke, or the shaggy Scithia,
Must send it over as a Merchandise,
Ere thou show any here.

My honoured Lord,
Say but the word, I'll force him from the doors.

I say the word, do it.


You my Lords fine fool?


I he Sir.


No, nor you my Lord fools fool.


Ware Boy, come back.


Come back I say Sir Abraham. Intrant Templum


Tis such a forward child.


My passion and my cause of griefe's so great,
That it hath drowned all worthy parts in me:
As drink makes Virtues useless in a man,
And with too much, kills natural heat in him,
Or else I could not stand thus coldly tame,
and see them enter; but with my drawn sword
Should hail her by the hair unto the Altar,
and Sacrifice her heart to wronged love.

On my life tis so.


Worthy friend, I am exceeding sorry to see this,
But cannot help it.

I'll follow, and unfold all in the Church:
Alas, to what end, since her mind is changed,
Had she bin loyal, all the earthly Lords
Could not have borne her; so, what heinous sin
Hath she committed, God should leave her then:
I never dreamt of lying with my Mother,
Nor wished my Fathers death, nor hated Brothers;
Nor did betray Trust, nor loved money better
Then an accepted friend; No such base thought,
Nor act unnatural, possessed this breast:
Why am I thus rewarded women, women?
He's mad by Heaven, that thinks you any thing
But sensual Monsters, and is never wife
Nor good, but when he hates you, as I now,
I'll not come near one, none of your base sex
Shall know me from this time, for all your Virtues
are like the Buzzes, growing in the fields,
So Weakly fastened te'e, by Natures hand,
That thus much wind blows all away at once,
Ye fillers of the world with Bastardy,
Worse then Diseases you are subject too,
Know I do hate you all, will write against you,
and fight against you; I will eat no meat
Dressed by a woman old or young, nor sleep
Upon a bed, made by their still given hands;
Yet once more must I see this Foeminine Devil,
When I will look her dead, speak her to hell;
I'll watch my time, this day to do it, and then
I'll be in love with death, and readier still
His mortal stroke to take, then he to kill.

Sweet is the love purchased with difficulty.


Then this Cross accident doth relish ours.


I rather think ours happier my fair Kate,
Where all is smooth, and no rub checks our course.

Are ye married?


Yes.


The Devil dance at your wedding: but for you I have something else to say,
let me see, here are reasonable store of people, know all my beloved Brethren,
(I speak it in the face of the Congregation) this woman I have lain with
oftener.


How?


Before God, you are a wicked fellow to speak on it in this manner, if you have.


Lain with her.


Yes, Good-morrow, God give ye joy.


I am speechless with my anger, follow him,
If it be true, let her be proved a Whore;
If false, he shall abide the slander dearly.

Follow that list, I will not meddle with him.


Why speak thou not, to reconcile those looks
That fight sterne battles in thy husbands face.

Thou art not so unworthy to believe him,
If I did think thou did, I would not open
My lips, to satisfy so base a thought,
Sprung from the slander of so base a Slave.

It cannot be, I'll tell you by to morrow;
I am no Fool Kate. I will find some time
To talk with this same Captain, Pouts de'e call him,
I'll lye we'e to night.

Sir you shall not:
What stain my Honour hath received by this
Base Villain, all the world takes notice of,
Mark what I Vow, and if I keep it not,
May I be so given over, to let this Rogue
Perform his slander; Thou that were ordained,
And in thy Cradle marked to call me wife,
And in that Title made as my defence,
Yet suffered'st him to go away with life,
Wounding my Honour dead before thy face.
Redeem it on his head, and his own way,
Even by the sword his long profession,
And bring it on thy neck out of the field:
and set it clear amidst the tongues of men,
That all eyes may discern it slandered,
Or thou shalt near enjoy me as a wife:
By this bright Sun thou shalt not; Nay I'll think
As a biectly of thee, as any Mongrill
Bred in the City; Such a Citizen
as the Plays flout still, and is made the subject
Of all the stages. Be this true or no,
Tis thy best course to fight.

Why Kate I say.


Pray pardon me, none seeles the smart but I,
Tis thy best course to fight, if thou be still,
and like an honest Tradesman eat'st this wrong:
Oh, may thy Spirit and thy state so fall,
Thy first borne child may come to the Hospital.

Heaven I desire thee hear her last request,
and grant it to, if I do slack the first;
By thy assured Innocence I swear,
Thou hast lost me half the Honour I shall win,
In speaking my intent, Come lets to dinner.

I must not eat nor sleep, weep till't be done.


Sister, this resolution is not good,
Ill thrives that Marriage that begins in blood.

Sister, inform your self, I have no Ladyship
To guild my infamy, or keep tongues in awe:
If God love Innocence, I am sure he shall not
Loose in this action.

Nor is't the others life,
Can give het to the world my perfect wife,
But what I do conceive. It is not blood then
Which she requires, but her good neine again,
and I will purchase it; for by heaven thou art
The excellent'st new fashioned Maid in this,
That ever ear shall hear a Tale told off.

But hear ye.


Good, save your labours, for by Heaven I'll do it
If I do it not, I shall be pointed at,
Proclaimed the Grand Rich Cuckold of the Town;
Nay Withal, even by them are known for both.

Take your revenge by Law.


It will be thought
Your greatness, and our money carries it:
Forsome say some men on the back of Law,
May ride and rule it like a patient Ass,
And with a Golden Bridle in the mouth,
Direct it unto any thing they please,
Others report, it is a Spiders web
Made to entangle the poor helpless Flies,
Whilst the great Spiders that did make it first,
and rule it, sit in the midst secure and laugh,
My Law in this shall only be my sword,
But peradventure not this month or two.

This month or two.


I'll be your second then.


You proffer too much honour, my good Lord.


And I will be your third.


I'll not be fourth, nor fifth,
For the old Prouerbe's good, which long hath bin,
Says safest tis sleeping in a whole skin.

Godamercy Nab, I'll ha thee, and be but for thy manhood.


Wife, my Lady Ninnie, do ye hear your Son, he
speaks seldom, but when he speaks.

He speaks Proverbs Efaith.


Oh, tis a pestlence Knight Mistress Lucida.


I and a pocky.


This month or two, de'e love me, not before,
It may be I will live so long Fames Whore.

What lowering Star ruled my Nativity,
You'll come to dinner?

Yes.


Good-morrow brother,
Come, let's be merry in despite of all,
And make this day (as t'should be) festival.

This sour thwart beginning may portend
Good, and be crowned with a delicious end.

So, I'll not see you till my task be done,
So much false time I set to my intent,
Which instantly I mean to execute,
To cut off all means of prevention,
Which if they knew my day, they would assay:
Now for the Merchants honour, hit all right,
Kate, your young Strange will lie with you to night.

What a stir is here made about lying with a Gentlewoman, I have been lien
with, a hundred and hundred times, and nothing has come on it, but haulke, hum,
haulke, hum, oh, oh. Thus have I done for this month or two, haulke, hum.


Ah Gods will, are you at it, you have acted your Name too much, sweet Mistress
is Wagtail, this was wittily, though somewhat knavishly followed on me.


Vmh, a my Conscience I am peppered, well thou tumblest not for nothing, for
he Dances as well that got thee, and plays as well on the Viol, and yet he
must not Father thee, I have better men; let me remember them, and here in my
Melancholy. choose out one Rich enough, to reward this my stale Virginity, or
fit enough, to marry my little Honesty; Haulke, hawk.


She has a shroud reach, I see that, what a casting she keeps, marry my
Comfort is, we shall hear by and by, who has given her the Casting Bottle.


Hawk, hawke, hawke, bitter, bitter, pray God I hurt not the Babe: Well, let
me see, I'll begin with Knights, Inprimis, Sir Iohn Doot-well, and Sir
William Burnit.


A hot Knight by my Faith, Dootwell and Burnit too.


For old Sir Innocent Ninnie, my Master, if I speak my Conscience look ye, I
cannot directly accuse him, much has he been about, but done nothing; marry
for S. Abraham, I will not altogether quit him, let me see, there's four
Knights, now for Gentlemen.


And so she'll come down to the footmen.


Master Louall, Master Liueby't, and M. Pendant, huke, hi, up, hi, up.


By this light I have heard enough, shall I hold your belly too, fair Maid
of the fashion?


What say ye Jack Sauce?


Oh fie, ill Mutton, you are too angry; why look ye, I am my Lords Page, and
you are my Ladies Gentlewoman, we should agree better, and I pray whether are
you riding with this burden in your Dosser.


Why Sir, out of Town, I hope tis not the first time you have seen a child
carried out of Town in a Dosser, for fear of the Plague.


You have answered me I promise you, but who put it in I pray.


Not you Sir, I know by your asking.


I, alas, I know that by my Talent; for I remember thus much Philosophie of my
Schoole-Maisters, Ex nihilo nihil fit; but come, setting this Duello of wit
aside, I have ouer-hearde your Confession, and your casting about for a Father,
and in truth in mere Charity, came in to relieve you. In the scroll of
Beasts, Horses, and Asses, that have fed upon this Common of yours, you named
one Pendant, Faith Wench let him be the Father, he is a very handsome
Gentleman I can tell you, in my Lords favour, I'll be both secret and your
friend, to my Lord, let it be him, he shall either reward thee bountifully, or
marry thee.


Sir you speak like an understanding young Gentleman, and I acknowledge my
self much bound to you for your Counsel.


Will, Will.


My Lord has sent him to call me, now I hold a wager ont, if thou be not a
Fool, as most weighting women are, thou'lt use him in his kind.


Why Will I say, go, my Lord calls extremely,


Did not I say so, Come this is but a trick to send me off Sir.


A notable little Rascal,
Prettis Mistress Wagtayle: why de'e walk so melancholy,
I sent him hence a purpose; Come shals do?

Do, what would you do, have done too much already.


What's the matter.


I am with child by you.


By me? why by me? a good jest in faith.


You'll find it Sir in earnest.


Why, do you think I am such an Ass to believe nobody has meddled with you,
but I.


Do you wrong me so much to think otherwise.
This tis for a poor Damsel like my self,
To yield her Honour and her youth to any,
Who strait conceaues she does so unto many,
and as I have a soul to save, tis true.

Pray do not swear, I do not urge you too't; Zoones, now I am undone; you
walk somewhat round, Sweet-hart, has Nobody bin tampering with you else, think
ont, for by this light, I am not worth the estate of an Apple wife, I do live
upon commending my Lord, the Lord of hoasts knows it; and all the world
besides, for me to marry thee, will undo thee more, and that thou may keep
me, keep thee in fashion,

Sell thee to English, French, to Scot, and all,
Till I have brought thee to an Hospital:
and there I leave you, ha you not heard nor read,
Of some base slave, that wagging his fair head,
Does whistling at one end of his shop walk,
Whilst some Gay-man doth vomit bawdy talk
In his wives ears at the other; such a Rogue or worse shall I be: For look
ye Mistress Wagtail, I do live like a Chameleon upon the air, and not like a
Moale upon the earth, Land I have none, I pray God send me a grave when I am
dead.


Its all one, I'll have you for your qualities.


For my good ones, they are altogether unknown, because they have not yet bin
seen, nor ever will be, for they have no being, in plain terms, as God
help me, I have none.


How, came you by your good cloths.


By undoing Taylors, and then my Lord (like a Snake) casts a suit every
quarter, which I slip into; therefore, thou art worse then mad, if thou wilt
cast away thy self upon me


Why, what mends will you make me, can you give me some sum of money to marry
me to some Tradesman, as the play says.


No by my troth: but tell me this, has not Sir Abraham bin familiar with you.


Faith, not enough to make up a child.


Could be content to marry him.


I by my troth, and thank ye too,


Has he but kissed thee?


Yes, and something more beside that.


Nay, and there ha been any jot of the thing, beside that, I'll warrant thee
lay the child to him, stand stiffly to it, leave the rest to me, By that Fool
thou shalt save thy honesty.


I Yes Captain Powts here pray?


Sir he does.


I prithee tell him here's a Gentleman Would speak with him.


What may I call your name Sir?


No matter for my name.


Troth Sir, the Captain is somewhat doubtful of strangers; and being as most
Captains are, a little in debt, I know he will not speak with you, unless
you send your Name.


Tell him my name is Strange, that I am come
About that business he spake off to day.
To have sent a formal Challenge by a Gentleman,
He being to choose his time, might peradventure
Have made him shift himself the sooner over.

Sir, I know your business, you are come to serve a warrant, ot a Scitation, I
will not speak with you: and get you gone quickly too, or I may happen send a
Bullet through your Mazard.


Strange Cross, past expectation: well I'll try,
My other course may speed more happily.

Sir, had you borne us company to Church,
You had been the better welcome.

Faith you had, I must needs say so to.


And I must needs say as my Lord says.


Sir Iohn I thank you, and my honoured Lord:
But I am sorry for this other News
Concerning Mistress Kate, and my good friend.

Tis certain true: He keeps his word well too,
He said he would come to dinner.

All we cannot get M. Katherine out of her chamber.


Oh good old woman, she is topshackeld.


Tis pestlence Sack, and cruel Clarret. Knight, stand to me Knight I say, up,
a cold stomach; give me my Aqua-vitae bottle.


Oh Guiniuer, as I am a Justice of peace and Coram, 'twere a good deed to
commit thee, Fie, fie, fie.


Why alas, I cannot help this and I should be hanged, she'll be as drunk
as a Porter: I'll tell you my Lord, I have seen her so bepiss the Rushes, as
she has danced at a Wedding: Her belly, and that Aqua-vitae bottle, have
almost undone my Father: Well I think in Conscience, she is not my natural
begotten Mother.


Ha, ha, ha.


Well said my wise Sir Abraham.


Oh this Music and good Wine is the soul of all the world.


Come, will your Lordship make one at Primero, until your Bride come forth.


You can play well my Lord.


VVhol?


Who my Lord, the only player at Primero in the Court.


I'd rather play at Bowles.


My Lords for you for that too: the only, Bowler in London, that is not a
Church warden.


Can he fence well too M. Pendant?


Who my Lord? the only Fencer in Christendom, he will hit you.


He shall not hit me, I assure you now.


Is he good at the exercise of drinking Sir?


Who my Lord; the only Drunkard in the VVoild, drinker I would say.


Godamercie for that.


I would he heard him.


Oh sie no, none so good as my Lord.


Hardly, berladie, hardly.


How now, whose this?


What would you?


I would speak with the Lady Bellafront,
From the young Lady Lucie.

You had best send in your Letter, she is withdrawn.


My Lady gave me charge of the delivery,
And I must do it my self, or cartie it back.

A trusty servant, that way leads you to her.


This trust in Servants is a Jewel; Come,
Let us to Bowles in the Garden.

Blessed fate.


Oh thou, whose words and actions seemd to me,
As innocent as this smooth sleep, which hath
Locked up thy powers: would thou had slept, when first
Thou sent and proferredst me beauty and love:
I had bin ignorant then of such a loss,
Happie's that wretch in my opinion,
That never ownd scarce Jewels, or bright Somes,
He can loose nothing but his constant wants:
But speaklesse is his plague, that once had store,
and from superfluous state falls to be poor:
Such is my hell-bred hap, cou^d Nature make
So fair a superficies, to enclose
So false a heart; This is like gilded Tombs,
Compacted of Jet Pillars, Marble stones,
Which hide from his stinking Flesh, and rotten bones.
Pallas so sat (methinkes) in Hectors Tent;
But time so precious and so dangerous
Why do I loose thee? Madam, my Lady, Madam.

Believe me my dear friend, I was enforcst: Ha,
I had a Dream as strange as thou art fellow,
How came thou hither? What's thy business?

That Letter Madam tells you.


Letter: Ha?
What dost thou mock me? Here is nothing writ.

Can you read any thing then in this face?


Oh Basilisk, remove thee from my sight,
Or thy harts blood shall pay thy rash attempt.
Ho, Who attends us there?

Stir not a foot,
And stop your clamorous acclamations,
Or by the bitterness of my fresh wrongs,
I'll send your Ladyship to the Devil quick;
I know the hazard I do undergo,
and whatsoere after becomes of me,
I'll make you sure first: I am come to speak,
and speak I will freely, and to bring back
Your Letters, and such things you sent; and then,
I'll ne'er see those deceiving eyes again.

Oh, I am sick of my corruption,
For Godsake do not speak a word more to me.

Not speak, yes woman, I will roar a loud,
Call thee the falsest fair that ever breathed,
Tell thee, that in this marriage, thou hast drowned
All virtue, left to credit thy weak sex,
which being (as 'twere) committed to thy trust,
Thou traitorously hast betrayed it thus.
Did I entice, or ever send thee guists
To allure thee, to reflect a beam on me?
Nay, did not thou thy self send and invent
Past human wit, our means of intercourse?
Why dost thou then prove base unto thy self,
Perjured and impious, know the good thou hast lost
In my opinion; doth outvalue far
The airy honours thou art married to.

Oh peace, for you speak sharpness to my soul
More torturous, then hells plagues to the damned,
For love sake hear me speak.

For loves sake, no:
Love is my surfeit, and is turned in me
To a disease.

Tyrant, my knees shall beg,
Till they get liberty for my tongue to speak,
Drowned almost in the Rivers of mine eyes.

What can thou say, art thou not married?


Alas I was enforst, first by the threats
Of a severe Father, that in his hand
Did gripe my fortunes; next to that, the fame
Of your neglect, and liberal tongue,
Which bred my honour an eternal wrong.

Pish, these are painted causes, till this Morn
He lived not in this land, that durst accuse
My intergritie, of such an ignorance.
But take your Letters here, your paper Vows,
Your Picture, and your Bracelets: and if ever
I build again upon a woman's faith,
May sense forsake me: I will sooner trust
Dice, or a reconciled enemy: Oh God,
What an internal joy my heart has felt,
Sitting at one of these same idle plays,
When I have seen a Maids inconstancy
Presented to the life; how glad my eyes
Have stole about me, fearing least my looks
Should tell the company contented there,
I had a Mistress free of all such faults.

Oh! still retain her, dear Scudmore hear me.


Retain thee so, it is impossible,
Art thou not married? Tis impossible,
Oh no! I do despise thee, and will fly
As far on earth as to the Antipodes,
and by some learned Magician, whose deep art
Can know thy residence on this Hemisphere;
There I'll be placst, my seete just against thine,
To express the opposite Nature, which our hart^
Must henceforth hold.

Oh rather shoot me friend,
Then let me hear thee speak such bitterness.
Oh pity me, redeem from the hell
That in this Marriage I am like to feel,
I'll rather fly to barren wildernesses,
and suffer all wants with thee Scudmore, then
Live with all plenty in this husbands arms,
Thou shalt perceive I am not such a woman,
That is transported with vain dignities,
Oh thy dear words have knocked at my harts gates,
and entered: They have plucked the Devils Vizard.
(That did deform this face, and blind my soul)
Off, and thy Bellafront presents her self,
(Lau'd in a Bath of contrite Virginall tears,)
Clothed in the Original beauty that was thine:
Now for thy love to God, count this not done,
Let time go back, and be as when before it,
Or from thy memory race it for ever.

Ha, ha, ha^ was there ever such strange creatures framed,
Why dost thou speak such foolish senseless things?
Can thy forsaking him redeem thy fault?
No, I will never mend an ill with worse.
Why this example will make women false,
When they shall hear it, that before were true,
For after ill examples we do fly,
But must be vowed to deeds of piety:
Oh woman, woman, woman, woman, woman,
The cause of future and Original sin,
How happy (had you not) should we have been,
False where you kiss, but murthering in your ire,
Love all that woe, know all men you desire.
Ungrateful, yet most impudent crave,
Torturous as hell, insatiate as the grave:
Lustful as Monkeys, grinning in your ease,
Whom if we make not Idols, we near please.
More vainly proud then fools, as ignorant;
Baser then Parasites, Witches that enchant
And make us senseless, to think death or life
Is yours to give, when only our belief
Doth make you able to deceive us so,
Begot by Drunkards, to breed sin and wo.
As many soul diseases hide your veins,
as there are mischiefs coined in your quick brains;
Not quick in wit, fit to perform least good,
But to subvert whole States, shed Seas of blood;
Twice as deceitful as are Crocodiles,
For you betray both ways; with tears and smiles,
Yet questionless there are as good, as bad:
Hence, let me go.

Hear me, and thou shalt go:
I do confess I do deserve all this,
Have wounded all the faith my sex doth owe,
But will recover it, or pay my life:
Strive not to go, for you shall hear me first,
I charge thee Scudmore, thou hard-hearted man,
Upon my knees: thou most implacable man,
^ since penitence
and satisfaction to, gets not thy pardon,
I charge thee use some means to set me free,
Before the Revels of this night have end,
Prevent my entering to this marriage bed;
Or by the memory of Lucretiaes knife,
Ere Morn I'll die a Virgin, though a wise.

Pish do, the world will have one mischief less.


Bowl they that list, for I will Bowl no more,
Cupid that lit^le Bowler in my breast
Rubs at my heart, and will not let me rest.
I, I, you may cry rub, fly to your Bowles,
For you are free, love troubles not your iowles,
But from my head to heel; from heel to hat^,
Behind, before, and round about I smart,
Then in this Arbor sitting all alone,
In doleful Ditty, let me howl my moan.
Oh Boy, leave pricking for I veil my Bonnet,
Give me but breath while I do write a Sonnet.

I have lost my money, and Sir Abraham too, yonder he sits at his Muse by
heaven, drowned in the Ocean of his love, Lord how he labours, like a hard
bound Poet, whose brains had a frost in em, now it comes.


I die, I sigh.


What after you are dead? Very good,


I die, I sigh, thou precious stony Jewel.


Good: because she is hard-hearted.


I die.


He has di'de three times, and come again.


I sigh thou precious stony Jewel,
Wearing of silk, why art thou still so cruel.

Oh Newington conceit, and quieting el^e.


Thy servant Abraham sends this foolish Ditty.


You say true intro^h Sir.


Thy Servant Abra. sends this foolish Dit

Tie unto thee, pity both him and it.

Tie unto thee: well, if she do not pity both, tis pity she should live.


But if thou still (...) poor Sir Abra: ^rump
Come grim death come, here give thy mortal thumpe.
So now I'll read it together.
I die, I sigh, thou precious stony Jewel,
Oh wherefore wear thou Sulke, yet art so cruel:
To thee thy Ninnie sends this foolish Dit --
Tie, and ^ pity both him and it,
If thou deny, and still Sir Abraham frump,
Come grim death come, here give thy mortal thumpe.
Let me see, who shall I get now, to set too a dumpish Note.

In good faith I do^ not know, but Nobody that is wise, I am sure of that. It
will be an excellent matter sung to the knacking of the tongues. But to my
business, God save the right Worthy and Woorshipfull Sir Abraham: what musing
and writing: oh, this love will undo us all, and that made me prevent love,
and undo my self: but what news of Mistress Lucida, ha, will she not come
off, not cannot you come on little Abraham.


Faith, I have courted her, and courted her: and she does as every body else
does, laughs at all I can do or say.


Laughs, why that's a sign she is pleased; do you not know when a woman
laughs, she's pleased.


I but she laughs most shamefully, most scornfully.


Scornfully, hang her, she's but a babble.


She's the fitter for my turn Sir, for they will not stick to say, I am a
fool for all I am a Knight.


Love has made you witty little Nab, but what a mad villain art thou, a
striker, a fiftieth part of Hercules, to get one Wench with Child, and go a
wooing to another.


With child, a good jest efaith, whom have I got with child.


Why Mistress Wagtail is with child, and will be deposd as yours, she is my
Kinswoman, and I wold be loath our house should suffer any disgrace in her, if
there be law in England, which there should be, if we may judge by their
Consciences, or if I have any friends, the Wench shall take no wrong, I
cannot tell, I think my Lord will stick to me.


De'e hear, talk not to me of Friends, Law, or Conscience, if your Kinswoman
say she is with Child by me, your Kinswoman is an arrant whore; Vds-will, have
you no body to put your Gulls upon but Knights? That Wagtail is a whore, and
I'll stand to it.


Nay, you have stood to it already; but to call my Cozen whore, you have not a
mind to have your throat cut: ha you?


Truth no great mind Sir.


Recant your words, or die.


Recant, oh base; out sword, my honour keep,
Love, thou hast made a Lyon of a Sheep.

But will you fight in this quarrel.

I am resolved.


Hart, I have pulled an old house over my head; here's like to be a tall fray,
I perceive a foole's more valiant then a Knave at all times, would I were well
riddle of him, I had as live meet Hector God knows, if he dare fight at all:
they are all one to me, or to speak more modernly, with one of the Roaring
Boys.


Have you done your prayers?


Pray give me leave Sir, put up an't please you: are you sure my Cofsen
Wagtail is a Whore?


With sword in hand I do it not recant.


Well, it shall never be said Jack Peudant would venture his blood in a
VVhores quarrel: but VVhore or no VVhore, she is most desperately in Love with
you, praises your head, your face, your nose, your eyes, your mouth; the fire
of her commendations, makes the pot of your good parts run over; and to
conclude, if the whore have you not, I think the Pond at Islington, will be
her Bathing-tubbe, and give an end to mortal Misery, but if she belie you
(pray put up Sir:) she is an arrant whore, and so let her go.


Does she so love me say you?


Yes, yes, out of all question the whore does love you abominable.


No more of these soul terms if she do love me,
That goes by fate, I know it by my self,
I'll not deny but I have dallied with her.

I, but hang her who ore, dallying will get no Children.


Another whore, and draw; where is the Girl.


Condouling her misfortune in the Gallery,
Upon the rushes, sitting all alone,
and for Sir Abrahams love venting her moan.

I know not what to say, Fates above all,
Come lets go ouer-heare her, be this true,
Welcome my Wagtayle, scornful Luce adieu.

One way it takes yet, tis a Fools condition,
Whom none can love: out of his penury,
To catch most greedily at any wench
That gives way to his love, or faignes herowne,
First unto him, and so Sir Abraham now
I hope will buy the poole where I will Fish,
Thus a quick Knave makes a fat fool his dish.

I have plaide the melancholy Ass, and partly the Knave, in this last
business, but as the Parson said that got the wench with child, Tis done now
Sir, it cannot be undone, and my purse or I must smart for it.


Your Trunks are shipped, and the Tide falls out about twelve to night.


I'll away, this Law is like the Basilisk, to see it first, is the death ont
this night: and noble London farewell, I will never see thee more, till I be
knighted for my Virtues. Let me see, when shall I return; and yet I do not
think but there are a great many dubbed for their Virtues; otherwise how could
there be so many poor knights, what att thou? whats thy news?


Zoones, a man is fain to break open doors, ere he can get in to you.
I would speak with a General sooner.

Sir you may, he owes less peradventure: or if more, he is more able to
pay't: What ar't?


A Soldier, one that lives upon this Bus Jerkin, t'was made of Fortunatus his
pouch; and these are the points I stand upon, I am a Soldier.


A counterset Rogue you are.


As true a Rogue as thy self: Thou wrong'st me, send your man away, go too, I
have strange and welcome business to impart, the Merchant is dead, for shame
let's walk into the fields, send away your man.


How?


Here is a Letter from the lusty Kate
That tells you all, I must not give it you
But upon some conditions. Let us walk,
and send away your man.

Go Sirrha, and bespeak Supper at the Bear, and provide Oars, I'll see
Graues-end to night.


The Gentlewoman will run mad after you then, I'll tell you more, let's walk.


I See greatest Spirits can serve to their own ends,
Were you the seeming Serving-man that past by?
By my sad heart I was, and not a Tittle
Of my relation to thee wrong or feigned.

In truth you were too blame to venture so,
Mischiefs find us, we need not mischiefs seek;
I am not ti'de to that opinion,
They are like women, which do always shun
Their lovers and pursuers, and do follow
With most rank appetites them that do fly:
All mischief that I had is but one woman,
and that one woman all mischance to me,
Who speaks worst of them, then's the best of men,
They are like shadows, mischiefs are like them.
Death fears me, for in truth I seek him out;
The Sun is stale to me, to morrow Morn
as this, 'twill rise, I see no difference;
The night doth visit me, but in one robe,
She brings as many thoughts as she wears Stars
When she is pleasant, but no rest at all,
For what new strange thing should I covet life then?
Is not she false, whom only I thought true?
Shall time to show his strength make Scudmore live.
Till (perish the vicious thought) I love not thee,
Or thou dear friend, remove thy heart from me.

Time is as weak for that, as he is old,
Take comfort, and attend this counsel friend,
This match is neither Sacred nor sure,
Close Fate annihilates what Opinion makes,
and since she is resolved this night to die,
If you do not redeem her, give the means,
Or her blood (credit me) will spring heavier griefs,
Sorer and stranger in thy oppressed hart
Then her false love before. Besides, tis you
My Scudmore that are false, if you will not
Consent to let her make Vows good, which were
But in a possibility to be broke,
This her Repentance casts her vice quite off:
and if you leave her now, you take it on,
Nay you incur a bloody mortal sin,
You do become an actual murderer.
If you neglect her, she will kill her self
This night, by poison, knife, or other means,
God gives you power to cross her desperate will,
and if you save not where you may, you kill.

Why can my Noble and wise friend, think still
That what a woman saics, her heart doth mean?
Can you believe that she will kill her self.
Tis a full hour since she spake the word,
and God forbid, that any woman's mind
Should not be changed and changed in a long hour.
She is by this time in her Lorldly arms,
and like pleased Iuno, clasped by Iupiter,
Forgets the plaints of poor mortality,
Such state, such pride, as Poets show her in,
Incensed with Ioues loose scapes upon the earth,
She cast on me at our encountering;
As cold and heavy, as a Rock of Ice
In her love to me, which while I there staide,
My bitter and hot words resolved a little,
(Just as the Sun doth Ice) I softened her,
and made her drown her fault in her own tears,
But think you she holds this flexible vain:
No, I me removed, and she's congealed again.

How well does Scudmore speak, ill for himself,
Wit's a disease, that fit employment wants,
Therefore we see, those happiest in best parts,
and vnder-borne fortunes under their merits,
Grow to a sullen envy, hate, and scorn
Of their Superiors; and at last, like winds
Break forth into rebellious civil wars,
Or private Treasons; none so apt for these,
as melancholy wits fettered with need.
How free's the Rustic Swain from these assaults,
He never feels a passion all his life,
But when he cannot sleep, or hunger gripes;
And though he want Reason, Wit, Art, nay Sense,
Is not so senseless to capitulate,
and ask God why he made not him as great
As that same foolish Lord, or that rich knave:
His brains with nothing does Negotiate,
But his hard Husbandry, which makes him live.
But have we worthy gifts, as Judgment, Learning,
Ingenious sharpness, which wise God indeed,
Doth seldom give out of his equal hand,
But joined with poverty to make it even
With Riches which he clogs with ignorance,
We vent our blessing in profane conceits,
Or in strong Arguments against our selves,
Foul Bawdry, and stark blindly hold it best,
Rather to loose a soul, then loose a jest.

Ill terms my friend, this wit in any man,
(For that but seasoned with discretion)
Holds him in awe of all these blemishes,
Free's him of envy, doth Phylosophize
His Spirit, that he makes no difference
Twixt man and man, twixt fortunes high and low,
But as the thicker they with virtues grow,
Freedom and bondage wit can make alone;
So 'twould by being left, and being loved,
If I had any of it tempered so:
But you have spoke all this condemning me,
For having wit to speak against my self,
But I'll be ruled by you in all.

Then thus:
To night by promise, I do give a Mask,
as to congratulate the Bridal day,
In which the Count, Pendant, and the wise Knight,
Will be most worthy dancers, Sir you shall,
Learn but my part, which I will teach you to,
as nimbly as the Usher did teach me,
and follow my further directions,
Though I in the Morn were a prodigious wight,
I'll give thee Bellafr^nt in thine arms to night.

I am your property, my Enginer
Prosper your purposes, shine thou eye of heaven,
and make thie lowering Morn, a smiling Eeuen.

Oh, these are Lambeth fields.


Strange murdered on the wedding day by you,
At his own Brides appointment, for my sake?

As dead as Charity.


This sounds not well.


Zoones, you may say as well I am the man,
as doubt he lives, a plague of your belief,
De'e know this bloody Ruff which she has sent,
Least you should be incredulous, and this Ring
Which you have seen her wear?

I know the Ring,
and I have seen the Ruff about his neck,
This comes of enforced marriages; Where was't done?
And how escaped you?

Sir receive it briefly:
I am her Kinsman, and being newly come
Over, and not intending to stay long,
Took this day to go see my Cozen Worldly,
(For so my Name is) where I found all of them
So deeply drenched in the Bridal cup,
That sleep had taken possession of their eyes;
Bacchus had given them such an overthrow,
Their bodies lay like slaughtered carcasses;
One here, one there, making such antique faces,
as drunkenness had mocked at drunkenness,
In truth their postures and their sleep like death,
(For their's, was liker death, then sober sleep)
Remembered me of body-scattered fields,
after the bloody battles I have seen,
Twas such a season. To make short my tale,
as Fate had said, Now murders may be done
and ne'er reueal'd, approaching further, I
Lighted upon a Chamber, where your Love
Sat by this Merchant cast drunk on the bed,
She weeping and lamenting her mishap,
assured both of my daring, and my trust,
Fell flat upon the ground, tehn raised her self,
Hung on my neck, then sunk down to my legs,
Told all things past to day, and never ceased
Till I had taken life from that half dead man
Before, whom straight I strangled with this Rope.

You have showed some kindness to me, I must love you Sir,
What did you with his body?

Having first
By her direction put on these his Clothes,
That like the Murdered man, the safelier
I might pass with her, being her Husbands shape,
If any of the Servants had been waked,
She showed me to a necessary vault,
Within a Closet in the Chamber too,
and there I threw the body.

Whence this blood?


That she her self first, let out of his veins,
Wherein she dipped the Ruff about his neck:
and said, Go bear this Ensign of my love,
To assure him what I dared for his dear sake.

Where is the Maid?


Captain a Maid for you,
But well you know (I hope) she is no Maid,
But Maid or no Maid, she is at my Mothers,
Whence I will bring her whether you'll appoint
To night, and let this Tide convey all hence,
For staying will be something perilous.

Sir, I will kill two men for you till then
I owe my life to you, and if ever Rackes,
Strapadoes, wheel, or any torturous Engine,
Even from the Roman Yoke, to the Scotch Boot,
Force me discover you, or her, to Law,
Pray God the Merchant may re-spire again,
But what a Villain have I been to wrong her?
Did she not tell you how I injured her?

She said you challenged her, and publicly
Told you had lain with her, but Truths no wrong.

Truth, t'was more false then Hell, you shall see me,
(As Well, as I can repent of any sin)
Ask her forgiveness for wounding of her Name,
and against the world recover her lost fame.
Kind soul, would I could weep, to make amends
Why I did slander her at the Church door.

The more base Villain thou.


Ha, what's the news?


Thou unspeakable Rascal, thou a Soldier,
a Captain of the Suburbs, a poor forced,
That with thy Slops, and Cat a Mountains f^ce,
Thy blather chops, and thy robustious words,
Fright'st the poor whore, and terribly dost exact,
a weekly Subsidy, twelve pence a piece,
Whereon thou liu'st, and on my Conscience
Thou snapst besides, with cheats and Cut-purses.

Hart, this is some railing Poet, why you Rogue?


Thou Rogue, far worse then Rogues, thou slanderer


Thou worse then slanderous Rogues, thou murderer


Tis well remembered, I will cut thy throat,
To appease that Merchants soul, which ne'er will rest,
Till some revenge be raken on thy tongue.

I'll kill the first, and in thy vital flood,
Wash my hands clean of that young Merchants blood.

You fight as if you had fought before,
I can still hold my sword, come on Sir.

Zoones can you ward so well, I think you are one of the Noble science of
Defence.


True, a'th Science of Noble Defence I am,
That fight in safeguard of a virtuous name.

Oh, now I understand you, and you stand over me, My hurts are not mortal, but
you have the better, if your name be Wordly, be thank ^ll for your fortune.


Give me thy sword, or I will kill thee.


Some wiser then some, I love my reputation well, yet I am not so valiant an
ass, but I love my life better, theirs my


Then get upon my back, come al shall be well.
I'll carry thee unto a Surgeon first, then unto thy wench, sword
Come we are friends.

Godamercy, zoones methinkes I see my self in
Moore-fields, upon a wooden leg, begging three pence.

I thank thee heaven for my success in this,
To what perfection is my business grown.
Seldom or never is right overthrown.

They say every woman has a Sprindge to catch a Wood-cocke, remember my
instructions, and let me see what a Paradise thou can bring this fool into.
15. hundred a year wench, will make us all merry, but a fool to boot; why we
shall throw the ^ouse out at window; Let me see, there are two things in this
foolish Transitory world, which should be altogether regarded, profit and
pleasure, or pleasure and profit, I know not which to place first, for indeed,
they are Twins, and were borne together; for Profit, this Marriage (God speed
it) marries you to it, and for pleasure, if I help you not to that as cheap
as any man in England, call me Cut, and so remember my instructions, for I'll go
fetch Sir Abraham.


Your instructions; Nay faith, you shall see I have as fruitful a brain as a
belly, you shall hear some additions of my own, my fantasy even kicks like
my Bastard: well Boy, for I know thou art Masculine, neither thy Father nor thy
Mother had any foeminine quality, but one, and that was to take a good thing
when it was proffered; when thou inherit'st Land, strange both to thy Father
and Grandfather, and rid'st in a Caroch, it may be thy Father an old Footman,
will be running by thy side, but yonder comes the Gentle Knight, and my Squire.


Unfortunate Damsel, why dost thou love
Where thou hast sworn it never to reveal?
May be he would vouchsafe to look on thee
Because he is a Knight, is it thy terror,
Why peradventure he is Knight-hoods Mirror.

De'e hear Sir Abraham?


Yes, with standing tears.


Beauis on Arundell with Morglay in hand,
Near to my Knight in prowess doth not stand;
They say Sir Beauis flew both Bore and Draggon,
My Knight for that can drink up a whole Flagon,
a thing as famous now amongst our men,
as killing Monsters were accounted then,
Tis not thy leg, no, were it twice as good,
Throws me into this melancholy mood,
Yet let me say and swear, in a cross Garter,
Poles never showed to eyes a lovelier quarter.

I, but all this while she does not name me, she may mean Somebody else.


Mean Somebodie else, you shall hear her name you by and by.


Courteous Sir Abraham.


Law ye there.


Oh, thy very name,
Like to a Hatchet cleaves my heart in twain,
When first I saw thee in those little Breeches,
I laughed for joy, but when I heard thy speeches
I smiled down right, for I was almost frantic,
A modern Knight should be so like an Antique,
In words and deeds, those Pinkanies of thine,
For I shall ne'er be blessed to call them mine.

Say not so, Sweet-heart.


How they did run not rheumatickly run,
But round about the room, one over one,
That wide mouth no, small, no, but Middle-size,
That Nose Dominicall, that head, like -- wise.

Very good, de'e mark that head like wise?


She has an excellent wit.


I'll now into her, Sir observe what follows, Now Turtle mourning still For the
party, for whom are you working that purse?


For me I warrant her.


What news good Cozen, I hope you have not reueal'd my Love.


Yes faith, I have acquainted the Knight withal, and thou may be ashamed to
abuse a Gentleman to slaunderously, he swears he ne'er lay with you.


Lay with me, alas no, I say not so, nor no man living; but there was one
night above the rest, that I dreamt he lay with me, and did you ne'er hear of
a child begot in a Dream.


By this light, that very night I dreamt she lay with me.


I but Sir Abra: is no dreaming knight: in short, he contemns you, he scorns
you at his heals.


By God so he lies, I have the most ado to forbear, but that I would hear a
little more.


And has sent this halter, you may hang your self, or you may cut your throat,
here's a knife too.


Well, I will love him in despite of all,
How ere he uses me, tis not the shame
Of being examined, or the fear of whipping.

Make as if thou would kill thy self.


Should move me, wold but he vouchsafe his love,
Bear him this purse filled with my latest breath.
I loved thee Abraham Ninnie, even in death.

Hold, hold, thy Knight commands thee for to hold,
I sent no halter, poor soul how it pants,
Take Courage, look up.

Look, Sir Abra: in person comes to see you.


Oh, let me die then in his worships arms.


Live long and happy to produce thy Baby,
I am thy Knight, and thou shalt be my Lady:
Frown Dad, fret Mother, so my love look cheerly,
Thou hast my heart, and thou hast bought it dearly,
And for your pains, if Abraham live to inherit,
He will not be unmindful of your merit;
Wear thou this Ring, whilst I thy labours Task,
This Purse wear in my Cap, anon in the Mask.

Oh happy woman.


To Supper let's, and merry be as may be.


Now God send every wise knight such a Lady.


Titles and State de'e call it: Oh Content!
Thou art both beauty, means, and all in marriage:
Joy dwells not in the Princes Palaces,
They that envy em do not know their cares,
Were I the Queen of Gold, it could not buy
An hours ease, for my oppressed heart.
Oh, were this Wedlock knot to tie again,
Not all the State and glory it contains,
Joined with my Fathers fury, should enforce
My rash consent; but Scudmore thou shalt see,
This false heart (in my death) most true to thee.
My Lord, my Father, all the Company
Did note my sudden sadness now at Supper,
Yet came I out, and put on feigned mirth,
And mean to sit out this nights Revels too,
To avoid all suspect may grow in em,
Least my behaviour should my intent reveal:
Our griefs (like love) we hardly can conceal,
Yon comes my Sisters: Are the Maskers ready?

They are gone to dress themselves, M. Neuil's come
I would I had not vowed to live a Maid,
I am a little taken with that Gentleman,
And yet if Marriage be so full of ill,
Let me be married to my Gyrlond still.

In truth thy State is happier much then ours,
Were never two (like us) unfortunate.

Thy case indeed, I needs must pity much,
Because I think thy Virtue slandered,
But for my Lady Sister, if she reap
Sad discontent, tis nones but her own fault,
I knew the passages twixt her and Scudmore.

Sister, I wonder you will name a man,
I think not on, he was no match for me,
Why de'e blame me, that should rather blame
Your wandering eye, to love a man loved me,

Well tis too late now to expostulate.
But my poor little Kate, where is thy man?

Lost, lost in truth, to morrow I shall hear,
I make account he's gone some five years voyage,
Till this disgrace of ours be ouer-blowne,
and for my Captain Powts, by this time he
Is ten mile on the River toward Graves end.

Stand you two there, Sirrha go you with me.
Why how now Girls here still, what your Ladyship?
Away, away, I say, go take your places.
Some Torches for my Lady.

You Sirrha,
Is my lady Ninnie awake yet?

Yes sir, she is awake, but she is scant sober, the first thing she called for,
was her Aqua vitae bottle.


Who is with her?


The good Sir Innocent, and her Gentlewoman,


Go tell em I desire their Company,
The Mask stays on em say, and de'e hear,
The sides of one a'th Chaire's must be let out,
For her great Ladyship.

Marry shall it Sir.


Soul man, leave eating now, look, look, you have all dropped a yoursute.


Oh Sir, I was in love to day, and could not eat, but here's one knows the
case is altered, lend me but a Handkerchief to wipe my mouth, and I ha done.


Soul, how this Rascal stays with the rest of our things.


How now son Count, what ready M. Neuill.


All ready, ready, only we tarry for our Vizards our Caps, I put em to a
knave to doing, because I would have em the better done.


If you put em to a knave, you are like to have em the worse done.


Your wit is most active, I called him knave in regard of his long stay Sir, not
his work.


But de'e hear May. Neuill, did you bespeak a Vizard with a most terrible
countenance for me.


A very Devils face, I fear nothing but that it will fright the women.


I would it would, and a huge Moustaches?


A very Turks.


Excelennt.


But do you think he will come at all?


Oh, there he is.


Nothing can be done to night, if I enter not.

Stand back there, or I'll burn you.


'twere but a whoorish trick Sir.


Oh Sir is't you, Hart you'll be killed.


Marry God forbid Sir.


Pray forbear, let me speak to him, Oh you use us very well.


In good Faith, I have been so troubled about this Gentleman's scurvy face (I
take it) tis wonderful.


Well, are you fitted now.


Fitted at all points.


Where are the Caps.


Here Sir.


Let me see mine.


Come help me on with mine.


This a rare face to fright the Maids in the Country, here now I'll pin my
purse, come help me on.


So, so, away, mine being on I'll follow you.


Pray make hast.


So that doors fast, and they are busied.
About their charge: on with this Robe of mine,
This Vizard and this Cap; help me a little.

At first Change I must tell her who I am?


Right, tis agreed, I (leading of the Mask,)
Should dance with Bellafront.

And at the second, I come away with her, leave them dancing, and shall find
you at the back door.


The rest
That follows, is digested in my breast.

What would you do? Stand back,
Unless you can eat Torches.

Come, come, away for shame.


Tis such a tedious rascal. So ha we'e.


Thou hast well fitted em, though thou made em stay.


I forbid any man to mend em Sir, 'good night unto your worship.


Alas Sir, I have another to set forth
This very night: By your leave my Masters.

By your leave, by your leave, you'll let a man go out?


Now go with me, and let all in that will.


I am your Scudmore.


Ha?


By heaven I am,
Be ruled by me in all things.

Even to death.


Sfut did you not know me by my purse?


I should ne'er have known you by that, for you wear it on your head, and
other folks in their pockets.


Which is my Lord I pray?


The second man
Young Neuill leads.

And where's Sir. Abraham?


He with the terrible visage.


Now out upon him to disfigure himself so,
And 'twere not for my bottle, I should swooned.

Good very good.


But where's the Bride and Neuill?


Ha.


Ware tricks.


Oh, there they come, it was their parts to do so


This Neuill, this is Scudmore.


How?


But here's my Lady,


No my Gentlewoman.


Zoones Treason, I smell powder.


In short know, that I am married to this Gent.
To whom I was contracted long ago:
This Priest the inviolable knot hath tied,
What ease I find being vn-Ladifyed.

What Riddle's this?


Ware the last Statute of two Husbands.


Bellafront, pish.


This is the very Priest that married me,
Is it not Sister?

No.


Lord bless us here is conjuring,
Lend me your Aqua-vitae bottle good Mother.

Hoy-day, the worlds turned up side down, I have heard and seen two or three
Benifices to one Priest, or more, But two Priests to one Benefice, ne'er
before.


Married not you the Earl?


Bonafide, no.


You did then?


Yes.


I have the Privilege then.


Right, you were married first.


Sir Iohn you dote,
This is a Devil in a Parsons coat.

A pretty Emblem.


Who married her, or would have caused her marry
To any man but this, no better was,
Let circumstances be examined,
Yet here's one more, and now I hope you all,
Perceive my marrying not Cannon call.

Neuill, whoop.


Hart, what a deal a Knavery a Priests cloak can hide, if it be not one of
the honestest friendliest Coozenages that ere I saw, I am no Lord.


Life, I am not married then in earnest.


So Mistress Kate, I kept you for my self.


It boots not to be angry.


No faith Sir Iohn.


Whether will you go with your Calfe on your back Sir.


Now more knavery yet.


Prithee forbear, or I shall do thee mischief: By your leave, here's some
sad to your merriment: know you this Captain?


Yes very well.


Oh Sister, here's the Villain slandered me.


You see he cannot stand to it.


Is he hurt in the arm too?


Yes.


Why then by Gods-lid thou art a base Rogue, I knew I should live to tell thee
so.


Sir Abraham I say.


Heaven is just.


What a Rogue are you, is this the Surgeon you would carry me to?


Confess your slander, and I will I swear.


Nay tis no matter, I'll cry quittance with you,
Forgive me Mrs. Kate, and know all people
I li'de not with her, but beli'de her once,
And to my recantation, that same Soldier
Enforced my hand.

Yes, here tis Mistress Kate.


I see now how I am cheated, love him well,
He has redeemed your honour with his sword.

But where is Strange my Son, oh were he heer He should be married new to
make all sure.


Oh my Divining Spirit, he's gone to Sea.


This cunning in her is exceeding good,
Your Son, your husband, Strange is murdered.

How?


Peace, peace, for Heavens sake peace,
Come Sir, I'll carrre you to a Surgeon,
Here's Gold to stop thy throat, for God-sake peace.

Sir, you have brought me to a Surgeon already, I'll be even with you.


Of all men living I could marry thee,
Were not my heart given to another man,
Sir you did speak of Strange.

These women are as crafty as the Devil,
Yes, I did speak of him, Sir Iohn, my Lord,
Know Strange is murdered by that Villains hand,
And by his wives consent.

How?


God forbid.


Search presently the Closet and the Vault,
There you shall find his body, tis too true,
The reason all may guess, her husband wanting
Spirit to do on me what he hath done,
In hope to marry her, he hath murdered him.

To marry me, no villain I do hate him
On this report, worse then I do thy self,
And may the plagues and Tortures of a Land
Ceize me, if this be not an Innocent hand.

Fore-God tis most like truth, son Scudmore pray
Look to this fellow, Gentlemen assist,
Torches, some Torches, I'll go search my self,

I will assist you.


But I pray Sir how came you unto this knowledge


From his mouth.


I'll save your labour, and discover all:
Thou perjured villain, did not swear thou would not discover me.

I but swore in jest.


Nay but remember thou did wish Strange living
If ever thou did tell, Sir all is true,
And would my punishment would ease my Conscience.

To New-gate with him hence, take her along,
Out Murderers, whore thou art no child of mine,
Fetch Constable and Officers, Away.

Sir do but hear me speak.


Fetch Officers.


Go fetch a Surgeon.


Sir, you are then too violent, I will bail her.


Oh my dear Strange.


My Son.


Brother.


Young Strange.


Hart, I was never sick before, help me now to a
Surgeon, or I shall swoon instantly. As 2 leads him he speaks
Thou were it borne a Roman-Citizen, fare thee well,
And farewell love, and women, ye diseases,
My horse and sword shall be my Mistresses,
My Horse I'll court, my sword shall lye with me.

The way to cure lust, is to bleed I see.


Tell him al Scudmore, whilst I go a wooing again, Sir Iohn will you go along,
and my two worshipful Elders, I pray be you witnesses, Priest go Lucida, you
did once love me, if you do still, no more words, but give me your hand, why
are ye doubtful?


Ne'er look upon me M. Lucida, Time was, Time is, and Times past, I'll none of
you now, I am other-wise provided.


Well spoken Brazen head, now or never Sir Abraham.


Then first as duty binds, I crave consent
Of my two parents dear: If I, say so;
If not, I'll ha her, whether you will or no.

How. how.


I hope you will not


Mam, I am resolved, you have a humour of your Aqua-vitae bottle, why should
not I have a humour in a wife?


An old man were a fitter match for her,
He would make much of her.

Much on her, I know not what ye call much making on her, I am su^e I have made
two on her.


And that an old man cannot do I hope.


Oh thou beyond Lawrence of Lancashire.


Come, come, you shall not.


Speak not in vain, I am to sure to change,
For hand and heart are sure,
Ecce signum, and this have I done, and never lay with her

Nay, then tis too late,
Tis sure, Tis vane to cross the will of Fate.

Well, well, God bless you.


Thanks reverend couple, and God bless withal
The little Ninnie that herein doth spraule,
Parson you shall dispatch us presently:
Lord how soberly you stand.

Now truly I could ne'er stand drunk in my life.


Strange and most fortunate, we must have a new Tucke then.


Is it a match?


Tis done.


Then Bacchus squeeze Grapes with a plenteous hand.
Parson you'll take some pains with us to night;
Come Brothers come, fly Willow to the woods,
And like the Sea, for healths let's drink whole floods.

I consecrate my deed unto ths City,
And hope to live my self, to see the day,
It shall be shown to people in a play.

And may all true love have like happy end,
Women forgive me; Men, admire my Friend.

On Parson on, and Boy out-voice the Music,
Ne'er was so much (what cannot heavenly powers,)
Done and undone, and done in twelve short hours.


