As in the vaults of this big-bellied earth,
Are dungeons, whips, and flames, for wicked Ghosts;
So fair Elysian fields; where spotless souls
Do bathe themselves in bliss. Among the rest,
Two pleasant Groves by two sorts are possessed:
One by true Lovers crowned with myrtle boughs,
Who hand in hand sing Paeans of their joy:
Brave Soldiers hold the second, clad in steel,
Whose glittering Arms brighten those gloomy shades,
In lieu of Starry lights. From hence I bring
A pair of Martial Imps, By Ioues decree,
As sticklers in their Nations enmity.
Furious Camillus, and thou Britain bold
Great Brennus, sheath your conquering blades: In vain
You threaten death: For Ghosts may not be slain.

From the unbounded Ocean, and cold climes,
Where Charles his wayne circles the Northern Pole:
I first lead out great swarms of shaggy Gaules,
And big-bon'd Britains. The white-pated Alps,
Where snow and winter dwell, did bow their necks
To our victorious feet: Rome, proudest Rome,
We clothed in scarlet of patrician blood,
And about your Capital prauns'd our vaunting steeds,
Defended more by Geese, than by your gods.

But I cut short your fury, and my sword
Redeemed the City, making your huge vast trunks
To fat our Crows, and dung our Latian fields:
I turned your Torrent to another Coast:
And what you quickly won, you sooner lost.

Leave these weak brawlings. Now swift time hath spent
A Pylian age, and more, since you two breathed,
Mirrors of Britain, and of Roman valour.
Lo, now the black Imperial Bird doth clasp
Under her wings the Continent, and Mars
Trampling down nations with his brazen wheels,
Fights for his Nephews, and hath once more made
Britains and Romanes meet. To view these deeds
I Hermes bring you to this upper sky;
Where you may wander, and with ghastly looks
Incite your Country-men, when night and sleep
Conquer the eyes, when weary bodies rest,
And senses cease: Be Furies in their breast.
Never two Nations better matched. For Jove
Loves both alike: whence then these armed Bands?
Mavors for Rome, Neptune for Albion stands.

Then let war open his jaws, as wide as hell,
And fright young babes, my Country-folke more sterne
Can out-looke Gorgon: Let the Fates transpos'd
Hang beaten Flags up in the victors land:
Full dearly will each Pace of ground be sold,
Which rated is at dearest Blood, not Gold.
What, are their ruined Fanes, demolisht Walls
So soon forgot? Doth Allia yet run clear?
Or can three hundred Summers slake their fear?

Arise thou Iulian Star, whose angry beams
Be Heralds to the North, of war, and death.
Let those black Calends be revenged; Those Ghosts,
(Whose mangled sheaths deprived of Funeral rites,
Made the Six hills promise a Cadmus crop:)
Be expiated with a fiery deluge.
Jove rules the Spheres, Rome all the world beside:
And shall this little corner be denied?

Bandy no more these private Frowns; but hast,
Fly to your parties, and enrage their minds:
Till at the period of these Broils, I call,
And back reduce you to grimm Pluto's hall.

Me thinks I hear Bellona's dreadful voice
Redoubled from the concave shores of Gaul:
Me thinks I hear their neighing Steeds, The groans
Of complemental Souls, taking their leave:
And all the din and clamorous route, which sounds
When falling Kingdoms crack in fatal flames.
Dye Belgickes, Dye like men. Free minds need have
Nought, but the ground they fight on, for their grave:
And we are next. Think ye the smoky mist
Of Sunne-boyld Seas can stop the Eagles eye?
Or can our watery walls keep dangers out,
Which fly aloft? That thus we snorting lye,
Feeding impostum'd humours, to be launched
By some out-landish Surgeon:
As they are now: whose flaming towns, like Beacons,
Give us fair warning, and even guild our Spyres,
Whilst merrily we warm us at their Fires.
Yet we are next: who charmed with peace and floath,
Dream golden dreams. Go, warlike Britain, go,
For Olive bough exchange thy Hazell bow:
Hang up thy rusty Helmet, that the Be
May have a hive, or Spider find a Loom:
In steed of soldiers fare, and lodging hard,
(The bare ground being their bed, and table) lye
Smothered in down, melting in luxury.
In steed of bellowing drum, and cheerful flute,
Be lulled in Ladies lap with amorous Lute.
But as for Nennius, know, I scorn this calm:
The ruddy Planet at my birth bore sway,
Sanguine adust my humour; and wild fire,
My ruling Element. Blood, and rage, and choler,
Make up the Temper of a Captains valour.

Welcome thus far, Partners of weal and woe,
Welcome brave bloods: Now may our weapons sleep,
Since Ariovist in cocke-boate basely flies:
Vast Germany stands trembling at our bridge:
And Gaul lies bleeding in her mothers lap.
Once the Pellaean Duke did Eastward march,
To rouse the drowsy Sun, before he rose
Adorned with Indian rubies: But the Mayne
Bad him retire. He was my Type. This day,
We stand on Natures western brink; Beyond,
Nothing but Sea and Sky. Here is Nil ultra.
Democritus make good thy fancy, give me
More worlds to conquer, which may be both seen,
And won together. But me thinks I ken
A whitish cloud kissing the waives, or else
Some chaulky rocks surmount the barking flood.
Comius, your knowledge can correct our eyes.

It is the Britain shore, which ten leagues hence
Displays her shining cliffs unto your sight.

I'll hit the white. That Sea-marke for our Ships,
Invites destruction, and gives to our eye
A treacherous Becko. Dare but resist: your shore
Shall paint her pale face with red crimson gore.

Thus much I know, Great Caesar, that they lent
Their secret aid unto the neighbour Gaules;
Fostering their fugitives with friendly care:
Which made your victory fly with slower wing.

That's cause enough. They shall not henceforth range
Abroad for War, We'll bring Him to their doors:
His ugly Idol shall displace their gods,
Their dear Penates, and in desolate streets
Raise trophies high of barbarous bones, whose stench
May poison all the rest. I long to stride
This Hellespont, or bridge it with a Navy,
Disclosing to our Empire unknown Lands,
Until the Arcticke Star for Zenith stands.

Then raise the Camp, and strike a dreadful March,
And unawares pour vengeance on their heads:
Be like the winged Bolt of angry Jove.
Or chiding Torrent, whose late-risen stream
From mountains bended top runs raging down,
Deflouring all the virgin dales.

First let's advise; For soon to ruin come
Rash weapons, which lack counsel grave at home.

What need consulting, where the Cause is plain?

The likeliest Cause without regard proves vain.

Provide for Battle, but of Truce of word.

Where peace is first refused, should come the sword.

But tis unlike, their selfe-presuming might
Will curbed be with terms of Civil Right.

Tis true: yet so, we stop the peoples cry,
When we propose, and they do peace deny.
We'll therefore wise Ambassadors dispatch,
Parents of Love, the Harbingers of Leagues,
Men that may speak with mildness mixed with courage,
Having quick feet, broad eyes, short tongues, long ears;
To warn the British Court.
And further view the Ports, faddome the Seas,
Learn their complotments; where Invasion may
Be soonest entertained. All this shall lye
On Volusene, a Legate, and a Spy.

My care and quickness shall deserve this kindness.
Mean time unite, and range your scattered troupes.
Embark your Legions at the Iccian shore,
And teach Erynnis swim, which crawled before.

Although the peoples voice constrains me hold
This Regal staff, whose massy weight would bruise
Your age and pleasures: yet this, Nephews, know:
Your trouble less, your honour is the same,
As if you wore the Diadem of this I'll.
Mean while Androgeus hold unto your use
Our Lady-City Troynovant, and all
The Toll and Tribute of delicious Kent;
Of which each Quarter can maintain a King.
Have you, Themantius, Cornewalles Dukedom large,
Both rich and strong, in mettalles and in men.
I must to Verulams fenced town repair,
And as Protector for the whole take care.

My heart agrees. Henceforth ye Sovereign cares,
State-mysteries, false graces, jealous fears,
The Linings of a Crown, forsake my Brain:
These Territories neither are too wide,
To trouble my content; nor yet too narrow,
To feed a Princely train.

All thanks I render: your will shall guide ours,
With treble-twisted love we'll strive to make
One Soul inform three Bodies, keeping still
The same affections both in good and ill.
Now am I for a hunting match. You thickets
Shelter a Boar, which spoils the plough-mans hope:
Whose jaws with double sword, whose back is armed
With bristled Pykes; whose fume inflames the air,
And some be-snowes the trampled Corn. This Beast
I long to see come smoking to a feast.

Here comes my Belgic friend, Landoraes servant:
What news, Rollano, that thy feet so strive
To have precedence of each other? Speak,
I read disturbed passions on thy brow.

My trembling hart quauers upon my tongue,
That scarce I can with broken sounds vent forth
These sad, strange, sudden, dreary, dismal news.
A Merchants ship arrived tells, how the Roman
Having run Gaul quite through with bloody arms,
Prepares for you: His navy rigged in bay,
Only expects a gale: Farther, they say,
A pinnace landed, from him brings command,
Either to loose your freedom, or your land.

And dares proud Caesar back our vn-tam'd surges?
Dreads he not our Sea-monsters? whose wild shapes
Their Theaters near yet in Picture saw.
Come Sirs, To arms, To arms: Let speedy posts
Summon our petty Kings, and muster up
Our valorous nations from the North, and West.
Androgeus hast you to the Scots and Pictes,
Two Names, which now Albaniaes kingdom share:
Entreat their aide, if not for love, yet fear:
For new foes should imprint swift-equall fear
Through all the arteries of our I'll.
Belinus, thy authority must rouse
The vulgar troops within my special charge,
Fire the Beacons, strike alarms loud,
Raise all the country against this common Foe:
We'll soon confront him in his full career;
This news more moves my choler, then my fear.

I am by birth a Belgic, whence I fled
To Germany, for fear of Roman Arms:
But when their bridge bridled the stately Rhine,
I soon returned, And thought to hide my head
In this soft Halcyons nest, this Britain I'll.
But now, behold, Mars is a nursing here,
And gins to speak aloud.
Is no nook safe from Rome? do they still haunt me?
Some peaceful God transport me through the air,
Beyond cold Thule, or the Suns Bed-chamber,
Where only Swine or Goats do live and reign.
Yet these may fight. Place me, where quiet Peace
Hushes all storms, where sleep and silence dwell,
Where never man nor beast did wrong the soil,
Or cropp the First-fruites, Or made so much noise
As with their breath. But foolish thoughts adieu:
Now catch I must, or stand, or fall with you.

The Court a wardrobe is of living shapes:
And Ladies are the tissue-spangled suites,
Which Nature wears on festival high days.
The Court a Spring, each Madame is a Rose.
The Court is Heaven, fair Ladies are the Stars.

I, falling Stars.

False Echo, don't blaspheme that glorious sex,
Whose beauteous rays can strike rash gazers blind.

Love should be blind.

Pray, leave this Cynic humour, whilst I sigh
My Mistress praise: Her beauty's past compare:
O would she were more kind, or not so fair.
Her modest smiles both curb and kindle love:
The Court is dark without her; when She rises,
The morning is her hand-maid, strewing roses
About loves Hemisphere: The lamps above
Eclipse themselves for shame, To see her eyes
Out-shine their Chrysolites, and more bless the skies,
Than they the Earth --

Give me her Name.

Her body is a Crystal cage, whose pure
Transparent mould not of gross elements
Compacted, but the extracted Quintessence
Of sweetest forms distilled: where Graces bright
Do live immured, but not exempt from sight. --

I prithee speak her.

Her model is beyond all Poets brains,
And Painters pencells: All the lively Nymphs,
Sirens, and Dryads, are but kitchin-maydes,
If you compare. To frame the like Pandore,
The Gods repine, and Nature would grow poor. --

By Love, who is't? hath she no mortal Name?

For here you find great Iunoes stately front,
Palla's gray eye, Venus her dimpled chin,
Auroraes rosie fingers, the small wast
Of Ceres daughter, and Medusaes hair,
Before it hist: --

O Love, as deaf, as thou art blind! Good Eulinus
Call home thy soul, and tell thy Mistress name.

O strange! what ignorant still? when as so plainly
These Attributes describe her: why? She is
A Rhapsody of Goddesses. The Elyxar
Of all their several perfections. She is
(Now bless your ears) by mortals called Landora.

What: Landora the Trinobanticke Lady?
How grow your hopes, what mettle is her breast?

All steel and adamant. Tis beauties pride, To stain
Her lilly white with blood of Lovers slain.
Their groans make music, and their scalding sighs
Raise a perfume, and vulture-like she gnawes
Their bleeding hearts. No gifts, no learned flattery,
No stratagems can work Landoraes battery.
As a tall Rock maintains majestic state,
Though Boreas gallop on the tottering seas,
And tilting split his froth out spurging waives
Upon his surly breast: So she resists:
And all my proiects on her cruel hart,
Are but retorted to their Authors smart.

Why then, let scorn succeed thy love, and bravely
Conquer thy self, If thou wilt conquer her:
Stomachs, with kindness cloyed, Disdain must stir.

Most impious thoughts! O let me rather perish,
And loving die, than living cease to love:
And when I faint, let her but hear me cry,
Aye me, there's none, which truly loves, but I.

O ye cross darts of Cupid! this very Lady,
This Lady-waspe woes me, as thou dost her,
With glances, jewels, bracelets of her hair,
Lascivious banquets, and most eloquent eyes:
All which my heart misse-consters as immodest,
It being pointed for another Pole.
But hence learn courage, Coosse; why stand you dumb?
Women are women, and may be ore-come.

Your words are eare-awigges to my vexed brain
Like henn-bane juice, or Aconite diffused
They strike me senseless.
My kinsman, and Hirildas to my end:
But I'll near call you Counsellor, or Friend Adieu.

Stay, stay. For now I mean with gentler breath.
To waft you to your happy landing place.
Seeing this Crocodile pursues me flying,
Flies you pursuing: we'll catch her by a trick:
With promise feigned, I'le' point a Cupids stage,
But in the night, and secret, and disguizd:
Where thou, which art my self, shalt act my part;
In Venus games, all Coosning goes for Art.

Blessed be these means, and happy the Success.
Now gin I rear my creast above the Moon,
And in those gilded books read Leactures of
The Faeminine Sex. There moves Cassiope,
Whose garments shine with thirteen precious stones,
Types of as many virtues: Then her Daughter,
Whose Beauty without Perseus would have tamed
The monstrous Fish, glides with a Starry Crown:
Then Just Asttea kembes her golden hair:
And my Landora can become the skies,
As well as They. Oh, how my joys do swell!
He mounted not more proud, whose burning Throne
Kindled the Cedar-toppes, and quafft whole fountains.
Fly then, ye winged hours, as swift as thought,
Or my desires: Let days bright Waggoner
Fall headlong, and lye buried in the deep,
And dor-mouse-like Alcides night out-sleep.
Good Tethys, quench his Beams, that He ne'er rise,
To scorch the Moors, to suck up hony-dewes,
Or to betray my person.
But prithee tell, What Mistress you adore?

The kind Cordella, Loving, and Beloved:
Only some jar of late about a Favour
Made me inveigh against women. Come, away,
Our plottes desire the night, not babbling day.

We must give way: Here come our reverend Bard
To sing in Synod, as their Custom is,
With former chance comparing present deeds.

At the Spring
Birds do sing:
Now with high,
Then low cry:
Flat, acute;
And salute,
The Sun borne,
Every morn.

The praises of the flowery Spring.
Flora Queen
All in green,
doth delight
To paint white,
Woods renew
Hunters hue.
Shepherds gray
Crowned with bay,
And to spread
Cruel red,
With a blew,
Colour true.

With his pipe
Care doth wipe,
Till he dream
By the stream.

Faithful loves,
Turtle Doves,
Sit and bill,
On a bill.
Country Swains
On the plains,
Run and leap,
Turn and skip.

Pan doth play
Care-away.
Fairies small
Two foot tall,
With caps red
On their head
Dance around
On the ground.

Phyllis bright
Cloth in white,
With neck fair,
Yellow hair:
Rocks doth move
With her love,
And make mild,
Tigers wild.

The praises of the flowery spring.
Thus spend we time in laughter,
While peace and spring do smile:
But I hear a sound of slaughter,
Draw nearer to our I'll.
Leave then your wonted prattle,
The Oaten reed forbear:
For I hear a sound of battle,
And Trumpets tear the air,
Let bag-pipes dye for want of wind,
Let Crowd and Harp be dumb;
Let little Taber come behind:
For I hear the dreadful drum.
Let no Birds sing, no Lambkins dance,
No fountains murmuring go:
Let Shepherds crook be made a lance:
For the martial horns do blow.
Heavens favour Cridous fair Albaniaes King:
And Britael decked with the Demetian Crown:
The same to famous Guerted, whose command
Embraces woody Ordovickes black Hills.
Legate, you may your message now declare.

By me great Caesar greetes the Britain state:
This letter speaks the rest.

Then read the rest.

Since Romulus race by will of Jove,
Have stretched their Empire wide:
From Danowes banks by Tygris swift,
Unto mount Atlas side:
And Provinces and Nations strong.
With homage due obey.
We wish that you hid in the Sea,
Do likewise tribute pay.
Submitting all unto our wills,
For rashly aiding Gaul:
And noble Lads for hostages
Make ready at our call.
These granted may our Friendship gain:
Denied shall work your woe:
Now take your choice, whether you'de find
Rome, as a Friend, or Foe.

Bold mandates are unwelcome to free Princes.
Legate withdraw; you shall be soon dispatch'd.

He writes more like a Victor, than a Foe;
Whose greatness risen from subdued nations,
Is fastened only with feare's slippery knot.
Nor can they fight so feirce, for wealth or fame,
As we for native liberty. With answer rough
Bid him defiance. So thinks Cridous.

Guerted maintains the same, and on their flesh
I'll write my answer in red Characters.

Thou Ravenous woolfe, Imperious monster Rome,
Seuen-headed Hydra; know, we scorn thy threats:
We can oppose thy hills with mounts as high;
And scourge usurpers with like cruelty.
And thus thinks Britael.

Let Caesar come: Our land doth rust with ease,
And wants an object, whose resisting power
May strike out valarous flashes from her veins.
So shadows give a Picture life. So flames
Grow brighter by a fanning blast. Nor think,
I am a Courtier, and no Warrior borne:
Nor Loue-Obiect: For well my Poet says,
Militat omnis Amans, Each Lover is a Soldier;
I can join Cupids bow, and Mars his Lance.
A pewter-coate fits me, as well as silk.
It grieves me see, Our Martial spirits trace
The idle streets, while weapons by their side
Dangle and lash their backs, as 'twere to upbraid
Their needless use. Nor is it glory small,
They set upon us last, when their proud Arms
Fadome the Land and Seas, and reach both Poles.
On then, So great a Foe, so good a cause,
Shall make our name more famous. So thinks Eulinus.

Then Friends and Princes on this Blade take oath:
First to your Country, to revenge her wrongs:
And next to me, as General, to be lead
With unity and courage.

The gods bless Britain, and Cassibelane.

Now royal friends, the Heirs of mighty Brute:
You see, what storm hangs hovering ore this land,
Ready to pour down cataclysmes of blood;
Let ancient glory then inflame your hearts:
Beyond the craggy hills of grim-fac'd death,
Bright honour keeps triumphant Court, and deeds
Of martial men live there in marble rolls.
Death is but Charon to the Fortunate Isles:
Porter to Fame.
What though the Roman armed with foreign spoil,
Behind him lead the conquered world, and hope
To sink our Island with his Armies weight:
Yet we have gods, and men, and horse, to fight:
And we can bravely die. But our just cause,
Your forward loves, and all our people edg'de
With Dardane spirit, and the powerful name
Of Country; Bid us hope for victory.
We have a world within our selves, whose breast
No Forainer hath vn-revenged pressed
These thousand years. Though Rhine and Rhoane can serve,
And envy Thames his never captive stream:
Yet maugre all. If we our selves are true,
We may despise, what all the earth can do.

Lets then dismiss the Legate with a frown:
And draw our forces toward the Sea, to join
With the four Kings of Kent, and so affront
His first arrival. But before all, let
Our Priests and Druids in their hallowed groves
Propitiate the gods, and scan events
By their mysterious Arts.

Well, so: your tongue's your own, though drunk or angry.

Vmh.

Speak not a word upon your life: Be dumb.

Vmh.

I'll winch up thy estate. Be Harpocrates.

Vmh.

Thy fortunes shall be double-guilt. Be midnight.

Vmh.

An excellent instrument to be the Bawd
To his dear Lady. -- But Rollano, hark:
What words, what looks did give my letter welcome?

Vmh.

Nay, now thy silence is ante-dated. Speak.

Vmh.

I give thee leave, I say. Speak, Be not foolish.

Then -- with your leave: She used upon receipt
No words, but silent joy purpell'd her face,
And seeing your Name, strait clapped it to her heart,
To print there a New Copy: As she would say,
The words went by her eyes too long a way.

You told her my Conditions, and my Oath
Of silence, and that only you be used.

All, Sir.

And that this night --

I, Sir.

You guard the Door --

I, Sir.

But I ne'er mean to come.

No, Sir? Oh wretch!
Shall I deceive, when She remains so true?

No. Thou shalt be true, and She remain deceived.
I'll lye, and yet I will not lye. My Friend
Eulinus in my shape, shall clime her Bed.
This is the point. You'll promise all your aid.

Your Servant to Command, and then Reward.

We'll draw thee Meteor-like by our warm favour
Unto the roof and feeling of the Court:
We'll raise thee (hold but fast) on Fortunes ladder.
This Fellow is a Medley of most lewd
And vicious qualities: A braggart, yet a coward,
A knave, and yet a slave: True to all villainy,
But false to Goodness. Yet now I love him,
Because he stands just in the way of love.

Coosse, I commend you to the Cyprian Queen;
Whilst I attend Diana in the Forest,
My kinsman Mandubrace, and I must try
Our Grey-hounds speed after a light-foot hare.

O Love! whose nerves unite in aequall bonds
This massy frame. Thou Caement of the world:
By which the Orbs and Elements agree:
By which all Living creatures joy to be,
And dying live in their Posterity.
Thy holy raptures warm each noble breast,
Sweetly inspiring more Soul. Thy delight
Surpasses melody, Nectar, and all pleasures
Of Tempe, and of Tempe's eldest Sister
Elysium: A banquet of all the Senses!
By thy Commanding power, Gods into Beasts,
And Men to Gods are changed, as Poets say:
When Sympathy rules, All like what they obey.
But Love triumphs, when Man and Woman meet
In full affection: Double vows then fill
His sacred Shrine. Yet, This to me denied,
More whets my Passion: Mutual Love grows cold.
Venus, be thou Propitious to my wiles;
And laugh at Lovers perjuries and guiles.

That Souls immortal are, I easily grant:
Their future State distinguisht, Joy, or Pain,
According to the merits of this Life.
But then I rather think, being free from Prison,
And bodily contagion, they subsist
In places fit for Immaterial Spirits:
Are not transfus'd from Men to beasts, from beasts
To men again: wheeled round about by change.

And were it not more cruel, to turn out
Poor naked Souls stripped of warm flesh, like Landlords,
Bidding them wander: Then (forsooth) imagine
Some unknown Cave or Coast, whether all the myriads
Of souls deceased are slipped, and thrust together.
Nay, Reason rather says: As at one moment,
Some dye, and some are borne; so may their Ghosts,
Without more cost, serve the succeeding age:
For sure they do'nt wear; to be cast aside.
But enter strait, less, or more noble bodies,
According to desert of former deeds.
The valiant into Lyons, coward minds
Into weak Hares, The ambitious into Eagles
Soaring aloft; But the perverse and peevish;
Are next indenniz'd into wrinkled Apes:
Each vice and virtue wearing seemly shapes.

So you debase the gods most lively image,
The humane Soul, and rank it with mere Brutes,
Whose life of reason void, ends with their sense.

Hayle to Heavens privy Counsellors. The King.
Desires your judgment of these troublesome times.

The gods foretold these mischiefs long ago,
In Eldells reign, The Earth and Sky were filled
With prodigies, strange Sights, and hellish shapes.
Sometime two Hostess with fiery lances met,
Armour and Horse being heard amid the Clouds:
With Streamers red now march these airy Warriors,
And then a sable hearse-cloath wrappes up all:
And bloody drops speckled the grass, as falling
From their deepe-wounded limbs:
Whilst staring Comets shook their flaming hair.
Thus all our Wars were acted first on high,
And we taught what to look for.

Nature tunes step-dame to her brood, and dams
Deny their monstrous issue. Saturne joined
In dismal league with Mars portends some change.
Late in a grove by night, a voice was heard
To cry aloud, Take heed, more Troianes come.
What may be known or done, we'll search, and help,
With all religious care.

The King and army do expect as much:
That powers divine perfumed with odours sweet,
And feasted with the fat of Bulls and Rams;
Be pleased to bless their plots.

All rites and orisons due, shall be performed.
Chifely Night's Empress fourefold Honour craves,
Mighty in Heaven, and Hell, in Woods, and Waives.

What land, what people, and what answer; Show.

We saw a Paradise, whose bosom teemes
With silver oar: whose Seas are paved with pearl:
The Meadows richly spread with Floraes tapestry:
The fields even wonder at their harvest loads.
In Crystal streams the scaly nations play,
Fringed all along with trembling poplar trees:
The Sun in Summer loath to leave their sight,
Forgets to sleep, and glancing makes no Night.
Then for the men, Their statures tall and big,
With blue-stain'd skins, and long black dangling hair
Promise a barbarous fierceness. They scarce know,
And much less fear our Empires might; but thus
Returned defiance:
Seeing your Empire's great. why should it not suffice?
To covet more and more, is Tyrants usual guise.
To loose what Jove you gave, you'de think it but unjust:
You have your answer then: Defend this I'll we must;
Which from the world cut of, and free from her first day,
Hath Iron more for swords, than Gold for tributes pay.
If amity, and like fear, succour to Gaul impartes:
Pardon: For this small brooke could not divide our hearts.
We hope the gods will help, and fortune back our Cause,
Who take Arms, but to keep our lives, our Wives, and Laws.
As you from Troy, so we; Our pettigree do claim:
Why should the branches fight, when as the roote's the same?
Despise us not, because the Sea and North us close*
Who can no further go, must turn upon their foes.
Thus rudely we conclude: Wage war, or change your will:
We hope to use a lance, far better than a quill.

I grieve to draw my sword against the stock
Of thrice-renowned Troy: But they are rude,
And must be frighted, ere we shall be friends.
Then lets aboard, and hoisting sails convey
Two legions over: For I long to view
This unknown land, and all their fabulous rites;
And gather margarites in my brazen cap.
Nature, nor Fates can valorous virtue Stop.

Now Caesar speaks like Caesar: stronger and stronger,
Rise like a whirlwind, tear the mountains pride;
Shake thy brass harness, whose loud clattering may
waken Gradivus, where he sleeps on top
Of Haemus, lulled with Boreas roaring Base:
And put to flight this Nation with the noise.
A Fly is not an Eagles combatant:
Nor may a Pygmee with a Giant strive.

Health and good fortune on Cassibelane tend.
My love to you and Britain, waft me hither,
To make atonement, ere the Roman Leader.
Bring fire and spoil and ruin on your heads.
No herb can ever grow, where once he treads.
Nothing withstands his force. Be not too hardy,
But buy a friend with kindness, least you buy
His anger dearly.

Comius, speak no more: He knows our mind.

O let not rage so blind your judgment, but
Prevent with ease the hazard of a war,
Of war, a word composed of thousand Isles.
O be not cruel to your selves. I'll undertake
Without discredit to appease his wrath,
If you'll cas-sheere your soldiers, and receive
Him like a Guest, not like an Enemy.

False-hearted Gaul, dare thou persuade even me,
For to betray my people to the sword?
Now know I, thou art sent for to solicit
Our Princes to rebel, to learn our strength.
Lay hands on him: A Spy.

A Spy, a spy, a traitor, and a spy.

Is this the Guerdon of my loving care?
You break the laws of Nature, Nations, Friends:
But look for due revenge at Caesars hand.

Expect in prison thy revenge. Away with him.
Belinus, have you mustered up our Forces?

Yes, if it please your Highness.

And what are the particulars?

First Cridous leads from the Albanian realm,
Where Grampiu's ridge deuides the smiling dales,
Five thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot,
Three thousand Chariots manned. The Brigants come
Decked with blew-painted shields, twelve thousand strong.
Under the conduct of Demetiaes Prince,
March twice three thousand, armed with Pelts and Glaues:
Whom the Silures flank, eight thousand stout,
Greedy of fight, borne soldiers the first day,
Whose gray-goose-winged shafts near flew in vain.
Then Guerted mounted on a shag-haire steed,
Full fifteen thousand brings, both horse and foot,
Of desperate Ordovicians, whose use is
To rush half naked on their foes, enraged
With a rude noise of pipes.
Your Province bounded with that boiling stream,
Where Sabrine lovely Damsel lost her breath,
And with curld-pated Humber, Neptunes heir:
Affords eight thousand Cars, with hooks and sithes,
And fifty thousand expert men of war:
All brave Lhoegrians, armed with Pike and Spear:
Each nation being distinguisht into troops,
With gawdie pennons flickering in the air.
Beside these, Kent is up in arms, to blunt
The edge of their first furious shock.

We'll now invite them to a martial Feast,
Carving with Fauchions, and carousing healths
In their lives moisture. Well returned Androgens:
Have you obtained, or is your suite denied?

Our message told unto the Scots, Their King
With willing sympathy, leauies a Band,
Ten thousand footmen, whose strange appetites
Murder, and then devour; and dare gnaw, and suck
Their enemies bones. Conducted thence, we saw
The Pictish Court, and friendly intertain'd,
Receive eight thousand, whose most ugly shapes,
Painted like Bears, and VVolues, and brinded Tigers,
May kill, and stonifie without all weapons.
More aide they promise, if more need. These forces.
Lead by Cadallan hither march with speed.

Tis well, our Kings consent for common good.
When all are joined, we shall ore-spred the hills,
And soldiers thicker than the sand on shore,
Hide all the landing coasts. Ere next day break,
The rocks shall answer, what the drum doth speak.

That ceremonious fear, which bends the heart
Of mortal creatures, and displays it self
In outward signs of true obedience;
As prayer, kneeling, sacrifice, and Hymns:
Requires again help from immortal Deities,
As promise, not as Debt: we laud their names,
They give us blessings, and forgive our blames.
Thus gods and men do barter. What in Piety
Ascends, as much descends again in pity:
A golden chain reaching from Heaven to Earth.

And now's the time, good Brother, of their aide,
When dangers, black face frowns upon our state.
Away, away, ye hearts and tongues profane:
Without devotion mysteries are vain.

Draw near ye heavenly powers,
Who dwell in Starry bowers.
And ye who in the deep,
On mosste pillows sleep.
And ye who keep the center,
Where never light did enter.
And ye whose habitations,
Are still among the nations;
To see, and hear our doings,
Our births, our wars, our wooings.
Behold our present grief:
Belief doth beg relief.
By the veruaine, and Lunary,
By Fernefeed planetary,
By the dreadful Mistletoe,
Which doth on holy Oak grow.
Draw near, draw near, draw near.

Help us beset with danger,
And turn away your anger:
Help us begirt with trouble,
And now your mercy double:
Help us oppressed with sorrow,
And fight for us to morrow.
Let fire consume the foe-man,
Let air infect the Roman,
Let Seas entomb their fury,
Let gaping earth them bury:
Let fire and air and water,
And earth conspire their slaughter.

By the veruaine, c.
Help us, help us, help us.

We'll praise then your great power,
Each month, each day, each hour:
And blaze in lasting story,
Your honour and your glory.
High altars lost in vapour;
Young Heifars free from labour;
White Lambs for suck still crying,
Shall make your music dying.
The boys and girls around,
With honie-suckles crowned:
The Bardes with Harp and riming,
Green baize their brows entwyning,
Sweet tune, and sweeter ditty,
Shall chant your gracious pity.

By the vervaine, c.
VVee'l praise, we'll praise, we'll praise.

Fix, holy Brother, now your prayers on One,
Britains chief Patroness; with humble cry,
Let us invoke the Moons bright Majesty.

Thou Queen of Heaven, Commandress of the Deep,
Lady of Lakes, Regent of Woods and Dear,
A Lamp dispelling irksome night: The source
Of generable moisture. At whose feet
With garments blue, and rushy garlands dressed
Wait twenty thousand Naiades. Thy Crescent
Brute Elephants adore, and man doth feel
Thy force run through the Zodiac of his limbs.
O thou first guide of Brutus to this I'll,
Drive back these proud usurpers from this I'll.
Whether the name of Cynthiaes silver globe;
Or chaste Diana with a gilded quiver;
Or dread Proserpina, sterne Dis his spouse;
Or soft Lucina, called in child-bed throws:
Doth thee delight. Rise with a glorious face,
Green drops of Nereus trickling down thy cheeks,
And with bright horns, united in full orb,
Toss high the Seas, with billows beat the banks,
Conjure up Neptune, and the Aeolian slaves,
Contract both Night and Winter in a storm:
That Romans loose their way, and sooner land
At sad Avernus, than at Albions strand.
So may thou shun the Dragons head and tail:
So may Endymion snort on Latmian bed:
So may the fair game fall before thy bow:
Shed light on us, but lightning on our foe.

Me thinks, a gracious luster spreads her brow:
And with a nod she ratifies our suite.

Behold, an Oracle flies out from her Shrine:
Which both the King and State shall see, before
We dare unfold it.

Follow me.

Follow? what means that word, who art, Thy will?

Follow me Nennius.

He names me: Sure it is some friend which speaks.
I'll follow thee, though't be through Stygian lakes.

Tis Ancient Brennus calls, whose victories
Europe and Asia felt, and still record.
Dear Nennius, now's the time to steel thy courage.
Can thou behold thy Mother captive, then
Look back upon thy Ancestors enrolled
Among the Worthies, who spread wide her Fame?
First let thy Eye-balles power out poisoned beams,
And kill them with Disdain, who dare but lift
Their hand against her. No: no Confull must
Boast of her Thraldom, and out-braue our Walls.
I wonder that such impudent Owls should gaze
Against the splendour of our Britain cliffs:
Play thou a second Brennus, Let thy Lance,
Like an Herculean club, Two monsters tame,
Romes Avarice and Pride; So come Life or Death,
Let Honour have the Incense of thy Breath.

Farewell heroic Soul: Thou shalt not blush,
At Nennius deeds. The smallest drop of Fame
Is cheap, If death and dangers may it buy.
Yet give thy words new vigour to my spirits,
And spur the Pegasus of my mounting thoughts:
I'll follow thee, ore piles of slaughtered foes,
And knock at Plutoes gate. I come. Come Life or Death,
Honour, To thee I consecrate my Breath.

Iulius, stay here: Thy friend Camillus speaks.

O thou Preserver of our present Race,
Our Cities Second founder! What dire fate
Troubles Thy Rest, that thou should trouble Mine?

Only to bid thee fight.

Thou shalt not need.

And bid thee take a full Revenge on this,
This Nation, which did sack and burn down Rome,
Quenching the coals with blood, and kicked Our ashes,
Trampling upon the ruins of our state.
Then led the Gaules in triumph thorough Greece,
To fix their Tents beside Euxinus gulf.

Is this that Northern route, the Scourge of kingdoms?
Whose names till now unknown, We judged Gaules;
Their Tongue and Manners not unlike.

Gaules were indeed the Bulk, but Brennus lead
Then Brother to the Britain King, those armies,
Backed with great troops of warlike Ilanders.
To thee belongs, To render Bad for Ill:
O be my Spirit doubled in thy breast,
With all the Courage of three Scipioes,
Marius, and Sylla: That this nation fierce
In feats of war, be forced to bear our Yoke.

So may thou sweetly rest, as I shall strive
To trace your steps: Nor let me live, If I
Thence disappointed ever seem to fly,

Ancient Bards have sung,
With lips dropping honey,
And a sugared tongue,
Of our worthy Knights.
How Brute did Giants tame,
And by Isis current,
A second Troy did frame;
A Center of Delights.
Locrinus eldest son
Did drown the furious Hunne,
But burnt himself with Elstrids love,
Leist, Rex Pacificus.
Elud, Judicious,
How heavenly Bodies roll above.
Wise Bladud founded hath,
Both Soul and Bodies Bath:
Like Icarus he flew.
How first Mulmutius wears
A golden crown: whose heirs
More than half the World subdue.
Thou nurse of Champions, O thou Spring
Whence Chivalry did flow:
Thou Diamond of the worlds great Ring,
Thy glorious virtue show:
Thou many a Lord hast bred,
In Catalogue of Fame read:
And still we have
As Captains Brave,
As ever Britains led.
Then dub a dub, dub. The Armies join, Tantara.
Cassibelane with armour gay,
And strongly couched lance:
His courser white turned into bay,
On carkesses shall prance.
What a crimzon stream, the Blade
Of Nennius sword hath made.
Black Alliaes day,
And Cannaes Fray,
Have for a Third long stayed.
Then dub a dub, dub. The Armies join, Tantara.
Our Landing cost us dearly, many lives
Between the ships and shore being sacrificed.
Our men with heavy armour clogged, and ignorant
Of all the flats, and shallows, were compelled
To wade and fight, like Tritons half above,
Half under water. Now we surer tread,
Though much diminished by so many lost.
Come on. Come on.

So, let them land. No matter which they choose
Fishes or Crows to be Executers:
They will find the Land as dangerous as the Sea.
The Nature of our Soil won't bear a Roman,
As Irish earth doth poison poisonous beasts.
On then: charge close, before they gather head.

Brother, Advance. On this side, I'll lead up
The new-come Succours of the Scots and Picts.

What, still fresh Supplies come thronging from their dens?
The nest of Hornets is awake: I think
Here's Natures Shop: Here men are made, not borne,
Nor stay nine tedious months, But in a trice
Sprout up like mushromes at Wars thunder-clap.
We must make out a way.

Since I must fight, I am prepared to fight:
And much inflamed, with noise of Trump and Drum:
Me thinks I am turned Lyon, and durst meet
Ten Caesars. Where are all these Covetous rogues?
Who spoil the rich for gain, and kill the poor
For glory? Blood suckers, and public Robbers.

Nay stay, and brag, Rollano did thee kill:
Stay, let me flesh my sword, and wear thy spoils.

Come. Will ye forsake your Ensign, and fall off?
I call to witness all the gods, I here
Perform my duty. Thou can not escape.
Now dye, or yield thy self.

I yield, I yield, Oh save my life, I yield.
I am no Britain, but by chance come hither:
I'll never more lift weapon in their quarrel.

How may I trust your faith?

Command me any thing.

Lay down your neck.
Give up your sword.
Base coward live: Such foes will near do hurt.

Rollano, what at stand? pursue the chase.

I made their strongest Captain fly: This hand,
This martial hand, I say, did make him fly.

Some silly scout.

He was a match for Cyclops, at each step
The ground danced, and his nostrills blew the dust:
Armed as the God of Battle pictured is.

What were his looks?

His brows were like a stormy winter night,
When Iuno scolding, and Mars male-content
Disturb the air: At each look lightning flies,
Jove against the Giants needed but his eyes.

How eloquent is fear!

So came he stalking with a Beame-like spear,
I gave the onset, then received his charge,
And next blow cleft his morrian: So he flies.

O bravely done. Here comes a straggling soldier.

Tis he, tis he. I care not for vain glory:
Its sweeter live, than dead to be a story,

O valiant coward, stay. There's not a spark
Of Britain Spirit doth enliue thy corps.

Fight Britains, fight. The day is ours. I'm cloyed
And glutted even with slaughter. There some fly,
And flying die, and dying mangled lie.
I twice broke through the ranks, yet cannot find
That venturous Captain Caesar, on whose breast
I long to try my blade, and prick that bladder
Puffed with ambition, and victorious fight.

We may confess, they come of Troiane kind,
An hundred valiant Hectors here we find.

Fairly encountered, let our blades discuss
Who hath the justest cause: And on this combat
May victory her equal Balance hang.

Thou seem a worthy Prince, and Caesars match.

Stay, stay. Thou art at home: Here's Campus Martius.
The Britains sought-for see thy frighted back:
Return, and take possssion of our I'll,
And by thy death be styled Britannicus.
Leave not thy blade vnsheath'd: A tyrants heart
To his own sword a scabberd should impart.
Ye Senators, and gaily-gownd Quirites,
Open the Capitolls ivory gates, and lead
Fat bulls with garlands green, and gilded horns:
Let supplications last for twice ten days:
Caesar returns a victor.
Prepare the laureate Coach, and snow-white steeds,
Embroidered Canopy, and scarlet gowns:
Let Altars smoke, and Tholes expect our spoils:
Caesar returns in Triumph. -- Basely flies,
And leaves his conquest in weak infancy.
For had he won this coast, yet many blows
Must pass, ere he could pass the Thames; And then
Ere he touch Humber, many nations must
Be tamed: And then before he Tweed can drink,
And climb the craggy rocks of Caledon:
A Life is spent: yea, many thousand lives.
Oh my wound rages, and tormented brain
Doth labour of a Fury, not a Pallas.
This Blade was steeped in poison: O, I am poisoned:
Well did thou fly, or I had made thee taste
Thine own provision. Now my wrath and pain,
With double force shall flow in purple streams.
The three infernal Ladies with wyar-whips,
And speckled snakes, shall lackey close my steps;
Whilst that I offer Hecatombes of men
The Latian Shepherds brood shall ban those stars,
Whose glimmering Sparks lead their audacious Pines,
To lye so far from home in foreign soil.
When Cedars fall, whole woods are crushed: nor dye,
Can Nennius private without company.
Thou runst upon thy death.

A Roman never daunted was with looks;
Else had not Sarmatane, and Lybian bug-beares
Bin captive led in chains.

But our looks kill.
Dye Slave, by Caesars sword. Thou art his friend.
Dye, as the Ransom of his greater ghost:
And learn as well as I, how venom smarts.
Be thou my Post to the Tartarian Prince,
And tell him, Nennius comes: But first, I'll send
More of you headlong home, a nearer way,
Then by the cloudy Alps.

Now hot Alarms dye in fainter notes:
Tempestuous night is gone: Victorious joy,
(As when pale Eos cleaves the Eastern fogs,
And blushing more and more opes half her eye,
With holy water sprinkling all the meads,
Whose clear Reflex serves as her Morning glass:)
Doth paint with gaudy plumes the checkerd sky.
The only Name of Victory sounds sweeter,
Than all mellifluous Rhetoric.

Thanks to Andates, whose power kingdoms feel:
Andates, greatest goddess: In whose train,
Fear, red-fac'd anger, and confusions wheel,
Murder, and Desolation run before:
But joyful shouts, mirth, Olive-budding Peace,
And Lawrell-crowned triumph, at her back,
Do pace with stately steps. Thy Temple is,
The Earth: where furious Monarchs play the Priests:
Armies of men imbrue thy Altar stones.
Thanks also to the Trident-shakers Mace,
Drawn by two ramping Sea-horses: at whose Beck,
The waters wrinkled frown, or smoothly smile.
But thou Heavens Diamond, fair Phoebus Sister,
Nor Delian Dames, nor the Ephesian Towers,
Shall blazon more thy Praise. Thy influence strong
Struck up the sandy ooes; that madding waives
Batterd their ships, and dashed their bended sails,
And with a tempest turned them round in scorn.

But where's the Answer which her Idol gave:
Can you expound the sense?

Dread Sovereign, Thus runs the Oracle*
Loud doth the King of Beasts roar,
High doth the Queen of Birds soar:
But her wings clipped soon grow out:
Both repent they are so stout.
Till C. against C. strike a round,
In a perfect Circle bound.
The meaning wrapped up in cross doubtful terms,
Lies yet thus open: That disastrous fate
Must be the Prologue to a joyful close.
The rest we'll search out, if our skill don't fail.

Renowned Cassibelane, might my counsel speak!

I know thy loyal heart, and prudent head,
Upon whose hairs Time's child experience hangs
A milke-white badge of wisdom: And can wield
Thy tongue in Senate, and thy hands in field.
Speak free, Belinus.

We forfeit fame, and smother victory
By idle lingering: The Foe discomfited
Must needs be much amazed: His Ships dismembered
Do peece-meale float upon the waives: The Horse,
Whose succour he expects, are beaten back
By friendly winds: His Camp contracted is,
A tithe of soldiers left, the rest all slain:
His chief munition spent, or lost: provision,
An Armies soul, but what we give, he wants.
What then shall hinder to destroy their name?
So none again shall venture, but our I'll
Rounded with Nereus girdle may enjoy
Eternal peace.

I like thy warning: with united stroke
Of all our Nations, we'll his Camp beleaguer,
Devouring ships and men. But one mischance,
My Brother's wound, his mortal wound I fear,
Turns all to wormwood. Why were ye dumb ye Idolls!
No Sainted Statue did foretell this grief.
Come lets go visit him. You may, Lord General,
Set Comius free: We love not to insult,
But render good for ill.

Heaven, Sea, and Wind, and all the Elements,
Conspire to work us harm. Our Ships in Gaul
Wind-bound, at length put forth, and come in view
Are tossed, and torn: Our Navy on the shore
With civil discord break each others planks.
The airy Rulers are displeased, all day
Noises and nimble flashes mixed with rain
Amaze our soldiers.
To make grief full, my Daughters death I hear.
When, powerful Fortune, will thy anger cease?
Never till now did Caesar fortune fear.
Mount Palatine, thou Throne of Jove, and ye
Whose lesser Turrets pinnacle Rome's head:
Are all your Deities fled? or was I bold,
To out-goe Nature, and our Empire stretch
Beyond her limits? Pardon then my fault.
Or do we basely faint? Or is our might
Answered with like, since Troy against Troy doth fight?
Nor can I write now, I came over, and
I overcame: Such foes deny such hast.

The Ilanders consult, and sure intend
Some sudden stratagem. And now the scales
Poyze equal day and night, when rougher Seas,
And stormy Pleyads may our passage stop.

Then Sirs, to ship: Compelled I leave this land:
But to return, if gods do not withstand,

We won the day: and all our foes are fled?

Yes noble Nennius, scattered on the shore
Thick lay the Latines, and the glutted stream
Spewes up her dead, whom death hath taught to swim,
Though ignorant alive: Their flowing blood
Made a new Red Sea. But those few we lost,
Sweetly reposed upon their mothers breast,
And wounded all before, kept in their face
A warlike frown.

Where is false Caesars sword, called Crocea Mors,
Which never hurt, but killed: Let it be placed
Within my tomb.

Here is the fatal Blade.

Death like a Parthian flies, and flying kills:
In midst of Conquest came my deadly wound.
Accursed weapon, more accursed man,
Who Serpent-like in poison bathes his sting:
Tyber doth breed as venomous beasts as Nile:
We scorn such cruel craft. But death draws near,
A giddy horror seizes on my brain.
Dear Brother, and thou holy Priest of Heaven,
Witness my words; I leave my Country free,
And dye a victor. Thus, with lighter wing
My purified soul mounts to her First-best Cause.
I long even to behold those glorious Cloisters,
Where Brutus, great Dunwallo, and his sons,
Thrice noble Spirits walk.
Thou mighty Enginer of this wondrous Globe,
Protect this I'll, confound all foreign plots:
Grant Thames and Tyber never join thair chanells;
But may a natural hate derived from us
Live still in our long-trailed progeny.
(My eyes do swim in death.)
Before this land shall wear the Roman yoke;
Let first the adamantine axell crack,
Which binds the Ball terrestrial to her poles,
And dash the empty air; Let Planets drop
Their scalding gelly, and all flame being spent,
Entomb the world in everlasting smoke.
Come faster, Death: I can behold thy grim,
And ugly Jaws with quiet mind: Now, now:
I hear sweet music; and my spirit flies.

His breath is gone: who was his Countries prop,
And my right hand. Now only doth he crave,
To see him laid with honour in the grave.

A mind content, Oh, tis a mind of pearl,
A Mint of golden thoughts, A Heaven on Earth!
When eager longer meet full-but their scope,
And hopes are actuated beyond hope.
So Iason joyed, the golden Fleet obtained:
So Hercules joyed, the golden fruit being gained:
So Venus joyed, the golden Ball to hold:
So Mydas joyed, when he turned all to gold.
So, and much more reioyc'd, the Phrygian swain,
When he conveyed the fairest (except mine)
Which air did ever kiss: His brazen keele
Proud of her burden, sliced the capering brine:
The Tritons blew their horns, and Sea-gods dance,
Before, behind, about his Ship they prance:
The meare-Maides skip on high, but to compaire
Their dangling tresses with her silken hair.
These were but shadows of my bliss. A robe
Of pure beatitude wrapes me round about,
Without a speck, or blemish: nor can Invention
Wish more unto me, than I have, Landora.
I'm rich, free, learned, honoured, all; in this.
Who dares conceive against the Female sex,
But one base thought? Lo here I stand, their Champion,
And will maintain, He is a beast, a devil,
Begot between a Bitch-woolfe, and an Incubus.
Women, all good, all perfect, and all gracious,
Men-making creatures, Angels clad in flesh;
Let me adore your Name.

-- And let me speak.
Why: Landora loves not you, but me in you.

But I in you enjoy Landoraes love.

But she enjoys not your love, cause unknown.

No matter; I in you, or you in me:
So that I still possess my Dearest dear.
A paltry fancy last night in her bed
Turmoyl'd my thoughts, which since I shaped in Rimes. Thus.

Prithee let's hear: I know thou art turned Poet.
Night having drawn the Curtain, down I lye
By one, for worse Saturnius left the sky.
Slumbering at last: For love can hardly sleep:
Strait-waies I dreamed: For love doth Revels keep.
A Damsel fair, and fashioned for delight,
(Our day-borne objects do return at night)
With flowery chaplet, and red velvet gown,
Which from her breast was fastened along down
With rich enamelled locks, all which one key,
Whose bright gold about her silver neck did play,
Could open and divorce. A veil most fair,
(Such witness only Paphian doves do wear)
With false light did her beauteous Front improve;
From this Arch Cupid shot his darts of Love.
With gentle strain she took me by the hand,
(Touches in love do more than tongue's command)
Then leads me with an amorous smile along:
He's easily led, whom beauty draws, more strong*
Than Cable-roapes. An Altar we descry,
Where Incense-franke, and Amber fumes did fly,
In little rolling curls: A reverend Priest,
With snowy beard waving upon his breast,
There kneeling did his eyes in sorrow steep:
Whose passionate cry made me, though ignorant, weep.
Phlegons hot breath no sooner lickes up dew,
Than joy had dried those tears: For lo I view
A circular room, all built with marble clear,
The title, Natures Store-house. Most strange here
It seemed: I know not how we came, nor whence,
Nor any passage saw to get from thence.
But Oh the rich delight, and glorious fire
Which dazzled me: No hart can more desire.
Her first my guide op'd her spice-breathing door,
Ask what thou wilt, this is the Arc of store,
No vows are here repulsed, she said. But I
Surprised with extreme joy and ecstasy,
By chance a Scorpion's tail behind her spied:
Pity, such beauty such a monster hide.
Trembling, yet silent, doubtful what to crave:
Lo, with a stink and fearful screech this brave
And glorious Dame doth vanish, and a dart,
Which still I quake at, struck me to the heart.
But waking I reuiu'd, and found in bed,
Such Sovereign Balm, would cure old Peleus dead.

Ha, ha. Your tedious dream hath made me drowsy.
But hark, we must attend the Funeral pomp.

Set down that heavy load with heavier hearts.
Could virtuous valour, honourable thoughts,
A noble scorn of Fortune, pride, and death;
Myriads of vows and prayers sent to heaven,
Could Countries Jove, or Britains Genius save
A mortal man from sleeping in his grave:
Then had thou lived great Nennius, and out-liu'd
The smooth-tongu'd Greek. But we may more envy,
And less bewail thy loss, since thou did fall
On honours lofty Field-bed, on which Stage
Never did Worthy act a statelier part.
Nor durst pale death approach with Cypress sad,
Till flourishing Bay thy conquering temples clad.
Turnus may conceal his Name,
Nennius had Aeneas fame.
Hannibal let Africa smother,
Nenius was great Scipioes brother.
Greece forbear Achilles story,
Nennius had brave Hectors glory.
Thrush and Nightingale be dumb:
Sorrowful songs befit a Tomb.
Turn ye marble stones to water:
Isis Nymphs forswear al laughter:
Sigh and sob upon your bed:
Belyes noble Son is dead.

I like such slaughtering well, of birds and beasts;
Which wear no swords, nor shake a fatal pike:
When hogsheads bleed, and Oxen mangled lye.
O what a world of victuals is prepared
For sacrifice and feasting. Forty thousand
Fat Bullocks: than the Parks and Forests send
Full thirty thousand wild beasts, armed with horns,
And dangerous teeth: The maine battaillion
Consists of Sheep, an hundred thousand fat:
The wings are both supplied with birds, and fowls,
Sans number: And some fish for succours serve.
A goodly Army. Troynouant doth smoke,
And smells all like a kitchen. The King, Princes,
And Nobles of the land a Triumph hold.
Music, and songs, good cheer, and wine; and wine,
And songs and Music, and good cheer* High, brave.
No more shall barley broth pollute my throat,
But Nectar, Nectar of the grapes sweet blood:
Come heavenly Potion, wine: whose gentle warmth
Softens the brain, vnlockes the silent tongue,
Wits Midwife, and our spirits vestal Priest
Keeping alive the natural heate. A health,
A health (to make short work) to all the world:
So will it sure go round.

Sorrow must doffe her sable sable weeds, and joy
Furbish the Court with fresh and vernant colours:
Else should we seem ungrateful to the gods.
Triumphs must thrust out Obsequies: And Tilt
With Turny, and our ancient sport called Troy,
Such as Iulus about his Grandsires tomb
Did represent. And at each Temples porch
Games, songs, and holy murdering of beasts.
The Roman Eagle threatening woe,
The Sea did shadow with her wing:
But our Goose quills did prick her so,
That from the clouds they down her bring.
Both. Sing then ye Hills and Dales so so clear:
That Io Paean all may hear.
They may us call Isles Fortunate;
They sought for life here, not for Fame.
All, yield to them, they to our State:
The world knows but our Double Name.
Both. Sing then ye Streams and Woods so so clear:
That Io Paean all may hear.

Twas fowly plaid.

You lye, twas fairly hit.

I'll give a quittance.

Do your worst, vain braggart.
Oh, I am slain.

Hold, hold: my Nephew's slain before my face.
Life shall be paid with Life.

He shall not dye.

Shall not? Your King and Uncle says, He shall.

No kingly menace, or censorious frown,
Do I regard. Tanti, for all your power.
But the compunction of my guilt doth send
A shuddering chillnesse through my veins inflamed:
Why do ye stare, ye grisly powers of night?
There, there, His soul goes: I must follow him.

He was prouok'd and did it in defence:
And being My kinsman shall be judged by laws
Of Troynovant: Such custom claims our Court.

No custom shall bar Justice: I command
That he appear before us.

Trials are vain, when Passion sits as Judge.

I'll soon rebate this Insolent disdain.
Let not this dismal chance deface our joy:
Most royal Friends.

War being silenced, and Enyoes rage
In hell fast fetterd: Sound we now retrayte,
That soldiers may regreete their household gods.
Their children cling about their armed thighs.

And place their Trophies about their smoky halles;
There hang a Gauntlet bright, here a stabt Buckler,
Pile up long piles, and in that corner plant
A weighty sword, brandished by some Centurion.
Not he, who near on snaky perils trod,
But happy He, who hath them stoutly past:
For danger's sauce gives joy a better taste.

Great Monarch, if thy Summons call us back,
We tender here our Service, Men, and Arms:
As duty bids, and binds.

Should he return: Our Province dares him front.
So a most kind adieu unto all three.
I know your faithful love, Kents foure-fold Head,
Will check rash Rebels, and as firmly stand
As hearty Oaks, who bear off Aeolus blows,
And with a whistle but deride his force.
Burst gall, and dye my actions in flame-colour:
I saw Hirildas fall, and breath his soul
Even in my face. As though hell watched a time,
To crush our pomp, and glory into sighs.
The conduits of his vital spring being ripped,
Spurtle'd my robes, soliciting Revenge. Belinus,
Attach the Murderer, and if abettors
Deny obedience, then with sword and fire
Wast their Dominions. For a Traitors sake,
Whole towns shall tremble, and the ground shall quake.

Shall Justice, and just Libra near forsake
The embroidered Belt? No sign of them on earth?
Are Gods dim-sighted grown, or do they sleep
The morning, and carouse the after noone?
That mortal motions tumble thus by chance:
Cleave thou blew Marble Seeling, that heavens King
With clearer aim may strike a tyrants crown,
Nor spend his brimstone bullets against some hill,
Or innocent Pine.

Your injuries run low; Mine break all bounds.
My Father butcherd at his lawless will:
I banished from my lands, deposed from rule,
Owing my Life to night and flight.

I do confess, You may complain aloud,
And tear the Element with a dolorous note:
Call down Astraea from her crystal chair,
Or call up Nemesis from the direful deep,
To expiate your wrongs.
Else would the Manes of your father slain,
In a white sheet come sliding to your Bed:
And be revenged on you. He gave you life;
How can you better spend it, than to wreak
His death and slaughter? But our case and Cause,
Brother, is not the same: Eulinus slew
His innocent friend; And we defend the fact;
With hostile noise drowning Lawe's reverent voice:
But Murder out-cries Both. Give me then leave
To be a Neutral: My young years unfit
For any desperate course, can but complain:
The King our Uncle doth not use us well.

Usurpers use this method still: At first
He as Protector flily got the sterne,
During our nonage: Then the Commons voice,
Bought with a fawning brow, and popular grace,
Confirms his Regiment: We appointed shares,
With empty titles to beguile our thoughts,
Like puppet-Lords, dressed up with crown and scarf,
Glad that we live, and hunt, and reign ore brutes.
Our Uncle is the King. So when he saw,
His throne established, and his foes repulsed,
Grown big with prosperous fortune, proudly spurns
All fear of God or man.

His anger nursed by jealousies must feed
On Princes flesh, who loose both state and life,
If they but look awry. A tyrants growth
Reared up by Ruins, thence may learn his fall:
For whom all fear, He justly fears all.

In Antiphones thus tune we female plaints:
But plots and force beseem us. Thus. Great Caesar
Shall pull him down below us. Thou Mandubrace,
Sure pledges take of our revolt, and quickly
Implore his aid: blow up his drooping fire
With hopeful terms. But let him stronger come.

I fly unseen, as charmers in a mist.
Grateful Revenge, whose sharp-sweet relish fats
My apprehensive Soul. Though all were par'd of,
Which doth accrue from Fortune, and a man left
As barely poor, as Nature thrust him out:
Nay worse, though spirits boyle, rage, anger, care,
And grief like wild-horse tear the affrighted mind:
Though wrongs excoriate the heart: yet all is sweetened,
If vengeance have her course. I wreak not how;
Let Common-wealth expire, and owls proclaim
Sad desolation in our Halls; Let heaps
Of dust and rubbage Epitaph our towns;
Let fire and water fight, who first shall spoil
This universal frame. From North, or South,
Revenge, you are welcome. No sin worse than pity:
A tyrants only physic is Phlebotomy.

Rejoice O Britanie,
Britain O rejoice:
The stormy cloud past over,
And only made a noise.
A clattering sound was heard;
And still we felt no wound:
Rejoice; Rejoice:
Thou happy Britain ground.
O that sweet plenidh,
Eloquent Orone,
Were now to chant our victories,
With a melodious tone:
And rousing Echo from the dales,
With harmony to sound:
Rejoice; Rejoice:
Thou happy Britain ground.
Gang ye lads and lasses,
Sa wimble and sa wight:
Fewle mickle teene betide ye,
If ye ligg in this plight.
Be bonny, buxom, jolly.
Trip haydegues beliue:
And gif night gars the welkin merk
Tom piper do you blive.
Hidder, eke and shidder,
With spiced sow ycramd;
Sa that vnneath thilke borrells
May well no yede, no stand:
As leefe as life do weet it,
When timbarins gin sound;
Fore harvest gil prankt up in lathe,
To lout it low around.
A Story is't, or fable; That sterne Mars,
Thy weight did Romulus sleepy mother press?
Since we thy Brood degenerous, stand at gaze,
Charmed in the circle of a foaming flood,
And trail our dastard pikes? Burst Ianus prison,
Roar as thou did at Troy, drown Stentors voice
By many eights, which Pindus may re-beate,
Which Caucasus may as a Catch repeat,
And Taurus loch the fame: That Pygmees small
May squeak, It thunders, and dive into burroughs.
Let the four winds with dreadful clamour sing
Thy anger through the affrighted world.
What Lemnian chain shackles our mounting Eagle?
The Moone's round Concave is too strait a cage
For her advanced Pineons.

If pity can have room in angry breast,
Favour a Britain Prince, his Father slain,
His regiment bereft, his dearest blood
Drawn by the sword of false Cassibelane.
Having got Crown, he then struck at my head:
Nor can I safely suck my native air.
His Coosse Androgeus also, and whole regions
In open war withstand his violence.
Lo, Albions aged arms spread wide t'inchaine
Thee as her Patron, in a true-loue knot.
Wherefore dread Caesar, let thy mercy strike
Revengeful fire; and be justly styled,
Tamer of Tyrants. Then fame blows aloud,
When valour helps the weak, pulls down the proud.

Arise unhappy Prince, our deeds shall show,
We grant thy suite.
Fortune repents at last;
The Moon is changed, the Globe doth to us turn
Her shining cheek, and woes us with a smile.
But what firm signs of Faith, what faithful aide,
What furtherance can you give at our arrival?

See here Androgeus heir, whose tender age
His Father venters, and makes bold with nature,
To pledge his Darling. He and thirty more
Of noble linage shall assure our faith:
Besides I pawn my life.

Enough. I'll once more cross the Seas,
For your good, more than mine; That happier sky
May bless your Towns with peace, your fields with plenty;
Perpetual spring in gay perfumed attire,
Surname your I'll, the Garden of the West.

Thanks, gracious Caesar, for this kind acceptance,
My knee doth kiss the ground, my lip your knee.
Pardon ye gods, if any haunt our land,
Ye Nymphs, and Lares, Fawns, and Silvanes wild;
That thus I bring a stranger on our coasts,
Whose foreign shape and language, may affright
Our lazy clowns, and on my Countries back
Once tread victorious steps: Be pleased to view,
Wrongs now redressed, neglected first by you.

Now Volusene:
Our glorious state, like the noone-pointed Sun,
When he bestrides the Lyons flaming fleece,
Doth North-west roll his burning brand, whose fire
The Oceans blue lake cannot stop, but flies
With brighter blaze to thaw the frozen Isles.
But how proceeds our preparation?

Many strong Ships are built, five Legions armed
Ready to launch.

Blow gently Africus,
Play on our poopes: When Hyperions Son
Shall couch in West his fome-bedappled jade;
We'll rise to run our course.

Though Orpheus Harp, Arions Lute, the Chimes
Whose silver sound did Thebane towers raise:
Though sweet Vrania with her ten-string Lyre,
Unto whose stroke the daily-rowling sphaeres
Dance their just measures; Should with tune and tone
Tickle my eare-bred air: Yet can their notes
Those fabulous stones more enter, than my Soul.
Lead, poppy, Slumber stupefy my heart:
But Bedlam grief acts gambolles in my brain.
The Centaurs Wheel, Prometheus Hawke, The Vulture
Of Tityus, Sisyphus never mossy stone,
The tale of Danaids tubbe, and Tantalus gaping,
Are but flea-bitings to my Smart: I've slain
A kinsman: more, A friend I dearly loved:
Nay more, no cause provoking, but in rash
And hellish choler.
I had thought my Love had cannon-proofe bin against
A world of injuries: when see, all is split
By a small wind. Cursed be thou my Sword,
The Instrument of Fury: Cursed hand,
Which made the thrust: But most accursed Part,
Whose ruddy flesh triangular boiled in flame,
Like an Aetnean, or Vesuvian Salamander.
That Breast, I so could hug, that faithful breast,
That snowy white, I with dark sanguine stained;
And from the wounds red lips, his panting heart
Did seem to speak, Is this a friendly deed?
O no, Hirildas: Bears can harmless play,
Lyons can dally, and sheath up their claws:
I only, worst of brutes, kill friends in jest.
Why dost Androgeus kindly-cruell keep
Me from their Sentence? Say, Law bids me dye:
If Law should not, I'll make that Law my self.
Shall Ensigns be displayed, and Nations rage
About so wild a wretch? Shall foreign hooves
Kick up our trembling dust, and must a Caesar
Redeem my folly with a kingdoms fall?
First may I stop black Cerberus triple jaws.
Dye, Dye, thou hast out-liv'd thy self. Thou only,
Phaenix of females, still dost bind and bound
My runagate spirit in these walls of mud:
From thee, and For thee tis, I breath. Yet how
Borrow can I his Shape, or use mine own?
Odious before, now worse than hell-borne goblin
With brand and chains, to scare this Dove all quaking
Twixt wrath and fear. But Time may favour win:
When Hope doth fail, then Knife or Rope begin.

Wisdom confirm my Sense: what seemed their number?

Rising from shore Conjecture might descry
A thousand Ships with painted prowes, to pave
The briny fields of Neptune, their broad sails
Did Nereus canopy, Titans taper veil.
As nations twenty nine against Troy built up
A floating Delos of a thousand Ships,
To plough the liquid glass: No frame of Pallas,
No crafty Sinon; but Those wooden horse
Did Troy dis-Troy: So Troynovant shall feel
Her Mothers Fate: Achilles comes again:
And Pergamus again shall sink in dust:
They threaten.

Wonder! What can their Arsenalles spawn so fast?
Last year his Barks and Galleys were debauched;
This spring they sprout again: Belike their Navy
Like the Lernean adder faster grows,
The more tis pruned. They come their last. Lord Deputy,
Lead on the present troops, and levy new.
Twere best I think to let Him land, least view
Of his huge Navy should our Commons fright:
Retire our selves to some place of advantage,
Entice him from his ships: So cut the veins
Which nourish both: Enclosed he cannot escape.

I rather judge, We should oppose his footing,
Using the benefit of our natural mound.

Uncertain tis, where, when, he makes in-road:
To furnish all, unlikely: to neglect
Any, were dangerous, as Pelides heel.
Our shores are large, and levell: Then t'attend
His time and leisure, would exhaust the state,
Weary our soldiers.

All places may be strengthened more, or less:
As by last year, Discretion now may guess.
The Cliffs themselves are Bullwarkes strong: The Shelves
And Flats refuse great ships, the coast so open,
That every stormy blast may rend their cables,
Put them from anchor: Suffering double war,
Their men, pitched battle; and ships, naval fight.
For charges, tis no season to dispute:
Spend something, or loose all: Shall he maintain
A fleet to enthrall us, we detract small costs,
When freedom, life, and kingdom lye at stake?

But the Assailants are the flower of Italy
Backed with four hundred Gallic horse, all tried
And gallant troops, joined in one martial body,
To give a fuller stroke; When we Defendants
Scattered along, can weak resistance make:
Plainness of ground affoording us no shelter.

For what serves Art and Engines, Mounts and Trenches,
But to correct the nature of a plain?
A few on firm land may keep out a million,
Weakened by sea, false footing, billows rage,
And ponderous rage. When as received within,
He prospers by our spoil; We feed a Viper:
And male-contents and rebels have a refuge.
Nor were it safe, to venture all at once:
When one fought field being lost, swift ruin runs
And rushing throws down all.

We know our strength, and his: we'll fight in field.
Some dozen miles from sea. An open Theater
Gives luster to our prowess: To keep him out
Supposes fear, not manhood. No, let him march,
Till he rouse death, and stride his future grave.

Your will commands, and mine obeies.

The coast is clear. Our honour is the Goal.
In vain doth Tagus yellow sand obey,
Rhenes horned front, and nimble Tygris running
For wager with the wind, which skimmes his top:
In vain from Ganges to Hesperian Gades,
The Bounds marked out by Ioues two base-borne Sons,
Our Echoed Name doth sound: If we recoil
From hence again not victors.
Ye Pilotes old, who were begot on mere-Maides,
Whose Element is the Sea, bred and brought up
In cradles rocked with storms, and wooden walls,
Fear not to grapple with their seas. Fear not
Their bulks, Brave veterans: That extended mass
Is not of iron, but can bleed, and dye:
They were not dipped in Styx: nor are they Giants,
Or wild Poetic Centaurs we assail:
Let then this voyage quit our credit lost,
And let Rage lash on Courage. Here's the Game:
Life may be lost, but sure we'll hold fast Fame.

Our first attempt doth prosper: They retiring
Scudde to the bosom of their Firre-tree vaults,
And under hatches hide themselves from death.
The Cornish band made havoc of their ranks,
Like Scythian wolves midst of a bleating fold:
The jingling lances, rattling chariot-wheeles
Madded their horse. The Bow men merrily shot.

Yet would our tributary Kings had succoured!
We are decayed they much in number grown,
And surely will make head again.

Fear not, thou know I can even with a whistle,
Hide Kent with glittering arms: More flaming sparkles
Paint not a freezing night: nor speckled Bees
Buzz not about sweet Hyblaes bloomy head.
But what need millions, when some thousands serve?
O did my Brother live! wee'de clime the Alps;
Like brave Mulmutius sons; make Romulus woolfe
Howl horror in their streets, and Rome look pale,
As when the Punicke Captain eyed her walls.

Are ye the Men, who never fought in vain?
Who wear Bellonaes favours, in your skarres:
I, ye are They. What then benummes our Spirits?
Our Empire from Quirinus narrow Center
Doth circling spread, and finds no brink nor bottom.
Titan no later sets, nor earlier wakes,
Than he beholds our Provinces, Why, then?
What Privilege hath this place? Have we, or They
The Phrygian powers? Have they Palladium got?
No, no, Those gods our Capital keep with joy:
These only have vn-daunted minds from Troy.
What news, good Atrius?

No good news from Atrius.
When ominous Earth with shade and cloudy vapours
Had darkness doubled, storms began to sound,
The dabled South, ruffe-footed Aquilo,
Came rushing like two Rams, whose steeled horns
Dart fiery sparks: The clouds crushed breathe out flames:
Thunder and Lightning daunt all ears and eyes.
The winds and billows strive, who loudest roar.
The sky distilled in rain: his room to fill,
Ambitious waives would clime the starry hill.
Our ships are batterd all, some forty sunk.

What diuell-Cacus drags our Fortune back?
Doth She move retrograde? and hoist us up.
That we may fall at height? Why doest Camillus
Each night torment my sleep, and cry, Revenge?
I strive against the stream.

Thus join we Standards: And resign the keys
Of Troynovant, with all our warlike forces.

By me the Trinobants submit, and Cenimagnians,
Segontiackes, Ancalites, Bybrockes, and Cassians,
Six worthy nations do desire thy guard.

All, all shall know our love.

The Tyrant lies on Isis flowery banks,
Where a full Queer sing of white-surplist swans.
The foordes vnleuell belly they have fenced,
With sharpe stakes under water.

Nor stakes, lakes, fords, nor swords shall check our progress:
Those downy swans shall hear more funeral notes.
Their Kings departed, Nennius dead, whose loss
Would tears extort even from Pumicean eyes;
Had Britain nursed but such another Champion,
They might have stuck their darts on our barred gates,
And Latium trembled with contrary fates.
In what now lies their hope?

Great numbers still remain: nay worse, they laugh
At death, and boldly trust (as Druids preach)
Their souls who die in fight shall live in joy.
Hence count they dangers, benefits: and die
With freedom in their mouth, and wilful rage.
But let soft mildness wait on women, Let
Thy wrath ring through the woods in dusty noise,
To tell thy coming. No man's built so lofty,
But his foundation meets the humble dust:
Which undermined, how high he pearc'd the clouds,
So deep he sinks.
Hostile and civil foes shake top and root
As winds invade above, and Vines below.
And so will We.

No doubt: This blow shall like an earth-quake move
The roots and pillars of this sea-clipt I'll.
A cloud of vultures shall attend our Camp,
And no more shall the fields bear Vert, but Gules:
The grain en-graind in purple die shall loose
His verdant hue. Bones, marrow, humane limbs
Shall putrefying reake, whose vapoured slime
Kindled on high may breed long-bearded Stars,
To tell more mischief, and out-beard Apollo.

Let's wast no time, least more unto him flock,
As humours glide to guard the wounded member.

Atrius, let our ships be drawn on shore,
New-rigg'd and mended. I must needs confess him
A darling of the gods; under whose colours
Stars, winter, sky, and tempests serve in pay,
And know both march and skirmish by his Drum.

O my dear Lady, hast thou slain thy self?
So fairly pure, so kindly chaste, so
A Venus and Diana mixed in one.
She eat her meat with studdes of Pearl, she kissed
With Rubies, and she looked with Diamonds bright.
Fish seas, and foul the air, hunt all the earth,
For such another bit, and loose your labour.

O, why dost thou complain.

Had she not killed her self, no cruel Atropos,
No fury could for pity cut her thread.
She was the Load-stone of all eyes, The whet-stone
Of all brains, the touch-stone of all hearts: She was --

O my presaging thoughts in ugly form
Suggest some Tragedy. Speak: yet stay a while:
I know thou kill with speaking. Be then dumb:
Let sound near give those Notions airy robes.
Yet speak, dispatch me: Feare's as bad as death.
Oh, could no tongue affirm it! Is she dead?

My Mistress is.

VVither ye pleasant gardens, where she trod:
White lillies droop, and blasted daisies wink,
And weep in pearely dew. Blind Vesper morn,
Hang thy cold tears on every grassy blade.
Groan loud ye woods, and tear your leafie hair:
Let wind and hoary frost kill every flower:
For she is gone, who made continual May.
Let foggy mists envelop Sun and Stars:
For she is gone, who made perpetual day.
Confounded Nature stand amazed, dissolve
Thy rolling engines, and unbrace the Seas:
Fling all into their first disordered lump.
For thy chief paragon, thy rich Master-piece,
The Jewel, for which thou did venture all,
Is lost, is lost. And can I live to speak it?
How died she?

By a poisoned draught.

The very word (poison) infects my breath.
Durst thou presume to pass that corrall portch?
Were not her Lips sufficient Antidote?
Durst thou descend through those close winding stairs
With treacherous intent? How could thy venom
Seize on her, and not sweetened loose his virtue,
Or rather vicious quality? May toads,
Dragons, and mandrakes be thy gally-pottes:
This Body was a casket for the graces,
No cask for poison. With her dies all love:
Cupid may break his Bow, his arrows burn,
Then quench his Taper in a flood of tears.
Is she dead?

Or in a long trance.

She may revive:
I'll visit her: Art may prolong her days,
Whether she will or no. --

Alecto rising from the lakes
Of nights sad Empery:
With knotty bunch of curled snakes,
Doth lash fair Britany.
More ghastly monster did not spring,
From the Hybernian flood:
With which Morindus combating,
Of foe became his food.
Shall no more Shepherds in the shade
sit whistling without care?
Shall never spear be made a spade,
And sword a plowing share?
Grant heaven at last, that Music loud
Of bloody Mars be still:
That Britain Virgins in a crowd,
With hymns the sky may fill.
Nor is Landoraes loss,
The least part of our mournful muse:
Jove Iuno for to cross,
This Troiane Dame for Bride did choose.
Where She doth shine,
Above Guendoline,
The Amazon of her days:
And Mercia wise
Law to devise. O sound Landor. praise.
There doth she shine above,
Clear as great Deliaes horned bow,
Bright as the Queen of Love,
To shoot down gentle beams below.
Sabrina dare
Not to compare
With her most splendent rays:
A ring the sky,
A gem her eye: O sound Lando. praise.
Thus gain we ground: yet still our foes will fight,
Whether they win or loose. With bloody drops
Our path is printed: Thames his maiden-cheekes
Blush with vermilion: Nations crave our League
On every side: Yet still Cassibelane braves us,
Nor will submit.

Not far hence Verolame lies, his chiefest fort,
By nature guarded round with woods and fens,
By Art enclosed with a ditch and rampire:
From hence we must dislodge the Boar.

There are but two ways to assail this Town:
Both which I know. Your parted army must
Break thorough both at once, and so distract
His doubtful reskues.

Draw slaves unwilling, I dare meet my death:
And lead my Leader.

You'll repent anon,

If I do ill: But not for suffering ill.

Your stoical apathy will relent I know.
This Priest I caught within a shady grove,
Devoutly kneeling at a broad Oaks foot.
Now He awaits your Doom.

What god adore you?

Him, whom all should serve.

Whats the Moon?

Nights Sun:

Whats Night?

A foil to glorify the Day.

What most compendious way to happiness?

To dye in a good cause.

What is a man?

An Hermaphrodite of soul body.

How differ they in nature?

The body hath in weight, the soul in length.

One question more: What dangers shall I pass?

Many by land and sea: As steps to glory*
Throw Palatine on Aesquiline, on both
Heap Aventine, to raise one Pyramid: for a
Chair of Estate, where thy advanced Head
Among those Heroes pictured in the Stars,
Orion, Perseus, Hercules, may consult
With Jove himself. But shun the Senate house.
March round about the Caspian sea; search out
Among Cedars tall the Arabian Phaenix nest;
Run counter to old Nile, till thou discover
His sacred head wrapped up in cloudy mountains:
And rather than work fail, Turn Hellespont
Out of his channel; Dig that Isthmus down,
Which ties great Africa. Shun the Senate house.
Be Saturne, and so thou shalt not be Tarquine.
A Brutus strong,
Repayes in Fine:
Thy brutish wrong
To Brutus line.

We'll talk at leisure more.

No rampires keep him back: He presses forward,
Though every stamp he treads, seems to conjure
The fates from their infernal center. None
But he, durst be so bold.

Yes, when Britains lead, and Mandubrace insulting
With naked sword calls on the lagging soldiers:
When fearce Androgeus with revolted nations,
Usher his army. No way half so quick
To ruinate kingdoms, as by home-bred strife.
Thus while we single fight, we perish all.

I, I, those treacherous caitiffes, rebel slaves:
O may their countries heavy curse them sink
Below the nine-fold brazen gates of hell:
That princox proud: I, twas a escape in policy,
I should have slain the whelps with their good Sire.
Let Britains climactericall year now run,
The Series break of seventy Kings: Nay let
One urn conclude our ashes and the worlds.
Befall what will: In midst of horrors noise,
And crackling flames, when all is lost, we'll dye
With weapons in our hands, and victory scorn:
There's none that dye so poor, as they are borne.
Faithful Belinus, let a Post command
The Kentish Kings to set upon his fleet:
Whilst we here bid the base. Four thousand chariotteers,
(Such as did glide upon the Phrygian Plains,
And wheeling double service do perform,
Both horse-mans speed, and foot-mans stable strength)
Still do remain: With these and flocking voluntaries
We'll give him once more battle. Let the Captains
Enter, and hear my charge.
Subjects and Fellow-souldiers; We must now try
For ancient freedom, or perpetual bondage.
There is no third choice. The enraged foe
With cruel pride, proud avarice, hath spoiled
From East to West, hunting for blood and gain.
Your wives and daughters ravished, ransacked towns,
Great bellies ripped with lances, sprawling babes,
The spouse about her husbands neck run through
By the same spear. Think on these Objects:
Then choose them for your Lords, who spoil and burn
Whole countries; and call Desolation, Peace.
Yield, yield; That he ennobled by our spoils,
May clime the Capital with triumphant carte,
You led fast fetterd through the staring streets,
For city Dames to mock your habit strange,
And fill their arras hangings with our story.
No: Brennus ghost forbid, who this night stood,
Before my eyes, and grimly furious spake:
Shall Britain stoop to Roman Rods and Hatchets,
And servile tribute? Will ye so defame
Your ancestors, and your successors wrong,
Heirs but of slavery* O, this day make good
The glory of so many ages past!
I see, you are incensed, and wish to use
Your weapons, not your ears.
All. To arms, to arms, to arms: We'll fight, and dye.

So the Siluer-feathered swan,
Both by death and colour wan,
Loves to sing before she dye,
Leaving life so willingly.
But how can I sing a note?
When dead hoarsenesse stops my throat:
Or how can I play a stroke?
When my heart-strings all are broke.
Come guilty night, and with black velvet wings
Mantle me round; Let melancholic thoughts,
Hang all my brain with Blacks: This darksome grove,
My gallery. So, all things suite my mind:
Such funeral colours please a gasping heart.
I dyed with thee Landora once: Now only
Some struggling spirits are behind, to be
Laid out with most thrift on thy memory.
Where shall I first begin my last complaint,
Which must be measured by my glass of life?
At thee Hirildas? Slain in furious mood,
By whose help only I enjoyed my love?
Or thee Landora? dying for his sake,
And in thy death including mine?
Or at my Countries wrack? whose surface torn
Doth for my vengeance importune the Pole?
Or at my self? I, there is sorrows spring.
Shall I go wandering lurk in woods unknown,
A banished Hermit, and sigh out my griefs?
Teaching the pretty birds to sing my dear,
My dear Landora: There to feed on acornes,
Drink the clear fountain, and consume with weeping,
Were but an easy life, an easy death:
My violent passion must have sudden vent.
Refined Soul, whose odoriferous light,
The damned hags stare at, and whining elves,
Thinking it Heaven in hell: Behold my pangs,
Pity my dying groans, and be more soft.
O may our shadows mingle; then shall I
Envy no more those Citizens above,
The ambrosian iuncates of the Olympian hall
And all that gorgeous Roof. But cowards talk.
Come thou last refuge of a wearisome life;
A passport to the Elysian land, A key
To unlock my grieved in-mate. Lo I come.
O let this river from my eyes, this stream
From my poor breast, beg favour of thy ghost:
O let this luke-warme blood thy Rigour steep,
And mollify thy adamantine heart.
Leander-like I swim to thee through blood:
Be thy bright eyes my Pharos, and conduct me
Through the dull night of gloomy Erebus.
Flow, flow, ye lively drops, and from my veins
Run winding to the Ocean of my bliss:
Tell her my love, and if She still shall doubt,
Swear that ye came directly from my heart.
I stay too long.
Though I shall pass twelve monsters as the Sun,
Or twelve Herculean labours on a row:
Yet one kind look makes all my journey sweet
Thou Fayry-Queene of the Tartarian Court,
To whom Proserpine may the Apple give,
Worthier than She, to warm old Plutoes bed:
See thy poor vassal weltering in his gore.
I faint, I faint.
I dye thy Martyr, as I lived thy Priest:
Great Goddess be propitious, Sweet Landora --
What shall I doee? How shall I escape?

I scorn to take advantage, Rise and Fight.

I had rather be killed quickly, quickly.

Then die, as thou destrest.

O let me wink first.
I shall never endure it. Oh, oh. I am peppered and salted.

O that base Fortune should great spirits damp,
And fawn on muddy slaves: That envious fate
Should ripen villainy with a Syrian dew,
And blast sweet virtue with a Sirian flame.
A Catalogue of mischiefs do concur
Our Britain Hector, Nennius dead: Our Kings
Angry to be refused, sit still at home:
And then those traitors with their train augment
His huge and expert Army: Nothing stops him;
Rivers, nor Rampires, Woods, nor dangerous Bogs;
On this side Thames his dismal Ensigns shine:
Last, Kents unhappy rulers are at Sea
Ore-throwne, and our men almost spent. Then, General,
In desperate pride, and valours scornful rage,
Let us run head-long through their armed tents,
And make their Camp a Shambles: So to raise
Our lofty tombs upon their slaughtered heaps.

Nay, rather first lets parley for peace.

Ye Country-gods and Nymphs, who Albion love,
Old Father Neptune, all ye powers divine,
Witness my loyal care: If humane strength,
Courage, and policy, could a Kingdom save;
We did our best. But discord, child of hell,
Numbers of traine-men, and each Captain picked
Out of a Province, make us bow or break.
In vain we strive, when Deities do frown:
When Destinies push, Atlas himself comes down.

No mediator is so fit as Comius: And here's the man.

Do not the dangers which environ you,
Call for a good conclusion? which I wish
As friend to both sides.

No Comius: There is more behind, than Caesar
Hath ouer-runne: Our Chariotters still drive,
Our harness still is worn: Through woods and lakes
We'll tire his dainty soldiers: Then set fire
On Towns, and sacrifice our selves, our wives,
Our goods, and cattle, in one public flame:
That wind may blow our ashes in his face.

So shall dead Elements curse your causeless fury.
Rather conclude some friendly peace.

Thus far we hear you: If with honoured terms,
And royal looks, he will accept our faith:
We will obey, but never serve.

I'll undertake as much.

Thus civil war by me, and factious broils,
Deface this goodly land: I am revenged:
The cause Eulinus dead, my Anger dies.
He is our Uncle, and in danger's mouth;
Both claim relenting pity. Whom peace made
A rampant Lyon, war hath made a Lamb.
Caesar shall not proceed, for private ends,
To captivate our I'll: whose clamorous curse
Doth knock, I know, at Heavens Starre-nailed gates:
For that Ioues bird, impt with our plumes, ore-flew
The Oceans wall; To seek her prey in Britain.

I, we have made a Rod for our own backs:
Fetters of gold are fetters. No gap worse
To let destruction in by, than to call
A foreign aide: who having seen our weakness,
And tasted once the fatness of our land,
Is not so easily thrust out, as admitted.
Such medicine is worse than the malady,
Fretting the bowels of our kingdom.

I know their hatred just; and here resign
All my birth-right to thee, my second self:
I must forsake my Countries sight, and seek
New fortunes with this Emperor; In hope
To be raised up, by his now rising wheel.

O, do not so, dear Brother. So to part,
Were to divide one Indiuiduall Soul.
Nor think me so ambitious: I can live
A private life, and see a regal Crown,
With no more entry than I see the Sun,
Glitter above me. Let not Lud's two sons
Be parted by a Sea: I hold your presence,
At higher price than a whole kingdoms pomp.
Keep then your right: like those admired twins,
Let us rejoice, morn, live, and die together.

You shall a Sceptre gain.

And loose a Brother.

Bear you the Sovereign power of this land.

A body politic must on two legs stand:
I'll bear a part, so to diminish envy.

I must away, and shun the peoples eye.

If to your self unkind, be kind to me:
For my sake stay at home: why will you fly?
Think you a stepdame soil gives sweeter sap?

I: For trees transplanted do more goodly grow.

And I'll count men but stocks, when they do so.

I am resolved: All troubles brought a sleep:
To leave you with a parting kiss.

And by that kiss
May I transfuse my soul, or quite expire?
Brothers have often for a kingdom fought:
We strive to loose it. This is holy strife.
But here I vow, if ere that sacred Lace
Shall gird my Temples: Rome must keep her bounds,
Or fish for Tribute in the dredfull deep.

Let gracious favour smooth wars rugged brow:
Cassibelane will compound: All rage must end:
We choose you Umpire, for a friendly close.

It is my glory to end all with peace:
And for that cause, I Comius sent in hast,
For to conduct him hither.

This trump gives warning of the Kings approach.

Fate, and no fault of mine, makes me appear,
To yield as far as honour gives me leave.

Hail valorous prince, disdain not this ingrafting
Into Romes Empire, whose command encloses
The whole Leuant, and whose large shadow hides
The triple-bounded Earth, and bellowing Seas.

We shall observe your will; so you impose
A league, no yoke.

Thus we determine: That Crown still shall stand;
Reign as the total Monarch of this I'll:
Till death vn-kings you. 'Twere, Androgeus, best
You in our train kept honourable place:
And let Themantius wear the royal wreath.
You must forgive the Towns which did revolt,
Nor seek revenge on Trinobants, but let
Young Mandubrace possess his Fathers Princedome.

Be all wrongs drenched in Lethe.

Pardon my rash attempts.

Count me your loyal friend.

In sign of league, you shall us pledges give,
And yearly pay three thousand pound of silver,
Unto our Treasury. So let these decrees
Be straight proclaimed through Troynovant, whose Tower
Shall be more fairly built at my charge, as
A lasting Monument of our arrival.

All shall be done: Renowned Prince, whose worth,
Vnparalelld both as a Friend and Foe,
We do admire.
Accept this Surcoate, starrified with pearls,
And Diamonds, such as our own shores breed.

And you receive this massy Cup of gold,
Loves earnest, and Memorial of this day:
By this, suppose our Senate calls you friend.

Now time, best Oracle of Oracles,
Father of truth, the true sense doth suggest
Of Dians answer;
The Lyon and the Eagle do design
The Britain and the Roman states, whose arms
Were painted with those Animals: Both fierce
Weary at last conclude: The Semicircles,
First letters of the Leaders names, we see
Are joined in true loves endless figure.
Both come of Troiane race, both nobly bold,
Both matchless Captains, on one Throne behold.

Now the Tarpeyan rock ore-lookes the world;
Her Empire bounded only by the Ocean;
And boundless Fame beats on the starry Pole.
So Danow crawling from a mountains side,
Wider and deeper grows, and like a Serpent,
Or Pyramid reuerst; improues his bigness,
As well as length: Till viewing countries large,
And fed with sixty rivers, his wide mouth
On the Euxine Sea-nymph gapes, and fear doth stir,
Whether he will disgorge, or swallow her.

Since the great guide of all, Olympus King,
Will have the Romanes his Vice-Royes on earth:
Since the red fatal eyes of crow-blacke night,
Fling their malignant influence on our state:
Since Britain must submit: It was her fame,
None but a Iulius Caesar could her tame.

Come fellow Bards and sing with cheer;
Since dreadful Alarms we shall no more hear.
Come lovely peace, our Saint divine,
Olive and Laurel do love for to twine.
The Graces, and Muses, and Nymphs in a round:
Let voice beat the air, and feet beat the ground.
So Hells black image chased away,
Eos doth dandle the goldy-lock'd day:
So Bruma banished all forlorn,
Cupid and Flora the spring do adorn.
And so the grim fury of Mars laid in grave,
A merrier ending doth friendly peace crave.
The Sky is glad that Stars above,
Do give a brighter splendour:
The Stars unfold their flaming gold,
To make the ground more tender:
The ground doth send a fragrant smell,
That air may be the sweeter:
The air doth charm the swelling Seas,
With pretty chirping meeter:
The Sea with rivers water doth
The plants and flowers dainty:
The plants do yield their fruitful seed,
That beasts may live in plenty:
The Beasts do give both food and cloth,
That man high Jove may honour:
And so the world runs merrily round,
When peace doth smile upon her.
Oh then, then Oh: Oh then, then Oh:
This Jubilee last for ever:
That Foreign spite, or Civil fight,
Our quiet trouble never.
How bravely Caesar past the angry Maine?

How bravely was he back repulsed again?

How did he wheel his sword in Nennius face?

How did he loose his sword, and fly apace?

How did again his Army fill your coast?

I, when our Princes did conduct his host.

How did they pierce through Isis dangerous flood?

But made her swell, and bank-rupt with their blood.

Mirror of Captains, Iulius stile hath won.

But we may justly brag of two for one.

Confess, our valorous race hath now repaid
The Allian Massacre, and our cities Flame:
See how they yield, and yearly Tribute pay.

No, proud Dictator: Both do weary stand
On equal terms: Both wish a peaceful League.
But if they shall oppress; know, Generous spirits
Will break this Compact, like a Spiders web.

Ioues will is finished: And (though Iuno frown,
That no more Troiane blood shall die the stage)
The worlds fourth Empire Britain doth embrace.
The Thunder-bearer with a Ianus look
At once views ruddy morn, and cloudy West:
Her wings displayed ore this Terrestrial egg,
Will shortly hatch an Universal peace:
For Jove intends a favour to the world.
It now remains, That you two martial wights
Cease from your braving one another worth:
You must be friends at last. The close is sweet,
When after tumults, hearts and hands do meet.

Nec Lusisse pudet, sed non incidere Ludum.

