LAnguage and matter, with a fit of mirth,
That sharply savours more of air than earth,
Like Midwives, bring a Play to timely birth.
But wheres now such a one? in which these three,
Are hansonely contrived? or if they be,
Are understood by all who hear to see.
Wit, wit's the word in fashion, that alone
Cries up the Poet, which though neatly shown,
Is rather censured often-times than known.
He who will venture on a jest, that can
Rail on another pain, or idly scan
Affairs of state, oh he's the only man.
A goodly approbation, which must bring
Fame with contempt, by such a deadly sting,
The Muses chatter, who were wont to sing.
Your savours in what we present to day,
Our fearless Author boldly bids me say,
He tenders you no Satyr, but a play.
In which, if so he have not hit all right,
For wit, words, mirth, and matter as he might,
A' wishes yet a' had for your delight.
Mr. Bird.
ACcomplished man of fashion.

The times wonder.
Gallant of gallants Genoas Piero.

Italies darling, Europes joy, and so forth,
The newest news, un-vampt,

I am no foot-poast,
No peddler of Aviso's, no monopolist
Of forged Corantos, monger of Gazets.

Monger of courtesans, fine Futelli,
In certain kind a merchant of the staple
For wares of use and trade, a taker up,
Rather indeed a knocker down, the word
Will carry either sense but in pure earnest,
How trowles the common noysc?

Auria who lately
Wedded and bedded to the same Spinella,
Tyred with the enjoyments of delights, is hasting to (...) the Turkish pirats,
in the service of the great Duke of Florence.

Does not carry
His pretty thing along.

Leaves her to buffet
Land pirats here at home.

That's thou and I,
Futelli (sirrah) and Piero -- blockhead
To run from such an arm full of pleasures
For gaining, what? a bloody nose of honour,
Most sottish and abominable.

wicked
Shameful and cowardly I will maintain.

Is all my signiors hospitality
Huge banquetings deep revels costly trapings
Shrunk to a c^bbin, and a single welcome
To beverage and biscuit,

Hold thy peace man.
It makes for us -- he comes, lets part demurely.

We wish thee (honoured Auria) life and safety,
Return crowned with a victory, whose wreath,
Of triumph may advance thy countries glory,
Worthy your name and Ancestors.

My Lord,
I shall not live to thrive in any action,
Deserving memory when I forget
Adurnis love and tavour.

I present ye^
My service for a farewell.

Let few words
Excuse all arts of complement.

For my own part,
Kill or be killed, for there's the short and long on it.
Call me your shadows hinch-boy.

Gentlemen,
My business urging on a present hast,
E^forceth short reply.

We dare not hinder
Your resolution winged with thoughts so constant.
All happiness.

PHVT. Contents.

So leave the wintred people of the North,
The minutes of their summer, when the Sun
Departing leaves them in Cold robes of Ice,
As I leave Genoa, -- now appears the object
Of my apprentic'd hart, thou bring Spinella
A welcome in a farewell, souls and bodies
Are severd for a time, a span of time;
To join again without all separation,
In a confirmed unity for ever.
Such will our next embraces be for life;
And then to take the wrack of our divisions,
Will sweeten the remembrance of past dangers,
Will fallen love in perpetuity,
Will force our sl^epes to steal upon our stories*
These days must come, and shall without a cloud
Or ^ight of fear, or envy: to your charge,
(Trelcatio our good uncle) and the comfort
Of my Spinella's sister, fair Castanna,
I do entrust this treasure.

I dare promise,
My husbanding that trust with truth and care.

My siser shall to me stand an example,
Of pouring free devotions for your safety.

Gentle Castanna, thou art a branch of goodness,
Grown on the self same stock with my Spinella.
But why my dear, hast thou locked up thy speech in so much silent sadness, oh
at parting!
Belike one private whisper must be sighed,
Uncle the best of peace enrich your family,
I take my leave.

Blessings and health preserve ye.

Nay nay Castanna, you may hear our counsels.
A while, you are desigad your sisters husband,
Give me thy hand Spinella, you did promise,
To send me from you with more cheerful looks,
Without a grudge or tear, deed love you did.

What friend have I left in your absence?

Many thy virtues are such friends, they cannot fail thee,
Faith, purity of thoughts and such a meekness,
As would force scandal to a blush.

Admit Sir,
The patent of your life should be called in,
How am I left then to account with griefs;
Mor^ slav'd to pity then a broken heart?
Auria! soul of my comforts, I let fall
No eye on breach of fortu^, I contemn
No entertainment to divided hopes;
I urge no pressures by the scorn of change;
And yet my Auria, when I but conceave
How easy tis (without impossibility)
Never to see thee more, forgive me then,
If I conclude I may be miserable,
Most miserable.

And such conclusion sister
Argues effects of a distrust more voluntary then cause by likely hood.

T is truth Castanna.

I grant it truth, yet Auria I am a woman;
And therefore apt to fear, to show my duty
And not take heart from you, I'll walk from ye,
At your command, and not as much as trouble
Your thought with one poor looking back.

I thank thee,
My worthy wife! before we kiss, receave
This caution from thine Auria, first Castanna
Let us bid farewell.

Speak (good) speak*

the steps
Young Ladies tread left to their own discretion,
How ever wisely printed are observed
And construed as the lookers on presume,
Point out thy ways then in such even pather,
As thine own jealousies from others tongues
May not intrude a guilt, tho undeserved.
Admit of visits as of Physic forced
Not to procure health, but for safe prevention
Against a growing sickness in thy use
Of time and of discourse be found so thristy,
As no remembrance may impeach thy rest,
Appear not in a fashion that can prompt
The gazers eye, or holla to report;
Some widowed neglect of hand, some value
In recreations be both wise, and free,
Live still at home, home to thy self how-ere
Enriched with noble company, remember
A woman's virtue in her lifetime, writes
The Epitaph all covet on their tombs,
In short I know thou never wilt forget
Whose wife thou art, nor how upon thy lips,
Thy husband at his parting stald this kiss.
No more.

Dear heaven I go sister, go.

Done bravely,
And like the choice of glory to know mine,
One of earths best I have forgone, -- see, see,
Yet in another I am rich; a friend,
A perfect one, Aurelio.

Had I been,
No stranger to your bosom Sir, erenow
You might have sorted me in your resolves,
Companion of your fortunes.

So the wrongs
I should have ventured on against thy fate
Must have denied all pardon, not to hold
Dispute with reputations, why before
This present instant I concealed the stealth
Of my adventures from the Counsels, know
My wants do drive me hence.

Wants, so you said,
And 'twas not friendly spoken,

Hear me further.

Auria take heed, the covert of a folly
Willing to range; be not without excuse
Discovered in the coinage of untruths.
I use no harder language, thou art near
Already on a ship-wrack in forsaking
The holy land of friendship in forsaking
To talk your wants. Fie.

By that sacred thing
Last issued from the Temple where it dwelt,
I mean our friendship, I am sunk so low
In my estate, that bids me live in Genoa
But six months longer, I survive the remnant
Of all my store.

Vmh.

In my Country, friend
Where I have sided my superior friend
Swayd opposition, friend, friend here to fall
Subject to scorn, or rarely found compasion,
W^re more than man that hath a soul could bear,
A soul not stooped to servitude.

Your show,
Nor certainty, nor weak assurance yet
Of reparation in this course: in case
Command be proffered.

He who cannot merit
Preferment by employments, let him bare
His throat unto the Turkish cruelty,
Or dye or live a slave without redemption.

For that so, but you have a wife, a young,
A fair wife; she, though free could never claim
Right in prosperity, was never tempted
By trial of extremes, to youth and beauty,
Baits for dishonour, and a perished fame.

Show me the man that lives, and so my face
Dares speak, scarce think, such tyranny against
Spinellas constancy, except Aurelio
He is my friend.

There lives not then a friend
Dares love you like Aurelio, that Aurelio,
Who (...) and early; often said and truly,
Your marriage with Spinella would entangle
As much th'opinion due to your discretion,
As your estate, it hath done so to both.

I find it hath.

He who prescribes no law,
No limits of condition to the objects
Of his affection; but will merely wed
A face because tis round, or limbed by nature
In purest red and white, or at the best,
For that his mistress owes an excellence
Of qualities, knows when and how to speak,
Where to keep silence, with fit reasons why,
Whose virtues are her only dowre, else
In either kind, ought of himself to master
Such fortunes as as add fuel to their loves
For otherwise: -- but herein I am idle,
Have foold to little purpose.

She's my wife.

And being so, it is not manly done
To leave her to the trial of her wits,
Her modesty, her innocence, her vows.
This is the way that points her out an art
Of wanton life.

Sir, said ye?

You form reasons,
Just ones, for your abandoning the storms
Which threaten your own ruin; but propose
No shelter for her honour; what my tongue
Hath utterd, Auria, is but honest doubt,
And you are wise enough in the construction.

Necessity must arm my confidence,
Which if I live to triumph over friend,
And ere come back in plenty, I pronounce
Aurelio heir of what I can bequeath.
Some fit deduction for a worthy widow,
Allowed with caution, she be like to prove so.

Who? I your heir? your wife being yet so young,
In every probability so forward
To make you a father? leave such thoughts.

Believe it,
Without replies Aurelio: keep this note,
A warrant for receiving from (...)
Two hundred Ducats; as you find occasion
Dispose them in my absence to Spinella.
I would not trust her uncle* he good man,
Is at an ebb himself, another hundred
I left with her, a fourth I carry with me,
Am I not poor, Aurelio, now? exchange
Of more debates between us, would undo
My resolution: Walk a little prithee,
Friends we are, and will embrace: but let's not speak
Another word.

I'll follow you to your horse.

With her own hand.

She never used my Lord,
A second means, but kissed the letter first,
Orelookt the superscription: then let fall
Some amorous drops, kissed it again, talked to it
Twenty times over, set it to her mouth,
Then gave it me, then snatched it back again,
Then cried, oh my poor heart, and in an instant
Commend my truth and secrecy, such medley
Of passion yet, I never saw in woman.

In woman? you are deceav'd; but that we both
Had mothers, I could say how women are,
In their own natures, modells of mere change:
Of change of what is nought, to what is worse,
She fed ye liberally.

Twenty ducats
She forcd on me, vowed by the precious love
She bore the best of men, (I use my lord)
Her very words the miracle of men,
Malfato, (then she sighed) this mite of gold
Was only entrance to a farther bounty,
Tis meant (my lord) be like press money.

Devil! how durst she tempt thee, Futelli, knowing
Thy love to me?

There lies (my lord) her cunning,
Rather her craft: first she began what pity
It was, that men should differ in estates,
Without proportion some so strangely rich,
Others so miserable poor; and yet,
Quoth she, since tis very deed unfit
All should be equals; so I must confess
It were good justice that the properest men
Should be preferred to fortune, such as nature
Had marked with fair abilities of which
Genoa, for ought I know, hath wondrous few
Not two to boast of.

Here began her itch.

I answered, she was happy then, whose choice
In you, my lord, was singular.

Well urgd.

She smiled, and said, it might be so, and yet
There stopped: then I cloz'd with her, and concluded
The title of a lord was not enough,
For absolute perfection, I had seen
Persons of meaner quality, much more
Exact in fair endowments; but your Lordship
Will pardon me, I hope.

And love thee for it.

Phew: let that pass (quoth she) and now we prattle
Of handsome gentlemen, in my opinion,
Malfato is a very pretty fellow,
Is he not, pray Sir, I had then the truth
Of what I roved a^nd with more then praise,
Approved her judgement in so high a strain,
Without comparison (my honoured Lord)
That soon we^ both concluded of the man,
The match and business.

For delivering
A letter to Malfato.

Whereto I
No sooner had consented, with protests,
(I did protest my Lord) of secrecy,
And service, but she kissed me (as I live)
Of her own free accord -- (I trust your lordship
Conceaves not me amiss) pray rip the seal
(My lord) you'll find sweet stuff, I dare believe,

Present to the most accomplished
Of men, Malfato with this
Love a service.
Kind Superscription, prithee find him out,
Deliver it with complement, observe
How ceremoniously he does receive it.

will not your lordship peruse the contents?

enough I know too much be just, and cunning
A wanton Mistress is a common sewer
Much never project labours in my brain --
Y^ur friend here's now the Gemini of wit
What od conceit is next on foot, some cast
Of neat invention, ha sire.

Very fine,
I do protest my lord.

Your lordships ear shall share in the plot.

As how?

You know my lord
Young Amoretta, old Trelcatio's daughter
An honest man, but poor.

And my good lord,
He that is honest, must be poor, my lord,
It is a common rule.

Well Amoretta,
Pray one at once my knowledge is not much,
Of her instruct me.

Speak Futelli.

Spare me.
Piero has the tongue more pregnant.

Fie play on your creature.

Shall be yours.

Nay good.

Well keep your mirth, my dainty honies agree
Some two days hence, till when --

By any means,
Partake the sport, my lord, this thing of youth.

Handsome enough, good face, quick eye, well bred.

Is yet possessed so strangely.

With an humour of thinking, she deserves --

A Duke, a Count.
At least a Viscount, for her husband that --

She scorns all mention of a match beneath
One of the foresaid nobles; will not ride
In a carriage without eight horses.

Six, she may be drawn to four --

Are for the power*
But for two horses in a coach --

She says,
They are not for creatures of heavens making fitter --

Fitter for litters to convey hounds in,
Then people christian yet herself --

Herself walks evermore a foot, and knows not whether
A Coach dothtrot or amble.

But by heare-say.

Stop gentlemen, you run a gallopboth*
Are out of breath sure, tis a kind of complement
Scarce entered to the times, but certainly
You coin a humour, let me understand
Deliberately your fancy.

In plain troth,
My Lord, the she whom we describe is such,
And lives here, here in Genoa, this City,
This very city, now, the very now.

Trelcatios daughter.

Has refused suitors
Of worthy rank, substantial and free parts*
Only for that they are not Dukes, or Counts,
Yet she herself, wi h all her fathers store,
Can hardly weigh above four hundred Ducats*

Now your design for sport.

Without prevention,
Guzman the Spaniard late cashiered, most gravely
Observes the full punctilios of his nation,
And him have we beleagred to accost
This shee-peece, under a pretence of being
Grandee of Spain, and cousin to twelve Princes.

For rival unto whom we have enraged
Fulgoso, the rich cox-combe lately started
A gentleman out of a Su^lers hut,
In the late Flemish wars, we have resolved him
He is descended from Pantagruel,
Of famous memory by the fathers side,
And by the mother from Dame Fusti-Bunga,
Who troubled long time with a strangury,
Vented at last salt-water so abundantly,
As drowned the land twixt Sirixia and V^re,
Where steeples tops are only seen* he casts
Beyond the Moon, and will be greater yet
In spite of Don.

You must abuse the maid
Beyond amends.

But countenance the course
My Lord, and it may chance beside the mirth,
To work a reformation on the maiden,
Her fathers leave is granted, and thanks promised,
Our ends are harmless trials.

I betray me secrets of such use.

Your Lordships humblest.

A Melancholy grounded, and resolved,
Received into a habit, argues love,
Or deep impression of strong discontents,
In cases of these raritles a friend
Upon whose faith, and confidence, we may
Vent with security, our grief becomes
Oft times the best Physician, for admit
We find no remedy, we cannot miss
Advise in sted of comfort, and believe
It is an ease, Malfato, to disburden
Our souls of secret clogs, where they may find
A rest in pity, tho not in redress.

Let all this sense be yielded to

Perhaps you measure what I say, the common nature
Of an officious couriosity

Not I Sir.

Or that other private ends
Sift your retirements --

Neither.

Under favour
Signior Malfato, I am sent to crave
Your leisure, for a word or two in private.

To me! your mind

This letter will inform ye.

Letter? howes this? whats here?

Speak ye to me sir?

Brave riddle: *I'll endeavour to unfold it.

How fares the Lord Adurni?

Sure in health sir.

He is a noble Gentle-man; withal
Happy in his endeavours: the general voice
Sounds him for courtesy, behaviour, language,
And every fair demeanour, an example:
Titles of honour add not to his worth,
Who is himself an honour to his titles.

You know from whence this comes.

I do.

Do ye laugh!
But that I must consider such as Spaniels,
To those who feed and cloth them, I would print
Thy pandarisme upon thy fore-head: there
Bear back that paper to the hell from whence
It gave thee thy directions, tell this Lord,
He ventured on a foolish policy,
In aiming at the scandal of my blood,
The trick is childish, base, say base.

You wrong him.

Be wise Malfato.

Say, I know this whore.
She who sent this temptation, was wife
To his abused servant, and divorced
From poor Benatzi, senseless of the wrongs
That Madam Levidolche and Adurni
Might revel in their sports without control,
Secure, uncheckt.

You range too wildly now,
Are too much inconsiderate.

I am
A gentleman free borne, I never wore
The rags of any great mans lo^kes, nor fed
Upon their after-meales; I never croucht
Unto the offall of an Office promised
Reward for long attendance, and then mist.
I read no difference between this huge,
This monstrous big word Lord, and Gentleman,
More than the Title sounds; for ought I learn,
The latter is as noble as the first,
I'm sure more ancient.

Let me tell you then,
You are too bitter, talk you know not what,
Make all men equals, and confound all course
Of order, and of Nature: this is madness.

Tis so; and I have reason to be mad:
Reason Aurelio, by my truth and hopes.
This wit Futelli brings a suit of love
From Lenidolche, one however maskt
In colourable privacy, is famed
The Lord Adurnies pensioner, at least.
Am I a husband picked out for a strumpet,
For a cast suit of bawdry? Aurelio,
You are as I am, you could ill digest
The trial of a patience so unfit.
Be gone Futelli, do not mince one syllable
Of what you h^are: another fetch like this
May tempt a pe^ce ^o rage: so say, be gone.

I shall report your answer.

What have I
Deserved to be so used? in colder blood
I do confess nobilit^e requires
Duty and love, it is a badge of virtue,
By action (...) ^equir'd, and next in rank
Unto anointed royal ie wherein
Have I neglected distance, or forgot
Observance to superiors? sure my name
Was in the ^o^e mistook.

We will consider the meaning of this mystery.

Not so,
Let them fear bondage who are sl^ves to fear,
The sweetest freedom is an honest heart.

Dexterity and sufferance, brave Don,
Are Engines the pure politic must work with.

We understand.

In subtilties of war,
(I talk t'ee now in your own occupation,
Your trade, or what you please) unto a Soldier,
Surprise of an enemy by stratagem,
Or down-right cutting throats is all one thing.

Most certain: on, proceed.

By way of parallel,
You drill or exercise your company,
(No matter which for terms) before you draw
Into the field, so in the feats of Courtship*
First choice is made of thoughts, behaviour, words,
The set of looks, the posture of the beard,
Besol as manus, cringes of the knee,
The very hums and ha's, thumps, and ay mees.

We understand all these: advance.

Then next,
Your enemy in face, your mistress (mark it)
Now you consult either to skirmish slightly,
That's careless amors, or to enter battle,
Then fall to open treaty, or to work
By secre^ spies or gold: here you corrupt
The Chamber-mayd* a fatal engine, or
Place there an Ambusesdo, that's contract
With some of her near friends, for half her portion,
Or offer truce, and in the interim,
Run upon slaughter, tis a noble treachery,
That's swear and lye, steal her away: and to her
Cast caps, and cry Victoria, the field's
Thine own (my Don) she's thine.

We do vouchsafe her.

Hold her then fast.

As fast as can the arms
Of strong imagination hold her.

No, sh'as skipped your hold, my imaginations eyes
Perceives she not endures the touch or sent
Of your war-over-worne habiliments,
Which I forgot in my instructions
To warn you of, therefore my warlike Don,
Apparel speedily your imagination
With a more courtly out-side.

Tis soon done.

As soon as said, in all the clothes thou hast,
More than that walking wardrobe on thy back.

Imagine first our rich Mockado doublet,
With our cut cloth of gold sleeves, and our quellio,
Our Diamond buttond Callamancho hose,
Our plume of Ostrich, with the embroidered scarf
The Duchess Infantasgo rowld our arm in.

I this is brave indeed.

Our Cloak whose cape is
Larded with pearls, which the Indian lackeys
Presented to our countrey-man De Cortez,
For ransom of his life, rated in value
At thirteen thousand pistolets, the guerdon
Of our achievement, when we reseued
The Infanta from the Bore in single duel,
Near to the Austrian forest with this rapier,
This only, very, naked, single rapier.

Top and top-gallant brave,

We will appear
Before our Amoretta like the issue
Of our progenitors.

Imagine so,
And that this rich suit of imagination,
Is on already now (which is most probable
As that apparel) here stands your Amoretta,
Make your approach and court her.

Lustre of beauty,
Not to affright your tender soul with horror,
We may descend to tales of peace and love,
Soft whispers fitting Ladies clossers, for
Thunder of cannon, roaring smoke and fire,
As if hells maw had vomited confusion,
The clash of steel, the neighs of barbed Steeds,
Wounds spouting blood, towns capering in the air,
Castles push^ down, and Cities plowd with swords,
Become great Guzmans Oratory best,
Who tho victorious, and during life
Must be: yet now grants parley to thy smilts.

S'foot, Don, you talk too big, you make her tremble,
Do you not see it imaginarily?
I do as plainly as you saw the death
Of the Austrian Bore, she rather hears
Of feasting then of fighting, take her that way.

Yes we will feast my queen, my empress saint,
Shall it taste no delicates but what are dressed
W^th costlier spices then the Arabian bird
Sweetens her funeral bed with, we will riot
With every change of meates; which may renew
Our blood unto a spring, so pure, so high,
That from our pleasures shall proceed a race
Of scepter-bra^ing princes, who at once
M^st reign in every quarter of the globe.

Can more be said by one that feeds on herring
And garlic constantly?

Yes we will feast.

Enough, shes taken, and will love you now,
As well in buff, as your imagined bravery,
Your dainty ten times dreft buff, with this language
(Bold man of arms) shall win upon her, doubt not
Beyond all silken puppetry, think no more
Of your mockadoes, calaminchaes, quellios,
Pearl larded capes and diamond buttond breeches,
Leave such poor out-side helps to puling lovers,
Such as Fulgoso your weak rival is,
That starveling braind-companion appear you
At first (at least) in your own warlike fashion:
I pray be ruled, and change not a thread about you.

The humour takes (for I sir, am a man
Affects not shifts) I will adventure thus.

Why so you carry her from all the world,
Ime proud my stars designed me out an instrument
In such an hie employment.

gravely spoken,
You may be proud ont --

What is lost is lost,
Money is trash, and Ladies are et caetera's,
Play's play; luck's luck, fortunes an I know what,
You see the worst of me, and whats all this now?

A very spark (I vow) you will be styled,
Fulgoso the invincible, but did
The fair Spinella loose an equal part
How much in all do ye say?

Bare threescore ducats,
Thirty a piece, we need not care who know it
She plaid, I went her half walkd by and whistled
After my usual manner thus -- unmoved
As no such thing had ever been as it were,
Although I saw the winners share my money
His lordship, and an honest gentleman
Pursed it, but not so merrily as I
Whistled it off -- whistles

A noble confidence.

Dee note your rival.

With contempt I do.

I can forgo things nearer then my gold,
Allyd to my affections, and my blood;
Yea honour, as it were, with the same kind.
Of careless confidence, and come off fairly
Too as it were.

But not your love, Fulgoso.

No, she's inherent, and mine own past loosing.

It tickles me to think with how much state*
You, as it were, did run at tilt in love
Before your Amoretta.

Broke my lance.

Of wit, of wit.

I mean so as it were
And laid flat on her back, both horse and woman.

Right as it were.

What else man, as it were.

Did you do this to her, dare you to vant
Your triumph we being present? um, ha, um.

What think you Don, of this brave man?

A ma?
It is some truss of reeds, or empty cask,
In which the wind with whistling spores it self

Beat up Sir, hes your rival, budge not from him
An inch, your grounds are honour.

Stoutly ventured, Don, hold him too't.

protelt a fine conceit,
A very fine conceit, and thus I told her,
That for mine own part, if she liked me, so,
If not, not; for my duck or do said I,
It is no fault of mine, that I am noble,
Grant it; another may be noble too,
And then wee'r both one noble better still
Habs-nabs good wink and choose, if one must have her,
The other goes without her, best of all,
My spirit is too high, to fight for woman,
I am too full of mercy to be angry,
A foolish generous quality, from which
No might of man can beat I'm, ime resolved.

Hast thou a spirit then ha? speaks thy weapon
Toledo language, Bilbo, or dull Pisa?
If an Italian blade, or spanish mettle,
Be brief, we challenge answer.

Famous Don.

What does he talk? my weapon speaks no language,
Tis a dutch iron trunchion.

Dutch?

And it need be,
Twill maule one's hide, in spite of who says nay

Dutch to a Spaniard, hold me.

Hold me too
Sirrah if you are my friend, for I love no fighting,
Yet hold me least in pity I fly off,
It I must fight, I must; in a scutvie quarrel
I de fie hes and she's, twit me with dutch?
Hang dutch and french, hang spanish and Italians,
Christians and Turks pew-waw; all's one to me,
I know whats what, I know on which side
My bread is butterd.

Butterd? dutch again?
You come not with intention to affront us.

Front me no fronts, if thou beestangrie squabble
Here's my defence, and thy destruction -- whistles a charge
If friends shake hands, and go with me to dinner.

We will embrace the motion, it doth relish,
The Cavaleiro treats on terms of honour,
Peace is not to be baulkd on fair conditions.

Still Don is Don the great.

He shows the greatness
Of his vast stomach in the quick embrace
Of thothers dinner.

Twas the ready means to catch his friendship.

Yare a pair of worthies,
That make the nine no wonder.

Now since fate
Ordaines that one of two must be the man,
The man of men which must enjoy alone
Loves darling Amoretta, both take liberty
To show himself before her, without cross
Of interruption, one of the other: he
Whose sacred mystery of earthly blessings
Crowns the pursuit; be happy.

And till then, live brothers in society.

We are fast.

I vow a match: I'll feast the Don to day
And fast with him to morrow.

Fair conditions.

Futelli and Piero, follow speedily.

My Lord we wait ye.

We shall soon return.

Whats that? I saw a sound.

A voice for certain.

It named a Lord.

Here are Lords too, we take it,
We carry blood about us, rich and haughty,
As any the twelve Caesars.

Gulls or Mogulls,
Tag, rag, or other, Hoger-Mogen vanden
Skip-Iacks, or Chouses. Whoo! the brace are flincht,
The pair of shavers are sneakt from us, Don.
Why? what are we?

The valiant will stand too't.

So say I, we will eat and drink, and squander,
Till all do split again.

Match on with greediness.

You cannot answer what a general tongue
Objects against your folly, I may curse
The interest you lay claim to in my blood,
Your mother my decre niece did die, I thought
Toosoon, but she is happy, had she lived*
Till now, and known the vanities of your life
Hath dealt in, she had wished herself a grave
Before a timely hour.

Sir, consider,
My sex, were I mankind, my sword should quit
A wounded honour, and repreave a name
From injury, by printing on their bosoms
Some deadly Character, whose drunken surfeits
Vomit such base aspersions, as I am
Scorn and contempt is virtue: my desert
Stands far above their malice.

Levidolche, hypocrisy puts on a holy robe,
Yet never changes nature: call to mind,
How in your girls days you fell forsooth
In love, and married, married (hark ye) whom*
A trencher-waiter, shrewd preferment: but
Your childhood then excused that fault: for so
Footmen have run away with lusty heirs,
And stable-grooms reached to some fair ones chambers.

Pray let not me be bandied sir, and basfaild
By your intelligence.

So touched to the quick,
Fine mistress, I will then rip up at length
The progress of your infancy, in colour
Of disagreement you must be divorced,
Were so, and I must countenance the reasons
On better hopes I did, nay took you home,
Provided you my care, nay justified
Your alteration, joyd to entertain
Such visitants of worth and rank, as tendered
Civil respects; but then, even then --

What then?
Sweet uncle do not spare me.

I more shame
To fear my hospitality was bawd
And (name it so) to your unchaste desires,
Then you to hear and know it.

Whose whore am I?
For that's your plainest meaning.

Were you modest,
The word you utterd last would force a blush.
Adurni is a bounteous Lord, tis said,
He parts with gold and jewels like a free
And liberal purchaser, a' wriggles in
To Ladies pleasures by a right of pension;
But you know none of this:
You are grown a Tavern talk,
Matter for Fiddlers songs, I toil to build
The credit of my family, and you
To pluck up the foundation, even this morning
Before the common Council, young Malfato
Convented for some lands he held; supposed
Belonged to certain Orphans, as I questioned
His tenure in particulars, he answered,
My worship needed not to flaw his right:
For if the humour held him, he could make
A jointure to my over-living Niece,
Without oppression, bad me tell her too,
She was a kind young soul, and might in time
Be sued to by a loving man, no doubt.
Here was a jolly breakfast.

Uncles are privileged
More than our parents, some wise man in state
Hath rectified, no doubt, your knowledge sir,
Whiles all the policy for public business,
Was spent -- for want of matter, I by chance
Fell into grave discourse; but by your leave,
I from a strangers table rather wish
To earn my bread, than from a friends by gift,
Be daily subj^ct to unfit reproves.

Come, come, to the point.

All the curses
Due to a ravisher of sober truth,
Dambe up their graceless mouths.

Now you turn rampant,
Just in the wenches trim and garb, these prayers
Speak your devotions purely.

Sir, alas,
What would you have me do? I have no Orators,
More than my tears, to plead my innocence,
Since you forsake me, and are pleased to lend
An open ear against my honest fame.
Would all their spite could harry my contents
Unto a desperate ruin; Oh dear goodness,
There is a right for wrongs.

There is, but first
Si^ in commission on your own defects,
Accufe your self: be your own Jury, Judge,
And executioner, I make no sport
Of my vexation.

All the short remains
Of undesired life, shall only speak
Th*extremity of penance: your opinion
Enjoynesit too.

Enough; thy tears prevail
Against credulity.

My miseries,
As in a glass, present me the rent face
Of an unguided youth.

No more -- Trelcatic,
Some business speeds you hither.

Happy news,
Signior Martino, pray your care; my nephew
Auria hath done brave service: and I hear
(Lets be exceeding private) is returned
High in the Duke of Florences respects,
Tis said, but make no words that a' has firk
And mumbl'd the roguie-Turkes.

Why would you know
His merits so unknown?

I am not yet
Confirmed at full, withdraw, and you shall read
All what this paper talks.

So; Levidolche, you know our mind,
Be cheerful, come Trelcatio,
Causes of joy or grief, do seldom happen
Without companions, necre thy resolutions
Have given an other birth to my contents*

Even so, wise uncle, much good do ye -- discovered!
I could fly out, mix vengeance with my love,
Unworthy man Malfato, my good Lord
My hot in blood, rare Lord, grows could too, well
Rise dotage into rage, and sleep no longer;
Affection turned to hatred, threatens mischief.

In the next gallory you may behold
Such living pictures Lady, such rich pieces,
Of Kings, and Queens, and Princes, that you'd think
They breath, and smile upon ye.

Ha, they crownthes,
Great crownthes oath gold upon their headthes.

Pure gold,
Drawn all in state.

How many horthes pray
Are ith their Chariots?

S^xteene, some twenty.

My sister wherefore left we her alone?
Where stays she gentlemen?

Viewing the rooms,
Tis like you'll meet her in the gallery.
This house is full of curiosities,
Most fit for Ladies sights.

Yeth, yeth, the thight
Of printhethes ith a fine thight.

Good, let us find her.

Sweet Ladies this way; see the doors sure.

Doubt not.


Whiles the spring of nature lasts,
Love and melting thoughts attend ye
Use the time, ere winter hastes.
Active blood, and free delight,
Place and privacy invite.
Do do! be kind as fair,
Loose not opportunity for air.
She is cruel that denies it,
Bounty best appears in granting,
Stealth of sport as soon supplies it,
Whiles the dues of love are wonting.
Here's the sweet exchange of bliss,
When each whisper proves a kiss.
In the game are felt no pains,
For in all the looser gains.
Plead not fair creature without sense of pity
So incompassionatly against a service,
In nothing faulty more then pure obedience,
My honours and my fortunes are led captives
In triumph by your all-commanding beauty,
And if you ever felt the power of love,
The rigour of an uncontrolled passion,
The tyranny of thoughts consider mine*
In some proportion, by the strength of yours,
Thus may you yield and conquer.

Do not study
(My Lord) to apparel folly in the steed
Of costly colours, henceforth cast off far
Far from your noblest nature, the contempt
Of goodness, and be gentler to your fame,
By purchase of a life to grace your story.

Dear, how sweetly
Reproof droopes from that baulmy spring your breath,
Now could I read a lecture of my griefs
Un-earth a mine of Jewels at your foot,
Command a golden shower to rain down,
Impoverish every Kingdom of the east,
Which trafficks richest clothes, and filkes; would you
Vouchsafe one, unspleend chiding to my riot,
Else such a sacrifice can but beget
Suspicion of returns, to my devotion,
In mercenary blessings, for that saint
To whom I vow my self, must never want
Fit offerings to her altar.

Auria, Auria,
Fight not for name abroad, but come my husband,
Fight for thy wife at home.

Oh never cank
(Dear crulty) one that is swo^ne your creature,
Amongst your countries enemies, I use.
No force, but humble words, delivered from
A tongue that's secretary to my heart.

How poorly some, tame to their wild desires,
Fawn on abuse of virtue, pray my Lord,
Make not your house my prison.

Grant a freedom,
To him who is the bondsman to your beauty.

Keep back ye close contrivers of false pleasures,
Or I shall force ye back -- can it be possible
Locked up and singly too, chaste hospitality
A ba^quet in a bed-chamber; Adurni!
Dishonourable man.

What sees this rudeness,
That can broach scandal here.

For you hereafter,
Oh woman, lost to every brave report,
Thy wronged Auria is come home with glory,
Prepare a welcome to uncrowne the greatness
Of his prevailing fates,

Whiles you belike,
Are furnis^d with some news for entertainment
Which must become your friendship to be knit
More fast betwixt your souls, by my removal,
Both from his heart and memory.

Rich conquest,
To triumph on a Ladies injured fame,
Without a proof or warrant.

Have I life Sir,
Faith, Christianity?

Put me on the rack,
The wheel, or the galleys, if --

Peace factors,
In merchandise of scorn, your sounds are deadly,
Castanna, I could pity your consent
To such ignoble practice, but I find.
Course fortunes easily seduced, and herein
All claim to goodness ceases.

Use your tyranny.

What rests behind for me, out with it.

Horror,
Becoming such a forfeit of obedience,
Hope not that any falsity in friendship
Can palliate a broken faith, it dares not
Leave in thy prayers (fair vow-breaking want on)
To dress thy soul new, whose purer whiteness
Is sullyd by thy change, from truth to folly.
A fearful storm is hovering, it will fall,
No shelter can avoydit, let the guilty
Sink under their own ruin.

How unmanly
His anger threatens mischief!

Whom, I prithee,
Doth the man speak to?

Lady, be not moved,
I will stand Champion for your honour, hazard
All what is dearest to me.

Mercy heaven!
Champion for me, and Auria living? Auria?
He lives, and for my guard my innocence
As free as are my husbands clearest thoughts,
Shall keep off vain constructions, I must beg
Your charities; sweet sister, yours to leave me,
I need no fellows now: let me appear,
Or mine own lawyer, or in open court
(Like some forsaken client) in my suit
Be cast for want of honest plea -- oh misery.

Her resolution's violent, quickly follow,

By no means (sir) y'aue followed her already*
I fear with too much ill success in trial,
Of unbecomming courtesies; your welcome
Ends in so sad a farewell.

I will stand
The roughnes of th'encounter, like a gentleman,
And wait ye to your homes, what are besal me.

I Say, Don, brother mine, win her and wear her.
And so will I; if it be my luck to loose her,
I loose a pretty wench, and there's the worst on it.

Wench said ye, most mechanically? faugh!
Wench is your trull, your blowe^, your dowdy, but
(Sir brother) he who names my Queen of love
Without his bonnet veiled, or saying grace,
As at Some paranymphall feast, is rude,
Nor versed in literature, Dame Amoretta,
Lo, I am sworn thy Champion.

So am I too.
Can as occasion serves, if she turn scurvy,
Vnsweare my self again, and ne'er change colours.
Pish man, the best, though call em, ladies, madames,
Fairs, fines, and honies, are but flesh and blood,
And now and then too, when the fi^s come on 'em,
Will prove themselves but flirts, and tirliry pufkins.

Our choler must advance.

Dost long for a beating?
Shalls try a slash, here's that shall do it: I'll tap
A gallon of thy brains, and fill thy hogshead
With two of wine for it.

Not in friendship brother,

Or whistle thee into an ague; hanged,
Be sociable: drink till we roar and scratch;
Then drink our selves asleep again. The fashion!
Thou dost not know the fashion.

Her fair eyes,
Like to a pair of pointed beams drawn from
The Suns most glorious Orb, does dazzle sight,
Audacious to gaze there; then over those
A several bow of jet securely twines
In semicircles under them two banks
Of roses red and white, divided by
An arch of polish Ivotle, surveying
A temple from whence Oracles proceed,
More gracious than Apollos, more desired
Than amorous songs of Poets, softly tuned.

Hey day, what's this?

Oh, but those other parts, all --

All: Hold there, I bar play under board,
My part yet lies therein; you never saw
The things you wier-draw thus.

I have dream't
Of every part about her, can lay open
Her several inches, as exactly (mark it)
As if I had took measure with a compass,
A rule, or yard, from head to foot.

Oh rare,
And all this in a dream.

A very dream.

My waking brother Soldier is tumd
Into a sleeping Carpenter or Taylor,
Which goes for half a man -- whats he? bear up?

Death of reputation, the wheel, strappado, galleys,
Rack, are ridiculous fopperies; goblins to
Fright babies: poor lean-sould rogues, they
Will swoon at the scarre of a pin: one tear
Dropped from their harlots eyes, breeds earth-quakes
In their bones.

Bless us, a monster patched of dagger bombast,
His eyes like Copper-basons, a' has changed
Hair with a shag dog.

Let us then avoid him,
Or stand upon our guard; the foe approaches.

Cut-throats by the score abroad, come home, and rot in fripperies, brave man
at arms. Go turn pander do, stalk for a mess of warm broth: damnable,
honourable cuts are but badges for a fool to vaunt, the raw rib'd Apothecary
poisons cum privilegio, and is paid. Oh the common-wealth of beasts is most
politically ordered.


Brother, we'll keep aloof, there is no valour
In tugging with a man fiend

I d. fie him.
It gabbles like I know not what, believe it,
The fellows a shrewd fellow at a pink.

Look else; the Lion roars, and the spaniel fawns. Down Cur, the Badger
bribes the Unicorue, That a Jury may not pass upon his pillage: here the Bear
fees the Wolf, for he will not howl gratis, beasts call pleading howling. So
then, there the Horse complains of the Apes rank-riding: the Jockie makes
mouths, but is find for it: the Stag is not jeered by the Monkey for his
horns: the Ass by the hare for his burden: The Ox by the Leopard for his
yoke, nor the Goat by the Ram, for his beard, only the Fox wrappes himself
warm in Beaver, bids the Cat mouze, the Elephant toil, the Boar gather
akorns, whiles he grinnes, feeds fat, tells tales, laughs at all, and sleeps
safe at the Lions feet. -- Save ye people.


Why save thee too, if thou be of heavens making:
What art? -- Fear nothing Don, we have our blades,
Are mettle men our selves, try us who dare.

Our brother speaks our mind, think what you please on it.

A match: observe well this switch; with this only switch have I pasht out the
brains of thirteen Turks to the dozen for a breakfast.


What man? tirteen? is't possible thoulyest not?

I was once a Scholar, then I begged without pity: from thence I practised
law, there a scruple of conscience popped me over the bar: a Soldier I turned a
while, but could not procure the letter of preferment. Merchant I would be,
and a glut of landrats gnawd me to the bones; would have bought an office, but
the places with reversions were catch up: offered to pass into the Court, and
wanted trust for clothes; was lastly, for my good parts pressed into the
Galleys, took prisoner, redeemd amongst other slaves by your gay great man,
they call him AURIA: and am now I know not who, where, or what. How d*thee like
me? say.


A shaver of all trades; what course o f life
Doest mean to follow next? ha? speak thy mind.

Nor be thou daunted fellow: we our selves
Have felt the frowns of fortune in our days.

I want extremely, exceedingly, hideously.

Take that, enjoy it freely, wisely use it.
Th'advantage of thy fate, and know the giver.

Hoy d^, a purse in troth wh o dropped, stay, stay,
Vmh; have we gipsies here? oh mine is safe
Is't your purse, brother Don?

Not mine, I seldom
Wear such unfashionable trash about me.

Hast any money in it, honest blade?
A bots on empty purses.

We defy them.

Stand from about me, as you are mortal, you are dull clod-pated lumps of
mire and garbish. This is the land of Fairies, Imperial Queen of Elves, I do
croutch to thee, vow my services, my blood, my sinews to thee, sweet
sovereign of largess, and liberality -- a French Taylor neat; Persian Cooke;
dainty! Greek Wines; rich Flanders Mares; stately Spanish Salads, poignant,
Venetian, wanton, ravishing, English Bawd unmatchable sirs I am fitted.


All these thy followers, miserable pigmies
Prate sense and don't be mad, I like thy humour,
Tis pretty odd, and so as one might say,
I care not greatly if I entertain thee,
Dost want a master? if thou dost I am for thee
Else choose, and sneak up; pish I scorn to flinch man.

Forsake not fair advancement, money certes
Will fleet and drop off, like a cozening friend,
Who holds it, holds a slippery Eel byth' tail,
Unless he gripe it fast, be ruled by counsel.

Excellent, what place shall I be admitted to?
Chamber, wardrobe, cellar, or stable.

Why one and all, you are welcome, lets shake hands on it,
Thy name?

Parado Sir

The great affairs
I shall employ thee most in will be news,
And telling whats a clock, for ought I know yet.

It is sir to speak punctually some hour and half
Eight three thirds of two seconds of one minute over at most, Sir

I do not ask thee now, or if I did
We are not much the wiser, and for news --

Auria, the fortunate is this day to be receavd with great
solemnity at the city counsel house, the stre^tes are already thronged
with lookers on.

That's well remembered, brother Don let's trudge,
Or we shall come too late.

By no means, brother.

Wait close my ragged new-come.

As your shadows.

Your favours with these honours, speak your bounties
And tho the low deserts of my success
Appear in your constructions fair and goodly,
Yet I attribute to a noble cause,
Not my abilities, the thanks due to them,
The Duke of Florence hath too highly prizd
My duty in my service, by example,
Rather to cherish and encourage virtue,
In spirits of action, then to crown the issue
Of feeble undertakings. whiles my life
Can stand in use I shall no longer rate it
In value then it stirs to pay that debt,
I owe my country for my birth and fortunes.

Which to make good, our state of Genoa
Not willing that a native of her own,
So able for her safety, should take pension
From any other Prince; hath cast upon you
The government of Corsica.

Adds thereto
Besides th'allowance yearly due, for ever
To you and to your heirs, the full revenue
Belonging to Savona; with the office
Of Admiral of Genoa.

Presenting
By my hands, from their public treasury,
A thousand Ducats.

But they limit only
One moves of stay, for your dispatch, no more.

In all your great attempts, may you grow thrifty,
Secure, and prosperous.

If you please to rank,
Amongst the humblest one that shall attend
Instructions under your command, I am
Ready to wait the charge.

Oh still the state
Engages me her creature with the burden
Unequal for my weakness, to you gentlemen
I will prove friendly honest, of all mindful.

In memory (my Lord, such is your stile now)
Of your late fortunate exploits, the counsel
Amongst their general acts, have registered
The great Dukes letters, witness of your merit
To stand in characters upon record.

Load upon load let not my want of modesty
Trespass against good manners, I must study
Retirement to compose this weighty business
And moderately digest so large a plenty.
For fear it swell unto a surfeit.

May I
be bold to press a visit?

At your pleasure,
Good time of day, and peace,
O^s: health to your Lordship.

What of Spinella yet?

Quite lost no prints,
Or any tongue of ^racing her, how ever
Matters are huddled up: I doubt my Lord
Her husband carries little peace about him.

fall danger what fall can, she is a goodness
Above temptation, more to be adored
Then sifted; I'm too blame sure.

Levidolche.
For her part too* laughd at Malfatos frenzy
(Just so she termed it) but for you (my Lord)
She said she thankd your charity, which lent
Her crooked soul, before it left her body,
Some respit, wherein it might learn again
The means of growing straight.

She has found mercy,
Which I will seek, and sue for.

You are happy.

Count of Savona, Genoas Admiral,
Lord governor of Corsica, enrould
A Worthy of my country, sought and sued to
Praised, courted, flatterd; sure this bulk of mine,
Tails in the size a timpany of greatness
Puffs up too monstrously my narrow chest,
How surely dost thou malice, these extremes,
Uncomfortable man? when I was needy,
Cast naked on the flats of barren pity,
Abated to an ebb so low, that boys
A Cocke-horse friskd about me, without plunge
You could chat gravely then, in formal tones,
Reason most paradoxically; now
Contempt and wilful grudge at my uprising
becalmes your learned noise.

Such flourish Auria,
Flies with so swift a gale, as it will wast
Thy sudden joys into a faithless harbour.

Can mutter mischief, I observed your dullness
Whiles the whole ging crowd to me hark my triumphs
Are echoed under every roof, the air
Is streightend with the sound, there is not room
Enough to brace them in, but not a thought
Doth pierce into the grief that cabins hear,
Here through a creek a little in-let crawles,
A flake no bigger than a sisters thread,
Which sets the region of my heart a fire.
I had a kingdom once, but am depose*d
From all that royalty of blessed content,
by a confederacle twixt love and frailty.

glories in publik view, but add to misery,
Which travails in unrest at home.

At home?
That home Aurelio speaks of, I have lost,
And which is worse, when I have rowld about,
Toild like a pilgrim, round this globe of earth,
Wearied with care, and over-worne with age,
Lodged in the grave, I am not yet at home,
There rots but half of me, the other part
Sleeps, heaven knows where, would she and I my wife,
I mean, but what alas talk I of wife,
The woman, would we had together fed
On any out-cast parings, course and mouldy,
Not lived divided thus, I could have begged
For both, for it had been pity she should ever
Have felt so much extremity.

This is not
Patience required in wrongs of such vile nature,
You pity her, think rather on revenge.

Revenge! for what? (uncharitable friend)
On whom? lets speak a little pray with reason,
You found Spinella in Adurnies house,
Tis like a' gave her welcome very likely,
Her sister and another with her, so
Invited, nobly done; but he with her
Privately chamberd, he deserves no wife
Of worthy quality, who dares not trust
Her virtue in the proofs of any danger.

But I broke open the doors upon em.

Marry, it was a slovenly presumption,
And punishable by a sharpe rebuke.
I tell you sir, I in my younger growth,
Have by the stealth of privacy enjoyd
A Ladies closet, where to have profaned
That shrine of chastity and innocence,
With one unhallowed word, would have exild
The freedom of such favour into scorn.
Had any he alive then ventured there,
With foul construction, I had stamped the justice
Of my unguiltie truth upon his heart.

Adurni might have done the like, but that
The conscience of his fault in coward blood,
blushed at the quick surprise.

O fie, fie.
How ill some argue in their sour reproof,
Against a party liable to law:
For had that Lord offended with that creature,
Her presence would have doubled every strength
Of man in him, and justified the forfeit
Of noble shame, else twas enough in both
With a smile only to correct your rudeness.

Tis well you make such use of neighbours courtesy,
Some kind of beasts are tame, and hug their injuries:
Such way leads to a fame too.

Not uncivilly, though violently, friend.

Wherefore th^n, think ye,
Can she absent her self, if she be blameless?
You grant of course, your triumphs are proclaimed,
And I in person told her your return.
Where lies she hid the while?

That rests for answer
In you, now I come t'ee, we have exchanged
bosoms, Aurelio, from our years of childhood,
Let me acknowledge with what pride I own
A man so faithful, honest, fast, my friend:
He whom if I speak fully, never failed
by teaching trust to me, to learn of mine,
I vvisht my self thine equal; if l aymd
A wrong, twas in an envy of thy goodness,
So dearly witness with me my integrity,
I laid thee up to heart, that from my love,
My wife was but distinguisht in her sex,
Give back that holy signature of friendship,
Canceld* defaced, plucked off, or I shall urge,
Accounts scored on the tally of my vengeance,
Without all former complements.

Do ye imagine
I fawn upon your fortunes, or intrude
Upon the hope of bettering my estate,
That you cashier me at a minutes warning?
No, Auria, I dare vie with your respects,
Put both into the balance, and the poise
Shall make a settled stand, perhaps the proffer,
So frankly vowed at your departure first
Of settling me a partner in your purchase,
Leads you into opinion of some ends
Of mercenary falsehood, yet such wrong
Lest suites a noble soul.

By all my sorrows,
The mention is too course.

Since then th'occasion
Presents our discontinuance, use your liberty:
For my part I am resolute to die
The same my life professed me.

Pish, your faith
Was never in suspicion; but consider,
Neither the Lord nor Lady, nor the bawd,
Which shuffled them together, opportunity
Have fastened stain on my unquestioned name,
My friends rash indiscretion was the bellows
Which blew the cole now kindled to a flame,
Will light his slander to all wandering eyes.
Some men in giddy zeal ore-doe that office
They catch at, of whose number is Aurelio:
For I am certain, certain it had been
Impossible, had you stood wisely silent,
but my Spinella, trembling on her knee,
Would have accusd her breach of truth, have bg'd
A speedy execution on her trespass,
Then with a justice lawful as the magistrates,
Might I have drawn my sword against Adurni,
Which now is sheathed and rusted in the scabberd;
Good thanks to yonr cheap providence, once more
I make demand -- my wife -- you -- si^.

Roar louder
The noise affrights not me, threaten your enemies,
And prove a valiant tongue man -- now must follow,
by way of method, the exact condition
Of rage which runs to mutiny in friendship.
Auria come on, this weapon looks not pale
At fight of that again hear and believe it,
What I have done, was well done and well meant;
Twenty times over, were it new to do.
I de do it and do it, and boast the pains religious;
Yet since you shake me off, I slightly value
Other sev^rity.

Honour and duty
Stand my compurgators, never did passion
Purpose ungentle usage of my sword,
Against Aurelio, let me rather want
My hands, nay friend, a heart then ever suffer
Such dotage enter here, if I must loose
Spinella, let me not proceed to misery,
by loosing my Aurelio, we through madness,
Frame strange conceits, in our discoursing brains,
And prate of things as we pretend they were,
Join help to mine (good man) and let us listen
After this straying soul, and till we find her,
bear our discomfort quietly.

So doubtless,
She may be soon discovered.

That's spoke cheerfully.
Why there's a friend now, -- Auria and Aurelio
At odds oh't cannot be, must not, and shanot --

But look Castannas here, -- welcome fair figure
Of a choice Jewel, locked up in a cabinet,
More precious then the public view should sully.

Sir how you are informd, or on what terms
Of prejudice against my course, or custom*
Opinion sways your confidence, I know not
Much anger, if my fears persuade not falsely,
Sits on this gentleman's sterne brow, yet sir,
If an unhappy maids word may find credit,
As I wish harm to no body on earth,
So would all good folks may wish none to me.

None does sweet sister.

If they do, dear heaven
Forgive them is my prayer, but perhaps,
You might conceave (and yet methinkes you should not)
How I am faulty in my sisters absence,
Indeed tis nothing so, nor was I knowing
Of any private speech my Lord intended,
Save civil entertainment, pray what hurt
Can fall out in discourse, if it be modest?
Sure noble men will show that they are such
With those of their own rank, and that was all
My sister can be charged with.

Is't not friend, an excellent maid?

Deserves the best of fortunes;
I ever spoke her virtuous.

With your leave,
You used most cruel language to my sister,
Enough to fright her wits, not very kind
To me my self, she sighed when you were gone,
Desired no creature else should follow her;
And in good truth, I was so full of weeping,
I markd not well which way she went.

Staid she not
Within the house then?

Pass not she -- Aurelio
Was passing rough.

Strange! no where to be found out*

Not yet, but on my life, ere many hours,
I shall hear from her.

Shalt thou? worthy maid,
Thast brought to my sick heart a cordial -- friend
Good news -- most sweet Castanna.

May it prove so.

The paper in the purse for my directions appointed this the place, the time
now, here dance I attendance -- she is come already.


Parado, so I over heard you named.

A mushrome sprung up in a minute, by the sun-shine of your benevolent grace,
liberality and hospitable compassion (most magnificent beauty) have long since
lain bed-rid in the ashes of the old world till now, your illustrious charity
hath raked up the dead embers by giving life to a worm inevitably devoted yours
as you shall please to new shape me.


A grateful man (it seems) where gratitude
Has harbour; other furniture becoming
Accomplished qualities must needs inhabit,
What country claims your birth?

None, I was borne at sea, as my mother was in passage from cape Ludugory to
cape Clagliaty toward Africa in Sardinia, was bred up in Aquilastro, and at
years put my self in service under the Spanish Viceroy: till I was taken
prisoner by the Turks. I have tasted in my days handsome store of good and
bad, and am thankful for both.


You seem the issue then of honest parents.

Reputed no less: many children oftentimes inherit their lands who
peradventure never begot them: my mothers husband was a very old man at my
birth, but no man is too old to father his wives child, your servant I am sure
I will ever prove my self entirely.


Dare you be secret?

Yes.

And sudden.

Yes.

But withal, sure of hand, and spirit.

Yes, yes, yes.

I use not many words, the time prevents 'em,
A man of quality has robbed mine honour.

Name him.

Adurni.

A' shall bleed.

Malfato contemned my proffered love.

Yoke 'em in death -- whats my reward?

Propose it, and enjoy it.

You for my wife.

Ha!

Nothing else, deny me.
And i'll betray your counsels to your ruin;
Else do the feat courageously -- consider.

I do dispatch the task I have enjoined,
Then claim my promise.

No such matter, pretty one,
We'll marry first -- or -- farewell.

Stay, examine
From my confession what a plague thou draw
Into thy bosom, tho I blush to say it,
Know I have without sense of shame, or honour,
Forsook a lawful marriage bed, to dally
Between Adurnis arms.

This Lords.

The same; more not content with him I courted,
A newer pleasure, but was there refused by him I named so late.

Malfato.

Right, am henceforth resolutely bent to print
My foll es on their hearts, then change my life
For some rare penance, can thou love me now?

Better I do believe tis possible you may mend,
All this breaks off no bargain.

Accept my hand, with this a faith as constant
As vows can urge, nor shall my haste prevent
This contract, which death only must divorce.

Settle the time.

Meet here to morrow night,
We will determine further, as behoves us.

How is my new love called?

Levidolche, be confident, I bring a worthy portion;
But you'll sly off.

Not I, by all that's noble,
A kiss -- farewell -- dear fate.

Love is sharpe sighted
And can pierce through the cunning of disguises,
False pleasures I cashier ye, fair truth welcome.

HEre you are safe, (sad cousin) if you please
May over-say the circumstance of what
You late discoursed, mine ears are gladly oper,
For I my self am in such hearty league
With solitary thoughts, that pensive language
Charms my attention.

But my husbands honours,
By how much more in him they sparkle clearly
by so much more they tempt belief to credit
The wrack and ruin of my injured name.

Why cousin should the earth cleave to the roots,
The seas and heavens be mingled in disorder,
Your purity with unaffrighted eyes
Might wait the uproar, tis the guilty trembles
At horrors, not the innocent, you are cruel
In censuring a libertle allowed.
Speak freely, gentle cousin, was Adurni
Importunately wanton?

In excess
Of entertainment, else not.

Not the boldness
Of an uncivil courtship.

What that meaht,
I never understood, I have at once
Set bars between my best of earthly joys,
And best of men, so excellent a man
As lives without comparison, his love
To me was matchless.

Yet put case, sweet cousin,
That I could name a creature, whose affection
Followed your Auria in the height: affection
To you; even to Spinella* true and settled,
As ever Auria's was* can, is, or will be.
You may not chide the story.

Fortunes minions
Are flattered, not the miserable.

Listen to a strange tale, which thus the author sighed,
A kinsman of Spinella (so it runs)
Her fathers sisters soune, some time before
Auria the fortunate possessed her beauties,
Became inamor'd of such rare perfections,
As she was stored with, fed his idle hopes
With possibilities of lawful conquest,
Proposed each difficulty in pursuit
Of what his vain supposal styled his own,
Found in the argument one only flaw
Of conscience, by the nearness of their bloods,
Unhappy scruple, easily dispensed with,
Had any friends advice resolved the doubt*
Still on a' loved, and loved, and wished, and wished,
Eft-soone began to speak, yet soon broke off,
And still the fondling durst not, cause a' durst not.

Twas wonderful,

Exceeding wonderful,
Beyond all wonder, yet tis known for truth,
After her marriage, when remained not ought
Of expectation to such fruitless dotage.
His reason then, now, then could not reduce
The violence of passion, tho a'vowd
Never to unlock that secret, scarce to her
Herself, Spinella, and withal resolved,
Not to come near her presence, but to avoid
All opportunities how ever proffered.

An understanding duld by th'infelicitie
Of constant sorrow, is not apprehensive
In pregnant noveltie, my ears receive
The words you utter, cousin, but my thoughts
Are fastened on another subject.

Can you embrace, so like a darling, your own woes,
And play the tyrant with a partner in them?
Then I am thankful for advantage, urged
By fatal and enjoynd necessity,
To stand up in defence of injured virtue,
Will against any, I except no quality,
Maintain all supposition misapplied,
Unhonest, false, and villainous.

Dear cousin, as you're a gentleman,

I'll bless that hand,
Whose honourable pity seals the passport
For my incessant turmoils, to their rest.
If I prevail, (which heaven forbid) these ages
Which shall inherit ours, may tell postericie
Spinella and Malfato for a kinsman,
By noble love made jealons of her fame.

No (...) I dare not hear it.

All is said:
Henceforth shall never syllable proceed,
From my unpleasant voice, of amorous folly --

Your summons warned me hither, I am come
Sister, my sister twas an unkind part,
Not to take me along w'ee.

Chide her for it,
Castanna, this house is as freely yours,
As ever was your fathers.

we conceave so,
Tho your late strangeness hath bred mervalle in us,
But wherefore, sister, keeps your silence distance?
Am I not welcome t'ee?

Lives Auria safe?
Oh prithee do not hear me call him husband,
before thou can resolve what kind of wife
His fury terms the run away, speak quickly,
Yet do not stay Castanna, I am lost,
His friend hath set before him a bad woman,
And he, good man, believes it.

Now in truth --

Hold, my heart trembles, I perceive thy tongue
Is great with ills and hastes to be delivered,
I should not use Castanna so, first tell me,
Shortly and truly tell me* how he does.

In perfect health.

For that my thanks to heaven.

The world hath not another wife like this,
Cousin you will not hear your sister speak,
So much your passion rules.

Even what she pleases: go on Castanna.

Your most noble husband
Is deaf to all reports, and only grieves
At his souls love, Spinellas causeless absence.

Why look ye cousin now?

Indeed.

Will value no counsel, takes no pleasure in his greatness,
Neither admits of likelihood at all,
That you are living: if you were he's certain
It were impossible you could conceal
Your welcomes to him, being all one with him,
But as for jealousy of your dishonour,
He both laughs at and scorns it.

Does a'.

Therein he shows himself desertfull of his happiness,

Methinks the news should cause some motion sister.
You are not well.

Not well.

I am unworthy*

Of whom? what? why?

Go cousin, come Castanna.

The state in counsel is already set,
My coming will be 'late; now therefore gentlemen,
This house is free as your intents are sober,
Your pains shall be accepted.

Mirth sometimes falls into earnest signior.

We for our parts aim at the best.

You wrong your selves meelse, good success t'ee*

Futilli tis our wisest course to follow
Our pastime with d scretion, by which means
We may ingratiate as our business hits,
Our undertakings to great Aurias favour.

I grow quite weary of this lazy custom
Attending on the fruitless hopes of service,
For meat and rags, a wit, a shrewd preferment
Study some scurrill jests, grow old and beg
No let em be admitted that love foul linen.
I'll run a new course.

Get the coin we spend,
And knock 'em ore the pate who jeers our earnings --

Husht man, one suitor comes.

The the other follows.

Be not so loud -- here comes Madonna sweet lips.
Mithtreth, inthooth for thooth, will lithpe it to uth.

Dentlemen then ye ith thith muthicke yourth, or can ye tell what great manths
fidleth, made it with vedee petty noyth, but who thold thend it.


does not your self know Lady.

I do not uth
To thpend lip labour upon quethtionths,
That I my thelfe can anthwer.

No sweet madam,
Your lips are destind to a better use,
Or else the proverb fails of lisping maids.

Kithing you mean pey come behind with your mockths then,
My lipthes will therve the one to kith the other --
How now whath necked?

what hoe we come to be merry,
Open the doors a Jovial crew,
Lusty boys and free, and very,
Very, very lusty boys are we,
We can drink till all look blew,
Dance sing and roar,
Never give ore.
As long as we have ne'er an eye to see
Pithee, pithee* leths come in*
Ove thall all oua favous win,
Dently, dently, we thall pass,
None kitheth like the lithping lass.
What call ye this a song?

Yeth a delithious thing, and wondroth pretty;

A very country catch -- doubtless some prince
Belikehath sent it to congratulate
Your nights repose.

Think ye tho thignior,
It muth be then thome unknown obthcure printh
That thuns the light.

Perhaps the prince of darkness.

Of darkens what ith he?

A courtier matchless
A'woes, and wins, more beauties to his love
Then all the kings on earth.

Whea thandeth his court pey --

This gentleman approaching I presume,
Has more relation to his court then I,
And comes in time t'informe ye.

Think ye tho time thure you know him,

Lady you'll perceave it*

She seems in my first entrance to admire me,
Protest she eyes me round; Fulg* she's is thine own.

Noble Fulgoso.

Did you hear the musique?
Twas I that brought it, was't not tickling? ah ha

Pay what pinth thent it.

Prince, no Prince but we,
We set the ditty and composed the song,
Theresnos a note or foot in it, but our own,
And the pure trodden mortar of this brain,
We can do things and things.

Doo'd thing't youa thelfe then.

Nay, nay, I could never sing
More then a gib cat, or a very howler,
But you shall heareme whistle it.

Thith thingth thome jethter,
Thure he belongth unto the printh of darkneth.

Yes, and i'll tell you what his office is,
His Prince delights himself exceedingly
In birds of divers kinds, this gentleman
Is keeper and instructor of his black-birds, he took his skill first
from his fathers carter.

With wonderful to thee by what thrange means
Thome men are raised to plathes.

I do hear you,
And thank ye heartily for your good wills,
In setting forth my parts, but what I live on,
Is simple trade of money from my lands.
Hang sharks, I am no shifter.

Ith pothible --

Bleth uth whoth thith?

Oh it is the man of might.

May my address to beauty lay no scandal
Upon my martial honour, since even Mars
Whom as in war, in love I imitate,
Could not resist the shafts of Cupid, therefore
As with the god of War, I deign to stoop*
Lady vouchsafe loves goddess like to yield
Your fairer hand unto these lips, the portalle
Of valiant breath, that hath ore-turnd an army.

Fay'a weather, keep me, what a thorme ith thith?

Oh Don keep off at further distance yet
A little farther, do you not observe
How your strong breath hath terrifyd the Lady?

I'll stop the breath of war and breath as gently
As a perfumed pair of sucking bellows
In some sweet Ladies chamber, for I can
Speak Lyon-like, or sheep like, when I please.

Stand by then, without noise a while brave Don
And let her only view your parts, they will take her.

(...) publish them in silence.

Stand you there
Fulgoso the magnificent.

Hear?

Just there,
Let her survey you both; you'll be her choice
Ne'er doubt it, man.

I cannot doubt it, man.

But speak not till I bid you.

I may whistle.

A little to your self, to spend the time.

Both foolth you thay.

But hear them for your sport.

Don shall begin, -- begin Don, she has surveyd
Your outwards and your inwards through the rents,
And wounds of your apparel.

She is politic,
My out-side Lady shrouds a prince obscurd;

I thank ye for your muthicke printh.

My words
Are musique to her.

The muthicke and the thong
You thent me by thith whithling thing, your man?

She took him for my man, love thou were just.

I wonot hold, his man, tis time to speak
Before my time, oh scurvy, I his man?
That has no means for meat or rags, and seame-rents.

Have I with this one rapier.

He has no other.

Past through a field of pikes, whose heads I lopped
As easily as the bloody minded youth
Lopped off the poppy heads.

The puppit heads.

Have I -- have I -- have I?

Thou lie thou hast not,
And i'll may not.

Have I -- but let that pass,
For tho my famous acts were damb'd to silence,
Yet my descent shall crown me thy superior.

That I would lithen to.

List and wonder,
My great, great Grandsire was an ancient Duke,
Stild Dis? vir di Gonzado.

That's in Spanish
An incorrigible rogue, without a fellow,
An unmatchd rogue, he thinks we understand not.

So was my grandfather height Argozile.

An arrant, arrant thief leader, pray mock it.

My grandsire by the mothers side a Condee,
Condee Scrivano.

A crop-eard Scrivener.

Whose son, my mothers father was a Marquis,
H^io di puto.

That's the son of a whore.
And my renowned sire Don Piccace.

In proper sense a rascal -- O brave Don.

Huio di una pravado --

A'goes on,
Son of a branded bitch -- high spirited Don,

Had honours both by sea and land, to wit.

The Galleys and Bride-well.

I'll not endure it,
To hear a canting mongrel -- Hear me lady,

Tis no fair play.

I care not fair or foul,
I from a King derive my pedigree,
King Oberon by name, from whom my father
The mighty and courageous Mounti-banco,
Was lineally descended, and my mother
(In right of whose blood I must ever honour
The lower Germany) was a Harlekine.

He blow up
The Spaniard presently by his mother side.

Her father was Grave Hansvan Herne, the son
Of Hogen Mogen, dat de droates did sneighen
Of veirteen hundred Spaniards in one neict.

Oh Diabolo.

Ten thousand Devils, nor Diabolos
Shall fright me from my pedigree, my uncle
Yacob van Flagon drought, with Abraham Snorten fert
And yongster Brogen foh with fourscore hargubush,
Managed by well-lin'd Butter-boxes, took
A thousand Spanish Iobber-nowles by surprise,
And beat a sconce about their ears.

My fury
Is now but justice on thy forfeit life.

Lath they thall not fight.

Fear not, sweet Lady.

Be advis*d great spirits.

My fortunes bid me to be wise in duels,
Else hanged, who cares?

Mine honour is my tutor,
Already tried and known.

Why there's the point,
Mine honour is my tutor too, Noble men
Fight in their persons, scorn't, tis out of fashion,
There's none but hare-brain'd youths of metal use it.

Yet put not up your swords, it is the pleasure
Of the fair Lady, that you quit the field,
With brandished blades in hand.

And more to show
your suffering valour, as her equal favours,
you both should take a competence of kicks.

How?

Thus and thus, away you brace of stinkards,

Pheugh, is it were.

Why since it is her pleasure, I dare and will endure it.

Pheugh.

A way, but stay below.

Budge not, I charge ye,
Till you have further leave.

Mine honour claims
The last foot in the field.

I'll lead the van then.

yet more, be gone, are not these precious suitors --

What tumults fright the house?

A brace of Castrels,
That flattered sir, about this lovely game
your daughter, but they durst not give the souze
And so took hedge.

Me Haggards, Buzzards, Kites.

Ith korne, thuch trump and will thape my luffe,
Henth forth ath thall my father betht direct me.

Why now thou sing in tune, my Amoretta*
And my good friends, you have likewise Physicians,
Prescribed a healthful diet, I shall think on
A bounty for your pains, and will present ye
To noble Auria: such as your descents
Commend, but for the present we must quit
This room to privacy: they come --

Nay predee,
Leave me not Dentlemen.

We are your servants.

You're welcome, be assured you are, for proof,
Retrive the boldness (as you please to term it)
Of visit to commands, if this mans presence
Be not of use, dismiss him.

Tis (with favour)
Of consequence my Lord, your friend may witness
How far my reputation stands engaged
To noble reconcilement.

I observe
No party here amongst us, who can challenge
A motion of such honour.

Could your looks
Borrow more clear severity and calmnesse,
Than can the peace of a composed soul;
Yet I presume, report of my attempt
(Trained by a curiosity io youth)
For scattering clouds before 'em, hath raised tempests
Which will at last break out.

Hid now (most likely)
In the darkness of your speech.

you may be plainer.

I shall my Lord, that I intended wrong,

Ha? wrong? to whom?

To Auria, and as far
As language could prevail, did --

Take advice,
(Young Lord) before thy tongue betray a secret
Concealed yet from the world; hear and consider
In all my flight of vanity and giddiness,
When scarce the wings of my excess were fledged,
When a distemperature of youthful heat,
Might have excused disorder and ambition,
Even then, and so from thence till now the down
Of softness is exchanged for plumes of age*
Confirmed and hardened, never durft I pitch
On any howsoever likely rest,
Where the presumption might be consterd wrong,
The word is hateful, and the sense wants pardon:
For as I durst not wrong the meanest, so
He who but only aimd by any boldness,
A wrong to me, should find I must not bear it,
The one is as unmanly as the other.
Now without interruption.

Stand Aurelio,
And justify thine accusation boldly,
Spare me the needless use of my confession,
And having told no more, then what thy jealousy
Possessed thee with again before my face,
Urge to thy friend the breach of hospitality
Adurni trespast in, and thou conceavst
Against Spinella; why proofs grow faint,
If barely not supposed, I'll answer guilty.

You come not here to brave us.

No Aurelio.
But to reply upon that brittle evidence,
To which thy cunning never shall rejoyne.
I make my Judge my Jury, be accountant
Whither withal the eagerness of spleen
Of a suspicious rage can plead, thou hast
Enforced the likelihood of scandal.

Doubt not
But that I have delivered honest truth,
As much as I believe, and justly witness.

Loose grounds to raise a bulwark of reproach on,
And thus for that; my errand hither is not
In whining trewant-like submission,
To cry I have offended, pray forgive me,
I will do so no more: but to proclaim
The power of virtue, whose commanding sovereignty,
Sets bounds to rebell-bloods, and check restrains,
Custom of folly by example teaches
A rule to reformation; by rewards,
Crowns worthy actions, and invites to honour*

Honour and worthy actions, best beseem
Their lips who practice both, and not discourse 'em.

Peace, peace, man, I am silent.

Some there are,
And they not few in number, who resolve
No beauty can be chaste, less unattempted;
And for because the liberty of courtship
Flies from the wanton, on the her comes next.,
Meeting oft times, too many soon seduced,
Conclude, all may be won by gifts, by service,
Or complements of vows; and with this file
I stood in rank, conquest securd my confidence,
Spinella (storm not Auria) was an object
Of study for fruition; here I angled
Not doubting the deceit could find resistance.

After confession follows --

Noise observe him.

Oh strange: by all the comforts of my hopes
I found a woman good; a woman good,
Yet as I wish belief, or do desire
A memorable mention, so much majesty
Of humbleness, and scorn, appeared at once
In fair, in chaste, in wise Spinellas eyes,
That I grew dull in utterance, and one frown
From her, could every flame of sensual appetite.

On sir and do not stop.

Without protests,
I pleaded merely love, used not a syllable,
But what a virgin might without a blush,
Have listened to, and not well armed have pitied,
But she neglecting, cried come Auria, come
Fight for ^hy wife at home, then in rushd you sir
Talkd in much fury, parted, when as soon
The Lady vanishd, after her the rest.

What followed?

My commission on mine error,
In execution whereof I have proved
So punctually severe, that I renounce
All memory, not to this one fault alone
But to my other greater, and more irksome,
Now he who ever owns a name, that consters
This repetition, the report of fear.
Of falsehood, or imposture, let him tell me
I give my self the lye, and I will clear
The injury, and man to man, or if
Such justice may prove doubtful, two to two,
Or three to three, or any way reprieve
The opinion of my forfeit, without blemish.

Who can you think I am? did you expect
So great a tamenesse as you find, Adurni,
That you cast loud defiance? say --

I have robbed you
Of rigour (Auria) by my strict self-penance,
For the presumption.

Sure Italians hardly
Admit dispute in questions of this nature,
The trick is new.

I find my absolution,
By vows of change from all ignoble practice.

Why look ye friend, I told you this before
You would not be persuaded, -- let me think.

You do not yet deny that you solicited
The Lady to ill purpose.

I have answered,
But it returned much quiet to my mind,
Perplexed with rare commotions.

That's the way
It smoothes all rubs.

My Lord.

Foh I am thinking
You may talk forward, if it take tis clear
And then and then, and so and so.

You labour with curious engines sure*

Fine ones, I take ye
To be a man of credit -- else,

Suspicion is needless, know me better.

Yet you must not part from me sir.

For that your pleasure.

Come fight for thy wife at home my Auria -- yes
We can fight my Spinella, when thine honour
Relies upon a Champion -- now.

My Lord
Castanna with her sister, and Malfato
Are newly entered.

Be not loud* convey them
Into the gallery -- Aurelio, friend
Adurni Lord, we three will sit in counsel
And piece a hearty league, or scuffle shrewdly.

RUffan out of my doors, thou come to rob me,
An officer, what ho! my house is haunted
By a lewd pack of thieves, of harlots, murderers,
Rogues, vagabonds, I foster a decoy here,
And she trowles on her ragged customer,
To cut my throat for pillage.

Good sir hear me,

Hear or not hear* let him rave his lungs out,
Whiles this woman hath abode under this roof,
I will justify my self her bedfellow in despite
Of denial, in despite, those are my words.

Monstrous! why sirrah, do I keep a bawdy-house,
An hospital for panders? Oh'; thou monster,
Thou she-confusion! are you grown so rampant,
That from a private wanton thou proclaimst thy self
A baggage for all gamesters, Lords or Gentlemen,
Strangers, or home-spun yeomen, foot-posts, pages,
Rorers or hangmen, hey day, set up shop,
And then cry a market open, toot, and welcome.

This is my husband.

Husband!

Husband natural, I have married her,
And whats your verdict on the match signior?

Husband, and married her!

Indeed tis truth.

A proper joining, give ye joy great mistress
Your fortunes are advanced, marry are they,
What jointure is assured pray? some three thousand
A year in oaths and vermin? fair preferment.
Was ever such a tattered rag of mans flesh,
Patched up for Copesmate to my Nieces daughter.

Sir,
for my mothers name forbear this anger,
If I have yoked my self beneath your wishes,
Yet is my choice a lawful one, and I
Will live as truly chaste unto his bosom,
As ere my faith hath bound me.

A sweet couple.

We are so, for mine own part, however my out-side
Appear ungay, I have wrestled with death,
Signior Martino, to preserve your sleeps, and such
As you are untroubled, a soldier is in peace
A mockery, a very towne-bull for laughter, unthrifts,
And landed babies, are prey-curmudgeons,
Lay their baits for, let the wars rattle about
Your ears once, and the security of a soldier is
Right honourable amongst ye then, that day
May shine again: so to my business.

A soldier! thou a soldier, I do believe
You are lowfre; that's a pretty sign I grant:
A villainous poor Bandetti rather, one
Can man a queen, and cant, and pick a pocket*
Pad for a cloak, or hat, and in the dark
Pistol a straggler for a quarter Duca^e.
A soldier! yes, a looks as if a had not
The spirit of a herring, or a tumbler.

Let age and dotage rage together, Levidolche thou art mine, on what conditions
the world shall soon witness: yet since our hands joined, I have not
interessed my possession of thy bed, nor till I have accounted to thy
injunction, do I mean: kiss me quick and resolute. So adieu Signior.


Dear, for loves sake, stay.

Forbear entreaties.

Ah thou: but what? I know not how to call thee,
Fain would I smother grief, and out it must*
My heart is broke, thou hast for many a day
Been at a loss, and now art lost for ever:
Lost, lost, without recovery.

With pardon,
Let me retain your sorrows.

Tis impossible,
Despair of rising up to honest fame,
Turns all the courses wild, and this last action
Will roar thy infamy, then you are certainly
Married forsooth, unto this new-come.

Yes, and herein every hope is brought to life,
Which long hath lain in deadness* I have once more
Wedded Benatzi my divorced husband,

Benatzi, this the man?

No odd disguise
Could guard him from discovery; tis he,
The choice of my ambition, heaven preserve me
Thankful for such a bounty; yet he dreams not
Of this deceit, but let me die in speaking,
If I repute not my success more happy
Then any earthly blessing; oh sweet uncle,
Rejoice with me, I am a faithful convert,
And will redeem the stains of a foul name,
By love and true obedience.

Force of passion
Shows me a child again, do Levidolche,
Perform thy resolutions, those performed,
I have been only steward for your welfare,
You shall have all between ye.

Join with me sir,
Our plot requires much speed* we must be earnest,
I'll tell ye what conditions threaten danger,
Unless you intermediate; let us hasten,
For fear we come too late.

As thou intend
A virtuous honesty, I am thy second
To any office, Levidolche witty,
My Niece, my witty Niece.

Let's slack no time sir.

Kinsman and Ladies, have a little patience*
All will be as you wish, I'll be your warrant,
Fear nothing, Augia is a nobe fellow,
I leave ye; but be sure I am in hearing:
Take courage.

Courage, they who have no hearts,
Find none to lose; ours is as great as his,
Who defy danger most* sure state and ceremony
In habit here like strangers we shall wait
Formality of entertainment, Cousin,
Let us return, 'tis paltry.

Gentle sir,
Contine your passion, my attendance only
Commends a duty.
Now for heavens sake sister --
A' comes, your husband comes, take comfort sister

Malfato.

Auria.

Cousin, would mine arms
In their embraces might at once deliver
Affectionately what interest your merit
Holds in my estimation, I may chide
The coyness of this intercourse betwixt us,
Which a retired privacle on your part
Hath pleased to show; if ought of my endeavours
Can purchase kind opinion, I shall honour
The means and practice.

Tis your charity.

Worthy Malfato.

Provident Aurelio.

Castanna, virtuous maid,

Your servant, brother.

But who's that other, such a face mine eyes
Have been acquainted with, the fight resembles
Something which is not quite lost to remembrance;
Why does the Lady kneel? to whom? pray rise;
I shall forget civility of manners,
Imagining you tender, a false tribute,
Or him to whom you tender (...) counterfeit.

My Lord, you use a borrowd bravery,
Not suiting fair constructions, may your fort unes
Mount higher than can apprehension reach 'em,
Yet this waste kind of antique sovereign (...)
Unto a wife who equals every best
Of your deserts, archievements, or posterity,
Betrays a barrenness of noble nature,
Let upstarts exercise uncomely roughness,
Clear spirits to the humble will be humble:
You know your wife no doubt.

Cry ye mercy Gentleman,
Belike you come to tutor a good carriage,
Are expert in the nick ont, we shall study
Instructions quiently, wife you said, agreed.
Keep fair, and stand the trial.

Those words raise
A lively soul in her, who almost yielded
To faintness and stupidity, I thank ye,
Tho prove what judge you will, till I can purge
Objections which require belief and conscience,
I have no kindred sister, husband, friend,
Or pity for my plea.

Call ye this welcome? we are mistook Castanna.

Oh my Lord, other respects were promised.

Said ye Lady,
No kindred, sister, husband, friend.

Nor name,
With this addition, I disclaim all benefit
Of mercy from a charitable thought,
If one or all the subtilties of malice,
If any enginiere of faithless discord,
If supposition for pretence in folly,
Can point out, without injury to goodness,
A likelihood of guilt in my behaviour,
Which may declare neglect in every duty,
Required fit, or exacted.

High and peremptory,
The confidence is masculine.

Why not, an honourable cause gives life to truth,
Without control.

I can proceed, that tongue,
Whose venom by traducing spotless honour,
Hath spread, th'infection is not more mine enemy,
Then theirs, or his weak and besotted brains are,
On whom the poison of its cankered falsehood
Hath wrought for credit to so foul a mischief.
Speak sir, the churlish voice of this combustion,
Aurelio speak, nor (gentle sir) forbear
Ought what you know, but roundly use your eloquence
Against a mean defendant.

He's put too't,
It seems the challenge gravels him*

My intelligence,
Was issue of my doubts, not of my knowledge.
A self confession may crave assistance,
Let the Ladies justice impose the penance.
So in the rules of friendship, as of love,
Suspicion is not seldom an improper
Advantage for the knitting faster joints
Of faithfullest affection by the fevers
Of casualty unloosd, where lastly error
Hath run into the toil.

Woeful satis faction for a divorce of hearts.

So resolute,
I shall touch nearer home, behold these hairs,
(Great Misters of a spirit) yet they are not
By winter of old age quite hid in snow,
Some messengers of time I must acknowledge
Amongst them took up lodging, when we first
Exchanged our faiths in wedlock, I was proud,
I did prevail with one whose youth and beauty
Deserved a choice more suitable in both.
Advancement to a fortune could not court,
Ambition either on my side, or hers:
Love drove the bargain, and the truth of love
Confirmed it, I conceived, but disproportion
In years, amongst the married, is a reason
For change of pleasures, whereto I reply
Our union was not forced, 'twas by consent;
So then the breach in such a case appears
Unpardonable; say your thoughts.

My thoughts in that respect are as resolute as yours,
The same, yet herein evidence of frailty
Deserved not more a separation,
Then doth charge of disloyalty objected
Without or ground or witness, woman's faults
Subject to punishments, and men's applauded,
Prescribe no laws in force.

Are ye so nimble.

A soul sublimed from dross by competition,
Such is mighty Aurias famed; descends
From its own Sphere, when injuries profound ones
Yield to the combat of a scolding mastery.
Skirmish of words hath with your wife lewdly ranged
Adulterating the honour of your bed.
Hold dispute, but execute your vengeance,
With unresisted rage we shall look on,
Allow the fact, and spurn her from our bloods,
Else not detected, you have wronged her innocence
Unworthily, and childishly, for which
I challenge satisfaction.

Tis a tyranny
Over an humble and obedient sweetness,
Ungently to insult --

That I make good,
And must without exception find admittance
Fitting the party who hath herin interest,
Put case I was in fault, that fault stretched merely
To a misguided thought, and who in presence
Except the pair of sisters fair and matchless,
Can quit an imputation of like folly?
Here I ask pardon (excellent Spinella
Of only you) that granted he amongst you,
Who calls an even reckoning, shall meet
An even accountant.

Baited by consederacie,
I must have right.

And I, my Lord, my Lord,
What stir and coil is here? you can suspect,
So reconciliation then is needless,
Conclude the difference by revenge, or part,
And never more see one another: sister,
Lend me thine arm, I have assumed a courage
Above my force, and can hold out no longer,
Auria unkind, unkind.

She faints.

Spinella, regent of my affections, thou hast conquered,
I find thy virtues as I left them, perfect,
Pure, and unflaw'd, for instance let me claim
Castannas promise.

Mine?

Yours, to whose faith
I am a guardian, not by imposition,
But by you chosen, look ye, I have fitted
A husband for you, noble and deserving,
No shrinking back, Adurni I present her
A wife of worth.

Howes that?

So great a blessing
Crowns all desires of life, the motion, Lady,
To me, I can assure you, is not sudden,
But welcomed forethought, would you could please
To say the like.

Castanna do -- Speak dearest,
It rectifies all crookes, vain surmises,
I prithee speak.

The courtship's somewhat quick,
The match it seems agreed on, do not sister
Reject the use of fate.

I dare not question
The will of heaven.

Unthought of and unlooked for.

My ever honoured Lord.

This marriage frees
Each circumstance of jealousy.

Make no scruple
(Castanna) of the choice, tis firm and real,
Why else have I so long with tamenesse nourished
Report of wrongs, but that I fixed on issue
Of my desires, Italians use not dalliance
But execution; herein I degenerated
From custom of our nation: for the virtues
Of my Spinella rooted in my soul,
Yet common form of matrimonial complements,
Short lived, as are their pleasures, yet in sooth,
My dearest, I might blame your causeless absence,
To whom my love and nature were no strangers,
But being in your kinsmans house, I honour
His hospitable friendship, and must thank it.
Now lasting truce on all hands.

You will pardon
A rash and over-busie curiosity.

It was too blame, but the success remits it.

Sir, what presumptions formerly have grounded
Opinion of unfitting carriage to you,
On my part I shall faithfully acquit
At easy summons.

You prevent the nicety,
Use your own pleasure --

Whats the matter?

Matter?

Adurni and Malfato found together!
Now for a glorious vengeance.

Hold, oh hold him.

This is no place for murder, yield thy sword.

Yield it, or force it; set you up your shambles
Of slaughter in my presence.

Let him come.

What can the Russian mean?

I am prevented.
The temple or the chamber of the Duke,
Had else not proved a sanctuary Lord,
Thou hast dishonourably wronged my wife.

Thy wife! I know not her, nor thee.

Fear nothing.

Yes, me you know, heaven has a gentle mercle
For penitent offenders: blessed Ladies,
Repute me not a cast-away, though once
I fell into some lapses, which our sex
Are oft inntangled by; yet what I have been,
Concerns me now no more, who am resolved
On a new life. This Gentleman Benatzi,
Disguised as you see, I have re-married,
I knew you at first sight, and tender constantly
Submission for all errors.

Nay, tis true sir.

I joy in the discovery, am thankful
Unto the change.

Let wonder hence forth cease,
For I am partner with Benatzis couns^ls;
And in them was director, I have seen
The man do service in the wars late past,
Worthy an ample mention; but of that
At large hereafter, repetitions now
Of good or bad, would straighten time presented
For other use.

Welcome, and welcome ever.

Mine eyes sir, never shall without a blush
Receive a look from yours; please to forget
All passages of rashness, such attempt
Was mine, and only mine.

You have found a way
To happiness, I honour the conversion,

Then I am freed.

may stile your friend your servant,

Now all that's mine, is theirs,

But let me add
An offering to the altar of this peace.

How likes Spinella this? our holy day
Deserves the Calendar.

This Gentlewoman
Reformed must in my thoughts live fair and worthy,
Indeed you shall.

And mine, the noveltie
Requires a friendly love.

You are kind and bountiful.

By your leaves Lords and Ladies, to your jollities,
I bring increase with mine too, here's a yongster
Whom I cll son-in-law, for so my daughter
Will have it.

Yeth in sooth thee will.

Futelli hath weaned her from this pain.

Stand forth stout lovers.

Top Top-gallant pair, and for his pains,
She will have him, or none, he's not the richest
In the parish; but a wit, I say Amen,
Because I cannot help it.

With no matter.

We'll remedy the penury of Fortune,
They shall with us to Corsica, our cousin
Must not despair of means, since tis believed
Futelli can deserve a place of trust.

You are in all unfellowed,

Withly thpoken.

Think on Piero sir.

Piero, yes,
But what of these two pretty ones?

I'll follow.
The Ladies, play at cards, make sport and whistle,
My purse shall bear me out, a lazy life,
Is scirvy, and deboshd; fight you abroad,
And we'll be game whiles you fight at home,
Run high, run low, here is a brain can doo^,
But for my martial brother Don, prithee make him
A what dee callt, a setting dog, a sentinel
I'll mend his weekly pay.

He shall deserve it.
Vouchsafe employment honourable

Marry.
The Dons a generous Don.

Unfit to loose him,
Command doth limit us short time for revels,
We must be thrifty in them, none I trust,
Repines at these delights, they are free and harmless,
After distress at sea, the dangers ore,
Safety and welcomes better taste a shore.

THe Court's on rising; tis too late
To wish the Lady in her fate
Of try all now more fortunate.
A verdict in the Juries breast,
Will be given up anon at least,
Till then tis fit we hope the best.
Else if there can be any stay,
Next sitting without more delay,
We will expect a gentle day.

