DIspute no more in this, for know (young man)
These are no Schoole-points; nice Philosophy
May tolerate unlikely arguments,
But Heaven admits no jest; wits that presumed
On wit too much, by striving how to prove
There was no God; with foolish grounds of Art,
Discovered first the nearest way to Hell;
And filled the world with deuelish Atheism:
Such questions youth are fond; For better 'tis,
To bless the Sun, then reason why it shines;
Yet he thou talk of, is above the Sun,
No more; I may not hear it.

Gentle Father,
To you I have vnclasp't my burdened soul,
Emptied the store-house of my thoughts and heart,
Made my self poor of secrets; have not left
Another word untold, which hath not spoke
All what I ever durst, or think, or know;
And yet is here the comfort I shall have,
Must I not do, what all men else may, love?

Yes. you may love fair son.

Must I not praise
That beauty, which if framed a new, the gods
Would make a god of, if they had it there;
And kneel to it, as I do kneel to them?

Why foolish mad-man?

Shall a peevish sound,
A customary form, from man to man,
Of brother and of sister, be a bar
Twixt my perpetual happiness and me?
Say that we had one father, say one womb,
(Curse to my joys) gave both us life, and birth;
Are we not therefore each to other bound
So much the more by Nature; by the the links
Of blood, of reason; Nay if you will hau'e,
Even of Religion, to be ever one,
One soul, one flesh, one love, one heart, one All?

Have done unhappy youth, for thou art lost.

Shall then, (for that I am her brother borne)
My joys be ever banished from her bed?
No Father; in your eyes I see the change.
Of pity and compassion: from your age
As from a sacred Oracle. distills
The life of Counsel: tell me holy man,
What Cure shall give me ease in these extremes.

Repentance (son) and sorrow for this sin:
For thou hast moved a Majesty above
With thy vn-rannged (almost) Blasphemy.

O do not speak of that (dear Confessor)

Art thou (my son) that miracle of Wit,
Who once within these three Moneth's were esteemed
A wonder of thine age, throughout Bononia?
How did the University applaud
Thy Government, Behaviour, Learning, Speech,
Sweetness, and all that could make up a man?
I was proud of my Tutellage, and chose
Rather to leave my Books, then part with thee,
I did so: but the fruits of all my hopes
Are lost in thee, as thou art in thy self.
O Giouanni: hast thou left the Schools
Of Knowledge, to converse with Lust and Death?
(For Death waits on thy Lust) look through the World,
And thou shalt see a thousand faces shine
More glorious, then this Idol thou ador'st:
Leave her, and take thy choice, 'tis much less sin,
Though in such gamos as those, they lose that win.

It were more ease to stop the Ocean
From floates and ebbs, then to dissuade my vower.

Then I have done, and in thy wilful flame:
Already see thy ruin; Heaven is just,
Yet hear my counsel.

As a voice of life.

Hye to thy Fathers house, there locke thee fast
Alone within thy Chamber, then fall down
On both thy knees, and grovel on the ground:
Cry to thy heart, wash every word thou vtter'st
In tears, (and if it be possible) of blood:
Beg Heaven to cleanse the leprosy of Lust
That rots thy Soul, acknowledge what thou art,
A wretch, a worm, a nothing: weep, sigh, pray
Three times a day, and three times every night:
For seven days space do this, then if thou find
No change in thy desires, return to me:
I'll think on remedy, pray for thy self
At home, whilst I pray for thee here -- away,
My blessing with thee, we have need to pray.

All this I'll do, to free me from the rod
Of vengeance, else I'll swear, my Fate's my God,

Come sir, stand to your tackling, if you prove Craven,
I'll make you run quickly.

Thou art no equal match for me.

Indeed I never went to the wars to bring home news, nor cannot play the
Mountibanke for a meals meat, and swear I got my wounds in the field: see
you these gray hairs, they will not flinch for a bloody nose, wilt thou to this
geere?


Why slave, think thou I'll balance my reputation With a Cast-suite; Call
thy Master, he shall know that I dare --


Scold like a Cot-queane (that's your Profession) thou poor shadow of a
Soldier, I will make thee know, my Master keeps Servants, thy betters in
quality and performance: Come thou to fight or prate?


Neither with thee,
I am a Roman. and a Gentleman, one that have got
Mine honour with expense of blood,

You are a lying Coward, and a fool, fight, or by these Hilts
I'll kill thee -- brave my Lord, -- you'll fight.

Prouoake me not, for if thou dost --

Have you.

What meaned these sudden broils so near my doors?
Have you not other places, but my house
To vent the spleen os your disordered bloods?
Must I be haunted still with such unrest,
As not to eat, or sleep in peace at home?
Is this your love Grimaldi? Fie, it is nought.

And Vasques. I may tell thee 'tis not well
To broach these quarrels, you are ever forward
In seconding contentions.

What's the ground?

That with your patience Signiore, I'll resolve
This Gentleman, whom same reports a soldier,
(For else I know not) rivals me in love
To Signior Florio's Daughter; to whose ears
He still preferrs his suite to my disgrace,
Thinking the way to recommend himself,
Is to disparage me in his report:
But know Grimaldi, though (may be) thou art
My equal in thy blood, yet this betrays
A lowness in thy mind; which were it thou Noble
Thou would it as much disdain, as I do thee
For this unworthiness; and on this ground
I willed my Servant to dorrest this tongue,
Holding a man, so base, no match for me.

And had your sudda no coming prevented us, I had let my Gentleman blood under
the gills; I should have wormed you Sir, for running mad.


I'll be revenged Soranzo.

On a dish of warme-broth to stay your stomach, do honest Innocence, do;
spone-meat is a wholesomer diet then a spanish blade.


remember this.

I fear thee not Grimaldi.

My Lord Soranzo, this is strange to me,
Why you should storm, having my word engaged:
Owing her heart, what ne^ you doubt her ^are?
Losers may talk by law of any game.

Yet the villain of words, signior Florio may be such,
As would make any vnspleen'd Dove, Choleric,
Blame not my Lord in this.

Be you more silent,
I would not for my wealth, my daughters love
Should cause the spilling of one drop of blood.
Vasques put up, let's end this fray in wine.

How like you this child? here's threatening challenging, quarrelling, and
fighting, on every side, and all is for your sake; you had need look to your
self ( Chardge) you'll be stolen away sleeping else shortly.


But ( Tutoress) such a life, gives no content
To me, my thoughts are fixed on other ends;
Would you would leave me.

Leave you? no marvel else; leave me, no leaving (Chardge)
This is love outright, Indeed I blame you not, you have
Choice fit for the best Lady in Italy.

Pray do not talk so much.

Take the worst with the best, there's Grimaldi the soldier a very
well-timbred fellow: they say he is a Roman, Nephew to the Duke Mount Ferratto,
they say he did good service in the wars against the Millanoys, but faith (
Chardge) I do not like him, and be for nothing, but for being a soldier; one
amongst twenty of your skirmishing Captains, but have some privy may me or
other, that mars their standing upright, I like him the worse, he crinckles
so much in the hams; though he might serve, if their were no more men, yet
he's not the man I would choose.


Fie how thou prat'st.


As I am a very woman, I like Seignior Soranzo, well; he is wise, and what is
more, rich; and what is more then that, kind, and what is more then all this, a
Noble-man; such a one were I the fair Annabella, my self, I would wish and
pray for: then he is bountiful; beside he is handsome, and, by my troth, I
think wholesome: (and that's news in a gallant of three and twenty.) liberal
that I know: loving, that you know; and a man sure, else he could never have
purchased such a good name, with Hippolita the lusty Widow in her husbands
life time: And 'twere but for that report (sweet heart) would'a were thine:
Commend a man for his qualities, but take a husband as he is a
plaine-sufficient, naked man: such a one is for your bed, and such a one is
Signior Soranzo my life for it.


Sure the woman took her mornings Draught to soon.


But look (sweet heart,) look what thing comes now:
Here's another of your ciphers to fill up the number:
Oh brave old Ape in a silken Coat, observe.

Did thou think Poggi^, that I would spoil my
New clothes, and leave my dinner to fight.

No Sir, I did not take you for so arrant a baby.

I am wiser then so: for I hope Poggio. thou
Never heard of an elder brother, that was a Coxcomb,
Did Poggio?

Never indeed Sir, as long as they had either land or money left them to inhe
rit.


Is it possible Poggio? oh monstrous! why I'll undertake, with a handful of
silver, to buy a headfull of wit at any time, but sirrah, I have another
purchase in hand, I shall have the wench mine uncle says, I will but wash my
face, and shift socks, and then have at her in faith -- Mark my pace Poggio.


Sir I have seen an. Ass, and a Mule trot the Spanish ^auin with a better
grace, I know not how often.


This Idiot haunts me too.

I, I, he needs no description, the rich Magnifico, that is below with your
Father ( Chardge) Signior Donado his Uncle; for that he means to make this
his Cozen a golden calfe, thinks that you will be a right Isralite, and fall
down to him presently: but I hope I have tuterd you better: they say a fools
babble is a Ladies play fellow: yet you having wealth enough, you need not cast
upon the dearth of flesh at any rate: hang him Innocent.


But see Putana, see: what blessed shape
Of some celestial Creature now appears?
What man is he, that with such sad aspect
Walks carelests os him self?

Where

Look below.

Oh, 'tis your brother sweet --

Ha!

'Tis your brother.

Sure 'tis not he, this is some woeful thing
Wrapped up in grief, some shadow of a man.
Alas he beats his breast, and wipes his eyes
Drowned all in tears: me thinks I hear him sigh.
Lets downe^ Putana? and partake the cause,
I know my Brother in the Love he bears me,
Will not deny me partage in his sadness,
My soul is full of heaviness and fear.

Lost, I am lost: my fates have doomed my death:
The more I strive, I love, the more I love,
The less I hope: I see my ruin, certain.
What Judgment, or endeavours could apply
To my incurable and restless wounds,
I thoroughly have examined, but in vain:
O that it were not in Religion sin,
To make our love a God, and worship it.
I have even wearied heaven with prayers, dried up
The spring of my continual tears, even starved
My veins with daily fasts: what wit or Art
Could Counsel, I have practised; but alas
I find all these but dreams, and old men's tales
To ^ight vnsteedy youth; I'm still the same,
Or I must speak, or burst; tis not I know,
My lust; but tis my fare that leads me on.
Keep fear and low faint hearted shame with slaves,
I'll tell her, that I love her, though my heart
Were rated at the price of that attempt.
Oh me! she comes.

Brother.

If such a thing
As Courage dwell in men, (ye heavenly powers)
Now double all that virtue in my tongue.

Why Brother, will you not speak to me?

Yes; how do ye Sister?

Howsoever I am, me thinks you are not well.

Bless us why are you so sad Sir.

Let me entreat you leave us a while, Putana,
Sister, I would be pryuate with you.

With-drawe Putana.

I will, If this were any other Company for her, I should think my absence an
office of some credit; but I will leave them together.


Come Sister lend your hand, let's walk together.
I hope you need not blush to walk with me,
Here's none but you and I.

How's this?

Faith I mean no harm.

Harm?

No good faith; how is't with'ee?

I trust he be not frantic
I am very well brother.

Trust me but I am sick, I fear so sick,
'Twill cost my life.

Mercy forbid it: 'tis not so I hope.

I think you love me Sister.

Yes you know, I do.

I know it indeed -- you're very fair.

Nay then I see you have a merry sickness,

That's as it proves: they Poets feign (I read)
That Iuno for her forehead did exceed
All other goddesses: but I durst swear,
Your forehead exceeds hers, as hers did theirs.

Troth this is pretty.

Such a pair of stars.
As are thine eyes, would (like Promethean fire.)
(If gently glaun'st) give life to senseless stones.

Fie vpon'ee,

The Lilly and the Rose most sweetly strange
Upon your dimpled Cheeks do strive for change.
Such lips would tempt a Saint; such hands as those
Would make an Anchorite Lascivious.

Do ye mock mee', or flatter me,

If you would see a beauty more exact
Then Art can counter fit, or nature frame,
Look in your glass, and there behold yourowne.

O you are a trime youth.

Here.

What to do.

And here's my breast, strict home.
Rip up my bosom, there thou shalt behold
A heart, in which is writ the truth I speak.
Why stand'ee?

Are you earnest?

Yes most earnest.
You cannot love?

Whom.

Me, my tortured soul
Hath felt affliction in the heate of Death.
O Annabella I am quite undone,
The love of thee (my sister) and the view
Of thy immortal beauty hath vntun'd
All harmony both of my rest and life,
Why do ye not strike?

Forbid it my just fears,
If this be true, 'twere fitter I were dead.

True Annabella; 'tis no time to jest,
I have too long suppressed the hidden flames
That almost have consumed me; I have spent
Many a silent night in sighs and groans,
Ran over all my thoughts, despised my Fate,
Reasoned against the reasons of my love,
Done all that smooth'd-cheeke Virtue could advise,
But found all bootless; 'tis my destiny,
That you must either love, or I must dye.

Comes this in sadness from you?

Let some mischief
Befall me soon, if I dissemble ought.

You are my brother Giouanni.

You,
My Sister Annabella; I know this:
And could afford you instance why to love
So much the more for this; to which intent
Wise Nature first in your Creation meant
To make you mine: else't had been sin and foul,
To share one beauty to a double soul.
Nearness in birth or blood, doth but persuade
A nearer nearness in affection.
I have asked Counsel of the holy Church,
Who tells me I may love you, and 'tis just,
That since I may, I should; and will, yes will:
Must I now live, or dye?

Live, thou hast won
The field, and never fought; what thou hast urged,
My captive heart had long ago resolved.
I blush to tell thee, (but I'll tell thee now)
For every sigh that thou hast spent for me,
I have sighed ten; for every tear shed twenty:
And not so much for that I loved, as that
I durst not say I loved; for scarcely think it.

Let not this Music be a dream (ye gods)
For pittie's-sake I begge'ee.

On my knees,
Brother, even by our Mothers dust, I charge you,
Do not betray me to your mirth or hate,
Love me, or kill me Brother.

On my knees,
Sister, even by my Mothers dust I charge you,
Do not betray me to your mirth or hate,
Love me, or kill me Sister.

You mean good sooth then?

In good troth I do,
And so do you I hope: say, I'm in earnest:

I'll swear it and I.

And I, and by this kiss,
(Once more, yet once more, now let's rise, by this)
I would not change this minute for Elyzium,
What must we now do?

What you will.

Come then,
After so many tears as we have wept,
Let's learn to court in smiles, to kiss and sleep.

Signior Donado, you have said enough,
I understand you, but would have you know,
I will not force my Daughter against her will.
You see I have but two, a Son and Her;
And he is so devoted to his Book,
As I must tell you true, I doubt his health:
Should he miscarry, all my hopes rely
Upon my Girl; as for worldly Fortune,
I am I thank my Stars, blessed with enough:
My Care is how to match her to her liking,
I would not have her marry Wealth, but Love,
And if she like your Nephew, let him have her,
Here's all that I can say.

Sir you say well,
Like a true father, and for my part, I
If the young folks can like, (twixt you and me')
Will promise to assure my Nephew presently,
Three thousand Florrens yearly during life,
And after I am dead, my whole estate.

'Tis a fair proffer si^, mean time your Nephew
Shall have free passage to commence his suite;
If he can thrive, he shall have my consent,
So for this time I'll leave you Signior.

Well,
Here's hope yet, if my Nephew would have wit,
But he is such another Dunce, I fear
Hee'le never win the Wench; when I was young
I could have done it y faith, and so shall he
If he will learn of me; and in good time
He comes himself.

How now Bergetto, whether away so fast?

Oh Uncle, I have heard the strangest news that ever came out of the Mynr,
have I not Poggio.


Yes indeed Sir.


What news Bergetto?


Why look ye Uncle? my Barber told me just now that there is a fellow come to
Town, who undertakes to make a Mill go without the mortal help of any water
or wind, only with Sand-bags: and this fellow hath a strange Horse, a most
excellent beast, I'll assure you Uncle, (my Barber says) whose head to the
wonder of all Christian people, stands just behind where his tail is, is't nor
true Poggio?


So the Barber swore for sooth.


And you are running hither?


I forsooth Vakle.


Wilt thou be a Fool still? come sir, you shall not go, you have more mind of
a Puppet-play, then on the business I told y'ee: why thou great Baby, wu't
never have wit, wu't make thy self a May-game to all the world?


Answer for your self Master.


Why Uncle, shu'd I sit at home still, and not go abroad to see fashions like
other gallants?


To see hobby-horses: what wise talk I pray had you with Annabella, when you
were at Signior Florio's house?


Oh the wench: vds sa'me, Uncle; I tickled her with a rare speech, that I made
her almost burst her belly with laughing.


Nay I think so, and what speech was't?


What did I say Poggio?


Fot sooth my Master said, that he loved her almost a^well as he loved
Parmasent, and swore (I'll be sworn for him). that she wanted but such a Nose
as his was, to be as pretty a young woman, as any was in Parma.


Oh gross!


Nay Uncle, then sh^e asked me, whether my Father had any more children then
my self: and I said no, 'twere better he should have had his brains knocked
out first.


This is intolerable.


Then said she, will Signior Donado your Uncle leave you all his wealth?


Ha! that was good, did she harp upon that string?


Did she harp upon that string, I that she did: I answered, leave me all his
wealth? why woman, he hath no other wit, if he had, he should hear on it to
his ever lasting glory and confusion: I know (quoth I) I am his white boy, and
will not be gulled: and with that she fell into a great smile, and went away. Nay
I did fit her.


Ah sitrah, then I see there is no changing of nature,
Well B^rgetto, I fear thou wilt be a very Ass still.

I should be sorry for that Uncle.

Come, come you home with me, since you are no better a speaker, I'll have you
wr^te to her after some courtly manner, and ^close some rich I ewell in the
Letter.


I marry, that will be excellent.


Peace ^nnocent,
Once in my time I'll set my wits to school,
If all fail, 'tis but the fortune of a fool.

Poggio, 'twill do Poggio.

Come Annabella, no more Sister now,
But Love; a name more Gracious, do not blush,
(Beauties sweet wonder) but be proud, to know
That yielding thou hast conquered, and inflamed
A heart whose tribute is thy brothers life.

And mine is his, oh how these stolen contents
Would print a modest Crimson on my cheeks,
Had any but my hearts delight prevailed.

I marvel why the chaster of your sex
Should think this pretty toy called Maiden-head,
So strange a loss, when being lost, 'tis nothing,
And you are still the same.

'Tis well for you,
Now you can talk.

Music as well consists
In th'eare, as in the playing.

Oh you're wanton,
Tell on it, you're best, do.

Thou wilt chide me then,
Kiss me, so; thus hung Jove on Laeda's neck,
And sucked divine Ambrosia from her lips:
I envy not the mightiest man alive,
But hold my self in being King of thee,
More great, then were I King of all the world:
But I shall lose you Sweet-heart.

But you shall not.

You must be married Mistres.

Yes, to whom?

Some one must have you.

You must.

Nay some other.

Now prithee do not speak so, without jesting
You'll make me weep in earnest.

What you will not.
But tell me sweet, can thou be dared to swear
That thou wilt live to me, and to no other?

By both our loves I dare, for did thou know
My Gionanni, how all suitors seem
To my eyes hateful, thou would trust me then.

Enough, I take thy word; Sweet we must part,
Remember what thou vow'st, keep well my heart.

Will you begone?

I must.

When to return?

Soon.

Look you do.

Farewell.

Go where thou wilt, in mind I'll keep thee here,
And where thou art, I know I shall be there
Guardian.

Child, how is't child? well, thank Heaven, hal

O Guardian, what a Paradise of joy
Have I past over!

Nay what a Paradise of joy have you past under? why now I commend thee (
Chardge) fear nothing, (sweeteheart) what though he be your Brother; your
Brother's a man I hope, and I say still, if a young Wench feel the fit upon
her, let her take any body, Father or Brother, all is one.


I would not have it known for all the world.


Nor I indeed, for the speech of the people; else 'twere nothing.


Daughter Annabella.


O me! my Father, -- here Sir, -- reach my work.


What are you doing?


So, let him come now,


So hard at work, that's well; you lose no time, look, I have brought you
company, here's one, a learned Doctor, lately come from Padua, much skilled in
Physic, and for that I see you have of late been sickly, I entreated this
reverent man to visit you some time.


You're very welcome Sir.

I thank you Mistress,
Loud Fame in large report hath spoke your praise,
As well for Virtue as perfection:
For which I have been bold to bring with me
A Kins-woeman of mine, a maid, for song,
And music, one perhaps will give content,
Please you to know her.

They are parts I love,
And she for them most welcome.

Thank you Lady.

Sirnow you know my house, pray make not strange,
And if you find my Daughter need your Art,
I'll be your pay-master.

Sir, what I am she shall command^

You shall bind me to you,
Daughter, I must have conference with you,
Aboutsome matters that concerns us both.
Good Master Doctor, please you but walk in,
Wee'le crave a little of your Cozens cunning:
I think my Girl hath not quite forgot
To touch an Instrument, she could have don't,
Wee'le hear them both.

I'll wait upon you sir.
Loves measure is extreme, the comfort, pain:
The life unrest, and the reward disdain
What's here? look over again, 'tis so, so writes
This smooth licentious Poet in his rymes.
But Sanazar thou lie, for had thy bosom
Felt such oppression as is laid on mine,
Thou would have kissed the rod that made the smart.
To work then happy Muse, and contradict
What Sanazer hath in his envy writ.
Loves measure is the mean, sweet his annoys,
His pleasures life, and his reward all joys.
Had Annabella lived when Sanazar
Did in his brief Euconium celebrate
Venice that Queen of Cities, he had left
That Verse which gained him such a sum of Gold,
And for one only look from Annabell
Had writ of her, and her diviner cheeks,
O how my thoughts are --

Pray forbear, in rules of Civility, lot me give notice on it: I shall be taxed
of my neglect of duty and service.


What rude intrusion interrupts my peace,
Can I be no where private?

Troth you wrong your modesty.

What's the matter Vasques, who is't?

'Tis I:
Do you know me now? look periurd man on her
Whom thou and thy distracted lust have wronged,
Thy sensual rage of blood hath made my youth
Ascorne to men and Angels, and shall I
Be now a foil to thy vnsated change?
Thou know (false wanton) when my modest fame
Stood free from stain, or scandal, all the charms
Of Hell or sorcery could not preuaile
Against the honour of my chaster bosom:
Thine eyes did plead in tears, thy tongue in oaths
Such and so many, that a heart of steel
Would have been wrought to pity, as was mine:
And shall the Conquest of my lawful bed,
My husbands death urged on by his disgrace,
My loss of woeman-hood be ill rewarded
With hatred and contempt? No, know Soranzo,
I have a spirit doth as much distaste
The slavery of fearing thee, as thou
Dost loath the memory of what hath past.

Nay dear Hippolita.

Call me not dear,
Nor think with supple words to smooth the grosenesse
Of my abuses; 'tis not your new Mistress,
Your goodly Madam Merchant shall triumph
On my deiection; tell her thus from me,
My birth was Nobler, and by much more Free.

You are too violent.

You are too double
In your dissimulation, see thou this,
This habit, these black mourning weeds of Care,
'Tis thou art cause of this, and hast diuore't
My husband from his life and me from him,
And made me Widow in my widdow-hood.

Will you yet hear?

More of the perjuries?
Thy soul is drowned too deeply in those sins,
Thou need not add to ^th number.

Then I'll leave you,
You are past all rules of sense.

And thou of grace.

Fie Mistress, you, are not near the limits of reason, if my Lord had a
resolution as noble as Virtue it self, you take the course to vnedge it all.
Sir I beseech you do not perplex her, griefs (alas) will have a vent, I dare
undertake Madam Hippolita will now freely hear you.


Talk to a woman frantic, are these the fruits of your love?

They are the fruits of thy untruth, false man,
Did thou not swear, whilst no happinese on earth
More then to call me wife? did thou not vow
When he should dye to marry me? for which
The Devil in my blood, and thy protests
Caused me to Counsel him to undertake
A voyage to Ligorne, for that we heard,
His Brother there was dead, and left a Daughter
Young and vnfriended, who with much ado
I wished him to bring hi^her; he did so,
And went; and as thou know dyed on the way.
Unhappy man to buy his death so dear
With my advice; yet thou for whom I did it,
Forget thy vows, and leau'st me to my shame.

Who could help this?

Who? perjured man thou could,
If thou had faith or love.

You are deceived,
The vows I made, (if you remember well)
Were wicked and unlawful,'twere more sin
To keep them, then to break them; as for me
I cannot mask my penitence, think thou
How much thou hast digressed from honest shame,
In bringing of a gentleman to death
Who was thy husband, such a one as he,
So noble in his quality, condition,
Learning, behaviour, entertainment, love,
As Parma could not show a braver man.

You do not well, this was not your promise.

I care not, let her know her monstrous life,
Ere I'll be servile to so black a sin,
I'll be a Curse; woman, come here no more,
Lear^e to repent and dye; for by my honour
I hate thee and thy lust; you have been too foul.

This part has been scurvily played.

How foolishly this beast contemns his Fate,
And shuns the use of that, which I more scorn
Then I once loved his love; but let him go,
My vengeance shall give comfort to his woe.

Mistress, Mistress Madam Hippolita,
Pray a word or two.

With me Sir?

With you if you please.

What is't?

I know you are infinitely moved now, and you think you have cause, some I
confess you have, but sure not so much as you imagine.


Indeed.


O yo^ were miserably bitter, which you followed even to the last ^llable:
Faith you were somewhat too shrewd, by my life you could not have took my Lord
in a worse time, since I first knew him: tomorrow you shall find him a new
man.


Well, I shall wait his leisure.


Fie, this is not a hearty patience, it comes sourly from you, troth let me
persuade you for once.


I have it a^d it shall be so; thanks opportunity
-- persuade me to what --

Visit him in some milder temper, O if you could but master a little your
female spleen, how might you win him!


He will never love me: Vasques, thou hast bin a too trusty servant to such a
master, I believe thy reward in the end will fall out like mine.


So perhaps too.


Resolve thy self it will; had I one so true, so truly honest, so secret to
my Counsels, as thou hast been to him and his, I should think it a flight
acquittance, not only to make him Master of all I have, but even of my self.


O you are a noble Gentlewoman.


Wu't thou feed always upon hopes? well, I know thou art wise, and see the
reward of an old servant dally what it is


Beggary and neglect.


True, but Vasques, were it thou mine, and would be private to me and my
designs; I here protest my self, and all what I can else call mine, should be
at thy dispose.


Work you that way old moule? then I have the wind of you -- I were not worthy
of it, by any desert that could lye -- within my compass; if I could --


What then?


I should then hope to live in these my old years with rest and security.


Give me thy hand, now promise but thy silence,
And help to bring to pass a plot I have;
And here in sight of Heaven, (that being done)
I make thee Lord of me and mine estate.

Come you are merry,
This is such a happiness that I can
Neither think or believe.

Promise thy secrecy, and 'tis confirmed.

Then here I call our good Genij foe-witnesses, whatsoever your designs are,
or against whomsoever, I will not only be a special actor therein, but never
disclose it till it be effected.


I take thy word, and with that, thee for mine:
Come then, let's more confer of this anon.
On this delicious bane my thoughts shall banquet,
Revenge shall sweeten what my griefs have tasted.

Thou see (my lovely Necce) these strange mishaps,
How all my fortunes turn to my disgrace,
Wherein I am but as a looker on,
Whiles others act my shame, and I am silent.

But Uncle, wherein can this borrowed shape
Give you content?

I'll tell thee gentle Niece,
Thy wanton Aunt in her lasc^ious riotts
Lives now secure, thinks I am surely dead
In my late Journey to Ligorne for you;
(As I have caused it to be rumord out)
Now would I see with what an impudence
She gives scope to her loose adultery,
And how the Common voice allows hereof:
Thus far I have prevailed.

Alas, I fear
You mean some strange revenge.

O be not troubled,
Your ignorance shall plead for you in all,
But to our business, what, you learnt for certain
How Signior Florio means to give his Daughter
In marriage to Soranzo?

Yes for certain.

But how find you young Annabella's love,
Inclind to him?

For ought I could perceine,
She neither fancies him or any else.

There's Mystery in that which time must show,
She used you kindly.

Yes.

And craved your company?

Often.

'Tis well, it goes as I could wish,
I am the Doctor now, and as for you,
None knows you; if all fail not we shall thrine.
But who comes here?
I know him, 'tis Grimaldi,
A Roman and a soldier, near allied
Unto the Duke of Montferrato, one
Attending on the Nuntio of the Pope
That now resides in Parma, by which means
He hopes to get the love of Annabella,

Save you Sir.

And you Sir.

I have heard
Of your approved skill, which through the City
Is freely talked of, and would crave your aid.

For what Sir?

Marry sir for this --
But I would speak in Private.

Leave us Cozen.

I love fair Annabella, and would know
Whether in Arts there may not be receipts
To move affection.

Sir perhaps there may,
But these will nothing profit you.

Not me?

Unless I be mistook, you are a man
Greatly in favour with the Cardinal.

What of that?

In duty to his Grace,
I will be bold to tell you, if you seek
To marry Florio's daughter, you must first
Remove a bar twixt you and her.

Whose that?

Soranzo is the man that hath her heart,
And while he lives, be sure you cannot speed.

Soranzo, what mine Enemy, is't he?

Is he your Enemy?

The man I hate,
Worse then Confusion:
I'll tell him straight.

Nay, then take mine advice,
(Even for his Graces sake the Cardinal)
I'll find a time when he and she do meet,
Of which I'll give you notice, and to be sure
He shall not escape you, I'll provide a poison
To dip your Rapiers point in, if he had
As many heads as ( Hidra had, he dyes.

But shall I trust thee Doctor?

As your self,
Doubt not in ought; thus shall the Fates d^erce,
By me Soranzo falls, that mined me.

Well Sir, I must be content to be both your Secretary and your Messenger my
self; I cannot tell what this Letter may work, but as sure as I am alive, if
thou come or^e to talk with her, I fear thou wu't mar whatsoever I make.


You make Uncle? why am not I big enough to carry mine own Letter I pray?


I, I carry a fools head o'thy own; why thou Dunce, would thou write a
letter, and carry it thy self


Yes that I wudd, and read it to her with my own mouth, for you must think,
if she will not belecue me my self when she hears me speak; she will not
believe another handwriting. O you think I am ablocke-head Uncle, no sir,
Poggio knows I have indicted a letter my self, so I have.


Yes truly sir, I have it in my pocket.


A sweat one no doubt, pray let's see it.


I cannot read my own hand very well Poggio, Read it Poggio.


Begin.


MOst dainty and honey-sweete Mistress, I could call you fair, (...) lie as
fast as any that loves you, but my Uncle being the older man, I leave it to
him, as more fit for his age, and the colour of his beard: I am wise enough to
tell you (...) board where I see occasian, or if you like my Uncles wit better
then mine, you shall marry me; if you like mine better then his ^ I will marry
you in spite of your teeth; So commonding my best parts to you, I rest.

Yours upwards and downwards, or you may chose, Bergetto.




Ah ha, here's stuff Uncle.

Here's stuff indeed to shame us all,
Pray whose advice did you take in this learned Letter?

None upon my word, but mine own.

And mine Uncle, believe it, no bodies else; 'twas mine own brain, I thank a
good wit for it.


Get you home sir, and look yon keep within doors till I return.


How? that were a jest indeed; I scorn it in faith.


What you do not?


Judge me, but I do now.


Indeed sir 'tis very unhealthy.


Well sir, if I hear any of your apish running to motions, and fopperies till
I come back, you were as good no; look too't.


Poggio, shall's steal to see this Horse with the head in's tail?


I but you must take heeds of whipping.


Dost take me for a Child Poggio,
Come honest Poggio,

Peace, thou hast told a tale, whose every word
Threatens eternal flaughter to the soul:
I'm sorry I have heard it; would mine ears
Had been one minute deaf, before the hour
That thou came to me: o young man cast-away,
By the relligious number of mine order,
I day and might have waked my aged eyes,
Above thy strength, to weep on thy behalf:
But Heaven is angry, and be thou resolved,
Thou art a man remark't to taste a mischief,
Look for it; though it come late, it will come sure.

Father, in this you are uncharitable;
What I have done, I'll prove both fit and good.
It is a principal (which you have taught
When I was yet your Scholar) that the Fame
And Composition of the Mind doth follow
The Frame and Composition of Body:
So where the Bodies furniture is Beauty,
The Minds must needs be Virtue: which allowed.
Virtue it self is Reason but refined,
And Love the Quintesence of that, this proves
My Sisters Beauty being rarely Fair,
Is rarely Virtuous; chiefly in her love,
And chiefly in that Love, her love to me.
If hers to me, then so is mine to her;
Since in like Causes are effects alike.

O ignorance in knowledge, long ago,
How often have I warned thee this before?
Indeed if we were sure there were no Deity,
Nor Heaven nor Hell, then to be lead alone,
By Natures light (as were Philosophers
Of elder times) might instance some defence.
But 'tis not so; then Madman, thou wilt find,
That Nature is in Heavens positions blind.

Your age over rules you, had you youth like mine,
You'd make her love your heaven, and her divine.

Nay then I see you are too far sold to hell,
It lies not in the Compass of my prayers
To call thee back; yet let me Counsel thee:
Persuade thy sister to some marriage.

Marriage? why that's to dambe her; that's to prone
Her greedy of variety of lust.

O fearful! if thou wilt not, give me leave
To shrive her; lest she should dye vn-absolu'd.

At your best leisure Father, then she'll tell you,
How dearly she doth prize my Matchless love,
Then you will know what pity 'twere we two
Should have been sundried from each others arms.
View well her face, and in that little round,
You may observe a world of variety;
For Colour, lips, for sweet perfumes, her breath;
For Jewels, eyes; for threads of purest gold,
Hair; for delicious choice of Flowers, cheeks;
Wonder in every portion of that Throne:
Hear her but speak, and you will swear the Sphaeres
Make Music to the Citizens in Heaven:
But Father, what is else for pleasure framed,
Least I offend your ears shall go vn-nam'd.

The more I hear, I pity thee the more,
That one so excellent should give those parts:
All to a second Death; what I can do
Is but to pray; and yet I could advise thee,
Would thou be ruled.

In what?

Why leave her yet,
The Throne of Mercy is above your trespass,
Yet time is left you both --

To embrace each other,
Else let all time be struck quite out of number;
She is like me, and I like her resolved.

No more, I'll visit her; this grieves me most,
Things being thus, a pair of souls are lost.

Where's Giouanni?

Newly walked abroad,
And (as I heard him say) gon to the Friar
His reverent Tutor.

That's a blessed man,
A man made up of holiness, I hope
Hee'le teach him how to gain another world.

Fair Gentlewoman, here's a letter sent:
To you from my young Cozen, I dare swear
He loves you in his soul, would you could hear
Sometimes, what I see daily, sighs and tears,
As if his breast were prison to his heart.

Receive it Annabella.

Alas good man.

What's that she said?

And please you sir, she said, alas good man, truly I do Commend him to her
every night before her first sleep, because I would have her dream of him,
and she harkens to that most relligiously.


Say so, godamercy Putana there's something for thee, and prithee do what
thou can on his behalf; sha'not be lost labour, take my word for it.


Thank you most heartily sir, now I have a Feeling of your mind, let me alone
to work.


Guardian!


Did you call?


Keep this letter,


Signior Florio, in any case bid her read it instantly.


Keep it for what? pray read it me here right.


I shall sir,


How do ye find her inclined Signior


Troth sir I know not how; not all so well
As I could wish.

Sir I am bound to rest your Cozens debtor,
The Jewel I'll return, for if he love,
I'll count that love a Jewel.

Mark you that?
Nay keep them both sweet Maid.

You must excuse me,
Indeed I will not keep it.

Where's the Ring,
That which your Mother in her will bequeathed,
And charged you on her blessing not to giue't
To any but your Husband? send back that.

I have it not,

Ha I have it not, where is't?

My brother in the morning took it fro me,
Said he would weare't to Day.

Well, what do you say
To young Bergetto's love? are you content
To match with him? speak.

There's the point indeed.

What shall I do, I must say something now.

What say, why do ye not speak?

Sir with your leave
Please you to give me freedom.

Yes you have.

Signior Donado, if your Nephew mean
To raise his better Fortunes in his match,
The hope of me will hinder such a hope;
Sir if you love him, as I know you do;
Find one more worthy of his choice then me,
In short, I'm sure, I sha'not be his wife.

Why here's plain dealing, I commend thee for it,
And all the worst I wish thee, is heaven bless thee,
Your Father yet and I will still be friends,
Shall we not Signior Florio?

Yes, why not?
Look here your Cozen comes.

Oh Coxcomb, what doth he make here?

Where's my Uncle firs.

What's the news now?

Save you Uncle save you, you must not think I come for nothing Masters, and
how and how is't? what you have read my letter, ah, there I -- tickled you
in faith.


But 'twere better you had tickled her in another place.


Sirrah Sweet-hea^t, I'll tell thee a good jest, and riddle what 'tis.


You say you'd tell me.


As I was walking just now in the Street, I met a swaggering fellow would
needs take the wall of me, and because he did thrust me, I very valiantly
called him Rogue, he hereupon bad me draw, I told him I had more wit then so,
but when he saw that I would not, he did so maule me with the hilts of his
Rapier, that my head sung whilst my fear capered in the kennel.


Was ever the like ass seen?


And what did you all this while?


Laugh at him for a gull, till I see the blood run about mine ears, and then
I could not choose but find in my heart to cry; till a fellow with a broad
beard; (they say he is a new-come Doctor) called me into this house, and gave
me a plaster, look you here 'tis; and sir there was a young wench washed my
face and hands most excellently, in faith I shall love her as long as I live
for it, did she not Poggio?


Yes and kissed him too.


Why la now, you think I tell a lye Uncle I warrant.


Would he that beat thy blood out of thy head, had beaten some wit into it;
For I fear thou never wilt have any.


Oh Uncle, but there was a wench, would have done a mans heart good to have
looked on her, by this light she had a face mee-thinks worth twenty of you
Mistress Annabella.


Was ever such a fool borne?


I am glad she liked you sir.


Are you so, by my troth I thank you forsooth.


Sure 'twas the Doctors niece, that was last day with us here:


'Twas she, 'twas she.


How do you know that simplicity?


Why does not he say so? if I should hau^ said no, I should hau^ given him
the lye Uncle, and so have deserved a dry beating again; I'll none of that.


A very modest welbehau'd young Maid as I have seen.


Is she indeed?


Indeed She is, if I have any Judgment.


Well sir, now you are free, you need not care for sending letters, now you are
dismissed, your Mistress here will none of you.


No; why what care I for that, I can have Wenches enough in Parma for half a
Crown a piece, cannot I Poggio?


I'll warrant you sir.


Signior Florio, I thank you for your free recourse you gave for my
admittance; and to you fair Maid that Jewel I will give you against your
marriage, come will you go sir?


I marry will I Mistres, farewell Mistres, I'll come again to morrow -- farewell
Mistres.


Son, where have you been? what alone, alone, still, still? I would not have
it so, you must forsake this over bookish humour. Well, your Sister hath shook
the Fool off.


'Twas no match for her.

'Twas not indeed I meant it nothing less,
Soranzo is the man I only like;
Look on him Annabella, come, 'tis supper-time,
And it grows late.

Whose ^ewell's that?

Some Sweet-hearts.

So I think.

A lusty youth, Signior Donado gave it me
To wear against my Marriage.

But you shall not wear it, send it him back again.

What, you are jealous?

That you shall know anon, at better leisure:
Welcome sweet night, the Evening crowns the Day.

Does my Uncle think to make me a Baby still? no,

Poggio, he shall know, I have a skonce now.


I let him not bobbe you off like an Ape with an apple.


Sfoot, I will have the wench, if he were ten Uncles, in despite of his nose
Poggio.


Hold him to the Grynd-stone, and give not a jot of ground, She hath in a
manner promised you already.


True Poggio, and her Uncle the Doctor
Swore I should marry her.

He swore I remember.


And I will have her that's more; did see the codpeicepoynt she gave me, and
the box of Mermalade?


Very well, and kissed you, that my chopps watered at the sight on it; there's no
way but to clap up a marriage in hugger mugger.


I will do it for I tell thee Poggio, I begin to grow valiant methinkes, and my
courage begins to rise.


Should you be afraid of your Uncle?


Hang him old doting Rascal, no, I say I will have her.


Lose no time then.


I will beget a race of Wise men and Constables, that shall cart whoores at
their own charges, and break the Dukes peace ere I have done my self. --
come away.


My Lord Soranzo, though I must confess,
The proffers that are made me, have been great
In marriage of my daughter; yet the hope
Of your still rising honours, have prevailed
Above all other Ioynctures; here she is,
She knows my mind, speak for your self to her,
And hear you daughter, see you use him nobly,
For any private speech, I'll give you time:
Come son and you, the rest let them alone,
Agree as they may.

I thank you sir.

Sister be not all woman, think on me.

Vasques?

My Lord.

Attend me without --

Sir what's your will with me?

Do you not know what I should tell you?

Yes, you'll say you love me.

And I'll swear it too; will you believe it?

'Tis not point of faith.

Have you not will to love?

Not you.

Whom then?

That's as the Fates infer.

Of those I'm regient now.

What mean you sweet?

To live and dye a Maid.

Oh that's unfit.

Here's one can say that's but a woman's noate.

Did you but see my heart, then would you swear --

That you were dead.

That's true, or somewhat near it.

See you these true loves tears?

No.

Now she winks.

They plead to you for grace.

Yet nothing speak.

Oh grant my suite.

What is't

To let me live.

Take it --.

Still yours. --

That is not mine to give.

One such another word would kill his hopes.

Mistres, to leave those fruitless strifes of wit, I know I have loved you
long, and loved you truly; Not hope of what you have, but what you are Have
drawn me on, then let me not in vain Still feel the rigour of your chaste
disdain. I'm sick, and sick to th'heart.


Help, Aquavitae


What mean you?


Why I thought you had been sick.


Do you mock my love?


There sir she was too nimble.


'Tis plain; she laughs at me, these scornful taunts neither become your
modesty, or years.


You are no looking-glasse, or if you were, I'd dress my language by you.


I'm confirmed --


To put you out of doubt, my Lord, mee-thinks your Common sense should make you
understand, that if I loved you, or desired your love, some way I should have
given you better taste: but since you are a Noble man, and one I wouldnot wish
should spend his youth in hopes, let me advise you here, to forbear your
suite, and think I wish you well, I tell you this.


Is't you speak this?

Yes, I my self; yet know
Thus far I give you comfort, if mine eyes
Could have picked out a man (amongst all those
That sue'd to me) to make a husband of,
You should have been that man; let this suffice,
Be noble in your secrecy and wise.

Why now I see she loves me.

One word more:
As ever Virtue lived within your mind,
As ever noble courses were your guide.
As ever you would have me know you loved me,
Let not my Father know hereof by you:
If I hereafter find that I must marry,
It shall be you or none.

I take that promise.

Oh, oh my head.

What's the matter, not well?

Oh I begin to sicken.

Heaven forbid.

Help, help, within there ho.

Look to your daughter Signior Florio.

Hold her up, she sounes.

Sister how do ye?

Sick, brother, are you there?

Convey her to her bed instantly, whilst I send for a Physician, quickly I
say.


Alas poor Child.

My Lord.

Oh Vasques, now I doubly am undone.
Both in my present and my future hopes:
She plainly told me, that she could not love,
And thereupon soon sickened, and I fear
Her life's in danger.

Byr lady Sir, and so is yours, if you knew all. -- ^las sir, I am sorry for
that, may be 'tis but the Maids sickness, an ouer-fluxe of youth^ and then
sir, there is no such presentremedy, as present Marriage. But hath she given
you an absolute denial?


She hath, and she hath not; I'm full of grief,
But what she said, ^'le tell thee as we go.

Oh sir, we are all undone, quite undone, utterly undone,
And shamed forever; your sister, oh your sister.

What of her? for Heavens sake speak, how does she?

Oh that ever I was borne to see this day.


She is not dead, ha, is she?


Dead? no, she is quick, 'tis worse, she is with child,
You know what you have done; Heaven forgiue'ce,
'Tis too late to repent, now Heaven help us.

With child? how dost thou know it?

How do I know it? am I at these years ignorant, what the meaning's of Quames,
and Waterpangs be? of changing of Colours, Quezinesse of stomachs, Pukings, and
another thing that I could name; do not (for her and your Credits sake) spend
the time in asking how, and which way, 'tis so; she is quick upon my word, if
you let a Physician see her water you're undone.


But in what case is she?

Prettily amended, 'twas but a fit which I soon espi'd, and she must look for
often hence-forward.


Commend me to her, bid her take no care,
Let not the Doctor visit her I charge you,
Make some excuse, till I return; oh me,
I have a world of business in my head,
Do not discomfort her; how do this news perplex me!
If my Father come to her, tell him she's recovered well,
Say 'twas but some ill diet; do ye hear Woman,
Look you to it.

I will sir.

And how do ye find her sir.

Indifferent well,
I see no danger, scarce perceive she's sick,
But that she told me, she had lately eaten
Mellownes, and as she thought, those disagreed
With her young stomach.

Did you give her ought?


An easy surfeit water, nothing else,
You need not doubt her health; I rather think
Her sickness is a fullness of her blood,
You understand me?

I do; you counsel well,
And once within these few days, will so order't
She shall be married, ere she know the time.

Yet let not hast (sir) make unworthy choice,
That were dishonour.

Master Doctor no,
I will not do so neither, in plain words
My Lord Soranzo is the man I mean.

A noble and a virtuous Gentleman.

As any is in Parma; not far hence,
Dwells Father Bonauenture, a grave Friar,
Once Tutor to my Son; now at his Cell
I'll haue'em married.

You have plotted wisely.

I'll send one straight
To speak with him to night.

Soranzo's wise, he will delay no time.

It shall be so^

Good peace be here and love.

Welcome relligious Friar, you are one,
That still bring blessing to the place you come to.

Sir, with what speed I could, I did my best,
To draw this holy man from forth his Cell,
To visit my sick sist^r, that with words
Of ghostly comfort in this time of need,
He might absolve her, whether she live or dye.

'Twas well done ^Giouanni, thou herein
Hast showed a Christians care, a Brothers love
Come Father, I'll conduct you to her chamber,
And one thing would entreat you.

Say on sir.

I have a Fathers dear impression,
And wish before I fall into my grave,
That I might see her married, as 'tis fit;
A word from you Grave man, will win her more,
Then all our best persuasions.

Gentle Sir,
All this I'll say, that Heaven may prosper her.

Now if the Doctor keep his word, Soranzo,
Twenty to one you miss your Bride; I know
'Tis an unnoble act, and not becomes
A Soldiers valour; but in terms of love,
Where Merit cannot sway, Policy must.
I am resolved, if this Physician
Play not on both hands, then Soranzo falls.

You are come as I could wish, this very night Soranzo,
'tis ordained must be affied to Annabella; and for ought
I know, married.

Yet your patience,
The place, 'tis Friars Bonauentures Cell.
Now I would wish you to bestow this night,
In watching thereabouts, 'tis but a night,
If you miss now, to morrow I'll know all.

Have you the poison?

Here 'tis in this Box,
Doubt nothing, this will-doe't; in any case
As you respect your life, be quick and sure.

I'll speed him.

Do; away, for 'tis not safe
You should be seen much here -- ever my love.

And mine to you.

So, if this ^itt, I'll laugh and hug revenge;
And they that now dream of a wedding^feast,
May chance to morn the lusty Bridegrooms ruin.
But to my other business; Niece Philotis.

Uncle.

My lovely Niece, you have bethought'ee.

Yes, and as you counselled,
Fashioned my heart to love him, but he swears
He will to night be married; for he fears
His Uncle else, if he should know the drift,
W^ll hinder all, and call his Couze to shrift.

To night? why best of all; but let me see,
I -- ha -- yes, -- so it shall be; in disguise
Wee'le early to the Friars, I have thought on it.

Uncle, he comes.

Welcome my worthy Couze.

I ass pretty Lass, come bus Lassae, a ha Poggio.

There's hope of this yet.

You shall have time enough, withdraw a little,
We must confer at large.

Have you notsweete-meates, or dainty devices for me?

You shall enough Sweet-heart.

Sweet-heart, mark that Poggio; by my troth I cannot choose but kiss thee
once more for that word Sweet-heart; Poggio, I have a monstrous swelling about
my stomach, whatsoever the matter be.


You shall have Physic for it sir.

Time runs apace.

Time's a blockhead.

Be ruled, when we have done what's fit to do,
Then you may kiss your fill, and bed her too.

I am glad to see this penance; for believe me,
You have unripped a soul, so foul and guilty.
As I must tell you true, I marvel how
The earth hath borne you up, but weep, weep on,
These tears may do you good; weep faster yet,
Whiles I do read a Lecture.

Wretched creature.

I, you are wretched, miserably wretched.
Almost condemned alive; there is a place
(List daughter) in a black and hollow Vault,
Where day is never seen; there shines no Sun,
But flaming horror of consuming Fires;
A lightless Suphure, choked with smoky fogs
Of an infected darkness; in this place
Dwell many thousand, thousand sundry sorts
Of never dying deaths; there damned fowls
Roar without pity, there are Gluttons fed
With Toads and Addars; there is burning Oil
Powered down the Drunkards throat, the Usurer
Is for^'t to supp whole draughts of molten Gold;
There is the Murderer for-euer stabbed,
Yet can he never dye; there lies the wanton
On Racks of burning steel, whiles in his soul
He feels the torment of his raging lust.

Mercy, oh mercy.

There stands these wretched things.
Who have dream't out whole years in lawless sheets
And secret incests, cursing one another;
Then you will wish, each kiss your brother gave,
Had been a Daggers point; then you shall hear
How he will cry, oh would my wicked sister
Had first been damned, when she did yield to lust.
But soft, methinkes I see repentance work
New motions in your heart, say? how is't with you?

Is there no way left to redeem my miseries?

There is, despair not; Heaven is merciful,
And offers grace even now; 'tis thus agreed,
First, for your Honours safety that you marry
The Lord Soranzo, next, to save your soul,
Leave off this life, and henceforth live to him.

Ay me.

Sigh not, I know the baits of sin
Are hard to leave, oh 'tis a death to do it.
Remember what must come, are you content?

I am.

I like it well, wee'le take the time,
Who's near us there?

Did you call Father?

Is Lord Soranzo come?

Heestayes below.

Have you acquainted him at full?

I have and he is ouer-ioy'd.

And so are we: bid him come near.

My Sister weeping, ha? I fear this Friars falsehood,
I will call him.

Daughter, are you resolved?

Father, I am.

My Lord Soranzo, here
Give me your hand, for that I give you this.

Lady, say you so too?

I do, and vow, to live with you and yours.

Timely resolved:
My blessing rest on both, more to be done,
You may perform it on the Morning-sun.

'Tis early night as yet, and yet too soon
To finish such a work; here I will lye
To listen who comes next.

We are almost at the place, I hope Sweet-heart.

I hear them near, and heard one say Sweet-heart,
'Tis he; now guide my hand some angry Justice
Home to his bosom, now have at you sir.

Oh help, help, here's a stich fallen in my guts,
Oh for a Flesh-taylor quickly -- Poggio.

What ails my love?

I am sure I cannot peace forward and backward and yet
I am wet before and behind, lights, lights, ho lights.

Alas, some Villain here has slain my love.

Oh Heaven forbid it; raise up the next neighbours
Instantly Poggio, and bring lights,
How is't Bergetto? slain?
It cannot be; are you sure you're hurt?

O my belly seeths like a Porridge-pot, some cold water I shall boyle over
else; my whole body is in a sweat, that you may wring my shirt; feel here --
why Poggio.


Here; alas, how do you?

Give me a light, what's here? all blood! O sirs,
Signior Donado's Nephew now is slain,
Follow the murderer with all the haste
Up to the City, he cannot be far hence,
Follow I beseech you.

Follow, follow, follow.

Tear off thy linen Couz, to stop his wounds,
Be of good comfort man.

Is all this mine own blood? ^ay then good-night with me, Poggio. commend me
to my V^kle, dost hear? bid him for my sake make much of this wench, oh -- I
am going the wrong way sure, my be^y aches so -- oh farewell, Poggio -- oh -- oh
--


O he is dead.

How! dead!

He's dead indeed,
'Tis now to late to weep, let's have him home,
And with what speed we may, find out the Murderer.

Oh my Master, my Master, my Master.

Betroath'd?

I saw it.

And when's the marriage-day?

Some two days hence.

Two days? Why man I would but wish two hours
To send him to his last, and lasting sleep.
And Vasques thou shalt see, I'll do it bravely.

I do not doubt your wisdom, nor (I trust) you my secre^ie,
I am infinitely yours.

I will be thine inspight of my disgrace,
So soon? o wicked man, I durst be sworn,
He would laugh to see me weep.

And that's a Villainous fault in him.

No, let him laugh, I'm armed in my resolue^
Be thou still true.

I should get little by treachery against so hopeful a preferment,
as I am like to climb to.

Even to my bosom Vasques, let My youth
Revel in these new pleasures, if we thrive,
He now hath but a pair of days to live.

'Tis bootless now to show your self a child
Signior Donado, what is done, is done;
Spend not the time in tears, but seek for Justice.

I must confess, somewhat I was in fault,
That had not first acquainted you what love
Past twixt him and my Niece, but as I live,
His Fortune grieves me as it were mine own.

Ala^ poor Creature, he meant no man harm,
That I am sure of.

I believe that too;
But stay my Masters, are you sure you saw
The Murderer pass here?

And it please you sir, we are sure we saw a Ruffian
with a naked weapon in his hand all bloody, get into my Lord
Cardinals Graces gate, that we are sure of; but for fear of his
Grace (bless us) we durst go no further.

Know you what manner of man he was?

Yes sure I know the man, they say a is a soldier, he
that loved your daughter Sir an't please y'ee, 'twas he for certain.

Grimaldi on my life.

I, I, the same.

The Cardinal is Noble, he no doubt
Will give true Justice.

Knock some one at the gate,

I'll knock sir.
Servant within. What would'ee?

We require speech with the Lord Cardinal
About some present business, pray inform
His Grace, that we are here.

Why how now friends? what saucy mates are you
That know nor duty nor Ciuillity?
Are we a person fit to be your host?
Or is our house become your common Inn
To beat our doors at pleasure? what such haste
Is yours as that it cannot wait fit times?
Are you the Masters of this Common-wealth^
And know no more discretion? oh your news
Is here before you, you have lost a Nephew
Donado, last night by Grimaldi slain:
Is that your business? well sir, we have knowledge (...)
Le that suffice.

In presence of your Grace,
In thought I never meant Bergetto harm,
But Florio you can tell, with how much scorn
Soranzo backed with his Confederates,
Hath often wronged me; I to be revenged,
(For that I could not win him else to fight)
Had thought by way of Ambush to have killed him,
But was unluckily, therein mistook;
Else he had felt what late Bergetto did:
And though my fault to him were merely chance,
Yet humbly I submit me to your Grace,
To do with me as you please.

Rise up Grimaldi,
You Citizens of Parma, if you seek
For Justice; Know as Nuntio from the Pope,
For this offence I here receive Grimaldi
Into his holiness protection.
He is no Common man, but nobly borne;
Of Princes blood, though you Sir Florio,
Thought him to mean a husband for your daughter
If more you seek for, you must go to Rome,
For he shall thither; learn more wit for shame.
Bury your dead -- away Grimaldi -- leaue'em.

Is this a Church-mans voice? dwells Justice here?
Flo. Justice is fled to Heaven and comes no nearer
Soranzo, was't for him? O Impudence!
Had he the face to speak it, and not blush?
Come, come Donado, there's no help in this,
When Cardinals think murder's not amiss,
Great men may do there wills, we must obey,
But Heaven will judge them for it another day.

THese holy rights performed, now take your times,
To spend the remnant of the day in Feast;
Such fit repasts are pleasing to the Saint^
Who are your guests, though not with mortal eyes
To be beheld; long prosper in this day
You happy Couple, to each others joy:

Father, your prayer is heard, the hand of goodness
Hath been a shield for me against my death;
And more to bless me, hath enriched my life
With this most precious Jewel; such a prize
As Earth hath not another like to this.
Cheer up my Love, and Centlemen, my Friends,
Rejoice with me in mirth, this day wee'le crown
With lusty Cups to Annabella's health.

Oh Torture, were the marriage yet undone,
Ere I'd endure this sight, to see my Love
Clipped by another, I would dare Confusion,
And stand the horror of ten thousand deaths.

Are you not well Sir?

Prithee fellow wait,
I need not thy officious diligence.

Signior Donado, come you must forget
Your late mishaps, and drowne^ your cares in wine.
So an. Vasques?

My Lord.

Reach me that weighty bowl,
Here brother Giouanni, here's to you,
Your turn comes next, though now a Bachelor,
Here's to your sisters happiness and mine.

I cannot drink.

What?

'Twill indeed offend me

Pray, do not urge him if he be not willing.

How now, what noise is this?

O sir, I had forgot to tell you; certain youg Maidens of Parma in honour to
Madam Annabella's marriage, have sent their loves to her in a Masque, for which
they humbly crave your patience and silence.


We are much bound to them, so much the more as it comes unexpected; guide
them in.


Thanks lovely Virgins, now might we but know
To whom we have been beholding for this love,
We shall acknowledge it.

Yes, you shall know,
What think you now?
Omnes Hippolita?

'Tis she,
Be not amazed; nor blush young lovely Bride,
I come not to defraud you of your man,
'Tis now no time to reckon up the talk
What Parma long hath rumoured of us both,
Let rash report run on; the breath that vents it
Will (like a bubble) break it self at last.
But now to you Sweet Creature, lend's your hand,
Perhaps it hath been said, that I would claim
Some interest in Soranzo, now your Lord,
What I have right to do, his soul knows best:
But in my duty to your Noble worth,
Sweet Annabella, and my care of you,
Here take Soranzo, take this hand from me,
I'll once more join, what by the holy Church
Is finished and allow'd; have I done well?

You have too much engaged us.

One thing more
That you may know my single charity,
Freely I here remit all interest
I ere could claim; and guie you back your vows,
And to confirm't, reach me a Cup of wine
My Lord Soranzo, in this draught I drink,
Long res t'ee --

Fear nothing --

Hippolita, I thank you, and will pledge
This happy Union as another life,
Wine there.

You shall have none, neither shall you pledge her.

How!

Know now Mistress she devil, your own mischievous treachery
Hath killed you, I must not marry you.

Villain.

What's the matter?

Foolish woman, thou art now like a Fire-brand, that hath kindled others and
burnt thy self; Troppo sperar nigann^, thy vain hope hath deceived thee, thou
art but dead, if thou hast any grace, pray.


Monster.

Dye in charity for shame,

This thing of malice, this woman had privately corrupted me with promise of
malice, under this politic reconciliation to to poison my Lord, whiles she
might laugh at his Confusion oh his marriage-day; I promised her fair, but I
knew what my reward should have been, and would willingly have spared her
life, but that I was acquainted with the danger of her disposition, and now
have fitted her a just payment in her own coin, there she is, she hath yet
-- and end thy days in peace wild woman, as for life there's no hope, think
noton't.


Wonderful Justice!

Heaven thou art righteous.

O 'tis true,
I feel my minute coming, had that slave
Kept promise, (o my torment) thou this hour
Had dyed Soranzo -- heate above hell fire --
Yet ere I pass away -- Cruel, cruel flames --
Take here my curse amongst you; may thy bed
Of marriage be a rack unto thy heart,
Burn blood and boyle in Vengeance -- o my heart,
My Flame's intolerable -- may thou live
To father Bastards, may her womb bring forth
Monsters, and dye together in your sins
Hated, scorned and unpitied -- oh -- oh --

Was e're so wild a Creature?

Here's the end
Of lust and pride.

Vasques, I know thee now a trusty servant,
And never will forget thee -- come My Love,
Wee'le home, and thank the Heavens for this escape,
Father and Friends, we must break up this mirth,
It is too sad a Feast.

Bear hence the body.

Here's an ominous change,
Mark this my Giouani, and take heed,
I fear the event; that marriage seldome's good,
Where the bride-banquet so begins in blood.

My wretched wife more wretched in her shame
Then in her wrongs to me, hath paid too soon
The forfeit of her modesty and life.
And I am sure (my Niece) though vengeance hover,
Keeping aloof yet from Soranzo's fall,
Yet he will fall, and sink with his own weight.
I need not (now my heart persuades me so)
To further his confusion; there is one
Above begins to work, for as I hear,
Debate's already twixt his wife and him,
Thicken and run to head; she (as 'tis said)
Sleightens his love, and he abandons hers
Much talk I hear, since things go thus (my Niece)
In tender love and pity of your youth,
My counsel is, that you should free your years
From hazard of these woes; by flying hence
To fair Cremona, there to vow your soul
In holiness a holy Votaress,
Leave me to see the end of these extremes
All humane worldly courses are uneven,
No life is blessed but the way to Heaven.

Uncle, shall I resolve to be a Nun?

I gentle Niece; and in your hourly prayers
Remember me your poor unhappy Uncle;
Hie to Cremona now, as Fortune leads,
Your home, your cloister, your best Friends, your beads,
Your chaste and single life shall crown your Birth,
Who dyes a Virgin, live a Saint on earth.

Then farewell world, and worldly thoughts adieu,
Welcome chaste vows, my self I yield to you.

Come strumpet, famous whore, were every drop
Of blood that runs in thy adulterous veins
A life, this Sword, (dost see it) should in one blow
Confound them all, Harlot, rare, notable Harlot,
That with thy brazen face maintainst thy sin
Was there no man in Parma to be bawd
To your loose cunning whorodome else but I?
Must your hot ytch and pleurisy of lust,
The hey day of your luxury be fed
Up to a surfeit, and could none but I
Be picked out to be cloak to your close tricks,
Your belly-sports? Now I must be the Dad
To all that gallymaufrey that's stuffed
In thy Corrupted bastard-bearing womb,
Shey, must I?

Beastly man, why 'tis thy fate:
I sued not to thee, for, but that I thought^
Your Cuer-louing Lordship would have run
Mad on denial, had ye lent me time,
I would have told 'ee in what case I was,
But you would needs be doing.

Whore of whores!
Dare thou tel' me this?

O yes, why not?
You were deceived in me; 'twas not for love
I chose you, but for honour; yet know this,
Would you be patient yet, and hide your shame,
I'd see whether I could love you.

Excellent Queen!
Why art thou not with Child?

What needs all this,
When 'tis superfluous? I confess I am.

Tell me by whom.

Soft sir, 'twas not in my bargain.
Yet somewhat sir to stay your lo^ging stomach
I'm content t'acquaint you with; The man,
The more then Man that got this sprightly Boy,
(For 'tis a Boy that for glory sir,
Your heir shall be a Son,)

Damnable Monster.

Nay and you will not hear, I'll speak no more.

Yes speak, and speak thy last.

A match, a match;
This Noble Creature was in every part
So angel-like, so glorious, that a woman,
Who had not been but human as was I,
Would have kneeled to him, and have begged for love.
You, why you are not worthy once to name
His name without true worship, or indeed,
Unless you kneeled, to hear another name him.

What was he called?

We are not come to that,
Let it suffice, that you shall have the glory,
To Father what so Brave a Father got.
In brief, had not this chance, fallen out as't doth,
I never had been troubled with a thought
That you had been a Creature; but for marriage,
I scarce dream yet of that.

Tell me his name.

Alas, alas, there's all
Will you believe?

What?

You shall never know.

How!

Never,
If you do, let me be cursed.

Not know it, Strumpet, I'll rip up thy heart,
And find it there.

Do, do.

And with my teeth,
Tear the prodigious lecher joint by joint.

Ha, ha, ha, the man's merry.

Dost thou laugh?
Come Wh^re, tell me your lover, or by Truth
I'll how thy flesh to shreds; who is't

Che morte pluis dolce che morire per amore.

Thus will I pull thy hair, and thus I'll drag
Thy lust be-leapred body through the dust.
Yet tell his name.

Morendoin gratia Lei morirere senzadolore.

Dost thou Triumph? the Treasure of the Earth
Shall not redeem thee, were there kneeling Kings,
Did beg thy life, or Angels did come down
To plead in tears, yet should not all prevail
Against my rage; dost thou not tremble yet?

At what? to dye; No, be a Gallant hang-man
I dare thee to the worst, strike, and strike home,
^ leave revenge behind, and thou shalt feel it.

Yet tell me cre thou die, and tell me truly,
Knows thy old Father this?

No by my life.

Wilt thou confess, and I will spare thy life?

My life? I will not buy my life so dear.

I will not slack my Ve^geance.

What do ye mean Sir?

Forbear Vasques, such a damned Whore
Deserves no pity.

Now the gods forefend!

And wud you be her executioner, and kill her in your rage too? O 'twere most
vn-manlike; she is your wife, what faults hath been done by her before she
married you, were not against you; alas Poor Lady, what hath she committed,
which any Lady in Italy in the like case would not? Sir, you must be ru^ed by
your reason, and not by your fury, that were vnhumane and beastly.


She shall not live.

Come she must; you would have her confess the Authors of her present
misfortu^es I warrant'ee, 'tis an unconscionable demand, and she should loose
the estimation that I (for my part) hold of her worth, if she had done it; why
sir you ought not of all men living to know it: good sir be reconciled, alas
good gentlewoman.


Pish, do not beg for me, I prize my life
As nothing; if The man will needs be mad.
Why let him take it.

Vasques, hear thou this?

Yes, and commend her for it; in this she shows the nobleness of a gallant
spirit, and beshrew my heart, but it becomes her rarely -- Sir, in any case
smother your revenge; leave the scenting out your wrongs to me, be rul'd^ as
you respect your honour, or you mar all -- Sir, if ever my service were of any
Credit with you, be not so violent in your distractions: you are married now;
what a triumph might the report of this give to other neglected Suitors, 'tis as
manlike to bear extremities, as godlike to forgive.


O Vasques, Vasques, in this piece of flesh,
This faithless face of hers, had I laid up
The treasure of my heart; had thou been virtuous
(Fair wicked woman) not the matchless joys
Of Life it self had made me wish to live
With any Saint but thee; Deceitful Creature,
How hast thou mock't my hopes, and in the shame
Of thy lewd womb, even buried me alive?
I did too dearly love thee.

This is well;
Follow this temper with some passion,
Be brief and moving, 'tis for the purpose.

Be witness to my words thy soul and thoughts,
And tell me did not think that in my heart,
I did too superstitiously adore thee.

I must confess, I know you loved me well.

And would thou use me thus? O Annabella,
Be thus assured, whatsor're the Villain was,
That thus hath tempted thee to This disgrace,
Well he might lust, but never loved like me:
He doted on the picture that hung out
Upon thy cheeks, to please his humourous eye;
Not on the part I loved, which was thy heart,
And as I thought, thy Virtues.

O my Lord!
These words wound deeper then your Sword could do.

Let me not ever take comfort, but I begin to weep my self, so much I pity
him; why Madam I knew when his rage was ouer-past, what it would come to.

Forgive me Annabella, though thy youth
Hath tempted thee above thy strength to folly,
Yet will not I forget what I should be,
And what I am, a husband; in that name
Is hid Deuinity; if I do find
That thou wilt yet be true, here I remit all former faults, and take thee to
my bosom.

By my troth, and that's a point of noble charity.

Sir on my knees --

Rise up, you shall not kneel,
Get you to your chamber, see you make no show
Of alteration, I^le be with you straight;
My reason tells me now, that 'Tis as common
To err in frailty as to be a woman,
Go to your chamber.

So, this was somewhat to the matter; what do you think of your heaven of
happiness now sir?


I carry hell about me, all my blood
Is fired in swift revenge.

That may be, but know you how, or on whom? alas, to marry a great woman,
being made great in the stock to your hand, is a usual sport in these days;
but to know what Secret it was that haunted your Cunny-berry, there's the
cunning.


I'll make her tell her self, or --

Or what? you must not doeso, let me yet persuade your sufferance a little
while, go to her, use her mildly, win her if it be possible to a Voluntary,
to a weeping tune; for the rest, if all hit, I will not miss my mark; pray
sir go in, the next news I tell you shall be wonders.


Delay in vengeance gives a heauyer blow.


Ah sirrah, here's work for the nonce; I had a suspicion of a bad matter in my
head a pretty whiles ago; but after My Madams scurvy looks here at home, her
waspish perverseness, and loud fault-finding, then I remembered the Proverb,
that Where Hens crow, and Cocks hold their peace, there are sorry houses;
sfoot, if the lower parts of a Shee-taylors Cunning, can cover such a swelling
in the stomach, I'll never blame a false stich in a shoe whiles I li^e again;
up and up so quick? and so quickly too? 'twere a fine policy to lear^e by whom
this must be known: and I have thought on it -- here's the way or none -- what
crying old Mistress! alas, alas, I cannot blame 'ee, we have a Lord, Heaven
help us, is so mad as the devil himself, the more shame for him.


O Vasques, that ever I was borne to see this day,
Doth he use thee so too, sometimes Vasques?

Me? why he makes a dog of me; but if some were of my mind, I know what
we would do; as sure as I am an honest man, he will go near to kill my
Lady with unkindness; say she be with-child, is that such a matter for a
young woman of her years, to be blamed for?


Alas good heart, it is against her will full sore.


I durst be sworn, all his madness is, for that she will not confess whose
'tis, which he will know, and when he doth know it, I am so well acquainted
with his humour, that he will forget all straight; well I could wish, she
would in plain terms tell all, for that's the way indeed.


Do you think so?


Fo, I know it; provided that he did not win her to it by force, he was once
in a mind, that you could tell, and meant to have w^ung it out of you, but I
somewhat pacified him for that^ yet sure you know a great, deal.


Heaven forgive us all, I know a little Vasques.


Why should you not? who else should? upon my Conscience she loves you
dearly, and you would not betray her to any affliction for the world.


Not for all the world by my Faith and troth Vasques.


'Twere pity of your life if you should, but In this you should both releiue
her present discomforts, pacify my Lord, and gain your self ever lasting
love and preferment.


Dost think so Vasques?


Nay I know it; sure 'twas some near and entire friend.


'T was a dear friend indeed; but --


But what? fear not to name him: my life between you and danger; faith I
think 'twas no base Fellow.


Thou wilt stand between me and harme^?


V'ds pity, what else; you shall be rewarded too; trust me.


'Twas even no worse then her own brother.


Her brother Giouanni I warrant'ee?


Even he Vasques; as brave a Gentleman as ever kissed fair Lady; O they love
most perpetually.


A brave Gentleman indeed, why therein I Commend her choice -- better and
better -- you are sure 'twas he?


Sure; and you shall'see he will not be long from her too.


He were to blame if he would: but may I believe thee?


Believe me! why dost think I am a Turk or a Jew? no Vasques, I have known
their dealings too long to belie them now.


Where are you? there within sirs?


How now, what are these?


You shall know presently,
Come sirs, take me This old Damnable hag,
Gag her instant^y, and put out her eyes, quickly, quickly.

Vasques, Vasques.

Gag her I say sf^ot do ye suffer her to prate? what do ye fumble about? let me
come to her, I'll help your old gums, you Toad-bellied bi^ch; sirs, carry her
closely into the Coalehouse, and put out her eyes instantly, if she roars,
slit her nose; do ye hear, be speedy and sure. Why this is excellent and
above expectation.

Giouanni! as I would wish; my belief is strengthened,
'Tis as firm as Winter and Summer.

Where's my Sister?

Troubled with a new sickness my Lord she's somewhat ill.

T^th too much of the flesh I believe.

T^th sir and you I think hauee'ne hit it,
But My virtuous Lady.

Where's she?

In her chamber; please you visit her; she is alone, your liberality hath
doubly made me your servant, and ever shall ever -- and success, I beseech you
let's be private.


My Ladies brother's come, now hee'le know all.

Let him know it, I have made some of them fast enough,
How have you dealt with my Lady?

Gently, as thou hast counsail'd; O my soul
Runs circular in sorrow for revenge,
But Vasques, thou shalt know --

Nay, I will know no more; for now comes your turn to know; I would not talk
so openly with you: Let my young Master take time enough, and go at pleasure;
he is sold to death, and the Devil shall not ransom him, Sir I beseech you,
your privacy.


No Conquest can gain glory of my fear.


Pleasures farewell, and all ye thriftless minutes,
Wherein False joys have spun a weary life,
To these my Fortunes now I take my leave.
Thou Precious Time, that swiftly rid'st in post
Over the world, to finish up the race
Of my last fate; here stay thy restless course,
And bear to Ages that are yet unborn,
A wretched woeful woman's Tragedy,
My Conscience now stands up against my lust
With dispositions charectred in guilt,
And tells me I am lost: Now I confess,
Beauty that clothes the out-side of the face,
Is cursed if it be not eloath'd with grace:
Here like a Turtle (mewed up in a Cage)
Vn-mated, I converse with Air and walls,
And descant on my wild unhappiness.
O Giouanni, that hast had the spoil
Of thine own virtues and my modest fame,
Would thou had been less subject to those Stars
That luckelesse reigned at my Nativity:
O would the scourge due to my black offence
Might pass from thee, that I alone might feele^
The torment of an uncontrolled flame.

What's this I hear?

That man, that Blessed Friar,
Who joined in Ceremonial knot my hand
To him whose wife I now am; told me oft,
I trod the path to death, and showed me how.
But they who sleep in Lethargies of Lust
Hugg^ their confusion, making Heaven v^ius^,
And so did I.

Here's Music to the soul.

Forgive me my Good Genius, and this once
Be helpful to my ends; Let some good man
Pass this way, to whose trust I may commit
This paper double lined with tears and blood:
Which being granted; here I sadly vow
Repentance, and a leaving of that life
I long have dyed in.

Lady, Heaven hath heard you,
And hath by providence ordained, that I
should be his Minister for your behoof.

Ha, what are you?

Your brothers friend the Friar;
Glad in my soul that I have lived to hear
This free confession twixt your peace and you,
What would you or to whom? fear not to speak.

Is Heaven so bountiful? then I have found
More favour then I hoped; here Holy man -- Throws a letter,
Commend me to my Brother give him that,
That Letter; bid him read it and repent,
Tell him that I (imprisoned in my chamber,
Bard of all company, even of My Guardian,
Who gives me cause of much suspect) have time
To blush at what hath past: bid him be wise,
And not believe the Friendship of my Lord,
I fear much more then I can speak: Good father,
The place is dangerous, and spies are busy,
I must break off -- you'll do it?

Be sure I will;
And fly with speed -- my blessing ever rest
With thee my daughter, live to dye more blessed.

Thanks to the heavens, who have prolonged my breath
To this good use: Now I can welcome Death.

Am I to be believed now?

First, marry a strumpet that cast her self away upon you but to laugh at your
horns? to feast on your disgrace, riott in your vexations, cuckold you in your
bride-bed, waste your estate upon Panders and Bawds?


No more, I say no more.

A Cuckold is a goodly tame beast my Lord.

I am resolved; urge not another word,
My thoughts are great, and all as resolute
As thunder; in mean time I'll cause our Lady
To deck her self in all her bridal Robes,
Kiss her, and fold her gently in my arms.
Begone; yet hear you, are the Bandetti ready
To wait in Ambush?

Good Sir, trouble not your self about other business, then your own
resolution; remember that time lost cannot be recal'd.


With all the cunning words thou can, inuit
The States of Parma to my Birth-dayes feast,
Haste to my Brother rival and his Father,
Entreat them gently, bid them not to fail,
Be speedy and return.

Let not your pity betray you, till my coming back,
Think upon Incest and Cuckoldry.

Revenge is all the Ambition I aspire,
To that I'll clime or fall; my blood's on fire.

Busy opinion is an idle Fool,
That as a Schoole-rod keeps a child in awe,
Frights the vnexperienc't temper of the mind:
So did it me; who ere My precious Sister
Was married, thought all taste of love would dye
In such a Contract; but I find no change
Of pleasure in this formal law of sports.
She is still one to me, and every kiss
As sweet, and as delicious as the first
I reap't; when yet the privilege of youth
Entitled her a Virgin. O the glory
Of two united hearts like hers and mine!
Let Poaring booke-men dream of other worlds,
My world, and all of happiness is here,
And I'd not change it for the best to come,
A life of pleasure is Elyzeum.
Father, you enter on the Iubile
Of my retired delights; Now I can tell you,
The hell you oft have prompted, is nought else
But slavish and fond superstitious fear;
And I could prove it too --

Thy blindness slays thee,
Look there, 'tis wrote to thee.

From whom?.

Unrip the seals and see:
The blood's yet seething hot, that will anon
Be frozen harder then congealed Corrall.
Why do ye change colour son?

Fore Heaven you make
Some petty Devil factor 'twixt my love
And your relligion-masked sorceries.
Where had you this?

Thy Conscience youth is seared,
Else thou would stoop to warning.

'Tis her hand,
I know it; and 'tis all written in her blood.
She writes I know not what; Death? I'll not fear
An armed thunder-bolt aimed at my heart.
She writes we are discovered, (...) o^ dreams
Of lowe faint-hearted Cowardice: discovered?
The Devil we are; which way is't possible?
Are we grown Traytoms to our own delights?
Confusion take such d^ge, 'tis but forged,
This is your peevish chattering weak old man,
Now sir, what news bring you?

My Lord, according to his yearly custom keeping this day a Feast in honour
of his Birth-day, by me invites you thither; your worthy Father with the Popes
reverend Nuntio, and other Magni^ico's of Parma, have promised their presence,
wil^ please you to be of the number?


Yes, tell them I dare come.

Dare come?

So I said; and tell him more I will come.

These words are strange to me.

Say I will come.

You will not miss?

Yet more, I'll come; sir, are you answered?

So I'll say -- my service to you^

You will (...) go I trust.

Not go? for what?

O do not go, this feast (I'll gage my life)
Is but a plot to train you to your ruin,
Be ruled, you sha'not go.

Not go? stood Death
Threatening his armies of confounding plagues,
With ^o^sts of dangers hot as blazing Stars,
I would be there; not go? yes and resolve
To strike as deep in slaughter as they all.
For I will go.

Go where thou wilt, I see
The wildness of thy Fare draws to an end,
To a bad fearful end; I must not stay
To know thy fall, back to Bononia I
With speed will haste, and shun this coming blow.
Parma farewell, would I had never known thee,
Or ought of thine; well Young man, since no prayer
Can make thee safe, I leave thee to despair.
Despair or tortures of a thousand hells
All's one to me; I have set up my rest.
Now, n^w, work serious thoughts on baneful plots
Be all a man my soul; let not the Curse
Of old prescription rent from me the gall
Of Courage, which inrolls a glorious death.
If I must totter like a well-growne Oak,
Some under shrubs shall in my weighty fall
Be crushed to splitts: with me they all shall perish.

You will not ^ayle, or shrink in the attempt?

I will undertake for their parts; be sure my Masters to be bloody enough, and
as unmerciful, as if you were praying upon a rich booty on the very Mountains
of Liguria; for your pardons trust to my Lord; but for reward you shall trust
none but your own pockets.


Wee'le make a murder.

Here's gold, here's more; want nothing, what you do is noble, and an act of
brave revenge.

I'll make ye rich Bandetti and all Free.


Liberty, liberty.


Hold, take every man a Vizard; when ye are with drawn, keep as much silence
as you can possibly: you know the watch-word, till which be spoken move not,
but when you hear that, rush in like a stormy-flood; I need not instruct ye
in your own profession.

No, no, no.

In then, your ends are profit and preferment -- away.

The guests will all come Vasques?

Yes sir, and now let me a little edge your resolution; you see nothing is
unready to this Great work, but a great mind in you: Call to your remembrance
your disgraces, your loss of Honour, Hippolita's blood; and arm your courage
in your own wrongs, so shall you best right those wrongs in vengeance which
you may truly call Your own.


'Tis well; the less I speak, the more I burn, and blood shall quench that
flame.


Now you begin to turn Italian, this beside, when my young Incest-monger
comes, he will be sharpe set on his old bit: give him time enough, let him have
your Chamber and bed at liberty; let my Hot Hare have law ere he be hunted to
his death, that if it be possible, he may post to Hell in the very Act of his
damnation.


It shall be so; and see as we would wish,
He comes himself first; welcome my Much-lou'd brother,
Now I perceive you honour me; you're welcome,
But where's my father?

With the other States,
Attending on the Nuntio of the Pope
To wait upon him hither; how's my sister?

Like a good huswife scarcely ready yet,
You're best walk to her chamber.

If you will.

I must expect my honourable Friends,
Good brother get her fort^.

You are busy Sir.

Even as the great Devil himself would have it, let him go and glut himself
in his own destruction; hark, the Nuncio is at hand; good sir be ready to
receive him.


Most reverend Lord, this grace hath made me proud,
That you vouchsafe my house; I ever rest
Your humble servant for this Noble Favour.

You are our Friend my Lord, ^is holiness
Shall understand, how zealously you honour^
Saint Peters Vicar in his substitute
Our special love to you.

Signiors to you
My welcome, and my ever best of thanks
For this so memorable court^sie,
Pleases your Grace to walk near?

My Lord, we come
To celebrate your Feast with Civil mirth,
^s ancient custom teaches: we will go.

Attend his grace there, Signiors keep your way.

What changed so soon? hath your new sprightly Lord^
Found out a trick in night-games more then we
Could know in our simplicity? ha! is't so?
Or does the fit come on you, to prove treacherous
To your past vows and oaths?

Why should you jest
At my Calamity, without all sense
Of the approaching dangers you are in?

What danger's half so great as thy revolt?
Thou art a faithless sister, else thou know,
Malice, or any treachery beside
Would stoop to my bent-browes; why I hold Fa^e
Clasp't in my fist, and could Command the Course
Of times eternal motion; had thou been,
One thought more steady then an ebbing Sea.
And what? you'll now be honest, that's resolved?

Brother, dear brother, know what I have been;
And know that now there's but a dying time
Twixt us and our Confusion: let's not waste
These precious hours in vain and useless speech.
Alas, these gay attires were not put on
But to some end; this sudden solemn Feast
Was not ordayn'd to riott in expense:
^hat have now been chambred here alone,
B^rd of my Guardian, or of any else,
Am not for nothing at an instant freed
To fresh access; be not deceived My Brother,
This Banquet is an harbinger of Death
To you and me, resolve your self it is,
And be prepared to welcome it.

Well then,
The Schoole-men teach that all this Globe of earth
Shall be consumed to ashes in a minute.

So I have read too.

But 'twere somewhat strange
To see the Waters burn, could I believe
This might be true, I could believe as well
There might be hell or Heaven.

That's most certain.

A dream, a dream; else in this other world
We should know one another.

So we shall.

Have you heard so?

For certain.

But do ye think,
That I shall see you there,
You look on me,
May we kiss one another,
Prate or laugh,
Or do as we do here?

I know not that,
But good for the present, what do ye mean
To free your self from danger? some way, think
How to escape; I'm sure the guests are come.

Look up, look here; what see you in my face?

Distraction and a troubled Countenance.

Death and a swift repining wrath -- yet look,
What see you in mine eyes?

Methinkes you weep.

I do indeed; these are the funeral tears
Shed on your grave, these furrowed up my cheeks
When first I loved and knew not how to woe.
Fair Annabella, should I here repeat
The Story of my life, we might loose time.
Be record all the spirits of the Air,
And all things else that are; that Day and Night,
Early and late, the tribute which my heart
Hath paid to Annabella's sacred love,
Hath been these tears, which are her mourners now:
Never till now did Nature do her best,
To show a matchless beauty to the world,
Which in an instant, ere it scarce was seen,
The jealous Destinies require again.
Pray Annabella, pray; since we must part,
Go thou white in thy soul, to fill a Throne
Of Innocence and Sanctity in Heaven.
Pray, pray my Sister.

Then I see your drift,
Ye blessed Angels, guard me.

So say I,
Kiss me; if ever after times should hear
Of our fast-knit affections, though perhaps
The Laws of Conscience and of Ci^ill use
May justly blame us, yet when they but know
Our loves, That love will wipe away that rigour,
Which would in other Incests be abhorred.
Give me your hand; how sweetly Life doth run
In these well col^ured veins! how constantly
These Palms do promise health! but I could chide
With Nature for this Cunning flattery,
Kiss me again -- forgive me.

With my heart.

Farewell.

Will you begone?

Be dark bright Sun,
And make this mid-day night, that thy guilt rays
May not behold a deed, will turn their splendour
More sooty, then the Poets feign their Styx.
One other kiss my Sister.

What means this?

To save thy fame and kill thee in a kiss.
Thus dye, and dye by me, and by my hand,
^enge is mine; Honour doth love Command.

Oh brother by your hand?

When thou art dead:
I'll give my reasons for it; for to dispute
With thy (even in thy death) most lovely beauty,
Would make me stagger to perform this act
Which I most glory in.

Forgive him Heaven -- and me my sins, farewell.
Brother unkind, unkind -- mercy great Heaven -- oh -- oh.

She's dead, alas good soul; The haplesse Fruit
That in her womb received its life from me,
Hath had from me a Cradle and a Grave.
I must not dally, this sad Marriage-bed
In all her best, bore her alive and dead.
Soranzo thou hast mist thy aim in this,
I have prevented now thy reaching plots,
And killed a Love, for whose each drop of blood
I would have pawned my heart; Fair Annabella,
How ouer-glorious art thou in thy wounds,
Triumphing over infamy and hate!
Shrink not Courageous hand, stand up my heart,
And boldly act my last, and greater part.

Remember Sir what you have to do, be wise and resolu^e.

Enough -- my heart is fixed, pleases Your Grace
To taste these Course Confections; though the use
Of such set enterteyments more consists
In Custom, then in Cause; yet Reverend Sir,
I am still made your servant by your presence.

And we your Friend.

But where's my Brother Giouanni?

Here, here Soranzo; trimmed in ree^ing blood,
That triumphs over death; proud in the spoil
Of Love and Vengeance, Fate or all the Powers
That guide the motions of immortal Souls
Could not prevent me.

What means this?

Son Giouanni?

Shall I be forestall'd?

Be not amazed: If your misgiving hearts
Shrink at an idle sight; what bloodless Fear
Of Coward passion would have ceased your senses,
Had you beheld the Rape of Life and Beauty
Which I have acted? my sister, oh my sister,

Ha! What of her?

The Glory of my Deed
Darkened the mid-day Sun, made Noone as Night.
You came to feast My Lords with dainty fare,
I came to feast too, but I dug for food
In a much richer Mine then Gold or Stone
Of any value balanced; 'tis a Heart,
A Heart my Lords, in which is mine entombed,
Look well upon it; do ye know it?

What strange ridle's this?

'Tis Annabella's Heart, 'tis; why do ye startle?
I vow 'tis hers, this Daggers point ploughed up
Her fruitful womb, and left to me the fame
Of a most glorious executioner.

Why mad-man, art thy self?

Yes Father, and that times to come may know,
How as my Fate I honoured my revenge:
Li^t Father, to your ears I will yield up
How much I have deserved to be your son.

What is't thou say?

Nine Moons have had their changes,
Since I first thoroughly viewed and truly loved
Your Daughter and my Sister.

How! alas my Lords, he's a frantic mad-man!

Father no;
For nine Months f^ace, in secret I enjoyed
Sweet Annabella's sheets; Nine Months I lived
A happy Monarch of her heart and her,
Soranzo, thou know this; thy paler cheek
Bears the Confounding print of thy disgrace,
For her too fruitful womb too soon bewray'd^
The happy passage of our stolen delights,
And made her Mother to a Child unborn.

Incestuous Villain.

Oh his rage belyes him.

It does not, 'tis the Oracle of truth,
I vow it is so.

I shall burst with fury,
Bring the strumpet forth.

I shall Sir.

Do sir, have you all no faith
To credit yet my Triumphs? here I swear
By all that you call sacred, by the love
I bore my Annabella whilst she lived,
These hands have from her bosom ripped this heart.
Is't true or no sir?

'Tis most strangely true.

Cursed man -- have I lived to --

Hold up Florio,
Monster of Children, see what thou hast done,
Broke thy old Fathers heart; is none of you
Dares venture on him?

Let 'em; oh my Father,
How well his death becomes him in his griefs!
Why this was done with Courage; now survines
None of our house but I, guilt in the blood
Of a Fair sister and a Haplesse Father.

Inhamane scorn of men, hast thou a thought
T'out live thy murders?

Yes, I tell thee yes;
For in my fists I bear the twists of life,
Soranzo, see this heart which was thy wives,
Thus I exchange it royally for thine,
And thus and thus, now brave revenge is mine.

I cannot hold any longer; you sir, are you grown insolent in your butcheries?
have at you.

Come, I am armed to meet thee.

No, will it not be yet? if this will not, another shall,
Not yet; I shall fit you anon --

Welcome, come more of you what e're you be,
I dare your worst --
Oh I can stand no longer, Feeble arms
Have you so soon lost strength.

Now, you are welcome Sir,
Away my Masters, all is done,
Shift for your selves, your reward is your own,
Shift for your selves.

Away, away.

How do ye my Lord, see you this? how is't?

Dead; but in death well pleased, that I have lived
To see my wrongs revenged on that Black Devil.
O Vasques, to thy bosom let me give
My last of breath, let not that Lecher live -- oh

The Reward of peace and rest be with him,
My ever dearest Lord and Master.

Whose hand gave me this wound?

Mine Sir, I was your first man, have you enough?

I thank thee, thou hast done for me but what I would have else done on my
self, ar't sure thy Lord is dead?

Oh Impudent slave, as sure as I am sure to see the dye,

Think on thy life and end, and call for mercy.

Mercy? why I have found it in this Justice.

Strive yet to cry to Heaven.

Oh I bleed fast,
Death, thou art a guest long looked for, I embrace
Thee and thy wouuds; oh my last minute comes.
Where e're I go, let me enjoy this grace,
Freely to view My Annabella's face.

Strange Miracle of Justice!

Raise up the City, we shall be murderedall.

You need not fear, you shall not; this strange task being ended, I have
paid the Duty to the Son, which I have vowed to the Father.

Speak wretched Villain, what incarnate Fiend
Hath led thee on to this?

Honesty, and pity of my Masters wrongs; for know My Lord. I am by birth a
Spaniard, brought forth my Country in my youth by Lord Soranzo's Father; whom
whilst he lived, I served faithfully; since whose death I have been to this
man, as I was to him; what I have done was duty, and I repent nothing, but that
the loss of my life had not ransomed his.


Say Fellow, know thou any yet vnnam'd
Of Counsel in this Incest?

Yes, an old woman, sometimes Guardian to this murdered Lady.

And what's become of her?

Within this Room she is, whose eyes after her confession I caused to be put
out, but kept alive, to confirm what from Giouanni's own mouth you have
heard: now My Lord, what I have done, you may Judge of, and let your own
wisdom be a judge in your own reason.


Peace; First this woman chief in these effects,
My sentence is, that forthwith she be taken
Out of the City, for examples sake,
There to be burnt to ashes.

'Tis most just.

Be it your charge Donado, see it done.

I shall.

What for me? if death, 'tis welcome, I have been honest to the Son, as I
was to the Father.

Fellow, for thee; since what thou did, was dove
Not for thy self, being no Italian,
We banish thee for ever, to depart
Within three days, in this we do dispense
With grounds of reason not of thine offence.

'Tis well; this Conquest is mine, and I rejoice that a
Spaniard out-went an Italian in revenge.

Take up these slaughtered bodies, see them buried,
And all the Gold and Jewels, or whatsoever,
Confiscate by the Canons of the Church,
We cease upon to the Popes proper use.

Your Graces pardon, thus long I lived disguised
To see the effect of Pride and Lust at once
Brought both to shameful ends.

What Richardetto whom we thoughr for dead?

Sir was it you --

Your friend.

We shall have time
To talk at large of all, but never yet
Incest and Murder have so strangely met.
Of one so young, so rich in Natures store,
Who could not say, 'Tis pity she's a Whore?

The general Commendation deserved by the Actors, in their Presentment of this
Tragedy, may easily excuse such few faults, as are escaped in the Printing: A
common charity may allow him the ability of spelling, whom a secure confidence
assures that he cannot ignorantly err in the Application of Sense.


