TIs true Molosso, fortune hath prepared
A full revenge for thee, without thy hazar'd,
And ere the rising Sun shall yet decline
Imperiale thy proud Lord shall fall
As low as hell; one unexpected blow
Shall recompense those many he gave thee;
When imitating foreign cruelty,
He bound thee fast, and made thy feet an Anvil.

Sango, if thou contemplating our friendship,
Begotten first by consanguinity,
And since confirmed by our joint sufferings here,
Hast undertaken some bold stratagem
Against my Patron to revenge my wrongs,
Thy great affection may but ruin me;
Delay not then to make me understand
Thy full intent: believe it will be vain,
Our sword once drawn, to think to sheath again.

Then know, the plot is more securely laid,
Than my weak means (although my will be strong)
Could ever reach, without my certain death;
And by strange chance I did discover it,
Without the Actors knowledge; thou hast heard
Of the old deadly feud between our Lords,
Which wound although it were in show healed up,
Is broken out afresh; 't was not well searched;
For the last night, at setting of the Sun,
A household business called me to the Garden,
^ere in the thicket, near the Arbor, lying
(...) my self, I quickly fell asleep.
Into which Arbor in the mean time came
My Patron, with a Brave accompanied,
A Fellow expert in that Mystery:
At their first entrance to the place I waked,
But durst not stir, for had I, death had seized me;
There was I privy to their whole discourse,
Which was in brief but this, that for the sum
Of fifteen hundred crowns, thy Patrons life
Is sold, and must ere noone be snatched away.

Sure thou did dream, thou were not thoroughly awake,
For though our Lords were lately reconciled,
Mine keeps a careful watch, and never stirs
Out of the City, where he knows he's safe.

He will be deceived, the rareness of the plot
Did please beyond the dear and longed for Act;
Here's the design, this being a solemn day
Annuallie observed by the State,
In memory of a public benefit
Received by the private care of one
Of thy Lords Ancestors, will draw all sorts
Of People to the Temple, where the (...)
Clothed like a filly Peasant, is resolved
To watch Imperiale, and keep near him,
And when the usual Ceremonies are done,
In the confused Crowd his cunning hand
Shall guide a poisoned dagger to his heart,
And in an instant, letting fall his cloak,
Which shall belarge to hide his rustic habit,
He, with the rest, will stand about the body
And wring his hands at th'horror of the fact,
And thus the Brave shall thy part bravely act,
What? silent? not affected with a joy
Should ravish thee? and swell thy veins with pleasure,
Like to the Ostrich in the act of lust?

Light joys are eas'ly vented; such as this
Is entertained with an ecstasy,
And by degrees expressed: but as the full
Fruition of a thing we most delight in
Is checked with daily fear of losing it,
So find I now my rising heart kept down
With doubt of such a wished happiness,

Had thou, as I beheld the Actors looks
When he declared his resolution,
To my attentive Patron, thou would rest,
Assured of the event, and swear he needed
No other weapon to destroy a man;
His eyes would have outstar'd a Basilisk,
They were two Comets that are surely fatal.

May they portend more mischief to this House,
Then those that blasted ours and our whole Country;
But in this strong desire of a revenge
Discretion must direct our passion;
And therefore let it be thy chiefest care
Neither in word, nor gesture, to disclose
Thy fortunate discovery, till the end
Shall crown the work, and banish all our fears;
My task shall be to make it profitable
No less then pleasant, by his foreknown fall
Weel raise our selves to wealth and liberty,
The great allurements of those bold attempts,
Wherein the Vassal dares affront his Lord,
And quite shake off the yoke of his subjection.

Our Magnificos think us phlegmatic rascals
Created but for blows, and scorn, so far
In love with servitude as scarce to wish
Revenge or freedom.

They shall find at length
Patience oppressed will into fury turn;
Nature, in spite of fortune gave us minds
That cannot like our bodies be enthral'd;
But soft, I doubt our early privacy
May render us suspected; leave to me
The manage of th'affaire; only let thy
Virtue be now the dumb mans secrecy.

THe hateful sound of Imperiale's name
Would strike me deaf, my dear Iustinian,
Were it not tempered by thy gentle tongue,
That had the art to make m'embrace and trust
A reconciled foe, who hath rejected
With scorn my hopeful son, as if his birth,
Fortune, and parts, had not deserved that flirt
His gilded daughter; but I tax not thee,
Whose friendship is a gem without a foil,
And hardly can be valued, never matched:
I know thy milder studies chiefly bent
To weed out Rancor from the minds of men,
Smoothing rough nature with morality,
And this becomes Philosophers: but I
That do profess the art of killing men,
Encouraged by all States, imposed by some
Must follow other precepts: he is sure
Of many wrongs, that will but one endure.

Thy Character of me, loved Spinola,
Thus far I may without vain glory own,
Truly to love my friend, yet hate no man,
And since mine own experience finds how well
Thou dost the one, I would persuade the other;
Nor would I now convert thee to a Stoicke,
To make thee think there are no injuries,
Or if there be, that wise men cannot feele'm,
These, I confess, are not compatible
With thy condition; on the other side,
I can encourage none, much less my friend
To take a scandal, when there is none given,
To call that injury, which is in truth
A liberty that every man may challenge;
Or if Imperial ought to have wav'd the same,
Yet since the will is free, thou could expect
But Fatherly persuasion, to incline
The affections of his daughter, all the rest
Is ravishment, or tyranny at best.

I know not how the rigid schools define
A fathers power, in their begged principles,
As if the freedom of the will extended
To silly wenches, to restrain the power
Of them that gave them first and second being;
No, it was only his inveterate malice
That closely lurk't under a new fein'd friendship
That stuck on me and mine this contumely,
Which ought to be resented far above
An injury, by any generous spirit;

Let it be what thy fancy apprehends,
Which scarce appears in the least circumstance,
Yet generous spirits at poor contumelies,
As seldom stoop as Eagles do to Flies.

What is there that should wound an active spirit,
Like base contempt?

The guilt of one base act.

Should we not then be jealous of our fame?

If we within find cause of jealousy.

Reports may brand, although they be untrue.

Yes, those that take their honour upon trust.

Our honour by opinion must subsist,

Then every puff of wind will scatter it.
How can we call that ours, which must depend
On the rash will, and vainer voice of others?
But herein thou most slightst thy self to doubt
Thou can be undervalued by any,
Much more contemned by him that dares not think
Himself to be the worthier, but that thou
Suggests it for him, in thy vain suspicion:
They that believe themselves despised, confess
An inward doubt of their own worthiness.

I am not for my part ambitious
Of the dull fame of stupid patience,
To be admired for wanting common sense,
Like Cato, that could let one spit in's face,
And when he should have wiped off the disgrace
With his sharpe Sword, he did it with a Jest
And his soft handcarcheife: This was that spirit
Thou lift'st above great Alexanders merit.

I, and above the glory of Hercules,
Or what bold Greece hath left in histories
Of her great Captains, to their endless fame,
They Monsters, Kingdoms, and their Justs orecame:
Cato fought not with Beasts, nor did live when
T'was thought that Heaven might be borne up by men,
But in an age when (barbarism being fled)
All industry and learning flourished;
And in that time did bravely set upon
That Monster, in many shapes, Ambition,
With all the crimes of Rome, and when the State
Was ready even to sink with its own weight
He it supported with his only hand;
And did (as much as one man could) withstand
Romes instant fate, till forced to let her go
He became partner in her overthrow;
And so one ruin did them both oppress;
Whom to have severd had bin wickedness;
For was it fit that liberty should dye
And Cato live? that had bin contumely,
Not the purgation of a mouth that might
As well have don the Sun or Moon despite:
But I will leave thee to thy thoughts a while,
For wholesome counsel like safe Physic is
Unpleasant in the taste, and must have time
To work upon the humour; thou that art master
Of so much worth, wilt master in the end
Those passions that with reason now contend.

I Must needs make a strong pretence to worth,
That dare pretend, Iustinian, to thy love;
But when I find how much I violate
The sacred Jaws of friendship, that refuse
T'anatomize my very Soul to thee;
I am compled ta'cknowledge mine own shame
Or to suspect thy known fidelity:
The plot, wherewith I labour, can admit
No Council, but a necessary faith
In the bold Actor, whose subsistence binds him
To resolution, and to secrecy;
All friendly trust is folly, every man
He has one, to whom he will commit as much
As is to him committed: our designs
When once they creep from our own private breasts
Do in a moment through the City fly,
Who tells his secret sells his liberty:
But shall I suffer this black treachery
To boil within my doubtful breast? mischief
Though it be safe, can never be secure,
Or shall I ease my thoughts, and give it vent?
Yes; prick a full swollen bladder to relax it,
Or bore a hole 'ith bottom of the ship
To cool a Calenture? dull fool thy life
Is with thy fame concerned: besides the base
Rejection of thy Son (lodged deeply here)
He wrought the Senate to confer the charge
Of our late aid lent Savoy against France,
On rash Marino, so to blast thy merit,
Be confident, he that durst often venture
Taffront thee, meant to prosecute thy ruin;
And it is no greater hazard to attempt
Death, than disgrace, that makes his life contemptible:
On then, be bold and secret, Spinola,
So shalt thou reap the double benefit
Of safety and revenge: all wickedness
Is counted virtue, when 'tis prosperous;
Be not by any reconcilement led
To trust thy so, you are safe when he is dead.

HOw comes it, dear, that the clear sky, thy looks,
Is suddenly o're-cast? what misty vapour
Hath raised those stormy clouds? can bright Aurora
Rise cheerfully from shrivelled Tythons bed?
And thou so discontentedly from mine?
But I'll not doubt the cause to spring from me,
Rather from fear of young Prince Doria's safety,
Whose great affairs perhaps have made him stretch
His promise to the utmost, not to break it,
Though he could not prevent our expectation,
He'll not deceive't, but like th'approaching Sun,
Will soon expel these mists, and cheer our hearts.

I am solicitous, I must confess
Of his return, whom we have long expected,
To whom we have designed our only daughter,
And with her both our fortunes and our loves:
But the true cause of all these perturbations
Which you discover in my countenance,
Is a strange dream (heaven make it but a dream)
And I perhaps should but have thought it so,
Had not my daughter, even this very night,
And the same hour, as near as we can guess,
With the like vision been disquieted:
Me thought we harboured in our house a Wolf,
Bred up so tame, that all did handle him,
Which like a dog would fawn on them that beat him,
Till on a time, accompanied with another
Of his own race, he rush't into the chamber
Where I together with my Daughter sate,
There they resumed their native cruelty:
The one assaulted her, the other me,
And tearing first our Jewels from our necks,
They made us both at length their farall prey:

Oh, how the terror of that dreadful vision
Affrights my Soul! I tremble when I think on'c?
Me thought the heartstrings of Prince Doria crack'r
At the direnewes, it proved the overthrow
Of our whole Family: we differ but in this,
The Savadge executioners to me
Seemed to be Bears, creatures as bloody as wolves.

It is no wonder that your dreams concurred,
Since there is that relation in your blood:
I must believe, you had the day before
Communicated some sad thoughts together,
Which in the night your wakeful fantasies
From a like temperature of brain reduced
Into like forms, suggesting that for truth
Which is at best but fond imagination;
What can be vainer then a woman's dream?
It is less to be regarded then her tears,
Which are prepared to flow at her command.

Cassandra's true predictions were despised.

And well they might, had Troy bin provident.

Many at length deplore their unbeleife.

But more lament their rash credulity.

Future events by dreams have bin revealed.

So did old wisards doubtful things vnfould
By flights of birds, such witchcrafts now are seas'd,
And we from those dark errors are released:
To talk of visions is an indiscretion,
Practised by Children, and distempered persons:
Go then; prepare your selves for solid joys,
On this day the Republic yearly pays
A retribution to our Family,
And as I hear (the time being Carnivall)
Some mirth shall season our solemnity;
If Doria come to day, as we expect,
To morrow nothing shall be heard of us
But songs of Hymen and Thalassius.

Never could any wretches be more glad
To be deceived.

My heart continues sad.

O Wretched state of man, to whom the time:
By nature made for ease, is found unquiet;
Sleep, properly called rest, who can express
How restless it becomes through various dreams?
Which are so strongly formed by the fancy
That though they be most false, and when we wake
Should wholly vanish, yet even then they leave
A deep Impression in the troubled mind;
Nor doth this only happen to weak women,
But unto men of special eminence,
Working upon their hopes as well as fears,
Who many times to their confusion
Have by such drowsy errors bin seduced;
Hence did Amilcar venture to assault
Strong ^racuse deluded by a dream;
But though it be a folly beyond pardon
To venture life or fortune in pursuit
Of such a vanity, yet in all things
Abundant warines can never hurt:
My slave may not unfitlie be compared*
To a tame Wolf, or Bear, who may perchance
Resent his late sharpe castigation;
Him will I send to my own Galley, where
He shall be chained from mischief, and to me
Not prove unuseful, when the smallest boudt
May eas'ly be removed, who would omit it?
Let others lose themselves in laborinthes
Of hidden superstition, and believe
The air to be replenished with spirits,
Who by a natural and inherent virtue
Foreseeing things to come, and taking pity
Upon improvident man, reveal by visions
The dangers that approach, to th'end he may
By timely care prevent his misery;
I'll not depend on such intelligence
T'informe me whether Spinola hath buried*
Or only hid, his long continued malice,
I'll fetch my preservation nearer; hence,
That shall conserve this individual;
No man can suffer ill but from himself,
Fate only awes the slothful; wisdom bars
The powerful operation of the stars.

THose men that mischief do devise,
Had need to borrow Argus eyes
To look about; a poor slave may
By chance lie hid, and then betray.

Within the house they may suspect
That walls and beds may them detect,
And in the field they must provide,
That not a bush a spy may hide.

And albeit they shut the door,
Having well searched the house before,
Yet they may be betrayed; for proof,
Jove in a shower did pierce the roof.

Though in the field no tree, nor bush,
Nor bird be near, nor wind doth rush,
Yet undiscerned a fairy drab
Their whole discourse may hear and blab.

Then since that neither house, nor field,
To our black crumes can safety yield,
Let us be virtious, and not fear
What all the world can see or hear.

Our dreams are often found to be
Fruits of a wandering fantasy;
Yet many times they likewise are
Sure pledges of Celestial care.

Some men believe too much, and some
Conceive no truths by dreams can come;
It is a knowledge given to few
To find if they be false or true.

Then as it is a rash misprision
To count each idle dream a vision;
So it's an error at the least
To think all visions are quite ceased.

CAn no advice of friends? nor mine own reason
Hold me from strong pursuit of what I find
Can never be obtained? am I so stupid
After so many scorns not to desist?
An arrow shot sooner may be recal'd
Then her affection; th'Apenine, the Alps
Will eas'lier be removed then her Father:
Feed not thy self, fond fool, with desperate hopes:
But shall I, armed with powerful love, consult
With timorous discretion? the weak Child
Of feeble age? the towering Eagle may
More eas'ly be confined within high walls
Then that winged boy, that hovered over Chaos
Be tied to humane possibilities:
What transformations did the Antique Poets
Affirm to have bin wrought on men and Gods
By his sole deity? which Jove himself
His frequent sport had found; what guards, what spies,
He hath deceived and fore't; the fiery Bull,
The wakeful dragon, and g^az'd Argus witness.
Though she that's truly named Angelica
Should now abhor thy person; love can lend thee
The shape of him she loves; were she averse
From all mankind, if she like any thing
She may at length be brought to dote on thee:
But may I not be taxed of too much sloth?
Neglecting active industry, t'expect
To be assisted by such miracles?
I yet have only trod the beaten path
Of vowed service, friends good will, and Jointure;
The elder Brothers formal evidence:
I am so far from practising the art
Of spells and philters, I have quite omitted
Corruption of her confidents and servants:
I am too cheap a lover and too tame,
And hither to have taught her to deny
By easy asking; I must let her know
What I dare do: my Father is incensed
At my repulse, his old suppressed hate
Renews it self; he will rather condescend
To match me with a fury, then with her:
It will be wisdom to decline th'alliance
Of him thy Father counts his enemy:
It would be wretchedness to make thy love
Depend upon th'affections of another:
He never loved that can for any cause
Suspend his love: set then before thine eyes
Valiant Achilles, who acquired more honour
By constancy, even to his enemies Daughter,
In spite of th'opposition of his friends,
Then ere he did by Hectors overthrow,
Redeem the time Francisco, though't be short,
And let this one day satisfy the loss
Of weeks and months; her father keeps a slave
A cunning African, whose very soul
For money and hope of liberty i'll buy:
Him will I strait employ; love ne'er refuses
The basest instruments, if they be useful,
A drudge may find more corners in the house
Than ere the master knew; and may discover
A secret inlet to betray a City;
There will I now begin, he shall advise
Where I shall plant my golden batteries.

I Am with wonder stricken, not with fear,
At thy relation of this barbarous plot,
Contrived against my life, after faith given,
Of firm atonement: but the Leopards spots
Or staines of virgin honour may as soon
Be wiped away, as hatred that hath seizd
A cankered breast; this machination
Is so inhumane, that to lend it credit
Is a degree to inhumanity.

To give slow faith to such a horrid plot
Becomes a heart so full of piety;
But in this black design many presumptions
Unite themselves to fortify belief;
Nor is it to be thought, the wretch durst feine it
Giving so short a time to be disproov'd;
The heavens forbid your virtuous diffidence
Should lead you to the hazard: I must count
This blessed discovery a large recompense,
Of former ills fortune hath thrown on me:
For I am bold to hope, it will by you
Be graciously accepted, though I find
Some late unhappy errors have infore't
Your patience to inflict just punishment
On him that is your slave, and might expect
The restless misery of the painful ^are,
With all the wants that ever were susteyin'd
In a remorsles Galley; but your goodness
(In spite of fate that meant all this) is pleased
To give me shelter under your own roof,
And to the emulation of my fellows
To grant the favour of your household service;
A bondage which I truly may prefer
Above the common peoples liberty:
These are the benifites, that invite my soul
To meditate your preservation,
Which ere I cease to do, Tyber and Poe
Shall quite abandon fruitful Italy,
And wash the Arabian sands; though I am rude,
I must abhor churlish ingratitude.

Fortune and thy integrity have found
A weighty occasion to confirm and fix thee
With roots of adamant, in my good opinion:
Nor doth it happen often to a servant
T'injoy the happy means t'account himself
The Saviour of his master: Kings are borne
More frequently, then such examples found:
But if to this unavlu'd benefit
Thy pregnant industry can add a second,
The mischief to divert upon himself
Thou having saved me now, shall crown me then.

Great sir, you owe the thanks of what's yet don
To chance alone; I am ambitious
Of something that might merit, if at least
The diligence and industry of one
Of my condition, may deserve that title.

It may, it may; great merit is in story
Ascribed sometimes to bondmen; all our souls
Are free and equal, thence our merits flow:
Why should the person vilify the work,
And not the work rather ennoble him?
It is the benefit we look upon,
And not the givers mean condition.

I have a ripe design that shall both give
Assurance of the truth of what I brought
And power the vengeance on your enemy;
Nor can it ever be discovered
To hurt your fame; it shall amaze the actor
And shall be speedy too; things of long time
Are ever doubtful, lost in expectation,
Propounded usuallie for private ends,
Gained by degrees; an acceptable deed
Hath double welcome when it is don with speed.

Noble Molosso, such thy virtues make thee,
Proceed with Courage in thy enterprise,
Which i'll not press to know* till the event,
But by implicit trust freely declare
What confidence I mean to place in thee;
And take from me this just encouragement
To rest assured, thy service hath not met
With an ungrateful master: I shall never
Forgive my late credulity, that meant
To have added to his former punishment.

HE's now made sure, I must with speed find out
Young Spinola, and speak with Sango too,
Behold'um both together, 'twill succeed;

See where Molosso comes, sir.

O it is he.
How is't Moloss? thy face hath business in it
I would thou were at lea^ure.

My toiled body
Will not admit a cheerful countenance;
But I can throw of care if you command.

Would thou embrace redemption?

Ask me whether
I would not wish some shade if I were broiled
Upon the Lybian Sands, where Cancer reigns:
But Sir if I mistake not, you sustain
A greater servitude, yet seek not freedom.

Thou would persuade me to shake off Loves fetters.

Rather to change them into chains of gold,
To wealth and ornament; it may be done
Without your Chemical projection.

Thou should not stand in need of that t'inrich thee,
Could this b'effected.

Sir, I have no art,
Nor leisure to discourse, but I have heard
There is by fare an opportunity
Allotted every man, to make him rich
And happy too, provided he take hold,
And I am confident that's offered you.

What? to enjoy divine Angelica?
No treasure else can make me rich or happy.

When she is brought into your own possession,
You can but blame your self, if she depart.

I shall destroy my self if then she escape,
But how? prithee convey thy joyful news
Into me by a reverend secrecy,
That I may be all ear, while thou art whispering.

What plot should this be now? I long to know,
Molosso doubts some accident may happen
Upon his Masters death, and wisely seeks
To gain a friend, under whose safe protection
He may be sheltered from a sudden storm;
I have an equal share in the success
Of his designs; his preservation's mine,
And therefore need not be inquisitive,
The assured fate of his obdurate Lord
May make that good he promises; the daughter,
If once the Father were removed* perhaps
Would entertain new thoughts, me thinks she should
Be sensible of Dorias neglects:
Who can condemn this young mans hot desire?
Were I as free, as noble as himself,
I should most willingly become her slave,
And I do hate my forced condition
For no one ill so much, as that it brings
Despair of such transcendent happiness

I'm ravished with it, 'tis the sprightful child
Of thine own brain, and will not brook delay.

That's true: I'll see that all things be prepared:
If the least wheel be out of frame, the watch
Is altogether useless.

Wind it up,
That I may observe each minute of the time
That is the Crysis of my life or death:
First take a taste of my ensuing bounty,
It may relieve thee, should we be discovered:
If by this plot my present hopes succeed,
All future Lovers shall thy story read.

I See thou hast a golden plot in hand,
Thou must impart.

Half this is due to thee
By our established law of equal fortunes.

I would I might share with Francisco too*

That riddle quickly will unfold it self:
But Sango, I'm glad I met thee, I was forced
For some important reasons to reveal
(...) weighty secret to my Patron. San. how?

I was compelled to do it.

What? to disclose it?
And unto him? is this your dumb mans virtue?
Can thou so soon forget thine own vile wrongs?
Hath the dull air of Europe chilled thy blood?
For thy sole cause I hardly could contain
My present joy in the discovery,
Though death stood gaping for me while I heard it,
And would thou cowardly betray thy fortune?

My obligation to my stars and thee,
Their Mercury, can never be expressed;
Which I have husbanded to my advantage.
It is the ground from whence I'll take my rise,
To leap, and fall like dreadful thunder on him;
It is not vengeance, but soft piety
To wish a foes death, when he's fit to dye,
To let him live, and feel himself so wretched,
That he shall seek and sue for absent death,
Is a revenge becomes me, and I'll have it;
Thou know my Patrons former trust was changed
Into a sudden jealousy, which sprang
From consciousnesse of his base injuries;
This hath removed that doubt, and set me right
In his lost good opinion, which I mean
Still to confirm by my strict diligence,
Till time and opportunity shall show
How far this petty-mischiefe I'll out-goe.

Now are thy thoughts full plumed, it pleases me
To see thee mount, not flag in thy revenge:
I must confess, I love a present mischief,
But, if it may conduce to thy brave ends,
To make a feyn'd retreat, and then return
With greater violence; I must consent,
And when you are ready for thy great assault,
But, this, and I shall join; in the mean time
Let nothing be discovered to my Patron;
If that be, death's the best I can expect.

Rest thou secure, and to express my thanks,
It shall not be the least part of my plot,
To give thee means to gain the full fruition
Of her that Genua so admires and strives for.

Can there be hope of such a happiness?

I, and a good assurance of success.

I shall embraced with all the circumstance
Of danger, that bold treason undergoes,
Or what accompanies forbidden love
In the most jealous climes: I should desire
In the fruition of such bliss t'expire.

Stoutly resolved, come, let us lay our ground,
We shall build sure, when our foundation's sound.

Under a homely habit many times,
Virtue lies hid; this rustic weed conceals
An Engine that can frustrate providence:
When I attempt the death of any man,
No town of Garrison, not his own house,
Nor any place of sanctuary can save him:
Nor doth my praise consist in this alone,
That I command the life of whom I list;
A desperate wretch may claim that privilege:
He that is weary of his own, may be
Lord of another life; but such attempts
Hatched only by a frenzy, seldom prosper:
My actions are the fruits of a bold spirit,
Tempered with judgement, done with secrecy:
Hence is our brave profession found to be
Of special use to awe the insolent,
And secure those that seek to live in peace.
What satisfaction is it to a man
That receives wrong, to call his enemy forth,
And then expose himself to equal hazard?
Or in strict Commonwealths t'appeale to law,
As if a feyn'd submission in set words
Could cure the piercing sting of injury;
No, 'tis assurance of a close revenge
That plants civility, deters and keeps men
From giving, and from suffering affronts;
This benefit we bring to every man,
Yes, and the public States of Italy,
How ere they censure our particular actions,
Receive no small security from us;
Treason would hardly find just punishment
Within their narrow territories, if we
Should not, like eager hounds, pursue the traitors,
And make them know, that in another Country
The justice of their own can overtake them;
Let then the sloathfull tax us, that our ends
Are not the public good, but private gain,
Which we prefer above mankind; this is
But what's objected to the soldier; he
Will fight against his brother for reward,
Men ought to follow their vocation;
The fountain of our livelihood is profit,
Without which, honour challenging the skill
To nourish arts, cannot provide us clothes,
Nor virtue, noys'd to be the greatest good,
Procure us bread. Nor yet is our profession
More cruel then the gravest; I have heard
Of Lawyers, that are privileged to cut
Their clients throats, with a perplexed Indenture,
A parchment Saw. The learned Physician
Following the long and beneficial way
Of reverend Galen, by degrees will purge
The humours of his Patient, till he leaves
Nothing but bo^es for death, and hungry worms
To gnaw upon; as for his pliant skin,
That, while he lives, by pieces is pulled off,
Till he be wholly fleaed: the Usurer,
I'st not his use to bind men first in bonds,
And bring them then to execution,
Extending both their bodies and their lands
Upon a rack; we are more pitiful,
And by an unexpected way dispatch
Quicker then lightning, or a cunning heads-man,
For all the ill of death is apprehension;
How's Imperiale wronged? if when he hath
But newly said his prayers, I release him
From the ensuing miseries of age;
And when that work's performed, my charity
May do as much for Spinola himself,
Provided I be offered like conditions:
My hand of justice is not partial.
But soft, this pleasing contemplation
May make my omit the time of action,
Which now draws near; my plot is so contrived,
That being pursued with resolution,
It cannot want success; our best designs
Are often crossed, when through a fond remorse
We change our counsels: few have learned the skill
To be or wholly good, or wholly ill.

FOnd youth to hope, where no hope is,
And to be brought to place thy trust
On him, that makes deceit his bliss,
And counts it folly to be just:
Go wash an Ethiop white, and find
Faith harboured in a slavish mind.

Love wanting eyes, makes all men blind,
That to his power submit their wills;
No counsel can acceptance find,
But such as their own lust fulfils.
To be in love, and to be wise,
Apollo to himself denies.

When he that hath received harm,
Requites it with pretended love,
We must believe 'tis but a charm,
Quick-ey'd suspicion to remove.
Some may do good for good, few will
Be brought to render good for ill.

Is it not strange to find a Trade?
Will act what our Revenge devises?
To see such formal bargains made
To kill, or wound at several prises?
At which those public States connive
That do by private faction thrive.

But though some do commit these crimes,
Yet let not us believe we may,
Only cry out against the times,
And be our selves as bad as they:
But let our virtuous deeds prevent
Both theirs, and our own punishment.

ALthough my father hath resolved all doubts*
My reason could object; yet still I feel
A chilling vapor hover in my breast,
Which many times breaks forth in sudden sighs,
For which I can assign no other cause
Than that the world cannot affoord a Joy
Vnmixt with real or supposed sorrow;
Hence is it that most Brides are found to weep,
Yet know not why upon their wedding day.

Such follies are too common, I confess,
But should I have the happiness to see
Young Hymen in his yellow socks my guest,
I'd entertain him with no other tears
Than such as from pressed grapes in Autumn flow,
Werewith his drowsy head and withered garland
I would bedew; till to his twinkling eyes
Each tapour should present a double light,
While waggish Boys should with their wanton Songs:
Prepare our thoughts to our ensuing pleasures.

Fie, fie, Nugolla, no laciviousnes
Can ere become solemnities, that must
Create us Matrons; there is cause to fear
Their chastity, that unchafte songs can hear.

It is a shame to lend our ears to that
We are allowed to do?

Yes many things
Are lawful, and yet shameful to be don
Or spoken publicly.

A woman may
Be free in outward Gesture, yet preserve
An inward chastity; and I know many
Both rich and Noble Ladies so disposed.

It is not the glittering canopy of greatness,
But th'humble veil of modesty must guard
A woman's fame; which being once thrown off
Leaves her exposed to every bold assault.

But when she's found impregnable, twi'll stop
Their vain attempts.

A fort cannot be thought
Impregnable, that offers frequent parleys.

Yet that (as I have heard) is often don
To gain advantage and delude the foe.

Can it beseem a Virgin or a Wife
To play with all the allurements of desire;
And think her honour's safe, if she abstain
From the bare act, the duller part of lust.

They do but imitate those Chariot drivers
That you were wont to read of, whose praise was
To come as near as might be, and not touch;
Love hath ordainedby an antique law
Newly revived, that every place and room
In Venus palace, be allowed for sport,
Except her cabinet, that, must not be
Opened nor touched, at least not willingly.

Thou wilt be waggish still, But hark who knocks?
This wench that never felt the fire of love
Thinks like a wanton Child, it may be plaid with,
But she will one day find it far more raging
Than that which fierce Medaea did convey
Into Creusas robe: how now? who is't?

A stranger, with a letter, which he says
He must present to your own hand.

Admit him;
If it be from my Doria, I fear
Some unexpected accident, wherein
His honour is concerned, retards his coming;
But I must likewise arm my self for wiles:
Such love as ours, cannot want envious plots.

I Shall not be discovered by my voice,
Italian Virgins are at distance woed,
And more by fame, then verbal courtship won:
This speaks my errand, leaves no circumstance
To be related by the messenger;
See how her blood retires, to aid her heart,
So looks bright Phoebe, when Thessalian charms
Strike her with fear, or th'early Rose, whose beauty
Nipped by a later frost, appears like snow:
Now it returns, and settles in her cheeks,
As if the news took no impression:
Such orient beams when youthful day returns,
By the bedewed Shepherd are beheld.

I may suppose you, sir, not ignorant
Of what you bring; and may believe y'have heard
Some thing of young Prince Doria and me.

Lady, I have; fame with her silver trumpet
Hath blazed your constant loves.

And are you not
Strangely amaz'ed to see me read these lines
Without a shower of tears?

If they relate
Any disaster, you then imitate
Those ancient Worthies, that had bravely learned
To conquer passion at the first assault.

You think young women very impatient
To have their joys deferred: my Lady's wise
To bear it thus, so long as he is safe.

He's dead, Nugella; the great. General
Writes me, that he having the sole command
Of an important place, forsook the same,
And in his swift retreat, received a shot
In the hinder part of's head.

O doleful accident!

Can thou be so ungrateful to my Doria,
To lend it such a serious belief
As may deserve a tear?

I would I durst
Suspect what comes so to our woe confirmed.

Were it confirmed by the unerring seal
Of this wise State, it should not merit faith.

Alas, he was not to be thought immortal.

But was he not to be acknowledged valiant?
That attribute his foes did not deny him:
Had these contrived lines contained but this,
Brave Doria's slain, a torrent, hence, had gushed,
That like Alpheus, had through earth and sea
Wandered unmixed, till in the gulf of death,
It should have lost it self in seeking him.
But when I find impossibilities
Basely obtruded, my true love disdains
To lend belief to any circumstance.
Mars could as soon be frighted from his sphere,
As he from any charge he undertook:
'Tis a malicious scandal; and although
My nature even abhors to use a stranger
With any incivility, yet I'm forced
To tax the bearer with this wild imposture.

By great Saint George, the Patron of this State,
Doria himself is not more innocent.

That name is sacred, let me then conjure thee
To answer truly but to this one question.

I shall.

Was there before you left the Army.
Any report of this sad news you brought?

I dare not say there was.

The Palace cracks
When such a pillar falls, the General
One of those many which my fortune wood,
Envious that Doria gained both that and me:
And knowing well, that valour always i^
The special object of a noble love,
Attempted thus to shake my constancy:
But if the fates should prove so cruel to me,
To make me survive him; this is my vow,
To stand for ever like sad Niobe,
A weeping statue to his memory.

Never did such a virtuous courage reft
In the calm harbour of a Virgins breast.

AS the fly Fowler, having over night,
Set cunningly his artificial net,
Early returns, with an assured hope
To find the foul insnar'd, so are my thoughts
Wholly possessed with present expectation
Of the glad news of my successful plot;
The managing whereof, I never can
Within my self sufficiently applaud:
I have not like rash Piso, foolishly
Dispers't my trust, nor like the sons of Brutus,
Disclosed my secret, where a servant might
Discover, and betray; my wariness
In a safe garden whispered my design,
And but to one, that if it should miscarry,
And he through fear or punishment confess,
Yet I am sure to have but one accuser,
Whose testimony my power and bold denial
Would easily convince; but these mistrusts
Are altogether needless: I may be
As confident as those Sicilians,
Who when their chief confederate was surprised,
So much relied upon his resolution,
As that not any one of them would fly,
And so conceal their bold conspiracy.
Behold my kinsmen bringing joyful news.

OH that I were snatched up into the sky!
And there transformed into a cloud, that so
I might dissolve into a shower of tears.

Can the day see such mischief, and be seen?
And not make haste to shroud his guilty head
Under the gloomy Canopy of night?

What earthquake? what prodigious spectacle
Hath struck you both with horror?

Oh he's dead!

Why should that so amaze or you? or me?
Since death must be the lot of every man.

Alas your son.

How does it concern him?

Great sir, your dear and only son is slain.

How's this?

He's murdered sacrilegiously,
Even in the Temple-porch, he was disguised,
And thought of all to have bin Imperiale.

I am undone.

The desperate actor was
Clad in a country habit, and it seems,
Mistook the person; when he saw his face,
He tore his viperous hair; the Judge was present,
Who gave command to bring him instantly,
To receive speedy judgement,

Over-reach't?
In my own plot? the sword of my revenge
Turned on my self? and drowned in mine own bowels?
I am betrayed, yet cannot suspect how;
It could not be by any mortal subtilty,
It was some devil lurking in the air;
How shall I be revenged? O that he would
Assume a humane body, that I might
Encounter him! but I have found the way,
I'll study the black art, turn Conjurer,
And then impose a labour on them all,
Worse then Ixion, or the Belides
Are said to undergo.

We have done ill,
To rush upon him with such violence;
The sudden grief hath half distracted him;
We'll strive to temper it with better hopes,
Things may not be so bad as our affections
Have made us fear; Francisco Spinola
Was often named.

But neither of us both
Can say we saw him dead.

Nay then I see
You're villains hired, suborned to undermine me.
First you confound me with your horrid news,
And then confess ye may be both mistaken:
But I am armed with patience, if Imperial
Retaining still his late abjured malice,
Hath by some hellish art contrived this mischief,
I may in just resentment of my wrongs,
Implore heavens vengeance, on his perjured head,
And this is all you're like to screw from me.

Let not your troubled thoughts make you doubt us,
Who for his life would sacrifice our own.

I will devise a stratagem, shall need
No other hand but this, which I'll conceal
From my own self, till th'instant time of action;
For if I should disclose it in a place
Where there are trees, or flowers, I am betrayed:
I would not breathe it forth, unless it were
After a dreadful thunder, that had purged
The air, and frighted thence those subtle spies,
That to our foes by night betray our plots.

You have a faithful friend, to whom you may
Safely power out the secrets of your heart,
The wise Iustinian.

Oh that name is like
A precious balm to cure the wounds of fortune!

Please you retire, I'll bring him presently.

No wild rebellion of my passions can
Make me neglect the friendship of that man.

NOw you may see, sir, you were not abused
In our discovery, and I hope you find
My undertakings and your trust made good;

The Sun at noone is not more clearly seen;
But may it not breed a suspicion
That he was clad like me?

Why sir you know
That it is now the time of Carnivall,
When every man takes what disguise he pleases.

But I much wonder how he was persuaded
To put himself so soon into my habit.

I brought him to a strong belief, that he
By that device and my assistance should
Convey away your daughter.

I intended
The Father should be punish't, not the son.

By this your vengeance is more exquisite;
Make your account that with the son y' have thrust
The father through, who having found himself
Ore-reach't by you, or by his own just fare,
In such a counterplot must needs at length
Become his own dire executioner:
In the mean time his life is worse then death.

True, true, death is the end of misery:
To die 's not wretched, but to live wretchedly,
Vengeance is mere compassion when we kill,
I feel a joy beyond expression;
There is no pleasure like to sweet revenge;
But I desire things should be carried so
That I be still reputed innocent.

That's my sole care, the Brave in th'act was taken,
And by commandment of the present Judge,
Is brought already to receive his trial.

Thou shalt do well to harken a aloof off,
I'll take no notice but in general,
And will proceed in our intended mirth.

By all means sir.

We must at this time shun
Unusual privacy; keep thou thy distance,
But know, that both my life and fortunes are
Most willingly committed to thy care.

SInce it hath bin the custom of this state
To place a stranger on this high Tribunal
Ordayning a professor of the Laws,
As his assistant (being the place you hold)
It is our duty to discharge that trust
With all integrity, and not to look
Upon men's persons, but to weigh their crimes
In equal balance, to which purpose now
Although a strange and horrid sacrilege
Ha's called us hither in unusual haste;
Yet it must be our chief care to proceed
With due deliberation; otherwise
Though just our sentence be, we are unjust.

I have for some years had the happiness
To be a witness of your constant session,
In all which time I have not heard a sentence
Pronounced by you that envy could pervert.

We must not think we deserve praise for that
Which to neglect would merit punishment.

But yet there are degrees of good and ill,
Wherein the actor takes a liberty.

Yet where the law prescribes a certain rule
A just Judge cannot challenge liberty:
But let us now pursue the work in hand,
Where is the prisoner?

Here.

Let him draw near.

His name?

He calls himself Virdugo, sir.

Then know, Virdugo, though thy heinous fact
Be evident, yet the Justice of this state
Grants thee free leave to answer for thy self.

I thank the state for their set complement.

Bring forth the witnesses that he may see them.

They are both here an't please your excellence.

Have they bin sworn?

Yes both sir, before me.

Then, by the oath you took, declare the truth
Of what you know concerning this delinquent,
Begin you first.

About some three hours since
Being in the Domo, I espi'd this man
At his first entrance, and although I never
To my remembrance saw his face before,
Yet instantly I found a strange mislike
Of his aspect, which did increase the more,
Because I saw him often fix his eyes
On him he slew, whom I conceived to be
Signior Imperiale, I revealed my thoughts
To this young man who then stood next me, who
Concurring with me, did resolve as I
To watch him narrowly; we both agreed
To keep on either side of him, at length
In midst of all the crowd, raising his arm
To fetch his blow, he hit me with his elbow,
At which I suddenly laid hold on him,
Supposing he had snatched at some mans purse,
But then I saw drop from his hand the sheath
Of that dire weapon, he had newly buried
In the warm bowels of that Gentleman.

Most part of this I aver, I stood so near him
That I perceived the motion of his arm,
And looking down, spied blood upon his hand.

The Canker take your Physiognomy
That made you try conclusions upon me.

There cannot be more clear and pregnant proof,
What have you to allege in your defence?

He hath confessed the fact.

Hath he confessed
Who set him on? whether he meant to kill
Signior Imperiale, or young Spinola?

The one had done me wrong, but destiny
Made the other take a Carnivall disguise
Somewhat too soon.

Such recreations
Though in themselves they be in different,
Yet in a sacred Temple they are profane,
And draw down vengeance.

Had there bin but hope
To have enervated their testimony:
The rack, nor the Strapado, no nor yet
The subtler torment both of fire and water
Should have enforced me to the least confession:
But 'tis my fate, and therefore let me hear
My passing bell, my doom quickly pronounced;
For 't were ridiculous to expect favour,
Since your integrity (as you confessed)
May not show any, where the law condemns.

Dare thou deride the Judge?

Let him alone,
He hath no sense of his own misery,
His boldness moves not me, I shall proceed
With the unchanged countenance of Law,
And with a voice not furious, but severe;
When I condemn a guilty man, 'tis done,
As if I struck a Serpent, not with passion.

His wicked acts have hardened him, he came
No novice to this cruel enterprise.
In Venice he climbing a Ladder, shot
Through the glass window a Clarissimo
Sitting at supper, flew a Count of Naples
In his own garden, having first observed
A place where he might scale the wall to escape;
And that his wants may not obtrude the guilt
Upon his fortune, he but lately ravished
A young and Noble Virgin in Siena,
The only daughter of Petruccio.

Can that be thought to be a great offence?

The harmless man thinks it no great offence,
With hot and beastly lust to vitiate
A Damsel, at the most but ten years old.

Believe it, I have found um good at eight;
Why there are many like Quartella, sir,
Remember not that they were ever maids.

He takes delight not only in the act,
But in the infamy of wickedness;
But I will rid the world of such a monster;
And therefore now, Verdugo, I pronounce,
Because th'hast heaped up crimes, and drunk in vice,
Which is dispersed into every limb,
Thy body shall be laid upon a wheel,
And limb by limb be broken, till thou die;
Nor shalt thou then find any other grave,
Then the black mawes of Vultures, and remain
In the mean time a spectacle to men:
This sentence justice hath declared by me.

Sir?

Not to be revok't, take him away,
And early in the morning see it be done.

I'll bear it manfully, although I feel
Ixion*like the torment of the wheel,

Such malefactors in a State are like
To putrified members in mans body,
Which like a skilful Surgeon, law finds best
To cut off quite, lest they infect the rest.

LOve built on virtue, cannot be
Led by a rash credulity,
To entertain reports that tend
To the dishonour of a friend.
True love is confident, a doubt
That slakes loves fire will put out.

As they whose tongues are used to err
Are not believed, when they aver
That which is true, so when we know
A story false in part, we grow
Jealous of all; if truth once touch
On falsehood, it is rendered such.

When men in their revengeful hate
Do study others ruins, Fate
Acts Justice part, to let them see
They plotted their own misery.
'Tis just that they themselves should find,
What they to others have designed.

But how are these amazed, when they
Being about to seize their prey,
Find themselves caught, yet do not know
From whence they did receive the blow:
Like him that hid his gold in hope
To keep it safe, but found a rope.

Though they could blind and bribe the law,
And keep all witnesses in awe
By their great power, though they could make
By cunning the whole Stake mistake:
Yet can they be so void of sense,
To think to cozen Providence?

If mischiefe-workers would but bend
Their guilty thoughts, to weigh the end
Of their ill deeds, they would confess,
No safety found in wickedness.
How can those crimes that heaven doth see
And so abhor, unpunish't be?

Believe it sir, he has all the signs of frenzy,
His inflamed blood boils in his swelling veins,
His eyes appear like fire, his colour changes,
He grates his teeth, and falters in his speech;
Sometimes he folds his arms, and deeply sighs,
Then strikes his angry foot againnst the ground.

Doth he continue in such violence
As at the first?

Yes sir, by fits; sometimes
A stupid silence seizes him, and then
He breaks again into his former rage.

These are, I must confess, the noted symptoms
Of a hurt fancy; he's of a high spirit
Apt to resent a wrong (if it could be)
From fate it self; but, where he takes, a friend,
On whom a man may build, as on a rock.

True sir, his rising passions at your name,
Like a tumultuous multitude, at sight
Of a grave Judge, were for the time appeased;
See where he comes, I pray observe, he vents
His passions often in poetic rage.

Ye Furies, active ministers of hell,
That have your heads environed with Snakes,
And in your cruel hands be are fiery scourges,
Lend me your bloody torches to find out,
And punish th'author of my dear son murder,
Assist Megaera with a new revenge,
Such as even thou would fear to execute:
Let a vast sea of blood o're-flow his house,
And never ebb till I shall pity him;
Ease now the infernal ghosts, remove the stone
From the Attic thief, and lay it on his shoulders,
Let the swift stream deceive his endless thirst,
And let his hands wind the unquiet wheel,
That hourly tortures the Thessalian King:
Let Vultures tire upon his growing Liver,
But let'um ne'er be tired; and fince there is
One of the fifty Danaan sisters wanting,
Let them admit that man into her room,
And with their Pitchers only load his arms;
How am Isure 'tis he? or if it be?
It is the law of Retribution,
And is but just, my conscience tells me so:
Hence childish conscience, shall I live his scorn?
And the whole Cities Pasquill? I abhor it,
Were he protected by the thunderer,
I'd snatch him from his bosom, and in spite
Of his revengeful thunder, throw him quick
Into the throat of the infernal dog;
Or if that monster be not yet releast,
Since great Alcides dragged him in a chain,
Through the amazed towns of Greece, Enceladus
That with his earth-bred flames affrights heaven,
Rather then he shall escape, shall fire the world:
But I delay, and wear away the time
With empty words, why do I call for Furies?
That bear in mine own breast a greater fury
Then Acheron and night did ever hatch;
I'll dart my self like winged lightning on him;
Have I no friend?

Yes, one that dares assist you
In a more valiant act, to crush that Fury,
And to restore brave Spinola to himself.

O faithful soul, my dear Francisco's murdered.

A heavy fate, yet such as should be borne
Without so strange a tumult, what you give
T'unbridled rage, you take from your revenge.

Wilt thou allow me to take vengeance, speak,
But speak Iustinian with thy wonted faith.

Yes, such as law and Justice shall allow.

I have no skill in Law, and as for Justice,
Your learned Stoickes make it but a fool,
A very animal.

'Tis now not seasonable
To tell you whether Justice, Fortitude,
And the other virtues may be called creatures;
But I must tell you, that no creature can
Be happy, wanting them; whereof that man
Deprives himself, that subjugates his reason,
On which they all depend, to brutish passion;
Could you but be persuaded to reflect
Upon your self, to see as in a glass,
What a deformity this vice hath brought
Upon your soul, although you hated me,
You would embrace my counsel.

Dear Iustinian,
Fortune hath nothing left that's worth my hope,
But thy affection; at thy sole command,
I would attempt to swim the mid-land sea,
When Aeolus and Neptune are at wars,
Expose my self to the fierce Dragons jaws,
Enraged by the theft of Hercules;
At thy command I'll live; hark, hark, what's that?
It is the voice of my dead son, that calls
For vengeance; see, see where he stands and points
At his still-bleeding wound; he bids me think
What he had done ere now, had we changed fates;
Did you not see him?

No, nor you your self,
'Twas nothing but a strong impression made
In your disturbed imagination.

Could both mine eyes and ears be so deceived.

That happens often to perplexed minds.

Alas, what shall I do?

Let me persuade you
But to retire, perhaps some mild repose
May softly steal upon your troubled spirits,
To give you ease.

If you will have it so,
My passions in my breast shall silence keep,
I'll be as tame, as (what you wish me) sleep.

Wait on him in, I'll follow presently.

THe unexpected death of his dear son,
So wounds his soul, that his distracted fancy
Suggests belief, he saw and hard him speak,
But that cannot seem strange, if we consider
How far imagination doth usurp
Upon the power of Reason, though it be
A faculty coincident to Bruites,
Receiving objects from the common sense;
But these his perturbations I suspect
To flow from mixed affections, grief, and anger,
The last of which, sinks deepest in the hearts
Of most of us Italians, and I doubt
That he thereby having involved himself
In that, which is our Nations crime, Revenge;
Hath bin by the other faction undermined:
If this be, his disease is curable,
Yet so, as every virtuous man must think
The remedy as bad as the disease,
Unless strict Justice do become th'avenger,
Or that their own sad fates appease his rage;
O how it wounds my heart to see my friend
And one that truly merits that name
But for that vice, whereof not to be guilty
Is made a vice here, by the Tyrant custom)
Plunged in distress, that cannot receive counsel:
But could he once with safety be restored
To his own native ingenuity,
He would detest such crimes; his candid soul
Appears in this, that in the midst of fury,
The sight or name of him he loved before
Can Orpheus-like calm his enraged spirit:
I therefore am obliged by sacred friendship
Even to devote my self to all just means
Of his recovery, and I will perform it,
To cure Orestes (If the Heavens so please)
There shall not want a faithful Pylades.

ARe all things ready.

Yes sir.

Noble friends,
Your presence gives addition to the honour
Which some young Gentlemen are pleased to do me
In the free presentation of their mirth
Most seasonable in time of Carnivall,
And fit to celebrate this joyful feast
Which we may challenge as our holy-day.

The honour of this day chiefly belongs
To you and to your family, but yet
The benefit redounds to the whole State,
Which every year is thankfully acknowledged.

The State, by such acknowledgement invites
All generous spirits beyond common duty
To venture life and fortune for her safety.

This common wealth that makes them truly happy
That share the blessings of her government
Disdains not, like a tyranny, to owe
A benefit to subjects; nor rewards
With banishment, in stead of Baize, their merit:
But hark, music proclaims the maskers coming,
Be pleased to take your places, there are seats.

I must crave leave to place your daughter, sir,
She that is once betrothed is a Bride.

'Twere incivility in her, or us,
If you request it, not to be uncivil,
Sit down Angelica.

Sit down, sit down,
Our friends desires are in our house, commands.

For Thalassius, for Thalassius.

Though custom challenges a liberty
To take our wives and daughters forth to tread
A measure without scandal, yet t'embrace,
And whisper too, requires a better warrant
Then carnivall permission, it implies
Domestic privilege, or an affornt.

For Thalassius, for Thalassius.

That voice was frequent at a public rape,
But sacred hospitality forbids
All jealousy of any ill intent.

Not, as the Romans when they had betrayed
The Sabine Virgins, do my glad friends make
These acclamations of Thalassius,
But rather as a more auspicious name
Then that of drowsy and lascivious Hymen;
Behold the late Ambassador himself
Thus contradicts his own seyn'd embasie.

My Doria!

O perfect happiness!

See how Prince Doria hath surprised us all,
Transformed into a nuptial Deity.

My doubt is in the better sense resolved:
You may perceive you're welcome by the joy
Expressed both by my daughter, and my wife,
In no dry complement, but in a moist
And silent Oratory.

Which works more
On my affections, then a golden tongue;
But tell me my divine Angelica,
How could thou at the tidings of my death,
Put on a valiant incredulity?
And when thou find me safe burst out in tears.

To lend belief to any ill report
Of a known friend, although averred with boldness,
In common friendship were unpardonable,
Much more in such a love as mine, which finding
In a mayne part a manifest untruth
Was for your honour bound to slight the rest:
And though there be a contrariety
In the true causes of our joy and grief,
Yet both are often times expressed with tears,

I could not entertain nor then nor now,
The least suspicion of thy constancy,
But truest love delights to please it self
With such disguises, and to find by trials
Our own assurance many ways confirmed:
Nor had I ventured to disturb thy thoughts,
Which thy discerning judgement did prevent,
But that I had a present remedy.

I might have safely tasted what the Mede,
Or the fierce Parthian dips his arrows in,
So long as there was such an antidote.

Were I left helpless by Machaons art,
Thy presence hath a virtue would restore me,
Pandora on whom each Deity bestowed
A several gift, was not endowed like thee.

So soon at strife? if you will needs contend
Who will love best, I'll put you both together.

He whose ambition made him weep and sweat
Within the narrow limits of one world,
Did never thirst so much for fame and glory,
As I for that encounter, in which combat,
Whether I vanquish, or am vanquished,
I shall not envy Pompey or Caesars triumphs:
In the mean time I'll crave an hour or two
For preparation of some necessaries,
Whereof my absence makes me destitute.

Troth my occasions have the like request,
And therefore if this noble company
Will honour us to morrow with their presence,
We shall endeavour to requite their loves.

Most willingly.

And at your nuptial feast,
We'll wish that every grace may be your guest.

I'll soon return, my heart with thee shall stay
As a sure pawn.

You carry mine away.

You have some business too must be dispatcht,
Go, loose no time; Molosso come thou hither,
I leave thee in my absence to take care,
That supper be prepared, and tell the Steward
That great revenue, parsimony, now
Must be by us neglected: thriving men
In charges that come seldom, are profuse.

I Shall sir, yes, by that time you return,
You shall confess you have a skilful Cater:
Why should proud greatness undervalue us,
And our condition? since all men are slaves;
If we survey the greatest monarchies,
What art their Courtiers else? with all the suits
They either beg or wear? the rich Banquier
Enthrals his debtor, and his money him:
This Captain is a captive to that wench;
This Magistrate to bribes; that Lord to pride,
This Statesman to ambition; all to fear:
From whence we only that have nought to loose,
Are free, and that shall instantly appear;
I'll send the servants forth, that Sango and I
May act our part with more security.
See how the fates themselves have helped to bring
The Beast into my toil, and made both him
And his whole house the subject of my vengeance,
My joy is such, I cannot temper it:
As when the bloud-hound in a leash being led,
Noseth the ground, and while the prey's far off,
Spares both his mouth and feet, but drawing near,
Will open wide, and drag away his leader,
So are my thoughts transported, I'll away,
My fury calls for blood, and I obey.

Undoubted friendship having made
A strong impression in the mind,
Though wild distempers do invade
Our reason can their fury bind.
Love in distracted thoughts may bear
As great a sway as servile fear.

He whose strong passions are his foes,
Is happy in a faithful friend,
That will assist him to compose
Those strifes that to his ruin tend.
A true friend wishes not a cause,
But when there's need, he ne'er withdraws.

A Lover with no ill intent,
Will Proteus -like, new forms devise,
He feynes to be on errands sent,
And then himself he will disguise
Like to a god, Love loves to stray,
And seldom keeps the beaten way.

But now the fatal time draws near,
Wherein the error and the offence
Of Imperiale will appear,
To trust the slave he did incense,
And to encourage him to act
What he once thought a heinous fact.

But may there not be some excuse?
At least to mitigate his fault?
That he could not expect a truce,
And that he found his own life sought:
It hath bin counted Justice still,
Rather then to be killed, to kill.

There's no excuse can purge the guilt
That murder brings; we must not take
Our own revenge, blood by us spilt,
Will our whole off-spring guilty make:
Then let's not blame heavens justice, when
Great plagues do light on virtuous men.

VVEe see there is small hope that gentle sleep
Can find admittance to his troubled thoughts,
While rage distracts them; he's no sooner laid
To rest upon his couch, but up he starts.

The wise Iustinian means this night to bring
Some curious music, that may rock his senses
Into a slumber by sweet harmony,
Working on his affections, we are all
Eternally obliged to that good man;
Who though he be with hearty sorrow moved
To see his friend in such necessity,
Even of his help, yet is resolved to employ
His constant care, nor will he ever think
His debt of friendship paid by my labour.

What will become of us if he miscarry?
We are his kinsmen, and have no subsistence
But by his only bounty; I received
A deadly wound in the deplored death
Of his dear son, who oft was pleased to bid me
Throw all my care on him, and now I find
My hopeful venture sunk in that brave ship.

To lose out friends and fortunes I confess,
Is that which needs must shake the firmest minds,
But when there is no hope for us to increase
Our own affliction, and to lose our spirits,
Is an infirmity beneath a man:
Why should we doubt his safe recovery?
Since passion as we see, doth but disturb
His reason, not destroy't; when he's at worst,
He'll hearken to the counfell of his friend.
How earnestly he begs, that he may speak
With Imperiale, and it seems Iustinian
Already condiscends to his request;
Me thinks that should not be, since he suspects
Him to be privy to Franciscoes death;

No doubt, Iustinian understands what's fit;
Perchance if once he shall his mind unburden
His passions may remit, or he may seem
To promise, cause he would not have him crossed,
These things we wholly must commit to him,
Whose Iudgement's not inferior to his love:
He wished us but withdraw awhile, we must
Not be far off, least he should chance to call,
For what soe'r occasion they should have
There's none but we t'assist: Sango the slave
Hath taken liberty to go abroad,
At his own pleasure, who would think the Villain
Durst venture to be absent at this time?

I have observed a wondrous league of late
Between him and his Cozen slave; how ere
Their Lords are far asunder, they are near.

It is ever best when such as they are kept
To daily labour, the least ease corrupts them.

There might perchance be some discovery made
If they were both examined apart,
And made believe each other had confessed.

Some plot, it is like to steal a silver spoon
To purchase Opium, or the drug Tobacco;
That is the height of their ambitious theft:
But hark they knock I prethy go thou in,
And i'll take order to have Sango sent for.

THou blow as much as he that carried
An Ox upon his shoulders, set it down,
There's for thy pains,

Troth t'was a heavy burrhen.

There's two quatrines more.

I thank you, sir.

Methinks Molosso might have saved this charge*
And bin himself Porter.

Who the Slave?
He's now our major Domo, our Lord told me
He would deliver his commands by him.
He gave me order to make this provision.

I like him he begins his government
With bounty, now the Cooke may show his skill;
Since I came hither, I have bin confined
To several sallets, porrage with scrapped cheese,
And a few Vermicelle, such slight dishes:
O when I served the Grand-Dukes master Cooke
How we were all employed! I can remember,
What lectures of our Mystery he would read,
Stiling the belly master of all arts,
And by a model of his own invention
Demonstrate how the antique Cooks were wont
To dress th'intire Boar; he was a Scholar
And would discourse of the delicious Sumen
And of the noble Patrons of the kitchen
Both Greeks and Romaines; he was wont to speak
Most reverently of one Apitius,

Why what was he?

A man of a brave stomach,
That spent upon his belly near three millions,
And having cast up his accounts, and found
Only two hundred and od thousand crowns
Remaining to support his appetite,
Doubting he should be famished, rather chose
To live by fame, and end his life with poison:
But prethy knock; there was another too,
One Nomentanus, but far short of him:
Will they not open? we shall all be shent,
Knock harder.

Sure they are a sleep, perhaps
The Slave being overleaven'd with his favour
Hath made himself stark drunk; we shall disturb
Our Lady and her Daughter, I much wonder
Mistress Nugella comes not to the door.

What noise is that within? some body groans,

I will go seek our Patron.

Here he comes.

what, no for warder? we're like to sup to night
At a fine hour?

W'have bin a good while here sir,
Have often knocked, but cannot be let in.

We thought we heard a groaning in the house.

How? knock again, yet, this is very strange,
Where should Molosso be; perhaps my wife
And daughter with their maids may all be busy,
For I suppose they were to take a bath;
He certainly would not neglect my service:
I know not what to think, my jealousy
Suggests a thousand fears, go presently,
Desire the Engineer to lend my an Engine,
That I may force the door.

SIr, here are they
Mean to make good this Fort in spite of you,
And all your Engineers.

What's thy intent?
Thou know how far I trust thee dear Molosso.

It is not your untimely trust or favour
(That is to me but sun-shine after shipwreck)
Can satisfy your former injuries:
I would have spent an age in base observance,
Only to gain this day, this happy hour
That shall produce what no time shall forget.

Iowe my life to thee and ever shall
Make that acknowledgement, then do not thou
Destroy thine own great merit.

Think not fond man,
I saved thy life for any love of thee,
But to reserve thee for a greater plague.

O my dear wife and daughter, where are they?

Both yet alive, the mischief's done already,
But not the vengeance, thou shalt that behold,
Till then there's nothing can be called revenge:
Go bring u'm Sango, thou hast had thy fill

Of Nectar, sweeter far than that of Jove.

THe best Physicians in extremities,
Allow their Patients what they most desire,
Though ne'er so seeming hurtful: when diseases
Exceed their safe and usual remedies,
They many times are cured by contraries:
What should this mean?

I must exact your promise.

Upon condition you'll forbear all out-rage.

Set me my bounds, and see if I transgress.

Stand here then, and be silent.

Like a Statue.

Behold a pair of Brides, their hair displayed,
Muse not to see u'm weep, the cause is light.

What is the woe that these strange signs import?
Speak my Honoria, my Angelica.

That which no woman's tongue is fit to express,
Nor any humane ear fit to receive.

Mine ears may hear what such soft hearts can bear*
I have a breast prepared for misery.

Behold the Wolves, the Bears, that our sad dreams
Fore-warn'd us of, which you did so despise.

You hear how light the cause is, but a dream.

Our wretched story's told and understood,
In the sole repetition of that vision;
The jewels ravished from our innocent necks.
When swords and direful threats could not (...)
By cruel force assisting one another,
Wrung from us both.

Oh that heavens power had pleased
According to my fervent invocation,
To have transformed me to some ugly monster,
That horror might have frighted away lust,
Or else converted it to sudden rage,
Whereby my life had ransomed mine honour!

Was there none near to aid? where was Nugella?

Bound, and then strangled, all the rest were forth.

What haste a wretched creature makes to hear
His own dire wretchedness? but now Molosso,
Since thou hast cloyed thy furious appetite,
Unbind their tender hands, and send them down,
That we may all condole their heavy fortunes.

If my revenge could have bin satisfied
With what's already done, it had done nothing;
No, Bears and Wolves always persist to death,
And I lament to find so narrow a Stage
To act my vengeance on, as but two women:
Sango prepare.

Command, and I obey.

Then there is hope to find compassion
In more then Scythian breasts, there's but that left
To expiate your former cruelty.

O spare their lives, and all shall be forgiven!

We are too far embark't to hope or wish
To be forgiven, mischief's upheld by mischief.

Alas poor souls, what crime have they committed?

They are both thine Imperial, that's their crime,
And 'tis the height of our triumphant glory,
That thou shalt see u'm dye, cast thine eyes up.

Villain, I will not, thus I snatch away
That part of thy revengeful insolence, pulls out his eyes.
So shall the Sun and Moon, heavens rolling eyes,
Drop from their spheres at the worlds general ruin,
To avoid the spectacle, 'tis fit my light
Should be extinguished with my dearest objects.

^hat? hast thou so deluded us? thine ears
^ough thou want eyes to see, shall hear their groans*

Oh, oh! Ang. Oh, oh!

I would have laboured more for this revenge,
Than those that search the bowels of the earth
For Mines, or dive into the Sea for pearls.

whose fortune should I envy? that am going
To take possession of a happiness,
Great, and (what crowns felicity) secure?
Such constant joy proceeds from virtuous love:
But soft, what unexpected change is here?
Either mine eyes mistake, or my Imperial
Is quite deprived of his; alas, 'tis so:
I am amazed at this sad spectacle.

There can be none but young Prince Doria left,
So apprehensive of my misery.

What strange Eclipse? or dire Stymphalides
With their prodigious wings obscure the sun?
What cruel hand hath made us all thus wretched?

What thou behold, is the least part of mine,
And thine own woe.

Where's my Angelica?

She and her mother both are visely murdered;
And that's not all, they both were ravished first
By those two savage beasts.

'Tis thy fate Doria
To be involved in that mans vowed destruction.

Where am I now, in fruitful Italy,
Or in Hircania, where there's nothing seen
But horrid monsters, and perpetual snow?
O wickedness! that no age will believe!
And all Posterity deny! malicious fate,
That to my boundless misery add this;
To make me suffer barbarous wrongs from such
As are not capable of my revenge.
Were the sole Monarch of the world, the actor,
Or had he but connived at the deed done
By his lustful son or minion; I might hope,
Armed with the justice of my cause, to wrest
The ill-sway'd sceptre from him, and reduce
Him and his race to unparrallel'd examples
Of woeful pride, and miserable greatness.
Then if abstracted spirits knowledge have
Of humane vows, look down deflowered Maid,
But yet no less a Virgin then a Vestal:
Since honour cannot stoop to punish slaves,
Whose vile condition sinks beneath that vengeance,
'Bove which no tyrants power could hope to clime.
And since thy cruel sufferings (blessed soul)
Require strict satisfaction, lo, I turn
My fury on my self, and punish thus
Mine own malignant fortune: who holds me?
Forbear, I may not be disarmed.

That man
That is transported by a desperate rage,
Disarmes himself, he that may hinder mischief,
And yet permits it, is an accessory.

Noble Iustinian, thou were wont to be
Full of compassion, show it now, and end
A loathed life.

That which had bin a crime
Not to prevent, were wickedness to act.

Restore me then my sword, it is not worse
To kill him that unwilling is to dye,
Than to hinder him that's willing.

If thou kil'st
Thy self, thereby thou dost confess a guilt.

The guilty seldom inflict punishment
Upon themselves; what wretch can keep a life
So full of misery?

'Tis wretchedness,
Not to be able to bear misery,
It is not as thou think, renowned Doria,
A virtue to hate life, but to endure
These weighty strokes of Fortune valiantly,
And this becomes thy noble birth and spirit,
On which th'afflictions of the world should fall,
But as tempestuous showers into the sea.

Thy counsel comes too late, sentence is given
By me upon my self, nor can thou save
Or yet reprieve me, he that resolves to dye,
Finds weapons every where, my mind could arm
These hands without a sword, but it disdains
All borrowed aid; my weapons are within:
If sudden joy can speedy death command,
Why should not grief? and mine above all others?
Then summon all thy forces mighty sorrow,
Contract this stubborn heart and stifle it,
Deny it the bold privilege, to be
The last that feels the stroke of death: so, so,
It shoots a vapour that will poison it,
And choke each passage of the vital spirits,
And now I feel it beat against my breast,
As if it gave th'allarum unto all
The organs of my life; O how it struggles,
Disdaining to submit! proud rebel down,
Thy lygaments are shrunk, and I approach
The place, where Lovers after death reside,
Where I a ghost will yet enjoy my Bride:
Wilt thou not yield? dost thou expect relief?
Time, that releaseth sorrow, shall not join
With refreshed nature to repair thy ruin:
I to a broken heart will add this doom,
No substance within these lips shall come.

Thy daughter Imperiale is canonised:
With contrite heart devout Prince Doria,
Hath vowed a fast to his Saint Angelica.

I feel so great a weight of misery,
That I can scarce be sensible of more,
Although it be (what's harder to be borne
Than my calamity) a villains scorn.

Thus shall my silence break, into remorse,
Not into rage, that fever of the soul
Is quite converted to an Apathie;
Let me cry out to fate, as Hanniball
At Canne, to his bloody Soldiers, spare;
Imperial know thou the voice of Spinola?
By the most faithful head of my Iustinian
(Than which there cannot be a holier found)
I truly am moved with pity, thy sad story
Would melt a flinty leart into compassion;
Procrustes, or the wild Inhabitants
Of horrid Caucasus are mild to these.

^ know not, gentle Spinola how thou
Ca^t accept thanks from me, that have from thee
^eserv'd so ill, It may not be supposed
^ ^an dissemble now, that Villain there
Contrived thy dear sons death without my knowledge,
Though I am guilty of as great a crime,
For I was willing, to my too late grief
Upon discovery made by thine own Slave
Of thy intent, to have the same retorted
Upon thy self, the rest that wretch did plot,
In whom I placed a wicked confidence;
And did at length too much applaud the fact,
From whence our mutual miseries result.

Thy crime was but diversion of an evil,
Whereof I hate the memory, and wish
I could drink deep of Lethe, to forget
That impious design, and for these villains,
I'll study a new punishment, that shall
Transcend Perillus Bull, and all the torments
Invented by the fierce Sicilian tyrants.

'Tis wretchedness to fear where there's no hope,
Could thou believe, vain Spinola, that we
Would undertake to act so bold a mischief,
And not resolve upon as brave an end?
We that have gained such a full revenge,
Mean not to lose it by a poor submission
To hopeless mercy, or your new found torments;
Though fortune made us wretched slaves to you,
We both retain some sparks of th'active fire,
Which the (...)
Did sometimes flame in our Numidean breasts,
Not yet so quench thy servitude, but we
Have will and power to free our selves, behold
Out liberty; these shall restore us now
To that equality that nature gave,
In which blind chance hath put a difference:
One blow from these deliverers, can make
An abject beggar equal to a King:
Sango keep time.

I'm ready.

By consent
We thus avoid mock your punishment.

The Harpies are flown suddenly to hell,
And hang already on that hideous rock;
Where dreadful fiends lye gaping to receive 'm;
But let me, sir, become your faithful guide
To lead you to my house, where you shall live,
And want no comfort love or cost can give.

The only comfort of a wretched soul
Is to despair of comfort. I see not
The mansion guilty of such wickedness,
But I am seen, a wretch, in Genua,
Where all my ancestors stand wreathed with honour:
I'll wander to a desert, or else clime
Some remote mountain, where dark clouds that hung
About his high erected head, shall hide me
From all the eyes of men, there I'll lament
My miseries in willing banishment.

What need we care how powerful our foes be?
When slaves can bring us to such misery?
Whose innate cruelties at length appear,
Though they the same may cunningly forbear,
For their own ends; it is not wisdom then
To place our trust in such conditioned men,
Whom punishments, and wants, and fears prepare
To hatred, to deceit, and to despair:
Yet these are but poor instruments, the cause
That on our heads heavens indignation draws,
Springs from our selves, ^st which there's no defence
^


