NVtmegge?


Sugar? well met, how chance you wait not upon your Master, where's Wine now?


Oh sometimes without Sugar, all the while he's well if I be in his company,
tis but for fashion sake, I wait upon him into a room now and then, but am
not regarded: marry when he is ill, he makes much of me, who but Sugar? but
to my remembrance I have not been in his presence this fortnight, I hope
shortly he will not know me, though he meet me in his drink.


Thou hast a sweet life in the mean time Sugar.


But thou art tied to more attendance Nutmegge upon your Master Beer.


Faith no, I am free now and then, though I be his Prentice still, Nutmegge
hath more friends to trust to then Beer: I can be welcome to wine thy master
sometimes, and to the honest Country man Ale too. But now I talk of Ale, when
did see his man prithee?


Who, Tossed?


The same.


I meet him at Tavern every day.


When shall thou, and he, and I, meet and be merry over a Cup?


I'll tell thee Nutmegge, I do not care much for his company, he's such a
choleric piece, I know not what he's made of, but his quarrelling comes home
to him, for he's every day cut for it, I marvel how he scapes, this morning
he had a knife thrust into him.


Indeed he will be very hot sometimes.


Hot? I, till he look black ith'face again, besides, if he take an opinion
there's no turning him, he will be burnt first. I did but by chance let fall some
words against Ale, and he had like to have beaten me to powder for it.


How; beaten Sugar? that would be very fine in faith; but he being bread, and
thou a loaf, you should not differ so. Stand, look where he is.


Then I'll be gone, for we shall quarrel.


Come, fear not, I'll part you, but he's drunk, ready to fall; whence comes
he dropping in now? How now Tossed?


Nutmeg? round and sound and all of a colour, art thou there?


Here's all that's left of me.


Nutmeg, I love thee Nutmeg. What's that a Ghost?


No* tis your old acquaintance Sugar.


Sugar: I'll beat him to pieces.


Hold, hold. Nutmegge.


Cannot Tossed stand without holding?


Where have you been Tossed?


I'll tell thee, I have bin with my M. Ale. Sir, I was very dry, and he has
made me drunk: do I not crumble? I shall fall a pieces; but I'll beat Sugar
for all that: I do not weigh him, he is a poor Rogue, I have known him
sold for two pence, when he was young, wrapped in swaddling clouts of Paper. I
know his breeding, a Drawer brought him up, and now he's grown so lumpish.


You're a rude Tossed.


Rude? Let me but crush him: Rude? Sir, tis well known you come from Barbary
your self, and because of some few Pounds in a Chest, you think to domineer
over Tossed: you're a little handsome, I confess, Wenches like their lips after
you; but for all that, would I might sink to the bottom, if I do not --: I
will give Sugar but one box.


Come, come. you shall not.


Prithee Nutmeg, take out Tossed a little, to morrow we'll meet and be drunk
together.


So, so, I am glad he's gone: I do not love this Tosts company, yet some
occasion or other, puts me still upon him. Ha, who's this?

Tis Wine my Master.

Sugar, you are a sweet youth, you wait well.


A friend of mine called me forth, to cure a cut finger.


You'll turn Surgeon or Physician shortly.


But your diseases need none: for inflammations, which are dangerous to others,
makes you more acceptable, nor do you blush to have it reported sir, how often
you have been burnt.


So sir, now you put me in mind on it, I hear say you run a wenching, and
keep women's company too much.


Alas sir, like will to like, Sugar being of his own nature sweet, has reason
to make much of women, which are the sweetest creatures.


But some of them are sower enough.


I sir, Widows at fifteen, and Maids at twenty five; but I keep them
company, for no other thing, then to convert them, some of them could even eat
me, but for fear of spoiling their teeth.


Indeed one of your sweet hearts complained the other day you made her teeth
rotten.


Alas sir, twas none of my fault, she bit me first, and I could do no less,
then punish her sweet tooth.


Well sir, I say, take heed of women.


Nay sir, if I may credit my own experience they are the best friends I have,
for I am always in their mouths. If I come to a banquet, as none are made
without me, in what fashion soever I appear, every woman bestows a
handkercher upon me, and strive to carry me away in their cleanest linen: nay,
but for shame, to betray their affections to me, they would bring whole sheets
for me to lie in*


Why sure thou were wrapped in thy mothers smock.


I think if the Midwife were put to her oath, I was wrapped in hers, oath
Christing day.

But see sir, here's Master Beer.


How, Beer? we are not very good friends, no matter, I scorn to avoid him.


Beere-leaue sir.


So me thinks? how now Beer, running atilt, dost not know me?


I do mean to have the wall on you.


The wall of me, you would have your head and the wall knocked together, learn
better manners, or I may chance to broach you.


Broach me, alas poor Wine, tis not your Fieri facias can make Beer afraid,
thy betters know the strength of Beer. I do not fear your high colour sir.


So, so, here will be some scuffling.


You'll leave your impudence, and learn to know your superiors Beer, or I
may chance to have you stopped up. what never leave working? I am none of your
fellows.


I scorn thou should.


I am a companion for Princes, the least drop of my blood, worth all thy
body. I am sent for by the Citizens, visited by the Gallants, kissed by the
Gentlewomen* I am their life, their Genius, the Poetical fury, the Helicon of
the Muses, of better value then Beer; I should be sorry else.


Thou art sorry wine indeed sometimes: Value? you are come up of late, men pay
dear for your company, and repent it: that gives you not the precedence;
though Beer set not so great a price upon himself, he means not to bate a
grain of his worth, nor subscribe to Wine for all his braueries,


Not to me?


Not to you: why whence come you pray?


From France, from Spain, from Greece.


Thou art a mad Greek indeed.


Where thou must never hope to come: who dares deny that I have been a
travailer?


A travailer? in a tumbrell, a little Beer will go farther: why Wine, art not
thou kept under locke and key, confined to some corner of a Cellar, and there
indeed commonly close prisoner, unless the Jailer or Yeoman of the Bottles
turn the Key for the chamber-maid now and then, for which she vows not to
leave him, till the last gasp, where Beer goes abroad, and randeuous in every
place.


Thou in every place? away hop of my thumb: Beer, I am a shamed of thee.


Be ashamed of thy self, and blush Wine thou art no better. Beer shall have
commendations for his mildness and virtue, when thou art spit out of men's
mouths, distasted: thou art an hypocrite, Wine, art all white sometimes, but
more changeable then Proteus: thou would take upon thee to comfort the blood,
but hast been the cause that too many noble veins have been emptied: thy
virtue is to betray secrets, the very preparative to a thousand rapes and
murders, and yet thou dare stand upon thy credit, and prefer thy self to
Beer, that is as clear as day.


Well said Beer, he bears up stiff like a Constable. Now will I play my
part with 'em both. Sir,


The vessel of your wit leaks, Beer, why thou art drunk.


So art thou Wine, every day in the week, and art fain to be carried forth of
doors.


How sir?


I scorn thy words, thou art base Beer: Wine is well borne, has good
breeding, and bringing up; thou deserve to be carted, Beer.


Suffer this, and suffer all, to him again.


Carted? thou would be carted thy self, racked and drawn for thy baseness,
Wine. Welborne? Did not every man call you Bastard the other day? borne? there's no
man able to bear thee much: and for breeding, I know none thou hast, unless
it be Diseases.


How, diseases? you have been held always to be wholesome Wine, sir.


Sir, if I take you in hand, I shall make you small Beer.


Take heed I do not make Vinegar of you first.


Do, do, make him peace it, in my opinion sir, it were not for your honour to
run away: yet Beer being a common quarreler, I fear may prove too hard for
you.


Too hard for me? away Boy, I'll be as hard as he for his hart: alas, he's but
weak Beer, if I give him but a tap, it shall stay him from running out thus.


So, so, they are high enough fall too, and welcome.


Who's this? Ale? Oh for the three-men-Song: this Ale is a stout fellow, it
shall go hard, but Sugar which makes all sweet sometimes, shall set him in his
part of Discord.

Come, come, Beer, you forget how low you were the other day: provoke me not too
much, lest I bestow a firkin on you.


Strike and thou dare Wine, I shall make thee answer as quick as the
objection, and give you a dash.


Vmh: what's this? it seems there's great difference between Wine and Beer.
Sugar, what's the matter?


Oh goodman Ale, I am glad you're come, heare's nothing but contention: I have
gone betwixt 'em twice or thrice, but I fear, one or both will be spilt.


What do they contend about?


For that, which for ought I can apprehend, belongs as much to you, as to
either of them.


Hah? to me? what's that?


Ale, by judicious men hath been held no despicable drink, for my own part,
tis nothing to me: you are all one to Sugar, whosoever be King, Sugar can be a
subject, but yet, twere fit, Ale had his measure.


Are they so proud?


They mind not you, as if you were too unworthy a Competitor; See, tis come to
a challenge.


Pray take no knowledge that I discovered any thing of their Ambition; Sugar
shall ever be found true to Ale, else would I might never be more drunk in
your company.

No matter for protestation.


So, so, now I have warmed Ale pretty well, I'll leave 'em: if Wine Beer and
Ale agree together, would Sugar might never be drunk but with Water, nor
never help to preserve any thing but old women, elder brothers.


Remember the place, and weapon.


Stay, stay, come together again, why how now, what fight, and kill one another?


Alas poor Beer, I account him dead already.


No sir, you may find Beer quick enough, to pierce your Hogshead. I shall
remember.


But ith mean time you both forget your selves: dee hear? Ale is a friend to
you both, let me know your difference.


He has disgraced me.


Thou hast disgraced thy self in thy comparisons. Wine must be acknowledged
the Nectar of all drinks, the prince of Liquors.


To wash Boots.


Hark you, are you both mad? who hath heat you, that you run over, do you
contend for that in justice belongs to another? I tell you Wine and Beer, I do
not relish you, I'll tell you a tale: Two spruce hot-spurre fiery gallants
meeting ith streets, iustled for the wall, drew, would he been fighting: there
steps me forth a correcter of soles, an vnderlaid cobbler, and cries out, Hold,
hold your hands Gentlemen, are you so simple to fight for the wall? why the
wall's my Landlords. Have you but so much wit as to apply this, you shall never
need fence for the matter. Superiority is mine, Ale is the prince of liquors,
and you are both my subjects.


We thy Subjects?


O base Ale.


O muddy Ale.


Leave your railing, and attend my reasons, I claim your duties to me, for
many prerogatives: my antiquity, my riches, my learning, my, strength, my
gravity.


Antiquity? your first reason's a very small one.


Dare any of you deny my antiquity? I say.


We must bear with him, tis in his Ale.


It only pleads for me: who hath not heard of the old Ale of England?


Old Ale; oh there tis grown to a Proverb, Iones Ale'new.


These are trifles, and convince me not.


If we should grant your argument, you would gain little by it, go together,
I do allow you both a couple of stale companions.


Wine, you're very harsh.


Let him, my second prerogative is my riches and possessions; for who knows
not how many howses I have? Wine and Beer are fain to take up a corner, your
ambition goes no further then a Cellar, where the whole house where I am is
mine, goes only by my name, is called an Alehouse; but when is either heard, the
Wine-house, or the Beerehouse? you cannot pass a street, wherein I have not
houses of mine own, besides many that go by other men's names.


I confess you have here and there an Alehouse, but whose are all the rest?
hath not Beer as much title to them?


And yet I have not heard that either of you both have find for Aldermen,
though I confess something has bin attempted out of nick and froth. Be ruled
by me, Beer and Ale, aspire no heigher then the Common-Councell-houses. Oh
impudence, that either of you should talk of houses, when sometimes you are
both glad of a tub: dee hear Ale? do not you know the man that did the
bottle bring?


Thou art glad of a Bottle thy self, Wine, sometimes, and so is Beer too, for
all he froaths now.


So, so.


My third Prerogative, is my Learning.


Learning? If you have the Liberal Sciences, pray be free, and lets hear
some.


For that, though I could give you demonstration, for breuities sake I remit
you to my books.


Books? printed Cum priuilegio no doubt on it, and sold for the Company of
Stationers: what are the names?


Admire me, but when I name learned, though not the great Alexander Ale and
Tostatus the Iesuite.


O learned Ale, you scorn to make Indentures any more, but you might as well
have concluded this without book.


Why, you will shortly be Towne-Clerke, the City Chronicler is too mean a
place for you.


Now for my strength and invincibilitie.


But here let me interrupt you, talk no more of strength, none but Beer
deserves to be called strong, no pen is able to set down my victories. I?
why, I have been the destruction. --


Of Troy, hast not? here your own mouths condemn you: if killing be your
conquest, every Quacksaluing knave may have the credit of a rare Physician,
that sends more to the Church and Churchyard, then diseases do: I Wine,
comfort preserve, let that be my Character. I am cousin German to the blood, not
so like in my appearance as I am in nature, I repair the debilities of age,
and revive the refrigerated spirits, exhilarate the heart, and steel the brow
with confidence. For you both the Poet hath drawn you memorial in one. -- nil
spissus illa
Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, vnde
Constat quod mult as foeces in corpore linquat.
Nothing goes in so thick,
Nothing comes out so thin:
It must needs follow then,
Your dregs are left within.


And so I leave you Stygiae monstrum conforme paludi, monstrous drink, like
the river Styx.


Nay but hark, tis not your Latin must carry it away, I will not loose a
drop of my reparation, and by your favour, if you stand so much upon your
preserving, I'll put you to your Latin again, and prove my self superior, for
Ale as if it were the life of mankind, hath a peculiar name and denomination,
being called Ale from Alo, which every School boy can tell, signifies to feed
and norish, which neither Wine nor Beer can show for themselves; and for my
strength and honour in the wars, know that Ale is a Knight of Malta, and
dares fight with any man bears a head, tis more safe to believe what a
Soldier I am, then try what I can do.


If you look thus ilfauouredly Ale, you may fright men well enough, and be
held terrible by weak stomachs; but if you call to mind the puissance and
valour of Beer, invincible Beer, tumble down Beer, you must sing a
Pallinode. I? why I have overthrown armies, how easy is it for me to take a
city, when I can tame Constables, which in their presence are formidable at
midnight, in the midst of their rugged Bill-men, make 'em all resign their
weapons, and send 'em away to sleep upon their charge.


How? upon their own charge? take the Constable committing that fault, and
he will never be good in his office after it.


Now for my virtue in preserving and nourishing the body wherein you both so
glory, you are not to compare with me, since thousands every day come to
receive their healths from me.


Kings and Princes from me, and like them I am served in plate.


But thou art come down of late to a glass, Wine: and that's the reason I
think, so many Vintners have broke: now observe my last Reason.


Yes, pray where lies your gravity?


Not in my Beard, I speak without mental reservation, I'll tell you, and you
shall confess it: the Wise men of ancient time were called Sages, and to this
day it signifies judgment, discretion, gravity; for by what other would you
excite to good manners more aptly, then to show a young man to be sage, that
is grave: and with what title can you better salute him that is grave, or more
honour him, then to call him one of the Sages? Now this appellation neither of
you can challenge, yet every man gives me the attribute; for who knows not I
am called Sage Ale?


One may guess what brains he caries by the Sage now.


And thus having given you sufficient reasons for your acknowledgment of my
principality, let your knees witness your obedience to your King, and I will
grace you both by making you Squires of my body, right honourable Ale-Squires.


This is beyond suffering: was ever Wine so undervalued? Barbarous detractors,
whose beginning came from a dunghill, I defy you Bacchus, look down, and see
me vindicate thine honour, I scorn to procrastinate in this, and this minute
you shall give account of your insolences: my spirit's high, I am enemy to
both.


Is Wine drawn? then have at you, I'll make good Ale.


I stand for the honour of Beer, were you an army.


Hold, hold, hold.


How now? what comes water running hither for?


Let my fear ebb a little.


What tide brought you hither, Water?


The pure stream of my affection: oh how I am troubled! I am not yet
recovered.


So me thinks you look very thin upon it Water: but why do we not fight?


Do not talk of fighting, is it not time that Water should come to quench the
fire of such contention? I tell you, the care of your preservation made me
break my banks to come to you, that you might see the overflowing love I bear
you: your quarrel hath echoed unto me; I know your ambition for superiority:
you are all my kinsmen, near allied to Water, and though I say it, sometimes
not a little beholding to Water, even for your very makings. Will you refer
your selves to me, and wade no further in these discontentments? I will
undertake your reconcilement and qualification.


To thee, Water? wilt thou take upon thee to correct our irregularity? Thou
often go beyond thy bounds thy self. But if they consent, I shall.


I am content.


And I.


Then without further circumlocution or insinuation, Water runs to the
matter: you shall no more contend for excellency, for Water shall allow each
of you a singularity. First, you Wine, shall be in most request among
Courtiers, Gallants, Gentlemen, Poetical wits, Qui melioris luti homines,
being of a refined mould, shall choose as a more nimble and active watering, to
make their brains fruitful, Fecundi calices quem non? but so as not confined
to them, nor limitting them to you, more then to exhilarate their spirits, and
acuate their inventions.

You Beer, shall be in most grace with the Citizens, as being a more stayed
Liquor, fit for them that purpose retirement and gravity, that with the Suaile
carries the cares of a house and family with them, tied to the atendance of an
illiberal profession, that neither trot nor amble, but have a sure pace of
their own, Bos lassus fortius figit pedem, The black Ox has trod upon their
foot: yet I bound you not with the City, though it be the common
entertainment, you may be in credit with Gentlemen's Cellars, and carry
reputation before you from March to Christmas -- tide I should say; that Water
should forget his Tide.

You Ale I remit to the Country as more fit to live where you were bred: your
credit shall not be inferior, for people of all sorts shall desire your
acquaintance, specially in the morning, though you may be allowed all the day
after: the Parson shall account you one of his best Parishioners, the Church
wardens shall pay for your company, and drawing their Bills all the year
long, you shall be loved and maintained at the Parish charge till you be old,
be allowed a Robin-hood, or Mother Red-cap, to hang at your door, to beckon
in Customers: and if you come into the City, you may be drunk with pleasure,
but never come into the fashion. At all times you shall have respect, but ith
Winter Morning without comparison. How do you like my censure now?


Water has a deep judgment.


And yet the world says sometimes Water is shallow: nay, I'll see you shake
hands, and tie a new knot of friendship.


We are henceforth brothers.


Stay, who's here?


I tell thee, Sugar, I am now friends with thee. But if it be as you say --


What's the matter?


Let's observe him a little, Tossed is angry.


What need you be so hot, Tossed?


Hot? tis no matter, Sugar: you will justify that Wine and Beer offered this
wrong unto Ale.


I know not whose pride began; but I was sorry to see Wine, Beer, and Ale at
such odds.


Ods quotha? I do mean to be even with some body.


An even Tossed shows well,


They shall find that Ale has those about him that are not altogether dow.


Thou hast been baked, I'll swear.


And new come out of the Oven too, I think: son he is very fiery.


Ale must not be put down so long as Tossed has a crum of life left. Beer too?


What do you mean to do with your knife, Tossed? that will scarce cut Beer
and 'twere buttered.


Come not near me, Nutmeg, least I grate you, and slise you: Nutmeg, do you
mark?


Let's in, and make 'em friends. How now Tossed?


Tis all one for that: Oh, are you there? pray tell me which of 'em is't?


Is what?


Why they are friends: what did you mean Sugar, to make Tossed burn thus?


No such matter.


You will not tell me then. Hark you Beer, March-Beere, this way a little.


What dost thou mean to do with thy knife?


I must stir you a little Beer: what colour had you to quarrel with my
Master?


Ale. We are sworn brothers.


We were at difference, and Wine too. but --


Wine too But, but me no buts, I care not a straw for his buts; dee here sir,
do you long to be Graves Wine?


We are all friends.


I, I, all friends on my word, Tossed.


Fire and water are not to be trusted, away new River, away, I wash my hands
on thee.


Come hither again, Tossed.


Over head and ears in Ale.


How comes this about, Sugar?


The truth is, sir, I told him of some difference between you, for he and I
had been fallen out, and I had no other security to put in for my self, then
to put him upon some body else.


Nutmeg durst scarce speak to him, he was ready to put me in his pocket.


I am cool again: I may believe you are friends; then I am content to put up.

Sugar and Nutmeg, come, we be three.


Let's be all one rather: and from henceforth since they are so well accorded,
let's make no difference of our Masters, but belong to 'em in common: for my
part, though I wait upon Wine, it shall not exempt my attendance on Beer, or
Ale, if they please to command Sugar.


A match. I am for any thing but Water.


And I.


But my service shall be ready for him to, Water and Sugar I hope, may be
drunk together now and then, and not be brought within compass of the
Statute, to be put ith stocks for it,


Godamercy Sugar with all my hart, I shall love thy company, fer I am solitary,
and thou wilt make me pleasant. Stay.

Hark Music? Oh some friends of mine, I know 'em, they often come upon the
water: let's entertain the air a little, never a voice among you?


I Jovial Wine exhilarate the heart.

March Beer is drink for a King.

But Ale, bonny Ale, with Spice and Tossed,
In the Morning's a dainty thing.

Then let us be merry, wash sorrow away,
Wine, Beer, and Ale, shall be drunk to day.

I generous Wine, am for the Court.

The City calls for Beer.

But Ale, bonny Ale, like a Lord of the Soil,
In the Country shall domineer.

Then let us be merry, wash sorrow away,
Wine, Beer and Ale shall be drunk to day.



Why, now could I dance for joy.


Now you talk of dancing, Wine, tis one of your qualities, let's pay the
Musicians all together: we have often made other men have light heads and
heals, there's no hurt a little in tripping for our selves, what say you?


Strike up Piper.


Lustily, make a merry day on it; nay, leave out none, at Dancing and at
Foot-ball, all fellows.


Be your leave gentlemen -- will it please you be here sir?


Who's this Tobacco?


Why comes he into our company?


I do hear say there is a controversy -- among you, and I am come -- to
moderate the business,


It shannot need, we are concluded sir.


Your name is Tobacco I take it.


No sir you take it not -- deesee, tis I that take it.


But we take it very ill, you should intrude your self into our mirth.


I did guess, by the chimney your nose that you might stand in need of water,
to quench some fire in your kitchen.


Ho? Water.


He has spit me out already


Sugar tossed and nutmeg. puh. vanish.


He has blown away the spice too.


Now, do you not know me -- what do ye stand at gaze -- Tobacco is a drink
too.


A drink?


Wine, you and I come both out of a pipe.


Prithee go smoke somewhere else, we are covetous of your acquaintance.


Do not incense me, do not inflame Tobacco.


We do not fear your puffing sir, and you have any thing to say to us be
brief and speak it.


Then briefly -- and without more circumstance -- not to hold you in
expectation.


Heida, this is prolixity it self.


Oh sir his words are not well dyed in his mouth.


Or his understanding is not sufficiently lighted yet gin him leave I pray.


I do come --


Not yet to the purpose methinkes.


And I do mean --


Somewhat -- wo'd hear out.


And I entend --


Yet again, think, think, till to morrow, we may chance meet again.


Stay, I command you stay.


How, you command us by whose autority.?


That must be disputed.


Attend my argument; The sovereign ought to command, I am your sovereign, the
sovereign drink Tobacco. Ergo. --


I see Tobacco is sophisticated.


I ought to command you, and it will become your duty to obey me --


You our sovereign a mere whiffler.


I say again I am your Prince, bow, and do homage.


You have turned over a new leaf Tobacco.


You are very high Tobacco, I see ill weeds grow apace.


Most high and mighty trinidado.


For whose virtue would you be exalted, if it shall please your smoky
excellence?


Not yours, -- nor yours -- nor yours -- but altogether, all the virtues which
you severally glory in, are in me united, -- look not so coy, Call water to
spread your faction, and you are but like the giddy elements changing and
borrowing creatures, whilst I Tobacco am acknowledged a Heavenly quintessence,
a divine herb.


Tobacco you are out.


After what rate is this an ounce?


Let us beseech your excellence, for less title we must not give you having
so much virtue as you pretend, to let us understand some of your particular
graces and qualities.


I pray discourse alitlle, what's the first?


You have named it -- tis discourse which you are so far from being able to
advance that you destroy it, in all men when you are most accepted, when my
divine breath mixing with theirs, doth distill eloquence and oracle upon the
tongue, which moves with such deliberation -- words flowing in so sweet
distinction, that many ears are chained to the lips of him that speaks.

Da puer accensum selecto fictile Poeto, vt Phaebum ore bibam.


And yet we are not enchanted with the music of your pipe to dance after it.
My most excellent discourser.


And a help for the imperfections of nature. For when a man ha's not wit
enough to express himself in words, you being taken, do presently help him,
-- to spit forth gentleman like.


Indeed the most part of our common complement is but smoke, and now I know how
Gentlemen come by it.


Thus swine do value pearl --


But as you have the eloquence of Vlysses, I suppose you have not the strength
of Aiax, we should move in great fear, if you were valiant, I hope you are
but weak Tobacco.


Weak? whose brain hath not felt the effects of my mightiness? He that
opposes me shall find me march like a tempest, waited upon with lightening and
black Clouds.


Here is no crack.


Yet he thunders it out.


Yes yes, I remember I have heard him reported a solidier, and once being in
company with a knap-Iack man a companion of his, I obtained a copy of his
military postures, which put down the pike and pot-gun clean, pray observe
'em.




Exercise this discipline till you stink, defile the room, offend your
friends, destroy your liver and lungs, and bid adieu to the world with a
scouring flux.


You have a good memory. --


I'm sure Tobacco will spoil it.


These are but childish inventions.


They are most proper to illustrate your magnificence, for howsoever you
pretend that you converse with men, it is apparent, that you make men children
again, for they that use you most familiarly, do but smoke all the day long.


You dishonour me.


Not so much as Gentlemen dishonour themselves, to turn common pipers: but if
you have any more conditions, pray enrich us with the story.


I am medicinal.


How?


And preserve the health of man.


I hope they are not come to drink healths in Tobacco.


I repair the bodies which your immoderate cups have turned to fens and
marshes. The wisest Physicians prescribe my use, and acknowledge me a salutary
herb.


Physicians are no fools, they may commend you for their profit, you are one
of their herbingers to provide for a disease; yet howsoever you call them wise,
and glory in their flatteries, they make but a very simple of you.


Methinkes this should cut Tobacco.


Not at all, I am above their poor derision; at my pleasure I could revenge
their malice, for I am in favour, and grown to be the delight of poets and
princes.


How poets and princes? Ego Rex meus, a stopper for Tobacco, we shall have
pretty treason anon else.


Does it scruple your judgment Mr. small beer that I say poets and Princes? I
am not to learn their distinction, nor doth it take from any allegiance, they
are both sacred names: yet I am confident it is easier for a poet not borne to
sovereignty to aspire to a kingdom, then for a King not borne with fancy to
be made a poet. I mentiond these names, not in their methode and order, but to
show my grace with them, that are most able to punish insolence, such as
yours,


How the vapour rises.


This ruffler may be troublesome, we were best admit him to our society, he is
a dry companion, and you may observe, how he hath insinuated already with the
greatest; the ladies begin to affect him, and he receives private favours from
their lips, every day he kisses their hands, when he appears in a fair pipe;
though we allow him not a priority, for our own sakes, let us hold
correspondence with him, least he seduce men to forsake us, or at least to make
use of us but for their necessity.


Hum! he says well, now I better consider 'twere safest to use him kindly,
least by degrees he overthrow us, and jet upon our privileges, for I heard a
geutleman the other day affirm, he had fasted 3 or 4 days, only with Tobacco.


Beside, if we continue friends he will be a preparative for our reception,
without us he may subsist, but with him we are sure of liberal
entertainment.


I am converted, Wine you are the best orator, speak for us.


Tobacco, you are a good fellow, all ambition laid aside, let us embrace as
friends; excuse us, that we have been a little merry with you, we acknowledge
you a gentle drink and you shall have all the respect will become Wine, Beer,
or Ale to observe you with: what should we contend for primacie, quarrel about
titles, which if to any we acknowledge most properly belong to you, for they
are all but smoke. Let us unite and be confederate states for the benefit of
men's low countries, live and love together. Wine doth here enter into league
with Tobacco.


And beer.


And Ale.


Are you in earnest? why then Tobacco is so far from pride, that he vows to
serve you all, and when I leave to be a true friend, may fire consume me, and
my ashes want a burial.

W. B. A. and when we falsify, may thunders shrike us dead.



