I Suppose you are assembled here, supposing to reap the fruit of my
travails: and to be plain, I mean presently to present you with a Comedy
called Supposes, the very name whereof may peradventure drive into every of
your heads a sundry Suppose, to suppose the meaning of our supposes. Some
percase will suppose we mean to occupy your ears with sophistical
handling of subtle Suppositions. Some other will suppose we go about to
decipher unto you some quaint conceits, which hitherto have been only
supposed as it were in shadovves: and some I see smiling as though they
supposed we would trouble you with the vain suppose of some wanton
Suppose. But understand, this our Suppose is nothing else but a mystaking or
imagination of one thing for an other: for you shall see the master supposed
for the servant, the servant for the master: the freeman for a slave, and the
bond slave for a freeman: the stranger for a well knovven friend, and the
familiar for a stranger. But what? I suppose that even already you suppose me
very fond, that have so simply disclosed unto you the subtilties of these our
Supposes: where otherwise in deed I suppose you should have heard almost
the last of our Supposes, before you could have supposed any of them
arighte. Let this then suffice.

HEre is no body, come forth Polynesta, let us look about, to be sure least
any man hear our talk: for I think within the house the tables, the planks,
the beds, the portals, yea and the cupbords them selves have ears.

You might as well have said, the windows and the doors: do you not see howe
they harken?


Well you jest fair, but I would advise you take heed, I have bidden you a
thousand times beware, you will be spied one day talking with Dulippo.


And why should I not talk with Dulippo as well as with any other, I pray you?


I have given you a wherefore for this why many times, but go too, follow your
own advise till you overwhelm us all with soden mishap.


A great mishap I promise you: marie Gods blessing on their heart that set
such a brouche on my cap.


Well, look well about you: a man would think it were enough for you secretly
to rejoice, that by my help you have passed so many pleasant nights together,
and yet by my troth I do it more than half against my will, for I would
rather you had settled your fancy in some noble family, yea and it is no small
grief unto me, that rejecting the suites of so many nobles and gentlemen, you
have chosen for your darling a poor seruaunt of your fathers, by whom shame
and infamy is the best dower you can look for to attain.


And I pray you whom may I thank but gentle nurse, that continually praising
him, what for his personage, his courtesy, and above all, the extreme passions
of his mind, in fine you would never cease till I accepted him, delighted in
him, and at length desired him with no less affection, than he erst desired
me.


I can not deny, but at the beginning I did recommend him unto you (as in
deed I may say that for my self I have a pitiful heart) seeing the depth of
his unbridled affection, and that continually he never ceased to fill mine
ears with lamentable complaints.


Nay rather that he filled your purse with bribes and rewards.


Well you may judge of Nurse as you list: In deed I have thought it always
a deed of charity to help the miserable young men, whose tender youth
consumes with the furious flames of love: but be you sure if I had thought you
would have passed to the terms you now stand in, pity nor pencion, penny nor
pater noster should ever have made Nurse once to open her mouth in the cause.


No of honesty, I pray you, who first brought him into my chamber? who first
taught him the way to my bed but you? fie Nurse fie, never speak of it for
shame, you will make me tell a wise tale anon.


And have I these thanks for my good will? why then I see well I shall be counted
the cause of all mishap.


Nay rather the author of my good hap gentle Nurse, for I would thou knew
I love not Dulipo, nor any of so mean estate, but have bestowed my love more
worthily than thou deem, but I will say no more at this time.


Then I am glad you have changed your mind yet.


Nay I neither have changed, nor will change it.


Then I understand you not, how said you?


Mary I say that I love not Dulipo, nor any such as he, and yet I neither have
changed nor will change my mind.


I can not tell, you love to lye with Dulipo very well: this gear is Greek to
me, either it hangs not well together, or I am very dull of under standing,
speak plain I pray you.


I can speak no plainer, I have sworn to y^ contrary.


Howe? make you so deintie to tell it Nurse, least she should reveal it? you
have trusted me as far as may be, I may show to you, in things that touche
your honour if they were known: and make you strange to tell me this? I am sure
it is but a trifle in comparison of those things whereof heretofore you have
made me privy.


Well, it is of greater importance than you think Nurse, yet would I tell it
you under condition and promise that you shall not tell it again, nor give any
sign or token to be suspected that you know it.


I promise you of my honesty, say on.


Well hear you me then: this young man whom you have always taken for Dulipo,
is a noble borne Sicilian, his right name Erostrato, son to Philogono, one of
the worthiest men in that country.


How Erostrato? is it not our neighbour, which?


Hold thy talking nurse, and harken to me, that I may explain the whole case
unto thee: the man whom to this day you have supposed to be Dulipo, is (as I
say) Erostrato, a gentleman that came from Sicilia to study in this City,
even at his first arrival met me in the street, fell enamoured of me, of such
vehement force were the passions he suffered, that immediately he cast aside both
long gown and books, determined on me only to apply his study: and to the end
he might the more comodiously both see me and talk with me, he exchanged both
name, habit, clothes and credit with his servant Dulipo, who only he brought
with him out of Sicilia, and so with the turning of a hand, of Erostrato a
gentleman, he became Dulipo a serving man, and soon after sought service of my
father, and obtained it.


Are you sure of this?


Yea out of doubt, on the other side Dulippo took^ upon him the name of
Erostrato his master, the habit, the credit, books, and all things
needful to a student, and in short space profited very much, and is now
esteemed as you see.


Are there no other Sicylians here: nor none that pass this way, which may
discover them?


Very few that pass this way, and few or none that tarry here any time.


This hath been a strange adventure, but I pray you howe hang these things
together? that the student whom you say to be the servant, and not the
master, is become an earnest suitor to you, and requires you of your father in
marriage?


That is a policy devised between them, to put Doctor Dotipole out of
conceit, the old dotard, he that so instantly doth lye upon my father for
me: but look where he comes, as God help me it is he, out upon him, what a
luskie yonker is this? yet I had rather be a Noonne a thousand times, than be
encumbered with such a Coistrel.


Daughter you have reason, but let us go in before he come any nearer.


WEre there dames here, or did mine eyes dazil?

Nay sir here were Polynesta and her nurse.


Was my Polynesta here? alas I knew her not.


He must have better eyesight that should marry your Polynesta, or else he
may chance to oversee the best point in his tables sometimes.


Sir it is no marvel, the air is very misty to day: I my self knew her
better by her apparel than by her face.


In good saith and I thank God I have mine eye sight good and perfect, little
worse than when I was but twenty years old.


How can it be otherwise? you are but young.


I am fifty years old.


He tells ten less than he is.


What say thou of ten less?


I say I would have thought you ten less, you look like one of six and
thirty, or seven and thirty at the most.


I am no less than I tell.


You are like enough to live fifty more, show m^ your hand.


Why is Pasiphilo a Chiromancer?


What is not Pasiphilo? I pray you show me it a little.


Here it is.


O how straight and infracte is this line of life, you will live to the years
of Melchisedech.


Thou would say, Methusalem.


Why is it not all one?


I perceive you are no very good Bibler Pasiphilo.


Yes sir an excellent good Bibler, specially in a bottle: Oh what a mount of
Uenus here is, but this light serves not very well, I will behold it an
other day, when the air is clearer, and tell you somewhat, peradventure to your
contentation.


You shall do me great pleasure: but tell me, I pray the^ Pasiphilo, whom dost
thou think Polynesta likes better, Erostrato or me?


Why you out of doubt: She is a gentlewoman of a noble mind, and makes
greater account of the reputation she shall have in marrying your worship,
than that poor scholer, whose birth and parentage God knows, and very few
else.


Yet he takes it upon him bravely in the country.


Yea, where no man knows the contrary: but let him brave it, bost his birth,
and do what he can, the virtue and knowledge that is within this body of yours,
is worth more than all the country he came from.


It becomes not a man to praise himself: but in deed I may say, and say
truly, that my knowledge hath stood me in better steed at a pinch, than
could all the goods in the world. I came out of Otranto when the Turks
won it, and first I came to Padua, after hither; where by reading,
counsailing, and pleading, within twenty years I have gathered and gained as
good as ten thousand Ducats.


Yea mary, this is the right knowledge, Philosophie, Poetry, Logic, and all
the rest, are but pickling sciences in comparison to this.


But pyckling in deed, whereof we have a verse:

The trade of Law doth fill the boisterous bags,
They svvimme in silk, when others royst in rags.

O excellent verse, who made it? Virgil?


Virgil? tush it is written in one of our glosses.


Sure who so ever wrote it, the moral is excellent, and worthy to be written in
letters of gold: but to the purpose: I think you shall never recover the
wealth that you lost at Otranto.


I think I have doubled it, or rather made it four times as much: but in
deed, I lost mine only son there, a child of five years old.


O great pity.


Yea, I had rather lost all the goods in the world.


Alas, alas, by God and grafts of such a stock are very gayson in these days.


I know not whether he were slayue, or the Turks toke him and kept him as a
bond slave.


Alas, I could weep for compassion, but there is no remedy but patience, you
shall get many by this young damsel with the grace of God.


Yea, if I get her.


Get her? why doubt you of that?


Why, her father holds me off with delays, so that I must needs doubt.


Content your self sir, he is a wise man, and desirous to place his Daughter
well, he will not be too rash in his determination, he will think well of the
matter, and let him think, for the longer he thinks, the more good of you
shall he think: whose wealth, whose virtue, whose skill, or whose estimation
can he compare to yours in this City?


And hast thou not told him that I would make his Daughter a dower of two
thousand Ducats?


Why, even now, I came but from thence since.


What said he?


Nothing, but that Erostrato had proffered the like.


Erostrato? how can he make any dower, and his father yet alive?


Think you I did not tell him so? yes I warrat you, I forgot nothing that may
further your cause, and doubt you not, Erostrato shall never have her unless it
be in a dream.


Well gentle Pasiphilo; go thy ways and tell Damon I require nothing but his
daughter, I will none of his goods: I shall enrich her of mine own: if this
dower of two thousand Ducats seem not sufficient, I will make it five hundredth
more, yea a thousand, or what so ever he will demand rather the fail: go to
Pasiphilo, show thy self friendly in working this feat for me, spare for no
cost, since I have gone thus far, I will be loath to be out ^idden. Go


Where shall I come to you again?


At my house.


When?


When thou wilt.


Shall I come at dinner time?


I would bid thee to dinner, but it is a Saints even which I have ever fasted.


Fast till thou famish.


Hark.


He speaks of a dead mans fast.


Thou hear me not.


Nor thou understand me not.


I dare say thou art angry I bid thee not to dinner, but come if thou wilt,
thou shalt take such as thou find.


What? think you I know not where to dine?


Yes Pasiphilo thou art not to seek.


No be you sure, there are enough will pray me.


That I know well enough Pasiphilo, but thou can not be better welcome in
any place than to me, I will tarry for thee.


Well, since you will ne^des, I will come.


Dispatch then, and bring no news but good.


Better than my reward by the rood.


O Miserable covetous wretch, he finds an excuse by S Nicholas fast, because
I should not dine with him, as though I should dine at his own dish: he
makes goodly feasts I promise you, it is no wonder though he think me bound
unto him for my fare: for over and besides that his provision is as scant as
may be, yet there is great difference between his diet and mine. I never so
much as s^ppe of the wine that he tastes, I feed at the bords end with
brown bread: Marie I reach always to his own dish, for there are no more but
that only on the table: Yet he thinks that for one such diner I am bound to do
him al the service that I can, and thinks me sufficiently rewarded for all my
travel, with one such festival promotion: and yet peradventure some men
think I have great gains under him: but I may say and swear, that this dozen
year I have not gained so much in value as the points at my hose (which are
but three with codpeece point and al): he thinks that I may feed upon his
favour and fair words: but if I could not otherwise provide for one, Pasiphilo
were in a wise case. Pasiphilo hath mo pastures to pass in than one, I warrant
you: I am of household with this scholer Erostrato, his riuale, as well as with
Domine Cleander, now with the one, and then with the other, according as I see
their Caters provide good cheer at the market: and I find the means so to
handle the matter, that I am welcome to both. If the one see me talk with the
other, I make him believe it is to harken news in the furtherance of his
cause, and thus I become a broker on both sides. Well, let them both apply the
matter as well as they can, for in deed I will travel for none of them both:
yet will I seem to work wonders on each hand. But is not this one of Damons
servants that comes forth? it is, of him I shall understand where his
master is. Whither goes this ioyly gallant?

I come to seek some body that may accompany my master at dinner, he is alone,
and would fain have good company.


Seek no further, you could never have found one better than me.


I have no commission to bring so many.


How many? I will come alone.


How can thou come alone that hast continually a legion of ravening wolves
within thee?


Thou doest as servants commonly do, hate all that love to visit their
masters.


And why?


Because they have too many teeth as you think.


Nay because they have to many tongues.


Tongues? I pray you what did my tongue ever hurt you.


I speak but merrily with you Pasiphilo, go in, my master is ready to dine.


What? dyneth he so early?


He that rises early, dyneth early.


I would I were his man, master doctor never dyneth till noone, and how
dilicately then god knows, I will be bold to go in, for I count my self
bidden.


You were best so.


Hard hap had I when I first begone this unfortunate enterprise, for I supposed
the readiest medicine to my miserable effect^s had been to change name,
clothes, credit with my servant, to place my self in Damons service, thinking
that as sheuering cold by glowing fire, thirst by drink, hunger by pleasant
repasts, and a thousand such like passions find remedy by their contraries,
so my restless desire might have found quiet by continual contemplation. But
alas, I find that only love is vnsaciable, for as the fly plays with the
flame till at last she is cause of her own decay, so the lover that thinks
with kissing and colling to content his unbridled appetite, is commonly scene the
only cause of his own consumption: Two years are now paste since under the
colour of Damons service I have been a sworn servant to Cupid, of who I have
received as much favour grace as ever man found in his service, I have free
liberty at al times to behold my desired, to talk with her, to embrace her,
yea (be it spoken in secrete) to lye with her, I reap the fruits of my
desire, yet as my joys abound, even so my pains increase, I fare like the
covetous man, that having all the world at will, is never yet content, the
more I have, the more I desire. Alas, what wretched estate have I brought my
self unto, if in the end of all my far fetches, she be give by her father
to this old doting doctor, this buzzard, this bribing villain, that by so many
means seeks to obtain her at her fathers hands? I know she loves me best of
all others, but what may that preuaile when perforce she shall be constrained to
marie another? Alas, y^ pleasant taste of my sugared joys doth yet remain so
perfect in my remembrance, that the least sop of sorrow seems more sour th^
gall in my mouth: if I had never known delight, with better contentatio might
I have passed these dreadful dolours. And if this old.M. impsimus (whom the
pockes consume) should wyn her, then may I say, farewell the pleasant talk,
the kind embracings, yea farewell the sight of my Polynesta, for he like a
ielouse wretch will pen ^ir up, that I think the birds of the air shall not
win the sight of her. I hoped to have caste a block in his way, by the
means that my seruaunt, who is supposed to be Erostrato, and with my habit
and credit is well esteemed, should proffer himself a suitor, at the least to
countervail the doctors proffers: but my master knowing the wealth of the one,
and doubting the state of the other, is determined to be fed no longer with
fair words, but to accept the doctor, (whom he right well knows) for his
son in law: well, my seruaunt promised me yesterday to devise yet again some
new conspiracy to drive master doctor out of conceit, and to lay a snare
that the fox himself might be caught in, what it is, I know not, nor I saw
him not since he went about it: I will go see if he be within, that at least
if he help me not, he may yet prolong my life for this once. But here comes
his lackey, ho Jack hark, where is Erostrato?

ERostrato? mary he is in his skin.

Ah hooresone boy, I say, howe shall I find Erostrato?


Find him? howe mean you, by the week or by the year.


You crack halter, if I catch you by the ears, I shall make you answer me
directly.


In deed?


Tarry me a little.


In faith sir I have no leisure.


Shall we try who can run fastest?


Your legs be longer than mine, you should have given me the aduauntage.


Go to, tell me where is Erostrato?


I left him in the street, where he gave me this Casket, this basket I would
have said, and bad me bear it to Dalio, and return to him at the Dukes
Palace.


If thou see him, tell him I must needs speak with him immediately: or abide
awhyle, I will go seek him my self, rather than be suspected by going to his
house.


I Think if I had as many eyes as Argus, I could not have sought a man more
narrowly in every street and every by lane, there are not many gentlemen,
scholars, nor Marcha^ntes in the City of Ferrara, but I have met with them,
except him, peradventure he is come home an other way: but look where he
comes at the last.

In good time have I spied my good master.


For the love of God call me Dulipo, not master, maintain the credit that
thou haste hitherto kept, and let me alone.


Yet sir let me sometimes do my duty unto you, especially where no body
hears.


Yea, but so long the Parat uses to cry knap in sporte, that at the last
she calls her master knave in earnest: so long you will use to call me
master, that at the last we shall be heard. What news?


Good.


In deed?


Yea excellent, we have as good as won the wager.


Oh, how happy were I if this were true.


Hear you me, yesternight in the evening I walked out, and found Pasiphilo,
and with small entreating I had him home to supper, where by such means as I
used, he became my great friend, and told me the whole order of our
adversaries determination: yea and what Damon doth intende to do also, and hath
promised me that fro time to time, what he can epsy he will bring me word of
it.


I can not tel whether you know him or no, he is not to trust unto, a very
flattering and a lying knave.


I know him very well, he can not deceive me, and this that he hath told me I
know must needs be true.


And what was it in effect?


That Damon had purposed to give his daughter in marriage to this doctor, upon
ye dower that he hath proffered.


Are these your good news? your excellent news?


Stay awhile, you will understand me before you hear me.


Well, say on.


I answered to that, I was ready to make her the like dower.


Well said.


Abide, you hear not the worst yet.


O God, is there any worse behind?


Worse? why what assurance could you suppose that I might make without some
special consent from Philogono my father?


Nay you can tell, you are better scholer than I.


In deed you have lost your time: for the books that you toss now a days,
treat of small science.


Leave thy jesting, and proceed.


I said further, that I received letters lately from my father, whereby I
understood that he would be here very shortly to perform all that I had
proffered: therefore I required him to request Damo on my behalf, that he would
stay his promise to the doctor for a fourthnight or more.


This is somewhat yet, for by this means I shall be sure to linger and live in
hope one fourthnight longer, but at the fourthnights end when Philogono
comes not, how shall I then do? yea and though he came, howe may I any way
hope of his consent, when he shall see, that to follow this amorous enterprise,
I have set aside all study, all remembrance of my duty, and all dread of
shame. Alas, alas, I may go hang my self.


Comfort your self man, and trust in me: there is a salve for every sore, and
doubt you not, to this mischief we shall find a remedy.


O friend revive me, that hitherto since I first attempted this matter have
been continually dying.


Well, harken a while then: this morning I took my horse and rode into the
fields to solace my self, and as I passed the ford beyonds S. Anthonies
gate, I met at the foot of the hill a gentleman riding with two or three men,
and as me thought by his habit and his looks, he should be none of the wise^.
He saluted me, and I him: I asked him from whence he came, and whither he
would? he answered that he had come from Venice, then from Padua, now was
going to Ferrara, and so to his country, which is Scienna: As soon as I
know him to be a Scenese, suddenly lifting up mine eyes, as it were with an
admiration I said unto him, are you a Scenese, and come to Ferrara? why not,
said he: quoth I, half and more with a trembling voice, know you the danger
that should ensue if you be known in Ferrara to be a Scenese? he more than
half amassed, desired me earnestly to tell him what I meant.


I understand not where this tends.


I believe you, but hearken to me.


Go too then.


I answered him in this sort: Gentleman, because I have heretofore found very
courteous entertainment in your country, being a student there, I account my
self as it were bound to a Scenese, and therefore if I knew of any mishap
towards any of that country, God forbid but I should disclose it: and I
marvel that you know not of the injury that your countrymen offered this
other day to the Ambassadors of County Hercule.


What tales he tells me: what appertain these to me?


If you will harken a while, you shall find them no tales, but that they
appertain to you more than you think for.


Forth.


I told him further, these Ambassadoures of County Hercule had divers Mules,
Waggons, and Charettes, laden with diverse costly jewels, gorgeous furniture,
other things which they carried as presents, passing that way to the king of
Naples* the which were not only stayed in Sciene by the officers who you cal
Customers, but searched, ransacked, tossed turned, in the end exacted for
tribute, as if they had been the goods of a mean merchant.


Whither the devil will he? is it possible that this gear appertains any
thing to my cause? I find neither head nor foot in it.


O how impaciet you are: I pray you stay a while.


Go to yet a while then.


I proceeded, that upon these causes the Duke sent his Chancellor to declare
the case unto the Senate there, of whom he had the most discourteous answer
that ever was heard, whereupon he was so enraged with all of that country, that
for revenge he had sworn to spoil as many of them as ever should come to
Ferrara, and to send them home in their doublet and their hose.


And I pray thee how could thou upon the sudden devise or imagine such a
lye? and to what purpose?


You shall hear by and by a thing as fit for our purpose, as any could have
happened.


I would fain hear you conclude.


You would fain leap over the stile, before you come at the hedge: I would
you had heard me, and seen the gestures that I enforced to make him believe
this.


I believe you, for I know you can counterfeit well.


Further I said, the duke had charged upon great penalties, that the Inholders
and vitlers should bring word daily of as many Sceneses as came to their
houses: the gentleman being (as I guessed at the first) a man of small sapientia,
when he heard these news, would have turned his horse an other way.


By likelyhoode he was not very wise when he would believe that of his cuntrey,
which if it had been true, every man must needs have known it.


Why not? when he had not been in his country for a month paste, and I told
him this had happened within these seven days.


Belike he was of small experience.


I think, of as little as may be: but best of all for our purpose, and good
adventure it was, that I met with such an one. Now harken I pray thee.


Make an end I pray thee.


He, as I say, when he hard these words, would have turned the bridle, I
say^ing a countenance as though I were somewhat pensive careful for him,
passed a while, and after with a great sigh said to him: gentleman, for the
courtesy that (as I said) I have found in your country, and because your
affairs shall be the better dispatched, I will find the means to lodge you
in my house, and you shall say to every man, that you are a Sicilan of
Cathanea, your name Philogono, father to me that am in dede of that country
and city, called here Erostrato: and I (to pleasure you) will (during your
abode here) do you reverence as you were my father.


Out upon me, what a gross hedded fool am I? now I perceive whereto this tale
tends.


Well, and how like you of it?


Indifferently, but one thing I doubt.


What is that?


Marie, that when he has been here two or three days, he shall hear of every
man that there is no such thing between the Duke and the Town of Sciene.


As for that let me alone, I do entertain and will entertain him so well,
that within these two or three days I will disclose unto him all the whole
matter, and doubt not but to bring him in for performance of as much as I
have promised to Damon: for what hurt can it be to him, when he shall bind a
strange name and not his own?


What, think you he will be entreated to stand hound for a dower of two
thousand Ducats by the year?


Yea why not, if it were ten thousand, as long as he is not in deed the man
that is bound?


Well, if it be so, what shall we be the nearer to our purpose.


Why, when we have done as much as we can, how can we do any more?


And where have you left him?


At the Inn, because of his horses, he and his men shall lye in my house.


Why brought you him not with you?


I thought better to use your advise first.


Well, go take him home, make him all the cheer you can, spare for no cost, I
will allow it.


Content, loke where he comes.


Is this he? go meet him, by my truth he looks even like a go^d soul, he
that fishes for him, might be sure to catch a cods head: I will rest here a
while to decipher him.


HE that travails in this world passes by many perils.

You say true sir, if the boat had been a little more laden this morning at
the ferry, we had been all drowned, for I think, there are none of us that
could have swam.


I speak not of that.


O you mean the foul way that we had since we* came from this Pad^a, I
promise you, I was afraid twice or thrice, that your mule would have lien
fast in the mire.


Iesu, what a blockehead thou art, I speak of the peril we are in presently
since we came into this city.


A great peril I promise you, that we were no so^er arrived, than you found a
friend that brought you from the Inn, and lodged you in his own house.


Yea marie, God reward the gentle young man that we met, for else we had been
in a wise case by this time. But have done with these tales, and take you
heed, and you also sir, take heed y^ none of you say we be Sceneses, and
remember that you call me Philogano of Cathanea.


Sure I shall never remember these outlandish words I could well remember
Haccanea.


I say, Cathaenea, and not Haccanea, with a vengeance.


Let another name it then when need is, for I shall never remember it.


Then hold thy peace, and take heed thou name not Scene.


Howe say you, if I fain my self dum as I did once in the house of
Crisobolus?


Do as thou think best: but look where comes the gentleman whom we are
so much bound unto.


Welcome, my dear father Philogano.


Gramercy my good son Erostrato.


That is well said, be mindful of your tong, for these Ferareses be as crafty
as the devil of hell.


No, no, be you sure we will do as you have bidden us.


For if you should name Scene they would spoil you immediately, and turn you
out of the town, with more shame, than I would should befall you for a
thousand Crown^s.


I warrant you, I was giving the warning as I came to you, and I doubt not but
they will take good heed.


Yea and trust not the servants of my household to far, for they are
F^rareses all, and never knew my father, nor came never in Sicilia: this is my
house, will it please you to go in? I will follow.


THis gear hath had no evil beginning, if it continue so and fall to happy
end. But is not this the silly doctor with the side bonet, the doting fool,
that dare presume to become a suitor to such a peerless Paragons? O howe
covetousness doth blind the common sort of men: Damon more desirous of the
dower, than mindful of his gentle gallant daughter, has determined to make
him his son in law who for his age may he his father in law, and hath
greater respect to the abundance of goods, than to his own natural child. He
bears well in mind to fill his own purse, but he little remembers that his
daughters purse shall be continually empty, unless Master Doctor fill it with
double duck eggs. Alas, I jest and have no joy, I will stand here aside and
laugh a little at this lobcocke.

Master, what the devil mean you to go seek guests at this time of the
day? the Majors officers have dy^ed ere this time, which are always the last in
the market.

I come to seek Pasiphilo, to the end he may dine with me.


As though six mouths and the cat for the seventh, be not sufficient to eat
an harlotry shotterell, a pennieworthe of chese, and half a score spurlinges,
this is all the dainties you have dressed for you and your family.


Ah greedy gut, art thou afeared thou shalt want?


I am afeared in deed, it is not the first time I have found it so.


Shall I make some sporte with this gallant? what shall I say to him?


Thou art afeared belike that he will eat thee and the rest.


Nay, rather that he will eat your mule, both hear and hyde.


Hear and hyde? and why not flesh and all?


Because she hath none, if she had any flesh, I think you had eaten her your
self by this time.


She may thank you then, for your good attendance.


Nay she may thank you for your small allowance.


In faith now let me alone.


Hold thy peace drunken knave, and espy me Pasiphilo.


Since I can do no better, I will set such a staunce between him and
Pasiphilo, that all this town shall not make them friends.


Could you not have sent to seek him, but you must come your self? surely
you come for some other purpose, for if you would have had Pasiphilo to dinner,
I warrant you he would have tarried here an hour since.


Hold thy peace, here is one of Damons servant, of him I shall understand
where he is: good fellow art not thou one of Damons servants?


Yes sir, at your knamandement.


Gramercy, tell me then, hath Pasiphilo been there this day or no?


Yes sir, and I think he be there still, ah, ah, ah.


What laugh thou?


At a thing, that every man may not laugh at.


What?


Talk, that Pasiphilo had with my master this day.


What talk I pray thee?


I may not tell it.


Doth it concern me?


Nay I will say nothing.


Tell me.


I can say no more.


I would but know if it concern me, I pray thee tel me.


I would tell you, if I were sure you would not tell it again.


Believe me I will keep it close: Carrion give us leave a little, go aside.


If my master should know that it came by me, I were better die a thousand
deaths.


He shall never know it, say on.


Yea, but what assurance shall I have?


I lay thee my faith and honesty in pane.


A pretty pane, the fulkers will not lend you a farthing on it.


Yea, but amongst honest men it is more worth than gold.


Yea marie sir, but where be they? but will you needs have me to tell it unto
you?


Yea I pray thee if it any thing appertain to me.


Yes it is of you, and I would gladly tell it you, because I would not have
such a man of worship so scorned by a villain ribaulde.


I pray thee tell me then.


I will tell you so that you will swear never to tell it to Pasiphilo, to my
master, nor to any other body.


Surely it is some toy devised to get some money of him.


I think I have a book here.


If he knew him as well as I, he would never go about it, for he may as
soon get one of his teeth from his jaws with a pair of pinchers, as a penny
out of his purs^ with such a conceit.


Here is a letter will serve the turn: I swear to thee by the contents hereof
never to disclose it to any man.


I will tell you, I am sorry to see how Pasiphilo doth abuse you, persuading
you that always he labours for you, where in de^de, he lies on my master
continually, as it were with tooth and nail for a stranger, a scholer, borne
in Sicilia they call him Roscus or arskisse, he has a mad name I can never
hit upon it.


And thou recknest it as madly: is it not Erostrato?


That same, I should never have remembered it: the villain speaks all the
evil of you that can ^e devised.


To whom?


To my master, yea and to Polinesta herself sometimes.


Is it possible, Ah slave, and what saith he?


More evil than I can imagine: that you are the miserablest and most nigardly
man that ever was.


Says Pasiphilo so by me?


And that as often as he comes to your house, he is like to die for hunger,
you fare so well.


That the devil take him else.


And that you are the testiest man, and most diverse to please in the whole
world, so that he cannot please you unless he should even kill himself with
continual pain.


O devilish tong.


Furthermore, that you cough continually and spit, so that a dog cannot
abide it.


I never spit nor cough more than thus, vho, vho, and that but since I
caught this murre, but who is free from it?


You say true sir, yet further he saith, your arm holes stincke, your feet
worse than they, and your breathe worst of all.


If I quite him not for this gear.


And that you are bursen in the cods.


O villain, he lies, and if I were not in the street thou shouldest see
them.


And he saith, that you desire this young gentlewoman, as much for other men's
pleasure as for your own.


What means he by that?


Peradventure that by her beauty, you would entice many young men to your
house.


Young men? to what purpose?


Nay, guess you that.


Is it possible that Pasiphilo speaks thus of me?


Yea, and much more.


And doth Damon believe him?


Yea, more than you would think, in such sort, that long ere this, he would
have give you a flat repulse, but Pasiphilo entreated him to continue you a
suitor for his advantage.


How for his advantage?


Marie, that during your suit he might still have some reward for his great
pains.


He shall have a rope, and yet that is more than he deserves: I had thought to
have given him these hose when I had worn them a little nearer, but he shall
have a. c.


In good faith sir, they were but lost on him. Will you any thing else with me
sir?


Nay, I have heard to much of thee already.


Then I will take my leave of you.


Farewell, but tell me, may I not know thy name?


Sir, they call me Foul fall you.


An ill favoured name by my truth, art thou this country man?


No sir, I was borne by a castle me cal Scabbe catch you, fare you well sir.


Farewell, oh God how have I been abused? what a spokesman? what a messanger
had I provided?


Why sir, will you tarry for Pasiphilo till we die for hunger?


Trouble me not, that the devil take you both.


These news what so ever they be, like him not.


Art thou so hungry yet? I pray to God thou he never satisfied.


By the mass no more I shall as long as I am your seruaunt.


Go with mischance.


Yea, and a mischief to you, and to all such covetous wretches.


BY that time we come to the house, I trust that of these xx. eggs in the
basket we shall find but very few whole, but it is a folly to talk to him: what
the devil, wilt thou never lay that stick out of thy hand? he fights with
the dogs, beats the bears, at every thing in the streate he finds
occasion to tarry, if he spy a slipstring by the way such another as himself,
a Page, a Lackey or a dwarf, the devil of hell cannot hold him in chains,
but he will be doing with him: I cannot go two steppes, but I must loke back
for my yonker: go to halter sack, if you break one egg I may chance break.

What will you break? your nose in mine ars^


Ah beast.


If I be a beast, yet I am no horned beast.


Is it even so? is the wind in that door? If I wer^ vnlode I would tel you
whether I be a horned beast or no.


You are always laden either with wine or with ale.


Ah spitef^ll boy, shall I suffer him?


Ah cowardelie beast, dare thou strike and say never a word?


Well, my master shall know of this geere, either he shall redress it, or he
shall lose one of us.


Tel him the worst thou can by me.


What noise, what a rule is this?


Mary sir, he strikes me because I tell him of his swearing.


The villain lies deadly, he reviles me because I bid him make hast.


Holla: no more of this. Dalio, do you make in a readiness those Pigeons,
stock Doves, and also the breast of Ueale: and let your vessel be as clear as
glass against I return, that I may tell you which I will have roasted, which
boiled. Crapine, lay down that basket and follow me. Oh that I could tell
where to find Pasiphilo, but look where he comes that can tell me of him.


What have you done with Philogano your father?


I have left him within, I would fain speak with Pasiphilo, can you tell me
where he is?


He dined this day with my master, but whether he went from thence I know not,
what would you with him?


I would have him go tell Damon that Philogano my father is come and ready to
make assurance of as much as he will require. Now shall I feach master doc^or a
school point, he travails to none other end but to catch Cornua, and he
shall have them, for as old as he is, and as many subtilties as he hath learned
in the law, he can not go beyond me one ace.


O dear friend, go thy ways seek Pasiphilo, find him out, and conclude
somewhat to our contentation.


But where shall I find him?


At the feasts if there be any, or else in the market with the poulters or
the fishemongers.


What should he do with them?


Mary he watches whose Caters by the best meat, if any by a fat Capon, a
good breast of Ueale, fresh Samon or any such good dish, he follows to the
house, and either with some news, or some stale jest he will be sure to make
himself a geast.


In faith, and I will seek there for him.


Then must you needs find him, and when you have done I will make you
laugh.


Whereat?


At certain sport I made to day with master doctor.


And why not now?


No it asks further leisure, I pray thee dispatch, and find out Pasiphilo
that honest man.


THis amorous cause that hangs in cotrouersie between Domine doctor me, may be
compared to the that play at primero, of who some one peradventure shall leese a
great sum of money before he win one stake, at last half in anger shall set up
his rest, win it, after that another, another, another, till at last he draw ye
most part of the money to his heap, ye other by little little still deminishi^g
his rest, till at last he be come as near the brink, as erst ye other was,
yet again peradventure fortune smiling on him, he shall as it were by piece
meal, pull out ye guts of his fellows bags, bring him barer than he himself
was tofore, so in play continue still, (fortune favouring now this way now y^
way) till at last ye one of the is left with as many crosses as God hath
brethren: O howe often have I thought my self sure of the upper hand herein?
but I triumphed before the victory: and then how oft again have I thought
the field^ lost? Thus have I been tossed now over, now under, even as
fortune list to wherle the wheel, neither sure to win nor certain to loose
the wager: and this practise that now my servant hath devised, although
hitherto it hath not succeeded amiss, yet can I not count my self assured of
it, for I fear still that one mischance or other will come and turn it topsy
tur^ie. But look where my master comes.

DVlipo.

Here sir.


Go in and bid Neuola and his fellows come hither that I may tell them what
they shall go about, and go you into my study, there upon the shelf you
shall find a roll of writings which Iohn of the Deane made to my father, when
he sold him the Grange ferme, endorced with both their names: bring it hither
to me.


It shall be done sir.


Go, I will prepare other manner of writings for you tha you are aware of. O
fools that trust any ma but themselves now adays, oh spiteful fortune, thou
doest me wrong I think, that from the depth of Hell pit thou hast sent me
this servant to be the subversion of me and all mine, come hither sirs and
hear what I shall say unto you: go in to my study, where you shall find
Dulippo, step to him all at once, take him and with a corde that I have laid
on the table for the nonce, bind him hand and foot, carry him into the dungeo
under the steares, make fast the door and bring me the kay, it hangs by upon
a pin ou the wall, dispatch and do this gear as privily as you can, and thou
Neuola come hither to me again with speed.


Well sir I shall.


Alas how shall I be revenged of this extreme despite? if I punish my servant
according to his devilish deserts, I shall heap further cares upon mine own
head, for to such detestable offences no punishment can seem sufficient, but
only death: in such cases it is not lawful for a man to be his own carver,
the laws are ord^yned, and officers appointed to minister justice for the
redress of wrongs: and if to the potestates I complain me, I shall publish
mine own reproach to the world: yea, what should it prevail me to use all
the punishments that can be devised? the thing once done can not be undone. My
daughter is deflowered, and utterly dishonested, howe can I then wipe that blot
off my brow? and on whom shall I seek revenge? Alas, alas, I my self have
been the cause of all these cares, and have deserved to bear the punishment of
all these mishaps. Alas, I should not have committed my dearest darling in
custody to so careless a creature as this old Nurse: for we see by common
proof, that these old women be either peevish, or to pitiful: either easily
inclined to evil, or quickly corrupted with bribes and rewards. O wife, my
good wife (that now lie cold in the grave) now may I well bewail the want
of thee, and mourning now may I bemoan that I miss thee: if thou had lived,
such was thy government of the least things, that thou would prudently have
provided for the preservation of this pearl: a costly jewel may I well
account her, that hath been my chief comfort in youth, and is now become
the coro^ue of mine age. O Polynesta, full evil hast thou requ^ed the
clemency of thy careful father, and yet to excuse thee guiltless before God,
and to condemn thee guilty before the world, I can count none other but my
wretched self the caitiff and causer of all my cares: for of all the duties
that are requisite in humane life, only obedience is by the parents to be
required of the child, where on ye other side the parents are bound, first to
beget them, then to bring the forth, after to nourish them, to preserve them
from bodily perils in the cradle, from danger of soul by godly education, to
match them in comfort inclined to virtue, to banish them all idle and wanton
company, to allow them sufficient for their sustentation, to cut of excess
the open gate of sin, seldom or never to smile on them unless it be to
their encouragement in virtue, and finally, to provide them marriages in time
convenient, lest neglected of us, they learn to set either to much or to
little by themselves: five years are past since I might have married her, when
by continual excuses I have prolonged it to my own perdition: Alas, I should
have considered, she is a collop of my own flesh, what should I think to make
her a princess? Alas alas, a poor kingdom have I now caught to endue her
with: it is too true, that of all sorrows this is the head source and chief
fountain of all furies: the goods of the world are uncertain, the gains to
be rejoiced at, and the loss not greatly to be lamented, only the children
cast away, cutteth the parents throat with the knife of inward care, which
knife will kill me surely, I make none other accoumpte.


SIr, we have done as you bad us, and here is the key.

Well, go then Neuola and seek master Casteling the jailer, he dwells by S.
Antonies gate, desire him to lend me a pair of the fetters he uses for his
prisoners, and come again quickly.


Well sir.


Hear you, if he ask what I would do with them, say you ca not tell, and tell
neither him nor any other, what is become of Dulippo.


I warante you sir. Fie upon the Devil, it is a thing almost unpossible for a
man now a days to handle money but the metal will stick on his fingers: I
marvelled always at this fellow of mine Dulippo, that of the wages he received,
he could maintain himself so bravely apparelled, but now I perceive the
cause, he had the disbursing and receipt of al my masters affairs, the keys of
the granair, Dulippo here, Dulippo there, in favour with my master, in favour
with his daughter, what would you more, he was Magister fac totum, he was as
fine as the Crusadoe, and we silly wretches as course as canvas: well, behold
what it is come to in the end,

Thou say true Neuola, he hath done to much in deed.


From whence comes thou in the devils name?


Out of the same house thou came from, but not out of the same door.


We had thought thou had been gone long since.


When I arose from the table, I felt a rumbling in my belly, which made me
run to the stable, and there I fell on sleep upon the straw, and have line
there ever since: And thou, whether go thou?


My Master hath sent me on an errand in great hast.


Whether I pray thee?


Nay I may not tell, Farewell.


As though I need any further instructions: O God what news I hard even now,
as I lay in the stable: O good Erostrato and pore Cleander, that have so
earnestly strouen for this damsel, happy is he that can get her I promise
you, he shall be sure of mo than one at a clap that catches her, either Adam or
Eve within her belly: oh God how men may be deceived in a woman: who wold have
believed the contrary but that she had bin a virgin? ask the neighbours and
you shall hear very good report of her, mark her behauiors you would have
judged her very maidenly, seldom seen abroad but in place of prayer, and
there very devout, and no gaser at outward sights, no blaser of her beauty
above in the windows, no stal at the door for the bypassers: you would have
thought her a holy young woman. But much good do it you Domine Doctor, he
shall be sure to lack no corn in a dear year, whatsoever he have with her
else: I beshrew me if I let the marriage any way. But is not this the old
scabbed queen that I heard disclosing al this geere to her master, as I stood
in the stable ere now? it is she. Whither goes Psiteria?


TO a Gossip of mine hereby.

What? to tattle of the goodly stir that thou keptst concerning Polynesta.


No, no: but how knew you of that geere?


You told me.


I? when did I tell you?


Even now when you told it to Damon, I both saw you and heard you, though you
saw not me: a good part I promise you, to accuse the poor wench, kill the
old man with care, over and besides the danger you have brought Dulipo and
the Nurse unto, and many more, fie, fie.


In deed I was to blame, but not so much as you think.


And how not so much did I not hear you tell?


Yes, But I will tell you how it came to pass: I have known for a great
while, that this Dulipo and Polynesta have been together, and all by the
means of the nurse, yet I held my peace, and never told it. Now this other
day the Nurse fell on scolding with me, and twice or thryce called me drunken
old whore, and such names that it was t^o bad: and I called her ^aude, and
told her that I knew well enough howe often she had brought Dulipo to
Polynestas bed: yet all this while I thought not that any body had heard me,
but it befell clean contrary, for my master was on the other side of the
wall, and heard all our talk, whereupon he sent for me, and forced me to
confess all that you heard.


And why would thou tell him? I would not for. c.


Well, if I had thought my master would have taken it so, he should rather
have killed me?


Why? how could he take it?


Alas, it pitieth me to see the poor young woman how she weeps, wails, and
tears her hear, not esteming her own life half so dear as she doth poor
Dulipoes: and her father, he weeps on the other side, that it would pearce an
hart of stone with pity: but I must be gone.


Go that the gone powder consume the old trot.


WHat shall I do? Alas what remedy shall I find for my rueful estate? what
escape, or what excuse may I now devise to shift over our subtle supposes?
for though to this day I have usurped the name of my master, and that without
chec^e or control of any man, now shall I be openly discyphred, and that in the
sight of every man: now shall it openly be known, whether I be Erostrato the
gentleman, or Dulipo the seruaunt: we have hitherto played our parts in
abusing others, but now comes the man that will not be abused, the right
Philogono the right father of the right Erostrato, going to seek Pasiphilo, and
hearing that he was at the water gate, behold I espied my seruaunt Litio, and
by and by my old master Philogano setting forth his first step on land, I to
fuge and away hither as fast as I could to bring word to the right Erostrato,
of his right father Philogano, that to so sudden a mishap some subtle shift
might be upon the sudden devised. But what can be imagined to serve the turn,
although we had a months respite to beat our brains about it, since we are
commoly know, at the least supposed in this town, he for Dulipo, a slave
servant to Damon, I for Erostrato a gentleman a student? But behold, run
Crapine to yonder old woman before she get within the doors, desire her to
call out Dulipo: but hear you? if she ask who would speak with him, say thy
self and none other.

HOnest woman, you gossip, thou rotten whore, hear thou not old witche?

A rope stretch your young bones, either you must live to be as old as I, or
be hanged while you are young.


I pray thee loke if Dulipo be within.


Yes that he is I warrant him.


Desire him then to come hither and speak a word with me, he shall not tarry.


Content your self, he is otherwise occupied.


Yet tell him so gentle girl.


I tell you he is busy.


Why is it such a matter to tell him so, thou crooked Crone?


A rope stretch you marie.


A pockes eat you marie.


Thou wilt be hanged I warrant thee, if thou live to it.


And thou wilt be burnt I warrant thee, if the canker consume thee not.


If I come near you hempstring, I will teach now to sing sol fa.


Come on, and if I get a stone I will scare crows with you.


Go with a mischief, I think thou be some devil that would tempte me.


Crapine: hear you? come away, let her go with a vengeance, why come you not?
Alas loke where my master Philogano comes: what shall I do? where shall I
hide me? he shall not see me in these clothes, nor before I have spoken with
the right Erostrato.


HOnest man it is even so: be you sure there is no love to be compared like the
love of the parents towards their children, it is not long since I thought that
a very weighty matter should not have made me come out of Sicilia, and yet
now I have taken this tedious toil and travail upon me, only to see my son,
to have him home with me.

By my faith sir it hath been a great travail in de^e and to much for one of
your age?


Yea be you sure: I came in company with certain gentlemen of my country,
who had affairs to dispatch as far as to Ancona, from thence by water to
Rauenna, and from Rauenna hither, continually against the tide.


Yea, I think y^ you had but homly lodging by ye way.


The worst ye ever man had, but that was nothing to the stir that ye searchers
kept with me when I came aborde y^ ship, Iesus how oft they vntrussed my male
ransacked a little capcase that I had, tossed turned all that was within it,
searched my bosom, yea my breeches, that I assure you I thought they would have
flayed me to search between the fell and the fl^she for fardings.


Sure I have heard no less, and that the merchants bobbe them some times, but
they play the knaves still.


Yea be you well assured, for such an office is the inheritance of a knave,
and an honest man will not meddle with it.


Well, this passage shall seem pleasant unto you when you shall find your
child in health and well: but I pray you sir why did you not rather send for
him into Sicilia, tha to come your self, specially since you had none other
business? peradventure you had rather endanger your self by this noisome
journey, than hazard to draw him from his study.


Nay, that was not y^ matter, for I had rather have him give over his study
altogether and come home.


Why? if you minded not to make him learned, to what end did you send him
hither at the first?


I will tell you: when he was at home he did as most young men do, he played
many mad pranks and did many things that liked me not very well, and I
thinking, that by that time he had scene the world, he would learn to know
himself better, exhorted him to study, and put in his electio what place he
would go to. At the last he came hither, and I think he was scarce here so
soon as I felt the want of him, in such sort, as from that day to this I
have passed few nights without tears: I have written to him very often that
he should come home, but continually he refused still, beseeching me to
continue his study, wherein he doubted not (as he said) but to profit greatly.


In dede he is very much commended of all men, and specially of the best
reputed students.


I am glad he hath not lost his time, but I care not greatly for so much
knowledge, I would not be without the sight of him again so long, for all
the learning in the world. I am old now, and if God should call me in his
absence, I promise you I think it would drive me into desperation.


It is commendable in a man to love his children, but to be so tender over them
is more womanlike?


Well, I confess it is my fault: and yet I will tell you another cause of my
coming hither, more weighty than this. Diverse of my country have been here
since he came hither, by whom I have sent unto him, and some of the have been
thrice, some four or five times at his house, and yet could never speak with
him: I fear he applies his study so, that he will not leese the minute of an
hour from his book. What, alas, he might yet talk with his countrymen for a
while, he is a young man, tenderly brought up, and if he fare thus continually
night and day at his book, it may be enough to drive him into a frenesie.


In dede, enough were as good as a feast: lo^ you sir, here is your son
Erostratoes house, I will knock.


Yea, I pray you knock.


They hear not.


Knock again.


I think they be on sleep.


If this gate were your Grandefathers soul, you could not knock more softly,
let me come: ho, ho, is there any body within?


WHat devil of hell is there? I think he will break the gates in pieces.

Marie fir, we had thought you had been on sleep within, and therefore we
thought best to make you: what doth Erostrato?


He is not within.


Open the door good fellow I pray thee.


If you think to lodge here, you are deceived I tell you, for here are guests
enough already.


A good fellow, and much for thy masters honesty by our Lady: and what
guests I pray thee?


Here is Philogano my masters father, lately come out of Sicilia.


Thou speak truer than thou art aware of, he will be, by that time thou hast
opened the door: open I pray thee heartily.


It is a small matter for me to open the door, but here is no lodging for you,
I tell you plain, the house is full.


Of whom?


I told you: here is Philogano my masters father come from Cathanea.


And when came he?


He came three hours since, or more, he alighted at the Angel, and left his
horses there: afterward my master brought him hither.


Good fellow, I think thou haste good sport to mock me.


Nay, I think you have good sporte to make me tarry here, as though I have
nothing else to do: I am matched with an vnrulye mate in the kitchen, I will
go loke to him another while.


I think he be drunken.


Sure he seems so: see you not how red he is about the gills?


Abide fellow, what Philogano is it whom thou talk of?


An honest gentleman, father t^ Erostrato my master.


And where is he?


Here within.


May we see him?


I think you may if you be not blind.


Go to, go tell him here is one wold speak with him.


Mary that I will willingly do.


I can not tell what I should say to this geere, Litio what think thou of
it?


I cannot tell you what I should say sir, the world is large and long, there
may be more Philoganos and more Erostratos than one, yea and more Ferraras, more
Sicilias, and more Cathaneas: peradventure this is not that Ferrara which you
sent your son unto.


Peradventure thou art a f^le, and he was another that answered us even now.
But be you sure honest man, that you mistake not the house?


Nay, then god help, think you I know not Erostratos house? yes, and
himself also: I saw him here no longer since tha yesterday: but here comes
one that will tell us tidings of him. I like his countenance better than the
others that answered at the window erewhile.


WOuld you speak with me sir?

Yea sir, I would fain know whence you are.


Sir I am a Sicilian, at your commandment.


What part of Sicilia?


Of Cathanea.


What shall I call your name?


My name is Philogano.


What trade do you occupy?


Merchandise.


What merchandise brought you hither?


None, I came only to see a son that I have here, whom I saw not these two
years.


What call they your son?


Erostrato.


Is Erostrato your son?


Yea verily.


And are you Philogano.


The same.


And a merchant of Cathanea?


What need I tell you so often? I will not tell you a lye.


Yes, you have told me a false lie, and thou art a villain and no better.


Sir, you offer me great wrong with these injurious words.


Nay, I will do more than I have yet proffered to do, for I will prove thee a
liar, and a knave to take upon thee that thou art not.


Sir I am Philogano of Cathenea, out of all doubt, if I were not I would be
loathe to tell you so.


Oh, see the boldness of this brute beast, what a brazen face he sets on
it?


Well, you may believe me of you list: what wonder you?


I wonder at thy impudency, for thou, nor nature that framed thee, can ever
counterfeit thee to be me, ribald villain, and lying wretch that thou art.


Shall I suffer a knave to abuse my masters father thus? hence villain,
hence, or I will sheath this good fawchio in your pauch: if my master
Erostrato find you prating here on this fashio to his father, I wold not be in
your coat for mo cunnie skins than I gat these twelve months: come you in
again sir, and let this Cur bark here till he burst.


LItio, how likest thou this geere?

Sir, I like it as evil as may be, but have you not often heard tell of the
falsehood of Ferrara, and now may you see, it falls out accordingly.


Friend, you do not well to slander the City, these men are no Ferrareses you
may know by their tong.


Well, there is never a barrel better herring, between you both: but in deed
your officers are most to blame, that suffer such faults to escape unpunished.


What know the officers of this? think you they know of every fault?


Nay, I think they will know as little as may be, specially when they have no
gains by it, but they ought to have their ears as open to hear of such
offeces, as the Ingates be to receive guests.


Hold thy peace fool.


By the mass I am afeared that we shall be proved fools both two.


Well, what shall we do?


I would think best we should go seek Erostrato him self.


I will wait upon you willingly, and either at the schools, or at the
convocations, we shall find him.


By our Lady I am weary, I will run no longer about to seek him, I am sure
hither he will come at the last.


Sure, my mind gives me that we shall find a new Erostrato ere it be long.


Look where he is, whether runs he? stay you awhile, I will go tell him that
you are here: Erostrato, Erostrato, ho Erostrato, I would speak with you.


Now can I hide me no longer, Alas what shall I do? I will set a good face
on, to bear out the matter.


O Erostrato, Philogano your father is come, of Sicilia.


Tell me that I know not, I have been with him and seen him already.


Is it possible? and it seems by him that you know not of his coming.


Why, have you spoken with him? when saw you him I pray you?


Loke you where he stands, why go you not to him? Look you Philogano,
behold your dear son Erostrato.


Erostrato? this is not Erostrato, this seems rather to be Dulippo, and it
is Dulippo in deed.


Why, doubt you of that?


What saith this honest man?


Mary sir, in deed you are so honourably clad, it is no marvel if you loke
big.


To whom speaks he?


What, God help, do you not know me?


As far as I remember Sir, I never saw you before.


Hark Litio, here is good geere, this honest man will not know me.


Gentleman, you take your marks amiss.


Did I not tell you of the falsehood of Ferrara master? Dulippo hath learned to
play the knave indifferently well since he came hither.


Peace I say.


Friend, my name is not Dulippo, ask you thorough out this town of great and
small, they know me: ask this honest man that is with you, if you will not
believe me.


In deed, I never knew him otherwise called than Erostrato, and so they call
him, as many as know him.


Master, now you may see the falsehood of these fellows, this honest man your
host, is of counsel with him, and would face us down that it is Erostrato:
beware of these mates.


Friend, thou doest me wrong to suspect me, for sure I never heard him
otherwise called than Erostrato.


What name could you hear me called by, but by my right name? But I am wise
enough to stand prating here with this old man, I think he be mad.


Ah runagate, ah villain traitor, doest thou use thy master thus? what hast
thou done with my son villain?


Doth this dog bark here still? and will you suffer him master thus to
revile you?


Come in, come in, what wilt thou do with this pestil?


I will rap the old cackabed on the costerd.


Away with it, you sir, lay down these stones, come in at door every one of
you, bear with him for his age, I pass not of his evil words.


ALas, who shall reli^ue my miserable estate? to whom shall I complain, since
he whom I brought up of a child, yea and cherished him as if he had been
mine own, doth now utterly deny to know me? and you whom I toke for an
honest man, and he that should have brought me to the sight of my son, are
compact with this false wretch, and would face me down that he is Erostrato.
Alas, you might have some compassion of mine age, to the misery I am now in,
and that I am a stranger desolate of all comfort in this country, or at the
least, you should have feared the vengeance of God the supreme judge (which
knows the secrets of all harts) in bearing this false witness with him,
whom heaven and ^arth do know to be Dulippo and not Erostrato.

If there be many such witness in this country, me may go about to prove
what they will in controversies here.


Well sir, you may judge of me as it pleases you, and howe the matter comes
to pass I know not, but truly, ever since he came first hither, I have
known him by the name of Erostrato y^ son of Philogano a Cathanese, now
whether he be so in dede, or whether he be Dulipo, (as you aleadge) let that be
proved by them that knew him before he came hither. But I protest before god,
that which I have said, is neither a matter compact with him, nor any other,
but eve as I have hard him called reputed of al me.


Out and alas, he whom I sent hither with my son to be his seruaunt, and to
give attendance on him, hath either cut his thr^ate, or by some evil means
made him away, and hath not only taken his garments, his books, his money,
and that which he brought out of Sicilia with him, but usurps his name
also, and turns to his own commodity the bills of exchange that I have
always allowed for my sons expenses, Oh miserable Philogano, oh unhappy
old man: oh eternal god, is there no judge? no officer? no higher powers whom
I may complain unto for redress of these wrongs?


Yes sir, we have potestates, we have Judges, and above al, we have a most
just prince, doubt you not, but you shall have justice if your cause be just.


Bring me then to the Judges, to the potestates, or to whom you think best:
for I will disclose a pa^t of the greatest knavery, a farthel of the foulest
falsehode that ever was heard of.


Sir, he that will go to the civil law, must be sure of four things: first,
a right and a just cause: then a righteous doctor to plead: next, favour Coram
Iudice: and above all, a good purse to procure it.


I have not heard, that the law hath any respect to favour, what you mean by
it I cannot tell.


Have you no regard to his words, he is but a (...).


I pray you sir, let him tell me what is favour?


Favour cal I, to have a friend near about the Judge, who may so solicit thy
cause, as if it be right, speedy sentence may ensue without any delays: if it
be not good, then to prolong it, till at the last, thine adversary being
weary, shall be glad be compound with thee.


Of thus much (although I never heard thus much in this country before) doubt
you not Philogano, I will bring you to an advocate that shall speed you
accordingly.


Then shall I give my self, as it were a pray to the doctors, whose insatiable
jaws I am not able to feed, although I had here all the goods and lands
which I possess in mine own country, much less being a strauger in this
misery. I know their cautels of old: at the first time I come they will so
extol my cause, as though it were already won: but within in seuenight or ten
days, if I do not continually feed them as the crow doth her brattes, twenty
times in an hour, they will begin to wax cold, and to find canels in my
cause, saying, that at the first I did not well instruct them: till at the
last, they will not only draw the stuffing out of my purse, but the marrow
out of my bones.


Yea sir, but this man that I tell you of, is half a Saint.


And the other half a Devil, I hold a penny.


Well said Litio, in deed I have but small confidence in their smothe looks.


Well sir, I think this whom I mean, is no such manner of man: but if he
were, there is such hatred and evil will between him and this gentleman
(whether he be Erostrato or Dulippo, what so ever he be) that I warrant you, he
will do what so ever he can do for you, were it but to spite him.


Why? what hatred is betwixt them?


They are both in love and suitors to one gentlewoman, the daughter of a wealthy
man in this city.


Why? is the villeine become of such estimati^n that he dare presume to be a
suitor to any gentlewoman of a good family?


Yea sir out of all doubt.


How call you his adversary?


Cleander, one of the excellentest doctors in our city.


For gods love let us go to him.


Go we then.


WHat a mishap was this? that before I could meet with Erostrato, I have
light even full in the lap of Philogano, where I was constrained to deny my
name, to deny my master, and to fain that I knew him not, to contend with
him, and to revile him, in such sort, that hap what hap can, I can never hap
well in favour with him again: therefore if I could come to speak with the
right Erostrato. I will renounce unto him both habit and credit, away as
fast as I can trudge into some strange country, where I may never see
Philogano again. Alas, he that of a little child hath brought me up unto this
day, and nourished me as if I had been his own: and in dede (to confess ye
troth) I have no father to trust unto but him. But loke where Pasiphilo
comes, the fittest man in the world to go on my message to Erostrato.

TWo good news have I heard to day already, one that Erostrato prepared a
great feast this night: y^ other, that he seeks for me, and I to ease him of
his travail, least he should run up and down seeking me, and because no
man loves better tha I to have an errand where good cheer is, come in post
hast even home to his own house: and loke where he is.

Pasiphilo, thou must do one thing for me if thou love me.


If I love you not, who loves you, command me?


Go then a little there, to Damons house, ask for Dulipo, and tell him.


Wot you what? I cannot speak with him, he is in prison.


In prison? how comes that to pass? where is he in prison?


In a vile dungeon there within his masters house.


Can thou tell wherefore?


Be you content to know he is in prison, I have told you to much.


If ever you will do any thing for me, tell me.


I pray you desire me not, what were you the better if you knew?


More than thou think Pasiphilo by god.


Well, and yet it stands me upon more than you think, to keep it secrete


Why Pasiphilo, is this the trust I have had in you? are these the fair
promyses you have always made me?


By the mass I would I had fasted this night with master doctor, rather than
have come hither.


Well Pasiphilo, either tell me, or at few words never think to be welcome
to this house from hence forth.


Nay, yet I had rather leese all the gentlemen in this town, but if I tell you
any thing that displease you, blame no body but your self now.


There is nothing can grieve me more tha Dulipos mishap, no not mine own, and
therefore I am sure thou can tell me no worse tidings.


Well, since you would needs have it, I will tell you: he was taken a bed with
your beloved Polynesta.


Alas, and doth Damon know it?


An old trot in the house disclosed it to him, whereupon he took both Dulipo
and the Nurse which hath been the broker of all this bargain, and clapte them
both in a cage, where I think they shall have sour soppes to their sweet
meates.


Pasiphilo, go thy ways into the kitchen, command the cooke to boyle and
roast what likes thee best, I make thee supra visor of this supper.


By the mass if you should have studied this seuenight, you could not have
appointed me an office to please me better, you shall see what dishes I will
devise.


I Was glad to rid him out of the way, least he should see me burst out these
swelling tears, which hitherto with great payne I have prisoned in my breast,
least he should hear the Echo of my doubled sighs, which bounce from the
botome of my heavy heart. O cursed I, O cruel fortune, that so many dispersed
griefs as were sufficient to sub^ert a legion of Lovers, hast suddenly
assembled within my careful carcase to freat this fearful heart in sunder
with desperation: thou that hast kept my master all his youth within the
realm of Sicilia* reserving the wind and waives in a temperate calm (as it
were at his command) now to convey his aged limbs hither, neither sooner
nor later, but even in the worst time that may be: if at any time before thou
had conducted him, this enterprise had been cut off without care in the
beginning: and if never so little longer thou had lingered his journey, this
happy day might then have fully finished our drifts and devises. But alas,
thou hast brought him eve in the very worst time, to plunge us all in the pit
of perdition. Neither art thou content to entangle me alone in thy ruinous
ropes, but thou must also catch the right Erostrato in thy crooked claws, to
reward us both with open shame and rebuke. Two years hast thou kept secret
our subtle Supposes, even this day to decipher them with a sorrowful success.
What shall I do? Alas what shift shall I make? it is too late now to imagine
any further deceit, for every minute seems an hour till I find some succour
for the miserable captive Erostrato. Well, since there is no other remedy, I
will go to my master Philogano, and to him will I tell the whole truth of the
matter, that at the least he may provide in time, before his son feel the
smart of some sharpe revenge punishment: this is the best, and thus will I do:
yet I know, that for mine own part I shall do bitter penance for my faults
forepassed: but such is the good will and duty that I bear to Erostrato, as
even with the loss of my life I must not stick to adventure any thing which
may turn to his commodity. But what shall I do? shall I go seek my master
about the town, or shall I tarry his return hither? If I meet him in the
streets, he will cry out upon me, neither will he harken to any thing that I
shall say, till he have gathered all the people woondring about me, as it were
at an Owl. Therefore I were better to abide here, and yet if he tarry long, I
will go seek him, rather than prolong the time to Erostratos peril.

YEa dress them, but lay them not to the fire, till they will be ready to sit
down: this geere goes in order: but if I had not gone in, there had fallen a
foul fault.

And what fault I pray thee?


Marie, Dalio would have laid the shoulder of mutton and the Capon both to the
fire at once, like a fool, he did not consider, that the one would have more
roasting than the other.


Alas, I would this were the greatest fault.


Why? and either the one should have been burned before the other had ^ene
roasted, or else he must have drawn them off the spit: and they would have
been served to the board either cold or raw.


Thou hast reason Pasiphilo.


Now sir, if it please you I will go into the town and buy oranges, ^lyues,
and caphers, for without such sauce the supper were more than half lost.


There are within already, doubt you not, there shall lack nothing that is
necessary.


Since I told him these news of Dulipo, he is clean beside him self: he
hath so many hammers in his head, that his brains are ready to burst: and let
them break, so I may sup with him to night, what care I? But is not this
Dominus noster Cleandrus that comes before? well said, by my truth we will
teach master Doctor to wear a cornerd cap of a new fashion: by God
Polynesta shall be his, he shall have her out of doubt, for I have told
Erostrato such news of her, that he will none of her.


YEa, but how wilt* ye prove that he is not Erostrato, having such presumptios
to the contrary? or how shall it be thought that you are Philogano, when an
other takes upon him this same name, and for proof brings him for a
witness, which hath been ever reputed here for Erostrato?

I will tell you sir, let me ^e kept here fast in prison, and at my charges
let there be some man sent into Sicilia* that may bring hither with him two or
three of the honestest men in Cath^nea and by them let it be proved if I or
this other be Philogano, and whether he be Erostrato or Dulipo my servant: and
if you find me contrary, let me suffer death for it.


I will go salute master Doctor.


It will ask great labour great expenses to prove it this way, but it is the
best remedy that I can see.


God save you sir.


And reward you as you have deserved.


Then shall be give me your favour continually.


He shall give you a halter, knave and villein that thou art.


I know I am a knave, but no villein, I am your seruaunt.


I neither take thee for my servant, nor for my friend.


Why? wherein have I offended you sir?


Hence to the gallows knave.


What soft and fair sir, I pray you, I prae se^, you are mine elder.


I will be even with you, be you sure, honest man.


Why sir? I never offended you.


Well, I will teach you: out of my sight knave.


What? I am no dog, I would you wist.


Prate thou yet villein? I will make thee.


What will you make me? I see well the more a man d^the suffer you, the worse
you are.


A villein, if it were not for this gentleman, I would tell you what I.


Uillein? nay I am as honest a man as you.


Thou lie in thy throat knave.


O sir, stay your wisdom.


What will you fight? marie come on.


Well knave, I will meet with you another time, go your way.


Even when you list sir, I will be your man.


And if I be not even with thee, call me cut.


Nay by the mass, all is one, I care not, for I have nothing: if I had either
lands or goods, peradventure you would pull me into the law.


Sir, I perceive your patience is moved.


This villeine: but let him go, I will see him punished as he hath deserved.
Now to the matter, howe said you?


This fellow hath disquieted you sir, peradventure you would be loathe to be
troubled any further.


Not a whit, say on, and let him go with a vengeance.


I say, let them send at my charge to Cathanea.


Yea I remember that well, and it is the surest way as this case requires: but
tell me, howe is he your seruaunt? and howe come you by him? inform me fully
in the matter.


I will tell you sir: when the Turks won Otranto.


Oh, you put me in remembrance of my mishaps.


How sir?


For I was driven among the rest out of the town (it is my native country)
and there I lost more than ever I shall recover again while I live.


Alas, a pitiful case by saint Anne.


Well, proceed.


At that time (as I said) there were certain of our country that scoured
those costs upon the seas, with a good bark well appointed for the purpose,
and had espial of a Turkey vessel that came laden from thence with great
abundance of riches.


And peradventure most of mine.


So they boarded them, in the end overcame them, and brought the goods to
Palermo, from whence they came, and amongst other things that they had, was
this villeine my servant, a boy at that time, I think not paste five years
old.


Alas I lost one of that same age there.


And I being there, and liking the Childes favour well, proffered them four
and twenty ducattes for him, and had him.


What? was the child a Turk? or had the Turks brought him from Otranto?


They said he was a Child of Otranto, but what is that to the matter?
once.xxiiij Ducattes he cost me, that I wot well.


Alas, I speak it not for that sir, I would it were he whom I mean.


Why, whom mean you sir?


Beware sir, be not to lavish.


Was his name Dulippo then? or had he not another name?


Beware what you say sir.


What the devil hast thou to do? Dulipo? no sir, his name was Carino.


Yea, well said, tell all and more to, do?


O Lord, if it be as I think, how happy were I? and why did you change his
name then?


We called him Dulippo, because when he cried as Children do sometimes, he
would always cry on that name Dulippo.


Well, then I see well it is my own only Child, whom I lost, when I lost
my country: he was named Carino after his grandfather, and this Dulippo whom
he always remembered in his lamenting, was his foster father that nourished him
and brought him up.


Sir, have I not told you enough of ye falsehood of Ferrara? this gentleman will
not only pick your purse, but beguile you of your seruaunt also, and make you
believe he is his son.


Well goodfellow, I have not used to lie.


Sir no, but every thing hath a beginning.


Fie, Philogano have you not the least suspect^ that may be of me.


No marie, but it were good he had the most suspect that may be.


Well, hold thou thy peace a little good fellow. I pray you tell me Philogano
had y^ child any remembrance of his fathers name, his mothers name or ye name
of his family?


He did remember them, and could name his mother also, but sure I have
forgotten the name.


I remember it well enough.


Tell it then.


Nay, that I will not marie, you have told him to^ much already.


Tell it I say, if thou can.


Ca? yes by y^ mass I ca well enough: but I will have my tong pulled out, rather
tha tell it, unless he tell it first: do you not perceive sir, what he goes
about?


Well, I will tell you then, my name you know already* my wife his mothers name
was Sophronia, the house that I came of, they call Spiagia.


I never heard him speak of Spiagia but in deed I have heard him say, his
mothers name was Sophronia: but what of y^? a great matter I promise you, it is
like enough that you two have compact together to deceive my master.


What needs me more evident tokens? this is my son out of doubt whom I lost
eighteen years since, and a thousand thousand times have I lamented for him:
he should have also a mould on his left shoulder.


He hath a mold there in deed: and an hole in an other place too, I would
your nose were in it.


Fair words fellow Litio: oh I pray you let us go talk with him, O fortune,
howe much am I bound to thee if I find my son?


Yea how small am I behold to fortune, that know not where my son is become,
and you whom I chose to be mine advocate, will now by the means of this
Dulipo become mine adversary?


Sir, let us first go find mine: and I warrant you yours will be found also
ere it be long.


God grant, go we then.


Since the door is open, I will neither knock nor call, but we will be bold
to go in.


Sir, take you heed, least he lead you to some mischief.


Alas Litio, if my son be lost what care I what become of me?


Well, I have told you my mind Sir, do you as you please.


COme hither you old kallat, you tattling huswife, tha^ the devil cut out
your tong: tell me, howe could Pasiphilo know of this geere but by you?

Sir, he never knew it of me, he was the first that told me of it.


Thou lie old drab, but I would advise you tell me the truth, or I will
make those old bones rattle in your skin.


Sir, if you find me contrary, kill me.


Why? where should he talk with thee?


He talked with me of it here in the street.


What did you here?


I was going to the weavers for a web of clothe you have there.


And what cause could Pasiphilo have to talk of it, unless thou began the
matter first?


Nay, he began with me sir, reviling me, because I had told you of it: I asked
him how he knew of it, and he said he was in the stable when you examined me
erewhile.


Alas, alas, what shall I do then? in at doors old whore, I will pluck that
tong of thine out by the roots one day. Alas it grieves me more that
Pasiphilo knows it, than all the rest: he that will have a thing kept
secrete, let him tell it to Pasiphilo, the people shall know it, and as many
as have ears and no mo: by this time he hath told it in a hundredth places.
Cleander was the first, Erostrato the second, and so from one to another
throughout the city. Alas, what dower, what marriage shall I now prepare for
my daughter? O poor dolorous Damon, more miserable than misery it self,
would god it were true that Polinesta, told me ere while: that he who has
deflowered her, is of no servile estate, as hitherto he hath been supposed in my
service: but that he is a gentleman borne of a good parentage in Sicilia. Alas,
small riches should content me, if he be but of an honest family, but I fear
that he has devised these toys to allure my daughters love. Well I will go
examine her again, my mind gives me that I shall perceive by her tale whether
it be true or not. But is not this Pasiphilo that comes out of my neighbours
house? what the devil ails him to leap and laugh so like a fool in the
high way?


O God, that I might find Damon at home.

What the devil would he with me?


That I may be the first that shall bring him these news.


What will he tell me, in the name of God?


O Lord, how happy am I? loke where he is.


What news Pasiphilo, that thou art so merry?


Sir, I am merry to make you glad: I bring you joyful news.


And that I have need of Pasiphilo.


I know sir, that you are a sorrowful man for this mishap that hath chanced
in your house, peradventure you thought I had not known of it: but let it
pass, pluck up you sprites, and rejoice, for he that hath done you this
injury is so well borne, and hath so rich parents, that you may be glad to
make him your son in law.


How know thou?


His father Philogano one of the worthiest men in all Cathanea, is now come to
the city, and is here in your neighbours house.


What, in Erostratos house?


Nay in Dulipos house, for where you have always supposed this gentleman to be
Erostrato, it is not so, but your seruaunt whom you have emprisoned hitherto,
supposed to be Dulipo, he is in dede Erostrato, and that other is Dulipo: and
thus they have always, even since their first ariual in this city, exchanged
names, to the end that Erostrato the master, under the name of Dulipo a
servant, might be entertained in your house, and so win the love of your
daughter.


Well, then I perceive it is eve as Polinesta told me.


Why, did she tell you so?


Yea: But I thought it but a tale.


Well, it is a true tale: and here they will be with you by and by, both
Philogano this worthy man, and master doctor Cleander.


Cleander? what to do?


Cleander? Why thereby lies another tale, the most fortunate adventure that
ever you heard: wot you what? this other Dulipo, whom all this while we
supposed to be Erostrato, is found to be the son of Cleander, whom he lost
at the loss of Otranto, and was after sold in Sicilia to this Philogano, the
strangest case that ever you heard: a ma might make a Comedy of it, they will
come even straight, and tell you the whole circumstance of it themselves.


Nay I will first go hear the story of this Dulipo, be it Dulipo or
Erostrato that I hear within, before I speak with Philogano.


So shall you do well sir, I will go tell them that they may stay a while,
but loke where they come.


SIr, you shall not need to excuse the matter any further, since I have
received no greater injury than by words: let them pass like wind, I take
them well in worth, and am rather well pleased than offended, for it shall
both be a good warning to me another time howe to trust every man at the first
sight* yea, and I shall have good game hereafter to tell this pleasant storye
another day in mine own country.

Gentleman, you have reason, and be you sure, that as many as hear it, will
take great pleasure in it, and you Philogano may think, that god in heaven
above, hath ordained your coming hither at this present, to the end I might
rcouer my lost son, whom by no other means I could ever have found out.


Surely sir I think no less, for I think that not so much as a leaf
falls from the tree, without the ordynance of god. But let us go seek
Damon, for me thinks every day a year, every hour a day, and every minute
to much till I see my Erostrato.


I cannot blame you, go we then, Carino take you that gentleman home in the
mean time, the fewer the better to be present at such affairs.


Master doctor, will you not shewme this favour, to tell me the cause of your
displeasure?

Gentle Pasiphilo, I must needs confess I have done thee wrong, and that I
believed tales of thee, which in deed I find now contrary.


I am glad then that it proceeded rather of ignorance than of malice.


Yea believe me Pasiphilo.


O sir, but yet you should not have given me such foul words.


Well, content thy self Pasiphilo, I am thy friend as I have always been: for
proof whereof, come sup with me to night, and from day to day this seven
night be thou my guest: but behold, her^commeth Damon out of his house.


WE are come unto you sir, to turn your sorrow into joy and gladness: the
sorrow, we mean, that of force you have sustained since this mishap of late
fallen in your house. But be you of good comfort sir, and assure your self,
that this young man which youthfully and not maliciously hath committed this
amorous offence, is very well hable with consent of this worthy man his
father, to make you s^fficient amends, being borne in Cathanea of Sicilia, of
a noble house, noway inferior unto you, and of wealth (by the report of such
as know it) far exceeding that of yours.

And I here in proper person, do present unto you sir, not only my assured
friendship and brotherhood, but do earnestly desire you to accept my poor
child (though unworthy) as your son in law: and for recompense of the
injury he hath done you, I profer my whole lands in dower to your daughter,
yea and more would, if more I might.


And I sir, who have hitherto so earnestly desired your daughter in marriage,
do now willingly yield up and quite claim to this young man, who both for his
years, and for the love he bears her, is most meetest to be her husband: for
where I was desirous of a wife by whom I might have issue, to leave that little
which god hath sent me, now have I little need, that (thanks be to god) have
found my dearly beloved son, whom I lost of a child at the siege of
Otranto.


Worthy gentleman, you friendship, your alliance, and the nobility of your
birth are such, as I have much more cause to desire them of you, than you to
request of me that which is already granted: therefore I gladly, and willingly
receive the same, and think my self most happy now of all my life past,
that I have got so toward a son in law to my self, and so worthy a
father in law to my daughter, yea and much the greater is my contentation,
since this worthy gentleman master Cleander, doth hold himself satisfied.
And now behold your son.


O father.


Behold the natural love of the child to the the father, for inward joy he
cannot pronounce one word, in steed whereof he sends sobs and tears to
tell the effect of his inward intention. But why do you abide here abroad?
will it please you to go into the house sir?


Pasiphilo has said well, will it please you to go in sir?


Here I have brought you sir, both fetters bolts.


Away with them now.


Yea, but what shall I do with them?


Marie I will tell thee Neuola, to make a right end of our supposes, lay one
of those bolts in the fire, and make thee a suppositorie as long as mine arm,
God save the sample. Nobles and gentlemen, if you suppose that our supposes
have given you sufficient cause of delight, show some token, whereby we may
suppose you are content.



