WHat man hath mind to hear a worthy Jest,
Or seeks to feed his eye with vain delight:
That man is much unmeet to be a guest,
At such a feast as I prepare t^is night.
Who list lay out some pence in such a Mart,
Bellsauage fair were fittest for his purse,
I list not so to misbestowe mine art,
I have best wares, what need I then show worse?
An Enterlude may make you laugh your fill,
Italian toys are full of pleasant sporte:
Plain speech to use, if wanton be your will,
You may be gone, wide open stands the port.
But if you can contented be to hear,
In true discourse howe high the virtuous climb,
Howe low they fall which live withouten f^are
Of God or man, and much mispend their time:
What right rewards a trusty seruaunt earnes,
What subtle snares these Sycophants can use,
Howe soon the wise such crooked guyles discerns,
Then stay a while: give ear unto my Muse.
A Comedy, I mean for to present,
No Terence phrase: his time and mine are twain:
The verse that pleased a Romaine rash intent,
Might well offend the godly Preachers vain.
Deformed shows were then esteemed much,
Reformed speech doth now become us best,
Men's words must weye and tried be by touche
Of Gods own word, wherein the truth doth rest.
Content you then (my Lords) with good intent,
Grave Citizens, you people great and small,
To see your selves in Glass of Government:
Behold rash youth, which dangerously doth fall
On craggy rocks of sorrows nothing soft,
When sober wits by Virtue clymes aloft.
This work is compiled upon these sentences following, set down by me C. B.

Fear God, for he is just.
Love God, for he is merciful.
Trust in God, for he is faithful.
Obey the King, for his a^cthoritie is from above.
Honour the King, for he is in earth the lieutenant of the most high God.
Love the King, for he is thy protector.
Adventure thy life in defence and honour of thy country, for the quarrel is
good.
Be not unthankful to the soil that hath nurished thee, for it is a damnable
thing.
Study to profit the common wealth, for it is commendable with God and man.
Reverence the minister of God, for his office sake.
Love the minister that preaches the Gospel, for it is the power of God to
save thee.
Speak good of the minister, for the Gospelles sake.
Think well of the magistrates, for it pleases god well.
Be not disobedient to the magistrates, for they are the ^ies of the King.
Love the magistrates, for they are the bones s^nowes of the Common wealth.
Honour thy parents, for God hath commanded it.
Love thy parents, for they have care over thee.
Be assisting unto thy parents with any benefit that God hath endued thee,
for it is thy duty.
Give place to thine elder, for it is thy praise.
Let not a gray head pass by thee without a salutation.
Take counsel of an elder, for his experience sake.
Be holy, for thou art the Temple of God.
It is an horrible sin to pollute Gods Temple.
The buyers and sellers were driven out of the Temple with violence.

SUrely Phylocalus I think my self indebted unto you for this friendly
discourse, and I do not only agree with you in opinion, but I most earnestly
de sire, that we may with one assent devise which way the same may be put in
executio, for I delight in your loving neighbourhood, and I take singular
comfort in your grave advise.


It were not reason Phylopaes that having so many years contineued so near
neighbours, having trafficked (in manner) one self same trade, having
sustained like adventures, and being blessed with like successes, we should now
in the end of our time become any less then entiere friends: and as it is the
nature and property of friendship to seek always for perpetuity, so let us
seek to bring up our Children in such mutual society in their youth, that in
age they may no less delight in their former fellowship, then we their
parents have taken comfort in our continual cohabitation. It hath pleased
Almighty God to bless us both with competent wealth, and though we have
atteyned thereunto by continual pains and tra^ayle, rising (as it w^re) from
mean ^state, unto dignity, yet d^e I thi^e t^t it were not a^isse to bring ^p
our children with s^ch ^tion as (...) ^ay excel in knowledge of liberal
(...), f^r if we ^g vn^ed have by industry heaped up sufficient store, not
only to serve our own use, but further to provide for our posterity, then may
they by learning aspire unto greater promotion, and build greater matters
upon a better foundation. Neither yet would I have you conceive hereby that I
am ambitious. But if I be not deceived, Al desire of promotion (by virtue) is
godly and Lawful, where as ambition is commonly nestled in the breasts of the
envious.


I am of your opi^n Phylocalus, and since we have each of us two Sons of
equal age and stature, I would we could be so happy as to find some honest
and careful schoolmaster, who might enstruct them together: I say honest,
because in the house of the virtuous there is seldom any vice permitted, and
careful, because the care of the teacher is of no less consideration then his
skill: the do I wish him both honest and careful, because the conjunction of
two such qua^ities, may both cause the accomplishment of his duty, the
contentations of our desires. Our eldest Sons are near the age of xxi.
years, our younger Sons not much more then one year behind them. So that
as they have hitherto been thought toward enough at such common schools as
they have frequented, and therefore will shortly be ready for the university,
yet would I think convenient that they spent some time together, with some
such honest and careful Schoolmaster, who might before their departure lay a
sure foudation to their understanding.


Although it becomes not a seruaunt to come unto his masters counsel before
he be called, yet for that I am no way ignorant of your tender cares, which
both of you have always had over your children, and also for that I do now
perc^iue the continuance of the same by this your fatherly conference, I
presume to put my self forward upon a dutiful desire to further so godly an
enterprise I am a servant, and shall sometimes hear of things before my
Master, the which I speak, because I can presently (...) you of such a
schoolmaster as you both do desire to find.


And who is that, gentle fellow Fidus?


Sir his name is Gnomaticus, he dwells in Saint Antlines, a man famous f^r
his learning, of wonderful temperance, and highly esteemed for the diligence
and careful payne which he takes with his Schoolers.


Then can he not be long without entertainment, since now a days the good wine
needs none Iuye garland, and more parents there are that lack such
Schoolemaisters for their children, then there are to be found such
Schoolemaysters which seek and lack entertainment.


Sir you have reason, and therefore (if I were worthy to counsel you, I would
entertain him with speed, since he came but this other day from the Lord of
Barlemontes house, whose children he hath in small time made excellent
Schollers, and now hath dispatched them to the Uniuersitie of Doway.


Doest thou know him Fidus? or can thou tell where to find him?


Yea Sir, and if it so please my Master and you, I doubt not but to bring him
hither immediately.


Surely Phylopaes you shall do well to send for him.


There is no man more desirous then I, and since it so likes you I am ready to
dispatch it, go thy ways Fidus, and tell Master Gnomaticus, that my neighbour
Phylocalus and I desire to speak with him, and make as much hast as thou
can.


It shall be done Sir.


I am not the worst furnished of a seruaunt with this good fellow, for though
his capacity be not great, yet do I find him trusty, and towards my children
he is both loving and careful.


Then have you a jewel of him, for I hau^ one in whom I find contrary
conditions, I am seldom out of the doors but at my return I find him playing
with my Sons at some vain pastimes.


Beware of him then, for such a servant were better payed double wages in your
traffic abroad, then allowed barley bread in your shop at home, since
nothing is more perilous to seduce children or young men, then the consort
and council of a lewd seruannt. But is not this my Fidus which returns so
quickly? It is, and he brings with him a grave personage, I hope he hath
found Gnomaticus by the way.


SIr it is to be thought (...) Almighty God doth love you, and means to help
your (...) ^sire in the good education of your children, for it (...) (...)
chance to meet Master Gnomaticus by the way, (...) ^as going towards the
Bowrce to harken of entertainment, and it is not like that he should have
returned from thence vnplaced, wherefore I would wish that you let not slip
this happy occasion.


Sir we have ben so bold as to (...) this bearer for you, the cause hath
proceeded of an (...) desire which this worthy man my neighbour and I have to
see our children placed with a virtuous enstructer, and hearing great fame
as well of your integrity, as also of the diligence you have used with the Lord
of Barlemontes Children, we are desirous to entreat you that you will take the
like pains with ours, all which shall be recompensed according to our own
demand: For as there is no jewel so dear unto man, as the offspring wherewith
it pleases God to bless him, so is there no money so well spent as that which
is given to a good Schoolmaster.


You shall understand sir that my neighbour here and I have four Sons, of
equal age and stature, the eldest exceeds not twenty years, and the
youngest is about nineteen years old, they have ben already entered in
grammar at such schools as we have here in the City, and if, we be not abused
by reports they have shew^ themselves forward enough to take enstructions: so
that we are partly persuaded to send them unto some university, and mine
opinion is (as I lately declared unto my neighbour here) that we should do very
well yet to retain them a while longer, until they may be perfectly en^ructed
by some godly teacher, the sum of their duty first towards God, then to
their Prince, next to their parents, and consequently as well towards the
benefit of their country, as also how to behave themselves to all
magistrates, and officers in the same. In conclusion whereof they may also
learn what they are of themselves, and how they may be most acceptable both to
God and man, and for that we have hard very good report of your skill and also
of your (...), we thought good to require that (if you be not otherwise already
entertained) you would take some pa^nes to ^ructe them in these points, and
the same shall be (...) and deserved by measure of your own contentation, as my
neighbour Phylopaes hath before proffered.


Worthy Gentlemen I yield you (...) humble thanks for your courteous proffers,
and I render in^nite thanks unto almighty God that my name hath ben so
reported unto you, truly I would be loathe to deserre any less, then the name
of a faithful and diligent teacher, so far forth as it hath pleased GOD to
endue me with knowledge. Touching your proffer and request, I do most willingly
embrace the same, confessing even simply, that it was mine errand to seek such
entertainment, having of late dispatched out of my hands, the sons of the
Lord of Barlemont towards ^he Uniuersiti^ ^f Doway and if the touch of your
zeal be not contrary to the fame which is s^ed of your estates, I shall think
my self well occupied, in teaching or reading to the children of such worthy
men as you are.


Well then s^r, we will be bold to send for the youngmen, to the end that no
time be lost or deferred in bestowing of them. Fidus, go your ways to our
houses, and bring hither our Sons.


Most willingly sir I shall accomplish your commandment.


If it please you sir, my servant shall assist him.


It will not be amiss to acquaint him with them.


Sirha, go with this gentleman's servant, and help him to conduct their
children hither.


Well Sir it shall be done.


IT shall now be our parts to understand what stipend may content you for
your pains


Sir in that respect take you no care, but let me pray unto almighty God, that
he give me grace so to enstruct your children, as you may hereafter take
comfort in my travail, that done, I can no ways doubt of your benevolence,
since your inward desire doth already manyfestly appear: and furthermore, I
would be loathe to make bargains in this respect, as men do at the market or in
other places, for grazing of Oxen or feeding of Cattle, especially since I have
to deal with such worthy personages as you seem and are reported to be.


Well, yet Sir we would be glad to recompense you according to your own
demand, but in token of our ready will to please you, we shall desire you to
take at my hands these twenty angels as an earnest or pledge of our further
meaning, as I am the first that presume to open my purse in this occasion, so
I beseech the Father of Heaven that I may not be the last which may rejoice to
see his children prosper, thou know (O Lord) I mean not hereby my
neighbours detriment, but alas, the shadow of a mans self is ever nearest to
him, and as I desire to be the first that may hear of their well doing, so
yet if they hearken not diligently unto your enstruction, but obstinately
reject your precepts, then I desire you, and on Gods behalf I charge you, that
I may yet be the first that shall thereof be advertised: but behold where they
come, these two (I thank the Father of Heaven,) are the tokens of his
merciful blessing towards me, the Eldest is named Phylosarchus, and this
younger Phylotimus.


And these too sir are mine only children, and God for his mercy grant that
they may be mine only comfort, the Eldest is called Phylautus, and the younger
Phylomusus.


Sir according to your commandment expressed by Fidus I am come hither to
know your pleasure, and have by warrant of the same commission brought with me
my Brother Phylomusus.


And I in like manner Sir have brought with me my Brother Phylotimus destring to
know your pleasure, and being ready to obey your commandment.


Surely these young men give none evil hope of their ^wardnes, and declare by
their seemly gesture and modest boldness to be both of good capacity, and to
have been well enstructed hither (...) in humanity.


The cause that we have sent for you is to commit you unto the government of
this godly man, whom we have entreated to take pains with you and to enstruct
you in some principal points of necessary doctrine, to the end that after
you have ripely digested the same, you may be the more able to go boldly into
some University, and I for my part do here commit you unto him, charging you in
Gods name (and by the authority which he hath given me over you,) to hearken
unto him with all attentiuenosse, and to obey him with all humillity.


The same charge that my neighbour Phylocalus hath here given to his children,
the same I do pronounce unto you, and furthermore do charge you that you become
gentle and curteouse to each other, humble to your betters, and affable to your
inferiors in all respects.


Sir I trust we shall deserve your fatherly favour.


And I trust to deserve the continuance of your goodness.


We hope also to imitate the good in all moral examples of virtuous behaviour.


The Father of Heaven bless you with the blessing which it pleased him to
pronounce unto Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob.


Amen, and now let us depart, leaving here in your custody the choice lambs of
our flock, defend them then (for Gods love) from the ravening, and raging
lus^es of the flesh, and vanities of the world.


Sir by Gods power I shall do my best diligence.


My lovely Gentlemen, GOD guide you by his grace, and though I be somewhat
romoued from your daily company, yet spare not to command my service, if at
any time it may stand you in steed to use it.


Gr^mercy gentle Fidus.


MY dearly beloved schollers, since it hath pleased your Parents (as you have
heard) to put me in trust with you for a time, it shall not be amiss before I
enter further in enstruction, to know how far you have already proceeded in
learning, that there upon I may the better determine what trade or Methode
shall be most convenient to use in teaching of you: tell me therefore what you
have red, and in what manner the same hath been delivered unto you?


Sir, my Brother here, and I have been taught first the rules of the grammar,
after that we had read unto us the familiar comunications called the Colloquia
of Erasmus, and next to that the offices of Cicero, that was our last exercise.


It hath been well done, have you not also ben taught to ver^y?


Yes truly sir, we have therein been (in manner) daily enstructed.


And you Phylosarchus how have you passed your time?


Sir: my Brother and I have also been taught our grammar and to make a verse,
we have red certain Comedies of Terence; certain Epistles of Tully, and
some part of Uirgill, we were also entered into our greek grammar,


Surely it seems you have not hitherto lost your time, and the order of your
enstruction hath been such, that you might presently be able to take further
proceedings in an Uniuersiry, so that it should be (unto me) but labour lost
to stand still upon those points, since it seems that you have bin therein
perfectly grounded: nevertheless we will continue the exercise of the same,
and we will thereunto join such wholesome precepts, as may become a rule and
Squire, whereby the rest of your life and actions may be guided. For alchough
Tully in his book of dewtyes doth teach sundry vertuouse precepts, and out of
Terence may also be gathered many moral enstructions amongst the rest of his
wanton discourses, yet the true christian must direct his steppes by the
infallible rule of Gods word, from whence as from the head spring, he is to
draw the whole course of his life. I would not have you think hereby that I
do hold in contempt the books which you have red heretofore but we will
(by Gods grace) take in assistance suc^nt so many of them as may seem
consonant to the holy scriptures, and so joining the one with the other, we
shall be the better able to bring our work unto perfection. Sirha go you to my
lodging, cause


Well Sir it shall be done with diligence.


Now let us in the holy name of God begin, and he for his mercy give me grace
to utter, and you to digest such wholesome lessons as may be for the saluatio
of your souls, the comfort of your life, and the prositte of your Country.

You shall well understand my well beloved schollers, that as God is the author
of all goodness, so is it requisite that in all traditions and Moral
precepts we begin first to consider of him, to regard his majesty, and
search the sovereign points of his Godhead. The Heathen Philosophers
(although they had not the light to understand perfect truth) were yet all of
them astonished at the incomprehensible majesty and power of God, some of them
thought the air to be God, some other the earth, some the infiniteness of
things, some one thing, some another, whose opinions I shall pass over as
things unmeet to be much thought of, but by the way, the opinion of Plato is
not unworthy here to be recited unto you, who taught plainly that god was
omnipotent, by whom the world was made, and al things therein created and
brought unto such perfection as they be in. Xenophon affirmed that the true God
was invisible, and that therefore we ought not enquire what or what manner of
thing God is. Aristo the Stoicke, affirmed likewise that God was
incomprehensible. To conclude, Simonides being demanded what God was, required
one days respect to answer, and then being again demanded the same question,
he required two days respect, at the third apointment of his answer, he came
required three days, and being demanded wherefore he did so break his
apointments, and require always further time, he answered, that the more
deeply that he did consider the matter, the more infinite he found it, and
therefore remained always astonished what to answer, and always craved further
time. Truly to leave y^ heathen opinion^ and to come unto the very touchestone
I think it not amiss if we content our selves to think that God is
omni^otent, and yet his power unsearchable, and his goodness unspeakable. And to
be brief, I will deliver unto you the sum of your duties in four Chapters,
the first chapiter shall be of God and his ministers, the second of the King and
his Officers, the third shall conteyne the duties that you owe unto your
Country and the Elders thereof, and lastly you shall be put in remembrance of
your duties towards your Parents, and what you ought to be of your selves. In
these sour chapters I trust (by Gods help) to enclud^ as much as shall be
necessary for the perfect government of a true Christian.


Sir we beseech you that for as much as this order of teaching is both very
compendious, also much different from the lectures which have been red unto
us, you will therefore vouchsafe to stand somewhat the more upon every point,
to the end, that as well your meaning may be perspicuous, as also that we may
the better bear away the same, and not only learn it without the book, but
also engrave it in our minds.


Your request is reasonable, and it shall be by me as readily granted, as it
hath been by you necessarily required. Your first chapter and lesson shall then
be, that in all your actions you have an especial eye and regard to almighty
God, and in that consideration I commend unto your memory, first God himself,
and secondarily his ministers. As touching your duties unto God him self,
although they be infinite, yet shall we sufficiently contain them in three
especial points to be performed: that is to say, Fear, Love, Trust. And
first to begin with fear, it shall be necessary and above all things your
bounden duty, to ^eare God and his omnipoten power. Linus that ancient Poet
writes, that with God all things are easy to be accomplished, and nothing is
unpossible. Tully in his Oration Pro Roscio amerino saith, that the commodities
which we use, the light which we enjoy, and the breath which we have and
draw, are given and bestowed upon us by God: then if with God all things be
possible (according to Linus) he is to be feared, since the least part of his
displeasure being provoked, the greatest part of his will is to him right easy
to accomplish: and if we have our light, our life, and all commodities of his
gift (as Cicero affirms) then is he to be feared, least with the facillity
of his omnipotency he take away as fast as he gave, or turn light into
darkness, life into death, and commodities into discomodities. I might recite you
many heathen authorities, but it is most needless, since y^ very word of God
himself, is most plain in this behalf, and yet I have here set down these
few, because they are not repugnant to holy Scriptures. We find written in
the xx. chapter of Exodus, that God is a Jealous God, and doth visit the sins
of the Fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. Fear
him then for he is most mighty. Again: who shall defend me (saith the
Psalmist) until thine anger be past? Fear God then, since against his power
no defence prevails. Agai^, both the heavens and the earth obey the voice of
his mouth. Fear him then for althinges are subject unto his mighty power.

And yet with this fear you must also join love, for it is not with God as it
is with Princes of the world, which to make themselves feared do become
Tyrants, but the Tully in his second book de legibus saith, that God being
Lord of al things doth deserve best of makind, because he b^holdeth what every
man is, and with what devotion he worshippeth the Gods, and keeps an account
as well of the good as the bad: whereby appears that the heathen confessed
yet t^at the Gods were to be loved, because they cared for mankind, and truly
that opinion is neither contrary to Gods word, nor dissonant to natural reason.
For we see by common experience that we love them best of whom we are most
favoured, have received greatest benefits. I mean hereby those that rule their
doings by reason, for other^se we see daily wicked men, which (forgetting
their duty) do least love where they have most cause. When I my s^lfe was a
scholar in the University, I remember that I did often times defend in
Schools this proposition. Ingratitudo (tam versus. 'Deos immortales quam apud
homines) peccatum maximum. Ingratitude is the greatest fault that may be
either towards god or man. Let us consider the good ^ies of almighty God, who
first created us to his own Image and similitude, endued us with reason and
knowledge, preserved us from innumerable perils, and provided things
necessary for our sustentation, and to consider more inwardly the exceeding
love which he bare towards mankind, he spared not his only begotten Son,
but gave him (^uen unto the death of the cross) for our redemption. Oh what
mind were able to conceive* or what to^gue able to utter the love and goodness
of almighty God towards mankind? And since his love towards us, hath been
and yet doth continue infinite, our love should also be infinite, to r^nder him
thanks for his goodness. But though the causes be infinite which might bind us
to love GOD, yet is there no cause gr^ater then the manifold mercyes which he
hath she (...) ways to mankind. In the first age when iniquity kindled his
wrath to destroy the whole world, he yet vouchsafed to preserve No and his
family, Love him then since he preserves the good, though it be but for his
mercyes sake* When the people of Israell provoked him at sundry times, he did
yet at every submission stay his hand from punishment, Love God then since he
is ready to forgive, and though he pronounces his Jealousy in the twentieth of
Exodus saying, that he visits the sins of the Fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation, yet there withal he adds, that he
shows mercy unto thousands in them that love him and keep his
commandments. Love him then since his mercy is over all his works. To
conclude, when his unsearchable Majesty by his divine foresight did perceive,
that by the very sentence of the Law we stood all in state of condemnation,
he sent down his own and only Son, to be slandered, buffeted, and cruci^d
for our sins, to the end that all which believe in him, should not perish
but have lfie everlasting. Love God then since mercy is abundant with him, and
he shall redeem Israell from all his iniquities.

And here unto this fear and love you must join a sure For the words of his
mouth return not void and without effect. Tully in his offices doth use great
art in declaration what sorts of promises are to be observed, and which may
be broken. But the divine providence and foresight doth promise nothing but
that which Abraham that S^ra his wife should bear him a child, Sara laughed
because she was then four score ten years o^e, but the almighty remembered his
covenant. Trust in him then for his words shall never fail. When he promised
Moyses to conduct his people through the deserts, they began to doubt and
murmure, saying: would God that we Egypt or in this wilderness c. and the
lord was angry, but yet remembering his promise, at the humble petition of
Moyses he performed it. Trust in God therefore, since no displeasure can make
him alter his determination, he performed his holy promise in Ismaell, Fear
God for he is mighty, love God for he is merciful, and trust in God for he is
faithful just. Herewith all you must also learn to perform duty towards the
servant and Audience, Reverence, and Love. The Children of Israell by
harkening to Moyses, and Aaron, were not only enstructed and taught their
duties, but were (as it were) made at one with God when they had at any time
purchased his heavy displeasure. By Phyllip the Apostle, the Eunuch was
converted. By harkening unto Peter, Cornelius y^ captain was confirmed
strengthened in the faith. By harkening unto Paule and Sylas, Lidia, and the
gaylour of Phylippos were baptised, Harken you therefore unto the ministers of
God, for Co^elius the Captain, that he fell down prostrate at Peters feet
when he entered into his house, the which though Peter refused saying that he
was also mortal, yet did it signify unto us, that the ministers of God cannot
be too much reverenced. The Priests in the old Testament were exempt from
tributes and impositions, they were not constrained to go into the battle,
they were provided for sustenance and all things convenient, and the people Do
you likewise reverence unto Gods ministers in al places, for it shall become you
well. So shall you also love them because they preach the gospel of him which
hath power to save you. If the sensual appetite of man be such as engedreth
affection towards thehandmaide because she is of familiar conversation with the
Mistress: or breeds love towards them which are in office with Princes,
because they may also procure us favour: how much more ought the minds of men
to be kindled with love towards the ministers of God, which enstructs us
diligently, minister unto us painfully, and pray for us faithfully? yea how
much are we bound to love them, which for his might, love him for his mercyes,
and trust in him for he is faithful. You shall also harken unto his ministers
because they are sent of God, you shall do them reverence because it becomes
you, and for their office sake, and you shall love them by cause they feed you
with the bread of life. And this I think sufficient for explanation of this
first chapter at this time.


Sir I have done as you commanded, and there is meat ready for your dinner, if
it please you that it be set on the table.


Well we will then defer the rest of our labour until dinner be past, go we
together, for I think it time.


We follow when it pleases you.


COme on my good friends, for were not your friendly help, I could rather
content my self to be buried in my flowing years, then to live in such a
miserable and precise world as this is, Oh what Superfinesse are we now grown
unto? a gentlewoman may not now adays seem to speak to her friend at the door
passing by, she may not look at him in the window, she may not kiss him if
she meet him as a stranger, nor receive his letters or presents, but every
prattling minister will record it in the pulpit.


In deed fair Lady Lamia, they are both too curious and too much suspicious,
for if they do but see two in bed together, they will say that it was for to
commit some wickedness, fie fie upon such tongues.


Ha ha, by my troth Echo well said, but by your leave, let master minister
tattle what he will, for I will take my friends present when it comes, and
shall I tell you? if I could have been contented to be so shut up from ^ight
and speech of such as like me, I might have lived gallantly and well provided
with my mother, who (though I say it) is a good old Lady in Ualentia, but when
I saw that I must wear my good apparel always within doors, and that I
must pass over my meals without company, I trussed up my Jewelles in a
casket, and (being accompanied with my good Aunt here) I bad Ualentia
^arewell, for I had rather make hard shift to live at liberty, then e^ioy
grea^ riches in such a kind of emprisonment.


A good Aunt in deed, I would I had such an Uncle.


Content your self niece, it were now but folly to spend time in bootless
complaints, nor to lament the thing which may not be remedied, you must rather
learn the way that may maintain your estate, ^or beauty will not always
last, and if you provide not in youth, you may be assured to beg in age, take
example at me, I tell you I thought my halfepeny good silver within these few
years past, and now no man esteems me unless it be for counsel.


Counsel quoth you? mary sir and good counsel is much worth now adays.


I pray you Aunt since you are so good a councellor, give me some advise how
to behave my self.


As for that another time shall serve between you and me.


Why, and shall I be cast up for a hobler then? I am sure I was never yet
untrusty to any of you both.


Well Ladies, and if you look well upon the matter, I think that I am as
worthy as one to be of counsel, well I wot if any gentleman offer you the
least part of injury, then Dicke must be sent for to swear out the matter,
Dicke must bide all brontes, and therefore it were not amiss that he were of
counsel in all your conferences.


By mine honesty Aunt to confess a troth, both these are our very approved
friends, therefore you may be bold to speak your mind before them.


Well content then, I will tell you mine opinion, you take not the way to live,
you are too much subject to your passion, for if you chance to be acquainted
with a gentleman that is in deed courtlike and of good deserts, you become
straight way more destrous of him, then he is of you, and so ^arre you dote
upon him, that you do not only sequester your self from all other company, but
also you become so frank hearted, that you suffer him not to bestow upon you
any more then is necessary for present use, yea (...), I pray you learn these
three points of me to govern your steppes by. First Trust noman how fair so
ever he speak, next (...) no ^an (that hath ought) how evil favoured so ever he
be. And lastely Love no man longer then he gives, since liberal gifts are the
glewe of euerduring love.


O noble Dame, why were not you mother of the maids unto the Queen^ of
Hungary? by the faith of a true B^gondyan you had wrong, for you well descrued
the place.


I warrant you if the King our master had store of daughters, such a matron
could not live unknown, but was it not therefore (think you) that ambassadors
were sent this other day to the old Duchess?


Well Aunt, I were worthy of great reprehension, if I w^uld reject the good
documents of such a friend, and if I have heretofore done contrary, impute it
to my youth, but be you sure that hereafter I will endeavour my self to follow
your precepts.


And I fair Lady will stand you in some stead, to drive birds to the Net. If
I be not much deceived, I saw a frosty bearded scholemaster iustructing of four
lusty young men erewhyle as we came in, but if my judgment do not fail me, I
may chance to read some of them another lecture.


Lush, what needs such open talk here in the streate? let us go to the Lady
Pandarinaes house, and there we may devise at better commodity upon these
causes.


He speaks reason, let us go Aunt, for it is not meele that every dancer
hear our music before the maskers be ready.


Well, I said so at the first, but when you will, let us depart.


WHen God ordeynd the restless life of man,
And made him thrall to sundry greenous cares:
The first borne grief or Sorrow that began,
To show it self, was this: to save from snares
The pleasant pledge, which God for us prepares.
I mean the seed, and offspring that he gives,
To any wight which in this world here lives.
Few see themselves, but each man sees his child,
Such care for them, as care not for themself,
We care for them, in youth when wit is wild,
We care for them, in age to gather pelf:
We care for them, to keep them from the shelf
Of such quick sands, as we our selves first found,
When heady will, did set our ships on ground.
The care which Christ did take to save his sheep,
Hath been compared, to fathers care on child,
And as the hen, her harmless chicks can keep
From cruel kite: so must the father shield
His youthful Sons, that they be not beguylde.
By wicked world, by fleshly foul desire,
Which serve the devil, with Fuel for his fire.
First parents care, to bring their children forth,
To breed them then, to bring them up in youth,
To match them eke, with wights of greatest worth,
To see them taught, the trusty tracks of truth:
To bar excess, from whence all s^ ensues.
And yet to give, enough for common need,
Least loathsome lack make vise for virtue breed.
Let shame of sin, thy Childrens bridle be,
And spur them forth, with bounty wisely used:
That difference, each man may plainly see,
Tweene parents care, and masters bodes abused:
So Terence taught, whose lore is not refused.
But yet where youth is prone to follow ill,
There spare the spur, and use the brydell still.
Thus infinite, the cares of Parents are.
Some care to save their children from myshappe,
Some care for wealth, and some for honours care,
Whereby their Sons may sit in fortunes lap:
Yet they which cram them so with worldly pap,
And never care, to give them heavenly crommes,
Shall sce them starve, when hap of hunger comes.
Said Socrates: that man which cares more
To leave his child, much good and rich of rent:
Then he for sees, to furnish him with store
Of virtues wealth, which never can be spent:
Shall make him like, the steed that styll is pent
In stable close: which may be fair in sight.
But seldom serves, such horse in field to fight.
So Xenophon, his friend Dan Tully told,
And so do here, Phylopaes and his pheare
Phylocalus, that self same lesson hold:
They rather love to leave their sons in fear
Of God above: then wealth to wallow hear.
Which godly care, (O God) so deign to bliss,
That men may see how great thy glory is.
MY well beloved, as time is the greatest treasure which man may here on earth
receive, so let us not le^se time, but rather seek so to bestow the same,
that profit may thereof be gathered. I will now return to enstruct you what
duties you owe unto the King, whose place is next unto Gods place in
consideration of your duty. And as I have taught you three principal points
in service of God almighty, so will I also convey into three points, as much
as shall be necessary for this tradition: for I fear least I have been over
lunge in my first division, but I was drawn thereunto by the request which you
made of your selves, and therefore bear with me.


Sir our desire is such, to bear away perfectly your enstruction, that your
prolixity seems unto us very compendious.


Well then to return unto the matter, you shall perform unto the King three
especial duties, that is to say: Honour, Obediencae, and Love. Hypodamus in his
book of a common wealth, saith that a kingdom is a thing compared to the
imitation of gods power. Diotogenes the scholar of Pytagoras in his book of
government, saith that a king represents the figure of God amongst men.
Likewise he saith, that as god excells the most perfect things of nature, so
the king excells amongst men and worldly matters: so that he is to be
honoured as the lieutenant of God here upon earth, both because he hath power of
commandment, and chiefly because he represents that heavenly King, who is
king of kings, and above all Kings to be honoured: Even so is he also to be
obeyed in all seculer constitutions and pollitike provisions. This obedience
doth consequently follow hono^re, as the shadow solowes the body, for
whatsoever he be that gives unto his king that honour which to him
appertains, will (no doubt) likewise obey him with all humility. Erasmus
teaches in his Apothegmes, that obedience expels al sedition maynteyneth
concorde: the which may also appear by natural reason and common experience,
neither shall they ever become able to bear rule them selves, which cannot
be content to obey the authority of others. Wherefore it shall be most
convenient that you obey the King, since his authority is fro god, as this
obedience depends upon the honour wherewith ye shall reverence the King as
Gods lieutenant, so must you also join thereunto an unfeigned love, for as
almighty God is to be loved because he is merciful: so the King being
appointed by God must be loved because he is thy pretector here on earth.
Salamon saith, that the kings indignation is the messenger of death, whereby I
would frame mine argument from the contrary, that he is to be loved, least
his indignation being justly kindled, thou be not able to bear it. Next unto
the king we are to consider the Magistrates which are appointed for
administration of justice, and pollityke government: these Magistrates must also
be honoured, obeyed, loved: honoured because they are y^ substituts of y^ king
unto whom all honour (on earth) appertains, obeyed because their office is
appointed by the Kings authority, and loved because they are the grave and
expert personages, which devise laws and constitutions for continuance of
peace and tranquillity. The apostle Paule in his xiii. chapter of his Epistle
to the Romaines, teaches plainly, that Rulers bear not the sword in vain,
saying: Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no
power but of God. Again, the ruler (saith he) doth not bear the sword in
vain. Wherefore you must needs be subject, not only for fear, but also for
conscience* And Sanct Peter in his first Epistle and the second chapiter, doth
sufficientli^ teach us this point, saying* Submit your self unto all manner
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the king as having
the pre-eminence, or unto the rulers as unto them that are sent of him for the
punishment of evil dooers, but for the laud of them that do well. Whereby
appears, that the magistrates are not only to be feared, because they punysh
offenders, but also to be loved because they cherish the virtuous: and for
conclusion of this point, if you desire to be good men, then learn to perform
duty towards all magistrates. As Sophocles, well said, it becomes a good
man to have due respect unto all magistrates. I might now take your Parents
in hand, for the next point of your enstruction but I will first touch the
duty which you owe unto your country, and that is contained also in three
especial points: that is to say, in Thankfulness, Defence, and Proffit. And
as ingratitude is the most heinous offence against God, so have I taught you
that it is the greatest fault in humayne actions, amongst the which it shows
it self no way more untolerable, then if you should happen to be
unthankful unto your country. Tully in his offices saith, that we are not
borne only for our own particular cause or profit, but part (saith he) our
cuntrey challenges, part our Parents think due unto them, and our friends
ought likewise to enjoy some part of our travails. There are divers
Philosophers, which maynteyne in argument that all cuntryes are free for a
noble mind, and I agree thereunto, but yet thereby they conclude not, that a
noble mind by choosing a new cuntrey to enhabit, may lawfully forget the
cuntrey wherein he was native. Zopirus is condemned in all histories, for the
vnthankefulnes he used in betraying his cuntrey. The truth of the Troyan
history accuses Aeneas, Antenor, certain others, as most unthankful
traitors to their cuntrey. Cillicon for betraying of Miletus, Lasthenes for
delivering of Oli^thus, Nilo for selling of Epirus, and Apollonius for
neglecting of his charge in Samos, are generally noted with the names of
vnthankeful and untrusty traitors to their cuntreyes: so that you must always
remember to become thankful to your cuntrey, and myndefull to maynteyne the
honour of the same, least neglecting your duties in that behalf, you deserve
the oprobrious names of traitors, which are odius to God and man. You must
also spare no peril or travail to defend the same, for your country
challenges not only that you be thankful unto the soil which hath bred
you, but further also, that you defend the state, wherein you have been
nourished. Tully, in his Tusculanes questions recyteth one Lascaena, who when
he received tidings of his sounes death, whom he had sent into the wars in
defence of his country, answered: therefore did I beget him (quoth he) that
he might be such an one, as would not doubt to dye for his country. In his
book entytuled the dream of Sipio, he affirms that there is a certain
place appointed and ordained in heaueu, for all such as defend their country.
Euripides warns that we should never be weary in those travails, which
tend to the restitution or defence of our country. Platoes opinion was, that
we are more bound to defend our country, then our own Parents* Like
arguments have been defended by many Phylo^ophers, saying, that although thy
Parents and proper family b^ overthrown, yet (the common wealth of thy cuntrey
standing) thou may flourish and rife again: but the state of thy country
being overthrown, both thou and thy Parents must likewise come to utter
subuertion. Then as thou shalt find it thy bounden duty to honour thy country
with all gratitude, and to defend it with all thy power, ^o must thou likewise
endeavour thy self to be profitable to the same: whereof many notable examples
might be rehearsed. Lycurgus,, when he had by extreme diligence and travail
reduced the Spartanes unto cyuillytie, by sundry wholesome laws and pollityke
constitutions, and that they began to murmure, saying: that his laws were
untolerable, he feigned that he would go to Delphos, to consulte with the God
Apollo, whether his laws were to be observed or not promising to abide his
sentence, requiring no more of the Lacedemonianes, but to swear y^ they would
observe those laws until his return: which when they had solemnly sworn,
took his iurney without entente to return home again, and ordained before
his death, to be enclosed in a great chee^ of Lead, and so to be thrown into
the sea, to the end that he never returning, the Laucedemonians might be
bound by their other to continue the exercise of his profitable laws, such
care he had to become profitable unto his country. Curtius the Romayne, when
there apeared a great gulf in the market place, which could by no means be
stopped, and answer was geeuen from the Oracle, that it was only to be
stopped by that which was of most worth unto the city of Room, he deeming
that the city had nothing so precious, as stout valiant men, armed him
self, and leapt into the Gulf, which stopped immediately: declaring thereby,
howe light men ought to esteem their life, when as the same may yield
profit or commodity to their country. Menecius, the Son of Craeon,
refused not voluntary death, when he understood that the same might redeem
the city of Thebes from utter subversion. I might trouble you with infinite
stories to prove this proposition, but let these few suffice, and in your
country have allways especial respect to the elders, to whom you must also
perform three several deuties: that is, Reverence, Love, and Defence.
Lycurgus, ordained, that no young man should pass by an elder without
reverence first done unto him, namely if he were set, he rose to do
reverence unto the elders, and if they were alone, he was bound to proffer them
the comfort of his company. Plato, in his nynth dyalogue of laws and
constitucions doth thus propound: al men must grant (saith he) that age is much
to be preferred before youth, as well in the sight of God, as also in the sight
of men, which will live orderly: for it is abominable (saith he) that an old
man should give place unto an young man, and the Gods them selves do hate it,
since youth ought with patient mind to bear even the strypes of their
elders. You shall also love them, because of them you may learn good precepts,
and of them you may be bold to ask council: for as Euripides, in his tragedy
called Phaenissae, doth teach, prudence will not be gotten with few days
seeking for, and the apostles teach us our deuty dyrectly in that behalf, who
ordained amongst them elders in every congregation, to decide all matters in
controversy, of whom they were resolved of all doubts in conscience. It shall
also become you to defend the elders from al violence and outrage, since it is a
thing as comely and commendable to defend the weak, as it is glorious and
triumphant to overcome the mighty: whereof I might recite many famous examples
out of the Romain histories, but I will partly include the same in the duties
which you owe unto your Parents, which are also, Honour, Love, and Relief. And
of the first part, although I might bring in sundry worthy examples, yet
because the case is of it self familiar, I will be brief, and use no other
persuation then the express commandment of God, who bids you to honour
your Father and Mother, that your* days may be long in the land which the
Lord your god hath given you. And Sain^t Paule in the sixth chapiter of his
Epistle to the Ephesians, saith. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for
that is right and wellpleasing to the Lord. As he testifies in the third
chapiter to the Colossianes, you shall love them also because you are engendered
of their own flesh blood, as also you may not forget your Mothers pains in
bearing of you, you must always meditate in your mind, first the cares which
they have had to preserve you from bodily perils in the cradell, from danger
of dampnation by Godly education, from need and hunger by administering things
necessary, and from utter destruction by vigillant foresight Godly care: all
these with infinite other things considered, you shall find your selves bounden
by manyfolde occasions to love your Parents, and to be assistant unto them in
the necessities of their age. For well said that Poet, which affirmed that
children were tenderly swaddled in their cradels, to the end they might
sustain their aged Parents and supply their wants. Marvelous is the nature
of the Stork, which feeds the damme in age, of whom it self received
nurture being young in the nest. Tully in his book of the answers of
sothsayers saith, that nature in the beginning hath made an accord between us
and our Parents, so that it were damnable not to cherish them. And to conclude,
there is nothing that can worse become a common wealth, then to see y^ youth
flourish in prosperity which suffer their parents to perish for lack of any
commodity. Now that I have rehearsed unto you as much as I think requisite, for
the enstruction of your duties, first towards god, and his ministers, next to
the King and his Magistrates, thirdely to your country and the Elders thereof
and lastly towards your Parents: it shall not be amiss that you remenber of
your self how you are the Temple of God, keep your selves holy therefore in
your conversation, and undefiled, for if our saviour Christ did rigorously
rebuke and expel the buyers sellers out of the outward Temple, how much more
will he punish them which pollute and de^le the inward Temple of their
bodies, and give over their delight to concupiscence and van^es? thus may you
for brevity remember that you.

1 Fear God because he is mig^le,
2 Love God because he is merciful,
3 Trust in God because he is just.
1 Hear his ministers hecause they are sent to enstrust you,
2 Do reverence unto them because of their office,
3 Love them because they feed you with heuenly bread*
1 Honour the King because he is Gods lieutenant*
2 Obey him because his power is from above,
3 Love him because he is thy protector.
1 Honour his Magistrates because they represent his person,
2 Obey them because they have their authority from him,
3 Love them because they ^inteine peace.
1 Be thankful to thy country that hath bred thee*
2 Defend it because thou art borne to that end, and
3 Profit it because thou shalt thereby gain honour.
1 Reverence thy elders for their grey hears,
2 Love them because they council thee and
3 Defend them because they are feeble.
1 Honour your Parents beca^se God commands so*
2 Love them bycanse they tendered you, and
3 Relieve them because it is your duty.
Lastly forget not your selves* neither make any le^ account of your selves
then to be the Temple of God, which you ought to keep holy and undefiled. I
might stand in dilatacion hereof with many more examples and aucthorities, but
I trust these (being well remembered) shall suffyce, and now I will leave you
for a time, beseeching allmyghty God to guide and keep you now ever. So be it.


AH sirha, I see well the old proverb is true, which saith: so many men so
many minds, this order of teaching is far contrary to all other y^ ever I
have heard, shall I tell you? it hath in it neither head nor foot.


Truly brother it hath in it great reason virtue, and though it be at y^ first
unpleasant in comparison to T^es Commedies and (...) like, yet ought we to h^e
good regard thereunto, since it teaches in effect (...) (...) of our (...).


Yea, and that very compendiously.


Surely I am of ^ylautus opinion, for who is ignorant that* God is to be feared
above all things* or who knows not that the King is (...) of God to rule
here on earth*


Is there any (...) (...) (...) of (...), that he knows not that in all (...)
(...) must or will) be reverenced? and see we not daily, that all parents
challenge obedience and love?


Yes, and more to, for some parents (...) never ^ented what duty soever the
child performs, they ^et what they once were themselves: But to the purpose.
I l^ked for some excellent matter at this new Schoolemasters hands, if this
be all that he can say to us, I would for my part that we were in some
Uniuersitie, for here we shall but loose our time, I have (in e^ect) all th^
gear without book already.


And I lack not much of it.


Well said young gentlemen, it is a good hearing when young men are so toward,
and much ease is it for the teacher when he finds scollers of quick
capacity.


Surely I am not yet so forward, neither can I vaunt that either I have it
without book, or do ^usficiently bear away the same in such order as I
would.


For my part, I beseech God that I may with all my whole understanding be
able to bear away that which our Master hath delivered unto us, and that I may
so emprinte the same in my memory, that in all my life I may make it a glass
wherein I may behold my duty*: wherefore Phylotimus, (if you so think good,
you and I will go apart, and medytate the same to our selves, to the end we
ma^ be the perfecter therein when our enstructor shall examine us.


Contented, let us go where you will.


Let them go like a couple of blockheads, I would we two were at some
Uniuersitie, and then let them do what they list.


Even so would I, for at the Uniuersitie we should hear^ other ma^er of
teaching: There be lectures daily read of all the liberal sciences, of all
languages, and of all moral discourses. Furthermore, at the Uniuersitie we
should have choice company of gallant young gentlemen, with whom we might
acquaint our selves, and pass some times in recreation: yea, shall I tell you?
if a man list to play the good fellow and* be merry sometimes, he shall not
want there (as I have heard) that will accompany him.


And what Uniuersitie (do you suppose) we shall be sent unto.


I think unto Doway, for that is nearest.


Have you been in Doway at any time?


No surely, but I have harde it praised for a pr^per city, and well replenished
with courteous people and fair women.


Marr^ Sir there would I be then. Oh what a pleasure it is to behold a fair
woman? surly they were created of God for the comfort of man, but behold, I
see a passing fair woman come down the street, and if I be not much
deceived, Echo is her gentleman usher: it is so in deed.


What is that Echo?


Know you not Echo? why the you know no man, the best fellow in all this
town, and ready to do for all men: I will bring you acquainted with him.


YOu shall see (Lady Lamia,) how I will work this gear like wax, but is not
this Phylosarchus? it is even he, in good time I have espied him, keep your
countenance in any wise.


Echo doth give you good council, keep your co^ntenance.


As though I were to learn that at these years.


Master Phylosarchus, God save you.


And thee also gentle fellow Echo. whether walk thou?


Hereby Sir with this gentlewoman.


Abide I pray thee, here is a young gentleman a friend of mine, which desires
to be acquainted with thee.


Sir I am at your comm^dement and his also, I will be so bold as to kiss his
hands, Dyck go thou on with these gentlewomen before, I will overtake you
immediately.


And I pray thee tell me Echo, what gentlewoman is this?


Sir she is of Valentia, and hath presently some business in this city with
her Aunt which accompanies her.


Ha, ha, business in deed, tell me Echo, here are none but God good
friends, is she of the right stamp?


Sir, believe me I know no such thing by her, I have not been long acquainted
with her, and (to tell you what likely hoods I have hitherto seen) she is
very demure and modest, neither is there any company resorts to her lodging,
but what for that? all things have a beginning, she is a woman, and nothing
is unpossible.


Trust me truly she is a gallant wench, but young, that Fryer which would not
cast off his cowl to catch such a soul, shall never be my cofessor, but I pray
thee deal plainly with me: might not a man entreat master Echo to carry her a
present if need were?


Sir there is never a gentleman in this city, shall make Echo stretch a
stringe sooner then your self, but of a very truth, hitherto I have seen no
such likelihood, but Sir, you are a gallant young man, me thinks you might ^o
well to walk sometimes by her lodging, and give her the Albade, or the Bezo las
manos, and by that mean you may acquaint your self with her: afterwards if
any thing may be furthered by Echo, command him.


Gramercy gentle Echo, but where abouts is she lodged?


Not far from S. Myghels Sir, at a red houseI will take leave of you for this
time, least she think me very slack in attendance.


Fare well friend Echo. Did I not tell you what he was? there is not such a
fellow in a world again, surely it shall go hard but I will have a sling at
this damsel: but let us go in, for our companions are departed long since,
and we shall perchance give some cause of suspect, if we tarry long here*


Go we.


SUrely these young men are not hitherto to be misliked, and I trust in God they
will prove toward scholars.


Yea sir out of dout, especially the two elder, but the other two are nothing
so quick sprited, I came by them earewhile, soon after ye had done reading
unto the, and the two. eldest could even then (in manner) record without book
as much as you had taught them.


Yea but what is that to the purpose? the quickest wits prove not always best,
for as they are ready to conceive, so do they quickly forget, therewithal, the
fineness of their capacity doth carry such oftetimes to delight in vanities,
since mans nature is such, that with ease it inclyneth to pleasure, and
unwilling it is to endure pain or travel, without the which no virtue is
obtained.


This gear goes well, for whereas I was casting with my self howe to entrap
this yonker, he is fallen into the net of his own accorde, and desires that
of me which I was careful howe to profer cleanly unto him. But is not this
the old scholemaster? eve the same, well, we must find some device to blear his
eye for a while: let me alone, I know howe to bring it to pass.


Doth this fellow come to me think thou?


It may be sir, but I know him not.


I will salute him. God save you master schoolmaster.


Welcome gentle brother.


Sir, I am sent unto you by the Markgraue, who understanding that two of his
kinsemen are lately placed under your government, hath a desire to see them,
and therefore sent me to entreat you that you would give them liberty this
afternoon, to the end that he may common with them.


Surely I did not know that they were the Markgraues kinsemen, and they have
yet been but very small time with me, but since it so pleases him, I am
content to grant them liberty, and I will ^end them out unto you presently to
go where it likes him.


So so, they are as much a kin to the Markegraue, as Robyn Fletcher and the
sweet Rood of Chester, but yet this was a cleanly shift upon the sudden,
for by this means shall I take occasion to bring this yonker and the Lady
Lami^ better acquainted, much good do it him, for out of doubt she shall be
his, as long as his purse may be mine. But behold where they come altogether,
now let me bestir me and use my best wits.


I Am glad that we have liberty this afternoon to take recreation, not for
that I lacked time to meditate that which hath been read unto us, but because I
take pleasure in walking abroad.


And I hope by this means to have further communication with my friend Echo,
and behold where (...) is.


Amongst all that our instructor hath rehearsed unto us, there is nothing
sticks better in my remembrance, than that which he said of time: for surely
as it is the greatest treasure which God hath given unto man, so ought he to be
very curious and wary how he bestows the same, wherefore Philotimus I
think we can not better do, than to spend some time by the way in meditating
rehearsing these wholesome precepts, which our instructor hath to us delivered,
for I assure you, although he hath been therein very compendious and
sententious, yet in my judgment every sentence is suchas requires a ripe
deliberation, and weighty consideration of the same.


Surely Philomusus I am of your opinion, and therefore let us bestow the time
therein, although percase our brethren here will use this afternoon in some
other exercise.


Sir it is unto you that I address my self, for although I be not the rediest
man on live to deal in such affairs, yet such is the great good liking which
I have always had in you, that since I spake with you earewhile, I have not
been unmindful of you, surely I suppose that God doth favour your desires, for
even now when I departed from you, and as soon as I overtook the gentlewoman,
I cast in my brains how to pleasure you, and meaning to have devised some
subtilty whereby the thing might be brought into communication, the gentlewoman
of her* self proffred the occasion, for she demanded of me what young
gentlemen those were with whom I stayed, I told her that ye were Sons to two
of the welthiest burghers in this city, and be you sure I left out no
commendation which might advance you, whereat she seemed to bite on the
bridle, and commended you for your courtesies* in that ye saluted her so gently
as she passed by, but especially she marked you by sundry things and
gestures, and could describe you unto me by your apparel. Short tale to make,
I never saw her show so much lykelyhoode of affection, since I first saw her,
as she bewrayed presently, and shall I tell you in your ear? if Echo be any
better then a fool, she hath a months mind unto Phylosarchus, wherefore play
you now the wise man, strike the Iron whiles it is hot, she returns this way
presently, and thereupon I have adventured to come unto your Scoolemaster, to
crave you a liberty in the name of the Markegraue, saying that you were his
kynsemen, and this have I done, to the end that you might take occasion to
salute her e^nes as she returns: and if you use the matter wisely (as I know
you can) you may take opportunity also to talk with her, yea and to conduct her
to her lodging.


Surly Echo thou show playnlie what good will thou bear me, but what
shall we do with the Markgraue?


Tush, follow you your bu^nes now that you hau^ liberty, and let me alone with
that matter, if ever hereafter the thing come in question, lay all upon me,
and I will say, that I mistook both the Scoolemaster and the Skollers unto
whom I was sent.


Well friend Echo I know not how to deserve thy gentleness, but in token of
grateful mind, hold, receive these twenty gildres until I have greater
abillity, and be sure that if ever I live to enherit Phylocalus, then Echo
shall not be unprovided for.


What mean you sir? stay your purse until another time, well if you will
needs enforce me, I will never refuse the courtesy of a gentleman, but behold
where the Lady Lamia comes, Sir me recomandez, I will not be seen to talk
with you, for I stale from her to* pleasure you privily.


OH my friend Phylautus, behold here a peerless piece, doth it not delight
your eyes to gaze upon such a shining star? on my^e honour she hath a sweet
face, by al likelihood she is much to young to have been hitherto commonly
abused, but wherefore am I abashed? I will go and salute her. Fair lady God save
you, and send you that your hart most desires.


Worthy gentleman, I thank you most heartily for your good will, and if God
hear (...) prayer, he shall do more than he did for me a good while, but it is
no (...), (...) (...) hath taken his pleasure of punishing, he will at last
have pity on the poor.


Surely mistress, it were great pity that such a one as you, should endure
any punishment without great cause, and hardly can I think that any heart is
so hard as to see you sorrowful, if remedy may be therefore obtained.


Sir, I could be content that all men were of your mind, but I find courtesy
very cold now adays, and many there be which would rather depryue a poor
gentlewoman of her right, then ^ue upon her pi^eous plyght: the good king
Amadis is dead long since, whose Knights undertook always the defence of
Dames and Damsels.


Alas what ails the young gentlewoman to complain?


Sir and not without cause, since she is by great wrong dispossessed of rich
Signiories which belong to her by right and inheritance, and complaining here
unto the magistrates, she receives small comfort, but is rather hindered by
malice and detraction.


Fair gentlewoman: although I have hitherto had no great acquaintance with you,
yet if I might crave but to know the cause of your grief, be you sure I
would use my best indeuer to redress it, and therefore I conjure you by your
courtesy, that you change your opinio, for all Amadis Knights are not (...)
dead, only bewray your grief, and praise thereafter as you find.


Sir I have not power to reject your courtesy, you shall understand then, that
being c.


Neyce it seems that you have not your honour in such commendation as I would
wish you should, I pray you let us begone homewards.


Why Mistres, are you offended that ^hee should herken unto such, as seek to
relieve her estate.


Sir you are a gentleman well nurtured, and you know this is no place to talk
in, without discredyt.


Well Mistres, if it please you we will wait upon you unto your lodging, and
there you shall see what desire I have to comfort this fair Lady.


As for that sir at your pleasure, I pray God send her good friends in her
right, for God knows she hath need of such at this present.


BEhold behold, O mortal men behold,
Behold and see, how soon deceit is wrought:
How s^ne men's minds, of harmful things take hold,
How soon the g^d, corrupted is with nought.
Behold the cares whereof our saviour spake,
(...) Matthew tells, in thirteenth chapter plain,
Such wicked means, malicious men can make,
The frutfull seed, with worthless weeds to stain.
Behold the devil, whose ministers are pressed:
To stir an ore, in every forward boat:
Behold blind youth, which holds pleasure best,
And (...) the payne, which might their state promo^e.
Great is the care, which gravest men endure,
To see their Sons, brought up in Godly wise:
And great the pains, which teachers put in ur,
To trade then still, in virtuous qualities:
But oh how great, is greedy lust in youth?
How much mischief, it swallows up unseen?
With reckles mind, it castes aside all truth,
And feeds still, on that which is vncleene.
These parasites, and bawds have quickly caught,
The careless byrds, who see not their deceyptes:
with such vile wares, the world so full is fraught,
As few can escape, their subtilties and sleights:
Yet mighty God, vouchsafe to guide the rest,
That they may sh^n the bad, sew the best.
THere there there, this gear goes round as it should go, these young gallants
are caught without a net, shall I tell you one thing? no man gladder then I,
for as long as that chimney smoketh, I am sure I shall not go hungry to bed.
An Inheritrix quoth you? marie that she is a Meritrix I warrant her, of great
burdens, birthrightes I would say, no doubt of it, he that marries her shall be
sure of great ecclamation, and that good old gentlewoman her Aunt. Why though
the young woman had never a groat in the world, yet a man might be glad that
could match his Son in such an abominable (honourable) stock: these are
Aunts of Antwerpe, which can make twenty marriages in one week sor their
kinswoman, O noble old girls, I like them yet when they be wise, for it is an
old saying, one shrew is worth two sheep. Well, let me look about me how I
prate, and let me epsy what is become of their brothers according to their
commandment, but are not these two they which come debating of the matter in
such earnest? it is even they, and wot you what? their brethren are otherwise
occupied, but yet surely they argue as fa^t as they, when God knows a small
entreaty might serve, but I will step aside and herken to these yonkers.

SUrely Phylotimus, I wonder what is become of our brethren, I pray god they be
not enticed to some vanity by some lewd company.


You might have guessed twice have guessed worse, I beshrew your brains for your
busy conjecture.


Truly it may be, but I trust they will bear in mind the last precept which
your Master gave us, at y^ least I would we had their company, that we might
meditat the matter together.


I perceive it is time to call them, I will be gone.


If our enstructor should examine us, and find them to seek, it would grieve
me as much for my brother as if the fault were mine own.


Surely and I would also be very sorry if my brother should be found slack in
his duty, but in my judgment we need not to cast these doubts, for our
brethren seemed unto me to be very perfect and ready in the especial points of
our enstruction, and could (in manner) make rehearsal thereof immediately after we
had received the same.


Yea marie, but I will tel you one thing I know by experience in my brother, he
will as soon conceive or bear away a thing as any that ever I saw, and surely
to confess a truth, he hath an excellent ready wit, but doubtless he will
sometimes forget as fast, as he learns readily, and yet for mine own part, I
would to God that my memory were as capable as his is, for then I would not
doubt but to reteyne sufficiently.


It may be that his mind is much given to other plesures and delights, which
do so continually possess his brains, as they suffer not any other conception
to be emprinted in his memory: for my brother Phylautus doth in a manner
meditat nothing else but setting forth of him self, and in what soever he be
occupied or conversant, yet shall you perceive him to have a singular regard
to his own praise, the which doth sometimes carry him as far beyond all
reason, as his deserts might seem to advance him.


To be opinionate of h^ self is vicious, but surely I am of opinnion, that it
is commendable for a young man in all his actions to regard his own
advancement, and with all to have (reasonably) a good opinion of him self, in
exempting of such things as he undertakes, for if he which covets in the
latyne tongue to be eloquent, should so far embase his thoughts as to conceive
that he spake or wrote like old Duns or Scotus, surely (in my judgment) it
would be very hard for him to excel or to become a perfect Rethoritian, or
if he which employs his time in the exercise of riding, should imagine with
himself that he sat not comely on his horse back, it would be long before he
should become a gallant horseman: for in all human actions we delight so
much the more, and sooner attain unto their perfections, whenas we think in
our minds that in deed the exercise thereof doth become us: but behold now
where our brethren do come.


THis was a proper messanger in deed, he might have mocked others though he
mocked not us.


O sir you do him wrong, for it seems unto me that the poor fellow is as
sorry for it as we are miscontented, and that he rather faulted through
ignorance, than of any set purpose, but look where our brethren are* Brother
where have you bin whilst we were at the Markgraues house?


Truly brother I walked on with my companion here, hoping that we should have
followed you to the Markgraues house and we were so earnest in meditating such
matter as our instructor delivered unto us, that mistaking the way, not marking
which way you went, we were constrained to return hither, and to attend your
return, to the end we might go altogether.


And you (brother) where have you been?


Where have we been quoth you? why we have been with that good old gentleman
the Markgraue, unto whom we were as welcome as water into the ship, the old
^roward ^rowner would scarce vouchsafe to speak unto us, or to look upon us,
but he shall sit until his heals ache before I come at him again.


O brother, use reverent speech of him, principally because he is a Magistrate,
and therewithal for his greye hairs, for that is one especial point of our
masters traditions.


Tush what tell you me of our masters traditions? if a Magistrate, or an elder
would challendge reverence of a young gentleman, it were good reason also that
they should render affability, and cheerful countenance to all such as
present them selves before them with good wi^l. When we came to him he knew us
not, neither would he know us by any means, but with a grim countenance
turned his back, and desired us to go ere we drank: a Markgraue quoth you?


That is strange, that having sent for us, he would seem to use such
enterteynment when we came.


I will tell you brother, it seems unto me that it was rather the fault of
the messanger, and yet he


Truly and not without cause, but behold^ where our master comes.


Let us say then that we were together* least he be offended.


Now my well-beloved, and what saith the honourable reverend Markgraue unto you?
or howe doth he like the manner of your enstruction? have you recyted or
declared any part thereof unto him since your going?


Sir no* for it seems that the messanger did mistake his errand, and was
sent to some other scholars, and not unto us.


Is it even so? well then let us not altogether lose the golden treasure of the
time: but tell me, have you perfectly digested and committed unto memory the
articles which I delivered unto you, for especial consideration of your
duty?


Sir I think that I ca perfectly rehearse them.


And I sir do hope also that I shall not greatly ^ayle.


Sir this young man and I do partly bear them in mind, although not so
perfectly and readily as we desire.


Well, to the end that you shall the better imprint them in your memory,
behold, I have put them briefly in writing as a memorial, and here I deliver
the same unto you, to be put in verse every one by himself and in sundry
device, that you may therein take the greater delight, for of all other Arts
Poetry gives greatest assistance unto memory, since the very terminations
and ceasures do (as it were) serve for places of memory, and help the mind
with delight to carry burdens, which else would seem more grievous: and
though it might percase seem unto you, that I do in manner ouerlode you with
lessons and enterprises, yet shall you herein rather find comfort or
recreation, than any ^comberance: let me now see who can show himself the
pleasant^ ^et, in handeling thereof, (...) yet you must also therein (...)
d^rum, for ^ing allegories or pleasant (...) in serious causes are not most
comely. God guide you (...) and ever.


OH that I had now the ^ayne which Uirgill had in writing of a delectable
verse.


God is good and bountiful, yielding unto every man that is industrious the
open way to knowledge and s^ience, though at first it seem difficile, yet with
travel every thing is obtained* we see the hardest stones are pierced with
soft drops of water, whereby the mind of man may be encouraged to trust,
that unto a willing hart* nothing is impossible, but to perform the charge
which is given us, we must withdraw our selves from each other* since we are
enjoined every of us to devise it in (...) ^ortes of poems, wherefore I will
leave you for a time.


And I will also assay what I can do.


God be with them, shall I tell you Phylautus, wherefore I desired the
excellency of Ui^gil, in compounding of a verse? not as they think God
knows, to convert our tedious traditions there into: for a small grace in a
verse will serve for such unpleasant matter, but it was to furnish me with
eloquence* for the better obteyning of this heavenly dame, whose remembrance is
sweet unto me, neither yet am I able to express such praises as she doth
deserve. Oh how it delights me to behold in mine imagination the counterfeit
of her excellent face, me thinks the glimsing of her eyes have in it a
reflection, far more vehement than the beams of the Sun it self, and the
sweetness of her heavenly breath, surpasses the spiceries of Arabia. Oh that
I ha^ skill to write some worthy matter in commendation of her rare
perfections, surely I will tell you Phila^us, I do both rejoice in your doings,
and much wonder at your inclination. I wonder because I can not per^ that you
are any thing moved with affection of mind towards her, and yet I rejoice
therein least the same might have become an hinderance to my desires, oh, howe
only love will admit no companion.


Phylo^us, you may happily be deceived in me, and therefore I would not wish
you hereafter to (...) your self in any man at the first acquaintance, but in
deed to confess a truth unto you, although this gentlewom^n be beautiful,
yet, have I refreyned hitherto to become affectionate on her, as well because I
would therein give place unto your desire, as also because I have not perceived
that ever she lent any glance or liking look towards me, and as I can be
content to love where I find my self esteemed, so be you sure that I think
my halfepeny as good silver as another doth, and she that seems not with
greedy eye to behold me, it is veri^ likely that I will not be ouerhastie to
gaze at her. But to return unto the purpose, as you do now earnestly desire
to get victory over her affection: so do I every day beseech of God, that
our parents may at last determine to send us unto some Uniuersitie, that
there the variety of all delights may yield unto each of us his
contentation.


Alas, and I am of another mind, for though I desire no less than you to be
at some university, yet to lose the sight of my Lamia seems no less grief
unto me, than if my heart were torn out of my body. But behold where
Ambidexter comes, my mind gives me that I shall hear some news by him.
Howe now Ambidexter? what news?


Good sir, and such as I dare say you will be glad of.


And what are those? tell me quickly I pray thee.


Sir I will tell you, there came a tattling fellow to your father erewhile, and
told him a tale in his ear which seemed to like him but a little, what so ever
it was, where upon your Father mumbled a while as the Cade which chews the
Cud, and in the ^de with a great sigh he said. Well, then (quoth he) there
is no remedy but send them with speed to the Uniuersitie: which words when I
overheard, I smiled to my self and thought, (by God, and so you may dress
them) for I dare well say, they will be the most joyful news that they heard
this half year, and to gratify you with the same, I came immediately to seek
you out, but where (...) (...) brother?


He is gone that way walking, ^ pray thee follow him, and make him partaker of
these news.

Oh howe much is Ambidexter deceived in me at this present? No no, I can not so
content my self to forget the sweet face of that worthy Lady Lamia, neither
can I ever hope to rejoice, unless I might be so happy, as to enjoy the
continual sight of her heavenly countenance, the university is in deed the
place where I have of long time been desirous to be placed, especially for the
variety of delights and pleasures which there are daily exercised: but alas,
what needs the rich man to become a these? or what need I to wander unto
the university for to seek pastime and pleasurs, when I may even here in
Antwerp without further travel, enjoy the daily comfort of such consolation?
and if I be not also much deceived, she loves and likes me no less than I
desire her, I pray you tell me Phylautus, do you not plainly perceive that she
hath an affection towards me?


Surely Phylosarchus, I dare not swear it, although in deed the franknesse of
her entertainment was much, but when I consider that it was at the very first
sight, it makes me think that her courtesy is common, and may be quickly
obtained.


Why did she not then make as fayr^ semblant unto you?


Marie, because she perceived you to address your self most directly unto her,
and there is no woman so kind, that she can deal with mo than one at once,
but be you sure if I had been there alone, she would have lent me as favourable
regard as she seemed now to give you, it is the trick of them all, and
therefore never set your mind so much thereon, I warrant you, when we come to
the Uniuersiti, we shall have store of such there, and I am glad to understand
that your father determines to send^ you thither, for I am sure that my
brother and I shall accompany you, since our fathers have always been
destrous that we should spend our youths together. But behold where our
fathers come both together, let us go in, least they epsy us, and think that
we loiter here.


SUrely neyghbor Phylocalus, I can not blame you though you be moved at these
tidings, but in things which come contrary to expectation or desire, the
wisdom of men is best seen, therefore I would advise you to forecast in time
howe you may prevent such a mischief, for greatest wouds are at the first more
easily cured, than if they continue until some abundance of humour or other
accident do hinder the benefit of nature, and surely it grieves me in manner
as much, as if the like had been found in mine own son.


So have you great reason to say, for your son Phylautus was there with him
also, and though the Harlot seemed not to lend liking unto any but my son,
yet be you out of doubt that being in such company, he shall hardly escape the
snares of temptation.


Well, howe so ever it be, we shall best do to consult with their teacher
hereupon, and behold where he ^mmeth. Sir we were about to send for you,
being ad^tised that my neighbours son Phylosarchus doth haunt a very dishonest
house in this town, and my son Phylautus hath also ben there in company with
him, the which gives us just occasion to lament, most glad we would be to
devise some comfort in time, since the thing hath (as yet) been of no long
continuance. Wherefore we beseech you to deal faithfully with us, and to
declare if you have s^ne any such behaviour, or likelihood in them, and
furthermore to advise us, which way we might best redress this mishap
betimes.


Sir to declare of your sons behaviour, trewly I have never seen any thing
to misselyke of them, neither could I ever perceine that they were slow in
apprehending mine enstructions, but rather more forward then their brethren,
true it is that here came one to me in name of the Markgraue, saying that he
was their kinseman and very desirous to see them, whereupon I did willingly
give them leave, and when they came there they say that the messenger miss
took the matter, and should have gone to some other schollers. But doubtless my
mind gives me, that if they have been allured to any evil company, it hath
been by that same fellow which came to me on that message.


Do you not know him, or what his name is?


I do not know him, but he said that his name was Echo.


Echo? Nay then you have not judged amiss, for it is one of the lewdest
fellows in this town, a common Parasite and a seducer of youth.


Surely my heart did not greatly like him at the first sight, but since
things done cannot be undone, I like well that you should (according to your
own devise) provide in time before they wade deeper in such enterprises, and
to speak mine opinion, you may do well to send them unto some University,
before they have further acquaintance or haunt in such company, for whether it
be love, or lust that hath infected them, there can be no presenter remedy then
to absent them from the things which they desire, and therewithal I promise
you (not to flatter) they are already very sufficiently able for the
University, and the en^ructions which I have given them, may serve rather for
precepts of their perfect duty to God and man, then for any exercise of the
liberal sciences, wherein they are so well entered, and have been so thoroughly
traded, as there lacks nothing but convenient place where they might proceed
in Logic and such like.


And me thinks we might better do to enfourme the Markgraue. Who upon such
means as we shall make, may banish the harlot with her train out of the City,
and may also punish the parasite for so entysing the young men.


I grant you that all this may be done ^ery well but then you are to
consider, that the hearts of young men, are oftentimes so stout, that they can
not abid publicly to hear of a fault, the which (being priuatlie and
gently admonished) they would peradventure willingly amend: and great
difference there is between children and young men, for in childhood all
punishment is terrible, but in flourishing youth every punishment may not be
used, but discretion must foresee what kind of punishment will most preuaile
and best gain reformation in the mind of the offender. Wherefore mine advice
shoud be that you send them to some Uniuersitie, and as near as you can foresee
to place them with such a Lutor as may always have an eye to their exercises,
and may have especial care how they shall bestow their vacant times. For
idleness is the cause of many e^ils in youth, whereas being occupied or
exercised in any thing that is virtuous or commendable, they shall not have so
great occasion to think of vanities.


All that is true, but what Uniuersitie do you think meetest?


For mine own opinion I like Doway very well, both for that it is near, and
from thence you may always within short time be advertised, and also
because I do know very learned and faithful men there, and herewithal it is
but a little Town, and the Uniuersytie but lately erected, whereby the root of
evil hath hitherto had least skope, and exercise hath been (and is) th^ more
straightly observed.


And could you direct us unto any such faithful Tutor, that we might be bold
to think our selves sure of their well doing? and that they should not be
susfred to run at large about wanton toys and lewdness?


Truly I can tell you of two or three which are both faithful and careful of
their charge, but to assure you in such sort as you require were very hard to
do, since no Tutor can use such vygilant industry, but that sometimes he may
be deceived, nevertheless I know them to be careful.


Well for my part I can be content to follow your advise, what think you
neighbour Phylopaes.


I do lykwise agree to as much as hath been said.


Well then mark yet a little further mine intent, I would think good that the
young men themselves should not know thereof until the Journey were prepared and
they ready to depart, and my meaning is this, in so doing you shall antyeypate
all occasions that they might have to confer with lewd company, who
peradventure would not spare to follow and accompany them wheresoever they go.


Surly that is well considered, and therefore neighbour. I pray you give
straight charge unto your servant least he do bewray our intent herein.


Sirha do you hear not one word for your life of that which we have here
communed together.


Sir I trust you have never hitherto found me ^acke to do that which I have ben
commanded, nor rash to disclose any thing which I thought might displease you.


Well I pray you let us go together unto my house, and there let us more at
large debate this matter.


Go we where best likes you.


WOuld God now that I could mete with Phylotimus that unto him I might recount
what I have done in the theme which our Master gave us earwhile, for coference
is comfortable unto schollers, were it no more but to use each others advise
and opinion in such things as they shall undertake: and though in compiling of
verses, all company is cumbersome, yet when the same are made and finished,
then is it a singular comfort to have acompanion with whom (as with thy self,
(thou may be bold to confer for judgment. And behold where Phylotimus comes
in good time.


Phylomusus I have finished the charge which our enstructer gave us in verse, I
would be glad to have your opinion therein.


He tells the tale that I should have told.


I pray you give ear a while, and I will read unto you what I have done
therein.


With right good will Phylotimus, read them I pray you.


Give ear then, but first I must thus much declare unto you. I have no more
but conveyed in to verse the very brief which our Master delivered us in
prose, adding neither dilatations, allegories, nor examples: and thus it is.

Fear God always whose might is most, join thy fear with love
Since over all his worthy works, his mercy stands above:
In him thou may likewise be bold, to put thy trust always,
Since he is just and promise keeps, his truth cannot decay.
Give ear unto his Ministers, which do his word profess,
Disdain them not due reverence, their place deserves no less.
And love them eke with hearty love, because they feed thee still,
With heavenly food, whereon thy soul, his hungry hart may fill.
Then next to God true honour give, to Gods anointed king,
For he is Gods lieutenant here, in every earthly thing:
his power comes from heaven above, the which thou must obey,
And love him since he doth protect, thy life in peace always.
To Magistrates in their degrees, thou must like duties bear,
Love, honour, and obedience, since they betoken hear,
The majesty: and represent the king him self in place,
And bear his sword, maintayn peace, and deem each doutfull case.
Be thankful to the country soil, wherein thou hast been bred,
Defend it always to the death, therefore thy life is led:
And seek by all thy skill and power, to do such deeds therein,
As may thereto some profit yield, so shalt thou honour win.
To elders for their hoary hears, thou shalt do reverence,
And love them since they council thee, in every good pretence:
Defend them eke because they be, as feeble (for their might)
As stout and strong in good advice, against the flesh to fight.
Thy father and thy mother both, with other parents (...),
Thou shalt in honour still esteem, for God commands so:
And love them as they tendered thee, in cradle and in kind,
Releiue their age (if it have need) for duty so doth bind.
Thus shalt thou bear thy self always, if y^ wilt prosper well
And from thy self if thou desire, all mischief to expel:
The keep thy self both chaste cleen, in deed eke in thought,
Embrace the good, leave y^ bad, for thou art dearly bought.
Thou art the Temple of the Lord, which must be vnde^de,
More dere to him the Teples are, which mortal me do build.
And since he cast fro Temple once, which was but lime stone
The biers and the sellers both, bad them thence be gon,
How much more the will he require, y^ y^ shuldst keep thy self
Both clean pure from fylthy sin, much worse the worldly
Be holy the, keep thesewords, in mind both night day (pel^
For so be sure that god himself, thy stagring steppes will stay.
Thus have you now seen Philomusus, my simple skill in poetry, and I pray you
tell me your opinion therein.


Surely Phylotimus. I like your verses very well, for they are compendious:
and to be plain with you, I have likewise framed a verse or poem upon y^ same
matter, marie I have some what more dilated and enlarged every point, but such
as it is, I will likewise crave your opinion therein.


With right good will: I pray you read them.


THe man that means, by grace him self to guide,
And so to live, as God may least offend:
These lessons learn, and let them never slide,
^rom out his mind, what ever he pretend.
Since God is great, and so omnipotent,
as nothing can withstand his mighty power,
he must be feared, least if his wrath be bent:
we perish all, and wither like a flower.
Yet with such fear, we must him love likewise,
Since he hath store, of mercyes in his hand:
And more delights, that Sinners should arise,
then still to fall, and neuermore to stand.
In him also, we may be bold to trust,
In him we may, put all our confidence:
For he is true, and of his promise just,
He never fails, the pyth of his pretence.
His Ministers, and such as prech his word,
Because they be, from him (to teach us) sent*
We should to them, give ear with one accord*
And learn their lore, which leads us to repent.
All reverence, to them shall be but due,
As well because, their office so requires:
As there with all, because there doth ensue,
A just reward, to humble men desires.
And love them eke, with fast and faithful love,
Because they feed, thy soul with heavenly bread:
Which cannot mold, nor from thy mouth remove,
Until thou have, thy fill there on ysed.
Next God the king, doth challenge second place,
And him we must, both honour and obey:
^ause he hath, (from God above) ^is grace,
And is (...), on earth to bear the sway.
Yet as with hart, we shall him honour yield,
And must obey, what he commands with feare^
So love him eke* because he is our shield,
And doth protect, our life in quiet here.
Like duties do, to Magistrates belong,
Because they bear, the sword, and represent
The king him self, righten every wrong,
And maintain peace, with all their whole intent.
Unto the soil, wherein we fostered were,
We must always, be thankeful children found:
And in defence thereof we must not fear,
To venture life, as we by birth ^e bound.
For to that end, our life to us was lent,
And therewith all, we ought the same to advance.
And do such deeds, as may be pertment.
To profit it, and eke our selves enhance.
The silver hears, of Elders every where,
Claim reverence, as due thereto by right:
Their grave advise, and precepts which we lear*
Doth challenge love, the same for to requite.
Their weak estate, when force is gon and past,
Doth crave defence, of such as yet be strong:
Since they defend, the force of fortunes blast,
From weakest wytts, which harken to their song.
The parents they, which brought us up in youth,
Must honoured be, since God commands so:
And since thereby, a gracious gyfte ensewth,
Even lunge to live, in earth whereon we go.
They ought likewise, our hearty loves to have,
As they loved us, in cradle when we lay:
And b^ake their sleeps, our sely life to save,
When of our selves, we had no kind of stay.
And if they need, in age when strength is gone,
We ought r^ue, the same with all our power:
We should be greeud, when as we hear them groan,
And w^yle their wants, and help them every howre.
And he that thus, can well direct his ways,
And (...) himsefe, in chaste and holy life:
Shall please the Lord, shall prolong his (...),
In quiet state, protected still from stry^e.
Be holy thus, and live in good accord,
Since men one earth, are Temples to the Lord
Thus may you see Phylotimus, that one self same thing may be handled sundry
ways, and now I pray you tell me your opinion, as I have told you mine.


Surely Phylomusus your verses do please me much better then mine own, and
very glad I am that we have each of us so well accomplished our duties,
nothing doubting but that our enstructer will also like the same accordingly:
now if you think good, let us go in and present the same, when soever he
shall think good ^o demand it.


With right good will, go you on I will follow*


THe Shed is great, and greater then the show,
Which seems to be, between the good and bad:
For even as weeds, which fast by flowers do grow^,
(Although they be with comely collors clad:)
Yet are they found, but seldom sweet of smell,
^o vices brag, but virtue bears the Bell.
The prancing steed, can seldom hold his flesh,
The hottest greyhound leaves the course at length:
The finest Silks, do seeld continue fresh,
The fattest men, may fail sometimes of strength:
Such deep deceiptes, in fair pretence are found,
That vices lurk, where virtue seems t'abound.
A Spanish trick, it hath ben counted oft,
To seem a thing, yet not desire to be:
Like humble bees, which fly all days aloft,
And taste the flowers, that fairest are to see:
But yet at even, when all things go to rest,
A foul cow shard, shall then content them best.
Well yet such bees, because they make great noise,
And are withal, of sundry pleasant hues:
Be most esteemed, always by common voice,
And honoured more, then Bees of better thewes:
So men likewise, which bear the bravest Show,
Are held for best, and crowched to full lowe.
But virtue she, which dwells in secret thought,
Makes good the seed, what ever be the smell:
Though outward gloss, sometimes do seem but nought,
Yet inward stuff, (of virtue) doth excel:
For like a stone, most worthy to esteem,
It loves to be, much better then to seem*
Phylautus here, and Phylosarchus eke,
Did seem at first, more forward then the rest:
But come to proof, and now they be to seek,
Their brethren no we, perform their duty best*
Thus good from bad, appears as day from night,
That one takes pain, that other loves delight.
I Have for my part set al things in redynesse for my Sons departure, and
if my neighbour have done the like, they shall depart immediately: but behold
where he comes, how now sir? What have you done or dispatched?


Al things necessary for my Sons are in readynesse, and you, what have you
done?


Doubt you not of my diligence, I am ready were it within this hour, but I
would be glad to talk with Master Gnomaticus, as well to use his advise, as
also to have his letters of commendation unto some faithful Tutor at the
University: and look where he comes in haste.


Gentlemen I have found you both in good hour, and I would wish you to
dispatch the young men your sons with all convenient speed, for the thing
which you suspected is doubtless too true.


And how know you?


I will tell you sir, care while as soon as I departed from you, I examined the
al concerning a task which I had given them, and that was to put in verse a
b^iefe memorial of the chief points wherein I did enstruct them, and I found
that Phylomusus and Phylotimus

had done the same very well: on that other side, I found Phyl^us and
Phylosarchus to have done there in nothing of all, and marvelling at their
strange and unaccustomed slackenesse, I searched them upon such suspicion as
I had conceived, and found that Phylosarchus had spent the time in writing of
loving sonnets, and Phylautus had also made verses in praise of Marshiall feats
and pollycies.


O God, and have you not punished them accordingly?


As for that sir be you contented, there is time for all things, and presently
in my judgment you could devise no punishment which would so much grieve them
as to depart from this City, hereafter I doubt not but to devise the means
that both they shall be rebuked as appertains (though they be out of my hands)
and the causers of these mischiefs may also chance to hear thereof when they
think it quite forgotten, but at this point we will hold no longer discourse
therein, only prepare for your Sons departure to the University.


The chief thing whereupon we ^tay, hath been both to use your advise, and to
desire you that you will take pains to write your letters unto some faithful
Tutor there, who may both rebuke them for that which is past, and have care to
govern them better in time to come.


Mine advise you have heard already, and touching the letters which you
require, they are in manner ready, for I had so determined before you required
me, and now if it please you to walk unto my lodging, we will from thence
dispatch them before they hear any further news of the matter.


Go we with good will.


IT is a wondrous matter to see the force of love, saving your reverence. I
dare say the Lady Lamia since she saw this young gentleman, could never sleep
until her eyes were shut, and there withal she takes such thought, that
as soon as ever she is laid she falls on snorting: and God knows, her
cheeks are become as lean as a pestill of pork, and her face as pale as a
carnation gilofloure. Fie (...), what means she? Will she cast away her
self on this fashion for his sake? She bears but evil in remembrance the
good documents of that virtuous old Lady her Aunt. I warrant you it would be
long before that (...) would dye for love. Tush tush shall I tell you? It is
folly to stand meditating of these matters, every man for him self and I for
one, these yonkers shall pay for the roast, and Echo by your leave will take
part of the cost, but behold where comes doughty Dicke. Howe now Richard
what news?

WHat news? mary Phylosarchus hath sent a fat breast of veale, a capon, a dozen
of pigeons, a couple of rabets, and a stoup of wine unto the lady Pandarinaes
house, and promises to be there at supper to talk more of the matter which
you wot of.

And hath he sent no more?


Why is not that well for a footman? By our lady sir, it doth me good to
think what cheer I will make with the leauinges, and wot you what? Be you
sure he shall lack no clean trenchers, for as soon as he hath laid a good
morsel before him, Dicke will be at an inch with a clean plate to pro^er him.


Well said Dicke, and I trow that I will skinke in his cups as fast on the
other side, but hear me Dicke, as for these matters neither of us both will
be to seek, but there are other things to be remembered which are of more
weighty con^eration.


And what I pray thee?


Marie thou must mark whenever he casts a glance at the Lady Lamta, and
round him in the ear, saying: beware sir how you look, least her Aunt epsy
you. And again, if he speak a word wherein he seems himsel^ to take
pleasure, extol him straight with praise, and say tha^ (...) hath to (...)
(...) (...) as he. Likewise (...) to whet (...) forward, as (...) she showed
not (...) (...) enough. These and a thousand such other (...) must be (...) and
practised, to make him come off, and whatsoever he gives thee let us share
between us, for I promise thee Dicke by the faith of a true B^rgondyance, I
will be as true to thee as thy coat is to thy back.


By the mass Echo and that is true enough, for it hath (...) so long to my
shoulders, that a louse can not well climb the cliffs thereof without a
pitchfork in her hand. But I trust master (...) fees will be suf^ient to set
both thee and me a float, and make us as brave as the best.


(...), as for that matter, if he do not another shall: he were w^se enough
that would lean altogether unto one (...) these days, no no Dicke; be ruled
by Echo, and ^ warrant thee we two will ^iue howe soever the world wag^e,
hast thou not often heard, that change of pasture makes fat ealues?


Ha ha ha, by God and well said, but who comes (...)?


Ha? mary it is the old Phylopaes and his neighbour Phylocalus, what is the
matter tro^ (...) us stand aside and hear their talk a while.


Best of all stand close.


SInce time is the greatest treasure which God lends us, and yet he doth but
lend us the same to the end that we should well employ it, it shall be therefore
the bounden duty of every man so to bestow the same, as may return to most
commodity and profit. And since your enstructer here doth commend your
towardness much more, (I fear) then you deserve, it seems that we should
have lost time in longer deteyning you from the University, therefore we have
prepared (as you see) to send you thither, trusting that you will there use
such diligence, as may be to the profit of your Country and for your own
aduancementes. The which to perform, I beseech the Father of Heaven that he
will always give you the spirit of wisdom, and power his grace upon you
continually.


Sir it shall become us to obey whatsoever you command, although in very deed
the sudden of our departure seems somewhat strange unto me, but it
becomes me not to be enquisitiue thereof, and in deed for mine own part,
there is nothing which could better content me then to go unto the University.


Phylosarchus, you and your Brother shall also accompany my neighbours Sons
here to Doway, for since you have hitherto been brought up together, I think
not meet now to part you. Wherefore I charge you that you so behave your
self, as I may always hear that you be diligent and studious, since that is
the mean to bring you unto estimation.


As touching my diligence, I trust that I


As for your preparation, all things are made ready for you, and your friends
shall be gladder to see your retourn home again learned, then they would have
been pensive to depart with you.


My well-beloved, since it pleases your parents thus to dispose your journey, I
cannot otherwise do but commend you to the tuition of almighty GOD, whom I
beseech now and ever to guide you by his grace, and I exhort you for Gods
sake, that you bear well in mind the precepts which I have given you,
assuring my self that ruling your actions by that measure, you shall be
acceptable to GOD, pleasing to the world, profitable to your selves, and
comfortable to your parents.


Sir it is no small grief unto us to depart from such a loving enstructer, but
since it becomes us to obey our parents, we contend not contrary to their
commandments, hoping by Gods grace so to employ our time, and so to continue
in the trac^e which you have trodden unto us, that you shall always commend
our diligence and good will.


Sirha? are the wagons ready? And is their carriage therein placed with all
things convenient?


Yea sir all things are dispatched.


Then go your ways with them, and the Father of Heaven be their guide and
yours now ever.


Fellow mine, you must deliver me this letter when you come to Doway according
to the superscription thereof.


It shall be done sir God willing.


The God of peace vouchsafe to bless you now and ever.


And give you grace to become his faith^ull servants. Amen.


My well beloved, I beseech the Heavenly Father to grant you a prosperous
journey, and well to bestow your time now and ever.

Did you not perceive that only the two elder seemed to grudge and repugn? it
is a marvelous matter, they two are of an excellent capacity, and able to
bear away (in manner) more then can be laid to their charge, but an old saying
hath been Chi tropo abraccia niente tiene. Well now, it shall not be amiss if
we consult of our affairs here at home, for as for them take you no doubt,
they shall understand at Dowaye, wherefore they were sent so soon from
Antwerpe, because in all things Secrecy is a great furderaunce, it shall be
best that we draw our selves apart unto one of your houses, where we may more
commodiously confer upon that which is to be done here.


I like your counsel well, when it pleases you let us go to my house.


With good will, I will accompany you.


FEllow Rychard, how like you this gear?


Marie friend Echo, I lykeit but a little.


And why I pray you?


Why quoth you? marie because I am sorry that such a sweet morsel is plucked
out of my mouth.


And I am glad that I shall feed my fill on such a sweet morsel, for since
there is now no remedy, but these younkers must needs be gone, God be with
them. Dyck and Echo, with the Ladies will eat drink as freely for their
sake, as if they were here present, and hear me Dyck, if they had been here,
we should have been fain to wait on the table, and to be contented with
their leavings after supper, whereas now we will be so bold as to sit down with
the rest, since we be (as thou well know) of household with that good
gentlewoman, and by our Lady, I was never so deintyly brought up but I could
eat a hot Cap^n, as well and as sauorly as a cold mess of porage, especially
where the bread drink is good.


All this I confess also to be good sound doctrine, but yet it gr^ueth me to
think that we have lost so good customers which might have continued such
banquits often times.


Tush Dyck hold thy peace, if we have not them, we shall have others as good as
they, thou may be sure that as long as Lamia continues beautiful, she shall
never be without Suitors, and when the Crows f^te grows under her eye, why
then no more ado but ensineuate thy self with such another. Yea and in the
mean time also, it should be no bad council, if a man had four or five such
hants in store, that evermore when one house is on sw^eping, another spit
may cry creak at the fire: store is no store as the proverb saith, and now
adays the broker which hath but one bargain in hand, may chance to wear a
thread bare coat.


Say thou so Echo? and I promise thee I had such a liking to this young man,
that I was partly in mind to have followed him to Doway.


To Doway? nay get me further from Antwarpe, then I may see the smoke of the
chymnies, and they have good luck. Tush tush, Doway is a pelting town packed
full of poor Skollers, who think a pair of cast hosen a great reward, but
Antwarp for my money. I tell ye truth, there are not many towns in Europe
that maintain more iollytie then Antwarpe, but behold where the Markgraue and
his officers come. I will be gone, I like not the smell of them.


By the mass neither I, they are going to cast off some bloodhound to seek a
vagabond or some like chase, and let them hunt till their hearts ache, so I be
once out of their sight first.


MUch is the mind of man deceived, which thinks that rulers officers have the
merriest lives, for although it seem unto some men a sweet thing to command,
yet whosoever copareth the burde of such cares as are insidet unto his (...),
unto the lightness of the pleasure which comes by com^undement, he shall find,
that much greater is the payne of that ^ne, then the profit of that other. For
what pleasure redounds unto an honest mind, to pronounce sentence of death
upon an offender? or what profit arises by punishing of malefactors? but on
that other side, what grief wants where a quiet mind is encembred with
government? what howre of the day is exempt from toil? in the morning the
press of Suitors at the chamber door do break the sweetest sleep, the rest of
the forenoon is little enough for the ordynarie hours of courts and decydyng
of contentions, at diner you shall hardly dysgest your meat without some sauce
of complaints or informations, wherein likewise the rest of the day most be
occupied: and the night suffyzeth not to forecast what polityke constitucions
are needful to be devised or renewed, for to meet with the daily practises and
inuention^s of lewd versones: So that in fine thine office will neither suffer
thee to sleep, nor yield thee contentmet when thou art awake, neither give thee
leave to eat in quiet, nor permit thee to follow thine own profit when thou
art fasting. I set a side to declare what trade of other private gains a man
must omit when he is in aucthority: but well said the philosopher, which
concluded that we are not borne only for our selves, but part our country
also doth challenge. Well goodfellowes, one of you shall go to Saincte Mighells,
and there at a hows with a red lattyce you shall find an old ba^de called
Pandarina, and a young damsel called Lamia, take them both and carry them to
the coupe, giving charge that they be safely kept until my further direction
be known, and another of you shall s^ek out Echo the parasite, al men know him
well enough, take him and bring him to me.

IF none other thing were required in a faithful ^tor but only that he should
teach his s^hollers grammar or such other sciences, then with lesser travail
might we attain unto perfection, since Gammer and all the liberal Sciences
are by traditions left unto us in such sort, that without any great
difficulty the doubt thereof may be resolved: but the School M^ster which
cares ^or none other thing but only to make his schollers learned, ^y in some
respect be compared to the horse courser, which one lie cares to feed his
horse fat, and never delights to ride him, manage him, or make him handsome:
and when such palfryes come to iorneyng, they are commonly so ^der proud, that
they prance at the first exceedingly, but being put to a long journey or
service, they melt thei^ own grease and are not able to endure traua^le. E^n
so y^ minds of young men being only trained in knowledge of arts, and never
persuaded in points of moral reformation, become often times so proud so
heady* that they are carried rather away with a vain imagination of their own
excellency, then settled in y^ resolutions which might promoote them unto
dignity: and wandering so in a vain glorious opinion of their own wit, they
do (as it were) fouder and cast them selves in their own halter. Su^h haw
(...) philosophers bin in time past, who have so far gone on pilgri^age in
their own pee^ish concei^s, y^ they have not shamed, by a vain show of
learning to defend s^ch propositions, as seem most ridiculous ^stranged from
reason. Anaxagoras def^ded that snow was black and yet was accounted a
philosopher of great gravity judgment. Pherecydes, prog^icated y^ an
earthquake was at hand, because he saw the water drawn out of a fountain, and
yet was he the Master of Pythagoras, accompsed a pro^ound philosopher.
Protagoras, also affirmed that me might well affirm all that to be true,
which unto them seemed true. And infinite others might be rehearsed, whose
opinionate judgements did eclipse the rest of their commendable capacity:
w^rupon also hath sprung the damnable opinio of Atheysts. For the mind of man
is so heavenly a thing and of such care excellecie, that it always works
and can not be idle. And if with the quickness of conceit it be tempered by a
modest moderation, to have regard unto virtue, and morality, then proves it
both goodly godly: whereas if it run on headlong, only led by natural
considerations of causes, it may prove admirable for some passing quality, but
it seldom is seen commendable or allowed for perfection* The consideration
whereof hath oft moved me rather to enstruct youth by a pr^scribed order out of
gods own w^rd, the to nuzzle the over deeply in philosophical opinions. And
yet is the mind of young men so prone and prompt to vanity delight, that all
proves not as I would have it. For example behold my late schollers, who
forgetting their duty and neclecting my precepts, are fallen into the snares
which I least of al (...): But surely to confess a truth, I judge that it
rather proceeded by the entisements of others, then by their own default. Oh
how perilous is lewd company unto youngmen? Well, I have devised yet a mean
whereby both the Parasites here may be punished, and the youngmen may also be
rebuked at 'Doway: In such sort, that their sudden separation may prevent all
means to escape it, and yet that one being ignorant of that others punishment,
shall never grudge or snuff at the same. And Phylopaes with his neighb^ur
Phylocalus promised me ear while to put my devise in execution, I long to
hear what may be done therein, for still I fear me least the crafty Parasite
should get knowledge thereof, and so both escape himself and further enfect
some other with new devises. But who is this that comes here in such haste?


Good lord what a world is this? Justice quoth he? mary this is Justice in deed
of the new fashion.


And what Justice good fellow I pray thee.


Nay none at all Sir, but rather open wrong, an honest old gentlewoman with
her kinswoman are commanded to the coupe, only because they suffered an
honest young man (and Son to a wealthy Burgher) to sup with them yesternight,
and a good fellow which is well known here in the City, and hath dwelt here
these seven years past, is also cast in prison because he served them at
supper, I have seldom heard of such rigour used, especially since they prosfer
good sureties to be always forth coming until their behaviour be tried.


Well good fellow speak reverently of the Magistrates, peradventure there was
some further matter therein then thou art aware of, but when was it done?


Even now sir, I do but come from thence.


This gear hath been pollitiquely used, and I will go see how it is come to
pass, for these are even those lewd companions which seduced my schollers.
Good fellow gramercy for thy tidings.


Why? Do they like him so well? I hold a groat the parties are not half so
well pleased therewyth, but I will go further until I may declare them unto some
pitiful mind, which moved with compassion, may speak unto the Markgraue in
their behalf.


THe toiling man which tills, his ground with greatest pain,
Hath not always such crops thereon, as yield him greatest gain.
Nor he the fairest house, which lays thereon most cost,
Since many chips of chance may fall, to prove such labours lost.
In vain men build their fortes, with stone with lyme and sand*
Unless the same be founded first, with Gods own mighty hand.
Though Paule himself did plant, whose travels did not cease,
And then Apollo watered eake, yet God did give increase:
The grace of God it is, whereon good gifts must grow,
And lack of God his grace it is, which makes them lye full lowe.
How often have been seen, both watch and ward well kept,
And yet into the strongest holds, hath treason lightly leapt?
The heediest hen that is, the puttock oft beguiles,
Such wolves do walk in wethers felles, y^ Lambs mistrust no wiles*
The for can preach sometimes, but then beware the geese,
For seldom fails a thievish hand, but that it takes a flees.
The devil hath many men, to gather in his rentes,
And every man hath sundry means, to bring us to their bents.
Some puff us up with pride, and some set men aloft,
Whereby the most by princely pomp, forget themselves full off.
Some give us worldly good, and some give beauties grace,
That one breeds care, y^ other lust, which train us to their trace.
In fine and to conclude, what mind of man desires,
That same the devil can set to sale, which still maintains his fires
Behold Gnomaticus, which learnedly had taught:
His schollers here such good precepts, as were with wisdom
And therewithal did care, to see them spend their time, fraught:
In exercise that might be good, and clean devoid of crime.
But then behold self love, and sparks of filthy lust,
Which made them straight despi^ his words, cast the down in dust.
And now behold he cares, to cure it if he might,
But all too late the water comes, when house is burned quite.
Wherefore who list to learn: Obstaprincipijs.
Since virtue seldom can preuaile, where vice so rooted is.
NAy if you play such play fare well altogyther, of all weapons I can not abide
these silver daggers, I, with a mace quoth you? I will not stand one blow with
a mace, they have caught my fellow Echo, but I promise them they shall have
good luck if they catch me, you will say that I ought not so to leave Echo in
the briars, in deed we were sworn brethren, but what for that? I know not now
how I was advised when I took that oath, but surely as I am now advised my
Brother shall dance alone in prison, it is no biding here for me, but to be
plain I will trudge after these yenkers to Doway, and try howe the ale
tastes in those Coasts, for I like not the drink in Antwerpe, now a days it
is vengeable bitter, this was a supper in deed, no marvel though Echo and I
were so glad of it, but we triumphed before the victory, for whiles we were
preparing the banquet, came in an officer and laid hold of the women and Echo
all at once: that saw I, and to go. Whether now sirha quod one of the
sargeantes to me? To buy olives for my M^stres quod I. T^e knave catchpole
replied nothing but l^ughed, as who should say, the Supper might be ^ten
without sauce well enough, but how mad am I to stand prating here so long? I
will be gone, to Dow^y, to Doway, on mine honesty beheld where the old men
come, I mean the Fathers of these yankers, adieu my masters, and say yo^ saw
not me.

Even now neighbour Phylocalus I find what it is to be a Father, a Father? Nay
a careful father, for I must confess unto you, that since the departure of my
Sons I have found no quiet in my thoughts: one while I seem to doubt least
they have been distressed by the way, another while I seem to doubt least they
be eftsoones enticed unto vanities by evil company, and how much the more I
think here^, so much the more I am perplexed with dout. God for his mercy send
us comfortable news, to ^fort my sorrowful and doubtful heart.

Truly neighbour, and I am not altogether free from such imaginations, but
whiles I recomfort my self by the hope which I have in those letters that
master Gnomaticus did write, I am straight ways tormented again with another
dout, the which is such, that I may be ashamed to utter it considering mine
own solly.


O neighbour keep nothing from me for Gods sake.


I will tell you then, I condemn my self of exceeding ^lly, in that I have
(...) the carriage of those letters to my seruaunt Ambidexter, whose doubleness
I have often tried, and therefore my simpl^city was the greater: and because he
is not (long since) (...)* my mind (...) some doubt of his ^dellity.


Tr^ly and not without cause, for he mig^t have retourn^d long (...). O what a
dolt was I that I sent not Fidus (here) with them also? Surely Phylocalus my
mind gives me t^t he hath (...) us.


Letters, letters, letters.


What cries this good fellow?


Letters from Doway letters from Doway. Hey


Mary this seems to be some Carrier which comes from Doway. Comes thou
from Doway good fellow?


Yea sir doutlesse.


And what letters hast thou?


Nay that can not I tell, there are to many strange names for me to remember,
but here is my register, and so may you know better then I what letters I have
in my pack.


Is that the fashion to write in a role a note of their names to whom thy
letters are directed?


Yea Sir that is a custom which I and such ignorantfellowes must use, for I
cannot read my self. to show all my letters were folly, but I do always bear
such a role in my hand, wherein are written the names of those unto whom my
letters (for that time) are directed, then when I show it, every man can soon
tell whether I be for him or not.


A good order surely, and I pray thee let us see thy role of names.


Here it is Sir.


To begin with all here is a letter for you neighbour, I trust I shall also
find another for my self.


Oh how this comfort my hart, this letter comes from my younger Son, I
will break it up.


Lo now I have likewise found one that is directed to me, it is also ye
orthographie of my Son Phylotimus, let us see what it conteyneth in Gods
name.


Who shall pay me for the bringing of them?


Stay a while good fellow, thy pains shall be considered well I warrant thee.


Yea but I may not long tarry, for I must go about and deliver the rest of these
letters this night.


All that may thou do well enough, they will not be long before they have
done, but I pray thee tell me, doest thou not know my Masters Sons?


What should I cal them by their names?


The eldest is named Phylautus, and the younger called Phylomusus.


I think I know master Flautus, a tall young gentleman, small in the middle,
is he not?


Yes surely he is but slender.


Mary and I saw him in deed at Doway, brave (by the mass) and lusty, there
was another gay young gentleman in his company, and a serving man, wot you
who? old Ambidexter the best fellow in all Antwerpe, I promise you they are
merry and well.


What news neighbour?


Good and bad.


Even so have I in my letter, hold good fellow there is a reward for bringing
of these letters, gramer^y.


I thank you sir, I return to Doway with in these two days, and if it
please you to command me any thing thither I will repair to your house.


I pray thee do, for peradventure I will write by thee.

O God neighbour, how unhappy were we to send your lewd seruaunt Ambidexter
with our Sons? My Son writes unto me that his brother Phyla^tus your Son
Phylosarchus are seldom from the Bordelles or Taverns, and that Ambidexter is
their companion, and means to tarry there with them and to retour^ no more.


My Son writes so in effect, but he seems to do^t least they prepare
themselves to abandon the University, and to go gadding about the world a
little, for he ^teth that they stay on hope that Echo certain other of his
companions will shortly be with them, othermyse they had been gone long
since. Of himself I have (...) news, for he writes unto me that the
Palsegraue hath written unto the chancellor of the university for a
secretary, and that he stands in clection.


And my Son Phylomusus is entered into the ministry, and hath preached in
the University, and means thortly to go unto Geneua, such comfort we have yet
unto our calamity. But as every mischief is most casely cured and redressed in
the beginning, so if you will follow my counsel, we will immediately dispatch
Fidus vnfo them, who shall both aprehend Ambidexter and cause him to be
punished, and shall also staye our two wandering Somes and bring them home unto
us.


I like your council well, and for the l^ue of God let it be put in execution
immediately, for insuch cases nothing is so requisite as expedition.


Hold Fidus take these twenty crowns, and get thee away with all speed
possible, take post horses from place to place, and if they should chance to
be gone from Doway before thou come, yet follow them, and never cease until
thou have found them, and bring them home unto us.


Fidus spare for no cost, and hold thee there are twenty crowns more if need
require.


Well Sir you shall see that no diligence shall want in me to recover them.
Will it please you to command (...) any other service?


No, but God send thee good success.

In the m^ane time neighbour let us go see what is done for the staying of
E^cho, that we may yet prevent all mischief as much as in us lies.


I like you well, your wit is very good upon a so^aine, but behold where
master Gnomaticus comes, by him we shall partly understand what is done.


GNOMATICVS, PHYLOPAES, PHYLOCALVS.

GEntlemen, I have sought you round about the Town, this gear is in manner
dispatched, Echo is apprehended with his train and all.


Well, that is some comfort yet to our heavy hearts.


Why have you any cause of heaviness? Tell me I pray you Sir, what mean you
to stand thus amassed?


My neighbour and I have received news which are both sorrowful and
comfortable. Our two elder Sons (by the lewd assistance of my seruaunt whom
I sent with them) do bestow their time very wantonly in Doway, and do
determine (as seems) to be gone from thence very shortly.


To be gon? whether in Gods name?


Nay that he knows, to seek aduenfures abroad in the world by all
lykelyhoode, and they stay but for the coming of Echo and his companions.


Well as for their c^ming thanked be god it is preuen^ed well eneugh, but I pray
you Sir tell me how know you this to be certeynly so?


Why w^ have received letters from our other two Sons, hold^ you here is
mine, you may read it.

How now neighbour? what muse you? your wits were good (erewhile) upon the
sudden, pluck up your spirits, you shall see by Gods grace Fidus will bring
us good news.


Oh neighbour I am not able to express the sorrows which my heart conceives,
alas the goods of the world (although they be gotten with great travail, and
kept with great care) yet the loss of them doth never torment a wise man*
since the same device or brain that could contrive the gathering of them, is
able again to renew the like: but the misgouernmet of a mans children, or to
see them cast away by lack of grace or for lack of vigilant foresight, that
only is unto the wisest mind an vnmedicinable wound. Oh that my heart is not
able to bear nor to abide the furious assaults of this misfortune.


What man stand up and take a mans heart unto you.


What Sir for the love of God do not take the matter thus heavily, by his grace
you shall have no such cause, your neighbour here hath cause of comfort: for I
perceive that his Son hath so well spent his time, and so well profited at
his book, that ^e stands in election to be Secretary unto Palsegraue.


Yea and his Son Phylomusus is also become a famous preacher, means shortly
to go unto Geneua.


Well then each of you hath some cause of comfort yet, and by the grace of God you
shall see that the rest will fall out better then you look for, but if it
should not, you must yet arm your self with patience, and give god thanks in
all things, since he can send tribulations and vexations when pleases him,
and can also send comfort when seems mete to his divine majesty, but what
have you done for the preventing hereof?


Mary we have dispatched my neighbours servant Fidus to stay both them and
Ambidexter, that the one may be punished in example of all others, and that the
oth^r may also be bridled from their hedstrong race which they mean to run.


Ambidexter? Why what hath h^ done?


Do you not mark the letter? it seems that his only leudenes hath
ministered matter unto their misbehaui^ur, for he is their lodes mate c^mpanio
in all places, and hath settled himself with them, meaning never more to turn
unto me.


Surely Phylocalus you were not well advised to sed such a fellow with your
Sons, I pray god he have delivered my letters faythfullie, for I did yet
never receive answer of them. By whom received you these letters?


By a carrier which trauayleth weekly to Doway.


And had he no letters for me? Phylocalus. Surely I cannot tell, for I was ^o
glad when I found in his role, letters to me and my neighbour, that I sought
no further for any other, but you shall soon find him out if you ask for the
Carrier of Doway.


Well by your leave then I will go seek him, for I long sore to have answer
of my letters.


You shall do well, and in mean time my neighbour and I will go unto his
house, for I perceive he is not well.


COme on sirha, what acquaintance have you with these Ladies?


Sir I have but small acquaintance with them.


No? What did you there then?


Sir I had waited upon them into the Town that day (as I do upon diverse
other for my living) and they prayed me to sup with them in part of
recompense for my travail.


Mary sir your fare was good as I understand, and meet for much better
personages then either of you. Tell me who provided it? And who paid for it?


I know not Sir, it was enough for me that I knew where it was, I never asked
from whence it came for conscience sake.


Well jested fellow Echo, but I must make you sing another note before you and
I part. Tell me how came you acquainted with Phylosarchus?


I have known him long since sir, as I know diverse other young gentlemen in
this Town.


Yea but howe came it to pass that he should have been there at supper that
night?


That cannot I tell, neither do I know wheth^ he should have bin there that
night or no.


Yes that you can, did you never see him there before?


I saw him there once, in other honest company, but what is that to me? Had I
any thing to do with his being there? or doth it follow of necessity that
because he was there once before, therefore he should have been there that
night also?


No, but you know well enough if you list that he should have been there, and
that the banquet was prepared for him. You were best to confess a truth.


Sir I will not confess that which I know not, neither for you nor for never
a man on live. He might have been there for all me, he might have been away
also if he list, for any thing that I know.


Well, it were but lost labour to talk any longer with you, go take him, and
carry him to the mill, and there let him be whipped every day thryse, until
he confess the cyrcustances of al these matters, we may not suffer the Sons
of honest and wealthy Burghers to be seduced by such lewd fellows, and they
to skape skotfree.


O God how a man may be deceived (at the first) in a young man? the capacity
of this Phylos^rcus and his yokefellow Phylautus was so quick and so sufficient
to receive any charge, that a man would have believed them to have been two of
the best and towardest youngmen in this city, and yet behold how (...) and
vain delight hath carried them to run another race. I have received letters
here from my friend Master in Doway, who deelareth unto me thereby, that they
are sufficyently able to conceive any tradition or Science, but therewithal
that they are so give over to pleasures light pastimes, y^ it is in manner
unpossible to bridle their ^adring desires. On that other side he praises the
other two f^r the sobrest young men that ever came under his charge, confirms
in effect as much as they had writ for news unto their parents, whereof I
have greatly to rejoice, that (having passed through my hands) they are so
likely to come unto promotion. And as I rejoice in them, so an^ I most heartily
sorry for the two elder, that their misgovernment may become not only a great
grief to their parents* but also a hinderance to such commendation as I might
else have gained by the others: but thus we may see, that in every comfort
there may grow some ^uiet, and no herb so clean but may be hindered by
stinking weeds that gro^ by it. Well I will go talk with their parents, and
if they will be ruled by my council, they shall give them leave a little to see
the world, and to follow any exercise that be not repugnant unto virtue, for
unto some wits neither correction, nor friendly ad^tion, nor any other
perswasi^n will serve, until their own rod have beaten them, and then they
prove oftentimes (though late) men of excellent qualities. But behold where
they come to discharge me of this travail.

HOw now master Gnomaticus, have you received any letters from Doway?


Yea sir I have received letters from thence.


And what news I pray you?


Even the same in effect that you have received.


Why then I perceive that our two younger sons have not deceived us, nor
boasted more in their letters then is true in effect.


No surely, for my friend advertises me that they are two of the towardest
young men that ever came in that University, and that he hath great hope to see
them in the end become famous through all the lowe countries.


Well that is some comfort yet, and what writes he of the two ^lder?


Surely he writes as much commendation as may be of their capacity, mary
there^al he saith that they be marvelously bent unto concupiscence, therefore
I will tell you mine advise. As soon as they come home, first rebuke them
sharply for the miss bestowing of their excellent wits, and it shall not be
a^e if you add there unto also some correction, that being done, I would wish
you to put in their choice what kind of life they will follow, so that it be
virtuous, and not contrary to Gods word, and let them see the world a while:
for such fine wits have such an universal desire commonly, that they never
prove stayed until the black ox hath trodden on their toes.


Yea mary but how are we sure to recover them again? When as I fear much that
they are gone from the University already?


Why doubt you of that?


Because my neighbours Son Phylotimus wrote unto him that he much doubted they
would abandon the university, and that they tarried but only to hear from
Echo and his accomplices.


Yea, but Echo and the rest are safe enough for coming at them, and behold
where comes the honourable Markgraue with his Officers, you were best to go
unto him, and to give him thanks for his great care and diligence.


RIght Honourable, we are bound to yield you humble and hearty thanks, for that
(as we understand) you have ^sed great pain and diligence in apprehending of a
lewds company, who have (as we see now) seduced our children, and made them to
neglect the wholesome precepts which their faithful enstructer had given them.


Surely I have done my best (in discharge of my duty) to apprehend them, and I
have examined them also, but truly I can not find hitherto any proof against
them, whereby they ought to be punished: and though I desire (as much as you)
to see them condingly corrected, yet with out proof of some offence I should
therein commit a wrong. True it is that Echo is known commonly in this Town
for a Parasite and a flattering fellow, and the young woman also doth not seem
to be of the honestest, but yet there is no body which will come in and say
this or that I have seen or known by her. She confesses that Phylosarchus
and Phyl^us ^re there one night at a banquet, and that Phylosarchus should have
supped there the same night that they were taken, and when I ask her to what
end, she answers that he was a suitor to her for marriage, and for witness
brings in her Aunt as good as her self, in the mean time I have no proof
of evil wherewith to burden her. And then master Echo (on that other sid) he
(...) as stiff as may be, and saith that he knows not whether Phylos^us
should have supped there or not, and for lack of proof I am able to go no
further.


Yea Sir but doubtless that Echo was the first cause of their acquaintance,
for the first time that my Son was there, was one afternoon, at which time
Echo came to their School Master in your name, and craved liberty for them to
come and speak with you.


With me?


Yea Sir doubtless, and when I gave them leave to come unto you, they returned
(after two or three hours respyte) and said that you knew them not when they
came there, and that Echo said he had mistaken the Scholemaster and the
schollers.


Said they thus of me?


Yea truly sir.


And said they that they had been with me?


Sir I would be loathe to say so if it were otherwise, and furthermore they
seemed angry.


And wherefore I pray you?


For that you gave them no better countenance.


Before God they never came at me, but this is somewhat yet, for by this
means I have good cause to punish Master Echo, and I pray you Master
Gnomaticus go with me unto him, and you shall ^are what answer he is able to
make unto these matters.


With right good will sir I will wait upon you. Worthy gentlemen, you shall do
well to consider in the mean time upon that which I last told you as mine
opinion.


THe advice which master Gnom^ticus hath given us, doth not mislike me
altogether, but still my mind is more and more vexed with doubt, least in the
mean time (and ^efore Fidus can come at them) they fall into some notable
mishap by their misgovernment.


You do well to doubt the worst, but if it were so, what remidie but patience?
and give god thanks that hath sent to each of us such a Son as may become the
comfort of our age.


Truly it is in deed a great comfort that either of us may take in our younger
Sons, but if we have lost the elder (as I fear it much) what a corrosive
will that be unto us? Oh how I feel my fearful heart panting in my restless
breast? the Father of heaven vouchesafe to send me joyful news of Phylautus.
O wretched Phylopaes thou are like unto a covetous man, which having abundance
is yet never contented, thou art already sure of such offspring as may give
thee cause to rejoice, and yet thy mind is not satisfied, unless all things
might fall out unto thine own desire, and thou may be compared to the patient
which cries out before the Chirurgiens instrument do ^ouch him, because thou
conceiuest in thy imagination, the dread which torments all thy thoughts. But
alas why do I not prepare this wretched corpse of mine, to be a present witness
what is become of my Phylautus? I will surely, go provide all things
necessary for my journey, and never give rest unto these bones until I may
see him. I will do so.


What abide Phylopaes, I am a shamed to see you so impa^, what man, I am as
sorry to hear of my Sons l^wd behaviour as you are of yours, and (...) a
truth. I think he will be f^wnde more fa^ltie then yours, b^t be it as God
pleases, I have one especial comfort, and that is, that I performed my du^tie
in carefulnes and in foresight (as much as in me lay) so guide him unto
promotion, it is commendable in a parent to have a care for his children, but
this womanlike tenderness in you deserves reprehention.


Se how every man can give good council, and few can follow it, well I pray
you let us withdraw oureselues to our houses, to see if change of place may
also change my melancholic passion.


Go we, I will go to your house for company.


WEll since he is found culpable of thus much, I would but talk with these
neighbours of mine (I mean Phylopaes and Phylocalus) and we will devise such
punishment for the malefactors, as may be a terror hereafter to all parasites
how they abuse the name of an officer, or entyse the children of any burghers.


Sir I dare say they will be pleased what soever you do therein, and if it so
please you I will go unto their houses and call them unto you, for me t^inkes
they are departed since we went. But what is he that comes here in such
haste?


Oh that I could tell where to find my Master.


It is Fidus, God grant he bring good ^idings.


I would rather fy^d him in any place then at his hows, that he might have
some company (yet) which might comfort him, for I dare say these tidings will
break his heart with Sorrow.


I will go to him. How now Fidus, what news?


O master Gnomaticus I know no man whom I wuld rather have presently then you,
O Sir I am unhappy, for I am the messenger of the most woeful news that ever
my master received, for gods love accompany me unto him that you might yet by
your wisdom aswage the extremity of his grief.


I will willingly bear thee company gentle Fidus, and surely thou deserve
great commendation and thanks, as well for thy fidelity, as also for the
exceeding great speed which thou hast made, but I pray thee tell us first (in
the presence of the right honourable Markegraue) the whole circumstance effect
of these thy news, which thou say are so s^rowfull.


Sir since you will needs have it, my master hath lost his eldest Son, and
Master Phyl^calus hath little better ^en lost his also.


Alas these are heavy news in deed, and must ne^des afflict the poor parents
with extreme grief, for they are unto me (almost) untolerable: but since it
becomes a christian to bear pa^ientely what soever God doth provide, I pray
thee tell on the whole circumstance of every thing as it fell.


I will tell you Sir, I used all the diligence possible on my way, and yet
before I could come at Doway, they were ^rom thence departed.


What all togithers?


No sir, but Phylomusus was sent by the whole consent of the university unto
the Palsgraue to be his secretary, whereas he yet remains in good estimation,
and Phylotimus was gone unto Geneua, moved with an earnest zeal and spirit,
and there he is in singular commendation and much followed.


and what was become (the mean while) of Phylautus and Phylosarchus? They were
still at Doway were they not?


No sir they were gone also, but no man could tell me whether they were gone,
and they were gone somewhat before their brethren.


Why then they tarried not for Echo, as the letters emported that they would
have done.


O Sir they had advertisement that Echo was apprehended, and that hastened
their departure.


And by what means knew they of it?


There was one Dicke Droom a companion of Echoes, which came unto them and
told them the whole discourse, whereupon they fled with him immediately.


Such a one was present in deed when Echo was taken, and because mine
officers knew him not, nor had any commission to search for him, therefore they
suffered him to depart.


Out upon him, I would to God they had made him safe also, for he hath bin the
casting away of Phylautus. Phylautus, Phylosarcus, Dick Droom with my friend
Ambidexter here, went out of Doway together, and because my masters charge was
that I should follow where so ever they went, I followed as fast as I could by
enquiry, and with in three or four days journey, I heard that Phylosarcus by
the help of this good companion Ambidexter had gotten a fair minion for sooth,
and stayed with her at Brusselles, fron^ whence Phylautus and Dycke Droom
departed, and took their wa^ together up towards Germany, now Phylosarchus
and his cari^ge held their way (as it was said) towards (...) W^n I saw that
they were so par^ed, and that I could not follow both companies at once, I
thought best to hold on my way towards the Palsgraues Court, hoped that by
the way I might yet chance to hear of Phy^tus, and in very deed I heard of
such a one at sundry places, and at last I heard of him expressedly, for the
day before I came to the Palsgraues Court, he was there e^ecuted for a robbery
with Dicke Droom, yea even in sight of his Brother, and notwithstanding the
favour that he is in there, such severe execution of justice is there
administered.


It is a happy common wealth where Iustic^ may be ministered with severity, and
where no mediacions or suits may wrest the sentence of the Law.


When I had there recoyued these heavy news, I took letters of dispatch and
advertisement from Philomusus to his Father, crossed over the Country towards
Geneua. And long before I came thither Phylosarchus had bin there (for
fornication) whipped openly three several days in the market, and was
banished the Town with great infamy, notwithstanding that his Brother
Phylotimus was an earnest suitor unto the congregation for him. When I perceived
that none other issue could be had of my travail, I took letters from
Phylotimus, and sought no further after Phylosarchus, but thought my duty first
to advertise my master of the certainty, and by my way homewards I overtook
this good fellow Ambidexter in such array as you see, and have brought him with
me to abide such punishment as the worthy Markgraue here and other magistrates
shall think meet for him.


Oh Sir be good unto me and pardon this offence.


Pardon? Nay surely thou rather deserve death, for it seems unto me, that
these young men had not so lightly gone astray, had it not bin through the
help of thee and such as thou art, such lewd servants as thou art, are the
casting away of many toward young personages, and therefore since thy good
hap hath returned thee hither, thou shalt with the rest serve as an example
to all servant. But thou can tell what is become of Phylosarchus?


He was so sore whipped that I fear he be dead. I left him in a village five
leagues distant from Geneua, so sore that he was not able to stir either hand
or foot.


Well Master Gnomaticus, since onley this fellow is recovered, I think meet to
hold this course of justice, he together with Master Echo shall be whyped
about the Town three several market days, with papers declaring their
faults set upon their heads, and afterwards they shall be banished the City,
upon payne of death never to return, Mistress Lamia with her Aunt shall
likewyse be set on the Cucking stool in public three market days, then to
be banished the Town also.


Surely you have well devised, and I beseech you Sir vouchsafe to assist me in
comforting the woeful Parents Phylopaes and Phylocalus, who I dare say will be
so sorrowful for these tidings, that it shall be harde to persuade them to
patience.


It is but a reasonable request, I will most gladly accompany you, go we
together, and thou Fidus hast well deserved thy freedom, with a better turn
for thy faithful service in this behalf, and I will be a mean unto thy Master
that thou may be considered accordingly.


I thank you Sir. My Masters, the common saying is clap your hands, but the
circumstance of this ^full tragical comedy considered, I may say justly unto
you wring your hands, nevertheless I leave it to your discretion.


WE live to learn, for so Saint Paule doth teach,
and all that is, is done for our avail:
Both good and bad, may be the wisemans leach,
The good may serve, to make him bear like sail,
The bad to shun, the faults wherein they fail.
Good wyndes and bad, may serve in sundry sort,
To bring our barks, into some pleasant port.
Who list to learn, what diligence may do,
what humble minds, by studies may attain,
Let him behold, these younger brethren two,
Whose wits at first, did seem to be but plain,
Yet as you see, at last they got with payne,
The golden flees, of grace and cunning Skill,
Before the rest which followed wanton will.
And such as brag, of quick capacity,
Or think the field, is won withouten blows,
Let them behold, the youthful vanity:
O^ th'elder twain, (...) ^ncies lightly chose,
To seek delight, in garish ground that grows.
Yet had by hart, their masters words in hast:
But things soon got, are lost again as fast.
For proof whereof, behold how soon they fell,
From virtues path, to tread in vices tracks,
And therewithal, (I pray you mark it well)
Their falls were foul, they fell upon their backs.
Which gave their bones, so many bruising cracks:
That afterwards, they never rose again^,
Till shameful death, did end their grievous payne.
Who falls on face, hath elbows hands and all,
To save himself, and therewith eke to rise:
To fall on back, betokens such a fall,
As cannot rise again in any wi^e*
For when he falls, his face wide open lies,
To every blow: and cannot fend the same,
Such falls found they, which brought them soon to shame
And in mean while, their Brethren rose as fast,
Much like the snail, which clymes the Castle wall,
With easy steppes* when soldiers do^ne be cast,
With furious force, and many a headlong fall.
Assaults are hot, but yet if therewithal,
Some temperance, and pollyey be used,
They win those fortes, which hotter heads refused.
I mean but this: you see the younger twain,
(Because they did in virtue take delight)
They clombe at last (and that with pleasant pain,)
To honours Court, wherein their place was pight.
You see again, their Brethren (by delight,
In fi^thy lust, self love, and such like nio)
Did fall as fast, to shameful death and wo.
You see the bend, for faithfulness made free,
You see the free, for doubleness disdained:
You see the whip, the cucke stool, and the tree,
Are thought rewards, for such as vice hath stained:
You s^e that right, which ever more hath raignd,
And justice both: do keep their places still,
To cherish good, and eke to punish ill.
These things my muse, did mean to make you know.
By proof in act, of that which you have seen
These things my muse, thought meet to set in show,
But otherwise, then common wont hath been.
This crystal glass I polished fair and cleene,
For every man, that list his faults to mend,
This was my mind, and t^s I make an end.
IMPRINTED* AT London in Fleetestreate at the sign of the Falcon by Henry
Middleton, for Christopher Barker. Anno Domini. 1575.


