WHat wonder you my Lords? why gaze you gentlemen?
And wherefore marvel you mez Dames, I pray you tell me then?
Is it so rare a sight, or yet so strange a toy,
Amongst so many noble peers, to see one Pouer Boy?
Why? boys have been allowed in every kind of age,
As Gany^ede that pretty boy, in Heaven is Jove his page.
Cupid that mighty God although his force be fearse,
Yet is he but a naked boy, as Poets do rehearse.
And many a pretty boy a mighty man hath proved,
And served his Prince at all assays deserving to be loved.
Percase my strange attire my glittering golden gite,
Doth either make you marvel thus, or move you with delight.
Yet wonder not my Lords for if your honours please,
But even to give me ear awhile, I will your doubts apease.
And you shall know the cause, wherefore these robes are worn,
And why I go outlandish like, yet being english borne.
And why I thus presume, to press into this place,
And why I (simple boy) am bold to look such men in face.
First then you must per stand, I am no stranger I,
But english boy, in England borne, and bred but even hereby.
My father was a knight Mount Hermer was his name,
My mother of the Mountacutes, a house of worthy fame.
My father from his youth was trained up in field,
And always toke his chief delight, in helmet spear and shield.
Soldado for his life, and in his happy days
Soldado like hath lost his life, to his immortal praise.
The thundering fame which blew about the world so wide,
How that the christian enmie, the Turk that prince of pride,
Addressed had his power, to swarm upon the seas,
With galleys, foists, and such like ships, well armed at all assays,
And that he made his vaunt, the greedy fish to glut,
With g^bs of christians carcasses, in cruel pieces cut.
These news of this report, did pierce my fathers ears,
But never touched his noble heart, with any spark of fears.
For well he knew the trade of all the ^urkishe wars,
And had amongst them shed his blood at many cruel jars.
In Rhodes his race begone, a slender tall young man,
Where he by many martial feats, his spurs of knighthod wan.
Yea though the piece was lost, yet won he honour still,
And evermore against the ^urkes he warred by his will.
At Chios many know, how hardily he fought,
And howe with streams of striving blood, his honour dear he bought.
At length enforst to yield with many captains mo,
He bought his liberty with lands and let his goods ago.
Zechynes of glistering gold, two thousand was his price,
The which to pay his lands must leap, for else he were unwise.
Believe me now my lords although the loss be mine,
Yet I confess them better sold, than like a slave to pine.
"For lands may come again, but liberty once lost,
"Can never find such recompense, as covnteruailes the cost.
My self now know the case, who like my fathers lot,
Was like of late for to have lost my liberty god wot.
My father (as I say) enforste to leave his land
In mortgage to my mothers kin, for ready coin in hand,
Began now upon these new^s, which erst I did rehearse,
Prepare himself to save his pawn or else to leese his pheares.
And first his ransom paid, with that which did remain,
He rigged up a proper Bark, was called Leffort Brittayne.
And like a venturer (besides him seemly self)
Determined for to venture me and all his worldly pelf.
Perhaps some hope of gain persuaded so his mind,
For sure his hauty heart was bent, some great exploit to find.
How so it were, the winds now hoisted up our sails,
We furrowing in the foaming floods, to take our best avails.
Now hearken to my words, and mark you well the same,
For now I will declare the cause wherefore I hither came.
My father (as I say) had set up all his rest,
And tossed on seas both day and night, disdaining idleness,
We left our forelands end, we past the coast of France,
We reached the cape of Finestre our course for to advance.
We past Marrocchus streights, and at the last descried,
The fertile coasts of Cyprus soil, which I my self first spied.
My self (a foreward boy) on highest top was placed,
And there I saw the Ciprian shore, whereto we sailed in hast.
Which when I had declared unto the masters mate,
He leapt for joy and thanked God, of that our happy state.
"But what remains to man, that can continue long?
"What sun can shine so clear and bright but clouds may rise among?
Which sentence soon was proved, by our unhappy hap,
We thought our selves full ne'er our friends, light in ^nimies lap.
The Turk y^ tirat he, with siege had girt the walls,
Of famous Famagosta then and sought to make them thrals.
And as he lay by land, in strong and stately trench,
So was his power pressed by sea, his christian foes to drenche.
Upon the waltring waives, his foistes and galleys fleet,
More forest like than orderly, for such a man most meet.
This heavy sight once seen, we turned our course a pace,
And set up all our sails in haste, to give such fury place.
But out alas, our wills, and winds were contrary,
For raging blasts did blow us still upon our enemy.
My father seeing then, whereto he needs must go,
And that the mighty hand of God, had it appointed so,
Most like a worthy knight (though certain of his death)
Began clean forget al wailing words as lavish of his breath.
And to his christian crew, this (too short) tale he told,
To comfort them which seemd to faint, make the coward bold,
"Fellows in arms, quoth he, although I bear the charge,
"And take upon me chieftaines name, of this unhappy barge,
"Yet are you all my pheares, and as one company,
"We must like true companions, together live and die,
"You see quoth he our foes, with furious force at hand,
"And in whose hands our handful hear unable is to stand.
"What rests then to do, should we unto them yield?
"And wilfully receive that yoke, which christians cannot weld.
"No sure, hereof be ^ure, our lives were so unsure,
"And though we live, yet so to live, as better death endure.
"To hear those hellish fends in raging blasphemy,
"Defy our only saviour, were this no misery?
"To see the foul abuse of boys in tender years,
"The which I know must needs abhor all honest christians ears.
"To see maids ravished, wives, wom^n f^rst by f^are,
"And much more mischief tha this time can let me utter here.
"Alas, quoth he, I tell not all, my tong is tide,
"But all the slaueries on the earth we should with them abide,
"How much were better than to die in worthy wise,
"And so to make our carcasses, a willing sacrifice?
"So shall we pay the debt, which unto God is due,
"So shall you die in his defence, who deind to die for you.
"And who with hardy hand most turkish tikes can quell,
"Let him account in conscience, to please his maker well.
"You see quoth he, my son, wherewith he looked on me,
"Whom but a babe, yet have I brought, my partner here to be,
"For, him I must confess, my heart is pensive now,
"To leave him living thus in youth, to die I know not how.
"But since it pleases God, I may not murmure I,
"If God had pleased we both should live, and as god will we die.
Thus with a braying sigh, his noble tong he staide,
Commanding all the ordinance, in order to be laid,
And placing all his men in order for to fight,
Fell groueling first upon his face, before them all in sight.
And when in secret so he whispered had a while,
He raised his head with cherefull look, his sorrows to beguile:
And with the rest he prayed, to God in heaven on hie,
Whi^h ended thus, Thou only Lord, can help in misery.
This said, behold, the Turks enclosed us round about,
And seemd to wonder that we durst resist so great a ro^.
Whereat they doubt not long, for though our power was slender,
We sent them signs by Canon shot, that we meant not to redder.
Then might we see them chafe, them might we hear them rage,
And all at once they bent their force, about our silly cage.
Our ordinance bestowed, our men them selves defend,
On every side so thick beset, they might not long contend.
But as their captain wild, each man his force did strain,
To send a Turk (some two or three) unto the hellish train.
And he him self which saw, he might no more abide,
Did thrust amid the thickest throng, and so with honour died.
With him there died likewise, his best approved men.
The rest did yield as men amazd, they had no courage then.
Amongst the which my self, was taken by Turks alas,
And with the Turks a turkish life, in Turkie must pass.
I was not done to death for so I often craude,
But like a slave before the Gates, of Famagosta saude.
That piece once put to sack, I thither was conueyed.
And under safeguard evermore, I silly boy was stayed.
There did I see such sights as yet my hart do prick,
I saw the noble Bragadine, when he was fleyd quick.
First like a slave enforst to bear to every breach,
Two baskets laden full with earth Mustaffa did him teach.
By whom he might not pass before he kiss the ground,
These cruel torments (yet with mo) that worthy soldier found.
His ears cut from his head, they set him in a chair,
And from a maine yard hoisted him aloft into the air,
That so he might be showed with cruelty and spite,
Unto us all, whose weeping eyes did much abhore the sight.
Alas why do I thus with woeful words rehearce,
These weary news which all our harts with pitttie needs must pearce?
Well then to tell you forth, I still a slave remained,
To one, which Prelybassa hight, who held me still enchai^d.
With him I went to Seas into the gulf of Pant,
With many christians captives mo, which did their freedom wat.
There with the Turkish tyranny we were enforst to stay,
For why? they had advise, that the Vene^ fleet,
Did flote in Argostelly then with whom they hoapt to meet.
And as they waltered thus with tides and billows tossed,
Their hope had hap, for at the last they met them to their cost.
As in O^tober last upon the seventh day,
They found the force of christian knights addressed in good array.
And shall I try my tong to tell the whole discourse,
And how they did encounter first and how they joined in force?
Then harken now my lords, for sure my memory,
Doth yet record the very plot of all this victory.
The christian crew came on, in form of battle pight,
And like a crescent cast them selves preparing for to fight.
On other side the Turks, which trusted power to much,
Disorderly did spread their force, the will of God was such.
Well, at the last they met, and first with cannons thunder,
Each other sought with furious force to slit their ships in sunder.
The Barks are battered sore, the galli^s gald with shot,
The hulks are hit and every man must stand unto his lot.
The powder sends his smoke into the cruddy skies,
The smoulder stops our nose with stench, the sun offends our eyes,
The pots of lime vnsleakt, from highest top are cast,
The parched peas are not forgot to make them slip as fast.
The wild fire works are wrought and cast in foemens face,
The grappling hooks are stretched forth, y^ pikes are pushed apace.
The halberds hew on head, the browne bills bruze the bones,
The harquebush doth spit his spite, with pretty piercing stones.
The drums cry dub a dub, the braying trumpets blow,
The whistling fi^es are seldom herd, these sounds do drown the so.
The voice of warlike wights, to comfort them that faint,
The piteous plaints of gold harts, which were with fears attaint.
The groaning of such ghosts as gasped now for breath,
The prayers of the better sort, prepared unto death,
And to be short, each grief which on the earth may grow,
Was eath and easy to be found, upon these floods to flow.
If any sight on earth, may unto hell resemble,
Then sure this was a hellish sight, it makes me yet to tremble:
And in this blouddie fight, when half the day was spent,
It pleazed God to help his flock, which thus in poud was pent.
The general for Spain, began galde that Ga^ley sore,
Wherein my Prely Ba^a was, and grieude it more and more:
Upon that other side, with force of sword and flame,
The good (...) general did charge upon the same.
At length they came aboard, and in his raging pride,
St^oke of this Turkish captains head, which blasphemd as it did:
Oh howe I feel the blood now tickle in my breast,
To think what joy then pierced my heart, and how I thought me blessed
To see that cruel Turk which held me as his slave
By happy hand of Christians his payment thus to have:
His head from shoulders cut, upon a pike did stand,
The which Don Iohn of Austrye held in his triumphant hand.
The boldest Bassa then, that did in life remain,
Began tremble at the sight hereof for privy grief and payne.
Thus when these fierce had fo^ght from morning until night,
Christ gave his stock the victory, and put his foes to flight:
And of the Turkish train were eight score Galeys taken,
Fifteen soonk, five and twenty burnt, brought unto their bane,
Of Christians set at large were fourteen thousand souls,
Turks twenty thousand registered in Beelzebub his rolls.
Thus have you now my Lords, the sum of all their fight,
And trust it all for true I tell, for I was still in sight:
But when the seas were calm, and skies began to clear,
When foes were all or dead or fled, and victors did appear,
Then every christian sought amongst us for his friend,
His kinsman or companion some succour them to lend:
And as they ransackte so, lo God his will it was,
A noble wise Venetian by me did chance to pass*
Who gazing on my face, did seem to like me well
And what my name, and whence I was, commanded me to tel:
I now which waxed bold, as one that escaped had,
From depest hell to highest heaven, began for to be glad*
And with a ^yuely spryte, began to plead my case,
And hid not from this worthy man, mine ancient worthy race:
And told my fathers name, and howe I did descend
From Mountacutes by mothers side, nor there my tale did end:
But furthermore I told my fathers late exploit,
And how he left lands, goods and life, to pay son Dieu son dro^t.
Nor of my self I craved so credited to be,
For ^o there were remaining yet, These four whom here you see,
Which all were English borne, and knew I had not lied,
And were my fathers soldiers eke, and saw him how he dyed*
This grave Venetian who heard the famous name
Of Mountacutes rehearsed there, which long had ben of fame
In Italy, and h^ of self same worthy race,
Began straight with many courteous words in arms me to embrace,
And kissed me on cheek, and bad me make good cheer,
And thank the mighty God for that which happened there,
Confessing that he was himself a Mountacute,
And bare the self same arms that I did quarter in my scut:
And for a further proof, he showed in his hat,
This token which the Mountacutes do bear always,
They covet to be known from Capels where they pass,
For ancient grutch which long age tween those two houses was.
Then took me by the hand, and led me so aboard
His galley: where there were yfeere, full many a comely Lord:
Of whom eight Montacutes did sit in highest place,
To whom this first declared first my name, and then my race:
Lo lordings here (quod he) a babe of our own bloods,
Who Turk^ had taken, his father slain, with loss of lands and goods:
See how God favours us, that I should find him now,
I strange to him, he strange to me, we m^t I know not how:
But sure when I him saw, and gazed in his face,
Me thought he was a Mountacute, I chose him by his grace:
Herewith he did rehearse my fathers valiant deed,
For loss of whom each Mountacute, did seem in hart to bleed.
They all embrast me then, and straight as you may see,
In comely garments trimde me up, as brave as brave may be:
I was in sackcloath I, now am I clad in gold,
And wear such robes as I my self take pleasure to behold.
Amongst their other gifts, this Token they me gave,
And bad me like a Montacute my self always behave.
Now hearken then my Lords, I staying on the seas,
In consort of these lovely Lords, with comfort and with ease,
Determined with them in Italy to dwell,
And there by train of youthful years in knowledge to excel:
That so I might at last reedify the walls,
Which my good father had decayde by tossing fortunes balls:
And while they slice the seas to their desired shore,
Behold a little gale began, increasing more and more:
At last with raging blast, which from Southeast did blow,
Began send our sails upon these shores, which I full well did know:
I spied the Chalky Clyues upon the Kentishe coast,
Whereby our land hight Albyon, as Brutus on^e did boast,
Which I no sooner saw, but to the rest I said,
Sia^e di buona voglia, My lords be well apaid:
I see by certain signs these tempests have us caste,
Upon my native country coasts with happy hap at last:
And if your honours please this honour me to do,
In English havens to harbour you, see our Cities too:
Lo London is not far, where as my friends would be
Right glad, with favour to requite you favour showed to me:
Vouchsafe my Lords (quod I) to stay upon this strande,
And whiles your Barks be rigged new, remain with me on land,
Who though I be a boy, my father dead and slain,
Yet shall you see I have some friends which will you entertain.
These noble men, which are the flower of courtesy,
Did not disdain this my request, but took it thankfully,
And from their battered Barks commanded to be cast
Some Gondalaes, wherein upon our pleasant streams they past
Into the mouth of Thames, thus did I them transport,
And to London at the last, where as I heard report,
E^en as we landed first, of this twyse happy day,
To think whereon I leapt for joy, as I both must and may:
And to these lovely lords, which are Magnificoes,
I did declare the whole discourse in order as it rose:
That you my Lord who are our chiefest Mountacute,
And he whom English Mountacutes their only stay impute,
Had ^ounde the means this day to match your son and heir,
In marriage with a worthy dame which is both fresh and fair,
And (as reports are spread) of goodly qualities,
A virgin trained from her youth in godly exercise,
Whose brother had likewise your daughter taken to wife,
And so by double lynkes enchaynde themselves in lovers life:
These noble Mountacutes which were from Venice driven,
By tempest (as I told before) wherewith they long had strouen
Began now give thanks to God which so did them convey,
To see such honours of their kin in such a happy day:
And straight they me entreat, whom they might well command,
That I should come to my Lord first them to recommaunde,
And then this boon to crave, that under your protection
They might be bold to enter here, devoid of all suspection,
And so in friendly wise for to concelebrate,
This happy match solemnised, according to your state.
Lo this is all they crave, the which I can not doubt,
But that your Lordship soon will grant, with more, if more ye mought:
Yea were it for no more, but for the Courtesy,
Which (as I say) they showed to me in great extremity:
They are Venetians, and though from Venice reft,
They come in such Venetian robes as they on seas had left:
And since they be your friends, and kinsmen too by blood,
I trust your entertainment will be to them right good:
They will not tarry long, lo now I hear thei^ drum,
Behold, lo now I see them here in order howe they come,
Receive them well my lord, so shall I pray always,
That God vouchsafe to bless this house with many happy days.
GVardate Signori, my lovely Lords behold,
This is another Mountacute, hereof you may be bold.
Of such our patron here, The viscount Mountacute,
Hath many comely sequences, well sorted all in suit.
But as I spied him first I could not let him pass,
I took the card that likt me best, in order as it was.
And here to you my lords, I do present the same,
Make much of him, I pray you then, for he is of your name,
For whom I dare advance, he may your tronchman be,
Your herald and ambassador, let him play all for me.
BRother, these noble men to you now have me sent,
As for their tronchman to expound theffect of their intent.
They bid me tell you then, they like your worthy choice,
And that they cannot choose therein but triumph and rejoice.
As far as guess may give, they seem to praise it well,
They say between your ladies eyes doth Gentilezza dwell.
I term it as they do, their english is but weak,
And I (God knows) am all to young beyond sea speech to speak.
And you my sister eke they seem for to commend,
With such good words as may be seem a cousin and a friend.
They like your chosen pheare, so pray they for your sake,
That he may always be to you, a faithful loving make.
This in effect is all, but that they crave a boon,
That you will give them licence yet, to come and see you soon.
Then will they speak them selves, such english as they can,
I fear much better than I speak, that am an english man.
Lo now they take their leaves of you and of your dames,
Hereafter shall you see their face and know them by their names.
And I your Seruidore, vibascio le mani.
These words I learnt amongst them yet, although I learnt not many.

