BOnum opus laudabila, which is as much to say,
Good works though plain are worthy praise, and so have been always.
Then though with Bullus Tully style, our Author do not frame,
This his first work which you shall hear, yet do accept the same,
For why the Story being good, the matter also true,
Doth but declare a matter old, as it were done anew.
And shows forth how prone God is, to help such as are just,
And in that God before all men, do put assured trust,
Of Susans life the story is, what trouble she was in,
How narrowly she escaped death because she would not sin,
How wondrously she was prouokte, how virtuously she fled,
The strong assaults of wicked men, that lecherous lusts had led,
To ravish her, and to pollute, her chaste and wyfely view,
This is the sum of all that shall be showed unto you,
And though perchance some wanton word, do pass which may not seem
Or gestures light not meet for this, your wisdoms may it deem,
Account that nought delights the hart of men on earth,
So much as matters grave and sad, if they be mixed with mirth,
Of both which here I trust you shall, as in a mirror see,
And that in such a decent sort as hurtful shall not be,
And for because ensample good, is meet in these our days,
This hath he done to shorten time, to God give all the praise.
Thus craving quiet sylence now, my speech I mean to spare,
Behold when Satan enters place, his mind he will declare.
Among the plagues of thee O God,
Wherewith thou plaguest man,
Plague such as I would have thee plague,
Or let me if I can.
I wallow now in worldly wealth,
And have the world at will,
Into each hart I creep by stealth,
Of blood I have my fill.
But yet there is a wight,
In thee O Babilon,
Whose flesh or fleece if I may get,
How well were I begone,
To seek her out my self,
Or to attempt her grace,
I might perchance have had my pray,
So eugly is my face.
Well, well, I have a crafty child,
His name is Ill Report,
A blessed Babe that I have traynde,
To talk in such a sort.
That were she never so just or true,
Or liver never so chaste,
By hooke, or crook, by trace or pace,
He brings her home at last.

What Evil Report thou crooked Knave,
What can thou not hear thy Dad,
Come with a proper pestilence,
I think the thief be mad.

What quoth he, now by this day,
I think thee mad to be,
How say you all, within this Hall,
What Knave more crookte then he,
Why you shitten slave, you crookte nose knave,
What are thy wits now past,
What moved thee with Ill Report,
To call in such a haste.

O Son.

O Thief.

O Boy.

O Knave.

I have a Cheer for thee to do,

Gogges wounds more Cheers yet.
I must cheer abroad, and you in Cheer must sit,

O loving Boy, and dainty Child,
As ever thou did me good,
Let me now crave thy good aduyce,
To help me in this mood,
Thou see I have what I desire,
In all the Country here,
Yet is there one in Babilon,
That never had no peer,
She serves God and on him sets,
Her study and her care.

Gogges wounds thou lie I trow,
Such gifts be very rare,

O Son it is true in deed,
I would it were a lye:
I would sing, I would dance,
Oh I would skip full hye,

How say you now my masters all,
Think you my Dads not light,
If you mark him, he is indeed,
To dancing trimly plight,
I dare now swear a thousand oaths,
And eake as many more,
You never saw such a one behind,
As my Dad is before.
But Dad what would you have me to do herein.

Why Knave thou wilt not hear me how I begin,

Why slave beginnest thou to rail,
Farewell with a pestilence, I would thou had kissed my tail,

Why come again son art thou grown so short,

Gogges wounds who would be used after such a sort.
Without my help thou syttest like a Whelp,
And know not what to do,
And yet like a slave thou call me slave, and crooked villain to,

O Son, O Boy, O Lord, O Child,
Thou art my ground on thee I do build,
Be not displeased I pray thee with all my heart,
And look what thou get thou shalt have thy part,
If thou can compass Susanna to overthrow,
Thou shalt have my blessing wheresoever I go.
Because I have trusted thee long time before,
I yield it to thy policy, and I say no more.
But if thou shouldest want any part of my aid,
I will be at thy hand then be not afraid,
And let us see if God with all his might,
Can defend this soul from our ancient spyght.

Dad doest thou put the matter to my ordering?

Yea Son that I do with all my blessing,
Kneel down and thou shalt have it in way of good speed,
And all the Devils in Hell to help thee at thy need.
The blessing given to the Serpent which tempted Eve,
And all manner extremities thee to relieve.
And that which God gave for Abels sake to Caine,
Light upon thee with might and mayne.
That which Ionas threatened unto Niniuie,
Light on thee and all thy posterity.
And I use to be short, and in few words to tell,
God send thee a thousand plagues more then ever were found in hell,
These and ten thousand when thou art laid in thy bed,
To recompense thy travail light upon thy head.

Who there Dad we have blessings ynow,
And ten thousand mo then I give unto you,
And when it shall please you, ye may be packing,
For in me I warrant you nought shall be lacking.

Then farewell Boy with a pestilence,

And farewell Dad with a vengeance.

Am I not a jolly fellow, it is seen by my progeny,
That my auncyent stock is of great antiquity,
How old it is none of you all can tell,
Seven years elder at the least then is th^ Devil of Hell,
Evil Report mary he is a jolly man, and had in such a price,
That no man lives now adays, but will him excercyse.
Well the charge I have, each one of you do know,
In accomplishing of the same, my diligence I will show,
The policy of the Devil, the envy he doth bear,
The man he seeks to overthrow, all such as God doth fear,
Is marvelous in faith, think you his foresight is not strange,
Mark well my tale and you shall see, how his deuyse doth change
There is in all this Babilon, but one that he doth spy,
That fears God, and eke my Dad in all his works defy.
Her hath he sought by pride at first to blind her youthful hart,
Tush, tush, she was and is so meek, he sped not in that part,
Then did he seek by gluttony to blind her fancies to,
Her sober diet him deceived, and did that quyte subdue,
Then knowing that all women are given much to envied string,
To force her have an envious hart, right many cause did bring,
But she like one not of this world, but like a very fool,
Did arm her self with patience, till every cause did cool,
But here you wives, I would not wish that you should take her part,
But if your husbands anger you, beshrew their crooked hart,
Well to my matter yet again, he sets his seruaunt sloth,
To follow her with sugared steps, in every place she goes.
But busy Susan envies the Devil and all he doth,
As she withstandes sloth and his steps, in despite of his tooth.
And that you Maids full well do know, sloth with his drowsy head,
Is able to do much with you, when you are laid in bed,
For you had rather serve the Devil, or what he will deuyse,
Then leave your bed in winter morn, when hory frosts arise,
He gave her Gold then at her will, to make her covetous,
She takes it but for needful use, or else doth it despise,
And yet with Gold my Dad hath got, a thousand old men's souls,
As well of them wear bloody gowns, as such as shear their noules,
But now my Dad nor all these things, are able to prevail,
With filthy lusts of fleshly men, means her to assail,
And such they be shall her intise, to do that pleasant deed,
As shall prevail I tell you true, by force or else by mead,
And when that they have got their wills, and so have wrought her shame
My self will blow the leaden Trump of cruel slanderous fame,
Lo thus my Dad I please I trow, and thus my nature show,
Thus shall each man my power and might in every corner blow,
And say that though the Devil himself, could not tempt Susans grace
The wit of Master Ill Report hath her and it defaste,
Oh goodly wit, oh noble brain, whence comes this deuyce.

Come in Master Sensualitas I pray thee,
Reche me thy hand and I will help thee.

By my truth Voluptas I have need of thy aid,
Such is my secrete sorrow, my senses are dismayed.

Though you judge me scant worth to be a proctor,
Mark me well now, and I will play the Doctor.
Amor vincit omnia, I nose cedamas Amori,
Love overcomes every thing, love can each Mount remove,
The Gods of old, and every man are subject unto love*

Mark his tale.

Trouble him not.

Res est Solicia, Plena ten oris amor,
How say you my masters this is good clamour*
Love hath a pleasure in it self, yet love is full of fear,
Love helps and it doth harm a man, love is not this good gear,
Love from the Senses of a man can steal away the might,
Love can make mad the mind of man, and love can blind the sight,
But is not he a jolly man that love can so subdue,
As he can lose it when he list, and it again renew,

My friend God speed,

Soft swift not friends so soon,

Why sir I never gave you cause of offence,

Nor to do it is our pretence,

You lye like crafty knaves boeth,
God speed so carterly to him ye never see before,
For you and your speed, a stinking turd for you both,
Gogges blood were ye brought up at the cart,
To break a mans tale in such sort, now I beshrew your hart,

Oh blame us not sir I pray you, your talk I trow was of love,
And hearing your arguments your wits did us move,
To speak to you bree^ely for feeling that payne,
Your Arguments said you could help us again.

And though I can, what is that to thee,

That you will sir I hope verily.

Nay soft masters a while, it is a condition,
That never yet was used, by expert Physician,
His Patient or Cure to practise to heal,
Before his disease he know very well,
And therefore I say your secretes discrye,
Or else for your help I cannot apply.

Mary sir love is my sickness.

And what is the cause of your weakness,

Love to good Gentleman.

And for thy fair words, I will help thee if I can,
But those that stand by will think it to strange,
That I unto health your sickness should change.
And busynesse at this time doth call me away,
And therefore farewell till another day.

Nay good Master Doctor let us have your help.

^o shall you sir but I must first provide,
Such things as the cause of your groefes do desyde.
And since you will not pack I must be gone,
For my confections I always make alone,
And none of you both to provide my trumpery,
Have not the wit to offer me money,
And I being shamefaste the same cannot crave,
Lo you will have help, and I nought shall have.

Yes Master Doctor here is five pound.
And here is as much see it falls to the ground,
Take it up Master Doctor, to provide your drugs,
And to buy the same I would you would trudge.

At your commandment sir, first I must stoop for my reward,
And then run at a beck, no that were to harde.
You know where to have me, get you hence for a space,
And within a day or two return to this place,
And then for your health here shall nothing be lacking,
Tarry no longer, go hence and be packing.

Alas Sir will it be two days first.

Yea.

I think sure we are both accursed.

Yet will we follow your counsel,

And in so doing, you do but well,

God be with you.

And with you to.

God be with you with all my hart,

And with you to, with all my fart.

Ah syrra, I think this hour well spended,
The lining of my purse is very well amended.
I might do little if I could not talk,
Seeing how liberally their hands do walk.
Judge what I will do for this ten pound,
Teach them a way themselves to confound.
For these are the two that Susan shall prove,
By all manner means to cool their hose love,
And if they obtain what get they than,
A Tabernacle forsooth with my Dad Satan.
and if they do not, but she it discrye,
The rygor of Law shall force them to dye.
Lo thus you do see I have gone the device,
That Mistress Susan shall sore entice.
Send them good luck Dad be thou their speed,
And grant that with shame they may end for their mead,
And thus because things do grow fast upon,
Farewell my masters I will be gone.

The weighty charge that God hath given, to such as do live here,
And joined are the pore to guide, doth fret my hart with fear,
The charge we have to help the just, and vice to punish to,
O Lord thou know it is to great for mortal men to do.
The Princes thought to live at ease, the pore man to take payne,
But dangerous is the Princes life, and dangerous once again,
O God let it not seem to thee that I would change my fate,
But if it be thy will good Lord, rid me from Rulers state.

God save your goodness worthy sir, God still augment your days,

God send you Nestors time to reign, with help in all assays,

In froth right (...) pity are you come, I thought your absence long,
For when I am in place alone, my passyons seem full strong,
I cannot rid out of my brain the charge of our degree,
How rightly we should rule the world, which crooked is to see,
I promise you if I might speak without offence of God,
There is no sharper punishment, then is the Rulers rod.
Yea let us do even what we can to rule each thing aright,
Thou know Lord the weight is such it passes much our might.

Why Sir me thinks you do offend, because you thus repyne,
Against the doings of that God, whose works are all deuyne,
He hath plaste you for chiefest here, and us to be your aid,
We may not shrink like fearful ones, but bear the burden laid,
We may not think the burden great, nor yet the time to long,
That God shall keep us in this state, but see we do no wrong.
^ (alas) who lives now and doth the people guide,
But that against his will, O Lord, his foot shall sometime slyde,
The matters are so croockt and vile, that comes forth each day,
As how to end without some* wrong, I know not well the way.

A Judges state is straight indeed, and to be looked upon,
But if so straight as you do fear, then were we wo begone.
But this I think if evidence our matters do desyde,
Our ground is sure, our path is straight, our sentence cannot slyde.

Your if doth well, but if your if, do miss in any case,
How should we end our journey straight, and have a crooked race.
But reply on words with words, doth vaynely spend the time,
And time ill spent you know right well, is eake a grievous crime,
What things we have to do you know, what matters to discuss,
The number of them Lord thou know, I think to much for us,
Well it is our charge you know, and therefore do you two,
Peruse each plaint with such effect, as Judges ought to do,
And when you have with dil^igence, done it with good aduyce,
I will you aid to cut of doubts, if any do arise.

O God when thou madste man of nought, thou framdste him in such bliss,
As he should still ^isy thy grace, and feel no heaviness.
Unto thy likeness him thou madste, among thy works of wonder,
And s^ttest him in Paradise, where is no thyrst (...) hunger.
This joyful life did he lead still, till death the Devil and Hell,
By disobeying of thy doom did spite his state so well,
He fell from that and now is come, into such weakness Lord,
As what a love of him doth come, by thee it is abhorde.
Therefore good Lord since thou haste plaste, me for a Ruler here,
Grant that no word may pass my mouth, without thy love and fear

I cannot but must marvel much, of Ioachim my Lord,
And why he comes not home to dine, according to his word.
Was it not at (...) a Clock that he said he would dine,
How think you both in faith is it not, a little past that time.

Not much Madam he is not soont to break his promise just,

No, no, Madam, he will ere long be with you, you may trust.

What yonder he is me thinks.

It is he in very deed.

I will not say unto you now, what you did cause me think,
In deed I will conceal it now, and at the matter wink.

What Susan doest thou chide me now, I will fell thee my mind,
That women there be none at all, but shrews they are by kind,

Well, well, to avoid this controversy, I will confess that crime,
And I pray you heartily to arise, and let us home to dine.

What is it dinner time so soon, me thinks it scantly noone,

Yes good my Lord I pray you now, make ready and go we soon.

Lo now my masters you may see, the state of married men,
My wife is come, I must be gone, I must yield to her when,

And reason good forsooth it is, for every man to do,
In some thing as his wife shall will, his willing hart unto.

Ye speak it well in very deed, but it were harde to find,
If both your words and hart did gre in uttering this your mind,

If he speak not his thought Madam, I dare beshrew his heart,
For as he said I think in deed, and shall do for my part.

Your conclusion now I see, is that I should obey,
(...) wise in this her small request, well, well, I say not nay,
But Susan come let us go home, the sooner shall we dine,
As I do you, so shall you me, obey another time.

And reason good in faith my Lord, both now and always to,
That I should follow your behestes, as reason wills me do.

Well farewell my Masters till after noone,
I trust you will dine, and be here again soon.

I warrant you we will not be long,

If we should, we should do you wrong.

Now Master Sensuality I would master Doctor were here*

I had rather talk with him, then hear of this gear.

Oh Venus that hath suffered me, to quench my youthful fire,
With love of those from time to time, that I did most desire.
And Cupid to that never erst did seek to quench the hart.
Of her to whom thou gave might to mitigate my smart,
Continue still your friendly guise, to me your ancient man,
And now with point of piercing dart, do cause that fair Susan,
May love again those that love her, grant this you Gods to me,
and pull away even what you will, I crave no more but she.

Or if you Gods have any power, as ancient Poets fain,
Mark well my words which from the hart proceed I tell you plain.
If any man in all the world have cause for to reply,
I must confess and thank you to, the same is very I,
I never yet did fancy her, I thank you of your grace,
But you vouchsafte to give her me, with time as meet as place.
Now those which in felicity by your good grace have been,
That you will here thus cast them of, let not those days be seen,
Grant to us now that Susan may grant love for love again,
Thrice happy then shall be our days, we shall be void of payne.

What wight in all this world hath fortune so faunde on,
As she hath done on Ioachims side, in truth I think of none,
A wife quoth a: No, no, I think an Angel sure she be,
Why all this world, nor ten worlds mo, have any such as she.
The fewter of her formed face, the glistering of her eyne,
Her shoulders that are quadrant to, her nose that is so fine.
Her cheeks that are so cheri red, her lips so red and thin,
Her smiling cheer which often shows the pits upon her chin.
Her breasts that are so round and fair, her arms that are so long,
Her fyngers straight with veins beset, of blew and white among.
Her middle small, her body long, her buttocks broad and round,
Her legs so straight, her foot so small, the like treads not on ground
I think that Nature which made her, cannot make like again,
Or else that she a Goddess is, I think I tell you plain,
A Judge quoth a: A Juggler Lord, I would thou madste of me,
So that I had to Iugle with, such juggling staff as she.

Why Sir are you a Juggler now, I pray you answer me,
What is the juggling staff you crave, if granted it may be.

You know your self no Nicromancie, but yet of Leg^rdimayne,
A cast or two but secretly would right well please us twain,

By God I would spend my best cote to fish within her poole,
And yet my father in fishers art was never but a fool.
But what for that it forces not, if we might spy a place,
And time that well may serve the turn, I will put forth the case,
But we are counted Elders here, and do the people guide,
And that we do must secrete be, least that we be espied,
For God, or for his threatenings, I pass it not a straw,
But for mine honour in this world, is it I stand in awe.

You say I do assu^e you, as I my self do think,
The time that we have here to live, it lasts but a wink,
And when that we are dead and gone, then rest we in the ground,
And out of doubt beside this life, none other life is found,
Therefore I do assure you, I mente and do mean still,
By right or wrong, by force or frawde, to live and have my will,
To eat and drink to quaff and play, I care not in what sort,
To lead my life full merrily in every kind of sporte.
And for to have the company of such a one as she,
I will oppress a thousand fools to give her gold and fee.
Marr^ always in our Garments sad and grave we must us show,
And that shall still our lightness hyde, that no man shall it know,
But yet our enterprise seems great, that we do mean to do,
For Susan is a secrete Dame, report me unto you.
And eake her credit is so great, that if she do deny,
The most and least in all the world, believe her by and by.
And therefore let us seek and know each danger still before*
And so our ship shall safely sail* and we may keep on shore.
And therefore if we could by craft, some slander on her raise,
It might help well our credit when, we seek our lust to please.

I promise thee I must account, thy wits to be deuyne,
Thy senses are of such effect, how f^r do they pass mine.
I know a ma^e full meet for this, if I knew his resort,
A fellow for this to^ alone, his name is Ill Report
Why see how good our fortune is, see how he comes yond
And we to see his entrance now, in Corner here will stand.

Twixt Dover and Kent,
Except I misu^nt,
Is miles five and dirty,
Twixt London and Powles,
Are coddes headed nowles,
A shameful company,
Twixt Freshingfield feuersha,
And Norwich and Ludham,
A mile and a half,
Twixt Dunington and Dawbny
If you will believe me,
Is a Cow and a Calfe,
At ^ramlingtowne Steeple,
Amongst all the people,
Are Oysters to sell.
At the sign of the Plow,
Is a very fair Sow,
I know her by the smell.
At Baddingham Kay,
A woman harde say,
Lay ships at an Anchor:
The best red wine.
That ever drank swyne,
at the sign of the Tanker,
On shooters hill,
Is such a Wyndmill.
To grind Gonpowder withal
as old women's bones,
Are saved for the nones,
To keep work withal.
Who Robin who,
How far wilt thou go,
From Rommey to Rome,
Well it makes no matter,
Who can lye and flatter,
May come again soon.
Why what kind of weather,
Did bring me hither,
Or what make I here:
Examine me well,
For I cannot tell,
Is not this good gear,
Well even like a mome,
I must pack and be gone,
To one place or other,
My Dad is so black,
That what I do lack,
I ask of my mother.

Why friend know you not me?

Why man I know not my self.

No, art not thou a Physician?

No by my troth Sirs in no condition,

No, I trow we two gave thee ten pound,

Mary sir and I am glad that such gu^s^es I have found,
For the law saith plainly thus, look what a man doth give,
Is irrecompensible sure, so long as God doth live.
But you shall have your come again so soon as God is dead,
Or else take all my Lands and goods, and also take this head,
Till then my masters record bear, what you do hear and see,
These gentlemen do both confess, that they did give it me.

Why friend shall we lose our Money?

Why fool though I know not Physic I know a conny.

Master Uoluptas for the Money force not, he is a good fellow,
And will otherwise deserve it, I do right well know,

I will say no more of it, but do remitte the same,
But I pray thee tell me what is thy name?

Mary Sir a woman.

What act thou a man, and haste a woman's name?

Why sir are you a woman, and have a man to your Dame.

Nay I pray thee jest not but tell me thy name.

In faith sir she can do you no pleasure, for she goes with crooches.

(...) go^th upon crooches I pray thee tell,

Mary my Dame sir her A^se is not well.
For she had a vengeance boat payne between her legs,
And her Surgeon hath magmed her with driving in pegges.

Thou art a merry fellow, I ask thee thy name?

B^ my Fathers soul sir I know not the same,
But yet I will talk like a master of art,
Though my chief erudition hath been at the Carte,
Twert I^fa^de Redding any Portsmouth,
You shall find my name I tell you forsooth.

If thou werte gentle, thou would not send me so far,
But f^iendly declare and show what you are.

Why whether I be friendly or no, in faith thou art foolish,
And mad to I think, that understand not English,
Take the first Syllable of these Towns three,
A^d what my name is thou shalt plainly see.

I will rid the strife, and tell in playner sort,
His name as I told you, is Ill Report,

What plain Ill Report, no master at all,
in faith for all your bloody gown, I will ray you on the scall.

Why gentle Master Ill Report it is a friendly part,
With plain words to salute a friend, proceeding from the heart,
And I dare speak in your behalf, although you seem to swear,
That friendly you do take his words, as we do friendship bear.

Give me thy hand my friend, I swear by my Dad and Lord,
Thou art arse honest a man, as is in the vn^arshole world.
Thou l^uest me, and thou love me, and I love thee, and I love thee,
And is not Ill Report Voluptuousness, and Sensuality,
A glorious and blessed trinity, a pestilence on you both,

Let us leave now master Ill Report,

Why Knave dost thou check me in such a sort.

No sir, but we have weighty masters to discus,
And for your wysedomes sake we account you chief of us,
And because it concerne^h women's kind,
I know you as good as any man may find.

In women's gear I am alone, it is my whole delight,
And I will help you in that case, be it wrong or right,

Well then I will be short unto thee man,
We burn both with lust to Susan.

And Ue^us with Bacchus for wine, and Ceres for Corn,
Is always cold, and thou burnest after a horne.

Why sir, why say you so,

Thine own words in such sort go.
Did not thou say to me even now man,
That thou waste in love, and could not get thy shoes on.

No sir, no, I speak of Susanna.

Who sir, the country hath no pear a,
And is not a Neates feather I pray thee a,
Better to pull on thy shoes a,
Then to pull them on with thy fyngers end a.

We talk of Ioachims wife, whose name in Latin is Susan

Oh oh, Est nomen Mulieris,
And you would have, tactus ipsius ventris.
You love well Salmon of the meses,
For a woman's belly your diet doth please,
But if you mean to have my help, to fortefy your forte,
All that I can do is, to give her an ill Report*
By which means if you prove, and cannot speed,
That she desires you, the peoples cares I will ^eede,
Whereby, and by your demure countenaunc^,
You shall by love or fear, obtain your desired d^lyaunce.

Oh excellent wit, and friendship irrecompens^ble,
We will requyte you with the like, i^ ever we be able.

By my troth you say very well, for so do the common sort,
in recompense of a good turn, give an ill report.
Well g^t you packing to dinner, and when you find her alone,
Speed your purpose if you may, and let me alone.
For I will cloak your doings, and hers shall be the blame,
You shall do the fault, and she shall have the shame,
Well once again adieu.

And to be short as much again to you.

Must not a common wealth,
Be needs in good health,
That have such Rulers,
They are sick of the sweat,
And to avoid their heat,
They must have coolers,
They must needs speed well,
That know I come from hell,
And seek mine aduyce,
Well do them not blame,
For to open shame,
I will them intyce.
And so at the last,
I shall bring to pass
My Fathers desire,
For Susan or the Judge,
To please his old grudge,
Shall burn in his fire,
What seace Knave seace,
Hold thy tongue and be peace,
What is he comes here,
It is Ioachim alas,
I will be gone by the Mass,
It is he that I fear.

Seven times is said that in one day, the just man doth offend,
Then seven times seven do I alas, good Lord do it amend,
And grant that what I take in hand, or what I shall begin,
May guided be by thy good grace, and so I shall not sin.
Well to see what my mates have done, to help each pore mans case,
I will absent my self a while, and get me from this place,
But yet before that I go hence, Lord shield me with thy might,
And grant me by thy wonted grace, to judge each thing aright,
I pass not of this pomped world, nor might that is therein,
I seek good Lord by thy good grace, in heaven a place to win.
And therefore I assure my self, my hope shall be no less,
That if thou guide me with thy grace, I shall obtain thy bless.
And so shall all that virtue seeks, and live here on the ground,
And they that do the contrary, God will them sure confound.
Well weighty busynesse calls me hence, to God I leave you all,
Who grant us all to stand upright, and not in sin to fall.

When first I came into the Court, where we do serve and dwell,
What I did think would move you laugh, if I that tale should tell.

To laugh sometime is medsonable, therefore thou may do well,
Thy merry thought to utter now, that time doth serve to tell.

I heard once in my fathers house, a Gentleman declare,
The worthy customs of the court, and ^ake the Princely fare,
The gorgeous Garments of each Dame, their tyne and famous life,
The noble works of amorous Knights, their stout and loving strife,
The pleasure of each worthy Dame, how they do hunt and hawke,
And wearied with each pastime thus, the streets how they did walk
The noble masks that were showed forth in every winters night,
The Revels and the revelling cheer, that did each heart delight,
Musicians how they did deuyse, with songs to please the ear,
And Musickes art by instrument that gladded hearts to hear,
And sometime the pore mans child, that there is plaste to be,
To honour clymes for virtues sake, and brought to hye degree,
Tush, then was I on fire set, till I could get the grace,
Of Fathers and of mothers grant, to dwell in such a place,
They granted me, and I was glad, thus came I here to dwell,
But now I think both you and I, another tale can tell,
And yet can none of us deny, but that his words were true,
But that pertaynes not to my state, nor yet belonges to you.
For we but wayters are on them, that lead these happy days,
We trudge and travail and take payne, they do possess the praise,
Thus when I think how wide I shot, when I shot at this mark,
I laugh to see how ready youth is still to change his work,
I leapt from ease and quiet state, within my native soil,
And came into a stranger air, to travail and to toil.

And can you laugh at this conceit, then I will make make you smile
When time and place shall serve again, for us to talk a while,
But now let us be packing hence, our Dame may think us long,
She will forsooth give us the right, if we give her the wrong.

Hark Serua, hark, the clock strikes one, tis time for us to go,
It is a point of policy, to love and fear a throw.

Heu mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis,
Wo to me wretch, wo once again, wo to this day and hour,
Wherein my heate of ard^n^ love, will cool with herb nor flower,
Wo to the God that sends the love, wo to him (...) the Dart,
And can so stryke as will not heal, by herb or medicines art,
Wo to my self that fyxt my hart, where I cannot revoke,
Wo to that blind boy once again, that gave my hart the stroke.
if I may find a time and place, to cool this my desire
I will do it to spyte the Gods, I care not for their ire.

Sensualitas my friend, you know as well as I,
How first we found by secrete means Susannas haunt to spy,
She goes each day when she hath dynde, unto a certain spring,
Within here Orchard her to wash, which is a wholesome thing.
There were we sure at the least, our eyes to fill and please,
Be quiet then, that may perhaps, our sorrows partly ease.

Ye say full well, and I think sure, if we could closely hyde,
Our selves within some covert place, a time there might be spied,
Wherein we might take her alone, and then through love or might,
We would have both our pleasure there, to void this sorrowful plight

Well let us go and hyde our selves, within that Orchard then,
For after dinner she comes there, I know her wonted when,
And Ill Report us promised, what so we say or do,
That he would sense us of the fault, and blame Susanna to.

Have with you then with all my hart, O Lord that the were there,
Away apace, go on before, me think she comes here.

If any woman in this world, my God may justly praise.
It is I good Lord above the rest, that lives in these days.
Thou blessest me my Lord my God, and ^ake my loving Spouse,
My Cattayle in the field abroad, my servants in the house.
My Corn both in the Barn and field, doth yield full great increase,
And thus O Lord thy benifytes, towards us doth never seace.
O Lord do grant that these thy gifts do not our hearts so syll,
That if thou lay thy hand on us, we take that part for ill.
But as by this thy providence, we live and take our rest,
We may if any storm do fall, account it for the be^t.
Anci^la have you warned the Cooke, his busynesse so to end,
As sl^cknesse in the sam^ his act, my Lord do not offend.

Yea Madam each thing is pr^st, and shall be in good hour,
He is right careful for his part, I do it you assure.

And Serua have you for your part done that I bid you do,

Those things which you gave me in charge,
My self have done them to.

Well then will I go wash my self, to the Orchard let us go.
Me thinks the whether very warm* the season very hot,
And yet there is a thing or two, that both you have forgot.

What is that Madam?

Neyth^r of you both I think, have brought me soap and oil,
To wash the sweat of from my skin, or rid away the soil.
Well go you both together hence, I think you know wherefore,
And speed again, but here you hoe, make fast the Orchard door,

Ye forsooth.

Prone with your foot, if that the Door, as we were had he locked,

I warrant him that must come here must stand awhile and knock.

How say you friend and fellow both, did we not go hence well,
Gods blessing have his honest heart, that first did found that bell.
You s^d if you remember well* when I did tell my tale,
To recompense the same with like, you said you would not fail.

You say but true* and to it then, for losing of the time,
My Mother is a Farmers wife, her maids do serve her swyne,
But here you what, if I again were at my country home,
I would not leap thus to the court, to sit there like a mome.
For pleasure more is in one hour, there with our Gill and Jack,
Then here is in five hundred years, for nothing there doth lack,
There had I for to run abroad my free and youthly will,
Here may we not once peep for fear, our mouths are shut up still,
I nothing doubt but when I shall, to mother make my moan,
For lack of talk my tongue and lips together will be grown,
Well change I would this my straight life, I tell you for my part,
And he that brought me to the court beshrew his naked heart.

Not long ago I heard one say, I think he meant by us,
A latin sense, and this it was, Nemo sua sort contentus,
Women are inquisitive, I asked him what he meant,
He said not one in all this world, was with his chance content,

Well we must now, and therefore peace, and let us go our way,
For we it is that must account which way we spend the day.

The greatest scourge that may be given, to any living wight,
I feel it now, alas, alas, that she is in my sight.
Why Cupids flames do burn my heart, why see my torments here,
And ye^ to ease my hugy smart, I dare not prove for fear.
Now is the time and let it go, we never find the leek,
And yet to heal my secrete wo, my hart is now to seek.

Peace friend, consider well your state, and let your sorrow slake,
For I it is that must and will this matter on me take,
if you do this with languishing our presence here descry,
Before that we lay hands on her then were we near the ny.
Peace I say. I say be still, I will to her alone,
And follow you as you see time, as soon as I am gone,

I will.

Fair Lady be you not afraid that you do see us hear,
We both be come to do you good, and not to yield you fear,
You see the Orchard doors are fast, the wails are close and just,
In all this world none can us see, we may do what we lust,
I say again in all this world* none can see what we do,
We burn toward thee with fervent lust consent us therefore to,
We are but men, and of that kind, that thou thy self art made*
Come lye with us, we love thee well, Susan be not afraid,
For if thou wilt not then we shall, a testimonial lay,
Against thee of a maruai^ous force, and thus both we will say,
A young man with thee here we found, in very secrete sporte,
Which caused thee away to send thy maids in such a sort.

Alas me thinks your thoughts and words together do not gr^e,
You are of age, and know right well, that no such sin should be,
You know also God doth it curse, and ^ake our law on earth,
Doth recompense such sinners to, with sharpe and cruel death.
And therefore good my friend I say, do leave as you begone,
And I will hold me so content, and hyde that you have done.

Nay, nay Madame, we mean not so, we mean^ to have our will,
Do you consent you shal^ us find both sure and secrete still,
And so we may have company, no wigh^ can us correct,
And this I know assuredly, no man will us suspect,
This do, or else I swear for troth we shall declare at large,
as this my friend hath said before, which were to great a charge,
Therefore consent we might have done, while we have used this talk
If not do you assure you, our evidence shall walk.

Oh Lord, o^ God, oh King of bliss, what storms do stop my breath,
If I fulfil your fylthy lust, I know it breeds my death,
And if I do not, then ah, alas, ^ou trap me in your bands,
And thus can I pore Innocent, by no means escape your hands.
Well better it is without the act, your danger to fall in.
Then to attempt my Lord my God with this so vile a sin.

Help, help, help.

What is the matter?

It was our chance in ending things, which we have for to end,
Secretly to common here, where none should here our mind,
And lying close and secrete still, we shame to much to show,
But what we saw, we keep it close, till Ioachim may it know.

There is but one that lives for aye, and sees every thing,
He knows the fruit of every tree, before the branch do spring,
I leave to him in this my need, that which I have to do,
I am but one, thou know my God, these wicked men are two.

Me thinks this matter very strange, and sounds not like a truth
My Mistress virtue all the world have noted from her youth.

Our Mistress, yea she doth her life, in such sort still direct,
As fyckle fame at no time durst, her honest life suspect,
I tell thee true Seruus my friend, I flatter not for mead,
It shall be found that they them selves have wrought this wicked deed
And cause that she would not consent, to serve their fylthy lust,
They have wrought this to scuse themselves, Seruus thou may me trust,

Come away, come away, in faith Madame, you are a secrete whore
Full long have I mistrusted it, though I took you not before.

A whore, yea vile and fylthye whore, fie on it fylthy act,
I think a thousand of her toys, the vyldest whore doth lack.

Why God if I most sinful wight, might reason once with thee,
Can thou permit and suffer still, these wicked thus to lye?
My sorrows all and some I send, them to thy heavenly throne,
Receive my sobbing tears oh Lord, and ease me that do moan.

Harde you not my fellow dear, I thought her hart had broke,
And eke my soul did sorrow much, to here the words she spoke,
But I know this assuredly, that if she guiltless be,
God will defend the innocent, from cruel destiny,

Guiltless man, yes assuredly, and mark what I do tell,
Thou shalt see them dye shamefully, and she shall do full well,
Why God himself hath spoken this, the fruit shows every tree,
And mark if since thou kn^west her first, where is one such as she*
She serves God devoutly still, she helps eke the pore,
And to aid them that want relief, she goes from door to door,
And now in this her greatest need, she doth upon God call,
I promise thee I trust in God, he will not let her fall,

Oh Lord that never did refuse, a sinners just complaint,

That if she guiltless be good Lord, as I do hope full well,
Do strength her Lord, and teach her tongue, which way her tale to tell.
Not Lord that thou haste need of us, but for to heap thy praise,
Which thy desert shall herein get, for now and eake always,
The world shall wonder at thy work, and always in thee trust,
Because thou doest deliver her, from those that are unjust.

Rise up Seruus, for I have heard, ear this some men to say,
The sore that sudden taken is, doth soonest wear away.
And oft the painter in his works, to show the fairer white,
Doth set the blackest black of all, against it over right.
And I have heard, and so have you, our mistress often say,
Why Lord doest thou love me so well, that live in wealth always,
Grant to me God once in my life, a little piece of thrall,
But stand by me good Lord I say, let me not synke nor fall.
And this hath God I warrant thee, done for to show his might,
And though her case do now seem crookte, he will set it aright.
You see that time wears fast away, and we have much to do,
Let us go home and nothing say, as nought at all we knew.

Are not the Judges yet come here, alas what is their care,
They wa^gh at all no pore mans case, but ply their dainty fare,
I heard of late, I trust not true, they care not who do curse,
Or who do bless they force it not, so they may fill their purse,
Oh Lord thou know how thou doest hate, ye wicked bribing wight,
And I know Lord not one at all, can hyde him from thy sight,
And if they be such wicked men, as Fame hath spread for true,
Do teach them Lord to mend their fault, frame themselves anew.
Thou gloriest not in sinners seat, which from thy laws remeue,
Thou grant them time of thy grace, for to repent and live,
I speak but as the common brute, hath filled every ear,
I hope my self oh Lord my God, they do thee love and fear,
Well since they are not come in deed, I will go home again,
Where till they come in viewing things, my self will take some payne
And God preserve and bless you all, I speak to each degree,
And he always remain with you, and also go with me.

Sorrow oft times doth try a man, it is a manly part,
When sorrows do oppress a man, to show a manly heart,
Where weeping will not veil nor help, nor courtesy will serve,
What vayieth then a manly hart, his courage to let swerve,
Well wife she is our daughter dear, and we her parents eke,
U^rtuous ever me thought the wench, gentle, wise, and meek.
And for our parts thou know O Lord, it was our chiefest awe,
Our Daughter to instruct and teach* the trade of Moyses l^we,
And therefore Lord if our offence, or else her own desert,
Have been the cause of this her fall, yet quallify her smart,
And grant that with her life, her fame may also dye,
And that we hear no more her fault, this only bowne ask I.

The loss of goods sometime doth move, a man his hart to break,
But of his child: Ah, me alas* my sobs nill let me speak,
These breasts my Spouse, with tender milk, proceeding from my hart
Did give her suck, did nourish her, alas most grievous smart,
And from my breast until you gave, her to be made a wife,
I nourished her in God his fear, and loved her as my life.

And sure I am those wicked men that do accuse her still,
Do it because that she her self, would not obey their will.
Then Lord of thy hye majesty, this only bowne ask I,
By guilty means thou wilt not let, an innocent to dye.

Peace wife, attempt not God, thou know all flesh is frail.

I know also where is Gods fear, such lust cannot prevail.

Peace fie, I know as well as you, that God can well withstand
All kind of ill that may befall, but who can escape his hand.
If God to sh^w us what we are, doth suffer us to fall,
What flesh can that O Lord withstand, not one amongst us all,
And yet he shall not think by this, that I do judge it true,
That this is laid unto her charge, and both we thus do rue.

True* no, no, alas, not true I trust it be,
And yet that she shall dye therefore, both our two eyes shall see.

Fie wife how oft ha^e thou, thy neighbours grief relieved,
And why in this thy own distress, are all thy senses meeued,
Doest thou not know our Lord and God is able to make right,
The weakest part of simple men, against all Tyrants spite,
Doest thou not know how God himself did Toby always aid,
And sent him home his son again, for whom he was dismayed,
And know not eake, how that that God, the more to show his might
When Toby had long time been blind, he gave to him his sight,
Remember how the children three for serving God aright,
Were thrust into the burning Oven, with Terror and with spite,
And how that he defended them, amidst the flaming fire,
And made the Prince praise him by them, and mitigate his ire,
These and a thousand samples mo, Gods goodness still doth show,
That God will guiltless let her dye, good wife do not think so.

Gods goodness and his power and might, all living creatures see,
And therefore Lord even as thou wilt, we leave it unto thee,

You say right well, and in distress, friends comfort every man,
We will go see her heaviness, and ease her if we can.

In my best petticoat,
Is there a hole,
My sister burnt it with a cole
A skeane of silk
Will not make it whole,
will ye by any sand mistress.
Now I desire
The pox and wild fire,
And all the plagues of Hell,
May recompense his mead
That first wrought this deed
To give me this bell.
Ill Report is a crier,
And a common liar.
As every Knave saith now:
In faith I was an honest man,
But I cannot tell when,
Come sporte me to you.
is it not pretty gear,
That I must spend and wear,
My Shoes in this sort,
And trot about the country,
Upon my ten toed Palfrey*
It is a pretty sporte.
Know you not Ioachims wife,
it is a piece with a mischief,
She must have two at ones:
There is never a wench here.
But in her best gear,
Would have flesh without bones
Why, why, do you wink,
Shame to you that shame think,
it is but your kind:
So you may do it covertly,
And cloak it honestly,
You care not where you find.
well I wold master gailer would come
Then shall all and some,
Know the cause of my coming:
it is as I fear,
For other manner of gear,
Then for masking or mumming.

What Ill Report how do ye?
I come to seek a Knave I think it be ye.

What swear not fellow, it is not an hour ago,
Since we were both Knaves, the people says so.
But what busynesse haste thou to do?

Why you shitten Knave, what is that to you,

The cause why I come hither now, is my masters will to done
And to tell thee that Susanna shall be here arraigned soon.

And worthy to I make God avow, but what ill luck had I,
That could not get grant, to hunt in her haunt before that she dye.
Dispatch I pray thee, for yonder I see, the Judges are coming,
And therefore take payne, I say once again, let us do something.

We need not since we are here ready.

Who lives in this world, and hath to guide the people to,
Have work enough I warrant you, and more then he can do
Here have I now a busynesse, that is of marvelous weight,
The way to find the truth thereof, is also very straight.
But yet in doing of the same, I would we had begone,
The sooner that we do begin, the sooner is it done.
What Bailey have ye here the cry, that I wild you to make?

Yea my Lord.

Then let the Crier here an O yes make,
And you your self do to him make the order of the cry,
And let him speak it after you, come of and do you hye.

Ill Report make an O yes here.

Help me up.

O yes.
All manner creatures,
That have humayne features,
And dwell within this Land,
Come in and disclose,
What you hear and suppose,
By this woman Susan,
And what you can tell,
Shall now be heard well;
As reason it is,
Your work shall be good,
In saving her blood,
If she did not amiss,
But if she be guilty,
Then is it necessity,
That she die for her sin,
Then what you can say,
Let us know straight way,
For the Court doth begin.

O yes.
All manner traitors,
That are yeomen f^utours,
That lead Dogs in band,
Do stop well your nose,
For fear of the pose,
And give me your hand.
And if you cannot smell,
Then are you not well,
For reasons by gis:
Will do you small good,
But change your good blood,
To stinking iwis.
But if you be guilty,
With order of necessity,
By shyting so thin:
Then get you away,
And that straight way,
And to cleanse you begin.

Crier call Susanna.

Susanna.

Here my Lord.

Stand forth and hold up thy hand,

If any here within this court there is that can detect,
This woman guilty of that crime, whereof she is suspect,
Come forth and say your minds at large, and all that you know true
For now is time and other time, you have not that to do,

My Lord Susanna is the wight, whose fault we must accuse,
And what she is that stands there, we can do nought but muse.
She is so muffled about the face, we think it is not she,
A crafty Dame may compass so to have us go awry.

Thou say as well as hart can think, for though we could not touch
Yet pleasing our eyes with this her sight shall serve our lust as much.

What peace horeson.
My Lord under correction, I mean to see her face,
And know if it be she or no, before I speak in place.

Discover her face Bailey.

I will my Lord.
Come on fair Lady you here your self, what I am bid to do.

I pray thee Gayler hold thee still my self will do it to,
O living God that all thing sees, what means this cruelty,
Do not I feel enough good Lord, but all the world must see,
I morn the less, O Lord thou know an innocent to dye,
But yet my grief is to to great* to end with infamy.
Yet Lord I leave me to thy will, and I will say no more,
Thou a^e my strength in thee I hope, I have none other power.

Now Crier hold them a Book.
Lay on you hands and mark well what I shall say,
^he evidence that you shall give against this woman here,
Is for trothes sake, and not for mead, for hatred nor for fear.
Ye shall declare the truth of all, and there from s^all not slyde,
Nor any part of it at all from us you shall not hyde.

You swear by God who knows all, and also by this Book.

As we two in the Orchard walkte, and none but we alone,
In came this woman with two maids, but straight she sent them home.
And wayghty charge she gave them both, we could but muse wherefore
In any case that they should shut, and spar the Orchard door,
With that a young man straight slept forth, that hidden secrete lay.
And came to her right shamefully, and found her Uenus play.
For us to see the end of this, in secrete corner stood,
The open sight of this foul deed, appalde our ancient blood.
And when we saw with both our eyes, that they had lain together,
Pretending for to take the wretch, our selves we did discover.
But when we laid our hands of him, we could not hold him still,
His strength was of much fortitude, and ours very ill,
This done, he hyde him to the gate, and so from thence away,
For reason saith one ^usty blood, two weak men cannot stay.
Now when this woman thus we took, Dame (quoth we) what is he,
That thus your husbands bed hath fyld, as we with sorrow see,
But she because that time would help, to frame a lye full well,
And craftily then could hold her peace, and spared that to tell.
So this the matter is in deed, and both we witness be,
And as we mean to answer it, we say but what we see.

How say you sir, I charge you now, by the oath that you did take,
Is this conclusion but the truth, that this your friend doth make.

True Sir, yea true in deed, I would there were no cause,
For Ioachim her husbands sake, to punish her with laws.

Susanna now thou see here the evidence of these men,
Speak for thy self it is high time, what haste thou to say then,
Wherefore thou ought not to dye, for I must sentence give,
Speak forth or else I know not how, that longer thou shouldste live.

Oh God, oh King, oh mighty one, oh euerliuing Lord,
What secretes is there thou see not, what sin is not abhorde,
Before each thing do come to pass, thou know what it will be,
Thou know good Lord these wicked men, have falsely blamed me.
Because I would not to their lust, most shamefully consent,
Against me Lord thou know they do, this matter thus invent.
Behold my God I dye therefore, through malice of their heart,
Th^refore my God receive my soul, none else can ease my smart.

Susanna hold thee still a while, and harken to my talk,
Thy earthly days are almost past, now must thou change thy walk
Thou see here before thy face, how plain thy fault is seen,
For as I do I must needs do, although thou werte a Queen,
Be thou therefore attentive to, and harken to thy doom,
Repent the life is gone and past, think on the life to come.
Know that there is a God in deed, on whom I heard thee call,
That were thy sins ten times as great, he would forgive them all,
Well hence thou must and to the place, where then shalt end thy life,
Lo, thus I end my sentence now, and thou shalt end thy s^ryfe.

Oh foolish folk of Israell, that know not ill from good,
I am you see an innocent, and guiltless of this blood.

I pray thee friend what mean thy words, which seem of such a weight
Disclose the secretes of thy mind, and tell us thereof straight,

That I mean speak, I tell you true, shall straight be plainly said,
Why? are you fools O Israell, or are your wits dismayed.
Or have you not the policy, the truth to know and try,
Why have you now condemn^ here, this Israelite to die.
And that which worst is yet of all, and fills her heart with ruth,
You have done this (oh foolish men) and have not known the truth.
Go sit in judgment once again, the witness they have borne,
Is false, and yet their gravity, your senses doth subborne.

Mary child with all my hart, we will return us soon,
And also what thou think meet, it shall straight way be done,
And since that God by thee hath given, a warning to us all,
Come sit with us in judgment seat, least we again should fall.

Is Mustard good for sick folks relief?

Yea Sir, Vinegar and Mustard both is good for beete.

Why Lord my God, my King and joy, what have I done for thee,
That in the midst of all my woes, thus thou should succour me,
I as touching fylthy flesh, nought but a lump of clay,
Yet thou O Lord I find it still, wilt always be my stay,
What can I do for recompense unto thy heavenly grace,
Nought else good Lord but praise thy name while I have living space
And I shall be a witness still, to those that cleave to thee,
Thou wilt not suffer them to fall but wilt their ayder be.
Now Lord while life and days shall last, and till my breath be spent,
I will set forth thy glorious praise, which is so parmament.

Danyell I pray thee with all my hart,
Sit down and in this weighty charge,
Do help to take our part.

Cause that sylence be proclaimed.

Bailey cause the Crier to make an O yes.

How many in this court doth stand, to hear what God hath done,
I charge them in that God his name, their sylence to use soon,
And Bailey undo Susanna, and rid her from her bands,
And bind those wicked Elders two, both by their seete and hands.

See here good people, unto you all I speak,
How God doth help the innocent, and eake their sorrows break,
Let mine example comfort you, in all kind of distress,
That if you suffer for his sake, he will your ca^s ^case.
And let not fear of any man your constant that (...),
From him that thus most constantly, his (...) doth true,
You see I am at liberty, that erst hath been in thrall,
And thus will God deal with all such, as end is mercy call.

Where be these wicked people two, that would have s^ed the blood,
Of guiltless Susan, for that she* their fylthy lust withstood.

Uoluptas and Sensualitas, hold up your hands.

Here my Lord.

Amongst each things that bears life, there is nothing so excellent
Then man, nor yet there is nothing more pestilent.
God made of man an Innocent, thereby to show his power,
Man made himself a wicked wight, as you see at this hour.
God also did make Magistrates, the pore to help and stay,
Yet some do vile examples show, which now do bear a sway,
I speak it not I will you know, the worst man to offend,
But for that such as guilty be, their guilt may soon amend.
And you that wicked are in deed, have you none other trust,
God will confound your acttes and deeds, turn your selves to dust
And then for your just desert, he will place you to dwell,
In Plutoes Pit a fyery Lake, the deepest dyke in Hell.
And therefore I advertise you, do learn your selves to know,
And read Gods books where you shall find, I nought but truth do show
And let these wicked Elders two, be sample to you all,
Uiew well their lofty state of late, and now do mark their fall.

What witness shall we have to try, that they would do this act,
So closely twixt themselves they have, this fylthy crime compact.

Command that these two wicked men may straight be put asunder,
And how they shall accuse themselves, it will make you to wonder.

Crier take aside Uoluptas, while Sensualitas be examined.

Come on you Knave, thou bawdy wretch, I hope to have thy cote,
And for exchange thereof thou shalt be strangled in a rope.
Mary sir a bloody gown upon my back, will make me look a hye,
And then that I am Ill Report, no worldly man can spy.

Well friend I would not have thee prate, nor place thy words awry
For all the world doth know right well, thou art as ill as I.

Gogs wouds knave thou shit slave, hast thou none to check but me
I am an honest man, prove it he that can, I will not be judged by thee

No God shall judge thee.

What haste thou learned that Lesson now?
Had you learned it sooner, it had been better for you.

What say thou now Sensualitas, now that thy mate is gone,
And no man is to help thee here, but thou art left alone.
Oh old and crooked cankered Carl, whose ancient wickedness,
And rape and rygor thou haste done, now thus det^cted is.
What false decrees hast thou decreed, what Innocents oppressed,
What guilty folk haste thou set free, which good folk do detest,
Thou haste forgot what God doth say, O wicked thou know when
Thou shalt not hurt the Innocent, nor yet the righteous man.
Well if that thou the truth haste spoke, then tell under what tree,
The mutual talk between these two, in Orchard thou did see?

Under a Mulberry tree I saw their conference,
And under that tree she committed her offence,
And meaning not for to conceal that fault, but it to tell,
We mark the order and the tree, we also marked it well.

Oh now thou lie thou wicked man, unto thy head I speak,
And look that God his vengeance will with shame upon thee wreak.
And lo thy sentence he hath heard, and thus he means to do,
according to thy due desert, to cut thy life in two,
And hearst thou Bailey take thou aside, this vile and wicked wight,
And so he comes not to his mate, nor once within his sight.

Now that this man is gone, I beseech you here me speak,
Me thinks he tells still the tale, that he at first did break.

Yea one man may still in one tale, in only order tell,
But yet his Mate will not agree, do therefore mark him well.

Hoe Crier bring in Uoluptas there.

Anon my Lord, see how he comes here.

Stand forth Uoluptas, and answer for thy self,

Thou must stand forth, and show thee like an elf,

Oh wicked seed of Canaan, and not of Iuda kind,

Fayrenesse hath thine eyes deceaude, and lust hath made thee blind
With Israels daughters thus you dealt, and they for fear consent,
But Iuda Daughter would not bide, your po^es ^o (...),
Now if such thing thou saw by her, as thou haste made report,
What kind of tree I pray thee waste, where under they did sport.

Under a pomegranate tree, she used fylthy sporte,
And take her part that takes it list, it was in shameful sort.

Lo now thou lie naughty man, thy tongue hath thee betrayed,
And calls thy fellows talk before, your fylthy lust bewrayde,
And now your fylthy lust is spied, we see it very well,
Oh wicked wight, oh devilish deed, oh act that sounds to hell.
Gods Angel stands with his sword, even pressed to spill thy blood,
And to dismember both your corpse, which erst was never good.

Crier call in the Bailey with Sensualitas.
Now God be praised, and thanks I give, to thee oh Danyell,
And for this act I am most bound, Gods glory forth to tell,
He hath saved here the innocent blood, which in him put her trust,
And by the words of their own mouth, hath cast down the unjust,
Now praise be to his name therefore, both now and eake always,
Let all the world that know his might, Amen with us here say*

Here my Lord, here is Sensualitas.

Set him by Uoluptas.
Shall it please you Danyell now, their Sentence for to give,
For all the world must needs confess, they are not meet to live.

No Iudex, I have done Gods will, proceed you in your charge,
And give them sentence to the death, do you your self discharge.

Sensualitas and Uoluptas to, I speak unto you twain,
How falsely you accused her, all men do now see plain.
And God him self to save her blood, hath wonderfully wrought,
And you that sought to spill the same, are also come to nought.
Well God forgive your wicked deed, and give your selves to pray,
For of your course of mortal life, this same is the last day.
For hence you shall unto the place, where such do use to dye,
As do transgress the Princes laws, even forthwith by and by.
And there with stones you shall be st^nde* while life and (...) doth last
Hoe there away with them I say, let it be done in haste.

Come of with the mischief,
Is it now more grief,
For you two to dye:
Then other you thought,
Whom you accused for nought,
Mary fie for shame fie.
Be of good cheer,
You shall be past fear,
Within this half hour:
Much good do your hearts,
That thus do take parts,
In every stower.
They that shall spy,
You Judges to dye,
For transgressing the law,
Shall say that by might,
In steed of good right,
You kept men in awe.
Now hold up your hands,
And receive your bands,
Now throw on your stones,
And there is for me,
One as much as three,
Shall break all their bones.

Soft I pray thee yet a while, I pray thee hold thy hands,
And suffer us to call on God, upon us now it stands.
And Lord receive us yet at last, that erst did never know,
Thy goodness nor thy mighty hand, our wealth did blind us so,
I have been given in all my time, my flesh to follow still,
Now Lord forgive my senses all, I leave me to thy will.
My sins are more then I can tell, my sorrows passing great,
The shivering passions of my bones, doth cause my flesh to sweat.
Now Lord into thy hands I leave, my sobbing sorrowful spirit,
Receive it Lord and from the Fiend defend me with thy might.

And to me Lord do not account, the number of my sins,
Reject the same and hear me now, for now my plaint begins.
And though the falsehood of the flesh, in wealth would let me know,
Yet in this my extremity, do thou thy mercy show.
The whole do need no medicine, it is bought for thee sick,
So mercy Lord do help the froward, and those against the kick.
Not justice Lord, but mercy we do crave to ease our bands.
And by thy mercy both we yield our souls into thy hands.

Are ye ready yet?

Yea when you will.

Now the world is rid of a couple of Knaves we see,

And yet one to much alive by thee.

Nay, nay, my friend and brother,
A Knave is one, and you (...) another.
I could but marvel of the words they did speak.
Before they did dye, and whence they did break.

Why fool know thou not yet, that nature will teach,
Thee when thou go to hanging how thou shouldste preach.

Hanging quoth a, mary I trust or I dye,
To see thy good face hang full hye.

I promise you I fear me much that Ill Report is fled,
If not I have commissyon, to hang all but his head.

Who, who, Devil who,
How doth the world go,
Must Ill Report dye:
No no, I trow,
The world goes not so,
Then all were awry.
For neither of Prince nor King,
Nor of any other thing,
But my tongue shall walk,
The proudest of them all,
Shall not give me such a fall,
Or shall let me to talk.

Except I be deceived much, that same is Ill Report,
That stands in yonder scarlet gown, and prates in such a sort,
Come nea^ and we will see in deed, whether it be he or no,
For if it be, I ^ll thee true, he shall no further go.
For why the Judge hath given in charge, where so we could him spy,
We should for his demerits sake, hang him by and by.

It is he in deed I think, I will ask him the questyon.

Sir what is your name.

A Judge Knave thou see, I am the very same.
I am had in great price, both in City and in town,
I am a Magistrate, doest not see by my gown.

By my troth I think more gravity consists in your co^e,
Then abides in your hart, or goes thorough your throat,
You may be honest and sober, but your countenance doth give,
That you will grow worse and worse, so long as you do live.

Gogs wounds knave, vyld knave to, doest thou speak blasphemy
I am as honest a man, as is in all this country.
And for the antiquity of the house I was borne in,
Was a famous house before thou was heard of, or any of thy kin.
And thou doest not well to use me in this sort.

Why sir is not your name Ill Report.

My name is master Ill Report in deed,

Hearst thou True Report, this is the man we loke for,

Mary then is it he that I come for.

My good fellow, why what is thy name,

True Report, I am the very same.

Gogs wounds, Cousin Hugh Report, how the Devil met we here,
I think thou saw not Willyam Report this seven year,
Me thought by thy speech, we should be acquainted,
Though prolixity of time thy Uisage had tainted.
Oh Cosyn Hugh why good Cousin Hugh take it in good part,
That I fawn thus on thee, for I love thee with all my hart.

Thou art a false wretch, and not my Cousin I swear,
He would have Ill and true to be Cosyns, is not this good gear,

Oh Cousin Hugh it grieves me thou want learning, art so pretty a man
I will tell thee fool, how thy name is Hugh, and mine Wylliam,
Though thou know it not thy self, I may not much blame thee,
It is so long ago since thou waste in my country.
His no Letter, but an asperation,
Which may be left out in many a fashion.
Helin with an H, hark and be attentive,
Or Elin without an H, is not offensyue.
So whether the H be put in, or the H be left out,
The word stands indifferent, this is no doubt,
Now take the H from thy name, then it stands like an Ewe,
And some friend hath put in Tr, and so calls thee true,
As by a familyer example, I know a false knave or two,
That are Hostlers in Innes, yet men call them true,
Therefore leave of Tragayne, fie man for shame,
And be called Hugh again, for that is thy Christen name,
And now to my own name, first we are children then grow to men
And Will for Wylliam is heard often then,
And Children at first when they learn to prattle,
In steed of Will, do ill often tattle,
Thus being young, and called Ill for Will,
Men for a custom do call me so still,
And it contents me well to hear the same,
Because for my purpose it often doth frame,
And I my self did never seek it to amend,
Because by good learning I can it defend,
Aphaeresis is a figure which Latinestes use,
And Apocope another which they will not refuse.
The one from the beginning of a word a syllable may cut,
The other from the end, another may shut.
Now twixt Aphaeresis and Appocope you may see full plain,
That Ill for Wylliam is used without shame,
Lo thus do you see that we both have take maims,
By figurative calling of our Christen names,
But as for that kindreds do not always agree,
In their christen names, as every man doth see.
But in the sir name consanguinity doth grow,
And so every kinseman his kinseman doth know,
As Thomson to Thomson, and so in in like sort,
^ gentle master Wyllyam, thou Hugh Report.

Such a diffinition heard you never I trow,
Sir you can make a Silligismus in Buccardo.

I beshrew your hart, you smell of learning,
This Knave hath been at Oxforde, I give you warning,
In Buccardo (quoth you) I swear by saint Megge.
Once was I there a year fast tied by the leg,
And at my coming forth I escaped a check,
That had not heals helped hands, my ar^ had break my neck.

Exore tuo te iudeco, thou hast been an old thief,

Now shalt thou be hanged in sign of relief,
Lo True Report for all his great cunning,
Himself hath bewrayed his knavery in something.

Ill Report troth will be troth whosoever say no,
And thou must be hanged before thou do go.

Nay by the mass then have I ill luck,
If words will not serve I will fight a pluck.

Nay then let me come and help,
For though my tongue be ill and I cannot use talking,
Yet I love to be where fists are walking.

Why Knave wilt thou choke me?

No not yet sir, but I will by and by.

Yet for pity sake, let me first say my Pater noster.

Content I faith, we will bear with him till than.

Now by my Fathers soul thou art an h^nest man,
And since thou doest so gently that time to me give,
I will not say my Pater noster, while I have a day to live,
And if you shall at any time hear that I so do,
Then hang me hardly and draw me to.

Fie on him Knave, away with the villain,

See the Knave himself can now call me Willyam.
I faith Cosyn True, I shall but prepare your way,
Your self will be hanged to another day.

How long have I with toiling payne, sought Susans blood to get,
What engines, snares, and other crafts, about that have I set,
And yet that God still doth me wrong, he doth my force withstand,
And them that I do seek to get, he keeps them in his hand.
He suffers some to lean to me, as they would come alone,
And when I think with them to meet, by him my pray is gone,
Oh God wilt thou not yet thy spite leave of, wilt thou yet still,
Seem for to offer as thou doest, and yet deny my will.
Well Ill Report thou villain boy, thy bones I mean to gnaw,
Because of that I gave thee charge, I am no whit in awe.
Why stand I hear and suffer him, all this while to take rest,
His soul, his bones, his flesh and all, by me shall be possessed.
And what there is in Hell to harm, or punish him withal,
Or what I may deuyse anew, his flesh shall seele it all.
Oh Boy, oh Knave, oh foolish Sot, should thou be put in trust,
And haste not wit to bring to pass, that thing I after lust.
Well, well thou villain Boy and wretch, I joy thy self art come,
And what I would have done to her, thou shalt have all and some.
From hence therefore even presently, my journey I will take,
And hye me fast for time it is, to mine infernal lake.

When stormy clouds doth show their force, boisterous winds work care
Then each man saith when these are past, ye whether will be fair.
And semblably my Lord my God, amidst my heavy cheer,
I hopte at length, as now it doth, my quiet would appear,
I have to thank thy majesty for every kind of gift,
But cheefely for mine honest wife, my heart to thee I lift.
How did thou Lord against her foes her simpleness defend,
How did thou clean deliver her, even at her latter end.
I thank thee Lord yet once again, thou haste deserved so,
That from thy praise my hart nor lips shall hence forth never go.

Nay then am I good Lord most bound, to yield thee hearty praise.
That haste by helping this my child, prolonged these my days.
Sorry I was to hear her fault, more sorry for her death,
Her fault was none, and she lives still, what joy like this on earth,
To serve thee still as I have done, it is my whole pretence,
Thou art my strength, my hope, my aid, I seek no other defence.

Mine are the joys, and yours none, God hath given all to me,
For greater joys then I do feel, there surely none can be.
My Daughter was given to the death, thou kepst her with thy might,
Thou helpest her for thy mercy sake, because her cause was right,
Thus I confess and will do still, while life in me doth reign,
Thou only God haste strength enough, to rid each wight from payne.

No, no, good Lord above the rest, to praise thee I am bound,
That me doest help miraculously, and eake my foes confound*
I was but dead, and thou to life, restoredst me silly wight,
What is she then that bears breath, that more can show thy might,
And this thine act shall so increase, within me evermore,
And from thy laws I will not slyde, although I dye therefore,

Also good Lord amongst thy gifts, which every day are seen,
We have to praise thy mighty grace, for our most noble Queen.
Defend her Lord in all affairs, give passage to thy word.
And cut them short that will her wo, grant this O living Lord.

And to her noble counsel Lord, give wisdom and good health,
Grant that they do may glory thee, and mend the common wealth.

And for the commons of this realm, O Lord grant my request,
But what thou and the Prince doth will, they judge it for the best.

And for this company gathered here, do I my prayer make,
God grant them their life in quietness, and then their souls do take.

Hear have you heard good Audience, the end of this our work,
Wherein we trust no cause of grief in any point doth lurk,
And though we cannot bewtify the same with musickes song,
Bear with our rudeness in that part, we troubled you not long,
And if our Author may perceive you take this in good part,
To do the like you comfort him, again with all his hart.
If any thing hath been amiss, inform him if you please,
If every thing do like you well, to God give all the praise,
To whom I leave you every one, and eke my self withal,
Who grant us all eternal life. Amen now say you all.




