ON Saturday being the. xvj. of August. 1578. and in the twentieth year of the
reign of our most gracious sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen
of England, Frace, and Irelande, Defendor of the Faith. c. The same our most
dread and sovereign Lady (continuing her Progress in Norffolke) immediately
after dinner set forward from Brakenashe, where she had dined with the Lady
Style, being five miles distant from Norwich, towards the same her most
dutiful City: Sir Robert Wood, then Esquire, and now Knight, Mayor of the
same City, at one of the Clock the same happy day, set forward to meet
with her Majesty in this order: First there road before him well and seemly
mounted, threescore of the most comely young men of the City as Bachelers,
apparelled all in black Sattyn doublets, black Hose, black Taffeta Hats
and yeallowe Bands, and their universal livery was a Mandylion of purple
Taffeta, laid about with silver Lace: and so apparelled, marched forwards two
and two in a rank. Then one which represented King GVRGVNT, sometime King of
Englande, which builded the Castle of Norwich, called Blanch Flower, and laid
the foundation of the City. He was mounted upon a brave Courser, and was thus
furnished: His body Armed: his Bases of green and white silk: on his head a
black velvet Hat, with a plume of white Feathers. There attended upon him three
Henchmen in white and green: one of them did bear his Helmet, the second his
Tergat, the third his Staff. After him a noble company of Gentlemen, and
wealthy Citizens in velvet Coats, and other costly furniture, bravely
mounted. Then followed the Officers of the City every one in his place. Then
Master Sword bearer, with the Sword and Hat of Maintenance. Then Master
Mayor, and four and twenty Aldermen, and Master Recorder, al in Scarlet
gowns, whereof, so many as had bin Majors of the City, and were Justices, did
wear their scarlet cloaks. Then followed so many as had bin Sherifs, and were
no Aldermen, in violet Gowns, satin tippets. Then followed diverse other, to
keep the people from disturbing the array aforesaid. Ths every thing in due
and comely order, they al (except GVRGVNT which stayed her majesties coming
within a flight shot or two of the city, where the Castle of Blanch Flower
was in most beautiful prospect) marched forwards to a bridge, called
Hartforde Bridge, the uttermost lymit that way, distant from the City two
miles or thereabouts, to meet with her Majesty: who, within one hour or
little more after their attendance, came in such gracious and Princely wife,
as ravished the harts of all her loving subjects, and might have terrified the
stoutest heart of any enemy to behold. Whether the Majesty of the Prince,
which is incomparable, or joy of her subjects, which exceeded measure, were
the greater, I think would have appalled the judgment of Apollo to define.
The acclamations and cries of the people to the Almighty God for the
preservation of her Majesty, rattled so loud, as hardly for a great time could
any thing be heard: But at last, as every thing hath an end, the noise
appeased: Master Mayor saluted her highness with the Oration following, and
yielded to her Majesty there with the sword of the City, and a fair
standing cup of silver and guilt, with a ^ouer, and in the Cup one hundredth
pounds in gold. The Oration was in these words:

SI nobis ab Optimo Maximo concederetur optio quid rerum humanarum nunc
potissimum vellemus: nihil duceremus antiquius (Augustissima Princeps) quam vt
tuus ille, qui ita nos recreat, castissimi ocelliradius posset in abditissimos
cordium nostrorum angulos se confer. Cerneres profecto quanta sint hilaritate
perfusa, quam in ipsis arterijs venulis spiritus sanguis gestiant: dum intuemur
te huius Regni lumen (vt Dauid olim fuit Israelitici) in hijs tandem finibus
post longam spem, ardentissima vota exoriri. Equidem vt pro me, qui tua ex
autoritate clementia (quod humillimis gratijs profiteor) celeberrimae huic
Ciuitati praesum, pro hijs meis fratribus, at{que} omni hoc populo quem tuis
auspicijs regimus, ex illorum sensu loquar, quod ipse sentio: sic nos demum
supplicibus votis exposcimus, vt Maiestatem tuam beneuolam nobis, propitiam
experiamur: vt nunquam cuiquam populo aduenisti gratior quam nobis. In illius
rei luculentissimum indicium, insignia haec honoris, officij nostri, quae nobis
clemetissimus Princeps Hericus Quartus quinto sui Regni anno cum Praetore,
Senatoribus, Vicecomitibus concessit: (cum antea Balliuis (vt la) ultra
annalium nostrorum memoriam regeremur) perpetuis deinde Regum priuilegijs,
corroborata nobis, aucta magnifice, Maiestati tuae omnia exhibemus, quae per
tuam vnius clemetiam (quam cum immortalibus gratijs praedicare nunquam
cessabimus) vicesimo jam anno tenuimus. At{que} una cum illis, hunc Thesaurum,
quasi pignus nostraru voluntatum, facultatum, quas omnes, quantae, quantulaeue
sint, ad tuum arbitrium deuouimus: vt si quid omni hoc foelicissimi tui teporis
decursu admisimus, quod amantissimos, obsequetissimos, amplitudinis tuae
saluti, Coronae, emolumento deuotissimos non deceat: statues de nobis, nostris
omnibus, pro tua clementissima voluntate. Sin ita clauum huius Ciuitatis (Deo
duce) reximus: vt eam in portu saluam Maiestati tuae conseruauerimus, populum
primum gloria Dei, verae religionis, deinde salutis, honoris, voluntatis tuae
studiosissimum, quantum in nobis est, effecerimus: tum non libet nobis id a te
petere, quod insita tibi singularis clementia facillime a te ipsa impetrabit.
Tantum obsecramus, vt Amplitudinem tuam Deus omnibus animi, corporis bonis
cumulatissime bear velit.

IF our wish should be granted unto us by the Almighty, what human thing
we would chiefly desire: we would account nothing more precious (most
Royal Prince) than that the bright beam of your most chaste eye, which doth
so chere us, might penetrate the secret strait corners of our hearts: then
surely should you see how great joys are dispeised there, and howe the
spirit and lively blood tickle in our arteries and small veins, in beholding
thee the light of this Realm (as Dauid was of Israell) now at length, after
long hope and earnest petitions, to appear in these coasts. Truly on mine
own part, which by your highness authority and clemency (with humble
thanks be it spoken) do govern this famous City, and on the part of these
my brethren and all these people which by your authority we rule (speaking
as they mean, and as I my self do think) this only with all our hearts
and humble prayers we desire, that we may so find your Majesty gracious and
favourable unto us, as you for your part never came to any subjects better
welcome tha to us your poor subjects here. For most manifest token whereof,
we present unto your Majesty here, these signs of honour and office, which
vvee received of the most mighty Prince Henry the fourth, in the fifth year of
his reign, then to us granted in the name of Mayor, Aldermen, and Shirifs,
where as before time out of mind or mention, we were governed by Bayliffes
(as they term them) which ever since have been both established and increased
with continual privileges of Kings: And which by your only clemency
(which with immortal thanks we shall never cease to declare) we have now
these. xx. years enjoyed: and together with those signs, this treasure is a
pledge of our good vvils and hability: which all how great or little so ever
they be, we pour down at your pleasure, that if we have neglected any thing
in all this course of your most happy reign, which becomes most loving,
obedient, and well willing subjects to perform, for the preservation of
your Crown, and advancement of your highness, you may then determine of us and
al ours, at your most gracious pleasure. But if we have (God being our guide)
so ordered the governance of this city, that we have kept the same in safety
to your Majesties use, and made the people therein (as much as in us lies)
first, most studious of Gods glory and true religion, and next of your
Majesties health, honour, and pleasure, then ask we nothing of you, for that
the singular clemency ingraffed in your highness, will easily of it self grant
that which is requisite for us to obtain. We only therefore desire, that God
would abundantly bless your highness with al good gifts of mind and body.

Which Oration ended, her Majesty accepting in good part every thing
delivered by the Mayor, did thankfully answer him in these words, or very
like in effect. We heartily thank you, Master Mayor, and all the rest, for
these tokens of goodwill, nevertheless Princes have no need of money: God
has endowed us abundantly, we come not therefore, but for that which in
right is our own, the hearts and true allegiance of our Subjects, which are
the greatest riches of a Kingdom: whereof as we assure our selves in you, so
do you assure your selves in us of a loving and gracious sovereign: wherewith
was delivered to Master Mayor, a Mace or Sceptre, which he carried before her
to her lodging, which was in the Bishop of Norwich his Palace, two miles
distant from that place. The Cup and money was delivered to a Gentleman, one of
her Majesties footmen to carry: Master Mayor said to her, Sunt hic Centum
librae puri auri, the cover of the Cup lifted up, her Majesty said to the
footman, look to it, there is a hundredth pound. With that her highness, with
the whole company, marched towards Norwich, till they came to a place called
the Town Close, distant from the City a good flightshot, where the party,
which represented Gurgunt, came forth, as in manner is expressed, and was
ready to have declared to her Majesty this speech following: but by reason of
a shower of rain which came, her Majesty hasted away, the speech not
uttered: But thus it was.

Leave of to muse most gracious Prince of English soil,
What sudden wight in Martial wise approaches near:
King Gurgunt I am hight, King Belins eldest son,
Whose sire Dunwallo first, the British crown did wear.
Whom truthlesse Gutlack forste to pass the surging seas,
His falshode to revenge, and Denmark land to spoil.
And finding in return, this place a gallant vent,
This Castle fair I built, a forte from foreign soil:
To win a Conquest, gets renown and glorious name,
To keep and use it well, deserves eternal fame.
When brute through cities, towns, the woods and dales did soud
ELIZABETH this country peerless Queen drew near:
I was found out, my self in person noble Queen
Did hast, before thy face in presence to appear.
Two thousand years well-nigh in silence lurking still:
Hear, why to thee alone this service I do yield.
Besides that, at my Cities suit, their founder first
Should gratulate most this joyful sight in open field.
Four special points and rare concurring in us both
This special service have reserved to thee alone:
The glory though of each in thee doth far surmount,
Yet great with small compared, will like appear anon.
When doubtful wars the British princes long had wrong,
My grandsire first uniting all did wear the Crown.
Of York and Lancaster, who did conclude the broils?
Thy grandsire Henry seventh, a king of great renown.
Mine uncle Brennus eke, my father joining hands,
Old Rome did raze, and sack, and half consume with fire:
Thy puissant father so, new Rome that purple whore
Did sack, and spoil her near of all her glittering tire.
Lo Cambridge schools by mine assignment founded first,
By thee my Cambridge schools are famous through the world,
I thirty wandering ships of banished men relieved.
The thronges of banished souls that in this City dwell,
Do weep for joy, and pray for thee with tears untold.
In all these things thou noble Queen doest far excel.
But lo to thee I yield as duty doth me bind
In open field my self, my City, Castle, Key,
Most happy fathers Kings in such a daughter Queen,
Most happy England were, if thou shouldest never die.
Go on most noble Prince, for I must hast away,
My City gates do long, their Sovereign to receive:
More true thou never could, nor loyal subjects find,
Whose hearts full fast with perfect love to thee do cleave.
THen her Majesty, drew near the Gates of the City called Saint Stephens
gates, which with the walls there were both gallantly and strongly repaired.
The gate it self was thus enriched and beautified. First y^ Portcullice was
new made both timber and iron, then the outward side of the gate was thus
beautified: The Queenes Arms were most richly and beautifully set forth in
the chief front of the gate, on the oneside thereof, but somewhat lower, was
placed the scutcheon of S. George, or Saincte George his cross: on the other
side, the arms of the City: and directly under the Queenes Majesties arms
was placed ye Falcon, her hyghnesse Badge in due form, under the same were
writ these words, God and the Queen we serve. The Inner side of the gate was
thus beautified: on the right side was gorgeously set forth the red Rose,
signifying the house of York, on ye left ye side white Rose, representing the
house of Lancaster: in the midst was the white red Rose united, expressing ye
Union, under ye which was placed by descent the arms of the Queen, and under
that were written these two verses: DIVISION kindled strife,
Blist UNION quenchte the flame:
Thence sprang our noble PHAENIX dear, the pearlesse prince of FAME.


And besides that, at this gate, the Waits of the City were placed with loud
Music, who cheerfully and melodiously welcomed her Majesty into the City:
and then passed she forward, through Saint Stephens street, where the first
Pageant was placed in form following.

IT was builded somewhat like the manner of a stage, of xl. foot long, and in
breadth eight foot. From the standing place upward, was a bank framed in
the manner of a free stone wall, in very decent and beautiful sort: and in
the hight thereof were written these Sentences. Viz.

FRom the standing place downward, it was beautified with Painters work
artificially, expressing to sight the portraiture of these several Looms, and
the Weavers in them (as it were working) and over every Loombe the name thereof,
Viz. Over the first Loombe was writ the weaving of Worsted: over the second,
the weaving of Russels: over the third, the weaving of Darnix: over the
fourth, the weaving of Tuft Mockado: the fifth the weaving of lace: the sixte
the weaving of Caffa: the seventh the weaving of Friudge. And then was there
the portraiture of a Matron, and two or three children, over her head was
written these words, Good nurture changes qualities. Upon the stage there
stood knitting at the one end eight small women children spinning Worsted
yarn, and at the other end as many knitting of Worsted yarn hose: in the
myddest of the said stage stood a pretty Boy richly apparelled, which
represented the Common wealth of the City. And all the rest of the stage was
furnished with men, which made the said several works, and before every man
the work in deed: and every thing thus in readiness, stayed her majesties
coming and when she did come, the child which represented, Common wealth, did
speak to her highness these words. Viz.

Most gracious prince, undoubted sovereign Queen,
Our only joy next God, and chief defence:
In this small show, our whole estate is seen.
The wealth we have, we find proceed from thence,
The idle hand hath here no place to feed,
The painful wight hath still to serve his need.
Again, our seat denies our traffic here,
The Sea too near decydes us from the rest,
So weak we were within this dozen year,
As care did quench the courage of the best:
But good advise, hath taught these little hands
To rend in twain the force of pining bands.

From thence the Looms have dealing with the same,
And thence again in order do proceed,
These several works, which skilful art doth frame:
And all to drive Dame need into her cave,
Our heads and hands together labourde have.
We bought before the things that now we sell,
These slender ympes, their works do pass the waives,
Gods peace and thine we hold and prosper well,
Of every mouth the hands the charges saves.
Thus through thy help and aid of power divine,
Doth NORVVICH live, whose harts and goods are thine.
B. G.
THis show pleased her Majesty so greatly, as she particularly viewed the
knitting and spinning of the children, pervsed the Looms, and noted the
several works and commodities which were made by these means: and then after
great thanks by her given to the people, marched towards the market place,
where was made a second devise as follows.

THe second Pageant thwarted the street at the entrance of the Market,
between Master Skinner and master Quashe, being in breadth two and fifty
foot of assise, and was divided into three gates, viz. in the midst a maine
gate, and on either side a postern: the maine gate in breadth fourteen foot,
each postern eight foot, their heights equal to their proportion: over each
postern was as it were a Chamber, which Chambers were replenished with
Music. And over all the gates, passed a stage of eight foot broad, made in
the manner of a Pageant, both curious, rich, and delightful, the whole work
from the Pageant downward, seemed to be Jasper and Marble. In the forefront
towards her Majesty, was the Arms of Englande on the one side the gate, and
on the other side the Falcon with Crown and Sceptre, which is her own badge.
The other side was beautified with the arms of Englande on the one side the
gate, and with the crest of Englande on the other side. The Stage or Pageant
was replenished with five personages appareled like women. The first was, the
City of Norwich: the second Debora: the third Iudeth: the fourth Esther: the
fifth Martia, sometime Queen of Englande. At the first sight of the Prince,
and till her Majesties coming to the Pageaunte, the Musicians, which were
close in the Chambers of the said Pageant, used their loud Music, and then
ceased: wherewith her highness stayed, to whom the personage representing
the City of Norwich, did speak in these words. viz.

WHom Fame resounds with thundering Trump, which rends the rattling skeis,
And pierces to the haughty heavens, and thence descending flies
Through flickering air: and so conioines the Sea and shore together,
In admiration of thy grace, good Queen thart welcome hither,
More welcome than Terpsicore, was to the town of Troy.
Sea-faring men by Gemini conceive not half my joy:
Strong Hercules to Theseus was never such delight
Nor Nisus to Eurialus as I have in this sight,
Penelope did never thirst Vlisses more to see
Than I poor Norwich hungered have to gain the sight of thee.
And now that these my happy eyes behold thy heavenly face,
The Lord of Lords I humbly pray, to bliss thy noble grace
With Nastors life, with Sibilles health, with Croesus stock and store,
With all good gifts of Salomon, and twice as many more.
What should I say? thou art my joy next God, I have none other,
My princess and my peerless Queen, my loving nurse and mother.
My goods and lands, my hands and hart, my limbs and life are thine,
What is mine own in right or thought, to thee I do resign.
Grant then (oh gracious sovereign Queen) this only my request,
That that which shall be done in me, be construed to the best.
And take in part my slender shows, wherein my whole pretence
Is for to please you Majesty, and end without offence.
So shall I clap my hands for joy, and hold my self as rich
As if I had the gold of Iude, and double twice as much.
B. G.
WHere princes sitting in their thrones set god before their sight
And live according to his law, and guide their people right,
There doth his blessed gifts abound, there kingdoms firmly stand
There force of foes cannot prevail, nor fury fret the land.
My self (oh peerless Prince) do speak by proof of matter past,
Which proof by practise I perfourmde, and foiled his foes at last.
For Iabin king of Canaan, poor Israel did spite,
And meant by force of furious rage to overrun us quite.
Nyne hundred Iron Chariots, he brought into the field.
With cruel captain Sisera by force to make us yield.
His force was great, his fraud was more, he fought, we did defend,
And twenty winters long did last this war without an end.
But he that neither sleeps nor slackes such furies to correct,
Appointed me Debora for the judge of his elect:
And did deliver Sisera into a woman's hand.
I slew them all, and so in rest his people held the land.
So mighty prince, that puissant Lord, hath plaste thee here to be,
The rule of this triumphant Realm alone belongth to thee.
Continue as thou hast begone, weed out the wicked route,
Uphold the simple, meek and good, pull down the proud stout.
Thus shalt thou live and reign in rest, and mighty God shalt please.
Thy state be sure, thy subjects safe, thy common wealth at ease.
Thy God shall grant thee length of life, to glorify his name,
Thy deeds shall be recorded, in the book of lasting fame.
B. G.
OH flower of Grace, oh prime of Gods elect,
Oh mighty Queen and finger of the Lord,
Did God sometime by me poor wight correct.
The Champion stout that him and his abhord?
Then be thou sure thou art his mighty hand,
To conquer those which him and thee withstand.
The rage of foes Betbulia did besiege,
The people faint were ready for to yield:
God aided me poor widow nerethelesse,
To enter into Holofernes field,
And with this sword by his directing hand,
To slay his foe, and quiet so the land.
If this his grace were given to me poor wight,
If widows hand could vanquish such a foe:
Then to a Prince of thy surpassing might.
What Tyrant lives but thou may overthrow.
Persevere then his servant as thou art,
And hold for aye a noble victors part.
B. G.
The fretting heads of furious foes have skill,
As well by fraud as force to find their pray:
In smiling looks doth lurk a lot as ill,
As where both sterne and sturdy streams do sway,
Thy self oh Queen, a proof hath seen of this,
So well as I poor Esther have iwis.
As Iabins force did Israel perplex,
And Holofernes fierce Betbuliel besiege,
So Hamons slights sought me and mine to vex,
Yet shewde a face a subject to his liege.
But Force nor Fraud, nor Tyrant strong can trap,
Those which the Lord in his defence doth wrap.
The proofs I speak by us have erst bin seen,
The proofs I speak, to thee are not unknown.
Thy God thou know most dread and sovereign Queen,
A world of foes of thine hath overthrown,
And hither now triumphantly doth call
Thy noble Grace, the comfort of us al.
Dost thou not see the joy of all this flock?
Vouchsafe to view their passing gladsome cheer,
Be still (good Queen) their refuge and their rock,
As they are thine to serve in love and fear:
So Fraud, nor Force, nor foreign Foe may stand
Against the strength of thy most puissant hand.
B. G.
WIth long discourse (oh puissant Prince) some tract of time we spend,
Vouchesafe yet now a little more, and then we make an end.
The thundering blast of Fame, whereof Dame Norwich first did speak,
Not only shook the air and skies, but all the earth did break,
It rend up graves, and bodies raised, each spirit took his place,
And this lonely word was heard: Here comth the pearl of Grace,
Here comes the Jewel of the world, her peoples whole delight,
The Paragon of present time, and Prince of Earthly Might.
The voice was strange, the wonder more: For when we viewed the Earth
Each Prince that erst had reigned here, receyvde again his breath,
And with his breath, a liberty to hold again his place,
If any one amongst us all exceed your noble Grace.
Some comfort every one conceived to catch again his own,
His utmost skill was trimly used, to have his virtues known.
The plays surpass my skill to tell, but when each one had said,
Apollo did himself appear and made us all dismayed.
Will you contend with her (quoth he,) within whose sacred breast
Dame Pallas and my self have framed our sovereign seat of rest?
Whose skill directs the Muses nine, whose grace doth Venus stain:
Her eloquence like Mercurie: Like Iuno in her train?
Whose God is that eternal love which holds us al in awe?
Believe me, you exceed the bounds of equity and law.
Therewith they shronk themselves aside, not one I could epsy,
They coutcht them in their caves again and there full quiet lye,
Yet I that Martia hight, which sometime ruled this land,
As Queen for thirty three years space, gate licence at his hand,
And so Gurguntius did, my husbands father dear,
Which built this Town and Castle both, to make our homage here,
Which homage mighty Queen accept: The Realm and right is thine:
The Crown, the Sceptre, and the sword to thee we do resign.
And wish to God, that thou may reign, twice Nestors years in peace,
Triumphing over all thy foes, to all our Joys encreace. Amen.
B. G.
Herewith she passed under the gate, with such thanks, as plainly expressed
her noble nature: and the Musicians within the gate upon their soft
instruments used broken Music, and one of them did sing this Ditty.

FRom slumber soft I fell a sleep,
From sleep to dream, from dream to deep delight,
Each Gem the Gods had given the world to keep
In Princely wise came present to my sight:
Such solace then did sink into my mind,
As mortal man on mould could never find.
The Gods did strive, and yet their strives were sweet,
Each one would have a Virtue of her own,
Dame Iuno thought the highest place most meet
For her, because of riches was her throne.
Dame Venus thought by reason of her love
That she might claim the highest place above.
The Virgins state DIANA still did praise,
And CERES praysde the fruit of fertile soil:
And PRVDENCE did dame PALLAS chiefly raise.
MINERVA all for eloquence did strive,
They smylde to see their quarelling estate*
And JOVE himself decided their debate.
My sweets ({quod} he) leave of your sugared strife,
In equal place I have assigned you all:
A sovereign wight there is that hears life,
In whose sweet hart I have inclosde you all.
Of ENGLAND soil she is the sovereign Queen,
Your vigors there do flourish fresh and green.
They skipped for joy and gave their frank consent,
The noise resounded to the hawtie sky:
With one loud voice they cried al, content,
They clapped their hands, and therewith waked I.
The world and they concluded with a breath,
And wished long reign to Queen ELIZABETH.
B. G.
HErewith she passed thorough the market place, which was goodly garnished,
thence through the other streets which were trimly decked, directly to the
Cathedral church, where Te Deum was song, and after service she went to the
Bishops palace, where her Majesty kept ye time she continued in Norwich. All
this was upon Saturday the xvj. of August. 1578.

Upon the Monday following, M. Churchyard brought Mercurie in a gallant coatch
stragely apparelled, into the grene yard under the privy or bedchamber window,
out of the which, the Queenes Majesty looked: which Mercurie, in verse made
for ye purpose, uttered to her highness, that if it were her pleasure at any
time to take the air abroad, there were devises to be seen to pleasure her
Majesty, according to that promise, on Tewsday following (for before that day
by means of the whether she went not abroad) he performed a very pretty pleasant
show before her highness without S. Benels g^tes as she went towards Cossie
Park to hunt. In which day the Minister of the Dutch church pronouncing to her
Majesty the Oration following, presented the cup therein mentioned, which I
esteem to be worth fifty pounds, very curiously wrought.

MAgna oratoribus qui percelebrat^rum aetate vixerunt fuit laus, Serenissima
Regina, quod Iudicum animos partim suauiloquentia, partim posita rei
personae{que} ante ipsorum oculos calamitate, in quemcunque vellent animi
habitum transformarent: Prius membrum non vulgarem nobis ob oculos ponit
hominum facilitatem, quod adeo sequaces dicto{que} audientes fuerint, vt se
linguis duci paterentur: Posterius magnam vbique apud gentes, quarum Respublica
optabili ordine fuit constituta obtinuit gratiam: lunge autem maiorem apud cos
qui Christo nomen dederunt: omnium vero maximam apud te o Serenissima Regina,
ecclesiae Christi matrix, cuius animum verbo Dei obsequentem instruxit, non
fucatus hic ^ermo, sed Christi spiritus, pietatis{que} zelus: ipsissima piorum
calamitas afflictorum{que} lachrymae, lachrymae inquam Christifidelium te
commouerunt, misera dispersa{que} Christi membra quibusuis iniurijs obiecta,
mill jam mortibus territa, in tutelam salutem{que} animi iuxta ac corporis
recipere at{que} protegere: Ob haec singularia tua in nos pietatis beneficia,
quod tutore optimo Magistratus in hac tua Nordouicensi vrbe (quam Maiestas tua
nobis ob Christi religionem exulantibus domicilij loco clemeter concessit)
viuimus, add quod populi in nos animum fauorabilem experimur, inprimis Deo
patri, Domino vnico seruatori nostro Iesu Christo, deinde tibi Serenissimae
Reginae immortales non quas debemus sed quas possimus agimus gratias: Porro
humile quidem vnicum tamen nostrum est votum, animi nostri gratitudinem
Maiestati tuae ostendere: Ecce igitur nullum munus, sed animum nostrum: nullum
regium splendorem, sed pietatis posteritatis{que} monumentum Serenissimae tuae
Maiestati consecratum, hoc autem co gratius maiestati tua ^ore confidimus, quod
inculpati pijssimi{que} Iosephi historia Dei erga Maiestatem tuam bonitas, ad
vinum sit delineata, quem nulla astutia, nullum robur, nulla deni{que} regnandi
libido, sed fides constans, Christiani pectoris pietas, coelestis{que} virtus,
singulari Dei fauore ex sanguinaria fratrum conspiratione, mortis{que} metu, ad
summam dignitatem, regni{que} decus euexerunt: In huius fratres non ^liena
videtur prouerbialis illa apud Habraeos sententia, Inuidia malarum rerum
appetitus, studium variae gloria hominibus saepissime occasio sunt sui
interitus, tamen quod Iosephi animum attinet, ea fuit praeditus temperantia,
fortitudine, vt nimis iniquus simul pranus censeri posset, qui eum vel minimo
vindicandi affectu accusare velit, adco Dei prouidentiae se, omne vitae suae
studium, vitae inquam in alieno regno discrimen commisit, vt non aliunde quam a
solo Dei nutu pendere visus sit: sed quorsum ista? In te no haet ipsa alia{que}
consimilia o Serenissima Regina, regni tui ratione omnium oculis conspicua
sunt? Haec inquam esse ecclesiae Christi foelicissimum gaudium, spirituale
diadema, summum decus, huius vero regni vere Regium splendorem, atque perennem
gloriam, quis nisi mente captus inficias ire potest? Pijssime tu quidem
singulari Dei bonitate animum Iosephi tum in regni tui conseruatione, tum in
regno Christi amplificando imitata es o nutrix ecclesiae Dei fidelissima,
solius enim Dei est nunc per res (prout hominum ^culis sunt subiectae)
secundasdisperdere, illum autem per quaeuis tentationum genera rerum{que}
discrimina extollere: quos vt vasa suae misericordiae agnoscit, ita etiam
bonitate spiritus sui tum consolation, tum fortitudine ad aeterna vitae
foelicitatem prosequitur: Quod nostrum votum ratum esse, Maiestatem tuam
regni{que} ordinem spirituali prudentia ac sapientia stabilire, cam{que} in
longam aetatem seruare, tuae item Maiestatis subditos vera sui cognitione magis
ac magis imbuere, dignetur bonus ille clemens Deus, per merita filij sui Domini
nostri Iesu Christi. Amen.

REgiae Maiestati post orationem oblati^ est monumentum aliquod, in cuius
superficie artificiose sculpta erat historia Iosephi; e^ Genesi.

In circumferentia vero hoc carmen.

Innocuum pietas ad regia sceptra Iosephum,
Ex manibus fratrum, carnificis{que}, rapit:
Carcere insidijs sic te Regina tuorum
Ereptam duxit culmina ad ista Deus.
Inscriptio eras in ipsius capacitate scripta in orbem, hoc modo.

Serenissimae Angliae Reginae Elizabethae, ecclesiae Belgicae Nordouici ob
religionem exulantes, hoc monumentum pietatis posteritatis ergo consecrabant.
1578.

In interiore ipsus part erat insigne serpentis in gyrum conuo^ti, cui media
insidebat columba, cum hoc Christi Elogio: Prudens vt serpens, simplex vt
columba.

THE Orators (most gracious Queen) which lived in the age of them that won
greatest renown; were highly commended, for that they could transform the
Judges minds partly, by eloquence, and partly by setting down before their
eyes the calamity of the thing and person they spake of, into what disposition
them listed: the first part declares unto us no common facility of men, in
that they were so willing in following, and attentive in hearing, as they would
suffer themselves to be lead by eloquence: the last, obtained great favour
amongst all nations, whose common weal was governed in good order, and far
greater amongst the Christians: but greatest of all with thee O most excellent
Queen, the nurse of Christ his church, whose mind obedient to Gods word,
the spirit of Christ, and zeal of Godliness, and not this profane kind of
speech hath instructed: the very calamity of Godly men, and tears of the
afflicted, the tears, I say, of faithful Christians have thoroughly moved thee
to defend and protect the miserable and dispersed members of Christ object to
every kind of injury, before beaten in pieces by a thousand deaths with the
safety and preservation as well of mind as body: for these thy singular
benefits of Godliness towards us, and that we live under so good a tutor
being magistrate in this the City of Norwich, which thy majesty hath of
elemencie granted unto us for a mansion place, which were banished for Christ
his religion, moreover that we find the minds of the people favourable
towards us, first we give immortal thanks, not such as we ought, but such as
we are able unto God the father, and the Lord our only saviour Iesus Christ,
and then unto thee most merciful Queen. Moreover it is our humble and yet our
only petition to show unto your majesty the thankfulness of our mind:
behold therefore dedicated to your most excellent majesty not any gift but our
mind, no princely jewel but a monument of godliness and posterity, the
which we hope will be so much the more acceptable to your majesty, for because
the goodness of God towards your majesty is lively drawn out of the
history of the innocent most godly Iosephus, whom neither policy, strength
nor desire of bearing rule, but constant faith, godliness of a Christian
heart, and heavenly virtue by Gods singular mercy, delivered from the bloody
conspiracy of his brethren fear of death, and brought unto high dignity and
royal kingdom: to whose brethren that proverbial sentence of the Hebrewes is
very fitly alluded. Envy being the desire of evil things, and covetousness
of transitory renown, is often times the occasion of mans destruction: but
touching the mind of Iosephus, the same was endued with such temperance and
fortitude, that he might be thought no less unjust then wicked, that would
accuse him so much as with the least affection of revengement: so wholly did he
commit him self and all the government of his life, his life, I say, put in
hazard in a strange kingdom unto the providence of God, that he seemed to hang
of no other thing then the only will of God. But to what end speak I this?
Are not these self same things, and others their like (o most excellent
Queen) by the eyes of all men clearly beholden in thee, and the order of thy
kingdom? What man (I say) having his wits, can deny these things to be the
most happy joy, spiritual crown, and chiefest ornament of Christ's church,
and truly of this kingdom the princely beauty and perpetual renown? Thou
surely doest follow most hollily, the mind of Iosephus, by the singular
goodness of God, as well in preserving thy kingdom, as in amplifying the
kingdom of Christ (o thou most faithful nurse of the church of God:) for
it is in God only to destroy this man by prosperity (as it seems unto man)
and advance another by all kinds of adversity and human danger: whom he
acknowledges as the vessels of his mercy: and so by his goodness, together
with the consolation and strength of his spirit, doth bring them to the
happiness of eternal life, which our petition that good and merciful God
grant may be ratified in establishing your majesty and governance of your
kingdom with spiritual wisdom and understanding, in preserving the same for
many years, and in induing your majesties subjects more and more with true
knowledge of him, for his sons sake our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen.

The Oration ended, there was a certain monument presented to her princely
Majesty, in the upper part whereof, was artificially graven the history of
Iosephus out of Genesis.

In the compass thereof was this verse.

To royal scepters, godliness,
Iosephus innocent,
Doth take, from brothers bloody hands, and murderers intent.
So thee, O Queen, the Lord hath led from prison and deceit
Of thine, unto these highest tops of your princely estate.
In the inner part of the same, there was the figure of a serpent,
enterfolding it self: In the midst whereof did sit a dove with this sentence
of Christ, Mat. 10.16. Wise as the Serpent, and meek as the Dove.

The Wednesday towards evening, master Church-yard was likewise ready upon the
water with another devise, when her majesty was without the gates towards
mount Surrey, but weather hindered it so, as nothing was then done by him. But
as she returned homeward, within Bishops gate at the Hospital door, master
Stephan Limbert, master of the Grammar school in Norwich stood ready to
render her an Oration: her majesty drew near unto him, and thinking him
fearful, said graciously unto him: Be not afraid. He answered her again in
English: I thank your majesty, for your good encouragement: and then with
good courage entered into this Oration.

AEgyptum fama est inundante Nilo (serenissima Regina,) aureo Pactoli flumine
quotannis Lidiam irrigari, quaeres in ijs agris maxima faecunditatis causa
putatur: In nos autem at{que} adeo vniuersam Angliam, qua late patet, non e
Tmolo aut alijs nescio quibus montibus, sed ex illo perenni vberrimo font
bonitatis tuae, multi maximi{que} pietatis, iusliciae, mansuetudinis,
aliorum{que} innumerabilium bonorum, prae quibus jam viluit aurum obsoleuit,
coptos^ssimi riui profluxerunt. At{que} vt ex infinitis vel vnum leutter
attingam, propterca quod de pluribus dicere nec est huius loci temporis, nec
facultatis meae. Insignem illam misericordiam celsitudinis tuae, Nobilissima
Regina, ad leuandum pauperrimorum hominum inopiam incredibilem propensionem
(qua de plurimis virtutibus nulla deo gratior, (...) vt canit Homerus, (...).
tantamigitur benignitatem, tam eximiam, incredibilem misericordiam tua,
(illustrissima Princeps) quibus complectemur studijs? quibus officijs, aut qua
voce grati animi voluntatem testificabimur? Cum enim omnes referendae gratiae
studio labore, vel accuratissimas rationes exquisiuerimus, no uni us quidem
huius beneficij, quo nos augustissimae maiestati tuae obstrictos esse deuinctos
agnoscimus, magnitudinem assequi poterimus. Superabimur vel ab hoc la
singulari merito, nedum sperandum est, vt immenso reliquorum meritorum pelago,
quod tum in omnes tibi subditos public, generatim, tum in hanc ciuitate
proprie ac particulatim exundauit, pares esse queamus. Vere nos jam (...)
incolimus, in beatis illis insulis de quibus meminit Hesiodus (...) aetatem
agimus, qui non modo frugibus, lana, pecore, alijs{que} subsidijs humanae
vitae, sed multo magis verae religionis verbi{que} diuini, in quibus animi
solis acquiescunt preciosissimis opibus abundamus. Sunt qui Britanniam alterum
orbem appellauerunt, quod hac aetate nostra dici rectissime posse arbitror, Cum
enivi omnes vndi{que} terrae grauissimis bellis affligantur, discordiarum
iactentur fluctibus, soli nos, celsitudine tua clanum moderante, in pacatissimo
portu nauigamus, ab orb malorum disiuncti, in caelu quodammodo foelicitatis
sublati videmur. Quod est ergo officij nostri, primu deo Opt. Max. gratias
agimus, cuius vnius bonitati omnem hanc, quantacun{que} est, be atitudinem
acceptam referimus, precamur{que} vt cam nobis propriam perpetuam esse velit:
deinde celsitudini tuae, serenissima Regina, cuius opera, cura, solicitudine,
partam hanc nobis foelicitatem tot annos conseruatam agnoscimus. Laetamur hoc
aspectu tuo, gratulamur incredibili studio, quod tum ex meo ipsius sensu
loquor, tum omnes qui jam vndi{que} confluxerunt Nordouicenses tui a me dici
postulant. At{que} vtinam in haec pectora posses oculos inserere, occultos
animoru nostrorum sinus perlustrare, videres profecto inclusam intus, quae
tantis angustijs erumpere non potest, infinitam molem voluntatis. Fidem omnem,
studium, obseruantiam, quae tantae Principi debentur, vt hactenus promptissime
detulimus, ita studiosissime semper deferemus, si quando casus aliquis
inciderit (quod Deus omen auertat) vt sacrosanctae maiestatis tuae, aut istius
florentissimi regni vel salus in discrimen veniat, vel dignitas periclitetur,
non solum bonorum omniu ac facultatum effusionem, sed laterum nostrorum
oppositus corporum pollicemur. Rogamus deinde obsecramus excellentiam tuam,
illustrissima Regina, vt hoc nostrum qualecun{que} officium a summa
beneuolentia animo{que} quam gratissimo profectu boni consulas, de nobis
Nordouicensibus sic existimes, ad lautiores te fortasse subditos venisse saepe,
ad laetiores nunquam.

IT is reported (most gracious Queen,) that Egypt is watered with the
yearly overflowing of Nilus, and Lidia with the golden stream of Pactolus,
which thing is thought to be the cause of the great fertility of these
countries: but upon us, farther, over all Englande, even in the uttermost
borders many and maine rivers of godliness, justice, humility, and other
innumerable good things, in comparison of the which, gold is vile nought
worth, do most plentifully gush out, and those not from Tmolus, or other hills
I know not which, but from that continual and most abundant welspring of
your goodness. And that of those infinite goodnesses I may lightly touch one,
for that neither place, time, nor my faculty doth permit to speak of many:
with what praises shall we extol: with what magnificent words shall we
express that notable mercy of your highness, most renowned Queen,
uncredible readiness to relieve the need of poor men, then the which of many
virtues none can be more acceptable unto God, as Homer writes, neither any
virtue in a mighty Prince more wondered at amongst men. This hospital of
poor men is most famous, which will be a monument of princely virtue and
beneficence amongst all posterity, instituted by the most mighty King Henry
your highness father, confirmed with the great seal, by the most noble King
Edward your brother, but by your majesty which deserves no less praise, of
late notably increased and amplified by the lands possessions of Cringleforde,
that you may not now worthily rejoice so much in others ornaments, as your
own virtues. For you are said for your singular wisdom and learning, to
have studied that divine law of the most wise Plato, which he left written in
the eleventh book of laws. Such your great bounty therefore, so exceeding,
and incredible mercy (O most virtuous Prince) in what books shall we
comprehend? with what duties, or with what voice shall we testify the good
will of a thankful mind? For when we diligently seek all the most
exquisite and curious means of thanksgiving: we cannot so much as attain
unto the greatness of this one benefit, by the which we acknowledge our
selves bound straightly holden to your most royal majesty. We shall be
overcome, even with this one and singular benefit, so much the less hope
have we then in any point to countervail the huge Sea of the rest of thy
benefits which overflows on every side as well publicly and generally over
all thy Subjects, as properly and particularly upon this City. We certainly
now inhabit, and lead our lives in those most happy Lands of the which
Hesiodus makes mention, which not only abound with all manner of grain,
woll, cattle, and other aids of mans life, but much more with the most
precious treasure of true religion and the word of God, in the which only the
minds of men have rest and peace. There be that call Englande another world,
which I think may be most true in this our age: For whereas all lands on
every side of us are afflicted with most grievous wars, tossed with the
floods of dissention, we only, your highness governing our sterne, do sail
in a most peaceable haven, and severed from the world of mischiefs, do seem
after a sort to be taken up into a heaven of happiness. We therefore,
according to our bounden duty, first give thanks unto God Almighty, unto
whose goodness only with thanks we refer all this our happiness, howe
great soever it be, and pray that he would vouchesafe to make the same proper
and perpetual unto us. And afterwards, unto your highness, (O most gracious
Queen) by whose study, care and diligence we confess this blessedness to be
gotten, so many years preserved unto us.

We are glad in this beholding you, and we rejoice with desire more than may be
believed, which as I speak of mine own thought, so also all these subjects
of Norwich desire me to say the same in their behalf. And I would to God you
could pearce these our breasts with your eyes, and thoroughly view the hidden
and covered creeks of our minds: then undoubtedly should you behold an
infinite heap of good will closely shut up within, which cannot break out
of so narrow straights. All the faith, study, and obedience, which are due to
so great a Prince, as hitherto we have most willingly employed, so will we
always most diligently perform the same: and if at any time any chance
shall happen (which fortune God turn from us) that the state of thy blessed
majesty or of this flourishing realm should come in danger, or the
worthiness thereof be in hazard, we do not only protest the effusion of all
our goods and substance, but also the putting forth and brunt of our
strengthes and bodies therein. Finally we desire and beseech thy excellency
(most renowned Queen) well to accept of this our duty, howe soever it be,
proceeding from a singular good will, and a most thankful mind, and so to
think of us Citizens of Norwich, that perhaps you have many times com to people
more wealthy, but to more joyful never.

(...) Immediately after the beginning of the Oration, her Majesty called to her
the French Ambassadors, whereof there were iij. and diverse English Lords,
willed them to harken, and she herself was very attentive, even until the end
thereof. And the Oration ended, after she had given great thanks therefore to
Master Lymbert, she said to him: It is the best that ever I heard, you shall
have my hand, and pulled off her glove, and gave him her hand to kiss, which
before kneeling on his knee, he arose and kissed, then she departed to the
Court, without any other show that night, but that she sent back to know his
name.

The next night being Thursdaye, there was an excellent Princely Mask brought
before her after Supper, by Master Goldingham in the Privy Chamber, it was of
Gods Goddesses, both strangely and richly apparelled.

The first that entered was MERCVRIE.

Then entered two Torch-bearers in Purple Taffeta Mandilions laid with silver
lace, as all other the Torchberers were.

Then entered a consort of Music, viz six Musicians, all in long vestures of
white Sarcenet girded about them, and garlands on their heads playing very
cunningly.

Then two Torch-bearers more.

The IVPITER and IVNO.

Then two Torch bearers more.

Then MARS and VENVS.

Then two Torch bearers more.

Then APOLLO and PALLAS.

Then two Torch-bearers.

Then NEPTVNE DIANA: And last comes CVPIDO concludes y^ matter. Thus when they
had once marched about the chamber, MERCVRIE discharges his message in these
words to the Queen.

The good meaning Mayor, and al his brethren, with the rest, have not rested
from praying unto the Gods to prosper thy coming hither, and the Gods
themselves moved by their unfeigned prayers, are ready in person to bid thee
worthily welcome, and I MERCVRIE the God of Merchantes and Merchandise, and
therefore a favourer of these Citizens, being thought meetest and chosen
fittest to signify the same. Gods there be also which cannot come, being tied
by the time of the year, as CERES in Harvest, BACCHVS in Wines, POMENA in
Orchards. Only HIMINEVS denies his good will, either in presence, or in
person: notwithstanding, DIANA hath so countrechecked him therefore, as he
shall ever hereafter be at your commandment. For my part, as I am a reioycer
at your coming, so am I a furtherer of your welcome hither, and for this time
I bid you farewell.


Fear not oh Queen, thou art beloved so,
As Subjects true, will truly thee defend:
Fear not my power to overthrow thy wo,
I am the God that can each miss amend.
Thou doest know, great IVPITER am I,
That gave thee first thy happy Sovereignty.
I give thee still, as ever thou haste had,
A peerless power, unto thy dying day:
I give thee rule to overcome the bad,
And love, to love thy loving Subjects aye.
I give thee here this small and slender wand,
To show, thou shalt in quiet rule the Land.

IS IVNO rich? no sure she is not so
She wants that wealth, that is not wanting here,
Thy good gets thee friends, my wealth wins many a foe,
My riches rustes, thine shyne passing clear.
Thou art beloved of Subjects far and ny,
Which is such wealth as money cannot bye.
Farewell fair Queen, I cannot give thee aught,
Nor take away thy good that is so bound:
Thou can not give, that I so long have sought,
No can I hold the riches thou hast found.
Yet take this gift, though poor I seem to be,
That thou thy self shalt never poorer be.

where force doth fiercely seek to foster wrong,
There MARS doth make him make a quick recoil,
Nor can endure that he should harbour long,
Where naughty wights manure in goodly soil,
This is the use that aids the force of War,
That MARS doth mend, that force doth seek to mar.
And though oh Queen thou be a Prince of peace,
Yet shalt thou have me fastly sure at need:
The storms of strife, and blustering broils to cease,
Which foreign foes, or faythlesse friends may breed.
To conquer, kill, to vanquish and subdue,
Such feigned folk, as loves to live untrue.

These words were graven on those Knyues.

To hurt your foe, and help your friend,
These Knyues are made unto that end.
Both blunt and sharpe you shall us find,
As pleases best your Princely mind.
IN vain (fair Queen) from Heaven my coming was,
To seek tamend that is no way amiss:
For now I see thy favour so doth pass,
That none but thou, thou only she it is,
Whose beauty bids each wight to look on thee,
By view they may an other VENVS see.
Where beauty boastes, and favour doth not fail,
What may I give to thee O worthy wight?
This is my gift, there shall no woe prevail,
That seeks thy will, against thy wills delight,
Not where they will, but where it likes thy mind,
Accept that friend, if loyal thou him find.

IT seems strange to see such strangers here,
Yet not so strange, but strangers knows you well:
Your virtuous thoughts to Gods do plain appear,
Your acts on earth bewrays how you excel:
You cannot die, Love here hath made your lease,
Which Gods have sent, and God says shall not cease.
Virtuous desire desired me to sing,
No Subjects suit, though suitors they were all,
APOLLOS gifts are subjects to no King,
Rare are thy gifts, that did APOLLO call,
Then still rejoice, since God and Man say so,
This is my gift, thou never shalt have woe.

MOst worthy wight, what wouldste thou have of me?
Thou haste so much, thou can enjoy no more:
I cannot give, that once I gave to thee,
Nor take away thy good I gave before.
I robbed was by Natures good consent
Against my will, and yet I was content.
A PALLAS thou, a Princess I will be:
I Queen of loss, thou Goddess which haste got:
I sometime was, thou only now art she,
I take, thou gave that luck that was my lot,
I give not thee this Book to learn thee aught,
For that I know already thou art taught.

WHat art thou (Queen) that Gods do love thee so?
Who won their wills to be so at thy will?
How can the world become thy cruel foe?
How can DISDAIN or MALICE seek to kill?
Can Sea or Earth devise to hurt thy hap,
Since thou by Gods doest sit in Fortunes lap.
As Heaven and Earth have vowed to be thine,
So NEPTVNES Seas have sworn to drench thy foes,
As I am God, and all the waters mine,
Still shalt thou get, but never shalt thou lose:
And since on Earth my wealth is nought at all,
Accept good will, the gift is very small.

WHo ever found on Earth a constant friend,
That may compare with this my Virgin Queen?
Who ever found a body and a mind
So free from stain, so perfect to be seen,
Oh Heavenly hew, that aptest is to soil,
And yet dost live from blot of any foil
Rare is thy gift* and given to few or none,
Malist therefore of some that dare not say,
More shines thy light, for that I know but one,
That any such show, to follow on their way.
Thou thou art she, take thou the only praise,
For chastest Dame in these our happy days:
Accept my Bow, since best thou dost deserve,
Though well I know thy mind can thee preserve.

AH ha, I see my mother out of sight,
Then let the boy now play the wag a while,
I seem but weak, yet weak is not my might,
My boyishe wit can oldest folk beguile.
Who so doth think, I speak this but in jest,
Let me but shoot, and I shall quench his rest,
Mark here my shafts: This all is made of would,
Which is but soft, and breeds but soft goodwill.
Now this is guilte, yet seems it gold full good,
And doth deceive blind loving people still.
But here is one is seldom felt or seen:
This is of Gold, meet for the noblest Queen.
Wherefore Dame fair, take thou this gift of me,
Though some deserve, yet none deserve like you,
Shoot but this shaft at King or Caesar: He,
And he is thine, and if thou wilt allow.
It is a gift, that many here would crave,
Yet none, but thou, this golden Shaft may have.

There was written upon the shaft.

My Colour Joy, my Substance Pure,
My Virtue such as shall endure.
Goldingham.
SIr Majesty received these gifts very thankfully, the Gods and Goddesses with
the rest of the mask marched about^ the Chamber again, and then departed in
like manner as they came in. Then the Queen called to her Master Robert Wood,
the Mayor of Norwich, whom first the heartily thanked: and toke by the hand,
and used secret conference, but what, I know not. And thus this delightful
night passed, to the joy of all which saw her Grace in so pleasant plight.

The next day being Friday in which day the Course removed, the Streets
towards Saint Benets gates, were hanged, from the one side to the other, with
cords made of herbs and flowers, with Garlands, Coronets, Pictures, rich
clothes, and a thousand devices. At the gates themselves, there was a stage
made, very richly apparelled with cloth of Gold, crimsen velvet, whereupon in
a close place made thereon for the purpose, was placed very sweet Music: and
one ready to tender her this speech following. The doleful hour of her
departure came, she passed from the Court, to those gates, with such
countenances, both of her Majesties part, and her Subjects, now dolorous,
now cheerful, as plainly showed the loving harts of both sides: when she
came there, the speech was thus uttered unto her.

Terrestrial Joys are tied with sclender ^ile,
Each happy hap full hastily doth slyde,
As Summer season lasts but a while,
So Winter storms do longer time abide:
Alas what bliss can any time endure?
Our Sunshine day is dashte with sudden shower.
Could tongue express our secret joys of hart,
(Oh mighty Prince) when thou did come in place?
No no God wot, nor can express the smart
Thy Subjects feel in this departing case.
But gracious Queen, let here thy Grace remain
In gracious wise, till thy return again.
In lieu' whereof, receive thy Subjects hearts,
In fixed Faith continually thine own:
Who ready rest to lose their vital parts
In thy defence, when any blast is blown.
Thou art our Queen, our rock and only stay,
We are thine own to serve by night and day.
Farewell oh Queen, farewell oh Mother dear,
Let IACOBS God thy sacred body guarde:
All is thine own that is possessed here,
And all in all is but a small reward
For thy great grace, God length thy life like NO,
To govern us, and eke thy Realm in Joy. AMEN.
B. G.
Then with the Music in the same place was song this short Ditty following,
in a very sweet voice.

WHat vayleth life, where sorrow soakes the heart?
Who fears Death that is in deep distress?
Release of life doth best abate the smart
Of him, whose woes are quite without redress.
Lend me your tears, resign your sighs to me,
Help all to wail the dolor which you see.
What have we done, she will no longer stay?
What may we do to hold her with us still?
She is our Queen, we subjects must obey.
Grant, though with grief to her departing will.
Conclude we then, and sing with sobbing breath,
God length thy life, (oh Queen ELIZABETH.)
B. G.
THen departed her Majesty out of the gates, within a flight shot or little
more whereof, Master Churchyard had another show, which I leave to himself
to utter: because my hope is, he will manifest that amongst the rest
shortly.

This finished, her Majesty in Princely manner marched towards the confines
of the liberties of the City of Norwich, which I suppose almost two miles:
before she came there, Master Mayor brake to my Lord Chamberlaine, that he
was to utter to her Majesty an other Oration, whereof my Lord seemed to have
good liking: but before they came to the said confines, Master Mayor was
willed to forbear the utterance of the same his Oration, because it was about
vij. of the clock, and her Majesty had then five miles to ride. Nevertheless
he gave to her Majesty both his Orations in writing, which she thanked him
for. She also thanked the Mayor, every Alderman, and the Commoners, not only
for the great cheer they had made her, but also for the open households they
kept to her highness servant, and al other. Then she called Master Mayor
made him Knight: so departing, said: I have laid up in my breast such good will,
as I shall never forget Norwich, and proceeding onward did shake her riding rod
and said: Farewell Norwich, with the water stading in her eyes: In which great
good will towards us all, I beseech God to continue her Majesty with long and
triumphant reign over us all. AMEN.

QVae venietia lata sunt, ea cu recedunt solent esse tristiora. Quid enim
(Sum Deus) potuit hic Sol vsquam conspicere beatius, quam nos videbamur
nobis, vel cum hic primum (Serenissima Princeps) Maiestatis tuae splendour
illuxerit: vel reliquo hoc perexiguo sane tempore quo in tua praesentia,
tanquam in omnium rerum falicissima vbertat^ conquteuimus: Sed vae illi rerum
humanarum vicissitudini, quae nihil illibatum, nihil aeternum patitur: ita
voluptas tristitiam trahit, letitiam nostram dolor no excipit solum: sed
acerbissime intercipit: Ita vt, qui nuper accidentem te lautitijs omnibus
excepimus: abeuntem nunc, si id pateretur Amplitudinis tuae tanti comitaetus
celebritas, pullatis vestibus prosequeremur. Tati d^loris causam si postules,
nescio quid suae Maiestatis personae tuae Deus indidit, quod summa tui
Reuerentia aamirabilis cui^sdam amoris plena e^citat, quo fit vt agree pattamur
nos a te devils. Accedit quod vtcun{que} Amplitudini tuae visi sum^ (quae tua
est clementiae) omne gratitudinis officio satisfecisse: nobis tamen ipsis
nondum satisfecimus, nec vnquam sane satisfacturi sum^s. Longioris tamen
temperis vsuram optaremus, si id comodum esset, vt si no maius, at certe
diuturnius specimen vel obedienciae, velamoris nostri exhiberemus. Sed
voluntati tuae vtilitati public^ cedendum est: quam te velle semper, in omnibus
spectare satis nobis magno cum emclumento nostro est compertum. I nunc igitur,
i pede farsto, quo tua te virtus la. Nes autem vel hoc ipsum abunde
consolabitur, (qu^d immortales gratias, perpetua rei memoriam meretur) Te
principem post omnium memoriam praestatissimam dignatam nostres lares tam
humaniter inuisisse. Postremum hoc eri^, nos hic coram te, quam Dominus vnxie,
at{que} omni hac celebritate Deum nunc intuentem testari in a^imas nostra^, nos
fidem obedientia in illo, nostram tibi vns inperpetuum reseruaturos. Tu
Religionis nutrix, Reipublicae matter, Principum decu^, Subditorum solacium,
falicissime (nellem dicere) Vale.

THose things which at their coming are joyful, when they depart are the
more sorrowful. For what (o mighty God) could this Sun at any time behold more
happy, than we did seem to our selves, either when first (o most merciful
Prince) the brightness of thy Majesty did here shine out, or else in all the
time we rested in your presence, as in a paradise or most happy abundance of
all things. But woe to that changeable course of human things, which
suffers nothing incorrupt, nor any thing eternal* so pleasure brings after
it sadness, and grief doth not only suddenly take away our delights, but
most bitterly cut of the same. So that we that lately received thee approaching
with all joys: should follow thee departing (if the renown of your highness
and train would suffer it) with mourning garments. If you demand the cause of
so great sorrow, I know not what part of his Majesty God hath endued your
person withal, which doth stir up great reverence of thee, but full of a
certain wonderful love, whereby it comes to pass that we hardly suffer our
selves to be severed from your presence. Add moreover, that we seem after a
sort unto your highness (such is your clemency) to have satisfied every
point of gratefulness: yet have we not, nor ever shall we satisfy our selves
in that behalf. We would wish a longer use of time (if it were profitable)
that we might express, if not a greater, yet a more continual show of our
love and obedience. But we must both yield to your pleasure, and to the common
wealth, for that we know assuredly to our great and singular adu^uncement, you
never cease to seek out and afoord the same to all your subjects. Go now
therefore, go with lucky steppe thither, whether thy virtue calls thee. And
for us, this shall comfort us abundantly (which deserves both immortal
thanks and perpetual memory) that thou so renowned a Prince, hast vouchsafed
so courteously to visit our dwellinges. And finally, we here before thee, whom
God hath anointed, and before all this famous assembly, take God (which now
beholds us) to our witness, that we will keep our faith and obedience in
him to thee only for ever. Thou Nurse of religion, Mother of the Common
Wealth, Beauty of Princes, Solace of thy Subiecte^, most happily (oh how I
rue to speak it) Farewell.

SCribit Gellius in noctibus Atticis, Eminentissima Princeps, Phauorinum
Philosophum dixisse, nunc matrem esse diem, nunc esse never cam, hunc versum
longo hominum aeuo probatu sermonibus suis vsurpasse, (...). Quem ipse Gellius
ita interpretatur, dolorum ac voluptatum esse vicissitudines, non omni dic been
esse posse, sed isto been, atque alio male. Nihil autem nec venustius vnquam
nec verius dictum fuisse, tum perpetua rerum humanarum volubilit as, crebrae
mutationes indicant, tum hodiernus dies fidem f^cit amplissimam. Non enim tam
recreauit nos e diuturno me roar atque desyderio laetissimus ille aduentus
celsitudinis tuae, quam isto quem vndi{que}jam parari videmus discessu
exanimamur, vt{que} ^mnium aetatum atque ordinum infiniti plausus gratulationes
venientem exceperunt: ita nemo est qui non discedentem etiam luctu ^achrymis
prosequatur. Equidem vt de me ipso loquar, la meus mihi notissimus est
animus, nunquam me duriorem prouinciam sustinuisse profiteor, quam est haec
imposita mihi hoc tempore, no solum vt affarar cruditissimam principem, quod
tamen per se arduum est difficile, sed multo magis vt hoc tristi acerbo
valedicendi munere defungerer. Quis enim non vchementer indolueris breuissimo
tempore ac veluti (...) vidisse se quod maxim concupierat, ereptum ante quam
eo penitus perfrui liceret? Quam luctuosum est, lactentes infantulos ab
vberibus matrum charissimis amplexibus diuelli? A patribus filios quibus vnice
diliguntur grauio^i aliquo casu separari? Nullis tamen mortalibus arbitror
naturam tantos amores tantam beneuolentiam, aut in cos quos procrearunt
ingenerasse, aut a quibus sunt procreati, quanta est ea qua nos omnes
celsitudinem tuam comunem, videlicet parentem patriae, suspicimus, colimus,
veneramur. Magna vis est amicitiae necessitudinis, quae saepe facit, vt qui vel
societate aliqua, vitae{que} consuetudine aliquandiu coniuncti fuerint, ita
cohaereant animis quasi coalescant: vt a se inuicem distrahi atque disiungi
molestissime serant. Hinc Theseasides omnium ore ac literis celebrata,
aliorum{que} innumerabilium arctissima necessitudo, quos nulla peris cula,
nulli terra mari{que} labores, ab eorum quibus conuixissent suauissim^ Comitatu
depellere potuerunt. Quae autem tanta studia, tanti ardores animo^um vsquam
reperti sunt, qui nostris erga te praestantissima Princeps synceris minim{que}
fucatis voluntatibus conferantur? Non satis ostendunt ista fidem beneuolentiam
nostram, mayor est quam vel cuiusquam eruditissimi copia, nedum huius ingenij
mei mediocritate possit illustrari. Nullas vnquam res arctiori nexu maiori
concordia, quam animum corpus natura colligauit, quod in vita declarat
incredibilis illoru conspiratio, sibi{que} mutu^ subueniendi cura, in morte
grauissima distractio. Nos autem qui Christianam religionem ac pietate
profitemur, multo magis quam illi Decij, Scaeuolae, Curtij, qui se pro Republic.
Romana denouisse dicuntur, patriam, cam qua patriae salus continetur etiam vita
nostra chariorem habere didicimus. Quis enim est qui pro ea dubitet mortem
oppetere, quae si non esset, grauiorem morte seruitutem perpeti cogeretur?
Neque vero est haec pietas tuorum animis leuiter infixa, quasi summo fundata
solo, Illustrissima Regina, sed altis nixa radicibus qua nullis fortunae
procellis ac tempestatibus concuti, nullis subuerti machinis, nullo impetu
expugnari potest. Quantum enim facit ad amoris fidei stabilitatem, quod sciamus
celsitudinem tuam non arbitrio vacillantis fortunae, sediure haereditario, hoc
est (...) dominationem imperium obtinuisse, nec Homericum tibi Iouem (...), sed
verum illum rerum omnium opificem fabricatorem in manu^ tradidisse? ac
propterea summam esse nobis parendi necessitatem etiam diuinitus impositam, no
Gyganteo more (...), vt est in fabulis, ipfi{que} Deo sceleratissime bellum
indicere videamur. Quid cum perspiciamus quantis quam{que} diuinis rempub
meritis aff^cerit celsitudo tua vtiam ex innumerabilibus terris ac gentibus
quae soli subiectae sunt, nulla, non dicam, anteferrinobis, sed ^e comparari
quidem possit. Non ad illam parend^legem necessitatem summam etiam oporter
voluntatem accedere? Quid enim referam vigintiiam totos annos in tanta nos
pace, tanta tranquillirate vixisse, quantam non solum haec aetas nunquam vidit,
sed no omnium quidem seculorum ac gentium annals vetustatis{que} monumenta
memoriae prodiderunt? Quid commemorem lunge velut e specula prospectas
tempestates, praeuisa simul anticipata censilio grauissima pericula,
clandestinas insidias non tam vi quam art obrutas, omnes deni{que} nefari^s
conatus maximo cum applausis extinctos, nullo aut sane perexiguo mo^um
populari? Facerent ista quidem vt qualiscun{que} esses, omnem tamen fidem
beneuolentiam maiestati tuae libentissimis animis praestaremus. I am vero cum
mitissimam te clementissimam principem habeamus, quae in summa potestate
constitut^ no tantillum quidem ab aequitate modo{que} recedis, quis est tam
ferus ac ferreus, quem non ad omnem obseruantiam tantae virtutis inuitarent?
Quare si firmissima sit custodia principum fides, subditorum, quemadmodum
prudentissimos sensisse viros accepimus, quid potest tutius esse securius
excellentia tua, quam tanta tuorum studia muniuerunt? Extraxi longius orationem
meam, Nobilissima Regina, vt paulo diutius frueremur vsurae incundissimi
conspectus tui, quem non fine maxima molestia grauissimo{que} dolor amissuri
sumus. Sed quia ferenda sors est quae vitari non potest, no profectionem tua
plus aequo remorari videar dum obsequi studeo cupiditati nostrae, finem
dicendifacia. Tuam vero Maiestate quam ex oculis nostris hodiernus dies eripiet
animis tame voluntatibus prosequemur, absentem semper intuebimur, legibus
mandatis studiosissime obtemperabimus, salutem deni{que} incolumitatem tuam
quae nostra etiam salus continetur, Deo Opt. Max. assiduis precibus quam
diutissime tuendam conseruandam commendabimus.

GEllius in his Noctibus Atticis (most excellent Princess) doth write, that
it was the saying of Phaeuorinus the Philosopher, that the day was one while a
mother, another while a stepdame: and that he used this verse, long time
allowed, among men, in his accustomed communication, (...). Which verse
Gellius in this manner expounds: That of sorrows pleasures there be changes,
that it cannot be well every day with us, but this day well, and that day i'll.
And surely, that nothing hath bin at any time more gallantly or truly spoken,
both the continual course of mans uncertain estate, and the often alterations
where he is subject, manifestly declare, beside that, this present day gives
evident proof thereof. For, the most joyful coming of your highness, did
not so much recreate and comfort us in our daily desire and longing, as we
are discouraged by this your departing, whereto we see preparation made on al
hands. And as all ages and degrees received your Majesty, with joy and gladness
at your coming: so there is not one but laments and mourns at your graces
going. And doubtless for my part, because mine own hart is best known to my
self, I protest that I never took upon me a greater charge, then that,
wherewith at this present I am burdened: not only to speak face to face with
a most learned lady and princess, which notwithstanding is, of it self, a
harde and a busy matter: but, which is much more, that to me is befall the
sad and sorrowful office of leave taking. For, who would not be exceedingly
grieved, to see the thing which he principally desired, in a very short
time, and as it were (...), at an instant taken away, before he might have
thereof full fruition? How lamentable a thing is it, to pull away sucking babes
from the breasts and bosoms of their most loving mothers? That sons and
fathers, through some miserable misfortune, should be sundered? Yet I
notwithstanding am of opinion, that nature hath not engendered in any ma, such
large love, and so great good will, no not toward them whom they have
begotten, or of whom they themselves have been begotten, as is the love and
good will wherewith we advance, obey, and reverence your Majesty, being the
mother and nurse of this whole Common wealth, and Country. Great is the force
of friendship and familiarity, which oftentimes brings to pass, that
they, which either by some kind of fellowship, or by an accustomed condition
of life, in tract of time have bin closely knit, and so become both of one
mind, and as it were grown together, that hard and scant they may be
separated, set in sunder. Hereof sprang the faithfulness of Theseus, commended
by the mouth and monuments of all men: and the entier friendship of
innumerable more, who no dangers, nor labours, either by sea or land, could
sequester from their sweet society comfortable company, with whom they long
had lived. And what desires, or what delights have any where bin found, that
may be compared with the sincere affection, and unfeigned good will, which we
bear to your Highness, most excellent Princess? These are not sufficient
shows of our faith and benevolence, which is much greater, than that the
eloquence of any learned man, or that the slenderness of my wit and
capacity may make it manifest. Nature at no time tied any thing with a
straighter knot, or set several things at greater agreement, than the soul
and the body: a declaration whereof is, the incredible consent and concorde of
the both, the mutual care and regard of succouring each other resting in the
both: and the grievous departing, at the hour of death, the one fro the other
remaining in them both. But we which profess Christian religion and
godliness, have learned this lesson, not only to love our country, but also
her highness, in whom the health and safety of our country consists, far
above the valiant Decij, the Scaeuolae the Curtij, which ventured their lives
for the Common wealth of Rome: yea, to love her grace much better than our own
lives. For, what is he that would doubt to dye for her sake, who if she were
not, he should be constrained to abide a bondage much more bitter than death?
Neither is this faithful love of us your subjects (most excellent Queen)
lightly laid up in our hearts, and scarcely covered as it were in the ground,
but deeply rooted, so that by no storms nor tempests of Fortune it can be
shaken, by no engines overthrown, by no force or violence vndertroden. For how
much makes it for the establishment of faith and love, in that we know your
Majesty hath obtained regimente and rule, not at the pleasure and appoyntmente
of wavering Fortune, but by right of inheritance, that is to say, (...): nor
that the Homericall Iuppiter (...), but that the maker and Creator of all
things delivered it into your Highness hands? And therefore a singular
necessity of obedience is laid upon us, even by God himself, least in Giant
guise as it is feigned, we set shoulder against God, and being at defiance with
him most wickedly, bid him battle. When we behold those excellent and
divine benefits, which your grace has bestowed upon the common wealth, in
so much that among many, yea innumerable Countries, and nations under the
Sun, none (I will not say may be preferred before us) but not so much as
one may be compared with us. Ought not then a singular love and good will to
be linked with that law, and necessity of obedience? For what should I make
rehearsal of full twenty years, wherein we have lived in such peace and
tranquillity, as not only this our age hath never seen the like, but as in
old records and ancient Chronicles of all ages and people, is no where
mentioned? What should I call to memory hurlyburlies foreseen a far off,
as from an espyall: exceeding great dangers, not only perceived by wisdom,
but also prevented by counsel: secrete snares, and privy practises
disappointed, not to much by violence, as by policy: finally, all Treacherous
attempts, and Rebellious enterprises, with great gladness and reioicing
extinguished, without any tumult at all, or very little (doubtless) ensuing
among the people? These things might make us (although your Grace were
otherwise than you are) perform all duty of faith and love, with most willing
minds to your Majesty. Now, for so much as we have your highness, our
merciful and bountiful Sovereign, who possessing principality and royal
regimente, doest not swerve an hears breadth from justice and equity, what is
he for a man so savage and obstinate, whom these so singular and rare virtues
may not allure to all love and allegiance? Wherefore, if the surest safety of
Princes is the faith of their subjects (as we have heard very wise men hold
opinion) what can be more safe, what can be more sure, than your excellency,
which the studies and endeauoures of your people, being so great, have fenced
and fortified? I have made mine Oration the longer (most noble Queen) to the
intent we might the longer enjoy your comfortable presence, from the which, to
our great grief and sorrow, we shall depart. But because luck must be borne,
which can not be avoided, least I might seem more than is meet to delay your
Graces progress, whiles I am in hand to please mine own humour, I will make
an end. Concerning your Majesty, whose presence this day will shut from our
sight, we will notwithstanding in your absence behold and reverence, we will
love your Highness with all our hearts, minds, and endeauoures: we will
most dutyfully obey your Graces Laws and Commandments. Finally, your
Majesties good estate (whereupon likewise our safety depends) we will
commend to Almighty God in our daily Prayers, that the same a long time may
be continued, and also preserved. Amen.

SPlendide Phoebe redi, cur te sub nube recondis?
Innuba Pallas adest, splendide Phoebe redi.
Hasta minax procul est, non Gorgonis or a videbis,
Pallas inermis adest, splendide Phoebe redi.
Scilicet a tanto metuis tibi lumine forsan:
No superet radios foemina Phoebe tuos.
Pulcher Apollo tibi no sit Regina rulori:
Ipse decor tuo vincis, illa suo.
Euge redux reducem quia pulsa nocte reducis
Phoebe diem: toto est gratius orb nihil.
Haec pepulit tetri tenebras noctem{que} papismi,
Et liquidum retulit relligione diem.
Euge nigras nebulas radijs quia saepe repellis
Phoebe tuis: paene est gratius orb nihil.
Texuerant remoras discrimina mill Papistae:
No ceptum Princeps continuaret iter:
Nec tamen hunc nebulae potuerunt condere Solemn:
Quanuis tu nebulis cedis Apollo tuis.
Ergo iubar nostrum repulisse obstacula cernis:
Sic age, Sol nebulas lumine pelle tuo.
Splendide Phoebe redi, cur te sub nube recondis?
Innuba Pallas adest, splendide Phoebe redi.
SVstinet, ornat, habet, regnum, literaria, formam,
Prouida, docta, decens, Iuno, Minerua, Venus.
Singula dona trium simul ELIZABETHA Dearum
Prouida, docta, decens, sustinet, ornat, habet.
Esse Deas lusi: Diuinam dicimus istam:
Quamuis nec liceat nec libet esse Deam.
IN shadowing clouds why art thou closed? o Phoebus bright retire:
Vnspoused Pallas present is, o Phoebus bright retire.
The threatening spear is flung far off, doubt not grim Gorgons ire:
Unarmed Pallas present is, o Phoebus bright retire.
Perhaps thou art afraid: And why? at this so large a light:
Least that a Woman should excel, thy beams (o Phoebus) bright.
Let not a Queen, a Virgin pure, which is, and ever was,
O fair Apollo, make thee blush: you both in beauty pass.
O Phoebus safe and sound return, which, banishing the nigh^,
Bring back the day: in all the world nothing of like delight.
She, only she, the darkness drove of Poprye quite away:
And, by Religion, hath restord the bright and lightsome day.
O Phoebus, with thy beams, which foylst the clouds both blind and black,
The world, in manner all, a thing of like delight doth lack.
A thousand dangers and delays, the Papists had devised,
To the end our Princess should abridge, her progress entreprisde:
Yet this our bright and shining sun, cast light through every cloud:
Although in clouds thou art content, Apollo, oft to shroud.
Thou see our Sun in comely course, cuts off each stop stay:
Do thou the like, and by thy light drive every cloud away.
In shadowing clouds why art thou closed? o Phoebus bright retire:
Vnspoused Pallas present is: o Phoebus bright retire.
Her kingdom all by providence, Queen Iuno doth uphold:
And of Minerua Lady learned, is learned lore extolled:
And Venus fair of countenance, hath beauty uncontrolled.
These sundry gifts of Goddesses three, Elizabeth possesses:
By providence her peoples peace, and comfort she increases:
Her learning, learning amplifies: her beauty never ceases.
I did but ieast, of Goddesses to give them three the name:
This Lady may thou Goddess call, for she deserves the same:
Although she will not undertake, a title of such fame.
GRaecia Alexandrum, praeclaros Roma triumphos
Caesatis eximij, fortem Britannia Brennum
Arthurum{que} canit, Permul^os Anglia reges
Edidit inuictos summo quos aequat Olympo.

Ergo nihil maius? superant haec omnia laude^
Virgineae, semper mirabitur Anglia nomen
ELIZABETHA tuum, famam{que} ad la tollet
Donec brumali concrescet frigore tellus.
Donec aestiuis candescet solibus ether
Tempora nulla tuae capient obliuia laudis.

Innumeras Macedo gentes sua sub iuga misit
Et totum qua terra patet fortissimus orbem
Imperio parere suo, virtute subegit
Et doluit quod non alius superesset orbis
Quem bello peteret, rigidis sterneret armis.
Quis referat, tua quanta fuit celeberrime Caesar
Gloria, cuitoties deuictis hostibus vrbem
Ingresso, proceres clar^s statuere triumphos?
Aurato quoties, curru deuectus in arcem
Romanae genti spectacula laeta dedisti?
Roma recens Brenni funestis ignibus arsit
Nobilis Arthurus Pictos dare terga coegit
Saxoneas{que} manus, f^cit jam regia virtus
Anglorum nomen quam formidabile Gallis?
O memoranda mihi bello quae fama paratur.

Vera quidem narras, nec enim mihi carper laudes
Tantorum procerum magno discrimine partas
Nec vafre tenebras inducere fortibus ausis
Est animus, Per me constet sua fama cui{que}.
Sed qui iustitia firmant legibus aequis
Imperium, Spaertam{que} suam conamine toto
Exornare student tutis finibus vti
Quanto maiores illi meruere triumphos?
Iura celebrantur plusquam Minoia bell^
Quis non praeponet Solomonia regna paternis?
Praetulit ipse Deus, qui non sua templa Dauidem
Belligerum voluit manibus fabricare cruentis.
Pacificus sacras extruxit filius aedes
Qui iusto sancto{que} sui moderamine regni
Clarus, in aeternum memori celebrabitur aeu^.
Quis non ante Numae foelicia tempora ponet
Romuleis bello rigidis? Quae denique possunt
Singula si lustres conferri secula nostris?
O memoranda mihi quae gloria pace paratur.

Sed me laurea delectat.


Me mitis oliua,


At pulchru multis dominari getibus.


Esto
(...).

Fortis memorabile nome
Magnanimi{que} ducis toto clarescit in orb.

Exiguas quantum stellas radiantia Phoebi
Lumina, sublustres tenebras lux alma diei:
Ciuilis tantum superat prudentia Martem.

Vis dirimat nostram Critici sententia litem?
Non etenim lingua tecum contendere pergam
Cui pugnae est assueta manus.

Placet, ergo loquatur
Et statuat finem Criticus certaminis huius
Ambiguas docte nouit componere lites.

Quis{que} suo trahitur studio, non omnibus idem
Est animus, la hunc tranquillae pacis, at illum
Martis horrifici delectat gloria belli,
Sed mea jam breuiter quae sit sententia dicam.
Foelix quilongo cruciatus membra dolor
Post multos noctu gemitus, suspicia luce
Amissas tandem vires animum{que} recepit.
Sed tamen hic quanto foelicior esset habendus
Languida si nunquam sensissent corpora morbum?
Cur geritur bellum laetae nisi pacis amore?
Quaesi consilio poterit, fatis{que} benignis
(...) seruari, bella facessant
Perpetuae mayor pacis quam gloria Martis
Si modo labe caret maculis nec spargitur vllis.

Stephani Limberti Carmen.
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
W. G.
ERgo tibi antiquae laudes, auita resurget
Gloria Norwice, veteris spe^ reddita famae est:
Nam{que} tuos Regina lares faelicibus intrat
Auspicijs, clarum{que} tuae Iubar intulit vrbi.
Magnum numen habes, quo nil augustius vsquam
Sol videt, aut ingens maius complectitur orbis.
Illa suis magnum verae pietatis amorem.
Restituit, sanctam{que} fidem sine fraud dolosa
Reddidit aeternis e fontibus: illa tumentem
Aequantem{que} Deo semet Regum{que} Tyrannum
Fregit, Inferno damnatum carcere mersit.
Perge pijs Animis dignas{que} euoluito grates,
Aduentum{que} sacrum Diuinae Principis altis
^udibus illustra, voces{que} in sidera mitte.
Nempe facis: video motus vultus{que} tuorum
Feruores{que} auidos, plausus{que} anhela flagrantum
Pectora, sinceras{que} praeces, at{que} vndi{que} vulgi
Laetitiam ingentem: no{que} enim haec sacra frequentant
Soli primates vrbis, lectus{que} Senatus,
Quin etiam populus, pueri, innuptae{que} puellae
Exultant Animis: adeo vox omnibus una est
Aduentasse decus Reg^i, at{que} hac vrbe coruscum
Illuxisse Iubar, magnam{que} in secula famam
Norwico partam, nullus quam carper liuor
Aut violare potest, nostris non eximet aetas
Mentibus, aut nigra condet sub nube vetustas.
Macte animis, n^tat ista deus, meritum{que} laborem
Laudat, obsequijs vestris studio{que} fideli
Attribuet longos, optatae Principis Annos.
Gul. Goldingham, Mag. Artis.

