Urge this no more, 'tis troublesome.
My Lord, though I affect you
Almost with that Religion I do our Gods, yet
The constant motion of my will does fix
On noble Argalus, and I confess
His gracious merit challenges a wife,
Fair as Parthenia, did she stain the East,
When the bright morn hangs day upon her cheeks
In chains of liquid pearl.

I must confess,
I have not studied the nice rules of love,
Nor can with flattering eloquence adore
A Ladies aerie shadow, court her smiles
With adoration, or with supple knees
Cringe like an humorous dancer, when the air
Play's with her hair, or fret to see the Sun
Be over sav^cy with her cheeks or (...):
I speak this to my glory; the big War
Has been my mistress, where intended fields
When I have (...) a moving grove of Pike^
Advanced as if the splendour of their heads
Meant to obscure the Sun beam, gore the clouds
Till they wept ^loud, a^d heard the fiery h^rse
Neighing destruction to ^n host of men,
From their hot nostrils: there I did command
With ample Fortune; and to be repulsed
In an effeminate Skirmish; wounds my soul
Worse than a quiver of sharp Parthian shafts
Could prejudice my body.

I could wish
Both for your present peace, and to secure
Your future quiet, you had still confined
Your disposition to that warfare; this
Is far more dangerous* He that means to win
Loves bloodless battles, must be strong in tears,
Marshall his Army in a Field of Sighs,
Have for his Ensign beauty in his looks,
Under which colours ought to march kind smiles
As ablest ^ the van. Smooth vows,
And amoro^s (...) will batter Ladies hearts,
Sooner than slings or iron rams demolish
Resisting Citadels.

Can thou conceit,
That I Demagoras, to whose very name
Laconian Matrons have with early^haste,
Paid tributary vows, her choicest maids,
Have left Pans Orgies to present so^t Hymns
To the honour of my merit, can decline
So much my great soul, as with forced entreats
To beg Parthenias mercy; let tame fools
Such as have hearts scarce fit to furnish Doves,
Or spleen less Iambs with courage; intercede
For female favours by submissive prayers;
My resolution grounded on the worth
Of my desert, shall with her mothers power
Enforce Partheniae, were she cold as air
In its most subtle motion, to become
In her affection fervent as the day,
That she was borne in, was to gaudy light,
Or ruin her best comforts,

I am fain to be
Your most industrious advocate: my Daughter
Thinks she offends in each familiar look
Bestowd on manhood, but I hope that Time
And Counsel may convert her to become
Loves proselyte,

She's that already Madam,
Or Argalus durst not without consent,
And patronage from her, rival my love;
But if the boy oppose me in a thought,
Borrow a smile, or pay an amorous glance
As tribute to her eyes, were he defenc'd,
With some light bog, that dances to the winds
Loud whistling Music, I would dart a frown
Should ravish his mortality into Air,
For the presumption.

'Tis my Lord,
This rough demeanour (though it speak you man)
Declares a spirit full of fire, which does fright
Parthenia's softness: Virgins loves are won
(Like Heavens compassion) by submissive prayers.
'Tis not the brave relation of a fight,
Can move the mild breast of a tender maid
To ought but terror; she will start at sight
Of scars though bought with honour, bleed in tears,
When wounds are mentioned; for Lord Argalus
His affable and courtly carriage calls
Respective blushes into the bashful cheeks
Of every Virgin, that my daughters bound
By a due Justice, to esteem his worth,
With more than common courtesy, yet my will
Seconded by a Mothers kind entreats,
Shall work upon her duty to accept
You'll as her servant.

Servant, Lady;
What mortal fool ambitious to out-vie
The Gods in honour, dare presume to hope
That glorious title from me? have I stood
(When armies timorous of a general death,
Quaking with Panick horror, have invoked
Divine assistance) fearless, and not deemed
Heavens power deserving a religious prayer,
After so many Trophies as may claim
Each its particular star, to be esteemed
A servant to a woman.

Nay, my good Lord.

Persuade the girl
T'attire like Iuno in a dress of clouds
Her beauteous head; put off her human Earth
For Immortality, and achieve a seat
Due to the Queen of Heaven, that with regard
The humble Senate of the petty Gods,
And Goddesses may tremblingly adore
The sparkling Majesty, yet were my will
Not satisfied by voluntary gift
Of her affection, my great soul would scorn it,
Worse than the proffered service of a Slave.

See my Daughter,
My Lord, loose not this opportunity,
You shall have place, and leisure, for my presence
Shall be no detriment to your purpose.

Now Lady,
Are you in haste, or do you slight a presence
May challenge your observance? I am come,
Confident of my merit, to inform you
You ought to yield me the most strict regard
Your love can offer.

Sir, I am not
(Though I affect not self conceited boast)
So ignorant of my worth, but I deserve
From him who will enjoy me, a respect
More fair and Courtlike.

The blunt phrase of war
Is my accustomed language, yet I can
Tell you yo'ar handsome, and direct your looks
With a becoming posture; I must speak
In the Heroic Dialect, as I use
To court Bellona, when my high desires
Aim at a glorious victory.

You'll scarce
Conquer a Lady with this sterne discourse,
Mars did not woo the Queen of Love in Arms,
But wrapped his battered limbs in Persian silks,
Or costly Tyrian Purples, speak in smiles,
To win her tempting beauty.

I'll bring on
Well-manag'd troops of Soldiers to the fight,
Draw big battaliaes, like a moving field
Of standing Corn, blown one way by the wind
Against the frighted enemy; the Van
Shall save the Rear a labour, and by me
Marshald, shall fold bright conquest in the curls
Of their conducting Ensigns, while grim Death
Shall on the feathered arrows with more haste,
Then on his own shafts, fly upon the foe;
While the shrill Trumpet, and each piercing Fife
Shall sing their Dirges, and the hoarse mouthed Drums,
Wars fatal bells, with surly noise proclaim
Their sudden funeral: This brave resolve
Vanquished my steel winged Goddess, and engaged
Peneian Daphne, who did fly the Sun,
Give up to willing ravishment, her boughs
To invest my awful front, and this shall prostrat
Spite of all opposition, your nice soul
To my commanding merit,

These high terms, were apt to fright an enemy, or beget
Terror in flinty bosoms: Can you think
A timorous Virgin, can affect her fear,
Yield the security of her peace and life,
To the protection of her horror. You must not persuade my thoughts that you
who vary so the Scene of love, can act it perfectly.


Slighted in this: 'tis a contempt inhumane, and deserves my utmost scorn.


Nay may most honoured Lord, be not transported with a needless rage, 'tis but
her childish folly.

You have done ill to entertain a man
Of such an absolute worth, with such a mean
Regardless value; you must alter this
Neglectful temper, or my anger will
Surpass my natural love, and I shall chide
Your too affected niceness.

Gracious Madam
The zealous duty which religious laws,
Teaches me owe my parents, would inflict
A heavy curse for disobedient guilt,
Upon my Innocence, should I transgress
The intention of your honourable will,
In what I can obey it.

Then in this
You are resolved t'usurp the privilege
Of your discretion: and not fulfil
My will in the disposal of your love.

Yes with that freedom that I would to Heaven
Tender my best obedience; but since love
Is by example and discourse allow'd
Reasons superior, it must be esteemed
Above all duty.

Yet there ought to be
Consent attayn'd from those whose power sh'ud guide
Their childrens youth and actions.

'Tis confessed,
But not except it justly sympathise
With their affection: you would have suffered
A conflict in your peace, had you been forced,
When your free will had yielded up your heart,
My fathers choice, to've had it ravished back,
And in despite of your resolve conferred
Upon another.

I was not so childish
To contradict my parents, but subscribed
To their discretions, as I would advise,
You would obey mine, and yield consent
To wed Demagoras.

What can your Wisdom
Behold in him, (if with impartial Eyes
You would survey his quality) that should engage
Your inclination to enforce my love,
Besides the native fierceness of his looks
Apter to fright a Lady, than beget
Fancy: his courtships clothed in angry threats,
As if that Love were turned a Soldier,
And had unyok'd her teem of spleenlesse Doves,
To have her Chariot drawn by ravenous Wolves,
Tigers, or treacherous Leopards, had put off
Her wreath of harm esse Myrtle to invest
Her brow with Yew or Cyprus.

This excuse
Proceeds not from his merit, but your love
To Argalus, a stranger only known
For his brisque Courtship, the Queen supports
His wavering Fortune, he depends on her,
And should she fail by death, his utmost hopes
Embraced a sudden ruin.

Argalus,
Were he more abject in his fate than your
Imagination could conceit, deserved
My Equalst fancy; in his youthful looks
Sits a divinity able to enchant
Queenes to admire, nay to adore his worth,
Continued smiles make Summer on his cheeks,
At his bright Eyes does Cupid warm his wings,
When he intends to fly at Women's hearts;
Music and rich perfumes are in his breath,
Aptly resembling aromatic winds,
That sing the Phoenix Exequies.

Can my daughter
So much decline the greatness of her spirit,
Hereditary to her blood,
To affect a person merely for his smiles,
Effeminate carriage without any proof
Of manly valour in him.

You mistake
His character, though he can tread in peace
An aerie measure to the warbling Lute,
Demean his actions with that sweet deceit.
Can cousin Ladies of their souls, yet when
The glorious war does summon him to the field,
He does excel in feats of active arms
The ablest youth of Arcady; instructs
Old Soldiers Martial discipline, that those
Who had beheld his sweetness in the Court,
Pusled in Faith, believed that conquering Mars
Had clothed his fierceness in a Cupids shape,
To vanquish some more beauteous prize than was
The blind Gods mother.

'Tis offensive, I'll hear no more of this.

Thus I'm enforced to prove,
Dead to obedience if I live to love.

Your niceness
Must not excuse the due respects we bear
The Lord Demagoras; if the shepherds be prepared,
They shall present their mirth to expel his melancholy.

Pish, you're as fierce an aspen leaf you wag every way.

I'll tell thee honest Strephon, I
No more affect a woman than the Sky
Does Birds that sore in it, they are as vain
Inconstant as the flying showers of rain
In April Strephon.

The more dissembling fellow you: why do you protest to every Wench you see,
you are inamor'd on her: why you should see, and seeing ought to imitate your
betters, Clitophon, there's not a Lass

That trips nimbly ore the Arcadian grass,
When she does fair Strephon view,
Though I fly, but will pursue,
Throw her eyes out on my shape,
Call me Pigsny, pretty Ape;
Some there are that do suppose
Loves hot fire in my nose:
With which they scorched, for pity cry,
Blow it ou't Strephon, or' we die;
Others say my head's a bell,
My hair the ropes, that ring the knell,
My tong the clapper which though their deaths it rings,
They swear no Courefeu half so sweetly sings;
The hollow of my eyes, the grave,
Which with their nailes they dig: but have -- But who comes here?


Strepho, you're well-met, good Aminta, see,
Is he not chaste, and fair as young Goats be,
His head like to a Cedar over-growes,
His studded cheeks and rich enameld nose.

I would be loath to give my face for the washing
Girl, now Clitophon do not you not imagine Venus girdle was
My swathband, the maids so dote on my well timbered limbs.
Here's a leg, Satho, that's as neatly made,
As any that ore Shepherdess is laid;
A thigh proportionable I tak't,
I know thou longst to feell it nak't,
A tail, some say, does hang thereby,
Which none must know but thee and I:
I have a back too, though I say it
That should not, can bear any weight,
Full limbs, with sinews strong and plump,
A lusty chine, and for my rump
'Tis so well made, and firmly knit,
The Nymphs are all stark mad for it,
Because they think the rest of my members proportionable.

What a quick flame
Into my breast from Saphos bright eyes came,
Another from Aminta's; my desire,
Erst cold as Ice, grows active as the fire,
Dearest Aminta, Sapho lend your ear
To my just vows.

Fond Clitophon forbear
To swear in earnest, I do know your heart
Was never wounded with the blind Gods dart.

See how bright Strephon does entice the air,
To play with the sweet belropes of his hair.
What a soft murmuring the tresses makes,
As did Medusa's locks, or Alectos snakes.

Gentlest Virgin, white as infant snow,
Pleasing as Ladon that does coolly flow,
Through our green meadows; trust a loving swain,
When he protest with truth.

There does remain
No such good property amongst men on Earth,
Truth is fled to Heaven with Justice.
Florida the news.

The Lord Demagoras this way pursues,
And must have entertainment, 'tis a charge
From our great Lady, that we strait enlarge
Our Pastoral devises.

We have none
On such a sudden, less she will have done
Those that were for Argalus welcome meant.

Be pressed with speed that greeting to present --

They are upon us ere we are ready for the action.

Florida, are the shepherds here?

Madame they are, Castalia only wants.

This Music speaks her entrance.
Please your Lordship,
Under this shady Poplar, sit and see
Our rural pastimes.
Loves a Child, and ought to be
Won with smiles, his Deity
Is clothed in Panthers skins, which hide
Those parts which kill, if but espied.
Hates wars, but such as mildly led
By Venus are to pleasures bed,
There does soft embraces fight,
Kisses combat with delight,
Amorous looks and sighs discover
What will win a Virgin-Lover.

'Tis too effeminate this; I had rather hear
The cries of dying men than these nice strains,
Or Soldiers with loud clamours rend the air
With shouts of victory.

Patience my Lord, the Shepherds are proceeding to dance.


I do not like this Moral, it includes
Something that is distasteful; a mans possessed
With eminent frenzy that would a minute
View these idle Morris-Dances.

That fellow
That wooed with such obsequiousness and won
His yielding Mistress, sure did represent
Effeminate Argalus. The other, who
With confidence attempting, was repulsed,
Figured my self. This same was an abuse,
Such as no hospitality, nor laws
Of true nobility can suffer. Madam.
You have done well and justly. I perceive
You are as various in your giddy faith,
As your coy daughter in her choice; reserve her
For gracious Argalus: but if this scorn
Meet not a sudden and severe revenge,
May all my former glories be obscured;
Though to perform it I should scale the Stars,
And snatch them like quick wilde-fire from their Spheres,
Then dart them on the earth: catch the dull clouds
And squeese them into a deluge, and aspire
To startle Jove with terror of my ire.

This is the suddenest passion I have seen,
Whence had it its original? My Lord,
Let's follow and persuade him.

YOu are too strangely timorous, your full worth
Speaks in as loud an accent of Desert,
As the most meriting Arcadian Lord,
Who boasts his Ancestry.
My Lord,
The fair Parthenia instructs all hearts.
Nobility, with Music of her voice;
Myriads of joys are in her looks; her eyes
Are Natures richest Diamonds set in foils
Of polished Ebony, her breath expires
Odours more sweet than issued from the trees
Of Balm in Paradise.

Demagoras
Drunk with opinion of himself, declines
As much her glorious merit, as your just
Expressions honours it.

'T were sacrilege
Not to confess so manifest a truth,
'T was she when first I did salute the War
With my unable person; who inspired
My soul with courage active as the wind,
Gave me a manly being, and infused
By the divine reflection of her love,
Thoughts fiery as that passion: I do live
Only her creature. Borrow my poor heat
From the extended virtue of her flame.

You are too modest,
T'ascribe a greater glory to my niece,
Then the whole stock of women ever boasted;
You'll make her proud my Lord, 'tis an excess
Of natural sweetness in you; you must temper
With a more moderate confidence.

Alas my Lord,
Of more sincere devotion; every thought
My fancy offers, is a sacrifice
To the bright deity of Parthenia,
Whose noble freeness, though it may afford
Me entertainment, more replete with grace,
Than she bestows on every Suitor, yet
My timorous hopes dare not assume that life,
As to believe she loves me; pray my Lord,
You are familiar with Parthenias thoughts
Resolve your friends this questionable doubt;
Whom her affection at purity has chosen
Her loves blessed favourite.

My Lord, you know him,
He's your most intimat friend.

My friend,
Were he my utmost enemy and beloved,
Of fair Parthenia: that should be a tie
Of adoration to me, pray declare
The man must be made fortunate with the title
Of Lord of such perfection.

He is
A noble generous and well manured youth
Bears beauties ensigns in his gracious looks.
Has that supreme Divinity in his eyes
As sparkles flames, able to fire all hearts,
And the superlative virtue of his Mind,
Transcends his outward figure; he is wise
As most mature age, Valiant in resolve,
As fames beloved Child reputation,
Conjoine the masculine graces of his soul,
With lovely carriage, and discret discourse
Has not your knowledge reached him yet?

This character
So far excelling me undoes my hopes.

My Lord were not to
Secure your peace, I'd not disclose this secret, 'tis your self,
'Tis Argalus Parthenia has received
A welcome guest into her open heart,
Amass not your quick senses, 'tis a truth.

Your mutual modesties
Defer your just desires, I must become
The moderator 'twixt your bashful hopes
You do affect, as timorously as Swans,
(Cold as the brook they swim in) who do bill,
With tardy modesty, and chirring plead
Their constant resolutions.

Noble Argalus,
My honoured brother, pray heaven out entertainment,
Be worthy your acceptance, you must not expect
That happy welcome, here your house affords
To such deserving guests. My Lord Philarchus,
Saw you the Lord Demagoras lately.

Madam,
Not since he flung last night hence in a rage
From the presentment by the Shepherds.

Demagoras
Is of so haughty a disposition
(Though noble otherwise) that I can wish
No alliance with him: sister, I do fear,
You are too zealous to advance the match
'^ wixt him and your Parthenia: her's a Lord
As great by birth, and greater by the favour
Done him by th'King, but greatest by his own
Superlative goodness, does affect her with
So true a fancy, that you much would wrong
Humanity to dispose her to another,
Wheresuch a meriting Suitor does pretend
A holy interest in her.

Good brother do not
Question my honour so much, I am loath
To give the least occasion of distaste
To my Lord Demagoras, and since my daughter
Cannot affect him, I conceive he will
Cease his unnecessary suit, and leave her
To her own disposure.

I wish it.
My Lords, and sister, honour me to transfer
Your companies to my Castle; it doth stand
Oppressed with solitude, and mourns the lack
Of noble hospitality, like a widow
Deprived of a loved husband. I do long
To see Dame Ceres crowned with wreathes of wheat,
Kiss plump cheeked Bacchus there in daily feasts,
To view my table furnished with such guests
As would esteem't no trouble to adorn it
A year or two together, and there find
No entertainment like a bounteous mind.

This way she went, I followed her thorough the grove of Cypress to this Bower,
she cannot befarre off.

O Argalus!
It was her voice, Parthenia's voice, she named
Her minion Argalus: that sound (though clothed
In the enchanting accents of her breath)
Was harsh as Screech-owles, or the Whislers notes,
And shall be fatal to her as the strains
The Sirens (dancing on the peaceful Seas)
Bestow on wretched Mariners. Come forth,
Employ your airy numbers on your own
Proud beauties Epitaph.

What means my Lord,
This rude intrusion on my retired thoughts?
How dare you hand me thus? Uncivil man
Forbear this boldness.

Persuade me to it.
When you can sing the world into a sleep,
Or tame wild lightning with a tear; you'd best
Try if the passing sweetness of your tunes
Can (like the voice of Magic) charm my rage
To pity, or bring Argalus to your rescue;
Would he were here, and armed with sulphurous clouds,
Like Jove embracing Semele in fire,
This hand should snatch thee from his circular flames
To my revenge, enforce him to behold,
Helpless, the present ruins of thy beauty.

Your threats cannot affright me, I defenc'd
With mine own innocence, fear not your malice,
Should it invade my life; your foul intent
Will (like an arrow shot upright) descend
On your own head. But pray declare my Lord
Why you thus riot on my guiltless self.
If because I cannot love you, I will die
That causes Martyr.

Die! your Fates reserve you
Not to so brave a period as death
From my great hand: I'll stick on thee a shame
Worse than the poor deprival of thy life,
Such as will kill thee daily with conceit
Of thy unequalled misery.

Perhaps
He does intend my ravishment. My Lord,
Mischief I see in your distracted looks
Pretended to my purity: Oh do not
Murder mine honour; I'll resign my breath
With freedom to your fury. Surely Sirs
A virgins gore (sooner than blood of kids)
Will mollify your heart of Adamant
To a soft fleshie substance.

Do not prate,
Nor with loud clamours fill the wood, nor question
What my intent is. Though you had not loved me,
You need not in contempt have thrown your heart
On that effeminate Argalus; that wrong
Fills my vast soul with horror, and invites
My active thoughts to a severe revenge,
Since he whom I can name, but in contempt,
Usurps my lawful privilege; otherwise
The injury with patience had been borne,
Revenges cause is an immediate scorn.

Gentle Aminta hear me.

Have you done?
Winding Meander first shall straightly run,
Roses in winter flourish, and our flocks
Wear golden fleeces in stead of woolly locks,
Ere Clitophon's false heart do serious prove,
And entertain the perfectness of love.

'Tis her love to me makes her slight Clitophon thus. This 'tis to be a
handsome man: I shall dote shortly (seeing my lovely Physiognomy in some clear
spring, the Shepherds looking-glasse) on my own shadow, and like Narcissus
leap into the waves to embrace it.

Which is she among the Swains
On whom the gentle Strephon dains
To cast a sheeps-eye, nod or wink,
But does her self immortal think?
Who indeed has such a face,
So full of a bewitching grace.
My head loves pillow, where he does rest
As safe as Magpie in her nest.
My forehead sweetly is bespred
With Violets, and Tulips blew and red:
The amber Cowslip, and the coral Rose,
Precious complexion of my sweeter nose.
My eyes are elements from which fall showers
That make my cheeks a spring of several flowers.
So is my head a nose-gay growing on one stalk,
My body is the garden, though it walk;
And there's no woman but may well,
To th'worst part about it smell.
My arms are Dragons that defend all these:
Now view in me living Hesperides.

Who looks on Strephon that will not suppose
The blushing Piony growing in his nose?
The yellow Primrose that in woods had wont
To flourish, springs up in his amber front.

I had a face of brass indeed should I deny this for truth: she'll praise me
shortly into the stars, and then I shall (for a new Planet) be set in the the
Shepherds Calendar. What a gull's this Clitophon, ^ow long might he live ere he
be in such favour with the Shepherdesses.

Why when on him they will not gaze,
On me they stare with much amaze;
And when on him, as on a Clown,
With lowering looks they scowle and frown,
Let gentle Strephon but vouchsafe
To let them look on him, they laugh.

Oh you are pleasant Strephon. Sapho say,
Are you as cruel as Aminta? Day
Loves not the Sunne-shine dearlier than my flame
Is equally devoted to your name:
To yours Aminta jointly, Oh you two,
Are clearer, sweeter than the morning dew
Falling in May on Lillies, fairer far
Than Venus Swans, or spotless Ermins are.
Which first vouchsafes me answer? There does fly
Immediate comfort from Aminta's eye:
Sapho speaks joy in smiles: but Virgins, here
Comes beauties abstract, who has no peer
Grace me, dear Florida, with one blessed look.

Away dissembler; Fishes scorn the hooke
They see laid bare before them: but prepare,
The other Shepherds hither coming are,
Attending on my Lady and her guests.
This music does invite us to Pans feast.

Great Pan to thee we do confine
This fleece of W^ll, This (...) of Wi^
To father Bacchus Ceres dear
This garland of the ^
Accept. Silvanus we present
These fruits to thee, thy bounty sent.
And you maid^, from whose each^eye
Winged shafts of love do fly,
Do not shame to let your feet
In a country measure meet
With these youths, whose active parts
Will play the thieves, and steal your hearts.
Shepherds, we owe our gratitude to your thanks.

Lords, and Ladies, thanks to all
That graced our harmless festival.

I do admire we wanted my fair Niece
At these solemnities: me thought the sports
Showed dull without her; noble Argalus
My best wishes wait upon you.

Your honours Creature: I much wonder where
Partheni^ has bestowed herself.

She cannot
Be absent long, see here she comes;
Madam, you were expected here, the Shepherds
Did in their Pastoral presentiments move
Dully without your presence. Why thus veiled,
Extend your glorious beauty, and eclipse
The emulous day with brightness: Heavens protect me,
What strange delusion's this?

Surely a mist
Shades our amazed optics, or has some
Black Devil taken her habitual form
To mock our erring fancies; 'tis her face
Veiled in a robe of darkness, yet her eyes
Shoot their acc^stomed brightness through the clouds,
To tell the admiring gazers, two such lights
Cannot endure priv^tion: Horror friend!
What should portend this ominous sight?
Dear Madam, have you devised this emblem of disguise*
That when disperc'd 't may give more perfect lustre
To your most exquisite figure.

Oh my Lord,
Look not on such a monster, lest my sight
Infect your spotless purity. I am
(Stop your innocent ears, lest the harsh sound
Pierce them with horror) poisoned.

What ignoble villain,
Madam, has spoiled natures most glorious frame,
Demolished such a beauty as the most
Cunning Painters with their skill shall never imitate?

Let her name
Guess at his appellation that has ventured
This irreligious blemish to white truth;
And were his heart wrapped in a marble rock,
Fenced with a Mine of Adamant, this hand
Should from the stony casket dig it out,
And with his vile blood poison all the world.

Dear Sir, the employment of this fruitless rage
Cannot attach him for this mischief. 'Twas
Demagoras, who mad with the conceit
That for your sake I did neglect his love,
Surprised my guitlesse person in the wood,
And with a juice (more poisonous than the foam^
Of angry Dragons) sprinkled my clear face,
By the ^owerfull venom straight ore bespred with this
Contagious leprosy, and then he fled.

Whither? What place can be so strong to guard
So merciless a Tiger? Should he mix
His conversation with unsettled aires,
Break (like a cunning Pioner) through the earth,
And hide himself in the Center, some quick wind,
Or hideo^s earthquake, would enforce him thence
To his deserved punishment. Oh friend!
Me thinks this object should affright the light
Into a sad concealment, force the clouds.
To drop upon the earth in floods of tears,
And drown it everlastingly.

P^ore Lady.

Do not Lords
Urge violent rage to discompose your peace, I will (like
The pleasing air) wrap in that cloud, my head,
That has infected it, and seek out death:
Nor do I grieve for my vain beauties loss,
Since shivering sickness, or the hand of age
Would have performed that office which his poison
Usurped upon its lustre: this only wounds
My frail resolve, since I believe that you,
Lord Argalus, affected me, that I
Should be so wretched, as to be deprived
Of that indifferent form, for which I might
Have merited your favour.

Gracious soul!
Enforce my immortality from my breast,
Which like a flame (enclosed 'twixt walls of brass)
Strives to ascend to heaven, and fetch from thence
Thy ravished beauty: 'twas thy excellent mind
That I admired; no noble soul can fix
Only on fleshly glory; and since that
Remains entire, immovable as faith,
I should undo my honour, in revolt
From sacred truth, should I renounce thy love:
I'll yet embrace thy Nuptials with a heat
Holy as altars incense; for thy face!
A thousand virgins with immaculate tears
Shall weep upon it, bathe it in their bloods,
Till (from the different colours) the fresh Rose
And glorious Lilly, in that snowy field,
Regain their ancient seats, and re-create thee
The absolute Queen of beauty.

Oh my Lord,
Your fancy wanders in distracted paths
Of vanquished reason; since unfortunate I,
Must like a piece of ^
By an unskilful Carver, needs beco^e
A most imperfect statue. Since I cannot
Boast any thing that's meriting your love,
Strive to forget (...), who will ^eeke
Some desert, where poor mo^ll never trod,
To spend the wretched (...) of he^ lifein.
Farewell my Lord, hereafter wish to meet,
As I do, in one tomb, one winding sheet.

ARe all our forces mustered.
They are my Lord.

Let them be
All in a readiness. I mean this night
T'attempt Kalanders Castle: my great soul
Is not yet satisfied by my revenge
Upon Parthenia's beauty: the contempt
(Cast on me by* refusal of my match)
Cannot be washed off, but in streams of blood.

But my Lord, think on Kalanders strength.

I know my own.
And 'twere a sin against my undaunted courage
To doubt 'tis large ^ has not power
To vanquish any enemy. Let hosts,
Conjoyne to hosts, affront me; yet this arm
Has an innated virtue, that shall force
Victory from their multitudes, as due
Only to my deservings. Let the Cap^aines
Prepare our forces, while in this grove I meditate
The sweetness of my just revenge.

Pray Sir to whom belong yo^ forces.

To Lord Demagoras, there is the General.

You're happily encountered, Do you know me?

Though such things as you are,
Fit only for effeminacy and sport,
Do seldom meet my knowledge, you are,
If I mistake not, Argalus; I sent you
A glorious present lately, your Parthenia
Dressed in her new robes of beauty, such as might
Entice your wanton appetite to love.

Villain, to glory in thy most detested act,
Shows that thy Fiend-like nature has forgot
All laws of noble manhood; but I sin
To interchange a word with such a Monster;
Yet before thou dost fall by me, as, if heaven have not
Lost all its cure of innocence, thou must do,
I'll force thee hear the blackness of thy mischiefs.
What devil clothed in humane shape, except
Thy barbarous self, would have achieved the wrack
Of so much matchless beauty.

'Twas too mean, too light a sacrifice for my revenge,
Had her whole Sex been there, attired in all
The glory of their beauty, and you Sir present,
My anger had invaded them, and spite
Of your defence converted their choice forms
To the same loathsome leprosy.

Peace Monster.
Each syllable thou utterest does infect
The air with killing pestilence: it was
H^avens never-sleeping Justice that directed
My erring person hither to revenge

murdered beauty on thy life.
Nay stare not on me Sir, were you defenc'd
With heaps of men as numerous as your sins,
This sword should force a passage, and dig out
Thy heart from that black cabinet of thy breast,
And cast it a prey to Vultures.

You're very confident
Young gallant of your fortune, prithee go
Poor boy and fight a combat in the court
With some soft Mistress, dance, or touch a Lute:
Thou art a thing so abject you're not worthy
The anger of Demagoras; arm, be gone,
Lest I do frown thy soul away. My sword
Will be an useless instrument against such
A childish enemy.

Glorious Devil,
My furies grown to that unequal height
'Twill not admit more conference; thy crimes
Are now ripe for my punishment: though Fiends
Guard your black breast, I'll pierce it.

So valiant?
I shall chastise your fury.

Parthenia,
Thou art in part revenged, and if mine own
Death do succeed his, I shall go in peace to my eternity.

Sure great Mars
Has put on arms against me in this shape,
For 'tis impossible mortality could
Achieve Demagoras conquest. Farewell light,
'Tis fit the world should wear eternal night.

I hate to triumph
Over his loathed carcass, which should be a prey
To Wolves and Harpies: O Parthenia!
Here lies the Fatal Cause of all our mischiefs;
And sure no soul will at his death repine:
Revenge, when just, 's, not humane, but Divine.

Where have you left my Lord?

There lies your Lord.

Dead?
Cursed Fate, that so much greatness
Should suffer this great overthrow, and fall
From such a height to a sad funeral!

'Tis such a cruelty, as no report,
Though it discourse of rapes, and timeless deaths,
Has ever equalled.

The success will speak
The wonder more prodigious. The poor Lady
(Still lovely in her sorrow) after this sad rape
Of her rare beauty, privately stole thence,
And with that strictness has obscured her self,
That though inquest (though many endeavoured
In her desired search) can attain the least
Discovery of her present being.

How bears Argalus this sad disaster?

As a man
Whose noble courage, 'bove the cross of Fate,
Seems patient at his misery.

He and I
Are both made up of sorrow, our full griefs
Might (like two swelling Oceans when they meet
In a contracted channel) aptly combat
For rough priority. Philoclea
My glorious Cousin, will by no entreats,
No services, yet be induced to love,
That I was forced, against the natural zeal
I bear the King my Uncle, to transgress
(Such is the power of my fancy) the strictness
Of my obedience, captivating her
By force, to whom by a most free consent
My soul before was prisoner.

I could wish, noble Amphialus, that your desires
Might both achieve forgiveness, and success:
I'm none of those strict Statesmen, though I love
My King, that hate your virtues for this fact,
Because I know the greatness of your spirit
Attempted it not for inveterate hate,
Or for ambition, but to gain her love.

Philocleas love, upon whose meanest thought
The Art of Memorie's grounded, and inspires
Each organ of our meditating sense,
With their perfections merit.

But my Lord:
How brooks the king the bold detention
Of his fair daughters? Sure he will invert
Some sudden forces on you, and compel
Their back-deliverie.

He shall first enforce
Mortality into nothing. I did send,
To avoid effusion of more humane blood,
This fair defiance, that he should elect
A Champion daring singly to oppose
Me in a combat, and if Fate decreed
My fall by him, security for the freedom
Of his imprisoned daughters.

Did his Grace accept the noble offer?

With a freedom
Fitting a King, but who the person is
That hopes to gain a Trophy by my death,
Fame has not yet divulged. This urgent business
Hinders my visit of my Lord Argalus;
Present my true hearts service to him, tell him I
Do inwardly dissolve into a dew
Of bleeding passion for his lo^e, and would
To re-invest blessed quiet in his heart,
Act over the Scene of dangers I have passed
Since I knew earliest manhood, so your Lordship
Will please to pardon my rude haste, I must,
As to my friends, to my own affairs be just.

Persuade me not to this, there is no woman
Worthy my love, they are all too falsely common
To every Suitor.

Why Clitophon say you so, who are blessed
With her society whom I love best?
Yet in her presence I'm forbid to move
My suit, nay dare not name the name of love.

'Tis your own flat foolery Alexis; you should with garb and gesture
pastoral, with as much scorn as you would o'returne your enemy at football,
contemn the force of woman, Why?

Women are shadows, fly away
When follow'd, or desired to stay;
But if you slight them, they will sue,
Follow, entreat, nay fly to you:
But if stiff and strong you stand,
You may tread them at command.
But lie down, the pretty Elves
Will straight fall under you of themselves.
Like my Spaniel, beaten, they
Will lick your lips, and with you play.
This is the reason why
They love me so doggedly;
You might by my example edify,
And live in peace Alexis.

Why Strephon, you usurp without a cause
The privilege of their love; your carriage draws
Their laughter, not affection; you appear
To them for sport, not for your person dear.

There's your foolery still, thou hast commerc'd it seems with none but thine
own sheep, and art far sillie^ than they: your woman is the greatest
dissembler in the world, and where they toy and jeer, they most affect:

Finally women are slippery, as at their tails are Eels,
Their minds as light as are their heals.
And every one's for what she feels:
And so with my opinion, farewell.

Stay honest Strephon, I did late compose verses in hatred of them.


They are not prose, pray read them.

Who would trust a woman, when
They are the only curse of men?
Sirens sing but to entice,
They men to a fools paradise:
Hyaena's speak, 'tis to betray
To certain ruin, so do they:
Crocodiles shed tears of slaughter,
Women weep when they mean laughter.
Inconstant, cruel, falfe, unkind,
Are attributes that suit their mind.

Now, as I am true Arcadian, thou would be whipped for this; Cupid shall cite
thee into his Court for this by some of his villainous Apparators, where his
wide conscienc'd Proctors, and their Clerks, shall with their pen and inkhornes
beat thy brains out: if thou scap'st that, Ladies shall beat thee to death
with their Monkeys, you jack-a-napes; chambermaids shall worry thee to death
with kisses, than which there can be no greater tyranny; then, the very Cooke,
and Milkmaids, shall in scolding prose, baste thee into a jelly, or charm thee
into May-butter; you shall answer this, I'll peach, I'll play the Informer.


I'll not recant it, not deny this truth,
Alexis you shall hear it justified.

Where met you Lord Amphialus?

In the grove, 'twixt Mantinea and his Castle, while
Our servants led our horses down the hill,
We did exchange some accents in discourse.
The noble youth, as hopeful of success
In his design, as brave in his resolve;
But the great rumoured warfare 'twixt the King
And him's converted to a single fight
Betwixt Amphialus and what champion
The King will venture to engage in such
A cause of weighty consequence.

I'm glad:
Arcadia long blessed in a happy peace
Shall by the letting of so few veins blood
Continue in her quiet; it was feared
This sad domestic quarrel would have cost
More lives than might with justice have been spared;
But 'tis not yet divulged by fame whose valour
Will be employed in the combat.

His knowledge
Has not yet attained the notice of't: My Lord,
He does present his best respects to you,
Deplores your sorrows with a brothers grief, entreats you
Have so much mercy on your glorious youth,
As not to spend its blooming pride in sighs.

My Lord, I thank him, and rejoice his Fate
Has sorted him so honourable a trial
Of his undoubted valour: for my griefs,
They do increase on me, like a disease,
Spreading through all my faculties, which shakes
My soul into an agony of death,
And will, I hope, ere long, dissolve this flesh
Into forgetfulness.

Nay good my Lord,
Renounce this passionate temper, we'll depart
Hence to my Castle, expel our cares with feasts,
Hunt the wild bore that will with masculine rage
Resist the hunters, till he foam to death,
View swift hounds running hotly in pursuit
Of the chased game, and from the neighbouring hills
Force Echoes to their shrilnesse.

Alas my Lord:
The sole conceit of fair Parthenia's loss
Would from a heart of marble force salt tears
Cold as the dew the stone distills, invite
An unremorsefull Crocodile to shed
Drops as sincere as does the timorous Hart
When he o'reheares the feath'red arrow sing
His funeral Dirge.

See Alexis accompanied with a stranger Lady.

Sir, this Lady, newly arrived from Corinth, has
Some business she will disclose to none but you.

My vow's absolved.

Angels, or if there be a power has charge
Of humane frailty, shroud me with their wings;
The sight of this divinity will strike
More than my Eyes, my Reason, and enforce me
Here to die gazing.

Bless me! 'tis sure Parthenia.

My virtuous Niece recovered.

'Tis her face.
I have examined with industrious eyes
Each line, each lovely circle that adorns
This best perfect piece of nature and all speaks
Parthenia's figure.

My honoured Lords.

'Tis her voice!
The same well-sounding music did enchant
With its melodious harmony my heart.
Let me adore the miracle.

My Lords: Do not distract with a deceiving joy
Your noble souls, I will not seek to fold
Your thoughts in doubtful error: you mistake,
I'm not Parthenia.

What delusion plays with our faculties?

My Lord, afford me patient hearing, my discourse
Contains much consequence, you never loved
Parthenia dearlier than my self: we wore
The very figure of each others mind,
As well as body, and I should transgress
Th'integrity of our inviolate truths;
Not to fulfil each scruple of her will
With ceremonious duty, she being dead.

Oh my just fears!

Dear Lady, is she dead?

Dead, cold in her dark urn,
As was her Icy chastity; she did arrive
Some few days since at Corinth, where resolved
T'obscure her self to all but me, kind heaven
Pitying her sad disaster, by mild death,
Translated her to the immortal bliss
Prepared for innocent lovers.

Sure I am insensible of misery, or my breast
Would burst with fullness of my griefs; dear Lady
Inform me where Parthenia is entombed,
That like some humble pilgrim, I may visit
The holy place with a religious zeal, and bathe
Her virgin ashes in my tears,
Weep over her grave till from my drops arise
Some crystal pyramid to tell the world:

You interrupt, what my sad heart, as an unwelcome load,
Desires to be disburdend of: before
Her dying breath, she did enjoin me by
All our friendships rites, when I had laid
Her corps in earth: straict to repair (with notice
Of her expiring) hither.

Dear my Lord, be not so much distempered.

Tell, quoth she, my noble mother that I die in peace,
Even with D^magoras; commend me to my love,
My dearest Argalus; inform him that
His very name flies with my soul to heaven,
There to remain for ever; and engage him
T'accept of you as my last gift, you are
So like Parthenia that, hee'll love you for
My memory: So with a constant truth
To my dead friend I'm come, my Lord, to offer
What she bequeathed, her legacy of my love,
To your acceptance.

Madam, I must rest
For your kind wish your servant; but in me
Parthenia only must have room to live,
While I have vital motion. Had she imposed
What charge (but this) soever, I'd endeavour
It's strict performance: but I am resolved
As she enjoyed my first, my latest love
Shall on her memory wait till we do meet
In the happy shades together.

Sure my Lord,
This is contempt of my desert, I must not
Be thus repulsed: to satisfy your fears,
I am your true Parthenia.

Parthenia.

Yes, and by the Queen of Corinth cured, whose sk^ and care cleansed my foul
leprosy.


Parthenia, 'twas well your wisdom by degrees
Diffused this comfort; had you showered it all at once,
'twould like a torrent have o'reborne the banks
Of my amazed mortality.

Come, discourse
Your story at your leisure, Argalus
Take your Parthenia, treachery nor hate
Cannot undo the firm decree of Fate.

I'll try your impudence, have you the face
To deny your libel Clitophon?

Good Strephon urge me not, I shall not want
Audacity to express them to recant.
My just opinion were injust, and fit
To stain my resolution, and my wit.

Clitophon, how dare
You armed with boldness greater than despair
Venture abuse to woman, or defile
That name with scandal, to whose meanest smile,
You have done worship?

Praised looks with flat'tring art,
Each look, each lineament, as the best part
Of Natur's choicest workmanship: but men
Are more inconstant than light whirlewinds; trust
The sea with feathers, or March winds with dust
Rather; and let their words, oaths, tears, vows pass,
As words in water writ, or slipery glass.

This is more juggling. O! with these he has found
A passage through my Eyes, to give a wound
To my poor Heart: it is their looks beget
This sudden alteration, which as yet
Does but with infant feathers strive to fly
To heaven, tells Justice of the ^njury
I have done sacred womanhood: thence
Thou scroll detracting spotless innocence.

dear forgive me, Sapho see
How my tears distill.

If they were every one as big as a Turnip, it should not serve to feed my
anger: well wenches, if you do pardon him, may your maidenheads be a burden to
you, till you be fourscore at least, then may you turn Witches, and some
Goblin get them; or else perish in your Virginity, and lead Apes in Hell
for it: Nay if you do forgive him, I will have you arraing'd of treason against
Venus, and Cupid shall be your blind Judge, and condemn you for the fact, to
loose your heads; your maidenheads I mean, and have a man of fourscore and
ten for your Executioner.


Dear Strephon, do not frown, it does disgrace
The sallow color of thy withered face.

You would fain cog your self into my favour again; but till you be
converted from this Clitophon, you shall not kiss the worst part about me.


O say not so,
Thou art more sweet than Yew or Miscletoe,

O Clitophon, Aminta, every voice
Be filled with admiration, sing, rejoice,
Till the earth dance like our young Lambs, till trees
Grow active at the music; all degrees,
Of grief are banished: all our flocks shall play
For joy Parthenia, O Parthenia?

What of Parthenia?

Is returned, her right
Beauty new shining like the Queen of night,
Appearing fresher after she did shroud:
Her gaudy forehead in a pitchy cloud,
Loves triumphs in her eyes; auda^ious I,
That durst name love, and fair Alexis by:
Be dumb for ever.

Stay Alexis,
She shall now revoke that loving tyranny,
Since our Parthenia's returned, I'll turn
My Elegiack strains away, and burn in high love raptures.

She must strait be wed to Lord Argalus.
The bridal bed is in preparing.

At a verse of mine,
Hymen shall light his Nuptial flaming pine,
I will enchant them to embraces free,
With a devoted Epithalamy;
Till I sing day from Tothis arms, and fire
With airy raptures the whole morning quire,
Till the small birds their Sylvan notes display
And sing with us, joy to Parthenia.

SIt my most honoured Cousin, you are Lord
Both of this house and feast: the honest Shepherds
Were taken too much o'th sudden to provide
A fitting entertainment; but they've strived
With their most early haste, t'expresse their duty:
Sapho inspired with her Poetique fury,
Will speak your Epithalamy;
They do intend to dance too, I see;
This Music declares their purpose.

The joys of health and what the spring
Of youth, strength, happiness, can bring
Wait upon this noble pair;
Lady, may you still be fair,
As earliest light, may you enjoy
Beauty, which age cannot destroy,
May you be fruitful as the day,
Never sigh but when you pray,
Know no grief, but what may be
To temper your felicity.
And you my Lord, may truest fame
Still attend on your great name,
Live both of you espoused to peace,
And with your years let love increase,
Go late to Heaven, but coming thither,
Shine there two glorious stars together.

Does these presentiments please you? our dull wits
Are not so fortunate, in rich conceits
As your quick Cyprian intellects.

You vouchsafe
Too much to grace them, but Parthenia
The King as conscious of my mean desert
To make me seem more worthy of thy love,
Has by imposing a command, conferred
An honour greater on my sprightly hopes,
Then the addition of estate or blood
Before enriched me with possession of.

Let me participate your happiness,
My dearest Lord, what is it?

An honour which like the Eldest child of Fame treads on the neck of glory.


Come, my Lord, let's leave these happy lovers to themselves.


What may it portend tell me, and I'll rejoice
As much to hear it, as when I recovered my poisoned beauty.

Thou shalt know it,
And with loud acclamations sound my fate,
For most completely happy: by the King
I am elected instantly to meet
In single opposition, honours type
The brav'st of Soldiers and the best of men,
The noble Lord Amphialus.

Bless me divinity! can you conceive my Lord
That act an honour, upon which the loss
Of the unvalued treasure of your life
Has strict dependence? sure my Lord, the King
Cannot be such a Tyrant to employ
You in your infant age of peaceful love,
To such a cruel warfare.

Now I see, Parthenia loves not Argalus, if she wish him
Turn recreant to his valour; what account
Unless of Coward, shall I give the King?
Should I refuse this honourable task;
Which but to meet I'd scalestar-neighboring rocks,
Travel through deserts, scarcely known to beasts,
And combat all that durst oppose my passage,
To this brave enterprise.

My dearest Lord,
This resolution does oppress my soul,
With torments worse than death: there's not a word
Which you have uttered, but like mandraks groans,
Or howls of wolves affrights me: Can there be
Such a contempt of my regardless love
Be got so soon? Can you forsake my bed,
Before I scarce conceive my self a wife,
Or you a husband? Oh Argalus, I thought
We should have lived, and taught the erring world
Affections primitive pureness; grown like Palms
(That do with amorous mixture twine their boughs
Into a league-union) and so flourish,
Old in each others arms; when now if thou
Proceed to trial in this bloudytaske,
My fears do with prophetike motion tell me,
We are undone eternally.

Have you so slight an estimation of my worth,
In managing bright arms, that you can fear
My persons suffrance, O Parthenia?
Thou would deprive me of that same, which time,
Should he decline his restless course away,
Shall never equal, from my youth-full head:
Thou wouldk detain a chaplet of such baize,
As not Penein Daphne first transformed
Could boast the like for freshness: dry my love,
Those sacted eyes drowned in crystal streams.
Or if thou wilt, I'll kiss away thy tears,
In stead of heavenly Nectar.

This but ads to my misfortune, Sir, I am your wife,
And never yet requested any grant,
Unless your love deny me not my first,
And only suit; leave my good Lord to tempt
Your destiny, Amphialus is so good
In his kind love to women; that I doubt not
To find some means without your honours breach,
To put this fatal combat off.

No Parthenia,
'Tis but in vain to tempt me with your prayers,
Could he spit thunder would affright the Gods,
Or wore at each lock of his hair a flash
Of piercing lightning, yet I should attempt
To snatch the fery chaplet from his head,
And as a garland of victorious baize,
Wreath it about these temples.

Well my Lord, since no persuasion will reclaim your will,
Go, and be happy in your disastrous task
My maids and I will pay each hour to heaven
A thousand vows for your success; I give
You my free licence; O that deathful word
Comes from the Organs of my troubled soul!
As a constant does from a timorous maid,
To an enforcing ravisher.

Why now, thou art my best Parthenia, doubt not love,
But I will bring white victory to crown
Thy glorious front; give me but one kind look,
T will fill me with heroic force: let's in,
And feareleffe take a happy parting kiss,
Suspicion hinders loves immediate bliss.

Sweet Sapho, will you still persist, and kill whom you might save?


'Tis your own various will
Enforces my contempt; but ^ere's no place
T'afford our loves an answer: the kind gra^e,
That decks the plains, will smile when we do fit
On its green tapestry, and aptly fit
Our wild affections: Shepherdesses, l^t
Our woolly charge within our folds be set,
Lest the hoarse Wolf to sate his ravenous thirst
With blood of Lambs, do through our weak flocks burst;
After let's meet upon the neighbouring plain,
And there determine of our loves: I'll strain
A little on your patience to rehearse,
On the late Nuptials, this ^uing verse.

Do my dear Sapho.

Shepherds, attend her Lays.

They get us credit, and our Sapho Baize.

The holy Priest had joyed their hands, and now
Night grew propitious to their Bridal vow,
Majestic Iuno, and young Hyme^ies
To light their Pines at fair Parthe^ia's eyes;
The little Graces amorously did skip,
With the small Cupids, from each lip to lip;
Venus her self was present, and ^ntide
Her virgin Love; when (...), on either side
Stood as her handmaids Chastity and Truth,
With that immac^e g^ider of her youth
Rose-colour'd Modesty: These did ^nd ^esse
The beauteous maid, who now in readiness,
The Nuptial tapers waving about her head,
Made poor her garments, and enriched her bed;
While the fresh Bridegroom, like the lusty Spring,
Did to the holy bride-bed with him bring
Attending masculine virtues; down he laid
His snowy limbs by a far whiter maid;
Their kisses link their minds, as they embrace
A quire of Angels flew about the place,
Singing all bliss unto this pair; for ever
May they in love and union stil^ persevere.

'Tis almost sung for the nuptials,
Why was't not sung with music?

voice would have been tired with it.
Come, let's depart,
Love though obscured still flames about the heart.

I could have wished the King
Had destined any to this fatal task
But noble Argalus; in him there rests
Such a commanding fullness of true worth,
That as't will be a glory to overcome,
'Twill be a grief equal to think'gainst whom
The present fury of my arm must be
Unwillingly directed.

Famous Amphialus;
'Tis so much honour to be held your friend,
'Twere indiscretion in me to admit
A thought of being your enemy: we two
Should meet, my Lord, to revel, not to fight:
But since th'injustice of our Fates does force*
This sad contention; dear Amphialus,
Think that two brothers may with hot resolve
Strive to achieve one crown, yet still be friends*
The laurel destined for my head will wither
If it be snatched from thine.

More famous Arg^l^s,
Under whose hand the great (...) fell^
These attributes of courtesy do speak
Your noble natures free^effe you and I
Should rather exercise our able arms
In one another quarrel, than employ them
Upon our selves. Dear Argalus, our fates
Are too in just t'ingage our swords against
Our bodies; for in harming thee, I offer
Wounds to my self; we two retain so much
Affinity, by friendship, we must needs be
One individual substance.

Good my Lords,
Since there's that sympathy of love and nature
'T wixt your two souls, dissolve it not; the blow
That shall divide your hearts will be more impious
In sep'rating that union, than in cutting
Your twists of life asunder.

Philarchus, you are so noble,
Our wills desired* you an indifferent Judge
In our unwilling difference, since you are
An equal friend to both.

Philarchus,
We two are fortunes scorn that we should be
Such friends in soul, yet by our deeds be thought
Severest enemies. Dear Argalus,
Let not thy lenity regard my life,
Which is so worth less, 'tis a weight I wish
Rather to lose than keep: but guard thy own,
Preserve that precious blood, which I shall grieve
To see diffused on earth, nay rather weep
Than shed a drop of it.

How much, my Lord, you vanquish him with courtesy
Whom your arm means to conquer? But Amphialus,
Since we are mutual friends, and yet must seem.
Mutually enemies, to testify
'Tis by our fate, not malice, we are foes,
I'll make thee my full Executour; bestow
A gift upon thee of that priceless worth
Posterity shall never boast I^par^llell^
When I am ashes, if there be a wretch
(For some there are that dare blaspheme the Gods)
Does injure my Partheni^; prithee friend,
Let be thy Care to punish that contempt
Against virtuous purity: and as the last
And most supreme inducement of my love*
If by thy hand I perish, let my heart
Be sent to my Parthenia.

The same justice
I beg of thee, my Argalus, to have mine
Convay'd to my Philoclea; and if ^ame
(As it may chance) traduce me after, death,
Noblest Argalu^, justify thy friend,
Thy poor Amphialus; and defend the dear
Author of my misfortune, sweet Philoclea; otherwise
Posterity informed by bad report,
May black her precious memory; and say
A worthless man fell by thy sword.
Let us embrace, my Argalus, and take
A true, though sad, farewell; and once
Let us employ our hands against our hearts.

Kill our selves mutually; for who first does fall,
Leads but the way to the others fu^erall.

Eternal darkness seize me: O my Lord,
You are reported to be thrall to love;
^or her sake you affect most, do not make
A breach in ebbing nature; More! This blood
Clothing the grass in purple, does convert
My heart to Alabaster. O Argalm!

O Parthenia! Never till now unwelcome have I lived
To such an abject lowness, that my life.
Must (like a malefactors) be by prayers
Redeemed from death. Let us renew the fight.
(...) Me thinks I tread on slippery glass, my unsupporting (...).
Dance measures on light waves, and I am sinking
Into the watery bosoms, there to rest for all eternity.

I have seen
So dying tapers, as it were, to light
Their own sad funeral; expiring, dart
(Being but stirred) their most illustrious beams,
And so extinguish.

Angels, if ye have charity, afford
Some Surgery from heaven. Now I see the cause
Why my sad heart (filled with prophetic fear)
Sought to have stopped your journey and why I
Compelled by power of overruling Fat^
Follow'd you hither. Oh Argalus!

Parthenia, I do feel
A marble sweat about my heart, which d^es*
Gongeale the remnant of my blood to Ice;
My Lord, I do forgive you, friend, farewell.
Parthenia, shower on my pale lips a kiss,
'Twill waft my soul to its eternal bliss.
Parthenia, O Parthenia.

So cracks the cordage of his heart, as Cabl^s
That guide the heavy Anchors, cut by blasts
Of some big tempest. My Lord, your wounds are many*
And dangerous, 'tis fit you do withdraw*
And have'm cured.

I am careless grow^e, my life
Is now more odious to me than the light
Of day to Furies: Madam, I am past
The thought of grief for this sad fact, and (...)
Griefs individual substance: pray forgive me,
Heaven knows it was not malice that betrayed
Your Lords loved life; but a necessitous force
To save my own. Joy comfort you: thus Fate
Forces us act what we most truly hate.

Dear Madam, calm your passion, and resolve
To arm your soul with patience.

Patience Sir?
Doubt not so much my temper, I am calm.
You see o'th sudden as untroubled seas.
I could stand silent here an age to view
This goodly ruin. Noblest Argalus,
If thou had died degenerate from thy self,
I should have flowed with pity, till my tears
Had drowned thy blasted memory; but since
Thou perished nobly, let thy soul expect
A joy, not sorrow from me: the green oak
Laurel, and lovely myrtle shall still flourish
About thy sepulchre, which shall be cut
Out of a Mine of Diamonds; yet the brightness
Proceeding from thy ashes shall out-shine
The stones unvalew'd substance.

Sure she is grown insensible of her grief, or fallen
Into some wild distraction.

You mistake;
'Tis not a fury leads me to this strange
Demeanour; but conceit that I should sin
Against my Argalus. Should I lament
His overthrow? No Blessed soul,
Augment th'illustrious number of the stars.
Outshine the Ledan brothers: I'll not diminish
Thy glory by a tear, until my breast
Does like the pious Pellican's, break forth
In purple fountains for thy loss, and then,
It shall diffuse for every drop thou shed'st
A Crimson river, then to thee I'll come:
To die for love's a glorious martyrdom.

'TIs certain my Alexis; have not I
(Who in their presence for love daily die)
A cause to blame my destiny, and be
Oppressed with a continual melancholy?

You are your own Oppressor.

O wretched fate!
I in their presence ^oat on every one,
Yet in their absence am content with none.

Yet I am in a far worse case
Than any of you both alas.
This villain Cupid played the knave,
Or at my birth his mother gave
Some of her beauty to my natural parts,
Which do allure even stony hearts,
That I am weary of so many
Good parts, and would lend some to any.
I Clitophon, even every limb
About thee can with beauty trim,
And never missed: I ^are be sworn
There's not an inch about me worn,
Which has not, all the Maids can tell,
Waiting on it of love an Ell*

O far more happy Strephon,

I do (...) Alexis, I will surrender you
That happiness with all my heart:
Were there but only two or three,
Or four or five did dote on me,
I grant you then'twere very well,
The handsome th^n should ^eare the bell;
But there's not in this face a wrinkle,
Nor on my precious nose a pimple,
Nor a hair upon my chin,
(But those you see are very thin)
Nor any squint comes from mine eye,
But that so^e w^nch for it does fry
In loves hot furnace: Though ne'er so coy,
Each Lass would my good pars enjoy.

Why does not Strephon then,
Make use of time, and choose the richest Gem
Out of this Mine of beauty, and enrich
Himself by marriage*

My fingers itch at thee to ^ foolishly: Would have me make an Anatomy of my
self?

Or dost suppose
That unto one I'll wed my nose.
And to another all the rest
Of this sweet face? A pretty ^est*
Should I pretend my self to match,
The wenches then would play at catch
That catch may; each get a limb,
Or rather with themselves in rage,
They cruel civil war would wage,
And with those terrible weapons, their nailes,
Which them in battle never fails*
And far more terrible tongues* (...)
They'd fighting scold, and scolding (...)

Still dearest ^
By prayers and tears be moved though (...)
Delight in murder; you do seem to take
Your natural fierceness from them, there cannot (...)
So much sterne vigour in humanity,
As to contemn a suppliant, and prove
To him most cruel, who does truliest love.

You are too sickle' Clitophon, you see
Leaves in green Autumn scattered from each tree
By the rude winds; you are more light than they,
More fading than the flowrey dress which May
Attires the prickly thorns in; lighter far
Than frothy bubbles, or dispersed smoakesare,
Yet I should love you, did not Strephons eye
Dart flames might fire a marble heart; they fly,
With nimble wings about me; Strephon see
She who refuses him, will yield to thee.

Would you could persuade me to it my nimble toung'd Melpomene. I must not be
injust to wrong my friend Clitophon, my friend's my friend, sweet Sapho: and
you are a woman, of which gender (thanks be to Heaven and my good parts) I have
indifferent choice, a hundred or so. If you Aminta, or you Florida love me, the
best comfort or course you can take Is to run mad for my dear sake.

And hang your selves, for you'll so prove
True lovers hanged in chains of love.

A cruel resolution: Sapho, well,
We must resolve not to lead apes in Hell.
And we have vowed never to match but where
Strephon vouchsafes to give us; for you two,
Unless he please, our wills can nothing do.

Come hither Clitophon, you love this witty rogue, this Sapho.

Dear as my own eyes.

That's dear enough; and you Alexis love Aminta.

I dare not name that word, yet there's in me
A most severe and lasting constancy, to fair Aminta.

O be gentle Strephon, let kind pity move
Thy honest heart, not to deprive our love
Of its true comfort.

I shall be sure now to be famous for some thing,
Your hands, your hands, my pretty pair of turtles.

Will you forsake us Strephon?

Will you give me away?
Whose heart desires to live only by your affection.

I cannot help it, less I should distribute my self amongst you; I'm very
glad the matter is deposed into my handling; these wenches are in good hope now
that I will have one of them my self, and that makes them refer themselves to
me: here Clitophon, take Sapho, and you Alexis the beautiful Aminta: But be
sure to confess you have but my reversions. You'll give me leave to kiss your
wives, or so, when you are married, I'll not go an inch further, as I am a true
Arcadian; and so shake hands, and Heavens give you joy. Now Clitophon you're
excellent at that sport, shall's not have a frisque or so at your Wedding, ha?


We'r all your servants.

Now Strephon we have suffered you to play the fool all this while,
Receive our true opinions of you.

I, come, let's hear't.

Thou hast a face
So full of vileness, it does disgrace
Deformity it self; there's not a woman,
Were she to filthy prostitution common,
That could affect thee.

Cease to torment him Sapho, the pretty el^e
Begins to see the beauty of it self:
We must attend our Lady.

Strephon go,
And hang thy self, or else resolve to show
Thy self no more, but like an Owl by night,
Or keep thy ill-favourd countenance to affright
Wolves from our sheep: Come lovers, now 'tis time
To celebrate our joys, which then renew
When proof has sealed our fancies pure and true.

Now do I perceive my self an errant ass, and could hang my self in
earnest, were I sure but to die in jest for it: these wenches are shee-furies,
and I hope in time to see them grow so abominably ugly, that they may hate
them: for to say truth,

These women are mere Weather-cocks,
And change their minds more than their smocks;
Have hearts as hard as stony rocks,
And tongues that lie worse than false clocks,
By which they catch men like Jacks in a box:
And so with my curses I leave them.

'Twould be the safest way my Lord, and which
Would best suit with your honour; be a means
To gain fair Philoclea.

That blessed name
Charms me to adoration: O my Lord,
Philoclea's love is like a mine of wealth,
Guarded by watchful Dragons; there attend
Legions of fears, and unrelenting thoughts,
On the unvalued treasure.

I could wish you would express a more indulgent care
Towards yourself: you see the angry King
Grieved for his daughters, and Zelmanes loss,
Attempts what ever may invade your life;
I shall endeavour your reconcilement with him; but my Lord,
Farewell, I know you wait some opposite; I wish
Your actions crowned with a deserved success.

Thus honest Lord engages my observance: how my fate
Plays the sly tyrant with me, and involves
My thoughts in killing passions: flames meet flames
With equal resolution, and contend,
Like Cadmus earth-borne brothers to destroy
Each other by their fury; fear kills hope,
But a new rising from the former urn,
Takes vengeance on the murd'rer: wretched I
Live as to live were every hour to die.
A most sad apparition suiting well
The inward horror of my mind! this Knight
Sure should not be my enemy, he fights
Under my very colours; Noble youth,
If what your outward figure speak, does challenge
Relation to your mind; I see no cause
We should endanger our mortalities
In this unfortunate quarrel: there appears
So great an outward sympathy, it tells
My soul we should not combat.

Teach your fears
This fruitless hope: I come not hither armed
With resolution big as Fate, to part,
Overcome with aeyry treaties; sooner think
To charm the Genius of the world to peace,
When earthquakes have affrighted it, tha^ with
Well-worded eloquence, to decline the height
Of my waked wrath.

Sir, you promise
An Early conquest over me, but there rests
In me a manly pity, would not stain
My conquering hands in your too innocent blood;
I would not have your virtue, gentle youth,
Be like a toward Cedar overwhelmed
By an outrageous tempest blasted ere.
It come to full growth; if for honours Cause,
And to atcheive fame, you attempt my life,
Let me desire you to employ your force
On some less fortunate Warrior. I am loath
To triumph in the guiltless spoils of your
Yet blooming honour.

Read thy friends this dialect of cowardice:
Know, to incense thee more, I'm one that hate
Thy dear Philoclea, with so dire a spite,
That I pronounce her one, who lives upon
The spoil of innocent virtue, that has caused
Guiltless esfusion of more Noble blood,
Than ever filled hers or your baser veins.

Then I see, you come to rail, and must chastise the wrong
You do inflict on her, whose spotless soul.
Is so much ignorant of the least guilt,
It understands it not: recant this wrong
Opinion of her purity, and leave off
To wake an anger that had rather sleep,
Than rise to hurt you.

I see then I must add
New truths to affright your cowardice: Your mistress
Is the decay of more same-worthy souls,
Than she has hairs or vain bewitching looks
T'inthrall your wanton passion: on your heart,
My sword shall write this for a serious truth,
And underneath it, that unworthy lie
You have pronounced, in justifying her free
From my just affirmation.

Fiends could never have so incensed me,
Bless me! sure some Angel's entered
Into arms against my unworthy self;
Those golden locks, surely are Pallas head-tyre, or the Queen.
Of Love has masked her self in Mars his shape,
So to betray my luckle^se arm to slaughter
Of the worlds exquisite beauty.

Now my joy
Exceeds the greatest trophies: Argalus,
Me thinks I see him riding in a chariot drawn by Doves,
Cut the bright firmament, and there attend
My wished ascention.

Some mountain that
Has stood the longest rage of time, unloose
Its stony roots, fall on me, that I never
May be on earth remembered; dearest Lady,
Look up, and let me shower a flood of tears
Into your wounds: distraction seize me; may I
Like some black prodigy contemned by light
Never be more distinguished.

Nay my Lord,
Do not let passion discompose your thoughts.
You've done an office for me, that blots out
All my conceit of hatred: pray, forgive me,
I injured your Philoclea; armed for death,
I came to have it from that hand which (...)
My Argalus; weep not girls,
I do not need your moist religious tears
To usher me to Heaven: Look how an host
Of Sainted lovers on their turtles wings,
Conducted by my Argalus, approach
To wa^t me to Elisium; take my breath
That flies to thee on the pale wings of death,
Argalus, O Argalus.

Can I retain mortality, and behold
This impious act of my dire fate? this piece
Of new demolished Nature, were it placed
For its own Ivory figure on a Tomb
Of purest Alabaster, would be thought
One with the stones white substance: Maids, convey
Your Ladies body hence, while I depart
To find a grief out, that may break my heart.

Haplesse Lady,
Let us resolve not to out-live her, but
Like constant servants, wait upon in death
Our murd'red Mistress.

Our poor lives cannot
Redeem her loss, not pacify her ghost,
For her late slaughter. I have composed
An Elegy on her death, and beauty: hear it.
Happy Arabians, when your Phoenix dies
In a sweet pile of fragrant spiceries,
Out of the ashes of the Myrrhe-burn'd mother,
That you may still have one, springs up another.
Unhappy we, since 'tis your Phoenix nature;
Why could not ours our, only matchless Creature,
Enjoy that right? why from Parthenia's urn.
Should not Parthenia gloriously return?
O, there's a reason: 'tis because Natures store
All spent on her, is now become too poor
To frame her equal: so that on her Hearse
My trembling hand shall hang this funeral verse.
True love, and beauty, none can boast to have,
They both are buried in Parthenia's grave,
Who was loves, glories, beauties, virtues pride,
With her love, glory, virtue, beauty died.
Now girls,
Strew flowers upon the body, while our tears
Imbalme her memory; and what ever ears
Shall hear this story, may with Justice say,
None loved like Argalus and Parthenia.


