HOw do these new Guests like us?

Very well:
That fortnight they've been here, I have observed
From them not the least relish of distaste;
The Lady and her sister are so good
Themselves, their innocence cannot mistrust
Ill in another, specially in us,
Who do assume that formal gravity
Might dash prying eyes: But is the sister
Cured of her Ague perfectly?

The Spring
Does not produce an Ague but for Physic,
She's cured, and only does expect her sister,
The Lady Yellow, otherwise I fear
We should not have her company.

Green-Sicknesse take her,
I thought it had been that, and then my Art
Would have been requisite. I should have found
Some lusty youth that would have given her physic,
More powerful to expel that lasy humour
Than all your Cordials: Heaven, I can but think
How in this seven years, since we came to town,
The Tide is turned with us: when thou were an Inne-
Keeping Apothecary in the Country,
The furniture of our shop was Gally-pots,
Filled with Conserve of Roses, empty Boxes,
And Aqua vitae glasses: and now thou art
My most admired Doctor, walk in Satin,
And in plush, my heart.

Applaud my wit that has effected it.

You will grant I hope
An equal share to me? Was it not I
That first advised you to set up a School
For Female vaulters, and within pretence
Of giving Physic, give them an over-plus
To their disease. How much this has conduced
To our advancement, forgetfulness it self
Cannot deny.

Nor will I, my dear associate, I have now
Achieved a wealth sufficient to procure
My self a license, though the murmuring Doctors
That do not bite-backe it, though they watch
All opportunities that may undo
My estimation: we must therefore arm
Our selves with circumspective care: be sure
Those virtuous gentle women, who are now
Domestic guests, have no cause to suspect
A misdemeanour here, nor that, our daughter,
A virgin could as morning air or Ice.
So timorous of society, that she seems
Neglectful of mankind, be exposed to every common eye,
Frequents our house, we must be politic, wise, or our state,
Will soon embrace a ruin.

Are you the Doctor Artless pray sir?

My name is Artless

Sir, I am sent from Mr. Mixum, your Apothecary, to give attendance on you.


Your name is Urinal, I take it?


you take my name by the right end sir, my father was a brother of master
Mixum's function: marry my mother told me a Doctor got me, for professions sake
I hope you'll use me kindly.


Doubt not good Urinal, if thou be not cracked can thou hold water.


Well, that is, be secret, insooth husband, the young man will be very good at
a dead lift, to serve our patients turns, he has a promising countenance.


A good subsidy face mistress, but master Mixum has certified me, that hither
come Ladies and gentlewomen, City wives and country wives, and the better sort
of sailors wives: Nay wives of all sorts, but Oyster wives, some to have the
falling sickness cured, others the inflammation of the blood, the Consumption
of the body and lungs; if I do not to any man or woman administer a glister,
vomit, potion, Iulip, Cordial, or what physic your worship shall think fit,
with dexterity, say I am no sound Urinal, and beat me to pieces.


I believe thee, but did Tom Mixum give you nought in charge to say to me?


O yes sir, he had me tell you he had a fat Goose in the pens, only for your
pulling: a yunker of a thousand pound per annum.


Say so, what is he; know thou?


I saw him sir, he was a propenman: but I think has not much more wit then my
self, he seems of a good ^ane disposition, and may I believe, be led by the
nose as quietly as the tamest Bear in the garden: he has not wit enough to be
a knave, nor manhood enough to be an honest man: this is my (...) of him sir,
when you see him you'll understand him better.


With licences, is not this (...) a receiptacle
For sinners?

Now you are in it perhaps it is, what mean you?


Pish, seem not to obscure, is it not in plain terms, a house of ease.


There is one in the garden sir.

Where one may do his business with (...) fear of Marshall,
Constable, or any one of that most awful tribe.

Surely this gentleman comes to take a purge, he talks so eleanely.


Shall I have answer sir? I come as hot from sea, as a
Hollander from herring fishing, I have an appetite,
The most insatiate citizen who frequents
Your mansion cannot tame; had she been fed
With amber possets, eaten sparrows eggs, or her accustomed
Bevendy, been the juice of Clare or Sparagus.

What abuse may this be?
Perhaps your most officious pander (...)
That for a shilling will betray his sister
to prostitution; did mistake, be gone, or I shall
Fetch a gentleman will whip your hot blood out of you.

Shall I ^unne for the Bead les mistress?

No go to the next Justice for a warrant, and make haste, be sure I'll have the
knave smoked for abusing my house.


This must not fright me, do you not keep a pimping
Roaring varle^ noted as much as pig, have you not constant
She ^uldiers in your citadel, none such,
Had Hollands Leaguer, Lambeth Marsh is held
A Nunnery to your College.

And the three Scuirrels in the town; I warrant a very
Sanctuary to it.

Come here's gold, be not so bashful, Mistress pray receive it,
I know you are open handed.

Now I desie thee for a Rascall^ Urinal why run you not to the Justice, his
man would have taken your money ere this time.


Yet least I should mistake you, though I am by all
Truth confident this is the house: pray resolve me;
Has the Lady Yellow a chamber here?

Yes sir, she lies in the yellow chamber, and has done this two months.


I did believe it.


Nay you may believe me if you will: I know neither Lady Yellow, nor yellow
chamber, I have not been here above half an hour.


Sure sent this fellow hither, he's so unmannerly, silence Urinal, what if
that Lady have a chamber here sir?


Now he comes to the purpose.


Nay speak directly suppositions: include a doubtful sense, if she have not,
I shall repent the error of my language and crave your mercy.


Impudence I think, beyond my own rests in this youth,
I must find out his meaning; tis perchance some one
Sent from her jealous husband, whom she told me,
In discontent was travelled prithee wife go in, and tell the
Lady Yellow, here is one wishes the knowledge of her.

Hang him young whisling, he know a Lady, pity of his life first.


Do as I bid you: Urinal attend your mistress in.


Yes, I will attend her in and in too, to do her any service.

Sir, the uneivill language you have given me,
Might justly stir a passionate man to rage;
But it no morestirs me then the light wind,
If you've relation to the Lady Yellow:
She's one who^e virtues merit that respect,
'twould be a stain to manners not to use the meanest of her
Friends with due regard: pray sir what is she to you?

As any woman else is for my money, only I must confess, I have an itch, a
tickling thought to her before the rest of common prostitutes: I know she'll
lodge in none but vicious houses, which enforces me think yours is so.


Tis a misconceit, I me sorry for her sake (whom I esteem
So chaste, the pure untainted Doves may envy
Her unstain'd whiteness) should be cast upon
My innocent house, expect I'll send her to you, she'll shape you ^
Just answer, would she were as they suspect her.

This Doctor is dishonest, speaks untruth,
My jealousy is just, that any man
Should so undo his reason; in belief
Of women's goodness, as on their loose souls,
To venture his creation; nay transform
His essence by them: for a cuckold is
Na^ures huge prodigy, the very abstract
Of all, that is wonderful: contempt and shame, are accidents as
Proper to his brow, as baire and whiteness.

Is this she sir?

I nephew that's the monster.

If Africa did produce no other monsters, there would
Be more cuckold in it then Lyons, but to my business,
Madam the old tradition of this house invites your
Knowl^dge to conceive for what I sent to speak with you.

As yet indeed it does not.

Truly it does, I hope I shall obtain
The virgin glories of this days encounter,
Come shalls kiss, and then retire into your chamber.

My chamber, sure your manners lies in your berd, what do you take me for?


An excellent creature* one whose meanest smile
Would tempt a votary earnest at his prayers,
Before the image of his tutelar Saint; to vary his
Fixed brow: yet I must tell you, you are a factress^ of the
Devils, one who fell damnation pleasingly as Asps
Infuse their itching venum: a standing poole,
On whose salt womb the too lascivious sun
Begets of Frogs and Toads a numerous off-spring.
Compared with you is empty of corruption.

^so have at him, a strange complement to win a Lady,
Sir by your first discou^e I had imagined
You came to spend part of this cheerful morn
In amorous dalliance with me, I am apt
For entertainment of it, as a bride
Long time contracted to some exquisite man
Is on her wedding night, but your quick change,
(Did not my glass assure me) no great blemish
Dwells in my cheeks, would urge me to mistrust
An imperfection in them: they are my own sir,
I do not wear (though its common among Ladies)
My face ith day-time only, and at night
Put off the painted visor, this hair believe it,
Was never shop-ware, you may venture on me, let but your
Creature keep the door, my chamber is empty for you.

Impudent strumper.

Ga^ y^u be a woman, utter this, the hot desire of quails,
To yours is modest appetite, you carry
A stone about you, not to warm your blood
Oppressed with chilly cold, but to inflame it
Beyond all sensual heat, which you would extinguish,
(Had you a soul about you) with your tears,
Or weep with the continuance that tall Pines
Diffuse their gummy drops in summer, and
Faster then trembling Isicles, or snow, at their own dissolution.

This is stranger yet sir, I see you come to convert me
Prompted with a zeal would choke ten precisians earnest in
Their hot house of convention, alas poor youth thy want
Of practice in the sweet delights of love,
Undoes thy judgement, can there be a joy
Equal to this to have a sprightful Lady,
Whose every lineament speaks captivity
To the beholder, clasp with the same strictness
That curling billows do embrace a wrack,
Her lovers neck, kiss close, and soft, as moss
Does some oregrowne Oak; but I see tis vain,
To prate to thee whose ignorance may plead
Excuse for thy fond here^ie; go depart,
Turn Eunuch and reserve thy voyee, perhaps ^ will purchase thee
A petty Cannons place in some blind chantry.

I'll cut off their discourse, if (...) be right i'll have my benefit out of her:
Dalinea attend her Ladyship, Madam I fear you take cold here, your Sister,
Mistress Know^ worth expects you too within; Gentlewoman you cannot complain
you have been used uncivilly; pray now depart, tis time.


They may return to the wise man my husband, from whom I'm sure they come, and
tell him my disposition, ha, ha, ha.


Flames rise on flames successively, the sphere
Has no such fire as I do ^arbour here.

What divine creature should the other be, well master
Doctor, we shall be even with you.

I, do your pleasure sir, the small Riveret
Does in its cold waves, seem to drench the sun
(When liks a riotous drunkard) his hot rays
Sucks up the pea^ly waters, if this Lady
We are in her breast, the burning spots of lust,
They shall increase, and like the Stars, light her soul
To the firmament of pleasure. The business sirrha?

The business sirha, he's gotten into the Lordly phrase
Already, Sir the gentleman I speak off?

Is this he? would you have ought with me sir?


Amon Deui, this is the Doctor: Foutra I would fain speak to him, Sir I
should be happy to initiate my knowledge in your acquaintance Master Mixum an
Apothecary, at whose shop I use to eat Eringo Roots, did recommend me to you.


Honest Tom Mixum, you are welcome; what's your design with me?


Fame does divulge you to be a man experienced in the Arts.


Of cousenage and lying excellently.

Which does concern our bodily health.

And you perhaps Iabor of some disease,
And come to seek for remedy, I can
As Gallen or Hipocrates, read a lecture,
On maladies, their causes and effects,
Tell by the countenance of a man, the ill oppresses him,
You by that ^ altitude of your horoscope,
Should be subject to Calentures.

Neen up mine ^eale min here: ick neet, infection vanish I never was subject to
disease, but the gentile itch which I obtained in the Low Countries.


I was in hot service certainly.


With licence sir, let me desire your character, I long to know you, Symptoms
of worth declare you in my opinion noble.


I shall explain my self by land shape a far off, my father was a Dutch man.


Which makes him look so like a smoked westphalia ham, or dry Dutch pudding.


And one in the conspiracy with Barnevet, at whose hanging he fled ore hither.


And the gentle noose had knit up him, and a hundred of his country men, ^our
land would not be pestered so with butterboxes.


Thinking to have purchased a monopoly for Tobacco: but that the Vintners took
in snuff, and informed the gallants, who had like to smoked him for it.


An admirable project.


Afterwards he undertook to have drayn'd the Fens, and there was drowned, and
at the ducking time at Crowland drawn up in a net for a widgin.


Pray sir what tribe was he of?


He was no Jew Sir, yet he would take pawnes, and their forfeits too, and has
left me such as you see, I am a proper man: a trifling patrimony, a thousand
pounds perannum.


I admire no man begs him for a fool, and gets it from him.


May I request your name?


My name is Sconce sir, Master Ier^my Sconce, I am a gentleman of a good
family, and can derive my pedigree from Duke Alvas time, my ancestors kept the
inquisition out of Amsterdam.


And brought all Sects in thither.


And took their surname from Kickin pot, the strongest Sconce in the
Netherlands.


An excellent derivation for a Dutch-man, Kickin-pot.


I had a good strong cousin taken in by the enemy, last summer, Skinks Sconce
Mr. Doctor, my cozen german once removed by a stratagem of hay boats a fire on
them.


That should have been before they came there Master Sconce.


But tis thought our nation had recovered it ere this, but that the villainous
Dunkerkers at sea met with the Herrinbusses and made stocke-fish of them.


They beat them soundly then it seems.


Have you no brothers Mr. Sconce?


Not any that I know of, as I am gentleman, nor was there any of my name till
of late, that gallants have begot me namesakes in every Tavern.


But the business you have with me is unrelated yet, and I have haste, pray
what may it concern?


A household matter Mr. Doctor; I would be loath to be accounted troublesome, I
should be none of your vulgar guests though: Mixum has informed me you have
fair lodgings in your house, convenient for ease and pleasure, might I be so
much engaged to your goodness, as to affoord me a handsome one for my money, it
should be an end earement conspicuously trenching upon my gratitude, and render
me your obliged servant ever lastingly.


As long as his money lasts, that is


If that be all, for Tom Mixums sake, were chambers scar^r, you should not be
denied. Urinal bring the gentleman into the dining room, I'll go acquaint my
wife with it.


Urinal, art thou styled Urinal?


It is my right and title to be termed so.


Come hither my sweet Rascal, can keep council, there's gold for thee,
thou shalt have a new case sirrha, wilt thou be true to me?


I will steal nothing from you Mr. Sconce.


Thou look not like a man of theft, I mean in a design.


Tis not to convey gold over, in hollow anchors, to pay your Countrymen
soldiers; if it be, I'll hear no more of it.


Pish, not that neither. Mixum thou know him, dost not?


Twas he preferred me hither.


I did imagin't; my fine Urinal reports thy Mr. to have the rarest salve.


The weapon salve I warrant.


Which would, if I were desperately hurt, cure me without a Surgeons help.


So I have heard indeed.


Now Urinal, it is our Country Custom only to Stick or Snee. But could
thou but procure this precious salve, I would confront the glistering steel,
out-face the sharpest weapon.


My Master is very cautious in parting with it.


Save you gentlemen, belong you to this house?


No sir, this house belongs to us.


Mistress Know-worth, the Lady Yellows sister, she is not stirring?


Tis a lye sir, she is.


Your wit is very scurvy Sir: if you serve a Creature here to carry messages;
pray deliver one to her.


I may choose whether I will or no though.


Nay, and he shall choose sir.


Prithee good friend let him; i'll do it my self.


Nay, that you shall not neither: what stand I here for? But sir, 'tis not the
fashion of this liberal age, to employ a man of merit in a message without
consideration: your Lawyers Clark will not acquaint his Master with a Clients
cause, until his fist be soundly greased: Why may not I then use the
privilege of my office? Sir, we Doctors men take aurum palpabile for
Restorative: you are not unfurnished sir.


O thou would have money; there's for thee, prithee Entreat her presence.


Instantly, instantly, noble sir, Mr. Sconce pray bear this worthy gentleman
company.


Why should she lodge here? all similitude
Explaines this house for vicious, and this Doctor
For an impostor: Though she have ^bin sick,
She might have found to remedy her disease,
Another, and more famed Physician
Than this: She stays perhaps to bear
Her sister company. Whatsoere's the cause,
Who dare deprave her innocence, or cast
A thought of blemish on her virtues? Light
Diffused through air (although some thicke-brow'd fog,
Or sickly vapour do invade airs sweetness)
Suffers no loathed corruption. Thomes may gore
With envious pricking, the discoloured leaves
Of the chaste wood-binde, but can never blast
Their unstain'd freshness.

Now in the name of madness what (...) this man? Sir are you jealous of your
wife before you have her?


What if I be sir.


She may chance Cuckold you after you have her for it.


Good Go^combe hold thy prattling.


Coxcomb? how Coxcomb to a naturallis'd Dutchman? Death sir, shall I blow you
down with my Can; or show you Twibill.


How Sir?


Nay, be not angry man, I meant no harm, tis but a complement all salutation,
I purchased of the Mr. of the Order of the valiant Knights of the Twibill.


A new Order of Knight-hood, that may I know the institution.


Servant welcome: Lovering entreat
That gentleman to withdraw with Mr. Doctors man.

Sir, my Mistress begs your absence.


Beggars are no choosers my friend: she shall
Undergo no contradiction: but Madam, tis the fashion
As I tak't, to salute at meeting, and kiss at parting.

You had best kiss her double Mr. Sconce.


Lady, serviture vostre a vous assi Monsieur tresnoble.


He looks like a squirrill indeed: this way sir.


I hope you grow to perfect health,
The Native beauty that once sild your cheeks,
Like to the budding Rose puts forth again,
After cold winters violence: and your lips
On whose soft touch, had it bin possible,
Death would have died himself, begin to show
Like untouched Cherries, pale with Morning dew,
Which once shook off, the purple fruit aspires
With amorous blushes to entice the small
Linnet and wanton Sparrow from their Lays,
To dote on its pure tincture, till they eat
What they admired.

-- O you are pleasant servant; did you know
How near I am to death, and for your sake,
Your humour soon would alter.

Truly, fair one,
It is a sweetness in you, I could wish
Were tempered with less passion: (Your much care
Of my unworthy self;) tis but a fortnight,
Since last my eyes enriched their needy sight,
By the reflection of these stars, and had
The least ill seas'd me, you had bin the first
Whose ears would have received it; harms are aptest
To be reported where they are least welcome.

They are indeed, and one of yours is come
To kill my knowledge; such a one, as had
You worn a common heart, no strong disease
Could have dispatched sooner.

-- I feel
No inclination in my faculties
Tending to sickness: I have never yet
By nightly sursets forced my youthful blood^
To a distemper.

Would your youthful blood
Has ne'er forced you one. Perfidious man,
Had I achieved the patience of a Saint
(Seclude my love to thee) I should in rage
Title thee worthless: nay, a name above
That hateful appellation: did you never
Injure a Creature of your mothers one Martha?

Ha: how mean you Lady?

In the black act of Sin, when you designed
Her honour, as a carcass to the Grave,
Wherever since your deed of ill was acted,
'T has slept lost and forgotten.

By just truth.

Invoke your falsehood, if you dare etect
On the black number of your heed less oaths
A monument to perjury. White truth,
Flies from the ranckorous poison of your breath,
As from a stifling damp. Can you deny
Without a blush what I have urged?

My resolution staggers a tall Oak,
Whose weighty top has discomposed his roots)
When whirlewinds do assault it, fits unmoved,
Balanced with me, to recollect the strength
Of impudence, and deeply contradict
Her mightiest affirmation, were to wage
A feeble war with truth. Say I did Mistress;
Twas ere a thought reciprocal enjoynd me
A serious duty to you and your mercy,
In which you do approach as near heavens goodness,
As heaven does blessed eternity, will pardon that wit less error in me.

Truth I shall n^t: the harmless Myrtle first shall live in frosts,
And the pale Couslips flourish, ere warm showers
With quickening moisture raises them to tell
The e^rly Violets they are not alone
The Springs prime Virgins: my peculiar wrong
I freely pardon: but if you respect
Your conscience, seek that injured woman, and
Restore by sacred marriage the sad loss
Of her deprived fame. Do it Free-wit, heaven
Will smile at thy integrity; my tears
Shall strive to wash your crime away.

She weeps: so choice flowers, when extracting fire,
Enforces their lost leaves to a mild warmness,
Do through the Lymbecke temperately distill
Their odoriferous tears. But tis most just
To lose a chaste love, when distained with lust.

BUt are you certain Urinal this ointment is Orthodoxall; may I without
error in my faith believe this same the weapon salve Authentical?


Yes, and infallibly the cream of weapon salves, the simples which do
concur to the composition of it, speak it most sublime stuff; tis the rich
Antido^e that scorns the steel, and bids the Iron be in peace with men, or
rust: Aurelius Bombastus, Paracelsus, was the first inventer of this admirable
Unguent.


He was my Countryman, and held an Errant Conjurer.


The Devil he was as soon: an excellent Naturallist, that was all upon my
knowledge, Mr. Sconce; and tis thought my Mr. comes very near him in the
secrets concerning bodies Physical, as Herbs, Roots, Plants vegetable and
radical, out of whose quintessence, mixed with some hidden causes, he does
extract this famous weapon salve, of which you now are Mr.


There's a Welch Doctor in the City reported skilful in compounding it.


He? a mere Digon a whee* his salve, why it is Casebaby to my Masters: I dare
be sworn tis nothing but Methegling boiled to jelly, the blades of Leeks, mixed
with a Welch Goats blood; then stamped, and straind through a piece of British
Freeze, or one of the old laps of Merlins Jerkin.


Probable Urinal. That Welch Doctor I do not like: I did attempt him for the
weapon salve, and like a Turk he answered me, that Hollanders were Iewes.


They are a rebellious nation that's certain.


And that the salve was only made for Christians; there is a City Captain
too; I know not how you stile him.


Not Iohn a Stiles, the Knight of the post is it?


No, no, a very honest gentleman; but he's^, reported to have achieved the
salve in Lapland among the witches, and to be very liberal in imparting it to
his friends, an Aldermans daughter Urinal may, and they say a witty
gentlewoman.


Is't possible Mr. Sconce? they have few sons of that condition.


Had a desperate hole made in her by a gentleman, with his But-shaft, as in her
Country garden he was shooting at Penny prick; was, when none else could do
it, eur'd by this Captain.


By this light a trifle, a mere trifle, the very scraping of our Galley-pots
performs more monstrous wonders: there was a Puritan Mr. Sconce, who, cause
he saw a Surplisse in the Church, would needs hang himself in the Bell-ropes.


Why did not the Sexton ring him by the ears for it?


Him my Mr. seeing, did for experience sake anoint the noose wherein his neck
had bin, and it recovered him.


Is't possible he should so easily escape a hanging! but on good Urinal.


Nay sir I'll tell you a greater miracle: You heard of the great training last
Summer master Sconce?


O when the whole: City went in Arms to take in Islington; marry I heard the
Ale-wives curse the report of their Muskets, it made their Pies and Custards
quake ith'Oven, and so come out dow-back't, which almost broke the poor
Harlots.


I then Mr. Sconce there was at least three-score blown up with a basket of
powder, thirty of their lives my Master saved.


Rarer, and rarer yet: But how good Urinal?


He dressed the smoke of the powder as it flew up Sir, and it heald them
perfectly.


O that any body would blow me up, to see how I could eure my self. Still on
good Urinal.


Nay there, are thousands of this kind: but now I think on it since, it did
commit a villainous mischief.


Could it ever do a mischief Urinal?


Yes, yes, it has done a most notorious one, sufficient to exauctorate its
power, and almost annihilate the virtue of it.


What was't good Urinal?


I could even weep to tell yousir: tis supposed twill never recover the favour
of gentlemen and City wits, they are quite out of conoeite with it.


But why should they be so Urinal?


I scaree dare answer Sir, for fear you hate it likewise,
Twas such another mischief.

Prithee what? nay on my gentility Urinal.


Why sir, it cured two Sergeants, and their yeomen.


How? two Sergeants.


Who otherwise had drunk Mace-Ale with the Devil.


A Capital crime that same, to cure two Sergeants.


Tom Mixum I thank thee for the man
Thou set me; tis a most serviceable knave;
I've set him to pull you bird of Paradise, you parcel Dutch: thou sentst him
hither too.


I knew he was for your purpose, Mr. Doctor: this is the gentleman I told you
had one thousand pound per annum, and would be a match for Mr. Doctors
daughter.


There was a touch for him indeed Urinal.


It will, indeed, now I consider on it, I had rather she should marry a wealthy
gull, than a witty Beggar: Wife and Mr. Mixum, will you discourse a little with
the gentleman, sound his intent and proneness to a match, and as you find him
use him; Mr. Sconce I should be glad to wait on you, did not urgent affairs
withdraw me.


Mr. Doctor I saw you not before: I am sorry sir, you will be gone so soon, I
should have changed some syllables with you.


Another time sweet Mr. Sconce.


A very good fortune Mrs Arilesse for your daughter, and not to be neglected:
shall I speak to him, or will you for sooth?


Perhaps he will speak to us: see kind gentleman.


Lady, my manners does command me leave you: you would perchance be private by
your selves, or peradventure Urinal were more behoofefull for your company:
then I adieu Vfroes.


Pray stay sir, we have some business with you, (let me alone to try him Mrs.
Artless) besides we had rather be private with a gentleman, then by our
selves: they say you Dutch-men are the kindest men, and love a woman heartily,
you kiss so finely too.


You shall feel that presently Artless you shall not blame my manners, I have
a lip, a piece for you


So please you sir, I have another touch for you too, Artless.


A very strong touch that same; she will beleaguer me I think, and her Cannon
shot will be kisses, they almost blow me over. Surely the Minikin is
enamoured on me.


Motion it to him Mrs. Mixum.


Pray give me leave to feel his mind first, Mistress Artless: Tis pity sir,
you are so long unmarried; you are an exceeding handsome Gentleman.


Yes, yes, I know that well enough, I might serve for a gentleman Usher, were
my legs small enough: there are Ladies would consume half the revenues of
their Lords, on such a man of Chine and pith as I am.


Fie master Sconce, think not of Ladies sir, they are so imperious, a man must
serve them as they do command, at every turn and toy comes in their head;
they'll puff and fret else, like their taffeta peticoats withoften brushing up;
I will protest to you, you had better set you mind upon some honest country
Gentlewoman, or Citizens daughter, Master Doctor has a handsome girl (though I
say it before her mothers face) only she wants the audacity, which a man would
put into her; would you were married to her: Sir, she may do worse, I dare
assure you.


Yes indeed may you master Sconce, have you not seen her yet? tis a pretty
puling baggage, so it is, marry ere I would make her a Lady, she should be a
new Exchage wench, your Citizens wives they are the goodest creatures, live the
finest lives.


Very right, mistress Artless, good souls, did you but know sir, what tender
hearts they have, how kind they will be to a gentleman that comes to deal for
their commodities, they will use him and it were their own husbands.


I'll lay my life this musk-melon has a mind to use me so: I care not much to
give her a touch, or so, she's of the right sis, but Mistress Artless should I
have your good will, if I could love your daughter.


Certainly sir, were you of English blood, I should like you better.


Fie Mistress Artless, when I was a maid, I had a desire to be a kin to all
nations: I have tried some English men, and they are like my husband, mere
meacocks verily: and cannot lawfully beget a child once in seven years.


A touch, by this light, that's the reason there are so many bastards in the
city.


Your Spaniard as a neighbour of mine, told me who had lived among, is too
hasty, he will not give a woman time to say her prayers after she is bed: your
French is with a woman as with an enemy, soon beaten off, but mistress
Artless, if you will marry your daughter to the most complete man, let him be
Dutch: they are the rarest men at multiplication, they will do it so readily.


They be indeed very good Arithmeticians.


Here comes the Ladies: Mistress Mixum we will depart, they must not know our
conference.


A diew kind master Sconce.


Adieu min vroen, I have a pestilent mind to this talking harlotry, I will to
her, but if I should obtain the Neapolitan beneach, a creek ith'backe, or so,
from her, 'twould be but a sourvy touch, that for me, I should be forced to
swim ith tub for it, or be hanged by the arms, and smoked like a bloat
herring, I had forgot my precious salve, should I be served so, 'twere but
dressing the weapon that hurt me (which I can have at any time) and be sound
again, ha other donsella's: Madams, they are creatures of Plush, and Satin, I'll
accost them.


This is the gentleman I told you of, I wonder what his quality may be, our
Landlord the Doctor is a much famed man, and surely very honest.


It shall be so, my English is not complete enough
To hold discourse with Ladies of regard, my natural
Dutch too is a Clownish speech, and only fit to court
A leagurer in: no your French shall do it, and thank
My memory, I am perfest in it, tis your most
Accomplished language, there's scarce a gallant but does woe
His mistress in the mood, but if they should
Not understand me: well I will experce
Me it.

He means to speak surely in cringes.


Madametres puissant en lecommand. de touts ceurs de cest monde, ie que sui
semond invite en tant de lieux que ie no scay ^u aller pour abrir mon sayn: a
un beauty digne de mon acceptance.


Heyday, what's this, how should he know
Who can speak French.

He supposes it, prithee answer him sister.


Suiuant vostre treschier virtue, Ie sui si liberal
Que ie abadonnerenie renounce a tout mis biens
Demon vid mon Engine mon alayne mon sang mon
Pensir (pour ie no saurioye, que dire) proueior mon
Ceur mon affection tout a vostre plaiseur.

Aproche's ie no vou's morderay pas.

Si ie no vous fay tratement t'el que
A vons appartient, ie espere que vostre
Noblez te contera de mon bon intention.

There is the Lady you enquire for.

Thank thee my friend, there's for
Thy pains, depart.
Nephew stand clear, observe.

Sily'a chose en mon petit povoir en quoy ie vous puisse
Servir aider commands moy librement.

Vous Este fort liberal de suparoll monsieur.

At it so close, so now he wrings her hand,
And she smiles on him: and her sister laughs
At the lascivious posture, that I could
Command a flash of lightning, or usurp
A minute the prerogative of death
That I might force a ruin on them, sudden
As water falls from mountains, yet so wretched,
They might despair and damn themselves, what say they?

They speak French, I understand them not.

O that's the ages bawd to lustful contracts,
Hell seize them, may their lips, like twins
In mischief grow together, that their foul breath
May have no vent, least like some poisonous fog,
It do infect the air.

Per dona mi Madam apre's le's leures le maine.

Again, why strait,
If I stand still, they'll to the very act,
I shall behold my self transformed to beast,
And like an innocent lamb, when the keen knife's
Prepared to slit his wesand never bleat
But in calm silence perish; villain devil
Had thou as many lives as thou hast sins.
This should invade them all with the swift rage
Of fire or whirlewinds.

Heavens bless ye
Innocent gentleman: sister my husband.

I fear he has mischiev'd him.


You think you have hurt me wonderfully I warrant.


Good sir be more your self.


Give me thy hand, tis but a touch ith arm man, thou art a valiant fellow, I
warrant thee a right twibiller, run a tilt at a man before his weapon is
drawn, your, Lady would not have don't I me sure, but tis no matter, thou hast
done me a courtesy, or otherwise I should not take it so patiently, (I shall by
this means experience my precious weapon salve) hold, thou wilt fight no more,
there's a twibill for thee, thy sword I'll keep till we next meet, Ladies beso
los doights de vostre blanch mains, adieu comrade remember I am beholding to
thee.


He's gone, but has left his hanger behind him.


Sister prithee speak to him, he has put me in such a fright,
I cannot.

Sir be not so extremely passionate,
Discourse your grievance mildly, hear her answer,
Then censure justly of her.

Brot^er ^ admire
A person of your breeding should transgress,
Civility so highly, to at empt
Upon a gentleman, who to my knowledge
Injured you no way.

He is your champion, and you his Ladies.

How sir?

His prostiutes I might have said O creature,
Who art so bad, the present age will question
The truth of history, which does but mention
A virtuous woman; with what impudence
Can thou behold me, and a shivering cold,
Strong as the hand of winter, casts on brookes
Not freeze thy spirits up, congeal thy blood.
To an ere'lasting le^hargy. The stars
Like stragglers, wander by successive course,
To various seats yet constantly revisit
The place they moved from: the Phaenix whose sweetness
Becomes her sepulcher, ascends again
Vested in younger feathers from her pile
Of spicy ashes, but mans honour lost
Is irrecoverable the force of fate cannot revive it.

Sir tis past my thoughts,
What should incense you to this jealous rage
Against me your loyal wife, when no one blemish
Lies on my soul that can give testimony
Unto my conscience that I have not ever
Truly and chastely loved you.

Yes just so the green
Willow and shady Poplar love the brooke,
Upon whose banks they're planted, yet infect
By frequent dropping of their witherd boughs,
Its wholesome waters; that thou should be fair
And on the white leaves of thy face bear writ
The character of foulness, swallow up
In thy abyss of sin, thy native pureness,
As the high seas that do with flattering curls
Entice the spotless streams to mix their waves
With the insatiate billows, that entomb the innocent rivers.

O me unfortunate woman.


Good uncle speak more kindly to her, alas she weeps.

I see it nephew,
So violent rain weeps or the purple heads
Of smiling Violets, till its brakish drops
Insmuate among the tender leaves,
And with its weight oppress them: these are tears,
Such as distill from henbane full of poison,
And craft as she they come from: tell me woman,
Who hast not shame enough left in thy cheeks
To cause a blush, dare thou usurp the name
Of good or virtuous, when these ears can witness
Thou did solicit yesterday this youth,
To fate the ravenous heate of thy desire,
With all the eloquence well worded lust
Could borrow to adorn its painted fow lenesse.

Was it you indeed? I'm glad I know it dear sir,
Had I the chastest temper, that frail flesh
Could ever boast of, your strange usage of me,
Would undermine it: to forsake my bed,
Before my blood scarce relished the delights
Attending on young nuptials, so that I
Expect no anger from you, if I seek
That from the charity of other men,
Which your neglect (though you in duty owe it)
Will not allow me.

Well said sister.

Life she'll tell me straight
She will retain before my face some slave,
Some strong backed monster to perform her hot
Desires with able activenesse, the slow
Motion of snails that carry on their heads
Their shelly habitations to the pace
Of my dull rage, is swift as erring flames,
Which had it not been leaden winged; as sleep,
Ere this had seized the monster.

Ha, ha, ha, the man is sure distracted, ha, ha, ha,

Heyday, here's laughing and crying both with a wind,
As boys do, a juglar's but an ass to a right woman.

Good sir will you walk? the gentleman he's in a terrible sweat, should he
stand still, he may chance catch an Ague.


A Cardus posset were very sovereign for him, I perceive his fit is coming.


How do you husband, sweet heart, what not speak? I thought your jealousy
ere this had driven you into France, but now I see you fear to be sea-sicke,
you have found me out it seems; I hope ere long you will provide Gossips for
the child I go with, mark you duck.


If I stay, my rage
Will hurry me to mischief, better leave her
To certain ruin, then betray my self
To danger of it, when strong tides meet tides
In a contracted channel, they theirforce,
Resign to the wearing of the troubled waves
A frothier livery, then when Oceans
Encounter with full liberty, the winds
Imprisond in the Caverns of the earth,
Break out in hideous earthquakes, passions so
Increase by opposition of all scorns,
Tis most opprobrious to be armed with horns.

He leaves you here sir as his spy, does he not?
Pray wait upon your master, I suppose he is so.

Pardon me Madam, he is my uncle.

Which of his sisters sons are you?

The Lady Popingaies.

My cousin Harry Popingay; I cry your mercy sir: your good mother knows, and
grieves Ime sure, to see her brother wrong me as he does: should I tell her how
you dealt with me too, she would chide you soundly.


Your goodness Madam will forgive it on my submission and sorrow for it.


Weel beg it for you sir.


Sister he has it, were it possible
To work a reclamation on this man,
From his fond jealousy, I would not wish
A change to be an Empress.

Madam, my mother does entreat your Ladyships company in your chamber, Mrs.
Mixum has brought the conserves my father did appoint her.


Tis the same face, or else some Angel does
Assume this shape to mock mortality,
With the true form of beauty.

Nephew pray see us oftner, and use all means to gain your distracted uncle
from his frenzy, sister shall's walk; Dalinea be it your care to see my
Nephew forth.


I shall Madam.


Life, she speaks too
A tempting language, such was our first mothers voice,
While she was innocent, most perfect woman.

Would you have ought with me sir?

Yes bright virtue.

That title relishes flattery for ought you know: I may be vicio us.


Goodness deludes it self then,
I cannot flatter Lady, you mistake me:
What I shall speak, comes from an innocence
Yet undefild by falsehood.

Speak quickly, if it concern me, otherwise I must
Entreat a licence to depart.

You cannot affoord example of such cruelty
To following Lovers, to deprive my sight so soon
Of yours, for whose least view, the dark Cimmerian, blinded
With continual sleep, would rouse his heavy eyelids.

Nay, and you begin to run a complementout of breath,
You' l drive me hence indeed: (believe me sir) had I not liked
You well, my modesty would scarce have suffered the least
Interchange of words (but since it has done) pray be brief,
What tends your conference to?

I love you Lady
With the religious fancy, that one Saint
Affects another; such a heate as mine
Was that, with which the first who ere knew love,
Had their souls warmed (essential) not as now
The common garb is to adore a lip,
Or any other lineament, but for
The abstract of perfection, which does glory
In being derived from one so good as you are,
Am I become your captive.

This to me, sounds as the empty whistling of the air
Does in some hollow vault, unspotted truth
Informs my ignorance, there's not a person
In all the multitude of men loves chastely.

Be so charitable
As to believe I can, who never yet
Knew flame was vicious, my desires retain
Their maiden purity, no other object
Did ere attract my souls unblinded eyes, but your fair self.

Then I believe you sir,
No man will be so worthless to dissemble
With me, who cannot think but all the world
Intends the same reality that I do:
Yet tis an error, which persuasion scarce
Shall free me from: that every woman ought
To love a man with that indifferent heate
She fancies other women, without sense
Of difference twixt the Sexes.

Soul of sweetness,
How equally an Angels intellect
Informs her sacred Reason: to love chastely,
Could not have bin defined with juster strictness,
Had we produced the constancy of Swans,
Or never changing Turtles, as our patterns,
(It had but described chaste love) the Palm that prospers,
(Not but by's fellow) and the Vine that weaves
Of her own leaves a thin, yet glorious mantle
For her naked lover. Do but emblem what
Her truth has utt'red: but resolve me fair one,
Could you affect so?

If that were all
Requisite to love, I could; but there's obedience
A Nuptial wreath brings with it, which I fear
My frailty would scarce keep, and to become
Perfidious to a vow were such a sin
As I should quake to think of.

You allege
Vain difficulties: I perceive your looks
Would be propitious to me, did your will,
Ashamed perhaps to suffer sudden conquest,
Not play the Tyrant with them, and call back
The crimson Nectar from your well-form'd cheek
To guard your heart from yielding: come, let's kiss,
The modest heate proceeding from my lips
Will thaw your soul to softness.

Away, we may not;
If true -- chaste love had rested in discourse,
I could have been its votary, but a thought
Of any thing beyond it, is to me
Dangerous as sickness: farewell sir.

Sure some white Cherubim,
Coming to teach the irreligious earth
The ancient truth; in its swift flight to heaven,
Pronounced that happy farewell to the souls
Its music had converted, I've not lost
In my first trial, like some venturous man,
Who finds the Indies, though he get small wealth,
Yet he sets forth again, in hopes at last
To lade his winged vessel: I'll return.
That fire's not out, which does in Ashes burn.

SO, now it works: the operation I believe is not on the sudden, and my
wound rancles as fast as if he had run his Rapier through a Head of
Garlic, or washed it in Aqua fortis; and this weapon salve, so much extolled
byth' Twiball Knights, commended by Mixum, deified by Urinal, and adored by my
believing self, procures no more miraculous effect, than if it were unguentum
album. Well, I am confident yet, there's no defect in the ^guent; my blood, my
blood is sure anathemated; carries some cursed impediment about it, that
disannuls the virtue and incomparable force of the divine s^lve. This Dutch
blood of mine, guilty of Bacon grease, and potted Butter -- Sof, who are these?
my Cozen Fortress, General of the Twiball Knights; and his assistant Pirke,
with Mr. Mixum; twere a detriment to valour to complain before them.


Yonder's your Cousin talking to himself: pray Gentlemen draw near. Mr. Sconce
I brought these friends to visit you.


Thanks good Mr. Mixum, Cousin Fortress, and my Diminutive Captain Pirke; give
your hands, you are welcome, very welcome.


Health to the Weather-cocke of my Kin, the noble Signeur I^emias Sconce.


Propitious, and auspicious be thy stars, man of renown and merit: ha thy
arm in sling my Palmerin: Confusion Captain Fortress, he wears a wound
about him.


No, no, a touch, a mere touch, a Flea-bite, Captain Pirke.


Is't not recovered by the salve Mr. Sconce?


Yes, as good as whole; the weapon salve will remedy it.


Yes, past all chance it will: twill mundifie and purge your body Cousin: I use
to combat three of four at once, every spring, purposely to be let blood a
little: it does me good all the year after.


I am very glad of it. But tell me Cousin Fortress, how fares it with the
residue of the blades, the valiant Twiball Knights, the famous brethren, do
they walk in Coat gelt, or all a mode in Dunkirke Cloaks?


Those fashioned Cloaks I never heard of before: I marvel my Tailor gets not
a pattern of them; Pray sir, what is a Dunkirke Cloak?


Not know a Dunkirk upper garment, a leag^er Cloak; behold my I^, this Cane,
this staff of office; this we stile the Millitarie Caster.


Twill hardly keep a shower of rain out that.


Are they confined to Chamber still, for want of Boots, or Linen? I love to
hear of their prosperities.


Why Cousin they are well, but in the accustomed garb, the frugal brim, and
petty feather: they expect most carefully thy admittance into our Order.


'Tshall be don^ after my wedding Cousin* I have got, dost hear, sirrah Pirke a
girl of mettle, the Doctors daughter Bully, Fortress. Flesh of Milk and
Roses Blade.


But Cousin, tis necessary, you inrole your self into the Family before you
wed: our order, like the Knights of Malta, does admit no persons espoused: but
with this difference, if they receive the Order Bachelors, they may then
marry and yet retain the title.


Say you so Cousin?


Certain truth my Io: we met upon our grand Exchange last night, our place of
trade and consultation, and there concluded some decrees, necessary for
supporting our Commonwealth.


How perdition Captain? how durst you meet without me? or conceit that decree
valuable, which the voice of Captain Pirke has not assented to. Refuse me sir,
the brethren of the Blades shall me their bold confrontment: vengeance do you
take me for a boy, or some Pigwiggin? consult without me?


Patience, good Captain Pirke, I would fain hear them.


He reads his necke-verse, reads them in my presence: Death rob me of the
privilege of my place and dignity Captain, confound you, I could show you
Twibill for it.


What does this Tom Thumb mean troe?


Why sirrah Dandiprat, you might have given attendance.


What without a summons, you can send Jack Shirke your Beadle; to congregate
the meaner branches of the Brotherhood, not a Picke-pocket I warrant you, but
had notice of it: and must I be forgotten? by my man-hood tis base.


You have given the Captain too bold a touch Senior Pirke; thou art just like
the Mouse to the Elephant, borne to vex him (...) p^ethee for my sake let him
read them.


Your sake prevails, or otherwise --


Attend then Cousin Sconce; our Orders I'll assure you are such, as the most
envious Justice, nor their Goose-quill Clarks, that smell at new Bridewell, and
Finsbury shall not exclaim on. Imprimis, it is generally decreed.


How, generally without me? Fire of Styx this is insufferable.


Good Captain Pirke, on cousin Fortress.


That no knight of the Twibill; as Whiskin or ally gentleman shall presume to
lead or convey any of the sisters of the order, viz. Striker, Cockatrice, or
Gynimeg through the watch after twelve, unless he see them asleep, or be in
see with the Constable, under the penalty of being sent to the house of
Correction.


Renounce me sir, this order I'll not sign to, it savors of cowardice, fear to
convey a sister through the watch, tis against Our noble institution


Next it is enacted, that none of the grooms of our wardrobe shall offer to
deprive any man of cloak, coat, or hat, unless it be in the dark, as they
fear to answer it at the next assises, and be burned in the hand for it.


'twould be a hot touch for them cousin Fortress.


Next it is decreed, that the receivers of our rents and customs, to wit
divers Rooks, and Saint Nicholas Clerks shall certainly use no more slights
to get more then they can clearly come off with, under penalty of being
carried up Holborn in a cart, and at Tiburne executed, which may tend to the
dissolution of our whole fraternity.


But have you concluded nothing for the sisters, I long to hear them?


O yes cousin, we have confined them to a certain price, a stipend reasonable,
so that they shall not need to dive into pockets.


They will do that if you would hang them cousin.


I do disclaim that order, Captain Fortress. your wisdom should have well
considerd at wha^ charge they are, for coach or hand litter, specially those of
the gentile garb, next their ushers must be maintained, paint paid for,
clothes, provided and the matron satisfied, these things considerd, could you
be so cruel as to confine them to a price by valour sir, I am ashamed on it.


Tis mended by the next order, they are prescribed from wearing Plush and
Satin, unless in peticoats.


You will not have them like the Jewes at Rome wear party coloured garments,
to be known from Christians?


By no means sir, we would have every one take notice of them, but Marshalls
men, Beadles, and Constables, and therefore have ordained that they shall wear
Beaver Hats, Poak'd Russes, Grogram Gowns, or at the best wrought Taffeta,
Fox Skin Musses, Moehaire peticoates, Bodkins and Croscloaths edged with
gold lace.


This is the habit of our Rotterdamians.


The only shape to hide a striker in: ever while you
Live, your city is most secure from officers, and most
Notorious to gentlemen, they will take up your city ware at
Any rate. Besides while they ^lanted it in plush,
'Twas an abuse to gentlewomen and Ladies, we have er'd in
Questioning them for females of our tribe, and had our pates
Broke for it.

But Cousin is this edict generally confirmed by all the society of the
Twibillers Knights and Ladies.


Tis universal cousin, only for Captain Pirkes name, we left a blank,
there's the decree sir, read it if you please.


Twas the safest course to leave a blank for me, or I had
Blanked your whole decree! I had by magnanimity.

Im^rimis, I Captain Furibundo Fortress.


A fearful name that same.


Knight great master of the order of Twibill: Lord of no
Cloak, Viscount Ratan, cane and one spur.

You are but an ill cock of the game it seems.


Count Freeze, gray Felt, and mony-lacke, Duke of Turnbull, Bloomesbury, and
Rotten Row, Lord paramont of all Garden-Alleyes, Gun Ally, and Rosemary Lane.


He has more titles then the great Turk^ Proceed sir.


Chief commander of all Twibills, dangerfeild and whiskins, who will quarrel in
Taverns with a man, and not fight in the field with a mouse. And of the
residue of the fraternities of husses, diverse dams and decoyes, sole sultan
and grand signeur, have to the premises set my mighty hand, together with
hands of our trusty and our courageous assistants (this blanke's for you
Captain Pike) Holafernes Make-shift, Rosiran Knockdowne, and twenty six more
of our principal companions of the order.


Nay there are others too, bu^y not their appellations in oblivion, they merit
memory.


To which at our command also are subsign'd our most illustrious and remarkable
sisters (they are slit nosed perhaps) (there was a touch for them cousin
Fortress) Donna Iesabella, Garreta, mother of the maids of Lambeth Marsh, with
her conspicuous consort, at the three skipping Conies in the town. (a touch
that) you mean the three Squirrels, you are cunning cousin Fortress, together
with our most industrious servant Pythagoras Pig.


I gave him that name from his transmigration into cast suites, who has put his
petie toes to it, and finally the woman that sings ballads, has her name
trunled at the tail of it.


I marvel master Doctor has not set his hand to this.


Sealed with the seal at arms of our order, viz. Three Rooks volant in a field
sanguine, two broken jugs the supporters, and a Twibill for the erest, and
given the second day of this present month, at our mansion royal, or place of
meeting in the long gravield walks in our usual fields.


Well Master Doctor you'll remember me,
And have an eye unto my nephew, I trust
Her with you. Farewell sir.

Doubt it not good sir Martime.


Captain Pirke pray retire unto the brothers of our
Society: entreat them to prepare again tomorrow, for
My cousin Sconces enseasement.

Upon compulsion sir, I should refuse, marry on fair entreaty I do fly, good
and high fates look on you.


Son Sconce (I'm bold to call you so) how does your at me?


Indifferent sir, but yet I have not found
That rare effect in the weapon salve you spoke of,
Urinal I fear since it cured the two sergeants and their
Yeomen, the virtue has been much extenuated.

Twas your ill dressing the weapon: give me your sword son, this is of the
right salve the welsh Doctor makes, this shall save my credit. (Annoints the
weapon.) Now Urinal take this weapon, lap it warm in linen clothes, and
locke it in my son, your anguish son will soon be mitigated.


I have a touch of it already sir.


I have seen experience of this weapon salve, and by its most mysterious
working known some men hurt, past the help of surgery recovered.


Mark you that master Sconce, the gentleman may be believed.


Yet I cannot
With my laborious industry invent
A reason why it should do this, and therefore
Transcending natural causes, I conclude
The use unlawful.

He is unlawfully begotten sir, dares term it so, there was a touch for him
cousin Fortress; I called him son of a whore, and he would take no notice of
it.


But pray sir, why should it be unlawful?


Cause Conscience and religion disallow
In the recovery of our impaired healths,
The assistance of a medicine made by charms,
Or subtle spells of witchcraft.

his mother was a witch, says this maid, so there was another touch for him
cousin Fortress, son of a witch, but he understands not that neither.


Conceive you this to be compounded so?


I'll prove it master Doctor.


The proof of a pudding is the eating, in your teeth sir, a pudding in his
teeth: you know what I mean cousin Fortress, another touch for him, but al's
one, he has wit in's anger, and will not understand me.


If he durst blunder for it Cousin Sconce.

Yet to avoid a tedious argument,
Since our contention's only for discourse,
And to instruct my knowledge, pray tell me,
A (...) you not tha this same salve will cure
At any distance (as if the person hurt
Should be at York) the weapon, dres'd at London,
On which his blood is.

All this is granted 'twill.


Nay we will grant you more sir (that it will not) and yet prove it, and you shall
prove your self a (so you shall.) There had been another touch for him cousin
Fortress, but I feared he would have understood me now, ere you shall prove
it.


Silence cousin Sconce, let's hear the whif^ter if he cannot verify his words,
sink me my Jo, he shall taste arm of dangerfield.


Out of your words sir I'll prove it Diabolical, no cause
Natural; begets the most contemned effect,
Without a passage through the means, the fire
cannot produce another fire until
it be applied to subject apt to take
Its flaming form, nor can a natural cause,
Work at incompetent space: how then can this
Neither consigned to the matter upon which
Its operation is to cause effect;
Nay at so far a distance, work so great
And admirable a cure beyond the reach
And law of nature; yet by you maintained,
A natural lawful agent, what dull sense can credit it.

Very authentic this, well if the devil have taken the pains to be my
surgeon, my arm I fear will be possessed, I feel an evil spirit in it
already.


Respect the Doctors answer.


Sir, you speak reason, I must confess, but every cause
Works not the same way; 'we distinguish thus:
Some by a Physical and real touch
Produce: So Carvers hewing the rough Marble,
Frame a well polished statue: but there is
A virtual contact too: which other causes
Employ in acting their more rare effects,
So the bright Sun does in the solid earth,
By the infusive virtue of his rays,
Convert the for did substance of the mold
To Mines of mettle, and the piercing air
By cold reflection so ingenders Ice;
And yet you cannot say the chilly hand
Of air, or quickening fingers of the Sun,
Really touch the water or the earth.
The Load-stone so by operative force,
Causes the Iron which has felt his touch,
To attract another Iron; nay, the Needle
Of the ship guiding compass, to respect
The cold Pole Artic; just so the salve works,
Certain hidden causes convey its powerful
Virtue to the wound from the anointed
Weapon, and reduce it to welcome soundness.

The salve is legitimate again, Cousin Fortress, O rare Doctor


Nay, you shall hear him tickle the gentlemen I warrant you.


This, Mr. Doctor, is
A weak evasion, and your purities
Have small affinity; the glorious Sun
As tis a general instrument of heaven,
In all its great productions, and the Air
An Elemental agent, naturally
Engender Mettalls in the earth, and Ice
On the self (...) waters: The Load-stone
As tis a simple body, may afford
That virtue to the steel by secret power
Of all-commanding nature. But that this,
This weapon ^lve, a compound, should affect
More than the purest bodies can, by ways
More wonderful than they do, as applied
Unto a sword a body void of life,
Yet it must give life, or at least preserve it.

Pish, he talks like an Apothecary to the Doctor.

You mistake, it does not,
Tis the blood sticking to the sword achieves
The cure: there is a real sympathy
Twixt it, and that which has the juice of life,
Moystens the body wounded.

Rare Parac^lsian, thy Annalls shall be cut in Brass by
Pen of steel.

You may as well
Report a real sympathy between
The nimble soul in its swift ^light to heaven*
And the cold carcass it has lately left,
As a loathed habitation: blood, when like
The sap of Trees, which weeps upon the Axe
Whose cruel edge does from the aged Trunk
Dissever the green Branches from the Veins,
Ravished, forgoes his Native heate, and has
No more relation to the rest, than some
Desertlesse servant, whom his Lord casts off,
Has to his virtuous fellows.

Mr. Free-wit returned again, and in discourse
With Mr. Doctor: I'll not disturb your conference.

So please your Ladyship we had even done.
I am glad she's come to rescue me.

There was a touch for him Cousin Fortress, victus, victa, victum, he looks
like a Schoole-boy vanquished at capping verses: hark you sir, repent your
error, and in time you may be saved; you see the virtue of the salve the
Doctor had dressed his Speaking weapon with it. It hurt you, and it has cured
you Beware you fall not into a relapse: there was another touch for him Cousin


Doctor give your hand (father I should have said) some famed Historian, some
Gallo-Belgicus shall Chronicle thee and thy salve, there was a touch for him
Cousin Fortress. Come you shall see my Mistress.


Mr. Freewit have you yet found the injured
Woman out, I motioned at last parting?

Truly Mistress, had she bin worthy the seeking, your
Command should not have been protracted, but
'Twere a stain to my own honour to be inquisitive
After a prostitute, and a blot to your
Discretion, should nice judgements know you enjoined me
So manifest a folly.

'Twas a greater to be the author of her shame,
Whom now you slight so infinitely.

Could I slight her more,
'Twere a due justice which I owe my self,
(In hazarding the forfeit of your love)
Undone by her, but your most serious thoughts
Will sure convert your soul from the intent
Of my most certain ruin, which your last
Discourse perhaps, for trial of my faith,
Seemed to invert upon me.

You mistake; needless are second trialls, when a first
Proves you perfidious; doubtless you confirmed*
Your love to her, with the same sad protests
You've done to me (yet left her) for her sake,
And in revenge of woman's innocence, martyred by you,
I here to heaven pronounce a sure disjunction
Of our loves and vows for ever.

O reserve that breath,
Which ought like sacred incense to be spent
Only on heaven, or in delivering notes
May charm the world to peace, when raging wars
Or Earth quakes have affrighted it. Confirm't
On no such use, horrid and ominous,
As if it threatened thunder to the earth,
Or would infect the genius of the air
With Mists contagious (as if composed
Of Viper steam) O had you were wont
To be so good, that virtue would have sighed
(At the unwelcome spectacle) if you
Had appeared woman in a passion,
(Though of the slightest consequence) O do not
Renounce that Saint-like temper, it will be
A change hereafter burdenous to your soul,
As sin to one, who all his life time blessed
With peace of Conscience, at his dying minute,
Falls into mortal enmity with heaven,
And perishes eternally.

These words
Have not the effectual Oratory you first had,
When I was confident, as day of light,
Your youth had been as destitute of vice
As of deformity. So a sweet stream,
Whose bubbling harmony allured the Birds
To court its moving music, when it mixes
With impure waters, with the noise affrights
The ears, before delighted in it.

This is too severe a Justice, and extends
To cruelty, had some intemperate rage
Purpled my hand in murder (though the guilt
Would have been written in a larger Text
In Conscience black book; yet the punishment
Had not bin half so hideous. I should for that
Have suffered but a temporary pain
At worst; and my truly repentant soul
Perhaps have had free entrance to the place
consigned to penitents, when now, like so me
Manacled Captive, or diseased wretch,
On whom each minute does beget a death:
I like a slow fire by my own soft flames,
With Tortoyse speed extinguish.

Sir, your words are superficial, as a shadow which
The morning Sun produces and black night
Renders forgotten: and no more excite
Belief in me: that what you utter's truth,
Then Mand rakes groans do a conceit of death
In persons resolute* while I have yet
A specious memory left, that once my heart
Tendered you dearly; I would counsel you
First to endeavour to find out that maid,
(If that succeed not) not to think on me,
As one affianced to you by a nearer interest then other women
Are that never had conversation with you.

Had a frost, sharpe as a tedious winters Northern blasts,
Congealed your mercy, my unfeigned tears
Should with moist warmth dissolve it, mistress you
Approach so near the attributes of heaven,
That had you lived in the superstitious age,
More precious gums had fum'd upon your altars,
Then on all female deities. O forgive me,
A rigorous tyrants breath will scarce pronounce
For one and the first crime, so strict a sentence:
You shall not go yet if you will recall it,
Lovers will bless your piety, and sub scribe to your
Superlative goodness.

Pray desist, affoord me liberty to retire, I cannot alter my resolution.


Yet reclaim it; some devils spleen has lately fraught
Your breast, and banished thence mild de pity, (bostrous winds,
Force so the gentle and untroubled seas,
To swallow up some ships, its natural calmness
Would have transported safely with their wealth
To their desired harbors) were my thoughts,
Not fixed with that religion upon you
That are my prayers (when I repent) on heaven,
I should not thus transcend the laws and strength
Of manhood, and like some distressed babe
Left by its parent to the desolate woods,
Or airs cold charity, so long implore
A new and holier union twixt our souls,
Then ere had linked them which when you have tied,
Time shall depend like summer on your brow,
And your whole life be one continued youth,
(Such were the springs in paradise) and when
You pass to be a sharer in heavens bliss,
Virgins and innocent lovers spotless tears,
Hardened to pearl by the strong heat of sighs
Shall be your monument.

I shall relent spite of my settled will, if be continue
These moving supplications: Sir because
You shall not blame my cruelty, or judge
Tis for regard of any thing but my honour,
I do forsake you, if ere to morrow night
You find that woman, get her to renounce
Freely her title to you, ^ again
On (...) of your future loyalty
Will stand the trial of your wavering faith,
Perhaps be yours again: you have
Received my utmost meaning,

How I adore
This constancy of worth in her, though
It make against myself, well I must to my task,
That labour's richest that most pains doth ask.

TIS a strange humour Madam, and condemns
Your judgement of much indiscretion,
Did I not know it lawful; nay no way
But that for the recovery of your health,
I should not urge it thus, you are lately fallen
Into a desperate melancholy, and your blood
Can no way purge so well as by
Performance of what I have declared.

Truth sir I weigh not at so high a rate, my life
That to prolong it to an irke some age,
I should destroy my honour, neither do I
Find any such strange sickness raining on me
As you have urged; pray as you love me sir,
Unless you mean to drive me from
The house, repeat this argument no more.

Why look you sir, my master has
Persuaded her as much as lay in him, and
He has a tongue able to cousin the devil: but twill not do,
She is too honest believe it, for your nephew Sir Martine, she
His kept her chamber ever since she came,
None but my self has seen her.

It shall be so, the holy law of heaven
Made us one individual; the strict league
'Iwixt man and wife, ought to confine both souls
To a most constant union, injured woman.

My husband and on the sudden, speak you to me sir.


His mouth opend Ime sure, sir the Dutch Gentleman.


O my son Sconce, come hither Urinal.


This acknowledgement cannot
Be serious from him, good Sir Martine
Has your wild fancy not imposed enough,
Temptations on my fraylty that you come after
So many strange indignities, again to delude me.

Tis misery of customary sinners when they mean
A real truth, then their precedent ills,
Deprive it credit, Madam not that night,
That sacred night which spread its starry wings,
(Like Curtains shadowing the Altar) ore
Our Hymeneal couch, could witness more
Sincerity of indissolving love'twixt us,
Then does this minute, if your soul,
(Which is so passive it may justly challenge
A Martyrs temper) can dispense with pas'd
Absurd distastes, and like a Saint for humane
Condition is too vengeful freely pardon
What I amiss have acted.

As you are my husband sir, and consequently my head.

How many Lad^ies in town are of that mind.

And ought to be the guider of my youth,
I will not stand on that nice term of honour,
With you whom duty ties me to observe
With more then superficial care, t'injoyne
A penance for your folly; the light smoke
Finds not a surer burial in the a ire
(To whose embraces with ambitious haste.
On azure wings it soared) then has your guilt,
In this forgiving bosom, this pure kiss seals the agreement.

She offred first too, and me thought she kis'd
As she would eat my lips, the ravenous touch
Of her hot flesh has seard me up like grass
In summer time, and her foul breath like blasts
Of Southern winds, has quickened my dead fire
Of jealousy, nay raised it to a greater
Heat then my former.

What aisle you sir on the sudden?

Viper, toad, out of my presence, ere my just waked
Rage, get to its height, whence like a Falcon towering
At full pitch ore the trembling foul, it will seas on thee.

Madam tis best to leave him, I fear he's absolutely frantic; Urinal look
to him, least he act some violence on himself, please your Ladyship withdraw.


Soft patience guard my heart: wheres no offence, one safely may rely on
innocence.


Why sir Martine, how do you sir? not speak? now by my life, he looks like a
staggerell newly come to his Horns, flings his head just in that manner they
do not touch the seeling, yet Sir Martine: in time they may be three and four
at top, and serve to hang hats and cloaks on in the best knights hall in
town.


O Urinal.


O Urinal, what a pitiful noate was there, that very sound has almost
cracked me to pieces: Sir Martine, good Sir Martine what ails you? or rather
what ails your wife, that you hum and haw so after kissing her* her breath is
savory, I dare be sworn she has neither eaten Onions nor drunk Aquavitae.


O no, she is like a too ripe, so extremely sweet,
She poisons like the honey which small Bees
Suck from the Aconite, the Panther so
Breaths odors precious as the Sarmaticke gums
Of Eastern groves, but the delicious sent not taken in at
Distance choakes the sense with the too muskie savor.

You should have kis'd her as the Court fashion is, upon the cheek, but pray
^ir, why are you so jealous: yet cannot prove your Lady has a trick with her
toe, or turns oftner then an honest woman (if she do) had not you better like
an old Stag, cast the cognisance of your order into the hedge, then like a
wanton Pricket, run f^ll Butte at every one you meet, as who should say; take
notice of my horns. I am ashamed of it so I am.


Dost not believe I am? a hideous cuckold.


And must you needs cry Cuckoo therefore. There are knights in town who know
their Ladies to be Hens oth'game, and ^ive by tredding, yet like mettle Cocks
they never hang the Gills for it, they are sure fair Gamesters use to pay the
box well: especially at In, and In, (the Innes of Court Butlers would have had
but a bad Christmas of it else) and what care they, so they can purchase plush,
though their wives pay in the hole for it.


Can there be such monsters?


Monsters, they are men Sir Martine, such as you are; only they are velvet
browd a little: but hear me Sir, if a man would venture fair offer to give a
certain knowledge of your wives honesty.


Do that, and be my genius Urinal.


You would have an evil Angel of me, I'll tell you sir, my master intends
privately this night to wed his daughter to the Dutch younker S^once, the house
will be atquiet, and your Lady left alone in her chamber, her sister Mistress
Knoworth, being to go to Church with them.


What of this?


Soft and fair Sir Martine, I will in the evening steal you into the Ladies
chamber when she's in bed, come to her, and in the dark, (that's the only time
to deal with a woman) (and as another man) try what you can do with her: if
she consent (the worst) you do but cuckold your self, if hold out, being a
woman alone, in bed, and in the dark having a man standing by her, you may then
conclude her an honest wife, and your jealousy foolish, as your vexation
needless, you think I have no wit now I warrant.


According as my soul could wish.


Why law you then, who's the fool now? Sir Martine come in the evening, I
will not fail you.


Nor I hopes of trial, fare you well,
A jealous man has in his heart his hell.

well knight, if I do not fit your jealous head, let me be sung in ballads
for an erranter coxcomb then your self.


Well said mi^x, you will not have him: but you had best consider and do as I
and your father would have you: or you shall trudge for it, you shall be his
wife.


Nay in sadness Mistress Dal. you are too blame, the gentleman is an honest
gentleman, I and a kind man I warrant him to a woman; your mother and I have
made trial of him, and find him of a very good disposition, come chic you
shall have him.


Nay let her choose and be hanged, proud baggage who will refuse a gentleman of
my own choosing, but I'll send him to you and see if thou dare deny him, for
thy life, come Mistress Mixum.


Was ever innocent virgin thus betrayed
By cruelty of parents, who for wealth
Have sold my youth to slavery, the cold
Ashes of injurd maids surround my heart,
Or some divine dew, stead of blood replenish
My swelling veins, circle my thought with Ice,
Thou power of chastity, that like the fresh
Primrose uncropt, by any hand, I may
Return my self as pure and white
To earth, as when I came from it.

How do you Mistress Dal. alas poor gentlewoman, would they have thee coverd
with a Frisland horse, a Dutch Stallion: now shame upon their souls that wish
it, he's neighing here already.


Urinal, my cousin Fortress and the rest of the Knights will be here presently;
pray you prepare the music and the wine, I would not fail in the most
diminute ceremony.


Of a most absolute coxcomb, I shall provide them sir.


Now begins my horror, the fatal Bell should it proclaim my death, were
spheare-like music to his night-crowes voice; yet I must hear it and retain
my sense, continue subject to a da^ly noise from the ill boding monster.


Lady or Madamosell, Vfroe or Seniora, what you please, or in what language to
be entitled the Mistress of my thoughts, the complemental garb is customary,
and though I have learned by conversation with the Twibill Knights to kiss my
hand, believe me I had rather bestow my lips on yours; our natural Dutch
contracting is the best, without deceit or shadow, there we only go to the
tavern and be ungue browd, then drunk together. There's all our ceremony, and
tis lawful marriage too.


Would you would sir, better consider with your self and ma^ch where your own
customs are observed, my fear my quality will never suite the liking of your
Dutch manners.


Manners Lady, you mistake I've none at all; ere we will disagree about
manners, I'll be as clownish as an Upland Bore, foutra, tell a Dutch man of
manners?


Yet sir have so much charity.


We detest that worse then the former, tis Papisticall, and was with that
religion banished our reformed Common-wealth: but to our business, pretty
soul, I shall give thee touch mon and get a burger of thee.


Gentle sir, there ought to be in manhood a divine
Pity, believe me as I tender truth,
I cannot set the smallest of my thoughts
On your ill welcome love, therefore I beseech you
Not to proceed in my unfortunate match
Which will be fatal to us both, for goodness
Have so much mercy on me.

An excellent touch that, as if there could be mercy in a Dutch-man, and to a
woman? if there had been any, the Nuns at Tilmont had not been used so
horribly last summer: why should you say you cannot love me^tis a false touch I
me certain of it, I shall know anon, till when receive your lips in pledge
that no such words shall issue forth of them, adieu Lady, anon we must to the
old touch of Matrimony.


The hand of death
Shall give me first a bride to some dark grave,
Where I will mix with worms before the Priest
Knit so unjust an union, the kind grass
Will sure be green still on my Sepulchre, and spotless
Virgins annually dance a fairy ring about it.

Now if you do not catch a Roach in her troubled waters, I shall conclude you
a gudgion: speak to her; a woman has ever a hole open to receive a mans tale,
believe it you shall have my assistance, and if I do not second you
confidently, may my tongue be cramped, my wit breech'd; and the machina of my
invention ruined perpetually.


Fairest creature.


Had you said wretched'st, Mistress you had given me
My proper attribute.

Can there be on earth,
A savagenesse so great as will conspire
To afflict so rich a goodness? yet by your eyes
Adorned by those clear pearls which do transform
Even sorrow to a loveliness beyond
Indifferent beauty, I conceive some fiend
Rested in humane shape (for man would never
Have dared so vile a sacrilege) in hope
By your pure tears, t'extinguish his own flames
Caused this distemper in you.

Pish you are long to speed, be
Short and quick, that pleases Ladies.

I had a younger brother, though not fully blessed
In your sweet knowledge, yet once his tongue
Was his hearts bold ambassador, and delivered
A true narration of his zealous love,
Which is in him so permanent, that when
his ears receive a notice that your faith
Is plighted to another, twill be ^uice
Of baleful hemlo^ke to his brain, convert it
Either to sudden madness or a sleep, cold and erelasting.

I remember once a nephew of Sir Martines did solicit
That which he termed my love, but I conceived
His meaning rather was to cause discourse,
Then that his strict intention had resolved
His promises performance.

Did I not tell you she would come about?

Trust me Lady, the solitary Nightingale who sings
To her lost honour a harmonious ditty,
Loves not the thorne so dearly, to whose pricks
She sets her featherd bosom, as I me sure
My brother tenders you, the gaudy light
May sooner be obscured by wandering smoke:
Nay the eternal essence of the soul
Become corporeal and revisit earth,
After its flight to paradise, ere he
Descend to variation of his love, could you affect him.

Had your brother been
Of the same disposition and soft sweetness
That I perceive in you (though this be our
First interview) there could not have been molded
(Had I been borne to entertain loves heat)
A man that would so fitly sympathize
With my condition, nor whom I should fancy
With more entire perfection.

Strike home, and sure the iron's hot already,

Behold him Lady,
Whose every motion does as from the sphere,
Receive a lively influence from your looks;
The modest silence of the temperate Even,
When zephyr softly murmurs to the flowers
A wholesome farewell undisturbed by storms,
May sooner rest in one continued night,
Then can my soul in quiet without just
Assurance of your love, which if you grant,
Times native Belman, the shield Organd Cock
Shall cease to carrol^ (...) to the morn,
The ^arely Lark that whispers to the Sun
A constant Augury of a beauteous day,
Shall lose his light plumes in the che^kerd Clouds,
Ere I my resolute chastity* nor can you
Invent evasions to declare my suite,
Since on its grant relies the only hopes
Of your redemp^ion from the barbarous arms,
Of him you were espoused to.

This surprise,
And your strong vows would batter a resolve,
Down in a breast that could be flexible
To easy love, but since I cannot frame
My conscience to a warrantable zeal
Toward any man, I'll rather fix my hate
(For that must of necessity accrue
To him that weds me) on a person worthy
Contempt, then on your self, whose wor^ does challenge
A noble and reciprocal regard
For your affection, blessings on ye sir, think not amiss of me.

Now the curse of a tedious virginity light on ye, you will not be tupped by a
Dutch Ram, a Hausen Kender, a West-fally Bore-pig, now the iniquity of a
swagbellied Hollands Burgers get thee with child of a dropsy, if thou
marry him, why how now Master Popingay, stricken with a Planet? tis a female
Star, as changeable as the Moon, go to your chamber, I hear company
approaching, this Dutch Butter-Firkin shall be melted to grease ere he shall
have her, trust to it.


Passion on passion fall when hopes are spent,
The best of comforts is a forced content.

So here comes my blades, now plot but hit,
And Urinal shall be styled the Lord of wit.

Cousin Fortress welcome, welcome Captain Pirke, valiant brothers, nay
gentlemen, then your accoutrements be of the vulgar cut, be not daunted, tis
hereditary to Low Country soldiers to wear off reckonings, the time shall
come the little worm shall weave, and silken tribute pay to men of service,
give me your hands gentlemen, I shall be one of you anon, but Cousin F^rtresse,
what bashful youth is that that dares not thrust his nose out of his coat,
for fear the wind should blow it to his face, ha?


Tis flat enough already, this my Jo, nay show thy Physiognomy, h'is our quondam
trusty attendant, but now Knight of the Twibill, Pithagoras Pig.


Is this the famous off-spring of great hog? we should be kindred certainly,
my Ancestors were Bores, give me thy foref^ot sirrha, and tell me coz, why dost
not wander into a new skin? this begins to crackle vilely.


O tis forwant of basting sir.


No my Jo, he casts his skin but once a year, like the poor snake: well, he
has done our Order special service; but coz, where are the preparations the
vancarriors coz, to the solemnity of your insta^m^nt? renounce me, if you
vilify the institution by disregard of properties, this hand shall never
cross the Twibill ore thy head, nor give thee thy avaunt chevalier, while thou
art mortal my Jo, I say I shall not.


No matter sir Sconce, by the head of valor, my self shall dub thee.


Who you King Twadle? Mushrome you dub him?


Yes, I Gog, Magog, I dub him Garantua.


Nay good cousin Fortress, Captain Pirke, this Urinal I could even fill him
to the brim with curses, but here's my agent; come where are the musitioners
Urinal?


They will be loud enough by and by, I warrant you.


This is legitimate blood of the Spanish grape my Jo.


Lusty sack credit me coz, twill give the touch, Urinal make fast the door,
and leave us, and give us notice if any body approach.


What haste this gull makes to cheat himself in private, must the music
enter?


No by no means, weel call to them through the door, varlet avoid.
Now coz, to begin our ceremony; first, drink to me.

I like it well when it begins with drinks, tis a sign twill end merrily; this
cup is abominable to little, one can scarce wet his whistle out of it, it shall
be this goblet, a vostre grace, coz Fortress.


Sir Pithagoras we do create you skinker, it shall go round my blades, you
shall dible in liquor of account; here brother Make-shift.


Gramercies Captain.


Choke you sir, learn manners, offer to drink before betters, tis an affront
to seniority, destroy me if I can suffer this, no forsake me Captain I cannot.


There was a touch for you brother Makeshift, but good little Pirke be patient.


This Preface is very Cannonical my Io, nay, I shall learn the phrases
instantly.


Have you all had it brothers?


All but my self Sir Holofernes.


Who my coz Pig, off sup off thy wash my Jo, at worst thou can but be
swine-drunke; but coz, shall we dispatch? I long to be instald.


I now we will to it, come hither Captain, sing the hymn preparatory to
Knight-hood, but wet your pipes first, Ganimed, they'll squeak the better.


An admirable touch this, what's next troe?


Now coz Sconce, our Order does constrain us to a frisk, a dance about you, as
the Fairies tred about their great King Oberon.


But can this music play the Twibill dance, none else will satisfy.


Music you must play the Twibill dance he says, dance so while.


They dance, the wine shall tread a sink apace into my belly, you have lost one
of your best heels cousin.


No me Jo, twas off before the ceremony is half accomplished, you are our
wardrobe keeper, brother Knock^downe have you brought the vestments of our
Order?


Fuse Captain not I.


Rot me sir, you would be made to fetch them.


How, not our robes of honour the ensigns of our cheval^y?


Sink me, sir you know they are in tribulation.


Hell take the Broker: we must perforce employ one of our own suits.


Take my Buff Jerkin Captain.


Death keep it on, you'll show your dirty shirt.


Found you sir, you lye: I fathom in your guts, he has none on.


How, son of foul Adultery, the lye?


What do you blunder, whi^lers Pig, are you grunting too: shall I whet my
Twibill on your bones mips of debility?


Nay, Cousin, Gentlemen rather than you shall fall out, I'll be content to be
dubbed in my own clothes: nay pray you Gentlemen.


Tis against order, and we must observe ceremony.


O by all means Coz.


First then receive this cap of maintenance.


Cap of Maintenance do you call it? I will maintain when this old Cap was
new, 'twas a Dutch felt, but now tis nine degrees below a straw Hat; I do not
like this touch: but Coz I shall have my Beaver again I hope?


How? suspicious my Io: Brother Knockdowne disroab his neck of this old
linen, savours of a winding-sheet: this is Decimo Sexto, fears no rumpling:
Now Cousin Sconce, you must discuss your doublet.


That will be damned instantly; pray heaven my skin escape.


Here sir, receive this Military Cassock, 't has seen service.


'Thas been shot through both the Elbows; this Military Cassock has I fear,
some Military hangbyes: this Twibill Knight-hood is but a lousy Order, would I
had he're meddled with it.


Now you appear something above an Embryo: Makeshift help to untrusse his
breeches.


I shall be whipped instantly: But Cozen Fortress, is there no redemption for my
Breeches?


Sum me Captain, tis not requisite he should put off his Breeches.


Thanks good Captain Pirke, twas a friendly touch that


May not his transitory money serve to excuse his breeches?


To him it may.


A Twibill Knight ought to regard no money, but the glistering steel.


Well, since it must be so, there take my money.


Paw sir, you lose the privilege of the Order, if you respect your money.


Now do I look like -- as if I were new come from the Lottery: or what say
you Sir Holofernes, to the Picture of the Prodigal in the painted Cloth? Sure
I have now performed all the Ceremonies; if not, I me sure I have nothing else
left to perform withal.


So, now kneel down, while thus I thee create: Ieremia^ Sconce, Knight of the
order of Twibill. Now avaunt Chevaleire.


Health to our worthy Brother, Ieremi^ Sconce, Knight of the Twibill.


But brothers, there is Sack yet to be drunk, in Celebration of this
Knight-hood,


I like this drinking heartily; there's some goodness in it: will you begin,
my Captain General; I'll call you so now.


Pythagoras, fill his Bowl up. Capt. Pirk this Cornucopia To my Leiftenant
Generals health: I'll call you so now.


A place of Mark and Charge that.


Man of valour, respect this Cup to the health of our Leift, General.


A vous brother Knockdowne.


Here Sir Barrabas.


Altogether gentlemen, a health Musicians, tres humblement serviture vostre: I
ha done you right.


Expect me Io; heart of my father, you must for consummation of your
instalment, drink a cup a piece to each of us.


Twas my intention General: to you all in general, help Pith. let it be be
two Captain, tis pity to put so many worthy men in a pint pot.


Soul of my valour, you're shipped sir, you must drink five together.


You're wanton Captain, a wag upon my Knight-hood, you mean to measure the
profundity of my belly, twill be a hard task to do it to a Dutch-man --
look you Captain.


Thou shalt be my Bacchus Io, he drinks as if he had eaten Pickle Herring.


This Cup was as deep as Fleet-street Conduit. Sound me my Io, I have made a
new River in my Belly, and my Guts are the Pipes: The other cup good wreckling,
virtue shall be virtue still, so long as I can stand Captain.


That will not be long I hope.


This Collar spoils my drinking, or else this Sack has horse-flesh in it, it
rides upon my stomach. O Urinal, Ime a Knight of the Twibill honest Urinal.


Take heed you'll crush me sir to pieces. Gentlemen yonder are the Constables
at the door to apprehend Captain Fortress.


Some more sack sirrah, I shall be married anon.


That's I, tis for the linen brothers: Hell my Io, how shall I escape them?


More Sack sirrah, the the other touch sweet Pig, the the other touch.


There is no way but one sir, they have beset the house; my Master is
persuading them. Follow me, I'll by a back way set you safely out with your
company.


Noble Urinal: come Blades here's purchase for us.


This is but four Cups captain Cousin Pig. Skinke my parting Cup, and then I
me gone: ha! where be you Gentlemen, I am not blind, or play you at Boe-peep?
they are gone, this is a pretty touch, my touch my Io, with my money and
Clothes, a pretier touch still, let me see, they have left some Sack behind
them, there's my comfort yet.

Who's this? my wife that must be.
Come hither wife, thou see the worst of me
I am but drunk: Kiss me Borankee: never fear, I will not spoil thy gorget.
Hark in thy ear my Io, shall I have a gentle touch? twill do no harm, we
are to be married anon thou know; I shall get wise children on thee.


What would thou ravish me libidinous Swine? Strive, and thou die.


Twas an unkind touch that, my Io, you might have fallen under me, 't had been
the fitter place for a woman, (pray help me up again.


Yes, to thy death, if thou deny to perform what I enjoin thee.


How, kill a knight of the Twibill, and in the Ensigns of his own Order, ere
it shall be said to the disgrace of Knight-hood, that any of the fraternity was
killed by a woman, I'll do any thing: Lead on, I'll follow you.


Thus they must strive*
Who in loves subtle Merchandise will thrive.

THis stealth was unexpected, tis almost
Beyond belief, my daughter should thus change
Her perverse humour, and embrace his love
Which when I motioned to her, the dark shade
Seemed not a greater enemy to blessed light
Than she appeared to it: and that she should
Cousin my hopes, and without me her mother,
Or any friend resign her will to his,
And strike the match up, puzzles my best faith,
Though I rejoice at it.

You have reasons sir to do so, your daughter had more wit then you expected,
tis the quality of maids, to deny what they desire: had you but seen how
nimbly she trod over the threshold; you would have sworn she had been mad of
the match: I stood and heard him ask her: shall we go to the Church ^ not
too late ^ ^oo late to do well replied she again: (though it were at midnight)
and then the Dutch you (...) took her up into a (what do you call it) (...)
(and heaven speed) away they went, marry to what Church, he's gone I know not,
only I heard him swear he would not (...) at Pencridge.


And why not; tis an ancient Church, and all old things must not be cast away*
there has been many an honest couple given to the lawful bed there, so there
has.


No matter for that, he protested he would be marryd in a Tavern ere that
pencridge, there's no drink ne'er it; but at the Pinder of Wakefield, and that's
abomi^able, and he has vowed to season their bargain with a cup of Sack ere
they return.


He will not be drunk on's wedding night I hope; my daughter would have a
sweet bed-fellow of him, if he should.


There is another loving couple gone with them too for company, who will be man
and wife if the Priest say Amen to it.


who are they of our knowledge?


O yes sir, tis Master Lovering, the attendant to Master Know^rth, and Sir
(...) Niece that came but yesterday.


Is't possible? twas some ^lie policy of her Uncles to bring her hither, Master
Lovering knew her before it seems.


Too well I fear sir, they would not have marryd in such post haste else.


Well Master Doctor, I hope my gloves shall be better then the ordinary, I had
no small hand in this match, you know.


Tis nine a clock at least: twill not belong ere they return, wife pray go
in and see all things in readiness for their lodgings.


They will have more stomachs to their beds then to their suppers.


To morrow we will celebrate their nuptial feast: Urinal be you careful of the
doors* let none come in but our own company.


I'll locke them up, and keep the keys my self sir, Mrs. Mixum your husband
is with them, and in his absence I would desire a word with you.


I love to talk with any man in my husbands absence; sweet Urinal I will
fulfil your pleasure, will you go Mistress?


So now have at her.


Have I not plotted finely? has my brain
not won the laurel garland the fa^d breath
That wafts the honour of deserving wits
Among the humorous multitude (as (...)
As it speaks conquering triumphs) shall proelaime
My politic merit, who have raised my self
From worse then no name in the judging world,
To an indifferent wealth, which though^ ve g^t
By ways sinister, such as err from truth:
Nay might incur a punishment no eyes
Has ere discerned them, but with wonder how
I should achieve such fortune, now complete
In this alliance.

Sister, let's to our chambers and to bed,
That time approaches.

Your good Ladyship (I hope) will honour me so much
As for an hour to dispense with rest*
And see my bride in bed.

Your bride good Master Doctor, who should that be?
I understand you not.

My daughter Ladies, that to me
And all the house seemed so averse from marriage,
Is this night stolen forth with younker Sconce,
And is by this time wedded to him.

Beyond wonder, well sir,
We will have her bride garters, it shall go
Hard else, sister could you have thought it?

You may both credit it, instantly they will return, and
Then I'll wait upon you.

I pity the p^ore girl,
That she should be so sudden in her choice,
Enthrall her soul in the manacles of fate,
(For such are nuptial bonds) (...) sister
Enforces me to (...) her (...)

How equally we two^
Divide true, sorrow sympathi^e in grief,
As in our blood and nature: sister you
When your affectionate fancy ^ix'd your heart
Upon your husbands love, had no suspicion
Of his unmanly jealousy, and I
When I c^nfin'd my love to Free (...) breast*
Judged him as void of falsehood, as the spring
When it has rested in green tobes the Earth is
Of bare nakedness, but we are both
Deceived by our cred^lity*

For you, discretion may (...) you from the care
Of his affection, you are free (as light)
(Which in the darkest night retains some splendour)
From the obedient slavery, due to marriage;
But I no burne-markd captive is engaged
With more officious ^eale to serve his Lord,
Then I my husband, I must either perish
Like the chaste ice, when from a Christ all Rock,
It feels a sad conversion into foul
Corrupted waters, by his jealous flames;
Or break those ties whose dissolution
Would betray my innocent virtue to a ruin,
Sure and eternal.

But yet counsel me,
I love this man so that if honour would
Dispense with his offence, I should forgive him,
And take him to my bosom

Alas you cannot,
What noble soul (though halse starved) would be fed with
Base reversions, conscience too forbids.
The supplantation of another, sister strive to forget him

Mrs. there is a gentleman without, this knocked for entrance as if he had been
a Constable, his business is with you, and his name Free^it; I told him you
were in bed ^nd he swore he would come to you through the door, shall I admit
him?


This is his last night, his business carries weight, pray let him in. Be now
propitious Love: is any with him?


There is enough of him, unless he made less noise. I'll send him to you.


Sister, now give him his latest answer, and resolve
Upon some choice more happy: here he comes.

How, as a Bridegroom?
Decked with the Ensigns of young Nuptials,
A wreath of Flowers, and Baize, and yet me thinks
His hand displays a Willow: what should this Emblem?
Master Freewit we scarce expected you thus late.

You'll please to afford my manners an indulgent pardon,
For pressing to your presence thus: but tis
Perhaps our extremest interview, and so
May challenge the prerogative of excuse,
For the audacious error.

Would I could, with as much safety to my honour, grant Remission to your other
fault.


My thanks, are humble debtors to you for it, Mistress,
The nimble minutes have with crafty theft,
Stolen time away, reduced your limited hour
To an unwelcome period: I have sought
With the same diligence good men seek heaven,
What you enjoined me, but the rain that falls
In Summer time upon the parched dust,
May easier be restored to the moist Clouds,
Then she to my discovery. Wherefore since
Her loss is certain, and the loss of you
Depends on her, to satisfy your soul
That I have man about me, I am come
With the same confidence your scorn has taught me,
To tell you, I as lightly prize your love,
As you have valued mine^ nor can you blame me, since 'twas your own desire.

Credit me I^me very glad on it: but pray tell me sir,
Why yo^ come thus adorned with Nuptial wreathes
Into my presence? is't to invite me to your wedding, or expression
Of your contempt, I have not merited so harsh an usage.

Neither: This branch of forsaken Willow I resign
To your own wearing, that when after times
Shall know our ^tuall parting; 't may report,
That we were both forsaken, though we sever
With the unwillingness that flourishing ^rees,
Divest themselves of greenenesse, yet no blemish
Of harsh unkindness shall defile our thoughts:
We'll part fair, though for ever.

This gentleman seems so noble, I repent that I advised her from him.


This Laurel wreath, that circles
My uncaptiv'd brow, I do justly challenge,
Since I have conquered the greatest enemy,
Mankind can combat (passion) yet the dew
(That on the red lips of the blushing Rose
Bestows a weeping kiss) leaves not so sadly
The amorous flower, that curls its purple leaves,
To hide it from the Suns enforcing Rays,
As do my thoughts your memory, which did once
Preserve it as inviolable, as heaven
Does the bright souls of innocents.

You might
Have had so much humanity, as to have kept
Your purpose to your self: though your loose sin
Constrains my honour to renounce your love,
I would not have my ears (...) with this
Relation of your contempt, for so
Trust me I take it Freewit.

Why, good Madam? can you condemn my too officious truth,
Of a conceit of falsehood, when the spring
Of my Revolt, derives its head from yours.
You for a trivial, and scarce known offence,
Could without scruple banish me your heart,
When Angels should, for a desertlesse kiss
From an impure lip, have renounced their bliss,
Ere the most urgent reason of suspect,
Should upon me have practised a contempt
Of you: Had not your breath e^pos'd a mist
Of infidelity before the eyes
Of my clear seeing soul, and left it blind
As the black Mole, that like a Pioner digs
A winding Labyrinth through the earth to find
A passage to the comfortable light,
He never has fruition of.

But sir, suppose my sister did it for a proof,
Of your affection, and now should reclaim
The harsh prescription she imposed, you would not
Continue in this temper.

Madam ever. The Cedars juice, whose bitter poison gives
The most strong body unavoyded death,
Preserves the Carcass by its dying force,
Void of corruption: so has dealt her love
With me; its reclamation struck me dead,
And since my Exequies has kept my heart
From entertaining a corrupt regard
Of future slavery,

They are entered, sir, I heard Mr. Mix. say as I let them in, that they were
married.


Nay, come an end gentlemen and your wives, Mr. Doctor will not be angry though
I have usurped his office, and been the father to his daughter.


You are not a cunning baggager you would none forsooth when I proposed it to
you; but when the fit came on you, you could then run madding, and never let
the Sexton ring the Bell to give us notice: had it been any one but Mr.
Sconce, you should have fought a portion; but since to him, we pardon it: take
her son, heavens give thee joy of her.


You would scarce say so, knew you as much as I do.


We thank you sir, and rest your dutiful children.


Ha^ my Nephew Popingay!


Mr. Popingaies. Sir (...) Nephew! I am abused, undone, my daughter's cousend
Urinal, a (...) put on me, Mr. Popingay to wed my daughter.


^ was with her own consent Sir, and she my wife by your free gift.


Your wife, your whore she is as soon, she is Master Sconces wife, and that
you shall find, so you shall, let me come to the baggage husband, ^ her eyes
out.


(...) he sh^ll enjoy her, I'll spend the best part of my wealth he shall not
have a penny portion with her, depart my house I charge you^ urinal call in my
neighbours, ere (...) he used thus*


^ I know you and your ways.


^


Go to, be patient, then give this gentleman your daughter; nay be friends,
and love him too, or all shall out.


Thou wilt not betray me villain?


But I shall discover you and your practises, nay to the Justice,
This gentleman is the same Sir Martin brought hither as his Niece.

Plots upon plots against me.


But the great one is still behind: if you will be friends quickly with them,
so; if not, your impostures all come out.


Is it even so? well since I am ore-reach'd.
Better sit down in peace, than with disgrace:
Mr. Popingay consideration of your just desert,
Now his persuasion has suppressed my heat,
Enjoyns me to forgive your loving theft*
Accept my daughter with as good a heart
As she is mine: come hither wife, say you so too?

Nay, since you say it, it must be so.


Humbly I thank you: such another gift,
Should Nature offer all her precious store,
Could not be given Mortality: but truly sir*
I had much ado to win her.

You have me now;
But I profess until we came to be
Conjoined in the Church, I took you for Mr. (...), but now rejoice
I was deceived so, I shall study to love you^

Now you name, where is Mr. Sconce?


Tis my cue now. O father I me here they have given me a touch, a very scurvy
touch, I am a brother of the Twibills, and I am married too, but I need not
fear being a Cuckold.


Mris. you know the Gent.


My servant Lovering married to Mr. Sconce!
You'll get brave boys I doubt not.

I and wenches too; come hither, we will be man and wife, that's certain, nay
and lie together, so we will, you shall behave your self well enough like a
woman: but that you have a (...) ^pediment for-bearing Children: but give me
thy hand, shal's be drunk together?


He is scatoe sober yet I think.


^e tell you father, ere I* went to the Church I had gotten a touch in the
'Crowne, the Twibil Knigh^ ^ my (...) had made me'drunke, and got my ^ by these
I know not: But ha, let me see, this should be my suite, tis it, by valour it
is: do you hear good man Fox, how crept you into this Lyons case?


What means this new married man?


Do you jeare me, with a touch of that? hark you husband, Though I be your
wife, you shall not hinder me from claiming my own Breeches. Mistress a word
with you too you put a gentle touch upon me did you not? But I shall know you
hereafter, I'll say no more, and touch you boldly for it.


You're very merrily disposed Sir: had it not been to have done Sir Martines
Nephew, I should not have been fooled so. I'll try his temper though.


No matter Lovring thou art a Gent.
And since I am resolved from Master Freewit,
That heel not have me now, (though I were willing)
To toote the least remembrance of him
Out of my breast, by this my happier choice,
I'll marry thee.

But let him marry you though if he dare, i'll sue the Statute of Bigamy upon
him, he shall be hanged for being double married.


In this one act
She only appears woman, all her Saint,
Speak her a Saint. I did not think her heart
Could have resumed (though than rejected me)
A baser choice, Sir you've good Fortune: Mris
I will not wish you ill success in your
So sudden Love: but it was eruell in you
To give away your soul, (as in despite)
In my loathed presence: yet to show how much
I prize your satisfaction, I resign^
My interest in you to him, and thus freely
Bestow him on you: will you have him Lady^

Heaven bless me sister, this is the same maid
Whom Master Freewit is reported to have
Got with Child: this is strange^

Nay, be not amazed Mistress it is she:
You had best call her to a strict account
How long tis since I lay with her.
(...) Freewit, what means this mad delusion?

My wife turned a woman indeed: this is a touch indeed, I had best be^ gone,
for fear she challenge me.


O stay your patience good Mr. Sconce.


Now let heaven, and all that can be titled good beneath
Divinity, conjoyne to frame a piece
Of virtue great as this; yet be deficient
In the achievement* for some c^ing Artist
To draw her in this posture (to be placed
(In Alabaster, white as her own figure)
Or some green mead or flowery valley, where
Posterity of Virgins yearly might
Offer a tear to the blessed memory
Of perfect feminine goodness. Let me dye,
Gazing on you and I shall fly to heaven
Through your bright eyes.

Sir, what means this ecstasy?


I'll tell you, and Mrs trust each word*
As the just accent of Oraculous truth:
Knowing your and e^t love to me, I feared
It might embrace a change, and therefore shaped this woman^
In the habit of a man got her unknown to you,
Preferred to serve you: (which she could not have bin without
Discovery, in her own shape) not too'^-looke your life.
Or watch your actions, but to raise report
That I had bin false: so to try if that
Would stagger your resolve, which I have found^
So noble, that the happiness of Fates,
Can give no more addition to my bliss.
Madam beg you my pardon.

O sir you have it, and I my best of wishes, but why did you
Employ a woman thus dis^is'd suppose
She had been got with child you must
Have been the father of it.

I knew she was too honest, and beside,
I put her to the acting of't because
She being the accuser of me for her self
Might without the least seruple of (...)
Free me from her own calumny, nay here's another,
Can witness this for truth.

How Urinal Master: Doctor's man turned to (...) Mr. Freewits man, and Marthies
brother?


So it appears by the story Mrs. I am glad sir you put my sister in this
disgu^se, she has got a good husband by the shift, take your wife sir, she is
no worse a woman then my own sister.


But let me see and feel you better, it is no periwigge this but are you my
husband, a woman; wife?


I your wife am sir.


Master Doctor you wish me well I know, I have married here I know not whom,
you have excellent salves and unguents sir.


They are at your service all.


Thank you good Mr. Doctor, have you never a one that will eat off the wen of
manhood, make all whole before that will eunuchise a man, I would ^aine be a
Her maphrolite, or a woman to escape this match, I do not like it


Help gentlemen, help Mr. Doctor, yonder is a man would ravish me whether I
would or no, nay killed me, I think he has pulled out the longest naked weapon, O
there he is.


She shall not escape me were she
Fenced with fire, strumpet thou die.

Who's this, Sir M^tin, what do you mean sir?


I, this is he Thomas do you see what a terrible thing he has got? was that
sit to use to a woman? I was but laid in the next room, to sleep, and he
would have done something to me so he would had not I been the honester
woman.


Is't so Sir Martine? I have now just cause
To suspect your loyalty, and that your fond
Jealousy proceeds out of intemperate lust,
Could I not serve, but underneath my nose
You must be rioting upon another?

Shame and confusion seas me.


You may see Sir what comes of your jealousy, but fear not Sir, your wife
will pard on it, there's no harm done.


But there might have been, had not my honesty been the greater.


Well Sir martine, though you have injurd
Me most infinitely, I do re^t all if you will protest
Ne'er to be jealous more.

Amazement and my shame hinders my utterance,
Let me breath in sighs my true repentance,
And henceforth
That jealousy in man if it be injust
Is ill, nay worse then in a woman's lust.

But pray you brother, who brought you hither?
We shall tejoyce to have you at out wedding,
And see this reconcilement.

I Madam, I; under pretence to have attempted his wife, but I sent him in to
Mrs. Mixum, who I knew would fit his turn.


And so I could have f^ed him as well as another woman.


Brother Urinal you are a ^ave, brother Urinal, and have showd all a ^ehing
touch.


No sir I saved you from being cozend, my sister shall have some portion,
here's a hundred pieces in this pu^e.


Sink me my ^o, my own purse.


It, is indeed Sir, I got it from your 'Twibill brothers, and this your watch
too, and your cloths which Mr. Popingay wears, by locking them into a room,
and threatening punishment, if^ they denied, the blades shall now resume
freedom* this key will let them out, come forth gentlemen, he^e is your
brother Master Sconce.


Captain general, give thy hand bully, Captain Pirke, my cousin Pig, and all
of you; though you would have cheated me tis no matter, you shall dance at my
wedding, and be drunk too, my Joe, you shall.


Confusion rot the bones of Urinal perdition shall slay him;


Madam I hope we shall keepeour nuptial feast with Master Doctor.


As you dispose it sir, I have resigned my will to yours.


Uncle I hope you'll pardon me, that I deceived your expectation in watching my
Aunt, she is too ver^ous: father your blessing, and then we are happy.


Take it.
Thus all are pleased I hope: what this night cannot
(For celebration of these feasts) perform,
To morrow shall, and from this (...) I
Renoun^e all ways sinister to get (...)
Things that in the p^riod prosperously^ succeed,
Though cros'd before, are acted well indeed.


