THe rumour still continues.


Yes, my Lord,
Ill fames though quick are certain,
'tis concluded
Past question or dispute, for these reports
Are grounded on too manifest a truth,
To carry doubt in them, it is confirmed this morning;
He must resign

Though a stranger Sir,
And so less interessed in the Generals cause
Then you his Country-man: were you not my friend,
You lied to speak it. Must our General
That soul of valor Wallenstein; who has
(Like subtle lightning) purged the German air,
From all the hot infections, foreign war
Could threaten: sent the health-carousing Dane
Drunk with his own blood home: broke all the force,
With which the valiant Palatine and his aids.
Infested had the Province: given to Death
(That thunder-bolt of war) whose very name
Was great as Fate it self unto his foes,
The Swedish King: and must he now, his age
Is candid over with victories, be enforced
(...) To a base ^ Death he's damned
That dare but mutter it*

And they were so
Who first occasioned it, 'twould bring much comfort
To all true Soldiers.

'Tis concluded Sir,
Past all redemption, they are doubly damned
For their ingratitude, displace a man
To whom they owe their lives! one whom, my Lords,
We have seen in the heat and bravery of a fight,
Cheer up his fainting and disheartened troupes,
Even when his body seemed but all one wound,
That it appeared a little Island, circled
Round with the purple deluge of his blood;
Who when wars Quiruters, the big-mouth'd Drums,
And surly Trumpet sung his Armies Dirge,
That fatal Music swelled his sprightly sense
More then soft Hymns at Nuptials.

Sir, his glories
Are so well known to us we need not urge
Their reputation, but 'tis past my thoughts,
Why on the sudden he should be compelled
To give his charge up.

When the world believed
He should have had a double triumph in
The honour of his victories.

I'll tell you,
There is in Princes Courts a leane-fac'd monster,
Termed Envy, reigning in unworthy breasts,
To fames Heroic sons, such as know to cringe
With subtle motion to their Princes smiles,
Adore his foot-steps and his awful nods,
And can like Aspes instill into his ears,
A sweet yet killing venom: these thin souls
When the blunt Soldier, has on piles of wounds
Built up his Countries peace, whisper Beware
In time my Lord, least he do grow too great:
This meeting with the jealous Princes fears,
(As Princes still are fearful of the greatness
Of rising active subjects) breeds resolves to cut up
That prop, leaning on which themselves have stood,
Firm and unshaken on their base; and these
Court Parasites, and th'Emperors weak distrusts,
Pulls this disgrace on Fridland, which if he
With an effeminate patience do put up,
May all the Laurels growing on his Crest.
Be turned to Cyprisse, serving for no use
But to adorn his Funerals.

Soft,
The Generall's here himself: my gracious Lord
The Duke.

Our thrice redoubted General.


Ha! that sound
Awakes my drowsy soul, pray good my Lords,
What do you behold degenerate in my looks,
Showing me unworthy still of that great title?

I would pull my eyes out,
Should they convey into my soul a thought
Tending to so much sacrilege to honour,
And perfect masculine virtue.

Yet I must
Put off that glorious title, like a garment,
Old and unfit for wearing: O my Lords,
Our honours individual with our souls
Grows to that essence, as to the hand or cheek
The native whiteness; and to have that torn,
Lugged off by violent torture, is a suffrance
Beyond the strength of patience: is't not, Lords?

Yes, and look
How far the noble immaterial soul,
Transcends the duller body, so much torments
Resemblance of a star, a Comet fall
By my own fire consumed to earth forgotten.

Great Sir, though a stranger to you
By birth and nation, yet the strict alliance
I've to your princely nobleness, injoins me
Under your pardon, and with the allowance
Of these brave Counts, your followers, to deliver
My zealous counsel to you.

Noble Scot,
Use your discretion freely.

Thus great Sir then,
Though't be in the power of Princes to prescribe
Laws to their subjects, 'tis their subjects wills
Must put those Laws in act, 'tis their obedience,
Which are the ablest sinews of the state,
And 'twere a barbarous cruelty to employ
Their hands against themselves, a strange injustice,
To make their proper virtue instrument
Of their own ruin.

Colonel Lesle
Speaks home.

And to much purpose.

Do not Lords
Misunderstand my meaning, I speak not this,
That I contemn authority, or dislike
Order in every thing, without preeminence
In title of command our trade the warfare
Could not subsist, but to inform our General,
Our too much injured General, that it is
No such strange crime, to disobey a Prince
In things injust; and can there be a greater,
Or shamefuller injustice then for Caesar,
By's Mandate to enforce him to resign
His glorious charge up?

'Twere a shame.


An utter, an abominable disgrace
To all that honour virtue, should we suffer it?

Here then
Ends what I would have uttered; of what force
Are Caesars Mandats, when their real loves
Has disannull'd them? circled with these hearts,
These bulwarks of brave hearts, what need have you
To acknowledge any Emperor but your self?
Your self great Duke, whose merit lays just claim
To that supremest title.

Pray once more,
Give me your patience: Rashness, Gentlemen,
Gives the first on-set fiercely, then recoyles,
As Wasps when they have lost their stings: affairs
Of this high consequence, do require mature
Deliberation: to confirm our own
Strength for the exploit, 'twere fit we did conjoyne
With Saxon Waymar and Gustavus Horne,
And the other bold confederates: how likes
Your Grace this project?

The Drum and Fife,
Trumpet and Canon, when their loud voices sing,
Ios to victory, could ne'er beget
More music in my ravished sense: best friend,
I am so bankrupt grown in my extent
Of gratitude, that trust me I could weep,
To see my self so far outdone in friendship:
I am engaged in honour to go on,
That this insulting Emperor by his fall,
To gain fit means to gratify your loves.
Thou aerie name of loyalty, hence to heaven,
And find like smoke a burial in the clouds,
Thus I expire thy essence; henceforth I'll acknowledge
No other Emperor but these worthies hearts.

And we (great Duke) henceforth will ne'er submit,
To any rule but yours, which to confirm
As sure as Fate had sealed it, on your sword
(...) My Council always has had that success,
To be accounted faithful to my Prince:
Fear it not, follow then my poor advice,
Meet treachery with policy, and try,
If you the Ambitious traitor can surprise,
The head once off, the weak and fainting limbs,
Like seared dri'd boughs, by an impetuous wind,
Torn from an aged Oak, will fall to earth,
And be consumed to ashes.

It shall be so,
Lord Questenberg, with all convenient speed,
Dispatch a trusty messenger unto
The King of Hungary, command his presence,
With his most able legions for the safeguard
Of our own person: In such like affairs,
Which do concern the uncertain rule of States,
Wise men should always be above their fates.

A pox upon her fir, and for her sake,
On all good faces; must you sigh and whine,
And make a face worse then a zealous drunkard
Does over dead musty wine, because she is beauteous:
We Soldiers do not use to engender with
A physiognomy, nor as the learned term it,
Co-habit with a handsome nose or lip,
There are some parts beneath the waste I take it,
More useful for a man of Arms.

Good Colonel,
No more of this.

Should I ask you
The reason why you love her, you must answer;
'Tis for the sport (as for what other reason
Women were made, unless to prick upon
A clout, or starch, transcends my best Philosophy)
And for that purpose, a short coat frister,
That as she milkes each morning,
Bedews the cool grass with her Virgin moisture,
As useful is and active (sounder far
That's certain granted) pray, my Lord, remember
She's but your mothers Gentlewoman, and whom perhaps
The Butler has oftener folded up, then ere
He did his table linne one.

No more, you'll anger me.


You'll anger me again then: we Imps of Mars,
Should know no other mistresses, then what the Camp contains,
I ne'er durst love in the field (marry in the City.
I've had copulation with all trades) but one poor sutlers wife,
She as fair too, as was the kettle which she boiled her beef in,
O how the sweet smell of her amber grease
And kitchen stuff perfumed my greedy nostrils,
Yet on this beauty doted I (inspired by insurrection of the flesh)
And gave her to cuckol'd the good corporal her husband.

Ten comely dollars, and the devil take her, she paid me with a pox. But see,
here comes the Lady of the Lake, for whom you good fir Lancelot make these
lamentations; be not you bashful now, but fall on boldly heart, let me drill
her for you, if her body be under Musket proof, 'tis ten to one my morris pike
shall enter. to her, to her.


Surprised by him alone, O my just fears.


Why, cruel fair one, should you shun his sight,
Whose very soul moves in your eyes, or why
Should your blessed voice, speak health to all the world,
Yet threaten death to me: look on my youth,
My hopeful youth, which in the active war,
Has taught old Soldiers discipline: behold it
Nipped by the cold frost of your icy beauty,
As in a fever languishing to nothing,
Forgetful of the noble pride and strength,
It has so lately boasted, 'tis injust
To see me still over my foes victorious,
Made by my self your captive, to insult
Over your suppliant vassal, would those eyes,
Which can contract lights orb into a glance,
Become impoverished by a smile, those cheeks
Sully their native tincture, should they blush
At your minds cruelty, 'twould rather add
To the illustrious excellence.

My noble Lord.


Stay, you must not speak yet,
There's not an accent issuing from your lips,
But has the power, should thunder speak, to charm,
To peaceful quiet the affrighted, the world,
And would strike dumb my passion: best of Virgins
There is not that disparity 'twixt our births,
As there's inequall difference 'twixt our hearts;
Mine's all on fire, dare combat with the Sun
For heats priority, yours Mountain snow,
Cold as the north, and cruel as my fortunes:
Yet you may make them equal as your eyes are,
By yielding up that fort, which will, when time
Has given it ceremonious privilege, be perhaps
By some unworthy groom, without resistance
Surprised and entered.

My Lord, bad custom is become
In men a second nature to deceive
Poor Virgins by their flatteries; noble youth,
That I do love you dearly, may these tears,
Shed for your folly testify: look back
Into your princelesse honour, call that up
To assist the fortress of your mind assailed
By foul unlawful passion: think how base 'tis,
To rob a silly Orphan of her dowry;
I have no other but my Virgin whiteness,
Left to uphold my fame, nought but my virtue
To my inheritance; should you despoil me
Of that fair portion by your lust, my memory,
Would like an early Rose bud by that tempest,
Dye on its own stalk blasted.

I do dream sure.


Women's fames sir,
Are like thin Crystal glasses, by a breath
Blown into excellent form, and by a touch,
Cracked or quite broken: say I should consent
To your desires, your appetite once sated,
You would repent the fact, when you should see
Your self surrounded in a mist of cares,
View bashful Virgins point at you, as at
Some hateful prodigy; hear matrons cry,
There goes the lustful thief, that glories in
The spoil of innocent Virgins, that foul thief,
That has a hundred eyes to let lust in at,
As many tongues to give his wild thoughts utterance.

Sure some Angel inhabits here,
This cannot be a Mansion
For mortal frailty: sweet farewell, good night,
I would not have my over-sawcie love,
Commit a rude intrusion on thy peace,
Though parting with thee be more torment to me,
Then to forgo mine eyes; may all the joys
Of healthful slumbers crown thy bed, thy dreams
Be free from paraphrasing on my memory*
Lest it affright you; once more, Dear, good night,
While you with pleasing happy sleeps are blessed,
I'll seek some way to my eternal rest.

The honour you have done me mighty Princes,
Electors of the sacred Roman Empire,
By this your personal visit does engage
So much our gratitude, that what our selves,
And the most able forces of our friends,
Can in requital act, shall be performed,
Mutual discourses often mingle souls*
And as the Arteries convey the blood,
Throughout the body, they from mind to mind
Convey affection: to this end we did
Entreat this meeting, that our conference might,
Join in an individual league our hearts.

This happy treaty, glorious Duke, shall bring
Blessed peace once more with turtles wings, to soar
Over the German Provinces; shall dry
Tears from the eyes of mothers, while the Virgins
Shall dedicate their hours to joyful Hymns,
In honour of your merit.

The sturdy boor
Shall plough his fields in safety, and ascribe
To you, great Duke, that happiness: 'twas you,
Who when Bellona thundered through the land,
Did stop the steel-wing'd Goddess in her course,
Who when our Armies, like a raging flood,
Did bear down all before them, did oppose,
The greedy torrent, boldly turned it back,
Into its native body, and conjoined
With you so inur'd to conquest, he were less
Then man, and more then coward, that could fear
Any ensuing dangers.

You do me too much honour, mighty Princes:
And now my brave confederates in Arms,
Where business of import commands attendance,
That time's mis-spent, that's spent in useless words,
I shall so please you, therefore speak the cause,
(In brief) which urged me to desire this conference,
And give you reasons for my strange revolt,
From my so long loved Master.

'Twas the end
We only came for.

The sole reason
That drew us to this meeting.

Thus in brief then,
How I have served this Emperor, these wounds
That beautify my body (cause the marks
Of my just loyalty) given by your swords,
Can bear me righteous witness; but good service
To a malicious and ungrateful Prince,
Are rather causes of suspect, then love,
And when men's actions do transcend reward,
They then descend to punishment (my cause
Is rightly stated thus) for when my self,
(I well may speak it without partial boast)
Had like his Eagle in my powerful gripe,
Snatched up his Crown that lay despised on earth,
And heaved it up to Heaven, borne all the weight,
Which yours, the Danish and the Swedish force,
Could load these shoulders with; nay shook it off
Lightly, as winds in Autumn do from trees,
Their withered Summer garments: then, even then,
When my just hopes were pregnant with conceit
Of Wreathes and triumphs (as a brave reward)
My Soldiers by his Mandates were forbid,
To obey me as their General, and my self
Commanded straightway to resign my charge,
All my great power which I had bought with blood,
Unto Matthias Gallas my Field-Marshall.

Insufferable injury!


Inhumane and unhear'd of ingratitude!


Nay more,
As I had been a Traitor then in fact,
He did endeavour my surprise, to bring me
A prisoner to Vienna: think then Lords,
When both my priceless honour and my life
Were at one stake proposed, if I'd not cause
To play my game with cunning skill, when these
My brave Commanders from their martial eyes,
Did for my wrongs shed tears of blood, called on me,
As on their friend, their father, not to leave
My Sons my Soldiers: if I their request
Performed, I saved my honour and my life,
But if the Emperors, I gave up them both
To plain perspicuous ruin; yet in not
Accomplishing my Masters harsh commands,
The name of treason brands me (but pass that,)
I of two evils chose to take the least,
Rather to draw upon me Caesars hate,
Then to forsake my charge and soldiers loves:
And now being free in my own soul as thought
Unsought to (Lords) and unconstrained, I offer
T'assist against this Emperor (this thing
Made only up of name and voice) whom we
Will break as showers do bubles, which themselves
Of nothing had created.

So welcome
Is this your proffes'd amity, no blessing
Heaven in its fullest bounty could have showered,
Could have arrived more pleasing, and to show
How much we prize your friendship, your the son,
Young Fredericke be affianced to my daughter,
The tie of nature to the tie of blood,
Will make the union perfect.

'Tis an honour,
We are bound in duty to accept, my Lords,
In noble souls no thought should once admit
Sullen delay, our progress should be swift,
As is the passage of unlimited fire
In populous Cities; or as winds, whose force
Does at their birth send open the stubborn womb
Of the dull earth their mother; great designs
Should by great spirits only be pursued,
And our last business is our speedy conference
With Chancellor Oxenstern, and the French Ambassador.
Actions that carry an unusual weight,
Ought still to fly at an unusual height.

So, let the dull
Halfe-spirited souls, who strive on reremice wings,
By that which fools term honesty, to climb
To the top of honour, in their silly virtue
Boast, while ingenious and more active spirits,
In a direct line without stop or hindrance,
Mount to their wishes, yet ith'worlds esteem,
Are held as real, and endued with goodness.
This Wallenstein, like a good easy Mule,
Have I led on byth' nose to this rebellion,
Fired with such venom as will spread,
Like swift infection through his soul: these two
Shall be my agents to achieve my ends,
Factors in cunning to vent forth my intentions,
Lieutenant Colonel Gordon, and my good
Captain Butler.

We were musing,
What serious thought it was, that could so long
Detain you from our conference.

Faith I was studying
On our great Generals fortunes, upon which
Our hopes and lives depend; what think you of them?

Well at least, wee'r bound
To hope the best, he's in himself so mighty,
He seems above his fate.

His plots do carry
A fair and specious out side.

'Tis a sign,
Corruption is within them, noble friends,
You are my country-men, and if my life
May preserve yours from ruin, I shall deem it
Religiously employed: if you discover
What I intend to utter, 'twill but send
My age some hours before its destined minute,
Unto my grave, and I most willingly,
Shall dye the causes martyr.

By our honours,
No syllable shall ever pass our lips,
What you in love reveal to us.

Thus then friends,
Rebellion never yet could boast a happy
Or prosperous period, Wallensteins designs
Are built on sand, and with the Emperors breath
Will be dispersed into the air; I speak not this,
That I do hate the man, heavens know I love
His person, but detest the cause he justifies.

True, the dignity of Princes,
Does make what ever quarrels subjects raise
Against their Sovereigns, odious.

Shall we then,
Here in a strange country, violate
The Laws of hospitality, unmake the ancient faith
Ascribed unto our Nation, by assisting
A Traitor against his lawful Prince, a General
Against that power which gave him that command,
Betray that royal Master, to whose bounty
We owe our lives: first rather let's resolve,
To open all his treasons, his proceedings,
Unto our Lord the Emperor.

'Tis very just,
And in my judgement requisite.

I do approve it.


'Twere mere madness,
And he that does mislike it, bears no brain,
No soul about him: Instead of slight preferment,
Which (should our General prosper) we at best,
Could but expect, we shall have
Castles, Lordships, Earledomes, nay Provinces,
Be styled the savers,
Preservers of the Empire, have our names,
As 'twere in triumph sung about the streets,
In popular acclamations, think then friends,
How far these certain honours will surpass
Our aerie expectations: come let's post
Straight to Vienna, and inform the Emperor
Of all's proceedings, in this great affair,
We must not use our fortune, but our care.

Pish, perish still in ignorance, am I,
Who am grand master in the art of Love,
Not able to instruct a limber youth
Of the first growth, your brother here makes love
In all ill favored tone, and skrewes his countenance,
As he were singing of lamentable Ballads
Of Tillies overthrow, but you for your part,
(I've known you of an urchin) are so fiery,
You speak all squibs and crackers, carry a Canon
In your mouth, you'll fright the Lady, she'll imagine
You come to ravish her.

The Colonel
Tells you, your own, good brother.

I've told you yours too, or I'm much mistaken,
You love, 'tshould seem, the fair Emilia,
A pretty wench, they say, but that's no matter,
Your fathers are agreed on it, and you'd have me
Show you the readiest way, how to accost her
Negatively, I will demonstrate instantly.

I shall observe your doctrine most exactly.

Pray observe,
You must not then accost her with a shrug,
As you were lowzie, with your Lady, sweet Lady,
Or most super-excellent Lady,
Nor in the Spanish garb, with a state face,
As you had new been eating of a Raddish,
And meant to swallow her for mutton to it:
Nor let your words, as that I'm most afraid of,
(Because 'tis your natural mood) come rumbling forth,
Ushered with a good full-mouth'd oath, I love you:
But speak the language of an overcomming Lover;
I do not mean that strange pedanticke phrase,
Used by some gallants, who do aim at wit,
And make themselves stark asses by it, praise their mistresses
Byth' Sun and stars, while the poor girls imagine,
They mean their signs, their Mercers or Perfumers
Inhabit at (for sure beyond those Planets
They've studied no Astrology) but you must
In gentle, free, and genuine phrase deliver
Your true affection, praise her eye, her lip,
Her nose, her cheek, her chin, her neck, her breast,
Her hand, her foot, her leg, her every thing,
And leave your roses and your lillies for
Your country froes, to make nosegays of:
But stay, here comes your Mistress, her father too,
In conference; fall on my Mirmidon,
While we retreat.

Speed your endevors, brother.


'Tis so concluded 'twixt me and her father,
For both our goods, be not you nice Emilia,
The noble youth's so furnished with all worth,
You needs must like him.

Good sir give me license,
To let my eye direct my heart to love,
And if young Fredericke be the master of
Such absolute gifts, doubt not but I shall find them.

My Lord I'm glad
Of this fair interview I and my daughter
Were even conferring of you; sir as yet
She's something timorous, dreads a Soldiers looks.

She needs not sir.
She bears a spell about her that would charm
A Scythians native fierceness into softness,
Those spirit-breathing eyes, my Lord, which can
Kill as they please, or quicken with a glance.

Now they are entered,
I'll steal away and leave them.

Gentle Lady,
To make the addresses of my love-sicke heart,
Plain and apparent to you, that you may,
Search through my soul, and find it all your creature,
Give me your patient hearing.

'Tis a request,
Might tax my manners, should I deny it to
One of your noble quality; use your pleasure.

Which consists
In viewing your bright beauty, the idea
Of all perfections, which the jealous heavens
Durst ever lend to earth-divinest Lady,
The gentle air which circumscribes your cheek,
Leaving its panting kisses on the flowers,
That in that Tempe blossom, does not love
Those fields of purity more then mine eyes do,
Mine, Lady, is a holy,
An intellectual zeal, such as the Angels
And Saints, who know no sexes do affect by,
Past imitation too, should they who strive
To trace me, take the constancy of Swans,
Or never-changing Turtles, as their patterns.

Sir, it seems
You've studied complement as well as Arms,
But he's a foolish Lover, who to gain
His Mistress, dare not promise what you have uttered, but I must
Have more then verbal assurance of your love.

By your fair self I'm real, do intend,
What I've delivered with as much true zeal,
As Anchorits do their prayers: I love your mind,
Your excellent mind, and for its sake, the pure
Shrine, which contains that blessing, this fair building,
This palace of all happiness, and entreat you,
As you have mercy in you, to take pity
Upon my loves stern sufferings, and redress them,
By your consent to take me for your husband.

Sir you are an over-hasty Lover, to imagine
I can at first sight of your person, be
Surprised and yield, they must be strong allurements,
Must tempt a bashful Virgin still inur'd
To no companion but her fears and blushes,
To give her heart away, and live in thraldom,
Unto a stranger.

Love, Madam, has Eagles eyes; it can beget acquaintance,
Even in a moment, suddenly as time,
The time that does succeed it. Farewell.
I will not have my over-hasty zeal,
Urge your mild sufferance further, pray think on me
As one who've plaid my full extent of bliss,
In your enjoying, think you are the land wrack,
By which the brittle vessel of my hopes,
Must through Loves-swelling Ocean be directed,
To a safe harbour, honour me to kiss
Your fair hand; Lady now farewell, no bliss
Can be in love, till we know what it is.

Crowns are perpetual cares, and to their heads,
That wear the wreath Imperial, are annexed.
Foreign invasions oft may shake a state,
But civil broils are the impetuous fire-brands,
That burn up Commonwealths; to quench
A flame domestic we are met, which will
Like fame increase, by going on; this late
Revolt of Wallenstein.

Perfidious slave!
On whom your plenteous bounties showered so fast,
They seemed to drown him* he whose great commands,
Could not know ought above them, but your self,
The General of your forces of Gloyawe,
Mechlenburg, Sagan, Fridland styled the Duke,
He to invert your own Arms against your self,
Swells my vexed soul to think on it.

'Tis not words,
Or aerie threatenings will appease thy mischief,
It must be done by force; Matthias Gallas,
Have you according to our late commands,
Given order for the levying new forces,
To oppose this Traitor.

Mighty Sir, I have,
And seen them mustered.

To what amounts their number.


Threescore thousand


A royal Army, had they been trained
In Military discipline, experience
Is half the soul of Arms, we will take order,
To have them taught the exercise of Arms,
By those Hungarians troupes which we brought hither.

Now sir, your business.


Mighty sir,
The Governor of Egers, Colonel Gordon,
Attended by Lieutenant Colonel Butler,
And Colonel Lesle do desire admittance
Into your presence.

Let them enter,
They are his friends, and may perhaps discover
Some of his trecheries: Noble strangers welcome,
I do conceive 'tis business of importance
Has drawn you hither, in Colonel Lesles looks
I read affairs of consequence, with which
His active brain does teem, and fain would be
By's tongue delivered.

Most mighty Caesar,
To indear the service to you, I shall do you,
By guilding over each circumstance, its weight
And consequence, since 'tis my bounden duty,
To you, my royal Master, would but show,
Pride and arrogant love in me the author,
To my own act, and so 'twould rather lessen
Then amplify my merit; how I've served you
Under command of him, whom in due justice
I cannot mention now without foul curses,
Revolted Wallenstein is to these Lords,
And your great self best known.

And our rewards
Shall strive to pay those services.

But when I saw him
Put off his faith, abandon his allegiance,
Accounting all your bounteous favours trifles,
Unto the mountainous pile of his deservings,
And like a black cloud hung over all your Empire,
Uncertain where to break and in's vast thoughts,
Aspired your sacred dignity and life,
I like his Genius skrewd into his counsels,
Explored his plots and treasons, and have found them
So full of eminent danger.

So malicious.


Empty of worth and honour, it had been
A sin beyond the horridst punishments,
To have concealed them from you, and which most
Tortures my loyal thoughts, as't had not been
Sufficient for him to rebel himself,
He has firmed a league defensive and offensive,
With your most eager enemies, Saxon Waymar,
Branaenburg, Arheim, and Gustavus Horne,
And had a personal meeting for that purpose,

And 'tis to be feared,
That if sudden power stop not their progress,
They will with speedy violence invade you,
Here in your capital City.

Worthy strangers,
In this one act you've shown your self more faithful*
Then all my home-borne subjects, but be sure
If gratitude can equal your deserts,
You shall enjoy that amply: Noble Lesle,
The time is come now, and the dilemma cast,
That must conclude our Empire, which we must
Unto thy care commit; to kill a Traitor,
Is a deserving action, for thou strik'st
Then with the Sword of Justice: wilt thou add
This one act to thy former high deservings,
Kill this Arch-Rebell.

'Twas an office,
We should have begged, believe it he's dead already,
I'll kill him in his pride, in all his glories,
With such security, as I would sleep
After a tedious watching.

And expect,
(...)
Natures choice pleasures, that same happiness
You were created for.

You have prevailed Sir;
You who are still victorious over your foes,
Must needs remain a Conqueror over your friends,
My Lord, receive me freely, I am yours
For ever.

This chaste kiss shall seal the contract.
Come my Emilia, love is such a wealth,
As must be gained by free consent, not stealth.

Are they agreed yet, Newman,


Faith my Lord,
The Virgin Lady's something fearful, fears
A man of war should board her, lest his charge
Should make her keele split, my Lord Fredricke
Is of that rough demeanour, spite of my
Instructions, he will never learn to woe
In the due phrase and garb.

I do admire,
The fond base carriage of our giddy youth
In love affairs, and grieve to see my sons,
(Who should inherit from me my great spirit,
As well as fortune) so degenerate from
My masculine courage; when in the blooming pride
Of my green youth I flourished, my desires
Aimed always rather in the tented field
To spend my hours, then on a downy Couch,
To see the face of a sterne enemy besmeared with blood,
Pleased me far better then a Ladies looks.

And yet you vowed,
E're you won me, my Lord* you ne'er saw object,
That so much pleased your appetite.

Perhaps I might,
For the obtaining of my ends, descend
From my great spirit so much, as to decline
To idle Courtship, the birds and beasts will do it
To sate their appetites, the fiery Steed,
(That in the fervor of a fight, oft times
Neighs courage to his rider) when provoked
With eager heat, will like and bite his female
Into the same desire: The Sparrows bill,
And with a chirping rhetoric, seem to court
Enjoyment of their wishes, which fulfil'd
Dulls their heads, they couch beneath their wings,
And in a slumber, forfeit all remembrance
Of their past pleasures: Yet insatiate man,
In his desire more hot then Steeds or Sparrows,
Will to obtain it, quite divest his soul
Of all that's masculine in him, and transform*
His very being into woman.

Sure,
My Lord intends to write some Proclamation,
Against wearing holland smocks, some furious Edict,
Against charitable leaguerers: I've known him,
(And so have you my Lords) for all this heat
Against woman-hood, pursue a sutlers usroe,
(And she had but one eye neither) with as much zeal,
As e're knight-errand did his fair Linda brides,
Or Claridiana.

My Lord, your son and fair Emilia.


The quarrel's reconciled, I'll lay my life on it.


Beauteous Lady,
The contract 'twixt me and your father, touching
The marriage 'twixt my son and your fair self, I hope
By your consent is ratified: my boy
Looks sprightly, as if he were new returned
From a triumphant victory.
(...) But pray divide my soul, my life and fortunes,
Are at your disposition: noble Lords,
That this base Emperor seeks to take my life
By treachery, is an apparent sigre,
He fears that I should live, and half victorious
E're blow be stricken, are they whom their foes
Dread, e're they do behold them: let's go on then,
Armed with our aides, backed with our causes justice,
Against this insulting Emperor, and resolve
To pull the tyrant from his Throne, destroy
His very name, his memory, his ashes,
With as much easy freedom, as rough winds
Demolish crazy buildings. Colonel Gordon,
Some five days hence we shall arrive at Egers,
There to make preparation for the Nuptials,
Betwixt our some and fair Emilia.
Come Lords, since we amongst our selves are true,
Conquest is ours, which we will with speed pursue.

To be in love, nay to be so in love,
To put off all our reason and discourse,
Which does distinguish us from savage beasts,
To dote upon a face (which like a mirror,
Sullied by any breath) by the least sickness,
Grows pale and ghastly: Is not this mere madness,
Why should't inhabit here then: sure the soul,
As 'tis a spirit of a subtle essence,
A form as thin and pure, as is an Angels,
Can ne'er be author of these wild desires,
So opposite to its nature, they are all fleshly,
Sordid, as is the clay this frame's composed of.
Shall the soul,
The noble soul, be slave to these wild passions,
And bow beneath their weight: ha Isabella,
All reason, sense and soul are in her looks,
There's no discourse beyond them: cruel fair one,
Are you still resolute to persist in your
Strange tyranny* and scorn my constant love.

Do not sir
Abuse that sacred title which the Saints,
And powers celestial glory in, by ascribing
It to your loose desires, pray rather cloth them
In their own attribute, term them your lust sir,
Your wild irregular lust, which like those fired rakes*
Mis-guiding nighted travellers, will lead you
Forth of the fair path of your fame and virtue,
To unavoided ruin.

This is coyness,
A cunning coyness, to make me esteem
At a high rate, that jewell which you seem
To part from so unwillingly (Merchants use it
To put bad wares away:) dear Isabella,
Think what excessive honour thou shalt reap,
In the exchange of one poor trivial gem,
And that but merely imaginary, a voice,
And unsubstantiall essence, yet for that
Thou shalt have real pleasures, such as Queenes,
Prone to delicious luxury, would covet
To sate their appetites: Think Isabella,
That hardest Marble, though not cut by force,
By oft diffusion of salt drops, is brought
Into what ever form the Carvers fancy
Before had destined it: your heart's that substance,
And will by frequent oratory of tears,
Be brought to wear the perfect stamp, the figure
Of my affection on it.

Thus besieged,
It is high time, I summon up my virtue,
All that is good, about me, to assist
(...)
But ne'er aspire your Nuptials.

You're too humble,
Impose too mean a value on a gem,
Kings would be proud to wear, dear Isabella,
Let not thy modest sweetness interpose
A new impediment 'twixt my lawful flames,
And thy own Vestal chastity, let not fear,
(To thy sex incident) of my fathers wrath
Stagger thy resolution; thou shalt be
To me, my father, mother, brother, friend,
My all of happiness; if we cannot here
In peace enjoy our wishes, we will love
Like Turtles in a Desert, only blessed
In one another company.

Why look you sir. yonder's the cock of the game,
About to tred you ginny hen, they are billing;
Shall we retire, my Lord, perhaps they are going to it,
And 'twould be a shame to spoil their sport.

I am resolved, I'll speak to him.


Your pleasure must be accomplished,
But take heed we draw not the Virgins curses on us
Both, take heed on it, it will fall heavy.

Surprised, and by my brother, prethy sweet
Withdraw, I would not have thy timorous ears,
Frighted with his loud anger.

Save you brother, you've parted with your
Mistress, pray tell me, does she kiss well,
Has she a fragrant lip?
Are her demeanours courtly, apt to ravish?
Are you resolved to run away with her,
And stain the honour of our family, for her sweet sake?

Gentle brother, you speak a language
I nor understand,
Nor value much the meaning. In your love
I meddled not, and't had been manners in you,
Not to have intruded upon mine, your presence
Being unrequired.

You're very confident, young Gallant,
In defence of your brave Mistress,
I know you are in love, bravely in love
With a trim Chamber-maid, a thing made up
Of a cast Taffeta gown of an old Wardrobe:
Degenerate brother, were I not assured
Of your chaste mothers virtues, I should question,
Whither my father got you, but I'm come
To disinchant thy senses from the charms,
That hateful witch throws on them, but resolve
Quickly to quit her, or by Heaven she would better
Commix with lightning.

Pray, good brother use
Your threats upon your Corporals, or stamp
At your tame Lancepresados, when they do not
Perform your charge; your rage upon your boys,
Were more becoming, then upon your brother:
If you will sit, and with attentive patience,
Mark what I shall deliver, I will give you
Reasons for my intentions, but if not,
You may depart unsatisfied.

Well Sir, be brief, I shall attend you.


In brief, I love fair Isabella, so as honour,
Not the vicious heat of youth,
Commands me to affect, I love her virtue,
And have in that as noble, rich a dowry,
As the addition of estate and blood,
Which you have acquired in your late happy match
With young Emilia.

Dare you, boy, name her,
And my Emilia as paralels.

Why, good brother,
Though she transcends her in her birth and fortunes,
Yet in the rare endowments of her mind,
She is her equal, virtue has a soul as precious
(...) Look on my face, and read my business there.

Alas my Lord, your looks
Are discomposed with rage, your fiery eyes
Roll with the accustomed motion, they had wont
To dart upon your enemies, I am
Assured my innocence can no way merit
Your all-consuming anger.

'Tis a lye,
A worthless lye, false as thy flattering hopes are,
You are in love, most gallantly in love
With Isabella, one who is composed
Of paint and plasters: thou degenerate monster,
Traitor to fame, and parricide to honour,
Abject in thy condition, as thy thoughts are;
Tear this vil'd strumpet from thy soul, do it quickly,
Renounce her with all binding ties can urge thee
To keep thy faith, or I will quite put off
The name of Father, take as little notice
Thou art my of-spring, as the surly North,
Does of the snow, which when it has engendered,
Its wild breath scatters through the earth forgotten.

This was the killing fever I still feared;
Sir I should be a stranger to your blood,
As well as noble worth, should I commit
Actions I shamed to justify: I confess
I love fair Isabella, and beseech you,
The meandness of her fortune and her birth
Omitted. she may be conferred upon me
In lawful marriage.

Dare you boy,
Speak this to me.

I should Sir be degenerate
From your great spirit, should I fear to utter
What I do wish effected, were you a God,
As being my Father, you're but a degree
To me beneath one, in a cause so righteous,
I should not only boldly crave your license,
But hope to have it granted.

Hell and furies,
Durst any mortal fool, but my own issue,
Venture to brave my fury thus; resolve
Villain in full to satisfy my purpose,
Do it without regret, renounce this strumpet
Even from thy soul, abandon her remembrance.
Or by my own unwearied valour, better,
And with more safety thou may hug a wave,
When its white lips kiss heaven: young sir your honour
Is not your own, for it you're but my factor,
And must give me account, a strict account
Of the errors you run in: to the Dust
Of my great Ancestors, stand I accountant
For all my family, and their blessed ashes
Would break their Marble lodgings, and come forth
To quarrel with me, should I permit this bar
To stain their glorious Heraldry.

Great Sir,
Can virtue be a blemish, or true worth
Disgrace Nobility; 'twas that at first,
When Nature made all equal, did distinguish
'Twixt man and man, and gave a just precedence
To the most worthy: Honour is Virtues of-spring,
Since then the Angel, my affection's fixed on,
Is fair and virtuous, all the good that ever
Durst with frail flesh commix, or earth be proud of:
How to our Families honour can she bring
A diminution? Can sir the chaste ice,
Kissed by the Sun, into its native substance,
Pollute a crystal River, surely rather
It adds fresh moisture to its stream. My Lord,
I am your son, and have been still obedient
To your commands; O by your love, your virtue,
Your never daunted virtue, I beseech you,
Grant me this one request, were it for my life,
I should not be so abject, as to spend
This breath for its redemption.

Well, thy prate
Has overcome me, I am pitiful,
Beyond my nature pitiful to thee,
Thou shalt enjoy thy wishes.

All the blessings,
Prayers can obtain from heaven, shower down upon you
For your superlative mercy.

Stay and mark me,
'Tshall be with this condition, that as soon
As thou art wed, and hast enjoyed thy wishes,
Ere the next Sun rise on you,
You resolve without remorse,
To kill your Isabella.

Heavens protect me!


Nay thou shalt swear it too: Alas gentle boy,
I know thy nature is too full of fire,
To mix with sordid earth, and though thy last,
(Which is but manhood in thee) prompt thee on,
To taste the sweets of Isabellas beauty,
I know thou scornst so much to unmake thy Gentry,
To take her for thy wife, perhaps she will not
Give up her honour, till the Church has sealed
That grant as lawful; freely I allow
Her brave ambition, if as a reward
Due to her haughty pride, thy own hands kill her,
And so wipe out the infamy.

Strange cruelty! so tyrants used to grant offenders life,
After their condemnation: to reserve them
To combat wild beasts in the spacious Cirque,
Or bloody Amphitheater: My Lord.

Pish I am deaf, inexorable as Seas
To the prayers of Mariners, when their sinking Keel
Is drunk with billows.

O my Lord,
Your justice on this cursed witch, this thief,
This morning I have lost out of my Cabinet
The so much valued Jewell, which your bounty
Bestowed upon me, none but she and I
Having been there since; she must be thief:
Force her to restitution.

'Twas a gem, my mother gave me, which I did preserve
With as much care, as votaries do the relics
Of their protecting Saints: I gave it you,
When in the eager fervor of my youth,
I destined you my wife: come hither minion,
You who can steal the Jewels of men's hearts,
With your enchanting sorceries, will not fear
To make a venture upon pettier theft:
Sirrah go bid them wait me here.

My Lord,
I'm so secure in my own innocence,
That should your fury riot on my life,
'Twould not affright me, I should meet my death,
As willingly as I should do my rest,
After a tedious watching, there's no armour
Like that of innocence, with which I'm guarded,
And therefore laugh at punishment.

So brave I shall soon quell your insolence; lay hands
On this ignoble strupet, hang her up, here in my presence.

Stay sir, I do beseech you hear me.


Your entreaties are cast on me, as fools throw oil on fire,
Striving to extinguish it: hang her up,
I'll hang you all else.

Then Sir I will speak,
Since you forget to be a father to me,
I will put off my duty; I'm resolved,
Since 'tis impossible that we should live,
To dye together: nor do not slave presume,
To touch this mine of purity, 'tis a treasure
While I'm alive Hell cannot ravish from me,
(For fiends would fear to touch it) if you murder
This spotless innocent Virgin, you are such,
So merciless a tyrant, as do love
To feed on your own bowels, one whom nature
Created for a curse, and to get curses,
Such prodigies as I am, one whom all Lovers
Shall tremble at, if mentioned; one.

Death have I lost my command, is he or I
To be obeyed? hang her, if he resist,
Kill the unnatural Traitor.

Dear Albertus, draw not a ruin on thy prizeles life,
For my despised sake I will go to death,
All peace as does an Anchorite, that's assured of all his sins forgiveness.

Saucy devil, carry that touch of her to hell, 'twill serve
To mitigate thy tortures.

O my Lord, what has your fury acted,
Dear Albertus.

'Twas a most friendly hand, and I could kiss it,
For the most welcome benefit; Isabella,
In death thou give me life, thy innocence,
Will like my guardian Angel, safely convey me
To yonder heavenly Mansion: pray forgive me,
Dear Sir, if in my over-hasty zeal
In this poor innocents quarrel, my wild fury,
Transgressed my natural duty, and as the last
Request your dying son can ask, take pity
On this most innocent Maid: thy hand, my fair one,
And now as willingly I do expire,
As a blessed Martyr, who does court the fire. O Isabella dies.

O my dear Albert.


Death slave, dare you play with a flame
That shall consume you.
Hang her up, or torments shall pay your breach of duty.

There friend, there's all the Jewels I am mistress of,
And that thou merits, prithee be as speedy
In thy dispatch, as fate it self; there is
A pure white Ghost in you same azure cloud,
Expects me straight, I come my dear Albertus.

Take hence their bodies, 'twas a hopeful boy,
And one I loved well, till his wild love
Made him forget his duty; and 'tis better
He died with fame, his sword in's hand, then that
He'd lived with foul dishonour: would he were
Alive again, I do begin to feel strange horrors here, and that
Big guest, my soul, is shaken as with a nipping frost, hence idle
Grief, I must be furnished with more spritly passions, thou art too
Heavy, fit for the society of none but pensive women. All must die,
Why should not he then, 'twas his destiny.

Are all your horse in readiness.


Yes, 'tis time,
That we were mounted, 'tis four leagues at least
Unto the Generals Camp, and 'twill be late
Ere we arrive there, are you yet resolved
Upon the means, by which to put in practice
Our long intended purpose, our delay
Will make the Emperor apt to call in question
Our faiths integrity,

So great a business,
Is not with easy speed to be performed:
An eager haste oft-times o'rethrowes the fortunes
Of such affairs, if we once get him hither,
Within our City walls, be confident,
He's in his grave; but have you given command,
That all your Soldiers be in readiness,
To wait the Generals entry.

They shall be
In their best furniture of Arms, all drawn
Into parada, he shall have all pomp,
And ornament of war, to bid him welcome.

These triumphs
Shall be but funeral pomps before his death;
Gordon, you must, as Governor of Egers,
Present the keys with all humility
To his dispose, 'twill make him be more careless,
And trust his very soul into our hands.

Doubt not me,
I shall perform with cunning skill, what e're
Belongs to me; but do you intend the General
Alone shall fall, or his confederates
Shall perish with him,

O by all means, Indian princes
Do carry slaves to wait on them into
The other world, and 'twere inglorious,
That our brave General should not have that privilege
Count Tertzki, Kintzki, Newman, Marshall Illawe,
Shall be his harbingers, and in the shades below,
Provide fit entertainment for his Ghost.

They are of power, their deaths will shroudly weaken,
The strength of the Conspiracy.

Very true, I'll craftily instill into his ears,
New causes of distrust, so to beget
In him more confidence of my faith, so to
Allure him hither sooner, we must work
Surely, as does the Mole, who digs
Her habitation in the earth, and scorns!
All the assaults of tempests; when he's in,
We must be prompt in action, sure of hand,
And sound of heart, and strike him with that violence,
From the supposed Heavens,
His ambition climbs to, that the thin air
Does from its purer Regions
Dull earthly meteors; come let's away,
Nought crosses actions like a dull delay.

To be diseased in mind, diseased past cure
Of Physic or sage counsel, is a madness,
The active Soldiers, all whose ends are glory,
And that by virtue (cowards term a sin)
Ambition, should not be acquainted with.
Although my cares do hang upon my soul,
Like mines of Lead, the greatness of my spirit,
Shall shake the sullen weight off; natural rest,
(Is like a wholesome bath to limbs oppressed
With gouts and aches) to a troubled mind,
A most excelling medicine, and I feel
A strong propension in my brain, to court
Sleep for its mild Physician: within there; boy.
Sirrah be sure that none disturb my rest,
On no occasion, on your life I charge you.

Shall I sing Sir.


Yes, if the notes be heavy, apt to invite
The weary soul to slumbers.

Who's there? you must not enter.


Must not sirrah,
Where is your Lord?

Your pardon, gracious Madam, he's laid down
To rest, and has upon my life commanded
Me, none should wake him.

Think thou he is
So much addicted to his ease, he will
Neglect his business, go in and tell him,
The Governors of Egers, Colonel Gordon,
And Colonel Lesle are without upon
Affairs of consequence.

Would your Grace
Would pardon me, your self with greater safety
Might do it, Madam.

Foolish boy, go in, I will be thy security.


I shall perform,
Though most unwillingly your command; my Lord,
Please you to rise, your Duchess.

Ha, where's my sword,
Thou art a Coward Ghost, and not my sons,
To take me in my sleep unarmed, my Poniard
Will still be faithful to me, if thou be not
Thin air, its point will graze on thee.

O my Lord,
What has your fury acted? this your sudden
Murdering this innocent youth, doth add new horrors
To your strange cruelties.

Ha, my Page! his death
Was but due justice for his breach of duty,
For thus disturbing of my rest.

My Lord,
Your hands are purpled so in innocent blood,
Tears cannot wash the tincture of: my self
Am as deep guilty as you in the slaughter
Of Isabella, she was innocent,
The Jewell I accused her of, this morning,
Grief to my soul, I've found, pray heaven, repentance
May expiate our offences.

I begin
To feel strange horrors here, my Marble soul,
Does strive to sweat it self into a tear,
At thought of these sad accidents. Noble Friends,
You're opportunely welcome, I was oppressed
With sudden melancholy, but your loved presence
Expells all thought of it, and I'm grown
As full of sprightly mirth, as when my hopes
Aim at a glorious victory.

Mighty Duke,
According to my duty, I am come
Here to present you with the keys of Egers,
My place of Government, and with them my life,
To do you service.

noble Gordon,
you do so much indear me by your love,
I have no possibility to requite
Your overflow of Courtesies, have you not
Received new intelligence of business,
Which does concern me.

New temptations Sir
Against your precious life, 'tis to be feared,
Lest seeing we do slack so in performance
Of what we've promised, he'll employ new agents
To attempt your ruin, and should treason,
As 'tis a subtle serpent, stings unseen Sir,
Invade your life: to what a dire misfortune
Were we, whose lives have upon your dependence,
Betrayed, and therefore good my Lord beware,
Lest your own courage, which contemns all dangers,
Do undo you.

Never fear; how far
Is't hence to Egers.

Some three hours easy march.


Set forward thither;
It were in vain my enemies swords to fear,
When I do carry sharper poniards here.

Vexed with so many cares, so many mischiefs,
That do like Hidra's dreadful heads increase,
By cutting off, as billows follow billows,
Succeed each other with that eager violence,
Our weary Eagles know not where to perch,
But flag their sickly wings: were it not irreligious,
I should capitulate with the powers divine,
And tax them of injustice; my whole reign
Has been a long and one continued trouble;
And if blessed peace with her fair beams did e're
Shine on our Empire, 'twas but like a fair
Deceitful wind, courting the ships out of the harbour,
Into the maine to drown them: but the mother
Of a more horrid warfare, that I fear as
I found the Wreathe Imperial drowned in blood,
So I in blood must leave it.

Have good hope Sir,
Tides then approach their full height, when their ebb
Has been at lowest; the most hideous tempests,
Which seemed to threat the ruin of the world,
Bing ushered in by thunder and hot lightning,
Are soonest past, there's nothing violent
Can boast of perpetuity; our fortunes
Are not so desperate, as our fears present them:
We've hands and hearts left yet, that dare oppose
The inhumane Traitor, and our causes justice
Assures us, if we cannot live victorious,
We shall dye nobly.

Man, my royal Father
Is not himself, when he beholds
Events through the quick perspective of fear,
Which shows him dangers at remotest distance,
As clearest and his most perspicuous objects.
Suppose this traitor in his Giant-reach
Fathom even heaven it self, yet there are bolts
To strike him into earth for his ambition,
And make his memory and name, all, save his treason,
For ever to be forgotten.

That which most
Does drive my tortured soul into affrights,
Is, that I see we'r false among our selves:
The faithless Soldiers daily do in troupes,
Fly from our Ensigns to the Traitors Camp:
What cause have we then but t'expect sad ruin?
When those who should be our security,
Do prove our greatest enemies; our Guard,
Our fear and terror, they all look
On him, as superstitious Indians on the Sun,
With adoration; on me, with contempt,
Or (but at best) with pity.

Mighty Caesar,
To doubt an ill before it fall upon us,
Amongst valiant and resolved souls* is counted
A point of cowardice: Great Spirits ever
Should be above their fates; good Sir retreat
Into that fortress of your mind,
Your resolution, call it up to guard,
Your soul from timorous thoughts:
Are you the man have swayed
The Roman Empire four and twenty years,
With that success against your foreign foes,
Your very name more then your forces vanquished,
To let a Traitor fright you: good my Lord
Let's draw forth new battalias to the Field,
Awake the Drum and Trumpet, summon up
The very last hopes of our weakened strength,
Against this insulting traitor; very infants
Will on the sudden grow up able men,
And fight in this brave quarrel.

Heaven it self
Will arm on our side, and with certain vengeance,
Pursue the inhumane monster: why? to dye,
(As that's the worst can happen) in this cause,
Were a religious martyrdom: I am your son Sir,
And what your fortunes are, good or disastrous,
Mine has on them dependence; by my hopes, I do
So little weigh the glorious traitors pride,
I think him worthy scarce my meanest thought,
And rest assured, ere long, I shall behold
This fearful meteor, that would be a Star,
And does affright us with his hideous blaze,
Like a vain Comet drop his fading rays.

Your comforts
Come as in droughts the elemental dew
Does on the earth, it wets, but leaves no moisture,
To give the seared plants growth: But yesternight
We'd certain information, that our forces
Led by Matthias Gallas, were o'rethrowne
By Saxon Waymar, and his son young Fredricke:
Who had they known as well how to pursue,
As gain a victory, and made a sudden
Onslaught upon Vienna, their's; not ours
Had been the Wreathe Imperial. Now your news sir.

Letters from Colonel Lesle fir, from Egers.


This is our latest hope; he writes me word,
That the Arch-traytor, and his prime confederates,
Last night arrived at Egers,, and assures me
Of their immediate ruin: Well Colossus,
You'd best stand firm, unshaken as a rock,
Whose feet the fierce waves striving to trip up,
Do against its hard hooves dash themselves to pieces,
Or thou wilt fall unpitied, fall to be
The scorn of story, the contempt and by-word
To all posterity; let's in my Lords:
This law the Heavens inviolably keep,
Their justice well may slumber, but ne'er sleep.

The honour you have done us mighty Duke,
By this your gracious presence, gives a period
To our ambition; Egers is grown proud,
Dares with Vienna stand in competition,
Which is the capital City, which does hold
The true and lawful Caesar.

Ferdinand,
Had he arrived here in his greatest glory,
Could not have been more welcome; while I am
Governor of this town, it and my life
Are at your service.

Noble Gentlemen,
You do so load me with new courtesies,
I know not first for which to give you thanks,
And did a sullen humour not possess
My much distempered faculties, my mirth
Should speak my gratitude; but on the sudden,
I am so overburdned with sad thoughts,
I cannot suite my mind (so much oppressed)
To jollity.

'Tis our general grief,
(...) Ought should disturb your quiet here, when we
Were all composed of triumph, for the joy
We do conceive for your arrival. My noble Lord of
Tertzki, these are the welcomes
Full bowles of sprightly Wine that Soldiers use
In entertainment; to our Generals health,
And to his good recovery from his melancholy.

Who shall refuse to pledge it with that zeal,
He would drink healthful potions, may it be
A deadly poison to him: Colonel Gordon.

May he dye for droughth like a Westphalia Pig
In the dog days, or be choked with eating tosted cheese.

My Lord of Kintzki,
This to our Generals health, and welcome hither.

I'm like to faint for thirst,
Would 'twould arrive at me once, my mouth
Even waters at it.

Noble Butler.


Marshall Illawe.


I shall be last, I see,
But if the stoops hold out, 'tis ten to one
I'll have my share.

Here Colonel Newman.


And 'twere the Tun of Heidleberg, I'd drink it
Off with as much ease, as a leaguer can
In a grim sutlers house of thatch: My Lord,
Under your gracious pardon, take me off
This lusty rouse to your own health, and after
Begin as much to each of ours, and if
It do not make you as merry as a Corporal
Upon pay day, say I'm no Esculapius,
But a mere Mountebank in the effects
Of sprightly Wine.

Kind Gentlemen, my thanks
To all of you, and would my disposition
Afford me licence, I should not forget
The soldiers ceremony, to begin
Each of your happy wishes howsoever
I will trench so far on my melancholy,
To drink this cup. To all your healths.

Your Grace hath shown us
A too excessive courtesy.

I'll only
Repose a little, and if I find
My sad distemper alter, I'll return,
And frolic in your company.

I smell him:
He has a plot upon us, hee'le steal hence,
And shift a score or two of cups, and then
Set fresh upon us, make us all as drunk,
As rats in the Canaries.

We'll attend your Grace.


By no means,
Let not my melancholy discompose
Your thought of frolic mirth:
There's Colonel Newman,
Will in my absence take a cup or two
For me: mean time be merry, 'tis my charge:
Remember to observe it.

I'm sorry,
He should be thus distempered here. My Lord
Let not our Generals sadness rob us of
Our late intended jollity: Colonel Newman
You'd wont to be all air: I hope, you are not
Turned earth of the sudden.

No faith, thank heaven, I feel no inclination
that savours of mortality: gentlemen
Shal's have a catch.

With all our hearts, good Colonel.


A military Madrigal, I learned it
Of a right Imp of Mars, a red-fac'd Sergeant,
At Halberstat.
To me be terrible, since 'tis maine folly,
To fear that which we no way can avoid:
Nor is't much matter how we dye, by force,
Or naturally checkered with grisly wounds,
Or in our beds, since all's but the same death still:
Oh! but to dye surcharged with mortal sins,
Such as can kill our everlasting beings,
Our souls, and send them hence to bathe in floods
Of living fire; there, that's the frightful mischief,
The other's but a trifle; I, who never
Could fear the other, at the thought of this,
Am one with death already; my vast crimes,
My horrid murders kill that conscience in me,
Which makes me know my guilt, that conscience,
Which as my shadow follows me.

Come softly,
And if my stroke miss, second me.

Ha! 'twas no ghost, that was a
Mortal touch,
It came so home and heavily: base Traitor,
Who e're thou art, thou durst not see my face,
My looks would even have blasted thee:
Ha! Lesle, Gordon, Butler.

Yes Traytor-Duke, 'twas we, who out thy soul
From thy weak twist of life, we who glory
More in performing this brave act of justice,
Then had we gained the Empire thy ambition
Aspired to, thy base trecheries to Caesar,
Are by us revenged.

The Counts,
Thy bold confederate Rebels, by our hands
Sent to their ruin.

Thus coward Hare,
Prey on a dying Lyon, for thee Lesle,
Basely perfidious to me in thy faith,
Receive my last breath in a curse: you have
But plaid the Hang-men to perform heavens justice.
Forgive me Heaven my past offence: I dye,
Not for my ambition, but my cruelty.

Let us convey the body in, and post
With all speed to Vienna, and give notice
To the Emperor of our proceedings; thus every Traitor shall,
Stead of a Crown, meet his own Funeral.


