TO begin particularly to wright of these attempts, and briefly to run over
^ache s^uerall action, the cause of the same is first to be considered. After
the arrival of the French Ambassadors, and upon thei^ coming to the English
court, The Nobles and Gentlemen of the same, desirous to sh^w them alcourtesie
poss^ble fittest for such estates, and to sporte them with all courtly
pleasure, agreed among them to prepare a Triumph, which was very quickly
concluded, and being devised in most su^ptuous order, was by them performed in
as valiant a manner, to their endless fame and honour. The chief, or
challengers in these attempts, were these. The Earl of Arundel, the Lord
Windsore Master Philip Sidney, and Master Fulke Grevill, Who calling themselves
the four Foster Children of Desire, made their invention of the foresaid
Triumph in this order and form following.

The Gallary or place at the end of the Tiltyard adjoining to her Majesties
house at Whiteball, Fortress of perfect beauty, for as much as her highness
should be there included, whereto the said Foster children laid Title and
claim as their due by descent to belong unto them. And upon denial or any^
cpulse from that their d^s^red pa^rimonie, they vowed to vanquish conquer by
force who so should seem to wit^stand it. For the accomplishing whereof they
sent their challenge or first defiance to the Q^eens majesty: which was uttered
by a boy on Sunday, the sixt^enth of April last, as her Majesty came fro the
Chapel, who being apparelled in red and white, as a Martial messenger of
Desires fostered Children, without making any pr^cise reverence at all, uttered
these speeches of defiance, from his masters to her Majesty, the effect
whereof ensues.

O Lady, built by nature is seated in this Realm: These four I say and say
again, thus nourished, thus animated thus entitled, and thus informed, do
will you by me, even in the name of Justice, that you will no lodger exclude
virtuous DESIRE fro perfect BEAV TIE? Whereto if you yield, (O yield for so al
reason requires) then have I no more to say, but rejoice that my sayings hath
obtained so righfull, and yet so blissful a request. But if (alas but let
not that be needful) BEAVTIR be accompanied with disdainful pride, and pride
vvaighted on by refusing cruelty. Then must I denounce unto you (Woe is me,
answer before it be denounced) that they determine by request to accomplish
their claim, And because they will better testify to the world, they have
been brought up under the wings of honourable DESIRE, this honourable
forevvarning they send you. That upon the xxiiii day of this month of April
they will besiege that fatal FORTRESS, vowing not to spare (if this
obstinacy continue) the svvoorde of faithfulness, and the fire of affection?
Now if so it fall out, the worthy knights of your Court (moved with
passion in them selves) disdain of my senders boldness, or partial liking
(which I most doubt) to the majesty of your eyes, will either bid them
battle before they approach, or suffering them to approach, will after la^or to
l^uye the siege, They protest to meet them in what sort they will choose,
vvihning only it may be performed before your own eyes, whom they know
as even in judgment, as dainty in choosing, where if so they list. First at
the Tilt in so many courses, as your self shall please to appoint. And then if
any will call them to the course of the field with Lance and sword, they hope
to give such true proofs of their valler, as at least shall make their desires
more noble, vovving on the other side, that if before the night part the fray,
they do not overcome al the that come in against them, they will yield
themselves slaves unto you for ever? This therefore O Queen (greater in that
you are Queen of your self, then in passing the whole compass of the earth)
have I delivered my charge, not as a challenge to your knights? against
whom, (but in so just a cause) they acknowledge themselves unable to match
the meanest, But as a plain proclaimation of War, unless the FORTRESS OF
BEAVTIE, that hath vvoon so many to lose themselves, be speedily surrendered:
And now it shall be seen what knights you have, whom BEAVTIE may draw to
resist a rightful title, And I for my pore part moved by that I see in you
(though I serve your enemies) will daily pray that all men may see you, then
you shall not fear any arms of adversaries: Or if enemies you must have, that
either they may have the minds of them that send me, or their fortunes in that
they have long desired.

At which day abouesaid for certain urgent occasions, May: And so till Whitson
Monday, when they first began to perform it.

The said day being come, the four Foster children had made preparation to
besiege the Fortress of Beauty. And thereto had provided a frame of wood
which was covered with Canvas, painted outwardly in such excellent order, as if
it had been very natural earth or mold, and carried the name of a Rolling
trench, Beauty. These things thus al in a readiness, the Challengers
approached, came from the Stable toward the Tyltyard, one after another in brave
and excellent order. And the manner of their several entrings was as follows.

First, Arundell entered the Ty^teyarde, all in Gilt and engraven Armour, with
Caparisons and furniture richly and bravely embroidered, having attendant on
him, Two gentlemen ushers, iiii. Paages riding on four spare horses, and
twenty of his Gentlemen. Al which aforesaid were apparelled in short Cloaks
and venetian hose of Crimson velvet, laid with gold lace, doublets of yellow
Satin, hats of Crimson velvet with gold bands and yellow feathers, and yellow
silk stocks. Then had he six tump^ers that sounded before him. And xxxi.
^eomen that waited after him apparelled in Cassock coats, and venetian hose of
Crimson velvet, laid on which red silk and gold lace, Duble^s of yellow
taffeta, Hats of crimson Taffeta, with yellow feathers, and yellow worsted
stockings.

After him proceeded the Lord Windsore, in short cloaks of scarlet, lined
through with orange tawny taff^tie, laid about with silver lace, Dublets of
orange taw^y Satin, venetiahose of orange tawny velvet, black velvet caps,
with silver bands and white feathers, and silu^red rapiers daggers, with
scabberds o^blacke velue^. Four trumpetters, and ^wo footmen in cassock
coats and ven^tian hose of orange tawny velvet, and black velvet caps with
silver bands white feathers, four gromes of his stable leading of his four
horses, in cassock coats and venetian hose of orange tawny ^affatie, and
orange tawny feltes with silver ^ands, and white feathers. Then had he three
score yeomen in coats of Orange tawny clothe, with the Unicorn of of silver
plate on their sleeves, and orange tawny feltes with silver bands and white
feathers.

Then proceeded M. Philip Sidney, with gold and silver feathers, very richly
cunningly wrought, he had four pages y^ rode on his four spare horses, who had
cassok coats venetia hose al of cloth of silver, laid with gold lace, hats of
y^ same with gold bands, and white feathers, and each one a pair of white
buskins. The had he a thirty gentlemen ^eomen, four trumpetters, who were all
in cassoke coats and venetian l^ose of yellow velvet, laid with silver lace,
yellow velvet caps with silver bands and white feathers, and every one a pair
of white buskins. And the had upon their coats, a scroll or band of silver,
which came scarce wise over the shoulder, and so down under the arm, with
this po^e, or sentence written upon it, both before and behind, Sicnos non
nobis.

Then came M. Fulke Gr^uill, in gilt armour, Jerkins of Tawny taffeta, cut
and lined with yellow sarsenet, laid with gold lace, and cut down the arm
and set with loopes and buttons of gold, Uenetian hose of the same lined as
asoresaid, laid with gold lace down the side with loopes and buttons of
gold, with each a pair of yellow worsted stockings. And ha^ts of Tawny
Taffarie with gold bands and yellow Feathers. Having thus all entered the Tilt
yard, they proceeded on with the rolling trench before them, which stayed
against the Queen, and they passed by, as though they would behold the
Fortress of Beauty. And so went about the Tilt, At last the boy that uttered
the first deflaunce pronounced these speeches to her Majesty.

If the message lately delivered unto you had been believed and followed. the
defence of obstinate refusal there never grows victory but by compassion? They
are come, what need I say more, you see them, ready in hart as you know, and
able with hands as they hope, not only to assailing but to prevailing.
Perehance you despise the smallness of number, I say unto you, the force of
DESIRE goes not by fullness of company. Nay rather View with what unresistable
determination themselves approach, And howe not only the heavens send their
invisible Instrument to aid them. But also the very earth the dullest of al
the Elements which with natural heaviness still strives to the sleepy
Center,

Which speech being ended, the Rowlling trench or Mount of earth was moved as
ne'er the Queenes Majesty as might be, which being settled, the music played
very pleasantly, and one of the Boys being then accompanied with Cornets,
summoned the Fortress with this song.

Yield yield, O yield, you that this FORTE do hold,
which seated is, in spotless honours fi^lde,
Desires great force, no forces can withhold:
then to DESIERS desire, O yield O yield.
Yield yield O yield, trust not on beauties pride,
fayrenesse though fair, is but a feeble shield,
When strong Desire, which virtues love doth guide,
claims but to gain his due, O yield O yield.
Yield yield O yield, who first this Fort did make,
did it for just Desires, true children build,
Such was his mind, if you another take:
defence herein doth wrong, O yield O yield,
Yield yield O yield, now is it time to yield,
Before thaslault begin, O yield O yield.
When that was ended, another Boy turning him self to the Foster children and
their retinue, sung this Alarm.

Alarm alarm, here will no yielding be,
such marble ears, no cunning words can charm,
Courage therefore, and let the stately see.
that nought withstandes DESIRE, Alarm alarm.
Alarm alarm, let not their beauties move
remorse in you to do this FORTRESS harm,
For since war is the ground of virtues love,
no force, though force be used Alarm alarm.
Alarm alarm, companions now begin,
about this never conquered walls to swarm,
More praise to us we never look to win,
much may that was not yet, Alarm alarm.
Alarm alarm when once the fight in warm,
then shall you see them yield, Alarm alarm.
Which ended, the two Canons were short off, Desire, All which did continue
till time the Defendants came in.

Then came in the defendants in most sumptuous manner,

First M. Henry Grey, Sir Thomas Parat, Anthonie Cooke, M. Th^mas Ratcliffe,
Master Henrie Knowles, M. William Knowles, M. Robert Knowles. M. Frauncis
Knowles, M. Raffe Bows, M. Thomas Kelway, M. George Goring, M. William
Tresham, M. Robert Alexander, M. Edwarde Dennie, M. Herculus Meautus, M. Edward
Moore, M. Richard Skipwith, M. Richard Ward, M. Edward Digibie, M. Henry
Nowell, M. Henry Brunkerd. And afterwards in the midst of the running, came
in Sir Henry Lea, as unknown, and when he had broke his six staves, went out
in like manner again.

So passing on one after another, when sir Thomas Parat and M. Cooke came to
the end of the Tilt, over against the Queens Majesty, one of their pages
arrayed like an Angel, uttered these speeches unto her.

Despair, if DESIRE overshoot duty, there is no reason, and where either of
these are, there can be no rule. And so setting more sighs then may be
numbered by syphers, this present time, (ah grief) this present time, that
honest and fair hearted frozen Knight died, (what said I) even that which
again with grief I must say died, whose ghost making speedy passage into the
ELISIAN fields (for what more swift then a soul) in the midst of the
infernal multitude, with s^re^ches, cries and clamers, made both Heaven and
hell to redouble this Echo, shall deprive them the safeguard, yet command
them to be humble in affection, though ^uente, least they seem to disdain
that pride (...), which they desire themselves, their pretence, So your laying
challenge upon claim, conquest upon challenge, may well prove a will but no
worthiness, A desire to reach, but no possibility to recover, In which your
soaring attempts if you chase to fall, the only comfort you have, is to cry with
PHAETOn MAGNIS EXCIDIMVS AVSIS: But if no persuasions may move your minds: Know
ye proud Knights, there are that have hearts as big as mountains, and as far
above you in prowess, as ye are above all in presumption, yet not so vain
(which ye term valiant) to assault the sun, and why, because it is
impregnible, vvee content to enjoy the light, ye to eclipse it, we to rest
under the feet, ye to run over the head, we to yield to that which nothing
can conquer, you to conquer that which makes all men Captives. But vveare it
possible, that head could devise, courage attempt, or hand execute any thing
that might show the depth of our vnspot ted Loialty, soon should be seen
(and for your selves to soon) that your enterprises should be of as small
account then, as now they are of lightlihood, to deep an impressi^n is
engraven in our thoughts, for the majesty of that sun which now piercing
our eyes hath fully subdued our hearts, that we are pressed in her defence to
offer the whole world defiance, In proof whereof I am charged to throvve
down his Gauntler, which who so dares take up, shall feel both the heate
of their just conceived quarrel, and the reproach of their own deserved
folly, not my riding in breaking a few staves to end the strife, but at
Tournie or what else so ever they can devise or dare adventure for to win the
benefit of BEAVTIE, Thus most renowned and divine BEAVTIE, whose beams
shine like the Sun, have ADAM and EVE adventured to defend the Sun, the same
I call Beauty the light of the world, the marvel of men, the mirror of
nature, on which their encounter, if those favourable gleams may fall, they
will not only think to have done good herein, but to be restored ag^ine to
Paradi^e, the one means to repose his trust in a woman, who like Eve cannot
be beguiled, t^e other to rest on a Saint, which by a Serpent will not be
tempted, Thus being placed in the Garden of your Graces, O of all things most
gracious where virtues grow as thick as leaves did in Paradise. They will
take heedeto taste of the forbidden fruit, contented to behold, not coveting
to take hold, And for that it hath bin long argued, ^nd no arguing can end?
whether the first offence came by the crudelitie of ADAM, or the simplicity
of Eve, the one defending his fault by sound arguments, the other excusing
hers by sharp ansvveres, they most humbly s^e for this, that either by Six
courses betvvene them the quarrel may be ended, or by your highness peremptory
sentence determined, for they both being in the world are desirous that one
might bear the blame of both, And what herein your excellency shall set
down, there is none shall gainsay, For whenever the question shall be moved,
No other reason shall be allovved then this.

Elizabetha dixit.

This speech being thus ended, Sir Thomas Parat, and M. Cooke proceeded backward
on the other side of the Tilt, And when M. Ratcliffe came likewise against the
Q^ene, one of his Pages pronounced these speeches in his Masters behalf to her
Majesty.

So many were the misfortunes, (most renowned and beavvtifull Princess) of
the desolate knight my master, his strange diet new conceits, he became so
enchanted, that neither the remembrance of others, nor a thought touching
himself could enter into his mind: An alteration seldom heard of, that the
place vvhere^s he vv^s shrovvded in, should make him to forget who he is?
Living thus a long time for that no limb should seem short, rising according
to ^s manner to vvalke in the moss in the grisping of the day he espied upon
the shore certain men either cast away by shipvvrake, or cast ouerborde by
Pyrattes, unto whom he went and perc^ing by their pl^ints one which lay
dead amongst the to be their master, enquired whence they were, but they not
willing to repeat their misfortunes, opened the bosom of the gentleman, and
pulled out as crovvle containing a claim, a challenge, nay a conquest of
BEAVVTIE. At the sight whereof, suddenly (quoth he) Beavvtie, and therewithal
apalled paused, entering by little and little out of his present M^LANCHOLI^S into
his former misfortunes, who as one awaked out of a long dream, began thus
to debate. O Beavvtie where thy Fortress is sounded I know, but what these
brethren should mean I mar^ile, for as I am assured that to vvinne thee none
could be so fortunate, so did I (...) that to claim thee none could be so
fond, when as thou O divine BEAVVTIE art of every one to be desired, but
never to be conquered of DESIRE. But as the Eagle beholding the sun, cou^teth
to build her ^est in the same, and so dims her sight. So they vevving the
brighnesse of BEAVVTIE are incensed to conquer it by DESIRE. And what then?
because she is invincible shall I be indifferent. No, I will forsake this
caytifly Cottage, and will take Arms to defend that BEAVVTIES CASTLE.
Nothing shall remove me from mine attempt, which being performed, nothing can
move me, yea but she hath servants already a number, I but unless I be
there, not the whole number, but many were famous but none more faithful,
yet alas, if thou go, thou shalt ever be unfortunate, better always
infortunat, then one disloyal, which words being ended, he demaded whether
they would in like case adventure with one of no less courage then their
master, but certainly of greater affection: Whose service he having upon small
entreaty obtained, for that belike they were desirous to see the event for the
which they had suffe^ed such adventures, he departed to his cave, hevving a
shield out of the hard cliffe enriched only with soft moss: A double sign
of his desire, thinking that nothing could manifest BEAVVTIE so well as
PITHAGORAS wallunt, a tender ^yne and a hard shell. And now most excellent
and divine BEAVVTIE, divine it must needs be that vvorketh so heavenly,

Which speech being ended, Frauncis Knowles, on after another, according to
their age, and all in like armour, who coming to the end of the Tilt, stayed
till these speeches were uttered by one of their Pages, who being apparelled
like unto Mercurie, pronounced these speeches in the Knights behalues to her
Majesty.

Report hath bruited all abroad, though they feed not fat therewith, yet must
they either feed thereon or fast, for BEAVVTIE is the only bait whereon
DESIRE bites, and love the chief restority that lady BEAVVTIE likes, so that
she ca no more be left without meat, then men can live with out minds: Of
all affections that are, DESIRE is the most worthy to woe, but least
deserves to vvinne BEAVVTIE, for in winning his saint he loses him self,
no sooner hath desire what he desires, but that he dies presently: So that
when BEAVVTIE yields once to desire, then can she never vaunt to be desired
again: Wherefore of force this principle must stad it is convenient for
DESIRE ever to wish, nec^ssarie that he always want, O rare most renovvmed
BEAVVTIE, O gods to be honoured of all, not to be equalled of any, become not
now a prisoner, your FORTRESS is invincible, no doubt DESIRE will content
him self with a favourable parley, vvaight for grace by loyalty not challenge
it by lavvnce, although he make ne'er so brave, the vvordle doth know, that
Ladi^ BEAVVTIE needs no rescue to raise this siege, for that she sits above al
reach, her heavenly looks above when she so lists can dazzle all men's eyes.
But though she list not use those means, yet it is meet that all her
servants come and show them selves devout to do her vvil^ perchance her
pleasure is to see the fortes tried of these iiii. FOSTER friends. O happy,
ten times happy they whose hap shall be with favour of her D^, to take in
hand this brave attempt: In hope whereof these iiii legitimate sons of
Despair, bre thren to hard mishap, suckled with sighs, and svvathed up in
sorrow, vveaned in woe, dry nursed by DESIRE, long time fostered with
favourable countenance, fed with sweet fancies, but now of late (alas)
wholly give over to grief is disgraced by disdain, are come with ready hearts
and hands, to prove against these other 4. that DESIRE doth not deserve one
vvinke of good favour from Lady BEAVTIES smiling eyes, for threatening to win
her, forte by force? They dout not the victory if only they may find some
little show from their Saint in favour of their enterprise. If Mercurie have
said amiss, blame those bright beams which have be^eft him of his wit, if
well, v^uchsafe one beck to bid him pack away.

These speeches being ended, both they the rest marched about the Till,^and so
going back to the nether end thereof prepared themselves to run, Fame hath
the same reported.

When this days sporte was thus accomplished, the boy that uttered the
defiances, in these few speeches took his goodnight of the Queen.

In the trial of this debatefull question (O your self) then with what can
be said more,

The next days show was done in this order. Desire, entered in a brave
Chariot, (very finely and curiously decked) as men f^rewearied half overcome,
The chariot was made in such sort as upon the top the 4 knights sate, with a
beautiful Lady, representing Desire about them. Whereunto their eyes were
turned, in token what they desired, In the Lu^ke of (...) Chariot was conveyed
room ^or a full consort of Music, who played still very doleful music as
t^e Chariot moved, the chariot was drawn by four horses according to the
four knights, which horses were apparelled in White and carnation silk,
being the colloures of Desire, and as it passed by the upper end of the Tilt,
a Harrault of Arms was sent before to utter these speeches in the knights
behalf to her Majesty.

No confidence in themselves, limits, Not any slight regarding the force of
your valiant knights, hath encoura^ed the Foster children of Desire to make
this day an inheritor of yesterdays action: ^ut the wing of Memory alas
the sworn enemy to the wofullmans qui^tnesse, being constantly held by the
hand of perfection, And never ceasing to blow the cole of some kindled
Desire, hath brought their invvard fire to blaze forth this flame vnquench^ble
by any mean^s (...) by death the whole fuel be consumed, and ther^fore not
able to master it, they are violently bo^e whether desire dravves. Although
they must con^es (alas^) that yesterdays brave onse^ should come to such a
confession: That they are not greatly companied with hope, the common supplie^
to Desi^es army. So as now from summoning this Cast^l to yield, they are
fallen lowly to beseech you to vouchsafe your eyes out of that Impregnable
Fortress to behold what will fall out betvvixt them and your famous knights:
wherein though they be so eu^pressed with the others vallure that a^ready
they could vnnethe have been able to come (...)* if the chariot of Desire had
not carried them, yet will they make this whole assembly witnesses so fai^e
of their will, That sooner their souls shall leave their bodies then Desire
shall leave souls: In that on^lye stands their strength that gave them th^
fi^st courage, and must be their last comfort. For what resistance is there
where not only they are met with fo^ren enemies, such as stately disdain,
which looks from so high a Tower to pore Desire. That though (in it self) it
be great yet in her eyes (so seated) it seems small or such on the other
side as unfortunate despair, which makes the count^ie so barren where they lay
their siege, that it would take away all the food of fancy: But even civil
war yesterday grew betwixt them and others, who bears the same badge of
Desire: that they do so, as thus bestead they are brought to this fair pass,
to desire no more, but that this death or overthrow, may be seen^ by those
eyes who are only unhappy, in that they can neither find fellows nor see
them selue^.

Which speech being done, the defendants came in, in such order as they came in
the day before, therefore I shall not need to make a new repetition of the
same, since al hath been touched already. Then went they to the Tourney, where
they did very Nobly, Greekes and Troians had dealt their deadly dole, no party
was spared, nor estate expected, but each knight endued to win the golden
fleece, that expected either fame or the favour of his mistress, which
sporte continued all the same day, And towards the evening the sport being
ended, there was a boy sent up to the queen being clothed in Ash coloured
garments in t^ken of humble submission, wh^ having an Olive brauch in his
hand, and falling down prostrate on his face, and then kneeled up, concluded
this noble exercise with these words to her Majesty,

Most renowned Princess of Princess, they will bear in their foreheads, as
their other (...) i^ engraven in their hea^s: For witness thereof they present
this Olive branch to your presence, in token of your Triumphant peace, And of
their peaceable servitude.

Whereby they present themselves as bondmen by those bonds, which the loss
of life, can only loose: Only from out of that which was theirs they crave
thus much, to give so token to those knights which may be judged to hauedon
best in each kind of weapon, or who by his devise hath come in best sort in
this desirous strife, this being don, they being now slaves (in whom much
duty requires) for fear of office, dare say no further, but wish from the
bottom of their captived hearts, That while this realm is thus fortified and
beautified: Desire may be your ^ adversary.

Which speech being ended her majesty gave them al praise and great thanks,
which they esteemed so well thought themsel^es rewarded according to their own
wishing, And so they departed each (...) in order, according to their first
coming i^.

THUS have I (good Reader) according to my s^mple skill set forth this singular
pastime that thou may* being far of? peradventure know more, then they
that were present and eye beholders of the same, which so ^eere as I could
either gather or get, I have for thy pleasure here placed it, If any thing be
wanting which is not here mentioned, or ought awry and not right reported, let
this suffice, that my ^il was good to have gotten all, and most vnwiling to do
ought amiss, yet s^ch as it is if thou well accept it, I shall think my pains
well employed for thy pleasure, and gratified enough with that good will:
Therefore wishing thee to think no worse of my work, then I thought the laber
little in working, craving but P^na verba for my well meaning. I give thee the
friendly Farewell.

Thine to command in all courteous manner. HENRIE GOLDVVIL.

