VV^re not our present subject mix^ with sear,
'Twould much aff^ight us to see all y^u here.
One would suffice us, or no Auditor.
Each to hi^selfe an amp^e Theater,
Let rude Pl^bejans think so, b^t we know
All judgments here from the same Spring do flow.
All here have but one c^nsure, all one breast*
All sons of the same Mother; but the rest
We pre^ccupate their Censure, and (...),
What after may be said not to be well,
As in most decent Garments you may see*
Some gracious Ornaments inweav^d be:
Which serve for lit^le use* but on some day
Destined to please himself, the wearer may
Without a blush put on, when his best friends
Intend to visit him, so our hope intends
The sacred Muses Progeny to greet,
Which under our Roo^e, now the t^ird time meet,
We will not open the book to you, and show
A story word by word, as it doth go,
But give invention leave to undertake,
Of it's own strains, some ben^fit to make:
For though a Tragic P^n may be confined,
Within a studies private Walls, the mind
Must be unbounded, and with inventions steel,
Strike fir^ from ali^nt Flints --
So free we are from set^ing any price,
On these our studied Vanities, that advice
Almost d^dain'd the whispers of those ^ngues
Which private fi^t, though vented public wrongs*
To the Patient Patient oft* We'il here begin
To be alitlle perempto^y, oh that sin
Of wilful indiscretion, 'tis no baize
To make us Garlands of our own mouths prai^e,
Which who aff^ct, may they so Laurel lack,
That slanders Thunder may behi^d their back^*
Blast them with C^lumny, for we vow th^y dear
Pay for their pains, that give attention here.
And since it's suffered with kind indulgence
We hope that Kingly Parent's our d^fence,
Who would not have his d^dling love be known,
But unto tho^e had off spring of (...) own,
And for we are assured that here be
No br^ines so cursed with black sterilitie.
But of (...) nature they can freely call,
Bi^ths more mature, and Celestial,
Their stud^es ^ssue, they like kindest Mothers,
With tend^r hands will swath the limb^ of others.

BE dumb those now harsh notes, our (...)
Shall never be acquainted with such (...),
Peace (our grand) Captai^, se^ h^ (...),
That would have once confronted (...) hi^selfe,
(Acknowledged for a better Deity)
Puts off ambitious burdens, and doth ha^e
Through bloody Rivers to make passages,
Whereby his Soul might flote to A^heron,
Wrin^kle your brows no more (sterne fates) for we
Scorn to be made the servi^e Ministers
To cut those threads, at which your selves have trembled*
^ming us the fiercer Destiny.
Yet m^st great Amurath thank those sacred powers,
They have enriched our souls with such a price,
As ha^ those Heroes whose revengeful Arms,
S^v'd Mars a ten years Prentiship at Troy,
^re d^eam'd succeeding times should b^ possessed,
With such an unparalleled unprized beauty as my Saint:
They would not have prevented so their bliss,
But been most humble Suitors to the Gods,
To have protra^ted their then fond spent life,
But to behold this object. Which out-shines
Their (...). as much as doth the eye
O^ all the World, dazzle the lesser fires.
^ove I'll outbrave thee! melt thy self in Lust
Embrace at once a^l starre-made Concubines,
I'll not envy thee, know I have to spare
Beauty enough, to make another Uenus;
And for fond Gods, that have no reward in store
To make me happier, here I'll place my Heaven.
And for thy sake, this shall my Motto be,
I conquered Greece, one Grecian conquered me.

But (gracious Lord) those streams (we see) soon ebb,
Which with outragio^s swelling flow to fast,
Forbid ( ^ucina) this soon kindled fire,
Should ere burn out itself 'tis a true Theme,
That ne'er last^long, that seems most extreme.

Can this rich price of nature, precious jem
Give entertainment to suspecting guests?
Come, come, these arms are curious chains of love,
With which thou link'st my heart aeternally,
Thy cheeks the royal Paper interlined,
With Natures Rhetoric, and love persuasion,
Stands there attracting still my gazing eye:
This then ^le read, and here I now will fain,
That these all Antique fables of the Gods,
Are writ in flowing numbers; first thy lip,
Was fair Euro^aes which they say made Jove,
Turn a wild Heifer: next, this sparkling eye
Was the Aemonian Io's; then, this hand
Laedaes, fair Mother to those Stare made Twins,
Thus, thus, I'll Comment on this golden Book:
Nature nor Art, have taught how to fain:
Fairest, 'twas you first brought me to this vain:
In loving Combats now I valiant prove,
Let others war, great ^murath shall love.

Brave resolution, O the fond thoughts of man,
Awake Enuo! I'll find stratagems:
There shall be Physic, to purge this disease,
Light sores are gently used, but such a part,
Must be cut off, least it infect the hart.

Schahi^, Our Tutor, we command this nigh^
Be solemnised with all delightful sports,
Thy learned invention best can think upon.
Prepare a Mask, which lively represents,
How once the Gods did love: that shall not teach
Us by examples, but we'll smile to think:
How poor and weak their idle faining was
To our affection. Scahin, be free in wit*
And sudden: now come my Kingdoms Pride*
Hymen would wed himself to such a Bride.

Nature, and all those universed powers,
Which showed such Admirable Godlike skill,
Inframing this true model of our selves,
This Man, this thing called man, why do you thus,
Make him a spectacle of such laughter for you,
When in each man we see a Monarchy?
For, as in states, all fortunes still attend:
So with a Kingdom, with a complete state
Well governed, and well managed in himself,
Both each man bears, when that best part of man,
(Reason) doth swayand rule each Passion.
Affections are good Servants: but if will
Make them once Master, they'll prove Tyrants still.
No more King now: poor Subject AMVRATH,
Whom I have seen break through a Troop of Men,
Like lightning from a Cloud: and done those Act^,
Which 'ene the Furies would have trembled a^:
Treading down Armies, as if by them he meant
Of d^ad men's backs to build up stairs to Heaven:
A^d now lies lurking in a woman's arms
(...) in the Le^he of Ignoble lust,
(...) its me for the wanton Enginere
^o ke^pe his so loose thoughts in smoothing tune*
(...) woman: golden hooke
To (...) thoughts: and when we once are caught*
^o (...) i^to the public view of shame:
A^d (...) we lye b^thed in incestuous pleasure
(...) ^od (...) to laugh and scorn at once.
(...) to (...) s^ses! ^ could either wish
(...) like tho^e Creatures, which we say
A^ (...) fr^m Put^id and corrupted matter;
(...) we should acknowledge our dear being
(...) grass and flowers: for what else is our ^tate?
V^ to the top but then the weight sh^ll fall
Upon t^eir head that caused it. Work (my brain)
Tush, blood, not wat^r must wash off this stain.

Shine here (my (...)) and expel the night
More than a thousand stars that grace the Heavens:
Me thinks, I see the Gods inventing shapes
In which they mean to court thee. Jove he frowns
And is far more jealous, more suspicious
Of thee, then all the painted Truls, whose eyes
Bedeck the all ennameld Firmament.

Beauty (my Lord) 'tis the worst part of woman.
A weak poor thing, assaulted every hour
By creeping minutes of defacing time:
Asuperfici^ which each breath of care.
Blasts off: and every hum^rous (...) of gri^e,
Which flows from forth these Fountains of our eyes*
Wash^th away, as rain^ doth Winters snow.
But those bles^ guiders of all Nuptial rites,
Have wrought a better sement to mak^ fa^t,
The hearts of Lovers; the tr^e name of Wife
Guilds over our th^ones, with a more constant shape*
Than can be subj^ct or to time, or c^re:
And in our selve^; yea in our own tru^ brea^ts*
We have (...), d^ty, careful Love;
And last and (...) of all, we may have Children*
Children are Hym^ns pl^dges, these shall be
Perpetual chains, to link my Lord a^d me.

Art thou a W^man? Godd^sse, we ador^*
And Idolize; what we but loved before;
What Devils have men (...), whose furious brain^
Have oft abused that Deity called Woman:
Dipping their Ravens quill in Stygian Ink,
To blast such heavenly pap^r as your faces.
Were all the enticing lusts, damned polici^s,
Prodigious fas^inations, u^searcht thoughts,
Dissembled tears, brok^ vows, loathed app^tites,
Luxurious ^nd (...) desires.
Were all these of Women ^qually weighed,
That virtue in thy breast, 'twill out-ballance all
And r^compence th^ ^uine of all thy Sex.

So please ^our Majesty, L. (...) ready
For entrance with (...) M^sque.

Tell him we're wholly ^ent for ^xpectation.
Sit, sit (my Queen) Musi^ke exceed your Spheres,
Thi^ke I am I^ve, and Godlike please our ears.

Gaze you mortals, gaze you still,
On the Gods now look your fill.
Jove and Iuno are descending,
Yet her lealousie's not ending,
Mars, sterne Mars, he will not fight,
But with Venus when 'tis Night.
Daphne crowns Apolloes head,
Whom she would embrace in Bed,
Neptune swells his frothy cheek,
Cause Diana is not meek.
Gaze you mortals, c.

Come now my (Sister and Wife) we'll begin
To court afr^sh! Nay, lour^ not (Heavens Queen)
Here on this green we'll a Lava^to dan^e,
What if our hairs grow silver, yet our strength,
Is young, and vigorous! Say (fellow Gods)
(Since we are full of Nectar, and our cares,
Lye drenched in our Nepenth^) take your Queene^, and be all
Ioviall, Mars for our Daughter Ve^s!
Apollo joyn^ with Pallas! Brother of Floods
^mbrace Diana! Gods sometimes merry be:
But in the night, when mortals m^ not see.

How now (wanton?) Can I no wh^e go,
For recr^ation but you f^llow me?

Is this your Recreation? Fie! My Lord
Will you be wanton still? For here you came
For some new Harlot, some new Queen for you.

Jun^, Wife.


Your Sister, (thunderer,) and not your Wife!
Banished from Heav^n I am; and your Bed,
Resign them both to Strumpets, Concubines,
And now you com^ to see a fresh new lass
In which Pole now or in what part of h^aven,
Shall she be stellified?

Shall still sinister thoughts wrong our intent,
Well ( I^o) well, you'll ever be a woman,
A very, very woman! But ^ince she scolds,
Let's hence (ye Gods) lest her infectious breath
Blast the s^cceeding day: and mortals curse
Her hel-bred jeal^usie: Calumnious woman
Come scold in heaven! For if Gods lived on Earth
S^spitious tongues would blame most innocent mirth.

Well! love looked pale! I touched him to the quick!
'Tis some new Mini^n he came down to see!
Hark (jealousy) know Jun^ is a woman!
Am I not mad yet? Mistress Bride, adieu:
Jove shall not steal a kiss? My curse is past,
When thou sleep first a Bride, may^t sleep thy last.

Fair Bride I sang thy ^pithalamy,
And left (...) for thy Nuptials:
Iuno here thundered against the Thunderer,
Knowing how thy beauty dazzles hers,
She durst not let heavens King once glance a look,
But threatened with her helbred incantations,
To metamorphise thine unparaleld
And most celestial shape into worse forms;
And more prodigiou^ than ever poisoned charms.
Wrought on the fabled Concubines of love:
But kn^w great Queen* my Mother Venus vows
Her everlasting guard to save such beauty,
Lest if thou perish, Nature (...) self
Loose he^ o^ely pattern of ^erenity,
But I must ha^t, Love which the Gods protect,
Can never (...) by neglect.

^cahin, thine Art is excellent; but say,
Do Gods fall out for love amongst themselves?

My Lord, these are but fables: yet to make
The show more p^rtinent, and to grace your Queen,
Co^ceipt took leave to put the frown on Iu^o.

My Lords and friends, we shall be ever thankful
And rest a Debtor to your courtesy.

Not so fair Queen, but durst ^ now ^ntreat
The Kings detaining from th^ sweets of Bed*
There yet remains one thought upon conceit,
Which you would doubly grace me to behold.

Our worthy Tutor shall obtain a Night,
A night ofus, in any case we can!

But then let me inform your Majesty,
That 'tis a warrier^ show, which once you loved,
But now are free from.

'Tis best of all, with greediness we will see it,
O how the soul doth gratulate it self
When saf^ly it beholds the dangerous state
Of others, and it self securely free!
Glad are we still to stand upon the shore,
And see a far off ot^ers tossed in the Sea,
Or in a Gallery at a Fencers stage,
We laugh when mutually each one takes wound^;
Sit still ( (...)) Sc^hin, thy show in hast;
'Tis best delight, to think^ on troubles past.

Stay you most worthy fhades* brave Hector stay*
And proud Achilles, know your massi^ Tombs,
Which have so long orewhelm'd your valiant bones
Yawns wide to let the imprisoned coarses forth.
I must afresh imbalme your sacred Trunks,
And swe^t your memory with most happy oil,
Of just report, the Gods awaked me Fame
From out the oblivious Sepulch^r of sleep,
To drop that Ink into old Homer^ pen,
Werewith he curiously hath lined your names,
Enfolding them in Everlasting Cedar,
And made them live to all posterity.
Virtue to valour hath his gift assigned*
Great men may dye, yet deeds still rest in mind.

(...)
Most fortunate young man, whose worth is crowned
With everlasting Trophies of renown,
How hath he set thee on the wings of Fame
Which soar in the middle region of high glory
Proposed to all, a never dying story.

May it please the (Son of Iupiter) to accept
A Present, which our fight enriched us with?

Is it a Band of stubborn Souldi^rs Captain?


O no (my Lieg^) of exquisite formed Ladies*
Darius his wife, the wonder of her Sex,
Besides a Troop of such shaped Ganim^des,
That love ^ot equals.

Philoxenus* We thank thee! Yet hark!
There is a secr^t we would know of thee,
And you must tell Us: on your faith you must.

My L^ige --


Nay, no Court oil (by your leave) no flattery*
We are but man, this very trun^ke of ours,
Is but a Vessel filled with human^ bloo^
And we trust not that Parasite like (...)*
I (...).
All the destroying vices of frail man,
I may be subject to, but what base looseness,
Or supple Luxury, did thou ere obscure
So to benumne our sense, that thou should think
We could be pleased with such effaeminate Presents,
* Know sir our eyes shall have that abstinence
That will not look on them, on boys, of women,
Hence then, and present some coward with them,
Give me a spectacle would please the Gods,
And make them bend their Ivory brows to the Earth,
A man, a Soldier, ^trong with his wounds,
Amongst fate and ruin, upright and unshap't,
His mind ^eing all his guard, his wall, and armour,
And if he fall, ^till noble wrath remains,
In his amassed Trunk: not ^ll the darts
Stuck in his sides, making him a^ one wound,
A^right his courage, but wrath lending weapons,
Himself doth seem a new and horrid War,
Nor are those Milke-sops which beguile the time,
With ^tealing minutes from their Ladies lips
Such as the Gods do love; for as the Wind
Loses it's force, if it be not opposed
With woods of strong and stubborn planted trees*
So virtue, if it wa^ke in trodden paths
That breaks up honours gap, and makes the way
Through paths of death, that flame burns strong
Which is resisted: valor ^hines in wrong:
Of Alexanders Soldiers be this sed,
War was a^ peace, when he the army led.

Brave Macedon, how truly hast thou weighed,
The reason of mans birth, who is equal borne,
For all the world, as well as for himself.
The world's a field t^o narrow for thy worth!
And although Nature, hath her enacted bounds
For Sea and Earth, nay for the Heavens themselves,
Nor Sea nor Earth, shall coop thy valour up:
Valour of Nature ever this attains
That it breaks forth, far, and beyond her chains,
And this I'll trumpet out. the whole worlds Ball
In which thou art so great, to thee is small;
When men want worlds to ^hew their virtue in,
That is the crime o'th ^ods, and not their sins:
* 'Tis a decree of a true Soul^iers mind,
To think nought done, when ought is left behind,
On (valiant youth) for, know I will appoint;
A Grecian Prince who so shall steep his quill
To paint out thy name in W^ls of eloquence,
That this thy soorne of Lust shall be
Proposed to all Kings example to posterity,
Know mortals that the men the Gods most love
In hard and da^gerous Arts, they always prove,
When men live brave at first, then fall to crimes,
Their bad I Chronicle to future times:
For, who begins good Arts, and not proceeds
He but goes backward in all noble deeds.
Death consecrates those men whose awful end,
Though most men fear, yet all men must commend.

Scahin, the Macedo^s beholding to the^,
And history shall pay you thanks for this*
Which we rest Debtors for.

Great Prince, such kindness of acc^ptance pays:
For things which are but for a Kings delight,
In ^eeing them, he amply doth requite.

Eumorphe, Love, Queen, Wife, let's haste to Bed!
And may we wish this night aeternall time,
Scahin, good night: good night (kind Gentlemen!)
Thus when we are dead shall we revive oath stage:
One hour can present a Kings whole age.

Observed you not the Kings looks? Grew th^ not pale?


O yes (Lord Scahin) you mu^t be his Parent?
And snatch him out'h the Gulf he's falling in,
That feigned speech of Alexanders wrought
Like to most purging Physic, nights then black
When 'tis compared with day: Boldness is clear,
When 'tis presented before bastard fear.

I'll tell thee ( Eurenoses) thou art a Soldier:
And I am both a Soldier, and a Scholar,
And for these two Professions, am both most glorious:
And most meritorious, Pall^s is for both:
O what Tysiphon, what snaked scourge
Ca^ make a Scholar, that should never sleep,
But 'twixt th^ Pillows of Pernassus Hills,
And dip his lips in springs of Helicon,
Make him by snoring on a wanton breast,
And suck the adulterate and spiced breath
Of a lewd fained woman?

And for a Soldier ( Scahin,) let me speak!
We that do know the use of swords, and fire,
We that do know, halters can throatle us,
Shall we ere venture on a Woman's cruelty?
We that endur^ no Lords, shall we endure:
A woman to overcome us? Most true Demophoon!
I reverence thy memory, no pewling phrase
Could so euchaine thee to thy Thraci^n Dame,
But thou would r^her perish than she save thee.
I'll not declaim long on that common Theam^,
But they have lust lies in their fingers ends,
And whilst their sweet-hearts breath sticks in their sheets,
They will admit another. Lucrec^ in the day
To be a Thais, if the night will not gain-say.

Why ( Euren^ses) why should we endur^
A new Queen now? this Kingdom wants not heirs?
We know (should we have more) 'twere dangerous,
But hark! The Queens for Bed, enticing sleep
With charms of Music: well, even such a Night*
May yet prove dismal ere the following Light!

Scahi^, let's in:
The first degree to purge such ils as these*
Is to instruct the patient his disease:
That you have done.

Yea, and will yet once more
Adventure a new stratagem, just when the King
He has rid his Chamber, and with covetous hast
Thinks for to clip Elizium, and drink deep
Of his long wished delight, I having skill
And uncontrolled acce^se, will in disgu^se
Seem his deceased Fathers apparition:
And by all ties of children to their Parents,
Bid him forsake that vile bewitching woman.

An easy Medicine doth and sure will work,
To rub shrewd wounds, make them but fester more,
Foul Medicines we worse brook, than a foul sore.

Madam make hast ^ The King will be impatient
If h^ be from you long. O Happiness.

Why Menthe, then thou deem us happy no^
Thus to command a world of services,
To have a King my subject; and attended
With these harmonious sounds t'affect our ears?

Yes (truly Madam) 'tis a happiness.


'Tis, were it Eternal: but I fear a pow^r
A woman's power, doth but make ^port with us;
Why, were we not once Menthe, a Captive (Wretch?)

Yes Lady* now your happiness the more:
Riches please best, when there w^nt want before.

That power which raised us from so base, so high,
Can throw us down again as suddenly:
Me thi^ks my life is but a Players Scaene,
In the last Act my part was then to play,
A Captive (...), ^nd a ^ueene to day.

Your Morals (Madam) are too serious*
Me thinks the^e Ornaments should elevate
Your dumpish spi^its. Think this Bed a place
In which no ^cie slipping chance hath power;
A Ki^gs safe Bed is like a guarded Tower.

No ( ^enthe) no, 'tis not the Bed of state,
Nor the free smile of a well pleased King:
'Tis not the embracing Arms of Emperors,
N^ all the Gems that so enwreathe the brows
Can so allure Fortune unto their gaze,
As she should still be constant; O she's blind,
Nor doth she know her self where she is kind;
Close, those are Kings, and Queenes whose brest's secure
Like brazen walls, Lust's entrance not endure!
Where impotent ambition not intrudes,
Nor the unstable talk of multitudes;
Fo^tune sernes such, they happiness command
More than all (...) gold, all Tagu^ sand;
As Heaven hath given us no more conspicuous thing
Than form or beauty: so like a forward spring.
Nothing more short.

Madam, divine (...) of a change; Belief


Our Lord attends to enter in,
And surely sleep envyeth his delig^t,
For he sits heavy on my drowsy lids,
Draw all our Curtai^es; sleep beguiles our ear^s.

(Madam) good night; time helps suspicious fears!


Drop golden showers, gentle sleep,
And all the Angels of the Night,
Which do us in protection keep,
Make this Queen dream of delight
Morpheus be kind a little, and be
Deaths now true Image, for 'twill prove
To this poor Queen, that then thou art he;
Her grave is made in the Bed of love:
Thus with sweet sweets can Heaven mix gall,
And marriage turn to Funeral.

Turk, Amurath, slave nay something baser*
King! For all aerie titles which the Gods
Have blasted man withal* to make them swell
With puffed up honour, and ambitious wind,
This name of King holds greatest antipathy
With manly government* for if we weigh*
'Tis subjects, and not Kings bear all the sway.
Each whispered mur mur from their idle breath,
Condemns a King to Infamy, to death;
Were there a Metempsucocosis of souls,
And nature should a free Election grant
What things they afterwards would reinforme
The vain and haughti^st minds the Sun ere saw,
Would choose it's Cottage in some Shepherds flesh,
Nay, be confined within some Dog or Cat,
Than Antique like prank in a Kings gay-clothes*
Were I no King, and had no Majesty,
I had more than all Kings, blessed liberty;
And without rumour might enjoy my choice,
Not f^aring Censure of each popular vo^ce;
Poor men may love, and none their wills correct:
But all turn Satyrs of a Kings affect!
O my base greatness! What disasterovs star,
Professed it self a Midwife at my birth,
To shape me into such prodigious States,
But hence regard of tongues! Were we a Saint,
Some envious tongue would dare our names to taint:
And he from slander is at securest rest,
Not that hath none, but that regards it least.
Open you envious Curtains here's a sight,
That might commend the act of Love so Chaste;
Were now the chariot-guider of the Sun
Weary on's task, and would entreat a day
Of Heaven to rest in, here's a radiant Look,
That might be fixed in the midst of the Axle-tree;
And in despite of dark conspiring Clouds,
She would out-shine Sun, Moon, and all the Stars,
O, I could court thee now (my sweet) a fresh,
Mixing a kis^e with every period:
Telling the Lillies how they are but wanne,
Earth in the vernant spring is dull, and dark,
Compared with this aspect! the Aeasterne air,
Famed with the wings of Mercury and ^ove,
Infectious, but compared with this perfume!
Hence then th'ambition of that furious
Who knew not what a crime his rashness was!
I might overcome more Kingdoms; have more dominion
Enthrone my self an Emperor! of the world,
I might! I might! Amurath thou might!
The Christians now will scoff at Mahomet;
Perchance they sent this wretch thus to enchant me!
O my perplexed thoughts! tush I'll to bed
Should the commanding Thunder of the Gods
Prohibit me, or strike me in the act!
Talk on (vain rumour) fame I dare thy worst!
Call me a Lusty, Lazy, wanton, Coward!
Should I win all the world, my breath once fled,
My bad would still survive, all good be dead.
Eum^rphe, sweet, I come! you sacred powers,
Who have bestowed some happiness on man,
To help to pass away this sinful ^ife,
Grant me a youthful vigour yet a while,
Full veins, free strength, complete and manly fence
To know, and taste a beauty most immense!

Amurath, Amurath?


Divel, Divel? What?
Dare thou appear before an Angel (Fiend?)

O Amurath, why doth intemperate Lust
Raging within thy furious youthful veins,
Burst through thy fathers Tomb? Disturb his soul?
Know, all the torments that the fabulous age
Dream't, did afflict deceased impious Ghosts,
Hartbiting-hunger, and soule-searching thirst,
The ne'er consumed, yet ever eaten prey
That the devouring Vulture feeds upon,
Are not such tortures as our off-springs crimes!
They, they sit heavy on us, and no date
Makes our compassionate affection cease.
O thou hereditary Ulcer, hark
By the name of Father, and by all those cares,
Which brought me to my grave, to make thee great*
Thou that hast nothing of me but my crown:
My enterprise surpassed the boundless Sea,
Cutting the churlish Waves of Hellespont,
When the flood stood which wind for to obey!
Euxinum groaned beneath my burdenous Ships;
I was the first of all the Turkish Kings
That Europe knew, and the fond Christians plagu^
What coward blood ran flowing in my veins,
When thou were first begot: who marrest all
Thy Fathers acts, by thy untamed desires,
Wherefore with Stygian curses I will lade thee
First, may she prove a Strumpet to thy Bed
Be her lips poison, and let her loose embrace,
Be venomous as Sco^pions! If ^he conceived,
A Generation from thee, let it be
As ominous as thou hast been to me!
Rebellious to thy Praecepts, printing care^,
Upon thy aged brows, O may they prove,
As Faeries for to lash thee in thy rest!
But Amurath, if thou can quench this flame,
If thou wilt cut this Gordian thread, and rend hence,
That putrid When which cleaves unto thy flesh,
Be all thine actions prosperous! Mahomet,
Sha^l be auspicious unto each design;
Fortune to show thee favour shall be proud,
Farewell! if that men do speak last, before
They dye, take root, then dead men's should take more.

What art thou vanished? Know (thou careful spright)
Thou shalt no sooner pierce the wandering Clouds
With unperceived flight, than my resolve
Shall expiate my former Vanity!
Look on thy son thou (aerie intellect)
And see him sacrifice to thy command!
Now Titan turn thy breathing curses back!
Start hence bright day, a sable Cloud invade
This Universal Globe, break every prop,
And every h^ndge that doth sustain the Heavens:
For straight must dye a woman, I have named
A crime, that may accuse all Nature guilty.
The Sex wisely considered, deserves a death;
For think this ( Amurath) this woman may,
Prostrate he^ delicate and Ivory limbs,
To some base Page, or Skull, or shrunk up Dwarf:
Or let some Groom lye feeding on her lips,
She may devise some misshapen trick,
To satiate her goatish Amurath,
And from her bended knees at Meditation,
Be taken by some slave to the deep of Hell!
You are a brave Creature, were thou not a woman:
(...)! Come! thou shalt see my well-kept vow,
And know my hate, which saw me dote but now:
Schahin! (...)! Captains ho!

Our Tutor, Eurenoses, Captains, welcome!
Gallants, I call you to a spectacle:
My breast too narrow to hoard up any joy:
Nay, gaze here (Gentlemen!) give Nature thanks,
For framing such an excellent sense as (Sight)
Whereby such objects are enjoyed as this!
Which of you now imprison not your thought
In envio^s and silent policy.
My Lord to whatsoever you shall propose,
My sentence shall be free.

And mine. Chase-Il. And mine.


Which of you then dare challenge to himself,
Such a pathetic a Prerogative,
So stoically ^evered from affection,
That had he su^h a Creature as lies here,
One, at whom Nature her self stood amazed:
One, whom th^se lofty exta^ies of Poets,
Should they decay, here't must not barely dump
Their dull inventions with similitudes,
Taken from Sun, Moon, V^olets* Roses,
And, when their raptures at a period stand;
A silent admiration must supply
Only name her, and she is all described.
Hyperbole of women, Colour it self
Is not more pure, and incontaminate!
Sleep doates on her: and grasps her eye-lids close*
The sky it self hath only so much blew
As the azure in her vei^es, bends by reflex.
Here's breath that would those vapors purify,
Which from Avernus choakes the flying Birds!
Here's heat would tempt the numbed Atkenian,
Though all his blood with age were conjealed ice!
Now, which of you all is so temperate;
That, did he find this Jewel in his Bed
(Unless an Eunuch) could refrain to grapple,
And dally with her? Come! Speak freely all.

Truly (my Lord) I came of mortal Parents
And much confess me subject to desires;
Freely enjoy your Love!
That were she mine, I surely would do no less.

What saith Euren^ses?


My Lord, I ^ay;
That they may rail at light, that ne'er saw day;
But, had I such a Creature by my side
Were the world twice enlarged, and all that world
Overcome by me, all volumes writ,
Made clean and filled up by Rhetoric strains:
Of my great deeds, Historians should spend
Their Ink and Paper in my sole Chronicle,
A thousand such alluring idle charms,
Could not conjure me from betwixt her arms.

Your sentence Chase (...) Beg?


What need your Grace depend upon our breath?
I vow (my Lord,) if all those scrupulous things
Which burden us with praecepts so praecise,
Those Parents which when they are married once
And past their strength of years, think their sons ^traight,
Should be as old in every thing as they,
I say my Lord, did my head wear a Crown
That Queen should be the chiefest jem t'adorne it,
Spite of all hate, that's an unhappy state
When Kings must fear to love, least subjects hate.

Well spoke three Milk-sops, S^hahin! Your Sword!
Now, now be valour in this manly arm
To cut off troupes of thoughts that would invade me!
Think you my mind is waxy to be wrought,
By any fashion, Orch^nes thy strength,
Here do I wish as did that Emperor,
That all the heads of that enticing Sex,
Were upon hers, thus then should one full stroke
Mow them all off.
There, kiss now (Captains) do! and clap her cheek;
This is the face that did so captive me:
These were the looks that so bewitched mine eyes*
Here be the lips, that I but for to touch,
Gave over Fortune, Victory, Fame, and all;
These were two lying mirrors where I looked
And thought I saw a world of happine^e.
Now Tutor, shall our swords be exercised,
In ripping up the breasts of Christians.
Say Generals! Whether is first?

For Thracia!


On then for Thracia, for he surely shall
That conquers first himself, soon conquer all.

Thou sacred guider of the arched Heavens,
Who can collect the scattering stars, and fix
The Erratique Planet in the constant Pole,
O why should thou take such solicitous care
To keep the air, and Elements in course?
That Winter should uncloth our Mother Earth,
And wrap her in a winding sheet of snow;
That then the spring duly revives her still,
Vnlinds her sinews, fills her clung up veins,
With living dew, and makes her young again;
Next that, the Nemean terror breathes her flames,
To parch her flaxie hairs with furious heat;
Which to allay too, thou op'st the Chataracts,
And waters the worlds Gardens with blessed drops;
Can thou* which can sustain the ponderous world,
And keepst in true poise, securely sleep,
Letting a Tyrant (which with a Philip, thus;
Thou might sink to Earth) to baffle thee?
A warrior in thy Fields, I long have been
To see if in thy sacred providence,
Thou meanst to arm me with thy thunder-bolt,
Yet, yet, it strikes not now, he Gyant-wise,
He dares thee again; pardon our earnest zeal
What ere's decreed for man by thy behost,
He must perform: and in obedience rest.
Thou, like Spectators when they do behold
An hardy youth encountering with a Bear*
Or something terrible; then they give a shout,
So dost thou even applaud thy self to see,
Religion striving with Calamity.
Which while it often bears, and still rests true,
It's fence against all that after shall ensue.
Turk, i'll oppose thee still! Heaven has decreed:
That this weak hand, shall make that tyrant bleed.
A man religious, firm, and strongly good
Cannot of the sudden be, nor understood.

Rise (Soul!) enjoy the prize of thy brave worth!
Scahin! the Present that thou so professed,
Should from the City of Orestias,
Make proud our eyes! then tell me. hast thou slain
A thousand superstitious Christian souls;
Make them stoop to us; O, I would bath my hands
In their warm blood to make them supple. ( Schahin;)
That they may wield more Spears! our hands are dull,
Our furie's patient! now will I be a Turk,
And to our Prophets altars do I vow,
That to his yoke I will all necks subdue,
Or in their throats my bloody sword imbrew.

Then King, to add fresh oil unto thy hate,
And make it raise it self a greater flame,
See here these Christians heads; thus still shall fall
Before thy fatal hand, these impio^s slaves;
So long as number's wanting to the sand,
So long as day shall come with Sun, and night
Be spangled with the twilight dawning stars,
Whilst floods shall fall into the Ocean
Shall Christians tremble at Turks thundering strokes.

Soam I Amurath the great King of Turks,
O how it glads me thus to pash thei^ brains,
To rend their locks, to tear these Infidels!
Who thundered when these heads were smitten off?
Stars I could reach you with my lofty hand,
'Tis well enough, enough, (great Amurath)
For now I sit in Orchanes great throne,
And sacrifice due rites to Mahomet;
Yet why enough? I'll on and dung the Earth,
With Christians rotted trunckes, that fro that soil,
May spring more Cadmean Monsters to overcome the.
Captains, what Conntries next shall we make flow,
With Channels of their blood?

To Servia (my Lord) there are troupes of arms,
Gathered to resist Mahometans.

At Bulgaria, there they set on fire,
The Countries as they pass, 'twere good we haste.

Why they do well! we like of their desire
To make the flame in which themselves must fry!
Ruin, destruction, famine, and the sword,
Shall all invade them, Sun stay thou thy flight,
And see the snakes in their own River drenched,
Whil^t with their blood our furious thirst is que^cht!

Whether ( Bulgaria) whether must we fly?
The Butcherous Tur^e's at hand. Blessed Sanctity*
If thou did ere guard goodness, wall our towers?
Bring strength into our Nerves! For in thy cause
Our Breasts upon their Rapiers we will run;
We'll with just hope (...) the tyrants rage,
Meet him in the face, fury will ^de us arms:
There is a power can guard us from a^l harms.

Let's be su^dain: for we'^ not find scope,
To see our haps. Who most doth fear, may hope.

Governor, Captains, hast unto your arms:
The dangers imminent, and the Turke's at hand

( Cobelitz) must we still wade thus deep
In blood and terror.

Yes ( Servia) we must, we should, we ought,
Ease and success keeps baseness company,
Shall we not blush to see the register
Of those great Romans, and Heroic Greekes,
Which did those acts (at which our hearts are struck
Beneath all credence) only to win fame:
And shall not we for that Eternal name?
To live without all credence even to win fame,
Is not to know life's chief, and better parts:
To us of future hopes; calamity
Must help to purchase immortality.

Well spoke (true Ch^istian) they who still live high,
And snoare in praised applause ne'er know to bear,
A contu^ely, or check a fate,
Wisely to steer a Ship, or guide an Army,
Undaunted hardiness is requisite;
(O) then lets to our weapo^s! make him yield*
They which deny all right, of^give't in the Field.

Why (Gentlemen) we want no foes to fight,
Nor need we turn our weapons on our selves!

You lazy rogue, what! come in my Cabinet?


Conspiring slave you murmured gin's th'allowance,
And would^t persuade upon a larger pay,
To betray all Garrisons, and turn Tur^.
Thou half Can-carousing rascal, I'll tear thee,
And those treacherous veins of thine, will you see.

Will you see your Corporal wronged?
Well, since I fight for victuals for company,
Use now your swords and Bucklers.

Treason the next man that speaks or strikes a blow*


Then shall our Laundresses fight for us.


Why, Amazo^s! Baudicans, come help to scratch!


O Cobelitz, what way shall we appease them?


Out thy Corporal (huswife) hath the itch,
You now will have foul washing, Drab i'll tear your mouth;

An inch or two yet wider.


What, soldiers think you each distasteful word,
Given *mo^gst your selves so strong an obloquy
That revenge spurs you to each others death?
And will not seek to wash those blasphemies,
In Seas of their foul blood, which they belched out.
By our approaching foes, against the Essence
Of the Eternal.

Leave, leave, these factions; cease these Mutinies*

Hark their Drums take advantage of these stirre^*
Let us oppose our strength against our foe!
And in our Camp let not one soldier be,
Who will not find and strike his Enemies.

Now (blessed guider and great strength of arms)
If in thy secret and hid decree,
Thou hast not yet appointed the full time,
Wherein thou meanest to tame this tiger,
Who dare murmur against thine hidden will?
Be we slain now, there's victory in store,
Which when thou please thou't give, not before.
Give us still strength of patience, not to wish,
A funeral honour unto all the world,
When we are perishing we will still believe,
Those dangers worth our death we undergo.
Whilst who is ours, is all alike thy foe;
Should fortune loose this day when we are slain,
Thou can give hands, and strength, and men again^;
On thee we trust then, and on thee bear,
Scorning for Heavens sake to shed a tear.

Bassa! we thank thy valor and discretion*
In finding fit occasion to invade
The mutinons Christians! these Captives here
Shall be good presents to our worthy Master.

General now trust me these young slaves,
To be full of Valor, they have mettle in them.

Yes; and to his Highness shall perform
A service which I long have thought upon,
And which his Turkis^ Majesty requires;
They'll fit to be a near attendant guard,
On all occasions to the Emperor;
Therefore they shall be called (...)*
By me first instituted, for our Princes safeties sake.

Their vigour and strong hearts becomes such service,
For to overcome them made our soldiers sweat,
Much Turkish blood: the Servians kept the Fight,
With stubborn hard resistance, The Bulgarians
Left the right wing; there set I forward first,
And like a torrent rolled destruction on,
Raising huge storms of blood, as doth the Whale,
Puff up the Waves against a mighty Ship;
Me thinks I see the Rivers of their gore:
Their Leaders trampled on by Turkish Horse,
The body of their army quite dispersed;
Themselves all floating in Vermilion pooles,
With their own weapons hasting to their death.
And such a slaughter did we make of them,
As Nature scarce can ere repair again.
One hasting to others death, pulling to ground,
Him that held up, so they each other drowned.

Still are they confident upon a power,
They know not what, who (as they think) can snatch
Their praecise souls from out the jaws of death.

Yes, such a superstition doth possess them,
For when they looked for nothing but their fate,
And danger stood in sweat upon their brows?
They yet scorned Mahom^t, and profaned his rites,
And nought but horror made them to believe him;
So many men were fighting on his side:
As might have changed my seat, and part in the world,
(Though Nature stood against) to a new place:
Or carry Sestos whereby Abydos stands,
Or pull down Atlas with so many hands*

How like our Captains the last Victory?
(If any can prophecy of future things)
Me thought I did dream of this blessed hap,
How Fortune did involve them in their ruin,
And slight from danger, brought them into danger,
Each one astonished with a sudden fear,
Knew not the danger that was then most near.

To add more triumph, I present my Liege,
With these young Rebels, which you may bring up,
In all the praecepts of our Mahomet:

And for great Emperor, your person wants,
A thing which much ore-Clouds your light of state,
Attendant Ianizarie^ to a Prince:
These may be so trained up, as to supply
The duty fit for such a Majesty:

Bassa we thank thy strength: Schahin your counsel,
And to that end, let them have safe protection.
But we must treat now of a marriage (Lords)
The German Og^y, he who Scept^r sways
The (...) confines in strong Asia,
By Embassy entreats that he may join
His Daughter H^tam to our (...)!
Ambassador here to our Council speak,
Your Masters Message.

Please then your Maj. and these reverend heads
To be informed my Masters will by me,
In Wedlock; if your Prince may be combined
To the fair Princess his sole Daughter:
He freely gives the Phr^gian territories,
And B^thinia to you for your Dowry;
Cata^, Simon, Egreg^os, Sansale,
Abbettin^on, the Ottomans estate,
Which Ottomans, because he not endures,
The Noble Zelzucciom family protests,
To join with you in quelling their ambition.

May it please your Majesty to like mine advice
It's good to have alliance with such friends;
Kings that combine themselves are like to shafts,
The ancient Sage proposed unto his son!
Which whilst together they were close compact:
Arms, knees, and his wh^le strength* could never break;
Take one by one, they with a touch were tract,
So Kings may be overcome that stand alone;
But two such Princes, knit thus hand in hand,
Should Nations totter, they would firmly stand.

Yes Schahin we'll approve what thou say;
Then from us carry the great Asians Monarch,
This his kindest greeting:
Tell him the gates of Prusa shall stand open,
And the glad air shall Echo notes of joy,
To ent^rtaine her who shall bless our Land,
With hopeful issue; gre^dy thoughts expect
Her soon arrival; and so (Emba^sador)
Inform thy Priucesse, when she shall appear,
A lasting Star shall shi^e within our Sphaere!

O Servia, our Cities are turned flames;
Each stays to hast his own and others death:
And as though Heaven conspired destructiou too,
That reigns down scalding Sulphur on our heads,
Here one that lies thick gasping for his breath,
Is choked with blood that runs from his fellows wounds,
Whilst others for the dead are making Graves,
Themselves are made the coarses that do fill them!
Nobles, and base, together perish all:
And a drawn sword sticks fast in every rib;
Our stones are dyed Vermillion with our blood!
Old creatures that are creeping to the grave,
Are thrust on fast^r!
Infants but in the (...) of their lives,
And thus kicked off, O most disastrous times,
To love our deaths, and make our life our crimes.

See, see, the ruins of our goodly Walls,
Our Cities smoke hinders the sight of heaven:
The conqueror yet amazed measures ou^ our Towns*
With eyes of terror, and doth scarce believe
He hath overcome us; yet among these fires,
Our dead men are denied their funeral flames:
And those infectious Carka^ses do perform,
A second murder on the rest that live!
And all the hope of safety that we have,
Is now to fix our flattering lips at's feet:
Mercy (perhaps) may wearied slaughter meet.

Will you do so? speak for I am determi'nd --


No (worthy General) Heaven avert
And ^rme you with the proof of better thoughts!
What though a Tyrant strives to terrify
All Christendom, and would not be beloved?
Let not your fears give impious rage such scope!
As for to bring Religion to profaneness:
Fortune and Heaven will scorn to try a man,
That hurles his weapons hence and runs away!
How is he worthy of heavens victory;
That, when it frowns, dares not look u^ and see?
Me thinks w^ three are now environed round,
With hosts of Angels, and our powerful Mars.
Is putting bows of steel into our hands:
He doth suggest our wrath, and bids us, on!
O what an army 'tis to have a cause
Holy and just; there, there's our strength indeed.
-- Tu mente Labantes,
Dirige nos, dubios: Certo Robore firma.
If we must dye, the narrow way to bliss,
Shall be made wide for us, the gate wide open,
And the spread Palace entertains with joy.
Mean time, let's look like men upon our g^iefe.
Out frown fate, Despot, Bulgaria, come!
Turk! once more at thee (Tyrant) mortals must,
Command Heavens favour in a cause so just.

Sends our proud father in Law this greeting to us?
Was our sword sheathed so soon to hear this answer?

My Lord, he bad me tell you that 'twas you
(...) him leave off this great Prophets Wars,
When he was hewing down the Christians;
Therefore submission ^hould not now appease him,
Mo* though your Wife, his Daughter, ^hould her self,
Upon her penitent knees be supplyant!
No sooner shall the Tycian splendent Sol,
Open Heavens Casements, and enlarge the day,
But his horse hooves shall beat your treacherous Earth;
And that you may be warned of his approach,
Murder and flames shall be his Prodromo's!

Confederate Princes and my kind allies,
Shall his proud nostrils breath those threats on us?

Moreover, my Lord will or win, or raz^,
I^ouium and Larenda.

Iconium and Larenda? I? No more?
Had best look first, how safe his Prusa stands!
Lords, I am moved, and will forget my Queen
Was ere the issue of his hated blood!
My spleen is tossed within; mine entrails pant,
As, wen the Sea is raised with Southern gusts,
The wind allayed, yet still the Waves will tremble,
Princes, now bind your selves with such strong chains,
Your faith and breaths can make; swear to me all,
To be as firm to me against Amurath,
As is the skin and ^lesh unto the Nerves;

We all swear we will.


Then all here kiss my Sword,
Which shall be steeped within the head-mans thr^at*
We will make him know those will not ^lye in War,
Which may in policy in treat a peace!
Hast thy course (time) and soon reduce the year!
Ensigns may Ensigns meet, (...) King,
Great (...), scorns to avoid a Turk:
Princes, and Neighbours, muster up your strength,
That we may meet him on his full Career!
And let it be Car^nia's pride to say,
To overcome him we asked no second day.

Thne O Hymen, thine: O she,
Whose Beauties verse Calliope,
Sing to Marriage rites an Io,
Io to Hymen.
To thee Apollo is my suit,
Lend me a while thy silver Lute,
O what a woe it is to bring,
A Bride to Bed and never sing.
Io to Hymen.
When she's old, still seems she young,
When she's weke, to her be strong!
Be Cyprus, both, and Paphos here,
Love, sing with merry cheer.
Io to Hymen.

You Gods of Marriage: sacred Protectoresse
Of lawful propagations, and blessed Love
Be most propitious to these grafted stemmes!
Drop dewing showers of gen^ration on them!
Think (Son) this day too prodigal of blessing
As, that had ^uno taskt thee (like Alcides)
To grapple with St^mphallides, or cleanse
Angelas stables: or like the Trojan Boy,
Sit like a Shephe^rd on Dardadias Hills,
Such a reward as this fair Queen repair,
O thou hoped future off-spring spare thy Parent!
Hurt not this tender womb, these Ivory worlds,
When you are borne; O be within your limbs,
The Grandsire Amurath, and fathers strength!
Line their faces (Nature) ^ith their Mothers dye!
And let the Destinies mark the ensuring night
In their Eternal Books, with notes most white.

Grant it great Ma^omet!


Most awful father and my honoured P^inee,
Although it be enacted by the Heavens,
That in these bonds of marriage such curse
Attends on Princes above private men,
That nor affection, nor home-nourisht Love
But ^tate and policy must elect their Wives.
Which must be fetched from Countries far remote!
Yet the protecting Powers have such a care,
Both of their off-springs and their Kingdoms state,
That to what they ordain, they work in us
A sudden willingness to make us obey;
For, in this breast, I do already feel
That there's a kindling a Diviner heat:
Which disobedience never shall extinguish.
And, if there be any felicity
From these u^ited Loves to be derived
From the weak sex into the husbands soul,
Then may my Lord make his affection sure,
To be repayd with unattainted Love,
In which a pretty peopl^ ye shall live,
Wi^ soft and yielding courtesy in all
He shall command, my willing arms shall still,
Be open t'enfold within a Wives embrace,
If any comfort else there be in store,
(Which modesty keeps silent to it self)
Cause only husbands and the night must know it,
My Loyalty shall ever all perform*
And (though my) Lord should frown, I'll be the ^ame*
Green wood will burn with a continued flame:

Princess our ardor is already fired,
Yet with no violent temerity;
Such as might fear it's short and soon decaying*
Thy virtue seems so to exceed thy Sex,
And wisdom so far to out-pace thy years,
That, surely (Ptincesse) soon maturity,
Argues in them, hidden Divinity.
Expected ( Hymen) here hath bound our hands,
And hearts, with everlasting ligaments*
Fortunate both we are, and have one bliss
The want of which for ever doth infect,
With anxious cares the sweets of marriage Beds:
Our Parents benediction and consent,
They are the truest Hymens, and should be
To children the best marriage Deity.
Thus then attended with ^uch sacred charms
Our last day of content shall never come;
Till we must part by th'unresisted doom,
With a pleased error we will age beguile,
All stars on us, an aequall yoke must smile.

Now (Lords) who'll dance
A Turkish measure? Ladies our nerves are shrunk;
And you now fix the sign of age on me,
You who have blood still flowing in your veins,
Be nimble as an Hart: Caper to the ^phaeres!
O you are light, that wrnt the weight of years!

And health to our Bride and her father!
O (Nobles) would this wine were Christians blood,
But that it would Phrenetique humours breed,
And so infect our b^aines with Superstition!

Auspicious fortunes to great Amurath!
To open more springs unto this full tide of joy,
Know (potent Emperor) I from Europe bring
Six daughters of six several Kings,
Whose Cities we have equalled to the ground;
And of their Palaces did torches make,
To light their souls through the black Cave of death ( Achero)

Describe (good Captain) how the dogs were wearied.


So weary were they to endure to endure our swords,
That by impetuous mutiny themselves,
Turned on each other; slew their Masters;
Childrens own hands, tore out their fathers throats.
And each one strove who should be ^laughtered first;
Here did a brother pash out a Brothers brains,
Some in stinking Quagmires, and deep Lakes
(Which they had made t'avoyd their excrements)
Ran quick, and in the lake lay buried.

(Goon Executioner of our most just wrath!)


Nor did it leave till death it self was weary*
Murder grew faint, and each succeeding day,
Showed us the slaughter of the day before.
Amongst carcasses and funerals we stood,
Denying those that lived such Ceremonies
As i^ their Temples to the Indian Gods,
With prayers and vows they daily offred:
Nor destiny, nor cruelty ere left,
Till they had nothing to work upon;
For, of so many souls that breathed
These six are all remained: which as a Pledge
Of my best service to your Majesty.
I here am bold to yield an offer.

Nor shall this present b^ unrecompenced;
For thy true service, on thee ^e bestow
All the rich gifts, which all these Asian Lords
B^ought to adore these happy Nuptials,
On you fair Bride great Princess and our Daughter
Do we bestow the^e Virgins (daughters to Kings)
For your attend^nce.

We are too much bound unto our Princely Father*


No (Daughter) no! we hope thou art the spring,
From whence shall flow to all the world a King*
^Captaines and Lords* to morrow we must meet,
To think of our rebelliious son in Law)
Be this time all for comfort and delight,
Short wedding days make it seem long to night.

Here set we down our miserable load,
O (...) with whom is't that we fight?
With Lydia^ Lyons, and Hyrcania^ Bears;
Which grind us daily in their ravenous te^th?
The Tyrant (as it were dest^uctions Enginere)
Help Nature to destroy the worlds frame quickly,

Alas my Lord that needs not, every day
Is a sufficient he^per to decay:
Great workman, who art sparing in thy strength
To bring things to perfectio^, a^ to oret^rne
All thy best wo^kes, thou use sudden force,
When mans a^ E^rio! and first con^eived
How long 'tis ere he see his native light?
Then borne, with expectation for his growth!
Tenderly nourished, carefully brought up,
Grown to p^rfection, what a little thing,
Serves to call on his sudden ruining?

Come Cobelitz, *amongst those demolisht ston^s
We'll sit as Hecub^, at those Troy^n Walls:
Our tears shall be false glasses to our eyes:
Through these we will look, and think we yet may see
Our stately Pinnacles, and strong founded holds;
That which one hour can delapidate,
One age can scarce repair.

No sir, for nothing's hard
To Nature, when she means t'consume
A thousand Oaks (which time hath fixed in the earth,
As Monuments of lasting memory)
Are in a moment turned to ashes all;
Things that rise ^lowly, take a sudden fall.

What course now Cobelitz, must we still be yoke*
To misery, and murder? We scarce have room,
Upon our bodies to receive more wounds,
And must we still oppose our selves to more?

Yes! We are ready still; a solid mind
Must not be shook with every blast of Wind!
Pollux, nor Hercules, had none other art,
To get them Mansions in the spangled Heavens
Then a true firm resolve; the A^riatike Sea,
Shall from his currents with tempestuous blasts,
Be sooner heard, than virtue from it's aim,
Let us but think (when we so many see,
Enjoying greater quiet than our selves.)
How many have endured more misery;
Ilion, Ilion, what a fate had thou?
How fruitful were thou in matter for thy foe?
Thus we'll delude our grief, make our self glad,
To think of miseries that others had.

I (Captain) I! they that furnished thee
With sentences of comfort, never saw,
Their Cities burnt, their C^untries desolate!
'Tis easy for Physicians for to tell
Advice to others, when themselves are well!

Tush, tush (my Lord) there's on our side we know,
One that can both, and will our weak hands g^ide,
One that will strike and thunder; Giant then,
Look for a dart! we must not appoint when;
Mean while help for to convey this burden henc^
Turk, though thy tyranny deny us graves,
Corruption will give them spite of thee!
Nor do our corps, such Tombs and Caverns need:
For our own flesh, still our own graves to breed:
And, when the Earth receives not, when they die;
Heavens Vault overwhelms them, so their tombe's in the sky.

Besieged on every side? Iconi^m taken?
Entrencht within my foes my self must lye
Wrapped in my Cities ruin! Turks come on!

Nay but my Lord, mean you to meet your death?
Let's hast our flight, and trust more to our feet
Then words, or hands --

Why, so much of our blood
Is already spilt* as should the glittering Sun
Exhale it upward, 'twould obnubulate
It's luster, else to fiery Meteors turn.
Some council (Lords) he that's amidst the Sea,
When every curled wave doth threat his death
Yet trusts upon the oars of his own arms,
And sometime the salt some doth pity him,
A Wolf, or Lyon, that hath filled his gorge
With bloody prey, at last will lye to sleep,
And the unnaturalst creatures not forget
Their love to those whom they do know their own!
My wife's his Daughter; si^ce we can^ot stand
His ^ury longer* she sh^ll s^age his wrath.
The boisterous Ocea^ wh^ ^ no (...) oppose,
Growth's (...) is lo^t, whe^'t hath no foes.

Why then (my Lord) array your self in weeds*
Of a Petitioner: take the Queen along,
And your two children; they may move his eyes;
For, desperate sores ask desperate remedies.

Go (Lords) go: fetch some straight. O Heavens!
O fortune they that lean on thy cracked wheel,
And trust a Kingdoms power, and domineer
In a walled Palace, let them look on me,
And thee ( Carmania) greater instances
The world affords not to demonstrate
The frail estate of proudest Potentates,
Of sturdiest Monarchies: high Pinnacles
Are still invaded with the prouder winds;
They must endure the threats of every blast;
The tops of Caucasus and Pindus shake,
With every crack of thunder; humble Vaults
Are ne'er touched with a bolt, ambiguous wings
Hath all the state, that hovers over Kings.
I, I, this vesture fits my misery!
This badge of poverty must now prevail,
Where all my Kingdoms power strength doth fail,
Why should not a prophetic soul attend
On great men's persons, and forewarn their ils?
Raging Boots doth not so turmoil
The Lybian ford, as Fortune doth great hearts.
Be^tona and Erynnis scourge us on*
Should wars and treasons cease, why our own weight
Would send us to the Earth; as spreading arms
Make the huge trees in tempest for to split.
For as the slaughter-man to pasture goes,
And drags that Ox home first, whose Bulk is greatest,
The lean he still lets feed: disease takes hold
On bodies that are pampered with best fare;
So doth all ruin choose the fairest marks:
At which it bends, and strikes it full of shafts,
Ambition made me now that eminent but:
And I that fell by mine own strength, mu^t rise
By professed weakness; Buckets full sink down:
Whilst empty ones danceith' ayr^, and cannot drown.
Come (^ords) he out o^*s way can never range,
Who is at f^thest! worst ne'er finds ill change.

Our hate must not part thus, I'll tell thee (Prince)
That thou hast kindled violent Aetna in our breast,
And such a flame is quenched with nought but blood:
His blood whose hasty and rebellious blast,
Gave life unto the fire; should Heaven threat us;
Knows we dare not menace it; are we not Amurat^?
(Whose awful name is even trembled at)
So often dared by Pigmy Christians;
Which we will crush to air; what haughty thought
Buzzed thy praesumptuous ears with such vain blasts,
To puff thee into such impetuous acts?
Or what, durst prompt thee with a thought so frail,
As made thee covetous of so brave a death?
As this known hand should cause it? know that throat
Shall feel it strangled with some slave brought up
To no^ght but an Hangman: thy last breath,
Torn from thee by a hand that's worse than death

Why then, I'll (like the Roman Pompey) hide
My dying sight, scorning Imperious looks
Should grace so base a stroke with sad aspect;
Thus will I muffle up and choke my groans,
Least a grieved tear should quite put out the name,
Of lasting courage in Carmanias fame.

What? still sti^e necked? Is this the tru^e you b^g?
^prinkled before thy face those Reb^ll Brats,
Shall have their brains, and their dissected lim^es,
Hurled for a prey to Kites; for (Lords) 'tis fit
No spark of such a Mountain threatening fire,
Be left as unextinct, least it devour,
And prove more hot unto the (...) Empery,
Then the (...) blaze did trouble Iov^!
First sacrifice those Brats --

(Dear father) let thy fury rush on me!
Within these entrails sheath thine unsatiate sword,
And let this ominous, and too fruitful womb,
Be torn in sunder? For from thence those Babes,
Took all their crimes; error made them guilty,
'Twas Natures fault, not theirs; O if affection
Can work then; now show a true Fathers Love,
If not, appease those murdering thoughts with me*
For as (...) pleaded with her sons
For their dear Father, so to a Father I
For my dear Babes and husband; husband, father*
Which shall I first embrace? Victorious father,
Be bl^t those now sharpe thoughtsllay down those threats,
Vn^laspe that impious Helmet! fix to earth
That monumental Sphere look on thy child
With pardoning looks, not with a Warriors eye:
Else shall my breast cover my husbands breast,
And serve as Buckler to receive thy wounds,
Why dost thou doubt? Fear thou thy Daughters faith?

I fear, for after Daughters perjury
All Laws of Natures shall di^tastfull be;
Nor will I trust thy children or thy self.

No Father 'tis I, fear you him, he you,
I both, but for you both, for both you war;
So that 'tis best with him that's overcome.
O let me kiss (kind father) first the Earth
On which you tread, then kiss mine husbands cheek.
Great King embrace these Babes! you are the stock
On which these Grafts were planted --

True, and when sprouts do^ rob th^ tree of sap,
They must be pruned,

Dear Father, leave such harsh similitudes*
By my deceased Mother, (to whose womb
I was a ten months burden:) By your self,
(To whom I was a pleasing In^ant on^e)
Pity my husband, and these tender Infants!

Yes to have them collect a manly strength,
And their first lesson that their Dad ^hall teach them
Shall be to read my misery.

Sterne Conqueror: but that thy daughter shows,
There ^nce dw^lt good in that ob^urate breast,
I would not ^pend a tear to soften thee!
Thou see my Countries turned into a Grave:
My Cities ^carre the Sun with fiereer flames,
Which turn them into ashes! all my self
So slickt and carved, that my amazed blood
Knows not through which wound first to take it's way;
If not on me, have mercy on my Babes! --
Which, with thy mercy thou may turn to Love.

No sir, we must root out malicious seed:
Nothing sproutes faster, then an envious weed!
We see a little Bullock, amongst an heard
(Whose hor^es are yet scarce crept from out his front)
Grows on a sudden tall, and in the Fields,
Frolics so much, he makes his Father yield.
A little twig left budding on an ^lme
(Ungratefully) bars his mother ^ight from Heaven!
I love not (...) Aladins.

Threat all a Conqueror can, can threat but death,
And I can die, but if thou would have mercy! --

O see you feet we're proved with this hands kiss!
The higher those great powers have raised you,
Press that which lies below with gentler weigh^*
To pardon miseries is Fortunes height:
Alas, these Infants, these weak sinewed hands
Can be no terror to these Hectors arms!
Beg (Infants) beg, and teach these tender joints
To ask for mercy; learn your lisping tongues
To give due accent to each syllable:
Nothing that Fortune urges too, is base;
Put from your thoughts all memory of descent:
Forget the Princely titles of your fathers:
If your own misery you can feel,
Learn thus of me to weep, of me to kneel*

Do (boys) and imitate your Parents tea^es*
Which I (like (...)) shed, when he beheld,
H^ctor thrice dragged about the ^rojan Walls.
He that burst open the gates of Erebus,
And roused the yelling Monster from his Den,
Was conquered with a tear! great Monarch learn,
To know how dear a King doth weeping earn.

Good Grandsire see, see how my father cries!


Good mother take my napkin for your eyes!


(Good father) hear, hear how thy daughter pr^yes:
Thou that know how to use sterne Warriors arms,
Learn how to use mild Warriors pity too!
Alas? can er^ these ungrowne strengths repair
Their Fathers batter^d Cities? Or can these
These orethrowne Turrets? ( Jconium) what small hopes
Hast thou to lean upon? If these be all?
Not half so mild hath our misfortune been
That any can ere fear us: Be pleased --

Rise (my dear child) as Marble against rain,
So I at these obedient showers, melt!
Thus I do raise thy husba^d: thus thy Babes:
Freely admitting you to former state.
But Alad^, wake not our w^ath agai^e!
"Patience grows fury that is ofter stirred;
When Conquerours wax calm, and cease to ^ate,
The conquered should not dare to reite^ate.
Be thou our son and friend.

By all the rites of Mahomet I vow it!


Then for to seal u^o our love,
Your self shall lead a wi^g in ^ervia,
In our immediate Wa^res, we are to meet
The Christians in Cassanoe's Plains with speed:
Great Amurath ne'er had time to breath himself:
So much, as to have warring with new foes;
No day securely to ^is Sceptre shone,
But one Wars end, still brought another on.

Let now victorious wreathes ingirt our ^rowes,
Let Angels 'stead of Soldiers wield our arms,
Against him, who that our Citti^s might be his
Strives to depopulate, and make them none!
But look, look in the air (me thinks) I se^
An host of Soldiers brandishing their swords;
Each corner of the Heaven shoots thunderbolts,
To nail these impious forces to the Earth.

Soldiers stand to 't! though fortune bandy at's
Let's stand her shocks, like sturdy Rockesith' Sea.
On which the angry foaming Billows beat,
With frivolous rush: and break themselves, not th^m;
Stand like the undainted countenance of the sky,
Or, like the Sun, which when the foolish King*
Thought to obscure with a Cloud of Darts,
Out looked them all, our lives are all enchanted,
And more i^vulnerate than Thetis son.
We shall have hands snd weapons, if the stone,
Of fortune glide from under our weak feet,
And we must fall: yet, let all Christians say,
'Tis she, and not the cause, that wins the day.
We must believe Heaven hath a greater care
Of them, whom fortune doth so oft out dare!

Gentlemen, brothers, friends Soldiers, Christians,
We have no reason to command of Heaven
A thing denied to all mortality.
Nor should we be so impude^tly proud,
As in this weak condition to repute
Our selves above the stroke of Lady Chance,
A caution must divine it ever fixed,
That whil^t her checks, equally fall out,
Community should ease their bitterness.
I could afresh now shed those Princely tears
To think su^h sudden rain should attend
Heroic spirits glittering in bright arms*
But if the Grecian (when he heard the dreams
Disput^d subtly by Philosophers,
To prove innumerable extant worlds)
Was ^trucke with pensive^, and wept to think
He had not yet obtained ^ne for himself;
What terror can affright a Christians thoughts
Who knows there is a world, at liberty
To breath in, when this glass of life is broke?
Our foes with cir^ling fury are entrenched;
Pelions of earth and darkness shall orelade them,
Whilst we shall mount, and these our spirits light,
Shall be yet ponderous to depress them lower.
Nay, my ^nthesiasticke soul divines,
That some weak hand shall from the blazing Zone
Snatch Lightning, which shall strike th^ snarling C^r
With horror and amazement to the Earth!
Which Hell cannot oppose! Turk, Tyrannize!
Stand, yet at le^gth to fall my sacrifice.
Super-Olympicke vigour will (no doubt)
Squease all thy supercilious rancor out!

Who set the world on fire? How now (ye Heavens)
Grow you so proud that you must needs put on curled locks*
And cloth your selves in Peri^igs of fire?
Mahomet (say not but I invoke thee now!)
Command the puny-Christians demi-God
Put out those flashing sparks, those Ignes (...),
Or i'll unseate him, or with my Looks so shake
The ^taggring props of his weak seated Throne,
That he shall find he shall have mo^e to do
To quell one Amurath, then the whole Giant brood
Of those same sons of Earth then ten Lycaons!
Do the poor snakes so love their misery
That they would see it by these threatening lights?
Dar^ ye blaze still? I'll toss up Buckets full
Of Christians blood to quench you: by those hairs
Drag you beneath the Center: there put out
All your praesaging flames in (...)!
Can you outbrave me with your piddling Lights?
Yawn earth with Casements as wide as hell it self*
Burn Heaven as ardent as the Lemnian flames!
Wake (pale Tysiphon) spend all thy snakes!
Be Eacus, and Minos as severe
As if the Jail delivery of us all
Were the next Sessions! I'll pull Radamant
By his flaming furs from out his Iron Chair.

Horror dismal cries, and yells
Of these thy Grandsires thee fore-tells,
Furies sent of thee to learn
Crimes, which they could ne'er discern.

Furies sent, c.

O Amurathl thy Father's come,
To warn thee of a sudden doom,
Which in Cassanoe's fields attends
To bring thee to thy Hellish friends.

Which in Cassanoes, c.

Megaera and Ennio both do stand,
Trembling, least when thou art damned
Chief of Furies thou should be,
And they their snakes resign to thee.

Chief of Furies, c.

Terror we a while will leave thee,
Till Cocytus Lake receive thee.
Cerberus will quake for fear
Where he a new Turks fate shall hear.

Cerberus will, c.

Now who the Devil sent my Grandsires hither?
Had Pluto no task else to set them too?
He should have bound them to Ixions wheel,
Or bid them roll the stone of Sysiphus:
Beshrew me, but their singing did not please me!
Have they not been so drunk with Lethe yet
As to forget me? Then can portend no ill
For, should the fates be twining my last thread;
Yet none durst come from Hell to tell me so!
Shall I be scared with a Night-walking Ghost;
Or what my working fancy shall present?
Why, I can look more t^rrible, then Night,
And command darkness in the unwilling day:
Make Hecate start: and draw back her head,
To wrap it in a swarthy veil of Clouds.
Drop sheets of Sulphur, you prodigious skies!
Cyclops, run all thy Bullets into Ae^,
Then vomit them at once! should Christians
Couch to the bottomless abyss of (...),
Or hide themselves under Avernaes shade,
This mine arm should fetch them out! Day must perform
What I intend, wrath rains a bloody storm:
And now 'gins rise the Sun, which yet not knows
The misery it shall see on Amuraths Foes,
Lords, Leaders, Captains:

Your Highness up so soon?


He small rest takes,
That dreams on nought but bloody broils and death.

Your Grace seems much distempered: Beds of sweat
Bedew your brows with never wonted paleness.

Why; see you not? The heavens are turned Court Ladies,
And put on other Hair besides their own:
Can guess (learned Schahin) what these flames portend?

My Lord, such things as these we (...) mu^t (...),
And wonder at, and yet not search the reason,
Perchance unwholesome fogs exhailed (...) th'Sunne
Are set a blazing by his too near heate:
But 'tis not lawful that a mortal eye:
Should dare to penetrate Heavens secrecy.

Doth it not bode a Conquest?


Yes, against the Christians:
For, unto them it bends sinister looks,
And frowns upon their army more then ours.

So, so! ^ome on, ere ' Phosphorus appear
Let's too't, and so prevent that sluggard Sol!
If we want light, we'll from our Winnards*
Strike fire enough to scorch the Universe*
Mine armour there!
Now (Mahomet) I implore
Thy promised aid for this auspicious day!
To^e me aloft, and make me ride on Clouds!
If my horse fail me, those fire breathing jades,
(Which the boy Phaethon k^ew not how to guide)
Will I pluck out from out the flaming team,
And hurl my self against those condense Spheres,
On which i'll sit, and stay their turning Orbs;
The whole vertigious Circle shall stand still,
But to behold me:
So help on here, now like Alcides do I girt my self,
With well knit sinews, able to stagger Earth,
And threaten Nature with a second Chaos:
If one impetuous broil remain to come
In future ages, set on foot this hour!
How well this weight of steel befits my strength?
Me thinks the Gods stand quivering, and do fear
(When I am armed) another Ph^egrae's near!
Chiron shall see his Pindus at my feet!
And, i'll climb to Heaven, and pull it down,
And kick the weighty b^rden of the world,
From off the Babies shoulders that supports it!
For I am safer Buckled against my foe.
Then st^dy Iason who by the enchanted charms
Medea gave, encountered Unicorns,
Queld Lyons, struggeld with fiery belching Bulls:
Obtained a glorious prize, a Fleece, a Fleece
Dipped deep in tincture of the Christians blood.
Shall be my spoil, nay should they hide their heads
In their Gods bosom, here's a sword shall reach the ^
Come they shall know no place is free from wrath,
When boiling blood is stirred in Amurath.

Here (mighty Prin^) take view of Victory,
And see the field too narrow for thy spoils!
Erynnus hides her head as if afraid,
To see a slaughter. She durst never hope for,
Earth hath the Carcasses, and denies them Graves,
And lets them be and rot, and fat her womb,
Scorning to be unto slaves a Tomb.

Where are b^come those ominous Comets now?
What? ar^ those pissing Candles quit^ extinct?
Leave their disastrous snuffs no stench behind them?
'Tis something yet, that their God sees their slaughter.
^ending sulphurious Meteors to behold
The blessed destruction of these Parasites*
I knew the Elements would first untie
The Nerves of the Universe, then l^t me dye!

See (King) here's one worm yet that dare confess
He breaths and lives, which once this hand crushed down.

Ha, ha, by Mahomet and we are weary now:
Some Mercy shall lay Victory asleep.
It will a Lawreat prove to this great strife,
Amongst all these murdered to give one his life,
So we'll descend.

From what a dismal grave am I awaked,
Entombed within a Golgotha of men;
Have all these Souls prevented me in bliss,
And left me in a dream of happiness?
But soft! m^ thoughts he said he would descend!
Then, Heavens one minutes breath, that's all I ask,
And then I shall perform my lifes true task.

Poor slave, would live?


Yes Turk to see thee dye!
Howl, howl* (grim ^artar) yell (thou gristly Wol^e)
Force the blood from out thy gaping Wound!
Dij tibi non mortem, quae c^ctis p^na paratur,
Sed sensum post fata, tu^ dent (imp^e) morti.

My spirit makes me not to f^ele thy weapon!
Hold you (cracked Organs) of my shottered life,
I am not touched yet! can ^ not mock my death,
And thi^ke 'tis but a dream t^lls me I am hurt?
Dare thou then leave me (blood?) Can be so bold
As to forsake these veins to flow on Earth?
And must, I like th'unhappy Roma^, dye
By a slaves hand?

Tyrant, 'tis known
He's Lord of others lifes that scorns his own!

I that could sca^ce ere sleep, can I ere die?
And will none ^eare my life when I am dead
Tortures and torments for the murderer!

Ha, ha, ha!
I thank the (great omnipotent) tha^ I
Shall ere laugh out the lag end of my life!

Villain, thy laugh wounds worse then did thy Dagger!
Are you Lethargic (Lords) in cruelty?

Nay, hear me ( Turk) now will I prompt their rage
Locke me in the Bull of Phalaris,
Cut off these eye-lids, bid me then out-gaze
The parching Sun-beames; flea this tender ski^,
Set nests of Hornets on my rawest flesh,
Let the Siconian Clouds d^op brimstone on me,
Power boiling Lemnos on my greenest wounds,
Put on my shoulder Ne^us poisoned shirt,
Bind all these bloody faces to my face
Rock me Procra^tes like --

Hell, oh! I cannot brooke your smallest touch,


Ha, ha, each groan is Balsam to my wounds:
I am perfect well!

Rascal dare deride us?


Yea? and while your witty furies shall invent
For me, some never heard of punishment;
I see a guard of Saints ready to take me hence.
Take then fro flight, my new rewarded soul,
And seat thee on the winged Seraphims,
Hast to the Empyreum, where thy welcome
Shall be an Haleluia, anthem'd forth
By the Chorus of the Angell-Hierarchy.
Pierce with (swift plumes) the concave paths of the Moon
Where the black air enlightened is with stars.
Stay not to wonder (there) of wandering Signs
At the inhorn'd Gemin^, or Amph^s Harp,
At Arctos, or Boots, or the Bear,
(Which are to pl^se wizard Astrologers)
Soar higher with the pitch and then look down
To la^gh at the hard trifles of the world!
Perchance some oft have known a better life,
Never did none ere leave it more willingly.

Fear your deaths (Gods) for I have lost my life,
And what I most (complain) my tyranny!

Soul to detain thee from thy wished rest
Were but an envious part ^ arise, farewell:
To stay thee to accuse or fate or man
Would show I were unwilling yet to leave thee
But dear companion hence: cut through the air:
Let not the grosen^sse of my Earth ore-lime
Thy speedy wings, fly without weight of crime.

O now have I and Fortune tried it out.
With all her best of favours was I crowned
And suffered her worst threats, when most she frowned.
Stay (Soulel) a King, a Turk, commands thee stay!
Sure ^ am but an actor, and must strive
To personate the Tragic ends of Kings.
And so (^o win applause unto the Scaene)
With fained passion thus must grasp at death!
O but I see pale Nemesis at hand:
Art thou dull fate, and dost not overspread
Gimmerion wings of death throughout the world;
What? Not one Earthquake? One blazing Comet
T'accompany my soul t'his Funeral?
^s not this hour the general period
To ne'er returning time? Last breath command
A new Dewcalions deluge, that with me
The world may swim to his Eternal Grave,
Crack hindge that holds this globe, and welcome death,
Wilt thou not stay Soul? Friend not stay with Kings?
Sink th^n, and sink beneath the Thracian Mou^.
Sink beneath Athos, be the B^sh Waves
Of Acheron thy Tomb, i'll want a Grave;
So all parts fear, which first my Corps shall hav^;
For in my Grave, i'll be the Christians foe.
Here like a Massy Pyramid i'll fall,
I'll strive to sink all the whole fabric with me,
Quake Pluto, for 'tis I that come
A Turk, a Tyrant, and a Conqueror,
And with this groan, like thunder will I cleave,
The timorous earth, whilst thus my last I breath.

O eafie powers, to give's all at first,
But in their loss they make us most accursed.

The Taper of your Fathers life is spent
We must have light still and adore a Sun
That next is rising, therefore mighty Prince,
Upon your shoulders must the load
Of Empire rest.

Why (Lords) we have a Brother
Who, as in the same blood he tocke a share,
So let him bear his part in Government:

My Lord! within the selfe-same Hemisphere
It's most prodigious when two Suns appear!
One body by one soul must be informed.
Kingdoms like (marriage beds) must not endure
Any corrival! (...) was ne'er secure
Whilst she contain'da Pompey, and a Caesar.
Like as one Prophet we acknowledge now
So of one King in state we must allow.
You know the Turkish Laws, Prince be not nice
To purchase Kingdoms, whatsoever the price.
He must be lopped, send for him he must dye.

O happy Baiazet that he was borne
To be a King when thou was Counseller.
Call in our Brother ^cup,

Why (Lords!) is Am^rath so light a weight?
Is this the Trunk of the T^rkish Emperor?
Oh what a heap of thoughts are come to nought
What a light weight is he unto six men
Who durst stand under Ossa, and sustain it:

My Lord, these Meditations fit not you:
You are to take the honour he hath left,
And think you of his rising, not his fall!
Let your decree be sudden, here's your Brother.

B^other, I could have wished we might have met
At tim^s of better greeting! Our father hath
Bequeathed to the Grave these ashes, to us his State.
No^ have we leisure (yet) to morn for him
Brothe^, you k^ow our state hath made a Law,
That, he that sits in a Majestic Chair,
Must not endure the next succeeding heir.

Yes, we do:
And (Brother) do you think 'tis crime enough
To dye, because I am son to an Emperor?

My Lord, we know their breathes in him that ay^
Of true affection, that he doth much desire
You should be equal in his Kingdom with him:
But still when two great evils are proposed:
The less is to be chosen.

My Lord, your life's but one:
Kings are the threads whereto there are inweaved
Millions of lives, and he that must rule all
Must still be one that is select from all.
Although we speak, yet think them not our words,
But what the Land speaks in us! Kings are free*
And must be impatient of equality.

And is't en so?
How have th^se Dogs fawned on me licked my feet
When A^th yet lived? Felt all my thoughts,
And soothed them to the sight of Empyrie*
And now the first would set their politic hands
To strangle up that breath, a blast of which
Their nostrils have sucked up like perfumed air
Well brother well by all men this is spoke,
That heart that cannot bow, may yet be brok^.

Brother you must not now stand to upbraid;
They which do fear the vulgars murmuring tongue,
Must also fear th'authority of a King;
For rulers mu^t esteem it happiness
That with their government they can hate suppress:
They with too faint a hand the Scepters sway,
Who regard love, or what the people say:
To Kindred we must quite put off respect,
When 'tis so near it may our Crown affect.

Then name of Brother do I thus shake off,
For 'tis in vain, their mercy to implore
When impio^s Scatists have decreed before.
Yet King although thou take my life away
See how ^le dye in better state then thou!
Who like (my Father) after his greatest glor^
May fall by some base hand: The Minister
To take my breath, shall be to thy self, a King.
Yet give me leave a while* to Prophecy,
You that so Puppet-like delude your hopes,
And Miser-draw th^ ancestry from Kings,
Thinking, that fates dare not app^oach your blood
Till they do seize you, then you leave this Earth
Not as you went, but by compulsion dragged;
Still begging for a morrow from your Grave,
And with such shifts you do deceive your selves:
As if you could deceive mortality,
No (Brother King) nor all the Glow-worme state,
Which makes thee be a Horse-leach for thy blood,
Not all the Parasites Minions thou maintains*
Nor the restorative Dishes that are found out.
Nor all thy shifts a^d tricks can cheat mortality,
Or keep thee from a* death that's worse then mine.
Shoul^ all this fail, age would profess it self
A slow, but a sure Executioner.
O 'tis a hard thing well to temperate
Decaying happiness in great estate
But this example by me may you gain:
That at my death I not of Heaven complain
P^ll then, and with my fall pull on thy self
Mountains of burdenous honour which shall curse thee
Death l^ades the willing by the hand
But spurs them headlong on, that dares command.
Take up this Trunk; and let us first appoin^
O^ Fathers and our Brothers Funerals,
The senseless body of that Ca^fe slave,
Hurl to a Ditch, Posterity shall hear
Our less ill Chronicled, but time shall hear
These minutes rather, then repeat their woe.
Now Primacy, on thee i'll medi^,
Which who enjoy thee, are in blessed estate.
Whose age in secure silence fleets away,
Without disturbance to his funeral day;
Nor ponderous nor unquiet honours can
Vex him but dyes a primate ancient man,
What greater powers threaten inferior men
A greater power threatens him again:
And like to wasted Tapers Ki^gs must spend
Their lives to light up others: So a^l end.


