POets are scarce when Goddesses themselves
Are forced to leave their high and stately seats
Placed on the top of high Olympus Mount,
To seek them out, to pen their Champions praise.
The time hath been when Homers sugared Muse,
Did make each Echo to repeat his verse,
That every coward that durst crack a spear,
And Tilt and Turney for his Ladies sake,
Was painted out in colours of such price
As might become the proudest Potentate.
But now a days so irksome Idels slights,
And cursed charms have witch'd each students mind,
That death it is to any of them all,
If that their hands to penning you do call:
Oh Virgil, Virgil, were thou now alive,
Whose painful pen in stout Augustus days,
Did deign to let the base and silly flea
To escape away without thy praise of her.
I do not doubt but long or ere this time,
Alphonsus fame unto the heauen's should clime:
Alphonsus fame that man of Jove his seed,
Sprung from the loins of the immortal Gods,
Whose sire although he habit on the earth,
May claim a portion in the fiery Pole,
As well as any one what ere he be.
But setting by Alphonsus power divine,
What man alive or now amongst the ghoasts
Could countervail his courage and his strength?
But thou art dead, yea Virgil thou art gon:
And all his acts drowned in oblivion.
And all his acts drowned in oblivion?
No Venus no, though Poets prove unkind,
And loath to stand in penning of his deeds,
Yet rather then they shall be clean forgot,
I which was wont to sollow Cupids games
Will put in ur Mineruaes sacred Art,
And this my hand which used for to pen
The praise of love, and Cupids peerless power,
Will now begin to treat of bloody Mars,
Of doughty deeds and valiant victories.
But see whereas the stately Muses come,
Whose harmony doth very far surpass
The heavenly music of Appolloes pipe.
But what means this Melpomine her self
With all her sisters sound their Instruments,
Only excepted fair Calliope?
Who coming last hanging down her head,
Doth plainly show by outward actions
What secret sorrow doth torment her heart.
Calliope thou which so oft did crake,
How that such clients clustred to thy Court
By thick and threefold, as not any any one
Of all thy sisters might compare with thee:
Where be thy schollers now become I troe?
Where are they vanished in such sudden sort,
That while as we do play upon our strings,
You stand still lazing, and have nought to do?

Melpomine make you a why of that?
I know full oft you have Authors red,
The higher tree the sooner is his fall,
And they which first do flourish and bear sway,
Upon the sudden vanish clean away.

Mock on apace, my back is broad enough
To bear your flouts as many as they be.
That year is rare, that ne'er feels winters storms:
That tree is fertile which ne'er wants fruit.
And that same Muse hath heaped well in store:
Which never wants clients at her door.
But yet my sisters, when the surgent seas
Have ebde their fill, their waives do rise again
And fill their banks up to the very brims:
And when my pipe hath easd her self a while,
Such store of suitors shall my seat frequent,
That you shall see my schollers be not spent.

Spent (quoth you) sister, then we were too blame
If we should say your schollers all were spent:
But pray now tell me when your painful pen will rest enough?

When husbandmen sheer hogs.

Melpomine, Errato and the rest,
From thickest shrubs dame Venus did epsy
The mortal hatred which you jointly bear
Unto your sister high Calliope.
What do you think if that the tree do bend,
It follows therefore that it needs must breaks
And since her pipe a little while doth rest,
It never shall be able for to sound?
Yes Muses yes, if that she will vouchsafe
To ente^tain Dame Venus in her school,
And further me with her insti^tions,
She shall have schollers which will deign to be
In any other Muses company.

Most sacred Venus do you doubt of that?
Cal^ope would think her three times blessed,
For to receive a Gods in her school,
Especially so high an one as you,
Which rules the earth, and guides the heavens too.

Then sound your pipes, and let us bend our steps
Unto the top of high Pernassus hill,
And there together do our best deuoyr
For to describe Alphonsus warlike fame:
And in the manner of a Comedy,
Set down his noble valour presently.

As Venus wills, so bids Calliope.

And as you bid your sisters do agree.

My noble son, since first I did recount
The noble acts your predecessors did
In Aragon, against their war^ke foes,
I never yet could see thee joy at all,
But hanging down thy head as malcontent:
Thy youthful days in mourning have been spent.
Tell me Alphonsus what might be the cause
That makes thee thus to pine away with care?
Hath old Carinus done thee any offence
In reckoning up these stories unto thee?
What ne'er a word (...) ^mme? Alphonsus speak,
Unless your Fathers fatal day you seek.

Although dear father I have often vowed
Ne'er to unfold the secrets of my heart
To any man or woman, who some ere
Dwells underneath the circle of the ^kie:
Yet do your words so conjure me dear sire,
That needs I must fulfil that you require.
Then so it is, amongst the famous tales
Which you rehearst done by our sires in war,
When as you came unto your fathers days,
With sobbing notes, with sighs blubbering tears,
And much ado, at length you thus began.
Next to Alphonsus should my father come,
For to possess the Diadem by right
Of Aragon, but that the wicked wretch
His younger brother, with aspiring mind,
By secret treason robbed him of his life,
And me his son, of that which was my due.
These words my sire, did so torment my mind,
As had I been with Ixion in hell,
The ravening bird could never plague me worse:
For ever since my mind hath troubled been
Which way I might revenge this traitorous fact,
And that recover which is ours by right.

Ah my Alphonsus never think on that,
In vain it is to sttiue against the stream,
The Crown is lost, and now in hucksters hands,
And all our hope is cast ^to the dust:
Bridle these thoughts, and learn the same of me,
A quiet life doth pass an Empery.

Yet noble father, ere Carinus brood
Shall brooke his foe for to vsu^ his seat,
Heel die the death with honour in the field,
And so his life and sorrows briefly end.
But did I know my froward fate were such,
A^ I should fail in this my just attempt:
This sword dear father should the Author be,
To make an end of this my Tragedy.
Therefore sweet sire, remain you here a while,
And let me walk my Fortune for to t^e:
I do not doubt but ere the time be long,
I'll quite his cost, or else my self will die.

My noble son, since that thy mind is such
For to revenge thy fathers foul abuse,
As that my words may not a whit preuaile
To stay thy journey, go with happy fate,
And soon return unto thy fathers Cell,
With such a t^ne as Iulius C^ar came
To noble Rome, when as he had atchiu'd
The mighty Monarch of the triple wo^ld,
Mean time Carinus in this silly grove (...)
Will spend his days with prayer and horizons,
To mighty Jove, to further thine intent:
Farewell dear son Alphonsu^ fare you well.

And is he gone? then hie Alphonsus hie,
To try thy fortune where thy fates do call:
A noble mind disdains to hide his head,
And let his foes triumph in his overthrow.

What loitering follow have we spied here?
Presume not vill^ne (...) her for to go,
Unless you do at length the same ^pent.

Villain sai^t thou, nay vilain in thy throat:
What know ^ou skip^ck whom thou vilain call?

A common vassal I (...) villain call.

That shalt thou soon approve persuade thy self,
Or else i'll die, or thou shalt die for me.

What do I dream, or do my dazzling eyes
Deceive me? Is't Alpho^sus that I see?
Doth now Medea use her wonted charms
For to delude Albinius fantasy?
Or doth black Pluto king of dark Auerne,
Seek to flout m^ with his cou^rfait?
His body like to Alphonsus framed is:
His face resembles much Alphonsus hew:
His noble mind declares him for no les.
Tis he indeed, wo worth Albinius,
Whose babbling tong hath caused his own annoy.
Why doth not Jove send from the glittering skies
His Thunder bolts to chastise this offence?
Why doth dame Terra cease with greedy jaws
To swallow up Albinius presently?
What ^ll I fly and hide my traitorous head,
From ^out Alphonsus whom I so misusde?
Or shall I ^eld Tush yielding is in vain:
Nor can I fly, but he will follow me.
Then ^ast thy self down at his graces seete,
Confess thy fault, and ready make thy breast,
To entertain thy well de^ued death.

What news my friend? why are you so blank
That erst before did vau^ it to the skies?

Pardon dear Lord, Albinius pardon craves
For this offence, which by the heaue^ I vow,
Unwittingly I did unto your grace.
For had I known Alphonsus had been here,
Ere that my tongue had spoke so traitorously,
This hand should make my very ^uie to ^ie.

Rise up my f^end, thy pardon soon is go^
But prithi^ ^ll me what the ^auie might be^
That in such s^t thou e^st (...) m^?
Have compassed the circle of the sky,
I'll clog their toongs, since nothing else will serve
To keep those wild and threatening speeches in.
Farewell Belinus, loke thou to thy self:
Alphonsus means to have thy Crown ere night.

What is he gone, the devil break his neck,
The fiends of hell torment his traitorous corpse:
Is this the quittance of Belinus grace,
Which he did show unto that thankles wre^ch?
That runagate, that rachel, yea that thief,
For well I wot he hath robbed me of a Crown.
If ever he had sprung from gentle blood,
He would not thus misuse his favourer.

That ^nnag, that rachel, yea that thief?
Stay their sir King, your mouth runs over much,
It ill becomes the subject for to use
Such traitorous terms against his sovereign.
Know thou Belinus, that Carinus son,
Is neither rachel nor runagate,
But be thou sure, that ere the darksome night
Do drive God Phoebus to his Thetis lap,
Both thou and all the rest of this thy train,
Shall well repent the words which you have sane.

What traitorous villain dost thou threaten me?
Lay hold on him, and see he do not escape,
I'll teach the slave to know to whom he speaks.
To thee I speak, and to thy fellows all:
And though as now you have me in your power,
Yet doubt I not but that in little space,
These eyes shall see thy treason recompenst:
And then I mean to vaunt of our victory.

Nay proud Albinius, never build on that,
For though the Gods do chance for to appoyn^
Alphonsus victor of Belinus land,
Yet shalt thou never live to see that day,
And therefore Fabius stand not lingering,
But presently slash off his traitorous head.

Slash off his head, as though Albinius head
Were then so easy to be slashed off.
In faith sir no, when you are gone and dead,
I hope to flourish like the pleasant spring.

Why how now Fabius, what do you stand in doubt,
To do the deed? what fear you? who dares seek^
For to revenge his death on thee again,
Since that Belinus did command it so?
Or are you waxed so dainty, that you dare
Not use your sword for staining of your hands?
If it be so, then let me see thy sword,
And I will be his butcher for this time.
Now sir Albinius, are you of the mind
That erst you were? what do you look to see
And triumph in Belinus overthrow?
I hope the very sight of this my blade,
Hath changed your mind into an other tune.

Not so Belin^s, I am constant still,
My mind is like to the Abeston stone,
Which if it once be heat in flames of fire,
Deineth to becommen cold again.
Even so am I, and shall be till I die,
And though I should see Attropos appear,
With knife in hand, ^o slit my thread in twain,
Yet ne'er Albinius should persuaded be,
But that Belinus he should vanquished see.

Nay then Albinius, since that words are vain
For to persuade you from this heresy:
Th^ sword shall sure put you out of doubt.

My noble Lords of Aragon, I know
You wonder much what might the occasion be,
That Laelius which erst did fly the field,
Doth egg you forwards now unto the wars,
But when you hear my reason, out of doubt
Yowle be content with this my rash attempt.
When first our King, Flaminius I do mean,
Did set upon the Neapolitans,
The worst of you did know and plainly see,
How far they were unable to withstand
The mighty forces of our royal Camp,
Until such time as froward fates we thought,
Although the fates ordained it for our gain,
Did send a stranger stout, whose sturdy blows
And force alone, did cause our overthrow.
But to our purpose, this same martial knight
Did hap to hit upon Flaminius,
And lent our King then such a friendly blow,
As that his gasping ghost to Lymbo went:
Which when I saw, and seeking to revenge,
My noble Lords, did hap on such a prize:
As never King nor Keisar got the like.

Laelius, of force we must confess to thee,
We wondered all, when as you did persuade
Us to return unto the wars again,
But since our marvel is increased much
By these your words, which sound of happiness,
Therefore good Laelius make no tarrying,
But soon unfold thy happy chance to us.

Then friends and fellow soldiers, hark to me.
When Laelius thought for to revenge his king,
On that same knight, in steed of mortal foe,
I found him for to be our chiefest friend.

Our chiefest friend, I hardly can believe,
That he which made such bloody massacres
Of stout Italians, can in any point
Bear friendship to the country or the King.

As for your king Miles, I hold with you,
He bear no friendship to Flaminius,
But hated him as bloody Attropos,
But for your country, Laelius doth a^owe,
He loves as well as any other land:
Yea sure he loves it best of all the world:
And for because, you shall not think that I
Do say the same without a reason why,
Know that the knight Alphonsus hath to name,
Both son and heir to old Carinus, whom
Flaminius sire bereaved of his Crown:
Who did not seek the ruin of our host,
For any envy he did bear to us,
But to revenge him on his mortal foe,
Which by the help of high celestial Jove,
He hath atchieu'd with honour in the field.

Alphonsus man, i'll ne'er persuaded be,
That ere Alphonsus may survive again,
Who with Carinus many years ago,
Was said to wander in the stigian fields.

Truth Noble Miles, these mine ears have heard,
For certainty reported unto me,
That old Carinus with his peerless son,
Had felt the sharpness of the sisters shears,
And had I not of late Alphonsus seen
In good estate, though all the world should say
He is alive, I would not credit them:
But fellow soldiers wend you back with me,
And let us lurk within the secret shade,
Which he himself appointed unto us:
And if you find my words to be vntroth,
Then let me die to recompense the wrong.

Laelius make haste, soldiers of Aragon,
Set lingering by, and come and help your King.
I mean Alphonsus, who whilst that he did
Pursue Belinus at the very heals,
Was suddenly environed about,
With all the troupes of mighty Millain land.

What news is this, and is it very so?
Is our Alphonsus yet in humane state,
Whom all the world did judge for to be dead.
Yet can I scarce give credit to the same.
Give credit, yes, and since the Millain Duke,
Hath broke his league of friendship, be he sure,
E^e Cynthia, the shining lamp of night,
Doth scale the heavens with her horned head,
Both he and his shall very plainly see,
The league is burst, that caused long the glee.

And could the traitor harbour in his breast
Such mortal treason against his sovereign,
As when he should with fire and sword defend
Him from his foes, he seeks his overthrow?
March on my friends, I ne'er shall joy at all,
Until I see that bloody traitors fall.

NO sooner did Alphonsus with his troupe,
Set on the soldiers of Belinus band,
But that the fury of his sturdy blows,
Did strike such terror to their daunted minds,
That glad was he which could escape away,
With life and limb, forth of that bloody fray.
Belinus flies unto the Turkish soil,
To crave the aide of A^r their King:
Unto the which he willingly did consent,
And sends Belinus with two other Kings,
To know god M^ets pleasure in the same:
Mean time the Empress by Medeas help,
Did use such charms, that Amuracke did see
In soundest sleep, what afterward should hap:
How Amuracke did recompense her pain,
With mickle more, this Act shall show you plain.
Welcome brave youths of Aragon to me.
Yea welcome Miles, Lali^s and the rest,
Whose prowess alone hath been the only cause,
That we like victors have subdued our foes.
Lord what a pleasure was it to my mind,
To see Bel^s, which not long before,
Did with his threatenings terrefie the Gods,
Now scudde apace, from warlike L^lius blows:
The Duke of Millaine he increased our sport,
When doubting that his force was ouerweake,
For to withstand Miles, thy sturdy arm
Did give more credence to his frisking skippes
Then to the sharpness of his cutting blade,
What Fabius did to pleasure us withal,
Albinius knows as well as I my self:
For well I wot, if that thy tyred steed
Had been as fresh and swift in foot as his,
He should have felt, yea known for certainty,
To check Alphonsus, did deserve to die.
Briefly my friends and fellow peers in arms,
The worst of you do deserve such mickle praise,
As that my tongue denies for to set forth
The demi parcel of your valiant deeds,
So that perforce, I must by duty be
Bound to you all, for this your courtesy.

Not so my Lord, for if our willing arms
Have pleasured you so much, as you do say,
We have done nought but that becomes us:
For to defend our mighty sovereign.
As for my part, I count my labour small,
Yea though it had been twice as much again,
Since that Alphonsus doth accept thereof.

Thanks worthy Miles, least all the world
Should count Alphonsus thankless for to be,
Laelius sit down, and Miles sit by him,
And that receive, the which your swords have won.
First, for because thou Laelius in these broils,
By martial might, did proud Belinus chase,
From troupe to troupe, from side to side about,
And never ceased from this thy swift pursuit,
Until thou had obtained his royal Crown,
Therefore I say, i'll do thee nought but right,
And give thee that which thou well hast won.
Here doth Alphonsus Crown thee Laelius, King
Of Naples Town, with all dominions
That erst belonged to our traitorous foe,
That proud Belinus in his regiment.
Miles, thy share the Millaine Dukedom is,
For well I wot thy sword deserved no less.
The which Alphonsus frankly gives thee,
In presen^ of his warlike men at arms.
And if that any stomach this my deed,
Alphonsus can revenge thy wrong with speed.
Now to Albinius which in all my toils
I have both faithful, yea and friendly found:
Since that the Gods and friendly Fates assign
This present time to me to recompense,
The sundry pleasures thou hast done to me,
Sit down by them, and on thy faithful head
Receive the Crown of peerless Aragon.

Pardon dear Lord Albinius at this time,
It ill becomes me for to wear a Crown,
When as my Lord is destitute himself:
Why high Alphonsus, if I should receive
This Crown of you, the which high Jove forbid,
Where would your self obtain a Diadem?
Naples is gone, Millaine possessed is,
And nought is left for you but Aragon.

And nought is left for me but Aragon?
Yes surely yes, my Fates have so decreed,
That Aragon should be too base a thing,
For to obtain Alphonsus for her King.
What hear you not how that our scattered foes,
Belinus, Fabius, and the Millaine Duke,
Are fled for succour to the Turkish Court?
And think you not that Amurack their King,
Will with the mightiest power of all his land,
Seek to revenge Belinus overthrow?
Then doubt I not but ere these broils do end,
Alphonsus shall possess the Diadem
That Amurack now wears upon his head.
Sit down therefore and that receive of me:
The which the Fates appointed unto thee.

Thou king of heaven, which by thy power divine,
Dost see the secrets of each livers heart,
Bear record now with what unwilling mind,
I do receive the Crown of Aragon.

A rise Albinius King of Aragon,
Crowned by me, who till my gasping ghost
Do part asunder from my breathless corpse,
Will be thy shield against all men alive:
That for thy kingdom any way do strive.
Now since we have in such an happy hour
Confirmed three kings, come let us march with speed
Into the City, for to celebrate
With mirth and joy, this blissful festival.

Welcome Belinus to thy cousins Court,
Whose late arrival in such posting pace,
Doth bring both joy and sorrow to us all:
Sorrow because the Fates have been so false,
To let Alphonsus drive thee from thy land:
And joy, since that now mighty Mahomet
Hath given me cause to recompense at full,
The sundry pleasures I received of thee.
Therefore Belinus do but ask and have:
For Amurack doth grant what ere you crave.

Thou second sun which with thy glimsing beams
Doest clarify each corner of the earth,
Belinus comes not, as erst Mydas did,
To mighty Bacchus, to desire of him,
That what so ere at any time he touched,
Might turned be to gold incontinent.
Nor do I come as Iuppiter did erst
Unto the Palace of Amphitrion,
For any fond or foul concupiscence,
Which I do bear to Alcumenaes hew.
But as poor Saturne, forced by mighty Jove
To fly his Country, banished and forlorn,
Did crave the aide of Troos, King of Troy.
So comes Belinus to high Amurack.
And if he can but once your aide obtain,
He turns with speed to Naples back again.

My aide Belinus, do you doubt of that?
If all the men at arms of Africa,
Of Asia likewise, will sufficient be,
To press the pomp of that usurping mate:
Assure thy self, thy kingdom shall be thine,
If Mahomet say I unto the same:
For were I sure to vanquish all our foes,
And find such spoils in ransacking their Tents,
As never any Keisar did obtain,
Yet would I not set foot forth of this land:
If Mahomet our journey did withstand.

Nor would Belinus for King Croesus trash,
Wish Amurack to displease the Gods;
In pleasuring me in such a ^ling toy.
Then (...) Monarch, if it be thy will,
Get the^ consents, and then the act fulfil.

You counsel well, therefore Belinus haste,
And Claramount go bear him company,
With King Arcastus, to the City walls.
Then bend with speed unto the darksome grove,
Where Mahomet this many a hundred year
Hath prophesied unto our ancestors,
Tell to his Priests, that Amurack your King
Is now selecting all his men at arms,
To set upon that proud Alphonsus troupe.
The cause you know, and can inform him well,
That makes me take these bloody broils in hand:
And say that I desire their sacred God,
That Mahomet which rules all the skies,
To send me word and that most speedely,
Which of us shall obtain the victory.
You Baiazet go post away apace,
To Siria, Scythia, and Albania,
To Babylon, with Mesopotamia,
Asia, Armenia, and all other lands
Which owe their homage to high Amurack.
Charge all their Kings with expedition
To gather up the ch^est men at arms
Which now remain in their dominions,
And on the twenty day of the same month,
To come and wait on Amurack their King,
At his chief City Constantinople.
Tell them moreover, that who so doth fail,
Nought else but death, from prison shall him bail.
What heavenly Music sounds in my ear?
Peace Amurack and hearken to the same.

Now have our charms fulfild our minds full well,
High Amurack is lulled fast a sleep,
And doubt I not, but ere he wakes again,
You shall perceive Medea did not gibe,
When as she put this practise in your mind:
Sit worthy Fausta at thy spouse his feet.
Iphigina, sit thou on the other side:
What ere you see be not aghast thereat,
But bear in mind what Amurack doth chat.
Thou which were wont in Agamemnons days
To utter forth Apolloes Oracles
At sacred Delphos, Calchas I do mean,
I charge thee come, all lingering set aside,
Unless the penance you thereof abide.
I conjure thee by Plutoes loathsome lake,
By all the hags which harbour in the same,
By stinking Styx, and filthy Flegeton,
To come with speed, and truly to fulfil
That which Medea to thee straight shall will.

Thou wretched witch, when wilt thou make an end
Of troubling us with these thy cursed Charms?
What meanst thou thus to call me from my grave?
Shall ne'er my ghost obtain his quiet rest?

Yes Calchas yes, your rest doth now approach
Medea means to trouble thee no more,
When as thou hast fulfild her mind this once.
Go get thee hence to Pluto back again,
And there enquire of the Destinies,
How Amurack shall speed in these his wars:
P^use their books, and mark what is decreed
By Jove himself, and all his fellow Gods:
And when thou know the certainty thereof,
By fleshless visions show it presently
To Amuracke, in pain of penalty.

Forced by thy charm though with unwilling mind:
I hast to hell, the certainty to find.

Now peerless Princes I must needs be gon,
My hast^ buns^esse calls me from this place.
There rests nought, but that you bear in mind,
What Amuracke in this his fit doth say.
For mark what dreaming madam he doth prate:
Assure your self, that that shall be his fate.

Though very loath to let thee so depart,
Farewell Medea, easer of my hart.

What Amurack doest thou begin to nod?
Is this the care that thou hast of thy wars?
As when thou should be prancing of thy steed,
To egg thy soldiers forward in thy wars:
Thou sit moping by the fire side?
See where thy Viceroies grovel on the ground.
Look where Belinus breaths forth his ghost.
Behold by millions how thy men do fall
Before Alphonsus like to silly sheep.
And can thou stand still lazing in this sort?
No proud Alphonsus, Amurack doth fly
To quail thy courage, and that speedily.
And doest thou think thou proud injurious God,
Mahound I mean since thy vain prophesies
Led Amurack into this doleful case,
To have his Princely feet in irons clapped,
Which erst the proudest kings were fo^st to kiss,
That thou shalt escape vnpunisht for the same?
No no, as soon as by the help of Jove,
I escape this bondage, down go all thy groves.
Thy alters tumble round about the streets.
And whereas erst we sacrifisde to thee:
Now all the Turks thy mortal foes shall be.
Behold the Gem and Jewel of mine age,
See where she comes, whose heavenly majesty
Doth far surpass the brave and gorgeous pace
Which Cytherea daughter unto Jove,
Did put in ur when as she had obtained
The golden Apple at the shepherds hands.
See worth^ Fausta where Alphonsus stands,
Whose valiant courage could not daunted be,
Brid'ed my thoughts, and pressed down my rage,
In recompense of which my good intent,
I h^ue received this woeful bamshment.
Wo^l said I? nay happy I did mean,
If that be happy, which doth set one free:
For by this means, I do not doubt ere long,
But Fausta shall with ease, revenge her wrong.
Come daughter come, my mind fore^lleth me:
That Amuracke shall soon requited be.

Fausta, what means this sudden flight of yours?
Why do you leave your husbands princely Court,
And all alone pass through these thickest groves,
More fit to harbour brutish savage beasts,
Then to receive so high a Queen as you?
Although your credit would not stay your steps,
From bending them into these daikish dens,
Yet should the danger which is imminent,
To every one which passes by these paths,
Keep you at home with fay^e Iphigina.
What fool^h toy hath tickled you to this?
I greatly fear some hap hath hit amiss.

No toy Medea, tickl^d Faustaes head,
Nor foolish fancy led me to these grou^s,
But ^nest business eggs my tre^'ing steps,
To pass all dangers what so ere they be.
I banished am Medea, I which erst
Was Empress over all the triple world,
Am banished now from palace and from pomp,
But if the gods be fauou^ers to me,
Ere twenty days, I will revenged be.

I thought as much, when first from thickest leaves,
I saw you trudging in such posting pace.
But to the purpose, what may be the cause,
Of this strnnge and sudden banishment?

The cause ask you, a simple cause god wo^:
Twas neither treason, nor yet felony,
But for because I blamed his foolishnes.

I hear you say so, but I greatly fear,
Ere that your tale be brought unto an end,
You'll prove your self the author of the same:
But pray be brief, what folly did your spouse?
And how will you revenge your wrong on him?

What folly quoth you? such as never yet
Was heard or seen, since Phoebus first began shine,
You know how he was gathering in all haste,
His men at arms, to set upon the troupe
Of proud Alphonsus, yea you well do know,
How you and I did do the best we could,
To make him show us in his drowsy dream,
What afterward should happen in his wars:
Much talk he had, which now I have forgot.
But at the length, this surely was decreed,
How that Alphonsus and Iphigina
Should be conioynd in Iunoes sacred rites,
Which when I heard, as one that did despise,
That such a traitor should be son to me,
I did rebuke my husband Amuracke.
And since my words could take no better place,
My sword with help of all Amazons,
Shall make him soon repent his foolishnes.

This is the cause then of your banishment,
And now you go unto Amazone,
To gather all your may dens in array,
To set upon the migh^ie Amuracke?
Oh foolish Queen, what meant you by this talk?
Those pra^ing speeches have undone you all.
Do you disdain to have that migh^ie Prince,
I mean Alphonsus, counted for your son?
I tell you Fausta, he is borne to be,
The ruler of a mighty Monarchy:
I must confess the powers of Amuracke
Be great, his confines stretch both far and near,
Yet are they not the third part of the lands,
Which shall be ruled by Alphonsus hands,
And yet you deign to call him son in law:
But when you see his sharpe and cutting sword
Piercing the heart of this your gallant girl,
You'll curse the hour wherein you did denay,
To join Alphonsus with Iphigina.

The gods forbid, that ere it happen so.

Nay never pray, for it must happen so.

And is there then no remedy for it?

No none but one, that you have forsworn,

As though an oath can bridle so my mind,
As that I d^re not break a thousand oaths,
For to eschew the danger imminent.
Speak good Medea, tell that way to me,
And I will do it, what so ere it be.

Then as already you have well decreed,
Pack to your country, and in readiness,
Select the army of Amazons,
When you have done, march with your female troupe
To Naples Town, to succour Amuracke,
And so by marriage of Iphigina,
You soon shall drive the danger clean away.

So shall we soon eschew Caribdis lake,
And headlong fall to Syllaes greedy gulf,
I vowed before, and now do vow again:
Before I wed Alphonsus, I'll be slain.

In vain it is, to strive against the stream,
Fates must be followed, and the gods decree
Must needs take place in every kind of cause.
Therefore fair maid, bridle these brutish thoughts,
And learn to follow what the fates assign,
When Saturne heard that Iuppiter his son
Should drive him headlong from his heavenly seat,
Down to the bottom of the dark Auarne,
He did command his mother presently,
To do to death, the young and guiltless child:
But what of that, the mother ^oathd in heart,
For to commit so vile a massacre.
Yea Jove did live, and as the fates did say,
From heavenly seat, drove Saturne clean away.
What did avail the Castle all of Steel,
The which Acrisius caused to be made,
To keep his daughter Danae clogged in?
She was with child for all her Castles force,
And by that child, Acrisius her sire,
Was after slain, so did the fates require.
A thousand examples, I could bring hereof.
But Marble stones needs no colouring,
And that which every one doth know for truth,
Needs no examples to confirm the same.
That which the fates appoint must happen so,
Though heavenly Jove, and all the Gods say no.

Iphigina, she saith nought but truth,
Fates must be followed in their just decrees:
And therefore setting all delays aside,
Come let us wend unto Amazone,
And gather up our forces out of hand.

Since Fausta wills, and fates do so command,
Iphigina will never it withstand.

THus have you seen, how Amuracke himself,
Fausta his wife, and every other King,
Which holds their seepters at the Turk his hands,
Are now in arms, intending to destroy
And bring to nought, the Prince of Aragon.
Charms have been used by wise Medeas art,
To know before what afterward shall hap,
And King Belinus with high Claramount,
Joined to Alphonsus, which with Princely pomp,
Doth rule and govern all the warlike Moors,
Are sent as Legates to god Mahomet,
To know his counsel in these high affairs.
Mahound proupk^ by Amurackes discourse,
Which as you heard, he in his dream did use,
Denies to play the Prophet any more,
But by the long in^atie of his Priests,
He prophesies in such a crafty sort,
As that the hearers needs must laugh for sport.
Yet poor Belinus with his fellow Kings,
Did give such credence to that forged tale,
As that they lost their dearest lives thereby,
And Amuracke became a prisoner
Unto Alphonsus, as straight shall appear.
My fellow Priests of Mahounds holy house,
What can you judge of these strange miracles,
Which daily happen in this sacred seat?
Hark what a rumbling ratleth in our cares.
See flakes of fire proceeding from the mouth
Of Mahomet that God of peerless power.
Nor can I tell with all the wit I have,
What Mahomet by these his signs doth crave.

Thrice ten times Phoebus with his golden beams,
Hath compassed the circle of the sky,
Thrice ten times Ceres, hath her workmen hired,
And filled her barnes with frutefull crops of corn,
Since first in Priesthood I did lead my life:
Yet in this time I never heard before,
Such fearful sounds, nor saw such wondrous sights,
Nor can I tell, with all the wit I have,
What Mahomet by these his signs doth crave.

You cannot tell, nor will you seek to know,
Oh perverse Priest, how careless are you waxed?
As when my foes approach unto my gates,
You stand still talking of I cannot tell:
Go pack you hence, and meet the Turkish kings,
Which now are drawing to my Temple ward:
Tell them from me, God Mahomet is disposed
To prophecy no more to Amuracke,
Since that his tongue is waxen now so free,
As that it needs-must chat and rail at me.

Oh Mahomet, if all the solemn prayers
Which from our childhood we have offered th^,
Can make thee call this sentence back again,
Bring not thy Priest into this dangerous state:
For when the Turk doth hear of this repulse,
We shall be sure to die the death therefore.

Thou say truth, go call the Princes in,
I'll prophecy unto them for this once,
But in such wise, as they shall neither boast,
Nor you be hurt in any kind of wise.

You Kings of Turkie, Mahomet our God,
By sacred science, having notice that
You were sent Legates from high Amuracke,
Unto this place, commanded us his Priests,
That we should cause you make as mickle speed,
As well you might, to hear for certainty,
Of that shall happen to your King and ye.

For that intent we came into this place,
And since that, the mighty Mahomet
Is now at leisure for to tell the same,
Let us make haste and take time while we may:
For mickle danger happens through delay.

Truth worthy king, and therefore you your self,
With your companions, kneel before this place,
And listen well what Mahomet doth say.

As you do will, we ^oyntly will obey.

Princes of Turkie, and Ambassadors
Of Amuracke, to mighty Mahomet,
I needs must muse, that you which e^st have been
The readiest soldiers of the triple world,
Are now become so slack in your affairs,
As when you should with bloody blade in hand,
Be hacking he mes in thickest of your foes,
You stand still loitering in the Turkish soil.
What know you not, how that it is decreed,
By all the gods, and chiefly by my selfe^
That you with triumph should all Crowned be:
Make haste Kings, least when the fates do see,
How carlesly you do neglect their words,
They call a Counsel, and force Mahomet
Against his will some other thing to set.
Send Fabius back to Amuracke again,
To haste him forwards in his enterprise:
And march you on with all the troupes you have,
To Naples ward, to conquer Aragon.
For if you stay, both you and all your men,
Must needs be sent down straight to Lymbo den.

Muse not brave kings at Mahomets discourse,
For mark what he forth of that mouth doth say,
Assure your self it needs must happen so.
Therefore make hast, go mount you on your steeds,
And set upon Alphonsus presently.
So shall you reap great honour for your pain:
And escape the scourge, which else the Fates ordain.

Then proud Alphonsus, look thou to thy Crown,
Belinus comes in glittering armour clad,
All ready pressed for to revenge the wrong
Which not long since, you offred unto him.
And since we have God Mahound on our side:
The victory must needs to us betide.

Worthy Belinus, set such threats away,
And let us haste as fast as horse can trot,
To set upon presumptuous Aragon.
You Fabius, hast as Mahound did command,
To Amuracke, with all the speed you may.

With willing mind I hasten on my way.

And thinking long till that we be in fight,
Belinus hastes to quail Alphonsus might.

No sooner had God P^bus brightsome beams
Both Millaine land, and all the parts thereof.

Why then I doubt not but you can resolve
Me of a question that I shall demand.

I that I can, what ever that it be.

Then to be brief, not twenty winters past
When these my limbs which withered are with age,
Were in the prime and spring of all their youth,
I still desirous as voong gallants be,
To see the fashions of Arabia,
My native soil, and in this pilgrims weed,
Began to travel through vnkenned lands,
Much ground I past, and many soils I saw,
But when my feet in Millain land I set,
Such sumptuous triumphs daily there I saw,
As never in my life I found the like.
I pray good sir, what might the occasion be:
That made the Millains make such mirth and glee?

This solemn joy whereof you now do speak,
Was not solemnised my friend in vain.
For at that time there came into the land,
The happiest tidings that they ere did hear.
For news was brought upon that solemn day,
Unto our Court, that Ferdinandus proud
Was slain himself, Carinus and his son
Were banished both for ever from Aragon:
And for these happy news that joy was made.

But what I pray did afterward become,
Of old Carinus with his banished son?
What hear you nothing of them all this while?

Yes too too much, the Millain Duke may say.
Alphonsus first by secret means did get
To be a soldier in Belinus wars:
Wherein he did behave himself so well,
As that he got the Crown of Aragon.
Which being got, he dispossessed also,
The King Belinus which had fostered him:
As for Carinus he is dead and gone,
I would his son were his companion.

A blister build upon that traitors tongue,
But for thy friendship which thou showed me,
Take that of me, I frankly give it thee.
Now will I haste to Naples with all speed,
To see if Fortune will so favour me,
To view Alphonsus in his happy state.

Fabius come hither, what is that thou say?
What did god Mahound prophecy to us?
Why do our Viceroys wend unto the wars,
Before their king had notice of the same?
What do they think to play bob fool with me?
Or are they waxed so frolic now of late,
Since that they had the leading of our bands,
As that they think that mighty Amuracke
Dares do no other then to soothe them up?
Why speak thou not? what fond or frantic fit
Did make those careless Kings to venture it?

Pardon dear Lord, no frantic fit at all,
No frolic vain, nor no presumptuous mind,
Did make your Viceroies take these wars in hand.
But forced they were by Mahounds prophecy,
To do the same, or else resolve to die.

So sir, I hear you, but can scare believe
That Mahomet would charge them go before
Against Alphonsus with so small a troupe,
Whose number far exceeds king Xerxe^ troupe,

Yes Noble Lord, and more then that he said,
That ere that you with these your warlike men,
Should come to bring your succour to the field:
Belinus, Claramount, and Arcastus too,
Should al be crowned with crowns of beaten gold,
And bo^ne with triumphs round about their tets.

With triumph man, did Mahound tell them so^
Provost go carry Fabius presently,
Unto the Marshalsie, there let him rest,
Clapped sure and safe in fetters all of steel,
Till Amuracke discharge him from the same.
For be he sure, unless it happen so
As he did say, Mahound did prophecy,
By this my hand, forthwith the slave shall die.

Stay Provost stay, let Fabius alone,
More fitteth now, that every lusty lad
Be buckling on his helmet, then to stand
In carrying soldiers to the Marshalsie.

Why what art thou,
That dare once presume,
For to gainsay that Amuracke did bid?

I am my Lord,
The wretcheds man alive:
Borne underneath the Planet of mishap:
Erewhile, a soldier of Belinus band
But now.

What now?

The mirror of mishap:
Whose Captain is slain, and all his army dead:
Only excepted me unhappy wretch.

What news is this, and is Belinus Slain?
Is this the Crown which Mahomet did say,
He should with triumph wear upon his head?
Is this the honour which that cursed god
Did prophecy, should happen to them all?
Oh Dadalus, and were thou now alive,
To fasten wings upon high Amuracke,
Mahound should know, and that for certainty,
That turkish Kings can brooke no injury.

Tush tush my Lord,
I wonder what you mean,
Thus to exclaim against high Mahomet:
I'll lay my life, that ere this day be past,
You shall perceive, his tidings all be waste.

We shall perceive, accursed Fabius,
Suffice it not that thou hast been the man,
That first did beat those bables in my brain,
But that to help me forward in my grief,
Thou seek to confirm so foul a lie.
Go get thee hence, and tell thy traitorous King
What gift you had, which did such tidings bring.
And now my Lords, since nothing else will serve,
Buckle your helmes, clap on your steeled coats,
Mount on your steeds, take Lances in your hands,
For Amuracke doth mean this very day,
Proud Mahomet with weapons to assay.

Mercy high Monarch, tis no time now
To spend the day in such vain threatenings,
Against our god, the mighty Mahomet:
More fitteth thee to place thy men at arms
In battle ray, for to withstand your foes,
Which now are drawing towards you with speed.
Hark how their drums with dub a dub do come,
To arms high Lord, and set these trifles by:
That you may set upon them valiantly.

And do they come you kings of Turkie?
Now is the time, in which your warlike arms
Must raise your names above the starry skies:
Call to your mind your predecessors acts,
Whose martial might, this many a hundred year,
Did keep those fearful dogs in dread and awe,
And let your weapons show Alphonsus plain,
That though that they be clapped up in clay,
Yet there be branches sprung up from those trees,
In Turkish land, which brooke no injuries.
Besides the same, remember with your selves,
What foes we have, not mighty Tamberlaine,
Nor soldiers trained up amongst the wars,
But fearful bodies, picked from their rural flock,
Which till this time were wholly ignorant
What weapons meant, or bloody Mars doth crave.
More would I say, but horses that be free,
Do need no spur^ and soldiers which themselves
Long and desire to buckle with the foe,
Do need no words to egg them to the same.
Besides the same, behold whereas our foes
Are marching towards us most speedily.
Courage my Lords, ours is the victory.

Thou Pagan dog how dare thou be so bold
To set thy foot within Alphonsus land?
What art thou come to view thy wretched kings,
Whose traitorous heads bedecked my tents so well?
Or else thou hearing that on top thereof,
There is a place left vacant, art thou come
To have thy head possess the highest seat?
If it be so, lie down, and this my sword
Shall presently that honour thee affoord.
If not, pack hence, or by the heavens I vow,
Both thou and thine shall very soon perceive,
That he that seeks to move my patience,
Must yield his life to thee for recompense.

Why proud Alphonsus, think thou Amurack
Whose mighty force doth terrefie the Gods,
Can ere be found to turn his heals and fly
Away for fear, from such a boy as thou?
No no, although that Mars this mickle while
Hath fortified thy weak and feeble arm,
And Fortune oft hath viewed with friendly face,
Thy armies marching victors from the field,
Yet at the presence of high Amuracke,
Fortune shall change, and Mars that God of might
Shall succour me, and leave Alphonsus quite.

Pagan I say, thou greatly art deceived,
I clap up Fortune in a cage of gold,
To make her turn her wheel as I think best.
And as for Mars whom you do say will change,
He moping sits behind the kitchen door,
Pressed at command of every Skullians mouth^
Who dares not stir, nor once to move a whit
For fear Alphonsus then should stomach it.

Blasphemous dog, I wonder that the earth
Doth cease from renting underneath thy feet,
What froward fortune happened on your side:
I hope your king in safety doth abide?

I noble madam, Amurack doth live:
And long I hope he shall enjoy his life.
But yet I fear, unless more succour come,
We shall both loose our king and sovereign.

How so king Crocon, dost thou speak in jest?
To prove if Fausta would lament his death?
Or else hath any thing hapt him amiss?
Speak quickly Crocon what the cause might be,
That thou dost utter forth these words to me?

Then worthy Fausta know, that Amuracke
Our mighty king, and your approved spouse,
Pricked with desire of everlasting fame,
As he was pressing in the thickest ranks
Of Aragonians, was with much ado
At length took prisoner, by Alphonsus hands.
So that unless you succour soon do bring,
You loose your spouse, and we shall want our king.

Oh hapless hap, oh dire and cruel fate!
What injury hath Amuracke my sire
Done to the Gods, which now I know are wrath?
Although unjustly and without a cause.
For well I wot, not any other king
Which now doth live, or since the world begun
Did sway a sceptre, had a greater care
To please the Gods, then mighty Amuracke.
And for to quite our fathers great good will,
Seek they thu^ basely all his fame to spill.

Iphigina, leave off these woeful tunes,
It is not words can cure and ease this wound:
But warlike swords, not tears, but sturdy spears:
High Amuracke is prisoner to our foes.
What then? think you that our Amazons
Joined with the forces of the Turkish troupe,
Are not sufficient for to set him free?
Yes daughter yes, I mean not for to sleep,
Until he is free, or we him company keep.
March on my mates.

How now Alphonsus, you which never yet
Could meet your equal in the feats of arms,
How haps it now that in such sudden sort
You fly the presence of a silly maid?
What have you found mine arm of such a force,
As that you think your body ouerweake
For to withstand the fury of my blows?
Or do you else disdain to fight with me:
For staining of your high nobility?

No dainty dame, I wold not have thee think
That ever thou or any other wight,
Shall live to see Alphnosus fly the field
From any king or Keisar who some ere,
First will I die in thickest of my fo,
Before I will disbase mine honour so.
Nor do I scorn thou gods for to stain
My prowes with thee, although it be a shame
For knights to combat with the female sect.
But love sweet mouse hath so benumbd my wit,
That though I would, I must refrain from it.

I thought as much when first I came to wars,
Your noble acts were fitter to be writ
Within the Tables of dame Venus sun,
Then in God Mars his warlike registers.
When as your Lords are hacking helm es abroad,
And make their spears to shiver in the air,
Your mind is busied in fond Cupids toys.
Come on I faith, i'll teach you for to know
We came to fight, and not to love I trow.

Nay virgin stay, and if thou wilt vouchsafe
To entertain Alphonsus simple suit,
Thou shalt ere long be Monarch of the world:
All christened kings, with all your Pagan dogs
Shall bend their knees unto Iphigina.
The Indian soil shall be thine at command,
Where every step thou set on the ground,
Shall be received on the golden mines.
Rich Pactolus that river of account,
Which doth descend from top of Tiuole mount,
Shall be thine own, and all the world beside:
If you will grant to be Alphonsus bride.

Alphonsus bride? nay villain do not think
That fame or riches can so rule my thoughts,
As for to make me love and fancy him
Whom I do hate, and in such sort despise,
As if my death could bring to pass his bain:
I would not long from Plutoes port remain.

Nay then proud peacock since thou art so stou^,
As that entreaty will not move thy mind
For to consent to be my wedded spouse,
Thou shalt in spite of Gods and Fortune too,
Serve high. Alphonsus as a concubine.

I'll rather die then ever that shall hap.

And thou shalt die unless it come to pas.

Nay Amurack this is no time to jar,
Although thy wife did in her frantic mood
Use speeches which might better have been spared,
Yet do thou not judge the same time to be
A season to requite that injury:
More fitteth thee with all the wit thou hast,
To call to mind which way thou may release
Thy self, thy wife, and fair Iphigina,
Forth of the power of stout Alphonsus hands.
For well I wot, since first you breathed breath,
You never were so nie the snares of death.
Now Amurack, ^our high and kingly seat,
Your ro^all sceptre, and your stately Crown,
Your mighty Country, and your men at arms,
Be conquered all, and can no succour bring.
Put then no trust in these same paltry toys:
But call to mind that thou a prisoner art:
Clapped up in chains, whose life and deaths depends
Upon the hands of thy most mortal foe.
Then take thou heed that what some ere he say,
Thou doest not once presume for to gainsay.

Away you fool, think you your cursed-charmes
Can bridle so the mind of Amuracke,
As that he will stand croaching to his foe?
No no, be sure that if that beggars brat
Do dare but once to contrary my will,
I'll make him soon in heart for to repent,
That ere such words against Amuracke he spent.

Then since thou dost disdain my good advise,
Look to thy self, and if you fare amiss
Remember that Medea counsel gave,
Which might you safe from all those perils save.
But Fausta you, as well you have begun,
Beware you follow still your friends advise.
If that Alphonsus do desire of thee
To have your daughter for his wedded spouse,
Beware you do not once the same gainsay:
Unless with death he do your rashness pay.

No worthy wight, first Fausta means to die,
Before Alphonsus she will contrary.

Why then farewell, but you Iphigina,
Beware you do not ouersqueamish wax,
When as your mother gives her consent.

The Gods forbid that ere I should gainsay
That which Medea bids me to obey.

Now Amurack the proud blasphemous dogs
(For so ^ou termed us) which did brawl and rail
Against God Mars, and fickle Fortunes wheel,
Have got the gole for all your solemn prayers:
Your self are prisoner, which as then did think
That all the forces of the triple world,
Were insufficient to fulfil the same.
How like you this? is Fortune of such might,
Or hath God Mars such force or power divine,
As that he can with all the power he hath,
Set thee and thine forth of Alphonsus hands?
I do not think but that your hopes so small,
As that you would with very willing mind,
Yield for my spouse the fair Iphigina,
On that condition, that without delay,
Fausta and you may scotfree escape away.

What think thou vilain that high Amurack
Bears such a mind, as for the fear of death,
Heel yield his daughter, yea his only joy,
Into the hands of such a dunghill Knight?
No traitor no, for as now I lie
Clapped up in Irons, and with bolts of steel:
Yet do there lurk within the Turkish soil,
Such troupes of soldiers, that with small ado,
Theile set me scotfree from your men and you.

Villain say thou, traitor dunghill knight,
Now by the heavens, since that thou dost deny,
For to fulfil that which in gentle wise
Alphonsus craves, both thou and all thy train
Shall with your lives requite that injury.
Albinius lay hold of Amuracke,
And carry him to prison presently,
There to remain until I do return
Into my tent, for by high Jove I vow,
Unless he wax more calmer out of hand,
His head amongst his fellow Kings shall stand.

No villain, think not that the fear of death
Shall make me calmer while I draw my breath.

Now Laelius, take you Iphigina,
Her mother Fausta, with these other Kings,
And put them into prisons severally:
For Amuracks stout stomach shall undo,
Both he himself and all his other crew.

Oh sacred Prince, if that the salt-brine tears,
Distilling down poor Faustas withered cheeks,

What ne'er a word Alphonsus, art thou dumb?
O^ d^th my presence so perturb thy mind,
That for because I come in Pilgrims weed,
You think each word which you do spend to me
A great disgrace unto your name to be?
Why speak thou not? if that my place you crave,
I will be gone and you my place shall have.

Nay father stay, the Gods of heaven forbid,
That ere Alphonsus should desire or wish
To have his absence whom he doth account
To be the Loadstone of his life.
What though the fates and fortune both in one,
Have been content to call your loving son,
From beggars state, unto this princely seat,
Should I therefore disdain my aged sire?
No first both Crown and life I will detest,
Before such venom breed within my breast.
What erst I did, the sudden joy I took,
To see Carinus in such happy state,
Did make me do, and nothing else at all,
High Jove himself do I to witness call.

These words are vain, I knew as much before:
But yet Alphonsus I must wonder needs,
That you whose years are prove to Cupids snares,
Can suffer such a Gods as this dame,
Thus for to shed such store of Crystal tears.
Believe me son, although my years be spent,
Her sighs and sobs in twain my heart do rent.

Like power dear father had she over me,
Until for love, I looking to receive
Love back again, not only was denied,
But also taunted in most spiteful sort:
Which made me loathe that which I erst did love,
As she her self, with all her friends shall prove.

How now Alphonsus, you which have so log
Been trained up in bloody broils of Mars,
What know you not, that Castles are not won
At first assault, and women are not wooed
When first their suitors profer love to them:
As for my part, I should account that maid
A wanton wench, inconstant lewd and light,
That yields the field, before she venture fight.
Especially unto her mortal foe,
As you were then unto Iphigina.
But for because I see you fitter are
To enter Lists and combat with your foes,
Then court fair Ladies in God Cupids tents,
Carinus means, your spokesman for to be,
And if that she consent, you shall agree.

What you command,
Alphonsus must not fly:
Though otherwise perhaps he would deny.

Then dainty damsel stint these trickling tears,
Cease sighs and sobs, yea make a merry cheer,
Your pardon is already purchased:
So that you be not over curious
In granting to Alphonsus just demand.

Thanks mighty Prince, no curioser i'll be,
Then doth become a maid of my degree.

The Gods forbid that ere Carinus tongue
Should go about to make a maid consent
Unto the thing which modesty denies:
That which I ask, is neither hurt to thee,
Danger to parents, nor disgrace to friends,
But good and honest, and will profit bring,
To thee and those which lean unto that thing.
And that is this, since first Alphonsus eyes,
Did hap to glance upon your heavenly hew,
And saw the rare perfection of the same,
He hath desired to become your spouse.
Now if you will unto the same agree,
I dare assure you, that you shall be free.

Pardon dear Lord, the world goes very hard,
When women kind are forced for to woo,
If that your son had loved me so well,
Why did he not inform me of the same?

Why did he not? what have you clean forgot
What ample proffers he did make to you,
When hand to hand he did encounter you?

No worthy sir, I have not it forgot,
But Cupid cannot enter in the breast,
Where Mars before had took possession:
That was no time to talk of Venus games,
When all our fellows were pressed in the wars.

Well, let that pass, now can thou be content
To love Alphonsus, and become his spouse?

I if the high Alphonsus could vouchsafe
To entertain me as his wedded spouse.

If that he could? what dost thou doubt of that
Iason did jet when as he had obtained,
The golden fleece by wise Medeas art,
The Greekes rejoiced when they had subdued
The famous bulwarks of most stately Troy,
But all their mirth was nothing in respect
Of this my joy, since that I now have got,
That which I long desired in my heart.

But what says Fausta to her daughters choice?

Fausta doth say, the Gods have bin her friends
To let her live to see Iphigina
Bestowed so unto her hearts content.

Thanks mighty Empress for your gentleness,
And if Alphonsus can at any time
With all his power requite this courtesy,
You shall perceive how kindly he doth take
Your forwardness in this his happy chance.

Albinius go call forth Amuracke,
We'll see what he doth say unto this match.
Most mighty Turk, I with my warlike son
Alphonsus, loathing that so great a Prince
As you should live in such unseemly sort,
Have sent for you to profer life or death:
Life, if you do consent to our demand,
And death if that you dare gainsay the same,
Your wife, high Fausta, with Iphigina,
Have given consent that this my warlike son
Should have your daughter for his bedfellow,
Now rests nought but that you do agree,
And so to purchase sure tranquillity.

Now Amu^ack advise thee what thou say,
Bethink thee well what answer thou wilt make:
Thy life and death depends on thy words,
If thou deny to be Alphonsus sire,
Death is thy share: but if that thou consent,
Thy life is saved, consent? nay rather die.
Should I consent to give Iphigina
Into the hands of such a beggars brat?
What Amuracke thou dost deceive thy self,
Alphonsus is the son unto a King:
What then? the worthy of thy daughters love
She is agreed, and Fausta is content:
Then Amuracke will not be discontent.
Here brave Alphonsus, take thou at my hand,
Iphigina, I give her unto thee:
And for her dowry, when her father die,
Thou shalt possess the Turkish Empery.
Take her I say, and live King Nestors years,
So would the Tu^ke and all his Noble Peers.

Immo^tall thanks I give unto your grace.

Now worthy Princes, since by help of Jove
On either side the wedding is decreed,
Come let us wend to Naples speedily,
For to solemnize it with mirth and glee.

As you do will, we jointly do agree.

Now worthy Muses with unwilling mind,
Venus is forced to trudge to heavens again:
For luppiter that God of peerless power,
Proclaimed hath a solemn festival,
In honour of dame Danaes luckless death:
Unto the which, in pain of his displeasure
He hath invited all the immortal Gods
And Goddesses, so that I must be there,
Unless I will his high displeasure bear:
You see Alphonsus hath with much ado,
At length obtained fair Iphigina
Of Amuracke her father, for his wife.
Who now are going to the Temple wards,
For to perfo^me dame Iunoes sacred rites,
Whe^e we will leave them till the feast be done:
Which in the heavens by this time is begun,
Mean time dear Muses, wander you not farr^
Forth of the path of high Pernassus hill:
That when I come to finish up his life,
You may be ready for to succour me.
Adieu dear dames, farewell Calltope.

A dieu you sacred Gods of the sky.
Well loving sisters, since that she is gone,
Come let us haste unto Pernassus hill,
As Citherea did lately will.

Then make you haste her mind for to fulfil.


