WHY looks my Lord like to a troubled sky,
When heavens bright shine, is shadowed with a fog:
Alate we ran the Dear and through the Iawnds
Stripped with our Nagges the lofty frolic Bucks,
That scudded fore the teisers like the wind,
Ne'er was the Dear of merry Fresingfield,
So lustily pulled down by jolly mates,
Nor shard the Farmers such fat venizon,
So frankly dealt this hundred years before:
Nor have I seen my Lord more frolic in the chase,
And now changed to a melancholy dump.

After the Prince got to the Keepers lodge
And had bin incond in the house a while:
Tossing of Ale and milk in country cannes,
Whether it was the Countries sweet content,
Or else the bonny Damsel filled us drink
That seemed so stately in her stammel red:
Or that a qualm did cross his stomach then,
But straight he fell into his passions.

Sir Raphe, what say you to your master,
Shall he thus all amort live malecontent?

Hear thou Ned? nay look if he will speak to me.

What say thou to me, Fool?

I pree thee tell me Ned, art thou in love with the Keepers daughter?


How if I be, what then?

Why then sir, I'll teach thee how to deceive Love.

How Raphe.

Marry sir Ned, thou shalt put on my cap, and my coat, and my dagger, and I
will put on thy clothes, and thy sword, and so thou shalt be my fool.


And what of this?

Why so thou shalt beguile Love, for Love is such a proud scab, that he will
never meddle with fools nor children. Is not Raphes counsel good, Ned.


Tell me Ned Lacie, did thou mark the maid,
How lively in her country weeds she looked?
A bonier wench all Suffolke cannot yield,
All Suffolke, nay all England holds none such.

Sir, Will Ermsby, Ned is deceived.

Why Raphe?

He says all England hath no such, and I say, and I'll stand to it, there is
one better in Warwickeshire.


How proves thou that Raphe?

Why is the Abbot a learned man, and hath he read many books, and think
thou he hath not more learning then thou to choose a bonny wench, yes warrant I
thee by his whole Grammar.


A good reason Raphe.

I tell thee Lacie, that her sparkling eyes
Do lighten forth sweet Loves alluring fire:
And in her tresses she doth fold the looks
Of such a gaze upon her golden hair,
Her bashful white mixed with the mornings red,
Luna doth boast upon her lovely cheeks,
Her front is beauties table wherr she paints
The glories of her gorgeous excellence:
Her teeth are shelves of precious Margarites,
Richly enclosed with ruddy curroll cleues.
Tush Lacie, she is beauties overmatch,
If thou suruaist her curious imagery.

I grant (my Lord) the Damsel is as fair,
As simple Suffolks homely towns can yield:
But in the Court be qainter Dames then she,
Whose faces are enriched with honours taint,
Whose beauties stand upon the stage of fame,
And vaunt their trophies in the Court of Love.

Ah Ned, but had thou watched her as my self,
And seen the secret beauties of the maid,
Their courtly coinesse were but foolery.

Why how watched you her my Lord?

When as she swept like Venus through the house,
And in her shape fast folded up my thoughts:
Into the Milk chose went I with the maid,
And there amongst the cream-boles she did shine,
As Pallas, amongst her Princely housewifery:
She turned her smock over her lilly arms,
And dived them into milk to run her cheese:
But whiter then the milk her crystal skin,
Checked with lines of Azure made her blush,
That Art or Nature durst bring for compare,
Ermsby if thou had seen as I did note it well,
How beauty plaid the huswife, how this girl
Like Lucrece laid her fingers to the work,
Thou would with Tarquine hazard Rome and all
To win the lovely maid of Fresingfield.

Sir Ned, would fain have her?

I Raphe.

Why Ned I have laid the plot in my head, thou shalt have her already.


I'll give thee a new coat and learn me that.

Why sir Ned, weell ride to Oxford to Fryer Bacon, oh he is a brave scholar
sir, they say he is a brave Necromancer, that he can make women of devils,
and he can juggle cats into Costermongers.


And how then Raphe?

Mary sir, thou shalt go to him, and because thy father Harry shall not
miss thee, he shall turn me to thee; and I'll to the Court, and I'll Prince it
out, and he shall make thee either a silken purse, full of gold, or else a fine
wrought smock.


But how shall I have the maid?

Marry sir, if thou be a silken purse full of gold, then on Sundays
she'll hang thee by her side, and you must not say a word. Now sir when she
comes into a great press of people, for fear of the Cut-purse on a sudden
she'll swap thee into her plackerd, then sir being there, you may plead for
your self.


Excellent policy.

But how if I be a wrought smock?

Then she'll put thee into her chest and lay thee into Lavender, and upon some
good day she'll put thee on, and at night when you go to bed, then being
turned from a smock to a man, you may make up the match.


Wonderfully wisely counselled, Raphe.

Raphe shall have a new Coat.

God thank you when I have it on my back, Ned.

Lacie the fool hath laid a perfect plot,
For why our Country Margret is so coy,
And stands so much upon her honest points,
That marriage or no market with the maid:
Ermsby, it must be nigromanticke spells,
And charms of Art that must enchain her love,
Or else shall Edward never win the girl,
Therefore my wags we will horse us in the morn,
And post to Oxford to this jolly Fryer,
Bacon shall by his magic do this deed.

Content my Lord, and that's a speedy way
To wean these head-strong puppies from the teat.

I am unknown, not taken for the Prince,
They only deem us frolic Courtiers,
That revel thus among our Lieges game:
Therefore I have devised a policy,
Lacie, thou know next Friday is St. Iames,
And then the Country flocks to Harlston fair,
Then will the Keepers daughter frolic there,
And ouer-shine the troupe of all the maids,
That come to see, and to be seen that day.
Haunt thee disguised among the Country swains,
Fain you are a Farmers son, not far from thence,
Epsy her loves, and who she likes best:
Coat him, and court her to control the clown,
Say that the Courtier tyred all in green,
That helped her handsomely to run her cheese,
And filled her fathers lodge with venison,
Commends him, and sends fairings to her self,
Buy something worthy of her parentage,
Not worth her beauty, for Lacie, then the Fair
Affords no Jewel sitting for the maid:
And when thou talk of me, note if she blush,
Oh then she loves, but if her cheeks wax pale,
Disdain it is. Lacie, send how she fares,
And spare no time nor cost to win her loves.

I will, my Lord, so execute this charge,
As if that Lacie were in love with her.

Send letters speedily to Oxford of the news.

And sir Lacie, buy me a thousand thousand million of fine bells.


What wilt thou do with them, Raphe?

Mary every time that Ned sighs for the Keepers daughter, I'll tie a bell about
him, so within three or four days I will send word to his father Harry, that
his son and my master Ned is become Loves Morris dance.


Well, Lacie, look with care unto thy charge,
And I will haste to Oxford to the Fryer,
That he by Art, and thou by secret gifts,
May make me Lord of merry Fresingfield.

God send your Honour your hearts desire.

Miles, where are you?

Hic sum doctissime reuerendissime Doctor.

Attulisti nos libros meos de Necromantia.

Ecce quam bonum quam incundum habitare libros in vnum.

Now Masters of our Academic State,
That rule in Oxford Vice-roies in your place,
Whose heads contain Maps of the liberal Arts,
Spending your time in depth of learned skill,
Why flock you thus to Bacons secret Cell,
A Fryer newly stalde in Brazennose,
Say whats your mind, that I may make reply.

Bacon, we hear, that song we have suspect,
That thou art read in Magicks mystery,
In Piromancy, to divine by flames,
To tell by Hadromaticke, ebbes and tides,
By Aeromancy, to discover doubts,
To plain out questions, as Apollo did.

Well Master Burden, what of all this?

Mary sir, he doth but fulfil by rehearsing of these names, the Fable of the
Fox the Grapes, that which is above us, pertains nothing to us.


I tell thee Bacon, Oxford makes report,
Nay England, and the Court of Henry says,
Thart making of a brazen head by Art,
Which shall unfold strange doubts and Aphorisms,
And read a Lecture in Philosophy,
And by the help of Devils and ghastly fiends,
Thou meanst ere many years or days be past,
To compass England with a wall of brass.

And what of this?

What of this, Master? why he doth speak mystically, for he knows if your
skill fail to make a brazen head, yet Mother Waters strong Ale will fit his
turn to make him have a copper nose.


Bacon, we come not grieving at thy skill,
But joying that our Academy yields
A man supposed the wonder of the world,
For if thy cunning work these miracles,
England and Europe shall admire thy fame,
And Oxford shall in characters of brass,
And statues, such as were built up in Rome,
Eternize Fryer Bacon for his Art.

Then gentle Fryer, tell us thy intent.

Seeing you come as friends unto the Fryer,
Resolve you Doctors, Bacon can by books,
Make storming Boreas thunder from his cave,
And dim fair Luna to a dark Eclipse,
The great Arch-ruler, potentate of hell,
Trembles, when Bacon bids him, or his fiends,
Bow to the force of his Pentageron.
What Art can work, the frolic Fryer knows,
And therefore will I turn my Magic books,
And strain out Necromancy to the deep,
I have contrived and framed a head of brass,
(I made Belcephon hammer out the stuff)
And that by Art shall read Philosophy,
And I will strengthen England by my skill,
That if ten Caesars lived and reigned in Rome.
With all the Legions Europe doth contain,
They should not touch a grass of English ground,
The work that Ninus reared at Babylon,
The brazen walls framed by Semiramis,
Carved out like to the portal of the Sun,
Shall not be such as rings the English strond:
From Dover to the market place of Rye.

Is this possible?

I'll bring ye two or three witnesses.

What be those?

Marry sir, three or four as honest Devils, and good companions as any be in
hell.


No doubt but Magic may do much in this,
For he that reads but Mathemoticke rules,
Shall find conclusions, that avail to work
Wonders that pass the common sense of men.

But Bacon roves a bow beyond his reach,
And tells of more then Magic can perform:
Thinking to get a fame by fooleries,
Have I not past as far in state of schools,
And read of many secrets? yet to think.
That heads of brass can utter any voice,
Or more to tell of deep Philosophy,
This is a Fable Aesope had forgot.

Burden, thou wrongst me in detracting thus,
Bacon loves not to stuff himself with lies:
But tell me fore these Doctors if thou date,
Of certain questions I shall move to thee.

I will, ask what thou can.

Mary sir, hee'le straight be on your pick pack to know whether the feminine
or the masculine gender be most worthy.


Were you not yesterday Master Burden at Henly upon Themes?


I was, what then?

What book studied you thereon all night?

I, none at all, I read not there a line.

Then Doctors, Fryer Bacons Art knows nought.

What say you to this, Master Burden, doth he not touch you?


I pass not of his frivolous speeches.

Nay Master Burden, my master ere he hath done with you, will turn you from a
Doctor to a dunce, and shake you so small, that he will leave you no more
learning in you then is in Balams Ass.


Masters, for that learned Burdens skill is deep,
And sore he doubts of Bacons Cabalisme:
I'll show you why he haunts to Henly oft,
Not Doctors for to taste the fragrant air:
But there to spend the night in Al^umy,
To multiply with secret spells of Art.
Thus private steals he learning from us all,
To prove my saying true, I'll show you straight,
The book he keeps at Henly for himself.

Nay, now my master goes to conjuration, take heed.

Masters, stand still, fear not, I'll show you but his book.

Per omnes deos infernales Belcephon.


Oh master cease your conjuration, or you spoil all, for her's a she devil
come with a shoulder of mutton on a spit, you have marde the devils supper, but
no doubt he thinks our College fare is slender, and so hath sent you his
cooke with a shoulder of mutton to make it exceed.


Oh where am I, or whats become of me?

What art thou?

Hostess at Henly, mistress of the Bell.

How came thou here?

As I was in the kitchen amongst the maids,
Spitting the meat against supper for my guess:
A motion moved me to look forth of door,
No sooner had I pried into the yard.
But straight a whirlwind hoisted me from thence,
And mounted me aloft unto the clouds:
As in a trance I thought nor feared nought,
Nor know I where or whither I was taken:
Nor where I am, nor what these persons be.

No, know you not master Burden?

Oh yes good sir, he is my daily guest.
What, master Burden, 'twas but yesternight,
That you and I at Henly plaid at cards.

I know not what we did, a pox of all conjuring Fryers.


Now jolly Fryer tell us, is this the book that Burden is so careful to look
on?


It is, but Burden, tell me now,
Think thou that Bacons Nicromanticke skill
Cannot perform his head and wall of brass,
When he can fetch thine hostess in such post?

I'll warrant you, Master, if Master Burden could conjure as well as you, he
would have his book every night from Henly to study on at Oxford.


Burden, what are you mated by this frolic Fryer?
Look how he droops, his guilty conscience
Drives him to bash and makes his hostess blush.

Well Mistress for I will not have you mist,
You shall to Henly to cheer up your guests
Fore supper gin. Burden, bid her adieu,
Say farewell to your hostess fore she goes,
Sir away, and set her safe at home.

Master Burden, when shall we see you at Henly?

The Devil take thee and Henly too.

Master, shall I make a good motion?

Whats that?

Mary sir, now that my hostess is gone to provide supper, conjure another
spirit, and send Doctor Burden flying after.


Thus Rulers of our Academic State,
You have seen the Fryer frame his Art by proof:
And as the College called Brazen-nose,
Is under him, and the Master there:
So surely shall this head of brass be framed,
And yield forth strange and uncouth Aphorisms:
And Hell and Heccate shall fail the Fryer,
But I will circle England round with brass.

So be it, nunc semper, Amen.

By my troth, Margret, here's a whether is able to make a man call his father
whoreson, if this whether hold, we shall have hay good chape, and butter and
cheese at Harlston will bear no price.


Thomas, maids when they come to see the fair
Count not to make a cope for dearth of hay,
When we have turned our butter to the salt,
And set our cheese upon the rackes.
Then let our fathers prise it as they please,
We Country sluts of merry Fresingfield,
Come to buy needless noughts to make us fine,
And look that young-men should be frank this day,
And court us with such fairings as they can.
Phoebus is blithe and, frolic, looks from heaven,
As when he courted lovely Semele:
Swearing the Peddlers shall have empty packs,
If that fair weather may make chapmen buy.

But lovely Peggy Semele is dead,
And therefore Phoebus from his Palace pries,
And seeing such a sweet and seemly saint,
Shows all his glory for to court your self.

This is a fairing gentle sir indeed,
To sooth me up with such smooth flattery,
But learn of me, your scoffe's to broad before:
Well Ione, our beauties must abide their jests,
We serve the turn in jolly Fresingfield.

Margret, a Farmers daughter for a Farmers son,
I warrant you the meanest of us both,
Shall have a mate to lead us from the Church:
But Thomas, whats the news? what in a dump?
Give me your hand, we are near a Peddlers shop,
Out with your purse, we must have fairings now.

Faith Ione and shall, I'll bestow a fairing on you, and then we will to the
Tavern, and snap off a pint of wine or two.


Whence are you sir, of Suffolke? for your terms are finer then the common
sort of men.


Faith lovely girl, I am of Beckles by,
Your neighbour not above six miles from hence,
A Famers son that never was so quaint,
But that he could do courtesy to such Dames:
But trust me Margret I am sent in charge,
From him that reveled in your fathers house,
And filled his Lodge with cheer and venison,
Tyred in green, he sent you this rich purse:
His token that he helped you run your cheese,
And in the milkehouse chatted with your self.

To me? you forget your self.

Women are often weak in memory.

Oh pardon sir, I call to mind the man,
Twere little manners to refuse his gift,
And yet I hope he sends it not for love:
For we have little leisure to debate of that.

What, Margret, blush not, maids must have their loves.


Nay by the mass she looks pale as if she were angry.


Sir are you of Beckles? I pray how doth goodman Cob? my father bought a
horse of him, I'll tell you Margret, a were good to be a Gentleman's jade, for of
all things the foul hilding could not abide a dung-cart.


How different is this Farmer from the rest,
That carst as yet hath pleased my wandering sight
His words are witty, quickened with a smile,
His courtesy gentle, smelling of the Court,
Facill and debonair in all his deeds,
Proportioned as was Paris, when in gray,
He courted Aenon in the vale by Troy.
Great Lords have come and pleaded for my love,
Who but the Keepers Lass of Fresingfield?
And yet me thinks this Farmers ioylly son,
Passes the proudest that hath pleased mine eye.
But Peg disclose not that thou art in love,
And show as yet no sign of love to him,
Although thou well would wish him for thy love:
Keep that to thee till time doth serve thy turn,
To show the grief wherein they heart doth burn.
Come Ione and Thomas, shall we to the Fair,
You Beckles man will not forsake us now.

Not whilst I may have such quaint girls as you.

Well if you chance to come by Fresingfield,
Make but a stepped into the Keepers Lodge,
And such poor fare as Woodmen can affoord,
Butter and cheese, cream, and fat venizon,
You shall have store, and welcome therewithal.

Gramarcies Peggie, look for me ere long.

Great men of Europe, Monarchs of the West,
Ring'd with the walls of old Oceanus,
Whose lofty surges like the battlements,
That compassed high built Babell in with Towers,
Welcome my Lords, welcome brave western Kings,
To Englands shore, whose promontory cleeues,
Shows Albion is another little world,
Welcome says English Henry to you all,
Chiefly unto the lovely Eleonor,
Who dared for Edwards sake cut through the seas,
And venture as Agenors Damsel through the deep,
To get the love of Henries wanton son.

Englands rich Monarch brave Plantagenet,
The Pyren mounts swelling above the clouds,
That ward the wealthy Castile in with walls,
Could not detain the beauteous Eleanor,
But hearing of the same of Edwards youth,
She dared to brooke Neptunus haughty pride,
And bide the brunt of froward Eolus,
Then may fair England welcome her the more.

After that English Henry by his Lords,
Had sent Prince Edwards lovely counterfeit,
A present to the Castile Elinor,
The comely portrait of so brave a man,
The virtuous fame discoursed of his deeds,
Edwards courageous resolution,
Done at the holy Land fore Damas walls,
Led both mine eye and thoughts in equal links,
To like so of the English Monarchs son,
That I attempted perils for his sake.

Where is the Prince, my Lord?

He posted down, not long since from the Court,
To Suffolke side, to merry Fremingham,
To sport himself amongst my fallow Dear,
From thence by packets sent to Hampton house,
We hear the Prince is ridden with his Lords,
To Oxford in the Academy there,
To hear dispute amongst the learned men:
But we will send forth letters for my son,
To will him come from Oxford to the Court.

Nay rather Henry, let us as we be,
Ride for to visit Oxford with our train,
Fain would I see your Universities,
And what learned men your Academy yields,
From Haspurg have I brought a learned Clerk,
To hold dispute with English Orators.
This Doctor surnam'd Iaques Vandermast,
A Germane borne, past into Padua,
To Florence, and to fair Bolonia,
To Paris, Rheims, and stately Orleans,
And talking there with men of Art, put down
The chiefest of them all in Aphorisms,
In Magic, and the Mathematike rules,
Now let us Henry try him in your Schools.

He shall my Lord, this motion likes me well,
We'll progress straight to Oxford with our trains,
And see what men our Academy brings.
And wonder Vandermast welcome to me,
In Oxford shalt thou find a jolly Fryer,
Called Fryer Bacon, Englands only flower,
Set him but Non-plus in his magic spells,
And make him yield in Mathematicke rules,
And for thy glory I will bind thy brows,
Not with a Poets Garland made of Baize,
But with a Coronet of choicest gold,
Whilst then we sit to Oxford with our troupes,
Lets in and banquet in our English Court.

Where be these vagabond knaves, that they attend no better on their master?


If it please your Honour, we are ready at an inch.


Sir Ned, I'll have no more poste-horse to ride on,

I'll have another fetch.

I pray you how is that, my Lord?


Mary sir, I'll send to the I'll of Eely for four or five dozen of Geese, and
I'll have them tide six and six together with whip-cord. Now upon their backs
will I have a fair field bed, with a Canopy, and so when it is my pleasure,
I'll slay into what place I please; this will be easy.


Your honour hath said well, but shall we to Brazennose College before we pull
off our boots.


Warren, well motioned, we will to the Fryer
Before we revel it within the town.
Raphe, see you keep your countenance like a Prince.

Wherefore have I such a company of cutting knaves to wait upon me, but to
keep defend my countenance against all mine enemies? have you not good swords
and bucklers?


Stay, who comes here?


Some Scholer, and we will ask him where Fryer Bacon is.


Why thou arrant dunce, shall I never make thee good scholer, doth not all the
Town cry out, and say, Fryer Bacons subsiser is the greatest block-head in
all Oxford? why thou can not speak one word of true Latin.


No sir, yes what is this else; Ego sum tuiu homo, I am your man, I warrant you
sir, as good Tullies phrase as any is in Oxford.


Come sir, what patt of speech is Ego.


Ego, that is I, mary nomen substantino.


How prove you that?


Why sir, let him prove himself and a will, I can be heard felt and
understood.


Oh gross dunce.


Come let us break off this dispute between these two. Sir, where is
Brazen-nose College?


Not far from Copper-smiths hall.


What doest thou mock me?


Nor I sir, but what would you at Brazen-nose?


Mary we would speak with Fryer Bacon.


Whose men be you?


Mary scholar, here's our master.


Sir, I am the master of these good-fellowes, may thou not know me to be a
Lord by my reparrell?


Then here's good game for the hawke, for here's the master fool, and a couie
of Cockscombes, one wise man I think would spring you all.


Gogs wounds Warren kill him.


Why Ned, I think the devil be in my sheath, I cannot get out my dagger.


Nor I mine, Swones Ned, I think I am bewitched.


A company of Scabs, the proudest of you all draw your weapon if he can.

See how boldly I speak now my master is by.

I strive in vain, but if my sword by shut,
And conjured fast by magic in my sheath,
Villain here is my fist.

Oh I beseech you conjure his hand too, that he may not lift his arms to his
head, for he is light-finger'd.


Ned strike him, I'll warrant thee by mine honour.

What means the English Prince to wrong my man?

To whom speak thou?

To thee.

Who art thou?

Could you not judge when all your swords grew fast,
That Fryer Bacon was not far from hence,
Edward King Henries son, and Prince of Wales,
Thy fool disguised cannot conceal thy self,
I know both Ermsby and the Sussex Earl,
Else Fryer Bacon had but little skill.
Thou come in post from merry Fresingfield,
Fast fancied to the Keepers bonny Lass,
To crave some succour of the jolly Fryer,
And Lacy Earl of Lincolne hast thou left,
To treat fair Margret to allow thy loves:
But friends are men, and Love can baffle Lords.
The Earl both woos and courts her for himself.

Ned, this is strange, the Fryer knows all.

Apollo could not utter more then this.

I stand amazed to hear this jolly Fryer,
Tell even the very secrets of my thoughts:
But learned Bacon since thou know the cause,
Why I did post so fast from Fresingfield,
Help Fryer at a pinch, that I may have
The love of lovely Margret to my self,
And as I am true Prince of Wales, I'll give
Living and lands to strength thy College state.

Good Fryer help the Prince in this.

Why servant Ned, will not the Fryer do it? Were not my sword glued to my
scabberd by conjuration, I would cut off his head and make him do it by force.


In faith my Lord, your manhood and your sword is all alike, they are so fast
conjured that we shall never see them.


What Doctor in a dump? tush help the Prince,
And thou shalt see how liberal he will prove,

Crave not such actions, greater dumps then these,
I will my Lord strain out my magic spells,
For this day comes the Earl of Fresingfield;
And fore that night shuts in the day with dark,
They 'le be betrothed each to other fast:
But come with me, we'll to my study straight,
And in a glass perspective I will show
What's done this day in merry Fresingfield.

Gramercies Bacon, I will quite thy pain.

But send your train, my Lord, into the Town,
My scholar shall go bring them to their Inn:
Mean while we'll see the knavery of the Earl.

Warren, leave me and Ermsby, take the fool,
Let him be master, and go revel it,
Till I and Fryer Bacon talk a while.

We will, my Lord.

Faith Ned, and I'll Lord it out till thou comes, I'll be Prince of Wales over
all the black pots in Oxford.


Now frolic Edward, welcome to my Cell,
Here tempers Fryer Bacon many toys:
And hold this place his Consistory Court,
Wherein the devils plead homage to his words,
Within this glass perspective thou shalt see
This day what's done in merry Fresingfield,
Twixt lovely Peggis and the Lincolne Earl.

Fryer, thou gladst me, now shall Edward try,
How Lacy means to his Sovereign Lord.

Stand there and look directly in the glass.

What sees my Lord?

I see the Keepers lovely lass appear,
As bright-sunne as the Paramour of Mars,
Only attended by a jolly Fryer.

Sit still and keep the crystal in your eye.

But tell me Fryer Bungay, is it true,
That this fair courteous Country Swain,
Who says his father is a Farmer ny,
Can be Lord Lacy Earl of Lincolnshire.

Peggie 'tis true, 'tis Lacy for my life:
Or else mine Art and cunning both do fail,
Left by Prince Edward to procure his loves:
For he in green that help to run your cheese,
Is son to Henry, and the Prince of Wales.

Be what he will, his lure is but for lust.
But did Lord Lacie like poor Margret,
Or would he deign to wed a Country Lass?
Fryer, I would his humble hand-maid be,
And for great wealth, quite him with courtesy.

Why Margret dost love him?

His personage like the pride of vaunting Troy,
Might well avouch to shadow Hellens cape:
His wit is quick and ready in conceit,
As Greece afforded in her chiefest prime
Courteous, ah Fryer full of pleasing smiles,
Trust me I love too much; to tell thee more,
Suffice to me he is Englands Paramour.

Hath not each eye that viewed thy pleasing face,
Surnamed thee fair maid of Fresingfield?

Yes Bungay, and would God the lovely Earl
Had that in esse, that so many sought.

Fear not, the Fryer will not be behind,
To show his cunning to entangle Love.

I think the Fryer courts the bonny wench,
Bacon, me thinks he is a lusty churl.

Now look, my Lord.

Gogs wounds Bacon, here comes Lacy.

Sit still my Lord, and mark the Comedy.

Here's Lacy, Margret, step aside a while.

Daphne the Damsel, that caught Phoebus fast,
And locked him in the brightness of her looks,
Was not so beauteous in Apollo's eyes,
As is fair Margret to the Lincolne Earl,
Recant thee: Lacy, thou art put in trust,
Edward thy Sovereigns son hath chosen thee
A secret friend to court her for himself:
And dare thou wrong thy Prince with treachery*
Lacy, Love makes no exception of a friend,
Nor deems it of a Prince, but as a man:
Honour bids me control him in his lust,
His wooing is not for to wed the girl,
But to entrap her and beguile the lass:
Lacy, thou love, then brooke not such abuse,
But wed her, and abide thy Princes frown:
For dye, then see her live disgraced.

Come, Fryer, I will shake him from his dumps,
How cheer you sir, a penny for your thought:
Your early up, pray God it be the near,
What 'are come from Beckles in a morn so soon?

Thus watchful are such men as live in love,
Whose eyes brooke broken slumbers for their sleep.
I tell thee, Peggie, since last Harlston fair,
My mind hath felt a heap of passions.

A trusty man that court it for your friend,
Woo you still for the Courtier all in green?
I marvel that he sues not for himself.

Peggie, I pleaded first to get your grace for him:
But when mine eyes surveyed your beauteous looks,
Love like a wag, straight dined into my heart,
And there did shrine the Idea of your self:
Pity me though I be a Farmers son,
And measure not my riches, but my love.

You are very hasty for to garden well,
Seeds must have time to sprout before they spring,
Love ought to creep as doth the dyals shade,
For timely ripe, is rotten too too soon.

Deus hic, room for a merry Fryer,
What, youth of Beckles, with the Keepers Lass?
'Tis well, but tell me here you any news,

No, Fryer, what news.

Hear you not how the Purseuants do post,
With Proclamations through each Country town?

For what, gentle Fryer? tell the news.

Dwelst thou in Beckles, hear not these news?
Lacy the Earl of Lincolne is late fled
From Windsor Court, disguised like a Swain,
And lurks about the Country here unknown.
Henry suspects him of some treachery,
And therefore doth proclaim in every way,
That who can take the Lincolne Earl, shall have
Paid in the Exchequer twenty thousand Crowns.

The Earl of Lin^olne? Fryer, thou art mad,
It was some other, thou mistake the man:
The Earl of Lincolne? why it cannot be.

Yes, very well my Lord, for you are he,
The Keepers daughter took you prisoner,
Lord Lacy yield, I'll be your gailor once.

How familiar they be, Bacon.

Sit still, and mark the sequel of their loves.

Then am I double prisoner to thy self,
Peggie, I yield, but are these news in jest?

In jest with you, but earnest unto me:
For why, these wrongs do wring me at the heart,
Ah how these Earles and Noble-men of birth,
Flatter and fain to forge poor women's ill!

Believe me, Lass, I am the Lincolne Earl,
I not deny, but tyred thus in rags,
I lived disguisd to win fair Peggies love.

What love is there where wedding ends not love?

I meant, fair girl, to make thee Lacies wife.

I little think that Earles will stoop so low.

Say, shall I make thee Countess ere I sleep?

Handmaid unto the Earl so please himself:
A wife in name, but servant in obedience.

The Lincolne Countess, for it shall be so,
I'll plight the bands and seal it with a kiss.

Gogs wounds, Bacon, they kiss, I'll stab them.

Oh hold your hands (my Lord) it is the glass.

Collar to see the traitors gre so well,
Made me think the shadows substances.

'Twere a long Poinard, my Lord, to reach between
Oxford and ^resingfield, but sit still and see more.

Well, Lord of Lincolne, if your loves be knit,
And that your tongues and thoughts do both agree:
To avoid ensuing jars, I'll hamper up the match,
I'll take my Portace forth, and wed you here,
Then go to bed and scale up your desires.

Fryer, content, Peggie how like you this?

What likes my Lord, is pleasing unto me.

Then hand-fast hand, and I will to my book.

What sees my Lord now?

Bacon, I see the Lovers hand in hand,
The Fryer ready with his Portace there,
To wed them both, then am I quite undone,
Bacon, help now, if ere thy magic served,
Bacon, help now, if ere thy magic served,
Help, Bacon, stop the marriage now,
If Devils or Necromancy may suffice,
And I will give thee forty thousand Crowns.

Fear not, my Lord, I'll stop the jolly Friar,
For mumbling up his orisons this day.

Why speak not Bungay? Friar, to thy book.

How look thou, Friar, as a man distraught,
Reft of thy senses, Bungay? show by signs
If thou be dumb, what passion holds thee.

He's dumb indeed: Bacon hath with his Devils
Enchanted him, or else some strange disease,
Or Apoplexy hath possessed his lungs:
But, Peggie, what he cannot with his book,
We will twixt us both unite it up in heart.

Else let me die (my Lord) a miscreant.

Why stands Friar Bacon so amazed?

I have struk him dumb, my Lord, if your honour please:
I'll fetch this Bungay straightway from Fresingfield,
And he shall dine with us is Oxford here.

Bacon, do that, and thou contentest me.

Of courtesy, Margret, let us lead the Friar
Unto thy fathers lodge, to comfort him
With broths to bring him from this haplesse trance.

Or else my Lord, we were passing unkind
To leave the Friar so in his distress.

O help, my Lord, a Devil, a Devil, my Lord,
Look how he carries Bungay on his back:
Let's hence, for Bacons spirits be abroad.

Bacon, I laugh to see the jolly Fryer
Mounted upon the Devil, and how the Earl
Flees with his bonny lass for fear.
As soon as Bungay is at Brazen-nose,
I will in post hie me to Fresingfield,
And quite these wrongs on Lacy ere it be long.

So be it, my Lord, but let us to our dinner:
For ere we have taken our repast awhile,
We shall have Bungay brought to Brazen-nose.

Now that we are gathered in the Regent house,
It sits us talk about the long repair,
For he troop't with all the Western Kings,
That lye along the Dansick Seas by East,
North by the clime of frosty Germany,
The Almaine Monarch, and the Scocon Duke,
Castile, and lovely Ellinor, with him,
Have in their jests resolved for Oxford Town.

We must lay plots for stately Tragedies,
Strange Comic shows, such as proud Rossius
Vaunted before the Roman Emperors.

To welcome all the Western Potentates,
But more the King by letters hath fore-told,
That Fredericke the Almaine Emperor,
Hath brought with him a Germane of esteem,
Whose surname is Don Iaques Vandermast,
Skilful in Magic and those secret arts.

Then must we all make suit unto the Fryer,
To Friar Bacon, that he vouch this task,
And undertake to countervail in skill
The Germane, else there's none in Oxford can
Match and dispute with learned Vandermast.

Bacon, if he will hold the German play,
We will teach him what an English Friar can do:
The Devil I think dare not dispute with him.

Indeed mas Doctor, he pleasured you,
In that he brought your hostess with her spit,
From Henly, posting unto Brazen-nose.

A vengeance on the Friar for his pains,
But leaving that, let's to Bacon straight,
To see if he will take this task in hand.

Stay! what rumour is this? The town is up in a mutiny, what hurly burly is
this?


Nay masters, if you were ne'er so good, you shall before the Doctors to answer
your misdemeanour.


Whats the matter, fellow?


Mary sir, here's a company of Rufflers, that drinking in the Tavern, have
made a great brawl, and almost killed the Vintner.


Salve, Doctor Burden, this lubberly Lurden,
Ill shaped and ill faced, disdained and disgraced,
What he tells unto vobis, mentitur de nobis.

Who is the master and chief of this crew?

Ecce asinum mundi, figura retundi,
Neat, sheat and sine, as brisk as a cup of wine.

What are you?

I am, father Doctor, as a man would say, the Belweather of this company, these
are my Lords, and I the Prince of Wales.


Are you Edward the Kings son?

Sir Miles, bring hither the Tapster that drew the wine, I warrant when they
see how soundly I have broke his head, thei'le say 'twas done by no less man
then a Prince.


I cannot believe that this is the Prince of Wales.

And why so, sir?

For they say the Prince is a brave a wise Gentleman.

Why, and think thou, Doctor, that he is not so?
Dare thou detract and derogate from him,
Being so lovely and so brave a Youth?

Whose face shining with many a sugared smile,
Betrays that he is bred of princely race.

And yet, master Doctor, to speak like a Proctor,
And tell unto you, what is veriment and true,
To cease off this quarrel; look but on his apparel,
Then mark but my talis, he is great Prince of Walis,
The chief of our gregis, and filius Regis,
Then ware what is done, for he is Henries white son.

Doctors, whose doting night-caps are not capable of my ingenious dignity, know
that I am Edward Plantagenet, whom if you displease, will make a ship that
shall hold all your Colleges, and so carry away the Niniuersity with a fair
wind, to the Bankeside in Southwarke, how say thou Ned Warraine, shall I not
do it?


Yes my good Lord, and if it please your Lordship, I will gather up all your
old pantophles, and with the cork, make you a Pinnace of five hundred tun,
that shall serve the turn marvelous well, my Lord.


And I my Lord will have Pioners to undermine the Town, that the very Gardens
and Orchards be carried away for your Summer walks.


And with scientia and great diligentia,
Will conjure and charm, to keep you from harm,
That vtrum horum manis, your very great nauis,
Like Bartlets ship, from Oxford do skip,
With Colleges and schools, full laden with fools,
Quid dices ad hoc, worshipful Domine Dawcocke?

Why harebraind Courtiers, are you drunk or mad,
To taunt us up with such scurrilitie?
Deem you us men of base and light esteem,
To bring us such a fop for Henries son?
Call out the Beadles and convey them hence
Straight to Bocardo, let the Roisters lie
Close clapped in bolts, until their wits be tame.

Why, shall we to prison my Lord?

What say, Miles, shall I honour the prison with my presence?

No, no, out with your blades, and hamper these Jade,
Have a fiurt and a crash, now revel dash,
And teach these Sacerdos, that the Bocardos,
Like Pezzants and clues, are meet for themselves.

To the prison with them, Constable.

Well (Doctors) seeing I have sported me,
With laughing at these mad and merry wags,
Know that Prince Edward is at Brazen-nose,
And this, attired like the Prince of Wales,
Is Raphe, King Henries only loved fool,
I, Earl of Essex, and this Ermsby,
One of the privy Chamber to the King,
Who while the Prince with Friar Bacon stays,
Have reuel'd in Oxford as you see.

My Lord, pardon us, we knew not what you were*
But Courtiers may make greater scapes then these,
Wilt please your Honour dine with me to day?

I will, master Doctor, and satisfy the Vintner for his hurt; only I must
desire you to imagine him all this forenoon the Prince of Wales.


I will, sir.


And upon that I will lead the way, only I will have Miles go before me,
because I have heard Henry say, that wisdom must go before Majesty.


Lacie, thou can not shroud thy traitrous thoughts,
Nor cover, as did Cassius, all his wiles,
For Edward hath an eye that looks as far,
As Lincaeus from the shores of Grecia.
Did not I sit in Oxford by the Fryer,
And see thee court the maid of Fresingfield,
Sealing thy flattering fancies with a kiss?
Did not proud Bungay draw his portasse forth,
And joining hand in hand, had married you,
If Friar Bacon had not struck him dumb,
And mounted him upon a spirits back,
That we might chat at Oxford with the Friar?
Traitor, what answer? Is not all this true?

Truth all, my Lord, and thus I make reply,
At Harlstone Fair there courting for your Grace,
When as mine eye surveyed her curious shape,
And drew the beauteous glory of her looks,
To dive into the center of my heart,
Love taught me that your Honour did but jest,
That Princes were in fancy but as men,
How that the lovely maid of Fresingfield
Was fitter to be Lacies wedded wife,
Then Concubine unto the Prince of Wales.

Injurious Lacy, did I love thee more
Then Alexander his Hephestion?
Did I unfold the passions of my love,
And locke them in the clozet of thy thoughts?
Were thou to Edward second to himself,
Sole friend, and partner of his secret loves;
And could a glance of fading beauty break
Th'inchained fetters of such private friends?
Base coward, false, and too effeminate,
To be corival with a Prince in thoughts!
From Oxford have I posted since I dined,
To quite a Traitor before that Edward sleep?

'Twas I, my Lord, not Lacy stepped awry:
For oft he sued and courted for your self,
And still wooed for the Courtier all in green:
But I, whom fancy made but ouer-fond,
Pleaded my self with looks as if loved,
I fed mine eye with gazing on his face,
And still bewitched loved Lacie with my looks,
My heart with sighs, mine eyes pleaded with tears,
My face held pity and content at once,
And more I could not cipher out by signs,
But that I loved Lord Lacy with my heart:
Then worthy Edward, measure with thy mind,
If women's favours will not force men fall,
If beauty, and if darts of piercing love,
Is not of force to bury thoughts of friends.

I tell thee, Peggie, I will have thy loves,
Edward, or none shall conquer Margret;
In Frigates bottomed with rich S^thin planks,
Topped with the lofty Firs of Libanon,
Stem'd and incast with burnished Ivory,
And ouer-laid with plates of Persian wealth,
Like Thetis shalt thou wanton on the waives,
And draw the Dolphins to thy lovely eyes,
To dance Lauoltas in the purple streams,
Sirens with harps and silver Psalteries,
Shall wait with music at thy Frigates stem,
And entertain fair Margret with her lays;
England and Englands wealth shall wait on thee,
Britain shall bend unto her Princes love,
And do due homage to thine Excellence,
If thou wilt be but Edwards Margret.

Pardon, my Lord, if Ioues great Royalty
Sent me such presents as to Danae,
If Phoebus tied in Latonas webs,
Come courting from the beauty of his lodge,
The dulcet tunes of frolic Mercurie,
Not all the wealth heavens treasury affords,
Should make me leave Lord Lacy, or his love.

I have learned at Oxford then this point of schools,
Ablata causa, la effectus.
Lacy, the cause, that Margret cannot love,
Nor fix her liking on the English Prince.
Take him away, and then the effects will fail.
Villain, prepare thy self: for I will bathe
My poinard in the bosom of an Earl.

Rather then live, and miss fair Margrets love,
Prince Edward, stop not at the fatal doom,
But stab it home, end both my loves and life.

Brave Prince of Wales, honoured for Royal deeds,
Twere sin to stain fair Venus courts with blood,
Loves conquest ends, my Lord, in courtesy,
Spare Lacy, gentle Edward, let me dye,
For so both you and he do cease your loves.

Lacie shall die as Traitor to his Lord.

I have deserved it, Edward, act it well.

What hopes the Prince to gain by Lacies death?

To end the loves 'twixt him and Margaret.

Why, thinks King Henries son that Margrets love
Hangs in the uncertain balance of proud Time,
That death shall make a discord of our thoughts?
No, stab the Earl, and before the morning Sun
Shall vaunt him thrice over the lofty East,
Margret will meet her Lacy in the heavens.

If ought betides to lovely Margret,
That wrongs or wrings her honour from content,
Europes rich wealth, nor Englands Monarchy,
Should not allure Lacy to ouer-liue.
Then Edward, short my life, and end her loves.

Rid me, and keep a friend worth many loves.

Nay, Edward, keep a love worth many friends.

And if thy mind be such as fame hath blazed,
Then Princely Edward, let us both abide
The fatal resolution of thy rage,
Banish thou fancy, and embrace revenge,
And in one tomb knit both our carcasses,
Whose hearts were linked in one perfect love,

Edward, art thou that famous Prince of Wales,
Who at Damasco beat the Sarazens,
And broughtst home triumph on thy Lances point?
And shall thy plumes be pulled by Venus down?
Is't princely to dissever Lovers loves?
Leave, Ned, and make a virtue of this fault,
And further Peg and Lacy in their loves;
So in subduing fancies passion,
Conquering thy self, thou get'st the richest spoil.
Lacy, rise up. Fair Peggis, here's my hand,
The Prince of Wales hath conquered all his thoughts,
And all his loves he yields unto the Earl.
Lacy, enjoy the maid of Fresingfield,
Make her thy Lincolne Countess at the Church.
And Ned, as he is true Plantagenet,
Will give her to thee frankly for thy wife.

Humbly I take her of my Sovereign,
As if that Edward gave me Englands right,
And rich't me with the Albion Diadem.

And doth the English Prince mean true?
Will he vouchsafe to cease his former loves,
And yield the title of a Country maid,
Unto Lord Lacy?

I will, fair Peggie, as I am true Lord.

Then Lordly Sir, whose conquest is as great,
In conquering love, as Casars victories,
Margret as mild and humble in her thoughts,
As was Aspatia unto Cyrus self,
Yields thanks, and next Lord Lacy, doth inshrine
Edward the second secret in her heart.

Gramercy, Peggie, now that vows are past,
And that your loves are not to be revolt:
Once, Lacy, friends again, come, we will post
To Oxford: for this day the King is there,
And brings for Edward Castile Ellinor.
Peggie, I must go see and view my wife;
I pray God I like her as I loved thee.
Beside, Lord Lincolne, we shall hear dispute,
Twixt Fryer Bacon, and learned Vandermast,
Peggy, we will leave you for a week or two.

As it please Lord Lacy: but loves foolish looks
Think footsteps miles, and minutes to be hours.

I'll hasten, Peggie, to make short return.
But please your Honour go unto the Lodge,
We shall have Butter, Cheese, and Venison.
And yesterday I brought for Margret,
A lusty bottle of neat Clarret wine:
Thus can we feast and entertain your Grace.

'Tis cheer, Lord Lacy, for an Emperor,
If he respect the person and the place.
Come, let us in, for I will all this night
Ride post until I come to Bacons cell.

Trust me, Plantagenet, these Oxford Schools
Are richly seated near the River side:
The mountains full of fat and fallow Dear,
The battling pastures laid with Kine and Flocks,
The Town gorgeous with high built Colleges,
And Schollers seemly in their grave attire,
Learned in searching the principles of Art.
What is thy judgment, Iaques Vandermast?

That Lordly are the buildings of the Town,
Spacious the rooms, and full of pleasant walks:
But for the Doctors, how that they be learned,
It may be meanly, for ought I can hear.

I tell thee, Germane, Haspurge holds none such,
None read so deep, as Oxenford contains,
There are within our Academic state,
Men that may lecture it in Germany,
To all the Doctors of your Belgic Schools.

Stand to him, Bungay, charm this Vandermast,
And I will use thee as a Royal King.

Wherein dare thou dispute with me?

In what a Doctor and a Fryer can.

Before rich Europes Worthies put thou forth
The doubtful question unto Vandermast.

Let it be this, Whether the spirits of Piromancy or
Geomancy, be most predominant in Magic?

I say, of Piromancy.

And I of Geomancy.

The Cabalists that write of Magic spells,
As Hermes, Melchre, and Pythagoras,
Affirm that amongst the quadruplicity
Of elemental essence, Terra is but thought,
To be a punctum squared to the rest:
And that the compass of ascending elements
Exceed in bigness as they do in height;
Judging the concave Circle of the Sun,
To hold the rest in his Circumference;
If then, as Hermes says, the fire be greatest,
Purest, and only gives shapes to spirits:
Then must these Demones that haunt that place,
Be every way superior to the rest.

I reason not of elemental shapes,
Nor tell I of the concave latitudes,
Noting their essence, nor their quality,
But of the spirits that Piromancy calls,
And of the vigour of the Geomanticke Fiends.
I tell thee, Germane, Magic hants the grounds,
And those strange Negromanticke spells,
That work such shows and wondering in the world,
Are acted by those Geomanticke sprites,
That Hermes calls Terrae silij.
The fiery spirits are but transparent shades,
That lightly pass as Heralds to bear news,
But earthly Fiends cloz'd in the lowest deep,
Dissever mountains, if they be but char'd,
Being more gross and massy in their power.

Rather these earthly Geomantike spirits,
Are dull and like the place where they remain:
For when proud Lucifer fell from the heavens,
The spirits and Angels that did sin with him,
Retained their local essence as their faults,
All subjects under Lunas Continent,
The which offended less, hang in the fire,
And second faults did rest within the air,
But Lucifer and his proud-hearted fiends,
Were thrown into the Center of the earth,
Having less understanding then the rest,
As having greater sin, and lesser grace.
Therefore such gross and earthly spirits do serve,
For Jugglers, Witches, and wild Sorcerers,
Whereas the Piromanticke Genij,
Are mighty, swift, and of far reaching power.
But grant that Geomancie hath most force,
Bungay, to please these mighty Potentates,
Prove by some instance what thy Art can do.

I will.

Now English Harry, here begins the game,
We shall see sport between these learned men.

What wilt thou do?

Show thee the Tree leaved with refined gold,
Whereon the fearful Dragon held his seat,
That watched the Garden called Hesperides,
Subdued and won by conquering Hercules.

Well done.

What say you Royal Lordlings to my Fryer?
Hath he not done a point of cunning skill?

Each Scholar in the Negromanticke spells
Can do as much as Bungay hath performed.
But as Alemenas bastard raised this Tree,
So will I raise him up as when he lived,
And cause him pull the Dragon from his seat,
And tear the branches piecemeal from the root,
Hercules, Prodi, Prodi, Hercules.

Quis me vult?

Ioues bastard son, thou Lybian Heroules,
Pull off the sprigs from off the Hesperian Tree,
As once thou did to win the golden fruit.
Hercules. Fiat.

Now Bungay, if thou can by Magic charm
The Fiend, appearing like great Hercules,
From pulling down the branches of the Tree,
Then art thou worthy to be counted learned.

I cannot.

Cease Hercules, until I give thee charge.
Mighty Commander of this English I'll,
Henrie, come from the stout Plantagenets,
Bungay is learned enough to be a Fryer:
But to compare with Iaques Vandermast,
Oxford and Cambridge must go seek their Celles,
To find a man to match him in his Art.
I have given non-plus to the Paduans,
To them of Sign, Florence, and Bologna,
Rheims, Louain, and fair Roterdam,
Franckford, Lutrech, and Orleance:
And now must Henrie, if he do me right,
Crown me with Laurel, as they all have done.

All hail to this Royal Company,
That sit to hear and see this strange dispute:
Bungay, how standst thou as a man amazed?
What, hath the Germane acted more then thou?

What art thou that questionst thus?

Men call me Bacon.

Lordly thou look, as if that thou were learned?
Thy countenance, as if science held her seat
Between the circled arches of thy brows.

Now Monarchs, hath the Germane found his match?

Bestir thee Iaques, take not now the foil,
Lest thou doest lose, what foretime thou did gain.

Bacon, wilt thou dispute?

No, unless he were more learned then Vandermast.
For yet tell me, what hast thou done?

Raised Hercules to ruinate that tree,
That Bungay mounted by his Magic spells.

Set Hercules to work.

Now Hercules, I charge thee to thy task,
Pull off the golden branches from the root.

I dare not. See thou not great Bacon here,
Whose frown doth act more then thy Magic can?

By all the Thrones, and Dominations,
Virtues, Powers, and mighty Hierarchies,
I charge thee to obey to Vandermast.

Bacon, that bridles headstrong Belzephon,
And rules Asmenoth guider of the North:
Binds me from yielding unto Vandermast.

How now, Vandermast, have you met with your match?

Never before was't known to Vandermast,
That men held Devils in such obedient awe.
Bacon doth more then Art, or else I fail.

Why, Vandermast, art thou overcome?
Bacon dispute with him, and try his skill;

I come not, Monarchs, for to hold dispute
With such a Novice as is Vandermast;
I came to have your Royalties to dine
With Fryer Bacon here in Brazen-nose;
And, for this Germane troubles but the place,
And holds the Audience with a long suspense,
I'll send him to his Academy hence.
Thou Hercules, whom Vandermast did raise,
Transport the Germane unto Haspurge straight,
That he may learn by travel against the Springs,
More secret dooms and Aphorisms of Art,
Vanish the Tree, and thou away with him.

Why, Bacon, whither doest thou send him?

To Haspurge, there your Highness at return,
Shall find the Germane in his Study safe.

Bacon, thou hast honoured England with thy skill,
And made fair Oxford famous by thine Art,
I will be English Henry to thy self.
But tell me, shall we dine with thee to day?

With me, my Lord; and while I fit my cheer,
See where Prince Edward comes to welcome you:
Gracious as the morning-starre of heaven.

Is this Prince Edward, Henries Royal son?
How martial is the figure of his face!
Yet lovely and beset with Amorets.

Ned, where hast thou been?

At Framingham, my Lord, to try your Bucks,
If they could escape the teisers or the toil:
But hearing of these Lordly Potentates
Landed, and progrest up to Oxford town,
I posted to give entertain to them,
Chief to the Almaine Monarch, next to him,
And joint with him, Castile, and Saxonie,
Are welcome as they may be to the English Court.
Thus for the men. But see, Venus appears,
Or one that ouermatcheth Venus in her shape,
Sweet Ellinor, beauties high-swelling pride,
Rich natures glory, and her wealth at once:
Fair of all fairs, welcome to Albion,
Welcome to me, and welcome to thine own,
If that thou dain'st the welcome from my self.

Martial Plantagenet, Henries high-minded son,
The mark that Ellinor did count her aim,
I liked thee before I saw thee; now I love,
And so as in so short time I may:
Yet so, as time shall never break that so,
And therefore so accept of Ellinor.

Fear not, my Lord, this couple will agree,
If love may creep into their wanton eyes:
And therefore, Edward, I accept thee here,
Without suspense, as my adopted son.

Let me that joy in these consorting greets,
And glory in these honours done to Ned,
Yield thanks for all these favours to my son,
And rest a true Plantagenet to all.

Saluete omnes Reges, that govern your Greges, in Saxony, and Spain, in
England, and in Almaine: for all this frolic rabble must I cover the table,
with trenchers, salt, and cloth, and then look for your broth.


What pleasant fellow is this?


Tis, my Lord, Doctor Bacons poor Scholar.


My master hath made me sewer of these great Lords, and (God knows) I am as
serviceable at a table, as a Sow is under an Apple tree: 'tis no matter, their
cheer shall not be great, and therefore what skils where the salt stand before
or behind?


These Schollers know more skill in Axioms,
How to use quips and sleights of Sophistry,
Then for to cover courtly for a King.

Spill, sir? why, do you think I never carried two-penny chop before in my
life? By your leave, Nobile decus, for here comes Doctor Bacons pecus, being in
his full age, to carry a mess of pottage.


Lordlings, admire not if your cheer be this,
For we must keep our Academic fare,
No riot where Philosophy doth reign:
And therefore, Henry, place these Potentates,
And bid them fall unto their frugal cates.

Presumptuous Fryer, what, scoft'st thou at a King?
What, doest thou taunt us with thy peazants fare,
And gives us cates fit for Country Swains?
Henrie, proceeds this jest of thy consent,
To twit us with a pittance of such price?
Tell me, and Fredericke will not grieve thee long.

By Henries honour and the Royal faith
The English Monarch bears to his friend,
I knew not of the Fryers feeble fare,
Nor am I pleased he entertains you thus.

Content thee, Frederick, for I showed thee cates,
To let thee see how schollers use to feed:
How little meat refines our English wits.
Miles take away, and let it be thy dinner.

Mary sir, I will, this day shall be a festival day with me:
For I shall exceed in the highest degree.

I tell thee, Monarch, all the Germane Peers
Could not afford thy entertainment such,
So Royal and so full of Majesty,
As Bacon will present to Fredericke,
The Basest waiter that attends thy cups,
Shall be in honours greater then thy self:
And for thy cates rich Alexandria drugs,
Fetched by Carueils from Aegypts richest straights:
Found in the wealthy strond of Africa,
Shall Royallize the table of my King,
Wines richer then the Gyprian Courtisan
Quaft to Augustus Kingly countermatch,
Shall be carrowst in English Henries feasts:
Candy shall yield the richest of her canes,
Persia down her Volga by Canows,
Send down the secrets of her spicery.
The Africa Dates, mirabiles of Spain,
Conserves, and Suckets from Tiberias,
Cates from Iudea choiser then the lamp
That siered Rome with sparks of gluttony,
Shall beautify the board for Fredericke,
And therefore grudge not at a Fryers feast.

Come frolic, Keeper of our Lieges game,
Whose table spread hath ever Venison,
And lacks of wine to welcome passengers.
Know I am in love with jolly Margret,
That ouer-shines our Damsels, as the Moon
Darkneth the brightest sparkles of the night,
In Laxfield here my land and living lies,
I'll make thy daughter jointer of it all,
So thou consent to give her to my wife,
And I can spend five hundred marks a year.

I am the Lands-lord Keeper of thy holds,
By copy all thy living lies in me.
Laxfield did never see me raise my due,
I will infeoffe Margret in all,
So she will take her to a lusty Squire.
^ Keeper. Now courteous Gentles, if the Keepers girl
Hath pleased the liking fancy of you both,
And with her beauty hath subdued your thoughts,
'Tis doubtful to decide the question.
It joys me that such men of great esteem,
Should lay their liking on this base estate,
And that her state should grow so fortunate,
To be a wife to meaner men then you.
But since such Squires will stoop to Keepers fee,
I will t'auoyd displeasure of you both,
Call Margret forth, and she shall make her choice.

Content, Keeper, send her unto us.
Why, Serlsby, is thy wife so lately dead?
Are all thy loves so lightly passed over,
As thou can wed before the year be out?

I live not, Lambert, to content the dead,
Nor was I wedded but for life to her,
The grave ends, and begins a married state.

Peggie, the lovely flowers of all towns,
Suffolks fair Hellen, and rich Englands star,
Whose beauty tempered with her huswifrie,
Makes England talk of merry Fresingfield.

I cannot trick it up with poesies,
Nor paint my passions with comparisons,
Nor tell a tale of Phoebus and his loves,
But this believe me, Laxfield here is mine,
Of ancient rent seven hundred pounds a year,
And if thou can but love a Country Squire,
I will infeoffe thee, Margret, in all,
I cannot slatter, try me if thou please.

Brave neighbouring Squires, the stay of Suffolks clime,
A Keepers daughter is too base in gre
To match with men accounted of such worth:
But might I not displease, I would reply.
Lambert. Say, Peggie, nought shall make us discontent.

Then Gentiles, note that love hath little stay,
Nor can the flames that Venus sets on fire,
Be kindled but by fancies motion,
Then pardon, Gentiles, if a maids reply
Be doubtful, while I have debated with my self,
Who, or of whom love shall constrain me like.

Let it be me, and trust me, Margret,
The meads environed with silver streams,
Whose battling pastures fatten all my flocks,
Yielding forth fleeces stapled with such wool,
As Lempster cannot yield more finer stuff,
And forty kine with fair and burnished heads,
With strouting dugs that puggle to the ground,
Shall serve thy dary if thou wed with me.

Let pass the Country wealth, as flocks and kine,
And lands that wave with Ceres golden sheaves,
Filling my barnes with plenty of the fields:
But, Peggie, if thou wed thy self to me,
Thou shalt have garments of imbrodred silk,
Lawns, and rich net-works for thy head attire,
Costly shall be thy fair habiliments,
If thou wilt be but Lambert loving wife.

Content you, Gentles, you have proffered fair,
And more then fits a Country maids degree:
But give me leave to counsel me a time,
For fancy bloomes not at the first assault;
Give me but ten days respit, and I will reply,
Which or to whom my self affectionates.

Lambert, I tell thee, thou art importunate,
Such beauty fits not such a base Esquire:
It is for Serlsby to have Margret.

Think thou with wealth to ouer-reach me,
Serlsby? I scorn to brooke thy Country braves.
I dare thee, Coward, to maintain this wrong,
At dint of Rapier single in the field

I'll answer Lambert what I have auoucht.
Margret, farewell, another time shall serve.

I'll follow. Peggie, farewell to thy self,
Listen how well I'll answer for thy love.

How Fortune tempers lucky haps with frowns,
And wrongs me with the sweets of my delight!
Love is my bliss, and love is now my bale.
Shall I be Hellen in my forward fates,
As I am Hellen in my matchless hue,
And set rich Suffolke with my face a fire?
If lovely Lacy were but with his Peggie,
The cloudy darkness of his bitter frown
Would check the pride of these aspiring Squires,
Before the term of ten days be expired,
When as they look for answer of their loves,
My Lord will come to merry Fresingfield,
And end their fancies, and their follies both;
Till when, Peggie be blithe and of good cheer.

Fair lovely Damsel, which way leads this path?
How might I post me unto Fresingfield?
Which footpath leads to the Keepers Lodge?

Your way is ready, and this path is right,
My self do dwell hereby in Fresingfield;
And if the Keeper be the man you seek,
I am his daughter: may I know the cause?

Lovely and once beloved of my Lord,
No marvel if his eye was lodged so low,
When brighter beauty is not in the heavens,
The Lincolne Earl hath sent you Letters here,
And with them, just an hundred pounds in gold.
Sweet bonny wench, read them, and make reply.

The scrolls that love sent Danae,
Wrapped in rich closures of fine burnished gold,
Were not more welcome then these lines to me.
Tell me, whilst that I do unrip the scales,
Lives Lacy well, how fares my lovely Lord?

Well, if that wealth may make men to live well.

THe bloomes of the Almond tree grow in a night, vanish in a morn, the flies
Haemerae (fair Peggie) take life with the Sun, and die with the dew, fancy
that slips in with a gaze, goes out with a wink; and too timely loves,
have ever the shortest length. I write this as thy grief, and my folly, who at
Fresingfield loved that which time hath taught me to be but mean dainties,
eyes are dissemblers, and fancy is but queasy, therefore know, Margret, I
have chosen a Spanish Lady to be my wife, chief wayting-woman to the Princess
Ellinor, a Lady fair, and no less fair then thy self, honourable and
wealthy, in that I forsake thee, I leave thee to thine own liking, and for thy
dowry I have sent thee an hundred pounds, ever assure thee of my favour, which
shall avail thee and thine much. Farewell. Not thine, nor his own.

Fond Atae, doomer of bad boasting fates,
That wraps proud Fortune in thy snaky locks,
Did thou enchant my birth-day with such stars,
As lightened mischief from their infancy?
If heavens had vowed, if stars had made decree,
To show in me their froward influence,
If Lacy had but loved, heavens, hell and all,
Could not have wronged the patience of my mind.

It grieves me, Damsel, but the Earl is forced
To love the Lady, by the Kings command.

The wealth combined within the English shelves,
Europes Commander, nor the English King,
Should not have moved the love of Peggie from her Lord.

What answer shall I return to my Lord?

First, for thou came from Lacy whom I loved,
Ah, give me leave to sigh at every thought,
Take thou, my friend, the hundred pound he sent:
For Margrets resolution craves no dower;
The world shall be to her as vanity,
Wealth, trash; love, hate; pleasure, de spaire:
For I will straight to stately Fremingham,
And in the Abbey there be shorn a Nun,
And yield my loves and liberty to God.
Fellow, I give thee this, not for the news,
For those be hateful unto Margret,
But for you are Lacees man, once Margrets love.

What I have heard, what passions I have seen,
I'll make report of them unto the Earl.

Say, that she joys his fancies be at rest,
And prays that his misfortunes may be hers.

Miles, where are you?


Here, sir.


How chance you tarry so long?


Think you that the watching of the brazen head craves no furniture? I warrant
you, sir, I have so armed my self, that if all your devils do come, I will
not fear them an inch.


Miles, thou know that I have dived into hell,
And sought the darkest palaces of the Fiends,
That with my Magic spells great Belzephon
Hath left his lodge and kneeled at my cell,
The rafters of the earth rent from the poles,
And three-form'd L^a hid her silver looks;
Trembling upon her concave continent,
When Bacon read upon his Magic book,
With seven years tossing Nigromanticke charms,
Poring upon dark Hecats principles,
I have framed out a monstrous head of brass,
That by th'inchanting forces of the Devil,
Shall tell out strange and uncouth Aphorisms,
And girt fair England with a wall of brass.
Bungay and I have watched these threescore days,
And now our vital spirits crave some rest,
If Argos lived and had his hundred eyes,
They could not ouer-watch Phobeters night,
Now Miles, in thee rests Fryers Bacons weal,
The honour and renown of all his life,
Hangs in the watching of this brazen-head;
Therefore I charge thee by the immortal God,
That holds the souls of men within his fist,
This night thou watch; for ere the morning star
Sends out his glorious glister on the North,
The head will speak; then (Miles) upon thy life,
Wake me: for then by Magic Art I'll work,
To end my seven years task with excellence,
If that a wink but shut thy watchful eye,
Then farewell Bacons glory and his fame,
Draw close the curtains, Miles, now for thy life,
Be watchful and

So, I thought you would talk your self asleep anon, and 'tis no marvel,
for Bungay on the days, and he on the nights, have watched just these ten and
fifty days, now this is the night, and 'tis my task and no more. Now Iesus
bless me, what a goodly head it is, a nose! You talk of nos autem
glorificare; but here's a nose, that I warrant may be called nos autem popelares
for the people of the parish. Well I am furnished with weapons, now sir, I will
set me down by a post, and make it as good as a watch-man to wake me if I
chance to slumber.

I thought, goodman head, I would call you out of your moment^ passion a God, I
have almost broke my pate: Up, Milet, to your task, take your browne bill in
your hand, here's some of your masters Hobgoblins abroad. With this, a great
noise.


Time is.


Time is. Why, Master Brazen-head, have you such a capital nose, and answer
you with syllables, Time is? is this all my masters cunning, to spend seven
years study about Time is? Well, sir, it may be, we shall have some orations
of it anon; well, I'll watch you as narrowly as ever you were watched, and I'll
play with you as the Nightingale with the Slow-worme, I'll set a prick against
my breast; now rest there, Miles, Lord have mercy upon me, I have almost killed my
self: up, Miles, list how they rumble.


Time was.


Well, Friar Bacon, you have spent your seven years study well, that can make
your Head speak but two words at once, Time was: yea mary, time was when my
Master was a wise man, but that was before he began to make the Brazen-head.
You shall lye while you arse ache, and your Head speak no better: well, I will
watch and walk up and down, and be a Peripatetian and a Philosopher of
Aristotles stamp. What, a fresh noise? Take thy Pistols in hand, Miles.


Time is past.


Master, master, up, hell's broken loose, your head speaks, and there's such a
thunder and lightning, that I warrant, all Oxford is up in arms; out of your
bed, take a browne bill in your hand, the latter day is come.


Miles, I come. O passing warily watched;
Bacon will make thee next himself in love.
When spake the Head?

When spake the Head? did not you say that he should tell strange principles of
Philosophy? Why sir, it speaks but two words at a time.


Why villain, hath it spoken oft?


Oft, I mary hath it thrice: but in all those three times it hath uttered but
seven words.


As how?


Mary sir, the firs time he said, Time is, as if Fabuis Commentator should have
pronounst a sentence: he said, Time was: and the third time with thunder and
lightning, as in great choler, he said, Time is past.


Tis past indeed. A villain, time is past:
My life, my fame, my glory, all are past:
Bacon, the turrets of thy hope are ruined down,
Thy seven years study lies in the dust:
Thy Brazen-head lies broken through a slave
That watched, and would not when the Head did will.
What said the Head first?

Even, Time is.

Villain, if thou had called to Bacon then,
If thou had watched and wakte the sleepy Fryer,
The Brazen-head had uttered Aphorisms,
And England had been circled round with brass:
But proud Astmeroth, ruler of the North,
And Demegorgon, master of the Fates,
Grudge that a mortal man should do so much.
Hell trembled at my deep commanding spells,
Fiends frowned to see a man their ouer-match,
Bacon might boast more then a man might boast:
But now the braves of Bacon have an end,
Europes conceit of Bacon hath an end:
His seven years practice sorts to ill end:
And villain, since my glory hath an end,
I will appoint thee fatal to some end.
Villain, avoid, get thee from Bacons sight:
Vagrant, go rome and range about the world,
And perish as a vagabond on earth.

Why then, sir, you forbid me your service.

My service, villain? with a fatal curse,
That dire full plagues and mischief fall on thee.

Tis no matter, I am against you with the old proverb, The more the Fox is
cursed, the better he fares. God be with you, sir, I'll take but a book in my
hand, a wide sleeved gown on my back, and a crowned cap on my head, and see
If I can want promotion.


Some fiend or ghost haunt on thy weary steps,
Until they do transport thee quick to hell:
For Bacon shall have never merry day,
To lose the same and honour of his Head.

Now lovely Prince, the Prince of Albions wealth,
How fares the Lady Ellinor and you?
What, have you courted and found Castile fit,
To answer England in equiuolence?
Wilt be a match twixt bonny Nell and thee?

Should Paris enter in the courts of Greece,
And not lye fettered in fair Hellens looks?
Or Phoebus escape those piercing amorits,
That Daphne glanced at his deity?
Can Edward then sit by a flame and freeze,
Whose heat puts Hellen and fair Daphne down?
Now Monarchs, ask the Lady if we gre

What, Madam, hath my son found grace or no?

Seeing my Lord his lovely counterfeit,
And hearing how his mind and shape agreed,
I come not, trooped with all this warlike train,
Doubting of love, but so affectionate,
As Edward hath in England what he won in Spain.

A match, my Lord, these wantons needs must love:
Men must have wives, and women must be wed,
Let's haste the day to honour up the rites.

Sir Harry, shall Ned marry Nell?

I, Raphe, how then?

Mary Harry, follow my counsel, send for Fryer Bacon to marry them, for heel
so conjure him and her with his Nigromancy, that they shall love together like
Pig Lamb whilst they live.


But hearst thou, Raphe, art thou content to have Ellinor to thy Lady?


I, so she will promise me two things.


Whats that, Raphe?


That she will never scold with Ned, nor sight with me, Sir Harry, I have put
her down with a thing unpossible.


Whats that, Raphe?


Why Harry, did thou ever see that a woman could both hold her tongue and her
hands? no: but when egge-pyes grow on Apple-trees, then will thy gray Mare
prove a Bag-piper.


What says the Lord of Castile and the Earl of Lincolne, that they are in
such earnest and secret talk?


I stand, my Lord, amazed at his talk?
How he discourses of the constancy
Of one surnam'd for beauties excellence,
The fair maid of Fresingfield.

Tis true, my Lord, tis wondrous for to hear,
Her beauty passing Marses Paramour:
Her virgins right as rich as Vestas was,
Lacy and Ned have told me miracles.

What says Lord Lacy? shall she be his wife?

Or else Lord Lacy is unfit to live.
May it please your Highness give me leave to post
To Fresingfield, I'll fetch the bonny girl,
And prove in true appearance at the Court,
What I have vouched often with my tongue.

Lacy, go to the Quiry of my Stable,
And take such Coursers as shall fit thy turn,
Hie thee to Fresingfield, and bring home the Lass,
And, for her fame flies through the English coast,
If it may please the Lady Ellinor,
One day shall match your Excellence and her.

We Castile Ladies are not very coy,
Your Highness may command a greater boon:
And glad were I to grace the Lincolne Earl
With being partner of his marriage day.

Gramercy, Nell, for I do love the Lord,
As he that's second to my self in love.

You love her? Madam Nell, never believe him you, though he swears he loves
you.


Why Raphe?


Why, his love is like unto a Tapsters glass that is broken with every tutch;
for he loved the fair maid of Fresingfield once out of all hoe; nay Ned, never
wink upon me, I care not, I.


Raphe tells all, you shall have a good Secretary of him.
But, Lacy, haste thee post to Fresingfield:
For ere thou hast fitted all things for her state,
The solemn marriage day will be at hand.

I go, my Lord.

How shall we pass this day, my Lord?

To horse, my Lord, the day is passing fair,
We'll fly the Partridge, or go rouse the Dear.
Follow, my Lords, you shall not want for sport.

What means the Fryer that frolickt it of late,
To sit as melancholy in his Cell,
As if he had neither lost nor won to day?

Ah Bungay, my brazen-head is spoiled,
My glory gone, my seven years study lost:
The fame of Bacon bruited through the world,
Shall end and perish with this deep disgrace.

Bacon hath built foundation on his fame,
So surely on the wings of true report,
With acting strange and uncouth miracles,
As this cannot infringe what he deserves.

Bungay, sit down, for by perspective skill,
I find this day shall fall out ominous,
Some deadly act shall betide me ere I sleep:
But what and wherein little can I guess.

My mind is heavy whatsoere shall hap.

Who's that knocks?

Two Schollers that desire to speak with you.

Bid the come in. Now, my youths, what would you have?

Sir, we are Suffolke men neighbouring friends,
Our fathers in their Countries lusty Squires,
Their lands adioyne, in Crack field mine doth dwell,
And his in Laxfield, we are College mates,
Sworn brothers; as our fathers live as friends.

To what end is all this?

Hearing your worship kept within your Cell
A glass perspective wherein men might see,
What so their thoughts or hearts desire could wish,
We come to know how that our fathers fare.

My glass is free for every honest man.
Sit down, and you shall see ere long,
How or in what state your friendly fathers live,
Mean while tell me your names.

Mine Lambert.

And mine Serlsby.

Bungay, I smell there will be a Tragedy.

Serlsby, thou hast kept thine hour like a man,
You are worthy of the title of a Squire:
That durst for proof of thy affection,
And for thy mistress favour prize thy blood;
Thou know what words did pass at Fresingfield,
Such shameless braves as manhood cannot brooke:
I, for I scorn to bear such piercing taunts,
Prepare thee, Serlsby, one of us will die.

Thou see I single thee the field,
And what I spake, I'll maintain with my sword:
Stand on thy guard, I cannot scold it out.
And if thou kill me, think I have a son,
That lives in Oxford in the Brodgates hall,
Who will revenge his fathers blood with blood.

And Serlsby, I have there a lusty boy,
That dares at weapon buckle with thy son,
And lives in Brodgates too as well as thine;
But draw thy Rapier: for we'll have a bout.

Now lusty yonkers, look within the glass,
And tell me if you can discern your sires.

Serlsby, tis hard, thy father offers wrong,
To combat with my father in the field.

Lambert, thou lie, my fathers is the abuse,
And thou shalt find it, if my father have harm.

How goes it, sirs?

Our fathers are in combat hard by Fresingfield.

Sit still, my friends, and see the event.

Why standst thou, Serlsby, doubt thou of thy life?
A veny, man, fair Margret craves so much.

Then this for her.

Ah, well thrust.

But mark the ward.

Oh, I am slain.

And I, Lord have mercy on me.

My father slain, Serlsby ward that.

And so is mine, Lambert, I'll quite thee well.

O strange stratagem!

See, Fryer, where the fathers both lye dead.
Bacon, thy magic doth effect this massacre:
This glass perspective works many woes,
And therefore seeing these lusty Brutes,
These friendly youths did perish by thine Art.
End all thy magic and thine Art at once:
The poniard that did end the fatal lives,
Shall break the cause efficiat of their woes,
So fade the glass, and end with it the shows,
That Nigromancy did infuse the crystal with.

What means learned Bacon thus to break his glass?

I tell thee, Bungay, it repeuts me sore,
That ever Bacon meddled in this Art,
The hours I have spent in Piromanticke spells,
The fearful tossing in the latest night,
Of papers full of Nigromanticke charms,
Conjuring and adiuring Devils and Fiends,
With Stole and Albe, and strange Pentaganon,
The wresting of the holy Name of God,
As Sother, Eloim, and Adonai,
Alpha, Manoth, and Tetragrammaton,
With praying to the fiue-fold powers of heaven,
Are instances that Bacon must be damned,
For using Devils to countervail his God.
Yet, Bacon, cheer thee, drown not in despair,
Sins have their salves, repentance can do much:
Think mercy sits where Justice holds her seat,
And from those wounds those bloody Iewes did pierce*
Which by thy magic oft did bleed afresh,
From thence for thee the dew of mercy drops,
To wash the wrath of hie Iehouahs ire,
And make thee as a new-borne babe from sin.
Bungay, I'll spend the remnant of my life
In pure devotion, praying to my God,
That he would save what Bacon vainly lost.

Margret, be not so head-strong in these vows.
Oh bury not such beauty in a Cell:
That England hath held famous for the hue.
Thy fathers hair like to the silver bloomes:
That beautifies the shrubs of Africa
Shall fall before the dated time of death,
Thus to forgo his lovely Margret.

A father, when the harmony of heaven
Sounds the measures of a lively faith:
The vain Illusions of this flattering world,
Seem odious to the thoughts of Margret.
I loved once, Lord Lacy was my love,
And now I hate my self for that I loved,
And doted more on him than on my God:
For this I scourge my self with sharpe repents;
But now the touch of such a spiring sins
Tells me, all love is lust, but love of heavens:
That beauty used for love is vanity,
The world contains nought but alluring baits:
Pride, flattery, and inconstant thoughts,
To shun the pricks of death, I leave the world,
And vow to meditate on heavenly bliss,
To live in Fremingham a holy Nun,
Holy and pure in conscience and in deed:
And for to wish all maids to learn of me,
To seek heavens joy before earths vanity.

And will you then, Margret, be shorn a Nun, and so leave us all?


Now farewell world, the engine of all woe,
Farewell to friends and father, welcome Christ:
Adieu to dainty robes, this base attire
Better befits an humble mind to God,
Then all the show of rich habiliments.
Love, oh Love, and with fond Love farewell,
Sweet Lacy, whom I loved once so dear,
Ever be well, but never in my thoughts,
Lest I offend to think on Lacies love:
But even to that as to the rest, farewell.

Come on my wags, we're near the Keepers Lodge,
Here have I oft walked in the watery Meads,
And chatted with my lovely Margret.

Sir Ned, is not this the Keeper?

Tis the same,

The old lecher hath gotten holy mutton to him, a Nun, my Lord.

Keeper, how fare thou holla man, what cheer,
How doth Peggie thy daughter and my love?

Ah, good my Lord! oh, woe is me for Pegge,
See where she stands clad in her Nuns attire,
Ready for to be shorn in Fremigham:
She leaves the world, because she left your love,
Oh good my Lord, persuade her if you can.

Why how now Margret, what a malecontent,
A Nun? what holy father taught you this,
To task your self to such a tedious life,
As dye a maid? 'twere injury to me,
To smother up such beauty in a Cell.

Lord Lacy, thinking of thy form miss,
How fond the prime of wanton years were spent
In love, Oh fie upon that fond conceit,
Whose hap and essence hangs in the eye,
I leave both love and loves content at once,
Betaking me to him that is true love,
And leaving all the world for love of him.

Whence, Peggie, comes this Metamorphosis?
What, shorn a Nun, and I have from the Court
Posted with coursers to convey thee hence,
To Windsore, where our marriage shall be kept?
Thy wedding robes are in the Taylors hands.
Come, Peggie, leave these peremptory vows.

Did not my Lord resign his interest,
And make divorce twixt Margret and him?

'Twas but to try sweet Peggies constancy:
But will fair Margret leave her love and Lord?

Is not heavens joy before earths fading bliss?
And life above sweeter then life in love?

Why then, Margret will be shorn a Nun.

Margret hath made a vow, which may not be reuokt.

We cannot stay, my Lord, and if she be so strict,
Our leisure grants us not to woo afresh.

Choose you, fair Damsel, yet the choice is yours,
Either a solemn Nunnery, or the Court,
God, or Lord Lacy, which contents you best,
To be a Nun, or else Lord Lacies wife?

A good motion. Peggie, your answer must be short.

The flesh is frail, my Lord doth know it well,
That when he comes with his enchanting face,
Whatsoere betide, I cannot say him nay.
Off goes the habit of a maidens heart,
And seeing fortune will, fair Fremingham,
And all the show of holy Nuns, farewell,
Lacy for me, if he will be my Lord.

Peggie, thy Lord, thy love, thy husband,
Trust me, by truth of Knighthood, that the King
Stays for to marry matchless Ellinor,
Until I bring thee richly to the Court,
That one day may both marry her and thee.
How say thou Keeper, art thou glad of this?

As if the English King had given
The Park and Dear of Fresingfield to me.

I pray thee my Lord of Sussex, why art thou in a browne study?


To see the nature of women, that be they never so near God, yet they love to
dye in a mans arms.


What have you fit for breakfast? we have hied and posted all this night to
Fresingfield.


Butter and cheese, and humbles of a Dear,
Such as poor Keepers have within their Lodge.

And not a bottle of wine?

We'll find one for my Lord.

Come, Sussex, let's in, we shall have more, for she speaks least, to hold
her promise sure.


How restless are the ghosts of hellish sprites,
When every Charmer with his Magic spells
Calls us from nine-fold trenched Phlegiton,
To scud and ouer-scoure the earth in post,
Upon the speedy wings of swiftest winds?
Now Bacon hath raised me from the darkest deep,
To search about the world for Miles his man,
For Miles, and to torment his lazy bones,
For careless watching of his brazen-head.
See where he comes: Oh he is mine.

A Scholar, quoth you, mary sir, I would I had been made a bottle-maker, when
I was made a scholar; for I can get neither to be a Deacon, Reader, nor
Schoole-master; no, not the Clarke of a Parish; some call me dunce: another
saith, my head is as full of Latin, as an eg's full of oate-meale: thus I am
tormented, that the Devil and Friar Bacon haunts me. Good Lord, here's one of
my masters Devils* I'll go speak to him: what master Plutus, how cheer you?


Dost thou know me?


Know you, sir, why are not you one of my masters Devils, that were wont to
come to my master Doctor Bacon, at Brazen-nose?


Yes mary am I.


Good Lord, M. Plutus, I have seen you a thousand times at my masters, and yet
I had never the manners to make you drink; but sir, I am glad to see how
conformable you are to the state; I warrant you, he's as yeomanly a man, as you
shall see, mark you masters, here's a plain honest man, without welt or guard;
but I pray you sir, do you come lately from hell?


I mary, how then?


Faith, tis a place I have desired long to see, have you not good tippling
houses there? may not a man have a lusty fire there, a pot of good Ale, a pair
of cards, a swinging piece of chalk, and a browne toast that will clap a
white waistcoat on a cup of good drink?


All this you may have there.


You are for me, friend, and I am for you: but I pray you, may I not have an
office there?


Yes, a thousand: what would thou be?


By my troth, sir, in a place, where I may profit my self. I know hell is a
hot place, and men are marvelous dry, and much drink is spent there; I would
be a Tapster.


Thou shalt,


There's nothing lets me from going with you, but that tis a long journey, and
I have never a horse.


Thou shalt ride on my back.


Now surely here's a courteous devil, that for to pleasure his friend, will
not stick to make a Jade of himself: but I pray you goodman friend, let me
move a question to you.


What's that?


I pray you, whether is your pace a trot or an amble?


An amble.


Tis well, but take heed it be not a trot,
But tis no matter, I'll prevent it.

What doest?


Mary, friend, I put on my spurs: for if I find your pace either a trot, or
else uneasy, I'll put you to a false gallop, I'll make you feel the benefit of
my spurs.


Get up upon my back.


Oh Lord, here's even a goodly marvel, when a man rides to hell on the Devils
back.


Great Potentates, earths miracles for state,
Think that Prince Edward humbles at your feet,
And for these favours on his martial sword,
He vows perpetual homage to your selves,
Yielding these honours unto Ellinour.

Gramercies, Lordings, old Plantagenet,
That rules and sways the Albion Diadem,
With tears discovers these conceived joys,
And vows requital, if his men at arms,
The wealth of England, or due honours done
To Ellinor, may quite his Favourites.
But all this while what say you to the Dames,
That shine like to the crystal lamps of heaven?

If but a third were added to these two,
They did surpass those gorgeous Images,
That gloried Ida with rich beauties wealth.

Tis I, my Lords, who humbly on my knee,
Must yield her horisons to mighty Jove,
For lifting up his handmaid to this state,
Brought from her homely cottage to the Court,
And graste with Kings, Princes and Emperors,
To whom (next to the noble Lincolne Earl)
I vow obedience, and such humble love,
As may a handmaid to such mighty men.

Thou martial man, that wears the Almaine Crown,
And you the Western Potentates of might,
The Albian Princesse^ English Edwards wife,
Proud that the lovely star of Fresingfield,
Fair Margret, Countess to the Lincolne Earl,
Attends on Ellinour: gramercies, Lord, for her*
Tis I give thanks for Margret to you all,
And rest for her due bounden to your selves.

Seeing the marriage is solemnised,
Let's march in triumph to the Royal feast.
But why stands Fryer Bacon here so mute?

Repentant for the follies of my youth,
That Magicks secret mysteries misled,
And joyful that this Royal marriage
Portends such bliss unto this matchless Realm.

Why, Bacon, what strange event shall hap to this Lad?
Or what shall grow from Edward and his Queen?

I find by deep praescience of mine Art,
Which once I tempered in my secret Cell,
That here where Brute did build his Troynouant,
From forth the Royal Garden of a King,
Shall flourish out so rich and fair a bud,
Whose brightness shall deface proud Phoebus flower,
And ouer-shadow Albion with her leaves.
Till then, Mars shall be master of the field,
But then the stormy threats of wars shall cease,
The horse shall stamp as careless of the pike,
Drums shall be turned to timbrels of delight,
With wealthy favours, plenty shall enrich
The strond that gladded wandering (...) to see,
And peace from heaven shall harbour in these leaves,
That gorgeous beautifies this matchless flower,
Apollos Hellitropian then shall stoop,
And Venus hyacinth shall veil her top,
Iuno shall shut her Gilliflowers up,
And Pallas Bay shall bash her brightest green*
Ceres carnation in confort with those,
Shall stoop and wonder at Diana's Rose.

This Prophecy is mystical,
But glorious Commanders of Europa's love,
That makes fair England like that wealthy I'll,
Circled with Gihen* and first Euphrates,
In Royallizing Henries Albion,
With presence of your prin^ely mightiness,
Let's march, the tables all are spread,
And viands such as Englands wealth affords,
Are ready set to furnish out the bords,
You shall have welcome, mighty Potentates,
It rests to furnish up this Royal Feast,
Only your hearts be frolic: for the time
Craves that we taste of nought but iouysance.
Thus glories England over all the West.


