WHY looks my lord like to a troubled sky,
When heavens bright shine, is shadowed with a fog:
A late we ran the dear and through the Lawndes
Stripped with our nagges the lofty frolic bucks,
That scudded fore the teisers like the wind,
Ne'er was the Dear of merry Fresingfield,
So lustily pulled down by jolly mates,
Nor shard the Farmers such fat venison,
So frankly dealt this hundred years before:
Nor have I seen my lord more frolic in the chase,
And now changed to a melancholy dump.

After the Prince got to the keepers lodge
And had been iocand in the house a while:
Tossing of ale and milk in country cannes,
Whether it was the countries sweet content:
Or else the bonny damsel filled us drink
That seemd so stately in her stammel red:
Or that a qualm did cross his stomach then,
But straight he fell into his passions.

Sir Raphe, what say you to your master,
Shall he thus all amort live malecontent.

Heerest thou Ned, nay look if he will speak to me.


What say thou to me fool?


I pree thee tell me Ned, art thou in love with the keepers daughter?


How if I be, what then?


Why then sirha I'll teach thee how to deceive love.


How Raphe.


Marry sirha Ned, thou shalt put on my cap, and my coat, and my dagger, and I
will put on thy clothes, and thy sword, and so thou shalt be my fool.


And what of this?


Why so thou shalt beguile Love, for Love is such a proud scab, that he will
never meddle with fools nor children, Is not Raphes counsel good Ned.


Tell me Ned Lacie, did thou mark the maid,
How lively in her country weeds she looked:
A bonier wench all Suffolke cannot yield,
All Suffolke, nay all England holds none such.

Sirha, Will Ermsby, Ned is deceived.


Why Raphe?


He says all England hath no such, and I say, and I'll stand to it, there is
one better in Warwickshire.


How proouest thou that Raphe?


Why is not the Abbot a learned man, and hath red many books, and think
thou he hath not more learning than thou to choose a bonny wench, yes I warrant
thee by his whole grammar.


A good reason Raphe.


I tell the Lacie, that hersparkling eyes,
Do lighten forth sweet Loves alluring fire:
And in her tresses she doth fold the looks
Of such as gaze upon her golden hair,
Her b^shfull white mixed with the mornings red,
Luna doth boast upon her lovely cheeks,
Her front is beauties table where she paints,
The glo^es of her gorgeous excellence:
Her teeth are shelves of precious Margarites,
Richly enclosed with rudd^e curroll cleues.
Tush Lacie, she is beauties overmatch,
If thou suruaist her curious imagery.

I grant my lord the damsel is as fair,
As simple Suffolks homely towns can yield:
But in the court be quainter dames than she,
Whose faces are enriched with honours taint,
Whose beauties stand upon the stage of fame,
And vaunt their trophies in the courts of love.

Ah Ned, but had thou watched her as my self,
And seen the secret beauties of the maid,
Their courtly coinesse were but foolery.

Why how watched you her my lord?


When as she swept like Venus through the house,
And in her shape fast folded up my thoughts:
Into the Milkhouse went I with the maid,
And there amongst the cream-boles she did shine,
As Palace, amongst her Princely housewifery:
She turned her smock over her Lilly arms,
And dived them into milk to run her cheese:
But whiter than the milk her crystal skin,
Checked with lines of Azure made her blush,
That art or nature durst bring for compare,
Ermsbie if thou had seen as I did note it well,
How beauty plaid the huswife, how this girl
Like Lucrece laid her fingers to the work,
Thou would with T^rquine hazard Room and all
To win the lovely maid of Fresingfield.

Sirha N^d, would fain have her?


I Raphe.


Why Ned I have laid the plot in my head thou shalt have her already.


I'll give thee a new coat and learn me that.


Why sir Ned weel ride to Oxford to Friar ^acon, oh he is a brave scholar
sir, they say he is a brave N^gromancer, that he can m^ke women of devils,
and he can juggle cats into Costermongers.


And how then Raphe?


Marry sirha thou shalt go to him, and because thy father Harry shall not miss
thee, he shall turn me into thee; and I'll to the Court, and I'll prince it
out, and he shall make thee either a silken purse, full of gold, or else a fine
wrought sinocke.


But how shall I have the maid?


Marry sirha, if thou be a silken purse full of gold, then on sundays
sheele hang thee by her side, and you must not say a word, Now sir when she
comes into a great press of people, for fear of the cut-purse on a sudden
sheele swap thee into her plackerd, then sirha being there you may plead for
your self.


Excellent policy.


But how if I be a wrought smo^ke.


Then sheele put thee into her chest and lay th^ into Lavender, and upon some
good day sheele put thee on, and at night when you go to bed, then being turned
from a smock to a man, you may make up the match.


Wonderfully wisely counselled Raphe.


Raphe shall have a new coat.


God thank you when I have it on my back Ned,


Lacie the fool hath laid a perfect plot,
For why our country Margret is so coy,
And stands so much upon her honest points,
That marriage or no market with the maid:
Ermsbie, it must be nigromaticke spells,
And charms of art that must enchain her love,
Or else shall Edward never win the girl,
Therefore my wags we'll horse us in the morn;
And post to Oxford to this jolly Friar,
Bacon shall by his magic do this deed.

Content my lord, and that's a speedy way
To wean these head-strong puppies from the teat,

I am unknown, not taken for the Prince,
They only deem us frolic Courtiers,
That revel thus among our lieges game:
Therefore I have d^uised a policy,
L^cie, thou know next friday is S. Iames,
And then the country flocks to Harlston fair,
Then will the keepers daughter frolic there,
And ouer-shine the troupe of all the maids,
That come to see, and to be seen that day.
Haunt thee disguisd among the country swains,
Fain thart a farmers son, not far from thence,
Epsy her loves, and who she likes best:
Coat him, and court her to control the clown,
Say that the Courtier tyred all in green,
That helped her handsomely to run her cheese,
And filled her fathers lodge with venison,
Commends him, and sends fairings to herself,
Buy some thing worthy of her parentage,
Not worth her beauty for Lacie then the fair,
Affoord^ no Jewel fitting for the maid:
And when thou talk of me, note if she blush,
Oh then sh^ loves, but if her cheeks wax pale,
Disdain it is. L^cie send how she fares,
And spare no time nor cost to win her loves.

I will my lord so execute this charge,
As if that Lacie were in love with her.

Send letters speedily to Oxford of the news.


And sirha Lacie, buy me a thousand thousand million of fine bells.


What wilt thou do^ with them Raphe?


Mary every time that Ned sighs for the keepers daughter, I'll tie a bell about
him, and so within three or four days I will send word to hi^ father Harry,
that his son and my master Ned is become Loves morris dance.


Well Lacie, ^ooke with care unto thy charge,
And I will hast to Oxford to the Friar,
That he by art, and thou by secret gifts,
May make me lord of merry Fresingfield.

God send your honour your harts desire.


Miles where are you?


Hi^ sum dos^issime reuerendissime doctor.


Attuli^in^s libr^s m^s de Necromantia.


Ecce quam bo^um quam i^cundum, habitares libr^s in^num.


Now masters of our Academic state,
That rule in Oxford Vizroies in your place,
Whose heads contain Maps of the liberal arts,
Spending your time in depth of learned skill,
Why flock you thus to Bacons secret Cell,
A F^ier newly stalde in (...),
Say whats your mind, that I may make reply.

Bacon we hear, that long we have ^spect,
That thou art read in Magicks mys^erie,
In Piromancie to divine by flames,
To tell by Hadromaticke, ebbes and tides,
By Aeromancie, to discover doubts,
To plain out questions, as Apollo did.

Well master B^den, what of all this?


Marie ^ir he doth but fulfil by rehearsing of thes^ names the Fable of the
Fox and the g^pes, that which is abou^ us, pertains nothing to us.


I tell thee Bacon, Oxford makes report,
Nay England, and the court of Henrie says,
Thart making of a brazen head by art,
Which shall unfold strang^ doubts and Aphorisme^,
And read a lecture in Philosophie,
And by the help of Devils and ghastly fiends,
Thou meanst ere many years or days be past,
To compass England with a wall of brass.

And what of this?


What of this master, why he doth speak mystically, for he knows if your
skill fail to make a brazen head, yet mother waters strong ale will ^it his
turn to make him have a coppernose.


Bacon we come not grieving at thy skill,
But ioieng that our Academi^ yields
A man supposed the wonder ofthe world,
For if thy cunning work these miracles,
England and Europe shall admire thy fame,
And Oxford shall in characters of brass,
And statues, such as were built up in Rome,
Eternize Friar Bacon for his art.

Then gentle Friar, tell us thy intent.


Seeing you come as friends unto the friar
Resolve you doctors, Bacon can by books,
Make storming Boreas thunder from his cave,
And dim fair Luna to a dark Eclipse,
The great arch-ruler, potentate of hell,
Trembles, when Bacon bids him, or his fiends,
Bow to the force of his Pentageron.
What art can work, the frolic friar knows,
And therefore will I turn my Magic books,
And strain out Necromancy to the deep,
I have contrivd and framed a head of bras^e,
(I made Belcephon hammer ^ut the stuff)
And that by art shall read Philosophie,
And I will strengthen England by my skill,
That if ten Caesars livd and raig^d in Rome,
With all the legions Europe doth contain,
They should not touch a grass of English ground,
The work that Ninus reared at Babylon,
The brazen walls framed by Semiramis,
Carved out like to the portal of the sun,
Shall not be such as rings the English st^ond:
From Dover to the market place of Ri^.

Is this possible?


I'll bring ye to or three witnesses.


What be those?


Marry ^ir three or four as honest devils, and good companions as any be in
hell.


No doubt but magic may do much in this,
For he that reads but Mathematicke rules,
Shall find conclusions that avail to work,
Wonder^ that pass the common sense of men.

But Bacon roves a bow beyond his reach,
And tells of more than magic can perform:
Thinking to get a fame by fooleries,
Have I not past as far instate of schools:
And red of many secrets, yet to think,
That heads o^ Brass can utter any voice,
Or more, to tell of de^pe philosophie,
This is a fable Aes^ had forgot.

Burden^ thou wrongst me in detracting thus,
Bacon loves not to stuff himself with lies:
But tell me fore these Doctors if thou dare,
Of certain questions I shall move to thee.

I will ask what thou can.


Marry si^ heel straight be on your pickpacke to know whether the feminine
or the masculin gender be most worthy.


Were you not yesterday master Burden at Henly upon the Thembs?


I was, what then?


What book studied you there on all night?


I, none at all I red not there a li^e.


Then doctors, Friar Bacons art knows nought.


What say you to this master Burden doth he not touch you?


I pass not of his frivolous speeches.


Nay master Burden, my master ere he hath done with you, will turn you from
a doctor to a dunce, and shake you so small, that he will leave no more
learning in you than is in Ba^aams Ass.


Masters, for that learned Burdens skill is deep,
And sore he doubts of Bacons Cabalisme:
I'll show you why he haunts to Henly oft,
Not doctors for to taste the fragrant air:
But there to spend the night in Alcumie,
To multiply with secret spells of art.
Thus private steals he learning from us all,
To prove my sayings true, I'll show you straight,
The book he ke^pes at Henly for himself.

Nay now my master goes to conjuration, take heed.


Masters stand still, fear not, I'll shew^ you but his book.

Pe^ omnes deos infernales Belcephon.


Oh master cease your conjuration, or you spoil all, for here's a she d^uell
c^me with a shoulder of mutton o^ ^spit, you have mard the devils supper, but
no doubt he thinks our College fare is slender, and so hath sent you his
cooke with a shoulder of mutton to make it exceed.


Oh where am I, or whats become of me.


What art thou?


Hostess at Henly mistress of the Bell.


How came thou here.


As I was in the kitchen amongst the maids,
Spitting the meat against supper for my guess:
A motion moved me to look forth of door.
No sooner had I pried into the yard,
But straight a whirlwind hoisted me from thence,
And mounted me alo^t unto the clouds:
As in a trance I thought nor feared nought,
Nor know I where or whether I was taken:
Nor where I am, nor what these persons be.

No, know you not master Burden.


Oh yes good sir, he is my daily guest,
What master Burden, twas but yesternight,
That you and I at Henly plaid at cards.

I know not what we did, a pox of all conjuring Friars.


Now jolly Friar tell us, is this the book that Burden is so careful to look
on?


It is, but Burden tell me now,
Think thou that Bacons Nicromanticke skill,
Cannot perform his head and wall of Brass,
When he can fetch thine hostess in such post.

I'll warrant you master, if master Burden could conjure as well as you, he
would have his book every night from Henly to study on at Oxford.


Burden what are you mated by this frolic Friar,
Look how he droops, his guilty conscience
Drives him to bash and makes his hostess blush.

Well mistres for I will not have you mist,
You shall to Henly to cheer up your guests
Fore supper gin, Burden bid her adieu,
Say farewell to your hostess sore she goes,
Sirha away, and set her safe at home.

Master Burden, when shall we see you at Henly.


The devil take thee and Henly too.


Master shall I make a good motion.


Whats that?


Marry sir now that my hostess is gone to provide supper, conjure up another
spirit, and send doctor Burden ^ying after.


Thus rulers of our Accademicke state,
You have seen the Friar frame his art by proo^:
And as the college called Braz^nno^
Is under him and he the master there:
So surely shall this head of brass be framd^,
And yield forth strange and uncouth Aph^rismes:
And Hell and Heccate shall fa^le the F^r,
But I will circle England round with brass.

So be it, n^ne semp^r, Amen.


By my troth Margret here's a whether is able to make a man call his father
whoreson, if this whether hold we shall have hay good cheap, and butter and
cheese at Harlston will bear no price.


Thomas, maids when they come to see the fair,
Count not to make a cope for dearth of hay,
When we have turned our butter to the salt,
And set our cheese safely upon the rackes.
Then let our fathers prise it as they please,
We country sluts of merry Fresingfield,
Come to buy needless noughts to make us fine,
And look that young men should be frank this day,
And court us with such fairings as they can.
Ph^us is blithe and frolic looks from heaven,
As when he courted lovely Semele:
Swearing the peddlers shall have empty packs,
If that fair whether may make chapmen buy.

But lovely Peggie Semele is dead,
And therefore Ph^bus from his palace pries,
And seeing such a sweet and seemly saint,
Shows all his glories for to court your self.

This is a fairing gentle sir indeed,
To sooth me up with suc^ smooth flattery,
But learn of me your sco^es to broad before:
Well Ione our beauties must abide their jests,
We serve the turn iniolly Fresingfield.

Margret^ a farmers daughter for a farmers sonn^,
I warrant you the meanest of us both,
Shall have a mate to lead us from the Church:
But Thomas whats the news? what in a dump.
Give me your hand, we are near a peddlers shop,
Out with your purse we must have fairings now.

Faith Ione and shall, I'll bestow a fairing on you, and then we will to the
Tau^rn, and snap off a pint of wine or two.


Whence are you sir, of Suffolke, for your (...) are finer than the common sort
of men?


Faith lovely girl, I am of Beckles by,
Your neighbour not above six miles from hence,
A farmers son that never was so quain^,
But that he could do courtesy to such dames:
But trust me Margret I am sent in charge,
From him that reveled in your fathers house,
And filled his Lodge with cheer and venison,
Tyred in green, he sent you this rich purse:
His token, that he helped you run your cheese,
And in the milkhouse chatted with your self.

To me, you forget your self.


Women are often weak in memorie^


Oh pardon sir, I call to mind the man,
Twere little manners to refuse his gift,
And yet I hope he sends it not for love:
For we have little leisure to debate of that.

What Margret blush not, maids must have their loves.


Nay by the mass she looks pale as if she were angry.


Sirha are you of Beckls? I pray how doth goodman Cob, my father bought a
horse of him, I'll tell you Marget, a were good to be a gentleman's jade, for of
all things the foul hilding could not abide a doongcart.


How different is this farmer from the rest,
That erst as yet hath pleased my wandering sight,
His words are witty, quickened with a smile,
His courtesy gentle, smelling of the court,
Facill and debonair in all his deeds,
Proportiond as was Paris, when in gray,
He courted Aenon in the vale by Troy.
Great lords have come and pleaded for my love,
Who but the keepers las^e of Fresingfield,
And yet me thinks this Farmers jolly son,
Passes the proudest that hath pleased mine eye.
But Peg disclose not that thou art in love,
And show as yet no sign of love to him,
Although thou well would wish him for thy love
Keep that to thee till time doth serve thy turn,
To show the grief wherein thy heart doth burn.
Come Ione and Thomas, shall we to the fair,
You Beckls man will not forsake us now,

Not whilst I may have such quaint girls as you,


Well if you chance to come by Fresingfield,
Make but a step into the keepers lodge,
And such poor fare as Woodmen can affoord,
Butter and cheese, cream, and fat venison,
You shall have store, and welcome therewithal.

Gramarcies Peggie, look for me ^are long.


Great men of Europe, monarchs of the West,
Ringd with the walls of old Oc^nus,
Whose lo^tie surges like the batte^ments,
That compassed high built Babell in with towers,
Welcome my lords, welcome brave westeme kings,
To Englands shore, whose promontory cleeues,
Shows Albion is another little world,
Welcome says English Henrie to you all,
Chie^ly unto the lovely Eleanour,
Who dared ^or Edwards sake cut through the seas,
And venture as Agenors d^msell through the deep,
To get the love of Henries wanton son.

Englands rich Monarch brave Plantagenet,
The Pyren mounts swelling above the clouds,
That ward the wealthy Castile in with walls,
Could not detain the beauteous Eleanour,
But hearing of the fame of Edwards youth,
She dared to brooke Neptunus haughty pride,
And bide the brunt of froward Eolus,
Then may fair England welcome her the more.

After that English Henrie by his lords,
Had sent prince Edwards lovely counterfeit,
A present to the Castile Elinor,
The comely pourtra^t of so brave a man,
The virtuous fame discoursed of his deeds,
Edwards courageous resolution,
Done at the holy land fore Damas walls,
Led both mine eye and thoughts in equal links,
To like so of the English Monarchs son,
That I attempted perils for his sake.

Where is the Prince, my lord?


He posted down, not long since from the court,
To Suffolke side, to merry Fremingham,
To sport himself amongst my fallow dear,
From thence by packets sent to Hampton house,
We hear the Prince is ridden with his lords,
To Oxford, in the Academy there,
To hear dispute amongst the learned men,
But we will send forth letters for my son,
To will him come from Oxford to the court.

Nay rather Henrie let us as we be,
Ride for to visit Oxford with our train,
Fain would I see your Universities,
And what learned men your Academy yields,
From Haspurg have I brought a learned clarke,
To hold dispute with English Orators.
This doctor surnamde Iaques Vandermast,
A Germaine borne, past into Padua,
To Florence, and to fair Bolonia,
To Paris, Rheims, and stately Orleans,
And talking there with men of art, put down
The chiefest of them all in Aphorisms,
In Magic, and the Mathematicke rules,
Now let us Henrie try him in your schools.

He shall my lord, this motion likes me well,
We'll progress straight to Oxford with our trains,
And see what men our Academi^ brings.
And wonder Vandermast welcome to me
In Oxford shalt thou find a jolly friar,
Called Friar Ba^on, Englands only flower
Set him but Non-plus in his magic spells,
And make him yield in Mathematicke rules,
And for thy glory I will bind thy brows,
Not with a poets garland^made of Bays,
But with a coronet of choicest gold,
Whilst then we fit to Oxford with our troupes,
Lets in and banquet in our English court.

Where be these vacabond knaves that they attend no better on their maiste^?


If it please your honour we are all ready at an inch.


Sirha Ned, I'll have no more post horse to ride on,
I'll have another fetch.

I pray you how is that my Lord?


Marry sir, I'll send to the I'll of Eely for four or five dozen of Geese, and
I'll have them tide six and six together with whipcord, Now upon their backs
will I have a fair field bed, with a Canapi^, and so when it is my pleasure
I'll flee into what place I please; this will be easy.


Your honour hath said well, but shall we to Brasennose College before we pull
off our boots.


Warren well motioned, we will to the Friar
Before we revel it within the town.
Raphe see you keep your countenance like a Prince.

Wherefore have I such a company of cutting knaves to wait upon me, but to
^eep and defend my countenance against all mine enemies: have you not good
swords and bucklers.


Stay who comes here.


Some scholar, and we'll ask him where Friar Bacon is.


Why thou arrant dunce shall I never make thee good scholar, doth not all the
town try out, and say, Friar Bacons subsiser is the greatest blockhead in all
Oxford, why thou can not speak one word of true Latin.


No sir, yes what is this else; ^g^ ^um tuus hom^, I am your man, I warrant you
sir as good Tullies phrase as any is in Oxford.


Come on sirha, what part of speech is Eg^.


Eg^, that is I, marry nomen s^bstant^.


How prove you that?


Why sir let him prove himself and a will, I can b^ hard felt and understood.


Oh gross dunce.


Come let us break off this dispute between these two. Sirha, where is
Brazennose College.


Not far from Copper-smithes hall.


What doest thou mo^ke me.


Not I sir, but what would you at Brazennose?


M^rrie we would speak with friar Bacon.


Whose men be you.


Marry scholar here's our master.


Sirha I am the master of these good fellows, may thou not know me to be a
Lord by my reparrell.


Then here's good game for the hawke, for heers the master fool, and a couie
of Cockscombs, one wise man I think would spring you all.


Gogs wounds Warren kill him.


Why Ned I think the deu^ll be in my sheath, I cannot get out my dagger.


Nor I mine, Swones Ned I think I am bewitched.


A company of scabs, the proudest of you all draw your weapon if he can,
See how boldly I speak now my master is by.

I strive in vain, but if my sword be shut,
And conjured fast by magic in my sheath,
Villain here is my fist.

Oh I beseech you conjure his hands too, that he may not lift his arms to his
head, for he is light fingered.


Ned strike him, I'll warrant thee by mine honour.


What means the English prince to wrong my man,


To whom speak thou.


To thee.


Who art thou.


Could you not judge when all your swords grew fast^
That friar B^con was not far from hence:
Edward king Henries son and Prince of Wales,
Thy ^oole disgui^d cannot conceal thy sel^e,
I know both Erm^bie and the Suslex E^rle,
Else Friar Bacon had but little skill.
Thou come in post from merry Fresingfield^
Fast fancied to the keepers bonny lass,
To crave some succour of the jolly Friar,
And Lacie Ear of Lincolne hast thou left,
To treat fair Margret to allow thy loves:
But friends are men, and love can baffle lords.
The Earl both woes and courts her for himself.

Ned this is strange, the friar knows al.


Appollo could not utter more than this.


I stand amazed to hear this jolly Friar,
Tell even the very secrets of my thoughts:
But learned Bacon since thou know the cause,
Why I did post so fast from Fresingfield.
Help Friar at a pinch, that I may have
The love of lovely Margret to my self;
And as I am true Prince of Wales, I'll give
Living and lands to strength thy college state.

Good Friar help the Prince in this.


Why servant Ned, will not the friar do it. Were not my sword glued to my
scabberd by conjuration, I would cut off his head and make him do it by force.


In faith my lord, your manhood and your sword all alike, they are so fast
conjured that we shall never see them.


Wat doctor in a dump, tush help the prince,
And thou shalt see how liberal he will prove,

Crave not such actions, greater dumps than these,
I will my lord strain out my magic spells,
For this day comes the earl to Fresingfield,
And fore that night shuts in the day with dark,
Theile be bet^othed each to other fast:
But come with me, w^ele to my study straight,
And in a glass pro^pectiue I will show
Whats done this day in m^rry Fresingfield.

Gramercies Bacon, I will quite thy pain.


But send your train my lord into the town,
My scholar shall go bring them to their Inn:
Mean while we'll see the knavery of the earl.

Warren leave me and Ermsbie, take the fool,
Let him be master and go revel it,
Till I and Friar Bacon ta^ke a while.

We will my lord.


Faith Ned and I'll lord it out till thou come, I'll be Prince of Wales over
all the black pots in Oxford.


Now frolic ^d^ard, welcome to my Cell,
Here tempers Friar Bacon many toys:
And holds this place his consistory court,
Wherein the devils pleads homage to his words,
Within this glasle pr^pectiue thou shalt see
This day whats done in merry Fresingfield,
Twixt lovely Peggie and the Lincolne earl.

Friar thou gladst me, nowshall Edward try,
How Lacie means to his sovereign lord.

Stand there and look directly in the glass,


What sees my lord.


I see the keepers lovely lass appear,
As bright-sunne as the parramour of Mars,
Only attended by a jolly friar.

Sit still and keep the crystal in your eye,


But tell me friar Bungay is it true,
That this fair courteous country swain,
Who says his father is a farmer nie,
Can be lord Lacie earl of Lincolnshire.

Peggie tis true, tis Lacie for my life,
Or else mine art and cunning both doth fail:
Left by prince Edward to procure his loves,
For he in green that help you run your cheese,
Is son to Henry and the prince of Wales.

Be what he will his lure is but for lust.
But did lord Lacie like poor Margret,
Or would he deign to wed a country lass,
Friar, I would his humble handmaid be,
And for great wealth, quite him with courtesy.

Why Margret doest thou love him.


His personage like the pride ofvaunting Troy,
Might well avouch to shadow Hellens cape:
His witis quick and ready in conceit,
As Greece afforded in her chiefest prime
Courteous, ah Friar full of pleasing smiles,
Trust me I love too much to tell thee more,
Suffice to me he is Englands parramour.

Hath not each eye that viewed thy pleasing face,
Surnamed thee fair maid of Fresingfield.

Yes Bungay, and would God the lo^ely Earl
Had that in esse, thatso many sought.

Fear not, the Friar will not be behind,
To show his cunning to entangle love.

I think the Friar courts the bonny wench,
Bacon, me thinks he is a lusty churl.

Now look my lord.


Gogs wounds Bacon here comes Lacie.


Sit still my lord and mark the commedie.


Here's Lacie, Margret step aside awhile.


Daphne the damsel, that caught Phoebus fast,
And locked him in the brightness of her looks,
Was not so beauteous in Appollos eyes,
As is f^re Margret to the Lincolne earl,
Recant thee Lacie thou art put in trust,
Edward thy sovereigns son hath chosen thee
A secret friend to court her for himself:
And dare thou wrong thy Prince with treachery.
Lacie, love makes no acception of a friend,
Nor deems it of a Prince, but as a man:
Honour bids thee control him in his lust,
His wooing is not for to wed the girl,
But to entrap her and beguile the lass:
Lacie thou love, then brooke not such abuse,
But wed her, and abide thy Princes frown:
For better die, then see her live disgraced.

Come Friar I will shake him from his dumps,
How cheer you sir, a penny for your thought:
Your early up, pray God it be the near,
What come from Beckles in a morn so soon.

Thus watchful are such men as live in love,
Whose eyes brooke broken slumbers for their sleep,
I tell thee Peggie since last Harlston fair,
My mind^ hath felt a heap of passions.

A trusty man that court it for your friend,
Woo you still for the courtier all in green.
I marvel that he sues not for himself.

Peggie, I pleaded first to get your grace for him,
But when mine ^i^s furuaid your beauteous looks
Love like a wag, straight dived into my heart,
And there did shrine the Idea of your self:
Pity me though I be a farmers son,
And measure not my riches but my love.

You are ver^e hasty for to garden well,
Seeds must have time to sprout before they spring,
Love ought to creep as doth the dials shade,
For timely ripe is rotten too too soon.

Deus hic, room for a merry Friar,
What youth of Beckles, with the keepers lass,
Tis well, but tell me here you any news.

No, Friar what news.


Here you not how the purseuants do post,
With proclamations through each country town:

For what gentle friar tell the news.


Dwelst thou in Beckles heerst not of these news,
Lacie the Earl of Lincolne is late fled
From Windsor court disguised like a swain,
And lurks about the country here unknown.
Henrie suspects him of some treachery,
And therefore doth proclaim in every way,
That who can take the Lincolne earl, shall have
Paid in the Exchequer twenty thousand crowns.

The earl of Lincoln, Friar thou art mad,
It was some other, thou mistake the man:
The earl of Lincolne, why it cannot be.

Yes very well my lord, for you are he,
The keepers daughter took you prisoner,
Lord Lacie yield, I'll be your gailor once.

How familiar they be Bacon.


Sit still and mark the sequel of their loves.


Then am I double prisoner to thy self,
Peggie, I yield, but are these news iniest,

In ^st with you, but earnest unto me:
For why, these wrongs do wring me at the heart,
Ah how these earles and noble men of birth,
Flatter and fain to forge poor women's ill.

Believe me lass, I am the Lincolne earl*
I not deny, but tyred thus in rags
I lived disguisd to win fair Peggies love.

What love is there where wedding ends not love?


I meant fair girl to make thee Lacies wife.


I (...) think that earles will stoop so low,


Say, shal^ I make thee countess ere I sleep.


Handmaid unto the earl so please himself
A wife in name, but servant in obedience.

The Lincolne countess, for it shall be so,
I'll plight the bands and seal it with a kiss.

Gogs wounds Bacon they kiss, I'll stab them,


Oh hold your hands my lord it is the glass.


Collar to see the traitors gre so well,
Made me think the shadows substances.

Twere a long poinard my lord, to reach between
Oxford and Fresingfield, but ^it still and see more.

Well lord of Lincolne, if your loves be knit,
And tha^ your tongues and thoughts do both agree:
To avoid ensuing jars, I'll hamper up the match,
I'll take my portace forth, and wed you here,
Then go to bed and seal up your desires.

Friar content, Peggie how like you this?


What likes my lord is pleasing unto me.


Then hand-fast hand, and I will to my book,


What sees my lord now.


Bacon, I see the lovers hand in hand,
The Friar ready with his portace there,
To wed them both, then am I quite undone,
Bacon help now, if ere thy magic serude,
Help Bacon, stop the marriage now,
If devils or nigromansie may suffice,
And I will give thee forty thousand crowns.

Fear not my lord, I'll stop the jolly Friar,
For mumbling up his orisons this day.

Why speak not Bungay, Friar to thy book.


How look thou friar, as a man disttaught^
To see if he will take this task in hand.

Stay what rumour is this, the town is up in a mutiny, what hurly burly is
this?


Nay masters if you were ne'er so good, you shall before the doctors to answer
your misdemeanour.


Whats the matter fellow?


Marie sir, here's a company of rufflers that drinking in the Tavern have made
a great brawl, and almost kilde the vintner.


Salve doctor Burden, this lubberly lurden,
Ill shaped and ill faced, disdained and disgraced,
What he tells unto v^bis, mentitur de nobis.

Who is the master and chee^e of this crew?


Ecce asinum mundi, fugura rotundi,
Neat sheat and fine, as brisk as a cup of wine.

What are you?


I am father doctor as a man would say, the Belwether of this copany, these are
my lords, and I the prince of Wales.


Are you Edward the kings son?


Sir Miles, bring hither the tapster that drew the wine, and I warrant when
they see how soundly I have broke his head, theile say twas done by no less
man than a prince.


I cannot believe that this is the prince of Wales.


And why so sir?


For they say the prince is a brave a wise gentleman.


Why and think thou doctor that he is not so?
Dare thou detract and derogat from him,
Being so lovely and so brave a youth.

Whose face shining with many a sugared smile,
Bewrays that he is bred of princely race.

And yet master doctor, to speak like a proctor,
And tell unto you, what is veriment and true,
To cease of this quarrel, look but on his apparel,
Then mark but my talis, he is great prince of Walis,
The cheese of our gregis, and fili^ regis,
Then ware what is done, for he is Henries white son.

Doctors whose doting nightcaps are not capable of my ingenious dignity, know
that I am Edward Plantagenet, whom if you displease, will make a ship that
shall hold all your colleges, and so carry away the Niniuersitie with a fair
wind, to the Bankeside in Southwarke, how say thou Ned Warraine, shall I not
do it?


Yes my good lord, and if it please your lordship, I will gather up al your old
pantophles, and with the cork, make you a Pinnace of five hundred tun, that
shall serve the turn marvelous well, my lord.


And I my lord will have Pioners to undermine the town, that the very Gardens
and orchards be carried away for your summer walks.


And I with scientia, and great diligentia,
Will conjure and charm, to keep you from harm,
That vtrum horum mauis, your very great nauis,
Like Bartlets ship, from Oxford do skip,
With Colleges and schools, full laden with fools,
Quid dices ad hoc, worshipful domine Dawcocke.

Why harebraind courtiers, are you drunk or mad,
To taunt us up with such scurilitie,
Deem you us men of base and light esteem,
To bring us such a fop for Henries son,
Call out the beadls and convey them hence,
Straight to Bocardo, let the roisters lie
Close clapped in bolts, until theirwits be tame.

Why shall we to prison my lord?


What say Miles, shall I honour the prison with my presence?


No no, out with your blades, and hamper these jade,
Have a flourish and a crash, now play revel dash,
And teach these Sacerdos, that the Bocardos,
Like pezzants and elves, are meet for themselves.

To the prison with them constable.


Well doctors seeing I have sported me,
With laughing at these mad and merry wags,
Know that prince Edward is at Brazennose,
And this attired like the prince of Wales,
Is Raphe, king Henries only loved fool,
I, earl of Essex, and this Ermsbie
O^e of the privy chamber to the king,
Who while the prince with Friar Bacon stays,
Have reveled it in Oxford as you see.

My lord pardon us, we knew not what you wer^,
But courtiers may make greater skapes than these,
Wilt please your honour dine with me to day?

I will master doctor, and satisfy the vintner for h^ hurt, only I must
desire you to imagine him all this forenoon the prince of Wales.


I will sir.


And upon that I will lead the way, only I will have Miles go before me,
because I have heard Henrie say, that wisdom must go before Majesty.


Lacie thou can not shroud thy traitrous thoughts,
Nor cover as did Cassius all his wiles,
For Edward hath an eye that looks as far,
As L^ncaeus from the shores of Grecia,
Did not I sit in Oxford by the Friar,
And see the^ court the maid of Fresingfield,
Seahog thy flattering fancies with a kiss,
Did not proud B^ngay draw his portasse forth,
And joining hand in hand had married you,
If Friar B^con had not stroke him (...),
And mounted him upon a spirits back,
That we might chat at Oxford with the friar,
Traitor what answerst, is not all this true?

Truth all my Lord and thus I make reply,
At Harlstone fair there courting for your grace,
When as mine eye ^uruaid her curious shape,
And drew the beauteous glory of her looks,
To dive into the center of my heart.
Love taught me that your honour did but jest,
That princes were in fancy but as men,
How that the lovely maid of Fresingfield,
Was fitter to be Lacies wedded wi^e,
Than concubine unto the prince of Wales.

Injurious Lacie did I love thee more
Than Alexander his Hephestion;
Did I vnfould the passion of my love,
And locke them in the closet of thy thoughts,
Were thou to Edward second to himself,
Sole friend, and partner of his secret loves,
And could a glance of fading beauty break,
Theinchained fetters of such private friends,
Base coward, false, and too effeminate,
To be coriuall with a prince in thoughts,
From Oxford have I posted since I dined,
To quite a traitor fore that Edward sleep.

Twas I my Lord, not Lacie stepped awry,
For oft he sued and courted for yourself,
And still wood for the courtier all in green,
But I whom fancy made but over fond,
Pleaded my self with looks as if I lovd,
I fed mine eye with gazing on his face,
And still bewitched lovd Lacie with my looks,
My hart with sighs, mine eyes pleaded with tear^,
My face held pity and content at once,
And mor^ I cou^d not siph^r out by signs
But that I lovd Lord Lacie with my heart,
Then worthy Edward measure with thy mind,
If women's fa^ours will not force men fall,
If beauty and if da^s of (...) ^oue,
Is not of force to bury thoughts of friends.

I tell thee Peggie I will have thy loues^
Edward or none shall conquer Margret,
In Frigates bottomd with rich Sethin planks,
Topped with the lofty firs of Libanon,
Stemd and incast with burnished luorie
And overlaid with plates of Persian wealth,
Like Thetis shalt thou wanton on the waives
And draw the Dolphins to thy lovely eyes,
To dance lauoltas in the purple streams,
Sirens with harps and silver psalteries,
Shall weight with music at thy frigates stem,
And entertain fair Margret with her lays,
England and Englands wealth shall wait on thee,
Britain shall bend unto her princes love,
And do due homage to thine excellence,
If thou wilt be but Edwards Margret.

Pardon my lord if Ioues great royalty,
Sent me such presents as to Danae,
If Phoebus tied in Latonas webs,
Come courting from the beauty of his lodge,
The dulcet tunes of frolic Mercurie,
Not all the wealth heavens treasury affords,
Should make me leave lord Lacie or his love.

I have learned at Oxford then this point ofschooles,
Abbata causa, ^llitur effectus,
Lacie the cause that Margret cannot love,
Nor fix her liking on the English Prince,
Take him away, and then the effects will fail,
Villain prepare thy self for I will bathe
My poinard in the bosom of an eatle.

Rather then live, and miss fair Margrets love,
Prince Edward stop not at the fatal doom,
But stab it home, end both my loves and life.

Brave Prince of Wales, honoured for royal deeds,
Twere sin to stain fair Venus courts with blood,
Loves conquests ends my Lord in courtesy,
Spare Lacie gentle Edward, let me die,
For so both you and he do cease your loves.

Lacie shall die as traitor to his Lord.


I have deserved it, Edward act it well.


What hopes the Prince to gain by Lacies death?


To end the loves twixt him and Margeret.


Why, thinks king Henries son that Margrets love,
Hangs in the uncertain balance of proud time,
That death shall make a discord of our thonghts,
No, stab the earl, and fore the morning sun
Shall vaunt him thrice, over the lofty east,
Margret will meet her Lacie in the heavens.

If ought betides to lovely Margret,
That wrongs or wrings her honour from content,
Europes rich wealth nor Englands monarchy,
Should not allure Lacie to ouerliue,
Then Edward short my life and end her loves.

Rid me, and keep a friend worth many loves.


Nay Edward keep^ a love worth many friends.


And if thy mind be such as ^ame hath blazde,
Then princely Edward let us both abide
The fatal resolution of thy rage,
Banish thou fancy, and embrace revenge,
And in one toomb^ knit both our carcasses,
Whose hearts were linked in one perfect love,

Edward Art thou that famous prince of Wales,
Who at Damasco beat the Sarasens,
And broughtst home triumph on thy lances point,
And shall thy plumes be pulled by Venus down,
Is it princely to dissever lovers leagues,
To part such friends as glory in their loves,
Leave Ned, and make a virtue of this fault,
And further Peg and Lacie in their loves,
So in subduing fancies passion,
Conquering thy self thou get the richest spoil,
Lacie rise up, fair Peggie here's my hand,
The prince of Wales hath conquered all his thoughts
And all his loves he yields unto the earl,
Lacie enjoy the maid of Fresingfield,
Make her thy Lincolne countess at the church,
And Ned as he is true Plantagenet,
Will give h^ to thee frankly for thy wi^e.

Humbly I take her of my sovereign,
As if that Edward gave me Englands right,
And richt me with the Albion diadem.

And doth the English Prince mean true,
Will he vouchsafe to cease his former loves,
And yield the title of a country maid,
Unto lord Lacie.

I will fair Peggi^ as I am true lord.


Then lordly sir, whose conquest is as great,
In conquering love as Caesars victories,
Margret as mild and humble in her thoughts,
As was Aspatia unto Cirus self,
Yields thanks, and next lord Lacie, doth ^nshrine
Edward the second secret in her heart.

Gramercy Peggie, now that vows are past,
And that your loves are not be revolt:
Once Lacie friends again, come we will post
To Oxford, for this day the king is there,
And brings for Edward Castile Ellinor.
Peggie I must go see and view my wife,
I pray God I like her as I loved thee.
Beside, lord Lincolne we shall hea^e dispute,
Twixt friar Bacon, and learned Vandermast,
Peggie we'll leave you for a week or two.

As it please lord Lacie, but loves foolish looks,
Think footsteps Miles, and minutes to be hours.

I'll hasten Peggie to make short return,
But please your houour go unto the lodge,
We shall have butter, cheese, and venison.
And yesterday I brought for Margret,
A lusty bottle of neat clarret wine,
Thus can we feast and entertain your grace.

Tis cheer lord Lacie for an Emperor,
If he respect the person and the place:
Come let us in, for I will all this night,
Ride post until I come to Bacons cell.

Trust me Plantagenet these Oxford schools
Are richly seated near the river side:
The mountains full of fat and fallow dear,
The batling pastures laid with kine and flocks,
The town gorgeous with high built colleges,
And schollers seemly in their grave attire.
Learned in searching principles of art,
What is thy judgment, Iaquis Vandermast.

That lordly are the buildings of the town,
Spacious the romes and full of pleasant walks:
But for the doctors how that they be learned,
It may be meanly, for ought I can here.

I tell thee Germane, Haspurge holds none such,
None red so deep as Oxenford contains,
There are within our accademicke state,
Men that may lecture it in Germanie,
To all the doctors of your Belgic schools.

Stand to him Bungay, charm this Vandermast,
And I will use thee as a royal king.

Wherein dare thou dispute with me.


In what a Doctor and a Friar can.


Before rich Europes worthies put thou forth
The doubtful question unto Vandermast.

Let it be this, whether the spirits of piromancie
or Geomancie, be most predominant in magic.

I say of Piromancie.


And I of Geomancie.


The cabalists that wright of magic spel^,
As Hermes, Melchie, and Pithagoras,
Affirm that amongst the quadruplicitie
Of elemental essence, Terra is but thought,
To be a punctum squared to the rest:
And that the compass of ascending eliments
Exceed in bigness as they do in height.
Judging the concave circle of the son,
To hold the rest in his circomference,
If then as Hermes says the fire be greatst,
Purest and only gives shapes to spirits:
Then must these Demones that haunt that place^
Be every way superior to the rest.

I reason not of elemental shapes,
Nor tell I of the concave lattitudes,
Noting their essence nor their quality,
But of the spirits that Piromancie calls,
And of the vigourof the Geomanticke fiends,
I tell thee Germane magic haunts the grounds,
And those strange necromantick spells
That work such shows and wondering in the world,
Are acted by those Geomanticke spirits,
That Hermes calls Terraefilii.
The fiery spirits are but transparent shades,
That lightly pass as Heralts to bear news,
But earthly fiends closed in the lowest deep,
Dissever mountains if they be but charged,
Being more gross and massy in their power.

Rather these earthly geomantike spirits,
Are dull and like the place where they remain:
For when proud Lucipher fell from the heavens,
The spirits and angels that did sin with him,
Retaind their local essence as their faults,
All subject under Lunas continent,
They which offended less hang in the fire,
And second faults did rest within the air,
But Lucifer and his proud hearted fiends,
Were thrown into the center of the earth,
Having less understanding than the rest,
As having greater sin, and lesser grace.
Therefore such gross and earthly spirits do serve,
For Jugglers, Witches, and wild sorcerers,
Whereas the Piromanticke gemij,
Are mighty, swift, and of far reaching power,
But grant that Geomancie hath most force,
Bungay to please these mighty potentates,
Prove by some instance what thy art can do.

I will.


Now English Harry here begins the game,
We shall see sport between these learned men.

What wilt thou do.


Show thee the tree leavd with refined gold,
Whereon the fearful dragon held his seat,
That watched the garden called Hesperides,
Subdued and won by conquering Hercules.

Well done.


What say you royal lordings to my friar,
Hath he not done a point of cunning skill.

Each scholar in the Nicromanticke spells,
Can do as much as Bungay hath performed,
Bur as Al^menas basterd ras^d this tree,
So will I raise him up as when he lived,
And cause him pull the Dragon from his seat,
And tear the branches peecemeale from the root,
Hercules Prod^, Pr^di Hercules.
Hercules appears in his Lions skin.

Quis me ^ult.


Ioues bastard son thou lybian Hercules
Pull off the sprigs from off the Hesperian tree,
As once thou did to win the golden fruit.

Fiat.


Now Bungay if thou can by magic charm,
The fiend appearing like great Hercules,
From pulling down the branches of the tree,
Then art thou worrhy to be counted learned.

I cannot.


Cease Hercules until I give thee charge,
Mighty commander of this English I'll,
Henrie come from the stout Plantagenets,
Bungay is learned enough to be a Friar.
But to compare with Iaquis Vandermast,
Oxford and Cambridge must go seek their celles,
To find a man to match him in his art.
I have given non-plus to the Paduans,
To them of Sign, Florence, and Belogna,
Reimes, Louain and fair Rotherdam,
Franckford, Lutrech and Orleance:
And now must Henrie if he do me right,
Crown me with laurel as they all have done.

All hail to this royal company,
That sit to hear and see this strange dispute:
Bungay, how standst thou as a man amazd,
What hath the Germane acted more than thou,

What art thou that questions thus.


Men call me Bacon.


Lord^y thou look, as if that thou were learned,
Thy countenance, as if science held her seat
Between the circled arches of thy brows.

Now Monarcks hath the Germain found his match.


Bestir thee Iaquis take not now the foil,
Least thou doest loose what foretime thou did gain.

Bacon, wilt thou dispute.


No, unless he were more learned than Vandermast.
For yet tell me, what hast thou done?

Raised Hercules to ruinate that tree,
That Bongay mounted by his magic spells.

Set Hercules to work.


Now Hercules, I charge thee to thy task,
Pull off the golden branches from the root.

Idare not, See thou not great Bacon here,
Whose frown doth act more than thy magic can.

By all the thrones and dominations,
Virtues, powers and mighty Herarchies,
I charge thee to ob^y to Vandermast.

Bacon, that bridles headstrong B^lcephon^
Andrules A^menoth guide erof the North:
Binds me from yielding unto Vandermast.

How now Vandermast, have you met with your match.


Never before was^ known to Vande^mast,
That men held d^uils in such obedient awe,
Bacon doth more than art or else I fail.

Why Vandermast art thou overcome,
Bacon dispute with him, and tri^ his skill:

I come not Monatckes for to hold dispute,
With such a novice as is Vandermast,
I come to have your royalties to di^e
With Friar Ba^on ^eere in Brazennose,
And for this Germane ^oubles but the place
And holds this audience wi^h a long suspense,
I'll se^d him to his Accademie hence,
Thou Hercules whom Vandermast did raise,
Transport the Germane unto Haspurge straight,
That he may learn by travail against the springs,
More secret dooms and Aphorisms of art,
Vanish the tree and thou away with him.

Why Bacon whether doest thou send him,


To Haspurge there your highness at return,
Shall find the Germane in his study safe.

Bacon, thou hast honoured England with thy skill,
And made fair Oxford famous by thine art,
I will be English Henrie to thy self,
But tell me shall we dine with thee to day.

With me my Lord, and while I ^it my cheer,
See where Prince Edward comes to welcome you:
Gracious as the morning star of heaven,

Is this Prince Edward Henries royal son,
How mart^all i^ the figur^ of his face,
Y^t lovely and be^t with Amorets.

N^d, where hast thou been.


At Framingham my Lord, to try your bucks.
I^ they could escape they teisers or the toil:
But hearing of these lordly Potentates
Landed, and prograst up to Oxford town,
I posted to give entertain to them,
Chief to the Almaine Monarch, next to him,
And joint with him, Castile and Saxonie,
Are welcome as they may b^ to the English Court.
Thus for the men, but see Venus appears,
Or one that overmatch eth Venus in her shape,
Sweet Ellinor, beauties highswelling pride,
Rich natures glory, and her wealth at once:
Fair of all fairs, welcome to Albion,
Welcome to me, and welcome to thine own,
If that thou dainst the welcome from my self.

Martial Plantagenet, Henries high minded sonne^
The mark that Ellinor did count her aim,
I likte thee fore I saw thee, now I love,
And so as in so short a time I may:
Yet so as time shall never break that so,
And therefore so accept of Ellinor.

Fear not my Lord, this couple will agree,
If love may creep into their wanton eyes:
And therefore Edward I accept thee here,
Without suspense, as my adopted son.

Let me that joy in these consorting greets,
And glory in these honours done to Ned,
Yield thanks for all these favours to my son,
And rest a true Plantagenet to all.

Saluete ^mnes reges, that govern your Greges, in Saxonie and Spain, in
England and in Almaine: for all this frolic table must I cover thee table,
with trenchers, salt and cloth, and thenlooke for your broth.


What pleasant fellow is this.


Tis my lord, doctor Bacons poor scholar.


My master hath made me sewer of these great lords, and God knows I am as
serviceable at a table, as a sow is under ^n apple tree: tis no matter, their
cheer shall not be great, and therefore what skils where the salt stand before
or behind.


Theseschollers knows more skill in actiomes,
How to use quips and sleights of Sophistry,
Than for to cover courtly for a king.

Spill sir, why do you think I never carried twopeny chop before in my life:
by your leave, Nobile d^cus, for here comes doctor Bacons pecus, being in his
full age, to carry a mess of pottage.


Lordings admire not if your cheer be this,
For we must keep our Accademicke fare,
No riot where Philosophi^ doth rain,
And therefore Henrie place these Potentates,
And bid them fall unto their frugal cates.

Presumptuous Friar, what scoffst thou at a king,
What doest thou taunt us with thy peasants fare,
And give us cates fit for country swains,
Henrie proceeds this jest of thy consent,
To twit us with such a pittance of such price,
Tell me, and Fredericke will not grieve the long.

By Henries honour and the royal faith
The English monarcke bears to his friend:
I knew not of the friars feeble fare,
Nor am I pleased he entertains you thus.

Content thee Fredericke for I showed the cates
To let thee see how schollers ^se to feed:
How little m^ate refines our English wits,
Miles take away, and let it be thy dinner.

Marry sir I will, this day shall be a festival day with me,
For I shall exceed in the highest degree.

I tell thee Monarch, all the Germane Peers
Could not a^oord thy entertainmentsuch,
So royal and so full of Majesty,
As Bacon will present to Fredericke,
The Basest waiter that attends thy cups,
Shall be in honours greater than thy self:
And for thy cates rich Alexandria drugs,
Fetched by Carueils from Aegypts richest straights:
Found in the wealthy strond of Africa,
Shall royallize the table of my king,
Wines richer than the Gyptian courtisan,
Qua^t to Augustus kingly countermatch,
Shall be carrowst in ^glish Henries feasts^
Candy shall yield the richest of her canes,
Persia down her volga by Canows,
Send d^wn the secrets of her spicery.
The Africa Dates mirab les of Spain,
Conserves, and Suckets from Tiberias,
Cates from Iudea choiser than the lamp
That fired Rome with sparks of gluttony,
Shall bewtisie the board for Fredericke,
And therefore grudge not at a friars feast.

Come frolic keeper of our lieges game,
Whose table spread hath ever venison,
And Jacks of wines to welcome passengers,
Know I am in love with jolly Margret,
That ouer-shines our damsels as the moon,
Darkneth the brightest sparkles of the night,
In Laxfield here my land and living lies,
I'll make thy daughter ioy^ter of it all,
So thou consent to give her to my wise,
And I can spend five hundredth marks a year.

I am the lan^lord keeper of thy holds,
By copy all thy living lies in me.
Laxfield did never see me raise my due,
I will infeofe fair Margret in all,
So she will take her to a lusty squire.

Now courteous gentls, if the Keepers girl^,
Hath pleased the l^king fancy of you both,
And with her beauty hath subdued your thoughts,
Tis doubtful to decide the question.
It joys me that such men of great esteem,
Should lay their liking on this base estate,
And that her state should grow so fortunate,
To be a wife to meaner men than you.
But since such squires will stoop to keepers fee,
I will to avoid displeasure of you both,
Call Margret forth, and she shall make her choice,

Content Keeper send h^rvnto us.
Why Serlsby is thy wife so lately dead,
Are all thy loves so lightly passed over,
As thou can wed before the year be out,

I live not Lambert to content the dead,
Nor was I wedded but for life to her,
The graves ends and begins a married state.

Peggie the lovely slower of all towns,
Suffolks fair Hellen, and rich Englands star,
Whose beautietempered with her huswifrie,
Makes England talk of merry Fr^sing^ield.

I cannot trick it up with poesies,
Nor paint my passions with comparisons,
Nor tell a tall of Phebus and his loves,
But this beeleue me Laxfield here is mine,
Of ancient rent seven hundred pounds a year,
And if thou can but love acountrie squire,
I will infeoffe thee Margret in all,
I can not flatter, try me if thou please.

Brave neighbouring squires the stay of Suffolks cli^e,
A Keepers daughters is too base in gre
To match with men accounted of such worth,
But might I notdisplease I would reply,

Say Peggy nought shall make us discontent.


Then gentles note that love hath little stay,
Nor can the flames that Venus sets on fire,
Be kindled but by fancies motion,
Then pardon gentles, if a maids reply
Be doubtful, while I have debated with my self,
Who or of whom^ love shall constrain me like,

Let it be me and trust me Margret,
The meads environed with the silver streams,
Whose Batling pastures fatneth all my flocks,
Yielding forth fleeces stapled with such wool,
As Lempster cannot yield more finer stuff
And forty kine with fair and burnished heads,
With strouting duggs that paggle to the ground,
Shall serve thy dary if thou wed with me.

Let pass the country wealth as flocks and kine,
And lands that wave with Ceres golden sheues
filling my barnes with plenty of the fields,
But peggie if thou wed thy self to me,
Thou shalt have garments of Imbrodred silk,
Lawns and rich networks for thy head attire
Costly shall be thy fare habiliments,
If thou wilt be but Lambert loving wife.

Content you gentles you have proffered faire^
And more than fits a country maids degree,
But give me leave to counsel me a time,
For fancy bloomes not at the first assault,
Give me but ten days respite and I will reply,
Which or to whom my self affectionats.

Lambert I tell thee thou art importunate,
Such beauty fits not such a base esquire
It is for Serlsby to have Margret.

Think thou with wealth to over reach me
Serlsby, I scorn to brooke thy country braves
I dare thee Coward to maintain this wrong,
At dint of rapier single in the field.

I'll aunswe^e Lamb^rt what I have auoucht
Margret farewell, another time shall serve.

I'll follow Peggie far^well to thy self,
Listen how well ^le answer for thy lo^e.

How Fort^ tempe^s lucky haps with frowns,
And wrongs me wi^h the sweets of my delight,
Love is my blis^e, and love is now my bale,
Shall I be Hellen in my forward fates,
As I am Hellen in my ma^chles h^e
And set rich Su^olke with my face afire,
If lovely Lacie were but with hi^ Peggy,
The cloudy darckenes^e of his bitter ^rowne
Would ch^k the pride of these aspiring squires,
Before the te^e of ten days be expired,
When as they look for a^swere of their loves,
My Lord will come to merry F^isingfield,
And end their fancies, and their follies both,
Till when Peggie be b^th and of good cheer.

Fair lovely damsel which way leads this path,
How might I post mevn^o Frisingfield,
which footpath leads to the keepers lodge?

You^ way is ^eady and this path is right,
My self do^ dwe^ her^by in Frisingfield,
And if the keeper be the ^an you seek,
I am his daughter may ^ the cause?

Lovely and once b^lo^d of my lord,
No merua^le if his ey^ was ^odg^ so low,
when brigh^r (...) is not ^n the he a^ens,
The Lincolne earl hath ^ent you letters here,
And with them, just an hundr^d pounds in gold,
Sweet bonny w^nch read them and make reply.

The scrolls that Jove sent Danae
Wrapped in rich closures of fine burnished gold,
Were not more welcome than these lines to me.
Tell me whilst that I do unrip the seals,
Lives Lacie well, how fares my lovely Lord?

Well, if that wealth may make men to live well.


THe bloomes of the Almond tree grow in a night, and vanish in a mome, the
flies Hamere (fair Peggie) take life with the Sun, and die with the dew,
fancy that slips in with a case, goes out with a wink; and too timely
loves, have ever the shortest length. I write this as thy grefe, and my folly,
who at Frisingfield lovd that which time hath taught me to be but mean
dainties, eyes are dissen^blers, and fancy is but queasy, therefore know
Margret, I have chosen a Spanish Lad^e to be my wife, chief weighting woman to
the Pri^cess^ Ellinour, a Lady saire, and no less fair th^n thy self,
honor^ble and wealthy, in that I forsake thee I leave thee to thine own liking^
and for thy dowr^e I have sent thee an hundred pounds, and ever assur^ thee of
my favour, which shall avail thee and thine much. Farewell.

Not thine nor his own, Ed^ard L^i^.

Fond Atae doomer of bad boding fates,
That wrappes proud Fortune in thy snaky locks,
Did thou enchant my byrth-day with such stars,
As lightened mischief from their infancy,
If heavens had vowed, if^tars had made decree,
To show on me their froward influence,
If L^cie had but lovd, heavens hell and all,
Could not have wronged the p^tience of my mind.

It grieves me damsel, but the Ear^ is forced
To love the Lady, by the Kings command.

The wealth combined within the English shelves,
Europes commander no^ the English King,
Should not have moude the love of Peggie from her Lord.

What answer shall I return to my Lord?


First for thou came from Lacie whom I lovd,
Ah give me leave to sigh at every thought,
Take thou my friend the hundred pound he sent,
For Margrets resolution craves no dower,
The world shall be to her as vanity,
Wealth trash, love hate, pleasure despair,
For I will straight to stately Fremingham,
And in the abbey there be shorn a Nun
And yield my loves and liberty to God,
Fellow I give thee this, not for the news,
For those be hateful unto Margret,
But for thart Lacies man once Margrets love.

What I have heard what passions I have seen
I'll make report of them unto the Earl.

Say that she joys his fancies be at rest,
And prays that his misfortune may be hers.

Miles where are you?


Here sir.


How chance you tarry so long?


Think you that the watching of the brazen head craves no furniture? I warrant
you sir I have so armed my self, that if all your devils come I will not
fear them an inch.


Miles thou know that I have dived into hell,
And sought the darkest palaces of fiends,
That with my Magic spells great Belcephon,
Hath left his lodge and kneeled at my cell,
The rafters of the earth rent from the poles,
And three-formd Luna hid her filuer looks,
Trembling upon her concave contenent,
When Bacon red upon his Magic book,
With seven years tossing nigromanticke charms,
Poring upon dark Hecats principles,
I have framed out a monstrous head of brass,
That by theinchaunting forces of the devil,
Shall tell out strange and uncouth Aphorisms,
And girt fair England with a wall of brass,
Bungay and I have watched these threescore daye^,
And now our vital spirits crave some rest,
If Argos livd and had his hundred eyes,
They could not ouerwatch Phobeters night,
Now Miles in thee rests Friar Bacons weal,
The honour and renown af all his life,
Hangs in the watching of this brazen-head,
Therefore I charge thee by the immortal God
That holds the souls of men within his fist,
This night thou watch, for ere the morning star
Sends out his glorious glister on the north,
The head will speak, then Miles upon thy life,
Wake me for then by Magic art I'll work,
To end my seven years task with excellence,
If that awinke but shut thy watchful eye,
Thenfarewell Bacons glory and his fame,
Draw close the courtaines Miles now for thy life,
Be watchful and

So, I thought you would talk your self a sleep anon, and tis no marvel,
for Bungay on the days, and he on the nights, have watched Just these ten and
fifty days, now this is the night, and tis my task and no more. Now Iesus
bless me what a goodly head it is, and a nose, you talk of n^s autem
gl^r^ficar^, but here's a nose, that I warrant may be called nos autem p^pelare
for the people of the parish, well I am furnished with weapons,, now sit I will
set me down by a post, and mak^ it as good as a watch-man to wake me if I
chance to slumber.

I thought goodman head, I would call you out of your memento, passion a God I
have almost broke my pate, Up Miles to your


Time is.


Time is, Why master Brazenhead have you such a capital nose, and answer you
with syllables, Time is: is this all my masters cunning, to spend seven years
study about Time is: well sir, it may be we shall have some better orations of
it anon, well I'll watch you as narrowly as ever you were watched, and I'll play
with you as the Nightingale with the Slowworme, I'll set a prick against my
breast: now rest there Miles, Lord have mercy upon me, I have almost killed my
selse: up Miles list how they rumble.


Time was.


Well friar Bacon, you spent your seven years study well that can make your
Head speak but two words at once, Time was: yea marie, time was when my
master was a wise man, but that was before he began to make the Brasen-head,
you shall lie while your ar^e ache and your Head speak no better: well I will
watch and walk up and down, and be a Perepatetian and a Philosopher of
Aristotles stamp, what a fresh noise, take thy pistols in hand Miles.


Time is past.


Master master, up, hells broken loose, your Head speaks, and there's such a
thunder and lightning, that I warrant all Oxford is up in arms, out of your
bed and take a browne bill in your hand, the latter day is come.


Miles I come, oh passing warily watched,
Bacon will make thee next himself in love,
When spake the Head^

When spake the Head, did not you say that he should tell strange principles
of Philosophie, why sir it speaks but two words at a time.


Why villain hath it spoken oft.


Oft, I marie hath it thrice: but in all those three times it hath uttered but
seven words.


As how


Mar^ie sir, the first time he said, Time is, as if Fabius cumentator should
have prono^nst a sentence, he said Time was, and the third time with thunder
and lightning, as in great choler, he said Time is past.


Tis past indeed, a villain time is past,
My life, my fame, my glory, all are past:
Bacon, the turrets of thy hope are ruined down,
Thy seven years study lies in the dust:
Thy Brazen-head lies broken through a slave
That watched, and would not when the Head did will,
What said the Head first.

Even sir, Time is,


Villain if thou had called to Bacon then,
If thou had watched and wakte the sleepy friar,
The Brazen-head had uttered Aphorisms,
And England had been circled round with brass,
But proud Astm^roth ruler of the North,
And Demegorgon master of the fates,
Grudge that a mortal man should work so much,
Hell trembled at my deep commanding spells,
Fiends frowned to see a man their overmatch,
Bacon might bost more than a man might boast:
But now the braves of Bacon hath an end,
Europes conceit of Bacon hath an end:
His seven years practise sorts toill end:
And villain since my glory hath an end,
I will appoint thee fatal to some end,
Villain avoid getthee from Bacons sight:
Vag^t go ^ome and range about the world,
And peri^ as a vagabond on earth.

Why then sir you forbid me your service.


My service villain with a fatal curse,
That direful plagues and mischief fall on thee.

Tis no matter I am against you with the old proverb, The more the foxis cursed
the better he fares: God be with you sir, I'll take but a book in my hand, a
wide sleeved gown on my back, and a crowned cap on my head, and see if I can
want promotion.


Some fiend or ghost haunt on thy weary steps,
Until they do transport thee quick to hell,
For Bacon shall have never merry day,
To loose the fame and honour of his Head.

Now lovely Prince the prince of Albions wealth,
How fares the lady Ellinor and you:
What have you courted and found Castile fit,
To answer England in equiuo^ence
Wilt be a match twixt bonny Nell and thee.

Should Paris enter in the courts of Greece,
And not lie fettered in fair Hellens looks,
Or Pho^bus escape those piercing amorits,
That Daphne glaunsed at his d^itie:
Can Edward then ^it by a flame and freeze,
Whose heat puts Hellen and fair Daphne down,
Now Monarcks ask the lady if we gre.

What madam hath my son found grace or no.


Seeing my lord his lovely counterfeit,
And hearing how his mind and shape agreed,
I come not trooped with all this warlike train,
Doubting of love, but so effectionat
As Edward hath in England what he won in Spain.

A match my lord, these wantons needs must love,
Men must have wives and women will be wed,
Lets hast the day to honour up the rites.

Sirha Harry, shall Ned marry Nell.


I Raphe, how then.


Marry Harrie follow my counsel, send for friar Bacon to marry them, for
heel so conjure him and her with his Necromancy, that they shall love
together like pig and lamb^ whilst they live.


But hearst thou Raphe, art thou content to have ^llinor to thy lady.


I so she will promise me two things.


Whats that Raphe.


That she will never scold with Ned nor fight with me, Sirha Harry I have put
her down with a thing unpossible,


Whats that Raphe.


Why Harrie did thou ever see that a woman could both hold her tongue and her
hands, no but when egge-pies grows on apple-trees, then will thy gray mare
prove a bagpiper.


What says the lord of Castile and the earl of Lincolne, that they are in
such earnest and secret talk.


I stand my lord amazed at his talk
How he discourses of the constancy,
Of one surnam'd fot beauties excellence,
The fair maid of merry Fresingfield.

Tis true my lord, tis wondrous for to hear,
Her beauty passing Marces parramour:
Her virgins right as rich as Vestas was,
Lacie and Ned hath told me miracles.

What says lord Lacie, shall she be his wife.


Or else lord Lacie is unfit to live,
May it please your highness give me leave to post
To Fresingfield Ilefetch the bonny girl,
And prove in true appearance at the court
What I have vouched often with my tongue.

Lacie, go to the quirie of my stable,
And take such coursers as shall fit thy turn,
Hie thee to Frefingfield and bring home the lass,
And for her fame flies through the English coast,
If it may please the lady Ellinor,
One day shall match your excellence and her,

We Castile ladies are not very coy,
Your highnesle may command a greater boon,
And glad were I to grace the Lincolne earl
With being partner of his marriage day.

Gramercy Nell for I do love the lord,
As he that's second to my self in love.

You love her, madam Nell, never believe him you though he swears he loves
you.


Why Raphe.


Why his love is like unto a tapsters glass that is broken with every tutch,
for he loved the fair maid of Fresingfield once out of all hoe, nay Ned never
wink upon me, I care not I.


Raphe tells all, you shall have a good secretary of him,
But Lacie haste thee post to Fresingfield:
For ere thou hast fitted all things for her state,
The solemn marriage day will be at hand.

I go my lord.


How shall we pass this day my lord.


To horse my lord, the day is passing fair,
We'll fly the partridge or go rouse the dear,
Follow my lords, you shall not want for sport.

What means the friar that frolickt it of late,
To sit as melancholy in his cell:
To sit as melancholy in his cell,
As if he had neither lost nor won to day.

Ah Bungay my Brazen-head is spold,
My glory gone, my seven years study lost:
The fame of Bacon bruited through the world,
Shall end and perish with this deep disgrace.

Bacon hath built foundation on his fame,
So surely on the wings of true report,
With acting strange and uncouth miracles,
As this cannot infringe what he deserves.

Bungay sit down, for by perspective skill,
I find this day shall fall out ominous,
Some deadly act shall tide me ere I sleep:
But what and wherein little can I guess.

My mind is heavy what so ere shall hap.


Whose that knocks.


Two schollers that desires to speak with you.


Bid the come in, Now my youths what would you ^aue.


Sir we are Suffolke men and neighbouring friends,
Our fathers in their countries lusty squires,
Their lands adioyne, in Crackfield mine doth dwell,
And his in Laxfield, we are college mates,
Sworn brothers as our fathers lives as friends.

To what end is ail this.


Hearing your worship kept within your cell
A glass perspective wherein men might see,
What so their thoughts or hearts desire could wish,
We come to know how that our fathers fare.

My glass is free for every honest man,
Sit down and you shall see ere long,
How or in what state your friendly father lives,
Mean while tell me your names.

Mine Lambert.


And mine Serlsbie.


Bungay, I smell there will be a tragedy.


Serlsby thou hast kept thine hour like a man,
You are worthy of the title of a squire:
That durst for proof of thy affection,
And for thy mistress favour prize thy blood,
Thou know what words did pass at Fresingfield,
Such shameless braves as manhood cannot brooke:
I for I scorn to bear such piercing taunts,
Prepare thee Serlsbie one of us will die.

Thou see I single thee the field,
And what I spake, I'll maintain with my sword:
Stand on thy guard I cannot scold it out.
And if thou kill me, think I have a son,
That lives in Oxford in the Brodgates hall,
Who will revenge his fathers blood with blood.

And Serlsbie I have there a lusty boy,
That dares at weapon buckle with thy son,
And lives in Broadgates too as well as thine,
But draw thy Rapier for we'll have about.

No^ lusty yonkers look within the glass,
And tell me if you can discern your ^ires.

Serlsbie tis hard, thy father offers wrong,
To combat with my father in the field.

Lambert thou lie, my fathers is the abuse,
And thou shalt find it, if my father harm.

How goes it sirs.


Our fathers are in combat hard by Fresingfield.


Sit still my friends and see the event.


Why standst thou Serlsbie doubt thou of thy life,
A venue man, fair Margret craves so much.

Then this for her.


Ah well thrust.


But mark the ward.


Oh I am slain.


And I, Lord have mercy on me.


My father slain, Serlby ward that.


And so is mine Lambert, I'll quite thee well.


O strange strattagem.


See Friar where the fathers both lie dead.
Baconthy magic doth effect this massacre:
This glass perspective works many woes,
And therefore seeing these brave lusty brutes,
These friendly youths did perish by thine art,
End all thy magic and thine art at once:
The poniard that did end the fatal lives,
Shall break the cause efficiat of their woes,
So fade the glass, and end with it the shows,
That Necromancy did infuse the crystal with.

What means learned Bacon thus to break his glass.


I tell thee Bungay it repents me sore,
That ever Bacon meddled in this art,
The hours I have spent in piromanticke spells,
The fearful tossing in the latest night,
Of papers full of Nigromanticke charms,
Conjuring and adiuring devils and fiends,
With stole and albe and strange Pentaganon,
The wresting of the holy name of God,
As Sother, Elaim, and Adonaie,
Alpha, M^noth, and Tetragramiton,
With praying to the fiue-fould powers of heaue^,
Are instances that Bacon must be damde,
For using devils to countervail his God.
Yet Bacon cheer thee, drown not in despair,
Sins have their salves repentance can do much,
Think mercy sits where Justice holds her seat,
And from those wounds those bloody Iews did pierce
Which by thy magic oft did bleed a fresh,
From thence for thee the dew of mercy drops,
To wash the wrath of hie Iehouahs ire,
And make thee as a new borne babe from sin,
Bungay I'll spend the remnant of my life
In pure devotion praying to my God,
That he would save what Bacon vainly lost.

Margret be not so headstrong in these vows,
Oh bury not such beauty in a cell:
That England hath held famous for the hue,
Thy fathers hair like to the silver bloomes:
That beautify the shrubs of Africa
Shall fall before the dated time of death,
Thus to forgo his lovely Margret.

A father when the hermony of heaven,
sounds the measures of a lively faith:
The vain Illusions of this fl^ttering world,
Seems odious to the thoughts of Margret,
I loved once, lord Lacie was my love,
And now I hate my self for that I lovd,
And doted more on him than on my God:
For this I scourge my self with sharpe repent^
But now the touch of such aspiring sins
Tells me all love is lust but love of heavens:
That beauty used for love is vanity,
The world contains nought but alluring baits:
Pride, flattery, and inconstant thoughts,
To shun the pricks of death I leave the world,
And vow to meditate on heavenly bliss,
To live in Framingham a holy Nun,
Holy and pure in conscience and in deed:
And for to wish all maids to learn of me,
To seek heavens joy before earths vanity.

And will you then Margret be shor^ a Nun, and so leave us all.


Now farewell world the engine of all woe,
Farewell to friends and father, welcome Christ:
Adieu to dainty robes, this base attire
Better befits an humble mind to God,
Than all the show of rich habiliments,
Love, oh Love, and with fond Love farewell,
Sweet Lacie whom I loved once so dear,
Ever be well, but never in my thoughts,
Least I offend to think on Lacies love:
But even to that as to the rest farewell.

Come on my wags weere near the keepers lodge,
Here have I oft walked in the watery Meads,
And chatted with my lovely Margret.

Sirha Ned, is not this the keeper.


Tis the same.


The old lecher hath gotton holy mutton to him a Nun my lord.


Keeper how fare thou holla man, what cheer,
How doth Peggie thy daughter and my love.

Ah good my lord, oh wo is me for Pegge,
See where she stands clad in her Nuns attire,
Ready for to be shorn in Framingham:
She leaves the world because she left your love,
Oh good my lord persuade her if you can.

Why how now Margret, what a malecontent,
A Nun, what holy father taught you this,
To task your self to such a tedious life,
As die a maid, twere injury to me.
To smother up such beauty in a cell.

Lord Lacie thinking of thy former miss^,
How fond the prime of wanton years were spent
In love, Oh fie upon that fond conceit,
Whose hap and essence hangs in the eye,
I leave both love and loves content at once,
Betaking me to him that is true love,
And le^uing all the world for love of him.

Whence Peggie comes this Metamorphosis,
What shorn a Nun, and I have from the co urt,
Posted with coursers to convey thee hence,
To Windsore, where our Marriage shall be kept,
Thy wedding robes are in the tailors hands,
Come Peggy leave these peremptory vows.

Did not my lord resign his interest,
And make divorce twixt Margret and him^

Twas but to try sweet Peggies constancy,
But will fair Margret leave her love and Lord?

Is not heavens joy before earths fading bliss,
And life above sweeter than life in love,

Why then Margret will be shorn a Nun,


Margret hath made a vow which may not be reuokt.


We cannot stay my Lord, and if she be so strict,
Our leisure grants us not to woo a fresh.

Choose you fair damsel, yet the choice is yours,
Either a solemn Nunnery, or the court,
God, or Lord Lacie, weich contents you best,
To be a Nun, or else Lord Lacies wife.

A good motion, Peggie your answer must be short.


The flesh is frail, my Lord doth know it well,
That when he comes with his enchanting face,
What so er^ betide I cannot say him nay,
Off goes the habit of a maidens heart,
And seeing Fortune will, fair Fremingham,
And all the show of holy Nuns farewell,
Lacie for m^, if he will be my lord.

Peggie thy Lord, thy love, thy husband,
Trust me, by truth of knighthood, that the King
Stays for to marry matchless Ellinour,
Until I bring thee richly to the court,
That one day may both marry her and thee,
How say thou Keeper art thou glad of this?

As if the English King had given
The park and decre of Frisingfield to me.

I pray thee my Lord of Sussex why art thou in a brown study?


To see the nature of women, that be they never so near God, yet they love to
die in a mans arms.


What have you fit for breakfast? we have hied and posted all this night to
Frisingfield.


Butter and cheese and humbls of a Dear,
Such as poor Keepers have within their lodge.

And not a bottle of wine?


We'll find one for my Lord.


Come Sussex lets in, we shall have more, for she speaks least, to hold her
promise sure.


How restless are the ghosts of hellish spirits,
When every charmer with his Magic spells
Calls us from nine-fold trenched Blegiton,
To scud and ouer-scoure the earth in post,
Upon the speedy wings of swiftest winds,
Now Bacon hath raised m^ from the darkest deep,
To search about the world for Miles his man,
For Miles, and to torment his lasy bones,
For careless watchidg of his Brazen head,
See where he comes, Oh he is mine.

A scholar quoth you, marry sir I would I had been made a botlemaker when I
was made a scholar, for I can get neither to be a Deacon, Reader, nor
Schoolmaster, no, not the clarke of a parish, some call me dunce, another
saith my head is as full of Latin as an eggs full of oatemeale, thus I am
tormented that the devil and Friar Bacon, haunts me, good Lord heers one of my
masters devils, I'll go speak to him, what master Plutus, how chere you?


Dost thou know me?


Know you sir, why are not you one of my masters devils, that were wont to
come to my master Doctor Bacon, at Brazen-nose?


Yes marry am I.


Good Lord M. Plutus I have seen you a thousand times at my masters and yet I
had never the manners to make you drink, but sir, I am glad to see how
conformable you are to the statute, I warrant you heesasyeomanlya man, as you
shall see, mark you masters, heers a plain honest man, without welt or
guard, but I pray you sir do you come lately from hell?


I marry how then,


Faith tis a place I have desired long to see, have you not good tippling houses
there, may not a man have a lusty fire there, apot of good ale, a pair of
cards, a swinging piece of chalk, and a browne toast that will clap a white
waistcoat on a cup of good drink?,


All thisyou may have there.


You are for me friend, and I am for you, but I pray you, may I not have an
office there?


Yes a thousand, what would thou be?


By my troth sir in a place where I may profit my self, I know hell is a hot
place, and men are marvelous dry, and much drink is spent there, I would be
a tapster.


Thou shalt.


There's nothing lets me from going with you, but that tis a long journey, and I
have never a horse.


Thou shalt ride on my back.


Now surely hers acourteous devil, that for to pleasure his friend will not
stick to make a jade of himself, but I pray you goodman f^iend let me move a
question to you.


Whats that?


I pray you whether is your pace a trot or an amble?


An amble.


Tis well, but take heed it be not a trot,
But tis no matter I'll prevent it.

What dost?


Marry friend I put on my spurs, for if I find your pace either a trot or else
uneasy, I'll put you to a false gallop, I'll make you feel the benefit of my
spurs.


Get up upon my back.


Oh Lord here's even a goodly marvel, when a man rides to hell on the Devils
back.


Great potentates earths miracles for state,
Think that prince Edward humbles at your feet,
And for these favours on his martial sword,
He vows perpetual homage to yourselves,
Yielding these honours unto Ellinour.

Gramercies Lordlings, old Plantagenet,
That rules and sways the Albion diadem,
With tears discovers these conceived joys,
And vows requital, if his men at arms,
The wealth of England, or due honours done
To Ellinour, may quite his favourites.
But all this while what say you to the Dames,
That shine like to the crystal lamps of heaven?

If but a third were added to these two
They did surpass those gorgeous images,
That gloried Ida with rich beauties wealth.

Tis I my lords who humbly on my knee,
Must yield her orisons to mighti^ Jove,
For lifting up his handmaid to this state,
Brought from her homely cottage to the court,
And graste with Kings Princes and Emperors,
To whom (next to the noble Lincolne Earl)
I vow obedience, and such humble love,
As may a handmaid to such mighty men.

Thou m^rtiall man that wears the Almaine crown,
And you the western Potentates of might,
The Albian Princess, English Edwards wife,
Proud that the lovely star of Frisingfield,
Fair Margret, Countess to the Lincolne Earl,
Attends on Ellinour, gramercies Lord for her,
Tis I give thanks for Margret to you all,
And rest for her due bounden to your selves.

Seeing the marriage is solemnised,
Lets march in triumph to the royal feast,
But why stands Friar Bacon here so mute?

Repentant for the follies of my youth,
That Magicks secret mysteries misled,
And joyful that this royal marriage,
Portendes such bliss unto this matchless realm.

Why Bacon what strange euet shall hap to this land
Or what shall grow from Edward and his Queen.

I find by deep praescience of mine art,
Which once I tempered in my secret cell,
That here where Brute did build his Troynouant,
From forth the royal garden of a King,
S^all flowrish out, so rich and fair a bud,
Whose brightness shall deface proud Phoebus flowr^,
And ouer-shadow Albion with her leaves.
Till then, Mars shal^ be master of the field,
But then the stormy threats of wars shall cease,
The horse shall stamp as careless of the pike,
D^ums shallbe turned to timbrells of delight,
With wealthy favours, plenty shall enrich,
The strond that gladded wandering Brute to see,
And peace from heaven shall harbour in these leaves,
That gorgeous beautifies this matchless flower,
Appollos Hellitropian then shall stoop,
And Venus hyacinth shall veil her top,
Iuno shall shut her Gilliflowers up,
And Palace bay shall bash her brightest greene^
Ceres carnation in consort with those,
Shall stoop and wonder at Dianas rose.

This Prophecy is mystical,
But glorious commanders of Europas love,
That makes fair England like that wealthy I'll,
Circled with Gihen, and first Euphrates,
In royallising Henries Albion,
With presence of your princely mightiness,
Lets march, the tables all are spread,
And viands such as Englands wealth affords,
Are ready set to furnish out the boards,
You shall have welcome mighty potentates,
It rests to furnish up this royal feast,
Only your hearts be frolic for the time,
Craves that we taste of nought but iouysaunce,
Thus glories England over all the west.


