Our heavenly blessing, be with you euerychone

All praise and glory, to your majesty alone.


Here styll to tarry, I think it be your mind.


My offyce ye know, is to instruct Mankynde.


Than God be with you, we leave you here behind.


THe law in effect^, is a teacher general
What is to be done, and what to be laid aside
But as touching me* the first law natural
A knowledge I am, whom God in Man doth hyde
In his whole workynge, to be to him a gyde
To honour his God, and seek his neighbours health
A great occasyon, of peace, and public wealth.
A sore charge I have, Mankynde to ouerse
And to instruct him, his lord God to obey
That lord of heaven grant, I may so do my duty
That he be pleased and Man brought to a staye
His bry^tle nature, his slyppernes to way
Much doth provoke me, but if God set to his hand
He shall do full well, for none may him withstand.

He comes in singing.

^Brom, brom, brom, brom, brom. Bye brom bye ^Bye. bromes for shoes and
powchrynges, botes and ^busayus for new bromes. Brom, brom, brom.

Mary God give ye good even
And the holy man saint Steven
Send ye a good new year
I would have brought ye the paxe
Or else an image of wax
If I had known ye here.
I will my self so handle
That ye shall have a candle
When I come hither again
At this your sudden mooyon
I was i^ such devotion
I had ne'er broke a vain.

That might have done ye smart^.


No, no it was but a fart
For pastime of my hart
I would ye had it forsooth
In syroppe or in sows
But for noyaunce of the hows
For easement of your toth,
Now have I my dream in dede
God send me wele to speed,
And sweet saint Antony
I thought I shulde mete a knave
And now that fortune I have
Among this company.

Why dost thou call me knave?


I said I would be your slave
If your grace would me have
And do your work anon.
I would so rub your botes
The rofe shulde from the rotes
When ye shulde do them on.

Thou art disposed to mock
Soon may thou have a knock
If thou with me so game.

Your mouth shall kiss my dock
Your tongue shall it unlock,
But I say what is your name?

I am the law of Nature


I thought so by your stature
And by your auncyent gature
Ye were of such a ^ature
When I first heard ye speak.
Ye commoned with God lately
And now ye are his bailey
Mankynde to rule dyscretly
Welcome sy^ huddyp^ke.

If thou use such villainy.
I shall displease the truly.

By the mass, I the defy
With thy whole Cukoldrye
And all that with the hold.

Why doest thou me blaspheme
And so ungodly deem?

For by this blessed book
I wend ye had ben a Cooke
And that made me so bold,
For a Cooke ones, having age
With a face demure and sage
And auncyent to behold.
As you have here in place
With a beard upon your face
What is he but a Cooke old?

Ye are disposed to dally.
To leap and ouersallye
The compass of your wit
I counsel ye yet in season
Somewhat to follow reason
And gnaw upon the bit.

Then after our great madness
Let us fall to some sadness
And tell me what ye entende.

God sent me unto Man
To do the best I can
To cause him to amend.
Such creatures as want reason
My rules obeye each season
And that in eueryborder
The son and moan doth move
With the other bodies above
And never break their order.
The trees and herbs doth grow
The sea doth ebb and flow
And varyeth not a nail
The floods and wholesome sprynges
With other natural things
Their course do never fail.
The beasts and birds engender
So do the fys^hes tender
According to their kind
Lonely man doth fall
From good laws natural
By a froward wicked mind.

Now will I prove ye a liar
Next cosynto a friar
And on the gall ye rub
Ye say they follow your law
And varye not a straw,
Which is a tale of a tubbe.
The sun ones in the clyppes
Away the clearness slyppes
And darkened is the day
Of the plants influence
Arises the pestylence.
To many ones decay.
Doth not the sea sorage
That none can it aswage,
And swallow in town and streate
The air which gives breath
Someyme infects to death
By his most pestylent heate.
The beasts of vndemure
Which were left to man cure
Will him sometime devour
Thus are you rulers forgot
As things of slendre note
In Creatures day and hour.

It is the will of God
To use them as a rod
Of his just punysshment
When Man doth not regard
The lord nor his reward
Nor to his laws consent.
They never are so ronnysh
But when God doth Man ponnysh
For his vnhappynesse
From God they never fall.
Nor from laws natural
Doing his busynesse.

And you are the same law
That kept them under awe
By your most polytyke wit?

God hath appointed me
Mankynde to ouerse
And in his heart to sit
To teach him for to know
In the Creatures high and lowe
His glorious majesty
And on his name to call,
Or power celestial,
In his necessity.
To think him euerlas^ynge
And wonderful in workynge
And that he creates all
Both govern and conserve
From them he never swerve
That to such faith will fall.

In dede here is good sporte.
But why do you resort
Unto this present place?

Man always to exhort
To seek all health and confort,
Of the only God of grace.
First in the hearts rejoice
And than with open voice
To worship him alone
Knowledgynge his deytie
His power and eternytie
When he shall make his moan.

I shall keep ye as well from that
As my grandam kept her cat
From lyckynge of her cream.

What will thou keep me fro?
Tell me ere thou farther go
Me think thou art in a dream.

From causynge of Mankynde
To give to God his mind
Or his obedyence.

What is thy name? tell me.


Mary Infydelyte
Which never will agree
To your benyuolence.

Thou can not keep me from man.


Yet I will do the best I can
To trouble ye now and than
That ye shall not prevail
I will cause ydolatrye
And most vile Sodomye
To work so vngracyouslye
Ye shall of your purpose fail.

I defy the wicked find
With thy whole vene mouse kind
God puts now in my mind
To fl thy company.

Ye are so blessed a Saint
And your self so well can paint
That I must me aquaynt
With you no remedy.

Avoid thou cruel enemy
I will none of the truly
But shurne thy company
As I would the devil of hell.

And are ye gone indeed?
Small wyttam be your speed.
Except ye take good heed
I will be next of your counsel.
Now will I work such masterye
By crafts and su^yle polycye
The law of nature to poison
With pestylent ydolatrye
And with most stynkynge sodomye
That he shall have no foison
Where are these vyllen knaves?
The devils own kytchyu slaves
That them I can not se
I conjure you both here
And charge ye to appear
Like two knaves as yebe.

Ambo is a name full clean
Know ye not what I mean?
And are so good a clarke.

By Terragramaton
I charge ye appear anon
And come out of the dark

Have in than at a dasshe
With swasshe merry annetswasshe
Yet may I not be to rasshe
For my holy orders sake.

Nor I son by my troth
Tha cau^a ^orage of sloth
And such a comberouse caught.
Yeh wot not what to do.

At Christmas and at Paske
Ye may dance the devil a mask
While his great cauldron pla^e
you such a pretty mynyon
And you now in relygyon
Such two I never saw
Is not thy name Idolatry*

Yes, an wholesome woman verelye,
And w^lls^n^ in phylosophye
Men fortunes she can tell
She can by saying her Aue mary
And by other charms of sorcerye
Ease men of the loath ache by and bye
Yea, and farche the devil from hell
She an c^nyike the Cow and hunt the fox
And help men of the ague and pox
So they bring money to the box
When they to her make mdne.
She can fatche again all that is lost
And draw drink out of a rotten post
Without the help of the holy Ghost
In workynge she is alone.

What sometime thou were an he.


Yea, but now yeh am a she
And a good mydwyf^ perde
Yonge children can Icharme*
With whysperynges and whysshynges
With crossynges and with kyssynges
With blasynges and with blessings
That sprytes do them no harm.

Then art thou like to Clysthenes.
To Clodius and Euclides,
Sardinapalus and Hercules
Which them selves oft transformed
Into a woman's likeness
With agylyte and quyckenes
But they had venus syckenes
As wryters have declared.

Let her tell forth her matter.


With holy oil and water
I can so cloyne and clatter
That I can at the latter
Many sutelties contryue
I can work wiles in battle
If I do ones but spattle
I can make corn and cattle
That they shall never thryue.
When ale is in the fat
If the Oruar please me not
The cast shall fall down flat
And never have any strength
No man shall tonne nor bake
Nor meat in inseason make
If I against him take
But lose his labour at length.
Their wells I can up dry
Ca^se trees and herbs to dye.
And slay all pullerye
Where as men doth me move
I can make stoles to dance,
And earthen pots to prance
That none shall them enhance
And do but cast my glove.
I have charms for the plowghe
And also for the cowghe
She shall give milk ^nowghe
So lunge as I am pleased
Apace the myl^ shall go.
So shall the credle do
And the musterde querne also
No man therewith diseased.

Than art thou for me fytte.


The woman hath a wit
And by her ger can sit.
Though she be somewhat old?
It is mine own sweet bullye
My muskyne and my mullye,
My gelouer and my cullye
Yea mine own sweet hart of Gold.

I say yet not to bold.


Peace fondelinge, tusshe a button


What will thou fall to mutton?
And play the hungry glutton
Before this company?
Rank love is full of heate
Where hungry dogs lack meat
They will dirty pu^dynges eat
For want of befe and cony.
Heyghe mynyon for money
As good is draff as honey.
When the day is whote and sonnye,
By the blessed rode of kent.

Say forth your mind good mother
For this man is none other
But our own loving brother
And is very well content.

I never miss but paulter
Our blessed ladies psaulter
Before saint Savers alter
With my beds ones a day
And this is my comoncast
To here Mass first or last
And the holy frydaye fast
In good time mought I it faye.
With blessings of Saint Germyne
I will me so determine
That neither for nor vermin
Shall do my chyckens harm
For your gese seek saint Legearde
And for your ducks saint Leonarde
For horse take Moyses yearde
There is no better charm.
Take me a napkyn folte
With the bias of a bolt
For the healynge of a ^olte
No better thing can be
For lamps and for bottes
Take me saint Wylfrides knots
And holy saint Thomas lots
On my life I warrande ye.
For the caught take Iudas ^are
With the paring of a pear
And drink them without fear
If ye will have remedy
Three syppes are for the hyckocke
And. vi. more for the chyckocke
Thus my pretty pyckocke
Recover by and by.
If ye can not sleep but slumber
Give Otes unto saint Un^umber
And beans in a certain number
Unto saint Blase and saint Blithe
Give onyons to saint Cutlake
And garlycke to saint Cyryake
If ye will shurne the head ache.
Ye shall have them at queen hythe.
A dram of a shepes tyrdle
And good saint trances girdle
With the hamlet of an hyr^le
Are wholesome for the pyppe
Besides these charms before
I have feats many more
That I keep styll in store
Whom now I over hyppe.

It is a sporte I trow
To heate howe she out blow
Her witchecraftes on a row
By the Mass I must needs smile.
Now I pray the let me know
What sedes that thou can sow
Mankynde to overthrow
And the law of nature beguile.

My self I so behave
And am so vile a knave
As nature doth deprave
And utterly abhore
I am such a vice truly
As God in his great ^rye
Did punysshe most t^ryblye
In Sodome and in Gomorr*
In the flesh I am a fire
And such a vile desire
As bring men to the mire
Of foul concupyscence.
We two together began
To spring and to grow in manne,
As Thomas of Aquyne scan
In the fourth book of his sentence.
I dwelt among the Sodomytes
The Beniamytes, and Madyanytes
And now the popysshe hypocrytes
Embrace me every where
I am now become all spyrytuall
For the clergye at Rome and over all
For want of wives to me doth fall
To God they have no fear.
The children of God I did so move
That they the daughters of men did love
Working such ways as did not behove
Till the floude them over went.
With Noes son Cham I was half joined
When he is drunken father scorned
In the Sodomytes I also reigned.
Till the hand of God them brent.
I was with Man not unacquainted
When he on the ground his increase shed
For me his bretherne Ioseph accused
As Genesis doth tell
Dauid ones warned all men of us two.
Do not as mules and horses will do.
Confounded be they, that to images go
Those are the ways to hell.
Both Esaye and Ezechiell
Both H^etemy and Daniell
Of us the abhominacions tell
With the prophets euerychou
For us two God struck with fire and water
With battle, with plages, fereful matter
With painful er^l^, than at the latter
Into Egipt and Babylon.
As Paule to the Romans testyfye
The gentyles after Idolatry
Fell to such be stiall Sodomye
That God did them forsake
Who follows us as he confess
The kingdom of God shall never possess
And as the Aparalyps express
Shall synke to the burning lake.
We made Thalon and Sophocles
Thamiras, Nero, Agathocles
Tiberius and Iristoteles
Themselves to use unnaturally
I taught Aristo and Fuluius
Semiramis and Hortensius
Crathes Hyliscus, and Pontius
Beasts to abuse most monstrouslye.

Marry thou art the devil him self


If ye knew howe he could pelf
Ye would say he were such an elf
As none under heaven were else.

The fellawe is well decked
Dysgysed and well necked
Both knave bald and pypecked
He lacks nothing but help.

In the first age I began
And so perseuerde with manne
And styll will if I canne
So lunge as he endure
If monkysshe sectes renew
And popysshe pre estes continue
Which are of my retynue
To live I shall be sure.
Clean Marriage they forbid,
Yet can not their ways be hyd,
Men know what hath betyd
When they have ben in apparel
Oft have they buried quycke
Such as were never sick
Full many a propre trycke
They have to help their quarrel.
In Rome to me they fall
Both Bysshope and Cardinal
Monk, fryer, pryest, and all
More rank they are then antes
Example in hope Iulye
Which sought in his fury
Two lads, and to use them beastly.
From the Cardinal of Nautes.

Well, you two are for my mind
Steppe forth and do your kind
Leave never a point behind
That may corrupt in man
The law writ in his heart
In his flesh, do thy part
And his soul so pernart
Do thou the best thou can.
Here have I pretty gynnes
Both brouches beads and pynnes
With such as the people wynnes
Unto Idolatry
Take thou part of the here
Beads, rings, and other ger
And shortly the be^ete
To deceive Man properly
Take this same staff and scryppe
With a God here of a chyppe
And good beldam foreward hyppe
To set forth pylgremage
Set thou forth Sacramentalles
Say dirge, and singe tre^alles
Study the popes Decretals
And myxt them with buggerage
Here is a stole for the
A ghostly father to be
To here, Benedicite
A box of cream and oil
Here is a purse of rellyckes
^agges, rotten boues, and styckes
A taper with other tryckes
Show them in every soil

I will corrupt Gods Image
With mos^e unlawful usage
And bring him into dottage
Of all concupyscence.

Within the flesh thou art
But I dwell in the hart.
And will the soul peruart
From Gods obedyence.

Spare none abhomynacion
Nor detestable fasshyon
That man ymagynacion
By wit may comprehend
To quycken our sprytes among
Singe now some metysonge
But let it not be lunge
Least we to much offend.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui ad imaginem et similitudinem nostram formasti
laicos, da quesumus, vt sicut corum sudoribus diuimus, ita coru vxoribus
filiabus et domicellis perpetuo frui mereamur. Per domin^ nostrum Papam,

Now are these horesons forth
It will be somewhat worth
To se howe they will work
The one to poison the hart
The other the outward part
Ingeniously will luck.
The law of Nature they will
Infect, corrupt and spyll
With their abhomynacion
Idolatry with wickedness
And Sodomye with fylthynesse
To his most utter dampnacion.
These two will him so use
Each one in their abuse
And wrap it in such evil
That by their wicked cast
He shall be at the last
A morsel for the devil.
Now vnderneth her wings
Idolatry hath kings
With their No^ylytie
Both dukes, lords, knights and ^arles
Fair ladies with their pearies
And the whole comynaltie.
Within the bownes of Sodomye
Doth dwell the spyrytuall clergye
Pope, Cardinal and pryest
Nonne, Chanon, Monk and fryer
With so many else as do desire
To reygne under Antechrist.
Detestynge Matrymonye
They live abhomynablye,
And burn in carnal lust.
Shall I tell ye farther news?
It Rome for Prelates are stews
Of doth kinds. This is just.
The law of nature I think
Will not be able to wy^ke
Against the assaults of them
They having so high prelates,
And so many gteat es^ates
From hens to Jerusalem.
Pause now a little while
Mine ears doth me beguile
If There not a sound
Y^n folk hath sped I guess
It is to by the Mess
Away now will I round^.

I think ye marvel, to se such altera^ion
At this time in me, whom God left here so pure
O^ me it comes not, but of man operation
Whom daily the devil, to great sin doth allure
And his nature is full brittle and unsure
By him have I got this foul disease of body
And as ye se here, am now thrown in a leprye.
I wrought in his hart, as God bad tr^estlye.
Him oft provoking, to love God over all
With the inner powers, but that false Idolatry
Hath him perverted, by slayghtes dyabolycall
And so hath Sodomye, through his abuses carnal
That he is now lost, offendynge without measure
And I corrupted to my most high displeasure.
I abhor to tell, the abusyous bestyall
That they daily use, which boast their chastity
Some at the alter, to incontyuencye fall
In confession some, full beastly occupied be
Among the close Nonnes, reygneth this enormytie
Such children s^eythey, as they chance for to have
And in their preuyes, provide them of their grave.
Ye Christen rulers, se ye for this a way
Be not illuded, by false hypocrysye
By the stroke of God, the world will else decay
Permyt prestes rather, Gods lawful remedy
Than they shulde i^c^r^, most bestyall Sodomye
Regard not the pope, nor yet his whorysshe kingdom
For he is the master, of Gomor and of Sodome
With Man have I ben, which hath me thus defiled
With Idolatry, and unclean Sodomye
And worthy I am, from God to be exiled
Pity me yet lord of thy most bounteous mercy
I will forth and morn, till thousende remedy
Promise haste thou made, to a glorious lybercie
To bring heue earth, the will thou (I trust) restore me.

THe lord perceiving, his first law thus corrupted
With vnclene vices, sent me his law of Moses
To se him for sin, substancyallye corrected
And brought in again, to a trade of godlynes
For I am a law of rygout and of hardenes
I straightly command, and if it be not done
I threti^, I curej, and sle in my anger soon.
To God I require a perfyght obedyence
Con^empnynge all sache, as do it not in effect
I show what sin is, I but de sore manes conscience
To him am I death, when his life is infect
Yet if he take heed, to Christ I him direct
Forgyuenes to have, with like health and saluatyon.
Least he shuloe dyspayre, and fall into dampnacion.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
A pastime quoth a, I know not the time nor when
I did laghe so much, sense I was an honest man
Believe me and ye will, I never saw such a sporte
I wold ye had ben there, lye might have made the fort.

Where would thou have had me, tell me good brother mine.


At the Mynorasse sir, late yester night at complyne.


At the Mynorasse? why what was there a do?


For such an other, would I to South ampton go
In dede yesterday was their dedycacion
And thythe^ in Gods name, came I to se the fashion
An old fryer stood forth, with spectacles on his nose
Begy^nynge this Anteme, a my faith, I do not gloss.
^

^pides pr^ciosi.


And what did follow of this?


I shall tell ye by Gods bliss
Then came Dame Isbell an ^lde Noune and a cal^e
Crowynge like acapon, and thus began the Psalme.
^

Sepe expugnauetun^ me a i^uent^te ^


And what includes this mystery?


A simple problem of bytcherye
When the fryer begone, before the Nonne
to singe of precious stones
From my youth saith she / they have comfort me
As it had ben for the nones

I assure the plain, I set not by such gauds
Thy usage show the, to be brought up among baude^

It was a good world, when we had such holsom story^s
Preached in out church, on sondayes and other feryes
With us was it in^rye
When we went to Berye
And to our lady of grace
To the blou^e of hails
Where no good chere fails
And other holy place.
When the pryestes might walk
And with yonge wives talk
Than had we children plenty
Then Cuckolds might leap
A score on a heap
Now is there not one to twenty.
When the Monks were fat
And rank as a ratte
With bellies like a Bore.
Then all things were dere
Both beafe, bread and bear
Now grudge the iourers sore.
When Bysshoppes might burn
And from the truth turn
The syllye simple soul.
Than dut^ no man creak
Open mouth nor speak
Of Christ nor yet of Powle.
No we are the knaves bold
With Scriptures to bold
And teach them every where
The carter, the sowter
The bodger, the clowter
That all will away I fere.
At us so they pull
Our lyuynges are dull
We are now like to fall
If we do not fight
For the churches right
By the Mess we lose all.
But I pray ye sir, tell me what is your name*

The law of Moses, to lye were I to blame


In the same parties, what do you intende?


Mankynde to reform, that he his life amend
I show what sin is, what thing pleases God
I comfort the just, and the ill, I ponysshe with rod
The common people, have thought it commodyous
Divers Gods to have, with rytes superstitious.
My commandment is, to seek one God alone
And in all their needs, to him to make their moan
Among the Gentyles, was it thought none injury
If a man were hurt, to slay his adversary
This thing I forbid, and say, thou shalt not kill
Law is the revenger, the man may do no ill.
Some persons there are, that inordynatlye love
Those are persuaded, all things them to behove
Which I inhybyte, saying contynuallye
No rape shalt thou do, nor yet comyt aduouteye
Thou shalt do no theft, nor coueyte that is not thine
Against thy neighbor, shalt thou not falsely dyffyne.

We may do nothing, if we be pynned in thus
Neither you nor God, to that harde trade shall bring us
We must have one God, and worship him alone
Matye that in dede, would make a Turk to g^ne
If we be stricken, we may not stryke again?
Aprope^ ^gyne* and dyscretlye v^t^ r^d ^la^ne
For companies sake, ye say we may not love
I defy your worst, and to you there is my glove.

What? thou will not fight thy wits are better than so.


In the quarrel of love, I shall prove ye ere I go
By the Mess I think, to put ye to your f^ure.

Thou were much better, to keep thy pacyence.


Nay by Cocks soul frynd, I must lay ye on y^ coat
In loves cause to fight, ye may soon have m^a f^ ar^
Nay but have at your py^ch^, defend ye if ye may.

Such a fool art thou, as seeks thine own decay
If I ones meddle, t^ the, it will be death
Did thou never here, that law sleeth in his wrath.

By the blessed lord, than will I play Robsons part.


Why what part will thou play?


By cocks sou^e give over, so soon as I feel smart


It will be to late, it I one scupple with the


Then let me a^on^, and we shall soon agree
And I shall be glad to be acquainted with ye.

Acquainta^ce good felaw, thou may soon have of me


The worst fault I have, I am hast^e now than
But it is soon gone, I toke it of a woman
But what mean those tables, y^ ye have in your hand.

Keep scylence a while, and thou shalt understand
Three things I declare, the first are y^ precepts moral
Next, the laws judicial, and last the rytes ceremonial
The moral precepts, are Gods comaundementes ten
Which ought evermore to be observed of all men
The laws of Nature, the moral precepts declare
And y^ pleasant works, to God they teach prepare
They stir man to faith provoke him also to love
To obey, to serve, and to worship God above
Into s^ony tables, God wrote them first of all
That they shulde remain, as things continual*
The first hath but three, which tend to Gods high honour,
Seven hath the second, they concern our neybour.
The first doth expound, the first law natural
The ^ext the other, making them very formal
Inspryt^ i^ the first, y^ we shulde God honour and love
To outward workynge the second doth us move
For^ydoynge all wrongs preserving just marriage
Norysshynge true peace, and other godly usage.

What is the effect, of your laws Judicial?


Such things to command, as are cyuyle or teporall
From vice to refrain, and outward injury
Quiet to conserve, and public honesty
These are to support, the laws of the second table
Ceremonyall rytes are also commendable
In holy days, garmetes, temples consecta^ions
Sacryfices vows, with offerynges and expi^acions
Which are unto Christ, as figures, types, shadows
As Paule doth declare, in his Epistle to the Hebrues
These are only figures, and outward testymonies
No man is perfyght, by such dark ceremonies
Only perteyne they, unto the third commandment
Of the Sabboth day, till Christ the lord be present.
In his death ending, the whole Judicial presthode.


Good days might ye have, ye speak full well by the rood.
I am a poor lad, and by my troth bent earues^lye*
To wait upon ye, and to be your very lackye.

What art thou called, I pray the heartily.


Gray fryer am I none, by the Mess I can not flatter.
I am Infydelytie, to tell the truth of the matter.

And hast thou so lunge dyssembled thus with me?


Yea, for aduauntage to smellout your subtyltie.


Avoid hens I say, thou false Infydelyte.


Nay that I will not, by yngham Trynytie.


Will thou not in dede, tha will I fet hither the pour
Of Judges kings, to subdue the within this hour.

Such knights will I have, as shall cofounde the al*
Is S^dduces scrybes, with the sec^ pharysaycal^
By help of my children Idolatry and Sodomye
The law of Nature, I cast ones in a leprye
I have yet two more, Ambycion Coneytousnes
Which will do as much to the law of Moyses
Where are my whorsons, that they come not away.

Yea, whoreson on thy face, even in thy best array
I will thou know it, I am a worshipful Doctor
A Scrybe in the law, and a profytable proctor.

Guppe with a vengeance, howe come thou so aloft.


I shall tell the man, if thou will come more solte
By feigned flattery^, and by coloured adulation
Ambycion here also, ^ose of a like foundation.

Come, are me blessing, pretty boys apace


I will not bow sure* to such a folys^he face.


Axe blessing I say, and make me no more ado.


Unsemely were it, we Prelates shulde do so.


For no compu^syon will I do it by sweet Mary.


I must fatche ye in, there is no remedy
A noughty horsons, have I brought ye up hitherto?
And know not your father, ye shall drink both ere I go

No more at this time, forsooth we cry amercye.


Down on your knees than, axe me blessing shortly.


Bless me gentell father, for sweet saint charytie.


Arise noughtyknaues, God let ye never to the
Though among our selves, we mu^mur^, brag, face
Sometime for lucre, sometime for the higher place
Yet for aduauntage, in this we all agree
To blind the rulers, and deceive the com^ynaltie.

Art advised of that, by the Mess we are in dede
Yet of our knaveries, the fo^le will neuertake heed.
To labour with a spade
Our colour would it fade
We may not with that trade
We love so much our ease
We must live by their sweat,
And have good drink and meat
When they have not to eat
The substance of a peas.
We lead them in the dark
And so their conseyence mark
That stutdye they are and stark,
In every wicked evil
We teach Idolatry
And laughed full merely
To se each company
Run headlonges to the devil.
Ifwe may have the tythynges
And profytable offeryages
We ca^e not to what doings
They customablye fall
We are such mercenaryes
And subtyle propryetaryes
As from the flock all carries
The w^lle, skin, flesh and all.
In our perambulacyons
We look for commendacions
And lowly salutacions
In temple, hows and street.
Our lowsye latyne hours
In borowes and in bowers
The poor people devours
And tread them under fete.

I am Ambycion, whose bysposycyan
Is honour to appete
I gape for empire, and worship desire
As Mynos did in Crete
I loke up Aloft, and love to lye soft
Not carynge for my flock
Have Iones the flese, with pygges, lambs, and gese
They may go turn a Sock.
Lucifer I made, so highly to wade,
To God he would be equal
Of Adam and Eve, I slew the believe
And caused them to fall
What need I rehearce, the gyauntes most fearce
With the buylders of Babell
Nemrod the tyrraunt, with them there applyaunt,
Agreed to my counsel.
From me would not go, cruel Pharao
No more would Amalech
Saul, Achitophell, Absolo^, Iesabel
Nor Adonisedech.
I made Roboam, and Hierobeam
With Nabuchodouosor
Triphon, Alchmius, and Simon magus
To abuse them evermore.
Inpryde I exceed, and no people fed
But with lies for aduauntage
As Mantuane tell, to lead men to hell
Is my most common usage.
High things I attempt, and will in exempt
From princes iurisdition
A am such an enyll, as bring men to the devil
Without any contradiction.

Here is a prelate even for mine own toth
Such an other is, not in the whole South
Clap thou somewhat more, as thou hast begun
I like wele your ta^kynge, by the holy Nun.

I Coutyse am, the beuyll or his dam
For I am insacyate
I rauysshe and pluck, I draw and I suck
After, a woluys she ra^e.
Father nor mother, Sister nor brother
I spare not in my mood.
I fear neither God, nor his rightful rod
In gatherynge of good.
But hows and meadow, from the poor widow
I spare not forto take
Right heirs I rob, and as bare as Iob
The fatherles I make.
With me toke Nadab, Nabal and Achab
With all the clergye of Bell
Iudas and Giezi, with the sons of Hel^
And the sons of Samuell.
Iannes and Iambres, also Diotrephes
Wrought wilful wickedness
So did Menelaus, with false Andronicus
And all for Coueytousnesse.

With vices seven, I close up heaven
And spear up paradyce
I oppen hell, by my counsel
Mayntaynynge every vice.

For Silver and gold, with falsehed I hold
Supporting every evil
I have it in awe, for to thoke the law
And bring all to the devil.

By the blessed Trynytie, no men more fit for me
To do my busynes.
Ambycion to beguile, and Auaryce to defile
The law of Moyses.
Tell me first of all, what will thou do Ambycyon.

I am thine own child, thou know my dysposycion
I will sure do, as did the Phylystynes.

Why what did those knaves?


They stopped up Abrahas pyttes, as Genesis diffynes
With mud and with mire, l^f^ them full vnclene

By the same practyse, tell me what thou dost mean.


With fylthy glosses, and dyrtye exposytion,
Of Gods law will I hyde, the pure dysposycions
The key of knowledge, I will also take away
By wrastynge the text, to the scriptures sore decay.

And what wy^te thou, my fellow Coueytousnes?


A veil will I sprede, upon the face of Moyses
That none shall perceive, the clerenes of his coutenauce
Which is the law, the meaning true ordynaunce.

Wy what will ye say, unto the ten comaundemetes


We must poison them, with wylworkes, good intetes
Where as God doth say, No strange gods thou shalt have
With Sayntes worshyppynge, that clause we will deprave.
And though he com^unde, to make no graved image
For a good intent, yet will we have pylgremage
Though he will us not, to take his name in vain
With tradycions yet, thereunto will we constrain.
No Sabboth will we, with Gods word sanctyfye
But with lip labour, and yd^e ceremony.
To father and mother, we may owe none obedyence
Our relygion is, of so so great excellence.
Though we do not slay, yet may we hertyckes burn
If they will not soon from holy Scripture turn
What though it be said, thou shalt do no fornycacion
Yet will we maintain, much greater abhomynacion
Though theft be forbid yet will we contynuallye
Rob the poor people, through prayer purgatory
God hath inhy^yted* to give false testimony
Yet we will condemn the Gospel for Heresye.
We shulde not coueyte our neybours house nor wife
His seruaunt nor b^ast, yet are we therein most rife
Of men make we swyne, by the draff of our tradycions
And cause them nothing to regard but supersticions
As Dogs unreasonable, on mos^vyle carren fed
So will we cause them, seek idols in their need.
And always their ground, shall be for a goodintent


More myscheuous I trow, the devil could not inuet
Than you two can do, by the Mess ye are alone
Little could I do, were ye ones from m^ gone
To the corruptynge, of the law of Morses
Go forward therefore, in your deceytful^es

With superstitions, the Iewes ceremonial laws
I will so handle, they shall not be worth* ii. straws
The laws Judicial throug^e cawtels and d^layes
I will also drown, to all ryghteous means decay
To set this forward, we must have sophystrye
Phylosophye and Logycke, as science necessary
The Bysshoppes must hold their priests in ygnorauee
With long laten hours, lest knowledge to them chance
Let them have long matins, lunge even songs long Masses
And that will make them as dull as ever were asses
That they shall never be able to prophecy
Or yet preach the truth, to our great injury.
Let the Cloyster^rs be brought up euerin scylence
Without the Scriptures, in pain of dysobedyence
Se the lay people, pray never but in latyne
Let them have their Cred, and service all in latyne
That a latyne believe, may make a latyne soul
Let them nothing know, of Christ, nor yet of powle
If they have English* let it be for aduauntage
For pardons, for Dyrges, for offerynges pylgremage
I teken to make them, a new Cred in a while
And all in English, their Conscience to beguile.

Rehearse unto me, the Articles of that Cred.


The Articles are these, give ear and take good heed
First they shall believe, in our holy father Pope
Next in his decrees, and holy decretals.
Then holy church, with sencer, cross and cope
In the Ceremonies, and blessed Sacramentals
In purgatory then, in pardons and intrentals
In praying to sayntes, and in saint Frances whoode
In our lady of Grace, and in the blessed rood
They shall believe also, in relyckes and relygion
In our ladies psalter, in frewyll and good works
In the ember days, and in the popes remyssyon
In b^des and in belles, not used of the turks
In the golden Masses, against such sprites as lurks
With charms and blessings. This cred will bring in money
In English therefore, we will it clarkely convey.

Yea, and burn the knaves, that will not believe ye cred
That into the dytche, the blind the blind may led.

Then I hold it best, that we always condemn
The Bible readers, least they your acts contempue.

Yea, never spare them, but evermore play the bytar
Expressyng always, the tropes and types of thy mytar

Why, what doest thou think, my mytar to sygnyfye.


The mouth of a wolf, and that shall I prove by by
If thou s^oupe downward, lo, se how y^ wolf doth ga^e
Ready to devour the lambs, least any escape
But thy woluyshnes, by three crowns will I hyde
Making the apope a captain of all ^ryde
That when thou dost slay, such as thy laws cotempne
Thou may say, not I, but the powers did the condepne
The Cabels betoken, the laws of se non cannon

I trow thou w^ldest say, the. ii. laws Cyuyle Canon


As I spake I thought, styll think by saint Iohan
Yea, persecute styll the instructers of the people
And thou Coueytous^es, let no bell ring in Steple
Without a profyght. T^sshe, take money every where
So nygh ^lyppe and shave, that thou leave never a here

I caused the Pope, to take but now of late
Of the gray fryers, to have a canonyzate
Franciscus de pola, three thousand duckattes and more
And as much besides / he had not lunge before
For a Cardinal hat, of the same holy ordre
Thus draw we to us, great goods from every border
Pope Clement the seventh payed ones for his papacy
Three hundred thousand, good ducats of lawful money

I marvel howe he could come to so much good.


Yes, yes, by pollage, and by shedynge Christen blode.
Crosers and Mytars, in Rome are good merchandyce
And allto little, to maintain their pomp and vice

The pope for whordom, hath in Rome and Uiterbye
Of gold and silver, a wonderful substance yearly
Tush they be in England yt much rather wold to dwell
Whores in their dyoceses, than the readers of Christ's Gospel.

They do the better, for by the they may have profyght
As for the other, do trouble them day and night
Well, now steppe foreward, and go do your busynes
To the corruptynge, of the law of Moyses.

Doubt not but we shall, make him a crepple blind.


Singe then at our farewell, to recreate our mind.


Now am I left alone, And these. ii. marchautes gone
Their myschyefe to seclude
I think within a while, they will trap and beguile
The worthy law of Iude.
Ambycion first of all, with his rytes bestial
Will make the people swyne
In draff will he them led, and with tradycions fed
Where they shall sup or dine
Coueytousnes will warke, that many one shall bark
Like dogs against the truth
Some shall gods word defile, and some will it reuyle
Such beastlynes ensu^th.
Ambition hath this hour, al the whole spyritual pour
And may do what him lust
Now coueytousnes doth rule, hath both horse mule
All matters by him dyseust
Now bysshopryt^es are ^ol^e, the holy ghost for gold
The pope doth bye and sell
The truth may not be told, under pains manyfolde
With sendynges down to hell
The people preestes do famysshe, and their goods fro them rauysshe
Yea and all the world they blind
All princes do they mock, and rob the sellye flock
Nothing they leave behind
On the face of Moyses, a veil they have cast doubtless
The light of the law to hyde
Least me to christ shulde come, fro ceremonies dome
As to their heavenly gyde
The law can never be, at any liberty
Where such two enemies rain
Now is it time to walk, of this more will I talk
When I come hither again.

If pity may mou^, your gentle christen hearts
Let it now stir ye, to morn this heavy chance
Two enemies with me, have played most wicked parts
And left me stark blind, God knows to my sore greuaunce.
And I think also to your mouth hynderaunce
To lead you to Christ, sometime a gyde I was
Now am I so blind, I can not do it, alas.
Most rygorously those enemies now of late
Did fall upon me, and spoil me of my sight
One was Ambycion, which ever ought me hate
And Coueyeousnesse, the other enemy hight
Now forsooth and God, iutheyr most cruel spyght
The one made me blind, the other made me lame
And when they had done, thereat they had great game.
Thus a blind cryple, I wander here alone
Abiding the time and grace, of restauracion
By the son of God, to whom I make my moan
My cause to pity, and grant me supportacion
Least I be left here, to utter desolation
And extreme decay without any remedy,
If he did not help of goodness and of mercy.
Ye christen princes, God hath given you the pour
With scepture and sword, allvyces to correct
Let not Ambycion, nor Coueytousnesse devour
Your faithful subjects, nor your offycers infect
Have to your Clergye, a dylygent respect
And se they do not corrupt the laws of God
For that doth require, a terryble heuy^ rod.
God gave me to man, and left me intables of stone
That I of hardenes, a law shulde specyfye
But the Pharysies, corrupted me anon
And toke from me clean, the quyueru^s of body
With cler^uesse of sight, and other pleasures many
Now will I to Christ, that he may me restore
To more perfection, than ever I had before.

UN faythfulnes hath, corrupted every law.
To the great decay, of Adams posterytie
were it not for me, which now do hither draw
Al flesh wold perysh, no man shulde saved be
I am Christ's Gospel, and infallible verytie
Such a power of God, as saves all such as believe
No burden nor yoke, that any man will gr^ue.
In the blood of Christ, I am a full forgyuenes
Where faith is grounded, with a sure confidence
I am such a grace, and so high tidings of, gladness
As raise the synner, and pacyfye his conscience.
I am spyryte and life, I am necessary science
I require but love, for man iustyfication
With a faith in Christ, for his health and salvation.

Gods beneson have ye, it is joy of your life
I have heard of ye, and of my mistress your wife.

If thou hardest of me, it was by the boy^e of God.


Nay, he that spake of ye, was ^ellynge of a God
In an Oystre boat, a little beyond queen hythe
A Northern man was he, he besought ye to be blithe

If he spake of me, he was some godly preacher.


Nay sir by the roo^e, nor yet a wholesome teacher.


After what manner dydhe speak of me? tell.


He swore like a man, by all contents of the Gospel
He swore and better swore, yea, he did swear swear again.

That speaking is such, as procures eternal payne
Will not the people, leave that most wicked folly?
And it so damnable, to hear it I am sorry
But what did thou mean, whau thouspakest of my wife?

Nothing, but I thought it was joy of your life
That ye were so good to your neighbours as ye are

Why, howe good am I? thy fantasy declare.


Ye ease them among, if it be as I hear
When ye are abroad, there is fine merycheare.

As thou art, thou speak after thy hertes abundaun^e
For as the man is, such is his utterance.
My wife is the church, or christen congregacion
Regenerate inspyryte, doing no vile operation
Both clean and holy, without either spot or wryncle
The lamb with his blood, did her wash bespryncle.
This is not the church, of dysguysed hypocrytes
Of apysh shauelyng^s, or papisticall Sodomytes
Nor yet as they call it, a temple of lyme and stone
But a lyuysh building, grounded in faith alone
On the harde rock Christ, which is the sure fosidacion
And of this church, some do reygne in every nation
And in all coutreyes, though their nombre be but small

Their nombre is such, as hath run over all
The same Danes are they, men prophecy of plain
Which should over run this realm yet ones again.

What Danes speak thou of? thy meaning show more clearly.


Da^e Iohan, Dane Robert, Dane Thomas, and Dane Harrye.
The same are those Danes, that lay with other men's wives.
And occupied their lands, to the detriment of their lives.
These are acccounted, a great part of the church
For in Gods service, they honourably wurche
Yellynge and cryenge, till their throats are full sore.

That Church was descrybed, of Esaye lunge before
This people (saith God) with their lyppes honour me
In vain worship, they teaching means fatuyte
Apparent is that church, and open to the eyes
Their worshyppynges are, in outward ceremonies
That couterfetchurch stands al by means tradycions
Without the scriptures, without y^ hertes affections
My church is secrete, and evermore will be
Adorynge the father, in spyryte and in verytie
By the word of God, this church is ruled only
And doth not consyst, in outward ceremony
This congregacion, is the true Church mylytaunt
Those Counterfeit Desardes, are the very Church malygnaunt.
To whom Christ will say, I know none of your sor^

Much are they to blame, that brethren so report


Such are no brethren, but enemies to Christ's blode
As put salvation, in shaven crown mytar, or whoode.

I pray ye how loge, have your sweet spouse cotynued


Sens the beginnynge, and now is in Christ re^ued.
Adam did promise, of Christ's incarnacion
So had Abraham, with his whole generation
Which was unto them, a preaching of the Gospel
Into salvation, and delyueraunce from hell.

By this time I hope, ye have a fair increase?


She is not ba^en, but bears and never cease
The Corinthes first epistle, hath this clear testymonye
In Christo Iesu, per Euangilium vos genui
I have begot you, in Iesu Christ saith Powle
By the Gospel preaching, to the comfort of your soul.

Than are ye a ouckolde, by the blessed holy mass
As I said before, so comes it now to pass
For I am a prophet, by high inspyration led
Now like I my self, much better than I did
Ye say y^ saint Paule, begat your wife with child.

By mysunderstandyng, thou art vngracyously begylde
An only mynyster, was paule in that same doing
That he therein did, was by the Gospel preaching
His mind is the Gospel, to have done that operation
And this must thou hold, for no carnal generation.

Mary so they say, ye fellows of the new learning
Forsake holy church, and now fall fast to wyuynge.

Nay they forsake whordom, with other dapnablevsage
And live with their wives, in lawful marriage
While the popes oiled swarm, ^aygne styll in their old buggerage

Yea, poor married men, have very much a do
I count him wisest, that can take a snatch and to go?

Thou semest one of them, that detests matrymonye*
Which is before God, a slate both just and holy.
Of such as thou art, saint Paule did prophecy
By the holy Ghost, that a certain company
In the latter days from the truth of God shulde fall
Attendynge to spyrytes, of error dyabolycall
Which in hypocrysye, will teach lies for advantage
With marked conseyences, inhabytynge maryages
Thou apperest by thy fruits, to be Infydelyti^

I am none other, but even the very he
And hither now come I, to comenthe matter with ye

Avoid cursed fend, and get the out at the gates.


Nay first will I serve ye, as I lately served your mates
And hence will I not, for this place is for me
Who shulde here remain, but I Infydelyte?

Well, than for a time, I must depart from hens
But this first will I say, before this andyens
Easier will it be, concerning punysshment
To Sodom and Gomor, in the day of judgment,
Than to those Cities, that resyste the verytie
At the suggestions of Infydelytie.
That people will be forever and ever lost
For it is the great sin, against the holy Ghost
In the old law first, the father his mind expressed
Then came his son Christ, made it more manifest
And now the holy Ghost, is come to close up all,
If he be not heard, extreme dampnacion will fall
No prayer remains, nor expyracion for sin
To them that no profyght, of the word of God will win.
Take good heed therefore, say that ye have warning

God send your mother, of you to have a fondelynge.
By the mass I think, he is wel^ out of the way
Now will I contryue the dryfte of an other play
I must work such ways, Christ's law may not cotynue,
In a while am I like, to have none else of my retynue
Com^ anyons I have, to begin this tragedy,
Namely false Doctrine, and his brother Hypocrysye
They will not belong, I suppose now verelye
By cocks soul me think, I se such a company
Hem, I say children, will not my voice be heard
As good is a beck, as is adieu vow guard.
By my honesty welcome, mine own companions both

Thou shalt have a livery of the same cloth,
Gramatcyes by God, my old friend Infydelyte.

What brother su^psuap, how go the world with the*


What, fryre ^ypflap, how say ye to, Bendicite?


Marry nothing but well, I cry now advantage


At her purse or arse, tell me good fryre fuccage?


By the Mess at both for I am a great penytensar
And sit at the pardon, tush I am the popes own vicar
If thou lackest a piece, I know where thou may be sped
With choice of a score, and brought even to thy be^*

Art thou not ashamed, to talk so like a knave?


No, for it is such ger, as the holiest of us will have
Pope, cardinal, bishop, moke, chanon prist fryre,
Not one of ye all, but a woman will desire.

Our ordres permyt us not, to have them in maryag^


No, but ye fatche them in, by an other carriage.
Ye do even as we do, we both are of one rate.

By the Mess I laugh, to here this whoreson prate*


What fashion use ye, to us here intymate.


Ego distingu^, wither ye will have Lyons or Parys.


Of them both to show, it will not be far amys*


In Parys we have, the mantle of saint Lewes
Which women seek much, for help of their barenes.
For be it ones laid, upon a woman's belly
She go thens with child, the miracles are scene there daily
And besides all this, ye would marvel in confession
What our fathers do, to assoyle them of transgressyon
Iohan Thessecelius, assoyled a yonge woman ones
Behind the high alter, till she cried out of her bones
And as for lyons, there is the length of our lord
In a great pillar, she that will with acorde
Be fast bound to it, and take such chance as fall
Shall sure have child, for within it is hollow all
Tush, I could tell ye, of much more wondre tha this
In course to here them, I think ye would ye blys.

As thou hast begone, go forward in it and te^.


Such a knave I suppose, is not from hens to hell.


In our relygyon, was an holy popysh patryarke
Which of all bawdrye, might be the great monarch.
The Nuns to confess, he went from place to place
And two hundred of them, he broached in that space
Many spices he eat, his courage to provoke
Such a fellow was he, as of that ger had the stroke

Now somewhat will I tel, to confyrme thy tale withal
In king f^dinads time, in Spain was a Cardinal
Petrus mendoza, was the very man that I mean
Of lemmans he had, great nombre besides the queen
One of his bastards, was an earl, an other was duke
Whom also he abused, and thought it no rebuke.
Ioannes Cr^mona an other good Cardinal
For reformation, of the clergye spyrituall
Came ones into Englad, to dapne preestes matrymony
And the next night after, was taken, doing bytcherye
Doctor Eckius also, which fearcely came to dyspute
In ^psia with luther, minding there him to con^ute.
For marriage of pryestes, three children ^ad that year
By this may ye se, that sometime we make merry cheer

Mary that do ye, I shall bear ye record now
But howe will ye answer, for breaking of your vow.

We never break vow, so lunge as we do not mary
Though we in whoredom, be never so bold and busy.

By your ordre than, ye may walk much at large
What hast thou hypocresy, to lay for thy dyscharge

Saint Frances habit, with the holy girdle whoode
Noue can go to hell, that therein dye by the rood
In case saint Frances, be sure upon their side
Else may they fortune, to be of their purpose wide
For I teade of one that shulde have gone to the devil
But the spyrytes of hell, could do no him no evil.
Till saint Frauces came, loke from him this cowl
Then went he to hell, the fryers did here him howl.
I will therefore serve S Frances, with heart and mind
With daily memories, that he may be my frynde
And than I care not for all the deuylles in hell
That I have told you, is more true then the Gospel.

Then are ye more sure, than monks for your heritage
For their lands are here, but ye claim heaven for aduauntage.

Yet is it to them, a very pleasant thing
Their Abbot at home, tobe called lord and king.

Nay monk and churl, for here ^s no king but one,
If he be a king, his mace is a mary bone
And his crown a cowtorde, such knaves as come fro the carte
Must be called kings, for playenge a popysh par^.

It becomes not the, the Romyshe pope, so to lurche
Considering he is the highest of the church.

If he be the highest, than is he the ^thercocke


Ah, now I per^eyne, thou art disposed to mock
Of all holy Church, he is the pry^eypall head.

Mary that is true, he sends out bulls under lead
And he hath two ^yes, the one to open hell
The other spea^eth heaven, thus do new here tyekes tell
They report also that Dogs have no devotion
To his holy laws, nor his old instruction.

Why should dogs hate him? make that more evident


They love no p^se portege, nor yet red herynges in lent
Steckfysshe nor oysters, but curse him body and bone
And would his red sprottes, rotten fysshe were gone
Tush, I hear them I, and that makes me full sad.

Either thou doest mock, or else thou art sure mad.


Theare the people complayue very much of the.


What is their pratlinge, I pray the heartily tell me.


They say thou teach, nothing but lowsy tradictos.
And lies for lu^e, with damnable supersticions
And thus they conclude, that the draff of popysh prysies
Is good enough for Swyne, by whom they do mean the Papystes.
Yea, and they say also, the diet of men is all
To most boil carryen, the dogs will soonest fall

Than do they compare, the papists unto dogs.


Mary that do they, and to such swynys she hogs
As in swyllandsosse, are brought up all their life
Such are the Papists, they say both man and wife
They say also, that thou art a noughty knave
By prowlynge and ly^ge, ye fryers would all have
Thine ordre they say, is sprung even out of hell
And al this knowledge, they have now of the Gospel.

Why, where is he now, I beseech the heartily tell.


By the mess abroad, I warrande ye makes revel.
I comoned with him, and he did us despise
Against him therefore, somewhat we must de uyse.

Mary that must we, or else it will be wrong
He will sure destroy us* if we do suffer him lunge
Needs must we serve him, as we ones served Christ.

Why mad bray^ed whorsons, how did ye handle Christ


As he preached here, we followed fro place to place
To trap him in snare, and his doctrine to deface
Than found we the means, to put him so to death
Least he against us, shulde open any more breath
And we set four knights, to kept him down in his grave
That he never more, our living shulde deprave.
And thus must we serve the Gospel, no remedy
Else will he destroy our lyuynges perpetually.
B^tt^r one were lost, than we shulde perysshe all
As Cayphas ones said, in Counsel pharisa^call.

By god well said, when ye have him in his grave
Stape him down, till he shyte, serve him like knau^

We must so ordre him, that he go no more at large.


Four knights wyllwe hire, whom we shall streyghtlye charge.
To keep him down harde, the first are ambycyous Prelates.
Then Coueytous lawyers, that Gods word spyght fuliye hates.
Lords without learning, and iustyces vnryghtfull
These will keep him down, rap him on the sc^ll.
Their Somners and their Scrybes, I warrande ye shall stere
With baylyurs and catchp^lles, to hold him down every where
I trow Rug Corbet, at Norwit^h will do their part
With wharton of ^ongaye, and for my sake put him to smart.

And I will raise up in the vnyuersyties
The seven slepers there, to advance the popes decrees
As Dorbell and Duns, Durand Thomas of Aquyne
The master of sentens, with Bachon the great deuyue
Hericus de Gandauo, and these shall read ad cletu.
Aristotle and Albert, de secretis mulierum
With the Comentaryes, of Aui^en and Aueroyes
And a Phebo Phebe, which is very good for boys

Yea and let the pope, as Gods own Uicat here
In his hand* iii. cro^ses,. iii. crowns on his head ^ere
His power betokenynge in heaven, in earth, in hell
That he may comaude all kings, subdue the gospel

His self may do that he need command none other
Is not he the head of the holy church out mother
May not be make sayuts devils at his own pleasure
Which hath in his hades, the ^eyes churches tresure
So well as he made saint Herman first a saint
And twenty years after, of Heresye him attaynte.
First he sent him to heaven, by his canonyzacion
And from thence to bell, by auexcommunycation
We read of formosus, that after he was dead
One pope his fyngars, another cut of his head
And threw his Carcass, into the floude of Tyber
With the head and fyngers, as Platina doth remember
In token that he, is judge over quycke and dead
And may dampne and save, by his pardons under lead
Syluester the second, to the devil himself ones gave
For that high offyce, that he might dampne and save
He offered also his stones to Satan, they say
For priests chastity, and so went their marriage away

Here is one coming, enquire what he entende.


Ha? it is the Gospel, from him God us defend.


Show me brother mine, who did the hither send.


The father of heaven, of his mere beuyu^lence
I desire therefore, of free audience.

Ye mind than to preach before this company?


In the laws of God, would I instruct them gladly
For none other way, there is unto salvation
But the word of God, in every generation
That qayckeueth, that saves, yt brings unto heaven.
As before his death, Christ taught the Apostle aleuen.

Preach here thou shalt not, without the Aucthorytie
Of pope or bys^hop, or some of their affynytie.

Gods word, never takes his auctorytie of man.


Thou shalt not here preach, do thou the best thou can.


Gods blessing on your heart, it is spoken even like a man.
Ye knowethis day sir, we have a full holy feast
And must go processyon, with the blessed rood of reast
We have lunge matins, lunge laudes, lunge hours, lunge pryme.
Mass, evensong, complyne, all must be done in time
Sensynge of the Aulters, and casting of holywater
Holy bread making, with other necessary matter.

Have God commanded any such things to be done


What is that to the? go meddle with old shone
Can thou say, but they are good sygnyfications?

I say they are fruits of your ymagynacions.

To bring in luere, and darken Gods high glory.
Of you God doth axe, no such vain beggary
Christ never sent his, to she we sygnyfications
But his living word, to all the Christen nations
Ye forsake the Lord, as Esaias doth tell
And highly blaspheme, the holy of Israell.
In his first chapter, this horrible sentence is
Quis hec frusteanea quesiuit, be manibus Bestris,
Who hath required, of yousuche sacryfyce
In vain offer you, that unto maunded service
Your incense to me, is great Abhomyuation
I sore abhorte it, and much detest your fasshyon
When ye pray to me, I give ye none attendance
But avert my face (saith God) my countenance
By this ye may se, that the lord doth not regard
your mangre mutteryng, neither grant it any reward
No man wills Paule, to speak in the congregation
In a strange language, without interpretation.
In your latin hours, the flock do ye not consider
But declare your selves, to be Romys she all together
Be not led about (saith Paule, by any strange letuyng
What else is your doctrine, but a blind popysh thing?
He testifies also, Non enim vt baptizatem
Dis^t tu^ Christue, sed vt Euangeliz^rem.
Christ hath not me sent, that I shulde baptyse, saith Paule
But to preach his word, to the coforte of mans soul
Loo, though baptyme be a thing very necessity
yet must it give place, to Gods word, no remidye
Why than preferreye, your draffys she ceremonies
To the Gospel preachyuge, O dampuable injuries.

Why suffer ye him, to prattle here so lunge?


Get the hence shortly, or with the, it will be wrong.


Peace be here and God, master Doctor by your leave
That I may declare, a pardon here in my slene
Of our Lady of Boston, Ingham, and saint Iohannes Frarye
With the indulgence, of blessed saint Antony

Well, take thy pleasure, and do it hardily.


Sir he doth me wrong, for this day it is my station
To preach my brotherhed, and gather my lymytacion

Who first spake, first speed, steppe forth and rede thy pardon
And when he hath done, your course is, father warden.

What course appoint ye, for preaching of the Gospel


I would thy Gospel, and thou, were both now in hell


Why and shall this baggage, put by the word of God


Thou will not be answered, till thou feel a sharper rod


Good Christen people, I am come hither berelye
As a true poctour, of the house of saint An^onye
Of clean remyssyon, I have brought ye indulgence
A pena et culpa, for all your sin and ^ff^ure
By the Auctorytie of pope Leo and pope Clement
Pope Bonyface, pope Pius, pope Iohan, and pope Innocent.
And here I bless ye, with the wing of the holy ghost
From thundre to save ye, and fro spyrytes in every coo^
Lo, here is a bell, to hang upon your hog
And save your Cattle, from the bytynge of a dog
So many as wyllcome, to this holy frater^ytie
Come paye your money, and ye shall have letters of me

Let me have a letter, for I will be a brother


Then give me a bell, for I will be an other.


O damnble leadyuge, of Babylonicall sodomytes
Your selves ye declare, to be shameful hypocrytes
Lord pity thy people, and take away these gydes
These scorners, these robbers, these cruel homycydes
Such prophets are they, as God did ueuer send
As Hiere my saith, they damnable ways pretend.
Wo Hypocrytes wo, for here ye tryfie and mock
With christen people, the kyngdo of heaven up locke
Ye count it a game, to lose that Christ hath bought
With his precious blode, here most dearly sought
O ye are wretches, and pestylent Antichrists
Mynysters of Dagon, and most deceitful papists.
Like tauenouse Wolves, poor Wydowes ye devour
By title of prayer* eternal dampnacion is your
Your own dreams ye follow, but matter much more wayghtye
Ye do not esteem, as judgment, faith, and mercy
Wo Pharyses wo, ye make clean outwardelye
But inwards ye are full, of coueytousues bawdrye.
Painted tumbes are ye, apryenge tyght beautiful
But within ye stink, have thoughts very shameful
Ye slew the prophets, your doing yet bear wytnes.
How think ye to avoid, that point of vnrighteousnes
Oh ragynge serpents, and vyperouse generation
Howe can ye escape, the danger of dampnacion

Who made the so bold, to meddle within my cure?
And teach new learning? an heretyke art thou sure
If due search were made, we shulde find the (I think) no pryest

Yes, anointed of God, but no popysshe Antichrist.


Let me se, where are the letters of thy ordres?


Where Christ his self is, not in the same borders
No such pryest am I, as is anointed with oil
But the holy Ghost, for I am none of this soil.

Here I attache the, for a buysye scismatyke
And will the accuse, for an haynouse heretyke
Lay hands upon him, depryue him of this apparel
H^c Best spotiatum sordidiori^us induunt.

Loo, thus will I handle al the, that shall take thy quarrel
Hold away with this ger, and lay it forth aside.

Nay, tarry brother mine, for away shalt thou not slyde


I am not going, why doest thou slander me?


But no him to ashes and show to him no pity.


Brent shall he not be, if he will nomore do so.
Fellow howe say thou? will th^u here abiute or no?

I will neither abjure, nor yet recant Gods glory.


I offered the reason, and thereto thou will not applyd,
Well get the foreward for thou shalt sure dye
The temporal power, shall judge the to the fire
At our Accusement, and holy relygyous desire.

Thought you for my sake impryson men cruelly
Famysshe them, stock them, and them with faggots fry
Hurt me ye shall not, for I can never dye
And they for my sake, shall live perpetually^.

Here is a pratynge, with a very vengeance hence.


This horrible hetetycke, now shall we well recompense


Yea, hurne him well fryre, and let him no longer reign
Lay on grieve faggottes, to put him to more payne
By the mess I laugh, to se howe this ge^e doth wurke
He is like of the, to have no more gra^r than a turk
For such knaves they are, as a man shall not lightly find.
And take over hell, companions they are to my mind
My busynesse all, is now at good conclusion
That I have brought these. iii. laws to confusion
Now shall I be able, to live here peaceablye
And make frowly^e chere, with hey how frysfa Iolye
The law of Nature, I caste first in a leprye
By the secrete help, of ydolatrye and sodomye.
The law of Moyses, I made a crypple blind
Auaryce and Ambycion, to help me were not behind
And now Christ's law, I have br^ut for heresy^
By help of false doctrine, and my cosyn hypocrysye
On these same three laws, all other laws depend
And can not prenayle, now these are at an end.
If Christen governors, do not these laws uphold
Their Cyuple ordynaunces, will soon be very cold
Well, this valeaunte George, hath made them all to stoup.
Cheer now may I make, and set cock on the houpe
Fill in all the pots, and bid me welcome hostess
And go cal me hither, mine own sweet mynyon Bess*

QUid gloriaris in malicia? qui potens es in iniquitate.
Thou vengeable wretch, replete with poison and vice
Why doest thou thus, rejoice in cruelty and maiyte?
Think thou that God sleeps, will not his defend
And that thy myschyefe, shall never have an end
The blode of Innocents, to him for vengeance call
And therefore this hour, must I fearcely upon the fall

Thou spyryte of the air, I straygtly conjure the here
By Panton Craton, and charge the to come no ne'er.

Think thou to stop me, with thy foolysshe cosuracion
Whom God sends hither, for thy abhomynacion.

What art thou called? thy name to me rehearse.


I am Uindicta Dei, in punysshement most fearce,
With water, with sooerde, and with fire I must thee pearce

Be good in thy offyce, thou shalt have money meat


By fylthy rewards, thou can not me entreat
But that I will do, as God hath me commanded
For if worldely gifts, my fury might have changed
The buyuetfall world, had ben drowned with water
Nor Sodome Gomor, with so fyery fearful matter
Nor yet the Israelyties, with terror of the sword
With hungre pestylence, in the anger of Gods word
Pharao in Egypt, the plagues had never felt
Might I have been stopped, for silver or for g^l^e
Into Egipte I brought, ten terryble punysshementes
Upon the people, for breaking his comaundementes
Their wholesome waters, I turned into blood
I multyplyed frogs, to poison therewith their food.
I made wasps and Dranes, them grievously to stynge
And all kinds of flies, soon after did I in bring
Upon their cattle, I threw the foul pestylence
Both botch, boil, and blayne, they had for their offence
Lyghtenynges and haylynges, destroyed their Corn and fruit.
A swarm of hungry locustes, their pastors destytute
The space of three days, I gave the palpable darkness
I slew the first gotten, of ma and beast, for thy rudeness
For I never stryke, but for the Infydelytie.

Stryke for me quoth ^? By y^ mary Mass I defy the


What thou will not so, thy brains are not so light


Anger me not to much, for if thou do, I fight


All that will not help, thy wicked workings now
When the stronger come, the weaker must needs bow
The law of Nature, infected thou hast, with a leprye.

Nay, it was not I, but that wytche Idolatry
And that polde shorn knave, that men cal Sodomye

Of whom syronge they first? but of Infydelytie?
Therefore thou shalt have, that plage of penalty
Which they first tasted, for their Iniquity
For those two vices, I drowned the world with water
In token whereof, I plage the, with the same matter.
Hic Infidelitatem ^ ^pha perc^tit,


Tusshe, I defy thy worst, this shall not drive me he^
For after the floude, with Cham had I resydence
And so continued, till Moyses law came in
With his iolye tryckes, a new rule to begin

And him thou cortuptest, with Auaryce and Ambition
And so did leave him in miserable condition
Thou shalt have therefore, that than to them was due
Most terryble battle, the Israelties untrue
That time did suffer, for their Infydelytie
Wherefore with this sword, I justly banysshe the.
Because thou shalt here, give place to Christ's gospel
Gladio Infidelitatem denuo cedit.

Yet will I not hence, but again ones rebel.
Did not I remain, with Iudas, and other more?
When Christ prea^hed here, and taught them to ve^ him sore.
Yes, and after that, was I with Simon Magus
With Saunder Coppersmyth, with Elimas and Demetrius.
And now I persevere, among the rank rabble of Papists
Teaching their sho^lynges, to play the Antichriste^

The Innocent blood, of sayntes continually
Doth all unto God to revenge their injury*
Against false doctrine and cursed hypocresye
Whom thou hast raised the glory of the Gospel
To darken, and his friends most miserably to quell.
Wherefore thou shalt have like as thou hast deserved
For thy wicked doings, thy punysshmet now doubled.
Ignis ipsum precedet. The Prophet Dauid saith thus.
At{que} inflammabit in citcuitu inimicos eiue.
A consumynge fire, shall run before the judge
His enemies consumynge, they shall find no refuge.
Ob scesera et culpas hominum, titus{que} nephandes
In cineres ibit tissus, tenuim{que} fauillam
As Mantuan writes, for the wickedness of the
The earth to ashes, by fire, shall turned be.
Ignis flamnia Infidelitatem (...) coget.

Credo, credo, credo. I say, credo, credo, credo,
To the Denyll of hell, by the Mess I wene I go.

As ^e have scene here* howe I have stricken with fire
The pestylent vice of Infydelytie
Sowyll I destroy, in the fearcenes of my^tyre*
All sectes of error, with their enormytie
Which hath risen out of that iniquytie
For as it is said, that my hand hath no set
Shall up by the root, no power may it let.
The Apostle Iohan, in the Apo^alyps doth say
He saw ^ new he even, and a new earth appearing
The old earth and se, were taken clean away
That heaven is man faith, that earth his understanding.
Whom we have renewed, by our most sexxet work ynge
The old cauered earth, exylynge with the see
Which is supersticion, and Infydelytie.
A new Hierusalem, the said Iohn also se
As a beautiful ^ to her husband
Our ^ue faithful church is that same fair City
Who we ^, by the power of our right hand
As a s^ouse to Christ, in every Christen land
^ the ^ecres, of Babylonicall poperye
That^ in ^y^yte, may walk to our glory.
^ three l^wes, for you will I ^lere also
Of such infections, as by Infydelytie
Ye have reciyued, that ye with he^ may go
Declarynge the ways, of Christen liberty
^, she may take, ^
For her only God, and be our people styll
In our laws walking, according to our will.

At your commandment, we are most blessed lord,


Approach nyghar than, and ye shall be restored.

Thou law of Naturewe first begin with the
Restorynge the again, to thy first purytie
Avoid Idolatry, Avoid vile Sodomye.
We charge ye no more, this law to putryfye
Keep styll that same hart for a sign perpetual
That thou were written, in man hart first of all.
Thou law of Moses* give me that veil from the
No longer shalt thou, neither blind nor crooked be
Hence thou Ambycion, and cut sed Coueytousn^s
I here banysche you, from this law ever doubtless
Lose not those tables, which are a token ture
That thou in the flesche, shalt ever more continue.
Thou law of the Gospel, though thou be last of all
In operation yet, thou art the pryacypall
From the I exile, hypoetysye and false doctrine
With all that depend, upon the papisticall^yne
Reserve the came book, for a sign of heavenly pour
For ye book thou art, that Iohn fro headue did devour.

Everlasting praise, to thy glorious majesty.


Our heavenly governor, great is thy gracious pity,


Of mankynde thou art, the eternal felicity.


Now leave thy servants, in thy perpetual peace
To do the service, from hence, will we notcease.

For your eyes have se^e, what thou hast now prepared
For thy peoples health, which hath benhere declared.

A light thou hast sent, which is thy joyous Gospel
To the consolation of the hows of Israell.

In rejoice of this, make we some melody.


The name of our God, to praise and magnyfye.


I assent thereto, and will singe very gladly.

Hic ad Dei gloria^ canta^unt. In exitu Israel de Aegipto, ^l aliud simile.


Now have we destroyed, the kingdom of Babylon
And thrown the great whore, into the bottomles pyt
Restorynge agayae, the true faith and relygyon
In the Christen church, as we have thought it fit
Depurynge these laws, so to continue it
Man is our creature, and hath grace in our sight
To dwell with him now, is our whole hearts delight.
Man is our people, his God we are again
With him will we have, continual resydence
A way will we wipe, from all sorrow and payne
He shall no longer dyspayre, for his offence
Nor have in his soul, any carefuldoubte of conscience
The old popyshnes is past, which was dampuacion
We have now re^ued, our Christen congregation.
Stand forth Christen faith, and take our aduertismet
We here appoint the, to govern our congregacion
Se thou do nothing, without the admonysshement
Of these three laws here, Imprynt their declaration
Of my sweet promyses, and than make thou relation
To my folk again, that they may walk to me
Without popysshe dreams, in a perfyght liberty.

Most heavenly maker, in it thoudoest command me
Evermore will I, full prompt and dylygent be.

Thou law of Nature, shalt ^ache man God to know
And thatto refuse, whereby any ill may grow.

From this your precept, shall I not varye I crow*


Teach thou him also, to worship one God about
And his proper neyber, to persecute with love.

I hope blessed lord, to do as me shall behove.


And thou shalt teach him, to love God in his hart.
And those to forgive, by whom he sufferethsmarte.

In your appoyntmentes, will I do also my part.


Work thou in the heart, a knowledge necessary
In the flesh, work thou, by outward Ceremony.
Change thou notto the sp^et* ^ workyn^s of these ^wo
And cause our people, in a perfyght way to go
Take heed christ faith, to the techynges of these three
And move our people, to walk in the verytie.
The promyses we made, in all these three are Gospel
We would thou shouldest so, to our Congregation tell
Our eu^rlastynge b^estynge, be with you ever more.

To thy sweet name lord, be praise perpetual honour*


It hath pleased God, to put me in this offyce
To govern his church, and christen Congregation
And theri^ do, as ye shall me entice
Give me I pray you, such wholesome exhortation
As may be to Man, aclere edyfication
And I will be glad, to take your adurttyshment
As it shall become, any child obedyent.

Ye speak it full wele, than mark what shall be said
And diligently, look that it be obeyed.

The effect of me, is for to know the lord
Everlasting, strong, most gracious and godly
And as touching Man, to have fraternal concorde
F^r to norysshe, and to do non injury
To ^ ^uenasites made, and love true matrymonye
T^ese noble effects, so temper you in Man.
That them to fulfil, he do the best he can.

The effect of me, is for to worship the lord
As one God alone, and to fly from Idolat^ye
Not to flee nor steal, nor yet to bear false record
To show what is sin, and to seek the remedy
Public peace to hold* and sore to punysshe the gyltie
From these good effects, se that man never soo^rue
Thau shall he be sure, that God will him preserve.

The effect of me, is for to worship the lord
In the inward spyryte, and to favour friend eumye
And in all points else, with Gods will to accorde
To preach remyssyon, to save and to iustyfye
In Christ all to se^elyfe, justice, peace and mer^y^
These heavenly effects, in man so incorporate
That he may in spyryte, be newly regenerate.

More sweet than honey, are your three exhortacions
And regestred they be, in my memorial
Now will I forward, to all the Christen nations
And se in effect, these laws observed all
To the abolyshment, of the dreams papisticall
Now the light is come, the darkness dies away
I trust in the lord, men will walk in the day.
Good Christen people, to these three laws apply
First know that ye have, a living God above
Than do him honour, and his name magnyfye
Worship him in spryte, as the Gospel you doth move
Than obey your quen^, like as shall you behove
For she in her life, that lord doth represent
To sauegard^ of the just, and fynners punysshement.
Se that ye regard, such laws as she doth make
For they are of God, as Salomon doth report
Of these laws doubteles, those laws their groundynges take
To the public wealth, to give aid, strength, and comfort
For preservation, of all the christen sort
In no case follow, the ways of ^eygnolde Pole
To his dampnacion, he doubtless plays the fool.
Have ^ due respect, unto your country natyue
Which hath brought ye up, and given ye noryshment
Even from your cradles, to these days nutrytyue
Do that ye may do, to her wealth and preferment
Mynyster to bet, no hateful detriment
A dog to his friend, will never be vnlouynge
Let reason in ye, not lose his natural workynge.

Who lives without law, shall perysshe without law
And therefore we have, three laws to you descrybed
That after their lives, ye shulde in your living draw
We have also showed, howe they have ben corrupted
By foul Idolaters, and Sodomytes polluted.
By coueytous preestes, and by ambytyous prelates
Hypocrytall fryers, false Doetours and false Cutates

Who hath restored, these same thyr laws again
But your late Iosias, and valiant king Henrye
No prince before him, toke ever yet such payne
Fro Englade to banysshe, Idolatry foul Sodomye
Coueytousnes, Ambycion, false Doctrine hypocresye
It was he that brought, Christ's verytie to light
When he put the pope, with his fylthynes to flight.

Fro dapnable darkness, as my brother here doth say
He hath delivered, this realm of Englande godly
Bringing his Subjects, into the true path way
Of their souls safeguard* if they now follow it wisely
And left them he hath, the same way styll to fortyfye
His noble son Edwarde, such a king of God elect
As questionles, while helyued, did perform it in effect

Pray we to the lord, for the lunge contynuaunce
Of Queen Elizabeth, in this worlds habitation
And that of her Noblesse, she have true maintenance
In the pryncyples of this most worthy foundation
^hat she may to Christ, bring us from desolation
And for her noble Counsellours, to god let us all pray
That in the true faith, their hertes direct he may.

Love thy Lord God. Swear thou no other
Thy sobbeth keep. Please thy friends both.
Wytnes none ill. Hold no man wife.
Bribe man good. Slay not with knife
Wysshe no man house. Nor Ox nor Ass
As thou will have. Do thou like case.
BEnedictus dominus, Deus Israel Which hath over thrown, the migh tie Idol
Bell
The false God of Rome, by power of the Gospel
And has prepared from the deep lake of hell.
Redeptionem ple^i^ su^.
^t ^rexit cornu, of mercy, health and grace
That cruel Tyrant, now clearly to de face
Whose blodye kingdom, dymynyssheth apace
By the word of God, which lately hath take place.
In ^omo Dauid, pueti sui*
Sicut Iocutus est, the Lord celestial
That Romys she Antichrist, is like to have a fall
With his whole rabble, of sectes dyabolycall
And now the nombre, will florysshe over all
Prop^etatum eiu^.
Salutem ex inimicis, now we may daily hear
The enemies of Christ, with him doth wytnesse bear
Saule is become a Paule, and preaching every where
Now may we receive, most heavenly wholesome gear
De manu corum qui ^d^t nos.
Ad faciendam misericodiam
The son of our God, from his high gloryecam
To redeem the sin, of the children of Adam
And to remember, to faithful Abraham
Testamentisui sancti.
Ad iusiurandum, which God hath made before
Unto our fathers he will keep evermore
Promised he hath if we regard his lore
For sakynge the Pope, with his damnable store
Daturum se nobis.
Ut sine timore, from Romysh tyrants fre
The lord grant us grace, that we may speakers b^
Of his holy word, and therein to agree
That in the Gospel and Christen liberty
Seruiam^ i^i.
In sanctitate, and purenes of life
Let us now travail, both maiden man and wife
All tyghtrous doings, in us be ever rife
That we perseuet, without debate orstryfe
Omnibu^ dicbus nostri^.
Tupuer Propheta, elected of the lord
Our Queen Elizabeth, to have Gods law restored
Folowest Iosias, therofto take record
In all thy doings, and in Gods holy word
Patate via^iu^.
Ad dandam scicentiam, for men's health and save guard
Christ's holy Gospel, by the is frely heard
Wherein doth cousyst, their life and full reward
With preservation, from dangerous i^oba^dye.
Peccatorum corum.
P^t viscera misericordie
Christ our dere master, us daily ouer^
Least we here perysshe, in our iniquytie
Our mediator, continually is he.
Ori^ns ex afto.
Illuminare, sweet lord we the desire
To menin darkness, and in the popysshe mire
Let not his baggage, thy faithful servants tyre
But us deliver, from them and from hell fire.
In viam pacis.
IMPRINTED AT London / in S. brides Churchyard, over against the North Door
of the Church, by Thomas Colwell.

Anno Domini. M. D. LXII. vi. Die Nouembris.


