IN ych come welthe, most high prchemynence,
Is due unto laws for soch commodyte,
As is had by them, For as Cicero gives sentence
Where as is no law, can no good order be,
In nature, in people, in hows nor yet in city.
The bodies above, are vnderneth a law,
Who could rule the world, were it not vndre awe?
Like as Chrysippus, full clarkely doth dyffyne,
Law is a teacher, of matters necessary,
A knowledge of things, both natural and deuyne
Perswadynge all truth. dysswadynge all injury.
A gyfte of the lord, devoid of all obprobry,
An wholesome doctrine, of men discrete and wise,
A grace from above and a very heavenly practyse.
Our heavenly maker, mannys living to direct,
The laws of Nature, of Bondage, and of Grace,
Sent into this world, with vycyousnesse infect,
In all ryghteousnesse, to walk before his face.
But Infydelyte, so works in every place,
That under the heavens, no thing is pure clean,
So much the people, to his perverse ways lean.
The law of Nature, his fylthy dysposycyon.
Corrupts with idols, and stynkynge Sodometry.
The law of Moses, with Auaryce and Ambycyon.
He also poluteth. And ever continually,
Christ's law he defyleth. with cursed hypocresy,
And with false doctrine, as will apere in presence,
To the edyfyenge, of this Christen audience.
Of Infydelyte, God royll himself revenge.
With plages of water, of wild fire and of sword.
And of his people, due homage he will challenge.
Ever to be known. for their God and good lord,
After that he hath, those laws again restored,
To their first beauty committing them to faith.
He is now in place, mark therefore what he saith.
I Am Deus pater, a substance inuysyble,
All one with the son, holy ghost in essence.
To Angel and Man. I am incomprehensyble,
A strength infynyte, a ryghteousnesse, a prudence,
A mercy, a goodness, a truth, a life, a sapyence.
In heaven and in earth, we made all to our glory,
Man ever having, in a specyall memory.
Man I say again, which is our own elect,
Our chosen creature, and seruaunt over all,
Above the others, peculyarly select,
To do us homage and onour name to call,
Acknowledgynge us for his author princypall.
Endued him we have, with gifts of specyall grace
And laws will we send, to govern him in place.
Steppe fourih ye iii. laws, for gydauce of Makynde
Whom most inteyrly, in hart we love and fauer.
And teach him to walk, according to our mind,
In clennes of life, and in a gentle behauer.
Deeply instruct him, our mysteryes to saver,
By the works of faith, all vices to seclude,
And preserve in him, our godly symylytude.

Of duty we ought, always to be obeysaunt,
To your commandment, for just it is and pleasant,

Your precepts are true, of perpetual strength
On justice grounded, as will apere at length.

Proudenesse ye abhor, with like inconuenyentes,
All they are cursed, wych go fro your comauedemetes

Our laws are all one, though you do three apere
Like wise as our will, is all one in effect.
But because that Man, in himself is not clear
To time and person, as now we have respect,
And as three teachers, to him we you direct,
Though ye be but one. In token that we are three,
Dystyncte in person, and one in the deyte.

We consydre that, for as concerning Man,
Four several times, are much to be respected.
Of Innocence first, of his transgressyon than,
Than the lunge season, wherein he was afflycted,
Fynally the time, wherein he was redeemed.
Of pleasure is the first, the second of exile.
The third doth ponnysh, the fort doth reconcyle,

When Angel was made, this law he had by by,
To serve you his lord, and with laudes to prosecute
This law was given Man, in time of innocence,
In no wise to eat, of the forbydden fruit.
These two laws broken, both they were destytute,
Of their first freedom, to their most high decay,
Till your only son, ded manys whole rausome paye

When Angel in heaven, and Man in paradyse,
Those laws had broke. The law of wicked Satha
Impugned your laws, by craft subtyle practyse.
Where you said. Eat not. He said unto the woman,
Eat, Ye can not dye, As Gods ye shall be than.
By this first of all, your lawdes Man proved true.
And Sathans law false, which he now daily rue.

Let him tha beware, how he our laws neglect
Only to Angel, and Man we gave lyberte,
And they only fell, becommynge a froward sect.
Not by our mocyon. but their own vanyte.
For that we gave them, to their felycyte,
Abused they have, to their perpetual evil.
Man is now mortal and Angel become a devil.
Lose Man we will not, though he fro us doth fall
Our love towards him, will be much better than so
Thu law of Nature, teach thu him first of all,
His lord God to know, and that is right to do.
Charge and enforce him, in the ways of us to go,
Thu law of Moses, And Christ's law fynally
Raise him and save him, to our perpetual glory*

For time of exile, than I must be his teacher.

Yea, for three ages, both gyde and governor.
From Adam to Noah, from Noah, to Abraham,
And than to Moses, which is the son of Amram,

Where must I remain, for the time I shall be here?

In the hart of Man, his conscience for to stere,
To ryghteouse living, and to a just believe,
In token whereof, this hart to the I give.
Thu shalt want no grace, to confort him with all,
If he to the faith, of my first promise fall.

Then my course is next, for time of his ponishment^

For three ages more, to the must he consent.
From Moses to Dauid fro thens to the Iewes exile
And so fourth to Christ, which will Man reconcyle

Where shall I sweet lord, for that same seaso dewell

With soch harde rulers, as will the people compel.
Our mind to fulfil, withuot vain gauds of fables
For a sign of this, hold these same stony tables.
All they that observe, our laws inuyolablye,
Shall every where prosper, increase and multyplye

Then I perceive well, my course is last of all.

What though it b^ so? yet art thu pryncypall,
Our all the world, thy beams shalt thu extend,
And styll continue, till the world be at an end.

Where shall I father, for that same time persevere?

With the faithful foet, must thu continue ever.
Thu shalt my people, return from far exile,
And for evermore, to my grace reconcyle.
Take this precyouse book, for a token evident.
A seal of my covenant, and a living testament.
They that believe it shall live foreuermore,
And they that do not, will rue their folly sore,
Blessed shall he be, that you my laws will keep.
In city and field, whether he do work or sleep,
His wife shall encreace, his land shall frutyfye.
And of his enemies, he shall have victory.
The sky will give rain, when seasonable time shall be,
The works of his hades, shall have prosperyte.
Cursed shall they be, that will not our laws fulfil,
Without and within, at market and at mile.
Of corn and cattle, they shall have non increase,
Within their own hows, shall sorrows never cease
Never shall they be, without boil, botch, or blayne,
The pestylence pox, will work the deadly payne,
Show this unto Man, bid him take good heed,
Of our ryghteousnesse, to stand always in dread.
We vysyte the sin. and the great abhomynacyon*
Of the wicked sort, to third and fort generation.
Thu law of Nature, instruct him first of all,
Thu law of Moses, correct him for his fall,
And thu law of Christ, give him a godly mind.
Raise him unto grace, save him from the find.
Our heavenly blessing, be with you every chone,

All praise and glory, to your majesty alone.

Here styll to tarry, I think it be your mind.

My offyce ye know, is to instruct Mankynde.

Than God be with you, we leave ye here behind,

THe law in effect. is a teacher general,
What is to be done. what to be laid aside
But as touching me the first law natural
A knowledge I am whom God in Man doth hyde,
In his whole workynge, to be to him a gyde,
To honour his God and seek his neybers health,
A great occasyon, of peace and public wealth,
A sore charge I have, Mankynde to over se.
And to instruct him, his lord God to obey.
That lord of heaven grant, I may so do my duty
That he be pleased, and Man brought to a staye.
His brittle nature, his slyppernesse to way,
Much doth provoke me. But if God set to hand,
He shall do full well. For non may him withstand,

^Brom, brom, brom, brom, brom. Bye brom bye ^bye. Bromes for shoes and
pow^h^rynges, botes and ^buskyns for new bromes / Brom, brom, brom.
Marry God give ye good even,
And the holy man saint Steven,
Send ye a good new year.
I would have brought ye the paxe.
Or else anymage of wax.
If I had known ye hear.
I will my self so handle.
That ye shall have a candle,
When I come hither again.
At this your soden mocyon.
I was in soch devotion,
I had ne'er broke a vain.

That might have done ye smart.

No, no, it was but a fart,
For pastime of my hart,
I would ye had it forsooth.
In serupp or in sows,
But for noyaunce of the hows,
For easement of your toth,
Now have I my dream in dede,
God send me wele to speed,
And sweet saint Antony.
I thought I should mete a knave,
And now that fortune I have
Among this company.

Why dost thu call me knave?

I said. I would be your slave,
If your grace would me have*
And do your work anon,
I would so rub your botes,
Therofe should from the rotes,
When ye should do them on,

Thu art disposed to mock,
Soon may thu have a knock,
If thu with me so game.

Your mouth shall kiss my dock,
Your tongue shall it unlock,
But I say what is your name?

I am the law of Nature.

I thought so by your stature,
And by your auncyent gature,
Ye were of soch a rature,
When I first heard ye speak.
Ye commoned with God lately,
And now ye are his bailey,
Mankynde to rule dyscretely,
Welcome sir huddy peke.

If thu use soch villainy.
I shall displease the truly.

By the mass I the defy,
With thy whole cuckoldrye,
And all that with the hold.

Why dost thu me blaspheme,
And so ungodly deem?

For by this blessed book,
I went ye had been a coke,
And that made me so bold,
For a coke ones having age
With ^ face demure and sage,
And auncyent to behold.
As you have here in place,
With a heard upon your face,
What is he but a coke old?

Ye are disposed to dally,
To leap and ouersallye,
The compass of your wit?
I counsel ye yet in season,
Somewhat to follow reason,
And gnaw upon the byrte,

Then after our great madness,
Let us fall to some sadness,
And tell me what ye in tend,

God sent me unto Man,
To do the best I can,
To cause him to amend.
Soche creatures as want reason.
My rules obye yche season,
And that in every bondre.
The sun and moan doth moan,
With the other bodies above,
And never break their ordre.
The trees and herbs doth grow,
The see doth ebb and flow,
And varyeth not a nail.
The floods and wholesome sprynges,
With other natural things,
Their course do never fail
The beasts and birds engendre,
So do the fyshes tender,
According to their kind
Alonlye man doth fall,
From good laws natural,
By a froward wicked mind.

Now will I prove ye a liar,
Next cosyne to a friar,
And on the gall ye rub.
Ye say thy follow your law,
And varyee not a straw,
Which is a tale of a tubbe /
The sun ones in the clyppes
Away the clerenesse slyppes
And darkened is the day,
Of the planetee influence,
Arises the pestylence.
To many ones decay,
Doth not the see so rage,
That non can it aswage,
And swellowe in town and streate?
The air which gives breathe,
Sumtyme infects to death,
By his most pestylent heate.
The beasts oft vndemure,
Which were left to mannys cure,
Will him sumtyme devour.
Thus are your rules forgot,
As things of slendre note,
In creatures day and hour,

It is the will of God,
To use them as a rod,
Of his just ponnyshment.
When Man doth not regard,
The lord nor his reward,
Nor to his laws consent.
They never are so ronnysh,
But when God doth Man ponnysh.
For his vnhappynesse.
From God they never fall,
Nor from laws natural,
Doing his busynesse.

And you are the same law,
That keep them vndre awe,
By youy most polytyke wytt?

God hath appointed me,
Mankynde to ouerse,
And in his hart to sytt.
To teach him, for to know,
In the creatures high and lowe,
His gloryouse mageste,
And on his name to call,
Or power celestial,
In his necessyte,
To think him everlasting,
And wonderful in workynge,
And that he creates all,
Both govern and conserve.
From them he never swerve,
That to soch faith will fall.

In dede here is good sport.
But why do you resort,
Unto this present place?

Man always to exhort,
To seek all health and confort,
Of the only God of grace.
First in the hearts rejoice,
And than with open voice,
To worshypp him alone.
Knowledgynge his deyte,
His power and eternyte.
When he shall make his moan*

I shall keep ye as well from that,
As my grandam kept her cat,
From lyckynge of her cream.

What will thu keep me fro?
Tell me ere thu farther go,
Me think thu art in a dream.

From causynge of Mankynde.
To give to God his mind,
Or his obedyence.

What is thy name? tell me.

Marry Infydelyte,
Which never will agree,
To your benyuolence.

Thu cannyst not keep me from man.

Yet will I do the best I can.
To trouble ye now and than.
That ye shall not prevail.
I will cause ydolatrye.
And most vile sodomye,
To work so on gracyouslye,
Ye shall of your purpose fail.

I defy the wicked find,
With thy whole venemouse find,
God puts now in my mind,
To fl thy cumpanye.

Ye are so blessed a Saint,
And your self so wele can paint,
That I must me acquaint,
With you no remedy.

Avoid thu cruel enemy,
I will non of the truly,
But shurne thy cumpanye,
As I would the devil of hell.

And are ye gone in dede?
Small wyttam be your speed,
Except ye take good heed,
I will be next of your counsel.
Now will I work soch masterye,
By crafts and sutyle polycye,
The law of nature to poison.
With pestylent ydolatrye,
And with most stynkynge sodomye,
That he shall have no Foison.
Where are these vyllen knaves?
The devils own kyd^yn slaves,
That them I can not se.
I conjure you both here,
And charge ye to apere,
Like two knaves as ye be.

Ambo is a name full clean,
Know ye not what I mean?
And are so good a clarke.

By Tetragrammaton,
I charge ye, apere anon,
And come out of the dark.

Have in than at a dash,
With swash miry annet swash,
Yet may I not be to rash,
For my holy orders sake.

Nor I son by my troth,
Cha caute a courage of sloth,
And soch a comberouse couth,
Ych wot not what to do.

At Christmas and at Paske.
ye may dance the devil a mask,
Whyls his great cauldron plawe.
you soch a prati mynyon.
And you now in relygyon,
Soch two I never saw.
Is not thy name ydolatrye?

Yes, an wholesome woman verelye.
And wele seane in Phylosophye,
Mennys fortunes she can tell.
She can by saying her Aue mary,
And by other charms of sorcerye,
Ease men of toth ache by and bye,
Yea, and fatche the devil from hell.
She can milk the cow and hunt the fox,
And help men of the ague and pox,
So they bring money to the box,
When they to her make moan.
She can fatch again all that is lost,
And draw drink out of a rotten post,
Without the help of the holy Ghost.
In workynge she is alone.

What, sumtyme thu were an he,

Yea, but now ych am a she,
And a good mydwife per de,
Yonge children can I charm.
With whysperynges and whysshynges.
With crossynges and with kyssynges
With blasynges and with blessings,
That spretes do them no harm.

Then art thu like to Clisthenes,
To Clodius and Euclides,
Sardinapalus and Hercules,
Which themselves oft transformed.
Into a womannys lyckenes,
With agylyte and quyckenes,
But they had Venus syckenes,
As writers have declared.

Let her tell fourth her matter.

With holy oil and watter,
I can so cloyne and clarter,
That I can at the latter,
Many suttylters contryue.
I can work wiles in battle,
If I do ones but spattle,
I can make corn and cattle,
That they shall never thryue.
When ale is in the fat,
If the bruar please me nart,
The east shall fall down flat.
And never have any strength.
No man shall tonne nor bake,
Nor meat in season make,
If I against him take,
But lose his labour at length.
Their wellys I can up dry,
Cause trees and herbs to dye.
And slay all pullerye,
Whereas men doth me move.
I can make stoles to dance,
And carthen pots to prance.
That non shall them enhance,
And do but cast my glove.
I have charms for the plowgh,
And also for the cowgh,
She shall give milk ynowgh,
So lunge as I am pleased.
Apace the mylle shall go,
So shall the credle do,
And the musterde querrie also,
No man therewith diseased.

Thou art thu for me fytt.

The woman hath a wytt,
And by her ger can syxt,
Though she be somewhat old.
It is mine own sweet bullye,
My muskyne and my mullye,
My gelouer and my cullye,
Yea, mine own sweet hart of Gold.

I say yet not to hold.

Peace fondelinge, tush a button,

What will thu fall to mutton?
And play the hungry glutton,
Before this cumpanye?
Rank love is full of heate,
Where hungry dogs lack meat,
They will dirty puddynges eat,
For want of befe and cony.
High, mynyon for money,
As good is draff as honey,
When the day is whote and sonnye,
By the blessed rode of kent.

Say fourth your mind good mother,
For this man is non other,
But our own loving brother.
And is very wele content.

I never miss but paulter,
Our blessed ladies psaulter,
Before saint Savers alter,
With my beds ones a day.
And this is my come cast,
To hear Mass first or last.
And the holy frydaye fast,
In good time mowt I it say.
With blessings of Saint Germyne,
I will me so determine,
That neither fox nor vermin,
Shall do my chuckens harm.
For your gese seek saint Legearde,
And for your ducks saint Lenarde,
For horse take Moyses yearde,
There is no better charm.
Take me a napkyn folte,
With the bias of a bolt,
For the healynge of a colt,
No better thing can be.
For lamps and for bottes,
Take me saint Wylfrides knots.
And holy saint Thomas lots,
On my life I warande ye.
For the cowgh take Iudas care,
With the paring of a pear,
And drink them without fear
If ye will have remedy,
Three syppes are for the hyckock,
And vj. more for the chyckock,
Thus may my praty pyckock,
Recover by and by.
If ye can not sleep but slumber.
Give otes unto saint Vncumber,
And beans in a serten number.
Unto saint Blase and saint Blithe*
Give onyons to saint Cutlake,
And garlyke to saint Cyryake,
If ye will shurne the head ache,
Ye shall have them at queen hythe.
A dram of a shepes tyrdle.
And good saint Frances girdle,
With the hamlet of an hyrdle,
Are wholesome for the pyppe.
Besyden these charms before,
I have feats many more,
That I keep styll in store,
Whom now I over hyppe.

It is a spoart I trow,
To hear how she out blow,
Her witche crafts on a row,
By the Mass I must needs smile.
Now I pray the let me know,
What sedes that thu cannyst sow.
Mankynde to over throw,
And the law of nature beguile.

My self I so behave,
And am so vile a knave.
As nature doth deprave,
And utterly abheire.
I am soche a vice truly,
As God in his great fury.
Ded ponnysh most terryblye,
In Sodome and in Gomoire.
In the flesh I am a fire,
And soch a vile desire,
As bring men to the mire,
Of foul concupyscence.
We two together began,
To spring and to grow in manne,
As Thomas of Aquyne scan,
In the fort book of his sentence.
I dwelt among the Sodomytes,
The Beniamytes, and Madyanytes,
And now the popysh hypocrytes,
Embrace me every where.
I am now become all spyrytuall,
For the clergye at Rome and over all,
For want of wives to me doth fall,
To God they have no fear.
The children of God I ded so move,
That they the daughters of men ded love,
Workynge soch ways as ded not behove,
Till the floude them over went.
With Noes son Tha I was half joined,
When he his drunken father scorned.
In the Gomorytes I also reigned,
Till the hand of God them brent.
I was with Onan not unacquainted,
When he on the ground his increase shed,
For me his bretherne Ioseph accused,
As Genesis doth tell.
Dauid ones warned all men of us two,
Do not as mules and horses will do,
Confounded be they that to images go,
Those are the ways to hell.
Both Esaye and Ezechiel.
Both Hieremy and Daniel,
Of us the abhomynacyons tell,
With the prophets euerychon,
For us two God struck with fire watter.
With battle, with plages fearful matter,
With painful exile, than at the latter,
Into Egipt and Babylon.
As Paule to the Romanes testyfye,
The gentyles after Idolatry,
Fell to soch bestyall Sodomye,
That God ded them forsake.
Who follows us as he confess,
The kyngedom of God shall never possess,
And as the Apocalypse express,
Shall synke to the burning lake.
We made Thalon and Sophocles,
Thamiras, Nero, Agathocles,
Tibernius and Aristoteles,
Themselves to use unnaturally
I taught Aristo and Fulmus,
Semiramis and Hortensius,
Crathes, Hyliscus, and Pontius,
Beasts to abuse most monstru^uslye.

Marry thu art the devil himself,

If ye knew how he could pelf,
Ye would say he were soch an elf.
As non under heaven were else

The fellawe is wele decked,
Dysgysed and wele necked.
Both knave bald and pyepecked.
He lacks nothing but beles.

In the first age I began,
And so perseuerde with manne,
And styll will if I canne,
So lunge as he endure.
If monkysh sectes renew,
And popysh prestes continue,
Which are of my retynue.
To live I shall be sure.
Clean Marriage they forbid,
Yet can not their ways be hyd,
Men know what hath betyd,
When they have been in apparel.
Oft have they buried quycke,
Soch as were never sick,
Full many a propre trycke,
They have to help their quarrel.
In Rome to me they fall,
Both Byshopp and Cardinal.
Monk, fryre, pressed and all,
More rank they are than antes.
Example in pope Iulye,
Which sought to have in his fury,
Two lads, and to use them beastly,
From the Cardinal of Nantes.

Well, you two are for my mind,
Steppe fourth and do your kind.
Leave never a point be hynde,
That may corrupt in man,
The law wryt in his hart.
In his flesh do thy hart.
And his soul to peruart,
Do thu the best thu can.
Here have I pratye gynnes.
Both brouches, beads and pynnes,
With soch as the people wynnes,
Unto ydolatrye.
Take thu part of them here,
Beads, rings, and other ger,
With their abhomynacyon.
Idolatry with wickedness,
And Sodomy with fylthynesse.
To his most utter dampnacyon.
These two will him so use,
Ich one in their abuse,
And wrap him in soch evil.
That by their wicked cast,
He shall be at the last
A morsel for the devil.
Now vnderneth her noynges,
Idolatry hath kings,
With their nobylyte.
Both dukes, lords, knights and earles.
Fair ladies with their pearls.
And the whole commenalte.
Within the bownes of Sodomye.
Doth dwell the spirytuall clergye,
Pope, Cardinal and pryst.
Nonne, Chanon, Monk and fryre,
With so many else as do desire,
To reign vndre Antichrist.
Detestynge matrymonye,
They live abhomynablye,
And burn in carnal lust.
Shall I fell ye farthernewes?
At Rome for prelates are stewed,
Of both kinds. This is just.
The law of Nature I think,
Will not be able to wynke,
Against the assaults of them.
They having so high prelates.
And so many great estates,
From hens to Hierusalem.
Pause now a little while,
Mine ears doth me beguile,
If I hear not a sound.
^yen folk hath sped I guess,
It is so by the Mess,
Away now will I round,

I think ye maruele, to se soch alteracyon,
At this time in me, whom God left here so pure*
Of me it comes not, but of mannys operation,
Whom daily the devil, to great sin doth allure,
^nd his nature is, full brittle and unsure.
By him have I got this foul disease of body.
And as ye se here, am now thrown in a leprye.
I wrought in his hart, as God bad ernestlye,
Him oft provoking, to love God over all.
With the inner powers, But that false Idolatry.
Hath him perverted, by slayghtes dyabolycall.
And so hath Sodomye, through his abuses carnal.
That he is now lost, offendynge without measure.
And I corrupted, to my most high displeasure.
I abhor to tell, the abusyons bestyall.
That they daily use, which boast their chastyte.
Some at the alter, to incontynency fall,
In confession some, full beastly occupied be.
Among the close nonnes, reigns this enormyte.
Soch children slay they, as they chance for to have.
And in their preuyes, provide them of their grave.
Ye Christen rulers, so you for this a way,
Be not illuded, by false hypocresye.
By the stroke of God, the world will else decay
Permyt prestes rather, Gods lawful remedy
Than they should incur, most bestyall Sodomye.
Regard not the pope, nor yet his whorysh kyngedom
For he is the master, of Gomor and of Sodome.
With Man have I been, which hath me thus defiled*
With Idolatry, and unclean Sodomye.
And worthy I am, from God to be exiled,
Pity me yet lord, of thy most bownteouse mercy.
I will fourth morn, till thu send remedy
Promise hast thu made, to a gloryouse lyberte,
To bring heave earth, tha will thu (I trust) restore me.

THe lord perceiving, his first law thus corupted,
With unclean vices, sent me his law of Moses,
To se him for sin, substancyallye corrected.
And brought in again, to a trade of godlynes.
For I am a law, of rigour and of hardenes.
I straightly command, and if it be not done.
I thretten. I curse, and slay in my anger soon.
To God I require, a perfyght obedyence,
Condempnynge all soch, as do it not in effect.
I show what sin is, I burde sore manys coscyence
To him am I death, when his life is infect.
Yet if he take heed, to Christ I him direct,
Forgeuenesse to have. with light, health salvation,
Least he should dyspayre, fall into dampnacyon.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
A pastime quoth A, I know not the time nor when,
I ded laugh so much, scene I was an honest man.
Believe me and ye will, I never saw soch a spott,
I would ye had been there, that ye might have made the fort.

Where would have had met tell me good brother (...).

At the Mynorasse ser, late yester night at complyne.

At the Mynorasse? Why. what was there a do?

For soch an other, would I to Southampton go.
In dede yesterday, it was their dedycacyon
And thydre in Gods name, came I to se the fashion.
An old fryre stood forth, with spectacles on his nose
Beginning this Anteme, a my faith I do not gloss
^Lapides preciosi.

And what ded follow of this?

I shall tell ye ser by Gods blys.
Then came Dame Isbell, an old None a calm,
Crowynge like a capon, and thus began the Psalme.
^Saepe expugnauerunt me a iuuentute mea.

And what includes this mystery?

A simple problem of bytcherye.
When the fryre begone, Before the Nonne,
To singe of precyouse stones.
From my youth say she, They have confort me,
As it had been for the nones.

I assure the plain, I set not by soch gaudee,
Thy usage show the, to be brought up amoge bawds

It was a good world, when we had soch wholso stories
Preached in our church, on sondayes other feryes.
With us was it merry,
When we went to Berye.
And to our lady of grace,
To the blood of hails,
Where no good chere fails,
And other holy place.
When the prestes might walk.
And with yonge wives talk.
Than had we children plenty.
Than cuckolds might leap,
A score on a heap,
Now is there not one to twenty.
When the Monks were fat.
And rank as a ratte.
With bellies like a Bore.
Then all things were dere,
Both befe, bread and bear,
Now grudge the iourers sore.
When Byshoppes might burn.
And from the truth turn.
The syllye simple soul.
Than durst no man creak,
Open mouth nor speak.
Of Christ nor yet of Powle.
Now are the knaves bold.
With Scriptures to hold,
And teach them every where.
The carter, the sowter.
The bodger, there clowter,
That all will away I fere.
At us so they pull.
Our lyuynges are dull,
We are now like to fall.
If we do not fight,
For the churches right,
By the Mess we shall lose all.
But I pray ye ser, tell me what is your name*

The law of Moses, to lye I were to blame.

In these same parties, what do ye now intende?

Mankynde to reform, that he his life amend.
I show what sin is, what thing pleases god,
I confort the just, and the ill I ponnysh with rod.
The come people, have thought it commodyouse,
Diverse Gods to have, with rytes superstycyouse.
My commandment is, to seek one God alone,
And in all their needs, to him to make their moan.
Among the Gentyles, was it thought no injury,
If a man were hurt, to slay his adversary.
This thing I forbid, and say, thu shalt not kill,
Law is the revenger, the man may do no ill.
Some persons there are, that inordynatlye love.
Those are persuaded, all things them to behove.
Which I inhybyte, saying contynuallye,
No rape shalt thu do, nor yet commit aduouterye.
Thu shalt do no theft, nor covet that is not thine.
Against thy neyber, shalt thu not falsely dyffyne.

We may do nothing, if we be pynned in thus.
Neither you nor God, to that hardetrade shall bring us.
We must have one God, worshypp him alone?
Marry that in dede, would make a Turk to groan.
If we be stricken, we may not stryke again?
A proper bargain, and dyscretelye uttered plain.
For cumpanyes sake, ye say we may not love?
I defy your worst, and to you there is my glove.

What, thu will not fight? thy wits are better tha so

In the quarrel of love, I shall prove ye ere I go,
By the Mess I think, to put ye to your fence.

Thu were much better, to keep thy pacyence.

Nay by cocks soul frynd, I must lay ye on the coat
In loves cause to fight, ye may soon have me a float
Nay, have at your pysche, defend ye if ye may.

Soch a foal art thu, as seek thine own decay.
If Iones meddle, to the it will be death.
Dedyst thu never hear that law sleath i his wreath

By the blessed lord, than will I play Robsons part.

Why, what part will thu play?

By cocks soul give over. so soon as I sele smart.

It will be to late, if I ones couple with the.

Then let me alone, and we shall soon agree,
And I shall be glad, to be acquainted with ye.

Acquaintance good fellawe, thu may soon have of me.

The worst fault I have, I am hasty now and tha,
But it is soon gone, I toke it of a woman.
But what mean those tables, that ye have in your hand?

Keep sylence a while, and thu shalt understand.
Three things I declare, the first are the precepts moral.
Next, the laws iudycial, last the rytes ceremonyal
The moral precepts, are Gods comaundemetes ten.
Which ought evermore, to be observed of all men.
The laws of Nature, the moral precepts declare,
And ye plesaut works, to God they teach prepare
They stir man to faith, provoke him also to love
To obeye, to sorne, and to worshypp God above.
In two stony tables, God wrote them first of all,
That they should remain, as things continual.
The first hath but three, which tede to Gods high honour,
Give hath the second, they concern our neybour.
The first doth expound, the first law natural.
The next the other, making them very formal.
In sprete is the first, yt we should God honour love.
To outward workynge, the second doth us move.
Forbyddynge all wroges, preserving just marriage,
Norryshynge true peace, and other godly usage.

What is the effect, of your laws Iudycyall?

Soch things to command, as are cyuyle or teporall.
From vice to refrain, and outward injury,
Quiet to conserve, and public honesty.
These are to support, the laws of the second table.
Ceremonyall rytes are also commendable,
In holy days, garmetes, temples consecracyons,
Sacryfyces vows, with offerynges expiacyos
Which are unto Christ, as fygurs, types shadows
As Paule doth declare, in his pystle to the Hebrues.
These are only figures, outward testymonyes,
No man is perfyght, by soch dark ceremonies.
Only perteyne they, unto the third commandment,
Of the Sabboth day, till Christ the lord be present.
In his death ending, the whole Iudaycal presthode.

Good days might ye have, ye speak it full wele by the rode.
I am a poor lad, by my troth bent ernestlye,
To wait upon ye, and to be your very lackye.

What art thu called, I pray the heartily.

Gray fryre am I non, by the Mess I ca not flatter.
I am Infydelyte, to tell the truth of the matter.

And hast thu so lunge, dyssembled thus with me*

Yea, for aduauntage, to smell out your subtylyte.

Avoid hens I say, thu false Infydelyte.

Nay that I will not, by Yngham Trynyte.

Will thu not in dede, tha will I fet hither the pour
Of judges kings, to subdue the withi this hour.

Soch knights will I have, as shall cofounde the all
As Sadducees scrybes, with the sect pharysayeal
By help of my children Idolatry and Sodomye.
The law of Nature, I kest ones in a leprye.
I have yet two more, Ambycyon Covetousness.
Which will do as much, to the law of Moses.
Where are my whoresons, that they come not away.

Yea, whoreson on thy face, even in thy best array.
I will thu know it, I am a worshipful Doctor.
A Scrybe in the law, and a profytable proctor.

By wrastynge the text, to the scriptures sore decay.

And what will thu do, my fellawe Covetousness?

A veil will I sprede, upon the face of Moses,
That no shall perceive, the clerenes of his cotenauce.
Which is of the law, the meaning true ordynauce.

Why, what will ye say, unto ye ten comaundemetes?

We must poison them, with will works good intents.
Where as God doth say, No siraunge gods thu shalt have,
With Sayntes worshyppynge, that clause we will deprave.
And though he command, to make no carved image,
For a good intent yet will we have pylgrymage.
Though he will us not, to take his name in vain,
With tradycyons yet, thereunto will we constrain.
No Sabboth will we, with Gods word sanctyfye,
But with lip labour, and idle ceremony.
To father and mother, we may owe non obedyence,
Our relygyon is, of so great excellence.
Though we do not slay, yet may we heretykes burn,
If they will not soon, from holy scripture turn.
What though it be said. Thu shalt do no fornycacyo,
Yet will we mayntene, much greatter abhomynacyon
Though theft be forbid, yet will we continually,
Rob the poor people, through prayer purgatory
God hath inhybyted, to give false testymonye,
Yet we will condemn, the Gospel for heresye.
We should not covet, our neybers hows nor wife,
His seruaunt nor beast, yet are we therein most rife.
Of me make we swyne, by the draff of our tradycyos
And cause the nothing, to regard but superstycyos.
As dogs vnresonable, on most vile carren fed,
So will we cause them, seek idols in their need.
And always their groude, shall be, for a good intent.

More myscheues I trow, the devil could not inuet
Than your two can do by the Mess ye are alone,
Little could I do, were ye ones from me gone,
To the corruptynge. of the law of Moyses,
Go forward therefore, in your deceytfulnes.

With superstycyons, the Iewes ceremonyall laws,
I will so hadle, they shall not be worth ij. straws.
The laws Iudycyall. through cawtels and delays.
I will also drown, to all ryghteouse menys decays
To set this forward, we must have sophystrye,
Phylosophye and Logyck, as science necessary.
The byshoppes must hold, their prestes in ignorauce
With lunge latyne hours, least knowledge to them chance.
Let them have loge matins, loge eve songs loge Masses.
And that will make them, as dull as ever were asses.
That they shall never, be able to prophecy,
Or yet preach the truth, to our great injury.
Let the cloysterers, be brought up ever in sylence,
Without the scriptures, in payne of dysobedyece.
Se the lay people, pray never but in latyne,
Let them have their Cred, and service all in latyne
That, a latyne believe, may make a latyne soul,
Let them nothing know, of Christ nor yet of powle
If they have English, let it be for advantage,
For pardons, for Syrges, for offerynges and pylgrymage.
I reckon to make them, a new Cred in a while,
And all in English, their conscyece to beguile.

Rehearce unto me, the Articles of that Cred.

The articles are these, give ear and take good heed
First they shall believe, in our holy father Pope,
Next in his decrees, and holy decretals.
Then in holy church. with sencer, cross and cope.
In the Ceremonies, and blessed Sacrametals.
In purgatory then, in pardons and in trentals,
In praynge to sayntes, and in saint Fraces whoode,
In our lady of Grace, and in the blessed rood.
They shall believe also, in rellyckes and relygyon,
In our ladies psalter, in fre will and good wurkes.
In the ember days, and in the popes remyssyon,
In beds and in belles, not used of the turks.
In the golden Masses, against soch spretes as lurks
With charms and blessings. This cred will bring in money.
In English therefore, we will it clarkely coueye.

Yea, and burn the knaves, that will not believe that, cred,
That into the dytche, the blind the blind may led

Then I hold it best, that we always condemn,
The Bible readers, least they our acres contempne.

Yea, never spare them, but evermore play the bytar,
Expressing always, the tropes and types of thy mytar.

Why, what dost thu think, my mytar to sygnyfy?

The mouth of a wolf, and that shall I prove by by.
If thu stoup downward. loo, se hom the wolf doth gape.
Ready to devour, the lambs, least any escape.
But thy woluyshnesse, by three crowns will I hyde,
Making the a pope, a captain of all pride.
That when thu doest slay, soch as thy laws conteyne
Thu may say, Nor I, but the powers ded them condemn.
These Labels betoken the laws of senon cannon

I trow thu would say, the ij. laws Cyuyle Canon.

As I spake I thought, styll think by saint Iohan
Yea, persecute styll the instructers of the people.
And thu Covetousness, let no bell ring i steple,
Without a profyght. Tush, take money every whear
So nygh clyppe and shave, that thu leave never a hear?

I caused the pope, to take but now of late,
Of the Gray fryres, to have canonyzate,
Franciscus de pola, three thousand ducats and more,
And as much besides he had not lunge before,
For a Cardinal heart, of the same holy order,
Thus draw we to us, great goods fro every border.
Pope Clement the seueth payed ones for his papacy
Three hoored thousand, good ducats of lawful money

I maruele how he, could come to so much good.

Yes, yes, by pollage, and by shedynge Christen blood.
Crosers and mytars, in Rome are good merchandyce
And all to little, to maynteyne their pomp and vice.

The pope for whoredom, hath in Rome and Viterbye
Of gold and silver, a wonderful substance yearlye
Tush they be in Englande, that much rather would to dwell,
Whores in their dyoceses, than the readers of Christ's Gospel.

They do the better, for by the they may have profyght
As for the other, do trouble them day and night,
Well, now steppe foreward, and go do your busynes.
To the corruptynge, of the law of Moyses.

Doubt not but we shall, make him a crepple blind.

Singe then at our farewell, to recreate our mind.

Now am I left alone. And these, ii. merchautes gone,
Their myschefes to conclude.
I think within a while, They will trappe beguile
The worthy law of Iude.
Ambycyon first of all, With his rytes bestial,
will make the people swyne.
In draff will he the led, And with tradycyos fed
Where they shall sup or dine.
Covetousness will warke, That many one shall bark,
Like dogs against the truth.
Some shall Gods word defile, some will it reuyle
Soch beastlynesse ensuth.
Ambycyon hath this hour All the whole spirytuall, pour
And may do what him lust.
Now covetousness doth rule, And hath both horse mule.
All matters by him dyscust.
Now byshopryckes are sold, the holy ghost for gold
The pope doth bye and sell.
The truth may not be told, vndre pains manyfolde
With sendynges down to hell.
The people prestes do famysh, And their goods fro them rauysh.
Yea, and all the world they blind.
All princes do they mock, And rob the syllye flock
Nothing they leave behind.
On the face of Moyses, A veil they have cast doughtles.
The light of the law to hyde.
Least Me to Christ should come, fro ceremonies dome
As to their heavenly gyde.
The law can never be, at any lyberte.
Where soch two enemies reign.
Now is it time to walk, of this more will I talk,
when I come hither again.

If pity may move, your gentle christen hearts,
Let it now stir ye, to morn this heavy chasice.
Two enemies with me, have played most wicked parts.
And left me stark blind, God knows to my sore greuaunce,
And I think also, to your more hynderaunce.
To lead you to Christ sometime, a gyde I was.
Now am I so blind, I can not do it, Alas.
Most rygorouslye, those enemies now of late.
Ded fall upon me, and spoil me of my sight.
One was Ambycyon, which ever ought me hate,
And Covetousness, the other enemy hight.
Now forsooth and God, in their most cruel spyght.
The one made me blind, the other made me lame,
And when they had done, there at they had great game
Thus a blind crypple, I wander here alone,
Abiding the time, and grace of restauracyon,
By the son of God To whom I make my moan,
My cause to pity, and grant me supportacyon,
Least I be left here, to utter desolacyon,
And extreme decay, without any remedy.
If he ded not help, of goodness and of mercy,
Ye christen princes, God hath given you the pour,
With scepture and sword, all vices to correct.
Let not Ambycyon, nor Covetousness devour,
Your faithful subjects, nor your offycers infect.
Have to your clergye, a dylygent respect
And se they do not* corrupt the laws of God,
For that doth require, a terryble heavy rod.
God gave me to man, and left me i tables of stone,
That I of hardenesse, a law should specyfye,
But the pharysees, corrupted me anon,
And toke fro me clean, the quyuernesse of body,
With clerenesse of sight, other pleasures many.
Now will I to Christ, that he may me restore,
To more perfection, than ever I had before.

VNfaythfulnesse hath, corrupted every Law,
To the great decay, of Adams posteryte.
Were is not for me, which now do / hither draw,
All flesh would perysh, no man should saved be.
I am Christ's Gospel, and infallible veryte,
Soch a power of God, as saves all that believe,
No burdene nor yoke, that any man will grieve.
In the blood of Christ, I am a full forgeuenesse,
Where faith is grouded, with a sure confidence.
I am soch a grace, and so high tidings of gladness,
As raise the synner, and pacyfye his conscience.
I am sprete and life, I am necessary science.
I require but love for manys iustyfycatyon,
With a faith in Christ, for his health and salvation,

Gods been son have ye, it is joy of your life,
I have heard of ye, and of my masters your wife,

If thu heardest of me, it was by the voice of God.

Nay, he that spake of ye, was selling of a Cod,
In an oyster boat, a little beyond queen hythe,
A northern man was he, b^sought ye to be blithe,

If he spake of me, he was some godly preacher,

Nay ser by the rood, nor yet a wholesome teacher.

After what manner, ded he speak of me? tell.

He swore like a man, by all cotentetes of the Gospel
He swore and better swore, yea, he ded swear swear again.

That speaking is soch, as procures eternal payne.
Will not the people, leave that most wicked folly?
And is so damnable? To hear it I am sorry.
But what dedyst thu mean, when thu spoke of my wife?

Nothing, but I thought, it was joy of your life,
That ye were so good, to your neybers as ye are.

Why, how good am I? thy fantasy declare.

Ye ease them among, if it be as I hear,
When ye are a broad, there is fine miry cheer.

As thu art, thu speak, after they hearts abundauce
For as the man is, soch in his utterance.
My wyf^ is the church, or christen congregacyon,
Regenerate in sprete, doing no vile operation,
Both clean and holy, without either spott or wryncle
The lamb with his blood, ded her wash be spryncle,
This is not the church, of dysgysed hypocrytes
Of apysh shauelynges, or papystycall sodomytes.
Nor yet as they call it, a temple of lyme and stone.
But, a lyuysh building, grounded in faith alone,
On the harde rock Christ, which is the sure foundacyon.
And of this church some, do reign in every nacyon,
And in all cotrayes, though their nombre be but small

Their number is soch, as hath ron over all
The same Danes are they, men prophecy of plain,
Which should over ron, this realm yet ones again.

What Danes speak thu of? thy meaning show more clerlye.

Dane Iohan, Dane Robert, Dane Thomas, and Dane harrye.
These same are those Danes, that lay with other menys wives.
And occupyco their lades, to the detrymet of their lives.
These are accounted, a great part of the church,
For in Gods service, they honourably wurche,
Yellynge and cryenge, till their throats are full sore.

That church was descrybed, of Esaye lunge before.
This people (saith God) with there lyppes honour me
In vain worship they teaching menys fatuyte.
Apparent is that church, and open to the eyes,
Their worshyppynges are, in outward ceremonies.
That couterfet church stadeth al by menys tradycyons
Without the scriptures, and without the hertes affeccyons.
My church is secrete, and evermore will be,
Adorynge the father, in sprete, and in veryte.
By ^he word of God, this Church is ruled only,
And doth not consyst, in outward ceremony.
This congregacyon, is the true Church mylytaut
These couterfet de^a^des, are the very Church malygnaunt.
To whom Christ will say, I know no of your sort.

Much are they to blame, that there bretherne so report

Soch are no bretherne, but enemies to Christ's blode.
As put salvation, in shaven crown, mytar, or whode.

I pray ye how loge, have your sweet spouse cotynued

Sens the beginning, and now is in Christ renewed.
Adam had promise, of Christ's incarnacyon,
So had Abraham, with his whole generation.
Which was unto them, a preaching of the Gospel,
Into salvation, and delyueraunce from hell.

By this time I hope, ye have a fair increase?

She is not barren, but bears and never cease.
The Corinthes first epystle, hath this clear testymony
In Christo Iesu, per Euangelum vos genui.
I have begot you, in Iesu Christ saith powle,
By the Gospel preaching, to the comfort of your soul

Than are ye a cuckold, by the blessed holy mass,
As I said before, so comes it now to pass.
For I am a prophet, by high inspiracyon led.
Now like I my self, much better than I ded.
Ye sayt that saint paule, begat your wife with child

By mysunderstadynge, thu art vngracyously begylde
An only mynyster, was paule in that same doing,
That he therein ded, was by the Gospel preaching.
His mind is the Gospel to have done yt operation
And this must thy hold, for no carnal generation

Marry so they say, ye fellawes of the new lerynge.
Forsake holy church, and now fall fast to wynynge,

Nay, they forsake whoredom, with other dapnable usage.
And live with their wives, in lawful marriage,
whyls the popes oiled swarm, reign styl^ in their, old buggerage

Yea, poor married men, have very much a do,
I coute him wisest, that can take a snatch and to go.

Thu semest one of them, that detests matrymonye,
Which is a fore God, a state both just and holy.
Of soch as thu art, saint paule ded prophecy,
By the holy Ghost, that a serten cupanye,
In the latter days from the truth of God should fall
A rendynge to spretes, of error dyabolycall.
Which in hypocresy, will teach lies for aduauntage,
W^h marked consciences, inhybytynge marriage.
Thu aperest by thy fruit to be Infydelyte.

I am non other, but even the very he,
And hither now come I, to come the matter with ye

Avoid cursed find, and get the out at the gates.

Nay first will I serve ye, as I lately served your mates
And he^e will I not for this place is for me?
Who should here remain, but Infydelyte?

Well, than for a time, I must depart from hens,
But this first will I say, before this audyens.
Easier will it be, concerning ponnyshment,
To Sodom and Gormor, in the day of judgment,
Than to those cities, that resist the veryte,
At the suggestyons, of Infydelyte.
That people will be, for ever and ever lost,
For it is the great sin, against the holy Ghost.
In the old law first, the father his mind expressed,
Than came his soon Christ, made it more manifest.
And now the holy Ghost, is come to close up all,
If he be not heard, extreme dapnacyon will fall.
No prayer remains, nor expyacyon for sin,
To them that no profyght, or the word of God will win.
Take good heed therefore, say that ye have warning

God send your mother, of you to have a fondelynge.
By the mass I think, he is wele out of the way,
Now will I contryue, the dryft of an other play.
I must work soch ways, Christ's law may not continue,
In a while am I like, to have non else of my retynue.
Companions I want, to begin this tragedy,
Namely false doctrine, and his brother hypocresye.
They will not belong, I suppose now verelye,
By cocks foul me think, I se soch a cumpanye.
Hem I say children, will not my voice be heard?
As good is a beck, as is a dew vow guard.
By my honesty welcome, mine own copanyons both.

Thu shalt sure have, a livery of the same cloth,
Gramercyes by God, my old frynde Infydelyte.

What, brother snyp snap, how go the word with the?

What, fryre flyp flap, how say ye to, Benedicite?

Marry nothing but well, for I cry now advantage

At her purse or arse, tell me good fryre fuccage?

By the Mess at both, for I am a great penytensar,
And sit at the pardon, Tush, I am ye popes own vicar
If thu lackest a piece, I know where thu may be sped.
With coyse of a score, brought even to thy bed.

Art thu not ashamed, to talk so like a knave?

No, for it is soch ger, as the holiest of us will have,
Pope, Cardinal, bishop, moke, chanon pressed fryre,
Not one of ye all, but a woman will desire.

Our orders permyt us not* to have them in marriage

No, but ye fatche them in, by an other carriage.
Ye do even as we do, we both are of one rate.

By the Mess I laugh, to hear this whoreson prate

What fashion use ye, to us here intymate.

Ego distinguo, whether ye will have lyons or parys.

Of them both to show, it will not be far amys.

In parys we have, the mantle of Saint lewes,
Which women seek much, for help of their barenes.
For be it ones laid, upon a womanys belly,
She go thens with child, the miracles are seane there Saylye.
And besides all this, ye would maruele in confession.
What our fathers do, to assoyle them of transgressyon
Iohan Thessecclius, assoyled a yonge woman ones.
Behind the high alter, till she cried out of hes bones.
And as for lyons, there is the length of our lord,
In a great pillar. She that will with a coorde,
Be fast bound to it, and take soch chance as fall,
Shall sure have child, for within it is hollow all.
Tush, I could tell ye, of much more wondre tha this,
In course to hear them, I think ye would blys.

As thu hast begun, go foreward in it and tell.

Soch a knave I suppose, is not from hens to hell.

In our relygyon, was an holy popysh patryarke,
Which of all bawdrye, might be the great monarch.
The nones to confess, he went from place to place,
And two hodred of them, he broached in that space.
Many spices he eat, his currage to pruuoke.
Soch a fellawe was he, as of that ger had the stroke.

Now, somewhat will I tell to confirm thy tale withal
In king ferdynads time, in Spain was a Cardinal
Petrus mendoza, was the very man that I mean.
Of some as he had, great nombre besides the queen.
One of his bastards, was earl, an other was duke,
Whom also he abused, and thought it no rebuke.
Ioannes Cremons, an other good Cardinal,
For reformacyon of the clergye spyrituall,
Came ones into Englade, to dapne prestes matrymonye.
And the next night after, was take doing bytcherye.
(...) E^fius also, which fearcely came to dyspute,
In lipsia with luther, minding there him to cofute
For marriage of prestys, three children had that year.
By this may ye se that sutyme we make merry cheer.

Marry that ye do, I shall bear ye record now.
But how will ye answer, for breaking of your vow?

We never break vow, so lunge as we do not marry,
Though we in whoredom, be never so bold busy.

By your order than, ye may walk much at large.
What hast thu hypocresye? to lay for thy dyscharge.

Saint Fraces habit, with the holy girdle whode,
Non can go to hell, that therein dye by the rode,
In case saint Frances, be sure upon their side,
Else may they fortune, to be of their purpose wide.
For I read of one, that should have gone to the devil
But the spretes of hell, could do to him non evil.
Till saint Frances came, toke fro him his cowl,
Then went he to hell, the fryres ded hear him howl.
I will therefore serve, S. Frances with hart mind
With daily memories, that he may be my frynde.
And than I care not, for all the devils in hell,
That I have told you, is more true than the Gospel.

Then are ye more sure, tha monks for your heretage,
For their lands are here, but ye claim heaven for aduauntage.

Yet is it to them a very pleasant thing,
Their abbot at home, to be called lord and king.

Nay, monk and chorle, for here is no king butone.
If he be a king. his mace is a mary bone,
Any his crown a cow torde. Soch knaves as come from the carr,
Must be called kings, for playenge a popysh part,

It become not the, the Romyshe pope so to lurche.
Considering he is, the highest of the church.

If he be the highest, than is he the whether cock,

Ah, now I perceive, thu art disposed to mock,
Of all holy church, he is the pryncypall head.

Marry that is true, he sends out bulls vndre lead
And he hath two keys, the one to open hell,
The other speareth heaven, thus do new heretykes tel
They report also, that dogs have no deuocyo,
To his holy laws, not to his old instruccyon.

Why should dogs hate him? make that more evident.

They love no pese porrege, nor yet read hearynges in lent,
Stock fysh nor oysters, but curse him body and bone,
And would his read sprottes, rottefysh were gone
Tush, I hear them I, and that makes me full sad.

Either thu doest mock, or else thu art sure mad.

I hear the people, complain very much of the.

What is their pratlinge, I pray the heartily tell me.

They say, thu teach, nothing but lowsy tradycios
And lies for lucre, with damnable superstycyons.
And thus they conclude, yt the draff of popysh prystes
Is good enough for swyne, by whom they mean the papystes.
Yea, and they say also, the diet of men is all.
To most vile carren, the dogs will soonest fall.

Than do they compare, the papystes unto dogs.

Marry that they do, to soch swynysh hogs.
As in swyll soffe, are brought up all their life.
Soch are the papystes, they say both man and wife.
They say of the also, that thu art a noughty knave,
By prowlynge and lyenge, ye fryers would all have.
Thine order they say, is sprung even out of hell,
And all this knowledge, they have now of the Gospel.

Why, where is he now, I besych the heartily tell,

By the mess abroad, I warade ye makes revel.
I commoned with him, and he ded us despise,
Against him therefore, somewhat must we deuyse.

Marry that must we, or else it will be wrong,
He will sure destroy us, if we do suffer him lunge.
Needs must we serve him, as we ones served Christ.

Why mad brained whoresos, how ded ye hadle Christ?

As he preached here, we followed fro place to place,
To trappe him in snare, and his doctrine to deface.
Than found we the means, to put him so to death,
Least he against us, should open any more breath.
And we set four knights, to keep him down in his grave.
That he never more, our living should deprave.
And thus must we serve, the Gospel, no remedy,
Else will be destroy, our living perpetually.
Better one were loft, than we should perysh all,
As Cayphas ones said, in counsel pharysaycall.

By God wele said. When ye have him this grave,
Stape him down till he shyte. serve him like a knave.

We must so ordre him, that he go no more at large.

Four knights will we hire, who we shall streyghtly charge,
To keep him down harde. The first are ambycyouse prelates,
Then covetous lawers, that Gods word spyghtfully hates,
Lords without learning, iustyces vnryghtfull,
These will keep him down, and rap him on the scull.
There someners there scribes, I warade ye shall stere
With balyues and catch polles, to hold him down every where.
I trow Rug Corbet, At Norwych will do their part.
With wharton of Bongaye, and for my sake put him to smart.

And I will raise up, in the vnyuersytees,
The seven slepers there, to aduauce the popes decrees
As Dorbel Duns, Durande Thomas of Aquyne
The mastre of sentens* with Bachon the great deuyne
Hericus de Gadauo. And these shall read ad cleru,
Aristotle and Albert, de secretis mulicrum,
With the comentaryes, of Auicen and Aueroyes.
And a Phebo Phebe, which is very good for boys.

Yea, and let the pope, as Gods own vicar here,
In his hand three crosses, iij, crowns on his head here.
His power betokenynge, in heave, in earth, in hell
That he may command, all kings to subdue the Gospel.

His self may do that, he need command no other.
Is not he the head, of the holy church our mother?
May not he make sayntes, and devils at his own pleasure?
Which hath in his hades, the keys churches treasure?
So wele as he made, S. Herma first a saint,
And twenty years after, of heresye him attain?
First he sent him to heaven, by his canonyzacyon,
And from thens to hell, by an excommunycacyon,
We read of Formosus, that after he was dead,
One pope his fyngars, an other cut of his head.
And threw his carcass, into the floude of Tyber,
With the head fyngars, as Platina doth remember.
In token that he, is judge over quyck and dead,
And may dapne save, by his pardons vndre lead,
Syluester the second, to the devil himself ones gave
For that high offyce, that he might dampne save.
He offered also, his stones to Satan, they say,
For prestes chastyte, and so went their marriage away.

Here is one coming, enquire what he intende.

Ha? it is the Gospel, from him God us defend.

Show me brother mine, who ded the hither send.

The father of heaven, of his mere benyuolence,
I desire therefore, to have fre audience.

Ye mind than to preach, before this cumpanye?

In the laws of God, would I instruct the gladly.
For non other way, there is unto salvation,
But the word of God, in every generation,
That quyckeneth, that saves, yt brings unto heau^
As before his death, Christ taugh the Apostle aleuen.

Preach here thu shalt not, without the auctoryte,
Of pope or byshopp, or of some of their affynyte.

Gods word never takes, his autoryte of man.

Thu shalt not here preach, do thu the best thu can.

Gods blessing on your good hart, it is spoken even like a man.
Ye know this day ser, we have a full holy feast,
And must go processyo, with the blessed rode of reast.
We have lunge matins, lunge laudes, lunge hours lunge pyyme.
Mass, eve songe, coplyne, all must be done i time.
Sensynge of the aulters, casting of holy water.
Holy bread making, with other necessary matter.

Have God commanded, any soch things to be done?

What is that to the? go meddle thu with old shone.
Cannyst thu say but they, are good sygnyfycacyons?

I say they are fruit, of your ymagynacyons
To bring in lucre, darken Gods high glory,
Of you God doth axe. no soch vain beggary.
Christ never sent his, to show sygnyfycacyons,
But his living, word to all the christen nacyons.
Ye forsake the lord, as Esaias doth tell,
And highly blaspheme, the holy of Israel.
In his first chaptre, this horrible sentence is,
Quis haec frustranea quaesiuit de manibus uestris.
Who hath required, of you soch sacryfyce?
In vain offer you, that vncomaunded service.
Your incense to me, is great abhomynacyon,
I fore abhor it, and much detest your fashion.
When ye pray to me, I give ye non attendance,
But avert my face (saith God) my countenance.
By this ye may se, that the lord doth not regard,
Your magy mutterynge, neyher grant it any reward
No ma wills Paule, to speak in the congregacyon
In a strange language, without interpretacyon.
In your latyne hours, the flock do ye not consydre,
But declare your selves, to be Romysh all togydre.
Be not led about (saith Paule) by any strange learning,
What else is your doctrine, but a blind popysh thing?
He testyfyeth also, Non enim vt baptizarem,
Misit me Christus, sed ut euangelizarem.
Christ hath not me sent, that I should baptyse, saith Paule.
But to preach his word, to the confort of mannys soul.
Loo, though baptyme be, a thing very necessary,
Yet must it give place, to Gods word, no remedy.
Why than prefer ye, your draffysh ceremonies?
To the Gospel preaching* O damnable injuries.

Why suffer ye him, to prattle here so lunge?

Get the hens shortly, or with the it will be wrong.

Peace be here God, Mastre doctor, by your leave,
That I may declare, a pardon here in my sleue.
Of our lady of Boston, Ingham, and saint Iohannes frarye,
With the indulgence of blessyd saint Antony.

Wele, take thy pleasure, and do it hardily.

Sir he doth me wroge for this day it is my ^acyon.
To preach my brotherhede, gather my lymytacyon

Who first speak first speed, steppe fourth and read thy pardon,
And when he hath done, your course is father ward

What course appoint ye, for preaching of the Gospel

I would thy Gospel, thu were both now in hell.

Why, shall this baggage, put by the word of God?

Thu will not be answered, till thu feel a sharper rod.

Good christen people, I am come hither verelye,
As a true poctour, of the hows of saint Antony.
Of clean remyssyon, I have brought ye indulgence,
A pena culpa, for all your sin and offence.
By the auctoryte, of pope Leo pope Clement,
Pope Bonyface, pope Pius, pope Iohan pope Innocent.
And here I bless ye, with a wing of the holy Ghost.
Fro thonder to save ye, fro spretes in every coost.
Lo, here is a belle, to hang upon your hog,
And save your cattle, from the bytynge of a dog.
So many as will come, to this holy fraternyte,
Come paye your money, ye shall have letters of me

Let me have a letter, for I will be a brother.

Then give me a belle, for I will be an other.

O damnable leadynge, of Babylonicall sodomytes,
Your selves ye declare, to be shameful hypocrytes.
Lord pity thy people, and take away these gydes,
These scorners, these robbers, these cruel homycydes
Soch prophets are they, as God ded never send,
As Hieremy saith, they damnable ways pretend.
Wo hypocrytes wo, for here ye tryfle and mock,
With christen people, the kyngedo of heave vplocke
Ye count it a game, to lose that Christ hath bought,
With his precyouse blood. here most dearly sought
Oh ye are wretches, and pestylent Antichrists,
Mynysters of Dagon, and most deceitful papystes.
Like rauenouse wolves, poor wydowes ye devour,
By tyttle of prayer, eternal dapnacyon is your,
Your own dreams ye follow, but matter much more wayghtye,
Ye do not esteem, as judgement, faith, and mercy.
Wo pharysees wo, ye make clean outwardly,
But inwards ye are full, of covetousness bawdry,
Painted tumbes are ye, a pryenge right bewtyfull,
But within ye stink, have thoughts very ^hamefull
Ye slew the prophets, your doings yet bear wytnesse,
How think ye to avoid, that point of vnryghteousnesse?
Oh ragynge serpetes, and vyperouse generation,
How can ye escape, the danger of dampnacyon?

Who made the so bold, to meddle within my cure?
And teach new learning? An heretyke art thu sure?
If due search were made, we should find the (I think) no pryst.

Yes, anointed of God, but no popysh Antichrist.

Let me se, where are, the letters of thy orders?

Where Christ his self is, not in these same borders
No soch pryst am I, as is anointed with olye,
But the holy Gost, for I am non of this soil.

Here I attache the, for a busy scysmatyke.
And will the accuse, for an haynouse heretyke.
Lay hands upon him, depryue him of this aparell.
Loo, thus will I hadle, all the yt shall take thy quarrel
Hold away with this ger, lay it fourth a side.

Nay, tarry brother mine, for away shalt thu not slyde

I am not going, why doest thu slander me?

Burn him to ashes, and show to him no pity.

Brent shall he not be, if he will no more do so.
Fellawe how say thu? will thu here abjure or no?

I will neither abjure, nor yet recant Gods glory.

I offered the reason, and thereto thu will not apply,
Wele get the foreward, for thu shalt sure dye.
The temporal power, shall judge the to the fire,
At our accusement, and holy relygyouse desire.

Though you for my sake, impryson men cruelly,
Famysh them, stock them, them with fagotesfrye
Hurt me ye shall not for I can never dye,
And they foy my sake, shall live perpetually.

Here is a pratynge, with a very vengeance hens.

This horrible heretyke, now shall we well recompens

Yea, burn him wele fryre, and let him no longer raygne,
Lay on grene fagotes, to put him to the more payne.
By the mess I laugh, to se how this ger doth wurke
He is like of the, to have no more grace than a turk,
For soch knaves they are, as a man shall not lightly find,
And take hell over. Companyos they are to my mind
My busynesse all, is now at a good conclusion,
That I have here brought, these. iij. laws to cofusyon
Now shall I be able, to live here peaceablye,
And make frowlyke chere, with hey how fryska Iolye.
The law of Nature, I kest first in a leprye.
By the secrete help, of ydolatrye and sodomye.
The law of Moses, I made a crypple blind,
Auaryce Ambycyon, to help me were not behind
And now Christ's law, I have brent for heresye,
By help of false doctrine, my cosyne hypocresye,
On these same. iij. laws, all other laws depend,
And can not prevail, now these are at an end.
If christen governors, do not these laws uphold,
Their cyuyle ordynauces, will soon be very cold.
Well, this valeaut George, hath made them all to stoup
Cheer now may I make, set cock on the houpe.
Fill in all the pots, and bid me welcome hostess,
And go call me hither, mine own sweet mynyo Bess

QVid gloriaris in malicia? qui potens es in iniquitate.
Thu vengeable wretch, replete with poison and vice,
Why doest thu thus rejoice, in cruelty and malice?
Think thu that God sleeps, will not his defend
And that thy myschefe, shall never have an end?
The blood of innocents, to him for vengeance call
And therefore this hour. must I fearcely upon the fall

Thu sprete of the air, I straightly conjure the here.
By panton Craton, and charge the to com no ne'er.

Think thu to stop me, with thy folysh coiuracyon
Whom God sends hither, for thy abhomynacyon?

What art thu called? thy name to me rehearce.

I am vindicta Dei, in ponyshment most fearce,
With water, with sword, and with fire I must the pearce.

Be good in thy offyce, and thu shalt have money and meat.

By fylthy rewards, thu cannyst not me entreat,
But that I will do, as God hath me commanded.
For if worldly gifts, my fury might have changed.
The vnyuersall world, had not been drowned with water,
Nor Sodome and Gomor, with so fyery fearful matter.
Nor yet the Israelytes, with terror of the sword,
With hungre and pestylence, in the anger of Gods word.
Pharao in Egipte, the plages had never felt,
Might I have been stopped, for silver or for gelt.
Into Egipte I brought, ten terryble ponyshmentes
Upon the people for breaking his commaudemetes
Their wholesome waters, I turned into blood,
I multyplyed frogs, to poyso therewith their fond
I made wasps dranes, them grievously to stynge,
And all kinds of flies, soon after ded I in bring
Upon their cattle, I threw the foul pestylence,
Both borche, boil blayne, they had for their offence.
Lyghtenynges and haylynges, destroyed their corn and fruit,
A swarne of hungry locustes, their pastors destytute
The space of three days, I gave them palpable darkness,
I slew the first goote, of ma beast for thy rudeness
For I never stryke, but for the, Infydelyte.

Stryke for me quoth A? By the mary Mass I defy the.

What, thu will not so, thy brains are not so light.

Anger me not to much, for if thu do, I fight.

All that will not help, thy wicked workings now,
When the stronger come, the weaker must needs bow
The law of Nature, infected thu hast with a leprye?

Nay, it was not I, but that wytche Idolatry,
And that polde shorn knave, that men call Sodomye

Of whom sprung they first? but of Infydelyte?
Therefore thu shalt have that plage of penalte,
Which they first tasted, for their inyquyre.
For those two vices, I drowned the world with water.
In token whereof, I plage the with the same matter.

Tush, I defy thy worst. This shall not drive me hence
For after the floude, with Cham had I resydence.
And so continued, till Moyses law came in.
With his iolye tryckes, a new rule to begin.

And him thu corruptedest, with Auaryce Ambycyo,
And so dedyst leave him, in miserable codycyo,
Thu shalt have therefore, that than to them was due,
Most terryble barrayle, the Israelytes untrue,
That time ded suffer, for their infydelyte,
Wherefore with this sword, I justly bannysh the.
Because thu shalt here, give place to Christ's gospel

Yet will I not hens, but against ones rebel.
Sed not I remain, with Iudas and other more?
When Christ preached here, taught them in vexed him sore?
Yes, after that, was I with Simon Magus.
With Saunder Copper smyth, with Elimas and Demetrius.
And now I persevere, amoge ye rake rabble of papystes
Teaching there shorlynges, to play the Antichrystes.

The innocent blood, of sayntes contynuallye,
Doth call unto God, to revenge their injury,
Against false doctrine, and cursed hypocresye.
Whom thu hast raised, the glory of the Gospel,
To darken, and his friends, most miserably to quell.
Wherefore thu shalt have, like as thu hast deserved
For thy wicked doings, thy ponyshmet now doubled.
Ignis ip su precedet, the Prophet Dauid saith thus
Are{que} inflam mabit in circuitu inimicos eius.
A consumynge fire, shall run before the judge,
His enemies consumynge, they shall find no refuge.
Ob scelera culpas hominum, ritus{que} nephandos
In cineres ibit tellus, tenuem{que} fauillam.
As Mantuan writes, for the wickedness of the.
The earth to ashes, by fire shall turned be.

Credo, credo, credo, I say, Credo, credo, credo,
To the devil of hell, by the Mess I wene I go.

As ye have seane here, how I have strycken with fire
The pestylent vice, of Infydelyte.
So will I destroy, in the fearcenesse of mine ire,
All sectes of error, with their enormyte,
Which hath risen out, of that inyquyte.
For as it is said, that my hand hath not set,
Shall up by the rote, no power may it let.
The Apostle Iohan, in the Apocalypse doth say,
He saw a new heaven, a new earth aperynge.
The old earth see, were taken clean a way,
That heave is manys faith, that earth his understanding,
Whom we have renewed by our most secret workynge.
The old cankered earth, exylynge with the see.
Which is superstycyon, and Infydelyte.
A new Hierusalem, the said Iohan also se,
As a bewtyfull bryde, prepared to her husband.
Our true faithful church, is that same fair city,
Whom we have cleansed, by the power of our right hand.
As a spouse to Christ, in every christen land.
Bannyshynge the sectes, of Babylonicall poperye,
That she in the sprete, may walk to our glory.
Resort ye three laws, for you will I clear also,
Of soch infeccyons, as by Infydelyte,
Ye have received, That ye with her may go,
Declarynge the ways, of Christen lyberte,
That us she may take, without perplexite,
For her only God, and be our people styll.
In our laws walking, according to our will.

At your commandment, we are most blessed lord.

Approach nyghar than, and ye shall be restored.
Thu law of Nature, we first begin with the,
Restorynge the again, to thy first puryte.
Avoid Idolatry, Avoid vile Sodomye,
We charge ye no more, this law to putryfye.
Keep styll that same hart, for a sign perpetual.
That thu were written, in mannys hart first of all.
Thu law of Moses, give me that veil from the,
No longar shalt thu, neither blind nor crooked be.
Hens thu Ambycyon, and cursed Covetousness,
I here bannysh you, from this law ever doughtles.
Lose not those tables, which are a token true,
That thu in the flesh, shalt evermore continue.
Thu law of the Gospel, though thu be last of all.
In operation yet, thu art the pryncypall.
From the I exile, hypocresy and false doctrine,
With all that depend, upon the papystycall lyne.
Reserve the same book, for a sign of heavily pour.
For that book thu art, that Iohan from heaven ded devour.

Everlasting praise, to thy gloryouse majesty.

Our heavily governor, great is thy gracyouse pity

Of mankynde thu art, the eternal felycyte.

Now leave thy servants, in thy perpetual peace.
To do the service, from hens will we not ceace.

For our eyes have seane, what thu hast now prepared.
For thy peoples health. which hath been here declared

A light thu hast sent, which is thy ioyouse Gospel.
To the consolation of the hows of Israel.

In rejoice of this, make we some melody.

The name of our God, to praise and magnyfye.

I assent thereto, and will singe very gladly.

Now have we destroyed, the kyngedom of Babylon,
And thrown the great whore, into the bottolesse pyt,
Restorynge again, the true faith and relygyon,
In the christen church, as we have thought it fit,
Depurynge these laws, so to continue yt.
Man is our creature, hath grace in our sight,
To dwell with him now, is our whole hearts delight
Man is our people, his God we are again,
With him will we have, continual resydence.
Away will we wipe, from him all sorrow payne:
He shall no longar, dyspayre for his offence,
Nor have i his soul, any careful doubt of conscyece
The old popyshnesse, is past which was dapnacyon,
We have now renewed, our christen congregacyon,
Grande fourth christ faith, take our aduertysemet
We here appoint the, to govern our congregacyon.
Se thu do nothing, without the admonyshment,
Of these three laws here. Enprent their declaracyon
Of my sweet promyses, and than make thu relation,
To my folk again, that they may walk to me.
Without popysh dreams, in a perfygt lyberte.

Most heavenly maker, in yt thu doest commaude me,
Evermore will I, full prompt and dylygent be.

Thu law of Nature, shalt teach man God to know
And that to refuse, whereby any ill may grow.

From this your precept, shall I not varye I trow.

The ache thu him also, to worship one God above,
And his poor neyber, to prosecute with love.

I hope blessed lord, to do as me shall behove.

And thu shalt teach him, to love God in his hart.
And those to forgive, by whom he suffers smart.

In your appoyntmentes, will I do also my part.

Work thu in the hart, a knowledge necessary,
In the flesh work thu, by outward ceremony.
Change thu to the spret, the workings of these two,
And cause our people, in a perfyght way to go.
Take heed christ faith, to the teachynges of these three
And move our people, to walk in the veryte.
The promyses we made, in all these three at Gospel,
We would thu should so, to our congregacyon tell.
Our everlasting blessing, be with you evermore.

To thy sweet name lord, praise perpetual honour.

It hath pleased God, to put me in this offyce,
To govern his church, and christen congregacyon,
And therein to do, as ye shall me entice.
Give me I pray you, soch wholesome exhortation,
As may be to Man, a clear edyfycacyon.
And I will be glad, to take your aduertysement.
As it shall become, any child obedyent.

Ye speak it full wele, tha mark what shall be said
And dylygentlye, loke that it be obeyed.

The effect of me, is for to know the lord.
Everlasting, strong, most gracyouse and godly.
And as touching Man, to have fraternal concorde.
Fauer to norrysh, and to do non injury.
To keep couenautes made, and love true matrymonye.
These noble effects so temper you in Man.
That them to fulfil, he do the best he can.

The effect of me, is for to worship the lord.
As one God alone, and to fl from Idolatry.
Nor to slay nor steal, nor yet to bear false record,
To show what is sin, and to seek the remedy,
Public peace to hold, sore to ponysh the gyltye.
From these good effects, se that Ma never swerve,
Than shall he be sure, that God will him preserve.

The effect of me, is for to love the lord,
In the innar sprete, and to fauer frynde enemy,
And in all points else, with Gods will to accorde
To preach remyssyon, to save and to iustyfye,
In Christ all to seek, life, justice, peace and mercy.
These heavenly effects, in Man so incorporate,
That he may in sprete, be newly regenerate.

More sweet than honey, are your three exhortacyons,
And regestred they be, in my momoryall.
Now will I foreward, to all the christen nacyons,
And sem effect, these laws observed all,
To the abolyshment, of the dreams papystycall.
Now the light is come, the darkness dies away,
I trust in the lord, men will walk in the day.
Good christen people, to these three laws apply,
First know that ye have, a living God above,
Than do him honour, and his name magnyfye,
Worship him in spret. as the Gospel you doth move
Than obeye your king, like as shall you behove,
For he in his life, that lord doth represent,
To safeguard of the just, sinners ponnyshment.
Se that ye regard, soch laws as he doth make,
For they are of God, as Salomon doth report.
Of these laws doubtless, those laws their groundynges take.
To the public wealth, to give aid, strength comfort
For preseruacyon, of all the christen sort.
In no case follow, the ways of Reygnolde Pole,
To his dampnacyon, he doubtless plays the foal.
Save a due respect, unto your country natyue,
Which hath brought ye up, given ye norryshment.
Even from your cradles, to these days nutrytyue.
So that ye may do, to her wealth and preferment,
My master to her, no hateful detriment.
A dog to his frynde, will never be vnlouynge,
Let reason in ye, not lose his natural workynge.

Who lives without law, shall perysh without law
And* therefore we have, three laws to you descrybed,
That after their live, ye should in your living draw
We* have also showed, how they have been corrupted,
By foul Idolatres, and sodomytes polluted,
By covetous prestes, and by ambycyouse prelates,
Hypocryticall fryres, false doctors false curates

Who hath restored, these same three laws again?
But your late Iosias, valeaut king Henrye.
No prince before him, toke ever yet soch payne,
Fro Englade to banish, Idolatry foul sodomye
Covetousness. Ambycyo, false doctrine hypocresye,
It was he that brought, Christ's veryte to light,
When he put the pope, with his fylthynes to flight.

Fro danable darkness, as my bother here doth say,
He hath delivered, this realm of Englande godly
Bringing his subjects, into the true path way,
Of their sowles safeguard, if they now follow it wyselye.
And left them he hath, the same way still to fortyfye,
His noble son Edwarde, soch a kings of god elect
As questyonles will, perform it in effect.

Pray all to the lord, for the lunge contynuaunce,
Of his graces life, in this worlds habytacyon.
And that of his nobles, he have true maintenance,
In the pryncyples, of this most worthy foundacyon.
That he may to Christ, bring us from desolacyon.
Pray for queen Bateryne, ye noble lord protector
With the whole counsel, that God be their director,

Let Idolatry be decked like an old wytche, Sodomy like a monk of all
sectes, Ambycyon like a bishop, Covetousness like a pharyse or spyrituall
lawer, false doctrine, like a popysh doctor, and hypocresy like a gray fryre.
The rest of the parts are easy enough to conjecture.



BEnedictus dominus, Deus Israel,
Which hath overthrown, the mighty Idol Bell,
The false god of Rome, by pour of the Gospel,
And hath prepared, from the deep lake of hell,
Redemptionem plebis sue.
Et erexit cornu, of mercy health and grace,
That cruel tyrant, now clearly to deface,
Whose bloody kyngedome, demynysheth apace,
By the word of God, which lately hath take place.
In domo Dauid pueri sui,
Sicut locutus est, the lord celestial,
That Romysh Antichrist, is like to have a fall,
With his whole table, of sectes dyabolycall,
And now the nombre, will florysh over all,
Prophetarum eius.
Salutem exinimicis, now we may daily hear,
The enemies of Christ with him doth wytnesse bear
Saul is become a paule, and preaches every where,
Now may we receive, most heavenly wholesome gear
De manu eorum qui derunt nos.
Ad faciendam, misericordiam,
The son of our God, from his high glory cam,
To redeem the sin. of the children of Adam,
And to remember, to faithful Abraham,
Testamenti sui sancti.
Iusiurandum, which God hath made before,
Unto our fathers, he will keep evermore,
Promesed he hath, if we regard his lore,
Forsakynge the pope, with his damnable store,
Daturum se nobis.
Vt sine timore, from Romysh tyrants fre,
The lord grant us grace, that we may speakers be,
Of his holy word, and therein to agree,
That in the Gospel, and christen lyberte,
Seruiamus illi.
In sanctitate, and pureness of life,
Let us now travail, both maiden man and wife,
All ryghtwys doings, in us be ever rife,
That we persevere, without debate or strife,
Omnibus diebus nostris.
To puer propheta, elected of the lord,
King Edwarde the sixth, to have Gods law restored,
Folowest Iosias, thereof to take record,
In all thy doings, and in Gods holy word,
Parare vias eius.
Ad dandam scientiam, for mennys health safeguard
Christ's holy Gospel, by their frelye heard,
Wherein doth consyst, their life and full reward,
With preseruacyon, from dangerous icoparde,
Peccatorum eorum.
Per uiscera, misericordiae,
Christ our dere master, us daily ouerse,
Least we here perysh, in our myquyte.
Our medyatour, continually is he,
Oriens exalto.
Illuminare, sweet lord we the desire,
To men in darkness, and in the popysh mire,
Let not his baggage, thy faithful servants tyre,
But us deliver, from them and from hell fire.
In uiam pacis.
Love thy lord God. Swear thu non other.
Thy sabbath keep, Please thy friends both.
Wytnes non ill. Hold no mannys wife.
Bribe no mannys good. Slay not with knife.
Wysh no mannys hows. Nor ox nor ass.
As thu will have, So thu like casse.
Thus ends this Comedy concerning three laws, of Nature, Moses, and Christ,
corrupted by the Sodomytes Pharisees papystes most wicked. Compiled by Iohan
Bale. Anno M. D. XXXVIII, and lately inprented per Nicolaum Bamburgensem


