SI quisquam est, qui placere se stu^at bonis Quam plurim^s, (...) mini^e
multos laedere, In his (...) hic nomen profite^ur suum.


What? shall we have Latin again? Master (...) yongster. I pRay you go to
the University, and set up your Stage there.


What, Mist^esse Lala Spinster? content yourself, I now repeat that which is
past, I do not represent that which is present.


I pray you then tell us so much in honest English.


I will, for your sake.


For mine? nay, for every she,
Whom here you see:
And for our honest neig^bours, many a good man that never
Was infected with this raving latin^ ever.

Keep silence, thou party-col^ured chattering Mappy.


^en speak sense, thou iabbe^ing al* black Jackdaw, with a green coxcom^e.


Good men, good wives, good ^nds, (...) ^ds, good boys.


I many, this (...) for my stomach, ^me in the ^ber of the fourth rank.


Who meet, to see, and hear our childish t^yes.


Well said, such easy drops sink well into our br^ines.


Of late ye know, if ye have not mistook us.


I do not ^istake you now, you take us very well with your pl^ne dealing
English Poetry.


We acted Comic Terence his Eunuebus.


Eunuchus! Out upon him, and thee too, and all of his kin. I have heard my
brother say, that this same Eunuchus is a man and no man,

The very scorn and hate of w^men.

I'll be sure, (...) (...), d^aw and quarter him; and for my part, si^
Prologue,

I ^ad rather ye should ^at us,

(...) thus defeat us,

(...) us,

Then (...) v^


For my (...) dame Lall, I do but act my part, you must not (...) (...).


I will n^t (...) (...) you, unless you name that h^tefull bilding (...). O
what a queame he hath cast over my stomach with that filthy word.


But now w^ (...) with mild audacity,
In vul^ar language unto low capacity.

See you ^old on your vulgar tongue, and bring not hither your latin vulgars,
and lessons which you have chanced in the school.


We come not with old worn common Thais,
^y ^rade the sister of Corinthian Lais.

L^is? Thais? W^lke where your way is,
And t^ll us what this Play is.

Nor Parmen^, nor scolding Pythias.


Thou pithless ass, dost thou tell us of scolding?


This wasp had almost put me out. Out (...) he^.
But in a nearer circle now we walk,
Where with our selves, and of our selves we talk.
Our School imagine here new built and dight,
This Scene our forms, our d^y this candle light.

Sir Prologue, I fear thou talk English extrumpery besides thy part, only
to beguile me, I doubt there is Latin in his budget.


I anow to thee, jealous Lala, that this same schollers feast is dressed in
English.


I dare not trust you, for you say you are here in the school. And you
schollers must not speak English in the school.


We are not now at ou^ task, but we have leave to play, and we play at our
best game.


What? Blow point? or Span-counter? or trappe out may hap?

Take heed you grow not Outish.


No Tomboy, no. Nor scourge-top, nor Truss, nor Leap frog, nor Nine holes,
nor Mumble the pegge: But a more Noble recreation, where we have more lookers
on, then gamesters.


What play call you it?


Take out thy fe^ue, and spell here, in this oneleau'd book. Tell the stitches
in this sample^ of black and white.


A. P. ap.


A. P. ap? Thou fumbling Ape. A. per se, A. P. O. L. pol.


A. per se, A. P. O. L. pol, L. O. lo. Apollo. On my maidenhead this is Latin.
We shall be choked with a dogrell Latin Play for all this.


I tell thee, this is Greek, Latin, and English too.


This Apollo is he an English man? I'll deal with none but my own
Country-men. I wont have to do, so I wont, with these outlandish people that
speak gibberish.


It is a proper name, it signifies the Lord and Master of the Muses. His Throne
and Court here represented is the shop and staple of learning.


A proper name? As you are a proper man, let none but English wares be sold
in this shop, or else you have no customer of me.


Nay, read on what followos.


S. H. R. O. shro. I'll none of this. What, do you call us shroues?


Thou a^t not worthy to go a shrouing, that can not spell it.


V I. N. G. ving, shrouing I'm gl^d of that. Now I like this Apollo well:
hee'le go a gossipping with us. does Apollo come a shrouing to us, or shall
we go a shrouing to him?


All which we on this Stage shall act or say,
Doth (...) Apollas shrouing day.
Whilst thus we greet you by our words and pens,
Our sorouing bodeth death to none, but bens.

Pens? hens? Me thinks the feathers of hens should not make good pens. I
do not like the death of hens. As I'm a true housewife, I wondered what made
our ^enne roost so empty, and see the scholars have gouen them.


I prethy, hold thy peace, thou go beyond thine office, thou'lt have the
first word and the last too, thou shew'st thy sel^e to be a true Lala.

But whilst I chat with her, the time grows late, I'll six this banner at
Apollos gate.


As I'm a true woman, I'll trust you slippery scholars no further then I see
you. I wont away, till I taste of the first dish of Apollos shrouing seast, and
know whether it was an English Cooke that dressed it.

I see a black coat come in, I'll know whether he be a true Britain.


Ecce vigil nitido (...) ab ortu
Purpureas aurora fores, et plena rosarum
Atria. Dissugiunt stellae, quarum agmina cogit
Lucifer, coeli statione nouissimus exit.
Iungere equos Titan velocibus (...) (...).

I can hold no longer. False play. I bar your dice. Body o'me, I thought how
we should be served.


What bold Nymph is this, that durst intrude amongst the Muses?


O'my life, this is no English. My Mother never spoke it. I proclaim to all of
my sex, they have leave to depart. I'd rather spin at home, then hear
these Barbarians spout Latin, Unless we had some kind scholar to tell us
what they say. What a foppery is this, that we must laugh for company, and then
ask what we laugh at.


Ignorant suspicious soul, be content, I will be thine Interpreter.


If you do not interpret to me, I'll make you plumme the play, you shant be
able to go on your part.


Then so.
Now gins the fair dew dabbling blushing morn
To open to the earth heavens Eastern gate,
Displaying by degrees the new borne light.
The stars have ^ac'd their dance, and unto night
Now ^id good night.
The young days Sentinel the morning slarre
Now drives before him all his glittering slocke,
And bids them rest within the ^old (...)
Till with his whistle Hesper call them forth.
Now Titan up and ready calls aloud,
And bids the rolling hours bosti^e them quick
And harness up his p^auncing foaming steeds
To hurry out the suns bright Chariot.
O now I hear their trampling feet approach:
Now now I see that glorious lamp to dart
His nearer beams, and all bepaint with gold
The over peeping tops of highest hills.

Trust you upon your word? Did not you promise to interprate? Here's
^insey-woolsey ^ian, where every English thread is ouer-cast with a thick
(...) len wool of strange words, which have so deep a nap, that the plain
ground cannot be seen. I pray you what have you said all this while?


I have said but one word, Lu^cit, ^t is morning.


And could you not have told me that in one word, by bidding me good morrow?


I give no morrow unto thee, but to the Muses, and my self.


I have as good part it h day light, as the best min^g Muse of them all.


Welcome fair light, most welcome unto me, When these thy beams reflect upon
my book.


Now I understand you better. I hope he ^mend.


O how it joys my watchful eyes and heart, To crop the first fruits of the
virgin morn.


Crop the first fruits of Virgins* I'l^ take heed of him.


And spend that precious stock of common light
Upon this Authors lines, and such bookeware.
The morning is the Muses gainest friend.

Surely this scholar loves to come first to school*


O how my blood doth warmely sweetly thrill,
My senses luld, my heart inwrapt with joy,
To see these plains, this fair two-headed hill,
Those bowers, these towers, those winding banks,
These shady laurels, and that Temple gate
The seat, the throne, the nest, the rest, the school
Of great Apollo, and his darlings nine.

Well, I see now it will be English. It shall go hard but I'll get a part
amongst them. I'll into the tyreing house, and scamble and rangle for a man^
part. Why should not women act men, as well as boys act women? I will wear
the breeches, so I will.


NO Court of King, no Palace stately rich,
Though proud of marble feet gilded head
Can outbid these for true and sweet content.
Let others grovel and embrace the earth,
(The earth the whole worlds basest sediment)
Let them there dig their mothers bowels out,
And thence ^ake gold (the earths worst excrement)
Let muddy minds ^oard up, and hug, and ^de,
And sit upon the eggs of au^rice:
Thence hatching vipers of their stinging care^.
Let others sell their lives away in sport,
Or play the Parasites in fickle Court.
Let others swell with greatness, burst with pride.
And others luske and s^ort in lazy sleep,
Or d^ench and soak themselves in Bacchus sudds,
Or wallow in the mire of pleasures lewd:
These seats, these bowers, are to Philoponus
True pleasure, riches, honour, kingdom, rest.
But now fair Phoebus with his rising rays
Strikes on his own bright Temples battlements,
The watchword for the daily sacrifice.
The suns first heate, that warmes this temples top,
Calls for the Altar to be warm below.
Now now Musaeus his observant Priest
With other sc^uiters bestir them quick
To fe^d that neuer-ceasing sacred fire.
My part must be in that devotion,
To take from thence a blessing for the day.
Our actions hence have their prosperity,
By timely worshipping the deity.

what is he gone? I so. He keeps out wonted time, and now is well employed in
doing sacred homage to Apollo. There lays he the foundation of his studious
diligence. There s^re he misses me, and says unto himself. Where is my
Amphibius? Why keeps he not his accuostomed hour? What, shall I after
Philoponus into the temple? 'Tis with the latest now. And (to confess the
truth) alas I dare not there appear to present my self before Apollos Altar.
Nor have I now the boldness to look my dear Philoponus in the face. His
settled countenance and grave gesture give a che^ke unto my levity. His very
silence reads unto me a ^ecture of reprehension. My passions so deep
inthrald another way, bid me now rather to withdraw from such society, and
hide my self in shades and g^oues, and solitude*

Alas Amphibius, though having ^ide himself to the mast of safety by the bo^ds
of temperance, yet breaks loose, and leaps into the sea of danger. Alas he
cannot hold. This Sirens song is so attractive. I yield, I come And yet how can
I? shall I ^unne away from the worthy trade whereto I am bound apprentise? My
name is inrold in Apol^os register, and shall I race it out, and be recko^ed
among the fugitives and renegados? Not so. And yet and yet it will be so. O how
my v^y book seems now a burden unto me, and that which heretofore did
elevate my soul, and give it wings to fly aloft, sweet contemplation of
nature and of arts, that now alas lays on me the heavy load of upbraiding, I
fly, I fly, I hast into the by ways of these thickest groves

What dark some ca^e will give me shelter, and hide me from the light of
mortal eyes, and of the immortal eye of this world the all-vu^ewing Phoe^us.


ANd now me thinks my spirits lighter are,
My soul more clear, my wits more active far
Since I received from grave Mulaeus hand
Apollos benediction for this day.
But where is my Amphibius? he promised to overtake me at this morning
sacrifice. I hasted not, I did protract till Phoebus (whose swist Chariot no
hand can stay) by his visible messenger called for our common duty and
devotion.

What will he thus leave me alone? And yet even thus alone I am not. Nunquam
minus solves quam cum solves. My books and meditations are my companions, that
never fail me. With me they walk and talk, with them I rest at home: and
other while when I travel abroad and converse with contemplation, how short
and easy are the ways? yea, and how safe too? I can fear no the eves: the
Muses are my guard. And in very truth, what can the eves rob me of? My purse is
light, and so my heart. My true riches treasured up in the cabinet of this
breast, no lurching hand by stealth, no robbing rover by force can seize upon.
My Father hath no land to leave me. I think his mean estate is the better
means of my happiness. This education which he astoo^ds me, I take for a more
goodly and durable inheritance, then if he could have left me thousands of
stocks and acres, without any bringing up in quality other then the gentle
vanities of the times.

I envy not our spruce gallant Gingle, that now forsooth scorns to be our
schoole-fellow any longer. Our sable robe is too homely for such gaudy
butterflies.

But ho Philoponus whither dost thou range? These flies not worth the gazing on
would seduce me out of my way. Away ye flutering moths that fain would eat
holes in the Muses robes.

Come wi^ Philosophers, come soule-plying Orators. Nay to you I come; ye are my
home, the true centre whereon my circling thoughts do rest. O mellifluous
Tully. O streaming overflowing Ouid. O Majestic Virgil. Grave Quintillian.
Sententious Isocrates. Virtuous Sentta Plentiful Plutarch. Profound Aristotle.
Divine Plato. My solace, my guides, my instructers. O how your words distill
into my thirsting soul, like to immortalising Nectar.

Where left we last, sweet numbersome Isocrates?

O here, where thy lamp burns bright.

(...). Isocrat ad Demonic.

This rule he delivers, Think not to walk unseen when thou go about any
wickedness. For, though no man ouerspye thee, thine own conscience keeps
watch over thee. O the divine power of unbred conscience? Suitable to this is
that of Seneca. Quid prodest non habere conscium habenti conscientiam? When
Amphibius and I discoursed on this point at our private reading of Seneca, I
remember how affectionately he would take the book into his bosom, and hug
it, and protest that this one sentence is able to make us honest men. I will
seek him out, that we may mutually kindle the sparks of conscience in our
breasts,


COme away, come away.
Now clearly shines our shrouing day.
Now are we fresher then in May,
Come, come awar, our work is play.

Apollos solemn shrouing feast,
Inuiteth all from cast to west:
Come away, come make no slay,
No Muses friend can say us nay.

Apollos yee^ely visitation
You know begins with Proclamation,
Come mouthing Praeco, clear thy threat,
And chant the law in twanging note.

O yez.


He may cry O yez till his belly burst. But, for ought I see, here's no body to
hear him.


No body? I hat's none of our fault. All may come if they will, Apollo keeps
open sessions. Look Praeco, can thou see no audience?


Nor man, nor mouse.


If I see any body, I would I were the Muses Tankard-bearer.


That's a punishment would no near to beggar you. For I am sure you would be
licking up the Castalian d^ops that fall from the Muses tankard, and that would
make you turn ryming Poet.


I wish I had no better fortune, then to be a pretty water Poet wi^h a bi^h
forehead like I. T. that acts the swan by the banks o^ Thames in England. I
cursed my self happily.


What is that acting the swan?


I mean the swans, or gooses broad paddle feet, the natural prime pattern
of the artificial oar.


O que, I have him. He means the easy smooth volluminous untaught Poet, that
will row you over the Thames in rime, every stroke of his oar cuts out the
capering feet of his verses.


Would we had him in Parnassus. He would stroke our Mistresses the Muses
gently with his oar, and make their worships very merry, with his paper
Wherry.


Paper Wherry? you mean by a metaphor, that his papers and verses carry a mans
attention as smooth as a wherry.


No, I mean his sailing in a Paper Boat, and poetising upon that and other
his own adventures.


He shall have my voice to be admitted into the third form of the Ushers part
in Parnassus school, if he will lay his claim for it in solemn session.


I'll register his name with a witness,
If he bring evidence of his fitness.

This Poetical Boat hath made us sail out of our way. Drudo look down there
between the Temple and the hill, see if you spy any body. And you Praeco, put
on you spectacles, and look into the Grove.


Neither bird nor feather.


Neither fish nor finn.


We shall forfeit our liberties, if we can get no audience to listen to our
Proclamation. Praeco, up that bank, nay mount up that tree.


It is more wholesome mounting that one tree, then some other three trees,
compact in a Greek Pee.


See thou any body now?


Abundance. O multitude! O variety!


What be they? discover them to us.


Men. Boys.


Who else?


Item there be others, shall I discover them too?


Why not?


I am too bashful to uncover them. They are women.


On prattling Preco.


Men, women, young, old, black, white, blew, sitting, standing, looking,
laughing.


Whence think thou come they, and what would they?


No doubt they come a shrouing to Apollo. If the Muses have not provided for
their palate, what shall we do?


It is hard to dress a shRouing dish to please so many several tastes. They
must be content to take such as they find or bring, like good gossips.


Well sir Preco, for the first service, let them hear the Proclamation. Begin.


O yez, O yez, O yez.


All manner of scholars and students


All manner of scholars and students


With their Reteiners


With their Reteiners and appurtenances that hold or pretend to hold in Capite
any learning, art or science of the grand Lord our sovereign Apollo or of the
mean Land. Ladies the nine sister Muses or of any of them Let them appear
this day in the afternoon at the great lowrell on the western top of
Parnassus there to do their homage luite and service and to give account to
our said Lord Apollo or to his high steward Muss us of the expense of their
time in their several trades ^nd mysteries of the Muses also there and then
upon the oath of homagers strict inquiry and search is to be made concerning
all encroachments intrusions and Nuissances done or suffered to be done upon
the inheritance rites and royalties pertaining to the manner of Parnassus All
that will accuse, shall be heard and all that will answer shall have liberty
of defence by themselves or by their counsel learned in the Muses laws.

Keep Apollos peace, and then he end the Muses prosper you.


Come down now Praeco from your chair of stare, and walk with us mortals
here below.


Iauriger think you that any of those, whom Praeco oueruiewed, will lay in any
action at Apollos Court to day?


Why not? perhaps some of them hold for life some paper Tenement belonging to
Apollos ^nner. And thereupon may crave admitionce to it Others upon their
experience may inform Apollos jury what wast hath been made of the trees in
Parnassus grove with cropping off laurel garlands to adorn the light head of
every ballad belching Po^. Or what delapidations have in process of time
grown upon the Muses cells. So that Boreas whistles euerloud in their ears
when they are retired to contemplation.


These and all other informations shall be firely heard. We know that is our
Lord Apollos express mandate.


Now return we up the Mount, and acquaint Mus^us what we have done.


REnowned Father of fashions, Count of courtesies, Marquess of modern
motions, Duke of debonair deportments, Chief Justice of ges^iculations.


Go on with the Alphabet of my Titles. Comptroller.


I have it, Comptroller of Conges, Compactor of Cringes, Fea^ Framer of ^ian
phrases.


O wonderful: this is a brave man. We have no such dainty words in our
school.


Dainty? I tell thee, Novice, we have store of this plumporridge at our house
every day. (little else.)


Sir, you forget the Titles given me by the great Mogull, when I went
Ambassador to him from the King of Calecut, a golden ^mpet sounded them in the
Persian language.


That trumpet could speak Persian well, I can hardly hit upon them in the
original. Varletto, p^one, manigoldo.


You masque unknown, unseen. Descend I say to the apprehension of the base
vulgar. Give us them ^n translation.


Indoctrinate of young Nobility. Accompli^r of Kings Courts, chief engineer of
cap and knee. clock-keeper of (...) (...) (...), and finally, ingrosser of all
saylable, available addresses, garbs, faces, graces in all places.


Yet gooder and gooder. O admirable! This man is for us to the heavens.


It is well, somewl at toward the superlative of my wo^h and pro^ssion But Imp.
I like not that word finally. When you rehearse me before the Lady Muses, they
will think we are at the wall, that thou hast told all my virtues, and
offices. I tell thee, not thou, nor the loud long tongue blab ^ame, can give
the inuentary of my perfections. Think thou with the small wherry boat of
thy short memory, to arrive at the Terra la of the virtues and
endowments o^ mighty Captain Complement?


O eloquence. I see now that Tully and Ouid are but cou^se w^e.


I tell thee, and thou shalt find, that tittle tattle Tully is but browne
bread, if he be laid near our Marchp^e.


Ergo therefore my nimble Imp. take away that padlocke finally, and in stead of
the aforesaid, add to the ^agge end of my Catalogue, that endless chain
which the vulgar Gramatians call e^ c^ra.


Indeed M^ster I have heard you say, that you would have your title like the
great Western Monarchs ^e, with a long tail behind it.


True: And therefore you know, the motto which I subscribe in banner is plus
ultra.


My sweet friend, Master Implement, you told me that you would speak --


I marry, and so I do.


For me to the mighty man. All you have yet said to him, is but in the vocatiue
case. And that case makes no sentence, as I have learned when I was in the
second ^orme. You know I gave you*


What did you give me? Nothing but a dozen of rotten ^ke points. You must tag
them better ere I t^e up your request.


I le steal my mothers Peacock, and bring it you.


A Peacock? That's well. You may make us latter by it; but you cannot make us
prouder.


What talk you of a Peacock?


Sir, this young ^ntleman presents you with a Peacock. It ha^ a tail* he ha^ a
small request to your worship.


I dare as well he hanged as steal the Peacock. My mother loves it so well,
and feeds it every day, and pricks the feathers of it in her sanne.


Where is this Peacock?


What shall I dee? I have none.


I mistook a Peacock for a Woodcock.


I have never a Woodcock neither.


Sir he would fain present you with a Woodcock every day. His suit is to be
your scholar for an hour in a day. He would dedicate himself to fine
fashions and quaint quallicoms.


What Nobiliy? What achievements imbolden him to ob^ upon us with such a
request? An hour in a day? I tell thee, young chicken, great Princes have not
made such a motion unto me without an Ambassador, and a present of a gold
chain, or diamond ring, or s^me such tri^e.


Wo^'s me! Alas. I have no hope now, I think I must even return to my old
trade again, repeat In nova (...) animus, and Tityre tu pa^lae. O sweet Imp.
be my ^aithfull ^mplement to your Master. I'll do any thing for thee, or for
any of thy kin.


Will you steal me your fathers dagger with the ailuer hast?


And my mothers silver bodkin too.


They shall prick forward thy cause. I gallop to save thy life. I will beg a
pardon for thee of this Judge. Relent heroic soirit, relent. For my sake
entertain Master Novice into your school.


Thou know our school is thronged. My hands are full. The truth is, my
virtuous faculty, joined with a strange dexterity, is so attractive, that I
have scholars come flocking unto me, not only from the Theater and Venus
Court, but also from Apollos seminary. I swell, I swell with the stuffings of
the Grammar broo^.


I am one of those that lest the fescue trade, to page it thus in state.


Nay, Logic and Philosophy doth often break up shop, and come to set up at
my stall.


Indeed Master of late we have had very good doings. The Usher of our school
has had for fees of young gentlemen at their entrance, above an hundred crowns
within this 12. months, besides his yearly stipend.


I'll beg hard, but I'll get a crown of my Mo there, and twelve pence for
thee honest I^ Implement.


As for money for stipend or entrance, I do not much stand upon it, neither
would I take any, but that I will not imbase my facult?.


Indeed Master, if you should not take some fair see, the gentlemen would not
think it such a reputation to be your Prentiles.


Truly the more cost, the mo^e worship. A wise saying. Write you that in your
table book Master Novice upon my authority.


And their Parents would scorn our ware, and say it were like s^inking fish it
hend of a market.


Again for me good Imp.


I pray you sir let him be admitted. Hee'le be content to stand next the door
of our school. I warrant you sir, hee'le be fedfat for a whole year, with two
or three of the easiest plain tricks, of ^g the hat* or the gambrell ^th
hams, the ma^ in the toe, an^ the gudiron in the forehead. Hee'le be pleased
with these till he can come to higher points of the Retort, the ^e, the
Catastiophe, the Antis^ropho.


I could be content to enrol him in our petty form, but that I doubt ^ome
excep^ns will be taken at the confluence of so many of that tribe, to ou^ part.
Master Philoponus a sour sloicalll scholar, told me to my teeth, that Apollo
should be complained unto, and I accused of robbery, for stealing away his
best hopes.


Sir, I see no reason but you may entertain him as well as another. One s^one
more will not make the boat sink.

One kernel more put in the sac^e

Will not break the M^s (...).


Good sir consider o^ me. Though I be not borne to so much land as master
Ging^e my forme-fellow, yet I shall learn b^ tricks as well as he. There is
Mumble and Tri^ram, Trump, and Iobbart, and nimble Nichol. I see not, but I may
leave the ^atchell as well as they, and turn fine gentleman.


Indeed they have ^ofited very well with us. For they have torn out the leaves
of all their books to light tobacco pipes, and they can i^me, effame, and
resume with gentle pos^ M^ister Nimble can at one time, and wah one (...) p^
^his hat with his right hand in due circumference, and brandish a baton in's
left hand, and suck a suming tobacco pipe in's mouth without any hand, all at
once.


They say th^ old gray beard Mus^us sets up inquisition, and ^at Apollo keep^
Court to day. My sweet Siren sent me word this morning, that I know not how
many of us should be indi^ed for encroaching upon Apollo^ liberties.


Indeed sir, and't please you, this Philoponus is the best scholar among us,
but he is but a tell tale. There can't one of us play the tron't, or run away
from school for recreation, or so, but presently he tells Musaeus of it. But I
care nor, I had rather stick to you, and show Apollo a fair pair of heals.


He that sticks to us must bring some glue: And money is a binder.


Imp. are these young mans friends rich? Will they lard us with a fat pension?


His father's but a plain Farmer; but he's called the rich Chuff^. He keeps
three ploughs, and fourteen yoke of Oxen.


But will his Oxen give down their milk?


^aith his m^ther will stroke hard for it. She is a gentlewoman ot'h left
side. I have heard her say, that she would like her son better in a scarce
and ruffled boots, then in a gown with a ^ardell of books.


Well said, enough. You young man. My servant hath entreated hard for you. I am
content to entertain you upon probation.


I am overjoyed, ouetioyed.


Overjoyed? What a plain packes^affe phrase is that? you must sublimate your
joy in triumph thus. Hold me down left I hit my head against a cloud.


Hold me down lest I hit my head against a cloud. O what a bran world is
this, all made of oa^meale: I'm now in the way of preferment and gallantry.
I'll presently run to my mother for some cash for my entrance. I'm all now
for Masks, Revels, Court. sh^p. Poor Apollo farewell.


Sir Imp. I honour thee with thanks, a whole bushel, heap measure.


I, with such light co^e and husks am I sed.


I enrich thee with thanks. Thou hast brought a pretty fat foul to our net.


We shall make him a flat fool.


Is not the hour come appointed by me to give access and interviw to Sir
Orgolio?


Yes sir, the sun and clock says so. (And my clock tells me it is
breakfast time. If I could tell where to lunch.)


Why then Vamos. I set my legs in due array, and march on foot down to the
plain.


So you had need. For all your horses have ten toes.


OR this, or that. This is my duty. So. And though so, yet why not rather that?
I o that mine inclination draws me. O strange Monster, worse then ever nature
did bring forth. A man in whom the light of reason shines, to walk in the
cloudy night of tempestuous passions, to live at once in two contrary elements.
Glorious Apollo I fain would still rrmaine chine. And yet. And yet sweet
Hedo^e, I cannot divorce my self from thee.


PArnassus plains. I he banks of Hippocrene, The laurel grove, all walked,
all searched by me: and yet I find him not. O here not hoped, yet now found.
Found? Is this he? Is this my Amphibius? Where a^t thou? Who art thou? Look up
and show thy friendly brow. I Hope no distaste estranges thee ^om thy
Philoponus. What have we here: The walking ghost of Amphibius? Where is his
soul, his life, his look, his speech?


A wandering soul.


Wandering? I know no by way can call thee off from me. These groves, these
banks, and shades, O ^ow oft have they bin companions and witnesses of our
friendship, and discourses of earth, of sea, of stars, of spheres, of
motions, of rest, of beasts, of plants, of all Dame natures works, and
wondrous art, by which this All stands thus composed, and framed in most exact
proportion. Awake I say, the Muses call us to our task.


Worthy Philoponus. I love thoe. I admire tho^. I envy thee.


I know thou can not envy me. Thy heart is so generous, and my worth so
mean, thou love me I know, for the parity of our dispositions and studies.


Would I were like thee now, as heretofore I have been, then should I not be
thus dashed with shame.


What Amphibius, you are always modest. Hic virtutis color. Blushing is
virtues scarlet robe.


Alas, I am now like a cropped flower, which fades and hangs the head, I am
pulled from the stalk on which I grew.


What blast hath thunder-strucken thee? Whence art thou fallen?


I must vntwist.


I hope, not from our bond of friendship.


No: but from my bond of service to Apollo.


Thou from Apollo? First may the stars be plucked from heaven. Why but how?


In a word, I am turned soldier.


Soldier? Which of the furies pluck't thee from our wonted peace and quiet in
Apollos service, now to pitch thy tent in Marses field?


O how the drums and trumpets sound alarm. What strokes, what shrieks,
what fierce encounters, wounds and deaths!


O Tragedy! What Scene is this? On what Stage dost thou tread?


Alarm, alarm, to war. I fight, I fight.


With whom?


I must maintain the quarrel on both sides.


Both sides? Who are the Cumbattants?


Amphibius, and Amphibius. Never till now a true Amphibius As I am* Apollos and
thine. I walk and march with thee, I fight under the Muses colours against
ignorance, idleness and voluptuousness. But as I am another self, my left
side walks another way. O force. O compulsion. I yield.


What force compels?


Fatis agimur, cedite fatis.

The destinies are powerful. If the fates say I, who dares say no?


Our fates? Speak ri^ht, and say, our faults. They ouer-rule and ouer-turne
us, when we are willing to be conquered, and then to colour our follies, we
put on the mask^ o^ tragic exclamation upon our stars, our fates, our
cross inexorable adamantine destinies.


Far easier is it to mock my misery then to cure it.


Cure it? I will cure it. Let me feel thy pulse. O what boiling and beating
waives of passion! W^ thou calm them?


O could I! or could thou my Esculapius?


Recipe a ^iletto or ^aylors bodkin; make but one oylet hole under the left
pap, three inches deep: your blood would be cooled; and you shall fall into
a sweet sleep, and presently be transported into the Elisian fields. T^obatum
est.


Facile est miserum irridere.


Not I, but -- you fate mon^ers teach you this. But in earnest I advise thee
thus. Give over parling and combating: blow away your enemy out of the field
with one blast. One word will do it.


What potent charm is that? I pray you teach it me.


Only this sloutly said N^lo.


Oft have I thought and said it, but another word crowds in withal, and makes
a counter charm. Volo.


What? do you blow hot and cold at once, at once will and nill?


Vos testor omnes Calites, hoc quod volo, Me notte.


O Sir, do you think Medea a sit pattern for you? Have you no better a
Mistress to instruct your wavering soul, then monstrous Medea?


Yes, another Mistress ouer-awes me, more powerful then that Enchantress.


Ouer-awes? O faint fondling, not worthy to march under the Muses banner, whose
Escuch^on is Virtue Argent, crowned Or. And the two supporters, winged Victory,
and winged all-eyed, all-eared, all-tongued Fame.


When this all-conquering Queen, sends sorth her mandates, alas virtue melts
into an aercall contemplation, and fame vanishes into an empty sound.


What mandates other then usurped Tyranny? What conquests other then by
voluntary yielding to false allurements?


O valiant Sir, can I, can you, can any mortal wight stand out and rebel when
he is apprehended by this Queenes writ?


What writ? what arrest? you need not obey it. At least you might lurk and
withdraw your self, and make them return a Non est inuentus:


O but these arrests do not so much command by authority, as convince persuade
by argument and reason.


Reason? what other reason then vt cum ratione insanias, that you may be
reasonably raving mad?


Tu si hic esses, aliter sentires, the case would be altered, and you would
plead as hard on my side.


Then let all the nine Muses hiss at me, and banish me out of Apollos
school.


The Muses? Apollos school? I tell you the arguments by which I am convinced,
are translated out of the Records of the Muses, and cite every where Apollos
Parliaments.


What are these forged patches which plead their workmanship from the Muses
looms? Have you bin weaving them in your sequestered studies?


Alas not mine, but on higher hand hath spun and twisted them. The Queen her
self vouchsafed with her own wit and hand to compose this sovereign Nepenthe
to imbalme my soul in most desirable content. Queen Hedone her self wrote
this lar^e mellifluous letter to me, poor me. I thought she had not known me:
but (O generous sweet gratiousnesse) to this mean negected Amphibius, she
(that high and mighty sovereign of delights) sent this amiable garland of
choicest flowers, culled by her own delicious hand; that hand, which the
chiefest Poets labour to paint cut, and the highest gods affect to kiss.


O how Pocticall you are grown, and fantastical? I think that paper hath
infected you. But by what hand was it conueyed to you?


By whom, but by her worthy maid of honour Dame Si^en, whole voice with one
warble can thaw the most frozen affections


Nay then I perceive he is handsomely caught.


I pray you view these lives. You will confess they are strong lines.


I have heard of strong lines, admitted by weak judgements, and derided by the
judicious.


I p^ay you read. El^e you rob me of my defence, and your self of care
pleasing* soule-conquering suauity!


To my not so dear, as worthy to be far dearer, Amphibius the flower of
youth --


(Meaning me.)


Honour and envy of his rank. --


(Meaning me, very good still)


Accomplisher of vertue^ --


(O complete!)


In nothing wanting, but that he is indebted, --


(Yet she does not arrest me for money debt, No)


Indebted to himself, in infinite sums of most currant delights, over
chu^shly neglected by him.


Had these title been of my own devising, modesty would not have suffered me,
to hear them read. But what Queen Hedone says, is a law; and it is a part of
my obedience to accept the honour she confers upon me by her own hand. She
trusts no Secretary when she writes to me. I think the Muses will wooc me for
copies of this letter, they will imitate it, when they sing hymns in praise of
Apollo.


O forgery O soppery!


Why? what?


Think thou that Queen Hedone wrote this lever to thee? I think she never
heard of Amphibius.


Why? Am I not in the indorcement? I neue^ heard of any other Amphibius. I will
be this Amphibius till you find another Amphibius.


See how thy good nature is wrought upon. This inscription i^ none of Queen
Hedones hand. See thou the character nothing a kin to the letter within


Perh^ps indorcements and names of note, are written in another hand for
excellency. That is the Court stile.


Let me tell thee a short tale. Thou hast heard o^ Burching-lane in London.


London? Where's that? In England?


So. And there are many volumes of Apparel made at large by guess for no man,
and for every man, for all, whom they may fit, or who will buy them.


What then? I buy none there.


An honest rural guest coming thither, is hailed into a shop, and ca^ed with
a suite which though too wide, too long or short, he's persuaded '^was made
fo^ him and none else, he pays, and goes, and after finds it s^inkes.


What's this to me?


Yes to thee. Mutato nomixe de te Fabula narratur. Thou art this new come
guest, gazing on and admiring the varnished wares, set out in the deceitful
shop of Hedone. She cuts out and tackes together, large declamations in folio.
In laudem voluptatis. These she sends abroad by the ^nd of her Broker Siren:
Who, lo^den with these blank letters, rambles up down: and, when she lights
upon any credulous soul, presently she adds an indorcement, and makes the
receiver believe that ^eene Hedone her self doth woo him. Against the
concourse of this solemn day this Siren, hovering here for gain, now seiseth
on thee. And thou believe that this paper garment was cut out and sowed and
laced for Amphibius. I^ she meet with me, verily I shall have another the
same letter, indorced, To her dear, her only dear Philoponus. Then shall I
be the flower of youth, and what not?


Admit sir this, that my name, was put in by the bearer upon general
instructions only. Yet the powerful contents of the letter enforce in
themselves the conclusion of my yielding.


Thy yielding? And why not mine as well?


Yes brother, and thine, and anies else, whose heart is not hewn out of a
marble rock. Mine is of flesh, I call a woman Mother.


I ^m of the same ^ould with thee. But I bethink my self, Why hath Reason the
Sceptre in her hand, if rebel Passion may be suffered to crowd into the
Throne.


True, no Oracle more certain. But alas. But I know not what within this
melting breast cries out louder, and says, Amphibius, Thou shalt now to this
case dispense with those severe rules.


Where is thy Logic? thy Philosophy? Art thou an Orator to persuade others to
that which they know not, and can thou not persuade thy self, in that which
thou acknowledge?


Nay, the Arguments used by Hedone, are not emptily blown up with passion, but
soundly grounded on Philosophy, Logic and Oratory. S^en told me that her Lady
Hedone is near allied to Manto, Cassandra, Aspasia, and the ancient Roman
Tanaquil. That this Hedone, better then Lesbian Sapph^, might pretend to be the
tenth Muse.


Why then comes she not now to Apollos Court at this solemn assem^ly, to l^y
in her claim for it?


Siren tells me, she had done so, but that she knew not of the set day, and now
resides in one of the fortunate Lands in the Atlantique sea f^rie oft from
Thessaly. And besides all this, she is invited to a feast of four or five gods
by Mercury into Ethiopia.


Such draste of si^ens by thy feast.


For the cause of her absence I pass not much But I'm sure she's learned,
and deeply read. That s^ee shows by the reasons and Authorities heaped in her
letter.


What slout reasons? What authorities?


Even those which we read and admire in Apollos school. What say you to Tully,
Plutarch, Aristotle, Scneca, Socrates, Horace, c.


I am sure these affoord impenctrable a^mor against the ^ssaults of Hedone. And
now are they brought on the other side against their wills?


Read but this line here in the bottom of the second page. Attend what your
(...) Tully saith, Dandu^ aliquid atat^. No^ s^mper ^ncat ratio, c.


This time and place s^s not to examine these particulars. Come lets to the
lau^ell Grove. There will we gage to the bottom this farthel of false wares.


ONe tells me I must study next my heart. That troubles my br^ne too much.
Another tells me 'tis good to e^te bread and butter next my heart. That sumes
sumes into my head too much. And to say the tru^h, my stomach is not yet up.
For I'm but new up my self, and I hope that will not be so saucy as to tread
on his Masters heals. But I say still, 'tis best playing next ones heart. That
is to me both study and breakfast. Once again cross and pile, handy dandy,
which hand will you have?

O for some Companions. O for some ^ood play fellows! Gingl^ he's grown so
proud, he tells me he's not for boys play now. And Slug I could not get him
up. I boune'd with my bag of counters against his door. And he answered me
nothing but whough, pooh: He outsnorts nine horses, and outsleepes ten
dormise. I will go find out Novice. He's a young fat gosling to pull.


when we had signified to our Lord Apollo our publishing of his Mandates, he
was pleased to say that there was never more need of warning a Court, then now,
that abuses and vsurpations have crept into his dominions. And therefore he
charged us that this inquity should be more strict then heretofore.

But look you now. There is one of the worms and Catte^pillers of our
harvest.

I know her, though I never saw her before. By her fawning gesture and
inchan^ing wand, she's that famous infamous Siren, which so troubles and
bewilders some of our society. She hooks at all she meets. It's marvel if
she reach not at me.


TO thee, renowned Lauriger,
I come a happy messenger,
From Hedone, Queen Hedone, sweet Hedone,
The Goddess of delight and pleasure,
The life of life, the worl is best treasure,
Perform what I advise,
And thou shalt be more wise,
Then all the rest that follow
Your mighty god Apollo.
Apollos t^ske torments your brains,
Abates your spirits, dries your vain^s.
Vain is your labour little profit,
No quiet by it, no end of it.
O cast away that laurel bow,
And crown thy head with roses now,
Now whilst thy frolick^ youth gives leisure
To bath thy self in choicest pleasure.
Thy time doth go,
As rivers flow.
Ere long, you know,
Gray hairs will grow.
Then shalt thou sigh, and say with tears,
Why lost I so my youthful years?
My spring is past, yet fain I would,
(But cannot) bud in winters cold.
Come then before age bids good night,
Spend youthful day in sweet delight.

Is this the lecture you read to us? Is this all you can say? A flourishing
glossing poetical Theme, that hath neither truth nor substance in it. An empty
sounding painted drum, fit ^or children to hear and follow with their
rattles and hobby horses. Go Gill flourish, go set up your Peddlers shop in Venus
Court. There shall you have those that will dance to your music.


No man so learned, wise, or strong,
But may be conquered by my song.

I can hear thee no longer. Avaunt thou Circe. Think thou to transform me
into a swine? I fly.


If he gone? I will not leave him so. A letter from the goddess her self may
pierce deeper with him, as it did with Amphibius.


IVgge Rubbish, what, Jug Rubbish. Come and bring hi^ g^dle.


Here forsooth.


Have you warmed it?


I can find none but seacole fire to warm it:


Out upon thee slut Seacoale? I cannot abide to have any of that brimstone fume
to come about the body of my child. Go kindle some Charcoal, and warm it
well on both sides.

What Mother can think it any pain to bring forth so precious a fruit? O my
living walking joy, thy fathers picture, and thy Mothers self, why shouldest
thou be weaned from my lap?


Sweet Mother. If I were to choose a Mother,

Thou and no other

Should be my Mother.


Sweet Child, when thou speak, me thinks the M^ses, if there were nine
times nine of them, are but Oysterwomen and Kitchinsluffe.


Honourable Mother Indulgence, I must be no more prentice to Apollos trade.
Must I?


No my Child, thou art in a better trade. We are higher slowne now.


I like this new Master better then Musaeus. We have no terrible sceptre
shaken over us in the Captains school.


Out upon that bloody butcherly weapon. What a base thing it is, that a man
should be armed against children? What natural Mother can suffer her own
flesh and blood to be torn by these black gown? Cannibals? He that rancheth
the flesh of my child, had as good kiss --


Mother, I have heard that he was hanged that invented burch.


I, and he that invented books escaped by burning in the hand.


I have almost scorched my fingers with warming it:


Shrink in while I buckle it, that you may be gaunt and fine in the wast.


Mother. When you go in your coach up Parnassus hill, I must sit in your lap,
must I not? and hold Tisbies left ear in my hand with two fingers thus Must I
not? O it is the finest Puppy.


I, darling, and hold my fan in thy other hand, and sometime shake it at the
common people when we pass by them.


Indeed Mother, these are very Gentlemanlike feats. I wonder the Captain has
not read any lecture to me of them.


The Captain is to teach thee more souldierlike tricks. I can teach thee
these at home. Why Jug do you see how the rose is ruffled on the top of his
spurleather, set it better with your poking finger. (valour.


He has already taught me one soldierly trick of


What is that my sweet Babby?


When you are in your Coach, if any horses, though never so well bred (except
the horses of Apollos own Chariot) shall presume to take the wall or upper
hand of any of your Coach-horses, I must straight leap out of the Coach, and
with my poniard stab one of those uncivil horses through both the ears at
once.


I see Captain Complement is an excellent Master, he will make my child be
called the son of Mars and Bellona. He deserves more stipend then I allow
him for thee. Why son Gingle, this will be an action not only of valour, but
of honour and duty to me.


If I thus venture my self in duty to you, I pray you forget not your duty to
me. You know my Father's a man of great worth, and lands, and I am his heir
apparent.

I pray you in good company, call not me plain son Gingle, or son Iohn,
or so, but Master Iohn, or Master Gingle my son, or so. Others will do me
the more honour for it.


True my honourable child Master Iohn Gingle or so. If thou be used with
such respect by me, how great honour will others yield me that bare thee? But
son I doubt, if the horses be tall, thou can not have them by the ears
with thy poniard. Thou shall* have thy Fathers long guilt Rapier. That will
reach them, unless they fly as high as Pegasus.


O for that Rapier. If I had it, the Captain would teach me in one day and a
half, how to wear it, how high the pummel must sit above the chape, and how
to wind it about when I salute.


I preethy, sweet son, let me see thee once act the fine gestures, which the
Captain hath taught you. You do them by your self alone in the chamber, and
the door shut to you. I looked in yesterday at the key-hole, and me thought it
did me good to see thee repeat some of them in the presence of a Candlestick,
and Bed-staffe that were set upon the table.


Are you ^uis'd of that Mother? That is a secret, which the Captain tells me,
that I must show my feats to none till I am well practised. And another
secret, better then that, is, in my private practising to set up imagined
spectators for the whetting of my care and diligence. And therefore sometime I
set upon my table, a full auditory of Cushion, Candlestick, Slippars, Bellows,
and Chamber-pot.


See my son Master Gingle, see what wrong you do me then. You will not allow
me that favour, which you do to your Bellows, and that which is below
Bellows.


As I am a Gentleman Mother, I cannot do withal as yet. You know when you put
me to this mighty Master, you charged me upon your blessing to obey him, and
follow his instructions, rather then the precepts of Musaeus or Apollo
himself. But by the next month, I think the Captain will give me leave to
repeat my postures before you. I will do your Mothership the favour to be in
the first form of my Spectators.


Next month? I cannot tarry till next day. Hold, here's a crown, carry to him
for his favour, to make me a spectator without delay. It may be in your
repeating, I shall teach you some gestures that the Captain thinks not of.


But Mother, I hope you will not fail my Master Captain. You will be a suitor
to Apollo for him, that he may continue his school of fine feats here near
our door.


Why child to that end have I called to have my Coach made ready. Apollos
great hall is almost a flight shot off on the top of Parnassus, I cannot get up
thither without my four foure-footed prancers. Jug bid my Coachman lay the
Coach bed backward, for we are to climb the hill. But I must in to dress me
better, and set my face in Court fashion.


Valorous sir, I pray you clear your brow. What cloud of discontent enuelops
your heroic soul?


I tell (...) (...). I am duloros^, I am fumbled and sud^led, and stu^ with two
horne^, grief anger.


Hath S^ ^ned on you?


Now b^y I have her love and shall.


(Well you may, you p^y dear for it.) I hope Sir you are not angry with me
sir, your diligent Implement.


With thee? Thou shrubbe, thou scrubbe. Thou art below my wrath. The
thunderbolt of my indignation, where it ^lteth fo^th --


(My Masters bolt is soon shot)


Bestunds the tallest oaks: it strikes not at such daisies as thou art,
dandiprat.


But Master, if you'll give me leave, I dare ask who dares make your choler
boyle.


Sir boy, I'm angry with my self, and with a certain Knight errant.


Errant? An errant ass he is, that angers you. I'll lay my cap against my
dinner (that's odds against a cheese paring) some Knight has taken the wall of
you, and has challenged you into the field. And now me think, your anger
makes you tremble.


learn this of me, no fear, but ange^, makes men of valour tremble. For anger
is the wherstone of fortitude, as sometime said Sir Harry Tottle, my fellow
Knight and Philosopher.


Woe to that Knight, which conjured up that spright. Your angry spirit will not
be coniut'd down, without blood shed. (The reason is, my Master loves black
puddings well.) But I pray you Master, what knight? I'll be your second. My
keen weapon feeds on bloodshed. But I shall have the worst in this bloody
combat. (For nothing but the pudding skins and knotted threads, will fall to
my share.)


Did thou mark even now when Sir Orgoli^ came to me, desirous to be intoll'd
my scholar?


I remember you went aside: but I could not perceive so much as an angry look
between you.


No. He was well pleased: but little to my case. The truth is, for fashions
sake, I had him to dinner against to morrow at my lodging. And he. --


(Hes enjoined penance by it)


And he, like an vnnurtur'd swain, --


Would have you dine with him.


NO. No, Imp. The swain accepted my p^sser. Was I so kind and generous to
inu^te him, and he be so unkind as to come?


Indeed that's plain Count^y fashion, unfit for us.


I tell thee Imp I hate him for it, and if he come, I'll sauce him for it. He
shall dine^s last. I'll temper the salad with my own hands.


So you had need, (fo^ we h^ue no Co^ke to do it. My Master and I are all the
offi^ in the house) But Master, is it so hateful and deadly to accept a dinner
at another man^ table? How are you then alive? Me thinks the Lords and Knights
should have poisoned you long since.


Thou hast a pestilent cross witted brain. I think thy conceits do caper the
cross point within thy P^icranion. But ^ee how fa^e thy reach comes short of
mine.


(I me sane to reach far^e sometime, else I may s^arue.)


Such young cubs as thou, though wily, yet cannot extinguish. I extinguish t^us
upon the point. A man may be said to eat another meat upon invitation, o^
sans inuitat^on. Which the vulgar call not invited* (...) walk the second way.
I will not be invited. My wo^th, my gentle faculty, My brave profession, They
are the Orato^s, the Messengers, the Sergeants that inuit, and drive, and draw
me to the tables of the best.


I would not be that Porter that should keep you out (in a cold hungry day
when we have fasted over night.)


I tell thee, my presence adds honour to the place where I come. Where ere I
dine, my virtues pay my share, and where I sit, I leave behind me the ^weet
perfume of court^sie.


(A sweet perfume quoth he. He has forgot at the French Ordinary when two
L^quies fell out, and on^ of them drew his poniard, who was't fell in a swoun^
and le^t such a perfume behind him, that the Chamberlaine spent six pence in
Frankincense.)


But hoe, where is this fly? My Imp. I do vouchsafe to stoop so low as to
ask thy counsel. It inhaunceth my wisdom, to choose such a servant, as is
able to advise his Master. The wise Commanders in the wars sometimes listen
to the counsel of a common souldi^r, as D^n Plato saith in his politickes.
What ^yst thou Imp. What shall I do ^o beat this dog from my d^ore, it he
come to morrow?


Let him come, and b^rke (...) hunger: the cudgel of my wit shall ^ang him
away


So you (...) my honour, ^aithfull Imp. to thee I leave this (...), But (...) I
would know the medicine whereby thou woulded purge this distemper out of me.


I was now temperin^ and preparing it. List how the hammers ^eate in t^e (...)
of my brain. Thump. I'll none of that. ^ump again. I like that better.


I long to see the bi^th of the child of thy brain.


What if you s^nd him word, that this day upon (...) call, the whole Academy of
^ous students arriving here, the Captain of your Complemental school Count
(...) Gi^o, takes up the chief Inn in Parnassu^.


O, at the sign o^ the flying horse Pegasu^.


And there makes his pro^ ^ast with a Mask, that must last till midnight.


I preethee do not hold ^e till midnight in the unmasking thy advise. What's
this to m^e and Sir Orgolio?


And thereupon that the foresaid Don hath over entreated your honourable
worship to be the Herald and Earl Marshall to set every guest in^ place, and
every di^ in^ rank.


That none can do but I, and those that learn of me.


Otherwise the Cooks and Sewers will make a ^ay with spi^ and choppi^g knives:
and among the guests the^ will be a mortal fight for p^ecedency in place.


Well said my boy. I have it now. Therefore Ergo. th^ Exclusion is, that, as he
would prevent murder, he expect not to have me stay at home that day.


That is a charitable exclusion, and tends unto the preservation of Apollos
peace.


But how if Sir Orgolio say then hee'le co^e thither too, and be my shadow
there, and play the under* Marshall at my beck?


He cannot be so uncivil, as to intrude, vnbid, vncooth, vnkist.


He that would be so uncivil, as to come invited, I dare not trust him where
he is not called.


Let him come at his own peril, yet our house shall be thus acquit of him.


What ^f he return me word that he will come and dine with me next day?


If so, then rather then fail, I'll blaze it all abroad, that your lodging is
set on fire with (...) of whole showles and legions of p^ouision for
entertainment.


That will be for mine honour, that my great Chamber of entertainment is in
combustion with the fumes of my hospitality.


And for your thrift too, that none shall hereafter think to be your guest.
(Great Chamber? We have never a ^come bigger then a Cobblers stall; and as for
fire, it blases no further then a tobaccopipe with us.)


What say thou?


I say non^ but the son of a Cobbler would be so uncourteous, as to reply
against this answer; and none so witless, if ever he refined his brains with
tobacco


O how hast thou raised up my heavy heart, I wa^rant I weigh ten pound lighter
then I did e^e while.


Lighter ten pound of lead. (For I never kn^ him weigh heavy ten pound of
silver. I think the Faryes run away with his money. He sucks the young
Gentlemen's purses, and yet we sta^ue at home.)


Now is the time that Master Gingle is to mee^e with us on Parnassus downs to
act his trampling par^ Uamos.


A Man had need to have a long fork, to keep off this Siren. After I had
repulsed her insinuating song, she follows me still, and delivers me a letter,
sent from the Lady Hedone (to me, she says) shows a fair indorcement in
gilded letters. To the grand supporter of Apollos Court, La^riger. And so
^orth as follows in that vn^st title, When I had read the superscription, she
by violence would needs embrace me. I vouchsafed not so much as to open the
letter. Whereupon with hateful heart, and spiteful look, she vowed revenge.
Now who but ^he has contrived to catch ^e in a sna^e. A message is brought to
me by a seeming ^riend, o^ prostering a pension from Captain Complement, to
procure a patent from Apollo to hold on his apish trade within these walls.

The Broker told me, that, of Lauriger, that gold would make me Auriger, that
t^is Captain fetching over diverse of our yonglings, and cheating them of their
money, we, by way of reprizall, may take this p^sion, that it is no b^ibery to
receive it, but an act of justice: that he that robs a thief, hath earned not
only pardon, but also praise.

Now Lauriger summons his wits, and says, this is a trap to bring thee in
disgrace, and to endanger thy office in Apollos Court. ^ay a straw there
Lauriger. Consider that this (...) hobby-horse lives but in al ungry fashi^n.
All he can ^cratch by cheating, he spends on that witch Siren. He every quarter
to allo^ (...) pension of ^iue crowns, that can sca^ce allow himself five
dinners, or an honest flo^kebed to repose his vaulting bones? Lay another straw
th^e, Lauriger, ^t his straw M^sse.


I Think I rose not on the right side today. I have rambled up and down, and
can get no playfellowes.


Nay this snare which they have laid for me, whe^ me the mo^e to accuse them
both anon at Apollos Judgment seat.


No^ice is so taken up with the Captain, that he cannot be for me all this
day.


First I will plead he is a corrupter of youth, and turns them from humane
shape into Baboons.


Will no body take pity on a de^olate gam^ster? Will you play with me? will
you?


Secondly, he ^obbes them of their patrimonies.


Come you it'h bl^w jacket, I'll try with you at this, or that, or these.


Thirdly, he pulls away the sweetest nu^ngs from the Muses breasts.


At length well hit, I have found now. Ho. Sir Lauriger, I challenge you at
bull, bear, and horse.


You will be ho^st at school for this. Will not a snatch in the afte^noone
se^ue you, and then buckle to your book again, but you must lavish out the
cream of the morning so prodigally, and hold on thus till noone?


I tell thee, I had rather have this then cream with sugar. I taste my play:
all else is unsavoury to me.


If Mus^us hear of this, Apollos curse will light upon thee.


Apollo is our great Lord. And yet I have heard that (...) loves boys play,
and therefore he still continues a boy.


Peace thou babbling ^auing tongue.


What is he else? I am sure he has no beard.


Thou ignorant ^ondling, that is hieroglificall. His beardless flourishing
youth, signifies the never fading s^me which is gotten by his service.


I, but (...), by your leave, I have read, that Apollo was wont to play at
Quoits.


The gods may be said to Quoite when they cast into the lap of fortune, the
lots and fates of mortal men. This is the moral of it.


I say Apolloplaid at Quoits, as we do. And his play-fellow was young
Cyparissus, a boy about my pitch and years, but that he had not so manly a
look, as my self, but simpered somewhat womanishly.


Cyparissus that ^as turned into a Cypress tree*


Apollo plaid with him, by a good token, their Quoits were knockers, heavier
then horse shoes, I think. For the poor boy was brained with one of them.

Doth not our Ouid Naso,
That never told lye, say so?

A good token? that's a bad token.


O how it gueues n^y heart to think of that honest lad. Ah p^ore ^rissus. When
I learned th^ lesson in Ouid, I could have corn that lease out of my book, for
very grief, that such a mischance should fall out at the worthy exercise of
Quo^ng. Out alas, if my trade did not employ me better, I could weep my
pocket full.


You may take a better lesson thence, then weeping. The meaning of that fable
is, that shrode hoyes must beware of spending their time in play, lest some
mischief befal^ them: Nay lest Apollo himself brain them.


You construe false to us, so you do.

But I say still,

And so I will.

I gather thence and will lay ods,

That sport and play beseems the gods.

Else our good Master Apollo would never himself have plai at Quoits in his
own proper person, with a palt^y boy, like one of us. I have writ this note in
the margin of my book. And I think verily if Ouid were alive again, and
should see my wholesome lines, he would turn them into verse, and add them to
that story.


Ouid had never been so good a Poet, if he had spent his school time idly in
play as you do.


Ouid loved play well. I have heard that he played with Corynna.


How this Lad p^ates? Ludio I tell thee that was no boys play.


By your leave sir, Ouid hath honoured my exercises. He describes in verse our
boys play.

Parna tabella capit ternos vtrinque lapillos,

Twice three stones, set in a crossed square where he wins the game

That can set his three along in a row,

And that is sippeny morrell, I trow,


This boy consters that true, which many a man understood not. Verily thou
read books only where they speak of play.


I do not think that if he were here, he would entreat Apollo to play at
Quoits with me or check stone, or spurnepoint.

Good Sir Lauriger, you are better acquainted with Apollo then I. I pray you
entreat him to play with me this great play day. This is his fat remedy at his
shrouingfeast they say. I challenge him at all games from blowpoint upward to
football, and so on to mumchance, and ticketacke.


How this boys fancy makes him saucy. Is it not enough sir, that you trouble
me thus with your idle chat, but you must be so bold with great Apollo? He
thinks the gods can enjoy no greater bliss then gaming.


Sir, do you hear? rather than sit out, I will give Apollo three of the nine
at Ticketacke. I do not think but I shall take him at a why not every other
game. His mind will be so on the Muses, upon his verses.


Apollo and his Musaeus take you too often with a Why-not at-schoole. You know
what should follow thereupon. Why-not, c.


Threaten me not. I tell thee, no torture can make me bate an ace of my play.
You would not think it, but, as I am true Ludio whenever I am trembling
under the hand of the executioner, If I do but think on my play, then even
then, those back blows, (which others think so rueful) seem to me nothing,
but threshing hens at Shrouetide. He that spend^ his life in play, keeps
Shrouetide all the year.


Belike you think play to be Apollos Shrouetide


I that I do: elsw why play we now in honour o^ Apollo?


I tell thee this our play if it be weighed right, i^ three ounces study, and
but one ounce play. This fla^ of recreation is not kindled without a spark of
diligence. Our playing now is a kind of study, whereas a^ thy seeming study is
nothing but playing or ploddin^ how and where and with whom to play. Thy trade
i^ to be prodigal of (the chiefest riches which is in o^ power) time. Thou art
a very bankrupt of thy own^ time: and love to pull others into the same
losses.


What speak you of losses? He that loses at o^ time may win at another. I
can tell you of o^ young Oleo, he got of Ganeo the Elder, all his poin^
hatband, garters, and a gold ring, and five crown^ in money; and yet in two
hours to see to, see ho^ fortune came with a windlace about again.


Peace thou brat, whose mouth is armed with bale of dice, instead of a stall of
teeth. What prate^ thou of recovering lost rings and money? The shi^ wrack
that thou make is vnrecoverable.

Lost days can never be recalled. Time steals away, a^ thou art a stealer of
time. See now how thou hast i^ croached upon my precious time, whilst I hear
a^ speak, with such a canker of good hours. Awa^ away.


You bid me away, because you dare not play wi^ me.


Dost thou dare me thou elf? I will.


I know you'll venture no money, nor points. must play with you for nothing.
Come on therefore at hide and seek, o^ blind man buff.


Come, I will once boy it again at either for a crash


Why then at bl^ndman buff you shall be first blinded.


Nay sir boy, if you challenge and choose the game too, you must be first
blinded. But what tools have we?


Borrow one of these Gentlewomens masks:


Nay then you will look through the holes. Will you gull me so?


If I once look through the holes, then say Ludio is set in the Pillo^y. but
rather then want ^ew, here take my ga^ter, and tie my sachell about my face.


O with what wicked bombast i^ his sachell slust? I thought it was not true
begotten books, that made the belly of it swell so big.


It has cast calfe now. You must tie me to these winckers.


I had rather tie thee to one of our school posts, or hang our great dic^ary
at thy heel, for a clog to keep thee from gadding to play.


Talk not to me of Dick snary, nor Richard-snary; I care not how little I come
near them. But sir you must have this Morice-bell tied to your point, that I
may hear where you go. Else you will have too much odds of me.


Will you make me act hobby horse, or Master Gingle? For once I will.


Now that is on, come and tie me.


So, you are tied, now I must turn you about thrice. Sic deluditur Ludre.


I do not hear the bell. Lauriger stands still I doubt. Nay gentle
playfellow, you must stir up and down, ^e we shall have no sport.


I Hope to find more game here. O yonder's a ^h (...). I think he is caught in
our net already. So, so, Verily Cup^ hath blinded him for our purpose.


O I have him. I have him. But where is your bell? vnty^ me now (...) your
(...) to be blinded O what ha^d (...) Vndow me, undo me.


I have but the vn^oing of many in my days. But I (...) met with so forward a
guest, that would beg hi^ own undoing.


I have over come it now. What now? He turned to She? (...) Lauriger, me
thinks your looks are grown very long on the sudden. Has he served me thus?


How well art thou seru^d, when such a Nymph is at thy service?


It tho^ be at my service, s^ake thy silken coat, and golden ^and, against my
garters and hat. Lift who shall deal.


Itell thee, I use little plain dealing. I must shuffle and cut too.


Both? Nay that's against law.


Yet will i deal plainly with thee. I have neither skill nor mind to play
with thee.


Can any sweet Nymph be a stranger to Ludio? I have heard that Nymphs love to
play at more games then I know.


I do not refuse, because thou art a stranger, but because thou art our
friend; Thou a^t ours already. What need we spend bi^me upon those wanton
sparrows, that are in our cage already? S^t (...) Ludio, thou art a member of
our fa^il Queen He done gets good acces^e by thee. Go on with all thy thrifty
wares to get in more letters up in our trade. Go to sir G^biano, make him pay
for thy acquaintance.


Gentle goldilockes. I would do so, but that I am now employed against my
wont in studying ^n oration to save my head from a blow, which Apollos
visitation may now bring upon me.


Novice, you know you must appear too.


I have cited him according to law.


What is the matter, think you?


I heard a bird sing (hark in your ear) that there's an accusation against
you for misspending your time with Captain Complement.


I do but as others do. I am not alone.


What strange guest is yon? A female I think. Who but Siren that has made such
turmoils here o^ late. Pr^co have you cited ^er?


She's in my ^owle, I'm glad I have met with her. Dame Siren, thou art
^ndited by the name of Siren for subuerting Apollos subjects; You must along
with me, and appear to answer such matters as shall be objected against you,
on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord Apollo.


Thou arrest me, who have arrested thy betters? I tell thee, I will be there. I
have good friends in Apollos Court. I will not be hired to tarry away. But
before I go, I must deliver a message to you from a great goddess.


A goddess to me?


I^o thee, and thee, and to you all.


Say what thou must, or can.


Hedone, Queen Hedone, sweet Hedone,
Dame natures care, and noblest birth,
The i^y, and crown of heaven, and earth,
The aim, and center of desire,
The fuel of most sacred fire,
By me, and this, and this
She sends you all her bliss.
Among the gods she hath her pla^e,
They all stand gazing on her face.
The clouds d^ from her presence fly,
'Tis sunshine where she casts her eye.
Where are she treads on earth below,
A rose or ^illy up doth grow.
Her breath a gale of spi^ brings:
Mute are the Muses when she sings.
What ere she touches turns to N^ar,
What man, but can, and must affect her?
No heart so hard, but needs must melt,
When once her kindly warmth is felt.
She, she vouchsafe, to call you to her,
And wooing prays you now to woo her.
By study soon, fresh youth doth break,
The fair grow foul, the strong grow weak:
Leave leave this musing bookish trade:
Enjoy your selves before youth fade.
Time must be gone,
Old age creeps on.

She puts her message home, me thinks.


I have arrested her; and I think she will arrest us.


I like her song well, I'll get a copy of it. If Apollo give me leave, I will
have more acquaintance with her. Me thinks this Siren would make a good wife
for my Master, Captain Complement, and so she shall be my Mistress. O fair
Hedone, sweet honey Hedone, more sweet then Marmalet, or Quidony.


Away thou glossing slatterer. We are no game for thee. Let us about our
business. Praeco do your office, carry her away. Let her chant this song
before Apollo. The Muses will out-sing her, and tear her s^earing locks. I
will go cite Slug.


GEntle sir Gingle, the flower of my school, return my thanks to the
honourable Dame Indulgence thy high deserving Mother, for the glittering token
the sent me. I shall deserve it in my readiness to accomplish thee. But where
ended we yesterday?


You were instructing me how to salute a Lady, or so, if she had a Monkey, or
so, and wept, or so.


This is but so, so.


In case you find a Lady weeping and ^ournfull, for that her M^nkey is sick
of the mum^, (...) say.


Fair ^ady weep not for your Monkey.


This is bare and vulgar. Rather ^sh your salutation thus. (...) (...)
Clarid^na.


^t as can be. T^ is Clarid^na was courted by the Knight of the sun. My
Mother has ^ad that book to me. Si^ your s^le is very h^h and lo^.


Ves sir, my master and I have gone over many ^s high a stile, when we went to
rob orchards for our dinners.


Twice d^ble worthy dubbed Maddaine --


Twice d^ble dubbed. What doth she wear a double^ (...) Ladies ^e to wear
doublets now?


You vnde stand not. There was of late years a fashion, when h^ vir, hic
mulier were in request. But gentle Gingle, though thou dost stand under me, yet
thou dost not understand me. Twice doubly because she hath two (...) to her
honour. The full a title of law which she hath from ^et ^u band who was dubbed
Knight with an vnbloody sword. The second The second What ^'st. h^m h^, the
second. Oh I have it, because the is rich^ in clothes then ^n jointer. But
proc^ we in your approach.


Oh s^ you have wonderfully (...) ^dme.


I have wipe ^and cla^d the dull spectacle of thy intellect with the Nap^ of my
Comment.


Indeed now me thinks ^espye her clearly w^ put a looking-glasse. But how
should I forbid her to weep?


To weep? Madame I forbid the ba^es between you and s^ow.


I, the Knights name Sorrow?


Perhaps he's a o^y knight, (like my master)


What Imp. you are too nimble. Are you so saucy to step before me?


(I was sane to step before him when we stole hens together, and he put me
fir^ into the henn-^oost.)


Truly Captain me thinks Implement suggests very (...) would willingly
forbid those banes.


Forbidding banes? Away with this forbidding banes. It is a bane^ull ominous
word, not besitting the wooing (...). You shall mould all up in the sine pull
past of poetry thus.

Twice double worthy dubbed Madame,

Whose virtues not the longest tongue can sadome.


I think La^es garments are measured by th'^ll and by the yard, but measuring
their virtues by the ^adome, I never heard o^ before.


Twice double worthy dubbed Madame, Whose long tongue no man can sadome.


O dismal. O dangerous! Take heed of stumbling so with your tongue when you
speak of female tongues. Whose virtues not the longest tongue can fadome.


Whose virtues not the longest tongue can fadome.


Right and straight. Then on.

Souse not thy glittering globy eyne

In d eary teary salt sea brine.


Globy eyne? What's that?


Kno^st thou not what globy is? I perceive then thou a^ no traveller, thou hast
not (as I have done) travelled about the globe of the earth. Know not what
eyne be? I see thou art no Poet, thou hast never read Chau^r. Hast thou never
heard of eyne tw^ine?


Souse not. This word will not down with me.


Mr. Gingles queasy slomacke cannot digest souse.


The Lady will think, I use to converse with Tripewiues, if I talk to her of
souse.


Mr you once courted a sousing Dame, (a fulsome Kitchinwench.)


Peace thou squeaking pig; or else the bandogs of these hands shall lug thy
lagging ears. Souse not thy globyeyne. I tell thee this is not such as it is
vulgarly taken. It is not a butcherly word, it is not descended from the Tripe
wife, nor hath it affinity with the fryingpan.


Nor did it ever hang cheek by iole with a black pudding.


Mark the Philosophy of the phrase. The roaring dashing element, the sea is
salt, and brine is salt, and trickling tears are s^lt.


And P. I. S. is salt.


The sea, the brine, the tears, the tears, the brine, the sea. Why may they
not all three thus dashing, soaking, soucing lye? It is a martial word. I use
it often my self, I tell thee.


I too often when you tell me you'll give me a souse on the ear.


Souse not, c. Fit. wondrous fit, as my persumed glove for my sweethand. It
she wept for sorrow before, I shall now make her weep for joy to hear this
eloquence.


But my Masters, you leave the poor Monkey too long in distress. Heelle dye
o'th Mumpes, unless we relieve him the sooner.


'Tis true. Pray go on. I am to say your Monkey will recover. Master Prompter
do your part.


Then thus. Your sour legged, two-leg'd, Manimitating, two-handed, long-tayled
play fellow, shall be readuanced to his pristine integrity of limbs.


He had need put in sound of wind and limb, for the Mumps lay siege to his
throat, and breed more danger to his weazand, then to his ten bones.


Two-foot, foure-foot? how can that be? Hath he six feet?


Six feet? six to one my Master puts the trick of the louse upon him. I have
known when he has blown them in a quill upon better men this this.


Thou art not worthy to be numbered among the two-footed, but rather art to be
imbased unto the foure-footed. If thou dost not understand how Apes and
Monkeyes are two-leg'd and two-handed; sometime they creep on all four. Imp.
show him how, sometime they stalk on tiptoe. Thus.


If I had bin an Ape I should have climbed plumtrees bravely.


Let me see how you can imitate this.


Sometime they trace on all four thus.


Sometime they ride upon a mastiff dog thus. I want nothing now but my
whip to keep this Lollard hound in awe.


Come off Imp. Enough of this. We will send him hereafter for instruction to
Paris Garden, where he shall learn not only Apetrickes, but the whipping o^
blind Bears.


Paris Garden? O sin^l Paris they say is a ^ne City in France. I am glad he
will send me thither. No man can be a complete Gentleman till he have learnt
their cringes and crinkling in the hams: which is in excellent request to the
heavens now adays.


Good sir, I hope my self, and such men of worth as I, have transported thence
already plentiful loads of this French ware, that you shall save the labour
and cost of living there at their dear Ordinaries and precious
dancing-schooles, you must therefore in your stipend to me allow me, for that
which I spent among Counts, Nobles, Knights and Monsiers there; sometime it'h
five pound Ordinary, I tell you.


An horrible profitable lye My Master ne'er dyn'd there but with O^llers and
Vintners boys.


I tell you it cost me sour Nobles to the Usher of the dancing school to
learn one trick, which they cal Le Turn fuseau It wheels a man about, as a
boy does a stone in a ho^pe, and makes him appear as round and uniform, as a
loyne^s turned bed post.


I pray you learn me that whi^ legig trick.


You are not come to that. Be not so hasty, you are yet but in the Rudiments,
and to tell you plain, you must refund to me some charge for other proficiency
before we aspire so high.

There was another vaulting trick called the ^ur.


The base vulgar in English call it the hoister.


It lifts a man up til^ he grow less and less like a Hawke after a Heron.
Shaw. It cost me. Let me see.


how much?


Upon mine honour thirty Crowns.


I think it was but twenty.


By your leave master, I know better then you. Do not I keep your Count
Book? I'm sure 'twa^ that week that you bought the Jewellers rich Diamond
that was refused by so many Nobles. They could not reach the price of it.


O it was the late Queen Mothers Jewel. Thou didstill thou forgetful brat to
leave it behind. I should have worn it at this public show. All Parnossus
would have admired it.


Master, you lost the key of your Cabinet. I durst not break it open (The
devil a Jewel we have, but one that was bought of a Peddler, and in the
Country Towns he makes a great show with it at Bear. baitings, but in such
civil places as this is, he durst not be seen with it.)


I pray you when I am in the humour of buying Jewels, let me have the refusal of
it.


Thou shalt, because thou art an ingenious Gentleman (...) Imp. Remember to set
down a caveat in the Margent of my Inuentary, that no man el^e ^y so much as
look on it or have any price set of it.


M^ster Gingle I pray you pay me ten groars forentring this Caveat in mine
^ffice. My see my see sir.


Come to me at my lod^ (...), and I will lay ^alt on this birds ^yle dor fear
o^ flyingg away.


I tell you Master Gingle. It will go near to cost you the manner of
Foolingham.


Let oaks and lands fly. I mean to gl^tter bright in Diamond* dearly dight.


You must add.

That men and dames may gaze, and say,

Wh^t (...) is that, that glides along this way?


What starts is that, c O excell^ All the world could never have furnished me
with such a Tutor.


Say rat er all the habitable circumference of this muddy masly earthy globe
could not have afforded and suppeditated unto me so melli^uous an
Indoctrinator, as is the curious Captain Complement.


O that I could by Metamorphasis be transformed into this eloquent man.


Thou had better be transformed with Apuleius ^o a golden Ass.


I tell thee I have written a large book of instructions how a man should
wear his clothes, on which side his p^e should lye in his pocket, which
^ocking he should draw on first upon ominous days.


Indeed (...) I have heard you often tell of a man that brake his leg because
he pulled on his left stocking first on one of the dog days.


I sir, and there was another, that had the toothach seven years after,
because he pic^t his teeth with the south end of his picktooth, in stead of the
north, while he was in his chamber meditating a discourse to be offred up
before a beny of Ladies.


Is there south and no^n a picktooth?


I, it was touched with a loadstone.


I would rather have picked my teeth with my knife thus, then have run into
such a mischief.


What say you? what do you? do you wear a knife about you?


I'm sure it cost me a Mark, and I got mine arms graven upon the blade,
three hobby-horses or, prancing in a field* or, b^idled and saddled argent.


Then I must n^s tell you my mind. I hoped well that you would prove under my
hands, but now I doubt you are no Gentleman, I fear you le never prove
fashionable, I will rather employ my pains about other my scholars who have
vowed never to wear knives.

What? wear a knife. Nay I have done with you.


Nay, good sir, I pray you do not cast me off, I'll rather cast away this
clownish tool.


I may take it up and wear it. No knife can wound my gentry.


We burn day light. I must hast, and muster up my friends and advocates to
plead for me in this Court. Sir Imp. run to Mistress Gingle, tell her,
now 'tis time.


I will be your Remembrancer to her: She shall protect you, else she is no
mother for me.


I Have bin mending my hedges, which the scurvy boy Ludio broke down. And now
when I would rest at home, and take my nooning-nap, I must be vexed with my
son, my wretched son. They say that Apollo keeps visitation to day. I will
lay my son at his Palace gate, perhaps this feast day we may get some
favour, some drop of his clemency.


IV. ge Rubbish What Jug? bring away the looking gla^e. Thou dirty Rubbish,
thy singers have defiled the lace of my Cuffs. Will not cuffing about the
ears make you more cleanly?


The lace is so thick, that I was fain to tug hard at it. I know not what
can foul it, unless the smoothing-iron cast a rusty colour through the paper


Out upon thee for an old rusty liar. The glass* Hold it on the other side.
You know I do not love to behold that moule on this cheek. Thou spiteful
baggage, more yet on the left hand. Is that the left hand?


Here's my left hand.


I, but the other side is my left hand. You must conforme your eyes and hands
to your* Mistress, and forget which is your own right or left. Does my Veil
hang in true proportion?


I can say nothing ^or any portion, but in hangs just behind you.


Unless I be set all in print, the Poetical Mus^ will make times on me, when
they see me in A^ Judgment Hall. But Jug, what had my son to breakfast
this morning?


A Pullets wing.


That's not forsooth. What nothing else?


Forsooth a piece of Pie too But so sooth Mistress, if you give me leave, I'll
tell you what they say o^ him.


What? who? Why?


Marry forsooth P^ponus, and others eke also d^ say, if you feed him so much,
that he will never p^u: a scholar.


Prove scholar? Do they think my child is so low borne as to be made a ^y
scholar? Shall such a keen refined w^t be dul'd and imbased, by plodding on a
book? What is Philoponus but a Bookeworme, an Inkhorn squirt, a botching
patcher of Latin shred^ What is this learning, but a little gibberish in the
tongue, a sheepish look in the face, and penniless famine in the purse? I he
more scholar a young man is, the less like to speed of a rich wife. I will
have my son the mark and wish of the most renowned Dames.


I do not so hate scholars, but that I could ^ne in my heart to ma^y Phil^us
at a venture.


I will, as man^erly as I may, tell Apollo that it is an honour to his school,
that such a one as my son was of it, though but for a taste of the Muses dish,
a gentle touch of the verge of their garment. I, but is my Coach ready?


One of the horses is very unruly, the Coachman. talks like a rogue, and says
that nothing but a wise will tame him.


This lewd horse-rubbers tongue must be tamed I doubt he is three quarters
drunk.


That's no news.


I must away, the hour runs with swifter race then my horses.


Keep on thy way, dost thou not see? hold on that path. See thou not how my
staff doth wise thee the way? I think thou came backward into the world,
that now art damned to this crab-like pace. Shall I never be rid of this office?
So: stand still Now me thinks I see the portch of great Apollos temple. O
great Apollo, if my son have thus deserved to be punished, yet what hath
guiltless Geron, what hath he offended?


O. terg. ollota nodra^. (...).


Tnou dost well to humble thy self before great Apollo. But why to pardon us?
Why me?


Rethaf, O. rethaf.


What say thou to thy Father?


Ti. saw. ruoy. tlaf.


What say thou? Was it my fault?


Voy. tes. em. ta. ot. ih, a koob.


Did I set you (...) (...) ^high a book? You were too proud of your (...), and
would needs slide over the ^udiments, and leap at first into an higher form,
then your capacity would reach unto.


(...). rehtom. Im. ^thom.


Thy Mother, thy Mother. I, it is true, thy Mother would needs have it so. I
must needs say 'twas her fault, not mine. She (...) ioggd me, and told me,
that her Rowland was as good a scholar, as his Master, and that the (...) est
book did best befit his ^gh (...) (...) (...) now (...) thy long long (...) ^
^nance unto me, then to thy ^ two years have I bin (...) ^ at home. It grieves
g^ates m^e (...) (...) (...) this backward language imposed by Apollos doom on
my wretched child. It wounds mine eyes to see these backward steps. And yet
remains a (...) (...) for me,

To be the scorn and by word of this pla^e.
Old Gerons ouer-forward child
Retorted fo^ his ^astinesse,
Is made the prou^ (...) of these times.
And likened to soon ^ipe soon ^otten fruit*
(...) how long time remains yet vnexpir'd
(...) this unnatural preposterous task?
(...) ^o. Rey. Sa^. Norey.
(...) I, so, it is one whole livelong year.
^ich thy poor father (spent with tears and grief)
^arce hopes now to ou^last. Alas
The candle of my days is almost spent,
It waueth in th^ snufte, and little oil
Is left to make it flame.
And yet alas too soon these blasts of sighs
Will puff it out* ^ese tears will drown it quite.

Rethaf. reed. Rethaf.


What say thou my dear son, too dear to me, that hast me cost so deep a
punishment.


Tel. su. geb so. ol^ pa.


Well What shall we beg of Apollo?


Ot, nodrap. su. sibt. ^ey.


To pardon this year to us, and release thee? I fear thy wishes are far
larger then ou^ hopes.


Irr^m. ollopa.


Merry Apollo? I doubt his ears are stopped, and I have heard the gods v^e not
to recall their dooms, which they have once pronounced.


Keps. o^ suesu^n.


What? would thou have me speak to Musaeus Apollos Priest, to intercede for
thee for this remission?


Os ot. mih.


IN good time here he comes forth.
But son I dare not approach to him.
O what a trembling reverence doth possess
My limbs, and all benums my chill cold blood,
When I behold his awful gravity.
Let us retire beside this shady tree
This mossy ban^ke will rest my weary limbs,
And give me time to recollect my spirits.

Grave guide of ^ender youth, Interpreter
Of great Apollos laws chief secretary
Unto the learned Muses, all your words
Are lodged safe in this laborious breast.
Think your command's no sooner said then done*

Careful Philoponus, I approve your pains
And have already recommended you
Unto Apollos self. O that the rest
Of those, that undertake this worthy task^,
Pretending to the liberal sciences,
Could so acquit themselves.
But (...) all seeing (...) in circling round
About bot^ Hemispheares of this large world,
Hath spied that some (O too too great a sum)
Have s^ly crept within the verge and pa^
Of his dominions. In truth they strangers are,
Nay enemies and rebels to his laws;
Yet would be counted Natiues of his school,
By them his tender plants corrupted are,
Distorted, brui^ed, hindered of their growth.
Think they that these ^oundations have bin l^
These Cells erected, and those Temples dight
To harbour such foul el^es? Shall snorting sloa^
Think here to nestle, fixed to his bed,
As is the slow-pac'd snail unto his shell?
Shall wanton pleasure think to revel ^ere?
Shall toying apish p^ating Complement
Outface the Muses, tear Apollos locks,
Entice away the tender brood, with shows
Of empty words, and bubbles vanishing?
Shall shifting sharks defraud their innocence?
Shall hasty heady Novices outl^ap their masters lo^,
Presuming on their wit, and undertake
To read a lecture to their teacher? No.
'Tis well that some have heretofore for this
Bin made examples of such hastiness.
Nay let them backward go, that thus have run.

Alas poor child, I see, he means thee.
Have pity on us great Apoll^s Priest.
Worthy Philoponus entreat Mus^us for my child.

Does your child desire so much?


D^g. ris keps. ros. em.


Speak for him good sir.


His language is so harsh, that I will speak, if it be but to rid my ears of
this preposterous sound. Venerable Mus^us. May it please our Lord Apollo, now
after two years penance to remit the remaining year.


If there be evidence that in this time, he hath retired and plied what
formerly he overslipped in his rudiments.


My self can partly witness that.


It may be that Apollo will consider him. But let us hast up to Per^assus top.
The time is come, the Court must now begin.


My heart is warm with hope to follow them.


STill I say and swear upon my virtues, that you are mistaken. Have you bin so
long my scholar, and are you yet unacquainted with the Callender of my stipend
book?


My bargain was to allow you five crowns a month, and will you now wire-draw
me to thirteen months in the year? When I was Apollos scholar, (...) sure
Musaeus reckoned but quarterly, (...) (...) but twelve months in the year.


Apollos Priest must follow his Masters walk, the suns yearly passage
through the twelve signs of the Zodiake. I will have nothing to do with
Astronomy.


I, but our Almanacs every year reckon but twelve months.


What dost thou tell me of Almanacs? Vsurer^ go by the Almana^ke. I scorn
that griping trade. My month is (...) weeks ^ust, you may remember them by
the changing your shirts, every fourth shirt determines my pay.


I reckon (...) month by one shirt.


Who shall be ^udge between us?


Judge between us? Am not I thine instructor* I'll be thy judge. For every one
of my months I te^ch thee a several strain of Courtesy And so thou hast of
me in the year, documents accordingly, thirteen to the dozen.


My Masters father was a Baker, and therefore he allows an odd call of
courtesy, nea^ly chipt.


Si^a Imp. draw out the Catalogue and number them.


The first month, the Semicircle.


I, with my hat thus. To make just half a circumference.


Remember always the drop withal.


In my motion, my gold hatband must fall down, thus.


I cry fallings: this is my see, I trow.


It is an excellent emblem, and signifies that for love of your friend, you
will cast away your gold, and trample it under your feet, and that's the reason
that Gentlemen now adays wear their hatbands loose. Register proceed.


The second month the Calue-claspe.


Perform it with Imp. that I may view you the better. Do you remember that in
arching your arm over his shoulder, you must never touch his band or garment
behind, but apprehend the calfe with your first touch entirely.


I warrant you, I am old dog at that.


If I had known you had bin an old dog, I would not have trusted you with my
Calfe. Ba.


And before I dismiss the calfe, I give it the gentle nip or prasye thus.


Ba, ba. No Butcher nips a Calfe more neatly in the rump.


Which shows your fervency of love, that you are loath to be unclasped from
your friends intimity.


I have it to a hai^e.


Register walk on your monthly pace.


The third month, the gentle shrug.


I must tell you, you have not got that perfect yet.


Not my shrug sir? That was my last lesson.


Indeed sir I was by, when Signior Gosso in that action smiled, and asked if
you were not lousy.


O there's your fault, gentle Gingle. A hundred to one you shrugged but with
one shoulder.


I would advise you hereafter to shrug by a looking-glasse, that you may see
after what manner you do it.


Indeed my looking-glasse is broken with dancing with it in my hand, to mark
the postures of my face when I capered. But I'll buy another.


Nay, you must buy two, that one may reflect upon the other, and then may you
at once see your motion in your shrug both before and behind.


O excellent! for this double glass, I'll give you a double fee. But, I pray
you sir, wherein is my shrug faulty?


My dear scholar, thou must know, there are diverse kinds of shrugges, there
is the Misers shrug, and that is accompanied with the scratching of the
elbow: the^e is the Beggars shrug, and that's done with a quick motion,
^atching, to make a six* footed bandogge leave his hold.


My Master and I act that at home sometimes, when we are loath to part with an
old friend, our linen.


There is a winter shrug, and that's performed with the hands ensconced in a
Must, a Foxe-surr'd co^ close gi^t. There is a drowsy shrug, and that
sometime befalls a gallant, when he has set up al night at Card^, and saved the
pulling off his boo^es. This shrug is commonly performed with displaying out
the arms, and yawn^ng with the mouth, which represents a kind of ^ibbards
face. And lastly, there is a gentle Italian shrug.


I pray you sir let me go with you Let me see. The Misers shrug, the winter
shrug, the drowsy shrug, the lousy shrug. I shall hardly carry away all
these.


Nay, you must carry away none of these. You must leave them all behind you.
The last and only gentle shrug, is your Italian shrug.


O the Italian shrug. The^e 'tis. How's that? I shrug with desire to learn
it.


That shrug is performed by lifting up both shoulders exactly together with
one uniform motion, somewhat swift, and holding them a while in suspense, with
the neck somewhat couching, and the chin thrust out, then the shoulders are
to be let down again, as it were by a double pulley, with a slow motion,
which by degrees vanishes. And if you will accomplish it with a grace, you
must all the while cast your eyes into a leering posture.


O excellent school of virtue! But when must I use this shrug?


Upon diverse occurring cases, very vsefully. But especially when you are asked
a question, which you cannot deny with safety, nor assent unto with honour. In
such a tw^-forked dilemma, the shrug relieves you, and you come off with
reputation of wisdom.


This is an oracle to me, I pray you expound by example.


Put case that some fair and honourable Lady were mentioned at the Table, and
thereupon some busy curious Gentleman should ask you whether there past no
terms of love between you and her. To deny it, were a derogation from your
honou^. To love or be beloved is honourable. For you to acknowledge it, were
perhaps dangerous. Some of the company may be your Rival, and so rusty iron
may leap out of the Ecle-skin, and 'pricke your skin. Thus Venus may be
exchanged for Mars. And of the two, hes the most dangerous companion to a mans
naked side. One shrug quits all this, by which you seem to say, I am not to
be examined upon this Intergatory. I stand upon my guard, all armed in silent
wisdom.


Incomparable dogments. Mus^us never taught me so good a lesson.


But high time it is for us to appear, the Session is begun by this. The
villain Pr^co i^ like death, and will spare none. Me think^ I hea^e him
(...), Captain Complement appear. Go Coach it up with your Mother. I and my


will march up the hill on foot. Here^ir, I appear sir.


Here sir, at hand.


SEe how thy soul was sna^'d with sophistry.
No Author here alleged for Hedone,
But quels those poisons with their Antidotes.
Mark Tully in that place doth smoothly plead
For youthful Calius, so to palliate
His Clients true objected vanities.
There Tully plaid the Lawyer for his fee.
Behold him now a sage Philosopher:
Discoursing of Old Age, he there concludes,
In voluptatis regno virtutem non posse ^onsistere,
That virtue cannot stand where pleasure reigns.
(...) was a wanton Epicure,
A glossing Poet, but ^wd Moralist:
He sold his soul to Uenus and her son,
Such writers we for stile, not matter read.
Siren from Terence pleads, that in young men
Deep quaffing, roating, whooring, is no fault.
Doth not that Poet represent the par^s,
The passions, and several enormities
Of cockering doting fathers, of lewd sons,
Of cheating slaves, and cogging parasites?
Thus he describes the vices of those times,
That readers might them hate, no^ imitate.
S^, Comique Poets set out drunkenness
In him that pleads for (...), and the while
Doth swagger, stagger, swallow, wallow, snort,
The soul* that this picture is, the more
That swinish vice breeds loathing of it self.
If I would on a Comique slage display
Virtue in conflict stoutly labouring,
And then in conquest honoured by (...);
First would I personate her enemy
In some such busy guiles and forgery,
As this lewd Siren represents to thee.
The rest of Authors, Motives, Arguments,
Which in that letter you so stood upon,
Are of no better stamp, as I have shown.
And can fa^re more at large.
But why should I distrust thy judgment so?

You have, ^udicious Philoponus,
More hardly in the grove, more briefly here,
Dispel'd those mists, which that enchanting witch
Had cast before mine eyes. I see, I see
The light of reason, then eclipsed quite,
But now reuiueing my recovered sight.
O how I loath, and hate that iug^ling hand,
That wrote, or ^each't to me these baleful lines.
What sacrifice to Virtue can I yield
More ^r, then thus to tear that ^obe, wherein
That poison was conveyed, to be to me
As was the deadly shirt to Hercules?
So would I also her.

Your best revenge on her will be henceforth, No more to speak with her by
word or pen, Weomens fair words work deep with passive men


What heaps of thanks owe I, and cannot pay, To such a faithful other self,
whose hand Hath reached forth that Ariadnes thread Which me out of this
Labyrinth hath led.


Com^ let us up into Apollos Court. The Session (...) long since begun. There
shall you more confirm your resolution, by hea^ing Apollo himself in his
judgment seat.


I Tell thee again, I have no great hope of it. You have suffered so many
repulses, that if I were in your case -- Where is he. So ho. Come along, mend
your pace. What? have you the gout?


Alas in foot, and hand too. My father and grandsite had so.


Stand up for shame. Else how will you appear in Apollos presence, so much as
to present your request.


Well. I'll stretch my limbs so far, though I be already tyred with ou^ long
journey.


A long journey from your Cottage to Apollos Court? when your Tent is fixed but
on the other side of the wall. A man may fling a horse loase so far.


I'll rather be fed with horse bread, then travail so far again to fetch
whitebread. But I pray you let us sit down. I shall talk much wiser, sitting
then standing.


Why so?


Do not Judges sit^ as now Apollo does there. And I hope they are wiser, then
those that stand to hear them.


I judge standing, that thou hast littl^ understanding that art such an enemy
to standing.


But sir Drud^, why do you discourage me from hope of admittance?


The truth is, I see no great reason why you should be admitted. I'm su^e for
these seven years, every visitation day you have bin shut out of doors by
Musaeus as soon as ever he espied you lying upon the bench in Apollos Court.
And for the most part, when your name hath bin called aloud by P^co, you have
bin asleep, and were fain to be ioggd and shook again before you would
answer.

Out upon thee, what art thou in a L^thargy? I think thy mother was asleep
when thou wast begotten. So by. So by. I tell thee again, after seven
repulses, why shouldest thou knock at Apollos gate.


I dare not knock at this gate* the hammer that hangs on it, is so cold and
heavy. And why should I disquiet the Muses with such a noise? Perhaps some of
them are asleep in Apollos lap.


Thou Dormouse, thou liu^st in a perpetual winter: think thou them like to
thee?


I cannot climb this hill. I pray fetch Apollo hither. Or be you Apollo.


What shall Drude be so bold. No. But say what thou can. Apollo sees and
hears all things in all places.


Why then Apollo. Drudo, I crave admittance.


What is your claim?


I am the top of my kin. I am Slim Slugge, Sluggy Sluggorum.


What's that to your plea? Are you a kin to the Muses.


I have long prescription time out of time. I have bin entertain d evermore by
some of Apollos prentices. They have kept me and sed me in their chambers, and
hugged me in their bed. I never wanted among them, those that would rather rest
with me in a cold morning, then dance after the Muses pipe with benumbed hands
and chattering teeth.


All Wines have some ^ees,

All Bee-hiues some D^oanes.

Think thou that such prescription shall get thee admittance?


I am weary of sitting. I think it were better for me to lye down upon this
bank. I shall talk much wiser yet when my head lies lower then my heals, for
then all my spirits and wi^s sink down into my brain. So ^'le tell thee now
what learned counsel I gave to a young scholar, when he told me that his
Master chid him for keeping his bed. Why (quoth I to him) then answer your
Master, I pray you sin, would you have me ^ll my bed? your law, that you give
us, is, Nil dabis, aut vendes. --


Very learnedly applied to the purpose.


When I read lecture to my auditors. --


Surely then thou giu'st a deep nod at every s^ point.


I enjoin them, Sell your Books, sell your Inkehornes, sell your
Candlesticks, sell your Points, but never sell your beds. The bed is the seat
and throne of a scholar. For contemplation requires quietness. And when is a
man more quiet, then when he is in (...) bed? Ergo.


Spoken like a Philosopher, but of the Epicures sect.


Nay you shall have Philosophy up to the elbows. The bed is the beginning and
end of a man. When we come into the world, are not our Mothers said to be
brought to bed? When we dye, are not we on our death bed? Whilst we live, when
are we more innocent then when we are asleep in our bed? then we think no
body any hurt. When are mischiefs done by men, but when they are awake, and
employ themselves most busily? Ergo.


It seems so by thee, for thou art seldom awake thus long, but to do some
such mischief at to talk in this manner.


The best Philosophers have said, and I have heard it in Apollos school. Motus
fit propter quietem. Nature intends motion, that it may attain rest. And all
scholars know, that what is desired, as the end, is better then that, which is
ordained as the means to it.


Nay siria, the best of them say, that motion is better then rest. For the
heavens move continually, and the earth, which is the dregs of the world, that
rests, and slugs like thee. The day is for labour, and the night for rest. And
I hope the day is far better then the night. Ergo.


Well. I have all the earth on my side: I'm safe enough. Go you and dance
after the stars. I'll hold my rest here.


Enough of this Philosophy. Thou lolling lubber, lasy Bough, get up, Rise old
huncks, rise drunken Bear, or I'll go in without thee.


A Bear? no. I'm a worthier beast, by my hardly rising. I am like an
Elephant.


I wood thou had a Castle upon thy back, then I wood hang thee out for a
sign, and it should be called the drowsy Inn. Come away, your name it
called ere this at the Session, and Prac^ woon't savour you. You will be in,
forty Marks in issues.


My turn is always last.


S^spbu. Scopas. Come away with the Cull^. Lay that Carpet smoother. When were
these Cushions brushed. Sir. ha?


I have heard say, that too much brushing will we are them out.


Thou Lozell. Hath Slugge infected you? Why do you give such kind
entertainment to that cobwebbe?


It shall have Tom Drums entertainment. A flap with a Fox tail.


For the preparing this Judgment seat. I pronounce judgment of banishment
against all presumptuous Cobwebbes. The Court will rise, and come upon us ere
we are aware. Scopas go see how forward they are, and bring away the
Frankincense.


where are they, tha^ay that Iudio is the Canker of the school? I have
pronounced a knocking Apology before Apollo and all his Court.


What, nimble Ludio, is the Session so far on?


Unto thee, O Thur^er, I am the Nuntio, to tell thee, that Apollo and his
Actors are by this time come to Actus quintus, Scena qua^ a. Pr^o told me they
will all com^ down hither to Act Scen^ ^ima.


I shall be ready for them. But I pr^, I^dio, how did Mistress Gingle behave
her self?


She neue^ ^sed crying out to Apollo, O the ^enerous Captain Complement! O
that he may bold ^is ^enement. Apollo himsel^ was fain to command her silence.


Did not Siren creep into the souls of the auditory?


My friend Siren slid on smoothly, like my feet upon the ice. I think she
has unbent Apollos bow. She will have a good day of it, I hope. Young Gingle in
his trial stood much upon his gentry, and carried himself like a fine dancing
Courtier. When I heard Slugge called, I thought we should tarry long, and so
away came peelegarlicke Ludio, to get him a room before hand here.


But thou tell me nothing all this while of thy own trial. Were you not
put to it shrewdly?


I trow I put Apollo and all his Muses to it. There can no sentence pass
against me. My defence was so strong and vnanswerable.


I am sorry that my office called me away from hearing you, will you do me
the honour to impart to me some of your discourse?


I have it here ^grossed and recorded.


I wonder how you could borrow so much time from play, as to compose so large a
declaration?


I have a ^end in a corner, I teach him the knacks of gaining, how to cut a bum
card, how to help a dye, and such like, and he in kind requi^all has drawn
an Apology for me in form of Law, according to the stile or Apollos Court.


Could you before all them pronounce it lustily, as if it had bin your own
making?


I have a certain virtue called audacity. I hat did bear me our where my wit
or memory failed.


I ^ng to hear some of it. Can you say it?


So, ^o: As we do our lessons, with a casting a leer eye sometime upon my
paper.


It is l^ge. I will n^ (...) ^le thee to say it over. Only read I pray you
some of the principal points.


I tell thee here be above a dozen of points. You sh^l have a touch of the
fore-point thus.


I have known the time when you have had neither fore not ^d point, when you
have returned from ^purne point.


First, I looked gravely like Cato, and withal, cheerfully like Pu^rilis And
then to show what confidence I had in my cause, I strok't up my foretop with
the comb of my finders thus. My sister had sprinkled it with rose water, and
my lips too, to make my Rhetoric the sweeter.


No doubt rose water added a sweet sound to your words.


Then I made ob^ysance thrice, with a nimble low stoop which I learned when we
plaid at Duck Fryer. Then (...) ^m, ^em to clear my voice, and to provoke the
Auditory to answer me with their gentle expectation.


Here is a large Entry to a low house.


Then displaying my naked protesting hands, I said. O thou lovely Lord of
learning, beauteous, bounteous Apollo.

O thou ever moving Phoebus,
Whose golden locks and silver bow,
Embellish heaven and earth below.
O ye assistant sisters ^ne,
Attend this just de^ence of mine.
What law, what justice, what reason can pronounce a against Ludio the sentence
of expulsion? Is not Apollos School stiled ladus literarius. Is it not Sc^ola
from (...) otium, remedy, play, relaxation? What talk we of Apollos Court. The
whole world is made free of Ludios Trade, and dances after his pipe.

What is our life but a game, wherein some win, some lose, some idly look
on, some have good fortune, and will not be known of their winnings, others
have bad luck, and curse their stars and fates; Some cheat and ^ke, and
others are befooled?

All Dame Natures lump is a true Ludio. If you banish Ludio, you must banish
the heavens and elements.


What? is this brat become a Philosopher?


The highest fixed stars, what do they all the year but dan^e their
measures, and kee^ there^ their stately distances, and, to show their mirth and
wantonness, they with their glaring eyes twinckle on their spectators. The
Planets have variety of dances, sometime grave Pauins, otherwhile ^mble G^rds.


^e Sellingers round.


Now a pace forward, now retiring backward.


Like a new Corranto.


What say thou Thuriger? did not I play the Astronomer well?


Better then sixteen Almanac^e-makers, with all their Sextile aspects, and
siery triplicities.


But now sir here was I put to my trumpes, when I came to bring in our Lord
Phoebus himself for an example, in my own defence, in his own presence. Th^
^fore I begun with c^auing pardon. O Maies^ Lord of the day, Moderator of the
year, R^ng-leader of all the glittering lamps; give poor Ludio leave to show
that in the work o^ thy bright Regiment, thou can not be without him. Dost
thou not all the year long recreate thy self by taking the air about the
hill of heaven in thy gilded Caroch, drawn with four prancing horses?


Some mortals now adays have in their Coach more horses then Don* P^oebus.


In this thy yearly journey thou art so frolic every spring, that thou gives
our mother earth a green ^owne.


That is (our Virgins say)
A pretty kind of play.

And in thy iournall circle when thou come and go, every day and night,
me thinks thou play at (...)* peep, and Hide and seek.

All night it our all hid. But in the day
We seek about. For what, say I, but play?

O Impudency! How durst thou base slay, skip thus high into Apollos face.
Did thou not fear to be pierced through with the least dart of his beams?


The truth is, one of Apollos learned Council had like to pulled me down,
when he told me that it was against law to produce the Judge for a witness.
Else I had gone on to allege his playing at Quoits with Cyparissus.


He would have cond you small thank for that. But, how did our Lord Apollo
look upon you all this while?


Me thought he put his hand toward his quiver, and withal, shaked his golden
locks. Then thought I, 'twas time for me to glide down lower, and talk of
Lady Lu^a. Mistress Moon (quoth I) what is her monthly task, but to run a
gossipping throughout all the twelve signs in the high street of the
Zodiac?.


The sign of the Ram, the Bull: the Lion, and the rest, they are Taverns set
up by Bacchus, for the gods to feast in. Are they not?.


She knocks at every door, tarryes two days at the least in each of those
houses. And as the Sun courts her, she makes cur^es in her round walk,
sometimes ba^fully putting on her Mask.


That is in conjunction.


Otherwhile she shows her half face very demurely.


Half moon; like my cheese.


And after that appears her broad Owls face, to allure Endymion to be in love
with her.


The Shepherd with the bu^h of thorns has prevented sleepy Endymion, and
gotten up thit^ before him.


The waives in the sea, what do they, but play at truss and leapsrogge on one
another back? The winds in the are perform one perpetual exercise, and that
is blow-point.


Sometimes they blow the points of ^eeples, and this is a very high point,
worth consideration.


They play very merrily: and therefore we often hear them ^g and whis^le.


Leave o^ now your rehearsal Ludio. Why pr^ted you of the stars and winde^?
What's this to you, and to those creatures that have bound themselves to the
school trade? Do the Mules play?


Yes undoubtedly, the Nine Muses play at Nineholes: every Muse hath her hole


Yes, and every Hate hath her Muse. But what then becomea o^ the (...) h^e?


That's a great one (...) Apollo their Master and ours.


Think t^ou, that Apollo will be moved with these reasons, to let such a
ve^mine harbour in the pigeon house (...) the M^?


Do ^u think that I will suck their eggs? Do I look lik^ a su^ (...)? I
am sure the Auditory did entertain (...) speech (...) th^ si^ne of
approbation* hum, hum, hum.


That (...) (...) but the yo^er sort, and those that stood at the lower end of
the Session hall.


I am much (...) ^aken if Apollo himself did not in the end hum and (...).


I think rather Apollo frowned on you.


I think rather that Mercury frowned on me.


Why Mercury? he is not there.


I'll tell thee, honest Thuriger, Whilst I was in the hear of my pleading,
some Villain, borne under the Planet Mercury, nims away my sachell that lay
behind me.


What loss suffered you in that vessel?


The Shipwreck of all my best houshold-stuffe, and tools of my trade. What
think you, Thuriger, does this forebode ill luck to me?.


I think it had bin better luck, if you had bin robbed of those Commodities
seven years ago. But see yonder comes my Scopas.


THey are coming hard by. Here is the frankincense. Put it in your self.


This fire is almost out, stir it up.


Laurel wood doth soon spend.


Apollos judgment seat
Makes all things pure and neat.

COme along, come on in rank.


On before, On before* Hold up the book. Give room, room, more room.


We must have room, more then the whole City of Rome.


Clio, you must sit down, and you E^erpe. Musaeus croues your assistance.


P^o do your office.


Silentium: et Tace^e. Our Lord Apollo by his deputed Judge, the venerable
Musaeus, doth command silence, and charge all, whom it may concern, to
attend the Court, and hear the charge


Ou^ great Apollos Palace seems like
A spacious gard'n set with choicest flowers,
Wherein creep up by small vnleene degrees
Vnu^ull, hurt^ull, and unsavoury weeds;
Which overgrow and choke the better plant^,
And make the tender flowers to hang the head.
Himself chief Gardner hath, from yonder top
Of this our sacred ^ll, even now ^view'd
All that his herbage, and with cutious eye
Discerned and designed by his doom,
What must be cherished, and what weeded out.
Me, his unworthy servant, he appoints,
As vnder-gardiner, with that wholesome hooke.
To check, or nip, or toot up what he damned.
(...) by oracle he did unfold,
What lot attends on every name inrold.
Pr^co, read the Record, and cite the names.

Memorandum. On Apollos Shroueday, being the eight and twentieth of Aquarius,
in the great hall of the western top of Par^assus. Our sovereign Lord Apollo
sitting in person upon over and terminer, after full hearing of all parties,
did then and there adou^ the Court, to be presently continued at the foot of
the said h^, under the Laurel, at the Temple gate, and to be there consummate
by his reverend Judge Musaeus.

Nomina Reorum.

The names of the parties sentenced by Apollo.

Siren, the first is Siren. Appear Siren Spinster.


She spinnes nothing but spiders webs, to catch flies.


Siren come out What do you lu^ke? Appear in your likeness, and hear your
doom.


Vous ^uez Si^.


I have a great deal more to say for myself, and for my Lady Hedone. I hope,
I shall be heard.


You would fain be heard; because you think your tongue enchants. There is no
pleading now. Apollos doom is past.


You must hear the Judge, or else be pressed to death presently.


Siren, then thus for Siren.


Record the sentence Praeco.


My pen is as nimble as your tongue.


Siren must first be sea^cht.


Sacred dispencer of Apollos justice, I hope you will not suffer a poor Nimp^
to be used so immodestly. If I must be ransa^, I p^y you let it be done by a
Jury of Muses. The three Graces, empanneld with them, will make up the whole
number of twelve good women, and true.


If I be made fore-woman of your jury,
You shall be doomed by justice, not by fury.

We Mus^ envy no man,
Much less will wrong a woman.

We shall not need to trouble you noble Clio* nor you sweet Euterpe. This
search is only of her upper garment. I auriger lift up ^er va^le.


Come, I must love, and court thee now.


O ugly a filthy fi^es tail.


Pull off her head of yellow locks.


O black b^stles. O nasty Vermin!


This seeming glossing Nymph is nothing else, but an ugly sea* Monster. She is
damned to return to the sea, and there to be tossed, and do^ssed, together with
S^ylla, that monstrous shame of nature. But, before you ^icke her out, let her
take a message to carry to Dame Hed^e, if ere they meet again. That is, that
Hedone shall ever vnseparably be manacled to Lupe.


O just d^ome, that pleasure shall be always (...) to pain. Which also this
false Siren proves. ^irst, a face see^ing fair to meet with: but if you
further go, turpem (...) in pisc^ mul^ formos^ superne.


Out with her.


I will have one kick more at her for inueigling me: Out Bitch. -- Exit Siren.


On Pr^co. Who is next?


The next is Ludio. Appear Ludio Gamester. Vous b^uez Ludi^.


Here appears poor banckrout Ludio. I hau^ suffered losses by misfo^tune.


What misfortune? fire? or thieves?


I sir. Thieves, they have robbed me of all my brass^ coin, and unbound paper
books. I must set up with a new stock.


The (...) means his cards and counters.


Thou bold else, that can ^ot at thy trial for get thy play. Apollo fit^
thee with a doom, that thou shalt pl^y uncessantly.


I'm glad of that A (...) play-day.


And thou sh^lt ^ue fifty (...).


So much good company doe^ the b^tter.


They are the fi^ty daughte^s of (...); whose play is still to fetch and fetch
water in a sieue. Thou must play still at dice.


At dice? that's well* I^e che^te all those fifty wenches.


But thus. Thy dice (...) must put into a bottomless box. So, when (...)
throw, they fall to the ground: and thou must t^ke them up: they fall
again, thou (...) again. Thi^ (...) the M^ll h^ering, wherein thou must (...)
^und eternally.


He that would find Lu^, must seek ^im at the sign of the Labour in va^e.


O would I had s^died when I played* rather then thus to play at lost labour
(...).


Mistress Indi^ence (...).


Blind fortune h^th quit he^ o^ that; but she i^ true to her name (...).


Mistress (...) Gin^le. Spi^ster.


All the wool and fl^xe, t^at (...) she spun, I will eat and fear no
choking.


Doth she not appear?


She scoured awa^ in her Coach with her son, and said she would dwell no
longer in Thess^ly, i^ her sons best instructor be not suffered here. And a^
she fled, her Coach oue^ned.


Let her four w^eeles carry Apollos curse with her, that none of her kindred
shall ever get above the petty form of Apollos school. Pass o^ (...).


Io^n Gingle, Gentleman Woo'd-be.


Apollo pronounces that his lot must be, before he be forty years old, to
spend all his five Manors upon the five Senses: Except the Mansion house of
^oolingham, which is entailed to the heirs of his body wo^fully begotten.


For ^y part I will not be of counsel to cut off th^ en^aile.


Complement, p^etended Captain, alias Captain Comp. Fashion^nger.


He is ^led, ^s ^heare.


Fled with (...) witness. For he flew like a bird up in the air.


Then has he saved us a labour. For Apollo had doomed him to be blown up with
Vulcans bellow^ into the middle Region of the air.


The boys in the outer-court of Apollos Palace, when they (...) by Mistress
Gingles discontent, that the Captain was like to be banished, they prevented
execution, by tying squibs to his ^kirts; which being fired, this light ^usball
mounted up into the ay^ as high as a ^arke.


One boy said, that this was the Captains losty cap^ring trick.


And whither did this whi^le wind carry him?


Who knows? But most do^ think to the Island of Coxcombria, a place thick
impeopled with such riff^ ^affe.


Jack Implement, Page to the aforesaid Complement. Vous hauez Implement.


Here sir, at hand. I pray you Master Musaeu^ be good to a poor Page. I had
but a hard service under him My bed and board was sc^rce to the mountenance of
a water-Spanniell. I would sane go to school again^.


How right this boy meets with Apollos (...) Thy lot i^ for the school
again: but there for one whole year thou must smooth out the dogs care^ of
all thy fellows books; And vow to ply thy book as nimbly as ever thou did
thy Maste^ Ap^ry, or the hauty vaulting horse.


I vow, and will. Elle let me ^ide our blind horse that kicks us on the
back^.


What Slugge, could you not come along with us? You must be lag. An hour
will s^arce serve you, though your journey be short, and down th^ hill.


Soft fire, (...)


The next name (...).


Slim Sl^gge.


Answer to your name.


Hum. ha*


He will not answer, unless you give him all his titles. (...) (...). Sl^e of
Slugge-ha^l.


Why then Slim Slugge, (...) Sluggorum, Slug^ of Slugge-hall, S^eper.


Here sir.


Vous hau^z Slugge. Stand forth and attend the sentence.


Thou night-bird, in whose ^sly nest all Books and Inkehornes, and all things
else are m^uldy, but thy bed. Yet there dost thou pig in, and pig out,
without molesting the feathers by concussion.


Stand upright, and leave thy yawning.


Thou that never may infect the Muses habitation, Apollo doth banish thee
into Lubberland.


Lubberland? I'm glad of that. I shall earn my fourteen pence a day there by
sno^ting. But who shll carry me th^ther?


Nay, you must foot it thither, there lies the ma^ow of your punishment.


O that I had Tom Co^ats everlasting shoes! But ho which is the way to
Lubberland? Has none of you bin (...) Will y^u go with me? will you in the
frize coat? It is a fine Country. There are rivers of Mu kad^e, and bridges of
Brawn, parks of Ven^* son Pasties, paled about with puddings and sausages.
H^y for our town, hey for Lubberland.


(...), I think thou dr^amest of Lubberland. Why d^ not y^u p^sse on?


Yon^ No^ice, Apprentice.


Here. I p^ay sir, save me: I'll get my Mothe^ to end y^. (...) (...) a couple
of Capon^.


(...) (...) (...) fre^ man, and thy follies come of simple (...) (...), and
are not de^pely rooted in thee, there is hope o^ thy (...). ^or three yee^es
thou shalt p^y but an hour in the week, and all thy scho^le (...) (...) (...)
fr^m the presence and ^dance of Ph^onus. Obseru^ and imitate his pam^ll
diligenc^: so shalt thou get the Muses love, and ^ord Apollo fau^ur.


Thanks, (...)* thanks to him, and thee for this your (...).


Good your Wo^ship, be good to my son, hi^ Mother will run (...) for gri^.


Thy sonn^* Come hither Retro.


I^em doo^is.


Mercy sir, mercy.


Apollo ha^ acc^pted thy submission, and cu^ o^ the third yeer^ of thy
punishment. Ari^e, and s^ew thy face, Thy tongue may now run right, speak as
others do. You may be a forward child.


Thanks, O most forward thanks, for the restoring of my distorted limbs and
tongue.

Retiring Crab farewell. Welcome humane pace.


But see thou holdst the scholars even path, nor st^iding f^st, nor wandr^ng
from the way.


I hankes sacred Priest I shall bring ^y wife joyful news.


Now is Apollos garden weeded quite,
Composed in order, swept, and cleanly dight.
Now may each tender plant, and goodly flower
Grow up, and th^e, by heavens assisting power.
Pr^co, dissolve the Session.

Oyez, Our sovereign Lord Apollo, having held and finished his Visitation,
discharges all suitors, parties, and homagers from their attendance in this
place; and licenseth all his subjects and servants, to depa^t to their sever
all habitations.


Uincat Apollo. Regnet Apollo.


It joys my heart, that we poor Mus^s,
Now have redress of our abuses.

Before alas I mou^nd and wept:
But now I joy: our school is swept.,

Vincat Apo^o, Regnet Apollo.


RIght Worthy Burgomasters, gentle Dames,
Accept (we pray) our hasty huddled games;
Who thus employ our parts, ou^ pains most gl^dly,
In hope to please our Mother Town of Ha^y.
And thus with this our homely shrouing dish,
A merry Shrou^tide to you all we w^h.
T^s late* Me thinks I spy some dro^ie head,
Whose yawning, nodding toles a peal^ to bed*
If any such be here, wee'le take them n^pping,
And all ^o box their ears with loud hand-clapping.

