IF profyght may grow, most Christ audyece.
By knowledge of things, which are ^,
And here for a time. Of much more ^
Advantage might spring, by the ser^ses heavenly.
As those matters are, that the Gospel specyfye.
Without whose knowledge, no man to the truth ^
Nor ever attain, to the life perpetual.
For he that knows not, the living God eter^
The father, the son, and also the holy Ghost,
And what Christ suffered, for redempcyon of us all*
What he commanded, and taught in every coost.
And what he forbode. That man must needs be lost.
And clean secluded, from the faithful chosen sort.
In the heavens above, to his most high dysconfo^
You therefore (good friends) I louyngel^ ^
To way soche matters, as will be uttered h^
Of whom ye may lo^e, to have no tryfelin^
In fantasies feigned, nor soche life gaudying,
But the things that shall, your inward stoma^
To rejoice in God, for your iustyfycacyon,
And alone in Christ, to hope for your salvation.
Yea, first ye shall have, the eternal generation.
Of Christ like as Iohan, in his first chapt^ wryght*
And consequently, of man the first creacyon,
The abuse and fall, through his first ouersyght,
And the raise again, through Gods high grace myg^
By promyses first, which shall be declared all,
Then by his own son, the worker pryncypall.
After that Adam, bywayleth here his fall,
God will show mercy, to every generation.
And to his kyngedome, of his great goodness call,
His elected spouse, or faithful congregacyon,
^ shall apere, by open protestacyon,
^ from Christ's birth, shall to his death conclude.
^ne that thereof, will show the certytude,

IN the beginning, before the heavens were create,
In me and of me, was my son sempyternall.
With the holy Ghost, in one degre or estate,
Of the high Godhed, to me the father coequal.
^hys my son was, with me one God essencyall,
^hout separacyon, at any time from me.
^ God he is, of equal dignyte.
^ the beginning, my son hath ever be,
^s father, in one essencyall being.
^e create, by him in yche degre,
^ earth, and have their diverse workynge.
^ power, was never made any thing,
^ wrought. But through his ordynaunce,
^e his strength, and whole contynuaunce.
^ him is the life, and the just recoueraunce,
^ Adam and his, which nought but death deserved.
And this life to men, is an high perseverance,
Or a light of faith, whereby they shall be saved.
And this light shall shyne, among the people darkened,
With vnfaythfulnesse: Yet shall they not with him take.
^ut of wyllfull hart, his liberal grace forsa^e.
Which will compel me, against man for to make,
In my displeasure. And send plages of coreccyon,
Most greuouse and sharpe, his wanton lusts to slake,
By water and fire, by syckenesse and infeccyon.
Of pestylent sores, molestynge his compleccyon
By troublouse war, by derthe and peynefull fearsenesse,
And after this life, by an extreme heaviness,
I well first begin, with Adam for his lewdenesse,
Which for an apple, neglected my commandment.
He shall continue, in labour for his rashenesse,
His only sweat shall, provide his food and raiment.
Yea, yet must he have, a greatter ponnyshment.
Most terryble death, shall bring him to his end.
To teach him how he, his lord God. shall offend.

Merciful father, thy pytiefull grace extend,
To me careful wretch, which have me sore abused.
Thy precept breaking. O lord, I mind to amend,
If thy great goodness, would now have me excused,
Most heavenly maker, let me not be refused,
Nor taste from thy sight, for one pore synnefull cr^
Alas I am frail, my whole kind is but slyme*

I wott it is so, yet art thu no less faulty,
Tha thu haddyst been made, of matter much more worthy,
I gave the reason, and wit to understand,
The good from the evil. And not to take on hand,
Of a braynelesse mind, the thing which I forbad the.

Soch heavy fortune, hath chefelye chanced me,
For that I was left, to mine own lyberte.

Then thu art blameless, and the fault thu lay to me?


Nay, all I ascribe, to my own imbecyllyte.
No fault in the lord, but in my infirmyte,
And want of respect, in soche gifts as thu gave me.

For that I put the, at thine own lyberte,
Thu ought my goodness, to have in more regard.

Avoid it I can not, thu lay it to me so harde.
Lord now I perceive, what power is in man,
And strength of himself, when thy sweet grace is absent.
He must needs but fall, do he the best he can,
And danger himself, as ap^reth evident.
For I synned not, so lunge as thu were present.
But when thu were gone, I fell to sin by and by,
And the displeased. Good lord I axe the mercy.

Thu shalt dye for it, with all thy posteryte.


^ fault good lord, avenge not thy self on me.
^ but a worm, or a fleshelye vanyte.

I say thu shalt dye, with thy whole posteryte.


Yet mercy sweet lord, if any mercy may be.


I am immutable, I may change no decre.
Thu shalt dye (I say) without any remedy.

Yet gracyouse father, extend to me thy mercy,
And throw not away, the work which thu hast create,
To thine own Image, But avert from me thy hate.

But art thu sorry, from bottom of thy hart?


Thy displeasure is, to me most heavy smart.


Than will I tell the, what thu shalt stycke unto,
Life to recover, and my good fauer also.

Tell it me sweet lord, that I may thereafter go.


This is my covenant, to the and all thy ofsprynge.
For that thu hast been, deceived by the serpent,
I will put hatred, betwixt him for his doing,
And the woman kind. They shall herafter dyssent.
His sede with her sede, shall never have agreement*
Her sede shall press down, his head unto the ground,
Slay his suggestyons, and his whole power confound,
Cleave to this promise, with all thy inward power,
Fyrmelye enclose it, in thy remembrance fast.
Fold it in thy faith, with full hope day and hour,
And thy salvation, it will be at the last.
That sede shall clear the, of all thy wickedness past,
And procure thy peace, with most high grace in my syghe,
Se thu trust to it, and hold not the matter light.

Sweet lord the promise, that thy self here hath made me,
Of thy mere goodness, and not of my deseruynge,
In my faith I trust, shall so established be,
By help of thy grace, that it shall be remaining,
So lunge as I shall, have here contynuynge,
And show it I will, to my posteryte,
That they in like case, have thereby felycyte,

For a closing up, take yet one sentence with the.


At thy pleasure lord, all things might ever be,


For that my promise, may have the deper effect,
In the faith of the, and all thy generation.
Take this sign with it, as a seal thereto connect,
Crepe shall the Serpent, for his abhomynacyon.
The woman shall sorrow, in painful propagacyon.
Like as thu shalt find, this true in outward workynge.
So think the other, though it be an hidden thing.

Incessant praysynge, to the most heavenly lord,
For this thy succour, and vnderserued kyndenesse.
Thu byndest me in hart, thy gracyouse gifts to record,
And to bear in mind, now after my heaviness,
The brute of thy name, with inward joy and gladness,
Thu dysdaynest not, as wele apereth this day,
To fatche to thy fold, thy first sheep going a straye.
Most mighty maker, thu casts not yet away,
Thy synnefull feruaunt, which hath done most offence.
It is not thy mind, for ever I should decay,
But thu reseruest me, of thy benyuolence,
And hast provided, for me a recompense,
By thy appointment, like as I have received,
In thy strong promise, here openly pronounced,
This goodness dere lord, of me is undeserved,
I so declynynge, from thy first instytucyon,
At so light mocyons. To one that thus hath swerued,
What a lord art thu, to give soche retrybucyon?
I damnable wretch, deserved execucyon,
Of terryble death, without all remedy,
And to be put out, of all good memory.
I am enforced, to rejoice here inwardelye,
An imp though I be, of hell, death, and dampnacyon,
Through my own workynge. For I consydre thy mercy.
And pytiefull mind, for my whole generation.
It is thu sweet lord, that workest my salvation,
And my recover. Therefore of a congruence,
From hens thu must have, my hart and obedyence.
Thought I be mortal, by reason of my offence,
And shall dye the death, like as God hath appointed.
Of this am I sure, through his high influence,
At a serten day, again to be reuyued.
From ground of my hart, this shall not be removed.
I have it in faith, and therefore I will singe,
This Anthem to him, that my salvation shall bring.

Oeternal Sapyence, that procedest from the mouth of highest, reachynge fourth
with a great power fro the beg^nynge to the end, with heavenly swetnesse
dysposynge a^ creatures, come now and enstruct us the true way of thy godly
prudence.

I have been moved, to stryke man dyuerselye,
Sens I left Adam, in this same earthly mansyon.
For whyc he hath done, to me dyspleasures many,
And will not amend, his life in any condition.
No respect hath he, to my word nor monycyon.
But doth what him lust, without discrete aduysement,
And will in no wise, take mine aduertysement.
Cain hath slain Abel, his brother an innocent,
Whose blood from the earth, doth call to me for vengeance
My children with mennis, so carnallye consent,
That their vain workynge, is unto me much greuaunce.
Mankynde is but flesh, in his whole dallyaunce.
All vice increases, in him contynuallye,
Nothing he regards, to walk unto my glory.
My hart abhors, his wilful misery,
His cankered malice, his cursed couetousenesse,
His (...) lecherouse, his vengeable tyranny,
(...) ^rcyfull mourther, and other ungodliness.
^yll destroy him, for his outragyousnesse.
^nd not him only, but all that on earth do stere,
^or it repents me, that ever I made them here.

Most gentle maker, with his fraylenesse somewhat bear
Man is thy creature, thy self can not say nay.
Though thu ponnysh him, to put him somewhat in fear,
His fault to knowledge, yet seek not his decay.
Thu may reclaim him, though he goes now astray,
And bring him again, of thy abundant grace,
To the fold of faith, he acknowlegynge his trespace.

Thu know I have given, to him convenient space.
With laufull warnynges, yet he amends in no place.
The natural law, which I wrote in his heart,
He hath outraced, all goodness putting a part,
Of helthe the covenant, which I to Adam made,
He regards not, but walk a damnable trade,

All this is true lord, I can not thy words reprove,
Let his weakness yet, thy merciful goodness move.

No weakness is it, but wilful workynge all,
That reigns in man, through mind dyabolycall.
He shall have therefore, like as he hath deserved.

Lose him not yet lord, though he hath deeply swerued,
I know thy mercy, is far above his rudeness,
Being infynyte, as all other things are in the.
His folly therefore, now pardon of thy goodness,
And measure it not, beyond thy godly pity.
Esteem not his fault, farther than help may be,
But grant him thy grace, as he offends so deeply,
The to remember, and abhorrre his misery.
Of all goodness lord, remember thy great mercy,
To Adam and Eve, breaking thy first commandment.
Them thu releuedest, with thy sweet promise heavenly,
Synnefull though they were, and their lives neglygent.
I know that mercy, with the is permanent,
And will be ever, so lunge as the world endure,
Than close not thy hand, from man which is thy creature.
Being thy subject, he is vndreneth thy cure,
Correct him thu may, and so bring him to grace.
All lies in thy hands, to leave or to allure,
Bitter death to give, or grant most suffren solace.
Utterly from man, auerte not then thy face,
But let him saver, thy sweet benyuolence,
Somewhat though he feel, thy hand for his offence.

My true servant Noah, thy ryghtousnesse doth move me,
Somewhat to reserve, for mannys posteryte.
Though I drown the world, yet will I save the lives,
Of the and thy wife, thy iij. sons and their wives,
And of yche kind two, to maynteyne you herafter.

Blessed be thy name, most mighty merciful maker.
With the to dyspute, it were vnconuenyent.

Why doest thu say so: Be bold to speak thy intent.


Shall the other dye, without any remedy?


I will drown them all, for their wilful wicked folly,
That man herafter, thereby may know my power,
And fear to offend, my goodness day and hour.

As thy pleasure is, so might it always be,
For my helthe thu art, and sowles felycyte.

After that this floude, have had his ragynge passage,
This shall be to the, my covenant everlasting.
The sees and waters, so far neuermore shall rage,
As all flesh to drown, I will so tempre their workynge.
This sign will I add, also to confirm the thing.
In the clouds above, as a seal or token clear,
For safeguard of man, my raynebowe shall apere.
Take thu this covenant for an ernest confirmacyon,
Of my former promise, to Adams generation.

I will blessed lord, with my whole hart and mind.


Farewele than just Noah, here leave I the behind.


Most mighty maker, ere I from hens depart,
I must give the praise, from the bottom of my hart.
Whom may we thank lord, for our helthe salvation?
But thy great mercy and goodness undeserved.
Thy promise in faith, is our iustyfycacyon,
As it was Adams, when his hart therein rested,
And as it was theirs, which therein also trusted.
This faith was grounded, in Adams memory,
And clearly declared, in Abels innocence.
Faith in that promise, Old Adam ded iustyfye,
In that promise faith, made Eua to prophecy.
Faith in that promise, proved Abel innocent,
In that promise faith, made Seth full obedyent.
That faith taught Enos, on Gods name first to call,
And made Mathusalah, the oldest man of all.
That faith brought Enoch, to so high exercise,
That God toke him up, with him into paradyse,
Of that faith the want, made Cain to hate the good,
And all his ofsprynge, to peryshe in the flood.
Faith in that promise, preserved both me and mine,
So will it all them, which follow the same lyne.
Not only this gyfte, thu hast given me sweet lord,
But with it also, thine everlasting covenant,
Of truse for ever, thy raynebowe bearing record,
Neuermore to drown, the world by floude inconstant,
Making the waters, more peaceable and pleasant.
Alac I can not, to the give praise condygne,
Yet will I singe here, with heart meke and benygne.

O most orient clerenesse, and light shynynge of the sempiternall bryghtnesse.
O clear sun of justice and heavenly ryghtousnesse, come hither and illumyne
the prisoner, sitting now in the dark prison and shadow of eternal death.

Mine high displeasure, must needs return to man,
Considering the sin, that he doth day by day:
For neither kyndenesse, nor extreme handelynge can,
Make him to know me, by any faithful way.
But styll in myschefe, he walk to his decay.
If he do not soon, his wickedness consydre,
^t is like doubtless, to perysh all togydre.
In my sight he is, more venym than the spider
Through soch abuses, as he hath exercysed,
From the time of Noah, to this same season hyder.
An vncomelye act, without shame Cham commysed,
When he of his father, the secrete parts reveled.
In like case Nemrod, against me wrought abusyon
As he raised up, the castle of confusion,
Ninus hath also, and all by the devils illusyon,
Through image making, up raised Idolatry,
Me to dyshonoure. And now in the conclusion,
The vile Sodomytes, live so unnaturally
That their sin vengeance, axes contynuallye*
For my covenants sake, I will not drown with water.
Yet shall I vysyte, their sins with other matter.

Yet merciful lord, thy gracyousnesse remember,
To Adam and Noah, both in thy word and promise.
And lose not the sowles, of men in so great nombre,
But save thine own work, of thy most discrete goodness.
I wore thy mercyes, are plentyfull and endless.
Never can they dye, nor fail, thy self endurynge,
This hath faith fixed, fast in my understanding.

Abraham my seruaunt, for thy most faithful meaning.
Both thu and thy stock, shall have my plentouse blessing.
Where the vnfaythfull, vndre my curse evermore,
For their vain workynge, shall few their wickedness sore.

Tell me blessed lord, where will thy great malice light,
My hope is, all flesh, shall not perysh in thy sight?

No truly Abraham, thu chauncest upon the right.
The thing I shall do, I will not hyde from the,
Whom I have blessyd, for thy true fydelyte.
For I know thu will, cause both thy children seruautes.
In my ways to walk, and trust unto my covenants,
That I may perform, with the my ernest promise.

All that will I do, by assystence of thy goodness.


From Sodom and Gomor, the abhomynacyons call,
For my great vengeance, which will upon them fall.
Wild fire and brymstone, shall light upon them all.

Pytiefull maker, though they have kindled thy fury,
Cast not away yet, the just sort with the vngodlye.
Parauenture there may, be fifty ryghteouse persons,
Within those cities, will thu lose them all at ones?
And not spare the place, for those fifty ryghteouse sake?
Be it far from the, soch rygoure to undertake.
I hope there is not, in the so cruel hardenesse,
As to cast away, the just men with the rechelesse,
And so to destroy, the good with the vngodlye.
In the judge of all, be never soche a fury.

At Sodom if I, may find just persons fifty,
The place will I spare, for their sakes verelye.

I take upon me, to speak here in thy presence,
More then become me, lord pardon my neglygence.
I am but ashes, and were loathe the to offend.

Say fourth good Abraham, for ill dost thu non intende.


Happlye there may be, five less in the same nombre.
For their sakes I trust, thu will not the rest accombre?

If I among them, might find but five and forty
Them would I not lose, for that just cumpanye.

What if the city, may forty ryghteouse make?


Then will I pardon it, for those same fortyes sake.


Be not angry lord, though I speak vndyscretelye.


Utter thy whole mind, and spare me not hardily.


Parauenture there may, be thirty found among them.


May I find thirty, I will nothing do unto them*


I take upon me, to much lord in thy sight?


No, no, good Abraham, for I know thy faith is right.


No less I suppose, than twenty can it have?


Could I find twenty, that city would I save.


Ones yet will I speak, my mind, and than no more,


Spare not to utter, so much as thu hast in store.


And what if there might, be x. good creatures found?


The rest for their sakes, might so be safe and sound,
And not destroyed, for their abhomynacyon,

O merciful maker, much is thy tolleracyon,
And sufferance of sin. I se it now in dede,
Wit save yet of fauer, out of those cities to lead,
Those that be faithful, though their flock be but small.

Loath and his howsholde, I will deliver all,
For ryghteousnesse sake which is of me and not them.

Great are thy graces, in the generation of Sem.


Well Abraham well, for thy true faythfulnes,
Now will I give the, my covenant or third promise.
Loke thu believe it, as thu couetyst ryghtuousnesse,

Lord so regard me, as I receive it with gladness.


Of many peoples, the father I will make the,
All generacyons, in thy sede shall be blessyd.
As the stars of heaven, so shall thy kynered be,
And by the same sede, the world shall be redressed.
In cyrcumcysyon, shall this thing be expressed,
As in a sure seal, to prove my promise true,
Prynt this in thy faith, and it shall thy soul renew,

I will not one Jot, Lord from thy will dyssent,
But to thy pleasure, be always obedyent,
Thy laws to fullfyll, and most precyouse commandment.

Farwele Abraham, for hear in place I leave the.


Thanks will I rendre, like as it shall behove me.
Everlasting praise, to thy most gloryouse name.
Which sauedyst Ada, through faith in thy sweet promise,
Of the womannys sede. And now confirmest the same,
In the sede of me. Fosoth great is thy goodness
I can not perceive, but that thy mercy is endless.
To soch as fear the, in every generation,
For it endures, without abreuyacyon.
This have I prynted in deep consyderacyon,
No worldly matter, can race it out of mind.
For ones it will be, the final restauracyon,
Of Adam and Eve, with other that hath synde.
Yea, the sure helthe, and raise of all mankynde.
Help have the faithful, thereof, though they be infect,
They condempnacyon, where as it is reject.
Merciful maker, my crabbed voice direct,
That it may break out, in some sweet praise to the,
And suffer me not, thy due lawdes to neglect,
But let me show forth, thy commendacyons fre.
Stop not my wind pypes, but give them lyberte,
To sound to thy name, which is most gracyouse,
And in it rejoice, with hart melodyouse.

O most mighty governor, of thy people, and in hart most desired, the harde
rock and true corner stone, that of two makes one, vnynge the Iewes with the
gentyles in one church, come now and releue mankynde whom thu hast formed of
the vile earth.

STyll so increases, the wickedness of man,
That I am moved, with plages him to confound*
His weakness to aid, I do the best I can,
Yet he regards me, no more than doth an hound.
My word and promise, in his faith takes no ground,
He will so lunge walk, in his own lusts at large,
That nought he shall find, his folly to dyscharge.
Sens Abrahams time, which was my true elect,
Ismael have I found, both wicked, fearce, and cruel,
And Esau in mind, with hateful muther infect,
The sons of Iacob, to lusts unnatural fell,
And into Egypt, ded they their brother sell.
Laban to idols, gave faithful reverence,
Dina was corrupt, through Sichems violence.
Ruben abused his fathers concubyne,
Iudas gate children, of his own daughter in law.
Yea, her in my sight, went after a wicked lyne,
His sede Onanspylte, his brothers name to withdraw.
Achan lived here, without all godly awe.
And now the children, of Israel abuse my power,
In so vile manner, that they move me every howre.

Pacyfye thy wrath, sweet lord I the desire,
As thu art gentle, benygne and pacyent.
Lose not that people, in fearcenesse of thine ire,
For whom thu hast showed, soche tokens evident,
Converting this rod, into a lyuelye serpent,
And the same serpent, into this rod again,
Thy wonderful power, declarynge very plain.
For their sakes also, put Pharao to payne,
By ten diverse plages, as I shall here declare.
By blood, frogs, lice, by flies, death, botch, blayne.
By hayle, by grassoppers, by darkness, and by care.
By a Soden plage, all their first gotten ware,
Thu flewest in one night, for his fearce cruelnesse.
From that thy people, witholde not now thy goodness.

I certyfye the, my chosen seruaunt Moses.
That people of mine is full of vnthankefuln^

Dere lord, I know it, alas yet way their weaken^
And bear with their faults, of thy great bounteousnesse.
In a flamynge bush, having to them respect,
Thu appoyntedest me, their passage to direct.
And through the read see, thy right hand ded us led.
Where Pharaoes host, the floude overwhelmed in dede.
Thu went before them, in a shynynge cloud all day,
And in the dark night, in fire thu shewedest their way,
Thu sent them Manna, from heaven to be their food,
Out of the harde stone, thu gave them water good.
Thu appoyntedest them, a land of milk and honey,
Let them not perysh, for want of thy great mercy,

Content they are not, with foul nor yet with fair,
But murmour and grudge, as people in dyspayre,
As I sent Manna, they had it in dysdayne,
Thus of their welfare, they many times complain.
Over Amalech, I gave them the victory.

Most gloryouse maker, all that is to thy glory.
Thu sent them also, a law from heaven above,
And daily shewedest them, many tokens of great love.
The brazen serpent, thu gave them for their healynge,
And Balaams curse, thu turnedest into a blessing.
I hope thu will not, dysdayne to help them styll,

I gave them precepts, which they will not fulfil.
Nor yet knowledge me, for their God and good lord,
So do their vile deeds, with their wicked hearts accorde,
Whyls thu hast talked, with me famylyarlye.
^ mountain, the space but of days forty,
^ghtes all, they have forgotten clearly,
^ are turned, to shameful ydolatrye.
For their God they have, set up a golden calfe.

Let me say somewhat, sweet father in their behalf.


I will first conclude, and then say on thy mind,
For that I have found, that people so unkind,
Nor one of them shall, enjoy the promise of me,
For entering the land, but Caleb and Iosue.

Thy eternal will, evermore fulfilled be.
For dysobedyence, thu show the sons of Aaron,
The earth swellowed in, both Dathan and Abiron.
The adders ded stynge, other wicked persons else,
In wonderful nombre. Thus hast thu ponnyshed rebels.

Never will I spare, the cursed inyquyte,
Of ydolatrye, for no cause, thu may trust me.

Forgive them yet lord, for this time if it may be.


Think thu that I will, so soon change my decre?
No, No, frynde Moses so light thu shalt not find me.
I will ponnysh them, all Israel shall it se.

I wot, thy people, hath wrought abhomynacyon,
Worshyppynge false gods, to thy honours derogacyon,
Yet mercyfullye, thu may upon them loke.
And if thu will not, thrust me out of thy book.

Those great blasphemers, shall out of my book clean,
But thu shalt not so, for I know what thu doest mean.
Conduct my people, mine Angel shall assyst the,
That sin a^ a day, will not uncorrected be.
And for the true zele, that thu to my people hast,
I add this covenant, unto my promyses past.
Raise them up I will, a prophet from among them,
Not onlyke to the, to speak my words unto them,
Who so hears not, that he shall speak in my name,
I will revenge it, to his perpetual shame.
The pass over lamb, will be a token just,
Of this strong covenant. This have I clearly dyscust,
In my appointment, this hour for your delyueraunce.

Never shall this thing, depart from my remembrauce.
Laud be for ever, to the most merciful lord,
Which never with draw, from man thy heavenly comfort.
But from age to age, thy benefytes doth record,
What thy goodness is, and hath been to his sort.
As we find thy grace, so ought we to report.
And doubtless it is, to us most bounteouse,
Yea, for all our sins, most ripe and plenteouse.
Abraham our father, found the benyuolouse,
So ded good Isaac, in his distress among.
To Iacob thu were, a gyde most gracyouse,
Ioseph thu sauedest, from dangerous deadly wrong.
Melchisedech and Iob, felt thy great goodness strong,
So ded good Sara, rebecca, and fair Rachel,
With Sephora my wife, the daughter of Raguel.
To praise the sweet lord my faith doth me compel,
For thy covenants sake, wherein rest our salvation.
The sede of promise, all other sedes excel,
For therein remains, our full iustyfycacyon,
From Adam and Noah, in Abrahams generation.
That sede procures, Gods mighty grace and power,
For the same sedes sake, I will singe now this howre.

O high king Emanuel, our leg lord, the lunge expectacyon of Gentyles, and
the mighty saver of their multitude, the helthe and consolation of sinners,
come now for to save us, as our lord and our redemer.

FOr all the fauer, I have showed Israel,
Delyuerynge her, from Pharaoes tyranny,
And geuynge the land fluentem lac mel,
Yet will she not leave, her old ydolatrye,
Nor know me for God. I abhor her misery.
Vexed her I have, with battayles and decays,
Styll must I plage her, I se non other ways.

Remember yet lord, thy worthy seruaunt Moses,
Walking in thy sight, without rebuke of the.
Both Aaron, Ietro, Eleazar, and Phinees.
Evermore feared, to offend thy mageste.
Much thu acceptedest, thy seruaunt Iosue,
Caleb and Othoniel, sought the with all their hart,
Aioth end Sangar, for thy folk ded their part.
Gedeon and Thola, thy enemies put to smart,
Iayr and Iephte, gave praises to thy name.
These to leave idols, thy people ded coart,
Samson the strongest, for his part ded the same.
Samuel and Nathan, thy messages ded proclaim,
What though fearce Pharao, wrough myschef in thy sight?
He was a pagan, lay not that in our sight.
I wot the Beniamytes, abused the ways of right,
So ded Helyes sons, and the sons of Samuel.
Saul in his offyce, was slothful day and night,
Wicked was Semei, so was Achirophel.
Measure not by them, the faults of Israel,
Whom thu hast loved, of lunge time so inteyrlye,
But of thy great grace, remyt her wicked folly,

I can not abide, the vice of ydolatrye*
Though I should suffer, all other villainy.
When Iosue was dead, that sort from me ded fall,
To the worshyppynge of Asteroth and Baal,
Full unclean idols, and monsters bestyall.

For it they have had, thy ryghteouse ponnyshment.
And for as much as they, ded wyckedly consent,
To the Palestynes, and Chananytes vngodlye,
Idolaters taking, to them in matrymonye,
Thu threwest them vndre, the king of Mesopotamye.
After thu subduedest them, for their Idolatry.
Eyghtene years to Eglon, the king of Moabytes,
And xx. years to Iabin, the king of Chananytes.
Oppressed they were, vij. years of the Madyanytes,
And xviij. years vexed, of the cruel Ammonytes.
In iii. great battayles, of iij. score thousand and five,
Of this thy people, not one was left alive.
Have mercy now lord, and call them to repentance.

So lunge as they sin, so loge shall they have greuauce.
Dauid my seruaunt, somewhat must I say to the,
For that thu lately, hast wrought soch vanyte.

Spare not blessed lord, but say thy pleasure to me.


Of late days thu hast, mysused Bersabe,
The wife of Vrye, and slain him in the field.

Mercy lord mercy, for doubtless I am defyelde:


I constytute the, a king over Israel,
And the preserved, from Saul which was thy enemy.
Yea, in my fauer, so much thu dedyst excel.
That of thy enemies, I gave the victory.
Palestynes and Syryanes, to the came trybutarye.
Why hast thu then wrought, soch folly in my sight?
Despysynge my word, against all godly right.

I have synned lord, I besyche the, pardon me.


Thu shalt not dye Dauid, for this inyquyte,
For thy repentance, But thy son by Bersabe,
Shall dye, for as much, as my name is blasphemed.
Among my enemies, and thu the worse esteemed.
From thy hows for this, the sword shall not depart,

I am sorry lord, from the bottom of my hart.


To further anger, thu doest me yet compel.


For what matter lord? I besyche thy goodness tell.


Why dedest thu number, the people of Israel?
Suppose in thy mind, therein thu hast done well?

I can not say nay, but I have done vndyscretelye,
To forget thy grace, for a humayne policy.

Thu shalt of these iij. chose which plage thu will have,
For that synnefull act, that I thy soul may save.
A scarsenesse vij. years, or else iij. months exile,
Either for iij. days, the pestylence most vile.
For one thu must have, there is no remedy,

Lord at thy pleasure, for thu art full of mercy,


Of a pestylence, then iij. score thousand and ten,
In iij. days shall dye of thy most puysaunt men.

Oh lord, it is I, which have offended thy grace,
Spare them and not me, for I have done the trespace.

Though thy sins be great, thy inward hearts cotrycyon.
Doth move my stomach, in wonderful condition.
I find the a man, according to my hart,
Wherefore this promise, I make the ere I depart.
A fruit there shall come, forth yssuynge from thy body,
Whom I will advance, upon thy seat for ever.
His trone shall become, a seat of heavenly glory,
His worthy scepture, from right will not dysseuer,
His happy kyngedome, of faith, shall perysh never,
Of heaven and of earth, he was author pryncypall,
And will continue, though they do perysh all.
This sign shalt thu have, for a token specyall,
That thu may believe, my words vnfaynedlye.
Where thu hast minded, for my memorial,
To build a temple, thu shalt not fynysh it truly.
But Salomon thy son, shall do that accyon worthy,
In token that Christ, must fynysh every thing,
That I have begun, to my praise everlasting.

Immortal glory, to the, most heavenly king,
For that thu hast given, continual victory,
To me thy seruaunt, ever sens my anoyntynge,
And also before, by many conquests worthy,
A bear and lyon, I slew through thy strength only,
I slew Golias, which was vj. cubits lunge.
Against thy enemies, thu made me ever strong.
My fleshly fraylenesse, made me do deadly wrong,
And clean to forget, thy laws of ryghteousnesse.
And thouh thu vysytedest, my synnefulnesse among,
With pestylent plages, and other vnquyetnesse.
Yet never took thu, from me the plenteousnesse,
Of thy godly sprete, which thu in me dedyst plant,
I having remorse, thy grace could never want.
For in conclusion, thy everlasting covenant.
Thu gave unto me, for all my wicked sin.
And hast promised here, by protestacyon constant,
That one of my sede, shall soch high fortune win,
As never ded man, sens this world ded begin.
By his power he shall, put Satan from his hold,
In rejoice whereof, to singe will I be bold.

O lord God Adonai, gyde of the faylhfull hows of Israel, which sumtyme
aperedest in the flamynge bush to Moses, and to him dedest give a law in
mount Syna, come now forto redeem us in the strength of thy right hand.

I Brought up children, from their first infancy,
Which now despyseth, my godly instytucyons.
An ox knows his lord, an ass his masters dewtye,
But Israel will not, know me nor my conditions,
Oh froward people, given all to superstycyons.
Unnatural children, expert in blasphemyes,
Provokes me to bate, by their ydolatryes.
Take heed to my words, ye tyrants of Sodoma,
In vain ye offer, your sacryfyce to me.
Dyscontent I am, with you beasts of Gomorra,
And have no pleasure, when I your offerynges se.
I abhor your fastes, and your solempnyte.
For your tradycyons, my ways ye set a part,
Your works are in vain, I hate them from the hart.

Thy city sweet lord, is now become vnfaythfull,
And her conditions, are turned up so down.
Her life is unchaste, her acts be very hurtful,
Her murder and theft, hath darkened her renown.
Covetous rewards, doth so their conscience drown,
That the fatherless, they will not help to right,
The poor wydowes cause, come not before their sight,
Thy peceable paths, seek they neither day nor night,
But walk wicked ways, after their fantasy.
Convert their hearts lord, and give them thy true light.
That they may perceive, their customable folly.
Leave them not helpless, in so deep misery,
But call them from it, of thy most specyall grace,
By thy true prophets, to their sowles helthe and solace.

First they had fathers, than had they patryarkes,
Than dukes, than judges, to their gydes and monarchs,
Now have they stowte kings, yet are they wicked styll,
And will in no wise, my pleasant laws fulfil.
Always they apply, to idols worshyppynge,
From the vile beggar, to the anointed king.

For that cause thu hast, in two divided them,
In Samaria the one, the other in Hierusalem.
The king of Iuda, in Hierusalem ded dwell,
And in Samaria, the king of Israel.
Ten of the twelve trybes, bycame Samarytanes,
And the other two, were Hierosolymytanes.
In both these cuntreyes, according to their doings,
Thu permyttedest them, to have most cruel kings.
The first of Iuda, was wicked king Roboam,
Of Israel the first, was that cruel Hieroboam.
Abia than followed, and in the other Nadab,
Then Basa, then Hela, then Zambri, Ioram and Achab.
Then Ochosias, then Athalia, then Ioas,
On the other part, was Ioathan and Achas.
To rehearce them all, that have done wretchydlye,
In the sight of the, it were lunge verelye.

For the wicked sin, of fylthye ydolatrye,
Which the x, trybes ded, in the land of Samarye,
In space of one day, fifty thousand men I slew,
Three of their cities, also I overthrew.
And left the people, in soch captyuyte,
That in all the world, they wit not wither tefle.
The other ij. trybes, when they from me went back,
To ydolatrye, I left in the hand of Sesack.
The king of Egipt, which toke away their treasure,
Conveyed their cattle, and slew them without measure.
In time of Achas, an hundred thousand and twenty,
Were slain at one time, for their ydolatrye.
Two hundred thousand, from thens were captyue led.
Their goods dyspersed, and they with penury fed.
Seldom they fail it, but either the Egipcyanes,
Have them in bondage, or else the Assyreanes.
And alone they may, thank their ydolatrye.

Wele, yet blessed lord, releue them with thy mercy.
Though they have been ill, by other princes days*
Yet good Ezechias, hath taugh them godly ways.
When the prince is good, the people are the better.
And as he is nought, their vices are the greatter.
Heavenly lord therefore, send them the consolation,
Which thu hast covenanted, with every generation.
Open thu the heavens, and let the lamb come hither,
Which will deliver, thy people all together.
Ye planetes and clouds, cast down your dews and rain,
That the earth may bear, out helthfull saver plain.

May the wife forget, the child of her own body?


Nay that she can not, in any wise verelye.


No more can I them, which will do my comaundementes,
But must preserve them, from all inconuenyentes.

Blessed art thu lord, in all thy acts and judgements.


Wele, Esaias, for this thy fydelyte,
A covenant of helthe, thu shalt have also of me.
For Syons sake now, I will not hold my peace,
And for Hierusalem, to speak will I not cease.
Till that ryghteouse lord, be come as a sun beam bright,
And their just saver, as a lamp extend his light.
A rod shall shut fourth, from the old stock of Iesse,
And a bright blossom, from that rote will arise.
Upon whom always, the sprete of the lord shall be,
The sprete of wisdom, the sprete of heavenly practyse,
And the sprete that will, all godliness deuyse,
Take this for a sign, A maid of Israel,
Shall conceive and bear, that lord Emanuel.

Thy praises condygne, no mortal tunge can tell,
Most worthy maker, and king of heavenly glory.
For all capacytees, thy goodness doth excel,
Thy plenteouse graces, no brain can cumpas truly,
No wit can conceive, the greatness of thy mercy,
Declared of late, in Dauid thy true seruaunt,
And now confirmed, in this thy latter covenant.
Of goodness thu made, Salomon of wit most pregnaut,
Asa and Iosaphat, with good king Ezechias,
In thy sight to do, that was to the right pleasant.
To quench ydolatrye, thu raysedest up Helias,
Iehu, Hellseus, Micheas, and Abdias.
And Naaman Syrus, thu pourgedest of a leprye,
Thy works wonderful, who can but magnyfye?
Arise Hierusalem, and take faith by and bye,
For the very light, that shall save the, is coming.
The son of the lord, apere will euydentlye,
When he shall resort, se that no Joy be wantynge,
He is thy saver, and thy life everlasting,
Thy release from sin, and thy whole ryghteousnesse.
Help me in this songe, to knowledge his great goodness*

O frutefull rote of Iesse, that shall be set as a sign among people, against
the worldly rulers shall fearcely open their mouths. Whom the Gentyles shall
worshypp as their heavenly lord, come now for to deliver us, and delay the
time no longar.

I Have with fearcenesse, mankynde oft times corrected.
And again I have, allured him by sweet promise.
I have sent sore plages, when he hath me neglected.
And then by and by, most comfortable swetnes.
To win him to grace, both mercy and ryghteousnes.
I have exercysed, yet will he not amend.
Shall I now lose him, or shall I him defend?
In his most myschefe, most high grace will I send.
To overcome him, by favour, if it may be.
With his abusyons, no longar will I contend.
But now accomplish, my first will and decre.
My word being flesh, from hens shall set him fre.
Him reachynge a way, of perfyght ryghteousnesse.
That he shall not need, to perysh in his weakness.

Manasses (lord) is past, which turned from the his heart,
Achas and Amon, have now no more a do.
Iechonias with other, which ded themselves auarte.
From the to idols, may now no farther go.
The two false judges, and Bells wicked prestes also.
Phassur and Semeias, with Nabuchodonosore,
Antiochus and Triphon shall the displease no more.
Three score years and ten, thy people into Babylon,
Were captyue and thrall, for idols worshyppynge.
Hierusalem was lost, and left void of domynyon,
Brent was their temple, so was their other building,
There high prestes were slain, there treasure came to nothing
The strength and beauty, of thine own heretage,
Thus dedest thu leave then, in miserable bondage.
Oft had they warnynges, sumtyme by Ezechiel,
And other prophets, as Esaye and Hieremye,
Sumtyme by Daniel, sumtyme by Ose and Iohel,
By Amos and Abdias, by Ionas and by Sophonye,
By Nahum and Micheas, by Agge and by Zacharye,
By Malachias, and also by Abacuch,
By Olda the widow, and by the prophet Baruch.
Remember Iosias, which toke the abhomynacyon.
From the people then, restorynge thy laws again.
Of Rechab consydre, the faithful generation,
Who to wine drinking, no fryndshyppe night costrayne.
Remember Abdemelech, the frynde of truth certain,
Zorobabel the prince, which ded repare the temple,
And Iesus Iosedech, of virtue the exemple,
Consydre Nehemias, and Esdras the good scrybe,
Merciful Tobias and constant Mardocheus.
Iudith and queen Hester, of the same godly trybe,
Devout Mathathias, and Iudas Machabeus.
Have mind of Eleazar, and then Ioannes Hircanus,
Way the ernest faith, of this godly cumpanye,
Though the other clean, fall from thy memory.

I will Iohan I will, for as I said before,
Rigour and hardenesse, I have now set a part,
Minding from hens fourth, to win man evermore,
By wonderful kyndenesse, to break his stubberne hart,
And change it from sin. For Christ shall suffres make,
In mannys frail nature, for his inyquyte,
This to make open, my massenger shalt thu be.

As thy pleasure is, so blessed lord appoint me,
For my helthe thu art, and my sowles felycyte.

Lunge ere I made the, I the predestynate.
Before thu were borne, I the endued with grace.
In thy mothers womb, were thu sanctyfycate,
By my godly gift, and so confirmed in place,
A Prophet to show, a way before the face,
Of my most dere son, which will come the until,
Apply the apace, thine offyce to fulfil.
Preach to the people, rebukynge their neglygence,
Doppe them in water, they knowledgynge their offence.
And say unto them. The kyngedome of God doth cum.

Vnmete lord I am, Quia puer ego sum.
An other than that, Alac I have no science,
Fit for that offyce, neither yet clean eloquence.

Thu shalt not say so, for I have given the grace,
Eloquence and age, to speak in the desert place,
Thu must do therefore, as I shall the advise,
My appointed pleasure, fourth utter in any wise.
My strong mighty words, put I into thy mouth,
Spare not by speak them, to east, west, north and southe.
Go now thy way fourth, I shall the never fail.
The sprete of Helias, have I given the already.
Persuade the people, that they their sins bywayle.
And if they repent, their customable folly,
Lunge shall it not be, ere they have remedy.
Open thu their hearts, tell them their health is coming.
As a voice in desert, se thu declare the thing.
I promise the sure, thu shalt was he him among them,
In Iordane a floude, not far from Hierusalem.

Show me yet good lord, whereby shall I know that ma.
In the multitude, which will resort to Iordan?

In thy mothers womb, of him had thu cognycyon.


Yea, that was in sprete, I would now know his person.


Have thu no fear Iohan, him shalt thu know full well.
And one specyall token, before will I the tell.
Super quem uideris spiritum descendentem manentem
Super eum, hic est qui baptizat spiritu sancto
Among all other, whom thu shalt baptyse there.
Upon whom thu seyst, the holy Ghost descend,
In shappe of a dove, resting upon his shuldere.
Hold him for the same, that shall the world amend.
By baptym of sprete, and also to man extend,
Most specyall grace. For he must repare his fall,
Restorynge again, the justice orygynall.
Take now thy iournaye, and do as I the advise,
First preach repentance, and than the people baptyse.

High honour, worshypp, and glory be unto the.
My God eternal, and patron of all puryte.
Repent good people, for sins that now are past,
The kyngedome of heaven, is at hand very ny.
The promised light, to you approaches fast,
Have faith, and apply, now to receive him boldelye.
I am not the light, but to bear testymonye,
Of him, am I sent, that all men may believe,
That his blood he will, for their redemption give.
He is soch a light, as all men doth illumyne,
That ever were here, or shall be after this.
All the world he made, by his mighty power deuyne,
And yet that rude world, will not know what he is.
His own he entering, is not regarded of his.
They that receive him, are Gods true children plain,
In sprete regenerate and all grace shall attain.
Many do reckon, that I Iohan Baptist am he.
Deceived are they, and that will apere in space.
Though he come after, yet was he lunge before me,
We are weak vessels, he is the well of grace,
Of his great goodness, all that we have we purchase.
By him are we like, to have a better increes,
Than ever we had, by the law of Moses.
In Moses harde law, we had not else but darkness,
Figure and shadow. All was not else but night,
Ponnyshment for sin, much rigour, payne and roughnes,
An high change is there, where all is turned to light,
Grace and remyssyon, anon will shyne full bright.
Never man lived, that ever se God before,
Which now in our kind, mannys ruin will restore.
Help me to give thanks, to that lord evermore,
Which am unto Christ, a cryars voice in the desert,
To prepare the paths, and high ways him before,
For his delight is, on the poor simple hart.
That innocent lamb, from soch will never depart,
As will faithfully, receive him with good mind.
Let our voice then sound, in some sweet musical kind.

O perfyght key of Dauid, and high scepture of the kindred of Iacob, which
openest and no man speareth, thu spearest and no man opens, come deliver thy
seruaunt (...) kind bound, in prison sitting in the darkness of (...) and
bitter dampnacyon.

THe matters are soch, that we have uttered here,
As ought not to slyde, from your memorial.
For they have opened, soch comfortable ger,
As is to the helthe, of this kind vnyuersall,
Graces of the lord, and promyses liberal,
Which he hath given, to man for every age,
To knytt him to Christ, and so clear him of bondage.
As Saint Paule doth write, unto the Corinthes plain,
Our fore fathers were, vndre the cloud of darkness,
And unto Christ's days, ded in the shadow remain.
Yet were they not left, for of him they had promise,
All they received, one spirytuall fedynge doubtless,
They drunk of the rock, which them to life refreshed,
For one saving helthe, in Christ, all they confessed.
In the woman's sede, was Adam first iustyfyed,
So was faytfull Noah, so was just Abraham.
The faith in that sede, in Moses fourth multyplyed,
Like wise in Dauid, and Esaye, that after cam.
And in Iohan Baptist, which showed the very lame.
Though they se a far, yet all they had one justice,
One Mass (as they call it) and in Christ one sacryfyce,
A man can not here, to Good do better service,
Than on this to ground, his faith and understanding.
For all the worlds sin, alone Christ payed the price,
In his only death, was mannys life always resting,
And not in will wor^, nor yet in mennys deseruynge.
The light of our faith, make this thyng^ evident,
And not the practyse of other experiment.
Where is now fre will, whom the hypocryte a comment.
Whereby they report, they may at their own pleasure,
Do good of themselves, though grace and faith be absent.
And have good intents their madness with to measure.
The will of the flesh, is proved here small treasure,
And so is mannys will, for the grace of God doth all.
More of this matter, conclude herafter we shall
Thus ends this Tragedy or enterlude manyfestynge the chief promyses of God
unto Man by all ages in the old law, from the fall of Adam, to the
incarnacyon of the lord Iesus Christ. Compiled by Iohan Bale. Anno domini, M.
D. XXXVIII.


