FIrst the Queenes Majesty in the figure of Tethys. The Ladies in the shape of
Nymphs, presiding several Rivers, appropriaten, either to their dignity,
Signiories or places of birth.

ON the Travers which served as a curtain for the first Scene, was figured a
dark cloud, in^erser with certain sparkling stars, which, at the sound of
a loud music, being instantly drawn, the Scene was discovered with these
adornements: First on either side stood a great statue of twelve foot high,
representing Neptune and Nereus. Neptune holding a Trident, with an Anchor made
to it, and this Mot. His artibus: that is, Regendo, retinendo, alluding to this
verse of Virgill, H^e tibi erunt arts, c. Nereus holding out a golden fish in
a net, with this word Industria: the reason whereof is delivered after, in the
speech uttered by Triton. These Sea-gods stood on pedestals and were al of
gold. Behind them were two pilasters, on which hung compartments with other
devises: and these bore up a rich Freeze, wherein were figures of ten foot
long, of floods, and Nymphs, with a number of naked children, dallying with a
draperie, which they seemed to hold up, that the Scene might be seen, and the
ends thereof fell down in folds by the pilasters. In the midst was a
compartment, with this inscription, Tethyos Epinicia, TETHYS feasts of triumph.
This was supported with two winged boys, and all the work was done with that
force and boldness on the gold and silver, as the figures seemed round and not
painted.

The Scene it self was a Port or Haven with Bulworkes at the entrance, and the
figure of a Castle commanding a fortified town: within this Port were many
Ships, small and great, seeming to lie at Anchor, some nearer, and some further
off, Zephirus with eight Naydes, Nymphs of fountains, and two Tritons sent
from Tethys to give notice of her intendement, which was the Ante-maske or
first show. The Duke of York presented Zephirus, in a short robe of green
satin embroidered with golden flowers with a round wing made of lawns on wires,
and hung down in labels. Behind his shoulders two silver wings. On his head a
Garland of flowers consisting of all colours, and on one Arm which was out
bare, he wore a bracelet of gold set with rich stones. Eight little Ladies
near of his stature represented the Naydes, and were attired in light robes
adorned with flowers, their hair hanging down, and waving with Garlands of
water ornaments on their heads.

The Tritons wore skin-coates of watchet Taffeta (lightened with silver) to show
the Muscles of their bodies. From the waste almost to the knee were finns of
silver in the manner of bases, a mantle of Sea-greene laced, and fringed with
gold, tied with a knot upon one shoulder, and falling down in folds behind,
was fastened to the contrary side: on their heads garlands of Sedge, with
trumpets of writhen shells in their hand: Buskins of Sea-greene laid with silver
lace. These persons thus attired, entered with this song of four parts, and a
music of twelve Lutes.

YOuth of the spring, mild Zephirus blow fair,
And breath the joyful air,
Which Tethys wishes may attend this day,
Who comes her self to pay
The vows her heart presents,
To these fair complements.
Breath out new flowers, which yet were never known
Unto the Spring, nor blown
Before this time, to beautify the earth,
And as this day gives birth
Unto new types of State,
So let it bliss create.
Bear Tethys message to the Ocean King,
Say how she joys to bring
Delight unto his Lands and his Seas,
And tell Meliades
The of-spring of his bood,
How she applauds his good.
The song ended, Triton in the behalf of Zephirus delivers Tethys message with
her Presents (which was a Trident to the King, and a rich sword and scarf to
the Prince of Wales) in these words.

FRom that intelligence which moves the Sphere
Of circling waives (the mighty Tethys, Queen
Of Nymphs and rivers, who will straight appear,
And in a humane Character be seen)
We have in charge to say, that even as Seas
And lands, are graced by men of worth and might,
So they return their favours; and in these
Exalting of the good seem to delight.
Which she, in glory, lately visiting
The sweet, and pleasant Shores of Cambria, found
By an unusual, and most forward Spring
Of comfort, wherewith all things did abound,
For joy of the Inuestiture at hand
Of their new Prince, whose Rites, with acts renownd
Were here to be solemnised on this Strand:
And therefore straight resolves t'adorne the day
With her al-gracing presence, and the train,
Of some choice Nymphs she pleased to call away
From several Rivers which they entertain.
And first the lovely Nymph of stately Thames,
(The darling of the Ocean) summoned is:
Then those of Trent and Aruns graceful streams,
Then Darwent next with cleare-wau'd worthiness.
The beauteous Nymph of Chrystall-streaming Lee
Gives next attendance: Then the Nymph of Air
With modest motion makes her sweet repair.
The Nymph of Seuerne follows in degree,
With ample streams of grace: and next to her
The cheerful Nymph of Rather doth appaere
With comely Medway, th'ornament of Kent,
And then four goodly Nymphs that beutifie
Cambers fair shores, and all that Continent
The graces of clear Vske, Olwy, Dulesse, Wy^
All these within the goodly spacious Bay
Of manifold inharboring Mil^ord meet,
The happy Port of Union, which gave way
To that great Heroes HENRY, and his fleet,
To make the blessed conjunction that beg at
A greater, and more glorious far then that.
From hence she sends her dear loved Zephirus;
To breath out her affection and her zeal
To you great Monarch of Oceanus,
And to present this Trident as the seal
And ensign of her love and of your right.
And therewithal she wills him, greet the Lord
And Prince of the Isles (the hope and the delight,
Of all the Northern Nations) with this sword
Which she unto Astraea sacred found,
And not to be vnsheath'd but on just ground.
Herewith, says she, deliver him from me
This skarffe, the zone of love and Amity,
Tingird the same; wherein he may survey,
Infigur'd all the spacious Empery
That he is borne unto another day.
Which, tell him, will be world enough to yield
All works of glory ever can be wrought.
Let him not pass the circle of that field,
But think Alcides pillars are the knot
For there will be within the large extent
Of these my waives, and watery Government
More treasure, and more certain riches got
Then all the Indies to Iberus brought,
For Nereus will by industry unfold
A Chimicke secret, and turn fish to gold.
This charge she gave, and looks ^ith such a cheer
As did her comfort and delight bewray,
Like clear Aurora when she doth appear
In brightest robes to make a glorious day.
The Speech ended, the Naydes dance about Zephirus, and then withdraw them
aside, when suddenly at the sound of a loud and fuller musique, Tethys with her
Nymphs appears, with another Scene, which I will likewise describe, in the
language of the Architector, who contrived it, and speaks in his own mestier
to such as are vnderstaders lovers of that design. First at the opening of the
heavens appeared 3. circles of lights and glasses, one within another, and came
down in a straight motion five foot, and then began to move circularly;
which lights and motion so occupied the eyes of the spectators, that the manner
of altering the Scene was scarcely discerned: for in a moment the whole face of
it was changed, the Port vanished, and Tethys with her Nymphs appeared in
their several Caverns gloriously adorned. This Scene was comparted into 5.
Nieces, whereof that in the midst had some slender pillows of whole round,
and were made of modern Architecture in regard of room: these were of
burnished gold, and bare up the returns of an Architraue, Freeze, and Cornish
of the same work: on which, upon either side was a Plinth directly over the
pillars, on them were placed, for finishings, two Dolphins of silver, with
their tails wreathed together, which supported oval vases of gold.

Between the two pillars on either side were great ornaments of ^elieuo, the
Basement were two huge Whales of silver. Above in an action mounting were two
Sea-horses, and above them, on each side of Tethys seat was placed a great
Trident The seat or Throne it self was raised six steps, and all covered
with such an artificial stuff, as seemed richer by candle, then any cloth of
gold. The rests for her arms were two Cherubines of gold: over her head was a
great skallop of silver from which hung the folds of this rich drapery.

Above the Skallop and round about the sides was a resplendent freeze of jewel
glasses or lights, which showed like Diamonds, Rubies, Sapphires, Emralds, and
such like,

The part which returned from the two Plinthes that bare up the Dolphins, was
circular, and made a hollowness over Tethys head, and on this circle were 4.
great C^artuses of gold, which bore up a round bowl of silver, in mannner of a
fountain, with mask-heads of gold, out of which ran an artificial water. On
the midst of this was a triangular basement formed of scrolls leaves, and
then a rich Veil adorned with flutings, and enchased work with a freeze of
fishes, and a batta^e of Tritons, out of whose mouths, sprang water into the
Bowl underneath. On the top of this was a round globe of gold full of holes,
out of which issued abundance of water, some falling into the receipt below,
some into the Oval vase, borne up by the Dolphins, and indeed there was no
place in this great Aquatic throne, that was not filled with the sprinckling
of these two natural seeming waters. The Nieces wherein the Ladies sate, were
four, with Pilasters of gold, mingled with rustic stones showing like a
mineral to make it more rock, and Cauern-like, varying from that of Tethys
throne. Equal with the heads of the Pillars was an Architraue of the same
work, above was a circular frontispiece, which rose equal with the Bowl of the
fountain fore described. On the rustic frontispiece lay two great figures in
Rileue, which seemed to bear up a Garland of Sea-weeds: to which from two
antic Candlesticks which stood over the Pilasters were hanging Labells of
gold. And these were the finishings of the top of the two Nieces next to that
of Tethys.

In the space between the frontispiece and the Architraue stood a great Concave
shell, wherein was the head of a Sea-god, and on either side the shell to fill
up the room, two great mask heads in perfile. The other two Nieces which were
outermost, were likewise borne up with Pilasters of gold, and for variation
had square frontispices, and against the straight Architraue of the other was
an Arch. All these were mingled with rustic, as before.

In the middle between the frontispiece the Arch, was a Bowl or fountain made
of four great skallops, borne up by a great mask head which had likewise
four aspects, and lying upon this Arch (to fill up the Concaues) were two
figures turned half into fishes, these with their heads held up the sides of
this Bowl: above this were three great Cherubines heads spouting water into
the Bowl. On the midst of the square frontispiece stood a great vase adorned.

The rest of the ornaments consisted of maske-heads, spouting water, swans,
festons of maritime weeds, great shells, and such like; and all this whole
Scene was filled with the splendour of gold and silver: only some beautiful
colours behind to distinguish them, and to set off the rest.

The whole work came into the form of a half round: there sate three Ladies
in each Niece, which made six of a side: the Queen in the midst, and the
Lady Elizabeth at her feet.

Now concerning their habit: first their head-tire was composed of shells and
corrall, and from a great Muriake shell in form of the crest of an helm, hung
a thin waving veil. Their upper garments had the boddies of sky-colored
taffataes for lightness, all embroidered with maritime invention: then had they a
kind of half skirts of cloth of silver embroidered with gold, all the ground
work cut out for lightness which hung down full, cut in points: underneath that,
came bases (of the same as was their bodies) beneath their knee. The long skirt
was wrought with lace, waued round about like a River, and on the banks sedge
and Sea-weedes, all of gold. Their shoulders were all embroidered with the
work of the short skirt of cloth of silver, and had cypress spangled, ruffed
out, and fell in a ruff above the Elbow. The under sleeves were all
embroidered as the bodies: their shoes were of Satin, richly embroidered, with
the work of the short skirt.

In this habit they descend out of their Caverns one after another, and so
marched up with winding meanders like a River, till they came to the Tree of
victory, which was a Bay erected at the right side of the state, upon a little
mount there raised, where they offer their several flowers in golden vrnes
which they bare in their hands: whilst a soft musique of twelve Lutes and
twelve voices, which entertained the time, expressed as a Chorus, their action in
this manner.

WAs ever hour brought more delight
To mortal sight,
Then this, wherein fair Tethys daignes to show
Her, and her Nymphs arow
In glory bright?
See how they bring their flowers,
From out their watery bowers,
To deck Apollos Tree,
The tree of victory.
About whose verdant bows,
They Sacrifice their vows,
And wish an everlasting spring
Of glory, to the Oceans King.
This songe and ceremony ended they fall into their first dance, after which
Tethys with draws and reposes her upon the Mount under the tree of victory,
entertained with Music and this Song.

IF joy had other figure
Then sounds, and words, and motion,
To intimate the measure,
And height of our devotion:
This day it had been showed
But what it can, it doth perform,
Since nature hath bestowd
No other letter,
To express it better,
Then in this form;
Our motions, sounds, and words,
Tuned to accords,
Must show the well-set parts,
Of our affections and our harts,
After this Tethys rises, and with her Nymphs performs her second dance, and
then reposes her again upon the Mount, entertained with another songe.

ARe they shadows that we see?
And can shadows pleasure give?
Pleasures only shadows be
Cast by bodies we conceive,
And are made the things we deem,
In those figures which they seem.
But these pleasures vanish fast,
Which by shadows are expressed
Pleasures are not, if they last,
In their passing, is their best.
Glory is most bright and gay
In a flash, and so away.
Feed apace then greedy eyes
On the wonder you behold.
Take it sudden as it flies
Though you take it not to hold:
When your eyes have done their part,
Thought must length it in the hart.
After this songe Tethys again arises, and with her Nymphs, takes out the
Lords to dance their Measures Corantos and Galliards, which done they fall
into their third and retiring dance, wherewith they return again into their
several Caverns, and suddenly vanish. When to avoid the confusion which
usually attends the desolve of these shevves; and when all was thought to be
finished, followed another entertainment, and was a third show no less
delightful then the rest, whose introduction was thus.

Zephirus marching a certain space after Tethys and her Nymphs, attended with
his Tritons, a sudden flash of lightning causes them to stay, and Triton
delivers this speech.

BEhold the Post of heaven, bright Mercury
Is sent to summon and recall again,
Imperial Tethys with her company,
Unto her watery Mansion in the maine:
And shift those firms, wherein her power did deign
T invest her self and hers, and to restore
Them to themselves whose beauteous shapes they wore.
And then bowing himself to wards the State, craves their stay, and
prepares them, to the expectation of a return of the Queen and her Ladies in
their forms, with these words.

ANd now bright Star the Guidon of this state,
And you great Peers the ornaments of power
With all these glittering troupes that have the fate,
To be spectators of this blessed hour.
Be pleased to sit a while, and you shall see
A transfirmation of far more delight
And apter drawn to nature, then can be
Described in an imaginary sight.
Triton having ended his speech, Mercury most artificially, and in an exquisite
posture descends, and sommons the Duke of York, and six young Noble-men to
attend him, and bring back the Queen and her Ladies in their own form,
directing him to the place where to find them; with this speech.

Fair branch of power, in whose sweet feature here
Mild Zephirus a figure did present
Of youth and of the spring-time of the year
I summon you, and six of high descent
T attend on you (a^ hopeful worthyes borne
To shield the Honour and the clear Renown
Of Ladies) that you presently return
And bring back those, in whose fair shapes were shown
The late-seene Nymphs in figures of their own
Whom you shall find hard by within a grove
And Garden of the spring addressed to Jove.
Hereupon the Duke of York with his attendants departing to perform this
service, the load Music sounds, and suddenly appears the Queenes Majesty
in a most pleasant and artificial Grove, which was the third Scene, and from
thence they march up to the King conducted by the Duke of York, and the
Noble-men, in very stately manner.

And in all these shows, this is to be noted, that there were none of
inferior sort, mixed amongst these great Personages of State and Honour (as
usually there have been) but all was performed by themselves with a due
reservation of their dignity. And for those two which did Personate the
Tritons, they were Gentlemen known of good worth and respect. The introducing
of Pages with torches, might have added more splendour, but yet they would have
pestered the room, which the season would not well permit.

And thus have I delivered the whole form of this show, and expose it to the
censure of those who make it their best show, to seem to know: with this
Postscript.

Pretulerim scriptor delirus inersque videri
Dum mea delectant mala me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere ringi.

