IT hath ever bin the nature of this honourable famous City (matchless for
her love and loyalty in all ages past and present) to come behind none other
of the world whatsoever, in duty to her Sovereign, and care, not only of
common good, but also of virtuous and neuer-dying credit. And such hath always
bin the indulgent endeavour of her worthy Magistrates, from time to time, that
they would never let slip any good occasion, whereby so maine especial respect
might be duly and successively preserved. And so much the rather, because
Plato terms Magistracy, to be the Anchor, Head, and Soul of any City:
holds it for the same thing in any commonwealth, as the Heart is in the body
of a living creature, or as Reason in the Soul: which being the chief and
essential parts of either, the life and existence of the whole, is in that
power, their cheerful motion, gives courage and alacrity to all the other
parts of the body.

Whereof no better exemplary rule can be made, then the late apparent
testimony of Londons Love to Royal Prince Henrie, appointed by our dread
Sovereign his Father, to be created Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester,
even now in the assembly of the high Court of Parliament: that he might be the
twelfte Prince in that Royal creation, succeeding those eleven so long since
passed.

For our Chronicles and Records do name but eleven, that (since the Conquest)
were Princes of Wales. Whereof the first was Edward, Son to King Henrie the
third, who afterward was King Edward the first, he was created Prince at
London.

The second was Edward his Son, called also afterward King Edward the second,
and he had his creation at London likewise.

Thirdly, Edward his Son being after that King Edward the third: but he had
his creation at York.

Fourthly, Edward, surnamed the Black Prince, who was Son to King Edward the
third, that conquered France, and quartered their Arms with ours: he also was
created at London.

The fifth was King Richard the second Son to that worthy warrior the Black
Prince, who lived not to enjoy the Crown: he had his creation at Hauering.

The sixth was Henrie the fifth, eldest Son to King Henrie the fourth, and he
had his creation at London.

The seventh, was Edward the Son of King Henrie the sixth, whose creation I
read to be at Reading.

The eight was Edward, the Son of King Edward the fourth, afterward called
Edward the fifth, never crowned, but made away by his cruel uncle Richard the
third: he was also created at London.

The ninth, was Edward, Son to King Richard the third, created at London
also,.

The tenth was Prince Arthur, Son to King Henrie the seventh, who
deceassing, his brother Henrie (afterward King Henrie the eight) who was made
the eleventh, was also created Prince of Wales, and both of them at London.

All these fore-named Princes of Wales, were created sollemnely, by and in the
Court of Parliament; except three, which were Richard the second, Edward the
fifth, Edward the Soon of Richard the third. And those that were created out of
Parliament, were Princes of hard and disaster fortune: For Richard the second
was deposed: Edward the fifte murdered, and Richard the third, his Son dyed
with in three months after, as a just judgment of God for his Fathers
wickedness.

But now our Royal Henrie coming to be the twelfth Prince in this great
dignity, and Londons chief Magistrate the Lord Mayor, with his worthy
Brethren the Aldermen, having very short and sudden intelligence thereof:
after some small consultation, understanding that the Prince was to come from
Richmonde, by water; they determined to meet him in such good manner, as the
brevity of time would then permit them.

Wherefore, upon Thursday, being the last day of May, about eight of the clock
in the morning, all the worshipful Companies of the City, were ready in
their Bardges upon the water, with their Streamers and Ensigns gloriously
displayed, Drommes, Trumpets, Fifes and other Musickes attending on them, to
await the Lord Mayor and Aldermens coming.

No sooner had his Honour and the rest taken Bardge, but on they rowed, with
such a cheerful noise of Hermony, and so goodly a show in order and
equipage; as made the beholders and hearers not meanly delighted; beside a
peal of Ordenance, that welcomed them as they entered on the water.

To beautify so sumptuous a show, and to grace the day with more matter of
Triumph, it seemd that Neptune smiled thereon auspitiouslie, and would not
suffer so famous a Cities affection, to go unfurnished of some favour from
him: especially, because it is the Metropolis and chief honour of the Island,
whereunto him self ever bare such endeared affection.

For, according to the affirmation of Annius de Viterbo, Diodorus Siculus,
Higginus, and Pictonius, Neptune being called King, or God of the Seas, had by
his Queen Amphitrita diverse Children, Bale sets down, each one of them he
made King of a several Island. Britayne, which himself termed to be Insula
beata, he bestowed upon his fourth, but best affected son Albion, who
subduing the Samotheans, became sole ruler thereof, according to the testimony
of Nicholaus Perottus, R^gmanus Philesius, Aristotle, and Humphrey Lloyd, and
after his own name, called it Albion.

Now it is not without good reason to be imagined, that in mere love to his
sons memory, and for his ancient affection to this Island; no blessedness at
any time can befall it, but it shall receive some especial and regardful noate
of his favour. But more especially at this time, when Heaven, Earth, Sea, and
all had interlaced love together, to honour the general rejoicing, for so fair
a fortune, so royal a hope, and a Prince of so unusual strain or
expectation.

For where mortalles do consent together and sing as in a Quire of settled joy;
the supremer powers can never sit as idle spectators: but seeing how weaker
strength expresses it self; they, in great bounty, must needs add applause
unto it, and out of their rich abundance, enable their meaner power, by their
help, and express also their own liking thereof, by some familiar addition
or other.

Wherefore let us thus think of Neptune, that out of his spacious watery
wilderness, he then suddenly sent a huge Whale and a Dolphin, and by the power
of his commanding Trident, had seated two of his choicest Tritons on them,
altering their deformed Sea-shapes, bestowing on them the borrowed bodies of two
absolute Actors, even the very best our instate time can yield; personating in
them, the several Genii of Corinea, the beautiful Queen of Cornwall, and
Amphion the Father of hermony or Music.

In these two well-seeming and richelye appointed persons, the Dukedom of
Cornwall, and the Principality of Wales, (by order of Neptunes Prophet, or
Poet, call him whether ye will) carried some tip or figure, and not improperly
to them so applied.

For such representations and mystical understandings, have always bin
reputed lawful, and are evermore allowed to hold and carry correspondency,
with such solemn shows and Triumphs; as before in Elder Antiquity, so
likewise in Modern and later use.

Let it suffice then, that thus was this goodly Fleet of Citizens
accompanied, and ushered the way so far as Chelseye, where hovering on the
water until the Prince came: all pleasures that the times interim could
afford, were pletifully entercoursed, and no disorder or breach of array in
the whole Navy.

Upon the Princes near approach, way was made for his best and aptest
entertainment, which by multitude of Boats and Bardges (of no use, but only
for desire of sight) was much impeached for a while, Till order being taken for
the contrary, the Princes Bardge accosted the Lord Majors, where duty
entertaining on the one side, Princely Grace most affably accepting on the
other: Corinea mounted on her Whale, presented herself in this manner to his
Highness.

CORINEA, a very fair and beautiful Nymph, representing the Genius of old
Corineus Queen, and the Province of Cornwall, suited in her watery habit yet
rich and costly, with a Coronet of Pearls and Cockle shells on her head,
salutes the PRINCE.

GRacious Prince, and great Duke of Cornwall, I, the good Angel or Genius of
Corinea, Queen to Brutes noble Companion Corineus, the first of fair
Britaynes Regions, and your own worthy Dukedom; in honour of this general
rejoicing day, and to express the endeared affections of Londons Lord Mayor,
his Brethren the Aldermen, and all these worthy Citizens, Merchants that
hold Commerce with me and the wide world, in our very best and richest
commodities: do thus usher them the way, to applaud in this Triumph, and to
let you know their willing readiness, by all means possible to love and honour
you.

The shortness of time, hath bin no mean bridle to their zealous forwardness,
which (else) would have appeared in more flowing and abundant manner.
Nevertheless, out of this little limitation, let me humbly entreat you to
accept their boundless love, which is like to Iaacobs Ladder, reaching from
Earth to Heaven. Whereon, their hourelie, holy and devout desires (like to so
many blessed Angles) are continually ascending and descending: For their
Royal Sovereign your Father, his Queen your peerless Mother, your sacred
self, and the rest of their illustrous race. That unpolluted souls may be
ever about ye, false harts or foul hands never to come near ye; but the
Hoaste of Heave, always to defend ye.

Here could I wish for such a copious brain, and liberal plenty of Art,
as might suffice to declare the Royal respect and affability of the Prince,
not only to my Lord Mayor and his Brethren, but to all the Companies in
general, spreading his gracious acceptance of their love and kindness, like to
the large extended wings of Ioues Bird the Eagle, even over them all, and
standing in the door of his Bardge, he suffered no occasion to pass him, but
still it took hold of his grace and liking.

And thus they set on towards White Hall, in so soft, mild and gentle a pace,
as the very Thames appeared proud of this gallant burden, swelling her breast
to bear them with pomp and Majesty: and not one wrinkle appeared in her
brow, but as plain and even, as the smoothest ivory. Nor durst any rude
storm peep forth his head, or the least noise of an ungentle wind stir:
but all were whist and still, as forgetful of those uncivil offices, and
overcome with admiration of the days delight.

Being come near White Hall, the Bardges (according to their quality and
degree in order dignity) divided themselves on either side, to make a spacious
passage for the Prince and his train between them, even until they came
near to the Court Bridge, the Lord Majors Bardge being then the formoste and
nearest. Now the Prince being ready to land, Amphion on his Dolphin salutes
him.

AMPION, a grave and judicious Prophet-like personage, attired in his apt
habits, every way answerable to his state and profession, with his wreathe of
Sea-shelles on his head, and his harp hanging in fair twine before him:
personating the Genius of Wales, gives the Prince this Farewell.

Royal PRINCE of Wales, in this figure of Musical Amphion upon his Dolphin,
we personate the Character of Wales your Principality. Who having with my
fair Sister Corinea thus far attended you, on behalf of Londons Lord Major,
his worthy Brethren, and this goodly Fleet of well affected Citizens; we
are all now forced to an unwilling departure.

See how our Streamers hang the head, as loathe to leave you: Our Bardges lag
and seem lumpish, as grieving to forgo you: Our Trumpets and other Musics
appear tongue-lesse, the word of farewell is so offensive to them. And except
you put spirit into them all, with a gracious acceptance of this their love
and loyalty: the bosom of fair Thames shrinks, and they fear swallowing.

But the Sun of true-borne Majesty shines in your bright eye, and your more
serious affairs calling you hence, speaks both your love to them, and liking
of their humble duty at their dismission.

Home again then fair Fleet, you have brought a Royal freight to landing,
such a burde as hath made the River not meanly proud to bear. And since we
must needs part, in our lowdest voice of Drommes, Trumpets and Ordenaunce, be
this our last accent: Long live our Prince of Wales, the Royal Henrie.

At which very instant, off went the Chambers, and such a triumphal noise of
Drommes and Trumpets, as made the very Air to Ecchoe: which done, they
returned back to London again, wherewith we conclude this solemn days
Triumph.

Upon the Sunday following, five and twenty Knights of the Bathe were made by
his Majesty, in honour of the Prince his Son, and they all rode in their apt
habits, with their Squires and Pages, from Durham house to White Hall, to their
no little praise and commendation.

On the Monday, the King and all the Nobility, going by water from the Court
to Westminster; in the Court of Requests (which then was reputed as the
Parliament house) the Prince had his creation of Prince of VVales, Duke of
Rotchsaye, Earl of Chester, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter,
with all the due ceremonies and vestures thereto belonging, his Majesty
himself girding on his Sword. Which being ended they returned in the like
manner to the Court again.

In the evening of the same day, it was expected that the water Fight Fire
works should have bin performed, no mean multitude of people attending to
see it^ But whether by the violent storm of rain, or other appointment of his
majesty, I know not (albeit Protheus mounted on a Sea Monster, had delivered
the intent of the devise to his Highness) yet was it deferred till the
Wednesday following.

Upon which day, after a most Royal and sumptuous Tilting, the water fight
was worthily performed, and by such report as was thereof made to me, thus
it was ordered:

A Turkishe Pirate prowling on the Seas, to maintain a Turkishe Castle (for so
their Arms and Streamers described them both to be) by his spoil rapine, of
Merchants, and other Passengers; skulking abroad to find a booty: he
descried two Merchants Ships, the one whereof bearing to wind somewhat
before her fellow, made the Pirate wafte her to strike sail and come in,
which the Merchant either not regarding, or no way fearing, rode still boldly
on. The Pirate with drawn weapons and other menaces, wafts her again to veil
her bonnet, but the Merchant still refusing: the Pirate sends a commanding
shot, which the Merchant answered again, encouraged thereto by her fellow
Merchant, who by this time was come near her, and spake in like language with
her to the Pirate. When he perceived his hope defeated, and this bold
resistance returned; he sent shot upon shot very fiercely, where they replied
as resoluedly: so that between them grew a very fierce dangerous fight.
Wherein the Merchats wexing to be somewhat distressed (by reason that the
Castle likewise often played upon them) two men of war happening then to be
near, made in to help and relieve their hard detriment.

And now the fight grew on all sides to be fierce indeed, the Castle
assisting the Pirate very hotly, and the other withstanding bravely and
courageously: diverse men appearing on either side to be slain, and hurlled
over into the Sea, as in such adventures it often comes to pass, where such
sharpe assaults are used indeed.

In conclusion, the Merchants and men of war, after a long and well fought
skirmish, proved too strong for the Pirate, they spoylde both him, and blew
up the Castle, ending the whole battery with very rare and admirable
Fire-workes, as also a worthy peal of Chambers.


