A Strange Play you are like to have, for know,
We use no Drum, nor Trumpet, nor Dumb show;
No Combat, Marriage, not so much to day,
As Song, Dance, Masque, to bumbaste out a Play;
Yet these all good, and still in frequent use
With our best Poets; nor is this excuse
Made by our Author, as if want of skill
Caused this defect; it's rather his self will:
Will you the reason know? There have so many
Been in that kind, that He desires not any
At this time in His Scene, no help, no strain,
Or flash that's borrowed from an others brain;
Nor speaks He this that He would have you fear it,
He only tries if once bare Lines will bear it;
Yet may it afford, so please you silent sit,
Some Mirth, some Matter, and perhaps some Wit.

OH friend, that I to mine own Notion
Had joined but your experience; I have the
Theoricke, But you the Practicke.

I perhaps, have seen what you have only read of.

There's your happiness.
A Scholar in his study knows the stars,
Their motion and their influence, which are fixed,
And which are wandering, can decipher Seas,
And give each several Land his proper bounds;
But set him to the Compass, he's to secke,
When a plain Pilot can, direct his course
From hence unto both th'Indies; can bring back
His ship and charge, with profits quintuple.
I have read Jerusalem, and studied Rome,
Can tell in what degree each City stands,
Describe the distance of this place from that,
All this the Scale in every Map can teach,
Nay, for a need could punctually recite
The Monuments in either; but what I
Have by relation only, knowledge by travel
Which still makes up a complete Gentleman,
Proves eminent in you.

I must confess,
I have seen Jerusalem and Rome, have brought
Mark from th'one, from the other Testimony,
Know Spain, and France, and from their airs have snckt
A breath of every language: but no more
Of this discourse since we draw near the place
Of them we go to visit.

Noble master Geraldine, worshipful master Dalauill.

I see thou still remember us.

Remember you, I have had so many memorandomes from the multiplicities of your
bounties, that not to remember you were to forget my self, you are both most
ingeniously and nobly welcome.


And why ingeniously and nobly?


Because had I given your welcomes other attributes then I have done, the one
being a Soldier, and the other seeming a Scholar, I should have lied in the
first, and showed my self a kind of blockhead in the last.


I see your wit is nimble as your tongue,
But how doth all at home?

Small doings at home sir, in regard that the age of my Master corresponds not
with the youth of my Mistress, and you know cold January and lusty May seldom
meet in conjunction.


I do not think but this fellow in time may for his wit and understanding
make Almanacs?


Not so sir, you being more judicious then I, i'll give you the preeminence in
that, because I see by proof you have such judgment in times and seasons.


And why in times and seasons?


Because you have so seasonably made choice, to come so just at dinner time;
you are welcome Gentlemen, i'll go tell my Master of your coming.


A pleasant knave.

This fellow I perceive
Is well acquainted with his Masters mind,
Oh tis a good old man.

And she a Lady.
For Beauty and for Virtue vnparraleld,
Nor can you name that thing to grace a woman
She has not in a full perfection,
Though in their years might seem disparity.
And therefore at the first, a match vnsit;
Imagine but his age and government,
Withal, her modesty, and chaste respect;
Betwixt them, there's so sweet a sympathy,
As crowns a noble marriage.

Tis acknowledged,
But to the worthy gentleman himself,
I am so bound in many courtesies,
That not the least, by all the expression
My Labour, or my Industry can show,
I will know how to cancel.

Oh you are modest.

He studies to engross me to himself,
And is so wedded to my company,
He makes me stranger to my Fathers house,
Although so near a neighbour.

This approves you,
To be most nobly propertied, that from one
So exquisite in Judgment, can Attract
So affectionate an eye.

Your Character,
I must bestow on his vnmerrited Jove,
As one that know I have it, and yet ignorant
Which way I should deserve it: Here both come.

Gentlemen, welcome, but what need I use
A word so common, unto such to whom
My house was never private; I expect
You should not look for such a needles phrase,
Especially you Master Geraldine,
Your Father is my neighbour, and I know you,
Even from the Cradle, then I loved your Infancy,
And since your riper growth bettered by travel;
My wife and you, in youth were play-fellowes,
And nor now be strangers; as I take it,
Not above two years different in your Age.

So much he hath out stripped me.

I would have you
Think this your home, free as your Fathers house,
And to command it, as the Master on 't;
Call boldly here, and entertain your friends,
As in your own possessions, when I see it,
I'll say you love me truly, not till then;
Oh what a happiness your Father hath,
Far above me, one to inherit after him,
Where I (Heaven knows) am childless.

That defect
Heaven hath supplied in this your virtuous Wife,
Both fair, and full of all accomplishments.
My Father is a Widower, and herein
Your happiness transcends him.

Oh Master Geraldine,
Flattery in Men's an adjunct of their sex,
This Country breeds it, and for that, so far
You needed not to have trauell'd.

Trueth's a word,
That should in every language relish well,
Nor have I that exceeded.

Sir, my Husband
Hath took much pleasure in your strange discourse
About Jerusalem and the Holy Land;
How the new City differs from the old,
What ruins of the Temple yet remain,
And whether Zion, and those hills about,
With these Adjacent Towns and Villages,
Keep that proportioned distance as we read;
And then in Rome, of that great Piramis
Reared in the Front, on four Lyons Mounted,
How many of those Idol Temples stand,
First dedicated to their Heathen gods,
Which ruined, which to better use repaired,
Of their Panthaeon, and their Capital,
What Structures are demolish't, what remain.

And what more pleasure to an old mans ear,
That never drew, save his own Countries air,
Then hear such things related. I do exceed him
In years, I must confess, Yet he much older
Then I in his experience.

Master Geraldine,
May I be bold to ask you but one question.
The which I'd be resolved in.

Any thing, that lies within my knowledge.

Put him too't,
Do Sister, you shall find him (make no doubt)
Most pregnant in his answer.

In your travels
Through France, through Sauoye, and through Italy,
Spain, and the Empire, Greece and Palestine,
Which breeds the choicest beauties.

Introath Lady^
I never cast on any in those parts
A curious eye of censure, since my Travel
Was only aimed at Language, and to know;
These past me but as common objects did,
Seen, but not much regarded.

Oh you strive
To express a most unheard of modesty,
And seldom found in any Traveller,
Especially of our Courtrey, thereby seeking
To make your self peculiar.

I should be loath
Profess in outward show to be one Man,
And prove my self another.

One thing more,
Were you to marry, You that know these clymes,
Their states and their conditions, out of which
Of all these countries would you choose your wife.

I'll answer you in brief, (as I observe)
Each several clime for object, fare, or use,
Affords within it self, for all of these
What is most pleasing to the man there borne;
Spain, that yields scant of food, affords the Nation
A parsimonious stomach, where our appetites
Are not content but with the large excess
Of a full table; where the pleasingest fruits
Are found most frequent, there they best content;
Where plenty flows, it asks abundant Feasts;
For so hath prou^dent Nature dealt with all;
So in the choice of Women, the Greek wantons
Comple'd beneath the Turkish slavery,
Vassal themselves to all men, and such best
Please the voluptious, that delight in change;
The French is of one humour, Spain another,
The hot Italian he's a strain from both,
All pleased with their own nations even the Moore,
He thinks the blackest the most beautiful;
And Lady, since you so far tax my choice,
I'll thus resolve you; Being an English man,
Mong'st all these Nations I have seen or tried,
To please me best, here would I choose my bride.

And happy were that Lady, in my thoughts,
Whom you ^id deine that grace too.

How now Sister,
This is a fashion that's but late come up,
For maids to court their husbands.

I would wife
It were no worse, upon condition,
They had my helping hand and purse to boot,
With both in ample measure; oh this Gentleman,
I love, nay almost dote on.

Ya'ue my leave,
To give it full expression.

In these arms then,
Oh had my youth bin blessed with such a son,
To have made my estate to my name hereditary,
I should have gone contented to my grave,
As to my bed; to death, as to my sleep;
But Heaven hath will in all things, once more welcome,
And you sir, for your friends sake.

Would I had in me,
That which he hath, to have clam^d it for mine own,
How ever, I much thank you.

Now sir, the news with you.

Dancing news sir,
For the meat stands piping hot upon the dresser,
The kitchin's in a heat and the Cooke hath so bestirred himself,
That he's in a sweat. The Jack plays Music, and the Spits
Turn round too't.

This fellows my best clock,
He still strikes true to dinner.

And to supper too sir, I know not how the day goes with you, but my stomach
hath struck twelve, I can assure you that.


You take us unprovided Gentlemen,
Yet something you shall find and we would rather
Give you the entertain of household guests,
Then complement of strangers, I pray enter.

I'll stand too't, that in good hospitality, there can be nothing found that's
ill, he that's a good house-keeper, keeps a good table, a good table, is never
without good stools, good stools, seldom without good guests, good guests,
never without good cheer, good cheer, cannot be without good stomachs, good
sfomackes, without good digestion, good digestion, keeps men in good health,
and therefore all good people, that bear good minds, as you love goodness, be
sure to keep good meat and drink in your houses, and so you shall be called
good men, and nothing can come on it but good, I warrant you.


Away you Corridon.

Shall I be beat out of my Masters hou^e thus?

Thy Master, we are Lords amongst our selves,
And here we Live and Reign, Two years already
Are past of our great Empire, and we now
Write, Anno Tertio.

But the old man lives,
That shortly will depose you.

In the mean time,
I, as the mighty Lord and Seneshcall
Of this great house and castle, banish thee,
The very smell ath' kitchen, be it death,
To appear before the dresser,

And why so?

Because thou stink'st of garlic, is that breath
Agreeing with our Palace, where each Room,
Smells with Musk, Ciuit, and rich Amber-greece,
Alloes, Cassia, Aromaticke-gummes,
Perfumes, and Pouders, one whose very garments
Scent of the fowlds and stables, oh fie, fie,
What a base nasty rogue tis.

Yet your fellow.

Then let us put a Cart-Horse in rich trappings.
And bring him to the Tilt-yard.

Prank it, do,
Waste, Riot, and Consume, Mispend your Hours
In drunken Surfeits, lose your days in sleep,
And burn the nights in Revels, Drink and Drab,
Keep Christmasse all year long, and blot lean Lent
Out of the Calender; all that mass of wealth
Got by my Masters sweat and thristy care,
Havoc in prodigal uses; Make all fly,
Powr't down your oily throats, or send it smoking
Out at the tops of chimneys: At his departure,
Was it the old mans charge to have his windows
Glister all night with Stars? his modest House
Turned to a common Stews? his Beds to palates
Of Lusts and Prostitutions? his Buttrey hatch
Now made more common then a Taverns bar,
His Stools that welcomed none but civil guests,
Now only free for Pandars, Whores and Bawds,
Strumpets, and such.

I suffer thee too long,
What is to me thy country, or to thee
The pleasure of our City? thou hast Cowes,
Cattle, and Beef to feed, Oues and Boues,
These that I keep, and in this pasture graze,
Are dainty Damosellaes, bonny Girls;
If thou be borne to Hedge, Ditch, Thrash and Plough
And I to Revel, Banquet and Carrow^e;
Thou Pessant, to the Spade and Pickaxe, I
The Battoone and Stiletto think it only
Thy ill, my good, our several lots are cast,
And both must be contented.

But when both our services are questioned.

Look thou to one,
My answer is provided.

Farewell Musk-Cat.

Adieu good Cheese and Oynons, stuff thy guts
With Speck and Barley-pudding for digestion,
Drink Whig and sour Milk, whilst I rince my Throat,
With Bordeaux and Ca^arie.

What was he?

A Spy Sir,
One of their Hinds of the country, that came prying
To see what dainty fare our kitchen yields,
What Guests we harbour, and what rule we keep,
And threats to tell the old man when he comes;
I think I sent him packing.

It was well done.

A whoreson-Iack-an-apes, a base Baboon,
To insinuate in our secrets.

Let such keep, the Country where their charge is.

So I said Sir.

And visit us when we command them thence,
Not search into our counsels.

'Twere not fit.

Who in my fathers absence should command,
Save I his only son?

It is but justice.

For am not I now Lord?

Dominus fac totum.
And am not I your Steward?

Well remembered,
This night I have a purpose to be Merry,
Jovial and Frolic, how doth our cash hold out?

The bag's still heavy.

Then my heart's still light.

I can assure you, yet tis pretty deep,
Tho scarce a mile to the bottom.

Let me have
to Supper, Let me see, a Duck --

Sweet Rogue.

A Capon --

Geld the Rascal.

Then a Turkey --

Now spit him for an Infidel.

Green Plouer, Snite,
Partridge, Lark, Cock, and Phessant.

Ne'er a Widgin?

Yes, wait thy self at Table.

Where I hope your self will not be absent.

Nor my friends.

We'll have them then in plenty.

Cauiare, Sturgeon, Anchoues, pickle Oysters: Yes,
And a Potato Pie; besides all these,
What thou think rare and costly.

Sir, I know
What's to be done; the stock that must be spent,
Is in my hands, and what I have to do,
I will do suddenly.

No Butchers meat,
Of that, beware in any case.

I still remember,
Your father was no Grasier, if he were,
This were a way to eat up all his Fields,
Hedges and all.

You will be gone sir.

Yes, and you are in the way going.

To what may young men best compare themselves?
Better to what, then to a house new built?
The Fabric strong, the Chambers well contrived,
Polished within, without, well beautified;
When all that gaze upon the Edifice,
Do not alone commend the workman's craft,
But either make it their fair president
By which to build another, or at least,
Wish there to inhabit: Being set to sale,
In comes a slothful Tenant, with a Family
As lasy and debauched; Rough tempests rise,
Vntile the roof, which by their idleness,
Left vnrepaired, the stormy showers beat in,
Rot the maine Posts and Rafters, spoil the Rooms,
Deface the Feelings, and in little space,
Bring it to utter Ruin, yet the fault,
Not in the Architector that first reared it,
But him that should repair it: So it fares
With us young men; We are those houses made,
Our Parents raise these Structures, the foundation
Laid in our Infancy; and as we grow
In years, they strive to build us by degrees,
Story on story higher; up at height,
They cover us with Council, to defend us
From storms without: they polish us within,
With Learnings, Knowledge, Arts and Diseiplines;
All that is nought and vicious, they sweep from us,
Like Dust and Cobwebs, and our Rooms concealed,
Hang with the costliest hangings; Bout the Walls,
Emblems and beauteous Symbols pictured round;
But when that lasy Tenant, Love, steps in,
And in his Train, brings Sloth and Negligence,
Lust, Disobedience, and profuse Excess;
The Thrist with which our fathers tiled our Roofs,
Submits to every storm and Winters blast,
And yielding place to every riotous sin,
Gives way without, to ruin what's within:
Such is the state I stand in.

And how doth this Tire become me?

Rather ask, how your sweet carriage,
And Court behaviour, doth best grace you, for Loucrs regard,
Not so much the outward habit, as that which the garment covers.

Oh here's that Hail, Shower, Tempest, Storm, and Gust,
That shattered hath this building; Let in Lust,
Intemperance appetite to Vice; withal,
Neglect of every Goodness; Thus I see,
How I am sinking in mine own disease,
Yet can I not abide it.

And how this Gown? I prithee view me well,
And speak with thy best Judgment.

What do you talk of Gowns, and Ornaments;
That have a Beauty, precious in it self,
And becomes any thing.

Let me not live, but she speaks nought but truth,
And i'll for that reward her.

All's one to me, become they me, or not,
Or be I fair, or foul, in others eyes,
So I appear so to my Lionell,
He is the glass, in whom I judge my face,
By whom in order, I will dress these curls,
And place these Jewels, only to please him,
Why dost smile.

To here a Woman, that thinks her self so wise, speak so foolishlie, that
knows well, and does ill.


Teach me wherein I err.


I'll tell thee Daughter; In that thou know thy self to be beloved of so
many, and settle thy affection, only upon one; Doth the Mill grind only,
when the Wind sits in one corner? Or Shippsonely Sail, when it's in this, or
that quarter? Is he a cunning Fencer, that lies but at one Guard? Or he a
Skilful Musician, that plays but on one String? Is there but one way to the
Wood? And but one Bucket that belongs to the Well? To affect one, and despise
all other, becomes the precise Matron, not the Prostitute; the loyal Wife, not
the loose Wanton: Such have I been, as you are now, and should learn, to
Sail with all Winds, defend all Blows, make Music with all Strings, know
all the ways, to the Wood, and like a good travelling Hackney, learn to
drink of all Waters.


May I miscarry in my Blandaes love;
If I that old damnation, do not send
To Hell, before her time.

I would not have you Mother, teach me ought,
That tends to injure him.

Well look too't when 'tis late, and then repent at leisure, as I have done;
Thou see, here's nothing but Prodigallity and Pride, Wantoning, and Wasting,
Rioting, and Revelling, Spoiling, and Spending, Gluttony, and Gormondising, all
goes to Havoc, and can this hold out? When he hath nothing left, to help
himself, how can he Harbour thee? Look at length, to Drink from a dry
Bottle, and feed from an empty Knap-sacke, look too 't, 'twill come to that.


My parsemony shall begin in thee,
And instantly, for from this hour, I vow,
That thou no more shalt Drink upon my cost,
Nor taste the smallest Fragment from my Board;
I'll see thee starve in the street first.

Live to one man? a ieast, thou may as well, tie thy self to one Gown; and
what Fool, but will change with the Fashion, Yes, do, Confine thy self to
one Garment, and use no Variety, and see how foone it will Rot, and turn to
Rags.


Those Rags, be thy Reward; Oh my sweet Blanda,
Only for Thee, I wish my Father dead,
And near to Rouse us from our Sweet delight;
But for this Hag, this Beldam, she whose back,
Hath made her Items, in my Mercers Books,
Whose raucnous Guts, I have Stuffed with Delicates,
Nay even to Surfit; And whose frozen Blood,
I have Warmed with Aquauitae; Be this day
My last of Bounty, to a Wretch Ingrate,
But unto Thee, a new Indenture Scaled,
Of an affection fixed, and Permanent,
I'll love thee still, be 't but to give the lye,
To this old Cancker'd Worm.

Nay, be not angry.

With thee, my Soul shall ever be at peace,
But with this love seducer, still at War.

Here me but speak.

Open but thy lips again, it makes a way,
To have thy Tongue plucked out.

What all in Tempest?

Yes, and the Storm, raised by that Witches Spells.
Oh 'tis a Damned Enchantress.

What's the business?

Only some few words, slipped her unawares,
For my Sake, make her peace.

You charge me deeply,
Come Friend, will you be Moved at women's Words,
A man of your known judgment?

Had you but heard,
The damned Erroneous Doctrine that she taught,
You would have judged her to the Stake.

But Sweet heart,
She now Recants those Errors, once more Number her
Amongst your Household servants.

Shall she beg, and be denied ought from you?

Come this Kiss, Shall end all former quarells.

'Tis not possible,
Those Lips should move in vain, that two ways plead;
Both in their Speech, and Silence.

You have prevailed,
But upon this Condition, no way else,
I'll Sensure her, as she hath Sentenced thee;
But with some small Inuersion,

Speak, how's that?

Not too severe, I prithee see poor wretch,
She at the bar, stands quaking.

Now, hold up?

How man, how?

Her hand, I mean; And now ^'e (...) thee,
According to thy Council given to her:
Sail by one Wind; Thou shalt, to one tune Sing,
Lie at one Guard, and Play but on one String,
Henceforth, I will Confine thee to one Garment,
And that shall be a cast one, Like thy self
Just, past all Wearing, as thou past all Use,
And not to be renewed, til't be as Ragged,
As thou art Rotten.

Nay sweet.

That for her Habbit.

A cold Suit, I have on 't,

To prevent Sursit,
They Diet, sha I be to one Dish confined,
And that too Rifled, with as unclean hands,
As ere were laid on thee.

What he scants me in Victuals, would he but allow once in Drink.

That shall be the refuse of the Flagons, Iaoks,
And Snuffs, such as the naftieft Breathes shall leave;
Of Wine, and Strong-water, never hope,
Henceforth to Smell.

Oh me, I (...) already.

If I sinc^e in my State, of all the rest,
Be thou excused, what thou proposed to her,
Beldam, is now against thy self decreed,
Drink from dry springs, from empty, Knap-sacks fe^de.

No burnt Wine, nor Hot-waters.

Take her hence.

Indeed you are too cruel.

Yes to her,
Only of purpose, to be kind to thee;
Are any of my Guests come?

Fear not Sir,
You will have a fill Table.

What, and Music?

Best Consort in the City, for fix parts.

We shall have Songs then?

Bith' ear.

And Wenches?

Yes bith' eyc.

Ha, what was that you said?

We shall have such to bear you company,
As will no doubt content you.

Enter then:
In Youth there is a Fate, that sways us still.
To know what's Good, and yet pursue what's Ill.

And what's this Dalauill?

My apprehension,
Can give him no more true expression,
Then that he first appears, a Gentleman,
And well conditioned.

That for outward show;
But what in him have you observed else,
To make him better known?

I have nor Eyes,
To search into the inward Thoughrs of Men,
Nor ever was studied in that 'Art,
To judge of Meus affection by the face;
But that which makes me best opinioned of him,
Is, That he's Companion, and the Friend
Beloved of him, whom you so much commend,
The Noble Master Geraldine,

Thou hast spoke,
That which not only crowns his true desert,
But now instates him, in my better thoughts,
Making his Worth, unquestioned.

He pretends
Love to my sister Pru. I have observed him,
Single her out, to private conference.

But I could rather, for her own sake, wish
Young Geraldine would fix his thoughts that way,
And she towards him; In such Affinity,
Trust me, I would not use a sparing hand.

But Love in these kinds, should not be compelled,
Forced, nor Persuaded; When it freely Springs,
And of it self, takes voluntary Root,
It Grows, it Spreads, it Ripens, and brings soorth,
Such an Vsurious Crop of timely Fruit,
As crowns a plentious Autume.

Such a Harvest,
I should not be the vngladdest man to see,
Of all thy sisters friends: Now, whence come you?

Who, I Sir, From a Lodging of Lardgesse, a House of Hospitality, and a Palace
of Plenty; Where there's Feeding like Horses, and Drinking like Fishes; Where
for Pints, we're served in Pottles; and in stead of Pottle-pots, in Pails; in
stead of Siluer-tanckards, we drink out of Water-tanckards; Clarret runs as
freely, as the Cocks; and Canary, like the Conduits of a Coronation day; Where
there's nothing but Feeding and Frollicking; Carving in Kissing; Drinking, and
Dancing; Music and Madding; Fidsing and Feasting.


And where, I pray thee, are all these Revels kept?


They may be rather called Reakes then Revels; As I came along by the door, I
was called up amongst them; Hee-Gallants, and Shee-Gallants, I no sooner looked
out; but saw them out with their Knives, Slashing of Shoulders, Mangling of
Legs, and Launching of Loins, till there was scarce a whole Limb lest amongst
them.


A fearful Massacre.


One was Hacking to cut off a Neck, this was Mangling a Breast, his Knife slip
from the Shoulder, and only cut of a Wing, one was picking the Brains out of
a Head, another was Knuckle deep in a Belly, one was Groping for a Liver,
another Searching for the Kidneyes; I saw one pluck the Sole from the Body
(Goose that she was to suffer't) another pricked into the Breast with his one
Bill, Woodcock to endure it.


How fell they out at first?


I know not that, but it seems, one had a Stomach, and another had a
Stomach; But there was such biting and tearing with their teeth, that I am
sure, I saw some of their poor Carcasses pay for it.


Did they not send for Surgeons?


Alas no, Surgeons help was too late; There was no stitching up of those
Wounds, where Limb was plucked from Limb; Nor any Salve for those Scars,
which all the Plaster of Paris cannot Cure.


Where grew the quarrel first?


It seems it was first Broached in the Kitchen; Certain creatures being brought
in thither, by some of the House; The Cooke being a Colloricke fellow, did so
Towse them and Toss them, so Pluck them and Pull them, till he left them as
naked as my Nail, Pinioned some of them like Felons; Cut the Spurs from
others of their Heals; Then down went his Spits, Some of them he ran in at
the Throat, and out at the Back-side; About went his Basting-Ladle, where he
did so besawce them, that many a shrode turn they had amongst them.


But in all this, How did the Women escape?


They fared best, and did the least hurt that I saw; But for quietness sake,
were forced to swallow what is not yet digested, yet every one had their share,
and she that had least, I am sure by this time, hath her belly full.


And where was all this havoc kept?


Marry Sir, at your next neighbours, Young Master Lionell, Where there is
nothing but Drinking out of Dry-Fats, and Healthing in Halfe-Tubs, his Guests
are fed by the Belly, and Beggars served at his Gate in Baskets; He's the
Adamant of this Age, the Daffadill of these days, the Prince of Prodigallity,
and the very Caesar of all young Citizens.


Belike then, 'twas a Massacre of meat, not as I apprehended?


Your gravity hath gest aright; The chiefest that fell in this Battle, were
wild Foul and tame Foul; Phessants were wounded in stead of Alfaresse, and
Capons for Captains, Anchoues stood for Antiants, and Cauiare for Corporals,
Dishes were assaulted in stead of Ditches, and Rabbits were cut to pieces upon
the rebellings, some lost their Legs, whilst other of their wings were forced
to fly; The Pioner vndermind nothing but Pie-crust; And --


Enough, enough, your wit hath played too long upon our patience;
Wife, it grieves me much both for the young and old man, the one,
Graces his head with care, endures the parching heat and biting cold,
The terrors of the Lands, and fears at Sea in travel, only to gain
Some competent estate to leave his son;
Whiles all that Merchandise, through Gulfs, Crosse-Tides,
Pitats and Storms, he brings so far; The other
Here Shipwrecks in the Harbour.

Tis the care of Fathers; and the weakness
Incident to youth, that wants experience.

I was at the beginning of the Battle,
But here comes some, that it seems
Were at the rifling of the dead Carcasses;
For by their mirth, they have had part of the Spoil.

Youare pleasant, Oendemen, what (...)
Might be the Subject of your pleasant sport,
It promises some pleasure?

If their recreation
Be, as I make no question, on truth grounded,
'twill beger sudden laughter.

What's the Project?

Who shall relate it.

Master Geraldine, if there be any thing can please my Ear,
With pleasant sounds, your Tongue must be the Instrument,
On which the Sring must strike.

Be it his then.

Nay hear it, 'tis a good one.

We entreat you, Possess us of the Novel,

Speak, good Sir.

I shall then, with a kind of Barbarism,
Shadow a Ieast, that asks a smoother Tongue,
For in my poor discourse, I doeprotest,
'twill but loose his luster.

You are Modest.

However speak, I pray; For my sake do it?

This is like a hasty Pudding, longer in eating then it was in making.


Then thus it was, this Gentleman and I,
Past but just now, by your next Neighbours house,
Where as they say, dwells one Young Lionell.

Where I was to night at Supper.

An vnthrist Youth, his Father now at Sea.

Why that's they very Subject, upon which
It seems, this Jest is grounded, there this Night,
Was a great feast.

Why so I told you, Sir.

Be thou still dumb, 'tis-hee that I would hear.

In the height of their Carousing, all their brains,
Warmed with the heat of Wine; Discourse was offered,
Of Ships, and Storms at Sea; when suddenly,
Out of his giddy wildness, one conceives
The Room wherein they quafft, to be a Pinnace,
Moouning and Floating; and the confused Noise,
To be the murmuring Winds, Gusts, Mariners;
That their vnstedfast Footing, did proced
From rocking of the Vessel: This conceived,
Each one begins to apprehend the danger,
And to look out for safety, fly saith one
Up to the Manne-top, and discourer; He
Climbs by the bed post, to the Tester, there
Reports a Turbulent Sea and Tempest towards;
And wills them if they will save their Ship and lines,
To cast their Lading ouer-board; At this
All fall to Work, and Hoyste into the Street,
As to the Sea, What next come to their hand,
Stools, Tables, Trestles, Trenchers, Bed-steds, Cups,
Pots, Plate, and Glasses; Here a fellow Whistles,
They take him for the Boatswain, one lies struggling
Upon the floor, as if he swome for life,
A third, takes the Base-violl for the Cock-boate,
Sits in the belly on it, labours and Rows;
His Oar, the Stick with which the Fiddler plaid;
A fourth, bestrides his Fellows, thinking to escape
As did Arion, on the Dolphins back,
Still fumbling on a gitterne.

Excellent Sport.

But what was the conclusion?

The rude multiude,
Watching without, and gaping for the spoil
Cast from the windows, went bith' ears about it;
The Constable is called to Atone the broil,
Which done, and hearing such a noise within,
Of eminent Ship-racke; enters the house, and finds them
In this confusion, They Adore his staff,
And think it Neptunes Trident, and that he
Comes with his Tritons, (so they called his watch)
To calm the Tempest, and appease the Waives;
And at this point, we left them.

Come what will, i'll steal out of Doors,
And see the end of it, that 'scertaine.

Thanks Master Geraldine, for this discourse,
Introath it hath much pleased me, but the night
Begins to grow fast on us, for your parts,
You are all young, and you may sit up late,
My eyes begin to summon m^e to sleep,
And nothing's more offensive unto Age,
Then to watch long and late.

Now good Rest with you.

What says fair Prudentilla? Maids and Widows,
And we young Bachelors, such as indeed
Are fore'd to lie in Solitary beds,
And sleep without disturbance; we methinks,
Should desire later hours; when Married Wines,
That in their amorous arms, hug their delights;
To often wakings subject; their more hast,
May better be excused.

How can you,
That are as you confess, a single man,
Enter so far into these Mystical secrets
Of Marriage, which as yet you never proved.

There's Lady, an instinct innate in man,
Which prompts us to the apprehensions
Of th 'vses we were borne to; Such we are
Aptest to learn; Ambitious most to know,
Of which our chief is Marriage.

What you Men
Most meditate, we Women seldom dream of.

When dream Maids most?

When think you?

When you lie upon your Backs, come come, your Ear.

We now are left alone.

Why say we be who should be jealous of us?
This is not first of many hundred Nights,
That we two have been private, from the first
Of our acquaintance, when our Tongues but clipped
Our Mothers-tongue, and could not speak it plain,
We knew each other; As in slatnre, so
Increased our sweet Society; Since your travel,
And my late Marriage, Through my Husbands lone,
Mid-night hath been as Mid-day, and my Bed-chamber,
As free to you, as your own Fathers house,
And you as welcome too 't.

I must confess,
It is in you, your Noble Courtesy,
In him, a more then common considence,
And in this Age, canscarce find president.

Most true, it is withal an Argument,
That both our virtues are so deep impressed
In his good thoughts, he knows we cannot err.

A villain were he, to deceive such trust,
Or (were there one) a much worse Character.

And she no less, whom either Beauty, Youth,
Time, Place, or opportunity could tempt,
To injure such a Husband.

You deserve, even for his sake, to be for ever young;
And he for yours, to have his Youth reuew'd;
So mutual is your true coniugall Love; Yet had the Fates so pleased

I know your meaning,
It was once voiced, that we two should have Matched,
The World so thought, and many Tongues so spake,
But Heaven hath now disposed us otherwise;
And being as it is, (a thing in me,
Which I protest, was never wished, nor sought)
Now done, I not repent it.

In those times,
Of all the Treasures of my Hopes and Love,
You were the Exchequer, they were Stored in you;
And had not my unfortunate Travel crossed them,
They had bin here reserved still.

Troth they had,
I should have been your trusty Treasurer.

However let us Love still, I entreat:
That, Neighbour-hood and breeding will allow;
So much the Laws Divine and Human both,
Twixt Brother and a Sister will approve;
Heaven then forbid, that they should limit us
Wish well to one another.

If they should not,
We might proclaim, they were not Charitable,
Which were a deadly fin but to conceive.

Will you resolve me one thing?

As to one, that in my Bosom hath a second place, next my dear Husband.


That's the thing I crave,
And only that, to have a place next him.

Presume on that already, but perhaps,
You mean to stretch it further.

Only thus far,
Your Husbands old, to whom my Soul doth wish,
A Nesters age, So much he merits from me;
Yet if (as proof and Nature daily teach)
Men cannot always live, especially
Such as are old and Crazed; He be called hence,
Fairly, in full maturity of time,
And we two be reserved to after life,
Will you confer your Widow-hood on me?

You ask the thing, I was about to beg;
Your tongue hath spake mine own thoughts.

Vow to that.

As I hope Mercy.

'Tis enough, that word
Alone, instates me happy; Now so please you,
We will divide, you to your private Chamber,
I to find out my friend.

Nay Master Geraldine, one Ceremony rests yet vnperform'd,
My Vow is past, your oath must next proceed,
And as you covet to be sure of me,
Of you I would be certain.

Make ye doubt?

No doubt; but Lone's still Jealous, and in that
To be excused; You then shall swear by Heaven,
And as in all your future Acts, you hope
To thrive and prosper; As the Day may yield
Comfort, or the Night rest, as you would keep
Entire, the Honour of your Fathers house,
And free your Name from Scandal and Reproach,
By all the Goodness that you hope to enjoy,
Or ill to shun --

You charge me deeply Lady.

Till that day come, you shall reserve your self
A single man; Converse nor company
With any Woman, Contract nor Combine,
With Maid, or Widow; which expected hour,
As I do wish not haste, so when it happens,
It shall not come unwelcome; You here all, Vow this.

By all that you have said, I swear, and by this Kiss Confirm.


You're now my Brother,
But then, my second Husband.

We had a stormy night on it.

The Wine still works,
And with the little rest they have took to night,
They are scarce come to themselves.

Now 'tis a Calm,
Thanks to those gentle Sea-gods, that have brought us
To this safe Harbour; Can you tell their names?

He with the Painted-staffe, I heard you call Neptune.

The dreadful god of Seas,
Upon whose back near stuck March flees.

One with the Bill, keeps Neptunes Purposes,
So Ouid says in's Metamorphosis.

A third the learned Poets write on,
And as they say, His name is Triton.

These are the Marine gods, to whom my father
In his long voyage prays too; Cannot they
That brought us to our Haven, bury him
In their Abisse? For if he safe arrive,
I with these Sailors, Sirens, and what not,
Am sure here to be shipwrecked.

Stand up stiff.

But that the ship so totters: I shall fall.

If thou fall, I'll fall with thee.

Now I sink,
And as I dive and drown, Thus by degrees,
I'll pluck thee to the bottom.

A maine for England, See, see,
The Spaniard now strikes Sail.

So must you all.

Whence is your ship, from the Bermoothes?

Worse, I think from Hell:
We are all Lost, Split, Shipwrecked, and undone,
This place is a mere quick-sands.

So we feared.

Wher's my young Master?

Here man, speak, the News?

The News is, I, and you --

What?

She, and all these --

I?

We, and all ours, are in one turbulent Sea
Of Fear, Despair, Disaster and mischance swallowed:
Your father, Sir --

Why, what of him?

He is, Oh I want breath.

Where?

Landed, and at hand.

Upon what coast? Who saw him?

I, these eyes.

Oh Heaven, what shall I do then?

Ask ye me what shall become of you, that have not yet
Had time of study to dispose my self;
I say again, I was upon the Key,
I saw him land, and this way bend his course;
What drunkard's this, that can out sleep a storm
Which threatens all our ruins? Wake him.

Ho, Rioter, awake.

Yes, I am wake;
How dry hath this Salt-water made me; Boy,
Give me the other Glass.

Arise, I say,
My Fathers come from Sea.

If he be come, Bid him be gone again.

Can you trifle at such a time, when your Inventions.
Brains, Wits, Plots, Devices, Stratagems, and all
Should be at one in action? each of you
That love your safeties, lend your helping hands,
Women and all, to take this drunkard hence,
And to bestow him else where.

Lift for Heavens sake.

But what am I the nearer, were all these
Conveyed to sundry places and unseen;
The stain of our disorders still remain,
Of which, the house will wirnesse, and the old man
Must find when he enters; And for these
I am here left to answer: What is he gone?

But whither? But into the self same house
That harbours him; my Fathers, where we all
Attend from him surpriseall.

I will make
That Prison of your fears, your Sanctuary;
Go get you in together.

To this house?

Your Fathers, with your Sweet-heart, these and all;
Nay, no more words but do it,

That were to betray us to his fury.

I haue't here,
To Bail you hence at pleasure; and in the interim,
I'll make this supposed Goal, to you, as safe
From the injured old mans just incensed spleen,
As were you now together in the Low-Countreyes,
Viriginia, or in the Indies.

Present fear,
Bids us to yield unto the faint belief
Of the least hoped safety.

Will you in?

By thee we will be counselled.

Shut them fast.

And thou and I to leave them?

No such thing, for you shall bear your Sweet-heart company, And help to
cheer the rest.


And so thou
Meanest to escape alone?

Rather without,
I'll stand a Champion for you all within;
Will you be swai'd? One thing in any case
I must advise; The gates bolted and locked,
See that amongst you no living voice be heard;
No not so much as a Dog to howl,
Or Cat to mew, all silence, that I charge;
As if this were a mere forsaken house,
And none did there inhabit.

Nothing else?

And though the old man thunder at the gates
As if he meant to ruin what he had reared,
None on their lives to answer.

'Tis my charge;
Remains there nothing else?

Only the Key; for I must play the jailer for your durance, To be the
Mercurie in your release.


Me and my hope, I in this Key deliver
To thy safe trust.

When you are fast you are safe,
And with this turn 'tis done: What fools are these,
To trust their ruined fortunes to his hands
That hath betrayed his own; And make themselves
Prisoner to one deserves to lie for all,
As being cause of all; And yet something prompts me,
I'll stand it at all dangers; And to recompense
The many wrongs unto the young man done:
Now, if I can doubly delude the old,
My brain, about it then; All's husht within,
The noise that shall be, I must make without;
And he that part for gain, and part for wit,
So far hath trauell'd, strive to fool at home:
Which to effect, Art must with Knavery join,
And smooth Dissembling meet with Impudence;
He do my best, and howsoever it prove,
My praise or shame, 'tis but a servants love.

Discharge these honest Sailors that have brought
Our Chests a shore, and pray them have a care,
Those merchandise be safe we left aboard:
As Heaven hath blessed us with a fortunate Voyage,
In which we bring home riches with our healths,
So let not us prove niggards in our store;
See them paid well, and to their full content.

I shall Sir.

Then return: These special things,
And of most value, we'll not trust aboard;
Me thinks they are not safe till they see home,
And there repose, where we will rest our selves,
And bid farewell to Travel; for I vow,
After this hour, no more to trust the Seas,
Nor throw me to such danger.

I could wish
You had took your leave of the Land too.

And now it much rejoices me, to think
What a most sudden welcome I shall bring,
both to my Friends and private Family.

Oh, but how much more welcome had he been,
That had brought certain tidings of thy death.

But soft, what's this? my own gates shut upon me,
And bar their Master entrance? Whose within there?
How, no man speak, are all asleep or dead,
That no soul stirs to open?

What mad man's that, who weary of his life,
Dares once lay hand on these accursed gates?

Whose that? my servant Reignald.

My old Master,
Most glad I am to see you; Are you well Sir?

Thou see I am.

But are you sure you are?
Feel you no change about you? Pray you stand off.

What strange and unexpected greetings this,
That thus a man may knock at his own gates,
Beat with his hands and feet, and call thus loud,
And no man give him entrance?

Said you Sir;
Did your hand touch that hammer?

Why, whose else?

But are you sure you touched it?

How else, I prithee, could I have made this noise?

You touched it then?

I tell thee yet I did.

Oh for the love I bear you,
Oh me most miserable, you, for you own sake,
Of all alive most wretched; Did you touch it?

Why, say I did?

You have then a sin committed,
No sacrifice can expiate to the Dead;
But yet I hope you did not.

'Tis past hope,
The deed is done, and I repent it not.

You and all yours will do it. In this one rashness,
You have undone us all; Pray be not desperate,
But first thank Heaven that you have escaped thus well;
Come from the gate, yet further, further yet,
And tempt your fate no more; Command your servants
Give off and come no nearer, they are ignorant,
And do not know the danger, therefore pity
That they should perish in 't; 'Tis full seven months,
Since any of your house durst o^ce set foot
Over that threshold.

Prithee speak the cause?

First look about, beware that no man hear,
Command these to remove.

Be gone.

Oh Sir, This house is grown Prodigious,
Fatal, Disastrous unto you and yours.

What Fatal? what Disastrous?

Some Host that hath been owner of this house,
In it his Guest hath slain; And we suspect
'Twas he of whom you bought it.

How came this
Discovered to you first?

I'll tell you Sir,
But further from the gate: Your son one night
Suppt late abroad, I within; Oh that night,
I never shall forget; Being safe got home,
I saw him in his chamber laid to rest;
And after went to mine, and being drowsy,
Forgot by chance, to put the Candle out;
Being dead asleep; Your son affrighted, calls
So loud, that I soon wakened; Brought in light,
And found him almost drowned in fearful sweat;
Amazed to see it, I did demand the cause:
Who told me, that this murdered Ghost appeared,
His body gasht, and all ore-stucke with wounds;
And spake to him as follows.

Oh proceed, 'tis that I long to hear.

I am, quoth he,
A Trans-marine by birth, who came well stored
With Gold and Jewels, to this fatal house;
Where seeking safety, I encountered death:
The covetous Merchant, Land-lord of this rent,
To whom I gave my life and wealth in charge;
Freely to enjoy the one, robbed me of both:
Here was my body buried, here my Ghost
Must ever walk, till that have Christian right;
Till when, my habitation must be here:
Then fly young man, Remove thy family,
And secke some safer dwelling: For my death,
This mansion is accursed; 'Tis my possession,
Bought at the dear rate of my life and blood,
None enter here, that aims at his own good.
And with this charge he vanished.

Oh my fear,
Whither wilt thou transport me?

I Entreat keep further from the gate, and fly.

Fly whither? Why doest not thou fly too?

What need I fear, the Ghost and I am friends.

But Reignald.

Tush, I nothing have deserved,
Nor ought transgressed: I came not near the gate.

To whom was that thou spoke?

Was't you Sir named me?
Now as I live, I thought the dead man called,
To enquire for him that thundered at the gate
Which he so dearly paid for: Are you mad,
To stand a fore-seene danger?

What shall I do?

Cover you head and fly; Lest looking back,
You spy your own confusion.

Why doest not thou fly too?

I tell you Sir,
The Ghost and I am friends.

Why did thou quake then?

In fear lest some mischance may fall on you,
That have the dead offended, For my part,
The Ghost and I am friends: Why fly you not,
Since here you are not safe?

Some blessed powers guard me.

Nay Sir, i'll not forsake you: I have got the start;
But ete the goal, 'twill ask both Brain and Art.

We are bound to you, kind Master Geraldine,
For this great entertainment; Troth your cost
Hath much exceeded common neighbour-hood:
You have feasted us like Princes.

This, and more
Many degrees, can never countervail
The oft and frequent welcomes given my son:
You have took him from me quite, and have I think,
Adopted him into your family,
He stays with me so seldom.

And in this,
By trusting him to me, of whom your self
May have both use and pleasure, you're as kind
As moneyed men, that might make benefit
Of what they are possessed, yet to their friends
In need, will lend it gratis.

And like such,
As are indebted more then they can pay;
We more and more confess our selves engaged
To you, for your forbearance.

Yet you see,
Like Debtors, such as would not break their day;
The Treasure late received, we tender back,
The which, the longer you can spare, you still
The more shall bind us to you.

Most kind Ladies,
Worthy you are to borrow, that return
The Principal, with such large use of thanks.

What strange felicity these Rich men take,
To talk of borrowing, lending, and of use;
The usurers language right.

Y'aue Master Geraldine,
Fair walks and gardens, I have praised them,
Both to my Wife and Sister.

You would see them,
There's no pleasure that the House can yield,
That can be debarred from you; prithee Son,
Be thou the Usher to those Mounts and Prospects
May one day call thee Master.

Sir I shall; Please you to walk.

What Master Dalauill,
Will you not bear us company.

'Tis not fit
That we should leave our Noble host alone,
Be you my Friends charge, and this old man mine.

Well, be it then at your pleasure.

You to your Prospects, b^t there's project here
That's of another Nature; Worthy Sir,
I cannot but approve your happiness,
To be the Father of so brave a Son,
So every way accomplished and made up,
In which my voice is least; For I alas,
Bear but a mean part in the common queer,
When with much louder accents of his praise,
So all the world reports him.

Thank my Stars,
They have lent me one, who as he always was,
And is my present joy; If their aspect
Be no ways to our goods Malevolent,
May be my Future comfort.

Yet must I hold him happy above others,
As one that Solie to himself enjoys
What many others aim at; But in vain.

How mean you that?

So Beautiful a Mistress.

A Mistress, said you?

Yes Sir, or a Friend,
Whether you please to stile her.

Mistress? Friend?
Pray be more open languag'd.

And indeed,
Who can blame him to absent himself from home,
And make his Fathers house but as a grange,
For a Beauty so Attractive? Or blame her,
Hugging so weak an old Man in her arms,
To make a new choice, of an equal youth,
Being in him so Perfect? yet introath,
I think they both are honest.

You have Sir,
Possessed me with such strange sancies.

For my part,
How can I love the person of your Son,
And not his reputation? His repair
So often to the House, is voyct by all,
And frequent in the mouths of the whole Country,
Some equally addicted, praise his happiness;
But others, more Censorious and Austere,
Blame and reprove a course so dissolute;
Each one in general, pity the good man,
As one unfriendly dealt with, yet in my conscience,
I think them truly Honest.

'Tis suspicious.

True Sir, at best; But what when scandalons tongues
Will make the worst? and what good in it self,
Sullie and stain by fabulous mis-report;
For let men live as chary as they can,
Their lives are often questioned, Then no wonder,
If such as give occasion of suspicion,
Be subject to this scandal: What I speak,
Is as a Noble Friend unto your Son;
And therefore, as I glory in his Fame,
I suffer in his wrong; for as I live,
I think, they both are honest.

Howsoever, I wish them so.

Some course might be deuis'd,
To stop this clamour ere it grow too wrancke;
Lest that which yet but inconvenience seems,
May turn to greater mischief; This I speak
In Zeal to both, in sovereign care of him
As of a Friend; And tender of her Honour,
As one to whom I hope to be allied,
By Marriage with her Sister.

I much thank you,
For you have clearly given me light of that,
Till now I never dreamt on.

'Tis my Love,
And therefore I entreat you, make not me
To be the first reporter.

You have done
The office of a Noble Gentleman,
And shall not be so injured.

See Master Geraldine,
How bold we are, especially these Ladies
Play little better then the thieves with you,
For they have robbed your Garden.

You might Sir,
Better have termed it saucenes, then theft;
You see we blush not, what we took in private,
To wear in public view.

Besides, these cannot
Be mist out of so many; In full fields,
The gleanings are allow'd.

These and the rest,
Are Ladies, at your service.

Now to horse,
But one thing ere we part, I must entreat;
In which my Wife will be joint suitor with me,
My Sister too.

In what I pray.

That he
Which brought us hither, may but bring us home;
Your much respected Son.

How men are borne,
To woe their own disasters?

But to see us
From whence he brought us Sir, that's all.

This second motion makes it Palpable:
To note a Woman's cunning; Make her husband
Bawd to her own lascivious appetite,
And to Solicit his own shame.

Nay Sir,
When all of us join in so small a suit,
It were some injury to be denied.

And work her Sister too; What will not woman
To accomplish her own ends: But this disease,
I'll seek to Physic ere it grow too far:
I am most sorry to be urged sweet Friends,
In what at this time I can no ways grant;
Most, that these Ladies should be ought denied,
To whom I owe all Service, but occasions
Of weighty and important conscequence,
Such as concern the best of my Estate,
Call him aside; excuse us both this once,
Presume this business is no sooner over,
But he's at his own freedom.

'Twere no manners
In us to urge it further, we will leave you,
With promise Sir, that he shall in my will,
Not be the last remembered.

We are bound to you;
See them to Horse, and instantly return,
We have Employments for you.

Sir I shall,

Remember your last promise,

Not to do it, I should forget my self:
If I find him false
To such a friend, be sure he forfeits me;
In which to be more punctually resolved,
I have a project how to fifth his foul,
How 'tis inclined; whether to yonder place,
The clear bright Palace, or black Dungeon: See,
They are onward on the way, and he returned.

I now attend your pleasure.

You are grown perfect man, and now you float
Like to a well built Vessel; 'Tweene two Currents,
Virtue and Vice; Take this, you steer to harbour;
Take that, to eminent shipwreck.

Pray your meaning.

What fathers cares are, you shall never know,
Till you your self have children; Now my study,
Is how to make you such, that you in them
May have a feeling of my love to you.

Pray Sir expound your self, for I protest
Of all the Languages I yet have learth'd,
This is to me most foreign.

Then I shall;
I have lived to see you in your prime of youth
And height of Fortune, so you will but take
Occasion by the forehead; to be brief,
And cut off all superfluous circumstance,
All the ambition that I aim at now,
Is but to see you married.

Married Sir.

And to that purpose, I have found out one,
Whose Youth and Beauty may not only please
A curious eye; But her immediate means,
Able to strengthen a state competent,
Or raise a ruined Fortune.

Of all which,
I have believe me, neither need nor use;
My competence best pleasing as it is;
And this my singularity of life,
Most to my mind contenting.

I suspect, but yet must prove him further;
Say to my care I add a Fathers charge,
And couple with my counsel my command:
To that how can you answer?

That I hope:
My duty and obedience still vnblam'd,
Did never merit such austerity;
And from a father never yet displeased.

Nay, then to come more near unto the point,
Either you must resolve for present marriage,
Or forfeit all your interest in my love.

Vn-say that language, I entreat you Sir,
And do not so oppress me; Or if needs
Your heavy imposition stand in force,
Resolve me by your counsel; With more safety
May I infringe a sacred vow to heaven,
Or to oppose me to your strict command?
Since one of these I must.

Now Dalauill,
I find thy words too true.

For marry, Sir, I neither may, nor can.

Yet whore you may;
And that's no brech of any vow to Heaven:
Pollute the Nuptial bed with Michall sin;
Asperse the honour of a noble friend;
Forfeit thy reputation, here below.
And the interest that thy Soul might claim above,
In you blessed City: These you may, and can,
With untouched conscience: Oh, that I should live
to see the hopes that I have stored so long;
Thus in a moment ruined: And the staff,
On which my old decrepit age should lean;
Before my face thus broken: On which trusting,
I thus abortiuely, before my time,
Fall headlong to my Grave.

It yet stands strong;
Both to support you unto future life,
And fairer comfort.

Never, never son:
For till thou can acquit thy self of scandal,
And me of my suspicion; Here, even here,
Where I have measured out my length of earth;
I shall expire my last.

Both these I can:
Then rise Sir, I entreat you; And that innocence,
Which poisoned by the breath of Calumny, cast you thus low,
Shall, these few staines wiped off, with better thoughts erect you.

Well, Say on.

There's but one fire from which this smoke may grow;
Namely, the vnmatcht yoke of youth; And
In which, If ever I occasion was,
Of the sma^lest breach; The greatest implacable mischief
Adultery can threaten, fall on me;
Of you may I be disauow'd a son;
And unto Heaven a servant: For that Lady,
As she is Beauties mirror, so I hold her
For Chastities examples: From her tongue,
Never came language, that arrived my ear,
That even censurious Cato, lived he now,
Could mis-interpret; Never from her lips,
Came unchaste kiss; Or from her constant eye,
Look sauouring of the least immodesty: Further --

Enough; One only thing remains, which on thy part performed, Assures firm
credit to these thy protestations.


Name it then.

Take hence the occasion of this common fame;
Which hath already spread it self so far,
To her dishonour and thy prejudice, From this day forward,
To forbear the house: This do upon my blessing.

As I hope it, I will not fail your charge.

I am satisfied.

To which hand shall I turn me; Here's my Master
Hath bin to enquire of him that sold the house,
Touching the murder; Here's an Vsuring-Rascall,
Of whom we have borrowed money to supply
Our prodigal expenses; Broke our day,
And owe him still the Principal and Use:
Were I to meet them single, I have brain
To oppose both, and to come off vnscarr'd;
But if they do assault me, and at once.
Not Hercules himself could stand that odds:
Therefore I must encounter them by turns;
And to my Master first: Oh Sir, well met.

What Reignald; I but now met with the man,
Of whom I bought you house.

What, did you Sir?
But did you speak of ought concerning that
Which I last told you?

Yes, I told him all.

Then am I cast: But I pray tell me Sir,
Did he confess the murder?

No such thing; Most stiffly he denies it.

Impudent wretch; Then serve him with a warrant, let the Officer
Bring him before a Justice, you shall hear
What I can say against him; Sfoot deni't:
But I pray Sir excuse me, yonder's one
With whom I have some business; Stay you here,
And but determine what's best course to take,
And note how I will follow't.

Be brief then.

Now, If I can as well put off my Vse-man,
This day, I shall be master of the field.

That should be Lionells man.

The ^ame, I know him.

After so many fri^olous delays,
There's now some hope. He that was wont to shun us,
And to absent himself, accoasts us freely;
And with a pleasant countenance: Well met Reignald,
What's this money ready?

Never could you
Have come in better time.

Where's your master, young Lionell, it something troubles me, That he should
break his day.


A word in private,

Tush, Private me no priuates, in a word,
Speak, are my moneys ready?

Not so loud.

I will be louder yet; Give me my moneys,
Come, tender me my moneys.

We know you have a throat, wide as your cons^ience; You need not use it now --
Come, get you home.


Home?

Yes, home I say, return by three a Clock,
And I will see all cancelled.

'Tis no^ past two, and I can stay till three,
I'll make that now my business, otherwise,
With these loud clamours, I will haunt thee still;
Give me my Use, give me my Principal.

This bur will still cleave to me; what, no means
To shake him off; I near was caught till now.
Come come, you're trouble (...).

Prevent that trouble,
And without trifling, pay me down my cash;
I will be fooled no longer.

So so so.

I have been still put off, from time to time,
And day to day; these are but cheating tricks,
And this is the last minute i'll forbear
Thee, or thy Master: Once again, I say,
Give me my Use, give me my Principal.

Pox a this use, that hath and one so many:
And now will confound me.

Hast thou heard this?

Yes Sir, and to my grief.

Come hither Reignald.

Here Sir; Nay, now I am gone.

What use is this?
What Principal he talks of? in which language
He names my Son; And thus vpbraideth thee,
What is't you owe this man?

A trifle Sir,
Pray stop his mouth; And pay't him.

I pay, what?

If I say pay't him; Pay't him.

What's the Sum?

A toy, the maine about five hundred pounds;
And the use fifty.

Call you that a toy?
To what use was it borrowed? At my departure,
I left my Son sufficient in his charge,
With surplus, to de^y a la^ge expense,
Without this need of borrowing.

'Tis confessed,
Yet stop his clamorous mouth; And only say,
That you will pay't to morrow.

I pass my word.

Sir, if I bid you do it; Nay, no more words,
But say you'll pay't tomorrow.

Ieast indeed, but tell me how these moneys were bestowed?

Safe Sir, I warrant you.

The Sum still safe,
Why do you not then tender it your selves?

Your ear sir; This sum joined to the rest,
Your Son hath purchased Land and Houses.

Land, dost thou say?

A goodly House, and Gardens.

Now joy on him,
That whilst his Father Merchandis'd abroad,
Had care to add to his estate at home:
But Reignald, wherefore Houses?

Now Lord Sir,
How dull you are; This house possessed with spirits,
And there no longer stay; Would you have had
Him, us, and all your other family,
To live, and lie in the streets; It had not Sir,
Been for your reputation.

Blessing on him,
That he is grown so thiftie.

'Tis struck three,
My money's not yet tendered.

Pox upon him,
See him discharged, I pray Sir.

Call upon me
To morrow Friend, as early as thou wilt;
I'll see thy debt defraid.

It is enough, I have a true mans word.

Now tell me Reignald,
For thou hast made me proud of my Sons thrift;
Where, in what Country, doth this fair House stand.

Never in all my time, so much to seek;
I know not what to answer.

Wherefore studdiest thou?
Use men to purchase Lands at a dear rate,
And know not where they lie?

'Tis not for that,
I only had forgot his name that sold them,
'Twas let me see, see.

Call thy self to mind.

Non-plust or never now; Where art thou brain?
O Sir, where was my memory; 'Tis this house
That next adioynes to yours,

My Neighbour Ricots.

The same, the same Sir; We had pennyworths in it;
And I can tell you, have been offered well
Since, to forsake our bargain.

As I live,
I much commend your choice.

Nay, 'tis well seated,
Rough-cast without, but bravely lined within;
You have met with few such bargains.

Prithee knock,
And call the Master, or the servant on it;
To let me take free view on it.

Puzzle again on Puzzle; One word Sir,
The House is full of Women, no man knows,
How on the instant, they may be employed;
The Rooms may lie unhandsome; and Maids stand
Much on their cleanliness and housewifery;
To take them unprovided, were disgrace,
'Twere fit they had some warning; Now, do you
Fetch but a warrant, from the Justice Sir;
You understand me.

Yes, I do.

To attach him of suspected murder; I'll see it scru'd;
Did he deny it? And in the interim, I
Will give them notice, you are now arrived,
And long to see your purchase.

Councilled well; And meet some half hour hence.

This plunge well past,
All things fall even, to Crown my Brain at last.

Where shall we dine to day?

At the Ordinary.
I see Sir, you are but a stranger here;
This Barnet, is a place of great resort;
And commonly upon the Market days,
Here all the Country Gentlemen Appoint,
A friendly meeting; Some about affairs
Of Consequence and Profit; Bargain, Sale,
And to confer with Chap-men, some for pleasure,
To match their Horses; Wager in their Dogs,
Or try their Hawks; Some to no other end,
But only meet good Company, discourse,
Dine, drink, and spend their Money.

That's the Market, We have to make this day.

'Tis a Commodity, that will be easily vented:
What my worthy Friend,
You are happily encountered; Oh, you're grown strange,
To one that much respects you; Troth the House
Hath all this time seemed naked without you;
The good Old Man doth never sit to meat,
But next his giving Thanks, he speaks of you;
There's scarce a bit, that he at Table tastes,
That can digest without a Geraldine,
You are in his mouth so frequent: He and She
Both wondering, what distaste from one, or either,
So suddenly, should alianate a Guest,
To them, so dearly welcome.

Master Dalauill,
Thus much let me for him Apoligie;
Diverse designs have thronged upon us late,
My weakness was not able to support
Without his help; He hath bin much abroad,
At London, or else where; Besides 'tis Term;
And Lawyers must be followed, seldom at home,
And scarcely then at leisure.

I am satisfied,
And I would they were so too, but I hope Sir,
In this restraint, you have not used my name^

Not, as I live.

You're Noble -- Who had thought
To have met with such good Company; You're it seem
But new alighted; Father and Son, ere part,
I vow we'll drink a cup of Sack together:
Physicians say, It doth prepare the appetite
And stomach against dinner.

We old men,
Are apt to take these courtesies.

What say you Friend?

lie but enquire for one, at the next Inn,
And instantly return.

'Tis enough.

Bess: How dost thou Gitle?

Faith we may do how we list for you, you are grown so Great a stranger: We
are more beholding

To Master Dalauill, He's a constant Guest:
And howsoe^e to some, that shall be nameless,
His presence may be graceful; Yet to others --
I could say somewhat.

He's a noble fellow,
And my choice friend.

Come come, he is, what he is; and that the end will prove.

And how's all at home?
Nay, we'll not part without a glass of wine,
And meet so seldom: Boy,
Drawer Anon, anon Sir.

A Pint of Clarret, quickly.
Nay, sit down: The news, the news, I pray thee;
I am sure, I have been much enquired of
Thy old Master, and thy young Mistress too.

Ever your name is in my Masters mouth, and sometimes too In hers, when she
hath nothing else to think of:

Well well, I could say somewhat.

Heerc's your wine Sir.

Fill Boy: Here Bess, this glass to both their healths; Why dost weep my
wench?


Nay, nothing Sir.

Come, I must know.

Introath I love you Sir,
And ever wished you well; You are a Gentleman,
Whom always I respected; Know the passages
And private whisperings, of the secret love
Betwixt you and my Mistress; I dare swear,
On your part well intended: But --

But what?

You bear the name of Land-lord, but another
Enjoys the rent; You dote upon the shadow,
But another he bears away the substance.

Be more plain.

You hope to enjoy a virtuous widdow-hood;
But Dalauill, whom you esteem you friend,
He keeps the wife in common.

Y' are too blame,
And Bess, you make me angry; He's my friend,
And she my second self; In all their meetings,
I never saw so much as cast of eye
Once entertained betwixt them.

That's their cunning.

For her; I have been with her at all hours,
Both late and early; In her bed-chamber.
And often singly ushered her abroad:
Now, would she have bin any mans alive,
She had bin mine; You wrong a worthy Friend,
And a chaste Mistress, you're not a good Girl;
Drink that speak better of her, I could chide you,
But I'll forbear; What you have rashly spoke,
Shall ever here be buried.

I am sorry my freeness should offend you,
But yet know, I am her Chamber-maid.

Play now the Market-maid.
And prithee bout thy business.

Well, I shall -- that man should be so fooled.

She a Prostitute?
Nay, and to him my troth plight, and my Friend;
As possible it is, that Heaven and Earth
Should be in love together, meet and kiss,
And so cut off all distance: What strange frenzy
Came in this wenches brain, so to surmise?
Were she so base? his nobleness is such,
He would not entertain it for my sake:
Or he so bent? His hot and lust burnt appetite
Would be soon quenched, at the mere contemplation
Of her most Pious and Religious life.
The Girl was much too blame; Perhaps her Mistress
Hath stirred her anger, by some word or blow,
Which she would thus revenge; Not apprehending
At what a high price Honour's to be rated;
Or else some one that envies her rare virtue,
Might hire her thus to brand it; Or, who knows
But the young wench may fix a thought on me;
And to divert me from her Mistress love,
May raise this false aspersion? howsoever,
My thoughts on these two columns fixed are,
She's good as fresh, and purely chaste as fair.

Oh Sir, you are the Needle, and if the whole County of Middlesex had bin
turned to a mere Bottle of Hay, I had bin inioyn'd to have found you out, or
never more returned back to my old Master: There's a Letter Sir.


I know the hand that superscribed it well;
Stay but till I peruse it, and from me
Thou shalt return an answer.

I shall Sir: This is Market-day, and here acquaintance commonly meet; and
whom have I encountered my gossip Pint-pot, and brim full; nay, I mean to
drink with you before I part, and how doth all your worshipful kindred? your
sister Quart, your pater-Pottle, (who was ever a Gentleman's fellow) and your
old grandsier Gallon; they cannot choose but be all in health, since so many
healths have been drunk out of them: I could wish them all here, and in no
worse state then I see you are in at this present; howsoever gossip, since I
have met you hand to hand, I'll make bold to drink to you -- Nay, either you
must pledge me, or get one to do it for you; Do you open your mouth towards
me? well, I know what you would say; Here Roger, to your Master and Mistress,
and all our good friends at home; gramercy gossip, if I should not pledge thee,
I were worthy to be turned out to Grass, and stand no more at Livery: And now
in requital of this courtesy I'll begin one health to you and all your
society in the Oeller, to Peter Pipe, Harry Hogshead, Bartholomew Butt, and
little master Randall Runlet, to Timothy Taster, and all your other great and
small friends.


He writes me heete,
That at my discontinuance he's much grieved,
Desiring me, as I have cuer rendered
Or him or his, to give him satisfaction
Touching my discontent; and that in person,
By any private meeting.

I Sir, 'tis very true, The Letter Speaks no more
Then he wished me to tell you by word of mouth.

Thou art then of his council?

His Privy and please you.

Though near so strict hath bin my fathers charge,
A little I'll dispense with it, for his love;
Commend me to thy Master, tell him from me,
On Monday night (then will my leisure serve)
I will by Heavens assistance visit him.

On Monday Sir:
That's as I remember, just the day before Tuesday.

But 't will be midnight first, at which late hour,
Please him to let the Garden door stand open,
At that I'll enter; But conditionally,
That neither Wife, Friend, Servant, no third soul
Save him, and thee to whom he trusts this message,
Know of my coming in, or passing out:
When, tell him, I will fully satisfy him
Concerning my forct absence.

I am something oblivious; Your message would be the truelier delivered if it
were set down in black and white.


I'll call for Pen and Ink,
And instantly dispatch it.

Now impudence, but steel my face this once,
Although I near blush after; Here's the house,
Ho, whose within? What, no man to desend
These innocent gates from knocking?

Whose without there?

One Sir that ever wished your worships health;
And those few hours I can find time to pray in,
I still remember it.

Gramercy Reignald,
I love all those that wish it: You are the men
Lead merry lives, Feast, Revel, and Carouse;
You seele no tedious hours; Time plays with you,
This is your golden age.

It was, but now Sir,
That Gold is turned to worse then Alcamy,
It will not stand the test; Those days are past,
And now our nights come on.

Tell me Reignald, is he returned from Sea?

Yes, to our grief already, but we fear
Hereafter, it may prove to all our cost's.

Suspects thy Master any thing?

Not yet Sir;
Now my request is, that your worship being
So near a Neighbour, therefore most disturbed,
Would not be first to peach us.

Take my word;
With other Neighbours make what peace you can,
I'll not be your accuser.

Worshipful Sir;
I shall be still your Beads-man; Now the business
That I was sent about, the Old Man my Master
Claiming some interest in acquaintance past,
Desires (might it be no way trouble some)
To take free view of all your House within.

View of my House? Why 'tis not set to Sale,
Nor bill upon the door; Look well upon it:
View of my House?

Nay, be not angry Sir,
He no way doth disable your estate;
As far to buy, as you are loath to sell;
Some alterations in his own^ he would make.
And hearing yours by worke-men much commended,
He would make that his President.

What fancies
Should at this age possess him; Knowing the cost,
That he should dr^ of Building.

'Tis supposed,
He hath late found a Wife out for his Son;
Now Sir, to have him near him, and that necrenesse
Too, without trouble, though beneath one roof,
Yet parted in two Families; He would build
And make what's picked, a persit quadrangle,
Proportioned just with yours, were you so pleased,
To make it his example.

Willingly; I will but order some few things within,
And then attend his coming.

Most kind cox-combe,
Great Alexander, and Agathocles,
Caesar, and others, have bin Famed, they say.
And magnified for high Facinerous deeds;
Why claim not I, an equal place with them?
Or rather a presedent: These commanded
Their Subjects, and their servants; I my Master,
And every way his equals, where I please,
Lead by the nose along; They placed their burdens
On Horses, Mules, and Camels; I, old Men
Of strength and wit, load with my knavery,
Till both their backs and brains ache; Yet poor animals,
They near complain of weight; Oh are you come Sir?

I made what haste I could.

And brought the warrant?

See here, I hau't.

'Tis well done, but speak, runs it
Both without Bail and Maineprize?

Nay, it carries both form and power.

Then I shall warrant him;
I have bin yonder Sir,

And what says he?

Like one that offers you
Free ingress, view and regress, at your pleasure;
As to his worthy Land-lord.

Was that all?

He spake to me, that I would speak to you,
To speak unto your Son; And then again,
To speak to him, that he would speak to you;
You would release his Bargain.

By no means,
Men must advise before they part with Land,
Not after to repent it; 'Tis most just,
That such as hazard, and disburse their Stocks,
Should take all gains and profits that accrue,
As well in Sale of Houses, as in Barter,
And Traffic of all other Merchandise.

See in acknowledgement of a Tenants duty,
He attends you at the gate; Salute him Sir.

My worthy Friend.

Now as I live, all my best thoughts and wishes
Impart with yours, in your so safe return;
Your servant tells me, you have great desire
To take suruiew of this my house within.

Be it Sir, no trouble to you.

None, enter boldly;
With as much freedom, as it were your own.

As it were mine; Why Reignald, is it not?

Lord Sir, that in extremity of grief,
You'll add unto vexation; See you not
How sad he's on the sudden,

I observe it.

To part with that which he hath kept so long;
Especially his Inheritance: Now as you love
Goodness, and Honesty, torment him not
With the least word of Purchase.

Councilled well;
Thou teach me Humanity.

Will you enter?
Or shall I call a servant, to conduct you
Through every Room and Chamber?

By no means;
I fear we are too much troublesome of our selves.

See what a goodly Gate?

It likes me well.

What brave carved posts; Who knows but here,
In time Sir, you may keep your Shreualtie;
And I be one of the Seriants.

They are well Carved.

And cost me a good price Sir, Take your pleasure,
I have business in the Town.

Poor man, I pity him;
H'ath not the heart to stay and see you come,
As 'twere, to take Possession; Look that way Sir,
What goodly fair Bay windows?

Wondrous stately.

And what a Galleric, How costly Seeled;
What painting round about?

Every fresh object to good, adds betternesse.

Tarrast above, and how below supported; do they please you?

All things beyond opinion; Trust me Reignald,
I'll not forgo the Bargain, for more gain
Then half the price it cost me.

If you would? I should not suffer you; Was not the
Money due to the Usurer, took upon good ground,
That proved well built upon? We were no fools
That knew not what we did.

It shall be satisfied.

Please you to trust me with it, I'll see it discharged.

He hath my promise, and I'll do it my self:
Never could Son have better pleased a Father,
Then in this Purchase: Hie thee instantly
Unto my house in the Country, give him notice
Of my arrive, and bid him with all speed
Poaste hither.

Ere I see the warrant served?

It shall be thy first business; For my Soul
Is not at peace, till face to face, I approve
His Husbandry, and much commend his Thrift;
Nay, without pause, be gone.

But a short journey;
For he's not far, that I am sent to seek:
I have got the start, the best part of the Race
is run already, what remains, is small,
And tyre now, I should but forfeit all.

Make haste, I do entreat thee.

This is the Garden gate; And here am I set to stand Sentinel, and to attend
the coming of Young Master Geraldine: Master Dalauill's gone to his Chamber;
My Mistress to hers; 'Tis now about Mid-night; A Banquet prepared, bottles of
Wine in readiness, all the whole Household at their rest; And no creature by
this, honestly stirring, saving I and my Old Master; He in a bye Chamber,
prepared of purpose for their private Meeting; And I here to play the Watch


A Friend.


The Word?


Honest Roger.


That's the Word indeed; You have lea^e to pass freely Without calling my
Corporal.


How go the affairs within?


According to promise, the business is composed, and the ser^ants disposed, my
young Mistress reposed, my old Master according as you proposed, attends you if
you be exposed to give him meeting; Nothing in the way being interposed, to
transpose you to the least danger: And this I dare be deposed, if you will not
take my word, as I am honest Roger.


Thy word shall be my warrant, but secured
Most in thy Masters promise, on which building;
By this known way I enter.

Nay, by your leave, I that was late but a plain Sentinel,
Will now be your Captain conductor: Follow me.

I wonder whence this strangeness should proceed,
Or wherein I, or any of my house,
Should be the occasion of the least distaste;
Now, as I wish him well, it troubles me;
But now the time grows on, from his own mouth
To be resolved; And I hope satisfied:
Sir, as I live, of all my friends to me
Most wishedly, you are welcome: Take that Chair,
I this: Nay, I int^eat no complement;
Attend -- Fill wine.

Till the mouths of the bottles yawn^ directly upon the floor, and the
bottoms turn their rayl^s up to the seeling; Whilst there's any blood in
their bellies, I'll not leave them.


I first salute you thus.

It could not come
From one whom I more honour; Sir, I thank you.

Nay, since my Master begun it, I'll see it go round
To all three.

Now give us leave.

Talk you by your selves, whilst I find something to say to this: I have a
tale no tell him shall make his stony heart relent.


Now, first Sir your attention I entreat;
Next, your belief that what I speak is just,
Maugre all contradiction.

Both are granted.

Then I (...); With due acknowledgement
Of all your more then many courtesies:
Y'aue bin my second father, and your wife,
My noble and chaste Mistress; All your seruanes
At my command; And this your bounteous Table,
As free and common as my Fathers house;
Neither against any, or the least of these,
Can I commence just quarrel.

What might then be
The cause of this constraint, in thus absenting
Your self from such as love you?

Out of many,
I will propose some few: The care I have
Of your (as yet unblemished) renown;
The untouched honour of your virtuous wife;
And (which I value least, yet dearly too)
My own fair reputation.

How can these, in any way be questioned?

Oh dear Sir,
Bad tongues have bin too busy with us all;
Of which I never yet had time to think,
But with sad thoughts and griefs unspeakable:
It hath bin whispered by some wicked ones,
But loudly thundered in my fathers ears,
By some that have maligned our happiness;
(Heaunen, if it can brooke slander, pardon them)
That this my customary coming hither,
Hath bin to base and sorded purposes:
To wrong your bed; Injure her chastity;
And be mine own undoer: Which, how false?

As Heaven is true, I know it.

Now this Calumny
Ariuing first unto my fathers ears,
His easy nature was induced to think,
That these things might perhaps be possible:
I answered him, as I would do to Heaven:
And cleared my self in his suspicious thoughts,
As truly, as the high all-knowing Judge
Shall of these staines acquit me; which are merely
Aspersions and untruths: The good old man
Possessed with my sincerity, and yet careful
Of your renown, her honour, and my fame;
To stop the-worst that scandal could inflict;
And to prevent false rumours charges me,
The cause remoou'd, to take away the effect;
Which only could be, to forbear your house;
And this upon his blessing: You hear all.

And I of all acquit you: This your absence,
With which my love most caucll'd; Orators
In your behalf. Had such things past betwixt you,
Not threats nor chidings could have driven you hence:
It pleads in your behalf, and speaks in hers;
And arms me with a double confidence,
Both of your friendship, and her loyalty:
I am happy in you both, and only doubtful
Which of you two doth most impart my love:
You shall not hence to night.

Pray pardon Sir.

You are in your lodging.

But my fathers charge.

My conjuration shall dispense with that;
You may be up as early as you please;
But hence to night you shall not.

You are powerful.

This night, of purpose, I have parted beds,
Faining my self not well, to give you meeting;
Nor can be ought suspected by my Wife,
I have kept all so private: Now 'tis late,
I'll steal up to my rest, But howsoever,
Let's not be strange in our writing, that way daily
We may confer without the least suspect,
In spite of all such base calumnious tongues;
So, Now good-night sweet friend

May he that made you
So just and good, still guard you. Not to bed,
So I perhaps might ouer-sleepe my self,
And then my tardy waking might be^ay me
To the more early household; Thus as I am,
I'll rest me on this Pallar; But in vain,
I find no sleep can fasten on mine eyes,
There are in this disturbed brain of mine
So many mutinous fancies: This, to me,
Will be a tedious night; How shall I spend it?
No Book that I can spy? no company?
A little let me recollect my self;
Oh, what more wished company can I find,
Suiting the apt occasion, time and place;
Then the sweet contemplation of her Beauty;
And the fruition too, time may produce,
Of what is yet lent out? 'Tis a sweet Lady,
And every way accomplished: Hath mere accident
Brought me thus near, and I not visit her?
Should it arrive here are, perhaps might breed
Our lasting separation; For 'twixt Lovers,
No quarrell's to unkindness; Sweet opportunity
Offers prevention, and invites me too't:
The house is known to me, the stairs and rooms;
The way unto her chamber frequently
Trodden by me at mid-night, and all hours:
How joyful to her would a meeting be,
So strange and unexpected; Shadowed too
Beneath the veil of night; I am resolved
To give her visitation, in that place
Where we have past deep vows, her bed-chamber:
My fiery love this darkness makes seem bright,
And and this the path that leads to my delight.
And this the gate vntoo't; I'll listen first,
Before too rudely I disturb her rest:
And gentle breathing; Ha? she's sure awake,
For in the bed two whisper, and their voices
Appear to me unequal; -- One a woman's --
And hers; -- The other should be no maids tongue,
It bears too big a tone; And hark, they laugh;
(Damnation) But list further; Tother sounds --
Like -- 'Tis the same false perjured traitor, Dalauill,
To friend and goodness: Unchaste impious woman,
False to all faith, and true coniugall love;
There's met, a Serpent and a Crockadell;
A Synon and a Circe: Oh, to what
May I Compare you? -- But my Sword,
I'll act a nobel execution,
On two unmatched for sorded vilianie: --
I left it in my Chamber, And thanks (...)
That I did to; It hath prevented me
From playing a base Hang-man: Since securely^
Whilst I, although for many, yet less faults,
Strive hourly to repent me; I once loved her,
And was to him intir'd; Although I pardon,
Heaven will find time to punish, I'll not stretch
My just revenge so far, as once by (...)
To make your brazen Impudence to (...);
Damn on, revenge too great; And to suppress
Your Souls yet lower, without hope to (...)
Heap Ossa upon Pelion: You have made me
To hate my very Country, because here bred:
Near two such monsters; First I'll leave this House,
And then my Fathers; Next I'll take my leave,
Both of this Clime and Nation, Travel till
Age snow upon this Head: My passions now,
Are unexpressible, I'll end the^ thus:
Ill man, bad Woman, your unheard of (...),
This uniust censure, on a Just man give,
To seek out place, where no two (...) live.

A happy Morning now (...) your Lady,
To equal the content of a sweet Night.

It hath bin to my wish, (...) your desire:
And this your coming by (...)
Unto my Sister Pru. cuts of suspicion
Of any such converse 'twi^ you and (...).

It hath bin wisely carried.

One thing troubles me.

What's that my Dearest?

Why your Friend Geraldine,
Should on the sudden (...) absent himself?
Has he had think you no intelligence.
Of these our private meetings.

No, on my Soul,
For therein hath my brain (...) yours;
I studying to engross you to my self,
Of his continued absence have bin (...)
Yet he of your affection no way jealous,
Or of my Friendship -- How the plot was cast,
You at our better leisure shall partake;
The air grows cold, have care unto your health,
Suspicious eyes are ore us, that yet sleep,
But with the dawn, will open; Sweet (...) you
To your warm Sheets; I now to fill my own,
That have this Night bin empty.

You advise well;
Oh might this Kiss dwell ever on thy Lips,
In my remembrance.

Doubt it not I pray,
Whilst Day frights Night, and Night pursues the day:
Good morrow.

Now is the Goal delivery; Through this back gate
Shift for your selves, I here vnprison all.

But tell me, how shall we dispose our selves?
We are as far to seek now, as the first;
What is it to repreeue us for few hours,
And now to suffer, better had it bin
At first, to have stood the trial, so by this,
We might have past our (...).

Sweet Reignald.

Honest rog^e.

If now thou fail us, then we are lost for ever,

This same sweet Reignald, and this honest rogue,
Hath bin the Burgess, under whose protection
You all this while have lived, free from Arrests,
But now, the Sessions of my power's broke up,
And you exposed to Actions, Warrants, Writs;
For all the hellish rabble are broke loose,
Of Seriants, Sheriffs, and Baliffes,

Guard us Heaven,

I tell you as it is; Nay, I my self
That have bin your Protector, now as subject
To every varlets Pestle, for you know
How I am engaged with you -- At whose suit sir.

Why did thou Start.

I was afraid some Catchpole stood behind (...),
To clap me on the Shoulder.

No such thing; Yet I protest
Thy fear did fright us all.

I knew your guilty conciences.

No Brain left?

No crotchet for my sake?

One kiss then Sweet,
Thus shall my crotchets, and your kisses meet.

Nay, tell us what to trust too.

Lodge your selves
In the next Tavern, there's the Cash that's left,
Go, health it freely for my good success;
Nay, Drown it all, let not a Tester escape
To be consumed in rot-gut; I have begun,
And I will stand the period.

Bravely spoke.

Or perisn in the conflict.

Worthy Reignald.

Well, if he now come off well, Fox you all;
Go, call for Wine; For sing^e of my self
I will oppose all danger; But I charge you,
When I shall faint or find my self disttest;
If I like brave Orlands, wind my Horne,
Make haste unto my rescew.

And die in it.

Well hast thou spoke my noble Charlemain,
With these thy Peers about thee.

May good Speed
Attend thee still.

The end still crowns the deed.

Sir sir, your threats nor warrants, can fright me;
My honesty and innocency's known
Always to have bin vnblemisht; Would you could
As well approve your own Integrity,
As I shall doubtless acquit my self
Of this surmised murder.

Rather Surrender
The price I paid, and take into thy hands
This haunted mansion, or I'll prosecute
My wrongs, even to the utmost of the Law,
Which is no less then death.

I'll answer all
Old Lionell, both to thy shame and scorn;
This for thy Menaces.

This is the House, but where's the noise that was wont to be in it? I am sent
hither, to deliver a Noate, to two young Gentlemen that here keep
Reuell-rout; I remember it, since the last Massacre of Meat that was made in it;
But it seems, That the great Storm that was raised then, is chaste now; I have
other Notes to deliver, one to Master Rycott -- and -- I shall think on them
all in order; My Old Master makes a great Feast, for the parting of young
Master Geraldine, who is presently upon his departure for Travel, and the
better to grace it, hath invited many of his Neighbours and Friends; Where will
be Old Master Geraldine -- his Son, and I cannot tell how many; But this is
strange, the Gates shut up at this time a day, belike they are all Drunk and
laid to sleep, if they be, I'll wake them, with a Murrain.


What desperate fellowe's this, that ignorant
Of his own danger, thunders at these Gates?

Ho, Reignald, Riotous Reignald, Revelling Reignald.

What madness doth possess thee, honest Friend,
To touch that Hammers handle?

What madness doth possess thee, honest Friend,
To ask me such a question?

Nay, stir not yo^?

Not I; The game begins.

How doest thou, art thou well?

Yes very well, I thank you, how do you Sir?

No alteration; What change about thee?

Not so much change about me at this time,
As to change you a Shilling into two Teasters.

Yet I advise thee Fellow, for thy good,
Stand further from the Gate.

And I advise thee Friend, for thine own good, stand not betwixt me and the
Gate, but give me leave to deliver my er^ant; Hoe, Reignald, you mad Rascal.


In vain thou thunder at these silent Doors,
Where no man dwells to answer, saving Ghosts,
Furies, and Sprights.

Ghosts; Indeed there has bin much walking, in and about the House after
Mid-night.


Strange noise oft heard.


Yes, terrible noise, that none of the neighbours could take any rest for it, I
have heard it my self.


You hear this; Here's more witness.

Very well Sir.

Which you shall dearly answer -- whooping.

And hollowing.

And shouting.

And crying out, till the whole house rung again.

Which thou hast heard?

Oftner then I have toes and singers.

Thou wilt be deposed of this?

I'll be sworn too't, and that's as good.

Very good still; Yet you are innocent:
Shall I entreat thee friend, to avouch as much
Here by, to the next Justice.

I'll take my soldiers oath on it.

A soldiers oath, What's that?

My corporal oath; And you know Sir, a Corporal is an office belonging to a
soldier.


Yet you are clear?
Murder will come to light.

So will your gullery too.

They say my old Master's come home; I'll see if he will turn me out of
doors, as the young man has done: I have laid rods in peace for some-body,
escape Reignald as he can, and with more freedom then I dust late, I boldly
now dare knock.


More mad-men yet; I think since my last voyage,
Half of the world's turned frantic: What dost mean,
Or long thou to be blasted?

Oh Sir, you are welcome home; 'Twas time to come
Ere all was gone to havoc.

My old servant? before I shall demand of further busin^. Resolve me why thou
thunder at these doors,

Where thou know none inhabits?

Are they gone Sir?
'Twas well yet they have left the house behind;
For all the furniture, to a bare bench,
I am sure is spent and wasted.

Where's my son,
That Reignald p^asting for him with such speed,
Brings him not from the Country?

Country Sir?
'Tis a thing they know not; Here they Feast,
Dice, Drink, and Drab; The company they keep,
Cheaters and Roaring-Ladds, and these attended
By Bawds and Queens: Your son hath got a Strumpet,
On whom he spends all that your sparing left,
And here they keep court; To whose damned abuses,
Reignald gives all encouragement.

But stay stay;
No living soul hath for these six months space
Here entered, but the house stood desolate.

Last week I am sure, so late, and the other day,
Such Revels were here kept.

And by my son?

Yes, and his servant Reignald.

And this house at all not haunted?

Save Sir with such Sprights.

This Murder will come out.

But see, in happy time here comes my
Neighbour of whom he bought this mansion; He I am sure
More amply can resolve me: I pray Sir,
What sums of moneys have you late received
Of my young son?

Of him? None I assure you.

What of my servant Reignald?

But devise
What to call less then nothing, and that sum
I will confess received.

Pray Sir, be serious;
I do confess my self indebted to you,
A hundred pound.

You may do well to pay't then, for here's witness Sufficient of your words.


I speak no more then what I purpose; lust so much I owe you, And ere I sleep
will tender.


I shall be as ready to receive it, and as willing,
As you can be to pay't.

But provided,
You will confess seven hundred pounds received
Before hand of (...) ^o^?

But by your favour;
Why should I yield seven hundred received
Of them I never dealt with? Why? For what?
What reason? What condition? Where or when
Should such a sum be paid me?

Why? For this bargain: And for what? This house,
Reason? Because you sold it: The conditions? Such
As were agreed between you: Where and When?
That only hath escaped me.

Madness all.

Was I not brought to take free view thereof,
As of mine own possession?

I confess;
Your servant told me you had found out a wife
Fit for your son, and that you meant to build;
Desired to take a friendly view of mine,
To make it your example: But for selling,
I tell you Sir, my wants be not so great,
To change my house to Coin.

Spare Sir your anger,
And turn it into pity; Neighbours and friends,
I am quite lost, was never man so so^'d,
And by a wicked servant; Shame and blushing
Will not permit to tell the manner how,
Lest I be made ridiculous to all:
My fears are to inherit what's yet left;
He hath made my son away.

That's my fear too.

Friends, as you would (...) a m^n
Deprived at once, both of his wealth and son;
And in his age, by one I ever tendered
More like a son then servant: By imagining
My case were yours, have feeling of my griefs
And help to apprehend him;
Furnish me with Cords and Fetters,
I will lay him safe in Prison within Prison.

We'll assist you.

And I.

And all;
But not to do the least hurt to my old friend Reig^d.

His Legs will be as nimble as his Brain,
And 'twill be difficult to seize the slave,
Yet your endeavours, pray peace, here hoe comes.

My heart mis-giues, for 'tis not possible
But that in all these windings and indents
I shall be found at last: I'll take that course
That men both troubled and affrighted do,
Heap doubt on doubt, and as combustions rise,
Try if from many I can make my peace,
And work mine own atonement.

Stand you close,
Be not yet seen, but at your best advantage
Hand him, and bind him fast: Whilst I dissemble
As if I yet knew nothing.

I suspect
And find there's trouble in my Masters looks;
Therefore I must not trust my self too far
Within his fingers.

Reignald?

Worshipful Sir.

What says my son in the Country?

That tomorrow,
Early in the morning, heel attend your pleasure,
And do as all such duteous children ought;
Demand your blessing Sir.

Well, 'tis well.

I do not like his countenance.

But Reignald? I suspect the honesty
And the good meaning of my neighbour here,
Old master Ricott; Meeting him but now,
And having some discourse about the house,
He makes all strange, and tells me in plain terms,
He knows of no such matter.

Tell me that Sir?

I tell thee as it is:
Nor that such moneys, took up at use, were ever tendered him
On any such conditions.

I cannot blame your worship to be pleasant,
Knowing at what an vnder-rate we bought it, but you ever
Were a most merry Gentleman.

(Impudent (...))
But Reignald, he not only doth demi it,
But offers to depose Himself and Servants,
No such thing ever was.

Now Heaven, to see to what this world's gro^e too.
I will make him --

Nay more, this m^n will not confess the Murder.

Which both shall dearly answer; You have warrant
For him already; But for the other Sir,
If he deny it, he had better --

Appear Gentlemen,
'Tis a fit time to take him.

I discover the Ambush that's laid for me.

Come nearer Reignald.

First sir resolve me one thing, amongst other Merchandise
Bought in your absence by your Son and me,
We engrossed a great commodity of Combs,
And how many sorts think you?

You might buy
Some of the bones of Fishes, some of Beasts,
Box-combes, and Iuery (...).

But besides these, we have for Horses Si^,
Mayne-combes, and Curry-combes; Now Sir for men,
We have Head-oombes, (...)-combes, I and Cox-combes too;
Take view of them at your pleasure, whil'it for my part,
I thus bestow my self.

Well said Reignald, nobly put off Reignald,
Look to thy self Reignald.

Why dost thou cli^bo thus?

Only to practice
The nimbleness of my Arms and Legs,
Ere they prove your Cords and Fetters.

Why to that place?

^ Harbour long, and now it must be my Sanctuary; Dispute now, and I'll
answer.


^
To challenge me of Murder?

Oh sir, the man you killed is alive at this present to iustisie it: I am, quoth
he, a Trans-marine by birth --


Why, challenge me receipt of Moneys, and to give abroad, That I had sold my
House?


Why? because sir,
Could I have purchased Houses at that rate,
I had meant to have bought all London.

Yes, and Middlesex too, and I would have bin thy half Reignald.

Yours are great,
My wrongs insufferable; As first, to fright me
From mine own dwelling, till they had consumed
The whole remainder of the little left;
Besides, out of my late stock got at Sea,
Discharge the clamorous Usurer; Make me accuse
This man of Murder; Be at charge of warrants;
And challenging this my worthy Neighbour of
Forswearing Sums he never yet received;
Fool me, to think my Son that had spent all,
Had by his thrift bought Land; I and him too,
To open all the secrets of his House
To me, a Stranger, On thou insolent villain,
What to all these can answer?

Guilty, guilty.

But to my Sons death, what thou slave?

Not Guilty.

Produce him then; In the mean time, and --
Honest Friends, get Ladders.

Yes, and come down in your own Ropes.

I'll fetch a Piece and shoot him.

So the warrant in my Masters pocket, will serve for my Murder; And ever after
shall my Ghost haunt this House.


And I will say like Reignald,
This Ghost and I am Friends.

Bring faggots, I'll set fire upon the House,
Rather then this endure.

To burn Houses is Felony, and I'll not out
Till be fired out; But since I am Besieged thus,
I'll summon supplies unto my Rescue.

Before you chide, first here me, next your Blessing,
That on my knees I beg; I have but done,
Like mis-spent youth, which after wit dear bought,
Turns his Eyes inward, sorry and ashamed;
These things in which I have offended most,
Had I not proved, I should have thought them still
Essential things, delights perdureable;
Which now I find mere Shadows, Toys and Dreams,
Now hated more then erst I doted on;
Best Natures, are soonest wrought on; Such was mine;
As I the offences, So the offenders throw
Here at your feet, to punish as you please;
You have but paid so much as I have wasted,
To purchase to your self a thrifty Son;
Which I from henceforth, Vow.

See what Fathers are,
That can three years offences, foul ones too,
Thus in a Minute pardon; And thy faults
Upon my self chastise, in these my Tears;
Ere this Submission, I had cast thee off;
Rise in my new Adoption: But for these --

The one you have nothing to do withal, here's his Ticket for his discharge;
Another for you Sir, to Summon you to my Masters Feast, For you, and you, where
I charge you all to appear, upon his displeasure, and your own apperils.


This is my Friends ^ one I loved,
Only because they have bin dear to him
That now will strive to be more dear to you;
Vouchsafe their pardon.

All dear, to me indeed, for I have paid for it soundly,
Yet for the sake, I am atoned with all; Only that wanton.
Her, and her Company, abandon quite;
So doing, we are friends.

A just Condition, and willingly subscribed to.

But for that Villain; I am now devising
What shame, what punishment remarkable,
To inflict on him.

Why Master? Have I laboured;
Plotted, Contrived, and all this while for you,
And will you leave me to the Whip and Stocks;
Not mediate my peace.

(...) come down.

Not till my Pardon's sealed, I'll rather stand here
Like a Statue, in the Fore-front of your house
For ever; Like the picture of Dame Fortune
Before the Fortune Play-house.

If I have here
But any Friend amongst you, join with me
In this petition.

Good Sir, for my sake, I resolved you truly
Concerning Whooping, the Noise, the Walking; and the Sprights,
And for a need, can show you a Ticket for him too.

I impute my wrongs rather to knavish Cunning,
Then least pretended Malice.

What he did,
Was but for his Young Master, I allow it
Rather as sports of Wit, then injuries;
No other pray esteem them.

Even as freely,
As you forget my quarells made with you;
Raised from the Errors first begot by him;
I here remit all free; I now am Calm,
But had I seized upon him in my Spleen --

I knew that, therefore this was my Invention,
For Pollicie's the art still of Prevention.

Come down then Reignald, first on your hands and feet, and then on your
knees to your Master; Now gentlemen, what do you say to your inviting to my
Masters Feast.


We will attend him.

Nor do I love to break good company;
For Master Wincott is my worthy Friend,
And old acquaintance; Oh thou crafty Wag-string,
And could thou thus delude me? But we are Friends;
Nor Gentlemen, let not what's here to past,
In your least thoughts disable my Estate;
This my last Voyage hath made all things good,
With surplus too; Be that your comfort Son:
Well Reignald -- But no more.

I was the Fox,
But I from henceforth, will no more the Cox --
Comb, put upon your pate.

Let's walk Gentlemen

Son, let me tell you, you are ill advised;
And doubly to be blamed, by undertaking
Unnecessary travel; Grounding no reason
For such a rash and giddy enterprise:
What profit aim you at, you have not reaped;
What Novelty affords the Christian world,
Of which your view hath not participated
In a full measure; Can you either better
Your language or experience? Your selfe-will
Hath only purpose to deprive a father
Of a loved son, and many noble friends,
Of your much wished a^quaintance.

Oh, dear Sir,
Do not, I do entreat you, repent you
Of your free grant; Which with such care and study.
I have so long, so often laboured for.

Say that may be dispensed with, show me reason
Why you desire to (...) out of your Country,
Like some Malefactor that had forfeited
His life and freedom; Here's a worthy Gentleman
Hath for your sake invited many guests,
To his great charge, only to take of you
A parting leave; You send him word you cannot,
After, you may not come: Had not my vrgence,
Almost compulsion, driven you to his house,
The unkindness might have forfeited your love,
And raced you from his will; In which he hath given you,
A fair and large estate; Yet you of all this stangenesse,
Show no sufficient ground.

Then understand;
The ground thereof took his first birth from you;
'Twas you first charged me to forbear the house,
And that upon your blessing: Let it not then
Offend you Sir, if I so great a charge
Have strived to keep so strictly.

Me perhaps,
You may appease, and with small difficulty.
Because a Father; But how satisfy
Their dear, and on your part, unmerited love?
But this your last obedience may salve all:
We now grow near the house.

Whose doors, to me,
Appear as horried as the gates of Hell:
Where shall I borrow patience, or from whence?
To give a meeting to this viperous brood,
Of Friend and Mistress.

Y'aue entertained me with a strange discourse
Of your mans knavish wit, but I rejoice,
That in your safe return, all ends so well:
Most welcome you, and you, and indeed all;
To whom I am bound, that at so short a warning,
Thus friendly, you will deign to visit me.

It seems my absence hath begot some sport,
Thank my kind servant here.

Not so much worth Sir.

But though their riots tripped at my estate,
They have not quite ore-throwne it.

But see Gentlemen, these whom we most expected, come at length; This I
proclaim the master of the Feast,

In which to express the bounty of my love,
I'll show my self no niggard.

Your choice favours,
I still taste in abundance.

Methinks it would not mis-become me Sir,
To chide your absence; That have made your self,
To us, so long a stranger.

Pardon me Sir,
That have not yet, since your return from Sea,
Voted the least fit opportunity,
To entertain you with a kind salute.

Most kindly Sir I thank you.

Methinks friend,
You should expect green rushes to be strewn,
After such discontinuance.

Mistress Pru,
I have not seen you long, but greet you thus,
May you be Lady of a better husband
Then I expect a wife.

I like that greeting:
Nay, enter Gentlemen; Dinner perhaps
Is not yet ready, but the time we stay,
We'll find some fresh discourse to spend away.

Not speak to me? nor once vouchsafe an answer,
But slight me with a poor and base neglect?
No, nor so much as cast an eye on her,
Or least regard, though in a seeming show
She courted a reply? 'twixt him and her,
Nay him and me, this was not wont to be;
If she have brain to apprehend as much
As I have done, sheele quickly find it out:
Now as I live, as our affections meet,
So our conceits, and she hath singled him
To some such purpose: I'll retire my self.
Not interrupt their conference.

You are sad Sir.

I know no cause.

Then can I show you some;
Who could be otherwise, to leave a Father
So careful, and each way so provident?
To leave so many, and such worthy Friends?
To abandon your own country? These are some,
Nor do I think you can be much the merrier
For my sake?

Now your tongue speaks Oracles;
For all the rest are nothing, 'tis for you,
Only for you I cannot.

So I thought;
Why then have you bin all this while so strange?
Why will you travel? suing a divorce
Betwixt us, of a love inseparable;
For here shall I be left as desolate
Unto a frozen, almost widowed bed;
Warmed only in that future, stored in you;
For who can in your absence comfort me?

Shall my oppressed sufferance yet break forth
Into impatience, or endure her more?

But since by no persuasion, no entreats,
Your settled obstinacy can be swal'd,
Though you seem desperate of your own dear life^
Have care of mine, for it exists in you.
Oh Sir, should you miscarry I were lost,
Lost and forsaken; Then by our past vows,
And by this hand once given me, by these reares,
Which are but springs begetting greater floods,
I do beseech thee, my dear Geraldine,
Look to thy safety, and preserve thy health;
Have care into what company you fall;
Travel not late, and cross no dangerous Seas;
For till Heavens bless me in thy safe return,
How will this poor heart suffer?

I had thought
Long since the Sirens had bin all destroyed;
But one of them I find survives in her;
She almost makes me question what I know,
An Heretic unto my own belief:
Oh thou mankinds seducer.

What? no answer?

Yes, thou hast spoke to me in Showers,
I will reply in Thunder; Thou Adulteress,
That hast more poison in thee then the Serpent,
Who was the first that did corrupt thy sex,
The Devil.

To whom speaks the man?

To thee, falsest of all that ever man termed fair;
Hath Impudence so stool'd thy smooth soft skin,
It cannot blush? Or sin so obdur'd thy heart,
It doth not quake and tremble? Search thy conscience,
There thou shalt find a thousand clamorous tongues
To speak as loud as mine doth.

Save from yours,
I hear no noise at all.

I'll play the Doctor
To open thy deaf ears; Monday the Ninth
Of the last Month; Can thou remember that?
That Night more black in thy abhorred sin,
Then in the gloomy darkness; That the time.

Monday?

Would thou the place know? Thy polluted Chamber,
So often, witness of my sin-lesse vows;
Would thou the Person? One not worthy Name,
Yet to torment thy guilty Soul the more,
I'll tell him thee, That Monster Dalauill;
Would thou your Bawd know? Mid-night, that the hour;
The very words thou spa^e? Now what would Geraldine
Say, if he saw us here? To which was answered,
Tush he's a Cox-combe, fit to be so fooled:
No blush? What, no faint Fever on thee yet?
How hath thy black sins changed thee? Thou Medusa,
Those Hairs that late appeared li^ golden Wires,
Now crawl with Snakes and Adders; Thou art ugly.

And yet my glass, till now, near told me so;
Who gave you this intelligence?

Only he,
That pitying such an Innocenti^s mine,
Should by two such delinquents be be^ray'd,
He brought me to that place by miracle;
And made mean ear witness of all this.

I am undone.

But think wharthou hast lost
To forfeit me; I not withstanding these,
(So fixed was my love and v^erable)
I kept this from thy Husband, nay all ears,
With thy transgressions smothering mine own wrongs,
In hope of thy (...)

Which begin^ thus low upon my knees.

Tush, bow in (...),
Which thou hast most offended; alas,
Save in such (Sca^ce unheard of) Treachery,
Most sinful like thy self;
Wherein, Oh wherein, hath my unspotted and unbounded Love
deserved the least of these? Sworn to be made a ^ale
For term of life; And all this for my goodness;
Die, and die soon, acquit me of my Oath,
But prithee die repentant; Farewell ever,
'Tis thou, and only thou hast Banished me,
Both from my Friends and Country.

Oh, I am lost.

Why how now, what's the business?

Go take her Up, whom thou hast oft thrown Down, Villain.


That was no language from a Friend,
It had too harsh an accent; But how's this?
My Mistress thus low cast upon the earth
Grauelling and breathless, Mistress, Lady, Sweet --

Oh tell me if thy name be Geraldine,
Thy very looks will kill me?

View me well,
I am no such man; See, I am Dalauill.

You are then a Devil, that presents before me
My horrid sins; persuades me to despair;
When he like a good Angel sent from Heaven,
Besought me of repentance; Swell sick Heart,
Even till thou burst the ribs that bound thee in;
So, there's one string cracked, flow, and flow high,
Even till thy blood distill out of mine eyes,
To witness my great sorrow.

Faint again,
Some help within there, no attendant near?
Thus to expire, in this I am more wretched,
Then all the sweet fruition of her love
Before could make me happy.

What was he clamoured so loud,
To mingle with our mirth this terror
And affright?

See Sir, your Wife in these my arms expiring.

How?

My sister?

Support her, and by all means possible
Provide for her dear safety.

See, she recovers.

Woman, look up.

Oh Sir, your pardon;
Convey me to my Chamber, I am sick,
Sick even to death, away thou Sycophant,
Out of my sight, I have besides thy self,
Too many sins about me.

My sweet Mistress.

The storme's coming, I must provide for harbour.

What strange and sudden alteration's this,
How quickly is this clear day overcast,
But such and so uncertain are all things,
That dwell beneath the Moon.

A Woman's qualm,
Frailties that are inherent to her sex,
Soon sick, and soon recovered.

If she misfare,
I am a man more wretched in her loss,
Then had I forfeited life and estate;
She was so good a creature.

I the like
Suffered, when I my Wife brought unto her gra^e;
So you, when you were first a widower,
Come arm your self with patience.

These are casualties
That are not new, but common.

Burying of Wives,
As stale as shifting shifts, or for some servants,
To flout and gull their Masters.

Best to send
And see how her fit holds her.

Sir, my (...)
In these few Lines commends her last to you,
For she is now no more; What's therein writ,
Save Heaven and you, none knows, This she desired
You would take view of; and with these words expired.

Dead?

She hath made one then a free release,
Of all the debts I owed her.

My fear is beyond pardon, Dalauill
Hath plaid the villain, but for Geraldine,
He hath bin each way Noble -- Love him still,
My peace already I have made with Heaven;
Oh be not you at war with me; My Honour
Is in your hands to punish, or preserve;
I am now Confessed, and only Geraldine
Hath wrought on me this unexpected good;
The Ink I write with, I wish had bin my blood,
To witness me Repentance -- Dalauill?
Where's he? Go seek him out.

I shall, I shall Sir.

The Wills of Dead folk should be still obeyed;
How ever false to me, I'll not reueale't;
Where Heaven forgives, I pardon Gentlemen,
I know you all commiserate my loss;
I little thought this Feast should have bin turned
Into a Funeral; What's the news of him?

He went presently to the Stable, put the Saddle upon his Horse, put his Foot
into the Stirrup, clapped his Spurs into his sides, and away he's Galloped, as
if he were to ride a Race for a Wager.


All our ill lucks go with him, farewell he;
But all my best of wishes wait on you,
As my chief Friend; This meeting that was made
Only to take of you a parting leave,
Shall now be made a Marriage of our Love,
Which none save only Death shall separate.

It calls me from all Travel, and from henceforth,
With my Country I am Friends.

The Lands that I have left,
You lend me for the short space of my life;
As soon as Heaven calls me, they call you Lord;
First feast, and after Morn; Wee'le like some Gallants
That Bury thrifty Fathers, think it no sin,
To wear Blacks without, but other Thoughts within.


