AS the world grows in years ('tis the Heavens curse)
Men's sins increase; the pristine times were best:
The Ages in their growth wax worse worse.
The first was precious, full of golden rest.
Silver succe^ded; good, but not so pure:
Then love and harmless lusts might currant pass:
The third that follows we find more obdure,
And that we title by the Age of Brass.
In this more gross and courser mettal'd Age,
Tyrants and fierce oppressors we present.
Nephews that against their Uncles wreak their rag^,
Mothers against their children discontent,
A sister with her brother at fier^e war,
(Things in our former times not seen or known)
But vice with virtue now begins to jar,
And sins (though not at height) yet great are grown.
Still with our history we shall proceed,
And Hercules vistorious acts relate:
His marriage first, next many a noble deed
Performed by him: last how he yields to Fate.
And these, I hope, may (with some mixtures) pass,
So you sit pleased in this our Age of Brass.
Thus midst our brothers, daughter, Queen and son,
Sits Oeneus crowned in fert^ll Ca^don
Whose age and weakness is supported only,
In those ripe joys that I receive from you.

May we long ftand supporters of your royaltyes,
And glad spectators of your age and peace.

The like I wish.

We have found you brothers royal,
And subjects loyal.

They are of our line,
Of which no branch did ever perish yet,
By Cankers, blastings, or dry barrenness.
But Meleager let me turn to thee,
Whose birth the Fates themselves did calculate,

Pray mother how was that? I have heard you say
Somewhat about my birth mi^aculous,
But never yet knew the true circumstance.

'Twas thus: the very instant thou wast borne,
The sisters, that draw, spin, and clip our lives,
Entered my chamber with a fatal brand,
Which hurling in the fire, thus said: One day, one date,
Betide this brand and child, even be their fate.
So parted they, the brand begins to burn:
And as it wasted, so did thou consume;
Which I perceiving, leaped unto the flame,
And quenching that, stayed thy consumption.
The brand I (as a jewel) have reserved,
And keep it in a casket, locked as safe
As in thy bosom thou maintainst thy heart.

Pray keep it well: for if not with my mother,
With whom dare Meleager trust his life?
But sister Deianeira, now to you.
Two worthy Champians must this day contend,
And try their emin^nce in Arms for you,
Great Achelous, and strong Hercules.

We know it: my love must be bought with blows,
Not Oratory wins me, but the sword:
He that can braueliest in the lists contend,
Must Deianeira's nuptial bed ascend.

Brothers, conduct these Champions to the lists,
Mean time Althea state thee on that hand,
On this side Deianeira the rich prize
Of their contention.

Clamours from a far,
Tell us these Champions are a dressed for war.

Stand forth you warlike Champions, and express
Your loves to Deianeira, in your valours.
As we are Oeneus the Aetolians King,
And under us command whole Calidon.
So we contest we make her here the prize
Of the proud victor:

Dares the Theban bastard
Contend with us, as we are eldest son
Unto the grave and old Oceanus,
And the Nymph Nais, borne on Pindus mount,
From whence our broad and spacious currents rise?
So are we proud to coape with Hercules.
Ne'er let my streams wash A^arnania's banks,
Or we confin'de in Thous, our grand seat,
Till (by the ruin of Alcmena's son)
We lodge bright Deianeira in our arms.

Have we the Cleonean Lyons torn?
And decked our shoulders in their honoured spoils?
The Calidoni^ Boar crushed with our Club?
The rude Thessalian Centaurs sunk beneath
Our Iuiall hand? pierced hell? bound Cerber^?
And buffeted so long, till from the some
The dog belch forth strong Aconitum spring?
And shall a petty river make our way
To Deianeira's bed impassable?
Know then the pettiest stream that flows through Greece,
I'll make thee run thy head below thy banks,
Make red thy waters with thy vital blood,
And spill thy waives in drops as small as tears,
If thou presum'st to coape with Hercules.

What's Hercules that I should dread his name?
Or what's he greater then Amphitri^'s son?
When we assume the name of Demi-god
Not Prote^s can trans-shape himself like us,
For we command our figure when we please.
Sometimes we like a serpent run along
Our medowy banks: and sometimes like a Bull
Graze on these strands we water with our streams.
We can translate our fury to a fire,
And when we swell, in our fierce torrents swallow
The Champion plains, and flow above the hills,
Drown all the continents by which we run;
Yea Hercules himself.

Me Achelous!
I can do more then this: love Deianeira,
Swin with her on my shoulders through thy streams,
And with my huge Club beat thy torrents back,
With thine own waters quench the infernal fires
Thy figure serpentine, flat on the earth:
And when you are Bull, catch fast hold by thy horns,
And whirl thee about my head thus into air.
Thou fair Aetolian dame, I cannot woo,
Nor paint my passions in smooth Oratory,
But fight for thee I can, against Achelous,
Or all the horrid monsters of the earth.

When 'gins your proud and hostile enmity?
Behold the prize proposed, the victors meed,
Champions your spirits enkindle at her eyes.

It is for her this bastard I despise.
Prepare thee Theban.

See, I am addressed
With this to thunder on thy captive crest.
I cannot bellow in thy bombast phrase;
Nor deaf these free spectators with my braves.
I cut off words with deeds, and now behold
For me, the echo of my blows thus scold.

Be thou a God or hell-hound thus transhap't,
Thy terror frights not me, serpent or devil I'll pash thee.

Fright us with fire? our Club shall quench thy flame,
And beat it down to hell, from whence it came.

What, yet more monsters? Serpent, Bull, and Fire,
Shall all alike taste great Alcides ire.

No more, I am thy Captive, thou my Conqueror:
I see, no Magic, or enchanting spell
Have power on virtue and true fortitude.
No slight Illusion can deceive the eyes
Of him that is divinely resolute.
I lay me at thy feet, a lowly vassal,
Since thou hast reft me of that prccious horne,
Which tearing from my head in shape of Bull,
Thus wounded me. Take Deianeira freely,
Only restore me that rich spoil thou hast won,
Which all the Nymphs and graces dwelling near,
Shall fill with redolent flowers, and delicate fruits,
And call it Cornucopiae, plenties horne,
In memory of Ach^lous loss,
And this high conqu^st won by Hercules.

Had thou not stooped thy horrid Taurine shape
I would have peece-meale rent, and thy tough hide
Torn into rags as thick as Autumn leaves:
Take thee thy life, and with thy life that spoil
Plucked from thy mangled front, give me my love,
I'll stoare no horns at winning of a wife.
Give me bright Deyanira, take that horne,
So late from thy disfigured Temples torn.

I have my prayers, Alcides his desires,
Both meet in love.

Receive her Hercules,
The conquest of thy warlike fortitude.

We take but what our valour purchased us,
And beauteous Queen thou shalt assure his love,
Whose puissant arm shall awe the triple world,
And make the greatest Monarchs of the earth
To thy divinest beauty tributary.

Will Hercules stay here in Calidon,
To solemnize the nuptials of our sister?
I Meleager, rich Aetolians heir,
Whose large Dominions stretch to Oeta Mount,
And to the bounds of fertile Thessaly
Will grace thy Bridals with the greatest pomp
Greece can affoord, nor is't my meanest honour
To be the brother to great Hercules.

Thanks Meleager, sojourn here we cannot,
My step-dame luno tasks me to more dangers:
We take thy beauteous sister in our guard,
Whom by Ioues aide we straight will bear to Thebes.

A fathers wishes crown the happiness
Of his fair daughter.

And a brothers love
Comfort thee where thou go: If not with Hercules
Whom dare we trust thy safety.

Not loves guard
Can circl^ her with more security.
Time calls us hence, Aetolian Lords farewell.

Adieu brave son, and daughter, only happy
In being thus bestowed, come Achelous,
With you we will feast, nor let your foil deject you,
Or Deyaniraes loss; he's more then man,
And needs must he do this, that all things can.

Dares Deyaneira trust her persons safety
With us a stranger, only known by Fame.

Were it against the Lyons in Chimera bred,
Or those rude Bears that breed in Caucasus:
The Hyrcan Tigers or the Syrian Wolves,
Nay against the Giants that assaulted heaven
And with their shoulders made those bases shake
That prop Olimpus: lived Enceladus
With whom love wrestled: even against those monsters,
I'd think me safe encircled in these arms.

Thou art as safe as if immured in heaven,
Pal'd with that Crystal wall that girts loves house,
Where all the Gods inhabit, built by fate,
Stay, I should know that Centaur.

That's Hercules I know him by his Club,
Whose ponderous weight I felt upon my Skull
At the great Bridal of the Lapithes.
What lovely Lady's she that in her beauty
So much exceeds fair Hypodamia?

Oh Nessus, thou of all thy cloud-bred race,
Alone did escape by trusting to thy heals
At Hypodamia's Bridals, but we now
Are friends, are we not Nessus?

Yes great Hercules,
(Till I can find fit time for just reuendge)
Methinkes my brains still rattle in my skull)
What Lady's that in great Alcides Guard?

Deyaneira, daughter to the Aetolian King,
Sister to Meleager, now our Bride;
Won by the force of arms from Achelous,
The boisterous flood that flows through Calidon.

A double envy burns in all my veins,
First for revenge; next, that he should enjoy
That beauteous maid whom Nessus dearly loves.
Will Hercules command me? or his Bride?
I'll lackey by thee wheresoer'e thou go,
And be the vassal to great Hercules.

We are bound for Thebes, but soft, what torrent's this
That intercepts our way? How shall we pass
These raging streams?

This is Euenus flood,
A dangerous current, full of whirle-pooles deep,
And yet vnsounded: dare thou trust thy Bride
On Nessus back? I'll undertake to swim her
Unto the furthest strond, upon my shoulders,
And yet not lave her shoe.

I'll pay thee for thy waftage Centaur, well,
And make thee Prince of all thy by-form'd race,
If thou willt do this grace to Hercules:
But ferry her with safety, for by Jove,
If thou but make her tremble in these streams,
Or let the least wave dash against her skirt;
If the least fear of drowning pale her cheek,
I'll pound thee smaller then the Autumn dust
Tossed by the warring winds?

Have I not swam
The Hellesepont, when waives high as yon hills
Tossed by the winds, have crowned me, yet in spite
Of all their briny weight I have wrought my self
Above the topmost billow to ore-looke
The troubled maine: come beauteous Deyaneira,
Not Charon with more safety ferries souls,
Then I will thee through this impetuous ford,

Receive her Centaur, and in her the wealth
And potency of mighty Hercules.

Now my revenge for that inhumaine banquet,
In which so many of the Centaurs fell,
I'll rape this Princess, having past the flood
Come beauteous Deyaneira, mount my shoulders,
And fear not your safe wastage.

That done return for us: fair Deianeira,
White as the garden lilly, pyren snow,
Or rocks of Crystal hardened by the Sun:
Thou shalt be made the potent Queen of Thebes,
And all my Jovial labours shall to thee
Be consecrate, as to Alcides love.
Well plundge bold Centaur, how thy boisterous breast
Plowes up the streams: thou through the swelling tides,
Sail'st with a freight more rich and beautiful,
Then the best ship crammed with Pangeous gold:
With what a swift dexterity he parts
The mutinous waives, whose waters clasp him round,
He plays and wantons on the curled streams,
And Deyanira on his shoulders fits
As safe, as if she steered a pine-tree bark.
They grow now towards the shore: my club and arms
I'll first cast over the deep Euenus ford,
But from my side my quiver shall not part,
Nor this my trusty bow.

Help Her^les.

'Twas Deyaneiraes voice.

The Traitor Nessus
Seeks to despoil mine honour, Jove, you Gods:
Out traitorous Centaur: Help great Hercules.

Hold, lust-burnt Centaur, 'tis Alcides calls
Or swifter then Ioues lightning, my fierce vengeance
Shall cross Euenus.

Oh, oh.

Dare thou devil?
Could thou clime Heaven or sink below the Center
So high, so low, my vengeance should pursue thee,
Hold; if I could but fix thee in my gripes,
I de tear thy limbs into more Atomies
Then in the Summer play before the Sun.

Help Hercules (out dog) Alcides help.

I'll send till I can come, this poisonous shaft
Shall speak my fury and extract thy blood,
Till I my self can cross this raging flood.

Thy beauty Deyaneira is my death,
And yet that Nessus dies embracing thee
Takes from my senses all those torturing pangs
That should associate death: to show I loved thee,
I'll leave thee, in my will, a legacy;
Shall stead thee more, then should thy father give thee
Unto thy Dower the Crown of Calidon.
Of such great virtue is my living blood,
And of such prize, that could thou value it,
Thou would not let one drop fall to the ground:
But oh I die.

Teach me to rate it truly.

Now Nessus, in thy death be aueng'd on him
On whom in life thou could not wreak thy rage:
(My blood is poison) all these pure drops save,
Which I bequeath thee ere I take my grave:
I know thy Lord lascivious, bent to lust,
Witness the fifty daughters of King Thespeius,
Whom in one night he did adulterate:
And of those fifty begot fifty sons:
Now if in all his quests, he be with-held
By any Ladies love, and stay from thee,
Such is the virtue of my blood now shed,
That if thou dipst a shirt, steeped in the least
Of all these drops, and sendst it to thy Lord,
No sooner shall it touch him, but his love
Shall die to strangers, and revive to thee,
Make use of this my love.

Centaur, I will.

And so, whom Nessus cannot, do thou kill;
Still dying men speak true: 'tis my last cry,
Save of my blood, ^may steed thee ere thou die.

Though I my love mistrust not, yet this counsel
I'lenot despise: this if my Lord should stray,
Shall to my desolate bed teach him the way.

After long struggling with Euenus streams,
I forced the river bear me on her breast,
And land me safely on this further strond,
To make an end of what my shaft begun,
The life of Nessus, lives the Centaur yet?

Behold him grovelling on the senseless earth,
His wounded breast transfixed by Hercules.

That the luxurious slave were sensible
Of torture; not th'infernals with more pangs
Could plague the villain then Alcides should.
Ixions bones racked on the torturing wheel
Should be a pastime: the three snake-hair'd sisters,
That la^h offenders with their whips of steel,
Should seem to dally, when with every string
They cut the flesh like razors: but the dead
We hate to touch, as cowardly and base,
And venge^ce not becoming Hercul^s.
Come Dey^eira, first to consummate
Our high ^owsals in triumphant Thebes,
That don^, our future labours wee'le pursue,
And by the assistance of the powers Divine,
Strive to act more then luno can assign.

Fair Deyaneira unto, The^es being guided,
And Hercules espousals solemnised.
He for his further labours soon provided,
As Iuno by Euritius had devised.
The Apples of Hesperia first he wan,
Maugre huge Atlas that supports the spheres:
And whilst the Giant on his business ran;
Alcides takes his place, and proudly bears
The heavens huge frame: thence into Scithia hies,
And their the Amazonian Baldricke gains,
By conquering Menalip (a br^e prise)
The warlike Queen that ^re the Scithians reigns.
That he supported heaven, doth well express
His Astronomicke skill, knowledge in ^tarres:
They that such practise know, what do they less
Then bear heavens weight so of the Lernean wars.
Where he the many-headed Hydra slew,
A Serpent of that nature, when his sword
Par'd off one head, from that another grew.
This showed his Logick^ skill: from every word
And argument confuted, there arise
From one a multiplicity, therefore we
Poets and such as are estee^ed wise,
Instruct the world by such ^rality.
To conquer Hydra showed his powerful skill
In disputation, how to argue well.
(By all that understand in custom still)
And in this Art did Hercules excel.
Now we the Egyptian tyrant must present,
Bloody Busiris, a king fell and rude,
One that in murder placed his sole content,
With whose sad death our first Act we conclude.
In Egypt there of long time fellnoraine,
For which unto the Oracle they sent:
Answers re^urn'd, that till one stranger slain,
Immou'd shall be the Marble f^rmament.
Therefore the Tyrant all these strangers kills
That enter Egypt, till Alcides came
And with the tyrants bulk the Altar fills:
At whose red slaughter fell a plenteous rain.
For he that stranger and usurper was,
Whose bloody fate the Oracle forespake.
But for a while we let Alcides pass,
Whom these of Egypt would their souer aigne make,
For freeing them from such a tyrants rage;
Now Meleager next must fill our stage.

Why doth Adonis fly the Queen of love?
And shun this Ivory girdle of my arms?
To be thus scarft the dreadful God of war
Would give me conquered kingdoms: For a kiss
(But half like this) I could command the Sun
Rise before his hour, to bed before his time:
And (being loue-sicke) change his golden beams,
And make his face pale, as his sifter Moon.
Come, let us tumble on this violet bank:
Prithee be wanton; let us toy and play,
Thy Icy fingers warm between my breasts;
Look on me Adon with a steadfast eye,
That in these Crystal glasses I may see
My beauty, that charms Gods, makes men amazed,
And stownd with wonder: doth this roseate pillow
Offend my love? come, wallow in my lap,
With my white fingers I will clap thy cheek,
Whisper a thousand pleasures in thine ear.

Madame, you are not modest: I affect
The unseen beauty that adorns the mind.
This looseness makes you foul in Adons eye:
If you will tempt me, let me in your face
Read blushfulnesse, and fear; a modest blush
Would make your cheek seem much more beautiful.
If you will whisper pleasure in mine ear,
Praise chastity, or with your loud voice shrill
The tunes of horns, and hunting; they please best:
I'll to the chase, and leave you to the rest.

Thou art not man; yet were it thou made of stone,
I have heate to melt thee. I am Queen of love,
There is no practiue art of dalliance
Of which I am not Mistress, and can use.
I have kisses that can murder unkind words,
And strangle hatred, that the gall sends forth:
Touches to raise thee, were thy spirits half dead:
Words that can power affection down thine ears.
Love me! thou can not choose, thou shalt not choose.
Am I not Venus? Had thou Cupids arrows,
I should have took thee to have been my son:
Art thou so like him, and yet can not love?
I think you are brothers.

Madame, you woo not well, men covet not
These proffered pleasures; but loue-sweets denied:
What I command, that cloys my appetite;
But what I cannot come by I adore.
These prostituted pleasures surfeit still,
Wheres fear, or doubt, men sue with best good will.

Thou can instruct the Queen of love in love.
Thou shalt not ( Adon) take me by the hand;
Yet if thou needs wilt force me, there's my palm.
I'll frown on him (alas! my brow's so smooth
It will not bear a wrinkle:) hye thee hence
Unto the chase, and leave me: but not yet,
I'll sleep this night upon Endimions bank,
On which the Swain was courted by the Moon.
Dare not to come, thou art in our disgrace;
(Yet if thou come I can affoord thee place.)

I must begone.

Swee^ whither?

To the Chase.

What does^ thou hunt?

The Calidonian Boar,
To which the Princes and best spirits of Greece
Are now assembled.

I beshrew thee boy,
That very word struck from my heart all joy:
It startled me, me thinks I see thee dye
By that rude Boar. Hunt thou the be^sts that fly,
The wanton Squirr^ll, or the trembling Hare,
The crafty Fox: these pastimes fea^ clesse are.
The greedy Wolves, and fierce Bears armed with claws,
Rough shouldered Lyons, such as glut their jaws
With herds at once, Fell Boars, let them pass by,
Adon, these look not with thy Venus ^ye.
They judge not beauty, nor distinguish you^h,
These are their prey; My pity, love and ruth
Lives not in them. Oh to thy self be kind,
Thou from their mouths, my kisses shalt not find.

The summons to the chase, Venus adieu.

Leave those, turn head, choose those thou may pursue

I am resolved, I'll help to rouse yon beast.

Thou art to de^ his savage throat to feast.
Forbear.

In vain.

Appoint when we shall meet.

After the chase. Farewell then.

Farewell sweet.

This kissing.

Adon, guard thee well, express
Thy love to me, in being of thy self
Careful and chary: they that raze thy skin
Wound me. Be wise my Adon.

Never doubt. So then

But lip-labour, yet ill left out.

The cause of this conuention (Lords of Greece)
Needs no expression; and yet briefly thus:
Oeneus our father, the Aetolians King,
Of all his fruits and plenty, gave due rights
To all the Gods and Goddesses, Jove, Ceres,
Bacchus, and Pallas; but among the rest,
Diana he neglects: for which enraged,
She hath sent (to plague us) a huge savage Boar,
Of an vn-measured height and magnitude.
What better can describe his shape and terror
Then all the piteous clamours shrild through Greece?
Of his depopulations, spoils, and preys?
His flaming eyes they sparkle blood and fire,
His bristles pointed like a range of pikes
Ranck't on his back: his foam snowes where he feeds
His tusks are like the Indian Oliphants.
Out of his jaws (as if Ioues lightning flew)
He scortches all the branches in his way,
Plowes up the fields, treads flat the fields of grain.
In vain the Shepherd or his dog secures
Their harmless fowlds. In vain the furious Bull
Strives to defend the heard ore which he Lords.
The Colonies into the Cities fly,
And till immured, they think themselves not safe.
To chase this beast we have met on Oeta mount,
Attended by the noblest spirits of Greece.

From populous Salamine I Tela^n
Am at thy fair request, King Meleager,
Come to behold this beast of Calidon,
And prove my virtue in his sterne pursuit.

Not Meleagers love, more then the zeal
I bear my honour, hath drawn Iason hither,
To this adventure, yet both forcible
To make me try strange masteries against that monster,
Whose fury hath so much amazed all Greece.

That was the cause I Castor, with my brother
Pollux, arrived, and left our sister Hellen
Embraced by our old father Tyndarus,
To rouse this beast.

Let us no more be held
The sons of L^da, and be got by Jove,
Brothers, and called the two Tyndarian twins
If we return not crimsoned in the spoils
Of this fierce Boar.

To that end Nestor came.
Nestor, that hath already lived one age,
And entered on the second, to the third
May I ne'er reach, if part of that wild swine
I bring not home to Pylos where I reign.

My young son Agamemnon, and his brother
Prince Menclaus in his swathes at home,
Without some honour purchased on this Boar,
May I no more see, or Myeenes visit.

Well speaks Atreus, and his noble acts
Still equalise his language. Shall not Theseus
Veoter as far as any? heavens you know
I dare as much against any mortal foe.

Wher's Hercules, that at this noble business
He is not present, being near allied
To Meleager, having late espowsed
His sister Deianeira?

He's for Busiris, that Aegytian tyrant,

Else noble valour, he would have bin first
To have purchased honour in this hauty quest.

Hail princes, let it not offend this troop,
That I a Princess and Atlanta called,
A virgin Huntress, press into the field,
In hope to double guild my Javelins point
In blood of yon wild swine.

Virgineam in puero, puerilem in virgin vultum

Oh you Gods! or make her mine,
Stated with us the Calidonian Queen,
Or let this monstrous beaft confound me quite,
And in his vast womb bury all my f^e.
Beauteous Atlanta welcome, grace her princes
For Meleagers honour.

Come, shal's vncupple Lords,
Some plant the toils, others bravely mount,
To vn-^en this savage.

Time and my bashful love
Admits no courtship, Lady rank with us.
I'll be this day your guardian, and a shield
Between you and all danger.

We are free,
And in the chase will our own guardian be.
Shals to the field, my Javelin and these shafts,
Pointed with death, shall with the foremost fly,
And by a woman's hand the beast shall dye.

As bold as fair; but soft, whose bugle's that
Which calls us to the chase? Ad^nis yours?

Mine oh you noble Greekes, we have discovered
The dreadful monster wallowing in his den:
The toils are fixed, the huntsmen placed on hills
Pressed for the charge, the fierce Tbessalian hounds
With their flag ears, ready to sweep the dew
From the moist earth: their breasts are armed with steel,
Against the encounter of so grim a beast:
The hunters long to vncupple, and attend
Your presence in the field.

Follow Atlanta.
I'll try what prince will second me in field,
And make his Javelins point shake even with mine.

That Meleagers shall.

Nor Telamon
Will come behind Atlanta, or the Prince.

Charge bravely then your Javelins, send them singing
Through the clear air, and aim them at yon fiend,
Den'd in the quechy bog, the signal Lords.

charge, charge.

Princes, shrill your Bugles free.
And all Atlanta's danger fall on me.

This way, this way, renowned Telamon,
The Boar makes through yon glade, and from the hills
He hurries like a tempest: In his way
He prostrates trees, and like the bolt of Jove,
Shatters where ere he comes.

Diana's wrath
Sparkles grim terror from his fiery eyes:
One Javelin pointed with the purest brass,
I have blunted against his ribs, yet he vnscar'd,
The head, as darted against a rock of marble,
Rebounded back.

He shakes off from his head
Our best Thessalian dogs, like Summer flies:
Nor can their sharpe fangs fasten on his hide.
Follow the cry.

Wher's noble Telamon?

Or warlike Iason?

Here you Tyndarides,
Speak, which way bends this plague of Calidon?

Here may you stand him, for behold he comes
Like a rough torrent, swallowing where he spreads,
Over his head a cloud of terror hangs
In which lean death (as in a Chariot) rides,
Darting his shafts on all sides: amongst the Princes
Of fertile Gree^e, Anceus bowels lye
Strewd on the earth, torn by his ravenous tusks:
And had not Nestor (by his Javelins help)
Leap'^vp into an Oak to have escaped his rage,
He had now perished in his second Age.

Peleus is wounded, Pelegon lies slain,
Eupalemon hath all his body rent
With an oblique wound: yet Meleager still,
And Theseus, and Atreus, with the rest,
Pursue the chase, with Boare-speares cast so thick,
That where they fly, they seem to dark the air,
And where they fall, they t^reaten imminent ruin.

To these wee'^ add our fury, and our fire,
And front him, though his b^ow bare figured hell,
And every wrinkle were the gulf of Styx
By which the Gods contest: Come noble Telamon,
Diana's monster by our hands shall fall,
Or (with the Princes slain) let's perish all.

Thou beauteous Nonacris, Arcadia's pride,
How hath thy valour with thy fortune joined,
To make thee stain the general fortitude
Of all the Princes we derive from Greece,
Thy lances point hath on yon armed monster,
Made the first wound, and the first crimson drop
Fell from his side, thy aim and arm extracted,
Thy fame shall never dye in Calidon.

We trifle here, what shall Atlanta gain
The first wounds honour, and be absent from
The monfters death, we must have hand in both.

Thou hast purchased honour and renown enough,
Oh stain not all the general youth of Greece,
By thy too forward spirit. Come not near
Yon rude blood-thirsty savage, lest he prey
On thee, as on Anceus, and the rest,
Let me between thee and all dangers stand.
Fight, but fight safe beneath our puissant hand.

The cry comes this way, all my shafts I'll spend.
To give the fury that affrights us, end.

And ere that monster on Atlanta pray,
This point of steel shall through his hart make way.

Adonis, thou that make Venus a Huntress,
Leave Paphos, Gnidon, Eryx, Erecine,
And Amathon, with precious metals big,
May thou this day live bucklerd in our wing,
And shadowed in the amorous power of love:
My swans I have vnyoakt, and from their necks
Taken of their bridles made of twisted silk.
And from my chariot stuck with Doves white plumes
Lighted upon this verdure, where the Boar
Hath in his fury snowed his scattered foam.
What cry was that? It was Adonis sure.
That piercesant shrike shrild through the musical pipes
Of his sweet voices organs, thou Diana
If thou hast sent this fiende to ruin love,
Or print the least scar in my Adons flesh
Thy chastity I will abandon quite,
And with my looseness, blast thy Cinthian light.

There lie most beauteous of the youths of Greece,
Who^e death I will not morn, ere I revenge.

I'll second thee, thou pride of Greece adieu,
Whom too much valor in thy prime ore-threw.

You're not mine eyes, for they to fee him dead
Would from their soft beds drop upon the earth:
Or in their own warm liquid moisture drown
Their native brightness: you are not Venus heart,
For were it thou mine, at this sad spectacle
Th'dst break these ribs though they were made of brass,
And leap out of my bosom instantly.
My sorrows like a populous throng, all striving
At once to pass through some enforced breach,
In stead of winning passage stop the way,
And so the greatest hast, breeds the most stay.
Oh me! my multiplicity of sorrows,
Makes me almost forget to grieve at all.
Speak, speak, my Adon, thou whom death hath fed on
Ere thou wast yet full ripe; and this thy beauty's
Devoured ere tasted. Eye, where's now thy brightness?
Or hand thy warmth? Oh that such lovely parts
Should be by death thus made vnseruiceable.
That (lives then) had the power to entrance Jove:
Ravish, amaze, and surfeit, all these pleasures
Venus hath lost by thy untimely fall.
And therefore for thy death eternally
Venus shall morn; Earth shall thy trunk devour,
But thy lives blood I'll turn into a flower,
And every Month in solemn rights deplore,
This beauteous Greek slain by Dianaes Boar.

Thus lies the terror that but once to day
Awed all the boldest hearts of Calidon
Wallowing and weltering in his native blood,
Transfixed by us, but bravely seconded,
By noble Iason, Theseus, Peleus,
Telamon, Nestor, the Tyndarides,
And our bold uncles, al our bore-speares stained
And gory hands lau'd in his reeking blood,
To whom belongs this brave victorious spoil?

To Meleager Prince of Calidon.

Is that your general suffrage?

Let not Greece
Suffer such merit unregarded pass,
Or valour live vnguerdon'd, that fell Swine
Whom yet, even dead, the amazed people fear,
And dare not touch but with astonish^ent
Fell by thy hand.

Thou stodst his violence,
T^l thy sharpe Javelin grated against his broines,
Beneath his shield thou entred'st to his heart.
At that we guirt him till a thousand wounds,
He from a thousand hands received at once:
And in his fall it seemed the earth did groan,
And the fixed Center tremble under him.

The spoil is thine, the young Adonis death,
Anceus slaughter, and the massacre
Of Archas, Pelagon, Eupateinon
And all the Grecian Printes lost this day,
Thou hast revenged, therefore be thine the fame,
Which with a general voice Greece shall proclaim.

Princes we thank you, 'tis mine given me free.
Which fair Atlanta we bestow on thee.

Ha, to a woman.

And so many men,
Engaged in it, call back thy gift again.

Greece is by this disparaged, and our fame
Fowly eclipsed.

Snatched from that emulous Dame.

Murmur you Lords at Meleagers bounty,
We first bestowed it as our own by gift,
Yea, and by right, but now we render it
To bright Atlanta, as her own by due
As she that from the Boar the first blood drew.

We must not suffer this disgrace to Greece.

Let women claim amongst women eminence,
Our Lofty spirits, that honour have in chase,
Cannot digest wrongs womanish and base.

Restore this woman and thy sex envy
For fortitude, aim not at quests so hye.

Castor forbear.

He gives but what's his own.

Tis the Kings bounty,

By the immortal Gods,
That gave us this days honour, the same hand
By which the Calidonian terror fell,
Shall him that frowns or murmurs launch to hell.

That will we try.

Then reskue for Atlanta,
This day shall ^all for thee, that art divine,
Monsters more savage then Dianaes ^wine.

No more, no more, behold your uncles slain,
Save in this act two Noble Gentlemen,
Pursue not f^ry to the spoil of Greece,
And death of more brave Princes: let your rage
Be here confin'de, cut off this purple stream
In his mid course, and turn this torrent back
Which in his fury else may drowned us all.

I second Iason and expose my self,
Between these factions to compose a peace.

We have done too much already, ^mpious fury,
How boundless is thy power: vncircumscribed
By thought or reason, you are all violence,
Thy end repentance, sorrow and distaste:
How will Althea take her brothers death
From her sons hand, but rash deeds executed
May be lamented, never be recal'd
Shall the suruiuers be atoned?

So it be done with honour on both parts
We have swords to guard our fortunes and our lives,
And but an equal language will keep both
Thus at the point.

Join hands renowned Princes,
The fury of the Prince of Calidon
Hath preyed but on his own, there let it end,
No further by your urgent spleens extend.

We are appeased.

Lords freely then embrace.

First then, wee'le royally inter our uncles,
And spend some tears upon their funeral rites,
That done we will in our Palace feast these Princes,
With bright Atlanta, whom wee'le make our Queen.
Our Uncles once bestow'de into the earth,
Our mournings shall expire in Bridal mirth.

Come to the Temple there to sacrifice
For these glad tidings, since the Boar lies dead,
That filled our kingdom with such awe and dread.

What joy names Oeneus in this spectacle?
This of a thousand the most sad and tragic,
Whose murdered trunks be these?

Your royal brothers, Prince Toxeus and Plexippus,

Speak, how slain?

Not by the Boar, but by your sons own hand.

By Meleagers, how? upon what quarrel?
Could the proud boy ground such a damned act.

Your son to fair Atlanta gave the prise
Of this days travel, which for, they with-stood
In mutinous arms they loss their vital bloods.

Shall I revenge or morn them.

O strange fate.
An object that must shorten Oeneus days,
And bring these winter hairs to a sad Tomb
Long (...) ther^ da^; I sink beneath these sorrows
Into my black and timeless monument.

My sorrows turn to rage, my tears to fire,
My prayers to curses, vows into revenge.

Peace, peace my Queen, let's bear the Gods vindiction
With patience, as we did Dianaes wrath:
Where Gods are bent to punish, we may grieve
But can our selves nor succour, nor relieve.
Come, let us do to them their latest rites,
Wait on their Hearses in our mourning black;
Their happy souls are mounted above the spheres,
We will wash their bodies in our funeral tears.

Althea what distraction's this within thee?
A sister or a mother wilt thou be?
Since both I cannot, (for these Princes slain)
Sister I choose, a mothers name disdain:
The fatal brand in which the murderers life
Securely lies, I'll hurl into the fire
And as it flames, so shall the slave expire.
Mischief I'll heap on mischief, bad on ill,
Wrong pay with wrongs, and slaughter these that kill.
And since the Gods would all our glories thrall,
I will with them have chief hand in our fall.
But he's my son: oh pardon me dear brothers,
Being a mother if I spare his life,
Though it be fit his sin be plaug'd with death,
And that his life lie in yon fatal brand,
'T will not come fitly from a mothers hand.
Is this the hope of all my ten months pain,
Must he by th'hand of him that nursed him now be slain?
Would he had perished in his cradle, when
I gave him twice life: in his birth, and then
When I the brand snatched from the ravenous flame,
And for this double good, hast thou with shame
And injury repaid me? I will now
A sister be, no mother, for I vow
Revenge and death; Furies, assist my hand
Whilst in red flames I cast his vital brand.

For fair Atlanta, and your Honours, Lords
We banquet you this day: and to begin
Our festivals we will crown this Jovial health
Unto our brother, Theban Hercules
And Deyaneira, will you pledge it Lords?

None but admire and love their matchless worths,
Not fair Atlanta will refuse this health.

You beg of me a pledge, I'll take it lason,
As well for his sake that begins the round,
As those to whom 'tis vowed.

Well spoke Atlanta, but I wonder Lords
What Province now holds Theban Hercules?

He is the mirror and the pride of Greece,
And shall in after ages be renoun'd,
But we forget his health, come Tellamon
Aim it at me.

Assist my rage you sterne Eumenides,
To you this black deed will I consecrate.
Pity away, hence thou consanguine love,
Maternal zeal, peccentall piety.
All cares, loves, duties, offices, affections,
That grow 'tweene sons and mothers, leave this place;
Let none but furies, murders, paracides,
Be my assistants in this damned attempt:
All that's good and honest, I confine,
Black is my purpose; Hell my thoughts are thine.

To bright Atlanta this loud music sown'd,
Her health shall with our loftiest strains be crowned.

Drink, quaff, be blithe; oh how this festiue joy
Stirs up my fury to revenge and death,
Thus, thus, (you Gods above, abject your eyes
From this unnatural act) the murderer dies.

Oh, oh.

My Lord.

I burn, I burn.

What sudden passion's this?

The flames of hell, and Pluto's fightlesse fires,
Are through my entrails and my veins dispierst, oh!

My Lord take courage.

Courage Tellamon?
I have a heart dares threat or challenge hell,
A brow front heaven; a hand to challenge both:
But this my paine's beyond all humane sufferance,
Or mortal patience.

What hast thou done Althea? stay thy fury,
And bring not these strange torments on thine own
Thou hast too much already, back my hand,
And save his life as thou conferust this brand.

How cheers the warlike Prince of Calidon?

Well now, I am at ease and peace within,
Whither's my torture fled? that with such suddenness
Hath freed me from disturbance, were we ill?
Come sit again to banquet, music sownd,
Till this to Deyaneiraes health go round.

Shall mirth and joy crown his degenerate head?
Whilst his cold Uncles on the earth lie spread?
No, wretehed youth whilst this hand can destroy,
I'll cut thee off in midst of all thy joy.

Again, Again.

Burn, perish, wast, fire, sparkle, and consume
And all thy vital spirits fly with this fume.

still, still, there is an Aetna in my bosom
The flames of Styx, and fires of Acheron
Are from the black Chimerian shades removed,
And fixed here, here; oh for Euenus flood,
Or some cool stream, to shoot his currents through
My flaming body, make thy channel here
Thou mighty flood that streamest through Calidon
And quench me, all you springs of Thessaly
Remove your heads, and fix them in my veins
To cool me, oh!

Defend us heaven, what fuddaine ecstasy
Or unexpected torture hath disturbed
His health and mirth?

Worse then my torment,
That I must die thus, thus, that the Boar had slain me,
Happy Anceus and Adonis blessed,
You died with fame, and honour crowns your rest;
My flame increases still, oh father Oeneus
And you Althea, whom I would call mother
But that my genius prompts me you are unkind,
And yet farewell, Atlanta beauteous maid,
I cannot speak my thoughts for torture, death,
Anguish and pains, all that Promethean fire
Was stolen from heaven, the Thief left in my bosom.
The Sun hath cast his element on me,
And in my entralls hath he fixed his Sphere,
His pointed beams he hath darted through my heart,
And I am still on flame.

So, now'tis done,
The brand consumed, his vital thread quite spun.

Now'gins my fire waste, and my natural heat
To change to Ice, and my scortch't blood to freeze.
Farewell, since his black ensign death displays,
I dye, cut off thus in my best of days.

Dead is the flower and pride of Calidon.
Who would displease the Gods? Diana's wrath
Hath stretched even to the death, and tragic ruin
Of this fair hopeful Prince, here stay thy vengeance
Goddess of chastity, and let it hang
No longer ore the house of Calidon:
Since thou hast cropped the young, spare these old branches
That yet survive.

She shall not, Iason no,
She shall not. Do you wonder Lords of Greece,
To see this Prince lye dead? why that's no novel,
All men must dye, thou, he, and every one,
Yea I my self must: but I'll tell you that
Shall stiff your hair, your eyes start from heads,
Print fixed amazement in your wondering fronts,
Yea and astonish all: This was my son,
Borne with sick throws, nursed from my tender breast
Brought up with femine care, cherished with love:
His youth, my pride; his honour all my wishes,
So dear, that little less he was then life.
But will you know the wonder ('lasse) too true,
Him (all my sons) this my enraged hand slue,
This hand, that Dians quenchless rage to fill,
Shall with the slain sons sword the mother kill.

The Queen hath slain herself: who'l bear these news to the sad King?


That labour may be spared:
The King no sooner heard of his sons death,
(wrought by his mother in the fatal brand)
But he sunk dead: sorrow so changed his weakness,
And without word or motion he expired.

We'll see them (ere we part from Calidon)
Interred with honour: But we sojourn long
In this cursed Clime; oh let us not incurro
Diana's fury, our next expedition
Shall be for Colchos, and the golden Fleece,
Unto which (Princes) we inuit you all.
Our stately Argoe we have rigged and trimmed,
And in it we will bear the best of Greece,
Styled from our ship by name of Argonauts.
Great Hercules will with his company,
Grace our adventure, and renown all Greece,
By the rich purchase of the Colchian Fleece.

Let not even Kings against the Gods co^test,
Lest in this fall their ruins be expressed.
Think Hercules, from clensing the foul stall
And stable of Augeus, in which fed
Three hundred Oxen, (never freed at all,
Till his arrive) returned where he was bred,
To Thebes; there Deianeira him receives
With glad embraces, but he stays not long,
Iason the Lady of her Lord bereaves:
For in the new-rig'd Argoe, with the young
And sprighly Heroes, he at Colchos aims,
Where the rich Fleece must publish their high fames.
Imagine now these Princes under sail,
Stearing their course as far as high-rear'd Troy,
Where King Laomedon doth much bewail
His daughter, whom a Sea-whale must destroy.
Observe this well: for here begins the jar
Made Troy rack't after in a ten years war.

Hesione, this is thy last on earth,
Whose fortunes we may morn, though not prevent:
Would Troy, whose walls I did attempt to rear,
Had ne'er grown higher then their ground-fils, or
In their soundation buried been, and lost,
Since their high structure must be thus maintained,
With blood of our bright Ladies: Oh Hesione!
Th'onely remainder of these female dames
Begot by us, I must be queath thy body
To be the food of Neptunes monstrous Whale.

Had you kept troth and promise with the Gods,
This had not chan^'t: You borrowed of the Priests
Of Neptune and Apollo, Sea, and Sun,
That quantity of gold, which to this height
And spacious compass, hath immured great Troy;
But the work finished, you denied to pay
The Priests their due, for which enraged N^ptune
Assembled his high tides, thinking to drown
Our lofty buildings, and to ruin Troy:
But when the Moon, by which the Seas are governed,
Retired his waters by her powerful wane,
He left behind him such infectious slime,
Which the Sun poisoning by his persant beams.
They by their mutual power, raised a hot plague,
To slack this hot pest, Neptune made demand,
Monthly a Lady to be chose by lot,
To glut his huge Sea-mo^sters raueno us jaws:
The lot this day fell on Hesione
Our beauteous sister.

Priam 'tis too true,
Till now Laomedon ne'er knew his guilt,
Or thought the Gods could punish.

Royal father,
Morn not for me, the Gods must be appeased,
And I in this am happy, that my death
Is made th'attonement 'tweene those angry powers
And your afflicted people, though my Innocence
Never deserved such rigour from the Gods.
Come good Anchises, bind me to this rock,
And let my body glut th'insatiate fury
Of angry Neptune, and th'offended Sun.

A more unwilling monster never past
Anchises hand.

Now, now the time draws ny,
That my sweet child by Neptunes whale must dye,

The very thought of it swallows my heart
As deep in sorrow, as the monster can
Bury my fister.

Soft, what clamor's that?

A stately ship, well rigged with swelling fails,
Enters the harbour, bound (by their report)
For Colchos^ but when they beheld the shores
Covered with multitudes, and spied from far,
Your beauteous daughter fastened to the rock,
They made to know the cause; which certified,
One noble Greek amongst these Heroes stands,
And offers to encounter Neptunes whale,
And free from death the bright Hesione.

Thou hast ( Aeneas) quickened me from death,
And added to my date a second Age.
Admit them.

'Tis told us that thy name's Laomedon,
And that thy beauteous daughter must this day
Feed a sea-monster: how wilt thou reward
The man that shall encounter Neptunes whale?
Tug with that fiend upon thy populous strond,
And with my club sows on his armed scales?
Hast thou not heard of Theban Hercules?
I that have awed the earth, and ransacked hell,
Will through the Ocean hunt the God of streams,
And chase him from the deep Abismes below.
I'll dare the Sea-god from his watery deeps
If he take part with this Leuiathan.

Thy name and courage warlike Hercules
Assures her life, if thou wilt undertake
This hauty quest: two milk white steeds, the best
Asia ere bred, shall be thy valours prize,

We accept them; keep thy faith Laomedon,
If thou but break with Ioue-borne Hercules,
These marble structures, built with virgins blood,
I'll raze even with the earth. When comes the monster?

Now, now, help Jove.

I see him sweep the sea's along.
Blow rivers through his nostrils as he glides,
As if he meant to quench the Suns brightfire,
And bring a palped darkness ore the earth:
He opes his jaws as if to swallow Troy,
And at one yawn whole thousands to destroy.

Fly, fly into the City.

Take along
This beauteous Lady, if he must have pray,
In stead of her Alcides here will stay.

The heartless Troians fly into the town
At fight of yon sea-diuell: here we'll stand
To wait the conquest of thy Jovial hand.

Gramercy Iason, see he comes in tempest,
I'll meet him in a storm as violent,
And with one stroke which this right hand shall aim,
Ding him into th'abisse from whence he came.

The monster's slain, my beautuous sister freed.

Be ever for this noble deed renowned,
Let Asia speak thy praise.

The Argonauts
A^e glorifi'd by this victorious act.

All Troy shall consecrate to Hercules
Temples and Altars: lets descend and meet him.

Stay, none presume to stir, we'll parley them
First from the walls.

Why doth not Troy's King from those walls descend?
And since I have redeemed Hesione,
Present my travels with two milke-white steeds,
The prize of my endeavours?

Hercules we owe thee none, none will we tender thee,
Thou hast won thee honour, a reward sufficient
For thy attempt: our gates are shut against thee,
Nor shall you enter, you are Greekish spies,
And come to pry but where our land is weak.

Oh royal father!

Peace boy: Greekes away:
For imminent death attends on your delay.

The Sea ne'er bred a monster half so vile
As this Land-fiend. Darft threaten Hercules?
Would universal Troy were in one frame,
That I might whelm it on thy cursed head,
And crown thee in thy ruin. Menace us?

Depart our walls, or we will fir^ your Argoe,
Lying in our harbour, and prevent your purpose
In the achievement of the golden fleece,

Laom^don, I'll toss thee from thy walls,
Batter thy gates to shivers with my Club,
Nor will I leave these broad Scamander plains,
Till thy aspiring Towers of Illium
Lye level with the place on which we stand.

Great Hercules, th'aduenture falls to me,
Our voyage bent for Colchos, not for Troy,
The golden fleece, and not La^medon:
Why should we hazard here our Argonauts?
Or spend our selves on accidental wrongs?

Iason advises well, great Hercules,
We should dishonour him, and th'expectation
Greece hath of us, delude by this delay.

Then let us from this harbour launch our Argoe,
To Colchos first, and in our voyage home
Revenge us on this false Laomedon.

You sway me princes: farewell treacherous King,
Nought, save thy blood, shall satisfy this wrong
And base dishonour done to Hercules.
Expect me; for by Olimpicke I^e I swear.
Ne'er to set foot within my native Thebes,
See Deianeira, or to touch in Greecs,
Till I'haue scaled these mures, invaded Troy,
Ransacked thy City, slain Laomedon,
And avenge the Gods that govern Sea and Sun.
Come valiant Heroes, first the fleece to enjoy,
And in our back return to ransack Troy.

We dread you not, we'll answer what is done.
As well as stand against Neptune and the Sun.

How may we glory above other kings
Being (by our birth) descended from the Gods?
Our wealth renowned through the world tripartite,
Most in the riches of the golden fleece,
And not the least of all our happiness,
Medea for her powerful magic skill,
And Negromanticke exorcisms admired,
And dreaded through the Colchian territories.

I can by Art make rivers retrograde,
Alter their channels, run back to their heads,
And hide them in the springs from whence they grew.
The curled Ocean with a word I'll smooth,
(Or being calm) raise waives as high as hills,
Threatening to swallow the vast continent.
With powerful charms I'll make the Sun stand still,
Or call the Moon down from her arched sphere.
What cannot I by power of Hecate?

Discourse (fair sister) how the golden fleece
Came first to Colchos.

Let Absyrtus know,
Phrixus the son of Theban Athamas,
And his fair sister Hells, being betrayed
By their cursed step-dame (...), fled from Greece,
Their Innocence pitied by Mercury,
He gave to them a golden-fleeced Ram,
Which bore them safe to the Syg^an sea,
Which swimming, beauteous Hells there was drowned,
And gave that sea the name of Hellespont,
That which parts Sestus and Abidos still:
Phrixus arrives at Colchos, and to Mars
There sacrificed his Ram in memory
Of his safe waftage, favoured by the Gods.
The golden Fleece was by the Oracle
Commanded to be fixed there, kept and guarded
By two fierce Bulls, that breath insernall fires,
And by a wakeful Dragon, in whose eyes
Never came sleep: for in the safe conserving
Of this divine and worthy monument,
Our kingdoms weal and safety most consists.

And he that strives by purchase of this fleece,
To weaken us, or shake our Royalty,
Must taste the fury of these fiery fiends,
The novel: speak.

Upon the Cholchian shores
A stately vessel, manned it seems from Greece
Is newly lancht, full fraught with Gentlemen
Of brave aspects and presence.

Whose their General?

Iason, he stiles himself a Prince of Greece
And Captain over the noble Argonautes.

Usher them in, that we may know their quest
And what adventure drew them to these shores.

Hail king of Colchos, thou behold in us
The noblest Heroes that inhabit Greece
Of whom I, though unworthiest, stile my self
The General; the intent of this our voyage
Is to reduce the rich and golden prise
To Greece, from whence it came, know I am come
To tug and wrestle with the infernal Bulls,
And in their hot fierce double guild my arms
To place upon their necks the feruile yoke,
And bondage, force them plow the field of Mars,
Till in the furrows I have sowed the teeth
Of vipers, from which men in armour grow
To enter combat with the sleepelesse Dragon,
And maugre him fetch thence the golden Fleece.
All this Oetes, I am pressed to achieve
Against these horrid tasks my life to engage
Bulls fury, Vipers poison, Dragons rage.

Such a bold spirit, and noble presence linked,
Never before were seen in Phasis Isle,
Colchos be proud, a Prince demands thy Fleece,
Richer then that he comes for; let the Greekes
Our Phasian wealth and Oetes treasure bear,
So they in lieu will leave me Iason here.

Princes, you aim at dangers more in proffe
Then in report, which if you should behold
In their true figure, would amaze your spirits:
Yea, terifye the Gods; let me advise you,
As one that knows their terror, to desist
Ere you enwrap your seffe into these perils,
Whence there is no euafion.

Oetes, know
Peril's a babe, the greater dangers threaten
The greater is his honour that breaks through.
Have we in the Ago rowed with sixty oars
And at each Oar a Prince; pierced Samo-thrace,
The Chersoneson sea, the Hellespont;
Even to the waives that break on Colchos sho^res?
And Shall we with dishonour turn to Greece?
Know Oetes, not the least of sixty Heroes
That now are in thy Confines, but thy monsters
Dare quell and baffle.

Much more Hercules.

Hercules.

Starts Oetes at the name of Hercules,
What would he do to see him in his eminence;
But leaving that, this must be Iasons quest,
A work not worthy him; where be these monsters?

May all enchantments be confined to hell,
Rather then he encounter fiends so fell.

Princes, since you will needs attempt these dangers
You shall; and if achieve the Golden Fleece
Transport it where you please, mean time, this day
Repose your selves, w^l'e feast you in our Palace.
To morrow morning with the rising Sun,
Our golden prise shall be conseru'd or won.

If he attempts he dies, what's that to me?
Why should Medea fear a strangers life?
Or what's that Iason I should dread his fall?
If (...), my fathers glory wains,
And all our fortunes must reward his pains.
Let lason perish then, and Colchos flourish.
Our pristine glories let us still enjoy,
And these our brasse-head bulls the Prince destroy.
Oh! what distraction's this within me bred,
Although he die, I would not see him dead?
The best I see, the worst I follow still,
He ne'er wronged me, why should I wish him ill?
Shall the Bulls toss him whom Medea loves,
A Tigress, not a Princess, should I prove?
To see him tortured whom I dearly love?
Be then a torteresse to thy fathers life,
A robber of the clime where thou wast bred,
And for some straggler that hath lost his way,
Thy fathers Kingdom and his State betray.
Tush, these are nothing, first his faith I'll crave,
That covenant made, him by enchantments faue

My task is above strength, Duke Peleus sent me
Not to achieve, but die in this pursuit,
And to prevent the Oracle that told him
I must succeed; Iason bethink thee then
Thou come to execution, not to act
Things above man; I have observed Medea
Retort upon me many an amorous look,
Of which I'll study to make prosperous use.
If by her art the Enchantments I can bind
Immured with death, I certain safety find.

Shall I o're-whelme upon my captive head,
The curse of all our Nation, the Crowns ruin?
Clamours of men, and woemens loud exclaims.
Burnings of children; the universal curse
Of a great people, all to save one man,
A straggler (God knows whence derived, where borne,
Or hither where Noble? let the proud Greek die,
We still in Colchos sit instated hye
Oh me! that look upon Medea cast
Drowns all these fears, and hath the rest surpassed.

Madam, because I love I pity you,
That you a beauteous Lady, art-full wise,
Should have your beauty and your wisdom both
Inuelopt in a cloud of Barbarism:
That on these barren Confines you should live,
Confined into an Angle of the world.
And ne'er see that which is the world indeed,
Fertile and populous Greece, Greece that bears men,
Such as resemble Gods, of which in us
You see the most dejected, and the meanest.
How harshly doth your wisdom sound in th'eares
Of these Barbarians, dull, vnapprehenfible,
And such, in not conceiving your hid Arts,
Deprive them of their honour; In Greece springs
The fountains of Divine Philosophy,
They are all vnderstanders; I would have you
Bright Lady with us, enter to that world
Of which this Colchos is no part at all.
Show then your beauty to these judging eyes,
Your wisdom to these understanding ears.
In which they shall receive their merited grace,
And leave this barren, cold, and stirrill place.

His presence without all this Oratory
Did much with us, but where they both conjoin
To entrap Medea, she must needs be caught.

I long to see this Colchian Lady clad
In Hymens stateliest robes, whom the glad Matrons,
Bright L^dies, and Imperial Queenes of Greece
Shall welcome and applaud, and with rich gifts
Present, for saving of their sons and kinsmen
From these infernal monsters: As for Iason
If you Medea shall despise his love,
He craves no other life then to die so,
Since life without you is but torturing pain,
And death to men distressed is double gain.

That tongue more then Medeaes spells enchants,
And not a word, but like our exoreismes
And power of charms prevails, Oh lone! thy Majesty
Is greater then the triple Hecates,
Bewitching Circes, or these hidden skils,
Ascribed unto the infernal Proserpine.
I that by incantations can remove
Hills from their syts, and make huge mountains shake,
Darken the Sun at noone, call from their graves
Ghosts long since dead, that can command the earth,
And affright heaven, no spell at all can find
To bondage love, or free a captive mind.

Love Iason then, and by thy Divine aide,
Give me such power, that I may tug vnscorcht
Amidst the flames with these thy fiery fiends,
That I vnuenom'd may these Vipers teeth
Cast from my hand, through Morpheus leaden charms,
Over that wakeful snake that guards the Fleece,
For which live Iasons happy Bride in Greece.

A match, what herbs or spells, what Magic can
Command in heaven, earth, or in hell below,
What either air, or sea can minister,
To guard thy person, all these helps I'll gather
To girdle thee with saf^ty.

Be thou then
For ever Iasons, and through Greece renowned
In whom our Heroes have such safety found,
Our bargain thus I seal.

Which I'll make good
With Colchos fall, and with my fathers blood.

Prince Iason, all the Heroes at the banquet
Inquire for you, twice hath my father Oetes
Made search for you; Oh sister!

No word you saw us two in conference.

Do you take me to be a woman, to tell all I see,
And blab all I know, I that am in hope one day to
Lie with a woman, will once lie for a woman,
Sister, I saw you not.

Remember; come Prince, will you lead the way?

I have parted you that never parted fray
Come sir will you follow.

The night grows on, and now to my black Arts,
Goddess of witchcraft and dark ceremony,
To whom the elves of Hills, of Brookes, of Groves,
Of standing lakes, and caverns vaulted deep
Are ministers; three-headed Hecate
Lend me thy Chariot drawn with winged snakes,
For I this night must progress through the Air.
What simples grow in Tempe of Thessaly,
Mount Pindus, Otheris, Ossa, Appida^,
Olimpus, Caucas. or high Teneriff.
I must select to finish this great work,
Thence must I fly unto Amphrisus Fords,
And gather plants by the swift Sperchius streams,
Where rushy Bebes, and Anthedon flow,
Where herbs of bitter juice and strong sent grow;
These must I with the hairs of Mandrakes use,
Temper with Poppy-seeds and H^locke juice:
With Aconitum that in Tartar springs,
With Cypress, E^, and Veruin, and these mix
With Incantations, Spells, and (...)
Of wondrous power and virtue; oh thou night,
Mother of dark Arts hide me in thy veil,
Whilst I those banks search, and these mountains scale.

Upon the safeguard of this golden Fleece
Colchos depends, and he that bears it hence
Bears with it all our fortunes; the Argonautes
Have it in quest, if Lason escape our monsters
I'll rather at some banquet poison him,
And quaff to him his death, or in the night
Set fire upon his Argoe, and in flames
Consume the happy hope of his return,
This purpose we, as we are Colchos King,
Absyrtus where's your sister?

In her chamber.

When you next see her give to her this noate,
The manner of our practise, her fell hand
Cannot be mist in this, but it shall fall
Heavy on these that Colchos seeks to thrall.
The howre draws nigh, the people throng on heaps,
To this adventure in the field of Mars,
And noble Iason armed with his good ^hield,
Is up already and demands the field.

Oetes, I come thus armed, demanding combat
Of all those monsters that defend thy Fleece:
And to these dangers singly, I oppose
My person as thou see, when set thou open
The gates of hell to let thy devils out?
Glad would I wrestle with thy fiery Bulls,
And from their throats the flaming dewlops tear.
Vnchaine them, and to Iason turn them loose,
That as Alcides did to Achelous;
So from their hard fronts I may tear there horns,
And lay the yoke upon their vntam'd necks.

Yet valiant Greek desist, I, though a stranger
Pity thy youth, or if thou wilt persist
So dreadful is the adventure thou persuest,
That thou wilt think I shall vnbowell hell,
Vnmacle the fiends, and make a passage
Free for the Infernals.

I shall welcome all.
Medea now if there be power in love;
Or force in Magic; if thou hast or will
Or Art, try all the power of Characters,
Virtue of Symples, Stones, or hidden spells,
If earth Elves, or nimble airy Spirits,
Charms, Incantations, or dark Exorcisms.
If any strength remain in Pyromancy,
Or the hid secrets of the air or fire.
If the Moons sphere can any help infuse,
Or any influent Star, collect them all
That I by thy aide may these monsters thrall.

Discover them.

The hidden power of Earth, Air, Water, Fire,
Shall from this place to Iasons help conspire.
Fire withstand fire, and magic temper flame,
By my strong spells the savage monster's tame:
So, that's performed, now take the Vipers teeth
And sow them in the furrowed field of Mars.
Of which strange seed, men ready armed must grow
To assault Iason. Already from beneath
Their deadly pointed weapons gin to appear,
And now their heads, thus moulded in the earth,
Straight way shall teem; and having fr^ed their fate
(The stalks by which they grow) all violently
Pursue the valiant Greek, but by my sorcery
I'll turn their armed points against themselves
And all these slaves that would on Iason fly
Shall wound themselves and by sedition die.
Yet thrives the Greek, now kill the sleeping snake
Which I have charmed, and thence the Trophy take,
These shouts witness his conquest, I'll descend,
Hear Iasons fears and all my charms take end.

Oetes, ^ow is this rich and precious Fleece,
By Iasons sword repurchast, and must turn
Unto the place whence Phrixus brought his Ram.

That practise by your ruins; I'll prevent,
And sooner then with that return to Greece,
Your slaughtered bodies leave with this rich fleece.

Since our adventure is atchieu'd and done,
The prize is ours, we ceize what we have won.

Enjoy it Iason, I admire thy worth,
Which as it hath exceeded admiration,
So must we needs applaud it. Noble gentlemen.
Depart not Colchos, ere your worths and valour
We with some rich and worthy gifts present.
The conquest of our Bulls, and Dragons death,
(Though we esteemed them) yet they sad us not,
Since we behold the safety of this prince.
Enter our palace, and your praise sownd hye,
Where you shall feast, (or all by treafon dye.)

I have not seeene my sister to day, I muse she hath not been at this
solemnity, me thinks she should not have lost this triumph; I have a note to
deliver her from my father. Here she comes.

Sister, peruse this brief, you know the character,
It is my fathers. This is all.

Iason with his Argonauts this night must perish, the fleece not be transported
to Greece -- Medea, your assistance.

This is my fathers plot to overthrow
Prince Iason, and the noble Argonauts,
Which I'll prevent: I know the King is sudden,
And if prevention be delayed, they dye:
I that have ventured thus far for a love,
Even to these arts that Nature would have hid
As dangerous and forbidden, shall I now
Undo what I have done, through womanish fear,
Paternal duty, or for filial love?
No Iason, thou art mine, and my desire,
Shall wade with thee through blood, through seas, through fire.

Madam.

My Lord, I know what you would say,
Think now upon your life, the King my father
Intends your ruin, to redeem the fleece,
And it repurchase with your tragic deaths:
Therefore assemble all your Argonauts,
And let them (in the silence of the night)
Launch from the Colchian harbour; I'll associate you
As Iasons bride.

You are my patroness,
And under you I triumph: when the least
Of all these graces I forget, the Gods
Revenge on me my hated perjury.
Must we then launch this night? you are my directress,
And by your art I'll manage all my actions.

Then fly, I'll send to see your Argoe trimmed,
Rigged and made tight: night comes, the time grows on:
Hye then aboard.

I shall.

Now populous Greece,
Thank us (not Iason) for this conquered fleece.

Medea, we are robbed, despoiled, dishonoured,
Our Fleece raped hence, we must not suffer it,
Since all our ominous fortunes it includes,
I am resolved Iason this night shall dye.

Should he survive, you might be held unworthy
The name of King; my hand shall be as deep
As yours in his destruction.

A strong guard
I will select, and in the dead of night,
When they are sunk in Leth^, set upon them,
And kill them in their beds.

I'll second you,
And lave my stained hands in their reeking bloods
That practise your dishonour.

Iason then dyes,
When he most hopes for this rich Colchian prize.

But ere the least of all these ils betide,
This Colchian strond shall with thy blood be died.
For Iason and his Argonauts I stand,
And will protect them with my art and hand.

Madam Medea^

Leave circumstance, away,
Hoise up your sails, death and destruction
Attends you on the shore.

You'll follow Madam.

Instantly: Blow gentle gales, assist them winds and tide,
That I may Greece see, live Iasons bride.

How now ^ister, so solitary?

Oh happy met, though it be late Absyrtus,
You must along with me.

Whither pray?

I'll tell you as we walk.
This lad between me and all harm shall stand;
And if the King pursue us with his Fleet,
His mangled limbs shall (scattered in the way)
Work our escape, and the Kings speed delay.
Come brother.

Any where with you sister.

Let none to whom true Art is not denied,
Our monstrous Bulls, and magic Snakes deride.
Some think this rich Fleece was a golden Book,
The leaves of parchment, or the skins of Rams,
Which did incl^ the Art of making gold
By Chimi^ke skill, and therefore rightly stild,
The Golden Fleece, which to attain and compass,
Includes as many travels, mysteries,
Changes and Chymicke bod^es, fires and monsters,
As ever Iason could in Colchos meet.
The sages, and the wise, to keep their Art
From being vulgar: yet to have them tasted
With appetite and longing, give those glosses,
And flourishes to shadow what they write,
Which might (at once) breed wonder and delight.
So did the Egyptians in the Arts best tried,
In Hierogliphickes all their Science hide.
But to proceed, the Argonauts are fled,
Whom the enraged Oetes doth pursue,
And being in sight, M^dea takes the head
Of young Absyrtus, whom (unkind) she slue,
And all his other limbs straws in the way
Of the old father, his pursuit to stay.
In memory of this inhumane deed,
These Islands where his ^ughtered limbs lye spread,
Were called Absyrtides: But we proceed
With King Laomedon, against whom are led
The Argonauts, Troy by Alcides raced,
Asks the next place, and must in rank be placed.

The Argonauts returned?

They are my Lord:

And landed?

Landed.

Where?

At Tenedos.

Could not those Colchian monsters in their bowels
Bury the Greekes, but must they all survive
To threat us with invasion. Speak Anchises,
March they towards Troy?

In conduct of the mighty Hercules,
Wasting with sword and fire where ere they march:
Scamander fields they have strewed with carcasses,
And Simois streams already purpled are
With blood of Troians.

Let us give them battle.

In vain, our forces are dispersed abroad,
Nor have we order to withstand their fury:
Best were we to immure our selves in Troy,
And trust unto the virtue of our walls.

Do not delay your safety, you may hear
Their cries, and lofty clamours, threatening Troy:
They dog us to our gates, and without speed
And expedition, they will enter with us.
Come then, our threatened lives we will immure,
And think us in our strong built walls secure.

Pursue the chase even to the gates of Troy,
Then call th'ingrate Loamedon to parley.

The perjured King shall pay us for the wrong
Done to Alcides in his promised steeds.

Better he had the monster had devoured
His beauteous daughter, then t'abide our furies.

He did exclude our virtue from the City,
And now therefore he shall admit our fury.

These walls first reared at the great Gods expense,
We'll ruin to the earth: let's summon him.

We will call him to parley.

Laomedon, we do not summon thee
To parley, but to warn thee guard thy walls,
Which (without pause) we now intend to scale.

Wilt hear me Hercules?

I listened thy periurious tongue too late.
Scale, batter, mount, assault, sack, and deface,
And leave (of Troy) nought save the name and place.

Thus is the tyrant, that but late awed Troy,
Buried amidst his ruins; he chastised,
And we revenged: the spoil of this rich Town
Rated as high as Iasons Colchian prize,
You shall divide: but first these lofty walls,
Builded by perjury, and maintained by pride,
We'll ruin to the earth: Who saw young Priam?

He's fled, and took the way to Samo-thrace,
With him Anchises, that on Venus got
The young Aeneas, they are fled together,
And left the spoil of all the town to us.

Which shall enrich Thebes, and the towns of Greece,
And Telamon, to do thy valour right,
For mounting first over the walls of Troy,
The first and choice of all the spoil be thine.

Then let Alcides honour Telamon
With this bright Lady, fair Hesione,
Sister to Priam, daughter to Laomedon,
Whose beauty I prefer before the state
And wealth of Troy.

Receive her Telamon,
She is thine own by gift of Hercules.

A present more delighting Telamon,
Then were I made Lord of high Illiums Towers,
And heir unto the dead Laomedon.

I am a Princess, shall my fathers ils
Fall on my head? If he offended Hercules,
He hath made satisfaction with his life.
Oh be not so severe, to stretch his punishment
Even after life; hast thou from death redeemed me,
To give me captive, and to slave my youth?
Things worse then death: rather let Hercules
Expose me to the rock, where first he found me,
To abide the wrath both of the Sea and Sun.
Oh! rather make my body food for monsters,
Then brand my birth with bondage.

Fair Hesione,
I will not loose thy beauty, nor thy youth,
Nor part with this my honour, could thou give me
For ransom of them, both our Argoes crammed
With gold and gems; you are my valours prize,
And shall with me to populous Salamine.

Can you so wrong the daughter of a king,
To give her as a Dukes base Concubine?
Touch me not Telamon, for I divine,
Ifere my brother Priam re-build Troy,
And be the king of Asia, he will revenge
This base dishonour done Hesione;
And for his sister, rauish't hence perforce,
Do the like out-rage on some Grecian Queen,
In just revenge of my injurious wrong.

Should all the kings in Asia, or the world,
Take part with Priam in that proud design,
Like fate, like fortune with Laomedon
They shall abide: renowned Telamon,
She is the warlike purchase of thy sword,
Enjoy her as the gift of Hercules.
And now brave Grecian Hero's, lets towards Greece
With al these honoured spoils from Colchos brought
And from the treasures of defaced Troy.
Fair Deianeira longs for us in Thebes,
Whom we will visit next, and thence proceed
Unto our future labours. Cacus lives
A bloody tyrant, whom we must remove:
And the three-headed Gerion sways in Spain,
Notorious for his rapes and out-rages;
Both these must perish by Alcides hand,
And when we can the earth from tyrants clear,
In the worlds utmost bounds our pillars rear. ex^

Loath are we (courteous auditors) to cloy
Your appetites with viands of one taste,
The beauteous Venus we must next employ,
Whom we saw mourning for Adonis last.
Suppose her still for the young Adon sad,
But cheered by Mars, their old loves they renew,
And she, that (whilst he lived) preferred the Lad,
Hath quite forgot him, since the Boar him slue.
Mars is in grace, a meeting they devise,
Jealous of all, but fearing most the Sun,
He that sees all things from his first vp-rise,
And like a blab, tells all that he knows done.
Our mortals must a while their spleens assuage,
And to the Gods, for this Act, leave the Stage.

I knew loves Queen could not be long unkind,
Though (whilst I absent, to teach Arms in Thrace)
You took th'aduangtage to forget your Mars,
To dote on Adon, and Anchises too;
Yet (those worn out) let us renew our loves,
And practise our first amorous dalliance.

How can I hate; that am the Queen of love?
Or practise ought against my native power?
As I one day, played with my Cupids shafts,
The wanton with his arrow razed my skin.
Trust me, at first I did neglect the smart:
At length it rankled, and it grew unsound,
Till he that now lies wounded, cut'd my wound.

Come shall we now, whilst Vulcan plies his forge,
Sweats at his Anuill, choakes himself with dust,
And labours at his bellows, kiss and toy?

Why met we else? Here is a place remote,
An obscure cave, fit for our amorous sport:
In this dark cavern we'll securely rest,
And Mars shall add unto my Vulcans crest.
But how if we be spied?

Whom need we fear?
Unless the Sun, who now the lower world
Lights with his beams; I mean the Antipodes,
The tell-tale blab is busy now else-where:
And I will set to watch at the caves door,
My trusty groom, who (ere the Sun shall rise
With his bright beams to light our Hemisphere)
Shall waken us.

For all the world I would not have the Sun
Discover our sweet sport, or see whats done.

Be that my charge. Wher's Gallus?

At hand fir: I am not that Gallows that is made of three trees, or one that is
never without hangers on: nor that Gallus that is latin for a French-man; but
your own Gallus gallinacius, servant and true squire to God Mars.


Syrrah, you know this Lady.

Yes, Mistress Vulcan, she is as well known in Paphos here for her Meretrix,
as any Lady in the land, she was the first that deuis'd stewed meat, and
proclaimed pickle-oysters to be good for the back; she is the first that
taught wenches the trade of Venery, and such as were borne to nothing but
beauty, she taught them how to use their Talent: Yes, I know her I warrant you.


Syrrah attend, this night yon Queen and I
Must have some private conference, in yon cave,
Where whilst we stay, 'tmust be thy care to watch
That no suspicious eye pry through these chinks,
Especially I warn thee of the Suns.

I smell knavery, if my Lady Venus play the whore
What am I that keep the door?

See thou do call us, e're the Sun uprise,
But sleep not for by all my Arms I swear,
If by thy careless floth, or negligence
We be describe, thy body I'll translate,
To some strange Monster.

I'm hard fauor'd enough already, you need not
Make my face worse then it is.

Com enter then fair Queen, we are secure,
Now safely may thou clasp the God of war,
Spite of Sun, Moon, or a jealous star.

Love answers love, desire with ardor meets,
Both which this night shall taste a thousand sweets.

I see you can make shift to go too't without sheets: How shall I pass this
night away till morning, I am as drowsy as a dormouse, the very thought that I
must wake, charms me a sleep already, I would I durst venture on a nap; Hey
ho, sure I may wake again before they rise, and never the wiser, I will stand
to it, there is not a more sleepy trade in the world then a watchman, nor one
that is more acquainted with deeds of darkness, tell me of the Sun! the
Sun will not rise this two hours; well, let them watch that will, or can, I
must have a nod or two, God night to you all, for here am I fast till morning.


The day-starre shines and calls me blushing up.
From Tithons bed to harness Phoebus Steeds.
My roseate fingers have already stroked
The element where light begins to appear,
And straight Apollo with his glistering beams,
Will guild the East, the Seasons, Months, and Dai^
Attend him in the palace of the Sun.
The Hours have brought his Chariot to the gate
Of Crystal, where the Sunne-God mounts his throne,
His fiery Steeds have all their traces fet,
Th'vnruly stalions fed with Ambrosy
(With their round hooves shod with the purest gold)
Thunder against the Marble floors of Heaven,
And wait till Phoebus hath but don'd his beams,
Which I the blushing Morning still put on.
And now's the howre (for thus time fleets still)
That the Suns up to clime the Eastern hill.

Beauteous Aurora, for full twice twelve hours
Till in my sphere I have compassed round the world
Farewell, I with my beams will dry these tears
Thou shedst at parting; we have chac't hence night,
And frighted all the twinkling stars from heaven,
And now the steep Olimpus we must clime,
Till from the high Meridian we peruse
The spacious bounds of this large vniuerse,
And thence decline our Chariot towards the West,
Till we have washed our Coach-steeds and our self
In Isters icy streams: We with this eye
Can all things see that mortals do on earth,
And what we find inhumane, or to offend,
We tell to Jove, that he may punish sins.
For this I am termed a tel-tale and a blab,
And that I nothing can conceal abroad.
But let spite spit the worst and wrong me still,
Day hates sins, and light despises ill.
And now behold a most abhorred deed,
Mars beds with Venus, shall not Vulcan know it?
By my light he shall; I have seen, and I will tell,
The Sun hates sin but crowns them that do well.

Venus awake, we have ore-slept our selves,
The Sunne's above in his diurnal task,
I saw his piercing beams pry through a cranny,
And cast his right eye full upon our bed.

We are betrayed, the blab will tell the Smith,
Our love will come to th'eare of ^upiter
And all the other Gods, what will Diana
Say when she hears of our inchastity?
Or how will Iuno take this spouse-breach from us?

Nay rather, how will Vulcan taste our sport?
He might suspect, but never prove till now,
Where is the villain Gallus set to watch?

See where he snorts, the slave is dead asleep.

Awake thou drowsy Groom, thy chaflisement
Shall exceed torture.

Hey ho, what's the matter there, ha?

Look, hast thou eyes? is not the Sun two hours
Mounted aloft? hath he not seen theesleeping
At the Caves door, Yea beheld us too?

More shame for him to look in at any bodies window.

Speak, how can thou excuse this?

Oh great God Mars.

Behold, this is thy doom, thy negligence
Thus I'll chastise, thou shalt thy humane shape
Henceforth forgo, I will translate thy body
Into a bird shall ever bear thy name,
Be Gallus still, a Cock, and be thy nature
Ever hereafter this; to watch the Sun,
And by thy crows and clamours warn the world
Two hours before he rise, that the Sun comes
Clap with thy wings, and with thy shrieking loud,
Proclaim his coming when thou thrice hast crowed.

The slaves right served, let this his punishment
Live to all ages, and let Gall^s name
Thy just revenge to all the world proclaim.
But whither shall we now?

I will to Thrace, go you to Lemnos.

Will you leave me then
To Vulcans rage, no let us once more meet
In Paphos, and if Vulcan needs will chide
Give him some cause.

Content fair Queen of love.
For more, he cannot be much more displeased,
Let's score on still, and make our reckoning full,
As yet^ alas fair Queen, the debts but small,
Make up the sum, and answer once for all.

Content sweet Mars, and since that he was borne
To be a Cuckold, let's augmennt his horne.

Make hast with that shield, see^ hammered well,
For when 'tis done I'll giue't my father Jove,
'Tis of the purest mettle Lemnos yields.

I shall sir, must the plate of two cubes high,
Be put into the Forge?

Pyragmon yes, that mass must be wrought well
And soundly tempered, bid your fellow Cyclops
Work lustily, it must be soon dispatcht.

When saw you my Lady Venus?

No matter when, the Huswiffe's too fine fingered,
And saith, the very smoke my Fordge doth cast
Choakes her, the very air of Lemnos (man)
Blasts her white cheeks, she scarce will let me kiss her,
But she makes vergisse faces, saith my visadge
Smug'd thus with cole-dust, doth infect her beauty,
And makes her wear a beard, she's, sure, in Paphos,
Cypress, or Candy, she's all for play
Whilst we Ioues thunders hammer hard all day.

I heard her once mock that polt-foote of yours
How came it pray?

I'll tell thee man, I was when I was borne
A pretty smug knave, and my father Jove
Delighted much to dance me in his lap.
Upon a time as he was toying with me
In his high house above, that Phaeton
Had at that instant set the world a fire,
My father when he saw heavens bases smoke,
Th'earth burn, and Neptunes broth to sees with heate;
But startles up to thunder-strike the lad,
And lets me fall: down tumbled I towards the earth:
I fell through all the Planets by degrees,
From Saturne first, so by the Moon at last:
And from the Moon down into Lemnos Isle
Where I still live, and halt upon my fall,
No marvel if it lamed me, for, Pyragmon.
How high I tumbled, who can guess aright,
Falling a Summers day from morn to night?

'Twas marvel you did not break your neck.

Had I not been derived from God-like seed,
Trust me Pyragmon I had don't indeed.
But to the Forge, for I Appollo spy,
He that sees all things with the days bright eye.
Good morrow Phoebus, what's the news abroad^
For thou see all things in the world are done,
Men act by day-light, or the sight of Sun.

Sometime I cast mine eye upon the sea,
To see the tumbling Seal, or Porpoise play,
There see I Merchants trading, and their sails
Big bellied with the wind; sea fights some times
Rise with their smoke, thick^ clouds to dark my beams.
Sometimes, I fix my face upon the earth
With my warm fervor, to give metals, trees,
Herbs, plants, and flowers life; here in gardens walk
Loose Ladies with their lovers arm in arm,
Yonder the labouring Plow-man drives his Teem.
Further, I may behold maine battles pitched,
And whom I favour most (by the winds help)
I can assist with my transparent rays.
Here, spy I Cattle feeding, Forests there
Stored with wild beasts; here Shepeheards with their lasses
Piping beneath the trees, whilst their flocks graze.
In Cities, I see trading, walking, bargening,
Buying, and selling, goodness, badness, all things.
And shine alike on all.

Thrice happy Phoebus,
That whilst poor Vulcan is confined to Lemnos
Hast every da^ these pleasures. What news else.

No Emperor walks forth, but I see his State,
Nor sports, but I his pastimes can behold,
I see all Coronations, Funerals,
Marts, Fairs, Assemblies, Pageants, Sights; and Shows.
No hunting, but I better see the chase
Then they that rouse the game, what see not I?
There's not a window but my beams breaks in,
No think or cranny but my rays pierce through,
And there I see (oh V^lcan) wondrous things.
Things that thy self nor any God besides
Would give belief to.

What, good Phoebus speak.

Here, wantons on their day-beds, I see spread
Clasping their amorous lovers in their arms,
Who even before my face, are not sometimes
Ashamed to show all.

Could not god Phoebus bring me to see this pastime.

Sometimes even mean fellows
A bed with noble Ladies whom they serve,
Servant with servant, married men with maids,
And wives with Batchelours.

There's simple doing.

And shall I tell thee Vulcan, the other day
What I beheld, I saw the great God Mars.

God Mars.

As I was peeping through a cranny; a bed.

A bed; with whom? some pretty wench I warrant.

She was a pretty wench.

Tell me good Phoebus,
That when I meet him^ I may flout God Mars,
Tell me, but tell me truly on thy life.

Not to dissemble Vulcan, 'twas thy wife!

Out on her whore, out on him Cuckold-maker,
Phoebus I'll be reuendge on great God Mars,
Who, whilst I hammer here his swords and shields,
Hammers upon my head, I will complain
To Jove, and all the Gods, and tell them flat
I am a Cuckold.

Vulcan be advised,
I have had notice where they use to meet,
Could not devise to catch them by some wile?
And lay their guilt, wide open to the Gods,
Then might thou have fit colour of complaint.

Enough, I have deuis'd a secret snare,
A draw-net, which I'll place upon the Couch
Where they still use to bed, a wire so tempered,
And of such fineness to deceive the eye.
So catch them when they are at it, and by this
I may presume, and be sure I am Cuckold.

That's the way to be satisfied.

If I can catch them, all the Gods I'll call
To see my wrongs, there sports I'll near to mar,
And avenge me on that lecherous God of war.

Cloris, you are the Nymph whose office is
To strew fair Venus bed with herbs and flowers,
Here is the place she means to sport her self.

I am the hand-maide to the Queen of love,
And unto all her pleasures minister,
When she drinks Nectar, 'tis from Cloris hand,
If feed on sweet Ambrotia, or those fruits
That Cornu-copia yields, I serve them up,
Come let us with fresh Roses strew her Couch
With pances and the buds of Eglantine,
Her pillow is the purple Violet bank,
About whose verges the blancht Lillies grow,
Whose bodies twined about with wood-byne leaves
Make a confused sweetness, so 'tis well,
Come Venus when she please to take her rest,
Her Arbour's dight, and all things well addressed.

By her baud Charis, this I know the place,
Which with adulterate pastimes they pollute.
Here will I set my pit-fall for these birds,
And catch them in the closure of this wire,
So, so, al's fit, my snare in order placed,
Happy the time, that I this Charis trac't.

Once more in spite of Phoebus and these eyes,
That dog our pastimes, we are closely met,
And whilst the Cuckold Vulcan blows the fire,
Our amorous souls their sportive bliss conspire.

He's limping thus, and like a cripple halts
From Forge to Fornace; where were Venus eyes,
When she made choice of that foul polt-foote Smith,
He smells all smoke, and with his nasty sweat
Tawnies my skin, out on him ugly knave,
Mars is my love, and he my sweets shall have.

Gramercy my kind wife.

Come God of war,
I'll teach thee a new skirmish, better far
Then thy sterne battles, meet me with a kiss
Which I retort thus, there's spirit in this,
What's he would play the coward and turn face,
When such sweet amorous combats are in place?
My hot encounters, leave me wound nor skarr^
Yet naked I dare meet the God of War.

Out of her Whore.

I am armed for thee, prepare thee, for this night
I'll breast to breast dare thee to single fight.

Come tumble in my lap, great Mars I dare
To do his worst.

'Tis well, your sports are fair.

Betrayed? bound? caught? release me, or by Jove,
Thou dy'st what ere thou art.

God Mars, good words;
This is a fight in which you use no swords.
You have left your steel behind.

Sweet vulcan.

No more.

Can thou use Venus thus?

Away you whore,
I'll keep you fast, and call the Gods to see
Your practise, Neptune, Jove, and Mercury,
Phoebus and Iuno, from your spheres look down,
And see the cause I wear a forked crown.

The Gods are all spectators of our shame,
And laugh at us.

Oh! I could cry for anger.
Sweet Vulcan let me loose. Vulc. When Gods and men
Have seen thy shame, but (strumpet) not till then.

See how Mars chafes.

But Venus weeps for rage

Why should Mars fret? if it so tedious be,
Good God of war bestow thy place on me.

By all the Gods, would she do me that grace,
I would fall too't even before Vulcans face.

To Gods and men let it be fully known
I am a Cuckold.

Vulcan is no less.

Now since red shame your cheeks with blood hath died,
I am revenged, and see my net's vnti'd.

The Gods have laughed their fill, Vulcan's revenged,
And now all friends: speak, are we?

Mars still frowns,

And Venus scarce well pleased.

For my part (oh you Gods!) what's past is past,
And what is once done, cannot be recald:
If Vulcan in this ieast hath pleased the Gods,
All his own wrongs he freely can forgive.
Venus we are friends, to Lemno^ we will hast,
And never more record what's done and past.

No fool, before I did offend with fear,
My guilt was but suspected, but not proved:
And therefore I selected privacy,
Closeness of place, and bashfully transgressed;
But since both Gods and men now know my sin,
Why should I dread to say I love God Mars?
What help hast thou in proving thy wife false?
Only to make me do with impudence,
What I before with fear did, on thy self
Brought a most certain shame, where it before
Was but suspected.

Venus speaks good sense,
That's certain now, which was before suspense.

Now fare well jealous fool, for my disgrace,
Him whom I love, I blushless thus embrace,
And may all such as would their wives so take,
(Although they might) be served thus for thy sake.

I am undone, be warned by me oh men,
Although you know your wives false, where and when,
Take them not in the manner, though you may:
They that with fear before, now blushless stray,
Their guilt 'tis better to suspect then know,
So you may take some part of that you owe.
Where I by seeking her good name to thrall,
Have made my self a scorn, and quite left all.

To Lemnos then, to make our Thunders fit,
Which against mortals we have cause to use,
Mars, you to Thrace, Venus in Paphos stay,
Or where you please, we to our several spheres.
Vulcan, thy moral this good use contrives,
None search too far th'offences of their wives.

Our last Act comes, which lest it tedious grow,
What is too long in word, acc^pt in show.
Think Hercules his labours having ended,
The Spanish Gerion killed, and Cacus slain,
As far as Lydea he his palm extended,
Where beauteous Omphale this time doth reign.
He that before to Deianeira sent,
As presents, all the spoils that he could win,
Now fills her heart with jealous discontent,
She hears how Hercules doth card and spin
With Omphale, and serves her as a slave.
(She quite forgot in Thebes) her grief to cheer,
Th'assembled Princes with their Counsels grave,
Are come to comfort and remove her fear.
By these all his stored labours he hath sent
To call him home, to free her discontent.

Iason, and the other Hero's for her sake,
Travel to Lydia, to persuade him thence
And by his twelve known labours, undertake
To move him, quite t'abandon his fair wench.
Further then this her jealousy extends,
Afar worse present she by Lychas sends.

Madam, these sorrows are too violent
For your weak sex, I do not think tis true,
Your husband can prefer that Omphale
Before your beauty.

He's forgot in Greece.
Greece that was wont to clangor with his fame,
Is now all silent, who but Iason now,
And Telamon, that scaled the walls of Troy,
Alcides is a name for got amongst us,
And Deianeira too forgot with him.
Oh! that I had the tempting strumpet here
That keeps my Lord away, confining me
Unto the coldness of a widowed bed.

Madam, these presents sent, so well known
Coming from you, must needs preuaile with him.
These Princes have great interest in his love,
And can persuade much.

But that strumpet more.
Lychas, he doates upon her tempting looks,
And is so much with her enchantments bleared,
That he's turned woman: woman Lychas, spinnes,
Cards, and doth chare-worke, whilst his mistres sits
And makes a cushion of his Lyons skin,
Makes of his club a rock. I loose my self
In thismy sorrow, and forget the means;
I still keep by my me, to restore my love,
Lychas, fetch me the shirt within my chamber,
I have bethought me now.

Madam I shall.

This shirt (in blood of Centaur Nessus dipped,
And since washed out) I'll send my Hercules,
Which hath the power to make his hot love dye
To any stranger, and revive to me.
This (as his last) the dying Centaur spake,
To this I'll trust, all other hopes forsake.

Madam the shirt.

This as my best and dearest,
Present me (trusty Lychas) to my Lord,
Entreat withal, that if he have not quite
Put off my love, he will deign to put on this.
If he despise my gift, return it back,
And in it my death.

Fear not fair Princess,
I hope to prove as fortunate as faithful.

Farewell, prove as thou speak. If my gift fail,
I have sentenced all my sorrows to one death,
Whilst Deianeira hath a hand to use,
She'll not live hated where she once did choose.

Why so, this is a power infused in love,
Beyond all magic; Is't not strange to see
A woman's beauty tame the Tyrant-tamer?
And the great Monster-maister ouer-match?
Have you done your task?

Beauteous Queen, not yet.

Then I shall frown.

Before that (lovely fair)
Augment my task, unto a treble chare.
For one sweet smile from beauteous Omphale,
I'll lay before thee all the monstrous heads
Of the grim tyrants that oppress the earth.
I that before, at Iuno's strict behest,
The hundred giants of Cremona slue,
Will twice five hundred kill for Omphale.
Find me a Cacus in a cave of fire,
I'll drag him from the mountain Auentine,
And lay his bulk at thy victorious feet.
Find me me another Gerion to captive,
All his three heads I'll tumble in thy skirt.
Bid me once more sack hell, to bind the furies,
Or to present thee with the Gods in chains,
It shall be done for beauteous Omphale.

Leave prating, ply your work.

Oh what a sweetness
Lives in her looks! no bondage, or base slavery
Seems servitude, whilst I may freely gaze
(And uncontrolled) on her: but for one smile,
I'll make her Empress ore the triple world,
And all the beauteous Queenes from East to West,
The Lydians vassails, and my fellow-slaues.
There is no Lord but Love, no vassailage
But in affection, and th'Emperious Queen
Doth tyrannize ore captive Hercules.

Madam, some Dukes of Greece attend without,
And crave to see your captive Theban here.

Admit them, they shall see what pomp we have,
And that our beauty can the loftiest slave.

Our business was to Thehan Hercules,
'Twas told us he remained with Omphale,
The Lydian Queen.

Speak, which is Omphale? or which Alcides?

We are queen of Lydia,
And this our vassal. Do you know him Lords?
Stoop slave, and kiss the foot of Omphale.

I shall.

Oh wondrous alteration!

Till now I trusted this report was false,
And scarcely can I yet believe mine eyes.

Lady, our purpose was to Hercules,
Show us the man.

Behold him Greekes there.

Where?

There at his task.

Alas! This Hercules?
This is some base effeminate groom, not he
That with his puissance frighted all the earth:
This is some woman, some Hermophrodite.

Hath Iason, Nestor, Castor, Telamon,
Atreus, Pollux, all forgot their friend?
We are the man.

Woman we know thee not.
We came to seek the Ioue-borne Hercules,
That in his cradle strangled Iuno's snakes,
And triumph in the brave Olimpicke games.
He that the Cleonean Lyon slue,
The Eremanthian Boar, the Bull of Marathon,
The Lernean Hydra, and the winged Hart.
He that dragged Cerberus from hell in chains,
And stownded Pluto in his Ebon Chair.
That Hercules, by whom the Centaurs fell^
Great Achelous, the Stymphalides,
And the Cremona giants? Where is he?

That traitorous Nessus with a shaft trans-fixt,
Strangled Antheus, purged Augeus stalls,
Wan the bright Apples of the Hesperides,
And whilst the Giant Atlas eased his limbs,
Bore on his shoulders the huge frame of heaven.

And are not we the man? see Telamon,
A woman do this? we would see the Theban,
That Cacus slue, Busiris sacrificed,
And to his horses hurled sterne Diomed
To be devoured.

That freed Hesione
From the Sea-whale, and after ransacked Troy,
And with his own hand slue La^medon.

He by whom Dercilus and Albion fell,
He that Oecalia and Betricia wan.

That monstrous Gerion with his three heads vanquished
With Linus, Lichas that usurped in Thebes,
And captived there his beauteous Megara.

He that the Amazonian Baldricke wan,
That Achelous with his club subdued,
And wan from him the pride of Calidon
Bright Deianeira, that now mourns in Thebes
For absenc of that noble Hercules.
To him we came, but since he lives not here,
Come Lords, we will return these presents back
Unto the constant Lady, whence they came.

Stay Lords.

^Mongst women?

For that Thebans sake
Whom you profess to love, and came to seek,
Abide awhile, and by my love to Greece,
I'll bring before you that lost Hercules,
For whom you came to enquire.

On that condition (Princes) lets stay a little.

It works, it works.

How have I lost my self?
Did we all this? where is that spirit become
That was in us? no marvel Hercules,
If thou be strange to them, that thus disguised,
Art to thy self unknown. Hence with this distaff
And base effeminate chares.

How slave? submit and to thy task again.
Dare thou rebel?

Pardon great Omphale.

Will Telamon persuade me this is Hercules
The Lybian Conqueror, now a ssaues slave.
He lived in midst of battles, this amongst truls:
This welds a distaff, he a conquering Club.
Shall we bestow fair Deianeiraes presents
On this (heaven knows) whether man or woman?

Who named my Deianeira? Iason you?
How fares my love? how fares my beauteous wife?
I know these presents, did they come from her?
What strumpet's this that hath detained my soul?
Captived my fame, trans-shap't me to a fool?
Made me (of late) but little less then God,
Now scarce a man? Hence with these womanish tyres,
And let me once more be my self again.

Keep from him Omphale, be that your charge,
We'll second these good thoughts.

Alcid s hear me.

By your favour madam.

Who spake?

Think that was Deianeira's voice,
Tha^ calls thee home to dry her widowed tears,
And to bring comfort to her de^olate bed.

Oh Deianeira.

Hear me Hercules.

Ha Omphale?

You shall not trouble him.

'Twas she that made Alcides womanish,
But Deianeira to be more then man.
For thy wives sake thou art renowned in Greece,
This Strumpet hath made Greece forget thee quite,
And scarce remember there was such a man.
Thebes that was wont to triumph in thy glories,
Is now all silent. Tyrants every where
Begin to oppress, thinking Alcides dead
For so the fame's already. Shall a Strumpet
Do this upon the Theban Hercules?
And Deyaneira, fair, chaste absolute
In all perfections, live despised in Thebes?

By Jove she shall not, first I'll rend these eyes out,
That sotted with the love of Omphale
Hath transhapt me, and deeply injured her.
Come we will shake off this effeminacy
And by our deeds repurchase our renown.
Iason and you brave Greekes, I know you now,
And in your honours I behold my self
What I have been, hence Strumpet Omphale,
I cast thee off, and once more will resume
My native virtues, and to prove this good
This day unto the Gods I'll sacrifice
To grace which pomp, and that we may appear
The same we were, before us shall be borne
These of our labours twelve, the memory,
Unto Ioues Temple, grace us worthy Heroes
To assist us in this high sollemnity.
Whilst we upon our manly shoulders bear
These massy pillars we in Gades must rear.

We have lost our servant, never yet had Lady
One of the like rank. All King Thespius daughters,
Fifty in number, childed all one night,
Could not preuaile so much with Hercules
As we have done; no not fair Yole
Daughter to Cacus, beauteous Megara,
Nor all the fair and amorous queenes of Greece,
Could slave him like the Lydian Omphale.
Therefore where e're his labours be renowned,
Let not our beauty pass vnregistred.
Bondaging him that captived all the earth,
Nor will we leave him, or yet loose him thus
What either beauty, cunning, flattery, tears
Or woman's Art can, we will practise on him.
But now the Priests and Princes are prepared
For the great sacrifice, which we will grace
With our high presence, and behold aloof
These rights unto the gods performed and d^ne
We will gain by Art, what we with beauty won.

Now Jove behold us from thy sphere of Stars,
And shame not to acknowledge us thy sons.
Thus should Alcides march amidst his spoils,
Inguirt with slaughtered Lyons, Hydraes, Whales,
Boars, Bulls, grim Tyrants, Hel-hounds, Monsters, Furies,
And Princes his spectators: oh you Gods,
To whom this day we consecrate your prayers,
And dedicate our sacred orisons,
Deign us your cies, behold these sholders bear
Two brazen pillars, trophies of our fame,
That have eased Atlas, and supported heaven,
And had we shrunk beneath that heavenly structure
The Spheres, Orbs, Planets, Zeniths, Signs, and Stars,
With loves high Palace, all confusedly
Had shattered, fallen, and o're-whelm'd earth and sea,
We have done that, and all these labours else,
Which we this day make sacred, lune see
These we surrender to thy love and thee.

From Deianera I present this gift,
Wrought with her own hand, with more kind commends
Then I have measured steps to Lydia
From Thebes, which she entreats you wear for her.

More welcome is this gift to Hercules
Then Iason's Fleece, Laomedon's white Steeds,
Or should Jove grace me with eternity,
Here stand our pillars, with non ultra insculpt,
Which we must rear beyond the Pyrene Hills
At Gades in Spain ( Alcides utmost bounds)
Whilst we put on this shirt, the welcome present
Of Deyianeira, whom we dearly love,
Lychas thy hand, In this wee'le sacrifice
And make our peace with her and Iupiter.

Never was Hercules so much himself,
How will this news glad Deyaneiraes heart,
Or how this sight enrage fair Omphale?

All his dead honours he revives in this,
And Greece shall once more echoe with his fame.

With this her present, I put on her love,
Witness heaven, earth, and all you Peers of Greece,
I wed her once more in this ornament,
Her love and her remembrance sit to me
More near by thousands then this robe can cleave.
So now before Ioues Altar let us kneel,
And make our peace with heaven, atone our self
With beauteous Dyaneira our chaste wife
And cast away the love of Omphale.

Princes of Greece assist us with your thoughts,
And let your prayers with ours ascend the Spears,
For mortals ori^ons are sons to Jove,
And when none else can, they have free access
Unto there fathers ear, hail son of Saturne,
To whom when the three lots of heaven, of sea,
And hell were cast, the high Olimpus fell.

Oh, oh.

That with a nod can make heavens collomes bend,
And th'earths Center tremble, whose right hand
Is armed with lightning, and the left with fear.

No more, are all the furies with their tortures,
Their whips and lashes crept into my skin?
Hath any sightless and infernal fire
Laid hold upon my flesh? when did Alcides
Thus shake with anguish? thus change face, thus shrink?
Shall torture pale our cheek? no, Priest proceed,
We will not feel the pain, thou shalt not breed,

What alteration's this? a thousand pangs
I see even in his visage, in his silence
He doth express even hell.

Thou sacred Jove
Behold us at thy Altar prostrate here
To beg atonement 'tweene our sins and thee,
Lend us a gracious ear and eye.

Priest no more,
I'll rend thy Typet, hurl Ioues Altars down,
Havoc his Offerings, all his Lamps extinguish,
Raze his high Temples, and scale heaven it self
Unless he stay my tortures.

VVarlike Theban,
Whence comes this fury? is this madness forced,
That makes Alcides thus blaspheme the Gods.

Patient your self.

I will not Iason, cannot Tellamon,
A stipticke poison boils within my veins,
Hell is within me, for my marrow fries,
A vulture worse then that Promotheus feels,
F^ers on my entrails, and my bulk in flames.

Yet be your self, renowned Hercules,
Strive with your torture, with yourrage contend
Seek to ore-come this anguish.

Well, I will,
See Iason, see renowned Tellamon
I will be well, I'll feel no poison boyle,
Though my blood skal'd me, though my hot suspires,
Blast where I breath like lightning, though my lungs
Sees in my blood, I will not pale a cheek,
Nor change a brow, I will not, spite of torture
Anguish, and pain, I will not.

What strange fury
Hath late possessed him to be thus disturbed?

Why this is well, once more repair Ioues Altar.
Kindle these holy Tapers and proceed.

To pluck the Thunderer from his Crystal thron^
And throw the Gallaxia, by the locks,
And amber tresses, drag the Queen of heaven.

Alcides.

Princes, Iason, Tellamon,
Help me to tear of this infernal shirt,
Which rawes me where it cleaves, vnskin my brawns,
And like one nak't rolled in a Tun of spikes
Of thousands, make one universal wound,
And such is mine: oh Deyaneira false,
Treacherous, unkind, disloyal; pluck, tear, rend
Though you my bones leave naked, and my flesh
Frying with poison you cast hence to dogs.
Dread Neptune, let me plundge me in thy seas,
To cool my body, that is all on flame.
Or with thy tri-sulke thunder strike me Jove,
And so let fire quench fire, vnhand me Lords,
Let me spurn mountains down, and tear up rocke^
Rend by the roots huge Oaks, till I have dug
A^way to hell, or found a scale to heaven.
Something I must, my torments are so great,
To quench this flame and qualify this heate.

Let us not leave him Princes least this out-rage
Make him lay violent hands upon him self.
If Deyaneiraes heart, were with her hand,
She is her sexes scandal, and her shame
Even whilst Time lives, shall every tongue proclaim.

I'll follow to, and with what Art I can,
Strive this his rage and torture to allay.

What's in this shirt unknown to me that brought it?
Or what hath jealous Deyaneira done?
To employ me, an unwilling messenger,
In her Lords death: well, whosoe're it prove
My innocence I know, I'll, if I may
Look to my life, and keep out of his way.

Lychas, Lychas, where's he that brought this poisoned shirt,
That I may tear the villain limb from limb.
And flake his body small as Winters snow,
His shattered flesh shall play like parched leaves,
And dance in th'aire, tossed by the summer winds.

Defend me heaven.

Oh that with stamping thus,
I could my self beneath the Center sink,
And tomb my tortured body beneath hell.
Had I heavens massy columns in my gripes,
Then with one sway I would or'e-turne yon frame,
And make the marble Elemental sky
My Tombe-stone to enter dead Hercules.
Oh father Jove thou laist upon thy son
Torments above supporture, Lichas, oh!
I'll chase the villain over Oetaes rocks,
Till I have nak't those hills, and left no shade
To hide the Traitor.

Which way shall I fly
To escape his fury? if I stay I dye.

Stay, stay, what's he that creeps into yon cave?
Is not that Lycas Dyaneiraes squire,
That brought this poisoned shirt to Hercules?
I thank thee Jove, yet this is some allayment
And moderation to the pangs I feel,
Nay, you shall out fir Lychas by the heals.

Thus, thus, thy limbs about my head I twine,
Eubaean sea receive him, for he's thine.
Princes, his torments are above Physic help,
And they that wish him well, must wish his death,
For that alone gives period to his anguish.

In vain we follow and pursue his rage,
There's danger in his madness.

Yet aloof,
Let's observe him, and great Jove implore
To qualify his pains.

As I am Philoctetes I'll not leave him,
Until he be immortal, Princes hark,
Cannot these groans pierce heaven and move to pity
The obdure Iuno.

Beneath this rock where we have often kissed,
I will lament the noble Thebans fall,
The Lydian Omphale will be to him
A truer Mistress, then his wife, whose hate
Hath brought on him this sad and ominous fate.
Nor hence, for any force or prayer remove,
But die with him whom I so dearly love.

His torments still increase, hear oh you Gods,
And hearing pity.

Down, down, you shadows that crown Oeta Mount,
And as you tumble bear the Rocks along.
I will not leave an Oak or standing Pine
But all these mountains with the dales make even,
That Oetaes self may morn with Hercules.
Hah! what art thou?

I am thy Omphale.

Art thou not Deyaneira come to mock
Alcides madness, and his pangs deride?
Yes, thou art she, thou, thou hast fier'd my bones,
And make me boyle in poison, for which (minion)
And for (by fate) thou hast shortened my renown,
Behold, this monstrous rock thy death shall crown,
So Deyaneira and her squire are now
Both in their sins extinct.

What hath Alcides done? slain Omphale,
A guiltless queen that came to morn his death.

Torment on torment. But shall Hercules
Dye by a woman's hand? No, aid me Princes,
(If you have in you any generous thoughts)
In my last fabric: Come, toss trees on trees,
Till you have reared me up a funeral pile,
Which all that's mortal in me shall consume.

Princes, let none deny their free assistance,
In his release of torture. There's for me.

My hand shall likewise help to bury him,
And of his torments give him ease by death.

Thanks, thus I throne me in the midst of fire,
And with a dreadlesse brow confront my death.
Olimpicke thunderer now behold thy son,
Of whose divine parts make a star, that Atlas
May shrink beneath the weight of Hercules.
And step-dame (...), glut thy hatred now,
That hast been weary to command, when we
Have not been weary to perform and act.
I that Busiris slue, Antheus strangled,
And conquered still at thy unkind behest,
The three-shap't Gerion, and the dog of hell,
The Bull of Candy, and the golden Hart,
Augeus and the fowls of Stymphaly,
The Hesperian fruit, and bolt of Thermidon,
The Lernean Hydra, and Arcadian Boar,
The Lyon of Naemea, Steeds of Thrace,
The monster Cacus; thousands more then these,
That Hercules in death dares thee to chide,
And shows his spirit, which torments cannot hide.
Lye there thou dread of Tyrants, and thou skin,
Invulner'd still, burn with thy masters bones:
For these be arms which none but we can wield.
My bow and arrows Philoctetes take,
Reserve them as a token of our love,
For these include the utmost fate of Troy,
Which without these; the Greekes can ne'er destroy.
You Hero's all fare-well, heap fire on fire,
And pile on pile, till you have made a structure
To flame as high as heaven, and record this
Though by the Gods and Fates we are ore-throwne,
Alcides dies by no hand but his own.

Iuno thou hast done thy worst; he now defies
What thou can more, his fame shall mount the skies.
What heavenly musicke's this?

His soul is made a star, and mounted heaven,
I see great Jove hath not forgot his son:
All that his mothers was is changed by fire,
But what he took of Jove, and was divine,
Now a bright star in the high heavens must shine.

We all have seen Alcides deified.
But what news brings Atreus?

A true report of Deianeira's death,
Who when she heard the tortures of her Lord,
And what effect her fatal present took,
Exclaimed on Nessus, and to prove herself
Guiltless of treason in her husbands death,
Witth her own hand she boldly slue herselse.

That noble act proclaimed her innocent,
And clears all black suspicion: but fair princes,
Let universal Greece in funeral black,
Morn for the death of Theban Hercules.

Who now shall monsters quel, or tyrants tame?
Th'oppressed free, or fill Gr^ece with their fame.
Princes your hands, take up these monuments
Of his twelve labours in a marble Temple
(We will erect and dedicate to him)
Reserve them to his lasting memory:
His brazen pillars shall be fixed in Gades,
On which his monumental deeds we'll grave.
Armed with these worthy Trophies lets march on
Towards Thebes, that claims the honour of his birth.
His body's dead, his fame shall ne'er expire,
Earth claims his earth, heaven shows his heavenly fire.

He that expects five short Acts can contain
Each circumstance of these things we present,
Me thinks should show more barrenness then hraine:
All we have done we aim at your content,
Striving to illustrate things not known to all,
In which the learned can only censure right:
The rest we (...), whom we unlettered call,
Rather to attend then judge: for more then sight
We seek to please. The ^erstanding ear
Which we have hitherto most gracious found,
Your general love, we rather hope then fear:
For that of all our labours is the ground.
If from your love in any point we stray,
Think HOMER blind, and blind men miss their way.


