THe Roman and Athenian Drammaes far
Differ from us, And those that frequent are
In Italy and France, even in these days,
Compared with ours, are rather jiggs than Plays:
Like of the Spanish may be said, and Dutch,
None versed in language, but confess them such.
They do not build their projects on that ground,
Nor have their phrases half the weight and sound
Our laboured Scenes have had; (and yet our Nation,
Already too much taxed for imitation,
In seeking to Ape others) cannot quit
Some of our Poets, who have sinned in it.
For where before great Patriots, Dukes and Kings
Presented for some hie facinorious things,
Were the Stage-Subiect; now we strive to fly
In their low pitch, who never could soar hie:
For now the common argument entreats,
Of puling Lovers, crafty Bawds or cheats.
Nor blame I their quick fancies, who can fit
These queasy Times, with Humours flash't in wit,
Whose Art I both encourage and commend;
I only wish that they would sometimes bend
To memorise the valour^ of such men,
Whose svery names might dignify the Pen,
And that our (once applauded) Roscian strain,
In acting such might be revived again:
Which you to countenance, would the Stage make proud,
And Poets strive to key their strings more loud,

THe united blood of Spain and Portugall,
Now meets in us; the Hereditary hopes,
That were but in Conception, now have birth,
And what was but Idea, till this day,
Hath put on essence.

Joy to the Prince and Princess.

This Hayl^ from you, we count a blessing to us,
And more then common greeting, as from Gentlemen,
Crowned both in blood, and virtue.

These perhaps,
See with judicial eyes unto th^se joys
You gain by enjoying us.

We find them great.

But great? we looked for a superlative,
And if there be a fit, and known degree,
Above compare; to have bin marked with th^
We would not have a thought conceived of (...)
But should be mixed with rapture, and what you
Term joy, transported into ecstasy,
But great?

Mee-thinkes addition great enough
For any mortal Woman.

To such goodness,
Your highness might have lent an attribute
Of far more weight, and splendour.

Teach us that?


I shall, who would be weighed unto my worth,
And yet in all my poise not loose a dram,
Put you the proudest Lady in one scale,
And me into another.

You shall mount her -- If pride will do it.


This Beauty, Virtue, Birth,
Shall unto mine own Center sink my self,
And lift her, unto nought save smoke and Air.

Nay, that upon my knowledge.


Fair Isabella,
Instruct me modestly in what I err,
And if I shall but scant you in the least,
I'll make you large amends.

Why even in that,
In terming me but fair, fair Isabella?
It is a Milke-maides title, every Swain
Bestows it on his Mistress, ne'er so mean,
Your City damsel scorns the word, because
'Tis common in the Country; and shall we^
Bred in the Courts rich glory, intertain't?
What's great and fair? we would be termed divine.
Such as would give us our full character,
Must search for Epithets, and study phrase.

Examine but plain Mantuan, and he will tell you, what woman is.


Great Prince of Portugall,
Observe in me thine happiness, thank not Heaven
So much that thou were borne, nor borne a Prince,
But that thou injoy'st us: For that great blessing
Give thy (...) thanks.

So he well may.


Behold I here expose me to all eyes,
To universal censure. Lives a Lady
Greater in Blood? if any that gainsay
Spain shall maintain it by her potency;
Search Italy and all these Climes beyond,
Come by the Alps back, and view France throughout,
Produce me the most excellent German Froae,
Examine England, which some say breeds beauties
Beyond all these, and Prince; your Portugall
To equal this; this? do I boast of those
That a^e no^ mine? say we ascribe our birth
Only to Fortune, and to nature form,
Count both these accidental, there's a third
Virtue remains: and even in that we dare
With any Princess of the World contest.
Come, your free censures Lords.

Madam I hold you
In least of these not to be paralleled.

In my opinion, Madam you so far
Exceed all these that yet mine eyes have seen
Nay heard, or read of.

O base flattery!

That unto those beforetime wondered at,
You in our age appear a miracle,
And never to be matched.

We observe in you,
A kind of inforct silence mixed with scorns,
Your tongue hath been so back-ward to pronounce
So definitive a sentence.

Know then Madam,
I must confess (although a woman's son)
Yet cannot I dissemble, neither would I,
Should I be racked and tortured, then with pardon
Unto the Prince and you, thus much I think,
I not deny, but you by birth are royal.
Beauteous, or else I should condemn mine eyes,
And say they wore false lights; for your known virtues,
Traitor he were, that should but question them,
I make this attestation, yet sweet Prin^ esse,
These praises you con^erre upon your self
Though they be just and true from your own Tongue
Loose part of their great luster, in these, or me,
They would have had more sweetness, better sownd,
But from a Tuskan tongue, or Porteguise,
English or French, or any Strangers mouth,
Much more harmonious relish; I have held it
Still as a Maxim, my best Judging days,
Such doubt their worths are for^d themselves to praise.

Who fitter to speak truth, then Trueth's own tongue?

Yet arrogance in Truth may blemish it.

Of Atrogance us?

Call'^ if you please, Selfe-love:
Besides in man or woman, since the first
Nature hath yee^ ded none so absolute,
To whom she made no fellow. First for beauty,
If Greece afforded a fair Hellen, Troy
Her paralleled with a Polyxena:
For Wisdom, Rome presented a Cornelia,
And Lidia a S^sipatra: Chastity?
Lucrece* of whom the Romanes so much boast:
Did not the self same City breed a Portia,
Who when she heard ber husband Brutus slain,
Kept from all other Engines, swallowed fire,
And by that means to meet with him in death,
Of such I could produce yet Infinite;
And Madam though I must confess you rare,
And most completely perf^ct in all these,
Yet not sochoice a piece, but the wide world
May yield you a competitor.

As you are, Prince,
And over hope to have the sweet fruition
Of those pure gifts, that man so much disdains;
Grant me one free demand.

Speak and obtain*


His banishment from Spain and Portugall,
Never hereafter to be capable
Of Honour, of Renown, place, or office,
Till he can find, produce, and set before us,
Our match in Face and bosom, birth we set by,
But be she woman, and can balance us,
In both, or either, he redeemes his exile
Without such, to return, forfeits his head,
Deny this Prince, you banish us your bed.

Most unpeer'd Lady, that, not for ten Worlds,
For if an husband can a vassal be,
To such approved virtues; I am he:
Lord Bonavid^, you have from her tongue
An express doom, that cannot be revok't;
Tis like the Persian seal unalterable:
And come my divine Princess; He shall know,
In his Just doom, what zeal to you we owe.

Is this Trueth's merit? Can the Court find place
For none but flatterers, and must I be made
The first example of her Tyranny?
Shall I be made a president through Spain,
To deter men from speaking in the Court
What's Just and honest? Nay, we term this law,
Or mere oppression. What an Infinite task
Am I confined too? One as virtuous
No Cloister scarce but could supply me with,
And never travel further; but the doubt is,
Whether it harbour in so smooth a skin;
As fair a face, I might with ease produce,
But Where's the Virtue then? since few there are
That wear both these ascriptions, Chaste, and fair:
In all his twelve great labours, Hercules
Was not thus tasked by Iuno.

Ill news flies apace, and hath pluck't me by the ears already, well,
whosoever pronounced that sentence; I hope no body hears me: I would his
Portugall skin were ta^n'd into Spanish Leather, and either cut into some
flovenly Boot, to be dabled in the dirt without a Galoach, or snip'd into a
Saint Martines Jerkin, that never came within the sent of a perfumers shop.


Had she proposed to find her match for pride,
There had bin then no help, no hope at all;
For that had bin the harder task of two.

In stead of confined had his doom been to have been coffined, there had
been some comfort, he might have still kept his Country, but in plain
Portenguise and Spanish, both banished


I am sure thou hear the news.


How can I choose, being in the mouth of every Diego, which I no sooner heard,
but I so sought that I might find you, and so find you never hereafter to
lose you, for without you this is no place for me, and without me no Country
can be a Country for you. And so a Fig for Spain, and a Prune for
Pertugall.


I both accept and will reward thy love,
If ere my Fate be to revisit home.
First these, then several Countries we will try,
To find out this choice piece.

That's you and I.

Why how! mistress daughter, have you conquered the West Indies, that you wear
a gold Mine on your back, this wearing will make your fathers revenues
shrink.


I'll be so bold as stretch them on the tenters and they do


Y^are a good Jewel the whilst.


And Jewels must be set in gold father, I'll not lose the least dram of my
lustre.


You will not, and to what end suits all this bravery pray?


To a good end if my Aim be steady. Hear you the News at Court.


Of Valladauraes fight at Sea; is this golden bait for him?


Alas poor Sea-calfe: 'tis not his love I angle for, I fish deeper streams
and for a richer draught, have you not heard of Bonavida's fortunes?


To parallel the Queen in beauty and virtue? which he can never do.


Which he may easily do, her Prerogative of birth set apart what blemish do
you see in me that I may not be the woman?


Thou foolish girl: then compare a Glow-worme with a Star, a Star with the
Sun.


And the Sun with a Burning glass: Come, come, you're dim-sighted Father,
could you see with my eyes, and judge with my understanding, your comparison
would hold e contrario I assure you: thy hasty news?


A Noble Gentleman --


Would speak with me; ( Bonavide in my Conscience) Is't not so fellow?


I am not familliar with his name: He is of a noble aspect.


It can be none but he, give me fresh ornaments, see your error now father,
Cupid and Venus, rich and new attires: Bonavide come? live in my cheek sweet
beauty: Eloquen^e attend my tongue, and perfection my behaviour: Came he on
horseback or Caroach't.


Neither of either. He is new come from Sea.


Certainly he having lost his labour in foreign search he meets his hopes at
home, the more my honour still: fly and admit him. Your Counsel father, shall
I seem strange of familiar, wanton or serious, affable or peevish, I am as
full of humours as an April day of variety, how shall I bear my self?


En in the midst mean, daughter, or let me see and thou wilt be ruled by me,
bear thy self -- Even how thou wilt, provided it be to thine own profit, and
my further honour: Noble Bonavide has Valladaur a Daughter? do you know this
gallant?


Valladaura I hate, this gentleman acquainted with my beauty, reveald it to
Bonavide: Sir you have bound me to you, and comes to usher him to my presence.


Marry and welcome, my further honour still.


We stay his coming, pray Sir so return him.


Whose coming?


His, your Masters Bonavide's.


You speak Riddles to me.


Be your own O Edipus and dissolve them then.


Come not you Nuntius from Bonavida Sir?


I am mine own Nuntius and my Errand's love.


I hear no hurt, my further honour still.


Which I am come in person to deliver
To this rare beauty.

Honour upon honour.

My fortunes fly of to strong a wing, to stoop so low a pitch, is not
Bonavida come yet?


As much as ere he will I think, Valladaura^s a pretty piece of flesh cease
him: play not Esops cur, lose not the substance in expectation of the shadow:
'tis a dog trick many Ladies have practised: bosom him, do.


What, this mean creature?


And he were meaner, so thou get profit, and thy father honour by it*


Are all my hopes repaid with scorn?


He begins to recoil, clap him close to thy breast, he's gone else.


Nay, Valladaura.


Have I laid out more breath
In sacrificing vows, and fruitless Sonnets
Unto that be autious shrine, than ere man did?

Come, be not passionate, though I know both my worth and beauty, and
understand what Orb they move into* I am not so much infected with that same
Court-sicknesse Philantia, or selfe-love, to scorn the service of any generous
Spirit.


How, neither for thy profit, nor thy fathers honour?


In sober conference then, what bounded service, have you ever done my beauty,
that may challenge the least interest in my love?


As many as man can, I writ my self
(And truly) lover ere I could write man,
Passing my service as a star, where she
The blessed Idea ofthy glorious feature,
Drawn by the curious working of my thoughts,
Gave me the better, I put out to Sea,
And there --

What did you?

For thy honour now; what did at Sea?

As much as any man --

That did no more than thou did, thy further honour still.

Somewhat I did: but what, let these deep wounds
Undressed and unbound up deliver.

They are tonguetide, and cannot speak for blushing, pretty ornaments for a
soldier, how came you by them (...)? honestly


As noble Hector did by his, but by
An enemy far more valiant than his.

I like that well, thy further honour still.

At Sea I met with a bold man of war,
And somewhat more, an Englishman: Oh had
Your eye (but fate denied that blessedness)
Witnessed our bearing, and how far the thought
Of you and your rare beauty carried me
Above my strength.

I should have said what you are forced to acknowledge that my beauty had been
the better man.


I am proud of that, my further honour still.

All this while you are beholding to my beauty, I nothing in debt to your
valour, which for ought I gather, is nothing at all


Nothing? to enter, and hold single combat
With such a daring opposite, nothing, to take
These dangerous wounds, and bring ^em home undressed?

'Twas I confess somewhat to takethese wounds, yet in my mind he that gives
the cognisance has more reason to boast of it, than he that wears it: show
me the man that gave you these wounds and I'll commend his valour.


For giving of 'em? Knight there's small honour in taking of 'em though in my
judgement, but what was he?


A man whose noble valour I must speak.

Good reason, he has paid you soundly for it before hand.

In love and honour I shall ever serve him.

So I thought, for you wear a livery of his, cut to the skin and lind with
Crimson: had you gin't him, I should have cane you for the Master. But pardon
me, I foare too high for a serving-man, your ear, I am modest, away, hie to the
subur^es, bribe some honest Barbarsurgeon to wash off your dishonour and hea^e
your intamy.

That done once, learn this tenet of the war,
The honour's more to give than wear a scar.
Each coward may do that.

'Tis not my fate but mine own imperfection,
That makes the act in it self good and laudable,
Ill and distasteful, were my services
Done by some other, they must needs become
And grace the owner, were my words deliv'rd
From any tongue but mine, they could not choose
But win attention: Had my love been bred
In any breast but mine, it could not thus
Be scorned and bafled. I of all the world
Am most unfortunate, neither act, word, or love
Can please your audience, or compassion move.

AFter our tedious travels we at length
Are safe arrived in England, speak what use
Hast made of our long Voyage?

Such as Travellers use, for by long practise I am now at length grown
perfect, and the truth is I can lie in any language.


But in our quest of this rare piece of beauty
And Vertne mixed, to rival the great Princess,
What think thou of our trial made in Spain?

I think of it as I ever did, that's as of a bottle of hay, and the Creature
you talk of, a Needle (...) Spanish Needle, which I fear you will never live
to hit full in the eye: Spain! there are so many Mores int, that I know you
would hope of nothing less: besides the most beauties of Spain have been oft
in Civil.


What then of Portugall?


Worse then the the other: the Women there are for the most part like their
Orindges, the fairer the outside the rottenner within, and the founder at the
heart, the rougher the skin; the Country is too hot, too hot.


What of the Russian then?


As of a Country too cold, and in cold countries I know we should have but cold
comfort, besides the women go wrapped in so much fur, that of necessity they
must have more ha^re then wit, besides they cannot be wise they have so much
ado to keep themselves warm, and more than that, what might the Prince and
Princess think, if after all our long travels, we should come home, and
present them with a rush?


Which only taking her great title of

Is worth more than her self, of Italy
Then give me thy true censure.

The clean contrary way, oh, my Lord, there are so many Italian Locks, that I
know it was unpossible your own key should open them all. Moreover these that
are naturally jealous of their women, it is probable their women naturally give
them cause.


For France.


What the pox should we speak of that, knowing what is bred in the bone, will
hardly out of the flesh?


The women of high Germany?


A place that I should highly stand for, if the Princess had imposed on us a
challenge for drinking.


Of the Low-Countries then.


In Flushing, there is good riding, but not without danger. For many at a high
tide, have been like to have been cast away in the road. At Middleborough,
night or day you could scarce find the Exchange empty. At Bristles, if you
remember you were used but roughly: At Sluice we were both well washed,
Nimmingham bid you look to your Sk^nce: and Ostend, beware the Cat. Don-hague
is full of Witches, and had we but tutcht at Rot or Dam, ten to one we had
never come off sound men. Much ado we had to find New-Port: Therefore if
ever you come to Bergen, see you make it wisely.


And now, there's hope I shall, this Albion
That fitly bears name of his chalky cliffs,
Breeds wondrous choice of Beauties, wise, and lovely,
Scarce to be matched in all the world besides,
Amongst which I have took particular view of one,
Whom had the Trojan Ravisher beheld,
Troy had still stood, the Queen of Love disgrac't,
And she alone had gained the golden prize,
For which the three celestial beauties strove.

I grant you the face, but if she should prove rotten at the heart, there's
the question.


I think none to be made. First for her birth,
I have inquired her noble: For her breeding,
It hath been amongst her equals, and so far
From least taxation, to the sail of tongues,
It merits imitation; of her chastity
Some proofs I have made, and found it like the Diamond,
Save by a Diamond never to be wrought.
Could opportunity have moved, words tempted,
Persuasions took effect, or gifts prevailed,
Beneath my much importance she had fallen:
But like a promontory rock she stands,
At all the curled Oceans wrath unmoved,
Telling the gusts, and bearing every storm,
Yet on such virtues are her bases fixed,
She is not to be shaken, then in her
My travels take their period.

Then I would shes and you were agreed, that you might come to a full point:
and here she comes, now or never make a full conclusion, and write Finis.


Daughter,
What think you of this stranger?

As a stranger.

Of his carriage and complement.

As things for which he hath travelled, 'tis easy
For him that hath the liberty of many
Grounds to pick himself a choys Nosegay,
And he that hath travelled so many Countries,
Out of every one peculiarizing what's best;
With what small difficulty may such a one
Appear complemental?

His proffers to you were large.

And the performance may perhaps prove like
His journey, long.

What think you of his person?

That there's many one cannot pray so well as
He, that is better benefic't.

But say he had power to perform all that he hath promised.


Only this, that I have power in my self to say
More then I have yet either promised him, or
You to utter.

Did you not hear her talk of utter, for shame Sir, either utte^ your mind
now to the full, or else utterly give it over.


Madam, What say you to my suit?


I needs must say Sir, it becomes you well,
Graces your person, and your person it:
I like both Stuff and fashion.

Oh, sweet Lady,
'Tis good to play with such as use to sport,
But with the staid be serious.

Now whilst they are in talk, will I hold some discourse or other with the old
Gentlewoman: because she shall not interrupt them.

May it please your old Ladyship --

Out of this fellow, I may find perhaps
That which his Master would have loath reveald,
I'll join with him in conference.

Since you tax me of jest, I charge you Sir
Henceforth to speak all earnest, or stand mute,

I vow it by my greatest bliss on earth,
(My hopes I have in you.)

Ilettry your faith,
Have you in all the countries you have travelled
Never made proof of Lady?

Yes, in all,
And in each clime, of many.

Nay, I thought what I should find you, trust a strangers love as gold to
court the wind. If then such numbers,

Why, after all these trialls make you me
The last of all your t'sales?

Last of my hopes,
Or period of my wishes, had you said,
I should have answered then, only because
Of all you are most perfect.

Now you flatter.


A Lord said st thou?


I, and I assure your Ladyship, ally'de to the best
Grandoes of Spain, nay more then so, --

As I confess you perfect, I entreat
Let not my merited praises make you proud,
And vie your own worth; I shall wonder then:
Know Madam, that I left my Country Spain,
And there my many honours, not of pleasure,
But by compulsive force, unwillingly,
My voyage purposely to find out you,
Which ere I could, I have travelled Kingdoms through,
Searched Courts, examined Cities, nay even Villages.

For me?

For you; for the chief Paragon
Of Beauty matched with Virtue; therefore you
For one to rival the great Spanish Princess,
Matchless in both, through half the world, save you,
Indeed I flatter not, you are that Mine,
(Oh Lady, might I truly say that Mine:)
No India yields, save this, but thine; the sun.
To out-shine that candle, none but this clear splendour,
Dimmes her imperfect glories; You by this
Shall win your self a name through all the world,
And purchase admiration: me that so
Have prys'd you, and esteemed you, marking you
Amongst thousands, for a piece unparralleld:
Before all things, my Country, Honours, Friends,
That else like a poor exile forfeit all,
And Lady, you the cause on it: If my Love,
Grounded upon such strong opinion
Merit repulse; if you will loose your self,
And hazard me, that have my head engaged
To make this good: I only shall report
The strangest thing in my long search I find,
Beauty with Virtue mixed, proved both unkind.

Which should I be? -- pray give ^
And then expect my answer.

And hath he chose her out amongst so many?


Yes, and means to make her a great Lady, to possess her of all his fortunes,
to put down all the prime Ladies of Spain: and for Beauty and Virtue, to be
preferred before the great Princess her self.


To this, should she not willingly assent,
She were no more my daughter.

Now, your answer.


Should this be true, that you prefer this face
Before the beauties of so many clymes:
And that your life and means soly depend,
There to expose it freely, I should much
Digress from honour, to neglect such love,
And should I not in unseen Virtue strive
To equal that seen beauty you so praise,
I should then much wrong that great character
You have bestowed upon me.

Which you shall not;
Daughter, I say you shall not; Sir, she's yours,
Or I disclaim her ever.

Pray good mother,
A little pardon me; how shall I know
What here you promise, you can there make good.

If you distrust his word, cake mine, which will pass in Spain for more
Myravids, then the best Squires in England for Farthing-tokens.


That you may know it is not lust, but love,
And the true speculation I have taken,
In both these adjuncts, that proclaim you rare,
That 'tis to have you denison'd in Spain,
Be instated in my liberal fortunes there,
To appear in Court a foreign miracle,
And not to make you here my Prostitute;
I only beg your promise, that, being granted,
I'll back into my Country, tell the Princess,
What here in England I have seen and found,
My peace being made, I will return thus far,
To fix you in that (...) a splendent star,
And this is all I crave^

'Tis just, and honest,
In this can be no fallacy at all.

As truth then I accept it, and am yours.


And Lady, I your creature: For by you
I am new made; as Mistress of this contract.
Accept this Ring, which never part withal,
But to my self in person.

Not in death,
T'shall with me to my grave.

To prove your constancy,
One Imposition more; there may be trains
Laid to entrap our love, to injure you,
And forfeit me, therefore till my return,
Which shall be with what suddenness I can:
Be shown unto no stranger.

These I vow,
And pray you keep this token with that care
That I shall your commands, on this presume.
Of which, through all Hesperia you may boast,
Though my face please, yet shall my virtue most.

Thou hast lost Isabella; and I gained
Me an Empire by my travel: I by you
Am new created, being lost and gone,
With this most sweet addition, two in one.

A good hearing, and I and the old Gentlewoman are both witnesses to the
bargen.


Approve no act, tho ne'er so well becoming
Part, so well beautified, phrase aptly languag'd,
To the very Tone and Accent of the Time,
But seems in me de^am'd and rustical^;
None can endure my sight, all things I do
Are construed to the worst; I walk the streets,
Satute I all I meet, none resaluteth me,
But look askue, and point, and laugh at me,
As who should say; See Petro^llaes Scorn,
And that which wounds me deeper then death can,
The more I strive to make me worth her love,
So much the more unworthy she reputes me.

And faith what think of Bonavidaes undertaking?


As of the man himself, most frivolous and idle;
He parallel the Queen? ha, ha, ha.

They speak of me, and seal it with a smile:
That I could sink, and hide me in the Center.

Bold Valladaura, well returned from Sea: we hear --


Of my disgrace, what a swift wing has Rumour?


You met a bold and noble opposite.


Have you heard that too?


But beauteous Petrocella --


She has told all: I shall be Ballated,
Sung up and down by Minstrills? Gentlemen,
Tho my success fell short of my intent,
Let it meet fair construction.

It deserves no less.


Your noble bearing, has given our modern gallants
Plaine-song to descant on.

They scoff me palpably: but noble friends,
Such I have ever reckoned you, Let's change
Discourse a while in private.

Of all the Christians this arm ever tried,
You come the nearest men: What Country?

England.


You're Nobly Spirited: Have you got your ransomes?


None but our lives.


Them thus we tender.


They are Jewels:
We rather wish to wear, than part withal,
But need commands us to make instant sale;
To the Male-Market with 'em, each man carries
His price upon his shoulder, go go, try the Market,
Our self will stay, and answer customers.

You've given both me and my fears satisfaction,
I shall report you noble, and esteem my credit
Much richer than I did: As I said, my opposer
Had man enough in him, and indeed more
Then I have known in many.

The Land breeds few other: what's here, a Market of Slaves?


Manly proportions? Ha! Mont. Ferrers?


Death!
My mortal foe? how is my poor life hunted?

You do not know me?


I must give you ^ne lie, to say I do.


'Tis surely he, yet if it be, mischance
Has made him much unlike himself, when he
And I vied valour on the purple deck,
He wot a look more manly; I'll try further.
Were you ne'er Captain of a Ship at Sea?

I had ne'er been slave unto a Turk, a shore else.


Of England? your name Ferr^s?


Rather than deny --
My name and Country, I'll acknowledge any
Thing base or deadly: I confess you know me,

You shall know me too, ere we part.


I shall?


Unto some cost you shall, trust tot.


If Fate
Has writ my name in her black book: and this
The hind-most minute of my hours, I scorn
To bribe the Beldam to wipe't out again.

You know the Gentleman conferred with you?


For a bold Foe, and a proud Spanyard.


You may have cause to say so: rh'as sent you Ransom.


My ransom? Why? Why should he ransom me?
Nay rather, why should I ask that? I saw
Inveterate hate flame in his burning eye,
He frees me from slight bondage of the Turk
To slave me to himself, and exercise
New tyranny: he meets a living grave
That's vassal unto him, was once his slave;
That fate o'retakes me: I will not accept it.

Your reason?


Not that I desire to live
Slave to a turk, or fear the bloody usage
Of an ambitious Spanyard: Death is but death
What shape so ere he comes in.

Why are ye so loath to meet him then?


Though you cannot enforce so much, I'll tell you,
See you this man? One that with me hath fronted
The wrath, and utmost violence of Fate,
Should mine own Countrymen, nay, natural mother,
Or my kind Sister, whose fair eyes I honour,
Should the best Lord of th^se have sent my ransom,
Had it come single without his, as this,
I would have spu^'d, and sent it back.

You would Sir? We shall return so much.

And be persuaded to find usage answerable to your Contempt.


Why for my sake do you neglect your freedom?


Because for mine, thou hast not loved thy life,
But throwneit upon dangers more than common:
Because for me, thou left'st thy native land,
Father and Friends, and to make me a fortune
Unmade thine own; gav'st both thy self and fate
Wholly to me; think me not so unjust
To lose a Jewel made over to me in trust.
But they return.

Here's both their Ransomes,


And there's both the slaves,
A better peny-worth of flesh and blood
Turk never sold.

Nor Christian but a Spanyard
Would ere have bought.

Oh yes, your English Iewes, they' le buy and sell their fathers, prostrate
their wives, and make money of their own children, the male stews can witness
that: come on Sir, you must along.


How, must?


And shall, prating you English slave?


You know me now?


Yes truly, for a Tyrant,
And bloody hangman: had I knownethee half so well.
When on the Deck I had thee at my mercy,
I would have ground my sword upon thy bones,
And writ my freedom in thy blood.

I live,
To do the like by thee --

And I breathe yet,
To dare thee to thy utmost: and may win
More honour of thee, by my manly suffering,
Than thou, by base inflicting: My friend and I
Like two chaine-bullets, side by side, will fly*
Thorough the jaws of death.

A strong resolve,
But I shall quickly weaken, sunder them,
With hin there -- quick, that Paper will point out
Diet and lodging for him.

Sunder them? that word
Falls colder on me than the Rhewme of Death.

Then you'll not fly like bullets in the jaws
Of Death and danger?

Hear me Valladaura,
Since thou wilt needs ta^e up the attribute
And name of Tyrant, study thy trade perfect,
Soil it not in per^ormance, like a true Artist,
Degree thy tortures, like an angry tempest,
Rise calmly first, and keep thy worst rage last,
Torment us jointly: sunder us at first,
A plague so deadly, that what ever follows
Will seem but as a Cordial: would have devised
After a thousand tortures, one to mad
My manly patience, or to split my heart,
It had been done in this one accent, part.

Divide'em so.


Mezentius. cruelty,
Comes short of yours, he joined, but you divide
A living man in two.

Right spanish Pride.


I used not you so though: but noble Sir,
How well thou hast merited living?

So I'll die,
Thy thought's an Antidote against tyrranie.

Borne on that confidence, lose not one tear,
Nor spend a sigh, let guilty cowards fear.

You'll find a change.

Your churlsh -- nor can we look to find
Usage more gentle. Revenge is unconfined.

And so shall mine be: what the art of man
Knows of tormentings, mine shall inflict, and can.
This parting of you is the least and first,
Of infinite to come.

I dare the worst.


Most divine Lady, in the late exile
Of your depraver Bonavid^; how
Do you applaud my justice?

Why, as Justice.
To have done less, should have disgraced (...) more
Then all your worth could merit.

Who doubts that,
He were not worthy to be styled a Prince,
Or to partake that goodness got in you,
That should have let slip such proud arrogance,
Without severest rigour.

Troth I wonder
In what remote climb the poor exile tre^ds,
Or in what place he hopes to find that piece
His impudence durst boast of?

He's perhaps
Travelled to Arabia Felix, and from thenc^
To bring the Phoenix hither.

He should then
Have kept his Country, if a Phoenix live,
You make Spain blessed Arabia.

I remember,
There lived a Spanish Princess of our name,
An Isabella too, and not long since;
Who from her Palace windows, steadfastly,
Gazing upon the Sun, her heir took fire,
Some Augures held it as a prodigy,
I rather think she was Latona's brood,
And that Apollo courted her bright hair,
Else envying, that her tresses put down his,
He scorched them off in envy, not dare I
From her derived, expose me to his beams,
Least, as he burns the Phoenix in her nest
Made of the sweetest aromatic wood;
Either in love or envy, he agree
To use the like combustion upon me.

A thing much to be feared.


Then royal Lady,
Might I advise you, keep out of the Sun
And walk still in the shade, by pro^fe we see
Such Meteors oft take fir^.

Alas poor Lord:
To see what thy bold rashness brings thee to
That thou art forced to wander through the world,
To find out a black Swan to rival us?
Thou seek a thing that is not: and thy rashness
Hath justly forced thine exile.

Fairest of Creatures,
I bring you news, Lord Bonavids returned,
And new arrived at Court,

Art sure 'tis so?


Most certain Royal Princess.


To his death: If he come empty handed.


But if sped,
Then he redeemes his exile.

Blind, and dull,
Hath plenty bred a surfett in you then?
Or have you taken possession of that treasure,
You know not how to value to the worth,
But though you cannot, we can rate our self:
Perhaps, despair hath brought him back to offer
His desperate life; Which if with submission,
Repentance, and some due acknowledgement,
May in our grace find pardon; Go, admit him.

Now let's prepare our eyes; For, he no question
Hath brought over some rare creature.

Take your stands, let's have of her full view.


All the delights of earth, and joys above,
For ever crown your Temples.

Welcome Bonavida;
How speed you in your voyage?

That success,
I had in expectation, Royal sir,
I am now possessed of, really.

We have found her.


Hah, whom?


The pride of Nature, and of Love;
Beauty and Virtue in most high contention
Which should exceed each other.

Why, I can assure you, we have her to show,
And such a p^ece --

Peace you; What Country?

England.

What place there?

Of their chief Cities, the Metropolis, London.


I, and the fairest there, one so fair, that all Bartholmew-fayre could not
match her again.


We have no tongue for thee --


But we have a Tale for you, if you will give us the hearing.


What name?

Hellena.

Of what descent or Parentage?

Noble by birth, yet not so hie degreed,
As her great virtues merit: nor her means,
To counterpoise her beauty.

Yet we have her, and weight and measure with her, to put down all the
black-browd wenches in Spain, for a face, and Phisi^gnomie.


That prater, Peace there.


I hope, when travellers have light upon a rich Purchase, It is lawful for
them to brag of their commodity.


We may imagine one most beautiful;
But how to rank with us?

With any Lady,
Europe or Asia yields, them pardon, Lady,
I hope without the least offence to you.

Perhaps she's fair, what Instance can you give, that she's of such prov^d
virtue.


Passing thousands;
I will insist in one: At my departure,
Only one Ring I left with her in change,
Which if she living part with, lend, or give
Till my return, I'll hold my self disgraced,
Her ever-more disparidg'd: In exchang,
She did bestow on me this Carcanett,
Which I as long shall keep.

Pray let me see it.

Madam, I dare expose to you my life,
Then much more this.

'Tis a most costly Jewel,
Worthy a Princess wearing.

I can assure you Lady, there was a Ring, and a thing exchanged upon the
bargen.


But where's this rare one? come produce her straight, To make her the courts
wonder.


Pardon Lady:
She's yet in her own Country; But that Careanet
Can quickly fetch her over.

Pardon? villain, and base Imposture, lived there such a creature, would not
thy pride have brought her to full view?

But this Illusion seconding the first,
Doubles thy punishment; Hence with him to prison,
More worthy of the block: Abuse us first,
And then deride us after; Royal sir,
If suffer me to swallow this disgrace,
You vnderprise me doubly.

Thou hast spoke it, and it shall stand.

Yet hear me Royal sir.

Away with him.

Then hear me Noble Lady.

Shall we be still tormented?

If you deny me freedom, grant me that
Which I more prise, my precious Ca^canet,
That which you with no Justice can detain.

Into some loathsome dungeon hurry him,
Unworthy the days comfort: bear this scorn?

Yo'have sentenced justly.


Please you sir, a little
To leave me to my private solitude:
I shall not be long from you.

Take your pleasure;
For your content is ours.

Centella and Pineda.

Royal Madam.

I have a project for you, which if you effect,
You shall indeere me ever.

What's in men,
Shall not in us be skanted.

You have heard
The Country, and the place of her abode;
Thither I'll furnish you: Spare for no cost,
Our Treasure ^es open to you; get that Ring
By any slight or craft: be it possible
That gold will do it, corrupt her; Use all means,
All friends, devices, plotts, and stratagems,
To bri^g some token of her falseness back:
Further instructions you shall have with you;
Meane-time prepare for travel.

And, or die,
Or bring you news of her inchastitie.

Enough, you are ours: part with this Carkane^?
Not for a World: I have project too in that:
Be rivaled by a petty English Dame?
Knew I the large earth did my equal give,
Rather then brooke her sight, I'd cease to live.

SIr from a bond-man, you have cast me into a free mould, almost new made me,
yet what your purpose is, I cannot gather, I am still yours; Is't your
intention to prank me up, to make me fit for death, or feed me till I be in
some good plight, the better to fat your own revenge?


What I purpose to my self, I still keep in my self,
What you have found hitherto, speak, and when you
Find your self pinched, then freely complain.

The face of your kind visage yet looks smooth,
I spy in it no wrinkle; But my friend,
How have you dealt by him?

As he deserves, no further, pray inquire him.

If he perish,
I am swept from off the earth too, with my sister,
He next my heart sits unmovable: pray what service
Will you command me now?

None: yet some love
I shall entreat, withal, a grace from you,
I have a Mistress, unto whom I purpose
A friendly visitation, to which duty,
I entreat you as a witness.

I am yours.


I hear say Bonavidaes returned:


And intends to visit thee, for having failed in all his Foreign purposes: he
means, upon those thy pillars, as Hercules did upon his, to write Nonultra,
think thou not so girl? my further honour still.


To see what a virtue lives in this Spanish continent, especially amongst
yellow-hayr'd wenches; Iason, when he went in quest of the Golden-Fleece,
found it in Spain, there's a Moral in that, and that great Hercules, so
talked on amongst the Greekes, after all his travels through Asia, Africa,
and Europe, coming to this Country, into the Island called Calis; he that,
unless Poets lie, lay with Fifty Ladies in one night, and got Nine and forty
Boys, marry I must tell you, the last was a Girl; was there so tyred with one
woman; that he gave over all his travels, retired home to his Country, like
a man taken down, and in memory of his adventure: where he reated his pillar,
writ that most methodical Motto you speak of; No further.


My daughter is an apt, and witty lass:
I know her apprehensive, and well-brayn'd:
My further honour still.

Noble Madam,
I have brought a stranger, and an English-man,
To give you visitation.

A worthy stranger, a bold villain too,
My further honour still.

To whom, Petrocella?
As to a Gentleman to me Intyr'd,
I beg from you all the best complement,
Du^ unto my long service.

Why, what's he?

This man, do you mean?

Yes he, that fellow there.

Fellow, to whom; he hath not his in Spain,
Nay, I might have took a larger bound,
And not have past my limitt; fellow, villain?

Yes, or commpanion.

Paint me out a worthy --
Else he is such to none: This was the man
I met at sea, and fought with; our Encounter
Was all in smoke and fire, so hotly fought,
That in that fog, we had no further light,
Then what our Lint-staves gave: our Decks flowed blood,
Which through the Port-holes run, and dyed the Sea
Into a deep vermillion, yet still fought.

But never with a braver opposite
Did English-man t^ie with fire.

He speaks well.

Both to their honours still.

When Powder, and Bullet,
And men, with all grew scant; for scarce was any
Left to the present purpose, serviceable,
Both bottoms ready through the violent leaks
To split, and founder; we then hauled, hung flags,
And grew to composition.

Which I begged.


Sir, it came first from me; And this proposed,
That both our ships, goods, lives, and people, might not
Be in the Sea engraved, and swallowed up,
Both from mans tongue and thought: that such rich Prises
Might be to one Survivor; the two Captains
To try it out by Combat.

Honour still.

This nobly he accepted; Faiths new pawned,
Hostages given, two worthy seconds chose;
Lots cast, whose Decks should be the appointed lists;
To mine it fell: He boarded me to fight,
From whom I came apparrel'd thus in wounds --

It seems then he's a cutter.

Whose scars still mark me his.

Wear I not yours?
Though not so many, yet more deeply ^arv'd,
With greater danger, and expense of blood,
Then ever dropped from these.

Short tale to make;
Vanquished I was, He victor; and when all,
Lading and lives were his; Nay even mine too
Lay prostrate at his mercy, with a magnificence
Equal to any Prince, he should at --

All this we know, nor do we desire to hear over again, what was before
related; but had you spoke more in his praise, then you have done, which it may
be is your purpose; I find nothing, but may well come within the compass of
his merit, and my belief.


Lady, I am glad you are so possessed of him;
And do you think him such?

I think you would gladly sell whom you have so lately bought, else you would
never have spoke him thus: If you have any such purpose; It may be, there be
those that, but surrender up your bargen, would be glad to help you to your
money.


I came but with one give upon my leg,
Fastened upon me in his courtesy,
But since I looked upon your Ladies eyes,
Now I am doubly fettered.

'Tis neglect,
A palpable neglect, she loves me not:
It shall be so, I will be borish and sullen.

Sir, you this day have brought me to a fight
That more contents me than the wealth of Spain:
This matchless Lady.

My Mistress,
Whom if thou wilt court for me,
And win unto my wishes.

I Sir do it?

Yes, by the love thou owe me; do you pause?
If ever I deserved the name of friend,
Or hope hereafter I may merit off thee,
Make it thy sole endeavours

Doubly captived:
Honour should still preseede love: Sir, I will,
Though I to cure another, my self kill.

How long is't since those Gentlemen of Spain arrived here?


Three days since, Lady.


Came there no letters along with 'em from Spain? some note there?


Not to my hands.


Has Bonavid. that name me thinks revives me, I dare not tax him of neglect,
and yet I am very pleasant this morning, lets have a song R^sara: I would have
the subject love, and yet modest to, and yet a little wanton, yet chaste and
innocent as dreams of coals, and hearst thou? where Bonavida's name vouchsafes
to grace the ditty, there let music speak in its smoothest phrase, and most
courtly singing, stay, thou art a jewell to precious to ^e washed with, thou
were given to dear purpose: honoured with this, lye there.


The ditties done.

And I have done, a dryer.

How am I blessed: occasion I thank thee,

Thy absence Bonavid, makes each minute seem an hour and thy delay, makes
infant time look old, and were it not for this pledge of thy affection --
Rosara, Maid.


Your pleasure madam?


Reach me my Ring.


What Ring, Lady?


Dost ask that question? that of the basin?


Trust me madam, I saw none.


Speak not again upon thy life, where is the water?


Thrown out Madam, and with it I fear the Ring, but I'll --


Find it again, or lose thy self, inconsiderate girl, how are my hopes
betrayed through thy rash negligence, was myblood pleasant for this? my
thoughts, Joyful for this? -- how now, hast found it?


Nor ever shall I fear Madam.


How, never? Then lose thy self, my hopes are lost for ever, torches and
lights there, find it again, or never see me more.


Your will's a law, which I intend not suddenly to infringe, and have I got
thee my best happiness? now to my Don of Spain, the next news you hear of
me, is a Ladyship at least; but fie on this idleness, I stand on thorns till
I be in action.


You find her pliant?


As a thing of wax, never was thri^ty trader more willing to put of a sullke
commodity, than she was to truck for her maidenhead, I admire her forwardness.


Call of the animal, she takes her entrance just at her q^step you aside for
fear of suspicion.


Oh, master Oracle, sweet master Oracle!


How thrives your project? works it into fashion?


Beyond hope or expectation, was there not a Don of Spain here, to speak
with me?


Not I assure you? you have met him then?


Yes, and so met him, sweet M. Oracle, I am bound to you for ever.


This by my direction is the place* the labour in vain, and here spite of
delay, she has prevented myhast, you see I keep my word sw^te.


And that's somewhat strange, in a gallant of your (...).


But usual in a lover, may we presume upon the trust of this gentleman?


Why, do not you know him? Oh strange! why 'tis M. Oracle man; trust him? and
I had a Maiden-head to spare, I durst trust it naked in bed with him.


Sir, though both strangers, yet fates past, and fortunes to come, are better
known to me, than your selves: have you got the Ring?


Have I? have I not? the handsomest way I had ^or^t.


Sweet, I am come to make tender of my promise.


The like purpose bring we Sir.


You have my heart already.


For which take mine, and that Ring to boot: and M.


Welcome as health to the house of sickness: and now, where how, what, when?


How is't Sir? I see a sudden sign of alteration in you.


And can you blame me, my blood chils, my nerves faint. I am abused, my
attendant Daemon prompts me, I am abused.


Where?


Or by whom?


Here, and by thee, by both a false imposture and a common Strumpet.


Do you mistrust my honesty?


Or my Art?


Both, they are both dissembled, and my noble purpose frustrate, this is not
the Ring.


Not the Ring?


And you the woman my fate points at; how simple innocence may be plaid upon?


How, not the Ring? return it back then.


No, I will keep it to witness and evidence against you, for instantly expect
the severest punishment law can inflict upon Impostures of this kind.


Disparagement to my Art, have you brought a falls Ring?


The right on my faith, as I hoped to be a Lady, the right.


I am proud of that, this trial was not amiss though.


But Oh master Oracle, how have you deceived me?


I was deceived my self, I see my error now; only a mistake in the sign, I
sought for Mercury in one house, and he logd'd in the next, I must change my
lodging, the City stones will grow too hot for me, I must go cool my feet in
the suburbs. The all and only mistake was in the sign.


The Labour in vain, a fire on the sign, and you too; my Donna turned to
this? my preferment to this? a Lady in the Morning, and a beggar before noone?
here's quick work indeed; a cunning man? a cunning Rogue If ere it be my luck
to see thee preach through a pill^ry, as one of the cast limbs of your cursed
crew did not long since, the hangman sh^l have you by the ears for this: but
I'll back and lay my case open to my Lady.


Your only curses, and now aboard for Spain,
Her shame's our honour, and her loss our gain.

The Spanyard's noble, beyond thought or expectation noble, instead of a
Dungeon, he has furnished me with means, and sent me home with a letter of
his purposed friendship to my friend. And now, though freed both from Turk and
Spanyard. I live slave to a more cruel nation than both, my own countrymen*
for suretyship and debt, (diseases that many a gallant lies sick to death on)
have taken hold on me, and though I know it improbable, and partly ridiculous,
that a false beard, and a fantastical habit, should mar my creation make me a
new creature, it has past currant with some in this place, and I may the bo^der
venture on it. First then to my friends Sister, the young Lady Ferrars, I think
her virtuous, but withal know her for a woman, and dare not trust my liberty
in so weak a stomach: in this disguise then, I'll address me to her
presently.


Thou tell me wonders, cheated of my Ring, by a cunning man, and a crafty
Spanyard? the cosenage was premeditate: a Spanyard was he?


Some D^ or Nobleman at least, he wore very good clothes.


So may a cheat, or a pickpurse; the better body, the planer the habit, paint^
clothes were devised for ruined ^eeling, and fluttish walls, It's the Apparel
of the mind, crowns thee withn Noble.


Then was he a very beggar to cheat for so poor a trifle as a Ring.


'Twas not so much for the value of the thing, As to improverish the oath of
the wearer; some crafty sunner had a hand in it: or it might be Bonavidaes
plot, to try my loyalty: and yet it relishes too much baseness to come from
so noble an author; how ever, shall I see this, turn coward, and like a
falling Tower, bury my beauty in my own Ruin^s? no, rather like the glorious
Sun, desolve, and scatter these clouds of Infamy. It is resolved, I'll after em
to Spain: Your purpose Rosara.


To give you my best attendance to th^ last minute, please you Ladyship accept
it.


And freely pardon thee; receive a few directions for our voyage.


Yes, this disguise will do it; and for my friend, her noble brothers sake, I'll
make the first tender of my service to her; save you Lady.


You're welcome sir; would you any thing with us?


Impart a secret to you.


To a Woman? by no means, we want discretion to keep our own.


Strange! Had I a secret concerned my life, I'd trust it in a Woman's bosom to
choose, and think I said it up safe too.


Your reason Sir?


Because no wise-man will over look for any matter of Worth in such a weak
building.


A fellow of a bold aspect, and such a one, were I assured of his carriage, as
would much avail me in my voyage; Art willing to serve?


Mine own turn with all my heart: This fashions to my wishes; what if your
Ladyship do want a servant? I am your man, your first man too, and such a man
as know the World.


And such a man do I want;
You have been in Spain then?
Did hear no talk of an English-man there,
One Farrers --

And one Manhurst his friend, they are both prisoners, and lie -- only for
ransom.


My brother Prisoner? This news wings me for my voyage.


Are you for any adventures Lady?


Thy bad news enforces me; I'll make that my colour, at least that Gentleman
is my brother; and cost it the last penny of my Dower, I will not see him want;
I'll furnish our voyage Instantly.


As generous, as he is valiant, 'twere cowardice in me to disharten her, we
must be gallant; what habit were I best to travel in, l^t me see, a Spanish
slop, good easy wear, but that like Chambermaids, they are loose, and
somewhat too open below.


Me-thinks your Dutch Cassock is a comely wear.


It hath bin, but now adays it grows shorter and shorter, like your Court
allowance: their Taylors are good husbands, though they make little or no waste
at all, and that makes your Gallants stand so much upon Points: your
button-hose is a good wear for Courtiers.


Why for Courtiers?


Cause they are full of large promises outward, but lined with narrow and
scant-performance wit^.


'Tas been a good fashion, but 'tis old.


So is all goodness else, we have nothing new, but oaths and diseases.


No, for my money, give me your substantial, English hose, to ^nd and
som-what full before.


Now they are mee-thinks a little too great.


The more the discretion of the Landlord that builds them the makes room
enough for his Tenant to stand upright in, he may walk in and out at ease
without stooping: but of all the rest, I am clean out of love with your Irish
trowfes; they are for all the world like a Jealous wife, always close at a
mans tail: out of all these will I cut and fashion that shall ^ and Imitable:
will you follow?


Even where fate leads me, we are all her slaves
And have no dwellings of our own.

Yes, Graves.


I Never heard a fellow since my years, taught me how to distinguish I^ from
good, to talk in this strange Key; how English this? What are thou in thy
Country?


The^e, a man.

What here?

No better then you see a slave.

Whose?

His that hath redeemed me.

Valladauraes?

Yes, I proclaym 't; I that was once mine own,
Am now become his creature.

I perceive,
Your coming is to make me think you noble,
Would you persuade me deem your friend a God?
For only such make men, are you a gentleman?

Not here, for I am all dejectedness*
Captive to fortune, and a slave to want;
I can not call these e^othes I wear mine own,
I do not eat, but at another cost,
This air I breathe, is borrowed; ne'er was man
So po^re and abject. I have not so much,
In all this universe, as a thing to leave*
Or a Country I can freely boast is mine:
In all the world, I had but one true friend,
And he is ravished from me;
My essen^e, and my being, is another:
What should I say? I am not any thing,
And I possess as little.

Tell me that?
Come, come, I know you to be no such man,
You are a Soldier, valiant, and renownd,
Your carriage tried by land, and proved at Sea,
Of which, I have heard such full expression
No contradiction can persuade you less,
And in this faith I am constant.

A mere worm
Trod on by every Fate.

Raised by your merit
To be a common argument through Spain.
And speech at Princes Tables, for your worth
Your presence when you please to expos^'t abroad,
Attracts all eyes, and draw them after you
And these that understand you call their friends,
And pointing through the streets, say, this is he,
This that brave and noble Englishman,
Whom Soldiers strive to make their president,
And other men their wonder.

This your scorn.
Makes me appear more abject to my self
Then all diseases I have tasted yet
Had power to asperse upon me, and yet Lady
I could say something durst ^.

Speak't at once.

And yet --

Nay, but we'll admit no pause.

I know not how my phrase may relish you,
And loath I were to offend, even in what's past
I must confess, I was too bold, -- Farewell,
I shall no more distaste you.

Sir, you do not,
I do proclaimt you do not, stay, I charge you,
Or as you say, you have been fortunes scorn^,
So ever prove to woman.

You charge deeply,
And yet now, I bethink me.

As you are a Soldier,
And Englishman, have hope to be redeemd
From this your scorned bondage you sustain,
Have comfort in your Mother, and fair Sister,
Renown so blazed in the ears of Spain,
Hope to re-breathe that air you tasted first.
So tell me --

What?

Your apprehension caught
And almost was in sheaf.

Lady I shall.

And in a word?

I will.

Pronounce it then.

I love you.

Ha, ha, ha.

Still it is my misery
Thus to be mocked in all things.

Pretty faith.

I looked thus to be laughed at, my estate
And fortunes I confess, deserves no less;
That made me so unwilling to denounce
Mine own de^sions, but alas I find
No Nation, sex, complexion, birth, degree.
But jest at want, and mock at misery.

Love me?

I do, I do, and maugre Fate,
And spite of all sinister evil shall.
And now I charge you, by that filias^ zeal
You owe your father, by the memory
Of your dear mother, by the joys you hope
In blessed marriage, by the fortunate issue
Stored in your womb, by these and all things else,
That you can stile with goodness: instantly,
Without evasion, trick, or circumstance,
Nay, least premeditation, answer me.
Affect you me, or no?

How speak you that?

Without (...) or pause.

Give me but (...)
To sleep upon it.

I pardon you ^o minute, not so much
As to apparel the least phrase you speak,
Speak in the shortest sentence.

You have vanquished me
At mine own weapon: noble sir, I love you:
And what my heart dur^t never tell my tongue
Least it should blab my thoughts, at last I speak
And iterate, I love you.

Oh, my happiness^
What wilt thou feel me still? art thou not weary
Of making me thy May-game to possess me
Of such a treasures mighty Magozin,
Not suffer me to inioy't, taken with this hand,
With that to get another.

You are sad Sir,
Be so no more, it you have been dejected
It lies in me to mount you to that height,
You could not aim at greater, I am yours.
These lips that only witness it in air
Now with this truth confirm it.

I was borne to 't,
And it shall out at once.

Sir, you seem passionate,
As if my answer pleased not.

Now my death,
For mine own tongue must kill me, noble Lady.
You have endeared me to you, but my vow
Was ne'ere to match with any of what state
Or birth soever, till before the contract,
Some one thing I impose her.

Sh^e to do it?

Or if she fail me in my first demand
I to abjure her ever.

I am she.
That beg to be implyde so, name a danger
Whose very face would fright all womanhood,
And manhood put in trance, nay whose aspect
Would ague such, as should but hear it told:
But to the sad beholder, prove like those
That gazed upon Medusaes snaky locks,
And turned them into Marble: Th^se and more
Should you but speak't I'd do.

And swear to this?

I v^w it by my honour, my best hopes
And all that I wish gracious, na^e it then,
For I am in a longing in my soul,
To show my loves expression.

You shall then,

I'll do it as I am a Virgin.
Lye it within mortality, I'll do it.

You shall?

I will: that which appears in you
So terrible to speak, I'll joy to act,
And take pride in performance.

Then you shall.

What? Soldier, What?

Love noble Vallada^ra,
And at his soonest appointment marry him.

Unkind man, thou hast killed me.

And my salfe with the same stroke.

Oh, Noble Englishman,
Thou now appear'st a mirror.

But in this,
Pray Sir can you be serious?

As I would in death unto my Confessor.

Then I am l^st,
Now ba^r than this fellow termed himself,
To him that was on earth most miserable:
I am now become a Vassal, Nay, despised, ^
I that but once to day, thought my self rival,
For face and virtue, to the peerclesse Queen^,
Both these have prostituted to a slave,
To be more ^lave than he, but shall he thus
Behold in me this passion to usurp
Triumph in my disgrace, and boast abroad
Of this so poor a conquest? No Peirocella recollect thy self,
Preserve thy honour, though against thy spirit,
And where thy heart is sick, complain thy heel,
Let not thy seen grief please him.

Home and retire, Why should you strive thus
to undo one that's already conquered?

Poor exile! oh, with what slight attribute
Shall I devise to give thee expression?
Thou all that ba^enesse thou hast termed thy self,
Thou look'^t now I should whine and p^le and weep
Hang about thy neck, submit, and kneel for grace,
As if thou were that brave man so reported!
Know I am no such Creature, neither think I
There can be ought good in thee, saving this
Which was the last, that thou hast plighted me,
To one more worthy one, whose very shadow
I prize, above thy being, one whose actions
Were never taxed in any thing save this
To ransom such a -- what thou know thy self
Him I'll both love and marry, hence, depart:
Oh heaven, how far my tongue speaks from my heart!

I would 'twere but a dream, then there were hope
I might be once a wake and so see day,
But night is lodged with^n me, night perpetual
Darker than the Ci^erian, all my lights
Have only been mere flashes that precede
Tempestuous cracks of thunder.

Now'tis time
To rowze him from his slumber, worthy friend
How have you sped this day in my behalf?

As you would wish.


You need not speak't again.
You aver no more then what my ears have witnessed,
In which you have used such fidelity,
I needs most freely must acquit all debts
Twixt you and me, and there Ingeniously
Confess my self in reradge.

Oh I still,
And ever-more, must owe you.

But If you,
Would add a second to this courtesy,
I should report you for the constantst friend
That ever strived to exceed in gratitude.

Name it I pray you, having one thing done,
I now am in at all things.

Upon your honour.

That which you have bought,
And paid for, with your money.

That no more,
I charge you by our love.

Why, I have done:
What I shall ever rue, may give it motion,
I being new all for action.

Only this,
For some occasions to my self best known,
And which I now entreat you not inquire,
But prosecute, that Priest shall marry us:
For your disguise, and all things fitting too't,
Leave it to my discretion to contrive,
And this is all I enjoin.

And this I'll do.

And bind me to you ever.

I am in,
Past half already, why not up to the chin?

Centella and Pineda, We have long
Mournd for your absence, had not our bright Queen
Made us acquainted with the intent the^eof,
We had not took it of you subject-like,
You so unfriendly, left us without leave,
But you are nobly welcome.

As the men,
Have crowned us with a wreathe, of rar^r worth,
Then can the united births of Spain and Portugall
Maintain to us: they make us still supreme,
And we by them find no Competitor,
The token that confirms infallibly,
That beauty stands corrupted.

Sacred Empress,
Behold the Ring: the manner how she fell,
How easily, and with what facillitie,
She yielded almost at the first demand,
We shall relate at full.

Forbear Centella, for to vex him more,
It shall be in his hearing; one of you
Release him from the torment of his Prison,
To endure a greater here: And might Prince,
Give me but leave, since he so prowdly durst
Deprave our worth to spite, nor all his grief,
And triumph in his wilful misery.

You speak but what is just and necessary,
In others to deter the like presumption,
I pray sir reprehend him, you cannot be too bitter
In his Just reprehension.

See, he's come.


We have sent to prove your Mistress.


And her constancy
Hath purchased my release, Is't not so Madam?

We are put down; I feared if any climb
Could yield rarietie to equal ours,
It would be found in England.

So I said,
And Royal Mistress, had you seen that face,
And made such proof, as I did of her heart,
You would esteem it no disgrace at all,
To honour her, that's your sol^ pa^agon,

Impudent slave --
But we'll contain our spleen; but 'tis my grief
To be excelled in both; to have failed in one,
Had bin the less vexation.

Oh, my fair Hellena!
Thou hast filled my soul with rapture, and releast me
From melancholy durance; Madam what were they
That made this happy trial, and informd you
That truth, to make her this acknowledgement?

Behold them: these are the witnesses
Of my disgrace through Spain.

They're noble Lords,
By whose approved censures, you have made,
Here highness to confes^e mine injuries.
At you return, in what plight did you leave
The unequalled Lady?

Faith, in health of body.

Be proud my genius on it.

And lusty wondrous lusty.

Was she seen?

yes seen, and felt, and heard, and understood,
We found her a Nou^e Substantive.

Oh, my blood! why fly thou from my hear^?

yet she stood,
And by her self too, when she was alone,
But lighting upon company she leak't,
Poor prostitute, she fell.

Unriddle me, and let me know thy meaning.

Then in plain -- your Mistress is a Whore.

Centalla spak't.

And will maked good, More Bonavida, mine,
My prostitute, most base and mercenary,
Bowing her lust beneath the price of gold,
For a few Spanish Ryalls.

Oh, my rage!
Whether wilt thou transport me? Villain, Dog,
False and unworthy and noble style,
Scarce the attribute of man,

Oh, Sir, anon I hope you' I have more patience,

Patience Devil?
Let it fl^e to the Antipodes, and we
Wraste in wrath and fury, that base lie
I'll ^ab with my steelet to down thy throat,
And make thee swallow both.

you are now heated: a little pause will cool you.

King, 'tis false,
Believe him not great Princess, 'tis injust;
Unless an Angel should descend and speak't,
And for an instance straight produce that Ring.
It wins with me no credence.

Know you that?

Ha, this -- I do, and therewithal dare swear
That there's no faith in woman.

Ha, ha, ha: what thinks he great censorious carper now?

That there's not one (give my allegiance leave)
I durst suspect even you, since she is fallen.

Ha; what of us?

That I have callumnis'd,
Your fame and virtue, that I merit death,
That I am now professed Antagonist,
(Saving your majesty) to all your sex,
That I am weary now the air I bre^th,
And should you grant it Madam, would not live,
That I no batter than a Traitor am,
And in the highest degree, have injured these,
Buy most, your sacred self: if for all these
You do not mount me on the public seaffold,
I will lay violent hands upon my se^e:
I beg my merited doom, my sentence crave,
Which with severest rigour let me have.

We limit thee two days for thy repentance,
The third's thy death.

My Hellena prove base?
Mount thoughts towards heaven, you have on earth no place.

He hath but what he merits.

And great prince,
Now boast your self 'bove Brutus, Collatine.
Or those most famous for their constant wives,
And I my self unequalled and unpeer'd
May on the earth a blazing Comet shine,
Seeming amongst others terren sole divine.
Our trusty friends and subjects henceforth live
In our highest grace, and trust: how we will right
You that for zeal to us have injured been
In our apparent justice shall be seen.

You sent for me.


I did, to tell thee a word of which no ear is worthy but thine own, I love
thee.


Possible, vexation should take new shapes to haunt me, you love me, come, this
jest might pass upon one of Cupids sashions, but I being a found Sophister in
the art, am too familiar with our fallacies, to credit them or you.


Let not your tomming betray your folly, though it be common with Ladies,
'twould show very ^lin a Courtier. I confess I seemed strange to you, till I
was acquainted with your worth.


How grew that acquaintance, 'twas without my knowledge?


Not to dissemble, some impulsive Nuntio's have wrought very strangely for you
but examine not particulars: suffice, I say I love you and you dare not take my
word, I can put you in no better security.


I des^te none, only, but silence, you have vouehsasfd me a happiness,
beyond merit or expectation.


You're the more beholding to me, and courtesy that comes from a woman freely,
is worth twenty pleasures infor^t, neither would I have you tax my love of
immodesty: nor think I purpose to make you pay for the nursery of another mans
pleasure, though it be common with some at Court; I have a kind of thing within
me called conscience, only I love you, and out of a compassionate charity
purpose to marry you.


He has don't to purpose, I know not how to take you Lady.


En as you find me, that's with more faults than vertues^ but see, my father
and some of my best friends, to whom I have read the story of my love, come in
person to dispatch the Nuptials.


Then I presume you're earnest, s^r I must call you father.


And never miscall me, if she be thy wife as I think she will be.


With your consent.


Get hers, it's not a straw matter for mine, and yet to make her no worse than
she is, I must needs say she will do any thing she list her self in spite of
my beard, my further Honour still: but take her to thee, I thought so, as soon
as ever I saw thee smack, I knew 'twould prove a match and now tis out, my
further honour still.


Out before 'tis thoroughly lighted? such matches were ner^ kindled at Hymens
altar, have you sufficient certificate of my love now?


Yes sweet, and now my resolutions wings
File with some Feathers: thou the man must join us?

Yes, and divide my self from happiness, this hand
Must forth my bosom pluck a blessedness
And place it in another, -- are you ready?

To shake thine Honour, which gins faint already,
We are, set on, let musickespeake aloud,
At such chaste Unions Jove himself is proud.

Awake? or in a dream? I hope the last,
The god of marriage would not see his shrine.
So much abused, the hallowed lights burn out
Themselves in anger, and the Covenant Book
Dropped down for shame, my hand shook, and my tongue
Like a false evidence before a judge
Faltred, and gave it self the lie, and yet
My treach^rous heart agreed (...), and this habit,
Oh, ^ould I throw my grief as easily from me,
As I do thee, ne'er did religious sha^s,
Count nance or shelter such a horrid act.

Friend Ferrers --

Ha? that very accent, friend,
Gi^es my faint fears the he, and writes my act
Nob^e and lawful: had I given him my life
'^was but his own.

Will not this Marble weep?
Nor shed a tear yet? Not? he quite outdares me,
In nob ^ e courtesies, all my attempts
Like curses shall against the wind fly back
In mi^e own face and soil it. Nob ^ e Ferrers
Thy manly undertakings half persuade me
Th^ art more than man.

Mine? alas, I have done nothing.
Worthy your least good thought: if you (or helf)
Can find a service to injoine your slavs
Mo ^ e hard (or damnable) that may become
(The Devil to will) a servant to effect,
Urge one more trial.

And with that I'll claim thee
King of thy self and thy affections.
And thusit is, for reasons yet concealed
And strangely working in my mutinous thoughts,
I would, and yet tis a request nor fitting
Me to enjoin, nor thee to practise.

Name it.
And if I do it not --

I am ashamed to own it,
Tis so uncomely and beyond the strength
Of man to act: yet in a word, this night
Thou shalt (denie't not) under my name and habit,
Sleep in my marriage sleets and with my wife.

Sleep with your wife? and is that all?

Yes, all
That I allow, if after I shall prove,
^, so much as in a kiss,
All thy past worth i^ blemished, never demand
The reason on it, that's buried.

I will do it; sleep with your wife? I'll do I,
No Eunuchs like me.

She's now gone to her Chamber.
Ladies and all have left her, under this cloud,
Go shrow'd thy self.

'Tis done,
How ere I (...), I'll rise bright honours son

WHat disturbs Valladaura?

What means my son?

To run, and roar, and bellow.

You are not mad?

As the great beast called Bull; Oh the cramp, the cramp!


Where?

Here, there, every where, in my Cry, my Mouth, my tongue, pull, and you love
me pull.

Where?

In the middle there.

What do you mean?

Show you a true Emblem of my self, I am married.

True, to my daughter.

Yes, to a strumpet, to a lascivious strumpet, not possible to draw on my
wedding shoes without a h^rne.

You are too dark.

And your daughter too light.

Speak your griefs fully.

As patience, not suffer me this piece
Of frailty, cut out of the heart of beauty,
Where I so loved, as it was doubtful whether
She or my life were dearer to me; she
Whom by me married, is this night
Clasped with a stranger: makes her fathers house
The wedding chamber, and her nuptial sheets
Reeke to adulterate pleasure --

Little to my honour* and this be true;

Would, oh my lost life, I could prove it false,
Fates not so merciful; late up at revels;
I will not say some of her sect of late
Plied me with wine, to give her purpose food,
But healths flew round, and with full wing, and still
I was their aim:
They mist their aim tho; and yet but a fairer
As soon as opportunity served me:
Unseen I lest 'em, and by a private key,
Went to my Chamber, where I said, I'll dare call her'
Neither my wife, nor Bride; your lustful danghter.

Doing no hurt, I hope she has more care of him then so.

Wearied with pleasure, she lies fast asleep,
Laid in a strangers arms, sh'as stayed my speech,
'Tas dim'd mine eyes from sight, and patience,
Restrian'd my head from fury: what he is, or whence,
I neither know nor question.

I commend ye, my daughter a whore, make my house a stews, and her father a
pander; is this all the honour she doth me?


Dishonoured above sufferance.


Wine, and a strumpet, were there no hope of generation, but in her only, this
hand should be her hang-man: a whore on her wedding night, There's more modesty
contem'd in a Gore, strumpet, whore, I will not call her daughter, I'll loose
her, Will you lead the way?


Your pardon, I am so mildly tempered, the expense Of one cheap tear, would
buy her pardon; had her fault stroke at my life; If you intend revenge, Do it in
my absence.


You are a chicken, leave us, tho'a fathers name, I'll bear a lyons heart,
break open the doors, strumpet, why Impudence, break op^ the door --


Whom do you seek?


A strumpet, thee, a -- I can't devise a name bad enough for thee.


I'll give my self one, call me Murderess;
A Name I am proud of.

Ha?

She has ^au'd us a labour; what means this bloody punyard*

Read in my brow, do you not see his name
Writ inted letters?

I see none: whose? what name?

Base Vallad^uraes --

Thy Husband?

He was never mine: for though you joined our hands,
My heart ne'^e (...) a man to 't; and how ever duty
Lives at command, Love cannot be infore'd,
And rather then live bound to one I love not,
I have bought my freedom with his life.

False woman?

Alive again! blessed star --

I ne^e was dead,
But thou has^ killed a man, whom to have saved,
Had I a thousand lives, I'd loose them all:
O valiant Ferrers, a more Noble Gentleman
Never drewaire.

The English man?

The wonder,
And abstract of all virtues: did you but know
What bold and noble Passages of honour,
He for my sake, with danger hazarded,
You would have thought there were more deity,
Then man within him --

Choked in my revenge,
This Joys me yet, that tho'l mist thy life,
I reached thy friends.

My friend indeed: and one,
That did but know how ardently he loved
Thee Tiger, thee, his c^ell m^dere,
You would (...) thy hand, and hate thy bloody self,
For thy ^o^loving him.

If he were so loving to her, and honourable to you what business had he in
your Chamber?


Much, and far more then ever was in man,
But passing many unmatched cu^tesies,
In honours duel, when I all hope had lost,
Ever to win the --

That slave wooed me for you, so much the sweeter by that, The thought of my
revenge.


To try him further, In a church-mans habit,
Although he loved thee dearer then his life,
At my entreat he married us.

White-liver'd peasant,
I have given him a due recompense.

But last,
And it may stand, writ in the Roll of time,
A daring challenge to all Ages.

You sent him to bed to your wife.

Which though I hated him, I must acknowledge
Him noble that way.

Every way; the World
Has lost a sewell, not to be regained
By loss of twenty Worlds.

But to what purpose did you send him to your wives bed?


My purpose was, having once past that trial,
To have made you man and wife.

How could that be, when you were married before?

She was never mine, the marriage was not lawful,
Done by a Lay-man; But mans fate, 'tis thrown
Above his reach, our hopes are not our own.

Ha, ha, ha.

Dost laugh at sorrow?

Would you have me turn Crocodile, and weep, Ferrers, Mont Ferrers, prithee
come help me to laugh a little.


Ferrers! my friend alive?


By this blood of a Turtle, and that's a chaste oath, he never did.


Hast failed thy promise, and abused my trust?


Do but name the word, abuse by love, and I'll kill him indeed; what should he
do? He came to bed, and for his eyes take, slept with me, yet ne'er so much
as kissed me, but I confess, I gave him twenty.


To quittance with him thus, I give him thy hand.


I ask no more, I have her heart already.


Have heart and faith, Noble Mont Ferrers.


My daughter chaste, my house honest, and noble Ferrers my Son-in-law; this
happens to my further honour indeed.


Noble of all sides, and so for joy of your friendly agreement, the Amorous
sun is come to give you a hunts-up.


Aurora looks red at that, but with the new light, new business meets us,
Bonavidaes Execution.


Ten a clock, is the last hour his life has to reckon.


Please you take patt of a short breakfast, we will accompany you.


Come Ferrers, now all Trials are confirmed
In this Embrace.

You have been ever noble.

This then is Spain, into which continent
You promised to conduct me.

Yes, it is.

And what this Cities name?

Civil, the chief of Spain; where I presume
You never were till now.

As I remember: I never was in Civil, but being here,
How shall we best dispose us?

Doubt not me: I'll fit you with a lodging;
Here's a Spaniard, I'll sownd him to that purpose.

Trust a Woman? trust thy mortgage to an Usurer, thy shoulder to the Mace, or
thy bare back to the Beadle, thou wilt be whipped on all sides; a Woman?


This fellow, as I recollect my self,
Was servant to the noble Bonavida.

I know him, 'tis the same.

Why are they called fair, but that they are like a Fair where every one sets
up shop, and any man may buy for his money? why lovely, but to denote unto us,
they lie when they tell a man they love him? why chaste? unless from Coast to
country, and from Constable to Constable: Why Virgin? but that they are
merely gins and snares to entangle poor men in: why, when a man courts them;
do they cry, away, away? but only to tell a man that there is a way, if he
have the wit to find it. Oh, Women, Women, foemineo gentri tribuuntur Propria
quae Maribus.


This fellow I perceive's a Satyrist
Against the Feminine Sex Save thee, my friend.

From Women and I care not, for there's against them no standi^g.


Is there in them such danger?


Danger, I find but a little in that face, and tis a face able to out-face the
best face in Spain. A face that I have been face to face with, before now,
but 'tis so long since I cannot tell when and we have travelld so many
Countries I cannot guess where, Are you a stranger fair Lady?


Yes, and a traveller.


I love you the better for that, for indeed I my self have seen Countries,
and I see no reason, but that if both parties were agreed we two might lie
together by Authority.


Why I have travelled too --


Alas, poor fellow, thou look not with the face, but if thou can give me
but the true fashions and descriptions of Countries, or my friend, with me you
can purchase no Credit. Man. I shall and thus in brief too.


THe Spanyard loves his ancient Slop.
A Lombard the Venetian:
And some like breech-lesse women go,
The Rush, Turk, Jew, and Grecian.
The thrifty Frenchman wears small waste,
The Dutch his belly boasts,
The English-man is for the ^s all,
And for each fashion coast.
The Turk in Linen wraps his head.
The Persian his in Lawn toe,
The Rush with sables furs his Cap
And change will not be drawn to.
The Spanyard's co^stant to his block,
The French inconsta^t ever,
But of all Felts that may be felt,
Give me your English Beaver.
The German loves his Coony-Wooll,
The Irish-man his shag too,
The Welch his Mo^-mouth lovesto wear,
And of the same will brag too.
Some love the rough and some the smooth,
Some great and others small thi^gs,
But O your lickarish English man,
(...) loves to deal in all things.
The Rush drinks quasse, Dutch Lubecks beer,
And that is strong and mighty,
The Britain he Mesheglen quaffs,
The Iris^ Aqua-vitae.
The French affects the Orleans grape,
The Spanyard sips his Sherry,
The English none of these can escape,
But he with all makes merry.
The Italian in her high Chopeene,
Scotch lass, and lovely Fro too,
The Spanish Donna, French Madam,
He doth net fear to go to.
Nothing so full of hazard, dread,
Nought lives above the Center,
No health, no fashion, wine or wench,
On which he dare not venture.
God-a-mercy for this in faith, and were it not that the grief, for my Noble
Masters death, and that to morrow too --


Why, hast thou a master to suffer?


Yes, and about a face too that would have served the turn, if the heart had
been correspondent. If you have a mind to see the pitiful spectacle, I'll
help you to a place, where you shall have room to see, leisure to lament, and
time to shed tears.


Strange, most strange, I will inquire this further,
In the mean time, can help us to a lodging?

Yes, especially for such a face. If you desire a strong one, to a prison. If
you would lie cheap and save charges, 'tis but speaking treaion, and I'll
help you to be billeted, at the Kings castle.


The Queen plays with my death,
And bids me act a bold Tragedians part,
To which, such moving action I will give,
That it shall glaze this Theater round with tears,
And all that shall behold me on this stage,
Pitying my fate: shall tax her cruelty,
And to the Spanish Chronicles let this a ^ de,
That he whose tongue hath justified their sex,
Whose fword hath coapt brave Champions for their fame
Whose travels have been to maintain their honours,
And of their virtues to give large approof,
That he, whose labour was their praise t'uphold,
Should by a woman fall; a fair false woman:
And be it not the least stain to that Country,
That she was bred in England.

The character you have given that noble stranger,
His valour, faith, and friendship Valladaura,
So deeply hath impressed us: that we are pleased,
To see him matched into a noble house,
And we from henceforth shall account him ours.

Fair Petrocella, we commend your choice,
For if renown bath blazomd him aright.
Spain it could scaree have bettered: we have stored
Favours for you, and high respect for him,
Which leisure shall make known: but to the Prisoner,
That's now our present business: Seat you Lords,
Pineda, you next us.

Queen here's your sport,
And this the mark you aim at: yet in this
Deal gently with me, do not mock my death,
And I'll expose my life as willingly,
As in my ripest joys and best of pleasures.
In love which most I wish to have preserved,
Nor trouble me with vain intergatories
To turn my soul (in the high rode to heaven
Into some dangerous by-path) grant but this,
My death I freely pardon.

Those small minutes
You have to spend, are at your own desires,
No tongue shall interrupt you.

Now you are kind:
I now with what prepared speed I can
Will come to kiss my Fate.

Come Lady, if we press not through the throng
We shall not get to th'hearing.

Amongst all these Courtiers, point me our the man?

That Pioke-devant that elbows next the Queen.

Enough, no more.

Now farewell Royal Sovereign and great Queen,
Unto whose high and sacred Majesty
My forfeit head thus stoops: and best loved Peers,
I only wish this blood you shall see drawn
Had dropped before the common enemy,
The barbarous Turk: in some just Christian cause
Not in this feminine quarrel. I had then
Died a crowa'd Martyr: that offender like
Now bow to the Axe of Justice: fare-well to
Thee, for whose love I undergo this shame,
May thy repentance for thy guilt beg pardon,
That we may meet in blessed Eliz^m,
There our o^les kiss together: Farewell world,
Grown so corru^t, thou wilt not suffer Virtue
And Beauty roof together* may thy charity
Guide me to yon safe harbonr. Thus I fall
Beneath my 'offences, and take leave of --

Stay.

Who interupts our Justice?

As you are Royal,
And worthy of those honours a^ch your head,
Defer that bloody business now in hand,
To right an injured woman.

What meares this?

A lovely and sweet presence.

That app^rition transports me into wonder.

A rare aspect; had she a suiting virtue,
Pineda, I should half ^spect my challenge,
And willingly compound.

Most Divine Princess,
Should they mere here, I should not blame your fears,
Since th'one appears to be in^omparable.

What seek you from this throne?

That in which Ki^gs
Resemble most the Gods: Justice.

Against whom?

Against a Felon, robber* a base thiese.
Harbourd in this your Court.

If su^h live here,
As we are King, we banish him our patronage.
And yield him up to sentence: first, fa^e creature,
Gi^ous your name, your birth, and quality.

My Nation foreign: birth, not high degree'd,
No^e e^y way ignoble: for my quality,
Some that resume to know me, c^ll me Libertine,
Wanton and w^ld wench; nay, a Courtesan:
But were I looser then ere Lais was,
It should not bar me justice.

Thou shalt ha'te.

That word quaked all the blood within my veins,
And agues all my nerves.

You keep your own yet madam.

And of that,
Pineda, I am proud, infinite proud,
I ne'er was pleased with anies, finn till now;
It makes me still unpeer'd.

Speak, what's your wrong?

See you this pantofle?
Twas a rich pair, till the base felony,
Of one of this your Court divided them;
For being lodged, and nobly entertained,
Was not alone content to vitiate
Both fame and body, and to take full surfeit
Of that my prostitution, but unworthy
The title of a noble Gentleman,
He stole the slipper there, that fellows this,
Valued at no less then a Thousand Crowns.

And cheaply rated too, find out the man,
And be he one Enthroned in our highest grace,
He shall be thine to censure.

Take surveigh,
Make strict inquiry, single men by men:
For mine own part, so much I grieve thy loss,
And his base theft abhor, that were it the man
Upon whose shoulder we did use to lean,
Severity should judge him.

You are all gracious,
And I'll make bold to use the benefit
Of this your Clemency.

Oh that some whirle-wind would but snatch me up,
And bear me to a desert wilderness,
Where never man was known, to sunder me
So far, If not much further, from my shame.

Pray sir, why should this beauty trouble you.
If one of your acquaintance.

I hope Lady, you are not Jealous, are you?

Sir look up: you are no whit like the man.

But she the woman,
For whom the sword thus thirsts: is this a vision?
Or else some waking dream.

And have I found thee villain? Think thou Majesty can be protection for a
common thief?

This is that base felonious impudent,
Shame to his Nation, scandal to his birth,
And a disgrace unto that Royal Court,
In which he seems protected.

Ha, who I?

Pineda guilty; shall we bolster theft,
And patronage dishonour.

Justice Queen,
Justice great sir, let not this hie tribunal.
So famous by that Virgin, sent from heaven,
That bears the sword and balance, now be taxed
Of favour, or connivence.

As we hope,
To be held worthy of the Crown we wear,
Thou shalt not find us partial.

Hence from us,
For till thou can approve thine Innocence,
And clear this black aspersion thrown on thee,
We here abandon thee, to the ^averitie
Of the Laws rigorous censure.

You amaze me,
Nor know I what this means.

I challenge then this man for stealing from me
The fellow to this slipper.

Of which crime,
I here protest me clear: Name the time where.

That night, when I became thy Paramore,
breasted thee, in these arms received th^e
Into my free Embraces, and imparted
The lavish store of such voluptuous sweets,
I lent with all profuseness

I do this!
Madam, by all my favours stored in you,
I never looked upon that face till now;
Nor do I know what this Imposture means*

What saith my Page to this?

That 'tis most false,
And what my Lady here protests for true,
That, noble fit, I'm witness, as a man
To all his unjust actions accessory.

Produce me as a party? May this presence,
And awful Throne, before which I stand accused,
Pronounce me as a man forsook and lost,
If in the least of what these two suggest,
I have the smallest knowledge.

Both ways strange.

Bring me in censure? by that royalty,
Beneath whose grace I breathe, she is to me
As foreign as an Indian: and her cause
As far from my acquintance: by my life,
Which ne'er before a more Royal Court,
Could have bin called in question: what she is,
I know not: of what Nation, birth, degree;
How, or from whence derived, what continent,
Or from what place she's come; she may be Turk,
But More she cannot be, she is so fair,
She's strange to me, yet somewhat should I say;
To breast with her, I might as well have done it
With a Bear, or Lioness: Madam with her
I vow I never did.

Give me thy oath of that.

I can, and dare.

And I as willingly,
That I was never second to a man,
In any such false business.

Let them swear.

They shall.

We will.

This is a conflict worse.
Then in the sad Duell'tweene death and life,
When neither's certain, both in difficulty,
As it is now with me I pray ha done
That I were posted to your Country, there
To finish all my Travels.

Both have sworn:
And Princes, as you hope to crown your heads
With that perpetual wreath, which shall last ever,
Cast on a poor dejected innocent Virgin
Your eyes, of grace and pity: what sin is't?
Or who can be the patron to such evil?
That a poor innocent Maid, spotless in thought,
And pure in heart, borne without spleen and gall:
That never injured creature: never had heart
To think of wrong, or ponder injury;
That such a one in her white innocence,
Striving to live peculiar in the compass
Of her own virtues, Notwithstanding these
Should be sought out by strangers, persacured
Made infamous, even there where she was made
For imitation, hist at in her Country,
Abandoned of her mother, kindred, friends:
Depraved in foreign Climes, scorned every where,
And even in Princes Courts, reputed vile:
O pity, pity this.

Thou speak Enigma's woman, and hast need
To find a Sphinx to explain them.

Then behold.
The strangest calling imposed on me
That ere was laid on Virgin; I am she
For whom this noble Sir hath undertook.
And wrongly stands convicted, this that body
So stained and fullied by these barbarous tongues,
That even in scolding lies justice, for heaven
Hath forced them to swear truth, they never saw me,
How am I then polluted gracious Queen?
How can such find competitors in virtue,
That will not give it countenance: had those murdered me,
As they have killed my same and havock't that,
A pitied and crowned martyr I had dyed,
That am in censure now, a condemned heretic,
And mere Apostate to all woman-hood;
And what I ever made my President,
Sincerity and goodness: Villeines blush,
And Sir, out gaze their falsehood, Queen be just;
Least in the Occan of that prize you steal,
You shipwreck all your glories.

'Tis most strange:


We know you not,
Give us some lively instance, you're the woman.

How should I know that Ring to be the same
Of which my credulous maid was by these two
Cheated and robbed, most treacherously betrayed;
That Carkanet you wear, peruse it well,
Hath both my name and picture. Marks sufficient
To prove me no impostor. Doth your guilt.
Bow you so low already? let your penitence
There stay you, least your sins weight cleave the earth,
And sink you down to hell.

What prostrates them
Mounts me to expectations: my blessed choice,
Now I have seen thy apparent innocence,
Queen I shall die contented.

Oh, till now,
I never thought to be vanquished.

Pox on that slipper.

Stand you all mute? then give me leave to speak.

Sir, what doth this concern you?

Woman, peace.

Oh sit, you are my brother.

Strumpet hence,
Would I had never known thee, thou hast made me
A foreign scorn, and where I aim at honour
Most infamous and loathed, this vitiated beauty
Even by her own confession late deflowr^d
I beg from this most sacred Majesty,
To see severely chastised: being English
To have that English shame and punishment,
Due to the like offenders.

She stands ele^r'd
By her accusers silence.

This may be
A mere confederacy, but to my fears
At all no satisfaction, her own tongue
Hath published her a mechall prostitute,
And that is my first truth.

I pray Sir,
What is this matchless beauty unto you,
Being already in your self engaged
To this fair Creature, that this Strangers case
Should any way be yours.

Spaines admiration.
And wonder of a friend, I dare to you
Be plain and serious: to all others ears I
Wish my words locked in silence: Oh, with shame
And infamy I speak it, defiring heaven
'T might be my last of speech, this thing, polluted
This (would I had ought elce to stile her by)
But needs out, out it must, she is my -- my Sister.

Flesh and blood?

The same, Oh me, the same, my natural Sister.

Father and mother?

So.

You are not honest,
And now no more my friend: I do begin
To doubt you, nay most heinously suspect you,
I scarce can think you a true moral man,
Much less Religious: Ferrers before these,
This Royal bench, either confess thee mad,
Des ^ erate, and quite given over to callumnie
Or in behalf of this ( I know not who)
I challenge thee the combat.

Oh, you are mine
And I vowed ever yours.

Come, no such thing.
Either pronounce this Lady innocent,
Or I denounce thee miscreant.

Though I have stood
In silence all this while, yet in this cause
I, I my self am taxed: and to approve
This Ladies Beauty, virtue, chastity
I'll be this Spanyard's second.

I am wronged.
And thou hast don't, try both, I should be first,
But be thou what thou can be, he or thou,
So freely hath this Lady showed her self
Mine, so I now dare term her, that in spite
Of spleen or envie's opposition;
It is a thing I do desire to embrace
And meet in violent lightnings: and then
I speak it, she is mine: and this encounter
Concerns me, only me; who intercepts me
Is guilty of my challenge, his own death,
Her injury, and my most just revenge.

Pray lets talk mildly:
And first to you, to whom my soule's engaged,
Why should you hazard such a precious life
For one by her own language stands condemned.

Because she is thy Sister; and so well
I love thy merit that no new impression
Can sink in me, that any of thy Line,
Can ever stand polluted: I have found thee
In all thy deeds so noble --

Oh you have moulded her
In me anew: and friend your confirmation,
I do receive her perfect as the woman,
Whose acts are laws, whose saying's Oracles,
And she was never truly mine, till now, so I receive her
from you. But I pray,
What might you be of whom I have deserved
So ill to make you my Antagonist?

Or why to me, to be so dear a friend
As to become my second, since your face.
I never saw till now.

Not Manhurst?

Friend!

Oh sir, you were my (...).

I am wrapped:
Spain show thy Justice; now, where, or from whence
Can thou desire so rare a president:
Would thou see Beauty? Look upon that face:
Or Virtue? here, see thy true Innocence,
Valour in him, true nobleness in them all,
And happy them, that naked of all these,
Hath sent thee hither foreign presidents,
For instruction, and example.

Now I yield:
And till now never; hence base sycophants,
I shall abjure you ever, Flatte^ing glasses,
That gave me a false face, but in this Crystal,
I now behold me truly, you are she
By whom I'll henceforth dress me, and not wear
No hurt, of which you are not president;
Be ever mine: next her, you that have travelld
To fetch me over this Mirror, which I'll casket,
As my best jewell: I now find my self,
That to my self, was till this day unknown,
I have transgressed in that I sought to fleece
So pure a Diamond.

Come, wee'le end all this:
First, Lady wee'le acquit your Jealousy,
She is his sift: Ferrers, we shall rank you
In as high grace, as you are in his love;
Nor have you Manhurst, least expressed your self,
In gratitude to him, friendship to both;
You Bonavida we restore, you stand
In the eye of our preferrement: you we admire:
And thus conclude: Two Nations have contended
For breast and face, in you both these are ended.

IN battles, some men fall, others again,
Come off with honoured scars, wounded, not slain,
In ship-wrack's, some sink, and are seen no more,
Others on Masts, and Planks, attain the shore;
'Tis so 'twixt (...) and you; your Smile or Frown,
Can save, or spill; to make us swim, or drown.

