To give content to this most curious Age,
The gods themselves we' have brought down to the Stage,
And figured them in Planets, made even Hell
Deliver up the Furies, by no spell,
(Saving the Muses rapture) further, we
Have traffickt by their help; no History
We have left unrifled, our Pens have, been dipped
As well in opening each hid Manuscript,
As Tracts more vulgar, whether read, or sung
In our domestic, or more foreign tongue:
Of Faiery Elves, Nymphs of the Sea, and Land;
The Lawns and Groves, no number can be scan'd
Which we have not given feet to, nay 'tis known,
That when our Chronicles have barren grown
Of Story, we have all Invention stretched,
Dived low as to the Center, and then reached
Unto the Primum mobile above:
(Nor escaped things intermediate) for your love,
These have been Acted often, all have past
Censure; of which some live, and some are cast:
For this in agitation, stay the end,
Though nothing please, yet nothing can offend.

THus from the holy Wars are we returned,
To, slumber in the Summer of soft peace,
Since those proud enemies that late blaspheamd
And spit their furies in the face of Heaven,
Are now laid low in dust.

Dread Sovereign.
The Heavens have showed their bounty unto us,
In guarding your most dear and isacred life
From opposite hatred, and that imminent peril
To which you were engaged.

When in one batt^ile you were twice unhorst,
Guirt with the opposite ranks of Infidels,
That had not timely res^e come from Heaven,
Mortal assistance had been used in vain.

Ey, now you load me with a surplu^dge^,
Of comprlesse debe^ this thrice (...) (...)
My noble Martial, twice that pe^llous day^
Did he bestride me, and beneath his Targe.
Me thought that instant did I lie as safe
As in my best and strongest Citadel;
The whilst his bright Sword like the Bolt of Jove,
Pierced the steele-crests of barbarous Insidels,
And flatted them with earth; although my Subject,
Yet in this one thing thou hast proved my Lord:
For when my life was forfeit to the Wars,
Thou by thy valour did redeem it freely,
And gav'st it me, whilst thou ingag'st thy life:
For which if ever by like chance of War,
Laws forfeiture, or our prerogative,
Thy life come in like danger, here we swear
By our earths honours, and our hopes divine,
As thou for us, wee'le ours engage for thine.

You give my Lord, to Duty Attributes
Too high for her submiss humility:
I am your vassal, and ten thousand lives
Of equal rank with mine, subjects and servants,
Be over-rated if compared with yours.

When I forget thee, may my operant parts
Each one forget their office: We create ^hee
Next to our self of power, we but except
The name of King, all other dignities
We will communicate to thee our friend.

May I no longer use these Roy alties,
Or have the power to enjoy them, the^ I wholly
Devote them to your service.

Noble Martial,
If I survive Englands Inheritance,
Or ever live to sit on Iacobs Stone,
Thy love shall with my Crown be hereditary.

And gracious Prince, since Heaven hath bin as liberal
To grace me with your favour, as my birth
Was to endow me richly; all your graces
Shall with my great and ample revenues
Be ever to your virtues serviceable.

We know it. and have been observers long
Of thy choice virtues neither could we yet
Fasten that love on thee, which came not home
With double use and ample recompense.

These graces are beyond dimension,
They have nor height, nor depth, uncircumscrib'd,
And without bounds. He like abroad armed tree
O're-shadows us, and throw his spacious bows,
We that grow under cannot see the Sun,
Nor taste the cheerful warmth of his bright beams.
These branches we must lop by fire or Thunder,
Or by his shadowy a^mes be still kept under.

I was borne Eagle-fighted, and to gaze
In the Suns fore-head; I will brooke no cloud
To stand betwixt me and his glorious fire,
I'll have f^ll light, or none; either foare high,
Or else sink low; my ominous Fate is ca^t,
Or to be first, or of all abjects last.

You shall renowned Martial feast for us
The Ambassadors that come from foreign Lands,
To gratulate our famous victories.

I shall my Lord, and give them entertainment
To Englands honour, and to suite the place
Of which I bear the name.

We doubt it not:
We understand Lords, in these tedious wars
Some forward spirits have been at great expense
To furnish them like noble Gentlemen;
And many spent most part of their revenues
In honour of their Country, some undone
In pursuit of th^se wars: now if such come
For their relief by suite petitionary,
Let them have gracious hearing, and supply
Or by our service, or our Treasury

I have one Kinsman hath spent all his land,
And is returned a beggar, and so tattered,
As that I can but blush to acknowledge him:
But in the Wars he spent it, and for me,
Wars shall relieve him. He was a noble Heir,
But what these lost, let other Wars repair.

Lords all, once more we greet your safe return,
With general welcome, we invite you all
To feast with us, and joy what we have wo^e,
Happiest in these, our Martial, and our son.

It soemes thou hast not been in the Wars my Friend, but art new come up to
London.


Heaven plesse thee from all his mercies, and his graces: It was told us in
Wales, that you have great pig Organ in Paul's, and pigger by a great deal
than our Organ at Rixam, which made me make my travels and my journies on the
pare hoof up to London, to have resolutions and certifications in that
pisinesse, that when I venturne into my Countries and habitations, I may give
notice to mine Uncle, Rice ap Davy, ap Morgan, ap Evan, ap Iones, ap Geffrey. I
pray where apout stands Paul's Church, can you tell her?


Overy easily; stand with thy face that way, and follow thy nose, and thou wilt
be there presently. But doest thou hear Brittan, take my word, our Organ of
Powles is much bigger and better than yours of Rixam, by as much as Powles
Church is bigger and better than Saint Pancridge.


Awe man, you prittle and prattle nothing but leasings and untruths: now will
you but ^ase your posteriors a little, and I will quickly show you your Organ
of Paul's.


Very good, I like your demonstration well; but doest thou think your Organ of
Rixam can compare with ours for all that?


Lend me but your ears and your apprehensions, and I will make you easily to
acknowledge your errors.


But first show me your case in which you carry your two pair of Organs, sure
those flops will not hold them: but in the mean time walk with me to the next
red Lattice, and I will give thee two Cannes, and wet thine Organ-pipes well I
warrant thee.


I will take your courtesies, and if ever I shall meet you in Glamorgan, or
Rednock-shire, I will make bold to requite some part of your kindnesses.


The very noise of that Horne hath frighted my courtesy, but all's one,
fare-well for this time, and at our next meeting ten to one I will be as good
as my word.


Say you so man, why then Cad keep you from all his mercies, and good
fortunes, and make us all his servants.


Come, we will to the c^ace, be near us Martial,
I'll try to day which of our two good steeds
Can speed it best; let the most swift take both.

So please your Grace, but I shall surely loose;
Yours is the best for proof, though mine for show.

That will we try, the wager grows not deep
Equals the lay, and what we win, wee'le keep,
Mount, mount.

Greater and greater still, no plot, no trick
To have him quite removed from the Kings Grace,
To slander him?

The King will lend no ear
To any just complaint that's made of him;
What can our ^ andals do then?

Challenge him
Of Treason then, and that may happily call
His Loyalty into suspect and question,
Which on the King at (...) will breed a coldness,
If not a deadness of affection.

Of Treason? say he crave the combat then,
For that's the least he can; which of us two
Shall combat him? I know his blows too well,
Not I.

I should be loath.

How do you relish this?
His virtue and his bounty won him grace,
On that wee'le build to ruin all his favours,
And work him to disgrace.

Pray teach me how?

First, praise him to the King, give all his virtues
Double their due, add unto every thing,
Ey, and Hyperb lize in all his deeds:
Let his known virtues be the common Theme
Of our discourse to stale him, rate his worth,
To equalise, if not to exceed the King:
This cannot but beget distaste at least.

But further.

Thus; then fall off from his praise,
And question his best deeds, as it may be
His noble bounty is but popular grace,
And his humility but inward pride:
His vulgar ^age and applause abroad,
A way to climb and seat himself aloft,
You understand me?

Fully; come to horse,
And as we ride, our further plots digest,
To find what may disturb, what aid us best.

Spur to the King, his steed's unshod before,
The ways be stony, and hee'le spoil his beast:
Here take these shoes and hammer, brought of purpose
For mine own use.

My Lord, have you pluck'e the shoes off from your own horse, to set them on
anothers^ a thousand to one but you will spoil your own Guelding quite.


No matter, do as I command thee sirrah;
Hollow him straight, I know he loves that horse,
And would not ride him bare for any gold.

Your horse is as good as his I am sure, and I think you love him as well.


No matter, if he ask thee where thou had them,
Tell him, thou broughtst them with thee for my use.
Away, I'll gallop after, and over-take thee.

Put your shoes on another horses feet, and let your own go bare-foot? a
jest indeed.


The King affects both his good horse and Game, I'll help to further both.


You have fetched me up at length, that's to your fortune,
Or my misfortune, for I lost a shoe.
Martial you ride well furnished to the field,

My Lord, so Horsemen should and I am glad
My man was so well furnished, and the rather
Since we are far from help; my man is cunning,
Your Highne^e to his skill may trust your horse.

Thou could not have presented me a gift
I could have tasted better, for that beast
I much esteem: you were out-stript at length.

Till I was forced to alight, my horse with yours Kept equal speed.


Our Lords? now Gentlemen,
How do you like the Chase?

'Twas excellent.

Had not my horse been by mischance unshod,
My Martial here and I had led you ^till.

You were the better horsed.

And you the worst,
Witness the hugeness of your way behind:
Is not my horse yet shod?

He is my Lord.

Then let us mount again.

Your horse my Lord, is not in state to ride,
He wants two shoes before.

Whose doth, the Martials?

Oft such mischance; happen.

Were you furnished
For us, and for your self kept no supply?

So I may have my Lord to furnish you,
I care not how my self want.

Apprehension help me, for every circumstance apply
Thou hast done me an unwonted courtesy;
You spied my loss first.

I did my Lord.


And then alighted.


True.


Upon my life 'tis so,
To unshooe thine own good steed, and furnish mine,
Was't not? upon thy life resolve me true.

What I have done my Lord, I did to you.


You will exceed me still, and yet my courtesy
Shall rank with thine; for this great duty shown,
I pay thee thus, both steeds are now thine own.

They wager love.

The best thing I can do
In me is duty; the worst, Grace in you.

The art ours; come mount, we wi^ return to Court,
To order the great Tournament prepared
To do our son grace; in which we entreat
Martial, your aid, because your skill is great.

We have visited all our familiars, is it not now time that we revisit our
Captain?


With all my heart good Corporal, but it had not bin amiss, if we had gone to
Burchen-lane first to have suited us: and yet it is a credit for a man of the
^word to go thread-bare, because by his apparel he may be taken to be an old
Soldier.


Cock, thy father was a fresh water soldier, thou are not; Thou hast been
powdered, witness thy f^axe touch-box.


But who comes yonder, my Match? I am glad I have met thee.


I knew Cock, at one time or other thou would meet with thy Match. What,
shall we go to my Captains lodging?


Spare that pains, yonder he appears in his colours.

Fortun' de la guere; I that have flourished, no colours like me, nay, no
Trumpet thou in his highest key, have nothing now but rags to flourish; I
that have faced the enemy, have not so much as any facing left me: were my
suite but as well pointed as I have seen some, and stood I but in the midst of
my followers, I might say I had nothing about me but tag and rag. I am
descended nobly; for I am descended so low, that all the clothes of my back
are scarce worth a Noble: I was borne to thousands, and yet a thousand to one,
they will now scarce acknowledge me where I was borne.


Health to our worthy Captain,


Thanks my most worthy soldiers; and yet if I should examine your worths, what
at the most could all you make?


I would not have your Worship to examine our outsides.


And for your insides I'll pass my word.


Cannot all your worships credit afford you a new suit?


Credit me, no; my revenues were a thousand a year, part of which I lavish'^
amongst gallants, riotted in Taverns, havockt in Ordinaries; and when my
estate began ^o ebb, as my last refuge, I laid all my hopes upon the last
wars, but failing there, (as the world imagines) I am returned as you see. The
King hath promised supply and relief to all that have spent their estates in
his expeditions, but many like my self have been borne to be poor, that
scorn to be beggars; as many have been borne to be rich, that can never leave
it; the truth is, I am my self as my proceedings will express me further.


Will you cashier us Captain, or shall we follow your future fortunes?


You shall not leave me; my purpose is to try the humours of all my friends, my
Allies, my ancient associates, and see how they will respect me in my supposed
poverty: though I loose their acquaintance, I will loose none of my retinew.
How say you Gentlemen, will you copart with me in this my dejectedness?


As I am Corporal, so will I prove true Squire to thy body.


And as I am true Cock, so will I crow at thy service, wait on thee with a
comb for thy head, with fire to thy Piece, with water to thy hands, and be
cock sure in any employment whatsoever.


And as I am true Match, I shall scorn that any of them shall o're-match me in
duty.


Attend me then; if I rise, you shall ascend; if fall, I will lie flat with
you. First then I will make some trial of my Friends at the Court, and in good
time: here's the King.


You have persuaded much, and I begin
To censure strangel, of his emulous love.

Further my Lord, what can his smoothness mean,
His courtesy, and his humility,
But as fly baits to catch the peoples hearts,
And wean them from your love.

Doth he not strive
In all things to exceed your courtesy,
Of purpose to out-shine your Royal deeds,
And daze I your brightness, that himself may shine?
Is he not only popular my Liege?
Is not the peoples suffrage sole to him,
Whilst they neglect your fame, his train doth equal,
If not exceed yours, still his Chamber thronged
With store of suitors: where the Martial lies,
There is the Court, all eyes are bent on him,
And on his glories; there's no Theme abroad,
But how he saved you from the Pagans sword,
How his sole hand sways, guides, and guards the Realm.

Think but my Lord on his last game at Chess,
'I was his past odds, but when he saw you moov'd,
With what a sly neglect he lost the mate,
Only to make you bound to'him.

For all the favours, graces, honours, loves
Bestowed upon him from your bounteous hand,
His cunning was to think to quit you all,
And pay you with a horse-shooe.

In the Tournament
Made by the Prince your son, when he was Peerless,
And without equal, this ambitious Martial
Strives to exceed, and did; but when he saw
Your Highness moov'd to see the Prince disgrac't,
He lost the Prize; but how? that all the people
Might see it given, not forfiet, which did add
Rather than derogate: briefly my Lord,
His courtesy is all ambition.

And well it may be; is he not our vassal?
Why should the Martial then contend with us.
To exceed in any virtue? we observe him.
His popularity, how affable
He's to the people; his Hospitality,
Which adds unto his love; his forwardness,
To entertain Ambassadors, and feast them,
Which though he do '^ upon his proper charge,
And for our honour, yet it may be thought
A smoothness, and a cunning, to grow great;
It must be so. A project we intend
To prove him faithless, or a perfect friend.

It takes, these jealous thoughts we must pursue,
And to his late doubts still add something new.

Your speech being ended, now comes in my cue.
My honourable Lord.

What begger's this?

Beggar my Lord? I never begged of you:
But were I a beggar, I might be a Courtiers fellow:
Could I beg suites my Lord as well as you,
I need not go thus clad; or were you free
From begging as I am, you might rank me.

Comparisons? Away.

Folly and pride
In Silks and Lace their imperfections show,
But let p^re virtue come in garments torn
To beg relief she gets a courtly scorn:
My Lord you know me?

I have seen that face.

Why 'tis the same it was, it is no changeling,
It bears the selfe-same front; 'tis not like yours,
Paled with the least disgrace, or past with brags,
That smiles upon gay clothes, and frowns on rags.
Mine's steadfast as the Sun, and free as (...);
Whose equal eyes look upon want and state.

And doth not mine so too? Pray w^at's your business?


Only that you would know me: the K^ngs favour hath made you a Baron, and the
Kings wars have made me a bare one: there's less difference in the Accent of
the word, than in the cost of our weeds: This is the same face you were once
acquainted with though not the same habit: I could know your face, though your
diseased body were wrapped in sheepe-skins.


This fellow offends me.


Go churl, pas^e free, Thou know my forfeit lands, though forget me:
Nay, you would be going too, you are as aff^aid of a torn suite, as a younger
brother of a Sergeant, a rich corne-master of a plentiful year, or a
troublesome Attorney to hear of suits put to compromise.

Sir. I must challenge you, you are my kinsman;
My Grandsire was the first that raised the name
Of Bonvile to this height, but Lord to see
That you are grown a Lord, and know not me.

Cousin, I know you, you have bin an unthri^t,
And lavisht what you had; had I so done,
I might have ^bb'd like you, where I now flow.

Yet I can purchase that, which all the wealth you have will never win you.


And what's that I pray?

Wit: is the word strange to you, wit?

Whither wilt thou?

True,
Wit will to many e^eit come to you.

Feed you upon your purchase, I'll keep mine.

Have you the wit to do it?

I have wit to buy,
And you to sell, which is the greater gain?
Cousin I'll keep my wealth, keep you your brain.

The wealth of Mydas choke thee ere you are old,
And even the bread thou feed on change to gold.
My Lord, you hear how I pray for my Kindred,
I have a little more charity for my friend: with you
I have some b^sinesse.

I am in haste now.

I pray you stay.

Not now indeed.

Pardon, for here's no way
Before you hear me.

Prithee be brief.

Your daughter lives I hope.

What's that to thee?

Somewhat 'twill prove, e^ and concerning me;
Before I laid my fortunes on these wars.
And was in hope to thrive, by your con^ent,
Nay, by your motion our united hearts
Were made more firm by contract; well you know
We were betrothed.

Sir, I remember't not.

I do, and thus proceed:
I was in hope to have raised my fortunes high,
And with them to have pulled her by degrees
Unto that eminence at which I aim:
I ventured for it, but instead of wealth
I purchased nought but wounds. Honour I had,
And the repute of valour; but my Lord,
These simply of themselves are naked Titles,
Respectless, without price, and bombast wealth,
And to the purblind world show seeming bad,
Behold in me their shapes, they thus go clad.

You said you would be brief.

All that I had,
I spent upon my Soldiers, we took no spoil.
The wars have grated on me even to this
That you now see: Now my last refuge is,
To raise my self by her.

And spend her means
As thou hast done thine own vile unthrift? no,
I know no Contract.

I have one to show.

No matter; think thou that I'll vent my bags
To suite in Satin him that Jets in rags?

The world's all of one heart, this blaze I can,
All love the money, none esteems the man.
These be our friends at Court, and fine ones too,
Are they not pray? where be our followers?

Here noble Captain.


You see how our friends grace us, what hopes we have to prefer you?


I see sufficient: Captain, I will discharge my self, I mean to seek
else-where for preferment.


All leave me if you please; but him that stays, If e're I mount, I'll with my
fortunes raise.


Captain, I desire your pas^e, I mean to march along with my Corporal.


Wilt thou go too?


I leave you? who I? for a little diversity, for a wet storm? no Sir, though
your out-sides fallaway, I'll cleave as close to you as your linings.


Gramercy yet, away without reply?


Futre for thy base service.


Away, sfoot how am I fallen out of my humour? and yet this strangeness of my
nearest friends and alliance deserves a little cotemplating; is't possible,
that even Lords, that have the best educating, whose ears are frequent to the
most fluent discourse, that live in the very brain of the Land, the Court,
that these should be gulled with shadows, and not be able to distinguish a man
when they see him; thou know me, yet these do not.


Why may not a poor man have as good eyes as another? their ears indeed may
be larger than mine, but I can see as far without spectacles as the best Lord
in the land.


These superficial Lords that think every thing to be as it appears, they
never question a mans wit, his discretion, his language, his inward virtues,
but as he seems, he passes.


I warrant if I should look like an Ass,
They would take me for one too.

The next I try is my betrothed, if she acknowledge this hand that hath
received hers, this heart, this face, and knows the person from the garment, I
shall say, Woman, there is more virtue in thee than Man.


There's no question of that; for they say, they will hold out better: But Sir,
if we be no better habited, I make a question how we shall get in at the
Court-gate; for I'll assure you your fashion is not in request at the Court.


My virtue is not to be imitated; I'll hold my purpose though I be kept back,
and venture lashing in the Porters Lodge. Come, follow me, I will go see my
Mistress, Though guirt with all the Ladies of the court:

Though ragged Virtue oft may be kept out,
No grate so strongly kept above the Center,
But Asses with gold laden, free may en^er.

Lord Martial, we are much in debt to you,
For by your favour we obtained the prize
In the last Tourney: we acknowledge it.

I could not love my Sovereign Gracious Prince,
Without extent of duty to the son.

'Twas nobly plied on both sides, both had honour;
Yet brother to be modest in your praise,
You had the best.

You please to grace me Sister.
Martial, I hear you are a widower late:
How long is't since your bea^teous Countess died?

My Lord, you make me now unsoldier-like
For get the name of Martial, to become
A passionate husband; her remembrance draws
Tears from mine eyes: she died some three Months since,
Good Lady she's now gone.

A kind Husband
I'll warrant him: if e're I chance to bride,
Heaven grant I find no worse.

Have you no children by her?

Two sweet Girls,
Now all my hopes and solace of this earth,
Whom next the zeal I owe unto my King,
I pri^e above the world.

Why noble Sir,
Are they not brought up to be trained at Court,
To attend our Sister?

They are young and tender,
And e're I teach them fas^ion, I would gladly
Train them in virtue, and to arm their youth
Against the smooth and amo^ous baits of Court.

As kind a Father as a Husband now:
If e're I chance to wed, such Heaven grant me.

Why Heaven may hear your prayer: here's one
I warrant that dreams not on a Husband.

Ye^ e're long
She may both dream, and speak as much as I.
No question but she thinks as much already;
And were here voice and her election free,
She would not stick to say this man for me.

You make the Lady blush.

Why to change face,
They say in mod^st Maids are signs of grace:
Yet many that like her hold down the head,
Will ne'er change colour when they're once in bed.

You'll put the Lady out of countenance quite.

Not out of heart; for all of her complexion,
Show in their face the fire of their affection:
And even the modest wives, this know we too,
Oft blush to speak what is no shame to do.

Lady, the Princess doth but try your spirit,
And prove your cheek, yet do not take it ^ll,
Hee'le one day come will act the Husbands part.

Here enters one, I hope it be not he.


Attend me sirrah into the presence, and if any of the Guard repulse thee,
regard him not.


I'll march where my Captain leads, were it into the Presence of the great
Termagant.


My duty to the Prince, Madam your favour, Lord Martial, yours.


What will the fellow do?


Lady, your lip.


My Lord, how like you this?
She would blush to speak, that doth not blush to kiss.

Well said Mistress.


A good bold fellow.


You are not ashamed to acknowledge me in this good company: I have brought
thee all that the wars have left of me; were I better worth, 'twere all
thine; thou can have no more of the Cat but his skin, I have brought thee
home the same eyes that first saw thee, the same tongue that first courted
thee, the same hand that first contracted thee, and the same heart that firs^
affected thee: More I have not, less I cannot: nay quickly sweet W^nch, and
let me know what to trust to.


Were you more worth, I could not love you more,
Or less, affect you less; you have brought me home
All that I love, your sel^e, and you are welcome.
I gave no faith to Money, but a Man,
And that I cannot loose possessing you:
'Tis not the robe or garment^l affect,
For who would marry with a suite of clothes?
Diamonds, though ^tin Lead, retain their worth,
And leaden Knives may have a golden sheath.
My love is to the Jewell, not the Case,
And you my jewell are.

Why god amerey Wench: come sirrah.


Here's a short horse soon curried.


Is this your sweet-heart? I had need wish you much joy, for I see but a little
towards: Where did you take him up by the hye-way, or did you not fall in love
with him hanging on a Gibbet?


What is he for Heavens sake? can no man give him his true character?


I can my Lord, he's of a noble House,
A Bonvile, and great H^re; but being profuse,
And lavish in his nonage, spent the most
Of his known means, and hoping now at last
To raise his fortunes by the wars now ceased,
His hopes have fail^d him, yet we know him valiant
And fortunate in service. One whose mind
No fortune can deject, no favour raise
Above his virtues pitch.

If he be such,
Wee'le move the King in his behalf, and help
To cherish his good parts.

My Lord the Prince,
The King calls for you; for he dines to day
In the great Hall with great solemnity,
And his best state: Lord Martial, you this day
Must use your place, and wait, so all the Lords.

Come, wee'le go see the King.


I shall attend your Grace.


And in faith Lady can you be in love with this rag of honour?


Madam, you know I am my Fathers heir,
My possibilities may raise his hopes
To their first height: should I despise my hand
In a torn glove, or taste a poisonous draught
Because presented in a Cup of Gold?
Virtue will last when wealth flies, and is gone:
Let me drink Nectar though in earth or stone.

But say your Father now, as many Fathers are, prove a true worldling, and
rather than bestow thee on one dejected, dis-inherite thee? how then?


My Father is my Father, but my Husband,
He is my self: my resolution is
To profess constancy, and keep mine honour;
And rather than to Queen it where I hate,
Beg where I love: I wish no better fate.

By my faith good counsel; if I live long enough, It may be I may have the
grace to follow it.


This Anniversary do we yearly keep
In memory of our late victories.
In joy of which we make a public feast,
And banquet all our P^eres thus openly.
Sit Lords, those only we appoint to wait,
Attend us for this day: and now to crown
Our Festival, we will begin this health.
Who's that so near ou^elbow? Martial? you?
Stand off we wish you, further.

Me my Lord?

Ey you my Lord.

Your Highness will's a law,
I shall obey.

You are too near us yet: what are we King,
Or have we countermanders?

Note you that?


Now it begins.


I fear some Sycophants
Have dealt ignobly with us to the King:
No matter I am armed with innocence,
And that dares front all danger.

Lords this Health:
See it go round, 'twas to our victory.

With pardon, can your Highness that remember, And so forget me?


Thou doest prompt me well,
You are our Martial.

I have used that place.

Your Staff? support it, and resolve me thus:
Which of yon Lords there seated at the board,
Hast thou been most in opposition with?
Or whom dost thou least favour?

I love all:
But should you ask me who hath wronged me most,
Then should I point out Chester.

Chester then,
Bear him that Staff, gived up into his hand,
Say, I commend me to him by the name
Of our High Martial; take your place below,
And let him wait on us: what do you pause?
Or shall we twice command?

I'll do it my Lord:
Chester, the King commends his love to you,
And by my mouth he styles you by the name
Of his High Martial, which this Staff of Office
Makes good to you; my place I thus resign,
And gived up freely as it first was mine.
You must attend the King, it is a place
Of honour Chester, and of great command,
Use it with no less modesty than he
That late enjoyed it, and resignes it thee.

I need not your instruction; the Kings bounty
Bestows it freely, and I take my place.

And I mine here, th'allegeance that I owe him
Bids me accept it, were it yet more low.

Attend us Chester, wait upon our Cup,
It is an honour due to you this day.

I shall my Lord.

Oh my Lord you are welcome, we have not had your company amongst us long.


You ever had my heart, though the Kings service
Commanded still my person: I am eased
Of a great burden so the King rest pleased.

I have not seen a man hath borne his disgrace with more patience; especially
to be forced with his own hand to deliver up his honours to his enemy.


It would have troubled me, I should not brooke it.


Command you fellow give his golden Key
To the Lord Clinton; henceforth we debar him
Access unto our Chamber, see it done.

The King commands you to give up your Key
Unto that Lord that neares you: henceforth Sir,
You to his person are denied access,
But when the King commands.

Say to my Liege,
The proudest foe he hath, were he an Emperor,
Should not have forced the least of these from me:
But I acknowledge these, and all I have,
To be sole his; my life too, which as willingly
To please him I will send: I thank his Highness
That sees so into my debility,
That he hath care to ease me of these loads
That have oppressed me long; so Sir 'tis done:
Come Lords, now let's be merry, and drink round,
After great tempests we a calm have found.

This Lord is of an unwonted constancy, He entertains his disgraces as merrily
as a man dyes that is tickled to death.


Cannot all this stir his impatience up?
I'll search his breast but I will find his gaul:
Command him give his Staff of Council up,
We will bestow it elsewhere where we please.

The King would have you to forbear the Council, And to give up your Staff.


I shall turn man,
Kings cannot force to bear more than we can.

Sir, are you moov'd?

Those that are wronged may speak:
My Lord, I let you know my innocence,
And that my true and unstain'd Loyalty
Deserves not this disgrace: none ever bore
Like eminence with me that hath discharged it
With better zeal and conscience: for my service
Let my wounds witnes^e, I have some to show;
That had I not my body interposed,
Had been your skarres: all my deserved honours
You have bestowed upon my enemies,
Ey such as have whole skins, --
And never bled but for their ease and health.
You might with as much lustice take my life^
As seize my honours: howsoe're my Lord
Give me free leave to speak but as I find,
I ever have been true, you now unkind.

Will you contest?
What have you Sir that is not held from us?
Or what can your own virtue purchase you
Without our grace? Are not your fortunes, favours,
And your revenues ours? where should they end
But where they first began? have we not power
To give our own? or must we ask your counsel,
To grace where you appoint? need we a Guardian,
Or a^me you at the place?

Oh my dread King,
It sorrows me that you misprize my love,
And with more freedom I could part with life
Than with your Grace: my offices alas,
They were my troubles, but to want your favours,
That only thus afflicts my loyal thoughts,
And makes me bold to term your Grace unkind.

Sir, we command you to abandon Court,
And take it as a favour that we now
Not question of your life; without reply
Leave us.

I'll leave the Court as I would leave my burden,
But from your Highness in this kind to part,
Is as my body should fortake my heart.

Shall we not be ourselfe, or shall we brooke
Competitors in reign? act what we do
By other men's appointment? he being gone,
We are unrivaled; wee'le be sole, or none.

The Martiall's gone in discontent my Liege.


Pleased, or not pleased, if we be Englands King,
And mightiest in the Sphere in which we move,
Wee'le shine alone, this Phaeton cast down,
Wee'le state us now midst of our best affected:
Our new created Martial first lead on,
Whose Loyalty we now must build upon.

Sir, now attend me, I'll to the Ordinary,
And see if any of my ancient friends will take note of me.
Where's the good man? within?

There's none dwells here; you may speak with the Master of the house if you
will.


Captain, Captain, I have descried an Host.


An Host? where? which way march they?


Mine Host of the house, see where he marches.


Here take my cloak, what is't not Dinner-time? Are there no gallants come
yet?


Why Sir, do you mean to dine here to day?


Here do I mean to cranch, to munch, to eat, To feed, and be fat my fine
Cullapolis.


You must pardon me Sir, my house intertaines none but Gentlemen; if you will
stand at gate, when Dinner's done, I'll help you to some fragments.


Sirrah, if your house be free for Gentlemen, it is fit for me; thou see I
keep my man, I've Crowns to spend with him that's bravest here: I'll keep my
room in spite of Silks and Satins.


I would I were well rid of this ragge-muffin.


How goes the day?


It cannot yet be old, because I see no more gallants come.


Mine Host, what's here?


A Tatterdemalean, that stays to sit at the Ordinary to day.


Doest know him?


I did when he was flush, and had the Crowns; but since he grew poor, he is
worn quite out of my remembrance. He is a decayed Captain, and his name is
Bonvile.


I would he would leave this place, and rank himself with his companions.


Morrow Gentlemen.


The morning's past, ^tis mid-day at the least.


What is the room so empty?


And please your Worships.
Here's more by one than it can well receive.

What Tatter's that that walks there?


If he will not leave the room, kick him down stairs.


There's ne'er a silken outside in this company
That dares present a foot to do that office:
I'll toss that heel a yard above his head
That offers but a spurn.

Can we not be private?

I am a man like you perhaps well bred,
Nor want I coin, for hark, my pockets chink:
I keep my man to attend me more perhaps,
Than some can do that go in costlier Silk
Are you so fearful of a ragged suite?
They were first paid for e're they were put on;
A man may question whether yours were so.
Who kicks first, ha, come; have you mind to game?
I'll cast, or set at thus much; will you card
A rest for this? no? then let's to dinner:
Come serve in meat.

Mine Host, prithee put this fellow out of the room, And let him not drop his
shooe-clouts here.


Sfoot dost thou mean we shall go louzie out of the house?


If he will not go out by fair means, Send for a Constable.


And send him to Bridewell Ordinary; whipping cheer is best for him.


Nay pray sir leave my house, you see the Gentlemen will not endure your
company.


Mine Host, thou knew me in my flourishing prime:
I was the first brought custom to thine house,
Most of my means I spent here to enrich thee;
And to set thee up, I've cast down my self.

I remember sir some such matter, but you see the times change. Nay, will you
leave the Gentlemen?


The Lease of this house had thou not from me?
Did I not give thee both the Fine and Rent?

I must needs say you were bountiful when you had it, but in troth sir, if you
will not be gone, J shall be forced to turn you out by the head and shoulders.


And is not all this worth the trusting for an Ordinary?

Nay if you prate, I shall use you somewhat extraordinary.

Down with the Rogue.

Since you hate calms, and will move stormy weather,
Now Host and guest shall all down stairs together.

Ah well done Master, tickle them noble Captain.

Come Cock I have took some of their stomachs away from them before Dinner.


We are at peace now, and in threatened death
We do enjoy new life: my only comforts,
The image of my late deceased wife,
Now have I time to surfeit on your sight,
Which Court-imployments have debarred me long.
Oh Fortune, thou did threaten misery,
And thou hast paid me comfort; need we ought
That we should seek the suffrage of the Court?
Are we not rich? are we not w^ll revenew'd?
Are not the Countrey-pleasures far more sweet
Than the Court-cares? Instead of balling suitors
Our ears receive the music of the Hound;
For mounting pride and lofty ambition,
We in the Air behold the Falcons Tower,
And in that Moral mock those that aspire.
Oh^ my good King, instead of threat and wrong,
Thou hast brought me rest which I have wished so long.

Sir we have long been Orphans in the Country,
Whilst you still followed your affairs at Court;
We heard we had a Father by our Guardian,
But scarce till now could we enjoy your sight.

Nor let it seem offencive to your love,
That we in your retirement should take pride,
The King in this pursues our greater happiness,
And quickens most where he would most destroy.

You are mine own sweet girls ' in your virtues
I place my sole bliss; you are all my honours,
My favours, state, and offices at Court:
What are you not? Let the King take my lands,
And my possession, and but leave me you,
He leaves me rich; more would I not desire,
And less he cannot grant.

One from the King
Attends your honour, and his urgency
Craves quick dispatch.

Ladies withdraw a little,
I long to know what mischiefe's now afoot;
Wee'le front it be it death, ey and march towards it.
A Chair, admit the Herald, let him in;
We are arm'd' against what can come, our breast is true,
And that's one Maxim, what is forced is wrong,
We can both keep our heart and guide our tongue.

Sir, the King greets you, and commands you effect
His will in this you know the Character.

My good Lord Martial you are welcome hither,
These Lines I kiss because they came from him.

You'll like the letter better than the style:
Ha, change your face? is your blood moov'd to the tide,
Or ebbes it to your heart?

Thou hast two Daughters,
Fair by report her whom thou love b^st
Send to the Court^ it is thy Kings behest,
Do this on thy allegiance,

Sir your Answer?

I pray Sir deal with men in ^isery
Like one that may himself be miserable:
Insult not too much upon men distressed,
Play not too much upon my wretchedness;
The noble minds still will not when they can.

I cannot st^ for answer pray be brief.

You are more welcome than your message Sir,
And yet that's welcome coming from my King;
Pray Sir forbear me, 'tis the Kings command,
And you shall know mine answer instantly^
Receive him nobly.

I shall wait your pleasure.

Malice, revenge, displeasure envy, ha^e,
I had thought that you had only dwelt at Court,
And that the Country had been clear and free:
But from Kings wraths no place I find is safe
My fairest daughter? had the King commanded
One of my hands, I had sent it willingly;
But her! yet Kings must not be dal^d with,
Somewhat I must ^esolve to breed of force
Treason or to my blood, or to my King,
False Father or false or Subject I must prove,
Be true to h^m I serve o^her I love,
Somewhat I must: my Daugh^rs, call them in:
Leave them and us.
Ladies I must be blunt, the King's displeased
And hearing of two children whom I love,
My patience and my loyalty to try,
Commands that she whom I love best must dye.

Dye? alas chat's nothing; must nor all men so?
And doth not Heaven crown martyred innocence?
I was afraid my Lord the King had scene
To have strumpetted the (...) for oft of your blood:
An innocent death my Lord is crown of rest,
Then let me dye as her whom you love best.

If but to dye, prove that you love me then;
Death were mo^t welcome to confirm your love.
Alas my Sister she: hath not the heart^
To look upon a rough To(...) face:
I am bold and con^tant, and my courage great;
As token of your love then point out me.

Alas my girl^ for greater ills prepare,
Death would end yours and somewhat (...) my sorrows:
What I must spe ke, contains ^avens greatest curse,
Search all the world, you can find nought so ill.

Speak't at once.

Her whom I best affect.
The King intends to strumpet.

Bless me Heaven!

Should he,

By all my joys I'll sooner dye
Then suffer it.

And so by Heaven will I.

Now you are mine indeed, who would forgo
One of these jemmes so fine, and valued so?
But passion give me leave, the King commands,
I must obey. The fairest he sent for;
None of my daughters have been seen at Court,
Nor hath the ambitious Chester viewed them yet:
My eldest then shall go, come hither girl;
I send thee, (Heaven knows) whether to thy death
Or to thine honour; though he envy me,
Yet in himself the King is honourable,
And will not stretch his malice to my child.
The worst I fear, and yet the best I hope.
I charge thee then even by a fathers name,
If the King deign to take thee to his bed
By name of Queen, if thou perceiv'st thy self
To be with child, conceal it even from him;
Next, when thou find him affable and free,
Find out some talk about thy Sister here,
As thus; thy Father sent thee but in jest,
Thy Sister's fairest, and I love her best.

It may incense the King.

What I intend
Is to my self, inquire no further of it.

I shall perform your will, and thus resolved
To be a Martyr e're a Concubine.
But if the King afford me further favour,
In my close bosom your last words I'll place.

Sister and Sister part, be you not seen,
Bid her farewell, a Martyr or a Queen.
They cannot speak for tears, alas for woe,
That force should part Sister and Sister thus,
And that the Child and Father of one heart,
Commands and powerful threats should thus divide.
But Chester stays, within there?

My Lord?

Have you received Earl Chester honourably?

The noblest welcome that the house could yield
He hath had my Lord, nothing was held too dear:
He much extolls your bounty.

Usher h^min, we are now ready for him.

I shall my Lord.

Sir, I have sta^'d your leisure, now your Answer?

That I obey, the fairest of my girls
I send the King.

I easily can believe
That this the fairest is, her like in Court
Lives not; she is a Present for a King.

Say to the King I give her but conditionally,
That if he like not this fairest of the two,
Unstained he wi^l his gift send back again.

I shall, come Lady.

My Lord, I do not load you with commends
And duties which I could do to the King:
I know your love your memory may fail you,
And you them all may scatter by the way.
Do thou a Fathers duty thus in tears,
And send me how thou speed'st to free these fears.

Came you from him?


Yes if it please your Maidenship; my Master sends you word he is the old man,
and his suite is the old suite still, and his clothes the old clothes: He
scorns to be a change ling, or a shifter; he fears nothing but this, that he
shall fall into the Lord your fathers hands for want of reparations.


We know thy meaning, here bear him this gold,
And bid him suite him like the man he was,
Bid him to face the proudest he in Court;
He shall not want whilst we have.

That was out of my Commission Lady, Gold tempts, I have commandment not to
touch it; 'tis another thing he aims at: it is a thing, but I know not what
manner of thing; but something it is, and he vows not to shift a shirt till he
be further resolved: he only sends you Commendations, and withal to know if
you would stand to your word.


He wrongs me to cast doubts:
Tell him I am the ^ame I ever was,
And ever will continue as I am.
But that he should disdain this courtesy
Being in want, and coming too from me,
Doth somewhat trouble me.

We want Madam? you are deceived, we have store, of rags; plenty, of
tatters; abo^ndance, of jags; huge rents, witness our breeches; ground
enough to command, for we can walk where we will, none will bid us to Dinner;
houses rent-free, and goodly ones to choose where we will; the Martialsie, the
Counter, Newgate, Bridewell; and would a man desire to dwell in stronger
buildings? and can you say that we are in want? No Lady, my Captain wants
nothing but your love, and that he entreats you to send by me the bearer.


I do, with all the best affection
A Virgin can bestow upon her friend.

I dare swear he is an honest man, but I dare not say he is a true man.


How, not a true man?


No; for he hath sworn to steal you away, and thus I prove it: if he steal
you away, I am sure you will not go naked; he cannot steal you, but he must
steal the clothes you have on; and he that steals apparel, what is he but a
Thief? and he that is a Thief cannot be a true man Ergo.


That is not theft when men but steal their own,
And I am his, witness this Diamond,
Which bear him, and thus say, that no disaster
Shall ever part me from his company.

I shall bear this with as good will as you would bear him, Vtcung volumus.


What are we but our words? when they are past,
Faith should succeed, and that should ever last.
My Father?

Wots thou who's returned,
The unthrift Bonvile, ragged as a scarre-crow,
The Wars have gnawed his garments to the skin:
I met him, and he told me of a Contract.

Sir, such a thing there was.

Upon condition if he came rich.

I heard no such exception.

Thou doest not mean to marry with a beggar?

Unless he be a Gentleman, and Bonvile
Is by his birth no less.

Such only gentile are, that can maintain Gentily.

Why, should your state fail you,
Can it from you your honours take away?
Whilst your Allegiance holds, what need you more,
You ever shall be noble although poor.

They are noble that have nobles; gentle they
That appear such.

Indeed so worldlings say:
But virtuous men prove they are only dear
That all their riches can about them bear.

Is not Earl Chester
Returned yet with an answer from the Martial?

Not yet my Lord.

For such contention we now scorn revenge,
Wee' le try the utmost of his patience now:
He would exceed our love, if it appear,
He will hold nothing for his King too dear.

Earl Chester is returned.

Hast brought her Chester?

Her whom her father the most fair esteems,
He hath sent by me, only with this request,
That if his free gift do not like your Highness,
You'll send her back untouched to his embrace.

I fear we shall not, she app^ares too fair,
So straightly to part with: what is he would
Attempt such virgin-modesty to stain
By hopes of honour, flatteries, or constraint?
How do you like her? your opinions Lords?

A beauteous Lady, one that hath no peer
In the whole Court.

Therefore I hold her precious.

A fairer face in Court who ever saw?
Her beaut, would become the name of Queen.

One of more state or shape where shall we find?

Her modesty doth do her beauty grace,
Both in her cheek have chose a soveraign^ ^ate.

You have past censure Lady, now you're mine,
And by your Fathers free gift you are so,
To make, or mar; to keep or bestow.

It glads me I am present to a King,
Whom I have always heard my father term
Royal in all things; virtuous, modest, chaste;
And to have one free attribute besides,
Which even the greatest Emperor need not scome,
Honest; to you if you be such my Liege,
A Virgins love I prostrate, and a heart
That wishes you all goodness with the duty
Of a true subject, and a noble father;
Then mighty Prince report your subject noble,
Since all those virtues you receive in me.

Thou hast overcome us all; that thou hast termed us,
Wee'le strive to be, and to make good those attributes
Thou hast bestowed upon us, rise our Queen,
Thy virtue hath took off the threatening edge
Of our intended hate: though thou art ours
Both by free gift and duty, which we challenge
As from a subject; though our power could stretch
To thy dishonour, we proclaim thee freed,
And in this grace thy father we exceed.

The King in this shows honour. Princes still
Should be the Lords of their own appetites,
And cherish virtue.

Have ^ your applause?

Your Highness shows both Royalty and Judgment
In four fair choice.

Are your opinions so?

Far be it mighty King we should distaste
Where you so well affect.

For grace and feature
England affords not a more complete Virgin.

Were she not the Martials daughter,
I'd term her worthy for my Sovereigns Bride.

Ey that's the grief.

This kiss then be the Seal,
Thou art our Queen, and now art only mine.

May I become your vassal and your Hand-maid,
Titles but equal to my humble birth:
But since your Grace a higher title deigns,
Envy must needs obey where power compels.
Give expeditious order for the Rites
Of these our present Nuptials which shall be
Done with all State and due solemnity;
And Martial in this business thou shall find
Thy self defective, and not us unkind.

Health to your Highness.

From my sad Master,
Your Martial once, now your dejected vassal,
And thus he bid me say: If the King deign
To grace my daughter with the stile of Queen,
To give you then this Casket which contains
A double dower; half of this mighty sum
He out of his revenues had afforded,
Had she bin match but to a Barons bed;
But since your Highness deigns her for your Bride,
And his Alliance scorns not to disdain,
He saith a double dower is due to you.

He strives to exceed us still; this emulation
Begets our hate, and questions him of life.
This Dower we take, his Daughter entertain,
But him we never shall receive to grace.
Bear not from us so much as love or thanks:
We only strive in all our actions
To be held peerless for our courtesy
And Royal bounty, which appears the worse,
Since he a Subject would precede his Prince:
And did we not his Daughter dearly love,
Weed send her back with scorn, and b^se neglect
But her we love, though him in heart despise,
Pay him that thanks for all his courtesies.

In this employment I will strive to do^
The office of a subject, and of servant too.

Since to that emulous Lord we have sent our hate,
Come to our Nuptials let^s pass on in state.

The humours of Court, City, Camp, and Country I have trac't, and in them can
find no man, but money; all subscribe to this Motto, Malo pecuniam viro. Oh
poverty, thou are esteemed a sin worse than whoredom, gluttony, extortion,
or usury:

And earthy gold, thou art preferred before Heaven.
Let but a poor man in a thred-bare suite,
Or ragged as I am, appear at Court,
The fine-nos'd Courtiers will not sent him; no,
They shun the way as if they met the Pest:
Or if he have a suite, it strikes them deaf,
They cannot hear of that side.

Come to the City, the Haberdasher will sooner call us block heads, than
block us; come to the Sempsters, unless we will give them money, we cannot
enter into their bands: though we have the Law of our sides, yet we may walk
through Burchin-lane and be non-suited: come barefoot to a Shooe-maker, though
he be a Constable, he will not put us into his Stocks; though the Girdler be my
brother, yet he will not let his leather embrace me; come to the Glover, his
gloves are either so little that I cannot pluck them on, or so great that I
cannot compass. And for the Camp, there's honour cut out of the whole piece,
but not a rag of money.


The Country hath alliance with the rest: my purpose is now I have so thoroughly
made proof of the humours of men, I will next assay the dispositions of women,
not of the choicest, but of those whom we call good wenches.


Pray Master if you go to a house of good fellowship, give me something to
spend upon my Cockatrice; if I have nothing about me, I shall never get in.


There's for you sirrah; doth not the world wonder I should be so flush of
money, and so bare in clothes? the reason of this I shall give account for
hereafter: But to our purpose, here they say dwells my Lady Bawdy-face, here
will we knock.


Who's there? what would you have? ha?


Sweet Lady we would enter; nay by your leave.


Enter? where? here be no breaches for you to enter truly.


And yet we are soldiers, and have ventured upon as hot service as this place
affords any.


Away you base companions, we have no breaches for such tattered breeches, we
have no patches to suite with your rags.


Nay, pray give way.


Away you rogues, do you come to shake your rags here? do you think we can
vent our ware without money you rascals? get you from my door you beggarly
companions, or I'll wash you hence with hot scalding water.


Nay I warrant her, wenches can afford her that at all times.


Do I keep house to entertain Tatterdemaleans with a Pox, you will be gone?


We must forbear, the gallants are out of patience, stand aside.


I would fain go in, but I have spent all my money.


No matter, they shall not know so much till we get in, and then let me alone,
I'll not out till I be fired out.


Then let's set a good face of the matter, By your leave Lady.


You're welcome Gentlemen.


What fellows be yon?


Two poor soldiers that came for an alms and please you, that stay for some
reversions; there's none such come into my house I warrant you.


Save you sweet Lady.


Where be those kitchinstuffes here, shall we have no attendants? show these
Gentlemen into a close room, with a standing bed in it, and a truckle too; you
are welcome Gentlemen.


'Tis general thorough the world, each state esteems A man not what he is, but
what he seems:

The purest flesh raged can no entrance have,
But It'ch and all disease if it come brave,
Wide open stand the gates of lust and sin,
And those at which the wide world enters in.
Madam, to be short, I must have a wench, though I am ragged outward, I am rich
inward: here's a brace of Angels for you, let me have a pretty wench, I'll be
as bountiful to her.


Your Worsh p's very heartily welcome: wher's Sis? Where's Joyce? the best
room in the house for the Gentleman: call Mistress Priscilla, and bid her keep
the Gentleman company.


I^le make bold to enter.


Your Worship's most lovingly welcome: let the Gentleman have attendance, and
clean linen it he need any; whither would you, you rogue?


Marry I would after my Master.


Thy Master? why is yon ragamuffin able to keep a man?


Ey that he is able to keep a man, and himself too.


Then that man must be able to pay for himself too, or else he may cool his
heals without if his appetite be hot.


Then shall I not go in?


No by my Mayden-head shall you not, nor any such beggarly companion shall enter
here, but he shall come thorough me too.


No? what remedy? ha, ha; he that rings at a door with such a Bell, and
cannot enter? Well, if there be no remedy, I'll even stay without.


Oh me! is it you Sir? and are so strong to stand at the door? Pray will you
come near? your Master is new gone in before: Lord, Lord, that you would not
enter without trusting! you were even as far out of my remembrance as one
that I had never seen before.


I cannot blame you to forget me, for I think this be the first time of ^ur
meeting.


What would you have Sir?


Nothing as they say, but a congratulation for our first acquaintance. I have
it here old bully bottom, I have it here.


I have it here too: nay, pray sir come in, I am loath to kiss at door, for
fear my neighbours should see.


Speak, shall you and ^ condogge together?
I'll pay you to a hair.

Nay, I beseech you sir, come in: a Gentleman, and stand at door? I'll lead
the way, and you shall come behind.


No, no; I will not salute you after the Italian fashion: I'll enter before.


Most lovingly, pray draw the latch sir.


Nay faith sweet rogue thou shalt trust me for once.


Trust you? come up, can'^t thou pay the hackny for the hire of a horse, and
think thou to breath me upon trust?


Thou bid me come up, and shall I not ride?


Yes the gallows as soon.


A Gentleman, and have no money? marry you make a most knightly offer.


How? to offer thee no money?


How can they offer that have none?


I'll either give thee ware or money, that's as good.


Ey but sir, I'll deal with no such chapmen.


What's the matter here? ha? can you not agree about the bargain?


Here's Gallants would have us breathed, and forsooth they have no money.


They think belike, diet, lodging, roughs, clothes, and holland-smocks can ^l
be had without money, and a disease, if we should catch it, Heaven bless us,
can be cured without money.


That's fine in faith: if my beds be shaken out of their ^o^nts, or my cords
broken, must not the Joiner and the Rope-maker both have money? if my rags be
rubbed out with your toes, can they be repaired without money? if my linnenbe
fouled, can I pay my laundress without money? besides, we must have so ^thing
to maintain our broken windows I hope; the Glazier will not mend the without
money.


Come, come let's run a score for once.


You shall not score of my tally, out of my doors.


Why shall we not be bosomed? have we paid, and must we not have wenches?


You shall have the choicest of my house gentlemen.


Who, those Rascals?


They be Rascals that have no money; those be Gentlemen that have Crowns;
these are they that pay the Joiner, the rope-maker, the Upholster, the
Laundrer, the Glazier; will you get you out of my doors, or shall we scold
you hence?


That you shall never by thrusting them out of doors.


Who but a mad man would be so base as to be hired, much more to hire one of
those bruitists, that make no difference betwixt a Gentleman and a beggar, nay,
I have seen enough to be soon entreated.


You shall not need to fear me, I am gone:

He's past before, nor will I stay behind;
I have seen enough to loath all your sisterhood.

Marry farewell frost. Now Sir, will you make your choice, and your man after?


I'll have both, these are mine.


Go you then with your pair of Whores, I'll go with this old skuller that
first plied me.


I see thou love to go by water; come, shall we dally together? sit upon my
knee my sweet boy, what money hast thou in thy purse? wilt thou bestow this
upon me my sweet chic?


I'll see what I shall have first for my money by your favour.


And shall I have this?


And I this?


Both these are mine, we are agreed then? But I am ashamed, being such a
tattered rogue, to lye with two such fine gentlewomen; besides, to tell you
truly, I am louzie.


No matter, thou shalt have a clean shirt, and but pay for the washing, and
thy clothes shall in the mean time be cast into an Oven.


But I have a worse fault, my skinne's not perfect; What should I say I am?


Itchy? Oh thou shalt have Brimstone and Butter.


Worse than all these, my body is diseased, I shall infect yours.


If we come by any mischance, thou hast money to pay for the cure: come,
shall's withdraw into the next chamber?


You are not women, you are devils both,
And that your Damme; my body save in wars,
Is yet unskarr'd, nor shall it be with you.
Say the last lecher that embraced you here,
And folded in his arms your rottenness,
Had been all these, would you not all that filth
Vomit on me? or who would buy diseases,
And make his body for a Spittle fit,
That may walk sound? I came to school you Whore,
Not to corrupt you; for what need I that
When you are all corruption; be he lame,
Have he no Nose, be all his body stung
With the French Fly, with the Sarpego dried:
Be he a Lazar, or a Leper, bring
Coin in his fist, he shall embrace your lust
Before the purest flesh that sues of trust.

What Diogenes have we here? I warrant the Cinnicke himself said not so much
when he was seen to come out of a Bawdy house.


He shamed not to come out, but held it sin
Not to be pardoned to be seen go in.
But I'll be modest: nay, nay, keep your Gold
To cure those hot diseases you have got,
And being once clear, betake you to one man,
And study to be honest, that's my counsel:
You have brought many like you Gentlemen
That jet in Silks, to go thus ragged like us,
Which did they own our thoughts, these rags would change
To shine as we shall, though you think it strange.
Come, come, this house is infected, shall we go?

Why Sir, shall I have no sport for my money, but even a snatch and away?


Leave me, and leave me ever, and observe
This rule from me, where there is lodged a Whore,
Think the Plagues cross is set upon that door.

Then Lord have mercy upon us: where have we been?


Hist, hist; here's a railing companion indeed.


I know not what you call a railing companion: but such another discourse would
make me go near to turn honest.


Nay, if you be in that mind, I'll send for your love: the plague in my house?
the Pox is as soon: I am sure there was never man yet that had Lord have mercy
upon us in his mind, that would ever enter here: Nay will you go?


Before you all I here acknowledge Lords,
I never held me happy but in this
My virtuous choice, in having your applause,
Me-thinks I had the sweet consent of Heaven.

This noble Lady, now my royal Mother,
Hath by her love to you, regard to us,
And courteous affability to all,
Attained the general suffrage of the Realm,

Her modest carriage shall be rules to me,
Her words instructions, her behaviour precepts,
Which I shall ever study to observe.

I feel my body growing by the King,
And I am quick although he know it not;
Now comes my fathers last injunction
To my remembrance, which I must fulfil,
Although a Queen, I am his daughter still.

Lords, and the rest forbear us till we call,
A chair first, and another for our Queen,
Some private conference we intend with her:
Now leave us.

My fairest Isabella, the choi^e jewell
That I wear next my heart; I cannot hide
My love to thee, 'tis like the Sun invelopt
In watery clouds, whose glory will break thorough,
And spite opposure, seornes to be concealed;
Saving one thing, ask what my kingdom yields.
And it is freely thine.

What's that my Lord?

I cannot speak it without some distaste
To thee my Queen, yet if thy heart be ours
Name it not to me.

I am only yours.

Beg not thy fathers free repeal to Court,
And to those offices we have bestowed,
Save this, my Kingdom, and what it contains,
Is thy wills subject.

You are my King, and Husband;
The first includes allegiance, the next duty,
Both these have power above a Fathers name,
Though as a daughter I could wish it done,
Yet since it stands against your Royal pleasure,
I have no suite that way.

Thou now hast-thrust thy hand into my bosom,
And we are one: Thy beauty, oh thy beauty!
Never was King blessed with so fair a wife.
I do not blame thy Father to prefer
Thee' fore thy sister both in love and face,
Since Europe yields not one of equal grace:
Why smiles my love?

As knowing one so fair,
With whom my pale cheek never durst compare:
Had you but seen my Sister, you would say,
To her the blushing Corrall should give way:
For her cheek staines it; Lillies to her brow
Must yield their Ivory whiteness, and allow
Themselves overcome. If e're you saw the sky
When it was clear'st, it never could come nigh
Her Azure veins in colour; she's much clearer,
Ey, and her love much to my Father dearer.

We by our noble Martial made request
For the most fair, and her whom he best loved:
Durst he delude us?

What I speak is true,
So will your self say when she comes in place.

Our love to thee shall not or'ecome that hate
We owe thy Father, though thou be our Queen.

He keeps her as his Treasure, locks her safe
Within his arms: he only minded me
As one he loved not, but thought merely lost.

Thou art lost indeed, for thou hast lost my heart,
Nor shalt thou keep it longet: all my love
Is swallowed in the spleen I bear thy Father,
And in this deep disgrace put on his King,
Which wee'le revenge.

It shall be thus:
Chester bear hence this Lady to her Father
As one unworthy us, with her that dower
The double dower he by his servant sent:
Thy tears nor knee shall once prevail with us.
As thou art loyal, without further language
Depart our presence, wee'le not hear thee speak.

What shall I further say?

Command him on his life to send to Court
His the other Daughter, and at our first summons,
Lest we proclaim him Traitor: this see done
On thy Allegiance.

Now the goal is ours.

None dare to censure or examine this,
That we shall hold our friend, or of our blood:
Subjects that dare against their Kings contend,
Hurl themselves down whilst others hie ascend.

I see the King is truly honourable:
All my disgraces and disparagements
He hath made good to me in this to queen my child,
And which more glads me, with such ardency
He seems to affect her, and to hold her dear,
That nothing's valued, if compared with her.
Now Heaven whilst thou this second happiness
And bliss wilt lend me, I shall still grow great
In my content, opinion, and my fate,
In spite of whisperers, and Court-flatterers.

Had you best loved my Sister, and less me,
I had been Queen before her; but she ventured
For her preferment, therefore 'tis her due;
Out of our fears and loves her honours grew.

Whilst I may keep thy beauty in mine eye,
And with her new raised fortunes fill mine ear,
I second none in bliss; she's my Court comfort,
Thou my home happiness: in these two blessed,
Heaven hath enriched me with a crown of rest.

Nor do I cover greater Royalties
Than to enjoy your presence, and your love,
The best of these I prize above all fortunes,
Nor would I change them for my Sisters state.

Herbeauty and her virtues mixed, have won
The King my Sovereign to be termed my son.

Earl Chester, with the Queen your princely daughter
Are without train alighted at the gate,
And by this entered.

Thou hast troubled me,
And with a thousand thoughts at once perplexed
My affrighted heart: adm^t them; soft, not yet;
What might this mean? my daughter in the charge
Of him that is my greatest opposite,
And without train, such as becomes a Queen?
More tempest towards Kate? from which sweet child,
If I may kept thee, may it on my head
Power all his wrath, even till it strike me dead.

Rather, my Lord, your Royal life to free,
All his sterne fury let him shower on me.

My Lord shall I admit them?

Prithee stay,
Fate threatens us, I would devise a means
To shun it if we might: thou shalt withdraw,
And not be seen; something we must devise
To guard our selves, and stand our opposites:
Go keep your chamber, now let Chester in.

I shall my Lord.

My Loyalty for me, that keep me still;
A Tower of safety, and a shield' against Fate.

The King thy daughter hath in scorn sent back.

Pause there, and as y are noble answer me
E're you proceed but to one question.

Propound it.

Whence might this dis^aste arise?
From any loose demeanour wanton carriage,
Spouse-breach, or disobedience in my daughter?
If so, I'll not receive her, she's not mine.

That let mine enemy speak, for in this kind
I would be taxed by such.

Upon my soul
There is no guilt in her.

Be it but his humour,
You are welcome, both my daughter and my Queen;
In this my Palace thou shalt reign alone,
I'll keep thy state, and make these arms thy Throne:
Whilst thou art chaste, thy stile with thee shall stay,
And reign, though none but I and mine obey.
What can you further speak?

Her double Dower
The King returns thee.

We accept it, see,
It shall maintain her port even with her name,
Being my Kings wife, so will I love his Grace,
She shall not want, will double this maintain her.

Being thus discharged of her, I from the King
Command thee send thy fairer Girl to Court,
She that's at home, with her to act his pleasure.

Sir, you were sent to challenge, not to kill;
These are not threats, but blows, they wound, they wound.

If Treasons imputation thou wilt shun,
And not incur the forfeit of thy life,
Let the Kings will take place.

You have my offices,
Would you had now my grief; but that alone
I must endure: would thou had both, or none.
Sentence of death when it is mildly spoke,
Hal^e promises life; but when your doom you mix
With such rough threats, what is't but twice to kill?
You tyrannize Earl Chester.

Will you send her?

That you shall know anon. Tell me my Queen,
How grew this quarrel 'tweene the King and thee?

By you was never Lady more beloved,
Or wife more constant than I was to him:
Have you forgot your charge, when I perceived
My self so grown, I could no longer hide
My greatness, I began to speak the beauties
Of my fair Sister, and how much she excelled,
And that you sent me thither as a jest,
That she was fairest, and you loved her best?

Enough; you are sure with child, and near thy time

Nothing more sure.

Then that from hence shall grow
A salve for all our late indignities:
Pray do my humble duty to the King.
And thus excuse me, that my daughter's sick,
Craz^d, and weak, and that her native beauty
Is much decayed; and should she travel now,
Before recovered, 'tw^ uld engage her life
To too much danger: when she hath ability
And strength to journey, I will send her safe
Unto my King; this as I am a subject,
And loyal to his Highness.

Your excuse
Hath ground from love and reason:
This your answer I shall return to the King.

With all my thanks:
That since my daughter doth distaste his bed,
He hath sent her back, and home to me her father,
His pleasure I withstand not, but return
My zeal, and these do not forget I pray.

I shall your words have perfect, and repeat them Unto the King.


I should disgrace her beauty
To send it maimed and waning; but when she
Attains her perfectness, then shall appear
The brightest star fixed in your Courtly Sphere.

The King shall know as much.

It is my purpose,
All my attempts to this one head to draw,
Once more in courtesies to overcome the King.
Come beauteous Queen, and thy fair Sister cheer,
Whom this sad news will both amaze and fear.

Sirrah, are all my lands out of mortgage, and my deeds redeemed?


I cannot tell that Sir; but we have had whole chest-fulls of writings brought
home to our house.


Why then 'tis done, I am possessed again
Of all my Fathers ancient revenues.

But how came you by all this money to buy these new suits? methinks we are not
the men we were.


Questionless that;. for now those that before despised us, and our company,
at meeting give us the bonjour.

Oh Heaven, thou ever art Virtues sole Patron,
And wilt not let it sink: all my known fortunes
I had engaged at home, or spent abroad:
But in the wars, when I was held quite bankrupt
Of all good hap, it was my chance to quarter
In such a house when we had sack't a Town,
That yielded me inestimable store
Of gold and jewels, those I kept till now
Unknown to any, pleading poverty,
Only to try the humour of my friends;
Which I have proved, and now know how to find
Fixed upon wealth, to want unnatural.

See Sir, yonder are my old fellows, Match and Touch box; I do not think but
they come to offer their service to you.


Save thee noble Captain, hearing of thy good fortunes, and advancement, I am
come to offer my self to be partaker of the same, and to follow thee in the
same colours that thou h^st suited the rest of thy servants.


God-a-mercy horse, you shall not stand to my livery.


You see our old clothes stick by us still, good Captain see us new moulded.


You are flies, away; they that my Winter fled,
Shall not my Summer taste: they only merit
A happy harbour, that through stormy Seas
Hazard their Barks, not they that sail with ease.
You taste none of my fortunes.

Corporal, you see this Livery? if you had stay, d by it, we had been both
cut out of a piece: Match, if you had not left us, you had been one of this
guard: Go, away, betake you to the end of the Town; let me find you between
Woods close-stile and Iflington, with will it please your Worship to bestow the
price of two Cannes upon a poor soldier, that hath served in the face of the
Souldan, and so forth, Apage, away, I scorn to be fellow to any that will leave
their Masters in adversity: if he entertain you, he shall turn away me,
that's certain.


Then good your Worship bestow something upon a poor soldier, I protest --


Lo, I have taught him his lesson already; I knew where I should have you?


There's first to make you beggars; for to that all such must come that leave
their Masters poor. Begone, and never let me see you more.


God be with you good Captain: come Match, let us betake us to our randevous
at some out end of the City.


He makes a beggar first that first relieves him;
Not Usurers make more beggars where they live,
Than charit^blemen that use to give.

Here comes a Lord.

I am glad to see you Sir.

You know me now? your Worship's wondrous wise,
You could not know me in my last disguise.

Lord God you were so changed.

So am I now
From what I was of late: you can allow
This habit well, but put my the other on,
No congie then, your Lordship must be gon.
You are my Summer-friend.

Cousin, well met.

You should have said well found^
For I was lost but late, dead, under ground
Our Kindred was: when I redeemed my Land,
They both revived, and both before you stand,

Well, well, I know you now.

And why not then?
I am the same without all difference; when
You saw me last, I was as rich, as good,
Have no additions since of name, or blood;
Only because I wore a thread-bare suite,
I was not worthy of a poor salute.
A few good clothes put on with small ado,
Purchase your knowledge, and your kindred too.
You are my silken Uncle: oh my Lord,

You are not in haste now?
I have time to stay,
To ask you how you do, being glad to hear
Of your good fortune, your repurchast lands,
And state much amplified.

All this is true;
Ey but my Lord, let me examine you:
Remember you a Contract that once past
Betwixt me and your daughter? here she stands.

Sir, since you did vnmorgage all your means,
It came into my thoughts; trust me, before
I could not call it to mind.

Oh men's weak strength,
That aim at worlds, when they but their mere length
Must at their end enjoy: Thou then art mine,
Of all that I have proved in poverty,
The only test of virtue: what are these?
Though they be Lords, but worldlings, men all earth.
Thou art above them; virtuous, that's divine;
Only thy heart is noble, therefore mine.

And to be yours is to be what I wish;
You were to me as welcome in your rags,
As in these Silks. I never did examine
The out side of a man, but I begin
To censure first of that which grows within.

Only for that I love thee: These are Lords
That have bought Titles. Men may merchandise
Wares, ey, and traffic all commodities
From Sea to Sea, ey and from shore to shore,
But in my thoughts, of all things that are sold,
'Tis pity Honour should be bought for gold.
It cuts off all desert.

Master, who's here? mine Host of the Ordinary?


Your business sir? what by petition?


Fallen to a little decay by trusting, and knowing your Worship ever a
bountiful young Gentleman, I make bold to make my wants first known to you.


Pray what's your suite?


Only for a cast suite, or some small remuneration.


And thou shalt have the suite I last put off: Fetch it me Cock.


I shall Sir.


Fallen to decay? I'll fit you in your kind.


I have a suite to you Sir, and this it is.


In this suit came I to thine Ordinary,
In this thou would have thrust me out of doors,
Therefore with this that then proclaimed me poor,
I'll salve thy wants, nor will I give thee more.
Base worldlings, that despise all such as need;
Who to the needy beggar are still dumb,
Not knowing unto what themselves may come.

I have a cold suite on it if I be forced to wear it in winter. I bid your
worship farewell.


So should all that keep Ordinaries, bid their guests farewell, though their
entertainment be never so ill. Well sir, I take you but for an ordinary fellow,
and so I leave you. Master, who will not say that you are a brave fellow, and a
most noble Captain, that with a word or two can discomfit an Host.


I know you, therefore know to rate your worths
Both to their height and depth, their true dimensions
I understand; for I have tried them all:
(...) thou art of anoth^r element,
A mirror of thy ^ex^, that can distinguish
Virtue from wealth, thee as my own I elect,
And these according to themselves despise.
A Courtier henceforth I my self profess,
And thee my wife, thou hast deserved no less.

No news yet from our Martial? we three months
Have stayed his leisure, but receive not yet
That daughter we sent for.

She peradventure
Hath not her strength recovered, or her beauty
Lost by her sickness, to the full regained.

Upon my life my Lord, when she is perfect,
And hath received her full ability,
She shall attend your pleasure.

But your Queen,
That virtuous Lady, when I think on her,
I can but grieve at her dejectedness.

Heaven knows I love her above all the world,
And but her Father, this contends with us
When we in all our actious strive to exceed:
We could not brooke her absence half so long.
But we will try his patience to the full.

My prostrate duty to the King my Master
I here present.

This is the Gentleman
Commended for his valour in your wars,
Whose ruined fortunes I made suite to raise:
I would entreat your Highness to respect him.

All his proceedings we partake at large,
Know both his fall and height; we shall regard him
Even with his worth: be near us, of our chamber.
Sir, we shall use your wisdom, and prefer it
According to your worth. Be this your hope
We know you.

Only in that I am happy.

Health to your Majesty.

Whence?

From my Master,
The pOOrest subject that your land contains,
Rich only in his truth and loyalty.

Speak, hath he sent his daughter?

Yes my Liege,
He hath sent his daughters, please you rest satisfied,
And patiently peruse what he hath sent.

We are full of expectations, pray admit
Those Presents that he means to greet us with.

You shall my Lord.

Your Queen and wise crowned with a wreath of gold
Of his own charge, with that this double dower
Doubled again, and guarded with this train
Of Gentlewomen according to her state,
My Lord presents you: this his younger daughter,
He hath bestowed a hand-maide to your Queen,
A place that may become her, were she child
Unto your greatest Peer; had he had more,
More had he sent; these worthless as they be,
He humbly craves you would receive by me.

His bounty hath no limit, but my Queen!
Her bright aspect so much persuades with me,
It charms me more than his humility.
Arise in grace, and sweet, forget your wrong.

My joys unspeakable can find no tongue
To express my true hearts meaning.

Beauteous Maid,
You are our Sister, and that royal Title
From all disgrace your freedom shall proclaim.

I find your Grace the same my noble Father
Hath still reported you; royal in all,
By whom the virtuous rise, th ^ignoble fall.

I have not seen a Lady more complete;
Her modesty and beauty, both are matchless.

Am I a King, and must be exceeded still?
Or shall a subject say that we can owe?
His bounty we will equal, and exceed;
We have power to better what in him's but well.
Your free opinions Lords, is not this Lady
The fairer of the twain? how durst our subject
Then dally with us in that high design?

With pardon of the Queen, she's paralell'd
By her fair Sister.

Were my censure free,
I durst say bettered.

Were it put to me,
I should avow she, not the Queen alone
Excells in grace: but all that I have seen --

Dost love her?

As my honour, or my life.

Her whom thou so much praise, take to wise.

You bless my youth.

And strive to eternize me.

Nor in this joy have I the meanest part,
Now doth your Grace your inward love express
To me, and mine.

I never meant thee less:
Thy Sister and thy daughter freely embrace,
That next thee hath our Kingdoms second place,
How say you Lords, have we requited well
Our subjects bounty? are we in his debt?

Your Highness is in courtesy invincible.

And bountiful beyond comparison.

This must not hold, prevention out of hand,
For if the Martial rise, we stand not long.

Our wits must then to work.

They must of force.
This is not that to which our fortunes trust.

Let then our subject know his King hath power
To vanquish him in all degrees of honour,
And he must now confess him self excelled:
With what can Heaven or Earth his want supply
To equal this our latest courtesy?
We have the day, we rise, and he must fall
As one subdued.

His Highness knows not all,
One special gift he hath reserved in store,
May happily make your Grace contend no more.

No sir? think you your Master will yet yield?
And leave to us the honour of the day?
I wish him here but this last sight to see,
To make him us acknowledge.

On my knee
One boon I have to beg.

Speak, let me know
Thy utmost suite.

My noble Master stays
Not far from Court, and durst he be so ambitious
As but to appear before you, and present you
With a rich gift exceeding all have past,
The only perfect token of his zeal,
He would himself perpetually hold vanquished
In all degrees of love and courtesy.

For our Queenes love, and our fair daughters sake,
We do not much care if we grant him that.
Admit him, and his presence urge with speed;
Well may he imitate, but not exceed.

I fear our fall: if once the Martial rise,
Down, down must we.

Therefore devise some plot
His favour to prevent.

Leave it to me.

Lords, we are proud of this our unity,
Double Alliance, of our sons fair choice,
Since 'tis applauded by your general voice;
The rather since so matchless is our Grace,
That force perforce our subject must give place.

Not to contend, but to express a duty
Of zeal and homage I present your grace
With a rich jewell, which can only value
These royal honours to my Daughters done.

Value our bounty? should thou sell thy self
Even to thy skin, thou could not rate it truly.

My Liege, I cannot, but in lieu and part,
Though not in satisfaction, I make bold
To tender you this Present.

What's the project?
Here's cost and art, and amply both expressed,
I have not viewed the like.

'Tis wondrous rare,
I have not seen a Model richlier framed.

Or for the quantity better contrived:
This Lord in all his actions is still noble,
Exceeding all requital.

'Tis a brave out-side.

This that you see my Lord is nothing yet;
More than its worth it hath commended bin:
This is the case, the jewell lies within,
Pleases your Grace t'unvaile it.

Yes, I will:
But e're I open it my Lord, I doubt
The wealth within not equals that without.

What have we here?

A jewell I should rate,
Were it mine own, above your Crown and Sceptre,

A child?

A Prince, one of your royal blood:
Behold him King, my grand-child, and thy son,
Truly descended from thy Queen and thee,
The Image of thy self.

How can this be?

My royal Liege and Husband, view him well,
If your own favour you can call to mind,
Behold it in this Infant, limn'd to'th life;
He's yours and mine, no kindred can be nearer.

To this rich jewell I hold nothing equal,
I know thee virtuous, and thy father loyal;
But should I doubt both, yet this royal Infant
Hath such affection in my heart impressed,
That it assures him mine: my noble subject,
Thou hast at length overcome me, and I now
Shall ever, ever hold me vanquished.
Had thou sought Earth or Sea, and from them both
Extracted that which was most precious held,
Thou nothing could have found to equal this,
This, the mixed Image of my Queen and me;
Here then shall all my emulation end,
O recome by thee our subject, and our friend.

Your vassal, and your servant, that have strove
Only to love you, and your royal favours:
Not to requite, for that I never can;
But to acknowledge, and in what I may
To express my gratitude.

Thine is the conquest:
But shall I gee't over thus? 'tis in my head
How I this lost days honour shall regain,
A gift as great as rich I have in store,
With which to gratify our subjects love,
And of a value unrequitable:
Thou hast given me a Grand-child, and a son,
A royal in^ant, and to me most dear,
Yet to surpass thee in this emulous strife,
I give thee here a daughter and a wife.
Now must thou needs confess the conquest won
By me thy King, thy Father, and thy son.

Your father, son, and subject quite surpassed,
Yields himself vanquished and overcome at length.

You have not my consent yet.

Madam, no;
The king doth this, his bounty to express.
Your love is to your self, and therefore free,
Bestow it where you please.

Why then on thee:
He that the Father doth so much respect,
Should not me-thinks the daughters love despise.
'Tis good for Maids take Husbands when they may.
Heaven knows how long we may be forced to stay.

Now Lords, these Nuptials we will solemnize
In all high state, in which we will include
Yours noble Bonvile, and with masks and revels
Sport out the tedious nights, each hand his Bride
Doubly by us from either part allied.

Why this is as it should be; now do I smell Courtier already, I feel the
Soldier steal out of me by degrees, for Soldier and Courtier can hardly
dwell both together in one bosom. I have a kind of fawning humour creeping
upon me as soon as I but looked into the Court-gate; and now could I take a
bribe, if any would be so foolish to gee't me. Now farewell Gun-powder, I must
change thee into Damask-powder; for if I offer but to smell like a soldier,
the Courtiers will stop their noses when they pass by me. My ^aske I must
change to a Cap and a Feather, my Bandileero to a Scarf to hang my Sword in,
and indeed, fashion my self wholly to the humours of the time. My Piece I
must alter to a Poynado, and my Pike to a Pickadevant: only this is my
comfort, that our provant will be better here in the Court than in the Camp:
there we did use to lye hard, and seldom: here I must practise to lye
extremely, and often: But whilst I am trifling here, I shall loose the fight
of the Solemnity: The Prince is married, and the Martiall's married, and my
Master's married, there will be simple doings at night. Well, I must hence, for
I believe, the King, the Queen, and the rest of the Lords will use this place
for their revels. Dixi.


And why so sad my Lord?

I am all dullness,
There's no life in me, I have lost my spirit,
And fluence of my brain: observe you not
In what a height you fellow now resides
That was so late dejected; trebly grafted
Into the Royal blood? what can succeed,
But that we all our honours must resign,
And he of them be repossest again?

The Marriages indeed are celebrated.

And they have all our pointed stratagems
Turned back upon our selves.

What, no prevention?

His Basses are so fixed he cannot shrink,
Being so many ways ingrast and planted
In the Kings blood: but our supporters stand
As shook with Earthquakes, or else built on sand.

My Lords attend the King, and clear this chamber,
For this nights revels 'tis the place prepared.

Your duties Lords, the King's upon his entrance.

Ey, so 'tmust be, each man hand his own:
For I am where I love; we are even coupled,
Some Music then.

Here's one falls off from me.

How now my Lord, dejected in your looks?
Or doth our sports distaste you?

Pardon me,
I cannot dance my Liege.

You can look on:
My Lord, you take his place, wee'le have a measure,
And I will lead it; bid the Music struck.

So, well done Ladies: but we miss the Husband
To our fair Daughter, what's become of him?
Gone discontented hence.

What might this mean?
Doth he distaste his Bride, or envy us
That are degree'd above him? where's our Queen?

My Liege?

You shall unto him instantly,
Attended with a beauteous train of Ladies,
And to his Chamber bear his princely Bride.
Bonvile, take you her royal Dower along,
You shall receive it of our Treasurer.

I shall my Lord.

Usher the Queen and Ladies, be their guide,
That done, each one to bed with his fair Bride.

I am so high, that when I look but down,
To see how far the earth is under me,
It quakes my body, and quite chills my blood:
And in my fear although I stand secure,
I am like him that falls. I but a subject,
And married to the Daughter of the King,
Though some may think me happy in this match,
To me 'tis fearful: who would have a wife
Above him in command, to embrace with awe,
Whom to displease, is to distaste the King?
It is to have a Mi^tris, not a wife,
A Queen, and not a subjects bed-fellow.
State I could wish abroad to crown my head,
But never yet loved Empire in my bed.

The Queen your daughter with your princely Bride,
And other Ladies, make way towards your chamber.

'Tis open to receive them, pray them in.

My Lord the King commends his love to you
In your fair Bride, whom royally conducted
He hath sent to be the partner of your bed.

Whom we receive in the arms of gratitude,
Duty to him, and nuptial love to her.

'Tis well they brought me, trust me my dear Lord,
I should have scarce had face to have come my self;
But yet their boldness mixed with mine together,
Makes me to venture I yet scarce know whither.

'Tis to our Nuptial bed.

Ey so they say,
But unto me it is a pach unknown;
Yet that which cheers me, I shall do no more
Than those, and such as I, have done before.
Sure 'tis a thing that must, though without skill,
Even when you please, I am ready for your will.

With her the King hath sent this princely dower,
In which his love and bounty he commends.

You are noble Sir, and honour waits on you
To crown your future fortunes: for that Casket,
Her beauty and her birth are dower sufficient
For me a subject.
I cannot think so much good to my King
As I am owing for her single self:
Then with all d^ty pray return that sum.
Her dower is in her self, and that l'le keep
Which in these lo^ all arms this night shall sleep:
That is the Kings, with that this jewell too,
I think her cheap bought at that easy rate;
My second duty in that gif^ommend,
Were I worth more, more I have will to send.

An Emperor cannot show more Royalty
Than this brave Peer, he's all magnificent:
I shall with the best eloquence I have,
Make known your thoughts.

To all at once good night:
Save this my beauteous Bride, no wealth I prize,
That hath my heart took captive in her eyes.
Lights for the Queen and Ladies, night grows old,
I count my Virtue treasure, not my Gold.

What not at rest my Lord?

Why who can sleep
That hath a labouring brain, and sees from far
So many storms and tempests threaten him?
It is not in my element to do it.

Find you no project yet how to remove him?

None, none, and therefore can I find no rest.

It grows towards day.

That day is night to me,
Whilst you Sun shines: I had this even some conference
In private with the King, in which I urged
The Martialls discontent, withal inferred,
That by his look the Princess he despised:
The King changed face: and could we second this
By any new conjecture, there were hope.
To draw him in displeasure.

Watch advantage,
And as you find the humour of the King,
Work it unto the Martialls deep disgrace:
But soft the Prince.

So early up, how did you like your rest?

I found my most rest in my most unrest;
A little sleep serves a new married man:
The first night of his brydalls I have made you
A Woman of a Maid.

You were up
Both late and early.

Why you were abroad
Before the Sun was up, and the most wise
Do say 'tis healthful still betimes to rise.
Good day.

In one, ten thousand.

Lords, you have not seen
The King to day? it was his custom ever
Still to be stirring early with the Sun;
But here's his Majesty.

N^t all your smooth and cunning Oratory
Can colour so his pride, but we esteem him
A flattering Traitor, one that scorns our love,
And in disdain sent back our Daughters Dower:
Your Judgment Lords?

Hath he refused the Princess?

No; but her Dower sent back, and insolently;
Her whom we gave, he with a gift would buy,
A jewell; shall we merchandise our Daughter,
As one not able to bestow her nobly,
But that our poverty must force us sell her?

Your Highness much mispriseth his intent,
For he had no such thought.

We know his pride,
Which his ambition can no longer shadow.

Your Highness might do well to call in question
His insolence and to arraign him fort.

Be you his Judges Bonvile, Audley, you:
Command him straight on his Allegiance,
To make appearance, and to answer us
Before our Lords of his contempt and scorn.

Shall we command him hither?

From his bed,
And if convicted, he shall surely pay for it.

We shall my Lord.

Arraign him on the sudden, e're it provied;
Le him not dream upon evasive shft^s,
But take him unprepared.

Shall we command
A Bar, and call a Jury of his Peers,
Whilst Chester, that enjoys the place of Martial,
Objects such Allegations against his life,
As he hath drawn out of his rude demeanour?

It shall be so; a Bar, and instantly
We will our self in person hear him speak,
And see what ^ust excuse he can produce
For his contempt.

My gracious Lord and Father,
What he hath done to you, proceeds of honour,
Not of disdain, or scorn; he's truly noble:
And if a Regal bounty be a sin
In any subject, he's only guilty
Of that true virtue.

Saw your Majesty
With what an humble zeal, and prostrate love
He did retender your fair Daugthers Dower,
You would not his intent thus misreceive.

'Tis humble pride, and mere hypocrisy
To blind the King, 'tis but ambitious zeal,
And a dissembling cunning to aspire.

My Father called in question for his life?
Oh let not me a sad spectator be
Of such a dismal object.

Nor will I,
But leave them to their hated cruelty.

This is no place for Ladies, we allow
Her absence; of the rest let none depart,
Till we have searched the cunning of his heart.

A Bar, a Judgment seat, and Jury set?
Yet cannot all this daunt our innocence.

You have disloyally sought to exceed
The King your Sovereign, and his royal deeds
To blemish, which your fellow Peers thus construe,
That strengthened by th'alliance of the King,
And better armed by the peoples love,
You may prove danngerous.
In policy of state to quench the sparks
Before they grow to flame, and top your height,
Before your spacious branches spread too far,
What to this general motion can you say,
Before we tax you with particulars?

With reverence to the State before which I stand,
That you my Lord of Chester appear shallow,
To think my actions can disgrace the Kings,
As if the luster of a petty Star
Should with the Moon compare: Alas, my deeds
Conferred with his, are like a Candles light
To out-shine the mid-dayes glory. Can the King
The glorious mirror of all gratitude,
Condemn that virtue in another bosom,
Which in his own shines so transparantly?
Oh pardon me, mere virtue is my end,
Whose pitch the King doth many times transcend.

To tax you more succinctly, you have first
Abused the King in sending to the Court
Your daughter less fair, and the least beloved.

And that includes contempt most barbarous,
Which you in that unsubject-like expressed:
Your former emulations we omit.
As things that may find tolerable excuse,
And are indeed not matters capital:
But to the best and greatest, when the King,
Out of his bounty and magnificence
Vouc^saft to stile thee with the name of son,
Being but a subject, with contorted brows
And looks of scorn you took his courtesy,
And in contempt sent back the Princess dower.

Most true; a grounded proposition
To question you of life.

My life my lords?
It pleases me, that the King in person deigns
To grace my cause with his Majestic ear:
You plead for me in this, and speak my excuse.
I have but two in all,
He sent for one, and he received them both,
With them a sweet and lovely Prince to boot;
Who ever lost, I am sure the King hath won
At once, a wife, a daughter, and a son.

'Tis true my Lord, we all can witness it.

He that my discontent objects to me,
With the fair Princess speaks uncertainly.
The man judicious such for fools allows,
As have their inward hearts drawn in their brows:
Is there in all that bench a man so honest
That can in this be discontent with me?
I charge you all; those favours I receive
From his high Majesty, I swallow not
With greedy appetite, perhaps like you:
When I am graced, it comes with awe and fear,
Lest I offend that Prince that holds me dear.
That for my brow.

But for your scornful sending
Of the fair Princess dower back to the King,
How can you answer that?

Why Chester thus:
I am a man, though subject; if the meanest
Lord over his wife; why should that privilege
Be only bard me? should I wive an Empress,
And take her dowerlesse, should we love, or hate,
In that my bounty equals her estate.
Witness that Judge above you, I esteem
The Princess dearly, and yet married her
But as my wife, for which I am infinitely
Bound to the King: why should I grow engaged
Above my power, since this my Lords you know,
The less we run in debt, the less we owe.
Give me my thoughts, and score you on I pray,
I wish no more than I have means to pay.

Shall we my Lord his actions censure freely?

And sentence them.

A Persian History
I read of late, how the great Sophy once
Flying a noble Falcon at the Herne,
In comes by chance an Eagle sousing by,
Which when the Hawke espies, leaves her first game,
And boldly v^nters on the King of Birds;
Long tugged they in the Air, till at the length
The Falcon better breathed, seized on the Eagle,
And struck it dead: The Barons praised the Bird,
And for her courage she was peerless held.
The Emperor, after some deliberate thoughts,
Made him no less: he caused a Crown of gold
To be new framed, and fitted to her head
In honour of her courage: Then the Bird
With great applause was to the market-place
In tri ^mph borne, where, wh^n her utmost worth
Had been proclaimed, the common Executioner
First b^ the ^ings command took off her Crown,
And after with a sword struck off her head,
As one no better than a noble Traitor
Unto the King of Birds.

^his use we make
From this your ancient Persian History,
That you a noble and a courteous Peer,
Praised for your hospital virtues and high bounty,
Shall be first crowned with Laurel to your worth:
But since you durst against your Sovereign
Oppose your self, you by your pride misled,
Shall as a noble Traitor loose your head.

That Sentence we confirm, and it shall stand
Irrevocable by our straight command.

I am glad my Liege I have a life yet left,
In which to show my bounty, even in that
I will be liberal, and spend it for you;
Take it, 'tis the last jewell that I have,
In lieu of which oh grant me but a grave.

A Laurel wreath, a scaffold, and a block,
Our self will see the Execution done:
Only thy life is ours, thy goods are free.

My Lord, you are the life of courtesy,
And you are kind unto me above measure,
To give away what might enrich your self.
Since they are mine, I will bestow them thus:
The best of those that were so late but yours,
My jewels, I, by will, restore you back,
You shall receive them separate from the rest:
To you the Kings son, and by marriage mine,
On you I will bestow my Armoury,
Stables of Horse, and weapons for the wars,
I know you love a Soldier: to the Princess,
And my two Daughters I give equal portions
From my revenue; but if my fair wife
Prove, and produce a Male-child, him I make
My universal Heir, but if a Female,
Her Dower is with the rest proportionable.
The next I give, it is my Soul to Heaven,
Where my Creator reigns: my words thus end,
Body to Earth, my Soul to Heaven ascend.

Stay.

Hold

Executioner forbear.

Hear me a Daughter for a Father plead.

Oh Father, hear me for my Husbands life,
Doubly allied, I am his Niece and Wife.

Oh Father hear me, for a Father crave.

Than sentence him oh let me perish rather;
I plead for him that's both my son and Father.

Oh make your mercy to this prisoner free.

Father to us.

And Husband unto me.

Hence with the^e womanish clamours.

Unto these
Let me my Liege presume to add another,
Behold him kneel that is your son and brother.

Your Sister and your Daughter great King hear.

Your Mother and your Daughter.

Or like dear,
Your Queen and Sister.

Speak, what hath he done?

Who ever saw a father on a son
Give sentence? or my Royal Lord, which rather
Adds to your guilt, a son condemn the father?

My Liege, command them hence, they but disturb
The Traitor in his death.

A Traytor's he
That dares so term him, Chester, we mean thee:
Our best of subjects, with our height of grace
We wed thee to us, in this strict embrace
Thy virtues, bounties, envied courtesies;
Thy courage, and thy constancy in death,
Thy love and Loyalty to the end continued,
More than their clamorous importunities
Prevail with us: then as our best and greatest,
Not to exceed, but equal thee in love,
To end between us this Heroic strife,
Accept what we most pecioushold, thy Life.

Which as your gift ^'le keep, till Heaven Nature
Confine it hence, and always it expose
Unto your love and service; I never loved it,
But since'twas yours, and by your gift now mine.

I observe in thee
The substance of all perfect Loyalty;
In you save flattery, envy, hate, and pride
Nothing, or ought to goodness that's allied;
Resign those places that belong to him,
Better than so borne noble, be unborn.
Till you your hearts can fashion to your faces,
We here suspend you from your stiles and places.

A royal doom.

Once more from us receive
Thy beauteous Bride, as we will hand our Queen:
The Prince already is possessed of his.
Nay Bonvile, as your Bridals were together,
So follow in your rank, and by the stile
Of a Lord Baron, you are now no less
If you dare take our word: Our Funerals thus
Wee'le turn to feasting, and our blood to wines
Of most choice taste pressed, from the purest Grape.
Our noble Martial, kinsman, and our friend,
In our two virtues after times shall sing,
A Loyal Subject, and a Royal King.

THat this Play's old, 'tis true, but now if any
Should for that cause despise it, we have many
Reasons, both just and pregnant, to maintain
Antiquity, and those too, not al vain.
We know (and not long since) there was a time,
Strong lines were not looked after, but if rime,
Othen 'twas excellent: who but believes,
But Doublets with stuffed bellies and big sleeves,
And those Trunke-hose, which now the age doth scorn,
Were all in fashion, and with frequence worn;
And what's now out of date, who is't can tell,
But it may come in fashion, and suit well?
With rigour therefore judge not, but with reason,
Since what you read was fitted to that season.

