THe Title of the Show is Scaturigo, (...) the Fountain and Well-spring of all
the Liberal Arts, and Sciences, or Mysteries whatsoever; which as they have
been long since planted, and encouraged: so they are at this time the more
liberally watered, and therefore more plenteously enriched by their blessed
Mother and bountiful Nurse, the most illustrious City London: For the first,
namely, the Arts and Studies of the Brain; How many Grammar Schools have
been by her and her indulgent Children erected (through all, or most of all)
the Sheers and Counties of England, to the propagation and advancement of
Learning, to the furnishing of the Accademies with Students, and from them, the
four flourishing Kingdoms (now under the Sword and Sceptre of his most Sacred
Majesty) with profound Theologists* expert Physicians, learned Philosophers,
skilful Mathemati^ians, c. If any man desire to be further instructed, in the
number of their Free-schooles, Hospitals, Almes-houses, Lectures, Exercises,
(scarce to be numbered) with the names of the founders, and the Annual
revenues still continued, and daily enlarged? for their perpetual
maintenance* I refer them unto our English Annalls, where they may be
plenteously satisfied; neither can these few Sheets of Paper contain them,
much rather require a Volumne.

Now for all other Sciences, Mysteries, Trades, and Manufactures, (including
as well Merchants as Mechannicks) What City in Europe yields more plenty? more
variety? In so much that by reason of Bartering, Bargening, Trade and Commerce*
(besides the Boss or Exchange, daily thronged with Merchants of all Countries.)
The populous Streets rather appear an open Matt, then an ordinary Market; she
not favouring and fostering her owns Natiues only, but Strangers, and of all
foreign Nations whatsoever. Here they suck the Milk of her breasts, here
they are fed, here cherished by this excellent City, and therefore neither
impertinently, nor unproperly may she be stiled: Artium Scientiarum inundans
Scatarigo.

It represents Arion with his Harp in his hand* riding upon the back of a
Dolphin, behind him for ornament old Oceanus and Amphetrite, mounted upon two
Sea horses, holding each of them a Staff and a Banner, wherein are displayed
the Arms of the two Sheriues now in place, of him it is thus commented.

Arion was borne in Methimnus, whom Pyranthus, (or as Gellius and Herodatus
please to name him) Periander, for his excellent skill upon the Harp, greatly
delighted in: Dycaearohus describes him for a noble Ditherambick Corinth into
Sicilia and Italy, to whom Apollo appears (the night before his embarking) in
a Dream, and willed him to attire himself in his Robe and Laurel, and to be
ready in any danger to sing unto his Harp, and not to fear any thing. The
next day (being far from shore) the Mariners having notice what Treasure
he had aboard, conspired amongst themselves to cast him into the Sea, which
he perceiving, begged of them so much respite, that habited as he was, he
might sing one funeral farewell to his Harp, which granted, so sweet was his
Harmony, that the Dolphins came sporting about the ship, as much delighted
with his Music: amongst whom he cast himself, and they supported him, and
bore him back unto Corinth; where having told this wondermeat, the King
graciously entertained him; soon after the same Bark being by a tempest
driven into the same Harbour, notice thereof being given unto the King, he
strictly questioned them concerning Arion, they affirmed him to be dead at
Sea, to which when they had sworn, he caused Arion suddenly to appear before
them* who confounded with shame, were commanded to death: Appollo after
translated Arion for his Music, and the Dolphin for his Pity amongst the
Stars.

Thamesis, upon whose silver breast
Arion with his Dolphin new doth rest.
How I admire thy Glory, State, and Pride,
Upon this Solemn day thus beautified?
Ganges renowned in all foreign Lands,
Nor T^gus boasting of her golden Sands
Can parallel thy Riches; Not Caister
Famous for Swans, nor Po her clear streamed Sister:
Winding Meander, nor yet Simois Flood,
Which Fame saith, at the Trojan Seige van blood.
Swift Rubicon, whose memory shall last,
Because it, Caesar with his Army post.
Choaspes, that almost guirts Persia round:
Nor Issa, by Darius aeath renowned.
The Amazonian Thermedon, the Nyle
That breeds in it the weeping Crocodile.
The Euphrates, the Volga, and the Ryne,
Nay Iordan too, that waters Palestine:
What Paris Some, or Romes swift Tyber be,
The one a Brooke, the other a Ditch to thee*
And my Crowned Dolphin doth proclaim thee thus,
You are the choice Darling of Oceanus.
And if thou hast a Genius, (as it is guest
All Rivers have?) know wherein you are most blessed.
Not that thy Banks are so defenc't and stable,
Nor within Land you are so far navigable,
Not for thy Flux and Refluxe, (Ebbs and Tides)
Or the rich Meadows bordering round thy sides.
Not that being pleased, you are smooth, being angry, curled,
Nor thy rare Bridge not equalled through the World.
Not for those goodly Buildings reared so bye,
To make these line to perpetuity.
Not for thy spacious Limits and Extents,
(And yet all those vnriuald Ornaments.)
But if I truly shall to thee commend,
That bliss wherein thou others dost transcend,
Behold this Day the Honour and the State
Of this thy Great and God like Magistrate.
Not waited on by Boats made of the Trunks
Of Canes, or hollowed Trees, or petty Iunks,
Or wanton Gondelaes: but Barges, strong,
And richly decked, who as they plow along
Thy breast, with their smooth keels to make their way,
See how the Wind doth with their streamers play,
How beautiful thy Waives how thronged thy shores,
And what a Musick's when they strike their Oars*
To see them with Grave Magistrates so Manned,
Powerful by Sea, and potent too by Land.
So many Sciences, and Mysteries
Distinguisht into several Companies,
In sundry bottoms: and each Art and Trade
Known by the Flags and Pendants here displayed.
And London which Metropolis we call,
The Fount and Scaturigo of them all.
Grave Praetor, now this Day to be invested
The Head of al these, pass on unmolested,
In your great Inauguration proceed,
Which to your lasting Honour is decreed.
In your return baske you shall understand,
Those Triumphs that attend on you by Land.

Perseus, Andromeda with the Sea-monster are only showed upon the Water, but
their expression I refer to their place by Land.

Paul's Churchyard: Namely, St. Katherine, Patroness of this Worshipful
Company, upon a Lyon, bordered about with the Sea-waues* (the Arms of the
Haberdashers) she is Crowned as being a Queen, bearing a Wheel in her hand,
full of sharpe cutting Irons, the Emblem of her Martyrdom: Her attendants to
beautify the plat-forme, are four Virgins, Humility the first: Of which
Virtue Seneca thus speaks, Laus vera humili sepe contingit vito. The second
Truth, which scales the Heavens, illustateth the Earth, maintains Justice,
governs Cities, kills Hatred, cherishes Love, and discovers Treasons: The
third Zeal, of which it is thus laid; Office is strengthened by Zeal, and
Zeal makes authority invincible. The fourth, Constancy: according with that
of
All which are necessary in a Magistrate, as needful in a Martyr: Of the
Etymology of her Name, her Royal Birth, her Breeding, her Life and Death, in
the last years Discourse I gave a large Charactar, and therefore preceede to
her Speech, which is as follows.

DOth any wonder, why St. Katherine, she

Is mounted on a Lyon? Let such know,
That (being a Queeney this kingly beast doth owe
Me duty by in^tinct: Besides I come
Both with Virginity and Martyrdom,
Sainted moreover, and (of these) the least
Able to tame the most insulting Beast.
But this is he the billows doth divide,
And therefore justly on his back I ride:
All these belonging to this Worthy Trade,
The Lyon, Sea-waues, and the Princely Maid*
That for the Arms: note next what I display
In this my Banner here, Serve and obey*
Rare Moral in this Motto, (if well scand)
For Kings are Gods, Viz-gerents, and command
By Sword and Sceptre: and by their good Grace
Can prefer others both to power and place.
As you this Day behold this Scarlet worn,
And Sword of Justice thus in public borne;
The Cap of Maintenance, Collar of Esses,
(Which Travellers in all their large progresses
Can in no City parallel, that's site
In the earths division, known quadrupertite:)
So, whosoever shall himself oppose
Against this Magistrate, (as one of those
The King deputes as Chief) himself he brings
To be a rebel to the King of Kings:
Far be it an arch*traitor in that kind
Amongst all these goodly Companies, (combind
In mutual love and league:) should dare to appear
In the fair Progress of this Praetors year.
Behold, and view who my attendants be,
Constancy, Zeal, Truth, and Humility.
Be constant then unto this Grave Lord Mayor,
And the two Shrieues that his assistants are;
Chose by the public Voice and Senats Doom,
As Censors, and the Tribunes were in Rome;
Do it in Zeal, in Truth, and all submission,
That their be found no cross interposition
Betwixt Power and Obedience, so shall all
Arts, Mysteries, and Trades Mechannicali,
Thrive* prosper, and increase, so long as they
Honour the King, the Magistrate obey.

This discovers Andromeda the Daughter of King Cepheus, and Cassiopeia, tide
to a Rock* and ready to be devoured by a Sea-monster: But rescued by Perseus
the Son of Iupiter and Danae, who is mounted upon a Pegasus, or Winged-horse,
who is said to be bred from Neptune and Medusa, and in Hellicon a Mountain in
B^^tia, striking a Stone with his hoof, opend that Fountain. called (from
him) Hyppocrene, much celebrated by the Muses. Perseus in one hand hath an
Harp or crooked Sword, and upon his left arm a Shield with a Gorgons head
figured therein: In Perseus are comprehended all the prime Virtues acquired in
a Noble Magistrate: In Andromeda Chastity and Innocence: I cannot here insist
Ouid, who hath most elegantly expressed it; but come to the Speech delivered by
Perseus.

I Perseus, Ioues son, borne of Heavenly Stead,
Mounted upon a swist Pegasian Steed,
Who with his hoof struck up the Muses Well,
Whence Euthusia^ma's and hie Ruptures swell.
As through the aerie tract I forced my way,
Spied here the Lovely Maid Andromeda,
Cheynd to a Rock, on whom (so Fate hath lowerd)
Ready by a Sea-whale to be deuourd.
Know there is figured in this Princely Maid,
Chastity, and Innocence, which Divine aid
Is ready to assist still from above,
By one or other of the Sons of Jove.
Of which denomination, none, more Grace
Can claim than you, who are in power and place,
And hold this Day in chief; then Perseus like,
Keep that your Sword still drawn, ready to strike;
Making such Monsters of your Justice taste,
Who insidiate the Innocuous and the Chaste.
Observe (Grave Sir) the Atmes and Shield I bear,
Such as your self, and others ought to wear,
Both for Defence and Offence: and in me
Embleam'd, all those prime Virtues that should be
In Persons of your Power, my Sword resembles
Unpartial Justice, at which guilt still trembles;
My Winged-horse, Celerity and Speed:
In doing it, that no illegal deed
May pass vnscourged, and there be took no rest,
Until relief be given to the oppressed.
This Shield that bears the Gorgons head imblaz'd,
Upon whose Snaky locks who ever gazed,
Were turned to statues of cold senseless stone,
Is that (Grave Magistrate) you now put on.
Whilst on your Arm you wear this constant Targe,
Bearing your self uprightly in your Charge.
All such as shall in Malice or in Pride
Your Purple State detract from, or deride,
Discover this before them, it hath power
To freeze them into Marble the same hour
Strive you to imitate what I have done,
Since you this day, are Perseus and Ioues son.



The Right Honourable the Lord Mayor in present, though free of this
Worshipful Company of the Haberdashers, (at whose sole charge, the High
Solemnity of this Day is celebrated) yet was by Profession a Mercer, and his
chief Trading was in Florence for Satins, Taffaties, and Sarsnets; in Luca
for Taffaties and Sarsnets, in Gene for Gene Veluets, Damasks, c. In Bolognia
for Satins, Cypress, and Sarsnets. As also in Pysa, now because the
materials of which these Stuffs are made, are brought from the farthest
remote Countries upon the backs of Camels, Mules, Dromidaries and Elephants: I
made choice of this Beast, especially, of whose incomparable strength and most
pregnant understanding, if any desire to be fully satisfied, I must refer
them to Pliny, Gesner, but more essentially to Don Sebastian de Cobarruias
Oroz^o En el Tesoro de la Lengua Castellana, (from whom Minshaw borrowed his
Etymologicall Spanish Dictionary) upon the word Elephante, where are diverse
Stories of them, which but for the Gravity of the Author, might almost appear
incredible. The Elephant is guided by an Indian, upon his back is a fair
Castle furnished with change and variety of objects, c. the Speech delivered by
the Indian as follows.

No beast of all the Wilderness can vant
Like Srength or Wisdom with the Elephant.
And therefore, (if considerd well) none may
Better become the Triumphs of this Day.
What Hieroglificke can a man invent,
Emblem or Symbol, for a Government
In this high nature, apter or more fit
Deuis'd before, or to be thought of yet.
He bears a Castle (as this day we see,
But of what strength and puissance must you be
Supporting this great City? who must lay
Your shoulders to a burden; such as may
Make Atlas shrink bencath it; Temples, Towers
Rial^oes, spacious Mansions, Suburb bowers.
A weight to make the Hesperian Giant droop
And Hercules, (who bore up Heaven) to stoop.
Next, of what Understanding* Apprehension,
What Judgment, Knowledge, Wisdom and Retention?
Of what Fore-sight? what Body and what Brain?
What an Antomedan to guide the rain
Of Steeds vnmannag'd? what a Palinure
To steer this Helm? and such a Bark assure
In a Sea troubled, where can be no trust
In an inconstant Surge or angry Gust?
Yet such an Elephant we hope to find
Of you, both in the ability of Mind
And strength of Arm, by that encouragement
The former passage of your life hath lent:
Showed in your Judgment and Experience,
Your Gravity, and unchanged Temperance;
All general Virtues that become such State,
Behooveful in so Great a Magistrate:
So after Times unto your Fame shall story
How you have borne up in her pristine Glory
This flourishing City, not once shrinking under
So great a burden, (to successive wonder)
Since no skilled Pilot better could command
By Sea, or expert Charicter by Land.

Is the Scaturigo or Fountain of Virtue, from which all Arts and Sciences are
watered: I need not to spend Time in the description thereof, it being able
sufficiently to express it self, the nature thereof being in the Poem laid
open even unto the meanest capacity. There are twelve sundry persons to
beautify the Mo^ell, suiting with the number of the twelve Companies as the
Saints that pancrize them; and every of them a (...) on their arm, bearing
their several Scu^chions properly belonging to the Halls. The Speech from the
Fountain is thus delivered.

Twelve hours twice told, distinguish night and Day,
Twelve Caesars of the Iulian Line did sway
Romes Empire, and in cuery case of striffe
Where Action's tried or if concerning life,
Twelve makes the Jury full: the Zodaiacke Lines
Are likewise filled by twelve Celestial Signs,
Amongst which one in your Emblazons borne
Is numbered by the name of Capricorne.
Twelve Sibills we account* and they fore-told
Things happened since, although they spake of old
By twelve: the blessed Word in the Church instated
Was at the first divuldg'd and propagated.
Twelve Companies you are in Chief, 13. here
Present that number with those Arms they bear.
And hence the Inundant Scaturigo grows,
Which through our Kingdoms large Dominions flows,
By founded Schools, by Colleges, by Trade*
By Traffic, ^by Commerce, by Project laid.
For thrifty Bargain and all competent Gain,
Asswell arising from the Hand as Brain.
London the Mother and the Fountain styled*
And you of all her Sons new eldest Child;
(Heir to her great good Works) encourage still
These pious Acts, and by Example fill
Void places with the like, and in this State
You bear, as being now chief Magistrate:
So order this your numerous Charge, that they
May God, the King, Your self Serve and Obey.

Parmentsius a Greek Author thus relates, King Mel^seus who ruled in Creete,
had two Daughters, to whom Iupiter in his Infancy was sent Saturne: but they
being at that time dry-brested, caused him to suck of a Goat called
Amalthaea, by whose Milk he was nourished, till the time that he came to be
weyned, (this Goat usually brought forth two twins) Iupiter after in requital
of so great a benefit received by her, translated her amongst the Stars. This
Goat is that Capricornus one of the 12. Celestial Signs, The two Kidds (her
twins) placed in the Heauensolso, were first observed by the great Astrologer
Cl^ostrates Tenedi^s. The last Speech at Night is delivered by Arion, which is
a short commemoration of the former passages of the Days Triumph in these
words following.

Now hath the Sun put off his golden beams,
Watering his hot Steeds in cold Ister streams,
And tired with his days travel, in the West
Took up his Inn: But ere you go to rest,
Remember what Arion still proclaims
In the due honour of the noble Thames.
Next, how your Queene-like Saint directs the way
For you to rule, for others to obey.
Then to be called Ioues Son you have the Grace,
And that in Persaus figured is your Place.
That in this able Elephant's implyde
Your Strength to bear, your Judgment to decide.
Last, that you are the Spring and Fountain made
To water enery Science, Art, and Trade;
Observing those, your Honour shall shine bright,
And so a happy and most blessed good-night.
I come last to the Artist, the Moddellor and Composer of these several
Pieces, Master Gerard Christmas, of whom (si paruis componert, magnalicet) as
Augustus Caesar, speaking of Rome, boasted, that he found it of Brick, but
he left it built of Marble: So he who found these Pageants and shows of
Wicker and Paper, rather appearing monstrous and prodigious Births, then any
Beast (presented in them) in the least kind imitating Nature: hath reduced them
to that sollidity and substance for the Materials, that they are so far from
one days washing to deface them, that the weathering of many Winters can not
impeach them: and for their excellent Figures and well-proportioned lineaments,
(by none preceding him) that could be said to be paralleled: In regard
therefore there be so many strangers of all Countries, and such as can judge
of Workmanship, come to be spectators of these Annual Triumphs, I could wish
that the undertaking thereof might be hereafter conferd (for the Honour of the
City) upon men like able and sufficient. For his own particular I conclude:
Hunc aliquis vix imitando superare potest.


