THE FAIR MAID OF THE WEST. OR, A Girl worth gold. The second part. As it was
lately acted before the King and Queen, with approved liking. By the Queens
Majesties Comedians.

Written by T. H.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, and are to be sold at his Shop in Ivy
Lane. 1631.

THe first part of this work I bestowed upon your friend Mr. Iohn Othow, the
second I have conferred upon you, both being incorporated into one House, and
noble Society. The proximitie in your Chambers, and much familiar conference,
having bred a mutual correspondency betwixt you. The prime motive inviting me
to this Dedication; the much love, and many courtesies reflecting upon me from
you both: Being the rather encouraged thereunto, that though the subject it
self carry no great countenance in the Title, yet it hath not only past the
censure of the Plebe and Gentry; but of the Patricians and Praetextatae: as
also of our royal Augustus and Livia. The reason why I have selected you my
Patrons, was to exclude my self from the number of those of whom Iuvenal
speaks, Satire 7.

Scire volunt omnes, mercedem solvere nemo. Please you at any of your more
leasur'd hours, to vouchsafe the perusal of these slight papers, your
acceptance shall be my recompense. Receive my wishes for your earths happiness
in millions, for your heavens bliss in myriads. Taking my leave of you with
that in Adelph.

Nunquam ita magnifice quicquam dicam,
Id virtus quin superet tua.
Yours plenally devoted THOMAS HEYVVOOD.
Courteous Reader, if thou be tired in the first part, I would not wish thee
to be travelled in the second; but I hope much better, and that thou did leave
in the last, as one that came late to his Inn to rest himself for that night,
only with purpose to go on with the second, as he that rises early the next
morning (having refresh't himself) to proceed on his journey. By this time you
cannot choose but be acquainted with the most of our Acts, bu^ not with all;
and more particularly for Spencer, and his western Bess. With these
Countrymen of ours in their fellowship, you have heard the beginning of their
troubles, but are not yet come to the end of their travels; in which you may
accompany them on land, without the prejudice of deep ways, or robbers; and by
Sea, free from the danger of rocks or Pirates; as neither using horse or ship,
more then this book in thine hand, and thy chair in thy chamber. More
complement I purpose not, and (I hope) thou expect not* Farewell.

One studious to be thine T. H.
IT must not, may not, shall not be endured:
Left we for this our Country? to be made
A mere neglected Lady here in Fesse,
A slave to others, but a scorn to all?
Can womanish ambition, heat of blood,
Or height of birth brooke this, and not revenge?
Revenge? on whom? on mighty Mullisheg?
We are not safe then; On the English stranger?
And why on her, when theirs no apprehension
That can in thought pollute her innocence?
Yet something I must do. What? nothing yet?
Nor must we live neglected; I should doubt
I were a perfect woman, but degenerate
From mine own sex if I should suffer this:
I have a thousand projects in my brain,
But can bring none to purpose.

Called your Majesty?


No, yet I think I did, be gone, yet stay.
Will not this mishapt Embrion grow to form?
Not yet? nor yet?

I attend your highness pleasure.


'Tis perfect, and Iha'te,
I am ambitious but to think upon it,
And if it prove as I have fashioned it,
I shall be trophide ever.

I wait still.


The King no way in peril, she secure,
None harmed, all pleased, I sweetly satisfied,
And yet revenged at full. Brain, I for this
Will wreathe thee in a glorious arch of gold,
stuck full of Indian gems. But Tota, whom
Wilt thou employ in this? the Moors are treacherous,
And them we dare not trust.

You need not me.


Say, wher's the King?


In the Presence.


How?


Distempered late, and strangely humerous,
The cause none can conjecture.

Send in his sweet heart,
And were his own heart double rib'd with brass,
Yet she would search the inmost of his thoughts.
No, 'tis not her on whom I build my project.
Is the King upon his entrance?

'Tis thought he is,
If so, this sudden strange distemperature
Hath not his purpose altered.

You have now leave
To leave us and attend the King,

I shall.


If any of the English Ladies train
Come in your way, you may request them hither,
Say, we would question some things of their country.

Madam, I shall.


Then on to your attendance, what we must,
We'll work by th'English, these we dare not trust.

'Tis the Queenes pleasure you attend her.


The Queen speak with me? Can you tell the business? A murren of these
barbers of Barberie, they have given me a receipt, that escape the colic as
well as I can, I shall be sure never to be troubled with the stone.


Yonder she walks. I leave ye.


Now sir, you are of England?


And I think you are a witch.


How sirrah?


A foolish proverb we use in our country, which to give you in other words,
is as much as to say, You have hit the nail on the head.


And servant to the English Elizabeth,
So great in Court by mighty Mullisheg,
You follow her?

I must confess I am not her Gentleman usher to go before her, for that way
as the case stands with me now, I can do her but small pleasure, I do follow
her.


You have seen both nations, England and our Fesse, how do our people differ?


Our countrymen eat and drink as yours do for all the world, open their
eyes when they would see, and shut them again when they would sleep: when
they go they set one leg before another, and gape when their mouths open, as
yours eat when they have stomachs, scratch when it itches: only I hold our
nation to be the cleanlier.


Cleanlier, wherein?


Because they never sit down to meat with such foul hands and faces.


But how your Ladies and choice Gentlewomen?


You shall meet some of them sometimes as fresh as flowers in May, and as
fair as my Mistress, and within an hour the same Gentlewoman as black as
your self, or any of your Morians.


Can they change faces so? not possible: show me some reason for it.


When they put on their masks.


Miskes, what are they?


Please you to put off yours, and I'll tell you.


We wear none but that which nature hath be^owed on us, and o^r births-give us
freely.


And our Ladies wear none but what the shops yield, and they buy for their
money.


Can thou be secret to me Englishman?


Yes, and chaste too, I have taken a medioine for it.


Be fixed to me in what I shall employ thee,
Constant and private unto my designs,
More grace and honour I will do to thee,
Then ere thou did receive from Mullisheg.

Grace and honour? his grace and honour was to take away some part, and she
would honour me to take away all: I'll see you damned as deep as the black
father of your generation the devil first.


Mistake me no^.


Nay if you were with child with a young princely devil, and had a mind to
any thing that's here, I'd make you lo^e your longing.


Sure this fellow is some sot.


Grace and honour, quotha.


How now Clem, whither in such post hast?


There, if you will have any grace and honour, you may pay fort as dear as I
have done; 'sfoot I have little enough left, I would fain carry home something
into my own country.


Why, what's the matter? I prithee stay.


No, Lieutenant you shall pardon me, not I, the room is too hot for me: I'll be
gone, do you stay at your own peril: I'll be no longer a prodigal, I'll keep
what I have.


This should have better sense, I'll next prove him.


Excuse me mighty Princess, that my boldness
Hath pressed thus far into your privacies.

You no way have offended; nay, come near,
We love to grace a stranger.

'T was my ignorance,
And no pretended boldness.

I have observed you
To be of some command amongst the English,
Nor make I question but that you may be
Of fair revennues.

A poor Gentleman.


Weel make thee rich; spend that.


Your graces bounty
Exceeds what merit can make good in me:
I am your highness servant.

Let that jewell be worn as our high favour.


'Sfoot I think
This Queen's in love with me. Madam, I shall.

If any favour I can do in Court
Can make you further gracious, speak it freely;
What power we have is yours.

Doubtless it is so, and I am made for ever.


Nay we shall ^ake it ill
To give our selves so amply to your knowledge,
And you not use us.

Use us, now upon my life she's caught:
What, courted by a Queen? a royal Princess;
Where were your eyes Bess, that you could not see
These hidden parts and mysteries, which this Queen
Hath in my shape observed? 'tis but a fortune
That I was borne to, and I thank heaven fort.

May I trust you?


With your life, with your honour.
I'll be as private to you as your heart
Within your bosom, close as your own thoughts.
I'll brag of this in England, that I once
Was ^avourite to a Queen, my royall-mistris.

If what you have already promised you'll made good,
I'll prove so.

Madam, let this,


What?


This kiss.


This fool, this ass, this insolent gull.


Why, did not your grace mean plainly?


In what, sir?


Did you not court me?


How, that face?
Think thou I could love a Monkey, a Babone?
Know, were I mounted in the height of lust,
And a mere prostitute, rather then thee
I'd embrace, one, name but that creature
That th^ dost think most odious.

Pardon me Lady,
I humbly take my leave.

Have I given you your description I pray, sir,
Be secret in'^.

I shall be loath to tell it,
Or publish it to any.

Yet you are not gone:
Know then you have incurred
The Kings wrath first, our high displeasure next,
The least of which is death; yet will you grow
More near to us, and prove loyal unto my present purposes.
I will not only pardon you what's past.
But multiply my bounties.

I am your prisoner.


Be free, th^s nothing can be called offence,
But that in thee we pardon.

I am fast.


And yet a free man: I am injured highly,
And thou must aide me in my just revenge.

Were it to combat the most valiantst Moore,
That ever Fesse, Morocko, or Argiers bred,
I for your sake would do it.

We seek nor blood,
Nor to expose thee to the least of danger:
I am modest, and what I dare not trust my own tongue with,
Or thoughts, I'll boldly give unto thine ears,
List: Do you shake your head, say, Is't done already?

Wrong my friend?


Do you cast doubts or dangers? Is not our l^fe.
Our honour all in your hand, and will you lavish us.
Or scant that bounty should crown you with excess.

I'll pause upon it.


Is not your life ours by your insolence? have not we power to take it?


Say no more, I'll do it.


But may I hope,


I have cast all doubts, and know how it may be compa^.


There's more gold, your secrecy that's all I crave.


To prove my self in this just cause I have,
An honest man, or a pernicious knave.

Take the advantage of this night.


I shall expect fair end,
All doubts are cast.

So make a Queen thy friend.


All musick's harsh, command these discords cease,
For we have war within us.

Mighty King,
What is't offends your highness?

Nothing Bess:
Yet all things do: Oh, what did I bestow,
When I gave her away.

The Queen attends you.


Let her attend.


I, King, neglected still,
My just revenge shall wound, although not kill.

I was a traitor to my own desires,
To part with her so slightly: what, no means
To alter these proceedings?

Strange disturbances.


What might the project be?


May it please your Highness, shall the Mask go forward,
That was intended to grace this jovial night?

We'll have none,
Let it be treason held
To any man that shall but name our pleasure,
Or that vain word, delight: The more I gaze,
The more I surfeit; and the more I strive
To free me from these fires, I am deeper wrapped:
In flames I burn.

Your discontent, great Prince, takes from us all
The edge of mirth: these nuptial joys that should
Have swelled our souls with all the sweet varieties
Of apprehensive wishes, with your sadness
Grows dull and leaden: they have lost their taste
In this your discontent all pleasures lose their sweetness.

Mighty Fesse,
Hath any ignorant neglect in us
Bred these disturbances?

Offence and you
Are like the warring elements, opposed.
And Fesse, why a king, and not command thy pleasure?
Is she not within our kingdom? nay, within our palace,
And therefore in our power: is she alone
That happiness that I desire on earth?
Which since the heavens have given up to mine hands,
Shall I despise their bounty? and not rather
Run through a thousand dangers, to enjoy
Their prodigal favours? dangers? tush, there's none:
We are here amidst our people, walled with subjects round,
And danger is our slave: besides, our war
Is with weak woman. Oh, but I have sworn
And sealed to her safe conduct; What of that?
Can a king swear against his own desires,
Whose welfare is the sinews of his Realm?
I should commit high treason against my self,
Not to do that might give my soul content,
And satisfy my appetite with fullness. Alcade.

My lord.


Rides the English Negro still within the harbour?


Some league from land.


Lest that these English should attempt escape,
Now they are laden fully with our bounties,
Cast thou a watchful eye upon these two.

I shall.


I know their loves so fervent and entire,
They will not part asunder, she leave him,
Or he without her make escape to sea.
Then while the one's in sight our hopes are safe.
Be that thy charge.

I'll be an Argus over them.


Unless the King be still in love with Bess,
Repenting him of their late marriage,
'Tis beyond wonder to calculate these storms.

How goes the hour?


About some four.{us}


We rose too soon Bess from your nuptial feasts,
Something we tasted made us stomach sick,
But now we find a more contentfull change.

Your sunshine is our day.


Dispose your selves
All to your free d^sires; to dancing some,
Others to mount our stately Barberie horse,
So famous through the world for swift carer,
Stomach, and fiery pace.
Those that love arms,
Mount for the tilt: this day is yours, to you tis consecrate.
He commits treason in the highest degree,
Whose cloudy brow dares the least tempest show
To cross what we intend: pleasure shall spring
From us to flow on you.

Long live the King:


To your free pastimes; leave us.
Captain, stay Captain, I read a fortune in thy brow,
More then the slight presage of a^guire,
Which tells me thou, and only thou art marked
To make me earthly blessed.

That I can do it?


It lies in thee to raise thy ruined fortunes
As high as is a Viceroy's, wreathe thy front
Within a eircled piramis of gold,
And to command in all our territories,
Next to our person.

Golden promises.


Our words are acts, our promises are deeds,
We do not feed with air: it lies in thee,
We two may grapple souls, be friends and brothers.

Teach me how.


I do not find thee coming: in thy looks
I cannot spy that fresh alacrity,
Which with a glad and sprightful forwardness,
Should meet our love half way.

You wonder me.


No, thou art dull, or fearful, fare thee well,
Thou had a fate lade up to make thee chronicled
In thy own Country, but thou wilt basely lose it,
Even by thine own neglect.

Forespeak me not,
The Sun ne'er met the summer with more joy
Then I'd embrace my fortunes; but to you,
Great king, to whom I am so greatly bound,
I'd purchased with a danger should fright earth,
Astonish heaven, and make all hell to tremble;
I am of no shrinking temper.

Prove but as wise as thou art bold and valiant,
And gain me wholly to thee, half thou hast already
Purchased by this bold answer; but perform
The rest, and we are all and only thine.

Show me the way to gain this royal purchase,
If I do it not, divide me from your presence,
From your grace, and all those glorious hopes you have proposed
Turn into scorns and scandalls.

I am dull,
And drowsy on the sudden: whilst I sleep,
Captain, read there.

To make Bess mine some secret means devise,
To thy own height and heart I'll make thee rise.
Is not this ink the blood of Basilisks,
That kills me in the eyes, and blinds me so,
That I can read no further: 'twas composed
Of Dragons poison, and the gall of Aspes,
Of Serpents venom, or of Vipers stings,
It could not read so harsh else: Oh my fate;
No^hing but this? this? Had a parliament
Of fiends and furies in a synod sat,
And devised, plotted, parleyed, and contrived,
They scarce could second this; This? 'tis unparalleled:
To strumpet a chaste Lady, injure him
That rates her honour dearer then his life.
T'imploy a friend in treasons against his friend,
And put that friend to do it: t'impose on me
The hateful stile and blot of pandarisme,
That am a Gentleman: nay, worse then this,
Make me in this a traitor to my country,
In giving up their h^nours: Who but a Moor,
Of all that bears mans shape, likest a devil,
Could have devised this horror? Possible
That he should mark out me? What does my face
Prognosticate, that he should find writ there
An index of such treasons? But beware,
'Twas his own plot, I, and his cunning too:
I'll add that to his project: but a Viceroy,
And a kings Minion, titles that will shadow
Ills the most base and branded. Not to do it
May purchase his displeasure, which can be
No less then death or bondage: here's proposed
Honour and peril. But what writes he further;
We are impatient of delays, this night
Let it be done.
I am doubtful of my purpose,
And can resolve of nothing.

If he fail,
I'll have his flesh cut small as winters snow
O^ summers atoms.

Ha, was that by us?


Where was I? Oh, I dream't upon the sudden,
How fast was I.

A fair warning 'twas, have you the cunning
To speak your thoughts in dreams?

Who's in the next room?


My lord.


My Captain, was it thou?
Sleep did surprise my senses, worthy friend,
And in my dreams I did remember thee.

How, me my lord?


Me thought I had emploid thee in a business,
In which thou were or fearful, or else false,
At which I was so overcome with rage,
That from my dreams I started.

Seamen say,
When Halcions sing, look for a storm that day
There's death in my denial.

Did you read,
That scrowl we gave you Captain there's wrapped up
A thousand honours for thee, and more gold
Then should thou live a double Nestors age,
Thou could find ways to lavish.

Add to your work a business of more danger,
That I may think me worthy, otherwise
This slight employment will but prize me low
And of desertlesse merit.

Think thou Captain
It may be easily compassed?

Dare you trust me?


I dare.


Then know, besides to dare and can,
I will, though work beyond the power of man,
I'll set my brains in action.

Noble friend,
Above thy thoughts our honours shall extend.

I am not to be shaken.


Where be our Eunuchs?
We'll crown our hopes and wishes with more pomp
And sumptuous cost, then Priam did his sons,
That night he bosomed Hellen; she's as fair,
And we'll command our pomp to be as rare.
We will have torches shall exceed the stars
In number and in brightness: we will have
Rare change of music shrill and high,
That shall exceed the spheres in harmony.
The jewels of her habit shall reflect,
To daze all eyes that shall behold her state.
Our treasure shall like to a torrent rush
Streams of rewards, richer then Tagus sands,
To make these English strangers swim in gold.
In wild Moriskoes we will lead the bride:
And when with full satieties of pleasures
We are dull and satiate, at her radiant eyes
Kindle fresh appetite, since they aspire,
T'exceed in brightness the high orbs of fire.
Make this Night mine, as we are King of Fesse,
You are Viceroy, Captain.

Make my estate much less,
And my attempts more honourable: honour and virtue,
To me seem things in opposition:
Nor can we with small danger catch at one,
But we must lose the other. Oh my brain,
In what a labyrinth art thou? Say I could
Be false, as he would make me; what device?
What plot? what train have I to compass it?
Or with what face can I solicit her,
In treason towards my friend?

I am to solicit Spencer
To lie with the Moors Queen; a business, Bess
Will hardly thank me for: but howsoever
I have undertane it.

Impossibilities all; the more I wade,
The more I drown in weakness.

Captain.


Oh Lieutenant,
Never was man perplexed thus.

What, as you?
Had you but my disturbance in your brain,
'Twould tax a Stoics wit, or Oedipus.
Why Captain, a whole school of Sophisters
Could not unriddle me.

I would we might change business.


I would give boot so to be rid of mine.


Shall we be free and open breasted?


How?


As thus;
Tell me thy grievances, and unto thee
I will unvail my bosom: both disclosed
I'll beg in mine thy counsel and assistance,
Thy cause shall mine command.

A heart, a hand.


I am to woo fair Bess to lie with Mullisheg.


And I woo Spencer to embrace the Queen.


Is't possible?


'Tis more then possible, 'tis absolutely past.


There's not a hair to chose, can counsel me?


Can you advise me?


I am past my wits.


And I beyond all sense.


Would thou do it, here lay the way plain before thee.


What, for gold
Betray my friend and country, would you Captain?

What and wear a sword
To guard my honour and a Christians faith,
I'd flesh it here fi^st.

Nobly resolved.


We are not safe Lieutenant, Moors are treacherous.
Nay come, thy counsel,
Fesse hath proffered me
The honour of a Viceroy; and withal,
If I should fail performance, cunningly
Hath threatened me with death.

You still propose
The danger, but you show no way to clear them.

Brain, let me waken thee, 'sfoot hast thou no project? dost thou partake my
dullness?


The more I strive, the more I am entangled.


And I too. Not yet?


Nor yet, nor ever.


'Twas coming here, now again 'tis vanished.


Call it back again for heavens sake.


Again.


Thanks heaven.


And now again 'tis gone.


Can you not catch fast hold on it?


Give me way,
Let's walk Lieutenant: Could a man propose
A stratagem to gull this lustful Moor,
To supply him, and then to satiate her?

Good.


Next, out of all these dangers secure us,
And keep our treasure safe.

'Twere excellent.


But how shall this be done?


Why Captain, know not you?


Think thou it in the power of man to work it?
Yet come, I'll try, I owe my fate a death,
Be swayed by me in all things.

Noble Captain, I do not wish to outlive thee.


THe King was wondrous pleasant: Oh my Bess,
How much am I indebted to his highness,
Only for gracing thee.

Could my Spencer
Think that a barbarous Moor could be so trained
In humain virtues?

Fie upon it: I am so tired with dancing with these same black
shee-chimney-sweepers, that I can scarce set the best leg forward, they have so
tired me with their Morisc^es, and I have so tickled them with our Country
dances, Sellengers round, and Tom Tiler: we have so fidled it.


Sirrah, what news will you tell to your friends when you return into England.


Brave news, which though I can neither write nor read, yet I have committed
them to my tables and the rest of my memory.


Let's hear some of your novelties.


First and foremost I have observed the wisdom of these Moors, for some two
days since being invited to one of the chief Bashaws to dinner, after meat,
sitting by a huge fire, and feeling his shins to burn, I requested him to pull
back his chair, but he very understandingly sent for three or four Masons and
removed the chimney: the same Mo^ian entreated me to lie with him, and I
according to the state of my travels, willing to have a candle burning by, but
he by no means would grant it; I asked him why? No, says he, we'll put out
the light that the fleas may not know where to find us.


No storm at sea could be so tyrannous,
Nor half th'^right bear in his forehead bare,
As I spy in that look.

Let not your looks pre^ge more terrors then*
Your tongues can speak; out with it at once Lieutenant.

Captain speak.


We're all lost.


All shipwrak't.


Are we ashore, and shall we be cast away?


Great Mullisheg is royal.


False to you.


Gracious and kind.


Disloy all to us all.


Wrap me not in these wonders worthy friend,
The very doubt of what the danger is,
Is more then danger can be.

Be it death,
So we may dye together: here's a heart
Fear never could affright.

The king still loves your Bess.


Ha?


The Queen your Spencer.


How?


This night he must enjoy her.


And she him.


A thousand deaths are in that word contrived.
I'll make my passage through the blood of kings,
Rather then suffer this.

I through hell,
Or were there place more dangerous.

Else all die.


Die, 'sfoot this is worse then being made an Eunuch as I was.


We have yet life, and therefore cherish hope.


All hopes are banished in the deep abyss
Of our perplexed thoughts.

All things run retrograde.


Why Captain? why Lieutenant? had you the skill
To bring my ship thus far, to wrack her here?
Past you the Ocean, to perish in the harbour?
Thou, Tom Goodlack
Were ever true and just to my designs,
And can thou fail me now?

I study for you.


Hast thou brought me but to see my Spencers shadow,
And not enjoy the substance: for what more
Have I yet had from him, then from his picture,
That once hung in my Chamber. Gentlemen, amongst you all
Rescue an innocent maid from violence:
Or do but say it cannot be prevented:
I begin, he that best loves me follow.

What means Bess?


If it could be fashioned to my thoughts,
And have success, 'twere brave.

What, noble friend?


To thrive but as we purpose.


Have you way?


'Tis bu^ a desperate course; and if it fail
The worst can be but death: and I, even I,
That laid the plot, will teach them how to dye.
I'll lead them on.

If thou hast any project.


Joy or comfort.


And if not comfort, counsel.


Say it thrive?


What Captain? what?


You'll rip it from the womb
Ere it be fully hatched now:
If it prosper but to my desire
And wishes, 'twere admirable.

No longer hold us in suspense, good Captain.
But free us from these fears.

You noble friend,
This night cast gracious eyes upon the Queen:

And prove to me disloyal?


Still you cross me,
And make the birth abortive. You fair Bess,
With amorous favours entertain the King.

And yield her self to his intemperate lust?


You still prevent me; either give me way
To show you light unto your liberties,
Or still remain in darkness.

Hear him out.


You sooth the Queen,
I'll flatter with the King,
Let's promise fair on both sides: say, 'tis done
All to their own desires.

The event of this?


A happy freedom, with a safe escape
Unto our ship this night.

Oh, could this be.


Fortune assists the valiant and the bold,
We'll bid fare for it. I had forgot my self,
Wher's Clem?

Noble C^ptain.


Post to the ship, bid Forset man the long Bo^
With ten good Musketeers, and at a watchword,
If we can free our passage, take us in.
Nay make haste, one minutes stay is death.

I am gone in a twinkling.


To compass the Kings signet; then to command
Our passage, escape the gates and watches too:
For that I have brain. The King's upon his entrance;
Hours wast, revels come on, a thousand projects
Of death, hopes, and fears, are warring
In my bosom, and at once.
Eye you the Queen, and humour you the King;
Let no distaft nor discontented brow
Appear in you: their lust I'll make the ground,
To set all free, or keep your honour sound.
Disperse, the King's on coming.

We consecrate this evening, beauteous Bride,
To'ch honour of your nuptials. -- Is all done?

Done.


Is he ours?


Yours.


And we ever thine.


I, and so cast, that she shall grasp you freely;
And think she hugs her Spencer.

And when he bosoms you, thinks he infolds
His lovely Bess.

Thou make a Queen thy servant.


Your highness Signet to command our passage from chamber to chamber.


'Tis there.


The word.


'Tis Mullisheg.


This must bring us safe aboard.


We keep the Bride
Too long from rest now, she is free for bed.

Please her to accept it,
In honour of her beauty, this night I'll do her any service.

Mighty princess,
Excuse my breeding from such arrogance,
And overbold presumption, you nor yours
Can owe me any duty: '^is besides
The fashion of our country, not to trust
The secrets of a nuptial night like this,
To the eyes of any stranger.

At your pleasure,


With our first nights unlacing, mighty Queen,
We dare not trust our husbands, 'tis a modesty
Our English maids profess.

Keep your own customs as you shall think best,
So for this night we leave you to your rest.

Remember.


'Tis writ here.


Captain,


I am fast,
Now is my task in labour, and is plunged
In thousand throes of childebirth, dangerous it is
To deal where kings affairs are questioned,
Or may be parled. But what's he so base,
That would not all his utmost powers extend,
For freedom of his country and his friend.
When all the Court is silent, sunk in dreams,
Then must my spirits awake. By this the King
He has taken his leave of bride and bridegroom too:
And th'^morous Queen longs for some happy news
From Ruffman, as great Fesse expects from us.
My friend and Bess wrapped in a thousand fears,
To find my plot in action: and it now
Must take new life: auspicious fate thy aide,
To guard the honour of this English maid.

Tread soft, good Madam.


Is this the Chamber.


I'll bring him instantly.
He thinks this bed provided for his Bess,
And that she lodges here, while she poor soul
Embraces nought but air.

Thou make a Queen thy servant.


Beware, be not too loud lest that your tongue
Betrays you.

Mute as night,
As silent and as secret. Wrongs should be
Paid with wrongs, for so indeed 'tis meet,
My just revenge, though secret yet 'tis sweet.
Haste time, and hast our bounty.

Queen I shall.
So now were we all safe and in our Negro shipped,
Might thou lie there till dooms day, lustful Queen.

My lord the custom is in England still
For maids to go to bed before their husbands,
It saves their cheek from many a modest blush.

And in the dark.


We use it for the most part.


Soft may their bones lie in their beds of ashes
That brought this custom into England first.

This the place where Bess expects her Spencer*


Thou Viceroy of Argiers, for Captain, that
Is now thy title: thou hast won a King,
To be thy breast companion.

Not too loud.
Why enters not your highness? you are safe.

With as much joy as to our prophets rest.
But what thinks Spencer of this?

I have shifted in her place
A certain Moor, whom I have hired for money,
Which (poor soul) he entertains for Bess.

My excellent friend.


Beware of conference, lest your tongue reveals
What this safe darkness hides.

I am all silent.
Oh, thou contentfull night, into thy arms,
Of all that ere I tasted, sweetest and best,
I throw me, more for pleasure then for rest.

One fury clasp another, and there beget
Young devils between you: so fair Bess be safe.
I have here the kings signet, this will yield us
Way through the court and city, Bess being masked,
How can she be discride, when none suspect,
Our flight this day not dream't on: now to execute
What was before purposed, which if it speed,
I'll say the heavens have in our fates agreed.

How goes the night?


Tis some two hours from day.


Yet no news from the Captain.


I have done a Midwives part, I have brought the Queen to bed, I could do no
more.


The Captain is come.


Thy news.


All safe, faith wench, I have put them to it for a single combat, I have left
them at it.


King and Queen.


The same.


Now for us.


I, there's all the danger, there's one Bashaw
Whose eyes is fixed on Spencer, and he now
Walks even before our lodging.

Then what's past,
Is all yet to no purpose.

He and I
May freely pass the Court: and you fair Bess,
I would disguise: but ^hen for Spencer?

Why that's the main of all* all without his freedom
That we can aim at's, nothing.

It shall be thus, which alter none that loves me.
With this signet you three shall pass to'^h ship
Whilst I'm in sight she will not be suspected:
My escape, leave to my own fair fortunes.

How that?


Through twenty Bashaws I will hew my way,
But I will see thee e're morning.

Think thou Spencer
That I will leave thee? think thou that I can?
Thou may as well part body from the soul,
As part us now: It is our wedding night,
Would now divide us?

Yield to times necessities, and to our strict disasters.


Words are vain,
We now must cleave to action: our stay's death,
And if we be not quick in expedition,
We all perish.

Bess, be swayed.


To go to sea without thee,
And leave thee subject unto a tyrants cruelty?
I'll dye a thousand deaths first.

First save one,
And by degrees the rest. When thou hast past
The perils of this night, I am half safe,
But whilst thou art still invirond, more then better
Half of my part's endangered.

Talk your selves
To your deaths, do: will you venture forth?
Leave me to the Bashaw.

Or me. I'll buffet with him for my passage.


Neither, in what I purpose I am constant.
Conduct her safe; th'advantage of the night
I'll take for my escape: and my sweet Beffe,
If in the morning I behold thee not
Safe within my Negro, be assured
I am dead. Nay, now delays are vain.

Sir, did you love
Me, you would not stay behind me.

I'll have it so.
Gentlemen, be chary of this jewell
That throws her self into the arms of night,
Under your conduct. If I live, my Bess,
To morrow I'll not fail thee.

And if thou die to morrow, be assured
To morrow I'll be with thee.

Shall thy love
Betray us all to death.

Well, I will go,
But if thou dost miscary, think the Ocean
To be my Bride-bed.

Heaven for us,
That power that hath preserved us hitherto,
Will not let's sink now. And, brave gentlemen,
Of the Moors bounty bear not any thing
Unto our ship, lest they report of us,
We fled by night and robbed them.

Nobly resolved.


Now embrace and part; and my sweet Bess,
This be thy comfort against all future fears,
To meet in mirth that now divide in tears:
Farewell Bess, I'll back into my chamber.

Can I part with life
In more distracted horror?

You spoil all
That we before have plotted.
Will you mask your self, and to the Porter first.
Ho, Porter.

Who calls?


One from the King.


How shall I know that?


This token be your warrnt, behold his signet.
That's not enough, the Word.

Mullisheg.


Pass freely: some weighty buisinesse is in hand
That the kings signet is abroad so late;
But no matter, this is my discharge, I'll to my rest*

I much suspect,

These English amongst themselves are treacherous:

I have observed, the king had conference with the Captain: many whisperings
and passages I have observed, but that which makes me most suspect is, because
the king hath removed his lodging, and it may be to prostitude the English
Maid: Ha, suspect said I; nay, examine things exactly, and 'tmust needs be so,
the king is wondrous bountiful, and what i'st gold cannot. Troth I could even
pity the poor ^orlorn Englishman, who this night must be forced lie alone,
and have the king taste to him.


Sure this Moore hath been made private to the Kings intents, which if I find,
I'll make him the instrument for me to pass the Court gates. This man, whose
office was to keep me, shall be the only means to free me.


On his marriage night, and up at this hour? nay, if I once suspect, 'tis as
firm as if it were confirmed by Alkaron, or (...) himself had sworn it: I'll
sport my self with his distaste and sorrow.


Thus abused.


What up so late and on your bridal night
When you should lie lul'd in the fast embrace
Of your fair Mistress. I hope I have given't him soundly.

s'possible,
To lodge my brid^ in one place, and dispose me
To a wrong chamber: she not once send to me,
That I might know to find her.

Excell^.
Nay, if I once suspect, it never fails.

I'll not tak'^
At th'hands of an Empress, much less at hers.

Why, what's the business, Sir? Oh, I guess the cause of your grief.


And Sir, you may, but I'll be revenged.


Troth and I would.


I'll bosom some body,
Be it the commonest Cur^zan in Fesse,
If not for love, to vex her.

Can you do less?


To leave me the first night.


Oh, 'twas a sign she never dearly loved you.


I perceive B^shaw Alcade you understand my wrongs.


In part, though not in whole.


Your word is warrant, pass me the court gate,
I'll to some loose Burdello, and tell her when I have done.

Were it my cause, I'd do this, and more.


Make me wait thus!


Oh Sir, 'cis insufferable.


Troth I dally my revenge too long, what ho, Porter.


How now, who calls?


Her's Bashaw Alcade, turn the key.


His name commands my gate, pass freely.


Sir, I am bound to you,
To take this wrong I should be held no man.
Now to the watch, escape there as I can.

Ha, ha, so long as she sleeps in the arms of Fesse, let him pack where he
pleases: Porter, now he's without, let him command his entrance no more,
neither for reward nor entreaty, till day breaks.


Sir, he shall not.


'Tis well we are so rid of him: Mulli^ will give me great thanks for this.
I'll to his chamber, there attend without,
Till he shall waken from his drowsy rest,
And then acquaint him with this fortunate jest.

Sir, though we wonder at your noble deeds,
Yet I must do the office of a subject,
And take you prisoner? by that noble blood
That runs in these my veins, when I behold
The slaughter you have made, which wonders me,
I wish you had escaped, and not been made captive
To him, who though he may admire and love you,
Yet cannot help you.

Your stile is like your birth, for you are Ioffer,
Chief Bashaw to the king, and him I know
Lord of most noble thoughts. Speak, what's my danger?

Know Sir, a double forfeit of your life:
Your outrage first is death, being in the night,
And against the watch; but those that you have slain
In this fierce conflict, brings'^ without all bounds
Of pardon.

I was born too^, and I embrace my fortune.


Sir, now I know you
To be that brave and worthy Englishman,
So highly graced in court, which more amazes me
That you should thus requite him with the slaughter
Of his loved subjects.

I entreat you Sir,
As you are noble question me no further,
I have many private thoughts that trouble me,
And not the fear of death.

We know your name, and now have proved your courage,
Both these moves us to give you as easy bondage as our loyalty
To the king can suffer, you are free
From irons.

When this news shall come to her,


Lieutenant, lead the watch some distance of,
Bid them remove these bodies lately slain,
I must have private conference with this prisoner,
Leave him to my charge.
Sir think me though a Moore,
A nation strange unto you Christians,
Yet that I can be noble: but in you
I have observed strange contrarieties,
Which I would b^ resolved in.

Speak your thoughts.


When I con^'d the nobleness of your blood,
With this your pres^nt passion, I much m^,
Why either such a small effuse of blood,
These your sl^ght wounds, or the pale fear of death,
Should have the power to force a tea^ from such
A noble eye.

Why think thou Bashaw
That wounds, blood, or death
Could force a tear from me, thou noblest of thy nation,
Do not so far mis^se me: I tell the^ Bashaw,
The rack, strapado, or the scalding oil,
The burning pincers, or the boiling l^d,
The stakes, the pikes, the cauldron, or the wheel,
Were all these to^ to befelt an once,
Could not draw w^r hence.

Whence ^es it then?


From that whose pains as far surmount^ all those
As whips of furies do the Ladies fans,
Made of the plumes o'th Ostrich: this like the Sun,
Extracts the de^ ^om my declining soul,
And swi^s mine eyes in moist eff^ie.
O Bess^, Bess^, Bess^, Bess^.

Dead pity you have wakened in my bosom,
And made me with you like compassionate.
Freely relate your sorrows.

Sir, I shall:
If you have ever loved, or such a maid,
So fair, so constant, and so chaste as mine,
And should fortune to lamentable fortune,
Betray her to a black abortive fate,
How would it wring you? Or if you had a heart,
Made of that mettle that we white men have,
How would it melt in you?

Sir, you confound me.


I will be brief; the travels of my Bess,
To find me out, you have pertook at full,
In presence of the King, these I omit.
Now when we came to sum up all our joy,
And this night were entering to our hoped bliss,
The king, Oh most unworthy of that name,
He quite fell off from goodness.

Who Mullish^g?


His lust out-waid his honour: and as if his soul
Were blacker then his face, he laid plots
To take this sweet night from me: but prevented,
I have convai'd my beauteous bride aboard,
My Captain and Lieutenant.

Are they escaped?


Safe to my Negro. Thus far fortune led me
Through many dangers till I past this bridge,
The last of all your watches. And muse not
Bashaw, that I thus single durst oppose my self,
I wore my Mistress here, and she, not I,
Made me midway a conqueror.

She being at sea,
And safe, why should your own fates trouble you?

Renowned Moor, there is your greatest error;
When we parted, I swore by the honour of a Gentleman,
And as I ever was her constant friend,
If I survived, to visit her aboard
By such an hour: but if I fail, that she
Should think me dead: now, if I break one minute,
She leaps into the sea: 'tis this, great Bashaw,
That from a soul^ers eyes draws pear^y tears:
For my own (...) ^ de^pise all ^ars.

You have deep^y touch (...)* and to let you know
All morra^ (...) (...) not ^olely grounded
In th'hearts (...) (...), go and (...);
Keep your appointed hour, preserve her life:
I will conduct you past all danger: but withal
Rememb^ my (...) (...) to answer it.

Is ho^our (...) from Ch^ians unto Moors,
That I may say in Birbarie ^ound
This rare black Swan.

And when you are a^ sea,
The wind no (...) (...) (...); your (...)
They are soon waid, and you (...) ^ea ^oome ^ree
To pass unto your country: 'tis but my life,
And I shall think it nobly spent to ^ave you,
Her, and your train from many ^ad di^ters.

Sir, ^ thank you,
Appoint me a (...) ^ower, if ^ ^turn not,
May I be held a scorn to Chri^tendome,
And recreant to my country.

By three ^o morrow.


Bin^ me by (...) (...).


Only your hand and word.


Which if I break.
What my heart thinks, my tongue forbears to speak.

I'll bear you pa^ (...) (...),


THrough satia^ with the pleasures of this night.
The morning (...) (...) from the sweet embraces*
Of the fair English Damsel.

The English stranger
Is ^toln from forth mine arms. I am at full revenged:
Were I again to match, I de marry one
Of this brave nation, if a Gentleman,
Before the greatest Monarch of the world,
They are such sweet and loving bedfellows.
Now to my chamber, darkness guide my way,
Lest what none yet suspect, the night betray.
Let all like me wronged in their nuptial bed,
Not aim at th'heart, but rather strike at th'head.

Venetian Ladies, nor the Persian Girls,
The French, the Spanish, nor the Turkish Dames,
Ethiope nor Greece can kiss with half that art
These English can, nor entertain their friends
With 'tenth part of that ample willingness
Within their arms.

Your highness called?


To tell thee that none shall partake but thou.
Oh, I have had the sweetest nights content
That ever king enjoyed.

With the fair English bride.


Nor envy if I raise the Captain for it,
For he shall mount.

And he deserves it: but to me you owe
Part of that honour, I had a hand in it too,
Although perhaps you thought me ignorant
In what is past.

Had thou no more
Then half a finger in this nights content,
It shall not be forgot, but thou as he
Shalt be raised one step higher.

Observing what had past, I spied the bridegr^
As still mine eyes were fixed on him, up and late,
Then by a trick, a pretty slight, a fine fetch of mine own,
I past him forth the gates, and gave command,
He should not have his entr^ce back again,
Neither for reward nor entreaties, till day broke.

Your ^im in t^t?


For fear lest he by some suspicious jealous^
Should have disturbed your rest.

Thy providence
Shall not die unrewarded: (...) him hence,
And with his will toe, this ^akes thee
Of our counsel.

'Tis an honour
My wisdom haih long aimed at, and I hope
Now shall receive his ^rit.

Pardon great king that I thus rudely press
Into your private bed-chamber.

Speak, thy n^ws.


The English Captain, with the lovely Bride,
With her Lieutenant hath ^ecretly this night,
With your highness signet and the word past the Courtgates, past all the
watches, and got aboard their Negro, and I was sent to know your highness
pleasure.

Ha, this night? Alo^de, seek, search,
I left her sleeping in our royal bed.

I shall my lord, I half suspect.


But was not Spencer with them?


Only they three: and we, by virtue of your highness signet, past them the
court-gates without trouble.


We are amazed:
Alcade, whom find thou there?

Nothing, my lord, but empty sheets,
A bed new tossed; but neither English Lady, nor any Lady else.

We stand astonished,
Not knowing what to answer.

Pardon great king if I relate the news
That will offend you highly.

That the English Captain, Lady, and Lieutenant are escaped.


But that's not all.


Can there be worse behind?


Yes, if the loss of your dear subjects lives
Be worse then their escape: Spencer, without
The signet or the word, being left behind.

You called the porter up
And let him after.

Pardon great King.


Was this your trick, your slight, your stratagem?
As we are king of Fesse, thy life shall pay
The forfet, thine own tongue shall sentence thee.
But to the rest.

Then past he to the bridge,
Where stood armed men, in number forty:
Maugre all their strength, with his good sword
He would have made through all:
And in this fierce conflict, six, to the maze
Of all the rest, were slain: nor would he yield,
Till suddenly we raised a loud alarm,
At which the Captain of the watch came down,
And so there surprised him.

Is he prisoner then?


In custody of the great Bashaw Ioffer,
With whom we left him.

Comm^nd our Bashaw
To bring him clogged in irons. These English Pirates
Have robbed us of much treasure: and for that
His traitorous life shall answer. But for thee, traitor,
That had a hand in his escape,
Thou shalt be sure to pay for it.

Alas, my lord,
What I did was merely ignorance.

Nay bribes,
And I shall find it so: bear him to guard.
What dissolute strumpet did that traitrous Captain
Send to our sheets; but all our injuries,
Upon that English prisoner we'll revenge,
As we in state and fortune hope to rise,
A never heard of death that traitor dies.

No news from Forset yet that waits for Spencer,
The long boat's not returned?

Not yet?


Clem. to the main top Clem, and give ^s notice if thou see any (like them)
make from the shore; the day is broke already.


With all my heart, so you will give me warning before the Gunner shoots, left
I tumble down again, and put my neck a second time in danger.


Prithee be gon, let's have no jesting now.


Then I'll to the main top in earnest.


How fares it with you Bess?


Like a hartlesse creature, a body without motion.
How can I chose when I am come to sea,
And left my heart ashore? What, no news yet?

None.


I prithee Ruffman step into my Cabin, and bring me here my hour glass.


That I shall.


To what end would you use it?


Shall I tell thee Captain,
I would know how long I have to live:
That glass once turned, the sandy hour quite run,
I know my Spencer's dead, and my life's donne.

Your glass.


Gramercy good Lieutenant:
'Tis better then a gaudy looking glass,
To deck our faces in; that shows our pride,
But this our ends those glasses seek to hide.
Have you been all at prayers?

We have.


I thank you
Gentlemen, never more need: and you would say
As I do, did you but know how near our ends some are.
Dost thou not think, Captain, my Spencer's slain?

Yet hope the best.


This is the hour he promised: Captain, look,
For I have not the heart, and truly tell me
How far 'tis spent
Some fifteen minutes.

Alas, no more; I prithee tak't away,
Even just so many have I left to pray,
And then to break my heart strings: None that loves me
Speak one word to me of him, or any thing:
If in your secret cabins you'll bestow
Of him and me some tears and hearty prayers,
We, if we live shall thank you. Good Gentlemen
Engage me so far to you.

News, news, news.


Ha, good or bad.


Excellent, most excellent, nay, super excellent, Forset and all his companions
are rowing hither like mad men; and there is one that sits in the stern and does
not row at all, and that is, let me see who is it? I am sure 'tis he, noble
Spencer.


Spencer?
Heart, let me keep thee; thou wast up to heaven
Half way in rapture. Art thou sure?

I think you'll make a man swear his heart out.


Teach me but how
I shall receive him when he comes aboard;
How shall I bear me, Captain, that my joy
Do not transcend my ^out out of this earth,
Into the air with passionate ex^:

Now farewell Barbary, king M^llisheg,
We have sea room, and wind at will, not ten
Of thy best Galleys armed with Moors,
Can fetch us back.

For England Gentlemen.


Oh, wher's the Gunner:
See all the ordnance be straight discharged
For joy my Spencer lives; let's mist our selves
In a thick cloud of smoke, and speak our joys
Unto the highest heavens in fire* and thunder.

To make the Queen vex and torment* her self.


To make the King tear his contorted locks,
Curled like the knots of furies: Oh this music
Doth please me better then th'^minate strings,
Tuned to their wild Moriskoes: dance my ^oul,
And caper in my bosom, joyful heart,
That I have here my Spencer.

Come, weigh Anchor,
Hoist sail, we have a fair and gentle gale
To bear us to our country.

Captain, stay.


I did not hear my Spencer speak till now,
Nor would my sudden joy give me that judgement
To spy that sadness in thee I now see;
Good, what's the cause, can thou conceal't from me?
What, from thy Bess? Whence came that sigh?
You will not tell me; no, do not:
I am not worthy to partake your thoughts.
Do you repent you that you see us safe
Imbar'kt for England to enjoy me there:
Is there some other whom you better love?
Let me but know her, and for your sweet sake
I'll serve her too: come, I will know the cause.

Know all in one:
Now I have seen you, I must leave you Bess.

Leave me? Oh, fatal.


Speak, my Bess, it is thy Spencer tells thee.


That he will leave me: if the same tongue
That wounded me, gives me no present cure,
It will again entrance me.

Arm your self,
It must be spoke again, for I must leave you.
My honour, faith, and coun^y are engaged,
The reputation of a Christian's pawned;
And all that wear that sacred livery,
Shall in my breach be scandal'd. Moors will say,
We boast of faith, none does good works but they.

I am nor sleep nor waking, but my senses
All in a confused slumber.

Sir, resolve us;
You wrap us in a Labyrinth of doubts,
From which I pray unloose us.

I shall;
I made my way through slaughter; but at length
The watch came down and took me prisoner
Unto a noble Bashaw: for my valour,
It pleased him to admire me: but when sorrow
To disappoint my Bess, struck me in passion,
He urged me freely to relate my griefs,
Which took in him such deep impression,
That on my word and promise to return
By such an hour, he left himself in hostage,
To give me my desires.

'Twas nobly done.
But what's the lives of twenty thousand Moors,
To one that is a Christian?

We have liberty, and free way to our country,
Shall not we take the advantage that the heavens
Have lent us: but now, as if we scorned
Their gracious bounty, give up our selves
To voluntary bondage.

Prize you my love no better, then to rate i^
Beneath the friendship of a barbarous Moor?
Can you, to save him, leave me to my death? Is this
The just reward of all my travels?

I prize my honour, and a Christians faith,
Above what earth can yield: shall Fesse report,
Unto our countries shame, and to the scandal
Of our religion, that a barbarous Moor
Can exceed us in nobleness? no, I'll die
A hundred thousand deaths first.

Oh, my fate, was ever maid thus crossed,
That have so oft been brought to see my bliss,
And never taste it? to meet my Spencer living after death,
To join with him in marriage, not enjoy him?
To have him here free from the barbarous Moors,
And now to lose him? being so o^'d
Unto the height of all felicity
To make my ruin greater. If you needs
Will hazard your own person, make me partner
In this thy present danger; take me with thee.

Not for the world, no living soul shall bleed
One drop for me.

Can thou be so unkind? then false man know,
That thou hast taught me harshness. I without
Thee came to Momarah, and to my country back,
I will return without thee: I am here
In mine own vessel, mine own train about me:
And since thou w^t forsake me, to embrace
The Queen of Moors: though coining strange excuse.
Even at*thy pleasure be i^, my wa^e's into my coun^rey*
Farewell, I'll not shed one tear more.

My partings death,
But honour wakens me, the hour draws nigh,
And if I fail one minut, he must die.
The long boat now. Farewell Bess.

Why, farewell
Spencer, I always loved thee but too well,
Captain, thine ^are,
This I have vowed, and this you all shall swear.

Produce your prisoner, Bashaw.


Mighty King,
Had you beheld his prowess, and withal,
But seen his passions, you would then like me,
Have pitied his diasters.

We know no pity for an injury
Of that high nature, more then our revenge,
We have vowed his death, and he shall therefore di^*
Go, bring him forth.

Spare me, my lord, but some few hours, I shall.


The least delay is death.


Then know, my lord, he was my prisoner.


How, was? and is not?


By promise.


Not in gyves.


He's gyv'd to me by faith, but else at liberty.


I pray unriddle us, and teach us that
Which we desire to know, where is the English prisoner?

I presumed, my lord,
Such noble valour could not be log'd alone,
Without some other virtues, faith and honour,
Therefore I gave him freedom to his ship,
Only upon his promise to return;
Now if there be such nobleness in a Christian,
Which being a Moor, I have expressed to him,
He will not see me perish.

Foolish Bashaw
To jest away ^hy ^ad: you (...) (...) (...) ours
Against our person: and you all shall (...).
Why? can^ thou think a (...) so re^ote,
Both in country and religion, being ^'t
At sea, and under sail, ^ee ^om o^ bands
In the arms of his fair bride,
His Captain and his sayl^ all abo^,
Sea room and wind at will, and will return
To expose all the^ t^ volun^ary da^,
For a bare verbal pro^?

If he comes no^,
Be this mine honour, King, th^ ^ough I bl^d,
A Moor a Chris^ ^hus (...) (...) (...).

The hour is past,
The Christian hath br^e faith.
Off with his head.

Yet come at last.


^t possible?
Can England so far di^ant harbour such noble ver^s?

I beshrow yo^, Sir,
You come unto your death, and you (...) (...)
Much honour from me, and engrossed it all
To your own fame; 'twould have li^ ^g by ^e,
Then any monument (...) (...), to ha^ lo^
My life for such a nob^ (...),
Whose virtue even in this la^ a^ ^rs,
I wish this blood, which now a^ ^ndly ^s.
You are come unto yo^r death.

Why, 'twas my purpose;
And by that death, to make my h^nour shine.
Great Mullisheg, cheri^ this noble Moor,
Whom all thy co^nes cannot para^ell
For virtue and true nobleness. ^e my ship
Should with such black dishonour bear me sa^
Into my country by thy Bashaws death,
I would have bent my ordnance gain^ her kee^,
And sunk her in the harbour.

Thou hast slain
Six of our subjects.

Oh, had you seen
But with what eminent valour.

Nought that's ill
Can be well done: then Bashaw, speak no more,
His life is merely forf^it, and h^ shall pay it.

I am proud, Fesse, that I now owe thee nothing*
But have in me ability to pay.
If it be forfeit, take it, lay all on me,
I'll pay the debt, then set the Bashaw free*

Besides, misprising all our gracious favours,
To violate our laws, infringe our peace,
Distu^be our watch by night, and now perhaps
Having robbed us of much treasure, *stolen to sea.

In that thou art not royal, Mullisheg.
Of all thy gold and jewels lately given us,
There's not a do it imbark't,
For finding ^ee dishonourably unkind,
Scorning thy gold, we left it all behind.

If private men be ^ords of such brave spirits,
How royal should their ^inces be!

Englishman,
There's but one way for thee to save thy life,
From eminent death.

Well, propose it.


Instantly
Send to thy Negro, and surrend^r up
Thy Captain and thy fair Bride; otherwise,
By all the holy rights of our great Prophet,
Thou shalt not live an hour.

Alas, good King,
I pity and despise thy tyranny:
Not live an hour? And when my head is off,
What can thou do then? Calls't thou that revenge,
To ease me of a thousand turbulent griefs,
And throw my soul in glory for my honour.
Why, thou striv'st to make me happy but for her;
Were thou the King of all the kings on earth,
Could thou lay all their scepters, robes, and crowns,
Here at my feet, and had power to install me
Emperor of the universal Empery,
Rather then yield my basest ship-boy up,
To become thy stave; much less betray my Bride
To thee and to thy brutish lust, know king
Of Fesse, I'd die a hundred thousand deaths first.

I'll try your patience: Off with his head.


Her's more work, stay.


What make you here?
You wrong me above injury.

If you love blood,
That river spare, and for him take a flood,
Be but so gracious as save him alone,
And great King see I bring thee three for one:
Spare him, thou shalt have more,
The lives of all my train, what says thou to it?
And with their lives my ship and all to boot.

I could be angry with you above measure,
In your four deaths I die, that had before
Tasted but one.

Captain, art thou there? how e're these fare,
Thou shalt be sure to pay for it.

'Tis my least care,
What's done is mine, I here confes't,
Then seize my life in ransom of the rest.

Lieutenant, you are a base villane,
What groom betrayed you to our sheets?

Please keep your tongue, I did you no dishonour.


Whom did you bring to our free ^mbraces?


'Twas the King, conceal what's past.


How e're my mind, then yet my bodie's chaste.


Make use on it.


Dismiss, great King, these to their ship again,
My life is solely forfeit, take but that,
I shall report thee merciful.

It were no justice, King, to forfeit his,
And to spare mine, I am as deep as he,
Since what my Spencer did was all for me.

Great King, if any faulted, then 'twas I,
I led them on, and therefore first should die.

I am as deep as any.


Oh, had my head
Excused all these, I had been nobly dead.

Why pause you king? Is't by our noble v^rtes,
That you have lost the use of speech? or can you think
That Spencer dead, you might inherit me.
No, first with Roman Portia I'd eat fire,
Or with Lucretia character thy lust
'Twixt these two breasts. Stood I engaged to death.
I'd scorn for life to bend a servile knee:
But 'tis for thee, my Spencer, what was his fault?
'Twas but to save his own, rescue his dear Bride
From adulterate sheets, and must he die for this?

Shall lust in me have chief predominance?
And virtuous deeds, for which in Fesse
I have been long renowned, be quite exiled?
Shall Christians have the honour
To be sole heirs of goodness, and we Moors,
Barbarous and bloody. Captain, resolve me,
What common Courtesan did thou convey
Into our royal bed.

I can excuse him, pardon me great King,
I having private notice of your plots,
Wrought him unto my purpose, and 'twas I lodged in your arms that night.

These English are in all things honourable,
Nor can we tax their ways in any thing,
Unless we blame their virtues. English maid,
We give thee once more back unto thy husband,
Whom likewise freely we receive to grace:
And as amends for our pretended wrongs,
With her we'll tender such an ample dower,
As shall renown our bounty: but we fear
We cannot recompense the injurious loss,
Of your last nights expectations.

'Tis full amends,
Where but the least part of your grace extends.

Captain, we prize thy virtues to thy friends,
Thy faith to us, and zeal unto our Queen.
And Bashaw, for thy nobleness to a Gentleman
Of such approved valour and renown,
We here create thee Viceroy of Argiers,
And do esteem thee next our Queen in grace.
Y'have quenched in me all lust, by which shall grow,
Virtues which Fesse, and all the world shall know.

We shall report your bounties, and your royalties
Shall fly through all the parts of Christendom.

Whilst Bess has gold, which is the meed of bays,
She'll make our English Poets tune thy praise.
And now my Spencer, after all our troubles,
Crosses and threatenings of the seas rough brow,
Ine're could say thou were mine own till now.

Call this your harbour, and your haven of joy,
For so we'll strive to make it, noble strangers,
Those virtues you have taught us by your deeds,
We futurely will strive to imitate.
And for the wrongs done to the hoped delights
Of your last nights divorce, double the magazine
With which our larges should have swelled your ship.
A golden Girl the art called,
And wench, be bold,
Thy lading back shall be with pearl and gold.

I Magine Bess and Spencer under sail:
But the intelligence of their great wealth,
Being bruited amongst the Merchants, comes to'th ears
Of a French Pirate, who with two ships wellrig'd,
Way lays them in their voyage: long they fought,
And many slain on both sides; but the Fr^chmen,
Proud of their hopeful conquest, boarding twice,
Are twice blown up, which add^s courage to the English;
But to the Frenchmen fear: just as they buckeld,
Spencer and Goodlack, with two proof Targets armed,
Into the French ship leap, and on the ^atches,
There make a bloody slaughter: but at that instant,
The billows swel'd, the winds grew high, and loud,
And as th^ soul and body use to part,
With no less force these lovers are divided,
He wafts to her, and she makes signs to him:
He calls, and she replies: -- they both grow hoarse,
With shrieking out their last farewell. -- now she swounds
And sinks beneath the arms of Ruffman. Spencer,
Upon a Chest gets hold and safe arives
In the Marquis of Farara's country: the like adventure
Chanced Goodlack, upon a Mast he pierces Italie,
Where these two Dukes were then at ods. Spencer is chosen
Farara's Champion: Mantua makes Goodlack his.
What happened them if you desire to know,
To cut off words, we'll act it in dumb show.
The Dukes by them atoned, they graced and preferred,
Take their next way towards Florence. What of Bess,
Ruffman, and Clem becomes, must next succeed.
The seas to them like cruel proves, and wracks
Their Negro on the coast of Florence, where
They wander up and down amongst the Bandetties,
More of their fortunes we will next pursue,
In which we mean to be as brief as true.

ALl is lost.


Save these our selves.


For my part I have not so much left as a ^lean Shirt.


And Spencer too, had the seas left me him,
I should have thought them kind, but in his fate,
All wishes, fortunes, hopes of better days
Expire.

Speneer may live.


I, that he may, if it be but in a sea-water green suit, as I was, among the
haddocks.


How many bitter plunges have I past.
Ere I could win my Spencer? who no sooner
Married, but quite divorst, possessed for some few days,
Then rent asunder, as soon a widow as I was a Bride:
This day the mistress of many thousands,
And a beggar now, not worth the clothes I wear.

At th^ lowest ebb
The tides still flow, besides, b^ing on the ground,
Lower we cannot fall.

Yes, into the ground, the grave.
Ruffman, would I were there; till then I never
Shall have true rest: I fain would know
What greater misery heaven can inflict, I have not y^t
Endured: if there be such, I dare it, let it come.

Cease, and surprise the prisoners: thou art mine.


Villain, hands off, know thou whom thou offendest?


Bind her fast, and after captive him.


I will rather die
Then suffer her sustein least injury.

What's thy purpose?


In all my travels, and my quest of blood,
I ne'er encountered such a beauteous prize:
Heavens, if I thought you would accept his thanks
That trades in deeds of hell, I would acknowledge
My self in debt to you.

What's thy intent,
Bold villein, that thou make this preparation?

I intend to ravish thee.


All goodness pardon me, and you blessed heavens,
Whom I too boldly challenged for a misery
Beyond my Spencers loss. What, rape intended?
I had not thought there had been such a mischief,
Devised for wretched woman: ravish me?
'Tis beyond shipwreck, poverty, or death:
It is a word invented first in hell,
And by the devils first spewed upon earth:
Man could not have invented to have given
Such letters sound.

I trifle hours too long,
And now to my black purpose. Envious day,
Gaze with thy open eyes on this nights work,
For thus the Prologue to my lust begins.

Help, murder, rape, murder.


I'll stop yo^ mo^h from bawling.


This way the cry came: resoue for the Lady,
Hold thy desperate fury, and arm thy (...)
For my encounter.

Hell prevented.


Unbind that beautio^s Lady, and pursue
The Ruffin; he that can bring his head shall have
A thousand crowns propo^'d for his reward:
He should be Captain of those bloody theevs,
That haunts our mountains, and of our dear subjects
Hath oft made outrage. Go, (...) this proclaimed.

E're I, the happy wish^ of my soul,
My orisons to heaven, or make free ^nder
Of a most bounden duty, grace my mi^ry,
To let me know, unto what worthy person,
Of what degree or state, I owe the service
Of a most wretched life, lest i^ my ignorance,
I prove an heretic to all good manners,
And harshly so off^nd.

Fairest of thy sex, I need not question thine,
Because I read a (...) in thy (...),
But to resolve thee, know, I am (...), The Duke
Of Florenco, and of this countr^y Prince.

Then from my (...) I (...) ^at on my face,
In bound obeisance.

Rise,
That earth's too base for s^eh pure lips to ki^.
They should rather join with a Princes, as at first
Made for such use: nay, we will have it so.

That Lady; if my memory be faithful
Unto my judgement, I should have seen e're now,
But where, what place, or in what (...), now
I cannot call to mind.

Where were you bred?


In England, royal Sir.


In England?


By what strange adventure then
Happened you on these coasts?

By shipwreck.


Then churlish were the waves t'expose you (...)
Such danger. Whence disimbark't you last?

From Barberie.


From Barberie? our Merchant, you came lately thence.


'Tis she, I now remember her,
She did me a great courtesy, and I am proud,
Fortune, how ever enemy to her,
Has given me opportunity to make
A just requital.

What occasion
Fair Lady, being of such state and beauty,
Drew you from your own country, to expose you
To so long travel.

Mighty Sovereign,
Pardon my interruption, if I make bold
To put your grace in mind of an English Virgin,
So highly graced by mighty Mullisheg.

A legend, worthy to be writ in gold,
Whose strangeness seemed at first to exceed belief;
And had not thy approved honesty
Commanded our attention, we should have doubted
That thou therein had much hyperboliz'd.

What would your grace give,
To see that miracle of constancy,
She who relieved so many Christian captives,
Redeemed so many of the M^rchants goods,
^eg'd of the king so many for^tures,
Kept from the Galleys some, and some from slaughter,
She whom the king of Fesse never denied,
But she denied him love; whose chastity
Conquered his lust, and maugre his incontinence,
Made him admire her virtues.

The report
Strikes us with wonder and amazement too:
But to behold the creature were a project,
Worthy a theatre of Emperors;
Nay, gods themselves to be spectators.

Behold that wonder. Lady, know you* me?


Not I, I can assure you, Sir.


I'll give you instance then;
I was that Florentine:
Who being in Fesse; for a strange outrage there,
Six of my men were to the Galleys doomed:
But at your intercession to the king,
Freely releast: for which, in this dejection,
I pray accept these thousand crowns, to raise
Your ruined fortunes.

You are grateful, Sir, beyond my merit


I cannot blame great Fesse
To become enamoured on so fair a creature.
You had a friend much graced by that same Moor,
Whom, as our Merchant told us, you were espoused to
In the Court of Fesse, whe^ he?

I cannot speak it without ^ears.


Why, is he dead?


I cannot say he lives.


How were you severed?


It asks a sad relation.


We'll find a fitter time to hear't. But now,
Augment your griefs no further: on what coast
Pray, were you shipwrecked?

Upon these neighbouring (...); where all the wealth
I had from B^rbarie is perished in the sea.
I that this morn commanded half a million,
Have nothing now but this good merchants bounty.

You are richer
In our high favour, then all the royalty,
Fesse could have crowned your pearlesse beauty with:
He gave you gold; but we your almost forfeit chastity.

A gift above the wealth of Barbary.


Conduct this Lady to the City straight,
And bear this our signet to our treasurer,
Command for her ten thousand crowns immediately.
Next to our wardrobe, and what choife of habit
Best likes her, 'tis her own;
Only for all this grace, daign beauteous Lady;
That I may call you servant.

Pardon me, Sir,
You are a Prince, and I am here your vassal.

Merchant,
As you respect our favour see this done.

What must my next fall be? I that this morning
Was rich in wealth and servants, and e're noon
Commanded neither: and next doomed to death;
Not death alone, but death with infamy.
But what's all this unto my Spencers loss?

You to the City, we'll pursue the chase.
Madam, be comforted, we'll send, or see you;
All your fortunes are not extinct in shipwreck,
The land affords you better if you'll be swai'd by us.
As first you find us, we'll be still the same:
Oft have I chac't ne'er found so fair a game.

Where are my Bashaw's now? Let me see, what shall I do? I have left my
Mistress, where shall I have my wages? she's peper'd by this: but if the
Captain of the Bandetties had had but that grace and honour that I had when I
was in Barbary, he would not have been so lusty. She escaped drowning, which is
the way of all fish, and by this is gone the way of all flesh. My Lieutenant
he's sure ^ut to pieces among the Bandetties, and so had I been, had not my
Bakers legs stepped a little aside. My noble Captain and Sp^ncer, they are either
drowned in the tempest, or murdered by the Pirates, and none is left alive but I
Clem, poor Clem: but poor Clem, how wilt thou do now? what trick have you to
sati^ Colon, here in a strange Country? It is not now with me as when Andrea
lived. Now I bethink me, I have a trade, and that, they say, will stick by a
man when his friends fail ^m: the City is hard by, and I'll see and I can be
entertained to my old trade of drawing ^ne: if it be but an under skinker, I
care not, better do so then like a prodigal feed upon husks and acorns.

Well, if I chance to lead my life under some happy ^gne*
To my Countrymen still I'll fill the best wine.

Wounded, but escaped with life: but Besses loss, that's it that gri^ me in^d:
rav^, perhaps, and murdered. Oh, if Spencer and Goodlack sur^, how would they
blame my cow^? a thread (...), may be untwined, but things in nature done,
undone can never be. She's lost, they are perished, they are happy in their
deaths, and I surviving (...) to ^he ^arth mo^ miserable. No means to raise my
self? I (...) a P^ even now, proclaiming to the man could bring the head of the
Bandetties Captain, for his reward a thousand crowns: If not for gain of gold,
yet for he injured Bess, that shall be my next task: What though I die?

Be this my comfort, that it chance*t me well,
To perish by his hand by whom she ^ll.

Our Merchant, have you (...) ^h English Lady
As we commanded, did she take the gold?

After many complements, circumstances,
Modest re^alls, sometimes with repu^,
I forced on her your bounty: Had you seen
What a bewitching art she strived to use,
Betwixt denial, and disdain; contempt and thankfulness,
You would have said, that out of a mere scorn
T'accept your gift, she expressed such gratitude,
As would demand a double donative.

And it has don't, it shall be doubled straight,
Arising thence unto an infinite,
If shee'll but grant us love. How for her habit?

With an enforced will, wilful constraint,
And a mere kind of glad necessity,
She put it on but to lament the death
Of her lost husband.

Why, is he lost?


By all conjectures never to be found.


The les^e her hope is to recover him,
The more our hopes remains to conquer her:
Bear her from us this jewell, and withal
Provide a banquet, bid her leave all mourning,
This night in person we will visit her.

I shall.


Withal more gold.
And if thou can by way of conference,
Get from her how she stands affected towards us:
It shall not be the furthest way about
To thy preferment and our special favour.

The two bold Dukes of Mantua and (...), after many bloody garboils have entered
league: and within these two days mean to visit Florence, to make your Court a
witness of their late concluded amity.


We'll receive them,
As Princes that in this would honour us.

These letters will speak further.


Bear them straight
Unto our Secretary, and withal, give order,
That all our Court may shine in gold and pearl,
They never could have come in a happier season,
Then when the great and high magnificence,
Without suspect we would have shown to her,
Will be accounted honour done to them.
In fates despite,
we will not lose the honour of this night.

Farara was exceeding bountiful.


So was the Duke of Mantua. Had we staid
Within their confines, we might even till death
Have lived in their high favour.

Oh, but Captain,
What would their Dukedoms gain me without Bess,
Or all the world t'injoy it without her:
Each passage of content or pleasing fortune,
When I record she has no part in it,
Seems rather as an augmentation
Of a more great disease.

This be your comfort, that by this
She's best part of her way for England, whither
She is richly bound, then where she is most hopeless
Of this your safety,
With your survivall to receive us gladly
With an abundant treasure.

But for that,
I had sunk e're this beneath the weight of war.
And chose an obscure death, before the glory
Of a renowned soldier. But we are now
As far as Florence onward of our way,
Were it best that we made tender of our service
To the grand Duke?

'Tis the greatest benefits of all our travels, to see foreign Courts, and
to discourse their fashions: let us by no means neglect that duty.


Where were we best to lodge?


Hard by is a Tavern, let's first drink there, and after make inquir^e who's
the best host for strangers.


Come ho, where be these Drawers?


Gentlemen, I draw none my self, but I'll send some.


Welcome Gentlemen. Score a quart.


Ha?


How?


No, no, I am an ass, a very animal, it cannot be.


Why dost thou bear the wine back, the slave thinks belike we have no money?


What dost thou think us to be such casher'd soldiers that we have no cash.
Tush, it cannot be he.


How should he come here, set down the wine.


I will, I will, sir. Score a quart of -- Tricks, mere fantasmes. Shall I draw
wine to shadows? so I might run o'th score, and find no substance to pay for
it.


Left we not him a shipboard on his voyage towards England with my


With Bess, true, Sir, set down the wine.


Some Italian Mountebanks, upon my life, mee^ juggling.


Upon my life 'tis Cl^m.


Ca, Ca, Cap. Captain? Master Spencer?


Clem?


I am Clem.


And I am Spencer.


And I Goodlack, but cannot think thee Clem.


Yes, I am Clem of Foy, the Bashaw of Barbary, who from a Courtier of Fesse,
am turned a Drawer in Florence: but let me clear my eyes better; now I know you
to be the same whose throats the Pirates would have cut, and have spoiled your
drinkings.


Oh, tell us, and be brief in thy relation,
What happened you, after the sudden tempest
Severed our ships? or what's become of Bess?

Where did our Negro touch?


I'll give you a touch, take it as you will: The Negro and all that was in her
was wrack't on the coast of of Florence, her, and all the wealth that was in
her, all drowned in the bottom of the sea.


No matter for the riches, wher's she, worth More then ship or goods?


Wher's Ruffman? for thou we see art safe.


Nay speak, wher's Bess?
How my heart quails within me?

She, Ruffman, and I were all cast ashore safe, like so many drowned Rats,
where we were no sooner landed, but we were set upon by the Bandetties; where
she was bound to a tree, and ready to be ravished by the Captain of the
Out-laws.


Oh, worse then shipwreck could be.


I see Ruffman half cut in pieces with rescuing her, but whether the other half
be alive or no, I cannot tell. For my one part, I made shift for one, my heels
doing me better service then my hands: and coming to the City, having no other
means to live by, got me to my old trade to draw wine, where I have the best
wine in Florence for you Gentlemen.


Ra^h't.


And Ruffman slain.


Oh, hard news:
It frets all my blood, and strikes me stiff with
Horror and amazement.

It strikes me
Into a marble statue, for with such
I have like sense and feeling.

Tell me Captain,
Wilt thou give me leave at length to despair
And kill my self: I will disclaim all further
Friendship with thee, if thou perswad'st me live.
Ravished!

Perhaps attempted but prevented,
Will you before you know the utmost certainty,
Destroy your self?

What is this world? what's man? are we created
Out of flint or iron, that we are made to bear this?

Comfort, Sir.


Your only way is to drink wine if you be in grief, for that's the only way,
the old proverb says, to comfort the heart.


Hark where we lie, and I prithee Clem lets hear from thee, but now leave us.


I will make bold inquire you out, and if you want money (as many travellers
may) as long as I have either credit, wages, or any coin in the world, you shall
not want, as I am a true Eunuch.


Let's stand aside and suffer these Gallants pass, that with their state take
a whole street before them.


Our Coach, stay, we'll back some half hour hence,
Only conduct this Lady to her lodging.
Ha, started you, Sweet, whence fetched
You that sigh. Our train lead on,
W'have other business now to think upon.

Sure this was some great Lady.


But observed you not this jewell that she cast me? 'tis a rich one.


Believe me, worthy your wearing.


What might she be to whom I am thus bound?
I'm here a stranger, never till this day
Beheld I Florence, nor acquaintance, friend
Especially of Ladies.

By th^ir train,
The man that did support her by the arm
Was of some special note; and she a Lady
Nobly de^cended. Why should she throw you this,
Being a mere stranger?

The^'s some mystery in'^,
If we could find the depth on'^, sure there is.

Perhaps some newly fallen in love*with you,
Now at first sight, and hurled that as a favour.

Yet neither of us had or the wit or sense to enquire her name:
I'll wear it openly and see if any
Will challenge it: the way to know her best.

And I would so.


I'll truce a while with sorrow for my Bess,
Till I find th'event.

And at best leisure
Tender our service to the Duke,
Whom fame reports to be a bounteous prince,
And liberal to all strangers.

'Tis decreed-
But howso^'re his favours he impart,
My Besses loss will still sit near my heart.

This honour you have done me, worthy Princes,
In leaving of your Courts to visit me,
We reckon as a trophe of your loves,
And shall remain a future monument,
Of a more firm and perfect amity.

To you, as to the greatest, most honoured,
And most esteemed Prince of Italy*
After a tedious opposition,
And much effuse of blood, this Prince and I,
Late reconciled* make a most happy tender*
Of our united league.

Selecting you
A royal witness of this union,
Which to express, we come to feast with you,
To sport and revel, and in full largess,
To spread our royal bounty through your Court.

What neither letters nor Ambassadors,
Soliciting by factions, or by friends,
Heavens hand hath done by your more calmer temper.

All resistalls,
Quarells, and ripping up of injuries,
Are smothered in the ashes of our wrath,
Whose fire is now extinct.

Which who so kindles,
Let him be held a new H^rostratus,
Who was so hated throughout Ephesus,
They held it death to name him.

Nobly spoke.
And now confederate Princes, you shall find,
By our rich entertainment, how w'esteem
Your friendship. Speak, have we no Ladies here
To entertain these princes?

Me thinks I spy one beauty in this place*
Worth all the sights that I have seen before.
I think, survey the spa^ious world abroad,
You scarce can find her equal.

Had not wonder,
And deep amazement curbed my speech in,
I had forestall'd this Prince in approbation
Of her comparelesse beauty.

Taste her Princes.
This surfeits me, and ads unto my love,
That they should thus admire her.

Beauteous Lady,
I^ is not my least honour to be first
In this most wished solicit*

I stand a statue,
And cannot move but by another will,
And as I am commanded.

I should have wrestled for priority,
But that I hold it as a ble^ing,
To take off that kiss which he so late laid on.

Now tell me Princes,
How do you like my judgement in the choice Of a fair mistress?

You shall choose for me.


More happy in this beauty, I account you,
Then in your rech^ treasure.

W^'t not cloud^d over
With such a melancholy sadness, I'd
Not change it for the wealth of Italy.
Sweet, cheer this brow whereon no frown can sit,
But it will ill become you.

Sir, I bleed.


Ha, bleed?
I would not have a sad and ominous fate
Hang over thee for a million:
Perhaps 'tis custom with you.

I have observed
Even from my childhood, never fell from h^nce
One crimson drop, but either my greatest enemy,
Or my dearest friend was near.

Why, we are here,
Fixed to thy side thy dearest friend on earth.
If that be all, fear nothing.

Pardon, Sir,
Both modesty and manners pleads for me
And I must needs retire.

Our train attend her,
Let her have all observance. By my royalty,
I would not have her taste the least disaster
For more then we can promise.

You have only showed us a rich Jewel, Sir,
And put it in a casket.

Of what country,
Fortune, or birth doth she proclaim her self?
For by her garb and language we may guess^*
She was not bred in Florence.

Seat you Princes, I'll tell you a strange project.


I have walked the streets, but find not any that will make challenge of this
jewell. Captain, now we'll try the Court.


Beware of these Italians,
They are by nature jealous and revengeful,
Not sparing the most basest opportunity,
That may procure your danger.

Innocence
Is bold and cannot fear. But see the Duke*
We'll tender him the solemnst reverence
Of travellers and strangers. Peace, prosperity,
And all good fates attend your royalty.

Behold, we're two poor English Gentlem^,
Whom travel hath enforc'^ through your Dukedom,
As next way to our country, prostrate you
Our lives and service: *tis not for reward,
Or hope of gain we make this tender to you,
But our free loves.

That which so freely comes,
How can we scorn? what are you Gentlemen?

I'll speak for this.


And I for him,
Well met renowned Englishman
Here in the Court of Florence: this was he,
Great Duke, whom fame hath for his valour bla^on'd;
Not only through Mantua*
But through the spacious bounds of Italie,
Where 'twas shown.

Hath fame been so injurious to thy merit,
That this great Court is not already filled
With rumour of their matchless chevalrie.

If these be they, as by their outward semblance,
They promise not much less: same hath been harbinger
To speak their praise before hand. Noble Gentlemen,
You have much graced our Court; we thank you for it:
And though no way according to your merits,
Yet will we strive to cherish such brave spirits.

Th'acceptance of our smallest service, Sir,
Is bounty above gold: we're poor Gentlemen,
And though we cannot, gladly would deserve.

'Tas pleased these princes to bestow on us
Too great a character: and gild our praises
Far above our deserts.

That's but your modesty.
English Gentlemen, let fame speak for you.

Gentlemen of England, we pardon you all duty,
We accept you as our friends and our companions:
Such you are, and such we do esteem you.

Mighty Prince,
Such boldness wants excuse.

Come we'll ha'^ so.
Amazement, can it be? Sure 'tis the self same jewell
I gave the English Lady: more I view it,
More it confirms my knowledge: now is no time
To question it, once more renowned Englishmen,
Welcome to us and to these Princes.

Can any man show me the great Duke of Florence?


Behold the Prince.


Deign, thou renowned Duke, to cast thy *eyes
Upon a poor dejected Gentleman,
Whom fortune hath dejected even to nothing.
I have nor meat nor money; these rags are all my riches;
Only necessity compels me claim
A debt owing by you.

By us?
Let's know the sum, and how the debt acrues.

You have proclaimed to him could bring the head
Of the Bandetties Captain, for his reward,
A thousand crowns. Now I being a Gentleman,
A traveller, and in want, made this my way
To raise my ruined hope: I singled him,
Fought with him hand to hand, and from his bloody shoulders
Lopped this head.

Boldly and bravely done: what e're thou be
Thou shalt receive it from our treasury.

You show your self as fame reports you,
A bounteous Prince, and liberal to all strangers.

From what country
Do you claim your birth?

From England, royal Sir*


These bold Englishmen,
I think are all composed of spirit and fire,
The element of earth hath no part in them.

If, as you say, from England, we retain
Some of your Countrymen; know you these Gentlemen?

Let me no longer live in ecstasy,
This wonder will confound me: Noble friends,
Bootless it were to ask you why, because
I find you here. Illustrious Duke, you owe
Me nothing now, to show me these, is reward
Beyond what you proclaimed: the rest I pardon.

What these are we know,
And what thou art we need not question much,
That head though mute can speak it.
Princes, once more receive our royal welcome.
Oh, but the jewell: but of that at leisure
Now we cannot stay. Our train, lead on.

Oh, that we three so happily should meet,
And want the fourth.

I left her in the hands of rape and murder,
Whence, except some deity,
'Twas not in the power of man to rescue her;
How ever, a good office I have done her,
Which even in death her soul will thank me for,
Revenged her on that villain.

It hath expressed the nobleness of thy Spirit.
For it we still shall owe thee.

But what adventure hath preferred you
And brought you thus in grace?

You shall hereafter
(...) of that at large. But leaving this discourse,
With our joint persuasions let's strive to comfort him,
That's nothing but discomfort.

Would I had brought him news of that rare verrue.
Yet you have never heard of our late shipwreck.

Clem reported it.


How Clem, wher's he?


He has got a service hard by, and draws wine.


His master may well trust him with his maids,
For since the Beshaws gelded him, he has learned
To run exceeding nimbly.

Sir, 'tis to you, I take it,
My message is directed.
The Duke would, have some conference with you, but it must be in private.

I am his servant, still at his command.
Where shall's meet anon.

At Clems.


Content.


Where we'll make a due relation of all our desperate fortunes.


'Tis concluded.


I Cannot rest till I am fully resolved
About this jewell. Sir, we sent to stay you,
And wean you some small season from your friends:
And you above the rest, because your presence
Doth promise good discourse.

Sir, I am all yours.


How long hath been your sojourn here in Florence?


Two days, no more.


Have you since your arrival
Retained no beauteous Mistress? Pardon me,
Sir, that I am come thus near you.

On my soul
Not any, royal Sir.

Think it my love that I presume thus far
To question you. Have you observed no Lady
Of special note, courted or discoursed with any
Within these two days.

Upon my honour, none.


You are a soldier and a Gentleman,
And should speak all truth.

If otherwise, I should disclaim my gentry.


I believe you, Sir. You have a rich jewell here,
Worthy a Princes wearing: twere not modesty
To ask how you came by it, or from whom.

Nor can I, Sir, resolve you, if you did:
But it was cast me by a Lady, of whom
As then I took small notice of, my mind
Being troubled.

'Tis even so.


Perhaps your grace by knowing of this jewell,
May know the beauteous ^inger, and so
You might engage me deeply to acquaint me with her,
To prove her grateful debtor.

No such thing,
You know none in this City?

Worse then scorn,
Or foul disgrace befall me if I know
Any you can call woman.

Be not moved,
I spoke but this in sport. Sure this strange Lady,
Casting her eye upon this Gentleman,
Grew straight ^f him enamoured, which makes her
Keep off from my embraces: but I'll sound all,
Yet my own wrongs prevent. Sir, I staid you,
But to another purpose, to commit
A weighty secret to you.

Were it of millions,
I'd prove your faithful steward.

I have a Mistress that Ptender dearer
Then mine own eyes. Observe me, dearer Sir,
Whom neither courtship moves, favours can work,
Nor no preferment tempt.

How rich were he
Could call himself lord of such a jewell.

My entreaties, friends, persuasions, importunities
Of my chaste Ladies cannot prevail at all.
Now would I chose a stranger, selecting thee,
To bear to her these few lines which contain
The substance of my mind.

And Sir, I shall.


In thy aspect
I read a fortune that should destine me
To strange felicities. Wilt thou be faithful?

As to my ^oul*


But thou shalt swear before thou undertak'stie,
(Though I suspect not falsehood in thy visage)
Not once to cast on her an amorous look,
Speak to her no familiar sylla^,
Not to embrace her, nor to kiss her hand,
Nor her free lip by no means.

Well, I swear.


But that's not all,
Swear by thy faith and thy religion*
Not to taste the least small favour for thy self,
Touch or come near her bosom; for, fair stranger,
I love her above measure, and that love
Makes me thus jealous.

By my honesty,
Faith, and religion, without free release
From your own lips, all this will I perform.

And so return the richest Englishman,
That ever pierced our Dukedom. Instantly
Thou shalt about thy task.

You have tired our ears with your long disco^
Leave us to rest.

Dream on your best desires.


If at some half hour hence you visit us,
We shall be free for language.

Soft rest with you.


If my soft sleeps presents me any shadov
Oh, let it be my Spencers, him whom waking
I cannot see, I may in dreams perhaps
Converse with, my sudden bleeding and my drowsiness,
Should not presage me good: pray heaven the Duke
Prove loyal to mine honour: howsoever
Death will end all: and I presume on this
'Tis way to Spencer, and my haven of bliss.

What beauty should this be, on whom the Duke
Is grown so jealous: sure 'tis some rare piece;
He told me she was fairer th^ I could either
Judge, Or yet imagine.
Would Bess were here to wager beauties with her,
For all my hopes in England. This is the Chamber:
Ha, thus far off she seems to promise well,
I'll take a nearer and more free survey,
This taper shall assist me: fail my eyes?
Or meet I nothing else but prodigies?
Oh heavens, it is my Bess; Oh, sudden rapture!
Let me retire to more considerate thoughts.
What should I think, but presently to wake her?
And being mine, to seize her where I find her.
Oh, but mine oath, that I should never, never
Lie with her being my wife, nor kiss her, touch her,
Speak to her one familiar syllable.
Can oaths bind thus? My honesty, faith, and
Religion are all engaged, there's no dispense for them.
And yet in all this con^ict to remember
How the Duke praised her virtue, chastity,
And constancy, whom nothing could corrupt,
Ads to my joys. But on the neck of this,
It lays a double (...) on my life.
First to forswear, then leave so fair a wife.

I am all distraction. In my sleep^
I saw him, could I but behold him waking.
That were a heaven. Ha, do I dream still?
Or was I born to ^ee
Nothing but strange illusions. Spencer: Love.

I am neither.


Thou hast his shape, his gate, his face, his language:
Only these words of thine and strange behaviour,
Never came from him. Let me embrace thee.

No.


Then kiss me.


No.


Yet speak me fair.


I cannot.


Look on me.


I must not, I will not, fare thee well:
Yet first read that.

I have read too much already within thy chang^ of looks.


Oh me my oath;
I'd chop off this right hand to cancel it.

But if not now, when then?


Never.


Not kiss me?


No.


Not fold me in thine arms?


Not.


Nor cast a gracious look upon thy Bess?


I dare not.


Never.


No never.


Oh, I shall die.


She faints, and yet I dare not for my oath
Once to support her. Dies before mi^ies.
And yet I must not call her back to life.
Where is the Duke? some help, no Ladies nigh?
Are you all, all asleep or dead,
There's no more noise in Court?

Ha, what's the buisinesse, noble (...), what (...)?
How speed you with my Mistress?

You may see there on the ground, half
In the grave already. So (...) you well,
What grief mine is, those that love best can tell.

Support her. Speak love, look up divinest Mist^isse.


You said you would not speak, nor look, nor touch your Bess.


Who I?
By all my hopes I ne'er had such a thought.

Oh, I mistook.


Why do you look so ghastly about the room?
Whom does your eyes enquire for?

Nothing, nay, no body.


Why do you we^p?


Hath some new love possessed him, and excluded
Me from his bosom? can it be possible?

All leave the chamber.


But I'll be so revenged as never woman was:
I'll be a president to all wives hereafter,
How to pay home their proud neglectful husbands;
'Tis in my way, I've power, and I'll do it.

What is't offends you?


'Tis you have don't.


We?


If you be the Prince:
There's but one man I hate above all the world.
And you have sent him to torment me h^.

What satisfaction shall I make thee for it?


This, and this only; If you have any interest
In him, or power above him: if you be a Prince
In your own country, have command and rule
In your own do^ons, fre^ly resign his person
And his state solely to my disposure.

But whence grows
The ground of such inveterate hate?

All circumstance to omit,
He, and only he ravished me from my country,
He was the cause of all my afflictions,
Tempests, shipwreck, fears. I never had just cause
Of care and grief but he was author of it.
Speak, is he mine?

What interest I can claim, either by oath
Or promise, thou art Commandress of.

Then I am yours;
And to morrow in the public view of all
The stranger Princes, Courtiers, and Ladies,
I will express my self. This night I entreat
I may repo^e my self in my own lodging
For private meditations.

What we have promised,
Is in our purpose most irrevocable,
And so we hope is yours.

You may presume, my lord.


Conduct this Lady to her chamber,
Let her have all observance: we will lay
Our strict command on him, lest he should leave
Our City before our summons, 'tis to morrow, then,
Shall happy thee, make us most blessed of men.

Now shall I quite him home,
Th'ingrate shall know,
'Tis above patience to be injured so.

Will you walk Lady, or take your coach?


That we the streets more freely may survey,
We'll walk along.

Let me see, three quarts, two pottles, one gallon and a pin^e, one pint, two
quarts more, then I have my load: thus are we that are under*journeymen put
too't. Oh the fortune of the seas; never did any man that marries a whore, so
cast himself away, as I had been like in the last tempest: yet nothing vexes me
so much, that after all my travels, no man that meets me but may say, a^d say
very truly, I am now no better then a pot companion.


That should be Clem my man, give me some gold,
Here, Sir, drink this to the health
Of thy old Mistress. Usher on,
We have more serious things to think upon.

Mistress Bess, Mi^s Eli^, 'tis (...): (...), gold: hence pewter pots, I'll be a
(...) porter no longer: my Mistress turned Gallant, and shall I do nothing but
run up stares and down^ (...), (...), anon, Sir? (...), I have gold, and anon
will be as gall^ as the proudest of them. Shall I stand at the Bar to bar any
mans ca^ing that drinks hard? no, I'll send these pots home by some porter or
other, put my self into a better habit, and say* The case is altered; then will
I go home to the bush where I drew wine, and buy out my time, and take up my
Chamber, be served in pomp by my fellow (...):

I will presently thither,

Where I will flaunt it in my Cap and my ^her.


You tell us of the strangest (...) (...) ever'came within the compass of my
knowledge.


I tell you but what's true*


It ca^not (...) example. Did you leave (...) those extremities of passion?


I think dying, or the next way to death.


To cheer you,
The Dukes own witness of (...) ^ancy,
And virtue, armed against all ^tions,
Part of your griefs should le^.

Rather friend,
Augment my passions, to be forced to lo^,
And quite (...) (...) sweet a (...).
Oh, it breeds more distraction.

VVer't my cause,
I'd to the Duke and claim her, beg for justice,
And through the populous court clamour my wrongs,
If he detain her from you.

But my oath
Ties me from that, I have quite abjured her,
I have renounced her freely, cast her off,
Disclaimed her quite: I can no more
Interest claim in her, then Goodlack
Thou, or Ruffman thou.

'Tis most strange, let's examine all our brains
How this may be avoided.

How now Clem, you loiter here, the house is full of guests, and you are
extremely called for.


You are deceived my Lieutenant* I'll assure you, you speak to as good a man as
my self: Do you want any money?


Can thou l^nd me any?


Look, I am the lord of these mines, of these Indies.


How came thou by them?


A delicate sweet Lady, meeting me in the street, like an Ass groaning under my
heavy burden, and being enamoured of my good parts, gave me this gold: if you
think I lie, examine all these pots, whose mouths, if they could (...), would
say as much in my behalf. But if you want any money, speak in time, for if I
once turn Courtier again, I will ^orn my poor friends, look scurvily upon my
acquaintance, borrow of all men, be beholding to any man, and acknowledge no
man: and my Motto shall be, (...) (...) the man (...) (...).


But (...), how came thou by this gold?


News, news, though not the lost sheep, yet the lost shrew is found, (...)
Mistress, Mi^ Elizabeth, 'tis she, she meeting me 'ith street, seeing I had a
pot or two too much, gave me ten pounds in a purse to pay for it, Ecce signum.


The Duke hath summoned your appearance, Gentlemen,
And lays his power of love, not o^ command,
To visit him in Court.

I am put into the number too, if he b^ a tall man, tell him we will attend his
high^.


Fellow, my langu^ge was not aimed at you.


But Sir, I'll make bold to come at first bidding.


Sir, your reward stays for you at Court,
For bringing of the ou^ lawed Cap^ head,
There's order tan^ fo^ from the treasuri^.

The Duke is just and royal* VVee'll attend you.


And I'll go furnish my self with some be^r accoutriments, and ^le b^ with you
to bring pr^sently.


There is not in your looks renowned Flor^*
That summers calm, and sweet alac^ie
That was wont there to shine, a winters storm
Sits threatening on your discontented brow.
May we desire the cause.

Which you shall know.
Princes, the fierce and bloody moors, have late
Committed outrage on our seas, especially,
One mighty Bashaw, *against whom w'have sent
Petro Deventuro, one of our best Sea Captains,
And, till we hear of his success, ^'are bard
Of much content.

My lord, good new^, ^tro De^ is returned
With happy victory, and many noble prisoners,
And humbly lays his conquest at your feet.

Petro, welcome.
This thy service shall not di^ unrewarded. Freely relate
The manner of thy Sea fight.

Then thus, great Duke.
This noble Bashaw: noble I must call him,
For he deserves that worthy attribute,
Did lord over these* our seas, appointed well;
Laden with many a rich and golden spoil,
Not weak to us in number; being in ken,
We had him and his Galleys straight in chase:
He ne'er set sail or fled: afar our ordnan^ plaid;
Coming more near, our muskets and our small shot,
Like showers of hail begun the slaughter;
There this Bashaw then perceiving straight
That he must either yield or die: his Scimitar
He pointed to his breast, thinking thereon
To perish, had not my coming staid him.

Nor think, bold Christian,
That I can commend, or thank thee for it,
For who that's noble will not prize brave death
Before a slavish bondage: had I died
By mine own hand, 'th^d been a s^ldiers pride.

Although a prisoner captive and a Moor,
Yet use him like the noblest of his nation.
And now withdraw with him, till we
Determine of his ransom.

Way there for the Dukes Mistress.


Ha, the Dukes Mistress, said he:


It was harsh.


Keep off, we would have no such rubs as these,
Trouble our way? but have them swept aside,
A company of base companions, to do no reverence
To a Princes Mistress.

Hear you t^?


Give back, you trouble the pr^ce.


This cannot ^e ^sse, but some Fury hath stolen her shape.


It seems strange.


But unto me most horrid.


Great Duk, I come to keep my promise with you, if you keep your word with me.


These kind regreets are unto me more welcome
Then my late victory (...) at Sea:
Wil^ please you take your seat?

Is not yo^ Spencer, and that the Captain of the Negro?


What shall w^ next behold?


Yet are you mine*


From all the world, great Fl^ence, witness this,
You ne'er had yet a vo^ary kiss.

'Sfoot I could tear my hair off.


Second your kindness, l^ these Princes see
Your tempting lips solely ^longs to me.

There's one again, i^ (...) (...) 'bove measure,
To be a Princes dar^, and ^oice ^ure.

Hold me Goodlack, or I shall break out,
Into some dangerous outrage.

Show in this your wisdom, and quite suppress your fury.


Princes, I fear you have mistook your selves
In these two ^gers, for I have little hope
To find them wort^ your gr^ ^racter.

There must be great presumption that must force belief to tha^.


Nay mo^ th^ pre^ptions, proofs,
Or they will win small credit.

You had from us Lady, a costly jewell,
It cost ten thousand crowns, speak, can you show it?

I kept it chary
As mine own heart, because it came from you;
But hurrying through the street, some cheating fellow,
Snatched it from my arm, therefore my suit is
With whomsoe're the jewell may be found,
The slave may die.

His sentence thine, we never will revoke i^.
Our Merchant, search all our Courtiers and such
Strangers as are within our Court.

Her's one of no mean lustre that this Gentleman wears in his hat.


Reach it the Lady.


This cannot be Bess Bridges, but some Medus^,
Changed into her lively portraiture.

Princes, the thief is found: what e're he be
That's guilty of this felony, I beg
That I may be his ^cer.

Thou shalt.


If you have any interest in his blood*
His oaths or vows, freely resign them, him,
And all at my dispose.

Have (...) not don't?


Who can with the least honour speak for him,
The theft being so app^

Now if she should challenge me with the purse she gave me, and hang m^ up for
my labour, I should curse the time that ever I was a courtier.


Let me descend, and ^'re I judge the Fello^,
Survey him first. 'Tis pity, for it seems
He hath an honest face. T^ (...) was never.

What Bess^, forget your self?


An indifferent pro^ m^, and take these courses. You said you would not speak,
nor look upon, nor touch your Bess.


I could be a new Si^ and b^ray
A second Troy, rather then suffer this.

Good outward parts, but in a foreign clime
Shame your own country. Never think of that.

I fear my heart will break,
It doth so struggle for eruption forth.

When do you speak his sentence, Lady?


You'll confirm't what e're it be.


As! we are Prince we will.


Set forth the prisoner.


Stand forward Englishman.


Then hear thy doom, I give thee back thy life,
And in thy arms throw a most constant wife;
If Thou hast rashly sworn, thy oaths are free,
You are mine by gift, I give my self to thee.

Lady, we understand not this.


Shall I make it plain?
This is, great Duke, my husband,
Whose virtues even the barbarous Moors admired.
This the man for whom a thousand dangers l've endured,
Of whom the best approved Croniclers,
Might write a golden legend.

My lord, I know that Gentleman
For Spencer, and her husband, for mine eyes
Saw them espoused in Fesse; that Gentleman,
As I take it, was Captain of the Negro,
The other his Lieutenant.

And do not you know me?


Not I, Sir.


I am Ba^haw of Barbary, by the same token I sold certain precious stones to
purchase the place.


Lady, you told us he ^as the author
Of all your troubles, cares, and fears.

I told true, his love was cause of all,
It drew me from my Country in his quest,
When I despaired: and finding him in Fesse,
Oh do but think great Duke if e're you loved,
What might have bought him from you.
Had my Spencer been an Euridice,
I would have plaid the Orpheus,
And found him out in hell.

We now perceive,
The cause of all these errors his unkindness,
Grounded on his rash oath, which we release;
And all those virtues, honours, and renowns,
Which even the barbarous Moors seemed to admire,
We'll dignify and raise their suffrage higher,

Floren^e is honourable.


Bring in the Bashaw, call Venturo forth.


Duke, I am prisoner,
Put me to ransom or to death: But to death rather;
For me thinks, a Soldier should not outlive bondage.

Bashaw Ioffer?
Leave my embraces, Bess, for I of force am cast
Into his arms. My noble friend?

I know you not, and I could wish you did not know me, now I am a prisoner, a
wretch, a captive, and such a one as I would not have my friends to know. I
pray stand off.


Because you are in durance,
Should I not know you? no:
For then the noblest minds should friends best know.
Have you forgot me, Sir?

No; were I in freedom and my princely honours,
I should then be proud to call you Spencer,
And my friend, but now

An English virtue thou shalt try,
That for my life once did not fear to die.
That for his noble office done to me,
Embrace him Bess, dear Goodlack, and the rest,
Whilst to this Prince I kneel. This was the Bashaw,
King Mullisheg made him great Viceroy of Argiers,
I know not, Prince, how he is fallen so low,
But if my self, my friends, and all my fortunes
M^y redeem him home, unto my naked skin
I'll sell my self: and if my wealth
Will not amount so much, I'll leave my self in hostage.

'Tis the part
Of a most noble friend.

And in these times worthy admiration


I wonder not the Moors so graced this nation,
If all the English equal their virtues.
For this brave Stranger so endeared to thee,
Pass to thy country ransomless and free.

Royal in all things is the duke of Florence.


Such honour is not found in Barbary.
The virtue in these Christians hath converted me,
Which to the world I can no longer smother,
Accept me then a Christian and a brother.

Princes,
These unexpected novelties,
Shall ad unto the high solemnity
Of your best welcome. Worthy Englishman,
And you, the mirror of your sex and nation,
Fair English Elizabeth, as well for virtue
As admired beauty, we'll give you cause, ere
You depart our Court, to say great Fesse
Was either poor, or else not bountiful.
Bashaw, we'll honour your conversion,
With all due rites. But for you beauteous Lady,
Thus much in your behalf we do proclaim,
The fairest Maid ner^ patterned in her life,
So fair a Virgin, and so chaste a wife.

STill the more glorious that the Creatures be,
They in their native goodness are more free
To things below them: as the Sun we find,
Vnpartially to shine on all mankind,
Denying light to none. And you we may
(Great King) most justly call our Light, our Day:
Whose glorious course may never be quite run,
While earth hath Sovereign, or the heave a Sun.

