THE Second Part of the Iron Age Which contains the death of Penthesilea,
Paris Priam, and Hecuba: The burning of Troy: The deaths of Agamemnon,
Menelaus, Clitemnestra, Hellena, Orestes, Egistus, Pillades, King Diomed,
Pyrhus, Cethus, Synon, Thersites, c. Written by THOMAS HEYVVOOD.

Aut prodesse solent aut Delectare.

Printed at London by Nicholas Oaks. 1632.

COurteous Reader: I commend unto thee an entire History, from Iupiter and
Saturne, to the v^ter subversion of Troy* with a faithful account of the
Deaths of all these Princes of Greece, who had hand in the Fate thereof,
(Vlisses only excepted, to whom belongs a further History.) Read freely, and
censure favourably. These Ages have been long since Writ, and suited with the
Time then: I know not how they may beereceiued in this Age, where nothing but
Satirica Dictaeria, and Comica Scommata are now inrequest: For mine own part,
I never affected either* when they stretched to the abuse of any person
public, or private. If the three former Ages (now out of Print,) be added to
these (as I am promised) to make up an handsome Volumne; I purpose (Deo
Assistente,) to illustrate the whole Work, with an Explanation of all he
difficulties, and an Historical Comment of every hard name, which may appear
obscure or intricate to such as are not frequent in Poetry: Which (as the rest)
I shall freely devote to thy favourable perusal, in this as all the rest
industrious to thy pleasure and profit:

Thomas Heywood
Worthy Sir, ANd my much respected Friend: The Impression of your Love, after
so many years acknowledgment, enforces me that I cannot choose, but in my best
recollection, to number you in the File and List of my best and cho ycest
Wellwishers. True it is, that my unable merit hath ever come much short of your
ample acknowledgement: Howsoe^er, though you be now absent in the Country,
upon a necessary retyrement; yet let this witness in my behalf, that you are
not altogether unremembered in the City: Nor take it unkindly at my hands that
I hauereserued your name to the Catastrophe and conclusion of this Work: Since
being Scoena nouissima, It must be consequently the fresher in memory; as you
have had ever a charitable and indulgent censure of such poor pieces of mine,
as have come accedentally unto your view. So I entreat you now, (as one better
able to judge, then I to determine) to receive into your favourable patronage,
this second part of the Iron Age. I much deceive my self, if J heard you not
once commend it, when you saw it Acted; if you persist in the same opinion,
when you shall spare some sorted hours to hear it read, in your pains, I
shall hold my self much pleased: over remaining

Yours, not to be changed: Thomas Heywood.
YOu Terrors of the Asian Monarchy,
And Europes glory: Warlike Lords of Greece:
Although the great Prince of the Mirmidons,
And arme-strong Aiax, our best Champions,
Be by the gods bereft us: yet now comes
A Phoenix out of their cold ashes rising:
Pyrhus, surnamed Neoptolemus:
On whom for his deceased fathers sake,
We must bestow some honours. Menelaus,
Vlisses, Diomed, give the Prince meeting,
And be his conduct to the General.

Pyrhus kneel down, we girt thee with this sword,
It was thy fathers. In his warlike hand
It hath cleft Troians to the navel down,
Par'd heads off faster then the harvest Sith
Doth the thin stalks, or bending ears of grain:
Wear it, and draw it to revenge his death.
Princes, perform your several ceremonies.

These golden spurs I fasten to thine heals,
The same thy warlike father won in field,
When Hector tide with thonges to his steeds fet-locks,
Was drag d about the high built walls of Troy.

This Armour, and this plumed Burgonet,
In which thy father, like a rampier'd wall,
Opposde the fury of his enemies,
(By general consent of all these Princes
Attributed to me) lo I surrender
To youthful Neoptolemus, wear it Prince,
Not all the world yields a more strong defence.

Achilles Tent, his Treasure, and his jewels,
We have reserved, enjoy them noble Pyrhus;
And lastly his strong guard of Mirmidons,
And with the honour he with these have won,
His Sword, Spurs, Armour, Guard, Pauileon,
Be by his valiant son much dignified.

Before I touch the handle of his sword,
Or to my Knightly spurs direct my eyes,
Lace this rich Armour to my youthful sides,
Or roof mine head within this warlike Tent,
Make proof of this his plumed Burgonet,
Or take on me the leading of his Guard:
Witness you Grecian Princes, what I vow:
By Saturnes son, the sire of Aeacus,
Begot on fair Europa; by their issue,
The second Judge, placed on the infernal bench
I will descend to Peleus, and from him,
Even to my natural father, with whose honours
I join my mother Deidamiaes
And in my venge^ull oath include them all,
Till Priam be compelled to shut his Gates
For want of men: ^le be as merci^esse
As vntam'd Lyons, and the flesh-fed Bears,
Blood shall look brighter in young Pyrhus eyes
Then disso^u^d Crystal, till o^d Priams hairs
Be dyed in gore: till Hecub's ^euerent locks
Be gu^'d in slaughter; all their son^es and daughters,
Subjects, and City quite confused in ruin,
Bow to our merciles^e fury: I'll not leave
This black and fatal siege; and this I ^weare
As I am Prince, and great Achille^ heir.

Even in thy looks I read the sack of Troy,
And ^riams Tragedy: welcome sweet Pyrhus,
And welcome you his warlike followers.

where be these Troians? I would fain behold
Their winged battalions grapple? I would see
The battered center fiye about their ears
In clouds of dust: I would have horses hooves
Beat thunder out of earth: the chariot Trees
I would see drowned in blood, Scamander plains
Ore-spread with entrails baked in blood and dust:
With terror I would have this day as black,
As when Hyperion leaping from his Sphere,
Cast ugly darkness from his Chariot wheels,
And in this veiled confusion the faint Troians
Beat back into the Yowne: I'd see their Gates
Entered, and fire by their high Battlements
Climbing toward heaven: the pavement of th'streets
I'd see paved ore with faces: infants tossed
On Lances points: big-bellied Ladies flung
From out their casements: I'd have all their souls
Set upon wings, and Troy, no Troy, but fire,
As if ten thousand Comets joined in one,
To close the world in red confusion.

Well spake bold Synon; and my Lords of Greece,
This fellow boasts no more then with his sword,
He will adventure for, and should that ^ayle,
He will set his brain to work. I tell you Princes,
My Grandsire Lycomedes hath made proof
Of Synons policies, state-quaking proiects
Are hand-maides to his brain; and he hath spirit
To drive his plots even to the door of Death,
With rare effects, and then not all the world
Affords a villain more incomparable,
Then Synon my attendant. Warlike Princes,
I speak this to his praise: and I profess
My self as sterne, bloody, and merciless.

I have not heard a braver Character
Given to a Greek: and had he but my railing*
He were a man complete.

Sure there is something
Above a common man in yon same fellow,
Whom nature hath so marked, and were his mind
As crooked as his body, he were one
I could be much in love with.

He hath a feature
That I could court, nay will: I would not loose
His friendship and acquaintance for the world.
Me thinks you are a comely Gentleman.

I ever held my self so: and mine eye
Gives you no less: of all the Grecians here
Thou haft a face like mine, that fears no weather*
A shape that war it self cannot deform:
I best love such complexions.

By the gods
We have two meeting souls: be my sweet Vrchin*

I will,
An thou shalt be mine ugly Toad.

A match: be we hence forth brothers and friends.

Embrace then friend and brother: my dear Toad*

My amiable Vrchin.

I long for work, will not these Troians come,
To welcome Pyrhus, great Achilles son?

Their drums proclaim them ready for the field.

Perhaps King Priam hath not yet related
The news of Neoptolemus arrive,
That he presumes thus, weakened as he is,
To open his Gates, and meet us in the field.

Tis like he hath, because for want of men
He brings a troop of Women to the field:
Most sure he thinks, we (like our warlike father)
Will be insnar'd with beauty: Priam no,
We for his death, are sworn vain beauties foe.

Artthou Achilles son, beneath whose hand
Assisted by his bloody Mirmidons,
The valiant Hector fell?

Woman I am.

Thou should be then a Coward.

How?

Even so:
Thy father was a foe dishonourable*
And so the world reputes him.

By all the gods --

Swear not, for ere the closure of the battle,
If both the Generals please, with my good sword,
In single combat I'll make good my word.

O that thou were a man! but women's tongues
Are privileged: come Priam, all his sons,
The whole remain of fifty, I'll make good
My fathers honour against sufficient odds.
But for these scoulds, we leave them to their sex*
What make they amongst ^ouldiers.

Scorn not prou^ Pyrhus
Our presence in the field; I tell thee Prince,
I am a Queen, the Queen of Amazons,
A warlike Nation disciplined in Arms.

Are you those Harlots famous through the wo^ld,
That have vsurpt a Kingdom to your selaes,
And pent your sweet hearts in a barren isle,
Where your adulterate sports are exercised.

Curb thy irregular tong: we are those women
That practise arms, by which we purchase fame.
All the year long, only three months excepted,
Those wherein Phoebus drives his Chariot,
In height of splendour through the burning Cancer,
The fiery Lyon, and the Virgins sign:
Then we forsake our Sun-burnt Continent,
And in a cooler clime, sport with our men,
And then return* if we have issue male,
We nurse them up, then send them to their Fathers.
If females, we then keep them, and with irons
Their right paps we sear off, with better ease
To couch their spears, and practise feats of arms.
We are those women, who expel'd our Land
By Aegypts Tyrant: Conquered Asia,
Egypt and Cappadocia: these two Ladies
Descend from Men^lippe and Hyppolita,
Who in Antiopes reign* fou^ht hand to hand
With Hercules and Theseus; we are those
That came for love of hector to the field,
And (being murdered) to revenge his death.

Then welcome Amazonians, as I live
I love you though I hate you: but beware,
Hate will out-way my love, and i'll not spare
Your ^usl ind squadrons: for my fathers fall,
Troians, and Amazonians perish all.

Now Queen of Amazons, by the strong spirit
Achilles left his son, I let thee know
My father was an honourable Foe.

Defiance Pyrhus, i'll to death proclaim,
Hector was by Achilles basely slain:
And on his sons head, with my keen edged sword,
And th^dring strokes, I well make good my word.

What? wounded noble Pirhus?

Wounded? no,
I have not met one that can raze the skin
Of great Achilles son.

Yet blood drops from your arm.

Not possible!
Tis sure the blood of some slain enemy.
Come lets us break into the battles center,
And too't pel mel.

But Neoptolemus,
We prise thy safety more then all advantage:
Retire thy sel^e to have thy wounds bound up,

Cowards fear death,
I'll avenge my blood, though with the loss of breath.
Art thou a mad-man fellow, that aduenturest
So near the blood of Neoptolemus,
Whose smallest drop must cost a Troians life.

Art thou the bleeding ^s^ue of that Greek?
I, in revenge of noble Hectors death,
Slew in Apolloes Temple.

Art thou then
That coward and effeminate Trojan boy.

Arm wounded Greek, I slew the false Achilles,
An act which I am proud of.

Fall on the murderer,
And flake him smaller then the Lybean sand.

If any but my self offer one blow,
I'll on the Troians party oppose him.
Come Paris, though against the odds of breath,
Achilles wounded son, will avenge his death.

Why sound the Troians this retreat?

Paris is ^ayne, and Penthisilea
Wounded by Pyrhus.

Come then Synon
Go with me to my Tent, this night we will revel
With beauteous Cressida.

Not I, I hate all women, painted beauty
And I am opposites: I love thee less
Because thou doat'st on Trojan Cressida.

She's worthy of our love: I tell thee Synon,
She is both constant, wise, and beautiful.

She's neither constant, wise, nor beautiful,
I'll prove it Diomed: four Elements
Meet in the structure of that Cressida,
Of which there's not one pure: she's compact
Merely of blood, of bones and rotten flesh,
Which makes her Leaprous, where the Sun exhales
The moist complexion, it doth putrefy
The region of the air: there's then another,
Sometimes the Sun sits muffled in his Cave,
Whilst from the Clouds fly hideous showers of rain,
Which sweeps the earths corruption into Brookes,
Brookes into rivers, Rivers send their tribute,
As they receive it to their Sovereign
The seething Ocean: Thus Earth, Air, and Water,
Are all infected, she then framed of these,
Can she be beautefull? No Diomed,
If they seem fair, they have the help of Art,
By nature they are ugly.

Leave this detraction.

Now for this Cressids wisdom, is she wise,
Who would forsake her birth-right, her b^aue friend,
The constant Troylus, for King Diomed;
To trust the faith of Greekes, and to love thee
That art to Troy a professed enemy?

Ca^t thou disprove her constancy?

I can.
Never was woman constant to one man:
For proof, do thou but put into one scale
A feather, in the other Cressids truth,
The feather shall down weigh it: Diomed
Wilt thou believe me, if I win not Cressid
To be my sweet heart: yet have no such face,
No such proportion, to bewitch a Lady*
I never practised court-ship, but am blunt;
Nor can I file my tongue: yet if I win not
The most chaste woman, I will cut it out.
Shall I make proof with her?

There she comes,
Affront her Synon, I'll with-draw unseen*

A gallant Lady, who but such a villain*
As Synon would betray her: but my vow
Is past, for she's a Trojan. Cressida,
You are well encountered: whether away sweet Lady?

To meet with Kingly Diomed, and with kisses
Conduct him to his Tent.

Tis kindly done:
You love King Diomed then?

As mine own life.

What see thou in him that is worth thy love*

He's of a fair and comely personage.

Personage? ha, ha.
I prithee look on me* and view me well,
And thou wilt find some difference.

True, more odds
Twixt him and thee, then betwixt Mercury
And limping V^can.

Yetas fair a blowse
As you, sweet Lady, wedded with that Smith*
And bedded too, a black complexion
Is always precious in a woman's eye:
Leave Diomed, and love me Cressida.

Thee.

Me.

Deformity forbear, I will to Diomed
Make known thine insolence.

I care not, for I, not desire to live,
If not beloved of Cressid: tell the King
If he stood by, I would not spare a word.
For thine own part, rare goddess, I adore thee,
And owe thee divine reverence: Diomed
Indeed's Aetolians King, and hath a Queen.

A Queen?

A Queen, that shall hereafter question thee:
Or can thou think he loves thee really
Being a Trojan, but for present use:
Can Greekes love Troians, are they not all sworn
To do them outrage?

How can thou then love me?

I am a pollitician, oaths with me
Are but the tools I work with, I may break
An oath by my profession. Hear me further,
Think thou King Diomed, forgets thy breach
Of love with Troylus? Ey or that he hopes
Thou can be constant to a second friend,
That wast so false unto thy first beloved.

Syn^n thou art deceived `thou know I never
Had left Prince Troylus, but by the command
Of my old father Calchas.

Then love Diomed;
Yes, do so still, but Cressid mark the end*
If ever he transport thee to Ae^olia,
His Queen will bid thee welcome with a vengeance:
Hast thou more eyes then these? she'll fall to work*
For such an other Vixen thou ne'er knew*
Come Cressida be wise.

What shall I do?

Love me, love Synon.

Synon loves not me*

I'll swear I do.

I heard thee say, that thou would break thine oath*

Then I'll not swear, because I will not break it:
But yet I love thee Cressida, love me,
I'll leave the wars vnfinisht, Troy vnsackt;
And to my native Country bear thee hence:
Nay wench I'll do it; come kiss me Cressida.

Well, you may use your pleasure;
But good Synon keep this from Diomed.

Oh perjured strumpet,
Is this thy faith? now Synon I'll believe
There is no truth in women.

Am ^ betrayed? oh thou base ugly villain,
I'll pull thine eyes out.

Ha, ha, King Diomed,
Did I not tell thee what thy sweet heart was.

Thou art a Traitor to all woman kind.

I am, and nought more grieves me then to
Think, a woman was my mother.

A villain.

Right.

A Devil.

Little better.

Go get you back to Troy, away, begone,
You shall no more be my Companion.

And now fair ^roian Weather-hen adieu*
And when thou next love, think to be more true*

Oh all you powers, above look down and see*
How I am punished for my perjury.

Stay, what sad Lady's this? whence are you woman?
Of Troy or Greece?

I was of Troy till lone drew me from thence,
But since have soiourn'd in the Tents of Greece,
With Diomed King of Etolin:
Oh had I never known him.

Would you trust
You honour amongst strangers? but sweet Lady
Discourse your wrongs.

I was betrayed:
It shames me to relate the circumstance,
By a false Greek, one that doth hate our sex,
One Synon, if you meet him in the battle,
I with my tears entreat you be revenged.

How might we know him?

His visage swart, and earthy ore his shoulder
Hangs locks of hair, black as the Ravens phunes:
His eyes down looking, you shall hardly see
One in whose shape appears more treachery.

We loose much time: Lady haft you to Troy,
And if we meet a fellow in the battle
Of your description, by our honoured names,
We will have his blood to recompense our shames.

By her description this should be the man

Compassed with smocks and long coats:
Now you whoores.

Is thy name Synon?

No, but I know Synon.
He is my friend and brother.

For Synons sake, prepare thy self for ^aughter*

He* who names Synon?

Brother thou ne'er could come in better time:
See, see, how I am rounded.

Were ever such a pair of Devils feene?
They are so like, they needs must be allied.

What can their Dams say to us?

You betray Ladies, envy all our sex,
And that you now shall pay for girt him round.

I recan^ nothing, (...) me sweet faced brother:
And now you witches* ^arlets, drabes, and queens,
We will cut you all to fragments.

The Troians sound retreat.

Who saw young Pyrhus?

I fear his too much rage hath spurred him on
Too far amongst the Amazonian troops.

Why stand you idle here, and let the Troians
Lead warlike Pyrhus prisoner to the Town.

How Pyrhus prisoner?

We saw him compassed by the Amazous:
Penthesil^ with her bustain troops.
Laid load upon his Helm.

Then this retreat
Upon the sudden argues that they lead him
Captive to Troy.

Courage brave Princes, I have got a prise
Worthy the purchase, on my Lances point
Sits pearcht the Amazonians lopped off head,
Upon my warlike sword her bleeding arm,
At sight of which the Troians sound retreat:
The honour of this day belongs to us.

To none but Neoptolemus.

Synon you played the coward: so Thersites.

If not so.
I had not lived to see Troyes overthrow

When did thou ever see a villain valiant?
What's past remember not, but what's to come:
Priam hath shut his Gates, and will no more
Meet him in arms: can you with all your valour
Glide through the walls, if not what are you nearer
For all your Ten years siege?

Tis true, some stratagem to enter Troy
Were admirable: for Princes till I see
The Temple burn wherein my father died,
And Troy no Troy but ashes; my revenge
Will have no sterne aspect, till I behold
Troyes ground-sils swim in pooles of crimson gore
Ramnusia's Alter filled with flowing helmes
Of blood and brains: Priam and Hecuba
Dragged by this hand to death, and this my sword
Ra^ish the breast of fair Polixena,
I shall not think my fathers death revenged.

To him that can contrive
A stratagem by which to enter Troy,
I'll give the whole spoil of Apolloes Temple.

I my rich Tent.

I the Palladium that I brought from Troy.

I all my birth-right in Aetoli^.

Peace, tis here: I have it.

I'll hug thee Synon.

Touch me not, away:
There're more hammers beating in my brain
Then ever touched Vulcans Anvil, more Ideaes
Then Attomes, Embrions innumerable*
Growing to perfect shape; and now 'tis good.
Call for Endimions bastard, where's Epeus?
I'll set him straight a work.

Upon some Engine Synon.

A horse, a horse.

Ten Kingdoms for a horse to enter Troy.

Stay, let me see:
Vlisses you have the Palladium.

I have so.

Call for Epeus then, the General
Hath no command in him.

Lets know the project.

And that Palladium stood in Pall^ Temple,
And Consecrate to her.

It did so.

Call for Epeus then.

Lets hear what thou intend.

I'll have an Horse built with so huge a bulk,
As shall contain a thousand men in Arms.

And enter Troy with that?

Do it you, you trouble mine invention,
I am grown muddy with your interruption:
Good young man lend more patience, hear me out:
This Engine framed, and stuffed with armed Gre^kes.
(Will you take down your Tents, march back to Tenedos?)

What shall the Horse do then?

Not gallop as your tongue doth: good Vlisses
Lend me your apprehension; when the Troians
Find you are gone aboard, they'll straight suppose
You'll not weigh Anchor: till the gods inform you
Of your success at Sea: if then a villain
Can drive into their ears, the goddess Pallas
Offended for her stolen Palladium:
(Will you erect this Machine to her honour?)
Withal that were it brought into her Temple,
It would retain the gilt Palladiums virtue.
Might not the forged tale move aged Priam,
To hale this Engine presently to Troy,
Pull down his walls for entrance, leave a breach
Where in the dead of night, all your whole Army
May enter, take them sleeping in their beds,
And put them all to sword.

Tis rare!

Tis admirable, I will adventure
My person in the Horse.

Do so, and get a thousand spirits more.
King Agamemnon, if you like the project,
Down with your Tent.

Synon, we will,

I'll set a lightvpon the walls of Troy
Shall give the summous when you shall return*
About it Princes: Pyrhus get you men
In readiness, I will expose my self
To bewitch Priam with a weeping tale,
I cannot to the life describe in words,
What I'll express in action.

Down with our Tents.

I'll to pick out bold Greeks to fill the horse:
Shine bright you lamps of Heaueu, for ere't be long
We will dim your radiant beams with flaming lights
And bloody meteors, from Troyes burning streets.

Such sights are glorious sparks in Synons eyes,
Who longs to feast the Devil with Tragedies.

The Grecians gone?

All their tents raised, their ten years siege remoon'd*
Now Troy may rest securely.

They may report at their return to Greece
The welcome they have had: what have they won?
But wounds, Times loss, shame, and confusion.

We now are Lord of our own Territories,
Ten years kept from us by th'inuading Greekes*
Now we may freely take a full survey
Of all Scamander plain, drunk with the mixture
Of th'opposite bloods of Troians and of Greekes.

And royal Husband we have cause to joy,
That after so long siege the Greekes are f^ed,
And you in peace may rest your aged head.

Upon this East-side stood Vlisses Tent,
The politic Greek.

There was old Nestors quarter,
And Agamemnons that; the General.

Upon the north-side of the field, Achilles
That bloody Greek pitched, and upon this plain,
I well remember, was my Hector slain.

This empty place being South from all the rest,
The valiant Diomed hath oft made good,
And here, even here, his rich Pavilion stood.

But here, even here, near to Duke Aiax tent,
Round girt with Mirmidons, my Troilus fell.

Then was this place a standing Lake of blood,
Part of which moisture the bright Sun exhald;
And part the thirsty earth hath quaft to Mars:
But now the swords on either part are sheathed,
And after ten years tumults wars surcease,
They layding their ships home with shameful peace.

For which we will praise the gods, banquet and feast,
Since by their flight, our glorious fame's increased.

Soft, what huge Engine's that left on the strond,
That bears the shape and figure of an Horse.

What, shall we hew it peace-meale with our swords?

Oh be not rash, sure tis some mystery
That this great Architecture doth include.

But mine opinion is, this Steeds huge bulk
Is stuffed with Greekish guile.

I rather think
It is some monumental Edifice
Unto the goddess Pallas consecrate:
Then spare your fury.

Why stand you gazing at this horrid craft,
Forged by the fly Vlisses, is his brain
Unknown in Troy? or can you look for safety
From those who ten years have besieged your walls?
Either this huge swollen bulk is big with soldiers,
Longing to be delivered of armed Greekes,
Whose monstrous fatal and abhorred birth,
Will be Troyes ruin: else this hill of timber
This horse-like structure stabled up in Troy,
Will spurn down these our walls, our towers demolish,
Which it shall never: come you Trojan youth
That love the public safety, no proud Greek
Upon this Steeds back, over 'Troyes wall shall ride.
First with this Javelin I'll transpearce his side.

What means Laoooon?

Princes stay his fury.

Hark Troians, if a jarring noise of Arms,
Sighed not throw these deep Caverns, I divine
This gluttenous womb hath swallowed a whole band
Of men in steel, then with your swords and glaues
Rip up his tough sides, and imbowell him,
That we may prove how they have lined his entrails.

Stay, and proceed, no further in your rage,
Till we have learnt some novel from this Greek,
Whom in a ditch we found fast giu'd and bound.

Laocoon cease thy violence till we know
From that poor Grecian, what that Machine means.

Oh me, (of all on earth most miserable,)
Whom neither Heavens will succour, earth preserve,
Nor seas keep safe, I, whom the Heavens despise,
The Earth abandnos, and the Seas disdain:
Where shall I shroud me? whom, but now the Greekes
Threatened with vengeance; and escaped from them,
Fallen now into the hands of Troians, menacing death:
The world affords no place, to wretched Synon,
Of comfort, for where ere I fix my foot,
I tread upon my grave: the four vast corners
Of this large Vniuerse, in all their rooms
And spacious emptiness, will not affoord me
My bodies length of rest: where ere I fly,
Or stay, or turn, Death's th'obiect of mine eye!

What art thou? or whence come thou? briefly speak?
Thou wretched man, thou moou'st us with thy tears:
Unbind him soldiers.

Shall I deny my self to be of Greece?
Because I am brought Captive into Troy?
No Synon cannot lye: Heaven, Earth, and Sea,
From all which I am out-cast, witness with me
That Synon cannot lye: thrice damned Vlisses,
The black-hair'd Pyrhus, and horned Menelaus
Grook-back'd Thersites, luxurious Di^med,
And all the rabble of detested Greekes,
I call to witness, Synon cannot lye.
Could I have oiled my tongue, and cringed my ham,
Suppled mine humble knee to croutch and bend,
Heaved at my bonnet, shrugged my shoulders thus,
Grinned in their faces, Synon then had stood,
Whom now this hour must stue in his own blood.

The perfect image of a wretched creature,
His speeches beg remorse.

Alas good man,
Shake off the timorous fear of servile death,
Though amongst us Troians, and thy self a Greek,
Thou art not now amongst thine enemies,
Thy life I'll warrant, only let us know
What this Horse means.

Greece I renounce thee, thou hast thrown me off,
Fair Troy ^ am thy creature. Now I'll unrip
Vlisses craft, my fatal enemy.
Who sold to death the Duke Palamides,
My Kinsman Troians (though in garments torn)
Synon stands here, yet is he nobly borne:
For that known murder did I haint his Tent
With railing menaces, horrible exclaims,
Many a blacke-saint, of wishes, oaths, and curses
Have I sung at his window, then demanding
Justice of Agamemnon, Diomed,
Duke Nestor with the other Lords of Greece,
For murder of the Prince Palamides,
And being denied it in my most vexation,
My bitter tongue spared not to bark at them:
For this I was observed, looked through and through
Vlisses brain had marked me, for my tongue
And fatted me for death by Calchas means,
He wrought so far that I should have bin offred
Unto the gods for sacrifice, the Priest
Lifting his hand aloft to strike me dead,
I leapt down from the Altar, and so fled,
Pursuit and search was made, but I lay safe
In a thick tuft of sedge, till I was found
By these your soldiers, who thus brought me bound.

Thou now art free secured from all their tyrannys
Now tell us what's the meaning of this Horse?
Why have they left him here, themselves being gon?

My new released hands, thus I heave on hye,
Witness you gods, that Synon cannot lye,
But as a new adopted Trojan now
By Priams grace; I here protest by Jove,
By these eternal fires that spangle Heaven,
The Alter, and that sacrificing sword,
Beneath whose stroke I lay, since my base Country
Casts me away to death, I am now borne
A son of Troy: not Hector whilst he lived
More dammag'd Greece by his all wounding arm,
Then I by my discovery: Well, you know
How the Greekes honour Pallas, who inceast
Because Vl^sses the Palladium stole
Out of her Temple, and her Warders slew,
In rage she threatened ruin to all Greece:
Therefore to her hath Calchas built this Horse.
(Greece pardon me, and all my Country gods
Be deaf to Synons tale, and let it be
Henceforth forgot that I was borne in Greece,
Least times to come record what I reveal,
The black confusion of my Native weal.

And what's that Synon?

Where left I? at the Horse, built of that size,
Least you should give it entrance at your Gates:
For know should your ^ude hands da^e to prophan
This gift sacred to Pallas; Rots and diseases,
Pests and infections shall depopulate you,
And in a small short season, they returning,
Shall see thy subjects slain, fair Troy bright burning.
I'm even with thee Vlisses, and my breath
Strikes all Greece home for my intended death.

Thanks Synon, we shall bounteously reward thee,

And see my Liege, to make good his report,
Laocoon, he that with his Javelin pierced
This gift of Pallas, round embraced with Snakes,
That wind their trains about his wounded wast,
And for his late presumption sting him dead.

We have not seen so strange a prodigy,
Laocoon hath offended all the gods,
In his profane attempt.

Then lend your helping hands,
To lift up that Pallad an monument
Into Troyes City: Leauers, Cables, Cords.

It cannot enter through the City Gates.

Down with the walls then.

These walls that ten years have defended Troy,
For all their service shall we ruin them.

But this shall not defend you for ten years,
But make your Town impregnable for ever.

Down with the walls then, each man lend a hand.

I hear a noise of Armour.

Ha, what's that?

I fear some treason in that Horse enclosed:
Nor will I lend an hand to hale him in.

Down with the Walls.

And Troians now after your ten years toil,
Days battles, the fields trouble, and nights watch,
This is the first of all your rest, feast, banquet, joy and play,
Pallas is ours, the Greekes say^'d hence away.

Here we release all Centuries and commit
Our broken walls to her Celestial guard:
We will rew^d thee Synon, the Greekes gone,
Prian. may ^ est his age, in his soft throne.

S^, so, so,
S^non I hope shall warm his hands annon,
A^ a bright goodly bone-fire: Here's the Key
Unto this Macnine by Ep^us built,
Which hath already with his brazen breast,
Tilt ed Tro^es wall down, and annon being drunk
With the best blood of Greece, in dead of night
Having surcharged his stomach, will spew out
A thousand men in Arms: sweet mid-night come,
I long to mask me in thy sable Wings,
That I may do some mischief and black deeds:
We shall have rare sport, admirable spoil,
Cutting of throats, with stabbing, wounding, killing
Some dead a sleep, and some half sleep, half wakes
Some dancing Antiques in their bloody shirts,
To which their wives cries, their infants shrieks,
Play music, brave mirth, pleasing harmony:
Then having spit young children on our spears,
We will roast them at the scorching flames of Troy:
Fly swift you winged minutes till you catch
That long-wisht hour of stillness: in which Troy
Sleeps her last sleep, made drunk with wine and joy.
In the receiving of this fatal Steed,
Sick Troy this day hath swallowed such a pill,
Shall search her entrails, and her ^iues blood spill.

Soft, soft, and let your stillness suite with night,
Fair Phebe keep thy silver splendour in,
And be not seen to night.

Were Phebe in my case,
She soon would blush to show her horned face.

We would not have a star cast it's clear eye
On our dark enterprise: too fast: so, still.
Here Ambush, till you see the flaming Torch,
Synon this night upon the walls of Troy,
Will toss about his ears, as a true signal,
The great Epean structure is received,
And we may find safe entrance by the breach.

A stand, the word through all the Regiment,

A stand.

Thy everlasting sleep sleep careless Troy,
This horrid night buried in Wine and mirth,
This fatal Horse spurred by the brain of Synon,
Hath leapt ore Troys high bulwarks great with Greeks,
Four times in raising up the monument,
A shaking sound of Armour harshly iar'd
In all the Princes ears, and had they not
Been drunk in Synons tears, they'd found our guile.
It is now mid-night. The black darkness fallen,
And rolled over all the world, as well the Poles,
As the great Ocean, and the earth: now's the time
For tragic slaughter, clad in gules and sables,
To spring out of Hells jaws, and play strange reakes
In sleepy Troy, this bright and flaming brand
Which I so often gire about mine ears,
Is signal for the Armies quick return,
And make proud Islium like my bright torch burn,
Wink all you eyes of Heaven, or you shall be
Blood-shot to view Troyes dismal Tragedy.

The signals on the wa^: forward brave soldiers,
The Horse is entered, Synons Tale believed.
And we this night shall see the sack of Troy.

March on then, the black darkness covers us,
And we without suspicion easily may
Disperse our selves about these high built walls:

Now with a soft march enter at this breach
But give no token of a loud Alarm,
Till we have met with Pyrhus and the rest,
Whom the Steeds bulk includes.

Soft, soft, ey so, hereafter Ages tell,
How Synons key vnlockt the gates of Hell.

The General?

Pyrhus?

Menelaus?

Diomed?

My Vrchin?

What my Toad?

Well met in Troy great Lords.

Where are we now?

In the high street, ne'er to the Church of Pallas,
And this you past, the gate called Dardanus.

Then here begins Troyes fatal tragedy:
Princes of Greece, at once unsheathe your swords,
And hear protest with Neoptolemus,
By our fore-father Peleus, grandam Thet^s,
The Emperious goddess of the Sea, that made
Achilles, save in th'heele, invulnerable,
And by my father great Aeacides,
His glorious name, his Armour which I wear,
His bloody wounds, and his black sepulchre;
I here abjure all respite, mercy, sleep,
Until this City be a place confused:
This murall girdle that begirts it round
A Cawsey for the Greekes to trample on,
The place a stone-heape swimming in an Ocean
Of Trojan blood, which shall from far appear
Like an high Rock in the red Sea.

A brave show,
To see full Boats in blood of Troians row,
And the poor labouring Snakes with arms spread swimms
In luke-warme blood of their allies and kin.

Whence must this Ocean flow?
From thousand Springs
Of gentle and ignoble, base and Kings.

Set on then, none retire;
Wave in the one hand steel, in the other fire.
Loud Drums and Trumpets ring Troyes fatal peal,
That now lies drawing on, the word be vengeance,
Alarm, at that watch-word fire, and kill,
And wide-mouth'd Orchus with whole legions fill*

T'was an alarm sure that frighted me
In my dead sleep, 'twas near the Dardan port:
Jove grant that all be well.

Oh Heaven! what tumult's this
That hurryes through the fatal streets of Troy*
I fear some treason.

Stay Wife, lay thine ear
Unto the ground and list, if we can gather
Of what condition this strange uproar is
That riots at this late unseasoned hour?
Sure 'tis the noise of war, whence should it grow?
The Greekes are sayl'd hence, Troy needs fear no foe.

The horrid stir comes on this way towards us.

Oh whither shall we turn?

Oh save me husband.

Succour me dear wife.

Vengeance for Greece and Neoptolemus.

So fly the word along, dye old and young,
Morn Troy in ashes for Achilles loss,
Steel in one hand, in the other fire-brands toss.

This horrid clamour that hath called me up
From my deep rest, much, much amazes me;
Tis on the right hand, now upon the left,
It goes before me and it follows me:
Oh Jove expound the meaning of this horror
Which the dark mid-night makes more terrible.

this street is clear, but now I climbed a Turret,
And I might well difcernel alfe Troy in fire,
And by the flame the burnis^t Helmets glister
Of men in Arms, whence Jove Olympicke knows.

Where shall I hide me? Treason, Troyes betrayed;
The fatal horse was full of armed Greekes.

Of Greekes? damned Synon.

Prince Chorebus fly,
Fly great Aeneas.

Which way? where? or how?
Are we not rounded with a quick-set hedge
Of pointed steel? are not the gates possessed
And strongly manned with Greekes? death every where,
Then whither should we fly?

Into the throng.
Where blows are dealt, where our inflamed Turrets
Burn with most fury.

Nobly speaks Aeneas.

Then whither flames, and furies, shreiks and clamours,
Death, danger, and the devils hurry us,
Thither will we: follow where I shall lead,
Thousands shall fall by us ere we be dead.

Charge on these naked Troians, and cry thus,
Vengeance for Greece and Neoptolemus.

Charge on these armed Grecians, and thus cry,
We may yet live to see ten thousand dye.
They charge the Greekes and kill them, Thersites runs away.

Well fought brave spirits in our utter ruin,
We are Conquerours yet: let's don these Greekish habits,
And mix our selves amongst their Armed ranks;
So unexpected murder all we meet:
The darkness will assist our enterprise.
These Greekish Arms this night by Troians Worn
Shall to the fall of many Grecians turn.

Burn fire, and kill, as you wound cry thus,
Vengeance for Greece and Neoptolemus.

What art thou that with such a grim aspect,
In this black night so dark and turbulent,
Haunts me in every corner of my house
Which yet burns over mine ears?

Doest thou not know me?
Or can Aeneas so forget his friend?
This face did fright Achilles in the field,
And when I shook these locks, now knotted all,
As baked in blood; all Greece hath quak't and trembled.
Look on mine Heals, and thou may see those thongs
By which so often I was dragged about Troy,
My body made an universal Wound
By the vnnumbred hands of Mirmidons,
This th'hand that tossed so many wild-fire balls
Into the Arg^ue fleet, and this the body
That decked in Aiax and Ac ills spoils
Rid from the fields triumphant thorough Troy.

Prince Hector?

Hence Aeneas post from Troy,
Rear that abroad the gods at home destroy.
The City burns, Priam and Priams glory
Is all expired, and tumbled headlong down:
Cassandraes long neglected prophesies
This night fulfils. If either strength or might
Could have protected Troy, this hand, this arms
That saved it oft, had kept it still from harm.
But Troy is doomed, here gins the fatal Story
Of her sad sack and fall of all her glory.
Away, and bear thy Country gods along,
Thousands shall issue from thy sacred seed,
Cities more rich then this the Grecian spoil,
In after times shall thy successors build,
Where Hectors name shall live eternally.
One Romulus, another Bruit shall rear,
These shall nor Honours, nor just Rectors want,
Lumbardies room, great Britains Troy-nouant.
Heu fuge nate Dea, te{que} his pater eripe flammis;
Hostis habet muros, ruit alto a culmine Troia
Sacra, la{que} tibi commendat Troia penates
Hos cape fatorum comites, his moenia quaere
Magna: pererrato statues quae denique pont^.

Soft lie thy bones and sweetly may they rest
Thou wonder of all worthyes, but Troy burns:
Thousands of Trojan Corses block the streets,
Some flying fall, and some their killers kill:
Where shall I meet thee death? before I fly,
Some Conquerours yet, shall bravely conquered die.

Oh help us father Priam, Oh the Greeks.

I have done more then age would suffer me
They have tilted masts against my Palace gates,
And burst them open.

Oh father Priam, whether shall we fly?

We are encompassed round with sword fire,
Alas Daughters, alas my young Astianax.

Oh heaven, they come, where may we hide us safe?

Safety and help are both fled out of Troy,
And left behind nothing but massacre:
My Palace is surprised my guard all slain,
My self am wounded, but more with your shrieks,
Then by the swords of Grecians: come let's fly.
Unto the sacred Altar of the gods.

May we be safe there father?

Safe? Oh no;
Safety is fled. Death hath our lives in chase,
And since we needs must dye, let's choose this place.

Whither runs Hellen?

Whither should I fly?

See, Troy is not it self, oh wretched Hellen!
To shun the Greekes to run into the fire,
Or flying fire, perish by Greekish steel:
Which had thou rather choose?

Death, in what shape soever he appears
To me is welcome, I'll no longer shun him;
But here with Cresida abide him: here,
Oh, why was Hellen at the first so fair,
To be come subject to so foul an end?
Or how hath Cresids beauty sinned against Heaven,
That it is branded thus with leprosy?

I in conceit thought that I might contend
Against Heavens splendour, I did once suppose,
There was no beauty but in Cresids looks,
But in her eyes no pure divinity:
But now behold me Hellen.

In her I see
All beauties frailty, and this object makes
All fairness to show ugly in it self:
But to see breathless Virgins piled on heap,
What less can Hellen do then curse these Stars
That shined so bright at her nativity,
And with her nails tear out these shining balls
That have set Troy on fire?

Pierce all the Trojan Ladies with your swords,
Least amongst them you might spare Polixena.

Stay, I should know that face, tis Helena?

My Queen?

I am not Hellen, but Polixena:
Therefore revengeful Neoptolemus
Do Justice on me for thy fathers death.

Polixena? by all Achilles honours
I'll part thee limb from limb.

Pyrhus forbear,
It's the Spartan Queen.

If Hellen, the adultorous strumpet dyes,
I'll be her deaths-man.

Strike home Menelaus,
Death from thy hand is welcome.

Hold I say,
She's Clitemnestras sister, for her sake
Hellen shall live, and Kingly Menelaus
Receive her into favour.

Agamemnon
Is too remiss, I have sworn all blood to spill
I meet with, and this one will Pyrhus kill.

And I this other.

For our sake Menelaus let her live.
Was not our sister borne against her will
From Sparta? for that wrong done by the Troians
Doth not Troy burn? and are not all our swords
Stained in the blood of Paris slaughtered friends?
You shall be reconciled to Helend,
And bear her back to Greece.

Hellen at shrift* alas poor penitent Queen,
Dost hear me Menelaus? pardon her,
Take her again to Sparta, thou'lt else want
So kind a bed-fellow.

Take back my shame?

Yes for thy pleasure.
There's in the world as rich and honourable
As thou, who lend the pleasures of their bed
To others, and then take them back again
As they can get them.

My brow shall never bear
Such Characters of shame.

Thy brows bears horns already, but who sees them?
When thou return to Sparta, some will think
Thou art a Cuckold, but who is't dare say so?
Thou art a King, thy sins are clouded over,
Where poor men's faults by tongues are made much more.
Of all men living, Kings are last shall hear
Of their dishonours.

What inferior Beast
Dares tell the Lyon of his Tyranny,
Who is not torn asunder with his paws?
The King of Sparta therefore needs not fear
The tongues of subjects bid our sister rise
To safety in thine arms.

Do Menelaus.

But will my Hellen then by future virtue
Redeem her long lost honour?

If with tears
The Heavens may be appeased for Hellens sins,
They shall have penitent showers: If Menclans
May with the spirit of love be satisfied,
He ten times rectify my forfet honour
Before I tonch his bed.

Arise then Hellen, Menclans arms
Thus welcome thee to safety.

Ha, ha, ha,
Why this is well, for he that's borne to dye
A branded Cuckhold, hugs his destiny:
Go, get you after Pyrhus to the slaughter,
I'll look to Hellen.

Convey her to our guard.

Hellen, hereafter see thou proou'st more wise,
If not more honest, yet be more precise,

These shapes thrive well, we have guilt our Greeki^ arm^
With blood of their own nation* some we have sent
To everlasting darkness, some repulsed
Back to their ships: some we have made to fly
Into their horses bulk, whence Pyrhus first
Leapt down upon his spear.

Come soldiers, this is stately tragical,
The Greekes wade up even to the brawny thighs
In luke-warme blood of our despoiled foes.
Above Melpomene's huge buskind top
We plunge at every step, and bravely fought
By Troyes bright burning flame: that's now our light.

More of our valiant mates, let's join with them,
This street yet's vnassaulted and vnfir'd:
Some balls of wild-fire straight, and hurl this Lady
Into the fury of the burning flame.

My wife Cassandra?

Courage, let none escape
Fire, vengeance, blood, death, murder, spoil and rape.

All these on Greece and twenty thousand more,
Till they like Troy be drowned in tears and gore.

From Greekes to Greeks, from fire kept for the sword, From one death to
another.

Cassandra no.

My Lord the Prince Chorebus?

Yes the same,
Who hath preserved thee both from sword and flame.

More Greekes and see Cassandra captive made,
Assault them Troiaus, rescue the fair Princess;
This way dear father mount my back again.

Oh false Aeneas, thou hast slain thy friend:
Many a Greek (thus shaped) he sent to hell,
And being a Trojan by a Trojan fell.

He died not by my hand, but his own fate.

And I forgive thee good Aeneas, fly,
Thou shalt survive, but Troy and we must fall:
The hope of all our future memories
Are stored in thee, take up thy sacred load
Reverent Anchises bed-rid through his age,
We are all doomed, fair Troy must perish here,
But thou art borne a greater Troy to rear.

The Heavens have hand in all things, to their pleasure
We must subscribe: Creusa, where's my wife?
In loosing her I save but half my life.
Come reverent father, on my shoulders mount,
Though thousand dangers dog us at the heals,
Yet will we force our passage.

Still let your voices to hye Heaven aspire
For Pyrhus vengeance, murdering steel and fire.

Oh, oh.

My son Polytes? oh thou more hard hearted
Then fatal Pyrhus or his fathers guard,
That in the shadow of this sacred place
Durst sprinke the child's blood in the fathers face.

Priam? thanks sweet revenge, through swords armour,
Through mures, and Counter-mures of men and steel;
Through many a corner, and blind entries mouth
I have followed this thy bleeding son to death,
Whose swift persuite hath trained me to this Altar
To be revenged on thee for the sad fate
Of great Achilles.

Thou art Pyrhus then?

My acts shall speak my name,
I am that Pyrhus who did mount you Horse
Hiding mine armour in his deep vast bulk,
The first that leapt out of his spacious side,
And tossed consuming fire in every street,
Which climbed, as if it meant to meet the stars,
I am that Pyrhus before whom Troy falls:
Before whom all the Vanes and Pinnacles
Bend their high tops, and from the battlements
On which they stand, break their aspiring necks.
The proudest roof and most imperious spyre
Hath veiled to us and our all wasting fire.

Pyrhus, I know thee for my destined plague,
I know the gods have left us to our weakness,
I see our glories ended and extinct,
And I stand ready to abide their doom;
Only for pity and for pieties sake
Be gracious to these Ladies.

Pyrhus no,
Such grace as they did to Achilles show,
Let them all taste; let grace be far exiled,
Kill from the elder to the sucking child.

He's prone enough to mischief of himself,
Spur not that fury on which ^unnes too fast,
Nor add thou to old Priams misery
Which scarce can be augmented tis so great.

Dye in thy tortures then.

Oh spare his life.

Good man kill not my Grandsire.

Good man do.

Kill me for him.

No, she's my Grandam too,
Indeed she's a good woman, choose some other
If you must needs kill.

This then.

She's my Mother, you shall not hurt her.

This boy had a father,
Hector his name, who had he lived to see
A sword bent against his wife, this Queen, or me,
He would have made all Greece as hot to hold him
As burning Troy is now to shelter us.

Good Grandsire weep not, Grandam, Mother, Aunt
Alas, what mean you? If you be good men
Put up your swords and help to quench these flames,
Or if in killing you such pleasure have,
Practise on him, kill that ill favoured knave.

Me bratt?

Vlysses, Agancemnon. Menelaus,
Synon, Thersites, and you valiant Greekes;
Behold the vengeance wrathful Pyrhus takes
On Priams body for Achilles death:
Synon, take thou that Siren Polixene,
And hew her peece-meale on my fathers Tomb.
Thersites, make the womb of fifty Princes
A royal sheath for thy victorious blade:
Diomed, let Cassandra dye by thee,
And Agamemnon kill Andromache:
And as my sword through Priams bulk shall fly,
Let them in death consort him, and so dye.

When, when, for Ioues sake when?

Some expeditious fate this motion further,
Me thinks tis long since that I did a murder.

Oh Heaven, oh Jove, Stars, Planets, fortune, fate,
To think what I have been, and what am now;
Father of fifty brave Heroic sons,
But now no Father, for they all are slain.
Queen Hecuba the Mother of so many,
But now no Mother: for her barren womb
Hath not one child to show, these fatal wars
Have eat up all our issue.

My dear Father,
And all my pri^cely Uncles.

My dear Husband,
And all my royal brothers.

Worthy Hector,
And all my valiant sons.

And now that Priam that commanded Asia,
And sate enthroned above the Kings of Gre^ce,
Whose dreaded Nany scowerd the Hellespont,
Sees the rich towers he built now burnt to ashes:
The stately walls he reared, leuel'd and euen'd;
His Treasures rifled and his people spoiled:
All that he hath on earth beneath the Sun
Bereft him, saving his own life and these,
And my poor life with these, are (as you see)
Worse then the rest: they dead, we dying be.
Strike my sterne foe, and prove in this my friend,
One blow my universal cares shall end.

And that blow Pirhus strikes, at once strike all.

Why so, so, this was stately tragical.

Where shall I hide me?

So nimble Hectors bastard?
My father slew thy father, I the son:
Thus will I toss thy carcass up on hie,
The brat above his fathers fame shall fly.

No, somewhat doth remain,
Alarm still, the peoples not all slain,
Let not one soul survive.

Then Trumpets sound
Till burning Troy in Trojan blood be drowned.

What more remains t'accomplish our revenge?
The proudest Nation that great Asia nursed
Is now extinct in Lethe.

All by Hellen,
Oh had that tempting beauty ne'er been borne,
By whom so many worthies now lie dead.

A hot Pest take the strumpet.

And a mischief.

Twas this hot whore that set all Troy a fire.

Forgive me Pyrhus for thy fathers death,
Troy for thy sack, King Priam for thy sons,
Greece for an infinite slaughter, and you Husband or all your nuptial wrongs,
King Menelaus,
^inust confess, my inconsiderate deed
Have made a world of valiant hearts to bleed.

What, note is that which Pyrhus eye dwells on?

The perfect number
Of Greekes and Troians slain on either part.
The siege ten years, ten months, ten days endured,
In which there perished of the Greekes before Troy
Eight hundred thousand six thousand fighting men:
Of Troians fell six hundred six and fifty thousand,
All soldiers; besides women, children, babes,
Whom this night massacred.

All these I slew.

Nay, some this hand sent packing, that's not true.

Aeneas, with twenty two ships well furnished,
(The self same ships in which young Paris sayl'd
When he from Sparta stole fair Helena,)
Is fled to Sea.

Anthen^r with five hundred Troians more Escaped through the gate called Dardan.

Let them go,
That of Troyes sack the world by them may know,
Where above thirty brave Heroic Kings
Have breathed their last: befides inferior Princes,
Barons and Knights, eighteen imperial Monarchs
With his own hands renowned Hector slew:
My father besides Troilus and that Hector,
Eight famous Kings that came in aid of Troy.
Three Trojan Paris with his Arrows slew,
Of which one was my father: Diomed
Four Monarchs with his bright sword sent to death.
Our self the warlike Queen of Aemazons,
And aged Priam.

Bravely boast he can,
A wretched woman and a weak old man.

And now Troyes wars sre ended, we in peace
With glorious conquest to sail back to Greece.
Their Nation's vanished like their Cities smoke,
Our enemies are all ashes: worlds to come
Shall Cronicle our pitiless revenge
In Books of Brass and leaves of Adamant.
Towards Greece victorious Leaders, our toyle's past;
Troy and Troyes people we have burned in flames,
And of them both left nothing but their names.

With wondrous joy they say, the Greekes return
With Triumphs and ouations piercing Heaven,
Where e're they set but foot loud Paeans sung,
And Oades to spheare-like Notes tuned in their praise:
Whilst Cethus like a forlorn shadow walks
Despised, disgrac't, neglected and debauched;
Playing his melancholy, cares and sorrows
On his discordant Hart-strings. Oh my fate!
Shall I, that have this body and this brain,
A royalty stamped on me in my birth:
Whose wrongs have been of mark through all the World
Troubling each ear, and being disputable
By every tongue that hath been taught to speak,
Even in the mouths of Babes, all rating me
Of cowardesie and sloth: sleep, an occasion
Being fairly offered? No, awake revenge,
I'll bring the now to action.

Hear you the news

Orestes friend, the noble Filades?
Instruct mine ignorance, I know of none.

This day the Prince, great Agamem^nons heir^
Orestes whom you truly call your friend,
Betroths the young and fair Hermione
Daugh^er to beauteous Hellen.

Hymens joys.
Crown them with all true pleasure.

Shall we have your presence at the Contract?

Who's within?

On^ly Egistus, Clitemnestras friend,
The Q^eene and fair Electra.

Witness enough,
Then spare me for this time good Pilades,
We^'le owe them greater service.

But t^s a duty that I owe my friend,
My absence would distaste him.

Fare you well.
Do, do, contract and marry, aim at Heaven,
But Hell is that they plunge in: Oh Palamedes
My basely betrayed brother, sold at Troy
As we would cheapen Horses, yet a Prince:
A Prince? nay General of the Greekish host.
Emperor and Keyser, chose to that command
By a full ^Iury of Kings, and by them rated
The prime worthiest: who being far from equal
Could find in whole Greece no competitor.
Yet this peculiar man, this God of men,
By false Vlysses and Atreus sons
Agamemnon and Menelaus, basely supplanted;
Who, for they would confer amongst themselnes
The sovereignty forged letters sent from Troy,
And coin withal marked with King Priams stamp,
As if this father of his fame and Nation
Whose only ends were aymd to honour Greece
Would have betrayed his people: this suggested,
My brother was arraigned, conuist, condemn*d;
For which I have vowed the universal ruin
Of all the Kings of that corrupted bench.
Palamides thy blood in Asia shed
Shall make all Europe morn since thou art dead.

Meeenaes King and Sparta's would be proud
To see this happy and blessed union made
Between their royal Families.

This fair Virgin,
Second from Laeda to whom Jove vouchsa^'t
The strict Embrace of his immortal arm,
Unspotted with her mothers prostitution,
Wee'le thus receive.

May my chaste innocence
Break through the Cloud which hath eclipsed her fame*
Whose luster may out-shine my mothers fraileties,
And they through m^ may be forgot in Greece.

Hermione, your words taste of your breeding
Under this Queen your fair and Princely Aunt,
were young Electra but so well bestowed,
Great A gamemnon in so brave a match
Would think himself more graced, then in fruition
Of all the foreign Trophies.

May she prove?
A whore like to her Mother: Prince Orestes,
And you bright Lady Spartans second light,
May all the virtues of this potent Queen
Take life in you, to prove hereditary
That the great Arch-duke crowned with fame and honour.
In his return may add a surplusadge
To his already surfeit: find his bed
By this adulteress basely strumpetted,
And make the Down they lye on quaff their blood.

How do you fair Electra in your judgment
Applaud your brothers choice?

As of a contract.
Made by the gods above, and now by Princes
Here ratified on earth.

I would my friend
Were to you sister, but as fast betrothed
As I to Hellens daughter: But dear Pilades,
Tis Time must perfect all things.

Madam you hear*
This motion from your brother.

And I crave
Time to consider on it.

Tis on foot,
Pursue it then with all advantages,
Command my free assistance to begin*
Had you Electra friend, as I Hermione;
We were at first as foreign as you two,
And every way as strange, but opportunity
That hath united us, may make you one.
After some amorous parlance, let us now
Unto the Temple and there sacrifice
Unto the gods, that Greece* no more may mourn^
But glory in our fathers safe return*

His safety is our danger* for know Madam*
Our love hath bin too public.

That's the ground
On which to build my project.

Grant it hath.
Cannot a more then nine years widdow-head
Excuse me being a woman? thinks the King
We can forget that lesson in our age,
Which was by him first taught us in our youth?
Or was't his aim to show us choice delights,
Then bar us their fruition? First to taste
Our palate, next to make us appetite;
And when our stomachs are prepared and sharpened
For Costly vionds placed before our eyes,
Then to remove the table? he's unkind;
And as he hath dealt with us, so must find.

The Queen? to her my speed is.

Speak on soldier.

I am the herald of most happy news,
Troy with the earth is leveled, sacked, and burnt;
Priam with all his memory extinct,
Queen, daughters, sons, and subjects ruined all.
Now like the vapour of their Cities smoke,
And of them no more found: And Madam now
The King your Lord, the Elder of the Atryd's,
Duke of the puissant and all conquering Host,
His temples arched in a victorious orb,
And wreth'd in all the glories earth can yield
Is landed in Mycene a Conquer our.

How could they escape those fierce fires Naulus made
In vengeance of his son Palamides
To split their cursed Fleet upon the rocks.

Make repetition of their joys again,
Being things that I cannot ^eare too oft*
And add to them: Is Menelaus safe
My husbands brother? Hellen how fares she?
Or is she thence repurchast? fill mine ears
With such sweet Tones, 'tis all I can desire.

Take your full longing then, for though the Seas
With tempests, storms, rocks, shipwrecks, shelves and sands
More dammag'd them then all the Trojan siege.
Although the Beacons fired to draw their Fleet
Distressed and dispersed upon the rocks
Sunk many a goodly bottom: Yet the General
Escaped by the hand of Jove, with him King Diomed,
Vlysses, and great Neoptolimus,
With Spartan Menelaus late attend
With beauteous Hellen cause of all these broils:
All these attend upon the General
To bring him home victorious, and this night
Will lodge in the Kings Palace,

Soldier thanks,
These twice five years I have a widow been,
Thy news have now new married me: give order
For the Kings entertainment, all the state
Mycene can yield shall freely be exposed
In honour of these Princes: your great hast
Doth ask some rest, therefore repose your self,
And for your fortunate news expect reward.

The Queen is royal.

And now to that devil
Which I must conjure up: Is the Queen mad?
Or thou Egistus sottish? see you not
The stake and scaffold, nay the Hang-man too;
And will you blind-fold run upon your deaths
When there is way to'scape them?

What horrid fright
Is this proposed by Cethus?

The King's returned,
And doth not your veins gush out of your temples
In sanguine blushes? are not your adulteries
Famous as Hellens? nay, more infamous,
There was a rape to countenance what she did,
You nought save corrupt lust and idleness:
Tis blabbed in the City, talked on in the Court,
All tongues surcharged, all eyes are fixed on you,
To see what fearful vengeance he will take
For that your prostitution.

He's a King.

True Clitemnestra, so he went from hence,
But is returned a Tyrant fleshed in blood:
Think thou that he who queld his foes abroad,
Will spare at home domestic enemies?
That was so prone to punish others wrongs,
And can forget his own?

If Menelaus
Have pardoned Hellen, may not he his brother
Make Spartaes King his noble president,
To do the like to me?

Tush shallow Queen,
How you mistake; see imminent fate affront you,
And will not shun it coming? If his brother
Be branded as a scandal to the world,
What consequence is it that he will groan
Under the self same burden? rather think
He hath proposed a vengeance dire and horrid
To terrif^e, not countenance such misdeeds:
And this must fall on you, lest time to come
Should Chronicle his family for a brood
Of Cuckolds and of Strumpets:

This thy language
Strikes me with horror.

And affrights me too.

Is he not King? hath he not Lynxes eyes,
And Giants arms, the first to see far off,
The last as far to punish? was he so poor
In friends at home, to lea^e no Argus here
To keep his eyes still waking? think it not
But that he knew the treason of his bed,
He had not fair Briscis snatched perforce
From th'armes of great Achilles.

That I heard.

Why hath he a new mistress brought from Troy,
But to state her in Clitemnestraes stead,
And make her Micenes Qucene whilst you poor wretches
Like malefactors suffer, marked for the Stag
And most ridiculous spectacles.

You show the danger,
But teach us no prevention*

See before us
The objects of our fears and difficulties,
But not the way to avoid them.

Hear me then,
Prevent your death's by his.

How? kill the King?
So we heap sin on sin and basely add
Unto adultery murder.

Per scelus semper tutum sceleribus it er.
Boldly you have begun, and being once in,
Blood will cure lust, and mischief phisieke sin.

Perhaps our guilt lies hid.

In a Kings Palace
Can lust in such great persons be concealed?

The first offence repents me, and to that
I should but add a greater.

Perish, do.
Or what concerns this me? I shall be safe,
I have strumpetted no Agamemnons Queen,
Nor bastarded the issue of the Atrides:
Or why should I thus labour their securities
Who study not their own?

Resolve then Queen,
The Kings austeere, and will extend his Justice
Unto some sad example.

Oh but my husband.

After ten years widdow-hood
Can Clitemnestra think of such a name?

You have half won me, when shall this be done?

When but this night? delays are ominous:
Ere he have time to think upon his wrongs,
Or find a tongue to whisper, ere suspicion
Can further be instructed or least censure,
To call his wrongs in question: instantly,
Even in his height of joy, fullness of complement
With the Argiue Kings: whilst cups are brimmed with healths,
Whilst jealousies are drowned in Bacchus boles.
This night before he sleep, or that his pillow
Can give him the least counsel, ere he can spare
A minute for the smallest intelligence,
Or moment to consider: I have done
If you have either grace in apprehension
Or spirit in performance.

I have both,
What answers Clitemnestra?

I am swayd,
And though I know there's difference of Justice
In Princes sitting on the skarlethench,
And husbands dallying in the private bed:
I'll hold him as one sits upon my life,
Not one that lies enclosed within mine arms;
He's now my Judge, not Husband, here I vow
Assistance in his death.

And so survive
Secure and fortunate.

This night?

Tis done.

The project I have cast with all security.
And safety for your person: smooth your brows,
And let there shine a welcome in your looks
At the Kings entertainment: nay begone,
By this time you are expected; what remains
Is mine in form, but yours in action.
Now father stile me a most worthy son
Palamides, a brother, what neither fires,
Nor rocks could do, what neither Neptunes rage,
Nor Mars his fury, what the turbulent Seas,
Nor the combustious Land* that Cethus can:
He that succeeds my brother in his rule,
Shall first succeed in death: none that had hand
Or voice in his subversion that shall stand.

Well met on Land kind brother, we are now
Victorious: let's be proud on it.

Thou say true,
We are Conquerours in our basest cowardice,
We had not been here else.

Valiant Hector,
Achilles, Troilus, Paris, Aiax too.
They are all fallen, we stand.

Yes, and will stiff
When all the Grecian Princes that survive
Are cramped and hamstringed.

Wast thou not sea-sicke brother?

Horribly, and feared
In the rough seas to have disgorged my heart,
And there to have fed Haddocks.

Troians were fellows
In all their fury to be parleyed with:
But with the tempests, gusts, and Furicanes,
The warring winds, the billows, rocks and fires
There was no talking: these few times we prayed,
The gods would hear no reason.

Twas because
The billows with their roaring, and the winds
Did with their. whistling keep them from their ears:
But now all's husht, could we find time to pray,
They might find time to hear us.

Shall we be
Spectators of the royal inter-view
Betwixt the King and Queen?

Ten years diuorst
Should challenge a kind meeting, let's observe
The form and state of this Court-complement,
(things I did never trade with:) Hark loud music
Gives warning of their coming.

Unto our Country and our Houshold-gods
We are at length returned, trophied with honours,
With Troyes subversion and rich Asiaes spoils,
This is a sacred day.

Such Troy had once.

Unto the gods wel'e sacrifice.

So Priam fell
Before the holy Altar.

This City is not Troy.

Where Hellen treads,
I hold the place no better.

See our Queen,
Orestes and Electra, for our sake.
Princes of Greece deign them your best salutes*
Dear Clitemnestra.

Royal King and Husband.

What's he that kneeles so close unto our Queen^

Egistus and your servant.

He was young
When we at first set sail from Aulis Gulf,
Now grown from my remembrance: we shall ^ude
Fit time to search him further,

Mark you that.

Yes, and it touched me deeply.

Our sister, and this young Hermione,
Daughter to us and Hellen.

Prity puppy.
Ofsuch a common brach.

Young Neoptolem^s,
This is the Lady promised you at Troy,
For your great service done there: she's your own,
Freely embrace her then.

I see we are like
To have a jolly kindred.

Pyrhus, enjoy
Her whom I have in contract?

Beauteous Lady,
The greatest ambition Pyrhus aims at now,
Is how to know you farther.
Hath been so mighty to revenge the wrongs
Of my fair mother, can from Hermione
Challenge no less then welcome.

Oh you gods,
Pyrhus, thou were more safe inburning Troy
With horror, fury blood, fires, foes about the^.
Then in my fathers court.

Another Collumne
On which to build my slaughters. Patience Prince,
This is no time for braves and Menaces,
I further shall instruct you.

I have done.

See now the two Queenes meet, smack in public,
That oft have ki^ in corners*

Ther^tes?
Thou art grown a monster, a strange thing searse knowns
Amongst soldiers, wives and daughters.

They are two sisters.

Yes, and the two King-brothers royally
Between them two cornuted*

We are to loud.

Princes of Greece, fi^ce we ha^e done a duty
To see our General mid*st his people safe,
And after many dreadful wars abroad
In peace at home. 'Tis fit we should disperse
Unto our several Countries instantly,
I purpose for Aetolia, where my Queen
With longing waits my coming.

Not King Di^med,
Till you have seen Me^ana's pomp and stat^
In ampliest royalty expressed at full,
Both tasted of our feasts and Princely gifts.
The fair Aegiale, who hath so long
^orborne your presence, will not I presume
Deny to spare you to us some few days,
To add to the years number, though not as General
Yet will I lay on you a friends command*
Which must not be denied.

Great Agamemnon
With me was ever powerful, I am his.

And now fair sister welcome back from Troy,
Be ever henceforth Spartaes.

Your great care
In my enforced absence (gracious Queen)
Expressed unto my dear Hermione,
Hath much obliged me to you. Oh my fate,
How swift time runs: Orestes grown a man,
Whom I left in the Cradle! Young Electra
Then (as I tak't) scarce borne, and now grown ripe,
Even ready for an husband!

In whose absence
If but one handsome sweete-heart come in place,
She'll not turn tail for it, if she do^ but take
After mine old Naunt Hellen.

The great and solemn preparation
Of the Court, state and glory mighty Princes,
Attend for you within.

All are consecrated
Unto your royal welcomes, enter then,
We'll feast like earthy gods, or god-like men*

My brain about again, for thou hast found
New project now to work on, and 'tis here,
Orestes hath received Hermione
From Clitemnestra's hand, her sonle is his*
And he her Genius, two combind in one:
Yet she is by the fathers Oath conferd
On Pyrhus, which shallbreede a stormy flaw
Ne'er to be peec't again, but by the deaths
Of the two hopeful youths: perhaps the hazard
Of all these Kings if my revenge strike home.
(Of that at leisure) but the bloody stage
On which to act, General this night is thine,
Thou lie down mortal, who must rise divine.

Oh Cethus what's this music unto me,
That are composed of discords? what are healths
To him that is struck heart-sicke? all those joys
Whose leaders seem to pierce against the roofs
Of these high structures, to him that is struck down
Half way below the Center?

Were you lower,
Yet here's a hand can raise you, deeper cast
Then to the lowest Abisme: It lies in me
To advance you to the height of happiness,
Where you shall live eternil'd from the reach
Of any humane malice.

Had thou seen
Her, in whose breast my heart was paradis'd,
Kissed, courted, and embraced.

By Pyrhus.

Him:
What passionate and in^idiating looks
He cast on her, as if in scorn of me:
Shall he enjoy my birth-right, or inheri^e
Where I am heir apparent? shall he usurp*
Or plead my interest, where I am possessed?
Rule where I reign? where I am stated, sit?
Brave me in my peculiar Sovereignty?

He must not, shall not.

Show me to depose.
The proud Usurper then.

Prince, maked my charge.
In the mean time, from your distracted from
Exile all discontent, let not least ra^e
Reign in your eye, or harshne^e in your tongue,
Smooth waters are still deep'st* wa^te on the King,
And be no stranger to your mothers eye,
Or foreign to your Kindred: the feast spent,
And night with it: the morrow shall beget
Project of more import (scarce thought on now.)

I build upon thy Counsel.

Which hath proved,
Fixed as a rock, still constant, and vnmoou'd.

What ^ethus here? why no such matter now
No cause of fear, or least suspicion.

Your reason?

Tush, presume it, we are safe.

Observe it, they are still securest, whom
The Devil drives to ruin.

Hark, their healths
Carousing to the Generals Victories,
In all thy heate of joy, and fire of wine,
No spark of jealously, all the Argument
Of their discourse, what they have done at Troy.
Still health on health, and the great General
So far from seeming to have least distaste,
That in all affable terms he courts his Queen,
Nay more, cuts off all banquet Ceremonies,
To hasten his bed-pleasures, as if times distance
Betwixt his board and pallade, seemed more tedious
Then all his Ten years siege.

Go, lost man,
Sink on firm ground, be shipwrecked in a Calm.
These healths are to your ruins, his revenge:
Hath not Egistus read of a disease
Where men dye laughing: others that have drunk
Poison in steed of Cordials, perish so?
To dye tis nothing, since tis all men due:
But wretchedly to suffer, fall unpitied,
Unpitied? nay derided, moekt, and cursed:
To dye as a base Traitor, and a Thief,
The adulterator of his Sovereigns bed,
The poison of the Atred^ family,
And scandal of his issue, so to dye?

Egistus will prevent, he by this hand
Must fall, before whom all Asia could not stand.

The banquet is broke up, sleep calls to rest,
And mid-nights hour for murder, still shows best*

Methinkes this night, we Clitemnestra meet,
At a new bridal; all Attendants leave us,
We now are only for bed-priuacies.

Great sir, I that so long have bin your widow,
Will be this night your hand-mayde.

You told me, Queen,
Orestes was a cunning horse-man grown:
It pleased me much to hear it.

Greece reports
No Centare can ride better*

And young Electra,
In all the endowments that may best become
A Princess of her breeding, most complete.

It was in your long absence, all my care,
(Being my charge) that you at your return
Might find them to your wishes,

Thanks for that.

How cunningly he seems to carry it*
But we must find prevention.

Who's without there?

Why started you?

Not all the Asian Legions, no not Hector
Armed with his balls of wild-fire, had the power
To shake me like this tremor: Is our Palace
Less safe in Greece, amidst our subjects here,
Then were our Tents in Asia?

Where, if not here in Clitemnestraes arms,
Can safety dwell?

And fair Queen, it should be so.

But why sir cast you such suspicious eyes
About your Chamber? are we not alone?
Or will you to the private sweets of night,
Call tell tale witness?

Now tis gone again. Shall we to rest?

So please you royal Sir.

How hard this Down feels, like a monument
Cut out of marble. Beds resemble Graves,
And these me-thinkes appear like winding sheets,
Prepared for corses.

Oh how ominously
Do you presage: you much affright me sir
In this our long-wisht meeting.

All's shook off.
I now am armed for pleasure: you commended
Late one Egistus to me, prithee Queen
Of what condition is he?

Tyrant this.

And I am thus his second.

Treason, murder, Treason:
This shows, we Princes are no more then men.
Thanks Iou^ tis fit when Monarchs fall by Treason,
Thunder to al^ the world, would show some reason.

The deed is done, lets fly to some strong Citadel,
For our more safety.

He thus made divine:
Now my Egistus, I am soly thine.

What strange tumultuous noise is this so late*
To rouse us from our beds?

Prodigious sure,
Sin^ 'tis confirmed by Thunder.

In mine ears
Did never sound seem half to terrible.

Nor to your eyes, as this sad object is,
See great Atrides groueling.

What damned Villain
Was auther of this project?

Horrid sight.

Rest you amazed all, as thunder struke,
And without sense or motion Apoplext,
And only hear me speak: Orestes, he
Who as if marbled by Medusaes head,
Hath not one tear to fall, or sigh to spend,
Till I find out the murderer, and on him
Inflict remarkable vengeance: for I vow
Were it my father, brother, or his Queen,
Had thou my weeping sister hand in it.
If he? whom equal, (if not ranked above)
I ever did, and shall love Pylades?
Were she whose womb did bear me, where I l^y
Full nine months bedded ere I saw the Sun,
Or the most abject Traitor under Heaven,
Their dooms were all alike, and this I vow.
Now you whom this silent and speechless King
Hath oft commanded, this now senseless brain
As oft directed, this now strengthless hand
More oft protected in a war, that shall
Be to all times example: Lend your shoulders
To bear him, who hath kept you all in life,
This is a black and mourning funeral right,
Deeds of this nature must be thoroughly searched,
Nay be revenged: the gods have said tis good,
The morning Sun shall rise and bl^sh in blood.

Sweet Lady, can you love:

Forbear my Lord,
Can such a thing as love be once named here,
Where every Marble that supports this roof,
In emulation doth vie tears with us?
Nay where the wounds of such a mighty King
Have yet scarce bled their last.

Tush fair Hermione,
These sights that seem to Iadies terrible,
Are common to us soldiers; when from field returning
All smeared in blood, where Dukes and Kings li^ slain,
Yet in our Tents at mid-night it frights not us
From courting a sweet Mistress.

He saith right,
And note of this how I can poetise:
This his great father of his Love desired.
When from the slaughter of his foes retired
He doft his Cushes and unarmed his head,
To tumble with her on a soft day bed:
It did rejoice Brisoi^ to embrace
His bruised arms, and kiss his blood-stain'd face.
These hands which he so often did imbrew
In blood of warlike Troians whom he slew,
Were then employed to tickle, touch and feel,
And shake a Lance that had no print of steel.

Continue in that ve^e, I'll feed thy Muse
With Crafi^h, Praunes and Lobsters.

You brought these of purpose to abuse m^e.

Peace Thersites,
And Synon you no more.

We see by Agamemnon all are mortal,
And I but show his niece Hermione
The way of all flesh.

Tis an easy path,
(The Mother and the Aunt have trod it both)
If she have wit to follow.

If it beso, Egistus is a traitor,
And she no more our sister.

Tis not possible
A Queen of her high birth and parentage
Should have such base hand in her husbands death,
Her husband and her sovereign.

Double treason,
Could it be proved against her.

It appears
So far against humanity and nature
We dare not once suspect it, but till proof
Explain it further, hold it in suspense.

Oh but their sudden flight and fortifying.

These are indeed presumptions, but leave that
To a most strict inquiry even for reverence
Of Majesty and Honour to all Queenes,
For love of us because she was our sister,
Both for Orestes and Electra's sake
Whose births are branded in so foul a deed
Till we examine further circumstances
Spare your severer censures.

Tis a business
That least concerns us, but for Honours sake
And that he was our General.

What, prince lie Pyrhus courting our fair daughter?

Yes sir, but in a time unseasonable
Even as the suite it self is.

All delays
Shall be cut off and she be swayd by us.
These Royal Princes ere they leave Mycone,
Shall see these ^uptiall rights solemnised,
We'll keep our faith with Pyrhus.

We our vows
As constant to the bright Hermione.
First see the royal General here interred
And buried like a soldier, 'tis his due:
To question of his death concerns not us,
We leave it to Heavens justice and revenge.
The rights performed with fair Hermione,
Then to our several Countries each man post,
Captains disperse still when the General's lost.

Egistus? and our Mother?

Am I Cethus,
Are you Orestes, and this Pyllades,
So sure they were his murderers: this disguise
Will suite an act of death, full to the life
He stands upon a strict and secure guard,
I have plotted your admittance, it will take
Doubt not, it cannot fail, I have cast it so.

As sent from Menelaus?

Whose name else
Can break through such strong guards, where fear and guilt
Keep hourly watch?

It is enough, I haue't,
And thou the faithful'st of all friends dear Pillades,
Do but assist me in my vowed revenge
And enjoy fair Electra.

Next your friendship
It is the prise ^ayme at, I am yours.

What slip you time and opportunity,
Or look you after dreams?

I am a wake.
And to send them to their eternal sleep.
In expedition there is still success,
In all delays defect: the traitor dyes
Were he in league with all the destinies.
And tis a fruitful year for villainy,
And I a thrining Farmer. In this interim
I have more plots on foot: King Menelaus:
I have licenced against proud Diom^d*
Fyrhus against Orestes, he against him,
Vlysses without parralell for wit
Against them all: so that the first combustion
Shall burn them up to ashes. Oh Palamides,
So dear was both thy love and memory,
Not Hellen by her whoredom caused more blood
Streaming from Princes breasts, then Cethus shall
(Brother) for thine untimely funeral.

Let none presume to dare into our presence
Or pass our guard, but such well known to us and to our Queen.

The charge hath past us round*

When sins of such hye nature against us rise,
Tis fit we should be kept with heedful eyes.

Presume it my Egistus, we are safe,
The Fort wherein we live impregnable:
Or say we were surprised by stratagem,
Or should expose our lives unto the censure
Of Law and Justice, even in these extremes
There were not the least fear of difficulty.

Your reason Madam.

Whom doth this concern
But our own blood? should Pyrhus grow enraged*
I have at hand my niece Hermione
To calm his fury: what doth this belong to
Vlysses, or Aetolian Diomed?
Are they not strangers? If it come in question
By Menelaus, is he not our brother*
Our sister Hellen in his bosom sleeps,
And can with him do all things, fear not then,
We are every way secure.

Oh but Orestes
His ey's to me like lightning, and his arm
Up heaved thus, shows like Iones thunder-bolt
Aimed against lust and murder.

He's our son,
The filial duty that's hereditary
Unto a mothers name prevents these fears:
Electra's young, and childish Pilades
Swai'd by his friend: It rests, could we but work
Hellen and Menelaus to our faction,
Egistus should be stated in Mycene,
We live his Queen and bride.

Feare's still suspicious.

A Letter sir.

From whence?

Tis superscribed from the great Spartae's King,
And the Queen Hellen.

Who the messenger?

Two Gentlemen who much importune you
For speedy answer.

Bid them wait without,
Now fates prove but propitious, then my kingdom
I shall presume establish't.

There's no fear,
Orestes once remoou'd, and that's my charge
Either by sword or poison.

See fair Queen,
Read what your brother writes, by this we are
Eternis'd in our happiness, and our lives
Rooted in sweet security.

We not suspect you in our brothers death,
A deed too base for any Noble breast.
Therefore in this necessity of state,
And knowing in this forced vacancy
So great a kingdom cannot want a guide:
The sovereignty we thought good to confer
On Clitemnestra, or whatsubstiture
She in her best discretion shall think fit,
The united Kings of Greece ^aue thus decre^d.
Your brother Menelaus.

We are happied ever.

A joy ratified*
And subject to no change.

Call in the messengers,
Orestes and Electra once remoon'd,
We have no rival, no competitor,
Therefore no jealousy at all.

None, none.
The gods have with these Kings of Greece agreed
In his supplanting and instating thee,
Thee my most dear Egistus.

You the men?

Those, whom the Spartan King made special choice of
To trust this great affair with.

And you're welcome,
But are you men of action: such I mean,
As have been Soldiers bred, whose eyes inur'd
To slaughter and combustions: at the like
Would not change face, or tremble?

They that to see
Legs, arms, and heads strewn on Scamander Plain,
Kings by the common soldiers stewed in gore,
And three parts hid with their imboweld Steeds,
Shadowing their mangled bodies from the Sun,
As if above the earth to bury them:
They that to see an Asian Potentate
Killed at the holy Altar, his own blood
Mixed with his sons and daughters, Towers demolisht
Crushing whole thousands, of each sex and age
Beneath their ruins: and these horrid sights
Lighted by scathe- fires, they that have beheld
These and more dreadful objects; can their eyes
Move at a private slaughter?

You're for us,
Will you for hire, for favour, or advancement,
(Now wars are done) to be made great in Court,
And undertake that one man easily spared
Amongst so many millions (now surviving)
That such a creature, no way necessary
But a mere burden to the world we live in,
He might no longer live?

But name the man,
And as I love Egistus, honour you
And al that glory in such noble deeds.
Be what he will; he's lost.

Orestes, then?

Is there none then the world so well may spare
As young Orestes? He to do it?

Vain world farewell,
My hopes withal, no building long hath stood
Whose slight foundation hath bin laid in blood.

I'll dye upon his bosom.

Secure the Fort my dear friend Pillades,
And to your utmost pacify the guard:
Tell them we are Orestes and their Prince,
And what we did was to revenge the death
Of their dead Lord and Soueraig^e*

Sir i'll do it.

Oh me, that thinking to have caught at Heaven,
Am plunged into an hell of misery.
Egistus dead? what comfort can I have,
One foot Enthroned, the the other in the grave.

Can you find tears for such an abject Groom,
That had not for an husband one to shed?
Oh monstrous, monstrous woman ^ is this carrion,
Is this dead Dog, (Dog said I?) nay what's worse,
Worthy the sigh or mourning of a Queen,
When a King lies unpitied?

Thou a son?

The name I am ashamed of: oh Agamemnon,
How sacred is thy name and memory!
Whose acts shall fill all foreign Chronicles
With admiration, and most happy he
That can with greatest Art but book thy deeds:
Yet whilst this rottenness, this gangrened flesh
Whose carcass is as odious as his name
Shall stinking lie, able to breed a Pest,
He with a Princess tears to be imbalm'd,
And a King lie neglected?

Bastard.

If I be,
Damned be the whore my Mother, I, I am sure
Nor my dead father had no hand in i^.

Oh that I could but lengthen out my years
Only to spend in ^urses.

Upon whom?

On whom but thee for my Egistus death?

And I could wish my self a Nestur^ age
To curse both him and thee for my dead father.

Doest thou accuse me for thy fathers death?

Indeed 'twould ill become me being a son,
But were I sure it were so, then I durst;
Nay, more then that, revenge it.

Upon me?

Were all the mothers of the earth in one,
All Empresses and Queenes cast in one mould,
And I unto that one a only son,
My sword should ravish that incestuous breast
Of nature, and of state*

I am as innocent of that black deed,
As was this guiltless Gentleman here dead.

Oh all you powers of Heaven I invoke,
And if you will not hear me, let Hell do it:
Give me some sig^e from either fiends or angel,
I call you both as te^tates.
Godlike shape,
Have you (my father) left the Elizium fields,
Where all the ancient Heroes line in bliss,
To bring your self that sacred testimony,
To crown my approbation: Lady see.

See what? thy former murder makes thee mad,

Rest Ghost in peace, I now am satisfied,
And need no further witness: saw you nothing?

What should I see save this sad spectacle,
Which blood-shootes both mine eyes.

And nothing else?

Nothing.

Mine eyes are clearer sighted then, and see
Into thy bosom. Murdresse.

How?

Incestuous strumpet, whose adulteries,
When Treason could not hide, thou thoughts to cover,
With most inhumane murder.

Meaning us?

Then, monster, thou did first instruct mine hand,
How to write blood, when being a Wife and Queen,
Thou kildst a King and husband, and hast taught
Me being a son, how to destroy a mother.

Oh most unnatural.

That I learnt of thee.

Unheard of cruelty, but heavens are ^ust.
And all remarkable sins punish with mark,
One mischief still another doth beger,
Adultery murder: I am lost, undone.

Being no wife, Orestes is no son.

The guard all stand for you, acknowledging
Orestes Prince and King.

I now am neither.

What obiect's this? Queen Clitemnestra s^aine?

I hope no sons hand in it

Orestes did it,
The other title's lost.

All my plots take
Seyond my apprehe^sion.

This is an age
Of nothing but portents and prodigies.

The fathers hand as deep was in her death
As was the sons, he pointed, and I struck:
Was he not then as unkind to a Wife,
As I was to a Mother?

Oh my friend,
What have you done?

There is a Plasma, or deep pit
Just in the Center fixed for Parricides,
I'll keep my Court there, and Erinnis, she
In stead of Hebe, shall attend my Cup,
Charon the Ferri-man of Hell shall be
My Ganimed.

The Prince is sure distracted.

New project still for me.

I'll have a guard of Furies which shall light me
Unto my nuptial bed with funeral Teades,
The ^atall sisters shall my hand-maides b^e,
And wait upon the fair Hermione.

Hermione? she is betrothed to Pyrhus,
And (mourning for your absence) all the way
Unto the Temple she will strowe with tears.

Ha? Pyrhus rape my dear Hermione?
He that shall dare to interpose my purpose*
Or cross me in mine Hymineall rights,
I'll make him lie as flat on the cold earth
As doth this hound Egistus.

And I would so.

Would? ^ay I will, his father wore a smocks,
And in that shape raped Deiadamia.
He shall not use my Loueso, oh my Mother;
Friend take that object hence.

But you Hermione,

My hand's yet deep in blood, but to the wrist,
It shall shall be to the elbow: gods, nor men,
Angels, nor Furies shall my rage withstand,
Not the grave Honour of the assembled Kings,
Not Reverence of the Altar, nor the Priest:
No superstition shall my fury slay*
Till Pyrhus from the earth be swept away,

Pillades attend your friend.

He's all my charge,
My life and his are twins.

Their mines are countermined, Cethus, thy fall
Is either plotted, or to blow up all.

My head aches brother.

What a batchiler,
And troubled with the Spartan Kings disease?

No, there's a wedding breeding in my brain,
Pyrhus the Bridegroom: thou strange creature woman*
To what may I compare thee?

Can thou devise ought bad enough?

Tis said they look like Angels, and of light*
But for the most part, such light Angels prove,
Ten hundred thousand of their honesties
Will scarce weigh eleauen Dragmaes.

Clite^nestra,
And Hellen for example.

Young Hermi^ne
Hath face from both.

The sharpe shrews nose, they hate hereditary.

Thersites, I commend that fellows wit
Proffred a wife young, beautiful and rich,
Only one fault she had, she wanted brain:
Who answered in a creature of that sex,
I ne'er desire more wisdom; then to know
Her husbands bed from another.

I commend him,
But tis not in the Atrides family,
To find out such a woman.

See now the sacred nuptial rights proceed*
The Priests prepare the Alter.

Hymen to whom my vows I consecrate
As all my love. To thee Hermione,
Whom in the presence of these Argiue Kings,
I hear contract, be thou auspicious to us:
This flamming substitute to Saturnes son,
Within whose sacred Temple we are roofed*
And before all these high Celestial gods
And goddesses, in whose eyes now we kneel:
Especially you I^n^ Queen of marriage,
And fair Lucina, who have child-births charge,
Your favours I invoke: Let your chaste fires
Dry up this Virgins tears; make her so fruitful
That in her issue great Achilles name
And fame withal, may live eternally*
Proceed Priest to your other Ceremonies*

Priam before the holy Alter fell,
Before the Alter bid thy life farewell:
Rescue Hermione.

Achilles son
Cannot reuengelesse dye, then witness all,
Blood must flow high where such great Princes fall.

Orestes is in danger.

Save Prince Pyrhus.

This plot was laid
Both for your life and Kingdom.

Menelaus: shall never bear it so.

Fie Thersites,
Thy sword against me.

Curse upon all whoores.

What all asleep? and are these gossiping tongues,
That boasted nought faue War and Victory,
Now mute and silent? Oh thou ugly rogue,
Where's now thy railing? and thou parracide,
Thy madness is now tamed, thou need no chains
To bring thee to thy wits, darkness hath don't.
This Diomed? who dared to encounter Mars,
And said to wound fair Venus in the hand:
Where's your valour now? Aegiale,
Unless (as some say) she be better stored,
Is like to lye without a bed-fellow:
Rise Pillades, and help to awake thy friend,
What doth your friendship sleep now? Menelaus
Hellen's with a new sweete-heart ith'next room,
Wilt thou be still a Cuckold? wink at errors
As pandors do and wittoles? Cethus now
Be crowned in History for a revenge,
Which in the former World wants president:
Methinks, as when the Giants warr'd'gainst heaven,
And dared for primacy with Jove himself*
He darting against their mountains thunder-boles*
Which shattred them to pieces: the war done,
I like the great Olimpicke Iupiter,
Walk ore my ruins, tread upon my spoils
With majesty, I pace upon this floor
Pan'd with the trunks of Kings and Potentates,
For what lesle could have sated my revenge?
This arch-rogue fallen amongst them? he whose eie^
Had the preposterous virtue to fire Troy.
Now is thy black soul for thy perjuries
Swimming in red damnation.

Sir, not yet,
All policies live not in Cethus brain,
Synon hath share, and know if thou hast craft,
I have reserved some cunning: see my body
Free and untouched from wounds.

Speak, shall we then
Divide these dead betwix^ us, and both live?

If two Suns cannot shine within one sphere,
Then why should two arch-villaines? thou hast discovered
Projects almost beyond me, and for which
I have engrossed a mortal envy here,
I will be sole, or none.

Cease then to be,
That I may live without Competitor.
Cause Synons name be rae'd out of the World,
And only mine remembered.

Thine's but frailty,
My ^ame shall be immortal; made more glorious
In treading upon thee, as thou on these;
^oope thou my Vnderling.

I still shall stand
Rooted.

And yet cut down by Synons hand.

I now am dust like these.

One single fight
Ends him, who millions ruined in one night.

Can you behold this slaughter?

Yes, and dye
Atsight of it: for why should Hellen live*
Hellen the cause of all these Princes deaths*
Cease to lament, reach me my Glass Hermione,
Sweet Orphan do; thy fathers dead already,
Nor will the fates lend thee a mother long.
Thanks, and so leave me. Was this wrinkled fore-head
When 'twas at best, worth half so many lives?
Where is that beauty? lives it in this face
Which hath set two parts of the World at war,
Been ruin of the Asian Monarchy,
And almost this of Europe? this the beauty
That launched a thousand ships from Aulis gulf?
In such a poor repurchase, now decayde?
See fair ones, what a little Time can do;
Who that considers when a seed is sown,
How long it is ere it appear from th'earth,
Then ere it stalk, and after ere it blade,
Next ere it spread in leaves, then bud, then flower:
What care in watering, and in weeding took,
Yet crop it to our use: the beauties done,
And smell: they scarce last betwixt Sun and Sun*
Then why should these my blastings still survive,
Such royal ruins: or I longer live,
Then to be termed Hellen the beautiful.
I am grown old, and Death is ages due,
When Courtiers sooth, our glasses will tell true.
My beauty made me pitied, and still loved,
But that decayed, the worlds assured hate
Is all my dowre, then Hellen yield to fate*
Here's that, my soul and body must divide,
The guerdon of Adultery, Lust, and Pride.

In thee they are punish t: of all these Princes,
And infinite numbers that opposed Troy,
And came in Hellens quarrel (save my self).
Not one suruies, (thanks to the immortal powers)
And I am purposde now to acquire by Sea,
My Kingdom and my dear Penelope,
And since I am the man soly reserved,
Accept me for the Authors Epilogue.
If he have been two bloody? tis the Story,
Truth claims excuse, and seeks no farther glory,
Or if you think he hath done your patience wrong
(In tedious Sceanes) by keeping you so long,
Much matter in few words, he bad me say
Are hard to express, that lengthned out his Play.


