WHen Rome was erected: at the first establishing of a common weal, Romulus
the founder of it, instituted a prime officer to govern the City* who was
called praefectus vrbis, i. the prefect of the City, whose vnconroulable
authority, had power, not only to examine, but to determie, all causes
controversies, to sit upon, and censure all delinquents, whether their offences
were capital or criminal: Intra centesfimum lapidem, within an hundred miles
of the City, in process of time the Tarquins being expelled, the prime
soueraignry remaining in the consuls. They (by reason of their foreign
employments) having no leisure to administer Justice at home, created two
chief officers, the one they called praetor vrbanus, or Mayor, the other per
egrinus: The first had his jurisdiction, in and over the City, the other
excercised his authority merely upon strangers.

The name Pr^or is derived from Pr^essondo or Praeeundo, from priority of
place, which as a learned Roman Author writs, had absolute power over all
public and private affairs, to make new Laws, and abolish old, without
controwle, or contradiction: His authority growing to that height, that
whatsoever he decreed or censured in public, was called Ius Honorarium, the
first on whom this dignity was conferd in Rome, was spur: (...) Camillus, the
son of Marcus: And the first Praeter or Lord Mayor appointed to the
Government of the Honourable City of London, was Henry Fitz Allwin, advanced
to that Dignity, by King Iohn, Anno. 1210. so much for the Honour and Antiquity
of the name and place, I proceed to the shows.

Upon the water.

Are two craggy Rocks, placed directly opposite, of that distance that the
Barges may pass betwixt them: these are full of monsters, as Serpents, Snakes,
Dragons, c. some spitting Fire, others vomiting water, in the bases thereof,
nothing to be seen, but the sad relics of shipwreck in broken Barks and
split Vessels, c. The one is called Silla, the other Charibdis, which is situate
directly against Messana; Scilla against Rhegium: and what soever ship that
passes these Seas, if it keep not the middle Channel, it is either wracked
upon the one, or devoured by the other; Medio cutissimus ibit. Upon these Rocks
are placed the Sirens, excellent both in voice and Instrument: They are three
in number, Telsipio, Jligi, Aglaosi* or as others will have them called,
Parthenope, skilful in music; Leucosia, upon the wind Instrument; Ligni,
upon the Harp. The moral intended by the Poets, that whosoever shall lend an
attentive ear to their music, is in great danger to perish; but he that can
warily avoid it by stopping his ears against their enchantment, shall not
only secure themselves, but be their ruin: This was made good in Vlisses the
speaker, who by his wisdom and policy not only preserved himself and his
people, but was the cause that they from the rocks cast themselves headlong
into the Sea. In him is personated a wise and discreet Magistrate.

BEhold great Magistrate, on either hand
Sands, Shelves, and Syrtes, and upon them stand
Two dangerous rocks, your safety to engage,
Boasting of nought save shipwrake spoil and strange.
This Sylla, that Charibdis, (dangerous both)
Placed in the way you row to take your oath.
Yet though a thousand monsters yawn and gape
To ingurdge and swallow you, there's way to escape;
Vlisses by his wisdom found it, steer
You by his Compass, and the way lies clear,
Will you know how? look upward then; and sail
By the sign Libra, that Celestial scale,
In which (some write) the Sun at his creation
First shone; and is to these times a relation
Of Divine Justice: It in justice shined,
Do you so (Lord) and be like it divind.
Keep the even Channel, and be neither swayde,
To the right hand nor left, and so evade
Malicious envy (never out of action,)
Smooth visadgd flattery, and black mouthd detraction,
Sedition, whisperings, murmuring, private hate,
All ambushing, the godlike Magistrate.
About these rocks and quick sands Sirens haunt,
One singes connivence, the other would enchant
With partial sentence; and a third ascribes,
In pleasing tunes, aright to gifts and bribes;
Sweetening the ear, and every other sense,
That place, and office, may with these dispense.
But though their tones be sweet, and shrill their notes,
They come from foul breasts, and inpostum'd throats,
Sea monsters they be stiled, but much (nay more,
'Tis to be doubted,) they frequent the shore.
Yet like Vlisses, do but stop your ear
To their enchantments, with an heart sincere;
They failing to endanger your estate,
Will from the rocks themselves precipitate.
Proceed then in your blessed Inauguration,
And celebrate this Annual Ovation;
Whilst you nor this way, nor to that way lean,
But shun the extremes, to keep the golden mean.
This glorious City, Europs chiefest minion,
Most happy in so great a Kings dominion:
Into whose charge this day doth you invest,
Shall her in you, and you in her make blessed.
THe first show by Land, (presented in Paul's Civitas been Gubernata, i. a City
well governed. Her Attendants (or rather Associates) are three Damsels habited
according to their quality, and representing the three Theologicall virtues,
Faith, Hope, and Charity: Amongst the leaves and fruits of this Tree, are
inscerted diverse labels with several sentences expressing the causes which
make Cities to flourish and prosper: As, The fear of God, Religious zeal, a
Wise Magistrate, Obedience to rulers, Unity, Plain and faithful dealing, with
others of the like nature. At the foot of the Hill sits old Time, and by him
his daughter Truth, with this inscription; Veritas est Temporis Filia, i. Truth
is the Daughter of Time: which Time speaks as follows.

IF Time (some say) have here bin oft in view,
Yet not the same, old Time is each day new,
Who doth the future locked up hours enlarge,
To welcome you to this great Cities charge.
Time, who hath brought you hither (grave and great)
To inaugure you, in your Praetorium seat:
Thus much with griese doth of himself profess
Nothing's more precious, and esteemed less.
Yet you have made great use of me, to aspire
This eminence, by desert, when in full quire
Avees and Acclamations, with loud voice,
Meet you on all sides, and with Time rejoice.
This Hill, that Nymph apparel like the Spring,
These Graces that attend her, (every thing)
As fruitful trees, green plants, flowers of choice smell,
All Emblems af a City governd well;
Which must be now your charge. The Labels here
Mixed with the leaves will show what fruit they bear:
The fear of God, a Magistrate discreet,
Justice, and Equity: when with these meet,
Obedience unto Rulers, Unity,
Plain and just dealing, Zeal, and Industry:
In such blessed symptoms where these shall agree,
Cities, shall like perpetual Summers be.
You are now General, do but bravely lead,
And (doubtless) all will march, as you shall tread:
You are the Captain, do but bravely stand
To oppose vice, see, all this goodly band
Now in their City Liveries will apply
Themselves to follow, where your Colours fly.
You are the chief, defend my daughter Truth,
And then both Health and Poverty, Age and Youth,
Will follow this your Standard, to oppose
Error, Sedition, Hate, (the common foes.)
But pardon Time (grave Lord) who speaks to thee;
As well what thou now art, as ought to be.
Then Time makes a pause, and taking up a leavelesse withered branch, thus
proceeds.

See you this withered branch, by Time over grown
A Cities Symbol, ruined, and trod down.
A Tree that bare bad fruit; Dissimulation,
Pride, Malice, Envy, Atheism, Supplantation,
Ill Government, Prophannes, Fraud, Oppressio,
Neglect of virtue, Freedom to transgression,
Obedience, here with power did disagree,
All which fair London be still far from thee.
The second show by Land, is presented in Justice upon the Lyon, the other
Mercy upon the Unicorn. The motto which Justice bears, is Rebels protero;
the inscription which Mercy carries, is Jmbelles protego: Herein is intimated,
that by these types and symboles of Honour (represented in these noble beasts
belonging io his Majesty) all other inferior magistracies and governments
either in Common weals, or private Societies, receive both being and
supportance.

The prime Lady seated in the first and most eminent place of the Chariot,
represents London, behind whom, and on either side, diverse others of the
chief Cities of the Kingdom take place: As Westminster, York, Bristoll,
Oxford, Lincolne, Exeter, c. All these are to be distinguished by their
several Escutchons; to them London being Speaker, directs the first part of
her speech as follows.

You noble Cities of this generous Isle,
May these my two each Ladies ever smile.
(Justice, and mercy) on you. You we know
Are come to grace this our triumphant show.
And of your courtesy, the hand to kiss
Of London, this fair lands Metropolis.
Why sister Cittyes sit you thus amazd?
If to behold above you, windows glas'd
With Diomonds'sted of glass? Stars hither sent,
This day to deck our lower Firmament?
Is it to see my numerous Children round
Encompass me? So that no place is found.
In all my large streets empty? My issue spread
In number more then stones whereon they tread.
To see my Temples, Houses, even all places.
With people covered, as If, Tyl'd with faces?
Will you know whence proceeds this fair increase,
This joy? the fruits of a continued peace,
The way to thrive; to prosper in each calling,
The weak, and shrinking states, to keep from falling,
Behold; my motto shall all this display,
Read and observe it well: Serve and obey.
Obedience though it humbly doth begin,
It soon augments unto a Magozin
Of plenty, in all Citties'tis the ground,
And doth like harmony in music sound:
Nations and Common weals, by it alone
Flourish: It incorporates, many into one,
And makes unanimous peace content and joy,
Which pride, doth still Insidiate to destrsy.
And you grave Lord, on whom right honour calls,
Both borne and bredi'th circuit of my walls,
By virtue and example, have made plain,
How others may like eminence attain.
Persist in this blessed concord, may we long,
That Cities to this City may still throng,
To view my annual triumphs, and so grace,
Those honoured Pretors that supply this place.
Next after the Chariot, are borne the two rocks, Sylla and Caribdis, which
before were presented upon the water: upon the top of the one stands a Sea Lyon
upon the other a Mearemaide or Sea-Nimphe, the Sirens and Monsters, being in
continual agitation and motion, some breathing fire, others spowting water, I
shall not need to spend much time in the Description of them, the wroke being
sufficiently able to Commend itself.

The third show by Land Presented near unto the great Cross in Cheape-side,
bears the title of the Palace of Honour: A fair and Curious structure arched
and Tarrest above, on the Top of which stands Honour, a Glorious presens, and
ritchly habited, she in her speech directed to the right Honourable: the Lord
Mayor, discovers all the true and direct ways to attain unto her as, first: A
King: Either by succession or Election.

A Soldier, by valour and martial Discipline

A Churchman by Learning and degrees in scooles

A Statesman by Travel and Language c.

A Lord Mayor by Commerce and Traffic both

By Sea and Land, by the Enriching of the Kingdom, and Honour of our Nation.

The Palace of Honour is thus governed

Industry Controwler, his Word Negotior Charity Steward, the Word Miserior.
Liberality Treasurer, the Word Largior, Innocence and Devotion Henchmen the
words. Patior: Precor. And so of the rest, and according to this Palace of
Honour is facioned not only the management of the whole City in general: but
the House and Family of the Lord Mayor in particular.

Before in the Front of this palace is seated Saint Katherin, the Lady and
Patroness of this Worshipful Society of whom I will give you this short
Character* the name it self imports in the Original. Omnis ruina, which (as
some interpret it) is as much as to say, the fall and ruin of all the works of
the Devil: Others derive the word from Catena, a Chain wherein all chief
Virtues and Graces are concatinated and linked together, so much for her name.

For her birth, she was lineally descended from the Roman Emperors, the
daughter of Costus the son of Constantine which Costns was Crowned King of
Armenia, for Constantine having conquered that Kingdom, grew Enamoured of the
Kings Daughter by whom he had Issue, this Costus who after succeeded his Grand
Father.

Constantine after the death of his first Wife made an expedition from Room,
and having Conquered this Kingdom of Great Britain: he took to his Second
Wife Helena, which Helena was she that found the Cross upon which the Saviour
of the World was Crucified, c.

Costus Dying whilst Katherine was yet young, and she being all that Time
huing in Famogosta, (a chief City) because she was there Proclaimed and
Crowned was called Queen of Famogosta, she lived and dyed a Virgin and a
Martyr under the Tyranny of Maxentius, whose Empress, with many other great
eminent persons she had before converted to the Faith. So much for her
character Her speech to the Lord Mayor as follows.

I Katherin, long since Sainted for true piety,
The Lady patroness of this Society,
A queen, a Virgin, and a Martyr: All
My Atributes: Inuit you to this Hall
Called Honours palace: nor is this my Wheel,
Blind Fortunes Emblem, she that makes to reel^;
Kingdoms and Common weals, all turning round,
Some to advance, and others to Confound:
Mine is the Wheel of Faith, (all ways in motion)
Steadfast in Hope, and Constant in Devotion.
It Imitates the Spheres swift agitation,
Orbicularly, still moving to Salvation:
That's to the Primus motor: from whom Flows,
All Goodness, Virtue: There; true Honour grows,
Which: If you will attaine^ must be your care.
(Crime Magistrate.) Instated as you are.
To keep thu Curoular action, in your charge,
To Curb the opressor, the oppressed to enlarge;
To be the Widows Husband, the Orphants Father,
The blindmans oy, the lune mans foot: so gather
(A treasure beyond value, by your place;
More then Earths Honour,) true Celestial grace,
Aim first at that* what other Honours be,
Honour Her self can best Instruct that's she*
At that word she poynteth upward to a Glorious presens which personates Honour
in the top of the palace, who thus seconds Saint Katherens Speech.

The way to me though not debarred,
Yet it is dificult and hard.
If Kings Arrive to my profection
Tis by Succession, or Election
When Fortitude doth Action grace,
The Soldier then with me takes place
When Stooddy, Knowledge and degree
Makes Scollers Eminent here with me;
They are listed with the Honoured: and
The Trauilar, when many a land
He hath' peir'st for language, and much knows
A great respected slatesman grows.
So you and such as you (Grave Lord)
Who wear this Scarlet, use that Sword
Collar, and Cap of Maintenance.
These are no things, that come by chance
Or got by sleeping but averse
From these I am (...): by care, Commerce,
The hazarding of Goods, and men
To Pirates Rocks, shelves, Tempest, when?
You through a Wilderness of Seas,
Dangers of wrack, Surprise, Desease
Make new descoveryes, for a lasting story
Of this our Kingdoms fame and Nations glory
Thus is that Collar, and your Scarlet worn,
And for such cause, the Sword before you Borne.
They are the emblems of your Power, and here
Though curbed within the Limmet of one year,
Yet manadge as they ought by your Endeavour
Shall make your name (as new) Honoured for eu^r
Unto which Palace of peace, rest and bliss,
Supply of all things, where nought wanting is
Would these that shall succeed you know the way?
Tis plain, God, the King Serve and Obey.
^* cannot hear forget that in the presentment of my papers to the Master,
Wardens, Committies of this Right Worshipful Company of the Haberdashers (at
whose sole expense and charges all the public Triumphs of this days
Solemnity both by water and land, were Celebrated) nothing here devised or
expressed was any way foreign unto them, but of all these my conceptions,
they were as able to Judge, as ready to Hear, and to direct as well as to
Censure; nether was there auy dificulty which needed a comment, but as soon
known as shown, and apprehended as read: which makes me now confident of the
best rank of the Cittisens: That as to the Honour and strength both of the
City and Kingdom in general, they exercise Arms in public, so to the
benefit of their Judgements, and enriching of their knowledge, they neglect not
the study of arts, and practise of literature in private, so that of them it
may be truly said they are, Tam Mercurio quam Mart periti: I proceed now to
the last Speech at night in which Vlisses at the taking leave of his Lordship
at his Gate, uses this short Commemoration, of all that hath bin included in
the former pageants, pointing to them in order, the manner thereof thus.

Night grows, Inviting you to rest, prepare
To rise to morrrw to a whole Years care,
Envy still waits on Honour, then provide
Vlisses Wisdom may be still your guide
To stere you through all dangers: Husband Time
That this day brings you to a place sublime,
By the Supporture of his daughter Truth
This Ancient City in her pristine Youth,
Your sword may reestablish: and so bring
Her still to flourish; like that lasting Spring
That London in whose Circuit you were bred
And borne therein, to be the Chief and Head
Drawn by these two beasts in an Equal line
May in your Mercy and your Justice shine,
So Honour who this day did you Inuit
Unto Her palace bids you thus Good Night,
No following day but add to your Renown
And this your Charge* with numerous Blessings crown.
I have forborne to spend much paper in need less and Inpertinent deciphering
the work, or explaining the habits of the persons, as being freely exposed to
the public view of all the Spectators. The maine show, being performed by the
most excellent in that kind, Miaster Gerard Christmas hath expressed hia Modals
to be exquisite (as having spared nei-ther Cost nor care, either in the
Figures or ornaments. I shall not need to point unto them to say, this is a
Lyon, and that an Unicorn, c. For of this Artist, I may boldly and freely
thus much speak, though many about the town may envy their work, yet with
all their endeavour they shall not be able to compare with their worth. I
Conclude with Plautus insticho: Nam curiosus est (...) non ^it malevolus.


