NOt to insist upon the Antiquity, Nobility, nor the first foundation and
situation of this glorious City, comparing it with others (of old) rarely
remarkable; now demolisht and ruined: neither with those contemporary or at
this present in greatest prosperity, either for Magnificent structure, or Grave
and godly Government; because it hath bin the Annual argument, suiting with
the occasion now in agitation: let them therefore pass as conclusions granted,
principles against which there is no disputation to be held; since for
beautiful Architectures, Palaces, Rialtoes, Guilds, Arcenalls, Temples,
Cathedralls, Aquaeducts c. and further for commerce in al Countries, Christian
or Heathen; discoveries, plantations, (as in Ireland, Virginia, Bromoothos, or
Summers Islands, St Christophers, New England, Harbergrace in new-found Land c.
In which the most famous Cities of the World, Athens, Thebes, Lacedemon, nor
Rome it self the Metropolis of the Roman Empire, could in her most flourishing
estate and Potency, (though she Tyrannised over the whole World,) in the least
compare with London. And in the way of Competitor-ship, the Spartan Ephori, the
Athenian Areopagitae, with Romes purple Optimates, may subscribe to her scarlet
Senate; no Praetor in any City whatsoever being graced with the like Solemn
and sumptuous Inauguration.

But from the City, I come now to the particular Company of the Drapers, one of
the prime members thereof; which may claim one special priority above the
rest: in regard that Sir Henry Fitz-Alwin was of that Fraternity, and the first
Lord Major, who might be rather called a perpetual Dictator than an one years
Praetor; continuing his Majoralty from four and twenty years and upwards
together: not Anno comple to, but vita durante; from his Initiation, to his
Expiration: which hath not happened in any other of the eleven Worshipful
Societies. After him within a little space, Sir William Powltney four years
together Lord Major, Iohn Hind, Sir Iohn New-man, Sir Richard Hardell, before
whom the Sword was borne for the space of six several years without
intermission. Simon Eyre who built Leaden Hall, or Sir Richard Pipe, George
Monox, Sir Iohn Milborne, Sir Richard Campion, Sir Thomas Hayes, Sir Iohn
Iolls, Sir Edward Barkham, Sir Martin Lumley, Sir Allen Cotton, Sir Cutbert
Hacket, and Sir Maurice Abbot, whom the Right Honourable Henry Garway now
succeeds: the right Worshipful Mr. Thomas Adam, being this year Sheriff,
and of the Drapers Society.

And although before the last Lord Major preceding this, there hath not bin
any for the space of ten years of that Worshipful fraternity, yet in the
Annual vicessitude of twelve years before, six of those before named were
elected into the Praetorian dignity: and all, or most of these from the first
being builders of Churches, and Chapels; Founders of Schools, Almes-houses,
and Hospitals, repayrers of decayed Temples, and Oratories; Benefactors to
Halls, and liberal contributors to the maintaining of Arts, and all Pious and
Charitable acts whatsoever. Besides your Coat of Arms, Nobilitated by ancient
Heraldry, being three imperial Crowns supported by two golden pelletted
Lions; your Crest Aries, the first of the twelve Zodiac signs; your inscript,
To God alone be all honour and glory: your Patroness, the blessed Virgin; all
these approve your antiquity and dignity: I have nominated these amongst many,
c. but I come now to the first show by water.

IS a person representing the ancient River Nilus, mounted in a Sea-Chariot,
and seated upon a silver Scallop (the plat-forme decored with Marine Nymphs and
Goddesses) his habit suiting with the nature of the river, in his right hand a
seven-forked Sceptre, alluding to the seven heads, or as many Channels through
which he runs; and therefore by Ovid, called Septem-fluus: he is drawn by two
Crocodile, which may be reckoned amongst the Amphibiae, as living in, and
pertaking of the two Elements, Earth and Water: the river it self by sundry
Inundations waters the whole Land of Egypt, leaving behind it a slime, or
moist Clay, which serves for a male or manuring, to make the soil more
fertile. The original head from which it flows is uncertain, which Claudian
thus expresses: Et Arcanos Nili deprendite fontes. The Ecclesiastical Writers
hold it for one of the four rivers that flows from the earthly Paradise; in
divers places it changes name, according to the situation of the shores
through which it runs: it brings forth Reeds, whose films or inward rinds
are much like our Paper, and for a need may be writ upon; and therefore by the
Poets called Nilus papyrifer: of all other rivers it only breeds Crocodile,
and Hippotami, Aequi fluviales, Sea Horses.

The Crocodile is a Serpent that from a small Egg, grows in short time to a
mighty length and bigness, for some of them have bin 22 Cubits long, it hath
^our feet, with which he runs as swiftly on land as he swims by water; he is
bold over those that fly him, but fearful of those that pursue him; the four
winter months, November, December, January and February, he eats not at all;
he hath no tongue, but teeth sharpe and long; neither in feeding doth he move
his lower jaw: briefly, he is terrible to man and beast, and preys on both;
but I leave them and come to the speaker.

NIlus an ancient River, known to excel
Amongst those four, (which before Adam fell
Watered the earthly Paradise) now claims
A new alliance with his brother Thames.
Martia, so called of Marsius, who to win
The praise from great Apollo, lost his skin:
Amphrisus, who his name shall ever keep,
Since there Apollo kept Admetus Sheep.
Nor yet Cremera, by whose firtile side
Three hundred and six Fabij at once did.
Xantus, and Simois, those too famous floods,
So often stained in Greek and Trojan bloods:
Nor let Pharsalian Enepeus boast
In Caesars triumph, over great Pompies host:
Deucalion brag not of Cephisus for'd,
Because near it lost man-kind he restored:
Caister of her Swans, Permessus clear,
Proud that the Muses were delighted there.
Pactolus, nor Idaspes, famed of old
For glittering Channels, paved with pearl and gold.
Let none of these compare with aged Nile,
Who only breeds the weeping Crocodile.
Who drew we hither to the Celebration,
Of this your great loud voiced inauguration.
Grave and judicious Praetor, O make me
Your happy Emblem; since as I foresee
By reason, that in Egypt falls no rain,
There needs must be a dearth of grass and grain;
Therefore, by frequent Inundations, I
In my great care, that needful want supply:
So Magistrates (of which you prime and best
We must acknowledge) ought to the distressed:
In your known gravity and goodness cast
The future to provide for, salve what's past.
My seven-fold Scepters Hierogliphick, tells
Seven heads, from which (my mighty river swells,
Seven liberal arts (by you maintained) express
Your Cities magnitude and worthiness.
And as you see my Crocodiles I sway,
(Monsters, which both by land and water prey)
If any such here breed? as some no doubt,
In place and Office may be; search them out:
And then, what greater honour can you claim,
Then such rude beasts like me to curb and tame?
But you're too long detained; I next commend you,
Unto those Triumphs that on Land attend you.

IS Ianus, placed upon an Artificial Structure, built in a square model, at
the four corners whereofsit four Persons representing the four seasons;
Spring, Summer, Autume, Winter; every one habited agreeable to his propriety
and condition. The name Ianus is borrowed from the Hebrew word Iain, which
implyeth Vinum, wine, being held to be the first that planted the Vine. Some
report him to have bin an ancient King of Italy amongst the Aborigines, An.
mun. 2629. before Christ 1319. who received Saturne flying from his Son
Iupiter, taught him the use of Agriculture and Tillage. Historians report him
to have bin the wisest King in his days; remembering things past, and
predicting what was futurely to come; therefore they figured him with two
faces: he was Deified after his death, to whom Numa dedicated a Temple, shut in
the time of peace, open in the time of war; from which he had the
denomination of Ianus Patuleius, and Clausius: some think him to have bin
Ogyges, others Noah, with one face looking backward upon the world before the
Flood, the other forward on that since the Flood: they also called the one the
face of Government, the other of Labour. His standing upon such fixed bases
admonishes all Magistrates, and men of Honour, to be constant in all their
courses; but especially in the establishing and maintenance of true Religion:
He holds in his right hand a golden Key to shut up the year past, as never
more to come; and open to the year future: it may also be an Emblem of noble
policy to unbosom and bring to light their treacherous devises and stratagems,
who seek to undermine and supplant the prosperity of a fair flourishing
Commonwealth. Upon the Key are two Greek letters engraven, x and e and on a
bar in his left hand the letter t all being numeral, and make up 365, the
number of the days in our solary year; of which by some he is styled the
Father: the bar in his left hand implyeth the Fortitude required in every good
Magistrate, in the encouragement of virtue, and suppressing of vice c. Ianus
the speaker:

I Janus, the years Father, in my prime
Almost as soon as either light, or time;
Hither my servants the four Seasons bring
Cold Winter, Autumn, Summer, and the Spring.
Eleven Months are my Sons, my Daughter May
Makes up the twelft: her Sisters Night, and Day
Acknowledge me their Father: Girls of spleen
So opposed, they never will at once be seen.
The Hours my Hand-maids are, which employed well,
Shall make you in your Praetor-ship excel
(As all the rest fore-nam'd:) Behold this Key,
With which I o'pe the gates of Land and Sea
To the time future; being made by me
To all your Trade, commerce, and Traffic free.
Proceed and prosper, whilst the year fore-past
(As never more to come) I shut up fast;
One face still looking back, least good Acts done
Might be obscured in dark oblivion:
As the other forward, to see what's to do;
Both for Gods Honour, and your Countries to.
From Janus this use may it please you gather,
You for one year are made the Cities Father;
These four succeeding Seasons, I resign
Unto your charge; (which I before called mine:
To the twelve Months, most aptly may comply
Your twelve chief Companies: who can deny
My Daughter Day for your employment pressed?
The blacke-brow'd Night, sequestered for your rest?
So spend the Hours to enrich future story,
Both for your own grace and the Cities glory.
My golden Key make use off, to set wide
Those Prison gates, where many a soul hath did,
Starved by th'Oppressors cruelty; those Gaild
For Capital crimes, unpitied, and unbaild,
Reserve for public Trial: Justice is bound
To cut of Gangreenes, to preserve the sound:
But none knows better than your self (Grave Lord)
What Mercy is; or when to use the Sword.

IS Orpheus with his Harp, seated in a fair Plat-forme, beautified with
pleasant Trees, upon which are pearcht several Birds, and below Beasts of all
sorts, who notwithstanding being of several conditions, and opposite natures,
yet all imagined to be attentive to his Music. This Show hath reference to the
title of the whole Triumph, Status pacatus, A peaceable and blessed estate, in
which our Sovereigns Royalty hath a correspondence with Saturnes Reign, which
was called the golden world. There were four most excellent of the Harp,
remembered unto us by the ancient Poets, who are likewise the Emblems of the
four Elements: Apollo the Son of Iupiter and Latona, (killing the Dragon
Pithon) of fire. Amphion the Son of Iupiter and Antiope, figured with a
Camelion of Air. Arion the Methimnian riding upon a Dolphin, of water: and
Orpheus the Thracian (thus accommodated) of the Earth: and these attributes were
conferred on them for their several Airs, and strains in Music: this Orpheus
was the Son of Apollo, who instructed him on the Harp, upon which he grew so
excellent that the Woods and Mountains followed him; the Rivers staid their
course, and the wild beasts, and birds their prey, with Trees, and stones were
said to be attentive to his Music: of him much more might be spoken, but to
shorten circumstance I come to his Speech.

I Nquire from all antiquity, 'tis said
That when Apolloes Son, (I Orpheus) plaid
Upon my Harp: the rivers if they swel'd
Above their banks or Torrents that rebeld;
Grew smooth to hear my music: and forbore
To vex the Channels, or molest the Shore.
The Panther, Tiger, the wild Boar, the Bear,
Forget their rage, to give me attentive ear,
Lions with Lambs together couched in love,
As dreadlesse by the Falcon pearcht the Dove:
The Hounds their pursuit did leave off, and there
Sate Hart, and Hare, close by them without fear:
The sad predicting Raven, from the Oak
(Hollowed with age) was not once heard to croake,
Nor any Bird of harsh throat: only then
The Nightingale, the Robin, and the Wren
With all their musical quire, in silent groans,
(Afraid to sing out) cherrupt to my Tones.
The very Trees I did so much entrance,
They shook their bows because they could not dance:
But, Stones not rooted, but above the ground
Moved in rare postures to my Harps sweet sound:
I the four blustering Brothers rage make calm,
And'stead of violent gusts to breath soft balm.
Yet there's an Harmony which doth rejoice
Mans heart, more than the Jnstrument, or Voice;
The Gitterne, Harp, the Viol, and the Lute,
When that is heard to sound may all stand mute;
Whose happy Symptoms more contentment brings
Than any Consort, made by breatb or strings:
And sends a sweeter rapture to the ears
Than that above; made by th'orbicular Spheres.
May it your grave Pretorian wisdom please,
You are that Orpheus who can do all these:
If any stream beyond its bounds shall swell,
You bear the Trident that such rage can quell.
When beasts of Rapine (trusting to their power)
Would any of your harmless stocks devour:
Yours is the sword that can such violence stay,
To keep the Rich from rigour, Poor from prey;
Neither from any harshall-boading beak,
Least discord shall be heard, when you but speak;
Whilst in Harmonious quire the rest contend,
Which in your praise each other shall transcend.
Trees rooted in selfe-will, and (which seems strange)
Even senseless stones you into life may change.
This Wisdom can; yet there's a more Divine
Concordancy, which far exceeds mine:
That's of unanimous hearts; plenty, increase;
With all Terrestrial blessings wait on peace:
Which whilst maintained in your Commerce and Trade,
Proves sweeter Music than e're Orpheus made.

IS a Chariot drawn by two Cammells, upon eithers back an Indian mounted, and
habited according to the manner of their Country: of Cammells there be two
sorts, the Bactrian, and Arabian; and differ thus: The Bactrians have two
bunches or swellings on the back, and are called Dromedaries: the Arabians but
one, and another on the breast, on which they lean when they lye down to
rest: They want the upper order of teeth, and are some times used in War, in
velocity exceeding horses; but most commonly for burdens, every one being
acquainted with his own lading according to his strength; less weight they
desire not, and more they will not bear: they are taught to kneel till they
have their load, and then they rise of themselves. Neither in their journey
will they change their pace; they can abstain from water four days together,
but then they drink as well for the time past, as that to come; yet not before
with their feet they have troubled the stream: they live to fifty years, and
some to an hundred; and though the pelleted Lyons might have served more
properly to this place, as being supporters of the Arms belonging to the Right
Worshipful Company of the Drapers; yet these are as genuine to the purpose: to
show his Lord-ships general negotiation in all kinds of Merchandise
whatsoever.

I cannot stand to speak much of the Fleece, but of Iason, and Medea, (thus
briefly;) Jason signifies sanans, or healing, Medea consilium, or Counsel: he
was the Son of Aeta, his Father was no sooner dead but he left the Kingdom to
his brother Pelias, who set him upon an adventure to fetch the golden Fleece
from Colchos: to which purpose he caused the Argoe to be built, in which sixty
of the prime Princes of Greece accompanied him; whom Medea the Daughter of Aeta
King of Colchos courteously entertained with all the rest of the Argonauts: and
being greatly enamoured of him, and afraid least he should perish in the
attempt; knowing the danger he was to undergo, upon promise of Marriage, she
taught him how he should tame the Brazenfooted Bulls, to cast the Dragon that
watched the Fleece into a dead sleep: which he did, and by slaying him bore
away the prize. The rest I leave to the Speaker, which is

THus doth the daughter of the Colchian King,
Her Husband Jason home in Triumph bring,
After his mighty Conquest of the Fleece;
The Aureum vellus brought from thence to Greece.
And wast not a brave prise? for who so dull
Cannot conceive the worth of golden wool?
The mornings Sun upon their Fleeces shines,
Making the fields appear like richest Mines.
One of the first we read of was the Ram,
Upon whose back Phrixus and Hell swam
The Hellespont: she to her lasting fame
(By being drowned there, gave the Sea that name:)
But Phrixus safely did to Colchos steer,
And on Joves Alter sacrificed there
The golden Beast, whose faithful service done,
With the Celestial gods such favour won;
That striving amongst themselves to have him graced,
Him first of all the Zodiak signs they placed.
And worthily, search the vast earth or deep,
No beast to man, so useful as the sheep:
How many poor men doth it keep in pay,
Of several Trades and faculties; else they
Might starve for want of lively-hood: but their charge bearing
By Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Fulling, Shearing.
How with her flesh we are satisfied within,
Clothed with her Wool without; in whose shorn skin
Those reverent antiquities are kept,
Which else long since had in oblivion slept:
And for the Fleece it self, it is an honour;
First Nature, and since Time, hath cast upon her,
So great, so eminent, so meriting praise,
Even Emperors were it on their Feastivall days:
And none that ever her true virtue knew,
But rated her with Ophir, and Peru.
These Camels though amongst us rarely seen,
Yet frequent where your Lordship oft hath been
In your long Travels: may the world persuade
The rich Commerce and nobleness of your Trade.
Time so contracts us, that we cannot dwell
On all in which you Merchants most excel:
Yet honoured Sir, what's in this place denied
Shall in Pacatus Status be supplied.

AS the last had a relation to the Company in general, so this hath reference
to his Lordship in particular, as he is a noble Merchant; having it hereditary
from his worthy Father Mr. William Garway, who was not only a great Benefactor
to the Right Worshipful Society of the Drapers, but an indulgent Educator of
divers young men, who have since proved great and Eminent adventurers; some
attaining even to the prime Magistracy of this our Metropolis.

The next Model presented to the public view is a Ship, which as it hath all
accomodatings and ornaments belonging to such a Vessel; so it is also decored
with the Arms of the nine Companies of Merchant-adventurers, of which his
Lordship hath bin, and is at this present free: the trouble of the place, the
press of so mighty a confluence, with the necessity of time, in the solemnity
of such a Feastivall Day (then limited) will not afford it a speech: which I
the rather omit; because in the last representation of the like, the excellency
of Merchandise, the commodity of shipping, with the antiquity and profit of
Navigation was delivered at large: I therefore come to the sixth and last. which
is

AN artificial Architecture best able (for the Workeman-ship) to commend it
self, and being apparent to the public view, less needs my description. It
presents the calamities of War, the blessedness of peace, Status Pacatus;
bearing the Title of the whole Triumph: In one part thereof are expressed to the
life, the figures of Death, Famine, Sickness, strange, c. in the other
Prosperity, Plenty, Health, Wealth, but especially the free and frequent
Preaching of the Word and Gospel. I desire not to swell these few pages to
small purpose, therefore thus briefly of both. Peace is the Tranquillity, and
calm quiet of Kingdoms, free from Section, tumult, uproars and faction; a
Plantation of rest, ease and security; with all the flourishing ornaments of
earthly felicity: peace is the end at which War aims: Honour the fruits of
peace; and good Government the ground of either, asking no less wisdom to
preserve it, then valour to obtain it: for Concord and Unity makes a mite to
increase to a Magazine, when discord and debate in any public Weal, or private
society, lessens a mountain to a Mole-hill; and therefore Pacem te poscimus
omnes.

Now of the contrary, War is of two sorts, Civil, or Foreign. Domestic War
is the over-throw and ruin of all Estates, and Monarchies, and the incendiary
of whatsoever is most execrable, begetting contempt of God, corruption of
manners, and disobedience to Magistrates: change of Laws, neglect of Justice,
and dis-estimation of Learning and liberal Arts: But foreign War is that)
by Plato, called a more gentle and generous contention) only lawful, being
undertook to propagate true Religion; or to procure a continuance of Peace.
Any War may be begun with great facility, but is ended with much difficulty;
neither is it in his power to end it who begins it: to raise a combustion is in
the power of any Coward, but to appease it lies only in the mercy of the
Conqueror: therefore much safer and better is certain peace, than hoped for
Victory: the first is in our Will, the latter in the Will of the Gods.

Ergo Fames, pestis, Bellum grassantur in omnes,
Vivere si vultis, vivite jam melius.
By War, Plague, Famine, (lo) the people fall;
Then better live: if you will live at all.
The more to illustrate this Triumph, it is graced by the Company of Artillery
men completely armed, to express War: and the Livery and gown-men being the
Emblem of Peace. I come now to the Speech, delivered by The Genius of the
City.

W Are, to the unexperienced, pleasant shows,
But they who in the Progress and the Close
Shall trace it, know it horrid; 'Tis a time
Destined, to the revenge, and scourge of Crime:
A time, when numerous armies, with the stress
Of mailed men, and harnessed Horses, press
Groans from the trembling Earth (with fear assounded)
And with the reeking gore of slain and wounded
Drenched her in stead of Rain: when like shooting Comets.
It's lightning bolts the thundering Cannon vomets;
Quaking the bellowing Air: when shrill alarms,
Rushing of routed Troops, clashing of Arms
Render a noise; as hideous and as loud,
As a tumultuous sea in Tempest ploughed:
When slaughter strowes the crimson plain with Courses,
Men combat men, enraged Horses Horses:
When Massacre, (all quarter quite denying)
Revels amidst the flying, crying, dying.
It is a Time when Stratagem surrounds,
And the beleaguered City close impounds:
When mounted Ordnance with their streporous peal
(Wars Dialect) on both sides rail; and deal
Death at each dire discharge: When pinching need
Of food, hath forced the famished Motherfeed
On her 'fore-starved Babe; and Hunger raves
So fiercely, Men eat men out of their Graves:
When Plague makes friend, the friend; brother, the brother;
The Harmless, armelesse; murder one another:
When in the Husbands and sad Parents sight,
The Wife, and Virgins ravished, in despite
Of helpless succour; when without all ruth,
The Honourable Aged, lovely Youth
And Infant, in promiscuous heaps are thrown
(By indifferent havoc) like a meadow mowne.
It is a time, when forage, pillage, strange,
What witty cruelty, or barbarous rage
Can or invent or execute; design
To utter desolation: when in fine
Whole Troy is but one Bone-fire, that devours
House, Palace, Temple, and kicks down those Towers
That with the Clouds did late alliance boast;
Which in aspiring smoke give up the ghost.
^ (who Exit, in these Tragic Scenes,
Of sword, fire, famine, plagues find; thraldom gleanes.
And such a time is War, and such the throws
Our neighbour Nations travel now in; woes
Quite desperate of delivery: whilst calm Peace,
Prosperity, and Plenty, with increase
Of all concatinated Blessings smile
With cheerful face on this sole-happy Isle.
Let then our gratitudes and Pious cares
Strive to entaile them to Us, and our Heirs:
Lest that too late, (having sterne War accited)
We wish that Peace; which (whilst we had) we slighted.
One thing I cannot omit, concerning the Wardens and Committies of this
Worshipful Society of the Drapers; that howsoever in all my writing I labour to
avoid what is Abtruse or obsolete: so withal I study not to meddle with what
is too frequent and common: yet in all my expressions either of Poetical
fancy, or (more grave History,) their apprehensions went equally along with my
reading: neither, had I travelled in the least deviating path, could I have
escaped without a just taxation: but I come now to the last Speech at night.

THe Sun is set, Day doth not now appear
(As some few hours late) in our Hemisphere;
Hesperus the Captain of the Watch, hath taken
Charge of the Stars; and now about Charles-waine
Hath placed his Sentinels to 'attend the Moon,
If possible to make of mid-night noone.
May it ple^ you to remember from old Nile,
The dang^ Amphibian Crocodile;
How from (...), you this year have power
Over each seasons Month, each (...) hour.
From Orpheus, that sweet music (...) parts,
The civil^ Harmony of tongues (...).
The Fleece of Aries Trumpets to eternity,
The Drapers Honour, due to that Fraternity.
We by the Sheep and Camels understand,
Your Lordships Travels both by Sea and Land:
Status Pacatus last doth intimate,
The happiness of this your peaceful state.
Long may it last (of all Earths blessings best,)
Whilst we this night commend you to your rest.
Concerning these two excellent Artists, Master Iohn, and Master Mathias
Christmas, brothers; the exquisite contrivers of these Triumphal Models; I can
only say thus much: their workeman-ship exceeds what I can express in words,
and in my opinion their performance of what they undertake, is equal at least,
if not transcendent over any's who in the like kind shall strive to parralell
them.


