LONDON and WESTMINSTER are two Twin-sister-Cities; as joined by one Street, so
watered by one stream: the first a breeder of grave Magistrates, the second,
the buriall-place of great Monarchs; Both famous for their two Cathedrals: the
one Dedicated to the honour of Saint Paul, the other of Saint Peter. These I
rather concatenate, because as in the one, the Right Honourable the Lord Major
receives his honour, so in the other he takes his Oath: yet London may be
presumed to be the elder, and more excellent in Birth, Means, and Issue; in
the first for her Antiquity, in the second for her Ability, in the third, for
her numerous Progeny: she and her Suburbs being decored with two several
Burses or Exchanges, and beautified with two eminent Gardens of Exercise,
known by the names of Artillery and Military. I shall not need to insist much
either upon her Extension, or Dimension, nor to compare her with other eminent
Cities that were, or are, it having been an Argument treated of by Authentic
Authors, and the laborious project of many learned Pens, and frequently
celebrated upon the like days of Solemnity.

And although by the space of Ten years last past, there hath not been any
Lord Major free of that Company, yet was there within Twelve years before that
six Lord Majors of the same. And it shall not be amiss to give you a brief
Nomination of some Honourable Praetors, and those of prime Remark in that
Company: Sir Henry Fitz-Alwin Draper, was the first Lord Major of this City,
which place he held for four and twenty years together, and upward; and in
the first year of his Majoralty, Anno 1210. London-Bridge, which was before
made of Timber, was begun to be built of Stone. Sir William Powltney was four
times Lord Major; 1337 he built a Chapel in Paul's, where he lies buried,
and erected a College near unto the Church of St. Laurence Powltney, London:
He moreover built the Church of little Alhallows in Thames street, with other
pious and devout Acts. Iohn Hind Draper, Lord Major 1405, built the Church of
Sr. Swithen by London-stone, c. Sir Iohn Norman was the first that rowed in his
Bardge to Westminster, when he went to take his Oath: Sir Richard Hardell face
in the Judicatory Seat six years together: Simon Eyre Lord Major, built
Leaden-Hall at his own proper costs and charges: Sir Richard Pipe, George
Monox, Lord Major 1515, and Sir Iohn Milborne, were great Erectors of
Almes-houses, Hospitals, c. and left liberally to the poor: Sir Richard
Campion perfected divers charitable works, left unfinish't by Sir Iohn
Milborne before named. Sir Thomas Hayes 1615* Sir Iohn Iolls 1616* Sir Edward
Barkham, Sir Martin Lumley, Sir Allan Cotton, Sir Cuthbert Hacket, c. To speak
of them all, I should but spend Paper in a mere capitulation of their names,
and neglect the project now in agitation.

THe first Show by Water, is presented by Proteus in a beautiful Sea-Chariot:
for the better Ornament, decored with divers Marine Nymphs and Sea-goddesses*
c. He sits or rides upon a moving Tortoise, which is reckoned amongst the
Amphibiae, quod in ambobus Elementis degant: That is, One of those Creatures
that live in two Elements, the Water, and the Land; alluding to the Trading of
the Right Honourable the present Lord Major, who is a Merchant, free of the
Turkey, Italian, French, Spanish, Muscovy, and was late Governor of the East
Indy-Company. This Proteus, or (...), that is, Primus, is held to be the first,
or most ancient of the Sea-gods, the Son of Oceanus and Thetis, who could
transhape himself into any Figure whatsoever, and was skilful in Prediction:
He was called Vertumnus a vertendo, because he indented or turned the course of
the River Tyber, which flows up to Rome, as the Thames to London; he was a
King, and reigned in the Carpathian Island, which because it was full of bogs
and marish places, (as lying near unto the maine Ocean) he had that Title
conferred on him to be a Marine god: when the Scithians thought to invade him,
and by reason of the former impediments could no way damage his Country, it
therefore increased their superstitious opinion to have him Deified. He was
called also Pastor populi, that is, A Shepherd of the people; and is said also
to feed Neptunes Fishes called Phocae.

It was a Custom amongst the Egyptian Kings, to have their Scepters insculpt
with sundry Hieroglyphics, or Figures, as a Lyon, a Dragon, a Tree, a flame of
fire, c. as their fancies lead them, for which that Proverb was conferred in
him, Proteo mutabilior, that is, More changeable than Proteus. This Proteus, or
Vertumnus, or Vesores, reigned in Egypt some four years before the Trojan
War, that is, Anno Mundi, 2752.

PRoteus of all the Marine gods the prime,
And held the noblest both for Birth and Time:
From him who with his Trident sways the Maine,
And ploughs the waves in curls, or makes them plain:
Neptune, both Lord of Ebb, and Inundation*
I come to greet your great Inauguration.
They call me Versi-pellis, and 'tis true,
No figure, for me, no shape to me is new;
For I appear what Creature I desire,
Sometimes a Bull, a Serpent, sometimes Fire:
" The first denotes my strength; strong must he be,
" And powerful, who aspire to your Degree.
" You must be wise as Serpents, to decide
" Such doubts as Error or Misprision hide.
" And next, like Fire, (of th'Elements most pure)
" Whose nature can no sordid stuff endure,
" As in Calcining Metalls we behold,
" It sunders and divides the dross from Gold,
And such are the Decorements that still wait
Upon so grave, so great a Magistrate.
This Tortoise, double-natur'd, doth imply
(By the two Elements of moist and dry)
So much as gives the world to understand,
Your noble Trading both by Sea and Land.
Of Purposes the vast Herds Proteus keeps,
And I am styled the Prophet of the Deeps,
Sent to praedict good Omen: May that Fleet
Which makes the East Indies with our England meet,
Prosper to all your hearts desires: Their sails
Be to and fro swelled with auspicious gales:
May You (who of this City now take charge)
With all the Scarlet Senate in your Barge,
The Fame thereof so heighten, future Story
Above all other States may crown her glory.
To hinder what's more weighty, I am loath,
Pass therefore freely on, to take your Oath.
This Show is after brought off from the water, to attend upon the rest by
Land, of which the first is,

A Shepherd with his Skrip and Bottle, and his Dog by him; a sheep-hooke in
his hand, round about him are his Flock, some feeding, others resting in
several postures; the plat-forme adorned with Flowers, Plants, and Trees
bearing sundry Fruits. And because this Worshipful Society tradeth in Cloth,
it is pertinent that I should speak something of the Sheep, who is of all
other foure-footed beasts the most harmless and gentle. Those that write of
them, report, that in Arabia they have tails three Cubits in length: In Chios
they are the smallest, but their Milk and Cheese the sweetest, and best. The
Lamb from her yeaning knows and acknowledges her Damme: Those are held to
be most profitable for store, whose bodies are biggest, the fleece softest and
thickest, and their legs shortest. Their Age is reckoned at Ten years, they
breed at Two, and cease at Nine: The Ewes go with their young an Hundred and
fifty days. Pliny saith, the best Wool Apulia and Italy yields, and next them
Milesium, Tarentum, Canusium, and Laodicea in Asia; their general time of
sheering is in July: The Poet Laberius called the Rams of the Flock
Reciproci-cornes, and Lanicutes, alluding to the writhing of their Horns and
their Skins bearing Wool: The Bell-weather, or Captain of the Flock is
called Vervex sectarius, c.

BY what rare frame, or in what curious Vorse
Can the rich profits of your Trades commerce
Be to the full expressed? which to explain,
Lies not in Poets Pen, or Artists brain.
What Beast, or Bird, for Hyde, or Feather rare,
(For mans use made, can with the Sheep compare?
The Horse of strength or swiftness may be proud,
But yet his flesh is not for food allow'd.
The Herds yield Milk and Meat (commodious both)
Yet none of all their skins make Wool for Cloth.
The Sheep doth all: The Parrot and the Jay,
The Peacock, Ostrich, all in colours gay,
Delight the Eye, some with their Notes, the Ear,
But what are these unto the Cloth we wear?
Search Forests, Deserts for Beasts wild or tame,
The Mountains or the Vales, search the vast frame
Of the wide Universe, the Earth, and Sky,
Nor Beast nor Bird can with the Sheep comply:
No Creature under Heaven, be it small or great,
But some way useful, one affords us meat,
Another Ornament: She more than this,
" Of Patience, and of Profit the emblem is,
In former Ages by the Heroes sought:
After, from Greece into Hesperia brought:
She's clothed in plenteous riches, and being shorn,
" Her Fleece an Order, and by Emperors worn,
All these are known, yet further understand,
In twelve divide the profits of this Land,
As Hydes, Tin, Lead; or what else you can name,
Ten of those twelve the Fleece may justly claim:
Then how can that amongst the rest be mist,
By which all States, all Common Weals subsist?
Great honour then belongs unto this trade,
And you, great Lord, for whom this triumph's made.
THe second Show by land is an Indian Beast, called a Rinoceros, which being
presented to the life, is for the rareness thereof, more fit to beautify a
Triumph: his Head, Neck, Back, Buttocks, Sides, and Thighs, armed by Nature
with impenetrable Skales; his Hide or Skin of the colour of the Boxe-tree, in
greatness equal with the Elephant, but his Legs are somewhat shorter: an
enemy to all beasts of rapine and prey, as the Lyon, Leopard, Bear, Wolf,
Tiger, and the like: but to others, as the Horse, Ass, Ox, Sheep, c. which
feed not upon the life and blood of the weaker, but of the grass and hearbage
of the field, harmless and gentle, ready to succour them, when they be any way
distressed. He hath a short horne growing from his nose, and being in
continual enmity with the Elephant, before he encounter him, he sharpens it
against a stone, and in the sight aims to wound him in the belly, being the
softest place about him, and the soonest pierced: He is backed by an Indian,
the speaker.

THe dignity of Merchants who can tell?
Or how much they all Traders ante-cell?
When others here at home securely sleep,
He plowes the bosom of each unknown deep,
And in them sees heavens wonders; for he can
Take a full view of the Leviathan,
Whose strength all Marine Monsters doth surpass,
His Ribs as Iron, his Fins and skales as brass.
His Ship like to the feathered Foul he wings,
And from all Coasts he rich materials brings,
For ornament or profit; those by which
Inferior Arts subsist, and become rich;
By Land he makes discovery of all Nations,
Their Manners, and their Countries scituations,
And with those savage natures so complies,
That there's no rarity from thence can rise
But he makes frequent with us, and yet these
Not without dangers, both on shores and seas:
The Land he pierces, and the Ocean skowers,
To make them all by free transportage ours.
You (honoured Sir) amongst the chief are named,
By whose commerce our Nation hath been famed.
The Romans in their triumphs had before
Their Chariots borne or lead, (to grace the more
The sumptuous Show) the prime and choicest things,
Which they had taken from the Captive, Kings:
What curious Statue* what strange bird, or beast
That Clime did yield (if rare above the rest)
Was there exposed: Entering your civil state,
Whom better may we strive to imitate?
This huge Rinoceros (not amongst us seen,
Yet frequent wheresome Factors oft have been)
Is emblem of the Praetorship you bear,
Who to all Beasts of prey, who rend and tear
The innocent herds and flocks, is foe professed,
But in all just defences arms his crest.
You of this wilderness are Lord, so sway,
The weak may be upheld, the proud obey.
THe third Show by land is a Ship, fully accommodated with all her Masts,
Sails, Cordage, Tacklings, Cables, Anchors, Ordnance, c. in that small Model,
figuring the greatest Vessel: But concerning Ships and Navigation, with the
honour and benefits thence accrewing, I have lately delivered my self so amply
in a Book published the last Summer of his Majesties great Ship, called the
Sovereign of the Seas, that to any, who desire to be better certified
concerning such things, I refer them to that Tractate, from whence they may
receive full plenteous satisfaction: I come now to a young Sailor the Speaker.

SHipping to our first Fathers was not known;
(Though now amongst all Nations common grown)
Nor trade by Sea: we read the first choice piece,
Was the Argo, built to fetch the golden Fleece,
In which brave voyage, sixty Princes, all
Heroes, such as we Semones call:
In that new Vessel to attain the shore.
Where such a prize was, each tugged at the Oar:
On one bench Hercules and Hilas sate,
Beauty and Strength; and siding just with that
Daunaus and Lynceus of so quick a sight
No interposer, or large distance might
Dull his clear Optics: those that had the charge,
And the chief stearadge of that Princely Barge,
Zethes and Calais, whose judgements meet,
Being said to have feathers on their heads and feet:
We spare the rest: Grave Sir, the Merchants trade
Is that, for which all Shipping first was made;
And through an Hellespont who would but pull,
Steer, and hoise sail, to bring home golden Wool?
For we by that are clothed: In the first place
Sate strength and beauty: oh what a sweet grace
Have those united; both now yours, great Lord,
Your beauty is your robe, your strength the sword.
You must have Lynceus eyes, and further see
Than either you before have done, or he
Could ever: having now a true inspection
Into each strife, each cause without affection
To this or that party: some are sed,
To have had feathers on their feet and head.
(As those whom I late named) you must have more,
And in your place be feathered now all over:
You must have feathers in your thoughts, your eyes,
Your hands, your feet; for he that's truly wise
Must still be of a winged apprehension
As well for execution, as prevention.
You know (Right honoured Sir) delays and pauses,
In judicature, dull, if not damp, good causes:
That we presume t'advise, we pardon crave,
It being confessed, all these, and more you have.
THe fourth Show by Land bears the Title Porta Pietatis, The Gate of Piety:
which is the door by which all zealous and devout men enter into the fruition
of their long hoped for happiness: It is a delicate and artificial composed
structure, built Temple-fashion, as most genuine and proper to the persons
therein presented. The Speaker is Piety her self, her habit, best suiting with
her condition; upon her head are certain beams or rays of gold, intimating a
glory belonging to sanctity; in one hand an Angelical staff, with a Banner;
on the other Arm a Cross Gules in a field Argent: upon one hand sits a
beautiful Child, representing Religion, upon whose Shield are figured Time,
with his daughter Truth: her Motto Vincit veritas: In another copartment
sits one representing the blessed Virgin, Patroness of this Right
Worshipful Society, Crowned: in one hand a Fan of Stars, in the other a
Shield, in which are inscribed three Crowns (gradatim) ascending, being the
Arms or Escutcheon of the Company, and her Motto that which belongs unto it:
Deo soli Honour gloria: that is, unto God only be Honour and Glory: Next her
sit the three Theologicall Graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity, with three
Escutchions, Faiths motto, Fidei ala, Caeli scala: The wings of Faith are the
ladder by which we scale heaven. Hopes, Solum spernit qui Caelum sperat: he
hates the Earth, that hopes for Heaven. Loves Motto, Vbi charitas, non est
Caritas, who gives willingly, shall never want wretchedly. A sixth personateth
Zeal, in whose Escutcheon is a burning Hart: Her word; In tepida, frigida,
flagrans: neither luke-warme, nor key-cold, but ever burning: A seventh
figureth Humility: Her's In terra Corpus, in Coelo Cor: the body on earth, the
heart in Heaven. And last Constancies: Metam tangenti Corona; A Crown
belongs to him who perseveres to the end. I come to the Speech.

THis Structure is a Citadel, or Tower,
Where Piety, placed in her heavenly bower,
Points out the way to bliss, guirt with a ring
Of all those Graces that may glory bring.
Here sits Religion firm, (though else where torn
By Schismatics, and made the Atheists scorn)
Shining in her pure truth, nor need she quake,
Affrighted with the Faggot and the stake:
She's to you dear, you unto her are tender,
Under the Sceptre of the Faiths defender.
How am I extasi'de when I behold
You build new Temples, and repair the old!
There's not a stone that's laid in such foundation,
But is a step degreeing to Salvation:
And not a Scaffold reared to that intent,
But mounts a Soul above the Firmament:
Of Merchants, we know Magistrates are made,
And they (of those) most happy that so Trade.
Your Virgin-Saint sits next Religion crowned,
With her own Hand-maids (see) environed round,
And these are they the learned Schoole-men call,
The three prime Virtues Theologicall,
Faith, Hope, and Love; Zeal all inflamed with fire
Of devout acts, doth a sixth place aspire.
The seventh Humility, and we commend
The Eight to Constancy, which crowns the end.
A Triple Crowne's th'Emblazon of your Crest,
But to gain one, is to be ever blessed.
Proceed in that fair course you have begun,
So when your Annual Glass of State is run,
(Nay, that of Life) Ours, but the Gate to bliss
Shall let you in to yon Metropolis.
There now remains only the last Speech at Night, spoken by Proteus, which
concludes the Triumph.

NOw bright Hiperion hath unloosed his Team,
And washed his Coach-Steeds in cold Isters stream:
Day doth to Night give place, yet e're You sleep,
Remember what the Prophet of the Deep,
Proteus fore-told: All such as State aspire,
Must be as Bulls, as Serpents, and like Fire.
The Shepherd grazing of his Flocks, displays
The use and profit from the Fleece we raise.
That Indian Beast, (had he a tongue to speak)
Would say, Suppress the proud, support the weak,
That Ship the Merchants honour loudly tells,
And how all other Trades it antecells:
But Piety doth point You to that Star,
By which good Merchants steer: too bold we are
To keep you from your rest; To-morrows Sun
Will raise You to new cares, not yet begun.
I will not speak much concerning the two Brothers, Mr. Iohn and Mathias
Christmas, the Modellers and Composers of those several Pieces this day
presented to a mighty confluence, (being the two succeeding Sons of that most
ingenious Artist Mr. Gerard Christmas) to whom, and to whose Workmanship I will
only confer that Character, which being long since (upon the like occasion)
conferred upon the Father, I cannot but now meritedly bestow upon the Sons:
Men, as they are excellent in their Art, so they are faithful in their
performance.


