AFter many a loving greeting,
Mars and Venus point a meeting;
And that Vulcan might not have
Least note thereof, they choose a Cave
Obscure and dark, to which they trust,
Intending there to sate their lust.
But when themselves most safe they think,
The rising Sun pries through a chink,
Sees all, and what he sees discovers
To Vulcan, touching these two Lovers.
The enraged Smith taking foul scorn
To be affronted with the horne,
Provides for them a subtle (...),
In hope to take them both therein.
His plot prevailed, and now being fiery
In just revenge, by strict inquiry,
To find where these by custom met,
He by his art contrives a Net,
More fine than is the Spiders thread,
And yet of wire; which he so spread
About the place, all things compact
So well, he took them in the act:
And then doth all the gods invite,
Who came at once to view that sight.
Some jeered, some pitied their disgrace,
One wished himself in Mars his place.
Tet for all this, the churlish Sir
So kept them that they could not stir.
Mars chafes and threats, and struggling keeps:
But Venus blushes first, then weeps.
And when tho gods could laugh no more,
Then Vulcan freed them, not before.
Now Venus knowing all this done
Was first discovered by the Sun;
Against him open war proclaims,
And at him her revenge she aims:
Cupid she uses as her instrument.
And that's of our Scoene the sole argument.
WHy lovely Daphne, will you lose yo^ Youth,
And let your best hours pass yo^ Well you know,
Beauty's a Flower, which not being cropped in time,
Soon withers on the stalk, and then (alas)
Will neither serve for use nor ornament.
You owe me sweet grand-children, pretty babes,
Even for your birth you do: it is a debt
That I would see discharged: I to my parents
Paid it in thee; it is a Bond stands firm,
'till canceld in thy sweet posterity.
See, I have brought thee Suitors, choice ones too,
Two noble Rivers, both residing near,
Amphrisus, and still-flowing Appidans,
Young, and of means, both active and of strength
To wrestle against barrenness, and give
The hug the foil. Being dead, I live in thee:
Live thou too in thine issue; so successively
Our Line and memory shall never perish,
But last as long as Time.

Your father (Daphne)
Counsels with judgment, and this argument
I could by many reasons amplify.
As, That without succession (one age past)
Mankind should cease to be. O what a punishment
Deserve they from the gods, that would destroy
^o glorious a creation, and to leave
^o wonderful a fabric as the world is,
To no admirers?

Save the Plants and Beasts;
And what can they distinguish?

Therefore, Daughter
Make use of time: a season being past,
Can never be recalled, no, not a month.
A month? no day, no hour, no minute can:
^herefore make use of opportunity
Which throws it self upon thee: but being straightened,
Will after prove a stranger; the least instant
^y long repentance cannot be redeemed.

To you I bow in duty, as to a father;
And these affront in noble courtesy,
Not wronging him, to show my breeding base,
^coffing your proffered love with womanish scorn.
^is counsels, your persuasions, I commend,
^nowing both fitting, were they seasonable.
^hat Maids should love men I am not ignorant,
^ that the breeding world should still increase;
^hat Progeny should reach from age to age,
^nd that the gods maked a necessity,
^o have all their miraculous works admired:
^l this I know; but

I'll proceed: But what
Can you produce against this?

Hear me out:
But when I in my best considerat thoughts
Ponder my youth, and what it is to love;
That vows are ties not easy to be loosed,
And that the smallest finger can pluck on
What not the hand and arm can well put off:
That Marriage is a Maze, which entered in,
The line is snatched thence which should guide us out.
Ere hazard then that unknown labyrinth,
Much blame me not to pause.

What need thou fear?
Fond timorous Girl, did not thy mother this
Long time before thee?

Nay, hereafter too
May not your daughter do so?

I'll resolve you
That, when I have a daughter of my years,
And tutored by her mother.

Excellent Nymph,
These are evasions mere unnecessary;
We know you to be ripe, and our selves grown,
Betwixt us is equality in state,
And parity in years: nor is our course
Irregular or indirect, we come
Admitted by your father, as a way
Plain, and not interdicted: nor is our suit
So far with cradle it may childish seem;
Nor so old, to appear decrepit: we are two
Rivals, yet friends; so you choose one of either,
Even he that is despised rests satisfied,
Nor is our love divided.

I commend you:
There is of you less danger, and least fear
That you should die of love; when both of you
Come with like premeditation to digest
A rigorous answer.

Pray what should we do?
Our service we have offered equally:
The world is wide, and if we speed not here,
We must provide us elsewhere.

Worthy friends.
To be most plain, to me most pleasing is:
Then take as plain an answer; I confess me
Weak as I am) unworthy of your love.
And yet not so low prised, but have bin courted
Both by as great and good. Nor can you blame me,
If I in adding to your worths, shall spare
From mine, in the least kind to derogate.
To you then, as my equals, I entreat;
Or if you shall deny me, Daphne then
Proclaims it as her will. I must retire me
For some few months, in them to meditate
What marriage is, and truly study man,
(A book in which I yet have truanted.)
Now, if I in my more maturity,
And after some cessation of your suits,
Can ground this Maxim, Man is worthy us,
And we of him; we'll breviate your long motions
Within a few short terms.

You speak but reason:
And so long we'll attend you.

Most fit, that such as bargain for their lives,
^hould read us over and over, before they set
Their hands to that Indenture. We are pleased.

And I that you are so. Nor can my father
At this be discontented.

Not I, Child;
I would not hurry on my joys too fast,
Having such hope of them. And yet, sweet Daphne,
The more thou hastes their harvest, the ripe crop
Shall be to them more welcome. For this time
'Tis best to leave her to her privacy:
More leisure that she hath to meditate,
Less time you have in which to be resolved,
'Twill shorten expectation.

May these hours
That add unto your years, still as you grow,
Increase toward us your love.

Friend you pray well,
And in that hope I take a loving leave,
By kissing your fair hand.

You understand a courtesy as well,
Once being done, as she that knows to do it.
Farewell. Where be my maids?

My Lady, at hand.
Daph. Doth either of you know what this love is,
That men so much affect it?

Trust me, not I: I never looked so far into man
and most sure I am, man never yet entered so far in^
me, that I should know how to define it. But can y^
tell the reason why this little god is still portraid like
child?

I think, because that dotage which he breeds
Only belongs to children. 1 Nymph. But why naked

Either to affright the Modest; or to such
As vow to him, to express their impudence.

But why with bow and arrows?

That denotes
Inconstancy, because the shafts of love
Are ever shot at random.

Wherefore hood winkt?

However his shafts are aimed, it shows his kind
Because they strike the eyes of Reason blind.

Then am I with Love quite out of love, beca^
at these years I should be loath to have one to lead ^

Yet do I love the beauty of the spring,
To listen to the birds, with various lays
To welcome in his coming. I affect
The pride and warmth of Summer, to behold
Abundant Autumn pour his harvest forth
In plenteous sheafs; to see the presses bleed
A flowing vintage. But I most admire
The glory of the Sun who comforts these:
For without him, what were the earth? what heaven?
If all were darkness, who should then discern
The lustre of the one or of the other,
The fresh fertility proudly adorned
With choice and change of all discoloured flowers?
More than a cased up Jewel, what were Beauty,
Without the Sun to give a brightness to 't?
What's ornament, without the Sun to judge it?
What to be fair or foul, without the Sun,
To censure and distinguish which is best?
The Sun's the deity which I adore.
Here then upon this verdure cast your selves,
And rest a while; not long 'tis e're he will
In all his glory mount the Eastern hill.

Here on the top of the mount Ericine
Ambush thy self, (a place sacred to me)
Where thou may boldly front the god of Light,
Who hath by this already chased hence night.
I'll leave thee now: strike, but strike home, my son,
I'll in these shades absent me whilst 'tis done.

He mocks my bow, but Phoebus soon shall find
Cupid hath power to strike the Sun-god blind.

The stars are frighted from the firmament,
And at the sight of our illustrious beams
Darkness unto the black
Now to our daily progress through the Signs.
But stay, what's he that with our honours, armed,
(The Bow and quiver, proper sole to us)
Braves us upon high
I know him now, 'tis Paphian Venus son,
To whom some fools have vowed a deity.
I'll know the reason why the bastard brat
Dares thus assume my trophies. 'Morrow Cupid.

As much to Phoebus.

Weak brat resolve me,
By whose enticement thou hast bin so bold
To take to thee the emblem of my power?
Is't not sufficient, thou with brain-sicke toys
Can fill the heads of mad men and of fools,
Who'ascribe to thee a god-head, merely usurped?
But thou must wear my due Impresa insculpt,
And (about thy shoulders) those known ornaments,
Apollinis insignia? (Apollo's Ensigns)

And why thine?

Because I am styled the god of Archery;
And where I aim I hit, my prey or enemy,
Kill near or far. The monstrous serpent
(Whose bulk being slain, an hundred acres spread)
Had from this bow his wounds, and I my honours:
And shall a child boast eminence with me?

Phoebus, thy bow hath monsters struck to ground,
But mine hath power the gods themselves to wound,
Of which thou art not least. Mother he's sped, He shoot
I have pierced him home with my shafts golden head.

Thou art mine own sweet boy, thy darts ne'er fail^
And now Apollo languish and look pale,
More wan than did thy sister Moon once prove,
When for she was sick of love,
Whilst I laugh and rejoice. Now make all sure,
And strike fair Daphne whilst she sleeps secure,
But with contempt and hate.

My arrow flies,
And as it hits, sick of disdain she lies.
Now mother let's away.

Phoebus, I divine,
Thou'It say his shafts can wound as deep as thine.

What alteration's this I feel? a heate
Beyond mine own fire, kindled at mine eye.

All sleep is still in darkness, yet our souls
See when our eyes are shut. My brest's in uproar;
And yet a dream tells me, the morning gray
Says the Sun's up, I shame to look on day.

What Beauty's this on earth, transpiercing more,
Than can the beams from my celestial Orb?

The Sun is up; Awake: What, shame you not
That he should find you sleeping?

Sweet Nymph stay.

The shades best please me, I in them will play;
The Sun's too hot and sultry.

I am he
That measures out the year; and shun you me
Fairest of thy sex, behold the Suns bright eye,
That all things sees, by whom you all things spy.
Will you in everlasting darkness dwell?
Light is heavens emblem, and becomes it well:
Where I appear, I comfort and make glad;
Be comforted in me, why are you sad?
Would you in blindness live? these rays of mine
Give that reflect by which your Beauties shine,
For what are artificial lights? when I
Appear in fullness they soon faint and die.
They only put on counterfeits: my rays
False colours find, and give the true the praise.
If yours be such, then prove them by my light,
The world will censure they are pure and right.

His piercing beams I never shall endure,
They sick me of a fatal Calenture.

What are you better to be lovely born,
If not beheld? What's state, if not observed?
Or wherefore before Cottages do we
Prefer the stately Palace, and the sumptuous roof?
What virtue were in jewels without me?
Else should they be with pebbles equal prised.
Wherefore did Nature make you with bright eyes,
Which profit not in night without my beams?
Why should the Rose be red? the Lilly white?
The Violet purple? and the Holly green?
All rhese my creatures. But when I decline,
And night usurps upon the Universe,
Their tincture's not discerned: but white and red
Which in your peerless cheeks exceed all flowers,
What lustre bear they? When my beams are gone,
The fair and foul in darkness seem all one.

That darkness doth best please me: let's away,
My beauty will be sun burnt if I stay,
He will blast me like an Ethiope.

Dost thou fly me?
Love bids me follow, and I must pursue:
No vault, no cave or cavern so obscure,
Through which I will not pierce, to find thee out,
The Antipodes for ever want my rays:
To gaze on her, I'll this Meridian keep,
And till attain the saint that I adore,
Here ever shine, where night shall be no more.

Laugh Cupid, laugh, for I am half revenged,
And shall e're long be fully, when this Blab
Shall in his course, or too much lag or speed
Post sometimes, and again run retrograde.
Where by his too long presence the earth is scortcht,
Or by his absence the other world shall freeze:
And all that lies beneath the Moon complain:
And that the gods at mans request shall call
Disorder into question. What can then
Both heaven and earth conclude when this is done,
But this thou did to avenge me of the Sun.

Will not Mars thank me for it?

And kiss thee too.
O still by his example punish those
That shall our sweet adulterate sports disclose.

Why flies my Daphne, knowing 'tis in vain:
Love makes me swifter than thy fear can thee.

O me, I am so tortured with the Sun,
I hate my very shadow.

I pursue not
As Eagles, Doves do; or the Lions, Harts;
Or Wolves, the Lamb. Love is my cause of hast:
Run not so fast, lest thou should trip perhaps,
And do thy self some damage: the ground's rough,
Should thou but slide, and I the Author on it,
How much would it offend me? To prevent which,
Stay but thy hast, and I will slack my speed.

I am almost breathless.

See, I am no Satire,
Shepherd, or such as live by grazing herds,
Delphos is mine, Pharos, and Tenedos:
Thou know not who thou fly'st, I am Apollo,
The only god that speaks by Oracle:
Jove is my father, and the Muses nine
Are all my daughters: I am Patron held
Of Numbers, Raptures, and sweet Poesy.
My shafts are ever certain where they aim,
(Yet one more certain, which hath pierced me deep)
Physic is mine, I first devised that Art,
And could it help me, I were then assured:
But Love is by no Simples to be cured.

O now I am quite spent; help, goddess Iuno,
(Queen of chaste marriage) bright Diana, help
One of thy true vowed Virgins: change my shape,
That I this hot adulterous Sun may escape.
Thanks, o ye Powers divine: the Spheres assent
To my chaste prayer: your heavenly dooms are just.
Here grow I fixed against all powers of lust.

Strange prodigy! Less hope is in her stay,
Than in her speed: her bodie's round encompassed
With a rough rind, in which her warm heart beats.
Her hair is all grown upward into boughs,
Here milk white fingers and her arms advanced
To great and lesser branches: her fair feet
But late so swift, fast rooted in the earth:
And I, whom Love late blinded, now may see
My Daphne turned into a Laurel tree.
Her life still struggles in the churlish bark,
And from her lips I feel her breath still flow.
One blessed kiss at parting, but in vain,
The very tree shrinks from me in disdain.
And yet in lasting memory of thee
And of my love, thou shalt be ever mine:
In all ovatious triumphs and rich shows
The Laurel shall ingirt the Conquerors brows.
All eminence shall think it graced in thee.
Poets, the Muses darlings, shall from thee
Receive their honour, and the best esteemed
Be crowned Laureate, and no excellence
But have it's noble estimate from hence.
Emperors shall prise thy leaves above pure gold:
For thou shalt ever wait on victory;
And as my youthful and still unshorn hairs
(Vnchanging) of this golden hew are seen,
So shall the boughs and branches still be green,
And arm against Ioves lightning. And all these
Shall be for our sake by the gods approved,
In memory that Daphne we once loved.

How comes it, fair Aurora, we the Hours
Are thus disturbed?

One halts, whilst the other runs;
Sometimes made longer by a many minutes,
Sometimes not full three quarters?

Am not I
As much distempered, being forced to rise
So oft before my time? which makes my husband
Old Tython jealous (for he bed-rid lies)
I have light on some new Love.

All's out of order.

How comes this strange confusion rise of late?
My spring to grow so forward by the Sun?
Summer complains that I usurp on her.

As much as I on thee, Autumn on me,
And saith, that in my ripening I include
His harvest, and so rob him of his due.

Have I not cause? when thou not only claimst
The honour of my crop: But frozen Winter,
He keeps a coil too, swearing, I intrude
Into his bounded limits.

This I am sure
I am curtaild of my right; my snow is melted,
And hath not time to cloth the mountain tops:
September is like May, January as June:
And all my bright and precious Isicles
Melting to nothing: What's the reason trow we?

'Tis the Suns slackness, or his too much speed,
That breeds all this distraction.

The Sun, say you?
Break he, or not directly keep his day,
Seasons and Hours all out of order stray.

Behold her whom you speak of, Day, whence come ye?

I parted now with Night, who had bin here,
But that both must not in one place appear.

And what saith she?

Like you, rails on the Sun,
And saith he doth her wrong: nor blame her, when
Being full twelve hours, he scarce affords her ten.

Day, you are the Suns mistress, hath he not
Reveald the cause to you?

No, his known brightness
Hath unto me been only dark in that.
Nor am I of his counsel.

Fine world grown,
When every drunken Sexton hath the skill
To make his giddy clock go truer far
Than can the best Sun dial.

What are you
That murmure thus against our Deity?
Are you not all our creatures? though we give you
Full sails on earth, do not we steer the helm?
Disposing you both where and how we please;
And dare you thus rebel?

The god of Light
Is our great Lord and Sovereign.

This submission
Hath somewhat calmed us: had you still stood out,
Disorder, we had to Confusion turned,
And so you all been ruined. But henceforth
Morning shall keep her hour, Hours measure day,
In a true scope the Day proportion Weeks,
Weeks, Months; Months, seasons; to sum up the year.
And we our course in that, perfecting time:
That nothing in this concordance appear
Either preposterous or unseasonable.
For which our grace, where-ever you shall find
This new sprung Laurel, you Aurora I charge,
With your moist tears bathe her green tender boughs:
From whence I will exhale them with my beams.
Hours, do you wait upon her gentle growth.
Day comfort her: Ver cheer her with thy spring.
Thou Summer give her warmth: and Autumn, thou
Dare not to spoil her of her plenteous leaves:
Nor Winter thou with thy robustuous gusts,
To blait her lasting verdure. These observed,
Still flourish under us. And that this unity
May last amongst you many fortunate years,
End in a Hymn tuned to the chiming Spheres.
HOwsoe're the Minutes go,
Run the hours or swift or slow:
Seem the Months or short or long,
Pass the seasons right or wrong:
All we sing that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.
Early fall the Spring or not,
Prove the Summer cold or hot:
Autumn be it fair or foul,
Let the Winter smile or skowle:
Still we sing, that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.


