ALL Triumphs have their Titles, and so this, according to the nature thereof,
bears a name: It is called Londini (...), that is, Speculum, more plainly,
Londons Mirror, neither altogether unproperly so termed, since she in her
self may not only perspicuously behold her own virtues, but all foreign
Cities by her, how to correct their vices.

Her Antiquity she derives from Brute, lineally descend from Aeneas, the
son of Anchises and Venus, and by him erected, about the year of the world
two thousand eight hundred fifty five: before the Nativity of our blessed
Saviour, one thousand one hundred and eight: first called by him Trinovantum, or
Troy-novant, New Troy, to continue the remembrance of the old, and after, in
the process of time Caier Lord, that is, Luds Town, of King Lord, who not only
greatly repaired the City, but increased it with goodly and gorgeous buildings;
in the West part whereof, he built a strong gate, which he called after his
own name Lord gate, and so from Luds Town, by contraction of the word and
dialect used in those times, it came since to be called London.

I will not insist to speak of the name of Mayor, which implyeth as much as
the greater, or more prime person; such were the Praetors, or Proefecti in
Rome, neither were the Dictators any more, till Iulius Caesar aiming at the
Imperial Purple, was not content with that annual honour, which was to pass
successively from one to another, but he caused himself to be Elected
Perpetuus Dictator, which was in effect no less than Emperor.

And for the name of Elder-man, or Alder-man, it is so ancient, that learned
Master Cambden in in his Britan. remembers unto us, that in the days of Royal
King Edgar, a noble Earl, and of the Royal blood, whose name was Alwin, was
in such favour with the King, that be was stiled Healf Kunning, or half King,
and had the stile of Alderman of all England: This man was the first founder of
a famous Monastery in the Isle of Ely, where his body lies interred, upon whose
Tomb was an inscription in Latin, which I have, verbatim, thus turned into
English, Here rests Alwin, cousin to King Edgar, Alderman of all England, and
of this Holy Abbey the miraculous founder. And so much (being tide to a brief
discourse) may serve for the Antiquity of London, and the Titles for Mayor or
Alderman.

I come now to the Speculum, or Mirror. Plutarch tells us, That a glass in
which a man or woman behold their faces, is of no estimation or value (though
the frame thereof be never so richly decked with gold gems, unless it
represent unto us the true figure and object. Moreover, that such are foolish
and flattering glasses, which make a sad face to look pleasant, or a merry
countenance melancholy: but a perfect and a true Crystal, without any falsity
or flattery; renders every object its true form, and proper figure,
distinguishing a smile from a wrincle; and such are the means many times to
bridle our refractory affections: for who being in a violent rage, would be
pleased that his servant should bring him a glass wherein he might behold the
^rvity and strange alteration of his countenance? Minerva playing upon a Pipe,
was mocked by a Satire in these words.

Non te decet forma istaec, pone fistulas,
Et Arma capesse componens recte genus.
That visage mis-becomes, thy Pipe
Cast from thee, Warlike dame,
Take unto thee thy wonted Arms,
And keep thy Cheeks in frame.
But though she despised his Council for the present, when after, playing upon
the same Pipe, in which she so much delighted, she beheld in a river such a
change in her face, she cast it from her, and broke it asunder, as knowing
that the sweetness of her music could not countervail or recompense that
deformity which it put upon her countenance, and therefore I have purposed so
true and exact a Mirror, that in it may be discovered as well that which
beautifies the governor, as deformes the government.

One thing more is necessitously to be added, and then I fall upon the shows
in present agitation: namely, that the fellowship of the Merchant Adventurers
of England were first trusted with the sole venting of the manufacture of Cloth
out of this kingdom, have for above this 4 hundred years traded in a
privileged, well governed course, in Germany, the Low Countries, c. and have
been the chief means to raise the manufacture of all woollen commodities to
that height in which it now existeth, which is the most famous staple of the
Land, and whereby the poor in all Countries are plentifully maintained: and of
this Company his Lordship is free: as also of the Levant, or Turkey, and of the
East India Company, whose trading hath been, and is in these foreign
adventures: also who spent many years and a great part of his youth abroad in
other Countries.

N^ the first show by water is presented by St. Katherine, of whom I will give
you this short Character: She was the daughter of King Costus, and had the
general title of Queen of Famogosta, because crowned in that City, being
lineally descend from the Roman Emperors, who as she lived a Virgin so she
dyed a Martyr, under the Tyrant Maxentius, whose Empress with divers other
eminent persons she had before converted to the Faith: she rides on a Scallop,
which is part of his Lordships Coat of Arms, drawn in a Sea-Chariot, by two
Sea-horses with divers other adornments to beautify the piece; the Art of
which, the eye may better discover, than my pen describe, and why she being a
Princess, and Patroness of this Company of the Haberdashers, who only ruled
on the Land, should at this time appear upon the water, and without any just
taxation, to make that clear, she thus delivers her self.

GReat Praetor, and grave Senators, she craves
A free admittance on these curied waves,
Who doth from long antiquity profess
Her (...) to be your gracious Patroness:
Oft have I on a passant Lyon sate,
And through your populous streets been borne in state:
Oft have I grac'ty our Triumphs on the shore,
But on the Waters was not seen before.
Will you the reason know why it doth fall,
That I thus change my Element? you shall:
When Triton with his pearly trumpets blew
A streperous blast, to summon all the crew
Of Marine gods and goddesses to appear,
(As the annual custom is) and meet you here:
As they were then in council to debate,
What honour they might add unto the state
Of this Inauguration; there appeared
God Mercury, who would from Jove be heard:
His Caducaus silence might command,
Whilst all attentive were to understand
The tenor of his message: who thus spake.
The Sire of gods, with what you undertake
Is highly pleased, and greatly doth commend
That fair design and purpose you intend;
But he beheld a Machine from an high,
Which at first sight dazed his immortal eye;
A royal Arc, whose bright and glorious beams
Rival the Suns, ready to prove your streams:
A vessel of such beauty, burden, state,
That all the high Powers were amazed thereat;
So beautified, so munified, so clad,
As might an eight to the seven wonders add:
Which must be now your charge; 'twas Ioves own motion,
That all of you attend her to the Ocean.
This notwithstanding, such was their great care,
(To show that over you they indulgent are)
That Neptune from his Chariot bad me choose
Two of his best Sea-horses, to excuse
His enforced absence: Thames (whose breast doth swell
Still with that glorious burden) bad me tell,
That loves command shall be no sooner done,
But every Tide he will on your errands run
From hence to the Lands end, and thence again
Back, to conveigh your traffic from the Maine:
My message thus delivered; now proceed
To take your oath, there is no further need
Of my assistance; who on Land will meet you,
And with the state of greater Triumphs greet you.
These few following Lines may, (and not impertinently) be added unto Iupiters
message, delivered by Mercury, which though too long for the Bardge, may
perhaps not show lame in the book, as being less troublesome to the Reader
than the Rower.

Dance in thy raine-bow colours Pr^t^s change
Thy self to thousand figures, 'tis not strange
With thee, thou old Sea-prophet, throng the seas
With Ph^rcus Daughters, the Nereides,
And all the blew-hair'd Nymphs, in number more,
Than Barks that float, or Pebbles on the shore:
Take Ae^lus along to fill her sails
With prosperous winds, and keep within his gailes
Tempestuous gusts: which was no sooner said,
But done: for all the Marine gods obeyed.
The second show, but the first by Land, is presented by the great Philosopher
Pythagoras, Samius, the son of Menarchus; which being outwardly Spherical
and Orbicular, yet being opened it quadrates it self just into so many Angles
as there be Scepters, over which his Sacred Majesty bears title: namely,
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, concerning which number of four, I
thus Read: Pythagoras and his Schollers, who taught in his schools, that Ten
was the nature and soul of all number; one Reason which he gave (to omit the
rest) was, because all nations, as well civil as barbarous, can tell no
farther than to the Denary, which is Ten, and then return in their account
unto the Monady, that is one: For example, from Ten we proceed to Eleven and
Twelve, which is no more than Ten and One, Ten and Two, and so of the rest,
till the number rise to an infinite.

Again he affirms, that the strength and virtue of all number consists in
the quaternion; for beginning with one, two, three and four, put them together
and they make ten; he saith further, that the nature of number consists in
ten, and the faculty of number is comprised in four: in which respect the
Pythagoreans express their holy oath in the quaternion, which they called
(...), as may appear in these words.

Per tibi nostrae animae praebentem tetrada Iuro,
Naturae fontemque firmamenta perennis.
For they held the soul of man to subsist in that number, proportionating it
into these four Faculties, Men's, Scientia, Opinio, Sensus, the Mind,
Knowledge, Opinion, and Sense, and therefore according to that number
Pythagoras frames his Speech, alluding to those four Kingdoms over which his
Majesty bears title.

SAcred's the number four, Philosophers say,
And bears an happy Omen; as this day
It may appear: four Elements conspire,
Namely, the Water, Earth, the Air, and Fire,
To make up man: the colours in him bred
Are also four, White, Pallid, Black, and red:
Of four Complexions he existeth soly,
Flegmaticke, Sanguine, Choler, Melancholy.
His meat four several digestions gains,
In Stomach, Liver, Members, and the Veins.
Four qualities called primae within lie,
Which are thus titled, Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry.
He acts his whole life on this earthy stage,
In Child-hood, Youth, Man-hood, Decripit age.
The very day that doth afford him light,
Is Morning the Meridian, Evening, Night.
Four seasons still successively appear,
Which put together make a complete year.
The earth, with all the Kingdoms therein guided,
Is into four distinguished parts divided.
The four Winds from the Worlds four quarters blow,
Eorus, Favonius, Austere, Aquilo.
All Moral virtues we in four include,
As Prudence, Justice, Temperance Fortitude.
Court, City, Camp, and Country, the four CCCs;
Which represent to us the four degrees,
Required in every fair and flourishing Land,
Substract but one a Kingdom cannot stand.
Four Colonels are in this City known,
Of which you, honoured Sir, have long been one:
And those four Crowns, (for so the high Powers please)
Emblem the Kings four Scepters, and four Seas.
The fifth Imperial Arch above, proclaims
That glorious Crown, at which his Highness aims.
Thus is our round Globe squard, figuring his power,
And yours beneath Him, in the number four.
THe third Pageant or Show merely consists of Antique gesticulations, dances,
and other Mimic postures, devised only for the vulgar, who are better
delighted with that which pleases the eye, than contents the ear, in which
we imitate Custom, which always carries with it excuse: neither are they
altogether to be vilefied by the most supercilious, and censorious, especially
in such a confluence, where all Degrees, Ages, and Sexes are assembled, every
of them looking to be presented with some fancy or other, according to their
expectations and humours: Since grave and wise men have been of opinion, that
it is convenient, nay necessitous, upon the like occasions, to mix seria
iocis; for what better can set off matter, than when it is interlaced with
mirth? From that I proceed to the fourth.

IT bears the Title of an Imperial Fort: nor is it compulsive, that here I
should argue what a Fort is, a Skonce, or a Cittadall, nor what a
Counterskarfe, or half Moon, c. is; nor what the opposures or defences are:
my purpose is only to express my self thus far, that this Fort which is
styled Imperial, defenc'd with men and officers, suiting their functions and
places proper to such a muniment; doth in the moral include his Majesties
royal chamber, which is the City of London, for to that only purpose was the
project intended.

The Speaker is Bellona, whom some held to be the Daughter, some the Sister,
others the Nurse of Mars the god of War; neither in any of these is any
impropiety, or ought that is dissonant from authority, because Eny^, which is
Bellona, implyeth that which puts spirit and courage into an army, c.
Antiquity called her Duell^a, that is, the goddess of war; to whom their
Priests sacrificed their own blood, and before whose Temple the Facialis set a
spear against some prime pillar thereof, when any public war was to be
denounced: She was most honoured of the Thracians, the Scithians, and those
wild and barbarous nations, upon whose Altars they used to sacrifice a Vulture,
which is a ravenous bird, used to prey upon dead carcasses, and assemble
themselves in great flocks after any fought battle: but this Discourse may to
some appear impertinent to the project in hand, and therefore I thus proceed
to her speech.

THis Structure honoured Sir doth title bear
Of an Imperial Fort, apt for that sphere
In which you now move, borrowing all her grace,
As well from your own person, as your place;
For you have past through all degrees that tended
Unto that height which you have now ascended.
You have been in this City ('tis known well)
A Soldier, Captain, and a Colonel.
And now in times fair progress, to crown all,
Of this Metropolis chief General.
You, of this Emblem, which this day we bring,
To represent the Chamber of the King,
Are the prime governor: a Royal Fort,
And strongly s^ed, as not built for sport,
But for example and defence: a Tower
Supported by no less than Sovereign power:
The Theologicke virtues, the three Graces,
And Charites have here their several places.
Here Piety, true Zeal, study of Peace,
(By which small mites to Magozines increase)
Have residence: now opposite there are
To these, and with them at continual war,
Pride, Arrogance, Sloth, Vanity, Prestigion,
Profaneness, the contempt of true Religion,
With thousands more, who assiduatly wait
This your Imperial Fort to insidiate.
You may observe in the music of your Bells
Like sound in Triumphs, and for funeral knels;
Marriage and death to them appear all one,
Masking nor mourning cannot change their tone:
With our Fort 'tis not so, whose fair pretence, is
To comply with the nature of offences,
Errors: she knows in low terms how to chide
Great faults, with greater noise are terrified:
But she can load her Cannons, and speak loud
To encounter with the arrogant and proud:
Whats further in your Praetorship assigned,
You, in your Londons Mirror there may find.
THis bears the title of the whole Triumph; of Glasses pertinent to this our
purpose, there be several so^ts, as Optic, Perspective Prospective,
Multiplying, c. The presenter is Visus, or Sight; for what the mind is to the
soul, the same is the eye to the body, being the most precious part thereof.
Sight is the most sovereign sense, the first of five, which directs man to
the study search of knowledge wisdom; the eyes are placed in the head as in
a Citadel, to be watch-towers and Sentinels for the safety, and ginders and
conducters for the solace of the body.

We read that one Marcus Varro was sir-named strabo, for the excellency and
quickness of his sight, who from Libaum, a Province in Scicilia, could
distinguish and give an exact account of all such ships as came out of the
haven of Carthage, which two places some hold to be more than an hundred
Italian leagues distant: indeed no man can better estimate the virtue and value
of the sight, than he that is made blind and wants it, neither could I devise
a more apt Speaker to present this Mirror, than the sense of the sight,
without which, the purest Crystal is of no use at all.

The Pageant it self is decored with glasses of all sorts: the persons upon or
about it are beautiful Children, every one of them expressing their natures
and conditions in the impresaes of their shields, eight of the prime of which
suiting with the quality of the Optic sense, bear these several
Inscriptions: Aspice, Despice, Conspice, Prospice, Perspice, Inspice,
Circumspice Respice:

BEhold me Sight, of the five senses prime,
(Now best complying with the place and time)
Presenting Londons Mirror, and this Glass
Shows not alone what she is, or once was,
But that the spacious Universe might see
In her, what their great Cities ought to be;
That every foreign Magistrate from hence
Might learn how to dispose his Optic sense.
Aspice saith, Look toward and upon
Desartfull men whom this Age frowns on.
And Despice cast down thy powerful eye
On the poor wretch that doth beneath thee lye.
Then Conspice take counsel first and pause
With meditation, ere thou judge a cause.
Prospice bids look a far off, and view
(Before conclude) what dangers may ensue.
Perspice wills, in sifting doubts, then scan
The nature of the matter with the man.
Let every cause be searched, and duly sought,
Saith Inspice, ere thou determinst ought.
Circumspice saith, look about to immure
So great a charge, that all within be sure.
Considerate Respice inioynes thee last,
To cast thine eyes back upon all things past.
For Londons self, if they shall first begin
To examine her without, and then within,
What Architectures, Palaces, what Bowers,
What Citadels, what turrets, and what towers?
Who in her age grew pregnant, brought a bed
Of a New Town, and late delivered
Of such a burden, as in few years space,
Can almost speak all tongues, (to her more grace.)
Then her Cathedrals, Temples new repairing,
An act of true devotion, no man sparing
His helping hand; and many, 'tis well known,
To further Gods house have forget their own.
Unto her outward shape I do not prize her,
But let them come within to anatomize her.
Her Praetor, scarlet Senate, Liveries,
The ordering of her brave societies:
Divine Astraea here in equal scale
Doth balance Justice, Truth needs not look pale,
Nor poverty dejected, th'Orphants cause,
And Widows plea find help; no subtle clause
Can make demur in sentence: a fair hearing,
And upright doom in every Court appearing:
Still to preserve her so, be it your endeavour,
And she in you, you her shall live for ever.
I come now to the Linvoy, or last Speech, when h^s Lordship, after his days
long and tedious trouble, retires himself to his rest at night, in which
Pythagoras the Speaker briefly runs over the passages of the Pageants before
expressed after this manner.

WE ^o a Valediction are confined,
(Right Honoured) and entreat You bear in mind
What was this Day presented: Your chief Saint
A Martyr once of the Church militant,
But now of the triumphant, bids You spare
Your self this Night: for to a World of Care
You are engaged to morrow, which must last
Till the whole progress of Your Year be past.
The Spheare-like Globe quadrated, lets You know,
What Pro-Rex doth to the four Scepters owe.
Your Military honours, (in your Days
Of less comm^nd) the Imperial Fort displays,
And Londons Mirror, that all men may see
What Magistrates have been, and ought to be.
Set is the Sun long since, and now the Light
Quite failing us, Thrice Honoured Sir, good Night.
For the Artists, and directors of these Pageants and shows, Iohn Christmas
and Mathias, the two Sons of Gerard, their now deceased Father, a known
Master in all those Sciences he professed.: I can say no more but thus, that
proportioning their Works according to the limits of the gates through which
they were to pass, being tied not to exceed one Inch either in height, or
breadth: My Opinion is, that few Workmen about the Town can parallel them,
much less exceed them. But if any shall either out of Curiosity or malice
tax their ability, in this kind of Art, I refer them to the Carving of his
Majesties Great Ship lately built at Woolwitch, which Work alone is able both
to satisfy Emulation, and qualify Envy.


