GOod morrow my good Lord Chamberlaine.


Many good morrows to my good Lord of Sussex.


Whose with the Queen my Lord.


The Cardinal of Winchester: The Lord of Tame: the good Lord Shandoyse: and
besides, Lo: Howard, Sir Henry Beningfeild, and diverse others.


A word my Lord in private.


Tuching the Queen my Lord who now sitts hye,
What thinks the realm of Phillip th'Emperours son,
A marriage by the Council treated of?

Pray god 't prove well.

Good morrow Lords.

Good morrow my good Lord of Sussex.

I cry your Honours mercy.

Good morrow to the Lords of Tame and Shandoyse.

The like to you my Lord: As you were speaking

Concerning Wiatt and the Kentish rebels,
Their ouer-throw is past: the rebel Dukes that sought
By all means to proclaim queen Iane chiefly Northumberland
For Gilfords sake, he for'st his brother Duke unto that war,
But each one had his merit.

Oh my Lord,
The Law proceeded against their great offence,
And 'tis not well, since they have suffered Judgment,
That we should raise their scandal being dead,
Tis impious, not by true Judgment bread.

Good morrow my Lord, good morrow good Sir Henry.

Pardon my Lord I saw you not till now.

Good morrow good Lord Howard.

Your honours; The like to you my Lords.

With all my hart Lord Howard.

Forward I pray.

The suffolke men my Lord, was to the Queen
The very stayres, by which she did ascend:
She's greatly bound unto them for their loves.

Good morrow Lords, attend the Queen into the presence.

Your duties Lords.

By gods assistance and the power of heaven,
We are instated in our brothers throne,
And all those powers, that warred against our right,
By help of heaven and your friendly aid,
Disper'stand fled, here may we sit secure,
Our hearts is joyful Lords, our peace is pure.

I do beseech your majesty peruse this poor petition.

O master Dodds we are indebted to you for your love,
You stood us in great stead even in our ebb
Of fortune, when our hopes were near declined,
And when our state did bear the lowest sail,
Which we have reason to requite we know;
Read his petition my good Lord Cardinal.

Oh gracious sovereign, let my Lord the Duke have the
Perusing of it, or any other that is near your grace,
He will be to our suit an opposite.

And reason fellow.
Madam, here is a large recital vpbraydinge of your highness Sovereignty, the
Suffolke men that lifted you to the throne, and here possessed you, claim your
promise you made them about religion.

True gracious Sovereign;
But that we do upbraid your majesty,
Or make recital of our deeds forepast,
Other then conscience, honesty and zeal,
By love, by faith, and by our duty bound,
To you the next and true successive heir,
If you contrary this; I needs must say,
Your skilless tongue doth make our well tuned words,
Iarr in the Princes ears, and of our text,
You make a wrong construction: Gracious Queen,
Your humble subjects prostrate in my mouth,
A general suit when we first flocked to you,
And made first head with you at Framagham,
Twas thus concluded that we your liegemen:
Should still enjoy our consciences, and use that faith
Which in king Edwards days was held Canonical.

May it please your highness note the Commons insolence
They tie you to conditions, and set limits to your liking.

They shall know,
To whom their faithful duties they do owe,
Since they the limbs, the head would seek to sway,
Before they govern, they shall learn t'obays
See it severely ordered Winchester.

Away with him, it shall be thoroughly scand,
And you upon the pillory, three days to stand.

Has not your sister (gracious Queen) a hand
In these petitions; well your highness knows
She is a favourite of these heritiques.

And well remembered, is't not probable,
That she in Wiats expedition,
And other insurrection lately queald
Was a confederate; if your highness will your own estate preserve,
You must foresee fore-danger, and cut off all such
As would your safety prejudice.

Such is your sister,
A mere opposite to us in our opinion, and besides
She's next Successive, should your majesty
Dye yssules, which heaven defend.

Which heaven defend.

The state of our religion would decline.

My Lord of Tame and Shandoyse,
You two shall have a firm Commission sealed,
To fetch our sister young Elizabeth
From Ashbridge where she lies, and with a band
Of armed soldiers to conduct her up to London,
Where we will hear her.

Gracious Queen, she only craves but to behold your face,
That she might clear her self of all supposed treasons,
Still protesting, she is as true a subject to your grace,
As lives this day.

Do not you hear, with what a sawcye impudence,
This Sentlo here presumes.

Away with him, i'll teach him know his place,
To frown when we frown, smile on whom we grace.

Twilbe a means to keep the rest in awe,
Making their sovereigns brow, to them a law.

All those that seek our sisters cause to favour,
Let them be lodged.

Young Courtney Earl of Devonshire,
Seems chiefly to affect her faction.

Commit him to the Tower,
Till time affords us and our Counsel breathing space.
Whence is that Post?

My Sovereign, It is from Southampton.

Our Secretary, vnseale them and return
Us present answer of the contents,
Whats the mayne business.

That Phillip Prince of Spain,
Son to the Emperor, is safely arrived,
And landed at Southampton.

Prepare to meet him Lords with all our Pomp.

Prepare you Lords with our fair Queen to ride,
And his high princely state let no man hide.

Set forwad Lords, this sudden news is sweet,
Two royal lovers on the mid way mere.

Good morrow Mistress, came you from the Princess?

Master Gage, I did.

How fares her Grace.

O wondrous crazey gentle master Gage,
Her sleeps are all unquiet, and her head
Bears and grows giddy with continual grief.

God grant her comfort, and release her pain,
So good a Lady few on earth remain.

O Arm, arm, arm.

How now what's the matter.

O Lord the house is beset, shouldiers are as hot as fire,
Are reddy to enter every hole about the hows,
For as I was a'th top of the stack, the sound of the Drum,
Hot me such a box a'th Ear, that I came tumbling down,
The stack with a thousand byllets a'th top on me, look about,
And help for gods sake.

Heaven guard the Princess grant that all be well,
This Drum I fear, will prove her passing-bell.

Wher's the Princess.

O my honoured Lords,
(May I with reverence presume to ask)
What means these arms, why do you thus begirt,
A poor weak Lady, near at point of death.

Resolve the Princess we must speak with her.

My Lords, know there is no admittance to her presence,
Without the leave, first granted from her self.

Go tell her we must and will.

I'll certify so much.

My Lords, as you are honourably borne,
As you did love her father, or her brother,
As you do owe alegeance to the Queen,
In pity of her weakness, and lowe state,
With best of favour, her commisserate.

Her grace entreats you but to stay till morn?
And then your message shall be heard at full.

Tis from the Queen and we will speak with her.

I'll certify so much.

It shall not need, press after her my Lord.

We are not pleased with your intrusions Lords.
Is your hast such, of your affairs so urgent,
That suddenly, and at this time of night,
You press on one, and will not stay till morn?

Sorry we are sweet Lady, to behold you in this sad plight.

And I my Lords not glad,
My hart, oh how it beats.

Madam, our message and our duty from our Queen,
We come to tender you, It is her pleasure,
That you the 7. day of this month appear at Westminster.

At Westminster? my Lords no soul more glad then I,
To do my duty to her Majesty,
But I am sorry at the hart, my hart, oh good Doctor raise me:
Oh my hart, I hope my Lords, considering my excremity and
Weakness, you will dispense a little with your hast.

Doctor Owine and Doctor Wendith,
You are the Queenes Physicians truly sworn,
On your alegeance, as before her highness you will answer it,
Speak, may the Princess be remoou'd with life.

Not without danger Lords, yet without death,
Her fever is not mortal; yet you see into what danger,
It hath brought the Princess.

Is your opinion so?

My Judgment is, not deadly, but yet dangerous,
No sooner shall she come to take the air,
But she will faint, and if not well prepared and attended,
Her life is in much danger.

Madam, we take no pleasure to deliver
so strict a message.

Nor I my Lords to hear a message delivered
with such strictnes; well must I go.

So says the Queen.

Why then it must be so.

To morrow early then you must prepare.

Tis many a more (...) my feeble legs,
Felt this my bodies weight: O I shall faint,
And if I taste the rawnes of the air,
I am but dead, indeed I am but dead.
Tis late, conduct these Lords unto their chambers,
And cheer them well for they have iorneyd hard,
whilst we prepare us for our morrows Journey.

Madam, the Queen hath sent her letter for you.

The Queen is (...), and we will strive with death
To tender her our life,
We are her subject, and obey her hest,
Good night, we wish you what we want,
Good rest.

Thus in the face of heave, broad eye of all the multitude,
We give a welcome to the Spanish Prince,
Those plausiue shouts which give you entertain,
Echoes as much to the almighties cares,
And there they sownd with pleasure, and excels
The claymorous trumpets, and loud ringing bells.

Thrice excellent and ever gracious Princess,
Doubly famous for virtue and for beauty,
We embrace your large stretched Honours with the arms of love,
Our Royal marriage, treated first in Heaven
To be solemnised here, both by Gods voice,
And by our loves consent, we thus embrace:
Now Spain and England two populous Kingdoms,
That have a long time been opposed
In Hostile-emulation, shall be at one:
This shall be Spanish England, ours English Spain.

Hark the redoubling echoes of the people,
How it proclaymes their loves; and welcome to this Union.

Then here before the (...) of the Land,
We do embrace and make a public contract.
Our souls are joyful, then bright Heavens smile,
Whilst we proclaim our new united Stile.

Read Sussex.

Long live the King and Queen.

We thank you all.

When please your Highness to solemnize this your Nuptials?

The 25. day of this month July.

It likes us well, but royal Queen we want
One Lady at this hye solemnity:
We have a Sister called Elixaebeth,
Whose virtues and endowments of the mind
Hath filled the ears of Spain.

Great are the causes, now too long to say,
Why she my Sovereign should be kept away.

The Lord of Tame and Shandoyse are returned.

How fares our Sister? Is she come along?

We found the Princess, sick and in great danger;
Yet did we urge our strict Commission,
She much entreated that she might be spared,
Until her health and strength might be restored.

Two of your Highness Doctors we then called,
And charged them as they would answer it,
To tell the truth, if that our journeys toil
Might be no prejudice unto her life;
Or if we might with safety bring her thence:
They answered, that we might; we did so,
Here she is to do her duty to your Majesty.

Let her attend, we will find time to hear her.

But royal Queen, yet for her virtues sake,
Deem her offences, if she have offended,
With all the lenity a Sister can.

My Lord of VVinchester, my Lord of Sussex.
Lord Howard, Tame, and Shandoyse,
Take you Commission to examine her
Of all supposed Crimes; so to our Nuptials.

What Festival more Royal hath been seen,
Than twixt Spaines Prince, and Englands Royal Queen.

Is not my gentleman usher yet returned.

Madam, not yet.

O God, my fear hath been good physic,
But the Queens displeasure, that hath cured my bodies Imperfectio,
Hath made me hart sick, brain sick, and sick even to death.
What are you?

Your howshold Officers and humble servants,
Who now your house fair Princess, is desolu'd
And quite broke up, come to attend your grace.

We thank you, and am more indebted for your loves
Than we have power: or virtue to requite,
Alas I am all the Queenes, yet nothing of my self,
But God and Inocence, be you my Patrons and defend my cause
Why weep you gentlemen?

Not for our selves, men are not made to weep
At there own fortunes, our eyes are made of fire,
And to extract water from fire is hard,
Nothing but such a Princess grief as yours,
So good a Lady so beautiful, so absolute a mistress,
And perfect as you have delivered been,
Have power to do it, your sorrow makes us sad.

My Inocence yet makes my hart as light,
As my front's heavy: all that heaven sends is welcome
Gentlemen divide these few crowns amongst you,
I am now a prisoner; and shall want nothing,
I have some friends about her majesty,
That are providing for me all things; all things;
I, even my grave; and being possessed of that,
I shall need nothing: weep not I pray,
Rather you should rejoice:
If I miscarry in this enterprise, and ask you why,
A Virgin and a Martyr both I die.

He that first gave you life, protect that life,
From those that wish your death.

VVhats my of offence? who be my accusers.

Madam, that the Queen VVinchester best knows.

What says the Queen unto my late petition.

You are denied that grace:
Her Majesty will not admit you conference,
Sir William Sentlo urging that motion,
Was first committed, since sent to the Tower,
Madam, in brief your foes are the Queenes friends,
Your friends her foes,
Six of the Counsel are this day appointed,
To examine you of certain articles,

They shall be welcome; my god in whom I trust,
Will help, deliver, save, defend the just.

All forbear this place unless the Princess.

Madam, we from the Queen are joined
in full commission.

By your Favour good my Lord ere you proceed,
Madam, although this place doth tie you to this reverence,
It becomes not you being a Princess to deject your knee,
A chair there.

My duty with my fortunes do agree,
And to the Queen in you I bend my knee.

You shall not kneel where Sussex sits in place,
The Chamber keeper, a chair there for her grace.

Madam, perhaps you censure hardly.
That was enforst in this commission.

Know you your own guilt my good Lord Chancellor,
That you accuse your self, I think not so,
I am of this mind, no man is my foe.

Madam I would you would submit, unto her highness.

Submit my Lord of Winchester, tis fit
That none but base offenders should submit,
No no my Lord, I easily spy your drift,
Having nothing whereon you can accuse me,
Do seek to have my self, my self betray,
So by my self my own blood should be spilt,
Confess submission I confess a guilt.

What answer you to Wiats late rebellion,
Madam, tis thought that you did set them on.

Who is't will say so? men may much suspect,
But yet my Lord, none can my life detect,
I a confederate with those kentish rebels?
If I ere saw or sent to them, let the Queen take my head,
Hath not proud Wyat suffered for his offence,
And in the purging both of soul and body for heaven,
Did Wyat then accuse Elizabeth?

Madam he did not.

My reverent Lord I know it.

Madam he would not.

Oh my good Lord he could not.

The same day Frogmorton was arrain'd in the Guild-hall,
It was imposed on him, whether this Princess had a hand
With him or no; he did deny it,
Cler'd her sore his death, yet accused others.

My god be prays'd, this is news but of a minute old.

What answer you to Sir Peter Carew in the west,
The western Rebels.

Ask the unborn Infant, see what that will answer,
For that and I, are both alike in guilt,
Let not by rigour Innocent blood be spilt.

Come Madam, answer briefly to these treasons.

Treason Lords, if it be treason to be the daughter
To th'Eight Henry; Sister to Edward, and the next of blood unto
My gracious sovereign now the Queen I am a traitor: if not, I
Spit at treason. In Henryes reign this Law could not have stood,
O god that we should suffer for our blood.

Madam, the Queen must here you sing another song,
Before you part with us.

My god doth know, I can no note but truth,
That with heavens King,
One day in quiers of Angels I shall singe.

Then Madam you'll not submit.

My life I will, but not as guilty,
My Lords, let pale offenders pardon crave,
If we offend, Laws rigour let us have.

You are stubborn, come letts certify the Queen.

Rowme for the Lords there.

Thou power eternal, Inocents just guide,
That sways the Sceptre of all Monarchyes,
Protect the guiltless from these ravening Jaws,
That hideous death presents, by Tyrants Laws,
And as my hart is known to thee most pure,
Grant me release, or patience to endure.

Madam, we your poor humble servants,
Made bold to press into your graces presence,
To know how your cause goes.

Well, well, I thank my god, well,
How can a cause go ill with Innocents,
They that to whom wrongs in this world are done,
Shall be rewarded in the world to come.

It is the pleasure of her majesty,
That you be straight committed to the Tower.

The Tower, for what?

Moreover all your howshold servants we have discharged,
Except this gentleman your usher this gentlewoman
Thus did the Queen command,
And for your guard, a hundred Northern whitecotes,
Are appointed to conduct you thither,
To night unto your chamber, to morrow early prepare
You for the Tower, your bardge stands ready,
To conduct you thither.

Oh god my hart: A prisoner in the Tower,
Speak to the Queen my Lords, that some other place
May lodge her sister, that's too wild, too base.

Come my lords, lett's all join in one petition
To the Queen, that she may not be lodged within the Tower.

My Lord, you know it is in vain,
For the Queenes sentence is definitive,
And we must see it performed.

Then to our chamber comfortless and sad,
To morrow to the tower that fatal place,
Where I shall never behold the suns bright face.

Now god forbid, a better hap heaven send:
Thus men may morn, for what they cannot mend.

Come my masters you know your chardge, tis now about
Alcauin, here we must watch till morning,
And then carry the Princess to the tower.

How shall we spend the time till morning.

Maze we'll drink and talk of our friends.

I but my frnd, do not talk of state matters.

Not I, I'll not meddle with the state,
I hope this a man may say without offence,
Prithee drink to me.

Withal my harry faith, this a man might
Lawfully speak, but now, faith what wast about to say.

Mass I say this: That the Lady Elizabeth is both a lady,
And Elizabeth, and if I should say she were a virtuous Princess,
Were there any harm in that?

No by my troth, there's no harm in that,
But beware of talking of the Princess,
Let's meddle with our kindred there, we may be bold.

Well sirs I have two sisters, and the one loves the other,
And would not send her to prison for a million, is there any harm
In this? i'll keep my self within compass I warrant you,
For I do not talk of the Queen, I talk of my sisters,
I'll keep my self within my compass I warrant you.

I but Sir, that word sister goes hardly down.

Why Sir, I hope a man may be bold with his own,
I learned that of the Queen, I'll keep my self within compass
I'll warrant you.

I but Sir, why is the Princess committed?

It may be she doth not know her self,
It may be the Queen knows not the cause,
It may be my Lord of Winchester does not know,
It may be so, nothing's unpossible to god,
It may be there's knavery in Munckery,
There's nothing unpossible, is there any harm in that?

Shoemaker, you go a little beyond your last.

Why, in saying nothing's unpossible to God,
I'll stand to it; for saying a truth's a truth, i'll prove it;
For saying there may be knavery in Monckery, I'll justify it,
I do not say there is, but may be, I know what I know,
You know what you know, he knows what he knows,
Marry we know not what every man knows.

My masters, we have talked so long that I think tis day.

I think so too, is there any harm in all this?

No harm ith world.

And I think by this time the Princess is ready
To take her barge.

Come then let's go, would all were well,
Is there any harm in all this? but alas wishes and tears
Have both one property, they show their love that
want the remedy.

Did you not mark what a piteous eye she cast
To the Queens window as she past a long,
Fain she would have stayed, but that I caused
The bargmen to make hast and row away.

The bargmen were too desperate my Lord,
In staying till the water was so lowe,
For then you know, being underneath the bridge,
The barges sterne did strike upon the ground,
And was in danger to have dround us all.

Well she hath escaped that danger,
Would she but conforme her self in her opinion,
She only might rely upon my love,
To win her to the favour of the Queen.

But that will never be, this is my censure,
If she be guilty in the least degree,
May all her wrongs survive and light on her:
If other ways that she be cleared,
Thus both ways I wish her down,
Or else her state to raise.

Why doth the Princess keep her barge so lunge,
Why lands she not? Some one go see the cause.

That shall be my charge my Lord.

Oh me my Lord, her state is wondrous hard,
I have seen the day, my hand I'd not have lent
To bring my Sovereigns Sister to the Tower:
Good my Lords, stretch your Commission
To do this Princess but some little favour.

My Lord, my Lord, let not the love we bear the Princess, incur the Queenes
displeasure, tis no dallying with matters of Estate, who dares gaine-say the
Queen?

Marry a God not I, no, no, not I;
Yet who shall hinder these my eyes to sorrow
For her sorrow: By Gods marry dear,
That the Queen could not, though her self were here:
My Lords, my Lords, if it were held foul treason,
To grieve for her hard usage, by my Soul
My eyes would hardly prove me a true Subject:
But tis the Queenes pleasure, and we must obey:
But I shall morn, should the King and Queen say nay.

My grieved Mistress humbly thus entreats,
For to remove back to the Common stayres,
And not to land where Traitors put to shore,
Some difference she entreats your Honours make
Twixt Crystal Fountains, and foul muddy Springs,
Twixt those that are condemned by the law,
And those whom Treasons stain did never blemish:
Thus she attends your answer, and sits still
Whilst her wet eyes, full many a tear did spill.

Marry a God, tis true and tis no reason: Launch Bargeman.
Good Lady land, where Traitors use to land,
And fore her guilt be proved, Gods marry no,
And the Queen wills it, that it should be so.

My Lord, you must look into our Commission,
No favours granted, she of force must land,
Tis a decree which we can not with stand,
So tell her master Gage,

As good a Lady as ere England bread,
Would he that caused this woe, had lost his head.

Madam, you have stepped too short into the water.

No matter where I tread,
Would where I set my foot, there lay my head,
Land Traitor like; my foot's wet in the flood,
So shall my hart ere long be drenched in blood.

Here comes the Constable of the tower,
This is your charge.

And I receive my prisoner, come will you go?

Whither my Lord, unto a grate of Iron,
Where grief and care my poor hart shall enuirone,
I am not well.

A chair for the Princess.

Here's no chair for prisoners,
Come will you see your chamber.

Then on this stone, this cold stone I will sit,
I needs must say you hardly me entreat,
When for a chair, this hard stone is my seat.

My Lord, you deal too cruelly with the Princess,
You knew her father, she's no stranger to you.

Madam it raynes.

Good Lady take my cloak.

No let it a lone: See gentle men,
The piteous heavens weeps tears into my bosom,
On this cold stone I sit, rain in my face,
But better here, than in a worser place
Where this bad man will lead me.
Clarentia, reach my book, now lead me where you please
From sight of day; or in a dungeon; I shall see to pray.

Nay, nay, you need not bolt locke so fast,
She is no starter; honourable Lords,
Speak to the Queen she may have some release.

So so, let me alone, let me alone to coop her,
I'll use her so, the Queen shall muth commend
My diligent care.

Where have you left the Princess?

Where she is safe enough I warrant you,
I have not granted her the privilege
Of any walk, or garden, or to open
Her windows, casements to receive the air.

My lord, my lord, you deal without respect,
And worse than your Commission can maintain.

My Lord, I hope I know mine office well,
And better than your self within this place,
Then teach not me my duty, she shall be used so still,
The Queen commands, and I'll obey her will,

But if this time should alter, mark me well,
Could this be answered, could it fellow Peers?
I think not so.

Tush tush the Queen is young likely to bear,
Of her own body a more royal heir.

My Lords the Princess humbly entreats,
That her own servants may bear up her diet,
A company of base vntutord slaves,
Whose hands did never serve a Princess board,
Do take that privilege.

Twas my appointment, and it shall be so.

Gods marry dear, but it shall not be,
Lord Howard join with me, we'll to the King.

Stay good my Lords for instance, see they come,
If this be seemly, let your honours Judge.

Come come my Lords, why do you staye so long,
The Queenes high favour shall amend this wrong.

Now sir, what have you got by your
complaining, you common find-fault; what, is
your Mistress stomach so queasy? our honest
soldiers must not touch her meat, then let her fast,
I know her stomach will come down at last.

Vntutor'd slave, I'll ease thee of this burden,
Her highness scorns to touch the dish
Her servants brings not up.

Presume to touch a dish I'll lodge thee there,
Where thou shalt see no sun for one hole year.

I would to god you would, in any place
Where I might live from thought of her disgrace,
O thou all-seeing heavens, with piteous eyes,
Look on th'oppresions of their cruelty!
Let not thy truth, by falsehood be oppressed,
But let her virtues shyne and give her rest,
Confound the sleights, and practise of those men,
Whose pride do kick against thy seat of heaven.
Oh draw the courtaines from their filthy sin,
And make them loath the hell which they live in.
Prosper the Princess, and her life defend,
A glorious comfort to her troubles send.
If ever thou had pity, hear my prayer,
And give releasement to a Princes care.

The Princess thus entreats you honoured Lord,
She may but walk in the Lieftenants garden,
Or else repose her self in the Queens lodgings:
My honoured Lord, grant this as you did love
The famous Henry her deceased father.

Come talk not to me for I am resolved,
Nor lodging, garden, nor lieftenants walks
Shall here be granted, she's a prisoner.

My Lord, they shall.

How, shall they knave?

If the Queen please, they shall.
A noble and right reverent Counsellor,
Promised to beg it of her Majesty:
And if she say the word, my Lord she shall.

I, if she say the word, it shall be so:
My lord of Winchester speaks the contrary,
So do the Clergy, they are honest men.

My honoured Lord, why should you take delight
To torture a poor Lady innocent?
The Queen I know when she shall hear of this,
Will greatly discommend your cruelty.
You served her father, and he loved you well,
You served her brother, and he held you dear,
And can you hate the sister he best loved?
You serve her sister, she esteems you hye,
And you may live to serve her ere you dye:
And therefore good my Lord, let this preuaile,
Only the casements of her window open,
Whereby she may receive fresh gladsome air.

O you preach well to deaf men, no, not I,
So letters may fly in, I'll none of that,
She is my prisoner, and if I durst,
But that my warrant is not yet so strict,
I'd lay her in a dungeon where her eyes,
Should not have light to read her prayer book,
So would I danger both her soul and body,
Cause she an alyen is to us catholiques,
Her bed should be all snakes, her rest despair,
Torture should make her curse, her faythles prayer.

My Lord, it is the pleasure of the Queen,
The prisoner Princess should have all the use
Of the lieftenants garden, the Queenes lodgings,
And all the liberty this place affords.

What means her grace by that?

You may go ask her and you will my Lord,
Moreover tis her highness further pleasure,
That her sworn servants shall attend on her,
Two gentlemen of her Ewry, two of her Pantry,
Two of her Kitchen, and two of her wardrobe,
Besides this gentleman here master Gage.

The next will be her freedom, oh this madds me.

Which way lies the Princess.

This way my Lord.

This will be glad tidings: come let's tell her grace.

Wilt please your honour, let my Lady
Walk in the leiftenants garden,
Or may but see the lodgings of the Queen,
Or open the casements to receive fresh air,
Shall she my Lord: shall she this freedom use,
She shall: for you can neither will nor choose,
Or shall she have some servants of her own,
To attend on her: I pray let it be so,
And let your look no more poor prisoners daunt,
I pray deny not what you needs must grant.

This base groom flowts me, oh this frets my hart,
These knaves will let upon their privilege,
But yet i'll vex her, I have found the means,
I'll have my cooks to dress my meat with hers,
And every officer my men shall match,
Oh that I could but drain her harts dear blood,
Oh it would feed me, do my soul much good.

How now, what means the fellow.

Audacious slave presuming in my place.

Sir 'twas my pleasure and I did command it.

The proudest he that keeps within the tower,
Shall have no eye into my private office.

No Sir, why say 'tis I.

Be it your self or any other here,
I'll make him sup the hottest broth I have.

You will not.

Zounds I will,
I have been true to her, and will be still.

Well, I'll have this amended er't be long,
And avenge my self on her for all their wrong.

I have got another Nosegay for my young Lady,
My Lord said I should be soundly whipped
If I were seen to bring her any more,
But yet I'll venture once again, she's so good,
Oh here's her chamber, I'll call and see if she be stirring,
Where are you Lady?

Welcome sweet boy, what hast thou brought me there.

Madam, I have brought you another nose gay,
But you must not let it be seen, for if it be,
I shall be soundly whipped, indeedla, indeed I shall.

God a mercy boy, here's to requite thy love.

Stay him stay him, oh have I caught you Sir,
Where have you been.

To carry my young Lady some more flowers,

Alas my Lord a child, pray let him go.

A crafty knave my Lords, search him for letters.

Letters my Lord, it is impossible.

Come tell me what letters thou carryedst her,
I'll give thee figgs and sugar plummes.

Will you indeed, well i'll take your word,
For you look like an honest man.

Now tell me what letters thou deliuerest.

Faith gaffer I know no letters but great A,
B and C: I am not come to K yet,
Now gaffer will you give me my sugar plummes.

Yes marry will I, take him away,
Let him be soundly whipped I charge you sir.

They keep even infants from us, they do well,
My sight they have too long bard, and now my smell,
This tower hath made me fall to huswiffry,
I spend my labours to relieve the poor,
Go Gage distribute these to those that need.

Madam the Queen out of her royal bounty,
Hath freed you from the thraldom of the tower,
And now this gentleman must be your gardyan.
I thank her: she hath rid me of a Tyrant,
Is he appointed now to be my keeper?
What is he Lords?

A gentleman in favour with the Queen.

Yt seems so by his charge, but tell me Gage,
Is yet the scaffold standing on tower hill,
Whereon young Gilford and the Lady Iane did suffer death.

Upon my life it stands not.

Lord Howard what is he.

A gentleman, tho of a sterne aspect,
Yet mild enough I hope your Grace will find.

Hath he not think you a stretch conscience,
And if my secret murder should be put into his hands,
Hath he not hart think you to execute.

Defend it heaven, and Gods almighty hand,
Betwixt your Grace, and such intendments stand.

Come madam will you go.

With all my hart, fare-well, far-well,
I am freed from Lymbo to be sent to hell.

What storm comes next: this hath dispersed us quite
And shattered us to nothing; though we be denied the presence
Of our mistres, yet we will walk a aloof, and none controwle us.

Here will she cross the river, stand in her eye,
That she may take some notice of our neglected duties,

Come this way they say, the sweet Princess comes,
Let us present her with such tokens of good will,
As we have.

They say she's such a virtuous Princess, that sheele
except of a cup of cold water, and I have even
a nosegay for her Grace, here she comes.

The Lord preserve thy sweet Grace.

What are these?

The townes-men of the country gathered here,
To greet your Grace, hearing you past this way.

Give them this Gold, and thank them for their loves.

what traitor knaves are gathered here to make a tumult?

Now the Lord bless thy sweet Grace.

If they persist, I charge you soldiers stop their mouths.

Yt shall not need the poor are loving, but the rich despise,
And though you curb their tongue, spare them their eyes,
Your love my smart always not but prolonges,
Pray for me in your harts, not with your tongues,
See see my Lord, look I have stild them all,
Not one amongst them, but debates my fall.

Alas Sir Harry these are honest country men,
That much rejoice to see the Princess well.

My lord my Lord, my charge is great.

And mine as great as yours.

Hark hark my Lord, what Bells are these?

The townes-men of this village,
Hearing your highness pass this way,
Salutes your coming with this peal of Bells.

Traitors and knaves ring Bells,
When the Queenes enemy passes through the town,
Go set he knaves by the heales, make their pates ring noone,
I charge thee Barwick.

Alas poor men, help them thou God above,
Thus men are forced to suffer for my love,
What said my servants, those that stood aloof?

They deeply conjured me out of their loves,
To know how your case goes, which these poor people second.

Say to them tanquam Ouis.

Come come away, this lingering will benight us.

Madam this night your lodging's at my house,
No prisoner are you Madame for this night.

How? no prisoner.

No, no prisoner, what I intend to do i'll answer,
Madame, will it please you go.

Now gentle master usher, what says my Lady.

Thus did she bid me say tanquam Ouis,
Farewell I must away.

Tanqus Ovrus pray whats tanqus Ovrus neighbor.

If the priest were here he would smell it out straight.

My self have been a scholar, and I understand
What tanquam Ouis means.
We sent to know how her Grace did fare,
She, tanquam Ouis said, even like a sheep,
That's to the slaughter led.

Tanqus Ovrus, that I should live to see, tanqus Ovris.

I shall ne'er love tanquam Ovris again for this trick.

Barwicke, is this the chair of state.

I sir, this is it.

Take it down, and pull of my boots.

Come on Sir.

O monstrous, what a sawey companion's this?
To pull of his boots in the chair of state,
I'll fit you a pennyworth for it.

Well said Barwick, pull knave.

A ha Sir.

Well said, now comes.

Gods pity I think you are down, cry you mercy.

What saucy arrant knave art thou, how?

Not so saucy an arrant knave as your worship takes me to be.

Villain thou hast broken my crupper.

I am sorry 'tis no worse for your worship.

Knave, doest flout me?

The wall, the wall.

Sblood Spaniard you get no wall here, unless you would
Have your head and the wall knocked together.

Seignior Caualero Danglatero,
I must have the wall.

I do protest, had not thou enforst it,
I had not regarded it, but since you will needs
Have the wall, I'll take the pains to thrust
You into the kennel.

O base Caualero, my sword and poniard well
Tried in Tolledo, shall give thee the Imbrocado.

Marry, and welcome Sir, come on.

Holo holo, thou hast given me
The Canuissado.

Come Sir will you any more.

Seignior Caualero look behint thee,
A blade of Tolledo is drawn against thee.

Hand that Ignoble groom,
Had we not beheld thy cowardice,
We should have sworn,
Such baseness had not followed us.

Oh vostro mandado grand Emperato.

Pardon him my Lord.

Are you respectles of our honour Lords,
That you would have us bosom cowardice,
I do protest the great turks Empire,
Shall not redeem thee from a felons death,
What place is this my Lords?

Charing cross my Liege.

Then by this cross, where thou hast done this murder,
Thou shalt be hanged, so Lords away with him.

Your Grace may purchase glory from above,
And intyer love from all your peoples hearts,
To make atonement twixt the woeful Princess,
And our dread sovereign, your most virtuous Queen.

It were a deed worthy of memory.

My Lord she's factious, rather could I wish
She were married to some private gentleman,
And with her dower conveyed out of the land,
Then here to stay and be a mutiner,
So may your highness state be more secure.
For whilst she lives wars, and commotions,
Foul insurrections will be set abroch,
I think 'twere not amiss to take her head:
This land would be in quiet, were she dead.

O my Lord, you speak not charitably.

Nor will we Lords embrace his heedles counsel,
I do protest as I am King of Spain,
My utmost power i'll stretch to make them friends,
Come Lords let's in, my love and wit i'll try
To end this Jar; the Queen shall not deny.

What fearful terror doth assail my hart?
Good Gage come hither and resolve me true
In thy opinion; shall I out live this night,
I pre thee speak.

Out live this night, I pray Madam why.

Then to be plain this night I look to die.

O Madam, you were borne to better fortunes,
That God that made you, will protect you still
From all your enemies that wish you ill.

My hart is fearful.

O my honoured Lord,
As ever you were noble in your thoughts,
Speak, shall my Lady out live this night, or no?

You much amaze me sir, else heaven forefend.

For if we should imagine any plot,
Pretending to the hurt of our dear mistres,
I and my fellows though far unable are
To stand against your power, will die together.

And I with you would spend my dearest blood,
To do that virtuous Lady any good.
Sir Harry, now my charge I must resign,
The Ladye's wholly in your custody,
Yet use her kindly as she well deserves,
And so I take my leave, Madame adieu.

My honoured Lord farewell, unwilling I
With grief and woe must continue,
Help me to some ink and paper good Sir Harry.

What to do Madam.

To write a letter to the Queen my sister.

I find not that in my Commission.

Good Jailer urge not thy Commission.

No Jailer, but your guardian Madam.

Then reach me pen and ink.

Madam I dare not, my Commission serves not.

Thus you have driven me of from time to time,
Still urging me with your Commission.
Good Jailer be not so severe.

Good madam I entreat you loose that name
Of Jailer, twilbe a by-word to me and my posterity.

As often as you name your Commission,
So often will I call you Jailer.

Say I should reach you pen, ink and paper,
Who is't dare bear a letter sent from you.

I do not keep a servant so dishonest,
That would deny me that.

Who ever dares, none shall.

Madame, impose the letter to my trust,
Were I to bear it through a field of pikes,
And in my way ten thousand armed men ambusht,
I'd make my passage through the midst of them,
And perforce bear it to the Queen your sister.

Baddy of me, what a bold knaue's this?

Gage leave me to my self,
Thou ever living power, that gives all harts,
Give to my pen, a true persuasive stile,
That it may move my impatient sisters ears,
And urge her to compassionate my woe.

What has she written here?
Much suspected by me, nothing proved can be,
Finis quoth Elizabeth the prisoner,
Pray god it prove so, soft what book's this,
Marry a God, whats here an English bible?
Sanctum Maria pardon this profanation of my hart,
Water Barwick, water, I'll meddle with it no more.

My hart is heavy and my hart doth close,
I am weary of writing, sleepy on the sudden,
Clarentia, leave me, and command some music
In the with-drawing chamber.

Your letter shall be forth-comming Lady,
I will peruse it ere it escape me now.

O God, how pleasant was this sleep to me?
Clarentia, saw thou nothing?

Madame, not I,
I near slept soundlyer for the time.

Nor heard thou nothing?

Neither Madame.

Did not thou put this book into my hand?

Madame not I.

Then 'twas by inspiration, heaven I trust
With his eternal hand, will guide the just.
What chapter's this? Who so puts his trust in the Lord,
Shall not be confounded:
My saviour thanks, on thee my hope I build,
Thou love poor Innocents, and art their shield.

Here have you writ a long excuse it seems,
But no submission to the Queen your sister.

Should they submit that never wrought offence,
The Law will always quit wronged Innocence:
Gage, take my letter, to the Lords commend my humble duty.

Madame I fly,
To give this letter to her majesty:
Hoping when I return,
To give you comfort that now sadly morn.

I do write and send, I'll cross you still;
She shall not speak to any man alive,
But i'll ore-heare her, no letter nor no token
Shall ever have access unto her hands,
But first i'll see it;
So like a subject to my sovereigns state,
I will pursue her with my deadly hate.

O Sir Harry, you look well to your office,
Yonders one in the garden with the Princess.

how knave, with the Princess? she parted even now.

I sir that's all one, but she no sooner came into the
Garden, but he leapt ore the wall, and there
They are together busy in talk Sir.

Here's for thy pains, thou art an honest fellow:
Go take a Guard and apprehend them straight.
Bring them before me,
O this was well found out,
Now will the Queen commend my diligent care,
And praise me for my service to her grace.
Ha, traitors swarm so near about my house,
Tis time to look into it:
O well said Barwick,
Wher's the prisoner.

Here he is in a string my Lord.

Lord bless us, knave what hast thou there?

This is he I told you was busy in talk with the Princess;
What a did there, you must get out of him by examination.

Why knave, this is a beast.

So may your worship be for any thing that I know.

What art thou knave?

If you worship does not remember me,
I hope your worships crupper doth:
But if you have any thing to say to this honest fellow,
Who for his gray head and reverent beard is so like,
He may be a kin to you.

A kin to me, knave i'll have thee whipped.

Then your worship will cry quittance with my
Posteriors for misusing of yours.

Nay, but doest thou flout me still.

I pray your honour to regard my hast,

I know your business, and your hast shall stay,
As you were speaking my Lord Constable.

When as the King shall come to seal these writes.

My Lord you know his highness treasure stays,
And cannot be transported this three months,
Unless that now your honour seal my warrant.

Fellow what then: This warrant that concerns
The Princess death, shuffle amongst the rest,
Hee'le ne'er peru'st.

How, the Princess death? thanks heaven,
By whom I am made a willing instrument her life to save,
That may live crowned when thou art in thy grave.

Stand ready pursuivant,
That when tis signed,
Thou may be gone, and gallop with the wind.

Our Chancellor Lords, this is our sealing day,
This our states business; is our signet there?

Stay your Imperial hand, let not your seal imprint
Deaths impress in your sisters hart.

Our sisters hart, Lo: Howard what means this?

The Chancellor and that iniuryous Lord,
Can well expound the meaning.

Oh chance accursed, how came he by this notice?
Her life is guarded by the hand of heaven,
And we in vain pursue it.

Lord Chancellor, your dealing is not fair,
See Lords, what writs affords it self
To the impress of our scale.

See my Lord, a warrant for the Princess death
Before she be convicted, what juggling call you this?
See, see for Gods sake.

And a pursuiuant ready to post away with it,
To see it done with speed,
What flynty breast could brooke to see her bleed?

Lord Chancellor, out of our prerogative
We will make bold to enterlyne your warrant.

Whose plot was this?

The Chancelors and my Lord Constables.

How was't reueald?

By this gentleman Master Gresham the Kings Agent here.

He hath showed his love to the King Queenes majesties,
His service to his Country, and care of the Princess.

My duty to them all.

In stead of charging of the Sheriffs with her,
We here discharge her keeper Beningfeild:
And where we should have brought her to the block,
We now will have her brought to Hampton court,
There to attend the pleasure of the Queen,
The Pursuiuant that should have posted down
With tidings of her death,
Bear her the message of her reprieved life,
You master Gage assist his speed, a good days work we ha made,
To rescue Innocence so soon betrayed.

Whether go you so fast mistress Clarentia.

A milking.

A milking, that's a poor office for a Madame.

Better be a Milk-maid free, then a Madame in bondage.
Oh had thou heard the Princess yesternight,
Sitting within an arbor all alone to hear a Milk-mayd sing,
It would have moved a flynty hart to melt,
Weeping and wishing, wishing and weeping,
A thousand times she with her self debates,
With the poor Milk-maid to exchange estates,
She was a Sempster in the tower being a Princess,
And shall I her poor gentlewoman, disdain
To be a Milk-maid in the country.

Troth you say true, every one to his fortune,
As men go to hanging, the time hath been,
When I would ha scorned to carry coals, but now the case is altered,
Every man as far as his talent will stretch.

Wher's mistres Clarential to horse to horse,
The Princess is sent for to the Court
She's gone already, come let's after.

The Princess gone, and I left here behind,
Come, come our horses shall out-strip the wind.

And I'll not be long after you, for I am sure
My curtal will cary me as fast as your double Gelding.

I wonder Gage that we have stayed so long,
So near the Court, and yet have heard no news
From our displeased sister, this more affrites me
Then my former troubles, I fear this Hampton court
Will be my grave.

Good madam, blot such thoughts out of your mind,
The Lords I know, are still about your suit,
And make no doubt, but they will so preuaile
Both with the King and Queen, that you shall see
Their haynos anger will be turned to love.

Where is the Princess.

Welcome my good Lo: Howard what says the Queen,
Will she admit my sight?

Madam she will, this night she hath appointed,
That she her self in person means to hear you,
Protract no time, then come let's hast away.

Where is the Princess.

She weights your pleasure at the common stairs.

Usher her in by torch light.

Gentlemen ushers, gentlemen Pensioners, lights
For the Princess, attendance gentlemen.

For her supposed virtues, Royal Queen
Look on your sister with a smiling brow,
And if her fault merit not too much hate,
Let her be censured with all lenity,
Let your deep hatred end where it began,
She hath bin too long banished from the sun.

Our favour shall be far above her desert,
And she that hath been banished from the light,
Shall once again behold our cheerful sight.
You my Lord shall step behind the arras,
And hear our conference, we'll show her Grace,
For there shines too much mercy in your face.

We bear this mind, we errors would not feed,
Nor cherish wrongs, nor yet see Innocents bleed.

Call the Princess.
All forbear this place, except our sister now?

That God that raised you, staye you, and protect
You from your foes, and clear me from suspect.

Wherefore do you cry?
To see your self so low, or us so hye.

Neither dread Queen, mine is a womanish tear,
In part compelled by joy, and part by fear:
Joy of your sight, these brinish tears have bread,
For fear of my Queenes frown, to strike me dead.

Sister, I rather think they're tears of spleen.

You were my sister, now you are my Queen.

I, that's your grief.

Madame, he was my foe, and not your friend
That hath possessed you so, I am as true a
Subject to your Grace, as any lives this day,
Did you but see,
My heart it bends, far lower than my knee.

We know you can speak well: will you submit?

My life madam I will, but not as guilty,
Should I confess
Fault done by her, that never did transgress.
Iioy to have a sister Queen so royal,
I would it as much pleased your majesty,
That you enjoy a sister that's so true:
If I were guilty of the least offence,
Madame, 'twould taint the blood even in your face,
The treasons of the father being noble,
Vnnobles all your children, let your grace
Exact all torture and imprisonment,
What ere my greatest enemies can devise,
And they all have done their worst, yet I
Will your true subject and true sister dye.

Mirror of virtue and bright natures pride,
Pity it had been, such beauty should have died

You'll not submit but end as you begin.

Madame to death I will, but not to sin.

You are not guilty then?

I think I am not.

I am not of your mind.

I would your highness were.

How mean you that.

To think as I think that my soul is clear.

You have been wrong imprisoned then.

I'll not say so.

What ere we think arise and kiss our hand,
Say God hath raised you friends.

Then God hath kept his promise.

Promise, why?

To raise them friends that on his word rely.

And may the heavens applaud this unity,
Accursed be they that first procured this wrong,
Now by my crown, you ha been kept down too long.

Sister this night your self shall feast with me,
To morrow for the country you are free,
Lights for the Princess conduct her to her chamber.

My soul is joyful that this peace is made,
A peace that pleases heaven and earth, and all,
Redeeming captive thoughts from captive thrall,
Fair Queen, the serious business of my father,
Is now at hand to be accomplished,
Of your fair sight needs must take my leave,
Return I shall, tho parting cause us grieve.

Why should two harts be for'st to seperate,
I know your business but believe me sweet,
My soul divines we never more shall meet.

Yet fair Queen hope the best I shall return,
Who met with joy, tho now sadly morn.

What, droopes your honour?

Oh, I am sick.

Where lies your grief?

Where yours and all good subjects else should lye,
Near at the hart, this confirmation I do greatly dread,
For now our true religion will decay,
I do divine who ever lives seven year,
Shall see no Religion here but heresye.

Come come my Lord, this is but for a show,
Our Queen I warrant wishes in her hart,
Her sister Princess were without her head.

No, no my Lords, this peace is natural,
This combination is without deceit,
But I will once more write to licence the Queen,
The plot is laid, thus it shall be performed:
Sir Harry, you shall go attach her seuant
Upon suspicion, of some treachery,
Wherein the Princess shall be accessory,
If this do fail, my policy is down,
But I grow faint, the fever steals on me,
Death like a vulture tyres upon my hart,
I'll leave you two to prosecute this drift,
My bones to earth I give, to heaven my soul lift.

Madam Clarentia, is my Lady stirring?

Yes master Gage, but heavy at the hart,
For she was frited with a dream this night.
She said, she dreamed her sister was new married,
And sat upon a high Imperial throne,
That she her self was cast into a dungeon,
Where enemies enuiron'd her about,
Offering their weapons to her naked breast;
Nay they would scarcly give her leave to pray,
They made such hast to hurry her away.

Heaven shield my Mistres, and make her friends increase,
Convert her foes, estate her in true peace.

Then did I dream of weddings, and of flowers,
Me thought I was within the finest garden,
That ever mortal eye did yet behold,
Then straight me thought some of the chief were picked
To dress the bride, O 'twas the rarest show,
To see the bride go smiling longst the streets,
As if she went to happynes eternal.

Oh most unhappy dream, my fear is now
As great as yours, before it was but small,
Come let's go comfort her, that joys us all.

Winchester's dead, O God upon even at his death,
He showed his malice to the sweet young Princess,
God pardon him, his soul must answer all,
She's still preserved, and still her foes do fall,
The Queen is much besotted on these Prelates,
For there's another raised more base then he,
Poole that Arch, for truth and honesty.

My Lord of Sussex I can tell ill news,
The Cardinal Poole that now was firmly well,
Is suddenly fallen sick and like to die.

Let him go, why, then there's a fall of Prelates.
This realm will never stand in perfect state,
Till all their faction be clear ruinate.

Sir, Harry do you hear the whispring in the Court,
They say the Queen is craysy very ill.

How hard you that?

Tis common through the house.

Tis a sad Court my Lord.

What's the matter say: how fairs the Queen?

Whether in sorrow for the Kings departure,
Or else for grief at Winchesters decease,
Or else that Cardinal Poole is suddenly dead,
I cannot tell, but she's exceeding sick.

The state begins to alter.

Nay more my Lord, I came now from the presence,
I heard the Doctors whisper it in seecret,
There is no way but one.

Gods will be done; whose with the Queen, my Lord?

The Duke of Norfolke, the Earl of Oxford,
The Earl of Arundell, and diverse others,
They are with-drawne into the inward chamber,
There to take counsel, and entreat your presence.

VVee'le weight upon their Honours.

O God, my last nights dream I greatly fear,
It doth presage my death, good master Gage
Look to the path-way that doth come from the court,
I look each minute for deaths messenger.
Would he were here now, so my soul were pure,
That I with patience might the stroke endure.

Madame I see from far a horse-man coming,
This way he bends his speed he comes so fast,
That he is covered in a cloud of dust,
And now I have lost his sight, he appear's again,
Making his way over Hill, Hedge, Ditch and Plain:
One after him, they two strive
As on the race they had wagerd both their lives,
Another after him.

O God, what means this hast?
Pray for my soul, my life cannot long last.

Strange and miraculous, the first being at the gate,
His horse hath broke his neck, and cast his rider.

This same is but as prologue to my death,
My heart is guiltless though they take my breath.

God save the Queen, God save Elizabeth.

God save the Queen, so all good subjects say:
I am her subject, and for her still pray.

My horse did you allegiance at the gate,
For there he broke his neck, and there he lies,
For I my self had much a do to rise,
The fall hath brus'd me, yet I live to cry,
God bless your Grace, God bless your majesty.

Long live the Queen, long live your majesty,

This news is sweet, my hart was sore afraid:
Rise thou first Baron that we ever made.

Thanks to your majesty, happy be my tongue,
That first breathed right, to one that had such wrong.

Am I prevented in my hast, O chance accursed!
My hopes did sooth me, that I was the first;
Let not my duty be ore swayd by spleen,
Long live my Sovereign, and God save the Queen.

Thanks good Sir Iohn, we will deserve your love.

Though third in order, yet the first in love,
I tender my allegiance to your Grace,
Live long fair Queen, thrice happy be your raygne,
He that instates you, your high state maintain.

Lord Howard thanks you ever were our friend,
I see your love continues to the end,
But chiefly, thanks to you my Lord of Hunsdon.

Meaning this Gentleman?

The very same;
His tongue was first proclaymer of our name:
And trusly Gage in token of our Grace,
We give to you a captain Pensioners place.

Madame the Counsel are here hard at hand.

We will descend meet them.

Let's guard our Sovereign praising that power:
That can throw down and raise within an hour.

Come neighbor, come away, every man his faggot,
And his double pot, for joy of the old Queenes death,
Let bells ring, and children sing.
For we may have cause to remember,
The seventeenth day of November.

How now my masters what's here to do.

Faith making Bone-fires for joy of the new Queen,
Come sir your penny, and you be a true subject,
You'll battle with us your faggot, we'lbe merry yfayth.

And you do well: and yet me think 'twere fit,
To spend some funeral tears upon her hearce.
Who while she lived was dear unto you all.

I, but do not you know the old proverb,
We must live by the quick, and not by the dead.

Did you not love her father when he lived,
As dearly as you ere did love any,
And yet rejoiced at his funeral:
Likewise her brother ^em'd him dear,
Yet once departed, joyfully you sung,
Run to make Bone-fiers, to proclaim your love
Unto the new, forgetting still the old:
Now she is gone, how you moan for her,
Were it not fit a while to moan her hearse,
And dutyfully there rejoice the the other;
Had you the wisest and the louingst Prince,
That ever swayd a Sceptre in the world,
This is the love he shall have after life:
Let Princes while they live have love or fear 'tis fit,
For after death, there's none continues it.

By my faith my masters, he speaks wisely,
Come we'll to the end of the lane, and there we'll
Make a bonfire and be merry,
Faith agreed i'll spend my halfepenny towards
Another faggot, rather then the new Queen shall
Want a Bone-fire.

I blame you not, nor do I you commend,
For you will still the strongest side defend.

Long live, long reign our Sovereign.

We thank you all.

The imperial Crown, I here present your Grace,
With it my staff of Office and my place.

Whilst we this Crown so long your place enjoy.

Th'mperiall Sceptre here I offer up.

Keep it my Lord, and with it be you hye admiral.

This Cap of maintenance, I present my state
of Office, and my utmost service.

Your love we know.

Pardon me gracious Madame 'twas not spleen,
But that alegance that I owed my Queen,
Madame I served her truly at that day,
And I as truly will your Grace obey,

We do as freely pardon as you truly serve,
Only your staff of Office we'll displace,
In stead of that we'll owe you greater Grace,

Long live the Queen, long live your Majesty,
I have bid hard to be the first reporter,
Of these glad tidings first; and all these here.

You are in your love as free as in your care,
You're come even just a day after the fair.

What's he, my Jailer?

God preserve your Grace.

Be not ashamed man, look me in the face,
Who have you now to patronize your strictnes on?
For your kindness this I will bestow,
When we have one we would have hardly used
And cruelly dealt with, you shall be the man,
This is a day for peace, not for vengeance fit,
All your good deeds wee'le quit, all wrongs remit.
Where we left off, proceed.

The Sword of Justice on my bended knee,
I to your Grace present, heaven bless your reign.

This Sword is ours, this staff is yours again.

This Garter with the order of the George,
Two Ornaments unto the Crown of England,
I here present.

Possess them still my Lord, what Offices bear you?

I Captain of your highness Pensioners.

I of your Guard.
I Sergeant Trumpetor present my Mace.

Some we intend to raise, none to displace;
Lord Hunsdon, we will one day find a staff
To poise your hand: you are our Cousin,
And deserve to be employed nearer our person:
But now to you from whom we take this staff,
Since Cardinal Poole is now decea'st and dead,
To show all malice from our breast is worn,
Before you let that Purse and Mace be borne,
And now to London Lords lead on the way,
Praising that King, that all Kings else obey.

I from this City London do present,
This Purse and Bible to your Majesty,
A thousand of your faithful Citizens,
In Velvet Coats and Chains well mounted, stay
To greet their royal Sovereign on the way.

We thank you all: but first this book I kiss.
Thou art the way to honour; thou to bliss,
An English Bible, thanks my good Lord Mayor,
You of our body and our soul have care,
This is the Jewel that we still love best,
This was our solace when we were distressed,
This book that hath so long concealed it self,
So long shut up, so long hid; now Lords see,
We here vnclaspe, for ever it is free:
Who looks for joy, let him this book adore,
This is true food for rich men and for poor,
Who drinks of this, is certain ne'er to perish,
This will the soul with heavenly virtue cherish,
Lay hand upon this Anchor every soul,
Your names shall be in an eternal scroll;
Who builds on this, dwel's in a happy state,
This is the fountain clear imaculate,
That happy issue that shall us succeed,
And in our populous Kingdom this book read:
For them as for our own selves we humbly pray,
They may live long and blessed; so lead the way.


