IS this the aide our Cousin Burgundy,
And the great Constable of France assured us?
Have we marched thus fart through the heart of France?
And with the terror of our English Drums:
kourde the poor trembling French, which leave their towns
That now the Wolves affrighted from the fields,
Do get their pray, and kennel in their streets?
Our thundering Canons, now this fortnight space,
Like common Bell-men in some market town,
Have cried the Constable and Burgundy:
But yet I see they come not to our aide,
We'll bring them in, or by the blessed light,
We'll search the Ground-stilles of their Cittis walls,
Since you have brought me hither: I will make,
The proudest Tower that stands in France to quake,
I marvel Scales returns not, for by him
I do respect to hear their resolutions.

My Sovereign he is happily returned.

Welcome my Lord, welcome good Cousin Scales,
What news from Burgundy, what is his answer?
What comes he to our succour as he promised?

Not by his good will, for ought that I can see
He lingers still in his long fiedge at Nuse.
I urged his promise and your expectation,
Even to the force and compass of my spirit,
I cheered my firm persuasions, with your hopes.
And gilded them with my best Oratory,
I framed my speech still fitly as I ^ound
The temper of his humour, to be wrought upon,
But still I found him earthly, vnresolude,
Muddy, and me thought ever through his eyes,
I saw his wavering and unsettled spirit,
And to be short, subtle and treacherous,
And one that doth entend no good to you,
And he will come, and yet he wants power,
He would fai^e come, but may not leave the siege,
He hopes he shall, but yet he knows not when,
He purposed, but some unpediments,
Have hindered his determined intent,
Briefly, I think he will not come at all.

But is he like to take the town of Nuse?

My Lord the town is liker to take him,
That if he chance to come to you at all,
Ti^s but for succour.

But what says Count Saint Paul?

My Lord he lies, and revels at S. Quintins,
And laughs at Edwards coming into France,
There Dominering with his drunken crew,
Make Jigges of us, and in their slau^ring i^sts,
Tell how like rogues we lie here in the field,
Then comes a slave one of those drunken sots,
In with a Tavern reckoning for a supplication,
Disguised with a cushion on his head,
A Drawers Apron for a Heralds Coat.
And tells the Count, the King of England craves
One of his worthy honours Dog-kennels,
To be his lodging for a day or two.
With some such other Tavern foolery:
With that this filthy rascal greasy rout,
Burst out in laughter at this worthy jest,
Neighing like horses: thus the Count Saint Paul
Regards his promise to your majesty.

Will no man thrust the slave into a sackbut?

Now by this light were I but near the slave with a black Jacke I would beat
out his brains.


If it please your highness but to say the word,
We'll pluck him out of Quintins by the cares.

No cousin Howard, we'll reserve our valour,
For better purpose, since they both refuse us,
Our selves will be vnriualde in our honour.
Now our first cast my Lord is at maine France,
Whilst yet our Army is in health and strong,
And have we once but broke unto that war,
I will not leave S. Paul, nor Burgundy,
Not a bare Pigscoate to shroud them in.
Herald.

My Sovereign.

Go Derauld, (...) to Lewes the French King,
Denounce sterne war, and tell him I am c^me,
To take possession of my Realm of France.
Defy him boldly from us, be thy voice
As fierce as thunder, to affright his soul:
Derauld be gone I say, and be thy breath,
Piercing as lightning, and thy words as death

I go my Liedge resolude to your hie will.

Sound Drum I say, set forward with our power,
And France ere long expect a dreadful hour,
I will not take the English standard down,
Till thou empale my temples with thy Crown.

Herald of England, we are pleased to hear,
What message thou hast brought us from thy King,
Prepare thy self, and be advised in speech.
English Herald, Right gracious and most Christian king of France,
I come not to thy presence vnpreparde
To do the message of my Royal Liedge.
Edward the Fourth, of England and of France,
The lawful King, and Lord of Ireland,
Whose puissant magnanimous breast incensde,
Through manifest notorious injuries,
Offred by thee King Lewes and thy French,
Against his title to the crown of France,
And right in all these Dukedoms following,
Aquitaine, Aniow, Guyen, A guilesme,
Breathes forth by me the Organ of his speech,
Hostile defiance to thy realm and thee:
And trampling now upon the face of France,
With barbed horse, and valiant armed foot:
Himself the leader of those martial troupes,
Bids thee to battle, where and when thou dare,
Except thou make such restitution
And yearly tribute on good hostages,
As may content his just conceived wrath,
And to this message answer I expect.

Right peremptory is this embassage,
And were my royal Brother of England pleased,
To entertain those kind affections,
Where with we d^e ^brace his amity:
N^olesse were all these thunder-threatning words,
Let heaven (where all our thoughts are registered)
Bear record, with what deep desire of peace,
We shall subscribe to such conditions,
As equity for England shall propound,
If Edward have sustained wrong in France,
Lewes was never author of that wrong,
Yet faultles we will make due recompense,
We are assured that his (...) thoughts
In his mild spirit ^o never mean these wars,
Till Charles Burgundy once our fawning friend,
But now our open foe, and Count S. Paul,
Our subject once and Constable of France,
But now a traitor to our Realm and us,
Were motives to incite him unto Arms,
Which having done will leave him on my life.

The King my master reckes not Burgundy,
And scorns S. Paul that treacherous Constable,
His puissance is sufficient in it self,
To conquer France like his progenitors.

He shall not need to waste by force of war,
Where peace shall yield him more then he can win:
We covet peace, and we will purchase it
At any rate that reason can demand,
And it is better England join in league
With us his strong, old, open enemy,
Than with those weak new dissenibling friends,
We do secure us from our open foes,
But trust in friends (though faithless) we repose,
My Lord S. Pier and cousin Burbon speak,
What censure you of Burgundy, and S. Paul?

Dread Lord, it is well known that Burgundy
Made show of tender service to your majesty,
Till by the engine of his flatteries,
He made a breach into your Highness love,
Where entered once and thereof full posse^,
He so abused that royal excellence,
By getting footing into many towns,
Castles and forts belonging to your Crown,
That now he holds them against your realm you.

And Count S. Paul the Constable of France,
Ambitious in that high authority,
^surps the lands and Seigneuries of those
That are true subjects, noble (...) of France,
Your boundless favours did him first suborn,
And now to be your Liegeman he thinks scorn.

By this conjecture, the unsteady course,
Thy royal master undertakes in France,
And Herald intimate what seruent ^eale,
We have to league with Edward and his English,
Three hundred crowns we give thee for reward,
And of rich Crimson velvet thirty yards,
In hope thou wilt unto thy Sovereign tell,
We show thee not one discontented look,
Nor render him one misbeholden word:
But his defiance and his dare to war,
We swallow with the s^pple oil of peace:
Which gentle Herald if thou can procure,
A thousand crown shall justly guerdon thee.

So please it your most sacred Majesty,
To send unto my gra^ious Sovereign,
Equal conditions for the bonds of peace,
And restitution of his injuries,
His temper is not of obdurate malice,
But sweet relenting princely clemency,
Perform your promise of a thousand crowns,
And second me with some fit messenger,
And I will undertake to work your peace.

By the true honour of a Christian King,
Effect our peace and thou shalt have our crowns,
And we will post a Herald after thee,
That shall confirm thy speech, and our designs:
Go Mugeroune, see to this Herald given
The velvet, and three hundred crowns pre^osde,
Farewell good friend, remember our request,
And kindly recommend us to King Edward.
How think you Lords, st^ not more requisite
To make our peace, then war with Englands power.

Yes gracious Lord, the wounds are bleeding yet,
That Talbot, Bedford, and King Henry made,
Which peace must cure, or France shall languish still.

Besides (my Liege) by these intestine foes,
The Constable and treacherous Burgundy,
The States in danger if the English stir.

Tis perilous, and full of doubt my Lords,
We must have peace with England every way,
Who shall be Herald in these high affairs?

No better man then Monsieur Mugeroune,
Whose wit is sharpe, whose eloquence is sound,
His presence gracious, and his courage good,
A gentleman, a scholar, and a soldier,
A complete man for such an Embassage:
Art thou content to be employde Mugeroune,
In this negotiation to King Edward?

If your most sacred Majesty command,
Your humble vassal Mugeroune shall go.

Gramercies Mugeroune, but thou must assume,
A Heralds habit, and his office both,
To plead our love, and to procure us peace
With English Edward, for the good of France.

I know the matter and the form my Lord,
Give me my Heralds coat, and I am gone.

Thou art a man composoe for business,
Attend on us for thy instructions.
And other fit supplies for these affairs,
And for thy diligence expect reward.

Whither away so fast goes Burgundy?

Nay rather whither goes the Constable?

Why to King Edward (man) is he not come?
Meanst thou not like wise to go visit him?

Oh excellent, I know that in thy soul,
Thou know that I do purpose nothing less,
Nay I do know for all thy outward show,
Thou hast no meaning once to look on him.
Brother dissembler, leave this colouring,
With him that means as falsely as thy self.

I, but thou know y^ Edward on our letters,
And hoping our assistance when he came,
Did make this purposde voyage into France,
And with his forces is he here arrived,
Trusting that we will keep our word with him.
Now, though we mean it not, yet set a face
Upon the matter, as though we intended
To keep our word with him effectnally.

And for my better countenance in this case,
My lingering siege at Nuse will serve the turn,
There will I spend the time to disappoynt,
King Edwards hope of my consoyning with him.

And I will keep me still here in S. Quintins,
Pretending mighty matters for his aide,
But not performing any on my word,
The rather Burgundy, because I aim,
At matters which perhaps may cost your head,
If all hit right to expectation,
In the mean space like a good crafty knave,
That hugs the man, he wishes hanged in hart,
Keep I fair weather still with Burgundy.
Till matters fall out for my purpose fit.
Ici sont mon secrets, beau temps pour moy.

Ici sont mon secrets, beau temps pour moy.
Are ye so crafty Constable? proceed, proceed,
You quick sharpe sighted man, imagine me
Blind, witless, and a filly Idiot,
That pries not into all your policies,
Who I? no, God doth know my simple wit,
Can never sound a judgment of such reach,
As is our cunning Constable of France:
Persuade thy self so still, and when time serves,
And that thou art in most extremity,
Needing my help, then take thou heed of me,
In mean while Sir, you are the only man
That hath my heart, hath? I, and great reason too,
Thus it befits men of deep reach to do.
Well Constable, you'll back again to Nuse,
And not aide English Edward?

What else man?
And keep thee in S. Quintins, so shall we
Smile at King Edwards weak capacity.

Tell not me Burgundy, tis I am wronged,
And you have dealt like a disloyal Knight.

Edward of England, these are unkingly words,

He that will do (my Lord) what he should not,
Must and shall hear of me what he would not,
I say again you have deluded me.

Am I not come according to my word?

No Charles of Burgundy, thy word was given
To meet with me in April, now tis August,
The place appointed Calice, not Lorraine,
And thy approach to be with martial troupes:
But thou art come, not having in thy train,
So much as Page or Lackey to attend thee,
As who should say thy presence were munition,
And strength enough to answer our expect:
Summer is almost spent, yet nothing done,
And all by dalliance with uncertain hope.

My forces lay before the city Nuse,
From which I could not rise, but with dishonour,
Unless upon some composition had.

There was no such exception in your letters.
Why smiles Lord Scales?

My man reports my Lord,
The composition that the Duke there made,
Was mere compulsion: for the citizens
Drove him from thence perforce.

I thought so much:
We should not yet have seen your excellence,
But that your heals were better then your hands.

Lord Scales, thou dost me wrong to slander me.

Letting that pass, it shall be seen my Lord,
That we are able of our self to claim
Our right in France, without or your assistance,
Or any others, but the help of heaven.

I make no question of it, yet the Constable
Pressed with no such occasion as I was,
Might have excusde us both if he had pleased.

Accuse him not, your cities as we came,
Were even as much to be condemnde as his,
They gave us leave to lye within the field,
And scarcely would affoord us meat for money.
This was small friendship in respect of that,
You had ingagde your honour to perform.
But march we forward as we were determined,
This is S. Quintins, where you say my Lord,
The Constable is ready to receive us.

So much he signified to me by letter.

Well we shall see his entertainment: forward.
Fly to our maine battle, bid them stand,
There's treason plotted: speak to me Lord Scales,
Or if there be no power of life remaining,
To utter thy hearts gr^euance, make a sign,
Two of our common soldiers slain beside,
This is hard welcome: but it was not you,
At whom the tatall enginer did aim,
My breast the level was, though you the mark,
In which conspiracy answer me Duke,
Is not thy soul as guilty as the Earles?

Perish my soul, King Edward, if I knew
Of any such intention: yet I did, and grieve that it
hath sped no otherwise.

Howard and Sellinger?
What is there hope of life in none of them?

The soldiers are both slain outright my Lord,
But the Lord Scales a little is recovered.

Convey his body to our Pavilion,
And let our Surgeons use all diligence
They can devise for safeguard of his life,
Whilst we with all extremity of war,
Go plague S. Quintins: Howard fetch on our powers,
We will not stir a foot, till we have she wne
Just vengeance on the Constable of France.
Oh God, to woo us first to pass the sea,
And at our coming thus to halt with us,
I think the like thereof was never seen.
But wheres the Duke?

Gone as it seems my Lord,
Stepped secretly away, as one that knew
His conscience would accuse him if he staide.

A pair of most dissembling hypocrites,
Is he and this base Earl, on whom I vow,
Leaving King Lewis vnpreiudizde in peace,
To spend the whole measure of my kindled rage,
Their streets shall sweat with their effused blood,
And this bright Sun be darkened with the smoke,
Of smouldring cinders, when their city lies
Buried in ashes of revengeful fire,
On whose pale superstcies in the stead
Of parchmet, with my lance I'll draw these lines,
Edward of England left this memory,
In just revenge of hateful treachery.
Lord Howard have ye done as I commanded?

Our battles are disposed, and on the brow
Of every inferior seruiter my Lord,
You might behold destruction figured,
Greedily thrusting to begin the fight:
But when no longer they might be restrained,
And that the drum and trumpet both began
To sound wars cheerful harmony: behold,
A flag of truce upon the walls was hanged,
And forth the gates did issue meekly paced,
Three men, whereof the Constable is one,
The other two the Gunner and his mate,
By whose gross ouer-sight (as they report)
This sudden chance unwittingly befell.

Bring forth the Constable: the other two,
See them safe guarded, till you know our pleasure.
Now my Lord Howard, how (...) with Scales?

Well my dread Sovereign, now his wound is dressed,
And by the opinion of the Surgeons,
Its thought he shall not perish by this hurt.

I am the gladder, but unfaithful Earl,
I do not see how yet I can dispense
With thy submission, this was not the welcome,
Your letters sent to England, promisde me.

Right high and mighty Prince cond^mne me not,
That am as innocent in this offence,
As any soldier in the English army,
The fault was in our gunners ignorance,
Who taking you for Lewis King of France,
That likewise is within the cities ken,
Made that unlucky shot to beat him back,
And not of malice to your majesty,
To knowledge which, I brought the with my self,
And thirty thousand crowns within this purse,
Sent by the Burgers to redeem your lack.

Constable of France, we will not sell a drop
Of English blood, for all the gold in France:
But in so much two of our men are slain,
To quit their deaths, those two that came with thee
Shall both be cramde into a Cannons mouth,
And so he shot into the town again:
It is not like but that they knew our Colours,
And of set purpose did this villainy:
Nor can I be persuaded thoroughly,
But that our person was the mark they aimed at;
Yet are we well content to hold you excusde,
Mary our soldiers must be satisfied,
And therefore first shall be distributed,
These crowns amongst the, then you shall return,
And of your best provision send to us,
Thirty wane load, beside twelve t^ne of wine.
This if the Burgers will subscribe unto,
Their peace is made, otherwise I will proclaim,
Free liberty for all to take the spoil.

Your highness shall be answered presently,
And I will see these articles performed.

Yet one thing more, I will that you my Lord,
Together with the Duke of Burgundy,
Do ere to morrow noone bring all your force,
And toyne with ours, or else we do recant,
And these conditions shall be frustrate.

Mine are at hand my Lord, and I will write,
The Duke may like wise be in readiness.

Let him have safe conduct through our army,
And against the morning every leader see,
His troupes be furnished, for no longer time,
God willing shall the trial be deferred,
Twixt Lewis and us. What echoing sound is this?

A gentleman from the K. of France my Lord,
Craves parlance with your excellence.

A gentleman, bring him in.
What news a Gods name fro our brother Lewis?

Most puissant and most honourable King,
My royal master, Lewis the King of France,
Doth greet your Highness with unfeigned love,
Wishing your health, prosperity, and rule,
And thus he says by me. When was it seen,
That ever Lewis pretended hurt to England,
Either by close conspirators sent over,
To undermine your state; or openly,
By taking arms, with purpose to invade?
Nay when was it, that Lewis was ever heard,
So much as to detract from Edwards name?
But still hath done him all his due of speech,
By blazing to the world his high deserts,
Of wisdom, valour, and his heroic birth:
Whence is it then that Edward is incensoe,
To render hate for love, for amity sterne war?
Not of himself we know: but by the means
Of some infectious counsel, that like mud,
Would spoil the pure temper of his noble mind,
It is the Duke, and that pernicious rebel,
Earl of S. Paul, have set abroach these wars,
Who of themselves, unable to proceed,
Would make your Grace the instrument of wrong,
And when you have done what you can for them,
You shall be sure of nothing but of this,
Still to be doubled and dissembled with.
But if it might seem gracious in your eye,
To cast off these despised consederates,
Unfit companions for so great a Prince,
And join in league with Lewis my royal master,
Him shall you find as willing as of power,
To do your Grace all offices of love:
And what commodity may spring thereby,
To both the Realms, your Grace is wise enough,
Without my rude suggestions to imagine,
Besides, much bloodshed for this present time,
Will be prevented when two such personages,
Shall meet together to shake hands in peace,
And not with shock of Lance and Curtelaxe,
That Lewis is willing, I am his substitute,
And he himself in person if you please,
Not far from hence will signify as much.

Sir, withdra^ and give us leave a while,
To take advisement of our Counsellors,
What say ye Lords unto this proffered truce?

In my conceit let it not be slipped my Lord.

Wilt not be dishonour having landed
So great an army in these parts of France,
And not to fight before we do return:

How can it when the enemy submits,
And of himself makes tender of allegiance?

I that's the question whether he will yield,
And do King Edward fealty or no.

What talk ye Lords? he shall subscribe to that,
Or no conditions I'll accept at all.

Let him be bound my Lord to pay your Grace,
Toward your expenses, since your coming over,
Seauentie fine thousand crowns of the Sun,
And yearly after fifty thousand more,
During your life, with homage there withal,
That he doth hold his royalty from you,
And take his offer, twill not beamisse.

It shall be so, draw you the articles,
And Sellinger call forth the messenger,
Bring with thee too a cup of massy gold,
And bid the bearer of our privy purse,
J^lose therein a hundred English Kyals,
Friend we do accept thy masters League,
With no less firm affection then he craves,
If he will meet us here betwixt our tents,
It shall on both sides be confirmed by oath,
On this condition that he will subscribe,
To certain Articles shall be proposde,
And so thou hast thy answer, to requite
Thy pains herein, we give to thee this cup.

Health and ^crease of honour wait on Edward.

Lord Howard bring the Frenchman on his way.

King Lewis is one that never was precise:
But now Lord Howard and Tom Sellinger,
There is a task remains for you to do,
And that is this, you two shall be disguised,
And one of you ^yre to Burgundy,
The other to the Constable of France,
Where you shall learn in secret if you can,
If they intend to meet us here to morrow,
Or how they take this our accord with France,
Somewhat it gives me you will bring from thence
Worthy the noting, will you undertake it?

With all my hart my L. I am for Burgun^e.

And I am for the Constable of France.

Make speed again, what news?

The king of France my L. attended royally,
Is marching hitherward to meet your Grace.

He shall be welcome, hast thou drawn the articles?

Yes my dread Sovereign.

Go, call forth our train,
We may receive him with like majesty.

My princely brother, we are grieved much,
To think you have been at so great a charge,
And toyld your royal self so far from home,
Upon the inconstant promise of those men,
That both bissemble with your Grace and me.

Brother of France, you might condenme us rightly,
Not only of great wrong and toil sustained,
But of exceeding solly, if incited,
We had presumde to enter these Dominions,
Upon no other reason then the word,
And weak assistance of the Earl S. Paul,
Or Burgundies persuasion: tis our right,
That wings the body of composed war,
And though we listened to their ^atteries,
Yet so we shaped the course of our affairs,
As of our self we might be able found,
Without the trusting to a broken staff.

I know your majesty had more discretion,
But this is not the occasion of our meeting,
If you be pleased to entertain a peace,
My kingly brother in the sight of these,
And of the al-discouering eye of beauen,
Let us embrace, for as my life I swear,
I tender England and your happiness.

The like do I by you and warlike France:
But princely brother ere this knot be knit,
There are some few conditions to be signed,
That done, I am as ready as your self.

Fair brother, let us hear them what they be.

Herald repeat the articles.

First it is covenanted that Lewis King of France, according to the custom of
his predecessors, shall do homage to King Edward, King of England, as his
Sovereign and true heir to all the Dominions of France.


How as his Sovereign? that were to depose
And quite bereave him of his Diadem,
Will kingly Lewis stoop to such vassallage?

Burbon and if he will not let him choose.

Brother have patience, Burbon seal your lips,
And interrupt not these high consequents.
Forward Herald, what is else demanded?

Secondly it is covenanted that Lewis King of France, shall pay unto Edward
King of England, immediately upon the agreement betwixt their Majesties,
seauentie five thousand crowns of the sun, toward the charge King Edward
hath been at since his arrival in these parts of France.


Mort dieu, heel neither leave him Crown nor coin.

Burbon I say be silent, Herald read on.

Thirdly and lastly, it is covenanted, that over and beside those seauentie
five thousand crowns of the sun, now presently to be paid, Lewis King of
France shall yearly hereafter, during the life of Edward King of England, pay
fifty thousand crowns more without fraud or guile, to be tendered at his
Majesties Castle, commonly called the Tower of London.


Nay bind him that he bring his Lordship a couple of
Capons too every year beside.
Here is a peace indeed far worse then war.

Brother of France are you resolude to do,
According as you hear the covenants drawn?

Brother of England, mount your royal throne,
For subjects weal, and glory of my God,
And to deal justly with the world beside,
Knowing your title to be lineal,
From the great Edward of that name the third,
Your predecessor, thus I do resign,
Giving my Crown and Sceptre to your hand,
As an obedient Liegeman to your Grace.

The same do I deliver back again,
With as large interest as you had before.
Now for the other covenants.

Those my Lord,
Shall likewise be performed with expedition,
And ever after, as you have prescribde,
The yearly pension shall be truly paid.

Swear on this book King Lewis so help you God,
You mean no otherwise then you have said.

So help me God as I dissemble not.

And so help he me as I entend to keep,
Unfeigned league and truce with noble France:
And kingly brother now to consummate,
This happy day feast in our royal tent,
English and French are one, so it is meant.

A peace concluded, says thou? is't not so?

My Lord I do assure you it is so.

And thou affirmst the like? say, dost thou not?

I do my Lord, and that for certainty.

I have found it now, the villain Constable
Hath secretly with Edward thus compact,
To join our King and him in amity,
And thereby doubtless got into his hands,
Such lands and Dukedoms as I aimed at,
And leaves me disappointed in my hope,
A plague upon such crastie cosening,
Now shall I be a mark for them to aim at,
And that bile ^ane to triumph in my toil.

(...) so, for it can be no otherwise,
Burgundy hath been privy to this plot,
Conspiros with Lewis and the English King,
To save (...) ^ne stake, and assure himself,
Of all those Seigneuries I hoped for,
And thereupon this close peace is contriude,
Now must the Constable be as a butte,
(...) all their bullets to be leveled at,
Hell and hot vengeance light on Burgundle,
For this his subtle secret villainy.

Well fellow for thy pains take that,
Leave me alone, for I am much displeasoe.

And get thee gone my friend, there's for thy pains, to Howard.
So leave me to my self.

Fare ye well Sir, I hope I have pepperd ye.

And so I think have I my Constable.

Now Constable, this peace, this peace,
What think ye of it man?

Nay rather what thinks Burgundy?

I think he that did contrive the same,
Was little less then a dissembling villain.

Dog bite thy self, come on, come on,
Have not you plaid Iohn for the King,
To save your self Sir?

I, art thou good at that?
Adieu Sir, I may chance to hit you pat.

You may Sir, I perhaps may be before ye,
And for this cunning through the nose to bore ye.

So Sellinger, we then perceive by thee
The Duke is passing angry at our league?

I, my dread Lord beyond comparison,
Like a mad dog snatching at every one
That passes by: shall I but show you how,
And act the manner of his tragic fury?

No stay a while, me thought I heard thee say,
They meant to greet us by their messengers.

They did my Lord.

What and the Constable too?

My Sovereign yes.

But how t^ke he the news?

Faith even as discontented as might be,
But being a more deep melancholiste,
And sullenner of temper then the Duke,
He chawes his malice, fumes frothes at mouth,
Uttering but little more then what we gather
By his disturbed looks and rivaled front,
Saving that now and then his boiling passion,
Damned up as in a surnace, finding vent
Breaks through his severed lips into short pusses,
And then he mumbles forth a word or two,
As doth a toothles Monk when hes at matins.

Oh it was sport alone to note their carriage,

Sport my Lord? will you but hear me speak,
And if I do not weary you with laughter,
Ne'er trust Tom Sellinger more upon his word.

I pray thee peace, by this it should appear
One of their messengers is come, go see,
Upon my life we shall have some devise,
Of new dissimulation how now Tom?

Tis as your highness did suppose my Lord,
^ere is a messenger from Burgundy.

Excellent good, admit him presently,
And brother of France, let me entreat your grace
To stand aside a little in my tent,
Least finding us together, he refrain,
To tell the message he is sent about,
So sure I am persuaded we shall find
Some notable piece of knavery set a foot.

With al my hart, urge him speak loud enough,
That I my Lord may understand him too.

Fear not, I have the method in my mind:
What it is you my Lord of Conte^ welcome.
How doth the valiant Duke, in health I hope?

In health (my Lord) of body, though in mind
Somewhat distempered, that your Grace hath ioind
In league with his professed enemy.

How say you y^ my Lord? pray you speak out,
For I of late, by reason of a cold,
Am somewhat thick of hearing.

Thus my Lord,
Your Grace demanded if the Duke were well,
I answer you, he is in health of body,
Though inwardly in mind somewhat perplexed,
That you without his knowledge have taken truce
With childish Lewes that hartlesse King of France.

With whom I pray y^ a little louder sir.

With childish Lewes that hartlesse K. of France.

I now do understand you, is it that
He takes unkindly? why if he had come
With his expected forces as he promised,
I had been still incapable of peace,
But he deceiving me, the fault was his.

No my good Lord, the fault was not in him,
But in that lewd pernicious counterfeit,
That crafty Fore the Constable of France,
Who counseld him to keep him at his siege,
Saying it would be more dishonourable
To rise from thence, then any way profitable,
To meet your Majesty, beside my Lord,
It hath bin proved since, how much the Constable
Hates your proceedings, by that wilful shot,
Was made against you from S. Quintins walls,
Which though he seemed to colour with fair speech,
The truth is, they did level at your self,
And grieved when they heard you were not slain.

May I be bold to credit your report?

The Duke upon his honour bad me say,
That it was true, and there withal quoth he,
Tell noble Edward if he will recant,
And fall from Lewes again, knowing it is
More for his dignity to be sole King,
And conquer France as did his ancestors,
Then take a fee, and so be satisfied,
That I am ready with twelve thousand soldiers
All well appointed, and not only will,
Deliver him the Constable of France,
That he may punish him as he sees good,
But seat him in the threne imperial,
Which now another basely doth usurp,

Speak that again, I heard not your last words

But seat you in the throne imperial,
Which now another basely doth usurp.

I thank his honour for his good regard,
Pleases you stay till we have pausde upon it,
And you shall have our answer to the Duke,
Tom Sellinger receive him to your tent,
And let him taste a cup of Drleance wine,
Now my kingly brother, have you heard this news?

So plainly my Lord, that I scarce held my self,
From stepping forth, hearing my royal name,
So much prophande and slubberd as it was,
But I do weigh the person like himself
From whence it came, a sly dissembler,
And spite my anger I was forced sometime,
To smile to think the Duke doth hang his friend,
Behind his back, whom to his face he smothes.

But we shall have far better sport anon:
Howard tells me that another messenger,
is come in Post-bast from the Constable,
As you have begun with patience hear the re^.

No more ado, i'll to my place again,
Remember that you still be deaf my Lord,

I warrant you, Howard, call in the messenger.

Health to the victorious King of England:

Tell him he must strain out his voice aloud,
For I am somewhat deaf, and cannot hear.

His Majesty requests you to speak out,
Because his hearing is of late decayde.

The worthy Earl S. Paul.

Come near me.

The worthy Earl S. Paul greets noble Edwa.
And gives your grace to understand by me,
That whereas Charles that painted sepulchre,
And most disloyal Duke of Burgundy,
Hath but vsurpt the habit of a friend,
Being in heart your deadly enemy,
As well appears in his false breach of promise,
And that whereas he never meant himself,
To send you aide, but likewise was the means,
To binder my Lords well affected duty,
Alleging you desired his company
But that you might betray him to his King,
Beside whereas it will be proud my Lord,
That he did hire the Gunner of S. Quintins,
For a large sum of money, to discharge
Three several pieces of great Ordenance,
Upon your coming to that cursed town,
To slay your Majesty: in which regard
If it will please you to revoke from France.
And think of Burgundy as he deserves,
The Duke with expedition bad me say,
That he would put the Earl into your hands.
Whereby you might revenge his treacherous purpose
And aid you too with twice flue thousand men,
And seat you like a conqueror in France,

Can it seem possible that two such friends,
So firmly knit together as they were,
Should on a sudden now be such great soes^

The Earl my Lord could never abide ye Duke
Since his last treason against your sacred person,
Before Saint Quintins came to open light.

Was that the cause of their dissention the^

It was my lord.

Well I will think vpont,
And you shall have our answer by and by,
Cousin Howard take him aside,
But let him be kept from the others sight.

Sir will you walk in, my Lord will take advise,
And so dispatch you back again unto the Earl,

Here's bying of billanie who shall have all,
Fraud with deceit, deceit with fraud outfacde,
I would the devil were there to cry swoope-stake,
But how intends your Grace to deal with them?

Faith in their kind, I am the steel you see,
Against the which their envy being struck,
The Sparkles of hypocriste fly forth,
T were not amiss to quench them in their blood.

My Lord here's letters to your Majesty, One from the Duke of Burgundy, the
other from the Constable,


More villainy, a thousand crowns to nothing:

Can there be more then is already broached,
We thinks they have already done so well,
As this may scrue to bring them both to hell.

No, no, they are indifferently well laden,
But yet their fraught, not full, see other ware,
Other provision to prepare their way,
The very same (my Lord) which they pretend,
In love to you against my life and crown,
The same they undertake to do for me
Against your safety, urging if I please,
That they will join their forces both with mine,
And in your back return to Calice, cut the throats
Of you and all your soldiers.

Oh damnable.
But that I see it figurde in these lines,
I would have sworn there had bin nothing left,
For their pernicious brain to work upon.

A traitor is like, a boldfacde hypocrite,
That never will be brought unto a nonplus,
So long as he hath liberty to speak.

The way to cure them, is to cut them off,
Call forth their messengers once more to us,

Both of them my Lord?

Yes, both together.
We'll see if they have grace to blush or no,
At that their masters shame now to attempt.

What is his Majesty of France so near?
And Monsieur Rosse the Earles secretary?
I fear some hurt depends upon his presence,

How comes it that I see the french King here?
I and the Lord of County too me thinks,
Pray God our message be not made a scorn.

You told me that you came from earl S. Paul.

I did my Lord, and therein fabled not.

You told me too of many kind indeyour^
Which he intended for our benefit?

No more then he is willing to perform.

Know you his hand-writing if you seete?

I do my Lord.

Is this his hand or no^:

I cannot say but that it is his hand.

How comes it then that underneath his hand
My death is sought, when you that are his mouth,
Tune to our ears a quite contrary tale?
The like read you decyphred in this paper,
Concerning treacherous wavering Burgundy,
Unless you grant they can divide themselves,
And of two shapes become four substances,
How is it I should have their knightly aide,
And yet by them be utterly destroide?

And I to be protected by their means,
And yet they shall conspire against my life.

What call you this, but vile hypocrisy?

Nay pesant-like unheard of treachery

My Lord upbraid not me with this offence:
I do protest I knew of no such letters.
Nor any other intention of the Duke,
More then before was uttered in my message.

Will you be halting too before a creeple?
Do you not remember what they were,
That first did certify the Duke of truce,
Betwixt the renowned Edward and the French?

Yes they were two soldiers, what of that?

Those soldiers were this Gentleman and I,
Where we did hear ye foul mouthed Duke exclaim
Against our noble Sovereign and this Prince,
And rorde and bellowed like a parish bull,
And that in hearing both of you and him,
His words so please my Lord I can repeat,
As he did speak them at that very time.

Well they are messengers, for that cause
We are content to bear with their amiss,
But keep them safe, and let them not return,
To carry tales unto those counterfeits,
Until you have them both as fast insnarde,
To compass which the better, brother of France,
Five thousand of our soldiers here we leave,
To be employed in service to that end,
The rest with us to England shall return.

King Edward is returned home to England,
And Lewes King of France soon afterward,
Surprised both his subtle enemies,
Rewarding them with traitorous recompense.
Now do we draw the curtain of our Scene,
To speak of Shore and his fair wife again,
With other matters thereupon depending,
You must imagine since you saw him last
Prepared for travail, he hath bin abroad,
And seen the sundry fashions of the world,
Vlysses like, his countries love at length,
Hoping his wives death, and to see his friends,
Such as did sorrow for his great mishaps,
Come home is he, but so unluckily,
As he is like to loose his life thereby:
His and her fortunes shall we now pursue,
Graced with your gentle sufferance view.

Have ye bestowed our small benevolence,
On the poor prisoners in the common Jail,
Of the white Lion and the Kings bench?

Yes forsooth?

What prisons this?

The Marshalsea for sooth.

Well met fair Lady, in the happiest time,
And choyse^ place that my desire could wish,
Without offence, where have ye been this way?

To take the air here in Saint Georges field,
Sir Robert Brackenburie, and to visit some
Poor patients that cannot visit me^.

Are you a physician?

I a simple one.

What disease cure ye?

Faith none perfectly,
My physic doth but mitigate the pain^
A little while, and then it comes again.

Sweet mistress Shore, I understand ye not.

Master lieutenant I believe you well.

Good faith Sir Robert brobenbellie, may masters speekes deftly and truly, for
she hes been till see there that cannot come till see her: and theyes
peatients perforce. The prisoners man in the twea prisons. And she hes gynne
tham her siller and her geere till bay tham fude.


Gramercies Jockey thou resolust my doubt.
A comfort ministering kind physician,
That once a week in her own person visits,
The prisoners and the poor in Hospitals,
In London or near London every way,
Whose purse is open to the hungry soul,
Whose piteous heart save many a tall mans life.

Peace good sir Robert, tis not worthy praise,
Nor yet worth thanks, that is of duty done,
For you know well, the world doth know too well,
That all the coals of my poor charity,
Cannot consume the scandal of my name,
What remedy? well, tell me gentle knight,
What meant your kind salute and gentle speech,
At our first meetin^, when you seemed to bless
The time and place of our encounter here?

Lady there lies here prisonde in the Marshalsea,
A gentleman of good parents and good descent.
My dear near kinsman, Captain Harrie Stranguidge,
As tall a skilful Nauigator tried,
As ere set foot in any ship at sea,
Whose luck it was to take a prize of France,
As he from Rochell was for London bound:
For which (except his pardon be obtained,
By some especial favourite of the King).
He and his crew, a company of proper men,
Are sure to die, because twas since the League.

Let me see him and all his company.

Keeper bring forth the Captain his crew.

Now say oath diell, that sike bonnie men sud be hampert like plue Jade, weas
me for ye good Lads.


I Cousin Harrie, this is mistress Shore,
Peerless in Court, for beauty, bounty, pity.

And if she can not save thee, thou must die.

Will she if she can?

I Cousin Stranguidge I.

O torment worse then death to see her face,
That caused her shame, my unjust disgrace,
O that our mutual eyes were, Basilisks,
To kill each other at his interview,

How like ye him Lady? you have viewed him well?

I pity him, and that same proper man,
That turns his back, ashamed of this distress.

Ashamed of thee, cause of my heaviness?

And all the rest, oh were the king returned,
There might be hope, but ere his coming home,
They may be tried, condemned, and judged, and dead.

I am condemned by sentence of vefame,
O were I dead I might not see my shame.

Your credit Lady may prolong their trial,
What Judge is he that will give you denial:

I'll rack my credit, and will launch my crowns,
To save their lives, if they have done no murder.

O thou hast cracked thy credit with a crown.
And murdered me poor Matthew Shore alive.

Fair Lady, we did shed no drop of blood
Nor cast one Frenchman over board, and yet,
Because the league was made before the fact,
Which we poor sea men God knows never heard:
We doubt our lives, yea though we should restore
Treble the value that we took, and more.
Twas lawful prize when I put out to sea,
And warranted in my commission.
The kings are since combined in amity,
(Long may it last) and I unwittingly
Have took a Frenchman since the truce was tanc
And if I die, via, one day I must.
And God will pardon all my sins I trust,
My grief will be for these poor harmless men,
Who thought my warrant might suborn the deed,
Chiefly that Gentleman that stands sadly there,
Who on (my soul) was but a passenger.

Well Captain Stranguidge, were the king at home,
I could say more.

Lady, hes come a shore.
Last night at Dover, my boy came from thence,
And saw his highness land.

Then courage sirs
I'll use my fairest means to save your lives,
In the mean season spend that for my sake.

By your leave mistress Shore, I have taken pain^,
To find you out, come you must go with me.

Whither my Lord?

Unto the Queen my mother.

Good my Lord Marquess Dorset wrong me not.

I can not wrong thee as thou wrongst my mother,
I'll bring thee to her let her use her pleasure.

Against my will I wrong her good my Lord,
Yet am ashamed to see her majesty.
Sweet Lord excuse me, say ye saw me not.

Shall I delude my mother for a whore?
No mistress Shore ye must go to the Queen.

Must I my Lord? what will she do to me?
Use violence on me now the kings away?
Alas my Lord, behold this shower of tears,
Which kind King Edward would compassionate,
Bring me not to her, she will slit my nose.
Or mark my face, or spurn me unto death.
Look on me Lord, can ye find in your heart?
To have me spoiled that never thought you harm?
O rather with your rapier run me through,
Then carry me to the displeased Queen.

O had thou never broke thy how to me
From fear and wrong had I defended thee.

I am inexorable, therefore arise,
And go with me, what rascal crew is this,
Mistress Shores suitors, such slaves make her proud,
What sir Robert Brackenburie you a Shorist too?

No Shorist, but to save my Cousins life.

Then i'll be hanged if he escape for this,
The rather for your means to mistress Shore.
My mother can do nothing, this whore all,
Come away minion you shall prate no more.

Pray for me friends and I will pray for you,
God send you better hap then I expect,
Go to my lodging you, and if I perish,
Take what is there in lieu of your true service.

Na a may sale ayse ne'er forsake my good mistress,
Till aye hey seen tha worst that spite can du her.

For all the wrong that thou hast done to me,
They should not hurt thee yet if I were free.

See cousin Stranguidge how the case is changed,
She that should help thee can not help her self.

What remedy? the God of heaven helps all.
What say ye mates? our hope of life is dashed,
Now none but God, lets put our trust in him,
And cuerie man repent him of his sin,
And as together we have lived like men,
So like tall men together let us die:
The best is if we die for this offence,
Our ignorance shall plead our innocence,

Your meat is ready (Captain) you must in.

Must I? I will: Cousin what will you do?

Visit you soon, but now I will to Court
To see what shall become of mistress Shore.

God speed ye well.

Come sir will you go in?

I'll eat no meat, give me leave to walk here,
Am I now left alone? no millions
Of miseries attend me every where:
Ah Matthew Shore, how doth all seeing heaven,
Punish some sin, from thy blind conscience hid?
Inflicting pame where all thy pleasure was,
And by my wife came all these woes to pass,
She falsde her faith, and brake her wedlocks band,
Her honour falue, how could my credit stand?
Yet will not I poor Iane on thee exclaim,
Though guilty thou, I guiltless suffer shame.
I left this land too little for my grief,
Returning, am accounted as a these,
Who in that ship came but a passenger,
To see my friends, hoping the death of her,
At fight of whom some sparks of former love,
(Hid in affections ashes) pity move,
Kindling compassion in my broken heart,
That bleeds to think on her ensuing smart.
O see weak women's imperfections,
That leave their husbands safe protections,
Hazarding all on strangers flatteries,
Whose (...) ala^d, leaves them to miseries,
See what dishonour breach of wedlock brings,
Which is not safe even in the arms of kings:
Thus do I Iane lament thy present state,
Wishing my tears thy torments might abate.

Now (as I am a Queen) a goodly creature,
Son how was she attended where you found her?

Madame I found her at the Marshalsea,
Going to visit the poor prisoners,
As she came by, having been to take the air,
And there the keeper told me she ost deals
Such bounteous alms as seldom hath been seen.

Now before God, she would make a gallant Queen,
But good son Dorset stand aside a while.
God save your maiestiomy my Lady Shore,
My Lady Shore said I? Oh blasphemy,
To wrong your title with a Ladies name,
Queen Shoore, nay rather Empress Shore,
God save your grace, your majesty, your highness
Lord I want titles, you must pardon me:
What? you kneel there, king Edwards bedfellow
And I your subject sit? sie, sie for shame.
Come take your place, ^e kneel where you do,
I may take your place, you have taken mine,
Good Lord that you will so debase your self:
I am sure you are our sister Queen at least.
Nay that you are, then let us sit together.

Great Queen, yet hear me, if my sin committed,
Have not stopped up all passage to your mercy,
To tel y^ wrongs that I have done your highness,
Might make revenge exceed extremity,
Oh had I words or tongue to utter it,
To plead my woman's weakness, his strength,
That was the only worker of my fall.
Even innocence her self would blush for shame,
Once to be named or spoken of in this,
Let them expect for mercy whose offence,
May but be called sin, oh mine is more,
Prostrate as earth, before your highness feet,
Inflict what torments you shall think most meet.

Spurn the whore (mother) tear those enticing eyes,
That robbed you of King Edwards dearest love.
Mangle those locks, the baits to his desires,
Let me come to her, you but stand and talk,
As if revenge consisted but in words.

Son stand aloof, and do not trouble me,
Alas poor soul, as much ado have I,
To for bear tears to keep her company.
Yet once more will I to my former humour.
Why as I am, think that thou were a Queen,
And I as thou should wrong thy princely bed,
And win the king thy husband, as thou mine:
Would it not sting thy soul? Or if that I
Being a Queen, while y^ did love thy husband:
Should but have done as thou hast done to me,
Would it not grieve thee? yes I warrant thee.
There's not the meanest woman that doth live,
But if she like and love her husband well,
She had rather feel his warm l^mmes in her bed
Then see him in the arms of any Queen,
You are flesh and blood as we, and we as you,
And all alike in our affections,
Though maiestic makes us the more ambitious.
What tis to fall into so great a hand,
Knowledge might teach thee. There was once a king
Henry the second, who did keep his leman,
Cag'de up at Woodstocke in a Labyrinth,
His Queen yet got a trick to find her out,
And how she used her, I am sure thou hast heard,
Thou art not mewed up in some secret place,
But kept in Court here underneath my nose,
Now in the absence of my Lord the King,
Have I not time most fitting for revenge?
Fair Rosamond, she a pure virgin was,
Until the King seduc'de her to his will.
She wronged but one bed, only the angry Queenes,
But thou hast wronged two, mine thy husbands,
Be thine own Judge, and now in justice see,
What due revenge I ought to take on thee.

Even what you will (great Queen) here do I lie,
Humble and prostrate at your Highness feet,
Inflict on me what may revenge your wrong,
Was never lamb abode more patiently,
Then I will do. Call all your griefs to mind,
And do even what you will, or how likes you,
I will not stir, I will not shrike or cry,
Be it torture poison, any punishment,
Was never Done, or Turtle more submiss,
Then I will be unto your chastisement.

Fetched I her for this? mother let me come to her,
And what compassion will not suffer you
To d^ to her, refer the same to me.

Touch her not son, upon thy life I charge thee,
But keep off still, if thou wilt have my love.
I am glad to hear ye are so well resolu'de,
To bear the burden of my just displeasure.
Thus then I'll do, alas poor soul,
Shall I weep with thee? in saith poor hart I will,
Be of good comfort, thou shalt have no harm,
But if that kisses have the power to kill thee,
Thus, thus, and thus, a thousand times i'll stab thee.
Iane I forgive thee: what fort is so strong,
But with be sieging he will batter it?
Weep not (sweet Iane) alas I know thy sex,
Touched with the selfsame weakness that thou art,
And if my state had been as mean as thine,
And such a beauty to allure his eye,
(Though I may promise much to mine own strength)
What might have hapt to me, I cannot tell.
Nay fear not, for I speak it with my hart,
And in thy sorrow truly bear a part.

Most high and mighty Queen, may I believe
There can be found such mercy in a woman,
And in a Queen, more then in a wife,
So deeply wronged as I have wronged you?
In this bright crystal mirror of your mercy,
I see the greatness of my sin the more,
And makes my fault more odious in mine eyes,
Your princely pity now doth wound me more,
Then all your threatenings ever did before.

Rise my sweet Iane, I say thou shalt not kneel,
Oh God for bid, that Edwards Queen should hate
Her, whom she knows he both so dearly love,
My love to her, may purchase me his love.
Iane, speak well unto the King of me and mine,
Remember not my sons ore-hastie speech,
Thou art my sister, and I love thee so.
I know thou may do much with my dear Lord,
Speak well of us to him in any case,
And I and mine will love and cherish thee.

All I can do is all too little too,
Tut to requite the least part of this grace,
The dearest thoughts that harbour in this breast,
Shall in your service only be expressed.

What is my Iane with her^ it is too true,
See where she hath her down upon her knees.
Why how now Bess? what, will ye wrong my Iane?
Come hither love, what hath she done to thee?

Oh royal Edward, love, love, thy beauteous Queen,
The only perfect mirror of her kind,
For all the thoysest virtues can be nam'de.
Oh let not my bewitching looks withdraw
Your dear affections from yo^ dearer Queen,
But to requite the grace that she hath shown,
To me the worthless creature on this earth,
To banish me the Court immediately,
Great King let me ^t beg one boon of thee,
That Shores wife ne'er do her more injury.

Nay then i'll beg against her royal Edward,
Love thy Iane still, nay more if more may be,
And this is all the harm that at my hands
She shall endure for it, Oh where my Edward loves,
It ill beseems his Queen to grudge thereat.

Say thou me so Bess, on my kingly word,
Edward will honour thee in heart for this:
But trust me Bess, I greatly was afraid,
I should not find ye in so good a tune,
How now, what would our Constable of the Tower?

The Queen and ^strts Shore do know my suit.

It is for Stranguidge and his men at sea,
Edward needs must you pardon them.

Have I not vowed the contrary already?
Dishonour me when I have made a league?
My word is past, and they shall suffer death,
Or neuer^re let me see France again.

Why there is one was but a passenger.
Shall he die too?

Pass me no passage Iane, fuc^ he in company, he dies for company.


Good Iane entreat for them.

Come Edward, I must not take this answer.
Needs must I have some grace for Stranguidge.

Why Iane, have I not denied my Queenes
Yet what is't Iane I would deny to thee?
I pretheel / Brackenkutie be not thou displeased,
My word is past, not one of them shall live,
One go see them forth with sent to death.

I cannot see this prophecy you speak of,
Should any way so much displease the ^ing,
And yet I promise you good Brother Clarence,
Tis such a letter as concerns us both,
That G. should put away King Edwards children,
And sit upon his throne? that G. should? well.

God bless the king, th^se two sweet young Princes.

Amen good brother Clarence:

Amen.

And send them all to heaven shortly I beseech him.

The Kings much troubled in his sickness with it.

I promise you he is, and very much,
But Doctor Shaw, who prophested that G. should be so sadly
ominous to us?

My Lord of Gloucester, I recefude the same
From old Friar Anselme of S. Bartholmewes.

A great learned man he was, and as I have heard,
Hath prophested of very many things,
I promise you it troubles me,
I hope in me his propheste is true.

And so it does me, I tell you brother Gloucester.

I am sure it does, for look you brother Clarence,
We know not how his Highness will apply it,
We are but two, your self my Lord and I,
Should the young Princes fail, which God defend.

Which God defend.

Which God defend.

But they should be cut off: Amen, Amen.
You brother first, and should your issue fail,
Poor I am next, the youngest of the three.
But how far I am from a thought of that,
Heaven witness with me, that I wish you dead.

Brother I durst be sworn.

God bless you al, and take you to him if it be his will.
Now brother, this prophesse of G. troubling the King,
He may as well apply it unto Gloucester,
My Dukedoms name, if he be fealfous,
As unto George your ^ame, good brother Clarence,
God help, God help: ^faith it troubles me,
You would not think how: aside. that any of you live.

It cannot thuse: how innocent I am,
And how unspotted are my loyal thoughts
Unto his Highness, and those sweet young Princes,
God be my record.

Who you, I, I durst answer for you,
That I shall cut you off ere it be long.
But reverend Doctor, you can only tell,
Being his Highness Confessor, how he takes it.
Shaw, you know my mind, a villain like my self.

My Lord of Clarence, I must tell your Lord^,
His Highness is much troubled in his sickness
With this same prophecy of G. Who is this G?
Oft times he will demand, then will he sigh,
And name his brother George, your self my Lord,
And then he strikes his breast, I promise you,
This morning in th'extreamest of his fit,
He lay so still, we all thought he had slept,
When suddenly, George is the G. quoth he,
And gave a groan, and turned his face away.

God be my witness, witness with my soul,
My just and upright thoughts to him and his,
I stand so guiltless and so innocent,
As I could wish my breast to be transparent,
And my thoughts written in great letters there,
The world might read the secrets of my soul.

Ah brother Clarence, when you are suspected,
Well, well, it is a wicked world the while:
But shall I tell you brother in plain terms,
I fear, your self and I have enemies,
About the King, God pardon them,
The world was never worser to be trusted:
Ah brother George, where is that love that was?
Ah it is banished brother from the world:
Ah Conscience, Conscience, and true brotherhood,
Tis gone, tis gone, brother I am your friend,
I am your loving brother, your own self,
And love you as my soul, use me in what you please,
And you shall see I'll do a brothers part,
Send you to heaven I hope, ere it be long,
I am a true stamped villain as ever lived.

I know you will, then brother I beseech you,
Plead you mine innocence unto the King,
And in mean time to tell my loyalty,
I'll keep within my house at Bainards Castle,
Until I hear how my dread Sovereign takes it.

Do so good brother.

Farewell good brother Gloster.

My tears will searcely let me take my leave,
I love you so: Farewell sweet George.
So, is he gone: now Shaw tis in thy power,
To bind me to thee everlastingly,
And there is not one step that I shall rise,
But I will draw thee with me unto greatness,
Thou shalt sit in my bosom as my soul,
Incense the king, now being as thou art,
So near about him, and his Confessor,
That this G. only is George Duke of Clarence,
Doctor thou need not my instruction,
Thou hast a searching brain, a nimble spirit,
Able to master any mans affections.
Effect it Shaw, and bring it to pass ^ce,
I'll make thee the greatest Shaw that ever was.

My Lord, I am going by commanndement,
Unto the Marshalsea, to Captain Stranguidge,
For Pyracie of late condemnde to die,
There to confess him and his company,
That done, ^e come with speed back to the king,
And make no doubt but ^e effect the thing.

Farewell gentle Doctor.

Farewell my Lord of Gloster.

Let me awake my sleeping wits a while,
^a, the mark thou aimst at Richard is a crown,
And many stand betwixt thee and the same,
What of all that? Doctor play thou thy part,
I'll climb up by degrees, through many a heart.

Why master Vaux is there no remedy?
But instantly they must be led to death?
Can it not be deferd till after noone,
Or but two hours, in hope to get reprie?

Master Lieutenant, tis in vain to speak,
The kings incensde, and will not pardon them,
The men are patient, and resolude to die,
The Captain and that other Gentleman,
Have cast the dice whether shall suffer first.

How fell the Lot, to Stranguidge or to him?

The guiltless passenger must first go toot,

They are all guiltless from intent of ill.

And yet must die for doing of the deed,
Besides the Duke of Exeter found dead,
And naked floating up and down the sea,
Twixt Calice and our coast, is laid to them,
That they should rob, and cast him overboard.

My soul be pauwne, they never knew of it.

Well bring them forth.

Stay them yet but an hour.

I dare not do it sir Robert Brackenburie,
You are Lieutenant of the Tower your self,
And know the peril of protracting time,
Moreover here's that pickthanke Doctor Shaw,
The Duke of Glosters spaniel shriving them,
Come bring them forth.

Poor Stranguidge must thou die?

I dare not say good morrow, but ill day,
That Harrie Stranguidge is thus cast away.
Strah. Good Cousin Brackenbury be as well content
To see me die, as I to suffer death,
Be witness that I die an honest man,
Because my fact proves ill through ignorance,
And for the Duke of Erceter his death,
So speed my soul as I am innocent,
Here goes my grief, this guiltless gentleman,
L^ke A^sops Stork, that dyes for company,
And came (God knows) but as a passenger.
Ah master ^lud, a thousand floods of woe
Ore-slow my soul, that thou must perish so.

Good Captain set no perturbation,
^inder our passage to a better world,
This last breaths blast will wafte our weary souls,
Over deaths gulf, to heavens most happy port,
There is a little battle to be fought.
Wherein by lot the leading must be mine,
Second me Captain, and this bitter breakfast,
Shall bring a sweeter supper with the Saints.

This Christian patiece at the point of death,
Doth argue he hath led no wicked life,
How ever heaven hath laid this cross on him,
Well Matthew Flood. for so thou call thy self,
Finish a good course as thou hast begun,
And cl^re thy conscience by confession,
What know thou of the Duke of Exceters death?

So God respect the waygate of my soul, as I know nothing.


Then concerning this for which thou diet, knew Stranguidge of the league
betwixt the Kings before he took that prize?


No in my conscience.

Stranguidge what say you?
You see there's but a turn betwixt your lives,
You must be next, confess and save yeur soul,
Concerning that wherein I questionde him:
I am your ghostly father to absolve
You of your sins, if you confess the truth.

True D. Shaw, and as I hope for heaven,
In that great day when we shall all appear,
I neither knew how that good Duke came dead,
Nor of the league, till I had taken the prize.
Neither was Fludde, (that innocent dying man)
Ever with me but as a passenger.

More happy he, well Flood forgive the world,
As thou wilt have forgiveness from the heavens.

O so I do, and pray the world forgive,
What wrong I did whilst I therein did live,
And now I pray you turn your pains to them,
And leave me private for a little space,
To meditate upon my parting hence.

Do gentle Flood, and we will pray for thee.

Pray not for Flood, but pray for Matthew Shore,
For Shore covered with the cloak of Flood,
If I have sinnde in changing of my name,
Forgive me God, twas done to hide my shame,
And I forgive the world, King Edward first,
That wracked my state, by winning of my wife,
And though he would not pardon trespass small,
In these, in me God knows no fault at all,
I pardon him, though guilty of my fall.
Perhaps he would, if he had known twas I,
But twenty deaths I rather wish to die,
Than live beholding for one minutes breath
To him, that living, wounded me with death.
Death of my joy, and hell of my defame,
Which now shall die under this borrowed name.

God forgive thee, even as I forgive,
And pray thou may repent while thou dost live,
I am as glad to leave this loathed light,
As to embrace thee on our marriage night.
To die unknown thus, is my greatest good,
That Matthew Shores not hanged, but Matthew flood.
For floods of woe have washed away the shore
That never wife nor kin shall look on more:
Now when ye will, I am prepared to go.

Hawd, hawd, say for speed, vntaye, untruss, pull down, pull off, God seaue
the King: off with the helters, hence with the prisoners, a pardon a pardon.


Good news unlooked for, welcome gentle friend, who brings the pardon?


Stay first lat ma blaw: my masters, masters Shore shoe brings tha pardoune,
tha kings pardoune: off with there bands, bestow them o tha hangman, may
masters made me runue the nearest way ore tha fields, she rayds a pace the he
way, she's at hand bay this: sir ye that preech, come down, lat Doctor Shaw
hey your place, hes tha better scholar, masters Shore bring a new lesson for
you.


O I had read my latest lesson well.
Had he been ready to have said, Amen.
Now shall I live to see my shame again.
O had I did unwitting to my wife,
Rather then see her, though she bring me life.

Alas I see that even my smallest stay,
Had lost my labour, and cast them away,
God knows I basted all that ere I might,
Here master Vaux, King Edward greets ye well,
His gracious pardon frees this Gentleman,
And all his company from shameful death.

God save the king, God bless mistress Shore.

Amen, keep these frea coming here any mar.

You must discharge them paying of their fees,
Which for I fear their store is very small,
I will defray, hold, here, take purse and all,
Nay master Vaux tis gold, if not enough,
Send to me, I will pay you royally.

Lady, in the behalf of all the rest,
With humble thanks I yield my self your slave,
Command their service, and command my life.

No Captain Stranguidge, let the king command
Your lives and service, who hath given you life,
These and such offices conscience bids me do.

Pity that ere awry she trod her shoe.

O had that conscience pricked when love prouokt.

Lady the last but not the least in debt,
To your devotion for my Cofins life,
I render thanks, yet thanks is but a breath,
Command (Madame) during life,
Old Brackenburie bows for you to stand,
Whilst I have limbs or any foot of land.

Thus is her glory builded on the sand.

Thanks good M. Lieutenant of the Tower.
Sir prepare my borse, why stay you here?
Pray ye commend me to my noble friend
The Duke of Clarence now your prisoner,
Bid him not doubt the kings displeasures past
I hope to gain him favour and release.

God grant ye may, hes a noble Gentleman.

My patron Gloster will cross it if he can.

Wheres mistress Shore? Lady I come in post,
The King hath had a very dangerous fit
Since you came from him, twice his majesty,
Hath sounded, and with much a do reuiu'de,
And still as breath will give him leave to speak,
He calls for you: the Queen and all the Lords
Have sent to seek ye, hast unto his Grace,
Or else I fear you'll never see his face.

O God desend, good friends pray for the king,
More bitter are the news which he doth bring,
Then those were sweet I brought to you but late:
If Edward die, confounded is my state,
I'll hast unto him and will spend my blood,
To save his life or do him any good.

And so would I for thee had thou been true:
But if I die, hid all thy pomp adieu.

Bra. Belee^ but I do not like these news,
Of the Kings dangerous sickness.

No nor I,
Captain, and master Fludde, and all the rest,
I dorcioice your pardon was obtained,
Before these news, these inauspicious news,
If the king die, the state will soon be changed,

Lieutenant, you'll go to the Tower:
I'll take my lean, gallants God buoye all.

God buoy M. Vaux, I was ye ha lost good guests.

You shall be my guest for a night or two,
Cousin, till your own lodging be prepared,
But tell me sir what means hath M. Fludde.

I cannot tell, i'll ask him if ye will.

Do so, and if his fortunes be debasde,
I'll entertain him if heel dwell with me,
On good condition.

Matthew Fludde,
He are ye my Cousin Brackenburies mind?
He hath concetude such liking of your parts,
That if your means surmount not his suppose,
Heel entertain ye gladly at the Tower,
To wait on him, and put ye in great trust.

In what I undertake I will be just,
And hold me happy, if my diligence
May please so worthy a Gentleman as he,
What ere my fortunes have been, they are now,
Such as to service make their master bow.

No Fludde more like a frieud fellow mate,
I mean to use thee, then a servitor,
And place thee in some credit in the Tower,
And give thee means to live in some good sort.

I thank ye sir, God grant I may deserve it.

Cousin and all your crew come home with me,
Where after sorrow we may merry be.

The Tower will be a place of secret rest,
Where I may hear good news bad, and use the best,
God bless the king, a worse may wear the crown
And then Iane Shore thy credit will come down,
For though i'll never bed nor board with thee,
Yet thy destruction with I not to see,
Because I lou'de thee when thou wast my wise,
Not for now saving my disdained life,
Which lasts too long. God grant us both to mend,
Well I must in my service to attend.

Well met my good Lord Louell.

Whither away so fast goes Doctor Shaw?

Why to the Tower, to shrive the Duke of Clarence,
Who as I hear is salne so grievous sick,
As it is thought be can by no means escape.

He neither can nor shall I warrant thee:

I hope my Lord he is not dead already?

But I hope sir he is, I am sure I saw him dead,
Of a Flies death, drowned in a butte of Malmesey.

Dround in a butte of Malmesey? that is strange,
Doubtless he never wonid misdoe himself?

No, that thou know right well, he had some helpers,
Thy hand was in it with the Duke of Glosters,
As smoothly as thou seekst to cover it.

Oh foul words my Lord, no more of that,
The world knows nothing, then what should I fear?
Doth not your honour seek promotion?
Oh give the Doctor then a little leave,
So that he gain preferment with a King,
Cares not who goes to wrack, whose heart doth wring.

A King? what King?

Wy Richard man? who else? good Lord I see,
Wise men sometimes have weak capacity.

Why is not Edward living? and if he were not,
Hath be not children? what shall become of them?

Why man, lining for beds, a knife, or so,
What make a boy a King, and a man by,
Richard, a man for us? fie that were a shame.
Nay then I see if Edward were deceased,
Which way the game would go.

What else my Lord?
That way the current of our fortune runs,
By noble Richard gallant royal Richard,
He is the man must only do us good,
So I have honour, let me swim through blood.
My Lord, be but at Paul's cross on Sunday next,
I hope I have it here shall soundly prove,
King Edwards chtldren not legitimate.
Nay, and that for Edward ruling now,
And George the Duke of Clarence so late dead:
Their mother hapt to tread the shoe awry,
Why what is Richard then?

Tut, lawful man, he says it so himself.
And what he says i'll be so hold to swear,
Though in my soul I know it otherwise,
Beware promotion while you live my Lord.

A staff, a staff, a thousand crowns for a staff.

What staff sir William Catesbie?

Why man a white staff for my lord Protector.

Why is King Edward dead?

Dead Louel, dead, and Richard our good Lord
Is made Protector of the sweet young Prince.
Oh for a staff, where might I have a staff,
That I might first present it to his hand?

Now do I smell two Bishoprics at least,
My sermon shall be pepperd sound for this.

Why how now mistress Shore? what, put finger in the es,
Nay then I see you have some cause to erie.

I blame her not, her chiefest stay is gene,
The only staff, she had to lean upon,
I see by her these tidings are too true.

I my Lord Louell, they are too true indeed,
Royal King Edward now hath breathed his last,
The Queen turned out, and every friend put by,
None now admitted, but whom Richard please.

Why doubtless Richard will be kind to you.

Ah my Lord Louell, God bless me from his kindness:
No sooner was the white staff in his hand,
But finding me and the right woeful Queen,
Sadly bemoaning such a mighty loss:
Here is no place quoth he, you must be gone,
We have other matters now to think upon.
For you, (quoth he to me) ant bit his lip,
And stroke me with his staff, but said no more.
Whereby I know he means me no good.

Well mistress Shore, its like to be a busy time,
Shift for your self, come lads let us be gone,
Royal King Richard must be wait upon.

Well mistress Shore, if you have need of me,
You shall command me to the uttermost.

First let me die ere I do put my trust,
In any fliering Spaniel of you all.
Go Jockey, take down all my hangings,
And quickly see my trunks be conuayde forth,
To mistress Blages, an Inn in Lombardstreete,
The Flower de Luce, good Jockey make some speed,
She, she must be my refuge in this need.
See it done quickly Jockey.

Whickly quoth a? marry here's a whicke change indeed, sike whicke change did
I ne'er see before. Now dream I, that ise be a very pure fellow, and hardly ha
any siller to drink with a good fellow. But what stand I tattling here. I must
go do my masters bidding, carry all her stuff and geere to mistres Blages,
at the Flower de luce in Lombardstreet, whicke then dispatch.


Come hither Flood let me hear thy opinion,
Thou know I build upon thy confidence,
And henest dealing in thy greatst affairs:
I have received letters from the Duke,
Gloster I mean, Protector of the land,
Who gives in charge the Tower be prepared,
This night to entertain the two young princes,
It is my ^utie to obey I know,
But manifold suspicion troubles me.

He is their uncle Sir, and in that sense,
Nature should warrant their security,
Next his deceased brother at his death,
To Richards care communitted both the realm,
And their protection: where humanity
Stands as an Orator to plead ag^inst
All wrong suggestion of uncivil thoughts:
Beside you are Lieutenant of the Tower,
Say there should be any hurt prefended,
The privilege of your authority
Pries into every corner of this house,
And what can then be done without your knowledge?

Thou say true Flood, though Richard be Protector,
When once they are within the Tower limits,
The charge of them (unless he derogate)
From this my office, which was never siene,
In any kings time; doth belong to me:
And ere that Brackenburie will consent,
Or suffer wrong be done unto these babes,
His sword, all the strength within the Tower
Shall be opposoe against the proudest commer,
Be it to my soul as I intend to them.

And faith in me unto this commonwealth,
And truth to men hath hitherto been seen,
The Pilot that hath guided my lives course,
Though twas my fortune to be wronged in both:
And therefore Sir neither the mighties frown,
Nor any bribes shall win me otherwise.

Tis well resolved: still me thinks they should
Be safe enough with us, and yet I fear,
But now no more, it seems they are at hand.

Uncle, what Gentleman is that?

It is (sweet Prince) Lieutenant of the Tower.

Sir we are come to be your guests to night:
I pray you tell me did you ever know,
Our father Edward lodged within this place,

Never to lodge (my liege) but oftentunes,
On other occasions I have seen him here.

Brother last night when you did send for me
My mother told me, hearing we should lodge
Within the Tower, that it was a prison,
And therefore marveled that my uncle Gloster,
Of all the houses for a Kings receipt,
Within this City, had appointed none,
Where you might keep your court but only here.

Vile brats, how they do descant on the Tower.
(...) gentle Nephew they were ill abuisde,
To tutor you with such unfitting terms,
(Who ere they were) against this royal mansion:
What if some part of it hath been reserved,
To be a prison for Nobility?
Follows it therefore that it cannot serve,
To any other use? Caesar himself
That built the same, within it kept his Court,
And many kings since him, the rooms are large,
The building stately, and for strength beside,
It is the safest and the surest hold you have.

Uncle of Gloster, if you think it so,
Tis not for me to contradict your will,
We must allow it, and are well content.

On then a Gods name.

Yet before we go,
One question more with you M. Lieutenant,
We like you well, and but we do perceive,
More comfort in your looks, then in these walls,
For all our uncle Glosters friendly speech,
Our hearts would be as heavy still as lead,
I pray you tell me, at which door or gate
Was it my uncle Clarence did go in,
When he was sent a prisoner to this place?

At this my ^iedge: why sighs your majesty?

He went in here that ne'er came back again,
But as God hath decreed, so let it be,
Come brother shall we go?

Yes brother, any where with you.

Sir were it best I did attend the Duke,
Or stay his leisure till his back return?

I pray master Tirill stay without,
It is not good you should be seen by day
Within the Tower, especially at this time,
I'll tell his honour of your being here,
And you shall know his pleasure presently.

Even so fir^men would be glad by any means.
To raise themselves, that have been overthrown,
By fortunes scorn, and I am one of them.
Here comes the Duke.

Catesbie, is this the man?

It is ift like your excellency.

Come near.
Thy name I hear is Tirill, is it not?

Iames Tirill is my name, my gracious Lord.

Welcome, it should appear that thou hast bin
In better state then now it seems thou art.

I have bin by my fey my Lord, though now depressed,
And clouded over with adversity.

Be ruled by me, then thou shalt rise again,
And prove more happy then thou ever wast,
There is but only two degrees by which
It shall be needful for thee to ascend,
And that is faith and taciturnitie.

If ever I prove false unto your grace,
Convert your favour to afflictions.

But can thou too be secret?

Try me my Lord:
This tongue was never known to be a blab.

Thy countenance hath like a silver key,
Opend the closet of my heart, read there,
If scholar like thou can expound those lines,
Thou art the man ordainde to serve my turn.

So far as my capacity will reach,
The sense my Lord is this, this night you say,
The two young Princes both must suffer death.

Thou hast my meaning, wilt thou do it, speak?

It shall be done.

Enough, come follow me,
For thy direction, and for gold to fee,
Such as must aid thee in their Tragedy.

Welcome good Jockey, what good news bring you?

Marry masters my good masters greets ye masters, and prays ye masters till
dight up her Chamber, for she'll lig we ye to night masters. And here's her
cat skin till she come.


Why how now loiterer? make ye no more haste?
When will my trunks and all my stuff be brought,
If you thus loiter, go, make hast withal.

Marie sall aye, gynne yeele be bud petient a while.

Now gentle mistress Blage the only friend,
That fortune leaves me to rely upon,
My counsels Closet and my Tower of strength,
To whom for safety I retire my self,
To be secure in these tempestuous times,
O smile on me, and give me gentle looks,
If I be welcome, then with cheerful heart,
And willing hand show me true signs thereof.

Doubt ye of welcome Lady to your friend?
Nay to your servant, to your bradswoman,
To speak but truth, your bounties bond woman:
Use me, command me, call my house your own,
And all I have sweet Lady at your will.

A way with titles, lay by courtly terms,
The Case is altered now the King is dead,
And with his life my favouring friends are fled,
No Madam now, but as I was before,
Your faithful kind companion, poor Iane Shore.

I loud you then, and since, and ever shall,
You are the woman, though your fortunes fall,
You when my husbands lewd transgression
Of all our wealth had lost possession,
By forfaiture into his Highness hands,
Got restitution of our goods and lands,
He fled, and died in France, to heal that harm,
You helpte me to three manors in fee farm,
The worst of which cleers threescore pound a year,
Have I not reason then to hold ye dear?
Yes hap what will until my life do end,
You are and shall be my best beloved friend,

How if misfortune my folly do succeed.

Trust me true friends bide touch in time of need.

If want consume the wealth I had before.

My wealth is yours, and you shall spend my store.

But the Protector prosecutes his hate.

With me live secret from the worlds debates

You will be weary of so bad a guest.

Then let me never on the earth be blessed.

Ah mistress Blage, you tender me such love,
As all my sorrows from my soul remove,
And though my portion be not very large,
Yet come I not to you to be a charge,
Coin, plate, and fewels prized at lowest rate,
I bring with me to maintain my estate,
Worth twenty thousand pound, and my array,
If you survive to see my dying day,
From you no penny will I give away.

And I thank you that so my wealth increased,
Am worth I trow, ten thousand pounds at least,
I think like two warm widows we may live,
Until good fortune two good husbands give,
For surely mistress Shore your husbands dead,
When heard ye of him?

Never since he fled.
O mistress Blage, now put you in my head
That kills my heart, why should I breath this air,
Whose lost good name no treasure can repair?
Oh were he here with me to lead his life,
Although he never used me as a wife,
But as a drudge to spurn me with his ^ecte,
Yet should I think with him that life were sweet,

How can ye once conceit so base a thing,
That have been kissed and cokerd by a king,
Weep not, you hurt your self by Gods blessed mother,
Your husbands dead woman, think upon another,
Let us in to supper, drink wine, cheer your heart,
And whilst I live, be sure i'll take your part.

Sir I assure ou tis my Lord Protectors warrant.

My friend, I have conferd it with his letters,
And tis his hand indeed, i'll not deny,
But blame me not although I be precise,
In matters that so nearly do concern me.

My Lord Protector, sir I make no doubt,
Dare justify his warrant, though perhaps,
He doth not now acquaint you why he doth it.

I think sic there's no subject now in England,
Will urge his Grace, to show what he dare do,
Nor will I ask him why he does it,
I would I might, to rid me of my doubt.

Why sir I think he needs no president,
For what he does, I think his power is absolute enough.

I have no power sir to examine it.
Nor will I do: obey your warrant,
Which I will keep for my security.

You shall do well in that sir.

Here's the keys.

And yet I could wish my Lord Protector,
Had sent his warrat thither by some other, aside.
I do not like their looks I tell you true.

Nor I Flood I assure thee.

What does that slave mutter to his master?

I hear him say he does not like our looks?

Why not our looks sir?

Sir we hear you.

I am glad you do sir? all is one for that,
But if you did not hearken better now,
I never saw three faces in whose looks,
Did ever sit more terror: or more death,
God bless the Princes if it be his will,
I do not like these villains.

Zounds stab the villane, sir do you bran us?

I that's your coming, for you come to stab.

Stab him.

Nay then i'll stab with thee.

Zbloud cut his throat.

Hold Gentle men I pray you.

Sir I am hurt, stabbed in the arm,

This is not to be justified my friends, I
To draw your weapons here within the Tower,
And by the law it is no less then death,
I cannot think the Duke will like of this,
I pray ye be content, too much is done.

He might have held his peace then, and been quiet Farewell, farewell.


Hell and damnation follow murderers.

Go Flood get thee some surgeon to look to thy wound.
Hast no acquaintance with some skilful surgeon?
Keep thy wound close, and let it not take air.
And for my own part, I will not stay here.
Whither wilt thou go that I may send to thee.

To one mistress Blages, an Inn in Gracious stroete,
There you shall find me, or shall hear of me.

Sweet Princely babes, farewell I fear you sore,
I doubt these eyes shall never see you more.

How does your Lordship?

Well good brother Richard, how does your selfe's
You told me your headaked.

Indeed it does, my Lord feel with your hands how hot it is.


Indeed you have caught cold,
With sitting yester night to hear me read,
I pray thee go to bed, sweet Dick, poor little heart.

Doule give me leave to wait upon your Lordship.

I had more need brother to wait on you:
For you are sick, and so am not I.

O Lord, me thinks this going to our bed,
How like it is to going to our grave:

I pray thee do not speak of graves sweet heart,
Indeed thou frightest me.

Why my Lord Brother, did not our Tutor teach us,
That when at night we want unto our bed,
We still should think we sent unto our grave.

Yes that's true, ye we should do as every christian ought.
To be prepared to die at every howre, but I am heavy.

Indeed and so am I.

Then let us say our prayers and go to bed.

What, bleeds your Grace?

I two drops and no more.

God bless us both, and I desire no more,

Brother see here what Dauid says, and so say (...)
Lord in thee will I trust although I die.

Go lay ye down, but never more to rise,
I have put my hand into the foulest murder,
That ever was committed since the world,
The very senseless stones here in the walls,
Break out in tears but to behold the fact,
Me thinks the bodies lying dead in graves,
Should rise and cry against ^s O hark, hark,
The Mandrakes shrieks are music to their cries,
The very night is frighted, and the stars,
Do drop like torches, to behold this deed:
The very Center of the earth doth shake,
Me thinks the Tower should rent down from the top,
To let the heaven look on this monstrous deed.

Stand further damned rogue, and come not near me.

Nay stand thou further villain, stand aside.

Are we not both damned for this cur^cd deed?

Thou art the witness that thou bear the King

And what hearst thou?

It is too true, oh I am damnde indeed,

I am as deep as you, although my hand
Did not the deed.

O villain, art thou there?

A plague light on thee.

Curse not, a thousand plagues will light upon us all.
The priest here in the Tower will bury them,
Let us away.

So, set him here a while, where is more air,
How cheer you sir, alack he doth begin
To change his colour, where is mistress Shore?
Gone to her Closet for a precious Balm,
The same (she said) King Edward used himself.
Alack I fear heel die before st^ee come.
Ran quickly for some Rosa-solis, faint not sir,
Be of good comfort, come good mistress Shore,
What have you there?

Stand by and give me leave.

Unhappy me to lodge him in my house.

I warrant you woman, be not so afraid,
If not this bloud-stone hangdc about his neck,
This balm will stanch it by the help of God:
Lift up his arm whilst I do bath his wound,
The sign belike was here when he was hurt,
Or else some principal and chief vein is pierced.

How ever sure the surgeon was a knave,
That looked no better to him at the first.

Blame him not mistress Blage, the best of them
In such a case as this, may be to seek.

Now God be blessed, see the crimson blood,
That was precipitate, and falling down
Into his arm, retires into his face,
How fare you sir? how do you feel your self?

Oh wherefore have you waked me from my sleep?
And broke the quiet slumber I was in,
Me thought I sate in such a pleasant place,
So full of all delight as never eye
Beheld, nor heart of man could comprehend,
If you had let me go I felt no pain,
But being now reuok't my grief renews.

Give him some Rosa-solis mistress Blage,
And that will like wise animate the sprites,
And send alacrity unto the heart,
That hath bin struggling with the pangs of death.

Here sir drink this, you need not fear it sir,
It is no hurt, see I will be your taster,
Then drink I pray you.

Now fellows raise hi^ body from the chair^
And gently let him walk a turn or two.

Good sooth mistress Shore, I did not think till now
You had been such a cunning skilde Physician.

Oh mistress Blage, though I must needs confess,
It would have been more welcome to my soul,
If I had died and been remoude at last,
From the confused troubles of this world,
Whereof I have sustained no mean weight,
Then lingering here be made a packhorse still
Of torments, in comparison of which
Death is but as the pricking of a thorne,
Yet I do thank you for your taken pains,
And would to God I could requite your love.

Sir I did you little good, what was done
Ascribe the benefit and praise thereof
Unto this Gentlewoman, kind mistress Shore,
Who next to God preserude your feeble life.

How? Mistress Shore, good friends let go your hold,
My strength is now sufficient of it self.
Oh is it she that still prolongs my wo^?
Was it ordainde not only at the first,
She should be my destruction, but now twice,
When gracious destinies had brought about,
To end this weary pilgrimage of mine,
Must she and none but she prevent that good,
And stop my entrance to eternal bliss?
Oh lasting plague, oh endless corrosive,
It now repents me double that I scap'te,
Since lifes made death, and lifes author hate.

Sir take my counsel and sit down again,
It is not good to be so bold of foot,
Upon the sudden till you have more strength.

Mistress I thank you, and I care not much
If I be ruled by you.
Oh God that she should pity me unknown,
That knowing me by her was overthrown,
Or ignorantly she should regard this smart,
That heretofore spared not to stab my heart.

By your leave mistress Blague, I am somewhat bold,
Is there not a Gentleman within your house,
Called M. Flood, came hither hurt last night?

Is his name Flood, I knew it not till now,
But here he is, and well recovered,
Thanks to this Gentlewoman mistress Shore.

Pardon me mistress Shore, I saw you not,
And trust me I am sorry at the heart,
So good a creature as your self hath been,
Should be so vilely dealt with as you are,
I momise you the world laments your case.

How mean^ you sir? I understand you not?
Lament my case, for what? for Edwards death?
I know that I have lost a gracious friend,
But that is not to be remedied now.

No mistress Shore, it is for Richards hate,
That too much envies your prosperity.

I know he loves me not and for that cause,
I have withdrawn me wholly from the court.

You have not seen the Proclamation then?

The proclamation? no, what proclamation?

Oh mistress Shore, the king in every street
Of London, and in every borough town,
Throughout this land hath publicly proclaimed,
On pain of death that none shall harbour you,
Or give you food or clothes to keep you warm,
But having first done shameful penance here,
You shall be then thrust forth the City gates,
Into the naked cold forsaken field,
I fable not, I would to God I did,
See, here's the manner of it put in print,
Tis to be sold in every Stationers shop,
Besides a number of them clapped on posts.
Where people crowding as they read your fall,
Some murmure, and some sigh, but most of them,
Have their relenting eyes even big with tears.

Gods will be done, I know my sin is great,
And he that is omnipotent and just,
Cannot but must reward me heavily.

It grieves me mistress Shore, it was my chance,
To be the first reporter of this news.

Let it not grieve, I must have heard of it,
And now as good, as at another time.

I pray ye mistress Blage have care of Flood,
And what his charge is I will see you paid,

Farewell to all that still shall be my song,
Let men impose upon me ne'er such wrong,
And this extremity shall seem the less,
In that I have a friend to lean unto,
Sweet mistress Blage, there were upon the earth,
No comfort left for miserable Iane,
But that I do presume upon your love,
I know though tyrant Richard had set down,
A greater penalty then is proclaimed,
Which cannot well be thought, yet in your house,
I should have succour and relief beside.

What, and so I should be a traitor, should I?
Is that the care you have of me and mine?
I thank you truly, no there's no such matter,
I love you well, but love my self better:
As long as you were held a true subject,
I made account of you accordingly,
But being otherwise, I do reject you,
And will not cherish my kings enemy:
You know the danger of the Proclamation:
I would to God you would depart my house.

When was it ever even Iane Shore was false
Either unto her country, or her king?
And therefore tis not well good mistress Blage,
That you upbraid me with a traitors name.

I, but you have been a wicked liver,
And now you see what tis to be unchaste,
You should have kept you^ your honest husband:
T was never other like but that such filthiness,
Would have a foul and detestable end.

Time was that you did tell me otherwise,
And studied how to set a gloss on that
Which now you say is ugly and deformde.

I told you then as then the time did serve,
And more indeed to try your disposition,
Then any way to encourage you to sin:
But when I say you were ambitious,
And saintly stood on terms of modesty,
I left you to your own arbitrament:
Can you deny it was not so? how say you?

We will not mistress Blage dispute of that,
But now in charity and womanhood,
Let me find favour if it be but this,
That in some barn or stable I may shroud.
Till otherwise I be provided for.

I pray you do not urge me mistress Shore.
I will not have my house endangered so.

Oh you did promise I should never want,
And that your house was mine, swore the same,
To keep your oath be then compassionate.

So you did swear you would be true to Shore,
But you were not so good as your word,
My oaths disherit which by the kings command.

Yet let me have those jewels and that money,
Which is within my trunks.

I know of none:
If there be any, i'll be so bold,
As keep it for your diet and your mans,
It is no little charge I have been at,
To ^de your dainty tooth, since you came hither,
Beside houseroome, I am sure is somewhat worth.

Ah Iane I cannot choose but pity thee,
Here's the first step to thy deep misery.

Oh that my grave had the bin made my house,
When either first I went unto the Court,
Or from the court returned unto this place.

How now, what are you? it had been manners
You should have knocked before you had come in.

We are the Bishops Parators my friend,
And mistress Shore our errand is to you.
This day it is commanded by the King,
You must be stripped out of your rich attire,
And in a white sheet go from Temple bar,
Until you come to Algate, bare footed,
Your hair about your ears, and in your hand,
A burning taper, therefore go with us.

Even when and whither you will, and would to God,
The King as soon could rid my soul of sin,
As he may stripped my body of these rags.

That would be soon enough, but come away,
And mistress Blage you'll hardly answer it,
When it is known we found her in your house.

It seems you do not fear to harbour her.

I harbour her? out on her strumpet queen,
She pressed upon me where I would or no:
I'll see her hanged ere I will harbour her.
So now her jewels and her gold is mine,
And I am made at least four thousand pound,
Wealthier by this match then I was before:
And what can be objected for the same,
That once I lou'de her: well perhaps I did,
And women all are governed by the Moon,
But now I am of another humour,
Which is you know a planet that will change.

Now M. Sheriff of London do your office,
Attach this rebel to his Majesty,
And having stripped her to her petticoat,
Turn her out a doors, with this condition,
That no man harbour her, that durst presume
To harbour that lewd courtesan Shores wife,
Against the strait commandment of the King.

I beseech you sir.

Away with her I say.
The while ^le seize upon her house goods,
Which wholly are confiscate to the King.

Oh what have I beheld, were I as young,
As when I came to London to be prentice,
This pageant were sufficient to instruct,
And teach me ever after to be wise.
First have I seen desert of wantonness,
And breach of wedlock: then of flattery,
Next of dissembilng love, and last of all,
The ruin of base catching avarice:
But poor Iane Shore in that I lou'de thee once,
And w^s thy husband I must pity, thee,
The sparks of old affection long ago,
(...) up in ashes of displeasure kindle,
And in this furnace of adversity,
The world shall see a husbands loyalty.

Spuria vitulamina non agent radices altas.
Bastardly slips have always slender grouth.
Ah Shaw, this was the cursed theme,
That at Paul's cross thou made thy sermon of,
To prove the lawful issue of thy King,
Got out of wedlock, illegittimate.
Ah Duke of Gloster this did thou procure.
Did Richard (villain) no it was thy fault,
Thou would be won to such a damned deed,
Which now to think on makes my soul to bleed.
Ah Friar Anselme, sleep among the blessed,
Thy propheste thus falsely did I wrest.

Thou did, and be thou damnde therefore,
Ne'er come thy soul where blessedness abides,
Did thou not know the letter G. was Gloster?

Anselme I did.

Why then did thou affirm,
That it was meant by George the duke of Clarece
That honourable harmless Gentleman,
Whose thoughts all innocent as any child,
Yet came through thee to such a luckless death.

I was enforced by the Duke of Gloster.

Enforst say thou? would you then be enforst,
Being a man of thy profession,
To sin so vilely, and with thine own mouth,
To damn thy soul? No thou wast not enforced,
But gain and hope of high promotion
Hyrde thee thereto, say was it so or no?

It did, it did.

Why then record in thy black hellish thoughts,
How many mischiefs have ensude hereon?
First wronged Clarence drowned in the Tower,
Next, Edwards children murdered in the Tower:
This day at Pomfret noble Gentlemen,
Three the Queenes kindred, lose their harmless heads.
Think thou that here this flood of mischief (...)
No villain, many are marked to the block,
And they the nearest, think them furthest off,
Even Buckingham, creator of that king,
Shall he to woe and wretched ending bring.
All this (accursed man) hath come by thee,
And thy false wresting of my prophecy,
For Englands good disclosed to thy trust,
And so it had been, had thou proved just.
But thou and every one that had a hand,
In that most woeful murder of the Princes,
To satall ends you are appointed all.
Here in thy study shalt thou starve thy self,
And from this hour not taste one bit of food,
The rest shall after follow on a row,
To all their deaths, vengeance will not be slow.

Where is M. Doctor Shaw?

Here friend, what is thy will with me?

K. Richard prays ye to come to him strait.
For he would be consest.

I cannot come, I pray thee take that Friar,
For he can do it better far then I.

A Friar M. Doctor I see none.

Doest thou not? no, thy untainted soul
Cannot discern the horrors that I do.

Shaw go with him, tell that tyrant Richard,
He hath but three years limited for life,
And then a shameful death takes hold on him,
That done, return, and in thy study end
Thy loathed life that did us all offend,

With all my heart, would it were ended now,
So it were done, I care not where nor how.

Now mistress Shore, here our commissionends,
Put off your robe of shame, for this is Algate,
Whither it was appointed we should bring you,

My robe of shame? Oh that so soul a name
Should be applied unto so fair a garment,
Which is no more to be condemnde of shame,
Then snow of putrefaction is deserude,
To cover an infectious heap of dung,
My robe of shame, but not my shame put off,
For that sits branded on my forehead still,
And therefore in derision was I wrapped,
In this white Sheet: and in derision bore
This burning taper, to express my folly,
That having light of reason to direct me,
Delighted yet in by-waies of dark error.

Well mistress Shore, I hope you grudge not us,
We she wde you all the favour poor men could.

Oh God forbid: I know the Kings Edia
Set you a work, and not your own desires.

I truly mistress, and for our parts,
We could be well content twere otherwise,
But that the laws severe, and so we leave you.

Farewell unto you both: and London too,
Farewell to thee, where first I was inticde,
That scandalizde thy dignity with shame,
But now thou hast returned me treble blame,
My tongue that gave consent inioynde to beg.
Mine eyes adiudgde to hourly laments,
Mine arms for their embracings, catch the air,
And these quick nimble feet that were so ready
To step into a kings for bidden bed,
London thy ^ints have punished for their pride,
And thou hast drunk their blood for thy revenge,
What now avails to think what I have been,
Then welcome nakedness and poverty,
Welcome contempt, welcome you barren fields,
Welcome the lack of meat, and lack of friends,
And wretched Iane, according to thy state,
Sit here, sit here, and lower if might be:
All things that breath in their extremity,
Have some recourse of succour, thou hast none,
The child offended flies unto the mother,
The Soldier struck, retires unto his Captain,
The fish distressed, slides into the river,
Birds of the air do fly unto their dams,
And underneath their wings are quickly shrouded
Nay, beat the spanniel, his master moans him,
But I have neither where to shroud my self,
Nor any one to make my moan unto,
Come patience then, and though my body pine,
Make then a banquet to refresh my soul,
Let hearts deep throbbing sighs be all my bread,
My drink salt tears, my guests repentat thoughts
That who so knew me, and doth see me now,
May shun by me the breach of wedlockes vow.

Oh God how full of dangers grows these till
And no assurance seen in any state,
No man can say that he is master now,
Of any thing is his, such is the tide
Of sharpe disturbance running through the land,
I have given over my office in the Tower,
Because I cannot brooke their vile complots,
Nor smoother such outrageous villainies:
But mistress Shore, to be so basely wronged,
And wildly used, that hath so well deserude,
It doth afflict me in the very soul,
She sau'de my kinsman, Harrie Stranguidge life,
Th^refore in duty am I bound to her,
To do what good I way, though law forbid,
See where she sits, God comfort thee good soul,
First take that to relieve thy body with,
And next receive this book, wherein is food,
Manna of heaven to refresh thy soul:
These holy meditations mistress Shore,
Will yield much comfort in this misery,
Whereon contemplate still, and never linne,
That God may be unmindful of thy sin.

Master Lieutenant, in my hart I thank ye,
For this kind comfort to a wretched soul:
Welcome ^weet prayer-booke, food of my life,
The sovereign balm for my sick conscience:
Thou shalt be my souls pleasure and delight,
To wipe my sins out of Ichouacs sight.
B. Do so good mistress Shore, now I must leave ye,
Because some other business calls me hence,
And God I pray regard your penitence.

Farewell sir Robert, and for this good to me,
The God of heaven be mindful still of thee.

This way she went, and cannot be far off,
For but even now I met the officers,
That were attendant on her in her penance,
Yonder she sits, now then Air show thy self,
Thankful to her, that sometime sau'de thy life,
When Law had made thee subject to base death,
Give her thy purse, for here comes some Lady,
Stand by a while, for fear thou be discovered.

What mistress Shore, King Edwards concubin^,
Set on a mole-hill, oh disparagement.
A throne were ^tter for your Ladyship,
Fie will you ^ubber these fair cheeks with fears?
Or sit so solitary, wheres all your servants?
Where is your gown of silk, your periwigs,
Your fine reba^oes, and your costly jewels,
What not so much as a shoe upon your foot,
Nay then I see the world goes hard with whoores.

The villain slave gibes at her misery.

Now whether is it better to be in court,
And there to beg a licence of the King,
For transportation of commodities,
Then here to sit forsaken as thou dost,
I think upon condition Edward lived,
And thou were still in favour as before,
Thou woulds not say that Rufford had deserude,
To have his ears rent for a worser suite,
Then licence to ship over corn and lead,
What not a word, faith wench i'll tell thee what,
If thou dost think thy old trade out of date,
Go learn to play the bawd another while.

Jnbum^e wretch, why dost thou scorn her so,
And vere her grieved soul with bitter taunts,

Because I will, she is a curtisan,
And one abhorred of the world for lust.

If all thy faults were in thy forehead writ,
Perhaps thou would thy self appear no less,
But much more horrible then she doth now.

You are no judge of mine sir.

Why nor thou of her.

The world hath judged, and found her guilty,
And tis the Kings command she be held odious.

The King of heaven commands otherwise,
And if thou b^ not willing to relieve her,
Let it suffize thou see her miserable,
And study not to amplify her grief.
What other woeful spectacle comes here?
Mistress take that and spend it for my sake.

Oh I am pinched with more the common want,
Where shall I find relief? Good Gentleman,
Pity a wretched woman like to starve,
And I will pray for ye. One halfepennie
For Christs sake, to comfort me withal.

What mistress Blage, is't you? no marvel sure,
But you should be relieude, a halfepenie quotha?
I marie sir, and so be hanged my self,
Not I, this Gentleman may if he please,
Get you to your companion mistress Shore,
And then there is a pair of queens wellmet,
Now I bethink me, i'll go to the King,
And tell him that some will relieve Shores wife,
Except some officer there be appointed,
That carefully regards it be not so.
Thereof my self will I make offer to him,
Which questionless he cannot but accept,
So shall I still pursue Shores wife with hate,
That scorned me in her high whoores estate.

Good Gentleman bestow your charity,
One single halfepennie to help my need.

Not one, were I the master of a mint,
What? succour thee that did betray thy friend?
See where she sits, whom thou did scorn indeed,
And therefore rightly art thou scorned again:
Thou thoughtst to been riched with her goods,
But thou hast now lost both thy own and hers,
And for my part, knew It would save thy life,
Thou should not get so much as a crum of bread
Pack counterfeit, pack a way dissembling drab.

Oh misery, but shall I stay to look
Her in her face, whom I so much have wronged?

Yes mistress Blage, I freely pardon you,
You have done me no wrong, come sit by me:
Twas so in wealth, w^y not in poverty?

Oh willingly if yo u can brooke her presence,
Whom you have great er reason to despise.

Why woman, Ric hard that hath banished me,
And seeks my ruin (c^uselesse though it be)
Do I in heart pray for, and will do still,
Come thou share wit h me what God hath sent,
A stranger gave it me, and part thereof
I do as freely now bestow on you.

I thank you mistress Shore, this courtesy
Renews the grief of my inconstancy.

Yonder she sits how like a withered tree,
That is in winter leauelesse and bereft
Of lively sap, sits she poor abic^ soul,
How much unlike the woman is sh^ now,
She was but yesterday: so short and brittle
Is this worlds happiness: but who is that.
False mistress Blage? how can thou brook her Iane?
I thou wast always mild and pitiful,
Oh had thou been as chaste, we had been blessed,
But now no more of that: she shall not starve,
So long as this, and such as this may serve,
Here mistress Shore, feed on these homely Cates,
And there is wine to drink them down withal.

Good sir your name, that pities poor In. Shore
That in my prayers I may remember you.

No matter for my name, I am a friend,
That loves you well, so farewell mistiris Shore,
When that is spent, I vow to bring you more.

Gods blessing be your guide where ere you go,
Thus mistress Blage you see ^idst our woe,
For all the world can do, God sends relief,
And will not yet we peris^ in our grief,
Come let us step into some secret place.

Tis not amiss, if you be so content,
For here the fields too open frequent.
Where vndisturbde we may partake this grace.

What is she gone so soon? alack poor Iane,
How I compassionate thy woeful case?
Whereas we lived tog^ther man and wife,
Oft on an humble stool by the fire side,
Sate she contented, when as my high heat,
Would chid her for it. But what would she say
Husband we both must lower sit one day,
When I dare swear thee never dreamd of this,
But see good God what prophesying is.

This is King Richards hand, I know it well,
And this of thine is justly counterfeit,
As he himself would swear it were (...) ou n^.

The kings hand (...) more of that.

Why cu^e letter, every little ^ash,
In all respects alike, how may I use,
My transportation of my cozne and hides,
Without the danger of forbidding law,
And so I would have done in Edwards days,
But that good ^ris Shore did please to cross me,
But mark how now I will requite her for it.
I moude my suit, and plainly told the King,
Some would relie^e her, if no man had charge,
To see seucrcly to the contrary.
Forth with his Grace appointed me the man,
And gave me officers to wait upon me,
Which will so countenance thy cunning work,
As I shall no way be suspected in it: how say thou Fog?

It will do well indeed:
But good sir have a care in any case,
For else you know what barm may come thereon.

A care say thou? why man, I will not trust
My house, my strongest locks, nor any place,
But mine own bosom, there will I keep it still,
If I miscarry, so doth it with me.

Are ye so cunning sir, I say no more,
Iane Shore or I may quittance you for this.

Well Fog I have contented thee,
Thou may be gone, I must about my charge,
To see that none relieve Shores wife with ought.
Come on good fellows, you that must atcend,
King Richards service under my command,
Your charge is to be very vigilant,
Over that strumpet whom they call Shores wife:
If any traitor give her but a mite,
A draught of water, or a crust of bread,
Or any other food what ere it be,
Lay hold on him, for it is present death,
By good King Richards proclamation,
This is her haunt, here stand I Sentincll,
Keep you unseen, and aide me when I call.

Now must I under colour of playing at bowles, help till relieve my good
masters, masters Shore. Come, Ieffrey, we will play five up for this bottle
of Ale, and yonder good pure woman shall keep the stakes, and this cheese
shall be the master.


Here is a villain, that will not relieve her,
But yet heel loose he bowles, that way to help her,
Apprehend him fellows when I bid ye:
Although his mate be gone, he shall pay for it.
Take him, and let the Beadles whip him well.

Hear ye sir, shall they be whipped and hanged that gfu^ to the pure, then they
shall be damn that take fro the pure.


Oh yonder sits the sweet forsaken soul,
To whom for ever I stand deeply bound:
She sau'de my life, then Air help to save hers.

Whither go ye sir?
You come to give this strumpet some relief.

She did more good then ever thou can do,
And if thou wilt not pity her thy self,
Give others leave, by duty bound thereto:
Here mistress Shore, take this, and would to God
It were so much as my poor heart could wish.

Who is it that thus pities my poor wife?
Ti^ M. Air, Gods blessing on him for it.

Dare thou do so Air?

Rufford I dare do more:
Here is my ring, it ways an ounce of Gold,
And take my cloak to keep ye from the cold.

Thou art a traitor Air.

Rufford, thou art a villain so to call me.

Lay hold on him, attach him officers.

Rufford, ^e answer thine arrest with this.

All this contending sir will not avail,
This treason will be rated at thy life.

Life is too little for her sake that sau'de it.

Is he a traitor sir, for doing good?
God save the King, a true heart means no ill.
I trust he hath reclaimde his ^arpe edict,
And will not that his poorest subject perish,
And so persuaded I my self will do,
That which both love and nature binds me to.
I c^nnot give her as she well deserves.
For she hath lost a greater benefit.
(...) take that purse.

(...) ^kte away.

You shall not sir, for I will answer it,
Before the King if you enforce it so.

It must be so, you shall unto the King.

You will be he will first repent the thing:
Come M. Air, i'll bear ye company,
Which wise men doth say ease calamity,

If grie^e to speech free passage could afford,
Or (...) w^e I had a fitting word,
I migh^ complain, or if my floods of tears,
Could move remorse of minds, or pearce dull ears,
Or wash away my cares, or cleanse my crime:
With words tears I would be wail the time.
But it is bootless, why live I to see,
All those despised that do pity me.
Despised? alas, destroyed, and led to death,
That gave me alms here to prolong my breath.
Fair Dames behold, let my example prove,
There is no love like to a husbands love.

Now tell us Rufford which of these it is,
That in the heat of his vpheaued spleen,
Contemns our crown, disdains our dignity,
And arms himself against authority.

Both have offended my dread sovereign,
Though not alike, yet both faults capital,
These l^es declare what, when, where it was.

Which is that Air?

This young man my Liege.

I thought it was some hot distempred blood,
That fierd his gyddie brain with business:
Is thy name Air?

It is.

This paper says so.

Perish may he that made that paper speak.

Ha? Dost thou wish confusion unto us?
This paper is the Organ of our power,
And shall pronounce thy condemnation,
We make it speak thy treasons to thy face,
And thy malicious tongue speaks treas^n still.
Relieu'st thou Shores wife in contempt of us?

No, but her just desert,
She sau'de my life, which I had forfeited,
Whereby my goods and life she me^ited.

And thou shalt pay it in the self same place,
Where thou this man our Officer, did out face,
And scorndst us saying if we stood by,
Thou would relieve her.

I do not deny,
For want of food her breath was near expired,
I gave her means to buy it vndesirde,
And rather choose to die for charity,
Then live condemned of ingratitude.

Your good d^tion brings you to y^ gall^ws,
He hath his sentence, Rufford see him ^gd.
Now sir your name?

Is it not written there?

Here's Matthew Flood.

That is his name my Lord.

Is thy name Flood?

So M. Rufford sates.

Flood and Air? the elements conspire,
In air and water to confound our power:
Did thou relieve that hateful wretch Shores wife?

I did relieve that woeful wretch Shores wife.

Thou seem a man well staid and temperate,
Durst thou infringe our proclamation?

I did not break it.

Yes, and added more,
That you would answer it before the King.

And added more, you would repent the thing.

Who, I? his Highness knows my innocence,
And ready service with my goods and life,
Answer thy treasons to his majesty.

What can thou say Flood why thou should not die?

Nothing, for I am mortal and must die,
When my time comes, but that I thinks not yet,
Although (God knows) each hour I wish it were,
So full of dolor is my wearje life:
Now say I this, that I do know the man,
Which doth abette that traitorous libeller,
Who did compose spread that slauderous rime,
Which scandals you, and doth abuse the time.

What libeller? another Collingborne?
That wrote: The Cat, the Rat, and Louell our Dog,
Do rule all England under a Hog.
Can thou repeat it Flood?

I think I can if you command me so.

We do command thee.

In this sort it goes.
The crook bakt Boar the way hath found,
To root our Roses from our ground,
Both flower and bud will he confound,
Till King of beasts the swine be crowned:
And then the Dog, the Cat, and Rat,
Shall in his trough feed and be fat.

quoth M. Fog, chief secretary and counsellor to M. Rufford.


How say thou Flood, doth Rufford (...) this?

He is a traitor if he do my Lord.

I (...) it? dread Lord I ask no grace,
If I be guilty of this libelling,
Vouchsafe me justice as you are my Prince,
Against this traitor that accuses me.

What justice crau'st thou? I will combat thee,
In sign whereof I do vnbutton me,
And in my shirt my challenge will maintain,
Thou call me traitor, I will prove thee one,
Open thy bosom like me if thou dare?

I will not be so rude before his grace.

Thou wilt not open the pack of thy disgrace.
Because thy doublets stuffed with traitorous libels.

Catesbie tear off the buttons from his breast.
What findst thou there?

Your highness hand and seal,
For transportation of Hides, Corn and Lead.

Traitor, did I sign that commission?

O pardon me most royal King.

Pardon? to counterfeit my hand and seal?
Have I bestowed such love, such countenance?
Such trust on thee, and such authority,
To have my hand and signet counterfeit?
To carry Corn the food of all the land,
And Lead, which after might annoy the land,
And Hides, whose leather must relieve the land,
To strangers enemies unto the land:
Did thou so nearly connterfet my hand?

Not I my liege, but Fog the Attorney.

Away with him Louell and Catesbie, go,
(...) the Sheriffs of London presently,
To see h^m drawn, and hango, and quartered,
Let them not drink before they see him dead.
Hast you again.

Well Flood thou art my death,
I might have liudet' have seen thee lose thy head.

Thou hast but ^ustice for thy cruelty,
Against the guiltless souls in misery,
I ask no fau^ur if I merit death.

Cra^st thou no favour? then I tell thee Flood,
Thou art a traitor ^reaking our edict,
By succouring that traitrous quean Shores wife.
And thou shalt die.

If I have broke the law.

If (...)? did thou not give her thy purse?
And d^st thou not maintain the deed?

I do, if it be death to the relenting heart,
Of a kind husband, wronged by a King,
To (...) his (...) seduced wife,
Whom all the world must suffer by command,
To pine and perish for the want of food:
If it be treason for her husband then,
In the dear bowels of his former love,
To bury his own wrong and her misdeed,
And give her meat whom he was wont to feed,
Then Shore must die, for Flood is not my name,
Though once I took it to conceal my shame,
Pittic permits not injured Shore pass by,
And see his once loud wife with famine die.

Louell Catesbie, this is Shore indeed,

We confess that thou hast p^ledge,
And art excepted in our Proclamation,
Because thou art her husband whom it concerns,
And thou may lawfully relieve thy wife,
Upon condition thou forgive her fault,
Take her again, and use her as before,
Hazard new horns, how sasist thou, wilt thou Shore?

If any but your Grace should so upbraid,
Such rude reproach should roughly be repaid.
Suppose for treason that she lay condemnde,
Might I not seed her till her hour of death,
And yet my self no traitor for it?

Thou mightste.

And why not now (O pardon me dread lord)
When she hath had both punishment and shame
Sufficient, since a King did cause her blame,
May I not give her food to save her life,
Yet never take and use her as my wife?

Except thou take her home again to thee,
Thou art a stranger, and it shall not be,
For if thou do, expect what doth belong.

I never can forget so great a wrong.

Then never feed her whom thou can not love.

My charity doth that compassion move.

Move us no more, Louell let Air be hanged,
Just in the place where he relicud Shores wife:
Shore hath his pardon for this first offence.
The name of husband pleads his innocence,
Away with them: Catesbie come you with v^?

Good mistress Shore, (...) not with your tears,
But let me go in quiet to mine end.

Alas poor soul,
Was never innocent thus put to death.

The mores my joy, that I am innocent,
My death is the less grievous, I am so.

Ah M. Air the time hath been ere now,
When I have kn^eld to Edward on my knees,
And begged for him, that now doth make me beg.
I have given him, when he hath begged of me,
Though he forbids to give me when I beg,
I have ere now relieved him and his,
Though he and his deny relief to me:
Had I been envious then, as Richard now,
I had not starved, nor Edwards sons bin murdered,
Nor Richard lived to put you now to death.

The more Iane is thy virtue and his sin.

Come sir dispatch.

Dispatch say you? dispatch you may it call,
He cannot stay when death dispatches all.

Lord, is my sin so horrible and grievous,
That I should now become a murderer?
I have sau'de the life of many a man condemned,
But never was the death of man before.
That any man thus for my sake should die,
Afflicts me more then all my misery.

Iane be content,
I am as much indebted unto thee,
As unto nature, I owed thee a life,
When it was forfeit unto death by law,
Thou b^gdst it of the king and gau'st it me:
This house of flesh wherein this soul doth dwell,
Is thine, and thou art Landladie of it,
And this poor life a Tenant but at pleasure,
It never came to pay the rent till now,
But hath run in arerage all this while,
And now for very shame comes to discharge it,
When death distraines for what is but thy due,
I had not ought thee so much as I do,
But by thy only mercy to preserve it,
Until I loose it for my charity.
Thou giu'st me more then ever I can pay,
Then do thy pleasure executioner,
And now farewell kind virtuous mistress Shore,
In heaven we'll meet again, in earth no more.

Farewell, farewell, thou for thy alms dost die.
And I must end here starude in misery,
In life my friend, in death i'll not forsake thee,
Thou go to heaven, I hope to overtake thee.

O world what art thou? man, even from his birth
Finds nothing else but misery on earth,
Thou never (world) scorn'dst me so much before,
But I (vain world) do hate thee ten times more.
I am glad I feel approaching death so nie,
World thou hate me, I thee vain world defy.
I pray ye yet good master officers,
Do but this kindness to poor wretched souls,
As let us have the burial of our friend,
It is but so much labour saude for you.

There take his body, bury it where you will,
So it be quickly done out of the way.

Whats he that begs the burial of my friend,
And hath so oftentimes relieved me?
Ah gentle sir, to comfort my sad woe,
Let me that good kind man of mercy know.

Ah Iane, now there is none but thou and I
Look on me well, know thou thy Ma. Shore?

My Husband? then break and live no more.

Ah my dear Iane, comfort thy heavy soul,
Go not away so soon, a little stay,
A little, little while, that thou and I,
Like man and wife may here together die,

How can I look upon my husbands face,
That shamde my self, and wrought his deep disgrace^

Iane be content, our woes are now alike,
With one self rod thou see God d^ us strike,
If for thy (...), i'll pray to heaven for thee,
And if for mine, do thou as much for me.

Ah Shore, is't possible thou can forgine me?

Yes Iane, I doc.

I cannot hope thou wilt:
My faults so great that I cannot expect it.

I faith I do, as freely from my soul,
As at Gods hands I hope to be forgiven.

Then God reward thee, for we now must part,
I feel cold death doth seize upon my heart.

And he is come to me, here he lies,
I feel him ready to close up mine eyes,
Lend me thy hand to bury this our friend,
And then we both will hasten to our end.

sit thou there, here I my place will have,
Give me thy hand, thus we embrace our grave,
Ah Iane, he that the depth of woe will see,
Let him but now behold our misery:
But be content, this is the best of al,
Lower then now we are, we cannot fall.

Ah, I am faint, how happy Airc art thou,
Not feeling that which doth afflict us now?

Oh happy grave, to us this comfort giving,
Here lics two living dead, here one dead living,
Here for his sake, lo this we do for thee,
Thou lookste for one, and art poss^st of three.

Oh dying marriage, o^, sweet married death
Thou grave which only should part faithful friends,
Bring us together, and dast i^yne our h^nds,
Oh ^ing death, even in this d^ing life,
Yet ere I go, once Matthew kiss thy wife.

Ah my sweet Iane, farewell, farewell poor soul,
Now tyrant Richard do the worst thou can,
She doth defy thee, oh inconstant world,
Here lies a true Anatom^e of thee,
A King had all my joy, that her inioyde,
And by a King again (...) was destroyed:
All ages of my kingly w^es shall tell,
Once more inconstant world farewell, farewell.

Sirs if the King, or else the Duke of Buckingham
Do send for me, I will attend them straight,
But what are these here openly lie dead,
Oh God, the one is mistress Shore, this is Flood,
That was my man: the third is master Air,
Who suffered death for his relieving her,
They shall not thus lie in the open way,
Lend me your hands, and heavy hearts withal,
At mine own charge lie give them burial.

Most noble Lords, since it hath pleased you,
Beyend our expectation on yeut bounties,
T'^ mpale my temples with the Diadem.
How far my quiet thoughts have ever been,
From this great (...),
Heaven best can ^nesse: I am your King,
Long may I be so, to deserve your love,
But I will be a servant to you all,
Pray God my broken sleeps may give you rest.
But only that my blood doth challenge it,
Being your lawful Prince by true succession,
I could have wished, with all my heart I could,
This majesty had sat on the brow
Of any other: so much do I affect a private life,
To spend my dates in contemplation.
But since that heaven and you will have it so,
I take the crowue as meekly at your hands,
As free and pure from an ambitious thought,
As any new borne babe. Thus must thou Richard
Seem as a saint to men in outward show, aside.
Being a very devil in thy heart:
Thus must thou cover all thy villainies,
And keep them close from ouerlookers eyes.

My Sovereign by the general consent
Of all the Lords and commons of the land,
I tender to your royal majesty,
This princely Lady, the Lady Anne of Warwick
Judged the only worthiest of your love,
To be your highness bride, fair Englands Queen

My royal Princely Cousin Buckingham,
I see you strive to bless me more and more,
Your bounty is so large and ample to me,
You overflow my spirits with your great love,
I willingly accept this virtuous Princess,
And crown her Angel beauty with my love.

Then as the hand of your high parliament,
I give her here unto your majesty.

Lord Louell I as heartily receive her,
Welcome fair Queen.

And from the Lords commons of your land
I give the free and voluntary oath,
Of their allegiance to your majesty.
As to their sovereign and liege Lord and Lady,
Richard the third, beauteous Anne his Queen,
The true and lawful King Queen of England.

I do accept it Catesbie, and return,
Exchange of mutual and party love.
Now Fog too, that in your traitorous Libels,
Besides the counterfeiting of our hand and seal
For Rufford, though so great a fault deserud^
To suffer death, as he already hath,
Going about to siubber our renowue,
And wound us with reproach and infamy,
Yet Fog that thou thy self may plainly see,
How far I am from seeking sharp revenge,
Fog I forgive thee, and withal we do,
Repeal our heavy sentence against Shores wi^e,
Restoring all her goods, for we intend,
With all the world now to be perfect friends.

Why my good Lord, you kn^w she's dead already.

True Catesbie, else I ne'er had spoke such words,
Alas I see our kindness comes too late,
For Catesbie tells me she is dead already.

I my good Lord, so is her husband too.

Would they had lived, to see our friendly change,
But Catesbie say, where did Shore and his wife?

Where Air was hanged for giving her relief,
There both of them round circling his cold grave,
And arm in arm departed from this life:
The people for the love they bear to her,
And her kind husband, pitying his wrongs,
For ever after mean to call the ditch,
Shores Ditch, as in the memory of them,
Their bodies in the Friars minorites,
Are in one grave enterred all together,
But mistress Blage for ingratitude,
To mistress Shore, lies dead unburied,
And no one will afford her burial.

But mistress Blage she shall have burial too,
What now we must be friends, indeed we must,
And now my Lords, I give you all to know,
In memory of our eternal love,
I do ordame an order of the Bathe,
Twelve knights in number of that royal sort,
Which order with all princely ceremonies,
Shall be observed in all royal pomp,
As Edwards our forefather of the Barter,
Which feast our self, and our beloved Queen,
Will presently solemnize in our person.

Now am I bold to put your grace in mind
Of my long suite, and partly your own promise,
The Earl of Herefords lands.

Cousin we'll better think on that here after.

M^ pains my Lord hath not deserude delay.

W^l you appoint our time: then you shall stay,
For this hot hastiness sir you shall stay,
Moo^ (...) no more you were best.

I Richard, is it come to this?
In my first suite of all, dost thou dense me?
Break thine o^ word, turn me off so slieghtly,
Richard thoud had as good have damnde thy soul,
As basely thus to beale with Buckingham:
Richard i'll sit upon thy cru^ped shoulder:
I faith I will, if heaven will give me leave,
And Harrie Richmond, this hand alone,
Shall fetch thee home, and seat thee in his throne.

What is he gone in heat, why farewell be,
He is displeased, let him be pleased again,
We have no time to think on angry men:
Come my sweet Queen, let us go solemnize,
Our Knighthoods order in most royal wise.


