WIthdraw, we must have private conference
With our dear husband.

What would thou wife?

Be what I am not, make thee greater far
Then thou canstay me to be.

Why I am Tarquin.

And I am Tullia what of that?
What Diapasons more in Tarquins name
Then in a Subjects? or what's Tullia
More in the sound, then to become the name
Of a poor Maid or waiting Gentlewoman?
I am a princess both by birth and thoughts,
Yet al's but Tullia, there's no resonance
In a bare stile: my title bears no breadth,
Nor hath it any state, oh me, i'm sick!

Sick Lady?

Sick at heart.

Why my sweet Tullia?

To be a Queen I long, long and am sick
With ardence, my hot appetite's afire,
Till my swollen fervor be delivered
Of that great Title Queen, my heart's al royal,
Not to be circumscribed in servile bounds,
While there's a King that rules the P^res of Rome.
Tarquin makes legs and Tullia courtesies lowe,
Bows at each nod, and must not near the state
Without obey sance, oh! I hate this awe, my proud heart cannot brooke it.

He are me wife.

I am no wife of Tarquini if not King:
Oh had God made me man, I would have mounted
Above the base tribunals of the earth,
Up to the clouds, for pompeous sovereignty,
Thou art a man, oh bear my royal mind,
Mount heaven and see if T^llia lag behind,
There is no earth in me, I am all fire,
Were Ta^quin so, then should we both aspire.

Oh Tullia, though my body taste of dullness,
My soul is wingde: lo I soar as high as thine,
But note what flags our wings! forty five years
The King thy father hath protected Room.

That makes for us: the people covet change,
Even the best things in time grow tedious.

'twould seem v nnaturall in thee my Tullia,
The reverend King, thy Father to depose:

A kingdoms quest, makes Sons and Fathers foes.

And but by Seruius fall we cannot climb,
The balm that must annoynt us is his blood.

Lets lave our brows th^n in that crimson flood,
We must be bold and dreadlesse, who aspires,
Mounts by the lives of Fathers, Sons, and Sires.

And so must I, since for a kingdoms love,
Thou can despise a Father for a Crown:
Tarquin shall mount Seruius be tumbled down
For he vsurpes my state, and first deposde,
My father in my swathed Infancy,
For which he shall be countant to his end.
I have sounded all the Peires and Senators,
and though unknown to thee my Tullia,
They al embrace my faction, and so they,
Love change of state, and new King to obey.

Now is my Tarquin, worthy Tullias grace
Since in my arms, I thus a King embrace.

The King should meet this day in Parliament,
With all the Senates and Estates of Rome:
His place will I assume, and there proclaim,
All our decrees in Royal Tarquins name.

May it please thee Noble Tarquin to attend
The King this day within the high Capitol?

Attend?

We intend this day to see the Capital,
You knew our father good Lucretius?

I did my Lord.

Was not I his Son?
The Queen my Mother was of royal thoughts
and heart pure, as vnb^emisht Innocence.

Why asks my Lord?

Sons should succeed their fathers, but anon
You shall hear more, high time that we were gone.

There's moral sure in this, Valerius,
Here's model, yea, and matter too to breed
Strange meditations in the provident brains
Of our grave Fathers: some strange project lives
This day in Cradle that's but newly borne.

No doubt Colatin^ no doubt hee^es a giddy world, it Reeles, it hath got the
staggers, the common-wealth is sick of an ague, of which nothing can cure her
but some violent and ^ddaine affrightment.


The wife of Tarquin would be a Queen, nay on my life she is with child till
she be so.


and lunges to be brought to bed of a Kingdom, I divine we shall see some
^uffling to day in the Capital.


If ^here be any difference among the Princes and Senate, whose faction will
Vale^ius follow?


Oh Collatin^! I am a true Citizen and in this I will best show my self to be
one, to take part with the stronger. If Se^ius ore-come, I am Liegeman to
Serutus, if Ta^quin subdue, I am for Viue Tarquinius.


Val^ius, no more, this talk does but keep us from the sight of this
solemnity: by this the Princes are entering the Capital: come, we must attend.


This place is not for fools, this parliament
assembles not the strains of Ideotisme:
Only the grave and wisest of the land:
Important are the affairs we have inhand.
Hence with that mome.

Brutus forbear the presence.

For bear the presence, why pra'y?

None are admitted to this grave concourse,
But wise men: nay good Brutus.

You'll have an empty parliament then.

Here is no room for fools.

Then what makst thou here, or he or he? oh Iupiter? if this command be kept
strictly, we shall have empty benches: get you home you that are here, for
here will be nothing to do this day: a general concourse of wise-men^ tw'as
never seen since the first Chaos. Tarquin if the general rule have no
exceptios, thou wilt have an empty Consistory.


Brutus, you trouble us.

How powerful am I you renowned Deities, that am able to trouble her that
troubles a whole Empire? fools exempted, women admitted! laugh Democritus, but
have you nothing to say to Madmen?


Madmen have here no place.

Then out a doors with Tarquin: whats he that may sit in a calm Valley, and
will choose to repose in a tempestuous mountain, but a madm^n? that may live
in tranquilous pleasures, and will seek out a kingdomes-cares, but a madman?
who would seek innovation in a common-wealth in public, or be ouer-ruld by a
cursed wife in private, but a fool or a mad-man? give me thy hand Tarquins shall
we two be dismissed together from the Capital?


Restrain his folly.

Drive the frantic hence.

Nay Brutus.

Good Brutus.

Nay soft, soft good blood of the Tarquins, lets have a few cold words first,
and I am gone in an instant: I claim the privilege of the nobility of Rome,
and by that privilege my seat in the Capitol. I am a Lord by birth, my place
is as free in the Capitol as Horatius thine, or thine Lucretius. Thine Sextus,
Arnus thine, or any here: I am a Lord and banish al the Lords fro the presence,
you'll have few to wait upon the King but Gentlemen: nay I am easily persuaded
then, hands off, since you will not have my company you shall have my room:

My room indeed, for what I seem to be,
Brutus is not, but borne great Room to fr^e.
The state is full of D^opsie, and swollen big
With windy vapors, which my sword must pierce,
To purge th'infected blood: bred by the pride
Of these infested bloods, nay now I go.
Behold I vanish, since tis Tarquins mind,
One small fool goes, but great fools leaves behind Exit.

Tis pity one so generously derived
Should be deprived: his best induements thus,
And want the true directions of the soul.

To leave these delatorie trifles, Lords,
Now to the public business of the Land,
Lords take your several places.

Not great Tarquin, before the King assume his regal throne
Whose coming we attend.

He's come already.

The King?

The King:

Seruius.

Tarquinius:

Seruius is King.

It was by power divine,
The Throne that long since he vsurpt is mine.
Here we enthroane our selves Cathedral state,
Long since detained us, justly we resume,
Then let our friends, and such as love us, cry
Live Tarquin and enjoy this sovereignty.

Live Tarquin and enjoy this sovereignty.

The King himself with such considerate Peers
As stoutly embrace his faction, being informde
Of Tarquins usurpation, armed comes,
Near to the entrance of the Capital.

No man give placethe that dares to arise
And do him reverence, we his love despise.

Traitor.

Usurper.

Descend.

Sit still.

In Tarquins name, Rooms great imperial monarch
I charge thee Tarquin disinthrone thy self.
and throw thee at our feet, prostrate for mercy.

Spoke like a King.

In Tarquins name, now Romes imperial Monarch,
We charge thee Seruius make free resignation,
Of that arched wreath, thou hast vsurpt so long.

Words worth an Empire.

Shall this be brooked my Sovereign?
Dismount the Traitor.

Touch him he that dares.

Dares:

Dares?

Strumpet, no child of mine.

Dotard, and not my father.

Kneel to thy King?

Submit thou to thy Queen.

Insufferable treason! with bright steel
Lop down these interponents, that withstand
The passage to our throne.

That Cocles dares.

We with our steel, guard Tarquin and this chair.

A Seruius.

A Tarquin.

Now are we King, indeed our awe is builded
Upon this royal base, and slaughtered body
Of a dead King? we by his ruin rise
To a Monarchal Throne.

We have our longing.
My fathers death gives me a second life,
Match better the the first, my birth was seruitud
But this new breath of reign is large and free,
Welcome my second life of Sovereignty.

I have a Daughter, but I hope of mettle,
Subject to better temperature: should my Lucrece,
Be of this pride, thief hands should sacrifice
Her blood unto the Gods that dwell below,
Theabortiue brat should not out live my spleen,
But Lucrece is my Daughter, this my Queen.

Tear off the crown, that yet empales the Temples
Of our usurping Father: quickly Lords,
And in the face of his yet bleeding wounds,
Lets us receive our honours.

The same breath
Gives our state life, that was the Usurpers death.

Here then by heavens hand we invest our selves:
Musique, whose loftiest tunes grace Princes crowned,
Unto our Noble coronation sound.

Whom doth Valerius to our state present?

Two valiant Romans, this Horatius Cocles,
This Gent. called Mutius Sceu^la,
Who whilst King Seruius wore the Diadem,
Up held his sway and Prince-dome by their loves:
But he being fa^ne, since all the Peers of Rome
Applaud King Tarquin in his sovereignty,
They with like suffrage greet your coronation.

This hand alyde unto the Roman Crown,
Whom never fear dejected or cast low,
Lays his victorious sword at Tarquins feet,
And prostrates with his sword, allegiance.
King Seruius life we loved, but he expired
Great Tarquins life, is in our hearts desired.

Why? whilst he rules with Justice and integrity,
Shall with our dreadles hands, our hearts command,
Even with the best employment of our lives,
Since fortune lifts thee, we submit to fate,
Our selves are vassailes to the Roman state.

Your rooms were empty in our train of friends,
Which we rejoice to see so well supplyde:
Receive our grace, live in our clement favours,
In whose submission our young glory grows
To his ripe height: fall in our friendly train,
And strengthen with your loves our Infant reign.

We live for Tarquin.

And to thee alone, whilst Justice keeps thy Sword thou thy Throne.


Then are you ours, and now conduct us straight,
In triumph through the populous streets of Rome,
To the Kings Palace our majestic seat:
Your hearts though freely proffered we entreat.

What block is that we tread on?

Tis the body
Of your deceased Father Madam, Queen
Your shoe is crimsend with his vital blood.

No matter, let his mangled body lye,
and with his base confederates strew the streets,
That in disgrace, of his usurped pride,
We ore his trunk may in our Chariot ride:
For mounted like a Queen, 'twould do me good
To wash my Coach-nailes in my fathers blood.

Here's a good Child.

Rem ove it, we command, and bear his carcass to the funeral pile
Where after this direction, let it have
His solemn and due obsequies, fair Tullia,
Thy hate to him grows from thy love to us.
Thou show thy self in this unnatural strife,
an unkind Daughter, but alouing wife.
But on unto our Palace this blessed day,
A Kings increase, grows by a Kings decay.

Murder the King, a high and capital treason.
Those Giants that wagde war against the Gods,
For which ore-whelmed Mountains hurled by Jove,
To scatter them, and give timeless Graves,
Was not more cruel then this butchery.
This slaughter made by Tarquin, but the Queen,
A woman, fie, fie, did not this she parracide.
ad to her fathers wounds: and when his body
Lay all besmeared and stained in the blood royal,
Did not this Monster, this infernate hag
Make her unwilling, Chariater drive on,
and with his shod wheels crush her Fathers bones,
Break his crazed scull, and dash his brains
Upon the pavements, whilst she hold the rains?
The affrighted Sun, at this abhorred object,
Put on a mask of blood, and yet she blushed not,
Jove art thou just, hast thou reward for piety?
and for offence no vengeance? or can punish
Felons, and pardon Traitors, chastise murdrers,
and wink at parracides? If thou be worthy
as well we know thou art, to fill the Throne
Of all eternity, then with that hand
That flings the trisalitie thunder, let the pride
Of these our Irreligious monarkisers
Be crowned in blood: this makes poor Brutus mad,
To see sin froliqu^, and the virtuous sad.

Soft, here's Brutus, let us acquaint him with the news.


Content, now Cousin Brutus:

Who I your kinsman? though I be of the blood of the Tarquins, yet no cousin,
gentle princes.


And why so B^tus, scorn you our all yance?

No, I was cousin to the Tarquins, when they were subjects, but dare claim no
kindred, as they are sovereigns: Brutus is not so mad though he be merry, but
he hath wit enough to keep his head on his shoulders.


Why do you my Lord thus loose your hours, and neither profess war nor
domestic profit? the first might beget you love, the other ri^ches.


Because I would live: have I not answered you because I would live? fools and
Mad-men are no rubes in the way of Usurpers: the firmament can brook but one
Sun, and for my part I must not shine: I had rather live an obscure black,
then appear a fair white to be shot at, the end of all (...), I would (...)
Ser^ius bin a shrub, the wind had not shook him, or a mad-man he had not
perished: I covet no more wit nor employment then as much as will keep life and
soul together, I would but live.


You are to ^atyricall cousin Brutus, but to the purpose: the King dreamt a
strange ominous dream last night, and to be resolved of the event, my brother
Sextus and I must to the Oracle.


And because we would be well accompained, we have got leave of the King that
you Brutus shall associate us, for our purpose is to make a merry journey
on it.


So you'll carry me along with you to be your fool, make you merry.


Not our fool, but --

To make you merry: I shall, nay, I will make you merry, or tickle you till
you laugh, the Oracle; i'll go to be resolved some doubts private to my self:
nay Princes, I am so much endeerd both to your loves and companies, that you
shall not have the power to be rid of me, what limits have we for our
journey?


Five days: no more.

I shall (...) me to your preperation, but one thing more, goes Colatine along?


Collatine is troubled with the common disease of all new married men, he's
sick of the wife, his excuse is forsooth that Lucrece will not let him go, but
you having neither wife nor wit to hold you, I hope will not disapoint us.


Had I both, you should preuaile with me abouea another.

We shall expect you.

Horatius Cocles, a and Mutius Sceuola are not engadge in this expedition,


No they attend the King, farewell.

Lucretius stays at home to, and Val^rius.

The Palace cannot spare them,

None but we three?

We three.

We three, well five days hence.

You have the time, farewell.

The time I hope for, cannot be conscribde,
Within so short alimit, Rome and I
Are not so happy, what's the reason then
Heaven spares his rod so long? Mercury tell me:
I hat'e: the fruit of pride is yet but green,
Not mellow, though it grows apace, it comes not
To his full height: Jove oft delays his vengeance,
That when it haps t'may prove more terrible.
Despair not Brutus then but let thy country
And thee take this last comfort after all,
Pride when thy fruit is ripe must rot and fall.
But to the Oracle.

I would I were no Roman.

Cocles why?

I am discontented dare not speak my thoughts,

What, shall I speak them for you?

Mutius do.

Tarquin is proud.

Thou hast them.

Tyrannous.

True.

Insufferable lofty.

Thou hast hit me.

And shall I tell thee what I proph^sie
Or his succeeding rule?

No lle dooe't for thee, Tarquins ability will in the weal,
Beget a weak unable impotence:
His strength, make Rome and our dominions weak,
His soaring high make us to flag our wings,
And fly close by the earth, his golden feathers,,
Are of such Vastnes that they spread like sails,
And so be calm us that we have not air,
Able to raise our plumes, to taste the pleasures of our own Elements.

We are one heart, our thoughts our desires are suitable.


Since he was King he bears him like a God,
His wife like Pallas or the wife of ^oue,
Will not be parleyed without sacrifice,
And homage sole due to the deities.

What hast with good Lucretius,

Hast small speed,
I had an earnest suit unto the King,
About some business that concerns the weal
Of Rome and us, twi'^ not be listened to,
He has took evppon him such ambiticus state,
That he abandons conference with his Piers,
Or if he chance to hear our tongus so much,
As but to hear their summons he despises,
The intent of all our speeches, our advises,
And counsel: thinking his own judgment only,
To be aprooued in matters military,
And in affairs domestic we are but shouts,
And fellows of no parts, viols vnstrung,
Our notes to harsh to strike in princes ^ares,
Great Jove amend it,

Whither will you my Lord?

No matter where if fro the court, I'll home to Collatin^,
And to my daughter Lucr^ce; home breeds safety,
Dangers begot in Court, a life retierd
Must please me now perforce: then noble Sce^la,
And you my dear Horatius, farewell both,
Where industry is scorned lets welcome sloth.

Nay good Lucretius do not leave us thus,
See here comes Collatine, but wheres Valerius
How does he taste these times.

Not giddily like Brutus, passionately
Like old Lucretius with his tear swoln eyes, Not laughing like
Nor bluntly like Horatius Cocles here,
He has vsurpt a stranger garb of humour,
Distinct from these in natures every way.

How is he relished can his eyes forbear,
In this strange state to shed a passionate tear,
Can he forbear to laugh with Sceuola,
At that which passionate weeping cannot mend.

Nay can his thought shape ought but melancholy
To see these dangerous passages of state,
How is he tempered noble Collatine?

Strangely, he is all song, hes ditty all,
Note that, Valerius hath given up the Court
And weand himself from the kings consistory
In which his sweet harmonious tongue grew harsh,
Whether it be that he is discontent
Yet would not so appear before the king
Or whether in applause of these new Edicts.
Which so distaste the people, or what cause,
I know not but now he's all musical.
Unto the counsel chamber he goes singing,
And whilst the king his wilful edicts makes,
In which nones tongue is powerful save the kings.
He's in a corner, relishing strange aires.
Conclusively he's fro a toward hopeful gentleman
Transeshapt to a mere balleter, none knowing
^ this transitation.

See where he comes. Morrow Valerius.

Morrow my Lord,

When Tarquin first in Court began,
And was approved King:
Some men for sodden joy began weep,
And I for sorrow sing.

Ha, ha, how long has my Valerius
Put on his strain of mirth, or whats the cause?

Let humour change and spare not,
Since Tarquins proud I care not:
His fair words so bewitch my delight,
That I dote on his sight.
Now all is gone new desires embracing,
And my deserts disgracing.

Upon my life he's either mad or loue-sicke,
Oh can Valerius, but so late a states-man,
Of whom the public weal deserved so well
Tune out his age in songs and Cansonets,
Whose voice should thunder conusell in the ears
Of Tarquin, and proud Tullia? think Valerius
What that proud woman Tullia is, twill put thee
Quite out of tune.

Now what is love I pray thee tell,
It is the fountain and the well,
Where pleasure and repentance dwell,
It is perhaps the sansing b^ll,
That rings all in to heaven or hell:
And this is love, and this is love, as I hear tell.
Now what is love I pray you show,
A thing that creeps and cannot go:
A prise that passes to and fro,
A thing for me, a thing, for more,
And he that proves shall find it so,
And this is love, and this love, sweet friends (...)

Valerius I shall quickly change thy cheer,
And make thy passionate eyes lament with mine,
Think how that worthy Prince our kinsman King
Was butchered in the marble capital.
Shall Seruius Tullius unregarded die
Alone of thee, whom all the Romaine Ladies,
Even yet with teare-swolne eyes, and sorrowful souls
Compassionate, as well he merited;
To these lamenting dames what can thou sing?
Whose grief through all the Romaine Temples ring.

Lament Ladies lament
Lament the Roman land,
The King is fra thee hent,
Was doughty on his hand,
We'll gangn ito the Kirk,
His dead corpse wele embrase,
And when we sea ha dea^
We (...) will cry alas. Fala la lero la
Tararara roun tar c.

This music mads me, I all mirth despise.

To hear him sing draws rivers from his eyes.

It pleases me, for since the Court is harsh,
And looks as kaunce on soldiers, lets be merry,
Court Ladies, sing, drink, dance, and every man
Get him a mistress, coach it in the Country,
And taste the sweets of it, what thinks Valerius,
Of Sceuolous last council?

Why since we soldiers cannot prove,
And grief it is to us therefore,
Let every man get him a love,
To trim her up, and fight no more.
That we may taste of lovers bliss,
Be merry and bl^h, embrace and kiss,
That Ladies may say, some more of this,
That Ladies may say, some more of this.
Since C^urt and Country both grow proud,
And safety you delight to hear,
We in the Country will us shroud,
Where lives to please both eye and ear:
The Nightingale sings Jug, Jug, Jug,
The little Lamb leaps after his dug,
And the pretty milke-maids they look so s^ug,
And the pretty milke-maids, c.
Come Sceuola, shall we go and beidle?

I'll in to weep.

But I my gall to grate.

I'll laugh at time, till it will change our Fate.

Thou art not what thou seem, Lord Sceuola,
Thy heart mourns in thee, though thy visage smile,
And so does thy soul weep, Valerius,
Although thy habit sing, for these new humours
Are but put on for safety, and to arm them
Against the pride of Tarquin, from whose danger,
None great in love, in counsel or opinion
Can be kept safe: this makes me lose my hours
At home with Lucrece, and abandon court.

Fortune I embrace thee, that thou hast assisted me in finding my master, the
Gods of good Rome keep my Lord and master out of all bad company.


Sir the news with you.

Would you ha Court news, Camp news, City news or Country news, or would
you know whats the news at home?


Let me know all the news.

The news at Court is, that a small leg and a silk sto^kin are in fashion
for your Lord: And the water that god Mercury makes is in request with your
Lady. The heaviness of the kings wine makes many a light head, and the
emptines of his dishes many full bellies, eating drinking was never more in
use; you shall find the baddest legs in boots, and the worst faces in masks.
They keep their old stomachs still, the kings good Cook hath the most wrong:
for that which was wont to be private only to him, is now vsurpt among all the
other officers: for now every man in his place to the prejudice of the master
Cooke, makes bold to like his own fingers.


The news in the Camp.

The greatest news in the camp is, that there is no news at all, for being no
camp at all, how can there be any tidings from it?


Then for the Camp.

The Senators are rich, their wives fair, credit grows cheap and traffic
dear, for you ha many that are broke, the poorest man that is, may take up
what he will, so he will be but bound to a post, till he pay the debt: There
was one Courtier, lay with twelve men's wives in the suburbs, and pressing
further to make one more cuckold within the walls, and being taken with the
manner, had nothing to say for himself, but this, he that made twelve made
thirteen.


Now Sir for the Country.

There is no news there but at the Ale-house, there's the most receipt, and is
it not strange my Lord, that so many men love ale that know not what ale is.


Why, what is ale?

Why ale is a kind of juice, made of the precious grain called Malt: what is
Malt? Malt's MALT. and what is MALT M much, A ale, L little, T thrift, all is,
much ale's, little thrist.


Only the news at home, and I have done.

My lady must needs speak with you about earnest business, that concerns her
nearly, and I was sent in all hast to entreat your Lordship to come away,


And could thou not have told me Lucrece stay,
And I stand tri^ing here fellow away.

I Mary sir, the way into her were a way worth following, and that's the reason
that so many serving-men that are familiar with their mistresses, have lost the
name of Servitors, and are now called their Masters followers. Rest you merry.


O thou sacred God enspire
The Priests, and with celestial fire
Shot from thy beams, crown our desire,
That we may follow.
In these thy true and hallowde measures,
The utmost of thy heavenly treasures
According to the thoughts and pleasures
Of great Apollo.
Our hearts with inflammations burn
Great Tarquin and his people morn
Till from thy Temple we return
With some glad tidings.
Then tell us, shall great Rome be blessed
And royal Tarquin live in rest,
That gives his high Ennobled breast
To thy safe guiding?

Then Rome her ancient honours wins
When she is purgd from Tullius sins.

Gramercies Phoebus for these spells,
(...) alone alone excelles.

Tullia perhaps sind in our gransiers death
And hath not yet by reconcilement made
Atone with (...), at whose shrine we kneel.
Yet gentle Priest let us thus far preuaile,
To know if Tarquins seed shall govern Rome
And by succession claim the Koiall wrath.
Behold me younger of the Tarquins Race
This elder Aruns both the sons of Tullia.
This Iunius Brutus though a mad-man yet,
Of the high blood of Tarquins.

Sextus peace. Tell us O thou that shin'st so bright
From whom the world receives his light,
Whose absence is perpetual night,
whose praises ring.
Is it with heavens applause decreed,
When Tarquins soul from earth is freed
That noble Sextus shall succeed
In Rome as king.

I Oracle hast thou lost thy tongue?

Tempt him again fair Priest,

If not as king, let Delphian Phoebus yet
Thus much resolve me who shall govern Rome,
Or of us three, bear greatest pre-eminence.

Sextus I will, yet sacred Phoebus we entreat,
Which of these three shall be great
Which largest power and state replete
by the heavens doom.
Phoebus thy thoughts no longer smother.

He that first shall kiss his mother
Shall be powerful and no other
Of you three in Kome.

Shall kiss his mother.

Mother earth to thee an humble kiss I tender.

What means Brutus?

The blood of the slaughtered sacrifice made this flore as slippry as the place
where Tarquin treads, tis glassy and as smooth as ice: I was proud to hear the
Oracle so gracious to the blood of the Tarquins and so I fell.


Nothing but so, then to the Oracle.
I charge thee Aruns, Iunus Brutus thee,
To keep the sacred doom of the Oracle
From all our train, lest when the younger lad
Our brother now at home sits dandled
Upon fair Tulliaes lap, this understanding
May kiss our beauteous M^ther and succeed.

Let the charge go round,
It shall go hard but I'll prevent you Sextus.

I fear not the madman Brutus, for Aruns let me alone to buckle with him, I'll
be the first at my mothers lips for a kingdom.


If the mad-man had not been before you Sextus, if Oracles be Oracles, their
phrases are mystical, they speak still in clouds: had he meant a natural
mother he would ha spoke it by circumference.


Tull^a, if ever thy lips were pleasing to me, let it be at my return from the
Oracle.


If a kiss will make me a king, Tullia I will spring to thee, though through
the blood of Sextus.


Earth I acknowledge no mother but thee, accept me as thy son, and I shall
shine as bright in Rome as Apollo himself in his temple at Delphos.


Our superstitions ended, sacred Priest,
Since we have had free answer from the Gods,
To whose fair altars we ha done due right
And hallowed them with presents acceptable,
Lets now return, treading these holy measures,
With which we entered great Apolloes temple.
Now Phoebus let thy sweet tuned organs sound,
Whose spherelike music must direct our feet
Upon the marble pavement: after this
VVee le gain a kingdom by a mothers kiss.

Attend us with your persons, but your ears
Be deaf unto our counsels.

Further yet.

Now Tuilia what must be concluded next?

The kingdom you have got by policy
You must maintain by pride.

Good Tullia.

Those that were late of the Kings faction
Cut off for fear they prove rebellious.

Better.

Since you gain nothing by the popular love,
Maintain by fear your princedome.

Excellent, thou art our Oracle, and save from thee
We will admit no counsel, we obtained
Our state by cunning, t'must be kept by strength.
And such as cannot love, we'll teach to fear,
To encourage which upon a better judgment,
Andto strike greater terror to the world.
I ha forbid thy fathers funeral.

No matter.

All capital causes are by us discust,
Traversed and executed without counsel.
We challenge too by our prerogative,
The goods of such as strive against our state,
The freest citizens without attaint,
Arraign or judgment we to exile doom,
The poorer are our drudges, rich our pray,
And such as dare not strive our rul eobey.

Kings are as Gods, and divine scepters bear,
The Gods command for mortal tribute fear.
But royal Lord, we that despise their love,
Must seek some means how to maintain this awe

By forrenie leagues, by our strength abroad,
Shall we that are degreed above our people,
Whom heaven hath made our vassals reign with them?
No kings above the rest tribunald hie
Should with no meaner, then with kings ally:
For this we to Ma^lius Tusculan
The Latin King ha given in marriage
Our royal daughter: now his peoples ours,
The neighbour princes are subdued by arms:
And whom we could not conquer by constraint
Them ha we sought to win by courtesy,
Kings that are proud, yet would secure their own,
By love abroad, shall purchase fear at home.

We are secure, then yet our greatest strength
Isin our children: how dare treason look?
Us in the face, having issue, barren princes
Breed danger in their singularity
Having none to succeed, their claim dies with them:
But when in topping on three T^rquins more,
Like Hydraes heads grow to revenge his death,
It terrifies black treason.

Tullia's wise, and apprehensive, were our pri^ely sons
Sextus and Aruns back returned safe,
With an applausiue answer of the Gods,
From th'oracle, our state were able then,
Being Gods our selves, to scorn the hate of men.

Wher's Tullia?

Where's our mother?

Yonder princes at Counsel with the king.

Our sons returned.

Royal mother.

Renowned Queen.

I love her best, therefore will Sextus do his duty first.

Being eldest in my birth i'll not be youngest
In zeal to Tullia.

Too't lads.

Mother a kiss.

Though last in birth, let me be first in love.
A kiss fair mother.

Shall I lose my right?

Aruns Shall down were Aruns twice my brother
If he presume fore me to kiss my mother.

I Sextus, think this kiss to be a crown, thus wold we tug fort.

Aruns thou must down.

Restrain them Lords.

Nay to it boys, o tis brave, they tug for shadows, I the substance have.


Through armed gates, and thousand swords i'll break
To show my duty let my valour speak.

Oh heavens ye have dissolved me.

Here I stand, what I ha done to answer with this hand.

Oh all you Del^ian Gods look down and see,
How for these wrongs I will revenged be.

Curb in the proud boys fury: let us know
From whence this discord rises.

From our love, how happy are we in our issue now,
When as our sons! even with their bloods cotend,
To exceed in duty we accept your zeal,
This your superlative degree of kindness
So much prevails with us, that to the king
We engage our own dear love twixt his incensement,
And your presumption, you are pardond both.
And Sextus though you failed in your first proffer,
We do not yet esteem you least in love, ascend touch our lips

Thank you, no.

Then to thy knee we will descend thus low,

Nay now it shall not need: how great's my heart!

In Tarquins crown thou hast now lost thy part.

No kissing now Tarquin, great Queen adieu:
Aruns On earth we ha no foe but you.

What means this their unnatural enmity?

hate borne from love.

Resolve us then, how did the Gods accept
Or sacrifice, how are they pleased with us.
How long will they applaud our souerai gnty?

Shall I tell the king.

Do Cousin, with the process of your journey.

I will. We went from hither, when we went from he^e arrived thither when we
landed there, made an end of our prayers when we had done our Orisons, when
thus quoth (...), Tarquin shall be happy whilst he is blessed, govern while he
reigns, wake when he sleeps not, sleep when he wakes not, quaff when he
drinks, eat when he feeds, gape when his ^outh opens, live till he die, and
die when he can live no longer. So Phoebus commends him to you.


Mad Brutus still, Son Aruns What say you.

That the great Gods to whom the potent king
Of this large Empire, sacrificed by us.
Applaud your reign, commend your sovereignty:
And by a general Synod grant to Tarquin,
Long days, fair hopes, Majestic government.

Adding withal, that to depose the late king, which in
others, had bin arch treason, in Tarquin was honour: what in
Brutus had been usurpation, in Tarquin was lawful succession
and for Tullia, though it be parricide for a child to kill her father,
in Tullia it was charity by death.
To rid him of all his calamities, Phoebus himself, said she, was a good
child, and shall not I say as he says, to tread upon her fathers skull,
sparkle his brains upon her chariot wheel,

And wear the sacred tincture of his blood
Upon the servile shoe? but more then this,
After his death deny him the due claim
Of all mortality, a funeral,
An earthen sepulcher: this this, quoth the Oracle,
Save Tullia none would do.

Brutus no more, lest with our surpassed eyes of wrath fury
We look into the humour; were not madness
And folly to thy words a privilege
Even in thy last reproof of our proceedings
Thou had pronounc^ thy death.

If Tullia will send Brutus abroad for news, and after at his return not
endure the telling of it; let Tullia either get closer ears, or get for Brutus
a stricter tongue. God boy.


Alastis madness, pardon him, not spleen,
Nor is it hate, but frenzy, we are pleased
To hear the Gods propitious at our prayers.
But wluthers Sextus gone? resolve us Cecles,
We saw thee in his parting follow him.

I heard him say, he would straight take his horse
Unto the warlike Gabines enemies.

To Rome and you save them we have no opposites.
And dares the boy, confederate with our foes?
Attend us Lords, we must new battles wage,
And with brght arms confront the proud boys rage.

Had I as many souls as drops of blood
In this brancht veins, as many lives as stars
Stuck in yond azare roof, and were to die
More deaths then I see wasted weary minutes
To grow to this, I'd hazard all, and more,
To purchase freedom to this bondag'd Rome.
I'm vexed to see this virgin conqueresse wear shackles in my fight.

Oh would my tears would rid great Rome of these prodigious fears.

What weeping ripe Lucretiu^ possible now Lords, Ladies, friends, fellows, young
mad^ap, gallats old courtly ruffians, al subjects under one tirany, therefore
should be partners of one the same unanimity. Shall we go single our selves by
two two, go talk treason then tis but his yea, and my nay, if we be cal d to
question: Or shals go use some violent bustling to break through this thorny
servitude, or shall we every man go sit like a man in desperation, and with
Lucretius weep at Romes misery: now am I for all things, any thing or nothing,
I can laugh with Sceuola, weep with this good old man, sing oh ^one ^one with
Valerius, fret with Horatius Cocles, be mad like my self, neutrize with
Collatine. Say what shal's do?


fret.

Sing.

Weep.

Laugh.

Rather lets all be mad that Tarquin still reigns, Romes still sad.

You are madmen all that yield so much topassion.
You lay your selves too open to your enemies,
That would be glad to pry into your deeds.
And catch advantage to ensnare our lives.
The kings fear like a shadow dogs you still,
Nor can you walk without it: I commend
Valerius most, and noble Sceuola
That what they cannot mend, seem not to mind,
By my consent lets all wear out our hours
In harmless sports, hawk, hunt, game, sing, drink
So shall we seem offenseles live safe.
In dangers bloody jaws where being humerous dance
Cloudy and curiously inquisitive.
Into the kings proceedings there armed fear
May search into us, call our deeds to question,
And so prevent all future expectation:
Of wished amendment let us stay the time,
Till heaven have made them ripe for just revenge,
When opportunity is offred us.
And then strike home, till then do what you please:
No discontented thought my mind shall cease.

I am of Collatines mind. Now Valerius sing us a bawdy song. and makes merry,
nay it shall be so.


Brutus shall pardon me.

The time that should have been seriously spent in the State house, I ha learnt
securely to spend in a wenching house, and now I prosesse my self any thing
but a States-man.


the more thy vanity.

The less thy honour.

The more his safety, and the less his fear.

We ha been mad Lords long, now let us be merry Lords, Horatins maugree thy
m^lancholy, and Lucretius in spite of thy sorrow, I'll have a song a subject
for the ditty.


Great Tarquins pride, and Tulliaes cruelty.

Dangerous, no.

The tyrannies of the Court, the ^assalage of the City.

Neither shall I give the subject.

Do, let it be of all the pretty wenches in the Suburbs of Rome.

It shall, it shall, shall it Valerius?

Any thing, according tomy poor acquaintance, little conuersance.

Nay you shall stay Horatius, Lucretius so shall you, he removes himself from
the love of Brutus, that shrinks from my side till we have had a song of all
the pretty suburbians: sit round, when Valerius?

Valor. Shall I woe the lovely Molly,
She's so fair, so fat, so jolly,
But she has a trick of folly,
T herefore (...) ha none of Molly. No no no, no no no.
I'll have none of Molly no no no.
Oh the cherry lips of Nelly,
They are red and soft as ielly,
But too well she loves her belly,
therefore i'll have none of Nelly. No no c.
What say you to bonny Betty,
Hayou seen a lass to pretty?
But her body is so swetty,
Therefore i'll (...) none of Bety. No no no, c.
When I dolly with my Dolly,
She is full of melancho (...).
Oh that wench is postile^t holy,
Therefore i'll have none of Dolly. No no no, c.
I could fancy lovely Nanny,
But she has the loves of many,
Yet her self she loves not any,
Therefore i'll have none of Nanny, No no no, c.
In a flax-shop I spied Ratchel,
Where she her flax and tow did h^chel,
But her cheeks hang like a satchel.
Therefore i'll ha none of Ratchel. No no no, c.
In a corner I met Biddy,
Her heals were light her ^ead was giddy,
She fell down and somewhat did I,
Therefore i'll have none of Biddy. No no no, c.

The rest we'll hear within: what offence is there in this Lucretius, what
hurt's in this Horatius? Is it not better to sing with our heads on then weep
with our heads off, I ne'er took Collatin^ for a politician till now. Come
Valerius, we'll run over all the wenches of Rome, even from the community of
lascivious Flora to the chastity of divine Lucrece, come good Horat.


A Chair.

A chair for my Lady, Mrs. Mirable do you not hear my Mrs call.

Come near sir, be less officious.
In duty, and use more attention,
Nay gentlewoman we exempt not you
From our discourse, but you must afford an ear
As well as he, to what we ha to say.

I still remain your handmaid.

Sir I ha seen you oft familiar
With this my Maid and waiting gentlewoman.
As casting amorous glances, wanton looks,
And pretty beckes, sauouring incontinence.
I let you know you are not for my service
Unless you grow more civil.

Indeed madam for my own part I wish Mrs Mirable well as one fellow servant
ought to wish to another, but to say that ever I ^long any sheep eyes in her
face, how say you mistress Mirable did I ever offer it?

Nay mistres I ha seen you answer him
With gracious looks and some uncivil smiles,
Retorting eyes, and giving his demeanour
Such welcome as becomes not modesty.
Know henceforth there shall no lascivious phrase,
Suspicious look or shadow of incontinence
Be entertained by any that attend on Roman Lucrece.

Madam I.

Excuse it not for my premeditable thought
Speaks nothing out of rashness, nor vain hear say.
But what my own experience testifies:
Against you both let then this mild reproof
Forewarn you of the like, my reputation
Which is held precious in the eyes of Rome,
Shall be no shelter totheleast intent
Of looseness, leave all familiarity:
And quite renounce acquaintance, or I here discharge you both my service.

For my own part madam, as I am a true Roman by nature, though no Roman by
my nose, I never spent the least lip labour on mistress Mirable never so much as
glanced, never used any winking or pinking, never nodded at her, no not so
much as when I was asleep never asked her the question so much as whats her name,
if you can bring any man woman or child, that can say so much behind my back;
As for he did but kiss her, for he did but kiss her and so let her go, let my
Lord Callatine in stead of plucking my coat, pluck my skin over my ears turn
me away naked, that wheresoever I shall come I may be held a raw serving-man
hereafter.


Sir you know our mind.

If ever I knew what bolongs to these cases, or yet know what they mean, if
ever I used any plain dealing, or were ever worth such a jewel, would I might
die a beggar, if ever I were so far read in my grammar, as to know what an
Interiection is, or a conjunction copulatiue, would I might never have good of
my ^: why do you think madam, I have no more care of my self being but a
stripling then to go to it at these years, flesh and blood cannot endure it, I
shall even spoil one of the best faces in Rome with crying at your unkindness.


I ha done, see if you can spy your Lord rerurning from the Court, and give me
notice what strangers he brings home with him.


Yes I'll go, but see kind man he saves me a labour.

Fair Lucrece, I ha brought these Lords from Court
To feast with thee, sir prepare us dinner.

My Lord is welcome, so are all his friends, the news at Court Lords?


Madam strange news: Prince Sextus by the enemies of Rome
Was nobly used and made their General,
Twice hath he met his father in the field,
And foild him by the warlike Gabines aid:
But how hath he rewarded that brave Nation,
That in his great disgrace supported him?
I'll tell you Madam, he since the last battle
Sent to his father a close messenger
To be received to grace, withal demanding
What he should do with those his enemies:
Great Tarquin from his son receives this news,
Being walking in his Garden, when the messenger
Importunde him for answer, the proud king
Lops with his wand the heads of poppies off,
And says no more, with this uncertain answer
The messenger to Sextus back returns.
who questions of his fathers words, looks, gesture,
He tells him what the hawty speechless King
Did to the heads of poppies, which bold Sextus
Straight apprehends, cuts off the great men's heads,
And having lest the Gabines without Governors,
Flies to his father, and this day is welcomed
For this his traitorous service, by the King
With all due solemn honours to the Court.

Curtefie strangely requited, this none but the son of Tarquin would ever
have enterpris'de.


I like it, I applaud it, this will come to somewhat in the end, when heaven has
cast up his account, some of them will be called to a hard reckoning.


Leave all to heaven.

My Lords, the best plumporedge in all Rome cools for your honours dinner is
piping hot upon the table: if you make not the more hast, you are like to have
but cold cheer, the cook hath done his part, there's not a dish upon the dresser
but he has made smoke for you, if you have good stomachs, and come not in
while the meat is hot, you'll make hunger and cold meet together.


My man's a Rhetorician I can tell you,
And this conceit is fluent. Enter Lords,
You must be Lucrece guests, and she is scant
In nothing: for such princes must not want.

My Lord Valerius, I have even a suit to your honour, I ha not the power to
part from you, without a relish, a note, a tone, we must get an a^re betwixt
us.


Thy meaning.

Nothing but this, Iohn for the king, has bin in many ballads, Iohn for the
king down din^, Iohn for the king, has eaten many sall^ts Iohn for the king
sings hey ho.

Thou would have a song, would thou not?

And be everlastingly bound to your honour, I am now forsaking the world and
the Devil, and somewhat leaning towards the flesh, if you could but teach me
how to choose a wench fit for my stature and complexion, I should rest yours
in all good offices.


I'll do that for thee, what's thy name?

My name sir is Pompie.

Well then attend,
Pompie I will show thee the way to know
A (...) dapper wench
First see her all bare, let her skin be rare,
And be (...) with no part of the french:
Let her (...) (...) clear, and her brow severe,
Her cie-browes thin and fine:
But if she be a punk, and love to be drunk,
Then keep her still from the wine.
Let her stature be mean, her body clean
Thou can not choose but like her.
But see she ha good clothes, with a fair Roman ^ose,
For that's the sign of a striker.
Let her legs be small, but not v^d to sprall,
Her tongue not too loud nor cocket,
Let her arms be strong and her fingers long.
But not used to dive in a pocket.
Let her body be long and her back be strong,
With a soft lip that entangles,
With (...) ivory breast, and her hair well dr^st
Without goldlace or spangles.
Let her foot be small, clean legedd withal,
Her apparel not too gaudy:
And one that hath not bin, in no house of sin,
Nor place that hath been ba^dy.

But gods me I am trifling here with thee, dinner cools o'th table, I am called
to my attendance, oh my sweet Lord Valerius.


Next king Porsenna, whom we tender dearly,
Welcome young Sextus, thou hast to our yoke,
Suppressed the neck of a proud nation
The warlike Gauines, enemies to Rome.

It was my duty royal Emperor,
The duty of a subject and a son.
We at our mothers intercession likewise,
Are now atoned with Aruns, who we here receive into our bosom

This is done like a kind brother and a natural son.

We interchange a royal heart with Sextus graft us in your love.


Now king Porsenna, welcome once more, to Tarquin and to Rome.


We are proud of your alliance, and Rome is ours,
And we are Romes, this our religious league,
Shall be carved firm in characters of brass,
And live for ever to succeeding times.

It shall P^rsenna, now this leagues established,
We will proceed in our determinde wars
To bring the neighbor Nations under us.
Our purpose is to make young Sextus General
Of all our army, who hath proved his fortunes
And found them full of favour, we'll begin
With strong Ardea, ha you given in charge
To assemble all our Captains, take muster of our strong army?

That business is dispatcht.

We ha likewise sent for all our best commanders to take charge
According to their merit, Lord Valerius,
Lord Brutus, Cocles, Mutius, Sceuola,
And Collatine to make due preparation of such a gallant siege.

This day you shall set forward, Sextus go,
And let us see your army march along
Before this King and us, that we may view
The puissance of our host prepared already,
To lay high reared Ardea waste and lowe.

I shall my liege.

Aruns associate him.

Arrival with my brother in his honours.

Porsenna shall be hold the strength of Rome,
And body of the Camp under the charge
Of two brave Princes to lay hostile siege
Against the strongest city that withstands
The all commanding Tarquin.

Tis an object, to please Porsennaes Eye. Soft March.

The host is now upon his march,
You from this place may see,
The pride of all the Romain chivalry.

This sight's more pleasing to Porsennaes (...),
Then all our rich Attalia pompous feasts,
Or sumptuous Revels, we are borne a soldier:
And in our manage sucked the milk of war.
Should any strange fate lower upon this army,
Or that the merciless gulf of confusion
Should swallow them, we at our proper charge,
And from our native confines vow supply
Of men and Arms to make these numbers full.

You are our Royal brother, and in you
Tarquin is powerful and maintains his awe.

The like Porsenna may command of Rome.

But we have in your fresh varieties
Feasted too much, and kept our self too long
From our stone seat, our prosperous return
Hath bin expected by our Lords and Pieres.

The business of our wars thus forwarded,
We ha best leisure for our entertainment,
Which now shall want no due solemnity.

It hath bin beyond both expectation
And merit, but in sight of heaven I swear
If ever royal Tarquin shall demand
Use of our love, tis ready stor'de for you,
Even in our Kingly breast.

The like we vow, to King Porsenna, we will yet a little
Enlarge your royal welcome with Rareties,
Such as Rome yields: that done before we part
Of two remote dominions make one heart.
Set forwards then, our sons wage war abroad,
To make vspeace at home, we are of our self
Without suppo^ance, we all fate defy,
Aidlesse, and of our self we stand thus hy.

Stand, who goes there?

A friend.

Stir not, for if thou dost I'll brooch thee straight upon the pike, The word.


Porsenna.

Pass, stay, who walks the round to night,
The General, or any of his Captains?

Horatius hath the charge, the other Chieftens
Rest in the Generals tent, there's no commander
Of any note but revel with the Prince:
And I among the rest am charged to attend
Upon their Rouse.

Pass freely, I this night must stand,
Twixt them and danger, the time of night.

The clock last told eleven.

The powers celestial, that ha took Rome in charge protect it still.

Again good night, thus must poor Soldiers do,
Whilst their commanders are with dainties fed,
They sleep on Down, the earth must be our bed.

Sit round the enemy is pounded fast
In their own folds, the walls made to oppugn,
Hostile incursions become a prison
To keep them fast for excution;
There's no eruption to be feared.

What shals do? come a health to the Generals health, Valerius that sits the
most civilly shall begin it, I cannot talk till my blood be mingled with this
blood of grapes: Fill, for Valerius thou should drink well, for thou hast
been in the German wars, if thou loust me drink vpse freeze.


Nay since Brutus has spoke the word, the first health shall be imposed on you
Valerius, and if ever you have bin germanis^d let it be after the Dutch
fashion.


The General may command.

He may, why else is he called the Commander?

We will entreat Valerius.

Since you will needs enforce a hie-German health, look well to your heads,
for I come upon you with this dutch Tassaker, if you were of a more noble
science then you are, it will go near to break your heads round.

O Morke gyff men (...) man,
Skerry merry vip,
O morke gyff men (...) man
Skerry merry vap.
O morke gyff men (...) man,
that tik die scine long o drieuan can;
Skerry merry vip, and skerry merry vap,
and skerry merry runke (...) bunk^.
Ede hoore was a haie dedle down
Deal drunk a:
Skerry merry runk, ede bunk, ede ^oor was drunk a
O daughter yeis ein alto kleene
Skerry merry vip,
O daughter yeis ein alto kleene,
Skerry merry vap,
O daughter yeis ein alto kleene,
Ye molten slop, ein year a leene
Skerry merry vip, and skerry merry vap
And skerry merry runk ede bunk
Ede hoore was a bay dedle down
Dedle drunk a:
Skerry merry, runk ede bunke ede hoor was drunk a.

Gramercies Valerius, came this hie-German health as double as his double
double ruff, i'd pledge it.


Were it in Lubeckes or double double beer their own natural, liquor i'd
pledge it, were it as deep as his ruff, let the health go round about the
board as his band goes round about his neck, I am no more afraid of this dutch
fauchio, the I should be of the heathenish invention.


I must entreat you spare me, for my brain brookes not the fumes of wine,
their vaporous strength offends me much.


I would have none spare me, for i'll spare none, Collatine will pledge no
health unless it be to his Lucrece.


What's Lucrece but a woman, and what are women?
But tortures and disturbance unto men.
If they be foul they are odious, and if fair,
They are like rich vessels full of poysnous drugs,
Or like black serpents armed with golden scales,
For my own part, they shall not trouble me.

Sex^ sit fast, for I proclaim my self a woman's champion, and shall unhorse
thee else.


For my own part, Ime a marride man, and I'll speak to my wife to thank thee
Brutus.


I have a wife too, and I think, the most virtuous Lady in the world.


I cannot say but that I have a good wife too, I love her: but if she were in
heaven, beshrew me if I would wish her so much hurt as to desire her copany
upon ear^h agin yet upon my honour, though she be not very fair, she is
exceeding honest.


Nay the less beauty the less temptation to despoil her honesty.


I should be angry with him that should make question of her honour.


And I angry with thee if thou should not maintain her honour.


If you compare the virtues of your wives, let me step in for mine.


I should wrong my Lucrece not to stand for her.

Ha, ha, all captens, and stand upon the honesty of your
wives, is't possible think you, that women of young spirit and full age
Of fluent wit, that can both sing and dance,
Read, write, such as feed well and taste choice cates,
That straight dissolve to purity of blo^d.
That keep the veins full, and inflame the appetite,
Making the spirit able, strong and prone,
Can such as these their husbands being away
Emploid in foreign sieges or elsewhere,
Deny such as importune them at home?
Tell me that flax will not be touched with fire,
Nor they be won to what they most desire.

Shall I end this controversy in a word?

Do good Brutus.

I hold some holy but some apt to fin,
Some tractable, but some that none can win,
Such as are virtuous, Gold nor wealth can move,
Some vicious of themselves are prone to love.
Some Grapes are sweet and in the Gardens grow,
Others vnprunde, turn wild neglected so.
The purest oar contains both Gold and dross,
The one all gain, the other nought but loss.
The one disgrace, reproach and scandal tai^ts,
The other angels and sweet featured saints.

Such is my virtuous Lucrece.

Yet for her virtue not comparable to the wife of Ar^ns.

And why may not mine be racked with the most virtuous?

I would put in for a lot, but 1000 to one I shall draw but a blancke.


I should not show I loved my wife, not to take her part in her absence, I hold
her inferior to none.


Save mine.

No not to her.

Oh this were a brau^ controversy for a Jury of women to arbitrate.

I'll hazard all my fortunes on the virtues
Of divine Lucrece, shall we try them thus?
It is now dead of night, lets mount our steeds,
Within this two hours we may reach to Rome,
And to our houses all come vnpreparde,
And unexpected by our hy praisd wines,
She of them al that we find best employed,
Devoted and most huswife exercised,
Let her be held most virtuous, and her husband
Win by the wager a good horse and armour.

A hand on that.

Here's a helping hand to that bargain.

But Shall we to horse without circumstance?

Sceuola will be mounted with the first.

Then mout Cleuall, Brutus this night take you the charge of the army, I'll see
the trial of this wager, 'twould do me good to see some of them find their
wives in the arms of their lovers, they are so confident in their virtues,
Brutus we'll interchange good night, within be thou, but as provident ore the
army as we (if our horses fail not) expeditious in our journey, horse, horse,
horse.


But one hour more you shall all to rest,
Now that your Lord is absent from this house,
And that the Masters eye is from his charge,
We must be careful and with providence
Guide his domestic business, we ha now
Given ore all feasting and leaud revelling,
Which ill becomes the house whose Lo: is absent,
We banish all excess till his return,
In fear of whom my soul doth daily morn.

Madam so please you to repose your self
Within your Chamber leave us to our tasks,
We will not loiter though you take your rest.

Not so, you shall not ouerwatch your selves
Longer then I wake with you: for it fits
Good huswifes when their husbands are fro home,
To ey their servants labours and in care,
And the true manage of his household state,
Earliest to rise, and to be up most late.
Since all his business he commits to me,
I'll be his faithful steward till the camp
Dissolve and he return, thus wives should do,
In absence of their Lords be husband too.

Madam the L. (...) his ma was thrice for you here to have entreated you home
to supper, he says his L. takes it unkindly he could not have your company.


To please a loving husband, I'll offend
The love and patience of my dearest friend,
Me thinks his purpose was unreasonable
To draw me in my husbands absence forth
To feast and banquet, 'twould have ill becomd me,
To ha left the charge of such a spacious house, without both L. Mistres,
I am opiniond thus, wives should not stray,
Out of their doors their husbands being away: L. (...) shall excuse me.

Pray Madam set me right into my work,
Being abroad I may forget the charge.

Imposde me by my L. or be compelled
To stay out late, which were my husband here,
Might be without distaste, but he from hence,
Which late a broad, there can no excuse dispense.
Here take your work again, a while proceed,
And then to bed, for whilst you sow, I'll read.

I would have hazsarded all my hopes, my wife had not been so late a
revelling.


Nor mine at this time of night a gamboling.

They wear so much cork under their heals, they cannot choose but love to
caper.


Nothing does me good, but that if my wife were watching all theirs were
wantoning, and if I halost, none can brag of their winnings.


Now Collatine to yours, either Lucrece must be better employed then the rest,
or you content to have her virtues ranckt with the rest.


I am pleased.

Soft, soft, lets steal upon her as upon the rest, lest having some watchword
at our ariual, we may give her notice to be better prepared, nay by your leave
Coll^tine, weel limit you no aduatage.


See Lords, thus Lucrece revels with her maids, In stead of Riot quaffing the
practise of hy laualties to the ravishing sound of chambring musique, she like
a good huswife Is teaching of her husband sundry chares. Lucrece.


My L. husband welcome, 10 times welcome,
Is it to see your L^crece you thus late
Ha with your persons so hazard left the camp,
And trusted to the danger of a night so dark, and full of horror?

Lords all's lost.

By Jove I'll buy my wife a wheel and make her spin for this trick.

If I make not mine learn to live by the prick of her needle for this, I me no
Roma^.


Sweet wife salute these Lords, thy continence
Hath won thy husband a Barbarian horse, a rich cote of arms.

O pardon me, the joy to see my Lord,
Took from me all respect of their degrees,
The richest entertainment lives with us,
According to the hour and the provision
Of a poor wife in the absence of her husband:
We prostrate to you howsoever mean,
We thus excusde Lord Collatin: away.
We neither feast, dance, quaff, riot nor play.

If one woman among so many bad, may be found good, If a white wench may prove
a black swan, it is Lucrece her beauty hath relation to her virtue, and her
virtue correspondence to her beauty, and in both she is fellowlesse.


Lords will you yield the wager?

Stay, the wager was as well which of our wives was fairest too, it stretched
as well to their beauty as to their continence, who shall judge that?


That can none of us, because we are all parties, let Prince Sextus determine it
who hath bin with us, and bin an ey witness of their beauties.


Agreed.

I am pleased with the censure of P. Sextus.

So are we all.

I commit my Lucre^ wholly to the censure of Sextus.

And Sex^us commits him wholly to the dispose of Lucr.
I love the Lady and her grace desire,
Nor can my love wrong what my thought admire.
Aruns, no question but your wife is chaste,
And thrifty, but this Lady knows no wast.
Val^rius, yours is modest something fair,
Her Grace and beauty are without compare,
Thine (...) well disposed and of good feature,
But the world yields not so divine a creature.
(...), thine a smug lass and gra^t well.
But amongst all bright Lucrece doth excel.
Then our impertiall harts judging eyes,
This verdict (...) fair Lucrece wins the prise

Then Lords you are indebted to me a horse and armour.

We yee'd it.

Will you taste such welcome Lords, as a poor unprovided house can yield?

Gramercy Lucrece, no we must this night sleep by Ardea walls.


I but my Lords, I hope my Collatine will not so leave his Lucrece.

He must, we have but idled from the Camp, to try a merry wager about their
wives, and tis the hazard of the kings displeasure, should any man be missing
from his charge: the powers that govern Rome make divine Luc. for ever happy,
goodnight.


Will not my husband repose this night with us?

Lucrece shall pardon him, we ha took our leaves of our wives, nor shall
Collatine be before us, though our Ladies in other things come behind you.


I must beswaid: the joys and the delights of many thousand nights meet all in
one to make my Lucr^ce happy.


I am bound to your strict will, to each goodnight.

To horse, to horse, Lucrece we cannot rest,
Till our hot lust imbosome in thy breast.

With no unkindness we should our Lords upbraid,
Husbands and Kings must always be obaid.
Nothing save the high business of the slate,
And the charge given him at Ardeas siege,
Could ha made Collatine so much digress
From the affection that he bears his wife.
But subjects must excuse when kings claim power.
But leaving this before the charm of sleep,
Cease with his downy wings: upon my eyes,
I must go take account among my servants
Of their days task, we must not cherish sloth,
No covetous thought makes me thus provident,
But to shun idleness, which wise men say,
Begets rank lust, and virtue beats away.

Return to Rome now we are in the mid way to the Cap?

My Lords tis business that concerns my life,
To morrow if we live we'll visit thee.

Will Sextus enjoin me to accompany him?

Or me?

Nor you, nor any, tis important business
And serious occurrences that call me,
Perhaps Lords I'll commend you to your wives.
Coslatine shall I do you any service to your Lucrece?

Only commend me.

What, no private token to purchase our kind welcome?

Would Royal Sextus would but honour me to bear her a slight token.


What?

This Ring.

As I am Royal I will feet delivered.
This Ring to Lucrece shall my love convey,
And in this gift thou dost thy bed be^ray.
To morrow we shall meet, this night sweet fate,
May I prove welcome though a guest ingrate.

Hes for the city, we for the camp, the night makes the way tedious and
melancholy, prithee Valeri^s a merry song to beguile (...).

Valor. There was a young man and a maid fell in love,
Terry dairy ding, terry dairy ding, tery tery (...).
To get her good will he often did,
Terry dairy ding, terry dairy ding, langtido dill^.
There's many will say, and most will allow, terry dairy, c.
Theirs nothing so good as a terry dairy dairy dairy, c.
I would wish all maids before the^ be sick, terrie derie, c.
To enquire for a young man that has a good terrie dairy, c.

Good Valeri^s, this has brought us even to the skirts of the camp, enter
Lords.


This ring, my Lord, hath opt our gates to you,
For though I know you for a royal Prince,
My sovereigns son, and friend to Collatine:
Without that key you had not entered here.
More lights, and see a banquet strait provided,
My love to my dear husband shall appear,
In the kind welcome that I give his friend.

Not loue-sicke, but love lunatike, loue-mad,
I am all fire, impatience, and my blood
Boils on my heart, with loose and sensual thoughts.

A chair for the Prince, may it please your highness sit.

Madam, with you.

It will become the wife of Collatine to wait upon your trencher.

You shall sit, behind us at the camp we left our state,
We are but your guest, indeed you shall not wait,
Her modesty hath such strong power ore me,
And such a reverence hath fate given her brow,
That it appears a kind ofblasphemy,
To have any wanton word harsh in her ears,
I cannot woe, and yet I love above measure,
Tis force, not suite, must purchase this rich treasure.

Your highness cannot taste such homely cates.

Indeed I cannot feed, but on thy face,
Thou art the banquet th^t my thoughts embrace.

Knew you, my Lord, what free and zealous welcome
We tender you, your highness would presume
Upon your entertainment, oft, I many times
I have heard my husband speak of Sextus worth,
Extol your worth, praise your perfection,
I dote upon your valor, and your friendship prise next his Lucrece.

Oh impious lust, in all things base, respectles unjust,
Thy virtue, grace and fame I must enjoy,
Though in the purchase I all Rome destroy.
Madame, if I be welcome, as your virtue bids me presume I am,
Carouse to me a health unto your husband.

A woman's draught my Lord to Collatine.

Nay, you must drink off all.

Your grace must pardon the tender weakness of a woman's brain.

It is to Collatine.

Me thinks 'twould ill become the modesty
Of any Roman Lady to carouse,
And drown her virtues in the juice of grapes.
How can I show my love to my husband,
To do his wife such wrong, by too much wine
I might neglect the charge of this great house,
Left soly to my keep, else my example
Might in my servants breed encouragement
So to offend, both which were pardonlesse,
Else to your grace I might neglect my duty,
And slack obeisance to so great a guest:
All which being accidental unto wine,
Oh let me not so wrong my Collatine.

We excuse you, her imperfections like a torrent
With violence breaks upon me, and at once
Invert and swallow all that's good in me.
Preposterous fates, what mischiefs you involve
Upon a captive Prince left to the fury
Of all grand mischief, hath the grandam world
Yet smothered such a strange abortive wonder,
That from her virtues should arise my sin:
I am worse then whats most ill, depriude all reason,
My hart all fiery lust, my soul all treason.

My Lord, I fear your health, your changing brow
Hath shown so much disturbance, noble Sextus,
Hath not your venturous travel from the camp,
Nor the moist rawnes of these humorous night impairde your health?

Divinest Lucrece no. I cannot eat.

To rest then, a rank of torches there, attend the Prince.

Madam, I doubt I am a guest this night
Too troublesome, and I offend your rest.

This ring speaks for me, that next Collatine you are to me most welcome, yet
my Lord, thus much presume, without this from his hand, Sextu^ this night could
not have entered here, no, not the king himself, my dor^s the day time to my
friends are free, But in the night the obdure gates are less kind,

Without this ring they ca no entrace find. Lights for the Prince.

A kiss and so godnight, nay for your rings sake deny not that

Jove give your Highness soft and sweet repose.

And thee the like, repose with (...) content,
My vows are fixed, my thoughts on mischief bent.

Tis late, so many stars shine in this room,
By reason of this great and princely guest,
The world might call our modesty in question,
To revel thus our husband at the Camp,
Hast and to ^est, save in the Princes chamber,
Let not a light appear, my hart's all sadness,
Jove unto thy protection I commit
My chastity and honour to thy keep,
My waking soul I give whilst my thoughts sleep,

Soft, soft, not to loud, imagine we were now going on the ropes with eggs at
our heals, he that hath but a creeking shoe, I wold he had a creek in his
neck, tread not to hard for disturbing Prince Sextus.


I wonder the P. would ha none of us stay in his chamber help him to bed.


What an ass art thou to wonder, there may be many causes thou know the
Prince is a soldier, soldiers many times want shift, who can say whether he
have a clean shirt on or no? for any thing that we know he hath used staves
aker a late, or hath taken a medcin to kill the itch, whats that to us, we did
our duty to (...) our service.


And what should we enter farther into his thoughts, (...) shals to bed? Ime as
drowsy as a doremouse, my head's as (...) as though I had a nightcap of lead
on:


And my eyes begin to glue themselves together, I was till supper was done
altoge^ (...) your repast, and now after supper I am only for your repose. I
think for the two virtues of eating and sleeping, there's never a Roman spirit
under the cope, can put me down.


For shame what a coniu^ing and catter-walling keep you here, that my Lady
cannot sleep: you shall have her call by and by, and send you all to bed with
a witness.


Sweet mistress Myrable, we are going.

You are too load: ^ome, every man dispose him to his rest and i'll to mine.


(...) with your Torches sir.

Come then, and every man sneak into his k^nnell

Night be as secret as thou art close, as close
as thou art black and dark, thou ominou. Q^ene
Of Tenebrouse filence, make this fatal hour,
as true to Rape as thou hast made it kind
To murder and harsh mischief: Cintheamaske thy cheek,
And all you sparkling Elamentall fires,
Choke up your beauties in prodigious fogs,
Or be extinct in some thick ^aparous cloud,
Least you behold my practise: I am bound
Upon a black adventure, on a deed
That must wound virtue, and make beauty bleed.
Pause Sextus, and before thou runst thy self
Into this violent danger, weigh thy sin,
Thou art yet free, beloved, graced in the Camp,
Of great opinion and undoubted hope,
Romes da^ling in the universal grace,
Both of the field, and senate: were these fortunes
To make thee great in both, back yet, thy fame
Is free from hazard, and thy stile from shame.
Of fate, thou hast vsurpt such power over man,
That where thou pl^dst thy will, no mortal can.
On then, black mischief hurry me the way.
My self I must destroy, her life betray,
The state of King and Subject, the displeasure
Of Prince and people, the revenge of noble,
And the contempt of base, the incurdveng^nce
Of my wronged kinsman Colatine, the Treason
A Against diuin'st Lucrece: all these total curses
Foreseen not feared upon me Sextus meet,
To make my days harsh^so so this might be sweet
No jar of clock no ominous hateful howl
Of any starting Hound, no horse ro^gh breathed from the
Of any drowsy Groom, wakes this charmed silence, entrails discovered in her bed
and starts this general silence forward still, Lucr.
To make thy lust live, all thy virtues kill.
Here, here, behold! beneath these Curtains lies,
That bright enchantress that hath daz^d my eyes.
Oh who but Sextus could commit such waste?
On one so fair, so kind, so truly chaste?
Or like a ravisher thus rudely stand,
To offend this face, this brow, this lip, this hand?
Or at such fatal hours, these revels keep,
With thought once to defile thy innocent sleep,
Save in this breast, such thoughts could find no place,
Or pay with treason her kind hospital grace:
But I am lust-burnt, all bent on what's bad,
That which should calm good thoughts makes Tarquin
mad. Madam, Lucresse?

Whose that? oh me! beshrew you.

Sweet, tis I.

What I?

Make room.

My Husband Colatine

Thy husband's at the Camp.

Here is no room for any man save him.

Grant me that grace.

What are you?

Tarquin and thy friend, and must enjoy thee.

Heaven such sins defend.

Why do you tremble Lady? cease this fear,
I am alone, there's no suspicious (...),
That can bewray this deed: nay start not sweet.

Dream I, or am I full awake? oh no!
I know I dream to see Prince Tarquin so.
Sweet Lord awake me, rid me from this terror,
I know you for a Prince, a Gentleman,
Royal and honest, one that loves my Lord.
And would not wrack a woman's chastity,
For Romes imperial Diadem, oh then
Pardon this dream, for being awake I know,
Prince Sextus, Romes great hope, would not for shame
Provoke his own wrath, or despoil my fame.

I'm bent on both, my thoughts are all on fire,
Choose thee, thou must embrace death, and desire,
Yet do I love thee, wilt thou accept it?

No.

If not thy love, thou must enjoy thy (...),
where fair means cannot, force shall make my way:
By Jove I must enjoy thee.

Sweet Lord stay.

I'm all impatience, violence and rage,
And save thy bed, nought ca this fire ^

No, I cannot.

Tell me why?

Hate me, and in that hate first let me dye.

By ^oue i'll force thee.

By a God you swear to do a de^ils d^de: sweet Lord forbea^
By the same Jove I swear that made this soul,
Never to yield unto an act so foul. Help, help.

These cushens first shall stop thy breath,
If thou but shreekest: hark how i'll frame thy death.

The death: I care not, so I keep vnstain^,
The vnceaz'd honour I have yet maintained.

Thou can keep neither, for if thou but (...),
Or le^st the least harsh noise Jar in my ear,
I'll broach thee on my steel: that done, strait murder
One of thy basest Grooms, and lay you both
Grasped arm in arm, on thy adulterate bed.
Then call in witness of that mechall (...),
So shalt thou die: thy ^,
Thy name be odious, thy suspected body
Denied all funeral rites, and loving Colatin^
Shall hate thee even in death: then save all this,
and to thy fortunes add another friend,
Give thy fears comfort, and these torments end.

I'll die first, and yet hear me: oh as you're nobl^,
If all your gracious and best generous thoughts
Be not exiled your heart, pi^tie, oh pity
The Virtues of a woman: mar not that
Cannot be made again: this once defiled,
Not all the Ocean waives can purify,
Or wash my stain away, you seek to
That which the radiant splender of the Sun
Cannot make bright again: behold my tears!
Oh think them pearled drops, destilled from the heart
Of soul chaste Lucrece: think them Orators,
To plead the cause of absent Colatine, your friend and kinsman.

Tush, I am obdure.

Then make my name pure: keep my body pure:
Oh Prince of Princes, do but weigh your sin,
Think how much I shall loose how small you win.
I loose my honour of my name and blood,
Lost, Romes imperial Crown cannot make good.
You win the worlds shame, all good men's hate,
Oh who would pleasure, buy at such dear rate?
Nor can you t^arme it pleasure: for what's sweet,
Where force hate, jar and contention meet?
Weigh but for what tis that you urge me still,
To gain a woman's love against her will?
You'll but repent such wrong done a chaste wife,
and think that labour's not worth all your strife.
Curse your hotlust, say you have wronged your friends,
But all the world cannot make me amends.
I took you for a friend, wrong not my trust,
But let these chaste terms quench your fiery lust.

No, those moist tears, contending with my fire,
Q^ench not my heate, but mak^ it climb more higher:
I'll drag thee hence.

Oh!

If thou raise these cries, lodged in thy flaughtered
arm^ some base Groom dies,
And Rome that hath thy name admired so long,
Shall blot thy death with scandal from my tongue.

Jove guard my innocence.

Lucrece, thar't mine
In spite of Jove all the powers divine.

What's a clock trow? my Lord bad me be early ready with his Gelding, for he
would ride betimes in the morning: now had I rather be up an hour before my
time then a minute after, for my Lord will be so infinitely eangrie if I but
over sleep my self a moment, that I had better be out of my life then in his
displeasure: but foft, some of my Lord Colatines menlye in the next chamber, I
care not if I call them up, for it grows towards day: what Pompy, Pompy.


Who is that cal's?

Tis I.

Whose that, my Lord Sextus his man? what a pox make you up before day?


I would have the key of the Gate to come at my Lords horse in the stable.


I wold my Lord Sextus you were both in the hayloft, for Pompy can take none of
his natural rest amongst you, here's (...) Ostl^r, rise give my horse another
peck of hay.


Nay good Pompy help me to the Key of the stable.

Well, Pompy was borne to do Rome good, in being so kind to the young
Princes Gelding, but if for my kindness in giving him Peas and Oats, he
should kick me, I should scarce say god a mer^ie horse: but come, i'll go with
thee to the stable.


Nay, weep not sweet, what's done is pastrecall,
Call not thy name in question, by this sorrow
Which yet is without blemish, what hath past
Is hid from the worlds eye, and only private
Twixt vs^faire Lucrece, pull not on my head,
The wrath of Rome if I have done thee wrong,
Love was the cause, thy fame is without blot,
And thou in Sextus hast a true friend got,
Nay sweet look up, thou only hast my hart,
I must be gone Lucrece a kiss and part.

Oh!

No? peevish dame farewell, then be the bruter
Of thy own shame, which Tarquin would conceals
I am armed against all can come, let mischief frown,
With all his terror ar^d with ominous fates,
To all their spleens a welcome I'll affoord,
With this bold hart, strong hand, and my good sword.

What so early Valor. and your voice not up yet? thou wast wont to be my Lark
and raise me with thy early notes.


I was never so hard set yet my Lord, but I had ever a fit of mirth for my
friend.


Prithee let's hear it then whilst we may, for I divine thy musique and my
madness are both short lived, we shall have somewhat else to do ere long, we
hope Valerius.


Jove send it.

Horatius, Me thinks our wars go not well forward,
Horatius we have greater Enemies to bustle with then the
Ardeans if we durst but front them Horatius.

Would it were come to fronting.

Then we married men should have the advantage of the bachelors Horatius,
especially such as have revelling wives, those that can caper in the City,
while their husb^ds are in the Camp, Collat why are you so (...)? the thought
of this should not trouble you, having a Luc. to your bedfellow.


My Lord I know no cause of discontent, yet can not I be merry.


I should be frolic if my brother were but returned to the Camp, and in good
time behold Prince Sextus.


Health to our general.

Thank you.

Will you survey your forces, give order for a present assault, your soldiers
long to be tugging with the Ardeas.


No.

Have you seen Lucretia my Lord, how fares she?

Well, I'll to my Tent.

Why how now whats the matter brother?

Thank you, No, well, I'll to my Tent, get thee to thy Tent a coward go with
thee, if thou hast no more spirit to a speedy encounter.


Shall I go after him and know the cause of his discontent?


Or I my Lord?

Neither, to pursue a fool in his humour? is the next way to make him more
humerous, I'll not be guilty of his folly, Thank you! no, before I wish him
health again when he is sick of the sullens, may I dye, not like a Roman, bu a
runagate.


Perhaps he's not well.

Well, then let him be ill.

The news with this hasty post?

Did nobody see my Lord Colatine? oh, my Lady commends her to you, here's a
letter.


Give it me.

Fie vppon't, never was poor Pompy so ouer-labourde as I have bin, I think I
have spurred my horse such a question, that he's scarce able to wighee or wag
his tail for an answer, but my Lady bad me spare for no horse flesh, and I
think I have made him run his race.


Cousin Colatine the news at Rome?

Nothing but what you all may well pertak: read here my Lord.
Dear Lord, if ever thou wilt see thy Lucrece,
Choose of the friends which thou affectest best,
And all important business set apart,
Repair to Room: commend me to Lord Brutus,
Valerius Mutius, Horatius,
Say I entreat their presence, where my Father
Lucretius shall attend them, farewell sweet,
Th^affaires are great, then do not fail to meet.

I'll thither as I live,

I (...) I dye,

To Room wi^h expedi^ious wings weel'e fly.

The news, the news, if it have any s^ape
Of^adnes, if some prod^gye have chanced,
That may beget revenge, I'll cease to chafe,
Vex, martyr, grieve, to^ture, torment my self,
And tune my hu^our to strange strains of mirth:
My soul deuines some happiness, speak, speak:
I know thou hast some news that will create me
Merry and musical, for I would laugh,
Be new transhapt, I prithee sing Valerius that I may air
with thee.

First tell us what's the project of thy massage?

My Lords, the princely Sextus has been at home, but what he hath done, I may
partly mistrust, but cannot altogether resolve you: besides, my Lady swore me,
that whatsoever I suspected I should say nothing.


If thou wilt not say thy mind, I prithee sing thy mind, and then thou may
save thine oath.


Indeed I was not sworn to that, I may either laugh out my news or sing am,
and so save my oath to my Lady.


Howe's all at Rome, that with such sad presage,
Distu^bed Colatine, and noble Brutus
Are hurried from the Camp with Scenola?
And we with expedition amongst the rest,
Are charged to Rome? speak, what did Sextus there with thy fair mistress?

Did he take fair Lucrece by the (...) man?

Toe man.

I man.

Ha, ha, ha, ha man.

And further did he strine to go man?

(...) man.

I man.

Ha, ha, ha man, hafa derry derry derry down a, hey fa derry dino.

Did he take fair Lucrece by the heel man?

Heel man.

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man.

And did he further strive to feel man?

Feel man.

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man, hey fadery, c.

Did he take the Lady by the shin man?

Shin man.

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man.

Further too would he have (...) man?

Bin man.

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man. Hey fadery. c.

Did he take the Lady by the knee man?

Knee man.

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man.

Further then that would he be man.

Be man.

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man. hey fa derie, c.

Did he take the Lady by the thigh man?

Thigh man.

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man.

And now he came it somewhat ny man.

Ny man

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man, Hey fa dairy, c.

But did he do the the other thing man?

Thing man?

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man.

And at the same had he a fling man.

Fling man.

I man.

Ha ha ha ha man, hey fadery, c.

Lucrece and her maid.

Mirable.

Madam.

Is not my father old Lucrecius come yet?

Not yet.

Nor any from the Camp?

Neither madam.

Go, be gone, and leave me to the truest grief of heart
That ever entr^d any Matrons breast. Oh!

Why weep you Lady? alas why do you stain
Your modest cheeks with these offensive tears?

Nothing, nay nothing: oh you powerful Gods,
That should have Angels guardent on your throne,
To protect innocence and chastity! oh why
Suffer you such inhumane massacre
On harmeles virtue? wherefore take you charge,
On sinles souls to see them wounded thus:
With Rape or Violence? forgive white innocence,
Armour of proof against sin: or by oppression
Kill Virtue quite, guerdon base transgression?
Is it my far^ above all other women?
Or is my sin more heinous then the rest,
That amongst thousands, millions, infinites,
I, only I, should to this shame (...) borne,
To be a stain to women, natu^es scorn? oh!

What ails you Madam, troth you make me weep
To see you shed salt tears: what hath oppressed you?
Why is your chamber hung with mourning black?
Your habit sable, and your eyes thus swollen
With ominous tears: alas what troubles you?

I am not, thou did deceive thy felfe,
I did not weep, there's nothing troubles me,
But wherefore dost thou blush?

Madam not I.

Indeed thou did, and in that blush my guilt thou did betray
How came thou by the notice of my sin?

What sin?

My blot, my scandal and my shame:
Oh Tarquin! thou my honour did betray,
Disgrace^no time, no age (...) wipe away, oh!

Sweet Lady cheer your self, i'll fetch my Vyol
And see if I can sing you fast a sleep,
A little rest would wear away this passion.

Do what thou wilt, I can command no more,
Being no more a woman, I am now
Devote to death, and an inhabitant
Of the other world: these eyes must ever weep,
Till fate hath closed them with eternal sleep.

Brutus!

Lucretius!

Father!

Lucrece!

Collatine!

How cheer you Madam? how is't with you cousin?
Why is your eye deject and drowned in sorrow?
Why is this funeral black, and ornaments
Ofwiddow-hood? resolve me cousin Lucrece.

How fare you Lady?

What's the matter girl?

Why how i'st with you Lucrece, tell me sweet?
Why dost thou hide thy face? with thy hand
Darken those eyes that were my Suns ofioy,
To make my pleasures flourish in the Spring?

Oh me!

Whence are these sig hes and tears?

How grows this passion?

Speak Lady you are h^m'd in with your friends,
(...) in a pale of safety, and (...)
and cirkled in a fortress of your kindred,
Let not those drops fall fruiteles to the ground,
Nor let your sighs ad to the senseless wind.
Speak, who hath wrong you?

Ere I speak my woe,
Swear you'll revenge poor Lucrece on her (...).

Be his head arched with gold.

Behis hand ar^d with an imperial Sceptre.

Be he great as Tarquin throand in an imperial seat

Be he no morethen mortal, he shall feel
The vengeful edge of this victorious steel.

Then seat you Lords, whilst I expose my wrong.
Father, dear husband, and my kinsmen, Lords
Hear me, I am dishonoured and disgraced,
My reputation mangled, my renown
disparaged, but my body, oh my body

What Lucrece?

Stained, polluted and defiled.
Strange steps are found in my adulterate bed,
And though my thoughts be white as innocence,
Yet is my body soild with lust burned sin,
And by a stranger I am strumpited,
Ravished, enforced, and am no more to rank among the Roman Matrons.

Yet cheer you Lady, and restrain these tears,
If you were forced, the sin concerns not you,
A woman's born but with a woman's strength: who was the Ravisher?

I, name him Lady, our love to you shall only thus appear
In the revenge that we will take on him.

I hope so Lords, t'was Sextus the Kings Son.

How? Sextus Tarquin!

That unprincely Prince, who guest-wise entered with my husbands Ring,
This Ring, oh Collatine! this Ring you sent
Is cause of all my woe, your discontent.
I feasted him, then lodgd him, and bestowed
The choicest welcome, but in dead of night,
My Traitorous guest came armed unto my bed,
Frighted my silent sleep, threatend, and praide
For entertainment: ^despised both.
Which hearing his sharpe pointed Semitar,
The Tyrant bent against my naked breast,
Alas, I begged my death, but note his tyranny,
He brought with him a torment worse then death
For having murdered me, he swore to kill,
One of my basest Grooms and lodge him dead
In my dead arms: then call in testimony
Of my adultery, to make me hated
Even in my death, of husband, father, friends,
Of Rome and all the world: this, this, oh Princes, Ravished and killed me at
once,

Yet comfort Lady, I quit thy guilt, for what could
Lucrece do more then a woman? had thou did polluted,
By this base scandal, thou had wronged thy fame,
And hinderd us of a most just revenge.

What shall we do Lords?

Lay your resolute hands upon the sword of Brutus,
Vow swear, as you hope meed for merit from the Gods
Or fear reward for sin, from devils below:
As you are Romans, and esteem your fame
More then your lives all hum^rous toys set off,
Of madding, singing, smilings, and what else,
Receive your native valour, be your selves,
And join with Brutus in the just revenge
Of this chaste ravished Lady, swear

We do.

Then with your humours here my grief ends too,
My stain I thus wipe off, call in my sighs,
and in the hope of this revenge, forbear
Even to my death to fall one passionate tear.
Yet Lords, that you may crown my innocence,
With our best thoughts, that you may henceforth know,
We are the same in heart we seem in show.
and though I quit my soul of all such sin, The Lords whisper
I'll not debar my body punishment:
Let all the world, learn of a Roman dame,
To prise her life less then her honoured fame.

Lucrece?

Wife.

Lady.

She hath slain herself.

Oh see yet Lords if there be hope of life

She's dead, then turn your funeral tears to fire and indignation, let us
now redeem Our misspent time, and over take our sloth With hostile
expedition, this great Lords, This bloody knife, on which her chaste blood
flower, Shall not from Brutus till some strange revenge fall on the heads of
Tarquins.


Nowe's the time to call their pride to count,
Brutus lead on, We'll follow thee to their confusion.

By (...) we will, the sprightful youth of Rome,
Tricked up in plumed harness, shall attend
The march of Brutus, whom we here create our genrall against the Tarquins.

Be it so.

We embrace it: now to stir the wrath of Rome,
You, Colla in and good Lucretius,
With eyes yet drowned in tears, bear that chaste body
Into the market place: that horrid object,
Shall kindle them with a most just revenge.

To see the father and the husband morn
Ore this chaste dame, that have so well deserved
Of Rome and them, then to infer the pride,
The wrongs and the perpetual tyranny
Of all the Tarquins, Se^Wuius, Tullius death,
and his unnatural usage by that Monster
Tullia the Queen all these shall well concur in a combind revenge

Lucrece, thy death we'll morn in glittering arms
and plumed casks: some bear that reverend load,
Unto the forum where our force shall meet
To set upon the pallas, and expel
This viperous brood from Rome: I know the people
Will gladly embrace our fortunes: Sc^uola,
Go you and muster powers in Brutus name.
Valerius, you assist him instantly,
and to the mazed people freely speak the cause of this concourse

We go.

And you dear Lord, whose speechless grief is boundless,
Turn all your tears with ours, to wrath and rage,
The hearts of all the Tarquins shall weep blood
Upon the funeral Hearse, with whose chaste body,
Honour your arms, and to th'assembled people,
Disclose her innocent wounds: Gramercies Lords,
That universal shout tells me their words
are gracious with the people, and their troops
are ready imbat^eled and expect but us,
To lead their troops, Jove give our fortunes speed,
We'll murder, murder, and base rape shall bleed.

Even thus far Tyrant have we dogd thy stepes,
Frighting thy frighted fear with horrid steel.

Lodge in the safety of Porsennaes arms
Now Traitor Brutas we dare front thy pride.

Porsenna tha^t unworthy of a sceptre,
To shelter pride, lust, rape, and tyranny,
In that proud Prince and his confederate sons.

Traitors to heaven, to Tarquin, Room and us,
Treason to Kings, doth stretch even to the Gods,
And those high Gods that take great Rome in charge,
shall punish your rebellion.

Oh Devil! Sextus speak not thou of Gods,
Not cast those false and fained eyes to heaven,
Whose rape the furies must torment (...), of Lucr: Lucrect:

Her chaste blood sul cries for vengeance to the Ethereal deities

Oh twa's a foul deed Sextus,

And thy shame shall be eternal, and outline her fame,

Say Sextus loved her, was she not a woman,
I, and perhaps was willing to beforc'd,
Must you being private subiect^ dare to (...)
Wars loud alarm against your potent King?

Brutus therein thou dost forget thy self, And wrongst the glory of thine
Ances^ors, staining thy blood with Treason.


Tuscan know the Consul Brutus is their powerful foe.
Ali Tarquin. Consul?

I consul, and the powerful hand of Rome
Graspes his imperial sword: the name of King
The tyrant Tarquins have made odious
Unto this nation: and the general knee,
Of this our warlik people, now lowe bends
To royal Brutus where the kings name ends.

Now Sextus where's the Oracle, (...) (...)
My Mother earth it plainly did foretell,
My noble virtues should thy sin exceed,
Brutus should sway, lust-burnt Tarquin bleed

Now shall the blood of Seruius fall, as heavy as a huge mountain on your
Tyrant heads, orewhelming all your glory.


Tullias guilt shall be by us reuengd, that in her pride,
In blood paternal, her rough coach-wheeles did.

Your Tirannies,

Pride,

And my Lucrece fate, shall al be swalowd in this hostile hate.

Oh Romulus, thou that fiirst reared yon walls,
In sight of which we stand in thy soft bosom,
Is hanged the nest in which the Tarquins build,
Which in the branches of thy lofty spires,
Tarquin shall perch, or where he once hath (...).
His high built airy shall be drowned in blood,
alarm then, Brutus by heaven I vow,
My sword shall prove thou ne'er wast mad till now.

Sextus, my madness with your lives expires,
Thy sensual eyes are fixed upon that wall,
Thou ne'er shalt enter, Room confines you all.

A chargethen.

Jove and Tarquin.

but we, cry a Brutus.

Lucrece, force and victory.

Thou Jovial hand hold up thy sceptre high
And let not justice be oprest with pride,
Oh you Senators leave not Room and us,
Grasped in the purple hands of death and ruin, the Tarquins have the best.

Yet stand, my foot is fixed upon this bridge.
Tyber, thy arched streams shall be changed crimso, with
Roman blood, before I trudge form hence.

Brutus retire, for if thou enter Rome,
We are all lost, stand not on valor now,
But save thy people, lets survive this day
To try the fortunes of another field.

Break down the bridge, lest the pursuing enemy
Enter with us and take the spoil of Rome.

Then breakt behind me, for by heaven I'll grow,
And root my foot as deep as to the center, before I leave this passage.

Come you're mad.

The foe comes on and we in trifling here hazard our self and people.


Save them all, to make Rome stand, Horatius here will fall.

We would not lose thee, do not breast thy self
Amongst thousands if thou frontst them thou art wingde,
With million swords and darts, and we behind
Must break the bridge of Tiber to save Rome,
Before thee infinits case on thy face,
And menace death, the raging streams of Tiber are at thy back to swallow
thee.

Retire to make Rome live, tis death that I desire.

Then farewell dead Horatius, think in us
The universal arm of potent Rome
Takes his last leave of thee in this embrace.

Farewell.

Farewell.

These arches all must down to interdict their passage the town.


Soft Tarquin, see a bulwark to this bridge.
You first must pass, the man that enters here
Must make his passage through Horatius breast,
See with this target do I buckle Rome,
And with this sword defy the pussat army of two great king.

One man to face an host,
Charge soldiers, of full forty thousan Romans,
There's but one daring hand against your host,
To keep you from the sack or spoil of Rome, charge, charge.

Oh cowards, slaves, and vassals what not enter?
Was it for this you placed my regiment
Upon a hill, to be the sad spectator
Of such a general cowardice? Tarquin, Aruns,
Porsenna, soldiers, pass, Horatius quickly,
And they behind him will deuolue the bridge
And raging Tyber that's impassible,
Your host must swim before you conquer Rome.

Yet stand Horatius, bear but one brunt more
The arched brunt shall sink upon his piles.
And in his fall lift up thy real me to heaven

Yet enter.

Dear Horatius, yet stand, save a millio by one powerful hand


Charge charge, charge.

Degenerate slaves, the bridge is fallen, Romes lost.
Valor. Horatius thou art stronger then their Hostess,
Thy strength is virtue, theirs are idle boastes.
Now save thy self and leap into the waives.

Porsenna, Tarquin, now wade past your depths,
And enter Rome, I seele my body sink
Beneath my ponderous weight, Rome is preserved,
And now farewell: for he that follows me
Must search the bottom of this raging stream^,
Fame with thy golden wings, renown my crest,
And Tiber take me on thy silver breast.

He's leapt off from the bridge and drowned himself.

You are deceived his spirits soars too hie
To be choked in with the base element
Of water, lo he swims armed as he was,
Whilst all the army have discharged their arrows.
Of which the shield upon his back stick full.
And hark the suit of all the multitude.
Now welcomes him a land, Horatius fame
Hath chekt our armies with a general shame;
But come, to morrows fortune must restore,
This scandal, which I of the Gods implore,

Then we must find another time fair prince,
To scourge these people, and revenge your wrongs.
For this night i'll betake me to my tent

And we to ours, to morrow we will renown
Our army with the spoil of a Rich-towne.

Our secretary.

My Lord.

Command lights and torches in our tents.
And let a Guard ingirt our safety round,
Whilst we debate, of military business: come sit and lets consult.

Horatius, famous for defending Rome.
But we ha done nought worthy (...).
Nor of a Roman, I in this disguise
Have past the army the puissant guard
Of king Porsen^a; this should be his tent
And in good time, now fate direct my strength
Against a king to free great Rome at length.

Oh I am slain, treason, treason.

Villain what hast thou done?

Why slain the king.

What king?

Porsenna.

Porsenna lives to see thee tortured,
With plagues more diuillish then the plague of hell.

Oh too rash M^tius, hast thou mist thy aim?
And thou base hand that did direct my poniard
Against a peasants breast, behold thy error
Thus I will punish, I will give thee freely
Unto the fire, nor will I wear a limb,
That with such (...) shall offend his Lord.

What will the madman doe^

Porsenna so punish my hand thus, for not killing thee.
Three hundred noble lads beside my self
Have vowed to all the Gods that Patron Rome,
Thy ruin for supporting tyranny;
And though I fai^e, expect yet every hour,
When some strange fate thy fortunes will devour.

Stay Roman, we admire thy constancy,
And scorn of fortune, go return to Rome,
We give thee life, and say the King Porsenna,
Whose life thou seek st is this honourable,
Pass freely, guard him to the walls of Rome,
And were we not so much ingadge to Tarquin,
We would not lift a hand against that nation that breeds such noble spirits.

Well I go, and for revenge take life even of my foe.

Conduct him safely, what 300 Gallants
Sworn to our death, and all resolved like him!
We must be provident, to morrows fortune
We'll prove for Tarquin, if they fail our hopes,
Peace shall be made with Rome, but first our secretary,
Shall have his due rights of funeral, then our shield
We must address next sor to morrows field.

By thee we are consul, still govern Rome,
Which but for thee, had bin dispoild and taken,
Made a confused heap of men and stones,
Swimming in blood and slaughter, dere Horatius
Thy noble picture shall be carved in brass,
And fixed (...) thy perpetual memory in our high capital.

Great consul thanks, but leaving thislets march out of the city.
And once more bid them battle on the plains.

This day my soul divines we shall live free
From all the furious Tarquins: but wheres Scenola? we se not him to day.
Here Lords behold me handless as you see,
The cause I mist P^rsonna in his tent,
And in his stead killed but his secretary.
The mazed King when he beheld me punish
My rash mistake, with loss of my right hand
Vnbegd and almost scorned he gave me life,
Which I had then refused, but in desire to avenge fair Lucrece
Rape.

Dear Sc^nola thou hast exceeded us in our resolve,
But will the Tarquins give us present battle?

That may ye hear, the skirmish is begun already twixt the horse.


Then noble consul lead our main battle on.

Oh Jove this day balance our cause, and let the innocent blood
Of Rape stained Lucrece crown with death and horror
The heads of all the Tarquins, see this day
In her cause do we consecrate our lives,
And in defence of Justice now march on:
I hear their martial musique, be our shock
As terrible as are the meeting clouds
That break in thunder, yet our hopes are fair,
And this rough charge shall all our hopes repair.

Yet grow our lofty plumes vnflagd with blood,
And yet sweet pleasure wantons in the air, how goes the battle Aruns?

Tis even ballanct, I enterchang'd with Brutus hand to hand, a dangerous
encounter both are wounded, had not the rude press divided us, one had dropped
down to earth.


Twas bravely fought, I saw the King your father free his person from thousand
Romans that begirt his state, where flying arrows thick as atoms hung about
his ears.

I hope a glorious day, come Tuskan king, lets on the.

Aruns stay that sword that late did drink the consuls blood
Must with his keen phange tire upon my flesh, or this on ^ine.

It spared the consuls life to end thy days in a more glorious strife.


I stand against thee Tuscan.

I for thee.

Where ere I find a Tarquin, hes for me.

Alarm, Enter Tarquin with an arrow in his breast, Tu^ia with him, pursued by
Collatine, Lucretius, Sceuola.

Fair Tullia leave me, save thy life by flight,
Since mine is desperate, behold I am wounded
Even to the death, there stays within my tent
A winged Jennet, mount his back and fly,
Live to revenge my death since I must die.

Had I the heart to tread upon the bulk
Of my dead father, and to see him slaughtered,
Only for love of Tarquin and a crown,
And shall I fear death more then loss of both?
No this is Tulliaes fame, rather then fly
From Tarquin, amongst a thousand swords she'll die.

Hew them to pieces both.

My Tullia save, and ore my caitiue head those meteors wave.

Let Tullia yield then.

Yield me cuckold no mercy, I scorn let me the danger know.

Upon them then.

Lets bring them to their fate,
And let them perish in the peoples hate.

Fear not, I'll back thee husband.

But for thee, sweet were the hand that this charged soul could free.
Life I diepise, let noble Sext^s stand
To avenge our death, even till these vitals end,
Scorning my own, this life will I defend.

And I'll sweet Tarquin to my power guard thine,
Come on you slaves and make this earth divine.

Aruns this crimsin favour for thy sake,
I'll wear upon my forehead maskt with blood
Till all the moistures in the Tarquins veins
Be spilt upon the earth and leave thy body
As dry as the parcht summer, burnt and scorched with the canicular stars.

Aruns lies dead by this bright sword that's here about his head.

And see great consul, where the pride of Rome lies sunk and fallen.


Besides him lies the queen mangled and hewd amongst the Roman soldiers.


Lift up their slaughtered bodies, help to rear them against this hill in view
of all the camp, This sight will be a terror to the so, and make them yield or
fly.


But wheres the ravisher, injurious Sextus that we see not him?

Through broken spears, cracked swords, vnboweld steeds
Flaude armours, mangled limbs, and battered casks,
Knee deep in blood, I ha pierct the Roman host to be my fathers rescue.

Tis too late, his mounting prid's sunk in the peoples hate.

My father, mother, brother, fortune now,
I do defy thee, I expose my self,
To horrid danger, safety I despise,
I dare the worst of peril I am bound.
On till this pile of flesh be all one wound,

Begirt him Lord, this is the Ravisher.
There's no revenge for Lucrece till he fall.

Cease Sextus then.

Sextus defies you all, yet will you give me language ere I (...):

Say on.

Tis not for mercy, for I scorn that life
That's given by any, and the more to ad
To your immense unmeasurable hate,
I was the spur unto my fathers (...),
Twas I that awde the Princes of the Land,
That made thee Brutus mad, these discontents,
I ravished the chaste Lucrece, Sextus I,
The daughter and thy wife, Brutus thy cousin.
Allide indeed to all, twas for my Rape,
Her constant hand ripped up her innocent breast, twas Sextus did all this.

Which i'll revenge.

Leave that to me.

Old as I am i'll do it.

I have one hand yet left, of strength enough to kill a rau^sher.


Come all at once, I all: yet hear me Brutus, thou art Hon^rable.
And my words tend to thee: my father did
By many hands, whats he amongst you can challenge
The least I smallest honour in his death?
If I be killed amongst this hostile ^hrong
The poorest snaky soldier well may claim
As much renown in royal Sextus death,
As Brutus, thou, or thou Horatius.
I am to die, and more then die I cannot,
Rob not your selves of Honour in my death.
When the two mightiest spirits of Greece and Troy
Tugde for the mast^ie, Hector and Achilles,
Had pu^ssant Hector by Achilles hand,
Did in a single monomachie Achilles,
Had (...) the ^orthie, but being slain by ods,
The (...) (...) had as much honour
As saint Achilles in the Troians death.

Had thou not done a deed so execrable,
That Gods and men abhor, i'd love thee Sextus,
And hug thee for this chalege breathed so freely:
Behold, I stand for Rome as General,
Thou of the Tarquins dost alone survive,
The head of all these garboils the chife actor
Of that black sin which we chastise by arms.
(...) Romans with your bright swords be our lists
And ring us in none dare to offend the Prince
By the least touch lest he incur our wrath:
This honour do your Consul, that his hand
may puni^h this arch mischief, that the times
Succeeding may of Brutus thus much ^ell,
By him pride, lust, and all the Tarquins fell.

To ravish Lucrece cuckold Collatine:
And spill the chasest blood that ever ran,
In any matrons veins, repents me not
So much as to ha wronged a gentleman
So noble as the Consul in this strife.
Brutus be bold, thou fightst with one scorns life.

And thou with one that less then his renown
Priseth his blood or Romes imperial crown

Sextus stand fair, much honour shall I winn^
To revenge Lucre^, and chastise thy sin.

I repent nothing, may I live or die,
Though my blood fall, my spirit shall mount on hie.

Both slain: oh noble Brutus this thy fam^
To after ages shall survive, thy body
Shall have a fair gorgeous Sepulchre:
For whom the matrons shall in funeral black
Morn twelve (...) moons, thou that first governed Rome,
And swayed the people by a consuls name.
These bodies of the Tarquins we'll commit
Unto the funeral pile: you Collatine
Shall succeed Brutus, in the consuls place.
Whom wi^h this Laurel wreath we here relate
Such is the peoples voice, accept it then.

We do, and may our power so just appear
Rome may have peace, both with our love fear.
But soft, what march is this?

The (...) king, seeing the (...) slain.
Thus armed and battelled offers peace to Rome.
To confirm which, we will give you present hostage
If you deny, we will stand upon our guard,
And by the force of arms, maintain our own

After so much effusion and large wast
Of Roman blood the name of peace is welcome,
Since of the (...) none remain in Rome.
And (...) rape is now revenged at full.
Twere good to entertain (...) league.

(...) we embrace whose royal presence.
Shall grace the Consul to the funeral pile.
March on to Rome, Jove (...) our guard and guide,
That hath in us veng'd Rape and punished pride.


