Son, I tell ye you have done you know not what:

I have married a woman, else I am decesue^ mot^er.


Married a woman? married indeed,
Here is a marriage that befits a King:
It is no matudile it was done in haste,
Here is a B^dall and with hell to boot,
You have mad^ work?

Faith mother some we have indeed, but ere long you shall see us make work for
an heir apparent I doubt not, nay, nay, come-come, Gods will what chid^g
stille


O God that ^re I ^de to see this day.

B^ my faith mother, I hope you ^al see the night too, and in the morning I will
be bold to ^ld you to the Christ^ing Gr^ndmother, and Godmother to a Prince of
Wales, tut mother, tis a st^ing world.


Have you sent Warwicke into France for this?

No by my faith mother I sent Warwicke into France for ^n other, but this by
chance being nearer hand, and coming in the way I cannot tell how, we
concluded, and now (as you see) are going about to get a young King.


But tell me son how will you answer this?
Is't possible ^our rash unlawful act,
Should not breed mortail hate betwixt the Kealme^
What may the French King think when he shall hear
That whilst you send to entreat about his daughter,
Basely to take a subject of your own?
What may the Princess Bona think of this?
Our noble Cousin Warwicke that great Lord,
That Center-shaking (...) of war,
That like a Colum propped the house of York:
And boar our white Rose brau^ly in his top,
When he shall hear his embassage abusor,
In this but made an instrument by you,
I know his soul will blush within his bosom,
And shame will sit i^ Scarl^t on his Brew,
To have his hon^r touched with this foul ble^h
Son, son I tell ^ou that is done by you,
Which yet the child that is unborn shall rue.

^sh mother you are dece^ude, all true subjects shall have (...) use to thank
God, to have their King borne of a true Engl^ woman, I tell you it was never
u^ll since we imatched wi^h strangers, so our children have been still l^ke
Chickens of the half kind but where the rock and the hen be both of one
^reede, there is like to be birds of the game: h^re you mother, hear you, had
I gone to it by fortune, I ^d made your sons George and Dicke to have stood
gaping after the crown: this wench mother is a widow, and hath made proof of
her valour, and for any thing I know, I am as like to do the deed as John Gray
her husband was, I had rather the people prayed to bless mine heir, then
selide me an heir: hold your peace, if you can see, there was never mother had
a to warder son, why Cousin Howard and Tom Sellinger heard you ever such a
coil about a wife?


My sovereign Lord with patience bear her spl^
Your princely mothers zeal is like a river,
That from the free abundance of the waters,
Breaks out into this inundation,
From her abundant care this rage proceeds,
Over swollen with the extremity of love.

My Lord, my Lord, avoid a woman's humour,
If you resist this tumor of her will,
Here you shall have her dwell upon this passion,
Until she lade and dull our ears again:
Seem you but sorry for what you have done,
And straight sheele put the finger in the e^e,
With comfort now, since it cannot be helped:
But make you show to justify the act
If ever other language in her lips,
Then out upon it, it is abominable, I dare be hanged,
Say any thing it makes no matter what,
Then thus be wearied with a woman's chat.

I, I, you are the spamels of the Court,
And thus you sawn and sooth your want^n king,
But Edward had thou prized thy maic^ie,
Thou never would have stained thy princely state,
with the base leavings of a subjects bed:
Nor borne the blemish of her Bigamy.
A widow, is't not a goodly thing?
Grayes children come ask blessing of the King.

Nay I beseech your Grace my Lady York,
Even as you are a Princess and a widow,
Think not so meanly of my widowhood,
A spotless virgin came I first to Gray,
With him I ^ude a true and faithful wife:
And since his hie imperial majesty,
Hath pleas^e to bless my poor del^ed state
With the high Sovereign title of his Queen,
I here protest before the host of heaven,
I came as chasse a widow to his bed,
As when a virgin (...) to Gray was wed.

Come, come have done, n^w have you ch^d ^nough, G^ds ^ote, we were as merry
ere she came, as any people in Chrstendome, I with the mist^s, and these with
the ma^es: only we have no fiddlers at our feast, but mother you have m^de a
sit of mirth: welcome to Grafton mother, by my troth you are even ^ust come as
I wished you here, let us go to supper, and in Charity give us your blessing
ere we go to Bed.


O Edward, Edward, stic and leave this place,
Wherein poor Gllie King thou art enchanted,
This is her d^m of Bedtords work her mother,
That hath be w^tcht thee Edwa^d my poor child,
D^honour not the Princes of thy land,
To make the (...) kneel with reverence at her feet,
That ere thou dl^st e^pale with sovereignty,
The^ would have scorned to have looked upon,
T^eres no such differen^e twixt the greatest Peer,
And the poor sill^st kitchen maid that lives,
A^ls bet wirt thy worthiness and hers.

I do confess it, yet my Lady York,
M^ mother is a duchess as you are,
A Princess borne, the Duke of Bedfords wi^e,
And as you ^no, a daughter and a sister,
U^to the royal blood of Burgundy.
But you cannot so basely think on me,
As I do think of these vain worldly titles,
God fro^ soul my sin as far dcuide.
As I am far ^rom boasting in this pride,

Madam, she is the mirror of her kind,
H^d she but so much spleen as hath a gnat,,
Her spirits would startle to abide your taunts,
She is a Sain^, and Madam you blaspheme,
^o wrong so sweet a Lady.

Thou art a ^nion and a slatterer.

Madam but that you are my sovereigns mother,
I would let you know you wrong a Gentleman,

Good Cousin Sellinger have patience,
Her Graces rage by too much violence,
Hath spent it self already into ^re:
Dear Madam I beseeth you on my knee,
Tender that loving kindness to the Queen,
That I dare swear she doth in soul to you.

Well said good Cos, I pray thee make them friends, why how now Bess, what
weep? nay then i'll chide y^u: what sudden news comes by this messenger?


My sovereign Lord, the bastard Falconbridge,
Of late hath stirred rebellion in the South,
Encouraging his forces to deliver,
King Henrie late deposde out of the Tower,
To him the malcontented commons flock,
From every part of Sussex, Kent, and Esier,
His armic waxed twenty thousand strong.
And as it is supposed by circumstance,
Mean to take London, if not well defended.

Well let this Phaeton that is mountel thus,
Look he sit surely, or by Englands George,
I'll break his neck, this is no new evasion,
I surely thought that one day I should see,
That bastard Falcon take his wings to mount,
Into our Eagle airy, me thought I saw,
Black ^iscontent sit ever on his brow,
And now I see I calculated well,
Good Cousin Howard, and Tom Sellinger,
This night we'll spend in fe^st and ^llitie,
With our new Queen, a^d our beloved mother,
To morrow you shall hau^ commission,
To raise up power against this haughty rebel:
Sir depart not till you know our pleas^re,
You shall convey us letters back to London,
Unto the Mayor, Recorder, and our friends,
Is supper ready? come by my bonnie Bess,
Welcome mother, we are all your guests.

Hold drum,

Hold drum and be hanged,

Hold drum hold, peace then ho, silence to the 3 proclamation.


You lie you rogue, tis to the Oration,

Nay then you all lie, it is to the coblication,

True hearted English and our valiant friends,

Do brave general isaith.

Peace there you rogues, or I will split your chaps:

De are countrymen, I publicly proclaim,
If any wronged discontented English,
Touched with true faeling of King Hens wrongs,
Henrie the ^rt the lawful King of England,
Who by that tyrant Edward the usurper,
Is held a wretched prisoner in the Lower,
If any man that fain would be enfranchisde,
From the sad yoke of ^orkrsh servitude,
Under which w^ toil like naked Gallislaues,
Know he that Thomas Neuill the Lord Falconbridridge:

I, a Falconbridge a falconbridge:

P^ace ye clamorous rogues, on General on with poor
Oration, peace there,

Pit^ing King Henries poor destressed case,
Armed with his title, and a subjects zeal,
Takes up just arm^s against the house of Yorks:
And do proclaim our ancient liberty:

Liberty, liberty, liberty, general liberty.

We do not rise like Tiler, Cade, and Straw,
Blewbeard, other of that rascal route,
Bascly like Linkers, or such mnddle ^anes,
For mending measures, or the price of corn,
Or for some common in the wild of Kent,
That's by some greedy Cormorant inclosde:
But in the true and ancient lawful right,
Of the redoubted bouse of Lancaster.
Our blood is noble, by our birth a Neuill,
And by our lawful line Lord Falconbridge,
Whose here that's of so dull a leaden temper,
That is not fired with a Neuils name?

A Neuill, a Neuill, a Neuill.

Our quarrel like our self is honourable,
The law our warrant.

I, I, the law is on our side.

I, the law is in our own hands,

Peace you rogues.

And more, a blessing by the word proposoe,
To those that aide a true anointed King,
Courage brave spirits and cry a Falconbridge,

A Falconbridge, a Falconbridge.

We will be masters of the mint our selves,
And set our own stamp on the golden coin:
We'll shoe our neighing coursers with no worse
Then the purest s^iuer that is sold in Cheap.
At Leaden hall we'll sell pearls by the peck,
As now the mealemen use to sell their meal:
In Westminster we'll keep a solemn court,
And build it bigger to receive our men,
Cry Falconbridge my hearts liberty,

Falconbridge and liberty, c.

Peace ye slaves, or I will smoke ye else,

Peace ye slaves, or I will chub your chappes, but indeed thou may well
smoke them, because thy name is Smoke.


Why sir, I hope Smoke the Smith of Chepsted, is as good a man as Chub the
Chandler of Sandwich.


Peace ye rogues, what are you quarrelling? and now list to Captain Spicing.
You know Cheapside there are the Mercers shops,
Where we will measure velvet by the pikes:
And Silks and Sattens by the streets whole breadth:
We'll take the Tankards from the Conduit cocks,
To fill with Ip^ras and drink carouse.
Where chains of gold and plate shall be as plenty,
As wooden dishes in the wild of Kent:

Oh bravely said Ned Spicing, the honestest Lad that ever punde spice in a
mortar, now speaks Captain Smoke.


Look Lads for from this hill ye may discern,
The lovely town which we are ma^hing to,
That same is London Lads yelook^ upon,
Range all arow my hearts and stand at gaze,
As do the herds of Dear at some strange sight:
Or as a troupe of hungry trauel^s,
That fire their eyes upon a fur^d feast,
Look how the Tower doth tice us to come on,
To take out Henry the sixth there prisoner,
See how S. Katherines smokes, wipe slaves four eyes
And whet your stomachs for the good malt pies.

Why then belike I am no body: room and avoidance, for now speaks Captain
Chub:
No sooner in London will we be,
But the Bakers for you, the Brewers for me,
Bir^hin lane shall suit us, the Costermongers fruit us:
The Poulters send us in soul,
And Butchers meat without control:
And ever when we sup or dine,
The Vintners freely bring us in wine:
If any body ask who shall pay,
Cut off his head and send him away.
This is Captain Chubs law whosoever say nay.

Bravely resolude, so m^rch we forward all,
And boldly say, good luck shall us be^all.

This is well done, thus should good Citizens,
F^hion themselves as well for war as peace:
Have ye command^d that in every streese,
They h^g forth ligh^s as soon as ^ght comes one
Say Colin Sn^are that was referd to you.
^hoare (...) have my Lord, besides from every hall
T^ere is at least two hund^ed men in arms.

(...) cheers my heart to hear this readiness,
Let never r^bels put true Subjects down,
Come when they will, th^ welcome shall be such,
As they had better kept them further off.
But where is M. Recorder? his advise,
Must not be wanting in these high affairs.

About an hour ago, and somewhat more,
I left him fortifying the bridge my Lord,
Which done he purposed to meet you here:

A discreet paineful Gentleman he is,
And we must all of us be so inclined:
If we entend to have the City safe,
Or look for thanks, and credit with the King,
I tell ye masters, aged though I be,
I (for my pa^t) will to no bed this night.

Why is it thought the Bastard is so near?

How ^cane ye M. Iosseline by near?
He neither comes from Italy nor Spain:
But out of Kent, and Esser which you know,
Are both so near, as nearer cannot be.

Nay, by your patience good my Lord a word,
Simple though I am, yet I must confess,
A mischief further off, would, and so forth,
You know my meaning, things not seen before,
Are, and so forth, yet in good sadness,
I would that all were well, and perchance,
It may be so, what, were it not for hope,
The heart, and so forth, but to the matter,
You mean and purpose, I, I, am sure ye do?

Well M. Iosseline, we are sure ye mean well
Although somewhat defective in your utterance.

I, I, my Lord Mayor, I am you know,
Willing ready, so forth, tut, tut, for me, ha, ha,
My Manston is at Ham, and thence you know,
I come to help you in this needful time:
When rebels are so busy, and so forth,
What masters, age must never be despised,
You shall find me my Lord, still, and so forth.

My Lord, now here comes M. Recorder.

Good even my good Lord Mayor, the streets are chainde,
The bridge well manned every place prepared,
Shall we now go together and consult.
What else there is to be determinde of?

Your coming M. Recorder was the thing
We all desired, therefore let us consult,
And now what say ye, if with half our power,
We issue forth, and give the rebels fight?

Before they do provoke us nearer hand
There were no way to that, if all be pleased,
Whats your opinion M. Iosseline?

Good soo^h my L. Mayor, and M. Recorder,
You may take your choice, but in my conceit,
Issue if you will, or else stay if you will,
A man can never be too wary and so forth,
Yet as to issue will not be the worst,
Even so to tarry, well, you may think more on it,
But all is one, we shall be sure to fight,
And you are wise enough, to see your time, I, I, a Gods name.

My Lord accept his meaning better then his counsel.

I, so we do, or else we were to blame,
What if we stop the passage of the Thames,
With such provision as we have of ships?

Its doubtful yet my Lord, whether the rebels,
Purpose that way to seek our detriment,
Rather me seems they will come by land,
And either make assault at London bridge,
Or else at Algate, both which enterances,
Were good they should be strongly lortified.

Well said master Recorder, you do, I I, Iye warrant

As for the other, the whole companies
Of Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, and the rest,
Are drawn together for their best defence,
Beside the Tower, a neighbour to that place,
As on the one side it will clear the river,
So on the other with their ordenance,
It may repulse and beat them from the gate,

What noise is this? provide ye suddenly:
And every man betake him to his charge.

Soft who is this, how now my friend what news?

My master the Lieutenant of the Tower, gives ye to understand, he hath
descried the army of the rebels.


Which may come they?

From Essexward, and therefore tis his mind,
You guarde both Algate well, and Bishopsgate.

Saint George away, and let us all resolve,
Either to vanquish this rebellious rout,
Preserve our goods, our children and our wives,
Or seal our resolution with our lives.

Summon the City, and command our entrance,
Which if we shall be stubbornly denied,
Our power shall rush like thunder through the walls,

Open your gates slaves when I command ye,
Spicing beats on the gates, and then enters the Lord Mayor and his associates
with prentices.

Whats he that beats thus at the City gates,
Commaun^ing entrance as ^e were a King?

He that will have releasement for a King:
I (...) Neuell the Lord Falconbridge.

H^ sir, you, clapp^n, ^che, ^olt,
Or ^e bolt you if I get in, stand you preaching with a pore?

We have no warrant I ho. Falconbridge,
To let your armed troupes into our City,
Considering you have taken up these arms,
Against our sovereign and our c^untries peace.

I tell thee Mawr, and know he tells thee so,
That comes armed in a Kings defence,
That I crave entrance in Kings He^es name,
In right of the true line of Lancaster,
Me thinks that word spoke from a Ne^ls mouth
Should like an earthquake rend your chained gates,
And tear in pieces your port^ullcises,
I thunder it again into you ears,
You stout and brave courageous London^rs,
In Henries name I crave my entrance in.

Should Henries name command thee entrance here
We should deny allrageance unt^ Edward,
Whose true and f^thfull subjects we are ^uorne,
And in whose presence is our sw^ up bo^ne.

I tell thee traitor then th^u bear thy (...)
Against thy true undoubted King.

Nay then I tell thee bastard Falconbridge,
My Lord Ma^or bears his sword in his defence,
That put the sword into the arms of London,
Made the Lord Malors for ever after Knights,
Richard, d^osde... Henrie Bollingbrooke,
From whom the house of York doth claim their right.

Whats he that answers us thus saucil^

Sir your name, that we may know ye hereafter,

My name is Shore, a Goldsmith by my trade,

What not that Shore that hath the da^e wife,
Shores wife, the flower of London for her beauty.

Yes rebel even the very same.

Run rascal and fetch thy wife to our General presently, or else all the
Gold in Cheapside cannot ransom her: wilt thou not stir when I bid thee.


Shore listen me, thy wise is mine that's flat,
This night in thine own house she sleeps with me,
Now Crosebie Lord Mayor shall we enter in?

Crosebie the Lord Mayor tells thee proud rebel no.

No Croseby shall I not: then doting Lord,
I cra^e the name of rebel down thy throat,
There's not the poorest rascal of my camp,
But if he chance to meet thee in Cheapside
Upon thy footcloath, he shall make thee light,
And hold his stirrup while he mount thy horse,
Then lackey him which way he please to go,
Crosebie ^le make the Citizens be glad,
To send thee and the Aldermen thy brethren,
All m^nicled, and chainde like Gally slanes,
To ransom them, and to redeem the City.

Nay then proud ^bel, pause hear me speak,
There's not the poorest and meanest Citizen,
That is a faithful subject to the King.
But in despite of thy rebellious route,
Shall walk to Bow, a small wand in his ^d
Although thou lie encamped at M^leend Green,
And not the proudest rebel of you all,
Shall dare to touch him for his damned soul.
Come, we will pull up our port^ses,
And let me see thee enter if thou dare.

Spoken like a man, and true Velvet ^acket,
And we will enter or strike by the way.

Wheres master Recorder, and master Iosseline?

Here my Lord Mayor, we now have mande the walls, and fortified such places
as were need^ll,


Why it is well, brothers and Citizens,
Stick to your City as good men should do,
Think that in Richards time even such a rebel,
Was then by Walworth the L. Mayor of London,
Stabbed dead in Smithfield:
Then show your selves as it be fits the time.
And let this find a hundredth Walworth, now,
Dare stab a rebel were he made of brass,
And Prentices stick to your officers,
For you may come to be as we are now,
God and our King against an arrant rebel,
Brothers away, let us defend our walls:

My Lord your words are able to in^use,
A double courage in a cowards breast,
Then fear not us although our chins be bare,
Our hearts are good, the trial shall be seen,
Against these rebels on this champion green.

We have no tricks nor pollices of war,
But by the ancient custom of our Fathers,
We'll soundly lay it on, takte off that will.
And London Prentices be ruled by me,
Die ere ye loose fair Londons liberty.

How now my flatcaps, are you grown so brave?
Tis but your words, when matters come to proose
You'll scudde as twere a company of sheep,
My counsel therefore is to keep your shops,
What lack you, better will bes^em your mouths,
Then terms of war, in sooth you are too young:

Sir go too, you shall not find it so,
Flatcaps thou call us, we scorn not the name,
And shortly by the virtue of our swords,
We'll make your cap so sit unto your crown,
As sconce and cap and all kiss the ground.

You are those desperate idle swaggering mates,
That haunt the suburbs in the time of peace,
And raise up a^-house brawls in the street,
And when the rumour of the war begins,
You hide your heads, and are not to be found,
Thou term it better that we keep our shops,
It's good indeed we should have such a care,
But yet for all our keeping now and then,
Your Pelfring fingers break into our locks,
Until at Tyborne you acquit the fault:
Go to, albeit by custom we are mild,
As those that do profess civility,
Yet being moude, a nest of angry hornets
Shall not be more offensi^ then we will,
We'll fly about your ears and sting your hearts.

He tells you truth my friends, and so forth.

Who can endure to be so vrauce by boys?

Nay scorn us not that we are Prentices,
The Chronicles of England can report,
What memorable actions we have done,
To which this days achievement shall be knit,
To make the volume larger then it is.

Now of mine honour, ye do cheer my heart
Brave English ofsprings, valiantly resolude.

My Lord return you back, let us alone,
You are our Masters, give us leave to work,
And if we do not banquish them in fight,
Let us go supperles to bed at night.

Get thee up on the top of S. Buttolphs steeple, and make a proclamation.


What a plague should I proclaim there?

That the hells be rung backward,
And cutting of throats be cried havoc,
No more calling of lantern and candlelight,
That maidenheads be valued at just nothing:
And Sack be sold by the Sallet.
That no piddling slave stand to pick a locke, but slash me off the hinges, as
one would slit up a Cowes paunch.

Let no man have less then a warehouse to his wardrobe: cry a fig for a
Sergeant, and walk by the Counter like a Lord, pluck out the clapper of Bow
bell, and hang up all the Sextons in the City.


Rantam Scantam, Rogues follow your leader, Caualero Spicing the maddest slave
that ere pund spice in a mortar.


Take me an Usurer by the gr^asie pouch, and shake out his Crowns, as a
hungry dog would shake a Haggas, Bar foul play Rogues, and live by honest
silching and stealing, he that hath a true finger, let him ^aite his face to
the fryingpan.


Follow your Leader Rogues, follow your Leader.


Assault, Assault, and cry a Falconbridge.

Sir Spicing, if Spicing be thy name, we are here for matters and causes as
it might ^me for the King, therefore it were good, and so forth.


Open the gates, or if we be the picklocks, ye Rogues we'll play the Mastiff
dogs amongst you: If I woorie not a thousand of you with my teeth, let me be
hanged in a packethreed, and so forth.


Fond fellow, justice is to be used, I marie is it, and law in some sort as it
were is to be followed, oh God forbid else, this our Magistrate hath power as
might seem, and soforth, for duty is to be observed, and Officers must be
obeyed, in sort and calling, and so forth.


We'll talk more anon, good M. and so forth.


Why this it is to trust to these base Rogues.
This dirty scun^ of rascal ^esanirie:
This hartles rout of base rascalitie;
A plague upon you all, you cowardly Rogues;
You crauand cures, you s^y muddy clowns,
Whose courage but consists in multitude,
Like sheep and ^eat that follow one another,
Which if one run away, all follow after:
This hedge-bred rascal, this filthy fry of ditches,
A vengeance take you all, this it is to lead you,
Now do you cry and shrike at every shock,
A hot consuming mischief follow you.

Swounds scale rogues, scale, a Falconbridge, a Falconbridge.


Set open the gates, nay then weel sally out,
It never shall be said when I was Mayor,
The Londoners were shut up in the City,
Then cry King Edward, and lets us issue out.

Now if ye be true hearted Englishmen,
The gat'es set open and the portcullise up:
Lets Pel Mel in, to stop their passage out,
He that first enters, be possessed of Cheap,
I give him it freely, and the chiefest wench.

That he can find, let that lie in the bargain.

Hear thou General, there's hot drinking at the mouth of Bishopsgate, for
our soldiers are all Mouth, they lie like Rascals with their brains beaten
out, therefore since we are all like to feed h^gs in Houndsditch, let us retire
our troupes, and save our maimed men, or if we issue further, we are put to the
sword every mothers son of us.


Art thou that villain in whose damned mouth,
Was never heard of any word but wounds?
Whose r^rcant limbs are nocht with gaping scars,
Thicker then any carking craft-mans score,
Whose very skalpe is scracht and crasde and broken,
Like an old mazzer beaten on the stones,
And stand thou now to save our maimed men?
A plague upon thee coward.

Why how now base Thomas? Swounds, were thou a base Vial, thou art but a
rascal and a rebel as I am, hear thou, if I do not turn true Su^ed and
leave thee, let me be wooried with dogs, Swounds dost thou impeach my manhood?
Tom Neuill thou had as good to have ^nnde thy self as uttered such a word,
flatly I forsake thee, and all that love Ned Spicing follow me.


Come come ye testic s^le, thou see me greende,
Yet can not bear with mine infirmity,
Thou know I hold thee for as tall a man
As any lines or breathes our English ay^e,
I know there lives not a more fiery spirit,
A more resolved daliant, a plague upon it,
Thou know I love thee, yet if a word escape
^y lips in anger, how testy then thou art?
I had rather all men left me then thy self,
Thou art my soul, thou art my Genius:
I cannot live without thee not an hour,
Thus must I still be forced against my will,
To sooth this durtic slave, this cowardly rascal.
Come, come be friends, ye testy firebrand,
We must retire there is no remedy.

Nay Tom, if thou wilt have me mount on the walls,
And cast my self down headlong on their pikes,
He do it, but to impeach my valour,
Had any man but thou spoke half so much,
I would have sp^t his heart, still be ware
My valour, such words go hardly down,
Well, I am friends, thou thought not as thou spoke.

No on my soul, thou think not that I did,
Sound a retreat there I command ye strait,
But whither shall we retire

To Mileend Green, there's no fitter place.

Then let us back retire to Mil^nd Green,
And there expect fresh succour from our friends,
With such supply as shall ere long assure
The Citic is our own, march on, away.

Ye have best^d ye like good Citizens,
And she wne your selves true subjects to your king,
You worthily p^entise bestirde your selves,
That it did th^re my heart to see your valour,
The rebels are retired to M^eerd Green,

Where so we may not suffer them to rest.
But issue forth upon them with fresh force.

My L. Mayor, d^gence doth well, and so forth. Matters must be looked into as
they ought, indeed should they, when things are well done, they are, and so
forth, for causes and things must indeed be look^ into.


Well sir, we ver^e well conceive your meaning,
And you have ^wne your self a worthy gentleman:
See that our walls be kept with courts of guard,
And well defended against the enemy,
For we will now withdraw us to Guild hall,
To take advise what further must be don.

Be not afraid (sweet heart) the worst is past,
God have the praise, the victory is ours,
We have prevailed, the rebels are repulsoe,
And every str^te of London sounds joy,
Can thou then (gentle Ianc) be sad alone?

I am not sad now you are here with me,
My toy, my hope, my comfort, and my love,
My dear, dear husband, kindest Matthew shore,
But when these arms the circles of my soul,
Were in the fight so forward as I heard,
How could I choose, sweet heart, but be afraid?

Why dost thou tremble now, when perilspast^

I think upon the horror of the tune,
But tell me why you fought so desperately?

First to maintain King Edwards royalty,
Next to defend the Cities libertic,
But chiefly ^anc to keep thee from the foil,
Of him that to my face did how thy spoil,
Had he prcua^de, where then had been our lives,
Dishonoured our daughters, ravished our fair wives,
Possessed our goods, and set our servants free,
Yet all this nothing to the loss of thee.

Of me sweet heart? why how should I be lost?
Were I by thousand storms of fortune tossed?
And should endure the poorest wretched life,
Yet Iane will be thy honest loyal wife,
The greatest Prince the sun did ever see,
Shall never make me prove vntruc to thee:

I fear not fair means, but a rebels force,

These hands shall make this body a dead corse,
^re force or flattery shall mine honour stain,

True fame sur^iues, when death the ^sh hath slain.

God save ye master Shore, and mistress by your leave,
Sir my L. Mayor sends for ye by Maio^,
And prates your speedy presence at Guild hall,
There's news the rebels have made head again,
And have ensco^de themselves upon Mileeud,
And prescutly our armed men must out,
You being Captain of two companies
In honour of your v^lour and your skill,
Must lead the vaward, God right stand with ye.

Friend tell my Lord i'll wait upon him strait.

Friend tel my Lord he does my husband wrong,
To set him foremost in the danger still,
Ye shall not go if I may have my will,

Peace wife, no more, friend I will follow ye,

I faith ye shall not, prithee do not go.

Not go sweet heart? that were a cowards trick,
A traitors part to shrink when others fight,
Envy shall never say that Matthew Shore
The Goldsmith ^aid, when other men went out,
To meet his Kings and countries enemy,
No Iane against all the rebels on Mileend,
I dare alone K. Edwards right defend.

If you be slain, what shall become of me?

Kite well my w^ch, ^nowe will marry thee,
I leave thee worth at least five thousand pound.

Marry again. that word my heart doth wound,
I'll never marry, nor I will not live,
If thou be killed, let me go with thee Mat.

^is idle talk good Iane, no more of that,
Go to my Lady Maioresse and the rest,
As you are still companion with the best,
With them be merry, and pray for our good speed,

To part from thee my very heart doth bleed.

Yet stand we in the sight of v^card Troy,
And suck the air she draws: our ^erie breath
Flies from our nostrils warm unto the walls,
We beard her bristling spires, her battled towers,
And proudly stand and g^e her in the face,
Look on me, and I doubt not ye imagine,
My worth as great as any one of yours,
My fortunes, would I basely fawn on Edward,
To be as fair as any mans in England,
But he that keeps your sovereign in the Tower,
Hath sea^de my land, and robbed me of my right:
I am a Gentleman as well as he,
What he hath got, he bolds by tyranny,
Now if you faint, or cowardly should fly,
There is no hope for any one to live,
We hear the Londoners will leave the City,
And bid us battle here on ^ilcend Green,
Whom if we vanquish, then we take the town,
And ride in triumph thorough Cheap to Paules,
The Mint is ours, Cheap, Lumbard street our own
The meanest soldier wealthier then a king.

March fair ye rogues, all kings or capknitters: dost thou hear Tom
Falconbridge? I pre thee grant me one boon I shall ask thee.


What is it Ned: its hard I should deny thee.

Why that when we have woune the Cry, as we cannot choose but win it, that I
may have the knighting of all these rogues and rascals.


What then?

What then? Zonnds I scorn your scurvy way mouthed, what then? now a pore
take me it I fight a blow.


Why this is fine, go to, knight whom thou wilt:

Who, I knight any of them? I'll see them hanged first for a company of tattred
ragged rascailes, if I were a king, I would not knight one of them?


What not me Caualero Chub?

Yes, I care not if I knight thee: and yet i'll see thee hanged ere i'll honour
thee so much: I care not so much for the matter, but I would not be denied my
humour.


Why what a perverse fellow art thou Ned?

Ho my sine Tom, my brave Falconbridge, my mad Greek, my lusty Neuill: thou
art a king, a Caesar, a plague (...) thee, I love thee not, and yet i'll die with
thee.


See how rebellion can exalt it self,
^ing the feathers of sick discipline.

They think they can outlooke our tr^r looks,

Mark but the scornful eye of Falconbridge.

I rather think tis fear upon his cheek,
Decyphers pale disturbance in his heart.

Our coming forth hath, well, I say no more,
But shall we take occasion, and so forth,
Rebellion should have no respite, oh my Lord,
The time hath ^ene, but all is one for that.

How like a troupe of rank oreridden jade,
You hu^se bearded Citizens appear?

Nay, rather so many men in the Moon,
And every one a forzen bush in his mouth.

The so^ and (...) wards? now fair befall them,
Would any one have thought before this hour,
There had been such increase of muddy slaves?

Peace soldsours, they are resolute you see,
And not to sta^ us, nor favour them,
Such haughty sto^hs seldom have been seen,
Imbodied in the breasts of Citizens,
How sternly in their own peculiar strength,
Without the assistance of their lingering king,
Did they of late repulse us from their walls?
And now again how expeditiously,
And unexpected they have met us here?
Were we more deadly incensed then we are,
I would not but commend their chivalry.

Captain, shall we go challenge them to fight?
Sbloud we burn daylight, theile think anon,
We are afraid to see their glittering swords.

Tell them they come in steed of pudding pies,
And Stratford cakes to makes a banquet here.

Soft give me leave, I will devise with words,
To weaken and abash their fortitude,

The bastard offers to come forth my Lord.

I am the man intend to answer him.

Crosbie.

Traitor.

Traitor? zounds down with him.

Be patient, give me leave I say to speak,
I doubt not but the traitors name shall rest
With those that keeps their lawful K. in bonds:
Mean time ye men of London once again,
Behold my warlike colours are displayed,
Which I have vowed shall never be wrapped up,
Until your lofty buildings kiss our feet,
Unles you grant me passagethrough your streets.

Passage, say thou? that must be ore our breasts,
If any passage thou art like to have.

Why then upon your bodies will I tread,
And wade through standing pooles of your lost blood.

We know thy threats, and reckon them as wind,
Not of suffecient power to shake a reed.

But we shook your gates not long ago,
And made your walls to shake like irish bogs.

I, and so terrified ye, that not one of ye ^rst come to fetch a pint of sack
at the mouth at Bishopsgate, no not for your lines.


I but you know what followed, and so forth.

Etretera? are you there? me thinks the sight of the dun Bull, the Neuels
honoured crest, should make you leave your broken sentences, and quite forget
ever to speak at all.


Nay then look thou upon our Cities arms.
Wherein is a bloody dagger, that is it,
Where with a rebel like to Falconbridge,
Had his desert, meet for his treachery,
Can you behold that, and not quake for fear?

Since when, it is successfuely decreed,
Traitors with us shall never better speed.

Captain and fellow soldiers talk no more,
But draw your meaning forth in down right blows.

Sound then alarm.

Do the like for us, and where the right is, there attend success.


Stay and be better advised, why countr^,
What is this Falconbridge you follow so?
I could instruct you, but you know my mind.
And Falconbridge what are these rusticalles,
Thou should repose such confidense in glass,
Shall I inform thee? no, thou art wise enough,
Edward of York delays the time you say,
Therefore he will not come, imagine so,
The Cities weak, hold that opinion still,
And your pretence King Henries liberty.
True, but as how? shall I declare you? no.
What the? you'll fight, a gods name take your choice,
I canno more but give you mine advise.

Away with this parentheses of words,
Crosbie courage thy men, and on this green,
Whose cause is right, let it be quickly seen.

I am as readic as thou can desire,
On then a Gods name.

This was well fought, now Spicing list to me.
The Citizens thus having given us ground,
And therefore somewhat daunted, take a band
Of Essex soldiers, and with all the speed
Thou possibly can make, withdraw thy self,
And get between the City gates and them.

Oh brave Tom Neuill, gallant Falconbridge,
Aim at thy intended policy,
This is thy meaning, while thou art imploide,
And holdst them battle here on Mileend Green,
I must provide as harbenger before,
There be not only clear and open passage,
But the best merchants houses to receive
Us and our retinew, I am proud of that,
And will not sleep upon thy just command.

Away then I will follow as I may,
And doubt not but that ours will be the day.

We have recovered what before we lost,
And heaven stands with the justice of our cause,
But this I noted in the fight even now,
That part of this rebellious crew is sent,
By what direction, or for what intent,
I cannot guess, but may suspect the worst,
And as it seems, they compass it about,
To hem us in, or get the gate of us,
And therefore Cousin Shore, as I repose
Trust in thy valour and thy loyalty,
Draw forth three hundred ^wmen, and some pikes,
And presently encounter their assault.

I have your meaning, and effect my Lord,
I trust shall disappoint them of their hope.

Come on my harts, we will be kings to night,
Carouse in Gold, and sleep with merchants wives,
While their poor husbands loose their lives abroad,
We are now quite behind our enemies backs,
And there's no let or hindrance in the way,
But we may take possession of the town,
Ah you mad rogues, this is the wished hour,
Follow your leader, and be resolute.

I, my good friend, so certify his grace,
The Rebels are dispersed all and fled,
And now his Highness meets with victory.
Marshall your sclues, and keep in good array:
To add more glory to this victory:
The King in person comes to this place,
How great an honour have you gained to day?
And how much is this City famde for ever,
That twice without the help, either of King,
Or any, but of God, and our own selves,
We have prevailed against our countries foes?
Thanks to his majesty assisted us,
Who always helps true subjects in their need.

Where is my Lord Mayor?

Here dread Sovereign.
I hold no Lordship nor no dignity,
In presence of my gracious Lord the King,
But all I humble at your highness feet,
With the most happy conquest of proud rebels,
Dispearst and fled, that now remains no doubt,
Of ever making head to vex us more.

You have not ^ane the bastard Falconbridge:
Or is he slain?

Neither my gracious Lord.
Although we labourd to our uttermost,
Yet all our care came over short,
For apprehending him or Spicing either
But some are taken, others on proffered grace
Yielded themselves, and at your mercy stand.

Thanks good L. Mayor, you may condemn us
Of too much slackness in such urgent need:
But we assure you on our royal word,
So soon as we had gathered us a power,
We dallied not, but mane all hast we could,
What order have ye taken for Falconbridge,
And his confederates in this rebellion?

Under your leave my Liedge, we have proclaimed
Who brings Falconbridge alive or dead,
Shall be requited with a thousand marks,
As much for Spicing, others of less worth
At easier rates are set.

Well have ye done,
And we will see it paid from our Erchequer.
Now leave we this and come to you,
That have so well veserude in these affairs,
Affairs, I mean of so maine consequence.
Kneel down and all of you receive in field,
The honour you have merited in field.
Arise Sir Iohn Crosbie, L. Mayor of London Knight.
Arise up Sir Ralph Iosseline knight.
Arise Sir Thomas Vrswicke our Recorder of London, and Knight.
Now tell me which is M. Shore.

This same my Lord,
And hand to hand he fought with Falconbridge.

Shore kneel thou down.
What call ye else his name?

His name is Matthew Shore my Lord.

Shore, why kneel thou not, and at thy Souetaignes hand receive thy right?


Pardon me gracious Lord,
I do not stand contemptuous or des^ising
Such royal favour of my Sovereign,
But to acknowledge mine unworthiness:
Far be it from the thought of Matthew Shore,
That he should be aduanc'de with Aldermen,
With our L. Mayor, our right gran Recorder.
If any thing hath been performed by me,
That may deserve your Highness mean respect,
I have enough, and I desire no more.
Then let me crave that I may have no more.

Well, be it as thou wilt, some other way
We will devise to quittance thy deserts,
And not to fail therein upon my word.
Now let me tell ye all my friends at once,
Your King is married, since you saw him last,
And haste to help you in this needful time,
Made me on sudden to forsake my bride.
But seeing all things are fallen out so well,
And there remains no further doubt of ill,
Let me ^ntreate you would go boot your selves,
And bring your King a little on his way.
How say you my Lord, shall it be so?

Now God forbid but that my Lord the King
Should always have his Subjects at command.

Forbid quotha? I in good sadness, your majesty shall find us always ready,
and so forth.


Why then set forward Gentlemen,
And come L. Mayor, I must confer with you.

Art thou the man whose victories drawn at sea,
Filled cuerie heart with terror of thy name?
Art thou that Neuill whom we took thee for?
Thou art a louse, thou bastard Falconbridge?
Thou baser then a bastard, in whose birth
The very dregs of servitude appears,
Why tell me, liver of some rotten sheep,
After by thy allurements we are brought,
To undertake this course, after thy promises
Of many golden mountains to eusue,
Is this the greatest comfort thou can glu^?
Hast thou insnarde our heedles feet with death,
And brought us to the Jebbet of defame,
And now dost bid us shift and save our selves?
No craven were I sure I should be taken,
I would not stir my feet, until this hand
Had venged me on thee for misguiding us.

Opprobrious villain, stable excrement,
That never dreamst of other manhood yet,
But how to jerk a horse, until my words
Insusde into thee resolutions sire.
Controlst thou me for that wherein thy self,
Art only the occasion of mishap?
Had thou and they stood to it as well as I,
The day had been our own, and London now,
That laughs in triumph, should have wept in tears,
But being backed by such faint hearted slaves
No marualle if the Lion go to wrack,
As though it were not incident to Kings,
Sometime to take repulse, mine is no more:
Nor is not for that muddy brain of thine
To tutor me how to digest my loss,
Then fly with those that are already fled,
Or stay behind, and hang all but the head.

Oh prejudice to Spicings conquering name,
Whose valor even the hacks this sword has made
Upon the flint, and iron bars at Aldgate:
Like mouths will publish whiles the City stands
That I shrunk backe^ that I was never seen
To show my manly spleen, but with a whipe.
I tell thee Falconbridge the least of these,
Do challenge blood before they be appeasde,

Away ye scoundrell, tempt not my resolve,
The courage that sur^es in Falconbridge,
Scorns the encounter of so base a drudge.

By the pure temper of this sword of mine,
By this true flesh and blood that gripes the same,
And by the honour I did win of late,
Against those frosty bearded Citizens,
It shall be tried before we do depart,
Whether accuses other wrongfully,
Or which of us two is the better man.

I shall but quit the Hangman of a labour,
Yet rather then to be ^pbraided thus,
The Eagle once will stoop to feed on tarrion.

Hold if ye be men, if not, hold as ye are: rebels (...) thieves: I bring you
news of a proclamation, the King hath promised that whosoever can bring the
head of Falconbridge, or Spicing, shall have for his labour a thousand crowns,
what mean you then to swagger? save your selves.


This proclamation comes in happy time,
I'll banquish Falconbridge, and with this sword
Cut off his head, and bear it to the King,
So not alone shall I be pardoned,
But have the thousand crowns is promised.

This rascal was ordainde to save my life,
For now when I have overthrown the wretch,
Even with his head ^le yield me to the King,
His princely word is past to pardon me,
And though I were the chief in this rebellion,
Yet this will be a means to make my peace.

Oh that I knew how to betray them both.

How say thou Spi. wilt thou yield thy self?
For I have vowed either alive or dead
To bring thee to King Edward?

And I have vowed the like by thee.
How will these two bad contarie^s agree?

And I the same by both of you.

Come sir, i'll quickly c^d you of that care.

And what thou lottest me, shall be thy share.

Here comes a miller, help to part the fray,
These are the rebels Falconbridge and Spicing,
The worst of them is worth a thousand crowns.

Marry and such a bootic should I have,
Submit, submit, it is in vain to strive,

Why what art thou:

One that will hamper yon,
But whats the other that is fled away?

Oh miller, that was Falconbridge,
And this is Spicing his companion.

I tell thee miller thou hast been the means,
To hinder the most charitable deed,
What ever honest Christian undertook.

Thou can bear nie witness I had fane
That most notorious rebel but for him.

But I have taken thee, and the world knows,
That Spicing is as bad as who is best.

Why thou mistakst, I am a true subsect.

Miller he lies, be sure to hold him fast.

Dost thou accuse me? apprehend him too,
For hes as guilty as any of us.

Come you shall both together answer it,
Before my Lord Mayor, and here he comes.

Sir Ralph Iosseline, have you ever seen a Prince more a^sable then Edward is?
what merry talk he had upon the way.


Doubtless my Lord heeie prove a royal King.
But how now what are these?

God save your honour,
Here I present unto you my Lord Mayor,
A pair of rebels, whom I did epsy
As I was busy grinding at my mill,
And taking them for vagrant idle k^ucs,
That had beset some trueman from his house,
I came to keep the peace, but afterward,
Found that it was the bastard Falconbridge,
And this his mate together by the ears,
The one, for all that I could do, escapte,
The other stands at your mercy here.

It is the rebel Spicing.

It is indeed?
I see you are not blind, you know me then.

Well miller, thou hast done a subic^s part,
And worthily deserust that recompense
Is publicly proclaimed by the King,
But whats this other? I have seen his face,
And as I take it, he is one of them.

I must confess, I took them both together,
^ee aided me to apprehend the rest.

A tells you true my Lord, I am Chub the Chaundler, and I curse the time that
ever I saw their faces, for if they had not been, I had lived an honest man in
mine own country, and never come to this,


Out rogue, dost thou recant for fear of death?
I Ma^or, I am he that sought to cut your thrpate,
And since I have miscaried in the fact,
I'll near deny it, do the worst you can.

Bring him a way, he shall have martial law, and at the next tree we do come
unto,

Be hanged to rid the world of such a wretch.

Miller thy duty is a thousand marks,

Which must be shard bet wixt thee and this poor fellow, that did reveal
him. And sir, your life is saude on this condition, that you hang up Spicing,
how say thou, wilt thou do it?


Will I do it? what a question is that?
I would hang him if he were my father to save mine own life.

Then when ye have done it, come home to my house, and there ve truly shall
have your reward.


Well sir, then thou must be my hangman?

I by my troth sir, for fault of a better.

Well, commend me to little Pim, and pray her to red^me my pande hose, they lie
at the blew Bore for eleven pence, and if my hostess will have the other odd
penny, tell her she is a damned bawd, and there is no truth in her score.


Take no thought sir for your pande hose, they are lousy, and not worth the
redeeming.


There is a Constable sticks in my mind, he got my sword from me, that night
I should have killed black Ralph, if I had ^ude, I would have been meet with
him.


I sir, but here's a thing shall take an order for that.

Cemmend me to black Luce, bouncing Bess, lusty ^ate, and the other pretty
morsels of mans flesh. Farewell Pink and Pinnesse, ^libote, and Caruell,
Turnbuil, and Spittle, I die like a man.


Oh Captain Spicing, thy vain enticing, brought me from my trade,
From good candles making, to this pains taking, a rebel to be made,
Therefore Ned Spicicing, to quit thy enticing, this must be th^ hope,
By one of thy fellows, to be led to the Gallows, to end in a rope.

Dudgeon, dost thou he are, look well to Broke my mare, drive Dunne and her
fair and softly down the hill, and take heed the thorns tear not the
horns of my Cow hides, as thou go near the hedges: ha what say thou
knave? is the Bulls hide down? why lay it up again, what rare I? He meet
thee at the stile, and help to set all straight. And yet God help, its a
crooked world, and an unthrifty, for some that have ne'er a shoe, had rather
go barefoot, then buy clo^-leather to mend the old, when they can buy no new,
for they have time enough to mend all, they sit so long between the cup and
the wall, well God amend them, God amend them. Let me see by my executor
here, my leather pouch, what I have taken, what I have spent, what I have
gained. what I have lost, what I have laid cut: my taking is more the my
spending, for here's store left. I have spent but a groat, a penny for my two
jade, a penny to the poor, a penny pot of ale, and a penny cake for my man
and me, a dicker of Cowehides cost me.

Snails who comes here? mistress Ferries, or mistress what call ye her? Put up
Iohn Hobs, money tempts beauty.


Well met good fellow, saw thou not the hart?

My heart? God bless me from seeing my heart.

Thy heart? the deereman, we demand the decre.

Do you demand whats dear? mary corn and cow hides, Mass a good sni^g
lass, well like my daughter Nell, I had rather then a bend of leather she and
I might smutch together.


Came thou not down the wood?

Yes mistress that I did.

And saw thou not the dear embossed?

By my hood ye make me laugh, what the dickens is it love that makes ye prate
to me so fondly, by my fathers soul I would I had iobd faces with you.


Why how now Hobs, so saucy with the Duchess and the Queen?


Much Queen I trow, these be but women, and one of them is like my wench, I
would she had her rags, I would give a load of hair and horns, and a fat of
leather, to match her to some justice, by the meghollie.


Be silent Tanner, and ask pardon of the Queen.

And ye be the Queen, I cry ye mercy good mistress Queen.


No fault my friend, Madam lets take our bows,
And in the standing seek to get a shoot.

Come bend our bows, and bring the herd of d^re.


God send yee-good standing, and good striking, and fat flesh, see if all
Gentle women be not alike when their black facce be on, I took the Queen, as
I am true Tanner, for mistress Ferris.


Soft, who comes here, more knaves yet?

Ho good fellow, saw^ thou not the King?

No good fellow, I saw no King, which King dost thou ask for.


Why King Edward, what King is there else?

There's another King and ye could hit on him, one Harrie, one Harrie, and by
our Lady they say, hes the honester man of the two.


Sir beware you speak not treason.

What if I do?

Then thoult be hanged.

A dogs death, ^le not meddle with it, for by my troth I know not when I speak
treason, when I do not, there's such halting betwirt two Kings, that a man
cannot go upright, but he shall offend tone of them, I would God had them both
for me.


Well, thou saw not the King?

No, is he in the country?

^es hunting here at Drayton Basset.

The devil he is, God bless his Mastership: I saw a woman here that they said
was the Queen, she's as like my daughter, but my daughter is the fairer, as
ever I see.


Fare well fellow, speak well of the King,

God make him an honest man, I hope that's well spoken, for byth mouse foot,
some give him hard words, whether be ^rues um or not, let him look to that,
i'll meddle of my cow hide, and let the world slide.

The devil in a dung cart, how these roysters swarm in the ^trie now the King
is so near? God liver me from this, for this (...) like a ^heese, but a man
cannot tell amongst these Courtnoles whose true.


^olla my friend, good fellow pre thee stay.

No such matter, I have more haste of my way.

If thou be a good fellow, let me borrow a word.

My purse thou meanest, I am no good fellow, and I pray God thou be not one.


Why? dost thou not love a good fellow?

No, good fellows be thieves.

Dost thou think I am one?

Thought is free, and thou art not my ghostly father.

I mean thee no harm.

Who knows that but thy self? I pray God he spy not my purse.


On my troth I mean she none.

Upon thy oath i'll stay: now, what say thou to me? Speak quickly, for my
company stays for me beneath at the next stile.


The King is hunting hereabouts, did thou see his Majesty?


His majesty, whats that? his horse, or his mare?

Tush, I mean his Grace.

Grace quotha? pray God he have any: which King dost thou quire for?


Why for King Edward, know thou any more Kings then one?


I know not so many, for I tel thee I know none, marry I hear of King Edward.


Did thou see his Highness?

By my hollida^e, that's the best term thou gaust him yet, hes high enough,
but he has put poor King Harrie low enough.


How low hath he put him?

Nay, I cannot tel, but he has put him down, for he has got the crown, much
good doot him with it.


Amen, I like thy talk so well, I would I knew thy name.

Dost thou not know me?

No.

Then thou know no body: did never hear of Iohn Hobs the Tanner of ^am
worth?


Not till now I promise thee, but now I like thee well.

So do not I thee, I fear thou art some out-rider, that lives by taking of
purses here on Basse^s heath, but I fear thee n^t, for I have wared all my
money in Cowhides, at Colesill market, and my man my mare are hard by at the
hill foot.


^s that thy grey mare that's tide at the stile with the h^es on her backe':


That's Broke my mare, and there's Dunne my nag, and Dadgeon my man.


There's neither man nor horse, but only one mare.

Gods bl^w budkin, has the knave served me so? farewell, (...) may loose h^s,
horns, and mare all, by prating with thee.


^arry man, tarry, th^le sooner take my gelding then thy grav mare, for I ^ue
tide mine by her.


That will I see before i'll take your word.

Il^ bear thee company.

I had as lieve go alone:

^ow on my troth the Queen shoots passing well.

So did the Duchess when she was as young.

Age s^s the hand, and shoots both wide short:

What have they given us?

S^re rose nobles lust:

The Queen gave four.

True, and the Duchess twain.

O were we ever so paid for our pain.

^ut, had the King come, as they said he would, he (...) have ra^de upon us
showers of gold.


Why he is hunting some where here about, lets first go drink, and then go
seek him out.


How ^st thou Tanner, wilt thou take my cour^ s^t for thy mare?


Courser callst thou him? so ill mought I fare, thy skittish jade will never
abide, to carry my leather, my horns nor hide. But if I were so mad to scorce,
what boot would thou give nice?


May boot, that's boot worthy, I look for boot of thee.

Ha, ha, a merry Jig, why man, Broke my mare knows ha and ree, and will
stand when I cry ho, and let me get up and down, and make water when I do.


I'll give thee a Noble if I like her pace, lay thy Cowbides in my saddle, and
lets iog towards Drayton.


It's out of my way, but I begin to like thee well.

Thou wilt like me better before we do part,
I pray thee tell ^ee, what say they of the King?

Of the kings thou mean, art thou no blab if I tel thee.

If the King know it not now, he shall never know it for me.


Mass they say King Harrie's a very aduowtrie man.

A ^uout man, and whats King Edward?

Hes a frank franion, a merr^ companion, and loves a wench well, they say he
has married a poor widow because shecs fair.


Dol^ thou like him the worse for that?

No by my feckens, but the better, for though I be a pla^ Tanner, I love a
fair lass my self.


Pree thee tell me, how love they King Edward?

Faith as poor folks love hollidaies, glad to have them now and then, but to
have them come too often, will vnd^ them, so to see the king now and then tis
comfort, but euerse day would beggar us, and I may to thee, we fear we shall be
troubled to lend him no money, for we doubt hes but needy.


Would thou lend him no money if he should need?

By my hallidome yes, he shall have half my st^, and i'll ^ell sole leather to
help him to more.


Faith whether love thou better Harry or Edward.

Nay, that's counsel, two may keep it, if one be a way.

Shall I say my conscience? I think Harry is the true king.

Art ad^isde of that? Harrie's of the old house of Lancasber, and that
progenitie do I love.


And thou dost not hate the house of York?

Why no, for I am ^ust a kin to Sutton Wind-mill, I can grind which way so ere
the wind blow, if it be Harrie I can say well fare Lancaster, if it be Edward I
can sing, York, York for my monse.


Thou art of my mind, but I say Harrie ^s the lawful King, Edward is but an
usurper, and a fool and a coward.


Nay there thou lie, he has wit enough, and courage enough, do^ thou not
speak treason?


I, but I know to whom I speak it.

Dost thou? well if I were Constable, I should be forsworn if I set the^ not
in the stocks for it.


Well let it go no further, for I did serve King Harrie and I love him best,
though now I serve King Edward.


Thou art the arranter knave to speak ill of thy ma^ster, but sir whats thy
name, what office hast thou? and what will the King do for thee?


My name is Ned, I am the Kings Butler, and he will do more for me, then for any
Noble man in the Court.


The d^uel he will, hes the more fool, and so i'll tel him, if ere I see him, I
wouid I might see him in my poor house at Tamworth.


Go with me to the Court and i'll bring thee to the king, what suit so ere thou
have to him, the warrant thee to speed


I ha nothing to do at Court, i'll home with my cowhids, and if the King will
come to me he shall be welcome.


Hast thou no suit touching thy trade, to transport hides or sell leather only
in a certain circuit, or about Bark, or such like, to have letters pattents?


By the Mass and the Matins I like not those Pattents, sir they that have
them, do as the Priests did in old ^ne, buy and sell the sins of the people,
so they make the King belee^ they mend whats amiss, and for money they make
the thing worse then it is, there's another thing in (...), the mor is the
pity?


What pity Iohn Hobs? I pree thee say all.

Faith tis pity that one subica should have in his hand that might do good
to many through the land.


Satcst thou me so ^anner well lets cast lots whether thou shalt go with me to
Drayton, or I go home with th^e to Tamworth.


Lot me no lotting, i'll not go with thee, if thou wilt go with me, cause thart
my Lciges man (and yet I think be has many honester) thou shalt be welcome
to Iohn Hobs, thou shalt be welcome to ^ese and bacon, and perhaps a
bagpudding, and my daughter Nell shall pop a possell upon thee when thou gost
to bed.


Here's my hand, i'll but go see the King seru'de, and ^le be at home as soon as
thy self.


Dost thou hear me Ned? if I shall be thy host,
Make haste thou art best, for fear thou kiss the ^ost.

Farewell Iohn Hobs, the honest true Tanner
I see plain men by observation,
Of things that alter in the change of times,
Doghter knowledge, and the meanest life,
Proporrioned with content sufficiency,
Is mericr then the mighty state of Kings.
Now now? what news bring ye sirs,
Wheres the Quoene?

Her Highness and your mother my dread Lord,
Are both invited by Sir Humphrey Bows,
Where they entend to feast and lodge this night,
And do expect your Graces presence there.

Tom Sellinger I have other business;
Astray from you and all my other train,
I met a Tanner, such a merry mate,
So frolic, and so full of good conceit,
That I have given my word to be his guest,
Because he knows me not to be the King:
Good Cousin Howard grudge not at the lest,
But greet my mother and my wife from me,
Bid them be merry, I must have my humour,
Let them both sup and sleep when they see time,
Commend me kindly to Sir Humphrey Bows,
Tell him at breakfast I will visit him.
This night Tom Sellinger and I must feast
With Hobs the Tanner, there plain Ned Tom.
No King nor Sellinger for a thousand pound.

The Queen Dutch will be discontent,
Because his ^ighnes comes not to the feast.

Sir Humphrey Bows may take the most conceit,
But whats the end, the King will have his pleasure?

Good news my boys, Harrie the sixth is dead, peruse that letter: sir,
drink you that, gives his purse, and stay not but post back again for life,
and thank my brother Gloster for his news, commend me to him, i'll see him to
morrow night. How like ye it sirs?


O passing well my Liege, you may be merry for these happy news.


The merrier with our host the Tanner Tom,
My Lord take you that letter to the Ladies,
Bid them be merry with that second course,
And if we see them not before we go,
Pray them to journey easily after us,
We'll post to London, so good night my Lord.

Come Nell, come daughter, is your hands and your face washed?


I forsooth Father.

Ye must be cleanly I tell ye, for there comes a Courtnole hither to night,
the kings master ships Butler, Ned, a spruce youth, but beware ye be not in
love nor overtaken by him, for Courtiers be slippery lads.


No forsooth father.

Gods blessing on thee, that half years schooling at Liechfield, was better
to thee then house and land, it has put such manners into thee, I forsooth and
no forsooth at every word, ye have a clean smock on. I like your apparel
well, is supper ready?


I forsooth father.

Have we a good barley bagpudding, a piece of fat Bacon, a good cow heel, a
hard cheese, and a browne loaf.


All this forsooth, and more, ye shall have a posset, but indeed the rats have
spoiled your hard cheese.


Now the dtuell choke them, so they have eat me a farthing candle the other
night.


What master master.

How now knave, what faist thou Dudgeon?

Here's guests come, wheres Hellen?

What guests be they?

A courtnole, one Ned the kings Butcher he sapes, and his friends too.


Ned the kings butcher? ha, ha, the kings butler, take their horses, and walk
them, and bid them come near house, Nell lay the cloth, and clap supper oath
b^rd.

Mas here's Ned indeed and another misproud ^uffian,

Welcome Ned, I like thy honesty, thou keep promise.


I faith honest Tanner, i'll ever keep promise with thee, pre thee bid my friend
welcome.


By my troth ye are both welcome to Tamwoorth: friend I know not your name.


My name is Tom Twist?

Believe ye that list: but ye are welcome both, and I like you both well but
for one thing.


Whats that?

Nay that I keep to my self, for I sigh to see and think, that pride brings
many one to er^ion.


Pre thee tell v^ thy meaning.

Troth I doubt ye ne'er came truly by all these gay rags. Tis not your bare
wages and thin f^s ye have of the King, can keep ye thus fine, but either
ye must rob the King privily, or his subjects openly, to maintain your
probicallitie.


Think thou so Tanner:

Tis no matter what I think, come lets go to supper,
What Nell, what Dudgeon, where be these folks?
Daughter bid my friends welcome.

Ye are welcome Gentlemen as I may say.

I thank ye fair maid.

A pretty wench be my faye.

How likest her Ned?

I like her so well, I would ye would make me your son in law.


And I like thee so well Ned, that had thou an occupation, for service is no
heritage, a young courtier, an old beggar, I could sinde in my heart to cast
her away upon thee, and if thou wilt forsake the court and turn La^ner, or
find thy self to a shoemaker in Liechfield, ^le give thee twenty nobles
ready money, with my Nell, and trust thee with a dicker of leather, to set up
thy trade.


Ned he offers ye saire, if ye have the grace to take it.

He does indeed, Tom, and hereafter i'll tell him more.

Come sit down to supper: go to Nell, no more sheeps eyes, ye may be caught I
tell ye, these be licorish lads.


I warrant ye father, yet in truth Ned is a very proper man, and the other may
serve, but Neds a pearl in mine eye.


Daughter, cal Dudgeon and his fellows, we'll have a three men song, to make
our guests merry.

Nailes what courtnoles are ye? yeele neither talk nor cate, What news at
the court? do somewhat for your meat.


Heavy news there, King Henrie is dead.

That's light news merry for your master king Edward.

But how will the commons take it?

Well, God be with good King Henrie, faith the commons will take it as a common
thing, deaths an bonest man, for he spares not the King: for as one comes,
another taue away, and seldom comes the better, that's all we say.


Shrewdly spoken Tanner by my faye.

Come fill me a cup of mother Whetstones ale, I may drink to my friends, and
drive down my tale.

Here Ned and Tom I drink to ye: and yet if I come to the court, I doubt you'll
not know me.


Yes, Tom shall be thy surety Tanner I will know thee.

If thou dost not Ned, by my troth I beshrew thee.

I drink to my wife that may be.

Faith Ned thou may live to make her a Lady.

Tush, her father offers nothing, having no more children but her.


I would I had not, condition she had all. But I have a knave to my son, I
remember him by you, even such an ^thrist as one of you two, that spends all on
gay clothes and new fashions, and no work will down with him, that I fear
heel be hanged, God bless you from a better fortune, yet you wear such
filthy breeks, Lord, were not this a good fashion? yes, and would save many a
fair penny.


Let that pass, and let us hear your song.

Agreed, agreed, come, sol, sol, sol, fa, fa, fa, say Dudgeon.
Agencourt, Agencourt, know ye not Agencourt.
Where the English slew and hurt,
all the French foemen:
With our Gunnes and bills browne,
O the French were beaten down,
Morrys pikes and bowmen, c.

Well sung good fellows, I would the King heard ye.

So should I faith, I should strain a noate for him: Come take away, and lets
to bed, ye shall have clean sheets Ned, but they be course, good strong
hemp, of my baughters own spinning and I tell thee, your Chamber pot, must be
a fair horne, a badge of our occupation, for we buy no bending peauter, nor
bending earth.


No matter Hobs, we will not go to bed.

What then?

Even what thou wilt, for it is near day.
Tanner, Gramercies for our hearty cheer,
If ere it be thy chance to come to court,
Enquire for me Ned the Kings butler,
Or Tom of the Kings chamber my companion,
And see what welcome we will give thee there.

I have heard of courtiers have said as much as you, and when they have been
tried, would not bid their friends ^rinke.


We are none such, let our horses be brought out,
For we must a way, and so with thanks farewell.

Farewell to ye both, commend me to the king, tel him I would have been glad to
have seen his worship here.


Come Tom for London, horse, and hence away.

Thomas Neuil, yet hast thou grarious time
Of deer repentance, now discharge thy conscience,
Lay open thine offences to the world,
That we may witness thou dost die a Christian.

Why sir Harry Moorton have you arraignde,
Condcnmde, and brought me to this place,
Of bloody execution, and now ask,
If I be guilty, therein doth appear,
What justice you have used, call you this law?

(...) dost mistake our meaning Falconbridge,
We do not ask as being ignorant,
Of thy transgression, but as urging thee,
To hearty sorrow for thy vile misdeeds,
That heaven may take compassion on thy soul.

How charitable you would seem to (...):
I fear anon you'll say it is for love,
You bind me thus, and bring me to the block,
And that of mere affcaion you are moude
To cut my head off, cunning policy:
Such butchers as your selves never want,
A colour to excuse your slaughterous minds.

We butcher thee? can thou deny thy self,
But thou hast been a pirate on the sea?
Can thou deny but with the communaltie
Of Kent and Essex, thou did rise in arms,
And twice assault the City London, where
Thou twice did take repulse, and since that time,
Can thou deny, that being fled from hence,
Thou ioynedst in con federarie with France,
And came with them to burn Southampton here,
Are these no faults, thou shuldst so much presume,
To clear thy self, and lay thy blood on us?

Hear me sir Harrie, since we must dispute.

Dispute bnciuil wretch, what needs dispute,
Did not the Viceadmirall here, and I
Incountring with the Navy of the French,
Attach thee in a ship of Normandie,
And wilt thou stand upon thine innocence?
Dispatch, thou art as rightfully condemnde
As ever rebel was. And thou shalt die.

I make no question of it, I must die,
But let me tell you how I scorn your threats,
So little do I reckon of the name
Of ugly death, as were he bisible,
I'lde wrestle with him for the victory,
And tug the slave, and tear him with my teeth,
But I would make him stoop to Falconbridge,
And for this life, this paltry brittle life,
This blast of wind which you have labourde fo,
By juries, sessions, and I know not what,
To rob me off, is of so vile repute:
That to attain that I might live mine age,
I would not give the value of a point,
You cannot be so cruel to afflict,
But I will be as forward to endure.

Go to, leave of these ^ole braves of thine:
And think upon thy souls health Falconbridge.

Submit and ask forgiveness of thy King.

What King?

Why Edward of the house of York.

He is no King of mine, he does usurp,
And if the destinies had given me leave,
I would have told him so before this time,
And pulled the Diadem from off his head.

Thou art a traitor, stop thy traitors mouth.

I am no traitor, Lancaster is King,
If that be treason to defend his right,
What is't for them that do imprison him?
If insurrection to advance his sceptre,
What fault is theirs that step into his throne?
Oh God, thou pour'dst the balm upon his head,
Can that pure unction be wipte off again?
Thou once did crown him in his insancie,
Shall wicked men now in his age depose him?
Oh pardon me, if I expostulate,
More then becomes a sinful man to do,
England I fear thou wilt thy folly rue.

Thou triflest time, and dost but weary us
With dilatory questions, make an end,

Indeed the end of all kingdoms must end,
Honour and riches, all must have an end.
And he that thinks he doth the most preu^le,
His head once laid, there rests but a tale:
Come fellow, do thy office, what me thinks,
Thou look as if thy heart were in thy hose,
Pull up thy spirits, it will be quickly done,
A blow or two at most will serve the turn.

Forgive me sir your death.

Forgive thee? I and give thoe too,
Hold, there is some few crowns for thee to drink,
Tush weep not man, give losers leave to plain,
And yet ^faith my loss I count a gain,
First let me see, is thy are sharpe enough,
I am indifferent, well a Gods name to this gear,

Come yield your head gently to the block,

Gently say thou: thou wilt not use me so:
But all is one for that, what strength hast thou,
Throughout the whole proportion of thy limbs,
Keuoke it all into thy manly arms,
And spare me not, I am a Gentleman,
A Neuill and a Falconbridge beside,
Then do thy work, thou may get credit by it,
For if thou dost not, I must tell thee plain,
I shall be passing angry when tis done.

I warrant you sir, none in the land shall do it better.


Why now thou please me, England farewell

And old Plantagenet, if thou survive,
Think on my love, although it did not thrive.

As for his head, it shall be sent with speed
To London, and the promised reward,
Allotted for the apprehending him,
Be given unto the poor of Southhampton here:
How say you Captain are you so content?

With all my heart, but I do marvel much
We hear not of the messenger we sent,
To give the King intelligence of this?

Take truce with your surmises, here he comes.
Follow it seems that thou art slow of gate,
Or very negligent in our affairs,
What says King Edward to our service done?

To answer you directly and as briefly,
I spoke with him, for when I was come
To Drayton Basset, where they said he was,
T was told me there, that even the night before,
His highness in all hast, was rid towards London:
The occasion, Henries death within the Tower,
Of which t^e people are in sundry tales,
Some thinking he was murdered, some again
Supposing that he died a natural death.

Well how so ere, that concerns not ^s,
We have to do with no mans death, but his,
That for his treason here hath lost his head.
Come let us give direction as before,
And afterward make back unto the shore.

I marie Crosbie this befits thee well,
But some will marua^le that with a scarlet gown,
I wear a gilded rapier by my side:
Why le^ them know, I was knighted in the field
For my good service to my Lord the king,
And therefore I may wear it lawfully,
In Court, in City, or at any royal banquet.
But soft Iohn Crosbie, thou forgetst thy self,
And dost not mind thy birth and parentage,
Where thou wast born, whence thou art derived,
I do not shame to say, the Hospital
Of London was my chiefest fostering place,
There did I learn, that near unto a Cross,
Commonly called Cow Cross near Islington,
An honest Citizen did chance to find me,
A poor Shoemaker by trade he was,
And doubting of my Chrystendome or no,
Called me according to the place he found me,
Iohn Crosbie, finding me so by a Cross.
The Masters of the Hospital at further years,
Bound me apprentise to the Grocers trade,
Wherein God pleased to bless my poor endeavours
That by his blessings I am come to this.
The man that found me I have well requited,
And to the Hospital my fostering place,
An hundred pound a year I give for ever,
Likewise in memory of me Iohn Crosbie
In Bishopgate street a poor house have I built,
And as my name have called it Crosbie house,
And when as God shall take me from this life,
In little S. Hellens will I be buried:
All this declares, I boast not of my birth,
But found on earth, I must return to earth.
But God for his pity I forget my self,
The King my Sovereign Lord will come anon,
And nothing is as yet in readiness.
Where are ye cousin Shore? nay where is Mistress Shore?
Oh I am sorry that she stays so long,
See what it is to be a widower,
And lack a Lady Maioresse in such need.
Oh are ye come? welcome good Cousin Shore,
But you indeed are welcome gentle Niece.
Needs must you be our Lady Maioresse now,
And help us, or else we are shamde for ever,
Good Cousin still thus am I bold with you.

With all my heart my Lord, thank ye too,
That you do please to use our homely help.

Why see how neatly she bestirs her self,
And in good sooth makes huswifery to shine?
Ah had my Lady Maioresse lived to see
Fair Mistress Shore thus beautify her house,
She would have been not little proud thereof.

Well my Lord Mayor I thank you for that flout,
But let his Highness now come when he please,
All things are in a perfect readiness.

The more am I beholding Niece to you,
That take such pains to save our credit now:
My servants are so slack, his Majesty,
Might have been here before we were prepared,
But peace here comes his Highness.

Now my Lord Mayor, have we not kept our word?
Because we could not stay to dine with you:
At our departure hence, we promised,
First food we tasted at our back return,
Should be with you, still yielding hearty thanks,
To you and all our London Citizens,
For the great service which you did perform
Against that bold ^de rebel Falconbridge.

My gracious Lord what then we did,
We did account no more then was our duty,
Thereto obliged by true subic as zeal,
And may he never live that not defends,
The honour of his king and country:
Next thank I God, it likes your Majesty,
To bless my poor roof, with your royal presence,
To me could come no greater happiness.

Thanks good Lord Mayor, but wheres my Lady Maioresse, I hope that she will
bid us welcome too.


She would my Liedge, and with no little joy,
Had she but liu^d to see this blessed day,
But in her sreed this Gentle woman here,
My Cousins wife, that office will supply:
How say you m^resse Shore?

How? mistress Shore? what not his wife
That did refuse his knighthood at our hand?

The very same my Lord and here he is.

What M. Shore, we are your debtor still,
But by Gods grace entend not so to die:
And Gentlewoman, now before your face,
I must condemn him of discourtesy,
Yea, and of great wrong that he hath offred you,
For you had been a Lady but for him.
He was in fault, trust me he was to blame,
To hinder virtue of her due by right.

My gracious L. my poor humble thoughts,
Ne'er had an eye to such unworthiness,
And though some hold it as a maxim,
That women's minds by nature do aspire,
Yet how both God and M. Shore I thank
For my continuance in this humble state,
And likewise how I love your Majesty:
For gracious sufferance that it may be so:
Heaven bear true record of my inward soul:
Now it remains, on my Lord Majors behalf,
I do such duty as becomes me,
To bid your Highness welcome to his house,
Were welcomes virtue powerful in my word,
The King of England should not doubt thereof.

Nor do I mistress Shore, now my Lo. Mayor
Edward dare boldly swear that he is welcome,
You spake the word well, very well in faith,
But mistress Shore her tougue hath gilded it,
Tell me Cousin Howard and Tom Sellinger,
Had ever Citizen so fair a wife?

Of flesh and blood I never did behold,
A woman eueric way so absolute.

Nor I my Liedge, were Sellinger a King,
He could afford Shores wife to be a Queen.

Why how now Tom? Nay rather how now Ned?
What change is this? proud, saucy roauing eye,
What whisperst in my brain, that she is fair?
I know it, I see it, fairer then my Queen?
^oulost thou maintain it? what thou traitor heart,
Would thou shake hands in this conspiracy?
Down rebel, back base treacherous conceit,
I will not credit thee, my Bess is fair,
And Shores wife but a blouze, compared to her,
Come let us sit, here will I take my place.
And my Lord Mayor, fill me a bowl of wine,
That I may drink to your elected Maioresse,
And M. Shore tell me how like you this,
My L. Mayor makes your wife his L. Maioresse?

So well my Lord as better cannot be,
All in the honour of your Majesty.

Nay drink to us L. Mayor, we'll have it so,
Go to I say, you are our Taster now,
Drink then, and we will pledge ye.

Al health happiness to my sovereign.

Fill (...) our cup, and Lady Maioresse,
This ^ll carouse we mean to drink to you,
And you must pledge us, but yet no more,
Th^n you shall please to answer us withal.
Nay you must drink to some body, yea Tom to thee?
Well sir, see you do her right:
For Edward would, oh would to God he might.
Yet idle eye, wilt thou be gadding still?
Keep home, keep home, for fear of further ill.
How now? letters to us, from whom?

My Liedge, this from the D. of Burgundy.
A^d this is from the Constable of France.

What news from them?
To claim our right in France?
And they will aid us, yea, will ye so?
But other aid must aid us ere we go.
A woman's aid, that hath more power then France
To crown us, or to kill us with mischance.
If chaste resolve be to such beauty tied,
Sue how thou can, thou wilt be still denied,
Her husband hath deserved well of thee,
Tut, love makes no respect where ^re it be,
Thou wrongst thy Queen: every enforced ill,
Must be endur'de, where beauty seeks to kill:
Thou seem to read, only to blind their eyes,
Who knowing it, thy folly would despise.
Thanks for my cheer L. Mayor, I am not well,
I know not how to take these news. This fit I (...),
That hath berest me of all reason eleane.

God shield my Sovereign.

Nay nothing I shall be well anon.

May it please your Highness sit.

I, fain with thee, nay we must needs be gon,
Cousin Howard convey these letters to our counsel,
And bid them give us their advise of them,
Thanks for my cheer L. Mayor, farewell to you
And farewell Mistress Shore, La. Maioresse I should say,
It's you have caused our parting at this time.
Farewell M. Shore, farewell to all,
We'll meet once more to make amends for this.

Oh God here to be ill?
My house to cause my Sovereigns discontent?
Cousin Shore I had rather spent.

Content your self my L. kings have their humor^
The letters did contain somewhat no doubt,
That did displease him.

So my Lord think I,
But by Gods help he will be well again.

I hope so too, well Cousin for your pains,
I can but thank ye, chiefly you fair Niece,
At night I pray ye both come sup with me.
How say ye? will ye?

Yes my Lord we will.
So for this time we humbly take our leave.

Oh now the sudden sickness of my Liedge,
Afflictes my soul with many passions?
His Highness did entend to be right merry,
And God he knows how it would glad my soul,
If I had seen his Highness satisfied
With the poor entertainment of his Mayor,
His humble vassal, whose lands, whose life and all
Are, and in duty must be always his.
Well, God I trust will bless his Graces health,
And quickly ease him of his sudden fit.
Take away there ho, rid this place,
And God of heaven bless my Sovereigns Grace.

Sir Jack, come set out.

You are the elder Prentice, I pray you do it, least my mistcis talk with you
when she comes down, what is it a clock?


Sir by Alhallowes.

Lying and stealing will bring ye to the Gallows.
Is here all the plate?

I that must serve to day,
Where is the weights and balance?

All ready, hark my mistress comes.

Sir boy, while I attend the shop my self,
See if the workman have dispatcht the Cup,
How many ounces weighs it:

Twenty ^orsooth.

What said the Gentleman to the fashiou?

He told my master I was not within.

Go sir make hast, your M. is in Cheapside:
Take h^d ye were best your loitering be not spied.

Well fare a case to put a King in yet,
Good mistress Shore this doth your love procure,
This shape is secret, and I hope tis sure,
The Wlatermen that daily use the Court,
And see me often, knew me not in this,
At Lyon key I landed in their view,
Yet none of them took knowledge of the King,
If any gallant strive to have the wall,
I'll yield it gently: Soft here must I turn,
Here's Lumbard street, and here's the Pelican,
And there's the Phoenix in the Pellicans nest,
O rare perfection of rich natures work,
Bright twinkling spark of precious Diamond,
Of greater value then all India,
Were there no Sun, by whose kind lovely heat
The earth brings forth those stones we hold of prize,
Her radiant eyes dejected to the ground,
Would turn each pebble to a Diamond.
Gaze greedy eyes and be not satisfied,
Till you find rest, where hearts desire doth bide.

What would you buy sir that you look on here?

Your fairest jewel, be it not too dear.
First how this Saphyre mistress that you wear?

Sir it is right that will I warrant ye,
No Jeweller in London shows a better.

No, nor the like, you praise it passing well.

Do ^no, if some Lapidary had the ^ne, more would not buy it then I can
demand. Tis as well set I think as ere ye saw.


Tis set indeed upon the fairest hand, that ere I saw.

You are disposed to jest, but for value, his Maiestis might wear it.


Might he in faith?

Sir tis the ring I mean.

I meant the hand.

You are a merry man,
I see you come to cheap, and not to buy.

Yet he that offers fairer then i'll do, shall hardly find a partner in his
bargain.


Perhaps in buying things of so small value?

Rather because no wealth can purchase it.

He were too fond, that would so highly prize,
The thing which once was given away for love.

His hap was good that came so easily by it.

The gift so small, that askte, who could deny it?

Oh she gave more, that such a gift then gave,
Then earth ere had, or world shall ever have.

His hap is ill, should it be as you say,
That having given him what you rate so high,
And yet is still the poorer by the match.

That easily proves he doth not know the worth.

Yet having had the use of it so long,
It rather proves you over rate the thing,
He being a chapman, as it seems you are.

Indeed none should adventure on the thing,
That's to be purchased only by a King.

If Kings love that, which no man else respects,
It may be so, else do I see small reason,
A King should take delight in such course stuff.

Lives there a King, that would not give his crown,
To purchase such a kingdom of content?

In (...) conceit, right well you ask that question.
The world I think contains not such fond king.

Why mistress Shore, I am the man will do it.

Its proudly spoke, although I not believe it,
Were he King Edward that should offer it.

But shall I have it?

Upon what acquaintance?

Why since I saw thee last.

Where was that?

At the L. Majors, in the presence of the King.

I have forgotten that I saw you there,
For there were many that I took small note of.

Of me you did, and we had some discourse.

You are deceived Sir, I had then no time,
For my attendance on his majesty.

I'll gage my hand unto your hand of that,
Look well upon me.

Now I beseech you let this strange disguise
Excuse my boldness to your majesty.
What ever we possess is all your highness,
Only mine honour, which I cannot grant,

Only thy love (bright angel) Edward craves,
For which I thus adventured to see thee.

But here comes one, to whom I only gave it.
And he I doubt will say you shall not have it.

Am I so soon cut off? oh spite.
How say ye mistress, will ye take my offer?

Indeed I cannot sir afford it so.

You'll not be offered fairlier I believe.

Indeed you offer like a Gentleman,
But yet the jewel will not so be left.

Sir, if you bid not too much vnder-foot,
I'll drive the bargain twixt you and my wife.

Alas good Shore, my self dare answer no.
Nothing can make thee such a jewel forgo.
She faith you shall be too much looser by it.

See in the row then, if you can speed better.

See many worlds arow, affords not like.

Why look thou Mat? know thou the (...)?
Alas what ails thee that thou look so pale?
What theere sweet hart? alas, where hast thou been?

Nay nothing Iane, know you the Gentleman?

Not I sweet heart, alas why do you ask?
Is he thine enemy?

(...) cannot tell,
What came he here to cheapen at our shop?

This Jewel love.

Well I pray God he came for nothing else.

Why who is it? I do suspect him Shore.
That you demand thus doubtedly of me.

Ah Iane, it is the King.

The king? what then? is't for that thou sighst?
Were he a thousand kings thou hast no cause
To fear his presence, or suspect my lout.

I know I have not, see he comes again.

Still is my hindzer there? be patient heart,
Some fitter season must assuage the smart.
What will ye take that mistress which I offred ye?
I come again sir, as one willing to buy.

Indeed I cannot sir, I pray ye
Deal with my husband, hear what he will say.

I'll sell it worth your money, if you please,
I pray you come near sir.

I am too near already, thou so near.
Nay, nay, she knows what I did offer her,
And in good sadness, I can give no more,
So fare ye well sir, I will not deal with you.

You are deceiude (sweet heart) tis not the king,
Think you he would adventure thus alone?

I do assure thee Iane it is the King.
Oh God, twixt the extremes of love and fear,
In what a shivering ague sits my soul?
Keep we our treasure secret, yet so fond,
As set so rich a beauty as this is,
In the wide view of every gazers eye.
Oh traitor beauty, oh deceitful good,
That dost conspire against thy self and love,
No sooner got, but wished again of others,
In thine own self, injurious to thy self,
Oh rich poor portion, thou good evil thing?
How many joyful woes still dost thou bring?

I pray thee come, sweet love, and sit by me,
No king that's under heaven I love like thee.

Neighbours and friends, the cause that you are called,
Concerns the Kings most excellent majesty,
Whose right you know by his progenitors,
Unto the Crown and sovereignty of France,
Is wrongfully detained by the French,
Which to revenge and royally regain.
His Highness means to put himself in Arms.
And in his princely person to conduct
His warlike troupes against the enemy.
But for his Coffers are unfurnished,
Through civil discord and intestine war,
(Whose bleeding scars our eyes may yet behold)
He prays his faithful loving subjects help,
To further this his just great enterprise.

So the fecke and meaning, whereby as it were of all your long purgation Sir
Humphrey is no more in some respect, but the king wants money would have some of
his Comentie.


Tanner you rightly understand the matter.

Note this withal, where his dread Majesty,
(Our lawful Soucraigne, and most royal King)
Might have exacted or imposde a Tax
Or borrowed greater sums then we can spare,
(For all we have is at his dread command,)
He doth not so, but mildly doth entreat
Our kind ben^uolence, what we will give,
With willing minds to wards this mightycharge.
Which to receive, his n^ble Counsellor
And kinsman the Lord Howard here is come.

Now good sir Humphrey Bows, and M. As^,
Have ye declared y^ kings most gracious pleasure?

We have my Lord.

His highness will not force,
As loan or tribute, but will take your gift,
In grateful part and recompense your love.

To show my love, though money now be scarce
A hundredth pound i'll give his Majesty.

Tis well sir Humphrey.

I a hundred marks.

Thanks M. Aston, you both show your love,
Now as^c your neighbours what they will bestow?

Come master Hadland your benevolence.

O good sir Humphrey do not rack my purse,
You know my state, I lately sold my land.

Then you have money, let the king have part.

I, do master Hadland do, they say ye sold a foul deal of dirty land for
fair gold and silver, let the king have some now while you have it, for if ye
be forborne a while, all will be spent, for he that cannot keep land that
lies fast, will have much a do to hold money, its slipperic ware, tis melting
ware, tis melting ware.


Gramercy Tanner.

Say, what shall we have?

My forty shillings.

Robert Goodfellowe.
I know you will be liberal to the King.

O M. Aston be content I pray ye,
You know my charge, my household very great,
And my housekeeping holds me very hare:
Threescore uprising, and down lying Sir,
Spends no sinall store of vittailes in a year,
Two brace of Greyhounds, tt. couple of hounds,
And then my jade devour a deal of Corn,
My Christmas cost, then my friends that come
Amounts to charge, I am Robin Goodfellow,
That welcomes all and keeps a frolic house,
I have no money pray ye pardon me.

Here's a plain Tanner can teach you how to thrive,
Keep fewer dogs, and then ye may feed men:
Yet feed no idle men, tis needles charge,
You that on hounds and hunting mates will spend,
No doubt but something to your King you'll lend.

My brace of Angels, by my troth that's all.

Mass and tis well thy Cures have left so much, I thought they would have
eaten up thy house and landere this.


Now Harrie Grudgen.

What would you have of me? Money I have none, and i'll sell no stock, here's
old polling, subsidy, fifteen, soldiers, and to the poor, and you may have
your will, you'll soon shut me out a door.


Hear ye worships, will ye let me answer my neighbour Grudgen? By my
hallidome Harry Grudgen, tha'rt but a grumbling, grudging Churl, thou hast two
ploughs going, and near a Cradle rocking, tha'st a peck of money, go to,
turn thee loose, thou'lt go to law with the Micat for a tithe goose, and wilt
not spare the King four or five pound.


Gep goodman Tanner, are ye so round? your prolicatenes has brought your son
to the gallows almost, you can be frank of an other mans cost.


Thart no honest man to twit me with my son, he may out live thee yet for
ought that he has done, my sons ith gail, is he the first has been there,
and thou ^rt a man, as thart a beast, I would have thee by the ears.


Friend thou wantste nurture, to vpbrasd a Father Weeping.
With a suns fault, we sit not here for this;
Whats thy benevolence towards his majesty?

His benegligence? hang him heel not give a pennis willingly.


I care not much to cast away forty pence.

Out grudging peasant, base ill nurturd groom,
Is th^ the love thou bear unto the King?
Gentlemen take notice of the slave,
And if he fault let him be soundly plagued?
Now frolic Ianner, what wilt thou afford?

Twenty old Angels and a score of hides, if that be too little, take twenty
Nobles more, while I have it my king shall spend of my stor^.


The King shall know thy loving liberal heart.

Shall he in faith, I thank ye heartily, but hear ye Gentleman, you come from
the Court?


I do.

Lord how does the King, and how does Ned the Kings Butler, and Tom of his
Chamber, I am sure ye know them?


They do very well.

For want of better guests they were at my house one night.


I know they were.

They promised me a good turn for kissing my daughter Nell, and now I ha cagion
to try them, my sons in Die hell here in Caperdochie, itha Gail for peeping
into another mans purse, and outstep the King be miserable, hes like to
totter, can that same Ned the Butler do any thing with the King?


More then my self, or any other Lord.

A halter he can, by my troth ye reiounce my heart to hear it.


Come to the Court I warrant thy sons life,
Ned will save that, and do thee greater good.

I'll wean Broke my maressole, and come up to the King, and it shall go hard
but two fat hens for your pains I will bring.


My Lord this fellow gladly now will give,
five pounds so you will pardon his rude speech.

For five and five I cannot brooke the beast.

What gives the Tanner, I am as able as he

He gives ten pound.

Take twenty then of me.
I pray ye my Lord forgive my rough heaud speech
I wis I meant no hurt unto my Liedge.

Let us entreat your Lordships patience.

I do at your request remit the offence,
So lets depart, here's all we have to do.

Tis for this time and place my Lord, sir bring your money.


What have you sau'de now goodman Grudgen, by your hinching and your pinching,
not the worth of a black pudding.


Now mistress Shore, what urgent cause is that, Which made ye send for me in
such great haste? I (...) it made me half afraid, you were not well.


Trust me, nor sick, nor well, but troubled still with the disease I told ye:
here is another le^er from the King, was never poor soul so importuned.


But will no answer serve?

No mistress Blage, no answer will sustize,
He, he it is, that with a violent siege
Labours to break into my plighted faith,
Oh what am I, he should so much forget
His royal State, and his high majesty?
Still doth he come disguised to my house,
And in most humble terms be wraies his love,
My husband grieves, alas how can he choose,
Fearing the dispossessement of his Iane?
And when he cannot come (for him) he writes,
Offering beside incomparable gifts,
And all to win me to his princely will.

Believe me M. Shore, a dangerous case,
And every way repeat with doubtful fear,
If you should yield, your virtuous name were foild
And your beloved husband made a scorn,
And if not yield, its likely that his love,
Which now admires ye, will convert to hate,
And who knows not a princes hate is death?
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.

Then counsel me what I were best to do.

You know his greatness ra dispense with il,
Making the sin seem lesser by his worth,
And you your self, your children your friends,
Be all adn^nced to worldly dignity,
And this worlds pomp you know is a goodly thing,
Yet I will not be she shall connsaile ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.

Alas I know that I was bound by oath,
To keep the promise that I made at first,
And virtue lives, when pomp consumes to dust.

So we do say, dishonour is no shame,
When slander does not touch th'offenders name,
You shall be folded in a princes arms,
Whose beck disperses even the greatest harms,
Many that sit themselves in high degree,
Will then be glad to stoop, and bend the knee,
And who is't, having plenty in the hand,
Never commanded, but doth still command,
That cannot work in such excess of things,
To quit the guilt one small transgression brings?
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.

Here do I live, although in mean estate,
Yet with a conscience free from all debate,
Where higher footing may in time procure,
A sudden fall, and mix my sweet with sour.

True, I confess a private life is good,
Nor would I otherwise be understood,
To be a Goldsmiths wife is some content,
But da^es in court more pleasantly are spent,
A households government deserves renown,
But what is a companion to a crown?
The name of mistress is a pretty thing,
But Madam at each word doth glory bring.
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for nice.

Oh that I knew which were the best of twain,
Which for I do not, I am sick^ with pain.
How now sir boy, what is the news with you?

The Gentleman forsooth the other day,
That would have bought the jewel at our stall,
Is here to speak with ye.

Oh God it is the King.
Good mistress Blague withdraw ye from this place,
Oh come anon, so soon as he is gone,
And sir get you to the shop again.

Now mistress Shore bethink ye what to do.
Such suitors come not every day to woo.

Thou may conuid me (beauties pride) of boldness,
That I intrude like an unbidden guest,
But love being guide, my fault will seem the less.

Most welcome to your subjects homely roof,
The foot my Sovereign, seldom doth offend,
Unless the heart some other hurt intend.

The most thou see is hurt unto my self
How for thy sake, is majesty disroabde?
Riches made poor, and dignity brought low,
Only that thou might our affection know.

The more the pity, that within the sky,
The sun that should all other vapours dry,
And guide the world with his most glorious light
Is muffled up himself in ^full night.

The want of thee, fair Cynthia is the cause,
Spread thou thy siluer-brightnesse in the air,
And strait the gladsome morning will appear.

I may not wander, he that guides my carre,
Is an im^nooued, constant, fixed star,

But I will give that star a comets name,
And shie^d both thee and him from further blame.

How if the host of heaven at this abuse
Kepine? who can the prodig^e excuse?

It lies within the compass of my power,
To dim their enu^ous eyes, dare seem to lower,
But leaving this our Enigmatike talk,
Thou must sweet Iane repair unto the Court,
His tongue entreats, controls the greatest peer,
His hand plights love, a royal sceptre holds,
And in his heart be hath confirmed thy good,
Which may not, must not, shall not be withstood.

If you enforce me, I have nought to say,
But wish I had not lived to see this day.

Blame not the time, thou shalt h^ue cause to soy.
Iane in the eueniug I will send for thee,
And thou and thine shall be advanced by me.
In sign whereof receive this true-loue kiss,
Nothing il meant, there can be no amiss.

Well I will in, and ere the time begin,
Learn how to be repentant for my sin.

But Cousin Shore, are ye assured it was the King you saw in such disguise?


Do I know you the uncle to my wife? know I Frank Emersley her brother here?
so surely do I know that counterseit to be King.


Well, admit all this. And that his Majesty in such disguise, please to survey
the manner of our City, or what occasion else may like himself. Me thinks you
have small reason brother Shore, to be displeased thereat.


Oh I have sound him now.
Because my Niece his wife is beautiful,
And well reputed for her virtuous parts:
He in his fond conceit misdoubts the King,
Doth dote on her in his affection.
I know not Cousin how she way be changed,
By any cause in you procuring it,
From the fair carriage of her wonted course:
But well I wot, I have oft heard you say,
She merited no scruple of mislike.
If now some gyddie fancy in your brain,
Make you conceive sinisterly of her,
And with a person of such difference.
I tell you Cousin, more for her respect,
Then to sooth you in such sottishnes,
I would reucale ye open to the world,
And let your folly justly plague your self.

Uncle you are too forward in your rage,
And much mistake me in this suddenness,
Your Nieces reputation have I prized,
And shrined as devoutly in my soul
As you, or any that it can concern.
Nor when I tell you that it is the King,
Comes muffled like a common Serving-man,
Do I infer thereby my wife is false?
Or swerues one jot from wonted modesty.
Though in my shop she sit, more to respect,
Her servants duty, then for any skill,
She doth, or can pretend in what we trade,
Is it not strange, that ever when he comes,
It is to her, and will not deal with me?
Ah Uncle Frank, nay, would all her kin,
Were here to censure of my cause aright:
Though I misoeeme not her, yet give me leave,
To doubt what his sly walking may entend.
And let me tell ye, he that is possessed,
Of such a beauty, fears undermining guests:
Especially a mighty one, like him,
Whose greatness may guilde over ugly sin.
But say his coming is not to my wife,
Then hath he some sly aiming at my life,
By false compounded metals, or light gold,
Or else some other trifle to be sold.
When kings themselves so narrowly do pry
Into the world, men fear, and why not I?

Believe my brother in this doubtful case
I know not well how I should answer ye,
I wonder in this serious busy time,
Of this great gathered benevolence,
For his regaining of his right in France,
The day and nightly turmoil of his Lords,
Yea of the whole estate in general,
He can be spared from these great affairs,
And wander here disguised in this sort.
But is not this your boy?

Yes marie is it: how now, what news with thee?

Master, my mistress by a Nobleman,
Is sent for to the King in a close Coach,
She's gon with him, these are the news I bring.

How? my (...) sent for to the King?
By a Nobleman, and she is gone with him?
Nay, then I like it not?

How, gone say thou?

Be patient Uncle, storm not gentle Frank:
The wrong is (...), by whom? a king,
To talk of such it is no common thing.
She is gone thou say?

Yes truly sir, tis so.

I cannot help it, a Gods name let her go,
You cannot help it Uncle, no, nor you,
Where kings are meddlers, meaner men must rue.
I storm against it? no, farewell lane Shore.
Once thou wast mine, but must be so no more.

Gone to the Court?

Yet uncle will ye rage?
Let mine example your high heat assuage.
To note offences in a mighty man,
It is enough, amend it he that can,
Frank Emersley, my wife thy sister was,
Lands, goods and all I have, to thee I pass,
Save that poor portion must along with me,
To bear me from this badge of obloquy,
It never shall be said that Matthew Shore,
A Kings dishonour in his bonnet wore.

Good brother.

Strive not to change me, for I am resolved,
And will not tarry. England fare thou well,
And Edward, for requiting me so well,
But dare I speak of him? forbear, forbear,
Come Frank I will surrender all to thee,
And then abroad, where ere my fortune be

And have our country subjects been so frank
And bountiful in their benevolence,
Toward our present expedition?
Thanks Cousin Howard for thy pains herein:
We will ha^e letters sent to every Shire
Of thankful gratitude, that they may know,
How highly we respect their gentleness.

One thing my L. I had well near forgot,
Your pleasant host the Tanner of Tamworth.

What of him Cousin?

He was right liberal,
I wentie old Angels did he send your Grace,
And others seeing him so bountiful,
Stretched further then otherwise they had done.

Trust me I must requite that honest Tanner.
Oh had he kept his word, and come to Court,
Then in good sadness we had had good sport.

That is not long my L. which comes at last
Hes come to London, on an earnest cause,
His son lies prisoner in Safford Jail,
And is condemned for a robbery.
Your Highness pardoning his sons ^ffence,
May yield the Tanner no mean recompense.

But who hath seen him since he came to rowne?

My Lord in Holborn twas my hap to see him
Gazing about, I sent away my men,
And clapping on one of their livery cloak^,
Came to him, and the Tanner knew we strait,
How dost thou Tom? and how doth Ned quoth he
That honest merry hangman, how doth he?
I knowing that your Majesty intended
This day in person to come to the Tower,
There bad him meet me, where Ned and I,
Would bring him to the presence of the King,
And there procure a pardon for his son.

Have then a care we be not seen of him,
Until we be provided for the purpose,
Because once more we'll have a little sport,
Tom Sellinger, let that care be yours.

I warrant ye my Lord let me alone.

Welcome L. Mayor, what have you signified
Our thankfulness unto our Citizens,
For their ^ate gathered benevolence?

Before the Citizens in our Guildhall,
Master Recorder made a good Oration,
Of thankful gentitude unto them all,
Which they received with so kind respect,
And love unto your royal majesty,
As it appeared to us they sorrowed,
Their bounty to your highness was no more,

Lord Mayor, thanks to your self and them,
And go ye with us now into the Tower,
To see the order that we shall observe,
In this so needful preparation,
The better may you signify to them,
What need there was of their benevolence.

I'll wait upon your gracious majesty,
Yet there is one thing that much grieves me. aside.

Go honest fellow, bear my trunks aboard,
And tell the master i'll come presently.

We will sir, but what Lady have we here?
Belike she is of no mean countenance,
That hath so many suitors waiting on her.

Go one of you I pray ye, enquire her name,

My honest friend, what Lady call ye this?

Her name is mistress Shore, the kings belou^d,
A special friend to suitors at the court.

Her name is mistress Shore the kings beloved,
Where shall I hide my head, or stop mine ears.
But like an owl I shall be wondered at?
When she with me was wont to walk the streets,
The people then as she did pass along,
would say, there goes fair modest mistress Shore,
When she attended like a City Dame,
Was praised of matrons. So that Citizens,
When they would speak of ought unto their wives
Fetched their example still from mistress Shore,
But now she goes decked in her courtly robes,
This is not she, that once in seemly black,
Was the chaste sober wife of Matthew Shore,
For now she is King Edwards Concubine,
Oh great ill title, honourable shame,
Her good I had, but King her ill is thine,
Once Shores true wife, now Edwards Concubine,
Amongst the rest i'll note her new behaviour.

Good mistress Shore remember my sons life.

What is thy name?

My name is Thomas Air.

There is his pardon signed by the King.

In sign of humble hearty thankfulness,
Take this in Angels twenty pound.

What think ye, that I buy sell for bribes,
His highness favour, or his subjects blood?
No, without gifts God grant I may do good,
For all my good cannot redeem my ill,
Yet to do good I willendeauour still.

Yet all this good doth but guild ore thy ill.

Mistress the restitution of my lands,
Taken perforce by his highness officers.

The King is content your goods shall be restored,
But the officers will hardly yield thereto,
Yet be content, i'll see ye have no wrong.

Thou can not say to me so, I have wrong.

Mistress good faith gin yeele help me till my laund, whilke the faulse loune
Billie Grime of Glendale hauds wranfully frea me: ise white your gudenes with a
bonnie uag, sall swum away so deftly as the wind.


Your suit my friend, requires a longer time,
Yet since you dwell so far off, to ease your charge,
Your diet with my ser^ants you may take,
And some relief i'll get thee of the King.

Its cold relief thou get me from the King.

Now Gods blessing light on that gudely fair face, ise be your true beadsman
mistress, I indead, sal I.


God bless the care you have of doing good.

Pity she should miscarry in her life,
That bears so sweet a mind in doing good.

So say I too, ah Iane this kills my heart,
That thou recks others, and not ru'st my smart.

Mistress I fear you have forgot my suit?

Oh, tis for a licence to transport corn from this land. and lead to foreign
Realms, I had your bil, but I have torn your bill, and tware no shame I
think, to tear your ears, that care not how you wound the commonwealth. The
poor must starve for food to fill your purse. And the enemy bandy bullets of
our lead. No master Rufford, i'll not speak for you, except it be to have you
punished.


By the mess a dest lass, Christ benison light on her.

Is that another suitor? I have no bill of his,
Go one of you, and know what he would have.

Yes Iane, the bill of my ^bliged faith,
And I had thine, but thou hast canceld^.

Oh God it is my husband, kind Matthew Shore.

Ah Iane, whats he dare say he is thy husband?
Thou wast a wife, but now thou art not so,
Thou wast a maid, a maid when thou wast wife,
Thou wast a wife even when thou wast a maid,
So good, so modest, and so chaste thou wast,
But now thou art diuorcde, whiles yet he lives,
That was thy husband, while thou wast his wife.
Thy wisehood stained, by thy dishonoured life,
For now thou art nor widow, maid, nor wife.

I must confess I yielded up the Forte,
Wherein lay all the riches of my ^y,
But yet sweet Shore, before I yielded it,
(...) did endure the longst and greatest siege,
That ever battered on poor chastity,
And but to him that did a^ault the same,
For ever it had been invincible,
But I will yield it back again to thee.
He cannot blame me, though it be so done,
To loose by me, what first by me was won.

No Iane, there is no place allowde for m^e,
Where once a King hath taken possession,
Mean men brooke not a Rival in their love,
Much less so high vnriualde Majesty,
^oncubine to one so great as Edward.
Is tar too great to be the wife of Shore,

I will refuse the pleasures ^f the Court,
Let me go with thee Shore, though not as a wife,
Yet as thy slave, since I have lost that name,
I will redeem the wrong that I have done thee,
With my true service, if thou wilt accept it.

Thou go with me Iane, oh God forbid,
That I should be a traitor to my King,
Shall I become a felon to his pleasures,
And fly away as guilty of the theft?
No my dear Iane, I say it may not be,
Oh what have subjects that is not their kings,
He not examine his prerogative.

Why then sweet Mat. let me entreat thee stay,
What is't with Edward that I cannot do?
I'll make thee wealthier then ere Richard was,
That entertained the three greatst kings in Europe,
And feasted them in London on a day
Ask what thou wilt, were it a million,
That may content thee, thou shalt have it Shore.

Indeed this were some comfort to a man,
That tasted want or worldly misery,
But I have lost what wealth cannot return,
All worldly losses are but toys to mine,
Oh, all my wealth, the loss of thee was more,
Then ever time or Fortune can restore.
Therefore sweet Iane farewell, once thou wast mine,
Too rich for me, and that King Edward knew,
Adieu, oh world, he shall deceived be,
That puts his trust in women or in thee.

Ah Shore farewell, poor heart in death i'll tell,
I ever loud thee Shore, farewell, farewell.

Having awakte forth of their sleepis dens,
Our drourie Cannons, which ere long shall charm
The watchful French, with deaths eternal sleep,
And all things else in readiness for France,
A while we will give truce unto our care,
There is a merry Tanner near at hand,
With whom we mean to be a little merry.
Therefore Lord Mayor, and you my other friends,
I must entreat you not, to knowledge me,
No man stand bare, all as companions,
Give me a Cloak, that I may be disguisd^,
Tom Sellinger, go thou and take another,
So Tanner, now come when ye please, we are provided,
And in good time, see he is come already.
Tom Sellenger, go thou and meet him.

What Iohn Hobs? welcome in faith to court,

Gramercies honest Tom, where is the hangman
Ned? where is that mad rascal, shall I not see him?

See where he stands, that same is he.

What Ned? a plague found thee, how dost thou for a villain? how dost thou
mad Kogue, and how, and how?


In health Iohn Hobs, and very glad to see thee,
But say, what wind drove thee to London.

Ah Ned, I was brought hither with a whirlewinde man, my son, my son, did I
not tell thee I had a knave to my son?


Yes Tanner, what of him?

Faith hes in Caperdoche Ned, in Stafford Goal, for a robbery, and is like
to be hanged, except thou get the King to be more miserable to him.


If that be all Tanner, i'll warrant him,
I will procure his pardon of the King.

Wilt thou Ned? for those good words, see what my Daughter Nell hath sent thee,
a handkercher wrought with as good Coventry silk blew thread as ever thou
saw.


And I perhaps may wear it for her sake,
In better presence then thou art aware off,

How Ned, a better present? that can thou not have for silk, cloth, and
workmanship, why Nell made it man. But Ned? is not the King in this company,
wshat he in the long beard and the red petticoat? before God I misooubt Ned
that is the King, I know it by my Lord what ye calls players.


How by them Tanner?

Ever when they play an Enterloute or a Commodity at Tamworth, the King always
is in a long beard, and a red gown like him, therefore I spekt him to be the
King


No trust me Tanner, this is not the King, but thou shalt see the King before
thou go, and have a pardon for thy son too with thee.

This man is the Lord Mayor, Lord Mayor of London, here was the Recorder too,
but he is gone.


What Nicnames these courtnoles have? Mare and Corder quotha? we have no such
at Liechfield, there is the honest Bailiff and his brethren, such words gre
best with us.


My Lord Mayor, I pray ye for my sake, to bid this honest Tanner welcome.


You are welcome my honest friend,
In sign whereof I pray you see my house,
And sup with me this night.

I thank ye good goodman Masor, but I care not for no meat, my stomach is
like to a sick swines, that will neither eat nor drink, till she know what
shall become of her pig. Ned and Tom, you promisde me a good turn when I came
to Court, either do it now, or go hang your selves.


No sooner comes the King, but I will do it.

I warrant thee Tanner, fear not thy sons life.

Nay, I fear not his life, I fear his death.

All health and happiness to my Sovereign.

The Master of Saint Katherines hath marde all:

Out alas that ever I was borne.

Look to the Tanner there, he takes no harm,
I would not have him (for my crown) miscarry.

Let me come to him by my kings good leave,
Here's ginger honest man, bite it.

Bite ginger, bite ginger, bite a dogs date, I am but a dead man, ah my Liedge,
that you should deal so with a poor well meaniug man, but it makes no matter,
I can but die.


But when Tanner can thou tell?

Nay even when you please, for I have so defended ye, by calling ye plain Ned,
mad rogue and rascal, that I know you'll have me hanged. Theref^re make no more
ado, but send me down to Stafford, and there a Gods name hang me with my
son. And here's another as honest as your self, you made me call him plain
Tom, I warrant his name is Thomas, and some man of worship too, therefore lets
to it, even when and where ye will.


Tanner attend, not only do we pardon thee,
But in all princely kindness welcome thee,
And thy sons trespass do we pardon too,
Ore go and see that forthwith it be drawn,
Under our seal of England, as it ought,
And forty pounds we give thee to defray
Thy charges in thy coming up to London.
Now Tanner, what say thou to us?

Marry you speak like an honest man, if you mean as you say.


We mean it Tanner, on our royal word.

Now master of S. Katherines, what would you?

My gracious Lord, the great benevolence,
(Though small to that your subjects could afford,
Of poor S. Katherines do I bring your grace,)
Five hundred pounds here have they sent by me.
For the easier portage, all in Angel gold,
What this good widow mistress Norton will,
She comes her self, and brings her gift with her.

Pardon me gracious Lord, presumption,
Nor over w^ning in mine own conceit,
Makes me thus bold to come before your Grace,
But love and duty to your majesty:
And great desire to see my Lord the King,
Our master here spake of benevolence,
And said my twenty Nobles was enough,
I thought not so, but at your Highness feet,
A widows mite, a token of her zeal,
In humble duty gives you twenty pound.

Now by my crown, a gallant Iustie Girl,
Of all the exhibition yet bestowed,
This woman's liberality likes me best.
Is thy name Norton?

I my gracious Liedge.

How long hast thou been a Widow?

It is my Lord,
Since I did bury Wilkin my goodman,
At Shrouetide next even just a dozen years.

In al which space, could thou not find a man.
On whom thou might bestow thy self again?

Not any like my Wilkin whose dear love,
I know is matchless, in respect of whom,
I think not any worthy of a kiss.

No widow? that i'll try, how like you this?

Beshrew my heart, it was a honey kiss,
Able to make an aged woman young:
And for the same most sweet and lovely Prince,
See what the widow gives you from her store,
Forty old Angels but for one kiss more.

Marie Widow and thou shalt have it,
Iohn Hobs thou art a widower,
Lackst thou such a wife?

Snails, twenty pound a kiss? had she as many twenty pound bags as I have
knobs of bark in my tansat she might kiss them away in a quarter of a year.
^e no Saint Katherines widows, if kisses be so dear.


Clubs and clouted shoes, there's none enamourd here.


Lord Mayor, we thank you and entreat withal,
To recommend us to our Citizens:
We must for France, we bid you all farewell,
Come Tanner thou shalt with us to Court,
To marrow you shall dine with my Lord Mayor,
And after ward set homeward when ye please:
God and our right that only fights for us,
Adieu, pray that our toil prove prosperous.


