THe innocence, truth, and simplicity
Of country Damsels: What felicity
They arrive to in their low estate;
What freedoms they participate,
What joy, what solace, what content
To their innocuous life is lent.
The humble shed and cottage held
More safe than gorgeous houses, swelled
With pomp and wealth. It likewise proves
More simple truth in their chaste loves,
Than greater Ladies, tympany' de
With much more honour, state, and pride.
Here's of the Willow wreath dispute,
How, and why worn. What best doth suit
Forsaken Virgins, read and find
Their characters who prove unkind.
GOod morrow.

So to you, fair Shepherdess.

What news in our Arcadia?

I know none:
For well you wot it is no news with us,
That men should prove inconstant.

Think you so?

Thought's free.

I pray can you define me Thought?

Let me bethink my self, I think I can:
For I have thought of many things e're now.

But can you guess what I think?

I (perhaps)
May jumpe with your conceit, come neere't at least.
Of colours there are none so opposite
As white and black: and of the Elements
Than fire and water none more contrary:
Nor is there ought so antipathy' de in men,
As what they think and speak.

Now let me help you:
Men's thoughts like Courtiers cloaks are often shifted,
And change as oft as they are truly sifted.

This then hath been the cause of women's sorrow;
Men think to day ill, to do worse to morrow:
Witness Amphrisa's servant.

Pity 'tis,
^o fair a body, and so sweet a soul
^hould be so foully dealt with. Her false Lover
^nkindely hath forsook her.

That's the reason
^hee's grown into so deep a melancholy.
^ wonder any woman dare trust man,
^nce, like as the Chamelions change themselves
^nto all perfect colours saving white;
^ they can to all humours frame their speech,
^e only to prove honest.

You say well.
^t as no worms breed where they feel no warmth,
^o Vultures watch where they can find no prey;
^o Pirat roves but where he hopes for spoil:
^ none of these false servants wait, but where
^hey find a yielding Mistress.

Indeed light minds are caught with little things,
^nd Phancie smells to Fennel.

But Amphrisa
Is held to be the wisest shepherdess
That lives in our Arcadia.

But I have heard,
Late wit and cheated wisdom to be counted
Next neighbours unto folly. Shepherds now,
The holier that they seem in outward show,
The hollower are their hearts. By subtle sophistry
(As I have heard) the best Philosophy
May be perverted. And men's flatteries
Are just like Circes riches, which can turn
Vain glorious fools to Asses, credulous Fools
To Woodcocks, pretty wanton Fools to Apes,
And proud Fools into Peacocks.

But amongst these,
Amphrisa had no place.

See, here she comes
That for her self can answer.

But 'twere sin
In us, not to be answered, thus to suffer her
To pale the cheerful blood in her far cheeks,
Through wilful passion. Which I'll not endure.

Then rouse her from these dumps.

You're sad, Amphrisa:
Sweet may we know the cause?
Amphrisa. You have prevented
A strange conceit which somewhat troubled me;
But by your interruption almost lost.

Nay recollect your self, pray let us hear't.

I was thinking, why Parrasius, drawing Youth,
Made Love to tickle one side with a feather,
To move a smile; and with the other hand
To sting it with a Scorpion.

You're stung then.
But I was thinking on Praxiteles,
Who drew his mistress thus: Look on her one way,
She laughed upon him: Strait before, she wept:
But change the side, and cast your eye adverse,
And then she appeared sleeping. And so you,
Fit but your fancies unto such a face,
You'll ne'er complain of servant.

Then it seems,
My storie's told aforehand.

Yes, and rumor'd
Through all Arcadia.

And none pity me?

There's none so marble breasted, but doth melt
To hear of your disaster.

Is there one,
To whom the cause of my disease is known,
That can prescribe me cure for it?

Without feeling
Your pulse, I know the nature of your grief:
You have an heate, on which a coldness waits,
A pain that is endured with pleasantness,
And makes those sweets you eat have bitter taste:
^ puts eyes in your thoughts, ears in your heart:
^Twas by desire first bred, by delight nursed,
And hath of late been weaned by jealousy.

But how can these disgusts be remedied,
Which Reason never yet could comprehend?

By patience.

That's a physic all prescribe,
But few or none doth follow. Pray what is't?

It is the best receipt that can be took
Both against love and fortune (Crossed in both.)

To wish the best, to think upon the worst,
And all contingents brooke with patience.
^s a most sovereign medicine.

And moreover;
What cannot be redressed with peevishness,
Ought to be borne with patience.

Patience?
^he is so like to Fortitude herself,
That by her sweet aspect she appears to be
Her sister or her daughter.

The only remedy for injuries, is
By patience to forget them. And more noble
It is to yield your self in triumph to it
Then to be drawn by force.

You have prevaild,
For I am now your Patient; and entreat you,
Like skilled Physicians, study for my health.

From their Doctors
The sick expect more art then eloquence:
And therefore what defect you find in words,
Expect in our Prescriptions.

I never was with pastime better pleased;
So clear a morning, and such temperate air;
The Sun so bright, yet sparing of his heat,
Made all the toil we took (to chase the Stag)
To seem no labour, but an exercise.
The wily beast to shun our swift pursuit,
Forsook the Plains, to take the mountain tops.
Yet maugre the opposure of the Rocks
And cliffs depending to molest our speed
Our well-tride Nymphs, like wild Kids climbed those hills
And thrild their arrowie Javelins after him:
Nor left the chase, till all those golden heads
Were new stained in his blood.

It proved, great Queen
Your active Nymphs were better breathed than he,
For whom we could not overtake, we tired:
That done, we touched our Beagles, and so made
Both hills and valleys echo to his death.

He stood so long, and made us stray so far,
Amongst the Swains and lovely Shepherdesses,
That use to graze their Flocks upon these downs;
The Sun must needs pass the Meridian,
E're we can reach the Lodge.

The Arcadian Girls
Are of no common beauty; as their habits
Much grace the fields; so many of those features
Mine eye by chance hath glanc't on in the Chase,
In mine opinion would become the Court.
They say, these virgins are acute in wit,
And fluent in conceit, to speak or sing;
As having oft drunk from the Muses spring.

See, Royal Queen, where three (not of the meanest
Or least to be respected) are retired.

Be not too loud, These bows will shelter us;
Let's l^sten how they fashion their discourse,
And how far short the Folds and Cottages
Come of the Court or City.

Nay pray prescribe. 'Tis said of all Physicians
What good comes by their Physic, the Sun sees:
But in their art, if they have bad success,
That the earth covers. Howsoe're I suffer,
You blameless are.

All those that are unskilful
Will flatter grief 'till it grow desperate.
But though you know the use of Physic sweet,
To taste it is unsavoury.

Howsoever I am prepared.

Imagine first, You never had a servant.

Not so: for who can know the sweet of ease,
That never was in pain?

Or say she had,
Think that he ne'er played false.

A mere relapse,
Before the first be cured, to think him faithful,
Were but to enter her disease anew,
To make her grief more violent.

But one speak:
The medicine that's proposed of contraries,
Can ne'er breed peace of mind.

All, solid sense.)
For I perceive, those that are sound themselves,
Have still more will to help, than skill to cure.

Well, Mistress Doctor I'll give way to you.

Think then you had a servant, and he false;
For whose sake never more trust per jur'd man.
And though some say Jove winks at Dovers Oaths,
'Tis (after) with broad eyes to punish them.
Words should not credit men, but men their words:
For he that breaks his promise lies to heaven;
And whom Heaven hates, who but would fear to love
Most cursed 'tis to flatter and forswear;
And dearth of oaths is blessed barrenness.
You're sick at heart: the only help for that
Is, Let your heart abhor his treachery,
And him, for it. You're pained too in the head,
For that here's balm made or a willow wreath.
Let this charmed c^ eel but impale your brows,
'Tis present help for both.

Make this apparent.

Thus: All the Arcadian Swains Nymphs that ^
Your brows ingirt with this for saken wreath
Will take note of his falsehood, and your faith;
Your innocence, and his inconstancy:
And those that wear tears in their eyes for you,
Of love and pity, to be thus abused,
Will steep their tongues in wormwood and in gall,
To brand him for his open perjury;
Their pity, with your patience joined,
(With this to boot) will prove an absolute cure.

Some ease I find already, crown me then.

May, wheresoever your head you softly pillow,
Be ne'er more troubled, whilst thus wreathed in willow

Nor shall it, Alope, for from this hour,
Hearts grief nor heads pain shall of me have power.
I now have chased hence sorrow.

This conceit
Hath took me highly; and great pity 'tis,
That such choice wits should find no other ears
Than those that Swains, and flocks, and fowls have. Wit
So spent, is only treasured in the air.
The earth hath least part on it. Virgins, Good day.
Nay, do not fall too low.

You are our Queen.

And Lady of our fortunes.

By that title
I do command you then to spare your knees.
Nay rise.

'Tis only by your Grace and goodness
We breathe and live.

It is enough to me,
That you present us such acknowledgement.
And as for you, fair Virgin, I could wish
Your Willow were a Laurel. Nay, so 'tis:
Because all such may be styled Conquerors,
That can subdue the ir passions.

Our fear is,
That if our rude discourse have touched your ear,
The coursenesse might offend you.

Pleased us highly:
Which that you may perceive in mee's vnfeignd,
I charge you, as I am your Soveraignesse,
All coyness and evasion set apart,
To be most free in language.

Imposition
That comes from you is unto us a Law,
Which ought to be kept sacred.

I'll as freely
Command then, as you willing are to obey,
For were I not a Queen, I'd wish to be
As one of you, a witty Shepherdess.
Pray sing me something of your country life,
To make me more in love with it.

Tis our fear; A life that is so mean, so ill expressed
As needs it must be, (if imposed on us)
May make you rather loath it.

I had thought
Courts only had been filled with complement,
Of which I see, the cottage is not clear.

Give not our simple truth, and fear to offend,
A character we know not (gracious Queen)
But howsoever, if you make us faulty,
You have the power to pardon.

And presume
That's granted, e're the offence be.

Then thus, Madam.
We that have known no greater state
Than this we live in, praise our fate:
For Courtly silks in cares are spent,
When Countries russet breeds content.
The power of Scepters we admire;
But sheep-bookes for our use desire.
Simple and low is our condition;
For here with us is no ambition.
We with the Sun our flocks unfold,
Whose rising makes their fleeces gold.
"Our music from the birds we borrow;
"They bidding us, we them, good morrow.

Nay, fair ones, what you have begun in song,
Continue in discourse: We would hear more
Of your pleased life.

Your highness may command.
Our habits are but course and plain,
Yet they defend from wind and rain.
As warm too, in an equal eye
As those be, stained in Scarlet dye.
Those that have plenty wear (we see)
But one at once; and so do we.

The Shepherd with his home-spun Lass
As many merry hours doth pass,
As Courtiers with their costly Girls,
Though richly decked in gold and pearls:
And though but plain, to purpose woo,
Nay oft-times with less danger too.

Those that delight in dainties store,
One stomach feed at once, no more.
And when with homely fare we feast,
With us it doth as well digest:
And many times we better speed;
For our wild fruits no surfeits breed,

If we sometimes the Willow wear,
By subtle Swains that dare forswear.
We wonder whence it comes, and fear,
The have been at Court, and learned it there.
If any Lady then shall please,
Whose cheek looks pale through my disease,
By any faithless servant, or false friend,
(Being cured myself) this I can give or lend.

Beleeve't, a sweet conclusion: for oft-times
Such things fall out. But we have further heard
(Besides what now our ears are witness to)
That as your words keep time, your voices tune;
So hath the curious motion of your feet
Been taught to know true measure. You can dance?

Yes royal Princess, as we sing and speak,
After such rural fashion.

If no worse,
It may become a Theatre of eyes,
Yet wrest no blushes from you. Will you then,
Since that we parallel in number thus,
Help us to fill a measure?

So we thought
There might no jarring discords grow from us,
To spoil your better music.

No such fear.
Come then, such music as the place will yield,
We'll instantly make use of.

Complete in all: You have made us now Eie-witnes
Of what, Relation sparingly hath spoke.
To encourage which, and that so great a merit
Pass not without some meed, receive these favours,
And wear them for our sake.
Time bids us part.
Greater than these we have for you in store,
And mean hereafter to employ you more.


