Unmask thy face thou minister of Time
Look forth bright mirror, let thy golded hand,
Ride (with distinctlesse motion) on the eyes
Of this fair Chorus, till the Reign of Peace,
Hath propagated Plenty, and increase.
Now sit we high (triumphant in our sway,)
Encircled with the seauen-fold flower of Art,
To tread on Barbarism with silver feet;
These, these are adiuncts fit to wait on Peace,
Who being courted by most searching spirits,
Have always borne themselves in God-like state,
With lofty foreheads, higher then the stars.
Draw near fair Daughters of eternity,
Your Fostresse Peace, is (like the aged Nurse)
Grown proud to see her Children flourish thus.

We know not how to turn these bounties back,
But with continuance of obsequious love,
Whilst Peace tryumphes, it lies in Grammars might,
To make the rudest brain both speak and write.

Logic shall furnish them with Argument,
And make them apt and able to dispute;
The theme shall be of Peace, and her sweet name,
And every Sillogism' shall prove her fame.

Rhetoric will put her richest habit on,
Of gestures, Voice, and exornation,
Her Tropes and Scheames, shall dignify her sense.
And Honours Peace, with clearest eloquence.

Her graces in my numbers shall be seen,
So full that nothing can be added more,
Nor ought subtracted: true Arithmetic
Will multiply and make them infinite.

Music shall feast the bounteous ears of Peace,
Whilst she inspires her numme conceit with life,
Varying each concord, mood and faculty,
In flowing straynes, and rapting Symphonie,

The motions of the Planets and their Spheres,
The Stars, their influence, quantities, consents,
All that Astronomy can teach or know,
She doth profess from sacred Peace to flow.

And I will make her powers demonstrative,
In all my angles, circles, cubes, or squares,
The very state of Peace shall seem to shine,
In every figure or dimensiue lyne.

Enough fair Virgins Time shall prove this true,
Whilst you do honour Peace she'll cheerish you.

Honour and safety, still attend fair Peace

Thanks noble Lords and worthy Gentlemen:
But wherefore look you so ask aunce on these,
As if they were not worthy your salutes?

Because we knew them not.

The more your blame.

O pitied state! most weak, where nobles want
The love and knowledge of the liberal Arts;
Are you the men (for birth and place) admired?
By whose great motions, lesser wheels turn round?
And shall your minds affect so dull a course?
As if your sense where most irrational?
What is a man superior to a beast
But for his mind? nor that ennobles him,
While he deiects his reason; making it
The slave unto his brutish appetite.
Make then your minds illustrious in your deeds
And each choose (in this troupe) a spowsall mate,

We do obey: And I choose Music first.

I Geometry.

I Rhetoric.

And I Astronomy.

And I to be a servant unto all.

But now beware ye injure not the fame
Of these bright Virgins with adulterate love,
Mean time their servant (here) Chrisoganus
Shall teach of every Art the mystery.

But if (by Art) as all our Artist^ say,
There is no real truth to be attained,
Why should we labour in their loves bestow?
The wisest said: I know I nothing know,

The wisest was a fool for saying so:
That Oracle pronounced wise Socrates:
For do I know I see you, or the light?
Or do you know you here me, or I touch you?

All this we needs must know assuredly.

If this be certain then which comes from sense,
The knowledge proper to the soul is truer;
For that pure knowledge by the which we know
A thing to be, with true cause how it is,
Is more exact then that which knows it is,
And reaches not to knowledge of the cause.
Besides; that knowledge (that considers things
Abiunct from senciue matter) is exacter
Then that which joins it self with elements;
Arithmetic ever considers numbers
Abstract from senciue matter: Music still
Considers it with sense, as mixed with sound:
Therefore Arithmeticque is more exact,
And more exact then is Geometry:
Since vnitas is still simplicior puncto,
And number simpler then is magnitude.
For Vnitas may still be sine puncto,
But Punctus never without Unity,
Nor; Magnitudo sine Numero.
Dum (enim) punctus ponitur, ponitur (ex necessitate) vnitas.

But all this proves not we may know a truth.

If we have this we call Scientia,
We must have truth of mere necessity,
For Acriueia doth not signify,
Only a certainty in that we know,
But certainty with all perfection.

Although I am not satisfied in this,
It doth me good to hear him thus discourse.

My Lords, let's betake us to our studies.

In nothing am I better pleased, let's go.

The nut-brwne ale, the nut-browne ale,
Puts down all drink when it is stale,
The toast, the Nut-meg, and the ginger,
Will make a sighing man a singer.
Ale gives a buffet in the head,
But ginger vnder-proppes the brain:
When ale would strike a strong man dead,
Then nut-megge tempers it again,
The nut-browne ale, the nut-browne ale,
Puts down all drink when it is stale.
This Peace breeds such Plenty, trades serve no tu^nes

The more sooles we to follow them.

Lett's make up a company of Players,
For we can all sing and say,
And so (with practise) soon may learn to play.

True, could our action answer your extempore.

I'll teach ye to play true Politicians.

Why those are th'falsest subtle fellows lives.

I pray sir, what titles have travailing Players?

Why proper-fellowes, they play Lords and Kings,

What parts would best become us (sir) I pray?

Faith to play Rogues, till we be bound for running away.

Content; Scrivener, hoe,
You must tie a knott of Knaves together.

Your appellations?

Your names he means; the man's learned.

I Belch the Beard-maker.

I Gut the Fiddle-string-maker.

I Incle the Peddler.

I Master Posthast the Poet.

Your nomenclature?

O stately Scrivener, that's where dwell ye?

Townsmen, townsmen all.

The Obligatories Condition?

Politician Players.

But whose men are we all this while:

Whose but the merry Knight's, sir Oliuer Owlets,
There was never a better man to Players.

If our parrell be not poynt-deuice the fatt's in the fire.

What a greazie phrase: This playing will furnish ye.

What hoe Master Bougle, a word.

Here's half a dozen good fellows.

Soft sir, we are but four or five.

The liker to thrive.

What saucy knaves are these?

A speaks to you players; I am the poett.

As concerning the King and the Clown.

Will you have rich stuff indeed?

Tis not to be dealt on without store of drink.

Store of money you would say.

Nay tis well said, for drink must clap up the bargain.
Lets away.

Master Fourcher, how fares your body sir? come you from your book?


Troth Master Lyon-rash, this Peace gives Lawyers leave to play.


Master Vourcher? you are very well encountered sir?


Master Velure, I value your frienship at as high a price, as any mans.


Gentlemen, how shall we spend this afternoon?


Faith lets go see a Play.


See a Play, a proper pastime indeed: to here a deal of prating to so little
purpose.


Why this going to a play is now all in the fashion.


Why then lets go where we may hear sweet music and delicate songs, for the
Harmony of music is so Heauenlike that I love it with my life.


Nay faith this afternoon we'll spend in hearing the Mathematickes read.


Why then lets to the Academy to hear Crisoganus.


content.


Master Chrisoganus: by your leave sir.

Gentlemen you are welcome.

I pray sir what were the best course for a scholar?

Why no man can attain to any truth,
But he must seek it Mathematice.

Which are the Mathematicque sciences?

Arithmetic and Geometry are chief.

What difference is there twixt philosophy
And knowledge which is Mathematical?

This sir: the natural Philosopher
Considers, things as merely sensible;
The Mathematician; vt mente abiunctas a materia sensibili,
But this requires time to satisfy;
For 'tis an Axiom with all men of Art,
Mathematicum abstrahentem non comittere mendacium:
And (for the beauty of it,) what can be
Urged (more extractiue) then the face of heaven?
The mysteries that Art hath found therein:
It is distinguisht into Regions,
Those Regions filled with sundry sorts of stars:
They (likewise) christened with peculiar names,
To see a daily use wrought out of them,
With demonstrations so infallible,
The pleasure cannot be, but ravishing.

The very thought thereof enflames me.

Why you shall meet with proiects so removed
From vulgar apprehension, (as for instance,)
The Sun here rises in the East with us,
But not of his own proper motion,
As being turned by primum mobile,
(The heaven above Coelum stellatum)
Whereas his true asscent is in the West,
And so he consummates his circled course
In the Ecliptic line, which parts the Zodiac,
Being borne from Tropic to Tropic: this time
We call a year; whose Hierocliphick was
(Amongst the Egyptians figured in a Snake
Wreathed circular, the tail within his mouth:
As (happily) the ^atines (since) did call,
A Ring, (of the word Annus) Annulus,

I apprehend not in my ablest powers,
That once in every four and twenty hours,
The Sun should rise and set; yet be a year
In finishing his own dessigned course.

Why that I will demonstrate to you, thus;
Turn a huge wheel: contrary to the sway
Place me a fly vppon't: the fly (before
It can arrive the point from whence it went)
Shall sundry times be circumuolu'd about;
Even so the Sun and the affinities:
For if you wonder how at one self hour,
Two of discordant natures may be borne,
As one a King, another some base Swain,
One valiant, and the other timorous,
Let but two drops of ink or water fall
Directly on so swift a turning wheel,
And you shall find them both cast far in sunder.
Even so the heavenly Orbs, whirling so fast
And so impetuously (project men's fates)
Most full of change and contrariety.

Cood faith these knowledges are very rare,
And full of admiration; are they not?

The Mathematicques are the strength of truth,
A Magazine of all perfection.

Shall we design some place for exercise,
And every morning have a Lecture read.

Content, (if so Chrisoganus stand pleaz'd)
His exhibition shall be competent: wee'le all be Patrons.

To make you Artists, answers my desire,
Rather then hope or mercenary hire.

Holiday, O blessed morn,
This day Plenty hath been borne,
Plenty is the child of Peace;
To her birth the Gods do press,
Full crowned Mazors Bacchus brings,
With liquor which from grapes he wrings:
Holliday, O blessed morn;
This day Plenty hath bin borne,
Holliday let's loudly cry,
For joy of her nativity.
Ceres with a bounteous hand,
Doth at Plenties elbo stand:
Binding mixed Coronets,
Of wheat which on her head she sets.
Holliday, O blessed morn,
This day Plenty hath bin borne,
Holliday lets loudly cry,
For joy of her nativity.
Reach me the bowl with rich Autumnian Juice,
That I may drink a health to your new Queen.
Times winged hours (that pointed out my raygne,)
Are fled; I am no more your Sovereign.
Wound Air with shrill tuned Canzonets,
I rob my self to make my Daughter rich,
Peace doth resign her pure imperial Crown,
(Wrought by the Muses) in whose Circle grow
All flowers that are to Phoebus consecrate.

What heavenly sovereignty supports my state
That Plenty reigns (as Princess) after Peace?
Then if this powerful arm can turn the hour,
It is my will, (and that shall stand for law)
That all things on the earth be plentiful.
I crush out bounty from the amber grape,
And fill your barnes with swelling sheaves of Corn,
How can this, but engender blessed thought,
Especially when Gods our good have sought?

For thee, thy servants captivate the Earth,
Her fruitfulnes falls down at Plentyes feet.

Bachus will cheer her melancholy sense,
With drops of Nectar from this Crimson Juice.

Her body shall sustain ten thousand wounds,
And swarthy India be transformed to Sea,
Disgorging golden choler to the waives,
Before sweet Plenty find the least defect.

For this abundance powered at Plenties feet,
You shall be Tetrarch's of this petty world.

What dullards thus, would dote in rusty Art?
Plod ding upon a book to dull the sense,
And see the world become a treasure-house,
Where Angels swarm like Bees in Plenties streets,
And every Peasant surfeits on their sweets?

Give me a season that will stir the blood
I like not Nigardice to hungar-starue,
Tis good when pooremen frolic in the hall,
The whilst our fathers in the Chambers feast,
And none repines at any stranger-guest.

Who was the author of this store, but Peace?
That common-welth is never well at ease,
Where Parchment skins, whose use should bear records,
Must head their brawling Drums and keep a coil,
As if they threatened Plenty with a spoil.

Your houses must be open to the poor,
Your dusty Tables filled with store of meat,
Let goodly yeomen at your elboes stand,
Swords by their sides and trenchers in their hand:
Long-skirted coats, wide-sleeues with cloth' enough:
Thus Lords, you shall my government enlarge,
Reverence your Queen, by practising her charge.

Ours be the charge and thine the Empire.

Gallants let us invent some pleasing sports,
To fit the Plentuous humour of the Time,

What better recreations can you find,
Then sacred knowledge in divinest things.

Your books are Adamants and you the Iron
That cleaves to them till you confound your self

Poor Scholar spend thy spirits so and dye.

Let them do so that list, so will not!.

I cannot feed my appetite with Air,
I must pursue my pleasures royally,
That spunged in sweat, I may return from sport,
Mount me on horse-back, keep the Hounds and Hawk,
And leave this Idle contemplation,
To rugged Stoical Morosophists.

O! did you but your own true glories know,
Your judgements would not then decline so low.

What Master Pedant, pray forbear, forbear.

Tis you my Lord that must forbear to err.

'Tis still safe erring with the multitude:

A wretched moral; more then barbarous rude.

How you translating-scholler? you can make
A stabbing Satire, or an Epigram,
And think you carry just Ramnusia's whip
To lash the patient; go, get you clothes,
Our free-borne blood such apprehension lothes.

Proud Lord, poor Art shall wear a glorious crown,
When her despisers die to all renown.

Wher's this drunkard Clarke to ring the bell?

Heigho, bottle Ale has buttond my cap.

Whats a quarter of Corn?

Two and six-pence.

Ty't up tis mine.

ha'y' any Potatoes?

Th'aboundance will not quite-cost the bringing.

What's your Cock-sparrowes a dozen?

A penny Mistress.

There's for a dozen; hold.

All they that can sing and say,
Come to the Towne-house and see a Play,
At three a clock it shall begin,
The finest play that e're was seen.
Yet there is one thing more in my mind,
Take heed you leave not your purses behind.

What's your plays name? Masters whose men are ye? how the sign of the Owl
ith luy bush? Ser Oliuer Owlets.


Tis a sign ye are not blind Sir.

The best that ever trod on stage.
The Lascivious Knight, and Lady Nature.

Have you cried the Play, masters?

I, I, I, no doubt we shall have good doings, but How proceed you in the new
plot of the prodigal child?


O sirs, my wit's grown no less plentiful then the time.
There's two sheets done in follio, will cost two shillings in time.

Shall we here a flourish before the audience come.

I that you shall, I swear by the Sunne-sit down sirs,
When Authors quill, in quivering hand,
His tyred arm did take:
His wearied Muse, bad him devise,
Some fine play for to make.
And now my Masters in this brauadoe,
I can read no more without Canadoe.

What hoe? some Canadoe quickly,

Enter the Prodigal Child; fill the pot I would say,
Huffa, huffa, who callis for me?
I play the Prodigal child in iollytie.

O detestable good.

Enter to him Dame Virtue:
My Son thou art a lost child,
(This is a passion, note you the passion?)
And hath many poor men of their goods beguiled:
O prodigal child, and child prodigal.
Read the rest sirs, I cannot read for tears,
Fill me the pot I prethe fellow Gulch.

Faith we can read nothing but riddles.

My masters, what tire wears your lady on her head?

Four Squirrels tails ti'de in a true loves knot.

O amiable good, 'tis excellent.

But how shall we do for a Prologue for lords?

I'll do it extempore.

O might we here a spurt if need require.

Why Lords we are here to show you what we are,
Lords we are here although our cloths be bare,
In steed of flowers, in season, ye shall gather Rime and Reason?
I never pleased my self better, it comes off with such suauity.

Well fellows, I never heard happier stuff,
Here's no new luxury or blandishment,
But plenty of old Englands mothers words.

I st not pity this fellow's not employed in matters of State,
But wher's the Epilogue must beg the plaudit?

Why man?
The glass is run our play is done,
Hence Time doth call, we thank you all.

I but how if they do not clap their hands.

No matter so they thump us not,
Come, come, we poets have the kindest wretches to our Ingles

Why whats an Ingle man?

One whose hands are hard as battle-dores with clapping at baldness.


Then we shall have rare Ingling at the prodigal child.

I a^t be played upon a good night -- lets give it out for Friday.

Content.

My masters; my Lord Mauortius is disposed to here what you can do.


What fellows, shall we refuse the Towne-play?

Why his reward is worth the Mayor all the town.

We'll make him merry in faith, we'll be there.

Come sirs, how shall we recreate our selves,
This plentious time forbids abode at home.

Let's Duck it with our Dogs to make us sport,
And cross the water to eat some Cream;
What hoe? Sculler.

You do forget; Plenty affords us Oars.

What shall we shoot for a green Goose sir?

There's a wise match.

Faith we may take our bows and shafts and sleep,
This dreaming long vacation gives us leave.

Gentlemen, well met, what? Pancrace Knights?

The bounty of the time will have it so.

You are prepared for sport, as well as we.

One of the goodliest Spaniels I have seen.

And here's the very quintessence of Ducks.

For diving mean ye?

I, and thriving too.
For I have won three wagers this last week;
What? will you go with us and see our sport?

No faith sir, I'll go ride and breath my horse.

Why whether ride you? we will all go with you.

Lets meet some ten miles hence to hawke hunt.

Content: this plenty yields us choice of sports.
Our trades and we are now no fit consorts.

Master Clarke of the Kitchen; faith what's your daily expense.


Two beef, a score of Muttons;
Hogsheads of Wine, and Beer, a dozen a day.

Never was Age more plentiful.

Usher, it is my Lords pleasure, all comer, be bounteously entertained.


I but is't my Ladies pleasure.

What else? She scorns to wear cloth-breeches man.

A Morrice-daunce of neighbours crave admittance.

Porter, let them in man.

Butler, make them drink their skins full.
God bless the sounder.

Porter, are these Players come?

Half an hour a go sir.

Bid them come in and sing the meat's going up.

Gentlemen, and yeomen, attend upon the Sewer.

Sir Oliuer Owlets men welcome, by Gods will,
It is my Lords pleasure it should be so.

Sir, we have carowst like Kings,
For here is plenty of all things.

Look about you Masters; be vncouer'd.

Brave lads come forth and chant it, and chant it,
for now 'tis supper time.
See how the dishes flaunt it, and flaunt it,
with meat to make up rime.
Pray for his honour truly, and truly,
in all he undertakes;
He seru's the poor most duly, and duly,
as all the country speaks.
God bless my Lord Mauortius, his merry men all,
To make his honour merry, we sing in the hall.

My Masters, for that we are not only (for causes)
Come new to the house; but also (for causes)
I matuaile where you will lodge.

We hope (for causes) in the house, though drink be in our heads.
Because to Plenty we carouse, for beef and beer, and beds.

Sed like honest men: what plays have you?

Here's a Gentleman scholar writes for us:
I pray Master Post-hast, declare for our credits.

For mine own part, though this summer season
I am desperate of a horse.

'Tis well; but what plays have you?

A Gentleman's a Gentleman, that hath a clean shirt on, with some learning,
and so have I.


One of you answer the names of your plays,

Mother Gurtons neadle; ( a Tragedy.)
The Devil and Dives; ( a Comedy.)
Arusset coat, and a Knaves cap; ( an Infernal)
A proud heart and a beggars purse; ( a pastoral.)
The Widows apron-strings; ( a nocturnal.)

I premise ye, pretty names,
I pray what ye want in any thing,
To take it out in drink.
And so go make ye ready masters.

My Lords, your entertainment i^ but base,
Courser your cates, but welcome with the best.
Fellows some Cushions; place fa re Ladies here,
Seignior Landulpho; pray be merry sir.

I'st th'Italian guise to be so sad?
When Love and Fancy should be banqueting?

Madam, your kindness hath full power to command.

These admirable wits of Italy,
That court with looks, and speak in syllables,
Are curious seperuisours over strangers,
And when we covet so to frame our selves,
(Like ouer-nice portraying picturers,)
We spoil the counterfeit in colouring;
England is plain and loves her mothers guise,
Enriched with cunning, as her parents rise.

Lady, these eyes did ever hate to scorn,
This toung's vnur'd to carpe or contrary,
The bozome where this heart hath residence,
I wish may seem the seat of courtesy.

Rowme my Masters take your places,
Hold up your torches for dropping there.

Usher are the Players ready? bid them begin.

Some up and some down, there's Players in the town,
You wot well who they be:
The sum doth arise, to three companies,
One, two, three, four, make we.
Besides we that travel, with pumps full of gravel,
Made all of such running leather:
That once in a week, new masters we seek,
And never can hold together.
Phillida was a fair maid; I know one fairer then she,
Troylus was a true lover; I know one truer then he:
And Cressida that dainty dame, whose beauty fair sweet,
Was clear as is ye Crystal stream, that runs along ye street.
How Troyll he that noble knight, was drunk in love and bad goodnight
So bending leg likewise; do you not us despise.

Most ugly lines and base-browne-paper-stuffe*
Thus to abuse our heavenly poesy,
That sacred off-spring from the brain of Jove,
Thus to be mangled with profane absurds,
Strangled and chok't with lawless bastards words

I see (my Lord this home-spun country stuff,
Brings little liking to your curious ear,
Be patient for perhaps the play will mend.

Come Cresida my Cresset light,
Thy face doth shine both day and night,
Behold, behold, thy garter blue,
Thy knight his valiant elboe wears,
That When he shakes his furious Spear,
The foe in shivering fearful sort,
May lay him down in death to snort.

O knight with valour in thy face,
Here take my screen wear it for grace,
Within thy Helmet put the same,
Therewith to make thine enemies lame.

Lame stuff indeed the like was never heard.

Passion of me sir, puff puff how I sweat sir,
The dust out of your coat sir, I intend for to beat sir.

I am the prodigal child, I that I am,
Who says I am not, I say he is too blame.

And I likewise am Iniquity
Beloved of many alas for pity.

Ho ho ho, these babes mine are all,
The Vice, Iniquity and child Prodigal.

Fie what unworthy foolish foppery,
Presents such buzzardly simplicity.

No more, no more, unless twere better,
And for the rest ye shall be our debtor.

My Lords, of your accords, some better pleasure for
to bring, if you a theme affords, you shall know it, that I
Post-hast the Poet, extempore can sing.

I pray my Lord let's ha^te, the Play is so good,
That this must needs be excellent.

Content (my Lord) pray give a theme.

Your Poetts and your Pots,
Are knit in true-Loue knots.

Give your Scholar degrees, and your Lawyer his fees
And some dice for Sir Petronell flash:
Give your Courtier grace, and your Knight a new case,
And empty their purses of cash.
Give your play-gull a stool, and my Lady her fool,
And her usher potatoes and marrow
But your Poet were he dead, set a pot to his head,
And he rises as peart a sparrow.
O delicate wine with thy power so divine,
Full of ravishing sweet inspiration,
Yet a verse may run clear that is tapped out of bear:
Especially in the vacation.
But when the term comes, that with trumpets and drumes,
Our play houses ringe in confusion,
Then Bacchus me murder, but rime we no further,
Some sack now, upon the conclusion.
Give them forty pence let them go,
How likes Landulpho this extempore song?

I blush in your behalfes at this base trasn;
In honour of our Italy we sport,
As if a Synod of the holly Gods*
Came to triumph within our Theaters,
(Always commending English courtesy.)
Our Amphitheaters and Pyramides*
Are situate like three-headded Dindymus,
Where stand the Statues of three striving Queenes,
That once contended for the golden ball,
(Always commending English courtesy.)
Are not your curious ^ames of sharper spirit?
I have a mistress whose ^ntangling wit,
Will turn and wind more cunning arguments,
Then could the Craetan Labyrinth ingyre.
(Always commending English courtesy,)

Good sir, you give our English Ladies cause,
Respectively to applaud the Italian guise,
Which proudly hence-forth we will prosecute.

Command what fashion Italy affords.

By'r Lady sir, I like not of this pride,
Give me the ancient hospitality,
They say 'tis merry in hall, when beards wag all.
The Italian Lord is an Ass, the song is a good song,

Brave minds, now beautify your thoughts with pomp,
Send forth your Ships unto the furthest Seas,
Fetch me the feathers of the Arabian Birds,
Bring Mermaids combs, and glasses for my gaze:
Let all your sundry imitating shapes,
Make this your native soil, the land of Apes.
Then Ladies trick your trains with Turkish pride,
Plate your disheau led hair with ropes of Pearl,
Wear sparkling Diamonds like twinkling stars,
And let your spangled crowns shine like the Sun,
"If you will sit in throne of state with Pride,
"The newest fashion (still) must be your guide.
Vain. Vaine-glory vows to lackey by thy foot,
Till she hath swollen men's hearts with Arrogance.

In like designs, twofac'd Hypocrisy,
Is pressed to spend her deepest industry.

And (till her sovereignty decline and bow)
Contempt shall be enthroned in every brow.

Then thus, (as sovereign Empress of all sins)
Pride turns her hour and here her Scene begins.

How shall we best employ this idle time?

Lets argue on some case for exercise.

You see the full gorged world securely sleeps,
And sweet contention (Lawyers best content)
Is sent by drowsy Peace to banishment.

O these be Lawyers! Concords enemies,
Prydes fuel shall their fire of strife increase.

Signior Vourcher, know you those Citizens?

They are two wealthy Merchants and our friends.

Yt may be they have brought us welcome fees.

Lawyers and Merchants met! bestir thee Pride.

In faith no suit sir, quiet, quiet all.

Fortune and health attend you Gentlemen.

We thank you Lady; may we crave your name?

Men call me Pride, and I am Plenties heir:
Immortal, though I bear a mortal show.
Are not you Lawyers, from whose reverend lips
Th'amaxed multitude learn Oracles?
Are not you Merchants, that from East to West.
From the antartieke to the Arctic Poles,
Bringing all treasure that the earth can yield?

We are, (most worthy Lady)

Then use your wisdom to enrich your selves,
Make deep success high Steward of your store.
Enlarge your mighty spirits, strive to exceed,
In buildings, riot, garments gallantry.
For take this note: The world the show affects,
Plain Virtue, (vilely clad) is counted Vice,
And makes high blood endure base praeiudice.

But we have Laws to limit our attire.

Broke with the least touch of a golden wire.

Yet wisdom still commands to keep a mean,

True, had you no means to excel the same,
But having power, labour to ascend,
The fames of mighty men do never end,

Is not Ambition an aspiring sin?

Yes for blind bats and birds of lazy wing.

Me seems tis good to keep within our bounds,

Why beasts themselves, of bounds are discontent,
Spend me your studies to get offices,
Then stooping suitors with uncovered heads
May groaning come, vnbowelling the bags,
Of their rich burdens, in your wide mouthed deskes.

But men will tax us to want charity.

True charity begins first at home,
Here in your bosoms dwell your deere-lou'd hearts,
Feed them with joy; first crown their appetites,
And then cast water on the care-scorch't face,
Let your own longings first be satisfied,
All other pity is but foolish pride.

Sweet council; worthy of most high regard,
All our endeavours shall be to aspire.

Ours to be rich and gallant in attire.

All to be brave, else all of no respect,
It is the habit, doth the mind deject.

Lets brave it out, since Pride hath made us know,
Nothing is graced that wants a glorious show.

The puffed up spirits of the greater sort.
Shall make them scorn the abject and the base;
The impatient spirit of the wretched sort,
Shall think imposed duties their disgrace,
Poor naked need shall be as full of pride,
As he that for his wealth is Deified.

No Steward with discharge shall us disgrace,

Why all the Lords have now cashierd their trains.

But we have served his father in the field.

What, think they boys can serve to beard their foes?

Be patient fellow, see thou not my Lord?

What an I see him? puppet prating ape?

We are no stocks, but we can feel disgrace.

Not tonglesse blocks, but since we feel, we'll speak.

What a coil keeps those fellows there?

These impudent audatious serving-men,
Scarcely believe your honours late discharge.

Believe it? by this sword and buckler no,
Stripped of our liveries, and discharged thus?

Walk sirs, nay walk; awake ye drowsy drones,
That long have sucked the honney from my hives;
Be gone ye greedy beefe-eaters y' are best:
The Callis Cormorants from Dover road,
Are not so chargeable as you to feed.

'Tis true my Lord, they carelessly devour.
In faith good fellows get some other trade,
Ye live but idle in the common-wealth.

Broke we not house up, you would break our backs.

We break your backs? no 'tis your rich laced suits,
And straight laced mutton; those break all your backs.

Cease Ruffians, with your swords and bucklers, hence.

For service, this is savage recompense.
Your Fathers bought lands and maintained men?
You sell your lands, and scarce keep rascal boys,
Who Ape-like jet, in guarded coats; are whipped
For mocking men? though with a shameless face,
Yet graceless boys can neuermen disgrace.

Desertfull virtue: O impiety!

My Lord Philarchus, follow all my course,
I keep a Taylor, Coach-man, and a Cooke,
The rest for their boord-wages may go look,
A thousand pound a year, will so be saved
For revelling, and banqueting and plays.

Plays, well remembered, we will have a play,
Steward lets have Sir Olliuer Owlets men,

Philarchus, I mislike your fashion?

Faith I'll fly intoo't with a sweeping wing,
Me thinks your honours hose sit very well,
And yet this fashion is grown so stale;

Your hat is of a better block then mine.

Is on a better block, your Lordship means;

Without all question tis, he that denies,
Either he hath no judgment or no eyes.

Your Lord-ships doublet-skirt is short and neat,

Who sits there, finds the more uneasy seat;

My Lords, your Supper stays; tis eight a clock,

What, is't so late, that fashion's not so good.

Of our three Jewels (sir) which likes you best?

An excellent piece, this those excells as sarre,
As glorious Tytan staines a silly Start;

Tush, be not partial, but peruse mine well,
See you not proud Vlisses carrying spoils;

The rest are but (to this) in sooth base foils,
And yet they all are rich and wondrous fair,

But trash; I'll have a Jewel Amatist,
Whose beauty shall strike blind the gazers Eye;

I'll put it down, one promised to devise
A Globelike Jewel cut transparently,
And in the place of fixed stars, to set
The richest stones that mightiest sums could get.

Nay I'll be matchless for a carckanet,
Whose Pearls and Diamonds placed with ruly rocks
Shall circle this fair neck to set it forth,

Well Goldsmith, now you may begone. -- Taylor,
I'll have a purfled Robe, loose boddied-wise.
That shall enjoy my jewels may denhead.

The loosest bodies are in fashion most,

We better know what likes us best, then you,
Let me have flaring fashions, tuck't and pinned
That powerful winds may heave it all a huff,

True measure of my body shall be taken,
Plain dealing is the best when all is done,
That fall Pride taught us when we first begun.

I'll have a rich embossed imbrothery,
On which invaluable precious Robe,
I'll hang the glorious brightness of my Globe.
Mistress Pinckanie is my new ruff done?

Believe me Madam tis but new begun.

Let pinching citty-dames orecloud their Eyes,
Our breasts lie forth like conduicts of delight
Able to tice the nicest appetite,
Mistress Pinckanie, shall I have this Fan,

Madam not this week do what I can,

Pleasure as bond slave, to our wills is tied,
We Ladies cannot be defamed with Pride,
Come, let's have a play, let poor slaves prate
Rank pride in meanest sort, in us is state,
Remember promise mistres Pinkanie.

Well Ladies, though with work I am oppressed,
Workewomen always live by doing, best.

Chrisoganus faith what's the lowest price,

You know as well as I; ten pound a play.

Our Companie's hard of hearing of that side,

And will not this book pass, alas for pride,
I hope to see you starve and storm for books,
And in the dearth of rich invention,
When sweet smooth lines are held for precious
Then will you fawn and crouch to Poesy,

Not while goosequillian Posthast holds his pen.

Will not our own stuff serve the multitude?

Write on, cry on, yawle to the common sort
Of thickskin'd auditors: such rotten stuffs,
More fit to fill the pauneh of Esquiline,
Then feed the hearings of judicial ears,
Ye shades triumph, while foggy Ignorance
Clouds bright Apollos beauty: Time will clear,
The misty dullness of Spectators Eeys,
Then woeful hisses to your fopperies,
O age when every Scriveners boy shall dip?
Profaning quills into Thessaliaes Spring,
When every artist prentice that hath read
The pleasant pantry of conceits, shall dare,
To write as confident as Hercules.
When every Ballad-monger boldly writes:
And windy forth of bottle-ale doth fill
Their purest organ of invention:
Yet all applauded and puffed up with pride,
Swell in conceit, and load the Stage with stuff,
Rakt from the rotten imbers of stall jests:
Which basest lines best please the vulgar sense
Make truest rapture lose pre-eminence.

The fellow doth talk like one that can talk,

Is this the well-learn'd man Chrissganus,
He beats the Air the best that ere I heard,

Ye scraps of wit, base Echoes to our voice,
Take heed ye siumble not with stalking hie?
Though fortune reeles with strong prosperity.

Farewell the Muses, poor Poet adieu,
When we have need't may be we'll send for you.

My Lord hath sent request to see a play.

Your Lord? what, shall our pains be soundly recompensed?
With open hand of honours srancke reward?

Ye shall have four fair Angels gentlemen,

Fair Ladies mean you? we have four in the play

Nay (my good friends) I mean in fair pure gold.

Fie tis to much, too long ere it be told,

Mas these are single jests indeed,
But I will double it once, ye shall have eight.

But are you sure that none will want the weight?
To wey down our expense in sumptuous Clothes?

Well, pleasures pride shall mount to higher rate,
Ten pound a play will scarce maintain our state,

Fat Plenty brings in Pride and Idleness:
The world doth turn a Maze in giddy round:
This time doth raise, what other times confound.

O sir, your moral lines were better spent,
In matters of more worthy consequent.

Well, whilst occasion helps to clime alofft,
Wee'le mount Promotions highest battlement.

And break your necks I hope; clime not too fast,
A heady course, confusion ends at last.

Preach to the poor; look Steward, to your count,
Direct your household, teach not us to mount:

Farewell ye proud (I hope they hear me not)
Proud Statute Rogues.

Faith husband, I'll have one to bear my train,
Another bare before to usher me.

Nay I my self will learn the Courtly grace,
Honour shall give my wealth a higher place.
Out on these velvet guards, and black laced sleeves,
These simpering fashions simply followed.

Well, through the streets in thundering coach I'll ride,
Why serves our wealth, but to maintain our pride?
Law, Arms, and Merchandise, these are three heads,
From whence Nobility first took his spring.
Then let our haughty minds our fortunes spend,
Pleasure and honour shall our wealth attend.

Nay I will have it, I that I will.

Contain your speech, within your private thoughts,
We are encountered with the honoured train.

Fair Ladies, could these times affoord you cates,
You should be feasted in Apolloes hall;
But (Lords) the chaps of wide-pancht gluttony,
Have wasted all the dainties of the land.
Servant Philarchus, what, no mask too night?

A Play, a Mask, a Banquet, we'll have all.

My Lord, the Players now are grown so proud,
Ten pound a play, or no point Comedy.

What? insolent with glib prosperity?
Faith Gentlemen no Players will appear:
Gallants, to your Mask.

How soon they can remember to forget,
Their undeserved Fortunes and esteem;
Blush not the peasants at their pedigree?
Sucked pale with lust; what, bladders swollen with pride,
To strout in shreds of nitty brogerie?

Well, though the penny raised them to the pound,
Just Envy, causeless Pride doth still confound.

Well let them blase, there's none so blind but sees,
Prydes fall is still frost-bit with miseries.
What, come they in so blunt without devise?

The night is dead before the sport be borne.

Cease Music there, prepare to banquet sirs.

Ceres and Bacchus tickled Venus stirs.

Gallants unmask, and fall to banqueting,
A health about, carouse shall feed carouse.

The first is pledg^d, and here begins a fresh.

This royal health of welcome greetes you all.

Bacchus begins to reel with going round.

The grape begins to fume.

Why let it fret: not pledge a Nobleman.

I like this Jewel, I'll have his fellow.

How? you? what fellow it? gip Velvet guards.

Insolent for-beare.

A petty-foggers whoodded wise so pearcht?

Why not proud Lord? then bid your mincks come down.

Dishonourable Lord, I say thou li'st.

I challenge thee on that disgraceful word,

Here answer I thy challenge in this wine.

I will confirm thy pledge, and meet thee too.

Down climbing Pride to Stygian Tartarie,
The breath of Envy fills the empty world,
Envy, whose nature is to work alone,
As hating any Agent but her self,
Turn, turn, thou Lackey to the winged Time,
I envy thee in that thou art so slow,
And I so swift to mischief: So, now stand,
Peace, Plenty, Pride, had their competitors,
But I enjoy my Sovereignty alone.
Now shall proud Noblesse, Law, and Merchandise,
Each swell at other, as their veins would break,
Fat Ignorance, and rammish Barbarism,
Shall spit and drivel in sweet Learnings face,
Whilst he half starved in Envy of their power,
Shall eat his marrow, and him-selfe devour,
Awake ye Brawne-fed Epicures, look up,
And when you think your clearest eyes to find.
Be all their Organs struck with Envy blind.

O pallid Envy how thou suck my blood,
And wastes my vital spirits: I could rave,
Run mad with anguish, for my slight respect,
O wher's the honour to my high borne blood!
When every peasant, each Plebeian,
Sits in the throne of vndeseru'd repute,
When every Pedlers-French is termed Monsignuer,
When broad-cloathd trades-man, and what lack you sir.
Is wrapped in rich habiliments of silk,
Whilst urgent need makes Princes bend their knee,
As servile as the ignobilitie,
To crouch for coin, whilst flaues tie fast our Lands,
In Statute Staple, or these Merchants bands.

Wan ghostlike Envy, spungeth up my blood,
Whilst I behold yon halfe-fac'd Minion,
The daughter of some Cloves and Cinnamon,
To equal me in rich accoutrements.
O, wher's the outward difference of our birth!
When each odde-mincing mistress Citty-Dame,
Shall dare to be as sumptuously adorned
With Jewels, chains, and richest ornaments,
As we from whom their Fathers held their land
In bond slaves Tenure, and base villianage.

Why should yon bubble of Nobility,
Yon shade of Man appropriate Epithetes
Of noble, and right honourable, Sir,
To the blind Fortune of his happy birth?
Why should this reeling world (drunk with the juice
Of Plenties bounty) give such attribute
Of sovereign title, place and dignity,
To that same swollen up Lord, whom blinded chance,
Above his virtues merit doth advance,
To high exalted state, whilst all repine,
To see our sweat rewarded, and our pain
Guerdond but with a single fee, an Angels gain.

God for his mercy, how yon Lady ietts,
And swoopes along in Persian royalty.
O, I could pine with Envy, and consume
My heart in foul disdain, that she should strout,
And swell in ostentation of her birth,
Decking the curled tresses of her hair
With glittering ornaments, whilst I am pent
In nice respect of civil modesty:
I'll not endure it, Lawyers wives shall shine,
Spite of the law, and all that dare repine.

Drops of cold sweat hang on my fretting brow,
O, I could gnash my teeth, and whip my self,
Parboyle my liver in this envious heate
Of deep repining Malice! I am vexed,
Stung with a Viperous impatience,
That yon Nobility, yon Iohn a Stile,
Should sole possess the throne of dignity,
Whilst we fat Burgomasters of the State,
Rich treasuries of gold, full stuffed up trunks,
With all the fattest marrow of the land
Should be debarred from types Majestic,
And live like Aesops Ass: whilst our mean birth
Curbs our aspiring humours from the seat,
Of honours mounted state; I cannot sleep,
My entrails burn with scorn, that Merchandise,
Should stand and lick the pavement with his knee,
Bare-head and crouching to Nobility,
Though forfeited to us be all their state,
Yet Envy (still) my heart doth macerate.

Gip Mistress Madam, and French-hood intaild
Unto a Habeas Corpus: Iesu God,
How proud they jet it, and must I give wall?
And bend my body to their Mistresse-ships,
O husband, I am sick, my cheek is pale
With --

With what my sweet?

With Envy, which no Physic can prevent;
Shall I still stand an abject in the eye,
Of fair respect, not mounted to the height
To the top gallant of o're-peering state,
That with Elated looks of Majesty,
I may out face the proud pild Eminence,
Of this same gilded Madam Bellula,
And yon same Ione a Noke, chained Champertie?

Content thee wife; the tide of Royalty,
Shall only flow into our Merchandise,
The gulf of our Ambition shall devour
All the supports of honour, lands and plate,
Rich mineral Jewels, sumptuous palaces,
All shall be swallowed by the yawning mouth
Of hungry Avarice. Thus I plotted it,
You see Mauortius stormy brow portends,
Tempestuous whirle-windes of tumultuous arms,
Now when the breath of war is once denounced,
Then troupe the gallants to our wealthy shops.
To take up rich apparel, pawn their land,
To puff up Prides swollen bulk with plumy shows,
Then, when the Actions expectation flags,
And fills not up the mouth of gaping hope,
To us returns the mal' contented youth,
And for the furnishment of one suite more,
All, all, is ours, Jewels, plate and Lands,
Al take career into the Merchants hands,
Then come, withdraw, and cool thy envious heate,
My policy shall make thy hopes replete.

And shall I still (dear Vourcher) sit below,
Give place to Madams and these city dames,
O, how my envy at their glory flames.

Be patient but a while (sweet Campertie,)
And I will make the world do fealty,
To thy exalted State: the Law shall stand,
Like to a waxen nose, or Lesbian rule.
A dial Gnomon, or a weathercock,
Turned with the breath of greatness every way,
On whose incertainty, our certain ground
Of towering hight shall stand invincible:
The Dubious Law shall nurse dissention,
Which being pampered with our feeding helps,
Wee'le swell in greatness and our palace Towers
Shall prick the ribs of Heaven with proud height:
Then let thy Envy cease, since thy high fate,
Shall not discern a fortune more Elate.

Se with what slight respect they pass from us,
Not giving to our birth's their due saluts,
O Dearest Lord! shall high borne Bellula?
Be sunk, and thus obscured by the proud shine,
Of yon sophisticate base Alcumie,
You b^llion stuff: O noble bloods repine!
That dirt vsurpes the orb, where you should shine.

Content thee sweet, the lightning of my arms,
Shall purge the air of these gross foggy clouds,
That do obscure our births bright radiance,
When Iron Mars mounts up his plumy Crest,
The Law and Merchandise in rust may rest,
Then Euy cease; for e're the Son shall set,
I'll buckle on Mauortius burganet.

Snmma petit liuor, perflant altissima venti,
Then poor Chrisoganus, whole envy thee,
Whose dusky fortune hath no shining gloss
That Envies breath can blast? O I could curse
This idiot world! This ill nursed age of Peace,
That foster all save virtue; comforts all
Saving industrious art, the souls bright gem,
That crussheth down the sprowting stemmes of Art,
Blasts forward wits with frosty cold contempt,
Crowning dull clodds of earth with honours,
Wreath guilding the rotten face of barbarism
With the unworthy shine of Eminence.
O! I could wish my self consumed in air,
When I behold these huge fat lumps of flesh,
These big-bulkt painted posts, that senseless
Ssand, to have their backs pasted with dignity,
Quite choking up all passage to respect:
These huge Colossi that roll up and down,
And fill up all the seat of man with froth
Of outward semblance, whilst pale Artisans.
Pine in the shades of gloomy Academes,
Faint in pursuit of virtue, and quite tierd
For want of liberal food* for liberal Art
Give up the goal to sluggish Ignorance.
O whether doth my passion carry me?
Poor fool, leave prating, envy not their shine,
Who still will flourish, though great Fate repine.

Jack of the Clock-house, wher's Master Post-hast?

In my book for Slow-pace, twelue-pence on'spate, for staying so late.

Prologue begin; rehearse, c.
Gentlemen in this envious age we bring Bayard
For Bucephalus: if mierd, bogg'd,
Draw him forth with your favours,
So promising that we never mean to perform
Our Prologue peaceth.

Peaceth? what peaking Pag^nter pend that?

Who but Master Post-hast.

It is as dangerous to read his name at a playe-dore
As a printed bill on a plague door.

You wear the hansom'st compassed hilt I have seen;

Doth this fashion like my friend so well.

So well I mean to wear it for your sake.

I can deny thee nothing if I would.

Fie how this Ingling troubles our rehearsal: say on.

Fellow Belsh you have found a haunt at my house
You must belch and breath your spirits some, where else.

Jealous of me with your seat for Master Iohn,

When the door's shut the signe's in Capricorne

Then you might heave the latch up with your horne

This Cockoldly coil hinders our rehearsal.

I'll tear their turret tops,
I'll beat their Bulwarcks down,
I'll rend such Raskalls form their rags,
And whip them out of town.

Patience (my Lord) your fury strayes too far.

Stay sirs, rehearse no farther then you are
For here be huffing parts in this new book;

Have Ier'e a good humour in my part?

Thou hast near a good one out of thy part;

I'll play the conquering King that likes me best,

Thou play the cowardly knave; thou dost but ieast,

Half a share, half a shirt, a Comedian
A hole share, or turn Chameleon.

Well sirs, the gentlemen see into our trade,
We cannot gull them with browne-paper stusse,
And the best Poets grown so envious
They will starve rather then we get store of money.

Since dearth of Poets lets not players live by wit
To spite them lets to wars, and learn to use a spit.

O excellent ill a spit to roast a rime.

Twill serve you to remember dinner time.

That's true tis time, let's away.

Rule fier-eied War, revel in blood and flames,
Envy, whose breath hath poisoned all estates,
Hath now resigned her spiteful throne to us:
Stand forth Ambition; fly through the land,
And enter every breast of noble blood,
Infect their honoured minds with factious thoughts,
And make them glister in opposed arms:
Let unjust force and scarlet Tyranny
Wait on their Actions till their ulcers break,
Or else be lauced by the hand of War,
Which cannot be without a lasting scarre,

Ambition like a Pestilence doth fly,
To poison Honour and Nobility.

Fury, thy turn is next, go now and fill
The trunk of Peasants with thy dangerous breath,
Inspire them with the spirit of Mutiny,
Rage, and rebellion, make them desperate
Hurry them headlong unto every ill,
Like dust raised with a whirl wind; let their eyes,
Be ever fixed upon the bruised prints
Made in their state by wild oppression,
And (after all) possess them with this fire,
That only War must purchase their desire.

Fury shall shine amongst this multitude,
Like a bright Meteor in the darkest cloud.

Horror shall greet the bosom of green youth,
The melting liver of pied gallantry,
The wrinkled vizard of Devotion,
The cheuerell conscience of corrupted law,
And frozen heart of gowty Merchandise,
Horror wound these, strike palsies in their limbs,
And as thou stalk'st (in thy prodigious shape,)
And meet a fellow swollen with mounted place;
Shake him with glaunses of thy hollow eyes,
And let thy vigour live as his heart dies.

Enough, ere long, the air shall ring with shrikes.
And sad lament of those, whom Horror strikes.

Horror adieu,
These three, are Ushers to our Deity,
Only vast Ruin here attends on us,
And is a follower of our high designs:
Ruin thou faithful servant to grimm War,
Now teach thy murdering shot to tear men's limm's,
Thy brazen Cannos how to make a breach,
In a fair Cities bozome; teach thy fierce
To climb the tops of houses; and thy mines,
To blow up Churches in th'offended sky.
Consume whole groves and standing fields of Corn
In thy wild age, and make the proud earth groan,
Under the weight of thy confusion.

This and much more shall Ruin execute.

Mean while we'll steep our sinewy feet in blood
And dance unto the Music of the field,
Trumpets for trebbles, bases, bellowing drnmmes.
Broils Envy bred, but War shall end those brawls,
Deaf war that will not hear a word of Peace:
Sharpe pikes shall serve for subtle lawyers pens
The Merchants silks shall turn to shining steel,
In steed of false-yard sticks, large horsemens staves,
Shall measure out true pattern's of their graves.

Sir what set you up there?

Text bills for Plays.

What Plays in time of Wars? hold sirta
There's a new plot.

How many mean you shall come in for this?

Player tis press money.

Press money, press money, alas sir press me,
I am no fit Actor for th action.

Text bills must now be turned to Iron bills.

And please you let them be dagger pies.

Sir Oliuers men; the last Players took the
Towns reward like honest men.

Those were a couple of Cunnicatchers that
Cousin Majors, and have no consort but themselves,
But we are a full company, and our credit with our
Master known.

Mean while there's presse-mony, for your reward,

No (I thank your worship) we mean not to trouble your town at this time.


Well Masters, you that are maister-sharers,
Must provide you upon your own purses,

Alas sir, we Players are priuieldg'd,
Tis our Audience must fight in the field for us,
And we upon the stage for them.

Sir as concerning half a score angels
Or such a matter for a man in my place.

Those days are out of date.

The more's the pity sir,

Well, I have a Brewer to my Ingle,
Heel furnish me with a horse great enough.

Faith I'll even past all my ballads together,
And make a coat to hold out pistoll-proofe;

I marvel what use I should make of my Ingle,
The hobby-horse-seller.

Fa^th make him sell a whole troupe of horse
To buy thee one.

Sirrs, if these soldiers light upon our playing parrell, they will strout it in
the field, and flaunt it out.


Well sirs, I have no stomach to these wars,

Faith, I have a better stomach to my breakfast.

A shrewd mornings work for Players,

Let's be gon?

Have patience worthy Lords, and calm your spirits.

Peace prating Scholar: bid the Sea be still,
When powerful winds doc toss the raging waives,
Or stay the winged lightning in his course;
When thou dost this, thy words shall charm me too.
Till then preserve thy breath.

Mauortius, dare thou maintain thy words?

How? dare Philarchus? yes, I dare do more;
In blood or fire; or where thou dare not come;
In the numme fingers of cold death I dare.

Swallow those words, or thou shalt eat my sword.

He is no Ostrich sir he loves no iron.

And yet me thinks he should be by his plume.

What are you playing with my feather too?

O stay your rages,
Let not Ambition captivate your blood,
Make not your hates objects for vulgar eyes.

A pox upon this linguist, take him hence;
Philarchus, I defy thee, and in scorn,
Spit on thy bozome: vowing here by heaven,
If either sword, or fire, or strength of men,
Or any other steeled violence,
Can bring to swift confusion what is thine,
Upon this grateful soil; it shall be done.

And when 'ts done, I will restore my wrongs
Out of thy Forts, thy Castles and thy lands.

My lands?

I, factious Lord, till then adieu,
We'll shine like Comets in next enter-view.

My soul is big in travail with revenge,
And I could rip her womb up with a stab,
To free the imprisoned issue of my thought.

O, how this vulture, (vile Ambition,)
Tyers on the heart of greatness, and devours,
Their bleeding honours, whilst their empty names,
Lye chained unto the hill of infamy:
Now is the time wherein a melting eye
May spend it self in tears, and with salt drops,
Write woe, and desolation in the dust,
Upon the frighted bosom of our land,
Pity and Piety are both exiled,
Religion buried with our Fathers bones,
In the cold earth; and nothing but her face,
Left to adorn these gross and impious times.

Liberty, liberty, liberty.

Nay but stay, stay, my Masters: we have not insulted yet who shall be our
Captain.


Mass that's true: faith let's all be Captains.

Content, so we shall be sure to have no equality amongst us.


O, it's best, for, (for mine own part)
I scorn to have an equal.

Well then: what exploit shall we do first?

Marry I'll tell you:
Let's pluck down the Church, and set up an Ale-house.

O excellent, excellent, excellent, a rare exploit, a rare exploit.


Good: this is for exploit: but then there's a thing called Action.

O, that's going to Sea; that, we have nothing to do withal,

No, we are all for the land, we.

Land, I: we'll pluck down all the noble houses in the land, e're we have
done.


It were a most noble service, and most worthy of the Chronicle.


Slid, these Lords are grown so proud,
Nay, we'll have a fling at the Lawyers too.

O, I, first of all at the Lawyers.

True, that we may have the law in our own hands.

O then we may take up what we will of the Merchants.

I and forfet our bonds at pleasure, no body can sue us.

O, 'twill be rare: I wonder how much Velvet will ^parell me and my horse.


Talk not of that man, we'll have enough:
All shall be common.

Wives and all: what, Helter, skelter.

Slid, we are men as well as they are.

And we came all of our Father Adam.

Go to then, why should we be their slaves?

Liberty, liberty, liberty.

See, see, this common beast the multitude,
(Transported thus with fury) how it raves;
Threatening all states with ruin, to englut
Their bestial and more brutish appetites.
O you auspicious, and divinest powers,
(That in your wisdoms suffer such dread plagues
To flow and cover a rebellious land)
Give end unto their furies! and drive back
The roaring torrent on the Authors heads,
That (in their pride of Rage) all eyes may see.
Justice hath whips to scourge impiety.

Good morrow master Fourcher.

Master Lyon-rash you are welcome:
How fare you sir, in these prodigious times?

Troth like a man grown wild and desperate,
E'ene spent with horror of their strange effects.

I fear they will be much more stranger yet.

And you have cause to fear sir.

So have you: if wealth may make a man suspect his state,
What news hear you sir? sit down I pray you.

I wonder how you dare keep open shop,
Considering the tumults are abroad:
They say the Nobles all are up in arms,
And the rude commons in disseuerd troupes
Have gathered dangerous head, and make such spoil,
As would strike dead a true reporters tongue.

Faith I am ignorant what course to take,
We in the City here are so distracted
As if our spirits were all earth and air,
I know not how: each hour here comes fresh news,
And nothing certain

Well if this be true,
The issue cannot be but dangerous,

O they have made the violent'st attempts
That ere were heard of: ruined Churches, Towns,
Burned goodly Mannours, and indeed laid wast.
All the whole Country as they pass along.

There's no prevention if they once come here
But that our City must endure the sack.

I fear it sir.

Faith we are sure to feel
The fury of the tempest when it comes.
The Law and Merchandise may both go beg.

Where are you husband, do you here the news?

What news on Gods name?

O the enemies.! Four. What of the enemies?

They are entered into the city.

Adieu good master Fourcher.

Lord have mercy upon us,

O good Master Lyon-rash go pray.

How now, what noise is this?

They cry arm arm me thinks.

O sweet heart the Spaniards are come,
We shall all be killed they say.
Master Vourcher what shall we do? O Lord.

Arm, arm, arm.

Come on Players, now we are the Sharers
And you the hired men: Nay you must take patience,
Slid how do you march?
Sirha is this you would rend and tear the Cat
Upon a Stage, and now march like a drowned rat?
Look up and play the Tamburlaine: you rogue you.

Thus Heaven (in spite of fury) can preserve,
The trustfull innocent, and guiltless Soul;
O, what a thing is man, that thus forgets
The end of his creation; and each hour
Strikes at the glory of his maker thus?
What brazen vizage, or black iron soul
Hath strength to Justify so Godlesse deeds?
He that is most infeoft to Tyranny,
The man whose Jaws burn most with thirst of blood,
What colours or thin cobweb can he weave,
To cover so abhorred iniquities?
If then there be no shadow, no pretext,
To veil their loathed bodies; what should make
Men so enamoured on this Strumpet war.
To dote upon her form? when (in her self)
She's made of nothing, but infectious plagues.
Witness the present Chaos of our Scene,
Where every street is chained with linckes of spoil,
Here proud Ambition rides; there Fury flies,
Here Horror; and there ruthless Murder stalks,
Led on by Ruin, and in Steel and fire,
That now on tops of houses; now in vaults,
Now in the sacred Temples; here, and there
Runs wild.

Reign Poverty in spite of tragic war,
And tiumph over glittering vanity,
Though want be never void of bitter woes,
Yet slow-pac'd remedy, true patience shows,
See worldling worlds of Virtue lined within,
Though sinners all; yet least replete with sin.
I scorn a scoffing fool about my Throne,
An Artless Idiot; that (like Esops Dawe,
Plumes fairer fether'd birds: no, Poverty,
Will dignify her chair with deep Divines,
Philosophers and Schollers feast with me,
As well as Martialists in misery.
First change the hour from five to fatal six,
Then ring forth knells of heavy discontent,
With fighes and groans whilst I have government.

Thin Famine needs must follow Poverty.
My bones lye open, like a withered tree
By storms disbarkt of her defending skin,
So near the heart the weather beats within.

O end thy Age! that we may end our days,
Once Objects, now all Abjects to the world,
For after feeble Sickness death ensues,
And ends grief that happy joy renews.

Then Bondage shall vnbolt those cruel bars,
That thralls fair honour in obscure reproach,
And sauage-like yokes up humanity,
To bind in chains true-borne ciuillity.

Though Sluttishnesse be loathsome to her self,
Penurious time must be obscene and base,
Who hates the rich must dwell with Poverty,
Since rule in any thing, is Sovereignty.

Were Poverty a word more miserable
Then Mans austere invention could propound,
Yet is poor Honesty rich Honours ground:
Whose eyes vnuail'd like to th'vnhoodded Hawke,
Look straight on high, and in the end aspire,
To feel the warmth of Princes holy fire.
Yet Honour, Wealth, Lands, and who wins the prize,
Obtains but Vanity of Vanities.
Come follow me my never failing friend.

The broils of war wherein I gloried more
Then Priams Hector, who by burning walls,
Was traild along (dread victories deep fall)
So from these gates my self in mean disgrace
Am banished forth, pinch't through with poverty.
Who tells us all 'tis true that she hath sed,
Poor flies will tickle Lyons being dead.

The thirst of Honour called me to the wars,
Where I have drunk a health (too deep a draught)
My full-mouthd bags may now be filled with air,
The Devil and Ambition taught it me.

Is that Philarchus that complains? 'tis so,

See how Mauortius turns away his face,
To seek to friends 'tis holden for disgrace.

Time was, I could have dined amongst my friends,
Now stands at every door a lack and Apes
And tells me 'tis too late, his Lord hath dined.

This miserable world would make one mad;
I stepped unto a Vintner at the Bar,
And offered him my Rapier for a pawn;
The saucy slave took it in such a scorn,
And flung it in the streets, replying thus,
Mere want brings weapons out of use with us.

See poor Philarchus pouring out his plaints,
To unrelenting walls, relentless men.

Are wounds rewards for Soldiers in the field?
What? sell our lands, are these the fruits of War?
Then dye Philarchus, let not shame survive,
Thy fainting honour, dead and yet alive.

Here come our wives, how wretchedly they look.

My Jewels pawnd, my rings are gone to wrack,
The greedy Usurer hath gotten all.

I am a prey to wretched Poverty,
Ill featured Famine will devour us up,
Whose wrinkled face, is like pale deaths aspect.

Behold my wife like Winters parramour,
Robbed and bereaved of nuptial Ornaments.
"Hide thee Philarchus lower then the grave,
"The Earth will cover though it cannot save.

If men lament, whose wonted yron-hearts,
Were harder then the Armour they have worn,
And wail the Agent of a woman's voice,
What shall weak women and poor Ladies do?
Fall to those tears, that we were borne unto.

Could I but learn (with Croesus) to endure
The falling sickness of sad Poverty,
Who lost a rich commanding Empery
Patience would prove a tutor to my grieves.

Thou want's a Solan to consort with thee,
To prove affliction is the perfect way
That leads to Ioues tribunal dignity;
Ill hast thou governed thy prosperity,
That can not smile in mere adversity.
Look upon me (the poorest slave in show,
That ever fortune buried in mishap:)
Yet this is Natures richest lewell-house
And teaches me to weep at all your wants.

Why, thou art far more wretcheder then we,
How can thou teach us then tranquillity?

See thou this poor and naked bozome here?
Dost thou behold this scorned uncovered head?
When thou wast rich and Peerless in thy pride,
Content did never harbour in thy breast,
Nor ere had love, her residence in thee,
(I mean the love of perfect happiness)
But skilless grudging from a haughty spirit
Did blind thy senses with a slender merit.
Whilst I (poor man) not subject to such thought
Gave entertain to those sweet blessed babes,
Which Sapience brought from Wisdoms holy breast,
And thought me rich to have their company.
By nursing them in Peace I shunned all Sloth,
Nor yet did Plenty make me prodigal:
Pride I abhorred and termed the Beggars shield:
Nor ever did base Euuie touch my heart.
Yet always loou'd to bear (as Solon sed,)
A Turtles eye within an Aspicks head:
Nor could the rattling fury of fierce war
Astonish me more then the mid-night clock,
The Trumpeter to Contemplation:
For Poverty, I shake her by the hand,
As welcome Lady to this woeful Land.

How might we tread the path's to happy ends,
Since foes to Learning are not Virtues friends.

First entertain submission in your souls
To frame true concord in one unity.
Behold the fair proportion of a man,
Whom heavens have created so complete,
Yet if the arm make war against the head,
Or that the heart rebel against the brain,
This elemental body (thus compact,)
Is but a scattred Chaos of revenge;
Your laws appointed to be positive,
(By War confounded) must be brought again.
For law is that which Love and Peace maintain.

Thou Son of knowledge (richer then a man)
We censure thy advise as oracles.

Follow, and I'll instruct you what I can:

We followed beasts before but now a man.

O Heavens pouring high-pryzd savours forth,
Like to the honny dew that sweets the Leaves,
Once send us Peace, that fairest Palme-crownd Queen.

Ruin and War the precedents of Wrath,
That crop't the fifty Sons of Hecuba,
Have rid their circuit through this fertile soil,
And quite transformed it to a Wilderness.

Come let us sit and morn with sad laments,
The heavy burdens of our discontents.

To wail our want let speaking slack the pain,
For words of grief divide the grief in twain.

Our Shops (sometimes) were stuffed with cloth of gold,
But War hath emptied them, and Spyders build
Their Cob-web-tents; weaving foul dusty lawn
For poor woe-working Poverty to wear.

O woes! behold our poor distressed wives.

From Poverty to Famine, worse and worse

The scourge of Pride, and Heavens detested curse.

Wher's that excess consumed upon the back?

Sunk down to Hell whilst hunger feels the lack.

Who now will pity us, that scorned the poor?

Pity is past when Peace is out of door.

Drink thou my tears and I will drink up thine,
For nought but tears is miseries salt wine.

We that have scorned to dress our meat our selves,
Now would be glad if we had meat to dress.

And if Lament were remedy for want
Their cates wear course that in Lament were scant,

Comfort sweet wife, ill lasts not always so:
And good (some-times) makes end of lingering woe.

My grief is thine,

And mine is most for thee.

My care is thine.

Be mine for thee and me.

Faith Poverty hath paid my wife on the petticoat.

From these deuowring woormes, eat men alive,
And swollow up whole Mannours at a bit
The whilst our hungry bodies die for lack,
And honest husbandy must go to wrack.

Pray sirs for Peace, that best may please us all.
From cities Pride the country takes his fall.

Tis Time, for plough-shares (now) are turned to bills,
Carte-horses pressed to cary Cavaliers,
True laboring servants counted Soldiers slaves,

Though Famine hungerstarue yet heaven saves.

Then let us pray to heaven all for Peace.
For thence comes comfort, plenty and increase.

Post me no posting; pay me the shot,
You live by wit; but we must live by money.

Goody sharpe, be not so short,
I'll pay you, when I give you money.

When you give me money? go to, I'll bear no Longer.


What and be under fifty?

Master Cunstable hoe, these Players will not pay their shot.


Faith sir, War hath so pinch't us we must pawn.

Alas poor Players: hostis; what comes it to?

The Sharers dinners six pence a piece, the hirelings pence.


What sixepence an Egg, and two and two at an Egg.


Faith Famine affords no more.

Fellows bring out the hamper choose somew-what out o'th Stock.

What will you have this cloak to pawn,
what think you it's worth?

Some four groats,

The pox is in this age, here's a brave world fellows.

You may see what it is to laugh at the Audience.

Well it shall serve for a pane.

Soft sirs I must talk with you for tax money,
To relieve the poor, not a penny paid yet,

Sir, (at few words we shared but xv. pence last week.

But tis well known, that each maintains his Puncke,
And taverns it with druncken suppers still.

Alas they are our wives.

Ye are not all married.

Who are not are glad to bring such as they can get.

Before I'll give such a president, I'll leave playing.

Faith and I too: I'll rather fall to work.

Fall to work after playing unpossible.

Sirs, will you here the truth.

Sir you may choose,

But you must all choose
Whither you'll be shipped and set a shore no man
Knows where as the Romaines did:
Or play for the maintenance of the poor;
And your selves kept like honest men.

We choose neither.

Saving your sad tale, will you take a pot or two.

The dearth of Malt denies it

Its a hard world if the Constable despise it.

Must we be shipped in earnest,
Or do you make us Sheep in ieast,

Ecce signum.

Cunstable do you know what you do.

I, banish idle fellows out o'th'land,

Why Cunstable do you know what you see.

I, I see a Madge howlet: and she sees not see.

Know you our credit with Sir Oliuer?

True, but your boasting hath cracked it, (I fear.)

Faith I must fall to making fidle strings again.

And I to curl horse tails to make fools beards.

I'll boldly fall to ballading again.

Sirs, those prouisoes will not serve the turn,
What hoe, Sailors, ship away these players.

The wind blows fair, and we are ready sir.

No matter where it blows; away with them.

It's an ill wind blows a man thus clean out of ballading.


Bondage, wan Sickness, and bare Poverty,
Vanish like clouds before the Eastern light,
Now Peace appears, hence all to endless night,
And you dejected spirits, crushed with want,
Mount up your minds unto the fairest hope,
Need hath nursed Peace within your Horoscope,
The warm reflection of whose cheering beams,
Makes you as rich as bright Pactolus streams.
Shine plentuous Bounty, crown the naked world,
With odourous wreaths of thy abundant sweets,
Laborious Artizanes, now bustle up,
Your drooping spirits with alacrity.
Peace gives your toiling sweat a due regard,
Crowning your labour with a rich reward.
Ceres be lavish, Bacchus swell to brim,
And all to Peace sing a propitious himne,

With Laurel shall our Altars flame,
In honour of thy sacred name.
No more:
Be dumb in husht observance at this sight,
Here comes Amazements object, wonders height,
Peaces patroness, Heavens miracle,
Virtues honour, Earths admiration,
Chastities Crown, Justice perfection,
Whose train is vnpolute Virginity,
Whose Diadem of bright immortal Fame,
Is burnished with vnvalued respect,
Ineffable wonder of remotest lands;
Still sway thy gracious Sceptre, I resign;
What I am is by Thee, my self am thine,

Astraea mounts unto the Throne.
Mount Empress, whose praise for Peace shall mount,
Whose glory, which thy solid virtues won,
Shall honour Europe whilst there shines a Sun.
Crowned with Heavens inward beauties, worlds applause,
Throned and reposd within the loving fear
Of thy adoring Subjects: live as long
As Time hath life, and Fame a worthy tongue.
Still breath our glory, the worlds Empress,
Religions Guardian, Peaces patroness;
Now flourish Arts, the Queen of Peace doth reign,
Virtue triumph, now she doth sway the stem,
Who gives to Virtue, honours Diadem.
All sing Paeans to her sacred worth,
Which none but Angels tongues can warble forth:
Yet sing, for though we cannot light the Sun,
Yet utmost might hath kind acceptance won.
Religion, Arts, and Merchandise, triumph, triumph:
Astraea rules, whose gracious eyes, triumph, triumph.
Over Vices conquest, whose desires, triumph, triumph:
Whose all to chiefest good aspires, then all triumph.


