IN the Book of Genesis it is expressed,
That when God to Abraha made sure promis
That in his seed al nations should be blessed:
To send him a son by Sara he did not miss,
Then to Isaac (as there recorded it is)
By Rebecca his wife, who had log time be barain
When pleased him, at one birth he sent sons twain.
But before Iacob and Esau yet borne were,
Or had either done good, or ill perpetrate:
As the prophet Malachie and Paule witness bear,
Iacob was chosen, and Esau reprobate:
Iacob I love (said God) and Esau I hate.
For it is not (saith Paule) in mans renewing or will,
But in Gods mercy who chooses whom he will.
But now for our coming we shall exhibit here
Of Iacob and Esau howe the story was,
Whereby Gods adoption may plainly appear:
And also, that what ever Gods ordinance was,
Nothing might defeat, but that it must come to pass.
That if this story may your eyes or ears delight,
We pray you of patience, while we it recite.
NOw let me see what time it is by the star light?
Gods for his grace man, why it is not yet midnight,
We might have slept these four hours yet I dare well say.
But this is our good Esau his common play:
What the devil ails him? now truly I think plain,
He hath either some worms or bottes in his brain.
He scarcely sleeps.xij. good hours in two weeks.
I wot well his watching makes me have lean cheeks.
For there is none other life with him day by day,
But up Ragau, up drowsy hogs head I say:
Why when? Up, will it not be? Up. I come anon.
Up, or I shall reyse you in faith ye drowsy hooreson.
Why, when? shall I fette you? I come sir by and by.
Up with a wild wenyon, how long wilt thou lie?
Up I say, up at once. Up up, let us go hence,
It is time we were in the forest an hour sense.
Now the devil stop that same yallyng throat (think I)
Somwhiles. For from he call, farewell all wink of eye.
Begin he once to call, I sleep no more that stounde,
Though half an hours sleep were worth.x. thousand poud.
Anon when I come in, and bid him good morrow:
Ah sir, up at last, the devil give thee sorrow.
Now the devil break thy neck (think I by and by)
That hast no wit to sleep, nor in thy bed to lye.
Then come on at once, take my quiver and my bow,
Fette Louell my hound, and my horne to blow.
Then forth go we fasting an hour or two ere day,
Before we may well see either our hands or way,
And there range we the wild forest, no crumb of bread
From morning to starck night coming within our head,
Sometime Esaus self will faint for drink and meat:
So that he would be glad of a dead horse to eat.
Yet of fresh the next morrow forth he will again,
And sometime not come home in a whole night or twain:
Nor no delight he hath, no appetite nor mind
But to the wild Forest, to hunt the Heart or Hind,
The Roebucke, the wild bore, the fallow Dear, or Hare:
But howe poor Ragau shall dine, he hath no care,
Poor I, must eat Acornes or Bearies from the Tree.
But if I be found slack in the suit following,
Or if I do fail in blowing or hallowing,
Or if I lack my Staff, or my Horne by my side:
He will be quick enough to fume chafe, and chide.
Am I not well at ease such a master to serve,
As must have such service, and yet will let me starve?
But in faith his fashions displease more than me,

He passes nothing on Rebecca his mother,
And much less passes he on Iacob his brother.
But peace, mum, no more: I see master Esau.
Howe now, are we all ready seruaunt Ragau?
Art thou up for all day man? art thou ready now?

I have ben here this half hour sir waiting for you.


And is all thing ready as I had, to my mind?


Ye have no cause, that I know, any fault to find:
Except that we disease our tent and neighbours all
With rising over early each day when ye call.

Ah thou drowsy draffesacke, would thou rise at noone?
Nay I trow the sixth hour with thee were ouersoone.

Nay I speak of your neighbours being men honest,
That labour all the day, and would fain be at rest:
Whom with blowing your Horne ye disease al abouts.

What care I for waking a sort of clubbishe louts?


And I speak of Rebecca your mother, our dame.


Tut I pass not whether she do me praise or blame.


And I speak of your good father, old Isaac.


Peace foolish knave: As for my father Isaac,
In case he be a sleep, I do him not disease,
And if he be waking, I know I do him please,
For he loves me well from mine nativity,
And never so as now, for mine activity.
Therefore have at it, once more will I blow my Horne
To give my neighbour louts an hail peal in a morn.
Now my master Lightfoote, how say you to this gear,
Will you do your duty to red or fallow Dear?
And Swan mine own good cur, I do think in my mind,
The game shall run apace, if thou come far behind:
And ha Takepart, come Takepart, here, how say you child
Wilt not thou do thy part? yes, else I am beguiled.
But I shrew your cheeks, they have had too much meat.

I blame not dogs to take it, if they may it geat:
But as for my part, they could have pardie,
A small releuauit of that that ye give me.
They may run light enough for ought of me they got,
I had not a good meals meat this week that I wot.

If we have luck this day to kill Hare, Teg, or Do,
Thou shalt eat thy belly full, till thou cry hoe.

I thank you when I have it, master Esau.


Well, come on, let us go now servant Ragau.
Is there any thing more, that I should say or do?
For perhaps we come not again this day or two.

I know nothing master, to God I make a vow,
Except you would take your brother Iacob with you:
I never yet saw him with you an hunting go,
Shall we prove him once whether he will go or no?

No, no, that were in vain: Alas good simple mome.
Nay, he must tarry and suck mothers dug at home:
Iacob must keep home I trow, under mothers wing,
To be from the Tents he loves not of all thing.
Iacob loves no hunting in the wild forest:
And would fear if he should there see any wild beast.
Yea to see the game run, Iacob would be in fear.

In good sooth I wene he would think each Hare a Bear.


What brother mine, what a word call ye that?


Sir I am scarce waked: I spake ere I wit what.


Come on your ways my child, take the law of the game.
I will wake you I trow, and set your tongue in frame.

Oh what have you done master Esau, Gods apes.


Why can ye not yet refrain from letting such scapes?
Come on, ye must have three iertes for the nonce.
One.

Oh, for Gods love sir have done, dispatch at once.


Nay there is no remedy but bide it, there is twain.


O ye rent my cheuerell, let me be past my pain.


Take heed of Huting terms fro hensforth, there is three.


Whoup. Now a mischief on all mopyng fools for me.
Iacob shall keep the Tents ten year for Ragau,
Ere I move again that he hunt with Esau.

Come on, now let us go. God send us game and luck,
And if my hand serve me well,

Ye will kill a Duck.


AH sir, I see I am an early man this morn,
I am once more begylde with Esau his horne.
But there is no such stirrer as Esau is:
He is up day by day before the Crow pis:
Then makes he with his Horne such tootyng and blowing
And with his wide throat such shouting and hallowing,
That no neighbour shall in his Tent take any rest,
From Esau addresses him to the Forest.
So that he makes us whether we will or no,
Better husbands than we would be, abroad to go,
Each of us about our business and our warke.
But whom do I see yonder coming in the dark?
It is my neyghbor Zethar, I perceive him now.

What neighbour Hanan, well met, good morrow to you.
I see well now I am not beguiled alone:
But what boot to lye still? for rest we can take none.
That I marvel much of old father Isaac,
Being so godly a man, why he is so slack
To bring his son Esau to a better stay.

What should he do in the matter I you pray?


Oh it is no small charge to fathers before God,
So to train their children in youth under the rod,
That when they come to age they may virtue ensue,
Wicked pranks abhor, and all lewdness eschew.
And me thinks Isaac, being a man (as he is)
A chosen man of God, should not be slack in this.

Alack good man, what should he do more than he hath don?
I dare say no father hath better taught his son,
Nor no two have given better example of life
Unto their children, than both he and his wife:
As by their younger son Iacob it doth appear*
He lives no looce life, he doth God love and fear.
He keeps here in the Tents like a quiet man:
He gives not himself to wildness any when.
But Esau evermore from his young childehoode
Hath ben like to prove ill, and never to be good.
Young it pricks (folks do say) that will be a thorne,
Esau hath ben nought ever since he was borne.
And whereof comes this, of Education?
Nay it is of his own ill inclination.
They were brought up both under one tuition,
But they be not both of one disposition*
Esau is given to looce and lewd living.

In faith I warrant him have but shreude thriving.


Neither see I any hope that he will amend.


Then let him even look to come to an ill end.
For youth that will follow none but their own bridle,
That leads a dissolute life and an idle,
Youth that refuses wholesome documents,
Or to take example of their godly parents,
Youth that is retchelesse, and takes no regard,
What become of them self, nor which end go forward,
It is great marvel and a special grace,
If ever they come to goodness all their life space.
But why do we consume this whole morning in talk,
Of one that hath no reck no care what way he walk,
We had been as good to have kept our bed still.

Oh it is our part to lament them that do ill.
Like as very Nature, a godly heart doth move
Others good proceedings to tender and to love:
So such as in no wise to goodness will be brought:
What good ma but will mourn, since god us al hath wrought
But ye have some busynesse, and so have I.

And we have ben long, farewell neighbour heartily.


COme forth son Iacob, why tarriest thou behind?


Forsooth mother, I thought ye had said al your mind.


Nay, come I have yet a word or two more to say.


What soever pleases you, speak to me ye may.


Saying thy brother Esau is such an one,
Why rebukest thou him not when ye are alone?
Why doest thou not give him some good sad wise counsel?

He lacks not that mother, if it would avail.
But when I do him any thing of his fault tell,
He calls me foolish proud boy with him to mell.
He will sometime demand by what authoritee,
I presume to teach them which mine elders be?
He will sometime ask if I learn of my mother,
To take on me teaching of mine elder brother?
Sometime when I tell him of his lewd behauour,
He will lend me a mock or twain for my labour:
And sometime for anger he will out with his purse
And call me as please him, and swear he will do worse.

Oh Lord, that to bear such a son it was my chance.


Mother, we must be content with Gods ordinance.


Or, if I should needs have Esau to my soon,
Would God thou Iacob had the Eldership won.

Mother, it is to late to wish for that is past:
It will not be done now wish ye never so fast.
And I would not have you to wish against Gods will:
For both it is in vain, and also it is ill.

Why did it not please God, that thou shouldest as wele
Tread upon his crown, as hold him fast by the heal?

Whatsoever mystery the Lord therein meant,
Must be referred to his vnserched judgment.
And what soever he hath pointed me unto,
I am his own vessel his will with me to do.

Well, some strange thing therein of God intended was,

And what he hath decreed, must sure come to pass.


I remember when I had you both conceived,
A voice thus saying from the Lord I received:
Rebecca, in thy womb are now two nations,
Of unlike natures and contrary fashions.
The one shall be a mightier people elect:
And the elder to the younger shall be subject.
I know this voice came not to me of nothing:
Therefore thou shalt follow my counsel in o thing.

So it be not displeasing to the Lord I must.


I fear the lord eke, who is merciful and just:
And loath would I be, his majesty to offend,
But by me (I doubt not to work he doth intende,
Assay if thou can, at some one time or other,
To buy the right of eldership from thy brother:
Do thou buy the birthright that to him doth belong,
So may thou have the blessing, and do him no wrong.
What thou hast once bought, is thine own of due right.

Mother Rebecca, if withouten fraud I might,
I would your advise put in ur with all my hart,
But I may not attempt any such guileful part:
To buy my brothers eldership and his birthright,
I fear would be a great offence in Gods sight.
Which thing if I wist, to redeem I no would,
Though I might get thereby ten millions of gold.

God, who by his word and almightifull decree,
Hath appointed thee Esau his lord to be,
Hath appointed some way to have it brought about.
And that is this way, my sprite doth not dout.

Upon your word mother, I will assay ere long,
Yet it grudges my heart to do my brother wrong.

Thou shalt do no wrong son Iacob, on my peril.


Then by Gods leave once assay I will.


Then farewell dere son, Gods blessing mine with thee.


I will again to the Tent. Well you be.


Ah my sweet son Iacob, good fortune God thee send.
The most gentle young man alive, as God me mend.
And the most natural to father and mother:
O that such a meke spirit were in thy brother,
Or thy sire loved thee as thou hast merited,
And then should Esau soon be disherited.

WHere art thou my boy Mido, when I do thee lack?


Who calls Mido? here good master Isaac.


Come lead me forth of doors a little I thee pray.


Lay your hand on my shoulder, and come on this way.


Now O Lord of heaven, the fountain of all grate,
If it be thy good will that my will shall take place:
Send success to Iacob, according to thy word,
That his elder brother may serve him as his lord.

Sir, wither would ye go, now that abroad ye be?


To myfe Rebecca.


Yonder I do her see.


Lord, thou know Iacob to be thy servant true,
And Esau all froward thy ways to ensue..

Yonder she is speaking, what ever she doth say:
By holding up her hands, it seems she doth pray.

Where be ye wife Rebecca? where be ye woman?


Who is that calls? Isaac my good man?


Where be ye wife Rebecca, let me understand?


She comes to you apace.


Here my lord, at hand.


Saving that what so ever God doth is all right,
No small grief it were for a man to lack his sight.
But what the Lord doth send or work by his high will,

Can not but be the best, no such thing can be ill.


All bodily punishment or infirmity,
With all man of nature, what ever they be,
Yea and all other aff^ictions temporal:
As loss, persecution, or troubles mortal,
Are nothing but a trial or probation.
And what is he that firmly trusts in the Lord,
Or steadfastly believes his promise and word,
And knows him to be the God omnipotent,
That feeds and governs all that he hath sent:
Protecting his faithful in every degree,
And them to relieve in all their necessity?
What creature (I say) that doth this understand,
Will not take all thing in good part at Gods hand?
Shall we at Gods hand receive prosperity,
And not be content likewise with adversity?
We ought to be thankful what ever God doth send,
And our selves wholly to his will to commend.

So should it be, and I thank my lord Isaac,
Such daily lessons at your hand I do not lack.

Why then should not I thank the Lord, if it please him
That I shall now be blind, and my sight wax all dim.
For who so to old age will here live and endure,
Must of force abide all such defautes of nature.

Why must I be blind too, if I be an old man?
How shall I grope the way, or who shall lead me than?

If the Lord have pointed thee such old days to see,
He will also provide that shall be meet for thee.

I trow if I were blind, I could go well inowe,
I could grope the way thus, and go as I do now.
I have done so ere now both by day and by night,
As I see you grope the way, and have hit it right.

Yea sir boy, will ye play any such childish knack?
As to counterfeit your blind master Isaac:
That is but to mock him for his impediment.

Nay I never did it in any such intent.


Nay it is to tempt God before thou have need:
Whereby thou may provoke him in very deed,
With some great misfortune or plague to punish thee.

Then will I never more do so while I may see:
But against I be blind, I will be so perfight,
That though no man lead me, I will go at midnight.

Now wife, touching the purpose that I sought for you.


What saith my lord Isaac to his handemayde now?


Ye have oft in covert words ben right earnest
To have me grant unto you a boune and request:
But ye never told me yet plainly what it was,
Therefore I have ever yet let the matter pass.
And now of late by oft being from me absent,
I have half suspected you to be scarce content.
But wife Rebecca, I would not have you to morn,
As though I did your honest petition wourne.
For I never meant to deny in all my life
Any lawful or honest request to my wife.
But in case it be a thing unreasonable,
Then must I needs be to you untractable.
Now therefore say on, and tell me what is your case.

I would, if I were sure in your heart to find grace:
Else sir I would be loathe.

To speak do not refrain,
And if it be reasonable ye shall obtain:
Otherwise, ye must pardon me gentle sweet wife.

Sir, ye know your son Esau, and see his life,
Howe looce it is, and howe stiff he is and stubborn,
Howe retchelesly he doth him self misgouerne:
He gives himself to hunting out of reason,
And serves the Lord and us at no time or season.
These conditions can not be acceptable
In the sight of God, nor to men allowable.
Now his brother Iacob your younger son and mine,
Doth more apply his heart to seek the ways divine.
He lives here quietly at home in the Tent,
There is no man nor child but is with him content.

Oh wife, I perceive ye speak of affection,
To Iacob ye bear love, and to his brother none.

I deed sir, I can not love Esau so well
As I do Iacob, the plain truth to you to tell.
For I have no comfort of Esau God wot:
I scarce know where I have a son of him or not.
He goes abroad so early before day light,
And returns home again so late in the night,
And vneth I set eye on him in the whole week:
No sometime not in twain, though I do for him seek.
And all the neighbours see him as seldom as I.
But when they would take rest, they hear him blow cry.
Some see him so seldom, they ask if he be sick:
Sometimes some demand whether he be dead or quick.
But to make short tale, such his conditions be,
That I wish of God he had ne'er been borne of me.

Well wife, I love Esau, and must for causes twain.


Surely your love is bestowed on him in vain.


First active he is, as any young man can be:
And many a good morsel he brings home to me.
Then he is mine eldest and first begotten son.

If God were so pleased, I would that were fordonne.


And the eldest son is called the fathers might.


If yours rest in Esau, God give us good night.


A prerogative he hath in every thing.


More pity he should have it without deserving.


Of all the goods his portion is greater.


That the worthy should have it, I think much better.


Among his bretherne, he hath the preeminence.


Where Esau is chief, there is a gay presence.


Over his bretherne he is sovereign and lord.


Such dignity in Esau doth ill accorde.


He is the head of the fathers succession.


I would Esau had lost that possession.


And he hath the chief title of inheritance.


Wisdom would in Esau change that ordinance.


To the eldest son is due the fathers blessing.


That should be Iacobs, if I might have my wishing.


And the chief endowement of the fathers substance.


Which will thrive well in Esau his governance.


By title of Eldership he hath his birthright.


And that would I remove to Iacob if I might.


He must have double portion to an other.


That were more fit for Iacob his younger brother.


In all manner of things divided by a rate.


Well given goods to him that the Lord doth hate.


Why say ye so of Esau mine eldest son?


I say true, if he proceed as he hath begone.


Is he not your son too, as well as he is mine?
Wherefore do ye then against him thus sore repine?

Because that in my spirit verily I know,
God will set up Iacob, and Esau down throw.
I have showed you many a time ere this day,
What the Lord of them being in my womb did say.
I use not for to lye: And I believe certain,
That the Lord spake not these words to me in vain.
And Iacob it is (I know) in whom the Lord will
His promises to you made, and to your seed fulfil.

I doubt not his promise made to me and my seed,
Leaving to his conveyance howe it shall proceed.
The Lord after his way change thinheritance,
But I may not wetingly break our ordinance.

Now would God, I could persuade my lord Isaac,
Iacob to prefer, and Esau to put back.

I may not do it wife, I pray you be content.
The title of birthright that comes by descent,
Or the place of elde^shyp coming by due course
I may not change nor shift, for better nor for wourse.
Natures law it is, the eldest son to knowlage,
And in no wise to bar ^ym of his heritage,
And ye shall of Esau one day have comfort.

Set a good long day then, or else we shall come short.


I warrant you, he will do well enough at length.


You must needs commend him being your might strength

Well, now go we hence, little Mido where art thou?


I have stood here all this while, listening howe you
And my Dame Rebecca have been laying the law,
But she hath as quick answers as ever I saw.
Ye could not speak any thing unto her so thick,
But she had her answer as ready and as quick.

Yea, women's answers are but few times to seek.


But I did not see Esau neither all this same week:
Nor I do love your son Esau so well,
As I do love your son Iacob by a great deal.

No doest thou Mido, and tell me the cause why?


Why? for I do not: And none other cause know I.
But every body as well one as other,
Do wish that Iacob had been the elder brother.

Well, come on, let us go.


And who shall lead you? I?


No, it is my office as long as I am by.
And I would all wives, as the world this day is,
Would unto their husbands likewise do their office.

Why dame Rebecca, then al wedded men should be blind.


What thou foolish lad, no such thing was in my mind.


I Have heard it oft, but now I feel a wonder,
In what grievous pain they die, that die for hunger.
Oh my greedy stomach howe it doth bite and gnaw?
If I were at a rack, I could eat hey or straw.
Mine empty guts do fret, my maw doth even tear,
Would God I had a piece of some horsebread here.
Yet is master Esau in worse case than I.
If he have not some meat the sooner he will die:
He hath sonke for faintness twice or thrice by the way.
And not one siely bit we got since yesterday.
All that ever he hath, he would have given to day
To have had but three morsels his hunger to allay.
Or in the field to have met with some hogs,
I could scarsely keep him from eating of these dogs.
He hath sent me before some meat for to provide,
And comes creeping after, scarce able to stride.
But if I know where to get of any man,
For to ease mine own self, as hungry as I am,
I pray God I stink: but if any come to me,
Die who die will, for sure I will first served be.
I will see if any be ready here at home:
Or whether Iacob have any that peakishe mome.
But first I must put all my dogs up,
And lay up this gear, and then God send us the cup.

OH what a grievous pain is hunger to a man?
Take all that I have for meat, help who that can.
O Lord, some good body for Gods sake give me meat.
I force not what it were, so that I had to eat.
Meat or drink, save my life, or bread, I reck not what.
If there be nothing else, some man give me a cat.
If any good body on me will do so much cost,
I will tear and eat her raw, she shall ne'er be roast,
I promise of honesty I will eat her raw.
And what a nody was I, and a hooreson dawe,
To let Ragau go with all my dogs at ones:
A shoulder of a dog were now meat for the nones.
Oh what shall I do? my teeth I can scarsely charm,
From gnawyng away the braun of my very arm.
I can no longer stand for faint, I must needs lie.
And except meat come soon, remediless I die.
And where art thou Ragau whom I sent before?
Unless thou come at once, I never see thee more.
Where art thou Ragau, I hear not of thee yet?

Here as fast as I can, but no meat can I get.
Not one draught of drink, not one poor morsel of bread
Not one bit or crum though I should straight way be dead.
Therefore ye may now see how much ye are to blame,
That will thus starve your self for following your game.

Ah thou villain, tell thou me this now?
If had thee, I would eat thee, to God I vow,
Ah, meat thou whoreson, why hast thou not brought me meat?

Would you have me bring you that I can nowhere geat.


Come hither, let me tell thee a word in thine ear.


Nay, speak out aloud: I will not come a foot ne'er.
Fall ye to snatching at folks? adieu I am gone.

Nay for gods love Ragau, leave me not alone:
I will not eat thee Ragau, so God me help.

No, I shall desire you to choose some other whelp.
Being in your best lust I would topple with ye,
And pluck a good crow ere ye brake your fast with me.
What? are you mankene now? I reckon it best I,
To bind your hands behind you even as ye lye.

Nay have mercy on me, and let me not perish.


In faith nought could I get wherewith you to cherish.


Was there nothing to be had among so many?


I could not find one but Iacob that had any,
And no grant would he make for ought that I could say,
Yet no man alive with fairer words could him pray.
But the best red pottage he hath that ever was.

Go pray him I may speak with him once ere I pass.


That message by Gods grace shall not long be undone.


Hie thee go apace, and return again soon.
If Iacob have due brother^y compassion.
He will not see me faint after this fashion,
But I dare say, the wretch had rather see me throst,
Than he would find in his heart to do so much cost:
For where is between one fremman and an other,
Less love found than now between brother and brother?
Will Iacob come forth to show comfort unto me?
The horeson hypocrite will as soon hanged be.
Yet peace, me thinks Iacob is coming in dede:
And my mind gives me at his hand I shall speed.
For he is as gentle and loving as can be,
As full of compassion and pity.
But let me see, doth he come? no I warrant you.
He come quod I? tush, he come? then hang Esau.
For there is not this day in all the world round,
Such an other hodypeake wretch to be found.
And Ragau my man, is not that a fine knave?
Have any mo masters such a man as I have?
So idle, so loitering, so trifling, so toying?
So prattling, so tra^ling, so chiding, so boying?
So jesting, so wresting, so mocking, so mowing?
So nipping, so tripping, so cocking, so crowing?
So knappishe, so snappishe, so eluishe, so froward?
So crabbed, so wrabbed, so stiff, so untoward?
In play or in pastime, so jocund, so merry?
In work or in labour so dead or so weary?
Oh that I had his ear between my teeth now,
I should shake him even as a dog that lulls a sow.
But in faith if ever I recover my self,
There was never none trounced as I shall trounce that elf*
He and Iacob are agreed I dare say, I,
Not to come at all, but to suffer me here to die.
Which if they do, they shall find this same word true,
That after I am dead, my soul shall them pursue.
I will be avenged on all foes till I dye.
Yea and take vengeance when I am dead too I.
For I mistrust against me agreed they have:
For the one is but a fool, and tother a stark knave.

I assure you Iacob, the man is very weak.


But hark once again, me think I hear them speak.


I promise you I fear his life be already past.


Mary God forbid.


Lo now they come at last.


If ye believe not me, see your self where he is.


Fie brother Esau, what a folly is this?
About vain pastime to wander abroad, and peak,
Till with hunger you make your self thus faint weak.

Brother Iacob, I pray you chide now no longer,
But give me somewhat wherewith to slake mine honger,

Alack brother, I have in my little cottage,
Nothing but a mease of gross and homely pottage.

Refresh me therewithal, and boldly ask of me,
The best thing that I have, what soever it be.
I were a very beast, when thou my life doest save,
If I should stick with thee for the best thing I have.

Can ye be content to sell your birthright to me?


Hold, here is my hand, I do sell it here to thee.
With all the profits thereof henceforth to be thine,
As free, as full, as large, as ever it was mine.

Then swear thou hand in hand before the living Lord,
This bargain to fulfil, and to stand by thy word.

Before the Lord I swear, to whom each heart is known
That my birthright that was, from hensforth is thine own.

Thou shalt also with me by this promise indent,
With this bargain and sale to hold thy self content.

If each penny thereof might be worth twenty pound,
I willingly to thee surrender it this stounde.
And if each cicle might be worth a whole talent,
I promise with this sale to hold me content.

Come, let us set him on foot that he may go sup.


Nay, first I will know a thing, ere I help him up.
Sir, will ye eat folk when ye are long fasting?

No, I pray thee help me up, and leave thy jesting.


No trow, eat your brother Iacob now if you lust.
For you shall not eat me, I tell you, that is just.

Come, that with my pottage thou may refreshed be.


There is no meat on earth that so well likes me.


Yet I may tell you, it is potage dearly bought.


No not a white, for my bargain take thou no thought.
I defy that birthright that should be of more price,
Than helping of ones self, I am not so unwise.

And how then sir, shall poor Ragau have no meat?


Yes, and if thou can my brother Iacob entreat.


God grant I have enough for Esau alone.


Why then I perceive poor Ragau shall have none.
Well, much good do it you with your potage of Rice:
I would fast and fare ill, ere I eat of that price.
Would I sell my birthright being an eldest son?
Forsooth then were it a fair thread that I had sponne.
And then to let it go for a mease of pottage,
What is that, but both unthriftiness and dotage?
Alack, alack, good blessed father Isaac,
That ever son of thine, should play such a lewd knack.
And yet I do not think but God this thing hath wrought,
For Iacob is as good as Esau is nought.
But forth comes Mido, as fast as he can trot:
For a cicle, whether to call me in or not?

HA, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Now who saw ere such an other as Esau?
By my truth I will not lie to thee Ragau,
Since I was borne, I never see any man
So greedily eat rice out of a pot or pan.
He would not have a dish, but take the pot and sup.
Ye never saw hungry dog so slabbe potage up.
Why howe did he sup it? I pray thee tel me how?


Mary even thus, as thou shalt see me do now.

Gently done Iacob: A frendely part Iacob.
I can sup so Iacob.
Yea than will I sup too Iacob.
Here is good meat Iacob.

As ere was eat Iacob.


As ere I saw Iacob.


Esau a dawe Iacob.


Sweet rice pottage Iacob.


By Esaus dotage Iacob.


Ioily good cheer Iacob.


But bought full dear Iacob.


I was hungry Iacob.


I was an unthrift Iacob.


Ye will none now Iacob.


I can not for you Iacob.


I will eat all Iacob.


The devil go withal Iacob.


Thou art a good son Iacob.


And would he never have done Iacob?


No, but styll cogeld in like Jack daw that cries call kob.
That to be kylde I could not laughing forbear:
And therefore I came out, I durst not abide there.

Is there any pottage left for me that thou wot?


No. I left Esau about to like the pot.


Lick quod thou? now a shame take him that can all lick.


The pot shall need no washing, he will it so like.
And by this he is sitting down to bread and drink.

And shall I have no part with him, dost thou think?


No, for he praide Iacob ere he did begin,
To shut the tent fast that no mo gestes come in.

And made he no mention of me his servant?


He said thou were a knave, and had thee hence, avaunt.
Go shift where thou could, thou got nothing there.

God yield you Esau, with all my stomachere.


I must in again, lest perhaps I be shent,
For I asked no body licence when I went.

Nay it is his nature, do what ye can for him,
No thank at his hand but choose you sink or swim.
Then reason it with him in a mete time and place,
And he shall be ready to flee straight in your face.
This proverb in Esau may be understand:
Claw a churl by the tail, and he will file your hand.
Well ywisse Esau, ye did know well ynouw
That I had as much need to be meated as you.
Have I trotted and trudged all night and all day,
And now leave me without door, and so go your way?
Have I spent so much labour for you to provide,
And you nothing regard what of me may betide?
Have I run with you while I was able to go,
And now you purchase food for your self and no mo?
Have I taken so long pain you truly to serve,
And can ye be content that I famish and starve?
I must lackey and come lugging greyhound and hound
And carry the weight I dare say of twenty pound,
And to help his hunger purchasse grace and favour,
And now to be shut out fasting for my labour.
By my faith I may say, I serve a good master,
Nay nay, I serve an ill husband and a waster.
That neither profit regards nor honesty,
What marvel I then if he pass so light on me?
But Esau now that ye have sold your birthright,
I commend me to you, and god give you good night.
And let a friend tell him his fault at any time,
Ye shall hear him chafe beyond all reason or rime.
Except it were a fiende or a very helhounde,
Ye never saw the match of him in any ground.
When I show him of good will what others do say,
He will fall out with me, and offer me a fray.
And what can there be a worser condition,
Than to do ill, and refuse admonition?
Can such a one prosper, or come to a good end?
Then I care not howe many children God me send.
Once Esau shall not beguile me, I can tell:
Except he shall fortune to amend, or do well.
Therefore why do I about him wast thus much talk,
Whom no man can induce ordinately to walk?
But some man perchance doth not a little wonder,
Howe I who but right now did roar out for hunger,
Have now so much vacant and void time of leisure,
To walk and to talk, and discourse all of pleasure.
I told you at the first, I would provide for one:
My mother taught me that lesson a good while agone.
When I came to Iacob his friendship to require,
I drew ne'er and ne'er till I came to the fire.
There harde beside me stood the potage pot,
Even as God would have it, neither cold nor hot,
Good simple Iacob could not turn his back so thick,
But I at the ladell got a goulpe or a like.
So that ere I went I made a very good meal.
And dynde better cheap than Esau a good deal.
But here comes now master Esau forth.

AH sir, when one is hungry, good meat is much worth.
And well fare a good brother yet in time of need,

By my truth if I had bidden from meat any longer,
I think my very maw would have fret asonder.
Then had I been dead and gone I make God a vow*

Surely then the world had had a great loss of you.
For where should we have had your fellow in your place?

What should I have done with my birthright in this case.


Kept it still, and ye had not been a very ass.


But the best pottage it was yet that ever was.
It were sin not to sell ones soul for such gear.

Ye have done no less in my conscience I fear.


Who is this that stands clattering at my back?


A poor man of yours sir, that doth his dinner lack.


Dinner whoreson knave? dinner at this time a day?
Nothing with thee, but dinner and mounching always.
Why thou whoreson villain slave, who is hungry now?

In dede sir (as seems by your words) not you.


A man were better fill the bellies of some twelfe,
Than to fill the gut of one such whoreson elf,
That doth none other good but eat and drink and sleep.

He shall do some thing else whom ye shall have to keep.


And that makes thee so slothful and so lither,
I dare say he was six hours coming hither,
When I sent him to make provision before,
Not passing a mile hence or very little more.
And yet being so far past the hour of dining,
See and the knave be not for his dinner whining.
Fast a while, fast with a mischief greedy slave,
Must I provide meat for every glutton knave?

I may fast for any meat that of you I have.


Or deserve thy dinner before thou do it crave.


If I have not deserved it at this season,
I shall never deserve it in mine own reason.
Ye promised I should eat till I cried hoe.

Yea that was if we toke either hare, tegge, or Do.


But when your self were hungry, ye said I wot what.


What thou villain slave, tell thou me now of that*


Then, help, run apace, Ragau my good servant.


Yea then was then, now is it otherwise: avaunt.
Have I nothing to do but provide meat for you?

Ye might have give me some part when ye had enough.


What, of the red rice pottage with Iacob I had?
Why, the crow would not give it her bird, thou art mad
Is that meat for you? nay it would make you to rank.
Nay soft brother mine, I must keep you more lank.
It hath made me even since so lusty and fresh,
As though I had eaten all delicates of flesh.
I feel no manner faintness whereof to complain.

Yet to morrow ye must be as hungry again,
Then must ye and will ye wish again for good chere:
And repent you that every bought this so dere.

Repent me? wherefore, then the Lord give me sorrow,
If it were to do, I would do it to morrow.
For thou foolish knave, what hath Iacob of me bought?

But a matter of a straw, and a thing of nought.


My birthright and whole title of mine eldership.
Mary sir I pray God much good do it his maship,
If I die to morrow, what good would it do me?
If he die to morrow, what benefit hath he?
And for a thing hanging on such casualty:
Better a mease of pottage than nothing pardy.
If my father live long, when should I it enjoy?
If my father die soon, then is it but a toy.
For if the time were come, think thou that Iacob,
Should find Esau such a lout or such a lob,
To suffer him to enjoy my birthright in rest?
Nay, I will first toss him and trounce him of the best,
I think to find it a matter of conscience,
And Iacob first to have a fart sir reverence.
When my father Isaac shall the matter know:
He will not let Iacob have my birthright I trow.
Or if he should keep it as his own, I pray you,
Might not I live without it and do well ynow?
Do none but men eldest sons prosper well?
How live younger brethren then, I beseech you tell?
Once, if any thing be by the sword to be got:
This falchion and I will have part to our lot.
But now come on, go we abroad a while and walk,
Let my birthright go, and of other matters talk.

Who? I walk? nay I trow not, till I have better dined.
It is more time to seek where I may some meat find.

What say thou drawlatch? come forth with a mischief.
Wilt thou not go with me? on forward whoreson thief.
Shall it be as pleases you, or as pleases me?

Nay as pleases you sir, me think it must be.


And where be my dogs? and my hound? be they all well?


Better than your man, for they be in their kenell.


Then go see all be well in my part of the tent.


With a right good will sir, I go incontinent.


And I will to my field the which I cleansed last,
To see what hope there is, that it will yield fruit fast.

THou know little Mido where my mother is.


I can go to her as straight as a thread, and not miss.


Go cal her, and come again with her thine own self.


Yes, ye shall see me scudde like a little elf.


Where I have by the enticement of my mother,
Bargained and bought the birthrighte of my brother:
Turn it all to good O Lord, if it be thy will:
Thou know my heart Lord, I did it for no ill.
And what ever shall please thee to work or to do,
Thou shalt find me pressed and obedient thereto.
But here is my mother Rebecca now in place.

How say you master Iacob, ran not I apace?


Yes, and a good son to go quick on your errand.


Son how goes the matter? let me understand.


Forsooth mother, I did so as ye me bade,
Esau to sell me all his birthright persuade.

Hast thou bought it in dede, and he therewith content?


Yea, and have his promise that he will never repent.


Is the bargain through? hast thou paid him his price?


Yea that I have, a mease of red pottage of rice,
And he eaten up every whit well I wot.

When he had supte up all, I saw him like the pot.
Thus he licked, and thus he licked, and this way.
I thought to have licked the pot my self once to day.
But Esau beguiled me, I shrew him for that,
And left not so much as a like for pusse our cat.

Son Iacob, forasmuch as thou hast so well sped,
With an himne or psalme let the Lord be praised.
Sing we all together, and give thanks to the Lord,
Whose promise and performance do so well accord.

Shall we sing the same himne that al our house doth sing*
For Abraham and his seed to give God praising.

Yea the very same.


Then must we all kneel down thus,
And Abra our maid here must also sing with us,
Kneel down Abra, what I say, will ye not kneel down?
Kneel when I bid you, the slackest wench in this town.

For thou art the Lord our God, and none but thou:
What thou workest to the glory of thy name,
Passes man reason to search what way or how.
Thy promise it was Abraham should have seed,
More than the stars of the sky to be told,
He believed and had Isaac in deed,
When both he and Sara seemed very old.
Isaac many years longed for a son,
Rebecca thy handmaid long time was barren,
By prayer in thy sight such favour he won,
That at one birth she brought him forth sons twain*
Wherefore O Lord, we do confess and believe,
That both thou can and wilt thy promise fulfil:
But how it shall come we can no reason give,
Save all to be wrought according to thy will.
Blessed be thou O God of Abraham. c.

Now dout not Iacob, but God hath appointed thee
As the eldest son unto Isaac to be:
And now have no dout, but thou art sure elected,
And that unthrift Esau of God rejected.
And to sell thee his birthright since he was so mad,
I warrant thee the blessing that he should have had.

Yea? how may that be wrought?


Yes, yes, let me alone.
Ones good old Isaac is blind, and can not see,
So that by policy he may beguiled be.
I shall devise howe, for no ill intent, no thought,
But to bring to pass that I know god will have wrought
And I charge you twain, Abra, and little Mido.

Nay ye should have set Mido before Abra, trow.
For I am a man toward, and so is not she.

No but yet I am more woman toward than ye.


I charge you both that what ever hath hene spoken,
Ye do not to any living body open.

For my part it shall to no body uttered be.


And slit my tongue, if ever it come out for me:
But if any tell, Abra here, will be prattling.
For they say, women will ever be clattering.

There is none here that pratleth so much as you.


No mo words, but hence we altogether now,

NOw since I last saw mine old father Isaac,
Both I do think it long, and he will judge me slack
But he comes forth, I will here listen and see,
Whether he shall chance to speak any word of me.

On lead me forth Mido, to the bench on this hand,
That I may sit me down, for I can not long stand.

Here sir this same way, and ye be at the bench now,
Where ye may sit down in gods name if please you.

I marvel where Esau my son doth become,
That he doth now of days visit me so seldom.
But it is oft scene whom fathers do best favour,
Of them they have lest love again for their labour.
I think since I saw him it is a whole week.
In faith little Mido I would thou would him seek.

Forsooth master Isaac, and I knew it where,
It should not be very long ere I would be there.
But shall I at adventure go seek where he is?

Seek no farther Mido, already here he is.


Me thinks I have Esau his voice perceived.


Ye guess truly father, ye are not deceived.


Here he is come now invisible by my soul:
For I saw him not till he spake harde at my poule,

Now go thou in Mido, let us two here alone.


Sir if ye command me, full quickly I am gone.


Yet and if I call thee, see thou be not slack.


I come at the first call, good master Isaac.


Son Esau.


Here father.


Is none here but we?


None to herken our talk father, that I do see.


Son Esau, why hast thou been from me so long?


I cry you mercy father, if I have done wrong*
But I am loath to trouble you having nothing
To present you withal, nor veneson to bring.

Son Esau, thou know that I do thee love.


I thank you for it father as doth me behove.


And now thou see my days draw towards an end.


That is to me great ruth if I could it amend.


I must go the way of all mortal flesh.
Therefore while my memory and wit is yet fresh,
I would thee endow mine heritage to succeed:
And bliss thee, (as I ought) to multiply my seed.
The God of my father Abraham, and of me,
Hath promised, that our seed as the sand shall be.
He is a God of truth, and in his words just.
Therefore in my working shall be no fault I trust.
Now therefore son Esau, get thee forth to hunt,
With thy bow and quiver, as erst thou hast been wont,
Bring me of thy venison that is good.

Ye shall have of the best that runs in the wood.


When thou comes home, to dress it, it shall behove:
And to make for mine own tooth such meat as I love.
Thus do mine own dere son, and then I shall thee kiss
With the koosse of peace, and thee for ever bliss.

Your will t'accomplishe most dere father Isaac,
Wits all good hast and speed, I shall not be found slack.

Then help lead me home, in my tent that I were set.
And then go when thou wilt.

I shall withouten let.


THis talk of Isaac in secrete have I heard.
And what end it should come to my heart is afraid.
Ne'er had I so much ado to forbear to speak.
But the Lord (I trust) will Isaacs purpose bre^ke.

Let Iacob have the blessing whom thou hast elect.
I for my part shall work what may be wrought,
That it may to Iacob from Esau be brought,
And in will I go to see what I can devise,
That Isaacs intent may fail in any wise.

NAy, we must on hunting go, yet once more again

But I trow for hunger I have provided here:
That what ever befall I Ragau shall have chere.
I have no time to tell what delicates here be,
But think this to be true) for better men than me.
And what? shall Esau hereof have any part?
Nay I trust to convey it by such pretty art,
That till the bag be clear, he shall it never see.
I shall, and if he faint, feed him as he fed me.
I shall requite his shutting me out of the door.
That if he bid me run to get him meat before,
I shall run as fast as my feet were made of lead,
And tell him, there is none, though I may well be spead.
I will be even with him for my fare last day
When he was with Iacob.

What is it that thou doest say?


Sir on your behalf I earnestly wish and pray,
That if like need chance, ye may fare as last day
When ye were with Iacob.

Well, come on, let us go.


Even when ye will, is there let in me or no?


Son Iacob even now is come the very hour,
That if thou have any grace or heart or power,
To play thy part well, and stick unto it throughout,
Esau his blessing will be thine without dout.

Mother I know your good will to be unfeigned:
But I see not which way the thing may be attained.

I have it contrived how all thing shall be done,
Do thou as I shall bid thee, and it will be won.

Mother in me shall be no fault or negligence.


Then herken very well unto this my sentence.
I heard old Isaac in a long solemn talk,
Bid thy brother Esau to the field to walk,
And there with his bow to kill him some venison,
Which brought and dressed, he to have his benison.
For I am aged (said Isaac) truly:
And would bless thee dere son before that I dye.
Now is Esau gone to do it even so.
But while he his away, I would have thee to go,
Abroad unto the flock, and fet me kids twain.
Of which I shall with a trice make such meat certain,
As shall say come eat me, and make old Isaac
Like his lips thereat, so toothsom shall it smack.
I shall make him thereof such as he doth love,
Which in thy brothers steed to bliss thee shall him move.

O sweet and dere mother, this devise is but vain,
For Esau is rough, and I am smothe certain.
And so when I shall to my father bring this meat,
Perchance he will feel me, before that he will eat.
Old men be mistrustful: he shall the matter take,
That I went about my father a fool to make.
Mother by such a prank the matter will be worse:
And I in stead of blissing shall purchase me his curse.

(...) be thy curse my son, let it light on me.
Only fet thou the kids hither, as I bid thee.
Do thou thy true deuoire, and let God work therein.

Upon your word mother, I will the thing begin,
Send me little Mido to help me bear a kid.

He shall come by and by, for so I shall him bid.
Now lord, if thou please, that this thing shall take place,
Further this our enterprise, helping with thy grace.

ARe ye here master Iacob? I came you to look:
And here dame Rebecca hath sent you your shepecroke
And hath commanded me to wait on you this day,
But wherefore or why, she would nothing to me say.

Come on then, follow me Mido a little ways.


Whether ye shall lead me, I am at all assays.


And art thou able to bear a kid on thy back?


I am able (I trow) to bear a quarter sack.
How say you to this corps? is it not fat and round?
How say ye to these legs? come they not to the ground?
And be not here arms able your matter to speed?
Be not here likely shoulders to do such a deed?
Therefore come master Iacob, if this your dout be,
For bringing home of kids, lay the biggest on me,
So that if we make a feast, I may have some part.

Yes that shalt thou Mido, right worthy thou art.


I Come to see if Iacob be gone a field yet,
A little slacking may all our purpose let.
But now that he is gone, he will be here at once.
Therefore I will call my maid Abra for the nonce,
That all thing within may be in a readiness.
Abra, where be ye Abra?

Here within mistress.


Come forth: when? Abra, what Abra I say.


Anon.


Must I call so oft? why come ye not by and by?


I was washing my vessel forsooth mistress I.


And in very deed, look that all your vessel be clean.


There is not one foul piece in all our tent I wene,

Then make a great fire, and make ready your pot
And see there be plenty of water cold and hot.
And see the spit be scoured as clean as any pearl.

If this be not quickly done cal me noughtie girl.


Nay, soft, whither away? I have not yet all done.


I thought ye would have had me as quick to be gone,
As when ye call Abra, ye would have me to come.

Than see ye have made ready cloaues, mace, and sinamom
Pepper and sasfron, then set herbs for the pot,

We will have the best that by me can be got.


And let no foul corner be about all the tent.


If ye find any fault, hardly let me be shent.
Is there any thing else but that I may go now?

Nought, but that when I come I find no faut in you.


No I warrant you, I will not let my matters sleep.


Any good wench will at her dames bidding take keep.
Now God of Abraham, as I trust in thy grace,
Send Iacob the blissing in Esau his place.
As thou hast ordained right so must all thing be.
Perform thine own words lord which thou spoke to me.
Now will I go in to see that mine old husband,
May of my secrete working nothing understand.
Or in case he smell what we have thus far begone,
He may think it all for Esau to be done.

HE that were now within, should find all thing I wene,
As trim as a trecher, as trick, as sweet, as clean.
And seeing that my dame prepares such a feast,
I will not I trow be found such a fluttishe beast,
That there shall any filth about our tent be kept,
But that both within and without it shall be swepte.
It hath been a proverb before I was borne,
Young doth it prick that will be a thorne.
WHo will be evil, or who will be good,
Who given to truth or who to falsehood,
Each bodies youth shows a great likelihood.

Who so in youth will no goodness embrace.
But follow pleasure, and not virtues trace,
Great marvel it is if such come to grace.
For young doth it prick that will be a thorne.
Such as in youth will refuse to be tought,
Or will be slack to work as he ought,
When they come to age, their proof will be nought.
For young doth it prick that will be a thorne.
If a child have been given to any vice,
Except he be guided by such as be wise,
He will thereof all his life have a spice.
For young doth it prick that will be thorne.
It hath been a proverb. c.

Now have I done, and as it should be for the nonce,
My sweeping and my song are ended both at once.
Now but for fetting mine herbs I might go play.
Deborra nurse Deborra, a word I you pray.

What is the matter? who calls me Deborra?


Forsooth gentle nurse even I little Abra,
I pray you sweet Deborra take in this same brom,
And look well to all thing till I return home:
I must to the gardine as fast as I can trot,
As I was commanded to fet herbs for the pot.
But in t^ mean time, I pray you nurse look about
And see well to the fire that it go not out,
I will aumble so fast, that I will soon be there,
And here again I trow, ere an horse like his ear.

There is not a pretier girl within this mile,
Than this Abra will be within this little while.
As true as any steal: ye may trust her with gold.
Though it were a bushel, and not a penny told.
As quick about her work that must be quickly spead
As any wench in twenty mile about her head.
As fine a piece it is as I know but a few,
Yet perchance her husband of her may have a shrew.
Cat after kind (saith the proverb) sweet milk will lap,
If the mother be a shrew, the daughter can not escape.
Once our mark she hath, I marvel if she slip:
For her nose is growing above her over lip.
But it is time that I into the tent be gone.
Lest she come and chide me, she will come now anon.

HOw say ye? have not I dispatched me quickly?
A straw for that wench that doth not somewhat likely,
I have brought here good herbs, of them plenty
To make both broth and farcing, and that full deinty,
I trust to make such broth, that when all things are in,
God almighty self may wet his finger therein.
Here is time and percelie, spinache, and rosemary.
Endiue, suckorie, lacteux, violette, clary,
Liver wort, marigold, sorrel, hearts tong, and sage:
Peniryal, purselane, buglosse and borage,
With many very good herbs mo than I do name.
But to tarry here thus long, I am much to blame.
For if Iacob should come, I not in readiness:
I must of covenant be shent of our mistress.
And I would not for twenty pound I tell ye,
That any point of default should be foun^ in me.

I Come to see if Iacob do not return yet,
I can not marvel enough what should be his let,
And greatly wonder he is away thus long.
I fear much of his absence, lest some thing be wrong.
As well as heart can wish all thing is ready here.
And now to me each moment seems a whole year.
But hark, me thinks I here a young kid blee
It is so in deed, I see Iacob, well is me.

Hark master Iacob, heard ye ever kid blea so?
I wene she knows before hand where she shall go*

I would not my father Isaac should hear:

Nay, she will scarcely be still, when she is dead, I do fear.


But lo I see my mother stand before the tent.


O Lord, me thinks long son Iacob since thou went

And me thinks mother, we have hied us well:

I have made many feet to follow, I can tell.


Give me thy kid my son, and now leat me alone,
Bring thou in thine Mido, and see thou be a stone.

A stone? howe should that be mistress? I am a lad:
And a boy alive, as good as ere ye had:
And now in bringing home this kyd I have I trow,
Tried my self a man, and a pretty fellow,

I meant thou shouldest nothing say..


One warning is enough, ye bad us so last day.


Well let me go in, and venison hereof make:

And hear thou Mido? see that good heed thou take,
In any wise to come in my fathers sight.

Why he sees no better at noone than at midnight.
Is he not blind long since, and doth his eyes lack?
Therefore go in dame, I bear an heavy pack.

I leave you here Iacob, and heartily you pray,
That when need shall require, you be not far away.

I shall be ready mother, when so ere you call.


O How happy is that same daughter or that son,
Whom the parents love with hearty affection.
And among all others howe fortunate am I,
Whom my mother Rebecca tendreth so greatly?
If it lay in her to do any good ye see,
She would do her earnest deuoire to prefer me.
But as for this matter which she doth now intende,
Without thy aide O Lord, howe should it come to end.
Nevertheless forasmuch as my said mother,
Works upon thy word O Lord, and none other,
It shall become me to show mine obedience,
And to thy promise O Lord, to give due credence.
For what is so possible to mans judgment,
Which thou can not with a beck perform incontinent?
Therefore thy will O Lord, be done for evermore.

Oh Iacob, I was never so afeared before.


Why what new thing is chanced Mido, I pray thee?


Old Isaac your father, heard your young kid blea.
He asked what it was, and I said, a kid.
Who brought it from the fold, I said you did.
For what purpose? forsooth sir said I,
There is some matter that Iacob would remedy:
And where hast thou ben so long little Mido, quod he,
That all this whole hour thou were not once with me?
Forsooth (quod I) when I went from you last of all,
You bade me be no more but be ready at your call.

But of the kids bleayng he did speak no more.


No, but and if he had called me before,
I must have told him al, or else I must have made a lye,
Which would not have been a good boys part truly.
But I will to him, and no longer here remain,
Lest he should happen to call for Mido again.

I Were best also to get me into the tent,
That if my mother need me, I may be present.
But I see her come forth, and nurse Deborra also,
And bring gear with them what so ere it shall do.

Where is my son Iacob? I do him now epsy.
Come apace Deborra, I pray thee let us hye,
That all thing were dispatched somewhat to my mind.

It is happy that Iacob ready here ye find.


Mother, what have ye brought? what things are those?


Gear that I have prepared to serve our purpose.
And because that Esau is so rough with hear:
I have brought sleues of kid next to thy skin to wear.
They be made glouelike, and for each finger a stall:
So that thy fathers feeling soon beguile they shall.
Then have I brought a collar of rough kids hear,
Fast unto the skin round about thy neck to wear.

He shall therwyth be beguiled wondrous wele.

And what shall this gear do, that ye have brought?


It shall serve anon I warrant you, take no thought.
Now, thoroughly to ravish thy father Isaac,
Thou shalt here incontinent put upon thy back,
Esau his best apparel, whose fragrant flauour,
Shall conjure Isaac to bear thee his favour.

Mary sir now is master Iacob trim in deed,
That is all triksie and gallant so God me speed,
Now I see apparel sets out a man.
Doth it become Esau so? nay beshrew me then.

Ye may now go in nurse, and leave looking on him.


I go, mary sir Iacob is now gay and trim.


No forsooth mother, this raiment likes not me.

And but for satisfying of your mind and will,
I would not wear it, to have it for mine own still.
I love not to wear an other birds feathers.
Mine own poor homely gear will serve for all wethers.

Well content thy self, and follow my mind this day.
Now the meat by this time is ready I dare say.
Before that with to much enough it be all spilt,
Take thy time, and assail thy father when thou wilt.

Yea, but have ye provided mother I you pray,
That no body within may your counsaille bewray?

I warrant the matter all safe from uttering,
I have stopped all mouths for once muttering.
Therefore while the time serves, I thee warn,
To slack when all things are ready may do harm.

Go before, I follow: but my chekes will blush red,
To be scene among our folk thus apparelled.

COme Mido, for without thee I can nothing do.


What is it sir, that ye would have my help unto?


Nothing but to sit abroad, and take th'open air.


That shall be well done, the weather is very fair,

Praised be the God of my father Abraham.
Who sends all thing needful for the use of man,
And most tenderly provides he for me Isaac,
Better than I can feel or perceive what I lack.

Where is my most dere father? as I would have it,
Taking the open air, here I see him sit.
O my most dear father Isaac, well thou be.

Here I am my sweet son, and who art thou tell me?


Dere father, I am Esau thine eldest son,
According as thou baddest me, so have I done.
Come in dere father, and eat of my venison,
That thy soul may give unto me thy benison.

But how hast thou sped so soon? let me understand.


The Lord thy God at the first brought it to my hand.


And art thou Esau mine elder son in deed?


To ask that question father, what doth it need?


Come ne'er that I may feel whether thou be he or not,
For Esau is rough of hear as any goat.
Let me feel thy hand, right Esau by the hear,
And yet the voice of Iacob sowneth in mine ear.
God bless thee my son, and so will I do anon,
As soon as I have tasted of thy venison.
Come on, lead me in, I will eat a pittance.
A little thing God wot to me is suffisance,

I may now go play, Iacob leads Isaac.
But I never saw such a pretty knack,
How Iacob beguiled his father, how slightly.
Now I see it true the blind eat many a fly.
I quaked once for fear lest Iacob would be caught,
But as hap was, he had his lesson well taught.
But what will Esau say, when he comes home?
Choose him, but for me to go in it is wisdom.

NOw I beseech the Lord prosper Iacob my son,
In our hardy enterprise which we have begone.
Isaac is eating such meat as he doth love,
Which thing to bless Iacob I dout not will him move:
If he obtain the blessing as I trust he shall,
Then shall my soul give to God laud perpetual.
But I will in to harken how the thing doth frame.

Come in dame Rebecca,

Who is it that doth me name?


My master Isaac is coming forth straight way.


He shall not find me here in no wise if I may.


SEt me down on the bench where thou did me first find:
Now forsooth I have eat meat even to my mind.
It hath refreshed my soul wonderfully well.
Nor never drank I better wine that I can tell.

If it were to your liking I am very glad.
It was the best meat and wine that ever I had.
Come kiss me son Esau with the kiss of peace,
That my love towards thee may the more increace.
I bless thee here for ever my son in this place,
The Lord my God of might endue thee with his grace.
What sweet flauour my sons raiment doth yield,
Even the fragrant smell that comes from a field.
Which the Lord hath blessed, and the same lord bless thee:
With the dew of heaven, the Lord thy ground increase
That the fatness of the earth may never cease.
The Lord send thee abundance of corn and wine,
And prosper continually all thing that is thine.
The Lord make great people servants unto thee:
And nations to do homage and fealty.
And here to succeed my place, mine heir I thee make,
Of all things that I have, possession to take.
Lord and ruler be thou over thy brethern all,
And bow to thee as head, thy mothers children shall.
Cursed be that man that shall thee curse or missay:
And who that blesses thee, blessed be he for aye.
Thus here have I made my last will and testament,
Which the Lord God ratify never to repent.
Serve the Lord our God, and then well shalt thou speed,
And he shall keep promise to multiply thy seed.
My day draws on, for old and feeble I am.
When I dye, put me to my father Abraham.
Now kiss me once again my son, and then depart,
And enter upon all, whereof now Lord thou art.

The Lord God reward your fatherly tenderness.
Which ye have here showed me of your mere goodness.

Go in peace my dere son, leaving me here alone:
And send little Mido to lead me in anon.
Lord God when thou shalt see time as thou think best,
Dissolve this feeble carkesse, and take me to thy rest.

How do ye master Isaac? I am here now.
For my master Iacob did bid me come to you.

Nay boy, it was not Iacob, I dare well say so.


Forsooth it was Iacob, if my name be Mido.


If that be a true tale, some body is come slack,
But lord that I have done, I will not now call back.
But yet I will go see if I be deceived:
For in deed me thought Iacobs voice I perceived.

O Lord, the God of Isaac and Abraham,

Because of thy word and promise true art thou,
In sending Iacob the blessing of Esau.
And for thus regarding a sinner as I am,
I eftsoones thank thee O Lord God of Abraham,
Thy mercy and wisdom shall I sing evermore:
And magnify thy name, for Gods there is no more.
But I will to my husband Isaac, and see,
That for this matter he take no grief at me.

NAy, now at last we have well sped I warrant you:

He coursed and coursed again with his dogs here:
But they could at no time take either hare or dere.
At last he killed this with his bow as God wold.
And to say that it is fat venison be bold.
But dressed it must be at once in all the haste,
That old father Isaac may have his repast.
Then without delay Esau shall blessed be,
Then faith cock on houpe, al is ours, then who but he?
But I must in that it may be dressed in time likely,
And I trow ye shall see it made ready quickly.
NAy now old master Isaac (I warrant you)
Hath blessed Iacob in the place of Esau.
At home here with us it is judged no small change
But a case wonderful, and also very strange.
The younger brother is made elder, and again,
The elder must now serve the younger as his swain.
And from hensforth we must all make courtesy and bow,
Unto master Iacob, and not to Esau now:
And Esau him self must under Iacob be,
At his commandment even as well as we.
But I care not I warrant you: for our household
Love Iacob better than Esau twenty fold.
None loves Esau but for his fathers sake:
But all good folks are glad Iacobs part to take.
And now by Esau no man will set a pin,
But yonder he comes now, I will get me in.

I Trow I have now won my spurs for ever,
For once better venison killed I never.
And though it were somewhat longer I could it take,
Yet the goodness thereof doth some recompense make.
My father Isaac shall thereof have such meat,
As in all his life he hath not the better eat.
Whereupon I doubt not, after tender kissing,
To be straight endowed with his godly blyssing.
As his full and true heir in his place to succeed,
And t'enioye the promise that God made to his seed,
And when I am once in my place of succession,
And have all manner things in full possession:
I shall wring all louts and make them stoup (I trow)
I shall make the slaves couch as lowe as dog to bow.
I shall ruffle among them of an other sort,
Than Isaac hath done, and with an other port.
But now will I go see what hast within they make
That part of my hunting my old father may take.

MIdo, come Mido, where art thou little Mido?


Here ready master Isaac, what shall I do?


Come lead me to mine old place, that I may sit down

That can I as well as any boy in this town.


O Lord my God, how deep and vnsercheable
Are all thy judgements, and how immutable?
Of thy justice, whom it pleases thee, thou doest reject,
Of thy mercy, whom pleases thee, thou doest elect.
In my two sons O Lord, thou hast wrought thy will,
And as thy pleasure hath wrought, so shall it stand still.
Sense thou hast set Iacob in Esau his place:
I commit him to the governance of thy grace.

Now where is Isaac that he may come and eat?
Lo where he is sitting abroad upon his seat.
Dear father Isaac, the Lord thy God thee save.

Who art thou my son? what thing would thou have?


I am your eldest son Esau by my name,
New come home from hunting, where I had ioyly game,
I have made meat thereof for your own appetite,
Meat for your own tooth, wherein ye will much delight.
Come eat your part, dere father, that when ye have don,
Your soul may bless me as your heir and eldest son.

Ah Esau, Esau, thou comes to late,
An other to thy blessing was predestinate,
And clean gone it is from thee Esau.

Alas,
Then am I the unhappiest that ever was,
I would the salvage beasts had my body torn.

The blessing that thou should have had, an other hath

Alas, what wretched villain hath done me such scath?


Thy brother Iacob came to me by subtiltee,
And brought me venison, and so prevented thee.
I eat with him ere thou came, and with my good will,
Blessed him I have, and blessed he shall be still.

Ah Iacob, Iacob, well may he be called so:
For he hath undermined me times two.
For first mine heritage he toke away me fro,
And see, now hath he away my blessing also.
Ah father, father, though Iacob hath done this thing:
Yet let me Esau also have thy blessing.
Shall all my good huntings for thee be in vain?

That is done and past, can not be called again.
Mine act must now stand in force of necessity.

And hast thou never a blessing then left for me?


Behold, I have made thy brother Iacob thy Lord.


A most poignant sword unto my heart is that word.


All his mothers children his servants have I made.


That word is to me sharper than a rasers blade.


I have also stablished him with wine and corn.


Wo be the day and hour that ever I was borne.


What am I able to do for thee my son?


Ah Iacob, Iacob, that thou hast me thus undone.
Oh unhappy hap: oh misfortune, well away,
That ever I should live to see this woeful day.
But hast thou one blissing and no mo my father?
Let me also have some blessing good sweet father.

Well, nature pricks me some remorse on thee to have.
Behold, thy dwelling place the earths fatness shall have.
And the dew of heaven which down from above shall fall:
And with dint of sword thy living get thou shall.
And to thy brother Iacob thou shalt be servant.

Oh, to my younger brother must I be servant?
Oh, that ever a man should be so oppressed.

Thine own fault it is that thou art dispossessed.


Father, change that piece of thy sentence judgment.


Things done can not be undone, therefore be content,
Let me be in quiet, and trouble me no more.
Come Mido, in gods name lead me in at the door.

Oh would not this chafe a man, and fret his guts out?
To live as an vnderling under such a lout?
Ah hypocrite, ah hedgecreeper, ah sembling wretch:
I will be even with thee for this subtle fetch.
O God of Abraham, what reason is herein,
That to slay ones enemy it should be made sin?
Were not one as good his part of heaven forgo,
As not to be revenged on his deadly foe?
God was angry with Caim for killing Able:
Else might I kill Iacob marvelously well.
I may fortune one day him to dispatch and rid:
The Lord will not see all things, some thing may be hid.
But as for these misers within my fathers tent,
Which to the supplanting of me put their consent,
Not one, but I shall coil them till they stink for pain,
And then for their stinking, coil them of fresh again.
I will take no days, but while the matter is hot,
Not one of them shall escape but they shall to the pot.

WHere are we now become? marie sir here is array,
With Esau my master this is a black day.
I told you, Esau one day would shite a rag,
Have not we well hunted, of blessing to come lag?
Nay I thought ever it would come to such a pass,
Since he sold his heritage like a very ass.
But in faith some of them I dare ieopard a groat,
If he may reach them, will have on the petticoat.
COme out whores thieves, come out, come out I say.


I told you, did I not? that there would be a fray.


Come out little whoreson ape, come out of thy den.


Take my life for a penny, whether shall I run?


Come out thou little fend, come out thou skittish Gill.


Out alas, alas, Esau will us all kill.


And come out thou mother Mab, out old rotten witche,
As white as midnightes arsehole, or virgin pitch.
Where be ye? come together in a cluster.

In faith and these three will make a noble muster.


Ere ye escape my fingers, ye shall all be tought.
For these be they which have all this against me wrought.

I wrought not a stroke this day but led Isaac.
If I wrought one stroke to day, lay me on the jack.

Hence then, get thee in, and do against me no more.


I care as much for you now, as I did before.


What say thou little thief? if I may thee catch,

Ye shall run apace then I wene, so God me snatch.


Now to go Mido, or thou art caught in a trip,

Nay for his sake, Abra, ye shall drink of the whip.


Nay for Gods love good sweet master Esau,
Hurt not me for Mido: speak for me Ragau.

Sir spare little Abra, she hath done none evil.


A little fiende it is, and will be a right devil,
And she is one of them that love not me a deal.

If ye let me go, I will love you very wele.


And never any more ado against me make?


Ragau shall be surety.


Sir I undertake.


Then hence out of my sight at once, and get thee in.


Adieu, I set not a straw by you nor a pin.


What says thou thou Ti^? once ye shall have a rap.


The best end of suretiship is to get a clap,

Now come on thou o^de heg, what shall I say to thee?


Say what ye lust, so ye do not touche me.


Yes, and make powder of thee, for I dare say, thou,
Hast been the cause of all this feast to Esau.

No it was Iacobs feast that I did help to dress.


Nay I thought such a witche would do such business.


But by my truth if I should dye incontinent,
I knew not of the purpose wherefore it was meant.

But wilt thou tell me truth if I do forgive thee?


Yea if I can master Esau, believe me.


Is it true that when I and my brother were first borne,
And I by Gods ordinance came forth him beforne,
Iacob came forthwith, holding me fast by the heal?

It is true, I was there, and saw it very wele.


Is it true? well Iacob I pray God I be dead,
But for my heles sake, I will have thee by the head.
What devil was in me, that I had not the grace
With kicking back my heal to mar his mopishe face?
But my father Isaac will not long live now,
If he were gone, Iacob I would soon meet with you.
For my soul hates Iacob even to the death,
And I will ne'er but hate him while I shall have breath.
I may well dissemble until I see a day:
But trust me Iacob, I will pay thee when I may.

I shall cut out thy tongue, I will not miss.
But come on Ragau with me, so mote I thrive,
I will get a good sword, for thereby must I live.

Live quod you? we are like to live God knows how.


What ye saucy merchant, are ye a prater now?


I Am glad that Esau is now gone certes.
For an evil disposed man he is doutlesse.
Yet am I no gladder of his departure hence,
Than I am that Rebecca is come in presence.

Deborra, what dost thou tarrying here so long?
I came full ill afraid least some thing had ben wrong
For Mido and Abra told me of Esau.

In dede here he was, and departed hence but now:
And one thing I tell you dame, let Iacob beware,
For Esau to mischief Iacob doth prepare,

Call Iacob hither, that I may show him my mind.
Send him hither quickly, and tarry ye behind.
That he give place awhyle, it is expedient,
And howe he may be sure, I will the way invent.

MOther Rebecca, did ye send for me hither?


Yea and the cause is this, thou must go somwhither,
To hyde thee from thy brother Esau a space.

In dede to men's malice we must sometime give place.


He lies in await, to slay thee if he can.
Thou shalt therefore by my rede flee hence to Haran,
And lye with my brother Laban a man aged,
Till Esaus wrath be somewhat assuaged.
When all things are forgotten, and his fury past,
I shall send for thee again in all goodly haste.

Yea, but howe will my father herewith be content?


Thou shalt see me win him thereto incontinent.
And here he comes happily, Iacob hear me,
Make a sign to Mido, that he do not name thee,
Then get thee in privily till I do thee call.

As ye command me mother Rebecca, I shall.


WHere be ye good wife?


My dame Rebecca is here.


I am glad sweet husband that I see you appear,

For I have a word or two unto you to say.
Whatsoever it be, tell it me I you pray.

Sir ye know, that now our life days are but short
And we had never so great need of comfort,
Now Esau his wives being Hethites both,
Ye know to please us are much unwilling and loath.
That if Iacob eke would take any Hethite to wife,
Small joy should we both have or comfort of our life.

Wife ye speak this well, and I will provide therefore,
Call Iacob quickly, that he appear me before.

I can run ^pace for him if ye bid me go.


Go hye thee at once then like a good son Mido.


O Lord save thou my son from miscarying.


Come master Iacob, ye must make no tarrying,
For I it is that shall be shent if you be slack,
Here is your son Iacob now master Isaac.

Son Iacob, make thee ready as fast thou can,
And in all hast possible get thee unto Laban.
He is thine own uncle, and a right godly man,
Marry of his daughters, and not of Canan.
In Mesopotamia shalt thou lead thy life.
The lord prosper thee there, without debate or strife.
And the God of Abraham prosper thee in peace,
He multiply thy seed, and make it to increase,
Now kiss me dear son Iacob, and so go thy way.

Kiss me also sweet son, and hence without delay.


Now most tender parents, as well with heart and word,
I bid you well to fare, and leave you to the Lord.

Nay master Iacob, let me have an hand also.


Even with all my heart farewell little Mido.


Now will I depart hence into the tent again.


As pleases God and you, but I will here remain.


ANd is he gone in deed to mine uncle Laban,
In Mesopotamia at the town of Haran?
And is Iacob gone to the house of Bethuel?
The whirlewynd with him, and flyngyng fend of hell.
But I shall m^te with him yet one day well enough.
And who is this? my mother, whom I see here now?
She stood here al this while sir, did ye not her see?


Did thou see her stand here, would not warn me?


Son Esau, before God thou art much to blame,
And to do as I hear of thee, is a foul shame.

Mother what is it ye heard of me of late?


That thou doest thy brother Iacob deadly hate.


Hate Iacob? I hate him and will do till I dye.
For he hath done me both great wrong and vilanny.
And that shall he well know if the Lord give me life.

Fie upon thee to speak so like a lewd caitiff.


My master Esau is of nature much hot,
But he will be better than he saith, fear not.

My birthright to sell did he not make me consent?


But the same to do were not thy self content?
There is no man to blame for it but thine own self.

Yea mother, see that ye hold with that mopishe elf.
It is your deinty dearlyng, your princkoxe, your golpoll,
He can never be praised enough of your soul,
He must ever be extolled above the Moon,
It is never amiss that he hath said or done.
I would he were rocked or dandled in your lap:
Or I would with this fauchon I might give him pap.
I marvel why ye should so love him, and me not?
Ye groaned as well for the one as tother I wot.
But Iacob must be advanced in any wise:
But I shall one day handle him of the new guise.

Both on thy fathers blessing and mine I charge thee,
That thy soul entend never such iniquity,
Beware by the example of Caym I thee rede,
That thou bring not the Lords curse upon thy head.

And what should I take all this wrong at Iacobs hand?


Forgive, and the Lord shall prosper thee on the land.
My son Esau hear me, I am thy mother:
For my sake let pass this grudge against thy brother.

Sir, your mothers request is but reasonable,
Which for you to grant shall be much commendable.

Mother, though it be a great thing that ye require:
Yet must all malice pass at your desire.
And for your cause mother, this mine anger shall slake.

I thank thee my son, that thou dost it for my sake

For your sake with Iacob I will be at accorde.


And shall I call thy father to be as record?


As pleases you mother, I can be well content.


Then will I go call him hither incontinent.
And where he doth already love thee very well,
This will make him to love thee better a great deal.

Truly sir, this is of you a right gentill part:
At least if it come from the bottom of your heart.

It must now be thus, but when I shall Iacob find,
I shall then do, as God shall put into my mind.

He hath at my word remitted all his quarele.


Forsooth I love him the better a great deal.
And if he be here, I would commend his doing.
All pressed here father to tarry on your coming.

Son Esau, thou haste thy self well acquitted.


That all quarrel to Iacob thou haste remitted.
It was the Lords pleasure that it should thus be,
Against whose ordinance to stand is not for thee:
But now to the intent it may please the Lord,
To knit your hearts one day in a perfect concorde,
We shall first in a song give laud unto his name,
And than with all gladness, within confirm the same.

As ye think best dere husband I agree thereto.


Me ye may command to what ye will have me to do:
And so may ye do also Ragau my man.

I see none, but praise we the Lord the hest we can.
Cal forth all our household that with one accord,
We may all with one voice sing unto the Lord.
O Lord the God of our father Abraham,
Howe deep and vnsearcheable are thy judgements*
Thy almightifull hand did create and frame,
Both heaven and earth and all the elements.
Man of the earth thou haste formed and create,
Some do thee worship, and some stray awry,
Whom pleases thee, thou dost choose or reprobate,
And no flesh can ask thee wherefore or why?
Of thine own will thou did Abraham elect,
Promising him seed as sterres of the sky,
And them as thy chosen people to protecte,
That they might thy mercies praise and magnify.
Perform thou O Lord, thine eternal decree,
To me and my seed the sons of Abraham,
And whom thou haste chosen thine own people to be,
Guide and defend to the glory of thy name. FINIS.
When Adam for breaking Gods commandment
Had sentence of death, and all his posterity:
Yet the lord our God who is omnipotent,
Had in his own self by his eternal decree,
Appointed to restore man, and to make him free,
He purposed to save mankynde by his mercy,
Whom he once had created unto his glory.
Yet not all flesh did he then predestinate,
But only the adopted children of promise:
For he forknewe that many would degenerate,
And wylfully give cause to be put from that bliss:
So on Gods behalf no manner default there is,
But where he chooses, he shows his great mercy:
And where he refuses, he doth none injury,
But thus far surmounts mans intellection,
To attain or conceive, and much more to discuss:
All must be referred to Gods election,
And to his secret judgment, it is meet for us,
With Paule the Apostle to confess and say thus:
Oh the deepnesse of the riches of Gods wisdom,
How vnsearcheable are his ways to mans reason?
Our part therefore is first to believe Gods word,
Not doubting but that he will his elected save:
Then to put full trust in the goodness of the Lord,
That we be of the number which shall mercy have:
Thirdly so to live as we may his promise crave.
Thus if we do, we shall Abrahams children be:
And come with Iacob to endless felicity.

NOw unto God let us pray for all the whole clergy,
To give them grace to avaunt gods honour and glory.

Then for the Quenes majesty let us pray,
Unto God to keep her in health and wealth night and day,
And that of his mere mercy and great benignity,
He will defend and maintain her estate and dignity,
That she being grieved with any outward hostility,
May against her enemies, always have victory.

God save the Quenes counselors most noble and true,
And with all godliness their noble hearts endue.

Lord save the nobility and preserve them all:
And prosper the Quenes subjects universal.


