GRacious spectators do not here expect,
Visions of pleasure, amorous discourse:
Our subject is of blood and Tragedy,
Murder, foul Incest, and Hypocrisy.
Behold the Strumpet of proud Babylon,
Her Cup with fornication foaming full
Of Gods high wrath and vengeance for that evil,
Which was imposd upon her by the Devil.
SEnt from the Crystal Palace of true Fame,
And bright Starre-Chamber of eternal souls,
Severed from Angels fellowship awhile,
To dwell with mortal bodies here on earth:
I Francis Guicciardine a Florentine,
Am by the powerful and commanding Muse,
(Which bears domination in our souls)
Sent down to let you see the Tragedy,
Of Roderigo Borgia lately Pope,
Called the sixth Alexander, with his son
Proud Caesar: to present unto your eyes,
Their faithless, fearless, and ambitious lives:
And first by what ungodly means and Art,
He did attain the Triple-Diadem,
This vision offered to your eyes declares.
At one door betwixt two other Cardinals, Roderigo in his purple habit close
in conference with them, one of which he guides to a Tent, where a Table is
furnished with diverse bags of money, which that Cardinal bears away: and
to another Tent the other Cardinal, where he delivers him a great quantity
of rich (...) ^braces, with joining of hands. (...) ^ome from an other place a
Moncke with a magical book and (...) in private whispering with Roderick,
whom the Monk draws to a chair on midst of th^ Stage which he circleth,
and before i^ an^ther Circle, into which (after semblance of reading with
(...)) p^eare exhalations of lightning an^ (...) smoke in (...) wh^reof a
diui^l in most ugly sha^e from which Roderigo tur^e^h his ^ce, he being
conjured ^owne after more thunder and ^ire, as^ends anot^er devil like a
Sergeant with a mace under h^s girdle: Roderigo disliketh. He descends:
after more thunder and ^earefull fire, ascend in r^bes ponti^icall with a
triple Crown on his head, and Cross keys in his ha^d: a diu^ll him ensuing
in ^lacke robes like a pronotary, a cornerd Cap on his head, a box of Lancets
at his gir^le, a little piece of fine parchment in his hand, who being brought
unto Alexander, he willingly receives him; to whom he delivers the
writing, which seeming to read, presentl^ the Pronotary strippeth up
Alexanders sleeve and lets his arm blood in a saucer, and having taken a
piece from the Pronotary subscribeth to the parchment; delivers it: the
remainder of the blou^, the other devil seems to sup up; and from him
disro^bed is put the rich Cap the Tunicle, and the triple Crown set upon
Alexanders head, the Crosse-keyes delivered into his hands; and withal a
magical book: this donne with thunder and lightning the devil d^scend:
Alexander advances himself, and departs.

Thus first with golden bribes he did corrupt
The purple conclave: then by devilish art
Satan transfigur'd like a Pronotarie
To him makes offer of the triple Crown
For certain years agreed betwixt them two.
The life of action shall express the rest.
Renowned Lodowik our warlike Cousin,
Auspiciously encountered on the skirts
Of Pie^mont, we greet you joyfully.

Thrice and forever most renowned Charles,
A ^aithfull tongue from an unfeigned heart
As a just herrold full of ^uth and honour
On the behalf of forlorn ^talie
Needing and craving a^ your Princely hands,
The patronage and true protection
Of such a Potent and victorious King
Humbly salutes your royal Majesty.
The ship of which some-time well guided state,
Is through tempestuous times malignity
By worthless Pilots, foolish Governors
Mutually factious, like to sink through Schism
Into the bottom of the black abisme
Through th'imposition of nec^ssity.
Do not! oh do not then (most Christian Charles)
Do not forsake her holding up her hands
For succour to your royal Clemency:
Her sails are rent, mastes spent and rudder brooke
And under water such wide open leaks
As under water soon will make her sink.
Having been bilg'd upon so many shelves,
So torn, so rotten and so long vnrig'd,
And playing with the waives to and again
As one not governed with help of he^e.
One then whom nature in his vows to God*
Hath tied to tender her forlone estate
With eyes fore-seeing and compassionate*
Retenders her to your high Majesty,
A Christian Prince so wise so valiant:
Undoubted heir unto the Crown of Naples,
By lawful right of that great house of Aniou:
Of which your grace is well known lawful heir,
By th'issues of that Charles the first, that first
Of the blood royal of the Crown of France,
Obtained that Kingdom ages many past.
These reasons wear with Lodowik Sforza moved,
To move your Majesty with martial force
To pass these mountains to possess your own.
March then most Christian and renowned Prince,
Advance thy lilly standard potent King:
And since all skandalls are removed and cleared,
Strike up your cheerful drums and march along
In Gods name; with good auspices of Saint Denys,
I know you doubt not mine integrity:
Can more gross error rest in policy.
Then first to raise a turbulent sharpe storm,
And unadvisedly to leave defence
To doubtful chance and possibilities.
To broach strong poison is too dangerous,
And not be certain of the present virtue
Which is contained in his Antidot.
Wild fire permitted without limmit burns,
Even to consume them that first kindled it:
I did advise you, I inducted you,
And Lodowike, which brought you on with honour,
Will bring you of with triumph and renown.

Embrace me Cousin Sforza: by the souls
Of my forefathers I rejoice as much
In thy dear friendship and wise industry,
As in the more parteof my patrimony:
Courage together let us share all one,
In life, in death, in purchase or in none.
^ are fornmate for Daubigny,
^ how that the Coloneses,
(Although Alfonso did accord with them,)
Declared have them-selues for France and us,
Without dissembling or hypocrisy.

Why this was it I did expect great Charles,
Our armies and our friends have been long sown,
The ground well ploughed, the blade is full come up,
And doubt not we shall have a joyful harvest.

Cousin Montpansier
March with your regiments to Pontremolt.
Expect us, or from us directions,
To meet our forces, when we come near Florence,
There shall you find the Swisse with their Artillery,
Newly by sea brought unto Spetia,
Come Cousin march we cheerfully together,
Fair is the way, fair fortune, and fair whether,

Nay such profane and monstrous Sodomy,
Such obscure Incest and Adultery,
Such odious Avarice and perfidy,
Such vinolence and bruti^h gluttony,
So barren of sincere integrity.

In whom there is no shame nor verity,
Faith nor religion, but mere cruelty?
Immoderate ambition, guilfull treachery,
Such profanation and Apostasy*
And in all falsehood such dexterity.

As heavens detest, and men on earth distaster


Such impious sacrilege, such adulation:


Of all good men such detestation.


Such Magic skill, such diuilish incantation.


Apparantfigures of damned reprobation.


As in all thoughts is thought abomination*


Time will out-strip us; for the morning star,
Portends the mounting of fair Phoebus Carre.

Hast we, for danger drawn on by delay,
Admits no time ^o tarry till clear day.

Fix on your Papers, these for Alexander
And his ambitious Caesar: set on yours.
Hale reverent Pasquill I doll of verity,
Accept these sacri^ices which we bring.

These be sin offerings figuring foul vice.
Oh glorious guider of the golden Spheres,
And thou that from thy precious lyric strings
Makes Gods and men in heaven and earth to dance
With sacred touch of sweetest harmony:
Pity these times, by whose malignity,
We loose our grace, and thou thy dignity.

High Muse, which meanwhile virtues patronized,
In whose eternal rowles of memory
The famous acts of Princes were comprised
By force of euer-liuing History:
What shall we do to call thee back again?
True Chronicler of all immortal glory,
When here with mortal men nought is deuis'd,
But how all stories with foul vice to stain:
So that alas thy gracious Oratory,
Which with mere truth and virtue simpathiz'd,
Is silent; and we Poets now with pain,
(Which in Castalian Fountains dipped our quills)
Are forced of men's impiety to plain;
And well thou wote^t, wrought against our wills,
In rugged verse, vile matters to contain:
And herein lurks the worst of mortal ills,
That Rome (which should be Virtues Paradise)
Bare of all good, is wilderness of vice.

How luculent and more conspicuous
Even then the sun, in clearest Majesty,
His vehement and more then hellish thirst
Soaring to perch upon the spire of honour
Displ^es his bastard wings: and in that nest
Where princely Falcons, or Ioues kingly Birds,
Should hatch their young ones, plants his ravenous Harpies,
His graceless^, impious, and disastrous sons,
Even in the sovereign Chair of domination.

But chiefly one, that devilish Cardinal,
Proud Caesar, farst, with fierce impiety:
His Oracle and instrument of shame
In all nefarious plotts and practises,
Is now become as wicked as himself:
But hast we now, least any should suspect us.

Much conference with Pasquill may detect us.


Dio viguarda Signior illustrissimo: whether in such hast my noble Lord thus
early?


Signior Barbarossa in happy time well encountered, for I have some business
this morning with my brother the Duke of Candy, wherein I would both use your
counsel and countenance.


My good Lord Viselli, the countenance of your devoted poor friend, is of
less value then his counsel, yet both of very small validity: such as they
be, with his life and best fortunes he sincerely sacrifices all to your
service.


Pardon me dear sir no service more then reciprocal, and in due parity
betwixt us, and since we be so near it, let us not pass Pasquill without an
Aue: what scandalous hyerogliphickes have we here?

A. S. P. M. M. P. S. A. These are the same letters with the first beginning at
the last, Magnum Petrum Sequitur Antichristus. Phy Diabolo, our blessed
Alexander (being Saint Peeters successor) this diuilish libeller calls
Antichrist.


Pause there my Lord a little, some-what here concerns my Lord the Cardinal
Borgia.


Read it good Barbarossa.


Alexander Caesarem suum Galero et purpura donauit vt menstruoso spiritus sui
veneno, vniuersum simul conclave suffocaret.


Oh most intolerable abomination?


Alexander adopted his son Caesar into the fellowship of Cardinals, that he
with the menstruous poison of his breath might choke the whole Conclave.


By the blessed alter of Saint Peeter this villainy surpasses patience.


My Lord here's a long libel.


Read it good Barbarossa: more mischief of my wife nay read it.


Quid mirum? Romae facta est Lucretia Thais,
Vnica Alexandri filia, sponsa nurus.
The same in effect inseueth.
Welcome good Post from Rome tell us some news,
Lucrece is turned Thayis of the stews:
In whom her father Alexander saw,
His only daughter, wife, and daughter in law,
Shall I read on my Lord? here is much more.

Nay read out all, it is but of a whore.


Francesco di Gonsaga was the first,
That married Lucrece Alexanders daughter,
And yet the Pope those bains of bridal burst,
And made of marriage sacrament a laughter,
His reason was because that fellow poor,
Lacked maintenance for such a noble whore.

Malignant aspect of ungracious stars,
Why have you pointed at my miseries?

Have patience good my Lord and here the rest,


Patienza per forza, but this wounds to th'quick.


Iohn Sforza now Lord Maerques of Pescare,
Was second husband to this jolly dame,
Of natures faculties he being bare,
In like state with his predecessor came,
(...) he, when he should have writ his mind,
Paper well might; but pen or ink none find.

Oh villamies of monstrous people,
Fashions and times deformed and unseasonable,

Yet my Lord a little have patience in your own cause


Malice perform thy worst least coming late,
I with anticipation cross that fate. Read it, toot man.

Gismond Viselli, nobly descended,
Is for his shameful match much discommended.
For never was the shameless Fuluia,
Nor Lais noted for so many wooers,
Nor that unchaste profuse Sempronia.
A common dealer with so many dooers,
So proud, so faithless, and so void of shame,
As is new brodell bride Lucretia,
Take to thee Gismond both the scorn and shame,
And live long ^ealous of Lucretia.
With pushing horns keep out all comers in,
For now thy mortal miseries begin.

Mortal miseries? but we are all mortal,
Fortune I scorn thy malice, and thy meed,
Keep them up safe that I may show them to his holiness,
Is this the licence which our city Rome
Hath given to beastly Bardes, and satirists,
Ribbaldly Rimesters, and malicious curs,
To leave no state of Church nor seculer,
Free from their ordure, and polution.
Good Barbarossa bear me Company:
Exile and Punishment for such base poets,
And str^pes with wiery scourges were too little.
Which breathing here in Rome, and taking grace*
From the fair Sunne-shine of this hemisphere,
Contaminate that air with their vile breath.
Obumbrating this light by which they live,
If these were truth: this times impiety,
May soon sink down under the deity.

With what expense of money plate and jewels
This Mitre is attayn'd my Coffers witness:
But Astaroth my covenant with thee
Made for this soul more precious then all treasure,
Afflicts my conscience, O but Alexander
Thy conscience is no conscience; if a conscience,
It is a ^coprouse and polluted conscience.
But what? a coward for thy conscience?
The devil is witness with me when I sealed it
And cauteriz'd this conscience now scard up
To banish out faith, hope and charity;
Using the name of Christian as a stale
For Arcane plots and intricate designs
That all my misty machinations
And Counsels held with black Tartarian fiends
Were for the glorious sunne-shine of my sons;
That they might mount in equal parallel
With golden majesty like Saturnes son
To dart down fire and thunder on their foes.
That, that was it, which I so much desired
To see my sons through all the world admired,
In spite of grace, conscience, and Acharon
I will rejoice and triumph in my Charter.
Sedebis Romae Papa, summa in foelicitate tui et
Filiorum vine; 11. et 7. dies 8. post moriere.
Proviso quod nunquam te signs tremende
Crucis signo.

Was ^ di^ill provides in his covenant
I should not cross my self at any time;
I never was so ceremonious.
Well this rich Mitre thought it cost me dear
Sh^ll make me live in pomp whilst I live here.
Holla Bernardo?
Call hither my two sons the Duke of Candy and the
Cardinal of Valence.
Happy those sons whom fathers love so well
That for their sakes they dare adventure hell.
Come my dear sons the comfort of my life
Yours is this earthly glory which I hold.
Cannot the spacious bounds of Italy
Divided equally contain you both?
From France and Switzerland I will begin
With Naples and those Towns in Peadmont
And all the signories in Lombardy
From Porto di Volane to Sauona
And Genes on the otherside of Italy
Upon the Mediterranean towards Greece;
Allotted Candy for his patrimony.
And in Romania from Pontremoli
And Prato to fair Florence; and from thence
In Tuskany within the River Narre
And fruitful Arno those sweet Provinces
Even to Mont Alto, Naples, Policastro
And Petrasilia in Calabria
The furthest home of Italy for Caesar.
Gain double strength with your united loves
Love one another boys you shall be Kings:
Fortune hath been auspicious at my birth
And will continue gracious to mine end.
Castor and Pollux would not live in Heaven
Vnlesses they might be stellified together,
You for a little-turfe of earth contend
When they together shine the welkin clears:
And gentle gales bear fourth the winged fails,
But when they shine a part they threaten storms
And hiddeous tempests to the Mariners
Castor would not be called but Pollux Castor
And Castor Castors Pollux: so my Candy
Be (...) Candy, Caesa^, Candies Caesar,
With perfect love, dear boys love one another
So (...) shall be s^engt^en^d by his brother.

M^s^ blessed reverend and renowned father,
Th^ lou^ by n^ture to my brother Candy,
(...) me some-times in plainer sort
To clee^ my conscience issuing from pure love,
It is mere love which moves these passions,
When I do counse ^or advise your good.

I know dear brother when your counsel tends
Unto my good it issues from pure love.

As when I tax your princely conscience
Like an vnpitted penetentiarie,
Brother with reverence of his Holiness
You^ ^eart is too much spiced with honesty.

I and I fear me he will ^ind it so,
Your brother Caesar tells you very true:
You must not be so ceremonious
Of oaths and honesty, Princes of this world
Are not p^ickt in the books of conscience,
You may not break your promise for a world:
Learn this one lesson look ye mark it well,
It is not always needful to keep promise,
For Princes (forced by mere necessity
To pass their faithful promises) again
Forced by the same necessity to break promise.

And for your more instructions learn these rules!
If any Cedar, in your forest spread,
And ouer-pee^e your branches with his top,
Provide ^n axe to cut him at the root,
Suborn informers or by snares entrap
That King of Flies within the Spiders Web;
Or else ensnare him in the Lions toils.
What though the multitude applaud his fame:
Because the vulgar have wide open ears
Mutter amongst them and possess their hearts
That his designments wrought against the state
By which yea wound him with a public hate.
So let him perish, yet seem pitiful
Cherish the weakness of his stock and race
As if alone he merited disgrace.
Suffer your Court to morn his funerals,
But burn a bone-fire for him in your Chamber.

Caesar delivers Oracles of tru^h.
Tis well said Caesar, yet attend a little,
And bind them like rich bracelets on thine arms
Or as a precious jewel at thine ear.
Suppose two factious Princes both thy friends
Ambitious both, and both competitors,
Advance in hostile arms against each other
Join with the strongest to confound the weak
But let your wars foundation touch his Crown,
Your nearest Charity concerns your self;
Else let him perish; yet seem charitable.
As if you were merely composed of virtue:
Believe me Candy things are as they seem,
Not what they be themselves; all is opinion:
And all this world is but opinion.
Look what large distance is twixt Heaven and Earth,
So many leagues twixt wealth and honesty:
And they that live puling upon the fruits
Of honest consciences; starve on the Common.
Caesar can tell thee this in ample sort.
And Caesar love him, love him heartily;
Though mildness do possess thy brother Cand^e,
It is a gentle vice, vicining virtue.

Under correction of your Holiness,
Those wars which virtue leu^es against v^ce,
Are only known to some particulers
Which have them written in their consciences.
Those are the same they seem and in such wars
Your son shall make remonstrance of his valour,
And so become true Champion of the Church.

It is the precious Ornament of Princes
To be strong hearted, proud, and valiant,
But well attempted with callidity,
Brother with reverence of his holiness
(Whose sacred words like blessed Oracles
Have pointed at your prudence) Caesar would
Have given the like advise: but (in conclusion)
Undoubtedly to work out thy confusion.

Upon my blessing follow Caesars counsel;
It tends to thy glory.

Most blessed Lord,
Ambassadors from Ferdinande of Naples
Arrived here attend your holiness.

This is a welcome messenger for Godfrey,
To make a marriage with the Lady Saunce:
And Can^y for so much as this requires
A ioyfu^l entertainment; take that honour
And bid him welcome with due complements.
Show courteous, language laudable apporte;
Let them be feasted in more sumpteous sort
Then ordinary messengers of state:
Observe his speeches, fathom his designs;
And for I know thy nature tractable,
And full of courtesy: show courtesy
And good entreaty to them: Gentle Candy
Now show thy sel^e a politician;
I need not give thee large instructions;
For that I know thee wise* and honourable
Greet them from us: Caesar shall at a turn
Give correspondence to thy courtesy:
I as well sits with my state and honour
Within these ten days will admit them hearing:
Mean while learn out by lore of policy
The substance of their motions, that we may
Be better arm^d to give them resolution.

Your holiness in this shall see my skill,
To do you service,

Caesar now to thee.
This task upon thy shoulders only leanes;
I rest upon thee Caesar: were it not
That thou must second it, or first it rather
I durst not trust such things of consequence,
To feeble spirits: therefore from our stables
Six Persian Coursers armed and furnished
With rich Caparisons of gold and Pearl,
With six rich Complete Armours for thei^ saddles,
And such a Cabinet of precious Jewels
As we shall choose within to morrow morning
Present from us in token of our love.
Let for no cost in sumptuous banqueting,
Believe me Caesar some-times at a banquet,
More ground is got then at a bloody battle.
Worm out their humours, fathom their delights,
If they delight in that which Naples covets,
Fine, witty, loue-sick, brave, and beautiful,
Eloquent, glancing, full of fantasies.
Such Sugar hearted Sirens, or such Comets,
As shine in our imperial state of Rome,
True pick-locks in close wards of policy,
Present them with the Paragons of Rome:
And spare not for a Million in expense,,
So long as here they keep their residence.

Caes^r in such a case will prooe true Caesar,
Wise, frank, and honourable.

I doubt it not:
And Caesar, (as thou dost embrace my love,
More then the world besides) accomplish this,
And we shall Caesar with high blessings bliss,

By this time is my fair Lucretia,
Befitted for a business of blood,
Nearly concerning her estate and mine.

Lucretia cast off all servile fear,
Revenge t^y se^e upon thy jealous husband
T^t ^ thine honour, wronged thy bed:
F^re not; w^th resolution act his death:
L^ ^ ^ace in policies
^ now prove Caesars Sister,
^ ^y s^ratagems as he:
^ ^aue found examples in all times.
^ thou m^lt ^he (...) c^ll to mind,
^ wrath f^ll fury,
^ indeous (...):
^ ^ther of her only son,
A ^ Dau^hters (all but one)
(...) i^ one night, their husbands sleeping slew.
My (...) as ^ust as theirs, my heart as resolute,
My hands as ready. G^smond I come,
Ha^ld on with fury ^o revenge these wrongs
And love imp^son'd with thy jealousy,
I have de^ised such a cu^ious s^are,
As ^ never yet deuis'd,
To gra^pe h^s arms v^able to res^st,
D^aths i^s^ruments enclosed in these hands.
You (...) Dau^h^ers of gum Erebus,
Which spit out venge^ce from your vipe^ous heirs,
Inf^e a three-(...) g^ in these arms;
I^ble ^ ^r^ng indurate heart,
To consummate the pl^ o^ my revenge.
Here comes the sn^ect of my Tragedy.

W^at my Lucretia walking alone?
Th^e solitary ^assions should bewray
Some discontentment, and those gracious eyes
Seem to be moon'd with anger, not with love:
Tell me Lucretia, may thy Gismond know?

Demaundst th^u the cause miutious Gismond?
When like a reduse (shut up from ^he world)
I live close prisoner to thy jealousy?
The Esperian Dragons kept not with more watch,
The golden ^ruit then thou my fatal beauty:
Thou would exclude me from the s^ght of Sun,
But that his beams break t^rough some ^cu^sies
Thou woul^st d^bar^e me ^om the common air,
(...) that against my will I ^uck it in,
A^d breat^ it out in sealding sighs again:
Were I in N^xos (...) no no^se is hea^d
But N^m^es ^age (...) ^ghts but ruthelesse rocks.
Or in t^e Libi^n ^eser^s or ex^hang'd
This Hemisph^e o^ Rome for (...) Int^odes,
We^e ^ot so g^ous as to dwell in Rome,
Ba^h'd ^ and conference ^f friends.

(...) t^ou my ie^lous^e? may blame thy beauty,
And love im^son'd in those amo^ous looks:
^ea^e the (...) ef^ect^o^s on thy face,
Least he more wondering at thy precious eyes,
Then any Nymphs wh^ch he most hono^ed,
Shou^d bear thee to some other Paradise,
And ^ob me, silly man, of this worlds joy.
I ^eare the winds least amorous Jove in them,
(Envying such precious nature among^t men)
With extreme passion hence should hurry thee.
Oh love is full of fea^e all things I fear,
By which I m^ght be frustrate of thy love.

Scoffst thou me Gis^ond wi^h continual taunts?
Oh God of heavens, shall ^ both suffer shame
And scorn, with such dispisd captivity.

Here in the presence of the powers in Heaven,
I do not speak ^n scorn, but in mere love:
And further Lucrese, (of thy clemency,
For love, and b^autie* both are rich in bounty)
F^rgiue me what is past, and I will swear,
Never to vex thee with more ie^lousie.

Thou wil^ so s^eare thy self: Gismond come hither?
Sit down and answer me this question.
When I bestowed on thee this diamond
A Iewe^l once held precious as my life;
And w^th it ca^t away my self on thee
Did t^ou not promi^e to ma^ntaine mine honour,
(...) in word nor deed to give suspect
O ^y (...) and hast th^u not since then
In (...) of my ne^es^ Noble friends
^ a (...) for my lightness^?
^ his mo^y up
So ^ and sight of them?

Wh^ (...) thou did bestow this Diamond
I ^ad a (...) lustre in mine eye:
And wa^ (...) o^ virtue, when I vowed
To ma^ntaine that, which was impossible:
B^t (...) that time this stone hath had a s^aw,
(...) within t^e ring, his foil grown dim,
The ve^tue vani^ and the lust lost.

I can no longer brooke these base rebukes.
These (...) riddles and close libellings

Oh help I am strangled.


Peace w^etched villain, then reciue this quickly:
Or by the living powers of heaven i'll kill thee.
Take pen and ink: tis not to make thy will;
For if then wilt subscribe, I will not kill.
Tis but to clear those scandalls of my shame,
With which thy jealousy did me defame.
So now that part is played, what follows now?
Thou Ribbauld, Cuckcold Rascal, Libeller,
Pern^cious Leche^ void of a^l performance;
Per^u^ious Coxcomb, ^oule, now for those wrongs
Which no great spirit could well tolerate
Come I, with mortal vengeance on thy soul.
Take this for sclandring of his Holiness
My blessed father and my brother Caesar
With incest: this take for my brother Candy:
And this for Noble Sphorza whom thou wrongest;
And since the time is short I will be short:
For locking up of me, calling me whore,
Setting esp^alls tending at my tail;
Take this and this this to make amends.
And put thee from thy pains;
Now will my father Alexander say
That I did take the best and safest way,
And Caesar will app^oue it with his heart,
That Lucrere hath performed a cunning part.
If others ask who Gismonde killed or why
It was himself repenting jealousy.

Holla within there?
Why ^ellowes?

Here my Lord.


What is my Lord Viselli stirring yet?
My Lord the Pope expects him and the ambassadors
Of Naples crave his company.

My Lord I have not seen him yet this morning.


Is not your Lady Lucrce stir^ing yet?


No my good Lord I think she be not yet come from her chamber, her custom is
not to be seen so soon.


Tis well, t^s well, let her take case in gods name,
But make hast call up my Lord thy master honest fellow.

Wi^h patience of your Lordship I will speak:
For three days space I did find in my Lord
Passionate motions, and strange melancholy
'T may be his solitude hath drawn him forth,
I will first look the garden and the galleries.

Do my good friend I will expect thee in this parler here?
Fellow come ba^ke, come back, fellow come back:
Y^ur Lo^d (...) mu^t^red here call up your Lady;
Call i^ your ^ellow se^uants. D^h anta Croce.
^ g^asped in his fatal ^and
^ ^ome violence, wrought on himself:
^ much vio^ate her self?
^ ^ought by bloody Borgi^es race?
^ t^e (...) hyp^chrisie,
Ius^e ^ ^me and in^eru^able
Re^ale^t, o^ (...) it in thy me^cy.

Where (...) ^y Lord? my dea^ L^d?


Fai^y Lady.
Approach no^ near this ^th^ull s^e^tacle;
Approach not near th^s spe^ac^e o^ bl^ud,
This ^u^hfull spect^cle of bl^ud and death,
Lease suddain^ horror of these bleeding wounds
Wound thy d^stracted sp^rits to pale death.

Wha^ honour or what mo^tall spectacle.
Upon such sudden hath astonished me?
Oh my dear Lord: Visell^ speak to me:
Oh most disastrous accident and hour;
Ay me most wretched and unfortunate,
My dearest* (...) the treasu^e of my life,
The sweetest paradi^e of my best hopes,
Is murth^ed^i^k^ out the murderers
Leave not vnsear^cht a corner n^r a Crany:
Locke up the ^otes there least that homicide
Escape us in t^i^ passion --

Hau^ patience Lady
Heavens will reveal t^e murder do^bt it not.

Ah Noble Barbaro^a much I fea^e
Now with t^ese eyes I see the murderer,
S^aind wi^ the guilt of nature; ^h my Lord
You l^ttle kn^w that these w^ke w^mans ha^ds
Twice ^escued have the v^ole^e o^ his;
From killing of himself before this time:
Oh f^e upon the devil, and melancholy;
Which leave me desolate a forlorn widow.

Madam these papers will bewray some matter.


Oh might I find an other murderer.


Th^se do contain some matter read them Lady.


My hea^t swollen up with sorrow, lends no light
Unto mine eyes, nor force unto my tongue
To see one letter, or to read one word,
I pray you read it good Lord Barbarossa.
I Gismond de Viselli through desperate grief conceived in jealousy (which I
bare against my Lady Lucrecia) having found out by much trial, and examina^ion
her faithfulness and innocence, make this my protestation as the last piacular
oblation to her for those wrongs that with mine own unfortunate hands I have
ended my li^e, desring her and all others to forgive me, and pray for me,
subscribed with mine own hand, a^d sealed with my seal.


Oh Lord of heavens have pardon on his soul.


This is his hand and seal, speak now my Lord:
Did not I soon disclose the murderer?
Told I not that the mur^herer was present?
Ah never never shall I live to see.

Comfort you self dear Lady God will send succour
Your hu^band hath paid dearly for these wrongs.

Give me my Lord again, death shall not have him,
Come my dear G^smond* come aga^ne my joy:
Delay me not least I prevent thy lo^e
I cannot brooke delay's, L^crece shall follow.

Tempt not Gods justice Lady, fall to prayer,
Help, in the take your Lord out of her sight.

Oh my dear friends that see my miseries,
I you beseech in dea^est tenderness
Bring in the body of my dearest Lord;
That I before my death may (with these eyes)
Behold him honoured in his obsequies.

And I will bear these papers to his Holiness,
Whose sorrow will exceed for Gismonds death.

Thus foul suspicion, fear and jealousy
Of shame, dishonour, and his wives hot lust,
Hath seized upon Visell; whose revenge,
Was to restrain Lucrece from Company*
But swelling pride, and lust, both limitles,
Answered his loving fear and shame with death.
Attend the sequel. Now successively
(After such warlike preparations,
So many firm hopes found in Italy)
King Charles with fifteen hundred men at arms,
Three thousand Archers, with six thousand Swisse.
French men, and Gascons twice as many more,
With martial measures, over Piemont
Treads a long march after his drums and fife,
With Milans force, and now his trumpets hard,
Unto the gates of Rome give fresh alarms,
Unto the Pope, who stirs up in arms,

Castillian take five hundred harguebusse,
Two hundred Arbalastes, and fortify,
Upon the tower of Saint Sebastian,
Affronting that port where proud Charles should enter,
Called Santa Maria di Pop^lo.

Our soldiers ready be with match in cock,
T'attend this service, and our scurriers,
Are now returned having discryd King Charles,
Hi^ ensigns and his Cornets proudly mand,
With plumed regiments, and troops of horse,
Marching in glory to the gates of Rome.

Bravely bring on your companies bold hearts,
Gaspar de Fois are those two Basilisks,
Al^eady mounted on their carriages?

They be.


We make you master of our Ordinance,
And on the Turret of Saint Adrian.
Plant six more Cannon, and four Culuerings,
Four Lizards, and eight Sacres, with all speed,
Take Gunners with you to the Citadel,
Powder and shot, with Ladles for their charge,
See none be wanting; set them to their task.
Have a good care your Pyoners work hard,
To further your fortifications.

Pleases your Holiness to give me leave,
It fitteth well with our own purposes,
To give Charles entrance, and without restraint,
Least he by rigour should usurp that leave,
Which to resist were vain and dangerous.
Believe me Father we must temporize.

Besides you see how the Calabrian Duke,
Out of the Port of Saint Sabastian,
Not one hour past, hath issued and left Rome.
Now though you do suspect, conceal all doubts:
For you shall find this sure and commonly,
Dangers accompany suspicion,

We will embrace that course, but with your leave,
In Castle Angelo Capitulate:
Standing (as best befits us) on our guarde.

Tis time your Holiness took to your guard,
For Potent Charles (like one that conquers)
Armed at all pieces, in his plumed cask,
And with a Lance resting upon his thigh,
Already with his forces hath possessed
The suberbs, and is now come to the gates.

We are resolved: Gasper de fois take heed,
On pain of death no soldier be so bold
As to dischardge one piece or arbalast,
Before th'alarme being given from them,
We with a culuering from Castle Angelo,
Proclaim hostility: troop on a pace,
Take we what fortune peace or war affords,
The worst of resolution is with swords.

Thus far with much applause in joyful march,
With good success and hopeful augury,
We marched have within the walls of Rome,
Not little wondering that his Holiness,
Doth give such slender welcome to our troops.

Your majesty may well perceive how fear,
And iealeous judgment of a wounded conscience,
Works hard in Alexander.

And how foxe-like.
(Houlding newtrality the surest guard)
He coopes himself in Castle Angelo.

Pleases your maistie to give a summons,
Unto the Castle for some parlance,
Upon such articles as were set down,

Come we will touch him, summon forth a parle.
What office bear you marching on those walls,
We made no summons to confer with you.

Most Christian prince pleases your mightiness,
I am Castillian of Saint Angelo, Under his Holiness.

To bid defiance to our forces?


No most gracious Lord.
But to salute you from his Holiness.

What is he sick?


Not very well disposed,
S. Pe. ad vin. Nor ever was, nor will be well disposed.

An other summons for his Holiness,


Most Christian Charles, here I salute your grace,
Bidding you peaceably welcome to Rome,
If you bring peace along with you to Rome.

In filial Love I thank your Holiness,
We little thought it our most holy father,
That our alegeance to the Church of Rome,
Which we with all our predecessors tendered,
Should have enforced you to take sanctuary.

Son Charles know then we took not to this place,
In fear as to some refuge or asyle:
But for as much as news were brought in post,
That you with all your forces did approach.
Armed and in hostile manner to this City,
The Conclave thought it fit tendering the safety,
Of holy Church, and sacred privilege,
To know your meaning first, and then with pomp,
To make your welcome in Saint Peters palace,
In the best fashion with due ceremonies.

Know then most holy father what we would,
Having in tedious marched from France thus far,
Past with our forces God still guiding us,
(As we be deeply bound by laws of nature.
And reason to work surely for our right)
We left no busy doubts, nor obstacles,
Which might prevent us in our just imprease,
Hence was it that we did Capitulate,
So strictly with the crafty Florentines,
Whom we well knew favoured Alphonsoes part.
And this made Ve^ice join in league with us.
Yet having notice that your Holiness.
Both with Alphonso (that vsurpes my Crown)
And his son Ferdinand drew deeper in
Upon considerations of more weight;
We thought it good to take France in our way.

And there to crave some certain Cautions
Of your indifferency to his just title
Had in the Crown of Naples: therefore first
We do require (if you these parties tender,
(As your late letters did import) yield up
In Caution of your good intent to France;
This Castle which you now retain against us.

Why Lodowick? the weathercock is turned,
The wind stands fair, but how long will that hold?
So may we put in hazard our whole Church
The dear estate of Christ's flock militant
And bring confusion unto Christendom.

So may you seize upon the Churches rights,
If that we should refer all to your trust.

This is Saint Peters bul-warke; for my part
Here I will die ere I surrender it.

Now find I true which common bruit proclameth
Of your bad meanings and hypochrisie:
But I refer your conscience to that Judge
Whom (if my conscience harber any thought
To wrong the Church of God, in any thing)
I call in justice to revenge on me.

Renowned Charles, suppose we should surrender*
How may we be secured that you will
Restore it, after your imprease at Naples.

The faith and honour of a Christian King.


Your faith honour? stay most Christian Charles
Men will not yield up Castles upon words
Unless their states, and lives grow desperate.

Why make we longer parley with this Pope
Whose false-hood is so much that neither oath,
Nor honesty can purchase place with him.

Who never yet in cause of con^equence
Ha^h k^pt his promise.

Tell us, will ye grant?


What should we grant most Christian King of France
And tell me truly (were it your own case)
Whether you would (on such slight promises)
Accord to such uneven conditions?

We did not think our royal promises
Had been so slightly censured in your heart:
But since we find your infidelities
We must requite it with extremity,
Cousin Mountpanseir.

My Lord.


Forthwith cause ten brass pieces with their shot
And powder to be drawn out of Saint Marks;
Such as you find most fit for battery.
You will not here us now, we speak so low:
Standing aloft you proudly scorn inferiors;
We'll send our minds, written in fiery notes.

Give doubtful answers, be not peremptory
Least through your heate, his rage exsaperate.

Offer unto him on his Princely word,
The strength of Terracina for a pledge.

Victorious Cha^les, such is my trust and love
That neither fear of force nor violence
Could any ways induce me to suspect you.
Hence came it that the ports of Rome were opened
(At our behests) to give you guestning.
Accept us therefore with our promises,
Which we shall under hand and seal confirm
Not any way to Cross your action.

If you will yield up Castle Angelo
Resolve us presently without delays?

Because it is Saint Peeters Citadel
The conclave is in doubt to make surrender.

You will not yield then?


We cannot, nor we will not yield it up.


Why then a parle with our ordinance.


What come ye to make pillage of the Church,
Which held you dear as her chief Champion?
For bear your violence in the name of God:
Fearing the scourge, and thunder from above,
Ou^ offers are both just and reasonable.

Pieces which are of more valid^ty
We mean to tender to your Majesty.

What are those pieces you would tender us.


To render presently the Cittadells
Of Terracina, Cinita Vecchia, and Spoleto.

And we receive them very ^hankfully.
S. P ad vin. Our voices of the coclaue pass, that Charles
Shall be possessed of Castle Angelo.

And if your meaning with your words accord
We dare engage our souls for resurrender.

Your souls? foh foh they stink in sight of God man,
Your souls? why they be sold to Lucifer,
Your consciences are of so large a last
That you would sell Saint Peters Patrimony,
As Esau did his heritage for broth.

Thou most prophaine impious Moabite;
So full of vices and abominable,
No Pope but Lucifer in Peters Chair.

Renowned Charles pull down this Antichrist;
Advance some worthy father in his place.
Your fame sha^l live with all posterities
Who from a wicked Bishops tyranny
Infranchised the Church of God misguided;
Even as (in this worlds worthy memories)
The names of Pepin and King Charlemain
Your predecessors, were eternized
For helping good Popes, Saints of Holy life,
O^t of ungodly persecutions.

A Pope by nature full of fraud, and pride;
Ambitious, auaritious, shameless, diuilish,
And that and which your experience testifies)
One that with mortal malice hates the French:
By whom this reconciliation made
Was more in fear and hard necessity
Then faithful inclination, or good will.

Iscraiot, reprobate apostata,
I charge thee to desist and make submission
With penance to the Mother Church of Rome
On pain of everlasting reprobation.

Blasphemous exorsist, here are no diuills
Which thou can conjure, with thy diuilish spirit.
We charge thee render up that triple Crown
Which most ungodly man thou dost usurp.
Those robes pontifical which thou prophanest,
Saint Peters Chair wherein (like Antichrist)
Thou doest advance thy self thou man of sin.

Saint Peeter doth make challenge to those keys,
Which (in those hands defiled with blood and bribes)
Thou like a profane deputy dost hold.

That sword (with which thou sholdst strike Antichrist)
Thou like proud Antichrist converted hast
Upon the members of Christ's chosen flock;
Saint Paule demands his sword, Peter his keys:

Forbear your blasphemies, what know ye not
Christ's Vicar general chosen on earth?
Have not I power to bind and loose men's sins,
And souls, on earth, in hell, and purgatory?
Come take Saint Peters Chair proud heretiks;
Here take this triple Crown, oh you would take it:
But he, that made it, did not for you make it.
Ascanio thou would have these Golden keys;
Here take them with my vengeance on thy head,
And Pseudo Paulus would have Saint Paules sword,
Ordained for his decollation.
Son Charles (since we capitulato with you)
Me thinks you should not suffer these t'affront us.

Forbear your idle velletations,
Ang^ing and rubbing up the festered scars
O^ wrath inveterate, and mortal quarrels,
We come not here to foster factions,
All are in one accorded, all are friends.
But yet most Holy-Father, let me crave,
Two favours more, both very reasonable;
First that you pardon both these Cardinals,
And other Barons which partake with me.
Then that the brother of great Baiaset,
That fled from Rhodes to France, and last to Rome,
With the protection of Pope Innocent
Called Gemen Ottoman, may be delivered
Into my hands, when after-time shall serve
For my best vantage in those holy wars,
Which we pretend against the Turks here-after.

The sun shall never set upon my wrath;
That Oily Lamp of blessed Charity
Shall not extinguish in my zealous heart:
He that knows all, knows this I cannot falter
With any brother, all are faithful friends:
Be but submissive, mild, and penitent,
And all is past, as all had been well meant.
Now touching Gemen Ottoman, son Charles,
When you shall undertake those godly wars,
I will deliver him as willingly
As you demand: and with a cheerful heart,
Praising your godly zeal on Christs behalf,
And praying for your good success in war.

I thank your Holiness.


These quarrels are as happily determined
As we could wish: call for an Actuarie,
And let a Charter Bipartite be drawn
Betwixt you: to confirm this amity.
And now most blessed Father I beseech,
That I may show the duty which belongs
Unto this place, and see Apostolick.

We will regreete your presence presently.


Son Charles, your welcome is as acceptable,
As ever was Kings presence into Rome:
To morrow we will with the power of heaven,
Together celebrate a solemn Mass:
After the Senior, Bishop, Cardinal,
You must take place: and as our custom is,
Shall give us water when we celebrate:
This done, we will bestow some time in pleasures.
Here leave we Charles with pompous ceremonies,
Feasting within the Vaticane at Rome:
From thence to Naples, where the peoples hatred
Conceived against the former Kings, made way
For him, without resistance to the crown.
This done, he marches back again for France,
And Ferdinand doth repossesse his state.
Mean while King Charles sick of an Apoplexy,
Dyes at Ambois: the Duke of Orleance,
Lewis the twelfth conjointly knitting force,
Doth march in arms with Ferdinand of Spain,
These regain Naples and divide that realm,
But this breeds mortal war betwixt them both,
The wily Pope dissembles at all hands,
These quell only concerns him and Caesar.

Brother Phillippo what avails it,
When our state lost the Fauintines compounded,
That I should hold both life and liberty,
Withal revenues of my proper state,
When as my life within the Court of Rome,
Is much more loathsome to my soul then death,
And liberty more grief then servitude.

I rather choose within the river Tiber
To drown my self, or from Tarpeyan hill,
My vexed body to precipitate,
Then to subject my body to the shame
Of such wild brutish and unkindly lust.

He that with fire and Brimstone did consume
Sodome and other Cities round about.
Deliver us from this soule-slaying sin.
To which our bodies are made prostitute,

Dear salutations from my Lord the Pope,
I recommend unto your excellence,
With semblable remembrance of his love,
To you my Lord Phillippo,

Good Barnardo.
My duty bound unto his Holiness,
Return in payment from his Captive servant.

Ingenious Prince, I bring a friendly message
Of tender kindness, which I must impart:
This Ruby from our Holy-fathers finger,
(In p^uate token of his faithful love)
^
And there-withall, desires of your love,
To have with him some private conference.

I was now going to our Ladies mass,
In Saint Iohn Laterans; where my ghostly father
Attends me for my confession.
But thank his Holiness on my behalf,
In all due reverence and humility.
Tell him I mean -- so soon as I return,
To come according to my bounden duty.
My case is desperate, what shall I do?
Phillippo, was there ever any man
Hunted with such unsatisfied rage?

What hath he sent again to visit you?


To visit me, nay to dishonour me,
Behold this Ruby sent from his own finger,
Which as a Bawd inuiteth me to shame.

Astor? what Astor? my delight my joy,
My star, my triumph, my sweet fantasy,
My more then son, my love, my Concubine,
Let me behold those bright Stars my joys treasure,
Those glorious well attempred tender cheeks;
That specious for-head like a lane of Lillies:
That seemly Nose loves chariot triumphant,
Breathing Panchaian Odors to my senses,
That gracious mouth, betwixt whose crimosin pillo^
Venus and Cupid sleeping kiss together.
That chin, the ball vowed to the Queen of beauty,
Now budding ready to bring forth love blossoms,
Astor Manfredi turn thee to my love,
Come hither Astor we must talk above.

Betrayed? a slave to sin? what shall I say?
Most Holy father.

Do not me forget:
I am thy brother, and thy dearest friend,
^
In ^iper years is pure and permanent,
Grounded on judgment, flowing from pure love:
Whereas the love lightning from young desire,
Fickle and feeble will not long hold fire,
It is so violent it will not last.
They are blessed whose lovers love when youth is past.

To call you friend were too familiar,
To call you brother sorts not with our years:
To call you Father doth import some fear,
Due to that age your Holiness doth bear.

Tell me not of mine age and Holiness,
Thy sight suffices me to make me young:
Neither upbraid me with my sanctimony,
Love is the purest essence from ^boue,
And to thy soul I would affix my love.
Come hither then and rest with me to night,
Give me ^ruition of those amorous pits,
Where blinded Cupid close in ambush sits:
Who with his Arrow (when thou laughed at Venus)
Shot through thy smiling cheeks, and did enchain us.
Thy Chamber with Ambrosiall odors breaths,
New loves and true loves unto them that entreats,
And furious M^rs made mild his Faulcheon sheatheth
At thy delicious aspect: see thy Chamber:
The walls are made of Roses, roof of Lillies,
Be not ashamed to mount and venture it,
Here Cupids Alter, and fair Venus hill is.
Thy bed is made with spice and Calamus,
With Sinamond and Spicnard, Arabic,
With Opobelsam and rich gums of Aegipt,
Music Angelical of strings and voices.
With sundry birds in sugared simphony,
Where whistling Wood-nimphes, and the pleasant choice is
Of Antique action mixed with harmony,
Attend thy joyous entrance to this Chamber.

Is it possible that the Diuil can be so sweet a dissembler?


Yes and play the pleasant part of a conceited Ani^re^,
^ the shape of a bright Angel.

Now my sweet friend the joys of love doth mutter
Thy mind too bashful is, speak tongue loves utter,
Thy Corrall gums cud loves pure quintisence,
And thou thy self fair boy loves purest essence.

Oh blessed heavens let Satan tempt no longer,
His force is powerful yet thy strenght much stronger,
He that with guileful baits gilded untruth,
So seeks to blast the blossom of my youth.

Delicious fruits divine Confections,
Of herbs, roots, flowers of sundry fashions.
Preseruatiues drawn from the rich Elixar,
Of finest gould pure pearl and precious stones,
Provided for thy divine appetite,
Wines of more price (made by th'industrious art,
Insacred distillations) then that Nectar,
Which Hebe bare, when Jove did most affect her.

Satan false god of lies, and flattery;
How palpable is this gross villain?

What wilt thou come Manfredi to my Chamber,
And bless me with thy precious breath of Amber.

After our ladies Mass I will return.
Dear God what furies in his soul do burn?
After the Celebration of the Mass,
I come my Lord.

Come then, and let that pass,
Holla Barnardo?
All business for this night I will adiourne,
Give good attendance that at his return*
Astor may come to me for my sick heart,
Till Astor with his beauty full embrace,
Do bless my body wounded with his dart,
Can find no rest, love hath it in hot chase.

Wilt thou perform it faithfully?


What I? will I live to eat, to drink, to sleep?


Wilt thou perform it valiantly?


Will I eat to drink, will I drink to sleep, will I sleep to live?


Will thou be secret, and conceal my plot?


My name is Frescobaldi, as for my pedigree,
My mother was of consanguinity* with the Princess
Of Perugia: my father of the noble family of the Oddi,
Florentine both: I my self
Brought up a Page under Rayner King of Sicily,
Have served against the Turks and Sarazines,
Where at Vienna (with my single Pike,
Armed in a Mali Briggandine of Naples,
And with an old-Fox which I kept in store,
A monument of Mars when I depart)
I did unhorse three Turkie Ianizaries.
Then (in the wars of Ferdinand the King)
This Hipp was shot through with a Crocodile,
But that it were too tedious I could show you:
Under the King of Romaines I was cut,
Just from this shoulder to the very pap:
And yet by fortunes of the war am here,
I thank God, and my Surgeon* all fix, trillill*
I fought at Malta when the town was girt
With Sargeants heads, and bul-beggers of Turkie:
And by my plot (niming below the rampire)
We gave th'obgoblings leave to scale our walls,
And being mounted all upon that place:
I with my Lint-stock gave fire to the train,
And sent them capering up to Capricornus.
Which when the wise Astronomers of Greece,
Prodigiously discovered from a far.
They thought those Turcaes fiery meteors.
Which with their Pikes were pushing in the clouds,
The learned Booke-men writ strange Almanacs,
Of signs, and apparitions in the air:
And by these honours (if I prove a blab)
Then call me villain, varlet, coward, skabbe.

Then tell me Frescobaldi
Where I may send to thee (...) time shall serve.

Faith for the most part my mansion is in Ciuitauechiae nella strada di san
lorenzo, ne'er the conduict at a good old Ladies house, la dona sempronia at
sign of the glister pipe, where if you chance to fail of me. Within three
houses more at sign of the frying-panne you may command me, at all hours in
the fore-noone.


Well gramercy ^ rescobaldi I will take the note of those houses in my tables.

But be sure and ready when opportunity calls upon you.


May it please your most reverend grace (without offence to your Lordship) to
deliver me the parties name upon whom I should perform this Tragedy. For I
may parcase catch him in a gilder my self before you are aware; and moylie
mufle up his maistership, with the garotta, or stiletto, perchance the ponya^d
or pistol, such as I warrant you shall serve his turn.


Be it sufficient thou shalt know hereafter,
My business and affairs are very great:
One word more, and adieu.

Secret as mid-night, sure as the sun, quick as the waters


Why? so said brave Frescobaldi like a man of some resolution farewell remember
the watchward -- do not fail.


My business and affairs are very great my gracious Lord, one word more with
your grace my good Lord, and so I kiss your foot.


It was not ingratitud, neither forgetfulness in me Frescobaldi: Here take
this and remember me.


I encounter your munificence with my love, and your love with my service, my
love and service with your money.

Padrone mio multo honorato,
More for your love then your money,
And yet your grace well knows, clothes must be wrought, weapons must be
bought; and Taverns must be sought, and all brave exploits must be done, as
they should be done bravely.


But that I keep my secret to my self;
I would not use this slave for any gold:
Yet when I trust him he shall not deceive me.

Now skelder ye scounderels, skelder you maggotmugers, you pompios; you
wood-wormes, you magatapipicoes, I am for you, now Frescobaldi, call thy wits
together, let me (...) see what a clock it is: very near eight, and almost
breakfast time at a cleauen, this very night must I stand Perdue for this
bloody service. I know my place and hour; I must confess and perchance be
hanged, I have in the Burdelliaes and in other such houses of natural
recreation and agility, received three or four score broken pates in my time:
and some bastinadoes for crossing courting spicy-spirited inamoratoes in their
humours. Besides I was the first that from the Swisse quarter, in the reign of
king Ferdinand brought up in his army the fashions of bowsing and to using
Greek and Spanish wines by the flagon, with that old stinckard Henrico
Baglioni, sometime Alferoes to Capitanco Piccolomini my self; I remember
likewise at Terracinae I broke a glass (containing some quart of Robollia)
upon the face of Capitanco Fransesco Boccansacchia a very sufficient soldier
in that service, and to my knowledge a tall trencherman: howbeit from the teeth
down-ward as base a mettled coward as ever was coined out of the sooty side of
a copper kettle; so he was: well I will second my Lord in any slaughter for his
wages, and if any man will give me better hiers (when I have served the
Cardinals turn) I will present my pistol upon his sacred person afterward
for charities sake: well, now to the drinking school, then to the fence
school, and lastly to the vaulting school, to my Lady Sempronia.


This was an act of such strange consequence,
As never yet was heard, a man found dead
Within a private chamber of his house;
When all his servants stirred: not one of them
That could give evidence of what befell
But that he killed himself. Cosa impossibile.

I was the first that found him in his blood;
Then warm from slaughter: such a ruthful sight
As yet I tremble to remember it.

It is impossible (after a search)
No ^anger found within Vis^llies doers,
But that some servant of his family
Should have sure notice how the murder was.

It was his own hand sure.


I cannot think it.
The gentleman was honest, full of sport,
And well affected.

Pardon me my Lord,
My Lady Lucrece told it in great grief
She twice before had rescued his life.

Go too, go too.


Besides my Noble Lord.
Papers both writ, and sealed with his hand
Were found about him t^stifying this.

Good Barbarossa pray my sister Lucrece,
Here to encounter me with her good company:
Som-what I would in private talk with her.

My Lord I will.


High God be merciful.
Thou that doest know the secrets of al hearts,
If Lucrece (as my father doth suspect)
Was privy to this murder of my life
I can learn all she knows.
But yet I will not either suspect, or urge her were it true
Being indeed a violation of brother-hood common humanity
She makes towards me -- sister how fairs it with you?

As with a dead Corse in a Sepulcher
Cold* lifeless, comfortless, oppressed with sorrow.
Nor since my joy did leave me desolate
Ever could I brooke well this open air
But still lamenting and disconsolate
Kept up in Chamber, mourning for my Lord.

What order took you for his funnerall?


He that alive was shrined in my breast,
Now dead lives yet entombed in my thoughts,
There is a model of it in my closet.

Perform it decently with diligence.


Brother me thinks the air is cold and raw,
And as you please let us confer within.

Gladly dear sister with what hast you may,
And I desire you noble Barbarosa
To meet us at my Chamber after supper.
My brother Caesar hath appointed with me
Some business, and I crave your company.

Thanks my good Lord: but matters of much moment,
I have at that time with my Lord Caraffa;
And I must speak this night with my Lord Caesar.

Tell him I will attend by nine of clock.


I will my good Lord.


Farewell Barbarossa.


Joy to you both.


My trembling liver throbs, my cold hearts heavy;
My mind disturbed and I know not why
But all as he will, heavens above for me.

This is the black night, this the fatal hand:
These are the bloody weapons which must be
Witness and actors of this Tragedy.
Now Frescobaldi play thy masters prize:
Here is a rich purse crammed with red crusadoes
Which doth inspire me with a martial spirit,
Now could I combat with the devil to night.
First did I wash my liver, lungs, and heart.
In Cretane wines and head strong Malues^e
(Such as would make a coward fight with Mars)
Then least I should with any weapons drawn
Be driven to danger of mine enemy;
I practised my martial fe^cts of fence:
As for example if with arms vnsheath'd,
I were to kill this conduct here I come.
He makes a thrust, I with a swift passado,
Make quick avoidance, and with this stoccado
(Although he fence with all his finest force)
Bared of his body thrust him in the throat.
G^rd^re^i ^ene, sigu^ri honorenoli.
Suppose this conduict or my duellist,
Should falsify the foin upon me thus.
Here will I take him, turning down this hand.
Il punto verso indrizzato, thus.
Admit he force me with his ambroccado
Here I deceive then, with this passado
And come upon him in the speeding place.

what Mandragon or salvage Ascapart,
what Pantaconger or Pantagruell
Art thou that fight with thy fathers soul
Or with some subtle apparitions.
Which no man can behold with mortal eyes
Or art thou ravished with bedlamy
Fighting with figments and vain fantazies
Chimeraes ot black spirits of the night.

Come not within 9. furlongs of this place.
My name is Rubosongal the grimm ghost
Of Bembocamber king of Calicute.
And here for this night I keep centrenell
For Muscopateron great king of flies;
Great grandfier of ten thousand hecatombes.

I Conjure thee foul fiende of Acheron
By puissant Hoblecock and Bristletoe,
By Windicaper Monti-boggl^bo.
Polipotmos and the dreadful names
of Mulli-sacke and Hermocotterock.
By Petrouidemi, by the dogged spirits
Of Bacchus which Canary land inherrits.
By purple Aligant the bloody giant.
And leaden headed hollock pure and pliant.
By B^rrha Martia and by Sydrack sweet
Who did with matthew Glynne in combat meet.
And by this awful cross upon my blade
Of which black cures and hedghogges are afraid.
And by this fox which stinks of Pagan blood,
Dost thou walk there for mischief or for good.

Brave man whose spirit is approved well,
(As most aprooued panders truly tell)
Under g^eene hedges, under Cobblers stalls,
In portal, porches, under batterd walls,
W^ich day; by night keeps watch-full sentinel
To gu^ze the pleasures of fair Claribell
Profane arch patriark of Pancridge steeple,
The bauldy beaken of ungodly people.
With ot^er ma^ter which I might allege
To the Grand Captain of Collman-hedge,
Marching foul Amazonian trulls in troupes
Whose ^anthornes are still lighted in their Poupes.
Some without kerchiefes, others with torn smocks;
Certain imboch'd with piles, and some with poxes.
Others with rotten shoes and stockings rent
With carrine in each ditch keep parliament.
In petticotes all patched and wast-coate torn,
And wandering with some rag bless every thorne.
Which with their Targets never make retire,
From any breach till they their foomen fire.
Rebating the stiff points of their keen blades
Till a^l their champions masculine prove lades.
To thee saith Fresceba^di case thy steel
Least thou the rigour of my fu^ie feel.

And yet I love thee for thy martial grace,
Thine in all service: shake hands and embrace.

A pox upon thy coward fistes foul knave,
And yet I love thee rogue: ask rogue and have.

Come and embrace: tis bli^h when malte-men meet,
And drink till they have lost both head and feet.
And drivelling sleep on every stall and bench
With every man a knee in his hand and in his Can a pretty wench
But Frescobaldi my brave Bodigonero,
Varlet of velvet, my moccado villain,
Old heart of durance, my stripped canuase shoulders,
And my Perpetuana pander tell me;
Tell me what humours Cataplasmatick,
Excited have thy Bacchick fantasies:
To draw that triumphant swerlidildido,
Upon some spirit of the Buttery,

This was no barmie spirit of the bottle,
It was a bloody spirit of the battle:
And if I lye, call me thy Wimble-cock.

A mouldy jest, well I will answer thee:
I coni^re thee by Negra Luciaes name,
By Dol Pattenti, by the subtle shape,
Of Nanna Baliker, by the cunning fleights
Of Vini Clerilicks with her fair sprights:
By Mega Court, with Marga Marichalus,
That in Turnuliball doth keep an Ale-house:
By Nan Riuehomo that hot stigmatist,
Now bedded wi^h the Ita^ian Vitraillist,
W^ich in the fiery Phlegitonian flames,
Did work strange vitriall dildidoes for Dames,
Her spirits have no power to touch this strand.
Till they transported from Lambechia land,
By Charon Ferriman of Black Auerne,
Fall Anchor at the Stilliard Tavern,
And by Tartarean Plutoes Heben bowl,
Why did thou combat with thy Fathers soul?

Learned Magician skilled in hidden Arts,
As well in prior as posterior parts,
I see thou kennist the secrets of all sorts,
Of sharpe s^ringues and salacious sports:
Venerall Buboes, Tubers Ulcerous,
And Iames Defisticanckers venomous.
Doubtless Don Vigo then his vigour poured
Into thy brains, when he thy bottle scoured.
Noble Henrilico question no further,
My meditations are of blood and murder,
I ^easted have too long, pree-thee be gone.
Henrico Baglioni (by this sword)
I am to morrow to perform a duel,
And practising in this nights melancholy,
How to dispatch it with a brave stoccadoe.
Here I did make a proof, prithie good-night,
Trouble me now no more: early to morrow,
I'll march unto the sign oath frying-panne,
And take thee timely with thy points untrust,
To drink a flagon of greek wine with thee.

Goodnight my noble Rillibilb^bo,
Thou shalt be welcome in the darkest midnight.

Now to my watchword it is quite forgot, oh
Col nunolo la Pioggia: think upon it.
This is mine hour appointed this the place,
Here will I stand close till tha'llatum call,

What is't a clock boy now?


My gracious Lord,
By Sistoes horologe tis struck eleven.

A fit hour for our purpose noble brother,


But hath La Bella formiana noti^e,
Of our aproch to night.

Oh doubt it not, villain put out that torch,
Being disguised we will not be descried,
Depart you to my lodging presently,
Pain of thy life not one word that thou saw us.

Tis very dark, good brother go before,
You know the streets best.

Oh keep your way; you cannot lightly fall,
But if you do.

How then.


You shall be supported.


My heart begins to throb, my soul misdoubts,
I fear some treachery A che me fido, guarda me Dio,
On in Gods name.

Give me your hand brother, fie do not faint.


Caesar I can scarce go,
A sudden qualm hath seized upon my spirits.

Tut brother forward with alacrity,
My life for yours you'll be at ease anon,

Tis a foul business let us retire,
And seek some other season for our sports,

I am ashamed thou should be general,
To lead those forces that fight for the Church,
And here show such faint hearted cowardice.

Are you d^spos;d to quarrel in the streets,
Neither the time nor place serves instantly;
To call you to some audit for these words.

Abortive Coward borne before thy time,
I will not brooke thy foolish insolence.
Col nuuolo la pioggia.

Dear God revenge my wrongs, receive my soul.


Let him receive thy soul when he thinks good,
I'll take an order for thy burial.
Help Frescobaldi let us heave him over,
That he may fall into the river Tiber,
Come to the bridge with him.

Be what he will the villaine's ponderous,
Hath he some gould about him shall I take it?

Take it were there a million of ducats,
Thou hast done bravely Frescobal^i,
Stretch thee, streth out thine arms fear that he
Fall not upon the arches.

I'll wash him doubt you not of a new fashion.


I think thou never had thy Christendom,
Follow for Company prenitious villain.

Hold hold, Coxwounds my Lord hold,


The devil go with you both for company.

Now Caesar Muster up thy wits together.
Summon thy senses and advance thy self,
Ware and Earth have interposed their bodies,
Betwixt the worlds bright eye and this black murder.
Sweet silent nig^t (gu^rded with secret stars)
Keep silence, and co^ale this Tragedy;
Satur^e is lord ascendant ^f this hour,
Propitious patron of assassi^ates
O^ murt^ers, Paracides, and massacres:
Lord of my birth, auspicious to my life,
This is my ^irst degree to d^mination.
Who can, or (if they could) who dare suspect,
How Caesar Borgia killed his brother Candy?
This is infall^b^e, that many crimes
Lurk underneath the robes of Holiness:
And underneath my Purple tunicle
This fact concealed is: Ascanio Sforza
Shall strangely (by some wily policies)
Be brought ^nto suspect for Candies death.
Sister Lucretia thou must follow next:
My fathers shame and mine, ends in thee.
Now show thy self true Caesar; Caesar shall
Either live Caesar like, or not at all.
Death and blood only lengthen out our Scoene.
These be the visible and speaking shows,
That bring vice into detestation,
Unnatural murders* cursed poysonings,
Horrible exorcisme, and Invocation,
In them examine the reward of sin.
What follows, view with gentle patience.

Fore-god 'tis Candy, 'tis Candy I know 'tis Candy,
Where is that traitorous homicide? where is he?
I cannot see him: he shall not escape me so*
I must and will find him, though he we^ invisible,
Appear appear; not yet; ha and Candy murdered too,
Let me look forth.
Oh, oh, very good very good: well I perfectly peceiue.
By this descention of Arctophilax,
What time of night it is, sorrow give place;
Revenge in blood and fiery sacrafice,
Commands: nature now prevents her current: yield,
Let us adore the second eye of heaven,
Bright Armatas increases she, is not combust.
O sacred season for nocturnal Ceremonies.
This ioyeous quarter is in Casmaran. ha.
What hour of night is't? why tis Salem, twelve a cloak,
What are our angels this quarter?
Gargatel Tariel Gauiel.
How goodly these augurize fair auspices of truth,
Now mounts bright Athaman in his golden ascention,
Direct in opposition with our hemispher,
And now there hour with them is Aetalon:
Bernardo bring hither thy white robes of sanctity,
Hast thou Coals ready burnt bring in my Thurible,
And sense about this sanctified place,
For here Festatiui must have her honour.
Candy my son is murdered, Candy my son,
Candy my son is murdered: I will raise
All the great diuills to show the murderer,
Even as thou lou'dst my son hast and dispatch,
Hast and dispatch it as thou love my soul.
Tis not yet yawn by three quarters of an hour,
What are our Angels of this night? Michael, Dardael, Huratipel
In a triumphant carre of burning gold,
Crowned with a circlet of black hebeny,
And with a mace of Jet King Varca rides.
Attended with his ministers of state, Andas and Cynaball.
Fit dismal times for our solemnities.
Put on my robes give me my Pentacle,
Cense well Barnardo: bring me some fire in an earthen vessel
Now must I labour like a colliers horse.
My precious best approved and trusty servant,
Hence in all hast be-take thee to thy beads,
Whi^st these dark works of horror are in hand,
Red Sand^ll is my ^umigation.
I conjure thee by these aforesaid names,
That thou receive no phantasmatike illusions.

What would great Alexander have with us,
That from our fiery region millions of leagues,
Beneath the sulphuro^s bottom of Abisse,
Where Mammon tells his ever tried gould,
Thou call me from strong business of high state,
From sure subuersions and mutations
Of mighty Monarchs, Emperors, and Kings,
From plotting bloody fields and massacres,
Triumphant treasons and assassinates.
Whats thy demand?

I charge thee by the four recited names,
And by the dreadful title of great Phaa.
By which all creatures are sure sealed up,
By which the prince of darkness and all powers,
In earth and hell do tremble and fall down,
Show me the shape of that condemned man,
Which murdered my son the duke of Candy.

Keep a firm station stir not for thy life,
Expect a messenger of trust stand fast,

Sent from the foggy lake of fearful styx.
Am I commanded by that puissant monarch,
Which rides triumphing in a chariot,
On misty black clouds mixed with quenchles fire,
Through vnquoth corners in dark paths of death,
To do what thou demandest.

Then by the dreadful names of Amioram,
Titepand Sadai show me that damned child of reprobation.
Which this night murdered the duke of Candy.

Keep a firm station stir not for thy life,


Hold, hold, hold, hold; per todos santos now no more,
Caesar hath killed a brother and a father.

What would thou more shall I descend?


Show me the person by whose impious hand,
Gismond Viselli, was done to death?

Keep a firm station stir not for thy life.


Out, out, no more no more, my soul disolues.


Say, say what would thou more? descend,


Beldachiensis, Berolanensis, Helioren, discende, discend^, iubeo, mando*
impero. Devil dese^deth with thunder. c.


Out out alas Bernardo I am wounded,
With grisly wounds and deep incurable.

Comfort your self in Gods name blessed father.
S^e long as no wounds of the body bleed.

The cureless wounds I mean are of my body
Wounds both of my soul and body: but Bernardo
This is my comfort in calamity
Some shall pack after them for company
Whats a clock?

Ve^y near six by Saint Peters bell


Hast thee, then pass thee to my Poticary, bid him provide those drugs I
spoke for yester-day, and bear them in all hast to Dominico Giglio take you
those letters with you which are here, bid him deliver them Lodowick Sforzaes
name her lustful Paramour; make hast and see that he dispatch it quickly,
deliver him a purse from me for a token cramd with two hundred ducats, bid
him be secret as he loves his life, hast and begone.

Astor shall follow, I must have his Lands
This thorne must be cut of being but tender
Then cut it soon whilst it is young and slender,
Least growing great it prick thee to the bone
My lust importunes it and he shall die,
Sons, Nephews, Daughters, Concubines, shall die.
My conscience is turned mercies enemy,
He that would rise to riches and renown
Must not regard though he pull millions down.

Where is his Holiness? where is my father?
Alas your Son is slain; your hapless Son,
My noble brother out alas, alas
Is murdered: in tender passion
Let curious search and inquisition
Be made through Rome to find the murderers:
I fear that Traitrous Iudas Cardinal
Asc^io Sforza with his complecies:
I wi^ not hold fraternity with him:
An^ (...) behold my meaning blessed father:
(...) gain these robes, take here this hat,
And in these arms which I have bucled on
I do forswear al offices of Church,
Until I be revenged for his death.

A foul red vengeance over hangs his head
Whose heart indurate or whose diuilish brain,
Could execute conceive or meditate
So foul a murder of an Innocent.
Caraffa with Bentiuoli give leave
Some-what I would in private have with Caesar.
Caesar desemble not for that were vain
Whence come thou.

Directly from my Chamber.


Where did thou here this news.


Fishers which found his body brought the news.


Then he was droun'd Caesar was he not?


It seems he was.


What by some Fisher.


How should I know that.


Sure by some subtle Fisher that laid nets
For Candies life and honour: but say truly,
Was it thy brother.

Are not you my father?


Ah that I never had been any father,
But speak again, man speak the truth and fear not:
Who slew thy brother Candy this last night,
Who trained him forth who walked along with him.

Am I the keeper of my brothers person.


Execrable Cain; perfidious Homecide,
Apparent villain what can thou design?
Which I would know that thou can hide from me.

A plague upon your diuills you deal with them,
That watch more narrowly to catch your soul
Then he which sought my brother Candies death,
You know that Satan is the lord of lies
A false accuser and desembler,
Tell your falce liers they be lying Diuils.

Caesar no more, Caesar no more, thou know.


What know I?


That I know, dissemble not.


Suppose you know, suppose in wrath fury
I killed my brother; can we mend it now?
He was not fashioned for these busy times:
He rests in peace, our peace rests in our swords.

Caesar thou dost unkindly vex my soul,
With rubbing up my secret miseries:
Incurred by seeking to lift up thy head.

Pull me not down good father with your conscience:
Your conscience, father of my conscience is.
My conscience is as like your conscience,
As it were printed with the selfe-same stamp.
I know my sins are burdenous, and bear them,
Your sins more heinous, yet your robes conceal them.

Out wicked and nefarious homicide.


Upbraid me not, for if that Lamp burn dim,
Which should give light to men in darkest night;
How can they choose but must in shadows err,
That follow the blind-glimering thereof:
Doth this one petty fault appear so grievous?
Which if you well consider is no fault;
He was an honest man, and fit for heaven:
Whilst he lived here he breathed in misery;
And would have been enlarged: I ^et him free,
Now if I may compare your state with his,
Or your condition with my quality,
Have you not sold your self unto the Devil,
To be promoted to the Papacy:
Have you not sold the livings of the Church?
Are not your coffers crammed with beastly bribes,
With foul extortion, and base Usury?
Have ye not (since your inauguration)
Poisoned and done to death six Cardinals;
In diuilish avarice to get their goods?
Have you not (which is most abominable)
Committed incest with your only daughter;
And made me sin with her for company,
That both might reign in hell for company?
Did you not take of Georgio Bucciardo
One hundred thousand Ducats from the Turk,
To kill his brother Gemen Ottamon?
Have you not kept the Pearl of Italie,
Astor Manfred^ that young virtuous Prince,
In beastly lust, and filthy Sodomy.
Blasting the blossom of his toward youth?
Have you not now given order for the death
Of my dear Sister, whom your passions caused
To kill her latter husband Di Viselli,
And robbed the noble Earl of his new spouse,
Only to cloak your vile impiety,

Caesar the Devil hath bin thy Schole-maister.


I pass your secret counsel with the devil,
Your Avarice, ambition, perfidy,
Your bloody plots, inhumane cruelty,
Why then vpbrayd ye me with Candies death?
A bastard of our house, degenerate,
In whom no spark or spiracle of honour,
Appeared to raise the race of Borgia.
But had I been Lieutenant of your forces,
This arm had conquered all Romania,
France before this had trembled, Spain had stooped,
The Romaine Emperor had faun'd upon us.
King Charles had been restraind, Frederick expulsd,
And Naples had been made our heritage.

A triple joy succeeds a single grief,
I have engaged all to make Caesar great,
Caesar it suits with thy grace and glory,
To cloak my vices, I will pardon thine,
Let one of us excuse an others crimes,
And for this bloody fact so lately done.
As thou did cunningly begin proceed,
To lay the guilt or imputation
On them whose death may do thee benefit:
And never was my soul better contented,
Then that our woes are with rich hopes prevented.

Now stands Romania subject to my sword.
Imola furli, Camerine, and Vrbine
Shall have the first charge, if I there succeed,
Have forward farther with a better speed,
Caesar o nullo written in my guydon,
When with my troops victoriously I ride on.

Holla Bernardo, call in Caraffa with Bentiuoly:
Ay now now now, my precious boy, my Caesar,
Prosecute as thou hast begun,
With Art, look sullaine and demure,
Hold down thy head, like one swollen up with sorrow,
They come, they come, say that those arms were put on,
In revenge of Candies death.
The sovereign medicine of things past cure,
Is for to bear with patience and forget,
Caesar hath vowed revenge for Candies death,
And in regard of Caesars piety,
I make him general in his brothers place.

And never shall I sheath this sword in peace
Till it have wrought upon the murderer.

Happy success accompany my Lord,
And in your battles give you victory.

Is order taken for his funerals.


Bentiuoli take you no thought for that,
That is the greatest care, which troubles me.

Come on my Lords, we will advise within,
For I must have your counsels in my grief.

Kind Lodowike had thou presented me,
With Persian clothes of gold or Tinsilry,
With rich Arabian Odors, precious stones,
Or what brave women hold in highest price,
Could not have been so gracious as this tincture,
Which I more value then my richest jewels,
Oh Motticilla.
Bring me some mixtures and my dressing boxes,
This night I purpose privately to sup
With my Lord Cardinal of Capua.
Bring me some blanching water in this bowl.
Here I perceive a little riueling
Above my for-head but I wimple it
Either with jewels or a lock of hair,
And yet it is as white as the pure snow:
O God when that sweet Marks Mantoua,
Did in Ferrara feast my Lord and me,
What rich comparisons and similes,
He with ingenious fantasy deuis'd,
Doting upon the whiteness of my brows?
As that betwixt them stood the chair of state,
Composed of Ivory for the Paphian Queen:
Sitting in comfort after amorous conquest.
And kissed my for-head twenty thousand times.
Oft have I wished the colour of this hair
More bright, and not of such a Spanish dye,
And yet the Duke of Bourbon on his knees,
As the divinest favour of this world,
Did beg one lock to make a Bracelet,
For which few hairs he garnished my head
With Jewels worth six thousand crowns at least.
My beaming eyes yet full of Majesty,
Dart love, and give bright luster to the glass,
As when the sun beams touch a Diamond.
The Prince of Salerne solemnly did swear,
These eyes were quivers which such shafts did bear
That were so sharpe, and had such fiery touch,
As Cupids Arrows never had so much,
The Rosie Garden of these amorous cheeks,
My nose the gracious forte of conquering love,
Breathing attractive odors to those lovers
That languish and are vanquished with desi^e,
Gonzaga calls it the silver perch,
Where Venus turtles mutual pleasure search.
Sweet mouth the ^uby port to Paradise
Of my worlds pleasure from whence issue forth,
Many fa^se brags, bold sallies, sweet supplies,
A chin the matchless fabric of fair nature,
A neck two breasts upon whose cherry niples.
So many sweet solcions Cupid sucked,
Give me some blanching water in this boule,
Wash my face Motticilla with this cloth,
So tis well now will I try these colours.
Give me that oil of Talc,
Take sa^snet Motticilla smooth my forehead.
I must delay this colour is it carnation right.

Oh the true tincture of a damask rose,


What is it excellent.


Most full of life.
And madame that's a precious liniment,
As ever I beheld to smooth the brows.

I will correct these arches with this mullet,
Pluck not to hard, believe me Motticilla,
You pluck to hard.
I feel a foul stincke in my nostrells,
Some stink is vehement a^d hurts my brain,
My cheeks both burn and sting give me my glass.
Out out for shame I see the blood it self,
Dispersed and inflamed, give me some water.
My brains intoxicate my face is scalded.
Hence with the glass: cool cool my face, rank poison,
Is ministered to bring me to my death,
I feel the venom boiling in my veins.

Ah me dear Lady; what strange leoprosie?
The more I wash the more spreads on your face.

Send to my father; call physicians in,
Oh Candy where art thou my comforter,
Dead and entombed; Lucrece must follow thee,
I burn I burn, oh where is my dear Lord.
My brains are seard up with some fatal fire.

Dear Lady cheer your self, be not dismayed,
His Holiness in hast hath sent relief:
His own Physician to recomfort you.

For our dear Ladies passion bring some water to cool my thi^st.


Madam you may not drink,
Till you receive this one preservative.

A foul unsavoury loathsome stink choakes up
My vital senses and a boiling heat
suppes up the lively spirit in my lungs.

This poison spreads and is incurable,
Madame receive one precious antidote.

What have I caught you Sforza,
Who painted my fair face with these foul ^pots,
You see them in my soul deformed blots,
Deliver me from that murdered man,
He comes to stab my soul I wounded him,
Oh Gismond Gismond hide those bleeding wounds,
My soul bleeds drops of sorrow for thy sake;
Look not so wrathful I am penitent.
Love and remorse did harbour in thine hart,
What doest thou beckon to me I will come,
And follow thee through millions of woes.

Sweet Lady will you take a little rest,
It will refresh your spirits instantly.

No rest until I see my Lord again.


Dear Lady do you love your life, take rest,


From the pure burning coals of true contrition.
Me thinks I see the lively counterfeit,
Of catiue Cressed in her misery,
Ingenderd out of her disloyalty,
Ah Moticilla whom I trained up
In cunning sleights and snares of filthiness,
Forgive me for that sin; live and repent.

Oh God forgive me for my sins are great,
And if his goodness lend my life some space,
I will with penance call on him for grace,
And spend the remnant of my life in prayer.

I can no more, death summons my soul,
Open thy bosom father Abraham,
Merciful father let thy mercy pass
Extend thy mercy where no mercy was.
Merciful father for thy sons dear merit
Pardon my sinnfull soul receive my spirit.

Now is her soul at rest tis very strange,
As well the cause as manner of her death,
I have been studied in Hipocrates,
In books of Gallen and old Auecine,
Observed the cures of diverse learned doctors,
In France in Spain and higher Germany,
Yet never met with such an accicent,
Bear in her body I will in all hast,
Bring woeful news unto saint Peeters Palace,
His Holiness will grieuiously lament.

Fellows in arms after our victories,
Had in the first front of our happy war,
With men of hardy resolution,
Now must we bend our forces against Surly,
Where that proud Amazonian Katharine,
Dares defiance in the face of war,
And yet our hopes are sure, all passage clear,
And she before I lodge this restless head,
Shall bear the bondage of this victori^.

These proud presuming spirits of vain women,
Whose bloodless wounds are only bloody words,
(...) without reason, fight without resistance,
But on the face of grimm devouring War,
With frowning fore-head menacing his force,
They fall down on their backs as Venus did,
When Mars beheld her with a Soldiers face,

Nay we must fight: I know the puissant spirit
Of warlike Kate the pride of Italie,
Sforzaes brave sister and old Riarioes widow,
Excellent valour, and deep policy
Must win it, if we purchase at her hands.

And yet we be before-hand with the Lady,
Having surprised her treasure and her sons,
As they were making their escape for Florence:
What shall we try renowned general?
And search her resolution.

Shall we? doubt you not,
Nay though the walls of Surly were of steel,
These pledges should make passage for our powers,
And what? shall we stoop for those twenty Ensigns,
Which this last night have entered their Ports,
Nay were they ten to one within those walls,
Caesar (that carries Fortune in his Standerd)
Would make them give ground subject them-selues.

Speak then at once renowned general,
Shall we go Soldier-like to work at first?
Shall we salute her with our Cannon?

What? no Barbarossa not without a parley,
Fore-God I love her, and admire her valour,
And till we find her words prove empty squibs,
We give her all the noble rights of war,
Summon a parley.
What have we Pallas come upon these walls,
To bring confusion of our companies:
Doth proud Penthesilea live again,
Which some-time raging in the Fields of blood,
Made passage with her angry sword through millions.

I tell thee C^sar son of Alexander
A book befits thee better then a blade:
Percase in scorn thou wilt reply the like,
A distaff fits me better then a pike.
Know Caesar had I now so many lives
As here are stones or hairs upon your beards,
I would forgo them al before this honour,
Which my dear Lord Riario did leave me,
The pledge of my dear love his Childrens patrimony.

Speak in a milder key renowned Kate.
I love you well and all brave Sforzaes race
Yet you must yield there is no remedy,
It is the Churches right and I must have it.

Me thinks a pulpit were more fit for thee,
But did thou ever read Saint Gregory:
That he which hunts for authority,
Himself should govern direct and know well;
He did a deed of danger that advanced thee,
For proud ambition violates all right.

Be not so bitter Kate a friend entreats you,
But if entreaties will not, look upon me:
Here stands C^sar, the sharpe scourge of Surly
And were your fort fenced with as many men,
As it is girt with stones Caesar would have it.
Subdue them and make pillage of their goods
And in resistance seal it with their bloods.

What are your weapons sheathed in your throats?
Is every word a sword then shake hands Caesar:
Venture no fu^ther and we will be friends
But if your words have accents in keen swords,
And end in blood, then Caesar look on me:
I with defiance turn swords in your throats,
You shall not thrust that imputation
Upon our fex, for I will fight it ou^
So long as I can stand upon these walls.

You would repent it, if you knew the worst,
Consider Kate be well advised first.

Caesar at one word to discharge my conscience,
Were there a Cannon there to be dischardg'd
Upon this fruitful womb the nurse of Children,
And I sure piece mell to be torn withal,
If I would not surrender up this forte
Your Cannon shot should plow these bowels up,
That vow to God and my dear husband made:
I never will infringe with perfedy:
I know thee bloody Caesar: the dishonour,
In yielding up thy reverend purple robes
Which should protect widows and Orphans rights,
Appears well in taking unjust arms,
To wrong the Widows and the Fatherless
Either fight Caesar or forsake the field,
Persuade thy self alive I will not yield.

Then I will show you what wars destiny,
Prognosticates, bring forth her ransom hither
If nature be not quite extinguished
These pledges shall enfranchize you from war
I brought them to this purpose; that in them,
You with your friends might live in liberty.

Never but with advantages dear Lord.
Monster of misery what think thou C^sar
That I will yield mine honour for their safety?
Be not deceived thou hast surprised my Children,
Riarioes riches left in my tuition
And borne out of these bowels; but dear boys,
Courage your selves I will defend your honours:
I tell thee C^sar these my boys are taught
To bear with patience fates inevitable
These carry Sforzaes spirit and their fathers;
I dare gage life and ask them they will choose,
To lack their lives before they loose their honours.

Caesar in this hath offered like himself,
He proffers to preserve your town vntouch't:
Your goods, your wives, your lives, your liberties:
But mark what fruits thy bitterness brings forth,
To make thine hard heart infamous for ever,
Before thy face these boys shall loose their lives
If thou surrender no^ without more pa^lee.

Bloody (...) I defy thy malice,
I spit defiance in thy cowards face.
Traitor to God and man had thou been Caesar,
Ins^sting on high terms of worth and honour
Thou woul^st consider that their blood is Noble,
Thou would consider that they be but children,
Thou would consider that thou art a warrior
And that such noble blood spilt with dishonour
And tram'd in with insideous treachery,
By God nor man in heaven nor earth below
Can be forgotten or abolished.

Brave general you parley with a woman,
Whose heart is obstinate, whose hands are freeble,
Seems in vain and over tedious.

Speak at a word cannon is my next parley,
You will not yee^d your state to save their lives.

I will not Caesar.


Cut of both their heads.


Let us entreat our mother noble general,
For to deliver up the state of Surly
And will you save our lives then.

Good Captain do not kill us.


If she will yield the state your lives are safe.


Good mother for my fathers sake that's dead,
And for mine Uncle sake part of your bowels
And for our own sakes yield your selves and save us.

Good sweet mother save us.


Poor boys, in heart unlike Riarioes race,
Or Sforzaes warlike lineage by the mother
Know what it is die with liberty,
And live with ignomineous servitude.
If you your lives buy with the loss of states
It were of all extreameties the vilest
But in extreamety to die resolved
Preserving state and reputation:
Is said to dye within the bed of honour,
This is an honour for Riarioes children,
And for my part, it never shall be said,
That Katherine being strong upon her guarde,
Having good forces able to defend,
In brutish feat should give away your states,
I rather will obtrude my self unarmed,
And meet the thickest ranks that enter breach,
To be tossed up upon their soldiers pikes,
Sooner I will set all the town on fire,
And with my soldiers sacrifice my self,
Rather then render up your heritage,

Oh bravely spoken warlike Amaz^n.


Mother we scorn death in respect of honour
Let him perform his worst, we fear him not,
Courage sweet brother, think upon my father,
I will dye first, be not afraid of death.

Why then you are resolved to dye?


I to dye Caesar.


Bring hither both their heads.


Gods blessing rest with you my dearest sons
And if I loose your states, my life shall follow,
Nothing but violence shall force it from us,
Ere long this quarrel twixt us will stand even:
Farewell dear boys, till we three meet in heaven.

Ah dear Mother, sweet mother, good Uncle Inlio save our lives.


Away with him.


Let me before I dye, but kiss my mother.


What would thou run again into my womb?
If thou we^t here thou should be Posthumus,
And ripped out of my sides with soldiers swords,
Before I would yield up thine heritage.

Come brother let us bravely dye together.


I tell thee when that these have lost their heads,
I will make sack and pillage of your state,
Man, women, Orphans, all put to the sword,
This hath your obstinacy wrought in us,
Carry them hence, bring hither both their heads.
And then a charge upon this valiant Lady,
Thi^ (...), this proud Semeramis,
Wh^se valou^ B^rbar^ssa by these heavens,
Is very wonderful and glo^ious.

Had he more force, what would this tyrant do?


A cha^ge a charge.


F^r Gods sake charge, a charge let us to sight.


A spi^it full of vengeance, wra^h, and spite,
Assau^t, assault, ch^rge noble hearts a charge.

Courageous Kate, you that would throw defiance
Into the face and throat of fate and Caesar,
Such are the fruits of pride and wilfulness.
Have I performed my word? are you surprised?
Is not your life and living in my power?

Now that my sons first by insidious means,
Bereaved of their lives, and their states lost,
The date of my calamities is out,
Go forward with thy tyranny, strike Caesar,
And take away the Mother with her sons:
This done, recount what is thy victory.
A woman with two children vanquished,
A prize befitting the renown of Caesar.

Come hither Katherine wonder of thy sex,
The grace of all Italian woman-hood:
Caesar shall never prove dishonourable,
Behold thy children living in my Tent.

Oh mother, mother, are you come, we be not dead.


Good mother, thank the Captain, we live yet,
They gave us spices, wines, and bad us welcome,
I pray you thank them.

Oh but your lands and honours are both lost,
Had not an honourable death been better:
Then thus to loose your states and liuely-hoods.
Heroike soldier, whose deceit is honour.
Thou that hast unexpected saved the lives
Of my two children, I submit them here
Thy captives, for their ransom what is fit.

I freely pardon ^hese two boys their ransom,
Lady behold thy treasure in my Tent,
Had I not won this town, this had thou lost,
See Soldiers that her Jewels be reserved
For her own service, now the quarrel ends.

But noble Caesar well entreat our people,
They be men valiant, civil, obedient,
If you their Magistrates entreat them well.

Take you the charge of Surly, Barbarossa,
Entreat the people well, do not restrain them,
We freely pardon all of them their ransomes,
So much as is in us, we pardon all,
Use them as Citizens of Rome in favour,
Other instructions you shall have here-after:
Till then regard your charge and so farewell.
Lady, your self, with your two little babes,
I will take order shall be sent to Rome,
Be not dismayed, you shall be well entreated,
You shall want nothing fitting your estates,
March with us on our way for Capua.

Bring in that Opium, and bowl of Wine,
Here I must act a Trage-comoedie,
Bernardo is it well confected and prepared?
According to my conference with Rotsi.

He sent it as your Holiness may see,
Safe sealed up

Fill me that bowl of wine,


Tis a drowsy medicine, do not taste it my Lord,


Thou hast ben taster to me, many times,
Begin Bernardo.

My Lord I slept too much the last night and I dare not,


It holds good colour hold here Bernardo,
Give good attendance, bring them to their rest,
Then give me notice at my study door.

One set was past before I parted from them,
And by this time they be well heated.

Sir be diligent and serviceable in this,
Even as thou love thy master.

Fear me not?
Were ^t not that my conscience hath been fyer'd,
With flames of purgatory by this Pope,
I never could endure such villainy,
The best is he doth pardon all my sins.

This set was strangely lost I durst have wagerd,
An hundred ducats after the first chase.

You think you play well, but believe me brother,
You cannot take pains not observe a ball,
With that dexterity which appertains.

Holla within there if I take no pains,
My wastcote well can witness for I sweat.

Barber bring in some linen for my Lords


Bring me some wine for I am very thirsty


I listend for that string and he hath touched it.


Wilt please your Lordship sit on this low chair?


Rub my head first then comb it,


Fill me some wine Bernardo,


Good my Lord cool your self a little,


Give me wine and let it be thy labour good Barnardo
To call for music.
Brother in this cup I commend the loves,
Of all true Fauentines our trusty friends,
Hoping ere long to live again with them.

I thank you brother, if our father Pope.
Perform his promise we'shall soon return.

This wine was good yet tastes of the casck,
It hath a musty relish.

Lets here this music,


Holla within there.


My Lord.


I think it good after this little rubbing to repose my body


I am some what heavy.


I know the cause,


And what Bernardo.


Marry with much motion of your bodies my Lords,
You must not be so vehement in play.
I knew a noble French man at Anchona,
Twenty years since at tennice took his death.
With over heating of him self in play.

More music there.


My Lords are both a sleep music depart.
And leave them to their ease; alas sweet boys,
Is it not pity that these noble branches,
So sweetly knit in one, should never wake?
I that am hard of heart sigh for their sake,
My Lord.

What news man?


Both fast a sleep.


And both upon one bed?


Ti^ done.


And chamber voided?


All is performed my Lord.


My blessing rest upon thee my Benardo.
Depart now with those letters I delivered,
To be conuayd to ^lore^ce leave me here.
Sl^p^ both secure upon your fatal bed,
Now ^hat ^he God of silence Morpheus,
Hath with his (...) to^ black horne sealed up,
Your langued eye lids laden with pale death,
Sleep until you draw your latest breath,
Poor ha^meles boys strangers to sin and evil,
Oh were my soul as innocent as yours!
This office is of highest consequence,
In friendsh^p for I consider it,
I sent you from a million of sorrows,
Into the flowery fields of Paradise.
Their to go habit in the groves of mittle,
To feed on Manna and to drink pure Nectar,
A cup of everlasting happiness.
Where such sweet music vn-con-ceiueable,
Shall entertain your senses in sweet comfort,
As the delight thereof shall never die
Astor what Astor speak awake Phillippo,
Both fast a sleep.
Now Roderick betake thee to thy task,
What? peace Astor begins to talk I will attend.

Fair gracious Angel of eternal light,
Which reachest out that hand of happiness.
Hayling my spirit to that triumphant throne,
Of endless comfort I adore thy grace.


Hark brother Astor hark my soul is rapt,
Into the joys of heaven with harmony.

Do they not sleep? are they not yet a sleep?
Be not their senses yet locked up in sleep.
Astor awake awake, awake Philippo.
All safe and sure, oh this was but a dream,
Their Genius hath fore told them of their end,
And joyfully they do shake hands with death.
Come out here now you Cleopatraes birds.
Fed fat and plump with proud Egiptian slime,
Of seven mouthed Nylus but now turned lean:
Take your repast upon these Princely paps.
Now Ptolamies wife is highly magnified,
Ensigning these fair princely twins their death,
And you my lovely boys competitors,
With Cleopatra share in death and fate.
Now Charon stays his boat upon the strond,
And with a rugged for head full of wrath'
He thrusts a million from the shore of Styx,
To give you waftage to the Elisian fields,
I see their coulors chang and death sits heavy.
On their fair foreheads with his leaden mace.
My birds are glutted with this sacrifice.
What now proud worms? how tastes you princes blood.
The slaves be plump and round in to your nests,
Is there no token of the serpents draught,
All clear and safe well now fair boys good-night.
Bernardo, Bernardo, the feat is done,
Use thy discretion as I did de^ect.

Tis done in deed alas they both be dead:
Now must I follow my directions,
Holla within there.

What news Bernardo?


Alas my Lord ill news,
But that his Holiness is fast a sleep,
And this day stirred not from his bed-chamber
I would have brought him to this woeful sight:
Prince Astor with Phillippo was at Tennis,
And being ouer-heated at their game,
Drinking so suddenly upon that heate,
With much sweet Wine did surfeit instantly,
And here alas lye dead upon this bed.

Alas it is a ruthful spectacle,
Two princely boys of noble disposition,
Endued with honourable gifts of virtue.

Of gracious favour, wise, and liberal.
Phaenzaes hope: Bernardo bear them in,
His Holiness will much bemoan their fate.

My Lord, my Lord, I do not like of this.


Peace man, no more do I, but bear with patience.


It is suspicious but we may not talk,
Come let us in, oh God!

Oh God what times are these.
After the bloody Duke Valentinoys
Had conquered Surly, with the warlike Lady,
By wily force he took in Capua,
Then through insidious sleights and treacheries,
He did surprise the state of Camerine,
Where he captived Iulio di Varana,
With his two sons all which he strangled,
With semblable tyranny proud Coesar,
On terms of trust meets with the Duke Grauina,
And Vitel^ozzo with the prince of Fermo:
Whom he betrayed at Sinigaglia,
Bereaving them both of their states and lives,
He conquers Vrbin; and with violence,
Performs strange and hiddeous outrages.
By this time with his forces back to Rome,
Caesar is marching; what betyded there,
Ends in the subject of this Tragedy.

Now that by cunning force and policy,
All the free states and cities o^ Romania
Subjected are unto the Church of Rome.
And that our pikes and swords in blood and slaughter,
Are stained and sheathed quiet in our scaberds,
Our blood and wounds stanch'd and bound up in scarfs,
Let us for this could season of the year,
Rest us and cheer our selves till the next spring.
And then march forward with alacrity.
Brave Barbarossa take these soldiers,
Unto some quarter where by sound of drum,
According to their muster give them pay,
Let them be satisfied and so discharged.
Fellows in arms faithful and valiant,
I thank you for your pains and honesties,
In token of our good heart to your service,
We give each common soldier more then pay,
Two ducats: and all other officers.
According to their place redoubled,
With many thanks for your exceeding valor,
Assuring you that in these wars with us,
Caesar shall make you Captains of your spoils,
And so doth he commend you to your ease.

A Caesar a Caesar God save Caesar.


Sir come hither you must wait on me.
My good Lord Cardinal and Bentiuoli,
Much thanks and dear acceptance of your loves,
I lovingly return for your great pains.

His Holiness gave us in serious charge,
To give you greeting and withal prepares
A sumpteous ^east for that solemnity.
To which he doth inuit the Cardinals
With other Lords yo^r favourers in Rome.

Humbly commend my duty to my father
Tell him this night I purpose to be with him,
Tell him I live in health and touching these,
I pray you certify his Holiness,
I will have special care: and so my Lords
For a small season I wil^ take my leave.

We do congratulate your safe return.


Come hither Baglioni speak sincerely,
Know thou Brandino Rotsi th'apothecary.

What I my gracious Lord? know I my self?


How should I know that sir?


May it please your highness he serves his Holiness.


He did indeed sometime and for his villainies,
Is wort^ily ca^t of; but tell me sir:
Thou dost rememb^r how for breach of arms
When thou did stab a certain lance-prizado:
I pardoned thee t^y life.

True my good Lord I very well remember,
He was a lousy villain, marry was he,
And if he lived yet such is my stomach,
That were he chopped in mammockes I could eat him:
But for that honour in a soldiers word
He spend my life to do your highness service.

Hast thou thy piece then ready.


Oh my good Lord lies fix, sound as a bell,
With all my warlike furniture beside
Good flask and touch-box, a Valentia blade
A slavish dagger, powder of Rhemes and bulletes
Here they been.

Sometime this after-^oone within the park,
Next, to the Vatican, Ratsie will be:
And as I know thee stout and resolute,
Be^tow a bullet on him as he posseth;
Few words; if any man attach thee for it,
By my protection thou shalt be enlarged.

And if I do not my good Lord damme me for it
I have an old grudge at him cole black cur,
He sha^l have two steel bullets strongly charged
Nay but here me my Lord?
I'll tell you what,
By this ^rue fox of steel
I had as good a spaniel for the water,
As ever hunted duck: and this true villain
Because my dog did eat up a pannado
Within his house; what did that Spanish rogue?
What did he think you my Lord?
Marry very fair an^ instantly
Poyson^d my ^paniell with Rosa-solis,
A pox on him micher, faith i'll pay him his old fippence for it now.

Take this to buy thee clothes my trusty servant,
Nay tis gold be not afraid of it.

Afraid my Lord
Were it a tempest in a shower of gold
I would endure it and adore you for it.

Then Baglion fit thee, to thy furniture,
Watc^ in a corner close beyond some tree:
And when the deed is done repair to me:
Say that thy piece went off against thy will,
Keep a light match in cock, wear flask and touch-box:
And take a murren with thee so fare-well;
Thus must I dive deep in a villains nature,
And thus must save a villain ^rom the gallows
To play my parts in others purposes.
The man w^ome I to benefit would choose,
I must in matters of more moment use:
Or else I will not benefit a man,
A^d cut him of in s^que'l if I can.

Here me, but my good Lord mark my words well,
If old Henrilico s^in^ in this service
Cass^ir him, call him whip-stock, let him perish,
For want of S^a^ish wines, and maluasie.

Then fail not my true servant finely, closely.


No more, but by this cross,
Why now this Noble Caesars like himself,
Hath fitted me with service: if the world,
Had sought out som-what to content a man,
Nothing could better please old Ballion
Then to kill a rascal, coward, cur,
A Spanish squirt-vp, a black poysning toad.
I like this trading better then the wars
For there I serve for two ducats a month,
And not a duck egg richer when I march
And in continual hazard of my life
For which percase my piece kills twenty persons:
Now shall I march in purse with many ducats,
For one hours service but to kill one man,
Free from all danger of mine enemy,
I will about it and take up my stand.

Thus doth one hideous act succeed an other,
Until the mouth of mischief be made up:
Now must I train my fellow to his death,
A deed of ^uch and I did swear the same,
Not only for the secrecy thereof.
But to conceal a matter of more we^ght,
Of greater moment and high cruelty:
When any d^ed of murder must be done,
To serve his Holiness, call for Bernardo.
He must be princ^pall or accessory
To serve all purposes; for gold or pardon,
The Pope gives both; and I can take them both:
Gold can make hard the softe^t conscience,
And mine is hardened by the practise of it.
Holla Signeor Bandino.

Who calls without there? what my good fellow Bernardo?
Very welcome: what news with you?

My Lord hath sent me for the things he spake of.


Here they be very strong and sufficiently compounded
According to directions from his Holiness,
And special warrant under his privy signet
I tried them on three men condemned to death:
For rapine and vile murder: but the first
Within less then one quarter of an hour,
Puffed up, grew leaprous and his heart strings broke;
Then did I give al^ay the second time,
The second prizoner died within three hours
I did the third time mitigate, a little,
And saw when it was minister'd the third man,
Who did within eight hours swell, rage and die.

Well have you done your part, set down your bottels,
And read this letter from the Duke Valentinoys,

Well said brave Pincoginger, by mine honour
Before I do this service lie there piece.
For I must have a saying to those bottels,
True stingo stingo by mine honour. Oh that mine old friend and Boccadillio
Fre^cobaldi Wear hear alive again to taste of this other bottle, Well I will
venture upon it, that I may drink one hea^th To Fr^scebaldi I will encounter
with this stout He^torean, Greek.

Were Meleager here that slew the boor.
Like a Boracchio armed all in sack,
Or stout Achilles in a pewter coat.
Or old Assar^cus a^med in a wicker lyrkin,
Or Priamus armed with a leather Jacket,
Lined and embossed with Elegant and Hollock
By forch of arms and Mars his valiant hand,
I would encounter them whilst I could stand.
The ^laues are buisie reading their paphlagonian papers,
I must have a ^aying to y^u sir I must; though,
You be provided for his Holiness own mouth; I will be,
Bold to be the Popes ta^ter by his leave.
Now trusty Troylus, base los manos.

Let him alone it is the Dukes pleasure,
That if he will taste he shall be suffered,
And therefore I was commanded to set them down,
In presence of such a fellow whom for his sauciness,
I have pepered.

Oh tis a perilous villeine if you knew him so well as I, believe me he would
pepper you for it if he understood so much, peace man he hath broken up the
bottle let him drink.


Nay let him drink and burst, for believe me I ^as enform^d before of such a
^ellowe; for whom I was commanded to lay bate; oh notable villeine, how he
seals death.


This is a Noble nipster ^faith, so so.
Back again to kennel slave.

He hath his full wages dout not Bernardo, to serve him till he die, seem not
to respect him in any case do I pray you.


Nay but do not you respect him, least he doubt you suspect him.


Oh doubt you not, doubt you not, I will never look, let us turn our talk.
Tell his Holiness tis well compounded and composed of all those drugs
mentioned in your letter, give the Duke right humble thanks for his token, and
with all reverence kiss his excellent hand.


And by this signet you are to deluiuer me the bottles.


Have a care of them and deliver them.


Farewell fellow Rotsi.


Adieu Bernardo.


Now do not I pity this Spanish villain because he consented to the
poisoning of this soldier, but for that I am innocent.


What is the wild goose fallen? have at you Sir, might a poor soldier speak
half a score words to your venomous worship and according to your accustomed
surlinesse have no rep^yall: I believe you sir, your words are not offenciue
in any sort I must confess. Now thou infectious slave, thou compictious
Rascal, thou confectionary villeine: where is you sublimatum now sir? where is
your Ratsbanatum now? now where are your poisoned pu^lets in stued-broth? where
be they? you never dreamed of a poisoned ballet, did you go too? now Signor
currigantino will I romage in the worm eaten keele of your rotten hulk^:
passion of my soul what papers are these. Foh powder, powder foh, whats here I
marry sir I like this well, a^e you so pursy sir, this may serve to stop a gap
in my neighbours hedge, what is this you show me with a s^ame to you, yea and
master of the small ordinance to, this Basilisk hath been often mounted where
there hath been hot and dangerous siruice in the I'll of Iapan, hold passion of
me my guts, out vpo^ thee thou hast poisoned me with thy stinking breath or
with thy villonous powders out alas alas what sirie commotions I feel in
my body griping fretting and suming, a plague on your bottle ale with a
vengeance, I am peppered there is no remedy in all these extreme agonies!
must draw this villeine further: and throw him into a ditch, Deh veleno dell
Diabolo, farewell farewell my old Shurcordillio Frescobldi* farewell Madam
Sempronia, for in conscience I am guilty of mine own death oh the pangs of
hell and purgatory; come you lousy Rascal I will bury thee with carrion in
the next ditch.


Have you delivered to the bottleman,
The fatal wine.

I I gave charge to Bernardo,
Having them safely sealed with mine own signet,
That when feasting I do call for wine,
He shall break up the seals and fill that out,
For the two Cardinals Cornetto and Modina.

Tis well, now if our plot prove right,
Thou shalt be master of much wealth to night,
Dying in estate all comes to my share,
Caraffa loves a sallet passing well,
And I have fitted one to serve his turn,
Their gould will make thy soldiers fight in blood,
And winge thy victories with good success.

Let us no longer entertain the time,
By this the Cardinals expect our presence.

On with auspicious steps triumphant Caesar.
And entertain them in brave jollity.

Have spetiall care you that have these in charge.
That these two sealed bottels be not stirred,
Until his Holiness call for that wine

Fear not I will attend it as my life.


Martial your selves here sworne-men and there
Church-men.

Here sit we swordmen to defend the Church.


My Lords give answer in sincerity,
Hath not my Caesar fought well for the Church?
That hath so soon subjected in her right.
Imola, Surly, Camerino, Capua,
Vrbine, Faenza* Sinegaglia.
Brave Caesar I must bost of it in presence,
That I Christ's vicare of his Church on earth,
Have such a son which issued fuom my loins,
That being vicare of the Churches wars.
Hath in revolution of one year,
Done more then all the generals have done,
In honour of our Church for forty years,

Your Holiness with all your Cardinals,
Your barons and indeed all christendom
Are bound to give God thanks for such a Prince.
And him great honour for his fortitude.

Your excellence did in a blessed hour.
Surrende^ up your Holy robe^ a^ hat,
Be taking ^ and a^mes,
By whic^ you m^ght enlarge our liberties.

(...) my Lord and see we have all of us good cause to rejoice, (...) I had
been with your excellence at Capua, I would h^d one boat with them as old as I
am.


You might my Lord have had your choice of Ladies,
B^full p^is^ners to be ^ent to Rom^.

I marry my Lord some what might have been said to this geere to die^ (...),
but tra^seant cum ceteris erroribus, would to GOD I wear as young as when I
was a Scholar in Padua, faith then I could have swingd a sword and a buckler,
and I did that then will being but a spring all of 24. years which be talked of
in Padua these 40. years I warrant it faith my Lord were I so lusty now I
would go with you to the waires this next spring that's flat, will you eat any
sallet my Lord, faith here are excellent herbs if you love them.


They be my Lord too cold for my stomach, wilt please you my Lord to drink a
cup of old Greek wine with it, bring me some wine here.


Bring me some wine here I will drink a Joy to Caesar and this Noble company.


Some wine for his Holiness own mouth, Bernardo.


C^sar your self are master of this ^east,
I drink a good success and victory,
To Caesar and great happiness to all.

Happy success and fortune to you all.


Hold Caesar; stay for we are poisoned,


My Lord it is all of.


Then art thou qu^te undone.


Some villainous conspiracy lies hid
Within this company, and this pernicious villain
Hath practised with the^; go with thy soul to hell,
I feel the raging of i^.

Away my Lord Modina come away,
Thi^ tra^e was laid of purpose ^or our lives.

Our re^uge and defence is from above,
Let Satan work, he never shall preuaile.

How doth my gracious Lord.


Oh very ^ick ^ bring me preseruatiues,
I think I have ^s good a^ any man.

My Lord ^entiu^gli take here my keys,
You know my study, search my Cabinet,
There shall you find a little Crystal Phiall,
Wrapped up in Sarcenet bring i^ hither straight,
I feel Vesonus raging in my guts.

Here C^sar taste some of this precious water,
Against all plague, poison, and pestilence
A present help: I bought it of a Jew,
Borne and brought up in Galily.

My Lord it is too sorceable and hot.


The flames of Mongibell consume my liver,
Bring me to some repose.

Comfort your self my Lord.


C^sar take rest,
Send for Physicians, all my fear remains
That Caesar shall miscarry.

And all my grief that both.
Noble Bentiuogli with-draw we both,
Unto my Chamber, I am very sick.

Belchar, Belchar, Belchar;


Varca, Varca, Varca,


Astaroth, Astaroth, Astaroth.


Let Orcus Erebus and Acheron,
And all those Ghosts which haunt the pitchy vaults
Of cole black hags in Cimerian shades
Muster themselves in numbers numberless,
To dance about the Ghost of Alexander.

Our fiery region void of all religion,
And diuilish order by necessity,
Compelled requires his present policy.

That fatal wine which for his Cardinals,
He destined I took out of the place:
And placed his own wine for those Cardinals.

The date of his damnation is at hand.


Be ready then for I the first will bear,
As swist as wirl-winde his black soul to Styx.

And I with poysned toads will stop his mouth,
Whose heart was never satisfied with lust.

And I with snakes and stinging Scorpions
Will scourge him for his pride and insolence.

And I with force of fiends will hall his limbs,
And pull them till he stretch an achor length.

And for his avarice I will fill his paunch,
With store of moulten gold and boiling lead.

Then let us for his sake a horne-pipe tread.


You talk of penance and of penitence,
Compunction with contrition and remission
For all my sins; I pray you think of yours
You vex your selves too much I cannot thank you,
Have patience sirs; oh tis a goodly exorcisme
Quem penitet peccasse paene est innocens
Give leave, give leave, come hither when I call
Either mere fools or good physicians all.
Nay leave me good my lords, fain would I meditate,
Leave me I pray you.

We leave our prayers with your Holiness,
Call upon God, think of his endless bounty.

Pray for your selves, troble not me with prayers,
I pray you troble not your selves with praying.

solves. What is repentance? have I not forgotten?
Why repentance is a spiritual martiredome,
Which mortifies sins and heales the soul:
Having been wounded with the spirits sword
This sword Gods book: that book by me profain'd
And by which book of God my soul is damned,
I damned undoubtedly.
Oh wretched Alexander, slave of sin
And of damnation; what is he that can
Deliver thy poor soul? oh none but he
That when thou did renounce him cast of thee,
Repentance is in vain, mercy too late,
Oh why should miserable mortal man,
Whose languashing breath lives in his nostrills
Vex and torment himself with daily travel
To scrape up heaps of gold to gape for honours?
What were the conquests of great Alexander:
Of Cyrus, Ca^us Caesar? what were it
To be possessed of this vniuerse
And leave it all behind him in a moment?
Might some one man attain that happiness
Which our first Adam had ^n Paradise,
Before he did preuaricate? why then
It were a work oflasting worthiness
To rip the bowels of our mother Ops
For treasure; and to conquer all the world,
Because eternity would promise it,
Out, out al^s my pains, my guts, my liver
And yet I fear it not though in secu^ity
Once more I will with powerful exorcisms,
Invoke those Angels of eternal darkness
To show me now the manner of death.

What dost thou start foul child of reprobation
Vain are thy crosses, vain all exorcismies,
Those be no fruits of faith but mere hypocrisy:
Signa te signa temere me tangis angis
Roma tibi subito motibus ibit amor.
Rome Which once was thy gorgeous concubine
Hath now forsaken thee: now doth she find,
Thy falsehood which did her adulterate
What dost thou tremble slave of sin and hell?

I exorcise thee foul malignant spirit
In the names of, of, of --

Of what? foul mouth, polluted soul?
Corrupted slesh; God hath forsak^n ^hee,
Thy date expired it, thy power determined.

Dissolve dissolve, break, break, black soul dissolve,
And poison all this hem so here wi^h sin.

Thy death and dissolution stand at door,
Resolve now to dissolve, thy soul is ours.

Proud Lucifer Traitor, to great Iehouah,
Father of lies my time is not expired
I will not do that violence to God,
Taking that which is his from him
To be bestowed on his great enemy.

Thou that hast thrown those graces in his face,
How can thou think upon salvation?
Think that you are damned. I will declare it plainly.

Seven years are yet to come, I look for them.


Examine thy soul with this counterparte.


Behold it? is it not for eight years 8 days?


Thou fool examine in Arithmetik,
Numbers without distinction placed thus.
Annos with the figure 11. signifying eleven years, the figure,
Seven applied to Dies importing seven days.

How? how? how? how? howes that?
Deh quella malitia del Diabolo: Deh quello veleno del inferuno.
And for what stands this figure then?

Why for eighteen this figure stands for octauo referred unto di^ last before,
signifying th'eight day after, so that Annos vndicem without distinction
signifying eleauen years; and this figure seven added to days; and that
octauo post, importing the eight day following, moriere, thou shalt die. I
mean thy body with thy soul in respect of Heaven.

Thus many days hast thou continued Pope,
And this is thy last day designed by fate.

Thou can not mock me with thy Sophistry,
M^ soul is more divine and cannot perish.

Thy soul foul beast is like a Menstruous cloth,
^oluted with unpardonable sins.

Know then malignant Angel of confusion,
My soul is a divine light first created
In liknesse lively formed to the word,
Which word was God, that God the cause of causes,
My soul is substance of the living God,
Stamped with the seal of heaven, whose Character
Is his eternal word, at which hell trembles.

And what of that? thou therein hast no part,
I do confes^e thy soul was first ordayn'd
To good: but by free-will to sin thou slave,
Hast sold that soul from happiness to hell.

Mark yet what I can answer for this soul.
Mighty Iehouah most exuperant,
Two creatures made in feature like himself,
The world and man: world reasonable and immortal,
Man reasonable, but dissoluble and mortal,
And therefore man was called Microcosmus,
The little world, and second tip of God,
Containing those high faculties and functions,
And elements which are within the world.
Man then that d^h participate with all,
Through operation, conversation, and simbolisation,
With matter in the subject properly,
With th'elements in body quadrifarie,
With growing plants in virtue vegitatiue
In sense with beasts; with heavens by th'influence
Of the superior spirits into th'inferiour
In wisdom and capacity with Angels,
With Eloym in that great continent,
Is without doubt preserved by that God,
Finding all things contained in himself.

Answer me vain Philosopher to this,
Thou that hast planted man in this perfection,
Not looking on thy detestable soul,
Which first like a pure leaf of whitest Lilly,
Clear from all blemish was bestowed by God,
And thou foul beast did shamefully polute it.
Is it not one of human faculties,
To propose for your selves the best you can,
Where other creatures carried with blind force,
Make them-selues bond slaves to the present time.
The scope of mans creation was to glorify
The most all potent maker of all things,
The Alpha and Omega of all bounty.
But he that wilfully betrays this soul,
That precious Jewel wherein God delights,
Dishonours God and doth deprive himself,
Of all salvation and beatitude.

Rest with this answer, that my soul is Gods
Whose habitacle is prepared in heaven.
First it doth know God being figured
According to that Image of himself,
And then the world whose lively shape it bears,
And to conclude the soul of man knows all,
Because with all things it doth simbolize,
For in this Man there is a mind intelligent,
A quickening word and a celestial spirit,
That like a lightning every way diffused,
All things which are made by the mighty power,
Unites, moves, and replenishes.

These things should have been thought upon before,
The summum bonum which lives in the soul,
Is an eternal pleasure to behold,
And have fruition of the mighty power.
Which thou did never see, nor can en^oy.

Pause yet a little, let me meditate, Mercy, mercy, mercy; arise arise: up, up,
up: fie, fie: no, no? stir stubburne, stony, stiff indurate heart not yet, up.
why, what? wilt thou not foul traitor? to my soul? not yet?

Arise, arise, advance heart clogged with sin,
Oppressed with damnation: up advance yet.
Wilt thou not stir stiff heart? what am I damned?
Yet a little, yet a little, oh yet: not yet? alas.
High God of heavens and earth if thou bear love,
Unto the soul of ^infull man show mercy,
Me^cy good Lord, oh mercy, mercy, mercy.
Oh save my soul out of the Lyons paws,
My darling from the den of black damnation,
My soul, my dove, cover with silver wings,
Her down and plumage make of fine tried gould,
Help, help, help, above* stir, stir, stupidity.

He charms in Dauids words with Iudas spirit,


It will not, no it will not, yet alas, no, no, no? is that my sentence to
damnation?

I am undone, undone.


He shall despair, vassal of sin and hell,
Provide thy self in black despair to dwell.

I tell thee I cannot be resolved,
To dwell in darkness break black soul dissolve,
And poison all this Hemisphere with sin,

And if I may not reach that happiness,
Since for my sons sake I my self inthral'd,
Tell me shall Caesar die this death with me?

Caesar; his youth and strength of blood drives out
This fat all poison and shall live a while.

Oh show me then the manner of his death,


Attend it time grows short all fear is past.


What means that ghastly shadow which came first?


By that which represents Lucretia,
Leprous and poisoned is thy death declared,
By poison which now struggles with thy spirits,
And by that other which sets out to thee,
The murder of thy son the Duke of Candy,
Prefigur'd is the death of thy son Caesar,
Thou for the poisoning of thy daughter poisoned:
He for the murthering of his brother murdered.

Thus God is only just.


The Devil cannot deny it.


Man only false.
Learn miserable wretched mortal men,
By this example of a sinful soul,
What are the fruits of pride and Avarice,
Of cruel Empire and impiety,
Of profanation and Apostasy,
Of brutish l^st falsehood, and perfidy,
Of deep dissembling and hypocrisy,
Learn wicked worldlings, learn, learn, learn by me
To save your souls, though I condemned be.

Here comes a fatal message, I must hence.


My robes, my robes; he robs me of my robes,
Bring me my robes, or take away my life,
My robes, my life, my soul and all is gone.

From the pale horror of eternal fire,
Am I sent with the wagon of black Di^,
To guide thy spirit to the gates of death,
Therefore I summon thee to come with speed,
For horrizons now stand thee not instead.

Horror and horror, fear ensues fear,
Torment with torments is Encompassed:
Despair upon despair, damnation
Upon damnati^, hell and cons^ence,
Mu^t^er lust a^arice impiety,
Va^e pr^ph^nation and apo^tacie,
Rage and distraction t^ranize: away,
Away proud Lucifer, away.

away, away.


Holla, holla, holla, come, come, come, what, when, where when, why, deaf,
strike, dead, alive, oh alas, oh alas, always burning, always f^eezing,
always living, tormented, never ending, never, never, never mending, out, out,
out, out, why, why, whether whether, thither.


Thither, thither, thither.


What is he dead?


Dead, and in such a fashion,
As much affrights my spirits to remember,
Thunder and fearful lightning at his death,
Out cries of horror and extremity.

Cause all your bells to ring my lords of Rome,
Rome is redeemed from a wicked Pope.

God hath beheld us with his eyes of mercy,
His name be glorified, join all in prayer,
And give him praise that took away your shame.

Go your procession, sing your letinies,
A^ let your Churches through with multitudes,
Banquets and bonfiers through the City make.
In sign our Church is freed from infamy,

Even as his spirit was inflate with pride,
Behold his body puffed up with poison,
His corps shall be conveyed to saint Peeters,
Open for all beholders, that they may
See the reward of sin, amend and pray.
Th'omnipotent great guider of all powers,
(Whose essence is pure grace, and heavenly love,
As he with glory crowns heroyick actions,
Bearing a taste of his eternal virtue)
So semblably doth he with terror strike,
In heavy vengeance sins detestable:
As in this tragike mirror to your eyes,
Our scene did represent in Alexander,
Flagicious Caesar his ambitious son,
Reserved for more calamities to come,
After he was imprisoned by the Church,
Escaped into the kingdom of Navarre,
Unto King Iohn then brother to his wife:
Where in an ambush at Viano slain,
^ust Nemesis repaid his treachery.

Heroic and benevolent spectators,
Your gracious ears, and curious observations,
Iuditious censures, and sweet clemency,
Have thus addressed our Tragic Theater,
T'exchange contentment, ^or benignity:
Humbly devoted to your good desires.
For some delight, cause of discourse for others,
For all example, and for none offence,
Your favours are a royal recompense.
Which when our lofty Muses shall perceive,
Then in more pompous and triumphant state,
Your eyes with glory shall the deed receive
Of mighty Monarchs, Kings, and change of fate.
By me those persons which our Scene presented,
Kiss all your hands, and wish you well contented.

