PRINCES of sweet and humane Natures have ever both amongst the Ancients and
Modernes in the best times, presented spectacles, and personal
representations, to recreate their Spirits wasted in grave affairs of State,
and for the entertainment of their Nobility, Ladies, and Courts.

There being now past three years of Intermission, that the King and Queenes
Majesties have not made Masques with shows and Intermdij, by reason the room
where formerly they were presented, having the seeling since richly adorned
with pieces of painting of great value, figuring the acts of King Iames of
happy memory, and other inrichments: lest this might suffer by the smoke of
many lights, his Majesty commanded the Surveyor of his works, that a new
temporary room of Timber, both for strength and capacity of spectators,
should be suddenly built for that use; which being performed in two months,
the Scenes for this Masque were prepared.

BRitanocles, the glory of the Western world, hath by his wisdom, valour,
and piety, not only vindicated his own, but far distant Seas, infested
with Pirates, and reduced the land (by his example) to a real knowledge of all
good Arts and Sciences. These eminent Acts Bellerophon in a wise pity
willingly would preserve from devouring time, and therefore to make them last
to our Posterity, gives a command to Fame, (who hath already spread them
abroad) that she should now at home (if there can be any maliciously
insensible) awake them from their pretended sleep, that even they with the
large yet still increasing number of the good and loyal, may mutually admire
and rejoice in our happiness.

THe Queens Majesty being seated under the State, and the room filled with
Spectators of quality, at the lower end of the room was a Stage raised of a
convenient height, and an Oval stair down into the room: That which first
presented it self to the eye, was the Ornament that enclosed the Scene.

In the under part of this were two pedestalls of a solid order whereon
captives lay bound, above sate two figures in neeches; on the right hand a
woman in a watchet drapery, heightened with silver, on her head a Corona
Rostrata, with one hand holding the rudder of a ship, in the other a little
winged figure with a branch of Palm, and a Girland; this woman represented
Naval victory. Opposite to this in the other neech sate the figure of a man
bearing a Sceptre with a hand and an eye in the Palm, and in the other hand a
book, on his head a Girland of Amaranthus, his Curace was of gold, with a
Palludamentum of blue and Antike bases of Crimson, his foot treading on the
head of a Serpent; by this figure was signified right government: above these
were other composed ornaments cut out like cloth of silver, tied up in knots
with scarfings all touched with gold.

These Pilasters bore up a large Freeze with a Sea triumph of naked children,
riding on sea horses fishes, and young Tritons with writhen trumpets, and other
maritime fancies. In the midst was placed a great compartment of gold, with
branches of Palm coming out of the scrolls, and within that a lesser of
silver with this inscription, VIRTVTIS OPVS, proper to the subject of this
Masque, and alluding to that of Virgil -- Sed famam extendere factis, c. from
this came a drapery of Crimson, which tied up with great knots in the corners
hung down in foulds on the sides of the Pilasters.

A curtain flying up discovered the first Scene, wherein were English houses
of the old and newer forms, intermixed with trees, and a far off a prospect
of the City of London, and the River of Thames, which being a principal part,
might be taken for all great Britain.

From several parts of the Scene came Action and Imposture. Action a young man
in a rich habit down to his knees, with a large guard of purple about the
skirt, wherein was written with silver letters, MEDIO TVTISSIMA, on his head a
girland of Laurel, and in one hand a branch of willow: Imposture in a coar
with hanging sleeves and great skirts, little breeches, a high crowned hat one
side pind up, a little ruff, and a formal beard, and an angling rod in his
hand with a fish at the hooke, with a bag and a horne at his girdle.

My variable Sir; In the name of Heaven,
What makes your falsehood here where fame intends
Her triumphs all of Truth? her Trumpet she
Hath chosen new and clean, lest it should taint
Her breath; Thou art so useless to the World
That thou art impudent, when thou dost share
What is most cheap, and common unto all
The Air and Light; I do beseech thee my
Fine, false Artificer, hide both thy faces
(For thou art double every where) steal hence
And I'll take care, thou shalt no more be missed
Than shadows are at night.

Be patient Sir!
This valiant humour of disdain works not
So powerfully as you believe, I hide my self?
The reasons must be strong, that shall persuade
Me under ground: The Badger loves his hole,
Yet is not so bashful, but dares look out
And show himself, when there is prey abroad:
Then strangely arrogant, I pity thee
As Politickes do men too humble, for
Their care, much more for their redress; that is,
I smile at thee (the Graver way of scorn)
For should I laugh, I fear 'twould make thee think
Thy impudence had somewhat in it of wit,
Did ever hope to be so useful in
The manage and support of humane works
As I?

Proceed, Proceed, make up your History.

Wisely the jealous sceptickes did suspect
Reality in every thing, for every thing but seems,
And borrows the existence it appears
To have: Imposture governs all, even from
The gilded Ethnic Mitre, to the painted staff
Of the Christian Constable, all but pretend
The resemblance of that power which inwardly
They but deride, and whisper merry questions to themselves
Which way it comes.

Y' have cunningly observed
This is a pleasant new Philosophie:

Right Sir, and what is pleasant unto all
Is generally good, Troth I could wish
Our reason were as certain as our sense
Would alter in dispute, as little be
As soon confirmed, but since it is not so,
That universally shall take, which most
Doth please, not what pretends at profit, and
Imaginary good, Is it not fit
And almost saf'st to cousin all, when all
Delight still to be cozened.

These Lectures would
Subdue a numerous sect, were thou to preach
To young soft Courtesans, unpractised heirs
Of over practised Usurers, silken
And fine feathered gallants, whose easy ears
Still open to delights, and shut at truths:
But Fate takes not so little care of those
For whom it doth preserve the Elements:
That what is chief within us should be quite
Depraved, as we were only borne to aim
At trifles here, like children in their first
Estate of using legs, to run at sight
Of bubbles, and to leap at noise of bells.

Even so believe it, and in their chiefest growth
They follow but my Grandsire Mahomets
Divinity, who doth allow the good a handsome Girl
On earth, the valiant two in Paradise.

Thou art so read in humane appetites
That were the Devil licenced to assume
A body, thou might be his Cooke, yet know
If you endeavour it, you may persuade
Your self, there are some few amongst men
That as our making is erect, look up
To face the Stars, and fancy nobler hopes
Than you allow, not downward hang their heads
Like Beasts to meditate on earth, on abject things
Beneath their feet.

It is a thin number sure,
And much dispersed, for they will hardly meet
In Councels and in Synods to enact
Their Doctrine by consent, That the next age
May say they parted friends.

'Tis possible
'Lesse you steal in amongst them to disturb
Their peace, disguisd in a Canonick weed,
Nor are these such, that by their reasons strict
And rigid discipline, must fright nice Court
Philosophers from their belief, such as impute
A tyrannous intent to heavenly powers,
And that their tyranny alone did point
At men, as if the Fawn and Kid were made
To frisk and caper out their time, and it
Were sin in us to dance, the Nightingale
To sing her tragic tales of love, and we
To recreate our selves with Groans, as if
All perfumes for the Tiger were ordained
Cause he excels in scent: colours, and gaudy tinctures for
The Eastern birds, whilst all our ornament
Are russet robes, like melancholy Monks.

There are Sir of this rigid sect, and much
They govern too, that think the Godwit and
The Rail were meant the Eagles food, and men
Designed to feed on Salads in a mead,
As if we were created but a great
And larger kind of Frogs.

It is confessed;
There are some sullen Clarks that love
To injure and to scant themselves, yet you
May find a few whose wisdoms merit greater sway
That will allow us pleasures 'bove our cares,
Yet these we must not compass with our guilt,
But every Act be squared by virtues rule.

Virtue, 'tis a mere name, Virgins that want
A dowry, learned by rote, to raise the price
Of old unhansome looks: admit, there's one
Or two allow in nature such a thing,
And that it is no dream: These mighty Lords
Of reason have but a few followers,
And those go ragged too, the prosperous, brave
Increasing multitude pursue my steps.
The great devourer of mysterious books
Is come, Merlin, whose deep Prophetic Art
Foretold that at this particle of Time
He would forsake's unbodied friends below
And waste one usual circuit of the Moon
On earth, to try how Natures face is changed
Since his decease.

Merlin the Prophetic Magician enters apparelled in a gown of light purple,
down to his ankles, slackly girt, with wide sleeves turned up with powdered
Ermines, and a roll on his head of the same, with a tippet hanging down be
hind, in his hand a silverd rod.

Your eyes encounter him
As you would make great use of's visit here.

With reason Sir, for he hath power to wake
Those that have many ages slept, such as
When busy in their flesh, were my Disciples.
Hail thou most ancient Prophet of this Isle,
I that have practised superstitious rites
Unto thy memory, beg thy immortal aid,
To raise their figures that in times forgot
Were in the world predominant; Help to
Confute this righteous fool, that boasts his small
Neglected stock of wisdom, comes from Heaven, and show
How little it prevailed on earth, since all
The mighty here, are of my sect.

'Tis long
Since this my Magic rod hath struck the Air
Yet loss of practice can no Art impair,
That soars above the reach of natures might,
Thus then I charm the Spirits of the night,
And unto Hell conjure their wings to steer,
And straight collect from dismal corners there
The great seducers of this Isle, that by
Their baits of pleasure strove to multiply
Those sad Inhabitants, who curse that truth below
Which here on Earth they took no pains to know,
Appear! Appear! nimbly obey my will
To express I died to increase my Magic skill.

The apparel of these in part showed their base professions, mixed with some
soldier-like Accoutrements.

These Antimasques being past, Bellerophon entered riding on Pegasus, in a cote
armour of silver scales, and on his head an Antique Helm with Plumes, his
Bases watchet with labels of gold, a golden Javelin in his hand, the point of
lead.

The Pegasus was covered all with white close to his skin, his main and tail of
silver, with large white wings, his reins and saddle of carnation trimd with
silver. He riding up into the middle of the room with an attendant alighted.

Bellerophon? Thou that the of-spring art of Heaven,
Most timely, and by Inspiration sure,
Thou come to help me to despise and scorn
These Airy mimic Apparitions, which
This cosening Prophet would present as great
Examples for succeeding times to imitate.

Through thick assembled clouds, through mists that would
Choke up the Eagles eye, I in my swift
And sudden journey through the Air, have seen
All these fantasticks objects, which but show
How dull the Impious were to be so sillily
Misled, and how the good did ever need
But little Care, and less of Brain, to escape
The apparent baits of such gross Fools.

I Sir,
To were easy to subdue if Choleric scorn
Might make up confutation without help
Of Arguments, the virtuous Sir of la^e
Have got a fine Feminine trick to rail
At all they will dislike, refer what is
Not easily understood unto a kind
Obedient Faith, and then call reason but
A new and saucy Heretic, those that
My reverend Prophet raised, which you Sir in
A virtuous fury have called Fools, In me sure
Did govern when alive, and by
Imposture made their estimation thrive.

Monster! thou know 'tis not thy strange defence
Of Reason that provokes my rage, but thou
Would cunningly disguise thy sense
In Reasons shape, cosening thy willing self,
And giving seeming pleasures, real Attributes:
These taking tunes, to which the numerous world
Do dance (when your false-sullennesse shall please)
You may compare, to th dangerous Musique of
The swan, a merry preparation still
To Melancholy death.

Cry mercy, Sir!
You are Heroic virtue, who pretend
An Embassy from Heaven, and that you're sent
To make new lovers here on Earth, you will
Refine the ways of wooing, and prescribe
To valor, nobler exercise, than what
The Ancient Knights Advent'rers taught, but first
See these of th'old Heroic race, Merlin
Assist me once more with thy charming rod,
To show this strict Corrector of delights
What Ladies were of yore, and what their Knights,
Although their shapes and manners now grow strange,
Make him admire, what he would strive to change.

Alas, how weak and easy would you make
Our intellectual strength, when you have hope
It may be overcome with noise and shows.

Yes, and this moral Magistrate; your strict
O'r solemn Friend, that insuch comely Phrase
Disputes for active virtue, and declares
Himself the mark of all unrighteous opposites,
His Magnanimity shall yield at last,
Straight take my Angle in his hand, then bait
The hooke with gilded Flies, to fish in troubled Seas:
For all the world is such, and in a storm;
Where the Philosopher (that still swims in
Profoundest depths) will (Sir) as easily
Be snapped, as fools that float on shallow streams
And taken with a Lyne, no stronger sir, than what
Will tear a little Gudgeons Jaws.

The Knight Adventurer that you intend
To raise, must then adventure far, and make
His valour captivate, surer and soon
As his lamenting Ladies looks, I'll not
Be taken else.

Most reverend Lord of Dark
Unusual sciences begin thy charm.

Like furious Rivers meeting under ground,
So hollow and so dismal is the sound
Of all my inward murmurs, which no ear
But with a wild astonishment can hear;
Though not so loud as Thunder, Thunders are
A slower noise, and not amaze so far.
Which to express, that distant spirits hear,
And willingly obey: Appear, Appear!

At this the Hell suddenly vanishes, and there appears a vast Forest, in
which stood part of an old Castle kep^ by a Giant, proper for the Scene of the
Mock Romansa which followed: Out of this Forest comes running and affrighted, a
Dwarf and a Damsel; The Dwarf in blue and white, the Damsel in a straight
bodied gown and wide sleeves of changeable, with a safeguard of Silver stuff,
and a past and partlet like a Moral figure in old hangings: to these a Knight
in old fashioned Armour, with Spear and Shield, his Squire apparelled in a
yellow Coat, with wide sleeves, and strossers cut in pains of yellow and
watchet; After them a Giant in a Coat of Mayle, his bases red and silver, with
a Fashion hanging in a Chain, and in his hand an iron mace, a great roll of
black and white on his head: A Saracens face with great black moustaches.

FLy from this Forest, Squire! Fly trusty spark!
I fear like child, whom maid hath left in the dark.

O Coward base! whose fear will never Lynne
Till't shrink thy heart as small as head of Pynne!
Lady, with pretty finger in her eye
Laments her Lamkin Knight, and shall I fly?
Is this a time for blade to shift for's self,
When Giant vile, calls Knight a sneaking Else?
This day, (a Day as fair as heart could wish)
This Giant stood on shore of sea to fish,
For Angling rod he took a sturdy Oak,
For line a Cable that in storm n'er broke;
His hook was such as heads the end of Pole,
To pluck down house ere fire consumes it whole.
This hooke was baited with a Dragons tail,
And then on Rock he stood to bob for Whale:
Which straight he caught and nimbly home did pack,
With ten Cart load of dinner on his back:
Thus homward bent, his eye too rude and cunning,
Spies Knight and Lady by an hedge a sunning.
That Modicum of meat he down did lay
(For it was all he eat on fasting day)

They come, in's rage he spurn's up huge tree roots,
Now stick to Lady Knight, and up with boots.

Bold recr'ant wight! what Fate did hither call thee,
To tempt his strength, that hath such power to maule thee?
How durst thy puling Damsel hither wander?
What was the talk you by yon'd hedge did maunder?

Patience sweet man of might! alas Heaven knows
We only hither came to gather sloes,
And Bullies two or three; for truth to tell ye
I've longed six weeks with these to fill my belly:
In fecks if you'll believe it, nought else was meant sure
By this our Iaunt, which Errants call Adventure.

Shall I grow meek as Babe when every Trull is
So bold to steal my sloes and pluck my bullyes?

Fear not! let him storm on, and still grow rougher,
Thou that art bright as candle cleared by snuffer,
Can ne'er endure a blemish or Eclipse
From such a hookt nose foul mouthed Bobber lips:
Ere he shall boast, he used thee thus to's People,
I'll see him first hanged high as any steeple.

If I but upward heave my ^aken Twig,
I'll teach thee play the Tom-boy, her the Rig,
Within my Forest bounds: what doth she ail
But she may serve as Cooke to dress my whale?
In this her Damsels tire and robe of sarcenet
She shall souse bore, fry tripes, and wild hogs harsnet.

O monster vile, thou mighty ill bred Lubber,
Art thou not moved to see her whine and blub ber?
Shall Damsel fair (as thou must needs confess her)
With Canvas apron, dress thy meat at dresser?
Shall she that is of soft and pliant mettle,
Whose Fingers silk would gaul, now scour a Kettle?
Though not to scuffle given, now I'll thwart thee,
Let Blowze thy daughter serve for shillings forty.
It is meeter (I think) such ugly baggages
Should in a Kitchen drudge for yearly wages,
Than gentle She who hath been bred to stand
Near chair of Queen with Island shock in hand.
At Questions and commands, all night to play,
And Amber Possits eat at break of Day,
Or score out Husbands in the charcole ashes.
With Courtly Knights, not roaring country swashes,
Hath been her breeding still, and's more fit far
To play on Virginals, and the Gittar,
Than stir a seacole fire, or scum a Cauldron,
When thou shalt break thy fast on a bulls Chaudron.

Then I perceive I must lift up my Pole,
And deal your love-sick noddle such a dole
That every blow shall make so huge a clatter,
Men ten leagues off shall ask, Hah! what's the matter?

Kind grumbling youth! I know that thou art able,
And want of breeding makes thee prone to squabble,
Yet sure thy Nature doth compunction mean
Though (alas) thy mother was a sturdy Queen:
Let not meek lovers kindle thy fierce wrath,
But keep thy blustering breath to cool thy broth.

Whine not my love, his fury straight will waste him,
Stand off a while and see how I'll lambaste him.

Now look to it Knight, this such a desperate blade is,
In Gaul he swinged the valiant sir Amadis!

With bow, now Cupid shoot this son of Puncke
With crosse-bow else, or pellet out of trunk!

I'll strike thee till thou sink where the abode is
Of wights that sneak below, called Antipodis.

My Art will turn this Combat to delight
They shall unto fantastic Music fight.

How trivial and how lost thy visions are!
Did thy Prophetic Science take such ^are
(When thou were mortal) with unlawful power
To recollect thy ashes, against this hour,
And all for such import? surrender strait
This usurpation of thy warmth and weight,
And turn to Air, thy Spirit to a wind:
Blow thine own dust about, until we find
No small remainder of ill gatherd thee
And like to it, so waste thy memory.

Thou Imposture to some dark Region steal
The light is killing, cause it doth reveal
Thy thin disguise, In the dark thou ne'er wilt fade,
For dismal plants still prosper in the shade;
Thou art a shadow, and observe how all
Vain shadows to our eyes stretch and grow tall,
Just when the Sun declines to bring in night,
So thou dost thrive in darkness, waste in light.

Away! Fame (still obedient unto Fate)
This happy hour is called to celebrate
Britanocles, and those that in this Isle
The old with modern virtues reconcile.
Away! Fames universal voice I hear,
Tis fit you vanish quite when they appear.

In the further part of the Scene, the earth opened and there rose up a richly
adorned Palace, seeming all of Gold smiths work, with Portico's vaulted on
Pilasters running far in: the Pilasters were silver of rustic work,
their bases and capitels of gold, in the midst was the principal entrance, and
a gate; the doors leaves with figures of Basse-relieve, with Jambs and
frontispiece all of gold, above these ran an Architraue Freeze and Coronis of
the same; the Freeze enriched with Jewels; this bore up a Ballestrata, in the
midst of which, upon an high Tower with many windows stood Fame in a Carnation
garment, trimd with gold, with white wings and flaxen hair, In one hand a
golden Trumpet, and in the other an Olive Girland.

In the lower part leaning on the Rail of the Ballesters were two Persons,
that on the right hand personating Arms with a Curace and plumed Helm, and a
broken Lance in his hand.

On the left hand, a woman in a watchet robe trimmed with silver, on her head a
Bend, with little wings like those of Mercury, and a scroll of parchment in
her hand, representing Science.

When this Palace was arrived to the height, the whole Scene was changed into a
Peristilium of two orders, Doric and Ionic with their several Ornaments
seeming of white marble, the Basesxs and Capitals of gold; this joining with
the former having so many returns, openings, and windows, might well be
known for the glorious Palace of Fame.

The Chorus of Poets entered in rich habits of seveverall colours, with Laurels
on their heads guilt.

Break forth thou Treasure of our sight,
That art the hopeful morn of every day,
Whose fair example makes the light,
By which Heroic virtue finds her way.
O thou, our cheerful morning rise
And strait those misty clouds of error clear,
Which long have overcast our eyes,
And else will darken all this Hemisphere:
What to thy Power is hard or strange?
Since not alone confined unto the land;
Thy Sceptre to a trident change,
And strait unruly Seas thou can command!
How hath thy wisdom raised this Isle?
Or thee, by what new title shall we call
Since it were lessening of thy stile,
If we should name thee natures Admiral!
Thou universal wonder know
We all in darkness morn till thou appear,
And by thy absence dulled may grow,
To make a doubt if day were ever here!
The Masquers came forth of the Peristilium, and stood on each side, and at
that instant the gate of the Palace opened, and Britanocles appeared.

The habit of the Masquers was close bodies of Carnation, embroidered with
silver, their arming sleeves of the same; about their waste two rows of
several fashioned leaves, and under this their bases of white, reaching to the
middle of their thigh, on this was an under basis with labels of Carnation
embroidered with silver, and betwixt every pain were pufts of silver fastened
in knots to the labels, the trimming of the shoulders was as that of the Basis,
their long stockings set up were Carnation with white shoes, and roses, their
bands and cuffs made of purles of Cutworke, upon their heads little carnation
caps embroidered as the rest, with a slit turned up before, out of the midst
came several falls of white feathers diminishing upwards in a Pyramidall
form.

This habit was beautiful, rich, and light for dancing, and proper for the
Subject of this Masque.

The Palace sinks, and Fame remaining hovering in the Air, rose on her wings
singing, and was hidden in the Clouds.

Britanocles, the great and good appears,
His Person fills our eyes, his name our ear,
His virtue every drooping spirit cheers!

Why move these Princes of his train so slow
As taking root, they would to Statues grow,
But that their wonder of his virtue turns them so!
'Tis fit you mix that wonder with delight,
As you were warmed to motion with his sight,
So pay the expectation of this night.

Move then in such a noble order here,
As if you each his governed Planet were,
And he moved first, to move you in each sphere.

O with what joy you'll measure out the time?
Each breast like his still free from every crime,
Whose pensive weight might hinder you to clime!

The song ended, the Scene returns to that of Britain:

Which ended, a new Chorus of our own modern Poets raised by Merlin, in rich
habits differing from the rest, with Laurels on their heads guilt, make their
address to the Queen.

Our eyes (long since dissolved to Air)
To thee for Day must now repair,
Though raised to life by Merlins might,
Thy stock of Beauty will supply
Enough of Sun from either eye,
To fill the Organs of our sight!
Yet first thy pity should have drawn
A Cloud of Cypress or of Lawn,
To come between thy radiant Beams:
Our eyes (long darkened in a shade)
When first they so much light invade
Must ache and sicken with extremes.
Yet wiser reason hath prevailed
To wish thy beauties still unvailed,
'Tis better that it blind should make us,
Than we should want such heavenly Fire,
That is so useful to inspire
Those Raptures which would else forsake us.
Who knows but Homer got his Flame
From some Refulgent Grecian Dame
Whose beauty gave his Muse supplies:
And would not trust in humble Prose
His noble thoughts, but rather chose
High numbers, though with loss of eyes?
Here the Scene changed, and in the farthest part the sea was seen,
terminating the sight with the Horizon; on the one side was a Haven, with a
Citadel, and on the other broken grounds and Rocks; from whence the sea-Nimph
Galatea came waving forth, riding on the back of a Dolphin, in a loose snow
white garment, about her neck chains of Pearl, and her arms adorned with
bracelets of the same; her fair hair disheveled and mixed with silver, and in
some part covered with a veil which she with one hand graciously held up,
being arrived to the midst of the sea, the Dolphin stayed, and she sung with a
Chorus of music.

So well Britanocles over seas doth Reign,
Reducing what was wild before,
That fairest sea-Nymphs leave the troubled maine,
And haste to visit him on shore.
What are they less than Nymphs since each make show
Of wondrous Immortality?
And each those sparkling Treasures wears that grow
Where breathless Divers cannot Pry?
On ever moving waves they used to dance
Unto the whistling of the wind;
Whose measures hit and meet byerring chance,
Where Music can no concord find.
But now for their Majestic welcome try
How even, and equally they will meet,
When you shall lead them by such Harmony,
As can direct their ears, and feet.
Which done, she gently past away, floating on the waves as she came in. After
this some ships were discerned sailing afar off several ways, and in the end
a great Fleet was discovered, which passing by with a side wind tacked about,
and with a prosperous gale entered into the Haven, this continuing to entertain
the sight whilst the dancing lasted.

Wise Nature, that the Dew of sleep prepares
To intermit our joys, and ease our cares,
Invites you from these Triumphs to your rest.
May every whisper that is made be chaste,
Each Lady slowly yield, yet yield at last;
Her Heart a Prisner to her Lovers breast!
To wish unto our Royal Lover more
Of youthful blessings than he had before,
Were but to tempt old Nature have her might,
Since all the Odor, Musique, Beauteous Fire,
We in the spring, the spheres, the stars, admire
Is his renewed, and bettered every night!
To Bed, to Bed, may every Lady dream
From that chief beauty she hath stolen a Beam,
Which will amaze her Lovers curious Eyes!
Eeach lawful Lover to advance his youth,
Dream he hath stolen, his Vigour, Love, and Truth;
Then all will haste to Bed, but none to Rise!

