POETASTER, OR His Arraignment. A Comical Satire. Acted, in the year 1601.
By the then Children of Queen ELIZABETHS CHAPEL.

The Author B. I.

Et mihi de nullo fama rubore placet.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY, for Matthew Lownes.

M. DC. XVI.

SIr, A thankful man owes a courtesy ever: the unthankful, but when he
needs it. To make mine own mark appear, and show by which of these seals I
am known, I send you this piece of what may live of mine; for whose innocence,
as for the Authors, you were once a noble and timely vndertaker, to the
greatest Justice of this kingdom. Enjoy now the delight of your goodness;
which is to see that prosper, you preserved: and posterity to owe the reading
of that, without offence, to your name; which so much ignorance, and malice of
the times, then conspired to have suppressed.

Your true lover, BEN. IONSON.
THE SCENE. ROME.

LIght, I salute thee, but with wounded nerues:
Wishing thy golden splendour, pitchy darkness.
What's here? TH'ARRAIGNMENT? I: This, this is it,
That our sunk eyes have waked for, all this while:
Here will be subject for my snakes, and me.
Cling to my neck, and wrists, my loving worms,
And cast you round, in soft, and amorous foulds,
Till I do bid, vncurle: Then, break your knots,
Shoot out your selves at length, as your forced stings
Would hide themselves within his malic't sides,
To whom I shall apply you. Stay! the shine
Of this assembly here offends my sight,
I'll darken that first, and out-face their grace.
Wonder not, if I stare: these fifteen weeks
(So long as since the plot was but an embrion)
Have I, with burning lights, mixed vigilant thoughts,
In expectation of this hated play:
To which (at last) I am arrived as Prologue.
Nor would I, you should look for other looks,
Gesture, or complement from me, then what
Th'infected bulk of ENVY can afford:
For I am rise here with a covetous hope,
To blast your pleasures, and destroy your sports,
With wrestings, comments, applications,
Spie-like suggestions, privy whisperings,
And thousand such promooting sleights as these.
Mark, how I will begin: The Scene is, ha!
ROME? ROME? and ROME? Crack ey-strings, and your balls
Drop into earth; let me be ever blind.
I am prevented; all my hopes are crossed,
Checked, and abated; fie, a freezing sweat
Flows forth at all my pores, my entrails burn:
What should I do? ROME? ROME? O my vexed soul,
How might I force this to the present state?
Are there no players here? no poet-apes,
That come with basilisks eyes, whose forked tongues
Are steeped in venom, as their hearts in gall?
Either of these would help me; they could wrest,
Peruer^, and poison all they hear, or see,
With senseless glosses, and allusions.
Now if you be good devils, fly me not.
You know what dear, and ample faculties
I have endowed you with: I'll lend you more.
Here, take my snakes among you, come, and eat,
And while the squeezed juice flows in your black jaws,
Help me to damn the Author. Spit it forth
Upon his lines, and show your rusty teeth
At every word, or accent: or else choose
Out of my longest vipers, to stick down
In your deep throats; and let the heads come forth
At your rank mouths; that he may see you armed
With triple malice, to hiss, sting, and tear
His work, and him; to forge, and then declaim,
Traduce, corrupt, apply, inform, suggest:
O, these are gifts wherein your souls are blessed.
What? do you hide your selves? will none appear?
None answer? what, doth this calm troupe affright you?
Nay, then I do despair: down, sink again.
This travail is all lost with my dead hopes.
If in such bosoms, spite have left to dwell,
Envy is not on earth, nor scarce in hell.

STay, Monster, ere thou sink, thus on thy head
Set we our bolder foot; with which we tread
Thy malice into earth: So spite should die,
Despised and scorned by noble industry.
If any muse why I salute the stage,
An armed Prologue; know, 't is a dangerous age:
Wherein, who writes, had need present his Scenes
Forty sold proof against the conjuring means
Of base detractors, and illiterate apes,
That fill up rooms in fair and formal shapes.
Against these, have we put on this forced defence:
Whereof the allegory and hid sense
Is, that a well erected confidence
Can fright their pride, and laugh their folly hence.
Here now, put case our Author should, once more,
Swear that his play were good; he doth implore,
You would not argue him of arrogance:
How ere that common spawn of ignorance,
Our fry of writers, may beslime his fame,
And give his action that adulterate name.
Such ful-blowne vanity he more doth loathe,
Then base deiection: There's a mean 'twixt both.
Which with a constant firmness he pursues,
As one, that knows the strength of his own muse.
And this he hopes all free souls will allow,
Others, that take it with a rugged brow,
Their moods he rather pities, then envies:
His mind it is above their injuries.
THen, when this body falls in funeral fire,
My name shall live, and my best part aspire.
It shall go so.

Young master, master OVID, do you hear? gods a me! away with your songs,
and sonnets; and on with your gown and cap, quickly: here, here, your father
will be a man of this room presently. Come, nay, nay, nay, nay, be brief.
These verses too, a poison on them, I cannot abide them, they make me ready
to cast, by the banks of helicon. Nay look, what a rascally untoward thing
this poetry is; I could tear them now.


Give me, how neere's my father?


Hart a'man: get a law-booke in your hand, I will not answer you else. Why so:
now there's some formality in you. By JOVE, and three or four of the gods
more, I am right of mine old masters humour for that; this villainous poetry
will undo you, by the welkin.


What, hast thou buskins on, LVSCVS, that thou swear so tragically, and
high?


No, but I have boots on, sir, and so ha's your father too by this time: for
he called for them, ere I came from the lodging.


Why? was he no readier?


O no; and there was the mad skeldring captain, with the velvet arms,
ready to lay hold on him as he comes down: he that presses every man he
meets, with an oath, to lend him money, and cries; (Thou must doo'r, old boy,
as thou art a man, a man of worship.)


Who? PANTILIVS TVCCA?


I, he: and I met little master LVPVS, the Tribune, going thither too.


Nay, and he be under their arrest, I may (with safety enough) read over my
elegy, before he come.


Gods a me! What'll you do? why, young master, you are not castalian mad,
lunatike, frantic, desperate? ha?


What ail thou, LVSCVS?


God be with you, sir, I'll leave you to your poetical fancies, and furies.
I'll not be guilty, I.


Be not, good ignorance: I'm glad you are gone:
For thus alone, our ear shall better judge
The hasty errors of our morning muse.

And call my verse, fruits of an idle quill?
Or that (unlike the line from whence I sprung)
Wars dusty honours I pursue not young?
Or that I study not the tedious laws;
And prostitute my voice to every cause?
Thy scope is mortal; mine eternal ^ame:
Which through the world shall ever chant my name.
HOMER will live, whilst TENEDOS stands, and I'D,
Or, to the sea, sleet SIMO^S doth slide:
And so shall HESIOD too, while vines do bear,
Or crooked sickles crop the ripened care.
CALLIMACHVS, though in invention lowe,
Shall still be sung: since he in art doth flow.
No loss shall come to SOPHOCLES proud vain.
With sun, and moon, ARATVS shall remain.
Whilst slaves be false, fathers hard, and bawds be whorish,
Whilst harlots flatter, shall MENANDER flourish.
ENNIVS, though rude, and ACCIVS high-reard strain,
A fresh applause in every age shall gain.
Of VARRO'S name, what ear shall not be told?
Of IASONS ARGO? and the fleece of gold?
Then shall LVCRETIVS lofty numbers die,
When earth, and seas in fire and flames shall fry.
TYTIRVS, Tillage, AENEE shall be read,
Whilst ROME of all the conquered world is head.
Till CUPIDS fires be out, and his bow broken,
Thy verses (neat TIBVLLVS) shall be spoken.
Our GALLVS shall be known from east to west:
So shall LYCORIS, whom he now loves best.
The suffering plough-share, or the flint may wear:
But heavenly poesy no death can fear.
Kings shall give place to it, and kingly shows,
The banks ore which gold-bearing Tagus flows.
Kneel hinds to trash: me let bright PHOEBVS swell,
With cups full flowing from the MVSES well.
Frost-fearing myrtle shall impale my head,
And of sad lovers I'll be often read.
"Envy, the living, not the dead, doth bite:
"For after death all men receive their right.
Then, when this body falls in funeral fire,
My name shall live, and my best part aspire.

YOur name shall live indeed, sir; you say true: but how infamously, how
scorned and contemned in the eyes and ears of the best and gravest Romanes,
that you think not on: you never so much as dream of that. Are these the
fruits of all my travail and expenses? is this the scope and aim of thy
studies? are these the hopeful courses, wherewith I have so long flattered my
expectation from thee? verses? poetry? OVID, whom I thought to see the
pleader, become OVID the play-maker?


No, sir.


Yes, sir. I hear of a tragoedie of yours coming forth for the common
players there, called MEDEA. By my houshold-gods, if I come to the acting of
it, I'll add one tragic part, more then is yet expected, to it: believe me
when I promise it. What? shall I have my son a stager now? an enghle for
players? a gull? a rooke? a shot-clogge? to make suppers, and be laughed at?
PVBLIVS, I will set thee on the funeral pile, first.


Sir, I beseech you to have patience.


Nay, this tis to have your ears dammed up to good counsel. I did angure all
this to him afore-hand, without poring into an oxes paunch for the matter, and
yet he would not be scrupulous.


How now, good man slave? what, roll powle? all rivals, rascal? why my
Master, of worship, dost hear? Are these thy best proiects? is this thy
desseignes and thy discipline, to suffer knaves to be competitors with
commanders and gentlemen? are we paralells, rascal? are we paralells?


Sirrah, go get my horses ready. You'll still be prating.


Do, you perpetual stinkard, do, go, talk to tapsters and ostlers, you
slave, they are in your element, go: here be the Emperors captains, you
ragamuffin rascal; and not your cam'rades.


Indeed, MARCVS OVID, these players are an idle generation, and do much harm
in a state, corrupt young gentry very much, I know it: I have not been a
Tribune thus long, and observed nothing: besides, they will rob us, us, that
are magistrates, of our respect, bring us upon their stages, and make us
ridiculous to the plebeians; they will play you, or me, the wisest men they can
come by still; me: only to bring us in contempt with the vulgar, and make us
cheap.


You are in the right, my venerable cropshin, they will indeed: the tongue of
the oracle never twanged truer. Your courtier cannot kiss his mistress
slippers, in quiet, for them: nor your white innocent gallant pawn his
revelling suit, to make his punk a supper. An honest decayed commander, cannot
skelder, cheat, nor be seen in a bawdy house, but he shall be straight in one
of their worm wood comoedies. They are grown licentious, the rogues;
libertines, flat libertines. They forget they are in the statute, the rascals,
they are blazond there, there they are tricked, they and their pedigrees; they
need no other heralds, I wisse.


Me thinks, if nothing else, yet this alone* the very reading of the public
edicts should fright thee from commerce with them; and give thee distaste
enough of their actions. But this betrays what a student you are: this argues
your proficiency in the law.


They wrong me, sir, and do abuse you more,
That blow your ears with these untrue reports.
I am not known unto the open stage,
Nor do I traffic in their theaters.
Indeed, I do acknowledge, at request
Of some near friends, and honourable Romanes,
I have begun a poem of that nature.

You have, sir, a poem? and where is't? that's tho law you study.


CORNELIVS GALLVS borrowed it to read.


CORNELIVS GALLVS? There's another gallant, too, hath drunk of the same
poison: and TIBVLLVS, and PROPERTIVS. But these are gentlemen of means, and
reuenew now. Thou art a younger brother, and hast nothing, but thy bare
exhibition: which I protest shall be bare indeed, if thou forsake not these
unprofitable by-courses, and that timely too. Name me a professed poet, that his
poetry did ever afford him so much as a competencie. I, your god of poets
there (whom all of you admire and reverence so much) HOMER, he whose
worme-eaten statue must not be spewd against, but with hallowed lips, and
groueling adoration, what was he? what was he?


Mary, I'll tell thee, old swagger; He was a poor, blind, riming rascal, that
lived obscurely up and down in boothes, and tap-houses, and scarce ever made a
good meal in his sleep, the whoorson hungry beggar.


He says well: Nay, I know this nettles you now, but answer me; Is't not
true? you'll tell me his name shall live; and that (now being dead) his works
have eternis'd him, and made him divine But could this divinity feed him,
while he lived? could his name feast him?


Or purchase him a Senators revenue? could it?


I, or give him place in the common-wealth? worship, or attendants? make him be
carried in his litter?


Thou speak sentences, old BIAS.


All this the law will do, young sir, if you'll follow it.


If he be mine, he shall follow and observe, what I will apt him too, or, I
profess here openly, and utterly to disclaim in him.


Sir, let me crave you will, forgo these moods;
I will be any thing, or study any thing:
I'll prove the vnfashion'd body of the law
Pure elegance, and make her ruggedst strains
Ruin smoothly, as PROPERTIVS elegies.

PROPERTIVS elegies? good!

Nay, you take him too quickly, MARCVS.

Why, he cannot speak, he cannot think out of poetry, he is bewitched with
it.


Come, do not mis-prize him.


Mis-prize? I, mary, I would have him use some such words now: They have some
touch, some taste of the law. He should make himself a stile out of these,
and let his PROPERTIVS elegies go by.


Indeed, young PVBLIVS, he that will now hit the mark, must shoot thorough the
law we have no other planet reigns, in that sphere, you may sit, and sing
with angels. Why, the law makes a man happy, without respecting any other
merit: a simple scholer, or none at all may be a lawyer.


He tells thee true, my noble Neophyte; my little Grammaticaster, he does: It
shall never put thee to thy Mathematiques, Metaphysiques, Philosophie, and I
know not what supposed sufficiencies; If thou can but have the patience to
plod enough, talk, and make noise enough, be impudent enough, and 'tis enough.


Three books will furnish you.


And the less art, the better: Besides, when it shall be in the power of thy
chen rill conscience, to do right, or wrong, at thy pleasure, my pretty
ALCIBIADES.


I, and to have better men then himself, by many thousand degrees, to observe
him, and stand bare.


True, and he to carry himself proud, and stately, and have the law on his
side for it, old boy.


Well, the day grows old, gentlemen, and I must leave you. PVBLIVS, if thou
wilt hold my favour, abandon these idle fruitless studies that so bewitch
thee. Send IANVS home his back-face again, and look only forward to the law:
Intend that. I will allow thee, what shall suit thee in the rank of gentlemen,
and maintain thy society with the best: and under these conditions, I leave
thee. My blessings light upon thee, if thou respect them: if not, mine eyes may
drop for thee, but thine own heart will ache for it self; and so farewell. What,
are my horses come?


Yes, sir, they are at the gate without.


That's well. ASINIVS LVPVS, a word. Captain, I shall take my leave of you?


No, my little old boy, dispatch with COTHVRNVS there: I'll attend thee, I --


To borrow some ten drachmes, I know his project.


Sir, you shall make me beholding to you. Now Captain TVCCA, what say you?


Why, what should I say? or what can I say, my flower of the order? Should I
say, thou art rich? or that thou art honourable? or wise? or valiant? or
learned? or liberal? Why, thou art all these, and thou know it (my noble
LVCVLLVS) thou know it: come, be not ashamed of thy virtues, old stump.
Honour's a good brooch to wear in a mans hat, at all times. Thou art the man
of wars MECOENAS, old boy. Why should not thou be graced then by them, as
well as he is by his poets? How now, my carrier, what news?


The boy has stayed within for his cue, this half hour.


Come, do not whisper to me, but speak it out: what? it is no treason against
the state, I hope, is't?


Yes, against the state of my masters purse.


Sir, AGRIPPA desires you to forbear him till the next week: his moyles are
not yet come up.


His moyles? now the bots, the spauin, and the glanders, and some dozen
diseases more, light on him, and his moyles. What have they the yellows, his
moyles, that they come no faster? or are they foundered? ha? his moyles have the
staggers belike: have they?


O no, sir: then your tongue might be suspected for one of his moyles.


He owes me almost a talent, and he thinks to bear it away with his moyles,
does he? Sirrah, you, nut-cracker, go your ways to him again, and tell him
I must have money, I: I cannot eat stones and turses, say. What, will he clem
me, and my followers? Ask him, and he will clem me: do, go. He would have
me fry my jerkin, would he? Away, setter, away. Yet, stay, my little
tumbler: this old boy shall supply now. I will not trouble him, I cannot be
importunate, I: I cannot be impudent.


Alas, sir, no: you are the most maidenly blushing creature upon the earth.


Dost thou hear, my little six and fifty, or thereabouts? Thou art not to
learn the humours and tricks of that old bald cheater, Time: thou had not
this chain for nothing. Men of worth have their chymaera's, as well as other
creatures: and they do see monsters, sometimes: they do, they do, brave boy.


Better cheap then he shall see you, I warrant him.


Thou must let me have six, six, drachmes, I mean, old boy; thou shalt do
it: I tell thee, old boy, thou shalt, and in private too, dost thou see? Go,
walk off: there, there. Six is the sum. Thy sonn's a gallant spark, and
must not be put out of a sudden: come hither, CALLINACHVS, thy father tells me
thou art too poetical, boy, thou must not be so, thou must leave them, young
novice, thou must, they are a sort of poor starved rascals; that are ever
wrapped up in foul linen; and can boast of nothing but a lean visage, peering
out of a seame-rent suit; the very emblems of beggary. No, dost hear? turn
lawyer, Thou shalt be my solicitor: Tis right, old boy, is't?


You were best tell it, Captain.


No: fare thou well mine honest horse-man, and thou old beaver. Pray thee
Roman, when thou comes to town, see me at my lodging, visit me sometimes:
thou shalt be welcome, old boy. Do not balke me, good swaggerer. JOVE keep
thy chain from pawning, go thy ways, if thou lack money, I'll lend thee
some: I'll leave thee to thy horse, now. Adieu.


Farewell, good Captain.


Boy, you can have but half a share now, boy.


'Tis a strange boldness, that accompanies this fellow: Come.


I'll give attendance on you, to your horse, sir, please you --


No: keep your chamber, and fall to your studies; do so: the gods of Rome
bless thee.


And give me stomach to digest this law,
That should have followed sure, had I been he.
O sacred poesy, thou spirit of arts,
The soul of science, and the queen of souls,
What profane violence, almost sacrilege,
Hath here been offered thy divinities!
That thine own guiltless poverty should arm
Prodigious ignorance to wound thee thus!
For thence, is all their force of argument
Drawn forth against thee; or from the abuse
Of thy great powers in a dultrate brains:
When, would men learn but to distinguish spirits,
And set true difference twixt those jaded wits
That run a broken pace for common hire,
And the high raptures of a happy Muse
Borne on the wings of her immortal thought,
That kicks at earth with a disdainful heel,
And bears at heaven gates with her bright hooves;
They would not then with such distorted faces,
And desperate censures stab at poesy.
They would admire bright knowledge, and their minds
Should ne'er descend on so unworthy objects,
As gold, or titles: they would dread far more,
To be thought ignorant, then be known poor.
"The time was once, when wit drowned wealth: but now,
"Your only barbarism is t'haue wit, and want.
"No matter now in virtue who excells,
"He, that hath coin, hath all perfection else.

OVID?

Who's there? Come in.

Good morrow, Lawyer.

Good morrow (dear TIBVLLVS) welcome: sit down.

Not I. What: so hard at it? Let's see, what's here?
Nay, I will see it --

Pray thee away --

If thrice in field, a man vanquish his foe,
'Tis after in his choice to serve, or no.
How now OVID! Law -- cases in verse?

In troth, I know not: they run from my pen
Unwittingly, if they be verse. What's the news abroad?

Off with this gown, I come to have thee walk.

No, good TIBVLLVS, I'm not now in case,
Pray let me alone.

How? not in case!
S'light you're in too much case, by all this law.

Troth, if I live, I will new dress the law,
In sprightly poesies habillaments.

The hell thou wilt. What, turn law into verse?
Thy father has schooled thee, I see. Here, read that same.
There's subject for you: and if I mistake not,
A Supersedes to your melancholy.

How! subscribed IVLIA! O, my life, my heaven!

Is the mood changed?

Musique of wit! Note for the harmonious spheres!
Celestial accents, how you ravish me!

What is it, OVID?

That I must meet my IVLIA, the Princess IVLIA.

Where?

Why, at -- hart, I have forgot: my passion so transports me.


I'll save your pains: it is at ALBIVS house,
The jewellers, where the fair LYCORIS lies.

Who? CYTHERIS, CORNELIVS GALLVS love?

I, heel be there too, and my PLAVTIA.

And why not your DELIA?

Yes, and your CORINNA.

True, but my sweet TIBVLLVS, keep that secret:
I would not, for all ROME, it should be thought,
I veil bright IVLIA underneath that name:
IVLIA the gem, and jewel of my soul,
That takes her honours from the golden sky,
As beauty doth all lustre, from her eye.
The air respires the pure elyzian sweets,
In which she breathes: and from her looks descend
The glories of the summer. Heaven she is,
Prays'd in her self above all praise: and he,
Which hears her speak, would swear the tune-full orbs
Turned in his zenith only.

PVBLIVS, thou'lt lose thy self.

O, in no labyrinth, can I safelier err,
Then when I lose my self in praising her.
Hence Law, and welcome, Muses; though not rich,
Yet are you pleasing: let's be reconcilde,
And now made one. Henceforth, I promise faith,
And all my serious hours to spend with you:
With you, whose music strikes on my heart,
And with bewitching tones steals forth my spirit,
In IVLIAS name; fair IVLIA: IVLIAS love
Shall be a law, and that sweet law I'll study,
The law, and art of sacred IVLIAS love:
All other objects will but abjects prove.

Come, we shall have thee as passionate, as PROPERTIVS, anon.


O, how does my SEXTVS?


Faith, full of sorrow, for his CYNTHIAS death.


What, still?


Still, and still more, his grieves do grow upon him,
As do his hours. Never did I know
An understanding spirit so take to heart
The common work of fate.

O my TIBVLLVS,
Let us not blame him: for, against such chances,
The heartiest strife of virtue is not proof.
We may read constancy, and fortitude,
To other souls: but had our selves been struck
With the like planet, had our loves (like his)
Been ravished from us, by injurious death,
And in the height, and heat of our best days,
It would have cracked our sinews, shrunk our veins,
And made our very heart-strings jar, like his.
Come, let's go take him forth, and prove, if mirth
Or company will but abate his passion.

Content, and I implore the gods, it may.

MAster CRISPINVS, you are welcome: Pray, use a stool, sir. Your cousin
CYTHERIS will come down presently. We are so busy for the receiving of these
courtiers here, that I can scarce be a minute with my self, for thinking of
them: Pray you sit, sir, Pray you sit, sir.


I am very well, sir. Ne'er trust me, but you are most delicately seated here,
full of sweet delight and blandishment! an excellent air, an excellent air!


I, sir, 'tis pretty air. These courtiers run in my mind still; I must
look out: for IVPITERS sake, sit, sir. Or please you walk into the garden?
There's a garden on the back-side.


I am most strenuously well, I thank you, sir.


Much good do you, sir.


Come, bring those perfumes forward a little, and strew some roses, and violets
here; Fie, here be rooms savour the most pitifully rank that ever I felt: I
cry the gods mercy, my husband's in the wind of us.


Why, this is good, excellent, excellent: well said, my sweet CHLOE. Trim up
your house most obsequiously.


For VVLCANVS sake, breathe somewhere else: in troth you overcome our perfumes
exceedingly, you are too predominant.


Hear but my opinion, sweet wife.


A pin for your pinnion. In sincerity, if you be* thus fulsome to me in
every thing, I'll be diuore't; Gods my body? you know what you were, before
I married you; I was a gentlewoman borne, I; I lost all my friends to be a
citizens wife; because I heard indeed, they kept their wives as fine as ladies;
and that we might rule our husbands, like ladies; and do what we listed: do
you think I would have married you, else?


I acknowledge, sweet wife, she speaks the best of any woman in Italy, and
moves as mightily: which makes me, I had rather she should make bumps on my
head, as big as my two singers, then I would offend her. But sweet wife --


Yet again? I'st not grace enough for you, that I call you husband, and you
call me wife: but you must still be poking me, against my will, to things?


But you know, wife; here are the greatest ladies, and gallantest gentlemen of
ROME, to be entertained in our house now: and I would fain advise thee, to
entertain them in the best sort, in faith wife.


In sincerity, did you ever hear a man talk so idly? You would seem to be
master? You would have your spoke in my cart? you would advise me to entertain
ladies, and gentlemen? because you can marshall your pack-needles,
horse-combes, hobby-horses, and wall-candlestickes in your ware-house better
then I; therefore you can tell how to entertain ladies, and gentle-folkes
better then I?


O my sweet wife, upbraid me not with that: "Gain savours sweetly from any
thing; He that respects to get, must relish all commodities alike; and admit no
difference betwixt oade, and frankincense; or the most precious balsamum, and a
tar-barrell.


Mary fough: You sell snuffers too, if you be remembered, but I pray you let me
buy them out of your hand; for I tell you true, I take it highly in snuff, to
learn how to entertain gentlefolkes, of you, at these years, I faith. Alas
man; there was not a gentleman came to your house in your the other wives time, I
hope? nor a lady? nor musique? nor masques? Nor you, nor your house were so
much as spoken of, before I disbast my self, from my hood and my fartingall,
to these bumrowles, and your whale-bone-bodies.


Look here, my sweet wife; I am mum, my dear mummia, my balsamum, my
spermacete, and my very city of -- she has the most best, true, feminine wit
in ROME!


I have heard so, sir; and do most vehemently desire to participate the
knowledge of her fair features.


Ah, peace; you shall hear more anon: be not seen yet, I pray you; not yet:
Observe.


'Sbodie, give husbands the head a little more, and they'll be nothing but
head shortly; whats he there?


I know not forsooth.


Who would you speak with, sir?


I would speak with my cousin CYTHERIS.


He is one forsooth would speak with his cousin CYTHERIS.


Is she your cousin, sir?


Yes in truth, forsooth, for fault of a better.


She is a gentlewoman?


Or else she should not be my cousin, I assure you.


Are you a gentleman borne?


That I am, lady; you shall see mine arms, if 't please you.


No, your legs do sufficiently show you are a gentleman borne, sir: for a
man borne upon little legs, is always a gentleman borne.


Yet, I pray you, vouchsafe the sight of my arms, Mistress; for I bear them
about me, to have them seen: my name is CRISPINVS, or CRI-SPINAS indeed; which
is well expressed in my arms, (a Face crying in chief; and beneath it a
blouddie Toe, between three Thorns pungent.)


Then you are welcome, sir; now you are a gentleman borne, I can find in my
heart to welcome you: for I am a gentlewoman borne too; and will bear my head
high enough, though 'twere my fortune to marry a trades-man.


No doubt of that, sweet feature, your carriage shows it in any mans eye, that
is carried upon you with judgment.


Dear wife, be not angry.


God's my passion!


Hear me but one thing; let not your maids set cushions in the parlour
windows; nor in the dining chamber windows; nor upon stools, in either of
them, in any case; for 'tis tauerne-like; but lay them one upon another, in
some out-roome, or corner of the dining chamber.


Go, go, meddle with your bed-chamber only, or rather with your bed in your
chamber, only; or rather with your wife in your bed only; or on my faith,
I'll not be pleased with you only.


Look here, my dear wife, entertain that gentleman kindly, I pre' thee, --
mum.


Go, I need your instructions indeed; anger me no more, I advise you.
Citi-sin, quoth'a! she's a wise gentlewoman in faith, will marry her self to
the sin of the city.


But this time, and no more (by heaven) wife: hang no pictures in the hall, nor
in the dining chamber, in any case, but in the gallery only, for 'tis not
courtly else, of my word, wife.


'Sprecious, never have done!


Wife. --


Do I not bear a reasonable corrigible hand over him, CRISPINVS?


By this hand, lady, you hold a most sweet hand over him.


And then for the great gilt andyrons? --


Again! would the andyrons were in your great guts, for me.


I do vanish, wife.


How shall I do, Master CRISPINVS? here will be all the bravest ladies in
court presently, to see your cousin CYTHERIS: O the gods! how might I behave my
self now, as to entertain them most courtly?


Mary, lady, if you will entertain them most courtly, you must do thus: as
soon as ever your maid, or your man brings you word they are come; you must
say (A pox on them, what do they here.) And yet when they come, speak them
as fair, and give them the kindest welcome in words, that can be.


Is that the fashion of courtiers, CRISPINVS?


I assure you, it is, lady, I have observed it.


For your pox, sir, it is easily hit on; but, 'tis not so easily to speak
fair after, me thinks?


O wife, the coaches are come, on my word, a number of coaches, and courtiers.


A pox on them: what do they here?


How now wife! would thou not have them come?


Come? come, you are a fool, you: He knows not the trick on it. Call CYTHERIS,
I pray you: and good master CRISPINVS, you can observe, you say; let me entreat
you for all the ladies behaviours, jewels, jests, and attires, that you marking
as well as I, we may put both our marks together, when they are gone, and
confer of them.


I warrant you, sweet lady; let me alone to observe, till I turn my self to
nothing but observation. Good morrow cousin CYTHERIS.


Welcome kind cousin. What? are they come?


I, your friend CORNELIVS GALLVS, OVID, TIBVLLVS, PROPERTIVS, with IVLIA the
Emperors daughter, and the lady PLAVTIA, are lighted at the door; and with
them HERMOGENES TIGELLIVS, the excellent musician.


Come, let us go meet them, CHLOE.


Observe, CRISPINVS.


At a hairs breadth, lady, I warrant you.


HEalth to the lovely CHLOE: you must pardon me, Mistress, that I prefer this
fair gentlewoman.


I pardon, and praise you for it, sir; and I beseech your Excellence, receive
her beauties into your knowledge and favour.


CYTHERIS, she hath favour, and behaviour, that commands as much of me: and
sweet CHLOE, know I do exceedingly love you, and that I will approve in any
grace my father the Emperor may show you. Is this your husband?


For fault of a better, if it please your highness.


Gods my life! how he shames me!


Not a whit, CHLOE, they all think you politic, and witty; wise women choose
not husbands for the eye, merit, or birth, but wealth, and sovereignty.


Sir, we all come to gratulate, for the good report of you.


And would be glad to deserve your love, sir.


My wife will answer you all, gentlemen; I'll come to you again presently.


You have chosen you a most fair companion here, CYTHERIS, and a very fair
house.


To both which, you and all my friends, are very welcome, PLAVTIA.


With all my heart, I assure your ladyship.


Thanks, sweet Mistress CHLOE.


You must needs come to court, lady, in faith, and there be sure your welcome
shall be as great to us.


She will well deserve it, Madame. I see, even in her looks, gentry, and
general worthiness.


I have not seen a more certain character of an excellent disposition.


Wife.


O, they do so commend me here, the courtiers! what's the matter now?


For the banquet, sweet wife.


Yes; and I must needs come to court, and be welcome, the Princess says.


OVID, and TIBVLLVS, you may be bold to welcome your Mistresses here.


We find it so, sir.


And thank CORNELIVS GALLVS.


Nay, my sweet SEXTVS, in faith thou art not sociable.


In faith, I am not, PVBLIVS; nor I cannot.
Sick minds, are like sick men that burn with fevers,
Who when they drink, please but a present taste,
And after bear a more impatient fit.
Pray, let me leave you; I offend you all,
And my self most.

Stay, sweet PROPERTIVS.

You yield too much unto your grieves, and sate,
Which never hurts, but when we say it hurts us.

O peace, TIBVLLVS; your philosophie
Lends you too rough a hand to search my wounds.
Speak they of griefs, that know to sigh, and grieve;
The free and unconstrained spirit feels
No weight of my oppression.

Worthy Roman!
Me thinks I taste his misery; and could
Sit down, and chide at his malignant stars.

Me thinks I love him, that he loves so truly.

This is the perfect'st love, lives after death.

Such is the constant ground of virtue still.

It puts on an inseparable face.

Have you marked every thing, CRISPINVS?

Every thing, I warrant you.

What gentlemen are these? do you know them?

I, they are poets, lady.

Poets? they did not talk of me since I went, did they?

O yes, and extolled your perfections to the heavens.

Now in sincerity, they be the finest kind of men, that ever I knew: Poets?
Could not one get the Emperor to make my husband a Poet, think you?


No, lady, 'tis love, and beauty make Poets: and since you like Poets so
well, your love, and beauties shall make me a Poet.


What shall they? and such a one as these?


I, and a better then these: I would be sorry else.


And shall your looks change? and your hair change? and all, like these?


Why, a man may be a Poet, and yet not change his hair, lady.


Well, we shall see your cunning: yet if you can change your hair, I pray,
do.


Ladies, and lordings, there's a slight banquet stays within for you, please
you draw near, and accost it.


We thank you, good ALBIVS: but when shall we see those excellent jewels you
are commended to have?


At your ladyships service. I got that speech by seeing a play last-day, and it
did me some grace now: I see, 'tis good to collect sometimes; I'll frequent
these plays more then I have done, now I come to be familiar with courtiers.


Why, how now, HERMOGENES? what ail thou trow?


A little melancholy, let me alone, pray thee.


Melancholy! how so?


With riding: a plague on all coaches for me.


Is that hard-fauour'd gentleman a poet too; CYTHERIS?


No; this is HERMOGENES, as humorous as a poet though: he is at Musician.


A Musician? then he can sing.


That he can excellently; did you never hear him?


O no: will he be entreated, think you?


I know not. Friend, Mistress CHLOE would fain hear HERMOGENES sing: are you
interested in him?


No doubt, his own humanity will command him so far, to the satisfaction of
so fair a beauty; but rather then fail, we'll all be suitors to him.


'Cannot sing.


Pray thee, HERMOGENES.


'Cannot sing.


For honour of this gentlewoman, to whose house, I know thou may be ever
welcome.


That he shall in truth, sir, if he can sing.


What's that?


This gentlewoman is wooing HERMOGENES for a song.


A song* come, he shall not deny her. HERMOGENES?


'Cannot sing.


No, the ladies must do it, he stays but to have their thanks acknowledged
as a debt to his cunning.


That shall not want: our self will be the first shall promise to pay him more
then thanks, upon a favour so worthily vouchsafed.


Thank you, Madame, but 'will not sing.


Tut, the only way to win him, is to abstain from entreating him.


Do you love singing, lady?


O, passingly.


Entreat the ladies, to entreat me to sing then, I beseech you.


I beseech your grace, entreat this gentleman to sing.


That we will CHLOE; can he sing excellently?


I think so, Madame: for he entreated me, to entreat you, to entreat him to
sing.


Heaven, and earth! would you tell that?


Good sir, let's entreat you to use your voice.


Alas, Madame, I cannot in truth.


The gentleman is modest: I warrant you, he sings excellently.


HERMOGENES, clear your throat: I see by him, here's a gentleman will worthily
challenge you.


Not I, sir, I'll challenge no man.


That's your modesty, sir: but we, out of an assurance of your excellency,
challenge him in your behalf.


I thank you, gentlemen, I'll do my best.


Let that best be good, sir, you were best.


O, this contention is excellent. What is't you sing, sir?


If I freely may discover, c. Sir, I'll sing that.


One of your own compositions, HERMOGENES.
He offers you vantage enough.

Nay truly, gentlemen, I'll challenge no man --: I can sing but one staff of
the ditty neither.


The better: HERMOGENES himself will be entreated to sing the other.

IF I freely may discover,
What would please me in my lover:
I would have her fair, and witty,
Sauouring more of court, then city;
A little proud, but full of pity:
Light, and humorous in her toying.
Oft building hopes, and soon destroying,
Long, but sweet in the enjoying,
Neither too easy, nor too hard:
All extremes I would have bard.

Believe me, sir, you sing most excellently.


If there were a praise above excellence, the gentleman highly deserves it.


Sir, all this doth not yet make me envy you: for I know I sing better then
you.


Attend HERMOGENES, now.

She should be allowed her passions,
So they were but used as fashions;
Sometimes froward, and then frowning,
Sometimes sickish, and then swowning,
Every ^it, with change, still crowning.
Purely jealous, I would have her,
Then only constant when I crave her.
'Tis a virtue should not save her.
Thus, nor her delicates would cloy me,
Neither her peenishnesse annoy me.

Nay, HERMOGENES, your merit hath long since been both known, and admired of
us.


You shall hear me sing another: now will I begin.


We shall do this gentleman's banquet too much wrong, that stays for us,
ladies.


'Tis true: and well thought on, CORNELIVS GALLVS.


Why 'tis but a short air, 'twill be done presently, pray stay; strike
musique.


No, good HERMOGENES: we'll end this difference within.


'Tis the common disease of all your musicians, hat they know no mean, to be
entreated, either to begin, or end.


Please you lead the way, gentles?


Thanks, good ALBIVS.


O, what a charm of thanks was here put upon me! O JOVE, what a setting forth
it is to a man, to have many courtiers come to his house! Sweetly was it said
of a good old house-keeper; I had rather want meat, then want guests:
specially, if they be courtly guests. For, never trust me, if one of their good
legs made in a house, be not worth all the good cheer, a man can make them.
He that would have fine guests, let him have a ^ne wife; he that would have a
fine wife, let him come to me.


By your kind leave, Master ALBIVS.


What, you are not gone, Master CRISPINVS?


Yes faith, I have a desseigne draws me hence: pray sir, fashion mean excuse
to the ladies.


Will you not stay? and see the jewels, sir? I pay you stay.


Not for a million, sir, now; Let it suffice, I must relinquish; and so in a
word, please you to expiate this complement.


Mum.


He presently go and enghle some broker, for a Poets gown, and bespeak a
garland: and then jeweller, look to your best jewel ysaith.


ode so: and it shall be to MECOENAS.


'Slid, yonder's HORACE! they say he's an excellen^ Poet: MECOENAS loves him.
I'll fall into his acquaintance, if I can; I think he be composing, as he goes
in the street! ha? 't is a good humour, and he be: I'll compose too.


Swell me a bowl with lusti^ wine,
Till I may see the plump LYaeVS swim
Above the brim:
I drink, as I would wright,
In slowing measure, filled with flame, and spright.

Sweet HORACE, MINERVA, and the Muses stand auspicious to thy desseignes. How
far'st thou, sweet man? frolic? rich? gallant? ha?


Not greatly gallant, sir, like my fortunes; well.
I'm bold to take my leave, sir, you'd nought else, sir, would you?

Troth, no, but I could wish thou did know us, HORACE, we are a scholer, I
assure thee.


A scholer, sir? I shall be covetous of your fair knowledge.


Gramercy, good HORACE. Nay, we are new turned Poet too, which is more; and a
Satyrist too, which is more then that: I write just in thy vein, I. I am for
your odes or your sermons, or any thing indeed; we are a gentleman besides:
our name is RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, wear a pretty stoic too.


To the proportion of your beard, I think it, sir.


By PHOEBVS, here's a most neat fine street, is't not? I protest to thee, I am
enamoured of this street now, more then of half the streets of ^ome, again;
'tis so polite, and terse! There's the front of a building now. I study
architecture too: if ever I should build, I'd have a house just of that
perspective.


Doubtless, this gallants tongue has a good turn, when he sleeps.


I do make verses, when I come in such a street as this: O your city-ladies,
you shall ha'hem ^it in every shop like the Muses -- offering you the c^s^lian
dews, and the thespian liquors, to as many as have but the sweet grace and
audacity to -- sip of their lips. Did you never hear any of my verses?


No, sir (but I am in some ^are, I must, now.)


I'll tell thee some (if I can but recover them) I composed even now of a
dressing, I saw a jewellers wife wear, who indeed was a jewel herself: I
prefer that kind of tire now, what's thy opinion, HORACE?


With your silver bodkin, it does well, sir.


I cannot tell, but it stirs me more then all your court-curles, or your
spangles, or your tricks: I affect not these high gable-ends, these
tuscane-tops, nor your coronets, nor your arches, nor your pyramids; give me a
fine sweet -- little delicate dressing, with a bodkin, as you say: and a
mushrome, for all your other ornatures.


Is't not possible to make an escape from him?


I have remitted my verses, all this while, I think I have forget them.


Here's he, could wish you had else.


Pray JOVE, I can entreat them of my memory.


You put your memory to too much trouble, sir.


No, sweet HORACE, we must not have thee think so.


I cry you mercy; then, they are my ears
That must be tortured: well, you must have patience, ears.

Pray thee, HORACE, observe.

Yes, sir: your satin sleeve begins to fret at the rug that is underneath it,
I do observe: And your ample velvet bases are not without evident staines of a
hot disposition, naturally.


O -- I'll die them into another colour, at pleasure: how many yards of velvet
dost thou think they contain?


Hart! I have put him now in a fresh way
To vex me more: Faith, sir, your mercers book
Will tell you with more patience, then I can;
(For I am crossed, and so's not that, I think.)

S'light, these verses have lost me again: I shall not inuit them to mind,
now.


Rack not your thoughts, good sir; rather, defer it
To a new time; I'll meet you at your lodging,
Or where you please: Till then, JOVE keep you, sir.

Nay, gentle HORACE, stay: I have it, now.

Yes, sir. APOLLO, HERMES, IVPITER, look down upon me.

Rich was thy hap, sweet, deintie cap,
There to be placed:
Where thy smooth black, sleek white may smack,
And both be graced.
white, is there vsurpt for her brow; her forehead: and then sleek, as the
parallel to smooth, that went before. A kind of Paranomasie, or Agnomination:
do you conceive, sir?


Excellent. Troth, sir, I must be abrupt, and leave you.


Why, what haste hast thou? pray thee, stay a little: thou shalt not go yet,
by PHOEBVS.


I shall not? what remedy? Fie, how I sweat with suffering!


And then --


Pray, sir, give me leave to wipe my face a little.


Yes, do, good HORACE.


Thank you, sir.
Death! I must crave his leave to peace anon;
Or that I may go hence with half my teeth:
I am in some such fear. This tyranny
Is strange, to take mine ears up by commission,
(Whether I will or no) and make them stalls
To his lewd soloecismes, and worded trash.
Happy thou, bold BOLANVS, now, I say;
Whose freedom, and impatience of this fellow,
Would, long ere this, have called him fool, and fool,
And rank, and tedious fool, and have flung jests
As hard as stones, till thou had pelted him
Out of the place: whilst my tame modesty
Suffers my wit be made a solemn ass
To bear his fopperies --

HORACE, thou art miserably affected to be gone, I see. But -- pray thee, let's
prove, to enjoy thee awhile: Thou hast no business, I assure me. Whether is
thy journey directed? ha?


Sir, I am going to visit a friend, that's sick.


A friend? What's he? do not I know him?


No, sir, you do not know him; and 'tis not the worse for him.


What's his name? where's he lodged?


Where, I shall be fearful to draw you out of your way, sir; a great way
hence: Pray, sir, let's part.


Nay, but where is't? I pray thee, say.


On the far side of all Tyber yonder, by CAESARS gardens.


O, that's my course directly; I am for you. Come, go: why stand thou?


Yes, sir: marry, the plague is in that part of the city; I had almost forgot
to tell you, sir.


Fow: It's no matter, I fear no pestilence, I have not offended PHOEBVS.


I have, it seems; or else this heavy scourge
Could ne'er have lighted on me --

Come, along.

I am to go down some half mile, this way, sir, first, to speak with his
physician: And from thence to his apothecary, where I shall stay the mixing of
diverse drugs --


Why, it's all one. I have nothing to do, and I love not to be idle, I'll
bear thee company. How call thou the pothecary?


O, that I knew a name would fright him now. Sir RHADAMANTHVS, RHADAMANTHVS,
sir.
There's one so called, is a just judge, in hell,
And doth inflict strange vengeance on all those,
That (here on earth) torment poor patient spirits.

He dwells at the three Faries, by IANVS Temple?

Your pothecary does, sir.

Hart, Iowe him money for sweet meates, and he has laid to arrest me, I hear:
but --


Sir, I have made a most solemn vow: I will never bail any man.


Well then, I'll swear, and speak him fair, if the worst come. But his name
is MINOS, not RHADAMANTHVS, HORACE.


That may be, sir: I but guest at his name by his sign. But your MINOS is a
judge too, sir?


I protest to thee, HORACE (do but taste me once) if I do know my self, and
mine own virtues truly, thou wilt not make that esteem of VARIVS, or VIRGIL,
or TIBVLLVS, or any of them indeed, as now in thy ignorance thou dost; which I
am content to forgive: I would fain see, which of these could pen more verses
in a day, or with more facility then I; or that could court his mistress, kiss
her hand, make better sport with her fan, or her dog --


I cannot bail you yet, sir.


Or that could move his body more gracefully, or dance better you shoo'd see
me, were it not in the street --


Nor yet.


Why, I have been a reveller, and at my cloth of silver suit, and my long
stocking, in my time, and will be again --


If you may be trusted, sir.


And then for my singing, HERMOGENES himself envies me; that is your only
Master of musique you have in Rome.


Is your mother living, sir?


Au: Convert thy thoughts to somewhat else, I pray thee.


You have much of the mother in you, sir: your father is dead?


I, I thank JOVE, and my grand-father too and all my kinsfolks, and well
composed in their vrnes.


The more their happiness; that rest in peace,
Free from th'abundant torture of thy tongue;
Would I were with them too.

What's that, HORACE?

I now remember me, sir, of a sad fate
A cunning woman, one SABELLA sung,
When in her ^rne, she cast my destiny,
I being but a child

What was't I pray thee?

She told me, I should surely never perish
By famine, poison, or the enemies sword;
The hecticke fever, cough, or pleurisie,
Should never hurt me; nor the tardy got:
But in my time, I should be once surprised,
By a strong tedious talker, that should vex
And almost bring me to consumption.
Therefore (if I were wise) she warned me shun
All such long-winded monsters, as my bane:
For if I could but escape that one discourser,
I might (no doubt) prove an old aged man.
By your leave, sir?

Tut, tut: abandon this idle humour, 'tis nothing but melancholy. Fore JOVE,
now I think o^t, I am to appear in court here, to answer to one that has me
in suit; sweet HORACE, go with me, this is my hour: if I neglect it, the law
proceeds against me. Thou art familiar with these things, pray thee, if thou
love me, go.


Now, let me dye, sir, if I know your laws;
Or have the power to stand still half so long
In their loud courts, as while a case is Argued.
Besides, you know, sir, where I am to go,
And the necessity --

'Tis true: --

I hope the hour of my release be come: He will (upon this consideration)
discharge me, sure.


Troth, I am doubtful, what I may best do; whether to leave thee, or my
affairs, HORACE?


O IVPITER, me, sir; me, by any means: I beseech you, me, sir.


No saith, I'll venture those now: Thou shalt see I love thee, come HORACE.


Nay then, I am desperate: I follow you, sir. 'Tis hard contending with a man
that ouer-comes thus.


And how deals MECOENAS with thee? liberally? ha?
Is he open-handed? bountiful?

He's still himself, sir.

Troth, HORACE, thou art exceeding happy in thy friends and acquaintance; they
are all most choice spirits, and of the first rank of Romanes: I do not know
that poet, I protest, ha's used his fortune more prosperously, then thou hast.
If thou would bring me known to MECoeNAS, I should second thy desert well;
thou should find a good sure assistant of me: one, that would speak all
good of thee in thy absence, and be content with the next place, not envying
thy reputation with thy patron. Let me not live, but I think thou and I (in a
small time) should list them all out of favour, both VIRGIL, VARIVS, and the
best of them; and enjoy him wholly to our selves.


Gods, you do know it, I can hold no longer;
This brize hath pricked my patience: Sir, your silkenesse
Clearly mistakes MECOENAS, and his house;
To think, there breathes a spirit beneath his roof,
Subject unto those poor affections
Of vnder-mining envy, and detraction,
Moods, only proper to base groueling minds:
That place is not in Rome, I dare affirm,
More pure, or free, from such low common evils.
There's no man grieved, that this is thought more rich,
Or this more learned; each man hath his place,
And to his merit, his reward of grace:
Which with a mutual love they all embrace.

You report a wonder! 'tis scarce credible, this.

I am no torture, to enforce you to believe it, but 'tis so.

Why, this enflames me with a more ardent desire to be his, then before: but,
I doubt I shall find the entrance, to his familiarity, somewhat more then
difficult, HORACE.


Tut, you'll conquer him, as you have done me; There's no standing out against
you, sir, I see that. Either your importunity, or the intimation of your good
parts; or --


Nay, I'll bribe his porter, and the grooms of his chamber; make his doors
open to me that way, first: and then, I'll observe my times. Say, he should
extrude me his house to day; shall I therefore desist, or let fall my suite,
to morrow? No: I'll attend him, follow him, meet him? in the street, the high
ways, run by his coach, never leave him. What? Man hath nothing given him, in
this life, without much labour.


And impudence.
Archer of heaven, PHOEBVS, take thy bow,
And with a full drawn shaft, nail to the earth
This PYTHON; that I may yet run hence, and live:
Or brawny HERCVLES, do thou come down,
And (though thou make it up thy thirteenth labour)
Rescue me from this HYDRA of discourse, here.

HORACE, well met.

O welcome, my releeuer,
ARISTIVS, As thou love me, ransom me.

What ail thou, man?

'Death, I am seized on here
By a Land- R^mora, I cannot stir;
Not move, but as he please.

Wilt thou go, HORACE?

'Hart! he cleaves to me like ALCIDES shirt,
Tearing my flesh, and sinews; O, I have been vexed
And tortured with him, beyond forty fevers.
For IOVES sake, find some means, to take me from him.

Yes, I will: but I'll go first, and tell MECOENAS.

Come, shall we go?

The jest will make his eyes run, in faith.

Nay, ARISTIVS?

Farewell, HORACE.

'Death! will a' leave me? FVSCVS ARISTIVS, do you hear? Gods of Rome! you
said, you had somewhat to say to me, in private.


I, but I see, you are now imploi'd with that gentleman: 'twere offence to
trouble you. I'll take some fitter opportunity, farewell.


Mischief, and torment! O, my soul, and heart,
How are you cramped with anguish! Death it self
Brings not the like convulsions. O, this day,
That ever I should view thy tedious face --

HORACE, what passion? what humour is this?

Away, good prodigy, afflict me not.
(A friend, and mock me thus!) never was man
So left under the axe -- how now.

THat's he, in the embroidered hat, there, with the ash-colour'd feather: his
name is LABERIVS CRISPINVS.


LABERIVS CRISPINVS; I arrest you in the Emperors name.


Me, sir? do you arrest me?


I, sir, at the suit of Master MINOS the apothecary.


Thanks, great APOLLO: I will not slip thy favour offered me in my escape, for
my fortunes.


Master MINOS? I know no master MINOS. Where's HORACE? HORACE? HORACE?


Sir, do not you know me?


O yes; I know you, master MINOS: 'crie you mercy. But HORACE? Gods me, is he
gone?


I, and so would you too, if you knew how. Officer, look to him.


Do you hear, master MINOS? pray^ let's be used like a man of our own
fashion. By IANVS, and IVPITER, I meant to have paid you next week, every
drachme. Seek not to eclipse my reputation, thus vulgarly.


Sir, your oaths cannot serve you, you know I have forborne you long.


I am conscious of it, sir. Nay, I beseech you, gentlemen, do not exhale me
thus; remember 'tis but for sweet meates --


Sweet meat must have sour sauce, sir. Come along.


Sweet, master MINOS: I am forfeited to eternal disgrace, if you do not
commiserate. Good officer, be not so officious.


WHy, how now, my good brace of bloud-hounds? whither do you drag the
gent'man? you mungrels, you cures, you bandogs, we are Captain TVCCA, that
talk to you, you inhumane pilchers.


Sir, he is their prisoner.


Their pestilence. What are you, sir?


A citizen of Rome, sir.


Then you are not far distant from a fool, sir.


A apothecary, sir.


I knew thou wast not a physician; fough: out of my nostrils, thou stink'st of
lo^m, and the syringe: away, quack-saluer. Follower, my sword.


Here, noble leader, you'll do no harm with it: I'll trust you.


Do you hear, you, good-man slave? hooke, ram, rogue, catch-pole, lose the
gent'man, or by my velvet arms --


What will you do, sir?


Kiss thy hand, my honourable active varlet: and embrace thee, thus.


O patient metamorphosis!


My sword, my tall rascal.


Nay, soft, sir: Some wiser then some.


What? and a wit to! By PLVTO, thou must be cherished, slave; here's three
drachmes for thee: hold.


There's half his lendings gone.


Give me.


No, sir, your first word shall stand: I'll hold all.


Nay, but, rogue --


You would make a rescue of our prisoner, sir, you?


I, a rescue? away inhumane varlet. Come, come, I never relish above one jest
at most; do not disgust me: Sir, do not. Rogue, I tell thee, rogue, do
not.


How, sir? rogue?


I, why! thou art not angry, rascal? art thou?


I cannot tell, sir, I am little better, upon these terms.


Ha! gods, and fiends! why, dost hear? rogue, thou, give me thy hand; I say
unto thee, thy hand: rogue. What? dost not thou know me? not me, rogue? not
Captain TVCCA, rogue?


Come: pra' surrender the gentleman his sword, officer; we'll have no fighting
here.


What's thy name?


MINOS, an't please you.


MINOS? come, hither, MINOS; Thou art a wise fellow, it seems: Let me talk
with thee.


Was ever wretch so wretched, as unfortunate I?


Thou art one of the centum-viri, old boy, art' not?


No, indeed, master Captain.


Go to, thou shalt be, then: I'll have thee one, MINOS. Take my sword from
those rascals, dost thou see? go, do it: I cannot attempt with patience.
What does this gentleman owe thee, little MINOS?


Fourscore sesterties, sir.


What? no more? Come, thou shalt release him, MINOS: what, I'll be his bail,
thou shalt take my word, old boy, and cashier these furies: thou shalt do it, I
say, thou shalt, little MINOS, thou shalt.


Yes, and as I am a gentleman, and a reveller, I'll make a piece of poetry,
and absolve all, within these five days.


Come, MINOS is not to learn how to use a gent'man of quality, I know; My
sword: If he pay thee not, I will, and I must, old boy. Thou shalt be my
pothecary too: hast good eringo's, MINOS?


The best in Rome, sir.


Go too then -- Vermin, know the house.


I warrant you, Collonell.


For this gentleman, MINOS?


I'll take your word, Captain.


Thou hast it, my sword --


Yes, sir: but you must discharge the arrest, Master CRISPINVS.


How, MINOS? look in the gentleman's face, and but read his silence. Pay, pay;
'tis honour, MINOS.


By JOVE, sweet Captain, you do most infinitely endear, and oblige me to
you.


Tut, I cannot complement, by MARS: but IVPITER love me, as I love good words,
and good clothes, and there's an end. Thou shalt give my boy that girdle, and
hangers, when thou hast worn them a little more --


O IVPITER! Captain, he 'shall have them now, presently: please you to be
acceptiue, young gentleman.


Yes, sir, fear not; I shall accept: I have a pretty foolish humour of
taking, if you knew all.


Not now, you shall not take, boy.


By my truth, and earnest, but he shall, Captain, by your leave.


Nay, and a 'sweare by his truth, and earnest, take it boy: do not make a
gent'man forsworn.


Well, sir, there is your sword; but thank master MINOS: you had not carried
it as you do, else.


MINOS is just, and you are knaves, and --


What say you, sir?


Pass on, my good scoundrell, pass on, I honour thee: But, that I hate to
have action with such base rogues as these; you should have seen me unrip their
noses now, and have sent them to the next barbers, to stitching: for, do you
see -- I am a man of humour, and I do love the varlets, the honest varlets;
they have wit, and valour: and are indeed good profitable -- errant rogues, as
any live in an empire. Doest thou hear, POETASTER? second me. Stand up (MINOS)
close, gather, yet, so. Sir (thou shalt have a quarter share, be resolute) you
shall, at my request, take MINOS by the hand, here, little MINOS, I will have
it so; all friends, and a health: Be not inexorable. And thou shalt impart the
wine, old boy, thou shalt do it, little MINOS, thou shalt: make us pay it in our
physic. What? we must live, and honour the gods, sometimes; now BACCHVS, now
COMVS, now PRIAPVS: every god, a little. What's he, that stalks by, there?
boy, PYRGVS, you were best let him pass, sirrah; do, ferret, let him pass,
do.


'Tis a player, sir.


A player? Call him, call the lousy slave hither: what, will he sail by, and
not once strike, or veil to a Man of war? ha? do you hear? you, player,
rogue, stalker, come back here: no respect to men of worship, you slave? What,
you are proud, you rascal, are you proud? ha? you grow rich, do you? and
purchase, you two-penny teare-mouth? you have fortune, and the good year on
your side, you stinkard? you have? you have?


Nay, sweet Captain, be confined to some reason; I protest I saw you not, sir.


You did not? where was your sight, OEDIPVS? you walk with hares eyes, do
you? I'll have them glas'd, rogue; and you say the word, they shall be glazed
for you: come, we must have you turn fiddler again, slave, 'get a base violin
at your back, and march in a tawny coat, with one sleeve, to Goose-faire,
and then you'll know us; you'll see us then; you will, gulch, you will? Then,
will it please your worship to have any music, Captain?


Nay, good Captain.


What? do you laugh, Owleglas? death, you perstemptuous varlet, I am none of
your fellows: I have commanded a hundred and fifty such rogues, I.


I, and most of that hundred and fifty, have been leaders of a legion.


If I have exhibited wrong, I'll tender satisfaction, Captain.


Sai'st thou so, honest vermin? Give me thy hand, thou shalt make us a supper
one of these nights.


When you please, by JOVE, Captain, most willingly.


Doest thou 'sweare? to morrow then; say, and hold slave. There are some of you
players honest gent'man-like scoundrels, and suspected to have some wit, as well
as your poets; both at drinking, and breaking of jests: and are companions for
gallants. A man may skelder ye, now and then, of half a dozen shillings, or
so. Doest thou not know that PANTALABVS there?


No, I assure you, Captain.


Go, and be acquainted with him, then; he is a gent'man, parcell- poet, you
slave: his father was a man of worship, I tell thee. Go, he pens high, lofty,
in a new stalking strain; bigger then half the rimers in the town, again:
he was borne to fill thy mouth, MINOTAVRVS, he was: he will teach thee to
tear, and rand, Rascal, to him, cherish his muse, go: thou hast forty,
forty, shillings, I mean, stinkard, give him in earnest, do, he shall write
for thee, slave. If he pen for thee once, thou shalt not need to travel, with
thy pumps full of gravel, any more, after a blind jade and a hamper: and
stalk upon boards, and barrel heads, to an old cracked trumpet --


Troth, I think I have not so much about me, Captain.


It's no matter: give him what thou hast: Stiff ^oe, I'll give my word for the
rest: though it lack a shilling, or two, it skils not: Go, thou art an honest
shifter, I'll have the statute repeal'd for thee. MINOS, must tell thee, MINOS,
thou hast dejected you gent'mans spirit exceedingly: dost observe? dost note,
little MINOS?


Yes, sir.


Go to then, raise; recover, do. Suffer him not to droop, in prospect of a
player, a rogue, a stager: put twenty into his hand, twenty, ^esterces, I
mean, and let no body see: go, do it, the work shall commend it self, be
MINOS, I'll pay.


Yes forsooth, Captain.


Do not we serve a notable shark?


And what new matters have you now afoot, sirrah? ha? I would fain come with
my cockatrice one day, and see a play; if I knew when there were a good bawdy
one: but they say, you have nothing but humours, revels, and satyrs, that
gird, and fart at the time, you slave.


No, I assure you, Captain, not we. They are on the other side of Tyber: we
have as much ribaldry in our plays, as can be, as you would wish, Captain:
All the sinners, in the suburbs, come, and applaud our action, daily.


I hear, you'll bring me of the stage there; you'll play me, they say: I shall
be presented by a sort of copper-lac't scoundrels of you: life of PLVTO, and
you stage me, stinkard; your mansions shall sweat for it, your tabernacles,
varlets, your Globes, and your Triumphs.


Not we, by PHOEBVS, Captain* do not do us imputation without desert.


I wu' not, my good two-penny rascal: reach me thy neufe. Dost hear? What
wilt thou give me a week, for my brace of beagles, here, my little
point-trussers? you shall have them act among ye. Sirrah, you, pronounce. Thou
shalt hear him speak, in king DARIVS doleful strain.


O doleful days! O direful deadly dump!
O wicked world! and worldly wickedness!
How can I hold my fist from crying, thump,
In rue of this right rascal wretchedness!

In an amorous vain now, sirrah, peace.

O, she is wilder, and more hard, withal,
Then beast, or bird, or tree, or stony wall.
Yet might she love me, to vpreare her state:
I, but perhaps, she hopes some nobler mate.
Yet might she love me, to content her sire:
I, but her reason masters her desire.
Yet might she love me as her beauties thrall:
I, but I fear, she cannot love at all.

Now, the horrible fierce Soldier, you, sirrah.

What? will I brave thee? I, and beard thee too.
A roman spirit scorns to bear a brain,
So full of base pusillanimity.

Excellent.

Nay, thou shalt see that, shall ravish thee anon: prick up thine ears,
stinkard: the Ghost, boys.

Vindicta.

Timoria.

Vindicta.

Timoria.

Veni.

Veni.

Now, thunder, sirrah, you, the rumbling plaier.

I, but some body must cry (murder) then, in a small voice.

Your fellow-sharer, there, shall do it; Cry, sirrah, cry.

Murder, murder.

Who calls out murder? lady, was it you?

O, admirable good, I protest.

Sirrah, boy, brace your drum a little straighter, and do the the other fellow
there, he in the -- what sha' call him -- and yet, stay too.


Nay, and thou dalliest, then I am thy foe,
And fear shall force, what friendship cannot win;
Thy death shall bury what thy life conceals,
Villain! thou die, for more respecting her --

O, stay my Lord.

Then me: yet speak the truth, and I will guerdon thee:
But if thou dally once again, thou die.

Enough of this, boy.

Why then lament therefore: damned be thy guts unto king PLVTOES hell, and
princely EREBVS; for sparrows must have food.

'Pray, sweet Captain, let one of them do a little of a lady.

O! he will make thee eternally enamoured of him, there: do, sirrah, do:
'twill allay your fellows fury a little.

Master, mock on: the scorn thou gives me,
Pray JOVE, some lady may return on thee.

No: you shall see me do the Moore: Master, lend me your scarf a little.

Here, 'tis at thy service, boy.

You, master MINOS, hark hither a little.

How dost like him? art not rapt? art not tickled now? dost not applaud,
rascal? dost not applaud?

Yes: what will you ask for them a week, Captain?

No, you mangonizing slave, I will not part from them: you'll sell them for
enghles you: let's have good cheer to morrow-night at supper, stalker, and then
we'll talk, good capon, and plouer, do you hear, sirrah? and do not bring
your eating plaier with you there; I cannot away with him: He will eat a leg
of mutton, while I am in my porridge, the lean POLVPHAGVS, his belly is like
Barathrum, he looks like a midwife in mans apparel, the slave. Nor the
villanous-out-of-tune fiddler AENO^ARBVS, bring not him. What hast thou there?
six and thirty? ha?


No, here's all I have (Captain) some five and twenty. Pray, sir, will you
present, and accommodate it unto the gentleman: for mine own part, I am a
mere stranger to his humour: besides, I have some business invites me hence,
with Master ASINIVS LVPVS, the tribune.


Well: go thy ways: pursue thy proiects, let me alone with this desseigne;
my POETASTER shall make thee a play, and thou shalt be a man of good parts, in
it. But stay, let me see: Do not bring your AESOPE, your politician; unless
you can ram up his mouth with cloves: the slave smells ranker then some
sixteen dung-hills, and is seventeen times more rotten: Mary, you may bring
FRISKER, my zany: He's a good skipping swaggerer; and your fat fool there, my
MANGO, bring him too: but let him not beg rapiers, nor scarfes, in his
ouer-familiar playing face, nor roar out his barren bold jests, with a
tormenting laughter, between drunk, and dry. Do you hear, stiffe-toe? Give
him warning, admonition, to forsake his saw^y glauering grace, and his goggle
eye: it does not become him, sirrah: tell him so. I have stood up and defended
you I, to gent'men, when you have been said to prey upon pu'nees, and honest
citizens, for socks, or buskins: or when they have called you usurers, or
brokers, or said, you were able to help to a piece of flesh -- I have sworn,
I did not think so. Nor that you were the common retreats for punkes decayed
in their practice. I cannot believe it of you --


Thank you, Captain: IVPITER, and the rest of the gods confine your modern
delights, without disgust.


Stay, thou shalt see the Moore, ere thou go: what's he, with the
halfe-armes there, that salutes us out of his cloak, like a motion? ha?


O, sir, his dubblet's a little decayed; he is otherwise a very simple honest
fellow, sir, one DEMETRIVS, a dresser of plays about the town, here; we have
hired him to abuse HORACE, and bring him in, in a play, with all his gallants:
as, TIBVLLVS, MECOENAS, CORNELIVS GALLVS, and the rest.


And: why so, stinkard?


O, it will get us a huge deal of money (Captain) and we have need on it; for
this winter ha's made us all poorer, then so many starved snakes: No body
comes at us; not a gentleman, nor a --


But, you know nothing by him, do you, to make a play of?


Faith, not much, Captain: but our Author will devise, that, that shall serve
in some sort.


Why, my PARNASSVS, here, shall help him, if thou wilt: Can thy Author do it
impudently enough?


O, I warrant you, Captain, and spitefully enough, too; he ha's one of the
most ouer-flowing rank wits, in Rome. He will slander any man that breathes,
if he disgust him.


I'll know the poor, egregious, nitty rascal, and he have these commendable
qualities, I'll cherish him (stay, here comes the Tartar) I'll make a gathering
for him, I: a purse, and put the poor slave in fresh rags. Tell him so, to
comfort him: well said, boy.


Where art thou, boy? where is CALIPOLIS?
Fight earth-quakes, in the entrails of the earth,
And eastern whirle-windes in the hellish shades:
Some foul contagion of th'infected heavens
Blast all the trees; and in their cursed tops
The dismal night-rauen, and tragic owl
Breed, and become fore-runners of my fall.

Well, now fare thee well, my honest penny-biter: Commend me to seuen-shares
and a half, and remember to morrow -- if you lack a service, you shall play
in my name, rascals, but you shall buy your own cloth, and I'll have two
shares for my countenance. Let thy author stay with me.


Yes, sir.


'Twas well done, little MINOS, thou did stalk well; forgive me that I said
thou stunkst, MINOS: 'twas the savour of a poet, I met sweating in the street,
hangs yet in my nostrills.


Who? HORACE?


I; he, dost thou know him?


O, he forsook me most barbarously, I protest.


Hang him fusty satire, he smells all goat; he carries a ram, under his
arme-holes, the slave: I am the worse when I see him. Did not MINOS impart?


Yes, here are twenty drachmes, he did convey.


Well said, keep them, we'll share anon; come, little MINOS.


Faith, Captain, I'll be bold to show you a mistress of mine, a jewellers wife,
a gallant, as we go along.


There spoke my Genius. MINOS, some of thy eringoes, little MINOS; send: come
hither, PARNASSVS, I must have thee familiar with my little locust, here, 'tis a
good vermin, they say. See, here's HORACE, and old TREBATIVS, the great
lawyer, in his company; let's avoid him, now: He is too well seconded.



And past a satyrs law, t'extend my power:
Others, that think what ever I have writ
Wants pith, and matter to eternise it;
And that they could, in one days light, disclose
A thousand verses, such as I compose.
What shall I do, TREBATIVS? say.

Surcease.

And shall my Muse admit no more increase?

So I advise.

An ill death let me die.
If 'twere not best; but sleep avoids mine eye:
And I use these, lest nights should tedious seem.

Rather, contend to sleep, and live like them,
That holding golden sleep in special price,
Rubbed with sweet oils, swim silver Tyber thrice,
And every eu'en, with neat wine steeped be:
Or, if such love of writing ravish thee,
Then dare to sing vnconquer'd CAESARS deeds;
Who cheers such actions, with abundant meeds.

That, father, I desire; but when I try,
I feel defects in every faculty:
Nor is't a labour fit for every pen,
To paint the horrid troops of armed men;
The lances burst, in GALLIA'S slaughtered forces;
Or wounded Parthians, tumbled from their horses:
Great CAESARS wars cannot be fought with words.

Yet, what his virtue in his peace affords,
His fortitude, and justice thou can show;
As wise LVCILIVS, honoured SCIPIO.

Of that, my powers shall suffer no neglect,
When such slight labours may aspire respect:
But, if watch not a most chosen time,
The humble words of FLACCVS cannot clime
The attentive ear of CAESAR; nor must I
With less observance shun gross flattery:
For he, reposed safe in his own merit,
Spurns back the glosses of a fawning spirit.

But, how much better would such accents sound,
Then, with a sad, and serious verse to wound
PANTOLABVS, railing in his saucy jests?
Or NOMENTANVS spent in riotous feasts?
"In satyrs, each man (though untouched) complains
"As he were hurt; and hates such biting strains.

What shall I do? MILONIVS shakes his heals
In ceaslesse dances, when his brain once feels
The stirring fervor of the wine ascend;
And that his eyes false number apprehend.
CASTOR his horse; POLLVX loves handy fights:
Thousand heads, a thousand choice delights.
My pleasure is in feet, my words to close,
As, both our better, old LVCILIVS does:
He, as his trusty friends, his books did trust
With all his secrets; nor, in things unjust,
Or actions lawful, ran to other men:
So, that the old mans life, described was seen
As in a votiue table in his lines;
And to his steps my Genius inclines,
Lucanian, or Apulian, I not whether;
For the Venusian colonie plowes either:
Sent thither, when the Sabines were forced thence
(As old fame sings) to give the place defence
Against such, as seeing it empty, might make rode
Upon the empire; or there six abode:
Whether the Apulian borderer it were,
Or the Lucanian violence they fear.
But this my stile no living man shall touch,
If first I be not forced by base reproach;
But, like a sheathed sword, it shall defend
My innocent life; for, why should I contend
To draw it out, when no malicious thief
Robs my good name, the treasure of my life?
O IVPITER, let it with rust be eaten,
Before it touch, or insolently threaten
The life of any with the least disease;
So much I love, and woe a general peace.
But, he that wrongs me (better, I proclaim,
He never had assai'd to touch my fame.)
For he shall weep, and walk with every tongue
Throughout the city, infamously song.
SERVIVS, the Praetor, threats the laws, and urn,
If any at his deeds repine or spurn;
The witch, CANIDIA, that ALBVCIVS got,
Denounces witch-craft, where she loves not:
THVRIVS, the judge, doth thunder worlds of ill,
To such, as strive with his judicial will;
"All men affright their foes in what they may,
"Nature commands it, and men must obey.
Observe with me; "The wolf his tooth doth use:
"The bull his horne. And, who doth this infuse,
"But nature? There's luxurious SCAEVA; Trust
His long-liu'd mother with him; His so just
And scrupulous right hand no mischief will;
No more, then with his heel a wolf will kill,
Or Ox with iaw: Mary, let him alone
With tempered poison to remove the croane.
But, briefly, if to age I destined be,
Or that quick deaths black wings environ me;
If rich, or poor; at Rome; or fate command
I shall be banished to some other land;
What hew soever, my whole state shall bear,
I will write satyrs still, in spite of fear.

HORACE; I fear, thou draw no lasting breath:
And that some great mans friend will be thy death.

What? when the man that first did satyrise,
Durst pull the skin over the ears of vice;
And make, who stood in outward fashion clear,
Give place, as foul within; shall I forbear?
Did LAELIVS, or the man, so great with fame,
That from sacked Carthage fetched his worthy name,
Storm, that LVCILIVS did METELLVS pierce?
Or bury LVPVS quick, in famous verse?
Rulers, and subjects, by whole tribes he checked;
But virtue, and her friends did still protect:
And when from sight, or from the judgment seat,
The virtuous SCIPIO, and wise LAELIVS met,
Vnbrac't, with him in all light sports, they shared;
Till, their most frugal suppers were prepared.
What e're I am, though both for wealth, and wit;
Beneath LVCILIVS, I am pleased to sit,
Yet, envy (spite of her empoisoned breast)
Shall say, I lived in grace here, with the best;
And, seeking in weak trash to make her wound,
Shall find me solid, and her teeth unsound:
'Lesse, learned TREBATIVS censure disagree.

No, HORACE, I of force must yield to thee,
Only, take heed, as being advised by me,
Lest thou incur some danger: Better pause
Then rue thy ignorance of the sacred laws;
There's justice, and great action may be sued
Against such, as wrong men's fames with verses lewd.

I, with lewd verses; such as libels be,
And aimed at persons of good quality.
I reverence and adore that just decree:
But if they shall be sharp, yet modest rimes
That spare men's persons, and but tax their crimes,
Such, shall in open court, find currant pass*
Were CAESAR judge, and with the makers grace.

Nay, I'll add more; if thou thy self being clear,
Shalt tax in person a man, fit to boar
Shame, and reproach; his suit shall quickly be
Dissolved in laughter, and thou thence sit free.

But, sweet lady, say: am I well enough attired for the court, in sadness?


Well enough? excellent well, sweet Mistress CHLOE, this straight-bodied city
attire (I can tell you) will stir a courtiers blood, more, then the finest
loose sacks the ladies use to be put in; and then you are as well iewell'd as
any of them, your ruff, and linen about you, is much more pure then theirs:
And for your beauty, I can tell you, there's many of them would defy the
painter, if they could change with you. Mary, the worst is, you must look to
be envied, and endure a few courtfrumps for it.


O JOVE, Madam, I shall buy them too cheap! Give me my muffe, and my dog
there. And will the ladies be any thing familiar with me, think you?


O IVNO! why, you shall see them flock about you with their puff wings, and
ask you, where you bought your lawn? and what you paid for it? who starches
you? and entreat you to help them to some pure laundresses, out of the city.


O CUPID! give me my fan, and my masque too: And will the lords, and the
poets there, use one well too, lady?


Doubt not of that: you shall have kisses from them, go pit-pat, pit-pat,
pit-pat, upon your lips, as thick as stones out of slings, at the assault of a
city. And then your ears will be so furd with the breath of their
complements, that you cannot catch cold of your head (if you would) in three
winters after.


Thank you, sweet lady. O heaven! And how must one behave her self amongst
them? you know all.


Faith, impudently enough, mistress CHLOE, and well enough. Carry not too much
vnder-thought betwixt your self and them; nor your city mannerly word
(forsooth) use it not too often in any case; but plain, I, Madam; and, No,
Madam: Nor never say, your Lordship, nor your Honour; but, you, and you my Lord,
and my Lady: the other, they count too simple, and minsitiue. And though they
desire to kiss heaven with their titles, yet they will count them fools that
give them too humbly.


O intolerable, IVPITER! By my troth, lady, I would not for a world, but you
had lain in my house: and in faith you shall not pay a farthing, for your
board, nor your chambers.


O, sweet Mistress CHLOE!


I faith, you shall not lady, nay, good lady, do not offer it.


COme, where be these ladies? By your leave, bright stars, this gentleman and
I are come to man you to court: where your late kind entertainment is now to
be requited with a heavenly banquet.


A heavenly banquet, Gallus?


No less, my dear, CYTHERIS.


That were not strange, lady, if the epithet were only given for the
company invited thither; your self, and this fair gentlewoman.


Are we invited to court, sir?


You are, lady, by the great Princess, IVLIA: who longs to greet you with any
favours, that may worthily make you an often courtier.


In sincerity, I thank her, sir. You have a coach? have you not?


The Princess hath sent her own, lady.


O VENVS! that's well: I do long to ride in a coach most vehemently.


But, sweet GALLVS, pray you, resolve me, why you give that heavenly praise,
to this earthly banquet?


Because (CYTHERIS) it must be celebrated by the heavenly powers: All the
Gods, and Goddesses will be there; to two of which, you two must be exalted.


A pretty fiction in truth.


A fiction indeed, CHLOE, and fit, for the fit of a poet.


Why, CYTHERIS, may not poets (from whose divine spirits, all the honours of
the gods have been deduc't) entreat so much honour of the gods, to have their
divine presence at a poetical banquet?


Suppose that no fiction: yet, where are your habilities to make us two
goddesses, at your feast?


Who knows not (CYTHERIS) that the sacred breath of a true poet, can blow any
virtuous humanity, up to deity?


To tell you the female truth (which is the simple truth) ladies; and to show
that poets (in spite of the world) are able to deify themselves: At this
banquet, to which you are invited, we intend to assume the figures of the
Gods; and to give our several Loves the forms of Goddesses. OVID will be
IVPITER; the Princess IVLIA, IVNO; GALLVS here APOLLO; you CYTHERIS, PALLAS; I
will be BACCHVS; and my Love PLAVTIA, CERES: And to install you, and your
husband, fair CHLOE, in honours, equal with ours; you shall be a Goddess,
and your husband a God.


A God? O my god!


A God, but a lame God, lady: for he shall be VULCAN, and you VENVS. And this
will make our banquet no less then heavenly.


In sincerity, it will be sugared. Good JOVE, what a pretty foolish thing it
is to be a poet! But hark you, sweet CYTHERIS; could they not possibly leave
out my husband? me thinks, a bodies husband does not so well at Court: A
bodies friend, or so -- but husband, 'tis like your clog to your marmaset, for
all the world, and the heavens.


Tut, never fear, CHLOE: your husband will be left without in the lobby, or
the great chamber, when you shall be put in, in the closet, by this lord, and by
that lady.


Nay, then I am certified: he shall go.


HORACE! Welcome.

Gentlemen, hear you the news?


What news, my QVINTVS?


Our melancholic friend, PROPERTIVS,
Hath closed himself, up, in his CYNTHIAS tomb;
And will by no entreaties be drawn thence.

Nay, good master CRISPINVS, pray you, bring near the gentleman.


CRISPINVS? Hide me, good GALLVS: TIBVLLVS, shelter me.


Make your approach, sweet Captain.


What means this, HORACE?


I am surprised again, farewell.


Stay, HORACE.


What, and be tired on, by yond' vulture? No:
PHoe^VS defend me.

'Slight! I hold my life,
This same is he met him in holy street.

Troth, 'tis like enough. This act of PROPERTIVS relishes very strange, with
me.


By thy leave, my neat scoundrell: what, is this the mad boy you talked on?


I: this is master ALBIVS, Captain.


Give me thy hand, AGAMEMNON; we hear abroad, thou art the HECTOR of citizens:
what say thou? are we welcome to thee, noble NEOPTOLEMVS?


Welcome, Captain? by JOVE, and all the Gods in the capital --


No more, we conceive thee. Which of these is thy wedlock, MENELAVS? thy
HELLEN? thy LVCRECE? that we may do her honour; mad boy?


She in the little fine dressing, sir, is my Mistress.


For fault of a better, sir.


A better, profane rascal? I cry thee mercy (my good scroile) was't thou?


No harm, Captain.


She is a VENVS, a VESTA, a MELPOMENE: Come hither, PENELOPE; what's thy name,
IRIS?


My name is CHLOE, sir; I am a gentlewoman.


Thou art in merit to be an empress (CHLOE) for an eye, and a lip; thou hast
an emperors nose: kiss me again: 'tis a virtuous punk, So. Before JOVE, the
gods were a sort of goslings, when they suffered so sweet a breath, to perfume
the bed of a stinkard: thou had ill fortune, THISBE; the fates were
infatuate; they were, punk; they were.


That's sure, sir: let me crave your name, I pray you, sir.


I am know'n by the name of Captain TVCCA, punk; the noble Roman, punk: a
gent'man, and a commander, punk.


In good time: a gentleman, and a commander? that's as good as a poet, me
thinks.


A pretty instrument! It's my cousin CYTHERIS viol, this: is't not?


Nay, play cousin, it wants but such a voice, and hand, to grace it, as yours
is.


Alas, cousin, you are merrily inspired.


'Pray you play, if you love me.


Yes, cousin: you know, I do not hate you.


A most subtle wench! How she hath baited him with a viol yonder, for a song!


Cousin, 'pray you call mistress CHLOE; she shall hear an essay of my poetry.


I'll call her. Come hither, cockatrice: here's one, will set thee up, my sweet
punk; set thee up.


Are you a puet, so soon, sir?


Wife: mum.

Love is blind, and a wanton;
In the whole world, there is scant*
one such another:
No, not his Mother.
He hath plucked her doves, and sparrows,
To feather his sharpe arrows,
And alone prevails,
Whilst sick VENVS waileth.
But if CYPRIS once recover
The wag; it shall behove her
To look better to him:
Or she will undo him.

O, most odoriferous music!


A, ha! stinkard. Another ORPHEVS, you slave, another ORPHEVS! an ARION, riding
on the back of a dolphin, rascal!


Have you a copy of this ditty, sir?


Master ALBIVS ha's.


I, but in truth, they are my wives verses; I must not show them.


Show them, bankerupt, show them; they have salt in them, and will brooke the
air, stinkard.


How? to his bright mistress, CANIDIA?


I, sir, that's but a borrowed name; as OVIDS CORINNA, or PROPERTIVS his
CYNTHIA, or your NEMESIS, or DELIA, TIBVLLVS.


It's the name of HORACE his witch, as I remember.


Why? the ditt'is all borrowed; 'tis HORACES: hang him plagiary.


How? he borrow of HORACE? he shall pawn himself to ten brokers, first. Do
you hear, POETASTERS? I know you to be men of worship -- He shall write with
HORACE, for a talent: and let MECoeNAS, and his whole college of critics take
his part: thou shalt do it, young PHOEBVS: thou shalt, PHAETON; thou shalt.


Alas, sir, HORACE! he is a mere sponge; nothing but humours, and
observation, he goes up and down sucking from every society, and when he
comes home, squeazes himself dry again. I know him, I.


Thou says true, my poor poetical Fury, he will pen all he knows. A
sharpe thornie-tooth'd satirical rascal, fly him; he carries hey in his
horne: he will sooner lose his best friend, then his least jest. What he once
drops upon paper, against a man, lives eternally to upbraid him in the mouth of
every slave tankerd-bearer, or water-man; not a bawd, or a boy that comes from
the bake-house, but shall point at him: 'tis all dog, and scorpion; he
carries poison in his teeth, and a sting in his tail. Fough, body of JOVE!
I'll have the slave whipped one of these days for his satyrs, and his humours,
by one casheer'd clarke, or another.


We'll vnder-take him, Captain.


I, and tickle him in faith, for his arrogance, and his impudence, in
commending his own things; and for his translating: I can trace him in faith.
O, he is the most open fellow, living; I had as lieve as a new suit, I were at
it.


Say no more then, but do it; 'tis the only way to get thee a new suit; sting
him* my little neufts; I'll give you instructions: I'll be your intelligencer,
we'll all join, and hang upon him like so many horse-leaches, the players and
all. We shall sup together, soon; and then we'll conspire, in faith.


O, that HORACE had stayed still, here.


So would not I: for both these would have turned Pythagoreans, then.


What, mute?


I, as fishes i'faith: come, ladies, shall we go?


We await you, sir. But mistress CHLOE asks, if you have not a god to spare,
for this gentleman.


Who, Captain TVCCA?


I; he.


Yes, if we can inuit him along, he shall be MARS.


Ha's MARS any thing to do with VENVS?


O, most of all, lady.


Nay, then, I pray let him be invited: and what shall CRISPINVS be?


MERCVRY, mistress CHLOE.


MERCVRY? that's a Poet? is't?


No, lady; but somewhat inclining that way: he is a Herald at arms.


A Herald at arms? good: and MERCVRY? pretty: he ha's to do with VENVS, too?


A little, with her face, lady; or so.


'Tis very well; pray let's go, I long to be at it.


Gentlemen, shall we'pray your companies along?


You shall not only pray, but preuaile, lady. Come, sweet Captain.


Yes, I follow: but thou must not talk of this now, my little bankerupt.


Captain, look here: mum.


I'll go write, sir.


Do, do, stay: there's a drachme, to purchase ginger-bread, for thy muse.


COme, let us talk, here; here we may be private: shut the door,


You are a plaier, you say.


I, and't please your worship.


Good: and how are you able to give this intelligence?


Mary, sir, they directed a letter to me, and my fellow-sharers.


Speak lower, you are not now i'your theater, Stager: my sword, knave. They
directed a letter to you, and your fellow-sharers: forward.


Yes, sir; to hire some of our properties; as a sceptre, and a crown, for
JOVE; and a caduceus for MERCVRY: and a petasus --


Caduceus? and petasus? Let me see your letter. This is a conjuration; a
conspiracy, this. Quickly, on with my buskins: I'll act a tragoedie, in faith.
Will nothing but our gods serve these poets to profane? dispatch. Plaier, I
thank thee. The Emperor shall take knowledge of thy good service. Who's there
now? Look, knave. A crown, and a sceptre? this is good: rebellion, now?


'Tis your pothecary, sir, master MINOS.


What tell thou me of apothecaries, knave? Tell him; I have affairs of
state, in hand; I can talk to no apothecaries, now. Heart of me! Stay the
pothecary there.

You shall see, I have fish't out a cunning piece of plot now: They have had
some intelligence, that their project is discovered, and now have they dealt
with my pothecary, to poison me; 'tis so; knowing, that I meant to take physic
to day: As sure as death, 'tis there. IVPITER, I thank thee, that thou hast
yet made me so much of a politician. You are welcome, sir; take the potion from
him there; I have an antidote more then you wot off, sir; throw it on the
ground there: So. Now fetch in the dog; And yet we cannot tarry to try
experiments, now: arrest him, you shall go with me, sir; I'll tickle you,
apothecary; I'll give you a glister, in faith. Have I the letter? I* 'tis here.
Come, your fasces, LICTORS: The half pikes, and the halberds, take them down
from the lares, there. Plaier, assist me.


Whither now, ASINIVS LVPVS, with this armoury?


I cannot talk now; I charge you, assist me: Treason, treason.


How? treason?


I: if you love the Emperor, and the state, follow me.


GOds, and Goddesses, take your several seats. Now, M^RCVRY, move your
caduceus, and in IVPITERS name command silence.


In the name of IVPITER; silence.


The crier of the court hath too clarified a voice.


Peace, Momus.


Oh, he is the God of reprehension; let him alone. 'Tis his office. MERCVRY,
go forward, and proclaim after PHOEBVS, our high pleasure, to all the Deities
that shall partake this high banquet.


Yes, sir.


The great God, IVPITER,
Of his licentious goodness,
Willing to make this feast, no fast
From any manner of pleasure;
Nor to bind any God or Goddess,
To be any thing the more god or goddess, for their names:
He gives them all free licence,
To speak no wiser, then persons of baser titles;
And to be nothing better* then common men, or women.
And therefore no God
Shall need to keep himself more strictly to his Goddess,
Then any man does to his wife.
Nor any Goddess
Shall need to keep her self more strictly to her God,
Then any woman does to her husband.
But, since it is no part of wisdom,
In these days, to come into bonds;
It shall be lawful for every lover,
To break loving oaths,
To change their lovers, and make love to others,
As the heate of every ones blood,
And the spirit of our nectar shall inspire.
And IVPITER, save IVPITER.

The great, c.
Of his, c.
Willing, c.
From any, c.
Nor to, c.
To be, c.
He gives, c.
To speak, c.
And to, c.
And there, c.
Shall need, c.
Then any* c.
Nor any, c.
Shall need, c.
Then any, c.
But, since, c.
In these, c.
It shall, c.
To break, c.
To change, c.
As the, c.
And the, c.
And IVPI. c.

So: now we may play the fools, by authority.


To play the fool by authority, is wisdom.


Away with your matterie sentences, Momus; they are too grave, and wise, for
this meeting.


MERCVRY, give our jester a stool, let him sit by; and reach him of our cates.


Dost hear, mad IVPITER? We'll have it enacted; He, that speaks the first
wise word, shall be made cuckold. What sai'st thou? Is't not a good motion?


Deities, are you all agreed?


Agreed, great IVPITER.


I have read in a book, that to play the fool wisely, is high wisdom.


How now, VULCAN! will you be the first wizard?


Take his wife, MARS, and make him cuckold, quickly.


Come, cockatrice.


No, let me alone with him, IVPITER: I'll make you take heed, sir, while you
live again; if there be twelve in a company, that you be not the wisest of
them.


No more, I will not indeed, wife, hereafter; I'll be here: mum.


Fill us a bowl of nectar, GANYMEDE: we will drink to our daughter VENVS.


Look to your wife, VULCAN: IVPITER begins to court her.


Nay, let MARS look to it: VULCAN must do, as VENVS does, bear.


Sirrah, boy: catamite. Look, you play GANYMEDE well now, you slave. Do not
spill your nectar; Carry your cup even: so. You should have rubbed your face,
with whites of eggs, you rascal; till your brows had shone like our sooty
brothers here, as sleek as a horn-booke: or have steeped your lips in wine, till
you made them so plump, that IVNO might have been jealous of'hem. Punk, kiss
me, punk.


Here, daughter VENVS, I drink to thee.


'Thanke you, good father IVPITER.


Why, mother IVNO! gods and fiends! what, wilt thou suffer this ocular
temptation?


MARS is enraged, he looks big, and begins to stut, for anger.


Well plaid, Captain MARS.


Well said, minstrel MOMVS: I must put you in? must I? When will you be in
good fooling of your self, fiddler? never?


O, 'tis our fashion, to be silent, when there is a better fool in place,
ever.


'Thanke you, rascal.


Fill to our daughter VENVS, GANYMEDE, who fills her father with affection.


Wilt thou be ranging, IVPITER, before my face?


Why not, IVNO? why should IVPITER stand in awe of thy face, IVNO?


Because it is thy wives face, IVPITER.


What, shall a husband be afraid of his wives face? will she paint it so
horribly? We are a King, cot-queane; and we will reign in our pleasures; and
we will cudgel thee to death, if thou find fault with us.


I will find fault with thee, King cuckold-maker: what, shall the King of gods
turn the King of good fellows, and have no fellow in wickedness? This makes
our poets, that know our profaneness, live as profane, as we: By my
god-head, IVPITER; I will join with all the other gods, here; bind thee hand
and foot; throw thee down into earth; and make a poor poet of thee, if thou
abuse me thus.


A good smart-tongu'd Goddess; a right IVNO.


IVNO, we will cudgel thee, IVNO: we told thee so yesterday, when thou were
jealous of us, for THETIS.


Nay, to day she had me in inquisition too.


Well said, my sine Phrygian fry, inform, inform. Give me some wine (King
of Heralds) I may drink to my cockatrice.


No more, GANYMEDE, we will cudgel thee, IVNO: by S^YX, we will.


I, 'tis well, Gods may grow impudent in iniquity, and they must not be told
of it --


Yea, we will knock our chin against our breast; and shake thee out of
Olympus, into an oyster-bote, for thy scolding.


Your nose is not long enough to do it, IVPITER, if all thy strumpets, thou
hast among the stars, took thy part. And there is never a star in thy
fore-head, but shall be a horne, if thou persist to abuse me.


A good jest, in faith.


We tell thee, thou anger'st us, cot-queane; and we will thunder thee in
pieces, for thy cot-queanitie.


Another good jest.


O, my hammers, and my Cyclops! this boy fills not wine enough, to make us kind
enough, to one another.


Nor thou hast not collied thy face enough, stinkard.


I'll ply the table with nectar, and make them friends.


Heaven is like to have but a lame skinker, then.


"Wine, and good livers, make true lovers: I'll sentence them together. Here
father, here mother, for shame, drink your selves drunk, and forget this
dissention: you two should cling together, before our faces, and give us
example of unity.


O, excellently spoken, VULCAN, on the sudden!


IVPITER, may do well to prefer his tongue to some office, for his
eloquence.


His tongue shall be gent'man usher to his wit, and still go before it.


An excellent fit office!


I, and an excellent good jest, besides.


What, have you hired MERCVRY, to cry your jests you make?


MOMVS, you are envious.


Why, you whoreson block-head, 'tis your only block of wit in fashion (now
adays) to applaud other folks jests.


True: with those that are not artificers themselves. VULCAN, you nod; and the
mirth of the jest droops.


He ha's filled nectar so long, till his brain swims in it.


What, do we nod, fellow Gods? sound music, and let us startle our spirits
with a song.


Do, APOLLO: thou art a good musician.


What says IVPITER?


Ha? ha?


A song.


Why, do, do, sing.


BACCHVS, what say you?


CERES?


But, to this song?


Sing, for my part.


Your belly weighs down your head, BACCHVS: here's a song toward.


Begin, VULCAN --


What else? what else?


Say, IVPITER --


MERCVRY --


I, say, say --

WAke, our mirth begins to die:
Quicken it with tunes, and wine:
Raise your notes, you're out: fie, fie,
This drouzinesse is an ill sign.
We banish him the queer of Gods,
That droops again:
Then all are men,
For here's not one, but nods.

I like not this sudden and general heaviness, amongst our Godheads: 'Tis
somewhat ominous. APOLLO, command us louder music, and let MERCVRY, and MOMVS
contend to please, and revive our senses.


THen, in a free and lofty strain,
Our broken tunes we thus repair;

And we answer them again,
Running division on the panting air:

To celebrate this feast of sense,
As free from scandal, as offence.

Here is beauty, for the eye;

For the ear, sweet melody;

Ambrosiack odours, for the smell;

Delicious nectar, for the taste;

For the touch, a ladies waste;
Which doth all the rest excel!

I: This hath waked us. MERCVRY, our Herald; Go from our self, the great God
IVPITER, to the great Emperor, AVGVSTVS CAESAR: And command him, from us (of
whose bounty he hath received his sir-name, AVGVSTVS) that for a
thanke-offring to our beneficence, he presently sacrifice as a dish to this
banquet, his beautiful and wanton daughter IVLIA. She's a cursed queen, tell
him; and plays the scold behind his back: Therefore, let her be sacrificed.
Command him this, MERCVRY, in our high name of IVPITER ALTITONANS.


Stay, feather-footed MERCVRY, and tell AVGVSTVS, from us, the great IVNO
SATVRNIA; if he think it hard to do, as IVPITER hath commanded him, and
sacrifice his daughter, that he had better to do so ten times, then suffer
her to love the well-nos'd poet, OVID: whom he shall do well to whip, or cause
to be whipped, about the capital, for soothing her, in her follies.


WHat sight is this? MECOENAS! HORACE! say!
Have we our senses? Do we hear? and see?
Or, are these but imaginary objects
Drawn by our fantasy? Why speak you not?
Let us do sacrifice? Are they the Gods?
Reverence, amaze, and fury fight in me.
What? do they kneel? Nay, then I see 'tis true
I thought impossible: O, impious sight!
Let me divert mine eyes; the very thought
Euerts my soul, with passion: look not, man.
There is a panther, whose unnatural eyes
Will strike thee dead: turn then, and die on her
With her own death.

HORACE. What means imperial CAESAR?

What, would you have me let the strumpet live,
That, for this pageant, earnes so many deaths?

Boy, slink boy.

'Pray IVPITER, we be not follow'd by the sent, Master.

Say, sir, what are you?

I play VULCAN, sir.

But, what are you* sir?

Your citizen, and jeweller, sir.

And what are you, dame?

I play VENVS, forsooth.

I ask not, what you play? but, what you are?

Your citizen, and jewellers wife, sir.

And you, good sir?

Your gentleman, parcell- poet, sir.

O, that profaned name!
And are these seemly company for thee,
Degenerate monster? all the rest I know,
And hate all knowledge, for their hateful sakes.
Are you, that first the deities inspired
With skill of their high natures, and their powers,
The first abusers of their vse-full light;
Profaning thus their dignities, in their forms:
And making them like you, but counterfeits?
O, who shall follow virtue, and embrace her,
When her false bosom is found nought but air?
And yet, of those embraces, centaurs spring,
That war with humane peace, and poison men.
Who shall, with greater comforts, comprehend
Her unseen being, and her excellence;
When you, that teach, and should eternize her,
Live, as she were no law unto your lives:
Nor lived her self, but with your idle breaths?
If you think gods but feigned, and virtue painted,
Know, we sustain an actual residence;
And, with the title of an Emperor,
Retain his spirit, and imperial power:
By which (in imposition too remiss,
Licentious NASO, for thy violent wrong,
In soothing the declined affections
Of our base daughter) we exile thy feet
From all approach, to our imperial court,
On pain of death: and thy mis-gotten love
Commit to patronage of iron doors;
Since her soft-hearted ^ire cannot contain her.

O, good my lord; forgive: be like the Gods.

Let royal bounty (CAESAR) mediate.

There is no bounty to be showed to such,
As have no real goodness: Bounty is
A spice of virtue: and what virtuous act
Can take effect on them, that have no power
Of equal habitude to apprehend it,
But live in worship of that idol vice,
As if there were no virtue, but in shade
Of strong imagination, merely enforced?
This shows, their knowledge is mere ignorance;
Their farre-fetcht dignity of soul, a phansy;
And all their square pretext of gravity
A mere vain glory: hence, away with them.
I will prefer for knowledge, none, but such
As rule their lives by it, and can becalme
All sea of humour, with the marble trident
Of their strong spirits: Others fight below
With gnats, and shadows, others nothing know.

WHat's become of my little punk, VENVS! and the poult-foot stinkard, her
husband? ha?


O, they are rid home in the coach, as fast as the wheels can run.


God IVPITER is banished, I hear: and his cockatrice, IVNO, locked up: 'Hart;
and and all the poetry in Parnassus get me to be a player again, I'll sell
them my share for a sesterce. But this is humours, HORACE, that goat-footed
envious slave; he's turned fawn now, an informer, the rogue: 'tis he has
betrayed us all. Did you not see him, with the Emperor, crouching?


Yes.


Well, follow me. Thou shalt libel, and I'll cudgel the rascal. Boy, provide
me a truncheon; Revenge shall gratulate him, tam MARTI, quam MERCVRIO.


I, but Master; take heed how you give this out, HORACE is a man of the sword.


'Tis true, in troth: they say, he's valiant.


Valiant? so is mine arse, gods, and fiends! I'll blow him into air, when I
meet him next: He dares not fight with a puck-fist.


Master, here he comes.


Where? IVPITER save thee, my good poet; my noble prophet; my little fat
HORACE. I scorn to beat the rogue in the court; and I saluted him, thus
fair, because he should suspect nothing, the rascal: Come, we'll go see
how forward our iourney-man is toward the untrussing of him.


Do you hear, Captain? I'll write nothing in it but innocence: because I may
swear I am innocent.


Nay, why pursue you not the Emperor for your reward, now, LVPVS?


Stay, ASINIVS; you, and your stager, and your band of LICTORS:
I hope your service merits more respect,
Then thus, without a thanks, to be sent hence?

Well, well, jest on, jest on.

Thou base unworthy groom.

I, I, 'tis good.

Was this the treason? this, the dangerous plot,
Thy clamorous tongue so bellowed through the court?
Had thou no other project to increase
Thy grace with CAESAR, but this wolfish train;
To prey upon the life of innocent mirth,
And harmless pleasures, bred, of noble wit?
Away, I loathe thy presence: such as thou,
They are the moths, and scarabes of a state;
The bane of empires; and the dregs of courts;
Who (to endear themselves to any 'employment)
Care not, whose fame they blast; whose life they endanger:
And under a disguised, and cob-web masque
Of love, unto their sovereign, vomit forth
Their own prodigious malice; and pretending
To be the props, and columns of his safety,
The guards unto his person, and his peace,
Disturb it most, with their false lapwing-cries.

Good. CAESAR shall know of this; believe it.

CAESAR doth know it (wolf) and to his knowledge,
He will (I hope) reward your base endeavours.
"Princes that will but hear, or give access
"To such officious spies, can ne'er be safe:
"They take in poison, with an open care,
"And, free from danger, become slaves to fear.

Banished the court? Let me be banished life;
Since the chief end of life is there concluded:
Within the court, is all the kingdom bounded,
And as her sacred sphere doth comprehend
Ten thousand times so much, as so much place
In any part of all the empire else;
So every body, moving in her sphere,
Contains ten thousand times as much in him,
As any other, her choice orb excludes.
As in a circle, a magician, then
Is safe, against the spirit, he excites;
But out of it, is subject to his rage,
And loses all the virtue of his art:
So I, exiled the circle of the court,
Lose all the good gifts, that in it I joyed.
"No virtue currant is, but with her stamp:
"And no vice vicious, blaunch't with her white hand.
The court's the abstract of all Romes desert;
And my dear IVLIA, th'abstract of the court.
Me thinks, now I come near her, I respire
Some air of that late comfort, I received:
And while the evening, with her modest veil,
Gives leave to such poor shadows as my self,
To steal abroad, I, like a heart-lesse ghost,
Without the living body of my love,
Will here walk, and attend her. For I know,
Not far from hence, she is imprisoned,
And hopes, of her strict guardian, to bribe
So much admittance, as to speak to me,
And cheer my fainting spirits, with her breath.

OVID? my love?

Here, heavenly IVLIA.

Here? and not here? O, how that word doth play
With both our fortunes, differing, like our selves,
Both one; and yet divided, as opposed?
I high, thou low? O, this our plight of place
Doubly presents the two lets of our love,
Local, and ceremonial height, and lowness:
Both ways, I am too high, and thou too low.
Our minds are even, yet: O, why should our bodies,
That are their slaves, be so without their rule?
I'll cast my self down to thee; If I die,
I'll ever live with thee: no height of birth,
Of place, of duty, or of cruel power,
Shall keep me from thee; should my father locke
This body up within a tomb of brass,
Yet I'll be with thee. If the forms, I hold
Now in my soul, be made one substance with it;
That soul immortal; and the same 'tis now;
Death cannot raze th'affects, she now retains:
And then, may she be any where she will.
The souls of parents rule not childrens souls,
When death sets both in their dissolved estates;
Then is no child, nor father: then eternity
Frees all, from any temporal respect.
I come, my OVID, take me in thine arms:
And let me breathe my soul into thy breast.

O, stay, my love: the hopes thou dost conceive
Of thy quick death, and of thy future life,
Are not autenticall. Thou choose death,
So thou might joy thy love, in the other life.
But know (my princely love) when thou art dead,
Thou only must survive in perfect soul;
And in the soul, are no affections:
We power out our affections with our blood;
And with our bloods affections, fade our loves.
"No life hath love in such sweet state, as this;
"No essence is so dear to moody sense,
"As flesh, and blood; whose quintessence is sense.
"Beauty, composed of blood, and flesh, moves more,
"And is more plausible to blood, and flesh,
"Then spiritual beauty can be to the spirit.
Such apprehension, as we have in dreams
(When sleep, the bond of senses, locks them up)
Such shall we have, when death destroies them quite.
If love be then thy object, change not life;
Live high, and happy still: I still below,
Close with my fortunes, in thy height, shall joy.

Ay me, that virtue, whose brave eagles wings
With every stroke, blow stars, in burning heaven;
Should like a swallow (preying toward storms)
Fly close to earth: and with an eager plume,
Pursue those objects, which none else can see,
But seem to all the world, the empty air.
Thus thou (poor OVID) and all virtuous men
Must prey like swallows, on invisible food;
Pursuing flies, or nothing: and thus love,
And every worldly fancy, is transpos'd,
By worldly tyranny, to what plight it list.
O, father, since thou gau'st me not my mind,
Strive not to rule it: Take, but what thou gau'st
To thy disposure. Thy affections
Rule not in me; I must bear all my griefs,
Let me use all my pleasures: virtuous love
Was never scandal to a Goddess state.
But, he's inflexible! and, my dear love,
Thy life may chance be shortened, by the length
Of my unwilling speeches to depart.
Farewell, sweet life: though thou be yet exiled
Th'officious court, enjoy me amply, still:
My soul, in this my breath, enters thine ears,
And on this turrets floor, will I lie dead,
Till we may meet again. In this proud height,
I kneel beneath thee, in my prostrate love,
And kiss the happy sands, that kiss thy feet.
"Great JOVE submits a sceptre, to a cell;
"And lovers, ere they part, will meet in hell.

Farewell, all company; and if I could
All light with thee: hells shade should hide my brows,
Till thy dear beauties beams redeemed my vows.

OVID, my love: alas, may we not stay
A little longer (think thou) vndiscern'd?

For thine own good, fair Goddess, do not stay:
Who would engage a firmament of fires,
Shining in thee, for me, a falling star?
Be gone, sweet life-bloud: if I should discern
Thy self but touched, for my sake, I should die.

I will be gone, then; and not heaven it self
Shall draw me back.

Yet IVLIA, if thou wilt,
A little longer, stay.

I am content.

O, mighty OVID! what the sway of heaven
Could not retire, my breath hath turned back.

Who shall go first, my love? my passionate eyes
Will not endure to see thee turn from me.

If thou go first, my soul will follow thee.

Then we must stay.

Ay me, there is no stay
In amorous pleasures: if both stay, both die.
I hear thy father, hence, my deity.
Fear forges sounds in my deluded ears;
I did not hear him: I am mad with love.
There is no spirit, under heaven, that works
With such illusion: yet such witchcraft kill me,
Ere a sound mind, without it, save my life.
Here, on my knees, I worship the blessed place
That held my goddess; and the loving air,
That closed her body in his silken arms:
Vain OVID! kneel not to the place, nor air;
She's in thy heart: rise then, and worship there*
"The truest wisdom silly men can have,
"Is dotage, on the follies of their flesh.

WE, that have conquered still, to save the conquered,
And loved to make inflictions feared, not felt;
Grieved to reprove, and joyful to reward,
More proud of reconcilement, then revenge,
Resume into the late state of our love,
Worthy CORNELIVS GALLVS, and TIBVLLVS:
You both are gentlemen, you, CORNELIVS,
A soldier of renown; and the first provost,
That ever let our Roman eagles fly
On swarthy Egypt, quarried with her spoils.
Yet (not to bear cold forms, nor men's out-termes,
Without the inward fires, and lives of men)
You both have virtues, shining through your shapes;
To show, your titles are not writ on posts,
Or hollow statues, which the best men are,
Without Promethean stuffings reached from heaven!
Sweet poesies sacred garlands crown your gentry:
Which is, of all the faculties on earth,
The most abstract, and perfect; if she be
True borne, and nursed with all the sciences.
She can so mould Rome, and her monuments,
Within the liquid marble of her lines,
That they shall stand fresh, and miraculous,
Even, when they mix with innouating dust;
In her sweet streams shall our brave Roman spirits
Chase, and swim after death, with their choice deeds
Shining on their white shoulders; and therein
Shall Tyber, and our famous rivers fall
With such attraction, that th'ambitious line
Of the round world shall to her center shrink,
To hear their music: And, for these high parts,
CAESAR shall reverence the Pierian arts.

Your Majesties high grace to poesy,
Shall stand against all the dull detractions
Of leaden souls; who (for the vain assumings
Of some, quite worthless of her sovereign wreaths)
Contain her worthiest prophets in contempt.

Happy is Rome of all earths other states,
To have so true, and great a president,
For her inferior spirits to imitate,
As CAESAR is; who adds to the sun,
Influence, and lustre: in increasing thus
His inspirations, kindling fire in us.

PHOEBVS himself shall kneel at CAESARS shrine,
And deck it with bay-garlands dewed with wine,
To quite the worship CAESAR does to him:
Where other Princes, hoisted to their thrones
By fortunes passionate and disordered power,
Sit in their height, like clouds, before the sun,
Hindering his comforts; and (by their excess
Of cold in virtue, and cross heate in vice)
Thunder, and tempest, on those learned heads,
Whom CAESAR with such honour doth advance.

All humane business fortune doth command
Without all order; and with her blind hand,
She, blind, bestows blind gifts: that still have nursed
They see not who, nor how, but still, the worst.

CAESAR, for his rule, and for so much stuff
As fortune puts in his hand, shall dispose it
(As if his hand had eyes, and soul, in it)
With worth and judgment. "Hands, that part with gifts,
"Or will restrain their use, without desert;
"Or with a misery, numm'd to virtues right,
"Work, as they had no soul to govern them,
"And quite reject her: seu'ring their estates
"From humane order. Whosoever can,
"And will not cherish virtue, is no man.

VIRGIL is now at hand, imperial CAESAR.

Romes honour is at hand then. Fetch a chair,
And set it on our right hand; where 'tis fit.
Romes honour, and our own, should ever sit.
Now he is come out of Campania,
I doubt not, he hath finished all his Aeneids,
Which, like another soul, I long t'enioy.
What think
(That are of his profession, though ranked higher)
Or HORACE, what say thou, that art the poorest,
And like lie to envy, or to detract?

CAESAR speaks after common men, in this,
To make a difference of me, for my poorness:
As if the filth of poverty sunk as deep
Into a knowing spirit, as the bane
Of riches doth, into an ignorant soul.
No, CAESAR, they be path-lesse, moorish minds,
That being once made rotten with the dung
Of damned riches, ever after sink
Beneath the steps of any villainy.
But knowledge is the nectar, that keeps sweet
A perfect soul, even in this grave of sin;
And for my soul, it is as free, as CAESARS:
For, what I know is due, I'll give to all.
"He that detracts, or envies virtuous merit,
"Is still the covetous, and the ignorant spirit.

Thanks, HORACE, for thy free, and wholesome sharpness:
Which pleases CAESAR more, then servile fawns.
"A flatterd prince soon turns the prince of fools.
And for thy sake, we'll put no difference more
Between the great, and good, for being poor.
Say then, loved HORACE, thy true thought of VIRGIL.

I judge him of a rectified spirit,
By many revolutions of discourse
(In his bright reasons influence) refined
From all the tartarus moods of common men;
Bearing the nature, and similitude
Of a right heavenly body: most severe
In fashion, and collection of himself,
And then as clear, and confident, as JOVE.

And yet so chaste, and tender is his ear*
In suffering any syllable to pass,
That, he thinks, may become the honoured name
Of issue to his so examined self;
That all the lasting fruits of his full merit
In his own poems, he doth still distaste:
As if his minds piece, which he strove to paint,
Could not with fleshly pencils have her right.

But, to approve his works of sovereign worth,
This observation (me thinks) more then serves:
And is not vulgar. That, which he hath writ,
Is with such judgment, laboured, and distilled
Through all the needful uses of our lives,
That could a man remember but his lines,
He should not touch at any serious point,
But he might breathe his spirit out of him.

You mean, he might repeat part of his works,
As fit for any conference, he can use?

True, royal CAESAR.

Worthily observed:
And a most worthy virtue in his works.
What thinks material HORACE, of his learning?

His learning labours not the schoole-like gloss,
That most consists in echoing words, and terms,
And soonest wins a man an empty name;
Nor any long, or far-fetcht circumstance,
Wrapped in the curious generalties of arts:
But a direct, and analyticke sum
Of all the worth and first effects of arts.
And for his poesy, 'tis so rammed with life,
That it shall gather strength of life, with being,
And live hereafter, more admired, then now.

This one consent, in all your dooms of him,
And mutual loves of all your several merits,
Argues a truth of merit in you all.

SEe, here comes VIRGIL; we will rise and greet him:
Welcome to CAESAR, VIRGIL. CAESAR, and VIRGIL
Shall differ but in sound; to CAESAR, VIRGIL
(Of his expressed greatness) shall be made
A second sur-name, and to VIRGIL, CAESAR.
Where are thy famous Aeneids? do us grace
To let us see, and surfeit on their sight.

Worthless they are of CAESARS gracious eyes,
If they were perfect; much more with their wants:
Which yet are more, then my time could supply.
And, could great CAESARS expectation
Be satisfied with any other service,
I would not show them.

VIRGIL is too modest;
Or seeks, in vain, to make our longings more.
Show them, sweet VIRGIL.

Then, in such due fear,
As fits presenters of great works, to CAESAR,
I humbly show them.

Let us now behold
A humane soul made visible in life;
And more refulgent in a senseless paper,
Then in the sensual complement of Kings.
Read, read, thy self, dear VIRGIL, let not me
Profane one accent, with an vntun'd tongue:
"Best matter, badly shown, shows worse, then bad.
See then, this chair, or purpose set for thee
To read thy poem in: refuse it not.
"Virtue, without presumption, place may take
"Above best Kings, whom only she should make.

It will be thought a thing ridiculous
To present eyes, and to all future times
A gross untruth; that any poet (void
Of birth, or wealth, or temporal dignity)
Should, with decorum, transcend CAESARS chair.
"Poor virtue raised, high birth and wealth set under,
"Crosses heavens courses, and makes worldlings wonder.

The course of heaven, and fate it self, in this
Will CAESAR cross; much more all worldly custom.

"Custom, in course of honour, ever erres:
"And they are best, whom fortune least prefers.

HORACE hath (but more strictly) spoke our thoughts.
The vast rude swinge of general confluence
Is, in particular ends, exempt from sense:
And therefore reason (which in right should be
The special rector of all harmony)
Shall show we are a man, distinct by it,
From those, whom custom rapteth in her preasse.
Ascend then, VIRGIL: and where first by chance
We here have turned thy book, do thou first read.

Great CAESAR hath his will: I will ascend.
'Twere simple injury to his free hand,
That sweeps the cobwebs, from vn-vsed virtue,
And makes her shine proportioned, to her worth.
To be more nice to entertain his grace;
Then he is choice and liberal to afford it.

Gentlemen of our chamber, guard the doors,
And let none enter, peace. Begin, good VIRGIL.


Of that, fell pouring storms of sleet, and hail:
The Tyrian lords, and Trojan youth, each where
With VENVS Dardane
Seek out for several shelter through the plain;
Whilst floods come rolling from the hills amain.
DIDO a cave, The Trojan
Lighted upon. There, earth, and heavens great dame,
That hath the charge of marriage, first gave sign
Unto this contract; fire, and air did shine,
As guilty of the match; and from the hill
The nymphs, with shreekings, do the region fill.
Here first began their bane; This day was ground
Of all their ills: For now, nor rumours sound,
Nor nice respect of state moves DIDO ought;
Her love, no longer now, by stealth is sought:
She calls this wedlock, and with that fair name
Covers her fault. Forth-with the bruit, and fame,
Through all the greatest Lybian towns, is gone;
Fame, a fleet evil, then which is swifter none:
That moving grows, and flying gathers strength;
Little at first, and fearful; but at length
She dares attempt the skies, and stalking proud
With feet on ground, her head doth pierce a cloud!
This child, our parent earth, stirred up with spite
Of all the gods, brought forth; and, as some wright,
She was last sister of that Giant
That thought to scale IOVES court; right swift of pace,
And swifter, far, of wing: a monster vast,
And dreadful. Look, how many plumes are placed
On her huge corps, so many waking eyes
Stick underneath: and (which may stranger rise
In the report) as many tongues she bears,
As many mouths, as many listening ears.
Nightly, in midst of all the heaven, she flies,
And through the earths dark shadow, shrieking, cries;
Nor do her eyes once bend, to taste sweet sleep:
By day, on tops of houses, she doth keep,
Or on high towers; and doth thence affright
Cities, and towns of most conspicuous site.
As covetous she is of tales, and lies,
As prodigal of truth: This monster, c.

COme, follow me, assist me, second me: where's the Emperor?

Sir, you must pardon us.

CAESAR is private now, you may not enter.

Not enter? Charge them, upon their allegiance, crop-shin.

We have a charge to the contrary, sir.

I pronounce you all traitors, horrible traitors:
What? do you know my affairs?
I have matter of danger, and state, to impart to CAESAR.

What noise is there? who's that names CAESAR?

A friend to CAESAR. One that for CAESARS good, would speak with CAESAR.


Who is't? look, CORNELIVS.


ASINIVS LVPVS.


O, bid the turbulent informer hence;
We have no vacant ear, now, to receive
The vnseason'd fruits of his officious tongue.

You must avoid him there.

I conjure thee, as thou art CAESAR, or respect thine own safety; or the
safety of the state, CAESAR: Hear me, speak with me, CAESAR; 'tis no
common business, I come about; but such as, being neglected, may concern the
life of CAESAR.


The life of CAESAR? Let him enter. VIRGIL, keep thy seat.


Bear back there: whither will you? keep back.


By thy leave good man usher: mend thy peruke, so.


Lay hold on HORACE there; and on MECOENAS, LICTORS. Romans, offer no reseue,
upon your allegiance: Read, royal CAESAR; I'll tickle you, Satire.


He will, humours, he will: He will squeeze you, Poet puckfist.


I'll lop you off, for an unprofitable branch, you satirical varlet.


I, and EPAMINONDAS your patron, here, with his flagon chain; Come, resign:
Though 'twere your great grand-fathers, the law ha's made it mine now, sir.
Look to him, my party-colour'd rascals; look to him.


What is this, ASINIVS LVPVS? I understand it not.


Not understand it? A libel, CAESAR. A dangerous, seditious libel. A libel
in picture.


A libel?


I, I found it in this HORACE his study, in MECOENAS his house, here; I
challenge the penalty of the laws against them.


I, and remember to beg their land betimes; before some of these hungry
court-hounds sent it out.


Show it to HORACE: Ask him, if he know it.


Know it? His hand is at it, CAESAR.


Then 'tis no libel.


It is the imperfect body of an emblem, CAESAR, I began for MECOENAS.


An emblem? right: That's greek for a libel.
Do but mark, how confident he is.

A just man cannot fear, thou foolish Tribune;
Not, though the malice of traducing tongues,
The open vastness of a tyrannes ear,
The senseless rigour of the wrested laws,
Or the red eyes of strained authority
Should, in a point, meet all to take his life.
His innocence is armour against all these.

Innocence? O, impudence! Let me see, let me see. Is not here an Eagle? And
is not that Eagle meant by CAESAR? ha? Does not CAESAR give the eagle? Answer
me; what say thou?


Hast thou any evasion, stinkard?


Now he's turned dumb. I'll tickle you, Satire.


Pish. Ha, ha.


Dost thou pish me? Give me my long-sword.


With reverence to great CAESAR, worthy Romans,
Observe but this ridiculous commenter:
The soul to my device, was in this distich.
Thus, oft, the base and ravenous multitude
Survive, to share the spoils of fortitude.
Which in this body, I have figured here,
A VULTVRE --

A Vulture? I; now, 'tis a Vulture. O, abominable! monstrous monstrous! ha's
not your Vulture a beak? ha's it not legs? and tallons? and wings? and
feathers?


Touch him, old Buskins.


And therefore must it be an Eagle?


Respect him not, good HORACE: Say your device.


A VULTVRE, and a WOLF --


A Wolf? good. That's I; I am the wolf. My name's LVPVS, I am meant by the
wolf. On, on, a Vulture, and a Wolf --


Preying upon the carcass of an ASS --


An Ass? Good still: That's I, too. I am the ass.
You mean me by the ass --

'Pray thee, leave braying then.

If you will needs take it, I cannot with modesty give it from you.


But, by that beast, the old Egyptians
Were wont to figure in their hieroglyphics,
Patience, frugality, and fortitude;
For none of which, we can suspect you, Tribune.

Who was it, LVPVS, that informed you first,
This should be meant by us? or was't your comment?

No, CAESAR: A player gave me the first light of it, indeed.

I, an honest sycophant-like slave, and a politician, besides.

Where is that player?

He is without, here.

Call him in.

Call in the player, there: Master AESOPE, call him.

Player? where is the player? Bear back: None, but the player, enter.


Yes: this gent'man, and his Achates must.


'Pray you, master usher; we'll stand close, here.


'Tis a gent'man of quality, this; though he be somewhat out of clothes, I
tell ye. Come AESOPE: hast a bay-leafe in thy mouth? Well said, be not out,
stinkard. Thou shalt have a monopoly of playing, confirmed to thee and thy
covey, under the Emperors broad seal, for this service.


Is this he?


I, CAESAR: this is he.


Let him be whipped. LICTORS, go take him hence.
And LVPVS, for your fierce credulity,
One fit him with a pair of larger ears:
'Tis CAESARS doom, and must not be reuok't.
We hate, to have our court, and peace disturbed
With these quotidian clamours. See it done.

CAESAR.

Gag him, we may have his silence.

CAESAR hath done like CAESAR. Fair, and just
Is his award, against these brainelesse creatures.
'Tis not the wholesome sharpe morality,
Or modest anger of a satyricke spirit,
That hurts, or wounds the body of a state;
But the sinister application
Of the malicious, ignorant, and base
Interpreter: who will distort, and strain
The general scope and purpose of an author,
To his particular, and private spleen.

We know it, our dear VIRGIL, and esteem it
A most dishonest practice, in that man,
Will seem too witty in another work.
What would CORNELIVS GALLVS, and TIBVLLVS?

Nay, but as thou art a man, dost hear? a man of worship; and honourable:
Hold, here, take thy chain again. Resume, mad MECoeNAS. What? dost thou
think, I meant to have kept it, bold boy? No; I did it but to fright thee, I,
to try how thou would take it. What? will I turn shark, upon my friends?
or my friends friends? I scorn it with my three souls. Come, I love bully
HORACE, as well as thou dost, I: 'tis an honest hieroglyphic. Give me thy
wrist, Helicon. Dost thou think, I'll second e're a rhinoceros of them all,
against thee? ha? or thy noble Hippocrene, here? I'll turn stager first, and
be whipped too: dost thou see, bully?


You have your will of CAESAR: use it Romanes.
VIRGIL shall be your Praetor; and our self
Will here sit by, spectator of your sports;
And think it no impeach of royalty.
Our ear is now too much profaned (grave MARO)
With these distastes, to take thy sacred lines:
Put up thy book, till both the time and we
Be sitted with more hallowed circumstance
For the receiving so divine a work.
Proceed with your desseigne.

Thanks, to great CAESAR.

TIBVLLVS, draw you the indictment then, whilst HORACE arrests them, on the
statute of Calumny: MECOENAS, and I, will take our places here. Lictors, assist
him.


I am the worst accuser, under heaven.


Tut, you must do it: 'Twill be noble mirth.


I take no knowledge, that they do maligne me.


I, but the world takes knowledge.


'Would the world knew,
How heartily I wish, a fool should hate me.

Body of IVPITER! What? Will they arraign my brisk POETASTER, and his poor
iourney-man, ha? Would I were abroad skeldring for a drachme, so I were out of
this labyrinth again: I do feel my self turn stinkard, already. But I must
set the best face I have, upon it now: well said, my divine, deft HORACE, bring
the whoreson detracting slaves to the bar, do. Make them hold up their spread
golls: I'll give in evidence for thee, if thou wilt. Take courage, CRISPINVS,
would thy man had a clean band.


What must we do, Captain?


Thou shalt see anon: Do not make division with thy legs, so.


What's he, HORACE?


I only know him for a motion, CAESAR.


I am one of thy Commanders, CAESAR; A man of service, and action; My name is
PANTILIVS TVCCA: I have served in thy wars against MARK ANTONY, I.


Do you know him, CORNELIVS?


He's one, that hath had the mustering, or convoy of a company, now, and then:
I never noted him by any other employment.


We will observe him better.


LICTOR, proclaim silence, in the court.


In the name of CAESAR, silence.


Let the parties, the accuser, and the accused, present themselves.


The accuser, and the accused; present your selves in court.


Here.


Read the indictment.


RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIVS FANIVS, hold up your hands. You are,
before this time, jointly and severally indicted, and here presently to be
arraigned, upon the Statute of Calumny, or Lex Remmia ( The one by the name of
RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, alias CRISPINAS, Poetaster, and plagiary: the other,
by the name of DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, play-dresser, and plagiary) That you (not
having the fear of PHOEBVS, or his shafts, before your eyes) contrary to the
peace of our liege lord, AVGVSTVS CAESAR, his crown and dignity, and against
the form of a Statute, in that case made, and provided; have most ignorantly,
foolishly, and (more like your selves) maliciously, gone about to deprave, and
calumniate the person and writings of QVINTVS HORACIVS FLACCVS, here present,
poet, and priest to the Muses: and to that end have mutually conspired, and
plotted, at sundry times, as by several means, and in sundry places, for the
better accomplishing your base and envious purpose; taxing him, falsely, of
selfe-loue, arrogance, impudence, railing, filching by translation, c. Of all
which calumnies, and every of them, in manner and form aforesaid, what answer
you? Are you guilty, or not guilty?


Not guilty, say.


Not guilty.


How will you be tried?


By the Roman Gods, and the noblest Romanes.


By the Roman Gods, and the noblest Romanes.


Here sits MECOENAS, and CORNELIVS GALLVS:
Are you contented to be tried by these?

I, so the noble Captain may be joined with them in commission, say.


I, so the noble Captain may be joined with them in commission.


What says the plaintiff?


I am content.


Captain, then take your place.


Alas, my worshipful Praetor! 'tis more of thy gent'nesse, then of my
deserving, I wusse. But, since it hath pleased the court to make choice of my
wisdom, and gravity, come, my calumnious varlets: Let's hear you talk for
your selves, now, an hour or two. What can you say? Make a noise. Act, act.


Stay, turn, and take an oath first. You shall swear,
By thunder-darting JOVE, the King of gods,
And by the Genius of AVGVSTVS CAESAR;
By your own white, and uncorrupted souls;
And the deep reverence of our Roman justice;
To judge this case, with truth and equity:
As bound by your religion, and your laws.
Now read the evidence: But first demand
Of either prisoner, if that writ be theirs.

Show this unto CRISPINVS. Is it yours?

Say I: what? dost thou stand upon it, pimp? Do not deny thine own MINERVA,
thy PALLAS, the issue of thy brain.


Yes, it is mine.


Show that unto DEMETRIVS. Is it yours?


It is.


There's a father, will not deny his own bastard, now, I warrant thee.


Read them aloud.


Ramp up, my genius; be not retrograde:
But boldly nominate a spade, a spade.
What, shall thy lubricall and glibberie Muse
Live, as she were defunct, like punk in stews?
Alas! That were no modern consequence,
To have cotburnall buskins frighted hence.
No, teach thy incubus to poetize;
And throw abroad thy spurious snotteries,
Upon that puft-vp lump of barmy froth,
Or clumsie chil-blain'd indgement: that, with oath,
Magnificates his merit; and bespawles
The conscious time, with humorous some, and brawls,
As if his organons of sense would crack
The sinews of my patience. Break his back,
O Poets all, and some: For now we list
Of strenuous venge-ance to clutch the fist.

I mary, this was written like a HERCVLES in poetry, now.

Excellently well threatened!

I, and as strangely worded, CAESAR.

We observe it.


The other, now.


This's a fellow of a good prodigal tongue too, this'll do well.

Our Muse is in mind for th'vntrussing a poet,
I slip by his name; for most men do know it:
A critic, that all the world be scumbers
With satirical humours, and lyricall numbers.
And for the most part, himself doth advance
With much selfe-loue, and more arrogance.
And (but that I would not be thought a prater)
I could tell you, he were a translater.
I know the authors from whence he ha's stole,
And could trace him too, but that I understand them not full and whole.
The best note I can give you to know him by,
Is, that he keeps gallants company;
Whom I would wish, in time should him fear,
Lest after they buy repentance too dear.

Well said. This carries palm with it.

And why, thou motley gull? why should they fear?
When hast thou known us wrong, or tax a friend?
I dare malice, to betray it. Speak.
Now thou curl'st up, thou poor, and nasty snake,
And shrink'st thy poys'nous head into thy bosom:
Out viper, thou that eat'st thy parents, hence.
Rather, such speckled creatures, as thy self,
Should be eschewed, and shunned: such, as will bite
And gnaw their absent friends, not cure their fame,
Catch at the loosest laughters, and affect
To be thought jesters, such, as can devise
Things never seen, or heard, t'impaire men's names,
And gratify their credulous adversaries,
Will carry tales, do basest offices,
Cherish divided fires, and still increase
New flames, out of old embers, will reveal
Each secret that's committed to their trust,
These be black slaves: Romans, take heed of these.

Thou twang'st right, little HORACE, they be indeed:
A couple of chap-falne cures. Come, We of the bench,
Let's rise to the urn, and condemn them, quickly.

Before you go together (worthy Romans)
We are to tender our opinion;
And give you those instructions, that may add
Unto your even judgment in the cause:
Which thus we do commence. First you must know
That where there is a true and perfect merit,
There can be no deiection; and the scorn
Of humble baseness, oftentimes, so works
In a high soul upon the grosser spirit,
That to his bleared, and offended sense,
There seems a hideous fault blazed in the object;
When only the disease in his eyes.
Here-hence it comes, our HORACE now stands taxed
Of impudence, selfe-loue, and arrogance,
By these, who share no merit in themselves;
And therefore, think his portion is as small.
For they, from their own guilt, assure their souls,
If they should confidently praise their works,
In them it would appear inflation:
Which, in a full, and wel-digested man,
Cannot receive that foul abusiue name,
But the fair title of erection.
And, for his true use of translating men,
It still hath bin a work of as much palm
In clearest judgements, as t'inuent, or make.
His sharpness, that is most excusable;
As being forced out of a suffering virtue,
Oppressed with the licence of the time:
And howsoever fools, or ierking pedants,
Players, or such like buffon, barking wits,
May with their beggarly, and barren trash,
Tickle base vulgar ears, in their despite;
This (like IOVES thunder) shall their pride control,
"The honest Satire hath the happiest soul.
Now, Romans, you have heard our thoughts, With-draw, when you please.

Remove the accused from the bar.

Who holds the urn to us? ha? Fear nothing: I'll quit you, mine honest
pitiful stinkards. I'll do it.


Captain, you shall eternally girt me to you, as I am generous.


Go to.


TIBVLLVS, let there be a case of vizards privately provided: we have found a
subject to bestow them on.


It shall be done, CAESAR.


Here be words, HORACE, able to bastinado a mans ears.


I. Please it great CAESAR, I have pills about me
(Mixed with the whitest kind of ellebore)
Would give him a light vomit; that should purge
His brain, and stomach of those tumorous heates:
Might I have leave to minister unto him.

O! be his AESCVLAPIVS, gentle HORACE;
You shall have leave, and he shall be your patient.
VIRGIL, use your authority, command him forth.

CAESAR is careful of your health, CRISPINVS;
And hath himself chose a physician
To minister unto you: take his pills.

They are somewhat bitter, sir, but very wholesome;
Take yet another, so: Stand by, they'll work anon.

Romans, return to your several seats: Lictors, bring forward the urn; and
set the accused at the bar.


Quickly, you whoreson egregious varlets; Come forward. What? shall we sit all
day upon you? you make no more haste, now, then a beggar upon patterns: or a
physician to a patient that has no money, you pilchers.


RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, hold up your hands. You have
(according to the Roman custom) put your selves upon trial to the urn, for
diverse and sundry calumnies, whereof, you have before this time been indicted,
and are now presently arraigned: Prepare your selves to ^arken to the verdict
of your Triers. CAIVS CILNIVS MECOENAS pronounces you, by this hand-writing,
Guilty. CORNELIVS GALLVS, Guilty. PANTILIVS TVCCA --


Parcell-guiltie, I.


He means himself for it was he indeed,
Suborned us to the calumny.

I, you whoreson cantharides? was't I?

I appeal to your conscience, Captain.

Then, you confess it, now.

I do, and crave the mercy of the court.

What saith CRISPINVS?

O, the Captain, the Captain --

My physic begins to work with my patient, I see.

Captain, stand forth and answer.

Hold thy peace, Poet Praetor: I appeal from thee, to CAESAR,
I. Do me right, royal CAESAR.

Mary, and I will, sir. Lictors, gag him: do.
And put a case of vizards over his head,
That he may look bi-fronted, as he speaks.

Gods, and fiends! CAESAR! thou wilt not, CAESAR? wilt thou? Away, you whoreson
vultures; away. You think I am a dead corps now, because CAESAR is disposed to
jest with a man of mark, or so. Hold your hook't talons out of my flesh, you
inhumane Harpies. Go to, do it. What? will the royal AVGVSTVS cast away a
gent'man of worship, a Captain, and a Commander, for a couple of condemned
caitiue calumnious Cargo's?


Dispatch, Lictors.


CAESAR.


Forward, TIBVLLVS.


Demand, what cause they had to maligne HORACE.


In troth, no great cause, not I; I must confess: but that he kept better
company (for the most part) then I: and that better men loved him, then loved
me: and that his writings thriu'd better then mine, and were better liked, and
graced: nothing else.


Thus, envious souls repine at others good.


If this be all; faith, I forgive thee freely.
Envy me still, so long as VIRGIL loves me,
GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, and the best-best CAESAR,
My dear MECOENAS: while these, with many more
(Whose names I wisely slip) shall think me worthy
Their honoured, and adored society,
And read, and love, prove, and applaud my poems;
I would not wish but such as you should spite them.

O --

How now, CRISPINVS?

O, I am sick --

A basin, a basin, quickly; our physic works. Faint not, man.

O -- retrograde -- reciprocal -- Incubus.

What's that, HORACE?

Retrograde, and reciprocal Incubus are come up.

Thanks be to IVPITER.

O -- glibbery -- lubricall -- defunct -- O --

Well said: here's some store.

What are they?

Glibbery, lubricall, and defunct.

O, they came up easy.

O -- O --

What's that?

Nothing, yet.

Magnificate.

Magnificate? that came up somewhat hard.

I. What cheer, CRISPINVS?

O, I shall cast up my -- spurious -- snotteries --

Good. Again.

Chilblaind -- O -- O -- clumsie

That clumsie stuck terribly.

What's all that, HORACE?

Spurious snotteries, chilblain'd, clumsie.

O IVPITER!

Who would have thought, there should have been such a deal of filth in a
poet?

O -- barmy froth --

What's that?

-- Puffy -- inflate -- turgidous -- ventositous.

Barmy froth, puffy, inflate, turgidous, and ventositous are come up.

O, terrible, windy words!

A sign of a windy brain.

O -- oblatrant -- furibund -- fatuate -- strenuous --

Here's a deal: oblatrant, furibund, fatuate, strenuous.

Now, all's come up, I trow. What a tumult he had in his belly!

No: there's the often conscious damp behind, still.

O -- conscious -- damp.

It's come up, thanks to APOLLO, and AESCVLAPIVS:
Yet, there's another; you were best take a pill more?

O, no: O -- O -- O -- O.

Force your self then, a little with your finger.

O -- O -- prorumped.

Prorumped? What a noise it made! as if his spirit would have prorumpt with it.

O -- O -- O.

Help him: it sticks strangely, what ever it is.

O -- clutched.

Now it's come: clutched.

Clutched? It's well, that's come up! It had but a narrow passage.

O --

Again, hold him: hold his head there.

Snarling gusts -- quaking custard.

How now, CRISPINVS?

O -- obstupefact.

Nay: that are all we, I assure you.

How do you feel your self?

Pretty, and well, I thank you.

These pills can but restore him for a time;
Not cure him quite of such a malady,
Caught by so many surfeits; which have filled
His blood, and brain, thus full of crudities:
'Tis necessary, therefore, he observe
A strict and wholesome diet. Look, you take
Each morning, of old CATOES principles
A good draught, next your heart; that walk upon,
Till it be well digested: Then come home,
And taste a piece of TERENCE, suck his phrase
In stead of lycorice; and, at any hand,
Shun PLAVTVS, and old ENNIVS, they are meates
Too harsh for a weak stomach. Use to read
(But not without a tutor) the best Greekes:
As ORPHEVS, MVSAEVS, PINDARVS,
HESIOD, CALLIMACHVS, and THEOCRITE,
High HOMER, but beware of LYCOPHRON:
He is too dark, and dangerous a dish.
You must not hunt for wild, out-landish terms,
To stuff out a peculiar dialect;
But let your matter run before your words:
And if, at any time, you chance to meet
Some Gallo-belgick phrase, you shall not straight
Rack your poor verse to give it entertainment;
But let it pass: and do not think your self
Much damnified, if you do leave it out;
When, nor your understanding, nor the sense
Could well receive it. This fair abstinence,
In time, will render you more sound, and clear;
And this have I prescribed to you, in place
Of a strict sentence: which till he perform,
Attire him in that robe. And hence-forth, learn
To bear your self more humbly; not to swell,
Or breathe your insolent, and idle spite,
On him, whose laughter, can your worst affright.

Take him away. CRIS. IVPITER guard CAE

And, for a week, or two, see him locked up
In some dark place, remoou'd from company:
He will talk idly else after his physic.
Now, to you, sir. Th'extremitie of law
Awards you to be branded in the front,
For this your calumny; But, since it pleases
HORACE (the party wronged) t'intreat, of CAESAR,
A mitigation of that juster doom;
With CAESARS tongue, thus we pronounce your sentence.
DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, thou shalt here put on
That coat, and cap; and henceforth, think thy self
No other, then they make thee: vow to wear them
In every fair, and generous assembly,
Till the best sort of minds shall take to knowledge
As well thy satisfaction, as thy wrongs.

Only (grave Praetor) here, in open court,
I crave the oath, for good behaviour,
May be administered unto them both.

HORACE, it shall: TIBVLLVS, give it them.


RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, Lay your hands on your
hearts. You shall here solemnly attest, and swear; That never (after this
instant) either, at Booke-sellers stalls, in taverns, two-penny rooms,
'tyring-houses, noble-mens buttries, puisne's chambers (the best, and farthest
places, where you are admitted to come) you shall once offer, or dare (thereby
to endear your self the more to any player, enghle, or guilty gull, in your
company) to maligne, traduce, or detract the person, or writings of QVINTVS
HORACIVS FLACCVS; or any other eminent man, transcending you in merit, whom
your envy shall find cause to work upon, either, for that, or for keeping
himself in better acquaintance, or enjoying better friends: Or if (transported
by any sudden and desperate resolution) you do; That then, you shall not
under the bastoun, or in the next presence, being an honourable assembly of his
favourers, be brought as voluntary gent. to undertake the for-swearing of it.
Neither shall you at any time (ambitiously, affecting the title of the
vntrussers, or whippers of the age) suffer the itch of writing to ouer-run your
performance in libel; upon pain of being taken up for lepers in wit, and
(losing both your time, and your papers) be irrecouerably forfeited to the
hospital of Fools. So help you our Roman gods, and the Genius of great
CAESAR.


So: now dissolve the court.

And thanks to CAESAR,
That thus hath exercised his patience.

We have, indeed, you worthiest friends of CAESAR.
It is the bane, and torment of our ears,
To hear the discords of those jangling rimers,
That, with their bad and scandalous practices,
Bring all true arts, and learning in contempt.
But let not your high thoughts descend so low,
As these despised objects; Let them fall,
With their flat groueling souls: Be you your selves.
And as with our best favours you stand crowned:
So let your mutual loves be still renowned.
Envy will dwell, where there is want of merit,
Though the deserving man should crack his spirit.
BLush, folly, blush: here's none that fears
The wagging of an asses ears,
Although a wooluish case he wears.
Detraction is but baseness varlet;
And apes are apes, though clothed in scarlet.

IF, by looking on what is past, thou hast deserved that name, I am willing
thou should yet know more, by that which follows; an apologeticall
Dialogue: which was only once spoken upon the stage, and all the answer I ever
gave, to sundry impotent libells then cast out (and some yet remaining) against
me, and this Play. Wherein I take no pleasure to revive the times, but that
Posterity may make a difference, between their manners that prouok'd me then,
and mine that neglected them ever. For, in these strifes, and on such persons,
were as wretched to affect a victory, as it is unhappy to be committed with
them. Non annorum canicies est laudanda, sed morum.

I Pray you let's go see him, how he looks
After these libells.

O, vexed, vexed, I warrant you.

Do you think so? I should be sorry for him,
If I found that.

O, they are such bitter things,
He cannot choose.

But, is he guilty of them?

Fuh! that's no matter.

No?

No. Here's his lodging;
We'll steal upon him: or, let's listen, stay.
He has a humour oft to talk to himself.

They are your manners lead me, not mine own.

The Fates have not spun him the coursest thread
That (free from knots of perturbation)
Doth yet so live, although but to himself,
As he can safely scorn the tongues of slaves;
And neglect Fortune, more then she can him.
It is the happiest thing, this not to be
Within the reach of malice; It provides
A man so well, to laugh of injuries:
And never sends him farther for his vengeance
Then the vexed bosom of his enemy.
I, now, but think, how poor their spite sets off,
Who, after all their waste of sulphurous terms,
And burst-out thunder of their charged mouths,
Have nothing left, but the vnsau'ry smoke
Of their black vomit, to vpbrayd themselves:
Whilst I, at whom they shot, sit here shot-free,
And as vn-hurt of envy, as vnhit.

I, but the Multitude, they think not so, sir,
They think you hit, and hurt: and dare give out
Your silence argues it, in not reioyning
To this, or that late libel?

'Lasse, good rout!
I can affoord them leave, to err so still:
And, like the barking students of Beares-Colledge,
To swallow up the garbadge of the time
With greedy gullets, whilst my self sit by
Pleased, and yet tortured, with their beastly feeding.
'Tis a sweet madness runs along with them,
To think, all that are aimed at, still are struck:
Then, where the shaft still lights, make that the mark,
And so, each fear, or feauer-shaken fool
May challenge TEVCERS hand in archery.
Good troth, if I knew any man so vile,
To act the crimes, these whippers reprehend,
Or what their servile apes gesticulate,
I should not then much muse, their shreds were liked;
Since ill men have a lust to hear others sins,
And good men have a zeal to hear sin shamed.
But when it is all excrement, they vent,
Base filth, and offall: or thefts, notable
As Ocean piracies, or high-way stands:
And not a crime there taxed, but is their own,
Or what their own foul thoughts suggested to them,
And, that in all their hea^ of taxing others,
Not one of them, but lives himself (if known)
Improbior satyram scribente cinaedo.
What should I say, more? then turn stone with wonder!

I never saw this play bred all this tumult.
What was there in it could so deeply offend?
And stir so many hornets?

Shall I tell you?

Yes, and ingenuously.

Then, by the hope,
Which I prefer unto all other objects,
I can profess, I never writ that piece
More innocent, or empty of offence.
Some salt it had, but neither tooth, nor gall,
Nor was there in it any circumstance,
Which, in the setting down, I could suspect
Might be perverted by an enemies tongue.
Only, it had the fault to be called mine.
That was the crime.

No? why they, say you taxed
The Law, and Lawyers; Captains; and the Players
By their particular names.

It is not so.
I used no name. My Books have still been taught
To spare the persons, and to speak the vices.
These are mere slanders, and enforced by such
As have no safer ways to men's disgraces,
But their own lies, and loss of honesty.
Fellows of practised, and most laxative tongues,
Whose empty and eager bellies, in the year,
Compel their brains to many desperate shifts,
(I spare to name them: for, their wretchedness,
Fury it self would pardon.) These, or such
Whether of malice, or of ignorance,
Or itch, t'haue me their adversary (I know not)
Or all these mixed; but sure I am, three years,
They did provoke me with their petulant stiles
On every stage: And I at last, unwilling,
But weary, I confess, of so much trouble,
Thought, I would try, if shame could win upon them.
And therefore chose AVGVSTVS CAESARS times,
When wit, and arts were at their height in Rome,
To show that VIRGIL, HORACE, and the rest
Of those great master-spirits did not want
Detractors, then, or practisers against them:
And by this line (although no parallel)
I hoped at last they would sit down, and blush.
But nothing could I sinde more contrary.
And though the impudence of flies be great,
Yet this hath so prouok'd the angry wasps,
Or as you said, of the next nest, the hornets;
That they fly buzzing, mad, about my nostrills:
And like so many screaming grasse-hoppers,
Held by the wings, fill every ear with noise.
And what? those former calumnies you mentioned.
First, of the Law. Indeed, I brought in OVID,
Chid by his angry father, for neglecting
The study of their laws, for poetry:
And I am warranted by his own words.
Sape pater dixit,
Maeonides nullas ipse reliquit opes.
And in far harsher terms elsewhere, as these:
Non me verbosas leges ediscere,
Ingrato voces prostituisse foro.
But how this should relate, unto our laws,
Or their just ministers, with least abuse,
I reverence both too much, to understand!
Then, for the Captain; I will only speak
An Epigram I here have made: It is
Unto true Soldiers. That's the lemma. Mark it.
Strength of my Country, whilst I bring to view
Such as are misse-call'd Captains, and wrong you,
And your high names; I do desire, that thence,
Be nor put on you, nor you take offence:
I swear by your true friend, my Muse, I love
Your great profession, which I once did prove;
And did not shame it with my actions, then,
No more then I dare, now, do with my pen.
He that not trusts me, having vowed thus much,
But's angry for the Captain, still* is such.
Now, for the Players, it is true, I taxed them,
And yet, but some; and those so sparingly,
As all the rest might have sate still, vnquestion'd,
Had they but had the wit, or conscience,
To think well of themselves. But, impotent they
Thought each mans vice belonged to their whole tribe:
And much good do it them. What the have done against me,
I am not moved with. If it gave them meat,
Or got them clothes. 'Tis well. That was their end.
Only amongst them, I am sorry for
Some better natures, by the rest so drawn,
To run in that vile line.

And is this all?
Will you not answer then the libells?

No.

Nor the vntrussers?

Neither.

You're undone then.

With whom?

The world.

The baud^

It will be taken
To be stupidity, or tamenesse in you.

But, they that have incensed me, can in soul
Acquit me of that guilt. They know, I dare
To spurn, or ba^full them; or squirt their eyes
With ink, or urine: or I could do worse,
Armed with ARCHILOCHVS fury, write Iambics,
Should make the desperate lashers hang themselves.
Rime them to death, as they do Irish rats
In drumming tunes. Or, living, I could stamp
Their foreheads with those deep, and public brands
That the whole company of Barber-Surgeons
Should not take off, with all their art, and players.
And these my prints should last, still to be read
In their pale fronts: when, what they write against me,
Shall like a figure, drawn in water, fleet,
And the poor wretched papers be employed
To cloth tobacco, or some cheaper drug.
This I could do, and make them infamous.
But, to what end? when their own deeds have marked them,
And, that I know, within his guilty breast
Each slanderer bears a whip, that shall torment him,
Worse, then a million of these temporal plagues:
Which to pursue, were but a feminine humour,
And, far beneath the dignity of a man.

'Tis true: for to revenge their injuries,
Were to confess you felt them. Let them go,
And use the treasure of the fool, their tongues,
Who makes his gain, by speaking worst, of best.

O, but they lay particular imputations --

As what?

That all your writing, is mere railing.

Ha! If all the salt in the old comoedy
Should be so censured, or the sharper wit
Of the bold satire, termed scolding rage,
What age could then compare with those, for buffo^s?
What should be said of ARISTOPHANES?
PERSIVS? or IUVENAL? whose names we now
So glorify in schools, at least pretend it.
Have they no other?

Yes: they say you are slow,
And scarce bring forth a play a year.

'Tis true.
I would, they could not say that I did that,
There's all the joy that I take in their trade,
Unless such Scribes as they might be proscribed
The abused theaters. They would think it strange, now,
A man should take but colts-foote, for one day,
And, between whiles, spit out a better poem
Then e're the master of art, or giver of wit,
Their belly made. Yet, this is possible,
If a free mind had but the patience,
To think so much, together, and so vile.
But, that these base, and beggarly conceits
Should carry it, by the multitude of voices,
Against the most abstracted work, opposed
To the stuffed nostrills of the drunken rout!
O, this would make a learned, and liberal soul,
To rive his stained quill, up to the back,
And damn his long-watch'd labours to the fire;
Things, that were borne, when none but the still night,
And his dumb candle saw his pinching throes:
Were not his own free merit a more crown
Unto his travails, then their reeling claps.
This 'tis, that strikes me silent, seals my lips,
And apts me, rather to sleep out my time,
Then I would waste it in contemned strifes,
With these vile Ibides, these unclean birds,
That make their mouths their clysters, and still purge
From their hot entrails. But, I leave the monsters
To their own fate. And, since the Comic MVSE
Hath proved so ominous to me, I will try
If Tragoedie have a more kind aspect.
Her favours in my next I will pursue,
Where, if I prove the pleasure but of one,
So he judicious be; He shall be alone
A Theatre unto me: Once, I'll say,
To strike the ear of time, in those fresh strains,
As shall, beside the cunning of their ground,
Give cause to some of wonder, some despite,
And unto more, despair, to imitate their sound.
I, that spend half my nights, and all my days,
Here in a cell, to get a dark, pale face,
To come forth worth the ivy, or the baize,
And in this age can hope no other grace --
Leave me. There's something come into my thought,
That must, and shall be sung, high, and aloof,
Safe from the wolves black iaw, and the dull asses hoof.

I reverence these raptures, and obey them.

This Comical Satire was first acted, in the year 1601.

By the then Children of Queen ELIZABETHS Chapel.

The principal Comoedians were,

With the allowance of the Master of REVELS.


