YOU woeful wights give ear a while,
And mark the tenor of my stile,
Which shall such trembling hearts unfold
As seldom hath to fore been told.
Such chances rare and doleful news
fellow Juniper
Peace a Gods name.
As may attempt your wits to muse.

Gods so, here man.
A pox a God on you.
And cause such trickling tears to pass,
Except your hearts be flint or brass:

Juniper, Juniper.
To hear the news which I shall tell,
That in Castella once befell.
Sbloud, where did thou learn to corrupt a man in the midst of a verse, ha?

Gods lid man, service is ready to go up man, you must slip on your coat and
come in, we lack waiters pittyfully.


A pitiful hearing, for now must I of a merry Cobbler become mourning
creature.


Well you'll come.


Presto. Go to, a word to the wise, away, ^ie? vanish: Lye there the weeds
that I disdain to wear.


God save you Master Juniper.


What Signior Antonio Balladino, welcome sweet I^gle*


And how do you sir?


Faith you see, put to my shifts here as poor retainers be oftentimes, sirrah
Antony there's one of my fellows mightily enamoured of thee, and I faith you
slave, now your come I'll bring you together, i'ts Peter Onion, the groom of
the hal, do you know him.


No not yet, I assure you.


O he is one as right of thy humour as may be, a plain simple Rascal, a true
dunce, marry he hath been a notable vilaine in his time: he is in love, sirrah,
with awench, I have preferred thee to him, thou shalt make him some pretty Paradox
or some Aligory, how does my coat sit? well.


I very well.


Na Gods so, fellow Juniper, come away.


Art thou there mad slave, I come with a powder? Sirrah fellow Onion. I must
have you peruse this Gentleman well, and do him good offices of respect and
kindness, as instance shall be given.


Nay good master Onion what do you mean, I pray you sir you are to respectu^
in good faith.


I would not you should think so sir, for though I have no learning, yet I
honour a scholer in any ground of the earth sir,

Shall I request your name sir?


My name is Antonio Balladino.


Balladino* you are not Pageant Poet to the City of Millaine sir, are you.


I supply the place sir: when aworse cannot be had sir.


I cry you mercy sir, I love you the better for that sir, by Iesu you must
pardon me, I knew you not, but Il'd pray to be better acquainted with you sir*
I have seen of your works.


I am at your service good Master Onion, but concerning this maiden that you
love sir? what is she,


O did my fellow Juniper tell you* marry sir, she is as one may say, but a
poor mans child indeed, and for mine own part I am no Gentleman borne I must
confess, but my mind to me a kingdom is truly.


Truly a very good saying.


It is somewhat stale, but that's no matter.


O it is the better, such things ever are like bread, which the staler it is,
the more wholesome.


This is but a hungry comparison in my judgment.


Why, I'll tell you, M. Onion, I do use as much stale stuff, though I say it
my self, as any man does in that kind I am sure. Did you see the last Pageant,
I set forth?


No faith sir, but there goes a huge report on it.


Why, you shall be one of my Maecen-asses, I'll give you one of the books, O
you'll like it admirably.


Nay that's certain, I'll get my fellow Juniper to read it.


Read it sir, I'll read it to you.


Tut then I shall not choose but like it.


Why look you sir, I write so plain, and keep that old Decorum, that you
must of necessity like it; mary you shall have some now (as for example, in
plays) that will have every day new tricks, and write you nothing but
humours: indeed this pleases the Gentlemen: but the common sort they care not
for it, they know not what to make on it, they look for good matter, they, and
are not edified with such toys.


You are in the right, I'll not give a halfepeny to see a thousand on'hem. I
was at one the last Term, but ever I see a more roguish thing, I am a piece
of cheese, no onion, nothing but kings princes in it, the fool came not out a
jot.


True sir, they would have me make such plays, but as I tell hem, and they will
give me twenty pound a play, I'll not raise my vain.


No, it were a vain thing and you should sir.


Tut give me the penny, give me the penny, I care not for the Gentlemen I, lerme
have a good ground, no matter for the pen, the plot shall carry it.


Indeed that's right, you are in print already for the best plotter.


I, I might as well ha been put in for a dumb show too.


I marry sir, I marle you were not, stand aside sir a while:


How now friend, what are you there? be uncovered, Would you speak with any
man here?


I, or else I must have returned you no answer.


Friend, you are somewhat to peremptory, let's crave your absence: nay never
scorn it, I am a little your better in this place.


I do acknowledge it.


Do you acknowledge it? nay then you shall go forth, I'll teach you how shall
acknowledge it another time; go to, void, I must have the hall purged, no
setting up of a rest here, pack, begone.


I pray you sir is not your name Onion?


Your friend as you may use him, and M. Onion, say on.


M. Onion with a murrain, come come put off this Lyons hide, your ears have
discovered you, why Peter! do not I know you Peter?


Gods so, Valentine!


O can you take knowledge of me now sir?


Good Lord, sir, how thou art altered with thy travel?


Nothing so much as thou art with thine office, but sir, Onion is the Count
Ferneze at home?


I Bully, he is above; and the Lord Paulo Ferneze, his son, and Madam Aurelia,
madam Phanixella, his daughters, But O Valentine?


How now man, how dost thou?


Faith sad, heavy, as a man of my coat ought to be.


Why man, thou were merry enough even now.


True, but thou know
All creatures here soiorning, upon this wretched earth,
Sometimes have a fit of mourning, as well as a fit of mirth.
O Valentine, mine old Lady is dead, man.

Dead!


I faith.


When dyed she?


Mary, to morrow shall be three months, she was seen going to heaven they say,
about some five weeks agone! how now? trickling tears, ha?


Faith thou hast made me weep with this news.


Why I have done but the part of an Onion, you must pardon me.


What Valentine? fellow Onion, take my dish I prithee you rogue sirrah, tell
me, how thou dost, sweet I^gle.


Faith, Juniper, the better to see thee thus frolic.


Nay, slid I am no changeling, I am Juniper still. Hierogliphick, when shall we
swagger.


Hierogliphick, what meanest thou by that.


Mean? Gods so, is't not a good word man? what? stand upon meaning with your
friends. Puh, Absconde.


Why, but stay, stay, how long has this sprightly humour haunted thee?


Foe humour, a foolish natural gift we have in the Aequinoctiall.


Natural, slid it may be supernatural, this?


Valentine, I prithee ruminate thy self welcome. What fortuna de la Guerra.


O how pitifully are these words forced.
As though they were pumped out on's belly.

Sirrah Ingle, I think thou hast seen all the strange countries in
Christendom since thou wen^st?


I have seen some Juniper.


You have seen Constantinople?


I, that I have.


And Jerusalem, and the Indies, and Goodwine sands, and the tower of Babylon,
and Venice and all.


I all; no marle and he have a nimble tong, if he practise to vault thus from
one side of the world to another.


O it's a most heavenly thing to travel, see countries, especially at sea, and
a man had a patent not to be sick.


O sea sick lest, and full of the scuru^e.


Valentine? welcome I faith how dost sir?


How do you good Valentine.


Troth, Valentine, I am glad to see you.


Welcome sweet rogue.


Before God he never looked better in his life.


And how is't man? what, Alla Coragi^.


Never better gentlemen I faith.


S'will here comes the steward.


Why how now fellows all here? and nobody to weight above now they are ready
to rise? look up one or two Signior Francesco Colomia's man how doo's your
good master.


In health sir he will be here anon.


Is he come home, then?


I sir he is not past six miles hence, he sent me before to learn if Count
Ferneze were here and return him word.


Yes, my Lord is here; and you may tel your master he shall come very happily
to take his leave of Lord Paulo Ferneze: who is now instantly to depart with
other noble gentlemen, upon special service.


I will tell him sir.


I pray you do, fellows make him drink.


Sirs, what service is't they are employed in?


Why against the French they mean to have a fling at Millaine again they say.


Who leads our forces, can you tell?


Marry that does Signior Maximilian? he is above, now.


Who, Maximilian of Vicenza?


I he? do you know him?


Know him? O yes he's an excellent brave soldier.


I so they say, but one of the most vain glorious men in Europe.


He is indeed, marry exceeding valiant.


And that is rare.


What.


Why to see a vaineglorious man valiant.


Well he is so I assure you.


What no further yet, come on you precious rascal, sir Valentine, I'll give you
a health I faith; for the heauen^ you mad Capriceio, hold hooke and line.


Boy.

My Lord.

Sirrah go up to Signior Angelio,
And pray him (if he can) devise some means,
To leave my father, and come speak with me.

I will my Lord.

Well heaven, be auspicious in the event*
For I do this against my Genius,
And yet my thoughts cannot propose a reason,
Why I should fear, or faint thus in my hopes,
Of one so much endeared to my love.
Some spark it is, kindled within the soul:
Whose light yet breaks not to the outward sense,
That propagates this timorous suspect;
His actions ne^er carried any face
Of change, or weakness* then I injury him?
In being thus cold conceited of his faith,
O here he comes.

How now sweet Lord, whats the matter?

Good faith his presence makes me half ashamed.
Of my strayed thoughts.

Bestow your self.
Where is my father, Signior Angelio.

Marry in the gallery, where your Lordship left him.

That's well. Then Angelio I will be brief.
Since time forbids the use of circumstance,
How well you are received in my affection,
Let it appear by this one instance, only
That now I will deliver to your trust,
The dearest secrets, treasurd in my bosom,
Dear Angelio. You are ^ot every man,
(...), whom my election hath designed,
^ object of my soul:
^ my desert,
Or supple your tried temper, with soft phrases;
True friendship lothes such oily complement:
But from th'aboundance of that love, that flows
Through all my spirits, is my speech enforced.

Before your Lordship do proceed too far,
Let me be bold to intimate thus much;
That what so ere your wisdom hath t'expose,
Be it the waightiest and most rich affair,
That ever was included in your breast,
My faith shall poise it, if not --

O no more,
Those words have rapt me with their sweet effects,
So freely breathed, and so responsible,
To that which I endeavoured to extract,
Arguing a happy mixture of our souls.

Why were there no such sympathy sweet Lord?
Yet the impressure of those ample favours,
I have derived from your unmatched spirit,
Would bind my faith to all obseruances.

How! favours Angello, o speak not of them,
They are mere paintings, and import no merit,
Looks my love well? thereon my hopes are placed:
Faith, that is bought with favours, cannot last.

My Lord.

How now?

You are sought for all about the house, within,
The Count your father calls for you.

God, what cross events do meet my purposes?
Now will he violently fret and grieve
That I am absent. Boy, say I come presently:
Sweet Angello, I cannot now insist
Upon particulars, I must serve the time
The maine of all this is* I am in love.

Why starts your Lordship?

I thought I heard my father coming hitherward, list* ha?

I hear not any thing, it was but your imagination sure.

No.

No, I assure your Lordship.

I would work safely.

Why, has he no knowledge of it then?

O no, no creature yet pertakes it but your self
In a third person, and believe me friend,
The world contains not now another spirit.
To whom I would reueile it. Hark, hark,

Signior Paulo.
Lord Ferneze.

A pox upon those brazen throated slaves,
What are they mad, trow?

Alas, blame not them,
Their services are (clock-like) to be set,
Backward and forward, at their Lords command,
You know my father's wayward, and his humour
Must not receive a check, for then all objects,
Feed both his grief and his impatience,
And those affections in him, are like powder,
Apt to inflame with every little spark,
And blow up reason, therefore Angelo, peace.

Why this is rare, is he not in the garden?

I know not my Lord.

See, call him?

He is coming this way, let's withdraw a little.

Signior Paulo, Lord Ferneze, Lord Paulo.

WHere should he be, trow? did you look in the armoury?


No my Lord.


No, why there? o who would keep such drones?
How now, ha ye found him?

No my Lord.


No my Lord, I shall have shortly all my family
Speak nought, but no my Lord, where is Christophero,
Look how he stands, your sleepy knave,
What is he not in the Garden?

No my good Lord.


Your good Lord, o how this smells of fennel.
You have been in the garden it appears, well, well.

We cannot find him my Lord.


He is not in the armoury.


He is not, he is no where, is he?


Count Ferneze*


Signior.


Preserve your patience honourable Count.


Patience? a Saint would loose his patience to be crossed,
As I am with a sort of motley brains,
See see, how like a nest of Rooks they stand,
Gaping on one another now Diligence, what news bring you?

Ant please your honour.


Tut, tut, leave pleasing of my honour Diligence, you double with we, come.


How: does he find fault with Please his Honour. Swounds it has begun a
seruingmans speech, ever since I belongd to the blew order: I know not how it
may show, now I am in black, but --


Whats that, you mutter sir? will you proceed?


Ant like your good Lordship.


Yet more, Gods precious.


What, do not this like him neither?


What say you sir knave?


Mary I say your Lordship were best to set me to school again, to learn how
to deliver a message.


What do you take exceptions at me then.


Exception? I take no exceptions, but by Gods so your humours --


Go to you are a Rascal, hold your tongue.


Your Lordships poor servant, I.


Tempt not my patience.


Why I hope I am no spirit, am I?


My Lord, command your Steward to correct the slave.


Correct him, S'bloud come you and correct him and you have a mind to it,
correct him, that's a good jest I faith, the Steward and you both, come and
correct him.


Nay see, away with him, pull his cloth over his ears.


Cloth? tell me of your cloth, here's your cloth, nay and I morn a minute
longer, I am the rottenest Onion that ever spake with a tongue.


What call your hind's count Ferneze?


His name is Onion Signior,


I thought him some such saucy companion.


Signior Maximillian.


Sweet Lord.


Let me entreat you, you would not regard
Any contempt flowing from such a spirit,
So rude, so barbarous.

Most noble Count under your favour --

Why I'll tell you Signior,
Heel bandy with me word for word, nay more,
Put me to silence, strike me perfect dumb;
And so amaze me, that oftentimes I know not,
Whether to check or cherish his presumption:
Therefore good Signior.

Sweet Lord satisfy your self, I am not now to learn how to manage my
affections, I have observed, and know the difference between a base wretch and
a true man, I can distinguish them, the property of the wretch is, he would
hurt and cannot, of the man, he can hurt, and will not.


Go to, my merry daughter, o these looks,
Agree well with your habit, do they not?

Tut, let me alone. By your favour, this is the Gentleman I think, Sir you
appear to be an honourable Gentleman, I understand, and could wish (for mine
own part) that things were conden't otherwise then they are: but (the world
knows) a foolish fellow, somewhat procliue, and hasty, he did it in a
prejudicate humour; mary now upon better computation, he wanes; he melts; his
poor eyes are in a cold sweat. Right noble Signior, you can have but
compunction, I love the man, tender your compassion.


Doth any man here understand this fellow?


O God sir, I may say frustra to the comprehension of your intellection.


Before the Lord, he speaks all riddle, I think.
I must have a comment ere I can conceive him.

Why he sues to have his fellow Onion pardoned,
And you must grant it Signior.

O withal my soul my Lord, is that his motion?


I sir, and we shall retort these kind favours with all allacrity of spirit,
we can sir, as may be most expedient, as well for the quality as the cause,
till when in spite of this complement: I rest a poor Cobbler, servant to my
honourable Lord here, your friend and Juniper.


How Juniper?


I Signior.


He is a sweet youth, his tongue has a happy turn when he sleeps.


I for then it rests, O Sir your welcome,
Why God be thanked you are found at last:
Signior Coloma truly you are welcome,
I am glad to see you sir so well returned.

I gladly thank your honour, yet indeed
I am sorry for such cause of heaviness,
As hath possessed your Lordship in my absence.

O Francisco' you knew her what she was!

She was a wise and honourable Lady.

I was she not! well weep not she is gone,
Passons duld eye can make two grieves of one,
Whom death mark out, virtue, nor bluod can save,
Princes, as beggars, all must feed the grave.

Are your horse ready Lord Paulo,

I signior the stay for us at the gate.


Well tis good. Ladies I will take my leave of you, Be your fortunes as your
selves? fair. Come let us to horse, Count Ferneza I bear a spirit full of
thanks for all your honourable courtesies.


Sir I could wish the number and value of them more in respect of your
deservings. But Signior Maximillian.

I pay you a word in private.


I Faith brother you are fitted for a general yonder, Beshrow my heart (If I
had Fortnnatus hat here) and I would not wish my self a man and go with you,
only t'enioy his presence.


Why do you love him so well sist^r.


No by my troth, but I have such an odd pretty apprehension of his humour me
thinks: that I am (...) tickled with the conceit of it.

O he is a fine man.


And me thinks another may be as fine as he.


O Angel^, do you think I do urge any comparison against you? no, I am not so
ill bred, as to be a deprauer of your worthiness: believe me, if I had not some
hope of your abiding with us, I should never desire to go out of black whilst I
lived ^ but learn to speak in the nose, and turn puritan presently.


I thank you Lady: I know you can flout.


Come do you take it so? I faith you wrong me.


I, but Maddame,
Thus to disclaim in all the effects of pleasure,
May make your sadness seem to much affected,
And then the proper grace of it is lost.

Indeed sir, if I did put on this sadness
Only abroad, and in Society,
And were in private merry; and quick humor'd;
Then might it seem affected and abhord:
But as my looks appear, such is my spirit,
Drowned up with confluence of grief, and melancholy*
That like to rivers run through all my veins,
Quenching the pride and fervor of my blood.

My honourable Lord? no more:
There is the honour of my blood engaged,
For your sons safety.

Signior, blame me not,
For tending his security so much.
He is mine only son, and that word only.
Hath with his strong, and reprecussiue sound,
^troke my heart cold, and given it a deep wound.

Why but stay, I beseech you, had your Lordship ever any more sons then this.


Why have not you known it Maximilian?


Let my Sword fail me then.


I had one other younger borne then this,
By twice so many how ers as would fill
The circle of a year, his name Camillo,
Whom in that black, and fearful night I lost,
(Tis now a nineteen years agone at least,
And yet the memory of it fits as fresh
Within my brain as twere but yesterday)
It was that night wherein the great Chamont,
The general for France surprised Vicenza,
Methinks the horror of that clamorous shout
His soldiers gave when they attained the wall,
Yet tingles in mine ear, me thinks I see
With what amazed looks, distracted thoughts,
And minds confused, we, that were citizens,
Confronted one another: every street
Was filled with bitter self tormenting cries,
And happy was that foot, that first could press,
The flowery champaign, bordering on Verona.
Here I (employed about my dear wives safety)
Whose soul is now in peace) lost my Camillo.
Who sure was murdered by the barbarous Soldiers,
Or else I should have heard -- my heart is great.
Sorrow is faint? and passion makes me sweat.

Grieve not sweet Count: comfort your spirits, you have a son a noble
gentleman, he stands in the face of honour: For his safety let that be no
question. I am master of my fortune, and he shall share with me. Farewell my
honourable Lord. Ladies once more adieu, for your self madam you are a most
rare creature, I tell you so, be not proud of it, I love you: come Lord Paulo
to horse.


Adieu good Signior Francesco: farewell sister.


How shall we rid him hence.

Why well enough? swe^e Sig^ior Maximilian,
I have some small occasion to stay:
If it may please you but take horse before
I'll over take you, ere your troops be ranged.

Your motion hath taste well: Lord Ferneze I go.

Now if my love fair Rachel, were so happy,
But to look forth. See fortune doth me grace.
Before I can demand? how now love.
Where is your father?

Gone abroad my Lord:

That's well.

I but I fear heel presently return,
Are you now going my most honoured Lord?

I my sweet Rachel.

Before God, she is a sweet wench.

Rachel I hope I shall not need to urge,
The sacred purity of our effects,
As if it hung in trial or suspense:
Since in our hearts, and by our mutual vows,
It is confirmed and sealed in ^ight of heaven.
Nay do not weep, why start you? fear not, Love.
Your father cannot be returned so soon,
I prithee do not look so heavily,
Thou shalt want nothing.

No is your presence nothing?
I shall want that, and wanting that, want all:
For that is all to me.

Content thee sweet,
I have Made choice here of a constant friend
This gentleman? one, whose zealous love
I do repose more, then on all the world,
Thy beauteous self excepted: and to him,
Have I committed my dear care of thee,
As to my genius, or my other soul,
Receive him gentle love, and what deffects
My absence proves, his presence shall supply.
The time is envious of our longer stay.
Farewell dear Rachel.

Most dear Lord, adieu,
Heaven and honour crown your deeds, and you.

Faith tell me Angelio how dost thou like her?

Troth well my Lord, but shall I speak my mind.

I prithee do.

She is deriud too meanly to be wife
To such a noble person, in my judgment.

Nay then thy judgment is to mean, I see*
Did thou near read in difference of good,
Tis more to shine in virtue then in blood.

Come you are so sententious my Lord.

Here comes her father. How dost thou good Iaques?

God save thee Iaques.

What should this mean? Rachel open the door.

Sbloud how the poor slave looks, as though
He had been haunted by the spirit Lar,
Or seen the ghost of some great Satrapas
In an unsavoury sheet.

I muse he spake not, belike he was amazd
Coming so suddenly and vnprepard? Well lets go.

SO now enough my heart, beat now no more*
At least for this affright, what a could sweat
Flowed on my brows, and over all my bosom!
Had I not reason? to behold my door
Beset with unthrifts, and my self abroad?
Why Iaques? was their nothing in the house
Worth a continual eye, a vigelent thought,
Whose head should never nod, nor eyes once wink?
Look on my coat, my thoughts worn quite thread bare,
That time could never cover with a nap,
And by it learn, never with nappes of sleep,
To smother your conceits of that you keep.
But yet, I marvel, why these gallant youths
Spoke me so fair, and I esteemed a beggar?
The end of flattery, is gain, or lechery:
If they seek gain of me, they think me rich,
But that they do not: for their other object:
Tis in my handsome daughter, if it be.
And by your leave, her handsomnesse may tell them
My beggary counterfeits, and, that her neatness,
Flows from some store of wealth, that breaks my coffers,
With this same engine, love to mine own breed.
But this is answered: Beggars will keep fine,
Their daughters, being fair, though themselves (...)
Well then, it is for her, I, it is sure for her,
And I make her so brisk for some of them,
That I might live alone once with my gold.
O it is a sweet companion* kind and true*
A man may trust it when his father cheats him,
Brother, or friend, or wife, o wondrous pelf,
,,That which makes all men false, is true it self.
But now this maid, is but supposed my daughter:
For I being Steward to a Lord of France,
Of great estate, and wealth, called Lord Chammount,
He gone into the wars, I stole his treasure,
(But hear not, any thing) I stole his treasure,
And this his daughter, being but two years old,
Because it loved me so, that it would leave
The nurse her self, to come into mine arms,
And had I left it, it would sure have dyed.
Now herein I was kind, and had a conscience;
And since her Lady mother that did dye
In child-bed of her, loved me passing well,
It may be nature fashioned this affection,
Both in the child and her: but hes ill bred,
That ransackes tombs, and doth deface the dead.
I'll therefore say no more: suppose the rest,
Here have I changed my form, my name and hers.
And live obsurely, to enjoy more safe
My dearest treasure. But I must abroad, Rachel*
What is your pleasure sir?

Rachel I must abroad.
Lock thy self in, but yet take out the key,
That whosoever peepes in at the key-hole,
May yet imagine there is none at home.

I will sir.

But hark thee Rachel: say a thief should come,
And miss the key, he would resoule indeed
None were at home, and so break in the rather:
Open the doo^ Rachel, set it open daughter;
But sit in it thy self: and tal^e aloud,
As if there were some more in house with thee:
Put out the fire, kill the chimneys hart,
That it may breath no more then a dead man,
The more we spare my child, the more we gain.

What says my fellow Onion? come on.

All of a house sir, but no fellows, you are my Lords
Steward, but I pray you what think you of love, sir?

Of love Onion? Why it's a very honourable humour.

Nay if it be but worshipful I care not.

Go to, it's honourable, chock not at the conceit of the Gentleman.

But in truth sir, you shall do well to think well of love:
For it thinks well of you, in me, I assure you.

G^mercy fellow Onion: I do (...) well, thou are in love, art thou?

Partly sir, b^ I am ashamed to say wholly.

Well, I will further^ in thee to any honest woman, or maiden, the ^.

Why now you co^e n^re him sir, he doth veil,
He doth remuner^e, he doth ^haw^ he (...) the kindness
Of an honest imperfection in your worship.

But who is it thou love fellow Onion?

Mary a poor (...) daughter, but none of the honestest, I hope.

Why, would thou not have her honest?

O no, for then I am sure she would not have me*
Tis Rachel de Pri^.

Why, she hath the name of a very vertuo^ maiden.

So she is sir, but the fellow talks in quiddi^s, he.

What would thou have me do in the matter?

Do nothing sir, I pray you, but speak for me.

In what manner?

My fellow Juniper can tell you sir.

Why as thus sir. Your worship may commend him for a fellow fit for
consanguinity, and that he shakes with desire of procreation, or so.


That were not so good, me thinks.


No sir, why so sir? what if you should say to her, correborate thy self
sweet soul, let me distinguish thy paps with my fingers, divine Mumps,
pretty Pastorella? look thou so sweet and bounteous? comfort my friend (...)


Well I perceive you wish, I should say something m^y do him grace, and further
hi^ desires, and that be (...) I will.


I thank you sir, God save your life, I pray God sir.


Your worship ^ good to live long (...) contaminate me no service*


Command thou would say, no good Juniper.


Health and wealth sir.


This wench will I solicit for my self,
Making my Lord and master privy to it;
And if he second me with his consent,
I will proceed, as having long ere this,
Thought her a worthy choice to make my wife.

Room for a case of matrons-coloured black,
How motherly my mothers death hath made us?
I would I had some girls now to bring up;
O I could make a wench so virtuous,
She should say grace to every bit of meat,
And gape no wider then a wafers thickness:
And she should mall French cur^i^, so most low,
That every touch should turn her over backward.

Sister, these words become not your attire,
Nor your estate: our virtuous mothers death
Should print more deep effects of sorrow in us,
Then may be worn out in so little time.

Sister, faith you take too much Tobacco,
It makes you black within, as you're without.
What true-stich sister? both your sides alike?
Be of a sleighter work: for of my word,
You shall be sold as dear or rather dearer?
Will you be bound to customs and to rites?
Shed profitable (...), weep for advantage*
Or else, do all things, as you are enclynd,
Hate when your stomach serves (saith the Physician)
Not at eleu^ (...) six. So if your humour
Be now (...) with this heaviness.
Give me the reins and spare not, as I do,
In this my pleasurable appetite,
It is Pracisianisme to alter that*
With austere judgment, that is given by nature.
I wept you saw too, when my mother dyed:
For then I found it easier to do so,
And fitter with my mood, then not to weep.
But now tis otherwise, another time
Perhaps I shall have such deep thoughts of her,
That I shall weep a fresh, some tweluemonth hence,
And I will weep, if I be so disposed,
And put on black, as grimly then, as now;
Let the mind go still with the bodies stature,
Judgment is ^t for Judges, give me nature.

See Signior Angelo here are the Ladies,
Go you and comfort one, I'll to the other.

Therefore I come sir, I'll to the eldest.
God save you Ladies, these sad moods of yours,
That make you choose these solitary walks,
Are hurtful for your beauties.

If we had them.

Come, that condition might be for your hearts,
When you protest faith, since we cannot see them.
But this same heart of beauty, your sweet face
Is in mine eye still.

O you cut my heart
with your sharpe eye.

Nay Lady that's not so, your heart's to hard.

My beautie^ hart?

O no.
I mean that regent of affection, Madam,
That tramples on al love with such contempt
^n this fair breast.

No more, your drift is sauour'd,
I had rather seem hard hearted

Then hard favoured,
Is that your meaning, Lady?

Go too sir.
Your wits are fresh I know, they need no spur.

And therefore you will ride them.

Say I do.
They will not tire I hope?

No not with you, hark you sweet Lady.

Tis much pity Madam.
You should have any reason to retain
This sign of grief, much less the thing difignde.

Griefs are more fit for Ladies then their pleasures.

That is for such as follow nought but pleasures.
But you that temper them so well with virtues,
Using your griefs so it would prove them pleasures.
And you would seem in cause of griefs pleasures equally pleasant.

Sir so I do now.
It is the excess of either that I strive
So much to shun in all my proved endeavours,
Although perhaps unto a general eye,
I may appear most wedded to my griefs,
Yet doth my mind forsake no taste of pleasure,
I mean that happy pleasure of the soul,
Divine and sacred contemplation
Of that eternal, and most glorious bliss,
Proposed as the crown unto our souls.

I will be silent, yet that I may serve
But as a Decade in the art of memory
To put you still in mind of your own virtues
When your too serious thoughts make you too sad)
Accept me for your servant honoured Lady.

Those cerimonies are too common signior Francis,
For your vncommon gravity, and judgment,
And fits them only, that are nought but ceremony.

Come, I will not sue, stally to be your servant,
But a new term, will you be my refuge?

Your refuge* why sir.

That I might fly to you, when all else fail me.

And you be good at flying, be my Plouer.

Nay take away the P.

Tut, then you cannot fly:

I'll warrant you. I'll borrow Cupids wings.

Mass then I fear me you'll do strange things:
I pray you blame me not, if I suspect you,
Your own confession simply doth detect you,
Nay and you be so great in Cupids books,
'twill make me Jealous. you can with your looks
(I warrant you) inflame a woman's heart,
And at your pleasure take loves golden dart,
And wound the breast of any vertous maid.
Would I were hence: good Faith I am afraid,
You can constrain one ere they be aware,
To run mad for your love?

O this is rate.

Close with my daughters gentlemen? well done,
Tis like your selves: nay lusty Angelo,
Let not my presence make you bauke your sport,
I will not break a minute of discourse
Twixt you and one of your fair Mistresses.

One of my mistresses? why thinks your Lordship
I have so many

Many? no Angelo.
I do not think you have many, some fourteen
I here thou hast, even of our worthiest dames,
Of any note, in Millaine.

Nay good my Lord fourteen: it is not so.

By the the Mass that is't, here are their names to show
Fourteen, or fifteen t'one. Good Angelo.
You need not be ashamed of any of them,
They are gallants all.

Sbloud you are such a Lord.

Nay stay sweet Angelo, I am disposed
A little to be pleasant past my coustome,
He's gone? he's gone, I have disgrast him shrewdly,
Daughters take heed of him, he's a wild youth,
Look what he says to you believe him not,
He will swear love to every one he sees.
Francisco, give them council, good Francisco,
I dare trust thee with both, but him with neither.

Your Lordship yet may trust both them with him.

Well go your ways away, how now Christopher,
What news with you?

I have an humble suit to your good Lordship.

A suit Christopher? what suit I prithee?

I would crave pardon at your Lordships hands,
If it seem vain or simple in your sight.

I'll pardon all simplicity, Christopher,
What is thy suit?

Perhaps being now so old a bachelor,
I shall seem half unwise, to bend my self
In strict affection to a poor young maid.

What? is it touching love Christopher?
Art thou dispost to marry, why tis well.

I, bu^ your Lordship may imagine now
That I being steward of your honours house.
If I be married once, will more regard
The maintenance of my wife and of my charge,
Then the due discharge of my place and office:

No, no, Christopher, I know thee honest.

Good faith my Lord, your honour may suspect it* but --

Then I should wrong thee, thou hast ever been
Honest and true, and will be still I know.

I but this marriage alters many men:
And you may fear, it will do me my Lord,
But ere it do so? I will undergo
Ten thousand several deaths.

I know it man.
Who would thou have I prithee?

Rachel de pry,
If your good Lordship, grant me your consent.

Rachel de pry? what the poor beggars daughter?
She's a right handsome maid, how poor soever,
And thou hast my consent, with all my hart.

I humbly thank your honour. I'll now ask her father.

Do so Christofero thou shalt do well.
Tis strange (she being so poor) he should affect her,
But this is more strange that my self should love her.
I spied her, lately, at her fathers door,
And if I did not see in her sweet face
Gentry and nobleness, ne'er trust me more:
But this persuasion, fancy wrought in me,
That fancy being created with her looks,
For where love is he think his ba^est object
Gentle and noble: I am far in love,
And shall be forced to wrong my honest steward,
For I must sat, and seek her for my self;
How much my duty to my late dead wife,
And my own dear renown so er^ it sways,
I'll to her father straight. Love hates delays.

Come on Isaith, lets to some exercise or other my hearts:
Fetch the hilts fellow Juniper, wilt thou play:

I cannot resolve you? tis as I am fitted with the ingenuity, quantity, or
quality of the cudgel.


How dost thou bastinado the poor cudgel with terms?


O Ingle, I have the phrases man, and the Anagrams and the Epitaphs, fitting
the mystery of the noble science.


I'll be hanged he were not misbegotten of some fencer.


Sirrah Valentine, you can resolve me now, have they their masters of defence
in other countries as we have here in Italy?


O Lord, I, especially they in Utopia, there they perform their prizes and
chalenges, with as great ceremony as the Italian or any nation else.


Indeed? how is the manner of it (for gods love) good Valentine?


Ingle? I prithee make recourse unto us, we are thy friends and familiars:
sweet Ingle.


Why thus sir.


God a mercy good Valentine, nay go on.


Silentium bonus socius Onionus, good fellow Onion be not so ingenious, and
turbulent: so sir? and how? how sweet Ingle?


Marry, first they are brought to the public Theater:


What? ha? they Theater there


Theaters? I and plays to: both tragedy and comedy set forth with as much
state as can be imagined?


By Gods so; a man is nobody, till he has travelled.


And how are their plays? as ours are? extemporal?


O no? all premeditated things, and some of them very good I faith, my master
used to visit them often when he was there.


Why how are they in a place where any man may see them?


I, in the common Theaters, I tell you. But the sport is at a new play to
observe the sway and variety of opinion that passes it. A man shall have such
a confused mixture of judgment, powered out in the throng there, as ridiculous,
as laughter it self: one says he likes not the writing, another likes not the
plot, another not the playing. And sometimes a fellow that comes not there past
once in five year at a Parliament time or so, will be as deep myr'd in
censuring as the best, and swear by Gods foot he would never stir his foot
to see a hundred such as that is.


I must travel to see these things, I shall ne'er think well of my self else.


Fellow Onion, I'll bear thy charges and thou wilt but pilgrimize it along with
me, to the land of Utopia.


Why but me thinks such rooks as these should be ashamed to judge.


Not a whit? the rankest stinkard of them all, will take upon him as
peremptory, as if he had writ himself in artibus magister.


And do they stand to a popular censure for any thing they present.


I ever, ever, and the people generally are very acceptiue and apt to applaud
any meritable work, but there are two sorts of persons that most commonly are
infectious to a whole auditory.


What be they?


I come lets know them.


It were good they were noted.


Marry? one is the rude barbarous crew a people that have no brains, and yet
grounded judgements, these will hiss any thing that mounts above their
grounded capacities. But the other are worth the observation, I faith.


What be they? what be they?


Faith a few Caprichious gallants.


Caprichious? stay, that word's for me.


And they have taken such a habit of dislike in all things, that they will
approve nothing, be it never so conceited or elaborate, but sit dispersed,
making faces, and spitting, wagging their upright ears and cry filthy, filthy.
Simply uttering their own condition, and using their wryed countenances in
stead of a vice, to turn the good aspects of all that shall sit near them,
from what they behold.


O that's well said, lay them down, come sirs.
Who plays, fellow Juniper, Sebastian, Balthazar:
Some body take them up, come.

Ingle Valentine?


Not I sir, I profess it not.


Sebastian.


Balthazar.


Who? I?


Come, but one bout, I'll give hem thee, I faith.


Why, here's Martino.


Foe he, alas he cannot play a whit, man.


That's all one: no more could you in stata quo prius, Martino, play with him,
every man has his beginning and conduction.


Will you not hurt me fellow Onion?


Hurt thee, no? and I do, put me among pot-hearbs,
And chop me to pieces, come on?

By your favour sweet bullies give them room, back, so, Martino, do not look
so thin upon the matter.


Ha, well plaid, fall over to my leg now? so* to your guard again,
excellent, to my head now, make home your blow: spare not me, make it home,
good, good again.


Why how now Peter?


Gods so, Onion has caught a bruise.


Couragio? be not caprichio^s? what?


Caprichio^s? not I, I scorn to be caprichious for a scrach, Martino must have
another bout, come.


No, no, play no more, play no more.


Foe, tis nothing, a philip, a devise, fellow Juniper prithee get me a Plantan,
I had rather play with one that had skill by half.


By my troth, fellow Onion, twas against my will.


Nay that's not so, twas against my head,
But come, we'll ha one bout more.

Not a bout, not a stroke.


No more, no more.


Why I'll give you demonstration, how it came, Thou openest the dagger to
falsify over with the back sword frick, and he interrupted, before he could
fall to the close.


No, no, I know best how it was better the any man here, I felt his play
presently: for look you, I gathered upon him thus, thus do you see? for the
double locke, and took it single on the head.


He says very true, he took it single on the head.


Come lets go.


Here fellow Onion, here's a cob-web.


How? a cob-web Martino, I will have another bout with you? S'wounds do you
first break my head, and then give me a plaster in scorn? come to it, I will
have a bout.


God's my witness.


Tut! your witness cannot serve.


S'bloud? why what, thou art not lunatike, art thou? and thou be avoid
Mephostophiles. Say the sign should be in Aries now: as it may be for all us,
where were your life? Answer me that?


He says well, Onion.


I indeed doo's he.


Come, come, you are a foolish Naturalist, go, get a white a of an egg, and a
little flax, and close the breach of the head, it is the most conducible thing
that can be. Marti^, do not insinuate upon your good fortune, but play an
honest part and bear away the bucklers.


My young and simple friend, Paulo Ferneze,
Bound me with mighty solemn conjurations,
To be true to him, in his love, to Rachel,
And to solicit his remembrance still,
In his enforced absence, much, I faith.
True to my friend in cases of affection?
In women's cases? what a jest it is?
How silly he is, that imagines it!
He is an ass that will keep promise strictly
In any thing that checks his private pleasure;
Chiefly in love. S'bloud am not I a man?
Have I not eyes that are as free to look?
And blood to be inflamed as well as his?
And when it is so, shall I not pursue
Mine own loves longings, but prefer my friends?
I tis a good fool, do so, hang me then,
Because I swore, alas, who doo's not know,
That lovers perjuries are ridiculous?
Have at thee Rachel: I'll go court her sure:
For now I know her father is abroad.
S'bloud see, he is here, o what damned luck is this?
This labour's lost, I must by no means see him.

Mischief and hell, what is this man a spirit,
Haunts he my houses ghost? still at my door?
He has been at my door, he has been in,
In my dear door: pray God my gold be safe.
Gods pity, here's another. Rachel, h^ Rachel.

God save you honest father.

Rachel, Gods light, come to me, Rachel, Rachel!

Now in Gods name what ails he? this is strange!
He loves his daughter so, I'll lay my life,
That he's afraid, having been now abroad,
I come to seek her love unlawfully.

Tis safe, tis safe, they have not robbed my treasure.

Let it not seem offensive to you sir.

Sir, Gods my life, sir, sir, call me sir.

Good father here me.

You are most welcome sir,
I meant almost; and would your worship speak?
Would you abase your self to speak to me?

Tis no abasing father: my intent
Is to do further honour to you sir
Then only speak: which is to be your son.

My gold is in his nostrils, he has smelt it,
Break breast, break heart, fall on the earth my entrails,
With this same bursting admiration!
He knows my gold, he knows of all my treasure,
How do you know sir? whereby do you guess?

At what sir? what is't you mean*

I ask, an't please your Gentle worship, how you know?
I mean, how I should make your worship know
That I have nothing --
To give with my poor daughter? I have nothing:
The very air, bounteous to every man,
Is scant to me, sir.

I do think good father, you are but poor,

He thinks so, hark, but think so:
He thinks not so, he knows of all my treasure.

Poor man he is so overjoyed to hear
His daughter may be past his hopes bestowed,
That betwixt fear and hope (if I mean simply)
He is thus passionate.

Yet all is safe within, is none without?
No body break my walls?

What say you father, shall I have your daughter?

I have no dowry to bestow upon her.

I do expect none, father.

That is well.
Then I beseech your worship make no question
Of that you wish, tis too much favour to me.

I'll leave him now to give his passions breath,
Which being settled, I will fetch his daughter:
I shall but move too much, to speak now to him.

So, he's gone, would all were dead and gone,
That I might live with my dear gold alone.

Here is the poor old man.

Out of my soul another, comes he hither?

Be not dismayed old man, I come to cheer you.

To me by heaven,
Turn ribs to brass, turn voice into a trumpet,
To rattle out the battles of my thoughts.
One comes to hold me talk, while the other robs me.

He has forgot me sure: what should this mean?
He fears authority, and my want of wife
Will take his daughter from him to defame her:
He that hath nought on earth but one poor daughter,
May take this ecstasy of care to keep her.

And yet tis safe: they mean not to use force,
But fawning coming. I shall easly know
By his next question, if he think me rich,
Whom see I? my good Lord?

Stand up good father, I call thee not father for thy age;
But that I gladly wish to be thy son,
In honoured marriage with thy beauteous daughter.

O, so, so, so, so, so, this is for gold,
Now it is sure, this is my daughters neatness,
Makes them believe me rich. No, my good Lord,
I'll tell you all; how my poor haplesse daughter
Got that attire she wears from top to toe.

Why father, this is nothing.

O yes, good my Lord.

Indeed it is not.

Nay sweet Lord pardon me! do not dissemble,
Hear your poor beads-man speak; tis requisite
That I (so huge a beggar) make account
Of things that pass my calling: she was borne
T'enioy nothing underneath the son:
But that, if she had more then other beggars
She should be envied: I will tell you then
How she had all she wears, her warm shoes (God wot)
A kind maid gave her, seeing her go barefoot
In a cold frosty morning; God requite her;
Her homely stockings

Father, I'll hear no more, thou mou'st too much
With thy too curious answer for thy daughter,
That doth deserve a thousand times as much,
I'll be thy Son in law, and she shall wear
Th'attire of Countesses.

O good my Lord,
Mock not the poor, remembers not your Lordship,
That poverty is the precious gift of God.
As well as riches, tread upon me, rather
Then mock my poorenes.

Rise I say:
When I mock poorenes, then heavens make me poor.

See here's the Count Ferneze, I will tell him
The haplesse accident of his brave son,
That he may seek the sooner to redeem him,
God save your Lordship.

You are right welcome sir.

I would I brought such news as might deserve it.

What, bring you me ill news?

Tis ill my Lord,
Yet such as usual chance of war affords,
And for which all men are prepared that use it,
And those that use it not, but in their friends,
Or in their children.

Ill news of my son?
My dear and only son, I'll lay my soul,
Ay me accursed, thought of his death doth wound me,
And the report of it will kill me quite.

Tis not so ill my Lord.

How then?

He's taken prisoner, and that's all.

That's enough, enough,
I set my thoughts on love, on servile love,
Forget my virtuous wife, feel not the dangers,
The bands and wounds of mine own flesh and blood,
And therein am a mad man: therein plagued,
With the most just affliction under heaven.
Is Maximilian taken prisoner to?

My good my Lord, he is returned with prisoners.

Is't possible, can Maximilian?
Return, and view my face without my son,
For whom he swore such care as for himself?

My Lord no care can change the events of war.

O! in what tempests do my fortunes sail,
Still wracked with winds more foul and contrary,
Then any northern guest, or Southern flaw?
That ever yet enforced the sea to gape,
And swallow the poor Merchants traffic up?
First in Vicenza, lost I my first son;
Next here in Millaine my most dear loved Lady:
And now my Paulo, prisoner to the French,
Which last being printed with my other griefs,
Doth make so huge a volume, that my breast
Cannot contain them. But this is my loue^
I must make love to Rachel, heaven hath thrown,
This vengeance on me most deservedly:
Were it for nought but wronging of my steward.

My Lord since only money may redress
The worst of this misfortune, be not griued,
Prepare his ransom and your noble son
Shall greet your cheered eyes, with the more honour.

I will prepare his ransom: gracious heaven
Grant his imprisonment may be his worst,
Honoured and soldier like imprisonment,
And that he be not manacled and made
A drudge to his proud foe. And here I vow,
Never to dream of seeme-les amorous toys,
Nor aim at other joy on earth,
But the fruition of my only son.

He's gone: I knew it; this is our hot lover,
I will believe them! I^ they may come in
Like simple wooers, and be arrant thieves,
And I not know them! tis not to be told,
What servile villainies, men will do for gold,
O it began to have a huge strong smell,
Which lying so long together in a place;
I'll give it vent, it shall ha shift enough,
And if the devil, that envies all goodness,
Have told them of my gold, and where I kept it,
I'll set his burning nose once more a work,
To smell where I removed it, here it is:
I'll hide and cover it with this horse-dung:
Who will suppose that such a precious ne^
Is crowned with such a dunghill excrement?
In my dear life, sleep sweetly my dear child.
"Scarce lawfully begotten, but yet gotten,
"And that's enough. Rot all hands that come near thee
Except mine own. Burn out all eyes that see thee,
Except mine own. All thoughts of thee be poison
To their enamoured harts, except mine own,
I'll take no leave, sweet Prince great Emperor,
But see thee every minute, King of Kings,
I'll not be rude to thee, and turn my back,
In going from thee, but go backward out:
With my face toward thee, with humble courtesies,
None is within. None overlooks my wall.
To have gold, and to have it safe, is all.

Lord Chamount and your valiant friend there* I cannot say welcome to Millaine:
your thoughts and that word are not musical, but I can say you are come to
Millaine.


Mort d^ew.


Gar soon.


Gentlemen (I would cal an Emperor so) you are now my prisoners, I am sorry,
marry this, spit in the face of your fortunes, for your usage shall be
honourable.


We know it signior Maximilian,
The fame of al your actions sounds nought else,
But perfect honour from her swelling cheeks.

It shall do so still I assure you, and I will give you reason, there is in
this last action (you know) a noble gentleman of our party, a right valiant;
semblably prisoner to your general, as your honoured selfe's to me, for whose
safety, this tongue hath given warrant to his honourable father, the Count
Ferneze. You conceive me.


I signior.


Well? then I must tell you your ransomes be to redeem him, what think you?
your answer.


Marry with my Lords leave here I say signior,
This free ample offer you have made,
Agrees well with your honour, but not ours:
For I think not but Chamount is as well borne
As is Ferneze, then if I mistake not,
He scorns to have his worth so vnderprised,
That it should need an adjunct, in exchange,
Of any equal fortune. Noble Signior?
I am a soldier, and I love Chamount,
Ere I would bruise his estimation,
With the least ruin of mine own respect,
In this wild kind, these legs should rot with irons,
This body pine in prison, till the flesh
Dropped from my bones in flakes, like withered leaves,
In heart of Autumn, from a stubborn Oak.

Mounsieur Gasper (I take it so is your name) misprise me not, I will trample on
the hart, on the soul of him that shall say, I will wrong you: what I purpose,
you cannot now know; but you shall know, and doubt not to your contentment.
Lord Chamount, I will leave you, whilst I go in and present my self to the
honourable Count, till my regression so please you, your noble feet may measure
this private, pleasant and most princely walk, Soldiers regard them and
respect them.


O Ver bon: excellenta gull, he tak'a my Lord Chamount for Mounsieur Gaspra,
Mounsieur Gaspra for my Lord Chamont, o dis be brave for make a me laugh'a, ha,
ha, ha, o my heart tickla.


I but your Lordship knows not what hard fate
Might have pursued us, therefore howsoever
The changing of our names was necessary
And we must now be careful to maintain
This error strongly, which our own devise,
Hath thrust into their ignorant conceits,
For should we (on the taste of this good fortune)
Appear our selves, 'twould both create in them
A kind of jealousy, and perchance invert
Those honourable courses they intend.

True my dear Gasper: but this hangby here,
Will (at one time or other) on my soul
Discover us: A secret in his mouth
Is like a wild bird put into a cage,
Whose door no sooner opens, but tis out.
But sir, if I may but know
Thou vtterst it

Vtteri^? vat Mounsieur?

That he is Gasper, and I true Chamount.

O pardon ^y, fore my tongue shall put out de secreta,
Shall breed de ^an^ra in my mouth.

Speak not so loud Pacus.

Foe, you shall not hear fool, for all your long ear,
Reguard Mounsieur: you be de Chamont, Chamont be Gaspra.

Peace, here comes Maximilian.

O belike that's the Count Ferneze, that old man.

Are those his daughters, trow?

I sure, I think they are.

Fore God the taller is a gallant Lady.

So are they both believe me.

True my honourable Lord, that Chamont was the father of this man.


O that may be, for when I lost my son,
This was but young it seems.

Faith had Camillo lived,
He had been much about his years, my Lord.

He had indeed, well, speak no more of him.

Signior perceive you the error? twas no good office in us to stretch the
remembrance of so dear a loss. Count Ferneze, let summer sit in your eye,
look cheerfully sweet Count, will you do me the honour to confine this noble
spirit within the circle of your arms?


Honoured Chamont reach me your valiant hand,
I could have wished some happier accident*
Had made the way unto this mutual knowledge,
Which either of us now must take of other,
But sure it is the pleasure of our fates,
That we should thus be wrack't on Fortunes wheel,
Let us prepare with steeled patience
To tread on torment, and with minds confirmed
Welcome the worst of envy.

Noble Lord, tis thus. I have here (in mine honour) set this gentleman free,
without ransom, he is now himself, his valour hath deserved it, in the eye of
my judgment. Mounsieur Gasper you are dear to me: fortuna non mutuat genus.
But to the maine, if it may square with your Lordships liking, and his love, I
could desire that he were now instantly employed to your noble General in the
exchange of Ferneze for your self, it is the business that requires the
tender hand of a friend.


I, and it would be with more speed effected,
If he would undertake it.

True my Lord. Mounsieur Gasper, how stand you affected to this motion?


My duty must attend his Lordships will.

What says the Lord Chamont?

My will doth then apprroue what these have urged.

Why there is good harmony, good music in this* Mounsieur Gasper, you shall
protract no time, only I will give you a bowl of rich wine to the health of
your General, another to the success of your journey, and a third to the love
of my sword.


Why how now sister in a motley muse?
Go to, theirs somewhat in the wind, I see.
Faith this browne study suites not with your black,
Your habit and your thoughts are of two colours.

Good faith me thinks that this young Lord Chamont favours my mother, sister,
does he not?


A mothelry conceit, o blind excuse,
Blinder then love himself. Well sister, well.
Cupid hath taken his stand in both your eyes, The case is altered.

And what of that?

Nay nothing but a Saint.
Another Bridget, one that for a face
Would put down Vesta, in whose looks doth swim,
The very sweetest cream of modesty.
You to turn tippet? fie, fie, will you give
A packing penny to Virginity.
I thought youl'd dwell so long in Cypres I'll,
You'd worship Madam Venus at the length;
But come, the strongest fall, and why not you?
Nay, do not frown.

Go, go, you fool. Adieu.

Well I may jest, or so: but Cupid knows
My taking is as bad, or worse then hers.
O Mounsieur Gasper? if thou be^'st a man,
Be not afraid to court me, do but speak,
Challenge thy right and wear it: for I swear
Till thou arriud'st, ne'er came affection here.

Come on my sweet finical Pacus, the very prime
Of Pages, here's an excellent place for us to practise in,
No body sees us here, come lets to it.

Contenta^ Reguarde, vou le Preimer.

Sir Finio?

Mort dei^ le peasant.

Did thou see Valentine?

Valentine? no.

No?

No. Sirrah Onion, whither go?

O I am vexed, he th^e would trust any of these lying travellers.


I prithee stay good Onion.

Mounsieur Onion, veneca, come hidera, Ie vou prey.
By gar me ha see two, tree, four hundra towsand of your
Cousan hang, Lend me your hand, shall prey for know you bettra.

I thank you good signior Parla vou? O that I were in an other world, in the
Ingies, or some where, that I might have room to laugh.


A we fort boon: stand? you be dear now, me come,
Boon iout Mounsieur.

God morrow good signior.

By gar, be mush glad for see you.

I return you most kind thanks sir.

How? how? Sbloud this is rare?

Nay, shall make you say rare by and by, Reguard
Mounsieur Finio,

Signior Pache.

Dieu vou guard Mounsieur.

God save you sweet signior.

Mounsieur Onion? is not fort boon.

Bean? quoth he, would I were in debt of a pottle of beans I could do as
much.

Welcome signior, whats next?

O here, Void de grand admiration, as should meet perchance Mounsieur Finio.

Mounsieur Pacus*

Iesu? by Gar who think we shall meet here?

By this hand I am not a little proud of it, sir

This trick is only for the the chamber, it cannot be cleanly done abroad.

Well what say you for dis den? Mounsieur.

Nay pray, sir.


Par ma foy vou bein encounters?

What do you mean sir, let your glove alone.

Come, se port la sante.

Faith exceeding well sir.

Trot, be mush joy for heir.

And how is't with you sweet signior Pache.

Fat comme vou voyer.

Young gentlemen? spirits of blood, if ever you'll taste of a sweet piece of
mutton, do Onion a good turn now.

Que que, parla Mounseir, what is't.

Faith teach me one of these tricks.

O me shall do presently, stand you dear, you signior dear, my self is
here: so sort bein, now I parle to Mounseir Onion, Onion pratla to you, you
speaka to me, so, and as you parle chang the bonet, Mounseir Onion.


Mounseiur Finio.


Mounseur Pacue.


Pray b^ couera.


Nay I beseech you sir.


What do you mean.


Pardon moy, shall be so,


O God sir.


Not I in good faith sir.


By gar you must.


It shall be yours.


Nay then you wrong me,


Well and ever I come to be great*


You be big enough for de Onion already,


I mean a great man.


Then you would be a monster.


Well God knows not what fortune may do, command me, use me from the soul
to the crown, and the crown to the soul: meaning not only from the crown
of the head, and the sole of the foot, but also the foot of the mind and the
crowns of the purse, I cannot stay now young gentlemen but -- time was, time
is, and time shall be.


Sweet Jasper I am sorry we must part,
But strong necessity enforces it.
Let not the time seem long unto my friend,
Till my return for by our love I swear
(The sacred sphere wherein our souls are knit)
I will endeavour to effect this business
With all industrious care and happy speed,

My Lord these circumstances would come well,
To one less capable of your desert
Then I: in whom your mirrit is confirmed
With such authentical and grounded proves.

Well I will use no more. Gasper adieu.

Farewell my honoured Lord.

Commend me to the Lady, my good Gasper:

I had remembered that had not you urged it.

Once more adieu sweet Gasper.

My good Lord.

Thy virtues are more precious then thy name,
Kind gentleman I would not sell thy love,
For all earthly objects that mine eyes,
Have ever tasted, sure thou art nobly borne,
How ever fortune hath obscurd thy birth:
For native honour sparkles in thine eyes,
How may I bless the time wherein Ch^mont
My honoured father did surprise vicenza,
Where this my friend (known by no name) was found,
Being then a child and scarce of power to speak,
To whom my father gave this name of Gasper,
And as his own respected him to death,
Since when we two have shard our mutual fortunes,
With equal spirits, and but deaths rude hand,
No violence shall dissolve this sacred band.

Fellow Juniper, no more of thy songs and sonnets, sweet Juniper, no more of thy
hymns and madrigals, thou sing, but I sigh.


Whats the matter Peter ha? what in an Academy still, still in sable, and
costly black array? ha?


Prithee rise mount, mount sweet Juniper, for I go down the wind, and yet I
puff: for I am vexed.


Ha Bully? vexed? what intoxicate? is thy brain in a quintessence? an Idea? a
metamorphosis? an Apology? ha rogue? come this love feeds upon thee, I see by
thy cheeks, and drinks healths of vermilion, tears I see by thine eyes.


I confess Cupids carouse, he plays super negulum with my liquor of life


Tut, thou art a goose to be Cupids gull, go to, no more of this
contemplations, calculations, morn not, for Rachels thine own


For that let the higher powers work: but sweet Juniper, I am not sad for her,
and yet for her in a second person, or if not so, yet in a third.


How second person? away, away, in the crotchets already Longitude and
Latitude? what second? what person? ha?


Juniper, I'll bewray my self before thee, for thy company is sweet unto me,
but I must entreat thy helping hand in the case.


Tut? no more of this surquedry; I am thine own? ad vngem vpsie freeze: pell
mell, come, what case? what case?


For the case it may be any mans case, as well as mine, Rachel I mean, but I'll
meddle with her anon, in the mean time, Valentine is the man hath wronged me.


How? my Ingle wrong thee, is't possible?


Your Ingle, hang him infidel, well and if I be not reuengd one him let Peter
Onion (by the infernal Gods) be turned to a leek or a scalion, I spake to him
for a ditty for this handkerchier.


Why, has he not done it?


Done it, not a verse by this hand.


O in diebus illis, O preposterous, well come be blithe, the best inditer of the
al is sometimes dull, fellow Onion, pardon mine Ingle: he is a man, has
impefections and declinations, as other men have, his mass sometimes cannot
caruet nor prognisticat and come of, as it should, no matter, I'll hammer our a
paraphrase for thee my self.


No sweet Juniper, no danger doth breed delay, love makes me choleric, I can
b^re no longer.


Not bear? what my mad Meridian slave? not bear? what?


Cupids burden: tis to heavy* to tolerable, and as for the handkerchire and
the posy: I will not trouble thee: but if thou wilt go with me into her
fathers bookside, old Iaques backside, and speak for me to Rachel, I will not
being ratitude, the old man is abroad and all.


Art thou sure on it.


As sure as an obligation.


Lets away then, come we spend time in a vain circumference, trade I cashier
thee till to morrow, fellow Onion for thy sake I finish this workiday.


God a mercy* and for thy sake I'll at any time make a holiday.


Nay I prithee Rachel, I come to comfort thee*
Be not so sad.

O signior Angelo,
No comfort but his presence can remove,
This sadness from my heart.

Nay then you're fond,
And want that strength of judgment and election,
That should be attendent on your years and form,
Will you, because your Lord is taken prisoner,
Blubber and weep and keep a peevish stir,
As though you would turn turtle with the news,
Come, come, be wise. Sblood say your Lord should die:
And you go mar your face as you begin,
What would you do trow? who would care for you;
But this it is, when nature will bestow
Her gifts on such as know not how to use them,
You shall have some that had they but one quarter
Of your fair beauty? they would make it show
A little otherwise then you do this,
Or they would see the painter twice an hour,
And I commend them I, that can use art,
With such judicial practise.

You talk iedly,
If this be your best comfort keep it still,
My senses cannot feed on such sower cates.

And why sweet heart.

Nay leave good signior.

Come I have sweeter viands yet in store.

I in any case mistres Rachel.


Rachel?


Gods pity signior Angelo, I here my father, away for Gods sake.


S'bloud, I am betwixt, I think, this is twice now, I have been served thus.


Pray God he meet him not.


O brave? she's yonder, O terrible she's gone.


Yea? so nimble in your Dilemma's, and your Hiperbole's Hay my love? O my love,
at the first sight: By the mass.


O how she skudded, O sweet scud, how she tripped, O delicate trip and go.


Come thou art enamoured with the influence of her profundity, but sirrah hark
a little.


O rare, what? what? passing In faith, what is't? what is't?


What wilt thou say now, if Rachel stand now, and play hity tity through the
keyhole, to behold the equipage of thy person:


O sweet equipage, try good Juniper, tickle her, talk, talk, O? rare


Mistress Rachel (watch then if her father come)
Rachel? Madonna? Rachel? No.

Say I am here, Onion or Peter or so.

No, I'll knock, we'll not stand upon Horizons, and tricks, but fall roundly to
the matter.


Well said sweet Juniper: Horizons? hang hem? knock, knock.


Whose there? father.


Father no? and yet a father, if you please to be a mother.


Well said Juniper, to her again, a smack or two more of the mother


Do you here? sweet soul, sweet radamant? sweet mathauell one word Melpomine?
are you at leisure.


At leisure? what to do*


To do what, to do nothing, but to be liable to the ecstasy of true loves
exigent, or so, you smell my meaning.


Smell, filthy, fellow Juniper filthy? smell? O most odious.


How filthy.


Filthy, by this finger? smell? smell a rat, smell a pudding, away these tricks
are for truls, a plain wench loves plain dealing, i'll upon my self, smell to
march pain wench.


With all my heart, I'll be legitimate and silent as anapple-squire, I'll see
nothing, and say nothing.


Sweet hart, sweet hart?


And bag pudding, ha, ha, ha?


What Rachel my girl what Rachel;


Gods lid*


What Rachel,


Here I am


What rakehell calls Rachel: O treason to my love.


Its her father on my life, how shall we entrench and edify our selves from
him?


O conni-catching Cupid.


How in my back side? where? what come they for?
Where are they? Rachel? thieves, thieves?
Stay villain slave: Rachel? untie my dog.
Nay theife thou can not escape.

I pray you sir.

A pitiful Onion, that thou had a rope.

Why Rachel: when I say: let loose my dog? garlique my mastiff, let him loose I
say.


For Gods sake here me speak, keep up your cur.


I fear not garlique, heel not bite Onion his kinsman, pray God he come out,
and then theile not smell me.


well then deliver, come deliver slave?


What should I deliver?


O thou would have me tell thee? would thou show me thy hands, what hast
thou in thy hands?


Here be my hands.


Stay are not thy fingers ends begrimd with dirt, no thou hast wiped them.


Wiped them?


I thou villain? thou art a subtle knave, put off thy shows, come I will see
them, give me a knife here Rachel, I'll rip the soles.


No matter he's a cobbler, he can mend them.


What are you mad? are you detestable, would you make an Anatomy of me, think
you I am not true Ortographie?


Ortographie, Anatomy?


For Gods sake be not so inviolable* I am no ambuscado, what predicament call
you this, why do you intimate so much.


I can feel nothing.


Bir Lady but Onion feels something.


Soft sir, you are not yet gon, shake your legs, come, and your arms, be
brief, stay let me see these drums, these kilderkins, these bombard slops,
what is it crams hem so.


Nothing but hair.


That's true, I had almost forgot this rug, this hedge hogs nest, this haymowe,
this bears skin, this heath, this firsbush.


O let me go, you tear my hair, you reluolue my brains and understanding.


Heart, thou art somewhat eased? half of my fear
Hath taken his leave of my, the other half
Still keeps possession in despite of hope,
Until these amorous eyes, court my fair gold:
Dear I come to thee: friend, why art not gone?
Avoid my souls vexation, Satan hence?
Why doest thou stare on me, why doest thou stay?
Why por*st thou on the ground with thievish eyes?
What see thou there, thou cur? what gap'st thou at?
Hence from my house, Rachel, send garlic forth.

I am gone sir, I am gone, for Gods sake stay.

Pack^, and thank God thou scap'st so well away.

If I escape this tree, destinies, I defy you.

I cannot see by any Characters
Writ on this earth, that any felon foot
Hath taken acquaintance of this hallowed ground.
None sees me: knees do ho^age to your Lord.
Tis safe, tis safe, it lies and sleeps so soundly,
'twould do one good to look on it. If this bliss
Be given to any man th^t hath much gold,
Justly to say tis safe, I say tis safe.
O what a heavenly round these two words dance
Within me and without me: First I think hem,
And then I speak hem, then I watch their sound,
And drink it greedily with both r^ine ears,
Then think, then speak, then drink their sound again,
And racket round about this bodies court.
These two sweet words: tis safe: stay I will feed
My other senses; o how sweet it smells

I mar'le he smells n^t Onion, being so near it.

Down to thy grave again, thou beauteous Ghost,
Ange^s men say, are spirits: Spirits be
Invisible, bright angels are you so?
Be you invisible to every eye.
Save only these: Sleep, I'll not break your rest,
Though you break mine: Dear Saints adieu, adieu:
My feet part from you, but my soul^ dwells with you.

Is he gone? o Fortune my friend, not fortune my foe,
I come down to embrace thee, and kiss thy great toe.

Fellow Onion? Peter.

Fellow Juniper.
What's the old panurgo gone? departed, cosmografied, ha?

O I, and hark Sirrah. Shall I tell him? no.

Nay, be brief and declare, stand not upon conodrums now, thou know what
contagious speeches I have suffered for thy sake and he should come again and
invent me here.


He says true, it was for my sake, I will tell him.
Sir Juniper? and yet I will not.

What say thou sweet Onion?

And thou had smelt the sent of me when I was in the tree, thou would not
have said so: but Sir, The case is altered with me, my heart has given love a
box of the ear, made him kick up the heals I faith.


Say thou me so, mad Greek? how haps it? how chances it.


I cannot hold it, Juniper, have an eye, look, have an eye to the door, the
old prouerb's true, I see: gold is but muck. Nay Gods so Juniper to the door,
an eye to the maine chance, here you slave, have an eye.


O inexorable! o infallible! o infricate divine, and superficial fortune.


Nay, it will be sufficient anon, here, look here.


O insolent good luck! How did thou produce th'intelligence of the gold
mynerals.


I'll tell you that anon, here, make shift, convey, cram.

I'll teach you how you shall call for garlic again I faith.


S'bloud what shall we do with all this? we shall ne'er bring it to a
consumption.


Consumption? why we'll be most sumptuously attired, man.


By this gold, I will have three or four most stigmatical suites presently.


I'll go in my foot-cloth, I'll turn Gentleman:


So will I.


But what badge shall we give, what cullison?


As for that lets use the infidelity and commiseration of some harrot of arms,
he shall give us a gudgeon.


A gudgeon? a scutheon thou would say, man.


A scuicheon or a gudgeon, all is one.


Well, our arms be good enough, lets look to our legs.


Content, we'll be jogging.


Rachel? we retire: garlic God boy ye.


Farewell sweet Iaques.


Farewell sweet Rachel, sweet dog adieu.


Nay but sweet Count.

Away, I'll hear no more,
Never was man so palpably abused,
My son so basely marted; and my self
Am made the subject of your mirth and scorn.

Count Ferneze you tread to hard upon my patience,
Do not persist I advise your Lordship.

I will persist, and unto thee I speak.
Thou Maximilian thou hast injured me.

Before the Lord:

Sweet signior.

O my father.

Lady let your father thank your beauty.

By gar^e shall be hang for tell^ di^ sam^,
Metella madamoyselle, she tell her fadera.

The true Ch^mou^t se^ free, and one left here
Of no descent, clad barely in his name.
Sirrah boy come hither, and be sure, you speak the simple truth:

O pardon^ ^oy mounsieur.

Come leave your pardons, and directly say.
What villain is the same that hath vsurpt,
The honoured name and person of Cha^ount:

O Mounsieur, no point villain* brave Che^lier, Mounsieur Gasper.


Mo^usieur Gasper, on what occasion did they change their names, what was their
policy, or their pre^e^.


Me canno tell, par ma foy Mounsieur.


My honourable Lord.


Tut tut, be silent.


Silent? Count Fern^ze, I tell thee if A^ath the great Turk were here I would
speak, and he should here me:


So will not I.


By my fathers hand, but thou shalt Count, I say till this instant, I was never
touched in my reputation: here me you shall know that you have wronged me, and I
will make you acknowledge it, if I cannot my sword shall.


By heaven I will not, I will stop mine ears,
My senses loath the Saviour of thy breath.
Tis poison to me, I say I will not hear.
What shall I know, tis you have iniurd me,
What will you make? make me acknowledge it.
Fetch forth that Gasper, that lewd counterfeit.
I'll make him to your face approve your wrongs.
Come on false substance, shadow to Chamont:
Had you none else to work upon but me,
Was I your fittest project? well confess,
What you intended by this secret plot.
And by whose policy it was contrived,
Speak truth, and be entreated courteously,
But double with me, and resolve to prove
The extremest rigour that I can inflict.

My honoured Lord, hear me with patience,
Nor hope of favour, nor the fear of torment,
Shall sway my tongue, from uttering of a truth.

Tis well, proceed then.

The morn before this battle did begin.
Wherein my Lord Chamount and I were taken,
We vowed one mutual fortune, good or bad,
That day should be embraced of us both,
And urging that might worst succeed our vow,
We there concluded to exchange our names.

Then Maximilian took you for Chamount.

True noble Lord.

Tis false, ignoble wretch,
Twas but a complot to betray my son.

Count, thou lie in thy bosom, Count:

Lye?

Nay I beseech you honoured gentlemen,
Let not the untimely ruin of your love,
Follow these slight occurents; be assured
Chamounts return will heal these wounds again,
And break the points of your too piercing thoughts.

Return? I when? when will Chamount return?
Heel come to fetch you, will he? I tis like,
Youl'd have me think so, that's your policy.
No, no, young gallant, your device is stale*
You cannot feed me with so vain a hope.

My Lord, I feed you not with a vain hope,
I know assuredly he will return,
And bring your noble son along with him.

I, I dare pawn my soul he will return.

O impudent dirision? open scorn?
Intolerable wrong? is't not enough?
That you have plaid upon me all this while;
But still to mock me, still to jest at me?
Fellows, away with him, thou ill-bred slave,
That sets no difference twixt a noble spirit,
And thy own slavish humour, do not think
But i'll take worthy vengeance on thee, wretch?

Alas, these threats are idle, like the wind,
And breed no terror in a guiltless mind.

Nay, thou shalt want no torture, so resolve, bring him away.


Welcome the worst, I suffer for a friend,
Your tortures will, my love shall never end.

Alas poor gentleman, my fathers rage
Is too extreme, too sterne and violent!
O that I knew with all my strongest powers,
How to remove it from thy patient breast,
But that I cannot, yet my willing heart,
Shall minister in spite of tyranny
To thy misfortune, something there is in him,
That doth enforce this strange affection,
With more then common rapture in my breast:
For being but Gasper, he is still as dear
To me, as when he did Chamount appear.

But in good sadness Signior, do you think Chamount will return?


Do I see your face, Lady?


I sure, If love have not blinded you.


That is a question, but I will assure you no, I can see, and yet love is in
mine eye: well, the Count your father simply hath dishonoured me: and this
steel shall engrave it on his burgonet.


Nay, sweet Signior.


Lady, I do prefer my reputation to my life,
But you shall rule me, come lets march.

I'll follow Signior, o sweet Queen of love!
Sovereign of all my thoughts, and thou fair fortune,
Who (more to honour my affections)
Hast thus translated Gasper to Chamount.
Let both your flames now burn in one bright spear*
And give true light to my aspiring hopes,
Hasten Chamounts return, let him affect me,
Though father, friends, and all the world reject me.

Sigh for a woman, would I fouled mine arms,
Rave in my sleep, talk idly being awake,
Pine and look pale, make loue-walkes in the night,
To steal cold comfort from a day-starres eyes.
Kit, thou art a fool, wilt thou be wise? then lad
Renounce this boy-gods nice idolatry,
Stand not on complement, and wooing tricks,
Thou love old Iaques daughter, doest thou?

Love her?

Come, come, I know it, be ruled and she's thine own,
Thou't say her father Iaques, the old beggar,
Hath pawnd his word to thee, that none bu^ thou,
Shalt be his son in law.

He has.

He has? wilt thou believe him, and be made a kooke,
To wait on such an antique weathercock;
Why he is more inconstant then the sea,
His thoughts, Cameleon-like, change every minute:
No Kit, work soundly, steal the wench away,
Wed her, and bed her, and when that is done,
Then say to Iaques, shall I be your son?
But come to our devise, where is this gold?

Here Signior Angelo.

Bestow it, bid thy hands shed golden drops,
Let these bald french crowns be uncovered,
In open sight, to do obey sance
To Iaques staring eyes when he steps forth,
The needy beggar will be glad of gold.
So, now keep thou aloose, and as he treads
This gilded path, stretch out his ambling hopes,
With scattring more more, as thou go, cry Iaques, Iaques

Tush, let me alone.

First i'll play the ghost, I'll cal him out, Kit keep aloo^e.

But Signior Angelo. Where will your self and Rachel stay for me, after the
jest is ended?


Mass, that's true, at the old Priory behind S. Foyes.


Agreed, no better place, i'll meet you there.


Do good fool, do, but i'll not meet you there.
Now to this geere, Iaques, Iaques, what Iaques?

Who calls? whose there?

Iaques.

Who calls?

Steward, he comes, he comes Iaques.

What voice is this? no body here, was I not called? I was.
And one cried Iaques with a hollow voice,
I was deceived, no I was not deceived,
See see, it was an Angel called me forth,
Gold, gold, man-making gold, another star,
Drop they from heaven, no, no, my house I hope
Is haunted with a Fairy. My dear Lar,
My household God, My Fairy on my knees.

Iaques.

My Lar doth call me, o sweet voice.
Musical as the spheres, see, see, more gold.

Iaques.

What Rachel, Rachel, lock my door, look to my house.

Iaques.

Shut fast my door, a golden crown, Iaques shall be a king.


To a fools paradise that path will bring
Thee and thy household ^ar.

What means my father, I wonder what strange humour.

Come sweet soul, leave wondering, start not, twas I laid this plot to get thy
father forth.

O Angelo.

O me no oo's, but hear, my Lord your love,
Paulo Ferneze is returned from war,
Lingers at Pont Valeria, and from thence
By post at midnight last, I was conjured
To man you thither, stand not on replies,
A horse is saddled for you, will you go,
And I am for you, if you will stay, why so.

O Angelo, each minute is a day till my Ferneze come, come we'll away sir.

Sweet soul I guess thy meaning by thy looks,
At pont Valerio thou thy love shalt see,
But not Ferneze, Steward fare you well.
You wait for Rachel to, when can you tell?

O in what golden circle have I dan'st?
Millaine these od'rous and enfloured fields
Are none of thine, no here's Elizium,
Here blessed ghosts do walk, this is the Court
And glorious palace where the God of gold
Shines like the son, of sparkling majesty;
O fair fethered, my red-brested birds,
Come fly with me, i'll bring you to a quie^,
Whose consort being sweetened with your sound:
The musique will be fuller, and each hour
These ears shall banquet with your harmony o, o, o,

At the old priory, behind Saint Foyes,
That was the place of our appointment sure:
I hope he will not make me loose my gold,
And mock me to, perhaps they are within: I'll knock.

O God, the case is altered.

Rachel? Angelo? Signior Angelo?

Angels? I where? mine Angels? wher's my gold?
Why Rachel? O thou thievish Canibal,
Thou eatest my flesh in stealing of my gold.

What gold?

What gold? Rachel call help, come forth,
I'll rip thine entrails, but i'll have my gold:
Rachel why comes thou not? I am undone,
Ay me she speaks not, thou hast slain my child.

What is the man possessed trow? this is strange,
Rachel I see is gone with Angelo:
Well i'll once again unto the priory,
And see if I can meet them.

Tis too true,
You have made away my child, how hast my golds
O what Hienna called me out of doors,
The theife is gone: my gold's gone, Rachels gone,
Al's gone? save I that spend my cries in vain,
But i'll hence too, and di^ or end th^s pain.

Swonds, let me go, hay catso, catch him alive,
I call, I call, boy. I come, I come sweet heart.

Page hold my rapier, while I hold my friend here.

O here's a sweet metamorphosis, a couple of buzzards turned to a pair of
peacocks.


Signior Onion, lend me thy boy to vnhang my rapier:


Signior Juniper for once or so, but troth is, you must inveigle, as I have
done, my Lords page here a poor folower of mine.


Hell ho, ^our page then sha'not be super intendent upon me? he shall not be
addicted? he shall not be incident? ^e shall not be incident? he shall not be
incident, shall he?


O sweet signior Juniper.


Sbloud stand away princocks? do not aggrauate my joy.


Nay good Master. Onion.


Nay and he have the heart to draw my blood, let him come.


I'll slice you Onion, I'll slice you?


I'll cleave you Juniper.


Why hold, hold, ^ough? what do you mean?


Let him come Ingle, stand by boy, his allebaster blad cannot fear me.


Why hear you sweet signior, let not there be any contetion, between my
Master you, about me, if you want a page sir, I can help you to a proper
stripling.


Can thou? what parentage? what ancestry? what genealogy is he?


A french boy sir.


Has he his French linguist? has he?


I, sir.


Then transport him: her's a crusades for thee.


You will not, imbecell my servant with your benevolence will you, hold boy
their's a portmantu for thee.


Lord sir.


Do take it boy, its three pounds ten shill. a portmantu.


I thank your Lordship.


Sirrah Ningle: thou art a traveller, and I honour thee. I prithee discourse?
cherish thy muse? discourse?


Of what sir?


Of what thou wilt. Sbloud? hang sorrow?


Prithee Valentine a^loile me one thing.


Tis pity to soil you sir, your new apparel.


Mass thou say true, aparel makes a man forget himself.


Begin, find your tongue Ningle.


Now will gull these ganders rarely: Gentlemen having in my peregrinatio
through Mesopotamia.


Speak legibly, this gam's gone, without the great mercy of God,
Here's a fine tragedy indeed. Theirs a Keisars royal.
By Gods lid, nor King nor Keisar shall?

Where? where? Finio, where be they:

Go to, i'll be with you anon.

O her's the page signior Juniper.

What saith monsier Onion, boy.

What say you sir.

Tread out boy.

Take up, you mean sir.

Tread out I say, so, I thank you, is this the boy.

Aue mounsieur.

Who gave you that name?

Give me do name, vat name:

He thought your name had been, we young gentlemen, you must do more then his
legs can do for him, bear with him sir.


Sirrah give me instance of your carriage? you'll serve my turn, will you?


What? turn upon the toe.


O signior no.


Page will you follow me, i'll give you good exhibition.


By gar, shall not alone follow you, but shall lead you to.


Plaguy boy, he sooths his humour? these french villains ha pocky wits.


Here? disarm me? take my semitary.


O rare, this would be a rare man, and he had a little travel, Balthazar,
Martino, put off your shoes, and bid him coble them.


Friends, friends, but pardon me for fellows, no more in occupation, no more in
corporation, tis so pardon me, the case is altered, this is law, but i'll stand
to nothing.


Fat so me ^inke.


Well then God save the dukes Majesty, is this any harm now? speak, is this
any harm now.


No nor good neither, Sbloud?


Do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me?


I sir, we do.


You do indeed?


I indeed sir.


Tis sufficient, Page carry my purse, dog me?


Gentlemen leave him not, you see in what case he is, he is not in adversity,
his purse is full of money, leave him not?


Nay gentle Rachel?

Away? forbear? ungentle Angelo,
Touch not my body, with those impious hands,
That like hot Iron^ sear my trembling heart,
And make it hiss, at your disloyalty.
Was this your drift? to use Fernezes name?
Was he your fittest stale, o wild dishonour!

Stay noble (...)*

Sbloud how like a puppet do you talk now*
Dishonour? what dishonour? come, come, fool,
Nay then I see you're peevish, S'heart dishonour?
To have you a topriest and marry you,
And put you in an honourable state.

To marry me o heaven, can it be?
That men should live with such unfeeling souls,
Without or touch or conscience of religion,
Or that their warping appetites should spoil
Those honoured forms, that the true seal of friendship
Had set upon their faces.

Do you hear? what needs all this? say, will you ^ue me, or no?

I'll have you gone, and leave me, if you would.

Leave you? I was accursed to bring you hither,
And make so fair an offer to a fool.
A pox upon you, why should you be coy,
What good thing have you in you to be proud of?
Are y'any other then a beggars daughter?
Because you have beauty. O Gods light a blast.

I Angelo.

You scornful baggage, I loved thee not so much, but now I hate thee.

Upon my knees, you heavenly powers, I thank you*
That thus have tamed his wild affections.

This will not do, I must to her again,
Rachel, o tha^ ^hou saw my heart, or did behold,
The place from whence that scalding sigh euented.
Rachel, by Iesu I love thee as my soul, Rachel, sweet Rachel.

What again returned unto this violent passion*

Do but hear me, by heaven I love you Rachel.

Pray forbear, o that my Lord Fer^ were but here.

Sbloud and he were, what would he do.

This would he do base villain.

My dear Lord,

Thou monster, even the soul of treachery!
O what disho^rd title of reproach,
May my tongue spit in thy deserved fa^e*
Me thin^es my very presence should invert,
The st^d organs of those traytrous eyes,
To take into thy heart, and pierce it through:
Turn thou them on the ground? wretch, dig a grave,
With their sharp points, to hide th'abhorred head;
Sweet love, thy wrongs have been too violent
Since my departure from thee, I perceive:
But now true comfort shall again appear,
And like an armed angel guard thee safe
From all th'assaults of covered villainy.
Come Mounsieur, let's go, leave this wretch to his despair.

My noble Fer^eze.

What can thou speak to me, and not thy tongue,
Forced with the torment of thy guilty soul
Break that infected circle of thy mouth,
Like the rude clapper of a crazed bell.
I, that in thy bosom lodged my soul,
With all her train of secrets, thinking them
To be as safe, and richly entertained,
As in a Princes court, or tower of strength,
And thou to prove a traitor to my trust,
And basely to expose it, o this world!

My honourable Lord.

The very owl, who other birds do state wonder at,
Shall hoot at thee, and snakes in every bush
Shall deaf thine ears with their --

Nay good my Lord, give end unto your passions.

You shall see, I will redeem your lost opinion.

My Lord believe him.

Come, be satisfied, sweet Lord you know our haste,
Let us to horse, the time for my engaged return is past;
Be friends again, take him along with you.

Come signior Angelo, hereafter prove more true.

T^ Maximillian, for your honoured self,
I am persuaded, but no words shall turn
The edge of purposd vengeance on that wretch,
Come, bring him forth to execution.
I'll hang him for my son, he shall not escape,
Had he an hundred lives: Tell me vile slave,
Think thou I love my son? is he my flesh?
Is he my blood, my life? and shall all these be torturd for thy
sake, and not revenged? truss up the villain.

My Lord, there is no law to confirm this action.
Tis dishonourable.

Dishonourable? Maximillian?
It is dishonourable in Chamount, the day of his prefixed return is past, and he
shall pay fort.

My Lord, my Lord,
Use your extremest vengeance, i'll be glad
To suffer ten times more, for such a friend.

O resolute and peremptory wretch!

My honoured Lord, let us entreat a word.

I'll hear no more, I say he shall not live,
My self will do it. Stay, what form is this
Stands betwixt him and me, and holds my hand.
What miracle is this? tis my own fancy,
Carves this impression in me, my soft nature,
That ever hath retaind such foolish pity,
Of the most abject creatures misery,
That it abhors it, what a child am I
To have a child? Ay me, my son, my son.

O my dear love, what is become of thee?
What unjust absence lay thou on my breast,
Like weights of lead, when swords are at my back,
That run me through with thy unkind flight,
My gentle disposition waxes wild,
I shall run frantic, o my love, my love.

My gold, my gold, my life, my soul, my heaven,
What is become of thee? see, i'll impart
My miserable loss to my good Lord,
Let me have search my Lord, my gold is gone.

My son, Christophero, think it possible,
I ever shall behold his face again.

O father wher's my love, were you so careless
To let an vnthrist steal away your child.

I know your Lordship may find out my gold,
For Gods sake pity me, justice, sweet Lord.

Now they have young Ch^unt? Christophero?
Surely they never will restore my son.

Who would have thought you could have been so careless to loose your only
daughter.

Who would think,
That looking to my gold with such hares eyes,
That ever open, I even when thy sleep,
I thus should loose my gold, my noble Lord, what says your Lordship?

O my son, my son.

My dearest Rachel?

My most honey gold.

Hear me Christophero.

Nay hear me Iaques.

Hear me most honoured Lord.

What rule is here?

O God that we should let Chamount escape.

I and that Rachel, such a virtuous maid, should be thus stolen away.


And that my gold, being so hid in earth, should be found out.


O confusion of languages, yet no tower of Babel!


Ladies, beshrew me, if you come not fit to make a jangling consort, will you
laugh to see three constant passions.


Stand by, I will urge them, sweet Count, will you be comforted.


It cannot be but he is handled the most cruelly,
That ever any noble prisoner was.

Steward, go cheer my (...)*

Well, if Rachel took her flight willingly?

Sirrah, speak you touching your daughters flight?

O that I could so soon forget to know the thief again, that had my gold, my
gold.

Is not this pure?

O thou base wretch, i'll drag thee through the streets*
And as a monster, make thee wondered at, how now.

Sweet Gentleman? how too unworthily
Art thou thus (...), brave Maximillian,
Pity the poor youth and appease my father,

How, my son returned? O Maximillian,
Francisco, daughters? bid him enter here.
Dost thou not mock me? O my dear Paulo welcome.

My Lord Ch(...)?

My Gasper.

Rachel.

My gold Rachel? my gold?

Some body bid the beggar cease his noise.

O signior Angelo, would you deceive
Your honest friend, th^ ^ply trusted you?
Well Rachel: I am glad tho'art here again.

I faith she is not for you steward.

I beseech you m^ddam urge your father.

I will anon? good Iaques be content.

Now God a mercy fortune, and sweet Venus,
Let Cupid do his part, and all is well.

Me thinks my heart's in heaven with this comfort.

Is this the true Italian courtesy.
Ferneze were you torturd thus in France? by my souls safety.

My most noble Lord? I do beseech your Lordship.

Honoured Count, wrong not your age with flexure of a knee,
I do impute it to those cares and griefs,
That did torment you in your absent son:

O worthy gentlemen, I am ashamed
That my extreme affection to my son,
Should give my honour so vncur'd a maine,
But my first son, being in Vicenza lost.

How in Vicenza? lost you a son there?
About what time my Lord?

O the same night, wherein your noble father took the town.

How long's that since my Lord? can you remember.

Tis now well nie upon the twentieth year.

And how old was he then?

I cannot tel, between the (...) of three and four,
I take it.

Had he no special no^e in his attire,
Or otherwise, that you can call to mind.

I cannot well remember his attire,
But I have often heard his mother say:
He had about his neck a tablet,
Given to him by the Emperor Sigismund.
His Godfather, with this inscription,
Under the figure of a silver Globe: Eu mi^imo, mundus.

How did you call your son my Lord?

Camillo Lord Chamount.

Then no more my Gasper? but Camillo,
Take notice of your father, gentlemen:
Stand not amazd? here is a tablet,
With that inscription found about his neck
That night, and in Vicenza by my father,
(Who being ignorant, what name he had)
Christened him Gasper, nor did I reveal,
This secret till this hour to any man.

O happy revelation? o blessed hour? o my Camillo.

O strange my brother.

Maximilian? behold how the abundance of his joy
Drownds him in tears of gladness.

O my boy? forgive thy fathers late austerity:

My Lord? I delivered as much before, but your honour would not be persuaded, I
will hereafter give more observance to my visions? I dreamed of this.


I can be still no longer, my good Lord,
Do a poor man some grace amongst all your joys.

Why whats the matter Iaques.

I am robbed, I am undone my Lord, robbed and undone:
A heap of thirty thousand golden crowns,
Stolen from me in one minute, and I fear:
By her confedracy, that calls me father,
But she's none of mine, therefore sweet Lord:
Let her be tortured to confess the ^ru^h.

More wonders yet.

How I ^ not Rachel then thy daughter.

No, I dis^ in her, I spit at her,
She is a harlot, and her customers,
Your son this gallant, and your steward ^ere,
Have all been partners with her in my spoil? no less then thirty thousand.

Iaques, Iaques, this is impossiole, how should thou come? to the possession
of so huge a heap:
Being always a known beggar.

Out alas, I have betrayed my self with my own tongue,
The case is altered.

One stay him there.

What means he to depart, Count Ferneze, upon my soul this beggar, this
beggar is a counterlait: urge him? did thou loose gold?


O no I lost no gold.

Said I not true.

How'didst thou first loose thirty thousand crowns,
And now no gold? was Rachel first thy child:
And is she now no daughter, sir Iaques,
You know how far our Millaine laws extend, for punishment of liars,

I my Lord? what shall I do? I have no starting hols?
Mounsieur Chamount stand you my honoured Lord.

For what old man?

Ill gotten goods never thrive,
I plaid the thief, and now am robbed my self:
I am not as I seem, Iaques de pry,
Nor was I borne a beggar as I am:
But sometime steward to your noble father.

What Melun that robbed my fathers treasure, stole my ^ister?

I, I, that treasure is lost, but Isabell your beauteous sister here seruiues
in Rachel: and therefore on my kne^?

Stay Iaques stay? the case still alters?


Fai^e Rachel sister to the Lord Chamount.

Steward your cake is dow, as well as mine.

I see that honours flames cannot be hid,
No more then lightening in the blackest cloud.

Then sir tis true? you have lost this gold,

I worthy signior, thirty thousand crowns.

Mass who was it told me, that a couple of my men, were become gallants of
late.

Marry (...) I my Lord? my man told me?

How now what pagent is this,

Come signior Onion, lets not be ashamed to appear,
Keep state? look not ambiguous now?

Not I while I am in this suit.

Lordings, equiualence to you all.

We thought good, to be so good, as see you gentlemen

What? mounsieur Onion?

How dost thou good captain.

What are my hinds turned gentlemen.

Hinds sir? Sbloud and that word will bear action, it shall cost us a thousand
pound a piece, but we'll be revenged.


Wilt thou sell thy Lordship Count?

What? peasants purchase Lordships?

Is that any Novels sir.

O transmutation of elements, it is certified you had pages:

I sir, but it is known they proved ridiculus, they did pilfer, they did
purloin, they did procrastinate our purses, for the which wasting of our
stock, we have put the to the stocks.


And thither shall you two presently,
These be the villains, that stole Iaques gold,
Away with them, and set them with their men.

Onion you will now be peeld.

The case is altered now

Good my Lord, good my Lord:

Away scoundrell? dost thou fear a little elocution?
Shall we be confiscate now? shall we droop now?
Shall we be now in helogabolus:

Peace, peace, leave thy gabling?

Away, away with them; whats this they prate,
Keep the knaves sure, strict inquisition
Shall presently be made for Iaques gold,
To be disposed at pleasure of Chamount.

She is ^ Lord Paul^, if your father
Give his consent.

How now Christofero? The case is altered.

With you, as well as me, I am content sir.

With all my heart? and in exchange of her,
(If with your fair acceptance it may stand)
I tender my Aurelia to your love.

I take her from your Lordship, with all thanks,
And bless the hour wherein I was made prisoner:
For the fruition of this present fortune,
So full of happy and unlooked for joys.
Melun, I pardon thee, and for the treasure,
Recover it, and hold it as thine own:
It is enough for me to see my sister:
Live in the circle of Fer^zes arms,
My friend, the son of such a noble father,
And my unworthy self rapt above all,
By being the Lord to so divine a dame.

Well, I will now swear the case is altered. Lady fare you well, I will subdue
my aff^ctions, Madam (as for you) you are a professed virgin, and I will be
silent, my honourable Lord Fern^ze* it shall become you at this time not be
frugal, but bounteous, and open handed, your fortune hath been so to you Lord
Ch^ount.

You are now no stranger, you must be welcome, you have a fair amiable and
splendius Lady: but signior Paulo, signior Camillo, I know you valiant? be
loving: Lady I must be better known to you, signiors for you, I pass you not:
though I let you pass; for in truth I pass not of you, lovers to your
nuptials, Lordings to your dances. March fair al, for a fair March, is worth
a kings ransom. --



