IT increasing, now, to the third time of my being used in these services to
her Majesties personal presentations, with the Ladies whom she pleases to
honour; it was my first and special regard, to see that the nobility of the
invention should be answerable to the dignity of their persons. For which
reason I chose the argument, to be, A celebration of honourable, and true fame,
bred out of virtue: observing that rule of the Majesty (best knowing, that a
principal part of life, in these spectacles, lay in their variety) had
commanded me to think on some dance, or show, that might precede hers, and
have the place of a foil or false Masque: I was careful to decline, not only
from others, but mine own steps in that kind, since the anti-masque of boys:
and therefore now, deuis'd, that twelve women, in the habit of hags, or
witches, sustaining the persons of ignorance, suspicion, credulity, c. the
opposites to good Fame, (should fill that part; not as a Masque, but a
spectacle of strangeness, producing multiplicity of gesture, and not unaptly
sorting with the current, and whole fall of the device.

His Majesty, then, being set, and the whole company in full expectation, the
part of the scene which first presented it self, was an ugly Hell: which
flaming beneath, smoked unto the top of the roof. And in respect all evils
are, morally, said to come from hell; as also from that observation of
TORRENTIVS upon HORACE his CANIDIA, quae tot instructa venenis, ex Orci
faucibus profecta videri possit: These witches, with a kind of hollow and
infernal musique, came forth from thence. First one, then two, and three, and
more, till their number increased to eleven; all differently attired: some with
rats on their head; some on their shoulders; others with ointment pots at their
girdles; all with spindles, timbrels, rattles, or other veneficall instruments,
making a confused noise, with strange gestures. The device of their attire was
Master IONES his, with the invention, and architecture of the whole scene, and
machine. Only, I prescribed them their properties of vipers, snakes, bones,
herbs, roots, and other ensigns of their magic, out of the authority of
ancient and late writers, wherein the faults are mine, if there be any found;
and for that cause I confess them.

These eleven witches beginning to dance (which is an usual ceremony at their
convents, or meetings, where sometimes also they are vizarded, and masked) on
the sudden, one of them missed their chief, and interrupted the rest, with
this speech.

SIsters, stay, we want our Dame;
Call upon her by her name,
And the charm we use to say,
That she quickly
DAME, DAME, the watch is set:
Quickly come, we all are met.

From the rocks, and from the dens,
From the woods, and from the caves,
From the church-yards, from the graves,
From the dungeon, from the tree
That they die on, here are we.
Comes she not yet?
Strike another heate.
THe weather is fair, the wind is good,
Up DAME, o'your
Or else, tucke up your gray frock,
And saddle your
And make his bridle a bottom of third,
To roll up how many miles you have rid.
Quickly come away;
For we, all, stay.
Nor yet? Nay, then,
We'll try her again.
THe owl is abroad, the bat, and the toad,
And so is the cat-a-mountayne,
The ant, and the mole sit both in a hole,
And frog peepes out of the fountain;
The dogs, they do bay, and the timbrels play,
The
The moon it is red, and the stars are fled,
But all the sky is a burning:
The
With pictures full, of wax, and of wool;
Their livers I stick, with needles quick;
There lacks but the blood, to make up the flood.
Quickly DAME, then, bring your part in,
Spur, spur, upon little
(...) (...) I Have been, all day, looking after
A Raven, feeding upon a quarter;
And, soon, as she turned her beak to the South,
I snatched this morsel out of her mouth.
I Have been gathering Wolves hairs,
The mad Dogs foam, and the Adders ears;
The spurging of a dead mans eyes,
And all since the evening star did rise.
I, Last night, lay all alone
Of the ground, to hear the Mandrake groan;
And plucked him up, though he grew full low;
And, as I had done, the Cock did crow.
ANd I ha'beene choosing out this scull,
From Charnel houses, that were full;
From private Grots, and public Pits,
And frighted a Sixteen out of his wits.
Under a cradle I did creep,
By day; and, when the child was asleep,
At night, I sucked the breath; and rose,
And plucked the nodding Nurse by the nose.
I Had a dagger: what did I with that?
Killed an infant, to have his fat.
A Piper it got, at a Church-ale,
I bad him, again blow wind in the tail.
A Murderer, yonder, was hung in chains,
The Sun and the wind had shrunk his veins;
I bit off a sinew, I clipped his hair,
I brought off his rags, that danced in the air.
THe Scrich-owles eggs, and the feathers black,
The blood of the Frog, and the bone in his back,
I have been getting; and made of his skin
A purset, to keep Sir CRANION in.
ANd I ha'beene plucking (plants among)
Hemlock, Henbane, Adders-tongue,
Night-shade, Moone-wort, Libbards-bane;
And twice, by the dogs, was like to be taken.
I, From the jaws of a Gardiners bitch,
Did snatch these bones, and then leaped the ditch;
Yet went I back to the house again,
Killed the black Cat, and here's the brain.
I Went to the Toad breeds under the wall,
I charmed him out, and he came at my call;
I scratched out the eyes of the Owl before,
I tore the Bats wing; what would you have more?
YEs, I have brought (to help our vows)
Horned Poppy, Cypress boughs,
The Fig-tree wild, that grows on tombs,
And juice, that from the Larch-tree comes,
The Basilisks blood, and the Vipers skin:
And, now, our Orgies let's begin.
YOu Fiends and Furies (if yet any be
Worse then our selves) you, that have quaked to see
These
You, that (to arm us) have your selves disarmed,
And to our powers, resigned your whips and brands,
When we went forth, the scourge of men and lands.
You, that have seen me ride, when HECATE
Durst not take chariot; when the boisterous se^,
Without a breath of wind, hath knocked the sky;
And that hath thundered, JOVE not knowing why:
When we have set the elements at wars,
Made midnight see the sun, and day the stars;
When the winged lightning, in the course, hath staid;
And swiftest rivers have run back, afraid,
To see the corn remove, the groves to range,
Whole places alter, and the seasons change,
When the pale moon, at the first voice down fell
Poisoned, and durst not stay the second spell.
You, that have oft, been conscious of these sights;
And thou three-formed star, that, on these nights
Art only powerful, to whose triple name
Thus we incline, once, twice, and thrice the same;
If now with rites profane, and foul enough,
We do invoke thee; darken all this roof,
With present fogs* Exhale earths rott'nest vapors,
And strike a blindness through these blazing tapers.
Come, let a murmuring charm resound,
The whilst we
But first, see every
And every knee. HAG. Yes, dame, they are.
Deep,
We leave thee drink by, if thou chance to be dry;
Both milk, and blood, the dew, and the flood.
We breathe in thy bed, at the foot, and the head;
We cover thee warm, that thou take no harm:
And when thou dost wake,
Dame earth shall quake,
And the houses shake,
And her belly shall ache,
As her back were brake,
Such a birth to make,
As is the blue drake:
Whose form thou shall take.
Never a star yet shot?
Where be the ashes? HAG. Here in the pot.
DAM.
Over the left shoulder bone:
Into the west. HAG. It will be best.
THe sticks are across, there can be no loss,
The sage is rotten, the sulphur is gotten
Up to the sky, that was in the ground.
Follow it then, with our rattles, round;
Under the bramble, over the brier,
A little more heat will set it on fire:
Put it in mind, to do it kind,
Flow water, and blow wind.
Rouncy is over, Robble is under,
A flash of light, and a clap of thunder,
A storm of rain, another of hayle.
We all must home, in the ^gge-shell sail;
The mast is made of a great pin,
The tackle of cobweb, the sail as thin,
And if we go through and not fall in --
charms do nothing win
Upon the night; our labour dies!
Our Magicke-feature will not rise;
Nor yet the storm! We must repeat
More direful voices far, and beat
The ground with vipers, till it sweat.
Bark dogs, wolves howl,
Seas roar, woods roll,
Clouds crack, all be black,
But the light our charms do make.
NOt yet? my rage begins to swell;
Darkness, devils, night, and hell,
Do not thus delay my spell.
I call you once, and I call you twice;
I beat you again, if you stay my thrice:
Thorough these cranyes, where I peep,

And all the secrets of your sway
Shall lie as open to the day,
As unto me. Still are you deaf?
Reach me a bough,
To strike the air; and Aconite,
To hurl upon this glaring light;

And, as it drops, I'll speak a charm,
Shall cleave the ground, as low as lies
Old shrunk-vp CHAOS, and let rise,
Once more, his dark, and reeking head,
To strike the world, and nature dead,
Until my magic birth be bred.
Black go in, and blacker come out;
At thy going down, we give thee a shout.

At thy rising again, thou shalt have two,
And if thou dost what, we would have thee do,
Thou shalt have three, thou shalt have four,
Thou shalt have ten, thou shalt have a score.
Hoo. Har. Har. Hoo!
A Cloud of pitch, a spur, and a switch,
To haste him away, and a whirlwind play,
Before, and after, which thunder for laughter,
And storms for joy, of the roaring boy;
His head of a drake, his tail of a snake.
ABout, about, and about,
Till the mist arise, and the lights ^lie out,
The images neither be seen, nor felt;
The woollen burn, and the waxen melt;
Sprinkle your liquors upon the ground,
And into the air; around, around.
Around, around,
Around, around,

And the pace be found,
To which we may dance,
And our Charms advance.
AT which, with a strange, and sudden musique they fell into a magical
dance, full of praeposterous change, and gesticulation, but most applying to
their property: who at their meetings, do call things contrary to the custom
of men, dancing back to back, and hip to hip, their hands joined, and making
their circles backward, to the left hand, with strange phantastique motions of
their heads, and bodies. All which were excellently imitated by the maker of
the dance, M. HIEROME HERNE, whose right it is here to be named.

IN the heat of their dance, on the sudden, was heard a sound of loud
musique, as if many instruments had made one blast; with which not only the
Hags themselves, but the hell, into which they ran, quite vanished, and the
whole face of the Scene altered, scarce suffering the memory of such a thing: But
in the place of it, appeared a glorious, and magnificent building, figuring the
house of fame, in the top of which, were discovered the 12. masquers, sitting
upon a throne triumphal, erected in form of a pyramid, and circled with all
store of light. From whom a person, by this time descended, in the furniture of
Perseus, and expressing heroic, and masculine virtue, began to speak.

SO should, at FAMES loud sound, and VERTVES sight,
All dark, and envious witchcraft fly the light.

His crooked sword, nor put on PLVTO'S cask,
Nor on mine arm, advanced wise PALLAS shield,
(By which, my face auers'd, in open field
I slue the GORGON) for an empty name:
When VERTVE cut off TERROR, he gat FAME.
And, if when FAME was gotten, TERROR di'de,
What black ERYNNIS, or more hellish pride,
Durst arm these HAGS, now she is grown, and great,
To think they could her glories once defeat?
I was her parent, and I am her strength.
Heroic Virtue sinks not under length
Of years, or ages; but is still the same,
While he preserves, as when he got good FAME.
My daughter, then, whose glorious house you see
Built of all sounding brass, whose columns be
Men making Poets, and those well-made Men,
Whose strife it was, to have the happiest pen
Renown them to an after-life, and not
With pride, to scorn the Muse, and die forgot;
She, that inquires into all the world,
And hath, about her vaulted Palace, hoorl'd
All rumours and reports, or true, or vain,
What utmost lands, or deepest seas contain;
(But only hangs great actions, on her file)
She, to this lesser world, and greatest I'll,
To night sounds Honour, which she would have seen
In yond' bright BEVY each of them a Queen.
Eleven of them are of times, long gone.
PENTHESILEA, the brave Amazon,
Swift foot CAMILLA, Queen of Volscia,
Victorious THOMYRIS of Scythia,
Chaste ARTEMISIA, the Carian dame,
And fayre-hayr'd BERONICE, Aegypts fame,
HYPSICRATEA, glory of Asia,
CANDACE, pride of Aethiopia.
The Brittane honour, VOADICEA,
The virtuous PALMYRENE, ZENOBIA,
The wife, and warlike Goth, AMALASVNTA,
And bold VALASCA, of Bohemia.
(...) (...) Vel mare per medium, fluctu suspensa tumenti,
Ferret iter, celereis nec tingeret aequore plantas.
And afterward tells her attire, and arms, with the admiration, that the
spectators had of her. All which i^ the Poet created out of himself, without
nature, he did but show, how much so divine a soul could exceed her.

The third lived in the age of CYRVS, the great Persian Monarch; and made him
leave to live. THOMYRIS, Queen of the Scythians, or Massagets. A Heroine of a
most invincible, and vnbroken fortitude. Who, when CYRVS had invaded her, and,
taking her only son (rather by treachery, then war, as she objected) had
slain him; not touched with the grief of so great a loss, in the juster
comfort she took of a greater revenge, pursued not only the occasion, and
honour of conquering so potent an enemy, with whom fell two hundred thousand
soldiers: but (what was right memorable in her victory) left not a messenger
surviving, of his side to report the massacre. She is remembered both by Elegy.
Quod potentissimo Persarum Monarchaebello congressa est, ipsam{que} vita
castris spoliauit, ad just vlciscendam filij eius indignissimam mortem.

The fourth was honoured to life in the time of XERXES, and present at his great
expedition into Greece; ARTEMISIA, the Queen of Caria: whose virtue Viri quide
extiterunt mihi foeminae, foeminae autem viri. She is no less renowned for her
chastity, love to her husband, MAVSOLVS, monument, deserving a place among the
seven wonders of the world, which could not be done by less then a wonder of
women.

The fifth was the fair hayr'd daughter of PTOLOMAEVS PHILADELPHVS, by the
elder ARSINOE; who, married to her brother PTOLOMAEVS, surnamed EVERGETES, was
after Queen of Egypt. I find her written both BERONICE, and BERENICE. This
lady, upon an expedition of her new wedded Lord into Assyria, vowed to VENVS,
if he returned safe, and conqueror, the offering of her hair; which vow of
hers (exacted by the success) she afterward performed. But, her father missing
it, and therewith displeased, CONON, a Mathematician, who was then in
house-hold with PTOLOMEY, and knew well to flatter him, persuaded the king that
it was taken up to heaven, and made a constellation; she wing him those seven
stars, ad caudam Leonis, which are since called Coma Beronices. Which story,
then presently celebrated by CALLIMACHVS, in a most elegant poem, CATVLLVS
more elegantly converted; wherein they call her the Magnanimous, even from a
virgin: alluding (as


The sixth, that famous wife of MITHRIDATES, and Queen of Pontus, HYPSICRATEA,
no less an example of virtue then the rest; who so loved her husband, as she
was assistant to him in all labours, and hazards of the war, in a masculine
habit. For which cause (as Tonsis enim capillis, equo se armis assuefecit, quo
facilius laboribus periculis eius interesset. And, afterward, in his flight
from POMPEY, accompanied his misfortune, with a mind, and body equally
vnwearied. She is solemnly registered, by that grave Author, as a notable
President of marriage-loyaltie, and love: virtues, that might raise a mean
person to equality with a Queen, but a Queen to the state, and honour of a
deity.

The seventh, that renown of Aethiopia, CANDACE: from whose excellency, the
succeeding queenes of that nation were ambitious to be called so. A woman, of
a most haughty spirit against enemies, and a singular affection to her
subjects. I find her celebrated by Egypt in the time of AVGVSTVS; who, though
she were enforced to a peace by his Lieutenant PETRONIVS, doth not the less
worthily hold her place here; when, every where, this Elegy remains of her
fame: That she was Maximi animi mulier, tantique in la meriti, vt omnes
d^inceps Aethiopum Reginae eius nomine fuerint appellatae. She governed in
Meroe.

The eight, our own honour, VOADICEA, or BOODICEA; By some BVNDVICA, and
BVNDVCA: queen of the Iceni. A people, that inhabited that part of our Island
which was called East-Anglia, and comprehended Suffolke, Norfolke, Cambridge,
and Huntington shires. Since she was borne here at home, we will first honour
her with a home-borne testimony; from the grave and diligent

-- BVNDVCA Britonesse*
BVNDVCA, that victorious conqueresse,
That lifting up her brave Heroic thought
'Bo^e woman's weakness, with the Romans fought;
Fought, and in field against them thrice prevailed, c.
To which, see her orations in story, made by Britanica foemina, orta stirpe
Regia, quaenon solum cis cum magna dignitate praefuit, sed etiam hellum omne
administrauit; cuius animus virilis potius quam muliebris erat. And afterwards,
Foemina, forma honestissima, vultu seuero, c. All which doth weigh the more to
her true praise, in coming from the mouths of Romanes, and enemies. She lived
in the time of NERO.

The ninth, in time, but equal in fame, and (the cause of it) virtue, was the
chaste ZENOBIA queen of the Palmerynes, who, after the death of (...)

(...) Her house is all of echo made,
Where never dyes the sound;
And, as her brows the clouds invade,
Her foot do strike the ground.
Sing then good Fame, that's out of Virtue borne:
For, who doth Fame neglect, doth Virtue scorn.
Here they lighted from their Chariots, and danced forth their first dance;
then a second, immediately following it: both right curious, and full of
subtle and excellent changes, and seemed performed with no less spirits, then
of those they personated. The first was to the Cornets, the second to the
Vyolines. After which, they took out the men, and danced the measures;
entertaining the time, almost to the space of an hour, with singular variety:
when, to give them rest, from the Musique which attended the Chariots, by that
most excellent tenor voice, and exact singer (her Majesties servant M. IO.
ALLIN) this Ditty was sung.

WHen all the Ages of the earth
Were crowned, but in this famous Birth;
And that, when they would boast their store
Of Worthy Queenes, they knew no more:
How happier is that Age, can give
A Queen, in whom all they do live!
After it, succeeded their third dance; then which, a more numerous composition
could not be seen: Graphically disposed into Letters, honouring the name of
the most sweet and ingenious Prince CHARLES Duke of York. Wherein, beside that
principal grace of perspicuity, the motions were so even and apt, and their
expression so just; as if Mathematicians had lost Proportion, they might there
have found it. The Author was M. THO. GILES. After this, they danced Galliards,
and Corrantoes. And then their last dance, no less elegant (in the place) then
the rest, with which they took their Chariots again, and triumphing about the
stage, had their return to the House of Fame celebrated with this last Song;
whose notes (as the former) were the work, and honour of my excellent friend,
ALFONSO FERRABOSCO.

WHo, Virtue, can thy power forget,
That sees these live, triumph yet?
The Assyrian pomp, the Persian pride,
Gre^kes glory, and the Romanes di'de:
And who yet imitate
Their noises, tarry the same fate.
Force greatness all the glorious ways
You can, it soon decays;
But so good Fame shall never:
Her triumphs, as their causes, are for ever.
To conclude which, I know no worthier way of Epilogue, then the celebration of
who were the Celebraters.


