Every MAN OVT OF HIS HVMOVR. A Comical Satire. Acted in the year 1599. By
the then Lord CHAMBERLAINE his Servants.

The Author B. I.

Non aliena meo pressi pede * si propius sles, Tec apient magis * deries
repetat^ (...). LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for I. Smithwicke.

1616

I Understand you, Gentlemen, no^ your houses: and a worthy succession of you,
to all time, as being borne the Judges of these studies. When I wrote this
Poem, I had friendship with diverse in your societies; who, as they were great
Names in learning, so they were no less Examples of living. Of them, and then
(that I say no more) it was not despised. Now that the Printer, by a doubled
charge, thinks it worthy a longer life, then commonly the air of such things
doth promise; I am careful to put it a servant to their pleasures, who are the
inheriters of the first favour borne it. Yet, I command, it lye not in the way
of your more noble, and vse-full studies to the public. For so I shall suffer
for it: But, when the gown and cap is off, and the Lord of liberty reigns;
then, to take it in your hands, perhaps may make some Bencher, tincted with
humanity, read: and not repent him.

By your true Honorer, BEN. IONSON.
NAy, my dear ASPER,

Stay your mind:

Away.
Who is so patient of this impious world,
That he can check his spirit, or reine his tongue?
Or who hath such a dead unfeeling sense,
That heavens horrid thunders cannot wake?
To see the earth, cracked with the weight of sin,
Hell gaping under us, and over our heads
Black rau'nous ruin, with her saile-stretcht wings,
Ready to sink us down, and cover us.
Who can behold such prodigies as these,
And have his lips sealed up? not I: my soul
Was never ground into such oily colours,
To flatter vice and daube iniquity:
But (with an armed, and resolved hand)
I'll strip the ragged follies of the time,
Naked, as at their birth:

(Be not too bold.

You trouble me) and with a whip of steel,
Print wounding lashes in their iron ribs.
I fear no mood stamped in a private brow,
When I am pleased t'vnmaske a public vice.
I fear no strumpets drugs, nor ruffians stab,
Should I detect their hateful luxuries;
No brokers, usurers, or lawyers gripe,
Were I disposed to say, they're all corrupt.
I fear no courtiers frown, should I applaud
The easy flexure of his supple hummes.
Tut, these are so innate, and popular,
That drunken custom would not shame to laugh
(In scorn) at him, that should but dare to taxe'hem.
And yet, not one of these but knows his works,
Knows what damnation is, the devil, and hell,
Yet, hourly they persist, grow rank in sin,
Puffing their souls away in perj'rous air,
To cherish their extortion, pride, or lusts.

Forbear, good ASPER, be not like your name.

O, but to such, whose ^aces are all zeal,
And (with the words of HERCVLES) invade
Such crimes as these! that will not smell of sin,
But seem as they were made of Sanctify!
Religion in their garments, and their hair
Cut shorter than their eye-browes! when the conscience
Is vaster than the Ocean, and devours
More wretches than the Counters.

Gentle ASPER,
Contain your spirit in more stricter bounds,
And be not thus transported with the violence
Of your strong thoughts.

Unless your breath had power
To melt the world, and mould it new again,
It is in vain; to spend it in these moods.

I not observed this thronged round till now.
Gracious, and kind spectators, you are welcome,
APOLLO, and the MVSES feast your eyes
With graceful objects, and may our MINERVA
Answer your hopes, unto their largest strain.
Yet here, mistake me not, judicious friends.
I do not this, to beg your patience,
Or servilely to fawn on your applause,
Like some dry brain, despairing in his merit:
Let me be censured, by th'austerest brow,
Where I want art, or judgment, tax me freely:
Let envious Censors with their broadest eyes
Look through and through me; I pursue no favour.
Only vouchsafe me your attentions,
And I will give you music worth your ears.
O, how I hate the monstrousness of time,
Where every servile imitating spirit,
(Plagued with an itching leprosy of wit)
In a mere halting fury, strives to fling
His ^lc'rous body in the Thespian spring,
And straight leap's forth a Poet! but as lame
As VULCAN, or the founder of Cripple-gate.

In faith, this Humour will come ill to some,
You will be thought to be too peremptory.

This Humour? good; and why this Humour, MITIS?
Nay do not turn, but answer.

Answer? what?

I will not stir your patience, pardon me,
I urged it for some reasons, and the rather
To give these ignorant well-spoken days,
Some taste of their abuse of this word Humour.

O do not let your purpose fall, good ASPER,
It cannot but arrive most acceptable,
Chiefly to such, as have the happiness,
Daily to see how the poor innocent word
Is racked, and tortured.

I; I pray you proceed.

Ha? what? what is't?

For the abuse of Humour.

O, I crave pardon, I had lost my thoughts.
Why Humour (as 'tis ens) we thus define it
To be a quality of air or water,
And in it self holds these two properties,
Moisture and fluxure: As, for demonstration,
Power water on this floor, 'twill wet and run:
Likewise the air (forced through a horne or trumpet)
Flows instantly away, and leaves behind
A kind of dew; and hence we do conclude,
That what so ever hath fluxure, and humidity,
As wanting power to contain it self,
Is Humour: so in every humane body
The choler, melancholy, phlegm, and blood,
By reason that they flow continually
In some one part, and are not continent,
Receive the name of Humours. Now thus far
It may, by Metaphore, apply it self
Unto the general disposition:
As when some one peculiar quality
Doth so possess a man, that it doth draw
All his affects, his spirits, and his powers,
In their confl^ctions, all to run one way,
This may be truly said to be a Humour.
But that a Rooke, in wearing a pied feather,
The cable hat-band, or the three-pild ruff,
A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
On his French garters, should affect a Humour!
O, 'tis more then most ridiculous.

He speaks pure truth: now if an Idiot
Have but an apish, or fantastic strain,
It is his Humour.

Well I will scourge those Apes;
And to these courteous eyes oppose a mirror,
As large as is the stage, whereon we act:
Where they shall see the times deformity
Anatomized in every nerve, and sinew,
With constant courage, and contempt of fear.

ASPER (I urge it as your friend) take heed,
The days are dangerous, full of exception,
And men are grown impatient of reproof.

Ha, ha:
You might as well have told me, yond is heaven,
This earth, these men; and all had moved alike.
Do not I know the times condition?
Yes MITIS, and their souls, and who they be
That either will, or can except against me.
None, but a sort of fools, so sick in taste,
That they contemn all physic of the mind,
And like gald camels kick at every touch.
Good men, and virtuous spirits, that loathe their vices,
Will cherish my free labours, love my lives,
And with the fervor of their shining grace,
Make my brain fruitful to bring forth more objects,
Worthy their serious, and intent eyes.
But why enforce I this? as fainting? no.
If any here chance to behold himself,
Let him not dare to challenge me of wrong,
For, if he shame to have his follies known,
First he should shame to act them: my strict hand
Was made to cease on vice, and with a gripe
Squeeze out the humour of such spongy souls,
As like up every idle vanity.

Why this is right Furor Poeticus!
Kind gentlemen, we hope your patience
Will yet conceive the best, or entertain
This supposition, that a mad-man speaks.

What? are you ready there? MITIS sit down:
And my CORDATVS. Sound hough, and begin.
I leave you two, as censors, to sit here:
Observe what I present, and liberally
Speak your opinions, upon every Scene,
As it shall pass the view of these spectators.
Nay, now, you're tedious Sirs, for shame begin.
And MITIS, note me, if in all this front,
You can espy a gallant of this mark,
Who (to be thought one of the judicious)
Sits with his arms thus wreathed, his hat pulled here,
Cries meaw, and nods, then shakes his empty head,
Will show more several motions in his face,
Then the new London, Rome, or Niniueh,
And (now and then) breaks a dry bisquet jest,
Which that it may more easily be chewed,
He sleeps in his own laughter.

Why? will that
Make it be sooner swallowed?

O, assure you.
Or if it did not, yet as HORACE sings,
" Ieiunus raro stomachus vulgaria temnit,
" Mean cares are welcome still to hungry guests.

'Tis true, but why should we observe them, ASPER?

O I would know them, for in such assemblies,
They are more infectious then the pestilence:
And therefore I would give them pills to purge,
And make them fit for fair societies.
How monstrous, and detested is't, to see
A fellow, that has neither art, nor brain,
Sit like an ARISTARCHVS, or starke-asse,
Taking men's lines, with a tobacco face,
In snuff, still spitting, using his wryed looks
(In nature of a vice) to wrest, and turn
The good aspect of those that shall sit near him,
From what they do behold! O, 'tis most vile.

Nay, ASPER.

Peace, MITIS, I do know your thought.
You'll say, your guests here will except at this:
Pish, you are too timorous, and full of doubt.
Then, he, a patient, shall reject all physic,
Because the physician tells him, you are sick:
Or, if I say, That he is vicious,
You will not hear of virtue. Come, you're fond.
Shall I be so extravagant to think,
That happy judgements, and composed spirits,
Will challenge me for taxing such as these?
I am ashamed.

Nay, but good pardon us:
We must not bear this peremptory sail,
But use our best endeavours how to please.

Why, therein I commend your careful thoughts,
And I will mix with you in industry
To please, but whom? attentive auditors,
Such as will join their profit with their pleasure,
And come to feed their understanding parts:
For these, I'll prodigally spend my self,
And speak away my spirit into air;
For these, I'll melt my brain into invention,
Coin new conceits, and hang my richest words
As polished jewels in their bounteous ears.
But stay, I loose my self, and wrong their patience;
If I dwell here, they will not begin, I see:
Friends sit you still, and entertain this troupe
With some familiar, and by-conference,
I'll haste them sound. Now gentlemen, I go
To turn an actor, and a Humorist,
Where (ere I do resume my present person)
We hope to make the circles of your eyes
Flow with distilled laughter: if we fail,
We must impute it to this only chance,
" Art hath an enemy called Ignorance.

How do you like his spirit, MITIS?

I should like it much better, if he were less confident.


Why, do you suspect his merit?


No, but I fear this will procure him much envy.


O, that sets the stronger seal on his desert, if he had no enemies, I should
esteem his fortunes most wretched at this instant.


You have seen his play, CORDATVS? pray you, how is't?


Faith sir, I must refrain to judge, only this I can say of it, 'tis strange,
and of a particular kind by it self, somewhat like Vetus Comoedia: a work
that hath bounteously pleased me, how it will answer the general expectation,
I know not.


Does he observe all the laws of Comedy in it?


What laws mean you?


Why, the equal division of it into Acts, and Scenes, according to the
Terentian manner, his true number of Actors; the furnishing of the Scene with
GREX, or CHORVS, and that the whole Argument fall within compass of a days
business.


O no, these are too nice observations.


They are such as must be received, by your favour, or it cannot be
authentic.


Troth, I can discern no such necessity.


No?


No, I assure you, Signior. If those laws you speak of, had been delivered
us, ab initio, and in their present virtue and perfection, there had been some
reason of obeying their powers: but 'tis extant, that that which we call
Comoedia, was at first nothing but a simple, and continued Song, sung by one
only person, till SVSARIO invented a second, after him EPICHARMVS a third;
PHORMVS, and CHIONIDES devised to have four Actors, with a Prologue and
Chorus; to which CRATINVS (long after) added a fifth, and sixth; EVPOLIS more;
ARISTOPHANES more then they: every man in the dignity of his spirit and
judgment, supplied some-thing. And (though that in him this kind of Poem
appeared absolute, and fully perfected) yet how is the face of it changed
since, in MENANDER, PHILEMON, CECILIVS, PLAVTVS, and the rest; who have utterly
excluded the Chorus, altered the property of the persons, their names, and
natures, and augmented it with all liberty, according to the elegancy and
disposition of those times, wherein they wrote? I see not then, but we should
enjoy the same licence, or free power, to illustrate and heighten our invention
as they did; and not be tied to those strict and regular forms, which the
niceness of a few (who are nothing but form) would thrust upon us.


Well, we will not dispute of this now: but what's his Scene?


Marry, Insula Fortunata, Sir.


O, the fortunate Island? mass, he has bound himself to a strict law there.


Why so?


He cannot lightly alter the Scene, without crossing the seas.


He needs not, having a whole Island to run through, I think.


No? how comes it then, that in some one Play we see so many seas, countries,
and kingdoms, past over with such admirable dexterity?


O, that but shows how well the Authors can travail in their vocation, and
out-run the apprehension of their auditory. But leaving this, I would they
would begin once: this protraction is able to sour the best-settled patience
in the Theatre.


They have answered your wish Sir: they sound.


O, here comes the Prologue: Now sir! if you had staid a little longer, I meant
to have spoke your prologue for you, I faith.


Mary, with all my heart, Sir, you shall do it yet, and I thank you.


Nay, nay, stay, stay, hear you?


You could not have studied to have done me a greater benefit at the instant,
for I protest to you, I am imperfect, and (had I spoke it) I must of necessity
have been out.


Why, but do you speak this seriously?


Seriously! I (wit's my help do I) and esteem my self in debted to your
kindness for it.


For what?


Why, for undertaking the prologue for me.


How? did I undertake it for you?


Did you! I appeal to all these gentlemen, whether you did or no? Come, it
pleases you to cast a strange look on it now; but 'twill not serve.


Before me, but it must serve: and therefore speak your prologue.


And I do, let me die poisoned with some venomous hiss, and never live to
look as high as the two-penny room again.


He has put you to it, sir.


Sdeath, what a humorous fellow is this? Gentlemen, good ^ith I can speak no
prologue, howsoever his weak wit has had the fortune to make this strong use
of me, here before you: but I protest --


Come, come, leave these fustian protestations: away, come, I cannot abide
these gray-headed ceremonies. Boy, fetch me a glass, quickly, I may bid these
gentlemen welcome; give them a health here: I marl'e whose wit 'twas to put a
prologue in you'd ^ack-buts mouth: they might well think he would be out of tune,
and yet you'd play upon him too.


Hang him, dull block.


O good words, good words, a well-timberd fellow, he would have made a good
column, and he had been thought on, when the house was a building. O, art
thou come? well said; give me boy, fill, so. Here's a cup of wine sparkles
like a diamond. Gentlewomen (I am sworn to put them in first) and Gentlemen, a
round, in place of a bad prologue, I drink this good draught to your health
here, Canary, the very Elixir and spirit of wine. This is that our Poet calls
Castalian liquor, when he comes abroad (now and then) once in a fortnight, and
makes a good meal among Players, where he has Caninum appetitum: mary, at home
he keeps a good philosophical diet, beans and butter-milke: an honest pure
Rogue, he will take you off three, four, five of these, one after another,
and look villainously when he has done, like a one-headed CR^BERVS (he do not
hear me I hope) and then (when his belly is well ballac't, and his brain
rigged a little) he sails away withal, as though he would work wonders when
he comes home. He has made a Play here, and he calls it, Every Man out of his
humour: Sbloud, and he get me out of the humour he has put me in, I'll trust
none of his Tribe again, while I live. Gentles, all I can say for him, is, you
are welcome. I could wish my bottle here amongst you: but there's an old rule,
No pledging your own health. Mary, if any here be thirsty for it, their best
way (that I know) is, sit still, seal up their lips, and drink so much of the
play, in at their ears.


What may this fellow be, CORDATVS?


Faith, if the time will suffer his description, I'll give it you. He is one,
the Author calls him CARLO BVFFONE, an impudent common jester, a violent
rayler, and an incomprehensible Epicure; one, whose company is desired of all
men, but beloved of none; he will sooner lose his soul then a jest, and
profane even the most holy things, to excite laughter: no honourable or
reverend personage whatsoever, can come within the reach of his eye, but is
turned into all manner of variety, by his adult'rate simile's.


You paint forth a monster.


He will prefer all Countries before his native, and thinks he can never
sufficiently, or with admiration enough, deliver his affectionate conceit of
foreign Atheistical policies: but stay -- Observe these, hee'le appear
himself anon.


O, this is your envious man (MACILENTE) I think.


The same, sir.


VIri est, fortunae caecuatem facile far.
Tis true; but, Stoique, where (in the vast world)
Doth that man breathe, that can so much command
His blood, and his affection? well: I see,
I strive in vain to cure my wounded soul;
For every cordial that my thoughts apply,
Turns to a cor'siue, and doth eat it farther.
There is no taste in this Philosophie,
Tis like a potion that a man should drink,
But turns his stomach with the sight of it.
I am no such pild Cinique, to believe
That beggary is the only happiness;
Or (with a number of these patient fools)
To sing: My mind to me a kingdom is,
When the lank hungry belly barks for food.
I look into the world, and there I meet
With objects, that do strike my bloud-shot eyes
Into my brain: where, when I view my self;
Having before observed, this m^n is great,
Mighty, and feared: that, loved and highly favoured:
A third, thought wise and learned: a fourth, rich,
And therefore honoured: a fifth, rarely featured:
A sixth, admired for his nuptial fortunes:
When I see these (I say) and view my self,
I wish the organs of my ^ight were cracked;
And th^t the engine of my grief could cast
Mine eye-balls, like two globes of wild-fire forth,
To melt this vnproportion'd frame of nature.
Oh, they are thoughts that have transfixed my heart,
And often (in the strength of apprehension)
Made my cold passion stand upon my face,
Like drops of dew on a stiff cake of ice.

This alludes well to that of the Poet,
Inuidus suspirat, ge^it, in^tit{que} demes,
S^d^t frigidus, intuem quod odit.

O peace, you break the Scene.

Soft, who be these?
I'll lay me down a while till they be past.

Signior, note this gallant, I pray you.

What is he?

A tame Rooke, you'll take him presently: List.

NAy look you CARLO: this is my Humour now! I have land and money, my friends
left me well, and I will be a Gentleman whatsoever it cost me.


Tut, and I take an humour of a thing once, I am like your taylors needle, I
go through: but, for my name, Signior, how think you? will it not serve for a
gentleman's name, when the Signior is put to it? Ha?


Let me hear: how is't?


Signior In^ulso Sogliardo: me thinks it sounds well.


O excellent! tut, and all fitted to your name, you might very well stand for a
gentleman: I know many Sogliardos gentlemen.


Why, and for my wealth I might be a Justice of Peace.


I, and a Constable for your wit.


All this is my Lordship you see here, and those Farms you came by.


Good steps to gentility too, mary: but SOGLIARDO, if you affect to be a
gentleman indeed, you must observe all the rare qualities, humours, and
complements of a gentleman.


I know it, signior, and if you please to instruct, I am not too good to
learn, He assure you.


Enough sir: I'll make admirable use in the proiection of my medicine upon this
lump of copper here. I'll bethink me, for you sir.


Signior, I will both pay you, and pray you, and thank you, and think on you.


Is not this purely good?


Sbloud, why should such a prick-card hine as this,
Berich? Ha? a fool? such a transparent gull
That may be scene through? wherefore should he have land,
Houses, and lordships? O, I could eat my entrails,
And sink my soul into the earth with sorrow.

First (to be an accomplished gentleman, that is, a gentleman of the time) you
must give over house-keeping in the country, and live altogether in the city
amongst gallants; where, at your first appearance, 'twere good you turned four
or five hundred acres of your best land into two or three trunks of apparel
(you may do it without going to a conjurer) and be sure, you mix your self
still, with such as flourish in the spring of the fashion, and are least
popular; study their carriage, and behaviour in all: learn to play at Primero
and Passage, and (ever when you lose) ha'two or three peculiar oaths to swear
by, that no man else swears: but above all, protest in your play, and affirm,
Upon your credit; As you are a true gentleman (at every cast) you may do it
with a safe conscience, I warrant you.


O admirable rare! he cannot choose but be a gentleman, that ha's these
excellent gifts: more, more, I beseech you.


You must endeavour to feed cleanly at your Ordinary, sit melancholy, and
pick your teeth when you cannot speak: and when you come to Plays, be
humorous, look with a good startch't face, and ruffle your brow like a new
boot; laugh at nothing but your own jests, or else as the Noblemen laugh.
That's a special grace you must observe.


I warrant you, sir.


I, and ^it of the stage, and stout: provided, you have a good suit.


O, I'll have a suit only for that, sir.


You must talk much of your kindred, and allies.


Lies! no Signior, I shall not need to do so, I have kindred in the city to
talk of: I have a niece is a merchants wife; and a nephew, my brother SORDIDOS
son, of the Innes of Court.


O, but you must pretend alliance with Courtiers and great persons: and ever
when you are to dine or sup in any strange presence, hire a fellow with a
great chain (though it be copper it's no matter) to bring you letters, feigned
from such a Nobleman, or such a Knight, or such a Lady, To their worshipful,
right rare, and noble qualified friend or kinsman, Signior In^ulso Sogliardo;
give your self stile enough. And there (while you intend circumstances of
news, or enquiry of their health, or so) one of your familiars (whom you must
carry about you still) breaks it up (as 'twere in a jest) and reads it
publicly at the table: at which, you must seem to take as unpardonable
offence, as if he had torn your Mistress colours, or breathed upon her picture;
and pursue it with that hot grace, as if you would advance a challenge upon it
presently.


Stay, I do not like that humour of challenge, it may be accepted; but I'll
tell you what's my humour now: I will do this. I will take occasion of sending
one of my suites to the Taylors to have the pocke^ repaired, or so; and there
such a letter, as you talk of (broke open and all) shall be left: O, the
Taylor will presently give out what I am, upon the reading of it, worth
twenty of your Gallants.


But then you must put on an extreme face of discontentment at your mans
negligence.


O, so I will, and beat him too: I'll have a man for the purpose.


You may; you have land and crowns: O partial fate!


Mass well remembered, you must keep your men gallant, at the first, fine py^d
liveries, laid with good gold lace, there's no loss in it, they may tipped off
and pawn it, when they lack victuals.


By'r Lady, that is chargeable Signior, 'twill bring a man in debt.


Debt? why, that's the more for your credit sir: it's an excellent policy to
owe much in these days, if you note it.


As how good Signior? I would fain be a Politician.


O! look where you are indebted any great sum, your creditor observes you
with no less regard, then if he were bound to you for some huge benefit, and
will quake to give you the least cause of offence, lest he loose his money. I
assure you (in these times) no man has his servant more obsequious and pliant,
then gentlemen their creditors: to whom (if at any time) you pay but a moitie,
or a fourth part, it comes more acceptedly, then if you gave them a new-yeares
gift.


I perceive you, sir: I will take up, and bring my self in credit sure.


Mary this, always beware you commerce not with bankrupts, or poor needy
Ludgathians* they are impudent creatures, turbulent spirits, they care not what
violent tragedies they stir, nor how they play fast and loose with a poor
gentleman's fortunes, to get their own. Mary, these rich fellows (that have the
world, or the better part of it, sleeping in their counting-houses) they are
ten times more placable, they; either fear, hope, or modesty, restrains them
from offering any outrages: but this is nothing to your followers, you shall
not run a penny more in arrerage for them, and you list your self.


No? how should I keep them then?


Keep them? Sbloud let them keep themselves, they are no sheep, are they?
What? you shall come in houses, where plate, apparel, jewels, and diverse
other pretty commodities lye negligently scattered, and I would have those
Mercuries follow me (I trow) should remember they had not their fingers for
nothing.


That's not so good, me thinks.


Why, after you have kept them a fortnight, or so, and showed them enough to
the world, you may turn them away, and keep no more but a boy, it's enough.


Nay, my humour is not for boys, I'll keep men, and I keep any; and I'll give
coats, that's my humour: but I lack a cullisen.


Why, now you ride to the city, you may buy one, I'll bring you where you shall
have your choice for money.


Can you, sir?


O, I: you shall have one take measure of you, and make you a Co^ of arms, to
fit you of what fashion you will.


By word of mouth, I thank you, Signior; I'll be once a little prodigal in a
humour, in faith, and have a most prodigious coat.


Torment and death! break head and brain at once,
To be delivered of your fighting issue.
Who can endure to see blind Fortune dote thus?
To be enamoured on this dusty turf?
This clod? a whoreson puck-fist? O god, god, god, god, c.
I could run wild with grief now, to behold
The rankness of her bounties, that doth breed
Such bull-rushes; these mushrompe gentlemen,
That shoot up in a night to place, and worship.

Let him alone, some stray, some stray.

Nay, I will examine him before I go, sure.

The Lord of the soil ha's al vvests, and strays here? ha's he not?

Yes, sir.

Faith, then I pity the poor fellow, he's fallen into a fools hands.


Sirrah, who gave you commission to lye in my lordship?


Your lordship?


How? my lordship? do you know me, sir?


I do know you, sir.


S'heart, he answers him like an echo.


Why, who am I, Sir?


One of those that fortune favours.


The Perphrasis of a fool; I'll observe this better.


That fortune favours? how mean you that, friend?


I mean simply. THat you are one that lives not by your vvits.


By my wits? No sir, I scorn to live by my wits, I. I have better means, I
tell thee, then to take such base courses, as to live by my wits. Sbloud, doest
thou think I live by my wits?


Me thinks, Jester, you should not relilsh this well.


Ha? does he know me?


Though yours be the worst use a man can put his wit to, of thousands, to
prostitute it at every tavern and ordinary; yet (me thinks) you should have
turned your broad side at this, and have been ready with an Apology, able to
sink this hulke of ignorance into the bottom, and depth of his contempt.


Sbloud 'tis MACILENTE! Signior, you are well encountered, how is't? O, we must
not regard what he says man, a trout, a shallow fool, he ha's no more brain
then a butter-flie, a mere stuffed suit, he looks like a musty bottle, new
vvickerd, his head's the cork, light, light. I am glad to see you so well
returned, Signior.


You are? Gramercy, good IANVS.


Is he one of your acquaintance? I love him the better for that.


Gods precious, come away man, what do you mean? and you knew him as I do,
you'd shun him, as you'd do the plague?


Why, sir?


O, he's a black fellow, take heed on him.


Is he a Scholar, or a Soldier?


Both, both; a lean mongrel, he looks as if he were chapfalne, with barking
at other men's good fortunes: 'ware how you offend him, he carries oil and fire
in his pen, will scald where it drops: his spirit's like powder, quick,
violent: hee'le blow a man up with a jest: I fear him vvorse then a rotten
wall does the cannon, shake an hour after, at the report. Away, come not near
him.


For Gods sake let's be gone, and he be a Scholar, you know I cannot abide
him, I had as leeue see a Cockatrice, specially as cockatrices go now.


What, you'll stay, signior? this gentleman SOGLIARDO, and I, are to visit the
knight PVNTARVOLO, and from thence to the city, we shall meet there.


I, when I cannot shun you, we will meet.
'Tis strange! of all the creatures I have seen,
I envy not this BVFFON, for indeed
Neither his fortunes, nor his parts deserve it:
But I do hate him, as I hate the devil,
Or that brasse-visag'd monster Barbarism.
O, 'tis an open-throated, black-mouth'd cur,
That bites at all, but eats on those that feed him.
A slave, that to your face will (serpent-like)
Creep on the ground, as he would eat the dust;
And to your back will turn the tail, and sting
More deadly then a scorpion: Stay, who's this?
Now for my soul, another minion
Of the old lady Chance's: I'll observe him.

O Rare! good, good, good, good, good! I thank my Stars, I thank my Stars
for it.


Said I not true? doth not his passion speak
Out of my divination? O my senses,
Why loose you not your powers, and become
Dulled, if not deadded with this spectacle?
I know him, 'tis SORDIDO, the farmer,
A Boor, and brother to that swine was here.

Excellent, excellent, excellent! as I would wish, as I would wish.


See how the strumpet Fortune tickles him,
And makes him swoune with laughter, o, o, o.

Ha, ha, ha, I will not sow my grounds this year. Let me see, what hauest
shall we have? June, July, August?


What is't, a Prognostication rap's him so?

The xx, xxi, xxij, days, rain and wind, O good, good! the xxiij, and
xxiiij, rain and some wind, good! the xxvi, rain, good still! xxvi, xxvij,
xxviij, wind and some rain; would it had been rain and some wind: well
'tis good (when it can be no better) xxix, inclining to rain: inclining to
rain? that's not so good now. xxx, and xxxi, wind and no rain: no rain?
S'lid stay; this is vvorse and vvorse: what says he of S. Swithins? turn
back, look, S. Swithins: no rain?


O, here's a precious dirty damned rogue,
That fats himself with expectation
Of rotten weather, and vnseason'd hours;
And he is rich for it, an elder brother!
His barnes are full! his reekes, and mowes well trod!
His garners crack with store! O, tis well; ha, ha, ha:
A plague consume thee, and thy house.

O here, S. Swithins, the xv day, variable weather, for the most part rain,
good; for the most part rain: Why, it should rain forty days after, now,
more or less, it was a rule held, before I was able to hold a plough, and yet
here are two days, no rain; ha? it makes me muse. We'll see how the next
month begins, if that be better. September, first, second, third, and fourth
days, rainy, and blustering; this is well now: fifth, sixth, seventh, eight,
and ninth, rainy, with some thunder; I mary, this is excellent; the other was
false printed sure: the tenth, and eleventh, great store of rain; O good,
good, good, good, good! the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth days, rain;
good still: fifteenth, and sixteenth, rain; good still: seventeenth, and
eighteenth, rain, good still; nineteenth, and twentieth, good still, good
still, good still, good still, good still! one and twentieth, some rain; some
rain? well, we must be patient, and attend the heavens pleasure, would it
were more though: the one and tvventieth, two and tvventieth, three and
tvventieth, great tempest of rain, thunder, and lightning. O good again, past
expectation good!
I thank my blessed angel; never, never,
Laid I penny better out, then this,
To purchase this dear book: not dear for price,
And yet of me as dear^ly prized as life,
Since in it, is contained the very life,
Blood, strength, and sinews of my happiness.
Blessed be the hour, wherein I bought this book,
His studies happy, that composed the book,
And the man fortunate, that sold the book.
Sleep with this charm, and be as true to me,
As I am joyed, and confident in thee.



Ha, ha, ha? In not this good? Is't not pleasing this?
Ha, ha, ha! God pardon me! ha, ha!
Is't possible that such a spacious villain
Should live, and not be plagued? or lies he hid
Within the vvrinckled bosom of the world,
Where heaven cannot see him? Sbloud (me thinks)
'Tis rare, and strange, that he should breathe, and vvalke,
Feed with digestion, sleep, enjoy his health,
And (like a boisterous whale, svvallowing the poor)
Still swim in wealth, and pleasure! is 't not strange?
Unless his house, and skin were thunder-proofe,
I wonder at it! Me thinks, now, the hecticke,
Gout, leprosy, or some such loth'd disease
Might light upon him; or that fire (from heaven)
Might fall upon his barnes; or mice, and rats
Eat up his grain; or else that it might rot
Within the hoary reekes, even as it stands:
Me thinks this might be well; and after all
The devil might come and fetch him. I, 'tis true!
Mean time he sursets in prosperity,
And thou (in envy of him) gnaw'st thy self,
Peace, fool, get hence, and tell thy vexed spirit,
"Wealth in this age will scarcely look on merit.

Who brought this same, sirha?

Mary, sir, one of the Justices men, he says 'tis a precept, and all their
hands be at it:


I, and the prints of them stick in my flesh,
Deeper then i'their letters: They have sent me
Pills wrapped in paper here, that should I take them,
Would poison all the sweetness of my book,
And turn my honey into homlocke juice.
But I am wiser then to serve their precepts,
Or follow their prescriptions. Here's a device,
To charge me bring my grain unto the markets:
I, much, when I have neither barn nor garner,
Nor earth to hide it in, I'll bring it; till then,
Each corn I send shall be as big as Pa^les.
O, but (say some) the poor are like to starve.
Why let them starve, what's that to me? are bees
Bound to keep life in drones, and idle moths? no:
Why such are these (that term themselves the poor,
Only because they would be pitied,
But are indeed a sort of lazy beggars)
Licentious rogues, and sturdy vagabonds,
Bred (by the sloth of a fat plentious year)
Like snakes, in heat of summer, out of dung,
And this is all that these cheap times are good for:
Whereas a wholesome, and penurious dearth
Purges the soil of such vile excrements,
And kills the vipers up.

O, but master,
Take heed they hear you not.

Why so?

They will exclaim against you.

I, their exclaims
Move me as much, as thy breath moves a mountain!
Poor worms, they hiss at me, whilst I at home
Can be contented to applaud my self,
To fit and clap my hands, and laugh, and leap,
Knocking my head against my roof, with joy
To see how plump my bags are, and my barnes.
Sirrah, go, hie you home, and bid your fellows,
Get all their flailes ready, again' I come.

I will, Sir.

I'll instantly set all my hines to thrashing
Of a whole reeke of corn, which I will hide
Under the ground; and with the straw thereof
I'll stuff the out-sides of my other mowes:
That done, I'll have them empty all my garners,
And in the friendly earth bury my store,
That, when the searchers come, they may suppose
All's spent, and that my fortunes were belied.
And, to lend more opinion to my want,
And stop that many-mouthed vulgar dog,
(Which else would still be baying at my door)
Each market day, I will be seen to buy
Part of the purest wheat, as for my household:
Where when it comes, it shall increase my heaps,
Twill yield me treble gain, at this dear time,
Promis^d in this dear book: I have cast all.
Till then I will not sell an ear. I'll hang first.
O, I shall make my prizes as I list,
My house and I can feed on peas, and barley,
What though a world of wretches starve the while?
"He that will thrive, must think no courses vile.

Now, Signior, how approve you this? have the Humorists expressed themselves
truly or no?


Yes (if it be well prosecuted) 'tis hitherto happy enough: but me thinks,
MACILENTE went hence too soon, he might have been made to stay, and speak
somewhat in reproof of SORDIDO'S wretchedness, now at the last.


O, no, that had been extremely improper, besides, he had continued the Scene
too long with him, as't was, being in no more action.


You may enforce the length, as a necessary reason; but for propriety, the
Scene would very well have borne it, in my judgment.


O, worst of both: why, you mistake his Humour utterly then.


How? do I mistake it? is't not envy?


Yes, but you must understand, Signior, he envies him not as he is a villain,
a wolf in the common-wealth, but as he is rich, and fortunate; for the true
condition of envy, is, Dolor altenae foelicitatis, to have our eyes
continually sixth upon another mans prosperity, that is, his chief happiness,
and to grieve at that. Whereas, if we make his monstrous, and abhord actions
our object, the grief (we take then) comes nearer the nature of hate, then
envy, as being bred out of a kind of contempt and loathing, in our selves.


So you'll infer it had been hate, not envy in him, to reprehend the humour
of SORDIDO?


Right, for what a man truly envies in another, he could always love, and
cherish in himself: but no man truly reprehends in another, what he loves in
himself; therefore reprehension is out of his hate. And this distinction hath
he himself made in a speech there (if you marked it) where he says, I envy
not this BVFFON, but I hate him.


Stay, sir: I envy not this BVFFON, but I hate him: why might he not as well
have hated SORDIDO, as him?


No, sir, there was subject for his envy in SORDIDO; his wealth: So was there
not in the other. He stood possessed of no one eminent gift, but amostodious, and
fiend-like disposition, that would turn charity it self into hate, much more
envy, for the present.


You have satisfied me, sir; O, here comes the Fool and the Jester, again,
me thinks.


'Twere pity they should be parted, sir.


What bright-shining gallant's that with them? the knight they went to?


No, sir, this is one Monsieur FASTIDIVS BRISK, otherwise called the fresh
Frenchefied courtier.


A humorist too?


As humorous as quick-siluer, do but observe him, the Scene is the cou^try
still, remember.


CINEDO, watch when the knight comes, and give us word.


I will, sir.


How lik'st thou my boy, CARLO?


O, well, well. He looks like a colonel of the Pigmies horse, or one of these
motions, in a great antique clock: he would show well upon a hab^erdashers
stall, at a corner shop, rarely.


S'heart, what a damned witty rogne's this? how he confounds with his simile's?


Better with simile's, then smiles: and whither were you riding now, Signior?


Who, I? what a silly iest's that? whither should I ride, but to the court?


O, pardon me, sir, twenty places more: your hot-house, or your whore-house --



By the virtue of my soul, this knight dwells in Elizium, here.


He's gone ^ow, I thought he would fly out presently. These be our
nimble-spirited Ca^so's, that have their evasions at pleasure, will run over a
bog like your wild Irish: no sooner started, but they will leap from one thing
to another, like a squirrel, heigh: dance! and do tricks in their discourse,
from fire to water, from water to air, from air to earth, as if their tongues
did but even like the four elements over, and away.


Sirrha, CARLO, thou never ^aw'st my grey-hobbie yet, did thou?


No: have you such a one?


The best in Europe (my good villain) thou'lt say, when thou see him.


But when shall I see him?


There was a noble man in the court offered me 100. pound for him, by this
light: a fine little fiery slave, he runs like a (oh) excellent, excellent!
with the very sound of the spur.


How? the sound of the spur?


O, it's your only humour now extant, sir: a good gingle, a good gingle.


Sbloud, you shall see him turn morris-dancer, he ha's got him bells, a good
suit, and a hobby-horse.


Signior, now you talk of a hobby-horse, I know where one is, will not be
given for a brace of angels.


How is that, Sir?


Mary, sir, I am telling this gentleman of a hobby-horse, it was my fathers
indeed, and (though I say it --


That should not say it) on, on.


He did dance in it, with as good humour, and as good regard, as any man of his
degree what soever, being no gentleman: I have danced in it my self too.


Not since the humour of gentility was upon you? did you?


Yes, once; mary, that was but to show what a gentleman might do, in a humour.


O, very good.


Why, this fellows discourse were nothing, but for the word Humour.


O, bear with him, and he should lack matter, and words too, 'twere
pitiful.


Nay, look you, sir, there's ne'er a gentleman in the country has the like
humours, for the hobby-horse, as I have; I have the method for the threeding of
the needle and all, the --


How, the method.


I, the leigeritie for that, and the wigh-hie, and the daggers in the nose, and
the travels of the egg from singer to singer, all the humours incident to the
quality. The horse hangs at home in my parlour. I'll keep it for a monument, as
long as I live, sure.


Do so; and when you die, 'twill be an excellent trophy, to hang over your
tomb.


Mass, and I'll have a tomb (now I think on it) 'tis but so much charges.


Best build it in your life time then, your heirs may hap to forget it else.


Nay, I mean so, I'll not trust to them.


No, for heirs, and executors, are grown damnably careless, specially, since
the ghosts of testators left walking: how like you him, Signior?


Fore heavens, his humour arrides me exceedingly.


Arrides you?


I, pleases me (a pox on it) I am so haunted at the count, and at my lodging,
with your refined choice spirits, that it makes me clean of another garb,
another sheaf, I know not how! I cannot frame me to your harsh vulgar phrase,
'tis against my genius.


Signior CARLO.


This is right to that of HORACE, D^m vitant sl^l^i la, in contraria
currunt: so this gallant, labouring to anoid popularity, falls into a habit of
affection, ten thousand times hatefuller then the former.


Who, he? a gull, a fool, no salt in him in the earth, man: he looks like a
fresh salmon kept in a tub, hee'le be spent shortly. His braine's lighter then
his feather already, and his tongue more subject to lie, then that's to wag: he
sleeps with a muske-cat every night, and walks all day hung'd in pomander
chains for penance: he ha's his skin tanned in civet, to make his complexion
strong, and the sweetness of his youth lasting in the sense of his sweet lady.
A good empty puff, he loves you well, Signior.


There shall be no love lost, sir, I'll assure you.


Nay, CARLO, I am not happy in thy love, I see: pray thee suffer me to enjoy
thy company a little (sweet mischief) by this air, I shall envy this
gentleman's place in thy affections, if you be thus private, in faith. How now? is
the knight arrived?


No, sir, but 'tis guest he will arrive presently, by his fore-runners.


His bounds! by MINERVA an excellent figure; a good boy.


You should give him a french crown for it: the boy would find two better
figures in that, and a good figure of your bounty beside.


Tut, the boy wants no crowns.


No crown: speak in the singular number, and wee'le believe you.


Nay, thou art so capriciously conceited now. Sir (damnation) I have heard
this knight PVNTARVOLO, reported to be a gentleman of exceeding good humour;
thou know him: prithee, how is his disposition? I ne'er was so favoured of
my stars, as to see him yet. Boy, do you look to the hobby?


I, sir, the groom has set him up.


'Tis well: I rid out of my way of intent to visit him, and take knowledge of
his -- Nay, good wickedness, his humour, his humour.


Why, he loves dogs, and hawks, and his wife, well: he has a good riding face,
and he can fit a great horse; he will taint a staff well at tilt: when he is
mounted, he looks like the sign of the George, that's all I know; save, that
in stead of a dragon, he will brandish against a tree, and break his sword as
con^idently upon the knotty bark, as the other did upon the skales of the
beast.


O, but this is nothing to that's delivered of him. They say he has dialogues,
and discourses between his horse, himself, and his dog: and that he will
court his own lady; as she were a stranger never encountered before.


I, that he will, and make fresh love to her every morning: this gentleman has
been a spectator of it, Signior Insulso.


I am resolute to keep a page: say you sir?


You have seen Signior Puntaruolo accost his lady?


O, I sir.


And how is the manner of it, prithee, good Signior?


Faith sir, in very good sort, he has his humours for it, sir: as first,
(suppose he were now to come from riding, or hunting, or so) he has his trumpet
to sound, and then the waiting gentlewoman, she looks out, and then he
speaks, and then she speaks -- very pretty in faith, gentlemen.


Why, but do you remember no particulars, Signior?


O, yes sir: first, the gentlewoman, she looks out at the window.


After the trumpet has summoned a parle? not before?


No, sir, not before: and then says he -- ha, ha, ha, ha, c.


What says he? be not rapt so.


Says he -- ha, ha, ha, ha, c.


Nay, speak, speak.


Ha, ha, ha, says he: God save you, says he: ha, ha, c.


Was this the ridiculous motive to all this passion?


Nay, that, that comes after, is -- ha, ha, ha, ha, c.


Doubtless, he apprehends more then he utters, this fellow: or else.


List, list, they are come from hunting: stand by, close under this (...), and
you shall see it done, better then I can show it.


So it had need, 'twill scarce poise the observation else.


Faith I remember all, but the manner of it is quite out of my head.


O, with-draw, with-draw, it cannot be but a most pleasing object.


Forester, give wind to thy borne. Enough, by this, the sound hath touched the
ears of the enclosed: Depart, leave the dog, and take with thee what thou
hast deserved, the horne, and thanks.


I, mary, there's some taste in this.


Is't not good?


Ah, peace, now above, now above!


Stay: mine eye hath (on the instant) through the bounty of the window,
received the form of a Nymph. I will step forward three pases: of the which, I
will barely retire one; and (after some little flexure of the knee) with an
erected grace salute her (one, two, and three.) Sweet lady, God save you.


No, forsooth: I am but the waiting gentlewoman.


He knew that before.


Pardon me: Humanum est errare.


He learned that of his chaplain.


To the perfection of complement (which is the Dial of the thought, and guided
by the Sun of your beauties) are required these three specials: the gnomon,
the puntilio's, and the superficies: the superficies, is that we call, place;
the puntilio's, circumstance; and the gnomon, ceremony: in either of which, for
a stranger to err, 'tis easy and facile, and such am I.


True, not knowing her horizon, he must needs err: which I fear, he knows
too well.


What call you the lord of the castle? sweet face.


The lord of the castle is a knight, sir; Signior PVNTARVOLO.


PVNTARVOLO? O.


Now must he ruminate.


Does the wench know him all this while, then?


O, doc you know me, man? why, therein lies the sirrup of the jest, it's a
project, a designement of his own, a thing studied, and rehearst as ordinarily
at his coming from hawking, or hunting, as a jigge after a play.


I, even like your jigge, sir.


'Tis a most sumptuous and stately edifice! of what years is the knight, fair
damsel?


Faith, much about your years, sir.


What complexion, or what stature bears he?


Of your stature, and very near upon your complexion.


Mine is melancholy:


So is the dogs, just.


And doth argue constancy, chie^ly in love. What are his endowments? Is he
courteous?


O, the most courteous knight in Christian land, sir.


Is he magnanimous?


As the skin between your brows, sir.


Is he bountiful?


'Slud, he takes an inuentory of his own good parts.


Bountiful? I, sir, I would you should know it; the poor are seen'd at his
gate, early, and late, sir.


Is he learned?


O, I sir, he can speak the French, and Italian.


Then he is trauail'd?


I, forsooth, he hath been beyond-sea, once, or twice.


As far as Paris, to fetch over a fashion, and come back again.


Is he religious?


Religious? I know not what you call religious, but he goes to church, I am
sure.


S'lid, methinkes, these answers should offend him.


T'ut, no; he knows they are excellent, and to her capacity, that speaks
them.


Would I might see his face.


She should let down a glass from the window at that word, and request him to
look in it.


Doubtless, the gentleman is most exact, and absolutely qualified? doth the
castle contain him?


No, sir, he is from home, but his lady is within.


His lady? what, is she fair? splendidious? and amiable?


O, Lord, sir!


Prithee, dear Nymph, entreat her beauties to shine on this side of the
building.


That he may erect a new dial of complement, with his gnomons, and his
puntilio's.


Nay, thou art such another Cinique now, a man had need walk uprightly before
thee.


Heart, can any man walk more upright then he does? Look, look; as if he
went in a frame, or had a suit of wanescot on: and the dog watching him, let
he should leap out on it.


O, villain!


Well, and ever I meet him in the city, I'll ha'him jointed, I'll pawn him in
east cheap, among the butchers else.


Peace, who be these, CARLO?


YOnder's your god-father; do your duty to him, son.


This, sir? a poor elder brother of mine, sir, a y^oman, may dispend some
seven or eight hundred a year: that's his son, my nephew, there.


You are not ill-come, neighbour SORDIDO, though I have not yet said,
well-come: what, my god-sonne is grown a great proficient by this?


I hope he will grow great one day, sir.


What does he study? the law?


I sir, he is a gentleman, though his father be but a yeoman.


What call you your nephew, signior?


Mary, his name is FVNGOSO.


FVNGOSO? O, he looked somewhat like a sponge in that pinck^ yellow doublet, me
thought: well, make much of him; I see he was never borne to ride upon a moil.


My lady will come presently, sir.


O, now, now.


Stand by, retire your selves a space: nay, pray you, forget not the use of
your hat; the air is piercing.


What? will not their presence preuaile against the current of his humour?


O, no: it's a mere flood, a torrent, carries all before it.


What more then heavenly pulchritude is this?
What magazine, or treasury of bliss?
Dazzle, you organs to my optique sense,
To view a creature of such eminence:
O, I am planet-strooke, and in yond sphere,
A brighter sharre then VENVS doth appear!

How? in verse!


An ecstasy, an ecstasy, man.


Is your desire to speak with me, sir knight?


He will tell you that anon; neither his brain, nor his body, are yet moulded
for an answer.


Most debonair, and luculent lady, I decline me low, as the basis of your
altitude.


He makes congees to his wife in geometrical proportions.


Is't possible there should be any such Humorist?


Very easily possible, Sir, you see there is.


I have scarce collected my spirits, but lately scattered in the admiration of
your form; to which (if the bounties of your mind be any way responsible) I
doubt not, but my desires shall find a smooth, and secure passage. I am a
poor knight errant (lady) that hunting in the adjacent forest, was by
adventure in the pursuit of a hart, brought to this place; which hart (dear
Madame) escaped by enchantment: the evening approaching (my self, and servant
wearied) my suit is, to enter your fair castle, and refresh me.


Sir knight, albeit it be not usual with me (chiefly in the absence of a
husband) to admit any entrance to strangers, yet in the true regard of those
innated virtues, and fair parts, which so strive to express themselves, in
you; I am resolved to entertain you to the best of my unworthy power which I
acknowledge to be nothing, valew'd with what so worthy a person may deserve.
Please you but stay, while I descend.


Most admired lady, you astonish me!


What? with speaking a speech of your own penning?


Nay, look; pry thee peace.


Pox on it* I am impatient of such foppery.


O, let's hear the rest.


What? a tedious chapter of courtship, after sir LANCELOT, and queen GVEVENER?
away. I mar'le in what dull cold nook he found this lady out? that (being a
woman) she was blessed with no more copy of wit, but to serve his humour thus.
'Slud, I think he feeds her with porridge, I: she could ne'er have such a
thick brain else.


Why, is porridge so hurtful, signior?


O, nothing under heaven more prejudicial to those ascending subtle powers,
or doth sooner abate that which we call, acumen ingenij, then your gross fare:
why, I'll make you an instance: your city wives, but observe them, you haven't
more perfect true fools in the world bred, then they are generally; and yet
you see (by the fineness and delicacy of their diet, living into the far
capons, drinking your rich wines, feeding on larks, sparrows, potato-pies,
and such good vnctuous meats) how their wits are refined, and rarefi'd! and
sometimes a very quintessence of conceit flows from them, able to drown a
weak apprehension.


Peace, here comes the lady.


Gods me, here's company: turn in again.


Slight, our presence has cut off the convoy of the jest.


All the better; I am glad on it: for the issue was very perspicuous Come, let's
discover, and salute the knight.


Stay: who be these that address themselves towards us? what, CARLO? now, by
the sincerity of my soul, welcome; welcome gentlemen: and how doest thou, thou
grand scourge; or, second untruss of the rime?


Faith, spending my mettle, in this reeling world (here and there) as the sway
of my affection carries me, and perhaps stumble upon a yeoman pheuterer, as I
do now; or one of Fortunes moiles, laden with treasure, and an empty
cloke-bagge following him, gaping when a bag will untie.


Peace, you, ban-dogge, peace: what brisk Nimfadoro is that in the white
virgin boot there?


Mary, sir, one, that I must entreat you take a very particular knowledge of,
and with more then ordinary respect: Monsieur FASTIDIVS.


Sir, I could wish that for the time of your vouchsafed abiding here, and more
real entertainment, this my house stood on the Muses hill; and these my
orchards were those of the Hesperide's.


I possess as much in your wish, sir, as if I were made lord of the Indies;
and I pray you, believe it.


I have a better opinion of his faith, then to think it will be so corrupted.


Come, brother, I'll bring you acquainted with gentlemen, and good fellows,
such as shall do you more grace, then --


Brother, I hunger not for such acquaintance:
Do you take heed, lest --

Husht: my brother, sir, for want of education, sir, somewhat nodding to the
boor, the clown: but I request you in private, sir.


By heaven, it's a very fine suit of clothes!


Do you observe that, signior? there's another humour has new cracked the
shell.


What? he is enamoured of the fashion, is he?


O, you forestall the jest.


I mar'le what it might stand him in!


Nephew?


Before me, it's an excellent suit, and as neatly becomes him. What said you,
uncle?


When saw you my niece?


Mary, yesternight I supped there. That kind of boot does very rare too!


And what news hear you?


The guilt spur and all! would I were hanged, but 'tis exceeding good. Say
you, uncle?


Your mind is carried away with somewhat else: I ask what news you hear?


Troth, we hear none. In good faith, I was never so pleased with a fashion,
days of my life! O (and I might have but my wish) I'd ask no more of god
now, but such a suit, such a hat, such a band, such a doublet, such a hose,
such a boot, and such a --


They say, there's a new Motion of the city of Niniueh, with IONAS, and the
whale, to be seen at Fleet-bridge? you can tell, cousin?


Here's such a world of question with him, now: Yes, I think there be such a
thing, I saw the picture: would he would once be satisfied. Let me see, the
doublet, say fifty shillings the doublet, and between three or four pound the
hose; then boots, hat, and band: some ten or eleven pound would do it all,
and suit me for the heavens.


I'll see all those devices, and I come to London once.


Gods s'lid, and I could compass it, 'twere rare: hark you, uncle.


What says my nephew?


Faith uncle, I'd have desired you to have made a motion for me to my father in
a thing, that -- walk aside and I'll tell you, sir, no more but this: there's
a parcel of law -- books, (some twenty pounds worth) that lie in a place for
little more then half the money they cost; and I think for some twelve pound,
or twenty mark, I could go near to redeem them; there's PLOWDEN, DIAR,
BROOKE, and FITZ-HERBERT, diverse such, as I must have ere long: and you know, I
were as good save five or six pound as not, uncle. I pray you, move it form.


That I will: when would you have me do it? presently?


O, I, I pray you, good uncle: God send me good luck; Lord (and^t be thy will)
prosper it: O, my stars, now, now, if it take now, I am made forever.


Shall I tell you, sir? by this air, I am the most beholding to that lord, of
any gentleman living; he does use me the most honourably, and with the
greatest respect, more indeed, then can be uttered with any opinion of truth.


Then, have you the count GRATIATO?


As true nobles gentleman too, as any breathes; I am exceedingly endeared to
his love: by this hand (I protest to you, signior, I speak it not gloriously,
nor out of affectation, but) there's he, and the count FRVGALE, signior
ILLVSTRE, signior LVCVLENTO, and a sort of them; that (when I am at court) they
do share me amongst them. Happy is he can enjoy me most private. I do wish my
self sometime an vbiquitarie for their love, in good faith.


There's ne'er a one of these, but might lie a week on the rack, ere they
could bring forth his name; and yet he powers them out as familiarly, as if he
had scene them stand by the fire in the presence, or ta^ne tobacco with them,
over the stage, in the lords room.


Then you must of necessity know our court-starre there? that planet of wit,
MADDONA SAVIOLINA?


O, lord sir! my mistress.


Is she your mistress?


Faith, here be some slight favours of hers, sir, that do speak it, she is:
as this scarf, sir, or this rib and in mine ear, or so; this feather grew in
her sweet sanne sometimes, though now it be my poor fortunes to wear it, as
you see, sir: flight, flight, a foolish toy.


Well, she is the lady of a most exalted, and ingenious spirit.


Did you ever hear any woman speak like her? or enriched with a more
plentiful discourse?


O, villainous! nothing but sound, sound, a mere echo; she speaks as she
goes tired, in cob-web lawn, light, thin: good enough to catch flies withal.


O, manage your affections.


Well, if thou be not plagued for this blasphemy, one day --


Come, regard not a jester: it is in the power of my purse, to make him speak
well, or ill, of me.


Sir, I affirm it to you (upon my credit, and judgment) she has the most
harmonious, and musical strain of wit, that ever tempted a true ear; and yet
to see, a rude tongue would profine heaven, if it could.


I am not ignorant of it, sir.


Oh, it flows from her like nectar, and she doth give it, that sweet, quick
grace, and exornation in the composure, that (by this good air, as I am an
honest man, would I might never stir, sir, but) she does observe as pure a
phrase, and use as choice figures in her ordinary conferences, as any be in the
Arcadia.


Or rather in Greenes works, whence she may steal with more security.


Well, if ten pound will fetch them, you shall have it, but I'll part with no
more.


I'll try what that will do, if you please.


Do so: and when you have them, study hard.


Yes, sir. And I could study to get forty shillings more now! well, I will put
my self into the fashion, as far as this will go presently.


I wonder it rains not! the Almanac says we should have store of rain,
today.


Why, sir, to morrow I will associate you to court my self; and from thence to
the city, about a business, a project I have, I will expose it to you, sir:
CARLO, I am sure, has heard of it.


What's that, sir?


I do intend, this year of Iubile, coming on, to travail: and (because I
will not altogether go upon expense) I am determined to put forth some five
thousand pound, to be paid me, five for one, upon the return of my self, my
wife, and my dog, from the Turks court in Constantinople. If all, or either of
us miscarry in the journey, 'tis gone: if we be successful, why, there will
be five and twenty thousand pound, to entertain time withal. Nay, go not
neighbour SORDIDO, stay to night, and help to make our society the fuller.
Gentlemen, frolic: CARLO? what? dull now?


I was thinking on your project, sir, and you call it so: is this the dog goes
with you?


This is the dog, sir.


He do' not go bare-foot, does he?


Away, you traitor, away.


Nay, before god, I speak simply; he may prick his foot with a thorne, and be
as much as the whole venture is worth. Besides, for a dog that never trauail'd
before, it's a large journey to Constantinople: I'll tell you now (and he were
mine) I'd have some present conference with a physician, what antidotes were
good to give him, preseruatiues against poison: for (assure you) if once your
money be out, there'll be diverse attempts made against the life of the poor
animal.


Thou art still dangerous.


Is signior DELIROS wife your kinswoman?


I, sir, she is my niece, my brothers daughter here, and my nephews sister.


Do you know her, sir?


O, God sir, Signior DELIRO, her husband, is my merchant.


I, I have seen this gentleman there, often.


I cry you mercy, sir: let me crave your name, pray you.


FVNGOSO, sir.


Good signior FVNGOSO, I shall request to know you better, sir.


I am her brother, sir.


In fair time, sir.


Come, gentlemen, I will be your conduct.


Nay, pray you, sir; we shall meet at signior DELIRO'S often.


You shall have me at the Heralds office, sir, for some week or so, at my first
coming up. Come, CARLO.


Methinkes, CORDATVS, he dwelt somewhat too long on this Scene; it hung in the
hand.


I see not where he could have insisted less, and to have made the humours
perspicuous enough.


True, as his subject lies: but he might have altered the shape of his
argument, and explicated them better in single Scenes.


That had been single indeed: why? be they not the same persons in this, as
they would have been in those? and is it not an object of more state, to
behold the Scene full, and relieved with variety of speakers to the end, then
to see a vast empty stage, and the actors come in (one by one) as if they were
dropped down with a feather, into the eye of the spectators?


Nay, you are better traded with these things then I, and therefore I'll
subscribe to your judgment; mary, you shall give me leave to make objections.


O, what else? it's the special intent of the author, you should do so: for
thereby others (that are present) may as well be satisfied, who happily would
object the same you do.


So, sir: but when appears MACILENTE again?


Mary, he stays but till our silence give him leave: here he comes, and with
him signior DELIRO, a merchant, at whose house he is come to sojourn: Make
your own observation now, only transfer your thoughts to the city, with the
Scene; where, suppose they speak.


i'll tell you by and by, sir.
Welcome (good MACILENTE) to my house,
To sojourn even for ever: if my best
In cares, and every sort of good entreaty
May move you stay with me.

I thank you, sir:
And yet the muffled fates (had it pleased them)
Might have supplied me, from their own full store,
Without this word (I thank you) to a fool.
I see no reason, why that dog (called Chance)
Should fawn upon this fellow, more then me:
I am a man, and I have limbs, flesh, blood,
Bones, sinews, and a soul, as well as he:
My parts are every way as good as his,
If I said better? why, I did not lie.
Nath'lesse, his wealth (but nodding on my wants)
Must make me bow, and cry: (I thank you, sir.)

Dispatch, take heed your mistress see you not.

I warrant you, sir. I'll steal by her softly.

Nay, gentle friend, be merry, raise your looks
Out of your bosom, I protest (by heaven)
You are the man most welcome in the world.

(I thank you, sir,) I know my cue, I think.

Where will you have them burn, sir?

Here, good FIDO*
What? she did not see thee?

No, sir.

That's well:
Strew, strew, good FIDO, the freshest flowers, so.

What means this, signior DELIRO? all this censing?

Cast in more frankincense, yet more, well said.
O, MACILENTE, I have such a wife!
So passing fair, so passing far unkind,
But of such worth, and right to be unkind,
(Since no man can be worthy of her kindness.)

What can there not?

No, that is sure as death,
No man alive! I do not say, is not,
But cannot possibly be worth her kindness!
Nay, it is certain, let me do her right.
How, said I? do her right? as though I could,
As though this dull gross tongue of mine could utter
The rare, the true, the pure, the infinite rights,
That sit (as high as I can look) within her!

This is such dotage, as was never heard.

Well, this must needs be granted.

Granted, quoth you?

Nay, MACILENTE; do not so discredit
The goodness of your judgment to deny it,
For I do speak the very least of her.
And I would crave, and beg no more of heaven,
For all my fortunes here, but to be able
To utter first in fit terms, what she is,
And then the true joys I conceive in her.

Is't possible, she should deserve so well,
As you pretend?

I, and she knows so well
Her own deserts, that (when I strive t'enioy them)
She weighs the things I do, with what she merits:
And (seeing my worth out-weigh'd so in her graces)
She is so solemn, so precise, so froward,
That no observance I can do to her,
Can make her kind to me: if she find fault,
I mend that fault; and then she says, I faulted,
That I did mend it. Now, good friend, advise me,
How I may temper this strange spleen in her.

You are too amorous, too obsequious,
And make her too assured, she may command you.
When women doubt most of their husbands loves,
They are most loving. Husbands must take heed
They give no gluts of kindness to their wives,
But use them like their horses; whom they feed
Not with a manger -- full of meat together,
But half a peck at once: and keep them so
Still with an appetite to that they give them.
He that desires to have a loving wife,
Must bridle all the show of that desire:
Be kind, not amorous; nor betraying kindness,
As if love wrought, but considerate duty.
" Offer no loue-rites, but let wives still seek them,
" For when they come unsought, they seldom like them.

Believe me, MACILENTE, this is gospel.
O, that a man were his own man so much,
To rule himself thus. I will strive i'faith,
To be more strange and careless: yet, I hope
I have now taken such a perfect course,
To make her kind to me, and live contented,
That I shall find my kindness well returned,
And have no need to fight with my affections.
She (late) hath found much fault with every room
Within my house; one was too big (she said)
Another was not furnished to her mind,
And so through all: all which, now, I have altered.
Then here, she hath a place (on my backside)
Wherein she loves to walk; and that (she said)
Had some ill smells about it. Now, this walk
Have I (before she knows it) thus perfumed
With herbs, and flowers, and laid in diverse places,
(AS 'twere on altars, consecrate to her)
Perfumed gloves, and delicate chains of amber,
To keep the air in awe of her sweet nostrils:
This have I done, and this I think will please her.
Behold, she comes.

Here's a sweet stink indeed:
What, shall I ever be thus crossed, and plagued?
And sick of husband? O, my head doth ache,
As it would cleave asunder with these favours,
All my room's altered, and but one poor walk
That I delighted in, and that is made
So fulsome with perfumes, that I am feared
(My brain doth sweat so) I have caught the plague.

Why (gentle wife) is now thy walk too sweet?
Thou said of late, it had sour aires about it,
And found much fault, that I did not correct it.

Why, and I did find fault, sir?

Nay, dear wife;
I know, thou hast staid, thou hast loved perfumes,
No woman better.

I, long since perhaps,
But now that sense is altered: you would have me
(Like to a puddle, or a standing poole)
To have no motion, nor no spirit within me.
No, I am like a pure, and sprightly river,
That moves for ever, and yet still the same;
Or fire, that burns much wood, yet still one flame.

But yesterday, I saw thee at our garden,
Smelling on roses, and on purple flowers,
And since, I hope, the humour of thy sense
Is nothing changed.

Why, those were growing flowers,
And these, within my walk, are cut and strewed.

But yet they have one sent.

I! have they so?

In your gross judgment. If you make no difference
Betwixt the sent of growing flowers, and cut ones,
You have a sense to taste lamp-oile, in faith.
And with such judgment have you changed the chambers,
Leaving no room, that I can joy to be in,
In all your house: and now my walk, and all,
You smoke me from, as if I were a fox,
And long, belike, to drive me quite away.
Well, walk you there, and I'll walk where I list.

What shall I do? O, I shall never please her,

Out on thee, dotard! what star ruled his birth?
That brought him such a star? blind Fortune still
Bestows her gifts on such as cannot use them:
How long shall I live, ere I be so happy,
To have a wi^e of this exceeding form?

Away, with them, would I had broke a joint,
When I deuis'd this, that should so dislike her.
Away, bear all away.

I, do: for fear
Ought that is there should like her. O, this man,
How cunningly he can conceal himself!
As though he loved? nay, honoured, and adored?

Why, my sweet heart?

Sweetheart! O! better still!
And asking, why? wherefore? and looking strangely,
As if he were as white as innocence.
Alas, you're simple, you: you cannot change,
Look pale at pleasure, and then red with wonder:
No, no, not you! 'tis pity o'your naturalls.
I did but cast an amorous eye, even now,
Upon a pair of gloves, that somewhat liked me,
And straight he noted it, and gave command,
All should be taken away.

Be they nay bane then.
What, sir, FIDO, bring in those gloves again,
You took from hence.

S'body, sir, but do not,
Bring in no gloves, to spite me: if you do --

Ay, me, most wretched; how am I misconstru'd?

O, how she tempts my heart-strings, with her eye,
To knit them to her beauties, or to break?
What moved the heavens, that they could not make
Me such a woman? but a man, a beast,
That hath no bliss like to others. Would to heaven
(In wreak of my misfortunes) I were turned
To some fair water- Nymph, that (set upon
The deepest whirle-pit of the rau'nous seas,)
My adamantine eyes might head-long hale
This iron world to me, and drown it all.

Behold, behold, the translated gallant.

O, he is welcome.

Save you brother, and sister, save you, sir; I have commendations for you out
i the country: (I wonder they take no knowledge of my suit:) mine uncle
SOCLIARDO is in town. Sister, me thinks, you are melancholy: why are you so
sad? I think you took me for master FASTIDIVS BRISLE (sister) did you not.


Why should I take you for him?


Nay, nothing -- I was lately in master FASTIDIVS his company, and, me thinks,
we are very like.


You have a fair suit, brother, 'giue you joy on it.


Faith, good enough to ride in, brother, I made it to ride in.


O, now I see the cause of his idle demand, was his new suit.


Pray you good brother, try, if you can change her mood.


I warrant you, let me alone. I'll put her out of her dumps. Sister, how like
you my suit?


O, you are a gallant in print now, brother.


Faith, how like you the fashion? it's the last edition, I assure you.


I cannot but like it, to the desert.


Troth, sister, I was fain to borrow these spurs, I have le^t my gown in
gage for'hem, pray you lend me an angel.


Now, beshrow my heart, then.


Good truth, I'll pay you again at my next exhibition: I had but bare ten
pound of my father, and it would not reach to put me wholly into the fashion.


I care not.


I had spurs of mine own before, but they were not ginglers. Monsieur
FASTIDIVS will be here anon, sister.


You jest?


Never lend me penny more (while you line then) and that I'd be loath to say,
in truth.


When did you see him?


Yesterday, I came acquainted with him at sir PVNTARVOLO'S: nay, sweet sister.


I fain would know of heaven now, why yond fool
Should wear a suit of satin? he? that rooke?
That painted jay, with such a deal of out-side?
What is his inside trow? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Good heaven, give me patience, patience, patience.
A number of these popen jayes there are,
Whom, if a man confer, and but examine
Their inward merit, with such men as want;
Lord, lord, what things they are!

Come, when will you pay me again, now?

O god, sister!

Here comes another.

Save you, signior DELIRO: how dost thou, sweet lady? Let me kiss thee.


How? a new suit? Aim.


And how does master FASTIDIVS BRISK?


Faith, live in court, signior DELIRO; in grace, I thank god, both of the
noble masculine, and feminine. I must speak with you in private, by and by.


When you please, sir.


Why look you so pale, brother?


S'lid, all this money is cast away, now.


I, there's a newer edition come forth.


Tis but my hard fortune! well, I'll have my suit changed, I'll go fetch my
taylor presently, but first I'll devise a letter to my father. Have you any pen,
and ink, sister?


What would you do withal?


I would use it. S'light, and it had come but four days sooner, the fashion.


There was a countess gave me her hand to kiss to day, in the presence: did
me more good by that light, then -- and yesternight sent her coach twice to my
lodging, to entreat me accompany her, and my sweet mistress, with some two, or
three nameless ladies more: O, I have been graced by them beyond all aim of
affection: this 's her garter my dagger hangs in: and they do so commend, and
approve my apparel, with my judicious wearing of it, it 's above wonder.


Indeed sir, 'tis a most excellent suit, and you do wear it as extraordinary.


Why, I'll tell you now (in good faith) and by this chair, which (by the grace
of god) I intend presently to sit in, I had three suits in one year, made
three great ladies in love with me: I had other three, vn-did three gentlemen
in imitation: and other three, gat three other gentlemen widows of three
thousand pound a year.


Is't possible?


O, believe it, sir; your good face is the witch, and your apparel the spells,
that bring all the pleasures of the world into their circle.


Ah, the sweet grace of a courtier!


Well, would my father had left me but a good face for my portion yet; though
I had shared the unfortunate wit that goes with it, I had not cared: I might
have past for somewhat in the world then.


Why, assure you, signior, rich apparel has strange virtues: it makes him that
hath it without means, esteemed for an excellent wit: he that enjoys it with
means, puts the world in remembrance of his means: it helps the deformities of
nature, and gives lustre to her beauties; makes continual holy-day where it
shines; sets the wits of ladies at work, that otherwise would be idle:
furnishes your two-shilling ordinary; takes possession of your stage at your
new play; and enriches your oars, as scorning to go with your scull.


Pray you, sir, add this; it gives respect to your fools, makes many thieves,
as many strumpets, and no fewer bankrupts.


Out, out, unworthy to speak, where he breaths.


What's he, signior?


A friend of mine, sir.


By heaven, I wonder at you, citizens, what kind of creatures you are!


Why, sir?


That you can consort your selves, with such poor seame-rent fellows.


He says true.


Sir, I will assure you (how ever you esteem of him) he's a man worthy of
regard.


Why? what has he in him, of such virtue to be regarded? ha?


Mary, he is a scholar, sir.


Nothing else?


And he is well trauail'd.


He should get him clothes; I would cherish those good parts of travail in
him, and prefer him to some nobleman of good place.


Sir, such a benefit should bind me to you for ever (in my friends right) and,
I doubt not, but his desert shall more then answer my praise.


Why, and he had good clothes, I'd carry him to court with me to morrow.


He shall not want for those, sir, if gold and the whole city will furnish him.


You say well, sir: faith, signior DELIRO, I am come to have you play the
Alchemist with me, and change the species of my land, into that mettle you
talk of.


With all my heart, sir, what sum will serve you?


Faith, some three, or four hundred.


Troth, sir, I have promised to meet a gentleman this morning, in Par^les, but
upon my return I'll dispatch you.


I'll accompany you thither.


As you please, sir; but I go not thither directly.


'Tis no matter, I have no other designement in hand, and therefore as good go
along.


I were as good have a quartain fever follow me now, for I shall ne'er be rid
of him: (being me a cloak there, one) Still, upon his grace at court, am I
sure to be visited; I was a beast to give him any hope. Well, would I were in,
that I am out with him, once, and -- Come, signior MACILENTE, I must confer
with you, as we go. Nay, dear wife, I beseech thee, forsake these moods:
look not like winter thus. Here, take my keys, open my counting houses,
spread all my wealth before thee, choose any object that delights thee: If thou
wilt eat the spirit of gold, and drink dissolved pearl in wine, 'tis for
thee.


So, sir.


Nay, my sweet wife.


Good lord! how you are perfumed! in your terms, and al! pray you leave us.


Come, gentlemen.


Adieu, sweet lady.


I, I! Let thy words ever sound in mine ears, and thy graces disperse
contentment through all my senses! O, how happy is that lady above other
ladies, that enjoys so absolute a gentleman to her servant! A countess give
him her hand to kiss? ah, foolish countess! he's a man worthy (if a woman
may speak of a mans worth) to kiss the lips of an empress.


What's master FASTIDIVS gone, sister?


I, brother (he has a face like a Cherubin!)


Gods me, what lucke's this? I have fetched my taylor and all: which way went
he, sister? can you tell?


Not I, in good faith (and he has a body like an angel!)


How long is't since he went?


Why, but even now: did you not meet him? (and a tongue able to ravish any
woman in the earth!)


O, for gods sake (I'll please you for your pains:) but even now, say you?
Come, good, sir: S'lid, I had forgot it too: Sister, if any body ask for mine
uncle SOGLIARDO, they shall have him at the Heralds office, yonder by Paules.


Well, I will not altogether despair: I have heard of a citizens wife, has
been beloved of a courtier; and why not I? heigh, ho: well, I will into my
private chamber, locke the door to me, and think over all his good parts, one
after another.


Well, I doubt, this last Scene will endure some grievous torture.


How? you fear 'twill be racked, by some hard construction?


Do not you?


No, in good faith: unless mine eyes could light me beyond sense. I see no
reason, why this should be more liable to the rack, then the rest: you'll say,
perhaps, the city will not take it well, that the merchant is made here to dote
so perfectly upon his wife; and she again, to be so Fastidiously affected,
as she is?


You have uttered my thought, sir, indeed.


Why (by that proportion) the court might as well take offence at him we call
the courtier, and with much more pretext, by how much the place transcends, and
goes before in dignity and virtue: but can you imagine that any noble, or true
spirit in court (whose sinewy, and altogether vn-affected graces, very
worthily express him a courtier) will make any exception at the opening of
such an empty trunk, as this BRISK is? or think his own worth empeacht, by
beholding his motley inside?


No sir, I do not.


No more, assure you, will any grave, wise citizen, or modest matron, take the
object of this folly in DELIRO, and his wife: but rather apply it as the foil
to their own virtues. For that were to affirm, that a man, writing of NERO,
should mean all Emperors: or speaking of MACHIAVEL, comprehend all States-men;
or in our SORDIDO, all Farmars; and so of the rest: then which, nothing can be
uttered more malicious, or absurd. Indeed, there are a sort of these
narrow-ey'd decipherers, I confess, that will extort strange, and abstruse
meanings out of any subject, be it never so conspicuous and innocently
delivered. But to such (where e're they sit concealed) let them know, the
author defies them, and their writing-tables; and hopes, no sound or safe
judgment will infect it self with their contagious comments, who (indeed)
come here only to pervert, and poison the sense of what they hear, and for
nought else.


Stay, what new Mute is this, that walks so suspiciously?


O, mary this is one, for whose better illustration; we must desire you to
presuppose the stage, the middle isle in Paules; and that, the west end of it.


So, sir: and what follows?


Faith, a whole volume of humour, and worthy the vnclasping.


As how? what name do you give him first?


He hath shift of names, sir: some call him APPLE IOHN, some Signior WHIFFE,
mary, his maine standing name is CAVALIER SHIFT: the rest are but as clean
shirts to his natures.


And what makes he in Paules, now?


Troth, as you see, for the advancement of a Siquis, or two; wherein he has so
varied himself, that if any one of them take, he may hull ^p and down in the
humorous world, a little longer.


It seems then, he bears a very changing sail?


O, as the wind, sir: here comes more.


THis is rare, I have set up my bills, without discovery.


What? Signior WHI^E? what fortune has brought you into these west parts?


Troth, signior, nothing but your rheum; I have been taking an ounce of
tobacco hard by here, with a gentleman, and I am come to spit private, in
Pau^es. Save you sir.


Adieu, good signior WHI^E.


Master APPLE IOHN? you are well met: when shall we ^up together; and laugh,
and be fat with those good wenches? ha?


Faith, sir, I must now leave you, upon a few humours, and occasions: but when
you please, sir.


Farewell, sweet APPLE IOHN: I wonder, there are no more store of gallants
here!


What be these two, signior?


Mary, a couple sir, that are mere strangers to the whole scope of our play;
only come to walk a turn or two, i'this Scene of Paules, by chance.


Same you, good master CLOVE.


Sweet master ORANGE.


How? CLOVE, and ORANGE?


I, and they are well met, for 'tis as dry an ORANGE as ever grew: nothing,
but Salutation; and, O god, sir; and, It pleases you to say so, Sir; one that
can laugh at a jest for company with a most plausible, and extemporal grace;
and some hour after, in private, ask you what it was: the other, monsieur
CLOVE, is a more spic't youth: he will fit you a whole afternoon sometimes, in
a booke-sellers shop, reading the Greek, Italian, and Spanish; when he
understands not a word of either: if he had the tongues, to his suits, he were
an excellent linguist.


Do you hear this reported, for certainty?


O god, sir.


SIrrah, take my cloak: and you sir knave, follow me closer. If thou lose my
dog, thou shalt die a dogs death; I will hang thee.


Tut, fear him not, he's a good lean slave, he loves a dog well, I warrant
him; I see by his looks, I: mass he's somewhat like him. Slud poison him,
make him away with a crooked pin, or somewhat, men; thou may have more
security of thy life: and so sir, what? you have not put out your whole venture
yet? have you?


No, I do want yet some fifteen, or sixteen hundred pounds: but my lady (my
wife) is out of her humour; she does not now go.


No? how then?


Mary, I am now enforced to give it out, upon the return of my self, my
dog, and my cat.


Your cat? where is she?


My squire has her there, in the bag: Sirrah, look to her: How lik'st thou my
change, CARLO?


Oh, for the better, sir; your cat has nine lines, and your wife have but one.


Besides, she will never be sea-sicke, which will save me so much in
conserves: when saw you signior SOGLIARDO?


I came from him but now, he is at the Heralds office yonder: he requested me
to go before, and take up a man or two for him in Paules, against his
cognisance was ready.


What? has he purchased arms, then?


I, and rare ones too: of as many colours, as e're you saw any ^ooles co^ in
your life. I'll go look among youd^ bill, and I can fit him with legs to his
arms --


With legs to his arms! Good: I will go with you, sir.


COme, let's walk in Mediterraneo: I assure you, sir, I am not the least
respected among ladies; but let that pass: do you know how to go into the
presence, sir?


Why, on my feet, sir.


No, on your head, sir: for 'tis that must bear you out, I assure you: as
thus, sir. You must first have an especial care so to wear your hat, that it
oppress not confusedly this your predominant, or fore-top; because (when you
come at the presence door) you may, with once or twice stroking up your
fore-head thus, enter, with your predominant perfect: that is, standing up
stiff.


As if one were frighted?


I, sir.


Which indeed, a true fear of your mistress should do, rather than gum
water, or whites of eggs: is't not so, sir?


An ingenious observation: give me leave to crave your name, Sir.


His name is, MACILENTE, sir.


Good signior MACILENTE: if this gentleman, signior DELIRO, furnish you (as he
says he will) with clothes, I will bring you, to morrow by this time, into the
presence of the most divine, and acute lady in court: you shall see sweet
silent rhetoric, and dumb eloquence speaking in her eye; but when she
speaks her self, such an anatomy of wit, so sinewiz'd and arteriz'd, that
'tis the goodliest model of pleasure that ever was to behold. Oh! she strikes
the world into admiration of her; (o, o, o) I cannot express them, beleuue me.


O, your only admiration, is your silence, sir.


Before god, CARLO, this is good; let's read them again. If there be any lady,
or gentlewoman of good carriage, that is desirous to entertain (to her private
uses) a young, straight, and upright gentleman, of the age of five, or six and
twenty at the most: who can serve in the nature of a gentleman usher, and hath
little legs of purpose, and a black satin fut of his own, to go before
her in: which fut (for the more sweetening) now lies in lavender: and can hide
his face with her fan, if need require: or sit in the cold at the stair
foot for her, as well as another gentleman: Let her subscribe her name and
place, and diligent respect shall be given. This is above measure exellent! ha?


No, this, this! here's a fine slave.


IF this city, or the suburbs of the same, do affoord any young gentleman, of
the first, second, or third head, more or less, whose friends are but lately
deceased, and whose lands are but new come to his hands, that (to be as
exactly qualified as the best of our ordinary gallants are) is affected to
entertain the most gentlemanlike use of tobacco: as first, to give it the most
exquisite perfume; then, to know all the delicate sweet forms for the
assumption of it: as also the rare corollary, and practice of the Cuban
ebolition, EVRIPVS, and whiffe; which he shall receive, or take in, here at
London, and evaporate at Vxbridge, or farther, if it please him. If there be any
such generous spirit, that is truly enamoured of these good faculties: May it
please him, but (by a note of his hand) to specify the place, or ordinary
where he uses to eat, and lie; and most sweet attendance, with tobacco, and
pipes of the best sort, shall be ministered: STET QVAESO CANDID LECTOR.


Why this is without parallel, this!


Well, I'll mark this fellow for SOGLIARDO'S use presently.


Or rather, SOGLIARDO, for his use,


Faith, either of them will serve, they are both good properties: I'll design
the other a place too, that we may see him.


No better place, then the Mitre, that we may be spectators with you, CARLO.
Soft, behold, who enters here: Signior SOGLIARDO! save you.


Save you, good sir PVNTARVOLO; your dogge's in health, sir, I see: how now,
CARLO?


We have taken simple pains, to choose you out followers here.


Come hither, signior.


Monsieur ORANGE, yond' gallants observe us; pray thee let's talk fustian a
little, and gull them: make them believe we are great schollers.


O lord, sir.


Nay, pray thee let's, believe me, you have an excellent habit in discourse.


It pleases you to say so, sir.


By this church, you have la: nay, come, begin: ARISTOTLE in his Daemonologia,
approves SCALIGER for the best Nauigator in his time: and in his
Hypercritiques, he reports him to be Heautontimorumenos: you understand the
Greek, sir?


O god, sir.


For societies sake he does. O, here be a couple of fine tame parrots.


Now, sir, whereas the Ingenuity of the time, and the souls Synderisis are
but Embrions in nature, added to the paunch of Esquiline, and the Inter-vallum
of the Zodiac, besides the Ecliptic line being optic, and not mental, but
by the contemplative theoricke part thereof, doth demonstrate to us the
vegetable circumference, and the ventositie of the Tropicks and whereas our
intellectual, or mincing capreall (according to the Metaphisicks) as you may
read in PLATO's Histriomastix -- You conceive me, sir?


O lord, sir.


Then coming to the pretty Animal, as Reason long since is fled to animals,
you know, or indeed for the more modellizing, or enamelling, or rather
diamondizing of your subject, you shall perceive the Hipothesis, or Galaxia,
(whereof the Meteors long since had their initiall inceptions and notions) to
be merely Pithagoricall, Mathematical, and Aristocratical -- For look you,
sir, there is ever a kind of concinnitie and species -- Let us turn to our
former discourse, for they mark us not.


Mass, yonder 's the knight PVNTARVOLO.


And my cousin SOGLIARDO, me thinks.


I, and his familiar that baunts him, the devil with a shining face.


Let them alone, observe them not.


Nay, I will have him, I am resolute for that. By this parchment, gentlemen, I
have been so toiled among the Harrots yonder, you will not believe, they do
speak in the strangest language, and give a man the hardest terms for his
money, that ever you knew.


But have you arms? have your arms?


Y faith, I thank god, I can write my self gentlemen now, here's my patent,
it cost me thirty pound, by this breath.


A very saire coat, well charged, and full of armoury.


Nay, it has as much variety of colours in it, as you have seen a cost have,
how like you the crest, sir?


I understand it not well, what is't?


Mary, sir, it is your Bore without a head Rampant.


A Bore without a head, that's very rare!


I, and rampant too: troth, I commend the Heralds wi^, he has decyphered him
well: A Swine without a head, without brain, wit, any thing indeed, ramping to
gentility. You can blazon the rest, signior? can you not?


O, I, I have it in writing here of purpose, it cost me two shillings the
tricking.


Let's hear, let's hear.


It is the most vile, foolish, absurd, palpable, ridiculous escutcheon, that
ever this eye survis'd. Save you, good monsieur FASTIDIVS.


Silence, good knight: on, on.


GVRONY, of eight pieces; AZURE and GULES, between three plates; a CHEV'RON,
^grailed checkey, OR, VERT, and ERMINES; on a chief ARGENT between two
ANN'LETS, sables; a Bores head, PROPER.


How's that? on a chief ARGENT?


On a chief ARGENT, a Bores head, PROPER between two ANN'LETS sables.


S'lud, it's a Hogs-cheeke, and puddings in a pewter field this.


How like you them, signior?


Let the word be, Not without mustard; your crest is very rare, sir.


A frying pan to the crest had had no fellow.


Entreat your poor friend to walk off a little, signior, I will salute the
knight.


Come, lap't up, lap't up.


You are right well encountered, sir, how does your saire dog?


In reasonable state, sir: what citizen is that you were consorted with? a
merchant of any worth?


'Tis signior DELIRO, sir.


Is it he? Save you, sir.


Good sir PVNTARVOLO.


O, what copy of fool would this place minister, to one endew'd with
patience, to observe it?


Nay, look you sir, now you are gentleman, you must carry a more exalted
presence, change your mood, and habit, to a more a^stere form, be exceeding
proud, stand upon your gentility, and scorn every man. Speak nothing humbly,
never discourse under a nobleman, though you ne'er saw him butriding to the
Starre-chamber, it's all one. Love no man. Trust no man. Speak ill of no man
to his face: nor well of any man behind his back. Salute fairly on the front,
and wish them hanged upon the turn. Spread your self upon his bosom
publicly, whose heart you would ca^e in private. These be principles, think
on them, I'll come to you again presently.


Sir, keep close; yet not so close: thy breath will thawmy ruff.


O, good cousin, I am a little busy, how does my niece? I am to walk with a
knight, here.


O He is here, look you sir, that's the gentleman.


What, he in the blush-colour'd satin?


I, he sir: though his suit blush, he blushes not, look you, that's the suit,
sir: I would have mine, such a suit without difference, such stuff, such a
wing, such a sleeve, such a skirt, belly, and all; therefore, pray you observe
it. Have you a pair of tables?


Why, do you see, sir? they say I am fantastical: why, true, I know it, and
I pursue my humour still, in contempt of this censorious age. S'light, and a
man should do nothing, but what a sort of stale judgements about this town
will approve in him, he were a sweet ass: I'd beg him in faith. I ne'er knew
any more find fault with a fashion, then they that knew not how to put
themselves in to it. For mine own part, so I please mine own appetite, I am
careless what the fusty world speaks of me. Puh.


Do you mark, how it hangs at the knee there?


I warrant you, sir.


For gods sake, do, note all: do you see the collar, sir?


Fear nothing, it shall not differ in a stitch, sir.


Pray heaven, it do not, you'll make these linings serve? and help me to a
chapman for the out-side, will you?


I'll do my best, sir: you'll put it off presently?


I, go with me to my chamber, you shall have it -- but make haste of it, for
the love of a customer, for I'll fit i'my old suit, or else lie a bed, and
read the Arcadia, till you have done.


O, if ever you were struck with a jest, gallants, now, now. I do usher the
most strange piece of military profession, that ever was discovered in Insula
Paulina.


Where? where?


What is he, for a creature?


A pimp, a pimp, that I have observed yonder, the rarest superficies of a
humour; he comes every morning to empty his hangs in Paules here: and offers
up some five, or six Hecatomb's of faces, and sighs, and away again. Here he
comes; nay, walk, walk, be not seen to note him, and we shall have excellent
sport.


S'Lid, he vented a sigh^'ne now, I thought he would have blown up the
church.


O, you shall have him give a number of those false fires ere he depart.


See, now he is expostulating with his rapier! look, look.


Did you ever, in your days, observe better passion over a hilt?


Except it were in the person of a cutlers boy, or that the fellow were nothing
but vapour, I should think it impossible.


See, again, he claps his sword of the head, as who should say, well, go to.


O violence! I wonder the blade can contain it self, being so prouokt.


With that, the moody squire thumpt his breast,
Andrear'd his even to heaven, ^or revenge.

Troth, and you be good gentlemen let's make them friends, and take up the
matter, between his rapier, and him.


Nay, if you intend that, you must lay down the matter, for this rapier (it
seems) is in the nature a hanger on, and the good gentleman would happily be
rid of him.


By my faith, and 'tis to be suspected, I'll ask him.


O, here's rich stuff, for lifes sake, let us go.
A man would wish himself a senseless pillar,
Rather then view these monstrous prodigies:
Nil habet inf^elix paupertas durius in se,
Quam quod ridiculous homines facit --

Signior.


At your service.


Will you sell your rapier?


Sbloud, he is turned wild upon the question, he looks as he had seen a
sergeant.


Sell my rapier? now fate bless me.


Amen.


You asked me, if I would sell my rapier, sir?


I did indeed.


Now, lord have mercy upon me.


Amen, I say still.


S'lud sir, what should you behold in my face, sir, that should move you (as
they say, sir) to ask me, sir, if I would sell my rapier?


Nay (let me pray you, sir) be not moved: I protest, I would rather have been
silent, then any way offensive, had I known your nature.


Sell my rapier? 'ods lid! Nay, sir (for mine own part) as I am a man that has
served in causes, or so, so I am not apt to injure any gentleman in the degree
of falling foul, but (sell my rapier?) I will tell you sir, I have served with
this foolish rapier, where some of us dare not appear in haste, I name no man:
but let that pass. (Sell my rapier?) death to my lungs. This rapier, sir, has
trauail'd by my side, sir, the best part of France and the low Country: I have
seen V^ishing Brill, and the H^ghe, with this rapier, sir, in my lord of
Leysters time: and (by gods will) he that should offer to disrapier me now, I
would -- Look you sir, you presume to be a gentleman of sort, and so likewise
your friends here, if you have any disposition to travel, for the sight of
service, or so, one, two, or all of you, I can lend you letters to di^ers
officers and commanders in the low Countries, that shall for my cause do you
all the good offices, that shall pertain or belong to gentlemen of your --
Please you to show the bounty of your mind, sir, to impart some ten groats,
or half a crown to our use, till our ability be of grow'th to return it,
and we shall think our self -- Sbloud! sell my rapier?


I pray you, what said he, signior, he's a proper man.


Mary, he tells me, if I please to show the bounty of my mind, to impart some
ten groats to his use, or so.


Break his head, and give it him.


I thought he had been playing of the Iewes trump, I.


My rapier? no sir: my rapier is my guard, my defence, my reuenew, my honour:
(if you cannot impart, be secret, I beseech you) and I will maintain it, where
there is a grain of dust, or a drop of water. (Hard is the choice when the
valiant must eat their arms, or clem:) Sell my rapier? no, my dear, I will
not be diuorc't from thee, yet, I have ever found thee true as steel -- and
(you cannot impart sir?) Save you gentlemen: (nevertheless if you have a
fancy to it, sir.)


Pray thee away: is Signior DELIRO departed?


Ha'you seen a pimp out-face his own wants better?


I commend him, that can dissemble them so well.


True, and having no better a cloak for it, then he has neither.


Gods precious, what mischievous luck is this! adieu gentlemen.


Whither? in such haste, Monsieur FASTIDIVS?


After my merchant, signior DELIRO, sir.


O hinder him not, he may hap lose his tide, a good flounder i'faith.


Hark you, signior WHIFFE, a word with you.


How? signior WHIFFE?


What was the difference between that gallant that's gone, and you, sir.


No difference: he would ha'giu'n me five pound for my rapier, and I refused
it; that's all.


O, was't no otherwise? we thought you had been upon some terms.


No other then you saw, sir.


Adieu, good Master APPLE-IOHN.


How? WHIFFE, and APPLE-IOHN too? Heart, what'll you say if this be the
appendix, or labell to both youd' indentures?


It may be.


Resolve us of it, IANVS, thou that look every way: or thou HE^CVLES, that
hast trauail'd all countries.


Nay, CARLO, spend not time in invocations now, 'tis late.


Signior, here's a gentleman desirous of your name, sir.


Sir, my name is CAVALIER SHIFT: I am known sufficiently in this walk, sir.


SHIFT? I heard your name varied even now, as I take it.


True, sir, it pleases the world (as I am her excellent Tabbacconist) to give
me the stile of signior WHIFFE: as I am a poor esquire about the town here,
they call me Master APPLE-IOHN. Varierie of good names does well, sir.


I, and good parts, to make those good names: out of which I imagine yond' bills
to be yours.


Sir, if I should deny the manuscripts, I were worthy to be banished the
middle I'll, for ever.


I take your word, sir: this gentleman has subscribed to them, and is most
desirous to become your pupil. Mary you must use expedition. Signior Insulso
Sogliardo, this is the professor.


In good time, sir, nay, good sir, house your head, do you profess those
sleights in tobacco?


I, do more then profess, sir, and (if you please to be a practitioner) I
will undertake in one fortnight to bring you, that you shall take it plausibly in
any ordinary, theatre, or the tilt-yard, if need be, in the most popular
assembly that is.


But you cannot bring him to the whiffe so soon?


Yes, as soon, sir, he shall receive the first, second, and third whiffe, if
it please him, and (upon the receipt) take his horse, drink his three cups of
Canary, and expose one at Hounslow, a second at Stones, and a third at
Bogshot.


Baw-waw!


You will not ser^e me, sir, will you^ I'll give you more then countenance.


Pardon me, sir, I do scorn to serve any man.


Who? he serve? Sbloud he keeps high men, and low men, he; he has a fair
living at Fullam.


But in the nature of a fellow, I'll be your follower, if you please.


Sir, you shall stay, and dine with me, and if we can agree, we'll not part
in haste: I am very bountiful to men of quality. Where shall we go,
signior?


Your Mitre is your best house.


I can make this dog take as many whiffes as I list, and he shall retain,
or efume them at my pleasure.


By your patience, follow me, fellows.


Sir, PVNTARVOLO!


Pardon me, my dog shall not eat in his company for a million.


Nay, be not you amazed, signior WHIFFE, what e're that stiffeneckt gentleman
say's.


No, for you do not know the humour of the Dog, as we do: where shall we
dine, CARLO? I would fain go to one of these ordinaries, now I am a
gentleman.


So you may, were you never at any yet?


No faith, but they say, there resorts your most choice gallants.


True, and the fashion is, when any stranger comes in amongst them, they all
stand up and stare at him, as he were some unknown beast, brought out of
Africa, but that'll be helped with a good adventurous face, you must be
impudent enough, sit down, and use no respect; when any thing's propounded
above your capacity, smile at it, make two or three faces, and 'tis excellent,
they 'le think you have trauail'd: though you argue a whole day in silence
thus, and discourse in nothing but laughter, 'twill pass. Only (now and then)
give fire, discharge a good full oath, and offer a great wager, 'twill be
admirable.


I warrant you, I am resolute: come, good signior, there's a poor french
crown, for your ordinary.


It comes well, for I had not so much as the least portcullice of come before.


I travel with another objection, signior, which I fear will be enforced
against the author, ere I can be delivered of it.


What's that, sir?


That the argument of his Comoedie might have been of some other nature, as of
a duke to be in love with a countess, and that countess to be in love with
the dukes son, and the son to love the ladies waiting maid: some such
cross wooing, with a clown to their serving-man, better then to be thus near,
and familiarly allied to the time.


You say well, but I would fain hear one of these autumne-judgements define
once, Quid sit Comoedia? if he cannot, let him content himself with CICEROS
definition (till he have strength to propose to himself a better) who would
have a Comoedie to be Imitatio vitae, Speculum consuetudinis, Imago veritatis;
a thing throughout pleasant, and ridiculous, and accommodated to the correction
of manners: if the maker have failed in any particle of this, they may worthily
tax him, but if not, why -- be you (that are for them) silent, as I will be
for him; and give way to the actors.


NAy, gods precious, if the weather and season be so respectless, that
beggars shall live as well as their betters; and that my hunger, and thirst for
riches, shall not make them hunger and thirst with poverty; that my sleeps
shall be brokes, and their hearts not broken; that my coffers shall be full,
and yet care; theirs empty, and yet merry! Tis time, that a cross should
bear flesh and blood, since flesh and blood cannot bear this cross.


What, will he hang himself?


Faith I, it seems his Prognostication has not kept touch with him, and that
makes him despair.


Beshrow me, he will be out of his humour then, indeed.


Tut, these star-monger knaves, who would trust them? one says, dark and
rainy, when 'tis as clear as crystal; another says, tempestuous blasts, and
storms, and 'twas as calm as a milke-bowle; here be sweet rascals for a man
to credit his whole fortunes with: You skie-staring cocks-combs you, you fat
brains, out upon you; you are good for nothing but to sweat night-caps, and
make rug-gownes dear! You learned men, and have not a legion of devils, a
vostre service! a vostre service! by heaven, I think I shall die a better
scholar then they! but soft, how now, sir.


Here's a letter come from your son, sir.


From my son, sir? what would my son, sir? some good news, no doubt.

Sweet and dear father (desiring you first to send me your blessing, which is
more worth to me then gold or silver) I desire you likewise to be advertised,
that this Shrouetide (contrary to custom) we use always to have revels; which
is indeed dancing, and makes an excellent show in truth; especially if we
gentlemen be well attired; which our seniors note, and think the better of
our fathers, the better we are maintained, and that they shall know if they
come up, and have any thing to do in the law: therefore, good father, these
are (for your own sake as well as mine) to re-desire you; that you let me not
want, that which is fit for the setting up of our name, in the honourable volume
of gentility, that I may say to our calumniators, with TVLLIE, Ego sum ortus
domus meae, tu occasus tuae. And thus (not doubting of your fatherly
benevolence) I humbly ask you blessing, and pray god to bless you.

Yours, if his own.

How's this? Yours, if his own? is he not my son, except he be his own
son? Belike this is some new kind of subscription the gallants use. Well,
wherefore doest thou stay, knave? Away: go. Here's a letter indeed; ie^els?
and benevolence? is this a weather to send benevolence? or is this a season to
revel in? Slid the devil and all takes part to vex me, I think! this letter
would never have come now else, now, now, when the sun shines, and the air
thus clear. Soul, if this hold, we shall shortly have an excellent crop of
corn spring out of the high ways: the streets, and houses of the town will
be hid with the rankness of the fruits, that grow therein spite of good
husbandry. Go to, I'll prevent the ^ight of it, come as quickly as it can, I
will prevent the sight of it. I have this remedy, heaven. Stay; I'll try the
pain thus a little, O, nothing, nothing. Well now, shall my son gain a
benevolence by my death? or any body be the better for my gold, or so forth?
No, alive, I kept it from them, and (dead) my ghost shall walk about it, and
preserve it, my son and daughter shall starve ere they touch it, I have bid it
as deep as hell from the sight of heaven, and to it I go now.


AYe me, what pitiful sight is this! help, help, help.


How now? what's the matter?


O, here's a man has hanged himself, help to get him again.


Hanged himself? Slid carry him before a justice, 'tis chance medley, of my
word.


How now, what's here to do?


How comes this?


One has executed himself, contrary to order of law, and by my consent he
shall answer't.


Would he were in case, to answer it.


Stand by, he recovers, give him breath.


Oh.


Mass, 'twas well you went the foot-way, neighbour.


I, and I had not cut the halter.


How! cut the halter? Aye me, I am undone, I am undone.


Mary, if you had not been undone, you had been hanged, I can tell you.


You thred-bare horse-bread-eating rascals, if you would needs have been
meddling, could you not have untied it, but you must out it? and in the midst
too! Aye me.


Out on me, 'tis the caterpillars SORDIDO! how cursed are the poor, that the
viper was blessed, with this good fortune?


Nay, how accursed art thou, that art cause to the curse of the poor?


I, and to save so wretched a caitiff?


Cursed be thy fingers that loosed him.


Some desperate fury possess thee, that thou may hang thy self too.


Never may thou be saved, that saved so damned a monster.


What curses breathe these men! how have my deeds
Made my looks differ from another mans,
That they should thus detest, and loathe my life!
Out on my wretched humour, it is that
Makes me thus monstrous in true humane eyes.
Pardon me (gentle friends) I'll make fair mends
For my foul errors past, and twenty-fold
Restore to all men, what with wrong I robbed them:
My barnes, and garners shall stand open still
To all the poor that come, and my best grain
Be made almes-bread, to feed halfe-famisht mouths.
Though hither to amongst you I have lived,
Like an unsauourie muck-hill to my self,
Yet now, my gathered heaps being spread abroad,
Shall turn to better, and more fruitful uses.
Bless then this man, curse him no more for saving
My life, and soul together. O, how deeply
The bitter curses of the poor do pierce!
I am by wonder changed; come in with me
And witness my repentance: now I prove,
"No life is blessed, that is not graced with love.

O miracle! see when a man ha's grace!


Had't not been pity, so good a man should have been cast away?


Well, I'll get our clarke put his conversion in the Acts, and Monuments.


Do, for I warrant him he's a Martyr.


O god, how he wept, if you marked it! did you see how the tears trilled?


Yes, believe me, like master vicars bowles upon the green, for all the world.


O neighbour, god's blessing of your heart, neighbour, 'twas a good grateful
deed.


How now, MITIS? what's that you consider so seriously?


Troth, that which doth essentially please me, the vvarping condition of this
green, and soggy multitude: but in good saith, signior, your author hath
largely out-stript my expectation in this Scene, I will liberally confess it.
For, when I saw SORDIDO so desperately intended, I thought I had had a hand of
him, then.


What? you supposed he should have hung himself, indeed?


I did, and had framed my objection to it ready, which may yet be very fitly
urged, and with some necessity: for though his purposed violence lost the
effect, and extended not to death, yet the intent and horror of the object, was
more then the nature of a Comoedie will in any sort admit.


I? what think you of PLAVTVS, in his Comoedie, called Cistellaria, there?
where he brings in ALCESIMARCHVS with a drawn sword ready to kill himself,
and as he is even fixing his breast upon it, to be restrained from his
resolved outrage, by SILENIVM, and the bawd: is not his authority of power to
give our Scene approbation?


Sir, I have this only evasion left me, to say, I think it be so indeed, your
memory is happier then mine: but I wonder, what engine he will use to bring
the rest out of their humours!


That will appear anon, never preoccupie your imagination withal. Let your
mind keep company with the Scene still, which now removes it self from the
country, to the court. Here comes MACILENTE, and signior BRISK, freshly
suited, lose not your self, for now the Epitasis, or busy part of our subject,
is in act.


WEll, now, signior MACILENTE, you are not only welcome to the court but also
to my mistress withdrawing chamber: Boy, get me some tobacco, I'll but go in,
and show I am here, and come to you presently, sir.


What's that he said? by heaven, I marked him not:
My thoughts, and I, were of another world.
I was admiring mine own out-side here,
To think what privilege, and palm it bears
Here, in the court! Be a man ne'er so vile
In wit, in judgement, manners, or what else;
If he can purchase but a silken cover,
He shall not only pass, but pass regarded:
Whereas, let him be poor, and meanly clad,
Though ne'er so richly parted; you shall have
A fellow (that knows nothing but his beef,
Or how to rince his clammy guts in beer)
Will take him by the shoulders, or the throat,
And kick him down the stairs. Such is the state
Of virtue, in bad clothes! ha, ha, ha, ha,
That raiment should be in such high request!
How long should I be, ere I should put off
To the lord Chancelors tomb, or the Shriues posts?
By heaven (I think) a thousand, thousand year.
His gravity, his wisdom, and his faith,
To my dread Sovereign (graces that survive him)
These I could well endure to reverence,
But not his tomb: no more then I'd commend
The chapel organ, for the guilt without,
Or this base viol, for the varnished face.

I fear I have made you stay somewhat long, sir, but is my tobacco ready,
boy?


I, sir.


Give me, my mistress is upon coming, you shall see her presently, sir, Italie
are nothing comparable to her! her braine's a very quiver of jests! and she
does dart them abroad with that sweet loose, and judicial aim, that you
would -- here she comes sir.


'Twas time, his invention had been bogd else.


Give me my fan there.


How now, Monsieur BRISK?


A kind of affectionate reverence strikes me with a cold shivering (me
thinks.)


I like such tempers well, as stand before their mistresses with fear and
trembling, and before their maker, like impudent mountains.


By this hand, I'd spend twenty pound my vauting-horse stood here now, she
might see me do but one trick?


Why, does she love activity?


Or if you had but your long stockings on, to be dancing a galliard, as she
comes by.


I either. O, these stirring humours make ladies mad with desire^ she comes.
My good GENIVS embolden me, boy, the pipe quickly.


What? will he give her music?


A second good morrow to my fair mistress.


Fair servant, I'll thank you a day hence, when the date of your salutation
comes forth.


How, like you that answer? is't not admirable?


I were a simple courtier, if I could not admire trifles, sir.


Troth, sweet lady, I shall


I ne'er knew tobacco taken as a parenthesis, before.


Fore god (sweet lady) believe it, I do honour the meanest rush in this
chamber, for your love.


I, you need not tell me that, sir, I do think, you do prize a rush, before
my love.


Is this the wonder of nations?


O, by this air, pardon me, I said, for your love, by this light: but it is
the accustomed sharpness of your ingenuity, sweet mistress, to -- Mass
your violl's new strung, methinkes.


Ingenuity. I see his ignorance will not suffer him to slander her, which he
had done most notably, if he had said wit, for ingenuity, as he meant it.


By the soul of music, lady (hum, hum.)


Would we might hear it once.


I do more adore, and admire your (hum, hum) predominant perfections, then
(hum, hum) ever I shall have power, and faculty to express (hum.)


Upon the viol de Gambo, you mean?


It's miserably out of tune, by this hand.


Nay, rather by the fingers.


It makes good harmony with her wit.


Sweet lady, tune it. Boy, some tobacco.


Tobacco again? he does court his mistress with very exceeding good changes.


Signior MACILENTE, you take none, sir?


No, unless I had a Mistress, signior, it were a great indecorum for me to
take tobacco.


How like you her wit?


Her ingenuity is excellent, sir.


You see the subject of her sweet fingers, there?


Not unlike, sir: but how? to be cased up, and hung by on the wall?


O, no, sir, to be in use I assure you; as your judicious eyes may testify.


Here, servant, if you will play, come.


Instantly, sweet lady.


Nay, I cannot stay to dance after your pipe.


Good! nay, dear lady, stay: by this sweet smoke, I think your wit be all
fire.


And, he's the Salamander belongs to it.


Is your tobacco perfumed, servant? that you swear by the sweet smoke?


Still more excellent! (before heaven, and these bright lights) I think


True, as your discourse is: O abominable!


Will your ladyship take any?


O, peace I pray you; I love not the breath of a woodcockes head.


Meaning my head, lady?


Not altogether so, sir; but (as it were fatal to their follies that think to
grace themselves with taking tobacco, when they want better entertainment) you
see your pipe bears the true form of a woodcockes head.


O admirable simile!


'Tis best leaving of you in admiration, sir.


Are these the admired lady-wits, that having so good a plaine-song, can run
no better division upon it? S'heart, all her jests are of the stamp, ( March
was fifteen years ago.) Is this the Comet, Monsieur FASTADIVS, that your
gallants wonder at so?


Hart of a gentleman, to neglect me before presence thus! Sweet sir, I beseech
you be silent in my disgrace. By the Muses, I was never in so vile a humour in
my life, and her wit was at the ^loud too. Report it not for a million, good
sir; let me be so far endeared to your love.


What follows next, signior CORDATVS? this gallants humour is almost spent, me
thinks, it ebbes apace, with this contrary breath of his mistress.


O, but it will ^low again for all this, till there come a general drought of
humour among all our actors, and then, I fear not but his will fall as low as
any. See, who presents himself here!


What, in the old case?


In faith, which makes it, the more pitiful, you understand where the Scene is?


WHy, are you so melancholy, brother?


I am not melancholy, I thank you, sister.


Why are you not merry then? there are but two of us in all the world, and if
we should not be comforts one to another, god help us.


Faith, I cannot tell, sister, but if a man had any true melancholy in him, it
would make him melancholy, to see his yeomanly father cut his neighbours
throats, to make his son a gentleman: and yet when he has cut them, he will
see his sons throat cut too, ere he make him a true gentleman indeed, before
death cut his own throat. I must be the first head of our house, and yet he
will not give me the head till I be made so. Is any man termed a gentleman
that is not always in the fashion? I would know but that.


If you be melancholy for that, brother, I think I have as much cause to be
melancholy, as one: for I'll be sworn, I live as little in the fashion, as any
woman in London. By the faith of a Gentlewoman, (beast that I am to say it) I
haven't one friend in the world besides my husband. When saw you master FASTIDIVS
BRISK, brother?


But a while since, sister, I think: I know not well in truth. By this hand, I
could fight with all my heart, me thinks.


Nay, good brother, be not resolute.


I sent him a letter, and he writes me no answer neither.


Oh, sweet FASTIDIVS BRISK! O fine courtier! thou art he make me sigh, and
say, how blessed is that woman that hath a courtier to her husband! and how
miserable a dame she is, that hath neither husband, nor friend in the court!
O, sweet FASTIDIVS! O, fine courtier! How comely he bows him in his curtsy!
how full he hits a woman between the lips when he kisses! how upright he
sits at the table! how daintily he carves! how sweetly he talks, and tells
news of this lord, and of that lady! how cleanly he wipes his spoon, at
every spoonful of any whit-meat he eats, and what a neat case of pick-tooths
he carries about him, still! O, sweet FASTIDIVS! O, fine courtier!


SEe, yonder she is, gentlemen. Now (as ever you'll bear the name of
musicians) touch your instruments sweetly, she has a delicate ear, I tell
you: play not a false note, I beseech you.


Fear not, siguior DELIRO.


O, begin, begin, some sprightly thing: Lord, how my imagination labours with
the success of it. Well said, good in faith! heaven grant it please her. I'll
not be seen, for then she'll be sure to dislike it.


Hey -- da! this is excellent! I'll lay my life, this is my husbands dotage. I
thought so; nay, never play peeke-boe with me, I know, you do nothing but
study how to anger me, sir.


Anger thee, sweet wife? why did thou not send for musicians to supper last
night, thy self?


To supper, sir? now, come up to supper, I beseech you: as though there were no
difference between supper time, when folks should be merry, and this time when
they would be melancholy? I would never take upon me to take a wife, if I had
no more judgment to please her.


Be pleased, sweet wife, and they shall have done: and would to fate, my life
were done, if I can never please thee.


Save you, lady, where is master DELIRO?


Here, master MACILENTE: you are welcome from court, sir; no doubt you have
been graced exceedingly of master BRISKES Mistress, and the rest of the ladies,
for his sake?


Alas, the poor fantastic! he's scarce known
To any lady there; and those that know him,
Know him the simplest man of all they know:
De^ide, and play upon his amorous humours,
Though he but apishly doth imitate
The gallant'st courtiers, kissing ladies pumps.
Holding the cloth for them, praising their wits,
And servilely observing every one,
May do them pleasure: fearful to be seen
With any man (though he be ne'er so worthy)
That's not in grace with some, that are the greatest.
Thus courtiers do, and these he counterfeits.
But sets not such a sightly carriage
Upon their vanities, as they themselves;
And therefore they despise him: for indeed
He's like the Zani, to a tumbler,
That tries tricks after him, to make men laugh.

Here's an unthankful spiteful wretch! the good gentleman vouchsafed to make
him his companion (because my husband put him into a few rags) and now see, how
the vnrude rascal back-bites him!


Is he no more graced amongst them, then? say you?


Faith, like a pawn, at Chess: fills up a room, that's all.


O monster of men! can the earth bear such an e^uious caytiffe?


Well, I repent me, I e're credited him so much: but (now I see what he is, and
that his masking visor is off) I'll forbear him no longer. All his lands are
mortgaged to me, and forfeited: besides, I have bonds of his in my hand, for the
receipt of now fifty pound, now a hundred, now two hundred: still, as he has had
a fan but wagg'd at him, he would be in a new suit. Well, I'll salute him by a
Sergeant, the next time I see him, in faith, I'll suit him.


Why, you may soon see him, sir, for he is to meet signior PVNTARVOLO at a
Notaries, by the Exchange, presently: where he means to take up, upon return
--


Now, out upon thee, IVDAS; can thou not be content to back-bite thy friend,
but thou must betray him? wilt thou seek the undoing of any man? and of such a
man too? and will you, sir, get your living by the counsel of traitors?


Dear wife, have patience.


The house will fall, the ground will open, and swallow us: I'll not bide here,
for all the gold, and silver in heaven.


O, good MACILENTE, let's follow and appease her, or the peace of my life is at
an end.


Now peas, and not peace, feed that life, whose head bangs so heavily over a
woman's manger.


Help me, brother: 'ods body, and you come here, I'll do my self a
mischief.


Nay, hear me, sweet wife, unless thou wilt have me go, I will not go.


Tut, you shall ne'er have that vantage of me, to say, you are undone by me:
I'll not bid you stay, I. Brother, sweet brother, here's four angels, I'll
give you toward your suit: for the love of gentry, and as ever you came of
christen creature, make haste to the water fide (you know where Master
FASTIDIVS uses to land) and give him warning of my husbands malicious intent;
tel him of that lea^e rascals treachery: O heuens! how my flesh rises at him!
nay, sweet brother, make haste: you may say, I would have writ to him, but
that necessity of the time would not permit. He cannot choose but take it
extraordinarily from me: and commend me, to him, good brother, say, I sent you.


Let me see, these four angels, and then, forty shillings more I can borrow
on my gown in Fetter-lane. Well, I will go presently, say on my suit, pay as
much money as I have, and swear my self into credit with my taylor, for the
rest.


O, on my soul you wrong her, MACILENTE,
Though she be froward, yet I know she is honest.

Well, then have I no judgment: would any woman (but one that were wild in
her affections) have broke out into that immodest and violent passion against
her husband? or is't possible --


If you love me, forbear; all the arguments in the world shall never wrest my
heart to believe it.


How like you the deciphering of his dotage?


O, strangely! and of the others envy too, that labours so seriously to set
debate betwixt a man, and his wife. Stay, here comes the knight aduenturer.


I, and his scrivener with him.


I Wonder, Monsieur FASTIDIVS comes not! but, NOTARY, if thou please to draw
the indentures the while, I will give thee thy instructions.


With all my heart, sir; and I'll fall in hand with 'he^ presently.


Well then, first, the sum is to be understood.


Good, sir.


Next, our several appellations, and character of my dog, and cat, must be
known: show him the cat, sirrah.


So, sir.


Then, that the intended bound, is the Turks court in Constantinople: the time
limited for our return, a year: and that if either of us miscarry, the whole
venture is lost. These are general, conceiu'st thou? or if either of us turn
Turk.


I, sir.


Now for particulars: That I may make my travails by sea or land, to my best
liking: and that (hyring a coach for my self) it shall be lawful for my dog,
or cat, or both, to ride with me in the said coach.


Very good, sir.


That I may choose to give my dog, or cat fish, for fear of bones: or any
other nutriment, that (by the judgment of the most autenticall physicians,
where I travail) shall be thought dangerous.


Well, sir.


That (after the receipt of his money) he shall neither in his own person, nor
any other, either by direct or indirect means, as magic, witchcraft, or
other such exotic arts, attempt, practise, or complot a^iething, to the
prejudice of me, my dog, or my cat: Neither shall I use the help of any
such forceries, or enchantments, as vnctious, to make our skins impenetrable,
or to travail invisible by virtue of a powder, or a ring, or to hang any
three-forked charm about my dogs neck, secretly conveyed into his collar:
(understand you?) but that all be performed, sincerely, without fraud, or
imposture.


So, sir.


That (for testimony of the performance) my self am to bring thence a T^rkes
moustache, my dog a Gracian hares lip, and my cat the train, or tail of a
Thracian rat.


'Tis done, sir.


'Tis said, sir, not done, sir: but forward. That upon my return, and landing
on the Tower-wharfe, with the aforesaid testimony, I am to receive five for
one, according to the proportion of the sums put forth.


Well, sir.


Provided, that if before our departure, or setting forth, either my self, or
these be visited with sickness, or any other casual event, so that the whole
course of the adventure be hindered, thereby; that then, he is to return, and
I am to receive the prenominated proportion, upon fair and equal terms.


Very good, sir, is this all?


It is all, sir: and dispatch them, good NOT ARIE.


As fast as is possible, sir.


O, CARLO! welcome: saw you Monsieur BRISK?


Not I: did he appoint you, to meet here?


I, and I muse he should be so tardy: he is to take an hundred pounds of me
in venture, if he maintain his promise.


Is his hour past?


Not yet, but it comes on apace.


Tut, be not jealous of him: he will sooner break all the commandments, then
his hour, upon my life, in such a case trust him.


Me thinks, CARLO, you look very smooth! ha?


Why, I come but now from a hot-house, I must needs look smooth.


From a hot-house!


I, do you make a wonder on it? why it's your only physic. Let a man sweat
once a week in a hothouse, and be well rubbed, froted, with a good plump
juicie wench, and sweet linen: he shall ne'er have the pox.


What, the French pox?


The French pox! our pox. S'bloud we have them in as good form as they, man:
what?


Let me perish, but thou art a salt one! was your new-created gallant there
with you? SOGLIARDO?


O, porpuse! hang him, no: he's a lieger at Horns ordinary yonder: his
villainous GANIMEDE, and he have been droning a tobacco pipe there, ever sin'
yesterday no one.


Who? signior TRIPARTITE, that would give my dog the Whiffe?


I, he. They have hired a chamber, and all private to practise in, for the
making of the Pato^, the Receipt reciprocal, and a number of other mysteries,
not yet extant. I brought some dozen, or twenty gallants this morning to view
them (as you'd do a piece of Perspective) in at a key-hole: and there we
might see SOGLIARDO sit in a chair, holding his snout up like a sow under an
apple-tree, while the other opened his nostrils with a poking-sticke, to give
the smoke a more free delivery. They had spit some three, or fourscore ounces
between them, before we came away.


How! spit three, or fourscore ounces?


I, and preserved it in porrengers; as a barber does his blood* when he opens a
vein.


Out, Pagan: how dost thou open the vein of thy friend?


Friend? Is there any such foolish thing in the world? ha? S'lid I ne'er
rellisht it yet.


Thy humour is the more dangerous.


No, not a whit, Signior: Tut, a man must keep time in all. I can oil my
tongue when I meet him next, and look with a good slick fore-head; 'twill
take away all soil of suspicion, and that's enough: what LYNCEVS can see my
heart? Pish, the title of a friend, it's a vain idle thing, only venerable
among fools: you shall not have one that has any opinion of wit affect it.


Save you, good sir PVNTARVOLO.


Signior DELIRO! welcome.


Pray you, sir, did you see Master FASTIDIVS BRISK? I heard he was to meet
your worship here.


Your heard no sigment, sir, I do expect him at every pulse of my watch.


In good time, sir.


There's a fellow now, looks like one of the Patricians of Sparta, mary his
wit's after ten in the hundred. A good bloud-hound, a close-mouth'd dog, he
follows the sent well, mary he's at a fault now, me thinks.


I should wonder at that creature is free from the danger of thy tongue.


O, I cannot abide these limbs of satin, or rather Satan indeed, that 'll
walk (like the children of darkness) all day in a melancholy shop, with their
pockets full of blanks, ready to swallow up as many poor unthrifts, as come
within the verge.


So! and what hast thou for him that is with him, now?


O, (dam' me) Immortality! I'll not meddle with him, the pure element of
fire, all spirit, extraction.


HOW, CARLO? ha, what is he, man?


A scholar, MACILENTE, do you not know him? a lank raw-bon'd anatomy, he
walks up and down like a charged musket, no man dares encounter him: that's
his rest there.


His rest? why has he a forked head?


Pardon me, that's to be suspended, you are too quick, too apprehensive.


Troth (now I think on it) I'll defer it till some other time.


Not, by any means, signior, you shall not lose this opportunity, he will be
here presently now.


Yes saith, MACILENTE, 'tis best. For look you, sir, I shall so exceedingly
offend my wife in it, that --


Your wife? now for shame lose these thoughts, and become the master of your
own spirits. Should I (if I had a wife) suffer my self to be thus
passionately carried (to and fro) with the stream of her humour? and neglect
my deepest affairs, to serve her affections? S'light I would geld my self
first.


O but, signior, had you such a wife as mine is, you would --


Such a wife? Now hate me, sir, if ever I discerned any wonder in your wife,
yet, with all the speculation I have: I have seen some that have been thought
fairer then she, in my time; and I have seen those, have not been altogether so
tall, esteemed properer women; and I have seen less noses grow upon sweeter
faces, that have done very well too, in my judgment: but in good faith,
signior, for all this, the gentlewoman is a good pretty proud hard-fauour'd
thing, mary not so peerelessely to be doted upon, I must confess: nay, be not
angry.


Well, sir, (how ever you please to forget your self) I have not deserved to
be thus played upon, but henceforth, pray you forbear my house, for I can but
faintly endure the favour of his breath at my table, that shall thus jade me
for my courtesies.


Nay, then, signior, let me tell you, your wife is no proper woman, and, by my
life, I suspect her honesty, that's more, which you may likewise suspect (if
you please:) do you see? I'll urge you to nothing, against your appetite, but
if you please, you may suspect it.


Good, sir.


Good sir? Now horne upon horne pursue thee, thou blind egregious dotard.


O, you shall hear him speak like ennie. Signior MACILENTE, you saw monsieur
BRISK lately? I heard you were with him at court.


I, BVFFONE, I was with him.


And how is he respected there? (I know you'll deal ingenuously with us) is he
made of amongst the sweeter sort of gallants?


Faith I, his civet and his casting-glasse,
Have helped him to a place amongst the rest:
And there, his Seniors give him good slight looks,
After their garb, smile, and salute in French
With some new complement.

What, is this all?

Why say, that they should show the frothie fool,
Such grace, as they pretend comes from the heart,
He had a mighty wind-fall out of doubt.
Why, all their Graces are not to do grace
To virtue, or desert: but to ride both
With their guilt sputres quite breathless, from themselves.
'Tis now esteemed Precisianisme in wit;
And a disease in nature, to be kind
Toward desert, to love, or seek good names:
Who feeds with a good name? who thrives with loving?
Who can provide feast for his own desires,
With serving others? ha, ha, ha:
'Tis folly, by our wisest worldlings proved,
(If not to gain by love) to be beloved.

How like you him? is't not a good spiteful slave? ha?

Shrewd, shrewd.

Dam'me, I could eat his flesh now: divine sweet villain!

Nay, pray thee leave: what's he there?

Who? this in the starcht beard? it's the dull stiff knight PVNTARVOLO, man;
he's to travail now presently: he has a good knotty wit, marry he carries
little o't out of the land, with him.


How then?


He puts it forth in venture, as he does his money; upon the return of a
dog, and cat.


Is this he?


I, this is he; a good tough gentleman: he looks like a shield of brawn, at
Shrouetide, out of date, and ready to take his leave: or a dry poule of ling
upon Easter-eue, that has furnished the table all Lent, as he has done the city
this last vacation.


Come, you'll never leave your stabbing smile's: I shall have you aiming at me
with them by and by, but --


O, renounce me then: pure, honest, good devil, I love thee above the love of
women: I could even melt in admiration of thee, now! gods so, look here, man;
Sir DAGONET, and his squire!


Save you, my dear GALLANTO'S: nay, come approach, good CAVALIER: pray thee
(sweet knight) know this gentleman, he's one that it pleases me to use as my
good friend, and companion; and therefore do him good offices: I beseech you,
gentles, know him, know him all over.


Sir (for signior SOGLIARDO'S sake) let it suffice, I know you.


Why (as I am true gentleman) I thank you, knight, and it shall suffice. Hark
you, sir PVNTARVOLO, you'd little think it; he's as resolute a piece of
flesh, as any's in the world.


Indeed, sir?


Upon my gentility, sir: CARLO, a word with you; Do you see that same fellow,
there?


What? CAVALIER SHIFT?


O, you know him; cry you mercy: before me, I think him the tallest man,
living within the walls of Europe.


The walls of Europe! take heed what you say, signior, Europe's a huge thing
within the walls.


Tut, (and 'twere as huge again) I'd justify what I speak. Slid, he
swagger'd even now in a place where we were: I never saw a man do it more
resolute.


Nay, indeed swaggering is a good argument of resolution. Do you hear this,
signior?


I, to my grief. O, that such muddy flags,
For every drunken flourish, should achieve
The name of manhood; whilst true perfect valour
(Hating to show it self) goes by despised!
Heart, I do know now (in a fair just cause)
I dare do more then he, a thousand times:
Why should not they take knowledge of this? ha?
And give my worth allowance before his?
Because I cannot swagger! Now the pox
Light on your Pickt-hatch prowess.

Why, I tell you, sir, he has been the only Bid-stand that ever kept
New-market, Salisbury-plaine, Hockley in the hole, Gads-Hill; all the high
places of any request: he has had his mares and his geldings, he, have been
worth forty, threescore, a hundred pound a horse, would have sprung you over
hedge, and ditch, like your grey-hound, he has done five hundred robberies in
his time, more or less, I assure you.


What? and escaped?


Escaped! in faith I: he has broken the jail when he has been in irons, and
irons; and been out, and in again; and out, and in; forty times, and not so
few, he.


A fit trumpet, to proclaim such a person.


But can this be possible?


Why, 'tis nothing, sir, when a man gives his affections to it.


Good PYLADES, discourse a robbery, or two, to satisfy these gentlemen of thy
worth.


Pardon me, my dear ORESTES: Causes have their quiddits, and 'tis ill jesting
with bell-ropes.


How? PYLADES, and ORESTES?


I, he is my PYLADES, and I am his ORESTES: how like you the conceit?


O, it's an old stale enterlude device: No, I'll give you names my self, look
you, he shall be your IVDAS, and you shall be his Elder tree, to hang on.


Nay, rather, let him be captain POD, and this his Motion; for he does nothing
but show him.


Excellent: or thus, you shall be HOLDEN, and he your Camel.


You do not mean to ride, gentlemen?


Faith, let me end it for you, gallants: you shall be his Countenance, and he
your Resolution.


Troth, that's pretty: how say you, Cavalier, shalt be so?


I, I, most voices.


Faith, I am easily yielding to any good impressions.


Then give hands, good Resolution.


Mass, he cannot say, good Countenance, now (properly) to him again.


Yes, by an irony.


O, sir, the countenance of Resolution should, as he is, be altogether grim,
and unpleasant.


GOod hours make music with your mirth, gentlemen, and keep time to your
humours: how now, CARLO?


Monsieur BRISK! many a long look have I extended for you, sir.


Good faith, I must crave pardon; I was invited this morning ere I was out of
my bed, by a beuie of ladies, to a banquet: whence it was almost one of
HERCVLES labours for me, to come away, but that the respect of my promise did
so preuaile with me: I know they will take it very ill, especially one that gave
me this bracelet of her hair but ouer-night, and this pearl another gave me
from her fore-head, mary, she -- what? are the writings ready?


I will send my man to know. Sirrah, go you to the Notaries, and learn if he
be ready: leave the dog, sir.


And how does my rare qualified friend, SOGLIARDO? oh, signior MACILENTE! by
these eyes, I saw you not, I had saluted you sooner else, o'my troth: I hope,
sir, I may presume upon you, that you will not divulge my late check, or
disgrace, indeed, sir.


You may, sir.


S'heart, he knows some notorious jest by this gull, that he hath him so
obsequious.


Monsieur FASTIDIVS, do you see this fellow there? does he not look like a
clown? would you think there's any thing in him?


Anything in him? beshrow me, I; the fellow hath a good ingenious face.


By this element, he is an ingenious tall man, as ever swagger'd about London:
he, and I, call Countenance, and Resolution, but his name is CAVALIER SHIFT.


CAVALIER, you knew signior CLOG, that was hanged for the robbery at Harrow
of the hill?


Knew him, sir! why, 'twas he gave all the directions for the action.


How? was't your project, sir?


Pardon me, Countenance, you do me some wrong to make that public, which I
imparted to you in private.


Gods will! here are none but friends, Resolution.


That's all one; things of consequence must have their respects, where, how,
and to whom. Yes, sir, he showed himself a true CLOG in the coherence of that
affair, sir; for if he had managed matters as they were corroborated to him,
it had been better for him by a forty, or fifty score of pounds, sir, and he
himself might have lived (in despite of fates) to have fed on wood-cocks, with
the rest: but it was his heavy fortune to sink, poor CLOG, and therefore
talk no more of him.


Why, had he more aiders, then?


O god, sir! I, there were some present there, that were the nine Worthies to
him, in faith.


I, sir, I can satisfy you at more convenient conference: but (for mine own
part) I have now reconciled my self to other courses, and profess a living
out of my other qualities.


Nay, he has left all now (I assure you) and is able to live like a gentleman,
by his quality. By this dog, he has the most rare gift in tobacco, that ever
you knew.


S'heart, he keeps more ado with this monster, then ever BANKS did with his
horse, or the fellow with the elephant.


He will hang out his picture shortly, in a cloth, you shall see.


O, he does manage a quarrel, the best that ever you saw, for terms, and
circumstances.


Good faith, signior, (now you speak of a quarrel) I'll acquaint you with a
difference, that happened between a gallant, and my self sir PVNTARVOLO, you
know him if I should name him, signior LVCVLENTO.


LVCVLENTO! what in-auspicious chance interposed it self to your two loves?


Faith, sir, the same that sundried AGAMEMNON, and great THETIS son; but let
the cause escape, sir: He sent me a challenge (mict with some few braves)
which I restored, and in fine we met. Now indeed, sir, (I must tell you) he did
offer at first very desperately, but without judgment: for look you, sir. I
cast my self into this figure: now he, comes violently on, and withal
advancing his rapier to strike, I thought to have took his arm (for he had
left his whole body to my election, and I was sure he could not recover his
guard) Sir, I mist my purpose in his arm, rasht his doublet sleeve, ran him
close by the left cheek, and through his hair. He again, lights me here (I
had on, a gold cable hatband, then new come up, which I wore about a murrey
French hat I had) cuts my hatband (and yet it was massy, gold-smithes work)
cuts my brims, which by good fortune (being thick embroidered with
gold-twist, and spangles) disappointed the force of the blow: Nevertheless, it
grazed on my shoulder, takes me away six purles of an Italian cut-worke band I
wore (cost me three pound in the exchange, but three days before.)


This was a strange encounter!


Nay, you shall hear, sir: with this we both fell out, and breathed. Now
(upon the second sign of his assault) I betook me to the former manner of my
defence; he (on the other side) abandoned his body to the same danger, as
before, and follows me still with blows: But I (being loath to take the deadly
advantage that lay before me of his left side) made a kind of stramazoun,
ran him up to the hilts, through the doublet, through the shirt, and yet mist
the skin. He (making a reverse blow) falls upon my embossed girdle (I had
thrown off the hangers a little before) strikes off a skirt of a thick --
laced satin doublet I had (lined with some four taffataes) cuts off two
panes, embroidered with pearl, rends through the drawings out of tissew, enters
the linings, and skips the flesh.


I wonder he speaks not of his wrought shirt!


Here (in the opinion of mutual damage) we paused: but (ere I proceed) I
must tell you, signior, that (in this last encounter) not having leisure to put
off my silver spurs, one of the rowels caught hold of the ru^le of my boot,
and (being Spanish leather, and subject to tear) overthrows me, rends me two
pair of silk stockings (that I put on, being somewhat a raw morning, a peach
colour and another) and strikes me some half inch deep into the side of the
calfe; He (seeing the blood come) presently takes horse, and away. I (having
bound up my wound with a piece of my wrought shirt) --


O! comes it in there?


Rid after him, and (lighting at the court-gate, both together) embraced, and
marched hand in hand up into the presence: was not this business well carried?


Well? yes, and by this we can guess what apparel the gentleman wore.


Fore valour, it was a designement begun with much resolution, maintained with
as much prowess, and ended with more humanity. How now, what says the
Notary?


He says, he is ready, sir, he stays but your worships pleasure.


Come, we will go to him, Monsieur. Gentlemen, shall we entreat you to be
witnesses?


You shall entreat me, sir: come Resolution.


I follow you, good Countenance.


Come, signior, come, come.


O, that there should be fortune
To clothe these men, so naked in desert!
And that the just storm of a wretched life,
Beats them not ragged, for their wretched souls,
And, since as fruitless, even as black as coals!

Why, but signior, how comes it, that FVNGOSO appeared not with his sisters
intelligence, to BRISK?


Mary, long of the evil angels that she gave him, who have indeed tempted the
good simple youth, to follow the tail of the fashion, and neglect the
imposition of his friends. Behold, here he comes, very worshipfully attended
and with good variety.


Gramercy, good shoo-maker, I'll put to strings my self. Now, sir, let me
see, what must you have for this hat?


Here's the bill, sir.


How does't become me? well?


Excellent, sir, as ever you had any hat in your life.


Nay, you'll say so, all.


In faith, sir, the hat's as good as any man in this town can serve you; and
will maintain fashion as long: ne'er trust me for a groat else.


Does it apply well to my suit?


Exceeding well, sir.


How lik'st thou my suit, haberdasher?


By my troth, sir, 'tis very rarely well made, I never saw a suit sit better, I
can tell, on.


Nay, we have no art to please our friends, we.


Here, haberdasher, tell this fame.


Good faith, sir, it makes you have an excellent body.


Nay (believe me) I think I have as good a body in clothes, as another.


You lack points, to bring your apparel together, sir.


I'll have points anon: how now? is't right?


Faith, sir, 'tis too little, but upon farther hopes -- Good morrow to you,
sir.


Farewell, good haberdasher. Well, now master SNIP, let me see your bill.


Me thinks he discharges his followers too thick.


O, therein he fancily imitates some great man. I warrant you, though he turns
off them, he keeps this taylor, in place of a page, to follow him still.


This bill is very reasonable, in faith (hark you, master SNIP) Troth, sir, I
am not altogether so well furnished at this present, as I could wish I were, but
-- If you'll do me the favour to take part in hand, you shall have all I
have, by this hand --


Sir --


And, but give me credit for the rest, till the beginning of the next term.


O lord, sir --


Fore god, and by this light, I'll pay you to the utmost, and acknowledge my
self very deeply engaged to you, by the courtesy.


Why, how much have you there, sir?


Mary I have here four angels, and fifteen shillings of white money: it's all
I have, as I hope to be blessed.


You will not fail me, at the next term, with the rest.


No, and I do, pray heaven, I be hanged. Let me never breathe again, upon
this mortal stage, as the philosopher calls it. By this air, and (as I am a
gentleman) I'll hold.


He were an yron-hearted fellow, in my judgment, that would not credit him
upon this volley of oaths.


Well, sir, I'll not stick with any gentleman for a trifle: you know what
'tis, remains?


I, sir, and I give you thanks in good faith. O fate! how happy am I made in
this good fortune! Well, now I'll go seek out Monsieur BRISK. 'Ods so, I
have forgot ribbon for my shoes, and points. Slid, what luck 's this! how
shall I do? Master SNIPPE, pray let me reduct some two or three shillings for
points, and ribbon: as I am an honest man, I have utterly disfurnisht my
self, in the default of memory, pray'le me be beholding to you, it shall come
home in the bill, believe me.


Faith, sir, I can hardly depart with ready money, but I'll take up, and send
you some by my boy, presently. What coloured ribbon would you have?


What you shall think meet i'your judgment, sir, to my suit.


Well, I'll send you some presently.


And points too, sir?


And points too, sir.


Good lord! how shall I study to deserve this kindness of you, sir? Pray, let
your youth make haste, for I should have done a business an hour since, that
I doubt I shall come too late. Now, in good faith, I am exceeding proud of my
suit.


Do you observe the plunges, that this poor gallant is put to (signior) to
purchase the fashion?


I, and to be still a fashion behind with the world, that's the sport.


Stay: O here they come, from sealed, and delivered.


WEll, now my whole venture is forth, I will resolve to depart shortly.


Faith, sir PVNTARVOLO, go to the court, and take leave of the ladies first.


I care not, if it be this afternoones labour. Where is CARLO?


Here he comes.


Faith, gallants, I am persuading this gentleman to turn courtier. He is a man
of fair revenue, and his estate will bear the charge well. Besides, for his
other gifts of the mind, or so, why, they are as nature lent him them, pure,
simple, without any artificial drug or mixture of these two thred-bare
beggarly qualities, learning, and knowledge, and therefore the more
accommodate, and genuine. Now, for the life it self --


O, the most celestial, and full of wonder, and delight, that can be imagined,
signior, beyond all thought, and apprehension of pleasure! A man lives there,
in that divine rapture, that he will think himself in the ninth heaven for
the time, and lose all sense of mortality whatsoever; when he shall behold
such glorious (and almost immortal) beauties, hear such angelical and
harmonious voices, discourse with such flowing and ambrosiam spirits, whose
wits are as sudden as lightning, and humorous as nectar, Oh: it makes a man
al quintessence, and flame, lifts him up (in a moment) to the very crystal
crown of the sky, where (hovering in the strength of his imagination) he
shall behold all the delights of the HESPERIDES, the Insulae Fortunatae, ADONIS
gardens, Tempe or what else (condfin'd within the amplest verge of poesy) to
be mere vmbrae, and imperfect figures, conferred with the most essential
felicity of your court.


Well, this Encomion was not extemporal, it came too perfectly off.


Besides, sir, you shall never need to go to a hot-house, you shall sweat
there with courting your mistress, or losing your money at primero, as well as
in all the stones in Sweden. Mary this, sir, you must ever be sure to carry a
good strong perfume about you, that your mistress dog may smell you out
amongst the rest; and (in making love to her) never fear to be out: for you
may have a pipe of tobacco, or a base viol shall hang of the wall, of purpose,
will put you in presently. The tricks your Resolution has taught you in
tobacco, (the whisse, and those sleights) will stand you in very good ornament
there?


I, to some perhaps: but, and he should come to my mistress with tobacco
(this gentleman knows) shee'ld reply upon him, in faith. O, (by this bright
sun) she has the most acute, ready, and facetious wit, that -- tut there's
no spirit able to stand her. You can report it, signior, you have seen her?


Then can he report no less, out of his judgment, I assure him.


Troth, I like her well enough, but she's too selfe-conceited, me thinks.


I indeed, she's a little too self conceited, and 'twere not for that humour,
she were the most-to-be-admir'd lady in the world.


Indeed, it is a humour that takes from her other excellencies.


Why, it may easily be made to forsake her, in my thought.


Easily, sir? then are all impossibilities easy.


You conclude too quick upon me, signior, what will you say, if I make it so
perspicuously appear now, that your self shall confess nothing more
possible?


Mary, I will say, I will both applaud, and admire you for it.


And I will second him, in the admiration.


Why, I'll show you, gentlemen. CARLO, come hither.


Good faith, I have a great humour to the court: what thinks my Resolution?
shall I adventure?


Troth, Countenance, as you please; the place is a place of good reputation,
and capacity.


O, my tricks in tobacco (as CARLO says) will show excellent there.


Why, you may go with these gentlemen now, and see fashions: and after, as you
shall see correspondence.


You say true. You will go with me, Resolution?


I will meet you, Countenance, about three or four of clock, but, to say to
go with you I cannot, for (as I am APPLE-IOHN) I am to go before the
Cocatrice you saw this morning, and therefore pray, present me excused, good
Countenance.


Farewell, good Resolution, but fail not to meet.


As I live.


Admirably excellent!


If you can but persuade SOGLIARDO to court, there's all now.


O let me alone, that's my task.


Now, by wit, MACILENTE, it's above measure excellent: 'twill be the only
court-exploit that ever proved courtier ingenious.


Upon my soul, it puts the lady quite out of her humour, and we shall laugh
with judgment.


Come, the gentleman was of himself resolved to go with you, before I moved
it.


Why then, gallants, you two, and CARLO, go before to prepare the jest:
SOGLIARDO and I will come some while after you.


Pardon me, I am not for court.


That's true: CARLO comes not at court indeed. Well, you shall leave it to the
faculty of monsieur BRISK, and my self, upon our lives we will manage it
happily. CARLO shall bespeak supper, at the mitre, against we come back:
where we will meet, and dimple our cheeks with laughter at the success.


I, but will you all promise to come?


My self shall manfrede it for them: he that fails, let his reputation lye
under the lash of thy tongue.


Gods so, look who comes here!


What, nephew!


Uncle, god save you; did you see a gentleman, one monsieur BRISK? a Courtier,
he goes in such a suit as I do.


Here is the gentleman, nephew, but not in such a suit.


Another suit!


How now, nephew?


Would you speak to me, sir?


I, when he has recovered himself: poor poll.


Some Rosa-solis.


How now, signior?


I am not well, sir.


Why, this it is, to dog the fashion.


Nay, come gentlemen, remember your affairs; his disease is nothing but the
flux of apparel.


Sirs, return to the lodging, keep the cat safe; I'll be the dogs Guardian my
self.


Nephew, will you go to court with us? these gentlemen and I are for the
court: nay, be not so melancholy.


By gods lid, I think no man in christendom has that rascally fortune that I
have.


Faith, your suit is well enough, signior.


Nay, not for that, I protest; but I had an errand to Monsieur FASTIDIVS, and I
have forgot it.


Why, go along to court with us, and remember it, come. Gentlemen, you three
take one boat, and SOGLIARDO and I will take another: we shall be there
instantly.


Content: good sir, vouchsafe us your pleasance.


Farewell, CARLO; remember.


I warrant you: would I had one of Kemps shoes to throw after you.


Good Fortune will close the eyes of our jest, fear not: and we shall
frolic.


This MACILENTE, signior, begins to be more sociable on a sudden, me
thinks, then he was before: there's some portent in it, I believe.


O, he's a fellow of a strange nature. Now does he (in this calm of his
humour) plot, and store up a world of malicious thoughts in his brain, till
he is so full with them, that you shall see the very torrent of his envy
break forth like a land-floud: and, against the course of all their affections
oppose it self so violently, that you will almost have wonder to think, how
'tis possible the current of their dispositions shall receive so quick, and
strong an alteration.


I mary, sir, this is that, on which my expectation has dwelt al this while:
for I must tel you, signior (though I was loath to interrupt the Scene) yet I
made it a question in mine own private discourse, how he should properly call
it, Every man out of his Humour, when I saw all his actors so strongly pursue,
and continue their humours?


Why, therein his art appears most full of lustre, and approaches nearest the
life: especially, when in the flame, and height of their humours, they are laid
flat, it fills the eye better, and with more contentment. How tedious a sight
were it to behold a proud exalted tree lopped, and cut down by degrees, when it
might be field in a moment? and to set the axe to it before it came to that
pride, and fullness, were, as not to have it grow.


Well, I shall long till I see this fall, you talk of.


To help your longing, signior, let your imagination be swifter them a pair
of oars: and by this, suppose PVNTARVOLO, BRISK, FVNGOSO, and the dog
arrived at the court gate, and going up to the great chamber. MACILENTE, and
SOGLIARDO, wee'le leave them on the water, till possibility and natural
means may land them. Here come the gallants, now prepare your expectation.


COme, gentles. Signior, you are sufficiently instructed.


Who, I, sir?


No, this gentleman. But stay, I take thought how to bestow my dog, he is no
competent attendant for the presence.


Mass, that's true indeed, knight, you must not carry him into the presence.


I know it, and I (like a dull beast) forgot to bring one of my cormorants to
attend me.


Why, you're best leave him at the porters lodge.


Not so: his worth is too well known amongst them, to be forth-comming.


Slight, how'll you do then?


I must leave him with one, that is ignorant of his quality, if I will have
him to be safe. And see! Here comes one that will carry coals, ergo, will hold
my dog. My honest friend, may I commit the tuition of this dog to thy
prudent care?


You may, if you please, sir.


Pray thee let me find thee here at my return: it shall not be long, till I
will ease thee of thy employment, and please thee. Forth, gentles.


Why, but will you leave him with so slight command, and infirse no more
charge, upon the fellow?


Charge? no; there were no policy in that: that were to let him know the value
of the gem he holds, and so, to tempt frail nature against her disposition.
No, pray thee let thy honesty be sweet, as it shall be short.


Yes, sir.


But hark you gallants, and chiefly Monsieur BRISK. When we come in
eye-shot, or presence of this lady, let not other matters carry us from our
project: but (if we can) single her forth to some place --


I warrant you.


And be not too sudden, but let the device induce it self with good
circumstance. On.


Is this the way? good truth, here be fine hangings.


Honesty sweet, and short? mary it shall, sir, doubt you not: for even at this
instant if one would give me twenty pounds, I would not deliver him; there's
for the sweet; but now, if any man come offer me but two pence, he shall have
him; there's for the short now. Slid, what a mad humorous gentleman is this to
leave his dog with me? I could run away with him now, and he were worth any
thing.


Come on, signior, now prepare to court this all-witted lady, most naturally,
and like your self.


Faith, and you say the word, I'll begin to her in tobacco.


O, fie on it: no: you shall begin with, How does my sweet lady? or, Why are
you so melancholy, Madame? though she be very merry, it's all one: be sure
to kiss your hand often enough; pray for her health, and tell her, how, more
then most fair she is. Screw your face at one side thus, and protest; let her
fleer, and look a skaunce, and hide her teeth with her fan, when she laughs
a fit, to bring her into more matter, that's nothing: you must talk forward
(though it be without sense, so it be without blushing) 'tis most court-like,
and well.


But shall I not use tobacco at all?


O, by no means, 'twill but make your breath suspected, and that you use it
only to confound the rankenesse of that.


Nay, I'll be advised, sir, by my friends.


Gods my life, see, where sir PVNTARS dog is.


I would the gentleman would return for his follower here, I'll leave him to
his fortunes else.


S'heart, 'twere the only true jest in the world to poison him now: ha? by
this hand, I'll do it, if I could but get him of the fellow. Signior
SOGLIARDO, walk aside, and think upon some device, to entertain the lady
with.


So I do, sir.


How now, mine honest friend? whose dog-keeper art thou?


Dogge-keeper, sir? I hope I scorn that in faith.


Why? dost thou not keep a dog?


Sir, now I do, and now I do not: I think this be sweet and short. Make me
his dogge-keeper?


This is excellent, above expectation: nay stay, sir, you'd be travailing,
but I'll give you a dram shall shorten your voyage: here. So sir, I'll be
bold to take my leave of you. Now to the Turks court in the devils name, for
you shall never go o'gods name. SOGLIARDO, come.


I have 't ysaith now, will sting it.


Take heed you leese it not, signior, ere you come there: preserve it.


How like you this first exploit of his?


O, a piece of true envy: but I expect the issue of the other device.


Here they come, will make it appear.


WHy, I thought, sir PVNTARVOLO, you had bin gone your voyage?


Dear, and most amiable lady, your divine beauties do bind me to those
offices, that I cannot depart when I would.


'Tis most court-like spoken, sir: but how might we do to have a sight of your
dog, and cat?


His dog is in the court, lady.


And not your cat? how dare you trust her behind you, sir?


Troth, madame, she hath sore eyes, and she doth keep her chamber: mary I
have left under sufficient guard, there are two of my followers to attend her.


I'll give you some water for her eyes: when do you go, sir?


Certes, sweet lady, I know not.


He doth stay the rather, madame, to present you acute judgment with so
courtly, and wel-parted a gentleman, as yet your lady-ship hath never seen.


What's he, gentle Monsieur BRISK? not that gentleman?


No lady, this is a kinsman to justice Silence.


Pray sir, give me leave to report him: he's a gentleman (lady) of that rare
and admirable faculty, as (I protest) I know not his like in Europe: he is
exceedingly valiant, an excellent scholar, and so exactly trauail'd, that he
is able in discourse, to deliver you a model of any princes court in the
world: speaks the languages with that purity of phrase, and facility of
accent, that it breeds astonishment: his wit, the most exuberant, and (above
wonder) pleasant, of all that ever entered the concave of this eve.


'Tis most true, lady: mary, he is no such excellent proper man.


His travails have changed his complexion, madame.


O, sir PVNTARVOLO, you must think, every man was not borne to have my servant
BRISKES feature.


But that which transcends all, lady; he doth so peerelessely imitate any
manner of person for gesture, action, passion, or whatever --


I, especially a rustic, or a clown, madame, that it is not possible for the
sharpest-sighted wit (in the world) to discern any sparks of the gentleman in
him, when he does.


O, Monsieur BRISK, be not so tyrannous to confine all wits within the
compass of your own: not find the sparks of a gentleman in him, if he be a
gentleman?


No in truth (sweet lady) I believe you cannot.


Do you believe so? why, I can find sparks of a gentleman in you, sir.


I, he is a gentleman, madame, and a reveller.


Indeed, I think I have seen your ladyship at our revels.


Like enough, sir: but would I might see this wonder you talk of: may one have
a sight of him, for any reasonable sum?


Yes, madame, he will arrive presently.


What, and shall we see him clown it?


I faith (sweet lady) that you shall: see, here he comes.


This is he! pray observe him, lady.


Be shrew me, he clowns it properly indeed.


Nay, mark his courtship.


How does my sweet lady? hot, and moist? beautiful and lusty? ha?


Beautiful, and it please you, sir, but not lusty.


O ho, lady; it pleases you to say so in truth: and how does my sweet lady?
in health? Bonaroba, quaeso, que novels? que nouells? sweet creature.


O excellent: why gallants, is this he that cannot be deciphered? they were
very bleare-witted, in faith, that could not discern the gentleman in him.


But, do you, in earnest, lady?


Do I, sir? why, if you had any true court-iudgement in the carriage of his
eye, and that inward power that forms his countenance, you might perceive his
counterfeiting as clear, as the noone-day: Alas -- Nay, if you would have
tried my wit, indeed, you should never have told me he was a gentleman, but
presented him for a true clown indeed; and then have seen if I could have
deciphered him.


Fore god, her ladyship says true (knight:) but does he not affect the clown
most naturally, mistress?


O, she cannot but affirm that, out of the bounty of her judgment.


Nay, out of doubt he does well, for a gentleman, to imitate; but I warrant
you, he becomes his natural carriage of the gentleman, much better then his
clownerie.


'Tis strange, in truth, her ladyship should see so far into him.


I, is't not?


Faith, as easily as may be: not decipher him, quoth you?


Good sadness, I wonder at it!


Why, has she deciphered him, gentlemen?


O, most miraculously, and beyond admiration!


Is't possible?


She hath gathered most infallible signs of the gentleman in him, that's
certain.


Why, gallants, let me laugh at you, a little: was this your device, to try
my judgment in a gentleman?


Nay, lady, do not scorn us, though you have this gift of perspicacie above
others: What if he should be no gentleman now, but a clown indeed, lady?


How think you of that? would not your ladyship be out of your humour?


O, but she knows it is not so.


What if he were not a man, ye may as well say? nay, if your worships could
gull me so, indeed, you were wiser then you are taken for.


In good faith, lady, he is a very perfect clown, both by father, and
mother: that I'll assure you.


O, sir, you are very pleasurable.


Nay, do but look on his hand, and that shall resolve you: look you, lady,
what a palm here is.


Tut, that was with holding the plough.


The plough! did you discern any such thing in him, madame?


Faith no, she saw the gentleman as bright, as at noon-day, she: she
deciphered him at first.


Troth, I am sorry your ladyships sight should be so suddenly struck.


O, you're goodly beagles!


What, is she gone?


Nay, stay, sweet lady, que novels? que novels?


Out, you fool, you.


She's out of her humour in faith.


Nay, let's follow it while 'tis hot, gentlemen.


Come, on mine honour we shall make her blush in the presence: my spleen is
great with laughter.


Your laughter will be a child of a feeble life, I believe, sir. Come, signior,
your looks are too dejected, me thinks: why mix you not mirth with the
rest?


By gods will, this suit frets me at the soul. I'll have it altered to morrow,
sure.


I Am come to the court, to meet with my Countenance SOGLIARDO: poor men must
be glad of such countenance, when they can get no better. Well. Need may insult
upon a man, but it shall never make him despair of consequence. The world will
say, tis base: tush, base! 'tis base to live under the earth, not base to live
above it, by any means.


The poor lady is most miserably out of her humour, in faith.


There was never so witty a jest broken, at the tilt of all the court-wits
christened.


O, this applause taints it, foully.


I think, I did my part in courting. O! Resolution!


Aye me, my dog.


Where is he?


Gods precious, go seek for the fellow, good signior.


Here, here I left him.


Why, none was here when we came in now, but CAVALIER SHIFT, enquire of him.


Did you see sir PVNTARVOLO'S dog here, Cavalier, since you came?


His dog sir? he may look his dog, sir, I saw none of his dog, sir.


Upon my life, he hath stol'ne your dog, sir, and been hired to it by some
that have ventured with you: you may guess by his peremptory answers.


Not unlike; for he hath been a notorious thief by his own confession.
Sirrah, where is my dog?


Charge me with your dog, sir? I have none of your dog, sir.


Villain, thou lie.


Lie, sir? S'bloud, y' are but a man, sir.


Rogue, and thief, restore him.


Take heed, sir PVNTARVOLO, what you do: heel bear no coals, I can tell you
(of my word.)


This is rare.


It's mar'le he stabs you not: by this light, he hath stabbed forty, for forty
times less matter, I can tell you, of my knowledge.


I will make thee stoop, thou abject.


Make him stoop, sir! gentlemen, pacifi^ him or hee'le be killed.


Is he so tall a man?


Tall a man? if you love his life, stand betwixt them: make him stoop!


My dog, villain, or I will hang thee: thou hast confessed robberies, and
other felonious acts, to this gentleman thy Countenance --


I'll bear no witness.


And, without my dog, I will hang thee, for them.


What? kneel to thine enemies?


Pardon me, good sir; god is my witness, I never did robbery in all my life.


O, sir PVNTARVOLO, your dog lies giving up the ghost in the wood-yard.


Heart! is he not dead, yet?


O, my dog, born to disastrous fortune! pray you conduct me, sir.


How? did you never do any robbery, in your life?


O, this is good: so he swore, sir.


I, I heard him. And did you swear true, sir?


I, (as I hope to be forgiven, sir) I ne'er robbed any man, I never stood by the
high-way-side, sir, but only said so, because I would get my self a name, and
be counted a tall man.


Now out, base viliaco: Thou my Resolution? I thy Countenance? By this light,
gentlemen, he hath confessed to me the most inexorable company of robberies,
and damned himself that he did them; you never heard the like: out skoundrell,
out, follow me no more, I command thee: out of my sight, go, hence, speak
not: I will not hear thee: away camouccio.


O, how I do feed upon this now, and fat my self! here were a couple
unexpectedly dishumour'd: well, by this time, I hope, sir PVNTARVOLO and his
dog are both out of humour to travail. Nay, gentlemen, why do you not seek
out the knight, and comfort him? our supper at the Mitre must of necessity
hold to night, if you love your reputations.


Before god, I am so melancholy for his dogs disaster, but I'll go.


Faith, and I may go too, but I know, I shall be so melancholy.


Tush, melancholy? you must forget that now, and remember you lie at the mercy
of a fury: CARLO will rack your sinews asunder, and rail you to dust, if
you come not.


O, then their fear of CARLO, belike, makes them hold their meeting.


I, here he comes: conceive him but to be entered the Mitre, and 'tis enough.


HOlla: where be these shot-sharkes?


By and by: you're welcome, good master BVFFONE.


Where's GEORGE? calm GEORGE hither, quickly.


What wine please you have, sir? I'll draw you that's neat, master BVFFONE.


Away NEOPHITE, do as I bid thee, bring my dear GEORGE to me: Mass, here he
comes.


Welcome, master CARLO.


What! is supper ready, GEORGE?


I, sir, almost: will you have the cloth laid, master CARLO?


O, what else? are none of the gallants come, yet?


None yet, sir.


Stay, take me with you, GEORGE: let me have a good faloyne of pork laid to
the fire, presently.


It shall, sir.


And withal, hear you? draw me the biggest shaft you have, out of the butt
you wo^ of: away, you know my meaning, GEORGE, quick.


Done, sir.


I never hungered so much for thing in my life, as I do to know our gallants
success at court: now is that lean bald-rib MACILENTE, that salt villain,
plotting some mischicuous device, and lies a soking in their frothy humours
like a dry crust, till he has drunk them all up: could the pummise but hold
up his eyes at other men's happiness, in any reasonable proportion: S'lid, the
slave were to be loved next heaven, above honour, wealth, rich fare, apparel,
wenches, all the delights of the belly, and the groine, whatever.


Here, master CARLO.


Is't right, Boy?


I, sir, I assure you 'tis right.


Well said, my dear GEORGE, depart: Come, my small gymblet, you in the false
scabberd, away, so. Now to you, sir B^rgomaster, let's taste of your bounty.


What, will he deal upon such quantities of wine, alone?


You will perceive that, sir.


I mary, sir, here's purity: O, GEORGE, I could bite off his nose for this,
now: Sweet rogue, he has drawn Nectar, the very soul of the grape! I'll wash
my temples with some on it presently, and drink some half a score draughts;
'twill heat the brain, kindle my imagination, I shall talk nothing but
crackers, and fire-worke, to night. So, sir! please you to be here, sir, and I
here: So.


This is worth the observation, signior.


Now, sir; here's to you; and I present you with so much of my love.


I take it kindly from you, sir, and will return you the like proportion: but
withal, sir, remembering the merry night we had at the countesses, you know
where, sir.


By heaven, you put me in mind now of a very necessary office, which I will
propose in your pledge, sir: the health of that honourable countess, and the
sweet lady that sate by her, sir.


I do veil to it with reverence. And now, signior, with these ladies, I'll be
bold to mix the health of your divine Mistress.


Do you know her, sir?


O lord, sir, I: and in the respectful memory and mention of her, I could
wish this wine were the most precious drug in the world.


Good faith, sir, you do honour me in it exceedingly.


Whom should he personate in this, signior?


Faith, I know not, sir, observe, observe him.


If it were the basest filth, or mud that runs in the channel, I am bound to
pledge it, respectively, sir. And now, sir, here is a replenished bowl, which I
will reciprocally turn upon you, to the health of the count FRVGALE.


The count FRVGALES health, sir? I'll pledge it on my knees, by this light.


Will you, sir? I'll drink it on my knee, then, by the light.


Why, this is strange!


Have you heard a better drunken dialogue?


Nay, do me right, sir.


So I do, in good faith.


Good faith you do not; mine was fuller.


Why, believe me, it was not.


Believe me, it was: and you do lie.


Lie, sir?


I, sir.


S'wounds!


O, come, stab if you have a mind to it.


Stab? dost thou think I dare not?


Nay, I beseech you, gentlemen, what means this? nay, look, for shame respect
your reputations.


WHy, how now CARLO! what humour's this?


O, my good Mischief! art thou come? where are the rest? where are the rest?


Faith, three of our ordinance are burst.


Burst? how comes that?


Faith, ouer-charg'd, ouer-charg'd.


But did not the train hold?


O, yes, and the poor lady is irrecouerably blown up.


Why, but which of the munition is miscarried? ha?


Inprimis, sir PVNTARVOLO: next, the COVNTENANCE, and RESOLVTION.


How? how for the love of wit?


Troth, the Resolution is proved recreant; the Countenance hath changed his
copy: and the passionate knight is shedding funeral tears over his departed
dog.


What's his dog dead?


Poisoned, 'tis thought: mary, how, or by whom, that's left for some cunning
woman here of the Banke-side to resolve. For my part, I know nothing, more then
that we are like to have an exceeding melancholy supper of it.


S'life, and I had purposed to be extraordinarily merry, I had drunk off a
good preparative of old sack here: but will they come, will they come?


They will assuredly come: may, CARLO (as thou love me) run over them all
freely to night, and especially the knight; spare no sulphurous jest that may
come out of that sweaty forge of thine: but ply them with all manner of shot,
minion, saker, culvertine, or any thing what thou wilt.


I warrant thee, my dear case of petrionels, so I stand not in dread of thee,
but that thou'lt second me.


Why, my good Germane tapster, I will.


What, GEORGE. Lomtero, Lomtero, c.


Did you call, master CARLO?


More nectar, GEORGE: Lomtero, c.


Your meat's ready, sir, and your company were come.


Is the loyne of pork enough?


I, sir, it is enough.


Pork? heart, what dost thou with such a greasy dish? I think thou dost
varnish thy face with the fat on it, it looks so like a glew-pot.


True, my raw-bon'd-rogue, and if thou would farce thy lean ribs with it
too, they would not (like ragged lathes) rub out so many doublets as they do:
but thou know not a good dish, thou. O, it's the only nourishing meat in the
world. No marvel though that saucy, stubborn generation, the Iewes, were
forbidden it: for what would they have done, well pampered with fat pork, that
durst murmure at their maker out of garlic, and onions. S'light, fed with it,
the whoreson strummell, patched, goggle-ey'd Grumbledories, would have
Gigantomachiz'd. Well said, my sweet GEORGE, fill, fill.


This savours too much of profanation.


O, seruetur ad imum, qualis ab incepto processerit, sibi conflet. The
necessite of his vain compels a toleration: for, bar this, and dash him out
of humour, before his time.


'Tis an Axiom in natural philosophie, What comes nearest the nature of that
it feeds, converts quicker to nourisment, and doth sooner essentiate. Now
nothing in flesh, and entrails, assimulates or resembles man more, then a hog,
or swine --


True; and he (to requite their courtesy) oftentimes d'offeth his own
nature, and puts on theirs; as when he becomes as churlish as a hog, or as
drunk as a sow: but to your conclusion.


Mary, I say, nothing resembling man more then a swine, it follows, nothing
can be more nourishing: for indeed (but that it abhors from our nice nature)
if we fed one upon another, we should shoot up a great deal faster, and thrive
much better: I refer me to your vsurous Cannibals, or such like: but since it
is so contrary, pork, pork, is your only feed.


I take it, your devil be of the same diet; he would ne'er have desired to
been incorporated into swine else. O, here comes the melancholy mess: upon
them CARLO, charge, charge.


Before god, sir PVNTARVOLO, I am sorry for your heaviness: body a me, a shrewd
mischance! why, had you no unicorns horne, nor bezoars stone about you? ha?


SIr, I would request you, be silent.


Nay, to him again.


Take comfort, good knight, if your cat have recovered her catarrh, fear
nothing; your dogs mischance may be helped.


Say how (sweet CARLO) for so god mend me, the poor knights moves draw me
into fellowship of his misfortunes. But be not discouraged, good sir
PVNTARVOLO, I am content your adventure shall be performed upon your cat.


I believe you, musk cod, I believe you, for rather then thou would make
present repayment, thou would take it upon his own bare return from
Calice.


Nay, 'ds life, hee'ld be content (so he were well rid out of his company) to
pay him five for one, at his next meeting him in Paules. But for your dog,
sir PVNTAR, if he be not out-right dead, there is a friend of mine, a
quack-saluer, shall put life in him again, that's certain.


O, no, that comes too late.


Gods precious, knight, will you suffer this?


Drawer, get me a candle, and hard wax, presently.


I, and bring up supper; for I am so melancholy.


O, signior, where's your Resolution?


Resolution! hang him rascal: O, CARLO, if you love me, do not mention him.


Why, how so? how so?


O, the arrant'st crocodile that ever Christian was acquainted with. By my
gentry, I shall think the worse of tobacco while I live, for his sake: I did
think him to be as tall a man --


Nay, BVFFONE, the knight, the knight.


S'hid, he looks like an image carved out of box, full of knots: his face is
(for all the world) like a dutch purse, with the mouth downward; his beard the
tassels: and he walks (let me see) as melancholy as one of the Masters side
in the Counter. Do you hear, sir PVNTAR?


Sir, I do entreat you no more, but enjoin you to silence, as you affect your
peace.


Nay, but dear knight, understand (here are none but friends, and such as wish
you well) I would have you do this now; Flea me your dog presently (but in
any case keep the head) and stuff his skin well with straw, as you see these
dead monsters at Bartholomew fair.


I shall be sudden, I tell you.


Or if you like not that, sir, get me somewhat a less dog, and clap into the
skin; here's a slave about the town here, a Jew, one YOHAN; or a fellow that
makes perrukes, will glue it on artificially, it shall ne'er be discerned,
besides, 'twill be so much the warmer for the hound to travail in, you know.


Sir PVNTARVOLO, 'death, can you be so patient?


O^ thus, sir: you may have (as you come through Germany) a familiar for little
or nothing, shall turn it self into the shape of your dog, or any thing
(what you will) for certain hours; 'ods my life, knight, what do you mean?
you'll offer no violence, will you? hold, hold.


'Sdeath, you slave, you bandog, you.


As you love wit, stay the enraged knight, gentlemen.


By my knighthood, he that stirs in his rescue, dies. Drawer, be gone.


Murder, murder, murder.


I, are you howling, you wolf? Gentlemen, as you tender your lives, suffer no
man to enter, till my revenge be perfect. Sirha, BVFFONE, lie down; make no
exclamations, but down: down, you cur, or I will make thy blood flow on my
rapier hilts.


Sweet knight, hold in thy ^urie, and before heaven, I'll honour thee more, then
the Turk does MAHOMET.


Down (I say.) Who's there?


Here's the Constable, open the doors.


Good, MACILENTE.


Open no door, if the ADALANTADO of Spain were here, he should not enter: On,
help me with the light, gentlemen: you knock in vain, sir officer.


Et in Brute!


Sirha, close your lips, or I will drop it in thine eyes by heaven.


O, O.


Open the door, or I will break it open.


Nay, good Constable, have patience a little, you shall come in presently, we
have almost done.


So; now, are you out of your humour, sir? Shift, gentlemen.


LAy hold upon this gallant, and pursue the rest.


Lay hold on me, sir! for what?


Mary, for your not here, sir, with the rest of your companions.


My riot! master Constable, take heed what you do. CARLO, did I offer any
violence?


O, sir, you see he is not in case to answer you, and that makes you so
paramptorie.


Peremptory, s'life I appeal to the drawers, if I did him any hard measure.


They are all gone, there's none of them will be laid any hold on.


Well, sir, you are like to answer till the rest can be found out.


Slid, I appear to GEORGE, here.


Tut, GEORGE was not here: away with him to the Counter, sirs. Come, sir, you
were best get your self dressed somewhere.


Good lord, that master CARLO could not take heed, and knowing what a gentleman
the knight is, if he be angry.


A pox on them, they have left all the meat on our hands, would they were
choked with it form.


What, are they gone, sirs?


O, here's master MACILENTE.


Sirha, GEORGE, do you see that concealment there? that napkin under the
table?


Gods so, signior FVNGOSO!


Her's good pawn for the reckoning, be sure you keep him here, and Ice him
not go away till I come again, though he offer to discharge all: I'll return
presently.


Sirrah, we have a pawn for the reckoning.


What? of MACILENTE?


No, look under the table.


I hope, all be quiet now: if I can get but forth of this street, I care not,
masters, I pray you tell me, is the Constable gone?


What? master FVNGOSO?


Was't not a good device this same of me, sirs?


Yes saith; have you been here all this while?


O god, I* good sir, look, and the coast be clear, I'd fain be going.


Al's clear, sir, but the reckoning; and that you must clear, and pay before
you go, I assure you.


I pay? Slight, I eat not a bit since I came into the house, yet.


Why, you may when you please, sir, 'tis all ready below, that was bespoken.


Bespoken? not by me, I hope?


By you, sir? I know not that: but 'twas for you, and your company, I am sure.


My company? S'lid, I was an invited guest, so I was.


Faith, we have no thing to do with that, sir, they're all gone but you, and
we must be answered; that's the short and the long on it.


Nay, if you will grow to extremities, my masters, then would this pot, cup,
and all were in my belly, if I have a cross about me.


What, and have such apparel? do not say so, signior, that mightily
discredits your clothes.


As I am an honest man, my taylor had all my money this morning, and yet I must
be fain to alter my suit too: good sirs, let me go, 'tis friday night, and in
good truth I have no stomach in the world, to eat any thing.


That's no matter, so you pay, sir.


Pay? gods light, with what conscience can you ask me to pay that I never
drank for?


Yes, sir, I did see you drink once.


By this cup, (which is silver) but you did not, you do me infinite wrong, I
looked in the pot once, indeed, but I did not drink.


Well sir, if you can satisfy our master, it shall be all one to us. (by and
by.)


Lose not your self now signior.


TVt, sir, you did bear too hard a conceit of me in that, but I will now make
my love to you most transparent, in spite of any dust of suspicion, that may
be raised to cloud it: and henceforth, since I see it is so against your
humour, I will never labour to persuade you.


Why, I thank you, signior, but what's that you tell me may concern my peace
so much?


Faith, sir, 'tis thus. Your wives brother, signior FVNGOSO, being at supper to
night at a tavern, with a sort of gallants, there happened some division
amongst them, and he is left in pawn for the reckoning: now, if ever you look
that time shall present you with a happy occasion to do your wife some
gracious and acceptable service, take hold of this opportunity, and presently
go, and redeem him; for, being her brother, and his credit so amply engaged
as now it is, when she shall hear (as he cannot himself, but he must out of
extremity report it) that you came, and offered your self so kindly, and with
that respect of his reputation, why, the benefit cannot but make her dote, and
grow mad of your affections.


Now, by heaven, MACILENTE, I acknowledge my self exceedingly indebted to you,
by this kind tender of your love; and I am sorry to remember that I was ever
so rude, to neglect a friend of your importance: bring me shoes, and a cloak
there, I was going to bed, if you had not come, what tavern is it?


The Mitre, sir.


O, why FIDO, my shoes. Good faith it cannot but please her exceedingly.


Come, I marle what piece of nightwork you have in hand now, that you call for
your cloak, and your shoes! what, is this your Pandar?


O, sweet wife, speak lower, I would not he should hear thee for a world --


Hang him rascal, I cannot abide him for his treachery, with his wild
quick-set beard there. Whither go you now with him?


No whither with him, dear wife, I go alone to a place, from whence I will
return instantly. Good MACILENTE, acquaint not her with it by any means, it
may come so much the more accepted, frame some other answer. I'll come back
immediately.


Nay, and I be not worthy to know whither you go, stay, till I take knowledge
of your coming back.


Hear you, mistress DELIRO.


So sir, and what say you?


Faith lady, my intents will not deserve this slight respect, when you shall
know them.


Your intents? why, what may your intents be, for god sake!


Troth, the time allows no circumstance, lady, therefore know, this was but a
device to remove your husband hence, and bestow him securely, whilst (with
more convenience) I might report to you a misfortune that hath happened to
Monsieur BRISK -- nay comfort, sweet lady. This night (being at supper a sort
of young gallants committed a riot, for the which he (only) is apprehended and
carried to the Counter, where if your husband, and other creditors should but
have knowledge of him, the poor gentleman were undone for ever.


Aye me! that he were.


Now therefore, if you can think upon any present means for his delivery,
do not forslow it. A bribe to the officer that committed him, will do it.


O god, sir, he shall not want for a bribe: pray you, will you commend me to
him, and say I'll visit him presently?


No, lady, I shall do you better service, in protracting your husbands
return, that you may go with more safety.


Good truth, so you may: farewell, good sir. Lord, how a woman may be mistaken
in a man? I would have sworn upon all the testaments in the world, he had not
loved master BRISK. Bring me my keys there, maid. Alas, good gentleman, if
all I have in this earthly world will pleasure him, it shall be at his service.


How MACILENTE sweates i'this business, if you mark him.


I, you shall see the true picture of spite anon: here comes the pawn, and
his redeemer.


COme, brother, be not discouraged for this, man, what?


No truly, I am not discouraged, but I protest to you, brother, I have done
imitating any more gallants either in purse or apparel, but as shall become a
gentleman, for good carriage, or so.


You say well. This is all, in the bill here? is't not?


I, sir.


There's your money, tell it: and brother, I am glad I met with so good
occasion to show my love to you.


I will study to deserve it in good truth, and I live.


What, is't right?


I, sir, and I thank you.


Let me have a capons leg saved, now the reckoning is paid.


You shall, sir.


Where's signior DELIRO?


Here, MACILENTE.


Hark you, sir, have you dispatcht this same?


I marie have I.


Well then, I can tell you news, BRISK is in the Counter.


In the Counter?


'Tis true, sir, committed for the stir here to night. Now would I have you
send your brother home before, with the report of this your kindness done him,
to his sister, which will so pleasingly possess her, and out of his mouth too,
that in the mean time you may clap your action on BRISK, and your wife (being
in so happy a mood) cannot entertain it ill, by any means.


'Tis very true, she cannot indeed, I think.


Think? why 'tis past thought, you shall never meet the like opportunity, I
assure you.


I will do it. Brother, pray you go home before, this gentleman, and I have
some private business; and tell my sweet wife, I'll come presently.


I will, brother.


And, signior, acquaint your sister, how liberally and out of his bounty, your
brother has used you. (Do you see?) made you a man of good reckoning; redeemed
that you never were possessed of, credit; gave you as gentleman-like terms as
might be; found no fault with your coming behind the fashion; nor nothing.


Nay, I am out of those humours now.


Well, if you be out, keep your distance, and be not made a shot-clog any
more. Come, signior, let's make haste.


O Master FASTIDIVS, what pity is't to see so sweet a man as you are, in so
sour a place?


As upon her lips, does she mean?


O, this is to be imagined the Counter, belike?


Troth, fair lady, 'tis first the pleasure of the Fates, and next of the
Constable, to have it so: but, I am patient, and indeed comforted the more in
your kind visitation.


Nay, you shall be comforted in me, more then this, if you please, sir. I
sent you word by my brother, sir, that my husband laid to rest you this
morning, I know not whether you received it, or no.


No, believe it, sweet creature, your brother gave me no such intelligence.


O, the lord!


But has your husband any such purpose?


O sweet master BRISK, yes: and therefore be presently discharged, for if he
come with his actions upon you (lord deliver you) you are in for one half a
score year; he kept a poor man in Ludgate once, twelve year, for sixteen
shillings. Where's your keeper? for loves sake call him, let him take a bribe,
and dispatch you. Lord, how my heart trembles! here are no spies? are there?


No, sweet mistress, why are you in this passion?


O lord, Master FASTIDIVS, if you knew how I took up my husband to day, when
he said he would arrest you; and how I railed at him that persuaded him to it,
the scholer there, (who on my conscience loves you now) and what care I took
to send you intelligence by my brother; and how I gave him four sovereigns
for his pains; and now, how I came running out hither without man or boy with
me, so soon as I heard on it; you'd say, I were in a passion indeed: your
keeper, for gods sake. O, Master BRISK (as 'tis in EVPHVES) Hard is the
choice, when one is compelled either by silence to die with grief, or by
speaking to live with shame.


Fair lady, I conceive you, and may this kiss assure you, that where
adversity hath (as it were) contracted, prosperity shall not -- gods me! your
husband.


O, me!


I? is't thus!


Why, how now, signior DELIRO? has the wolf seen you? ha? hath GORGONS head
made marble of you?


Some Planet strike me dead.


Why, look you; sir, I told you, you might have suspected this long before, had
you pleased; and have saved this labour of admiration now, and passion, and such
extremities as this frail lump of flesh is subject unto. Nay, why do you not
dote now, signior? Me thinks you should say it were some enchantment,
deceptio visus, or so, ha? if you could persuade your self it were a dream
now, 'twere excellent: saith, try what you can do, signior; it may be your
imagination will be brought to it in time, there's nothing impossible.


Sweet husband:


Out lascivious strumpet.


What? did you see, how ill that stale vein became him before, of sweet wife,
and dear heart? and are you fallen just into the same now? with sweet husband.
Away, follow him, go, keep state, what? Remember you are a woman, turn
impudent: give him not the head, though you give him the horns. Away. And yet
me thinks you should take your leave of Enfans-perdus here, your forlorn
hope. How now, Monsieur BRISK? what? friday night? and in affliction too? and
yet your Pulpamenta? your delicate morcels? I perceive, the affection of ladies
and gentlewomen, pursues you wheresoever you go, Monsieur.


Now, in good faith (and as I am gentle) there could not have come a thing, in
this world, to have distracted me more, then the wrinkled fortunes of this
poor spinster.


O, yes, sir: I can tell you a thing will distract you much better, believe it.
Signior DELIRO has entered three actions against you, three actions, Monsieur;
mary, one of them (I'll put you in comfort) is but three thousand, and the
other two, some five thousand a piece, trifles, trifles.


O, I am undone.


Nay, not altogether so, sir, the knight must have his hundred pound repai'd,
that 'll help too, and then sixe-score pound for a diamond, you know where.
These be things will weigh, Monsieur, they will weigh.


O, heaven!


What, do you sigh? this it is to kiss the hand of a countess, to have her
coach sent for you, to hang poinards in ladies garters, to wear bracelets of
their hair, and for every one of these great favours to give some slight
jewel of five hundred crowns, or so, why 'tis nothing. Now, Monsieur, you see
the plague that treads of the heals of your foppery: well, go your ways in,
remove your self to the two-penny ward quickly, to save charges, and there set
up your rest to spend sir PVNTARS hundred pound for him. Away, good pomander,
go.

Why, here's a change! Now is my soul at peace.
I am as empty of all envy now,
As they of merit to be envied at.
My humour (like a flame) no longer lasts
Then it hath stuff to feed it, and their folly,
Being now raked up in their repentant ashes,
Affords no ampler subject to my spleen.
I am so far from malicing their states,
That I begin to pity them. It grieves me
To think they have a being. I could wish
They might turn wise upon it, and be saved now,
So heaven were pleased: but let them vanish, vapors.
Gentlemen, how like you it? has't not been tedious?

Nay, we have done censuring, now.


Yes, faith.


How so?


Mary, because wee'le imitate your actors, and be out of our Humours. Besides,
here are those (round about you) of more ability in censure then we, whose
judgements can give it a more satisfying allowance: wee'le refer you to them.


I? is't even so? Well, gentlemen, I should have gone in, and returned to you,
as I was ASPER at the first: but (by reason the shift would have been somewhat
long, and we are loath to draw your patience farther) wee'le entreat you to
imagine it. And now (that you may see I will be out of humour for company) I
stand wholly to your kind approbation, and (indeed) am nothing so peremptory
as I was in the beginning: Mary, I will not do as PLAVTVS, in his Amphytrio,
for all this (Summi Ionis causa, Plaudit:) beg a Plaudit, for gods sake;
but if you (out of the bounty of your good liking) will bestow it; why, you
may (in time) make lean MACILENTE as fat, as Sir IOHN FAL-STAFFE.


Never till now did object greet mine eyes
With any light content: but in her graces,
All my malicious powers have lost their stings.
Envy is fled my soul, at sight of her,
And she hath chased all black thoughts from my bosom,
Like as the sun doth darkness from the world.
My stream of humour is run out of me.
And as our cities torrent (bent t'infect
The hallowed bowels of the silver Thames)
Is checked by strength, and clearness of the river,
Till it hath spent it self e'ene at the shore;
So, in the ample, and vnmeasur'd flood
Of her perfections, are my passions drowned:
And I have now a spirit as sweet, and clear,
As the most rarefi'd and subtle air.
With which, and with a heart as pure as fire,
(Yet humble as the earth) do I implore,
O heaven, that she (whose presence hath effected
This change in me) may suffer most late change
In her admired and happy government:
May still this Land be called fortunate,
And rugged treason tremble at the sound
When Fame shall speak it with an emphasis.
Let foreign polity be dull as lead,
And pale invasion come with half a heart,
When he but looks upon her blessed soil.
The throat of war be stopped within her land,
And turtle-footed peace dance fayrie rings
About her court: where, never may there come
Suspect, or danger, but all trust, and safety:
Let flattery be dumb, and envy blind
In her dread presence: death himself admire her:
And may her virtues make him to forget
The use of his inevitable hand.
Fly from her age; Sleep time before her throne,
Our strongest wall falls down, when she is gone.
This Comical Satire was first acted in the year 1599.

By the then Lord Chamberlaine his Servants.

The principal Comoedians were,

With the allowance of the Master of REVELS.


