CYNTHIAS REVELS, OR The Fountain of selfe-Loue. A Comical Satire. Acted, in
the year 1600. By the then Children of Queen ELIZABETHS CHAPEL.

The Author B. I.

Nasutum volo, nolo polyposum.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.

M. DC. XVI.

THou art a bountiful, and brave spring: and water all the noble plants of
this Island. In thee, the whole Kingdom dresses it self, and is ambitious to
use thee as her glass. Beware, then, thou render men's figures truly, and teach
them no less to bate their deformities, then to love their forms: For, to
grace, there should come reverence; and no man can call that lovely, which is
not also venerable. It is not pould'ring, perfuming, and every day smelling of
the taylor, that converts to a beautiful object: but a mind, shining through
any suit, which needs no false light either of riches, or honours to help it.
Such shalt thou find some here, even in the reign of CYNTHIA (a CRITES, and an
ARETE.) Now, under thy PHOEBVS, it will be thy province to make more: Except
thou desire to have thy source mix with the Spring of selfe-Loue, and so
wilt draw upon thee as welcome a discovery of thy days, as was then made of
her nights.

Thy servant, but not slave, BEN. IONSON.
THE SCENE. GARGAPHIE.

PRay you away; why fellows? Gods so? what do you mean?


Mary that you shall not speak the Prologue, sir.


Why? do you hope to speak it?


I, and I think I have most right to it: I am sure I studied it first.


That's all one, if the Author think I can speak it better.


I plead possession of the cloak: Gentles, your suffrages I pray you.

Why Children are you not ashamed? come in there.


Slid, I'll play nothing in the Play: unless I speak it.


Why, will you stand to most voices of the gentlemen! let that decide it.


O no, sir gallant; you presume to have the start of us there, and that makes
you offer so prodigally.


No, would I were whipped, if I had any such thought: try it by lots either.


Faith, I dare tempt my fortune in a greater venture then this.


Well said, resolute Jack, I am content too: so we draw first. Make the cuts.


But will you not snatch my cloak, while I am stooping?


No, we scorn treachery.


Which cut shall speak it?


The shortest.


Agreed.


The shortest is come to the shortest. Fortune was not altogether blind in
this. Now, sir, I hope I shall go forward without your envy.


A spite of all mischievous luck! I was once plucking at the other.


Stay, Jack: Slid, I'll do somewhat now before I go in, though it be nothing
but to revenge my self on the Author: since I speak not his Prologue. I'll
go tell all the argument of his play aforehand, and so stale his invention to
the auditory before it come forth.


O, do not so.


By no means.


First, the title of his play is CYNTHIAS Revels, as any man (that hath hope to
be saved by his book) can witness; the Scene, GARGAPHIE: which I do
vehemently suspect for some sustian country, but let that vanish. Here, is the
court of CYNTHIA, whither he brings CUPID (travailing on foot) resolved to
turn page. By the way, CUPID meets with MERCVRIE, (as that's a thing to be
noted, take any of our play-bookes without a CUPID, or a MERCVRY in it, and
burn it for an heretic in Poetry) -- Pray thee let me alone. MERCVRY, he
(in the nature of a conjurer) raises up ECHO, who weeps over her love, or
Daffodill, NARCISSVS, a little; sings; curses the spring wherein the pretty
foolish gentleman melted himself away: and there's an end of her. -- Now I am
to inform you, that CUPID, and MERCVRY do both become pages. CUPID attends on
PHILAVTIA, or selfe-Loue, a court-ladie MERCVRY follows HEDON, the voluptuous,
and a courtier; one that ranks himself even with ANAIDES, or the impudent, a
gallant, (and that's my part:) one that keeps laughter, GELAIA the daughter of
folly, (a wench in boys attire) to wait on him -- These, in the court, meet
with AMORPHVS, or the deformed; a travailer that hath drunk of the fountain,
and there tells the wonders of the water. They presently dispatch away their
pages with bottles to fetch of it, and themselves go to visit the ladies. But
I should have told you -- (Look, these emets put me out here) that with this
AMORPHVS, there comes along a citizens heir, ASOTVS, or the prodigal, who (in
imitation of the traveller, who hath the whetstone following him) entertains
the beggar, to be his attendant. -- Now, the Nymphs who are mistresses to these
gallants, are PHILAVTIA, selfe-Loue; PHANTASTE, a light wittiness; ARGVRION
money; and their Guardian, mother MORIA; or mistress folly. --


Pray thee no more.


There CUPID strikes money in love with the prodigal, makes her dote upon him,
give him jewels, bracelets, carkenets, c. all which (he most ingeniously
departs withal) to be made known to the other ladies and gallants; and in the
heat of this, increases his train with the fool to follow him, as well as the
beggar. -- By this time, your beggar begins to wait close, who is returned
with the rest of his fellow bottle-men. -- There they all drink, save
ARGVRION, who is fallen into a sudden apoplexy. --


Stop his mouth.


And then, there's a retired scholar there, you would not wish a thing to be
better contemned of a society of gallants, then it is: and he applies his
service (good gentleman) to the lady ARETE, or virtue, a poor Nymph of
CYNTHIAS train, that's scarce able to buy her self a gown, you shall see her
play in a black robe anon: A creature, that (I assure you) is no less
scorned, then himself. Where am I now? at a stand?


Come, leave at last, yet.


O, the night is come, (t'was somewhat dark, me thought) and CYNTHIA intends
to come forth: (That helps it a little yet.) All the courtiers must provide for
revels; they conclude upon a Masque, the device of which, is -- (what, will you
ravish me?) that each of these vices, being to appear before CYNTHIA, would
seem other then indeed they are: and therefore assume the most neighbouring
virtues as their masking habits. -- (I'lde cry, a rape, but that you are
children.)


Come, wee'le have no more of this anticipation: to give them the inuentorie of
their cates aforehand, were the discipline of a tavern, and not fitting this
presence.


Tut, this was but to show us the happiness of his memory. I thought at
first, he would have plaid the ignorant critique with every thing, along as he
had gone, I expected some such device.


O, you shall see me do that, rarely, lend me thy cloak.


Soft, sir, you'll speak my Prologue in it.


No, would I might never stir then.


Lend it him, lend it him.


Well, you have sworn.


I have. Now, sir, suppose I am one of your gentile auditors, that an come in
(having paid my money at the door, with much ado) and here I take my place,
and sit down: I have my three sorts of tobacco in my pocket, my sight by me,
and thus I begin. By this light, I wonder that any man is so mad, to come to
see these rascally Tits play here -- They do act like so many wrens, or
pismires -- not the fifth part of a good face amongst them all -- And then their
music is abominable -- able to stretch a mans ears worse then ten --
pillories, and their ditties -- most lamentable things, like the pitiful
fellows that make them -- Poets. By this vapour, and 'twere not for tobacco --
I think -- the very stench of them would poison me, I should not dare to
come in at their gates -- A man were better visit fifteen jailes, -- or a
dozen or two of hospitals -- then once adventure to come near them. How is't?
Well?


Excellent: give me my cloak.


Stay; you shall see me do another now: but a more sober, or better-gather'd
gallant; that is (as it may be thought) some friend, or welwisher to the
house: And here I enter.


What? upon the stage, too?


Yes: and I step forth like one of the children, and ask you, Would you have a
stool, sir?


A stool, boy?


I, sir, if you'll give me six pence, I'll fetch you one.


For what I pray thee? what shall I do with it?


O lord, sir! will you betray your ignorance so much? why throne your self in
state on the stage, as other gentlemen use, sir.


Away, wag, what, would thou make an implement of me? Slid the boy takes
me for a piece of perspective (I hold my life) or some silk cortaine, come to
hang the stage here! sir crack, I am none of your fresh pictures, that use to
beautify the decayed dead arras, in a public theatre.


It is a sign, sir, you put not that confidence in your good clothes, and your
better face, that a gentleman should do, sir. But I pray you sir, let me be
a suitor to you, that you will quit our stage then, and take a place, the play
is instantly to begin.


Most willingly, my good wag: but I would speak with your Author, where's he?


Not this way, I assure you, sir: we are not so officiously befriended by him,
as to have his presence in the tiring^house, to prompt us aloud, stamp at the
booke-holder, swear for our properties, curse the poor tire-man, rail the
music out of tune, and sweat for every venial trespass we commit, as some
Author would, if he had such fine engles as we. Well, tis but our hard
fortune.


Nay, crack, be not dis-heartned.


Not I, sir, but if you please to confer with our Author, by attorney, you
may, sir: our proper self here, stands for him.


Troth, I have no such serious affair to negotiate with him, but what may
very safely be turned upon thy trust. It is in the general behalf of this
fair society here, that I am to speak, at least the more judicious part of
it, which seems much distasted with the immodest and obscene writing of many,
in their plays. Besides, they could wish, your Poets would leave to be
promoters of other men's jests, and to way-lay all the stale apothegmes, or old
books, they can hear of (in print, or otherwise) to farce their Scenes
withal. That they would not so penuriously glean wit, from every laundress,
or hackney-man, or derive their best grace (with servile imitation) from common
stages, or observation of the company they converse with; as if their
invention lived wholly upon another mans trencher. Again, that feeding their
friends with nothing of their own, but what they have twice or thrice cooked,
they should not want only give out, how soon they had dressed it; nor how many
coaches came to carry away the broken-meat, besides hobbie-horses, and
footcloth nags.


So, sir, this is all the reformation you seek?


It is: do not you think it necessary to be practised, my little wag?


Yes, where any such ill-habited custom is received.


O (I had almost forgot it too) they say, the vmbrae, or ghosts of some three
or four plays, departed a dozen years since, have bin seen walking on your
stage here: take heed, boy, if your house be haunted with such hob-goblins,
'twill fright away all your spectators quickly.


Good, sir, but what will you say now, if a Poet (untouched with any breath of
this disease) find the tokens upon you, that are of the auditory? As some one
ciuet-wit among you, that knows no other learning, then the price of satin
and vellets; nor other perfection, then the wearing of a neat suit; and yet
will censure as desperately as the most professed critique in the house:
presuming, his clothes should bear him out in it. Another (whom it hath pleased
nature to furnish with more beard, then brain) prunes his mustaccio, lisps,
and (with some score of affected oaths) swears down all that sit about him;
That the old Hieronimo, (as it was first acted) was the only best, and
judiciously pend play of Europe. A third greatbellied juggler talks of twenty
years since, and when MONSIEVR was here, and would enforce all wits to be of
that fashion, because his doublet is still so. A fourth miscals all by the name
of fustian, that his grounded capacity cannot aspire to. A fifth, only shakes
his bottle-head, and out of his corkie brain, squeezeth out a pittiful-learned
face, and is silent.


By my faith, Jack, you have put me down: I would I knew how to get off with
any indifferent grace. Here, take your cloak, and promise some satisfaction in
your Prologue, or (I'll be sworn) we have marred all.


Tut, fear not, child, this will never distaste a true sense: Be not out, and
good enough. I would thou had some sugar-candied, to sweeten thy mouth.


IF gracious silence, sweet attention,
Quick sight, and quicker apprehension,
(The lights of judgements throne) shine any where;
Our doubtful author hopes this is their sphere.
And therefore opens he himself to those;
To other weaker beams, his labours close:
As loath to prostitute their virgin strain,
To eu'rie vulgar, and adult'rate brain.
In this alone, his MVSE her sweetness hath,
She shuns the print of any beaten path;
And proves new ways to come to learned ears:
Pied ignorance she neither loves, nor fears.
Nor hunts she after popular applause,
Or fomie praise, that drops from common jaws:
The garland that she wears, their hands must twine,
Who can both censure, understand, define
What merit is: Then cast those piercing rays,
Round as a crown, in stead of honoured baize,
About his poesy; which (he knows) affords
Words, above action: matter, above words.
WHo goes there?


Tis I, blind archer.


Who? MERCVRIE?


I.


Farewell.


Stay, CUPID.


Not in your company, HELMES, except your hands were ri^etted at your back.


Why so my little rower?


Because I know, you have not a finger, but is as long as my quiver (cousin
MERCVRIE) when you please to extend it.


Whence derive you this speech, boy?


O! tis your best polity to be ignorant. You did never steal MARS his sword
out of the sheath, you? nor NEPTVNES trident? nor APOLLOES how? no, not you?
Alas, your palms (IVPITER knows) they are as tender as the foot of a foundered
nag, or a ladies face new mercuried, the'ile touch nothing.


Go too (infant) you'll be daring still.


Daring? O IANVS! what a word is there? why, my light fether-heel'd couss',
what are you? any more then my uncle IOVES pandar, a lackey, that runs on
errands for him, and can whisper a light message to a loose wench with some
round volubility, wait mannerly at a table with a trencher, and warble upon a
crowd a little, fill out nectar, when Ganimed's away, one that sweeps the Gods
drinking room every morning, and sets the cushions in order again, which they
threw one at another headouer-night, can brush the carpets, call the stools
again to their places, play the crier of the court with an audible voice, and
take state of a President upon you at wrestlings, pleadings, negotiations, c.
Here's the catalogue of your imploiments now. O no, I err, you have the
marshalling of all the ghosts too, that pass the stygian ferry, and I suspect
you for a share with the old sculler there, if the truth were known; but let
that escape. One other peculiar virtue you possess, in lifting, or
lieger-du-maine, (which few of the house of heaven have else besides) I must
confess. But (me thinks) that should not make you put that extreme distance
twixt your self and others, that we should be said to ouerdare in speaking to
your nimble deity? So HERCVLES might challenge priority of us both, because
he can throw the bar farther, or lift more joined stools at the arms end,
then we. If this might carry it, then we who have made the whole body of
divinity tremble at the twang of our bow, and enforced SATVRNIVS himself to
lay by his curled front, thunder, and three-fork'd fires, and put on a masking
suit, too light for a reveller of eighteen, to be seen in --


How now! my dancing braggart in d^cimo sexto! charm your skipping tongue, or
I'll --


What? use the virtue of your snaky tip-staffe there upon us?


No, boy, but the smart vigour of my palm about your ears. You have forgot
since I took your heals up into air (on the very hour I was borne) in sight
of all the bench of deities, when the siluerroofe of the Olympi^ palace rung
again with applause of the fact.


O no, I remember it freshly, and by a particular instance; for my mother VENVS
(at the same time) but stooped to embrace you, and (to speak by metaphore) you
borrowed a girdle of hers, as you did IOVES sceptre (while he was laughing)
and would have done his thunder too, but that 'twas too hot for your itching
fingers.


Tis well, sir.


I heard, you but looked in at VULCANS forge the other day, and entreated a
pair of his new tongs along with you, for company: Tis joy on you (in faith)
that you will keep your hooked tallons in practice with any thing. Slight, now
you are on earth, we shall have you silch spoons and candle-s^icks, rather
then fail: pray JOVE the perfumed courtiers keep their casting-bottles,
pick-toothes, and shittle-cocks from you; or our more ordinary gallants their
tabacco-boxes, for I am strangely jealous of your nailes.


Ne'er trust me, CUPID, but you are turned a most acute gallant of late, the
edge of my wit is clear taken off with the f^e and subtle stroke of your
thin-ground tongue, you fight with too poignant a phrase, for me to deal with.


O HERMES, your craft cannot make me confident. I know my own steel to be
almost spent, and therefore entreat my peace with you, in time: you are too
cunning for me to encounter at length* and I think it my safest ward to
close.


Well, for once, I'll suffer you to win upon me, wag, but use not these
strains too often, they will stretch my patience. Whither might you march, now?


Faith (to recover thy good thoughts) I'll discover my whole project. The
Huntress, and Queen of these groves, DIANA (in regard of some black and
envious slanders hourly breathed against her, for her divine justice on
ACTEON, as she pretends) hath here in the vale of Gargaphy, proclaimed a
solemn revels, which (her god-head put off) she will descend to grace, with
the full and royal expense of one of her clearest moons: In which time, it
shall be lawful for all sorts of ingenuous persons, to visit her palace, to
court her NYMPHS, to exercise all variety of generous and noble pastimes, as
well to intimate how far she treads such malicious imputations beneath her,
as also to show how clear her beauties are from the least wrinkle of
austerity, they may be charged with.


But, what is all this to CUPID?


Here do I mean to put off the title of a god, and take the habit of a page,
in which disguise (during the interim of these revels) I will get to follow
some one of DIANAES maids, where (if my bow hold, and my shafts fly but with
half the willingness, and aim they are directed) I doubt not, but I shall
really redeem the minutes I have lost, by their so long and ouer-nice
proscription of my deity, from their court.


Pursue it (divine CUPID) it will be rare.


But will HERMES second me?


I am now to put in act, an especial designement from my father JOVE, but that
performed, I am for any fresh action that offers it self.


Well, then we part.


Farewell, good wag.
Now, to my charge, ECHO, fair ECHO, speak,
Tis MERCVRIE, that calls thee, sorrowful Nymph,
Salute me with thy repercussiue voice,
That I may know what cavern of the earth
Contains thy airy spirit, how, or where
I may direct my speech, that thou may hear.

HEre.


So nigh?

I.

Know (gentle soul) then, I am sent from JOVE,
Who (pitying the sad burden of thy woes,
Still growing on thee, in thy want of words,
To vent thy passion for NARCISSVS death)
Commands, that now (after three thousand years,
Which have been exercised in IVNOES spite)
Thou take a corporal figure, and ascend,
Enriched with vocal, and articulate power.
Make haste, sad Nymph, thrice shall my winged rod
Strike th'obsequious earth, to give thee way.
Arise, and speak thy sorrows, ECHO, rise,
Here, by this fountain, where thy love did pine,
Whose memory lives fresh to vulgar fame,
Shrin'd in this yellow flower, that bears his name.

His name revives, and lifts me up from earth.
O, which way shall I first convert my self?
Or in what mood shall I assay to speak,
That (in a moment) I may be delivered
Of the prodigious grief I go withal?
See, see, the mourning fount, whose springs weep yet,
The untimely fate of that too beauteous boy,
That trophaee of selfe-loue, and spoil of nature,
Who (now transformed into this drooping flower)
Hangs the repentant head, back from the stream,
As if it wished, would I had never looked
In such a flattering mirror. O NARCISSVS,
Thou that wast once (and yet art) my NARCISSVS;
Had ECHO but been private with thy thoughts,
She would have dropped away her self in tears,
Till she had all turned water, that in her,
(As in a (...) glass) thou might have gazed,
And seen thy beauties by more kind reflection:
But selfe-loue never yet could look on truth,
But with bleard beams; ^lieke flattery and she
Are twin borne sisters, and so mix their eyes,
As if you se^er one, the other dies.
Why did the gods give thee a heavenly form,
And earthy thoughts, to make thee proud of it?
Why, do I ask? Tis now the known disease
That beauty hath, to bear too deep a sense
Of her own selfe-conceiued excellence.
O, had thou known the worth of heavens rich gift,
Thou would have turned it to a truer use,
And not (with starved, and covetous ignorance)
P^'d in continual eyeing that bright gem,
The glance whereof to others had been more,
Then to thy famished mind the wide worlds store:
"So wretched is it to be merely rich.
Witness thy youths dear sweets, here spent untasted,
Like a fair taper, with his own flame wasted.

ECHO, be brief, SATVRNIA is abroad,
And if she hear, sheele storm at IOVES high will.

I will (kind MERCVRIE) be brief as time.
Vouchsafe me, I may do him these last rites,
But kiss his flower, and sing some mourning strain
Over his watery hearse.

Thou dost obtain.
I were no son to JOVE, should I deny thee.
Begin, and (more to grace thy cunning voice)
The humorous air shall mix her solemn tunes,
With thy sad words: strike music from the spheres,
And with your golden raptures swell our ears.

SLow, slow, fresh fount, keep time with my salt tears;
Yet slower, yet, ^ faintly gentle springs:
List to the heavy part the musique bears,
"Woe weeps out her division, when she sings.
Droop herbs, and flowers;
Fall grief in showers;
"Our beauties are not ours:
O, I could still
(Like melting snow upon some craggy hill,)
drop, drop, drop, drop,
Since natures pride is, now, a withered daffodill.
Now, have you done?

Done presently (good HERMES) bide a little,
Suffer my thirsty eye to gaze a while,
But e'ene to taste the place, and I am vanished.

Forgo thy use, and liberty of tongue,
And thou may dwell on earth, and sport thee there.

Here young ACTEON fell, pursu'de, and torn
By CYNTHIA'S wrath (more eager, then his hounds)
And here, (ay me, the place is fatal) see
The weeping NIOBE, translated hither
From Phrygian mountains: and by PHoeBE reared
As the proud trophaee of her sharpe revenge.

Nay, but hear.

But here, O here, the Fountain of selfe-Loue,
In which LATONA, and her careless Nymphs,
(Regardles of my sorrows) bathe themselves
In hourly pleasures.

Stint thy babbling tongue;
Fond ECHO, thou prophan'st the grace is done thee:
So idle worldlings (merely made of voice)
Censure the powers above them. Come, away,
JOVE calls thee hence, and his will brookes no stay.

O, stay: I have but one poor thought to clothe
In airy garments, and then (faith) I go.
Henceforth, thou treacherous, and murthering spring,
Be ever called the Fountain of selfe-Loue:
And with thy water let this curse remain,
(As an inseparate plague) that who but tastes
A drop thereof, may, with the instant touch,
Grow dotingly enamoured on themselves.
Now, HERMES, I have finished.

Then thy speech,
Must here forsake thee, ECHO, and thy voice
(As it was wont) rebound but the last words.
Farewell.

Well.

Now, CUPID, I am for you, and your mirth,
To make me light before I leave the earth.

Dear spark of beauty, make not so fast away.


Away.


Stay, let me observe this portent yet.


I am neither your Minotaure, nor your Centaur, nor your Satire, nor your
Hyena, nor your Babion, but your mere travailer, believe me.


Leave me.


I guessed it should be some travailing motion pursued ECHO so.


Know you from whom you fly? or whence?


Hence.


This is somewhat above strange! a Nymph of her feature, and lineament, to be
so preposterously rude! well, I will but cool my self at you' spring, and
follow her.


Nay, then I am familiar with the issue: I'll leave you too.


I am a Rhinoceros, if I had thought a creature of her symmetry, could have
dared so improportionable, and abrupt a digression. Liberal, and divine fount,
suffer my profane hand to take of thy bounties. By the purity of my taste,
here is most ambrosiacke water; I will sup of it again. By thy favour, sweet
fount. See, the water (a more running, subtle, and humorous Nymph then she)
permits me to touch, and handle her. What should I infer? If my behaviours
had been of a cheap or customary garb; my accent, or phrase vulgar; my
garments trite; my countenance illiterate; or vnpractiz'd in the encounter of a
beautiful and braue-attir'd piece; then I might (with some change of colour)
have suspected my faculties: but (knowing my self an offence so sublimated,
and refined by travel; of so studied, and well exercised a gesture; so alone
in fashion; able to tender the face of any states-man living; and to speak the
mere extraction of language; one that hath now made the sixth return upon
venture; and was your first that ever enriched his country with the true laws
of the duello; whose optiques have drunk the spirit of beauty, in some eight
score and eighteen Princes courts, where I have resided, and been there
fortunate in the amours of three hundred forty and five ladies (all nobly, if
not princely descended) whose names I have in catalogue; to conclude, in all so
happy, as even admiration her self doth seem to fasten her kisses upon me:
Certes, I do neither see, nor feel, nor taste, nor savour the least steam,
or fume of a reason, that should inuit this foolish fastidious Nymph, so
peevishly to abandon me. Well, let the memory of her fleet into air; my
thoughts and I am for this other element, water.


WHat! the wel-dieted AMORPHVS become a water-drinker? I see he means not to
write verses then.


No, CRITES? why?


Because -- Nec placere diu, nec viuere carmina possunt, quae scribuntur aquae
potoribus.


What say you to your HELICON?


O, the MVSES well! that's ever excepted.


Sir, your MVSES have no such water, I assure you; your nectar, or the juice of
your nepenthe is nothing to it; tis above your metheglin, believe it.


Metheglin! what's that, sir? may I be so audacious to demand?


A kind of greek wine I have met with, sir, in my travails: it is the same
that DEMOSTHENES usually drunk, in the composure of all his exquisite, and
mellifluous orations.


That's to be argued (AMORPHVS) if we may credit LVCIAN, who in his Eucomio
Demosthenis affirms, he never drunk but water in any of his compositions.


LVCIAN is absurd, he knew nothing: I will believe mine own travails, before
all the LVCIANS of Europe. He doth feed you with sittons, figments, and
leasings.


Indeed (I think) next a travailer, he does prettily well.


I assure you it was wine, I have tasted it, and from the hand of an Italian
Antiquary, who derives it authentically from the Duke of Ferrara's bottles.
How name you the gentleman you are in rank with there, sir?


Tis ASOTVS, son to the late deceased PHILARGYRVS the citizen.


Was his father of any eminent place, or means?


He was to have been Praetor next year.


Ha! A pretty formal young gallant, in good sooth: pity, he is not more
gently propagated. Hark you, CRITES, you may say to him, what I am, if you
please: though I affect not popularity, yet I would be loath to stand out to
any, whom you shall vouchsafe to call friend.


Sir, I fear I may do wrong to your sufficiencies in the reporting them, by
forgetting or misplacing some one; your self can best inform him of your
self, sir: except you had some catalogue, or list of your faculties ready
drawn, which you would request me to show him, for you, and him to take
notice of.


This CRITES is sour: I will think, sir.


Do so, sir. O heaven! that any thing (in the likeness of man) should suffer
these racked extremities, for the uttering of his sophisticate good parts.


CRITES, I have a suit to you; but you must not deny me: pray you make this
gentleman and I friends.


Friends! Why? is there any difference between you?


No, I mean acquaintance, to know one another.


O, now I apprehend you; your phrase was without me, before*


In good faith, he's a most excellent rare man, I warrant him!


Slight, they are mutually inamor'd by this time!


Will you, sweet CRITES?


Yes, yes.


Nay, but when? you'll defer it now, and forget it.


Why, is't a thing of such present necessity, that it requires so violent a
dispatch?


No, but (would I might never stir) he's a most ravishing man! good CRITES,
you shall endear me to you, in good faith-law.


Well, your longing shall be satisfied, sir.


And withal, you may tell him what my father was, and how well he left me, and
that I am his heir.


Leave it to me, I'll forget none of your dear graces, I warrant you.


Nay, I know you can better marshall these affairs then I can -- O gods* I'd
give all the world (if I had it) for abundance of such acquaintance.


What ridiculous circumstance might I devise now, to bestow this reciprocal
brace of butter-flies one upon another?


Since I trod on this side the Alps, I was not so frozen in my invention. Let
me see: to accost him with some choice remnant of spanish, or italian? that
would indifferently express my languages now: marythen, if he should fall out
to be ignorant, it were both hard, and harsh. How else? step into some ragioni
del stato, and so make my induction? that were above him too; and out of his
element, I fear. Fain to have seen him in Venice, or Padua? or some face
near his in similitude? it is too pointed, and open. No, it must be a more
quaint, and collateral device. As -- stay: to frame some encomiastick speech
upon this our Metropolis, or the wise magistrates thereof, in which politic
number, 'tis ods, but his father filled up a room? descend into a particular
admiration of their justice; for the due measuring of coals, burning of
cannes, and such like? As also their religion, in pulling down a superstitious
cross, and advancing a VENVS, or PRIAPVS, in place of it? ha? 'twill do well.
Or to talk of some hospital, whose walls record his father a Benefactor? or
of so many buckets bestowed on his parish church, in his life time, with his
name at length (for want of arms) tricked upon them? Any of these? Or to praise
the cleanness of the street, wherein he dwelt? or the provident painting of
his posts against he should have been Praetor? or (leaving his parent) come
to some special ornament about himself, as his rapier, or some other of his
accoutrements? I have it: Thanks, gracious MINERVA.


Would I had but once spoke to him, and then -- He comes to me.


'Tis a most curious, and neatly-wrought band, this same, as I have scene, sir.


O god, sir.


You forgive the humour of mine eye, in observing it.


His eye waters after it, it seems.


O lord, sir, there needs no such apology, I assure you.


I am anticipated: they'll make a solemn deed of gift of themselves, you shall
see.


Your ribbon too does most gracefully, in troth.


Tis the most gentile, and received wear now, sir.


Believe me, sir (I speak it not to humour you) I have not seen a young
gentleman (generally) put on his clothes, with more judgment.


O, tis your pleasure to say so, sir.


No, as I am virtuous (being altogether vn-trauel'd) it strikes me into wonder.


I do purpose to travail, sir, at spring.


I think I shall affect you, sir. This last speech of yours hath begun to make
you dear to me.


O god, sir. I would there were anything in me, sir, that might appear worthy
the least worthiness of your worth, sir. I protest, sir, I should endeavour to
show it, sir, with more then common regard, sir.


O, here's rare motley, sir.


Both your desert, and your endeavours are plentiful, suspect them not: but
your sweet disposition to travail (I assure you) hath made you another
my-selfe in mine eye, and struck me inamor'd on your beauties.


I would I were the fairest lady of France for your sake, sir, and yet I would
travail too.


O, you should digress from your self else: for (believe it) your travail is
your only thing that rectifies, or (as the Italian says) vi rendi pronto all'
attioni, makes you fit for action.


I think it be great charge though, sir.


Charge? why tis nothing for a gentleman that goes private, as your self, or
so; my intelligence shall quit my charge at all times. Good faith, this hat
hath possessed mine eye exceedingly; tis so pretty, and fantastike: what? is't a
beaver?


I, sir, I'll assure you tis a beaver, it cost me eight crowns but this
morning.


After your French account?


Yes, sir.


And so near his head? beshrow me, dangerous.


A very pretty fashion (believe me) and a most novel kind of trim: your
band is conceited too!


Sir, it is all at your service.


O, pardon me.


I beseech you, sir, if you please to wear it, you shall do me a most
infinite grace.


Slight, will he be praised out of his clothes?


By heaven, sir, I do not offer it you after the Italian manner; I would you
should conceive so of me.


Sir, I shall fear to appear rude in denying your courtesies, especially,
being invited by so proper a distinction: may I pray your name, sir?


My name is ASOTVS, sir.


I take your love (gentle ASOTVS) but let me win you to receive this, in
exchange --


'Hart, they'll change doublets anon.


And (from this time) esteem your self, in the first rank, of those few,
whom I profess to love. What make you in company of this scholar, here? I
will bring you known to gallants, as ANAIDES of the ordinary, HEDON the
courtier, and others, whose society shall render you graced, and respected:
this is a trivial fellow, too mean, too cheap, too course for you to
converse with.


Slid, this is not worth a crown, and mine cost me eight but this morning.


I looked when he would repent him, he ha's begun to be sad a good while.


Sir, shall I say to you for that hat? be not so sad, be not so sad: it is are
lique I could not so easily have departed with, but as the hieroglyphicke of my
affection; you shall alter it to what form you please, it will take any
block; I have received it varied (on record) to the three thousandth time, and
not so sew: It hath these virtues beside; your head shall not ache under it; nor
your brain leave you, without licence; It will preserve your complexion to
eternity; for no beam of the sun (should your wear it under Zona torrida)
hath power to approach it by two ells. It is proof against thunder, and
enchantment: and was given me by a great man (in Russia) as an
especiall-priz'd present; and constantly affirmed to be the hat, that
accompanied the politic VLYSSES, in his tedious, and ten years travels.


By JOVE, I will not depart withal, whosoever would give me a million.


Save you, sweet bloods: does any of you want a creature, or a dependant?


Beshrow me, a fine blunt slave!


A page of good timber? it will now be my grace to entertain him first,
though I cashier him again in private: how art thou called?


COS, sir, COS.


Cos? How happily hath fortune furnished him with a whetstone?


I do entertain you, COS, conceal your quality till we be private; if your
parts be worthy of me, I will countenance you; if not, catechize you: gentles,
shall we go?


Stay, sir; I'll but entertain this other fellow, and then -- I have a great
humour to taste of this water too, but I'll come again alone for that -- mark
the place. What's your name, youth?


PROSAITES, sir.


PROSAITES? A very fine name, CRITES? is't not?


Yes, and a very ancient, sir, the beggar.


Follow me, good PROSAITES: Let's talk.


He will rank even with you (er't be long)
If you hold on your course. O vanity,
How are thy painted beauties doted on,
By light, and empty idiots! how pursu'de
With open and extended appetite!
How they do sweat, and run themselves from breath,
Raised on their toes, to catch thy airy forms,
Still turning giddy, till they reel like drunkards,
That buy the merry madness of one hour,
With the long irke somenesse of following time!
O how despised and base a thing is a man,
If he not strive t'erect his groueling thoughts
Above the strain of flesh! But how more cheap
When, even his best and understanding part,
(The crown, and strength of all his faculties)
Floates like a dead drowned body, on the stream
Of vulgar humour, mixed with commonst dregs?
I suffer for their guilt now, and my soul
(Like one that looks on il-affected eyes)
Is hurt with mere intention on their follies:
Why will I view them then? my sense might ask me:
Or is't a racitie, or some new object,
That strains my strict observance to this point?
O would it were, therein I could affoord
My spirit should draw a little near to theirs,
To gaze on novelties: so vice were one.
Tut, she is stale, rank, foul, and were it not
That those (that woo her) greet her with locked eyes,
(In spite of all the impostures, paintings, drugs,
Which her bawd custom dawbes her cheeks withal)
She would betray her loth'd and leprous face,
And ^right th'enamor'd dotards from themselves:
But such is the perverseness of our nature,
That if we once but fancy levity,
(How antike and ridiculous so ere
It suit with us) yet will our muffled thought
Choose rather not to see it, then avoid it:
And if we can but banish our own sense,
We act our mimic tricks with that free licence,
That lust, that pleasure, that security,
As if we practised in a paste-boord case,
And no one saw the motion, but the motion.
Well, check thy passion, lest it grow too loud:
"While fools are pitied, they wax fat, and proud.

WHy, this was most unexpectedly followed (by divine delicate MERCVRY) by the
beard of JOVE, thou art a precious deity.


Nay, CUPID, leave to speak improperly, since we are turned cracks, let's
study to be like cracks; practise their language, and behaviours, and not with
a dead imitation: act freely, carelessly, and capriciously, as if our veins
ran with quick-siluer, and not utter a phrase, but what shall come forth
steeped in the very brine of conceit, and sparkle like salt in fire.


That's not every ones happiness (HERMES) though you can presume upon the
easiness and dexterity of your wit, you shall give me leave to be a little
jealous of mine; and not desperately to hazard it after your capering humour.


Nay, then, CUPID, I think we must have you hood-winkt again, for you are
grown too provident, since your eyes were at liberty.


Not so (MERCVRY) I am still blind CUPID to thee.


And what to the lady Nymph you serve?


Troth, page, boy, and sirha: these are all my titles.


Then thou hast not altered thy name, with thy disguise?


O, no, that had been supererogation, you shall never hear your courtier call
but by one of these three.


Faith, then both our fortunes are the same.


Why? what parcel of man hast thou lighted on for a master?


Such a one (as before I begin to decipher him) I dare not affirm to be any
thing less then a courtier. So much he is, during this open time of revels,
and would be longer, but that his means are to leave him shortly after. His
name is HEDON, a gallant wholly consecrated to his pleasures. --


HEDON? he uses much to my ladies chamber, I think.


How is she called, and then I can show thee?


Madame PHILAVTIA.


O I, he affects her very particularly indeed. These are his graces. He doth
(besides me) keep a barber, and a monkey: He has a rich wrought wast^coat to
entertain his visitants in, with a cap almost suitable. His curtains, and
bedding are thought to be his own: his bathing-tub is not suspected. He
loves to have a fencer, a pedant, and a musician seen in his lodging a
mornings.


And not a poet?


Fie no: himself is a rimer, and that's a thought better then a poet. He is
not lightly within to his mercer, no, though he come when he takes physic,
which is commonly after his play. He beats a tailor very well, but a
stocking-seller admirably: and so consequently any one he owes money too, that
dares not resist him. He never makes general inui^ement, but against the
publishing of a new suit, marie then, you shall have more drawn to his
lodging, then come to the launching of some three ships; especially if he be
furnished with supplies for the retiring of his old ward-robe from pawn: if
not, he does hire a stock of apparel, and some forty, or fifty pound in
gold, for that fore-noone to show. He's thought a very necessary perfume for
the presence, and for that only cause welcome thither: six millaners shops
affoord you not the like sent. He courts ladies with how many great horse he
hath rid that morning, or how oft he hath done the whole, or the half pommado
in a seuen-night before: and sometime venters so far upon the virtue of his
pomander, that he dares tell'hem, how many shirts he has sweat at tennis that
week, but wisely conceals so many dozen of balls he is on the score. Here he
comes, that is all this.


BOy.


Sir.


Are any of the ladies in the presence?


None yet, sir.


Give me some gold, more.


Is that thy boy, HEDON?


I, what think thou of him?


S'hart, Il'd geld him; I warrant he has the philosophers stone.


Well said, my good melancholy devil: Sirrah, I have devised one or two of the
prettiest oaths (this morning in my bed) as ever thou heard, to protest
withal in the presence.


Pray thee, let's hear them.


Soft, thou'lt use them before me.


No (dam' me then) I have more oaths then I know how to utter, by this air.


Faith, one is, by the tip of your ear, sweet lady. Is't not pretty, and
gentile?


Yes, for the person 'tis applied to, a lady. It should be light, and --


Nay, the other is better, exceeds it much: the invention is farther set too. By
the white valley that lies between the Alpine hills of your bosom, I protest
-- c.


Well, you travelled for that, HEDON.


I, in a map, where his eyes were but blind guides to his understanding, it
seems.


And then I have a salutation will nick all, by this caper: hay!


How is that?


You know I call madame PHILAVTIA, my Honour; and she calls me her Ambition.
Now, (when I meet her in the presence anon) I will come to her, and say, sweet
Honour, I have hitherto contented my sense with the lillies of your hand, but
now I will taste the roses of your lip; and (withal) kiss her: to which she
cannot but blushingly answer, nay, now you are too ambitious. And then do I
reply; I cannot be too ambitious of honour, sweet lady. Will it not be good?
ha? ha?


O, assure your soul.


By heaven, I think 'twill be excellent, and a very politic atchiuement of
a kiss.


I have thought upon one for MORIA, of a sudden too, if it take.


What is't, my dear invention?


Mary, I will come to her, (and she always wears a muffe, if you be
remembered) and I will tell her, Madame, your whole self cannot but be
perfectly wise: for your hands have wit enough to keep themselves warm.


Now, (before JOVE) admirable! look, thy page takes it too, by Ph^bus, my
sweet facetious rascal, I could eat water-gruell with thee a month, for this
jest, my dear rogue.


O, (by HERCVLES) 'tis your only dish, above all your potato's, or oyster-pyes
in the world.


I have ruminated upon a most rare wish too, and the prophecy to it, but I'll
have some friend to be the prophet; as thus: I do wish my self one of my
mistress Cioppini. Another demands, Why would he be one of his Mistress
Cioppini? A third answers, Because he would make her higher. A fourth shall
say, That will make her proud. And a fifth shall conclude: Then do I
prophecy, pride will have a fall, and he shall give it her.


I'll be your prophet. By gods so, it will be most exquisite, thou art a fine
inuentious Rogue, sirrah.


Nay, and I have poesies for rings too, and riddles that they dream not of.


Tut, they'll do that, when they come to sleep on them time enough; but were
thy devices never in the presence yet, HEDON?


O, no, I disdain that.


Twere good we went before then, and brought them acquainted with the room
where they shall act, lest the stratagems of it put them out of countenance,
when they should come forth.


Is that a courtier too?


Troth no; he has two essential parts of the courtier, pride, and ignorance;
mary, the rest come somewhat after the ordinary gallant. Tis impudence it
self, ANAIDES; one, that speaks all that comes in his checks, and will blush
no more then a sackbut. He lightly occupies the jesters room at the table,
and keeps laughter GELAIA (a wench in pages attire) following him in place of
a squire, whom he now and then tickles with some strange ridiculous stuff,
uttered (as his land came to him) by chance. He will censure or discourse of
any thing, but as absurdly as you would wish. His fashion is not to take
knowledge of him that is beneath him in clothes. He never drinks below the
salt. He does naturally admire his wit, that wears gold-lace, or tissue.
Stabs any man that speaks more contemptibly of the scholar then he. He is a
great proficient in all the illiberal sciences, as cheating, drinking,
swaggering, whoring, and such like: never kneeles but to pledge healths; nor
prays but for a pipe of pudding tobacco. He will blaspheme in his shirt. The
oaths which he vomits at one supper, would maintain a town of garrison in
good swearing a twelue-moneth. One other genuine quality he has, which crowns
all these, and that is this: to a friend in want, he will not depart with the
weight of a soldred groat, lest the world might censure him prodigal, or
report him a gull: mary, to his cockatrice or punquetto, half a dozen taffeta
gowns, or satin kirtles, in a pair or two of months, why they are nothing.


I commend him, he is one of my clients.


COme, sir. You are now within in regard of the presence, and see, the privacy
of this room, how sweetly it offers it self to our retired intendments. Page,
cast a vigilant, and enquiring eye about, that we be not rudely surprised, by
the approach of some ruder stranger.


I warrant you, sir. I'll tell your when the wolf enters, fear nothing.


O, what a mass of benefit shall we possess, in being the invisible
spectators of this strange show, now to be acted?


Plant your self there, sir: and observe me. You shall now, as well be the
ocular, as the eare-witnesse, how clearly I can revel that paradox, or rather
pseudodox, of those, which hold the face to be the index of the mind, which (I
assure you) is not so, in any politic creature: for instance. I will now give
you the particular, and distinct face of every your most noted species of
persons, as your merchant, your scholer, your soldier, your lawyer, courtier,
c. and each of these so truly, as you would swear, but that your eye shall see
the variation of the lineament, it were my most proper, and genuine aspect.
First, for your merchant, or citie-face, 'tis thus, a dull, plodding face,
still looking in a direct line, forward: there is no great matter in this face.
Then have you your students, or academique face, which is here, an honest,
simple, and methodical face: but somewhat more spread then the former. The
third is your soldiers face, a menacing, and astounding face, that looks
broad, and big: the grace of this face consists much in a beard. The
anti-face to this, is your lawyers face, a contracted, subtle, and intricate
face, full of quirks, and turnings, a labyrinthaean face, now angularly, now
circularly, every way aspected. Next is your statists face, a serious, solemn,
and supercilious face, full of formal, and square gravity, the eye (for the
most part) deeply and artificially shadowed: there is great judgment required
in the making of this face. But now, to come to your face of faces, or
courtiers face, tis of three sorts, according to our subdiuision of a courtier,
elementary, practique, and theoric. Your courtier theoric, is he, that
hath arrived to his fardest, and doth now know the court, rather by
speculation, then practice; and this is his face: a fastidious and oblique
face, that looks, as it went with a vice, and were screwed thus. Your courtier
practike, is he, that is yet in his path, his course, his way, hath not touched
the puntilio, or point of his hopes; his face is here: a most promising, open,
smooth, and ouer-flowing face, that seems as it would run, and power it
self into you. Somewhat a northerly face. Your courtier elementary, is one
but newly entered, or as it were in the alphabet, or vt-re-mi-fa-sol-la of
courtship. Note well this face, for it is this you must practice.


I'll practice them all, if you please, sir.


I, hereafter you may: and it will not be altogether an ungrateful study. For,
let your soul be assured of this (in any rank, or profession what-euer) the
more general, or mayor part of opinion goes with the face, and (simply)
respects nothing else. Therefore, if that can be made exactly, curiously,
exquisitely, thoroughly, it is enough: But (for the present) you shall only apply
your self to this face of the elementary courtier, a light, revelling, and
protesting face, now blushing, now smiling, which you may help much with a
wanton wagging of your head, thus, (a feather will teach you) or with kissing
your ^inger that hath the ruby, or playing with some string of your band, which
is a most quaint kind of melancholy besides: or (if among ladies) laughing
loud, and crying up your own wit, though perhaps borrowed, it is not amiss.
Where is your page? call for your casting-bottle, and place your mirror in
your hat, as I told you: so. Come, look not pale, observe me, set your face,
and enter.


O, for some excellent painter, to have taken the copy of all these faces!


PROSAITES.


Fie, I premonisht you of that: In the court, boy, lacquay, or sirrah.


Master, Lupus in -- O, it is PROSAITES.


Sirrha prepare my casting-bottle, I think I must be enforced to purchase me
another page, you see how at hand COS waits, here.


So will he too, in time.


What's he, MERCVRIE?


A notable smelt. One, that hath newly entertained the beggar to follow him,
but cannot get him to wait near enough. It is ASOTVS, the heir of PHILARGYRVS;
but first I'll give ye the others character, which may make his the clearer.
He that is with him, is AMORPHVS, a travailer, one so made out of the mixture
and shreds of forms, that himself is truly deform^d. He walks most commonly
with a clove, or pick-tooth in his mouth, he is the very mint of complement,
all his behaviours are printed, his face is another volume of essays; and his
beard an Aristarchus. He speaks all cream, skimd, and more affected then a
dozen of waiting women. He is his own promoter in every place. The wife of the
ordinary gives him his diet, to maintain her table in discourse, which
(indeed) is a mere tyranny over her other guests, for he will usurp all the
talk: ten constables are not so tedious. He is no great shifter, once a year
his apparel is ready to revolt. He doth use much to arbitrate quarrels, and
fights himself, exceeding well (out at a window.) He will lye cheaper then any
beggar, and louder then most clocks: for which he is right properly
accommodated to the whetstone, his page. The other gallant is his Zani, and
doth most of these tricks after him; sweates to imitate him in every thing (to
a hair) except a beard, which is not yet extant. He doth learn to make
strange sauces, to eat aenchouies, maccaroni, bouoli, fagioli, and cauiare,
because he loves them; speaks as he speaks, looks, walks, goes so in
clothes, and fashion: is in all, as if he were moulded of him. Mary (before
they met) he had other very pretty sufficiencies, which yet he retains some
light impression of: as frequenting a dancing school, and grievously torturing
strangers, with inquisition after his grace in his galliard. He buys a fresh
acquaintance at any rate. His eye and his raiment confer much together as he
goes in the street. He treads nicely, like the fellow that walks upon ropes;
especially the first sunday of his silke-stockings: and when he is most neat,
and new, you shall strip him with commendations.


Here comes another.


I, but one of another strain, CUPID: This fellow weighs somewhat.


His name, HERMES?


CRITES. A creature of a most perfect and divine temper. One, in whom the
humours and elements are peaceably met, without emulation of precedence: he is
neither to phantastikely melancholy, too slowly phlegmaticke, too lightly
sanguine, or too rashly choleric, but in all, so composde ordered, as it is
clear, Nature went about some full work, she did more then make a man, when
she made him. His discourse is like his behaviour, vncommon, but not
unpleasing; he is prodigal of neither. He strives rather to be that which
men call judicious, then to be thought so: and is so truly learned, that he
affects not to show it. He will think, and speak his thought, both freely:
but as distant from deprauing another mans merit, as proclaiming his own. For
his valour, tis such, that he dares as little to offer an injury, as receive
one. In sum, he hath a most ingenuous and sweet spirit, a sharp and seasoned
wit, a straight judgment, and a strong mind. Fortune could never break him,
nor make him less. He counts it his pleasure, to despise pleasures, and is
more delighted with good deeds, then goods. It is a competencie to him that he
can be virtuous. He doth neither covet nor fear; he hath too much reason to
do either: and that commends all things to him.


Not better then MERCVRY commends him.


O, CUPID, tis beyond my deity to give him his due praises: I could leave my
place in heaven, to live among mortals, so I were sure to be no other then he.


S'light, I believe he is your minion, you seem to be so ravished with him.


He's one, I would not have a wry thought darted against, willingly.


No, but a straight shaft in his bosom, I'll promise him, if I am CITHEREAS
son.


Shall we go, CUPID?


Stay, and see the ladies now: they'll come presently. I'll help to paint them.


What! lay colour upon colour? that affords but an ill blazon.


Here comes mettle to help it, the lady ARGVRION.


Money, money.


The same. A Nymph of a most wandering and giddy disposition, humorous as the
air, she'll run from gallant to gallant (as they sit at primero in the
presence) most strangely, and seldom stays with any. She spreads as she
goes. To day you shall have her look as clear and fresh as the morning, and
to morrow as melancholic as mid-night. She takes special pleasure in a close
obscure lodging, and, for that cause, visits the city so often, where she has
many secret true-concealing favourites. When she comes abroad, she's more
loose and scattering then dust, and will fly from place to place, as she were
rapt with a whirle-winde. Your young student (for the most part) she affects
not, only salutes him, and away: a poet, nor a philosopher, she is hardly
brought to take any notice of; no, though he be some part of an alchemist. She
loves a player well, and a lawyer infinitely: but your fool above all. She
can do much in court for the obtaining of any suit whatsoever, no door but
flies open to her, her presence is above a charm. The worst in her is want of
keeping state, and too much descending into inferior and base offices, she's
for any coorse employment you will put upon her, as to be your procurer, or
pandar.


Peace, CUPID, here comes more work for you, another character or two.


STay, sweet PHILAVTIA, I'll but change my fan, and go presently.


Now (in very good serious) ladies, I will have this order reuerst, the
presence must be better maintained from you: a quarter past eleven, and ne'er a
Nymph in perspective? beshrew my hand, there must be a reformed discipline. Is
that your new ruff, sweet lady-bird? By my truth, 'tis most intricately rare.


Good JOVE, what reverend gentlewoman in years might this be?


This, Madam MORIA, guardian of the Nymphs. One that is not now to be persuaded
of her wit, she will think her self wise against all the judgements that
come. A lady made all of voice, and air, talks any thing of any thing. She
is like one of your ignorant Poetasters of the time, who when they have got
acquainted with a strange word, never rest till they have wrong it in, though
it loosen the whole fabric of their sense.


That was pretty and sharply noted, CUPID.


She will tell you, Philosophie was a fine reveller, when she was young, and a
gallant, and that then (though she say it) she was thought to be the Dame-DIDO,
and HELLEN of the court: As also, what a sweet dog she had this time four
years, and how it was called Fortune, and that (if the sates had not cut his
thread) he had been a dog to have given entertainment to any gallant in this
kingdom: and, unless she had whelpt it her self, she could not have loved
a thing better i'this world.


O, I pray thee no more, I am full of her.


Yes (I must needs tell you) she composes a sack-posset well; and would court
a young page sweetly, but that her breath is against it.


Now, her breath (or something more strong) protect me from her: the other,
the other, CUPID.


O, that's my lady and mistress, Madam PHILAVTIA. She admires not her self for
any one particularity, but for all: she is fair, and she knows it: she has
a pretty light wit too, and she knows it: she can dance, and she knows
that too: play at shittle-cock, and that too: no quality she has, but she
shall take a very particular knowledge of, and most lady-like commend it to
you. You shall have her at any time read you the history of her self, and
very subtly run over another ladies sufficiencies, to come to her own.
She has a good superficial judgment in painting; and would seem to have so
in poetry. A most complete lady in the opinion of some three, beside her-selfe.


Faith, how liked you my quip to HEDON, about the garter? was't not witty?


Exceeding witty and integrate: you did so aggrauate the jest withal.


And did I not dance movingly the last night?


Movingly? out of measure (in troth) sweet charge.


A happy commendation, to dance out of measure.


Save only you wanted the swim in the turn: O! when I was at fourteen --


Nay, that's mine own from any Nymph in the court (I am sure on it) therefore
you mistake me in that, Guardian: both the swim and the trip, are properly
mine, every body will affirm it, that has any judgment in dancing: I assure
you.


Come now, PHILAVTIA, I am for you, shall we go?


I, good PHANTASTE: What! have you changed your head-tire?


Yes faith, the other was so near the common: it had no extraordinary grace;
besides, I had worn it almost a day, in good troth.


I'll be sworn, this is most excellent for the device, and rare. 'Tis after
the italian print, we looked on the other night.


'Tis so: By this fan, I cannot abide any thing that savours the poor
ouer-worne cut, that has any kindred with it; I must have variety, I: this
mixing in fashion I hate it worse, then to burn juniper in my chamber, I
protest.


And yet we cannot have a new peculiar court-tire, but these retainers will
have it; these Suburbe-sunday-waiters; these courtiers for high days; I know
not what I should call them --


O, I, they do most pitifully imitate, but I have a tire a coming (in faith)
shall --


In good certain, Madam, it makes you look most heavenly; but (lay your hand
on your heart) you never skinned a new beauty more prosperously in your life,
nor more metaphysically: look, good lady, sweet lady, look.


Tis very clear, and well, believe me. But if you had seen mine yesterday,
when t'was young, you would have -- who's your Doctor, PHANTASTE?


Nay, that's counsel, PHILAVTIA, you shall pardon me: yet (I'll assure you)
he's the most dainty, sweet, absolute rare man of the whole college. O! his
very looks, his discourse, his behaviour, all he doo's is physic, I
protest.


For heavens sake, his name; good, dear PHANTASTE --


No, no, no, no, no, no, (believe me) not for a million of heavens: I will not
make him cheap. Fie --


There is a Nymph too, of a most curious and elaborate strain, light, all
motion, an vbiquitarie, she is every where, PHANTASTE --


Her very name speaks her, let her pass. But are these (CUPID) the stars of
CYNTHIAS court? do these Nymphs attend upon DIANA?


They are in her court (MERCVRIE) but not as stars, these never come in the
presence of CYNTHIA. The Nymphs that make her train, are the divine ARETE,
TIME, PHRONESIS, THAVMA, and others of that high sort. These are privately
brought in by MORIA in this licentious time, against her knowledge: and (like
so many meteors) will van^sh, when she appears.


COme follow me, my wags, and say as I say.
There's no riches but in rags; hey day, hey day.
You that profess this art, come away, come away,
And help to bear a part. Hey day; hey day, c.

What! those that were our fellow pages but now, so soon preferred to be
yeomen of the bottles? the mystery, the mystery, good wags?


Some dyet-drinke, they have the guard of.


No, sir, we are going in quest of a strange fountain, lately found out.


By whom?


My master, or the great discoverer, AMORPHVS.


Thou hast well entitled him, COS, for he will discover all he knows.


I, and a little more too, when the spirit is upon him.


O, the good travailing gentleman yonder has caused such a drought in the
presence, with reporting the wonders of this new water* that all the ladies,
and gallants, lie languishing upon the rushes, like so many pounded cattle in
the midst of harvest, sighing one to another, and gasping, as if each of them
expected a cock from the fountain, to be brought into his mouth: and
(without we return quickly) they are all (as a youth would say) no better then
a few trowts cast ashore, or a dish of eels in a sand-bagge.


Well then, you were best dispatch, and have a care of them. Come, CUPID, thou
and I'll go peruse this dry wonder.


SIt, let not this dis-countenance, or dis-gallant you a whit: you must not
sink under the first disaster. It is with your young grammatical courtier, as
with your neophyte-player, a thing usual to be daunted at the first presence,
or enter-view: you saw, there was HEDON, and ANAIDES, (far more practised
gallants then your self) who were both out, to comfort you. It is no disgrace,
no more, then for your adventurous reveller, to fall by some in-auspicious
chance in his galliard, or for some subtle politic, to vnder-take the
bastinado, that the state might think worthily of him, and respect him as a
man well beaten to the world. What! hath your taylor provided the property
(we spake of) at your chamber, or no?


I think he has.


Nay (I entreat you) be not so flat, and melancholic. Erect your mind: you
shall redeem this with the courtship I will teach you against afternoon.
Where eat you to day?


Where you please, sir, any where, I.


Come, let us go and taste some light dinner, a dish of sliced c^uiare, or so,
and after, you shall practise an hour at your lodging, some few forms that I
have recalled. If you had but so far gathered your spirits to you, as to have
taken up a rush (when you were out) and wagg'd it thus, or clensd your teeth
with it: or but turned aside, and feigned some business to whisper with your
page, till you had recovered your self, or but found some slight stain in
your stocking, or any other pretty invention (so it had been sudden,) you
might have come off with a most clear, and courtly grace.


A poison of all, I think I was forespoke, I.


No, I must tell you, you are not audacious enough, you must frequent
ordinaries, a month more, to initiate your self: In which time, it will not
be amiss, if (in private) you keep good your acquaintance with CRITES, or
some other, of his poor coat; visit his lodging secretly, and often: become
an earnest suitor to hear some of his labours.


O JOVE! sir, I could never get him to read a line to me.


You must then wisely mix your self in rank, with such, as you know can;
and, as your ears do meet with a new phrase, or an acute jest, take it in: a
quick nimble memory will lift it away, and, at your next public meal, it is
your own.


But I shall never utter it perfectly, sir.


No matter, let it come lame. In ordinary talk you shall play it away, as you
do your light crowns at primero: It will pass.


I shall attempt, sir.


Do. It is your shifting age for wit, and I assure you, men must be prudent.
After this, you may to court, and there fall in, first with the wayting-woman,
then with the lady. Put case they do retain you there, as a fit property, to
hire coaches some pair of months, or so; or to read them asleep in afternoones
upon some pretty pamphlet, to breathe you; why, it shall in time imbolden you
to some farther archivement: In the interim, you may fashion your self to be
careless, and impudent. --


How if they would have me to make verses? I heard Hedon spoke to for some.


Why, you must prove the aptitude of your Genius; if you find none, you must
harken out a vein, and buy: provided you pay for the silence, as for the
work. Then you may securely call it your own.


Yes, and I'll give out my acquaintance with all the best writers, to
countenance me the more.


Rather seem not to know them, it is your best. I. Be wise, that you never so
much as mention the name of one, nor remember it mentioned, but if they be
offered to you in discourse, shake your light head, make between a sad and a
smiling face, pity some, rail at all, and commend your self: 't is your
only safe, and unsuspected course. Come, you shall look back upon the court
again to day, and be restored to your colours: I do now partly aim at the
cause of your repulse -- (which was omenous indeed) for as you enter at the
door, there is opposed to you the frame of a woolfe in the hangings, which
(surprising your eye suddenly) gave a false alarm to the heart; and that was
it called your blood out of your face, and so routed the whole rank of your
spirits: I beseech you labour to forget it. And remember (as I inculcated to
you before, for your comfort) HEDON, and ANAIDES.


HArt, was there ever so prosperous an invention thus unluckily perverted, and
spoiled by a whore-sonne booke-worme, a candle-waster?


Nay, be not impatient, HEDON.


S'light, I would fain know his name.


Hang him, poor grogran-rascall, pray thee think not of him: I'll send for
him to my lodging, and have him blanketted when thou wilt, man.


By gods so; I would thou could. Look, here he comes. Laugh at him, laugh
at him, ha, ha, ha.


Fough, he smells all lamp-oyle, with studying by candle-light.


How confidently he went by us, and carelessly! never moved! nor stirred at any
thing! did you observe him?


I, a pox on him, let him go, dormouse: he is in a dream now. He has no
other time to sleep, but thus, when he walks abroad, to take the air.


Gods precious, this afflicts me more then all the rest, that we should so
particularly direct our hate, and contempt against him, and he to carry it
thus without wound, or passion! 'tis insufferable.


S'lid, (my dear envy) if thou but say the word now, I'll undo him
eternally for thee.


How, sweet ANAIDES?


Mary half a score of us get him in (one night) and make him pawn his wit for
a supper.


Away, thou hast such unseasonable jests. By this heaven, I wonder at nothing
more then our gentlemen-vshers, that will suffer a piece of serge, or
perpetuana, to come into the presence: me thinks they should (out of their
experience) better distinguish the silken disposition of courtiers, then to let
such terrible coorse rags mix with us, able to fret any smooth or gentile
society to the threads with their rubbing devices.


Unless 'twere Lent, Ember weeks, or Fasting days, when the place is most
penuriously empty of all other good outsides. Dam' me, if I should adventure
on his company once more, without a suit of buff, to defend my wit; he does
nothing but stab the slave: how mischievously he crossed thy device of the
prophecy there? And MORIA, she comes without her muffe too, and there my
invention was lost.


Well, I am resolved what I'll do.


What, my good spirituous spark?


Mary, speak all the venom I can of him; and poison his reputation in every
place, where I come.


Before god, most courtly.


And if I chance to be present where any question is made of his
sufficiencies, or of any thing he hath done private, or public, I'll censure it
slightly, and ridiculously. --


At any hand beware of that, so thou may draw thine own judgment in
suspect. No, I'll instruct thee what thou shalt do, and by a safer means:
Approve any thing thou hear of his, to the received opinion of it; but if it
be extraordinary, give it from him to some other, whom thou more particularly
affect'st. That's the way to plague him, and he shall never come to defend
himself. S'lud, I'll give out, all he does is dictated from other men, and
swear it too (if thou'lt ha'mee) and that I know the time, and place where he
stole it, though my soul be guilty of no such thing; and that I think, out
of my heart, he hates such barren shifts: yet to do thee a pleasure, and him
a disgrace, I'll dam'my self, or do any thing.


Gramercies, my dear devil: we'll put it seriously in practice, ysaith.


Do, good detraction, do, and I the while
Shall shake thy spite off with a careless smile.
Poor piteous gallants! What lean idle sleights
Their thoughts suggest to flatter their starved hopes?
As if I knew not how to entertain
These straw-deuices: but, of force, must yield
To the weak stroke of their calumnious tongues.
What should I care what every dor doth buzz
In credulous cares? it is a crown to me,
That the best judgements can report me wronged;
Them liars; and their slanders impudent.
Perhaps (upon the rumour of their speeches)
Some grieved friend will whisper to me, CRITES,
Men speak ill of thee; so they be ill men,
If they spake worse, 'twere better: for of such
To be dispraised, is the most perfect praise.
What can his censure hurt me, whom the world
Hath censured vile before me? If good CHRESTVS,
EVTHVS, or PHRONIMVS, had spoke the words,
They would have moved me, and I should have called
My thoughts, and actions, to a strict account
Upon the hearing: But when I remember,
'Tis HEDON, and ANAIDES: alas, then,
I think but what they are, and am not stirred.
The one, a light voluptuous reveller,
The other a strange arrogating puff,
Both impudent, and ignorant enough;
That talk (as they are wont) not as I merit:
Traduce by custom, as most dogs do bark,
Do nothing out of judgement, but disease,
Speak ill, because they never could speak well.
And who'ld be angry with this race of creatures?
What wise physician have we ever seen
Moved with a frantic man? the same affects
That he doth bear to his sick patient,
Should a right mind carry to such as these:
And I do count it a most rare revenge,
That I can thus (with such a sweet neglect)
Pluck from them all the pleasure of their malice.
For that's the mark of all their inginous drifts,
To wound my patience, howsoe're they seem
To aim at other objects: which if missed,
Their enui's like an arrow, shot upright,
That, in the fall, indangers their own heads.

WHat, CRITES! where have you drawn forth the day?
You have not visited your jealous friends?

Where I have seen (most honoured ARETE,)
The strangest pageant, fashioned like a court,
(At least I dream't I saw it) so diffused,
So painted, pied, and full of rainbow strains,
As never yet (either by time, or place)
Was made the food to my distasted sense:
Nor can my weak imperfect memory
Now render half the forms unto my tongue,
That were conuolu'd within this thrifty room.
Here, stalks me by a proud, and spangled sir,
That looks three hand-fuls higher then his fore-top;
Savours himself alone, is only kind
And loving to himself: one that will speak
More dark, and doubtful then six oracles;
Salutes a friend, as if he had a stitch,
Is his own chronicle, and scarce can eat
For registering himself: is waited on
By mimiques, jesters, pandars, parasites,
And other such like prodigies of men.
He past, appears some mincing marmoset
Made all of clothes, and face; his limbs so set
As if they had some voluntary act
Without mans motion, and must move just so
In spite of their creation: one that weighs
His breath between his teeth, and dares not smile
Beyond a point, for fear t'vnstarch his look;
Hath trauell'd to make legs, and seen the cringe
Of several courts, and courtiers; knows the time
Of giving titles, and of taking walls;
Hath read court-common-places; made them his:
Studied the grammar of state, and all the rules
Each formal usher in that politic school,
Can teach a man. A third comes giving nods
To his repenting creditors, protests
To weeping suitors, takes the coming gold
Of insolent, and base ambition,
That hourly rubs his dry, and itchie palms:
Which grip't, like burning coals, he hurles away
Into the laps of bawds, and buffons mouths.
With him there meets some subtle PROTEVS, one
Can change, and vary with all forms he sees;
Be any thing but honest; serves the time;
Hovers betwixt two factions, and explores
The drifts of both; which (with cross face) he bears
To the divided heads, and is received
With mutual grace of either: one that dares
Do deeds worthy the hurdle, or the wheel,
To be thought some body; and is (in sooth)
Such as the Satyrist points truly forth,
That only to his crimes owes all his worth.

You tell us wonders, CRITES.

This is nothing.
There stands a Neophyte glazing of his face,
Pruning his clothes, perfuming of his hair,
Against his idol enters; and repeats
(Like an imperfect prologue, at third music)
His part of speeches, and confederate jests,
In passion to himself. Another swears
His Scene of courtship over; bids, believe him,
Twenty times, ^re they will; anon, doth seem
As he would kiss away his hand in kindness;
Then walks of melancholic, and stands wreathed,
As he were pinned up to the arras, thus.
A third is most in action, swims, and friskes,
Plays with his mistress paps, salutes her pumps,
Adores her hems, her skirts, her knots, her curls,
Will spend his patrimony for a garter,
Or the least feather in her bounteous fan.
A fourth, he only comes in for a mute:
Divides the act with a dumb show, and exit.
Then must the ladies laugh, straight comes their Scene,
A sixth times worse confusion then the rest.
Where you shall hear one talk of this mans eye;
Another, of his lip; a third, his nose;
A fourth commend his leg; a fifth his foot;
A sixth his hand; and every one a limb:
That you would think the poor distorted gallant
Must there expire. Then fall they in discourse
Of tires, and fashions, how they must take place,
Where they may kiss, and whom, when to sit down,
And with what grace to rise; if they salute,
What curtsy they must use: such cob-web stuff,
As would enforce the commonest sense abhor
The Arachnean workers.

Patience, gentle CRITES.
This knot of spiders will be soon dissolved,
And all their webs swept out of CYNTHIAS court,
When once her glorious deity appears,
And but presents it self in her full light:
Till when, go in, and spend your hours with us
Your honoured friends, TIME, and PHRONESIS,
In contemplation of our goddess name.
Think on some sweet, and choice invention, now,
Worthy her serious, and illustrous eyes,
That from the merit of it we may take
Desired occasion to prefer your worth,
And make your service known to CYNTHIA.
It is the pride of ARETE to grace
Her studious lovers; and (in scorn of time,
Envy, and ignorance) to lift their state
Above a vulgar height. True happiness
Consists not in the multitude of friends,
But in the worth, and choice. Nor would I have
Virtue a popular regard pursue:
Let them be good that love me, though but few.

I kiss thy hands, divinest ARETE,
And vow my self to thee, and CYNTHIA.

A Little more forward: So, sir. Now go in, dis-cloke your self, and come
forth. Taylor, bestow thy absence upon us; and be not prodigal of this
secret, but to a dear customer. 'Tis well entend, sir. Stay, you come on too
fast; your pace is too impetuous. Imagine this to be the palace of your
pleasure, or place, where your lady is pleased to be seen. First, you present
your self, thus: and spying her, you fall off, and walk some two turns; in
which time, it is to be supposed, your passion hath sufficiently whited your
face: then (stifling a sigh or two, and closing your lips) with a trembling
boldness, and bold terror, you advance your self forward. Prove thus much, I
pray you.


Yes, sir, (pray JOVE I can light on it) Here, I come in, you say, and present
my self?


Good.


And then I spy her, and walk off?


Very good.


Now, sir, I stifle, and advance forward?


Trembling.


Yes, sir, trembling: I shall do it better when I come to it. And what must I
speak now?


Mary, you shall say: Dear beauty, or, sweet honour (or by what other title
you please to remember her) me thinks you are melancholy. This is, if she be
alone now, and discompanied.


Well, sir, I'll enter again; her title shall be, My dear LINDABRIDES.


LINDABRIDES?


I, sir, the Emperor ALICANDROES daughter, and the Prince MERIDIANS sister (in
the Knight of the Sun) she should have been married to him, but that the
Princess CLARIDIANA --


O, you betray your reading.


Nay, sir, I have read history, I am a little humanitian. Interrupt me not,
good sir. My dear LINDABRIDES, My dear LINDABRIDES, My dear LINDABRIDES, me
thinks you are melancholy.


I, and take her by the rosie-finger'd hand.


Must I so? O, my dear LINDABRIDES, me thinks you are melancholy.


Or thus, sir. All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique,
rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts attend this dear
beauty.


Believe me, that's pretty. All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports,
sweet musique, rich fare, brave attires, soft beds, and silken thoughts, attend
this dear beauty.


And then, offering to kiss her hand, if she shall coily recoil, and signify
your repulse; you are to re-enforce your self, with, More then most fair
lady, let not the rigour of your just disdain thus coursly censure of your
servants zeal: and, withal, protest her, to be the only, and absolute
unparalleled creature you do adore and admire, and respect, and reverence, in
this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.


This is hard, by my faith. I'll begin it all, again.


Do so, and I will act it for your lady.


Will you vouchsafe, sir? All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports,
sweet musique, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts attend
this dear beauty.


So, sir, pray you away.


More then most fair lady, let not the rigour of your just disdain, thus
courtly censure of your servants zeal, I protest, you are the only, and
absolute, vnapparelled --


Vnparalelld.


Vnparalelld creature, I do adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence, in
this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.


This is, if she abide you. But now, put case she should be passant when you
enter, as thus: you are to frame your gate thereafter, and call upon her,
Lady, Nymph, Sweet refuge, Star^e of our court. Then if she be guardant,
here: you are to come on, and (laterally disposing your self) swear, by her
blushing and well coloured cheek, the bright die of her hair, her mori teeth
(though they be ebony) or some such white, and innocent oath, to induce you. If
reguardant, then maintain your station, brisk, and irpe, show the supple
motion of your plian^ body, but (in chief) of your knee, and hand, which
cannot but arride her proud humour exceedingly.


I conceive you, sir, I shall perform all these things in good time, I doubt
not, they do so hit me.


Well, sir, I am your lady; make use of any of these beginnings, or some other
out of your own invention: and prove, how you can hold up, and follow it. Say,
say.


Yes, sir, my dear LINDABRIDES. --


No, you affect that LINDABRIDES too much. And (let me tell you) it is not so
courtly. Your pedant should provide you some parcels of french, or some pretty
commodity of italian to commence with, if you would be exotic, and
exquisite.


Yes, sir, he was at my lodging the other morning, I gave him a doublet.


Double your benevolence, and give him the hose too, clothe you his body, he
will help to apparel your mind. But now, see what your proper GENIVS can
perform alone, without adiection of any other MINERVA.


I comprehend you, sir.


I do stand you, sir: fall back to your first place. Good, passing well: Very
properly pursued.


Beautiful, ambiguous, and sufficient lady, what! are you all alone?


We would be, sir, if you would leave us.


I am at your beauties appointment, bright angel; but --


What but?


No harm, more then most fair feature.


That touch relished well.


But, I protest --


And why should you protest?


For good will (dear esteemed Madam) and I hope, your ladyship will so
conceive of it: And will, in time, return from your disdain,
And rue the suffrance of our friendly pain.



O, that piece was excellent! if you could pick out more of these
play-particles, and (as occasion shall salute you) embroider, or damask your
discourse with them, persuade your soul, it would most judiciously commend
you. Come, this was a well discharged, and auspicious bout. Prove the second.


Lady, I cannot ruffle it in red and yellow.


Why, if you can revel it in white, sir, 'tis sufficient.


Say you so, sweet lady? Lan, tede, de, de, de, dant, dant, dant, dante, c. No
(in good faith) Madame, whosoever told your ladyship so, abused you; but I
would be glad to meet your ladyship in a measure.


Me, sir? belike you measure me by your self, then?


Would I might, fair feature.


And what were you the better, if you might?


The better it please you to ask, fair lady.


Why, this was ravishing, and most acutely continued. Well, spend not your
humour too much, you have now competently exercised your conceit: This (once or
twice a day) will render you an accomplished, elaborate, and well leveled
gallant. Convey in your courting-stock, we will (in the heat of this) go
visit the Nymphs chamber.


I Would this water would arrive once, our travailing friend so commended to us.


So would I, for he has left all us in travail with expectation of it.


Pray JOVE, I never rise from this couch, if ever I thirsted more for a thing,
in my whole time of being a courtier.


Nor I, I'll be sworn: The very mention of it sets my lips in a worse heate,
then if he had sprinkled them with MERCVRY. Reach me the glass, sirrah.


Here, lady.


They do not peel, sweet Charge, do they?


Yes, a little, Guardian.


O, 'tis an eminent good sign. Ever when my lips do so, I am sure to have
some delicious good drink, or other approaching.


Mary, and this may be good for us ladies: for (it seems) tis far-fet by their
stay.


My palate for yours (dear Honour) it shall prove most elegant, I warrant you:
O, I do fancy this gear that's long a coming, with an unmeasurable strain.


Pray thee sit down, PHILAVTIA, that rebat^ becomes thee singularly.


Is't not quaint?


Yes faith. Me thinks, thy servant HEDON is nothing so obsequious to thee, as
he was wont to be; I know not how, he's grown out of his garb a late, he's
warpt.


In trunesse, and so me thinks too; he's much converted.


Tut, let him be what he will, 'tis an animal I dream not of. This tire (me
thinks) makes me look very ingeniously, quick, and spirited, I should be some
LAVRA, or some DELIA, me thinks.


As I am wise (fair Honours) that title she gave him, to be her Ambition,
spoiled him: Before, he was the most propitious and observant young novice --


No, no, you are the whole heaven awry, Guardian: 'tis the swaggering
coach-horse ANAIDES, draws with him there, has been the diuerter of him.


For CUPIDS sake, speak no more of him; would I might never dare to look in a
mirror again, if I respect ere a marmaset of them al, otherwise, then I would
a feather, or my shittle-cock, to make sport with, now and then.


Come, sit down; troth (and you be good Beauties) let's run over them all
now: Which is the properst man amongst them? I say, the travailer, AMORPHVS.


O, fie on him, he looks like a venetian trumpeter, in the battle of
Lepanto, in the gallery yonder; and speaks to the tune of a country lady,
that comes ever in the rereward, or train of a fashion.


I should have judgment in a feature, sweet Beauties.


A body would think so, at these years.


And I prefer another now, far before him, a million at least.


Who might that be, Guardian?


Mary (fair Charge) ANAIDES.


ANAIDES! you talked of a tune PHILAVTIA, there's one speaks in a key: like
the opening of some Justices gate, or a poste-boies horne, as if his voice
feared an arrest for some ill words it should give, and were loath to come
forth.


I, and he has a very imperfect face.


Like a sea-monster, that were to ravish ANDROMEDA from the rock.


His hand's too great too, by at least a straws breadth


Nay, he has a worse fault then that, too.


A long heel?


That were a fault in a lady, rather then him: No, they say, he puts off the
calves of his legs, with his stockings, every night.


Out upon him: turn to another of the pictures, for loves sake. What says
ARGVRION? whom doo's she commend, before the rest?


I hope, I have instructed her sufficiently for an answer.


Troth, I made the motion to her ladyship for one to day, in the presence, but
it appeared she was other-waies furnished before: She would none.


Who was that, ARGVRION?


Mary, the poor plain gentleman, in the black, there.


Who, CRITES?


I, I, he. A fellow, that no body so much as looked upon, or regarded, and she
would have had me done him particular grace.


That was a true trick of your self, MORIA, to persuade ARGVRION, to affect
the scholer.


Tut, but she shall be no chuser for me. In good faith, I like the citizens
son there, ASOTVS, me thinks, none of them all come near him.


Not, HEDON?


HEDON, in troth no. HEDON'S a pretty slight courtier, and he wears his
clothes well, and sometimes in fashion; Mary, his face is but indifferent, and
he has no such excellent body. No, the other is a most delicate youth, a sweet
face, a straight body, a well proportioned leg and foot, a white hand, a
tender voice.


How now, ARGVRION?


O, you should have let her alone, she was bestowing a copy of him upon us.
Such a nose were enough to make me love a man, now.


And then his several colours he wears; wherein he flourishes changeably,
every day.


O, but his short hair, and his narrow eyes!


Why, she dotes more palpably upon him, then ere his father did upon her.


Believe me, the young gentleman deserves it. If she could dote more, 'twere
not amiss. He is an exceeding proper youth, and would have made a most neat
barber-surgeon, if he had been put to it in time.


Say you so? me thinks, he looks like a taylor already.


I, that had said on one of his customers suits. His face is like a squeezed
orange, or --


Well, ladies, jest on: the best of you both would be glad of such a servant.


I, I'll be sworn would they, though he be a little shame-fac'd.


Shame-fac'd, MORIA! out upon him. Your shame-fac'd servant is your only gull.


Go to, Beauties, make much of time, and place, and occasion, and
opportunity, and favourites, and things that belong to them, for I'll ensure
you, they will all relinquish; they cannot endure above another year; I know
it out of future experience: and therefore take exhibition, and warning. I was
once a reveller my self, and though I speak it (as mine own trumpet) I was
then esteemed --


The very march-pane of the court, I warrant you?


And all the gallants came about you like slyes, did they not?


Go to, they did somewhat, that's no matter now.


Nay, good MORIA, be not angry. Put case, that we four now had the grant
from IVNO, to wish our selves into what happy estate we could? what would you
wish to be, MORIA?


Who I? Let me see now. I would wish to be a wise woman, and know all the
secrets of court, city, and country. I would know what were done behind the
arras, what upon the stairs, what in the garden, what in the Nymphs chamber,
what by barge, what by coach. I would tel you which courtier were scabbed, and
which not; which lady had her own face to lie with her a-nights, which not;
who put off their teeth with their clothes in court, who their hair, who their
complexion; and in which box they put it. There should not a Nymph, or a
widow be got with child in the verge, but I would guess (within one or two,)
who was the right father: and in what month it was gotten; with what words;
and which way. I would tell you, which Madame loved a Monsieur, which a player,
which a page; who slept with her husband, who with her friend, who with her
gentleman-vsher, who with her horse-keeper, who with her monkey, and who with
all. Yes, and who jigg'd the cock too.


Fie, you'd tell all,


If I should wish now, it should be to have your tongue out. But what says
PHILAVTIA? who would she be?


Troth, the very same I am. Only I would wish my self a little more command,
and soueraignetie; that all the court were subject to my absolute beck, and
all things in it depending on my look; as if there were no other heaven, but
in my smile, nor other hell, but in my frown; that I might send for any man I
list, and have his head cut off, when I have done with him; or made an eunuch,
if he denied me: and if I saw a better face then mine own, I might have my
doctor to poison it. What would you wish, PHANTASTE?


Faith, I cannot (readily) tell you what* But (me thinks) I should wish my
self all manner of creatures. Now, I would be an empress; and by and by a
duchess; then a great lady of state; then one of your miscelany madams; then
a waiting-woman; then your citizens wife; then a course country gentlewoman;
then a deyrie maid; then a shepherds lass; then an empress again, or the
queen of fairies: And thus I would prove the vicissitudes, and whirl of
pleasures, about, and again. As I were a shepherdess, I would be piped and
sung too; as a deyrie wench, I would dance at may-poles, and make sillabubbes;
As a country gentlewoman, keep a good house, and come up to term, to see
motions; As a citizens wife, be troubled with a jealous husband, and put to
my shifts; (others miseries should be my pleasures) As a waiting-woman, I
would taste my ladies delights to her; As a miscellany madame invent new tyres,
and go visit courtiers; As a great lady, lye a bed, and have courtiers
visit me; As a duchess, I would keep my state: and as an empress, I'd
do any thing. And, in all these shapes, I would ever be follow'd with the
affections of all that see me. Mary, I my self would affect none; or if I
did, it should not be heartily, but so as I might save my self in them still,
and take pride in tormenting the poor wretches. Or, (now I think on it) I
would, for one year, wish my self one woman, but the richest, fairest, and
delicatest in a kingdom, the very center of wealth, and beauty, wherein all
lines of love should meet; and in that person I would prove all manner of
suitors, of all humours, and of all complexions, and never have any two of a
sort: I would see how Love (by the power of his object) could work inwardly
alike, in a choleric man, and a sanguine; in a melancholic, and a
phlegmatique; in a fool, and a wise man; in a clown, and a courtier; in a
valiant man, and a coward: and how he could vary outward, by letting this
gallant express himself in dumb gaze; another with sighing, and rubbing his
fingers; a third, with play-ends, and pitiful verses; a fourth, with stabbing
himself, and drinking healths, or writing languishing letters in his blood; a
fifth, in coloured ribbands, and good clothes; with this lord to smile, and
that lord to court, and the the other lord to do^e, and one lord to hang
himself. And then, I to have a book made of all this, which I would call the
book of humours, and every night read a little piece, ere I slept, and laugh
at it. Here comes HEDON.


Save you, sweet and clear beauties: By the spirit that moves in me, you are
all most pleasingly bestowed, ladies. Only, I can take it for no good omen, to
find mine Honour so dejected.


You need not fear, sir, I did of purpose humble my self against your
coming, to decline the pride of my ambition.


Fair Honour, Ambition dares not stoop; but if it be your sweet pleasure, I
shall lose that title, I will (as I am HEDON) apply my self to your bounties.


That were the next way to distitle my self of honour. O, no, rather be still
ambitious, I pray you.


I will be any thing that you please, whilst it pleases you to be your self,
lady. Sweet PHANTASTE, dear MORIA, most beautiful ARGVRION --


Farewell, HEDON.


ANAIDES, stay, whither go you?


S'light, what should I do here? and you engross them all for your own use,
'tis time for me to seek out.


I, engross them? Away, mischief, this is one of your extrauagantiests now,
because I began to ^alute them by their names --


Faith, you might have sp^rde us Madame Prudence, the Guardian there, though
you had more covetously aimed at the rest.


S'heart, take them all, man: what speak you to me of aiming, or covetous?


I, say you so? nay, then, have at them: ladies, here's one hath distinguished
you by your names already. It shall only become me, to ask, How you do?


Gods so, was this the design you trauaill'd with?


Who answers the brazen head? it spoke to some body.


Lady Wisdom, do you interpret for these puppets?


In truth, and sadness (Honours) you are in great offence for this, go too:
the gentleman (I'll vnder-take with him) is a man of fair living, and able to
maintain a lady in her two carroches a day, besides pages, munkeys, and
parachitos, with such attendants as she shall think meet for her turn, and
therefore there is more respect requirable, howsoever you seem to connive.
Hark you, sir, let me discourse a syllable with you. I am to say to you,
these ladies are not of that close, and open behaviour, as happily you may
suspend; their carriage is well known, to be such as it should be, both gentle
and extraordinary.


O, here comes the other pair.


THat was your fathers love, the Nymph ARGVRION. I would have you direct all
your courtship thither, if you could but endear your self to her affection,
you were eternally en-gallanted.


In truth, sir? pray PHOEBVS I prove fauour-some in her fair eyes.


All divine mixture, and increase of beauty to this bright bevy of ladies; and
to the male-courtiers, complement, and courtesy.


In the behalf of the males, I gratify you, AMORPHVS.


And I, of the females.


Succinctly returned. I do vale to both your thanks, and kiss them: but
primarily to yours, most ingenious, acute, and polite lady.


Gods my life, how he does all to be qualify her! ingenious, acute, and
polite? as if there were not others in place as ingenious, acute, and polite,
as she.


Yes, but you must know, lady, he cannot speak out of a dictionary method.


Sit down, sweet AMORPHVS: When will this water come, think you?


It cannot now belong, fair lady.


Now observe, MERCVRY.


How? most ambiguous beauty? love you? that I will by this hand-kercher.


S'lid, he draws his oaths out of his pocket.


But, will you be constant?


Constant, Madam? I will not say for constantnesse, but by this purse (which I
would be loath to swear by, unless 'twere embroidered) I protest (more then
most fair lady) you are the only, absolute, and vnparalelld creature, I do
adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence in this court, corner of the
world, or kingdom: Me thinks you are melancholy.


Does your heart speak all this?


Say you? --


O, he is groping for another oath.


Now, by this watch (I made how forward the day is) I do vnfeignedly vow my
self (s'light 'tis deeper then I took it, past five) yours entirely addicted,
Madame.


I require no more, dearest ASOTVS, hence-forth let me call you mine, and in
remembrance of me, vouchsafe to wear this chain, and this diamond.


O god, sweet lady!


There are new oaths for him: what? doth HERMES taste no alteration, in all
this?


Yes, thou hast struck ARGVRION enamoured on ASOTVS, the thinks.


Alas, no; I am no-body, I: I can do nothing in this disguise.


But thou hast not wounded any of the rest, CUPID?


Not yet: it is enough that I have begun so prosperously.


Nay, these are nothing to the gems I will hourly bestow upon thee: be but
faithful, and kind to me, and I will lade thee with my richest bounties:
behold, here my bracelets, from mine arms.


Not so, good lady, By this diamond.


Take them, wear them: my jewels, chain of pearl, pendants, all I have.


Nay then, by this pearl, you make me a wanton.


Shall not she answer for this, to maintain him thus in swearing?


O, no, there is a way to wean him from this, the gentleman may be reclaimed.


I, if you had the ayring of his apparel, couss', I think.


Loving? 'twere pity I should be living else, believe me. Save you, sir. Save
you, sweet lady. Save you, Monsieur ANAIDES. Save you, dear Madame.


Dost thou know him that saluted thee, HEDON?


No, some idle FVNGOSO, that hath got above the cup-board, since yesterday.


S'lud, I never saw him till this morning, and he salutes me as familiarly, as
if we had known together, since the deluge, or the first year of Troy-action.


A most right-handed, and auspicious encounter. Confine your self to your
fortunes.


For sports sake, let's have some riddles, or purposes; hough.


No faith, your prophecies are best, the the other are stale.


Prophecies? we cannot all sit in at them; we shall make a confusion. No; what
called you that we had in the fore-noone?


Substantiues, and Adiectiues. Is't not HEDON?


I, that, who begins?


I have thought; speak your Adiectiues, sirs.


But do not you change, then?


Not I, who says?


Odoriferous.


Popular.


Humble.


White-liuer'd.


Barbarous.


Pythagoricall.


Yours, Signior.


What must I do, sir?


Give forth your Adiectiue, with the rest; as, prosperous, good, fair, sweet,
well --


Any thing, that hath not been spoken.


Yes, sir: well-spoken, shall be mine.


What? have you all done?


I..


Then the Substantiue is Breeches. Why odoriferous Breeches, Guardian?


Odoriferous, because odoriferous; that which contains most variety of
savour, and smell, we say is most odoriferous: now, Breeches I presume are
incident to that variety, and therefore odoriferous Breeches.


Well, we must take it howsoever, who's next? PHILAVTIA.


Popular.


Why popular Breeches?


Mary, that is, when they are not content to be generally noted in court, but
will press forth on common stages, and brokers stalls, to the public view of
the world.


Good: why humble Breeches? ARGVRION.


Humble, because they use to be sate upon; besides, if you tie them not up,
their property is to fall down about your heals.


She has worn the breeches, it seems, which have done so.


But why white-liuer'd?


Why? 'shart, are not their linings white? besides, when they come in
swaggering company, and will pocket up any thing, may they not properly be
said to be white-liuer'd?


O, yes, we must not deny it. And why barbarous, HEDON?


Barbarous, because commonly, when you have worn your breeches sufficiently,
you give them to your Barber.


That's good: but now Pythagoricall?


I, AMORPHVS. Why Pythagoricall Breeches?


O, most kindly of all, 'tis a conceit of that fortune, I am bold to hug my
brain for.


How is't, exquisite AMORPHVS?


O, I am rapt with it, 'tis so fit, so proper, so happy --


Nay, do not rack us thus?


I never truly relished my self, before. Give me your ears. Breeches
Pythagoricall, by reason of their transmigration, into several shapes.


Most rare, in sweet troth. Mary, this young gentleman, for his well-spoken --


I, why well-spoken Breeches?


Well-spoken? mary well-spoken, because -- whatsoever they speak, is well
taken; and whatsoever is well taken, is well-spoken.


Excellent! believe me.


Not so, ladies, neither.


But why Breeches, now?


Breeches, quasi beare-riches; when a gallant bears all his riches in his
breeches:


Most fortunately etymologiz'd.


Nay, we have another sport before this, of A thing done, and Who did it, c.


I, good PHANTASTE, let's have that: Distribute the places.


Why, I imagine, A thing done; HEDON thinks, Who did it; MORIA, With what it
was done; ANAIDES, Where it was done; ARGVRION, When it was done; AMORPHVS, For
what cause it was done; you PHILAVTIA, What followed upon the doing of it; and
this gentleman, Who would have done it better. What? is't conceived about?


Yes, yes.


The speak you, sir. Who would have done it better?


How! does it begin at me?


Yes, sir: This play is called the Crab, it goes backward.


May I not name my self?


If you please, sir, and dare abide the venture of it.


Then, I would have done it better, what ever it is.


No doubt on it, sir: a good confidence. What followed upon the act, PHILAVTIA?


A few heate drops, and a months mirth.


For what cause, AMORPHVS?


For the delight of ladies.


When, ARGVURION?


Last progress.


Where, ANAIDES?


Why, in a pair of pained slops.


With what, MORIA?


With a glitter.


Who, HEDON?


A travailer.


Then, The thing done was, An oration was made. Rehearse. An oration was made.


By a travailer.


With a glitter.


In a pair of pained slops,


Last progress.


For the delight of ladies.


A few heat drops, and a months mirth followed.


And, this silent gentleman would have done it better.


This was not so good, now.


In good faith, these unhappy pages would be whipped, for staying thus.


Beshrew my hand, and my heart, else.


I do wonder at their protraction!


Pray VENVS, my whore have not discovered her self to the rascally hoyes, and
that be the cause of their stay.


I must suit my self with another page: this idle PROSAITES will never be
brought to wait well.


Sir, I have a kinsman I could willingly wish to your service, if you would
deign to accept of him.


And I shall be glad (most sweet lady) to embrace him: where is he?


I can fetch him, sir, but I would be loath to make you turn away your other
page.


You shall not, most sufficient lady, I will keep both: pray you lets go see
him.


Whither goes my love?


I'll return presently, I go but to see a page, with this lady.


As sure as fate, 't is so; she has opened all: A pox of all cockatrices.
Dam'me, if she have played loose with me, I'll cut her throat, within a hairs
breadth, so it may be healed again.


What, is he jealous of his Hermaphrodite?


O, I, this will be excellent sport.


PHANTASTE! ARGVRION! what? you are suddenly struck, me thinks! for loves
sake let's have some music, till they come. Ambition, reach the lyra, I pray
you.


Any thing to which my Honour shall direct me.


Come, AMORPHVS, cheer up PHANTASTE.


It shall be my pride, fair lady, to attempt all that is in my power. But
here is an instrument that (alone) is able to infuse soul in the most
melancholic, and dull disposed creature upon earth. O! let me kiss thy
fair knees. Beauteous ears attend it.


Will you have the Kiss, Honour?


I, good Ambition.

O, That joy so soon should waste!
or so sweet a bliss
as a kiss,
Might not for ever last!
So sugared, so melting, so soft, so delicious,
The dew that lies on roses,
When the morn her self descloses,
is not so precious.
O, rather then I would it smother,
Were I to taste such another;
It should be my wishing
That I might dye kissing.

I made this ditty, and the note to it, upon a kiss that my Honour gave me;
how like you it, sir?


A pretty air, in general, I like it well: but in particular, your long
die-note did arride me most, but it was somewhat too long. I can show one,
almost of the same nature, but much before it and not so long, in a composition
of mine own. I think I have both the note, and ditty about me.


Pray you, sir, see.


Yes, there is the note; and all the parts if I mis-thinke not. I will read the
ditty to your beauties here, but first I am to make you familiar with the
occasion, which presents it self thus. Upon a time, going to take my leave of
the Emperor, and kiss his great hands; there being then present, the kings of
France, and Arragon, the dukes of Sauoy, Florence* Orbeance, Bourbon,
Brunswicke, the Lantgraue, Count Palatine, all which had severally feasted me;
besides, infinite more of inferior persons, as Counts and others it was my
chance the Emperor detained by some exorbitant affair) to wait him the fifth
part of an hour, or much near it. In which time (retiring my self into a
bay-window) the beauteous lady ANNABELL, niece to the Empress, and sister to
the King of Arragon, who having never before eyed me, (but only heard the
common report of my virtue, learning, and travail) fell into that extremity
of passion, for my love, that she there immediately swouned: physicians were
sent for, she had to her chamber, so to her bed; where (languishing some few
days) after many times calling upon me, with my name in her lips, she expired.
As that (I must mourningly say) is the only fault of my fortune, that, as it
hath ever been my hap to be sewed to, by all ladies, and beauties, where I
have come, so, I never yet sojourned, or rested in that place, or part of the
world, where some high-borne admirable fair feature died not for my love.


O, the sweet power of travail! are you guilty of this, CUPID?


No, MERCVRIE, and that his page (COS) knows, if he were here present to be
sworn.


But, how doth this draw on the ditty, sir?


O, she is too quick with him; he hath not deuis'd that yet.


Mary, some hour before she departed, she bequeathed to me this glove; which
golden legacy, the Emperor himself took care to send after me, in six
coaches, covered all with black vellet, attended by the state of his empire;
all which he freely presented me with, and I reciprocally (out of the same
bounty) gave to the lords that brought it: only reserving the gift of the
deceased lady, upon which I composde this ode, and set it to my most affected
instrument, the lyra.

THou more then most sweet glove,
Unto my more sweet love,
Suffer me to store with kisses
This empty lodging, that now misses
The pure rosie hand, that ware thee,
Whiter then the kid, that bare thee.
Thou art soft, but that was softer;
CUPIDS self hath kissed it ofter,
Then e're he did his mothers doves,
Supposing her the Queen of loves,
That was thy Mistress,
Best of gloves.

Blasphemy, blasphemy, CUPID.


I, I'll revenge it time enough; HERMES.


Good AMORPHVS, let's hear it sing.


I care not to admit that, since it pleases PHILAVTIA to request it.


Here, sir.


Nay, play it, I pray you, you do well, you do well -- How like you it, sir?


Very well in troth.


But very well? O, you are a mere mammothrept in judgement then. Why, do you
not observe how excellently the ditty is affected in every place? that I do
not marry a word of short quantity to a long note? nor an ascending syllable
to a descending tone? Besides, upon the word (best) there, you see how I do
enter with an odd minnum, and drive it thorough the brief, which no intelligent
Musician (I know) but will affirm to be very rare, extraordinary, and
pleasing.


And yet not fit to lament the death of a lady, for all this.


Tut, here be they will swallow any thing.


Pray you let me have a copy of it, AMORPHVS.


And me too, in troth, I like it exceedingly.


I have denied it to princes, nevertheless to you (the true female twins of
perfection) I am won, to depart withal.


I hope I shall have my Honours copy.


You are ambitious in that, HEDON.


How now, ANAIDES! what is it hath conjured up this distemperature in the
circle of your face?


S'lood, what have you to do? A pox upon your filthy travailing face, hold
your tongue.


Nay, dost hear, mischief?


Away, muske-cat.


I say to thee, thou art rude, debauch't, impudent, coorse, impolisht, a
frapler, and base.


Heart of my father, what a strange alteration has half a years haunting of
ordinaries wrought in this fellow! that came with a tuss-taffa^a jerkin to
town but the other day, and a pair of penniless hose, and now he is turned
HERCVLES, he wants but a club.


Sir, you with the pencil on your chin; I will garter my hose with your
guts, and that shall be all.


S'lid, what rare fireworks be here? flash, flash.


What's the matter HEDON? can you tell?


Nothing, but that he lacks crowns, and thinks we'll lend him some, to be
friends.


Come, sweet lady, in good truth I'll have it, you shall not deny me. MORVS,
persuade your aunt I may have her picture, by any means.


Yes, sir: good aunt now, let him have it, he will use me the better, if you
love me, do, good aunt.


Well, tell him, he shall have it.


Master, you shall have it, she says.


Shall I? thank her, good page.


What, has he entertained the fool?


I, heel wait close, you shall see, though the beggar hang off, awhile.


Aunt, my master thanks you.


Call him hither.


Yes, master


Yes, in verity, and gave me this purse, and he has promised me a most fine
dog; which he will have drawn, with my picture, he says: and desires most
vehemently to be known to your ladyships.


Call him hither, 'tis good groping such a gull.


Master ASOTVS, master ASOTVS.


For loves sake, let me go: you see, I am called to the ladies.


Wilt thou forsake me then?


God so, what would you have me do?


Come hither, master ASOTVS. I do ensure your ladyships, he is a gentleman of
a very worthy desert: and of a most bountiful nature. You must show and
insinuate your self responsible, and equiualent now to my commendment. Good
Honours, grace him.


I protest (more then most fair ladies) I do wish all variety of divine
pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds,
and silken thoughts attend these fair beauties. Will it please your ladyship
to wear this chain of pearl, and this diamond, for my sake?


O.


And you, Madame, this jewel, and pendants.


O.


We know not how to deserve these bounties, out of so slight merit, ASOTVS.


No, in faith, but there's my glove for a favour.


And soon, after the revels, I will bestow a garter on you.


O Lord, ladies! it is more grace then ever I could have hoped, but that it
pleases your ladyships to extend. I protest, it is enough, that you but take
knowledge of my -- if your ladyships want embroidered gowns, tires of any
fashion, rebatu's, jewels, or carkanets, any thing whatsoever, if you
vouchsafe to accept.


And for it, they will help you to shooe-ties, and devices.


I cannot utter my self (dear beauties) but, you can conceive --


O.


Sir, we will acknowledge your service, doubt not: henceforth, you shall be no
more ASOTVS to us, but our gold-finch, and we your cages.


O VENVS, Madams! how shall I deserve this? if I were but made acquainted with
HEDON, now, I'll try: pray you away.


How he prays Money to go away from him!


AMORPHVS, a word with you: here's a watch I would bestow upon you, pray you
make me known to that gallant.


That I will, sir. Monsieur HEDON, I must entreat you to exchange knowledge
with this gentleman.


'Tis a thing (next to the water we expect) I thirst after, sir* Good Monsieur
ASOTVS.


Good Monsieur HEDON, I would be glad to be loved of men of your rank, and
spirit, I protest. Please you to accept this pair of bracelets, sir: they are
not worth the bestowing --


O, HERCVLES, how the gentleman purchases! this must needs bring ARGVRION to a
consumption.


Sir, I shall never stand in the merit of such bounty, I fear.


O, VENVS, sir; your acquaintance shall be sufficient. And if at any time you
need my bill, or my bond.


O, O.


Help the lady there.


Gods dear, ARGVRION! Madame, how do you?


Sick.


Have her forth, and give her air.


I come again strait, ladies.


Well, I doubt, all the physique he has will scarce recover her: she's too
far spent.


O Here's the water come: fetch glasses, page.


Heart of my body, here's a coil indeed, with your jealous humours. Nothing
but whore, and bitch, and all the villainous swaggering names you can think on?
S'lid, take your bottle, and put it in your guts for me, I'll see you poxt ere
I follow you any longer.


Nay, good punk, sweet rascal; dam' me, if I am jealous now.


That's true indeed: pray let's go.


What's the matter, there?


S'light, he has me upon intergatories, (nay, my mother shall know how you use
me) where I have been? and, why I should stay so long? and, how is't possible?
and withal, calls me at his pleasure, I know not how many cockatrices, and
things.


In truth and sadness, these are no good epitaphs, ANAIDES, to bestow upon any
gentlewoman; and (I'll ensure you) if I had known you would have dealt thus
with my daughter, she should never have fancied you so deeply, as she has
done. Go too.


Why, do you hear, mother MORIA. Heart!


Nay, I pray you, sir, do not swear.


Swear? why? S'lood, I have sworn before now, I hope. Both you and your
daughter mistake me. I have not honoured ARETE, that is held the worthiest lady
in court (next to CYNTHIA) with half that observance, and respect, as I have
done her in private, howsoever outwardly I have carried my self careless, and
negligent. Come, you are a foolish, punk, and know not when you are well
imploi'd. Kiss me, come on. Do it, I say.


Nay, indeed I must confess, she is apt to misprision. But I must have you
leave it, minion.


How now, ASOTVS? how does the lady?


Faith, ill. I have left my page with her, at her lodging.


O, here's the rarest water that ever was tasted: fill him some.


What! has my master a new page?


Yes, a kinsman of the lady MORIAS: you must wait better now, or you are
casheer'd, PROSAITES.


Come, gallants, you must pardon my foolish humour: when I am angry, that any
thing crosses me, I grow impatient straight. Here, I drink to you.


O, that we had five, or six bottles more of this liquor.


Now I commend your judgment, AMORPHVS, who's that knocks? Look, page.


O, most delicious, a little of this would make ARGVRION well.


O, no, give her no cold drink, by any means.


S'lood, this water is the spirit of wine, I'll be hanged else.


Here's the lady ARETE, Madame.


WHat! at your beaver, gallants?


Wilt please your ladyship drink? tis of the new fountain water.


Not I, MORIA, I thank you. Gallants, you are for this night free, to your
peculiar delights; CYNTHIA will have no sports: when she is pleased to come
forth, you shall have knowledge. In the mean time, I could wish you did
provide for solemn revels, and some vnlook't-for device of wit, to entertain
her, against she should vouchsafe to grace your pastimes with her presence.


What say you to a Masque?


Nothing better, if the project were new, and rare.


Why, I'll send for CRITES, and have his advice; be you ready in your
endeavours: He shall discharge you of the inventive part.


But, will not your ladyship stay?


Not now, PHANTASTE.


Let her go, I pray you, good lady Sobriety, I am glad we are rid of her.


What a set face the gentlewoman has, as she were still going to a sacrifice?


O, she is the extraction of a dozen of Puritans, for a look.


Of all Nymphs in the court, I cannot away with her; 'tis the coursest thing --



I wonder, how CYNTHIA can affect her so above the rest! Here be they are every
way as fair as she, and a thought fairer, I trow.


I, and as ingenious, and conceited as she.


I, and as politic as she, for all she sets such a fore-head on it.


Would I were dead, if I would change to be CYNTHIA.


Or I.


Or I.


And there's her minion CRITES! why his advice more then AMORPHVS? have not I
invention, before him? Learning, to better that invention, above him? and
infanted, with pleasant travail --


Death, what talk you of his learning? he understands no more then a
schoole-boy; I have put him down my self a thousand times (by this air) and
yet I never talked with him but twice, in my life: you never saw his like. I
could never get him to argue with me, but once, and then, because I could not
construe an Author I quoted at first sight, he went away, and laughed at me. By
HERCVLES, I scorn him, as I do the sodden Nymph, that was here even now, his
mistress ARETE: And I love my self for nothing else.


I wonder the fellow does not hang himself, being thus scorned, and contemned
of us that are held the most accomplished society of gallants!


By your selves, none else.


I protest, if I had no musique in me, no courtship, that I were not a reveller
and could dance, or had not those excellent qualities that give a man life, and
perfection, but a mere poor scholer as he is, I think I should make some
desperate way with my self, whereas now (would I might never breathe more) if
I do know that creature in the kingdom, with whom I would change.


This is excellent: well, I must alter all this soon.


Look you do, CUPID. The bottles have wrought, it seems.


O, I am sorry the revels are crossed. I should have tickled it soon. I did never
appear till then. S'lid, I am the neatlyest-made gallant in the company, and
have the best presence; and my dancing -- well, I know what our usher said to
me, lasst time I was at the school: would I might have lead PHILAVTIA in the
measures, and it had been the gods will. I am most worthy, I am sure.


Master, I can tell you news, the lady kissed me yonder, and plaid with me,
and says she loved you once, as well as she does me, but that you cast her
off.


Peace, my most esteemed page.


Yes.


What luck is this, that our revels are dashed? Now was I beginning to glister,
in the very high way of preferment. And CYNTHIA had but seen me dance a
strain, or do but one trick, I had been kept in court, I should never have
needed to look towards my friends again.


Contain your self. You were a fortunate young man, if you knew your own
good: which I have now proiected, and will presently multiply upon you.
Beauties, and Valors, your vouchsafed applause to a motion. the humorous
CYNTHIA hath, for this night, with-drawne the light of your de-light --


Tis true AMORPHVS, what may we do to redeem it?


Redeem that we cannot, but, to create a new flame, is in our power. Here is a
gentleman my scholer, whom (for some private reasons me specially moving) I am
covetous to gratify with title of Master, in the noble, and subtle science of
Courtship: For which grace, he shall this night in court, and in the long
gallery, hold his public Act, by open challenge, to all Masters of the
mystery whatsoever, to play at the four choice, and principal weapons
thereof, viz. the bare Accost, the better Regard, the solemn Address, and the
perfect Close. What say you?


Excellent, excellent, AMORPHVS.


Well, let us then take our time by the fore-head: I will instantly have bills
drawn, and advanced in every angle of the court. Sir, betray not your too much
joy. ANAIDES, we must mix this gentleman with you in acquaintance, Monsieur
ASOTVS.


I am easily entreated to grace any of your friends, AMORPHVS.


Sir, and his friends shall likewise grace you, sir. Nay, I begin to know my
self, now.


O, you must continue your bounties.


Must I? why, I'll give him this ruby on my finger. Do you hear, sir? I do
heartily with your acquaintance, and I partly know my self worthy of it;
please you, sir, to accept this poor ruby, in a ring, sir. The poesy is of my
own device. Let this blush for me, sir.


So it must for me, too. For I am not ashamed to take it.


Sweet man! by my troth, master, I love you, will you love me, too? for my
aunts sake? I'll wait well, you shall see. I'll still be here. Would I might
never stir, but you are a fine man in these clothes, Master, shall I have
them, when you have done with them?


As for that, MORVS, thou shalt see more hereafter: in the mean time, by this
air, or by this feather, I'll do as much for thee, as any gallant shall do
for his page, whatsoever, in this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.


I wonder, this gentleman should affect to keep a fool! me thinks, he makes
sport enough with himself.


Well, PROSAITES, 'twere good you did wait closer.


I, I'll look to it; 'tis time.


The revels would have been most sumptuous to night, if they had gone forward.


They must needs, when al the choicest singularities of the court were up in
pantofles; ne'er a one of them, but was able to make a whole show of it self.


Sirrah, a torch, a torch.


O, what a call is there! I will have a canzonet made, with nothing in it, but
sirrah; and the burden shall be, I come.


How now, CUPID, how do you like this change?


Faith, the thread of my device is cracked, I may go sleep till the revelling
musique awake me.


And there too, CUPID, without you had prevented the Fountain. Alas, poor god,
that remembers not selfe-Loue, to be proof against the violence of his
quiver! Well, I have a plot upon these prizers, for which, I must presently
find out CRITES, and with his assistance, pursue it to a high strain of
laughter, or MERCVRIE hath lost of his mettle.


IT is resolved on, CRITES, you must do it.

The grace divinest MERCVRIE hath done me,
In this vouchsafed discovery of himself,
Binds my observance in the utmost term
Of satisfaction, to his godly will:
Though I profess (without the affectation)
Of an enforced, and formed austerity)
I could be willing to enjoy no place
With so unequal natures.

We believe it.
But for our sake, and to inflict just pains
On their prodigious follies, aide us now:
No man is, presently, made bad, with ill.
And good men, like the sea, should still maintain
Their noble taste, in midst of all fresh humours,
That flow about them, to corrupt their streams,
Bearing no season, much less salt of goodness.
It is our purpose, CRITES, to correct,
And punish, with our laughter, this nights sport
Which our court- Dors so heartily intend:
And by that worthy scorn, to make them know
How far beneath the dignity of man
Their serious, and most practised actions are.

I, but though MERCVRIE can warrant out
His vnder-takings, and make all things good,
Out of the powers of his divinity,
Th'offence will be returned with weight on me,
That am a creature so despised, and poor;
When the whole Court shall take it self abused
By our ironical confederacy.

You are deceived. The better race in court
That have the true nobility, called virtue,
Will apprehend it, as a grateful right
Done to their separate merit: and approve
The fit rebuke of so ridiculous heads,
Who with their apish customs, and forced garbes,
Would bring the name of courtier in contempt,
Did it not live vnblemisht in some few,
Whom equal JOVE hath loved, and PHOEBVS formed
Of better mettle, and in better mould.

Well, since my leader on is MERCVRIE,
I shall not fear to follow. If I fall,
My proper virtue shall be my relief,
That follow'd such a cause, and such a chief.

NO more, if you love me, good master, you are incompatible to live withal:
Send me for the ladies.


Nay, but intend me.


Fear me not, I warrant you, sir.


Render not your self a refractarie, on the sudden. I can allow well, you
should repute highly, heartily (and to the most) of your own endowments; it
gives you forth to the world the more assured: but with reservation of an eye,
to be always turned dutifully back upon your teacher.


Nay, good, sir, leave it to me. Trust me with trussing all the points of
this action, I pray. S'lid, I hope we shall find wit to perform the science,
as well as another.


I confess you to be of an aped, and docible humour. Yet, there are certain
puntilioes, or (as I may more nakedly insinuate them) certain intrinsecate
strokes, and wards, to which your activity is not yet amounted. As your
gentile dor, in colours. For supposition, your mistress appears here in prize,
ribbanded with green, and yellow; now it is the part of every obsequious
servant, to be sure to have daily about him copy, and variety of colours, to
be presently answerable to any hourly, or half-hourely change in his mistress
revolution. --


(I know it, sir.


Give leave, I pray you) which if your Antagonist, or player-against-you shall
ignorantly be without, and your self can produce; you give him the dor.


I, I, sir.


Or, if you can possess your opposite, that the green your mistress wears, is
her rejoicing or exultation in his service; the yellow, suspicion of his truth,
(from her height of affection:) and that he (greenly credulous) shall withdraw
thus, in private, and from the abundance of his pocket (to displace her jelous
conceit) steal into his hat the colour, whose bluenesse doth express
trueness, (she being nor so, nor so affected) you give him the dor.


Do not I know it, sir?


Nay, good -- swell not above your understanding. There is yet a third dor, in
colours.


I know it too, I know it.


Do you know it too? what is it? Make good your knowledge.


Why it is -- no matter for that.


Do it, on poene of the dor.


Why? what is't, say you?


Lo, you have given your self the dor. But I will remonstrate to you the
third dor; which is not, as the two former dors, indicatiue, but deliberative:
As how? As thus. Your Riualis, with a dutiful, and serious care, lying in his
bed, meditating how to observe his mistress, dispatches his lacquay to the
chamber, early, to know what her colours are for the day; with purpose to apply
his wear that day, accordingly: You lay wait before, preoccupie the
chamber-maide, corrupt her, to return false colours; He follows the fallacy;
comes out accoutred to his believed instructions; your mistress smiles; and
you give him the dor.


Why, so I told you, sir, I knew it.


Told me? It is a strange outrecuidance! your humour too much redounds.


Why, sir, what, do you think you know more?


I know that a cooke may as soon, and properly be said to smell well, as you to
be wise. I know these are most clear, and clean strokes. But then, you have
your passages, and imbroccata's in courtship; as the bitter Rob in wit; the
Reverse in face, or wry-mouth; and these more subtle, and secure offenders. I
will example unto you. Your opponent makes entry, as you are engaged with your
mistress. You seeing him, close in her ear, with this whisper (here comes
your Babion, disgrace him) and withal, stepping off, fall on his bosom, and
turning to her, politiquely, aloud say, lady, reguard this noble gentleman, a
man rarely parted, second to none in this court; and then, stooping over his
shoulder, your hand on his breast, your mouth on his back-side, you give him the
Reverse stroke, with this Sanna, or Storkes-bill, which makes up your wits Bob,
most bitter.


Nay, for heavens sake, teach me no more. I know all as well -- S'lid, if I did
not, why was I nominated? why did you choose me? why did the ladies prick out
me? I am sure there were other gallants. But me of all the rest? By that
light, and as I am a courtier, would I might never stir, but 'tis strange.
Would to the lord, the ladies would come once.


SIgnior, the gallants and ladies are at hand. Are you ready, sir?


Instantly. Go, accomplish your attire: Cousin MORPHIDES, assist me, to make
good the door with your officious tyranny.


By your leave my masters there, pray you let's come by.


You by? why should you come by, more then we?


Why, sir? Because he is my brother, that plays the prizes.


Your brother?


I, her brother, sir, and we must come in.


Why, what are you?


I am her husband, sir.


Then thrust forward your head.


What tumult is there?


Who's there? bear back there. Stand from the door.


Enter none but the ladies, and their hang-bies; welcome Beauties, and your
kind Shadows.


This country lady, my friend, good signior AMORPHVS.


And my cockatrice, here.


She is welcome.


Knock those same pages there; and goodman Cockescombe the citizen, who would
you speak withal?


With whom? your brother?


Who is your brother?


Master ASOTVS? Is he your brother? He is taken up with great persons. He is
not to know you to night.


O JOVE, master! and there come ere a citizen gentlewoman in my name, let her
have entrance, I pray you. It is my sister.


Brother.


Brother, master ASOTVS.


Who's there?


'Tis I, brother.


Gods me! There she is, good master, intrude he.


Make place. Bear back there.


Knock that simple fellow, there.


Nay, good sir; It is my husband.


The simpler fellow he. Away, back with your head, sir.


Brother, you must pardon your non-entry: Husbands are not allow'd here in
truth. I'll come home soon with my sister; pray you meet us with a lanthorn,
brother. Be merry, sister: I shall make you laugh anon.


Your prizer is not ready AMORPHVS.


Apprehend your places, he shall be soon; and at all points.


Is there any body come to answer him? Shall we have any sport.


Sport of importance; howsoever, give me the gloves.


Gloves! why gloves, Signior?


What's the ceremony?


Besides their received fitness, at all prizes, they are here properly
accommodate to the nuptials of my schollers hauiour to the lady courtship.
Please you apparel your hands. Madam PHANTASTE, madam PHILAVTIA, Guardian,
Signior HEDON, Signior ANAIDES, Gentlemen all, Ladies.


Thanks, good AMORPHVS.


I will now call forth my provost, and present him.


Heart! why should not we be masters, as well as he?


That's true, and play our masters prizes, as well as the the other?


In sadness, for using your court-weapons, me thinks, you may.


Nay, but why should not we ladies play our prizes, I pray? I see no reason,
but we should take them down, at their own weapons.


Troth, and so we may, if we handle them well.


I indeed, forsooth, Madame, if'twere in the city, we would think foul
scorn, but we would, forsooth.


Pray you, what shoul'd we call your name?


My name is, Downfall.


Good mistress Downfall! I am sorry, your husband could not get in.


'Tis no matter for him, sir.


No, no, she has the more liberty for her self.


Peace, peace: They come.


So. Keep up your ruff: the tincture of your neck is not all so pure, but it
will ask it. Maintain your sprig upright; your cloak on your halfe-shoulder
falling; So: I will read your bill, advance it, and present you.

Be it known to all that profess courtship, by these presents (from the white
satin reveller, to the cloth of tissue, and bodkin) that we,
VLYSSES-POLYTROPVS-AMORPHVS, Master of the noble, and subtle science of
courtship, do give leave and licence to our Provost,
ACOLASTVS-POLYPRAGMON-ASOTVS, to play his Masters prize, against all Masters
whatsoever in this subtle mystery, at these four, the choice, and most
cunning weapons of court-complement, viz. the bare Accost; the better Reguard;
the solemn Address; and the perfect Close. These are therefore to give
notice, to all comers, that he, ^he said ACOLASTVS-POLYPRAG^ON-ASOTVS, is
here present (by the help of his Mer^er, Taylor, Milla^er, Sempster, and so
forth) at his designed hour, in this fair gallery, the present day of this
present month, to perform, and do his uttermost for the achievement, and
bearing away of the prizes, which are these: viz. for the bare Accost, two
Wall-eyes, in a face forced: For the better R^guard, a Face favourably
simpering, with a Farm waving: For the solemn Address, two Lips wagging, and
never a wise word: For the perfect Close, a Wring by the hand, with a Banquet
in a corner. And PHOEBVS sa^e CYNTHIA.


Appears no man yet, to answer the prizer? No voice? Musique, give them
their summons.


The solemnity of this is excellent.


Silence. Well, I perceive your name is their terror; and keeps them back.


I faith, Master, Let's go: no body comes. Victus, victa, victum; Victi,
victae, victi -- Let's be retrograde.


Stay. That were dispunct to the ladies. Rather, our self shall be your
Encounter. Take your state, up, to the wall: And, lady, may we implore you to
stand forth, as first term, or bound to our courtship.


Before heaven, 'twill show rarely.


Sound a charge.


A pox on it. Your vulgar will count this fabulous, and impudent, now: by that
candle, they will ne'er conceit it.


Excellent well! Admirable!


Peace.


Most fashionably, believe it.


O, he is a well-spoken gentleman.


Now the other.


Very good.


For a Scholer, Honour.


O, 'tis too d^tch. He reeles too much.


This weapon is done.


No, we have our two bouts, at every weapon, expect.


WHere be these gallants, and their brave prizer here?


Who's there? bear back: Keep the door.


What are you, sir?


By your licence, grand-master. Come forward, sir.


Heart! who l^t in that rag there, amongst us? put him out, an impecunious
creature.


Out with him.


Come, sir.


You must be retrograde.


Soft, sir, I am Truchman, and do flourish before this Monsieur, or
french-behau'd gentleman, here; who is drawn hither by report of your
chartells, advanced in court, to prove his fortune with your prizer, so he may
have fair play shown him, and the liberty to choose his stickler.


Is he a Master?


That, sir, he has to show here; and, confirmed under the hands of the most
skilful, and cunning complementaries alive: please you read, sir.


What shall we do?


Death, disgrace this fellow in the blacke-stuffe, what ever you do.


Why, but he comes with the stranger.


That's no matter. He is our own countryman.


I, and he is a scholer besides. You may disgrace him here, with authority.


Well, see these first.


Now shall I be observed by yon'd scholer, till I sweat again; I would to
JOVE, it were over.


Sir, this is the wight of worth, that dares you to the encounter. A gentleman
of so pleasing, and ridiculous a carriage; as, even standing, carries meat in
the mouth, you see; and I assure you, although no bred courtling, yet a most
particular man, of goodly hauings, well fashioned hauiour, and of as hard'ned,
and excellent a bark, as the most naturally-qualified amongst them, informed,
reformed, and transformed, from his original citticisme, by this elixi'r, or
mere magazine of man. And, for your spectators, you behold them, what they
are: The most choice particulars in court: This tells tales well; This provides
coaches; This repeats jests; This presents gifts* This holds up the arras;
This takes down from horse; This protests by this light; This swears by that
candle; This delights; This adores. Yet, all but three men. Then for your
ladies, the most proud witty creatures, all things apprehending, nothing
understanding, perpetually laughing, curious maintayners of fools, mercers,
and minstrels, costly to be kept, miserably keeping, all disdaining, but their
painter, and pothecary, twixt whom and them there is this reciprock commerce,
their beauties maintain their painters, and their painters their beauties.


Sir, you have plaid the painter your self, and limbed them to the life. I
desire to deserve before them.


This is anthentique. We must resolve to entertain the Monsieur, howsoever we
neglect him.


Come, let's all go together, and salute him.


Content, and not look of the other.


Well deuis'd: and a most punishing disgrace.


On.


Monsieur. We must not so much betray our selves to discourtship, as to suffer
you to be longer unsaluted: Please you to use the state, ordained for the
opponent; in which nature, without envy we receive you.


And embrace you.


And commend us to you, sir.


Believe it, he is a man of excellent silence.


He keeps all his wit for action.


This hath discountenanced our scholaris, most richly.


Out of all emphasis. The Monsieur sees, we regard him not.


Hold on: make it known how bitter a thing it is, not to be looked on in
court.


S'lud, will he call him to him yet? does not Monsieur perceive our disgrace?


Hart! he is a fool, I see. We have done our selves wrong to grace him.


S'light, what an ass was I, to embrace him?


Illustrous, and fearful judges --


Turn away, turn away.


It is the suit of the strange opponent (to whom you ought not to turn your
tails, and whose noses I must follow) that he may have the justice, before he
encounter his respected adversary, to see some light stroke of his play,
commenced with some other.


Answer not him, but the stranger, we will not believe him.


I will demand him my self.


O dreadful disgrace, if a man were so foolish to feel it!


Is it your suit, Monsieur, to see some praelude of my scholer? Now, sure the
Monsieur wants language.


And take upon him to be one of the accomplished? S'light, that's a goodiest:
would we could take him with that nullitie. Non sapette voi parlar' Itagliano?


S'foot, the carpe ha's no tongue.


Signior, in courtship, you are to bid your abettors forbear, and satisfy the
Monsieurs request.


Well, I will strike him more silent, with admiration, and terrify his daring
hither. He shall behold my own play, with my scholer. Lady, with the touch
of your white hand, let me re-enstate you. Pro^ost, begin to me, at the bare
Accost. Now, for the honour of my discipline.


Signior AMORPHVS, reflect, reflect: what means he by that mouthed wave?


He is in some distaste of your fellow disciple.


Signior, your scholer might have plaid well still, if he could have kept his
fear longer: I have enough of him, now. He is a mere piece of glass, I see
through him, by this time.


You come not to give us the scorn, Monsieur?


Nor to be frighted with a face. Signior! I have seen the lyons. You must
pardon me. I shall be loath to hazard a reputation with one, that ha's not a
reputation to lose.


How!


Meaning your pupil, sir.


This is that black devil there.


You do offer a strange affront, Monsieur.


Sir, he shall yield you all the honour of a competent adversary, if you please
to vnder-take him --


I am pressed for the encounter.


Me? challenge me?


What! my Master, sir? S'light, Monsieur, meddle with me, do you hear? but
do not meddle with my Master.


Peace, good squib, go out.


And stink, he bids you.


Master?


Silence, I do accept him. Sit you down, and observe. Me? He never professed a
thing at more charges. Prepare your self, sir. Challenge me? I will prosecute
what disgrace my hatred can dictate to me.


How tender a travellers spleen is? comparison, to men, that deserve least, is
ever most offensive.


You are instructed in our chartell, and know our weapons?


I appear not without their notice, sir.


But must I lose the prizes, Master?


I will win them for you, be patient. Lady, vouchsafe the tenure of this
ensign. Who shall be your stickler?


Behold him.


I would not wish you a weaker. Sound musiques. I provoke you, at the bare
Accost.


Excellent comely!


And worthily studied. This is the exalted Fore-top.


O, his leg was too much produced.


And his hat was carried skiruily.


Peace; Let's see the Monsieur's Accost: Rare!


Sprightly, and short.


True, it is the french curteau: He lacks but to have his nose slit.


He does hop. He does bound too much.


The second bout, to conclude this weapon.


Good, believe it!


An excellent offer!


This is called the solemn band-string.


Foe, that cringe was not put home.


S'foot, he makes a face like a stabbed LVCRECE.


Well, he would needs take it upon him, but would I had done it for all this.
He makes me sit still here, like a babioun as I am.


Making villainous faces.


See, the French prepares it richly.


I, this is y'cleped the serious trifle.


S'lud, 'tis the horse-start out of the browne study.


Rather the bird-ey'd stroke, sir. Your observance is too blunt, sir.


Judges, award the prize. Take breath, sir. This bout hath been laborious.


And yet your Critic, or your Besso'gno, will think these things sopperie,
and easy, now.


Or rather mere lunacy. For, would any reasonable creature make these his
serious studies, and perfections? Much less, only live to these ends? to be
the false pleasure of a few, the true love of none, and the just laughter of
all?


We must prefer the Monsieur, we courtiers must be partial.


Speak, Guardian. Name the prize, at the bare Accost.


A pair of wall-eyes, in a face forced.


Give the Monsieur. AMORPHVS hath lost his eyes.


I! is the palate of your judgement down? Gentles, I do appeal.


Yes master, to me. The judges be fools.


How now, sir? Tie up your tongue, Mungrill. He cannot appeal.


Say you, sir?


Sir you still, sir.


Why, so I do. Do not I, I pray you?


Remercie, Madame, and these honourable Censors.


Well, to the second weapon, The better Reguard: I will encounter you better.
Attempt.


Sweet Honour.


What says my good Ambition?


Which take you at this next weapon? I lay a discretion, with you, on AMORPHVS
head.


Why, I take the french-behau'd gentleman.


'Tis done, a discretion.


A discretion? A pretty court-wager! would any discreet person hazard his wit,
so?


I'll lay a discretion, with you, ANAIDES.


Hang them. I'll not venture a doibt of discretion, on either of their heads. --



No, he should venture all then.


I like none of their plays.


See, see, this is strange play!


'Tis too full of uncertain motion. He hobbles too much.


'Tis called your court-staggers, sir.


That same fellow talks so, now he has a place.


Hang him, neglect him.


Your good ladyships affectioned.


Gods so! they speak at this weapon, brother!


They must do so, sister, how should it be the better Reguard, else?


Me thinks, he did not this respectively enough.


Why, the Monsieur but dallies with him.


Dallies? Slight see, he will put him too't, in earnest. Well done, AMORPHVS.


That puff was good indeed.


Gods me! This is desperate play. He hits himself of the shins.


And he make this good through, he carries it, I warrant him.


Indeed he displays his feet, rarely.


See, see; He does the respective Leer damnably well.


The true idolater of your beauties, shall never pass their de^ties vnadored:
I rest your poor knight.


See, now the oblique leer, or the Ianus: He satisfies all, with that aspect,
most nobly.


And most terribly he comes off: like your Rodomantada.


How like you this play, ANAIDES?


Good play; but 't is too rough, and boisterous.


I will second it with a stroke easier, wherein I will prove his language.


This is silthie, and grave, now.


O, 't is cool, and wary play. We must not disgrace our own camerade, too
much.


Signora, ho tanto obligo per pefauore rescinto da lei; che veramente des^ero
con totto il core, ^ remunerarla in part: sicurati^e signor a mea cara, che
infera sempre pronto a seruirla, honorarla. Bascio le mane de v^ signoria.


The veneti^ Dop this.


Most vnexspectedly excellent! The French goes down certain.


As buckets are put down into a well;
Or as a schoole-boy. --

Truss up your simile, Iacke-daw, and observe.


Now the Monsieur is moved.


Boe-peepe.


O, most antique.


The french Quirk, this sir.


Heart, he will ouer-runne her!


Madamoyselle, Ie voudroy que pou^oy monstrer mon affection, mais ie suis tant
mal he^reuse, ci froid, ci laid, ci -- Ie no scay qui di dire -- excuse moy, Ie
suis tout vostre.


O brave, and spirited! He's a right Iouialist.


No, no: AMORPHVS gravity outwaies it.


And yet your lady, or your feather would outweigh both.


What's the prize, lady, at this better Reguard?


A Face favourably simpering, and a fan waving.


They have done doubtfully. Divide. Give the favourable Face to the Signior,
and the light wave to the Monsi^ur.


You become the simper, well, lady.


And the wag, better.


Now, to our solemn Address. Please the well-grac'd PHILAVTIA to relieve the
lady sentinel; she hath stood long.


With all my heart, come, Guardian* Resign your place.


Monsieur, furnish your self with what solemnity of ornament you think fit
for this third weapon; at which you are to show all the cunning of stroke, your
devotion can possibly devise.


Let me alone, sir. I'll sufficiently decipher your amorous solemnities. CRITES,
have patience. See, if I hit not all their practicke observance, with which
they lime twigs, to catch their fantastic ladiebirds.


I, but you should do more charitably, to do it more openly; that they might
discover themselves mocked in these monstrous affections.


Lacquay, where's the taylor?


Here, sir.


See, they have their Taylor, Barber, Perfumer, Millaner, Jeweller,
Feather-maker, all in common!


I, this is pretty.


Here is a hair too much, take it off. Where are thy mullets?


Is this pink of equal proportion to this cut, standing of this distance from
it?


That it is, sir.


Is it so, sir, you impudent Poultroun? you slave, you list, you shreds, you.
--


Excellent. This was the best, yet.


S'foot, we must use our taylors thus. This is your true magnanimity.


Come, go to: put on. We must bear with you, for the times sake.


Is the perfume rich, in this jerkin?


Taste, smell; I assure you sir, pure beniamin, the only spirited sent, that
ever awaked a neapolitane nostril. You would wish your self all nose, for the
love o^t. I frotted a jerkin, for a new-reuenu'd gentleman, yielded me
threescore crowns, but this morning, and the same titillation.


I savour no sampsuchine, in it.


I am a nulli-fidian, if there be not three thirds of a scruple more of
samp^uchinum, in this confection, then ever I put in any. I'll tell you all the
ingredients, sir.


You shall be simple, to discover your simples.


Simple? why sir? what reck I to whom I discover? I have in it, musk, civet,
amber, pheenicobalanus, the decoction of turmericke, sesama, nard, spikenard,
calamus odoratus, stacte, opobalsamum, amomum, storax, lad^num, aspalathum,
opponax, oenanthe. And what of all these now? what are you the better? Tut, it
is the sorting, and the dividing, and the mixing, and the tempring, and the
^earcing, and the decocting, that makes the fumigation, and the ^uffumigation.


Well, endue me with it.


I will, sir.


An excellent confection.


And most worthy a true voluptarie. JOVE! what a coil these mukse-wormes
take, to purchase another delight? for, themselves, who bear the odours, have
ever the least sense of them. Yet, I do like better the prodigality of
jewels, and clothes, whereof one passes to a mans heirs; the other, at least
wears out time: This presently expires, and without continual riot in
reparation is lost: which who so strives to keep, it is one special argument
to me, that (affecting to smell better then other men) he doth indeed smell
far worse.


I know, you will say it sits well, sir.


Good faith, if it do not, sir, let your Mistress be judge.


By heaven, if my Mistress do not like it, I'll make no more conscience to
undo thee, then to undo an oyster.


Believe it, sir, there's ne'er a Mistress in the world can mislike it.


No, not goodwife Taylor, your Mistress; that has only the judgment to heat
your pressing tool. But for a court-Mistris, that studies these decorums, and
knows the proportion of every cut, to a hair, knows why such a colour, is
cut upon such a colour, and, when a satin is cut upon six taffa^aes, will look
that we should dive into the depth of the cut. -- Give me my scarf. Show some
ribbands, sir. Ha you the feather?


I, sir.


Have you the jewell?


Yes, sir.


What must I give for the hire on it?


You'll give me six crowns, sir?


Six crowns? By heaven 'twere a good deed to borrow it of thee, to show: and
never let thee have it again.


I hope your worship will not do so, sir.


By JOVE, sir, there be such tricks stirring, I can tell you, and worthily
too. Extorting knaves! that live by these Court-decorums, and yet, -- What's
your jewell worth, I pray?


A hundred crowns, sir.


A hundred crowns? And six for the loan on it an hour? What's that? the
hundred for the year? These impostors would not be hanged? your thief is not
comparable to them, by HERCVLES, well* put it in, and the feather. You will
have it, and you shall; and the pox give you good on it.


Give me my confects, my moscardini, and place those colours in my hat.


These are ^olognian ribbands, I warrant you?


In truth, sir: if they be not right granado silk --


A pox on you, you'll all say so.


You give me not a penny, sir.


Come sir, perfume my deuant; May it ascend, like solemn sacrifice, into the
nostrils of the Queen of Love.


Your french ceremonies are the best:


Monsieur, Signior, your solemn Address is too long. The ladies long to have
you come on.


Soft, sir, our coming on is not so easily prepared. Signior Fig.


I, sir.


Can you help my complexion, here?


O yes, sir, I have an excellent mineral Fuc^, for the purpose. The gloves are
right, sir, you shall bury them in a mucke-hill, a draught, seven years, and
take them out, and wash them, they shall still retain their first sent, true
spanish. There's ambre in the vmbre.


Your price, sweet Fig.


Give me what you will, sir: The Signior pays me two crowns a pair, you
shall give me your love, sir.


My love? with a pox to you, goodman sasafras.


I come, sir. There's an excellent diapasme in a chain too, if you like it.


Stay, what are the ingredients to your fucus?


Nought, but sublimate, and crude mercurie, sir, well prepared, and dulcified,
with the jaw-bones of a sow, burnt, beaten, and searced.


I approve it. Lay it on.


I'll have your chain of pomander, sirrah; what's your price?


Wee'le agree, Monsieur; I'll assure you, it was both decocted, and dried, where
no sun came, and kept in an onyx ever since it was balled.


Come, invert my moustache, and we have done.


'Tis good.


Hold still I pray you, sir.


Nay, the ^ucus is exorbitant, sir.


Death! dost thou burn me, Harlot?


I beseech you, sir.


Beggar, Varlet, Poultroun?


Excellent, excellent!


Your french Beat is the most natural beat of the world.


O, that I had plaid at this weapon!


Peace, now they come on; the second part.


Madame, your beauties, being so attractive, I muse you are left thus, alone.


Better be alone, sir; then ill-accompanied.


Nought can be ill, lady, that can come near your goodness.


Sweet Madame, on what part of you soever a man casts his eye, he meets with
perfection; you are the lively image of VENVS, throughout; all the GRACES smile
in your cheeks; your beauty nourishes, as well as delights; you have a tongue
steep't in honey; and a breath like a panther: your breasts and forehead are
whiter then gotes milk, or May-blossomes; a cloud is not so soft as your
skin. --


Well struck, Monsieur: He charges like a Frenchman indeed, thick, and
hotly.


Your cheeks are CUPIDS baths, wherein he uses to steep himself in milk,
and nectar: He does light all his torches at your eyes, and instructs you how
to shoot, and wound, with their beams. Yet I love nothing, in you, more then
your innocence; you retain so native a simplicity, so vnblam'd a behaviour.
Me thinks, with such a love, I should find no head, nor foot of my pleasure:
You are the very spirit of a lady.


Fair play, Monsieur? you are too hot on the quarry. Give your competitor
audience.


Lady, how stirring soever the Monsieurs tongue is, he will lie by your side,
more dull then your eunuch.


A good stroke; That mouth was excellently put over.


You are fair, lady --


You offer foul, Signior, to close. Keep your distance; for all your Bravo
rampant, here.


I say you are fair, lady, let your choice be fit, as you are fair.


I say, ladies do never believe they are fair, till some fool begins to dote
upon them.


You play too rough, gentlemen.


Your frenchified fool is your only fool, lady: I do yield to this
honourable Monsieur, in all civil, and humane courtesy.


Buzz.


Admirable. Give him the prize. Give him the prize; That mouth, again, was
most courtly hit, and rare.


I knew, I should pass upon him with the bitter Bob.


O, but the Reverse was singular.


It was most subtle, AMORPHVS.


If I had don't, it should have been better.


How heartily they applaud this, CRITES!


You suffer them too long


I'll take off their edge instantly.


Name the prize, at the solemn Address.


Two lips wagging.


And never a wise word; I take it.


Give to AMORPHVS. And, upon him, again; let him not draw free breath.


Thanks, fair deliverer, and my honourable judges, Madame PHANTASTE, you are
our worthy object at this next weapon.


Most couetingly ready, AMORPHVS.


Your Monsieur is crestfallen.


So are most of them once a year.


You will see, I shall now give him the gentle dor, presently, he forgetting
to shift the colours, which are now changed, with alteration of the Mistress. At
your last weapon, sir. The perfect Close. Set forward, intend your approach.
Monsieur.


'Tis yours, Signior.


With your example, sir.


Not I, sir.


It is your right.


By no possible means.


You have the way.


As I am noble --


As I am virtuous --


Pardon me, sir.


I will die first.


You are a tyranne in courtesy.


He is removed -- Judges bear witness.


What of that, sir?


You are removed, sir.


Well.


I challenge you; you have received the dor. Give me the prize.


Soft, sir. How, the dor?


The common Mistress, you see, is changed.


Right, sir.


And you have still in your hat the former colours.


You lie, sir, I have none: I have pulled them out. I meant to play
discoloured.


The dor, the dor, the dor, the dor, the dor! the palpable dor.


Heart of my blood. AMORPHVS, what have you done? Stuck a disgrace upon us all,
and at your last weapon?


I could have done no more.


By heaven, it was most unfortunate luck.


Luck! by that candle, it was mere rashness, and ouer-sight, would any man
have venterd to play so open, and forsake his ward? Dam' me if he have not
eternally undone himself, in court; and discountenanced us, that were his
maine countenance, by it.


Forgive it, now. It was the solecism of my stars.


The Wring by the hand, and the Banquet is ours.


O, here's a lady, feels like a wench of the first year; you would think her
hand did melt in your touch; and the bones of her fingers ran out at length,
when you pressed them, they are so gently delicate! He that had the grace to
print a kiss on these lips, should taste wine, rose-leaues. O, she kisses as
close as a cockle. Let's take them down, as deep as our hearts, wench, till
our very souls mix. Adieu, Signior. Good faith, I shall drink to you at
supper, sir.


Stay, Monsieur. Who awards you the prize?


Why, his proper merit, sir: you see he has plaid down your grand
garbe-Master, here.


That's not in your logic to determine, sir: you are no courtier. This is
none of your seven, or nine beggarly sciences, but a certain mystery above
them, wherein we that have skill must pronounce, and not such fresh-men as you
are.


Indeed, I must declare my self to you no professed courtling; nor to have any
excellent stroke, at your subtle weapons: yet if you please, I dare venture a
hit with you, or your fellow, sir DAGONET, here.


With me?


Yes, sir.


Heart, I shall never have such a fortune to save my self in a fellow again,
and your two reputations, gentlemen, as in this. I'll undertake him.


Do, and swinge him soundly, good ANAIDES.


Let me alone, I'll play other manner of play, then has been seen, yet. I
would the prize lay on it.


It shall if you will, I forgive my right.


Are you so confident? what's your weapon?


At any, I, sir.


The perfect Close, That's now the best.


Content, I'll pay your scholaritie. Who offers?


Mary, that will I. I dare give you that advantage, too.


You dare? Well, look to your liberal skonce.


Make your play still, upon the answer, sir.


Hold your peace, you are a hobby-horse.


Sit by me, Master.


Now CRITES, strike home.


You shall see me undo the assured swaggerer with a trick, instantly: I will
play all his own play before him; court the wench, in his garb, in his
phrase, with his face; leave him not so much as a look, an eye, a stalk, or
an imperfect oath, to express himself by, after me.


Excellent, CRITES.


When begin you, sir? Have you consulted?


To your cost, sir; which is the Piece, stands forth to be courted? O, are you
she? Well, Madame, or sweet lady, it is so, I do love you in some sort, do
you conceive? and though I am no Monsieur, nor no Signior, and do want (as they
say) logic and sophistry, and good words, to tell you why it is so; yet by
this hand, and by that candle, it is so; And though I be no booke-worme, nor
one that deals by art, to give you rhetoric, and causes, why it should be
so, or make it good it is so, yet dam me, but I know it is so, and am assured
it is so, and I and my sword shall make it appear it is so; and give you
reason sufficient, how it can be no otherwise, but so --


S'light, ANAIDES, you are mocked; and so we are all.


How now, Signior! What, suffer your self to be cossen'd of your courtship,
before your face?


This is plain confederacy, to disgrace us: Let's be gone, and plot some
revenge.


When men disgraces share,
The lesser is the care.

Nay stay, my dear Ambition, I can do you over too. You that tell your
Mistress, Her beauty is all composde of theft; Her hair stole from APOLLO's
goldy-locks; Her white and red, lillies, and roses stolen out of paradise; Her
eyes, two stars, plucked from the sky; Her nose, the gnomon of Loves dial,
that tells you how the clock of your heart goes: And for her other parts, as
you cannot reckon them, they are so many; so you cannot recount them, they are
so manifest. Yours, if his own, unfortunate HOYDEN, in stead of HEDON.


Sister, come away, I cannot endure them longer.


Go, Dors, and you, my Madame Courting-stocks,
Follow your scorned, and derided mates;
Tell to your guilty breasts, what mere guilt blocks
You are, and how unworthy humane states.

Now, sacred god of wit, if you can make
Those, whom our sports tax in these apish graces,
Kiss (like the fighting snakes) your peaceful rod;
These times shall canonize you for a god.

Why, CRITES, think you any noble spirit,
Or any, worth the title of a man,
Will be incensed, to see th'inchaunted veils
Of selfe-conceit, and servile flattery
(Wrapped in so many solds, by time, and custom)
Drawn from his wronged, and bewitched eyes?
Who sees not now their shape, and nakedness,
Is blinder then the son of earth, the mole:
Crowned with no more humanity, nor soul.

Though they may see it, yet the huge estate
Fancy, and form, and sensual pride have gotten,
Will make them blush for anger, not for shame;
And turn shown nakedness, to impudence.
Humour is now the test, we try things in;
All power is just: Nought that delights is sin.
And, yet the zeal of every knowing man,
(Oppressed with hills of tyranny, cast on virtue
By the light phant'sies of fools, thus transported)
Cannot but vent the Aetna of his fires,
T'enflame best bosoms, with much worthier love
Then of these outward, and effeminate shades:
That, these vain joys, in which their wills consume
Such powers of wit, and soul, as are of force
To raise their beings to aeternitie,
May be converted on works, fitting men.
And, for the practice of a forced look,
An antique gesture, or a fustian phrase,
Study the native frame of a true heart,
An inward comeliness of bounty, knowledge,
And spirit, that may conforme them, actually,
To Gods high figures, which they have in power:
Which to neglect for a selfe-louing neatness,
Is sacrilege, of an vnpardon'd greatness.

Then let the truth of these things strengthen thee,
In thy exempt, and only man-like course:
Like it the more, the less it is respected;
Though men fail, virtue is by gods protected.
See, here comes ARETE, I'll with-draw my self.

CRITES, you must provide strait for a masque,
'Tis CYNTHIAS pleasure.

How, bright ARETE!
Why, 'twere a labour more for HERCVLES.
Better, and sooner durst I vnder-take
To make the different seasons of the year,
The winds, or elements to sympathize,
Then their unmeasurable vanity
Dance truly in a measure. They agree?
What though all concord's borne of contraries?
So many follies will confusion prove,
And like a sort of jarring instruments,
All out of time: because (indeed) we see
There is not that analogy, twixt discords,
As between things but merely opposite.

There is your error. For as HERMES wand
Charms the disorders of tumultuous ghosts,
And as the strife of Chaos then did cease,
When better light then Natures did arrive:
So, what could never in it self agree,
Forgets the eccentrike property,
And at her sight, turns forth-with regular,
Whose sceptre guides the flowing Ocean.
And though it did not, yet the most of them
(Being either courtiers, or not wholly rude)
Respect of majesty, the place, and presence,
Will keep them within ring; especially
When they are not presented as themselves,
But masked like others. For (in troth) not so
T'incorporate them, could be nothing else,
Then like a state vngouern'd without laws;
Or body made of nothing but diseases:
The one, through impotency poor, and wretched,
The other, for the anarchie absurd.

But, lady, for the revellers themselves,
It would be better (in my poor conceit)
That others were employed: for such as are
Unfit to be in CYNTHIAES court, can seem
No less unfit to be in CYNTHIAES sports.

That, CRITES, is not purposed without
Particular knowledge of the Goddess mind,
(Who holding true intelligence, what follies
Had crept into her palace) she resolved,
Of sports, and triumphs, under that pretext,
To have them muster in their pomp, and fullness:
That so she might more strictly, and to root,
Effect the reformation she intends.

I now conceive her heavenly drift in all,
And will apply my spirits, to serve her will.
O thou, the very power, by which I am,
And but for which, it were in vain to be,
Chief next DIANA, virgin, heavenly fair,
Admired ARETE (of them admired,
Whose souls are not kindled by the sense)
Disdain not my chaste fire, but feed the flame
Devoted truly to thy gracious name.

Leave to suspect us: CRITES well shall find,
As we are now most dear, wee'le prove most kind.
Hark, I am called.

I follow instantly.
PHOEBVS APOLLO: if with ancient rites,
And due devotions, I have ever hung
Elaborate p^ans, on thy golden shrine,
Or sung thy triumphs in a lofty strain,
Fit for a theater of gods to hear;
And thou, the other son of mighty JOVE,
Cyllenian MERCVRY (sweet MAIAS joy)
If in the busy tumults of the mind,
My path thou ever hast illumined,
For which, thine altars I have oft perfumed,
And decked thy statues with discoloured flowers:
Now thrine invention in this glorious court,
That not of bounty only, but of right,
CYNTHIA may grace, and give it life by sight.

QVeene, and Huntress, chaste, and fair,
Now the Sun is laid to sleep,
Seated, in thy silver chair,
State in wonted manner keep:
HESPERVS entreats thy light,
Goddess, excellently bright.
Earth, let not thy envious shade
Dare it self to interpose;
CYNTHIAS shining orb was made
Heaven to clear, when day did close:
Bless us then with wished sight,
Goddess, excellently bright.
Lay thy bow of pearl apart,
And thy cristall-shining quiver;
Give unto the flying hart
Space to breathe, how short soever:
Thou that make a day of night,
Goddess, excellently bright.

When hath DIANA, like an envious wretch,
That glitters only to his soothed self,
Denying to the world, the precious use
Of hoarded wealth, with-held her friendly aide?
Monthly, we spend our still-repaired shine,
And not forbid our virgin-waxen torch
To burn, and blaze, while nutriment doth last:
That once consumed, out of IOVES treasury
A new we take, and stick it in our sphere,
To give the mutinous kind of wanting men,
Their looked -- for light. Yet, what is their desert?
"Bounty is wronged, interpreted as due;
"Mortals can challenge not a ray, by right,
"Yet do expect the whole of CYNTHIAS light.
But if that Deities with-drew their gifts,
For humane follies, what could men deserve
But death, and darkness? It behooves the high,
For their own sakes, to do things worthily.

Most true, most sacred Goddess; for the heavens
Receive no good of all the good they do.
Nor JOVE, nor you, nor other heavenly power,
Are fed with fumes, which do from incense rise,
Or sacrifices reeking in their gore,
Yet, for the care which you of mortals have,
(Whose proper good it is, that they be so)
You well are pleased with odours redolent:
But ignorant is all the race of men,
Which still complains, not knowing why, or when.

Else, noble ARETE, they would not blame,
And tax, for or unjust, or for as proud,
Thy CYNTHIA, in the things which are indeed
The greatest glories in our starry crown;
Such is our chastity: which safely scorns
(Not Love; for who more fervently doth love
Immortal honour, and divine renown?
But) giddy CUPID, VENVS frantic son.
Yet ARETE, if by this veiled light,
We but discovered (what we not discern)
Any the least of imputations stand
Ready to sprinkle our unspotted fame,
With note of lightness, from these revels near:
Not, for the empire of the vniuerse,
Should night, or court, this whatsoever shine,
Or grace of ours unhappily enjoy.
"Place, and occasion are two privy thieves;
"And from poor innocent ladies often steal
"(The best of things) an honourable name:
"To stay with follies, or where faults may be,
"Infers a crime, although the party free.

How Cynthian-ly (that is, how worthily
And like herself) the matchless CYNTHIA speaks!
Infinite jealousies, infinite regards,
Do watch about the true virginity:
But PHoeBE lives from all, not only fault,
But as from thought, so from suspicion free.
"Thy presence broad-seales our delights for pure,
"What's done in CYNTHIAS sight, is done secure.

That then so answered (dearest ARETE)
What the argument or of what sort our sports
Are like to be this night, I not demand.
Nothing which duty, and desire to please
Bears written in the forehead, comes amiss.
But unto whose invention, must we owe,
The complement of this nights furniture?

Excellent Goddess, to a mans, whose worth,
(Without hyperbole,) I thus may praise;
One (at least) studious of deserving well,
And (to speak truth) indeed deserving well:
"Potential merit stands for actual,
"Where only opportunity doth want,
"Not will, nor power: both which in him abound.
One, whom the MVSES, and MINERVA love.
For whom should they, then CRITES, more esteem,
Whom PHOEBVS (though not Fortune) holds dear?
And (which conuinceth excellence in him*)
A principal admirer of your self.
Even, through the ungentle injuries of fate,
And difficulties, which do virtue choke,
Thus much of him appears. What other things
Of farther note, do lye unborn in him,
Them I do leave for cherishment to show,
And for a Goddess graciously to judge.

We have already judged him, ARETE:
Nor are we ignorant, how noble minds
Suffer too much through those indignities,
Which times, and vicious persons cast on them:
Our self have ever vowed to esteem*
(As virtue, for it self, so) fortune base;
Who's first in worth, the same be first in place.
Nor farther notice (ARETE) we crave
Then thine approuals sovereign warranty:
Let 'be thy care, to make us known to him,
" CYNTHIA shall brighten, what the world made dim.

Clear pearl of heaven, and, not to be farther ambitious in titles, CYNTHIA.
The same of this illustrous night, among others, hath also drawn these four
fair virgins from the palace of their Queen Perfection (a word* which makes
no sufficient difference, twixt hers, and thine) to visit thy imperial court:
for she, their sovereign, not finding where to dwell among men, before her
return to heaven, advised them wholly to consecrate themselves to thy
celestial service, as in whose clear spirit (the proper element, and sphere
of virtues) they should behold not her alone, (their ever honoured mistress) but
themselves (more truly themselves) to live inthroniz'd. Her self would have
commended them unto thy favour more particularly, but that she knows no
commendation is more available with them, then that of proper virtue.
Nevertheless, she willed them to present this crystal mound, a note of
monarchy, and symbol of perfection, to thy more worthy deity; which, as
here by me they most humbly do, so amongst the rarities thereof, that is the
chief, to show whatsoever the world hath excellent, howsoever remote and
various. But your irradiate judgment will soon discover the secrets of this
little crystal world. Themselves (to appear more plainly) because they know
nothing more odious, then false pretexts, have chosen to express their
several qualities, thus, in several colours.

The first, in citron colour, is natural Affection, which given us to procure
our good, is sometime called STORGE, as every one is nearest to himself, so
this hand-maid of reason, allowable selfe-loue, as it is without harm, so are
none without it: Her place in the court of Perfection was to quicken minds in
the pursuit of honour. Her device is a perpendicular Level, upon a Cube, or
Square. The word, SE SVO MODVLO. Alluding to that true measure of ones self,
which as every one ought to make, so is it most conspicuous in thy divine
example.

The second, in green, is AGLAIA, delectable and pleasant Conversation, whose
property is to move a kindly delight, and sometime not without laughter: Her
office, to entertain assemblies, and keep societies together with fair
familiarity. Her device within a Ring of clouds, a Heart with shine about it.
The word, CVRARVM NVEILA PELLO. An allegory of CYNTHIAES light, which no less
clears the sky, then her fair mirth the heart.

The third, in the discoloured mantle spangled all over, is EVPHANTASTE, a well
conceited Wittiness, and employed in honouring the court with the riches of her
pure invention. Her device, upon a Petasus, or Mercuriall hat, a Crescent. The
word, SIC LAVS INGENII. Inferring, that the praise and glory of wit, doth ever
increase, as doth thy growing moon.

The fourth in white, is APHELEIA, a Nymph as pure and simple as the soul, or
as an abrase table, and is therefore called Simplicity, without folds, without
pleights, without colour, without counterfeit: and (to speak plainly)
Plainness it self. Her device is no device. The word under her silver
Shield, OMNIS ABEST FVCVS. Alluding to thy spotless self, who art as far
from impurity, as from mortality.

My self (celestial Goddess) more fit for the court of CYNTHIA, then the
arbors of CYTHEREE, am called ANTEROS, or Loves enemy; the more welcome
therefore to thy court, and the fitter to conduct this quaternion, who as they
are thy professed votaries, and for that cause adversaries to Love, yet thee
(perpetual Virgin) they both love, and vow to love eternally.


NOt without wonder, nor without delight,
Mine eyes have viewed (in contemplations depth)
This work of wit, divine, and excellent:
What shape? what substance? or what unknown power
In virgins habit, crowned with laurel leaves,
And olive branches woven in between,
On sea-girt rocks, like to a Goddess shines?
O front! O face! O all celestial sure,
And more then mortal! ARETE, behold
Another CYNTHIA, and another Queen,
Whose glory (like a lasting plenilune)
Seems ignorant of what it is to wane!
Not under heaven an object could be found
More sit to please. Let CRITES make approach.
Bounty forbids to paule our thanks with stay,
Or to defer our favour, after view:
"The time of grace is, when the cause is new.

Lo, here the man (celestial DELIA)
Who (like a circle bounded in it self)
Contains as much, as man in fullness may.
Lo, here the man, who not of usual earth,
But of that nobler, and more precious mould,
Which PHOEBVS self doth temper, is composed;
And, who (though all were wanting to reward)
Yet, to himself he would not wanting be:
Thy favours gain is his ambitions most,
And labours best; who (humble in his height)
Stands fixed silent in thy glorious sight.

With no less pleasure, then we have beheld
This precious crystal, work of rarest wit,
Our eye doth read thee (now enstil'd) our CRITES;
Whom learning, virtue, and our favour last,
Exempts from the gloomy multitude.
"With common eye the supreme should not see.
Henceforth be ours, the more thy self to be.

Heavens purest light, whose orb may be eclipsed,
But not thy praise (divinest CYNTHIA)
How much too narrow for so high a grace,
Thine (save therein) the most unworthy CRITES
Doth find himself! for ever shine thy fame;
Thine honours ever, as thy beauties do;
In me they must, my dark worlds chiefest lights,
By whose propitious beams my powers are raised
To hope some part of those most lofty points,
Which blessed ARETE hath pleased to name,
As marks, to which m'indeuours steps should bend:
Mine, as begun at thee, in thee must end.

SIster of PHOEBVS, to whose bright orb we owe, that we not complain of his
absence; These four brethren (for they are brethren, and sons of EVTAXIA, a
lady known, and highly beloved of your resplendent deity) not able to be
absent, when CYNTHIA held a solemnity, officiously insinuate themselves into
thy presence: For, as there are four cardinal virtues, upon which the whole
frame of the court doth move, so are these the four cardinal properties,
without which, the body of complement moves not. With these four silver
javelins (which they bear in their hands) they support in Princes courts the
state of the presence, as by office they are obliged; which, though here they
may seem superfluous, yet, for honours sake, they thus presume to visit thee,
having also been emploid in the palace of Queen Perfection. And though to
them, that would make themselves gracious to a Goddess, sacrifices were fitter
then presents, or Impress, yet they both hope thy favour; and (in place of
either) use several Symboles, containing the titles of thy imperial dignity.

First, the hethermost, in the changeable blew, and green robe, is the
commendably-fashioned gallant, EVCOSMOS; whose courtly habit is the grace of
the presence, and delight of the surveying eye: whom ladies understand by the
names of neat, and elegant. His symbol is, DIVAE VIRGINI, in which he would
express thy deities principal glory, which hath ever been virginity.

The second, in the rich acoutrement, and robe of purple, empaled with gold, is
EVPATHES; who entertains his mind with an harmless, but not incurious
variety: All the objects of his senses are sumptuous, himself a gallant,
that, without excess, can make use of superfluity: go richly in
imbroideries, jewels (and what not?) without vanity, and fare delicately
without gluttony: and therefore not (not without cause) is universally thought
to be of five humour. His Symbol is, DIVAE OPTIMAE. An attribute to express
thy goodness, in which thou so resembles JOVE thy father.

The third, in the blush-colour'd suit, is, EVTOLMOS, as duly respecting
others, as never neglecting himself; commonly known by the title of good as
dacitie: to courts, and courtly assemblies, a guest most acceptable. His
Symbol is, DIVAE VIRAGINI. To express thy hardy courage, in chase of savage
beasts, which harbour in woods, and wilderness.

The fourth, in watchet tinsel, is the kind, and truly benefique EVCOLOS. Who
imparts not without respect, but yet without difficulty; and hath the
happiness to make every kindness seem double, by the timely, and freely
bestowing thereof. He is the chief of them, who (by the vulgar) are said to be
of good nature. His Symbol is, DIVAE MAXIMAE. An adjunct to signify thy
greatness, which in heaven, earth, and hell is formidable.


IS not that AMORPHVS, the travailer?


As though it were not! do you not see how his legs are in travail with a
measure?


HEDON, thy master is next.


What, will CUPID turn nomendator, and cry them?


No faith, but I have a comedy toward, that would not be lost for a kingdom.


In good time, for CUPID will prove the comedy.


MERCVRY, I am studying how to match them.


How to mis-match them were harder.


They are the Nymphs must do it, I shall sport my self with their passions
above measure.


Those Nymphs would be tamed a little indeed, but I fear thou hast not arrows
for the purpose.


O, yes, here be of all sorts, flights, rovers, and butt-shafts. But I can
wound with a brandish, and never draw bow for the matter.


I cannot but believe it, my invisible archer, and yet me thinks you are
tedious.


It behooves me to be somewhat circumspect, MERCVRY; for if CYNTHIA hear the
twang of my bow, she'll go near to whip me with the string: therefore, to
prevent that, I thus discharge a brandish upon -- it makes no matter which of
the couples. PHANTASTE, and AMORPHVS, at you.


Will the shaking of a shaft strike them into such a fever of affection?


As well as the wink of an eye: but I pray thee, hinder me not with thy
prattle.


JOVE forbid I hinder thee. Mary, all that I fear, is CYNTHIAS presence;
which, with the cold of her chastity, casts such an antiperistasis about the
place, that no heate of thine will tarry with the patient.


It will tarry the rather, for the antiperistasis will keep it in.


I long to see the experiment.


Why, their marrow boils already, or they are all turned eunuchs.


Nay, and 't be so, I'll give over speaking, and be a spectator only.


CYNTHIA (by my bright soul) is a right exquisite, and splendidious lady; yet
AMORPHVS, I think, hath seen more fashions, I am sure more countries: but
whether I have, or not, what need we gaze on CYNTHIA, that have our self to
admire?


O, excellent CYNTHIA! yet if PHANTASTE sate where she doo's, and had such a
tire on her head (for attire can do much) I say no more -- but goddesses are
goddesses, and PHANTASTE is as she is! I would the revels were done once, I
might go to my school of glas^e, again, and learn to do my self right
after all this ruffling.


How now, CUPID? here's a wonderful change with your brandish! do you not
hear, how they dote?


What prodigy is this? no word of love? no mention? no motion?


Not a word, my little Ignis fallen, not a word.


Are my darts enchanted? Is their vigour gone? is their virtue --


What? CUPID turned jealous of himself? ha, ha, ha.


Laughs MERCVRY?


Is CUPID angry?


Hath he not cause, when his purpose is so deluded?


A rare comoedie, it shall be entitled, CUPIDS.


Do not scorn us, HERMES.


Choler, and CUPID, are two fiery things; I scorn them not. But I see that
come to pass, which I presaged in the beginning.


You cannot tell: perhaps the physic will not work so soon upon some, as
upon others. It may be, the rest are not so resty.


Ex vngue, you know the old adage, as these, so are the remainder.


I'll try: this is the same shaft, with which I wounded ARGVRION.


I, but let me save you a labour, CUPID: there were certain bottles of water
fetched, and drunk off (since that time) by these gallants.


JOVE, strike me into earth: The Fountain of selfe-Loue!


Nay, faint not, CUPID.


I remembered it not.


Faith, it was ominous to take the name of ANTEROS upon you, you know not what
charm or enchantment lies in the word: you saw, I durst not venture upon any
device, in our presentment, but was content to be no other then a simple page.
Your arrows properties (to keep decorum) CUPID, are suited (it should seem)
to the nature of him you personate.


Indignity not to be borne.


Nay rather, an attempt to have been forborne.


How might I revenge my self on this insulting MERCVRY! there's CRITES, his
minion, he has not tasted of this water. It shall be so. Is CRITES turned
dotard on himself too?


That follows not, because the venom of your shafts cannot pierce him, CUPID.


As though there were one antidote for these, and another for him?


As though there were not! or as if one effect might not arise of diverse
causes? What say you to CYNTHIA, ARETE, PHRONESIS, TIME, and others there?


They are divine.


And CRITES aspires to be so.


But that shall not serve him.


'Tis like to do it, at this time. But CUPID is grown too covetous, that will
not spare one of a multitude.


One is more then a multitude.


ARETES favour makes any one shot-proofe against thee, CUPID. I pray thee,
light hony-bee, remember thou art not now in ADORIS garden, but in CYNTHIAS
presence, where thorns lie in garrison about the roses. Soft, CYNTHIA speaks.


LAdies, and gallants of our court, to end,
And give a timely period to our sports,
Let us conclude them with declining night;
Our empire is but of the darker half.
And if you judge it any recompense
For your fair pains, to have earned DIANAS thanks,
DIANA grants them: and bestows their crown
To gratify your acceptable zeal.
For you are they, that not (as some have done)
Do censure us, as too severe, and sour,
But as (more rightly) gracious to the good;
Although we not deny, unto the proud,
Or the profane, perhaps indeed austere:
For so ACTAEON, by presuming far,
Did (to our grief) incur a fatal doom;
And so, swollen NIOBE (comparing more
Then he presumed) was trophaeed into stone.
But are we therefore judged too extreme?
Seems it no crime, to enter sacred bowers,
And hallowed places, with impure aspect,
Most lewdly to pollute? Seems it no crime,
To brave a deity? Let mortals learn
To make religion of offending heaven;
And not at all to censure powers divine.
To men, this argument should stand for firm,
"A Goddess did it, therefore it was good:
"We are not cruel, nor delight in blood.
But what have serious repetitions
To do with revels, and the sports of court
We not intend to sour your late delights
With harsh expostulation. Let 't suffice,
That we take notice, and can take revenge
Of these calumnious, and lewd blasphemies.
For we are no less CYNTHIA, then we were,
Nor is our power (but as our self) the same:
Though we have now put on no tyre of shine,
But mortal eyes vndaz'led may endure.
"Years are beneath the spheres: and time makes weak
"Things under heaven, not powers which govern heaven.
And though our self be, in our self, secure,
Yet let not mortals challenge to themselves
Immunity from thence. Lo, this is all:
"Honour hath store of spleen, but wants gall.
Once more, we cast the slumber of our thanks
On your taken toil, which here let take an end.
And that we not mis-take your several worths,
Nor you our favour, from your selves remove
What makes you not your selves, those clouds of masque:
"Particular pains, particular thanks do ask.
How! let me view you! ha? Are we contemned?
Is there so little awe of our disdain,
That any (under trust of their disguise)
Should mix themselves with others of the court?
And (without forehead) boldly press so far,
As farther none? How apt is lenity
To be abused? severity to be loth'd?
And yet, how much more doth the seeming face
Of neighbour-vertues, and their borrowed names,
Add of lewd boldness, to loose vanities?
Who would have thought that PHILAVTIA durst
Or have usurped noble STORGES name?
Or with that theft have ventured, on our eyes?
Who would have thought, that all of them should hope
So much of our conniuence, as to come
To grace themselves, with titles not their own?
In stead of med'cines, have we maladies?
And such impostumes, as PHANTASTE is,
Grow in our palace? we must lance these sores,
Or all will putrefy. Nor are these all,
For we suspect a farther fraud then this:
Take off our veil, that shadows may depart,
And shapes appear, beloved ARETE -- So.
Another face of things presents it self,
Then did of late: What! featherd CUPID masked?
And masked like ANTEROS? And, stay! more strange!
Dear MERCVRIE, our brother like a page,
To countenance the ambush of the boy?
Nor ends our discovery as yet:
GELAIA, like a Nymph, that but ere-while
(In male attire) did serve ANAIDES?
CUPID came hither to find sport and game,
Who, heretofore hath been too conversant
Among our train; but never felt revenge:
And MERCVRIE bare CUPID company.
CUPID, we must confess this time of mirth
(Proclaimed by us) gave opportunity,
To thy attempts, although no privilege;
Tempt us no farther, we cannot endure
Thy presence longer: vanish hence, away.
You, MERCVRIE, we must entreat to stay,
And hear what we determine of the rest;
For in this plot, we well perceive your hand.
But (for we mean not a censorian task,
And yet to lance these ulcers grown so ripe)
Dear ARETE, and CRITES, to you two
We give the charge; impose what pains you please:
The incurable cut off, the rest reform,
Remembering ever what we first decreed,
Since revels were proclaimed let now none bleed.

How well DIANA can distinguish times?
And forther censures? keeping to her self
The doom of gods, leaving the rest to us?
Come, cite them, CRITES, first, and then proceed.

First, PHILAVTIA (for she was the first,)
Then light GELAIA, in AGLAIAS name,
Thirdly PHANTASTE, and MORIA next,
Maine follies all, and of the female crew:
AMORPHVS, or EVCOSMOS conterfeit,
Voluptuous HEDON taken for EVPATHES,
Brazen ANAIDES, and ASOTVS last,
With his two pages, MORVS and PROSAITES;
And thou, the travellers evil, COS, approach,
Impostors all, and male deformities --

Nay, forward, for I delegate my power.
And will that at thy mercy they do stand,
Whom they so oft so plainly scorned before.
"'Tis virtue which they want, and wanting it,
"Honour no garment to their backs can fit.
Then, CRITES, practise thy discretion.

Adored CYNTHIA, and bright ARETE,
Another might seem fitter for this task,
Then CRITES far, but that you judge not so:
For I (not to appear vindictive,
Or mindful of contempts, which I contemned
As done of impotence) must be remiss,
Who, as I was the author, in some sort,
To work their knowledge into CYNTHIAS sight,
So should be much severer to revenge
Th'indignitie, hence issuing to her name.
But there's not one of these, who are vnpain'd,
Or by themselves unpunished: for vice
Is like a fury to the vicious mind,
And turns delight it self to punishment.
But we must forward to design their doom,
You are offenders, that must be confessed,
Do you confess it?

We do.

And, that you merit sharpe correction?

Yes.

Then we (reserving unto DELIAES grace,
Her further pleasure, and to ARETE
What DELIA grants) thus do sentence you.
That from this place (for poenance known of all,
Since you have drunk so deeply of selfe-Loue)
You (two and two) singing a palinode,
March to your several homes by NIOBES stone,
And offer up two tears apiece thereon;
That it may change the name, as you must change,
And of a stone be called weeping Cross:
Because it stands cross of CYNTHIAS way,
One of whose names is sacred TRIVIA.
And, after poenance thus performed, you pass
In like set order, not as MIDAS did,
To wash his gold off into Tagus stream,
But to the well of knowledge, Helicon;
Where purged of your present maladies,
(Which are not few, nor slender) you become
Such as you fain would seem: and then return,
Offering your service to great CYNTHIA.
This is your sentence, if the goddess please.
To ratify it with her high consent:
"The scope of wise mirth unto fruit is bent.

We do approve thy censure, beloved CRITES.
Which MERCVRY, thy true propitious friend,
(A deity, next JOVE, beloved of us)
Will vnder-take to see exactly done:
And for this service of discovery
Performed by thee, in honour of our name,
We vow to guerdon it with such due grace,
As shall become our bounty, and thy place.
"Princes, that would their people should do well,
"Must at themselves begin, as at the head;
"For men, by their example, pattern out
"Their imitations, and reguard of laws:
"A virtuous Court a world to virtue draws.

From spanish shrugs, french faces, smirks, irps, and all affected humours.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From secret friends, sweet servants, loves, doves, and such phantastique
humours.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From stabbing of arms, flap-dragons, healths, whiffes, and all such
swaggering humours.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From waving of fans, coy glances, glickes, cringes, and all such simpering
humours.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From making love by atturny, courting of puppets, and paying for new
acquaintance.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From perfumed dogs, munkeyes, sparrows, dildo's, and parachito's.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From wearing bracelets of hair, shooe-ties, gloves, garters, and rings with
poesies.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From pargetting, painting, slicking, glazing, and renewing old rivaled faces.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From squiring to tilt-yards, play-houses, pageants, and all such public
places.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From entertaining one gallant to gull an other, and making fools of either.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

From belying ladies favours, noble-mens countenance, coining counterseit
employments, vaine-glorious taking to them other men's services, and all
selfe-louing humours.

Good MERCVRY defend us.

NOw each one dry his weeping eyes,
And to the well of knowledge haste;
Where purged of your maladies,
You may of sweeter waters taste:
And, with refined voice, report
The grace of CYNTHIA, and her court.
GEntles, be it known to you, since I went in
I am turned rimer; and do thus begin.
The Author (jealous, how your sense doth take
His travails) hath enjoined me to make
Some short, and ceremonious epilogue;
But if I yet know what, I am a rogue.
He ties me to such laws, as quite distract
My thoughts; and would a year of time exact.
I neither must be faint, remiss, nor sorry,
Sour, serious, confident, nor peremptory:
But betwixt these. Let's see; to lay the blame
Upon the Childrens action, that were lame.
To crave your favour, with a begging knee,
Were to distrust the writers faculty.
To promise better at the next we bring,
Prorogues disgrace, commends not any thing.
Stiffly to stand on this, and proudly approve
The play, might tax the maker of selfe-Loue.
I'll only speak, what I have heard him say;
by ( --) 'tis good, and if you liked, you may.
This Comical Satire was first acted, in the year 1600.

By the then Children of Queen ELIZABETHS Chapel.

The principal Comoedians were,

With the allowance of the Master of REVELS.


