SEIANVS his FALL. A Tragoedie. Acted, in the year 1603. By the K. MAJESTIES
SERVANTS.

The Author B. I.

Non hic Centauros, non Gorgonas, Harpyias{que}
Inuenies: Hominem pagmanostra sapit.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY,

M. DC. XVI.

MY LORD, IF ever any ruin were so great, as to survive; I think this be one
I send you: the Fall of Seianus. It is a poem, that (if I well remember) in
your Lo. sight, suffered no less violence from our people here, then the
subject of it did from the rage of the people of Rome; but, with a different
fate, as (I hope) merit: For this hath out-liu'd their malice, and begot it
self a greater favour then he lost, the love of good men. Amongst whom, if I
make your Lo. the first it thanks, it is not without a just confession of the
bond your benefits have, and ever shall hold upon me.

Your Lo. most faithful honorer, BEN. IONSON.
AELius Seianus, son to Seius Strabo, a gentleman of Rome, and borne at
Vulsinium, after his long service in court: first, under Augustus, afterward,
Tiberius: grew into that favour with the latter, and won him by those arts, as
there wanted nothing, but the name, to make him a copartner of the Empire.
Which greatness of his, Drusus, the Emperors son not brooking, after many
smothered dislikes, it one day breaking out, the Prince struck him publicly
on the face. To revenge which disgrace, Liuia, the wife of Drusus (being before
corrupted by him to her dishonour, and the discovery of her husbands counsels)
Seianus practises with, together with her Physician, called Eudemus, and on^
Lygdus, an Eunuch, to poison Drusus. This their inhumane act having
successful, and unsuspected passage, it emboldeneth Seianus to farther, more
insolent proiects, even the ambition of the Empire: where finding the lets, he
must encounter, to be many, hard, in respect of the issue of Germanicus (who
were next in hope for the succession) he devises to make Tiberius self, his
means: instill's into his ears many doubts, and suspicions, both against the
Princes, and their mother Agrippina: which Caesar jealously harkening to, as
covetously consents to their ruin, and their friends. In this time, the
better to mature and strengthen his design, he labours to marry Liuia, and
works (with all his ingine) to remove Tiberius from the knowledge of public
business, with allurements of a quiet and retired life: the latter of which,
Tiberius (out of a proneness to lust, and a desire to hide those unnatural
pleasures, which he could not so publicly practise) embraces: the former
inkindleth his fears, and there gives him first cause of doubt, or suspect
toward Seianus. Against whom, he raises (in private) a new instrument, one
Sertorius Macro, and by him vnder-worketh, discovers the others counsels, his
means, his ends, sounds the affections of the Senators, divides, distracts
them: at last, when Seianus least looks, and is most secure (with pretext of
doing him an vn-wonted honour in the Senate) he trains him from his guards,
with one letter, and in one day, hath him suspected, accused, condemned, and
torn in pieces, by the rage of the people,

THE SCENE.

ROME.

Hail, CAIVS SILIVS.

TITIVS SABINVS, Hail.
Yo'are rarely met in court!

Therefore, well met.

'Tis true: Indeed, this place is not our sphaere.

No, SILIVS, we are no good inginers;
We want the fine arts, their thriving use,
Should make us graced, or favoured of the times:
We have no shift of faces, no cleft tongues,
No soft, and glutinous bodies, that can stick,
Like snails, on painted walls; or, on our breasts,
Creep up, to fall, from that proud height, to which
We did by slavery, not by service, clime.
We are no guilty men, and then no great;
We have nor place in court, office in state,
That we can say, we owe unto our crimes:
We burn with no black secrets, which can make
Us dear to the pale authors; or live feared
Of their still waking iealosies, to raise
Our selves a fortune, by subuerting theirs.
We stand not in the lines, that do advance
To that so courted point.

But yonder lean
A pair that do.

SATRIVS SECVNDVS, and PINNARIVS NATTA,
The great SEIANVS clients: There be two,
Know more, then honest counsels: whose close breasts
Were they rip'd up to light, it would be found
A poor, and idle sin, to which their trunks
Had not been made fit organs. These can lye,
Flatter, and swear, forswear, deprave, inform,
Smile, and betray; make guilty men; then beg
The forfeit lives, to get the livings; cut
Men's throats with whisperings; sell to gaping suitors
The empty smoke, that flies about the Palace;
Laugh, when their patron laughs; sweat, when he sweates;
Be hot, and cold with him; change every mood,
Habit, and garb, as often as he varies;
Observe him, as his watch observes his clock;
And true, as turkise in the dear lords ring,
Look well, or ill with him: ready to praise
His lordship, if he spit, or but peace fair,
Have an indifferent stool, or break wind well,
Nothing can escape their catch.

Alas! these things
Deserve no note, conferred with other vile,
And filthier flatteries, that corrupt the times:
When, not alone our gentries chief are fain
To make their safety from such sordide acts,
But all our Consuls, and no little part
Of such as have been Praetors, yea, the most
Of Senators (that else not use their voices)
Start up in public Senate, and there strive
Who shall propound most abject things, and base,
So much, as oft TIBERIVS hath been heard,
Leaving the court, to cry O race of men,
Prepared for servitude! which showed, that, he
Who least the public liberty could like,
As loathly brook'd their flat servility.

Well, all is worthy of us, were it more,
Who with our riots, pride, and civil hate,
Have so prouok'd the justice of the gods.
We, that (within these fourscore years) were borne
Free, equal lords of the triumphed world,
And knew no masters, but affections,
To which betraying first our liberties,
We since became the slaves to one mans lusts;
And now to many: every ministering spy
That will accuse, and swear, is lord of you,
Of me, of all, our fortunes, and our lives.
Our looks are called to question, and our words,
How innocent soever, are made crimes;
We shall not shortly dare to tell our dreams,
Or think, but 'twill be reason.

"Tyrannes arts
"Are to give flatterers, grace; accusers, power;
"That those may seem to kill whom they devour.
Now good CREMVTIVS CORDVS.

Hail, to your lordship.

Who's that salutes your cousin?

'Tis one CORDVS,
A gentleman of Rome: one, that has writ
Annal's of late, they say, and very well.

Annal's? of what times?

I think of POMPEI'S,
And CAIVS CAESARS; and so down to these.

How stands h'affected to the present state?
Is he or Drusian? or Germanican?
Or ours or neutral?

I know him not so far.

Those times are somewhat queasy to be touched.
Have you or seen or heard part of his work?

Not I, he means they shall be public shortly.

O. CORDVS do you cal him?

I.

But these our times
Are not the same, ARRVNTIVS.

Times? the men,
The men are not the same: 'tis we are base*
Poor, and degenerate from th'exalted strain
Of our great fathers. Where is now the soul
Of god-like CATO? he, that durst be good,
When CAESAR durst be evil; and had power,
As not to live his slave, to dye his master.
Or where the constant BRVTVS, that (being proof
Against all charm of benefits) did strike
So brave a blow into the monsters heart
That sought unkindly to captive his country?
O, they are fled the light. Those mighty spirits
Lye raked up, with their ashes in their vrnes,
And not a spark of their eternal fire
Glowes in a present bosom. All's but blaze,
Flashes, and smoke, wherewith we labour so,
There's nothing Roman in us; nothing good,
Gallant, or great: 'Tis true, that CORDVS say's,
Brave CASSIVS was the last of all that race.

Stand by, lord DRVSVS.

Th'Emp'rours son, give place.

I like the prince well.

A riotous youth,
There's little hope of him.

That fault his age
Will, as it grows, correct. Me thinks, he bears
Himself, each day, more nobly then other:
And wins no less on men's affections,
Then doth his father lose. Believe me, I love him;
And chiefly for opposing to SEIANVS.

And I, for gracing his young kinsmen so,
The sons of Prince GERMANICVS: It shows
A gallant cleerenesse in him, a straight mind,
That envies not, in them, their fathers name.

His name was, while he lived, above all envy;
And being dead, without it. O, that man!
If there were seeds of the old virtue left,
They lived in him.

He had the fruits, ARRVNTIVS,
More then the seeds: SABINVS, and my self
Had means to know him, within; and can report him.
We were his followers, (he would call us friends.)
He was a man most like to vertue'; In all,
And every action, nearer to the gods,
Then men, in nature; of a body' as fair
As was his mind; and no less reverend
In face, then fame: He could so use his state,
Temp'ring his greatness, with his gravity,
As it avoided all selfe-loue in him,
And spite in others. What his funerals lacked
In images, and pomp, they had supplied
With honourable sorrow, soldiers sadness,
A kind of silent mourning, such, as men
(Who know no tears, but from their captives) use
To show in so great losses.

I thought once,
Considering their forms, age, manner of deaths,
The nearness of the places, where they fell,
T'haue paralell'd him with great ALEXANDER:
For both were of best feature, of high race,
Yeer'd but to thirty, and, in foreign lands,
By their own people, alike made away.

I know not, for his death, how you might wrest it:
But, for his life, it did as much disdain
Comparison, with that voluptuous, rash,
Giddy, and drunken Macedon's, as mine
Doth with my bond-mans. All the good, in him,
(His valour, and his fortune) he made his;
But he had other touches of late Romanes,
That more did speak him: POMPEI'S dignity,
The innocence of CATO, CAESAR'S spirit,
Wise BRVTVS temp'rance, and every virtue,
Which, parted unto others, gave them name,
Flowed mixed in him. He was the soul of goodness:
And all our praises of him are like streams
Drawn from a spring, that still rise full, and leave
The part remaining greatest.

I am sure
He was too great for us, and that they knew
Who did remove him hence.

When men grow fast
Honoured, and loved, there is a trick in state
(Which jealous princes never fail to use)
How to decline that growth, with fair pretext,
And honourable colours of employment,
Either by embassy, the war, or such,
To shift them forth into another air,
Where they may purge, and lessen; so was he:
And had his secon'ds there, sent by TIBERIVS,
And his more subtle damme, to discontent him;
To breed, and cherish mutinies; detract
His greatest actions; give audacious check
To his commands; and work to put him out
In open act of treason. All which snares
When his wise cares prevented, a fine poison
Was thought on, to mature their practices.

Here comes SEIANVS.

Now observe the stoups,
The bendings, and the falls.

Most creeping base!
I Note them well: No more. Say you.

My lord,
There is a gentleman of Rome would buy --

How cal you him you talked with?

'Please your lordship,
It is EVDEMVS, the physician
To LIVIA, DRVSV'S wife.

On with your suit.
Would buy, you said --

A Tribune* place, my lord.

What will he give?

Fifty sestertia.

LIVIA'S physician, say you, is that fellow?

It is, my lord; your lordships answer?

To what?

The place, my lord. 'Tis for a gentleman,
Your lordship will well like off, when you see him;
And one, you may make yours, by the grant.

Well, let him bring his money, and his name.

Thank your lordship. He shall, my lord.

Come hither.
Know you this same EVDEMVS? Is he learned?

Reputed so, my lord: and of deep practice.

Bring him in, to me, in the gallery;
And take you cause, to leave us there, together:
I would confer with him, about a grief. -- On.

So, yet! another? yet? O desperate state
Of grou'ling honour! See thou this, O sun,
And do we see thee after? Me thinks, day
Should lose his light, when men do lose their shames,
And, for the empty circumstance of life,
Betray their cause of living.

Nothing so.
SEIANVS can repair, if JOVE should ruin.
He is the now court-god; And well applied
With sacrifice of knees, of crookes, and cringe,
He will do more then all the house of heaven
Can, for a thousand hecatombes. 'Tis he
Makes us our day, or night; Hell, and Elysium
Are in his look: We talk of RHADAMANTH,
Furies, and fire-brands; But 'tis his frown
That is all these, where, on the adverse part,
His smile is more, then ere (yet) Poets feigned
Of bliss, and shades, nectar --

A serving boy?
I knew him, at CAIVS trencher, when for hire,
He prostituted his abused body
To that great gourmond, fat APICIVS;
And was the noted pathick of the time.

And, now, the second face of the whole world.
The partner of the empire, hath his image
Reared equal with TIBERIVS, borne in ensigns,
Command's, disposes every dignity,
Centurions, Tribunes, Heads of provinces,
Praetors, and Consuls, all that heretofore
Romes general suffrage gave, is now his sale.
The gain, or rather spoil, of all the earth,
One, and his house, receives.

He hath of late
Made him a strength too, strangely, by reducing
All the Praetorian bands into one camp,
Which he command's: pretending, that the soldier
By living loose, and scattered, fell to riot;
And that if any sudden enterprise
Should be attempted, their united strength
Would be far more, then severed; and their life
More strict, if from the city more removed.

Where, now, he builds, what kind of fort's he please,
Is hard to court the soldier, by his name,
Woos, feasts the chiefest men of action,
Whose wants, not loves, compel them to be his.
And, though he ne'er were liberal by kind,
Yet, to his own dark ends, he's most profuse,
Lavish, and letting fly, he cares not what
To his ambition.

Yet, hath he ambition?
Is there that step in state can make him higher?
Or more? or any thing he is, but less?

Nothing, but Emp'rour.

The name TIBERIVS
I hope, will keep; how ere he hath fore-gone
The dignity, and power.

Sure, while he lives.

And dead, it comes to DRVSVS. Should he fail,
To the brave issue of GERMANICVS;
And they are three: Too many (ha?) for him
To have a plot upon?

I do not know
The heart of his designs; but, sure, their face
Looks farther then the present.

By the gods,
If I could guess he had but such a thought,
My sword should cleave him down from head to heart,
But I would find it out: and with my hand
I'd hurl his panting brain about the air,
In mites, as small as atomi, to'vndoe
The knotted bed --

You are observed, ARRVNTIVS.

Death! I dare tell him so; and all his spies:
You, sir, I would, do you look? and you.

Forbear.

Here, he will instant be; Let's walk a turn.
Yo'are in a muse, EVDEMVS?
Not I, sir.
I wonder he should mark me out so! well,
JOVE, and APOLLO form it for the best.

Your fortune's made unto you now, EVDEMVS,
If you can but lay hold upon the means;
Do but observe his humour, and -- believe it --
He's the noblest Roman, where he takes --
Here comes his lordship.

Now, good SATRIVS.

This is the gentleman, my lord.

Is this?
Give me your hand, we must be more acquainted.
Report, sir, hath spoke out your art, and learning:
And I am glad I have so needful cause,
(How ever in it self painful, and hard)
To make me known to so great virtue. Look,
Who's that? SATRIVS -- I have a grief, sir,
That will desire your help. Your name's EVDEMVS?

Yes.

Sir?

It is, my lord.

I hear, you are Physician to LIVIA, the princess?

I minister unto her, my good lord.

You minister to a royal lady, then.

She is, my lord, and fair.

That's understood
Of all their sex, who are, or would be so;
And those, that would be, physic soon can make them*
For those that are, their beauties fear no colours.

Your lordship is conceited.

Sir, you know it.
And can (if need be) read a learned lecture,
On this, and other secrets. Pray you tell me,
What more of ladies, besides LIVIA,
Have you your patients?

Many, my good lord.
The great AVGVSTA, VRGVLANIA.
MVTILIA PRISCA, and PLANCINA, diverse --

And, all these tell you the particulars
Of every several grief? how first it grew,
And then increased, what action caused that;
What passion that: and answer to each point
That you will put them.

Else, my lord, we know not
How to prescribe the remedies.

Go to,
Yo'are a subtle nation, you Physicians!
And grown the only cabinets, in court,
To ladies privacies. Faith which of these
Is the most pleasant lady, in her physic?
Come, you are modest now.

'Tis fit, my lord.

Why, sir, I do not ask you of their vrines,
Whose smel's most violet? or whose seige is best?
Or who makes hardest faces on her stool?
Which lady sleeps with her own face, a nights?
Which puts her teeth off, with her clothes, in court?
Or, which her hair? which her complexion?
And, in which box she puts it? These were questions
That might, perhaps, have put your gravity
To some defence of blush. But, I enquired,
Which was the wittiest? merriest? wantonnest?
Harmless intergatories, but conceits.
Me thinks, AVGVSTA should be most perverse,
And froward in her fit?

She's so, my lord.

I knew it. And MVTILIA the most jocund?

'Tis very true, my lord.

And why would you
Conceal this from me, now? Come, what's LIVIA?
I know, she's quick, and quaintly spirited,
And will have strange thoughts, when she's at leisure;
She tells them all to you?

My noblest lord,
He breaths not in the empire, or on earth,
Whom I would be ambitious to serve
(In any act, that may preserve mine honour)
Before your lordship.

Sir, you can loose no honour,
By trusting ought to me. The coursest act
Done to my service, I can so requite,
As all the world shall stile it honourable:
"Your idle, virtuous definitions
"Keep honour poor, and are as scorned, as vain:
"Those deeds breathe honour, that do suck in gain.

But, good my lord, if I should thus betray
The counsels of my patient, and a ladies
Of her high place, and worth; what might your lordship,
(Who presently are to trust me with your own)
Judge of my faith?

Only the best, I swear.
Say now, that I should utter you my grief;
And with it, the true cause; that it were love;
And love to LIVIA: you should tell her this?
Should she suspect your faith? I would you could
Tell me as much, from her; see, if my brain
Could be turned jealous.

Happily, my lord,
I could, in time, tell you as much, and more;
So I might safely promise but the first,
To her, from you.

As safely, my EVDEMVS,
(I now dare call thee so) as I have put
The secret into thee.

My lord --

Protest not.
Thy looks are vows to me, use only speed,
And but affect her with SEIANVS love,
Thou art a man, made, to make Consuls. Go.

My lord, I'll promise you a private meeting
This day, together.

Can thou?

Yes.

The place?

My gardens, whither I shall fetch your lordship.

Let me adore my AESCVLAPIVS.
Why, this indeed is physic! and out-speakes
The knowledge of cheap drugs, or any use
Can be made out of it! more comforting
Then all your opiates, iulebes, apozemes,
Magistrall syrrupes, or -- Be gone, my friend,
Not barely stiled, but created so;
Expect things, greater then thy largest hopes,
To overtake thee: Fortune, shall be taught
To know how ill she hath deserved thus long,
To come behind thy wishes. Go, and speed.
"Ambition makes more trusty slaves, then need,
These fellows, by the favour of their art,
Have, still, the means to tempt, oft-times, the power.
If LIVIA will be now corrupted, then
Thou hast the way, SEIANVS, to work out
His secrets, who (thou know) endures thee not,
Her husband DRVSVS: and to work against them.
Prosper it, PALLAS, thou, that betterst wit;
For VENVS hath the smallest share in it.

We not endure these flatteries, let him stand;
Our empire, ensigns, axes, rods, and state
Take not away our humane nature from us:
Look up, on us, and fall before the gods.
How like a god, speaks CAESAR!

There, observe!
He can endure that second, that's no flattery.
O, what is it, proud slime will not believe
Of his own worth, to hear it equal praised
Thus with the gods?

He did not hear it, sir.

He did not? Tut, he must not, we think meanly.
'Tis your most courtly, known confederacy,
To have your private parasite redeem
What he, in public subtilty, will lose
To making him a name.

Right mighty lord --

We must make up our ears, against these assaults
Of charming tongues; we pray you use, no more
These contumelies to us: stile not us
Or lord, or mighty, who profess our self
The servant of the Senate, and are proud
T'enioy them our good, just, and favouring lords.

Rarely dissembled.

Prince-like, to the life.

"When power, that may command, so much descends,
"Their bondage, whom it stoups to, it intends.

Whence are these letters?

From the Senate.

So.
Whence these?

From thence too.

Are they sitting, now?

They stay thy answer, CAESAR.

If this man
Had but a mind allied unto his words,
How blessed a fate were it to us, and Rome?
We could not think that state, for which to change,
Although the aim were our old liberty:
The ghosts of those that fell for that, would grieve
Their bodies lived not, now, again to serve.
"Men are deceived, who think there can be thrall
"Beneath a virtuous prince. Wished liberty
"Ne'er lovelier looks, then under such a crown.
But, when his grace is merely but lip-good,
And, that no longer, then he aires himself
Abroad in public, there, to seem to shun
The strokes, and stripes of flatterers, which within
Are lechery unto him, and so feed
His brutish sense with their afflicting sound,
As (dead to virtue) he permits himself
Be carried like a pitcher, by the ears,
To every act of vice: this is a case
Deserves our fear, and doth presage the nigh,
And close approach of blood and tyranny.
"Flattery is midwife unto princes rage:
"And nothing sooner, doth help forth a tyranne,
"Then that, and whisperers grace, who have the time,
"The place, the power, to make all men offenders.

He should be told this; and be bid dissemble
With fools, and blind men: We that know the evil,
Should hunt the Palace-rattes, or give them bane;
Fright hence these worse then ravens, that devour
The quick, where they but prey upon the dead:
He shall be told it.

Stay, ARRVNTIVS,
We must abide our opportunity:
And practise what is fit, as what is needful.
"It is not safe t'enforce a soueraigne's ear:
"Princes hear well, if they at all will hear.

Ha? Say you so? well. In the mean time, JOVE,
(Say not, but I do call upon thee now.)
Of all wild beasts, preserve me from a tyranne;
And of all tame, a flatterer.

'Tis well prayed.

Return the lords this voice, we are their creature:
And it is fit, a good, and honest prince,
Whom they, out of their bounty, have instructed
With so dilate, and absolute a power,
Should owe the office of it, to their service;
And good of all, and every citizen.
Nor shall it e're repent us, to have wished
The Senate just, and fau'ring lords unto us,
"Since their free loves do yield no less defence
"To a princes state, then his own innocence.
Say then, there can be nothing in their thought
Shall want to please us, that hath pleased them;
Our suffrage rather shall prevent, then stay
Behind their wills: 'tis empire, to obey
Where such, so great, so grave, so good determine.
Yet, for the suit of Spain, t'erect a temple
In honour of our mother, and our self,
We must (with pardon of the Senate) not
Assent thereto. Their lordships may object
Our not denying the same late request
Unto the Asian cities: We desire
That our defence, for suffering that, be known
In these brief reasons, with our after purpose.
Since deified AVGVSTVS hindered not
A temple to be built, at Pergamum,
In honour of himself, and sacred Rome,
We, that have all his deeds, and words observed
Ever, in place of laws, the rather follow'd
That pleasing precedent, because, with ours,
The Senates reverence also, there, was joined.
But, as, t'haue once received it, may deserve
The gain of pardon, so, to be adored
With the continew'd stile, and note of gods,
Through all the provinces, were wild ambition,
And no less pride: Yea, even AVGVSTVS name
Would early vanish, should it be profaned
With such promiscuous flatteries. For our part,
We here protest it, and are covetous
Posterity should know it, we are mortal;
And can but deeds of men: 'twere glory' enough,
Could we be truly a prince. And, they shall add
Abounding grace, unto our memory,
That shall report us worthy our fore-fathers,
Careful of your affairs, constant in dangers,
And not afraid of any private frown
For public good. These things shall be to us
Temples, and statues, reared in your minds,
The fairest, and most during imag'rie:
For those of stone, or brasle, if they become
Odious in judgment of posterity,
Are more contemned, as dying sepulchres,
Then taken for living monuments. We then
Make here our suite, alike to gods and men,
The one, until the period of our race,
T'inspire us with a free, and quiet mind,
Discerning both divine, and humane laws;
The other, to vouchsafe us after death,
An honourable mention, and fair praise,
T'accompanie our actions, and our name:
The rest of greatness princes may command,
And (therefore) may neglect, only, a long,
A lasting, high, and happy memory
They should, without being satisfied, pursue.
Contempt of fame begets contempt of virtue.

Rare!

Most divine!

The Oracles are ceased,
That only CAESAR, with their tongue, might speak.

Let me be gone, most felt, and open this!

Stay.

What? to hear more cunning, and fine words,
With their sound flattered, ere their sense be meant?

Their choice of Antium, thereto place the gift
Vowed to the goddess, for our mothers health,
Senate know, we fairly like;
As also, of their grant to LEPIDVS,
For his repairing the Aemilian place,
And restoration of those monuments:
Their grace too in consining of SILANVS,
To the other Is'le Cithera, at the suit
Of his religious sister, much commends
Their policy, so temp'red with their mercy.
But, for the honours, which they have decreed
To our SEIANUS* to advance his statue
In POMPEI'S theatre (whose ruining fire
His vigilance, and labour kept restrained
In that one loss) they have, therein, out-gone
Their own great wisdoms, by their skilful choice,
And placing of their bounties, on a man,
Whose merit more adorns the dignity,
Then that can him: and gives a benefit,
In taking, greater, then it can receive.
Blush not, SEIANVS, thou great aide of Rome,
Associate of our labours our chief helper,
Let us not force thy simple modesty
With offering at thy praise, for more we cannot,
Since there's no voice can take it. No man, here,
Receive our speeches, as hyperbole's;
For we are far from flattering our friend,
(Let envy know) as from the need to flatter.
Nor let them ask the causes of our praise;
Princes have still their grounds reared with themselves,
Above the poor low flats of common men,
And, who will search the reasons of their acts,
Must stand on equal bases. Lead, away.
Our loves unto the Senate.

Caesar.

Peace.

Great POMPEI'S theatre was never ruined
Till now, that proud SEIANVS hath a statue
Reared on his ashes.

Place the shame of soldiers,
Above the best of generals? crack the world!
And bruise the name of Romanes into dust,
Ere we behold it!

Check your passion;
Lord DRVSVS tarries.

Is my father mad?
Weary of life, and rule, lords? thus to heave
An idol up with praise! make him his mate!
His rival in the empire!

O, good prince!

Allow him statues? titles? honours? such,
As he himself refuses?

Brave, brave DRVSVS!

The first ascents to sovereignty are hard
But, entered once, there never wants or means,
Or ministers, to help th'aspirer on.

True, gallant DRVSVS.

We must shortly pray
To Modesty, that he will rest contented --

I, where he is, and not write emp'rour.
THere is your bill, and yours; Bring you your man:
I have moved for you, too, LATIARIS.

What?
Is your vast greatness grown so blindly bold,
That you will over us?

Why, then give way.

Give way, Colossus? Do you lift? Advance you?
Take that.

Good! brave! excellent brave prince!

Nay, come, approach. What? stand you off? at gaze?
It looks too full of death, for thy cold spirits.
Avoid mine eye, dull camel, or my sword
Shall make thy brau'rie fitter for a grave,
Then for a triumph. I'll advance a statue,
O'your own bulk; but 't shall be on the cross:
Where I will nail your pride, at breadth, and length,
And crack those sinews, which are yet but stretched
With your swollen fortunes rage.

A noble prince!

A CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR!
HE that, with such wrong moved, can bear it through
With patience, and an even mind, knows how
To turn it back. Wrath, covered, carries fate:
Revenge is lost, if I profess my hate.
What was my practice late, I'll now pursue
As my fell justice. This hath styled it new.

Physician, thou art worthy of a province,
For the great favours done unto our loves;
And, but that greatest LIVIA bears a part
In the requital of thy services,
I should alone, despair of ought, like means,
To give them worthy satisfaction.

EVDEMVS, (I will see it) shall receive
A fit, and full reward, for his large merit.
But for this potion, we intend to DRVSVS,
(No more our husband, now) whom shall we choose
As the most apt, and abled instrument,
To minister it to him?

I say, LYGDVS.

LYGDVS? what's he?

An Eunuch DRVSVS loves.

I, and his cup-bearer.

Name not a second.
If DRVSVS love him, and he have that place,
We cannot think a sitter.

True, my lord,
For free access, and trust, are two maine aides.

Skilful physician!

But he must be wrought
To th'vndertaking, with some laboured art.

Is he ambitious?

No.

Or covetous?

Neither.

Yet, gold is a good general charm.

What is he then?

Faith, only wanton, light.

How! Is he young? and fair?

A delicate youth.

Send him to me, I'll work him. Royal lady,
Though I have loved you long, and with that height
Of zeal, and duty, (like the fire, which more
It mounts, it trembles) thinking nought could add
Unto the fervor, which your eye had kindled;
Yet, now I see your wisdom, judgment, strength,
Quickness, and will, to apprehend the means
To your own good, and greatness, I protest
My self through rarefied, and turned all flame
In your affection: Such a spirit as yours,
Was not created for the idle second
To a poor flash, as DRVSVS; but to shine
Bright, as the Moon, among the lesser lights,
And share the sou'raigntie of all the world.
Then LIVIA triumphs in her proper sphere,
When she, and her SEIANVS shall divide
The name of CAESAR; and AVGVSTA'S star
Be dimmed with glory of a brighter beam:
When AGRIPPINA'S fires are quite extinct,
And the scarce-seene TIBERIVS borrows all
His little light from us, whose folded arms
Shall make one perfect or be. Who's that? EVDEMVS,
Look, 'tis not DRVSVS? Lady, do not fear.

Not I, my Lord. My fear, and love of him
Left me at once.

Illustrous lady! stay --

I'll tell his lordship.

Who is't, EVDEMVS?

One of your lordships servants, brings you word
The Emp'rour hath sent for you.

O! where is he?
With your fair leave, dear Princess. I'll but ask
A question, and return.

Fortunate Princess!
How are you blessed in the fruition
Of this vnequald man, this soul of Rome,
The empires life, and voice of CAESARS world!

So blessed, my EVDEMVS, as to know
The bliss I have, with what I ought to owe
The means that wrought it. How do'I look to day?

Excellent clear, believe it. This same fucus
Was well laid on.

Me thinks, 'tis here not white.

Lend me your scarlet, lady. 'Tis the sun
Hath given some little taint unto the ceruse,
You should have used of the white oil I gave you.
SEIANVS, for your love! his very name
Commands above CUPID, or his shafts --

Nay, now yo'haue made it worse.

I'll help it straight.)
And, but pronounced, is a sufficient charm
Against all rumour; and of absolute power
To satisfy for any ladies honour.

What do you now, EVDEMVS?

Make a light fucus,
To touch you ore withal.) Honoured SEIANVS!
What act (though ne'er so strange, and insolent)
But that addition will at least bear out,
If 't do not expiate?

Here, good physician.

I like this study to preserve the love
Of such a man, that comes not every hour
To greet the world. ('Tis now well, lady, you should
Use of the dentisrice, I prescribed you, too,
To clear your teeth, and the prepared pomatum,
To smooth the skin:) A lady cannot be
Too curious of her form, that still would hold
The heart of such a person, made her captive,
As you have his: who, to endear him more
In your clear eye, hath put away his wife,
The trouble of his bed, and your delights,
Fair Apicata, and made spacious room
To your new pleasures.

Have not we returned
That, with our hate of DRVSVS, and discovery
Of all his councels?

Yes, and wisely, lady,
The ages that succeed, and stand far off
To gaze at your high prudence, shall admire
And reckon it an act, without your sex:
It hath that rare appearance. Some will think
Your fortune could not yield a deeper sound,
Then mixed with DRVSVS; But, when they shall hear
That, and the thunder of SEIANVS meet,
SEIANVS, whose high name doth strike the stars,
And rings about the concave, great SEIANVS,
Whose glories, stile, and titles are himself,
The often iterating of SEIANVS:
They then will lose their thoughts, and be ashamed
To take acquaintance of them.

I must make
A rude departure, lady. CAESAR sends
With all his haste both of command, and prayer.
Be resolute in our plot; you have my soul,
As certain yours, as it is my bodies.
And, wise physician, so prepare the poison
As you may lay the subtle operation
Upon some natural disease of his.
Your eunuch send to me. I kiss your hands,
Glory of ladies, and commend my love
To your best faith, and memory.

My lord,
I shall but change your words. Farewell. Yet, this
Remember for your heed, he loves you not;
You know, what I have told you: His designs
Are full of grudge, and danger: we must use
More then a common speed.

Excellent lady,
How you do fire my blood!

Well, you must go?
The thoughts be best, are least set forth to show.

When will you take some physic, lady?

When
I shall, EVDEMVS: But let DRVSVS drug
Be first prepared.

Were LYGDVS made, that's done;
I have it ready. And to morrow-morning,
I'll send you a perfume, first to resolve,
And procure sweat, and then prepare a bath
To cleanse, and clear the cutis; against when,
I'll have an excellent new fucus made,
Resistiue against the sun, the rain, or wind,
Which you shall lay on with a breath, or oil,
As you best like, and last some fourteen hours.
This change came timely, lady, for your health;
And the restoring your complexion,
Which DRVSVS choler had almost burnt up:
Wherein your fortune hath prescribed you better
Then art could do.

Thanks, good physician,
I'll use my fortune (you shall see) with reverence.
Is my coach ready?

It attends your highness.

IF this be not revenge, when I have done
And made it perfect, let Egyptian slaves,
Parthians, and bare-foot Hebrewes brand my face,
And print my body full of injuries.
Thou lost thy self, child DRVSVS, when thou though
Thou could out-skip my vengeance: or out-stand
The power I had to crush thee into air.
Thy follies now shall taste what kind of man
They have prouok'd, and this thy fathers house
Crack in the flame of my incensed rage,
Whose fury shall admit no shame, or mean.
Adultery? it is the lightest ill,
I will commit. A race of wicked acts
Shall flow out of my anger, and o're-spread
The worlds wide face, which no posterity
Shall e're approve, nor yet keep silent: Things,
That for their cunning, close, and cruel mark,
Thy father would wish his; and shall (perhaps)
Carry the empty name, but we the prize.
On then, my soul, and start not in thy course;
Though heaven drop sulphur, and hell belch out fire,
Laugh at the idle terrors: Tell proud JOVE,
Between his power, and thine, there is no odds.
'Twas only fear, first, in the world made gods.

IS yet SEIANVS come?
He's here, dread CAESAR.

Let all depart that chamber, and the next:
Sit down, my comfort. When the master-prince
Of all the world, SEIANVS, saith, he fears;
Is it not fatal?

Yes, to those are feared.

And not to him?

Not, if he wisely turn
That part of fate he holds, first on them.

That nature, blood, and laws of kind forbid.

Do policy, and state forbid it?

No.

The rest of poor respects, then, let go by:
State is enough to make th'act just, them guilty.

Long hate pursues such acts.

Whom hatred frights,
Let him not dream on sou'raignty.

Are rites
Of faith, love, piety, to be trod down?
Forgotten? and made vain?

All for a crown.
The prince, who shames a tyrannes name to bear,
Shall never dare do any thing, but fear;
All the command of scepters quite doth perish
If it begin religious thoughts to cherish:
Whole Empires fall, swayed by those nice respects.
It is the licence of dark deeds protects
Even states most hated: when no laws resist
The sword, but that it acts what it list.

Yet so, we may do all things cruelly,
Not safely:

Yes, and do them thoroughly.

Knows yet, SEIANVS, whom we point at?

I,
Or else my thought, my sense, or both do err:
'Tis AGRIPPINA?

She; and her proud race.

Proud? dangerous,

For in them apace
The fathers spirit shoots up. GERMANICVS
Lives in their looks, their gate, their form, t'vpbraide us
With his close death, if not revenge the same.

The act's not known.

Not proved. But whispring fame
Knowledge, and proof doth to the jealous give,
Who, then to fail, would their own thought believe.
It is not safe, the children draw long breath,
That are provoked by a parents death.

It is a dangerous, to make them hence,
If nothing but their birth be their offence.

Stay, till they strike at CAESAR: then their crime
Will be enough, but late, and out of time
For him to punish.

Do they purpose it?

You know, sir, thunder speaks not till it hit.
Be not secure: none swiftlier are oppressed,
Then they, whom confidence betrays to rest.
Let not your daring make your danger such:
All power's to be feared, where 'tis too much.
The youth's are (of themselves) hot, violent,
Full of great thought; and that male-spirited dame,
Their mother, slackes no means to put them on,
By large allowance, popular presentings,
Increase of train, and state, suing for titles,
Hath them commended with like prayers, like vows,
To the same Gods, with CAESAR: days and nights
She spends in banquets, and ambitious feasts
For the Nobility; where CAIVS SILIVS,
TITIVS SABINVS, old ARRVNTIVS,
ASINIVS GALLVS, FVRNIVS, REGVLVS,
And others, of that discontented list,
Are the prime guests. There, and to these, she tells
Whose niece she was, whose daughter, and whose wife,
And then must they compare her with AVGVSTA,
I, and prefer her too, commend her form,
Extol her fruitfulness; at which a shower
Falls for the memory of GERMANICVS,
Which they blow over straight, with windy praise,
And puffing hopes of her aspiring sons:
Who, with these hourly ticklings, grow so pleased,
And wantonly conceited of themselves,
As now, they stick not to believe they're such,
As these do give them out: and would be thought
(More then competitors) immediate heirs.
Whilst to their thirst of rule they win the rout
(That's still the friend of novelty) with hope
Of future freedom, which on every change,
That greedily, though emptily, expects.
CAESAR, 'tis age in all things breeds neglects,
And princes that will keep old dignity,
Must not admit too youthful heirs stand by;
Not their own issue: but so darkly set
As shadows are in picture, to give height,
And lustre to themselves.

We will command
Their rank thoughts down, and with a stricter hand
Then we have yet put forth, their trains must bate,
Their titles, feasts and factions.

Or your state.
But how sir, will you work?

Confine them,

No.
They are too great, and that too faint a blow,
To give them now: it would have served at first,
When, with the weakest touch, their knot had burst.
But, now, your care must be, not to detect
The smallest cord, or line of your suspect,
For such, who know the weight of princes fear,
Will, when they find themselves discovered, rear
Their forces, like seen snakes, that else would lye
Rolled in their circles, close: Nought is more high,
Daring, or desperate, then offenders found;
Where guilt is, rage, and courage doth abound.
The course must be, to let them still swell up,
Riot, and surfeit on blind fortunes cup;
Give them more place, more dignities, more stile,
Call them to court, to senate: in the while,
Take from their strength some one or twain, or more
Of the maine Fautors; (It will fright the store)
And, by some by-occasion. Thus, with slight
You shall disarm first, and they (in night
Of their ambition) not perceive the train,
Till, in the ingine, they are caught, and slain.

We would not kill, if we knew how to save;
Yet, then a throne, 'tis cheaper give a grave.
Is there no way to bind them by deserts?

Sir, wolves do change their hair, but not their harts.
While thus your thought unto a mean is tied,
You neither dare enough, nor do provide.
All modesty is fond; and chiefly where
The subject is no less compelled to bear,
Then praise his sovereigns acts.

We can no longer
Keep on our masque to thee, our dear SEIANVS;
Thy thoughts are ours, in all, and we but proved
Their voice, in our designs, which by assenting
Hath more confirmed us, then if heartening JOVE
Had, from his hundred statues, bid us strike,
And at the stroke clickt all his marble thumb's.
But, who shall first be struck?

First, CAIVS SILIVS;
He is the most of mark, and most of danger:
In power, and reputation equal strong,
Having commanded an imperial army
Seven years together, vanquished SACROVIR
In Germanie, and thence obtained to wear
The ornaments triumphal. His steep fall,
By how much it doth give the weightier crack,
Will send more wounding terror to the rest,
Command them stand aloof, and give more way
To our surprising of the principal.

But what, SABINVS?

Let him grow awhile,
His fate is not yet ripe: we must not pluck
At all together, lest we catch our selves.
And there's ARRVNTIVS too, he only talks.
But SOSIA, SILIVS wife, would be wound in
Now, for she hath a fury in her breast
More, then hell ever knew; and would be sent
Thither in time. Then, is there one CREMVTIVS
CORDVS, a writing fellow, they have got
To gather notes of the precedent times,
And make them into Annal's; a most tart
And bitter spirit (I hear) who, under colour
Of praising those, doth tax the present state,
Censures the men, the actions, leaves no trick,
No practice vn-examin'd, paralels
The times, the governments, a professed champion,
For the old liberty --

A perishing wretch.
As if there were that chaos bred in things,
The laws, and liberty would not rather choose
To be quite broken, and taken hence by us,
Then have the stain to be preserved by such.
Have we the means, to make these guilty, first?

Trust that to me: let CAESAR, by his power,
But cause a formal meeting of the Senate,
I will have matter, and accusers ready.

But how? let us consult.

We shall mispend
The time of action. Counsels are unfit
In business, where all rest is more pernicious
Then rashness can be. Acts of this close kind
Thrive more by execution, then advice.
There is no lingering in that work begun,
Which cannot praised be, until through done.

Our edict shall, forthwith, command a court.
While I can live, I will prevent earths fury:
(...).

MY Lord SEIANVS --
IVLIVS POSTHVMVS,
Come with my wish! what news from AGRIPPINA'S?

Faith none. They all locke up themselves a'late;
Or talk in character: I have not seen
A company changed. Except they had
Intelligence by augury of our practice.

When were you there?

Last night.

And what guests found you?

SABINVS, SILIVS, (the old list,) ARRVNTIVS,
FVRNIVS, and GALLVS.

Would not these talk?

Little.
And yet we offered choice of argument.
SATRIVS was with me.

Well: 'tis guilt enough
Their often meeting. You forgot t'extoll
The hospitable lady?

No, that trick
Was well put home, and had succeeded too,
But that SABINVS caught a caution out;
For she began to swell:

And may she burst.
IVLIVS,
Unto the palace of the great AVGVSTA,
And, (by your kindest friend,) get swift access;
Acquaint her, with these meetings: Tell the words
You brought me, (the other day) of SILIVS,
Add somewhat to them. Make her understand
The danger of SABINVS, and the times,
Out of his closeness. Give ARRVNTIVS words
Of malice against CAESAR; so, to GALLVS:
But (above all) to AGRIPPINA. Say,
(As you may truly) that her infinite pride,
Propped with the hopes of her too fruitful womb,
With popular studies gapes for sovereignty;
And threatens CAESAR. Pray AVGVSTA then,
That for her own, great CAESARS, and the public
safety, she be pleased to urge these dangers.
CAESAR is too secure (he must be told,
And best hee'll take it from a mothers tongue.)
Alas! what is 't for us to sound, to explore,
To watch, oppose, plot, practise, or prevent,
If he, for whom it is so strongly laboured,
Shall, out of greatness, and free spirit, be
Supinely negligent? Our citi's now
Divided as in time o'th'ciuill war,
And men forbear not to declare themselves
Of AGRIPPINA'S party. Every day,
The faction multiplies; and will do more
If not resisted: you can best enlarge it
As you find audience. Noble POSTHVMVS,
Commend me to your PRISCA: and pray her,
She will solicit this great business
To earnest, and most present execution,
With all her utmost credit with AVGVSTA.

I shall not fail in my instructions.

This second (from his mother) will well urge
Our late design, and spur on CAESARS rage:
Which else might grow remiss. The way, to put
A prince in blood, is to present the shapes
Of dangers, greater then they are (like late,
Or early shadows) and, sometimes, to fain
Where there are none, only, to make him fear;
His fear will make him cruel: And once entered,
He doth not easily learn to stop, or spare
Where he may doubt. This have I made my rule,
To thrust TIBERIVS into tyranny,
And make him toil, to turn aside those blocks,
Which I alone, could not remove with safety.
DRVSVS once gone, GERMANICVS three sons
Would clog my way; whose guards have too much faith
To be corrupted: and their mother known
Of too-too vnreproou'd a chastity,
To be attempted, as light LIVIA was.
Work then, my art, on CAESAR'S fears, as they
On those they fear, till all my betts be cleared:
And he in ruins of his house, and hate
Of all his subjects, bury his own state:
When, with my peace, and safety, I will rise,
By making him the public sacrifice.

THey'are grown exceeding circumspect, and wary.
They have us in the wind: And yet, ARRVNTIVS
Cannot contain himself.

Tut, he's not yet
Looked after, there are others more desired,
That are more silent.

Here he comes. Away.

HOw is it, that these beagles haunt the house
Of AGRIPPINA?
O, they hunt, they hunt.
There is some game here lodged, which they must rouse,
To make the great-ones sport.

Did you observe
How they inueigh'd against CAESAR?

I, baits, baits,
For us to bite at: would I have my flesh
Torn by the public hooke, these qualified hang-men
Should be my company.

Here comes another.

I, there's a man, AFER the orator!
One, that hath phrases, figures, and fine flowers,
To strew his rhetoric with, and doth make haste
To get him note, or name, by any offer
Where blood, or gain be objects; steepes his words,
When he would kill, in artificial tears:
The Crocodile of Tyber! him I love,
That man is mine. He hath my heart, and voice,
When I would curse, he, he.

Contemn the slaves,
Their present lives will be their future graves.

May it please your highness not forget your self,
I dare not, with my manners, to attempt
Your trouble farther.
Farewell, noble SILIVS.

Most royal princess.

SOSIA stays with us?

She is your servant, and doth owe your grace
An honest, but unprofitable love.

How can that be, when there's no gain, but virtuous?

You take the moral, not the politic sense.
I meant, as she is bold, and free of speech,
Earnest to utter what her zealous thought
Travails withal, in honour of your house;
Which act, as it is simply borne in her,
Pertakes of love, and honesty, but may,
By th'ouer-often, and vnseason'd use,
Turn to your loss, and danger: For your state
Is waited on by envies, as by eyes;
And every second guest your tables take,
Is a fee'd spy, t'obserue who goes, who comes,
What conference you have, with whom, where, when,
What the discourse is, what the looks, the thoughts
Of every person there, they do extract,
And make into a substance.

Hear me, SILIVS,
Were all TIBERIVS body stuck with eyes,
And every wall, and hanging in my house
Transparent, as this lawn I wear, or air;
Yea, had SEIANVS both his ears as long
As to my in-most closet: I would hate
To whisper any thought, or change an act,
To be made IVNO'S rival. Virtues forces
Show ever noblest in conspicuous courses.

'Tis great, and bravely spoken, like the spirit
Of AGRIPPINA: yet, your highness knows,
There is nor loss, nor shame in providence:
Few can, what all should do, beware enough.
You may perceive with what officious face,
SATRIVS, and NATTA, AFER, and the rest
Visit your house, of late, t'enquire the secrets;
And with what bold, and privileged art, they rail
Against AVGVSTA: yea, and at TIBERIVS,
Tell tricks of LIVIA, and SEIANVS, all
T'excite, and call your indignation on,
That they might hear it at more liberty.

Yo'are too suspicious, SILIVS.

Pray the gods,
I be so AGRIPPINA: But I fear
Some subtle practice. They, that durst to strike
At so examp-lesse, and vn-blam'd a life,
As, that of the renowned GERMANICVS,
Will not sit down, with that exploit alone:
"He threatens many, that hath injured one.

'Twere best rip forth their tongues, sear out their eyes,
When next they come.

A fit reward for spies.
Hear you the rumour?

What?

DRVSVS is dying.

Dying?

That's strange!

Yo'were with him, yesternight.

One met EVDEMVS, the Physician,
Sent for, but now: who thinks he cannot live.

Thinks? if it be arrived at that, he knows,
Or none.

This's quick! what should be his disease?

Poison. Poison --

How, SILIVS!

What's that?

Nay, nothing. There was (late) a certain blow
Given of the face.

I, to SEIANVS?

True.

And, what of that?

I'am glad I gave it not.

But, there is somewhat else?

Yes, private meetings,
With a great lady, at a physicians,
And, a wife turned away --

Ha!

Toys, mere toys:
What wisdom's now in the streets? in the common mouth?

Fears, whisp'rings, tumults, noise, I know not what:
They say, the Senate sit.

I'll thither, straight;
And see what's in the forge.

Good SILIVS do.
SOSIA, and I will in.

Haste you, my lords,
To visit the sick prince: tender your loves,
And sorrows to the people. This SEIANVS
(Trust my divining soul) hath plots on all:
No tree, that stops his prospect, but must fall.

TIs only you must urge against him, VARRO,
Nor I, nor CAESAR may appear therein,
Except in your defence, who are the Consul:
And, under colour of late en'mitie
Between your father, and his, may better do it,
As free from all suspicion of a practice.
Here be your notes, what points to touch at; read:
Be cunning in them. AFER ha's them too.

But is he summoned?

No. It was debated
By CAESAR, and concluded as most fit
To him take unprepared.

And prosecute
All under name of treason.

I conceive.

DRVSVS being dead, CAESAR will not be here.

What should the business of this Senate be?

That can my subtle whisperers tell you: We,
That are the good dull-noble lookers on,
Are only called to keep the marble warm.
What should we do with those deep mysteries,
Proper to these fine heads? let them alone.
Our ignorance may, perchance, help us be saved
From whips, and furies.

See, see, see, their action!

I, now their heads do travail, now they work;
Their faces run like shittles* they are weaving
Some curious cobweb to catch flies.

Observe,
They take their places.

What so low?

O yes,
They must be seen to flatter CAESARS grief
Though but in sitting.

Bid us silence.

Silence.

Fathers Conscript, may this our present meeting
Turn fair, and fortunate to the Common-wealth.
SEe, SILIVS enters.

Hail grave Fathers.

Stand.
SILIVS, forbear thy place.

How!

SILIVS stand forth,
The Consul hath to charge thee.

Room for CAESAR.

Is he come too? nay then expect a trick.

SILIVS accused? sure he will answer nobly.
WE stand amazed, Fathers, to behold
This general deiection. Wherefo^e sit
Romes Consuls thus dissolved, as they had lost
All the remembrance both of stile, and place?
It not becomes. No woes are of fit weight,
To make the honour of the empire stoop:
Though I, in my peculiar self, may meet
Just reprehension, that so suddenly,
And, in so fresh a grief, would greet the Senate,
When private tongues, of kinsmen, and allies,
(Inspired with comforts) lothly are endured,
The face of men not seen, and scarce the day,
To thousands, that communicate our loss.
Nor can I argue these of weakness; since
They take but natural ways: yet I must seek
For stronger aides, and those fair helps draw out
From warm embraces of the common-wealth.
Our mother, great AVGVSTA, 'is struck with time,
Our self impressed with aged characters,
DRVSVS is gone, his children young, and babes,
Our aims must now reflect on those, that may
Give timely succour to these present ills,
And are our only glad-suruiuing hopes,
The noble issue of GERMANICVS,
NERO, and DRVSVS: might it please the Consul
Honour them in, (they both attend without.)
I would present them to the Senates care,
And raise those suns of joy, that should drink up
These floods of sorrow, in your drowned eyes.

By JOVE, I am not OEDIPVS enough,
To understand this SPHYNX.

The princes come.
Approach you noble NERO, noble DRVSVS,
These princes, Fathers, when their parent dyed,
I gave unto their uncle, with this prayer,
That, though h' had proper issue of his own,
He would no less bring up, and foster these,
Then that selfe-bloud; and by that act confirm
Their worths to him, and to posterity.
D^VSVS taken hence, I turn my prayers to you,
And, before our country, and our gods, beseech
You take, and rule AVGVSTVS nephews sons,
Sprung of the noblest ancestors; and so
Accomplish both my duty, and your own.
NERO, and DRVSVS, (these shall be to you
In place of parents, these your fathers, these,
And not vnfitly: For you are so borne,
As all your good, or ill's the commonwealths.
Receive them, you strong guardians; and blessed go`ds
Make all their actions answer to their bloods:
Let their great titles find increase by them,
Not they by titles. Set them, as in place,
So in example, above all the Romanes:
And may they know no rivals, but themselves.
Let fortune give them nothing; but attend
Upon their virtue: and that still come forth
Greater then hope, and better then their fame.
Relieve me, Fathers, with your general voice.

May all the gods consent to CAESAR'S wish,

The hopeful issue of GERMANICVS.

We thank you, reverend Fathers, in their right.

If this were true now! but the space, the space
Between the breast, and lips -- TIBERIVS heart
Lies a thought farther, then another mans.

My comforts are so flowing in my joys,
As, in them, all my streams of grief are lost,
No less then are land-waters in the sea,
Or showers in rivers; though their cause was such,
As might have sprinkled even the gods with tears:
Yet since the greater doth embrace the less,
We covetously obey.

Well acted, CAESAR.)

And, now I am the happy witness made
Of your so much desired affections,
To this great issue, I could wish, the fates
Would here set peaceful period to my days;
How ever, to my labours, I entreat
(And beg it of this Senate) some fit ease.

Laugh, Fathers, laugh: Have you no spleens about you?)

The burden is too heavy, I sustain
On my unwilling shoulders; and I pray
It may be taken off, and re-confer'd
Upon the Consuls, or some other Roman,
More able, and more worthy.

Laugh on, still.)

Why, this doth render all the rest suspected!

It poisons all.

O, do' you taste it then?

It takes away my faith to any thing
He shall hereafter speak.

I, to pray that,
Which would be to his head as hot as thunder,

Receive him at his word

Hear.

For my self,
I know my weakness, and so little covet
(Like some gone past) the weight that will oppress me,
As my ambition is the counter-point.

Finely maintained; good still.)

But Rome, whose blood,
Whose nerues, whose life, whose very frame relies
On CAESAR'S strength, no less then heaven on ATLAS,
Cannot admit it but with general ruin.

Ah! are you there, to bring him of?)

Let CAESAR
No more then urge a point so contrary
To CAESARS greatness, the grieved Senates vows,
Or Romes necessity.

He comes about.

More nimbly then VERTVMNVS.)

For the public,
I may be drawn, to show, I can neglect
All private aims; though I affect my rest:
But, if the Senate still command me serve,
I must be glad to practise my obedience.

You must, and will, sir. We do know it.)

CAESAR,
Live long, CAESAR,
The gods preserve thee, and thy modesty,
Thy wisdom, and thy innocence.

Where is't?
The prayer's made before the subject.)

Guard
His meekness, JOVE, his piety, his care,
His bounty --

And his subtlety, I'll put in:
Yet hee'll keep that himself, without the gods.
All prayer's are vain for him.

We will not hold
Your patience, Fathers, with long answer; but
Shall still contend to be, what you desire,
And work to satisfy so great a hope:
Proceed to your affairs.

Now, SILIVS, guard thee;
The curtin's drawing.

advances.

Silence.

Cite CAIVS, SILIVS.

CAIVS SILIVS.

Here.

The triumph that thou had in Germanie
For thy late victory on SACROVIR,
Thou hast enjoyed so freely, CAIVS SILIVS,
As no man it enuy'd thee; nor would CAESAR,
Or Rome admit, that thou were then defrauded
Of any honours, thy deserts could claim,
In the fair service of the common-wealth:
But now, if, after all their loves, and graces,
(Thy actions, and their courses being discovered)
It shall appear to CAESAR, and this Senate,
Thou hast defiled those glories, with thy crimes --

Crimes?

Patience, SILIVS.

Tell thy moil of patience,
I am a Roman. What are my crimes? Proclaim them.
Am I too rich? too honest for the times?
Have I or treasure, jewels, land, or houses
That some informer gapes for? Is my strength
Too much to be admitted? Or my knowledge?
These now are crimes.

Nay, SILIVS, if the name
Of crime so touch thee, with what impotence
Wilt thou endure the matter to be searched?

I tell thee, AFER, with more scorn, then fear:
Employ your mercenary tongue, and art.
Where's my accuser?

Here.

VARRO? The Consul?
Is he thrust in?

'Tis I accuse thee, SILIVS.
Against the majesty of Rome, and CAESAR,
I do pronounce thee here a guilty cause,
First, of beginning, and occasioning,
Next, drawing out the war in Gallia,
For which thou late triumph'st; dissembling long
That SACROVIR to be an enemy,
Only to make thy entertainment more,
Whilst thou, and thy wife SOSIA poll'd the province;
Wherein, with sordide-base desire of gain,
Thou hast discredited thy actions worth
And been a traitor to the state.

Thou lie.

I thank thee, SILIVS, speak so still, and often.

If I not prove it, CAESAR, but unjustly
Have called him into trial, here I bind
My self to suffer, what I claim against him;
And yield, to have what I have spoke, confirmed
By judgment of the court, and all good men.

CAESAR, I crave to have my cause deferred,
Till this mans Consulship be out.

We cannot,
Nor may we grant it.

Why? shall he design
My day of trial? is he my accuser?
And must he be my judge?

It hath been usual,
And is a right, that custom hath allow'd
The magistrate, to call forth private men;
And to appoint their day: Which privilege
We may not in the Consul see infringed,
By whose deep watches, and industrious care
It is so laboured, as the common-wealth
Receive no loss, by any oblique course.

CAESAR, thy fraud is worse then violence.

SILIVS, mistake us not, we dare not use
The credit of the Consul, to thy wrong,
But only do preserve his place, and power,
So far as it concerns the dignity,
And honour of the state.

Believe him, SILIVS.

Why, so he may, ARRVNTIVS.

I say so.
And he may choose too.

By the capital,
And all our gods, but that the dear republic,
Our sacred laws, and just authority
Are interessed therein, I should be silent.

Please' CAESAR to give way unto his trial.
He shall have justice.

Nay, I shall have law;
Shall I not AFER? speak.

Would you have (...)

No, my well-spoken man, I would no more;
Nor less: might I enjoy it natural,
Not taught to speak unto your present ends,
Free from thine, his, and all your unkind handling,
Furious enforcing, most unjust presuming,
Malicious, and manifold applying,
Foul wresting, and impossible construction.

He raves, he raves.

Thou durst not tell me so,
Had thou not CAESARS warrant. I can see
Whose power condemns me.

This betrays his spirit.
This doth enough declare him what he is.

What am I? speak.

An enemy to the state.

Because I am an enemy to thee,
And such corrupted ministers of the state,
That here art made a present instrument
To gratify it with thine own disgrace.

This, to the Consul, is most insolent!
And impious!

I, take part. Reveal your selves.
Alas, I sent not your confed'racies?
Your plots, and combinations? I not know
Minion SEIANVS hates me; and that all
This boast of law, and law, is but a form,
A net of VULCANES filing, a mere ingine,
To take that life by a pretext of justice,
Which you pursue in malice? I want brain,
Or nostril to persuade me, that your ends,
And purposes are made to what they are,
Before my answer? O, you equal gods,
Whose justice not a world of wolfe-turn'd men
Shall make me to accuse (how ere provoke)
Have I for this so oft engaged my self?
Stood in the heate, and fervor of a fight,
When PHOEBVS sooner hath forsook the day
Then I the field? Against the blue-ey'd Gaules?
And crisped Germanes? when our Roman Eagles
Have fanned the fire, with their labouring wings,
And no blow dealt, that left not death behind it?
When I have charged, alone, into the troops
Of curled Sicambrians, routed them, and came
Not off, with backward ensigns of a slave,
But forward marks, wounds on my breast, and face,
Were meant to thee, O CAESAR, and thy Rome?
And have I this return? did I, for this,
Perform so noble, and so brave defeat,
On SACROVIR? (O JOVE, let it become me
To boast my deeds, when he, whom they concern,
Shall thus forget them.)

SILIVS, SILIVS,
These are the common customs of thy blood,
When it is high with wine, as now with rage:
This well agrees, with that intemperate vaunt,
Thou lately made at AGRIPPINA'S table,
That when all other of the troops were prone
To fall into rebellion, only yours
Remained in their obedience. You were he,
That saved the empire; which had then been lost,
Had but your legions, there, rebelled, or mutined.
Your virtue met, and fronted every peril.
You gave to CAESAR, and to Rome their surety.
Their name, their strength, their spirit, and their state,
Their being was a donatiue from you.

Well worded, and most like an Orator.

Is this true, SILIVS?

Save thy question, CAESAR.
Thy spy, of famous credit, hath affirmed it.

Excellent Roman!

He doth answer stoutly.

If this be so, there needs no farther cause
Of crime against him.

What can more impeach
The royal dignity, and state of CAESAR,
Then to be urged with a benefit
He cannot pay?

In this, all CAESARS fortune
Is made unequal to the courtesy.

His means are clean destroyed, that should requite.

Nothing is great enough for SILIVS merit.

GALLVS on that side to?

Come, do not hunt,
And labour so about for circumstance,
To make him guilty, whom you have fore-doom'd:
Take shorter ways, I'll meet your purposes.
The words were mine, and more I now will say:
Since I have done thee that great service, CAESAR,
Thou still hast feared me; and, in place of grace,
Returned me hatred: so soon, all best turns,
With doubtful Princes, turn deep injuries
In estimation, when they greater rise,
Then can be answered. Benefits, with you,
Are of no longer pleasure, then you can
With ease restore them; that transcended once,
Your studies are not how to thank, but kill.
It is your nature, to have all men slaves
To you, but you acknowledging to none.
The means that makes your greatness, must not come
In mention of it; if it do, it takes
So much away, you think: and that, which helped,
Shall soonest perish, if it stand in eye,
Where it may front, or but upbraid the high.

Suffer him speak no more.

Note but his spirit.

This shows him in the rest.

Let him be censured.

He' hath spoke enough to prove him CAESARS foe.

His thoughts look through his words.

A censure.

Stay,
Stay, most officious Senate, I shall straight
Delude thy fury. SILIVS hath not placed
His guards within him, against fortunes spite,
So weakly, but he can escape your gripe
That are but hands of fortune: She her self
When virtue doth oppose, must lose her threats.
All that can happen in humanity,
The frown of CAESAR, proud SEIANVS hatred,
Base VARRO'S spleen, and AFERS bloudying tongue,
The Senates servile flattery, and these
Mustered to kill, I'am fortified against;
And can look down upon: they are beneath me.
It is not life whereof I stand enamoured:
Nor shall my end make me accuse my fate.
The coward, and the valiant man must fall,
Only the cause, and manner how, discerns them:
Which then are gladdest, when they cost us dearest.
Romanes, if any here be in this Senate,
Would know to mock TIBERIVS tyranny,
Look upon SILIVS, and so learn to die.

O, desperate act!

An honourable hand!

Look, is he dead?

'Twas nobly struck, and home.

My thought did prompt him to it. Farewell, SILIVS.
Be famous ever for thy great example.

We are not pleased, in this sad accident,
That thus hath stalled, and abused our mercy,
Intended to preserve thee, noble Roman:
And to prevent thy hopes.

Excellent wolf!
Now he is full, he howls.

CAESAR doth wrong
His dignity, and safety, thus to morn
The deserved end of so professed a traitor,
And doth, by this his lenity, instruct
Others as factious, to the like offence.

The confiscation merely of his state
Had been enough.

O, that was gaped for then?

Remove the body.

Let citation
Go out for SOSIA.

Let her be proscribed.
And for the goods, I think it fit that half
Go to the treasure, half unto the children.

With leave of CAESAR, I would think, that fourth
Part, which the law doth cast on the informers,
Should be enough; the rest go to the children:
Wherein the Prince shall show humanity,
And bounty, not to force them by their want
(Which in their parents trespass they deserved)
To take ill courses.

It shall please us.

I,
Out of necessity. This LEPIDVS
Is grave and honest, and I have observed
A moderation still in all his censures.

And bending to the better -- Stay, who's this?
CREMVTIVS CORDVS? what? is he brought in?

More blood unto the banquet? Noble CORDVS,
I wish thee good: Be as thy writings, free,
And honest.

What is he?

For th'Annal's, CAESAR.

CREMVTIVS CORD{us}.
Here.

SATRIVS SECVND{us},
PINNARIVS NATTA, you are his accusers.

Two of SEIANVS bloud-hounds, whom he breeds
With humane flesh, to bay at citizens.

Stand forth before the Senate, and confront him.

I do accuse thee here, CREMVTIVS CORDVS,
To be a man factious, and dangerous,
A sower of sedition in the state,
A turbulent, and discontented spirit,
Which I will prove from thine own writings, here,
The Annal's thou hast published; where thou bit'st
The present age, and with a vipers tooth,
Being a member of it, dare that ill
Which never yet degenerous bastard did
Upon his parent.

To this, I subscribe;
And, forth a world of more particulars,
Instance in only one: Comparing men,
And times, thou praysest BRVTVS, and affirm'st
That CASSIVS was the last of all the Romanes.

How! what are we then?

What is CAESAR? nothing?

My lords, this strikes at every Romanes private,
In whom reigns gentry, and estate of spirit,
To have a BRVTVS brought in parallel,
A parricide, an enemy of his country,
Ranked, and preferred to any real worth
That Rome now holds. This is most strangely invective.
Most full of spite, and insolent upbraiding.
Nor is't the time alone is here dispris'd,
But the whole man of time, yea CAESAR'S self
Brought in disualew; and he aimed at most
By oblique glance of his licentious pen.
CAESAR, if CASSIVS were the last of Romanes,
Thou hast no name.

Let's hear him answer. Silence.

So innocent I am of fact, my lords,
As but my words are argued; yet those words
Not reaching either prince, or princes parent:
The which your law of treason comprehends.
BRVTVS, and CASSIVS, I am charged, to have prays'd:
Whose deeds, when many more, besides my self,
Have writ, not one hath mentioned without honour.
Great TITVS LIVIVS, great for eloquence,
And faith, amongst us, in his history,
With so great praises POMPEY did extol,
As oft AVGVSTVS called him a POMPEIAN:
Yet this not hurt their friendship. In his book
He often names SCIPIO, AFRANIVS,
Yea, the same CASSIVS, and this BRVTVS too,
As worthi'st men; not thieves, and parricides,
Which notes, upon their fames, are now imposed.
ASINIVS POLLIO'S writings quite throughout
Give them a noble memory; SO MESSALLA
Renowned his general CASSIVS: yet both these
Lived with AVGVSTVS, full of wealth, and honours.
To CICERO'S book, where CATO was heaved up
Equal with heaven, what else did CAESAR answer,
Being then Dictator, but with a penned oration,
As if before the judges? Do but see
ANTONIVS letters; read but BRVTVS pleadings:
What vile reproach they hold against AVGVSTVS,
False I confess, but with much bitterness.
The Epigram's of BIBACVLVS, and CATVLLVS,
Are read, full stuffed with spite of both the CAESARS;
Yet deified IVLIVS, and no less AVGVSTVS!
Both bore them, and contemned them: (I not know
Promptly to speak it, whether done with more
Temper, or wisdom) for such obloquies
If they despised be, they dye suppressed,
But, if with rage acknowledged, they are confessed.
The Greekes I slip, whose licence not alone,
But also lust did escape unpunished:
Or where some one (by chance) exception took,
He words with words revenged. But, in my work,
What could be aimed more free, or farther of
From the times scandal, then to write of those,
Whom death from grace, or hatred had exempted?
Did I, with BRVTVS, and with CASSIVS,
Armed, and possessed of the PHILIPPI fields,
Incense the people in the civil cause,
With dangerous speeches? or do they, being slain
Seventy years since, as by their images
(Which not the conqueror hath defaced) appears,
Retain that guilty memory with writers?
Posterie pays every man his honour.
Nor shall there want, though I condemned am,
That will not only CASSIVS well approve,
And of great BRVTVS honour mindful be,
But that will, also, mention make of me.

Freely, and nobly spoken.

With good temper,
I like him, that he is not moved with passion.

He puts them to their whisper.

Take him hence,
We shall determine of him at next sitting.

Mean time, give order, that his books be burned,
To the Aediles.

You have well advised.

It fits not such licentious things should live
To upbraid the age.

If the age were good, they might.

Let'hem be burnt.

All sought, and burnt, to day.

The court is up, Lictors, resume the fasces.

LEt them be burnt! O, how ridiculous
Appears the Senate's brainless diligence,
Who think they can, with present power, extinguish
The memory of all succeeding times!
'Tis true when (contrary) the punishment
Of wit, doth make the authority increase.
Nor do they ought, that use this cruelty
Of interdiction, and this rage of burning;
But purchase to themselves rebuke, and shame,
And to the writers an eternal name.

It is an argument the times are sore,
When virtue cannot safely be advanced;
Nor vice reproou'd.

I, noble LEPIDVS,
AVGVSTVS well foresaw, what we should suffer,
Under TIBERIVS, when he did pronouuce
The Roman race most wretched, that should live
Between so slow jaws, and so long a bruising.
THis business hath succeeded well, SEIANVS:
And quite remoou'd all jealousy of practice
Against AGRIPPINA, and our nephews. Now,
We must bethink us how to plant our ingines
For the other pair, SABINVS, and ARRVNTIVS,
And GALLVS too (how ere he flatter us,)
His heart we know.

Give it some respite, CAESAR.
Time shall mature, and bring to perfect crown,
What we, with so good vultures, have begun:
SABINVS shall be next.

Rather ARRVNTIVS.

By any means, preserve him. His frank tongue
Being lent the reins, will take away all thought
Of malice, in your course against the rest.
We must keep him to stalk with.

Dearest head,
To thy most forunate design I yield it.

Sir -- In have been so long trained up in grace,
First, with your father, great AVGVSTVS, since,
With your most happy bounties so familiar,
As I not sooner would commit my hopes
Or wishes to the gods, then to your ears.
Nor have I ever, yet, been covetous
Of ouer-bright, and dazzling honours: rather
To watch, and travail in great CAESAR'S safety,
With the most common soldier.

'Tis confessed.

The only gain, and which I count most fair
Of all my fortunes,
Hath thought me worthy his alliance. Hence
Begin my hopes.

H'mh?

I have heard, AVGVSTVS
In the bestowing of his daughter, thought
But even of gentlemen of Rome: If so,
(I know not how to hope so great a favour)
But if a husband should be sought for LIVIA,
And I be had in mind, as CAESARS friend,
I would but use the glory of the kindred.
It should not make me slothful, or less caring
For CAESARS state; it were enough to me
It did confirm, and strengthen my weak house,
Against the-now-vnequall opposition
Of AGRIPPINA; 'and for dear reguard
Unto my children, this I wish: my self
Have no ambition farther, then to end
My days in service of so dear a master.

We cannot but commend thy piety
Most-lou'd SEIANVS, in acknowledging
Those bounties; which we faintly, such, remember.
But to thy suit. The rest of mortal men,
In all their drifts, and counsels, pursue profit:
Princes, alone, are of a different sort,
Directing their maine actions still to fame.
We therefore will take time to think, and answer.
For LIVIA, she can best, her self, resolve
If she will marry after DRVSVS, or
Continue in the family; besides
She hath a mother, and a grandam yet,
Whose nearer counsels she may guide her by:
But I will simply deal. That enmity,
Thou fear in AGRIPPINA, would burn more,
If LIVIAS marriage should (as 'twere in parts)
Divide the imperial house; an emulation
Between the women might break forth; and discord
Ruin the sons, and nephues, on both hands.
What if it cause some present difference?
Thou art not safe, SEIANVS, if thou prove it.
Can thou believe, that LIVIA who was wife
To CAIVS CAESAR, then to DRVSVS, now
Will be contented to grow old with thee,
Borne but a private gentleman of Rome?
And raise thee with her loss, if not her shame?
Or say, that I should wish it, can thou think
The Senate, or the people (who have seen
Her brother, father, and our ancestors,
In highest place of empire) will endure it?
The state thou hold already, is in talk;
Men murmure at thy greatness; and the nobles
Stick not, in public, to upbraid thy climbing
Above our fathers favours, or thy scale:
And dare accuse me, from their hate to thee.
Be wise, dear friend. We would not hide these things
For friendships dear respect. Nor will we stand
Adverse to thine, or LIVIA'S designments.
What we had purposed to thee, in our thought,
And with what near degrees of love to bind thee,
And make thee equal to us, for the present,
We will forbear to speak. Only thus much
Believe our loved SEIANVS, we not know
That height in blood, or honour, which thy virtue,
And mind to us, may not aspire with merit;
And this we'll publish, on all watched occasion
The Senate, or the people shall present.

I am restored, and to my sense again,
Which I had lost in this so blinding suit.
CAESAR hath taught me better to refuse,
Then I knew how to ask. How pleases CAESAR
To embrace my late advice, for leaving Rome?

We are resolved.

Here are some motives more
Which I have thought on since, may more confirm.

Careful SEIANVS! we will straight peruse them:
Go forward in our maine design, and prosper.
IF those but take, I shall. Dull, heavy CAESAR!
Would thou tell me, thy favours were made crimes?
And that my fortunes were esteemed thy faults?
That thou, for me, were hated? and not think
I would with winged haste prevent that change,
When thou might win all to thy self again,
By forfeiture of me? Did those fond words
Fly swifter from thy lips, then this my brain,
This sparkling forge, created me an armour
To encounter chance, and thee? Well, read my charms,
And may they lay that hold upon thy senses,
As thou had snuffed up hemlock, or taken down
The juice of poppy, and of mandrakes. Sleep,
Voluptuous CAESAR, and security
Seize on thy stupide powers, and leave them dead
To public cares, awake but to thy lusts.
The strength of which makes thy libidinous soul
Itch to leave Rome; and I have thrust it on:
With blaming of the city business,
The multitude of suites, the confluence
Of suitors, then their importunacies,
The manifold distractions he must suffer,
Besides ill rumours, envies, and reproaches,
All which, a quiet and retired life,
(Larded with ease, and pleasure) did avoid;
And yet, for any weighty, 'and great affair,
The fittest place to give the soundest counsels.
By this, shall I remove him both from thought,
And knowledge of his own most dear affairs;
Draw all dispatches through my private hands;
Know his designments, and pursue mine own;
Make mine own strengths, by giving suites, and places;
Conferring dignities, and offices:
And these* that hate me now, wanting access
To him, will make their envy none, or less.
For when they see me arbiter of all,
They must observe: or else, with CAESAR fall.

TO marry LIVIA? will no less, SEIANVS,
Content thy aims? no lower object? well!
Thou know how thou art wrought into our trust;
Woven in our design; and think, we must
Now use thee, whatsoere thy proiects are:
'Tis true. But yet with caution, and fit care.
And, now we better think -- who's there, within?
CAESAR?

To leave our journey off, were sin
Against our decreed delights; and would appear
Doubt: or (what less becomes a prince) low fear.
Yet, doubt hath law, and fears have their excuse,
Where princes states plead necessary use;
As ours doth now: more in SEIANVS pride,
Then all fell AGRIPPINA'S hates beside.
Those are the dreadful enemies, we raise
With favours, and make dangerous, with praise;
The injured by us may have will alike,
But 'tis the favourite hath the power, to strike:
And fury ever boils more high, and strong,
Heat'with ambition, then revenge of wrong.
'Tis then a part of supreme skill, to grace
No man too much; but hold a certain space
Between the ascenders rise, and thine own flat,
Lest, when all rounds be reached, his aim be that.
'Tis thought -- IS MACRO in the palace? See:
If not go, seek him, to come to us -- He
Must be the organ, we must work by now;
Though none less apt for trust: Need doth allow
What choice would not. In have heard, that aconite
Being timely taken, hath a healing might
Against the scorpions stroke; the proof we'll give:
That, while two poisons wrestle, we may live.
He hath a spirit too working, to be used
But to the encounter of his like; excused
Are wiser sovereigns then, that raise one ill
Against another, and both safely kill:
The prince, that ^eeds great natures, they will sway him;
Who nourishes a lyon, must obey him.
MAcro, we sent for you.

I heard so, CAESAR.

(Leave us awhile.) When you shall know, good MACRO,
The causes of our sending, and the ends;
You then will harken nearer: and be pleased
You stand so high, both in our choice, and trust.

The humblest place in CAESARS choice, or trust,
May make glad MACRO proud; without ambition:
Save to do CAESAR service.

Leave our courtings.
We are in purpose, MACRO, to depart
The city for a time, and see Campania;
Not for our pleasures, but to dedicate
A pair of temples, one, to IVPITER
At Capua, the other at Nola, to AVGVSTVS:
In which great work, perhaps, our stay will be
Beyond our will produced. Now, since we are
Not ignorant what danger may be borne
Out of our shortest absence, in a state
So subject unto envy, and embroild
With hate, and faction; we have thought on thee,
(Amongst a field of Romanes,) worthiest MACRO,
To be our eye, and ear, to keep strict watch
On AGRIPPINA, NERO, DRVSVS, I,
And on SEIANVS: Not, that we distrust
His loyalty, or do repent one grace,
Of all that heap, we have conferd on him.
(For that were to disparage our election,
And call that judgment now in doubt, which then
Seemed as vnquestion'd as an oracle,)
But, greatness hath his cankers. Worms, and moaths
Breed out of too fit matter, in the things
Which after they consume, transferring quite
The substance of their makers, int'themselues.
MACRO is sharpe, and apprehends. Besides,
I know him subtle, close, wise, and wel-read
In man, and his large nature. He hath studied
Affections, passions, knows their springs, their ends,
Which way, and whether they will work: 'tis proof
Enough, of his great merit, that we trust him.
Then, to a point; (because our conference
Cannot be long without suspicion)
Here, MACRO, we assign thee, both to spy,
Inform, and chastise; think, and use thy means,
Thy ministers, what, where, on whom thou wilt;
Explore, plot, practise: All thou dost in this,
Shall be, as if the Senate, or the Laws
Had given it privilege, and thou thence styled
The sauier both of CAESAR, and of Rome.
We will not take thy answer, but in act:
Whereto, as thou proceed'st, we hope to hear
By trusted messengers. If it be enquired,
Wherefore we called you, say, you have in charge
To see our chariots ready, and our horse:
Be still our loved, and (shortly) honoured MACRO.
I Will not ask, why CAESAR bids do this:
But joy, that he bids me. It is the bliss
Of courts, to be employed; no matter, how:
A princes power makes all his actions virtue.
We, whom he works by, are dumb instruments,
To do, but not enquire: His great intents
Are to be served, not searched. Yet, as that bow
Is most in hand, whose owner best doth know
T'affect his aims, so let that states-man hope
Most use, most price, can hit his princes scope.
Nor must he look at what, or whom to strike,
But lose at all; each mark must be alike.
Were it to plot against the fame, the life
Of one, with whom I twined; remove a wife
From my warm side, as loved, as is the air;
Practise away each parent; draw mine heir
In compass, though but one; work all my kin
To swift perdition; leave no vntrain'd engine,
For friendship, or for innocence; nay, make
The gods all guilty: I would undertake
This, being imposed me, both with gain, and ease.
The way to rise, is to obey, and please.
He that will thrive in state, he must neglect
The trodden paths, that truth and right respect;
And prove new, wilder ways: for virtue, there,
Is not that narrow thing, she is else-where.
Men's fortune there is virtue; reason, their will:
Their licence, law; and their observance, skill.
Occasion, is their foil; conscience, their stain;
Profit, their lustre: and what else is, vain.
If then it be the lust of CAESARS power,
T'haue raised SEIANVS up, and in an hour
O're-turne him, tumbling, down, from height of all;
We are his ready engine: and his fall
May be our rise. It is no uncouth thing
To see fresh buildings from old ruins spring.

YOu must have patience, royal AGRIPPINA.

I must have vengeance, first: and that were nectar
Unto my famished spirits. O, my fortune,
Let it be sudden thou prepar'st against me;
Strike all my powers of understanding blind,
And ignorant of destiny to come:
Let me not fear, that cannot hope.

Dear Princess,
These tyrannies, on your self, are worse then CAESAR'S.

Is this the happiness of being borne great?
Still to be aimed at? still to be suspected?
To live the subject of all jealousies?
At least the colour made, if not the ground
To every painted danger? who would not
Choose once to fall, then thus to hang for ever?

You might be safe, if you would --

What, my GALLVS?
Be lewd SEIANVS strumpet? Or the baud
To CAESARS lusts, he now is gone to practise?
Not these are safe, where nothing is. Your self,
While thus you stand but by me, are not safe.
Was SILIVS safe? or the good SOSIA safe?
Or was my niece, dear CLAVDIA PVLCHRA safe?
Or innocent FVRNIVS? They, that latest have
(By being made guilty) added reputation
To AFERS eloquence? O, foolish friends,
Could not so fresh example warn your loves,
But you must buy my favours, with that loss
Unto your selves: and, when you might perceive
That CAESARS cause of raging must forsake him,
Before his will? Away, good GALLVS, leave me.
Here to be seen, is danger; to speak, treason:
To do me least observance, is called faction.
You are unhappy in me, and I in all.
Where are my sons? NERO? and DRVSVS? We
Are they, be shot at; Let us fall apart:
Not, in our ruins, sepulchre our friends.
Or shall we do some action, like offence,
To mock their studies, that would make us faulty?
And frustrate practice, by preventing it?
The danger's like: for, what they can contrive,
They will make good. No innocence is safe,
When power contests. Nor can they trespass more,
Whose only being was all crime, before.

You hear, SEIANVS is come back from CAESAR?

No. How? Disgraced?

More graced now, then ever.

By what mischance?

A fortune, like enough
Once to be bad.

But turned too good, to both.

What was't?

TIBERIVS sitting at his meat,
In a farm house, they call Spelunca, sited
By the sea-side, among the Fundane hills,
Within a natural cave, part of the grot
(About the entry) fell, and ouer-whelm'd
Some of the wayters; others ran away:
Only SEIANVS, with his knees, hands, face,
Ore-hanging CAESAR, did oppose himself
To the remaining ruins, and was found
In that so labouring posture, by the soldiers
That came to succour him. With which adventure,
He hath so sixth himself in CAESAR'S trust,
As thunder cannot move him, and is come
With all the height of CAESARS praise, to Rome.

And power, to turn those ruins all on us;
And bury whole posterities beneath them.
NERO, and DRVSVS, and CALIGVLA,
Your places are the next, and therefore most
In their offence. Think on your birth, and blood,
Awake your spirits, meet their violence,
'Tis princely, when a tyrant doth oppose;
And is a fortune sent to exercise
Your virtue, as the wind doth try strong trees:
Who by vexation grow more sound, and firm.
After your fathers fall, and uncles fate,
What can you hope, but all the change of stroke
That force, or slight can give? then stand upright;
And though you do not act, yet suffer nobly:
Be worthy of my womb, and take strong cheer;
What we do know will come, we should not fear.
Returned so soon? renewed in trust, and grace?
Is CAESAR then so weak? or hath the place
But wrought this alteration, with the air;
And he, on next remove, will all repair?
MACRO, thou art engaged: and what before
Was public; now, must be thy private, more.
The weal of CAESAR, fitness did imply;
But thine own fate confers necessity
On thy employment: and the thoughts borne nearest
Unto our selves, move swiftest still, and dearest.
If he recover, thou art lost: yea, all
The weight of preparation to his fall
Will turn on thee, and crush thee. Therefore, strike
Before he settle, to prevent the like
Upon thy self. He doth his vantage know,
That makes it home, and gives the foremost blow.

IT is a service, great SEIANVS will
See well requited, and accept of nobly.
Here place your selves, between the roof, and seeling,
And when I bring him to his words of danger,
Reveal your selves, and take him.
Is he come?

I'll now go fetch him.

With good speed. I long
To merit from the state, in such an action.

I hope, it will obtain the Consul-ship
For one of us.

We cannot think of less,
To bring in one, so dangerous as SABINVS.

He was a follower of GERMANICVS,
And still is an observer of his wife,
And children, though they be declined in grace;
A daily visitant, keeps them company
In private, and in public; and is noted
To be the only client, of the house:
Pray JOVE, he will be free to LATIARIS.

H'is alli'd to him, and doth trust him well.

And he'll requite his trust?

To do an office
So grateful to the state, I know no man
But would strain nearer bands, then kindred --

List,
I hear them come.

Shift to our holes, with silence.

IT is a noble constancy you show
To this afflicted house: that not like others,
(The friends of season) you do follow fortune,
And in the winter of their fate, forsake
The place, whose glories warmed you. You are just,
And worthy such a princely patrones love,
As was the worlds-renown'd GERMANICVS:
Whose ample merit when I call to thought,
And see his wife and issue, objects made
To so much envy, jealousy, and hate,
It makes me ready to accuse the gods
Of negligence, as men of tyranny.
They must be patient, so must we.

O JOVE.
What will become of us, or of the times,
When, to be high, or noble, are made crimes?
When land, and treasure are most dangerous faults?

Nay, when our table, yea our bed assaults
Our peace, and safety? when our writings are,
By any envious instruments (that dare
Apply them to the guilty) made to speak
What they will have, to fit their tyrannous wreak?
When ignorance is scarcely innocence:
And knowledge made a capital offence?
When not so much, but the bare empty shade
Of liberty, is reft us? and we made,
The prey to greedy Vultures, and vile spies,
That first transfixe us with their murdering eyes?

Me thinks, the Genius of the Roman race
Should not be so extinct, but that bright flame
Of liberty might be reuiu'd again,
(Which no good man but with his life, should lose)
And we not sit like spent, and patient fools
Still puffing in the dark, at one poor coal,
Held on by hope, till the last spark is out.
The cause is public, and the honour, name,
The immortality of every soul
That is not bastard, or a slave in Rome,
Therein concerned: Whereto, if men would change
The weari'd arm, and for the weighty shield
So long sustained, employ the facile sword,
We might have some assurance of our vows.
This asses fortitude doth tyre us all.
It must be active valour must redeem
Our loss, or none. The rock, and our hard steel
Should meet, t'enforce those glorious fires again,
Whose splendour cheered the world, and heat gave life
No less then doth the sunne's.

'Twere better stay,
In lasting darkness, and despair of day.
No ill should force the subject undertake
Against the sovereign; more then hell should make
The gods do wrong. A good man should, and must
Sit rather down with loss, then rise unjust.
Though, when the Romanes first did yield themselves
To one mans power, they did not mean their lives,
Their fortunes, and their liberties, should be
His absolute spoil, as purchased by the sword.

Why we are worse, if to be slaves, and bond
To CAESARS slave, be such, the proud SEIANVS?
He that is all, does all, gives CAESAR leave
To hide his ulcerous, and anointed face,
With his bald crown at Rhodes, while he here stalks
Upon the heads of Romanes, and their Princes,
Familiarly to Empire.

Now you touch
A point indeed, wherein he shows his art,
As well as power.

And villainy in both.
Do you observe where LIVIA lodges? How
DRVSVS came dead? What men have been cut off?

Yes, those are things removed: I nearer looked,
Into his later practice, where he stands
Declared a master in his mystery.
First, ere TIBERIVS went, he wrought his fear,
To think that AGRIPPINA sought his death.
Then put those doubts in her; sent her oft word,
Under the show of friendship, to beware
Of CAESAR, for he laid to poison her:
Drove them to frowns, to mutual jealousies,
Which, now, in visible hatred are burst out.
Since, he hath had his hired instruments
To work on NERO, and to heave him up;
To tell him CAESAR'S old; That all the people,
Yea, all the army have their eyes on him;
That both do long to have him undertake
Something of worth, to give the world a hope;
Bids him to court their grace; the easy youth,
Perhaps, gives ear, which straight he writes to CAESAR;
And with this comment: See yon'd dangerous boy,
Note but the practice of the mother, there,
She's tying him, for purposes at hand,
With men of sword. Here's CAESAR put in fright
Against son, and mother. Yet, he leaves not thus.
The second brother DRVSVS (a fierce nature,
And fitter for his snares, because ambitious,
And full of envy) him he clasp's, and hugs,
Poisons with praise, tells him what hearts he wears,
How bright he stands in popular expectance;
That Rome doth suffer with him, in the wrong
His mother does him, by preferring NERO:
Thus sets he them asunder, each against other,
Proiects the course, that serves him to condemn,
Keeps in opinion of a friend to all,
And all drives on to ruin.

CAESAR sleeps,
And nods at this?

Would he might ever sleep,
Bogg'd in his filthy lusts.

Treason to CAESAR.

Lay hands upon the traitor, LATIARIS,
Or take the name thy self.

I am for CAESAR.

Am I then caught?

How think you, sir? you are.

Spies of this head! so white! so full of years!
Well, my most reverend monsters, you may live
To see your selves thus snar'd.

Away with him.

Hale him away.

To be a spy for traitors,
Is honourable vigilance.

You do well,
My most officious instruments of state;
Men of all uses: Drag me hence, away.
The year is well begun, and I fall fit,
To be an offering to SEIANVS. Go.

Cover him with his garments, hide his face.

It shall not need. Forbear your rude assault,
The fault's not shameful villainy makes a fault.

SIr, but observe how thick your dangers meet
In his clear drifts! Your mother, and your brothers,
Now cited to the Senate! Their friend, GALLVS,
Feasted to day by CAESAR, since committed!
SABINVS, here we met, hurried to fetters!
The Senators all struck with fear, and silence,
Save those, whose hopes depend not on good means,
But force their private prey, from public spoil!
And you must know, if here you stay, your state
Is sure to be the subject of his hate,
As now the object.
What would you advise me?

To go for Capreae presently: and there
Give up your self, entirely, to your uncle.
Tell CAESAR (since your mother is accused
To fly for succours to AVGVSTVS statue,
And to the army, with your brethren) you
Have rather chose, to place your aides in him,
Then live suspected; or in hourly fear
To be thrust out, by bold SEIANV'S plots:
Which, you shall confidently urge, to be
Most full of peril to the state, and CAESAR,
As being laid to his peculiar ends,
And not to be let run, with common safety.
All which (upon the second) I'll make plain,
So both shall love, and trust with CAESAR gain.

Away then, let's prepare us for our journey.
STill, dost thou suffer heaven? will no flame,
No heate of sin make thy just wrath to boil
In thy distemp'red bosom, and ore-flow
The pitchy blazes of impiety,
Kindled beneath thy throne? Still can thou sleep,
Patient, while vice doth make an antique face
At thy dread power, and blow dust, and smoke
Into thy nostrils? JOVE, will nothing wake thee?
Must vile SEIANVS pull thee by the beard,
Ere thou wilt open thy black-lidded eye,
And look him dead? Well! Snore on, dreaming gods:
And let this last of that proud Giant-race,
Heave mountain upon mountain, against your state --
Be good unto me, fortune, and you powers,
Whom I, expostulating, have profaned;
I see (what's equal with a prodigy)
A great, a noble Roman, and an honest,
Live an old man! O, MARCVS LEPIDVS,
When is our turn to bleed? Thy self, and I
(Without our boast) are a'most all the few
Left, to be honest, in these impious times.
WHat we are left to be, we will be, LVCIVS,
Though tyranny did stare, as wide as death,
To fright us from it.

'T hath so, on SABINVS.

I saw him now drawn from the Gemonies,
And (what increased the direness of the fact)
His faithful dog (upbraiding all us Romanes)
Never forsook the corp's, but, seeing it thrown
Into the stream, leaped in, and drowned with it.

O act! to be enui'd him, of us men!
We are the next, the hooke lays hold on, MARCVS*
What are thy arts (good patriot, teach them me)
That have preserved thy hairs, to this white die,
And kept so reverend, and so dear a head,
Safe, on his comely shoulders?

Arts, ARRVNTIVS?
None, but the plain, and passive fortitude,
To suffer, and be silent; never stretch
These arms, against the torrent; live at home,
With my own thoughts, and innocence about me,
Not tempting the wolves jaws: these are my arts.

I would begin to study them, if I thought
They would secure me. May I pray to JOVE,
In secret, and be safe? I, or aloud?
With open wishes? so I do not mention
TIBERIVS, or SEIANVS? yes, I must,
If I speak out. 'Tis hard, that. May I think,
And not be racked? What danger is't to dream?
Talk in ones sleep? or cough? who knows the law?
May I shake my head, without a comment? say
It rains, or it holds up, and not be thrown
Upon the Gemonies? These now are things,
Whereon men's fortune, yea their fate depends.
Nothing hath privilege against the violent ear.
No place, no day, no hour (we see) is free.
(Not our religious, and most sacred times)
From some one kind of cruelty: all matter,
Nay all occasion pleases. Mad-mens rage,
The idleness of drunkards, women's nothing,
Jesters simplicity, all, all is good
That can be caught at. Nor is now th'euent
Of any person, or for any crime,
To be expected; for, 'tis always one:
Death, with some little difference of place,
Or time -- what's this? Prince NERO? guarded?
ON, Lictors, keep your way: My lords, forbear.
On pain of CAESARS wrath, no man attempt
Speech with the prisoner.

Noble friends, be safe:
To loose your selves for words, were as vain hazard,
As unto me small comfort: Fare you well.
Would all Rome's sufferings in my fate did dwell.

Lictors, away.

Where goes he, LACO?

Sir,
His banished into Pontia, by the Senate.

Do' I see? and hear? and feel? May I trust sense?
Or doth my phant'sie form it?

Where's his brother?

DRVSVS is prisoner in the palace.

Ha?
I smell it now: 'tis rank. Where's AGRIPPINA?

The princess is confined, to Pandataria.

Bolts, VULCAN; bolts, for JOVE! PHOEBVS, thy bow;
Sterne MARS, thy sword; and blue-ey'd Maid, thy spear;
Thy club, ALCIDES: all the armoury
Of heaven is too little! -- Ha? to guard
The gods, I meant. Fine, rare dispatch! This same
Was swiftly borne! confined? imprisoned? banished?
Most tripartite! The cause, sir?

Treason.

O?
The complement of all accusings? that
Will hit, when all else fails.

This turn is strange!
But yesterday, the people would not hear
Far less objected, but cried, CAESARS letters
Were false, and forged; that all these plots were malice:
And that the ruin of the Princes house
Was practised against his knowledge. Where are now
Their voices? now, that they behold his heirs
Locked up, disgraced, led into exile?

Hushed.
Drowned in their bellies. Wild SEIANVS breath
Hath, like a whirle-wind, scattered that poor dust,
With this rude blast. We'll talk no treason, sir,
If that be it you stand for? Fare you well.
We have no need of horse-leeches. Good spy,
Now you are spied, be gone.

I fear, you wrong him.
He has the voice to be an honest Roman.

And trusted to this office? LEPIDVS,
I'd sooner trust Greeke-SINON, then a man
Our state employs. He's gone: and being gone,
I dare tell you (whom I dare better trust)
That our night-ey'd TIBERIVS doth not see
His minions drifts; or, if he do, h'is not
So errant subtle, as we fools do take him:
To breed a mongrel up, in his own house,
With his own blood, and (if the good gods please)
At his own throat, flesh him, to take a leap.
I do not beg it, heaven: but, if the fates
Grant it these eyes, they must not wink.

They must
Not see it, LVCIVS.

Who should let them?

Zeal,
And duty; with the thought, he is our Prince.

He is our monster: forfeited to vice
So far, as no racked virtue can redeem him.
His loathed person fouler then all crimes:
An Emp'rour, only in his lusts. Retired
(From all regard of his own fame, or Rome's)
Into an obscure Island; where he lives
(Acting his tragedies with a comic face)
Amidst his rout of Chaldee's: spending hours,
Days, weeks, and months, in the unkind abuse
Of grave astrology, to the bane of men,
Casting the scope of men's nativities,
And having found ought worthy in their fortune,
Kill, or precipitate them in the sea,
And boast, he can mock fate. Nay, muse not: these
Are far from ends of evil, scarce degrees.
He hath his slaughter-house, at Capreae;
Where he doth study murder, as an art:
And they are dearest in his grace, that can
Devise the deepest tortures. Thither, too,
He hath his boys, and beauteous girls taken up,
Out of our noblest houses, the best formed,
Best nurtured, and most modest: what's their good
Serves to provoke his bad. Some are allured,
Some threatened; others (by their friends detained)
Are ravished hence, like captives, and, in sight
Of their most grieved parents, dealt away
Unto his spintries, sellaries, and slaves,
Masters of strange, and new-commented lusts,
For which wise nature hath not left a name.
To this (what most strikes us, and bleeding Rome,)
He is, with all his craft, become the ward
To his own vassal, a stale catamite:
Whom he (upon our low, and suffering necks)
Hath raised, from excrement, to side the gods,
And have his proper sacrifice in Rome:
Which JOVE beholds, and yet will sooner rive
A senseless oak with thunder, then his trunk.

THese letters make men doubtful what t'expect,
Whether his coming, or his death.

Troth, both:
And which comes soonest, thank the gods for.

List,
Their talk is CAESAR, I would hear all voices.)

One day, he's well; and will return to Rome:
The next day, sick; and knows not when to hope it.

True, and to day, one of SEIANVS friends
Honoured by special writ; and on the morrow
Another punished --

By more special writ.

This man receives his praises of SEIANVS,
A second, but slight mention; a third, none:
A fourth, rebukes. And thus he leaves the Senate
Divided, and suspended, all uncertain.

These forked tricks, I understand them not,
Would he would tell us whom he loves, or hates,
That we might follow, without fear, or doubt.

Good HELIOTROPE! Is this your honest man?
Let him be yours so still. He is my knave.)

I cannot tell, SEIANVS still goes on,
And mounts, we see: New statues are advanced,
Fresh leaves of titles, large inscriptions read,
His fortune sworn by, himself new gone out
CAESARS colleague, in the fifth Consulship,
More altars smoke to him, then all the gods:
What would we more?

That the dear smoke would choke him,
That would I more.

Peace, good ARRVNTIVS.)

But there are letters come (they say) even now,
Which do forbid that last.

Do you hear so?

Yes.

By POLLVX, that's the worst.

By HERCVLES, best.)

I did not like the sign, when REGVLVS,
(Whom all we know no friend unto SEIANVS)
Did, by TIBERIVS so precise command,
Succeed a fellow in the Consulship:
It boded somewhat.

Not a mote. His partner,
FVLCINIVS TRIO, is his own, and sure.
Here comes TERENTIVS. He can give us more.

I'll ne'er believe, but CAESAR hath some sent
Of bold SEIANVS footing. These cross points
Of varying letters, and opposing Consuls,
Mingling his honours, and his punishments,
Feigning now ill, now well, raising SEIANVS,
And then depressing him, (as now of late
In all reports we have it) cannot be
Empty of practice: 'Tis TIBERIVS art.
For (having found his favourite grown too great,
And, with his greatness, strong; that all the soldiers
Are, with their leaders, made at his devotion;
That almost all the Senate are his creatures,
Or hold on him their maine dependences,
Either for benefit, or hope, or fear;
And that himself hath lost much of his own,
By parting unto him; and by th'increase
Of his rank lusts, and rages, quite disarmed
Himself of love, or other public means,
To dare an open contestation)
His subtilty hath chose this doubling line,
To hold him even in: not so to fear him,
As wholly put him out, and yet give check
Unto his farther boldness. In mean time,
By his employments, makes him odious
Unto the staggering rout, whose aide (in fine)
He hopes to use, as sure, who (when they sway)
Bear down, ore-turne all objects in their way.

You may be a LINCEVS, LEPIDVS: yet, I
See no such cause, but that a politic tyranne
(who can so well disguise it) should have taken
A nearer way: feigned honest, and come home
To cut his throat, by Law.

I, but his fear
Would ne'er be masked, all-be his vices were.

His lordship then is still in grace?

Assure you,
Never in more, either of grace, or power.

The gods are wise, and just.

(The fiends they are.
To suffer thee belie them?)

I have here
His last, and present letters, where he writes him
The Partner of his cares, and his SEIANVS --

But is that true, it 'tis prohibited,
To sacrifice unto him?

Some such thing
CAESAR makes scruple of, but forbids it not;
No more then to himself: says, he could wish
It were forborne to all.

Is it no other?

No other, on my trust. For your more surety,
Here is that letter too.

(How easily,
Do wretched men believe, what they would have!
Looks this like plot?

Noble ARRVNTIVS, stay.)

He names him here without his titles.

(Note.

Yes, and come of your notable fool. I will.)

No other, then SEIANVS.

That's but haste
In him that writes. Here he gives large amends.

And with his own hand written?

Yes.

Indeed?

Believe it, gentlemen, SEIANVS breast
Never received more full contentments in,
Then at this present.

Takes he well th'escape
Of young CALIGVLA, with MACRO?

Faith,
At the first air, it somewhat troubled him.

(Observe you?

Nothing. Riddles. TIll I see
SEIANVS struck, no sound thereof strikes me.)

I like it not. I muse h' would not attempt
Somewhat against him in the Consul-ship,
Seeing the people 'ginne to favour him.

He doth repent it, now; but h' has employed
PAGONIANVS after him: and he holds
That correspondence, there, with all that are
Near about CAESAR, as no thought can pass
Without his knowledge, thence, in act to front him.

I gratulate the news.

But, how comes MACRO
So in trust, and favour, with CALIGVLA?

O sir, he ha's a wife; and the young Prince
An appetite: he can look up, and spy
Flies in the roof, when there are fleas in bed;
And hath a learned nose to'assure his sleeps.
Who, to be favoured of the rising sun,
Would not lend little of his waning moon?
'T is the saf'st ambition. Noble TERENTIVS.

The night grows fast upon us. At your service.

SWell, swell, my joys: and faint not to declare
Your selves, as ample, as your causes are.
I did not live, till now; this my first hour:
Wherein I see my thoughts reached by my power.
But this, and gripe my wishes. Great, and high,
The world knows only two, that's Rome, and I.
My roof receives me not; 'tis air I tread:
And, at each step, I feel my advanced head
Knock out a star in heaven! Reared to this height,
All my desires seem modest, poor, and slight,
That did before sound impudent: 'Tis place,
Not blood, discerns the noble, and the base.
Is there not something more, then to be CAESAR?
Must we rest there? It yrkes, to have come so far,
To be so near a stay. CALIGVLA,
Would thou stood'st stiff, and many, in our way.
Winds lose their strength, when they do empty fly,
Vn-met of woods or buildings; great fires die
That want their matter to with-stand them: so,
It is our grief, and will be' our loss, to know
Our power shall want opposites; unless
The gods, by mixing in the cause, would bless
Our fortune, with their conquest. That were worth
SEIANVS strife: durst fates but bring it forth.

SAfety, to great SEIANVS.
Now, TERENTIVS?

Hears not my lord the wonder?

Speak it, no.

I meet it violent in the peoples mouths,
Who run, in routs, to POMPEY'S theatre,
To view your statue: which, they say, sends forth
A smoke, as from a fornace, black, and dreadful.

Some traitor hath put fire in: (you, go see.)
And let the head be taken off, to look
What 'tis -- Some slave hath practised an imposture,
To stir the people. How now? why return you?

THe head, my lord, already is taken off,
I saw it: and, at opening, there leaped out
A great, and monstrous serpent!

Monstrous! why?
Had it a beard? and horns? no heart? a tongue
Forked as flattery? looked it of the hue,
To such as live in great men's bosoms? was
The spirit of it MACRO'S?

May it please
The most divine SEIANVS, in my days,
(And by his sacred fortune, I affirm it)
I have not seen a more extended, grown,
Foul, spotted, venomous, ugly --

O, the fates!
What a wild muster's here of attributes,
T'expresse a worm, a snake?

But how that should
Come there, my lord!

What! and you too, TERENTIVS?
I think you mean to make 't a prodigy
In your reporting?

Can the wise SEIANVS
Think heaven hath meant it less?

O, superstition!
Why, then the falling of our bed, that brake
This morning, burd'ned with the populous weight
Of our expecting clients, to salute us;
Or running of the cat, betwixt our legs,
As we set forth unto the capital,
Were prodigies.

I think them ominous!
And, would they had not happened. As, to day,
The fate of some your servants! who, declining
Their way, not able, for the throng, to follow,
Slip't down the Gemonies, and brake their necks!
Besides, in taking your last augury,
No prosperous bird appeared, but croaking ravens
Flagged up and down: and from the sacrifice
Flew to the prison, where they sate, all night,
Beating the air with their obstreperous beaks!
I dare not counsel, but I could entreat
That great SEIANVS would attempt the gods,
Once more, with sacrifice.

What excellent fools
Religion makes of men? Believes TERENTIVS,
(If these were dangers, as I shame to think them)
The gods could change the certain course of fate?
Or, if they could, they would (now, in a moment)
For a beef fat, or less, be bribed t'inuert
Those long decrees? Then think the gods, like flies,
Are to be taken with the steam of flesh,
Or blood, diffused about their altars: think
Their power as cheap, as I esteem it small.
Of all the throng, that fill the Olympian hall,
And (without pity) lade poor ATLAS back,
I know not that one deity, but Fortune;
To whom, I would throw up, in begging smoke,
One gran of incense: or whose ear I'd buy
With thus much oil. Her, I, indeed, adore;
And keep her grateful image in my house,
Some-times belonging to a Roman king,
But, now called mine, as by the better stile:
To her, I care not, if (for satisfying
Your scrupulous phant'sies) I go offer. Bid
Our priest prepare us honny, milk, and poppy,
His masculine odours, and night-vestments: say,
Our rites are instant, which performed, you'll see
How vain, and worthy laughter, your fears be.

POMPONIVS! whither in such speed?
I go
To give my lord SEIANVS notice --

What?

Of MACRO.

Is he come?

Entr'd but now
The house of REGVLVS.

The opposite Consul?

Some half hour since.

And, by night too! stay, sir;
I'll bear you company.

Along, then --

TIs CAESARS will, to have a frequent Senate.
And therefore must your edict lay deep mulct
On such, as shall be absent.
So it doth.
Bear it my fellow Consul to adscribe.

And tell him it must early be proclaimed;
The place, APOLLO 'S temple.

That's remembered.

And at what hour?

Yes.

You do forget
To send one for the Provost of the watch?

I have not: here he comes.

GRACINVS LACO,
You'are a friend most welcome: by, and by,
I'll speak with you. (You must procure this list
Of the Praetorian cohorts, with the names
Of the Centurions, and their Tribunes.

I.)

I bring you letters, and a health from CAESAR --

Sir, both come well.

(And hear you, with your note,
Which are the eminent men, and most of action.

That shall be done you too.)

Most worthy LACO,
CAESAR salutes you. ( Consul! death, and furies!
Gone now?) the argument will please you, sir.
(Hough! REGVLVS? The anger of the gods
Follow his diligent legs, and ouer'take them,
In likeness of the gout.) O, good my lord,
We lacked you present; I would pray you send
Another to FVLCINIVS TRIO, straight,
To tell him, you will come, and speak with him:
(The matter wee'le devise) to stay him, there,
While I, with LACO, do survey the watch.
What are your strengths, GRACINVS?

Seven cohorts.

You see, what CAESAR writes: and ( -- gone again?
H'has sure a vein of mercury in his feet)
Knew you, what store of the praetorian soldiers
SEIANVS holds, about him, for his guard?

I cannot the just number: but, I think,
Three centuries.

Three? good.

At most, not four.

And who be those Centurions?

That the Consul
Can best deliver you.

(When h'is away:
Spite, on his nimble industry.) GRACINVS,
You find what place you hold, there, in the trust
Of royal CAESAR?

I, and I am --

Sir,
The honours, there proposed, are but beginnings
Of his great favours.

They are more --

I heard him
When he did study, what to add --

My life,
And all I hold --

You were his own first choice;
Which doth confirm as much, as you can speak:
And will (if we succeed) make more -- Your guards
Are seven cohorts, you say?

Yes.

Those we must
Hold still in readiness, and vndischarg'd.

I understand so much. But how it can --

Be done without suspicion, you'll object?

What's that?

The keeping of the watch in arms,
When morning comes.

The Senate shall be met, and set
So early, in the temple, as all mark
Of that will be avoided.

If we need,
We have commission, to possess the palace,
Enlarge prince DRVSVS, and make him our chief.

(That secret would have burned his reverend mouth,
Had he not spit it out, now:) by the gods,
You carry things too -- let me borrow'a man,
Or two, to bear these -- That of freeing DRVSVS,
CAESAR proiected as the last, and utmost;
Not else to be remembered.

Here are servants.

These to ARRVNTIVS, these to LEPIDVS,
This bear to COTTA, this to LATIARIS.
If they demand you'of me: say, I have taken
Fresh horse, and am departed. You (my lord)
To your colleague, and be you sure, to hold him
With long narration, of the new fresh favours,
Meant to SEIANVS, his great patron; I,
With trusted LACO, here, are for the guards:
Then, to divide. For, night hath many eyes,
Whereof, though most do sleep, yet some are spies.

BE all profane far hence; Fly, fly far off:
Be absent far. Far hence be all profane.
We have been faulty, but repent us now,
And bring pure hands, pure vestments, and pure minds.

Pure vessels.

And pure offerings.

Garlands pure.

Bestow your garlands: and (with reverence) place
The veruin on the altar.

Favour your tongues.

Great mother FORTUNE, Queen of humane state,
Rectresse of action, Arbitresse of fate,
To whom all sway, all power, all empire bows,
Be present, and propitious to our vows.

Favour it with your tongues.

Be present, and propitious to our vows.
Accept our offering, and be pleased, great goddess.

See, see, the image stirs!

And turns away!

Fortune averts her face!

Avert, you gods,
The prodigy. Still! still! Some pious rite
We have neglected. Yet! heaven, be appeased.
And be all tokens false, or void, that speak
Thy present wrath.

Be thou dumb, scrupulous priest:
And gather up thy self, with these thy wares,
Which I, in spite of thy blind mistress, or
Thy juggling mystery, religion, throw
Thus, scorned on the earth. Nay, hold thy look
Averted, till I woo thee, turn again;
And thou shalt stand, to all posterity,
Th'eternall game, and laughter, with thy neck
Writhed to thy tail, like a ridiculous cat.
Avoid these fumes, these superstitious lights,
And all these coos'ning ceremonies: you,
Your pure, and spiced conscience. I, the slave,
And mock of fools, (scorn on my worthy head)
That have been titled, and adored a god,
Yea, sacrificed unto, my self, in Rome,
No less then JOVE: and I be brought, to do
A peevish gigglot rites? Perhaps, the thought,
And shame of that made Fortune turn her face,
Knowing her self the lesser deity,
And but my servant. Bashful queen, if so,
SEIANVS thanks thy modesty. Who's that?

HIs fortune suffers, till he hears my news:
I have waited here too long. MACRO, my lord --
Speak lower, with-draw.

Are these things true?

Thousands are gazing at it, in the streets.

What's that?

MINVTIVS tells us here, my lord,
That, a new head being set upon your statue,
A rope is since found wreathed about it! and,
But now, a fiery meteor, in the form
Of a great ball, was seen to roll along
The troubled air, where yet it hangs, imperfect,
The amazing wonder of the multitude!

No more. That MACRO'S come, is more then all!

Is MACRO come?

I saw him.

Where? with whom?

With REGVLVS.

TERENTIVS --

My lord?

Send for the Tribunes, we will straight have up
More of the soldiers, for our guard. MINVTIVS,
We pray you, go for COTTA, LATIARIS,
TRIO the Consul, or what Senators
You know are sure, and ours. You, my good NATTA,
For LACO, Provost of the watch. Now, SATRIVS,
The time of proof comes on. Arm all our servants,
And without tumult. You, POMPONIVS,
Hold some good correspondence, with the Consul,
Attempt him, noble friend. These things begin
To look like dangers, now, worthy my fates.
Fortune, I see thy worst: Let doubtful states,
And things uncertain hang upon thy will:
Me surest death shall render certain still.
Yet, why is, now, my thought turned toward death,
Whom fates have let go on, so far, in breath,
Vncheck'd, or vnreprou'd? I, that did help
To fell the lofty Cedar of the world,
GERMANICVS; that, at one stroke, cut down
DRVSVS, that upright Elm; withered his vine;
Laid SILIVS, and SABINVS, two strong Oaks,
Flat on the earth; besides, those other shrubs,
CORDVS, and SOSIA, CLAVDIA PVLCHRA,
FVRNIVS, and GALLVS, which I have grub'd up;
And since, have set my axe so strong, and deep
Into the root of spreading AGRIPPINE;
Lopped off and scattered her proud branches, NERO,
DRVSVS, and CAIVS too, although re-planted;
If you will, destinies, that, after all,
I faint, now, ere I touch my period;
You are but cruel: and I already have done
Things great enough. All Rome hath been my slave;
The Senate sate an idle looker on,
And witness of my power; when I have blushed,
More, to command, then it to suffer; all
The Fathers have sate ready, and prepared,
To give me empire, temples, or their throats,
When I would ask them; and (what crowns the top)
Rome, Senate, people, all the world have seen
JOVE, but my equal: CAESAR, but my second.
'Tis then your malice, fates, who (but your own)
Envy, and fear, t'haue any power long known.

STay here: I'll give his lordship, you are come.
MARCVS, TERENTIVS, pray you tell my lord,
Here's COTTA, and LATIARIS.
Sir, I shall.

My letter is the very same with yours;
Only requires me to be present there,
And give my voice, to strengthen his design.

Names he not what it is?

No, nor to you.

'Tis strange, and singular doubtful!

So it is?
It may be all is left to lord SEIANVS.

GEntlemen, where's my lord?

We wait him here.

The Provost LACO? what's the news?

My lord --

NOw, my right dear, noble, and trusted friends;
How much I am a captive to your kindness!
Most worthy COTTA, LATIARIS; LACO,
Your valiant hand; and gentlemen, your loves.
I wish I could divide my self unto you;
Or that it lay, within our narrow powers,
To satisfy for so enlarged bounty.
GRACINVS, we must pray you, hold your guards
Vnquit, when morning comes. Saw you the Consul?

TRIO will presently be here, my lord.

They are but giving order for the edict,
To warn the Senate.

How! the Senate?

Yes.
This morning, in APOLLO'S temple.

We
Are charged, by letter, to be there, my lord.

By letter? pray you let's see!

Knows not his lordship!

It seems so!

A Senate warned? without my knowledge?
And on this sudden? Senators by letters
Required to be there! who brought these?

MACRO.

Mine enemy! And when?

This mid-night.

Time,
With every other circumstance, doth give
It hath some strain of engine in it! How now?

MY lord, SERTORIVS MACRO is without,
Alone, and prays to have private conference
In business, of high nature, with your lordship,
(He say's to me) and which reguards you much.
Let him come here.

Better, my lord, with-draw,
You will betray what store, and strength of friends
Are now about you; which he comes to spy.

Is he not armed?

We'll search him.

No, but take,
And lead him to some room, where you, concealed,
May keep a guard upon us. Noble LACO,
You are our trust: and, till our own cohorts
Can be brought up, your strengths must be our guard.
Now, good MINVTIVS, honoured LATIARIS,
Most worthy, and my most vnwearied friends:
I return instantly.

Most worthy lord!

His lordship is turned instant kind, me thinks,
In have not observed it in him, heretofore.

'Tis true, and it becomes him nobly.

I
Am raped withal.

By MARS, he has my lives,
(Were they a million) for this only grace.

I, and to name a man!

As he did me!

And me!

Who would not spend his life and fortunes,
To purchase but the look of such a lord?

He, that would nor be lords fool, nor the worlds.

MACRO! most welcome, as most coveted friend!
Let me enjoy my longings. When arrived you?
About the noone of night.

SATRIVS, give leave.

I have been, since I came, with both the Consuls,
On a particular design from CAESAR.

How fares it with our great, and royal master?

Right plentifully well; as, with a prince,
That still holds out the great proportion
Of his large favours, where his judgment hath
Made once divine election: like the god,
That wants not, nor is wearied to bestow
Where merit meets his bounty, as it doth
In you, already the most happy, and ere
The sun shall climb the south, most high SEIANVS.
Let not my lord be' amused. For, to this end
Was I by CAESAR sent for, to the isle,
With special caution to conceal my journey;
And, thence, had my dispatch as privately
Again to Rome; charged to come here by night;
And, only to the Consuls, make narration
Of his great purpose: that the benefit
Might come more full, and striking, by how much
It was less looked for, or aspired by you,
Or least informed to the common thought.

What may this be? part of my self, dear MACRO!
If good, speak out: and share with your SEIANVS.

If bad, I should for ever loathe my self,
To be the messenger to so good a lord.
I do exceed my instructions, to acquaint
Your lordship with thus much; but 'tis my venture
On your retentive wisdom: and, because
I would no jealous scruple should molest
Or rack your peace of thought. For, I assure
My noble lord, no Senator yet knows
The business meant: though all, by several letters,
Are warned to be there, and give their voices,
Only to add unto the state, and grace
Of what is purposed.

You take pleasure, MACRO,
Like a coy wench, in torturing your lover.
What can be worth this suffering?

That which follows,
The tribuniciall dignity, and power:
Both which SEIANVS is to have this day
Conferred upon him, and by public Senate.

Fortune, be mine again; thou hast satisfied
For thy suspected loyalty.

My lord,
I have no longer time, the day approaches,
And I must back to CAESAR.

Where's CALIGVLA?

That I forgot to tell your lordship. Why,
He lingers yonder, about Capreae,
Disgraced; TIBERIVS hath not seen him yet:
He needs would thrust himself to go with me,
Against my wish, or will, but I have quitted
His forward trouble, with as tardy note
As my neglect, or silence could afford him.
Your lordship cannot now command me ought,
Because, I take no knowledge that I saw you,
But I shall boast to live to serve your lordship:
And so take leave.

Honest, and worthy MACRO,
Your love, and friendship. Who's there? SATRIVS,
Attend my honourable friend forth. O!
How vain, and vile a passion is this fear?
What base, uncomely things it makes men do?
Suspect their noblest friends, (as I did this)
Flatter poor enemies, entreat their servants,
Stoup, court, and catch at the benevolence
Of creatures, unto whom (within this hour)
I would not have vouchsafed a quarter-looke,
Or piece of face? By you, that fools call gods,
Hang all the sky with your prodigious signs,
Fill earth with monsters, drop the scorpion down,
Out of the zodiac, or the fiercer lyon,
Shake off the loos'ned globe from her long hinge,
Roll all the world in darkness, and let loose
Th'inraged winds to turn up groves and towns;
When I do fear again, let me be struck
With forked fire, and unpitied die:
Who fears, is worthy of calamity.

IS not my lord here?

Sir, he will be straight.

What news, FVLCINIVS TRIO?

Good, good tidings.
(But, keep it to your self) My lord SEIANVS
Is to receive this day, in open Senate,
The tribuniciall dignity.

Is't true?

No words; not to your thought: but, sir, believe it.

What says the Consul?

(Speak it not again,)
He tells me, that to day my lord SEIANVS --

I must entreat you COTTA, on your honour
Not to reveal it.

On my life, sir.)

Say.

Is to receive the tribuniciall power.
But, as you are an honourable man,
Let me conjure you, not to utter it:
For it is trusted to me, with that bond.

I am HARPOCRATES.

Can you assure it?

The Consul told it me, but keep it close.

Lord LATIARIS, what's the news?

I'll tell you,
But you must swear to keep it secret --

I Knew the sates had on their distaff left
More of our thread, then so.

Hail, great SEIANVS.

Hail, the most honoured.

Happy.

High SEIAN{us}.

Do you bring prodigies too?

May all presage
Turn to those fair effects, whereof we bring
Your lordship news.

May 't please my lord with-draw.

Yes (I will speak with you, anon.)

My lord,
What is your pleasure for the Tribunes?

Why,
Let them be thanked, and sent away.

My lord --

Wilt please your lordship to command me --

No.
You are troublesome.

The mood is changed.

Not speak?

Nor look?

I. He is wise, will make him friends
Of such, who never love, but for their ends.

I, Go, make haste; take heed you be not last
To tender your All hail, in the wide hall
Of huge SEIANVS: run, a Lictors pace;
Stay not to put your robes on; but, away,
With the pale troubled ensigns of great friendship
Stamp't in your face! Now, MARCVS LEPIDVS,
You still believe your former augury?
SEIANVS must go downe-ward? you perceive
His wane approaching fast?

Believe me, LVCIVS,
I wonder at this rising!

I, and that we
Must give our suffrage to it? you will say,
It is to make his fall more steep, and grievous?
It may be so. But think it, they that can
With idle wishes 'ssay to bring back time:
In cases desperate, all hope is crime.
See, see! what troops of his officious friends
Flock to salute my lord! and start before
My great, proud lord! to get a lord-like nod!
Attend my lord, unto the Senate-house!
Bring back my lord! like servile huishers, make
Way for my lord! proclaim his idol lord-ship,
More then ten criers, or six noise of trumpets!
Make legs, kiss hands, and take a scattered hair
From my lords eminent shoulder! See, SANQVINIVS!
With his slow belly, and his dropsy! look,
What toiling haste he makes! yet, here's another,
Retarded with the gout, will be before him!
Get thee liburnian porters, thou gross fool,
To bear thy obsequious fatness, like thy peers.
They are met! The gout returns, and his great carriage.

Give way, make place; room for the Consul.

Hail,
Hail, great SEIANVS.

Hail, my honoured lord.

We shall be marked anon, for our not-haile.

That is already done.

It is a note
Of upstart greatness, to observe, and watch
For these poor trisles, which the noble mind
Neglects, and scorns.

I, and they think themselves
Deeply dishonoured, where they are omitted,
As if they were necessities, that helped
To the perfection of their dignities:
And hate the men, that but refrain them.

O!
There is a farther cause of hate. Their breasts
Are guilty, that we know their obscure springs,
And base beginnings: thence the anger grows. On. Follow.

WHen all are entered, shut the temple doors;
And bring your guards up to the gate.
I will.

If you shall hear commotion in the Senate,
Present your self: and charge on any man
Shall offer to come forth.

I am instructed.

HOw well his lordship looks to day!
As if
He had been borne, or made for this hours state.

Your fellow Consul's come about, me thinks?

I, he is wise.

SEIANVS trusts him well.

SEIANVS is a noble, bounteous lord.

He is so, and most valiant.

And most wise.

He's every thing.

Worthy of all, and more
Then bounty can bestow.

This dignity
Will make him worthy.

Above CAESAR.

Tut,
CAESAR is but the rector of an I'sle,
He of the empire.

Now he will have power
More to reward, then ever.

Let us look
We be not slack in giving him our voices.

Not I.

Nor I.

The readier we seem
To propagate his honours, will more bind
His thought, to ours.

I think right, with your lordship.
It is the way to have us hold our places.

I, and get more.

More office, and more titles.

I will not lose the part, I hope to share
In these his fortunes, for my patrimony.

See, how ARRVNTIVS sits, and LEPIDVS.

Let them alone, they will be marked anon.

I'll do with others.

So will I.

And I.
Men grow not in the state, but as they are planted
Warm in his favours.

Noble SEIANVS!

Honoured SEIANVS!

Worthy, and great SEIANVS!

Gods! how the spunges open, and take in!
And shut again! look, look! is not he blessed
That gets a seat in eye-reach of him? more,
That comes in ear, or tongue-reach? O, but most,
Can claw his subtle elbow, or with a buzz
Fly-blow his ears.

Proclaim the Senates peace;
And give last summons by the edict.

Silence:
In name of CAESAR, and the SENATE. Silence.
MEMMIVS REGVLVS, and FVLCINIVS TRIO, consuls, these present kalends of June,
with the first light, shall hold a senate, in the temple of APOLLO PALATINE,
all that are Fathers, and are registered Fathers, that have right of entering the
Senate, we warn, or command, you be frequently present, take knowledge the
business is the commonwealths, whosoever is absent, his fine, or mulct, will
be taken, his excuse will not be taken.

Note, who are absent, and record their names.

Fathers Conscript. May, what I am to utter.
Turn good, and happy, for the common-wealth.
And thou APOLLO, in whose holy house
We here are met, inspire us all, with truth,
And liberty of censure, to our thought.
The majesty of great TIBERIVS CAESAR
Propounds to this grave Senate, the bestowing
Upon the man he loves, honoured SEIANVS,
The tribuniciall dignity, and power;
Here are his letters, signed with his signet:
What pleases now the Fathers to be done?

Read, read them, open, publicly, read them.

CAESAR hath honoured his own greatness much,
In thinking of this act.

It was a thought
Happy, and worthy CAESAR.

And the lord,
As worthy it, on whom it is directed!

Most worthy!

Rome did never boast the virtue
That could give envy bounds, but his: SEIANVS --

Honoured, and noble!

Good, and great SEIANVS!

O, most tame slavery, and fierce flattery!

Silence.

IF you, Conscript Fathers, with your children, be in health, it is
abundantly well: we with our friends here, are so. The care of the
common-wealth, howsoever we are remoou'd in person, cannot be absent to our
thought; although, oftentimes, even to princes most present, the truth of their
own affairs is hid: then which, nothing falls out more miserable to a state,
or makes the art of governing more difficult. But since it hath been our
ease-full happiness to enjoy both the aides, and industry of so vigilant a
Senate, we profess to have been the more indulgent to our pleasures, not as
being careless of our office, but rather secure of the necessity. Neither do
these common rumours of many, and infamous libels, published against our
retirement, at all afflict us; being born more out of men's ignorance, then
their malice: and will, neglected, find their own grave quickly; whereas too
sensibly acknowledged, it would make their obloquy ours. Nor do we desire
their authors (though found) be censured, since in a free state (as ours) all
men ought to enjoy both their minds, and tongues free.



The lapwing, the lapwing.)


Yet, in things, which shall worthily, and more near concern the majesty of
a prince, we shall fear to be so unnaturally cruel to our own fame, as to
neglect them. True it is, Conscript Fathers, that we have raised SEIANVS, from
obscure, and almost unknown gentry,



How! how!)


to the highest, and most conspicuous point of greatness, and (we hope)
deseruingly; yet, not without danger: it being a most bold hazard in that
sou'raigne, who, by his particular love to one, dares adventure the hatred of
all his other subjects.



This touches, the blood turns.)


But we affy in your loves, and understandings, and do no way suspect the
merit of our SEIANVS to make our favours offensive to any.



O! good, good.)


Though we could have wished his zeal had run a calmer course against
AGRIPPINA, and our Nephews, howsoever the opennesse of their actions, declared
them delinquents; and, that he would have remembered, no innocence is so safe,
but it rejoices to stand in the sight of mercy: The use of which in us, he
hath so quite taken away, toward them, by his loyal fury, as now our
clemency would be thought but wearied cruelty, if we should offer to exercise
it.



I thank him, there I looked for it. A good fox!)


Some there be, that would interpret this his public severity to be
particular ambition; and that, under a pretext of service to us, he doth but
remove his own lets: alleging the strengths he hath made to himself, by
the Praetorian soldiers, by his faction in Court, and Senate, by the offices
he holds himself, and confers on others, his popularity, and dependents,
his urging (and almost driving) us to this our unwilling retirement, and lastly
his aspiring to be our son in-law.



This 's strange!


I shall anon believe your vultures, MARCVS.)


Your wisdoms, Conscript Fathers, are able to examine, and censure these
suggestions. But, were they left to our absolving voice, we durst pronounce
them, as we think them, most malicious.



O, he has restored all, list.)


Yet, are they offered to be auerr'd, and on the lives of the informers. What
we should say, or rather what we should not say, Lords of the Senate, if this
be true, our gods, and goddesses confound us if we know! Only, we must think,
we have placed our benefits ill: and conclude, that, in our choice, either we
were wanting to the gods, or the gods to us.



The place grows hot, they shift.)


We have not been covetous, Honourable Fathers, to change; neither is it now,
any new lust that alters our affection, or old loathing: but those needful
jealousies of state, that warn wiser princes, hourly, to provide their
safety; and do teach them how learned a thing it is to beware of the humblest
enemy; much more of those great ones, whom their own employed favours have
made fit for their fears.



Away.


Sit farther.


Let's remove --


Gods! how the leaves drop off, this little wind!)


We therefore desire, that the offices he holds, be first seized by the
Senate; and himself suspended from all exercise of place, or power --



How!


By your leave.


Come, Porcpisce, (wher's HATERIVS?
His gout keeps him most miserably constant.)
Your dancing shows a tempest.

Read no more.

Lords of the Senate, hold your seats: read on.

These letters, they are forged.

A guard, sit still.

There's change.

Bid silence, and read forward.

Silence -- and himself suspended from all exercise of place, or power, but
till due and mature trial be made of his innocence, which yet we can faintly
apprehend the necessity, to doubt. If, Conscript Fathers, to your more
searching wisdoms, there shall appear farther cause (or of farther
proceeding, either to seizure of lands, goods, or more --) it is not our power
that shall limit your authority, or our favour, that must corrupt your
justice: either were dishonourable in you, and both uncharitable to our self.
We would willingly he present with your counsels in this business, but the
danger of so potent a faction (if it should prove so) forbids our attempting
it: except one of the Consuls would be entreated for our safety, to undertake
the guard of us home, then we should most readily adventure. In the mean
time, it shall not be fit for us to importune so judicious a Senate, who know
how much they hurt the innocent, that spare the guilty: and how grateful a
sacrifice, to the gods, is the life of an ungrateful person. We reflect not,
in this, on SEIANVS (notwithstanding, if you keep an eye upon him -- and there
is LATIARIS a Senator, and PINNARIVS NATTA, two of his most trusted ministers,
and so professed, whom we desire not to have apprended) but as the necessity of
the cause exacts it.



A guard on LATIARIS.

O, the spy!
The reverend spy is caught, who pities him?
Reward, sir, for your se^uice: now, you have done
Your property, you see what use is made?
Hang up the instrument.

Give leave.

Stand, stand,
He comes upon his death, that doth advance
An inch toward my point.

Have we no friends here?

Hushed. Where now are all the hails, and acclamations?

Hail, to the Consuls, and this noble Senate.
Is MACRO here? O, thou art lost, SEIANVS.

Sit still, and vn-affrighted, reverend Fathers.
MACRO, by CAESARS grace, the new-made Provost,
And now possessed of the praetorian bands,
An honour late belonged to that proud man,
Bids you, be safe: and to your constant doom
Of his deservings, offers you the surety
Of all the soldiers, tribunes, and centurions,
Received in our command.

SEIANVS, SEIANVS,
Stand forth, SEIANVS.

Am I called?

I, thou,
Thou insolent monster, art bid stand.

Why, MACRO,
It hath been otherwise, between you, and I?
This court, that knows us both, hath seen a difference,
And can (if it be pleased to speak) confirm,
Whose insolence is most.

Come down Typhoeus,
If mine be most, lo, thus I make it more;
Kick up thy heals in air, tear off thy robe,
Play with thy beard, and nostrills. Thus 'tis fit,
(And no man take compassion of thy state)
To use th'ingratefull viper, tread his brains
Into the earth.

Forbear.

If I could lose
All my humanity now, 'twere well to torture
So meriting a traitor. Wherefore, Fathers,
Sit you amazed, and silent? and not censure
This wretch, who in the hour he first rebelled
Against CAESARS bounty, did condemn himself?
P'hlegra, the field, where all the sons of earth
Mustered against the gods, did ne'er acknowledge
So proud, and huge a monster.

Take him hence.
And all the gods guard CAESAR.

Take him hence.

Hence.

To the dungeon with him.

He deserves it.

Crown all our doors with baize.

And let an ox
With gilded horns, and garlands, straight be led
Unto the capital.

And sacrificed
To JOVE, for CAESARS safety.

All our gods
Be present still to CAESAR.

PHOEBVS.

MARS.

DIANA.

PALLAS.

IVNO, MERCVRIE,
All guard him.

Forth, thou prodigy of men.

Let all the traitors titles be defaced.

His images, and statues be pulled down.

His chariot-wheeles be broken.

And the legs
Of the poor horses, that deserved nought,
Let them be broken too.

O, violent change,
And whirl of men's affections!

Like, as both
Their bulks and souls were bound on fortunes wheel,
And must act only with her motion!
WHo would depend upon the popular air,
Or voice of men, that have to day beheld
(That which if all the gods had fore-declar'd,
Would not have been believed) SEIANVS fall?
He, that this morn rose proudly, as the sun?
And, breaking through a mist of clients breath,
Came on as gazed at, and admired, as he
When superstitious Moors salute his light!
That had our servile nobles waiting him
As common grooms; and hanging on his look,
No less then humane life on destiny!
That had men's knees as frequent, as the gods;
And sacrifices, more, then Rome had altars:
And this man fall! fall? I, without a look,
That durst appear his friend; or lend so much
Of vain relief, to his changed state, as pity!

They, that before like gnats plaid in his beams,
And thronged to circumscribe him, now not seen!
Nor deign to hold a common seat with him!
Others, that waited him unto the Senate,
Now, inhumanely ravish him to prison!
Whom (but this morn) they follow'd as their lord,
Guard through the streets, bound like a fugitive!
In stead of wreaths, give fetters; strokes, for stoops:
Blind shame, for honours; and black taunts, for titles!
Who would trust slippery chance?

They, that would make
Themselves her spoil: and foolishly forget,
When she doth flatter, that she comes to prey.
Fortune, thou had no deity, if men
Had wisdom: we have placed thee so high,
By fond belief in thy felicity.

The gods guard CAESAR. All the gods guard CAESAR.
NOw great SEIANVS, you that awed the state,
And sought to bring the nobles to your whip,
That would be CAESARS tutor, and dispose
Of dignities, and offices! that had
The public head still bare to your designs,
And made the general voice to echo yours!
That looked for salutations, twelve score off,
And would have pyramid's, yea, temples reared
To your huge greatness! now, you lie as flat,
As was your pride advanced.

Thanks, to the gods.

And praise to MACRO, that hath saved Rome.
Liberty, liberty, liberty. Lead on,
And praise to MACRO, that hath saved Rome.
I Prophecy, out of this Senates flattery,
That this new fellow, MACRO, will become
A greater prodigy in Rome, then he
That now is fallen.

O you, whose minds are good,
And have not forced all mankind, from your breasts;
That yet have so much stock of virtue left,
To pity guilty states, when they are wretched:
Lend your soft ears to hear, and eyes to weep
Deeds done by men, beyond the acts of furies.
The eager multitude, (who never yet
Knew why to love, or hate, but only pleased
T'expresse their rage of power) no sooner heard
The murmure of SEIANVS in decline,
But with that speed, and heate of appetite,
With which they greedily devour the way
To some great sports, or a new theatre;
They filled the capital, and POMPEI'S circke,
Where, like so many mastiues, biting stones,
As if his statues now were sensitive
Of their wild fury; first, they tear them down:
Then fastening ropes, drag them along the streets,
Crying in scorn, this, this was that rich head
Was crowned with garlands, and with odours, this
That was in Rome so reverenced. Now
The fornace, and the bellows shall too work
The great SEIANVS crack, and piece, by piece,
Drop in the founders pit.

O, popular rage!

The whilst, the Senate, at the temple of Concord,
Make haste to meet again, and thronging cry,
Let us condemn him, tread him down in water,
While he doth lie upon the bank; away:
Where some, more tardy, cry unto their bearers,
He will be censured ere we come, run knaves,
And use that furious diligence, for fear
Their bond-men should inform against their slackness,
And bring their quaking flesh unto the hooke:
The rout, they follow with confused voice,
Crying, they'are glad, say they could ne'er abide him;
Enquire, what man he was? what kind of face?
What beard he had? what nose? what lips? protest,
They ever did presage h' would come to this:
They never thought him wise, nor valiant: Ask
After his garments, when he dies? what death?
And not a beast of all the herd demands,
What was his crime? or, who were his accusers?
Under what roof, or testimony, he fell?
There came (says one) a huge, long, worded letter
From Capreae against him. Did there so?
O, they are satisfied, no more.

Alas!
They follow fortune, and hate men condemned,
Guilty, or not.

But, had SEIANVS thriu'd
In his design, and prosperously oppressed
The old TIBERIVS, then, in that same minute
These very raskals, that now rage like furies,
Would have proclaimed SEIANVS emperor.

But what hath follow'd?

Sentence, by the Senate;
To lose his head: which was no sooner off,
But that, and th'vnfortunate trunk were seized
By the rude multitude; who not content
With what the forward justice of the state,
Officiously had done, with violent rage
Have rent it limb, from limb. A thousand heads,
A thousand hands, ten thousand tongues, and voices,
Employed at once in several acts of malice!
Old men not staid with age, virgins with shame,
Late wives with loss of husbands, mothers of children,
Losing all grief in joy of his sad fall,
Run quite transported with their cruelty!
These mounting at his head, these at his face,
These digging out his eyes, those with his brain,
Sprinkling themselves, their houses, and their friends;
Others are met, have ravished thence an arm,
And deal small pieces of the flesh for favours;
These with a thigh; this hath cut off his hands;
And this his feet; these fingers, and these toes;
That hath his liver; he his heart: there wants
Nothing but room for wrath, and place for hatred!
What cannot oft be done, is now ore-done.
The whole, and all of what was great SEIANVS,
And next to CAESAR did possess the world,
Now torn, and scattered, as he needs no grave,
Each little dust covers a little part:
So lies he no where, and yet often buried!
MOre of SEIANVS?

Yes.

What can be added?
We know him dead.

Then, there begin your pity.
There is enough behind, to melt even Rome,
And CAESAR into tears: (since never slave
Could yet so highly offend, but tyranny,
In torturing him, would make him worth lamenting.)
A son, and daughter, to the dead SEIANVS,
(Of whom there is not now so much remaining
As would give fastening to the hang-mans hooke)
Have they drawn forth for farther sacrifice;
Whose tenderness of knowledge, unripe years,
And childish silly innocence was such,
As scarce would lend them feeling of their danger:
The girl so simple, as she often asked,
Where they would lead her? for what cause they dragged her?
Cried, she would do no more. That she could take
Warning with beating. And because our laws
Admit no virgin immature to die,
The wittily, and strangely-cruell MACRO,
Delivered her to be deflowr'd, and spoiled,
By the rude lust of the licentious hang-man,
Then, to be strangled with her harmless brother.

O, act, most worthy hell, and lasting night,
To hide it from the world!

Their bodies thrown
Into the Gemonies, (I know not how,
Or by what accident returned) the mother,
Th'expulsed APICATA, finds them there;
Whom when she saw lie spread on the degrees,
After a world of fury on her self,
Tearing her hair, defacing of her face,
Beating her breasts, and womb, kneeling amazed,
Crying to heaven, then to them; at last,
Her drowned voice gate up above her woes:
And with such black, and bitter execrations,
(As might affright the gods, and force the sun
Run back-ward to the east, nay, make the old
Deformed CITAOS rise again, to ore-whelme
Them, us, and all the world) she fills the air;
Vpbraids the heavens with their partial dooms,
Defies their tyrannous powers, and demands,
What she, and those poor innocents have transgressed,
That they must suffer such a share in vengeance,
Whilst LIVIA, LYGDVS, and EVDEMVS live,
Who, (as she say's, and firmly vows, to prove it
To CAESAR, and the Senate) poisoned DRVSVS?

Confederates with her husband?

I.

Strange act!

And strangely opened: what say's now my monster,
The multitude? they reel now? do they not?

Their gall is gone, and now they 'gin to weep
The mischief they have done.

I thank them, rogues!

Part are so stupide, or so flexible,
As they believe him innocent; all grieve:
And some, whose hands yet reeke with his warm blood,
And gripe the part which they did tear of him,
Wish him collected, and created new.

How fortune plies her sports, when she begins
To practise'hem! pursues, continues, adds!
Con^ounds, with varying her empassion'd moods!

Dost thou hope fortune to redeem thy crimes?
To make amends, for thy ill placed favours,
With these strange punishments? Forbear, you things,
That stand upon the pinnacles of state,
To boast your slippery height; when you do fall,
You pash your selves in pieces, ne'er to rise:
And he that lends you pity, is not wise.

Let this example move th'insolent man,
Not to grow proud, and careless of the gods:
It is an odious wisdom, to blaspheme,
Much more to slighten, or deny their powers.
For, whom the morning saw so great, and high,
Thus low, and little, before the 'euen doth lie.

This Tragoedie was first acted, in the year 1603.

By the Kings Majesties SERVANTS.

The principal Tragoedians were,

With the allowance of the Master of REVELS.


