CATILINE HIS CONSPIRACY. A Tragoedie. Acted in the year 1611. By the Kings
MAJESTIES Servants.

The Author B. I.

-- His non plebecula gaudet:
Verum equitis quo{que}, jam migrauit ab aure voluptas
Omnis, ad incertos oculos, gaudia vana.
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.

M. DC. XVI.

MY LORD, IN so thick, and dark an ignorance, as now almost covers the age, I
crave leave to stand near your light: and, by that, to be read. Posterity
may pay your benefit the honour, thanks: when it shall know, that you dare, in
these ^ig-giuen times, to countenance a legitimate Poem. I must call it so,
against all noise of opinion: from whose crude, and airy reports, I appeal,
to that great and singular faculty of judgment in your Lordship, able to
vindicate truth from error. It is the first (of this race) that ever I
dedicated to any person, and had I not thought it the best, it should have
been taught a less ambition. Now, it approaches your censure cheerfully, and
with the same assurance, that innocence would appear before a magistrate.

Your Lo. most faithful honorer, BEN. IONSON.
THE SCENE ROME.

Dost thou not feel me, Rome? not yet? Is night
So heavy on thee, and my weight so light?
Can SYLLA'S Ghost arise within thy walls,
Less threatening, then an earth-quake, the quick falls
Of thee, and thine? shake not the frighted heads
Of thy steep towers? or shrink to their first beds?
Or, as their ruin the large Tyber fills,
Make that swell up, and drown thy seven proud hills?
What sleep is this doth seize thee, so like death,
And is not it? Wake, feel her, in my breath:
Behold, I come, sent from the Stygian sound,
As a dire vapor, that had cleft the ground,
T'ingender with the night, and blast the day;
Or like a pestilence, that should display
Infection through the world: which, thus, I do.
PLVTO be at thy counsels; and into
Thy darker bosom enter SYLLA'S spirit:
All, that was mine, and bad, thy breast inherit.
Alas, how weak is that, for CATILINE!
Did I but say (vain voice!) all that was mine?
All, that the GRACCHI, CINNA, MARIVS would;
What now, had I a body again, I could,
Coming from hell; what Fiends would wish should be;
And HANNIBAL could not have wished to see:
Think thou, and practice. Let the long-hid seeds
Of treason, in thee, now shoot forth in deeds,
Ranker then horror; and thy former facts
Not fall in mention, but to urge new acts:
Conscience of them provoke thee on to more.
Be still thy incests, murders, rapes before
Thy sense; thy forcing first a Vestal nun;
Thy parricide, late, on thine own only son,
After his mother; to make empty way
For thy last wicked nuptials; worse, then they,
That blaze that act of thy incestuous life,
Which got thee, at once, a daughter, and a wife.
I leave the slaughters that thou did for me,
Of Senators; for which, I hid for thee
Thy murder of thy brother, (being so bribed)
And writ him in the list of my proscribed
After thy fact, to save thy little shame:
Thy incest, with thy sister, I not name.
These are too light. Fate will have thee pursue
Deeds, after which, no mischief can be new;
The ruin of thy country: thou were built
For such a work, and borne for no less guilt.
What though defeated once th'hast been, and known,
Tempt it again: That is thy act, or none.
What all the several ills, that visit earth,
(Brought forth by night, with a sinister birth)
Plagues, famine, fire could not reach unto,
The sword, nor surfeits; let thy fury do:
Make all past, present, future ill thine own;
And conquer all example, in thy one.
Nor let thy thought find any vacant time
To hate an old, but still a fresher crime
Drown the remembrance: let not mischief cease,
But, while it is in punishing, increase.
Conscience, and care die in thee; and be free
Not heaven it self from thy impiety:
Let night grow blacker with thy plots; and day,
At showing but thy head forth, start away
From this halfe-spheare: and leave Romes blinded walls
T'embrace lusts, hatreds, slaughters, funerals,
And not recover sight, till their own flames
Do light them to their ruins. All the names
Of thy confederates, too, be no less great
In hell, then here: that, when we would repeat
Our strengths in muster, we may name you all,
And Furies, upon you, for Furies, call.
Whilst, what you do, may strike them into fears,
Or make them grieve, and wish your mischief theirs.
IT is decreed. Nor shall thy Fate, O Rome,
Resist my vow. Though hills were set on hills,
And seas met seas, to guard thee; I would through:
I, plough up rocks, steep as the Alps, in dust;
And lave the Tyrrhene waters, into clouds;
But I would reach thy head, thy head, proud city.
The ills, that I have done, cannot be safe
But by attempting greater; and I feel
A spirit, within me, chides my sluggish hands,
And says, they have been innocent too long.
Was I a man, bred great, as Rome her self?
One, formed for all her honours, all her glories?
Equal to all her titles? that could stand
Close up, with ATLAS; and sustain her name
As strong, as he doth heaven? And, was I,
Of all her brood, marked out for the repulse
By her no voice, when I stood Candidate,
To be commander in the Pontick war?
I will, hereafter, call her step-dame, ever.
If she can loose her nature, I can loose
My pietie^ and in her stony entrails
Dig me a seat: where, I will live again,
The labour of her womb, and be a burden,
Weight^er then all the prodigies, and monsters,
That she hath teem'd with, since she first knew MARS.
WHo's there?
'Tis I.

AVRELIA?

Yes.

Appear,
And break, like day, my beauty, to this circle:
Upbraid thy Phoebus, that he is so long
In mounting to that point, which should give thee
Thy proper splendour. Wherefore frowns my sweet?
Have ^ too long been absent from these lips,
This cheek, these eyes? What is my trespass? speak.

It seems, you know, that can accuse your self.

(...) (...) IT is, me thinks, a morning, full of fate!
It rises slowly, as her sollen carre
Had all the weights of sleep, and death hung at it!
She is not rosy-finger'd, but swollen black!
Her face is like a water, turned to blood,
And her sick head is bound about with clouds,
As if she threatened night, ere noone of day!
It does not look, as it would have a hail,
Or health, wished in it, as on other mornes.

Why, all the fitter, LENTVLVS: our coming
Is not for salutation, we have business.

Said nobly, brave CETHEGVS. Where's AVTRONIVS?

Is he not come?

Not here.

Nor VARGVNTEIVS?

Neither.

A fire in their beds, and bosoms,
That so will serve their sloth, rather then virtue.
They are no Romanes, and at such high need
As now.

Both they, LONGINVS, LECCA, CVRIVS,
FVLVIVS, GABINIVS, gave me word, last night,
By LVC'IVS BESTIA, they would all be here,
And early.

Yes? As you, had I not called you.
Come, we all sleep, and are mere dormice; flies,
A little less then dead: more dullness hangs
On us, then on the morn. We're spirit-bound,
In ribs of ice; our whole bloods are one stone;
And honour cannot thaw us; nor our wants:
Though they burn, hot a fevers, to our states.

I muse they would be tardy, at an hour
Of so great purpose.

If the gods had called
Them, to a purpose, they would just have come
With the same tortoyse speed! that are thus slow
To such an action, which the gods will envy:
As asking no less means, then all their powers
Conjoined, t'effect. I would have seen Rome burned,
By this time; and her ashes in an urn:
The kingdom of the Senate, rent asunder;
And the degenerate, talking gown run frighted,
Out of the air of Italie.

Spirit of men!
Thou, heart of our great enterprise! how much
I love these voices in thee!

O, the days
Of SYLLA'S sway, when the free sword took leave
To act all that it would!

And was familiar
With entrails, as our Augures!

Sons killed fathers,
Brothers their brothers.

And had price, and praise.
All hate had licence given it: all rage rains.

Slaughter bestrid the streets, and stretched himself
To seem more huge; whilst to his stained thighs
The gore he drew flowed up: and carried down
Whole heaps of limbs, and bodies, through his arch.
No age was spared, no sex.

Nay, no degree.

Not infants, in the porch of life were free.
The sick, the old, that could but hope a day
Longer, by natures bounty, not let stay.
Virgins, and widows, matrons, pregnant wives,
All dyed.

'Twas crime enough, that they had lives.
To strike but only those, that could do hurt,
Was dull, and poor. Some fell to make the number,
As some the prey.

The rugged CHARON fainted,
And asked a navy, rather then a boat,
To ferry over the sad world that came:
The mawes, and dens of beasts could not receive
The bodies, that those souls were frighted from;
And even the graves were sild with men, yet living,
Whose flight, and fear had mixed them, with the dead.

And this shall be again, and more, and more,
Now LENTVLVS, the third CORNELIVS,
Is to stand up in Rome.

Nay, urge not that
Is so uncertain.

How!

I mean, not cleared.
And, therefore, not to be reflected on.

The SYBILL'S leaves uncertain? or the comments
Of our grave, deep, divining men not clear?

All prophecies, you know, suffer the torture.

But this, already, hath confessed, without.
And so been weighed, examined, and compared,
As 't were malicious ignorance in him,
Would faint in the belief.

Do you believe it?

Do I love LENTVLVS? or pray to see it?

The Augures all are constant, I am meant.

They'had lost their science else.

They count from CINNA.

And SYLLA next, and so make you the third;
All that can say the sun is ris'n, must think it.

Men mark me more, of late, as I come forth!

Why, what can they do less? CINNA, and SYLLA
Are set, and gone: and we must turn our eyes
On him that is, and shines. Noble CETHEGVS,
But view him with me, here! He looks, already,
As if he shook a sceptre, over the Senate,
And the awed purple dropped their rods, and axes!

(...) (...) The dangers, the repulses, judgements, wants:
Which how long will you bear, most valiant spirits?
Were we not better to fall, once, with virtue,
Then draw a wretched, and dishonoured breath,
To loose with shame, when these men's pride will laugh?
I call the faith of gods, and men to question,
The power is in our hands; our bodies able;
Our minds as strong; of the contrary, in them,
All things grown aged, with their wealth, and years:
There wants, but only to begin the business,
The issue is certain.

On, let us go on.

Go on, brave SERGIVS.

It doth strike my soul,
(And, who can escape the stroke, that hath a soul,
Or, but the smallest air of man within him?
To see them swell with treasure; which they power
Out in their riots, eating, drinking, building,
I, in the sea! planing of hills with valleys;
And raising valleys above hills! whilst we
Have not, to give our bodies necessaries.
They have their change of houses, manors, lordships;
We scarce a fire, or poor household Lar!
They buy rare Atticke statues, Tyrian hangings,
Ephesian pictures, and Corinthian plate,
Attalicke garments, and now, new-found gems,
Since POMPEY went for Asia, which they purchase
At price of provinces! The river Phasis
Cannot affoord them foul; nor Lucrine lake
Oysters enough: Circei, too, is searched
To please the witty gluttony of a meal!
Their ancient habitations they neglect,
And set up new; then, if the echo like not
In such a room, they pluck down those, build newer,
Alter them too: and, by all frantic ways,
Vex their wild wealth, as they molest the people,
From whom they force it! yet, they cannot tame,
Or ouer-come their riches! Not, by making
Bathes, orchards, fish-pooles! letting in of seas
Here! and, then there, forcing them out again,
With mountainous heaps, for which the earth hath lost
Most of her ribs, as entrails! being now
Wounded no less for marble, then for gold.
We, all this while, like calm, benumbed Spectators,
Sit, till our seats do crack; and do not hear
The thundering ruins: whilst, at home, our wants,
Abroad, our debts do urge us; our states daily
Bending to bad, our hopes to worse: and, what
Is left, but to be crushed? Wake, wake brave friends,
And meet the liberty you oft have wished for.
Behold, renown, riches, and glory court you.
Fortune holds out these to you, as rewards.
Me thinks (though I were dumb) th'affaire it self
The opportunity, your needs, and dangers,
With the brave spoil the war brings, should inuit you.
Use me your general, or soldier: neither,
My mind, nor body shall be wanting to you.
And, being Consul, I not doubt t'effect,
All that you wish, if trust not flatter me,
And you'd not rather still be slaves, then free.

Free, free.

'Tis freedom.

Freedom we all stand for.

Why, these are noble voices! Nothing wants then,
But that we take a solemn sacrament,
To strengthen our design.

And so to act it.
Differring hurts, where powers are so prepared.

Yet, ere we enter into open act,
(With favour) 'twere no loss, if 't might be enquired,
What the condition of these arms would be?

I, and the means, to carry us through?

How, friends!
Think you, that I would bid you, grasp the wind?
Or call you to th'embracing of a cloud?
Put your known valures on so dear a business,
And have no other second then the danger,
Nor other gyrlond then the loss? Become
Your own assurances. And, for the means,
Consider, first, the stark security
The common wealth is in now; the whole Senate
Sleepy, and dreaming no such violent blow;
Their forces all abroad; of which the greatest,
That might annoy us most, is fardest off,
In Asia, under POMPEY: those, near hand,
Commanded, by our friends; one army' in Spain,
By CNEVS PISO; the other in Mauritania,
By NVCERINVS; both which I have firm,
And fast unto our plot. My self, then, standing
Now to be Consul; with my hoped Colleague
CAIVS ANTONIVS; one, no less engaged
By'his wants then we: and, whom I'haue power to melt,
And cast in any mould. Beside, some others
That will not yet be named, (both sure, and great ones)
Who, when the time comes, shall declare themselves,
Strong, for our party: so, that no resistance

(...) (...) Her round about? Or, are they none,
Except she first become her own?
O wretchedness of greatest states,
To be obnoxious to these fates:
That cannot keep, what they do gain;
And what they raise so ill sustain!
Rome, now, is Mistress of the whole
World, sea, and land, to either pole;
And even that fortune will destroy
The power that made it: she doth joy
So much in plenty, wealth, and ease,
As, now, th'excesse is her disease.
She builds in gold; and, to the stars;
As, if she threatened heaven with wars:
And seeks for hell, in quarries deep,
Giving the fiends, that there do keep,
A hope of day. Her women wear
The spoils of nations, in an ear,
Changed for the treasure of a shell;
And, in their loose attires, do swell
More light then sails, when all winds play:
Yet, are the men more loose then they!
More kemb'd, and bathed, and rubbed, and trimmed,
More sleek'd, more soft, and slacker limm'd;
As prostitute: so much, that kind
May seek it self there, and not find.
They eat on beds of silk, and gold;
At ivory tables; or, wood sold
Dearer then it: and, leaving plate,
Do drink in stone of higher rate.
They hunt all grounds; and draw all seas;
Foul every brooke, and bush; to please
Their wanton tastes: and, in request
Have new, and rare things; not the best!
Hence comes that wild, and vast expense,
That hath enforced Romes virtue, thence,
Which simple poverty first made:
And, now, ambition doth invade
Her state, with eating avarice,
Riot, and every other vice.
Decrees are bought, and laws are sold,
Honours, and offices for gold;
The peoples voices: and the free
Tongues, in the Senate, bribed be.
Such ruin of her manners Rome
Doth suffer now, as she's become
(Without the gods it soon gaine-say)
Both her own spoiler, and own prey.
So, Asia, 'art thou cru'lly even
With us, for all the blows thee given;
When we, whose virtue conquered thee,
Thus, by thy vices, ruined be.

THose rooms do smell extremely. Bring my glass,
And table hither. GALLA.
Madame.

Look
Within, in my blew cabinet, for the pearl
I'had sent me last, and bring it.

That from CLODIVS?

From CAIVS CAESAR. You'are for CLODIVS, still.
Or CVRIVS. Sirrha, if QVINTVS CVRIVS come,
I am not in fit mood; I keep my chamber:
Give warning so, without.

Is this it? madame.

Yes, help to hang it in mine ear.

Believe me,
It is a rich one, madame.

I hope so:
It should not be worn there else. Make an end,
And bind my hair up.

As 'twas yesterday?

No, nor the the other day. When knew you me
Appear, two days together, in one dressing?

Will you have it in the globe, or spire?

How thou wilt;
Any way, so thou wilt do it, good impertinence.
Thy company, if I slept not very well
A nights, would make me, an errant fool, with questions.

Alas, madame --

Nay, gentle half of the dialogue, ceas^.

I do it, indeed, but for your exercise,
As your physician bids me.

How! Does he bid you
To anger me for exercise?

Not to anger you,
But stir your blood a little: There's difference
Between luke-warme, and boiling, madame.

JOVE!
She means to cooke me, I think? Pray you, have done.

I mean to dress you, madame.

O, my IVNO,
Be friend to me! Offering at wit, too? Why, GALLA!
Where hast thou been?

Why? madam!

What hast thou done
With thy poor innocent self?

Wherefore? sweet madame!

Thus to come forth, so suddenly, a wit-worme?

It pleases you to flout one. I did dream
Of lady SEMPRONIA --

O, the wonder is out.

(...) (...) That has no pedigree, no house, no coat,
No ensigns of a family?

He'has virtue.

Hang virtue, where there is no blood: 'tis vice,
And, in him, sauciness. Why should he presume
To be more learned, or more eloquent,
Then the nobility? or boast any quality
Worthy a noble man, himself not noble?

'Twas virtue only, at first, made all men noble.

I yield you, it might, at first, in Romes poor age;
When both her Kings, and Consuls held the plough,
Or garden'd well: But, now, we have no need,
To dig, or loose our sweat for it. We have wealth,
Fortune and ease, and then their stock, to spend on,
Of name, for virtue; which will bear us out
Against all new comers: and can never fail us,
While the succession stays. And, we must glorify,
A mushrome? one of yesterday? a fine speaker?
Because he has sucked at Athens? and advance him,
To our own loss? No, FVLVIA. There are they
Can speak greek too, if need were. CAESAR, and I,
Have sate upon him; so hath CRASSVS, too:
And others. We have all decreed his rest,
For rising farther.

Excellent rare lady!

SEMPRONIA, you are beholden to my woman, here.
She does admire you.

O good GALLA, how dost thou?

The better, for your learned ladyship.

Is this grey poulder, a good dentifrice?

You see I use it.

I have one is whiter.

It may be so.

Yet this smells well.

And clenses
Very well, madame, and resists the crudities.

FVLVIA, I pray thee, who comes to thee, now?
Which of our great Patricians?

Faith, I keep
No catalogue of'hem. Sometimes I have one,
Sometimes another, as the toy takes their bloods.

Thou hast them all. Faith, when was QVINTVS CVRIVS,
Thy special servant, here?

My special servant?

Yes, thy idolater, I call him.

He may be yours,
If you do like him.

How!

He comes, not, here,
I have forbid him, hence.

VENVS forbid!

Why?

Your so constant lover.

So much the rather.
I would have change. So would you too, I am sure.
And now, you may have him.

He's fresh yet, FVLVIA:
Beware, how you do tempt me.

Faith, for me,
He' is somewhat too fresh, indeed. The salt is gone,
That gave him season. His good gifts are done.
He does not yield the crop that he was wont.
And, for the act, I can have secret fellows,
With backs worth ten of him, and shall please me
(Now that the land is fled) a myriade better.

And those one may command.

'Tis true: these Lordings,
Your noble Fauns, they are so imperious, saucy.
Rude, and as boisterous as Centaurs, leaping
A lady, at first sight.

And must be borne
Both with, and out, they think.

Tut, I'll observe
None of them all: nor humour them a jot
Longer, then they come laden in the hand,
And say, here's t'one, for th'tother.

Does CAESAR give well?

They shall all give, and pay well, that come here,
If they will have it: and that jewels, pearl,
Plate, or round sums, to buy these. I'am not taken
With a cob-swan, or a high-mounting bull,
As foolish LEDA, and EVROPA were,
But the bright gold, with DANAE. For such price,
I would endure, a rough, harsh IVPITER,
Or ten such thundering gamsters: and refrain
To laugh at them, till they are gone, with my much suffering.

You are a most happy wench, that thus can make
Use of thy youth, and freshness, in the season:
And hast it, to make use of.

(Which is the happiness.)

I am, now, fain to give to them, and keep
Musique, and a continual table, to inuite'hem;

(Yes, and they study your kitchen, more then you)

Eat my self out with usury, and my lord, too,
And all my officers, and friends beside,
To procure monies, for the needful charge
I must be at, to haue'hem: and, yet, scarce
Can I atchieue'hem, so.

Why, that's because
You affect young faces only, and smooth chins,

If youl'd love beards, and bristles,
(One with another, as others do) or wrinkles --
Who's that? Look GALLA.

'Tis the party, madame.

What party? Has he no name?

'Tis QVINTVS CVRIVS.

Did I not bid'hem, say, I kept my chamber?

Why, so they do.

I'll leave you, FVLVIA.

Nay, good SEMPRONIA, stay.

In faith, I will not.

By IVNO, I would not see him.

I'll not hinder you.

You know, he will not be kept out, madame.

No,
Nor shall not, careful GALLA, by my means.

As I do live, SEMPRONIA --

What needs this?

Go, say, I am asleep, and ill at ease.

(...) (...) So does the Senate, too, know, you can bear.

By all the gods, that Senate will smart deep
For your upbraidings. I should be right sorry
To have the means so to be veng'd on you,
(At least, the will) as I shall shortly on them.
But, go you on still; fare you well, dear lady:
You could not still be faire'vnlesse you were proud.
You will repent these moods, and ere't be long, too.
I shall have you come about, again.

Do you think so?

Yes, and I know so.

By what augury?

By the fair entrails of the matrons chests,
Gold, pearl, and jewels, here in Rome, which FVLVIA
Will then (but late) say that she might have shared:
And, grieving, miss.

Tut, all your promised mountains,
And seas, I am so stalely acquainted with --

But, when you see the universal flood
Run by your coffers; that my lords, the Senators,
Are sold for slaves, their wives for bond-women,
Their houses, and fine gardens given away,
And all their goods, under the spear, at out cry,
And you have none of this; but are still FVLVIA,
Or perhaps less, while you are thinking of it:
You will advise then, Coyness, with your cushion.
And look of your fingers; say, how you were wished;
And so, he left you.

Call him again, GALLA:
This is not usual! something hangs on this
That I must win out of him.

How now, melt you?

Come, you will laugh, now, at my easiness!
But, 'tis no miracle: Doves, they say, will bill,
After their pecking, and their murmuring.

Yes,
And then 'tis kindly. I would have my love
Angry, sometimes, to sweeten off the rest
Of her behaviour.

You do see, I study
How I may please you, then. But you think, CVRIVS,
'Tis couetise hath wrought me: if you love me,
Change that unkind conceit.

By my loved soul,
I love thee, like to it; and 'tis my study,
More then mine own revenge, to make thee happy.

And 'tis that just revenge doth make me happy
To hear you prosequute: and which, indeed,
Hath won me, to you, more, then all the hope
Of what can else be promised. I love valour
Better, then any lady loves her face,
Or dressing: then my self does. Let me grow
Still, where I do embrace. But, what good means
Ha'you t'effect it? Shall I know your project?

Thou shalt, if thou'lt be gracious.

As I can be.

And wilt thou kiss me, then?

As close as shells
Of cockles meet.

And print them deep?

Quite through
Our subtle lips.

And often?

I will sow them,
Faster, then you can reap. What is your plot?

Why, now my FVLVIA looks, like her bright name!
And is her self!

Nay, answer me, your plot:
I pray thee tell me, QVINTVS.

I, these sounds
Become a mistress. Here is harmony!
When you are harsh, I see, the way to bend you
Is not with violence, but service. Cruel,
A lady is a fire: gentle, a light.

Will you not tell me, what I ask you?

All,
That I can think, sweet love, or my breast holds,
I'll pour into thee.

What is your design, then?

I'll tell thee; CATILINE shall now be Consul:
But, you will hear more, shortly.

Nay, dear love --

I'll speak it, in thine arms, let us go in.
Rome will be sacked, her wealth will be our prize;
By public ruin, private spirits must rise.
GReat father MARS, and greater JOVE,
By whose high auspice, Rome hath stood
So long; and, first, was built in blood
Of your great nephew, that then strove
Not with his brother, but your rites:
Be present to her now, as then,
And let not proud, and factious men
Against your wills oppose their mights.
Our Consuls, now, are to be made;
O, put it in the public voice
To make a free, and worthy choice:
Excluding such as would invade
The common wealth. Let whom we name
Have wisdom, fore-sight, fortitude,
Be more with faith, then face endued,
And study conscience, above fame.
Such, as not seek to get the start
In state, by power, parts, or bribes,
Ambition's bawds: but move the tribes
By virtue, modesty, desert.

(...) (...) Our need made thee our Consul, and thy virtue.

CATO, you will vn-doe him, with your praise.

CAESAR will hurt himself, with his own envy*

The voice of CATO is the voice of Rome.

The voice of Rome is the consent of heaven!
And that hath placed thee, CICERO, at the helm,
Where thou must render, now, thy self a man,
And master of thy art. Each petty hand
Can steer a ship becalmed; but he that will
Govern, and carry her to her ends, must know
His tides, his currents; how to shift his sails;
What she will bear in foul, what in fair weathers;
Where her springs are, her leaks; and how to stop them;
What sands, what shelves, what rocks do threaten her;
The forces, and the natures of all winds,
Gusts, storms, and tempests; when her keele ploughs hell,
And deck knocks heaven: then, to manage her,
Becomes the name, and office of a pilot.

Which I'll perform, with all the diligence,
And fortitude I have; not for my year,
But for my life; except my life be less,
And that my year conclude it: if it must,
Your will, loved gods. This heart shall yet employ
A day, an hour is left me, so, for Rome,
As it shall spring a life, out of my death,
To shine, for ever glorious in my facts.
The vicious count their years, virtuous their acts.

Most noble Consul! Let us wait him home.

Most popular Consul he is grown, me thinks!

How the rout cling to him!

And CATO leads them!

You, his colleague, ANTONIVS, are not looked on.

Not I, nor do I care.

He enjoys rest,
And ease, the while. Let th'others spirit toil,
And wake it out, that was inspired for turmoil.

If all reports be true, yet, CAIVS CAESAR,
The time hath need of such a watch, and spirit.

Reports? Do you believe them CATVLVS,
Why, he does make, and breed'hem for the people;
T'endeare his service to them. Do you not taste
An art, that is so common? Popular men,
They must create strange monsters, and then quell'hem;
To make their arts seem something. Would you have
Such an HERCVLEAN actor in the scene,
And not his HYDRA? They must sweat no less
To fit their properties, then t'expresse their parts.

Treasons, and guilty men are made in states
Too oft, to dignify the magistrates.

Those states be wretched, that are forced to buy
Their rulers fame, with their own infamy.

We therefore, should provide that ours do not.

That will ANTONIVS make his care.

I shall.

And watch the watcher.

Here comes CATILINE.
How does he brooke his late repulse?

I know not.
But hardly sure.

LONGINVS, too, did stand?

At first: but he gave way unto his friend.

Who's that come? LENTVLVS?

Yes. He is again
Taken into the Senate.

And made Praetor.

I know it. He had my suffrage, next the Consuls;

True, you were there, Prince of the Senate, then.
Hail noblest Romanes. The most worthy Consul,
I gratulate your honour.

I could wish
It had been happier, by your fellowship,
Most noble SERGIVS, had it pleased the people.

It did not please the gods; who'instruct the people:
And their vnquestion'd pleasures must be served.
They know what's fitter for us, then our selves;
And 'twere impiety, to think against them.

You bear it rightly, LVCIVS; and, it glads me,
To find your thoughts so even.

I shall still
Study to make them such to Rome, and heaven.
(I would with-draw with you, a little, IVLIVS.

I'll come home to you: CRASSVS would not have you
To speak to him, before QVINTVS CATVLVS.

I apprehend you.) No, when they shall judge
Honours convenient for me, I shall have them,
With a full hand: I know it. In mean time,
They are no less part of the common-wealth,
That do obey, then those, that do command.

O, let me kiss your fore-head, LVCIVS.
How are you wronged!

By whom?

Public report.
That gives you out, to stomach your repulse;
And brooke it deadly.

Sir, she brookes not me.
Believe me rather, and your self, now, of me:
It is a kind of slander, to trust rumour.

(...) (...) And some small flattery of the Senate more,
Will make him to forget.

You wrong me, LVCIVS.

He will not need these spurs.

The action needs'hem.
These things, when they proceed not, they go backward.

Let us consult then.

Let us, first, take arms.
They that deny us just things, now, will give
All that we ask; if once they see our swords.

Our objects must be sought with wounds, not words.
IS there a heaven? and gods? and can it be
They should so slowly hear, so slowly see!
Hath JOVE no thunder? or is JOVE become
Stupide as thou art? O neere-wretched Rome,
When both thy Senate, and thy gods do sleep,
And neither thine, nor their own states do keep!
What will awake thee, heaven? what can excite
Thine anger, if this practice be too light?
His former drifts partake of former times,
But this last plot was only CATILINES.
O, that it were his last. But he, before
Hath safely done so much, hee'll still dare more.
Ambition, like a torrent, ne'er looks back;
And is a swelling, and the last affection
A high mind can put off: being both a rebel
Unto the soul, and reason, and enforces
All laws, all conscience, treads upon religion,
And offers violence to natures self.
But, here, is that transcends it! A black purpose
To confound nature: and to ruin that,
Which never age, nor mankind can repair!
Sit down, good lady; CICERO is lost
In this your fable: for, to think it true
Tempts my reason. It so far exceeds
All insolent fictions of the tragic scene!
The common-wealth, yet panting, vnder-neath
The stripes, and wounds of a late civil war,
Gasping for life, and scarce restored to hope;
To seek t'oppresse her, with new cruelty,
And utterly extinguish her long name,
With so prodigious, and vnheard-of fierceness!
What sink of monsters, wretches of lost minds,
Mad after change, and desperate in their states,
Wearied, and galled with their necessities,
(For all this I allow them) durst have thought it?
Would not the barbarous deeds have been believed,
Of MARIVS, and SYLLA, by our children,
Without this fact had rise forth greater, for them?
All, that they did, was piety, to this!
They, yet, but murdered kinsfolk, brothers, parents,
Ravished the virgins, and, perhaps, some matrons;
They left the city standing, and the temples:
The gods, and majesty of Rome were safe yet!
These purpose to fire it, to despoil them,
(Beyond the other evils) and lay wast
The farre-triumphed world: for, unto whom
Rome is too little, what can be enough?

'Tis true, my lord, I had the same discourse.

And, then, to take a horrid sacrament
In humane blood, for execution
Of this their dire design; which might be called
The height of wickedness: but that, that was higher,
For which they did it!

I assure your lordship,
The extreme horror of it almost turned me
To air, when first I heard it; I was all
A vapor, when 'twas told me: and I longed
To vent it any where. 'Twas such a secret,
I thought, it would have burnt me up.

Good FVLVIA,
Fear not your act; and less repent you of it.

I do not, my good lord. I know to whom
I have uttered it.

You have discharged it, safely.
Should Rome, for whom you have done the happy service,
Turn most ingrate; yet were your virtue paid
In conscience of the fact: so much good deeds
Reward themselves.

My lord, I did it not
To any other aim, but for it self.
To no ambition.

You have learned the difference
Of doing office to the public weal,
And private friendship: and have shown it, lady.
Be still your self. I have sent for QVINTVS CVRIVS,
And (for your virtuous sake) if I can win him,
Yet, to the common-wealth; he shall be safe too.

I'll vnder-take, my lord, he shall be won.

Pray you, join with me, then: and help to work him.

(...) (...) I see your nature's right; you shall no more
Be mentioned with them: I will call you mine,
And trouble this good shame, no farther. Stand
Firm for your country; and become a man
Honoured, and loved. It were a noble life,
To be found dead, embracing her. Know you,
What thanks, what titles, what rewards the Senate
Will heap upon you, certain, for your service?
Let not a desperate action more engage you,
Then safety should: and wicked friendship force
What honesty, and virtue cannot work.

He tells you right, sweet friend: 'Tis saving counsel.

Most noble Consul, I am yours, and hers;
I mean my countries: you' have formed me new.
Inspiring me, with what I should be, truly.
And I entreat, my faith may not seem cheaper
For springing out of penitence.

Good CVRIVS,
It shall be dearer rather, and because
Il'd make it such, hear, how I trust you more.
Keep still your former face: and mix again
With these lost spirits. Run all their mazes with them:
For such are treasons. Find their windings out,
And subtle turnings, watch their snaky ways,
Through brakes, and hedges, into woods of darkness,
Where they are fain to creep upon their breasts
In paths ne'er trod by men, but wolves, and panthers.
Learn, beside CATILINE, LENTVLVS, and those,
Whose names I have; what new ones they draw in;
Who else are likely; what those great ones are,
They do not name; what ways they mean to take;
And whither their hopes point: to war, or ruin,
By some surprise. Explore all their intents,
And what you find may profit the republique,
Acquaint me with it, either, by your self,
Or this your virtuous friend, on whom I lay
The care of urging you. I'll see, that Rome
Shall prove a thankful, and a bounteous mother:
Be secret as the night.

And constant, sir.

I do not doubt it. Though the time cut off
All vows. The dignity of truth is lost,
With much protesting. Who is there! This way,
Lest you be seen, and met. And when you come,
Be this your token, to this fellow. Light them.
O Rome, in what a sickness art thou fallen!
How dangerous, and deadly! when thy head
Is drowned in sleep, and all thy body feu'ry!
No noise, no pulling, no vexation wakes thee,
Thy lethargy is such: or if, by chance,
Thou heau'st thy eye-lids up, thou dost forget
Sooner, then thou were told, thy proper danger.
I did vn-reuerendly, to blame the gods,
Who wake for thee, though thou snore to thy self.
Is it not strange, thou should be so diseased,
And so secure? But more, that the first symptoms
Of such a malady, should not rise out
From any worthy member, but a base
And common strumpet, worthless to be named
A hair, or part of thee? Think, think, hereafter,
What thy needs were, when thou must use such means:
And lay it to thy breast, how much the gods
Upbraid thy foul neglect of them; by making
So vile a thing, the author of thy safety.
They could have wrought by nobler ways: have struck
Thy foes with forked lightning; or rammed thunder;
Thrown hills upon them, in the act; have sent
Death, like a damp, to all their families;
Or caused their consciences to burst them. But,
When they will show thee what thou art, and make
A scornful difference 'twixt their power, and thee,
They help thee by such aides, as geese, and harlots.
How now? What answer? Is he come?

Your brother,
Will straight be here; and your colleague ANTONIVS
Said, coldly, he would follow me.

I, that
Troubles me somewhat, and is worth my fear.
He is a man, against whom I must provide,
That (as hee'll do no good) he do no harm.
He, though he be not of the plot, will like it,
And wish it should proceed: for, unto men,
Pressed with their wants, all change is ever welcome.
I must with offices, and patience win him;
Make him, by art, that which he is not borne,
A friend unto the public; and bestow
The province on him; which is by the Senate
Decreed to me: that benefit will bind him.
'Tis well, if some men will do well, for price:
So few are virtuous, when the reward's away.
Nor must I be unmindful of my private;
For which I have called my brother, and the tribunes,
My kins-folke, and my clients to be near me:

(...) (...) With the old needy troops, that follow'd SYLLA:
And all do but expect, when we will give
The blow at home. Behold this silver eagle,
'Twas MARIVS standard, in the Cimbrian war,
Fatal to Rome; and, as our augures tell me,
Shall still be so: for which one ominous cause,
I'haue kept it safe, and done it sacred rites,
As to a god-head, in a chapel built
Of purpose to it. Pledge then all your hands,
To follow it, with vows of death, and ruin,
Struck silently, and home. So waters speak
When they run deepest. Now's the time, this year,
The twenti'th, from the firing of the Capitol,
As fatal too, to Rome, by all predictions:
And, in which, honoured LENTVLVS must rise
A king, if he pursue it.

If he do not,
He is not worthy the great destiny.

It is too great for me, but what the gods,
And their great loves decree me, I must not
Seem careless of.

No, nor we envious.
We have enough beside, all Gallia, Belgia,
Greece, Spain, and Africa.

I, and Asia too,
Now POMPEY is returning.

Noblest Romanes,
Me thinks our looks, are not so quick and high,
As they were wont.

No? whose is not?

We have
No anger in our eyes, no storm, no lightning:
Our hate is spent, and fum'd away in vapor,
Before our hands be' at work. I can accuse
Not any one, but all of slackness.

Yes,
And be your self such, while you do it.

Ha?
'Tis sharply answered, CAIVS.

Truly, truly.

Come, let us each one know his part to do,
And then be accused. Leave these untimely quarrels.

I would there were more Romes then one, to ruin.

More Romes? More worlds.

Nay, then, more gods, and natures,
If they took part.

When shall the time be, first?

I think the Saturnalls.

'Twill be too long.

They are not now far off, 'tis not a month.

A week, a day, an hour is too far off,
Now, were the fittest time.

We have not laid
All things so safe, and ready.

While we'are laying,
We shall all lye; and grow to earth. Would I
Were nothing in it, if not now. These things
They should be done, e're thought.

Nay, now your reason
Forsakes you, CAIVS. Think, but what commodity
That time will minister; the cities custom
Of being, then, in mirth, and feast --

Loosed whole
In pleasure and security --

Each house
Resolved in freedom --

Every slave a master --

And they too no mean aides --

Made from their hope
Of liberty --

Or hate unto their lords.

'Tis sure, there cannot be a time found out
More apt, and natural.

Nay, good CETHEGVS,
Why do your passions, now, disturb our hopes?

Why do your hopes delude your certainties?

You must lend him his way. Think, for the order,
And process of it.

Yes.

I like not fire:
'Twill too much wast my city.

Were it embers,
There will be wealth enough, raked out of them,
To spring a new. It must be fire, or nothing.

What else should fright, or terrify them?

True.
In that confusion, must be the chief slaughter.

Then we shall kill them bravest.

And in heaps.

Strew sacrifices.

Make the earth an altar.

And Rome the fire.

'Twill be a noble night.

And worth all SY^LA'S days.

When husbands, wives,
Grandfires, and nephews, servants, and their lords,
Virgins, and priests, the infant, and the nurse
Go all to hell, together, in a fleet.

I would have you, LONGINVS, and STATILIVS,
To take the charge of the firing, which must be,
At a sign given with a trumpet, done
In twelve chief places of the city, at once.
The flax, and sulphur, are already laid
In, at CETHEGVS house. So are the weapons.
GABINIVS, you, with other force, shall stop
The pipes, and conduits: and kill those that come
For water.

What shall I do?

All will have
Employment, fear not: Ply the execution.

For that, trust me, and CETHEGVS.

I will be
At hand, with the army, to meet those that escape.
And LENTVLVS, begirt you POMPEY'S house,
To seize his sons alive: for they are they
Must make our peace with him. All else cut off,
As TARQVINE did the poppy heads: or mowers
A field of thistles; or else, up, as ploughs
Do barren lands; and strike together flints,
And clods; th'vngratefull Senate, and the people:
Till no rage, gone before or coming after,
May weigh with yours, though horror leapt her self

(...) (...) So much his lord in mischief? when all these,
Shall, like the brethren sprung of dragons teeth,
Ruin each other; and he fall amongst them:
With CRASSVS, POMPEY, or who else appears,
But like, or near a great one. May my brain
^esolue to water, and my blood turn phlegm,
My hands drop off, unworthy of my sword,
And that b'inspired, of it self, to rip
My breast, for my lost entraills; when I leave
A soul, that will not serve: and who will, are
The same with slaves, such clay I dare not fear.
The cruelty, I mean to act, I wish
Should be called mine, and tarry in my name;
Whilst, after-ages do toil out themselves,
In thinking for the like, but do it less:
And, were the power of all the fiends let loose,
With fate to boot, it should be, still, example.
When, what the Gaul, or Moore could not effect,
Nor emulous Carthage, with their length of spite,
Shall be the work of one, and that my night.
I Thank your vigilance. Where's my brother, QVINTVS?
Call all my servants up. Tell noble CVRIVS,
And say it to your self, you are my savers;
But that's too little for you, you are Romes:
What could I then, hope less? O brother! now,
The engines I told you of, are working;
The machine 'gin's to move. Where are your weapons?
Arm all my house-hold presently. And charge
The porter, he let no man in, till day.

Not clients, and your friends?

They wear those names,
That come to murder me. Yet send for CATO,
And QVINTVS CATVLVS; those I dare trust:
And FLACCVS, and POMTINIVS, the Praetors,
By the back way.

Take care, good brother MARCVS,
Your fears be not formed greater, then they should;
And make your friends grieve, while your enemies laugh.

'Tis brothers counsel, and worth thanks. But do
As I entreat you. I provide, not fear.
Was CAESAR there, say you?

CVRIVS says, he met him,
Coming from thence.

O, so. And, had you a counsel
Of ladies too? Who was your speaker, madame?

She that would be, had there been forty more;
SEMPRONIA, who had both her greek, and figures;
And ever and anon, would ask us, if
The witty Consul could have mended that?
Or Orator CICERO could have said it better?

She's my gentle enemy. Would CETHEGVS
Had no more danger in him. But, my guards
Are you, great powers; and th'vnbated strengths
Of a firm conscience, which shall arm each step
Taken for the state: and teach me slack no pace
For fear of malice. How now, brother?

CATO,
And QVINTVS CATVLVS were coming to you,
And CRASSVS with them. I have let them in,
By the garden.

What would CRASSVS have?

I hear
Some whispering about the gate; and making doubt,
Whether it be not yet too early, or no?
But I do think, they are your friends, and clients,
Are fearful to disturb you.

You will change
To 'another thought anon. Have you given the porter
The charge, I willed you?

Yes.

With-draw, and hearken.
THe dore's not open, yet.

You'were best to knock.

Let them stand close, then: And, when we are in,
Rush after us.

But where's CETHEGVS?

He
Has left it, since he might not do it his way.

Who's there?

A friend, or more.

I may not let
Any man in, till day.

No? why?

Thy reason?

I am commanded so.

By whom?

I hope
We are not discovered.

Yes, by revelation.
Pray thee, good slave, who has commanded thee?

He that may best, the Consul.

We are his friends.

All's one.

Best give your name.

Dost thou hear, fellow?
I have some instant business with the Consul.
My name is VARGVNTEIVS.

True, he knows it;
And for what friendly office you are sent.
CORNELIVS, too, is there?

We are betrayed.

And desperate CETHEGVS, is he not?

Speak you, he knows my voice.

What say you to it?

You are deceived, sir.

No, 'tis you are so;
Poor, misse-led men. Your states are yet worth pity,
If you would hear, and change your savage minds.
Leave to be mad; forsake your purposes

(...) (...) Do; urge thine anger, still: good heaven, and just.
Tell guilty men, what powers are above them.
In such a confidence of wickedness,
'Twas time, they should know something fit to fear.
I never saw a morn morefull of horror.

To CATILINE, and his: But, to just men,
Though heaven should speak, with all his wrath at once,
That, with his breath, the hinges of the world
Did crack, we should stand upright, and vnfear'd.

Why, so we do, good CATO. Who be these?

Ambassadors, from the ALLOBROGES,
I take them, by their habits.

I, these men
Seem of another race; let's sue to these,
There's hope of justice, with their fortitude.

Friends of the Senate, and of Rome, to day
We pray you to forbear us: on the morrow
What suit you have, let us, by FABIVS SANGA,
(Whose patronage your state doth use) but know it,
And, on the Consul's word, you shall receive
Dispatch, or else an answer, worth your patience.

We could not hope for more, most worthy Consul.
This magistrate hath struck an awe into me,
And, by his sweetness, won a more reguard
Unto his place, then all the boisterous moods
That ignorant greatness practises, to fill
The large, unfit authority it wears.
How easy is a noble spirit discerned
From harsh, and sulphurous matter, that flies out
In contumelies, makes a noise, and stinks!
May we find good, and great men: that know how
To stoup to wants, and meet necessities,
And will not turn from any equal suites.
Such men, they do not succour more the cause,
They vnder-take, with favour, and success;
Then, by it, their own judgements they do raise,
In turning just men's needs, into their praise.

Room for the Consuls. Fathers, take your places.
Here, in the house of IVPITER, the STAYER,
By edict from the Consul, MARCVS TVLLIVS.
You'are met, a frequent Senate. Hear him speak.

What may be happy, and auspicious still
To Rome, and hers. Honoured, and conscript Fathers,
If I were silent, and that all the dangers
Threatening the state, and you, were yet so hid
In night, or darkness thicker in their breasts,
That are the black contrivers; so, that no
Beam of the light could pierce hem: yet the voice
Of heaven, this morning, hath spoke loud enough,
T'instruct you with a feeling of the horror;
And wake you from a sleep, as stark, as death.
I have, of late, spoke often in this Senate,
Touching this argument, but still have wanted
Either your ears, or faith: so'incredible
Their plots have seemed, or I so vain, to make
These things for mine own glory, and false greatness,
As hath been given out. But be it so.
When they break forth, and shall declare themselves,
By their too foul effects, then, then, the envy
Of my just cares will find another name.
For me, I am but one: and this poor life,
So lately aimed at, not an hour yet since,
They cannot with more eagerness pursue,
Then I with gladness would lay down, and loose,
To buy Romes peace, if that would purchase it.
But when I see, they'ld make it but the step
To more, and greater; unto yours, Romes, all:
I would with those preserve it, or then fall.

I, I, let you alone, cunning artificer!
See, how his gorget 'peeres above his gown;
To tell the people, in what danger he was.
It was absurdly done of VARGVNTEIVS,
To name himself, before he was got in.

It matters not, so they deny it all:
And can but carry the lye constantly.
Will CATILINE be here?

I'haue sent for him.

And have you bid him to be confident?

To that his own necessity will prompt him.

Seem to believe nothing at all, that CICERO
Relates us.

It will mad him.

O, and help
The other party. Who is that? his brother?
What new intelligence ha's he brought him now?

Some cautions from his wife, how to behave him.

Place some of them without, and some bring in.
Thank their kind loves. It is a comfort yet,
That all depart not from their countries cause.

How now, what means this muster? Consul, ANTONIVS?

I do not know, ask my colleague, hee'll tell you.
There is some reason in state, that I must yield to;
And I have promised him: Indeed he has bought it,
With giving me the Province.

I profess,
It grieves me, Fathers, that I am compelled
To draw these arms, and aides for your defence;
And, more, against a citizen of Rome,
Borne here amongst you, a Patrician,
A man, I must confess, of no mean house,
Nor no small virtue, if he had employed
Those excellent gifts of fortune, and of nature,
Unto the good, not ruin of the state.
But, being bred in's fathers needy fortunes,
Brought up in's sisters prostitution,
Confirmed in civil slaughter, entering first
The common-wealth, with murder of the gentry;
Since, both by study, and custom, conversant
With all licentiousness: what could be hoped
In such a field of riot, but a course
Extreme pernicious? Though, I must protest,
I found his mischiefs, sooner, with mine eyes,
Then with my thought; and with these hands of mine,
Before they touched, at my suspicion.

What are his mischiefs, Consul? you declaim
Against his manners, and corrupt your own:
No wiseman should, for hate of guilty men,
Loose his own innocence.

The noble CAESAR
Speaks god-like truth. But, when he hears, I can
Convince him, by his manners, of his mischiefs,
He might be silent: and not cast away
His sentences in vain, where they scarce look
Toward his subject.

Here he comes himself.
If he be worthy any good mans voice,
That good man sit down by him: CATO will not.

If CATO leave him, I'll not keep aside.

What face is this, the Senate here puts on,
Against me, Fathers! Give my modesty
Leave, to demand the cause of so much strangeness.

It is reported here, you are the head
To a strange faction, LVCIVS.

I, and will
Be proved against him.

Let it be. Why, Consul,
If in the common-wealth, there be two bodies,
One lean, weak, rotten, and that hath a head;
The other strong, and healthful, but hath none:
If I do give it one, do I offend?
Restore your selves, unto your temper, Fathers;
And, without perturbation, hear me speak.
Remember who I am, and of what place,
What petty fellow this is, that opposes;
One, that hath exercised his eloquence,
Still to the bane of the nobility:
A boasting, insolent tongue-man.

Peace, lewd traitor,
Or wash thy mouth. He is an honest man
And loves his country, would thou did so, too.

CATO, you are too zealous for him.

No;
Thou art too impudent.

CATILINE, be silent.

Nay then, I easily fear, my just defence
Will come too late, to so much prejudice.

Will he sit down?)

Yet, let the world forsake me,
My innocence must not.

Thou innocent?
So are the Furies.

Yes, and Ate, too.
Dost thou not blush, pernicious. CATILINE?
Or, hath the paleness of thy guilt drunk up
Thy blood, and drawn thy veins, as dry of that,
As is thy heart of truth, thy breast of virtue?
Whither at length wilt thou abuse our patience?
Still shall thy fury mock us? To what licence
Dares thy unbridled boldness run it self?
Do all the nightly guards, kept on the palace,
The cities watches, with the peoples fears,
The concourse of all good men, this so strong
And fortified seat here of the Senate,
The present looks upon thee, strike thee nothing?
Dost thou not feel thy counsels all laid open?
And see thy wild conspiracy bound in
With each mans knowledge? which of all this order
Can thou think ignorant (if they'll but utter
Their conscience to the right) of what thou did
Last night, what on the former, where thou were,
Whom thou did call together, what your plots were?
O age, and manners! This the Consul sees,
The Senate understands, yet this man lives!
Lives? I, and comes here into counsel with us;
Partakes the public cares: and with his eye
Marks, and points out each man of us to slaughter.
And we, good men, do satisfy the state,
If we can shun but this mans sword, and madness.
There was that virtue, once, in Rome, when good men
Would, with more sharpe coercion, have restrained
A wicked citizen, then the deadliest foe.
We have that law still, CATILINE, for thee;
An act as grave, as sharpe: The state's not wanting,
Nor the authority of this Senate; we,
We, that are Consuls, only fail our selves.
This twenty days, the edge of that decree
We have let dull, and rust; kept it shut up,
As in a sheath, which drawn should take thy head.
Yet still thou liu'st: and liu'st not to lay by
Thy wicked confidence, but to confirm it.
I could desire, Fathers, to be found
Still merciful, to seem, in these maine perils
Grasping the state, a man remiss, and slack;
But then, I should condemn my self of sloth,
And treachery. Their campe's in Italie,
Pitched in the jaws, here, of Hetruria;
Their numbers daily increasing, and their general
Within our walls: nay, in our counsel! plotting
Hourly some fatal mischief to the public.
If, CATILINE, I should command thee, now,
Here, to be taken, killed; I make just doubt,
Whether all good men would not think it done
Rather too late, then any man too cruel.

Except he were of the same meal, and batch.

But that, which ought to have been done long since,
I will, and (for good reason) yet forbear.
Then will I take thee, when no man is found
So lost, so wicked, nay so like thy self,
But shall profess, 'tis done of need, and right.
While there is one, that dares defend thee, live;
Thou shalt have leave; but so, as now thou liu'st:
Watched at a hand, besieged, and oppressed
From working least commotion to the state.
I have those eyes, and ears, shall still keep guard,
And spiall on thee, as they have ever done,
And thou not feel it. What, then, can thou hope?
If neither night can, with her darkness, hide
Thy wicked meetings; nor a private house
Can, in her walls, contain the guilty whispers
Of thy conspiracy: if all break out,
All be discovered, change thy mind at last,
And loose thy thoughts of ruin flame, and slaughter.
Remember, how I told, here, to the Senate,
That such a day, thy Lictor, CAIVS MANLIVS,
Would be in arms. Was I deceived, CATILINE?
Or in the fact, or in the time? the hour?
I told too, in this Senate, that thy purpose
Was, on the fifth (the kalends of November)
T'haue slaughtered this whole order: which my caution
Made many leave the city. Can thou here
Deny, but this thy black design was hindered,
That very day, by me? thy self closed in
Within my strengths, so that thou could not move
Against a public reed? when thou were heard
To say, upon the parting of the rest,
Thou would content thee, with the murder of us,
That did remain. Had thou not hope, beside,
By a surprise, by night, to take Praeneste?
Where when thou came, did thou not find the place
Made good against thee, with my aides, my watches?
My garrisons fortified it. Thou dost nothing, SERGIVS,
Thou can endeavour nothing, nay not think,
But I both see, and hear it; and am with thee,
By, and before, about, and in thee, too.
Call but to mind thy last nights business. Come,
I'll use no circumstance: at LECCA'S house,
The shop, and mint of your conspiracy,
Among your sword-men, where so many associates
Both of thy mischief, and thy madness, met.
Dare thou deny this? wherefore art thou silent?
Speak, and this shall convince thee: Here they are,
I see them, in this Senate, that were with thee.
O, you immortal gods! in what clime are we?
What region do we live in? in what air?
What common-wealth, or state is this we have?
Here, here, amongst us, our own number, Fathers,
In this most holy counsel of the world,
They are, that seek the spoil of me, of you,
Of ours, of all; what I can name's too narrow:
Follow the sun, and find not their ambition.
These I behold, being Consul; nay, I ask
Their counsels of the state, as from good Patriots:
Whom it were fit the axe should hew in pieces,
I not so much as wound, yet, with my voice.
Thou wast, last night, with LECCA, CATILINE,
Your shares, of Italie, you there divided;
Appointed who, and whither, each should go;
What men should stay behind, in Rome, were chosen;
Your offices set down; the parts marked out,
And places of the city, for the fire;
Thy self (thou' affirmd'st) wast ready to depart,
Only, a little let there was, that stayed thee,
That I yet lived. Upon the word, stepped forth
Three of thy crew, to rid thee of that care;
Two vnder-tooke this morning, before day,
To kill me in my bed. All this I knew,
Your convent scarce dismissed, armed all my servants,
Called both my brother, and friends, shut out your clients,
You sent to visit me; whose names I told
To some there, of good place, before they came.

Yes, I, and QVINTVS CATVLVS can affirm it.

He's lost, and gone. His spirits have forsook him.

If this be so, why, CATILINE, dost thou stay?
Go, where thou mean. The ports are open; forth.
The camp abroad wants thee, their chief, too long.
Lead with thee all thy troupes out. Purge the city.
Draw dry that noisome, and pernicious sink,
Which left, behind thee, would infect the world.
Thou wilt free me of all my fears, at once,
To see a wall between us. Dost thou stop
To do that now, commanded; which before,
Of thine own choice, you're prone to? Go. The Consul
Bids thee, an enemy, to depart the city.
Whither, thou'lt ask? to exile? I not bid
Thee that. But ask my counsel, I persuade it.
What is there, here, in Rome, that can delight thee?
Where not a soul, without thine own foul knot,
But fears, and hates thee. What domestic note
Of private filthiness, but is burnt in
Into thy life? What close, and secret shame,
But is grown one, with thy known infamy?
What lust was ever absent from thine eyes?
What lewd fact from thy hands? what wickedness
From thy whole body? where's that youth drawn in
Within thy nets, or caught up with thy baits,
Before whose rage, thou hast not borne a sword,
And to whose lusts thou hast not 'held a torch?
Thy latter nuptials I let pass in silence;
Where sins incredible on sins were heap't:
Which I not name, lest, in a civil state,
So monstrous facts should either appear to be,
Or not to be revenged. Thy fortunes, too,
I glance not a^, which hang but till next Ides.
I come to that which is more known, more public;
The life, and safety of us all, by thee
Threatened, and sought. Stood'st thou not in the field,
When LEPIDVS, and TVLLVS were our Consuls,
Upon the day of choice, armed, and with forces,
To take their lives, and our chief citizens?
When, not thy fear, nor conscience changed thy mind,
But the mere fortune of the common-wealth
With-stood thy active malice? Speak but right.
How often hast thou made attempt on me?
How many of thy assaults have I declined
With shifting but my body (as wee'ld say)
Wrested thy dagger from thy hand, how oft?
How often hath it fallen, or slip't by chance?
Yet, can thy side not want it: which, how vowed,
Or with what rites, 'tis sacred of thee, I know not,
That still thou make it a necessity,
To fix it in the body of a Consul.
But let me loose this way, and speak to thee,
Not as one moved with hatred, which I ought,
But pity, of which none is owing thee.

No more then unto TANTALVS, or TITYVS.

Thou came, e're-while, into this Senate. Who
Of such a frequency, so many friends,
And kindred thou hast here, saluted thee?
Were not the seats made bare, upon thy entrance?
Riss'not the consular men? and left their places,
So soon as thou sat'st down? and fled thy side,
Like to a plague, or ruin? knowing, how oft
They had been, by thee, marked out for the shambles?
How dost thou bear this? Surely, if my slaves
At home feared me, with half th'affright, and horror,
That, here, thy fellow-citizens do thee,
I should soon quit my house, and think it need too.
Yet thou dare tarry here? Go forth, at last;
Condemn thy self to flight, and solitude.
Discharge the common-wealth, of her deep fear.
Go; into banishment, if thou wait'st the word.
Why dost thou look? They all consent unto it.
Dost thou expect th'authoritie of their voices,
Whose silent wills condemn thee? While they sit,
They approve it; while they suffer it, they decree it;
And while they'are silent to it, they proclaim it.
Prove thou there honest, I'll endure the envy.
But there's no thought, thou should be ever he,
Whom either shame should call from filthiness,
Terror from danger, or discourse from fury.
Go; I entreat thee: yet, why do I so?
When I already know, they'are sent before,
That tarry for thee'in arms, and do expect thee
On th'AVRELIAN way. I know the day
Set down, 'twixt thee, and MANLIVS; unto whom
The silver eagle too is sent, before:
Which I do hope shall prove, to thee as baneful,
As thou conceiu'st it to the common-wealth.
But, may this wise, and sacred Senate say,
What mean thou MARCVS TVLLIVS? If thou know
That CATILINE be looked for, to be chief
Of an intestine war; that he'is the author
Of such a wickedness; the caller out
Of men of mark in mischief, to an action
Of so much horror; Prince of such a treason;
Why dost thou send him forth? why let him escape?
This is, to give him liberty, and power:
Rather, thou should lay hold upon him, send him
To deserved death, and a just punishment.
To these so holy voices, thus I answer.
If I did think it timely, Gonscript Fathers,
To punish him with death, I would not give
The Fencer use of one short hour, to breath;
But when there are in this grave order, some,
Who, with soft censures, still do nource his hopes;
Some, that with not believing, have confirmed
His designs more, and whose authority
The weaker, as the worst men, too, have follow'd:
I would now send him, where they all should see
Clear, as the light, his heart shine; where no man
Could be so wickedly, or fondly stupide,
But should cry out, he saw, touched, felt, and grasp't it.
Then, when he hath run out himself; led forth
His desperate party with him; blown together
Aides of all kinds, both shipwrecked minds and fortunes:
Not only the grown evil, that now is sprung,
And sprouted forth, would be plucked up, and weeded;
But the stock, root, and seed of all the mischiefs,
Choking the common-wealth. Where, should we take,
Of such a swarm of traitors, only him,
Our cares, and fears might seem a while relieved,
But the maine peril would bide still enclosed
Deep, in the veins, and bowels of the state.
As humane bodies, labouring with fevers,
While they are tossed with heate, if they do take
Cold water, seem for that short space much eased,
But afterward, are ten times more afflicted.
Wherefore, I say, let all this wicked crew
Depart, divide themselves from good men, gather
Their forces to one head; as I said oft,
Let'hem be severed from us with a wall;
Let'hem leave off attempts, upon the Consul,
In his own house; to circle in the Praetor;
To girt the court with weapons; to prepare
Fire, and balls, swords, torches, sulphur, brands:
In short, let it be writ in each mans fore-head
What thoughts he bears the public. I here promise,
Fathers Conscript, to you, and to my self,
That diligence in us Consuls, for my honoured
Colleague, abroad, and for my self, at home;
So great authority in you; so much
Virtue, in these, the gentlemen of Rome;
Whom I could scarce restrain to day, in zeal,
From seeking out the parricide, to slaughter;
So much consent in all good men, and minds,
As, on the going out of this one CATILINE,
All shall be clear, made plain, oppressed, revenged.
And, with this omen, go, pernicious plague,
Out of the city, to the wished destruction
Of thee, and those, that, to the ruin of her,
Have taken that bloody, and black sacrament.
Thou IVPITER, whom we do call the STAYER,
Both of this city, and this empire, wilt
(With the same auspice thou did raise it first)
Drive from thy altars, and all other temples,
And buildings of this city; from our walls;
Lives, states, and fortunes of our citizens;
This fiend, this fury, with his accomplices.
And all the'offence of good men (these known traitors
Unto their country, thieves of Italie,
Joined in so damned a league of mischief) thou
Wilt with perpetual plagues, alive, and dead,
Punish for Rome, and save her innocent head.

If an oration, or high language, Fathers,
Could make me guilty, here is one, hath done it:
H' has strove to emulate this mornings thunder,
With his prodigious rhetoric. But I hope,
This Senate is more grave, then to give credit
Rashly to all he vomits, against a man
Of your own order, a Patrician;
And one, whose ancestors have more deserved
Of Rome, then this mans eloquence could utter,
Turned the best way: as still, it is the worst.

His eloquence hath more deserved to day,
Speaking thy ill, then all thy ancestors
Did, in their good: and, that the state will find,
Which he hath saved.

How, he? were I that enemy,
That he would make me: Il'd not wish the state
More wretched, then to need his preservation.
What do you make him, CATO, such a HERCVLES?
An ATLAS? A poor petty in-mate!

Traitor.

He save the state? A burgess son of Arpinum.
The gods would rather twenty Romes should perish,
Then have that contumely stuck upon them,
That he should share with them, in the preserving
A shed, or signpost.

Peace, thou prodigy.

They would be forced themselves, again, and lost
In the first, rude, and indigested heap;
Ere such a wretched name, as CICERO,
Should found with theirs.

Away, thou impudent head.

Do you all back him? are you silent too?
Well, I will leave you, Fathers; I will go.
But -- my fine dainty speaker --

What now, Fury?
Wilt thou assault me here?

Help, aide the Consul.)

See, Fathers, laugh you not? who threatened him?
In vain thou dost conceive, ambitious orator,
Hope of so brave a death, as by this hand.

Out, of the court, with the pernicious traitor.)

There is no title, that this flattering Senate,
Nor honour, the base multitude can give thee,
Shall make thee worthy CATILINES anger.

Stop,
Stop that portentous mouth.)

Or, when it shall,
I'll look thee dead.

Will none restrain the monster?

Parricide.

Butcher, traitor, leave the Senate.

I'am gone, to banishment, to please you, Fathers.
Thrust head-long forth?

Still, dost thou murmure, monster?

Since, I am thus put out, and made a --

What?

Not guiltier then thou art.

I will not burn
Without my funeral pile.

What says the fiend?

I will have matter, timber.

Sing out scrich-owle.

It shall be in --

Speak thy imperfect thoughts.

The common fire, rather then mine own.
For fall I will with all, ere fall alone.

H'is lost, there is no hope of him.

Unless
He presently take arms; and give a blow,
Before the Consuls forces can be leui'd.

What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?

See, that the common-wealth receive no loss.

Commit the care thereof unto the Consuls.

'Tis time.

And need.

Thanks to this frequent Senate.
But what decree they, unto CVRIVS,
And FVLVIA?

What the Consul shall think meet.

They must receive reward, though 't be not known;
Lest when a state needs ministers, they have none.

Yet, MARCVS TVLLIVS, do not I believe,
But CRASSVS, and this CAESAR here ring hollow.

And would appear so, if that we durst prove them.

Why dare we not? What honest act is that,
The Roman Senate should not dare, and do?

Not an unprofitable, dangerous act,
To stir too many serpents up at once.
CAESAR, and CRASSVS, if they be ill men,
Are mighty ones; and, we must so provide,
That, while we take one head, from this foul Hydra,
There spring not twenty more.

In prove your counsel.

They shall be watched, and looked too. Till they do
Declare themselves, I will not put them out
By any question. There they stand. I'll make
My self no enemies, nor the state no traitors.

FAlse to our selves? All our designs discovered
To this state-cat?
I, had I had my way,
He' had mewed in flames, at home, not in the Senate:
In had singed his furs, by this time.

Well, there's, now,
No time of calling back, or standing still.
Friends, be your selves; keep the same Roman hearts,
And ready minds, you' had yesternight. Prepare
To execute, what we resolved. And let not
Labour, or danger, or discovery fright you.
I'll to the army: you (the while) mature
Things, here, at home. Draw to you any aides,
That you think fit, of men of all conditions,
Or any fortunes, that may help a war.
I'll bleed a life, or win an empire for you.
Within these few days, look to see my ensigns,

(...) (...) All may begin a war, but few can end it.
The Senate have decreed, that my colleague
Shall lead their army, against CATILINE,
And have declared both him, and MANLIVS traitors.
METELLVS CELER hath already given
Part of their troops defeat. Honours are promised
To all, will quit them; and rewards proposed
Even to slaves, that can detect their courses.
Here, in the city, I have by the Praetors,
And Tribunes, placed my guards, and watches so,
That not a foot can tread, a breath can whisper,
But I have knowledge. And be sure, the Senate,
And people of Rome, of their accustomed greatness,
Will sharply, and severely vindicate,
Not only any fact, but any practice,
Or purpose, against the state. Therefore, my lords,
Consult of your own ways, and think which hand
Is best to take. You, now, are present suitors
For some redress of wrongs; I'll vnder-take
Not only that shall be assured you: but
What grace, or privilege else, Senate, or people,
Can cast upon you, worthy such a service,
As you have now the way, and means, to do them,
If but your wills consent, with my designs.

We covet nothing more, most worthy Consul.
And how so e're have been tempted lately,
To a defection, that not makes us guilty:
We are not yet so wretched in our fortunes,
Nor in our wills so lost, as to abandon
A friendship, prodigally, of that price,
As is the Senate, and the people of Romes,
For hopes, that do precipitate themselves.

You then are wise, and honest. Do but this, then:
(When shall you speak with LENTVLVS, and the rest?

We are to meet anon, at BRVTVS house.

Who? DECIVS BRVTVS? He is not in Rome.

O, but his wife SEMPRONIA.

You instruct me,
She is a chief.) Well, fail not you to meet them,
And to express the best affection
You can put on, to all that they intend.
Like it, applaud it, give the common-wealth,
And Senate lost to them. Promise any aides
By arms, or counsel. What they can desire,
I would have you prevent. Only, say this,
You'haue had dispatch, in private, by the Consul,
Of your affairs, and for the many fears
The state's now in, you are willed by him, this evening,
To depart Rome: which you, by all sought means,
Will do, of reason to decline suspicion.
Now, for the more authority of the business
They' have trusted to you, and to give it credit
With your own state, at home, you would desire
Their letters to your Senate, and your people,
Which shown, you durst engage both life, and honour,
The rest should every way answer their hopes.
Those had, pretend sudden departure, you,
And, as you give me notice, at what port
You will go out, I'll have you intercepted,
And all the letters taken with you: So
As you shall be redeemed in all opinions,
And they convicted of their manifest treason.
Ill deeds are well turned back, upon their authors:
And against an iniurer, the revenge is just.
This must be done, now.

Cheerfully, and firmly.
We'are they, would rather hast to undertake it,
Then stay, to say so.

With that confidence, go:
Make your selves happy, while you make Rome so.
By SANGA, let me have notice from you.

Yes.

WHen come these creatures, the Ambassadors?
I would fain see them. Are they any schollers?
I think not, madame.

Have they no greek?

No surely.

Fie, what do I here, weighting on them then?
If they be nothing but mere states-men.

Yes,
Your ladyship shall observe their gravity,
And their reservedness, their many cautions,
Fitting their persons.

I do wonder much,
That states, and commonwealths employ not women,
To be Ambassadors, sometimes! we should
Do as good public service, and could make
As honourable spies (for so THVCIDIDES
Calls all Ambassadors.) Are they come, CETHEGVS?

Do you ask me? Am I your scout, or baud?

O, CAIVS, it is no such business.

No?
What does a woman at it then?

Good sir,
There are of us can be as exquisite traitors,

(...) (...) By several messengers: who no doubt will come,
Without sense, or suspicion. Prodigal men
Feel not their own stock wasting. When I have them,
I'll place those guards, upon them, that they start not,

But what 'll you do with SEMPRONIA?

A states anger
Should not take knowledge either of fools, or women.
I do not know whether my joy or care
Ought to be greater; that I have discovered
So foul a treason: or must undergo
The envy of so many great men's fate.
But, happen what there can, I will be just,
My fortune may forsake me, not my virtue:
That shall go with me, and before me, still,
And glad me, doing well, though I hear ill.

Stand, who goes there?

We are the ALLOBROGES
And friends of Rome.

If you be so, then yield
Your selves unto the Praetors, who in name
Of the whole Senate, and the people of Rome,
Yet, till you clear your selves, charge you of practise
Against the State.

Die friends, and be not taken.

What voice is that? Down with them all.

We yield.

What's he stands out? Kill him there.

Hold, hold, hold.
I yield upon conditions.

We give none
To traitors, strike him down.

My name's VOLTVRTIVS
I know POMTINIVS.

But he knows not you,
While you stand out upon these traitorous terms.

I'll yield upon the safety of my life.

If it be forfeited, we cannot save it.

Promise to do your best. I 'am not so guilty,
As many others, I can name; and will:
If you will grant me favour.

All we can
Is to deliver you to the Consul. Take him,
And thank the gods, that thus have saved Rome.
NOw, do our ears, before our eyes,
Like men in mists,
Discover, who'ld the state surprise,
And who resists?
And, as these clouds do yield to light,
Now, do we see,
Our thoughts of things, how they did fight,
Which seemed to agree?
Of what strange pieces are we made,
Who nothing know;
But, as new airs our ears invade,
Still censure so?
That now do hope, and now do fear,
And now envy;
And then do hate, and then love dear,
But know not, why:
Or, if we do, it is so late,
As our best mood,
Though true, is then thought out of date,
And empty of good.
How have we changed, and come about
In every doom,
Since wicked CATILINE went out,
And quitted Rome?
One while, we thought him innocent;
And, then, w' accused
The Consul, for his malice spent;
And power abused.
Since, that we hear, he is in arms,
We think not so:
Yet charge the Consul, with our harms,
That let him go.
So, in our censure of the state,
We still do wander;
And make the careful magistrate
The mark of slander.
What age is this, where honest men,
Placed at the helm,
A sea of some foul mouth, or pen,
Shall ouer-whelme?
And call their diligence, deceit;
Their virtue, vice;
Their watchfulness, but lying in wait;
And blood, the price.
O, let us pluck this evil seed
Out of our spirits;
And give, to every noble deed,
The name it merits.
Lest we seem fallen (if this endures)
Into those times,
To love disease: and brooke the cures
Worse, then the crimes.

(...) (...) I would fain help these wretched men.

You cannot.
Who would save them, that have betrayed themselves?
I Will not be wrought to it, brother QVINTVS.
There's no mans private enmity shall make
Me violate the dignity of another.
If there were proof against CAESAR, or who ever,
To speak him guilty, I would so declare him.
But QVINTVS CATVLVS, and PISO both,
Shall know, the Consul will not, for their grudge,
Have any man accused, or named falsely.

Not falsely: but if any circumstance,
By the ALLOBROGES, or from VOLTVRTIVS,
Would carry it.

That shall not be sought by me.
If it reveal it self, I would not spare
You, brother, if it pointed at you, trust me.

Good MARCVS TVLLIVS (which is more, then great)
Thou had thy education, with the gods.

Send LENTVLVS forth, and bring away the rest.
This office, I am sorry, sir, to do you.

WHat may be happy still, and fortunate,
To Rome, and to this Senate: Please you, Fathers,
To break these letters, and to view them round.
If that be not found in them, which I fear,
I, yet, entreat, at such a time, as this,
My diligence be not contemned. Have you brought
The weapons hither, from CETHEGVS house?
They are without.

Be ready, with VOLTVRTIVS,
To bring him, when the Senate calls; and see
None of the rest, confer together. Fathers,
What do you read? Is it yet worth your care,
If not your fear, what you find practised there?

It hath a face of horror!

I'am amazed!

Look there.

Gods! Can such men draw common air?

Although the greatness of the mischief, Fathers,
Hath often made my faith small, in this Senate,
Yet^ since my casting CATILINE out (for now
I do not fear the envy of the word,
Unless the deed be rather to be feared,
That he went hence alive; when those I meant
Should follow him, did not) I have spent both days,
And nights, in watching, what their fury' and rage
Was bent on, that so staid, against my thought:
And that I might but take them in that light,
Where, when you met their treason, with your eyes,
Your minds, at length, would think for your own safety.
And, now, 'tis done. There are their hands, and seals.
Their persons, too, are safe, thanks to the gods.
Bring in VOLTVRTIVS, and the ALLOBROGES.
These be the men, were trusted with their letters.

Fathers, believe me, I knew nothing: I
Was travailing for Gallia, and am sorry --

Quake not, VOLTVRTIVS, speak the truth, and hope
Well of this Senate, on the Consuls word.

Then, I knew all. But truly I was drawn in
But the other day.

Say, what thou know, and fear not.
Thou hast the Senate^ faith, and Consuls word,
To fortify thee.

I was sent with letters --
And had a message too -- from LENTVLVS --
To CATILINE -- that he should use all aides --
Servants, or others -- and come with his army,
As soon, unto the city as he could --
For they were ready, and but staid for him --
To intercept those, that should flee the fire --
These men (the ALLOBROGES) did hear it too.

Yes, Fathers, and they took an oath, to us.
Besides their letters, that we should be free;
And urged us, for some present aide of horse.

Nay, here be other testimonies, Fathers,
CETHEGVS armourie.

What, not all these?

Here's not the hundred part. Call in the Fencer,
That we may know the arms to all these weapons.
Come, my brave sword-player, to what active use,
Was all this steel provided?

Had you asked
In SYLLA's days, it had been to cut throats;
But, now, it was to look on, only: I loved
To see good blades, and feel their edge, and points.
To put a helm upon a block, and cleave it,
And, now and then, to stab an armour through.

Know you that paper? That will stab you through.
Is it your hand? Hold, save the pieces. Traitor,
Hath thy guilt waked thy fury?

I did write,
I know not what; nor care not: That fool LENTVLVS
Did dictate, and I the other fool, did sign it.

Bring in STATILIVS: Does he know his hand too?
And LENTVLVS. Reach him that letter.

I
Confess it all.

Know you that seal yet, PVBLIVS?

Yes, it is mine.

Whose image is that, on it?

My grand-fathers.

What, that renowm'd good man,
That did so only embrace his countrey^, and loved
His fellow citizens! Was not his picture,
Though mute, of power to call thee from a fact,
So foul --

As what, impetuous CICERO?

As thou art, for I do not know what's fouler.
Look upon these. Do not these faces argue
Thy guilt, and impudence?

What are these to me?
I know them not.

No PVBLIVS? we were with you,
At BRVTVS house.

Last night.

What did you there?
Who sent for you?

Your self did. We had letters
From you, CETHEOVS, this STATILIVS here,
GABINIVS CIMBER, all, but from LONGINVS,
Who would not write, because he was to come
Shortly, in person, after us (he said)
To take the charge of the horse, which we should levy.

And he is fled, to CATILINE, I hear.

Spies? spies?

You told us too, of the SIBYLLS books,
And how you were to be a king, this year,
The twentieth, from the burning of the Capital.
That three CORNELII were to reign, in Rome,
Of which you were the last: and praised CETHEGVS,
And the great spirits, were with you, in the action.

These are your honourable Ambassadors,
My sovereign lord.

Peace, that too bold CETHEGVS.

Besides GABINIVS, your agent, named
AVTRONIVS, SERVIVS SVLLA, VARGVNTEIVS,
And diverse others.

I had letters from you,
To CATILINE, and a message, which I'haue told
Unto the Senate, truly, word for word:
For which, I hope, they will be gracious to me.
I was drawn in, by that same wicked CIMBER,
And thought no hurt at all.

VOLTVRTIVS, peace.
Where is thy visor, or thy voice, now, LENTVLVS?
Art thou confounded? Wherefore speak thou not?
Is all so clear, so plain, so manifest,
That both thy eloquence, and impudence,
And thy ill nature, too, have left thee, at once?
Take him aside. There's yet one more, GABINIVS,
The enginer of all. Show him that paper,
If he do know it?

I know nothing.

No?

No. Neither will I know.

Impudent head!
Stick it into his throat; were I the Consul,
Il'd make thee eat the mischief, thou hast vented.

Is there a law for it, CATO?

Dost thou ask
After a law, that would have broke all laws,
Of nature, manhood, conscience, and religion?

Yes, I may ask for it.

No, pernicious CIMBER.
Th'inquiring after good, does not belong
Unto a wicked person.

I but CATO
Does nothing, but by law.

Take him aside.
There's proof enough, though he confess not.

Stay,
I will confess. All's true, your spies have told you.
Make much of them.

Yes, and reward them well,
For fear you get no more such. See, they do not
Die in a ditch, and stink, now you have done with them;
Or beg, of the bridges, here in Rome, whose arches
Their active industry hath saved.

See, Fathers,
What minds, and spirits these are, that, being convicted
Of such a treason, and by such a cloud
Of witnesses, dare yet retain their boldness?
What would their rage have done, if they had conquered?
I thought, when I had thrust out CATILINE,
Neither the state, nor I, should need t'haue feared
LENTVLVS sleep here, or LONGINVS fat,
Or this CETHEGVS rashness; it was he,
I only watched, while he was in our walls,
As one, that had the brain, the hand, the heart.
But now, we find the contrary! Where was there
A people grieved, or a state discontent,
Able to make, or help a war against Rome,
But these, the ALLOBROGES, and those they found?
Whom had not the just gods been pleased to make
More friends unto our safety, then their own,
As it then seemed, neglecting these men's offers,
Where had we been? or where the common-wealth?
When their great Chief had been called home? this man,
Their absolute king (whose noble grand-father,
Armed in pursuit of the seditious GRACCHVS,
Took a brave wound, for dear defence of that,
Which he would spoil) had gathered all his aides
Of ruffians, slaves, and other slaughter-men?
Given us up for murder, to CETHEGVS?
The other rank of citizens, to GABINIVS?
The city, to be fired by CASSIVS?
And Italie, nay the world, to be laid wast
By cursed CATILINE, and his accomplices?
Lay but the thought of it, before you, Fathers,
Think but with me you saw this glorious city,
The light of all the earth, tower of all nations,
Suddenly falling in one flame. Imagine,
You viewed your country buried with the heaps
Of slaughtered citizens, that had no grave;
This LENTVLVS here, reigning, (as he dreamp't)
And those his purple Senate; CATILINE come
With his fierce army; and the cries of matrons,
The flight of children, and the rape of virgins,
Shrieks of the living, with the dying groans
On every side t'inuade your sense; until
The blood of Rome, were mixed with her ashes!
This was the spectacle these fiends intended
To please their malice.

I, and it would
Have been a brave one, Consul. But your part
Had not then been so long, as now it is:
I should have quite defeated your oration;
And slit that fine rhetorical pipe of yours,
In the first Scene.

Insolent monster!

Fathers,
Is it your pleasures, they shall be committed
Unto some safe, but a free custody,
Until the Senate can determine farther?

It pleases well.

Then, MARCVS CRASSVS,
Take you charge of GABINIVS: send him home
Unto your house. You CAESAR, of STATILIVS.
CETHEGVS shall be sent to CORNIFICIVS;
And LENTVLVS, to PVBLIVS LENTVLVS SPINTHER,
Who now is Aedile.

It were best, the Praetors
Carried them to their houses, and delivered them.

Let it be so. Take them from hence.

But, first,
Let LENTVLVS put off his Praetor-ship.

I do resign it here unto the Senate.

So, now, there's no offence done to religion.

CAESAR, 'twas piously, and timely urged.

What do you decree to the ALLOBROGES?
That were the lights to this discovery?

A free grant, from the state, of all their suites.

And a reward, out of the public treasure.

I, and the title of honest men, to crown them.

What to VOLTVRTIVS?

Life, and fauour's well.

I ask no more.

Yes, yes, some money, thou need it.
'Twill keep thee honest: want made thee a knave.

Let FLACCVS, and POMTINIVS, the Praetors,
Have public thanks, and QVINTVS FABIVS SANGA,
For their good service.

They deserve it all.

But what do we decree unto the Consul,
Whose virtue, counsel, watchfulness, and wisdom,
Hath freed the common-wealth, and without tumult,
Slaughter, or blood, or scarce raising a force,
Rescud us all out of the jaws of fate?

We owe our lives unto him, and our fortunes.

Our wives, our children, parents, and our gods.

We all are saved, by his fortitude.

The common-wealth owes him a ciuicke gyrland.
He is the only father of his country.

Let there be public prayer, to all the gods,
Made in that name, for him.

And in these words.
For that he hath, by his vigilance, preserved
Rome from the flame, the Senate from the sword,
And all her citizens from massacre.

How are my labours more then paid, grave Fathers,
In these great titles, and decreed honours!
Such, as to me, first, of the civil robe,
Of any man, since Rome was Rome, have happened;
And from this frequent Senate: which more glads me,
That I now see, yo'haue sense of your own safety.
If those good days come no less grateful to us,
Wherein we are preserved from some great danger,
Then those, wherein we're borne, and brought, to light,
Because the gladness of our safety is certain,
But the condition of our birth not so;
And that we are saved with pleasure, but are borne
Without the sense of joy: why should not, then,
This day, to us, and all posterity
Of ours, be had in equal fame, and honour,
With that, when ROMVLVS first reared these walls,
When so much more is saved, then he built?

It ought.

Let it be added to our Fasti.

What tumult's that?

Here's one TARQVINIVS taken,
Going to CATILINE; and says he was sent
By MARCVS CRASSVS: whom he names, to be
Guilty of the conspiracy.

Some lying varlet.
Take him away, to prison.

Bring him in,
And let me see him.

He is not worth it, CRASSVS.
Keep him up close, and hungry, till he tell,
By whose pernicious counsel, he durst slander
So great, and good a citizen.

By yours
I fear, 'twill prove.)

Some of the traitors, sure,
To give their action the more credit, bid him
Name you, or any man.

I know my self,
By all the tracts, and courses of this business,
CRASSVS is noble, just, and loves his country.

Here is a libel too, accusing CAESAR,
From LVCIVS VECTIVS, and confirmed by CVRIVS.

Away with all, throw it out of the court.

A trick on me, too?

It is some men's malice.
I said to CVRIVS, I did not believe him.

Was not that CVRIVS your spy, that had
Reward decreed unto him, the last Senate,
With FVLVIA, upon your private motion?

Yes.

But, he has not that reward, yet?

No.
Let not this trouble you, CAESAR, none believes it.

It shall not, if that he have no reward.
But if he have, sure I shall think my self
Very untimely, and vnsafely honest,
Where such, as he is, may have pay t'accuse me.

You shall have no wrong done you, noble CAESAR,
But all contentment.

Consul, I am silent.

I Never yet knew, Soldiers, that, in fight,
Words added virtue unto valiant men;
Or, that a generals oration made
An army fall, or stand: but how much prowess
Habitual, or natural each mans breast
Was owner of, so much in act it showed.
Whom neither glory' or danger can excite,
'Tis vain t'attempt with speech: for the minds fear
Keeps all brave sounds from entering at that ear.
I, yet, would warn you some few things, my friends,
And give you reason of my present counsels.
You know, no less then I, what state, what point
Our affairs stand in; and you all have heard,
What a calamitous misery the sloth,
And sleepiness of LENTVLVS, hath plucked
Both on himself, and us: how, whilst our aides
There, in the citie-look'd for, are defeated,
Our entrance into Gallia, too, is stopped.
Two armies wait us: one from Rome, the other
From the Gaule-Prouinces. And, where we are,
(Although I most desire it) the great want
Of corn, and victual, forbids longer stay.
So that, of need, we must remove, but whither
The sword must both direct, and cut the passage.
I only, therefore, wish you, when you strike,
To have your valours, and your souls, about you;
And think, you carry in your labouring hands
The things you seek, glory, and liberty,
Your country, which you want now, with the Fates,
That are to be instructed, by our swords.
If we can give the blow, all will be safe to us.
We shall not want provision, nor supplies.
The colonies, and free towns will lye open.
Where, if we yield to fear, expect no place,
Nor friend, to shelter those, whom their own fortune,
And ill used arms have left without protection.
You might have lived in servitude, or exile,
Or safe at Rome, depending on the great ones;
But that you thought those things unfit for men.
And, in that thought, you then were valiant.
For no man ever yet changed peace for war,
But he, that meant to conquer. Hold that purpose.
There's more necessity, you should be such,
In fighting for your selves, then they for others.
He's base, that trusts his feet, whose hands are armed.
Me thinks, I see Death, and the Furies, waiting
What we will do; and all the heauen' at leisure
For the great spectacle. Draw, then, your swords:
And, if our destiny envy our virtue
The honour of the day, yet let us care
To sell our selves, at such a price, as may
Vn-doe the world, to buy us; and make Fate,
While she tempts ours, fear her own estate.

What means this hasty calling of the Senate?

We shall know straight. Wait, till the Consul speaks.

Fathers Conscript, bethink you of your safeties,
And what to do, with these conspirators;
Some of their clients, their freed men, and slaves
'Ginne to make head: there is one of LENTVLVS bawds
Runs up and down the shops, through every street,
With money to corrupt, the poor artificers,
And needy tradesmen, to their aide. CETHEGVS
Hath sent, too, to his servants; who are many,
Chosen, and exercised in bold attemptings,
That forth-with they should arm themselves, and prove
His rescue: All will be in instant uproar,
If you prevent it not, with present counsels.
We have done what we can, to meet the fury,
And will do more. Be you good to your selves.

What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?
SYLLANVS, you are Consul next designed.
Your sentence, of these men.

'Tis short, and this.
Since they have sought to blot the name of Rome,
Out of the world; and raze this glorious empire
With her own hands, and arms, turned on her self:
I think it fit they die. And, could my breath
Now, execute them, they should not enjoy
An article of time, or eye of light,
Longer, to poison this our common air.

I think so too.

And I.

And I.

And I.

Your sentence, CAIVS CAESAR.

Conscript Fathers,
In great affairs, and doubtful, it behooves
Men, that are asked their sentence, to be free
From either hate, or love, anger, or pity:
For, where the least of these doehinder, there
The mind not easily discerns the truth.
I speak this to you, in the name of Rome,
For whom you stand; and to the present cause:
That this foul fact of LENTVLVS, and the rest,
Weigh not more with you, then your dignity;
And you be more indulgent to your passion,
Then to your honour. If there could be found
A pain, or punishment, equal to their crimes,
I would devise, and help: but, if the greatness
Of what they have done, exceed all mans invention,
I think it fit, to stay, where our laws do.
Poor petty states may alter, upon humour,
Where, if they' offend with anger, few do know it,
Because they are obscure; their fame, and fortune
Is equal, and the same. But they, that are
Head of the world, and live in that seen height,
All mankind knows their actions. So we see,
The greater fortune hath the lesser licence.
They must nor favour, hate, and least be angry:
For what with others is called anger, there,
Is cruelty, and pride. I know SYLLANVS,
Who spoke before me, a just, valiant man,
A lover of the state, and one that would not,
In such a business, use or grace, or hatred;
I know, too, well, his manners, and modesty:
Nor do I think his sentence cruel (for
Against such delinquents, what can be too bloody?)
But that it is abhorring from our state;
Since to a citizen of Rome, offending,
Our laws give exile, and not death. Why then
Decrees he that? 'Twere vain to think, for fear;
When, by the diligence of so worthy a Consul,
All is made safe, and certain. Is't for punishment?
Why, death's the end of evils, and a rest,
Rather then torment: It dissolves all griefs.
And beyond that, is neither care, nor joy.
You hear, my sentence would not have them die.
How then? set free, and increase CATILINES army?
So will they, being but banished. No, grave Fathers,
I judge them, first, to have their states confiscate,
Then, that their persons remain prisoners
In the free towns, far off from Rome, and severed:
Where they might neither have relation,
Hereafter, to the Senate, or the people.
Or, if they had, those towns, then to be mulcted,
As enemies to the state, that had their guard.

'Tis good, and honourable, CAESAR, hath vtterd.

Fathers, I see your faces, and your eyes
All bent on me, to note of these two censures,
Which I incline to. Either of them are grave,
And answering the dignity of the speakers,
The greatness of th'affaire, and both severe.
One urges death: and he may well remember
This state hath punished wicked citizens so.
The other bonds: and those perpetual, which
He thinks found out for the more singular plague.
Decree, which you shall please. You have a Consul,
Not readier to obey, then to defend,
What ever you shall act, for the republique;
And meet with willing shoulders any burden,
Or any fortune, with an even face,
Though it were death: which to a valiant man
Can never happen foul, nor to a Consul
Be immature, or to a wise man wretched.

Fathers, I spake, but as I thought: the needs
Of th'common-wealth required.

Excuse it not.

CATO, speak you your sentence.

This it is.
You here dispute, on kinds of punishment,
And stand consulting, what you should decree
Against those, of whom, you rather should beware,
This mischief is not like those common facts,
Which, when they are done, the laws may prosequute.
But this, if you provide not, ere it happen,
When it is happened, will not wait your judgment.
Good CAIVS CAESAR, here, hath very well,
And subtly discoursed of life, and death,
As if he thought those things, a pretty fable,
That are delivered us of hell, and furies,
Or of the diverse way, that ill men go
From good, to filthy, dark, and ugly places.
And therefore, he would have these live; and long too;
But far from Rome, and in the small free towns,
Lest, here, they might have rescue: As if men,
Fit for such acts, were only in the city,
And not throughout all Italie? or, that boldness
Could not do more, where it found least resistance?
'Tis a vain counsel, if he think them dangerous.
Which, if he do not, but that he alone,
In so great fear of all men, stand vn-frighted,
He gives me cause, and you, more to fear him.
I am plain, Fathers. Here you look about,
One at another, doubting what to do;
With faces, as you trusted to the gods,
That still have saved you; and they can do it: But,
They are not wishings, or base womanish prayers,
Can draw their aides; but vigilance, counsel, action:
Which they will be ashamed to forsake.
'Tis sloth they hate, and cowardice. Here, you have
The traitors in your houses, yet, you stand,
Fearing what to do with them; Let them loose,
And send them hence with arms, too; that your mercy
May turn your misery, as soon as't can.
O, but they, are great men, and have offended,
But, through ambition. We would spare their honour:
I, if themselves had spared it, or their fame,
Or modesty, or either god, or man:
Then I would spare them. But, as things now stand,
Fathers, to spare these men, were to commit
A greater wickedness, then you would revenge.
If there had been but time, and place, for you,
To have repaired this fault, you should have made it;
It should have been your punishment, to'haue felt
Your tardy error: but necessity,
Now, bids me say, let them not live an hour,
If you mean Rome should live a day. I have done.

CATO hath spoken like an oracle.

Let it be so decreed.

We are all fearful.

And had been base, had not his virtue raised us.

Go forth, most worthy Consul, we'll assist you.

I'am not yet changed in my sentence, Fathers.

No matter. What be those?

Letters, for CAESAR.

From whom? let them be read, in open Senate;
Fathers, they come from the conspirators.
I crave to have them read, for the republique.

CATO, read you it. 'Tis a loue-letter,
From your dear sister, to me: though you hate me.
Do not discover it.

Hold thee, drunkard. Consul.
Go forth, and confidently.

You'll repent
This rashness, CICERO.

CAESAR shall repent it.

Hold friends.

He's scarce a friend unto the public.

No violence. CAESAR, be safe. Lead on:
Where are the public executioners?
Bid them wait on us. On, to SPINTHERS house.
Bring LENTVLVS forth. Here, you, the sad revengers
Of capital crimes, against the public, take
This man unto your justice: strangle him.

Thou dost well, Consul. 'Twas a cast at dice,
In FORTUNES hand, not long since, that thy self
Should have heard these, or other words as fatal.

Lead on, to QVINTVS CORNIFICIVS house.
Bring forth CETHEGVS. Take him to the due
Death, that he hath deserved: and let it be
Said, He was once.

A beast, or, what is worse,
A slave, CETHEGVS. Let that be the name
For all that's base, hereafter: That would let
This worm pronounce on him; and not have trampled
His body into -- Ha! Art thou not moved?

Justice is never angry: Take him hence.

O, the whore FORTUNE! and her bawds the Fates!
That put these tricks on men, which knew the way
To death by' a sword. Strangle me, I may sleep:
I shall grow angry with the gods, else.

Lead
To CAIVS, CAESAR, for STATILIVS.
Bring him, and rude GABINIVS, out. Here, take them
To your cold hands, and let them feel death from you.

I thank you, you do me a pleasure.

And me too.

So, MARCVS TVLLIVS, thou may now stand up,
And call it happy Rome, thou being Consul.
Great parent of thy country, go, and let
The old men of the city, ere they die,
Kiss thee; the matrons dwell about thy neck;
The youths, and maids, lay up, against they are old,
What kind of man thou were, to tell their nephews,
When, such a year, they read, within our Fasti,
Thy Consul-ship. Who's this? PETREIVS?

Welcome,
Welcome, renowned soldier. What's the news?
This face can bring no ill with it, unto Rome.
How does the worthy Consul, my colleague?

As well as victory can make him, sir.
He greets the Fathers, and to me hath trusted
The sad relation of the civil strife;
For, in such war, the conquest still is black.

Shall we with-draw into the house of Concord?

No, happy Consul, here; let all ears take
The benefit of this tale. If he had voice,
To spread unto the poles, and strike it through
The center, to the Antipodes; It would ask it.

The streights, and needs of CATILINE being such,
As he must fight with one of the two armies,
That then had near enclosed him; It pleased Fate,
To make us th'obiect of his desperate choice,
Wherein the danger almost paiz'd the honour:
And as he riss', the day grew black with him;
And Fate descended nearer to the earth,
As if she meant, to hide the name of things,
Under her wings, and make the world her quarry.
At this we roused, lest one small minutes stay
Had left it to be' enquired, what Rome was.
And (as we ought) armed in the confidence
Of our great cause, in form of battle, stood.
Whilst CATILINE came on, not with the face
Of any man, but of a public ruin:
His countenance was a civil war it self.
And all his host had standing in their looks,
The paleness of the death, that was to come.
Yet cried they out like vultures, and urged on,
As if they would precipitate our fates.
Nor staid we longer for them; But himself
Struck the first stroke: And, with it, fled a life.
Which cut, it seemed, a narrow neck of land,
Had broke between two mighty seas; and either
Flowed into other; for so did the slaughter:
And whirled about, as when two violent tides
Meet, and not yield. The Furies stood, on hills,
Circling the place, and trembled to see men
Do more, then they: whilst piety left the field,
Grieved for that side, that, in so bad a cause,
They knew not, what a crime their valour was.
The sun stood still, and was, behind the cloud
The battle made, seen sweating, to drive up
His frighted horse, whom still the noise drove backward.
And now had fierce ENYO, like a flame,
Consumed all it could reach, and then it self;
Had not the fortune of the common-wealth
Come PALLAS-like, to every Roman thought.
Which CATILINE seeing, and that now his troops
Covered that earth, they' had fought on, with their trunks,
Ambitious of great fame, to crown his ill,
Collected all his fury, and ran in
(Armed with a glory, high as his despair)
Into our battle, like a Lybian lyon,
Upon his hunters, scornful of our weapons,
Careless of wounds, plucking down lives about him,
Till he had circled in himself with death:
Then fell he too, t'embrace it where it lay.
And as, in that rebellion against the gods,
MINERVA holding forth MEDVSA'S head,
One of the giant brethren felt himself
Grow marble at the killing sight, and now,
Almost made stone, began t'inquire, what flint,
What rock it was, that crept through all his limbs,
And, ere he could think more, was that he feared;
So CATILINE, at the sight of Rome in us,
Became his tomb: yet did his look retain
Some of his fierceness, and his hands still moved,
As if he laboured, yet, to grasp the state,
With those rebellious parts.

A brave bad death.
Had this been honest now, and for his country,
As 'twas against it, who had ere fallen greater?

Honoured PETREIVS, Rome, not I, must thank you.
How modestly has he spoken of himself!

He did the more.

Thanks to the immortal gods,
Romans, I now am paid for all my labours,
My watchings, and my dangers. Here conclude
Your praises, triumphs, honours, and rewards,
Decreed to me: only the memory
Of this glad day, if I may know it live
Within your thoughts, shall much affect my conscience,
Which I must always study before fame.
Though both be good, the latter yet is worst,
And ever is ill got, without the first.

This Tragoedie was first Acted, in the year 1611.

By the KINGS Majesties SERVANTS.

The principal Tragoedians were.

With the allowance of the Master of REVELS.


