WHereas all Repraesentations, especially those of this nature in court,
public Spectacles, either have been, or ought to be the mirrors of mans life,
whose ends, for the excellence of their exhibiters (as being the donatiues, of
great Princes, to their people) ought always to carry a mixture of profit,
with them, no less then delight; We, the Inuentors, being commanded from the
King, to think on some thing worthy of his Majesties putting in act, with a
selected company of his Lords, and Gentlemen, called to the assistance: For the
honour of his Court, and the dignity of that heroic love, and regal respect
borne by him to his unmatchable Lady, and Spouse, the Queenes Majesty, after
some debate of cogitation with our selves, resolved on this following argument.

First, that a Person, boni ominis, of a good character, as Euphemus, sent
down from Heaven to Callipolis, which is understood the City of Beauty or
Goodness, should come in; and, finding her Majesty there enthroned, declare unto
her, that Love who was wont to be respected as a special Deity in Court, and
Tutelar God of the place, had of late received an advertisement, that in the
suburbs, or skirts of Callipolis, were crept in certain Sectaries, or
deprau'd Lovers, who neither knew the name, or nature of love rightly, yet
boasted themselves his followers, when they were fitter to be called his
Furies: their whole life being a continew'd vertigo, or rather a torture on the
wheel of Love, then any motion either of order or measure. When suddenly they
leap forth below, a Mistress leading them, and with antique gesticulation,
and action, after the manner of the old Pantomimi, they dance over a distracted
comoedy of Love, expressing their confused affections, in the Scenical
persons, and habits, of the four prime European Nations.

A glorious boasting Lover.
A whining ballading Lover.
An adventurous Romance Lover.
A fantastic vmbrageous Lover.
A bribing corrupt Lover.
A froward jealous Lover.
A sordid illiberal Lover.
A proud skorne-full Lover.
An angry quarrelling Lover.
A melancholic despairing Lover.
An envious unquiet Lover.
A sensual brute Lover.
Joy, joy to mortals, the rejoicing fires
Of gladness, smile in your dilated hearts!
Whilst Love presents a world of chaste defires,
Which may produce a harmony of parts!
Love is the right affection of the mind,
The noble appetite of what is best:
Desire of union with the thing designed,
But in fruition of it cannot rest.
The Father plenty is, the Mother want,
Plenty the beauty, which it wants, draws;
Want yields it self: affording what is scant.
So, both affections are the vnion's cause.
But, rest not here. For Love hath larger scopes,
New joys, new pleasures, of as fresh a date
As are his minutes: and, in him no hopes
Are pure, but those he can perpetuate.
To you that are by excellence a Queen!
The top of beauty! but, of such an air,
As, only by the minds eye, may be seen
Your enter-wouen lines of good, and fair!
Vouchsafe to grace Loves triumph here, to night,
Through all the streets of your Callipolis;
Which by the splendour of your rays made bright
The seat, and region of all beauty is.
Love, in perfection, longs to appear
But prays, of favour, he be not called on,
Till all the suburbs, and the skirts be clear
Of perturbations, and th'infection gon.
Then will he flow forth, like a rich perfume
Into your nostrils! or some sweeter sound
Of melting musique, that shall not consume
Within the ear, but run the mazes round.
Mean time, we make lustration of the place,
And with our solemn fires, and waters prove
T'haue frighted, hence, the weak diseased race
Of those were tortured on the wheel of love.
1 The glorious,2 whining,3 the adventurous fool,
4 Phantastique,5 bribing, and the6 jealous ass
1 The sordid,2 scornful,3 and the angry mule
4 The melancholic,5 dull, and envious mass,
With all the rest, that in the sensual school
Of lust, for their degree of brute may pass.
All which are vapor'd hence.
No loves, but slaves to sense:
Mere cattle, and not men.
Sound, sound, and treble all our joys again,
Who had the power, and vertueto remove
Such monsters from the labyrinth of love.



Here, stay a while: This! this
The Temple of all Beauty is!
Here, perfect Lovers, you must pay
First-fruits; and on these altars lay
(The Ladies breast's) your ample vows,
Such, as Love brings, and Beauty best allows!

For Love, without his object, soon is gone:
Love must have answering love, to look upon.

To you, best Judge then, of perfection!

The Queen, of what is wonder, in the place!

Pure object, of Heroic Love, alone!

The center of proportion --!

Sweetness.

Grace.?

Deign to receive all lines of love in one.

And by reflecting of them fill this space.

Till it a circle of those glories prove,
Fit to be sought in Beauty, found by Love.

Where Love is mutual, still
All things in order move,

The circle of the will
Is the true sphere of Love.

Advance, you gentler Cupids, then advance,
And show your just perfections in your dance.
The Cupids dance their dance.
And the Masquers their-entry.

So love, emergent out of Chaos brought the world to light!
And gently moving on the waters, wrought all form to fight!
Loves appetite
Did beauty first excite:
And left imprinted in the air,
Those signatures of good, and fair,

Which since have flowed, flowed forth upon the sense,
To wonder first, and then to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!

And Neptune too
Shows what his waives can do:
To call the Muses all to play,
And sing the birth of Venus day,

Which from the Sea flowed, forth upon the sense
To wonder first, and next to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!

Hast daughter Venus hast, and come away:

All powers, that govern marriage, pray That you will lend your light

Unto the constellation of this night.

Hymen.

And Iuno.

And the Genius call,

Your father Iupiter,

And all
That bless, or honour holy nuptial.

Here, here I present am
Both in my g^rdle, and my flame:
Wherein are woven all the powers
The Graces gave me, or the Hours
(My nources once) with all the arts
Of gaining, and of holding hearts:
And these with I descend.
But, to your influences, first commend
The vow, I go to take
On earth, for perfect love and beauties sake!

Beauty and Love, whose story is mysteriall,
In yonder Palme-tree, and the Crown imperial,
Do from the Rose, and Lilly so delicious,
Promise a shade, shall ever be propitious
To both the Kingdoms. But to Britains Genius
The snaky rod, and serpents of Cyllenius
Bring not more peace, then these, who so united be
By Love, as with it Earth and Heaven delighted be.
And who this King, and Queen would well historify,
Need only speak their names: Those them will glorify.
MARY, and CHARLES, CHARLES, with his MARY, named are
And all the rest of Loves, or Princes famed are.



