THE honour, and splendour of these Spectacles was such in the performance, as
could those hours have lasted, this of mine, now, had been a most
unprofitable work: But (when it is the fate, even of the greatest, and most
absolute births, to need, and borrow a life of posterity) little had been done
to the study of magnificence in these, if presently with the rage of the
people, who (as a part of greatness) are privileged by Custom, to deface
their carcasses, the spirits had also perished. In duty, therefore, to that
Majesty, who gave them their authority, and grace; and, no less then the
most royal of predecessors, deserves eminent celebration for these
solemnities: I add this later hand, to redeem them as well from ignorance, as
envy, two common evils, the one of Censure, the other of Oblivion.

African, remember unto us a river in Aethiopia, famous by the name of Niger;
of which the people were called Nigritae, now Negro's: are the blackest nation
of the world. This Lake, east-ward; after a long race, falls into the
western Ocean. Hence (because it was her Majesties will, to have them
Black-mores at first) the invention was derived by me, presented thus.

First, for the Scene, was drawn a Landtschape, consisting of small woods, and
here and there a void place filled with huntings; which falling, an artificial
Sea was seen to shoot forth, as if it flowed to the land, raised with waives,
which seemed to move, and in some places the billow to break, as imitating
that orderly disorder, which is common in nature. In front of this Sea were
placed six Tritons, in moving, sprightly actions, their upper parts humane,
save that their hairs were blew, as pertaking of the Seacolour: their desinent
parts, fish, mounted above their heads, and all varied in disposition. From
their backs were borne out certain light pieces of Taffeta, as if carried by
the wind, and their Musique made out of wreathed shells. Behind these, a pair
of Sea-Maides, for song, were as conspicuously seated; between which, two
great Sea-horses (as big as the life) put forth themselves; the one mounting
aloft, writhing his head from the other, which seemed to sink forwards; so
intended for variation, that the Figure behind, might come of better:

OCEANVS, presented in a humane form, the colour of his flesh, blew; and
shadowed with a robe of Sea-greene; his head grey, Ancients: his beard of the
like mixed colour* he was gyrlonded with Alga, or Sea-grasse; and in his hand a
Trident.

NIGER, in form and colour of an Aethiope; his hair, and rare beard curled,
shadowed with a blew, and bright mantle: his front, neck, and wrists adorned
with Pearl, and crowned, with an artificial wreath of Cane, and Paper-rush.

These induced the Masquers, which were twelve Nymphs, Negro's; and the
daughters of NIGER; attended by so many of the Light-bearers.

The Masquers were placed in a great concave shell, like mother of Pearl,
curiously made to move on those waters, and rise with the billow; the top
thereof was stuck with a cheu'ro of lights, which, indented to the proportion of
the shell, struck a glorious beam upon them, as they were seated, one above
another: so that they were all seen, but in an extravagant order.

On sides of the shell, did swim six huge Sea-monsters, varied in their
shapes, and dispositions, bearing on their backs the twelve Torch bearers; who
were planted there in several graces; so as the backs of some were seen; some
in purfle, or side; others in face; all having their lights burning out of
Whelks, or Murex shells.

The attire of the Masquers was alike, in all, without difference: the colours,
Azure, and Silver; but returned on the top with a scroll and antique dressing
of Feathers, and Jewels interlaced with ropes of Pearl. And, for the front,
ear, neck, and wrists, the ornament was of the most choice and orient Pearl;
best setting of from the black.

For the Light bearers, Sea-greene, moved about the skirts with gold and silver
^eir hair loose, and flowing, gyrlanded with Sea-grasse, and that stuck with
branches of Coral.

These thus presented, the Scene behind, seemed a vast Sea (and united with
this that flowed forth) from the terminaton, or horizon of which (being the
level of the State, which was placed in the upper end of the Hall) was drawn,
by the lines of Perspective, the whole work shooting downwards, from the eye;
which decorum made it more conspicuous, and caught the eye a far of with a
wandering beauty. To which was added an obscure and cloudy night-piece, that
made the whole set of. So much for the bodily part. Which was of Master YNIGO
IONES his design, and act.

By this, one of the Tritons, with the two Sea-Maides, began to sing to the
others loud Musique, their voices being a tenor, and two trebles.

SOund, sound aloud
The welcome of the orient Flood,
Into the West;
Fair, NIGER, OCEANVS,
Now honoured, thus,
With all his beauteous race:
(...) though but black in face,
Yet, are they bright,
And full of life, and light.
To prove that Beauty best,
Which not the colour, but the feature
Assures unto the creature.
BE silent, now the Ceremonies done.
And NIGER, say, how comes it, lovely Son,
That thou, the AETHIOPES River, so far East,
Art seen to fall into the extremest West
Of me, the King of floods, OCEANVS,
And, in mine Empires heart, salute me, thus?
My ceaseless current, now amazed stands!
To see thy labour, through so many lands,

And, in thy sweetness, stretch thy diadem,
To these far distant, and vn-equall'd skies
This squared Circle of celestial bodies:

Divine OCEANVS, tis not strange at all,
That (since the immortal souls of creatures mortal,
Mix with their bodies, yet reserve for ever
A power of separation) I should sever
My fresh streams, from thy brackish (like things fixed)
Though, with thy powerful saltnes, thus far mixed.
" Virtue, though chained to earth, will still live free;
" And Hell it self must yield to industry.

But, what's the end of thy Herculean labours,
Extended to these calm, and blessed shores?

TO do a kind, and careful Fathers part,
In satisfying every pensive heart
Of these my Daughters, my most loved birth:
Who though they were the
And in whose sparkling, and refulgent eyes,
The glorious Sun did still delight to rise;
Though he (the best Judge, and most formal Cause
Of all Dames beauties) in their firm hues, draws
Signs of his feruent'st Love; and thereby shows
That, in their black, the perfectst beauty grows;
Since the fixed colour of their curled hair,
(Which is the highest grace of dames most fair)
No cares, no age can change; or there display
The fearful tincture of abhorred Gray;
Since Death her self (her self being pale blew)
Can never alter their most faith-full hew;
All which are arguments, to prove, how far
Their beauties conquer, in great Beauties war;
And more, how near Divinity they be,
That stand from passion, or decay so free.
Yet, since the fabulous voices of some few
Poor brain-sicke men, styled Poets, here with you,
Have, with such envy of their graces, sung
The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly
To infect all clymates, yea our purity;
As of one PHAETON, that fired the world
And, that, before his heedles flames were hurled
About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as fair,
As other Dames; now black, with black despair:
And in respect of their complexctions changed,
Are each where, since, for
Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
Most jealous of their beauties) fear, and care
Possessed them whole; yea, and believing them,
They wept such ceasles tears, into my stream,
That it hath, thus far, ouerflow'd his shore
To seek them patience: who have since, ere more
As the Sun rises,
With volleys of revilings; cause he shone
On their scorched cheeks, with such intemperate fires,
And other Dames, made Queenes of all desires.
To frustrate which strange error, oft, I sought,
(Though most in vain, against a settled thought
As women's are) till they confirmed at length
By miracle, what I, with so much strength
Of argument resisted; else they feigned:
For in the Lake, where their first spring they gained,
As they sate, cooling their soft Limbs, one night,
Appeared a Face, all circumfus'd with light;
(And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes
Wherein they might decipher through the stream,
These words.
That they a Land must forthwith seek,
Whose termination (of the Greek)
Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
Their bloods, doth never
But in his Journey passes by,
And leaves that Climate of the sky,
To comfort of a greater Light,
Who forms all beauty, with his sight.
In search of this, have we three Princedomes past,
That speak out Tania, in their accents last;
Black Mauritania, first; and secondly,
Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
The place unto these longing Nymphs designed.
Instruct, and aid me, great OCEANVS,
What Land is this, that now appears to us?

This Land, that lifts into the temperate Air
His snowy cliffe, is Albion the fair;
So called of
For whose dear guard, my self, (four thousand year)
Since old Deucalion's days, have walked the round
About his Empire, proud, to see him crowned
Above my waives.

At this, the Moon was discovered in the upper part of the house, triumphant
in a Silver throne, made in figure of a Pyramid. Her garments White, and
Silver, the dressing of her head antique; crowned with a Luminarie, or Sphaere
of light: which striking on the clouds, and heightened with Silver, reflected as
natural clouds do by the splendour of the Moon. The Heaven, about her, was
vaulted with blew silk, and set with Stars of Silver which had in them their
several lights burning. The sudden sight of which, made NIGER to interrupt
OCEANVS, with this present passion.

-- O see, our silver Star!
Whose pure, auspicious light greetes us, thus far!
Great Aethiopia, Goddess of our shore,
Since, with particular worship we adore
Thy general brightness, let particular grace
Shyne on my zealous Daughters: Show the place,
Which, long, their Longings vrdg'd their eyes to see.
Beautify them, which long have Deified thee.

NIGER, be glad: Resume thy native cheer.
Thy Daughters labours have their period here,
And so thy errors. I was that bright Face
Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
Read mysticke lines; (which skill PITHAGORAS
First taught to men, by a reuerberate glass)
This blessed Isle doth with that TANIA end,
Which there they saw inscribed, and shall extend
Wished satisfaction to their best desires.
BRITANIA, which the triple world admires,
This Isle hath now recovered for her name;
Where reign those Beauties, that with so much fame
The sacred MVSES Sons have honoured,
And from bright HESPERVS to EOVS spread.
With that great name BRITANIA, this blessed Isle
Hath won her ancient dignity, and stile,
A World, divided from the world: and tried
The abstract of it, in his general pride.
For were the World, with all his wealth, a Ring,
BRITANIA (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
Might be a Diamant worthy to inchase it,
Ruled by a SUN, that to this height doth grace it:
Whose Beams shine day, and night, and are of force
To blanch an AETHIOPE, and revive a Cor's.
His light scientiall is, and (past mere nature)
Can salve the rude defects of every creature.
Call forth thy honoured Daughters, then;
And let them, before the Britain men,
Indent the Land, with those pure traces
They flow with, in their native graces.
Inuit them, boldly, to the shore,
Their Beauties shall be scorched no more:
This Sun is temperate, and refines
All things, on which his radiance shines.

Here the Tritons sounded, they danced on shore, every couple (as they
advanced) severally presenting their Fans: in one of which were inscribed their
mixed Names, in the other a mute Hieroglyphic, expressing their mixed
qualities. Which manner of Symbol I rather chose, then Imprese, as well for
strangeness, as relishing of antiquity, and more applying to that original
doctrine of sculpture, Aegiptians are said, first, to have brought from the
Aethiopians.



Their own single Dance ended, as they were about to make choice of their
Men: One, from the Sea, was heard to call'hem with this charm, sung by a tenor
voice.

Come away, come away,
We grow jealous of your stay:
If you do not stop your ear,
We shall have more cause to fear
Sirens of the land, then they
To doubt the Sirens of the Sea.
Here they danced with their men, several measures, and corranto's. All which
ended, they were again accited to sea, with a Song of two Trebles, whose
cadences were iterated by a double Echo, from several parts of the Land.

DAughters of the subtle Flood,
Do not let Earth longer intertayne you;


'Tis to them, enough of good,
That you give this little hope, to gain you


If they love,
You shall quickly see;
For when to flight you move,
They'll follow you, the more you flee


If not, impute it each to others matter;
They are but Earth, what you vowed was Water.




I Nough, bright Nymphs, the night grows old,
And we are grieved, we can not hold
You longer light: But comfort take.
Your Father, only, to the Lake
Shall make return: Your selves with feasts,
Must here remain the Ocean's guests.
Nor shall this veil, the Sun hath cast
Above your blood, more Summers last.
For which, you shall observe these rites.
Thirteen times thrice, on thirteen nights,
(So often as I fill my Sphaere
With glorious light, throughout the year)
You shall (when all things else do sleep
Save your chaste thoughts) with reverence, steep
Your bodies in that purer brine,
And wholesome dew called Ros-marine:
Then with that soft, and gentler some,
Of which the Ocean, yet, yields some,
Whereof bright Venus, Beauties Queen,
Is said to have begotten been,
You shall your gentler limbs ore-laue,
And for your pains, perfection have.
So that, this night, the year gone round,
You do again salute this ground;
And, in the beams of yond' bright Sun,
Your faces dry, and all is done.

At which in a Dance they returned to the Sea, where they took their Shell;
and, with this full Song, went out.

NOw Dian, with her burning face,
Declines apace:
By which our Waters know
To ebb, that late did flow.
Back Seas, back Nymphs; but, with a forward grace,
Keep, still, your reverence to the place:
And shout with joy of favour, you have won,
in sight of Albion, Neptunes Son.
So ended the first Masque, which (beside the singular grace of Music and
Dances) had that success in the nobility of performance; as nothing needs to
the illustration, but the memory by whom it was personated.

TWo years being now past, that her Majesty had intermitted these delights,
and the third almost come; it was her Highness pleasure again to glorify the
Court, command that I should think on some fit presentment, which should
answer the former, still keeping the the same persons, the Daughters of NIGER,
but their beauties varied, according to promise, and their time of absence
excused, with four more added to their Number.

To which limits, when I had apted my invention, and being to bring news of
them, fro the Sea, I induced Boreas, one of the winds, as my fitest Messenger;
presenting him thus.

In a robe of Russet, and White mixed, full, and bagg'd: his hair, and beard
rough: and horrid; his wings gray, and full of snow, and icycles. His mantle
borne from him with wires, in several puffs; his feet Branch, laden with
icycles.

But before, in midst of the Hall; to keep the State of the feast, and season;
I had placed January, in a throne of Silver; His robe of Ashcoullor long,
fringed with Silver; a white mantle: His wings white, and his buskins: In his
hand a laurel bough, upon his head an Anademe of laurel, fronted with the
sign Aquarius, and the Character. Who as Boreas blusterd forth, discovered
himself.

WHich, among these is Albion, Neptunes Son?

WHat ignorance dares make that question?
Would any ask, who Mars were, in the wars?
Or, which is Hesperus, among the stars?
Of the bright Planets, which is Sol? Or can
A doubt arise, among creatures, which is man?
Behold, whose eyes do dart Promethean fire
Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
The rest with duty; yet commanding, cheer:
And are obeyed, more with love, then fear.

WHat Power art thou, that thus inform me?

DOst thou not know me? I, to well, know thee
By thy
Thy hair, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
Thy Serpent feet, to be that rough North-winde,
Boreas, that, to my reign, art still unkind.
I am the Prince of Months, called January;
Because by me Ianus the year doth vary,
Shutting up wars, proclaiming peace, feasts,
Freedom, triumphs: making Kings his guests.

TO thee then, thus, by thee, to that King,
That doth thee present honours, do I bring
Present remembrance of twelve Aethiope Dames:
Who, guided hither by the Moons bright flames,
To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
Enioyn'd again, and (thence assigned a day
For their return) were in the waives to leave
Their blackness, and true beauty to receive.

WHich they receau'd, but broke their day: yet
Have not returned a look of grace for it,
Showing a course, and most unfit neglect.
Twice have I come, in pomp here, to expect
Their presence; Twice deluded, have been fain
With rites my Feasts to intertayne:
And, now the Third time, turned about the year
Since they were looked for; and, yet, are not here.

IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that caused their stay;
For they were all prepared by their day,
And, with religion, forward on their way:
When PROTEVS, Prophet of the Sea,
Met them, and made report, how other four
Of their black kind, (whereof their Sire had store)
Faithful to that great wonder, so late done
Upon their Sisters, by bright Albion,
Had followed them to seek BRITANIA forth,
And there, to hope like favour, as like worth.
Which Night envied, as done
And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
Thought to prevent in these; least men should deem
Her coulor, if thus changed, of small esteem.
And so, by malice, and her magic, tossed
The Nymphs at Sea, as they were almost lost,
Till, on an Island, they by chance arrived,
That
Them so, in charms of darkness, as no might)
Should loose them thence, but their changed Sisters
Whereat the Twelve (in piety moved, kind)
Straight, put themselves in act, the place to find;
Which was the Nights sole trust they so will do,
That she, with labour, might confound them too.
For, ever since, with error hath she held
Them wandering in the Ocean, and so quelled
Their hopes beneath their toil, as (desperate now
Of any least success unto their vow;
Nor knowing to return to express the grace,
Wherewith they labour to this Prince, and place)
One of them, meeting me at Sea, did pray,
That for the love of my ORYTHYIA,
(Whose very name did heate my frosty breast,
And make me shake my Snow-fill'd wings, crest)
To bear this sad report I would be won,
And frame their just excuse: which here I have done.

WOuld thou had not begun, unlucky Wind,
That never yet blew'st goodness to mankind;
But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
Strik'st

Here a second Wind came in, VVLTVRNVS, in a blew coulored robe mantle, puffed
as the former, but somewhat sweeter; his face black, and on his Sun, showing
he came from the East: his wings of several coullors; his buskins white, and
wrought with Gold.

ALL horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
Be all things here as calm as is my breath.
A gentler Wind, Vulturnus, brings you news
The I'll is found, that the Nymphs now use
Their rest, joy. The Nights black charms are flown.
For, being made unto their Goddess known,
Bright Aethiopia, the Silver Moon,
As she was Hecate, she brake them soon:
And now by virtue of their light, and grace,
The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
Of all the earth for Beauty. Queen
Hath raised them a Throne, that still is seen
To turn unto the motion of the World;
Wherein they sit, and are, like Heaven, whirld
About the Earth; whilst, to them contrary,
(Following those nobler torches of the Sky)
A world of little Loves, and chaste Desires,
Do light their beauties, with still moving fires.
And who to Heavens consent can better move,
Then those that are so like it, Beauty and Love?
Hither, as to their new Elysium,
The spirits of the antique Greekes are come,
Poets, and Singers, Linus, Orpheus, all
That have excelled in
Where, set in Arb^rs made of myrtle, and gold,
They live, again, these Beauties to behold.
And thence, in flowery mazes walking forth
Sing hymns in celebration of their worth.
Whilst, to their Songs, two Fountains flow, one hight
Of lasting Youth, the other chaste Delight,
That at the closes, from their bottoms spring,
And strike the Air to echo what they sing.
But, why do I describe what all must see?
By this time, ne'er thy coast, they floating be;
For, so their virtuous Goddess, the chaste Moon,
Told them, the Fate of the Island should, soon
Would fix it self unto thy continent,
As being the place, by Destiny fore-ment,
Where they should slow forth, dressed in her attires:
And, that the influence of those holy fires,
(First rapt from hence) being multiplied upon
The other four, should make their Beauties one.
Which now expect to see, great Neptunes Son,
And love the miracle, which thy self hast done.

Here, a Curtine was drawn (in which the Night was painted.) and the Scene
discovered. which (because the former was marine, and these, yet of necessity,
to come from the Sea) I deuisd, should be an Island, floating on a calm water.
In the midst thereof was a Seat of state, called the Throne of Beauty,
erected: divided into eight Squares, and distinguished by so many Ionic
pilasters. In these Squares the sixteen Masquers were placed by couples:
behind them, in the center of the Throne was a tralucent Pillar, shining with
several coloured lights, that reflected on their backs. From the top of which
Pillar went several arches to the Pilasters, that sustained the roof of the
Throne, which was likewise adorned with lights, and gyrlonds; And between the
Pilasters, in front, little Cupids in flying posture, waving of wreaths, and
lights, bore up the Coronice: over which were placed eight Figures,
representing the Elements of Beauty; which advanced upon the Ionic, and being
females, had the Corinthian order. The first was

The colours of the Masquers were varied; the one half in Orenge-tawny, and
Silver: the other in Sea-greene, and Silver. The bodies and short skirts of
White, and Gold, to both.

The habit, and dressing (for the fashion) was most curious, and so exceeding
in riches, as the Throne whereon they sat, seemed to be a Mine of light, stroke
fro their jewels, their garments.

This Throne, (as the whole Island moved forward, on the water,) had a circular
motion of it own, imitating that which we cal Motum mundi, from the East to
the West, or the right to the left side. For so Hom. Ilia. M. vnderstads by
(...), Orientalia mundi: by (...), Occidentalia. The steps, whereon the Cupids
sate, had a motion contrary, with Analogy, ad motum Planetarum, from the West
to the East: both which turned with their several lights. And with these three
varied Motions, at once, the whole Scene shot it self to the Land.

Above which, the Moon was seen in a Silver Chariot, drawn by Virgins, to
ride in the clouds, and hold them greater light: with the Sign Scorpio, and
the Character, placed before her.

The order of this Scene was carefully, and ingeniously disposed; and as
happily put in act (for the Motions) by the Kings Master Carpenter. The
Painters, I must needs say, (not to belie them) lent small colour to any, to
attribute much of the spirit of these things to their pen'cills. But that must
not be imputed a crime either to the invention, or design.

Here the loud Musique ceased; and the Musicians, which were placed in the
Arbors, came forth through the Mazes, to the other Land: singing this full
Song, iterated in the closes by two Eccho's, rising out of the Fountains.

WHen Love, at first, did move
From Chaos, brightened
So was the world, and lightened,
As now!
Yield Night, then, to the light,
As Blackness hath to Beauty;
Which is but the same duty.
It was Beauty, that the World was made,
And where she reigns, Loves lights admit no shade.


Which ended, Vulturnus the Wind, spake to the River Thamesis that lay along
between the shores, leaning upon his Urn (that flowed with water,) and
crowned with flowers; with a blew cloth of Silver robe about him: and was
personated by Master THOMAS GILES, who made the Dances.

RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
Receive these Nymphs, within the land:
And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
Wherewith thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
Of fruitful Kent, and Essex fair,
That lend thee gyrlands for thy hair;
Instruct their silver feet to tread,
Whilst we, again to sea, are fled.

With which the Winds departed; and the River received them into the Land, by
couples foures, their Cupids coming before them.

The dancing forth a most curious Dance, full of excellent device, and
change, ended it in the figure of a Diamant, and so, standing still, were by
the Musicians, with a second Song (sung by a loud Tenor) celebrated.

SO Beauty on the waters stood,
(When Love had
So when he parted air, from fire,
He did with concord all inspire!
And then a Motion he them taught,
That elder then himself was thought.
Which thought was, yet,
For Love is elder then his birth.
The Song ended; they Danced forth their second Dance, more subtle, and full
of change, then the former; and so exquisitely performed; as the Kings Majesty
incited first (by his own liking, to that which all others, there present,
wished) required them both again, after some time of dancing with the Lords.
Which time, to give them respite, was intermitted with Song; first by a treble
voice, in this manner.

IF all these Cupids, now, were blind
As is Brother;
Or play should put it in their mind
To shoot at one another:
What pretty battle they would make
If they their objects should mistake
And each one wound his Mother!
Which was seconded by another treble; thus.

IT was no polity of Court,
Albee' the place were charmed,
To let in earnest, or in sport,
So many Loves in, armed.
For say, the Dames should* with their eyes,
Upon the hearts, here, mean surprise;
Were not the men like harmed?
To which a tenor answered.

YEs, were the Loves or false, or straying;
Or Beauties not their beauty weighing:
But here, no such deceit is mixed,
Their flames are pure, their eyes are fixed:
They do not war, with different darts,
But strike a musique of like hearts.
AFter which Songs, they danced Galliards, C^ranto's; and with those excellent
Graces, that the Musique, appointed to celebrate them, showed it could be
silent no longer: but by the first Tenor, admitted them thus.

HAd those, that dwell in error foul,
And hold
But seen these move; They would have, then
Said, Women were the souls of Men.
So they do move each heart, and eye
With the Worlds soul, true Harmony.
Here, they danced a third most elegant, and curious Dance, and not to be
described again, by any art, but that of their own footing: which, ending in
the figure, that was to produce the fourth, January from his state saluted
them, thus,

YOur grace is great, as is your Beauty, Dames;
Enough my Feasts have proved your thankful flames.
Now use your Seat: that seat which was, before,
Thought stray'ing, uncertain, floating to each shore,
And to whose having Clime laid claim,
Each Land, and Nation urged as the aim
Of their ambition, Beauties perfect Throne,
Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
And that, by'impulsion of your destinies,
And his attractive beams, that lights these Skies:
Who (though with the Ocean compassed) never wets
His hair therein, nor wears a beam that sets.
Long may his light adorn these happy rites
As I renew them; and your gracious sights
Enjoy that happiness, eu'en to envy, 'as when
Beauty, at large, brake forth, and conquered men.

At which they danced their last dance, into their Throne again: and that
turning, the Scene closed with this full Song.

STill turn, and imitate the Heaven
In motion swift and even;
And as his Planets go,
Your brighter lights do so:
May Youth and Pleasure ever flow.
But let your State, the while,
Be fixed as the Isle.
Beauties sphaere
Elysian Fields are here.
Elysian fields are here.
Elysian fields are here.

