(...) To which limits, when I had apted my invention, and being to bring news
of them from the Sea, I induced Boreas, one of the winds, as my fittest
Messenger; presenting him thus.

In a robe of Russet and White mixed, full, and bagg'd; his hair and beard
rough, and horrid; his wings gray, and full of snow, and ycicles: his mantle
borne from him with wyres, and in several puffs; his feet

But before, in midst of the Hall, to keep the state of the Feast, and Season,
I had placed January, in a throne of silver; his robe of ash-colour, long,
fringed with silver; a white mantle; his wings white, and his buskins; in his
hand a Laurel bough; upon his head an Anademe of Laurel, fronted with the
sign Aquarius, and the Character. Who, as Boreas blustered forth, discovered
himself.

WHich, among these, is ALBION, NEPTVNES son?


WHat ignorance dares make that question?
Would any ask, who MARS were, in the wars?
Or, which is HESPERVS, among the stars?
Of the bright Planets, which is SOL? Or can
A doubt arise, among creatures, which is Man?
Behold, whose eyes do dart Promethean fire
Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
The rest with duty; yet commanding, cheer:
And are obeyed, more with love, then fear.

WHat Power art thou, that thus inform me?

Dost thou not know me? I too well know thee
By thy
Thy hair, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
Thy serpent feet, to be that rough North-wind,
BOREAS, that to my reign art still unkind.
I am the Prince of Months, called IANVARIE;
Because by me
Shutting up wars, proclaiming peace, and feasts,
Freedom, and triumphs; making Kings his guests.

TO thee then, thus, and by thee, to that King,
That doth thee present honours, do I bring
Present remembrance of twelve Aethiope Dames:
Who, guided hither by the Moons bright flames,
To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
Enioyn'd again, and (thence assigned a day
For their return) were in the waives to leave
Their blackness, and true beauty to receive.

WHich they received, but broke their day: and yet
Have not returned a look of grace for it,
Showing a course, and most unfit neglect.
Twice have I come, in pomp here, to expect
Their presence; Twice deluded, have been fain
With Rites my Feasts to entertain:
And, now the third time, turned about the year,
Since they were looked for; and, yet, are not here.

IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that caused their stay;
For they were all prepared by their day,
And, with religion, forward on their way:
When PROTEVS, Prophet of the Sea,
Met them, and made report, how other four
Of their black kind (whereof their Sire had store)
Faithful to that great wonder, so late done
Upon their Sisters, by bright Albion,
Had followed them to seek BRITANIA forth,
And there to hope like favour, as like worth.
Which NIGHT enui'd, as done
And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
Thought to prevent in these; lest men should deem
Her colour, if thus changed, of small esteem.
And so, by malice, and her magic, tossed
The Nymphs at sea, as they were almost lost,
Till, on an Island, they by chance arrived,
That
Them so, in charms of darkness, as no might
Should loose them thence, but their changed Sisters sight.
Whereat the Twelve (in piety moved, and kind)
Straight put themselves in act, the place to find;
Which was the NIGHTS sole trust they so will do,
That she, with labour, might confound them too.
For ever since with error hath she held
Them wandering in the Ocean, and so quelled
Their hopes beneath their toil, as (desperate now
Of any least success unto their vow;
Nor knowing to return to express the grace,
Wherewith they labour to this Prince, and place)
One of them, meeting me at sea, did pray,
That for the love of my
(Whose very name did heat my frosty breast,
And make me shake my snow-fill'd wings and crest)
To bear this sad report I would be won,
And frame their just excuse; which here I have done.

WOuld thou had not begun, unlucky Wind,
That never yet blew'st goodness to mankind;
But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
Strik'st

ALl horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
Be all things here as calm as is my breath.
A gentler Wind, VVLTVRNVS, brings you news
The I'll is found, and that the Nymphs now use
Their rest, and joy. The Nights black charms are flown.
For, being made unto their Goddess known,
Bright AETHIOPIA, the silver Moon,
As she was
And now by virtue of their light, and grace,
The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
Of all the earth for Beauty. Queen
Hath raised them a Throne, that still is seen
To turn unto the motion of the World;
Wherein they sit, and are, like Heaven, whirled
About the Earth; whilst, to them contrary,
(Following those nobler torches of the Sky)
A world of little Loves, and chaste Desires,
Do light their beauties, with still moving fires.
And who to Heavens consent can better move,
Then those that are so like it, Beauty and Love?
Hither, as to their new Elysium,
The spirits of the antique Greekes are come,
Poets and Singes, Linus, Orpheus, all
That have excelled in
Where, set in arbors made of myrtle, and gold,
They live, again, these beauties to behold.
And thence in flowery mazes walking forth,
Sing hymns in celebration of their worth.
Whilst, to their songs, two fountains flow, one height
Of lasting Youth, the other chaste Delight,
That at the closes, from their bottoms spring,
And strike the air to echo what they sing.
But, why do I describe what all must see?
By this time, near the coast, they floating be;
For, so their virtuous Goddess, the chaste Moon,
Told them, the fate of the Island should, and soon
Would fix it self unto thy continent,
As being the place, by destiny fore-ment,
Where they should flow forth, dressed in her attires:
And, that the influence of those holy fires,
(First rapt from hence) being multiplied upon
The other four, should make their beauties one.
Which now expect to see, great Neptunes son,
And love the miracle, which thy self hast done.

In a robe of flame colour, naked breasted; her bright hair loose slowing: She
was drawn in a circle of clouds, her face, and body breaking through; and in
her hand a branch, with two Roses, a white, and a red. The next to her was
SERENITAS.


In a garment of bright skie-colour, a long tress, and waued with a veil

(...) (...) As now! Echo. As now! Ecch. As now!
Yield Night, then, to the light,
As Blackness hath to Beauty;
Which is but the same duty.
It was Beauty, that the World was made,
And where she reigns, Loves lights admit no shade.
Ecch. Loves lights admit no shade.
Echo. Admit no shade.

Which ended, Vulturnus the Wind spake to the River Thamesis, that lay along
between the shores, leaning upon his Urn (that flowed with water,) and
crowned with flowers: with a blue cloth of Silver robe about him: and was
personated by Master THOMAS GILES, who made the Dances.

RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
Receive these Nymphs, within the land:
And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
Where with thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
Of fruitful Kent, and Essex fair,
That lend thee gyrlands for thy hair;
Instruct their silver feet to tread,
Whilst we, again to sea, are fled.

With which the Winds departed; and the River received them into the Land, by
couples and foures, their Cupids coming before them.

These dancing forth a most curious Dance, full of excellent device, and
change, ended it in the figure of a Diamant, and so, standing still, were by
the Musicians, with a second Song (sung by a loud Tenor) celebrated.

SO beauty on the waters stood,
(When love had
So when he parted air, from fire?
He did with concord all inspire!
And then a motion he them taught,
That elder then himself was thought.
Which thought was, yet,
For love is elder then his birth.
IF all these CUPIDS, now, were blind
As is brother;
Or play should put it in their mind
To shoot at one another:
What pretty battle they would make,
If they their objects should mistake
And each one wound his mother!
IT was no polity of court,
Albee' the place were charmed,
To let in earnest, or in sport,
So many Loves in, armed.
For say, the Dames should, with their eyes,
Upon the hearts, here, mean surprise;
Were not the men like harmed?
YEs, were the Loves or false, or straying;
Or beauties not their beauty weighing:
But here, no such deceit is mixed,
Their flames are pure, their eyes are fixed:
They do not war, with different darts,
But strike a musique of like harts.
HAd those, that dwell in error foul,
And hold
But seen these move; they would have, then
Said, Women were the souls of men.
So they do move each heart, and eye
With the worlds soul, true harmony.
YOur grace is great, as is your beauty, Dames;
Enough my feasts have proved your thankful flames.
Now use your seat: that seat which was, before,
Thought stray'ing, uncertain, floating to each shore,
And to whose having clime laid claim,
Each land, and nation urged as the aim
Of their ambition, beauties perfect throne,
Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
And that, by'impulsion of your destinies,
And his attractive beams, that lights these skies:
Who (though with the Ocean compassed) never wets
His hair therein, nor wears a beam that sets.
Long may his light adorn these happy rites
As I renew them; and your gracious sights
Enjoy that happiness, eu'en to envy, 'as when
Beauty, at large, brake forth, and conquered men.

STill turn, and imitate the heaven
In motion swift and even;
And as his Planets go,
Your brighter lights do so:
May youth and pleasure ever flow.
But let your state, the while,
Be fixed as the Isle.
CHO. So all that see your beauties sphaere,
May know the Elysian fields are here.
Ecch. The Elysian fields are here.
Ecch. 'Elysian fields are here.
