IT is a noble and just advantage, that the things subjected to understanding
have of those which are objected to sense, that the one sort are but
momentary, and merely taking; the other impressing, and lasting: Else the
glory of all these solemnities had perished like a blaze, and gone out, in the
beholders eyes. So short-liu'd are the bodies of all things, in comparison of
their souls. And, though bodies oft-times have the ill luck to be sensually
preferred, they find afterwards, the good fortune (when souls live) to be
utterly forgotten. This it is hath made the most royal Princes, and greatest
persons (who are commonly the personaters of these actions) not only studious
of riches, and magnificence in the outward celebration, or show; (which rightly
becomes them) but curious after the most high, and hearty inventions, to
furnish the inward parts: (and those grounded upon antiquity, and solide
learnings) which, though their voice be taught to sound to present occasions,
their sense, or doth, or should always lay hold on more removed mysteries.
And, howsoever some may squemishly cry out, that all endeavour of learning, and
sharpness in these transitory devices especially, where it steps beyond their
little, or (let me not wrong them) no brain at all is super^luous; I am
contented, these fastidious stomachs should leave my full tables, and enjoy at
home, their clean empty trenchers, fittest for such airy tastes: where
perhaps a few Italian herbs, picked up, and made into a sallade, may find
sweeter acceptance, than all, the most nourishing, and sound meates of the
world.

For these men's palates, let not me answer, O Muses. It is not my fault, if I
fill them out Nectar, and they run to Metheglin.

Vaticana bibant, si delectentur.
All the courtesy I can do them, is to cry, again; (...) (...)

Sit now propitious Aides,
To Rites, so duly prized;
And view two noble Maids,
Of different sex, to UNION sacrificed.
In honour of that blessed Estate,
Which all good minds should celebrate.
Here out of a Microcosm, or Globe, (figuring Man) with a kind of contentious
Musique, issued forth the first Masque, of eight men.

These represented the four and four Affections, all gloriously attired,
distinguisht only by their several Ensigns and Colours; and, dancing out on
the Stage, in their return, at the end of their dance, drew all their swords,
offered to encompass the Altar, and disturb the Ceremonies. At which, HYMEN
troubled, spake:


Save, save the virgins; keep your hallowed lights
Untouched; and with their flame defend our Rites.
The four vntemp'red Humours are broke out,
And, with their wild affections, go about
To ravish all Religion. If there be
A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Body,
Or little world of Man, from whence these came,
Look forth, and with thy bright and
Instruct their darkness, make them know, and see,
In wronging these, they have rebelled against thee.

Forbear your rude attempt; what ignorance
Could yield you so profane, as to advance
One thought in act, against these mysteries?
Are VNION'S orgies of so slender price?
She that makes souls, with bodies, mix in love,
Contracts the world in one, and therein JOVE;
Is spring, and end of all things: yet, most strange!
Her self nor suffers spring, nor end, nor change.
No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
For none but Humours and Affections would
Have dared so rash a venture. You will say
It was your zeal, that gave your powers the sway;
And urge the masked, and disguised pretence,
Of saving blood, and succ'ring innocence?
So want of knowledge, still begets jars,
When humorous earthlings will control the stars.
Inform your selves, with safer reverence,
To these mysterious rites, whose mysticke sense,
REASON (which all things, but it self, confounds)
Shall clear unto you, from th'authentique grounds.

THe Pair, which do each other side,
Though (yet) some space doth them divide,
This happy Night must both make one
Blessed sacrifice, to UNION.
Nor is this Altar but a sign
Of one more soft, and more divine.
The Genial bed, where HYMEN keeps
The solemn Orgies, void of sleeps:
And wildest CUPID, waking, hovers
With adoration 'twixt the lovers.
The Dead of white and blooming Thorne,
In token of increase is borne:
As
To fright all malice from the Night.
Like are the fire, and water, set;
That, even as moisture, mixed with heat,
Helps every natural birth, to life;
So, for their Race, join man and wife.

(...) (...) Who come to deck the genial Bower,
And bring, with them, the grateful Hour
That crowns such meetings, and excites
The married Pair to fresh delights:
As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Oaths, and Vows,
Soft Whisperings, Embraces, all the Joys,
And melting Toys,
That chaster LOVE allows.
CHO, Haste, haste, for HESPERVS his head down bows.

Convey them, ORDER, to their places,
And rank them so, in several traces,
As they may set their mixed Powers
Unto the Musique of the Hours;
And THESE, by joining with them, know
In better temper how to flow:
Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
Report the virtues of the Dames.
First Brides fair Tress.
Care of the ointments


Fair Bride her way;
And
m^id, quit of her Zone, defends;


NOw, now, begin to set
Your spirits in active heate;
And, since your hands are met,
Instruct your nimble feet,
In motions, swift, and meet,
The happy ground to beat:
Roof doth ring,
And each discording string.
With ^uery varied voice,
In UNION doth rejoice.
Such was Golden Chain let down from Heaven;
And not those links more even,
Then these: so sweetly tempered, so combined
By UNION, and refined.
Here no contention, envy, grief, deceit,
Fear, jealousy have weight;
But all is peace, and love, and faith, and bliss:
What harmony like this?
The gall, behind the altar quite is thrown;
This sacrifice hath none.
Now no affections rage, nor humours swell;
But all composed dwell.
O IVNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, IVNO! who
Can merit with you two?
Without your presence, VENVS can do nought,
Save what with shame is bought;
No father can himself a parent show,
Nor any house with prospe'rous issue grow.
O then! What deities will dare
With HYMEN, or with IVNO to compare?

Think, yet, how night doth wast,
How much of time is past,
What more then winged hast
Your selves would take,
If you were but to taste
The joy, the night doth cast
(O might it ever last)
On this bright virgin, and her happy make.
SEe, see! the bright Italian star,
That lights lovers to their war,
Complains, that you her influence loose;
While thus the night-sports you abuse.

THe longing bridegroom,
Shows you again, the bated torch;
And thrice hath IVNO air
With fire, to summon your repair.

SEe, now she clean with-drawes her light;
And (as you should) gives place to night,
That spreads her broad, and blackest wing
Upon the world, and comes to bring
A loves,
Some like sparrows, some like doves,
That hop about the nuptiall-roome,
And fluttering there (against you come)
Warm the chaste bower, which
With many a lilly, many a rose.

HAste therefore, haste, and call, away:
The gentle night is pressed to pay
The usury of long delights,
She owes to these protracted rites.

O Know to end, as to begin:
A minutes loss, in love, is sin.
These humours will the night out-weare
In their own pastimes here;
You do our rites much wrong,
In seeking to prolong
These outward pleasures:
The night hath other treasures
Then these (though long concealed)
Ere day, to be reueal'd.
Then, know to end, as to begin;
A minutes loss, in love, is sin.
HEre stay, and let your sports be crowned:
The perfect'st figure is the round.
Nor fell you in it by aduenter,
When REASON was your guide, and center.
This, this that beauteous
Of lovers many-colour'd bliss.
Come HYMEN, make an inner ring,
And let the sacrificers sing;
Cheer up the faint, and trembling Bride,
That quakes to touch her Bridegroom's side:
Tell her, what IVNO is to JOVE,
The same shall she be to her love;
His wife: which we do rather measure
dignity, then pleasure.
Up youths, hold up your lights in air,
And shake abroad
Now move united, and, in gate,
As you (in pairs) do front the state,
With grateful honours, thank his grace
That hath so glorified the place:
And as, in circle, you depart
Linked hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
May all those bodies still remain
Whom he (with so much sacred payne)
No less hath bound within his realms
Then they are with the OCEANS streams.
Long may his UNION find increase
As he, to ours, hath deigned his peace.

GLad time is at his point arrived,
For which loves hopes were so long-liu'd.
Lead HYMEN, lead away;
And let no object stay,
Nor banquets (but sweet kisses)
The turtles from their blisses.

And this his last alarm.
Shrink not, soft Virgin, you will love,
Anon, what you so fear to prove.
This is no killing war,
To which you pressed are;
But fair and gentle strife
Which lovers call their life.
'Tis CUPID cries to arm;
And this his last alarm.
Help youths, and virgins, help to sing
The prize, which HYMEN here doth bring,
And did so lately
From forth the mothers lap,
To place her by that side
Where she must long abide.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This night is HYMEN'S all.
See, HESPERVS is yet in view!
What star can so deserve of you?
Whose light doth still adorn
Your Bride, that, ere the morn,
Shall far more perfect be,
And rise as bright as he;
When name
Is changed, but not her flame.
Haste, tender lady, and aduenter;
The covetous house would have you enter,
That it might wealthy be,
And you, her
Haste your own good to meet;
And
Above the threshold, high,
With prosperous a^gury.
Now, youths, let go your pretty arms;
The place within chant's other charms.

(...) (...) much less description, be recovered to a part of that spirit it
had in the gliding by.

Yet, that I may not utterly defraud the Reader of his hope, I am drawn to
give it those brief touches, which may leave behind some shadow of what it
was: And first of the Attires.

That, of the Lords, had part of it (for the fashion) taken from the antique
Greek statue; mixed with some modern additions: which made it both graceful,
and strange. On their heads they wore Persick crowns, that were with scrolls
of gold-plate turned outward, and wreathed about with a carnation and silver
net-lawne; the one end of which hung carelessly on the left shoulder; the other
was tricked up before, in several degrees of foulds, between the plates, and
set with rich jewels, and great pearl. Their bodies were of carnation cloth of
silver, richly wrought, and cut to express the naked, in manner of the Greek
Thorax; girt under the breasts with a broad belt of cloth of gold, embroidered,
and fastened before with jewels: Their Labels were of white cloth of silver,
laced, and wrought curiously between, suitable to the upper half of their
sleeves; whose nether parts, with their bases, were of watchet cloth of silver,
chev'rond all over with lace. Their Mantills were of several coloured silks,
distinguishing their qualities, as they were coupled in payres; the first, sky
colour* the second, pearl colour; the third, flame colour; the fourth, tawny:
and these cut in leaves, which were subtly tacked up, and embroidered with
Oe's, and between every rank of leaves, a broad silver lace. They were
fastened on the right shoulder, and fell compass down the back in gracious
folds, and were again tied with a round knot, to the fastening of their swords.
Upon their legs they wore silver Greaues, answering in work to their
Labells; and these were their accoutrements.

The Ladies attire was wholly new, for the invention, and full of glory; as
having in it the most true impression of a celestial figure: the upper part of
white cloth of silver, wrought with IVNOES birds and fruits; a loose
vnder-garment, full gathered, of carnation, strip't with silver, and parted
with a golden Zone: beneath that, another flowing garment, of watchet cloth of
silver, laced with gold; through all which, though they were round, and
swelling, there yet appeared some touch of their delicate lineaments,
preserving the sweetness of proportion, and expressing it self beyond
expression. The attire of their heads did answer, if not exceed; their hair
being carelessly (but yet with more art, then if more affected) bound under the
circle of a rare and rich Coronet, adorned with all variety, and choice of
jewels; from the top of which, flowed a transparent veil, down to the ground;
whose verge, returning up, was fastened to either side in most sprightly
manner. Their shoes were Azure, and gold, set with Rubies and Diamonds; so
were all their garments; and every part abounding in ornament.

No less to be admired, for the grace, and greatness, was the whole Machine
of the Spectacle, from whence they came: the first part of which was a
MIKPOKOSMOS, or Globe, filled with Countries, and those gilded; where the Sea
was expressed, heightened with silver waives. This stood, or rather hung (for no
Axell was seen to support it) and turning softly, discovered the first Masque
(as we have before, but too runningly declared) which was of the men, sitting
in fair composition, within a mine of several metalls: To which, the lights
were so placed, as no one was seen; but seemed, as if only REASON, with the
splendour of her crown, illumined the whole Grot.

On the sides of this (which began the other part) were placed two great
Statues, feigned of gold, one of ATLAS, the other of HERCVLES, in varied
postures, bearing up the Clouds, which were of Releue, embossed, and tralucent,
as Naturalls: To these, a cortine of painted clouds joined, which reached to
the vpmost roof of the Hall; and suddenly opening, reueal'd the three Regions
of Air: In the highest of which, sate IVNO, in a glorious throne of gold,
circled with Comets, and fiery Meteors, engendered in that hot and dry Region;
her feet reaching to the lowest: where, was made a Rainbow, and within it,
Musicians seated, figuring airy spirits, their habits various, and resembling
the several colours, caused in that part of the air by reflection. The midst
was all of dark and condensed clouds, as being the proper place, where Rain,
Hail, and other watery Meteors are made; out of which, two concave clouds,
from the rest, thrust forth themselves (in nature of those Nimbi, wherein, by
Homer, Virgil, c. the gods are feigned to descend) and these carried the eight
Ladies, over the heads of the two Terms; who (as the engine moved) seemed also
to bow themselves (by virtue of their shadows) and discharge their shoulders
of their glorious burden: when, having set them on the earth, both they and the
clouds gathered themselves up again, with some rapture of the beholders.

But that, which (as above in place, so in the beauty) was most taking in the
Spectacle, was the sphere of fire, in the top of all, encompassing the air,
and imitated with such art and industry, as the spectators might discern the
Motion (all the time the Shows lasted) without any Moouer; and that so swift,
as no eye could distinguish any colour of the light, but might form to it
self five hundred several hiewes, out of the tralucent body of the air,
objected betwixt it, and them.

And this was crowned with a statue of IVPITER, the Thunderer.

ON the next Night, whose solemnity was of Barriers (all mention of the former
being utterly removed and taken away) there appeared, at the lower end of the
Hall, a Mist made of delicate perfumes; out of which (a battle being sounded
under the stage) did seem to break forth two Ladies, the one representing
Truth, the other Opinion; but both so alike attired, as they could by no note
be distinguished. The colour of their garments were blue, their socks white;
they were crowned with wreaths of Palm, in their hands ^ch of the sustained a
Palm-bough. These, after the Mist was vanished,

(...) (...) And then, what rules husbands praescribe their wives!
In their eyes circles, they must bound their lives.
The moon, when farthest from the sun she shines,
Is most refulgent; nearest, most declines:
But your poor wives far off must never rome,
But wast their beauties, near their lords at home:
And when their lords range out, at home must hide
(Like to begged monopolies) all their pride.
When their lords list to feed a serious fit
They must be serious; when to show their wit
In jests, and laughter, they must laugh and jest;
When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
And to their wives men give such narrow scopes,
As if they meant to make them walk on ropes:
No tumblers bide more peril of their necks
In all their tricks; then wives in husbands checks.
Where virgins, in their sweet, and peaceful state
Have all things perfect; spin their own free fate;
Depend on no proud second; are their own
Center, and circle; Now, and always one.
To whose example, we do still hear named
One god, one nature, and but one world framed,
One sun, one moon, one element of fire,
So, of the rest; one king, that doth inspire
Soul, to all bodies, in their royal sphere:

And where is marriage more declared, then there?
Is there a band more strict, then that doth tie
The soul, and body in such unity?
Subjects to sovereigns? doth one mind display
In th'ones obedience, and the others sway?
Believe it, marriage suffers no compare,
When both estates are valew'd, as they are.
The virgin were a strange, and stubborn thing,
Would longer stay a virgin, then to bring
Her self fit use, and profit in a make.

How she doth err! and the whole heaven mistake!
Look, how a flower, that close in closes grows,
Hid from rude cattle, bruised with no ploughs,
Which the air doth stroke, sun strength, showers shoot higher,
It many youths, and many maids desire;
The same, when cropped by cruel hand is withered,
No youths at all, no maidens have desired:
So a virgin, while untouched she doth remain,
Is dear to hers; but when with bodies stain
Her chaster flower is lost, she leaves to appear
Or sweet to young men, or to maidens dear.
That conquest then may crown me in this war,
Virgins, O virgins, fly from HYMEN far.

Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield,
For as a lone vine, in a naked field,
Never extolls her branches, never bears
Ripe grapes, but with a headlong heaviness wears
Her tender body, and her highest sproote
Is quickly leuell'd with her fading root;
By whom no husbandmen, no youths will dwell;
But if, by fortune, she be married well
To th'elme her husband, many husbandmen,
And many youths inhabit by her, then:
So whilst a virgin doth, vntouch't, abide
All vnmanu^'d, she grows old, with her pride;
But when to equal wedlock, in fit time,
Her fortune, and endeavour lets her clime,
Dear to her love, and parents she is held.
Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield.

These are but words; hast thou a knight will try
(By stroke of arms) the simple verity?

To that high proof I would have dared thee.
I'll strait fetch champions for the bride and me.

The like will I do for Virginity.

(...) (...)
