THe King, and Queenes Majesty, having given their command for the Invention of
a new argument, with the whole change of the Scene, wherein her Majesty, with
the like number of her Ladies, purposed a presentation to the King. It was
agreed, it should be the celebration of some Rites, done to the Goddess
Chloris, who in a general counsel of of the Gods, was proclaimed Goddess of
the flowers, according to that of Ouid, in the Fasti.

Arbitrium tu Dea floris habe.

And was to be stellified on Earth, by an absolut decree from Iupiter, who
would have the Earth to be adorned with stars, as well as the Heaven.

Upon this hinge, the whole Invention moved.

The ornament, which went about the Scene, was composed of Foliage, or leaves
heightened with gold, and enterwouen with all sorts of flowers; and naked
children, playing, and climbing among the branches; and in the midst, a great
garland of flowers, in which was written, CHLORIDIA.

The Curtain being drawn up, the Scene is discovered, consisting of pleasant
hills, planted with young trees, and all the lower banks adorned with flowers.
And from some hollow parts of those hills, Fountains come gliding down,
which, in the farre-of Land-shape, seemed all to be converted to a river.

Over all, a serene sky, with transparent clouds, giving a great lustre to the
whole work, which did imitate the pleasant Spring.

When the Spectators had enough fed their eyes, with the delights of the
Scene, in a part of the air, a bright cloud begins to break forth; and in it,
is sitting a plump Boy, in a changeable garment, richly adorned, representing
the mild Zephyrus. On the other side of the Scene, in a purplish cloud,
appears the Spring, a beautiful Maid, her upper garment green, under it, a
white robe wrought with flowers; A garland on her head.

Here Zephyrus begins his dialogue, calling her forth, and making narration of
the Gods decree at large, which she obeys, pretending, it is come to Earth
already: and there begun to be executed, by the Kings favour, who assists with
all bounties, that may be either urged, as causes, or reasons of the Spring.

Come forth, come forth, the gentle Spring,
And carry the glad news, I bring,
To Earth, our common mother:
It is decreed, by all the Gods
The Heaven, of Earth shall have no odds,
But one shall love another:
Their glories they shall mutual make,
Earth look on Heaven, for Heavens sake;
Their honour's shall be even:
All emulation cease, and jars;
Jove will have Earth to have her stars
And lights, no less then Heaven.

It is already done, in flowers
As fresh and new as are the hours,
By warmth of yonder Sun.
But will be multipli'd on us,
If from the breath of ZEPHYRVS
Like favour we have won.

Give all to him: His is the dew,
The heate, the humour,

Beloved of the Spring!

The Sun, the Wind, the Verdure!

That wisest Nature cause can call
Of quick'ning any thing.

At which, Zephyrus passes away through the air, and the Spring descends to
the Earth: and is received by the Naiades, or Napeae; who are the Nymph's,
Fountains, and Servants of the season --

Fair Maid, but are you come to dwell,
And tarry with is here?

Fresh Fountains, I am come to tell
A tale in yond'soft ear,
Whereof the murmure will do well:
If you your parts will bear.

Our purlings wait upon the Spring.

Go up with me, then: help to sing
The story to the King.

Here the Spring goes up, singing the argument to the King; and the Fountains
follow with the close.

Cupid hath taken offence of late
At all the Gods, that of the State,
And in their Council, he was so deserted,
Not to be called into their Guild
But slightly passed by, as a child.

Wherein he thinks his honour was perverted.

And though his Mother seek to season,
And rectify his rage with reason,
By showing he lives yet under her command,
Rebellious he, doth disobey,
And she hath forced his arms away.

To make him feel the Justice of her hand.

Whereat the Boy, in fury fell,
With all his speed, is gone to hell,
There to excite, and stir up lealousy,
To make a party against the Gods,
And set Heaven, Earth, and Hell at odds.

And raise a chaos of calamity.

The Song ended, the Nymphs fall into a dance, to their voices, and
instruments, and so return into the Scene.

A part of the under ground opening, out of it enters a Dwarfe-Post from Hell,
riding on a Curtal, with cloven feet, and two Lackeys: These dance, make the
first entry of the Antimasque. He alights, and speaks.

Hold my stirrup, my one Lackey; and look to my Curtal, the other: walk him
well, Sirrah, while I expatiate my self here in the report of my office! oh
the Furies! how I am joyed with the title of it! Postilion of Hell! yet no
Mercury. But a mere Cacodaemon, sent hither with a packet of news! news!
never was Hell so furnished of the commodity of news! Love hath bin lately
there, and so entertained by Pluto, and Proserpine, and all the Grandees of the
place as, it is there perpetual Holy-day: and a cessation of torment granted,
and proclaimed for ever! Halfe-famish'd Tantalus is fallen to his fruit, with
that appetite, as it threaten's to undo the whole company of Costardmungers,
and ha's ariuer before him, running excellent wine lxion is loosed from his
wheel, and turned Dancer, does nothing but cut capreols, fetch friskals, and
leads Laualtos, with the Lamiae! Sisyphus ha's left rolling the stone, and is
grown a Mr. bowler; challenges all the prime gamesters, Parsons in hell, and
gives them odds: upon Tityus his breast, that (for fix of the nine aeres) is
counted the subtlest bowling-ground in all Tartary. All the Furies are at a
game called nine pins, or keilles, made of old usurers bones, and their souls
looking on with delight, and betting on the game. Never was there such freedom
of sport. Danaus daughters have broke their bottomelesse tubs, and made
bonfires of them. All is turned triumph there. Had hell gates bin kept with
half that strictness as the entry here ha's bin to night, Pluto would have
had but a cola Court, Proserpine a thin presence, though both have a vast
territory We had such a stir to get in, I and my Curtal, and my two Lackeys
all ventured through the eye of a Spanish needle, we had never come in else,
that was by the favour of one of the guard who was a womans-tayler, and held
open the passage. Cupid by commission hath carried Iealoufie from Hell,
Disdain, Fear, and Dissimulation, with other Goblins, to trouble the Gods.
And I am sent after post, to raise Tempest, Winds, Lightnings, Thunder, Rain,
and Snow, for some new exploit they have against the Earth, and the Goddess
Chloris, Queen of the flowers, and Mistress of the Spring. For joy of which I
will return to my self, mount my Bidet, in a dance; and coruet upon my
Curtal.


The speech ended, the Postilion mounts his Curtal, and with his Lackeys,
dances forth as he came in.

Cupid, Jealousy, Disdain, Fear, and Dissimulation, dance together.

The Queenes Dwarf, richly apparrel'd, as a Prince of Hell, attended by 6
infernal Spirits; He first dances alone, and then the Spirits: all expressing
their joy, for Cupids coming among them.

Here the Scene changes, into a horrid storm. Out of which enters the Nymph
Tempest, with four Winds. they dance.

Lightnings, 3 in number, their habits gliste ring, expressing that effect, in
their motion.

Thunder alone dancing the tunes to a noise, mixed, and imitating thunder.

Rain, presented by 5 persons all swollen, and clouded over, their hair
flagging, as if they were wet, and in their hands, balls full of sweet water,
which, as they dance, sprinkle all the room.

Seven with rugged white heads, and beards, to express Snow, with flakes on
their garments, mixed wi^h hayle. These having danced, return into the stormy
Scene, whence they came.

Here, by the providence of Iuno, the tempest on an instant cease: And the
Scene is changed into a delicious place, figuring the bower of Chloris. Where,
in an arbour fayn'd of Gold-smiths work, the ornament of which was borne up
with Terms of Satyrs, beautified with Festones, garlands, and all sorts of
fragrant flowers. Beyond all this, in the sky a far of appeared a Rainbow,
In the most eminent place of the Bower, sate the Goddess Chloris, accompanied
with fourteen Nymphs, their apparel white, embroidered, with silver, trimmed
at the shoulders with great leaves of green, embroidered with gold, falling
one under the other. And of the same work were their bases, their head-'tires
of flowers, mixed with silver, and gold, with some sprigs of Aegrets among, and
from the top of their dressing, a thin veil hanging down.

All which beheld,

Run out, all the Floods, in joy with your silver feet;
And hast to meet, the enamoured Spring;
For whom the warbling Fountains sing:
The story of the flowers; preserved by the Hours;
At Iuno's soft command, and Iris showers;
Sent to quench jealousy, and all those powers
Of Loves rebellious war:
Whilst Chloris sits a shining star
To crown, and grace our jolly song, made long,
To the notes, that we bring, to glad the Spring.

Which ended, the Goddess, and her Nymphs descend the degrees, into the room,
and dance the entry of the grand-masque.

Tell a truth, gay Spring, let us know
What feet they were, that so
Impres't the Earth, and made such various flowers to grow!

She that led, a Queen was at least,
Or a Goddess, above the rest:
And all their graces, in her self expressed!

O'it were a fame, to know her name!
Whether she were the root;
Or they did take th'impression, from her foot.

Which done,

The farther Prospect of the Scene changes into air, with a low Land-shape,
in part covered with clouds: And in that instant, the Heaven opening, Iuno, and
Iris are seen, and above them many aerie spirits, sitting in the clouds.

Now Iuno, and the Air shall know
The truth of what is done below,
From our discolourd bow. Iris, what news?

The air is clear, your bow can tell,
Chloris renowned, Spite fled to Hell;
The business all is well. And Cupid sues-

For pardon. Does he?

He sheds tears
More then your Birds have eyes.

The Gods have ears.
Offences, made against the Deities,
Are soon forgot-

If who offends, be wife.

Here, out of the Earth, arises a Hill, and on the top of it, a globe, on
which Fame is seen standing with her trumpet, in her hand; and on the Hill,
are seated four Persons, presenting, Poesy, History, Architecture, and
Sculpture: who together with the Nymphs, Floods, and Fountains, make a full
Quire, at which, Fame begins to mount, and moving her wings, flies, singing
up to Heaven:

Rise golden Fame, and give thy name a birth

From great and generous actions, done on Earth.

The life of Fame is action.

Understood
That action must be virtuous, great, and good!

Virtue it self by Fame is of't protected,
And dies despised --

Where the Fames neglected

Who hath not heard of Chloris, and her bower
Fair Iris act, employed by Iuno's power
To guard the Spring, and prosper every flower,
Whom Jealousy and Hell thought to devour?

Great actions of't obscurd by time, may lye,
Or envy --

But they last to memory.

We that sustain thee, Learned Poesy

And I, her sister, severe History.

With Architecture, who will raise thee high,

And Sculpture, that can keep thee from to dye.

All help lift thee to eternity.

And Iuno, through the air, doth make thy way,

By her serenest Messenger of Day.

Thus Fame ascend's, by all degrees, to Heaven:
And leaves a light, here, brighter, then the seven.

Let all applaud the sight.
Air first, that gave the bright
Reflections, Day or Night!
With these supports of Fame,
That keep alive her name!
The beauties of the Spring.
Fount's, Rivers, every thing:
From the height of all,
To the Waters fall-
Resound, and sing
The honour's of his Chloris, to the King.
Chloris, the Queen of Flowers;
The sweetness of all Showers;
The ornament of Bowers;
The top of Par-amours!

Fame, being hidden in the clouds, the hill sinks: and the Heaven closes.


