THe worthy custom of honouring worthy marriages, with these noble
solemnities, hath, of late years, advanced it self frequently with us; to the
reputation no less of our court, then nobles: expressing besides (through the
difficulties of expense, and travel, with the cheerfulness of vnder-taking)
a most real affection in the personators, to those, for whose sake they would
sustain these persons. It behooves then us, that are trusted with a part of
their honour, in these celebrations, to doc nothing in them, beneath the
dignity of either. With this preposed part of judgment, I adventure to give
that abroad, which in my first conception I intended honourably fit: and (though
it hath laboured since, under censure) I, that know Truth to be always of one
stature, and so like a rule, as who bends it the least way, must needs do an
injury to the right, cannot but smile at their tyrannous ignorance, that will
offer to slight me (in these things being an artificer) and give themselves a
peremptory licence to judge, who have never touched so much as to the bark,
or utter shell of any knowledge. But, their daring dwell, with them. They have
found a place, to power out their follies, and I a seat, to sleep out the
passage.

The scene to this Masque, was a high, steep, red cliffe, advancing it self
into the clouds, figuring the place, from whence (as I have been, not
fabulously, informed) the honourable family of the RADCLIFFES first took their
name (a cliuo rubro) and is to be written with that Orthography; as I have
observed out of M. CAMBDEN, in his mention of the Earles of Sussex. This cliffe
was also a note of height, greatness, and antiquity; before which, on the two
sides, were erected two pilasters, chardg'd with spoils and trophies, of love,
and his mother, consecrate to marriage: amongst which were old and young persons
figured, bound with roses, the wedding garments, rocks, and spindles, hearts
transfixed with arrows, others flaming, virgins girdles, gyrlonds, and worlds
of such like; all wrought round and bold: and ouer-head two personages, triumph
and victory, in flying postures, and twice so big as the life, in place of the
arch, and holding a gyrlond of myrtle for the key. All which, with the pillars,
seemed to be of burnished gold, and embossed out of the mettle. Beyond the
cliffe was seen nothing but clouds, thick, and obscure; till on the sudden,
with a solemn musique, a bright sky breaking forth; there were discovered,
first two doves, then two swans with silver geeres, drawing forth a
triumphant chariot; in which VENVS sate, crowned with her star, and beneath
her the three Graces, or Charites, AGLAIA, THALIA, EVPHROSYN^, all attired
according to their antique figures. These, from their chariot, alighted on the
top of the cliffe, and descending by certain abrupt and winding passages,
VENVS having left her star, only, flaming in her seat, came to the earth,
the Graces throwing gyrlonds all the way, and began to speak.

IT is no common cause, ye will conceive,
My lovely Graces, makes your goddess leave
Her state in heaven, to night, to visit earth.
Love late is fled away, my eldest birth,
CUPID, whom I did joy to call my son;
And, whom long absent, VENVS is undone.
Spy, if you can, his foot-steps on this green;
For here (as I am told) he late hath been.
With
From their best flames, to guild a glorious night;
Which I not grudge at, being done for her,
Whose honours, to mine own, I still prefer.
But he, not yet returning, I'am in fear,
Some gentle grace, or innocent beauty here,
Be taken with him: or he hath surprised
A second PSYCHE, and lives here disguised.
Find ye no tract of his strayed feet?

Not I.

Nor I.

Nor I.

Stay nymphs, we then will try
A nearer way. Look all these ladies eyes,
And see if there he not concealed lies;
Or in their bosoms, 'twixt their swelling breasts:
(The wag affects to make himself such nests)
Perchance, he'hath got some simple heart, to hide
His subtle shape in: I will have him cried.
And all his virtues told. That, when they know
What spright he is, she soon may let him go,
That guards him now; and think her self right blessed,
To be so timely rid of such a guest.
Begin soft GRACES, and proclaim reward
To her that brings him in. Speak, to be heard.

Beauties, have ye seen this toy,
Called love, a little boy,
Almost naked, wanton, blind,
Cruel now; and then as kind?
If he be amongst ye, say;
He is VENVS run-away.

She, that will but now discover
Where the winged wag doth hover,
Shall, to night, receive a kiss,
How, or where her self would wish:
But, who brings him to his mother,
Shall have that kiss, and another.

H' hath of marks about him plenty:
You shall know him, among twenty.
All his body is a fire,
And his breath a flame entire,
That being shot, like lightning, in,
Wounds the heart, but not the skin.

At his sight, the sun hath turned,
NEPTVNE in the waters, burned;
Hell hath felt a greater heate:
JOVE himself forsook his seat:
From the center, to the sky,
Are his trophaees reared hie.

Wings he hath, which though ye clip,
He will leap from lip, to lip,
Over liver, lights, and heart,
But not stay in any part;
And, if chance his arrow misses,
He will shoot himself, in kisses.

He doth bear a golden Bow
And a Quiver, hanging low,
Full of arrows, that out-braue
DIAN'S shafts: where, if he have
Any head more sharpe then other,
With that first he strikes his mother.

Still the fairest are his fuel.
When his days are to be cruel,
Lovers hearts are all his food;
And his bathes their warmest blood:
Nought but wounds his hand doth season;
And he hates none like to Reason.

Trust him not: his words, though sweet,
Seldom with his heart do meet.
All his practise is deceit;
Every gift it is a bait;
Not a kiss, but poison bears;
And most treason in his tears.

Idle minutes are his reign;
Then, the straggler makes his gain,
By presenting maids with toys,
And would have ye think them joys:
'Tis the ambition of the elf,
To 'haue all childish, as himself.

If by these ye please to know him,
Beauties, be not nice, but show him.

Though ye had a will, to hide him,
Now, we hope, yee'le not abide him.

Since ye hear his falser play;
And that he is VENVS Run-away.

COme my little iocound sports,
Come away; the time now sorts
With your pastime: This same night
Is CVPID'S day. Advance your light.
With your Revel fill the room,
That our triumphs be not dumb.

WEll done Antiques: Now, my Bow,
And my Quiver bear to show;
That these Beauties, here, may know,
By what arms this feat was done,
That hath so much honour won,
Unto VENVS, and her Son.

WHat feat, what honour is it, that you boast,
My little straggler? I had given you lost,
With all your games, here.

Mother?

Yes sir, she.
What might your glorious cause of triumph be?
Ha'you shot Thespian dames?
Heat aged
Or have you made the colder Moon to visit
Once more, a sheepe-cote? Say, what conquest is it
Can make you hope such a renown to win?
Is there a second HERCVLES brought to spin?
Or, for some new disguise, leaves JOVE his thunder?

NOr that, nor those, and yet no less a wonder;
Which to tell, I may not stay:

'Tis, already, at his night,
He can give you farther light.
You, my sports may here abide,
Till I call, to light the Bride.

VENVS, is this a time to quit your carre?
To stoop to earth? to leave, alone, your star,
Without your influence? and,
Which should be crowned with your most cheering sight?
As you were ignorant of what were done
By CUPIDS hand, your all-triumphing Son?
Look on this state; and if you yet not know,
What Crown there shines, whose Sceptre here doth grow;
Think on thy loved
MARO, the golden trumpet of his fame,
Gave him, read thou in this. A Prince, that draws
By'example more, then others do by laws:
That is so just to his great act, and thought,
To do, not what Kings may, but what Kings ought.
Who, out of piety, unto peace, is vowed;
To spare his subjects, yet to quell the proud,
And dares esteem it the first fortitude,
To have his passions, foes at home, subdued.
That was reserved, until the Parcae spun
Their whitest wool; and then, his thread begun.
Which thread, when soul
(To day renowned, and added to my roll)
Opposed; and, by that act, to his name did bring
The honour, to Saver of his King.
This King, whose worth (if gods for virtue love)
Should VENVS with the same affections move,
As her AENEAS; and no less endear
Her love to his safety, then when she did cheer,
( Troy,
Upon the Lybian shore; and brought them joy.

I Love, and know his virtues, and do boast
Mine own renown, when I renown him most.
My CVPID'S absence I forgive, and praise,
That me to such a present grace could raise.
His champion shall, hereafter, be my care;
But speak his bride, and what her virtues are.

SHe is a noble virgin, styled the maid
Of the Red-cliffe, and hath her dowry waigh'd;
No less in virtue, blood, and form, then gold.
Thence, where my Pillar's reared, you may behold,
(Filled with Loves Trophae^s) doth she take her name.
Those Pillars did vxorious
Against this day, and underneath that hill,
He, and his Cyclopes, are forging still
Some strange, and curious piece, t'adorne the night,
And give these graced Nuptials greater light.

WHich I have done; the best of all my life:
And have my end, if it but please my wife,
And she commend it, to the labor'd worth.
Cleave solid Rock, and bring the wonder forth.

IT'is a sphere, I'haue formed round, and even,
In due proportion to the sphere of heaven,
With all his lines, and circles; that compose
The perfect'st form, and aptly do disclose
The heaven of marriage: which I title it.
Within whose Zodiac, I have made to sit,
In order of the signs, twelve sacred powers,
That are praesiding at all nuptial hours:

ANd for this gift, will I to heaven return,
And vow, for ever, that my lamp shall burn
With pure and chasest fire; or
But when it mixes with thy sphere, and mine.

(...) (...) Loves common wealth consists of toys;
His council are those antique boys,
Games, laughter, sports, delights,
That triumph with him on these nights:
To whom we must give way,
For now their reign begins, and lasts till day.
They sweeten HYMENS war,
And, in that jar,
Make all, that married be,
Perfection see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished star.
Why stays the Bride-grome to invade
Her, that would be a matron made?
Good night, whilst yet we may
Good-night, to you a virgin, say:
To morrow, rise the same
Your mother is, and use a nobler name.
Speed well in HYMEN'S war,
That, what you are,
By your perfection, we
And all may see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished star.
To night is VENVS vigil kept.
This night no Bride-grome ever slept;
And if the fair Bride do,
The married say, 'tis his fault, too.
Wake then; and let your lights
Wake too: for they'll tell nothing of your nights:
But, that in HYMENS war,
You perfect are.
And such perfection, we
Do pray, should be.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished star.
That, ere the rosy-fingerd morn
Behold nine moons, there may be borne
A babe, t'vphold the fame
Of RADCLIFFES blood, and RAMSEY'S name:
That may, in his great seed,
Wear the long honours of his fathers deed.
Such fruits of HYMENS war
Most perfect are;
And all perfection, we
Wish, you should see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth, thou wished star.
