SOft, subtle fire, thou soul of art,
Now do thy part
On weaker Nature, that through age is lamed.
Take but thy time, now she is old,
And the Sun her friend grown cold,
She will no more, in strife with thee be named.
Look, but how few confess her now,
In cheek or brow!
From every head, almost, how she is frighted.
The very age abhors her so,
That it learnes to speak and go
As if by art alone it could be righted.

STay, see! our Mercury is coming forth; Art and all the Elements assist. Call
forth our Philosophers. He will be gon, he will evaporate. Dear Mercury!
help. He flies. He is escaped. Precious golden Mercury, be fixed; be not so
volatile. Will none of the Sons of Art appear?


NOw the place and goodness of it protect me. One tender-hearted creature, or
other, save Mercury, and free him. Ne'er an old Gentlewoman in the house, that
has a wrinkle about her, to hide me in? I could run into a Seruing-womans
pocket now; her glove, any little hole. Some merciful vardingale among so
many, be bounteous, and undertake me: I will stand, close, up, any where, to
escape this polt-footed Philosopher, old Smug here of Lemnos, and his smoky
family. Has he given me time to breathe? O the variety of torment, that I
have endured in the reign of the Cyclops, beyond the most exquisite wit of
Tyrannes. The whole household of them are become Alchemists (since their trade
of armour-making failed them) only to keep themselves in fire, for this
winter; for the mischief of Secret, that they know, above the consuming of
coals and drawing of Vskabah. Howsoever they may pretend under the specious
names of Geber, Arnold, Lully, Bombast of Hohenhein, to commit miracles in art
and treason again' nature. And, as if the title of Philosopher, that creature
of glory, were to be fetched out of a furnace, abuse the curious and credulous
Nation of metall-men through the world, and make Mercury their instrument. I am
their Crude, and their Sublimate; their Praecipitate, and their vnctuous; their
male and their female; Sometimes their Hermaphrodite; what they list to stile
me. It is I, that am corroded, and exalted, and sublimed, and reduced, and
fetched over, and filtred, and washed, and wiped; what between their salts and
their sulphures; their oils, and their tartars, their brines and their
vinegers, you might take me out now a soused Mercury, now a salted Mercury, now
a smoked and dri'd Mercury, now a pouldred and pickled Mercury: never Herring,
Oyster, or Coucumer past so many vexations: my whole life with them hath been
an exercise of torture; one, two, three, four and five times an hour ha'they
made me dance the Philosphicall circle, like an Ape through a hoop, or a
dog in a wheel. I am their turne-spit indeed: They eat or smell no
rost-meate but in my name. I am their bill of credit still, that passes for
their victuals and house-roome. It is through me, they ha 'got this corner
of the Court to coozen in, where they shark for a hungry diet below stairs,
and cheat upon your vnder-Officers, promising mountains for their meat, and
all upon Mercuries security. A poor Page of the Larder, they have made
obstinately believe, he shall be Physician for the Household, next Summer: they
will give him a quantity of the quintessence, shall serve him to cure kibes, or
the mormall of the shin, take away the pustles in the nose, and Mercury is
engaged for it. A child of the Scullery steals all their coals for them too,
and he is bid sleep secure, he shall find a corner of the Philosophers stone
for it, under his bolster, one day, and have the Proverb inuerted. Against
which, one day I am to deliver the Buttry in, so many firkins of Aurum
potabile, as it delivers out Bombards of Budge to them, between this and that.
For the Pantry, they are at a certainty with me, and keep a Tally, An Ingot,
a loaf, or a wedge of some five pound weight, which is nothing of nothing, a
trifle. And so the Black guard are pleased with a any lease of life (for some
999.) especially those of the boiling house, they are to have Medeas kettle
hung up, that they may souse into it when they will, and come out renewed like
so many stripped Snakes at their pleasure. But these are petty Engagements, and
(as I said) below the stairs; Marry above here, Perpetuity of beauty, (do
you hear, Ladies) health, Riches, Honours, a matter of Immortality is nothing.
They will calcine you a grave matron (as it might be a mother of the maids)
and spring up a young virgin, out of her ashes, as fresh as a Phoenix: Lay you
an old Courtier of the coals like a sausedge, or a bloat-herring, and after
they have broiled him enough, blow a soul into him with a pair of bellows,
till he start up into his galliard, that was made when Mounsieur was here.
They profess familiarly to melt down all the old sinners of the suburbs once
in half a year, into fresh gamesters again. Get all the cracked
maiden-heads, and cast'hem into new Ingots, half the wenches of the town are
Alchemy. See, they begin to muster again, and draw their forces out against
me! The Genius of the place defend me. You that are both the Sol and Iupiter of
this sphere Mercury, invokes your majesty against the sooty Tribe here; for in
your favour only, I grow recovered and warm.


BEgin your charm, sound musique, circle him in, and take him: If he will not
obey, bind him.


IT is in vain, Vulcan, to pitch your net in the sight of the foul thus: I am
no sleepy Mars, to be caught i'your subtle toys. I know what your aims are,
Sir, to tear the wings from my head, and heals, and lute me up in a glass,
with my own seals, while you might wrest the Caducaeus out of my hand, to the
adultery and spoil of Nature, and make your accesses by it, to her dishonour,
more easy. Sir, would you believe, it should be come to that height of
impudence, in mankind, that such a nest of firewormes, as these are (because
their Patron Mulciber heretofore has made stools stir, and statues dance, a
dog of brass to bark, and (which some will say, was his worst act, a woman
to speak) should therefore with their heats called Balnei, cineris, or
horse-doung, profess to outwork the Sun in virtue, and contend to the great
act of generation, nay, almost creation? it is so, though. For, in yonder
vessels which you see, in their laboratorie, they have enclosed Materials, to
produce men, beyond the deeds of Deucalion, or Prometheus (of which, one, they
say, had the Philosophers stone, and threw it over his shoulder, the other the
fire, and lost it.) And what men are they, they are so busy about, think you?
not common or ordinary creatures, but of rarity and excellence, such as the
times wanted, and the Age had a special deal of need of: such, as there was
a necessity, they should be artificial; for Nature could never have thought
or dreamt of their composition. I can remember some of their titles to you, and
the ingredients do not look for Paracelsus man among them, that he promised
you out of white bread, and dele-wine, for he never came to light. But of
these, let me see; the first that occurres; a master of the Duel, a carrier of
the differencies. To him went spirit of ale, a good quantity, with the
amalgam of sugar and nutmegs, oil of oaths, sulphur of quarrel, strong
waters, valour precipitate, vapor'd over the helm with tobacco, and the rosin
of Mars with a dram of the business, for that's the word of tincture, the
business. Let me alone with the business, I will carry the business. I do
understand the business. I do find an affront in the business. Then another
is a fencer in the Mathematiques, or the townes-cunning-man, a creature of art
too; a supposed secretary to the stars; but, indeed, a kind of lying
Intelligencer from those parts. His materials, if I be not deceived, were juice
of almanacs, extraction of Ephemerids, scales of the Globe, fylings of
figures, dust of the twelve houses, conserve of questions, salt of confederacy,
a pound of adventure, a grain of skill, and a drop of truth. I saw vegitals
too, as well as minerals, put into one glass there, as adders tongue,
title-bane, nitre of clients, tartar of false conveyance, Aurum palpabile, with
a huge deal of talk, to which they added tincture of conscience, with the
faces of honesty; but for what this was, I could not learn; only I have
ouer-heard one of the Artists say, Out of the corruption of a Lawyer was the
best generation of a Broker in suits: whether this were he or no, I know not.


THou art a scorner, Mercury, and out of the pride of thy protection here,
make it thy study, to revile Art, but it will turn to thine own contumely
soon. Call forth the creatures of the first class, and let them move to the
harmony of our heat, till the slanderer have sealed up his own lips, to his
own torment.


LEt them come, let them come, I would not wish a greater punishment to thy
impudence.


ARt thou not ashamed, Vulcan, to offer in defence of thy fire and Art, against
the excellence of the Sun and Nature, creatures more imperfect, then the very
flies and insects, that are her trespasses and scapes? Vanish with thy
insolence, thou and thy Impostors, and all mention of you melt, before the
Majesty of this light, whose Mercury henceforth I profess to be, and never
again the Philosophers. Vanish, I say, that all who have but their senses, may
see and judge the difference between thy ridiculous monsters, and his absolute
features.


HOw young and fresh am I to night,
To see it kept day, by so much light,
And twelve my sons stand in their Makers sight?
Help, wise Prometheus, something must be done,
To show they are the creatures of the Sun,
That each to other
Is a brother,
And Nature here no stepdame, but a mother.

That make perfection up, and may absolve you men.
But show thy winding ways and arts,
Thy risings, and thy timely startes
Of stealing fire, from Ladies eyes and hearts.
Those softer circles are the young mans heaven,
And there more orbs and Planets are then seven,
To know whose motion
Were a Notion
As worthy of youths study, as devotion.

For Nature bids the best, and never bad in vain.

HOw many, amongst these Ladies here,
Wish now they such a mother were!

Not one I fear,
And read it in their laughters.
There's more I guess would wish to be my daughters.

You think they would not be so old, for so much glory.

I think that thought so told
Is no false piece of story.
'Tis yet with them, but Beauties noone,
They would not Grandames be too soon.

Is that your Sexes humour?
'Tis then since Niobe was changed that they have left that tumor.

Move, move again, in forms as heretofore.

'Tis form allures.
Then move, the Ladies here are store.

Nature is motions mother, as she is yours.

The spring, whence order flows, that all directs,
And knits the causes with th'effects.

WHat'ha you done
So soon?
And can you from such Beauty part?
You'll do a wonder more then I.
I woman with her ills did fly,
But you their good, and them deny.

Sure each hath left his heart
In pawn to come again, or else he durst not start.

THey are loath to go
I know,
Or sure they are no sons of mine.
There is no banquet, boys like this,
If you hope better, you will miss,
Stay here, and take each one a kiss.

Which if you can refine,
The taste knows no such cates, nor yet the palate wine.
No cause of tarrying shun,
They are not worth his light, go backward from the Sun.

