EPICOENE, OR The silent Woman. A Comoedie. Acted in the year 1609. By the
Children of her Majesties REVELS.

The Author B. I.

Vt sis tu similis Caeli, Byrrhi{que} latronum,
Non ego sim Capri, no{que} Sulci. Cur metuas me?
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY.

M. D C. XVI.

SIR, MY hope is not so nourished by example, as it will conclude, this dumb
piece should please you, by cause it hath pleased others before: but by trust,
that when you have read it, you will find it worthy to have dis-pleas'd none.
This makes, that I now number you, not only in the Names of favour, but the
Names of justice, to what I write; and do, presently, call you to the exercise
of that noblest, and manlyest virtue: as coveting rather to be freed in my
fame, by the authority of a Judge, then the credit of an Vndertaker. Read
therefore, I pray you, and censure. There is not a line, or syllable in it
changed from the simplicity of the first Copy. And, when you shall consider,
through the certain hatred of some, how much a mans innocence may be
endangered by an vn-certaine accusation; you will, I doubt not, so begin to
hate the iniquity of such natures, as I shall love the contumely done me,
whose end was so honourable, as to be wiped off by your sentence.

Your unprofitable, but true lover, BEN. IONSON.
THE SCENE LONDON.

TRuth says, of old, the art of making plays
Was to content the people; their praise
Was to the Poet money, wine, and baize.
But in this age, a sect of writers are,
That, only, for particular likings care,
And will taste nothing that is populare.
With such we mingle neither brains, nor breasts;
Our wishes, like to those (make public feasts)
Are not to please the cooks tastes, but the guests.
Yet, if those cunning palates hither come,
They shall find guests entreaty, and good room;
And though all relish not, sure, there will be some,
That, when they leave their seats, shall make them say,
Who wrote that piece, could so have wroten a play:
But that, he knew, this was the better way.
For, to present all custard, or all tart,
And have no other meats, to bear a part,
Or to want bread, and salt, were but course art.
The Poet prays you then, with better thought
To sit; and, when his cares are all in brought,
Though there be none far fet, there will deare-bought
Be sit for ladies: some for lords, knights, squires,
Some for your waiting wench, and citie-wires,
Some for your men, and daughters of White-Friars.
Nor is it, only, while you keep your seat
Here, that his feast will last; but you shall eat
A week at ord'naries, on his broken meat:
If his Muse be true,
Who commends her to you.
THe ends of all, who for the Scene do write,
Are, or should be, to profit, and delight.
And still't hath been the praise of all best times,
So persons were not touched, to tax the crimes.
Then, in this play, which we present to night,
And make the object of your ear, and sight,
On forfeit of your selves, think nothing true:
Lest so you make the maker to judge you.
For he knows, Poet never credit gained
By writing truths, but things (like truths) well feigned.
If any, yet, will (with particular slight
Of application) wrest what he doth write;
And that he meant or him, or her, will say:
They make a libel, which he made a play.
HAVE you got the song yet perfect I ga'you, boy?


Yes, sir.


Let me hear it.


You shall, sir, but in faith let no body else.


Why, I pray?


It will get you the dangerous name of a Poet in town, sir, besides me a
perfect deal of ill will at the mansion you wot of, whose lady is the
argument of it: where now I am the welcom'st thing under a man that comes
there.


I think, and above a man too, if the truth were racked out of you.


No faith, I'll confess before, sir. The gentlewomen play with me, and throw
me of the bed; and carry me in to my lady; and she kisses me with her oiled
face; and puts a peruke of my head; and asks mean' I will wear her gown;
and I say, no: and then she hits me a blow of the ear, and calls me innocent,
and lets me go.


No marvel, if the door be kept shut against your master, when the entrance
is so easy to you -- well sir, you shall go there no more, lest I be fain
to seek your voice in my ladies rushes, a fortnight hence. Sing,


Why, here's the man that can melt away his time, and never feels it! what,
between his mistress abroad, and his engle at home, high fare, soft lodging,
fine clothes, and his fiddle; he thinks the hours have no wings, or the day
no post-horse. Well, sir gallant, were you struck with the plague this minute,
or condemned to any capital punishment to morrow, you would begin then to
think, and value every article of your time, esteem it at the true rate, and
give all for it.


Why, what should a man do?


Why, nothing: or that, which when 'tis done, is as idle. Harken after the next
horse-race, Puppy, or Pepper-corne, White-foote, Franklin; swear upon
White-maynes party; spend aloud, that my lords may hear you; visit my ladies
at night, and be able to give them the character of every bowler, or better of
the green. These be the things, wherein your fashionable men exercise
themselves, and I for company.


Nay, if I have thy authority, I'll not leave yet. Come, the other are
considerations, when we come to have gray heads, and weak hams, moist eyes,
and shrunk members. We'll think on them then; then we'll pray, and fast.


I, and destine only that time of age to goodness, which our want of ability
will not let us employ in evil?


Why, then 'tis time enough.


Yes: as if a man should sleep all the term, and think to effect his
business the last day. O, CLERIMONT, this time, because it is an incorporeall
thing, and not subject to sense, we mock our selves the fineliest out of it,
with vanity, and misery indeed: not seeking an end of wretchedness, but
only changing the matter still.


Nay, thou'lt not leave now --


See but our common disease! with what justice can we complain, that great
men will not look upon us, nor be at leisure to give our affairs such
dispatch, as we expect, when we will never do it to our selves: nor hear,
nor regard our selves.


Foh, thou hast read PLVTARCHS moralls, now, or some such tedious fellow; and
it shows so vilely with thee: Before god, 'twill spoil thy wit utterly. Talk
me of pins, and feathers, and ladies, and rushes, and such things: and leave
this Stoicitie alone, till thou make sermons.


Well, sir. If it will not take, I have learned to loose as little of my
kindness, as I can. I'll do good to no man against his will, certainly. When
were you at the college?


What college?


As if you knew not!


No faith, I came but from court, yesterday.


Why, is it not arrived there yet, the news? A new foundation, sir, here in
the town, of ladies, that call themselves the Collegiates, an order between
courtiers, and country-madames, that live from their husbands; and give
entertainment to all the Wits, and Braueries of the time, as they call them:
cry down, or up, what they like, or dislike in a brain, or a fashion, with
most masculine, or rather hermaphroditicall authority: and, every day, gain
to their college some new probationer.


Who is the President?


The grave, and youthful matron, the lady HAVGHTY.


A pox of her autumnall face, her peec'd beauty: there's no man can be
admitted till she be ready, now adays, till she has painted, and perfumed,
and washed, and scoured, but the boy here; and him she wipes her oiled lips
upon, like a sponge. I have made a song, I pray thee hear it, of the subject.

STill to be neat, still to be dressed,
As, you were going to a feast;
Still to be pou'dred, still perfumed:
Lady, it is to be presumed,
Though arts hid causes are not found,
All is not sweet, all is not sound.
Give me a look, give me a face,
That makes simplicity a grace;
Robes loosely flowing, hair as free:
Such sweet neglect more takes me,
Then all th'adulteries of art.
Thy strike mine eyes, but not my heart.

And I am, clearly, of the other side: I love a good dressing, before any
beauty of the world. O, a woman is, then, like a delicate garden; nor, is
there one kind of it: she may vary, every hour; take often counsel of her
glass, and choose the best. If she have good ears, show them; good hair,
lay it out; good legs, wear short clothes; a good hand, discover it often;
practise any art, to mend breath, cleanse teeth, repair eye-browes, paint, and
profess it.


How? publicly?


The doing of it, not the manner: that must be private. Many things, that
seem foul, in the doing, do please, done. A lady should, indeed, study her
face, when we think she sleeps: nor, when the doors are shut, should men
be inquiring, all is sacred within, then. Is it for us to see their perrukes
put on, their false teeth, their complexion, their eye-browes, their nailes?
you see guilders will not work, but enclosed. They must not discover, how
little serves, with the help of art, to adorn a great deal. How long did the
canvas hang before Ald-gate? were the people suffered to see the cities Love,
and Charity, while they were rude stone, before they were painted, and
burnished? No. No more should servants approach their mistresses, but when they
are complete, and finished.


Well said, my TRVE-WIT.


And a wise lady will keep a guard always upon the place, that she may do
things securely. I once followed a rude fellow into a chamber, where the poor
madame, for haste, and troubled, snatched at her peruke, to cover her
baldness: and put it on, the wrong way.


O prodigy!


And the vn-conscionable knave held her in complement an hour, with that
reuerst face, when I still looked when she should talk from the the other side.


Why, thou should have releeu'd her.


No faith, I let her alone, as we'll let this argument, if you please, and
pass to another. When saw you DAVPHINE EVGENIE?


Not these ^ee days. Shall we go to him this morning? he is very
melancholic, I hear.


Sick of the uncle? is he? I met that stiff piece of formality, his uncle,
yesterday, with a huge turban of night-caps on his head, buckled over his
cares.


O, that's his custom when he walks abroad. He can endure no noise, man.


So I have heard. But is the disease so ridiculous in him, as it is made? they
say, he has been upon diverse treaties with the Fish-wiues, and Orenge-women;
and articles propounded between them: mary, the Chimney-sweepers will not be
drawn in.


No, nor the Broome-men: they stand out stiffly. He cannot endure a
Costard-monger, he swoons if he hear one.


Me thinks, a Smith should be ominous.


Or any Hamer-man. A Brasier is not suffered to dwell in the parish, nor an
Armourer. He would have hanged a Pewterers apprentice once upon a
shroue-tuesdaies riot, for being of that trade, when the rest were quit.


A Trumpet should fright him terribly, or the Hau'-boyes?


Out of his senses. The Weights of the city have a pension of him, not to come
near that ward. This youth practised on him, one night, like the Bell-man; and
never left till he had brought him down to the door, with a long-sword: and
there left him flourishing with the air.


Why, sir! he hath chosen a street to lie in, so narrow at both ends, that it
will receive no coaches, nor carts, nor any of these common noises: and
therefore, we that love him, devise to bring him in such as we may, now and
then, for his exercise, to breath him. He would grow resty else in his ease.
His virtue would rust without action. I entreated a Beare-ward, one day, to
come down with the dogs of some four parishes that way, and I thank him, he
did; cried his games under master MOROSE'S window: till he was sent crying
away, with his head made a most bleeding spectacle to the multitude. And,
another time, a Fencer, marching to his prize, had his drum most tragically run
through, for taking that street in his way, at my request.


A good wag. How does he for the bells?


O, in the Queenes time, he was wont to go out of town every saturday at ten
a clock, or on holy-day-eues. But now, by reason of the sickness, the
perpetuity of ringing has made him devise a room, with double walls, and
treble feelings; the windores close shut, and calk'd: and there he lives by
candle-light. He turned away a man, last week, for having a pair of new
shoes that creak'd. And this fellow waits on him, now, in tennis-court socks,
or slippers sol'd with wool: and they talk each to other, in a trunk. See,
who comes here.


HOw now! what ail you sirs? dumb?


Struck into stone, almost, I am here, with tales of thine uncle! There was
never such a prodigy heard of.


I would you would once loose this subject, my masters, for my sake. They are
such as you are, that have brought me into that predicament, I am, with him.


How is that?


Mary, that he will dis-inherit me, no more. He thinks, I, and my company are
authors of all the ridiculous acts, and moniments are told of him.


S'lid, I would be the author of more, to vex him, that purpose, deserves it:
it gives thee law of plaguing him. I'll tell thee what I would do. I would
make a false almanac; get it printed: and then have him drawn out on a
coronation day to the tower-wharfe, and kill him with the noise of the
ordinance. Dis-inherit thee! he cannot, man. Art not thou next of blood, and
his sisters son?


I, but he will thrust me out of it, he vows, and marry.


How! that's a more portent. Can he endure no noise, and will venture on a wife?


Yes* why, thou art a stranger, it seems, to his best trick, yet. He has
employed a fellow this half year, all over England, to harken him out a dumb
woman; be she of any form, or any quality, so she be able to bear
children: her silence is dowry enough, he says.


But, I trust to god, he has found none.


No, but he has heard of one that's lodged in the next street to him, who is
exceedingly soft-spoken; thrifty of her speech; that spends but six words a
day. And her he's about now, and shall have her.


Is't possible! who is his agent in the business?


Mary, a Barber, one CVT-BERD: an honest fellow, one that tells DAVPHINE all
here.


Why, you oppress me with wonder! A woman, and a barber, and love no noise!


Yes faith. The fellow trims him silently, and has not the knack with his
shears, or his fingers: and that continence in a barber he thinks so eminent
a virtue, as it has made him chief of his counsel.


Is the barber to be seen? or the wench?


Yes, that they are.


I pray thee, DAVPHINE, let's go thither.


I have some business now: I cannot i'faith.


You shall have no business shall make you neglect this, sir, we'll make her
talk, believe it; or if she will not, we can give out, at least so much as
shall interrupt the treaty: we will break it. Thou art bound in conscience,
when he suspects thee without cause, to torment him.


Not I, by any means. I'll give no suffrage to it. He shall never have that plea
against me, that I opposed the least phant'sie of his. Let it lie upon my
stars to be guilty, I'll be innocent.


Yes, and be poor, and beg; do, innocent: when some groom of his has got him
an heir, or this barber, if he himself cannot. Innocent! I pray thee, NED,
where lies she? let him be innocent, still.


Why, right over against the barbers; in the house, where sir IOHN DAW lies.


You do not mean to confound me!


Why?


Does he, that would marry her, know so much?


I cannot tell.


'Twere enough of imputation to her, with him.


Why?


The only talking sir in the town! JACK DAW! And he teach her not to speak
-- God b'w'you. I have some business too.


Will you not go thither then?


Not with the danger to meet DAW, for mine ears.


Why? I thought you two had been upon very good terms.


Yes, of keeping distance.


They say he is a very good scholar.


I, and he says it first. A pox on him, a fellow that pretends only to
learning, buys titles, and nothing else of books in him.


The world reports him to be very learned.


I am sorry, the world should so conspire to belie him.


Good faith, I have heard very good things come from him.


You may. There's none so desperately ignorant to deny that: would they were
his own. God b'w' you, gentlemen.


This is very abrupt!


COme, you are a strange open man, to tell every thing, thus.


Why, believe it DAVPHINE, TRVE-WIT'S a very honest fellow.


I think no other: but this frank nature of his is not for secrets.


Nay, then, you are mistaken DAVPHINE: I know where he has been well trusted,
and discharged the trust very truly, and heartily.


I contend not, NED, but, with the fewer a business is carried, it is ever the
safer. Now we are alone, if you'll go thither, I am for you.


When were you there?


Last night: and such a decameron of sport fallen out! BOCCACE never thought of
the like. DAW does nothing but court her; and the wrong way. He would lie with
her, and praises her modesty; desires that she would talk, and be free, and
commends her silence in verses: which he reads, and swears, are the best
that ever man made. Then rails at his fortunes, stamps, and mutines, why he is
not made a counsellor, and called to affairs of state.


I pray thee let's go. I would fain partake this. Some water, Boy.


We are invited to dinner together, he and I, by one that came thither to him,
sir LA-FOOLE.


O, that's a precious manikin!


Do you know him?


I, and he will know you too, if ere he saw you but once, though you should
meet him at church in the midst of prayers. He is one of the Braueries, though
he be none of the Wits. He will salute a Judge upon the bench, and a Bishop in
the pulpit, a Lawyer when he is pleading at the bar, and a Lady when she is
dancing in a masque, and put her out. He does give plays, and suppers, and
invites his guests to them, aloud, out of his window, as they ride by in
coaches. He has a lodging in the Strand for the purpose. Or to watch when
ladies are gone to the China houses, or the Exchange, that he may meet them by
chance, and give them presents, some two or three hundred pounds-worth of
toys, to be laughed at. He is never without a spare banquet, or sweet-meats in
his chamber, for their women to alight at, and come up to, for a bait.


Excellent! He was a fine youth last night, but now he is much siner! what is
his christen-name? I have forgot.


Sir AMOROUS LA-FOOLE.


The gentleman is here below, that owns that name.


Hart, he's come, to inuit me to dinner, I hold my life.


Like enough: pray thee, let's have him up.


Boy, marshall him.


With a truncheon, sir?


Away, I beseech you. I'll make him tell us his pedigree, now; and what meat he
has to dinner; and, who are his guests; and, the whole course of his fortunes:
with a breath.


S'Aue, dear sir DAVPHINE, honoured master CLERIMONT.


Sir AMOROUS! you have very much honested my lodging, with your presence.


Good faith, it is a fine lodging! almost, as delicate a lodging, as mine.


Not so, sir.


Excuse me, sir, if it were in the Strand, I assure you. I am come, master
CLERIMONT, to entreat you wait upon two or three ladies, to dinner, to day.


How, sir! wait upon them? did you ever see me carry dishes?


No, sir, dispense with me; I meant, to bear them company.


O, that I will, sir. The doubtfulness of your phrase, believe it, sir, would
breed you a quarrel, once an hour, with the terrible boys, if you should but
keep them fellowship a day.


It should be extremely against my will, sir, if I contested with any man.


I believe it, sir; where hold you your feast?


At TOM OTTERS, sir.


TOM OTTER? what's he?


Captain OTTER, sir; he is a kind of gamester: but he has had command, both by
sea, and by land.


O, then he is animal amphibium?


I, sir: his wife was the rich China-woman, that the courtiers visited so
often, that gave the rare entertainment. She commands all at home.


Then, she is Captain OTTER?


You say very well, sir: she is my kins-woman, a LA-FOOLE by the mother side,
and will inuit, any great ladies, for my sake.


Not of the LA-FOOLES of Essex?


No, sir, the LA-FOOLES of London.


Now, h'is in.


They all come out of our house, the LA-FOOLES of the north, the LA-FOOLES of
the west, the LA-FOOLES of the east, and south -- we are as ancient a family,
as any is in Europe -- but I my self am descended lineally of the french
LA-FOOLES -- and, we do bear for our coat Yellow, or Or, checkered Azure,
and Gules, and some three or four colours more, which is a very noted coat,
and has, some-times, been solemnly worn by diverse nobility of our house --
but let that go, antiquity is not respected now -- I had a brace of fat Does
sent me, gentlemen, half a dozen of phesants, a dozen or two of godwits, and
some other foul, which I would have eaten, while they are good, and in good
company -- there will be a great lady, or two, my lady HAVGHTY, my lady
CENTAVRE, mistress DOL MAVIS -- and they come a'purpose, to see the silent
gentlewoman, mistress EPICOENE, that honest sir IOHN DAW has promised to bring
thither -- and then, mistress TRVSTY, my ladies woman, will be there too, and
this honourable Knight, sir DAVPHINE, with your self, master CLERIMONT -- and
we'll be very merry, and have fiddlers, and dance -- I have been a mad wag,
in my time, and have spent some crowns since I was a page in court, to my lord
LOFTY, and after, my ladies gentleman-vsher, who got me knighted in Ireland,
since it pleased my elder brother to die -- I had as fair a gold jerkin on
that day, as any was worn in the Iland-voyage, or at Caliz, none dispraised,
and I came over in it hither, showed my self to my friends, in court, and
after went down to my tenants, in the country, and suruai'd my lands, let new
leases, took their money, spent it in the eye of the land here, upon ladies --
and now I can take up at my pleasure.


Can you take up ladies, sir?


O, let him breath, he has not recovered.


Would I were your half, in that commodity --


No, sir, excuse me: I meant money, which can take up any thing. I have
another guest, or two, to inuit, and say as much to, gentlemen. I'll take my
leave abruptly, in hope you will not fail -- Your servant.


We will not fail you, sir precious LA-FOOLE; but she shall, that your
ladies come to see: if I have credit, before sir DAW.


Did you ever hear such a wind-fucker, as this?


Or, such a rooke, as the other! that will betray his mistress, to be seen.
Come, 'tis time, we prevented it.


Go.


CAnnot I, yet, find out a more compendious method, then by this trunk, to
save my servants the labour of speech, and mine ears, the discord of sounds?
Let me see: all discourses, but mine own, afflict me, they seem harsh,
impertinent, and irksome. Is it not possible, that thou should answer me,
by signs, and, I apprehend thee, fellow? speak not, though I question you.
You have taken the ring, off from the street door, Italian, and Spaniard, are
wise in these! and it is a frugal, and comely gravity. How long will it be,
ere CVTBERD come? stay, if an hour, hold up your whole hand; if half an
hour, two singers; if a quarter, one; ( --) good: half a quarter? 'tis well.
And have you given him a key, to come in without knocking? ( --) good. And, is
the lock oild, and the hinges, to day? ( --) good. And the quilting of the
stairs no where worn out, and bare? ( --) very good. I see, by much doctrine,
and impulsion, it may be effected: stand by. The Turk, in this divine
discipline, is admirable, exceeding all the potentates of the earth; still
waited on by mutes; and all his commands so executed; yea, even in the war
(as I have heard) and in his marches, most of his charges, and directions,
given by signs, and with silence: an exquisite art! and I am heartily ashamed,
and angry often-times, that the Princes of Christendom, should suffer a
Barbarian, to transcend them in so high a point of felicity. I will practise
it,


It is a post from the court --


Out rogue, and must thou blow thy horne, too?


Alas, it is a post from the court, sir, that says, he must speak with you,
pain of death --


Pain of thy life, be silent.


BY your leave, sir (I am a stranger here) is your name, master MOROSE? is your
name, master MOROSE? fishes! Pythagoreans all! this is strange! What say you,
sir, nothing? Has HARPOCRATES been here, with his club, among you? well sir, I
will believe you to be the man, at this time: I will venture upon you, sir.
Your friends at court commend them to you, sir --


O men! O manners! was there ever such an impudence?)


And are extremely sollicitous for you, sir.


Whose knave are you!


Mine own knave, and your compere, sir.


Fetch me my sword --


You shall taste the one half of my dagger, if you do (groom) and you, the
other, if you stir, sir: be patient, I charge you, in the kings name, and
hear me without insurrection. They say, you are to marry? to marry! do you
mark, sir?


How then, rude companion!


Mary, your friends do wonder, sir, the Thames being so near, wherein you may
drown so handsomely; or London-bridge, at a low fall, with a fine leap, to
hurry you down the stream; or, such a delicate steeple, in the town, as Bow,
to vault from; or, a braver height, as Paul's, or, if you affected to do it
nearer home, and a shorter way, an excellent garret window, into the street;
or, a beam, in the said garret, with this halter; which they have sent, and
desire, that you would sooner commit your grave head to this knot, then to the
wed-lock noose; or, take a little sublimate, and go out of the world, like a
rat; or a fly (as one said) with a straw in your arse: any way, rather, then
to follow this goblin matrimony. Alas, sir, do you ever think to find a
chaste wife, in these times? now? when there are so many masques, plays,
puritan preachings, mad-folkes, and other strange sights to be seen daily,
private and public? if you had lived in king ETHELDRED'S time, sir, or EDWARD
the Confessors, you might, perhaps, have found in some cold countrey-hamlet,
then, a dull frosty wench, would have been contented with one man: now, they
will as soon be pleased with one leg, or one eye. I'll tell you, sir, the
monstrous hazards you shall run with a wife.


Good sir! have I ever cozened any friends of yours of their land? bought their
possessions? taken forfeit of their mortgage? begged a reversion from them?
bastarded their issue? what have I done, that may deserve this?


Nothing, sir, that I know, but your itch of marriage.


Why? if I had made an assassinate upon your father; vitiated your mother;
ravished your sisters --


I would kill you, sir, I would kill you, if you had.


Why? you do more in this, sir: It were a vengeance centuple, for all
facinorous acts, that could be named, to do that you do --


Alas, sir, I am but a messenger: I but tell you, what you must hear. It
seems, your friends are careful after your souls health, sir, and would have
you know the danger (but you may do your pleasure, for all them, I persuade
not, sir) If, after you are married, your wife do run away with a vaulter, or
the Frenchman that walks upon ropes, or him that dances the jig, or a sencer
for his skill at his weapon, why it is not their fault; they have discharged
their consciences: when you know what may happen. Nay, suffer valiantly, sir,
for I must tell you, all the perils that you are obnoxious too. If she be
fair, young, and vegetous, no sweet meats ever drew more flies; all the yellow
doublets, and great roses in the town will be there. If foul, and crooked,
shee'll be with them, and buy those doublets and roses, sir. If rich, and that
you marry her dowry, not her; shee'll reign in your house, as imperious as a
widow. If noble, all her kindred will be your tyrannes. If fruitful, as proud
as May, and humorous as April; she must have her doctors, her midwives, her
nurses, her longings every hour: though it be for the dearest morsel of man.
If learned, there was never such a parrot; all your patrimony will be too
little for the guests, that must be invited, to hear her speak Latin and
Greek: and you must lie with her in those languages too, if you will please
her. If precise, you must feast all the silenced brethren, once in three days;
salute the sisters; entertain the whole family, or wood of them; and hear
long-winded exercises, singings, and catechisings, which you are not given to,
and yet must give for: to please the zealous matron your wife, who, for the
holy cause, will cousin you, over and above. You begin to sweat, sir? but this
is not half, i'faith: you may do your pleasure notwithstanding, as I said
before, I come not to persuade you. Upon my faith,


O, what is my sin! what is my sin?


Then, if you love your wife, or rather, dote on her, sir: O, how shee'll
torture you! and take pleasure i'your torments! you shall lye with her but when
she lists; she will not hurt her beauty, her complexion; or it must be for that
jewel, or that pearl, when she does; every half hours pleasure must be
bought anew: and with the same pain, and charge, you wooed her at first. Then,
you must keep what servants she please; what company she will; that friend
must not visit you without her licence; and him she loves most she will seem
to hate eagerliest, to decline your jealousy; or, feign to be jealous of you
first; and for that cause go live with her she-friend, or cousin at the
college, that can instruct her in all the mysteries, of writing letters,
corrupting servants, taming spies; where she must have that rich goune for
such a great day; a new one for the next; a richer for the third; be served in
silver; have the chamber sill'd with a succession of grooms, foot-men, ushers,
and other messengers; besides embroyderers, jewellers, tyre-women, sempsters,
fether-men, perfumers; while she feels not how the land drops away; nor the
acres melt; nor forsees the change, when the mercer has your woods for her
veluets; never weighs what her pride costs, sir: so she may kiss a page, or
a smooth chin, that has the despair of a beard; be a states-woman, know all
the news, what was done at Salisbury, what at the Bath, what at court, what in
progress; or, so she may censure poets, and authors, and stiles, and compare
them, DANIEL with SPENSER, IONSON with the the other youth, and so forth; or, be
thought cunning in controversies, or the very knots of divinity; and have,
often in her mouth, the state of the question: and then skip to the
Mathematiques, and demonstration and answer, in religion to one; in state, to
another, in baud'ry to a third.


O, O!


All this is very true, sir. And then her going in disguise to that conjurer,
and this cunning woman: where the first question is, how soon you shall die?
next, if her present servant love her? next that, if she shall have a new
servant? and how many? which of her family would make the best baud, male, or
female? what precedence she shall have by her next match? and sets down the
answers, and believes them above the scriptures. Nay, perhaps she'll study the
art.


Gentle sir, have you done? have you had your pleasure of me? I'll think of
these things.


Yes sir: and then comes reeking home of vapor and sweat, with going afoot, and
lies in, a month, of a new face, all oil, and birdlime; and rises in asses
milk, and is cleansed with a new fucus: god b'w' you, sir. One thing more
(which I had almost forgot.) This too, with whom you are to marry, may have
made a conuayance of her virginity before hand, as your wise widows do of
their states, before they marry, in trust to some friend, sir: who can tell? or
if she have not done it yet, she may do, upon the wedding day, or the night
before, and antidate you cuckold. The like has been heard of, in nature. 'Tis
no deuis'd impossible thing, sir. God b'w' you: I'll be bold to leave this rope
with you, sir, for a remembrance. Farewell MVTE.


Come, have me to my chamber: but first shut the door. O, shut the door, shut
the door: Is he come again?


'Tis I, sir, your barber.


O CVTBERD, CVTBERD, CVTBERD! here has bin a cut-throat with me: help me in
to my bed, and give me physic with thy counsel.


NAy, and she will, let her refuse, at her own charges: 'tis nothing to me,
gentlemen. But she will not be invited to the like feasts, or guests, every
day.


O, by no means, she may not refuse -- to stay at home, if you love your
reputation: 'Slight, you are invited thither of purpose to be seen, and
laughed at by the lady of the college, and her shadows. This trumpeter hath
proclaimed you.


You shall not go; let him be laughed at in your stead, for not bringing you:
and put him to his extemporal faculty of fooling, and talking loud to satisfy
the company.


He will suspect us, talk aloud. 'Pray' mistress EPICOENE, let's see your
verses; we have sir IOHN DAW'S leave: do not conceal your servants merit, and
your own glories.


They'll prove my servants glories, if you have his leave so soon.


His vain glories, lady!


Show them, show them, mistress, I dare own them.


Judge you, what glories?


Nay, I'll read them my self, too: an author must recite his own works. It is
a madrigal of modesty. Modest, and fair, for fair and good are near
Neighbours, how ere. --



Very good.


I, Is't not?


No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.

Excellent!

That again, I pray'sir IOHN.

It has some thing in it like rare wit, and sense.

Peace.

No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.
Then, when I praise sweet modesty, I praise
Bright beauties rays:
And having praised both beauty' and modestee,
I have praised thee.

Admirable!

How it chimes, and cries tinke in the close, divinely!

I, 'tis SENECA.

No, I think 'tis PLVTARCH.

The dor on PLVTARCH, and SENECA, I hate it: they are mine own imaginations,
by that light. I wonder those fellows have such credit with gentlemen.


They are very grave authors.


Grave asses! mere Essaists! a few loose sentences, and that's all. A man
would talk so, his whole age, I do utter as good things every hour, if they
were collected, and observed, as either of'hem.


Indeed! sir IOHN?


He must needs, living among the Wits, and Braueries too.


I, and being president of'hem, as he is.


There is ARISTOTLE, a mere common place-fellow; PLATO, a discourser;
THVCIDIDES, and LIVIE, tedious and dry; TACITVS, an entire knot: sometimes
worth the untying, very seldom.


What do you think of the Poets, sir IOHN?


Not worthy to be named for authors. HOMER, an old tedious prolix ass, talks
of curriers, and chines of beef. VIRGIL, of dunging of land, and bees. HORACE,
of I know not what.


I think so.


And so PINDARVS, LYCOPHRON, ANACREON, CATVLLVS, SENECA the tragoedian, LVCAN,
PROPERTIVS, TIBVLLVS, MARTIAL, IVVENAL, AVSONIVS, STATIVS, POLITICIAN, VALERIVS
FLACCVS, and the rest --


What a sack full of their names he has got!


And how he pores them out! POLITICIAN, with VALERIVS FLACCVS!


Was not the character right, of him?


As could be made, in faith.


And PERSIVS, a crabbed cockescombe, not to be endured.


Why? whom do you account for authors, sir IOHN DAW?


Syntagma Iuris ciuilis, Corpus Iuris ciuilis, Corpus Iuris canonice, the King
of Spaines bible.


Is the King of Spaines bible an author?


Yes, and Syntagma.


What was that Syntagma, sir?


A civil lawer, a Spaniard.


Sure, Corpus was a Dutch-man.


I, both the Corpusses, I knew them: they were very corpulent authors.


And, then there's VATABLVS, POMPONATIVS, SYMANCHA, the other are not to be
received, within the thought of a scholar.


Fore god, you have a simple learned servant, lady, in titles.


I wonder that he is not called to the helm, and made a councellor!


He is one extraordinary.


Nay, but in ordinary! to say truth, the state wants such.


Why, that will follow.


I muse, a mistress can be so silent to the dotes of such a servant.


'Tis her virtue, sir. I have written somewhat of her silence too.


In verse, sir IOHN?


What else?


Why? how can you justify your own being of a Poet, that so slight all the
old Poets?


Why? every man, that writes in verse, is not a Poet; you have of the Wits,
that write verses, and yet are no Poets: they are Poets that live by it, the
poor fellows that live by it.


Why? would not you live by your verses, sir IOHN.


No, 'twere pity he should. A knight live by his verses? he did not make them
to that end, I hope.


And yet the noble SIDNEY lives by his, and the noble family not ashamed.


I, he professed himself; but sir IOHN DAW has more caution: hee'll not hinder
his own rising in the state so much! do you think he will? Your verses, good
sir IOHN, and no poems.


Silence in woman, is like speech in man,
Deny it who can.

Not I, believe it: your reason, sir.

Nor, i'st a tale,
That female vice should be a virtue male,
Or masculine vice, a female virtue be:
You shall it see
Proved with increase,
I know to speak, and she to hold her peace.
Do you conceive me, gentlemen?


No faith, how mean you with increase, sir IOHN?

Why, with increase is, when I court her for the common cause of mankind; and
she says nothiug, but consentire videtur: and in time is grauida.


Then, this is a ballad of procreation?


A madrigal of proceation, you mistake.


'Pray give me my verses again, servant.


If you you'll ask them aloud, you shall.


See, here's TRVE-WIT again!


WHere hast thou been, in the name of madness! thus accoutred with thy horne?


Where the sound of it might have pierced your senses, with gladness, had you
been in eare-reach of it. DAVPHINE, fall down and worship me: I have forbid
the banes, lad. I have been with thy virtuous uncle, and have broke the match.


You haven't, I hope.


Yes faith; and thou should hope otherwise, I should repent me: this horne
got me entrance, kiss it. I had no other way to get in, but by faining to be a
post; but when I got in once, I proved none, but rather the contrary, turned
him into a post, or a stone, or what is stiffer, with thundering into him the
incommodities of a wife, and the miseries of marriage. If ever GORGON were
seen in the shape of a woman, he hath seen her in my description. I hane put
him off o'that sent, for ever. Wby do you not applaud, and adore me, sirs? why
stand you mute? Are you stupid? you are not worthy of the benefit.


Did not I tell you? mischief! --


I would you had placed this benefit somewhere else.


Why so?


Slight, you have done the most inconsiderate, rash, weak thing, that ever man
did to his friend.


Friend! if the most malicious enemy I have, had studied to inflict an injury
upon me, it could not be a greater.


Wherein? for gods-sake! Gent: come to your selves again.


But I presaged thus much before, to you.


Would my lips had been soldred, when I spak on it. Slight, what moved you to
be thus impertinent?


My masters, do not put on this strange face to pay my courtesy: off with
this visor. Have good turns done you, and thank them this way?


Fore heaven, you have undone me. That, which I have plotted for, and been
maturing now these four months, you have blasted in a minute: now I am lost,
I may speak. This gentlewoman was lodged here by me o'purpose, and, to be put
upon my uncle, hath professed this obstinate silence for my sake, being my entire
friend; and one, that for the requital of such a fortune, as to marry him,
would have made me very ample conditions: where now, all my hopes are utterly
miscaried by this unlucky accident.


Thus 'tis, when a man will be ignorantly officious; do services, and not know
his why: I wonder what courteous itch possessed you! you never did absurder part
in your life, nor a greater trespass to friendship, to humanity.


Faith, you may forgive it, best: 'twas your cause principally.


I know it, would it had not.


How now CVTBERD? what news?


The best, the happiest that ever was, sir. There has been a mad gentleman
with your uncle, this morning (I think this be the gentleman) that has almost
talked him out of his wits, with threatening him from marriage --


On, I pray thee.


And your uncle, sir, he thinks 'twas done by your procurement; therefore he
will see the party, you wot of, presently: and if he like her, he says, and
that she be so inclining to dombe, as I have told him, he swears he will
marry her, to day, instantly, and not defer it a minute longer.


Excellent! beyond our expectation!


Beyond your expectation? by this light, I knew it would be thus.


Nay, sweet TRVE-WIT, forgive me.


No, I was ignorantly officious, impertinent: this was the absurd, weak part.


Wilt thou ascribe that to merit, now, was mere fortune?


Fortune? mere providence. Fortune had not a finger in it. I saw it must
necessarily in nature fall out so: my genius is never false to me in these
things. Show me, how it could be otherwise.


Nay, gentlemen, contend not, tis well now.


Alas, I let him go on with inconsiderate, and rash, and what he pleased.


Away thou strange iustifier of thy self, to be wiser then thou were, by the
event.


Event! By this light, thou shalt never persuade me, but I foresaw it, as well
as the stars themselves.


Nay, gentlemen, 'tis well now: do you two entertain sir IOHN DAW, with
discourse, while I send her away with instructions.


I'll be acquainted with her, first, by your favour.


Master TRVE-WIT, lady, a friend of ours.


I am sorry, I have not known you sooner, lady, to celebrate this rare virtue
of your silence.


Faith, and you had come sooner, you should ha'seene, and heard her well
celebrated in sir IOHN DAW'S madrigalls.


JACK DAW, god save you, when saw you LA-FOOLE?


Not since last night, master TRVE-WIT.


That's miracle! I thought you two had been inseparable.


He's gone to inuit his guests.


Gods so! tis true! what a false memory have I towards that man! I am one: I
met him even now, upon that he calls his delicate fine black horse, rid into a
foam, with posting from place to place, and person to person, to give them
the cue --


Lest they should forget?


Yes: there was never poor captain took more pains at a muster to show men,
then he, at this meal, to show friends.


It is his quarter-feast, sir.


What! do you say so, sir IOHN?


Nay, JACK DAW will not be out, at the best friends he has, to the talent of
his wit: where's his mistress, to hear and applaud him? is she gone!


Is mistress EPICOENE gone?


Gone before, with sir DAVPHINE, I warrant, to the place.


Gone before! that were a manifest injury; a disgrace and a half: to refuse
him at such a festival time, as this, being a Bravery, and a Wit too.


Tut, hee'll swallow it like cream: he's better read in jure ciuili, then to
esteem any thing a disgrace is offered him from a mistress.


Nay, let her even go; she shall sit alone, and be dumb in her chamber, a
week together, for IOHN DAW, I warrant her: does she refuse me?


No, sir, do not take it so to heart: she does not refuse you, but a little
neglect you. Good faith, TRVE-WIT, you were too blame to put it into his head,
that she does refuse him.


She does refuse him, sir, palpably: how ever you mince it. And I were as he,
I would swear to speak ne'er a word to her, to day, for it.


By this light, no more I will not.


Nor to any body else, sir.


Nay, I will not say so, gentlemen.


It had been an excellent happy condition for the company, if you could have
drawn him to it.


I'll be very melancholic, i'faith.


As a dog, if I were as you, sir IOHN.


Or a snail, or a hog-louse: I would roll my self up for this day, in truth,
they should not unwind me.


By this pick-tooth, so I will.


'Tis well done: he begins already to be angry with his teeth.


Will you go, gentlemen?


Nay, you must walk alone, if you be right melancholic, sir IOHN.


Yes sir, we'll dog you, we'll follow you a far off.


Was there ever such a two yards of knighthood, measured out by Time, to be
sold to laughter?


A mere talking mole! hang him: no mushrome was ever so fresh. A fellow so
utterly nothing, as he knows not what he would be.


Let's follow him: but first, let's go to DAVPHINE, he's hovering about the
house, to hear what news.


Content.


WElcome CVTBERD; draw near with you fair chardge: and, in her ear, softly
entreat her to vnmasque ( --) So. Is the door shut? ( --) enough. Now, CVTBERD,
with the same discipline I use to my family, I will question you. As I
conceive, CVTBERD, this gentlewoman is she, you have provided, and brought, in
hope she will sit me in the place and person of a wife? Answer me not, but
with your leg, unless it be otherwise: ( --) very well done CVTBERD. I
conceive, besides, CVTBERD, you have been pre-acquainted with her birth,
education, and qualities, or else you would not prefer her to my acceptance,
in the weighty consequence of marriage. ( --) this I conceive, CVTBERD. Answer
me not but with your leg, unless it be otherwise. ( --) Very well done
CVTBERD. Give aside now a little, and leave me to examine her condition, and
aptitude to my affection. She is exceeding fair, and of a special good
favour; a sweet composition, or harmony of limbs: her temper of beauty has the
true height of my blood. The knave hath exceedingly well fitted me without: I
will now try her within. Come near, fair gentlewoman: let not my behaviour
seem rude, though unto you, lady, you may speak, though CVTBERD, and my man,
might not: for, of all sounds, only, the sweet voice of a fair lady has the
just length of mine ears. I beseech you, say lady, out of the first fire of
meeting eyes, (they say) love is stricken: do you feel any such motion,
suddenly shot into you,


Judge you, forsooth.


What say you, lady? speak out, I beseech you.


Judge you, forsooth.


O'my judgment, a divine softness! but can you naturally, lady, as I enjoin
these by doctrine industry, refer your self to the search of my judgment,
and (not taking pleasure in your tougue, which is a woman's chiefest pleasure)
think it plausible, to answer me by silent gestures, so long as my speeches
jump right, with what you conceive? ( --) Excellent! divine! if it were
possible she should hold out thus! Peace CVTBRD, thou art made for ever, as
thou hast made me, if this felicity have lasting: but I will try her
further. Dear lady, I am courtly, I tell you, and I must have mine ears
banqueted with pleasant, and witty conferences, pretty girds, scoffs, and
dalliance in her, that I mean to choose for my bedpheere. The ladies in court,
think it a most desperate impair to their quickenesse of wit, and good
carriage, if they cannot give occasion for a man to court them; and, when an
amorous discourse is set on foot, minister as good matter to continue it, as
himself: and do you alone so much differ from all them, that, what they (with
so much circumstance) affect, and toil for, to seem learned, to seem
judicious, to seem sharpe, and conceited, you can bury in your self, with
silence? and rather trust your graces to the fair conscience of virtue, then
to the worlds, or your own proclamation?


I should be sorry else.


What say you, lady? good lady, speak out.


I should be sorry, else


That sorrow doth fill me with gladness! O MOROSE! thou art happy above
mankind! pray that thou may contain thy self. I will only put her to it
once more, and it shall be with the utmost touch, and test of their sex. But
hear me, fair lady, I do also love to see her, whom I shall choose for my
heicfar, to be the first and principal in all fashions; praecede all the dames
at court, by a fortnight; have her counsel of taylors, linneners, lace-women,
embroyderers, and sit with them sometimes twice a day, upon French
intelligences; and then come forth, varied like Nature, or oftner then she,
and better, by the help of Art, her emulous servant. This do I affect. And
how will you be able, lady, with this frugality of speech, to give the
manifold (but necessary) instructions, for that bodies, these sleeves, those
skirts, this cut, that stitch, this embroyderie, that lace, this wire, those
knots, that ruff, those roses, this girdle, that fan, the the other scarf,
these gloves? ha! what say you, lady.


I'll leave it to you, sir.


How lady? pray you, rise a note.


I leave it to wisdom, and you sir.


Admirable creature! I will trouble you no more: I will not sin against so
sweet a simplicity. Let me now be bold to print on those divine lips, the seal
of being mine. CVTBERD, I give thee the lease of thy house free: thank me not,
but with thy leg ( --) I know what thou would say, she's poor, and her
friends deceased; she has brought a wealthy dowr^e in her silence, CVTBERD:
and in respect of her poverty, CVTBERD, I shall have her more loving, and
obedient, CVTBERD. Go thy ways, and get me a minister presently, with a
soft-low voice to marry us, and pray him he will not be impertinent, but brief
as he can; away: softly, CVTBERD. Sirrah, conduct your mistress into the dining
room, your now -- mistress. O my felicity! how I shall be revenged on mine
insolent kinsman, and his plots, to fright me from marrying! This night I will
get an heir, and thrust him out of my blood like a stranger; he would be
knighted, forsooth, and thought by that means to reign over me, his title
must do it: no kinsman, I will now make you bring me the tenth lords, and the
sixteenth ladies letter, kinsman; and it shall do you no good kinsman. Your
knighthood it self shall come on it's knees, and it shall be rejected; it
shall be sued for it's fees to execution, and not be redeemed; it shall cheat
at the tweluepeny ordinary, it knighthood, for it's diet all the term time,
and tell tales for it in the vacation, to the hostess: or it knighthood shall
do worse; take sanctuary in Coleharbor, and fast. It shall fright all it
friends, with borrowing letters; and when one of the foure-score hath brought
it knighthood ten shillings, it knighthood shall go to the Cranes, or the Bear
at the Bridge-foot, and be drunk in fear: it shall not have money to discharge
one tavern reckoning, to inuit the old creditors, to forbear it knighthood;
or the new, that should be, to trust it knighthood. It shall be the tenth name
in the bond, to take up the commodity of pipkins, and stone jugs; and the part
thereof shall not furnish it knighthood forth, for the attempting of a bakers
widow, a browne bakers widow. It shall give it knighthoods name, for a
stallion, to all gamesome citizens wives, and be refused; when the master of a
dancing school, or ( How do you call him) the worst reveller in the town is
taken: it shall want clothes, and by reason of that, wit, to fool to lawyers.
It shall not have hope to repair it self by Constantinople, Ireland, or
Virginia; but the best, and last fortune to it knighthood shall be, to make DOL
TEARE-SHEET, or KATE COMMON, a lady: and so, it knighthood may eat.


ARe you sure he is not gone by?


No, I staid in the shop ever since.


But, he may take the other end of the lane.


No, I told him I would be here at this end: I appointed him hither.


What a barbarian it is to stay then!


Yonder he comes.


And his charge left behind him, which is a very good sign, DAVPHINE.


How now CVTBERD, succeeds it, or no?


Past imagination, sir, omnia secunda; you could not have prayed, to have had
it so well: Saltat senex, as it is in the proverb, he does triumph in his
felicity; admires the party! he has given me the lease of my house too! and, I
am now going for a silent minister to marry them, and away.


Slight, get one of the silenced ministers, a zealous brother would torment him
purely.


Cum priuilegio, sir.


O, by no means, let's do nothing to hinder it now when 'tis done and
finished, I am for you: for any devise of vexation.


And that shall be, within this half hour, upon my dexterity, gentlemen.
Contrive what you can, in the mean time, bonis auibus.


How the slave doth latin it!


It would be made a jest to posterity, sirs, this days mirth, if ye will.


Beshrew his heart that will not, I pronounce.


And, for my part. What is't?


To translate all LA-FOOLES company, and his feast hither, to day, to celebrate
this bride-ale.


I mary, but how will it be done?


I'll undertake the directing of all the ladie-guests thither, and then the
meat must follow.


For gods sake, let's effect it: it will be an excellent comoedy of affliction,
so many several noises.


But are they not at the other place already, think you?


I'll warrant you for the colledge-honors: one of their faces has not the
priming color laid on yet, nor the other her smock sleek'd.


O, but they'll rise earlier then ordinary, to a feast.


Best go see, and assure our selves.


Who knows the house?


I'll lead you, were you never there yet?


Not I.


Nor I.


Where ha'you lived then? not know TOM OTTER!


No: for gods sake, what is he?


An excellent animal, equal with your DAW, or LA-FOOLE, if not transcendent;
and does latin it as much as your barber: he is his wives Subject, he calls
her Princess, and at such times as these, follows her up and down the house
like a page, with his hat off, partly for heate, partly for reverence. At this
instant, he is marshalling of his bull, bear, and horse.


What be those, in the name of Sphinx?


Why sir? he has been a great man at the bear-garden in his time: and from
that subtle sport, has taken the witty denomination of his chief carousing
cups. One he calls his bull, another his bear, another his horse. And then he
has his lesser glasses, that he calls his dear, and his ape; and several
degrees of'hem too: and never is well, nor thinks any entertainment perfect,
till these be brought out, and set of the cupbord.


For gods love! we should miss this, if we should not go.


Nay, he has a thousand things as good, that will speak him all day. He will
rail on his wife, with certain common places, behind her back; and to her
face --


No more of him. Let's go see him, I petition you.


NAy, good Princess, hear me pauca verba.


By that light, I'll ha'you chained up, with your bul-dogs, and beare-dogges,
if you be not civil the sooner. I'll send you to kennel, i'faith. You were
best bait me with your bull, bear, and horse? Never a time, that the
courtiers, or collegiates come to the house, but you make it a shrouetuesday! I
would have you get your whitsontide-veluet-cap, and your staff i'your hand, to
entertain them: yes in truth, do.


Not so, Princess, neither, but under correction, sweet Princess, gi'me
leave -- these things I am known to the courtiers by. It is reported to them
for my humour, and they receive it so, and do expect it. TOM OTTERS bull,
bear, and horse is known all over England, in rerum natura.


Fore me, I will na-ture them over to Paris-garden, and na-ture you thither too,
if you pronounce them again. Is a bear a fit beast, or a bull, to mix in
society with great ladies? think in your discretion, in any good polity.


The horse then, good Princess.


Well, I am contented for the horse: they love to be well horsed, I know. I
love it my self.


And it is a delicate fine horse this. Poetarum Pegasus. Under correction,
Princess, IVPITER did turn himself into a -- Taurus, or Bull, under
correction, good Princess.


By my integrity, I'll send you over to the banke-side, I'll commit you to the
Master of the garden, if I hear but a syllable more. Must my house, or my
roof, be polluted with the sent of bears, and bulls, when it is perfumed for
great ladies? Is this according to the instrument, when I married you? That I
would be Princess, and reign in mine own house: and you would be my
subject, and obey me? What did you bring me, should make you thus peremptory?
Do I allow you your halfe-crowne a day, to spend, where you will, among your
gamsters, to vex and torment me, at such times as these? Who gives you your
maintenance, I pray you? who allows you your horse-meat, and mans-meat? your
three suits of apparel a year? your four pair of stockings, one silk,
three worsted? your clean linen, your bands, and cuffs when I can get you to
wear them? 'Tis mar'l you ha'hem on now. Who graces you with courtiers, or
great personages, to speak to you out of their coaches, and come home to your
house? Were you ever so much as looked upon by a lord, or a lady, before I
married you: but on the Easter or Whitson-holy-daies? and then out at the
banquetting-house window, when NED WHITING, or GEORGE STONE, were at the
stake?


For gods sake, let's go staue her off him.)


Answer me to that. And did not I take you up from thence, in an old greasy
buffe-doublet, with points; and green vellet sleeves, out at the elbows? you
forget this.


Shee'll worry him, if we help not in time.)


O, here are some of the gallants! Go to, behave your self distinctly, and
with good morality; Or, I protest, I'll take away your exhibition.


BY your leave, fair mistress OTTER, I'll be bold to enter these gentlemen in
your acquaintance.


It shall not be obnoxious, or difficill, sir.


How does my noble Captain? Is the bull, bear, and horse, in rerum natura
still?


Sir, Sic visum superis.


I would you would but intimate them, do. Go your ways in, and get tosts,
and butter, made for the wood-cocks. That's a sit province for you.


Alas, what a tyranny, is this poor fellow married too.


O, but the sport will be anon, when we get him loose.


Dares he ever speak?


No Anabaptist ever railed with the like licence: but mark her language in the
mean time, I beseech you.


Gentlemen, you are very aptly come. My cousin, sir AMOROUS, will be here
briefly.


In good time lady. Was not sir IOHN DAW here, to ask for him, and the
company?


I cannot assure you, Mr. TRVE-WIT. Here was a very melancholy knight in a
ruff, that demanded my subject for some body, a gentleman, I think.


I, that was he, lady.


But he departed straight, I can resolve you.


What an excellent choice phrase, this lady expresses in!


O, sir! she is the only authentical courtier, that is not naturally bred
one, in the city.


You have taken that report upon trust, gentlemen.


No, I assure you, the court governs it so, lady, in your behalf.


I am the servant of the court, and courtiers, sir.


They are rather your idolaters.


Not so, sir.


How now, CVTBERD? Any cross?


O, no sir: Omnia been. 'Twas never better of the hinges, all's sure. I have so
pleased him with a curate, that he's gone too't almost with the delight he
hopes for soon.


What is he, for a vicar?


One that has caught a cold, sir, and can scarce be heard six inches off; as
if he spoke out of a bull-rush, that were not picked, or his throat were full of
pith: a fine quick fellow, and an excellent barber of prayers. I came to tell
you, sir, that you might omnem mouere lapidem (as they say) be ready with your
vexation.


Gramercy, honest CVTBERD, be there abouts with thy key to let us in.


I will not fail you, sir: Ad manum.


Well, I'll go watch my coaches.


Do; and we'll send DAW to you, if you meet him not.


Is master TRVE-WIT gone?


Yes, lady, there is some vnfortnnate business fallen out.


So I judged by the physiognomy of the fellow, that came in; and I had a dream
last night too of the new pageant, and my lady Maioresse, which is always very
ominous to me. I told it my lady HAVGHTY the other day; when her honour came
hither to see some China stuffs: and she expounded it, out of ARTEMIDORVS,
and I have found it since very true. It has done me many affronts.


Your dream, lady?


Yes, sir, anything I do but dream of the city. It stained me a damasque
table-cloth, cost me eighteen pound at one time; and burnt me a black satin
gown, as I stood by the fire, at my lady CENTAVRES chamber in the college,
another time. A third time, at the Lords masque, it dropped all my wire, and my
ruff with waxe-candle, that I could not go up to the banquet. A fourth time,
as I was taking coach to go to Ware, to meet a friend, it dashed me a new suit
all over (a crimson satin doublet, and black velvet skirts) with a brewers
horse, that I was fain to go in and shift me, and kept my chamber a leash of
days for the anguish of it.


These were dire mischances, lady.


I would not dwell in the city, and 'twere so fatal to me.


Yes sir, but I do take advise of my doctor, to dream of it as little, as I
can.


You do well, mistress OTTER.


Will it please you to enter the house farther, gentlemen?


And your favour, lady: but we stay to speak with a knight, sir IOHN DAW, who
is here come. We shall follow you, lady.


At your own time, sir. It is my cousin sir AMOROUS his feast. --


I know it lady.


And mine together. But it is for his honour; and therefore I take no name of
it, more then of the place.


You are a bounteous kinswoman.


Your servant, sir.


WHy do not you know it, sir IOHN DAW?


No, I am a rooke if I do.


I'll tell you then, she's married by this time! And whereas you were put in
the head, that she was gone with sir DAVPHINE, I assure you, sir DAVPHINE has
been the noblest, honestest friend to you, that ever gentleman of your quality
could boast off. He has discovered the whole plot, and made your mistress so
acknowledging, and indeed, so ashamed of her injury to you, that she desires
you to forgive her, and but grace her wedding with your presence to day -- She
is to be married to a very good fortune, she says, his uncle, old MOROSE: and
she willed me in private to tell you, that she shall be able to do you more
favours, and with more security now, then before.


Did she say so, i'faith?


Why, what do you think of me, sir IOHN! ask sir DAVPHINE.


Nay, I believe you. Good sir DAVPHINE, did she desire me to forgive her?


I assure you, sir IOHN, she did.


Nay then, I do with all my heart, and I'll be jovial.


Yes, for look you sir, this was the injury to you. LA-FOOLE intended this
feast to honour her bridal day, and made you the property to inuit the
college ladies, and promise to bring her: and then at the time, she should
have appeared (as his friend) to have given you the dor. Whereas now, sir
DAVPHINE has brought her to a feeling of it, with this kind of satisfaction,
that you shall bring all the ladies to the place where she is, and be very
jovial; and there, she will have a dinner, which shall be in your name: and
so dis-appoint LA-FOOLE, to make you good again, and (as it were) a saver in
the man.


As I am a knight, I honour her, and forgive her heartily.


About it then presently, TRVE-WIT is gone before to confront the coaches, and
to acquaint you with so much, if he meet you. Join with him, and 'tis well.
See, here comes your Antagonist, but take you no notice, but be very jovial.


Are the ladies come, sir IOHN DAW, and your mistress? sir DAVPHINE! you are
exceeding welcome, and honest master CLERIMONT. Where's my cossen? did you see
no collegiats, gentlemen?


Collegiats! Do you not hear, sir AMOROUS, how you are abused?


How sir!


Will you speak so kindly to sir IOHN DAW, that has done you such an affront?


Wherein, gentlemen? let me be a suitor to you to know, I beseech you!


Why sir, his mistress is married to day, to sir DAVPHINES uncle, your cousins
neighbour, and he has diverted all the ladies, and all your company thither,
to frustrate your provision, and stick a digrace upon you. He was here, now,
to have enticed us away from you too: but we told him his own, I think.


Has sir IOHN DAW wronged me so in-humanely?


He has done it, sir AMOROUS, most maliciously, and treacherously: but if you'll
be ruled by us, you shall quit him in faith.


Good gentlemen! I'll make one, believe it. How I pray?


Mary sir, get me your phesants, and your godwits, and your best meat, and dish
it in silver dishes of your cousins presently, and say nothing, but clap me a
clean towel about you, like a sewer; and bare-headed, march before it with a
good confidence ('tis but over the way, hard by) and we'll second you, where
you shall set it of the board, and bid them welcome to it, which shall show 'tis
yours, and disgrace his preparation utterly: and, for your cousin, whereas she
should be troubled here at home with care of making and giving welcome, she
shall transfer all that labour thither, and be a principal guest her self,
sit ranked with the colledge-Honors, and be honoured, and have her health
drunk as often, as bare, and as loud as the best of them.


I'll go tell her presently. It shall be done, that's resolved.


I thought he would not hear it out, but 'twould take him.


Well, there be guests, meat now; how shall we do for musique?


The smell of the venison, going through the street, will inuit one noise of
fiddlers, or other.


I would it would call the trumpeters thither.


Faith, there is hope, they have intelligence of all feasts. There's good
correspondence betwixt them, and the London-cookes. 'Tis twenty to one but we
have them.


'Twill be a most solemn day for my uncle, and an excellent fit of mirth for
us.


I, if we can hold up the aemulation betwixt FOOL, and DAW, and never bring
them to expostulate.


Tut, flatter them both (as TRVE-WIT says) and you may take their
understandings in a purse-net. They'll believe themselves to be just such men
as we make them, neither more nor less. They have nothing, not the use of
their senses, but by tradition.


See! Sir AMOROUS has his towel on already. Have you persuaded your cossen?


Yes, 'tis very faesible: shee'll do any thing she says, rather then the
LA-FOOLES shall be disgraced.


She is a noble kinswoman. It will be such a pest'ling device, sir AMOROUS! It
will pound all your enemies practises to poulder, and blow him up with his own
mine, his own train.


Nay, we'll give fire, I warrant you.


But you must carry it privately, without any noise, and take no notice by any
means --


Gentlemen, my Princess says, you shall have all her silver dishes,
festinate: and she's gone to alter her tyre a little, and go with you --


And yourself too, captain OTTER.


By any means, sir.


Yes sir, I do mean it: but I would entreat my cousin sir AMOROUS, and you
gentlemen, to be suitors to my Princess, that I may carry my bull, and my
bear, as well as my horse.


That you shall do, captain OTTER.


My cousin will never consent, gentlemen.


She must consent, sir AMOROUS, to reason.


Why, she says they are no decorum among ladies.


But they are decora, and that's better, sir.


I, she must hear argument. Did not PASIPHAE, who was a queen, love a bull?
and was not CALISTO, the mother of ARCAS, turned into a bear, and made a
star, mistress VRSVLA, in the heavens?


O God! that I could have said as much! I will have these stories painted in the
bear-garden, ex Ouidij metamorphosi.


Where is your Princess, Captain? pray be our leader.


That I shall, sir.


Make haste, good sir AMOROUS.


SIr, there's an angel for your self, and a brace of angels for your cold.
Muse not at this manage of my bounty. It is fit we should thank fortune,
double to nature, for any benefit she confers upon us; besides, it is your
imperfection, but my solace.


I thank your worship, so is it mine, now.


What says he, CVTBERD?


He says, Praesto, sir, whenever your worship needs him, he can be ready
with the like. He got this cold with sitting up late, and singing catches with
cloth-workers.


No more. I thank him.


God keep your worship, and give you much joy with your fair spouse. (Vmh,
vmh.)


O, O, stay CVTBERD! let him give me five shillings of my money back. As it is
bounty to reward benefits, so is it equity to mulct injuries. I will have it.
What says he?


He cannot change it, sir.


It must be changed.


Cough again.


What says he?


He will cough out the rest, sir.


(Vmh, vmh, vmh.)


Away, away with him, stop his mouth, away, I forgive it. --


Fie, master MOROSE, that you will use this violence to a man of the church.


How!


It does not become your gravity, or breeding, (as you pretend in court) to
have offered this outrage on a water-man, or any more boisterous creature, much
less on a man of his civil coat.


You can speak then!


Yes, sir.


Speak out I mean.


I sir. Why, did you think you had married a statue? or a motion, only? one
of the French puppets, with the eyes turned with a wire? or some innocent out
of the hospital, that would stand with her hands thus, and a playse mouth, and
look upon you.


O immodesty! a manifest woman! what CVTBERD?


Nay, never quarrel with CVTBERD, sir, it is too late now. I confess, it doth
bate somewhat of the modesty I had, when I writ simply maid: but I hope, I
shall make it a stock still competent, to the estate, and dignity of your
wife.


She can talk!


Yes indeed, sir.


What, sirrah. None of my knaves, there? where is this impostor, CVTBERD?


Speak to him, fellow, speak to him. I'll have none of this coacted,
unnatural dumbness in my house, in a family where I govern.


She is my Regent already! I have married a PENTHESILEA, a SEMIRAMIS, sold my
liberty to a distaff!


WHere's master MOROSE?


Is he come again! lord have mercy upon me.


I wish you all joy, mistress EPICOENE, with your grave and honourable match.


I return you the thanks, master TRVE-WIT, so friendly a wish deserves.


She has acquaintance, too!


God save you, sir, and give you all contentment in your fair choice, here.
Before I was the bird of night to you, the owl but now I am the messenger of
peace, a dove, and bring you the glad wishes of many friends, to the
celebration of this good hour.


What hour, sir?


Your marriage hour sir. I commend your resolution, that (notwithstanding all
the dangers I laid before you, in the voice of a night-crow) would yet go on,
and be your self. It shows you are a man constant to your own ends, and
upright to your purposes, that would not be put off with left-handed cries.


How should you arrive at the knowledge of so much!


Why, did you ever hope, sir, committing the secrecy of it to a barber, that
less then the whole town should know it? you might as well have told it the
conduit, or the bake-house, or the infant'ry that follow the court, and with
more security. Could your gravity forget so old and noted a remnant, as
lippis tonsoribus notum. Well sir, forgive it your self now, the fault, and be
communicable with your friends. Here will be three or four fashionable
ladies, from the college to visit you presently, and their train of minions,
and followers.


Bar my doors! bar my doors! where are all my eaters? my mouths now? bar
up my doors, you varlets.


He is a varlet, that stirs to such an office. Let them stand open. I would
see him that dares move his eyes toward it. Shall I have a barricade made
against my friends, to be barred of any pleasure they can bring in to me with
honourable visitation.


O Amazonian impudence!


Nay faith, in this, sir, she speaks but reason: and me thinks is more
continent then you. Would you go to bed so presently, sir, before noone? a man
of your head, and hair, should owe more to that reueuerend ceremony, and not
mount the marriage-bed, like a towne-bul, or a mountaine-goate; but stay the
due season; and ascend it then with religion, and fear. Those delights are to
be steeped in the humour, and silence of the night; and give the day to other
open pleasures, and jollities of feast, or musique, of revels, of discourse:
we'll have all, sir, that may make your Hymen high, and happy.


O, my torment, my torment!


Nay, if you endure the first half hour, sir, so tediously, and with this
irksomeness; what comfort, or hope, can this fair gentlewoman make to her
self hereafter, in the consideration of so many years as are to come --


Of my affliction. Good sir, depart, and let her do it alone.


I have done, sir.


That cursed barber!


(Yes faith, a cursed wretch indeed, sir.)


I have married his citterne, that's common to all men. Some plague, above the
plague --


(All Egypt ten plagues)


Revenge me on him.


'Tis very well, sir. If you laid on a curse or two, more, I'll assure you
hee'll bear them. As, that he may get the pox with seeking to cure it, sir?
Or, that while he is curling another mans hair, his own may drop off? Or, for
burning some male-baudes lock, he may have his brain beat out with the
curling-iron?


No, let the wretch live wretched. May he get the itch, and his shop so lousy,
as no man dare come at him, nor he come at no man.


(I, and if he would swallow all his balls for pills, let not them purge him)


Let his warning pan be ever cold.


(A perpertuall frost underneath it, sir)


Let him never hope to see fire again.


(But in hell, sir)


His chairs be always empty, his scissors rust, and his combs mould in their
cases.


Very dreadful that! (And may he loose the invention, sir, of carving
lanternes in paper)


Let there be no baud carted that year, to employ a basin of his: but let him
be glad to eat his sponge, for bread.


And drink lotium to it, and much good do him.


Or, for want of bread --


Eat eare-waxe, sir. I'll help you. Or, draw his own teeth, and add them to
the lute-string.


No, beat the old ones to poulder, and make bread of them.


(Yes, make meal of the millstones.)


May all the botches, and burns, that he has cured on others, break out upon
him.


And he now forget the cure of them in himself, sir: or, if he do remember it,
let him have scraped all his linen into lint for it, and have not a rag left
him, to set up with.


Let him never set up again, but have the gout in his hands for ever. Now, no
more, sir.


O that last was too high set! you might go less with him i'faith, and be
revenged enough: as, that he be never able to new-paint his pole --


Good sir, no more. I forgot my self.


Or, want credit to take up with a combe-maker --


No more, sir.


Or, having broken his glass in a former despair, fall now into a much
greater, of ever getting another --


I beseech you, no more.


Or, that he never be trusted with trimming of any but chimney-sweepers --


Sir --


Or, may he cut a colliers throat with his razor, by chance-medlee, and yet
hang for it.


I will forgive him, rather then hear any more. I beseech you, sir.


THis way, madame.


O, the sea breaks in upon me! another flood! an inundation! I shall be
orewhelm'd with noise. It beats already at my shores. I feel an earthquake in
my self, for it.


'Giue you joy, mistress.


Has she servants too!


I have brought some ladies here to see, and know you. My lady HAVGHTY, this
my lady CENTAVRE, mistress DOL MAVIS, mistress TRVSTIE my lady HAVGHTIES
woman. Where's your husband? let's see him: can he endure no noise? let me come
to him.


What nomenclator is this!


Sir IOHN DAW, sir, your wives servant, this.


A DAW, and her servant! O, 'tis decreed, 'tis decreed of me, and she have
such servants.


Nay sir, you must kiss the ladies, you must not go away, now; they come
toward you, to seek you out.


I'faith, master MOROSE, would you steal a marriage thus, in the midst of so
many friends, and not acquaint us? Well, I'll kiss you, notwithstanding the
justice of my quarrel: you shall give me leave, mistress, to use a becoming
familiarity with your husband.


Your ladyship does me an honour in it, to let me know he is so worthy your
favour: as, you have done both him and me grace, to visit so unprepared a pair
to entertain you.


Complement! complement!


But I must lay the burden of that, upon my servant, here.


It shall not need, mistress MOROSE, we will all bear, rather then one shall
be oppressed.


I know it: and you will teach her the faculty, if she be to learn it.


Is this the silent woman?


Nay, she has found her tongue since she was married, master TRVE-WIT says.


O, master TRVE-WIT! 'saue you. What kind of creature is your bride here? she
speaks, me thinks!


Yes madame, believe it, she is a gentlewoman of very absolute behaviour, and
of a good race.


And JACK DAW told us, she could not speak.


So it was carried in plot, madam, to put her upon this old fellow, by sir
DAVPHINE, his nephew, and one or two more of us: but she is a woman of an
excellent assurance, and an extraordinary happy wit, and tongue. You shall
see her make rare sport with DAW, ere night.


And he brought us to laugh at her!


That falls out often, madame, that he that thinks himself the master-wit, is
the master-foole. I assure your lady-ship, ye cannot laugh at her.


No, well have her to the college: and she have wit, she shall be one of us!
shall she not CENTAVRE? we'll make her a collegiate.


Yes faith, madame, and MAVIS, and she will set up a side.


Believe it madame, and mistress MAVIS, she will sustain her part.


I'll tell you that, when I have talked with her, and tried her.


Use her very civilly, MAVIS.


So I will, madame.


Blessed minute, that they would whisper thus ever.


In the mean time, madame, would but your lady-ship help to vex him a
little: you know his disease, talk to him about the wedding ceremonies, or
call for your gloves, or --


Let me alone. CENTAVRE, help me. Mr. bridegroom, where are you?


O, it was too miraculously good to last!


We see no ensigns of a wedding, here; no character of a brideale: where be
our skarfes, and our gloves? I pray you, give them us. Let's know your brides
colours, and yours, at least.


Alas, madame, he has provided none.


Had I known your ladyships painter, I would.


He has given it you, CENTAVRE, in faith. But, do you hear, M. MOROSE, a jest
will not absolve you in this manner. You that have sucked the milk of the
court, and from thence have been brought up to the very strong meates, and
wine, of it; been a courtier from the biggen, to the night-cap: (as we may
say) and you, to offend in such a high point of ceremony, as this! and let
your nuptials want all marks of solemnity! How much plate have you lost to
day (if you had but regarded your profit) what gifts, what friends, through
your mere rusticitie?


Madame --


Pardon me, sir, I must insinuate your errors to you. No gloves? no garters?
no skarfes? no epithalamium? no masque?


Yes, madame, I'll make an epithalamium, I promised my mistress, I have begun
it already: will your ladyship hear it?


I, good JACK DAW.


Will it please your ladyship command a chamber, and be private with your
friend? you shall have your choice of rooms, to retire to after: my whole
house is yours. I know, it hath been your ladyships errand, into the city, at
other times, how ever now you have been unhappily diverted upon me: but I
shall be loath to break any honourable custom of your ladyships. And therefore,
good madame --


Come, you are a rude bridegroom, to entertain ladies of honour in this
fashion.


He is a rude groom, indeed.


By that light, you deserve to be grafted, and have your horns reach from one
side of the Island, to the other. Do not mistake me, sir, I but speak this, to
give the ladies some heart again, not for any malice to you.


Is this your Bravo, ladies?


As god help me, if you utter such another word, I'll take mistress bride in,
and begin to you, in a very sad cup, do you see? Go too, know your friends,
and such, as love you.


BY your leave, ladies. Do you want any musique? I have brought you variety
of noises. Play, sirs, all of you.


O, a plot, a plot, a plot, a plot upon me! This day, I shall be their anvil
to work on, they will grate me asunder. 'Tis worse then the noise of a saw.


No, they are hair, rosin, and guts. I can give you the receipt.


Peace, boys.


Play, I^say.


Peace, rascals. You see who's your friend now, sir? Take courage, put on a
martyrs resolution. Mock down all their attemptings, with patience. 'Tis but
a day, and I would suffer heroically. Should an ass exceed me in fortitude?
No. You betray your infirmity with your hanging dull ears, and make them
insult: bear up bravely, and constantly. Look you here, sir, what honour is
done you unexpected, by your nephew; a wedding dinner come, and a Knight sewer
before it, for the more reputation: and fine Mrs. OTTER, your neighbour, in the
rump, or tail of it.


Is that Gorgon, that Medusa come? Hide me, hide me.


I warrant you, sir, she will not transform you. Look upon her with a good
courage. Pray you entertain her, and conduct your guests in. No? Mistress
bride, will you entreat in the ladies? your bridegroom is so shame-fac'd, here
--


Will it please your ladyship, madame?


With the benefit of your company, mistress.


Servant, pray you perform your duties.


And glad to be commanded, mistress.


How like you her wit, MAVIS.


Very prettily, absolutely well.


'Tis my place.


You shall pardon me, mistress OTTER.


Why I am a collegiate.


But not in ordinary.


But I am.


We'll dispute that within.


Would this had lasted a little longer.


And that they had sent for the Heralds. Captain OTTER, what news?


I have brought my bull, bear, and horse, in private, and yonder are the
trumpetters without, and the drum, gentlemen.


O, O, O.


And we will have a rouse in each of'hem, anon, for bold Britons, in faith.


O, O, O.


Follow, follow, follow.


WAs there ever poor bridegroom so tormented? or man indeed?


I have not read of the like, in the chronicles of the land.


Sure, he cannot but go to a place of rest, after all this purgatory.


He may presume it, I think.


The spitting, the coughing, the laughter, the neesing, the farting, dancing,
noise of the musique, and her masculine, and loud commanding, and urging the
whole family, makes him think he has married a fury.


And she carries it up bravely.


I, she takes any occasion to speak: that's the height on it.


And how soberly DAVPHINE labours to satisfy him, that it was none of his
plot!


And has almost brought him to the faith, in the article. Here he comes. Where
is he now? what's become of him, DAVPHINE?


O, hold me up a little, I shall go away in the jest else. He has got on his
whole nest of night-caps, and locked himself up, in the top of the house, as
high, as ever he can climb from the noise. I peeped in at a crany, and saw him
fitting over a crosse-beame of the roof, like him of the sadlers horse in
Fleetstreet, vp-right: and he will sleep there.


But where are your collegiates?


With-drawne with the bride in private.


O, they are instructing her in the colledge-Grammar. If she have grace with
them, she knows all their secrets instantly.


Methinks, the lady HAVGHTY looks well to day, for all my dispraise of her in
the morning. I think, I shall come about to thee again, TRVE-WIT.


Believe it, I told you right. Women ought to repair the losses, time and
years have made in their features, with dressings. And an intelligent woman,
if she know by her self the least defect, will be most curious, to hide it:
and it becomes her. If she be short, let her sit much, lest when she stands,
she be thought to sit. If she have an ill foot, let her wear her gown the
longer, and her shoo the thinner. If a fat hand, and scald nailes, let her
carve the less, and act in gloves. If a sour breath, let her never discourse
fasting: and always talk at her distance. If she have black and rugged
teeth, let her offer the less at laughter, especially if she laugh wide, and
open.


O, you shall have some women, when they laugh, you would think they brayed,
it is so rude, and --


I, and others, that will stalk in their gait like an Ostrich, and take huge
strides. I cannot endure such a sight. I love measure in the feet, and number
in the voice: they are gentlenesses, that oft-times draw no less then the
face.


How came thou to study these creatures so exactly? I would thou would
make me a proficient.


Yes, but you must leave to live i'your chamber then a month together upon
AMADIS de Gaul, or Don QVIXOTE, as you are wont; and come abroad where the
matter is frequent, to court, to tiltings, public shows, and feasts, to
plays, and church sometimes: thither they come to show their new tyres too, to
see, and to be seen. In these places a man shall find whom to love, whom to
play with, whom to touch once, whom to hold ever. The variety arrests his
judgment. A wench to please a man comes not down dropping from the seeling,
as he lies on his back droning a tobacco pipe. He must go where she is.


Yes, and be never the near.


Out heretic. That diffidence makes thee worthy it should be so.


He says true to you, DAVPHINE.


Why?


A man should not doubt to ouer-come any woman. Think he can vanquish them,
and he shall: for though they deny, their desire is to be tempted. PENELOPE
her self cannot hold out long. Ostend, you saw, was taken at last. You must
persevere, and hold to your purpose. They would solicit us, but that they are
afraid. Howsoever, they wish in their hearts we should solicit them. Praise
them, flatter them, you shall never want eloquence, or trust: even the chastest
delight to feel themselves that way rubbed. With praises you must mix kisses
too. If they take them, they'll take more. Though they strive, they would be
ouer-come.


O, but a man must beware of force.


It is to them an acceptable violence, and has oft-times the place of the
greatest courtesy. She that might have been forced, and you let her go free
without touching, though she then seem to thank you, will ever hate you
after: and glad in the face, is assuredly sad at the heart.


But all women are not to be taken always.


'Tis true. No more then all birds, or all fishes. If you appear learned to an
ignorant wench, or jocund to a sad, or witty to a foolish, why she presently
begins to mistrust her self. You must approach them in their own height, their
own line: for the contrary makes many that fear to commit themselves to noble
and worthy fellows, run into the embraces of a rascal. If she love wit, give
verses, though you borrow them of a friend, or buy them, to have good. If
valour, talk of your sword, and be frequent in the mention of quarrels, though
you be staunch in fighting. If activity, be seen of your barbary often, or
leaping over stools, for the credit of your back. If she love good clothes or
dressing, have your learned counsel about you every morning, your french
taylor, barber, linnener, c. Let your poulder, your glass, and your comb, be
your dearest acquaintance. Take more care for the ornament of your head, then
the safety: and wish the common-wealth rather troubled, then a hair about
you. That will take her. Then if she be covetous and craving, do you promise
any thing, and perform sparingly: so shall you keep her in appetite still.
Seem as you would give, but be like a barren field that yields little, or
unlucky dice, to foolish, and hoping gamesters. Let your gifts be slight, and
dainty, rather then precious. Let cunning be above cost. Give cherries at time
of year, or apricots; and say they were sent you out of the country, though
you bought them in Cheap-side. Admire her tyres; like her in all fashions;
compare her in every habit to some deity; invent excellent dreams to slatter
her, and riddles; or, if she be a great one, perform always the second
parts to her: like what she likes, praise whom she praises, and fail not to
make the household and servants yours, yea the whole family, and salute them by
their names: ('tis but light cost if you can purchase them so) and make her
physician your pensioner, and her chief woman. Nor will it be out of your
gain to make love to her too, so she follow, no usher, her ladies pleasure.
All blabbing is taken away, when she comes to be a part of the crime.


On what courtly lap hast thou late slept, to come forth so sudden and absolute
a courtling?


Good faith, I should rather question you, that are so harkening after these
mysteries. I begin to suspect your diligence. DAVPHINE. Speak, art thou in
love in earnest?


Yes by my troth am I: 'twere ill dissembling before thee.


With which of them, I pray thee?


With all the collegiates.


Out on thee. We'll keep you at home, believe it, in the stable, and you be
such a stallion.


No. I like him well. Men should love wisely, and all women: some one for the
face, and let her please the eye; another for the skin, and let her please the
touch; a third for the voice, and let her please the ear; and where the
objects mix, let the senses so too. Thou would think it strange, if I
should make them all in love with thee before night!


I would say thou had the best philtre in the world, and could do more
then madame MEDEA, or Doctor FOREMAN.


If I do not, let me play the mounte-banke for my meat while I live, and the
bawd for my drink.


So be it, I say.


O Lord, gentlemen, how my knights and I have mist you here!


Why, Captain, what service? what service?


To see me bring up my bull, bear, and horse to fight.


Yes faith, the Captain says we shall be his dogs to bait them.


A good employment.


Come on, let's see a course then.


I am afraid my cousin will be offended if she come.


Be afraid of nothing. Gentlemen, I have placed the drum and the trumpets, and
one to give them the sign when you are ready. Here's my bull for my self, and
my bear for sir IOHN DAW, and my horse for sir AMOROUS. Now set your foot to
mine, and yours to his, and --


Pray god my cousin come not.


Saint GEORGE, and saint ANDREW, fear no cousins. Come, sound, sound. Et rauco
strepuerunt cornua cantu.


Well said, Captain, in faith: well fought at the bull.


Well held at the bear.


Low, low, Captain.


O, the horse has kicked off his dog already.


I cannot drink it, as I am a Knight.


Gods so, off with his spurs, some-body.


It goes again my conscience. My cousin will be angry with it.


I have done mine.


You fought high and fair, sir IOHN.


At the head.


Like an excellent beare-dog.


You take no notice of the business, I hope.


Not a word, sir, you see we are jovial.


Sir AMOROUS, you must not aequiuocate. It must be pulled down, for all my
cousin.


Sfoot, if you take not your drink, they'll think you are discontented wit
some thing: you'll betray all, if you take the least notice.


Not I, I'll both drink, and talk then.


You must pull the horse on his knees, sir AMOROUS: fear no cousins. Iacta est
alea.


O, now he's in his vain, and bold. The least hint given him of his wife now,
will make him rail desperately.


Speak to him of her.


Do you, and I'll fetch her to the hearing of it.


Captain hee-OTTER, your shee-OTTER is coming, your wife.


Wife! Buzz. Titiuilitium. There's no such thing in nature. I confess,
gentlemen, I have a cook, a laundress, a house-drudge, that serves my
necessary turns, and goes under that title: But he's an ass that will be so
vxorious, to tie his affections to one circle. Come, the name dulls appetite.
Here, replenish again: another bout. Wives are nasty sluttish animals.


O, Captain.


As ever the earth bare, tribus verbis. Where's master TRVE-WIT?


He's slipped aside, sir.


But you must drink, and be jovial.


Yes, give it me.


And me, too.


Let's be jovial.


As jovial as you will.


Agreed. Now you shall have the bear, cousin, and sir IOHN DAW the horse, and
I'll have the bull still. Sound Tritons of the Thames. Nunc est bibendum, nunc
pede libero --


Villains, murderers, sons of the earth, and traitors, what do you there?


O, now the trumpets have waked him, we shall have his company.


A wife is a sciruy clogdogdo; an unlucky thing, a very foresaid beare-whelpe,
without any good fashion or breeding: mala bestia.


Why did you marry one then, Captain?


A pox -- I married with six thousand pound, I* I was in love with that. I
have not kissed my fury, these forty weeks.


The more to blame you, Captain.


Nay, mistress OTTER, hear him a little first.


She has a breath worse then my grand-mothers, profecto.


O treacherous liar. Kiss me, sweet master TRVE-WIT, and prove him a
slandering knave.


I'll rather believe you, lady.


And she has a peruke, that's like a pound of hemp, made up in shoo-thrids.


O viper, mandrake!


A most vile face! and yet she spends me forty pound a year in mercury, and
hogs-bones. All her teeth were made in the Blacke- Friars: both her eye-browes
in the Strand, and her hair in Siluer-street. Every part of the town owns a
piece of her.


I cannot hold.


She takes her self asunder still when she goes to bed, into some twenty
boxes; and about next day noone is put together again, like a great Germane
clock: and so comes forth and rings a tedious larum to the whole house, and
then is quiet again for an hour, but for her quarters. Have you done me right,
gentlemen?


No, sir, I'll do you right with my quarters, with my quarters.


O, hold, good Princess.


Sound, sound.


A battle, a battle.


You notorious stinkardly beareward, does my breath smell?


Under correction, dear Princess: look to my bear, and my horse, gentlemen.


Do I want teeth, and eye-browes, thou bull-dog?


Sound, sound still.


No, I protest, under correction --


I, now you are under correction, you protest: but you did not protest before
correction, sir. Thou IVDAS, to offer to betray thy Princess! I'll make thee
an example --


I will have no such examples in my house, lady OTTER.


Ah --


Mrs. MARY AMBREE, your examples are dangerous. Rogues, Hell-hounds, Stentors,
out of my doors, you sons of noise and tumult, begot on an ill May-day, or
when the Gally-foist is a-floate to Westminster! A trumpeter could not be
conceived, but then!


What ails you, sir?


They have rent my roof, walls, and all my windores asunder, with their brazen
throats.


Best follow him, DAVPHINE.


So I will.


Where's DAW, and LA-FOOLE?


They are both run away, sir. Good gentlemen, help to pacify my Princess,
and speak to the great ladies for me. Now must I go lie with the bears this
fortnight, and keep out of the way, till my peace be made, for this scandal
she has taken. Did you not see my bull-head, gentlemen?


Is't not on, Captain?


No: but he may make a new one, by that, is on.


O, here 'tis. And you come over, gentlemen, and ask for TOM OTTER, we'll go
down to Rat^liffe, and have a course ysaith: for all these disasters. There's
bona spes left.


Away, Captain, get off while you are well.


I am glad we are rid of him.


You had never been, unless we had put his wife upon him. His humour is as
tedious at last, as it was ridiculous at first.


WE wondered why you shrieked so, Mrs. OTTER.


O god, madame, he came down with a huge long naked weapon in both his hands,
and looked so dreadfully! Sure, he's beside himself.


Why what made you there, mistress OTTER?


Alas, mistress MAVIS, I was chastising my subject, and thought nothing of him.


Faith, mistress, you must do so too. Learn to chastise. Mistress OTTER
corrects her husband so, he dares not speak, but under correction.


And with his hat off to her: 'twould do you good to see.


In sadness 'tis good, and mature counsel: practise it, MOROSE. I'll call you
MOROSE still now, as I call CENTAVRE, and MAVIS: we four will be all one.


And you'll come to the college, and live with us?


Make him give milk, and honey.


Look how you manage him at first, you shall have him ever after.


Let him allow you your coach, and four horses, your woman, your chamber-maid,
your page, your gentleman-vsher, your french cooke, and four grooms.


And go with us, to Bed'lem, to the China houses, and to the Exchange.


It will open the gate to your fame.


Here's CENTAVRE has immortalised her self, with taming of her wild male.


I, she has done the miracle of the kingdom.


But ladies, do you count it lawful to have such plurality of servants, and
do them all graces?


Why not? why should women deny their favours to men? Are they the poorer, or
the worse?


Is the Thames the less for the dyers water, mistress?


Or a torch, for lighting many torches?


Well said, LA-FOOLE; what a new one he has got?


They are empty losses, women fear, in this kind.


Besides, ladies should be mindful of the approach of age, and let no time
want his due use. The best of our days pass first.


We are rivers, that cannot be called back, madame: she that now excludes her
lovers, may live to lie a forsaken beldam, in a frozen bed.


'Tis true, MAVIS: and who will wait on us to coach then? or write, or tell us
the news then? Make anagrammes of our names, and inuit us to the cock-pit,
and kiss our hands all the play-time, and draw their weapons for our honours?


Not one.


Nay, my mistress is not altogether vn-intelligent of these things; here be in
presence have tasted of her favours.


What a neighing hobby-horse is this!


But not with intent to boast them again, servant. And have you those
excellent receipts, madame, to keep your selves from bearing of children?


O yes, MOROSE. How should we maintain our youth and beauty, else? Many
births of a woman make her old, as many crops make the earth barren.


O My cursed angel, that instructed me to this fate!


Why, sir?


That I should be seduced by so foolish a devil, as a barber will make!


I would I had been worthy, sir, to have partaken your counsel, you should
never have trusted it to such a minister.


Would I could redeem it with the loss of an eye (nephew) a hand, or any
other member.


Mary, god forbid, sir, that you should geld your self, to anger your wife.


So it would rid me of her! and, that I did supererogatorie penance, in a
bellfry, at Westminster-hall, in the cock-pit, at the fall of a stag; the
tower-whar^e (what place is there else?) London-bridge, Paris-garden,
Belins-gate, when the noises are at their height and lowdest. Nay, I would sit
out a play, that were nothing but fights at sea, drum, trumpet, and target!


I hope there shall be no such need, sir. Take patience, good uncle. This is
but a day, and 'tis well worn too now.


O, 'twill be so for ever, nephew, I foresee it, for ever. Strife and tumult
are the dowry that comes with a wife.


I told you so, sir, and you would not believe me.


Alas, do not rub those wounds, master TRVE-WI^, to blood again: 'twas my
negligence. Add not affliction to affliction. I have perceived the effect of
it, too late, in madamme OTTER.


How do you, sir?


Did you ever hear a more unnecessary question? as if she did not see! Why, I
do as you see, Empress, Empress.


You are not well, sir! you look very ill! something has distempered you.


O horrible, monstrous impertinencies! would not one of these have served? do
you think, sir? would not one of these have served?


Yes, sir, but these are but notes of female kindness, sir: certain tokens
that she has a voice, sir.


O, is't so? come, and 't be no otherwise -- what say you?


How do you feel your self, sir?


Again, that!


Nay, look you, sir: you would be friends with your wife upon vn-conscionable
terms, her silence --


They say you are run mad, sir.


Not for love, I assure you, of you; do you see?


O lord, gentlemen! Lay hold on him for gods sake: what shall I do? who's his
physician (can you tel) that knows the state of his body best, that I might
send for him? Good sir, speak. I'll send for one of my doctors else.


What, to poison me, that I might die intestate, and leave you possessed of all?


Lord, how idly he talks, and how his eyes sparkle! He looks green about the
temples! Do you see what blue spots he has?


I, it's melancholy.


Gentlemen, for heavens sake counsel me. Ladies! Servant, you have read PLINY,
and PARACELSVS: Ne'er a word now to comfort a poor gentlewoman? Ay me! what
fortune had I to marry a distracted man?


I'll tell you, mistress --


How rarely she holds it up!


What mean you, gentlemen?


What will you tell me, servant?


The disease in Greek is called (...), in Latin, Insania, Furor, vel Ecstasis
melancholica, that is, Egressio, when a man ex melancholico, euadit fanaticus.


Shall I have a lecture read upon me alive?


But he may be but Phreneticus, yet, mistress? and Phrenetis is only delirium,
or so --


I, that is for the disease, servant: but what is this to the cure? we are sure
enough of the disease.


Let me go.


Why, we'll entreat her to hold her peace, sir.


O, no. Labour not to stop her. She is like a conduit-pipe, that will gush out
with more force, when she opens again.


I'll tell you, MOROSE, you must talk divinity to him altogether, or moral
philosophie.


I, and there's an excellent book of moral philosophie, madame, of RAYNARD
the fox, and all the beasts, called, DONES philosophie.


There is, indeed, sir AMOROUS LA-FOOLE.


O misery!


I have read it, my lady CENTAVRE, all over to my cousin, here.


I, and 'tis a very good book as any is, of the Modernes.


Tut, he must have SENECA read to him, and PLVTARCH, and the Ancients; the
Modernes are not for this disease.


Why, you discommended them too, to day, sir IOHN.


I, in some cases: but in these they are best, and ARISTOTLES Ethics.


Say you so, sir IOHN? I think you are deceived: you took it upon trust.


Where's TRVSTY, my woman? I'll end this difference. I prithee, OTTER, call
her. Her father and mother were both mad, when they put her to me.


I think so. Nay, gentlemen, I am tame. This is but an exercise, I know, a
marriage ceremony, which I must endure.


And one of them (I know not which) was cured with the Sickmans salve; and the
other with GREENES groates-worth of wit.


A very cheap cure, madame.


I, it very faesible.


My lady called for you, mistress TRVSTY: you must decide a controversy.


O TRVSTY, which was it you said, your father, or your mother, that was cured
with the Sicke-mans salve?


My mother, madame, with the salve.


Then it was the Sicke-womans salve.


And my father with the Groates-worth of wit. But there was other means used:
we had a Preacher that would preach folk asleep still; and so they were
prescribed to go to church, by an old woman that was their physician, thrice a
week --


To sleep?


Yes forsooth: and every night they read themselves asleep on those books.


Good faith, it stands with great reason. I would I knew where to procure those
books.


Oh.


I can help you with one of them, mistress MOROSE, the groatsworth of wit.


But I shall disfurnish you, sir AMOROUS: can you spare it?


O, yes, for a week, or so; I'll read it my self to him.


No, I must do that, sir: that must be my office.


Oh, oh!


Sure, he would do well enough, if he could sleep.


No, I should do well enough, if you could sleep. Have I no friend that will
make her drunk? or give her a little ladanum? or opium?


Why, sir, she talks ten times worse in her sleep.


How!


Do you not know that, sir? never ceases all night.


And snores like a por^pisce.


O, redeem me, fate, redeem me, fate. For how many causes may a man be
diuorc'd, nephew?


I know not truly, sir.


Some Divine must resolve you in that, sir, or canon-Lawyer.


I will not rest, I will not think of any other hope or comfort, till I know.


Alas, poor man.


You'll make him mad indeed, ladies, if you pursue this.


No, we'll let him breathe, now, a quarter of an hour, or so.


By my faith, a large truce.


Is that his keeper, that is gone with him?


It is his nephew, madame.


Sir DAVPHINE EVGENIE.


He looks like a very pitiful knight --


As can be. This marriage, has put him out of all.


He has not a penny in his purse, madame --


He is ready to cry all this day.


A very shark, he set me in the nick the other night at primero.


How these swabbers talk!


I, OTTERS wine has swelled their humours above a springtide.


Good MOROSE, let's go in again. I like your couches exceeding well: we'll
go lie, and talk there.


I wait on you, madame.


'Slight, I will have them as silent as Signs, their posts too, e're I have
done. Do you hear, lady-bride? I pray thee now, as thou art a noble wench,
continue this discourse of DAVPHINE within: but praise him exceedingly.
Magni^ie him with all the height of affection thou can. (I have some purpose
in it) and but beat off these two rooks, JACK DAW, and his fellow, with any
discontentment hither, and I'll honour thee for ever.


I was about it, here. It angered me to the soul, to hear them begin to
talk so malapert.


Pray thee perform it, and thou win'st me an idolater to thee, everlasting.


Will you go in, and hear me do it?


No, I'll stay here. Drive them out of your company, 'tis all I ask: which
cannot be any way better done, then by extolling DAVPHINE, whom they have so
slighted.


I warrant you: you shall expect one of them presently.


What a cast of kastrils are these, to hawke after ladies, thus?


I, and strike at such an eagle as DAVPHINE.


He will be mad, when we tell him. Here he comes.


O Sir, you are welcome.


Where's thine uncle?


Run out of doors in's night-caps, to talk with a Casuist about his divorce.
It works admirably.


Thou would have said so, and thou had been here! The ladies have laughed
at thee, most comically, since thou went, DAVPHINE.


And asked, if thou were thine uncles keeper?


And the brace of Babouns answered, yes; and said, thou were a pitiful poor
fellow, and did live upon posts: and had nothing but three suits of
apparel, and some few benevolences that lords ga' thee to fool to them, and
swagger.


Let me not live, I'll beat them. I'll bind them both to grand Madames
bed-postes, and have them baited with monkeyes.


Thou shalt not need, they shall be beaten to thy hand, DAVPHINE. I have an
execution to serve upon them, I warrant thee shall serve: trust my plot.


I, you have many plots! So you had one, to make all the wenches in love with
me.


Why, if I do not yet before night, as near as 'tis; and that they do not
every one inuit thee, and be ready to scratch for thee: take the mortgage of my
wit.


Before god, I'll be his witness; thou shalt have it, DAVPHINE: thou shalt be
his fool for ever, if thou doest not.


Agreed. Perhaps 'twill be the better estate. Do you observe this gallery?
or rather lobby, indeed? Here are a couple of studies, at each end one: here
will I act such a tragi-comoedy between the Guelphes, and the Ghibellines, DAW
and LA-FOOLE -- which of them comes out first, will I seize on: (you two shall
be the chorus behind the arras, and whip out between the acts, and speak.) If
I do not make them keep the peace, for this remnant of the day, if not of the
year, I have failed once -- I hear DAW coming: Hide, and do not laugh, for
gods sake.


Which is the way into the garden, trow*


O, JACK DAW! I am glad I have met with you. In good faith, I must have this
matter go no further between you. I must have it taken up.


What matter, sir? Between whom?


Come, you disguise it -- Sir AMOROUS and you. If you love me JACK, you shall
make use of your philosophy now, for this once, and deliver me your sword. This
is not the wedding the CENTAVRES were at, though there be a shee-one here. The
bride has entreated me I will see no blood shed at her bridal, you saw her
whisper me ere-while.


As I hope to finish TACITVS, I intend no murder.


Do you not wait for sir AMOROUS?


Not I, by my knight-hood.


And your schollership too?


And my schollership too.


Go to, then I return you your sword, and ask you mercy; but put it not up,
for you will be assaulted. I understood that you had apprehended it, and walked
here to brave him: and that you had held your life contemptible, in regard of
your honour.


No, no, no such thing I assure you. He and I parted now, as good friends as
could be.


Trust not you to that visor. I saw him since dinner with another face: I have
known many men in my time vexed with losses, with deaths, and with abuses, but
so offended a wight as sir AMOROUS, did I never see, or read of. For taking
away his guests, sir, to day, that's the cause: and he declares it behind your
back, with such threatenings and contempts -- He said to DAVPHINE, you were the
errandst ass --


I, he may say his pleasure.


And swears, you are so protested a coward, that he knows you will never do
him any manly or single right, and therefore he will take his course.


I'll give him any satisfaction, sir -- but fighting.


I, sir, but who knows what satisfaction hee'll take? blood he thirsts for,
and blood he will have: and where-abouts on you he will have it, who knows,
but himself?


I pray you, master TRVE-WIT, be you a mediator.


Well, sir, conceal your self then in this study, till I return. Nay, you
must be content to be locked in: for, for mine own reputation I would not
have you seen to receive a public disgrace, while I have the matter in
managing. Gods so, here he comes: keep your breath close, that he do not
hear you sigh. In good faith, sir AMOROUS, he is not this way, I pray you be
merciful, do not murder him; he is a christian as good as you: you are armed
as if you sought a revenge on all his race. Good DAVPHINE, get him away from
this place. I never knew a mans choler so high, but he would speak to his
friends, he would hear reason. JACK DAW, JACK DAW! asleep?


Is he gone, master TRVE-WIT?


I, did you hear him?


O god, yes.


What a quick ear fear has?


But is he so armed, as you say?


Armed? did you ever see a fellow, set out to take possession?


I, sir.


That may give you some light, to conceive of him: but 'tis nothing to the
principal. Some false brother in the house has furnished him strangely* Or, if
it were out of the house, it was TOM OTTER.


Indeed, he's a Captain, and his wife is his kinswoman.


He has got some-bodies old two-hand-sword, to mow you off at the knees. And
that sword hath spawned such a dagger! -- but then he is so hung with pikes,
halberds, peitronells, calliuers, and muskets, that he looks like a Justice of
peace's hall: a man of two thousand a year, is not sess'd at so many weapons,
as he has on. There was never fencer challenged at so many several foils. You
would think he meant to murder all Saint PVLCHRES parish. If he could but
victual himself for half a year, in his breeches, he is sufficiently armed
to ouer-runne a country.


Good lord, what means he, sir! I pray you, master TRVEWIT, be you a mediator.


Well, I'll try if he will be appeased with a leg or an arm, if not, you must
die once.


I would be loath to loose my right arm, for writing madrigalls.


Why, if he will be satisfied with a thumb, or a little finger, all's one to
me. You must think, I'll do my best.


Good sir, do.


What hast thou done?


He will let me do nothing, man, he does all before me, he offers his left
arm.


His left wing, for a JACK DAW.


Take it, by all means.


How! Maim a man for ever, for a jest? what a conscience hast thou?


'Tis no loss to him: he has no employment for his arms, but to eat
spoone-meate. Beside, as good maim his body as his reputation.


He is a scholar, and a Wit, and yet he does not think so. But he looses no
reputation with us, for we all resolved him an ass before. To your places
again.


I pray thee, let me be in at the other a little.


Look, you'll spoil all: these be ever your tricks.


No, but I could hit of some things that thou wilt miss, and thou wilt say are
good ones.


I warrant you. I pray forbear, I'll leave it off, else.


Come away, CLERIMONT.


Sir AMOROUS!


Master TRVE-WIT.


Whether were you going?


Down into the court, to make water.


By no means, sir, you shall rather tempt your breeches.


Why, sir?


Enter here, if you love your life.


Why! why!


Question till your throat be cut, do: dally till the enraged soul find you.


Who's that?


DAW it is: will you in?


I, I, I'll in: what's the matter?


Nay, if he had been cool enough to tell us that, there had been some hope
to atone you, but he seems so implacably enraged.


'Slight, let him rage. I'll hide my self.


Do, good sir. But what have you done to him within, that should provoke him
thus? you have broke some jest upon him, before the ladies --


Not I, never in my life, broke jest upon any man. The bride was praising sir
DAVPHINE, and he went away in snuff, and I followed him, unless he took
offence at me, in his drink ere while, that I would not pledge all the horse
full.


By my faith, and that may be, you remember well: but he walks the round up
and down, through every room of the house, with a towel in his hand, crying,
where's LA-FOOLE? who saw LA-FOOLE? and when DAVPHINE, and I, demanded the
cause, we can force no answer from him, but (O revenge, how sweet art thou! I
will strangle him in this towel) which leads us to conjecture, that the maine
cause of his fury is for bringing your meat to day, with a towel about you,
to his discredit.


Like enough. Why, and he be angry for that, I'll stay here, till his anger be
blown over.


A good becoming resolution, sir. If you can put it on of the sudden.


Yes, I can put it on. Or, I'll away into the country presently.


How will you get out of the house, sir? He knows you are in the house, and
hee'll watch you this se'n-night but hee'll have you. Hee'll out-wait a
sergeant for you.


Why, then I'll stay here.


You must think, how to victual your self in time, then.


Why, sweet master TRVE-WIT, will you entreat my cousin OTTER, to send me a
cold venison pasty, a bottle or two of wine, and a chamber pot.


A stool were better, sir, of sir A-IAX his invention.


I, that will be better indeed: and a palate to lie on.


O, I would not advise you to sleep by any means.


Would you not, sir? why, then I will not.


Yet, there's another fear --


Is there, sir? What is't?


No, he cannot break open this door with his foot, sure.


I'll set my back against it, sir. I have a good back.


But, then if he should batter.


Batter! if he dare, I'll have an action of battery, against him.


Cast you the worst. He has sent for poulder already, and what he will do
with it, no man knows: perhaps blow up the corner of the house, where he
suspects you are. Here he comes, in quickly. I protest, sir IOHN DAW, he is not
this way: what will you do? before god, you shall hang no petarde here. I'll
die rather. Will you not take my word? I never knew one but would be satisfied.
Sir AMOROUS, there's no standing out. He has made a petarde of an old brass
pot, to force your door. Think upon some satisfaction, or terms, to offer
him.


Sir, I'll give him any satisfaction. I dare give any terms.


You'll leave it to me, then?


I, sir. I'll stand to any conditions.


How now, what think you, sirs? were it not a difficult thing to determine,
which of these two feared most.


Yes, but this fears the bravest: the other a whiniling dastard, JACK DAW! but
LA-FOOLE, a brave heroic coward! and is afraid in a great look, and a stout
accent. I like him rarely.


Had it not been pity, these two should have been concealed?


Shall I make a motion?


Briefly. For I must strike while 'tis hot.


Shall I go fetch the ladies to the catastrophe?


Vmh? I, by my troth.


By no mortal means. Let them continue in the state of ignorance, and err
still: think them wits, and fine fellows, as they have done. 'Twere sin to
reform them.


Well, I will have them fetched, now I think on it, for a private purpose of
mine: do, CLERIMONT, fetch them, and discourse to hem all that's past, and
bring them into the gallery here.


This is thy extreme vanity, now: thou think thou were undone, if every
jest thou make were not published.


Thou shalt see, how unjust thou art, presently. CLERIMONT, say it was
DAVPHINE'S plot. Trust me not, if the whole drift be not for thy good. There's
a carpet in the next room, put it on, with this scarf over thy face, and a
cushion of thy head, and be ready when I call AMOROUS. Away -- IOHN DAW.


What good news, sir.


Faith, I have followed, and argued with him hard for you. I told him, you were
a knight, and a scholar; and that you knew fortitude did consist magis
patiendo quam faciendo, magis ferendo quam feriendo.


It doth so indeed, sir.


And that you would suffer, I told him: so, at first he demanded, by my troth,
in my conceit, too much.


What was it, sir.


Your upper lip, and six o'your fore-teeth.


'Twas unreasonable.


Nay, I told him plainly, you could not spare them all. So after long argument
( pro con, as you know) I brought him down to your two butter-teeth, and them
he would have.


O, did you so? why, he shall have them.


But he shall not, sir, by your leave. The conclusion is this, sir, because you
shall be very good friends hereafter, and this never to be remembered, or
vp-braided; besides, that he may not boast, he has done any such thing to you
in his own person: he is to come here in disguise, give you five kicks in
private, sir, take your sword from you, and lock you up in that study, during
pleasure. Which will be but a little while, we'll get it released presently.


Five kicks? he shall have six, sir, to be friends.


Believe me, you shall not ouer-shoot your self, to send him that word by me.


Deliver it, sir. He shall have it with all my heart, to be friends.


Friends? Nay, and he should not be so, and heartily too, upon these terms, he
shall have me to enemy while I live. Come, sir, bear it bravely.


O god, sir, 'tis nothing.


True. What's six kicks to a man, that reads SENECA?


I have had a hundred, sir.


Sir AMOROUS. No speaking one to another, or rehearsing old matters.


One, two, three, four, five. I protest, sir AMOROUS, you shall have six.


Nay, I told you should not talk. Come, give him six, he will needs. Your
sword. Now return to your safe custody: you shall presently meet before the
ladies, and be the dearest friends one to another -- Give me the scarf, now,
thou shalt beat the other bare-fac'd. Stand by, sir AMOROUS.


What's here? A sword.


I cannot help it, without I should take the quarrel upon my self: here he
has sent you his sword --


I'll receive none on it.


And he wills you to fasten it against a wall, and break your head in some few
several places against the hilts.


I will not: tell him roundly. I cannot endure to shed my own blood.


Will you not?


No. I'll beat it against a fair flat wall, if that will satisfy him: If not,
he shall beat it himself, for AMOROUS.


Why, this is strange starting off, when a man vnder-takes for you! I offered
him another condition: Will you stand to that?


I, what is't.


That you will be beaten, in private.


Yes. I am content, at the blunt.


Then you must submit your self to be hood-wink'd in this scarf, and be led
to him, where he will take your sword from you, and make you bear a blow,
over the mouth, gules, and tweakes by the nose, sans number.


I am content. But why must I be blinded?


That's for your good, sir: because, if he should grow insolent upon this, and
publish it hereafter to your disgrace (which I hope he will not do) you might
swear safely and protest, he never beat you, to your knowledge.


O, I conceive.


I do not doubt, but you'll be perfect good friends upon it, and not dare to
utter an ill thought one of another, in future.


Not I, as god help me, of him.


Nor he of you, sir. If he should -- Come, sir. All hid, sir IOHN.


Oh, sir IOHN, sir IOHN. Oh, O-O-O-O-O-Oh --


Good, sir IOHN, leave tweaking, you'll blow his nose off. 'Tis sir IOHN'S
pleasure, you should retire into the study. Why, now you are friends. All
bitterness between you, I hope, is buried; you shall come forth by and by,
DAMON PYTHIAS upon it: and embrace with all the rankness of friendship that can
be. I trust, we shall have them tamer in their language hereafter. DAVPHINE, I
worship thee. Gods will, the ladies have surprised us!


CENTAVRE, how our judgements were imposed on by these adulterate knights!


Nay, madame, MAVIS was more deceived then we, 'twas her commendation uttered
them in the college.


I commended but their wits, madame, and their braueries. I never looked toward
their valours.


Sir DAVPHINE is valiant, and a wit too, it seems?


And a bravery too.


Was this his project?


So master CLERIMONT intimates, madame.


Good MOROSE, when you come to the college, will you bring him with you? He
seems a very perfect gentleman.


He is so, madame, believe it.


But when will you come, MOROSE?


Three or four days hence, madame, when I have got me a coach, and horses.


No, to morrow, good MOROSE, CENTAVRE shall send you her coach.


Yes faith, do, and bring sir DAVPHINE with you.


She has promised that, MAVIS.


He is a very worthy gentleman, in his exteriors, madame.


I, he shows he is judicial in his clothes.


And yet not so superlatiuely neat as some, madame, that have their faces set
in a brake!


I, and have every hair in form!


That wear purer linen then our selves, and profess more neatness, then the
french hermaphrodite!


I ladies, they, what they tell one of us, have told a thousand, and are the
only thieves of our fame: that think to take us with that perfume, or with
that lace, and laugh at us vn-conscionably when they have done.


But, sir DAVPHINES carelessness becomes him.


I could love a man, for such a nose!


Or such a leg!


He has an exceeding good eye, madame!


And a very good lock!


Good MOROSE, bring him to my chamber first.


Please your honours, to meet at my house, madame?


See, how they eye thee, man! they are taken, I warrant thee.


You have vnbrac'd our brace of knights, here, master TRVE-WIT.


Not I, madame, it was sir DAVPHINES ingine: who, if he have disfurnished your
ladyship of any guard, or service by it, is able to make the place good again,
in himself.


There's no suspicion of that, sir.


God so, MAVIS, HAVGHTY is kissing.


Let us go too, and take part.


But I am glad of the fortune (beside the discovery of two such empty
caskets) to gain the knowledge of so rich a mine of virtue, as sir DAVPHINE.


We would be al glad to stile him of our friendship, and see him at the
college.


He cannot mix with a sweeter society, I'll prophecy, and I hope he himself
will think so.


I should be rude to imagine otherwise, lady.


Did not I tell thee, DAVPHINE? Why, all their actions are governed by crude
opinion, without reason or cause; they know not why they do any thing, without
reason or cause; they know not why they do any thing: but as they are
informed, believe, judge, praise, condemn, love, hate, and in aemulation one
of another, do all these things alike. Only, they have a natural inclination
sways them generally to the worst, when they are left to themselves. But,
pursue it, now thou hast them.


Shall we go in again, MOROSE?


Yes, madame.


We'll entreat sir DAVPHINES company.


Stay, good madame, the inter-view of the two friends, PYLADES and ORESTES:
I'll fetch them out to you straight.


Will you, master TRVE-WIT?


I, but noble ladies, do not confess in your countenance, or outward bearing
to them any discovery of their follies, that we may see, how they will bear
up again, with what assurance, and erection.


We will not, sir DAVPHINE.


Upon our honours, sir DAVPHINE.


Sir AMOROUS, sir AMOROUS. The ladies are here.


Are they?


Yes, but slip out by and by, as their backs are turned, and meet sir IOHN
here, as by chance, when I call you. JACK DAW.


What say you, sir?


Whip out behind me suddenly: and no anger in your looks to your adversary.
Now, now.


Noble sir IOHN DAW! where have you been?


To seek you, sir AMOROUS.


Me! I honour you.


I prevent you, sir.


They have forgot their rapiers!


O, they meet in peace, man.


Where's your sword, sir IOHN?


And yours, sir AMOROUS?


Mine! my boy had it forth, to mend the handle, even now.


And my gold handle was broke too, and my boy had it forth.


Indeed, sir? How their excuses meet!


What a consent there is, in the handles?


Nay, there is so in the points too, I warrant you.


O me! madame, he comes again, the man man, away.


what make these naked weapons here, gentlemen?


O, sir! here hath like to been murder since you went! A couple of knights
fallen out about the brides favours: we were fain to take away their weapons,
your house had been begged by this time else --


For what?


For man-slaughter, sir, as being accessory.


And, for her favours?


I, sir, heretofore, not present. CLERIMONT, carry them their swords, now. They
have done all the hurt they will do.


Have you spke with a lawyer, sir?


O, no! there is such a noise in the court, that they have frighted me home,
with more violence then I went! such speaking, and counter-speaking, with their
several voices of citations, appellations, allegations, certificates,
attachments, intergatories, references, conuictions, and afflictions indeed,
among the Doctors and Proctors! that the noise here is silence too 't! a kind
of calm mid-night!


Why, sir, if you would be resolved indeed, I can bring you hither a very
sufficient Lawyer, and a learned Divine, that shall inquire into every least
scruple for you.


Can you, master TRVE-WIT?


Yes, and are very sober grave persons, that will dispatch it in a chamber,
with a whisper, or two.


Good sir, shall I hope this benefit from you, and trust my self into your
hands?


Alas, sir! your nephew, and I, have been ashamed, and oft-times mad since you
went, to think how you are abused. Go in, good sir, and lock your self up
till! we call you, we'll tell you more anon, sir.


Do your pleasure with me, gentlemen; I believe in you: and that deserves no
delusion --


You shall find none, sir: but heaped, heaped plenty of vexation.


What wilt thou do now, WIT?


Recover me hither OTTER, and the Barber, if you can, by any means, presently.


Why? to what purpose?


O, I'll make the deepest Divine, and gravest Lawyer, out of them two, for him
--


Thou can not man, these are waking dreams.


Do not fear me. Clap but a civil gown with a welt, of the one; and a
canonical cloak with sleeves, of the other: and give them a few terms in
their mouths, if there come not forth as able a Doctor, and complete a Parson,
for this turn, as may be wished, trust not my election. And, I hope, without
wronging the dignity of either profession, since they are but persons put on,
and for mirths sake, to torment him. The Barber smatters latin, I remember.


Yes, and OTTER too.


Well then, if I make them not wrangle out this case, to his no comfort, let me
be thought a JACK DAW, or LA-FOOLE, or any thing worse. Go you to your ladies,
but first send for them.


I will.


WHere had you our swords, master CLERIMONT?


Why, DAVPHINE took them from the mad-man.


And he took them from our boys, I warrant you?


Very like, sir.


Thank you, good master CLERIMONT. Sir IOHN DAW, and I are both beholden to
you.


Would I knew how to make you so, gentlemen.


Sir AMOROUS, and I are your servants, sir.


Gentlemen, have any of you a pen-and-inke. I would fain write out a riddle in
Italian, for sir DAVPHINE, to translate.


Not I, in troth lady, I am no scrivener.


I can furnish you, I think, lady.


He has it in the haft of a knife, I believe!


No, he has his box of instruments.


Like a surgean!


For the mathematiques: his squire, his compasses, his brass pens, and
black-lead, to draw maps of every place, and person, where he comes.


How, maps of persons!


Yes, sir, of NOMENTACK, when he was here, and of the Prince of Moldauia, and
of his mistress, mistress EPICoeNE.


Away! he has not found out her latitude, I hope.


You are a pleasant gentleman, sir.


Faith, now we are in private, let's wanton it a little, and talk waggishly.
Sir IOHN, I am telling sir AMOROUS here, that you two govern the ladies, where
e're you come, you carry the feminine gender before you.


They shall rather carry us before them, if they will, sir.


Nay, I believe that they do, withal -- But, that you are the prime-men in
their affections, and direct all their actions --


Not I: sir AMOROUS is.


I protest, sir IOHN is.


As I hope to rise in the state, sir AMOROUS, you have the person.


Sir IOHN, you have the person, and the discourse too.


Not I, sir. I have no discourse -- and then you have activity beside.


I protest, sir IOHN, you come as high from Tripoly, as I do every whit: and
lift as many joined stools, and leap over them, if you would use it --


Well, agree on it together knights; for between you, you divide the kingdom,
or common-wealth of ladies affections: I see it, and can perceive a little how
they observe you, and fear you, indeed. You could tell strange stories, my
masters, if you would, I know.


Faith, we have seen somewhat, sir.


That we have -- vellet petti-coates, wrought smocks, or so.


I, and --


Nay, out with it, sir IOHN: do not envy your friend the pleasure of hearing,
when you have had the delight of tasting.


Why -- a -- do you speak, sir AMOROUS.


No, do you, sir IOHN DAW.


I'faith, you shall.


I'faith, you shall.


Why, we have been --


In the great bed at Ware together in our time. On, sir IOHN.


Nay, do you, sir AMOROUS.


And these ladies with you, Knights?


No, excuse us, sir.


We must not wound reputation.


No matter -- they were these, or others. Our bath cost us fifteen pound, when
we came home.


Do you hear, sir IOHN, you shall tell me but one thing truly, as you love
me.


If I can, I will, sir.


You lay in the same house with the bride, here?


Yes, and conversed with her hourly, sir.


And what humour is she of? is she coming, and open, free?


O, exceeding open, sir. I was her servant, and sir AMOROUS was to be.


Come, you have both had favours from her? I know, and have heard so much.


O, no, sir.


You shall excuse us, sir: we must not wound reputation.


Tut, she is married, now; and you cannot hurt her with any report, and
therefore speak plainly: how many times, in faith? which of you lead first? Ha?


Sir IOHN had her mayden-head, indeed.


O, it pleases him to say so, sir, but sir AMOROUS knows what's what, as well.


Dost thou in faith, AMOROUS?


In a manner, sir.


Why, I commend you lads. Little knows Don Bridegroom of this. Nor shall he,
for me.


Hang him, mad ox.


Speak softly: here comes his nephew, with the lady HAVGHTY. Hee'll get the
ladies from you, sirs, if you look not to him in time.


Why, if he do, we'll fetch them home again, I warrant you.


I Assure you, sir DAVPHINE, it is the price and estimation of your virtue
only, that hath embarked me to this adventure, and I could not but make out
to tell you so; nor can I repent me of the act, since it is always an argument
of some virtue in our selves, that we love and affect it so in others.


Your ladyship sets too high a price, on my weakness.


Sir, I can distinguish gems from peebles --


(Are you so skilful in stones?)


And, howsoever I may suffer in such a judgment as yours, by admitting
equality of rank, or society, with CENTAVRE, or MAVIS --


You do not, madame, I perceive they are your mere foils.


Then are you a friend to truth, sir. It makes me love you the more. It is not
the outward, but the inward man that I affect. They are not apprehensive of an
eminent perfection, but love flat, and dully.


Where are you, my lady HAVGHTY?


I come presently, CENTAVRE. My chamber, sir, my Page shall show you; and
TRVSTY, my woman, shall be ever awake for you: you need not fear to
communicate anything with her, for she is a FIDELIA. I pray you wear this
jewel for my sake, sir DAVPHINE. Where's MAVIS, CENTAVRE?


Within, madame, a writing. I'll follow you presently. I'll but speak a word
with sir DAVPHINE.


With me, madame?


Good sir DAVPHINE, do not trust HAVGHTY, nor make any credit to her, what
ever you do besides. Sir DAVPHINE, I give you this caution, she is a perfect
courtier, and loves no body, but for her uses: and for her uses, she loves
all. Besides, her physicians give her out to be none of the clearest, whether
she pay them or no, heaven knows: and she's above fifty too, and pargets! See
her in a fore-noone. Here comes MAVIS, a worse face then she! you would not
like this, by candle-light. If you'll come to my chamber one of these mornings
early, or late in an evening, I'll tell you more. Where's HAVGHTY, MAVIS?


Within, CENTAVRE.


What have you, there?


An Italian riddle for sir DAVPHINE, (you shall not see it in faith, CENTAVRE.)
Good sir DAVPHINE, solve it for me. I'll call for it anon.


How now, DAVPHINE? how dost thou quit thy self of these females?


'S light, they haunt me like fairies, and give me jewels here, I cannot be
rid of them.


O, you must not tell, though.


Mass, I forgot that: I was never so assaulted. One loves for virtue, and
bribes me with this. Another loves me with caution, and so would possess me. A
third brings me a riddle here, and all are jealous: and rail each at other.


A riddle? pray le' me see 't? Sir DAVPHINE, I chose this way of intimation
for privacy. The ladies here, I know, have both hope, and purpose, to make a
collegiate and servant of you. If I might be so honoured, as to appear at any
end of so noble a work, I would enter into a fame of taking physique tomorrow,
and continue it four or five days, or longer, for your visitation. MAVIS. By
my faith, a subtle one! Call you this a reiddle? What's their plain dealing,
trow?


We lack TRVE-WIT, to tell us that.


We lack him for somewhat else too: his Knights reformados are wound up as
high, and insolent, as ever they were.


You jest.


No drunkards, either with wine or vanity, ever confessed such stories of
themselves. I would not give a flies leg, in balance against all the women's
reputations here, if they could be but thought to speak truth: and, for the
bride, they have made their affidauit against her directly --


What, that they have lain with her?


Yes, and tell times, and circumstances, with the cause why, and the place
where. I had almost brought them to affirm that they had done it, to day.


Not both of them.


Yes faith: with a sooth or two more I had effected it. They would have set it
down under their hands.


Why, they will be our sport, I see, still! whether we will, or no.


O, Are you here? Come DAVPHINE. Go, call your uncle presently. I have fitted
my Divine, my Canonist, died their beards and all: the knaves do not know
themselves they are so exalted, and altered. Preferment changes any man. Thou
shalt keep one door, and I another, and then CLERIMONT in the midst, that he
may have no means of escape from their cavilling, when they grow hot once. And
then the women (as I have given the bride her instructions) to break in upon
him, in the l'enuoy. O, 'twill be full and twanging! Away, fetch him. Come,
master Doctor, and master Parson, look to your parts now, and discharge them
bravely: you are well set forth, perform it as well. If you chance to be out,
do not confess it with standing still, or humming, or gaping one at another:
but go on, and talk aloud, and eagerly, use vehement action, and only
remember your terms, and you are safe. Let the matter go where it will: you
have many will do so. But at first, be very solemn, and grave like your
garments, though you loose your selves after, and skip out like a brace of
iugglers on a table. Here he comes! set your faces, and look superciliously,
while I present you.


Are these the two learned men?


Yes, sir, please you salute them?


Salute them? I had rather do any thing, then wear out time so unfruitfully,
sir. I wonder, how these common forms, as god save you, and you are well-come,
are come to be a habit in our lives! or, I am glad to see you! when I cannot
see, what the profit can be of these words, so long as it is no whit better
with him, whose affairs are sad, grievous, that he hears this salutation.


'Tis true, sir, we'll go to the matter then. Gentlemen, master Doctor, and
master Pastor, I have acquainted you sufficiently with the business, for which
you are come hither. And you are not now to inform your selves in the state of
the question, I know. This is the gentleman, who expects your resolution, and
therefore, when you please, begin.


Please you, master Doctor.


Please you, good master Parson.


I would hear the Canon-law speak first.


It must give place to positive Divinity, sir.


Nay, good gentlemen, do not throw me into circumstances. Let your comforts
arrive quickly at me, those that are. Be swift in affoording me my peace, if so
I shall hope any. I love not your disputations, or your court-tumults. And that
it be not strange to you, I will tell you. My father, in my education, was wont
to advise me, that I should always collect, and contain my mind, not
suffering it to ^low loosely; that I should look to what things were necessary
to the carriage of my life, and what not: embracing the one and eschewing the
other. In short, that I should endear my self to rest, and avoid turmoil:
which now is grown to be another nature to me. So that I come not to your
public pleadings, or your places of noise; not that I neglect those things,
that make for the dignity of the common-wealth: but for the mere avoiding of
clamours, impertinencies of Orators, that know not how to be silent. And for the
cause of noise, am I now a suitor to you. You do not know in what a misery I
have been exercised this day, what a torrent of evil! My very house turns
round with the tumult! I dwell in a wind-mill! The perpetual motion is here,
and not at Eltham.


Well, good master Doctor, will you break the ice? master Parson will wade
after.


Sir, though unworthy, and the weaker, I will presume.


'Tis no presumption, domine Doctor.


Yet again!


Your question is, for how many causes a man may have diuortium legitimum, a
lawful divorce. First, you must understand the nature of the word divorce, a
diuertendo --


No excursions upon words, good Doctor, to the question briefly.


I answer then, the Canon-law affords divorce but in few cases, and the
principal is in the common case, the adulterous case. But there are duodecim
impedimenta, twelve impediments (as we call them) all which do not dirimere
contractum, but irritum reddere matrimonium, as we say in the Canon-law, not
take away the bond, but cause a nullitie therein.


I understood you, before: good sir, avoid your impertinencie of translation.


He cannot open this too much, sir, by your favour.


Yet more!


O, you must give the learned men leave, sir. To your impediments, master
Doctor.


The first is impedimentum erroris.


Of which there are several species.


I, as error personae.


If you contract your self to one person, thinking her another.


The, error fortunae.


If she be a beggar, and you thought her rich.


Then, error qualitatis.


If she prove stubborn, or head-strong, that you thought obedient.


How? is that, sir a lawful impediment? One at once, I pray you gentlemen.


I, ante copulam, but not post copulam, sir.


Mr. Parson says right. Nec post nuptiarum benedictionem. It doth indeed but
irrita reddere sponsalia, annull the contract: after marriage it is of no
onstancy.


Alas, sir, what a hope are we fallen from, by this time!


The next is condition: if you thought her free borne, and she prove a
bond-woman, there is impediment of estate and condition.


I, but Mr. Doctor, those seruitudes are sublatae, now, among us christians.


By your favour, master Parson --


You shall give me leave, master Doctor.


Nay, gentlemen, quarrel not in that question; it concerns not my case: pass
to the third.


Well then, the third is votum. If either party have made a vow of chastity.
But that practice, as master Parson said of the other, is taken away among us,
thanks be to discipline. The fourth is cognatio: if the persons be of kin,
within the degrees.


I: do you know, what the degrees are, sir?


No, nor I care not, sir: they offer me no comfort in the question, I am sure.


But, there is a branch of this impediment may, which is cognitio spiritualis.
If you were her god-father, sir, then the marriage is incestuous.


That comment is absurd, and superstitious, master Doctor. I cannot endure it.
Are we not all brothers and sisters, and as much a kin in that, as
god-fathers, and god-daughters?


O me! to end the controversy, I never was a god-father, I never was a
god-father in my life, sir. Pass to the next.


The fifth is crimen adulterij: the known case. The sixth, cultus disparitas,
difference of religion: have you ever examined her, what religion she is of?


No, I would rather she were of none, then be put to the trouble of it!


You may have it done for you, sir.


By no means, good sir, on, to the rest: shall you ever come to an end, think
you?


Yes, he has done half, sir. (On, to the rest) be patient, and expect, sir.


The seventh is, vis: if it were upon compulsion, or force.


O no, it was too voluntary, mine: too voluntary.


The eight is, or do: if ever she have taken holy orders.


That's superstitious, too.


No matter, master Parson: would she would go into a nunnery yet.


The ninth is, ligamen: if you were bound, sir, to any other before.


I thrust my self too soon into these fetters.


The tenth is, publica honestas: which is inchoata quaedam affinitas.


I, or affinitas orta ex sponsalibus: and is but leave impedimentum.


I feel no air of comfort blowing to me, in all this.


The eleventh is, affitas ex fornicatione.


Which is no less vera affinitas, then the other, master Doctor.


True, quae oritur ex legitimo matrimonio.


You say right, venerable Doctor. And, nascitur ex eo, quod per coniugium duae
personae efficiuntur una caro --


Hey-day, now they begin.


I conceive you, master Parson. Ita per fornicationem aeque est verus pater,
qui sic generat --


Et vere filius qui sic generatur --


What's all this to me?


Now it grows warm.


The twelfth, and last is, si forte coire nequibis.


I, that is impedimentum grauissimum. It doth utterly annull, and annihilate,
that. If you have manifestam frigiditatem, you are well, sir.


Why, there is comfort come at length, sir. Confess your self but a man
unable, and she will sue to be diuorc'd first.


I, or if there be morbus perpetuus, insanabilis, as Paralisis, Elephantiasis,
or so --


O, but frigiditas is the fairer way, gentlemen.


You say troth, sir, and as it is in the canon, master Doctor.


I conceive you, sir.


Before he speaks.


That a boy, or child under years, is not fit for marriage, because he cannot
reddere debitum. So your omnipotentes --


Your impotentes, you whoreson Lobster.


Your impotentes, I should sa,y, are minim apti ad contrahenda matrimonium.


Matrimonium? We shall have most vn-matrimoniall latin, with you: matrimonia,
and be hanged.


You put them out, man.


But then there will arise a doubt, master Parson, in our case, post
matrimonium: that frigiditate praeditus (do you conceive me, sir?)


Very well, sir.


Who cannot vti vxore pro vxore, may habere eam pro sorore.


Absurd, absurd, absurd, and merely apostaticall.


You shall pardon me, master Parson, I can prove it.


You can prove a Will, master Doctor, you can prove nothing else. Does not the
verse of your own canon say. Haec socianda vetant conubia, facta retractant --



I grant you, but how do they retractare, master Parson?


(O, this was it, I feared.)


In aeternum, sir.


That's false in divinity, by your favour.


'Tis false in humanity, to say so. Is he not prorsus invtilis ad thorum? Can
he praestare fidem datam? I would fain know.


Yes: how if he do conualere?


He can not conualere, it is impossible.


Nay, good sir, attend the learned men, they'll think you neglect them else.


Or, if he do simulare himself frigidum, odio vxoris, or so?


I say, he is adulter manifestus, then.


(They dispute it very learnedly, in faith.)


And prostitutor vxoris, and this is positive.


Good sir, let me escape.


You will not do me that wrong, sir?


And therefore, if he be manifest frigidus, sir --


I, if he be manifest frigidus, I grant you --


Why, that was my conclusion.


And mine too.


Nay, hear the conclusion, sir.


Then, frigiditatis causa --


Yes, causa frigiditatis --


O, mine ears!


She may have libellum diuortij, against you.


I, diuortij libellum she will sure have.


Good eccho's, forbear.


If you confess it.


Which I would do, sir --


I will do any thing --


And clear my self in foro conscientiae --


Because you want indeed --


Yet more?


Exercendi potestate.


I Will not endure it any longer. Ladies, I beseech you help me. This is such
a wrong, as never was offered to poor bride before. Upon her marriage day, to
have her husband conspire against her, and a couple of mercenary companions,
to be brought in for forms sake, to persuade a separation! If you had blood,
or virtue in you, gentlemen, you would not suffer such eare-wigs about a
husband, or scorpions, to creep between man and wife --


O, the variety and changes of my torment!


Let them be cudgell'd out of doors, by our grooms.


I'll lend you my foot-man.


We'll have our men blanket them in the hall.


As there was one, at our house, madame, for peeping in at the door.


Content, in faith.


Stay, ladies, and gentlemen, you'll hear, before you proceed?


I'lld have the bridegroom blanketted, too.


Begin with him first.


Yes, by my troth.


O, mankind generation!


Ladies, for my sake forbear.


Yes, for sir DAVPHINES sake.


He shall command us.


He is as fine a gentleman of his inches, madame, as any is about the town,
and wears as good colours when he list.


Be brief, sir, and confess your infirmity, shee'll be a-fire to be quit of
you, if she but hear that named once, you shall not entreat her to stay.
Shee'll fly you, like one that had the marks upon him.


Ladies, I must crave all your pardons --


Silence, ladies.


For a wrong I have done to your whole sex, in marrying this fair, and
virtuous gentlewoman --


Hear him, good ladies.


Being guilty of an infirmity, which before I conferred with these learned
men, I thought I might have concealed --


But now being better informed in his conscience by them, he is to declare it,
give satisfaction, by asking your public forgiveness.


I am no man, ladies.


How!


Utterly vn-abled in nature, by reason of frigidity, to perform the duties, or
any the least office of a husband.


Now, out upon him, prodigious creature!


Bridegroom vncarnate.


And would you offer it, to a young gentlewoman?


A lady of her longings?


Tut, a device, a device, this, it smells rankly, ladies. A mere comment of his
own.


Why, if you suspect that, ladies, you may have him searched.


As the custom is, by a jury of physicians.


Yes faith, 'twill be brave.


O me, must I vnder-goe that!


No, let women search him, madame: we can do it our selves.


Out on me, worse!


No, ladies, you shall not need, I'll take him with all his faults.


Worst of all!


Why, then 'tis no divorce, Doctor, if she consent not?


No, if the man be frigidus, it is de part vxoris, that we grant libellum
diuortij, in the law.


I, it is the same in theology.


Worse, worse then worst!


Nay, sir, be not utterly dis-heartned, we have yet a small relic of hope
left, as near as our comfort is blown out. CLERIMONT, produce your brace of
Knights. What was that, master Parson, you told me in errore qualitatis, even
now? DAVPHINE, whisper the bride, that she carry it as if she were guilty,
and ashamed.


Mary sir, in errore qualitatis (which master Doctor did forbear to urge) if
she be found corrupta, that is, vitiated or broken up, that was pro virgin
desponsa, espoused for a maid --


What then, sir?


It doth dirimere contractum, and irritum reddere too.


If this be true, we are happy again, sir, once more. Here are an honourable
brace of Knights, that shall affirm so much.


Pardon us, good master CLERIMONT.


You shall excuse us, master CLERIMONT.


Nay, you must make it good now, Knights, there is no remedy, I'll eat no
words for you, nor no men: you know you spoke it to me?


Is this gentleman-like, sir?


JACK DAW, he's worse then sir AMOROUS: fiercer a great deal. Sir AMOROUS,
beware, there be ten DAWS in this CLERIMONT.


I'll confess it, sir.


Will you, sir AMOROUS? will you wound reputation?


I am resolved.


So should you be too, JACK DAW: what should keep you off?


Will he? I thought he would have been angry.


You will dispatch, Knights, it must be done, in faith.


Why, and it must it shall, sir, they say. They'll ne'er go back. Do not
tempt his patience.


It is true indeed, sir.


Yes, I assure you, sir.


What is true gentlemen? what do you assure me?


That we have known your bride, sir --


In good fashion. She was our mistress, or so --


Nay, you must be plain, Knights, as you were to me.


I, the question is, if you have carnaliter, or no.


Carnaliter? what else, sir?


It is enough: a plain nullitie.


I am vn-done, I am vn-done!


O, let me worship and adore you, gentlemen!


I am vn-done!


Yes, to my hand, I thank these Knights: master Parson, let me thank you
otherwise.


And, have they confessed?


Now out upon them, informers!


You see, what creatures you may bestow your favours on, madames.


I would except against them as beaten Knights, wench, and not good witnesses
in law.


Poor gentlewoman, how she takes it!


Be comforted, MOROSE, I love the better for it.


So do I, I protest.


But gentlemen, you have not known her, since matrimonium?


Not to day, master Doctor.


No, sir, not to day.


Why, then I say, for any act before, the matrimonium is good and perfect:
unless, the worshipful Bridegroom did precise, before witness demand, if
she were virgo ante nuptias.


No, that he did not, I assure you, master Doctor.


If he cannot prove that, it is ratum coniugium, notwithstanding the premises.
And they do no way impedire. And this is my sentence, this I pronounce.


I am of master Doctors resolution too, sir: if you made not that demand, ante
nuptias.


O my heart! wilt thou break? wilt thou break? this is worst of all worst
worsts! that hell could have deuis'd! Marry a whore! and so much noise!


Come, I see now plain confederacy in this Doctor, and this Parson, to abuse
a gentleman. You study his affliction. I pray be gone companions. And
gentlemen, I begin to suspect you for having parts with them. Sir, will it
please you hear me?


O, do not talk to me, take not from me the pleasure of dying in silence,
nephew.


Sir, I must speak to you. I have been long your poor despised kins-man, and
many a hard thought has strengthened you against me: but now it shall appear
if either I love you or your peace, and prefer them to all the world beside.
I will not be long or grievous to you, sir. If I free you of this unhappy
match absolutely, and instantly after all this trouble, and almost in your
despair, now --


(It cannot be.)


Sir, that you be never troubled with a murmure of it more, what shall I hope
for, or deserve of you?


O, what thou wilt, nephew! thou shalt deserve me, and have me.


Shall I have your favour perfect to me, and love hereafter?


That, and any thing beside. Make thine own conditions. My whole estate is
thine. Manage it, I will become thy Ward.


Nay, sir, I will not be so vn-reasonable.


Will sir DAVPHINE be mine enemy too?


You know, I have been long a suitor to you, uncle, that out of your estate,
which is fifteen hundred a year, you would allow me but five hundred during
life, and assure the rest upon me after: to which I have often, by my self and
friends tendered you a writing to sign, which you would never consent, or
incline too. If you please but to effect it now --


Thou shalt have it, nephew. I will do it, and more.


If I quit you not presently? and for-euer of this cumber, you shall have power
instantly, before all these, to revoke your act, and I will become, whose slave
you will give me to, for-euer.


Where is the writing? I will seal to it, that, or to a blank, and write
thine own conditions.


O me, most unfortunate wretched gentlewoman!


Will sir DAVPHINE do this?


Good sir, have some compassion on me.


O, my nephew knows you belike: away crocodile.


He does it not sure, without good ground.


Here, sir.


Come, nephew: give me the pen. I will subscribe to any thing, and seal to
what thou wilt, for my deliverance. Thou art my restorer. Here, I deliver it
thee as my deed. If there be a word in it lacking, or writ with false
orthographie, I protest before -- I will not take the advantage.


Then here is your release, sir; you have married a boy: a gentleman's son, that
I have brought up this half year, at my great charges, and for this
composition, which I have now made with you. What say you, master Doctor? this
is iustum impedimentum, I hope, error personae?


Yes sir, in primo gradu.


In primo gradu.


I thank you, good Doctor CVTBERD, and Parson OTTER. You are beholden to them,
sir, that have taken this pains for you: and my friend, master TRVE-WIT, who
enabled them for the business. Now you may go in and rest, be as private as
you will, sir. I'll not trouble you, till you trouble me with your funeral,
which I care not how soon it come. CVTBERD, I'll make your lease good. Thank
me not, but with your leg, CVTBERD. And TOM OTTER, your Princess shall be
reconciled to you. How now, gentlemen! do you look at me?


A boy.


Yes, mistress EPICOENE.


Well, DAVPHINE, you have lurch'd your friends of the better half of the
garland, by concealing this part of the plot! but much good do it thee, thou
deserve it, lad. And CLERIMONT, for thy unexpected bringing in these two to
confession, wear my part of it freely. Nay, sir DAW, and sir LA-FOOLE, you see
the gentlewoman that has done you the favours! we are all thankful to you,
and so should the woman-kind here, specially for lying on her, though not with
her! You meant so, I am sure? But, that we have stuck it upon you to day, in
your own imagined persons, and so lately; this Amazon, the champion of the
sex, should beat you now thriftily, for the common slanders, which ladies
receive from such cuckowes, as you are. You are they, that when no merit or
fortune can make you hope to enjoy their bodies, will yet lie with their
reputations, and make their fame suffer. Away you common moths of these, and
all ladies honours. Go, travail to make legs and faces, and come home with
some new matter to be laughed at: you deserve to live in an air as corrupted,
as that wherewith you feed rumour. Madames, you are mute, upon this new
metamorphosis! but here stands she, that has vindicated your fames. Take heed
of such insectae hereafter. And let it not trouble you that you have discovered
any mysteries to this young gentleman. He is (a'most) of years, will make a
good visitant within this twelue-month. In the mean time, we'll all undertake
for his secrecy, that can speak so well of his silence. Spectators, if you
like this comoedie, rise cheerfully, and now MOROSE is gone in, clap your
hands. It may be, that noise will cure him, at least please him.


This Comoedie was first acted, in the year 1609.

By the Children of her Majesties REVELS.

The principal Comoedians were,

With the allowance of the Master of REVELS.


