Then, Brother Poet,

Brother.

I have a suite.

What is it?

Your devise.

As you came in upon me, I was then
Offering the argument, and this it is.

Silence.

The mighty Neptune, mighty in his styles,
And large command of waters, and of Isles,
Not, as the Lord and Sovereign of the Seas,
But, Chief in the art of riding, late did please
To send his Albion forth, the most his own,
Upon discovery, to themselves best known,
Through Celtiberia; and, to assist his course,
Gave him his powerful Horse,
With divine Proteus, Father of disguise,
To wait upon them with his counsels wise,
In all extremes. His great commands being done,
And he desirous to review his Son,
He doth dispatch a floating I'll, from hence,
Unto the Hesperian shores, to waft him thence.
Where, what the arts were, used to make him stay,
And how the Sirens wooed him, by the way,
What Monsters he encountered on the coast,
How near our general Joy was to be lost,
Is not our subject now: though all these make
The present gladness greater, for their sake.
But what the triumphs are, the feast, the sport,
And proud solemnities of Neptunes Court,
Now he is safe, and Fame's not heard in vain,
But we behold our happy pledge again.
That with him, loyal HIPPIVS is returned,
Who for it, under so much envy, burned
With his own brightness, till her starved snakes saw
What Neptune did impose, to him was law.

But, why not this, till now?

-- It was not time,
To mix this Music with the vulgars chime.
Stay, till th'abortiue, and extemporal din
Of balladry, were understood a sin,
Minerua cried: that, what tumultuous verse,
Or prose could make, or steal, they might rehearse,
And every Songster had sung out his fit;
That all the Country, and the Citie-wit,
Of bells, and bonfires, and good cheer was spent,
And Neptunes Guard had drunk al that they meant;
That all the tales and stories now were old
Of the Sea-Monster Archy, or grown cold:
The Muses then might venture, vndeterr'd,
For they love, then, to sing, when they are heard.

I like it well, tis handsome: And I have
Some thing wold fit this. How do you present them?
In a fine Island, say you?

Yes, a Delus:
Such, as when fair Latena fell in travail,
Great Neptune made emergent.

I con^e you.
I would have had your I'll brought ^oting in, now
In a brave broth, and of a sprightly green,
Just to the colour of the Sea; and then,
Some twenty Sirens, singing in the kettel,
With an Arion, mounted on the back
Of a grown Conger, but in such a posture,
As, all the world should take him for a Dolphin:
O, 'twould have made such music! Have you nothing,
But a bare Island?

Yes, we have a tree too,
Which we do call the Tree of Harmony,
And is the same with Sun
Brought forth in the Indian Musicana first,
And thus it grows. The goodly bole, being got
To certain cubits height, from every side
The boughs decline, which taking root afresh,
Spring up new boles, those spring new, newer,
Till the whole tree become a Porticus,
Or arched Arbour, able to receive
A numerous troupe, such as our Albion,
And the Companions of his journey are.
And this they sit in

Your prime Masquers?

Yes.

But where's your Antimasque now, all this while?
I hearken after them.

Faith, we have none.

None?

None, I assure you, neither do I think them
A worthy part of presentation,
Being things so heterogene, to all devise,
Mere By-works, and at best Out-landish nothings.

O, you are all the heaven awry! Sir.
For blood of Poetry, running in your veins,
Make not your self so ignorantly simple.
Because Sir, you shall see I am a Poet,
No less then Cooke, and that I find you want
A special service here, an Antimasque,
I'll fit you with a dish out of the Kitchen,
Such, as I think, will take the present palates,
A metaphorical dish! And, do but mark,
How a good wit may jump with you. Are you ready, Child?
(Had there bin Mask, or no Mask, I had made it.)
Child of the boiling house.

Here, Father.

Bring forth the pot. It is an Olla Podrida,
But I have persons, to present the meates.

Persons!

Such as do relish nothing, but di stato,
(But in another fashion, then you dream of)
Know all things the wrong way, talk of the affairs,
The clouds, the cortines, and the mysteries
That are afoot, and, fro what hands they have them
(The master of the Elephant, or the Camels)
What correspondences are held; the Posts
That go, come, and know, almost, their minutes,
All but their business: Therein, they are fishes.
But have their garlic, as the Proverb says,
They are our Quest of enquiry, after news.

Together with their learned Authors?

Yes Sir,
And of the Epicoene gender, Hes, and She's:
Amphibion Archy is the chief.

Good boy!
The Child is learned too. Note but the Kitchen.
Have you put him, into the pot, for Garlic?

One in his coat, shall stink as strong as he, Sir,
And his friend Giblets with him.

They are two,
That give a part of the seasoning.

I conceive
The way of your Gally-mawfrey.

You will like it,
When they come pouring out of the pot together.

O, if the pot had been big enough!

What then, Child?

I had put in the Elephant, and one Camel,
at least, for Beef.

But, whom have you for Partridge?

A brace of Dwarfs, and delicate plump birds!

And whom for Mutton, and Kid?

A fine laced Mutton,
Or two; and either has her frisking Husband:
That reads her the Corrantos, every week.
Grave Mr Ambler, Newes-master of Poules,
Supplies your Capon; and grown Captain Buzz
(His Emissary) vnderwrites for Turkey,
A Gentleman of the Forest presents Pheasant,
And a plump Poultrers wife, in Graces street,
Plays Hen with eggs in the belly, or a Cony,
Choose which you will.

But, where's the Bacon, Thom?

Hogrel the Butcher, and the Sow his wife,
Are both there.

It is well, go, dish them out.
Are they well boiled?

Podrida!

What's that? rotten?

O, that they must be. There's one maine ingredient
We have forgot, the Artichoke.

No Sir.
I have a Fruicterer, with a cold red nose,
Like a blue fig, performs it.

The fruit looks so.
Good child, go pour he out, show their concoctio.
They must be rot boiled, the brotn's the best on it,
And that's the Dance. The stage here is the Charger.
And Brother Poet, though the serious part
Be yours, yet, envy not the C^ his art.

Not I. Nam lusis ipse Triumphus amat.
The Antimaske is danced by the persons described, coming out of the pot.


Well, now, expect the Scene it self; it opens!

The Island is discovered, the Masquers sitting in their several sieges. The
heavens opening, and Apollo, with Mercury, some Muses, the Goddess Harmony,
make the musique. the while, the Island moves forward, Proteus sitting below,
and APOLLO sings.

Look forth, the (h) Shepherd of the seas,
And (i) of the Ports, that keep the keys,
And to your Neptune tell,
His ALBION, Prince of all his Isles,
For whom the sea, and land so smiles,
Is home returned well.

And be it thought no common Cause,
That, to it, so much wonder draws,
And all the Hea'uens consent,
With HARMONY, to tune their notes,
In answer to the public votes
That, for it, up were sent.
It was no envious Stepdames rage,
Or Tyrants malice of the age,
That did employ him forth.
But such a Wisdom, that would prove,
By sending him, their hearts, and love
That else might fear his worth.

By this time, the Island hath joined it self with the shore: And Proteus,
Portunus, and Saron; come forth, and go up finging to the State, while the
Masquers take time to Land.

I! now the Pomp of Neptunes triumph shines!
And all the glories of his great designs
Are read, reflected, in his sons return!

How all the eyes, the looks, the hearts here, burn
at his arrival!

These are the true fires,
Are made of joys!

Of longings!

Of desires!

Of hopes!

Of fears!

Not intermitted blocks.

But pure affections, and from odorous stocks!

Tis incense all, that flames!
And these materials scarce have names!

My King looks higher, as he scorned the wars
Of winds, and with his trident touched the stars.
There is no wrinkle, in his brow, or frown,
But, as his cares he would in nectar drown,
And all the (l) siluer-footed Nymphs were dressed,
To wait upon him, to the Oceans feast.

Or, here in rows upon the banks were set,
And had their several hairs made into net
To catch the youths in, as they come on shore.

How! Galatea sighing! O, no more.
Banish your fears.

And Doris dry your tears.
Albion is come:

And (m) Haliclyon, too,
That kept his side, as he was charged to do,
With wonder.

-- And the Sirens have him not.

Though they no practise, nor no arts forgot
That might have won him, or by charm, or song.

Or laying forth their tresses all along
Upon the glassy waives;

Then diving:

Then,
Up with their heads, as they were mad of men.

And there, the highest-going billows crown,
Until some lusty Sea-god pulled them down,

See! He is here!

Great Master of the mayne,
Receive thy dear, and precious pawn again.

SAKON, PORTVNVS, PROTEVS bring him thus,
Safe, as thy Subjects wishes gave him us:
And of thy glorious Triumph let it be
No loss a part, that thou their loves doest see,
Then, that his sacred hea'ds returned to thet.
This sung, the Island goes back, whilst the upper Chorus takes it from them,
and the Masquers prepare for their figure.


Spring all the Graces of the age,
And all the Loves of time;
Bring all the pleasures of the stage,
And relishes of rime:
Add all the softnesses of Courts
The locks, the laughters, and the sports.
And mingle all their sweets, and salts,
That none may say, the Triumph halts.

Here, the Masquers dance their Entry.

Which done, the first perspective of a maritime Palace, or the house of
Oceanus is discovered, with loud Musique.

And the other above is no more seen.

Behold the Palace of Oceanus!
Hayle Reverend structure! Boast no more to us
Thy being able, all the Gods to feast;
We have seen enough: our Albion was thy guest.

Then follows the Maine Dance.

After which the second prospect of the ^ea, is shown, to the former Musique.

Now turn and view the wonders of the deep,
Where Proteus herds, and Neptunes orkes do keep,
Where all is ploughed, yet still the pasture green
The ways are found, and yet no path is seen,

There Proteus, Portunus, Saron, go up to the Ladies with this Song.

Come noble Nymphs, and do not hide
The joys, for which you so provide:

If not to mingle with the men,
What do you here? Go home again.

Your dressings do confess
By what we see so curious parts
Of Pallas, and Arachnes arts,
That you could mean no less.

Why do you were the Silkewormes toils;
Or glory in the shellfish spoils?
Or strive to show the grains of ore
That you have gatherd on the shore,
Whereof to make a stock
To graft the greener Emerald on
Or any better-waterd stone?

Or Ruby of the rock?

Why do you smell of Amber gris,
Of which was formed Neptunes Niece,
The Queen of Love; unless you can
Like Sea-borne Venus love a man?

Try, put your selves vnto't.

Your looks your smiles, and thoughts that meet,
Ambrosian hands, and silver feet,
do promise you will do it.

The Revels follow.

Which ended, the Fleet is discovered, while the three Cornets play.

'Tis time, your eyes should be refreshed at length
Which something new, a part of Neptunes strength
See, yond, his fleet, ready to go, or come,
Or fetch the riches of the Ocean home,
So to secure him both in peace, and wars,
Till not one ship alone, but all be stars.

A shout within follows.

After which the Cooke enters.

I have another service fer you, Brother Poet, a dish of pickled Sailors, fine
salt Sea-boyes, shall relish like Anchoues, or Caueare, to draw down a cup of
nectar, in the skirts of a night.


Come away boys, the Town is ours, hay for Neptune, and our young Master.


He knows the Compass and the Card,
While Castor sits on the maine yard,
And Pollux too, to help your ^ayles;
And bright Leucothoe, fills your sails:
Arion sings, the Dolphins swim,
And, all the way, to gaze on him.

The Antimasque of Sailors.

The last Song to the whole Musique, five Lutes, three Cornets, and ten voices.

Although we wish the Triumph still might last
For such a Prince, and his discovery past,
Yet now, great Lord of waters, and of Isles,
Give Proteus leave to turn unto his wiles:

And, whilst young Albion doth thy labours ease,
Dispatch Portunus to thy ports,

And Saron to thy Seas:
To meet old Nereus, with his fifty girls,
From aged Indus laden home with pearls,
And orient gummes, to burn unto thy name.

And may thy Subjects hearts be all on flame:
Whilst thou dost keep the earth in firm estate,
And, amongst the winds, dost suffer no debate.
But both at sea, and land, our powers increase,
With health, and all the golden gifts of peace.

The last Dance.


