THe honour, and splendour of these spectacles was such in the performance, as
could those hours have lasted, this of mine, now, had been a most unprofitable
work. But (when it is the fate, even of the greatest, and most absolute
births, to need, and borrow a life of posterity) little had been done to the
study of magnificence in these, if presently with the rage of the people, who
(as a part of greatness) are privileged by custom, to deface their
carcasses, the spirits had also perished. In duty, therefore, to that
Majesty, who gave them their authority, and grace; and, no less then the
most royal of predecessors, deserves eminent celebration for
these-solemnities: I add this later hand, to redeem them as well from
Ignorance, as Envy, two common evils, the one of censure, the other of
oblivion.

African, remember unto us a river in Aethiopia, famous by the name of Niger;
of which the people were called Nigritae, now Negro's: and are the blackest
nation of the world. This lake, east-ward; and after a long race, falls into
the western Ocean. Hence (because it was her Majesties will, to have them
Black-mores at first) the invention was derived by me, and presented thus.

First, for the Scene, was drawn a Landtschap, consisting of small woods, and
here and there a void place filled with huntings; which falling, an artificial
sea was seen to shoot forth, as if it flowed to the land, raised with waives,
which seemed to move, and in some places the billow to

(...) (...) But, what's the end of thy Herculean labours,
Extended to these calm, and blessed shores?

TO do a kind, and careful fathers part,
In satisfying every pensive heart
Of these my Daughters, my most loved birth:
Who though they were the
And in whose sparkling, and refulgent eyes,
The glorious Sun did still delight to rise;
Though he (the best judge, and most formal cause
Of all dames beauties) in their firm hiewes, draws
Signs of his feruent'st love; and thereby shows
That, in their black, the perfectst beauty grows;
Since the fixed colour of their curled hair,
(Which is the highest grace of dames most fair)
No cares, no age can change; or there display
The fearful tincture of abhorred Gray;
Since Death her self (her self being pale and blue)
Can never alter their most faithful hew;
All which are arguments, to prove, how far
Their beauties conquer, in great beauties war;
And more, how near Divinity they be,
That stand from passion, or decay so free.
Yet, since the fabulous voices of some few
Poor brain-sicke men, styled Poets, here with you,
Have, with such envy of their graces, sung
The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly
To infect all clymates, yea our purity;
As of one
And, that, before his heedless flames were hurled
About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as fair,
As other Dames; now black, with black despair:
And in respect of their complexions changed,
Are each where, since, for
Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
Most jealous of their beauties) fear, and care
Possessed them whole; yea, and believing them,
They wept such ceaseless tears, into my stream,
That it hath, thus far, ouerflow'd his shore
To seek them patience: who have since, ere more
As the Sun rises,
With volleys of revilings; cause he shone
On their scorched cheeks, with such intemperate fires,
And other Dames, made queenes of all desires.
To frustrate which strange error, oft, I sought,
(Though most in vain, against a settled thought
As women's are) till they confirmed at length
By miracle, what I, with so much strength
Of argument resisted; else they feigned:
For in the Lake, where their first spring they gained,
As they sate, cooling their soft Limbs, one night,
Appeared a face, all circumfus'd with light;
(And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes
Wherein they might decipher through the stream,
These words.
That they a Land must forthwith seek,
Whose termination (of the Greek)
Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
Their bloods, doth never
But in his Journey passes by,
And leaves that Climate of the sky,
To comfort of a greater Light,
Who forms all beauty, with his sight.
In search of this, have we three Princedomes past,
That speak out Tania, in their accents last;
Black Mauritania, first; and secondly,
Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
The place unto these longing Nymphs designed.
Instruct, and aid me, great OCEANVS,
What land is this, that now appears to us?

This Land, that lifts into the temperate air
His snowy cliffe, is Albion the fair;
So called of
For whose dear guard, my self, (four thousand year)
Since old Deucalion's days, have walked the round
About his empire, proud, to see him crowned
About my waives.

Whose pure, auspicious light greetes us, thus far!
Great Aethiopia,
Since, with particular worship we adore
Thy general brightness, let particular grace
Shyne on my zealous Daughters: Show the place,
Which, long, their longings vrdg'd their eyes to see*
Beautify them, which long have Deified thee.

NIGER, be glad: Resume the native cheer.
Thy Daughters labours have their period here,
And so thy errors. I was that bright face
Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
Read mysticke lines; (which skill PITHAGORAS
First taught to men, by a reuerberate glass)
This blessed Isle doth with that TANIA end,
Which there they saw inscribed, and shall extend
Wished satisfaction to their best desires.
BRITANIA, which the triple world admires
This Isle hath now recovered for her name;
Where reign those beauties, that with so much fame
The sacred MVSES sons have honoured,
And from bright HESPERVS to EOVS spread.
With that great name BRITANIA, this blessed Isle
Hath won her ancient dignity, and stile,
A world, divided from the world: and tried
The abstract of it, in his general pride.
For were the world, with all his wealth, a ring,
BRITANIA (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
Might be a Diamant worthy to inchase it,
Ruled by a SUN, that to this height doth grace it:
Whose beams shine day, and night, and are of force
To blanch an AETHIOPE, and revive a Cor's.
His light scientiall is, and (past more nature)
Can salve the rude defects of every creature.
Call forth thy honoured Daughters, then;
And let them, before the Britain men,
Indent the Land, with those pure traces
They flow with, in their native graces.
Inuit them, boldly, to the shore,
Their beauties shall be scorched no more:
This sun is temperate, and refines
All things, on which his radiance shines.



COme away, come away,
We grow jealous of your stay:
If you do not stop your ear,
We shall have more cause to fear
(...)
