PART OF THE KINGS ENTERTAINMENT IN PASSING TO his Coronation.

The Author B. I. Quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos!


LONDON, M. D C. XVI.

THe Scene presented it self in a square and flat upright, like to the side of
a City: the top thereof, above the Vent, and Crest, adorned with houses,
towers, and steeples, set off in perspective. Upon the battlements in a great
capital letter was inscribed, LONDINIVM:
According to TACITVS: At SVETONIVS mira constantia, medios inter hosteis
Londinium perrexit, cognomento quidem Coloniae non insigne, sed copia
Negotiatorum, commeatu maxim celebre. Beneath that, in a less and different
character, was written CAMERA REGIA,
Which title immediately after the Norman conquest it began to have; PAR DOMVS
HAEC COELO,
SED MINOR EST DOMINO.
Taken out of MARTIAL, Hyperbole) be said to touch the stars, and reach up to
heaven, yet was it far inferior to the master thereof, who was his Majesty;
and in that respect unworthy to receive him. The highest person advanced
therein, was MONARCHIA BRITANNICA,
and fitly: applying to the above mentioned title of the city, THE KINGS
CHAMBER, and therefore here placed as in the proper seat of the empire: for,
London, saith, she is, totius Britanniae Epitome, Britannici{que} Imperij
sedes, Regum{que} Angliae Camera, tantum inter omneis eminet, quantum (vt ait
ille) inter viburna Cupressus. She was a woman, richly attired, in cloth of
gold and tissue; a rich mantle; over her state two crowns hanging, with
pensile shields thorough them; the one limed with the particular coat of
England, the other of Scotland: on either side also a crown, with the like
Scutchions, and peculiar coats of France, and Ireland? In her hand she holds
a sceptre; on her head a fillet of gold, inter-wouen with palm and laurel;
her hair bound into four several points, descending from her crowns; and in
her lap a little globe, inscribed upon ORBIS BRITANNICVS.
And beneath, the word DIVISVS ABORBE.
To show, that this empire is a world divided from the world, and alluding to
that of -- Et nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
And VIRG. -- Et penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos.
The wreathe denotes victory and happiness. The sceptre and crowns
soueraignetie. The shields the precedence of the countries, and their
distinctions. At her feet was set THEOSOPHIA,
or divine Wisdom, all in white, a blue mantle seeded with stars, a crown
of stars on her head. Her garments figured truth, innocence, and cleerenesse.
She was always looking up; in her one hand she sustained a dove, in the
other a serpent: the last to show her subtlety, the first her simplicity;
alluding to that text of Scripture, Estote ergo prudentes sicut serpents,
simplices sicut columbae. Her word,


Intimating, how by her, all kings do govern, and that she is the foundation
and strength of kingdoms, to which end, she was here placed, upon a cube, at
the foot of the Monarchy, as her base and stay. Directly beneath her stood


A person attired rich, reverend, and antique: his hair long and white,
crowned with a wreathe of Plane tree, which is said to be Arbor genialis; his
mantle of purple, and buskins of that colour: He held in one hand a goblet, in
the other a branch full of little twigs, to signify increase and indulgence.
His word HIS ARMIS:
pointing to the two that supported him, whereof the one on the right hand, was
BOVLEVTES.
Figuring the council of the city, and was suited in black and purple; a
wreathe of SERVARE CIVES.


The other on the left hand.

POLEMIVS,
The warlike force of the city, in an antique coat, or armour, with a target
and sword; his helm on, and crowned with laurel, implying strength and
conquest: in his hand he bore the standard of the city, with this word,
EXTINGVERE ET HOSTEIS.


Expressing by those several mots, connexed, that with those arms of council
and strength, the Genius was able to extinguish the kings enemies, and preserve
his citizens, alluding to those verses in SENECA, Extinguere hostem,
Seruare Ciues, mayor est patriae, patri.
Vnder-neath these, in an Aback thrust out before the rest, lay
TAMESIS.
The river, as running along the side of the city; in a skin-coate made like
flesh, naked, and blue. His mantle of sea-greene or water colour, thin, and
bolne out like a sail; bracelets about his wrests, of willow and sedge, a
crown of sedge and reed upon his head, mixed with water-lillies; alluding to
VIRGILS description of Tyber; Deus ipse loci,
Populeas inter senior se attollere frondes
Visus, eum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
Carbasus, crineis vmbrosa tegebat Arundo.


His beard, and hair long, and ouer-growne. He leanes his arm upon an earthen
pot, out of which, water, with live fishes, are seen to run forth, and play
about him. His word, FLVMINA SENSERVNT IPSA.
A hemistich of OVIDS:
-- quid esset amor


Affirming, that rivers themselves, and such inanimate creatures, have
heretofore been made sensible of passions, and affections; and that he now,
no less pertooke the joy of his majesties grateful approach to this city,
than any of those persons, to whom he pointed, which were the daughters of the
Genius, and six in number: who, in a spreading ascent, upon several grices,
help to beautify both the sides, The first, EVPHROSYNE,
or Gladness: was suited in green, a mantle of diverse colours, embroidered with
all variety of flowers: on her head a gyrland of myrtle, in her right hand a
crystal cruz filled with wine, in the left a cup of gold: at her feet a
tymbrell, harp, and other instruments, all ensigns of gladness, Natis in
vsum laetitiae scyphis, c.
And in another place, Nunc est ^ibendum, nunc pede libero

Her word, HAEC AEVI MIHI PRIMA DIES.




SEBASIS, or Veneratio, was varied in an ash-colour'd suit, and dark mantle, a
veil over her head of ash colour: her hands crossed before her, and her eyes
half closed. Her word, MIHI SEMPER DEVS.




PROTHYMIA, or Promptitude, was attired in a short tuck't garment of
flame-colour, wings at her back; her hair bright, and bound up with ribands;
her breast open, virago-like; her buskins so ribanded: She was crowned with a
chaplet of trifoly, to express readiness, and opennesse every way; in her
right hand she held a squirrel, as being the creature most full of life and
quickness: in the left a close round censor, with the perfume suddenly to be
vented forth at the sides. Her word, QVA DATA PORTA.



Qua data porta ruunt, terras turbine perflant.


And showed that she was no less prepared with promptitude, and alacritic,
then the winds were, upon the least gate that shall be opened to his high
command. The fourth.

AGRYPNIA, or Vigilance, in yellow, a sable mantle, seeded with waking eyes,
and silver fringe: her chaplet of Heliotropium, or turnesole; in her one hand a
lamp, or cresset, in her other a bell. The lamp signified search and sight,
the bell warning. The Heliotropium care; and respecting her object. Her word,
SPECVLAMVR IN OMNEIS.


Alluding to that of OVID, where he describes the office of ARGVS. -- Ipse
procul montis sublime cacumen
Occupat,
and implying the like duty of care and vigilance in her self. The fifth,
AGAPE,
Or loving affection, in crimson fringed with gold, a mantle of flame-colour,
her chaplet of red and white roses; in her hand a flaming heart: The flame
expressed zeal, the red and white roses, a mixture of simplicity with love:
her robes freshness and fervency. Her word, NON SIC EXCVBIAE.


Out of CLAVDIAN, -- Nec circum stantiapcila
Quam tutatur amor.
Inferring, that though her sister before had protested watchfulness, and
circumspection, yet no watch or guard could be so safe to the estate, or person
of a Prince, as the love and natural affection of his subjects: which she in
the cities behalf promised. The sixth, OMOTHYMIA,
Or unanimity in blew, her robe blew, and buskins. A chaplet of blew lillies,
showing one truth and entireness of mind. In her lap lies a sheaf of
arrows bound together, and she her self sits weaving certain small silver
twists. Her word, FIRMA CONSENSVS FACIT.
Auxilia humilia firma,


Intimating, that even the smallest and weakest aids, by consent, are made
strong: her self personating the unanimity, or consent of soul, in all
inhabitants of the city to his service.

These are all the personages, or live figures, whereof only two were speakers
(GENIVS and TAMESIS) the rest were mutes. Other dumb complements there were,
as the arms of the kingdom on the one side, with this inscription.

HIS VIREAS.
With these may thou flourish.
On the other side the arms of the city, with HIS VINCAS.
With these may thou conquer.


In the centre, or midst of the Pegme, there was an Aback, or Square? wherein
this Elegy was written: MAXIMVS HIC REX EST, ET LVCE SERENIOR IPSA
PRINCIPE QVAE TALEM CERNIT IN VRBE DVCEM;
CVIVS FORTVNAM SVPERAT SIC VNICA VIRTVS,
VNVS VT IS RELIQVOS VINCIT VTRAQVE VIROS.
PRAECEPTIS ALII POPVLOS, MVLTAQVE FATIGANT
LEG; SED EXEMPLO NOS RAPIT ILLE SVO.
CVIQVE FRVI TOTA FAS EST VXORE MARITO,
ET SVA FAS SIMILI PIGNORA NOSSE PATRI.
ECCE VBI PIGNORIBVS CIRCVMSTIPATA CORVSCIS
IT COMES, ET TANTO VIX MINOR ANNA VIRO.
HAVD METVS EST, REGEM POSTHAC NO PROXIMVS HAERES,
NEV SVCCESSOREM NON AMET ILLE SVVM.


This, and the whole frame, was covered with a curtain of silk, painted like
a thick cloud, and at the approach of the K. was instantly to be drawn. The
Allegory being, that those clouds were gathered upon the face of the City,
through their long want of his most wished sight: but now, as at the rising of
the Sun, all mists were dispersed and fled. When suddenly, upon silence made
to the Musickes, a voice was heard to utter this verse;


Signifying, that he now was really objected to their eyes, who before had
been only, but still, present in their minds.

Thus far the complemental part of the first; wherein was not only laboured
the expression of state and magnificence (as proper to a triumphal Arch) but
the very site, fabric, strength, policy, dignity, and affections of the
City were all laid down to life: The nature and property of these Devices
being, to present always some one entire body, or figure, consisting of
distinct members, and each of those expressing it self, in the own active
sphere, yet all, with that general harmony so connexed, and disposed, as no
one little part can be missing to the illustration of the whole: where also is
to be noted, that the Symboles used, are not, neither ought to be, simply
Hieroglyphickes, Emblems, or Impress, but a mixed character, partaking
somewhat of all, and peculiarly apted to these more magnificent Inventions:
wherein, the garments and ensigns deliver the nature of the person, and the
word the present office. Neither was it becoming, or could it stand with the
dignity of these shows (after the most miserable and desperate shift of the
Puppets) to require a Truch-man, or (with the ignorant Painter) one to write,
This is a Dog; or, This is a Hare: but so to be presented, as upon the view,
they might, without cloud, or obscurity, declare themselves to the sharpe and
learned: And for the multitude, no doubt but their grounded judgements did
gaze, said it was fine, and were satisfied.

TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman
This point of Time hath done. Now London rear
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to wear
Thy choicest gems; teach thy steep Towers to rise
Higher with people: set with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows; and in every street,
Let thronging joy, love, and amazement meet.
Cleave all the air with shouts, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally,
As thunder; for, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou did begin to be.
When
And I, thy GENIVS walked auspicious rounds
In every
And saw this day
The several
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep you silence daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabits you? Shall office cease
Upon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME know
That article, wherein your flame stood still,
And not aspi'rd? Now heaven avert an ill
Of that black look. Ere pause possess your breasts
I wish you more of plagues: "Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake;
And from the liquid limbs this slumber shake:
Thou drown'st thy self in inofficious sleep;
And these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather than flow. Up, rise, and swell with pride
Above thy banks. "Now is not every tide.

TO what vain end should I contend to show
My weaker powers, when seas of pomp o'reflow
The cities face: and cover all the shore
With sands more rich than
When in the flood of joy, that comes with him,
He drowns the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but do express the cheer
Of these bright streams. No less may
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.

Indeed, true gladness doth not always speak:
"Joy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Yet (lest the fervor of so pure a flame
As this my city bears, might lose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heate)
Know greatest IAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of all my virtuous sons,
Whereof my
(A man without my flattering, or his pride,
As worthy, as he's
In his grave name, and all his brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drink the nectar of thy sight)
The council, commoners, and multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewed)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever king had to his
Never came man, more longed for, more desired:
And being come, more reverenced, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it: "In a prince it is
"No little virtue, to know who are his.

This springing glory of thy
His countries wonder, hope, love, joy and pride:
How well doth he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade, may Britain ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot over the maine, and knit with every shore
In bonds of marriage, kindred, and increase;
And stile this land, the
This is your servants wish, your cities vow,
Which still shall propagate it self, with you;
And free from spurs of hope, that slow minds move:
"He seeks no hire, that owes his life to love.

In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of queenes, and
Whose graces do as far out-speake your fame,
As fame doth silence, when her trumpet rings
You
Besides alliance, and the stile of mother,
In which one title you drown all your other.
Instance, be
Your eldest joy, and top of all your store,
With
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This city can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good advocate
To her best lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sour mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor fortune greet your grace
But coming on, and with a forward face.

TARACHE, or Tumult, in a garment of diverse, but dark colours, her hair
wild, and disordered, a foul and troubled face, about her lay s^aues, swords,
ropes, chains, hammers, stones, and such like to express Turmoil. The word
was,
Claud. Quod violenta nequit: mandata{que} fortius urgent Imperiosa quies.
To show the benefits of a calm and facile power, being able to effect in a
state that, which no violence can. On the other side the second handmaid was
ELEVTHERIA,
or Liberty, her dressing white, and some-what antique, but loose and free:
her hair flowing down her back, and shoulders: In her right hand she bare a
club, on her left a hat, the Characters of freedom, and power: At her feet a
cat was placed, the creature most affecting, and expressing liberty. She trod
on DOVLOSIS,
or Servitude, a woman in old and worn garments, lean and meager, bearing
fetters on her feet, and hands, about her neck a yoke to insinuate bondage,
and the word NEC VNQVAM GRATIOR.
Alluding to that other of Claud.
Quam sub Rege pio.
And intimated, that liberty could never appear more graceful, and lovely,
then now under so good a prince. The third hand-maid was SOTERIA,
or Safety, a damsel in carnation, the colour signifying cheer, and life,
she sat high: upon her head she wore an antique helm, and in her right hand a
spear for defence, in her left a cup for Medicine: at her feet was set a
pedestal upon which a serpent rowld up did lie. Beneath was PEIRA,
or Danger, a woman dispoiled, and almost naked, the little garment she hath
left her, of several colours, to note her various disposition. Besides her
lies a torch out, and a sword broken (the instruments of her fury) with a net
and wolves skin (the ensigns of her malice) rent in pieces. The word, TERGA
DEDERE METVS.
Mart. and implying that now all fears have turned their backs, and our
safety might become security, danger being so wholly depressed, and vnfurnisht
of all means to hurt. The fourth attendant is, EVDAIMONIA,
or Felicity, varied on the second hand, and apparelled richly; in an
embroidered robe, and mantle: a fair golden tress. In her right hand a
Caduceus, the note of peaceful wisdom: in her left, a Cornucopia filled
only with flowers, as a sign of flourishing blessedness; and crowned with a
garland of the same. At her feet, DYSPRAGIA,
or Unhappiness, a woman bareheaded, her neck, arms, breast, and feet naked,
her look hollow and pale; she holds a Cornucopia turned downward with all the
flowers fallen out and scattered, upon her sits a raven, as the augury of ill
fortune: and the soul was REDEVNT SATVRNIA REGNA.
Out of Virgil, Peace was with us so advanced, Rest received, Liberty
restored, Safety assured, and all Blessedness appearing in every of these
virtues her particular triumph over her opposite evil. This is the dumb
argument of the frame, and illustrated with this verse of Virgil, written in
the under freeze. NVLLA SALVS BELLO:
PACEM TE POSCIMVS OMNES.
The speaking part was performed, as within the temple where there was erected
an altar, to which at the approach of the king appears the Flamen
And to him, GENIVS VRBIS.
The Genius we attired before: To the Flamen we appoint this habit. A long
crimson robe to witness his nobility, his typpet and sleeves white, as
reflecting on purity in his religion, a rich mantle of gold with a train to
express the digniti^ of his function. Upon his head a Apex, according to that
of Lucan. lib. 1. Attollens{que} Apicem generoso vertice Flamen.
This Apex was covered with a Apiculum, and was sustained with a Pomegranat
tree, it was also in the hot time of Summer to be bound with ribands, and
thrown behind them as Scaliger teaches. In his hand he bore a golden censor
with perfume, and censing about the altar (having first kindled his fire on the
top) is interrupted by the Genius.

Begin our spring, and with our spring the prime,
And
And may these Ides as fortunate appear
To thee, as they to
Be all thy thoughts borne perfect, and thy hopes
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes.
Let not wide heaven that secret blessing know
To give, which she on thee will not bestow.
Blind Fortune be thy slave; and may her store
(The less thou seek it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen gates
Make haste to close, as urged by thy fates;
Here ends my cities office, here it breaks:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speaks
A short farewell; and lower then thy feet,
With fervent thanks, thy royal pains doth greet.
Pardon, if my abruptness breed disease;
,,He merits not t'offend, that hastes to please.

D. I. O. M. BRITANNIARVM. IMP. PACIS. VINDICI. MART. MAIORI. P. P. F. S.
AVGVSTO. NOVO. GENTIVM. CONIVNCTARVM. NVMINI. TVTELARI.

And upon the Gate, being shut,



All ills shall fly the light: Thy court be free
No less from envy, then from flattery;
All tumult, faction, and harsh discord cease,
That might perturb the musique of thy peace:
The querulous nature shall no longer find
Room for his thoughts: One pure consent of mind
Shall flow in every breast, and not the air,
Sun, moon, or stars shine more serenely fair.
This from that loud, blessed Oracle, I sing,
Who here, and first, pronounced, thee Britains king
Long may thou live, and see me thus appear,
As omenous
Unto thy reign; as that
So lasting glory to AVGVSTVS state.


