IF gracious silence, sweet Attention,
Quick sight, and quicker apprehension,
(The lights of iudgmets throne) shine any where;
Our doubtful author hopes, this is their Sphaere
And therefore opens he himself to those,
To other weaker Beams, his labours close;
As loathe to prostitute their virgin strain,
To every vulgar, and adulterate brain.
In this alone, his Muse her sweetness hath,
She shuns the print of any beaten path;
And proves new ways to come to learned ears:
Pied ignorance she neither loves. nor fears.
Nor hunts she after popular applause,
Or fomy praise, that drops from common Jaws;
The garland that she wears, their hands must twine,
Who can both censure, understand, define
What Merit is: Then cast those piercing rays,
Round as a crown, instead of honoured Baize,
About his Poesy; which (he knows) affords,
Words above Action: matter, above words.

WHo goes there?

Tis I, blind Archer.


Who? Mercurie?


I.


Farewell.


Stay Cupid.


Not in your company Hermes, except your hands were riueted at your back.


Why so my little Rover?


Because I know, you have not a finger, but is as long as my quiver, (cousin
Mercurie,) when you please to extend it.


Whence derive you this speech Boy?


O! tis your best policy to be Ignorant: you did never steal Mars his sword
out of the sheath; you? nor Neptunes Trident; nor Apolloes Bow; no, not you?
Alas your palms ( Iupiter knows) they are as tender as the foot of a
foundered Nag, or a Ladies face new Mercuried; they'll touch nothing.


Go to (Infant) you'll be daring still.


Daring? O Ianus, what a word is there? why my light fether-heeld Cousse, what
are you, any more then my uncle Ioues Pandar, a Lackey that runs on errands for
him, and can whisper a light message to a loose wench with some round
volubility, wait at a table with a Trencher, and warble upon a Crowd a
little; One that sweeps the Gods drinking room every morning, and sets the
Cushions in order again which they threw one at another head ouernight?
Here's the Catalogue of all your Imploiments now. O no, I err: you have the
Marshalling of all the Ghosts too, that pass the Stigian ferry; and I suspect
you for a share with the old Sculler there, if the truth were known; but let
that escape: one other peculiar virtue you possess* in lifting or
Lieger-du-maine (which few of the house of Heaven have else besides) I must
confess; But (me thinks) that should not make you set such an extreme distance
twixt your self and others, that we should be said too ouerdare in speaking to
your nimble Deity: So Hercules might challenge a priority of us both, because
he can throw the Bar farther* or lift more Ioyndstooles at the arms end then
we. If this might carry it; then we (who have made the whole body of Divinity
tremble at the twang of our Bow, and inforste Saturnius himself to lay^ by
his curled front, Thunder, and three forkd-fiers, and put on a Masking suit, too
light for a reveller of eighteen to be seen in --


How now my dancing Braggart in Decimo sexto? charm your skipping tongue, or
I'll --


What? use the virtue of your Snaky Tipstaffe there upon us?


No Boy, but the stretched vigour of mine arm about your ears; you have forgot
since I took your heals up into air, (on the very hour I was borne) in
sight of all the bench of Deities, when the silver roof of the Olympian
Palace rung again with the applause of the fact.


O no, I remember it freshly, and by a particular instance; for my mother Venus
(at the same time) but stoupt to embrace you, and (to speak by Metaphore) you
borrowed a Girdle of hers, as you did Ioues Sceptre (while he was laughing) and
would have done his thunder too, but that, twas too hot for your itching
fingers.


Tis well sir.


I heard you but looked in at Vulcans Forge the other day, and entreated a pair
of his new Tongs along with you for company: Tis joy on you (I faith) that you
will keep your hooked tallons in practise with any thing. Slight, now you are
on earth, we shall have you filch Spoons and Candlesticks rather then fail:
pray Jove the perfumed Courtiers keep their Casting-bottles, Pick-toothes, and
Shittle-cockes from you, or our more ordinary Gallants their Tabaco-boxes, for
I am strangely jealous of your nails.


Ne'er trust me Cupid, but you are turned a most acut^ gallant of late, the edge
of my wit is clear taken off with the fine and subtle stroke of your
thin-ground tongue, you fight with too poignant a phrase, for me to deal with.


O Hermes, your craft cannot make me confident, I know my own steel to be
almost spent, and therefore entreat my peace with you in time: you are too
cunning for me to encounter at length, and I think it my safest ward to
close.


Well for once, I'll suffer you to come within me wag, but use not these
strains too often, thei^e stretch my patience. Whether might you marche now?


Faith (to recover thy good thoughts) I'll discover my whole project. The
Huntress and queen of these groves, Diana (in regard of some black and
^nuious slanders hourly breathed against her for her divine justice on Acteon
as she preteds) hath here in the vale of Gargaphy proclaimed a solemn revels,
which she will grace with the full and royal expense of one of her clearest
moons: In which time it shall be lawful for all sorts of ingenuous persons,
to visit^ her palace, to court her Nymphs, to exerci^e all variety of
generous and noble pastimes, as well to intimate how far she treads such
malicious imputations beneath her, as also to show how clear her beauties are
from the least wrinkle of Austerity, they may be chardgd with.


But what is all this to Cupid?


Here do I mean to put off the title of a God, and take the habit of a Page,
in which disguise (during the Interim of these revels) I will get to follow
some one of Dianas maids, where (if my bow hold, and my shafts fly but with
half the willingness and aim they are directed) I doubt not but I shall
really redeem the minutes I have lost by their so long and ouer-nice
proscription of my Deity, from their court.


Pursue it (druine Cupid) it will be rare.


But will Hermes second me.


I am now to put in act an especial designement from ^y father Jove, but that
performed, I am for any fresh action that offers it self.


Well then we part.

Farewell good wag,
Now to my charge, Echo, fair Echo speak,
Tis Mercurie that calls thee; ^orrowfull Nymph:
Salute me with thy repercussi^e voice,
That I may know what cavern of the earth,
Contains thy aerie spirit: how, or where,
I may direct my speech, that thou may hear,

Here.

So nigh.

I.

Know (gentle soul) then, I am sent from Iou^,
Who (pitying the sad burden of thy woes,
Still growing on thee, in thy want of words*
To vent thy passion for Narcissus death)
Commands that now (after three thousand years,
Which have bin excercisde in Iunoes spite,)
Thou take a corporal figure and ascend,
Enriched with vocal, and articulate power,
Make haste sad Nymph: thrice doth my winged rod,
Strike th 'obsequious earth to give thee way,
Arise, and speak thy sorrows, Echo rise,
Here, by this Fountain where thy love did pine,
Whose memory lives fresh to vulgar fame,
Sh^in'd in this yellow flower, that bears his name

His name revives and lifts me up from earth.
O which way shall I first convert my self?
Or in what mood shall I assay to speak,
That (in a moment) I may be delivered,
Of the prodigions grief I go with all?
Se^, see, the morning fount whose spring weeps yet,
Th'vntimely fate of that too-beauteous boy,
That Trophaee of self love, and spoil of nature,
Who (now transformed into this drooping flower)
Hangs the repentant head, back, from the stream;
As if it wished: Would I had never looked,
In such a flattering mirror. O Narcissus,
Thou that wast once (and yet art) my Narcissus,
Had Echo but been private with thy thoughts,
She would have dropped away her self in tears,
Till she had all turned water; that in her,
(As in a truer glass) thou mighst have gazed,
And seen thy beauties by more kind reflection:
But Self love never yet could look on truth,
but with bleared beams; Slieke flattery and she:
Are twin-borne sisters, and so mix their eyes,
As if you sever one, the other dies.
Why did the Gods give thee a heavenly form,
And earthy thoughts to make thee proud of it?
Why do I ask? tis now the known disease
That beauty hath, to bear to deep a sense,
Of her own selfe-conceiued excellence.
O had thou known the worth of heavens rich gift,
Thou would have turned it to a truer use,
And not (with lean and covetous ignorance)
Pined in continual eyeing that bright Gem,
The glance whereof to others had bine more,
Then to thy famished mind the wide worlds store;
" So wretched is it to be merely rich:
Witness thy youths dear sweets, here spent untasted;
Like a fair Taper, with his own flame wasted.

Echo be brief, Saturnia is abroad;
And if she hear, sheele storm at Ioues high will:

I will (kind Mercury) be brief as time,
Vouchsafe me I may do him these last Rites,
But kis^e his flower, and sing some mourning strain:
Over his watery hearse.

Thou dost obtain,
I were no son to love should I deny thee;
Begin, and (more to grace thy cunning voice)
The humourous air shall mix her solemn tunes,
With thy sad words: strike Musique from the spheres,
And with your golden raptures swell our ears.

SLow, Slow Fresh fount, keep time with my salt tears;
yet flower, yet, o faintly gentle springs;
List to the heavy part the Musique bears,
" Woe weeps out her division when she sings*
Droop herbs, and flowers,
fall grief in showers;
" Our beauties are not ours:
O I could still
(Like melting snow upon some craggy hill,)
drop, drop, drop, drop,
Since Natures pride, is now awither'd Daffadill.

Now have you done?

Done presently (good Hermes) bide a little;
Suffer my thirsty eye to gaze a while,
But even to taste the place, and I am vanished:

Forgo thy use and liberty of tongue,
And thou may dwell on earth, and sport thee there;

Here young Action ^ell, pursued, and torn
By Cynthi^s wrath (more egar then his hounds;)
And here, (ay me the place is fatal) see,
The weeping Niobe, translated hither
From P^rygian mountains: and by Phaebe reared
As the proud Trophaee of her sharpe revenge.

Nay but here*

But here, oh here, the Fountain of self love:
In which Latona, and her careless Nymphs,
(Regardles of my sorrows) bath themselves,
In hourly pleasures.

Stint thy babbling tongue;
Fond Echo, thou prophanst the grace is done thee:
So idle worldlings (merely made of voice:)
Censure the powers above them. Come away,
Jove calls thee hence, and his will brookes no stay.

O stay: I have but one poor thought to clothe,
In aerie garments and then (faith) I go:
Henceforth, thou treacherous, and murthering spring,
Be ever called the Fountain of self love:
And with thy water let this curse remain,
(As an inseperate plague) that who but tastes,
A drop thereof, may (with the instant touch)
Grow dotingly enamoured on themselves.
Now Hermes I have finished.

Then thy speech,
Must here forsake thee Echo, and thy voice:
(As it was wount) rebound but the last words, Fare well.

Well.
Now Cupid I am for you, and your mirth,
To make me light before I leave the earth.

Dear spark of beauty make not so fast away:


Away.


Stay let me observe this portent yet.


I am neither your Minotaure, nor your Centaur, nor your Satire, nor your
Hyena, nor your Babion, but your mere traveler, believe me:


Leave me.


I gest it should be some travelling Motion pursu'de Echo so.


Know you from whom you fly? or whence?


Hence.


This is somewhat above strange: a Nymph of her feature and ^ineament to be so
preposterously rude; well; I will but cool my self at yon' Spring and follow
her.


Nay then I am familiar with the issue; I'll leave you too.


I am a Rhinoceros, if I had thought a creature of her Symmetry would have dard
so improportionable and abrupt a digression. Liberal and divine Founte,
suffer my prophan^ hand to take of thy bounties. By the purity of my taste,
here is most Ambrosiack water; I will sup of it again. By thy favour sweet
Founte. See, the water (a more running, subtle, and humorous Nymph then she)
permits me to touche, and handle her: what should I infer? If my behaviours
had been of a cheap, or customary garb; my Accent, or phrase, vulgar; my
Garments trite; my Countenance illiterate; or vnpractizd in the encounter of a
beautiful and braue-attirde Peace, then I might (with some change of coullor)
have suspected my faculties: but (knowing my self an Essence so sublimated,
and refin'de by Travail; of so studied, and well exercised a gesture; so alone
in fashion, able to make the face of any States-man living, and to speak the
mere extraction of language; One that hath now made the sixth return upon
venture; and was your first that ever enriched his country with the true laws of
the Duello; whose Optiques have drunk the spirit of beauty, in some eight
score and eighteen Princes Courts, where I have resided, and bin there
fortunate in the Amours of three hundred, forty, and five Ladies (all nobly
descend) whose names I have in Catalogue: to conclude; in all so happy, as
even Admiration her self doth seem to fasten her kisses upon me: Certes I do
neither see, nor feel, nor taste, nor favour, the least steam, or fume of a
reason, that should inuit this foolish fastidious Nymph so peevishly to
abandon me: well let the memory of her fleet into Air; my thoughts and I am
for this other Element, water.


What? the well-dieted Amorphus become a Water-drinker? I see he means not to
write verses then.


No Criticus? why?


Quia nulla placere diu* nec viuere carmina possunt, quae scribuntur aquae
po^oribus.


What say you to your Helicon?


O, the Muses, well! that's ever excepted.


Sir, your Muses have no such water I assure you; your Nectar, or the Juice of
your Nepenthe is nothing to it; tis above your Metheglin, believe it.


Metheglin! what's that Sir? may I be so Audacious to demand?


A kind of Greek Wine I have met with Sir in my Travails: it is the same
that Demosthenes usually drunk, in the composure of all his exquisite and
Mellifluous Orations.


That's to be argued, (Amorphus) if we may credit Lucian, who in his
(Enicomium Demosthenis) affirms, he never drunk but water in any of his
Compositions.


Lucian is absurd, he knew nothing: I will believe my own Travels, before all
the Lucians of Europe; he doth feed you with fictions, and leasings.


Indeed (I think) next a Traveller he does prettily well.


I assure you it was Wine, I have tasted it, and from the hand of an Italian
Antiquary, who derives it authentically from the Duke of Ferrara's Bottles. How
name you the Gentleman you are in rank with there, Sir?


Tis Asotus, son to the late deceased Philargyrus the Citizen.


Was his Father of any eminent place, or means?


He was to have bin Praetor next year.


Ha! A pretty formal young Gallant (in good soothe) pity, he is not more
gently propagated. Heark^ you Criticus: you may say to him what I am, if you
please; though I affect not popularity, yet I would be loathe to stand out to
any, whom you shall voutchsafe to call friend.


Sir, I fear I may do wrong to your sufficiencies in the reporting them, by
forgetting or misplacing some one; your self can best inform him of your
self Sir, except you had some Catalogue or Inuentory of your faculties ready
drawn, which you would request me to show him for you, and him to take notice
of.


This Criti^us is sower: I will think Sir.


Do so Sir. O heaven, that any thing (in the likeness of man) should suffer
these racked extremities, for the uttering of his Sophisticate good parts.


Criticus, I have a suit to you; but you must not deny me: pray you make this
Gentleman and I friends.


Friends! Why? is there any difference between you?


No: I mean acquaintance, to know one another.


O now I apprehend you; your phrase was without me before.


In good faith he's a most excellent rare man I warrant him.


Slight, they are mutually enamoured by this time.


Will you sweet Criticus?


Yes, yes.


Nay, but when? you'll defer it now, and forget it?


Why, is't a thing of such present necessity, that it requires so violent a
dispatch?


No, but (would I might never stir) he's a most ravishing man; good Criticus
you shall endear me to you, in good faith law.


Well your longing shall be satisfied Sir.


And withal, you may tell him what my father was, and how well he left me, and
that I am his heir.


Leave it to me, I'll forget none of your dear graces I warrant you.


Nay I know you can better marshall these affairs then I can. -- O Gods i'll
give all the world (if I had it) for abundance of such acquaintance.


What ridiculous circumstance might I devise now, to bestow this reciprocal
brace of Cockscombes, one upon another?


Since I trod on this side the Alps, I was not so frozen in my invention; let
me see: to accost him with some choice remnant of Spanish, or Italian? that
would indifferently express my languages now, mary then, if he should fall out
to be Ignorant, it were both hard, and harsh. How else? step into some
discourse of S^ate, and so make my induction? that were above him too; and out
of his element I fear Fain to have seen him in Venice? or Padua? or some face
near his in simillitude? tis too pointed, and open* No; it must be a more
quaint, collateral devise: As -- stay; to frame some encomiastique speech upon
this our Metropolis, or the wise Magistrates thereof, in which politic
number, tis ods but his father filled up a rome? descend into a particular
admiration of their Justice; for the due measuring of Coals, burning of Cans,
and such like? As also their religion, in pulling down a superstitious Cross,
and advancing a Venus; or Priapus, in place of it? ha? twill do well. Or to
talk of some Hospital, whose walls record his father a BENEFACTOR? or of so
many Buckets bestowd on his parish church in his life time, with his name at
length (for want of arms) tricked upon them; Any of these? or to praise the
cleanesse of the street wherein he dwelt, or the provident painting of his
posts against he should have been Praetor, or (leaving his parent) come to some
special ornament about him self, as his Rapier, or some other of his
accoutrements? I have it: Thanks gra^ious Minerua.


Would I had but once spoke to him, and then --


Tis a most curious and neatly-wrought band this same, as I have seen Sir.


O God Sir.


You forgive the humour of mine eye in observing it?


O Lord Sir, there needs no such Apology I assure you.


I am anticipated: they'll make a solemn deed of gift of themselves you shall
see.


Your Rose too does most grace-fully in troth.


Tis the most gentile and received Wear now Sir.


Believe me Sir (I speak it not to humour you) I have not seen a young
gentleman (generally) put on his clothes with more judgment.


O, tis your pleasure to say so, Sir.


No, as I am virtuous (being altogether vntrauel'd) it strikes me into wonder.


I do purpose to travel (Sir) at Spring:


I think I shall affect you sir, this last speech of yours hath begun to make
you dear to me.


O God Sir, I would there were anything in me Sir, that might appear worthy
the least worthiness of your worth Sir, I protest Sir, I should endeavour to
show it Sir, with more then common regard Sir.


O here's rare Motley, Sir.


Both your desert, and your endeavours are plentiful, suspect them not: but your
sweet disposition to travail (I assure you) hath made you another My-selfe in
mine eye, and struck me enamoured on your beauties.


I would I were the fairest Lady of France for your sake Sir, and yet I would
travail too.


O you should digress from your self else: for (believe it) your Travail is
your only thing that rectifies, or (as the Italian says) virendi pronto all'
Attioni, makes you fit for Action.


I think it be great charge though Sir.


Charge? why tis nothing for a gentleman that goes private, as your self, or
so; my Intelligence shall quit my charge at all times: Good faith this Hat
hath possessed mine eye exceedingly; tis so pretty, and fantastic; what? is't a
Beaver.


I Sir. I'll assure you tis a Beaver, it cost me six crowns but this morning.


A very pretty fashion (believe me) and a most novel kind of trim: your
Button is conceited too.


Sir, it is all at your service.


O pardon me.


I beseech you Sir, if you please to wear it you shall do me a most infinite
grace.


Slight, will he be praised out of his clothes?


By heaven Sir, I do not offer it you after the Italian manner; I would you
should conceive so of me.


Sir, I shall fear to appear rude in denying your curte^ies, especially being
invited by so proper a distinction; may I pray your name Sir.


My name is Asotus Sir.


I take your love (gentle Asotus) but let me win you to receive this in
exchange. --


'Hart, theile change dublets anon.


And (from this time) esteem your self in the first rank of those few whom I
profess to love; what make you in company of this scholle^ here? I will bring
you known to gallants as Anaides, Hedon the courtier, and others, whose
society shall render you grac'de, and respected; this is atriuiall fellow, too
mean, too coarse for you to converse with.


Slid, this is not worth a crown, and minecost me six but this morning.


I looked when he would repent him, he ha's beg^nne to be sad a good while.


Sir, shall I say to you for that Hat? be not so sad, be not so sad; tis a
Relic I could not so easily have departed with, but as the Hierogliphick of
my affection; you shall alter it to what form you please, it will take any
block; I have varied it my self to the three thousandth time, and not so few:
It hath these virtues beside; your head shall not ak^ under it; nor your brain
leave you, without licence; It will preserve your comple^ion to eternity; for
no beam of the Sun (should you wear it under Zona Torrida) hath force to
approach it by two ells. Tis proof against thunder, and enchantment: and was
given me by a great man (in Russia) as an especially-priz'd present; and
constantly affirmed to be the hat that acompanied the politic Vlisses, in his
tedious, and ten years Travails.


By Jove I will not depart withal, whosoever would give me a Million.


Save you sweet bloods: does any of you want a creature, or a dependant?


Be-shrow me a fine blunt slave.


A page of good timber; it will now be my grace to entertain him first, though
I cashier him again in private: how art thou called?


Cos Sir, Cos.


Cos? How happily hath Fortune furnished him with a Whetstone?


I do entertain you Cos: conceal your quality till we be private; if your
parts be worthy of me, I will countenance you; if not, catechize you; Gentles
shall we go?


Stay Sir; i'll but entertain this other fellow, and then -- I have a great
humour to taste of this water too, but i'll come again alone for that mark the
place; whats your name, youth?


Prosaites? Sir.


Prosaites? A very fine name Criticus? is't not?


Yes, and a very ancient Sir, the Beggar;


Follow me good Prosaites: Lets talk.


He will rank even with you (ere't be long)
If you hold on your course: O vanity,
How are thy painted beauties doted on,
By light, and empty Idiots? how pursu'de
With open, and extended appetite?
How they do sweat, and run themselves from breath,
Raised on their toes, to catch thy aerie forms,
Still turning giddy, till they reel like drunkards,
That buy the merry madness of one hour,
With the long irksomeness of following time?
O how despised, and base a thing is Man,
If he not strive t'erect his groueling thoughts
Above the strain of flesh. 'But how more cheap^
When, even his best and understanding part,
(The crown, and strength of all his faculties)
Floates like a dead drowned body, on the stream
Of vulgar humour, mixed with commonst dregs?
I suffer for their guilt now, and my Soul
(Like one that looks on ill affected eyes)
Is hurt with mere Intention on their follies:
Why will I view them then? my Sense might ask me:
Or is't a Rarity, or some new Object,
That strains my strict observance to this point?
O would it were, therein I could afford
My Spirit should draw a little near to theirs,
To gaze on novelties: so Vice were one.
Tut, she is stale, rank, foul, and were it not
That those (that woo her) greet her with locked eyes
(In spite of all the Impostures, paintings, drugs,
Which her bawd Custom daubes her cheeks withal)
She would betray her loathed and leprous face,
And fright th'enamor'd dotards from themselves:
But such is the perverseness of our nature,
That if we once but fancy levity,
(How antique and ridiculous so ere
It suit with us) yet will our muffled thought
Choose rather not to see it, then avoid it:
And if we can but banish our own sense,
We ac^e ou^ Mimic tricks with that free licence,
That lust, that pleasure, that security,
As if we practised in a Past-boord case,
And no one saw the Motion, but the Motion.
Well, check thy passion, least it grow too load:
^While fools are pitied, they wax fat, and proud.

Why this was most unexpectedly followed (my divine delicate Mercury) by the
Beard of Jove, thou art a precious Deity.


Nay Cupid leave to speak improperly; since we are turned cracks, lets study
to be like cracks: practise their language, and behaviours, and not with a dead
Imitation. Act freely, carelessly, and capricciously, as if our veins ran
with Quick-siluer, and not utter a phrase, but what shall come forth steeped in
the very brine of conceit, and sparkle like salt in fire.


That's not every ones happiness ( Hermes) though you can presume upon the
^asinesse and dexterity of your wit, you shall give me leave to be a little
Jealous of mine; and not desperately to hazard it after your capering humour.


Nay then Cupid, I think we must have you hoodwinckt again, for you are
grown too provident, since your eyes were at liberty.


Not so ( Mercury) I am still blind Cupid to thee:


And what to the Lady Nymph you serve?


Troth Page, Boy, and Sirha: these are all my titles.


Then thou hast not altered thy name with thy disguise.'


O No, that had bin Supererogation, you shall never hear your Courtier call
but by one of these three.


Faith then both our Fortunes are the same.


Why? what parcel of man hast thou lighted on for a Master?


Such a one (as before I begin to decipher him) I dare not affirm him to be
any thing else then a Courtier. So much he is, during this open time of Revels,
would be longer, but that his means are to leave him shortly after: his name
is Hedon, a gallant wholly consecrated to his pleasures. --


Hedon? he uses much to my Ladies chamber, I think.


How is she called, and then I can show thee?


Madame Philautia.


O I, he affects her very particulerly indeed. These are his graces. he doth
(besides me) keep a Barbar, and a Monkey: He has a ri^ch wrought Waste-coate
to entertain his vis^tants in, with a Cap almost suitable: His Curtains and
Bedding are thought to be his own; his bathing Tub is not suspected. He loves
to have a F^ncer, a Pedant, and a Musician seen in his lodging a mornings.


And not a Poet?


Fie no: himself is a Rimer, and that's a thought better than a Po^t: he is
not lightly within to his Mercer, no, though he come when he takes Phisique,
which is commonly after his play. He beats a Tailor very well, but a
Stocking-seller admirably; and so consequently any one he owes money too, that
dares not resist him. He never makes general inuitement, but against the
publishing of a new Suit, mary then, you shall have more drawn to his lodging,
then come to the launching of some three ships; especially if he be fur^ishd
with supplies for the retiring of his old Ward-robe from pawn; if not, he
does hire a stock of Apparel, and some forty or fifty pound in Gould for that
forenoon to show: He's thought a very necessary Perfume for the Presence, and
for that only cause welcome thither: six Millaners shops afford you not the
like sent. He courts Ladies with how many great Horse he hath rid that morning,
or how o^t he has done the whole, or the half Pommado in a seuen-night before;
and sometime ve^ters so far upon the virtue of his Pomander, that he dares
tell'hem, how many shirts he has sweat at Tennis that week* but wisely
conceals so many dozen of Balls he is on the score. Here he comes that is all
this.


Boy.


Sir.


Are any of the Ladies in the Presence?


None yet Sir.


Give me some Gold, More.


Is that thy Boy Hedon?


I, what think thou of him?


Shart, Il'd geld him; I warrant he has the Philosophers stone.


Well said my good Melancholy devil: Sirah, I have devised one or two of the
pretiest Oaths (this morning in my bed) as ever thou heard, to protest
withal in the Presence.


Pray thee lets heere'hem.


Soft thoult vse'hem before me.


No (damn me then) I have more oaths then I know how to utter, by this air.


Faith'one is; By the tip of your ^are, Sweet Lady, Is't not pretty, and
Gentile?


Yes for the person 'tis applied to, a Lady. It should be light, and --


Nay the other is better, exceeds it much: The Invention is farther fet too; By
the while valley that lies between the Alpine hills of your bosom, I protest
-- c.


Well, you travelled for that Hedon.

I, in a Map, where his eyes were but blind guides to his understanding it
seems.


And then I have a Salutatio will nick all; by this Caper: ho^


How is that?


You know I cal Mada Philautia, my Honour, she calls me her Ambition. Now (when I
meet her in the Presence anon) I will come to her, and say, Sweet Honour, I have
hitherto con^ented my Sense with the Lillies of your hand; but now I will taste
the Roses of your lip; and (withal) kiss her: to which she cannot but
blushingly answer: Nay now you are too Ambitious, And then do I reply; I
cannot be too Ambitious of Honour, sweet Lady. Wilt not be good? ha? ha?


O Assure your ^oule.


By heaven I think 'twill be excellent, and a very politic atchiuement of a
kiss.


I have thought upon one for Moria of a sudden too if it take.


What is't, my dear mischief?


Mary, I will come to her, (and she always wears a Muffe if you be remembered)
and I will tell her: Madame your whole self cannot but be perfectly wise: for
your hands have wit enough to keep themselves warm.


Now (before Jove) admirable: look, thy Page takes it too, by Phoebus, my
sweet facetious Rascal, I could eat Water-gruell with thee a month, for this
Jest, O my dear Rogue.


O (by Hercules) 'tis your only dish, above all your Potatos, or Oyster-pyes
in the world.


I have ruminated upon a most rare Wish too, and the Prophecy to it, but I'll
have some friend to be the Prophet; As thus: I do wish my self one of my
Mistress Ciopino's. Another demands: Why would he be one of his Mistress
Ciopinos? A third answers, Because he would make her higher. A fourth shall
say, That will make her proud. And a fifth shall conclude: Then do I prophecy,
Pride will have a fall: and he shall give it her.


I'll be your Prophet* By gods so, it will be most exquisite, th^ art a fine
Inuentious Rogue, Sirah.


Nay and I have Posies for Rings too, and Riddles, that they dream not of.


Tut theile do that, when they come to sleep on the time enough; but were thy
devises never in the Presence yet Hedon?


O no, I disdain that.

Twere good we went before then, brought th^ acquainted with the room where
they shall act, least the strangeness of it put them out of countenance, when
they should come forth.


Is that a Courtier too.


Troth no; he has two essential parts of the Courtier, Pride and Ignorance (I
mean of such a Courtier, who is (indeed) but the Za^i to an exact Courtier)
mary, the rest come somewhat after the Ordinary Gallant. Tis Impudence it self
Anaides; one, that speaks all that comes in his cheeks, will blush no more
then a Sackbut. He lightly occupies the Jesters room at the table, keeps
laughter, Gelai^ (a wench in pages atire) following him in place of a Squire,
whom he (now the) tickles with some strange ridiculous stuff, uttered (as his
land came to him) by chance: He will censure or discourse of any thing, but as
absurdly as you would wish: His fashion is not to take knowledge of him that
is beneath him in clothes; He never drinks below the Salt: He does naturally
admire his wit, that wears Gold-lace, or Tissue; Stabs any man that speaks
more contemptibly of the Scholar then he. He is a great proficient in all the
illiberal Sciences, as Cheating, Drinking, Swaggering, Whoring, and such like;
never kneeles, but to pledge Health's nor prays, but for a Pipe of pudding
Tabaco. He will blaspheme in his shirt; The oaths which he vomits at one
supper, would maintain a Town of garrison in good swearing a twelue-moneth:
One other genuine quality he has, which crowns all these; and that is this; to
a Friend in want, he will not depart with the weight of a soldard Groat, least
the world might censure him prodigal, or report him a Gull: Mary, to his
Cocatrice or Punquetto; half a dozen Taffeta gowns or Satin Kirtles, in a
pair or two of moneth's, why they are nothing.


I commend him he is one of my clients.


Come Sir. You are now within reguarde of the Presence, And see, the privacy
of this room, how sweetly it offers it offers it self to our retired
intendments, Page, cast a vigilant, and enquiring eye about, that we be not
rudely surprised, by the aproch of some ruder-stranger.


I warrant you Sir. I'll tell you when the Woolfe enters fear nothing.


O what a mass of benefit shall we possess, in being the invisible Spectators
of this strange show now to be acted?


Plant your self there Sir: And observe me. You shall now, as well be the
Ocular as the Eare-witnesse, how clearly I can revel that Paradox, or rather
Pseudodoxe of those, which hold the face to be the Index of the mind, which
(I assure you) is not so, in any Politic creature; for Instance, I will now
give you the particular, and distinct face of every your most noted Species of
persons; As your Merchant, your Schol^er, your Soldier, your Lawyer, Courtier,
c. And each of these so truly, as you would swear (but that your eye sees the
variation of the lineament) it were my most proper, and Genuine aspect: ^ for
your Merchants, or City face; Tis thus: a dull ^ face; still looking in a
direct line, forward: There is no ^ matter in this face. Then have you your
Students, or Ac^demique face, which is here, an honest, simple, and Methodical
face; But somewhat more spread then the former. The third is your Soldiers
face: A menacing, and astounding face, that looks broad, and big: the grace
of this face consists much in a Beard. The Anti face to this, is your Lawyers
face; a contracted, subtle, and Intricate face: full of quirks, and turnings;
A Labyrinthaean face, now angularly, now circularly, every way aspected. Next
is your Statists face, a serious, solemn, and supercilious face, full of
formal, and square gravity* the eye (for the most part) arteficially and
deeply shadowed, there is great judgment required in the making of this face.
But now to come to your face of faces; or Courtiers face: tis of three sorts:
(according to our subdiuision of a Courtier; Elementary, Practique, and
Theoric: your Courtier Theoric, is he that hath arrived to his fardest, and
doth now know the Court rather by speculation, then practise; this is his face:
A fastidious, and oblique face; that looks, as it went with a Vice, and were
screwed thus. Your Courtier Practique is he that is yet in his Path, his
Course, his Way, hath not touched the Puntillio or point of hopes; this face is
here: A most promising, open, smooth, and overflowing face, that seems as it
would run, and power it self into you; your Courtier Elementary is one but
newly entered, or as it were in the Alphabet Vt-re-mi-fa-sol-la, of Courtship:
Note well this face, for it is this you must practise.


I'll practise them all, if you please Sir.


I; here after you may: and it will not be altogether an ungrateful study. For
let your soul be assured of this (in any Rank or profession whatsoever) the
most general, or Mayor part of Opinio, goes with the face, (simply) respects
nothing else. Therefore: if that can be made, exactly, curiously, exquisitely,
thoroughly, It is enough: But (for the present) you shall only apply your self
to this face of the Elementary Courtier, A light, revelling, protesting face,
now blushing, now smiling which you may help much with a wanton wagging of
your head, thus; (a feather will teach you) or with kissing your finger that
hath the Ruby, or playing with some string of your band* which is a most quaint
kind of Melancholy besides. Where is your Page? call for your Casting Bottle,
and place your Mirror in your Hat, as I told you; so. Come, look not pale,
observe me: set your face, and enter,


O for some excellent Painter, to have ta'^e the copy of all these faces.


Prosaites.


Fie, I premonisht you of that; In the Court, Boy, or Sirha.


Master Lupus in -- O 'tis Prosaites.


Sirha, prepare me my Casting-bottle, I think I must be enforst to purchase me
another Page, you see how at hand Cos waits here.


So will he too in time.


What's he Mercury?


A notable Finch. One that hath newly entertained the Beggar to follow him, but
cannot get him to wait near enough. Tis Asotus the heir of Philargirus: but
first I'll give you the others Character, which may make his the clearer? He that
is with him is Amorphus, A Traveller, One so made out of the mixture and shreds
of forms, that himself is truly deformed: He walks most commonly with a
Clove or Picktoothe in his mouth, He's the very Mint of Compl^ment; All his
behaviours are printed, his face is another volume of Essays; and his beard an
Aristarchus. He speaks all cream, skimd, more affected then a dozen of
waiting women; He's his own promooter in every place: The wife of the
Ordinary gives him his diet to maintain her table in discourse, which (indeed)
is a mere Tyranny over her other guests: for he will usurp all the talk: Ten
Cunstables are not so tedious. He is no great shifter; once a year his
Apparel is ready to revolt; He doth use much to arbitrate quarrels, and
fights himself exceeding well (out at a window.) He will lie cheaper then any
Beggar, and louder then most Clocks; for which he is right properly
accommodated to the W^etstone his page. The other gallant is his Zani, doth
most of these tricks after him; sweats to imitate him in every thing (to a
hair) except a Beard, which is not yet extant: he doth learn to eat Anchoues,
Caueare because he loves them, speaks as he speaks; looks, walks, goes so
in Clothes and fashion, is in al, as he were moulded of him. Marry (before
they met) he had other very pretty sufficiencies, which yet he retains some
light Impression of: As frequenting a dancing school, and grievously
torturing strangers, with inquisitio after his grace in his Galliard; He buys
a fresh acquaintance at any rate; his Eye, and his Raiment confer much together
as he goes in the street; He treads nicely, like a fellow that walks upon
ropes, especially the first Sunday of his Silkstockings, and when he is most
neat and new, you shall strip him with commendations.


Here comes another.


I, but one of another strain Cupid: This fellow weighs somewhat.


His name Hermes?


Criticus. A creature of a most perfect and divine temper; One, in whom the
Humours Elements are peaceably met, without aemulation of Precedence: he is
neither too fantastickly Melancholy; too slowly Plegmatick, too lightly
Sanguine, or too rashly Choleric, but m al, so composed and ordered; as it is
clear, Nature was about some full work, she did more then make a man when she
made him; His discourse is like his behaviour, vncommon, but not unpleasing; he
is prodigal of neither: He strives rather to be (that which men call)
Judicious, then to be thought so; and is so truly learned that he affects not
to show it: He will think, speak his thought, both freely; but as distant fro
deprauing any other mans Merit, as proclaming his own: For his valor, tis
such, that he dares as little to offer an Injury, as receive one. In sum, he
hath a most Ingenious and sweet spirit, a sharp and seasoned wit, a straight
judgment. and a strong mind; constant and unshaken: Fortune could never
break him, or make him less, he counts it his pleasure to despise pleasures,
and is more delighted with good deeds then Goods, It is a competencie to him
that he can be virtuous. He doth neither covet, nor fear; he hath too much
reason to do either: and that commends all things to him.


Not better then Mercury commends him.


O Cupid, 'tis beyond my deity to give him his due praises; I could leave my
Place in heaven, to live among Mortals, so I were sure to be no other then he.


Slight, I believe he is your Minion; you seem to be so ravished with him.


He's one, I would not have awry thought darted against willingly.


No, but a straight shaft in his bosom, I'll promise him, if I am Cithereas
son.


Shall we go Cupid?


Stay and see the Ladies now; theile come presently. I'll help to paint them.


What lay Couller upon Colour* that affords but an ill blazon.


Here comes Mettle to help it, the Lady Arg^rion.


Money, money.


The same: A Nymph of a most wandering and giddy disposition, humourous as the
Air, she'll run from Gallant to Gallant (as they sit at Primero in the
Presence) most strangely, and seldom stays with any; She spreads as she
goes: To day you shall have her look as clear and fresh as the morning and to
morrow as Melancholy as midnight. She takes special pleasure in a close,
obscure lodging, and for that cause visits the City so often, where she has
many secret and true-concealing favourites. When she comes abroad she's more
loose and scattering then dust, and will fly from place to place, as she were
rapt with a whirle-winde. Your young Student (for the most part) she affects
not, only salutes him* and away: A Poet or a Philosopher she is hardly brought
to take any notice of, no, though he be some part of an Alchimist. She loves a
Player, well; and a Lawyer infinitely: but your Fool above all. She can do much
in the Court for the obtaining of any suit whatsoever, no door but flies open
to her; her presence is above a Charm: The worst in her is want of keeping
s^ate, and to much descending into inferior and base offices, She's for any
course Employment you will put upon her, as to be your Procurer or Pandar.


Peace Cupid; here comes more work for you, another Character or two.


Stay sweet Philautia; I'll but change my fann, and go presently.


Now (in very good serious) Ladies, I will have this order reuerst, the
Presence must be better maintained from you; A quarter past eleven, ne'er a
Nymph in Perspective; beshrew my hand, there must be a reformed Discipline. Is
that your new Ruff sweet Lady Bird? by my truth 'tis most Intricately rare.


Good Jove, what reverend gentlewoman in years might this be?


This Madam Moria, Guardian of the Nymphs: One that is not now to be persuaded
of her Wit, she will think herself wise against all the Judgements that come.
A Lady made all of voice, Air, talks any thing of any thing: She is like one
of your Ignorant Po^tasters of the time; who whe^ the have got acquainted with
a strange word, never rest t^ll they have wrong it in, though it loosen the
who^e fabric of their Sense.


That was pretty and sharply noted Cupid.


She will tell you Philosophy was a fine Reveller, when she was young and a
Gallant, and that then (though she say it) she was thought to be the Dame-Dido,
and Hallen of the Court; As also, what a sweet Dog she had this time four
year, and how it was called Fortune, and that (if the fates had not cut his
thread) he had been a Dog to have given entertainment to any Gallant in this
kingdom.


O I pray thee no more, I am full of her.


Yes (I must needs tell you) She composes a Sackpos^et well; and would court a
young Page sweetly, but that her breath is against it.


Now her breath (or some thing more strong) protect me from her; the other,
the other, Cupid.


O, that's my Lady and Mistress Madam Philautia: She admires not herself for
any one particularity, but for all; She is fair, and she knows it; She has a
pretty light wit too, and she knows it; She can dance, and she knows that
too; play at Shittle-cock, and that too: No quality she has, but she shall take
a very particular knowledge of, and most Lady-like commend it to you; you shall
have her at any time read you the History of her self, and very subtly run
over another Ladies sufficiences to come to her own.

She has a good superficial judgment in Painting; and would seem to have so
in Poetry. A most complete Lady in the opinion of some three beside herself.


Faith, how liked you my quipp to Hedon, about the garter? wast not witty?


Exceeding witty and Integrate: you did so Aggrauate the Jest withal.


And did I not dance moouingly last night?


Moouingly; out of measure (in troth) Sweet Lady.


A happy commendation, to dance, out of measure.


Save only you wanted the swimi the turn; O! when I was atfourteene --


Nay that's mine own from any Nymph in the Court) I am sure on it) therefore you
mistake me in that Guardian; both the swim, and the trip, are properly mine;
every body will affirm it, that has any judgment in dancing: I assure you.


Come now Philautia I am for you, shall we go?


I good Phantaste; What? have you changed your headtire?


Yes faith; the other was so near the common, it had no extraordinary grace;
besides, I had worn it almost a^ day in good troth.


I'll be sworn, this is most excellent for the devise, and rare. Tis after the
Italian print we looked on the other night.


Tis so: by this fan, I cannot abide any thing that savours the poor
ouer-worne cut, that has any kindred with it; I must have variety, ^* this
mixing in fashion I hate it worse, then to burn Juniper in my Chamber I
protest.


And yet we cannot have a new peculiar Court-tyre, but these Retainers will
have it; these Suburb sunday-waiters, these Courtiers for High days, I know
not what I should call them. --


O I, they do most pitifully Imitate; but I have a tire a coming (I faith)
shall --


In good certain, Madame, it makes you look most heavenly; but (lay your hand
on your hart) you never skinned a new beauty more prosperously in your life, nor
more supernaturally; look good Lady, sweet Lady look.


Tis very clear, and well believe me. But if you had seen mine yeasterday
when twas young, you would have -- who's your Doctor Phantaste?


Nay that's counsel Philautia, you shall pardon me: yet (I'll assure you) he's
the most dainty, sweet, absolute rare man, of the whole College. O! his very
looks, his discourse, his behaviour, all he doo's is Physic I protest.


For heavens sake his name; good, dear, Phantaste --


No, no, no, no, no, no, (believe me) not for a Million of heavens: I will not
make him cheap. Fie --


There is a Nymph too of a most curious and elaborate strain, light, all
motion, an Ubiquitary, she is every where, Phantaste --


Her very name speaks her; let her pass. But are these ( Cupid) the stars
of Cynthias Court? do these Nymphs attend upon Di^na?


They are in her Court ( Mercury) but not as Stars; these never come in the
presence of Cynthia: the Nymphs that make her train, are the divine Arete,
Timae, Phronesis, Thauma, and others of that high sort. These are privately
brought in by Moria in this licentious time, against her knowledge; and (like
so many Meteors) will vanish when she appears.


COme follow me my Wags, and say as I say.
There's no riches but in Rags; hey day, hey day;
You that profess this art. Come away; come away:
And help to bear a part. Hey day; hey day.
Beare-wards, Blackingme.
Corne-cutters, and Carmen.
Sellers of mar-king stones.
Gatherer's up o^ Marow-bones
Peddlers, and Puppit-players.
Sow-gelders, and Sooth-saiers.
Gipsies and ^aylers,
Rat-catchers* and Raylers,
Beadles, and Ballad-singers.
Fiddlers, and Fadingers.
Thomalins, and Tinkers.
Scauengers, and Skinkers.
There goes the Hare away.
Hey day, Hey day.
Bawds and blind Doctors.
Paritors, and spittle Proctors.
Chemists, and Cuttlebungs.
Hookers, and Horne-thums.
With all cast commanders.
turned Post-knights, or Padars.
Jugglers, and Jesters.
Borrowers of Testers.
And all the troop of trash
That're allied to the lash,
Come, and Join with your ^ags
Shake up your muscle-bags.
For Beggary bears the sway,
Then singe cast care away,
Hey day, hey day.

What? those that were our fellow Pages but now, so soon preferred to be Yeomen
of the Bottles? the mystery, the mystery, good wags?


Some diet drink, they have the guard of.


No Sir, we are going in quest of a strange Fountain, lately found out.


By whom?


My Master o^ the great discoverer, Amorphus.


Thou ha^ well entitled him Cos, for he will discover all he knows.


I and a little more too, when the spirit is upon him.


O the good travelling Gentleman yonder, ha's caused such a drought (...) the
Presence, wi^h reporting the wonders of this new water; that all the Ladies,
and Gallants ^e languishing upon the Rushes, like so many pounded Ca^tle (...)
the midste of (...), sighing one to another, and gasping, as if each of them
expected a Cock from the Fountain, to be brought into his mouth^ and (without
we return quickly) they are all (as a youth would say) no better then a few
Trowts cast a shore, or a dish of Eels in a Sand-bag.


Well then, you were best dispatch have a care of them, Come Cupid, thou and I'll
go peruse this dry wonder.


Sir, let not this discountenance, or dis-gallant you a whit, you must not
sink under the first disaster; It is with your young Grammattical Courtier, as
with your Neophyte-Player, a thing usual to be daunted at the first presence,
or enter-view: you saw, there was Hedon Anaides, (far more practisd gallants
then your self) who were both out, to comfort you: It is no disgrace, no more,
then for your adventurous Reveller to fall by some in-auspicious chance in his
Galliard, or ^or some subtle Politician to undertake the Bastinado, that the
State might think worthily of him, and respect him as a man well beaten to the
world. What? hath your Tailor provided the property (we spake of) at your
Chamber, or no?


I think he has.


Nay* (I entreat you) be not so flat, and melancholic, erect your mind: you
shall redeem this with the Courtship I will teach you against afternoon:
Where eat you to day?


Where you please Sir, any where I.


Come let us go and taste some light dinner, A dish of she'd Caueare, or so,
and after you shall practise an hour at your lodging, some few forms that I
have remembered; If you had but (so f^rre) gathered your spirits to you, as to
have taken up a Rush (when you were out) and wagd it, thus; or clensde your
tee^h with it, or but turn'de aside, and fa^de some business to whisper with
your Page, till you had recovered your self, or but found some slight stain
in your stocking, or any other pretty Invention (so it had been sudden,) you
might have come off with a most clear and Courtly grace.


A poison of all, I think I was forespoake, I.


No, I do partly aim at the cause (which was omenous indeed) for as you enter
at the door, there is oppos'de to you the frame of a Wolf in the Hangings,
which (your eye taking suddenly) gave a false Alarm to the heart; and that
was it called your blood out of your face, and so disordered the whole rank of
your spirits: I beseech you labour to forget it.


Heart, was there ever so prosperous an Invention thus unluckily perverted, and
spoiled, by a whoore-sonne Bookworme, a Candle-waster?


Nay, be not impatient, Hedon.


Slight, I would fain know his name.


Hang him poor Grogran Rascal, pray thee think not of him: I'll send for him
to my lodging, and have him blanketted when thou wilt, man.


By gods so; I would thou could. Look, here he coms. Laugh at him, laugh at
him. Ha, ha, ha.


Fough, he smells all Lamp-oyle, with studying by Candle-light.


How confidently he went by us; and carelessly! never moved! nor stirred at any
thing! Did you observe him?


I a pox on him, let him go, D^rmouse: he is in a dream now; He has no
other time, to sleep but thus when he walks abroad, to take the air.


Gods precious, this afflicts me more then all the rest, that we should so
particulerly direct our Hate, and Contempt against him; and he to carry it thus
without wound or passion! tis insufferable.


'Slid, (my dear Envy) if, thou but say the word now, I'll undo him
eternally for thee.


How sweet Anaides?


Marry half a score of us get him in (one night) and make him pawn his wit
for a supper.


Away, thou hast such unseasonable Jests. By this heaven I wonder at nothing
more then our Gentlemen Ushers; that will suffer a piece of Serge, or
Perpetuana, to come into the Presence: me thinks, they, should (out of their
Expe^ience) better distinguish the silken disposition of a Courtier, then to
let such terrible course Rags mix with them, able to fret any smooth or
gentile Society to the threads, with their rubbing Devises.


Damn me, if I should adventure on his company once more, without a suit of
Buff, to defend my wit: he does nothing but stab the slave: how
mischeiuously he crossed thy devise of the Prophecy there? And Moria she comes
without her Muffe too; and there my invention was lost.


Well, I am resolved, what I'll do.


What, my good spirituous Spark?


Marry, speak all the venom I can of him; and poison his reputation in every
place where I come.


Before god most Courtly.


And if I chance to be present where any question is made of his sufficiencies,
or of any thing he hath done private or public; I'll censure it slightly, and
ridiculously --


At any hand beware of that, so you may draw your own judgment, insuspect;
No, I'll instruct thee what thou shalt do, and by a safer means: approve any
thing thou hear^st of his, to the receiud opinion of it; but if it be
extraordinary, give it from him to some other, whom thou more particulerly
affectst, that's the way to plague him, and he shall never come to defend
himself: Sblood, I'll give out all he do^ is dictated from other men: and
swear it too (if thou'lt have me) and that I know the time, and place, where he
stole it: though my soul be guilty of no such thing; and that I think out of
my hart, he hates such barren shi^ts; yet to do thee a pleasure and him a
disgrace, I'll damn my self, or do any thing.


Gramercies my dear Devil: we'll put it seriously in practise, I faith.


Do good Detraction, do: and I the while
Shall shake thy spite off with a careless smile.
Poor piteous Gallants, what lean idle sleights
Their thoughts suggest to flatter their starved Hopes!
As if I knew not how to entertain
These Straw-deuises; but of fo^ce must yield
To the weak stroke of their calumnious tongues.
Why should I care what every Dor doth buzz*
In credulous ears? it is a Crown to me,
That the best judgements can report me wronged;
Them Liars; and their slanders impudent.
Perhaps (upon the rumour of their speeches)
Some grieved friend will whisper, Criticus,
Men speak ill of thee: So they be ill men,
If they spake worse, twere better: For of such
To be dispraised, is the most perfect praise.
What can his Censure hurt me, whom the world
Hath censured vile before me? If good Chre^tus,
Euthus, or Phronimus, had spoke the words,
They would have moved me; I should have called
My thoughts and Actions to a strict account
Upon the hearing: But when I remember
Tis Hedon and Anaides: Alas, then,
I think but what they are, and am not stirred:
The one, a light voluptuous Reveller,
The other a strange arrogating Puff,
Both impudent, and ignorant enough;
That talk (as they are wont) not as I merit;
Traduce by Custom, as most Dogs do bark,
Do nothing out of judgment, but disease;
Speak ill, because they never could speak well:
And who'ld be angry with this race of Creatures?
What wise Physician have we ever seen
Moved with a frantic man? the same affects
That he doth bear to his sick Patient,
Should a right mind carry to such as these:
And I do count it a most rare Revenge,
That I can thus (with such a sweet neglect)
Pluck from them all the pleasure of their Malice.
For that's the mark of all their enginous drifts,
To wound my Patience (how so ever they seem
To aim at other objects) which if mist,
Their Enuy's like an Arrow shot upright,
That in the fall endangers their own heads.

What Criticus? where have you spent the day*
You have not visited your jealous friends?

Where I have seen (most honoured Arete,)
The strangest Pageant, fashioned like a Court,
(At least I dreamp't I saw it) so di^us'd,
So painted, pied, and full of Raine-bow strains;
As never yet (either by Time, or Place)
Was made the food to my distasted Sense:
Nor can my weak imperfect Memory
Now render half the forms unto my tongue,
That were conuolu'd within this thrifty Room.
Here, stalks me by, a proud, and spangled Sir,
That looks three handfuls higher then his fore-top;
Savours himself alone, is only kind
And loving to himself: One that will speak
More dark and doubtful then six oracles;
Salutes a friend, as if he had a stitch,
Is his own Chronicle, and scarce can eat
For registering himself; is waited on,
By Mimiques, Jesters, Pandars, Parasites,
And other such like Prodigies of men.
He past; there comes some subtle Proteus: One
Can ^hange, and vary with all forms he sees;
Be any thing but honest; serves the time;
Hovers betwixt two factions, and explores
The drifts of both; which (with cross face) he bears
To the divided heads, and is received
With mutual grace of either: One that dares
Do deeds worthy the Hurdle, or the Wheel,
To be thought some body; and is (in sooth)
Such as the Satyrist points truly forth,
Criminibus debent hortos, praetoria, mensas:

You tell us wonders Criticus.

Tut, this is nothing.
There stands a Neophyte, glazing of his face,
Against his Idol enters; and repeats,
(Like an imperfect Prologue, at third Musique)
His part of speeches, and confederate Jests
In passion to himself; Another swears
His Scene of Courtship over, and then seems
As he would kiss away his hand in kindness;
A third, is most in Action; swims, and frisks,
Plays with his mistress paps, salutes her pomps;
Will spend his Patrimony for a Garter,
Or the least feather in he^ bounteous Fan:
A fourth, he only comes in for a Mute,
Divides the Act with a dumb show, and Exit,
Then must the Ladies laugh: straight comes their Scene;
A sixth times worse Confusion then the Rest.
Where you shall hear one talk of this mans Eye;
Another of his Lip, a third, his Nose;
A fourth commend his Leg, a ^ifth his Foot,
A sixth his Hand, and every one a limb;
That you would think the poor distorted Gallant
Must there expire: Then fall they in discourse
Of Tires, and Fashions; how they must take place:
Where they may kiss; and whom: when to sit down;
And with what grace to rise: if they salute,
What courtesy they must use; such Cob-web stuff,
As would enforce the commonst sense abhor
The Arachnean workers.

Patience Criticus.
This knot of Spiders will be soon dissolved,
And all their webs swept out of Cynthias Court,
When once her glorious Deity appears,
And but presents it self in her full light:
Till when, go in: and spend your hours with us
Your honoured friends Timae, and Phronesis,
In contemplation of our Goddess name:
Think on some sweet, and choice Invention now,
(Worthy her serious, and illustrous Eyes)
That from the merit of it we may take
Desired occasion to prefer your worth,
And make your service known to Cynthia:
It is the pride of Arete to grace
Her studious lovers; and (in scorn of Time,
Envy, and Ignorance) to lift their state
Above a vulgar height. True Happiness
Consists not in the multitude of friends,
But in the worth, and choice; Nor would I have
Virtue, a popular Reguard pursew;
Let them be good that love me, though but few.

I kiss thy hands, divinest Arete,
And vow my self to thee, and Cynthia.

A little more forward; So Sir. Now go in, dis-cloake your self, and come
forth. Taylor; bestow thy absence upon us; and be not prodigal of this secret,
but to a dear Customer. Tis well entered Sir. Stay you come on too fast; your
Pace is too impetuous. Imagine this to be the Palace of your Pleasure, or
Place where your Lady is pleased to be seen: First you present your self
thus; and spying her you fall off, and walk some two turns; in which time it
is to be supposed your Passion hath sufficiently whited your Face? then
(stifling a sigh or two, and closing your lips) with a trembling boldness,
and bold terror; you advance your self forward. Try thus much I pray you.


Yes Sir, (pray god I can light on it) Here I come in you say: and present my
self?


Good.


And then I spy her, and walk off?


Very good.


Now sir I stif^le, and advance forward?


Trembling.


Yes Sir, trembling. I shall do it better when I come to it. And what must I
speak now?


Mary you shall say; Dear Beauty, or sweet Honour, or by what other title you
please to remember her) me thinks you are Melancholy. This is if she be alone
now and discompanied.


Well Sir, I'll enter again; her title shall be My dear Lindabrides.


Lindabrides?


I Sir, the Emperor Alicandro's Daughter, and the Prince M^ridians sister (in
the Knight of the Sun) she should have been married to him, but that the
Princess Clari^iana --


O you betray your reading.


Nay sir, I have read History: I am a little Humanitian. Interrupt me no^, good
Sir. My dear Lindabrides, My dear Lindabrides, My dear Lindabrides, me
thinks you are Melancholy.


I, and take her by the Rosie-fingerd hand.


Must I so? O: My dear Lindabrides, me thinks you are Melancholy.


Or thus Sir. All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports, sweet Musique,
rich Fare, brave Attires, soft Beds, silken thoughts, attend this dear Beauty.


Believe me that's prerty: All variety of diuino pleasures, choice sports,
sweet Musique, rich Fare, brave Attires, soft Beds, and silken thoughts, attend
this dear Beauty.


And then, offering to kiss her hand, if she shall coyly recoil, and signify
your repulse; you are to re-enforce your self with, More then most fair Lady;
let not the Rigour of your just disdain thus coursly censure of your servants
zeal: and (with-all) protest her, To be the only, and absolute vn-paraeleld
Creature, you do adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence, in this Court,
Corner of the world, or Kingdom.


This is hard by my faith: I'll begin it all again.


Do so, and I will Act it for your Lady.


Will you vouchsafe sir? All variety of divine pleasures, choice Sports,
sweet Musique, rich Fare, brau^ Attire, soft Beds, and silken thoughts, attend
this dear Beauty.


So Sir, pray you a way.


More then most fair Lady, let not the Rigour of your just disdain, thus
coursly censure of your s^ruants zeal. I protest you are the only and absolute
vn-aparailed --


Vn-paraleld.


Vn-paraleld Creature, I do adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence, in
this Court, Corner of the world, or kingdom.


This is if she abide you: But now; put case she should be Passant when you
enter, as thus: you are to frame your Gate ther'after, and call upon her: Lady,
Nymph, Sweet Refuge, Star of our Court: Then if she be Guardant, here: you
are to come on, and (^aterally disposing your self,) swear by her blushing
and well coulored cheek: the bright dye of her hair, her Ivory teeth, or
some such white and Innocent oath, to induce you. If Reguardant; then, maintain
your station, Brisk, and Irpe, show the supple motion of your pliant body: but
(in chief) of your knee, and hand, which cannot but arride her proud Humour
exceedingly.


I conceive you sir, I shall perform all these things in good time, I doubt
not, they do so hit me.


Well Sir, I am your Lady; make use of any of these beginnings, or some other
out of your own invention: and prove how you can hold up, and follow it.
Say, Say.


Yes Sir: my dear Lindabrides.


No, you affect that Lindabrides too much: And (let me tell you) it is not so
Courtly. Your Pedant should provide you some parcels of French, or some pretty
Commodity of Italian to commence with, if you would be exotic, and exquisite.


Yes Sir, he was at my lodging the other morning, I gau^ him a Doublet.


Double your benevolence, and give him the Hose too; clothe you his body, he
will help to apparaile your mind. But now, see what your proper Genius can
perform alone, without adiection of any other Minerua.


I comprehend you sir.


I do stand you Sir: fall back to your first place. Good; passing well: Very
properly pursewd.


Beautiful, ambiguous, and sufficient Lady. What are you all alone.


We would be Sir, if you would leave us.


I am at your beauties appointment: bright Angel; but --


What but?


No harm, more then most fair feature.


Th^t touch relished well.


But I protest.


And why should you protest?


For good will ( dear esteemed Madam) and I hope your Ladyship will so
conceive of it: If ever you have seen great TAMBERLAINE.


O that Blank was excellent: if you could pick out more of these
Play-particles, and (as occasion shall salute you) embroyder or damask your
discourse with them (persuade your soul) it would iudiciouslye commend you:
Come, this was a well-dischar'gd and auspicious Bout: prove the second.


Lady, I cannot swagger it in Black and Yellow.


Why if you can Revel it in White Sir, 'tis sufficient.


Say you so Sweet Lady? Lan, tede de, de, dant, dant, dant, dante, c. No (in
good faith) Madame, whoseuer told your Ladyship so, abused you; but I would be
glad to meet your Ladyship in a measure.


Me Sir? beelike you measure me by your self then?


Would I might Fair Feature.


And what were you the better, if you might?


The better it please you to ask, Fair Lady.


Why this was ravishing, and most acutely continew'd; Well, spend not your
humour too much, you have now competently exercised your Conceit: This (once or
twice a day (will render you an accomplished, elaborate, and well leveled
Gentleman; convey in your Courting-stock, we will (in the heate of this) go
visit the Nymphs Chamber.


I would this water would arrive once our travailing friend so commended to us.


So would I, for he has left all us in travail, with expectation of it.


Pray Jove, I never rise from this Couch, if ever I thirsted more for a thing,
in my whole time of being a Courtier.


Nor I, I'll be sworn; the very mention of it sets my lips in a worse heate,
then if he had sprinkled them with Mercury. Reach me the glass Sirah.


Here Lady.


They do not peel sweet charge? do they?


Yes a little Guardian.


O 'tis a imminent good sign. Ever when my lips do so, I am sure to have
some delicious good drink or other approaching.


Mary this may be good for us Ladies: for (it seems) tis far-fet by their
stay.


My palate for yours ( dear Honour) it shall prove most elegant I warrant you:
O, I do fancy this gear that's long a coming, with an unmeasurable strain.


Pray thee sit down Philautia, that Rebatu beecoms thee singularly.


Is't not queynt?


Yes faith: me thinks thy seru^nt Hedon is nothing so obsequious to thee, as
he was wont to be; I know not how, He's grown out of his Garb a-late, he's
warp't*


In trueness, and so me thinks too, he's much converted.


Tut; let him be what he will, 'tis an Animal^ I dream not of. This tire (me
thinks) makes me look very Ingenuously, quick, and spirited: I should be some
Laura, or some Delia me thinks.


As I am wise (fair honours) that title she gave him, to be her Ambition,
spoiled him: Before, he was the most propitious, and observant young Novice. --


No, no; you are the whole heaven awry Guardian, tis the swaggering tilt-horse
Anaides draws with him there, has been the diuerter of him.


For Cupids sake speak no more of him; would I might never dare to look in a
Mirror again, if I respect ere a Marmaset of them all, otherwise, then I would
a Feather, or my Shittle-cock, to make sport with, now and then.


Come sit down; troth (and you be good Beauties) lets run over them all now:
Which is the properst man amongst them? I say the Travailer, Amorphus.


O fie on him: he looks like a Dutch Trumpeter in the battle of Lepanto, in
the gallery yonder; and speaks to the tune of a country Lady, that comes ever
in the rear ward, or train of a Fashion.


I should have judgment, in a feature sweet Beauties.


A body would think so, at these years.


And I prefer another now, far before him, A million at least.


Who might that be Guardian?


Mary (fair Charge) Anaides.


Anaides? you talked of a tune Philautia, there's one speaks in a Key: like the
opening of some Justices gate, or a Post-Boyes horne, as if his voice feared an
Arrest for some ill words it should give, and were loath to come forth.


I, and he has a very imperfect face.


Like a squeezed Orange, sower, sower.


His Hand's too great to; by at least a straws breadth.


Nay he has a worse fault then that too.


A long heel?


That were a fault in a Lady rather then him: No, they say he puts of the
Calves of his legs with his Stockings every night.


Out upon him: turn to another of the Pictures for Gods sake. What says
Argurion? whom does she commend before the rest?


I hope I have instructed her sufficiently for an answer.


Troth I made the motion to her Lady-ship for one to day in the Presence, but it
appeared she was other ways furnished before; She would none.


Who was that Argurion?


Mary the little, poor, plain Gentleman in the black there.


Who? Criticus?


I, I, he; A fellow that no body so much as looked upon, or regarded, and she
would have had me done him particular grace.


That was a true trick of your self Moria, to persuade Argurion affect the
scholar.


Tut; but she shall be no chooser for me. In good faith I like the Citizens son
there Asotus, me thinks, none of them all come near him.


Not Hedon?


Hedon, in troth no. Hedon's a pretty slight Courtier* and he wears his
clothes well, and sometimes in fashion; marry his face is but indifferent, and
he has no such excellent body. No; the other is a most delicate youth, a sweet
face, a straight body, a well proportioned leg, and foot, a white hand, a
tender voice.


How now Argurion?


O you should have let her alone, she was bestowing a Copy of him upon us.


Why she doates more palpably upon him, then ere his Father did upon her.


Believe me, the young gentleman deserves it; if she could dote more 'twere
not amiss: He is an exceeding proper youth, and would have made a most neat
Barber-surgeon, if he had been put to it in time.


Say you so? me thinks* he looks like a Taylor already.


I, that had said on one of his Customers suites.


Well Ladies, Jest on: the best of you both would be glad of such a servant.


I, I'll be sworn would they: Go to Beauties, make much of Time, and Place, and
Occasion, and Opportunity, and Favourites, and things that belong to them; for
I'll ensure you, they will all relinquish; they cannot endure above another
year; I know it out of future experience, and therefore take exhibition, and
warning: I was once a Reveller my self, and though I speak it (as mine own
Trumpet) I was then esteemed --


The very Marchpane of the Court I warrant?


And all the Gallants came about you like flies, did they not?


Go to; they did somewhat, that's no matter now. Here comes Hedon.


Save you sweet and clear beauties: By the spirit that moves in me, you are
almost pleasingly bestowed Ladies. Only, I can take it for no good Omen, to
find mine Honour so dejected.


You need not fear Sir, I did of purpose humble my self against your coming,
to decline the pride of my Ambition.


Fair Honour, Ambition dares not stoop; but if it be your sweet pleasure, I
shall loose that Title; I will (as I am Hedon) apply my self to your bounties.


That were the next way to distitle my self of Honour: O no, rather be still
Ambitious I pray you.


I will be any thing that you please, whilst it pleases you to be your self
Lady. Sweet Phantaste, Dear Moria, most beautiful Argurion. --


Farewell Hedon.


Anaides, Stay: whether go you?


'Slight, what should I do here? and you engross ^hem all for your own use,
'tis time for me to seek out.


I engross them? Away mischief, this is one of your extravagant Jests now,
because I began to salute them by their names --


Faith you might have spar'de us Madame Prudence the Guardian there, though you
had more covetously aymde at the rest.


'Shart, take them all man; what speak you to me of aiming or Covetous?


I, say you so? nay then, have at them: Ladies, here's one hath distinguished
you by your names already; It shall only become me, to ask; How you do?


Gods so, was this the disseigne you travelled with?


Who answers the Brazen head? it spoke to some body?


Lady Wisdom, do you Interpret for these puppets?


In truth, and sadness (Honours) you are in great offence for this; go too,
the Gentleman (I'll undertake with him) is a man of fair living, and able to
maintain a Lady in her two Coaches a day, besides Pages, Munkeys, and
Parachitos, with s^tch attendants as she shall think meet for her turn; and
therefore there is more respect requirable, how soever you seem to connive:
Hark you Sir, let me discourse a syllable with you. I am to say to you, these
Ladies are not of that close, and open behaviour, as happily you may suspend;
their Cariadge is well known to be such as it should be, both gentle and
extraordinary.


O here comes the other Pair.


That was your Fathers Love, the Nymph Argurion. I would have you direct all
your Courtship thither, if you could but endear your self to her affection,
you were eternally engallanted.


In truth Sir? pray Phoebus I prove fauorsome in her fair eyes.


All divine mixture, and increase of beauty, to this bright B^uy of Ladies; and
to the male- Courtiers Complement, and Courtesy.


In the behalf of the Males, I gratefie you Amorphus.


And I of the Females.


Succinctly spoken: I do vale to both your thanks, and kiss them; but
primarily to yours, Most ingenious, acute, and polite Lady.


Gods my life, how he does all to be qualify her! Ingenious, Acute, and
Polite? as if there were not others in place, as Ingenious, Acute, and Polite,
as she.


Yes, but you must know Lady, he cannot speak out of a Dictionary method.


Sit down sweet Amorphus. When will this water come think you?


It cannot now be long fair Lady.


Now observe Mercury.


How most Ambiguous beauty? Love you? that I will by this Hand-kercher.


'Slid he draws his oaths out of his pocket.


But will you be constant?


Constant Madame? I will not say for Constantnesse, but by this Purse (which I
would be loath to swear by, unless 'twere embroidered) I protest (more then
most fair Lady) you are the only, absolute and vn-paraleld Creature, I do
adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence in this Court, Corner of the
world, or Kingdom, Me thinks you are Melancholy.


Does your heart speak all this?


Say you?


O he is groping for another oath.


Now by this Watch (I marle how forward the day is) I do vnfaignedly vow my
self ('Slight 'tis deeper then I took it, past five) yours entirely
addicted, Madame.


I require no more dearest Asotus, hence-forth let me call you mine; and in
remembrance of me, voutchsafe to wear this Chain, and this Diamond.


O god sweet Lady.


There are new oaths for him: what? doth Hermes taste no Alteration in all
this?


Yes, thou hast struck Argurion enamoured on Asotus methinkes?


Alas no; I am no body, I: I can do nothing in this disguise.


But thou hast not wounded any of the rest, Cupid?


Not yet: it is enough that I have begun so prosperously.


Tut, these are nothing to the Gems I will hourly bestow vpo^ thee: be but
faithful and kind to me, and I will lade thee with my richest bounties:
behold here my Bracelets from mine Arms.


Not so good Lady, By this Diamond.


Take them; wear them: my Jewels, Chain of Pearl, Pendants, all I have.


Nay then, by this Pearl You make me a Wanton.


Shall not she answer for this, to maintain him thus in swearing?


O, no, there is away to wean him from this: the Gentleman may be reclaimed.


I, if you had the ayring of his apparel Cosse, I think.


Loving? 'twere pity I should be living else, believe me. Save you Sir. Save
you sweet Lady, Save you Mounsieur Anaides; Save you dear Madame.


Dost thou know him that saluted thee, Hedon?


No, some idle Fungoso I warrant you.


'Sbloud, I never saw him till this morning, and he salutes me as familiarly,
as if we had known together, since the first year of the siege of Troy.


A most right-handed, and auspicious encounter. Confine your self to your
fortunes.


For gods sake lets have some Ri^dles or Purposes; hough.


No faith, your Prophecies are best, the tother are stale.


Prophecies? we cannot all ^it in at them; we shall make a confusion: no; what
called you that we had in the forenoon?


Substantiues, and Adiectiues. Is't not Hedon?


I that, who begins?


I have thought; speak your Adiectiues Sirs?


But do not you change then.


Not I, Who says?


Odoriferous.


Popular.


Humble.


White-liuer'd.


Barbarous.


Pythagoricall.


Yours Signior.


What must I do Sir?


Give forth your Adiectiue with the rest; as Prosperous, Good, Fair, Sweet,
Well.


Any thing that hath not bin spoken.


Yes Sir: Well-spoken shall be mine.


What? ha you all done.


I.


Then the Substantiue is Breeches. Why Odoriferous Breeches Guardian?


Odoriferous, because Odoriferous: that which contains most variety of savor,
and smell, we say is most Odoriferous: now Breeches I presume are incident to
that variety, and therefore, Odoriferous Breeches.


Well, we must take it howsoever, who's next. Philautia.


Popular.


Why Popular Breeches?


Mary that is, when they are not content to be generally noted in Court; but
will press footth on common Stages, and Brokers stalls, to the public view
of the world.


Good: why Humble Breeches? Argurien.


Humble, because they use to be sat upon; besides if you tie them not up, their
property is to fall down about your heals.


She has worn the Breeches it seems which have done so.


But why White-liuerd?


Why? 'Sharte are not their linings white? besides, when they come in
swaggering company, and will pocket up any thing; may they not properly be
said to be White-liuerd?


O yes, we cannot deny it. And why Barbarous, Hedon?


Barbarous, because commonly when you have worn^ your Breeches sufficiently,
you give them to your Barbar.


That's good: but now Pythagoricall?


I, Amorphus. Why Pythagoricall Breeches?


O most kindly of all, 'tis a conceit of that Fortune; I am bold to hug my
brain for.


How is't, E^quisite Amorphus?


O I am rapt with it, 'tis so fit, so proper, so happy.


Nay do not rack us thus?


I never truly relished my self before. Give me your ears. Breeches
Pythagoricall, by reason of their transmigration into several shapes.


Most rare in sweet troth. Mary this young Gentleman, for his Well-spoken --


I, why Well-spoken Breeches?


Well-spoken: mary well-spoken, because whatsoever they speak is well taken,
and whatsoever is well taken, is well-spoken.


Excellent: believe me.


Not so Ladies neither.


But why Breeches now?


Breeches quasi Beare-riches; when a gallant bears all his Riches in his
Breeches.


In good faith these unhappy Pages, would be whipped for staying thus.


Beshrew my hand, and my hart else.


I do wonder at their protraction.


Pray God my whore have not discovered her self to the raskally Boys, and
that be the cause of their stay.


I must suit my self with another Page; this idle Prosaites will never be
brought to wait well*


Sir I have a kinseman I could willingly wish to your service, if you would
deign to accept of him.


And I shall be glad (most sweet Lady) to embrace him; where is he?


I can fetch him Sir, but I would be loath to make you turn away your other
Page.


You shall not most sufficient Lady, I will keep both: pray you lets go see
him.


Whether goes my Love?


I'll return presently; I go but to see a Page with this Lady.


As sure as Fate 'tis so; she ha's opened all: A pox of all Cocatrices. Damn
me if she have played loose with me, I'll cut her throat within a hairs
breadth, so it may be heald again.


What is he Jealous of his Hermaphrodite?


O I, this will be excellent sporte.


Phantaste, Argurion, what? you are suddenly stroke me thinks; for Gods will
lets have some Musique till they come. Ambition reach the Lyra I pray you.


Any thing to which my Honour shall direct me.


Come Amorphus; cheer up Phantaste.


It shall be my pride fair Lady to attempt all that is in my power. But here
is an Instrument that (alone) is able to infuse soul in the most
melancholic, and dull disposed Creature upon earth; O! let me kiss thy fair
knees: Beauteous ^ares attend it.


Will you have the Kiss Honour.


I good Ambition.


O That Joy so soon should wast!
or so sweet a bliss
as a Kiss,
Might not for ever last!
So sugared, so melting, so soft, so delicious,
The dew that lies on Roses,
When the Morn her self discloses,
is not so precious:
O, rather then I would it smother,
Were I to taste such another;
It should be my wishing
That I might dye kissing.
I made this Ditty and the Note to it upon a kiss that my Honour gave me; how
like you it Sir.


A pretty Air; in general I like it well. But in particular, your long
die-Note did arride me most, but it was somewhat too long: I can show one,
almost of the same nature, but much before it, and not so long; in a
Composition of mine own: I think I have both the Note, and Ditty about me.


Pray you Sir see.


Yes there is the Note; and all the parts if I mis-thinke not. I will read the
Ditty to your Beauties here, but first I am to make you familiar with the
occasion, which presents it self thus. Upon a time, going to take my leave of
the Emperor, and kiss his great hands; there being then present, the Kings
of France, and Arragon, the Dukes of Sauoy, Florence, Orleance, Bourbon,
Brunswick, the Lantgrau^, Count Palatine, all which had severally feasted me;
besides infinite more of inferior persons, as Earles, and others: it was my
chance (the Emperor detained by some other affair) to wait him the fifth
part of an hour, or much ne'er it* In which time (retiring my self into a
Bay-window) I encountered the Lady Annabel niece to the Empress, and ^ister to
the king of Arragon; who (having never before ey de me, but only heard the
common report of my Virtue, Learning, and Travail) fell into that extremity of
passion, for my love, that she there immediately sounded: Physicians were sent
for; she had to her chamber; so to her bed; where (languishing some few days)
after many times calling upon me, with my name in her mouth, she expired. As
that (I must needs say) is the only fault of my Fortune, that as it hath ever
bin my hap to be sewed to by all Ladies, and Beauties where I have come; so, I
never yet soiourn'd, or rested in that place, or part of the world, where some
great and admirable fair Creature died not for my love.


O the sweet power of travail, are you guilty of this Cupid?


No Mercury; and that his page (Cos) knows, and he were here present to be
sworn.


But how doth this draw on the Ditty Sir.

O she is to quick with him; he hath not deuis'd that yet.


Marry some hour before she departed, she bequeathed to me this Glou^; which
the Emperor himself took care to send after me, in six Coaches, covered all
with black-veluet, attended by the state of his Empire; all which he freely
gave me, and I reciprocally (out of the same bounty) gave it to the Lords that
brought it: only reserving, and respecting, the gift of the deceasde Lady,
upon which I composed this Ode, and set it to my most affected Instrument the
Lyra.


THou more then most sweet Glove,
Unto my more sweet Love;
Suffer me to store, with kisses
This empty lodging, th^t now misses
The pure Rosie hand that ware thee,
Whiter then the Kid that bare thee:
Thou art soft, but that was softer;
Cupids self hath kissed it ofter,
Then ere he did his mothers Doves,
Supposing her the Queen of Loves
That was thy Mistress
Best of Gloves.
Blasphemy, Blasphemy Cupid.


I, I'll revenge it time enough; Hermes.


Good Amorphus, let's here it sung.


I care not to do that, since it pleases Philautia to request it.


Here Sir.


Nay play it I pray you, you do well, you do well: how like you it Sir?


Very well in troth.


But very well? O you are a mere Mammo^hrept in judgment then: why do you not
observe how excellently the Ditty is affected in every place? that I do not
marry a word of short quantity, to a long Note* nor an ascending Syllable to a
descending Tone. Besides upon the word Best there, you see how I do enter with
an odd Minnum, and drive it thorough the Brief, which no intelligent Musician
(I know) but will affirm to be very rare, extraordinary, and pleasing.


And yet not fit to lament the death of a Lady for all this.


Tut here be they will swallow any thing.


Pray you let me have a copy of it Amorphus.


And me too, in troth I like it exceedingly.


I have denied it to Princes, nevertheless to you (the true Female Twins of
Perfection) I am won to depart withal.


I hope I shall have my Honours copy.


You are Ambitious in that Hedon. Enter Anaides.


How now Anaides? what is it hath conjured up this distemperature in the circle
of your face?


'Sblod what have you to do? A pox of God o'your filthy travailing Beard; hold
your tongue.


Nay, dost hear mischief?


Away Musk-cat.


I say to thee: Thou art rude, impudent, course, impolisht; a Frapler, and
base.


Heart of my father, what a strange alteration has half a years haunting of
Ordinaries wrought in this fellow? that came with a Tuff-taffata Jerkin to
Town but the other day, and now he is turned Hercules, he wants but a Club.


Sir, I will garter my hose with your guts; and that shall be all.


'Slid what rare fire works be here? flash, flash.


What's the matter Hedon? can you tell?


Nothing but that he lacks money, thinks weel^ lend him some to be friends.


Come sweet Lady* in good truth i'll have it, you shall not deny me; Morus
persuade your Aunt I may have her picture, by any means.


Yes Sir: good Aunt now, let him have it; he will use me the better, if you
love me, do good Aunt.


Well, tell him he shall have it.


Master, you shall have it, she says;


Shall I? thank her good Page.


What has he entertained the Fool?


I, heel wait close you shall see, though the Begg^r hang off.


Aunt my master thanks you.


Call him hither.


Yes: master.


Yes in very truth, and gave me this Purse, and he ha's promised me a most
fine Dog; which he will have drawn with my Picture, and desires most
vehemently to be known to your Ladyshipps.


Call him hither, 'tis good groping such a Gull.


Master Asotus. Master Asotus.


For Gods sake, let me go: you see, I am called to the Ladies.


Wilt thou forsake me then?


Gods so, what would you have me do?


Come hither master Asotus; I do ensure your Ladyships, he is a Gentleman of a
very worthy desert; and of a most ^ounti^ull nature. You must show and
insinuate your self responsible, and equiualent now to my commendment. Good
Honours grace him.


I protest (more then most fair Ladies) I do wish all variety of divine
ple^sure, choice sport, sweet Musique, rich Fare, brave A^yres, soft Beds,
and silken Thoughts, attend these fair Beauties. Will it please your Ladyship
to wear this Chain of Pearl, and this Diamond for my sake.


O.


And you Madam this Jewel, and Pendants.


O.


We know not how to deserve these bounties out of so slight merit, Asotus.


No in faith, but the'rs my Glove for a favour.


And soon after the Revels I will bestow a Garter on you.


O Lord Ladies, it is more grace then ever I could have hoped, but that it
pleases your Ladyships to extend; I protest it is enough that you but take
knowledge of my -- if your Ladyships want embroidered Gowns, Tyres of any
Fashion, Rebatus, Jewels, or Carkanets, any thing what soever; if you vouchsafe
to accept.


And for it they will help you to Shoo-tyes, and devises.


I cannot utter my self (Dear Beauties) but; you can conceive --


O.


Sir we will acknowledge your service doubt not; henceforth you shall be no
more Asotus to us, but our Golde-Finch, and we your Cages.


O God Madams, how shall I deserve this? if I were but made acquainted with
Hedon now; I'll try: pray you away.


How he prays Money to go away from him.


Amorphus, a word with you: here's a Watch I would bestow upon you, pray you
make me known to that Gallant.


That I will Sir. Mounsieur Hedon I must entreat you to exchange knowledge
with this Gentleman.


'Tis a thing (next to the water we expect) I thirst after Sir. Good Mounsieur
Asotus.


Good Mounsieur Hedon, I would be glad to be loved of men of your Rank, and
spirit, I protest. Please you to accept this pair of Bracelets Sir, they are
not worth the bestowing.


O Hercules; how the Gentleman purchases? this must needs bring Argurion to a
consumption.


Sir, I shall never stand in the merit of such Bounty. I fear.


O Lord Sir; your acquaintance shall be sufficient. And if at any time you
need my Bill or my Bond.


O, O.


Help the Lady there.


Gods dear, Argurion. Madam, how do you?


Sick.


Have her forth and give her air.


I come again straight Ladies.


Well, I doubt all the Phisique he ha's, will scarce recover her; she's too
far spent.


O here's the Water come: fetch Glasses Page.


Heart of my body here's a coil indeed with your ^ealous humours. Nothing but
Whore, and Bitch, and all the villainous swaggering names you can think on?
'Slid take your Bottle, and put it in your guts ^or me, I'll see you poxt ere
I follow you any longer?


Nay good Punk, sweet Rascal; damn me if I am Jealous now.


That's true indeed, pray lets go.


What's the matter there?


Slight he has me upon Intergatories, (nay my Mother shall know how you use me)
where I have been? and why I should stay so long? and how is't possible? and
with-all calls me at his pleasure; I know not how many Cocatrices, and
things.


In truth and sadness, these are no good Epithets


to bestow upon any Gentlewoman; and (I'll ensure you) if I had known you would
have dealt thus with my Daughter, she should never have fancied you so deeply,
as she has done. Go too.


Why do you he^re Mother Moria. Heart.


Nay I pray you Sir do not swear.


Swear? why? Sblood I have sworn before now I hope. Both you and your daughter
mistake me; I have not honoured Arete that is held the worthiest Lady in the
Court (next to Cynthia) with half that observance and respect, as I have done
her in private, howsoever outwardly I have carried my self careless and
negligent. Come you are a foolish Punk, and know not when you are well
employde. Kiss me. Come on. Do it I say.


Nay, indeed I must confess she is apt too misprision. But I must have you
leave it Minion.


How now Asotus? how does the Lady?


Faith ill. I have left my Page with her at her lodging.


O here's the rarest Water that ever was tasted; fill him some.


What? has my Master a new Page?


Yes a kinsman of the Lady Morias: you must wait better now, or you are
casheer'd Prosaites.


Come Gallants; you must pardon my foolish humour, when I am angry, that any
thing crosses me, I grow impatient straight. Here I drink to you.


O that we had five or six Bottles more of this liquor.


Now I commend your judgment Amorphus: who's that knocks? look Page.


O most delicious, a little of this would make Argurion well.


O no give her no cold drink by any means.


Sblood, this water is the spirit of Wine, I'll be hanged ^lse.


Here's the Lady Arete Madam.


What at your Beaver Gallants?


Wilt please your Lady-shipp drink, tis of the new fountain water.


Not I, Moria; I thank you: Gallants you must provide for some solemn Revels
to night, Cynthia is minded to come forth, and grace your sports with her
presence; therefore I could wish there were some thing extraordinary to
entertain her.


What say you to a Masque?


Nothing better, if the Invention or Project were new and rare.


Why, I'll send for Criticus, and have his advise; you will be ready in your
endeavours;


Yes* but will not your Lady-ship stay?


Not now Phantaste.


Let her go, I pray you; good Lady Sobriety, I am glad we are rid of her.


What a set Face the gentlewoman has, as she were still going to a Sacrifice?


O she is the extraction of a dozen of Puritans, for a look.


Of all Nymphs 'i^he Court I cannot away with her: 'tis the coursest thing --


I wounder how Cynthia can affect her so above the rest! Here be they are
every way as fair as she, and a thought, fairer, I trow.


I, and as ingenious, and conceited as she.


I and as politic as she, for all she sets such a Forehead on it.


Would I were dead if I would change to be Cynthia.


Or I.


Or I.


And there's her Minion Criticus; why his advise more then Amorphus? have I not
Invention, before him? Learning, to better that Invention, above him? and
Travail. --


Death, what talk you of his Learning? he understands no more then a
schoole-Boy; I have put him down my self a thousand times (by this Air) and
yet I never talked with him but twice in my life; you never saw his like: I
could never get him to argue with me, but once, and then because I could not
construe a piece of Horace at first sight, he went away and laughed at me. By
Gods will, I scorn him, as I do the sodden Nymph that was here even now; his
mistress Arete: And I love my self for nothing else.


I wonder the Fellow d^e's not hang himself, being thus scorned, and contemned
of us that are held the most accomplished Society of Gallants!


By your selves none else.


I protest, if I had no Musique in me, no Courtship; that I were not a Reveller
and could dance, or had not those excellent qualities that give a man Life,
and Perfection, but a mere poor Scholar as he is, I think I should make
some desperate way with my self; whereas now (would I might never breath more)
if I do know that Creature in this kingdom, with whom I would change.


This is excellent: well I must alter this soon.


Look you do Cupid.


O I shall tickle it soon; I did never appear till then. Slid I am the
ne^tliest-made Gallant in the company, have the best presence; and my dancing
-- I know what the Usher said to me the last time I was at the school; would
I might lead Philautia in the measure, and 'tweere gods will. I am most
worthy, I am sure.


Master I can tell you news, the Lady kissed me yonder, and plaid with me; and
says she loved you once, as well as she does me, but that you cast her of.


Peace my most esteemed Page.


Yes.


Gallants, think upon your Time, and take it by the forehead; Anaides, we must
mix this gentleman with you in acquaintance. Mounsieur Asotus.


I am easily entreated to grace any of your friends, Amorphus.


Sir, and his friends shall likewise grace you Sir. Nay I begin to know my
self now.


O, you must continue your Bounties.


Must I? why i'll give him this Ruby on my finger.


Come Ladies; but stay we shall want one to Lady it in our Masque in place of
Argurion.


Why my page shall do it, Gelaia.


Troth and he'^e do it well, it shall be so.


Do you here Sir, I do heartily wish your acquaintance, and I partly know my
self worthy of it; please you Sir, to accept this poor Ruby in a Ring Sir.
The Poe^ie is of my own devise* Let this blush for me Sir.


So it must for me, too. For I am not ashamed to take it.


Sweet man, by my troth master I love you; will you love me to? for my Aunts
sake? I'll wait well you shall see, I'll still be here. Would I might never
stir, but you are in gay clothes.


As for that Morus, thou shalt see more here after, in the mean time, by this
Ay^e, or by this Feather, i'll do as much for thee as any Ga^lant shall do for
his Page whatsoever, in this Court, corner of the world, or Kingdom.


I wounder this gentleman should affect to keep a ^oole, me thinks he makes
sport enough with him self.


Well Prosaites tweere good you did wait closer.


I, I'll look to it; 'tis time.


We are like to have sumptuous Revels to night Sirs.


We must needs when all the choicest Singularities of the Court are up in
Pantofles, ne'er a one of them, but is able to make a whole show of it sel^e.


Sirah a Torch, a torch.


O what a call is there? I will have a Canz^net made with nothing in it but
(...); and the Burden shall be. I come.


--.A masque, bright Aret^
Why tweere a labour more for Hercules.
Better, and sooner durst I undertake:
To make the different seasons of the Year,
The Winds, or Elements to sympathize;
Then their unmeasurable vanity
Dance truly in a measure: They agree?
What though all Concord's borne of Contraries?
So many Follies will confusion prove*
And like a sort of jarring Instruments,
All out of tune; because (indeed) we see
There is not that Analogy twixt Discords,
As between things but merely opposite.

There is your error; for as H^mes wand
Charms the disorders, of tumultuous Ghosts,
And as the strife of Chaos then did cease,
When better light then Natures did arrive;
So, what could never in it self agree,
Forgets the eccentrick property,
And at her sight turns forthwith regular,
Whose sceptre guides the flowing Ocean:
And though it did not, yet the most of them
(Being either Courtiers, or not wholly rude)
Respect of Majesty, the Place, and Pres^nce,
Will ke^pe them within Ring; especially
When they are not presented as themselves,
But masked like others: for (in troth) not so
T'incorporate them, could be nothing else
Then like a State vngouern'd, without laws; or
A body made of nothing but diseases;
The one, through impotency poor, and wretched;
The other for the Anarchy absurd.

But Lady, for the Revellers themselves;
It would be better (in my poor conceit,)
That others were employed; for such as are
Unfit to be in Cynthias Court, can seem
No les^e unfit to be in Cynthias sports.

That is not done (my Criticus) without
Particular knowledge of the Goddess mind;
Who (holding true intelligence, what Follies
Had crept into her Palace) she resolved,
Of sports, and Triumphs; under that pretext,
To have them muster in their Pomp and Fullness:
That so she might more strictly, and to root,
Effect the Reformation she intends.

I now conceive her heavenly drift in all;
And will apply my spirits to serve thy will:
O thou, the very power by which I am;
And but for which, it were in vain to be;
Chief next Diana, Virgin, heavenly fair*
Admired Arete, (of them admired
Whose souls are not kindled by the sense)
Disdeigne not my chaste fire, but feed the flame
Devoted truly to thy gracious name.

Leave to suspect us: Criticus shall find
As we are now most dear, we'll prove most kind.

Hark, I am called.

I follow instantly,
Phoebus Apollo: if with ancient Rites,
And due Devotions, I have ever hung
Elaborate Paeans on thy golden Shrine,
Or sung thy Triumphs in a lofty strain;
Fit for a Theater of Gods to hear:)
And thou the other son of mighty Io^
Cyllenian Mercury (sweet Maias joy)
If in the busy tumults of the mind,
My path thou ever hast illumined:
For which, thine Altars I have oft per^um'de,
And decked thy Statue with discoulored flowers:
Now thrive Invention in this glorious Court,
That not of bounty only, but of right,
Cynthia may grace, and give it life by sight.

QVeene and Huntress, chaste, and fair,
Now the Sun is laid to sleep,
Seated, in thy silver Chair,
State in wonted manner keep:
Hesperus entreats thy light,
Goddess excellently bright.
Earth, let not thy envious shade
Dare it self to interpose;
Cynthias shining Or be was made
Heaven to clear, when day did close:
Bless us then with wished sight,
Goddess excellently bright.
Lay thy Bow of Pearl apart.
And thy Christ all-shining Quiver;
Give unto the flying Hart,
Space to breath, how short soever.
Thou, that makst a day of night,
Goddess excellently Bright.

When hath Diana, like an envious wretch*
That glitters only to his soothed self,
Denying to the world the precious v^e
Of hoarded wealth, with-held her friendly aid?
Mon'thly we spend our still-repaired shine,
And not forbid our Virgin-waxen torch,
To burn, and blaze while nutriment doth last:
That once consumed, out of Ioues treasury
Anew we take, and stick it in our Sphere
To give the mutinous kind of wanting men,
Their looked for light. Yet what is their desert?
" Bounty is wronged, interpreted as due;
" Mortals can challenge not a Ray but right,
" Yet do expect the whole of Cynthias light:
But if that Deities with-drew their gifts,
For humane Follies, what should men deserve
But Death and Darkness? It behoo^es the high,
For their own sakes to do things worthily.

Most true, most sacred goddess; for the Heavens
Receive no good of all the good they do:
Nor Jove, nor you, nor other heavenly Power,
Are fed with Fumes, which do from Incense rise,
Or Sacrifices reeking in their gore:
Yet for the care which you of mortals have,
(Whose proper Good it is, that they be so;)
You well are pleased with Odours redolent:
But ignorant is all the Race of men,
Which still complains, not knowing why, or when,

Else noble Arete, they would notblame,
And tax for or unjust, or for as proud
Thy Cynthia, in the things which are indeed
The greatest glories in our starry crown:
Such is our Chastity, which safely scorns,
Not Love (for who more fervently doth love
Immortal Honour, and divine Renown?)
But giddy Cupid, Venus frantic son.
Yet Arete, if by this veiled light
We but discovered (what we not discern)
Any the least of imputations, stand
Ready to sprinkle our unspotted fame,
With note of lightness, from these Revels near:
Not, for the Empire of the Vniuerse
Should Night or Court, this whatsoever shine
Or grace of ours, vnhappely enjoy.
" Place, and Occ^sion are two privy Thieves;
" And from poor innocent Ladies, often steal
" (The best of things) an honourable Name:
" To stay with Follies, or where Faults may be,
" Infers a Crime, although the party free.

How Cynthianly (that is how worthily
And like her self) the matchless Cynthia speaks!
Infinite Jealousies, infinite Reguards,
Do watch about the true virginity:
But Phoebe lives from all not only fault,
But as from thought, so from suspicion free,
" Thy Presence broad-seales our delights for pure,
" What's done in Cynthias sight, is done secure.

That then so answered (Dearest Arete)
What the Argument, or of what sort, our Sports
Are like to be this night; I not demand.
Nothing which Duty, and desire to please
Bears written in the for^head, comes amiss^;
But unto whose Invention, must we owe,
The complement of this nights furniture?

Excellent Goddess, to mans, whose worth,
(Without Hyperbole,) I thus may praise;
One (at least) studious, of deserving well:
And (to speak truth) indeed deserving well,
" Potential merit stands for actual,
" Where only Opportunity doth want,
" Not Will, nor Power: both which in him abound.
One whom the Muses, and Minerua love;
For whom should they more love then Criticus,
Whom Phoebus (though not Fortune) holds dear?
And (which conuinceth excellence in him*)
A principal admirer of your self:
Even* through th'vngentle injuries of Fate,
And difficulties, which do virtue choke,
Thus much of him appears. What other things
Of farther note, do lye unborn in him,
Them I do leave for cherishment to show.
And for a Goddess graciously to judge.

We have already judged him Arete:
Nor are we ignorant, how noble minds
Suffer too much through those indignities,
Which Times, and vicious Persons cast on them:
Our self have ever vowed to esteem
(As Virtue, for it self) so Fortune, base;
Who first in Worth, the same be first in Place.
Nor farther notice ( Arete) we crave
Then thine approualls sovereign warranty:
Let, be thy care, to make us known to him;
" Cynthia shall brighten what the World made dim*

Clear Pearl of Heaven, and not to be farther ambitious in titles) Cynthia.
The fame of this illustrious night, among others hath also drawn these four
fair Virgins from the Palace of their Queen Perfection (a word, which makes
no sufficient difference, twixt hers, and thine) to visit thy Imperial Court:
for she their Sovereign Lady, not finding where to dwell among men, before her
teturne to heaven: advised them wholly to consecrate themselves to thy
Celestial service, as in whose clear Spirit (the proper Element, and Sphare
of virtues) they should behold not her alone, (their ever honoured Mistress)
but themselves) more truly themselves) to live enthronised. Her self would
have commended them vnt^ thy favour more particularly, but that she knows no
commendation is more available with thee then that of proper virtue:
Nevertheless, she wild them to present this Crystal Mound, a note of
Monarchy, and Symbol of Perfection, to thy more worthy Deity; which as here
by me they most humbly do, so amongst the Rarities thereof, that is the chief,
to show whatsoever the world hath excellent, howsoever remote and various. But
your irradiate judgment will soon discover the secrets of this little
Crystal world. Themselves (to appear the more plainly) because they know
nothing more odious then false pretexts: have chosen to express their several
qualities thus in several coulors.

1 The first in Citron coullour is natural Affection, which given us to
procure our good, is sometime called Storge, and as every one is nearest to
himself, so this Hand-maid of Reason, allowable Selfe-loue, as it is without
harm, so are none without it: Her place in the Court of Perfection was to
quicken minds in the pursuit of Honour. Her device is a Perpendicular Level
upon a* Cube or Square. The word, SE SVO MODVLO: alluding to that true measure
of ones self, which as every one ought to make, so is it most conspicuous in
thy divine example.

2 The second in Green is Aglaia, delectable and pleasant Conversation, whose
property it is to move a kindly delight, and sometime not without laughter:
Her office to entertain assemblies, and keep societies together with fair
familliarity. Her device within a Ring of clouds, a Heart with shine about it,
the word, CVRARVM NVBILA PELLO. An Allegory of Cynthias light, which no less
clears the Sky, then her ^ayre M^rthe the heart.

3 The third, in discoul^ur'd Mantle spangled all over, is Euphantaste, a well
conceited Wittiness, and employed in honouring the Court with the riches of
her pure Invention. Her device upon a Petasus, or Mer^nriall Hat, a Crescent.
The word; SIC LAVS INGENII: Inferring that the praise and glory of wit, doth
ever increase, as doth thy growing Moon.

4 The fourth in White is Apheleia, a Nymph as pure and s^ple as the Soul, or
as an abrase Table, and is therefore called Symplicity; without foulds, without
pleights, without coullour, without counterfeit: and (to speak plainly)
Plainness it self. Her device is no Device. The word under her silver
Shield: OMNIS ABEST FVCVS, alluding to thy spotless self, who art as far
from Impurity, as from Mortality.

My self (Celestial Goddess) more fit for the Court of Cynthia, then the
Arbors of Cythere, am called Anteros, or Loves enemy; the more welcome
therefore to thy Court, and the fitter to conduct this Quaternio, who as they
are thy professed Votaries, and for that cause adversaries to Love, yet thee
(Perpetual Virgin) they both love, and vow to love eternally.


Not without wounder, nor with out delight,
Mine eyes have veiwd in Contemplations depth,
This work of wit, divine, and excellent:
What Shape? what Substance? or what unknown Power
In virgins habit crowned with Laurel leaves
And Olive branches woven in between,
On Sea-girt Rock like to a Goddess shin^s?
O front! O face! O all celestial sure
And more then mortal! Arete, behold
Another Cynthia, and another Queen,
Whose glory (like a lasting Plenilun^)
Seems ignorant of what it is to wane.
Not under heaven an Object could be found
More fit to please; let Criticus approach,
Bounty forbids to paull our thanks with stay,
Or to defer our favour after view:
" The time of Grace is, when the Cause is new.

Lo here the man (celestial Delia)
Who (like a Circle bounded in it self,)
Contains as much, as Man in fullness may.
Lo here the man; who, not of usual earth,
But of that nobler, and more precious mould
Which Phoebus self doth temper, is composed;
And, who (though all were wanting to reward,
Yet, to himself he would not wanting be:
Thy Favours gain is his Ambitions most,
And labours best; who (humble in his height)
Stands fixed silent in thy glorious sight.

With no less pleasure, then we have beheld,
This precious Crystal, work of rarest wit,
Our eye doth read thee, now, our Criticus;
Whom Learning, Virtue, and our Favour last,
Exempts from the gloomy Multitude.
" With common eye the Supreme should not see.
Hence forth be ours, the more thy self to be.

Heavens purest light, whose Orb may be eclipsed,
But not thy Praise; (divinest Cynthia)
How much too narrow for so high a grace,
Thy (save therein) unworthy Criticus:
Doth find himself? for ever shine thy Fame;
Thine Honours ever, as thy Beauties do;
In me they must, my dark worlds chiefest Lights;
By whose propitious beams my powers are raised
To hope some part of those most lofty points,
Which blessed Arete hath pleased to name
As marks, which my'ndeuors steps should bend:
Mine, as begun at thee, in thee must end.

Sister of Phoebus to whose bright Orb we owe, that we not complain of his
Absence; These four Brethren (for they are Brethren and sons of Eutaxia, a
Lady known, and highly beloved of your resplendent Deity) not able to be
absent, when Cynthia held a solemnity, officiously insinuate themselves into
thy presence: For as there are four Cardinal virtues, upon which the whole
Frame of the Cour^ doth move, so are these the four Cardinal properties
without which the Body of Complement moves not. With those four silver
Javelins (which they bear in their hands) they support in Princes Courts the
state of the Presence, as by office they are obliged; which though here they
may seem superfluous, yet for Honours sake they thus presume to visit thee,
having also bin employed in the Palace of Queen Perfection. And though to
them, that would make themselves gracious to a Goddess, Sacrifices were fitter
then Presents or Impresses, yet they both hope thy favour, and (in place of
either) use several Symboles containing the titles of thy imperial Dignity.

1 The hit hermost in the changeable blew, and green Robe, is the
commendably-fashionate Gallant Eucosmos; whose Courtly Ha^it is the grace of
the Presence, and delight of the surveying eye: whom Ladies understand by the
names of Neat, Elegant. His Symbol is DIVAE VIRGINI, in which he would
express thy Deities principal glory, which hath ever bin Virginity.

2 The second in the rich Acoutrement, and Robe of Purple empaled with Gold,
is Eupathes; who intertaines his mind with an harmless, but not incurious
variety: All the Objects of his senses are Sumptuous, himself a Gallant, that
without excess can make use of superfluities: go ritchly in Imbroyders,
Jewels, (and what not?) without Vanity; and fare delicately without Gluttony:
and therefore (not without cause) is universally thought to be of fine humour.
His Symbol is DIVAE OPTIMAE. An attribute to express thy Goodness in which
thou so resembles love thy father.

3. The third in the blush-collourd Suit is Eutolmos, as duly respecting
others, as never neglecting himself; commonly known by the title of Good
Audacity, to Courts and courtly assemblies, a guest most acceptable. His
Symbol is DIVAE VIRAGINI, To express thy hardy Courage, in chase of Savage
beasts which harbour in Woods, and Wilderness.

4. The fourth in Watchet-Tinsell, is the kind, and truly Benefique Eucolos.
Who imparts not without respect, but yet without difficulty: and hath the
happiness to make every kindness seem double, by the timely, and freely
bestowing thereof, he is the chief of them who (by the vulgar) are said to be
of Good Nature. His Symbol is DIVAE MAXIMAE. An Adjunct to signify thy
greatness, which in heaven, earth, and hell is formidable.


Is not that Amorphus the Traveller?


As though it were not? do you not see how his legs are in travail with a
Measure?


Hedon, thy master is next.


What will Cupid turn Nomenclator, and cry them?


No faith, but I have a Comedy toward, that would not be lost for a kingdom.


In good time, for Cupid will prove the Comedy.


Mercury, I am studying how to match them.


How too mismatch them, were harder.


It is the Nymphs must do it, I shall sport my self with their passions above
measure.


Those Nymphs would be tamed a little indeed, but I fear thou hast not
Arrows for the purpose.


O yes, here be of all sorts, Flights, Rovers, and Butshafts. But I can wound
with a Brandish, and never draw Bow for the matter.


I cannot but believe it my invisible Archer, and yet me thinks you are
tedious.


It behooves me to be somewhat circumspect Mercury, for if Cynthia here the
twang of my Bow, sneele go near to whip me with the string; therefore to
prevent that, I thus discharge a Brandish upon -- it makes no matter which of
the couples: Phantaste, and Amorphus at you.


Will the shaking of a shaft, strike'hem into such a Fever of Affection?


As well as the wink of an Eye: but I pray thee hinder me not with thy
prattle.


Jove forbid I hinder thee. Marry all that I fear is Cynthias presence, which
with the could of her Chaste^y, casts such an Antiperistasis about the place,
that no heate of thine will tarry with the Patient.


It wiltarry the rather, for the Antiperistasis will keep it in.


I long to see the experiment.


Why their marrow boils already, or they are all turned Eunuchs.


Nay and't be so, I'll give ouerspeaking, be a Spectator only.


Cynthia (by my bright soul) is a right exquisite, and spendidious Lady; yet
Amorphus I think hath seen more fashions, I am sure more Countries; but
whether I have or no: what need we gaze on Cynthia, that have our self to
admire?


O excellent Cynthia; yet if Phantaste sat where she does, and had such a tyre
on her head (for attire can do much) I say no more; but Goddesses are
Goddesses, and Phantaste is as she is. I would the R^u^ls were done once, I
might go to my School of Glass again, and learn to do my self right after
all this Ruffling.


How now Cupid? here's a wonderful change with your Brandish? do you not
hear, how they dote?


What Prodigy is this? no Word of Love? no Mention? no Motion?


Not a word my little H^ll-fire, not a word.


Are my Darts enchanted? is their vigour gone? is their virtue --


What? Cupid turned jealous of himself? ha, ha, ha.


Laughs Mercury?


Is Cupid angry?


Hath he not cause, when his purpose is so deluded?


A rare Comedy, it shall be entitled; Cupids.


Do not scorn us Hermes.


Chollar and Cupid are two fiery things; I scorn them not. But I see that come
to pass which I presaged in the beginning.


You cannot tell: perhaps the Physic will not work so soon upon some, as
upon others. It may be the Rest are not so resty.


Ex vngue, you know the old Adage; as these, so are the remainder.


I'll try: this is the same Shaft with which I wounded Argurion.


I, but let me save you a labour Cupid: there were certain Bottles of Water
fetched, and drunk off, (since that time,) by these Gallants.


Jove strike me into earth: The Fountain of Selfe-loue?


Nay faint not Cupid.


I remembered it not.


Faith it was omenous to take the name of Anteros upon you, you know not what
Charm or Enchantment lies in the word: you saw I durst not venture upon any
Devise in our presentment: but was content to be no other then a simple Page.
Your Arrows properties (to keep deco^um) Cupid, are suited (it should seem)
to the nature of him you personate.


Indignity not to be borne.


Nay rather an attempt to have bin forborne.


How might I revenge my self on this insulting Mercury? there's Criticus his
Minnion: he has not tasted of this water? it shall be so.

Is Criticus turned Dotard on himself too?


That follows not, because the venom of your sha^ts cannot pierce him.


As though there were one Antidote for these, another for him?


As though there were not? or as if one Effect might not arise of diverse
causes? what say you to Cynthia, Arete, Phronesis Tim E, and others there?


They are divine.


And Criticus aspires to be so.


But that shall not serve him.


Tis like to do prettily well at this time. But Cupid is grown too covetous,
that will not spare one of a Multitude.


One is more then a Multitude.


Aretes favour makes any one shot proof against thee Cupid.

I pray thee light Hony-Bee, remember thou art not now in Adonis garden, but in
Cynthias presence, where thorns (...) garrison about the Roses. Soft Cynthia
speaks.


Ladies and gallants,
To give a timely period to our sports,
Let us conclude them, with declining night;
Our Empire is but of the darker half:
And if you judge it any recompense*
For your fair pains, t'haue earnd Di^as thanks;
Diana grants them: and bestows their crown
To gratefie your acceptable Zeal.
For you are they, that not (as some have done)
Do censure us, as too severe, and sower,
But as (more rightly) Gracious to the Good;
Although we not deny, unto the Proud,
Or the Profane, perhaps indeed austere:
For so Actaeon by presuming far,
Did (to our grief) incur a fatal doom;
And so, swollen Niob^ (comparing more
Then he presumed) was trophaeed into stone.
But are we therefore judged too extreme?
Seems it no Crime to ^er sacred Bowers,
And hallowed Places with impure aspect
Most lewdly to pollute? Seems it no crime,
To brave a Deity? let Mortals learn
To make Religion of offending Heaven;
And not at all to censure powers divine:
To Men, this Argument should stand for firm,
" A Goddess did it; therefore it was good:
" We are not cruel, nor delight in blood.
But what have serious Repetitions
To do with Revels, and the sports of Court?
We not intend to sour your late delights
With harsh expostulation; Let suffice
That we take notice, and can take revenge
Of these calumnious, and lewd Blasphemies;
For we are no less Cynthia, then we were,
Nor is our Power (but as our Self) the same:
Though we have now put on no tyre of shine
But mortal eyes vndazled may endure.
" Years, are beneath the Spears; and Time makes weak,
" Things under Heaven; not Powers which govern Heaven:
And though our Self be in our self, secure,
Yet let not mortals challenge to themselves
Immunity from thence; Lo this is all:
" Honour hath store of spleen, but wants Gall.
Once more, we cast the slumber of our thanks
On your taken toil, which here let take an end:
And that we not mistake your several worths*
Nor you our Favour; from your selves remove,
What makes you not your selves; those clouds of Masque:
" Particular pains, particular thanks do ask.
-- Are we contemned?
Is there so little awe of our Disdeigne,
That any (under trust of their disguise)
Should mix themselves with others of the Court?
And (without forehead) boldly press so far*
As farther none? (...) apt is Lenity
To be abused? Seu^rity to be loathed?
And yet, how much more doth the s^eming Face
Of neighbor Virtues, and their borrowed Names,
Add of lewd Boldness to loose Vanities?
Who would ha^n^ thought that Philautia durst,
Or have usurped noble Storge's name?
Or with that theft have ventured on our eyes?
Who would have thought that all of them should hope,
So much of our conniuence, as to come
To grace themselves, with Titles not their own?
Instead of Medicines have we Maladies?
And such Impostumes, as Phantaste is,
Grow in our Palace? we must lance these sores,
Or all will putrefy: Nor are these all,
For we suspect a farther fraud then this;
Take off our veil, that shadows may depart,
And shapes appear, beloved Arete. So.
Another Face of things presents it self
Then did of late: what? Featherd Cupid masked?
And masked like to Anteros? but, more strange!
Dear Mercury our Brother, like a Page,
To countenance the ambush of the Boy?
Nor ends our discovery as yet;
Gelaia like a Nymph, that but ere while
(In male attire,) did serve Anaides?
Cupid came hither to find sport and Game,
Who, heretofore hath been too conversant
Among our train; but never felt Revenge:
And Mercury bare Cupid company:
Cupid, we must confess this Time of mirth
(Proclaimed by us) gave Opportunity,
To thy attempts, although no Privilege;
Tempt us no farther, we cannot endure
Thy presence longer: Vanish, Hence, Away.
You Mercury, we must entreat to stay,
And hear what we determine of the rest;
For in this Plot, you have the deepest hand:
But (for we mean not a Censorian tasque
And yet to lance these ulcers grown so ripe)
Dear Arete, and Criticus, to you
We give the charge; Impose what pains you please:
Th'incurable cut of, the rest reform;
Remembering ever what we first decreed,
Since Revels were proclaimed, Let now none bleed.

How well Diana can distinguish Times?
And sort her Censures? keeping to her self
The doom of Gods, leaving the rest to us?
Come, cite them Criticus and then proceed.

First Philautia (for she was the first)
Then light Gelaia, in Aglaias name,
Thirdly Phantaste, and Moria next,
Mayne follies all, and of the Female crew;
Amorphus, or Eucosmos counterfeit,
Voluptuous Hedon taken for Eupathes,
Brazen Anaides, and Asotus last,
With his too Pages Morus, and Prosaites;
And thou the Travellers Evil, Cos, approach,
Impostors all, and male Deformities.

Nay forward, for I delegate my power,
And will, that at thy mercy they do stand
Whom they so oft, so plainly scorned before:
" Tis virtue which they want, and wanting it,
" Honour no garment to their backs can fit.
Now Criticus, use your Discretion.

Adored Cynthia, and bright Arete;
Another might seem fitter for this tasque
Then Criticus, but that you judge not so:
For I (not to appear vindictive,
Or mindful of Contempts, which I contemned
As done of Impotence) must be remiss;
Who as I was the Author in some sort,
To work their knowledge into Cynthias sight,
So should be much severer to revenge
The indignity, hence issuing to her Name:
But there's not one of these, who are vnpaind,
Or by themselves unpunished; for Vice
Is like a fury to the vicious mind,
And turns Delight it self to Punishment.
But we must forward to define their Doom;
You are Offenders, that must be confessed.
Do you confess it?

We do.

And that you merit sharpe Correction?

We do.

Then we (reserving unto Delias grace,
Her farther pleasure, and to Arete
What Delia grants) thus do sentence you.
That from this place (for Penance known of all,
Since you have drunk so deeply of Selfe-loue)
You (two and two) singing a Palinode,
March to your several homes by Nio^es stone,
And offer up two tears a piece thereon;
That it may change the name, as you must change,
And of a stone be called Weeping Cross:
Because it stands cross of Cynthias way,
One of whose names is sacred TRIVIA.
And after penance thus performed, you pass
In like set order; not as Midas did
To wash his Gold off into Tagus stream;
But to the Well of Knowledge, Helicon,
Where, purged of your present Maladies,
(Which are nor few, nor s^ender) you become
Such as you fain would seem; and then return
Offering your service to great Cynthia.
This is your Sentence, if the Goddess please
To ratefie it with her high Consent:
" The scope of wise Mirth unto fruit is bent.

We do approve thy Censure Criticu^*
Which Mercury, thy true propitious friend,
(A D^ity, next Jove, beloved of us,)
Will undertake to see exactly done.
And for this service of Discovery
Performed by thee, in honour of our name,
We vow to guerdon it with such due grace,
As shall become our Bounty, and thy Place.
" Princes that would their People should do well,
" Must at themselves begin, as at the heads;
" For men by their example pattern out
" Their Imitations, and reguard of Laws:
" A virtuous Court, a world to virtue draws.

From Spanish shrugs, French faces, Smirks, Irps, and all affected Humours.


Good Mercury defend us.


From secret friends, sweet Servants, Loves, Doves, and such Phantastique
Humours.


^ood Mercury defend us.


From stabbing of Arms, Flap-dragons, Healths, Whiffes, and all such
swaggering Humours.


Good Mercurie defend us.


From waving of Fans, coy Glances, Glicks, Cringes, and all such simpering
Humours.


Good Mercury defend us.


From making love by Attorney, courting of Pupp^ts, and paying for new
acquaintance.


Good Mercury defend us.


From perfumed Dogs, Monkeys, Sparrows, Dildos, and Parachitos.


Good Mercury defend us.


From wearing Bracelets of Hair, Shoo-tyes, Gloves, Garters, and Rings with
Poesies.


Good Mercury defend us.


From Pargetting, Painting, Slieking, Glazing, and Renewing old rivaled Faces.


Good Mercury defend us.


From Squiring to Tilt-yards, Play-Houses, Pageants, and all such Public
places.


Good Mercury defend us.


From entertaining one Gallant to gull another, and making Fools of either.


Good Mercury defend us.


From Belying Ladies favours, Noble-mens countenance, coining counterfeit
Employments, vain-glorious taking to them other men's Services, and all
selfe-louing Humours.


Good Mercury defend us.


NOw each one dry his weeping Eyes,
and to the Well of Knowledge hast;
Where purged of your Maladies,
we may of sweeter waters taste:
And with refined voice report,
The Grace of Cynthia, and her Court.
GEntles, be it known to you, since I went in
I am turned Rimer; and do thus begin:
The Author (jealous, how your sense doth take
His travails) hath enjoined me to make
Some short, and Ceremonious Epilogue;
But if I yet know what, I am a Rogue:
He ties me to such Laws, as quite distract
My thoughts; and would a Year of time exact.
I neither must be Faint, Remiss, nor Sorry,
Sower, Serious, Confident, nor Peremptory:
But betwixt these. Lets see? to lay the blame
Upon the Childrens Action, that were lame.
To crave your Favours with a begging knee,
Were to distrust the Writers faculty;
To promise better at the next we bring,
Prorogues disgrace, commends not any thing.
Stiffly to stand on this, and proudly approve
The Play, might tax the Maker of Selfe-loue.
I'll only speak, what I have heard him say;
By God 'tis good, and if you liked, you may,

