PResented it self in a square and flat upright, like to the side of a City:
the top thereof, above the Vent, and Crest, adorned with houses, towers, and
steeples, set off in perspective. Upon the Battlements in a great capital
Letters was inscribed, LONDINIVM: According to Tacitus: At Suetonius mir^
constantia, medios inter hosteis Londinium perrexit, CAMERA REGIA Which Title
immediately after the Norman Conquest it began to have; PAR DOMVS HAEC COELO,
SED MINOR EST DOMINO.
Taken out of Martial, Hyporbole) be said to touch the stars, and reach up
to heaven, yet was it far Inferior to the Master thereof, who was his
Majesty; and in that respect unworthy to receive him. The highest person
aduaunc'd therein, was MONARCHIA BRITANNICA and fittely: applying to the above
mentioned Title of the City, the Kings Chamber, and therefore here placed as
in the proper seat of the Empire: for, Camden, speaking of London, says,
she is, totius Britanniae Epitome, Britannicique imperii sedes, Regumque
Angliae Camera, tantum inter ^mneis eminet, quantum (vt ait ille) inter viburna
Cupressus. She was a woman richly attired in cloth of gold and tissue; a rich
mantle; over her state two Crowns hanging, with pensile shields thorough them;
the one limed with the particular Coat of England, the other of Scotland: on
either side also a Crown, with the like Scutchions, and peculiar Coats of
France, Ireland. In her hand she holds a Sceptre; on her head a fillet of
gold, inter-wouen with Palm Laurel; her hair bound into four several
points, descending from her Crowns; and in her lap a little Globe, inscribed
upon ORBIS BRITANNICVS.
And beneath, the word
DIVISVS AB ORB.
To show, that this Empire is a world divided from the world, and alluding to
that of* Clau. -- Et nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
And Virg.
-- Et penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos.
The wreathe denotes Victory and Happiness. The Sceptre Crowns sovereignty. The
Shields the precedence of the Countries and their distinctions. At her feet
was set THEOSOPHIA, or Divine wisdom, al in white, a blew mantle seeded with
Stars, a crown of Stars on her head. Her garments figured Truth, Innocence and
Cleerenesse. She was always looking up; in her one hand she sustained a Dove,
in the other a Serpent: Estote ergo prudentes sicut serpents, simplices sicut
columbae. Her word, PER ME REGES REGNANT.

Intimating, how by her, all Kings do govern, and that she is the foundation
and strength of kingdoms, to which end, she was here placed, upon a Cube, at
the foot of the Monarchy, as her Base and stay. GENIVS VRBIS.

A person attired rich, reverend, and antique: his hair long and white,
crowned with a wreathe of Plane tree, which is said to be Arbor genialis; his
mantle of purple, and buskins of that colour: He held in one hand a Goblet, in
the other a branch full of little twigs, to signify Increase and
Indulgence: His word HIS ARMIS. pointing to the two that supported him, whereof
the one on the right hand, was BOVLEVTES. Figuring the Council of the City,
SERVARE CIVES.

The other on the left hand. POLEMIVS The warrelike force of the City, in an
antique Coat, or Armour, with a Target and Sword; his helm on, and crowned
with Laurel, implying Strength and Conquest: in his hand he bore the Standard
of the City, with this word, EXTINGVERE ET HOSTEIS.

Expressing by those several Motts, connexed, that with those Arms of
Council and Strength, the Genius was able to extinguish the Kings enemies, and
preserve his Citizens, alluding to those verses in Seneca, Extinguere hostem,
maxima est virtus Ducis.
Servare Cives, mayor est patriae, patri.


Underneath these, in an Aback thrust out before the rest lay TAMESIS.

The River, as running along the side of the City; in a skin made like flesh,
naked, and blew. His mantle of sea-greene or water colour, thin, and bolne
out like a sail; Bracelets about his wreasts, of willow and sedge, a crown of
sedge and reed upon his head, mixed with water-lillies; alluding to Virgills
description of Tiber; -- Deus ipse loci,
Populeas inter senior se att^llere frondes
Visus. cum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
Carbasus. crineis vmbrosa tegebat Arundo.


His beard, and hair long, and overgrown. He leanes his arm upon an earthen
pot, out of which, water, with live Fishes, are seen to run forth, and play
about him. His word, FLVMINA SENSERVNT IPSA. A Hemistich of Ouids: quid esset
amor.

Affirming, that Rivers themselves, and such inanimate Creatures, have
heretofore been made sensible of Passions, and Affections; and that he,
now, no less pertooke the joy of his Majesties grateful approach to this
City, than any of those persons, to whom he pointed, which were the daughters
of the Genius, and six in number: who, in a spreading ascent, upon several
grices, help to beautify both the sides. The first, EVPHROSYNE, or Gladness:
was suited in green, a mantle of diverse colours, embroidered with all variety of
flowers: on her head a Gyrland of Myrtle, in her right hand a crystal Cruz
filled with wine, in the left a Cup of gold: at her feet a Tymbrell, Harp,
and other Instruments, all ensigns of gladness, Natis in vsum laetitiae
scyphis, c.
And in another place,
Nunc est bibendum,
Pulsanda Tellus, c.
Her word.

HAEC AEVI MIHI PRIMA DIES. As if this were the first hour of her life, and
the minute wherein she began to be; beholding so long coveted, and looked for
a presence. The second. SEBASIS. or Veneratio, was varied in an ash coloured
suit, and dark mantle, a veil over her head of ashcolour: her hands crossed
before her, and her eyes half closed: Her word: MIHI SEMPER DEVS.

Implying both her office of reverence, and the dignity of her object, who
being as God on earth, should never be less in her thought: The third:
PROTHYMIA. or Promptitude, was attired in a short tuckt garment of
flame-colour, wings at her back; her hair bright, bound up with ribands; her
breast open, virago-like; her buskins so ribanded: She was crowned with a
Chaplet of Trifoly, to express readiness, and opennesse every way; in her right
hand she held a squirrel, as being the creature most full of life and
quickness: in the left a close round Censor, with the perfume suddenly to be
vented forth at the sides. Her word: QVA DATA PORTA.

Taken from an other place in Virgill where Eolus at the command of Iuno letts
forth the wind; -- ac venti velut agmine facto
Qua data p^rta ruunt, terras turbine perflant.


And showed that she was no less prepared with promptitude, and alacrity,
then the winds were, upon the least Gate that shall be opened to his high
command. The fourth AGRYPNIA. or Vigilance, in yellow, a sable mantle, seeded
with waking eyes, and silver fringe: her Chaplet of Heliotropium, or Turnsole;
in her one hand a Lamp, or Cresset, in her other a Bell. The Lamp signified
search and sight, the Bell warning. The Heliotropium care; and respecting her
object. Her word SPECVLAMVR IN OMNEIS.

Alluding to that of Ouid, where he describes the office of Argus, -- Ipse
pr^cul mon^is sublime cacumen
Occupat,
and implying the like duty of care and vigilance in her self. The fifth
AGAPE. Or loving Affection, in Crimson fringed with gold, a mantle of
flame-colour, her Chaplet of red and white roses; in her hand a flaming heart:
The flame expressed zeal, the red and white roses, a mixture of Simplicity
with Love: her robes freshness and fervency. NON SIC EXCVBIAE. Out of Claudian,
in following -- Nec circumstantia peila
-- Quam tutatur amor.
Inferring, that though her Sister before had protested watchfulnes,
circumspection, yet no watch or guard could be so safe to the estate, or person
of a Prince, as the love and natural affection of his Subjects: which she in
the Cities behalf promised. The sixth, OMOTHYMIA. Or Unanimity in blew, her
robe blew, and buskins. A Chaplet of blew lillies, showing one truth and
entireness of mind. In her lap lies a sheaf of arrows bound together, and
she her self sits weaving certain small silver twists. Her word, FIRMA
CONSENSVS FACIT.
Auxilia humilia firma,


Intimating, that even the smallest and weakest aids, by consent, are made
strong: herself personating the unanimity, or consent of Soul, in all
inhabitants of the City to his service.

These are all the personages, or live figures, whereof only two were Speakers
( Genius and Tamesis) the rest were Mutes. Other dumb complements there were,
as the Arms of the Kingdom on the one side, with this Inscription. HIS
VIREAS.
With these may thou flourish.


On the other side the Arms of the City, with HIS VINCAS.
With these may thou conquer.


In the centre, or midst of the Pegme, there was an Aback, or Square, wherein
this Elegy was written. Maximus hic Rex est, lucc serenior ipsa
Principe quae talem cernit in vrbe Ducem;
Cuiu^ Fortunam superat sic vnica Virtus,
Vnus vt is reliquos vincit vtraque viros.
Praeceptis alii populos, multaque fatigant
Leg; sed exemplo nos rapit ille suo.
Cuique frui tota fas est vxore marito,
Et sua fas simili pignora nosse pa^ri.
Ecce vbi pignoribus circumstipata coruscis
It comes, tanto vix minor ANNA viro.
Haud metus est, Regem posthac no proximus Hares,
Neu Successorem non amet ille suum.


This, and the whole frame, was covered with a curtain of silk, painted like
a thick cloud, and at the approach of the K. was instantly to be drawn. The
Allegory being, that those clouds were gathered upon the face of the City,
through their long want of his most wished fight: but now, as at the rising of
the Sun, all mists were dispersed and fled. When suddenly upon silence made
to the Musikes, a voice was heard to utter this verse; Totus adest oculis,

Signifying that he now was really objected to their eyes, who before had
been only, but still, present in their minds.

Thus far the complemental part of the first; wherein was not only laboured
the expression of State and Magnificence (as proper to a triumphal Arch) but
the very Site, Fabric, Strength, Policy, Dignity and Affections of the
City were all laid down to life: The nature, and property of these Devises
being, to present always some one entire body, or figure, consisting of
distinct members and each of those expressing it self, in the own active
sphere, yet all, with that general harmony so connexed, and disposed, as no
one little part can be missing to the illustration of the whole: where also is
to be noted, that the Symboles used, are not, neither ought to be simply
Hierogliphickes, Emblems, or Imprese, but a mixed Character, pertaking somewhat
of all, and peculierly apted to these more magnificent Inventions: wherein the
Garments, and Ensigns deliver the nature of the person, and the Word the
present office. Neither was it becoming, or could it stand with the dignity of
these shows (after the most miserable desperate shift of the Puppets) to
require a Truch-man, or (with the ignorant Painter) one to write. This is a
Dog; or, This is a Hare: but so to be presented, as upon the view they might
without cloud, or obscurity declare themselves to the sharpe and learned: And
for the multitude, no doubt but their grounded judgements gazed, said it was
fine, and were satisfied.

TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman
This point of Time hath done. Now London rear
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to wear
Thy choicest Gems; Teach thy steep Towers to rise
Higher with people: Set with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows; and in every street,
Let thronging Joy, Love, and Amazement meet.
Cleave all the air with show^es, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally
As Thunder; For, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou did begin to be.
When Brutus plough first gave thee infant bouds,
And I, thy GENIVS walked auspicious rounds
In every
And saw this day Clotho's book.
The several
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep you silence Daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabits you? Shall Office cease
Upon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME know
That Article, wherein your flame stood still,
And not aspired? Now heaven avert an ill
Of that black look. Ere pause possess your breasts
I wish you more of plagues: "Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be Zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake;
And from thy liquid limbs this slumber s^ake:
Thou drown'st thy self in inofficious sleep;
And these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather than flow. Up, rise, and swell with pride
Above thy banks. "Now is not every Tide.

TO what vain end should I contend to show
My weaker powers, when Seas of pomp o'reflow
The Cities face: and cover all the shore
With sands more rich than Tagus wealthy ore?
When in the flood of Joy, that comes with him,
He drowns the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: Not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but do express the cheer
Of these bright streams. No less may
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.

Indeed, true Gladness doth not always speak:
Joy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Yet (lest the fervor of so pure a flame
As this my City bears, might loose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heate)
Know greatest IAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of all my virtuous Sons,
Whereof my
(A Man without my flattering, or his Pride,
As worthy, as he's
In his grave name, and all his Brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drink the Nectar of thy sight)
The Council, Commoners, and Multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewed)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever King had to his
Never came man, more longed for, more desired:
And being come, more reverenced, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it: In a Prince it is
No little virtue, to know who are his.

This springing glory of thy
His Countries Wonder, Hope, Love, Joy and Pride:
How well doth he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade, may Brittane ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot over the Maine, and knit with every shore
In ^onds of Marriage, Kindred, and Increase;
And stile this Land, the
This is your Servants wish, your Cities vow,
Which still shall propagate it self, with you;
And free from spurs of Hope, that slow minds move:
He seeks no hire, that owes his life to Love.

In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of Queenes, and
Whose Graces do as far out-speake your Fame,
As Fame doth silence, when her Trumpet rings
You
Besides Alliance, and the stile of Mother,
In which one Title you drown all your other.
Instance, be
Your eldest Joy, and top of all your store,
With those, whose sight to us is yet denied,
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This City can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good Advocate
To her best Lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sower mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor Fortune greet your Grace
But coming on, and with a forward face.


