CAndid spectators, you that are invited
To see the Lilly and the Rose united;
Consider that this Comedy of ours,
A Nosegay is composed of sundry flowers.
Which we selected with some small expense
Of time, to please each one that hath a sense:
But if this glorious Cynic crown contains
A head that wants a competence of brains,
We could desire his absence, and be glad
That one more wise his seat or standing had.
Because experience shows that such as he,
The greatest enemies to science be:
For what the Noddy cannot understand,
He will seek to disparage underhand,
Branding eternal lines with black disgrace,
Because they do his numbers smothe surpass.
For this bold Critic would have the world know it,
That he no small fool is, though a small Poet.
But with Icarean wings, why strives he thus,
To mount Parnassus tops with Pegasus?
When 'tis most meet that he with Asses meek,
His pasture at the Mountains feet should seek,
On thistles wild, and brakes there let him knabble,
While Pegasus does make the skies his stable.
But you (judicious friends) that well descry
The strength and worth of noble Poesy;
That can discreetly judge of what is done,
We crave your favour and attention,
And shall applaud the fortune of our Muse,
If ought worth your acceptance we produce.

TS the worlds eye not yet asleep?

Hath love not yet put on his starry night-cap?
No; nor Iuno her spangled smock?

What, hath Hesperus forgot tolight heavens tapers up?
Or be the Charret wheels of Night over laden with the leaden weights of
sleep,

That she delays to throw her misty veyle upon the face of things?


Blind Ignorance that grop'st in Cymerian darkness,
That lie invelop'd in the shads of everlasting night,
That want those glorious spectacles of Nature,
Those Crystalline spheres that should illumine
Thy Microcosmus,
Why dost thou thus maligne the guiltless light,
She being the fairest Creature that Nature ever made?

I hate her because she is light: I say she is
The Mistress of disquiet and unrest, and breeds
More troubles in the world then one of my young
Hungry Lawyers doth in a Common-wealth,
Or a schismatical selfeconceited Coxcomb in an ancient Corporation.

Oh that I could Vlysses-like burn out the eye
Of that Celestial Polypheme;
Or raise dull Chaos from Demogorgons Cell
To quench the worlds unnecessary luminaries.

Bold Ignorance, thou Idol of these times
That over a woollen wit, oft wear a satin Cap:
And sometimes at our Bacchanalian feasts
Appear'st as brave as a Canonical Saint
In a Calendar: I hug thy resolution, stupid devil,
That dost with generous malice amply supply
What is defective in thy intellect:
But if thou'lt give my faithful Counsel leave
For to divert the torrent of thy wrath,
Then lend a facile ear to my advice:
Bend not thy bootless hate against that Orb of light,
Whose mighty flames will scorch the impious wings
Of those Nocturnal birds, that shall attempt
With talons most profane, to injure his bright beauty.
A meaner object than this, shall satisfy
Thy wrath, and my displeasure.
This is the day whereon the new society of
Florists, have determined to keep their annual festivals:
Whose pompous Celebration hath wont to eclipse
All feasts besides: the Olympian games,
And Isthmian plays, with all those Ludicrous
And Ludibrious Combats, are but mere Puppet plays
To this grand feast, for Art and nature both have tried
To make this Feast surpass all feasts beside.
Unite thy force with mine, then ten to one
We shall disturb their mirth, e're we have done.

Then mischief lend me all thy guilty nerves:
Let flames of boundless fury quite dispel
Lethaean dullness from my Clouded brain.
Assist our great design, ye subterraneous powers,
That utterly abhor to view the glaring light:
Let not the weakness of my Crazed intellectuals,
Nor yet this loathed deficiency of my sense,
Be prejudicial to the bent of our design:
Poneria, act thy part, for I am thine.

(RHodon) my honoured, soule-united friend,
Cast oft that dusky melancholy veyle.
Too vile a robe for thy majestic brow,
Blast not the pride of Hyblas happiness
With thy offensive passion.

Nay, good Acanthus, did love ere offend any?

And art not thou the map of loves calamity?
Witness those crystal bowles of thy bright eyne,
Which I have seen swelled up with brinish tears,
Prepared for sorrows bitter beverage:
Witness those frequent tempests of thy sighs,
Which made thy breast a fiery fea of dolor:
Witn esse those palled cheeks, whose glorious hue
Aurora late envied, and quite despairing
To reach thy beauties height, with Cupid treated,
And him suborned to wound thy generous heart,
(Which no base passion ever durst assault)
That now like pale Narcissus on the brink
Of the beguilding stream, thou lie a dying.

I tell thee (brazen Colosse) marble statue,
Whose heart loves darts could never penetrate;
Love is the Prince of all affections,
And like the element of fire transcends
His brothers in activity and splendour.

It is a fire indeed, that doth consume
All virtuous actions; that feeds upon men's souls
Like the fiend Eurynomus upon dead carcasses;
That makes the microcosmus a mere Chaos.
It is the Remora of all noble enterprises,
And the Lernaean fen which breeds a Hydra,
Crested with a thousand inconveniences.
Let me ne'er inherit more then my Fathers hempland,
Or ne'er be owner of more wit then some elder brothers,
If I think not Cupid the most pernicious deity
Among all the Olympian Senators.
Oh that I had but Stentors lungs,
To thunder out the vanity of that idol.

Now I hope you have railed your self out of breath,
And therefore I may now have time to speak:
Thus 'tis, dear friend Acanthus, I confess
That once I loved the Lady Eglantine,
Whose rare endowments both of art and nature,
Well corresponding with high birth and fortune,
Did moderately attract my sincere love,
Which love conspiring with a strong desire,
To see the Customs of some foreign Nations,
And know the manners of people far remote,
Made me to greet the Princely Dame
With a personal visitation.
Then my indulgent stars did me advise,
For to suspend my suit: whose Counsel I obeyed.
But trust me, friend, thou were too much mistaken,
To think that love had scorched or singed so much
The wings of reason; that I must needs fall,
And perish in the fornace of despair.
Thou art a bad constructer of my thoughts,
If that thou think 'tis love which makes me sad:
Yea, thou, oft-times, dost take thy marks amiss,
To think me sad; perhaps, when as my mind
(Uprais'd above the sphere of terrene things)
Is ravished with Celestial Contemplation;
For earthly passion hath no power at all
To work upon an elevated soul.
Passions are stars to lower orbs confined;
Scorching an earthly, not a heavenly mind.
Yet am I not so much a Stoicke, or a Stock,
To plume the pinions of th'immortall soul,
Who while she's Cloistered in this Cell of Clay,
Moves with the wings of the affections:
But lest she, like to heedless Icarus,
Should soar too high a pitch; or like young Phaeton,
Should shape her Course too low, Jove hath appointed
Wise Virtue for to regulate her flight.
Of these affections, love the Empress is;
Who, while she stands submiss to reasons lore,
Doth keep the Fabric of the little world in frame.
Love is the genial goddess, the Lucina
Which doth produce each honourable achievement,
Which this true axiom evidently proves,
Nobilitas sub amore iacet.
Had not the spriteful flames of love, egged on
That Thehan Kilcrow mighty Hercules,
To brave adventures; he, perhaps, had died
As much inglorious as did base Thersites.
Had not the fair Andromache beheld,
From Trojan Towers, Hectors valiant acts
Among the Greeks, amid the Phrygian fields;
The gallant Dames of Troy then might, perchance,
Most justly have preferred Achilles far before him.
Tis this heroical passion that incends
The sparks of honour in each noble mind;
Making dull sluggards study industry;
And animating each unlearned head
To toil in Arts and liberal Sciences,
Even to the high degree of rare proficience.
Then cease Acanthus with thy lawless tongue,
True loves Condition to maligne or wrong.

Thou zealous patron of the winged Boy,
Well hast thou pleaded thy blind Archers Case;
Pray Jove thou may deserve a lusty fee
For this Herculean labour of thy tongue.

Surcease these malapert invectives, friend,
Cupid is armed with fire and arrows keen,
To be avenc'd on those that shall him spleen.

When Sol shall make the Eastern Seas his bed,
When Wolves and Sheep shall be together fed;
When Stars shall fall, and planets cease to wander,
When Iuno proves a Bawd, and Iupiter a Pander;
When Venus shalturn Chaste, and Bacchus become sober,
When fruit in April's ripe, that blossomed in October;
When Prodigals shall money lend on use,
And Usurers prove lavish and profuse;
When Art shall be esteemed, and golden pelf laid down,
When Fame shall tel all truth, Fortune cease to frown,
To Cupids yoke then I my neck will bow;
Till then, I will not fear loves fatal blow.

Were thou a mere spirit, then I confess,
And think, this resolution might endure;
But so long as thy soul wears robes of earth,
Laced all with veins, that over a Crimson deep,
Set forth an Azure bright; needs must thy heart
Yield to the force of Cupids golden dart.

OH impotent desires, allay the sad consort
Of a sublime Fortune, whose most ambitious flames
Disdain to burn in simple Cottages,
Loathing a hard unpolished bed;
But Coveting to shine beneath a Canopy
Of rich Sydonian purple; all embroidered
With purest gold, and oriental Pearls;
In tesselated pavements, and gilded roofs,
Supported by proud artificial Columns,
Of polished Ivory and Marble; doth love delight
There; doth he, like a mighty Tyrant, rage,
Subverting the whole edifice of reason
With his impetuous conflagration:
That this is true, the gentle Shepherdess
Fair Eglantine doth evidently show:
For she, a sister to the great Cynosbatus,
Was Courted lately by the Shepherd Rhodon:
Whose suit she entertained with due respect,
Requiting love with love: but Fate (it seems)
Not condescending that great Hymen should
Accomplish their desires; forbade the Banes,
And Rhodon hath relinquished his suit;
And is returned to Hybla sweet; whose flowery vales
Began to droop, and wither in his absence.
But Eglantine remains disconsolate;
Like to a Turtle that hath lost her mate.
See where she comes, expressing in her face
A perfect Map of melancholy:
I will retire, because I well desery,
She's out of love with all society.

Address thy self sweet warbling Instrument,
My sorrows sad Companion; to tune forth
Thy melancholy notes; somewhat to slake
Those furious flames that scorch my tender heart.
Upon the black Rock of despair
My youthful joys are perished quite,
My hopes are vanished into air,
My day is turned to gloomy night:
For since my Rhodon dear is gone,
Hope, light, nor comfort, have I none.
A Cell, where grief the Landlord is,
Shall be my palace of delight;
Where I will woo with votes and sighs,
Sweet death to end my sorrows quite;
Since I have lost my Rhodon dear,
Deaths fleshless arms why should I fear?

What time shall end thy sorrows, sweetest Eglantine?

Such grief as mine cannot be cured by time.
But when the gentle fates shall disembogue
My weary soul, and that Celestial substance free
From irksome manacles of clay; then may I find,
If not a sweet repose in blessed Elysium,
Yet some refrigeration in those shades,
Where Dido and Hypsiphile do wander.

Thou gentle goddess of the woods mountains,
That in the woods and mountains art adored,
The Maiden patroness of chaste desires,
Who art for chastity renowned most,
Tresgrand Diana, who hast power to cure
The rankling wounds of Cupids golden arrows;
Thy precious balsam deign thou to apply,
Unto the heart of woeful Eglantine;
Then we thy gracious favour will requite
With a young Kid, than new fallen snow more white.

MY honoured friend, most noble Martagon,
Who meanwhile did with thy imperial power
Command the mountains proud, and humble plains
Of happy Thessaly: who hath eclipsed
The splendour of thy light, and clipped those wings
That did ore-shade these fields from East to West.
Each Shepherd that was wont to feed his flocks
Upon these fertile meads, was wont whilere
To pay the tribute of his primest lambs.
But now as one couped in an angle up,
Thou art compelled to satisfy thy self,
With a small portion of that sovereignty
Which thou did erst enjoy.

Dear friend Cynosbatus, if that the world
Had bin composed in a cubicke form
And not orbicular; or if this globe
Were destined to be ought else then fortunes ball,
By alterations racket banded to and fro;
Then justly might thou wonder to behold
My present state, so short of my precedent height.
Nor doth this monster, Change, bear sway alone,
Ore elements, men, beasts, and plants,
But those celestial bodies that are framed
Of purer constitutions, are compelled
To be obedient to her awful doom.
Rear up thy eyes unto the spangled cope,
And there behold Ioves starre-enchased belt,
The glittering Zodiac wonderfully changed
In a few thousand years:
For those fixed stars, which like a Diamond clear,
Adorn the baudricke of the Thunderer,
Have wandered from their former stations.
Witness the golden Ram who now is gone astray,
And shouldered hath the Cretian Bull; and he
Those twins of Jove so sore hath butted,
That they have crushed the Crab, and thrust him quite
Into the den of the Nemaean Lyon.
Thus by the change of these superior bodies,
Strange alterations in the world are wrought,
Great Empires maimed, Kingdoms brought to nought.
And that auspicious lamp, who freely lends
His light to lesser fires, the prince of generation,
Even Sol himself, is five degrees declined,
Since learned Ptolome did take his height.
But if Egyptian wisards we may trust,
Who in Astrology wont to excel;
By them tis told, that four times they have seen
That glorious Charrioter flit from his place:
Twice hath he rose (they say) where now he sets,
And twice declined where he now doth rise.
If these Celestial powers, whose influence
Commands terrestrial substances,
Be object to mutation, then needs must
Sublunar things, submit themselves to change.
Then wonder not good friend Cynosbatus,
To see my state and power diminished thus.

Tis true dear Martagon, experience shows
That alteration every day brings forth
A new birth of effects.

But I prethe friend, satisfy me in one thing.

My bosome's yours, take from that Cabinet
The choicest secret that can pleasure you:
Tell me in what your will's to be resolved.

There is a rumour spread through Thessaly,
That your fair sister, Madame Eglantine,
Shall be espoused to the Shepherd Rhodon,
The prince of all the Swains that dwell on Hybla.

From no ill grounds this rumour sprang, thou^
The Fates did cross what was by us intended.

Then there's no expectation of my Nuptial rite

No; all's dissolved.

I thank my Stars for that.

Your reason, Noble friend.

A kin he is to that male spirited Dame,
That stout Virago, that proud Shepherdess
Called Violetta: who complains of wrongs
Late suffered at my hands:
And he's the man by whom she hopes
To be avenged on me, for this pretended injury;
And had he matched your sister, sweet Eglantine,
Then might I have had cause for to suspect
Your love not to be sound, since you accepted
So great a so of mine, for your near friend.

Then I am glad the Fates would not agree
That I should lose so true a friend as thee.

Never till now, did my Hymettus flourish:
More blessed effects hath thy sweet presence wrought,
(Honoured Rhodon) then could have been produced
By moist-wing'd Zephyrus, or Favonius,
Who fanns our flowers with his gentle breath.

Thanks, good Anthophotus:

Nor doth our sister Iris hold her self
Meanly engaged to you, for this your gracious visit.

To be the meanest servant of so sweet a saint,
Is the full height and scope of my ambition.

Fair Sr. I wish you would be pleased t'imploy
Your service on an object of more worth.

Dissemble not, admired Shepherdess;
For thou art she, that art as far beyond
That light piece of beauty, Hellen of Greece,
In outward perfections; as she was short of thee in inward graces.

Yea, had those fifty Kings that did for her
Engage themselves in a long tedious war,
Seen but the Model of thy rare beauty,
Drawn by the hand of but a rude painter,
Doubtless, they had their honours forfeited,
And broke that sacred oath which they had taken.
Their work in hand they had relinquished quite,
And left the walls of wretched Troy untouched;
For each attracted with thy beauties splendour,
No Seas nor perils would have left unpast,
To find thee in the furthest angle of the world.

Could my perfections, valued at the highest rate,
But countervail a dram of your great worth,
Then should I think my self borne under stars
Most happy and auspicious.

Surcease your Complements, dear Rhodon,
Let empty Casks, and hollow Cymbals speak
That airy language, which unworthy is
Of your reallities.

Pardon me, gentle Sir: this radiant star,
My judgements feeble eyes did dazzle so,
That I was forced to speak what passion did inform me.

Which is the Shepherd Rhodon?

I am the man.

Then you are he whom Violetta greets.

How fares my sister?

This letter shall relate what I can never utter.

Pray Jove we have good news, me thinks I saw
A pallid horror settled in the face
Of the sad Messenger: be it good or ill,
We are resolved to see it, come what will.
I Violetta much distressed
By Martagon my mortal foe,
Your succour humbly do request,
To set me free frrm servile woe.
Our flowers he hath trampled on,
Our Gardens turned to thickets wild;
Our fields and Meads he hath ore-run,
That we are forced to live exiled.
We therefore do your aide implore,
Us to our freedom to restore.
Your distressed sister, Violetta, Violetta.
'Twas for no good, that the late shag haired Comet
With his erected staring looks, did over-looke
Our frighted flocks, who all amazed poor wretches
At such a horrid unexpected sight,
Ere Hesperus began from the west to peep,
Half empty, did retire unto their folds again:
Nor were those idle fires which late we saw,
Hang like a flaming canopy above us,
When we did walk the round about our folds,
To keep the warwolfe from our Lambs by night.
But is't possible that man should be so savage,
To vent his rage upon a silly woman?

It is no wonder gentle sir at all:
For when Prometheus formed his man of clay,
Tis said that he did to his stomach add,
The raging fury of a Lyon fierce.

Tis true: but histories report that a Lyon did,
The suppliant Getulian virgin spare;
Scorning to make so innocent a creature
His pray or quarry.

Foul shame and infamy it is, god wot,
That manly might should women weak oppose,
Whom they by right for life ought to defend.

(Rhodon) do thou but say Amen: and I will in
An instant raise our spriteful youth,
And lead them on with such a vigorous force
Against the most unhumane Martagon;
That we will pull the Craven from his nest,
Disrobing him of all his borrowed plumes,
And repossessing Violetta of her own.

In actions of such consequence as this,
We must not be too precipicious,
Mature deliberation must conclude
What shall be done in such a maine design:
The stately Steed that with a full career
Attempts to mount the brow of the steep hill,
Oft breaks his wind, ere he can reach the height.
But the slow snail without or harm, or peril,
In time ascends unto the mountains top,
For that true love we owe to Thessaly,
In which affection all we are engaged;
We by a friendly treaty will endeavour
To bring the usurper to a restitution.
But if the Olive branch will do no good,
Then let the scourge of war it self disclose;
They that our friendship scorn, must be our foes.

And if my right hand fail to second thee,
Then for a Peasant let me counted be.

Nay, stay fair Nymph, I would request
A private Conference with you.

If that I could with my affairs dispense,
I gladly should embrace your Conference:
But my occasions bid me hast away;
Sweet Sr, adieu; I can no longer stay.

I that of late was made of Scythian snow,
And Hyperborean ice, am now quite thawed
In the uncessant flames of hot desire.
A new Vesuvius burns within my breast,
But shall I overturn those noble trophies
Which I most firmly have on virtue sounded;
Or shall I singe the wings of reason so,
In the outrageous flames of passion;
That I must needs fall down and perish quite
In the black hideous gulf of deep despair,
No: no: I will not,
Of this I am resolved whatso're befall,
Or not to love too much, or not at all.

BOld foolish wickedness is that
Which walks by day, exposed to the world's eye.
Sin is the daughter of the darkest night,
And therefore doth abhor to come to light.
Give me that cole black sin that can lye hid.
Under the candid robes of seeing sanctity;
Which dares put out the perspicacious eyes
Of those that shall attempt to find her out.
Come dull Agnostus, let us disguise our selves
And be prepared to act some stratagem
To eclipse the glory of these festivals.
This robe of virtue doth belong to me;
This goodly veil shall hide my black intents.
Thus personated, I durst undertake
To rend a well woven state in factious pieces;
To win the ears of mighty Potentates;
And hood-winke Kings, that they should neither see
To do what's just, nor hear the piteous cries
Of those that are oppressed.
But that thou, Agnostus, may second my designs,
'Tis very fit thou should be thus accoutred.

My dear Poneria, I am yours.

Then first unto thy chin we must apply
This Philosophical beesome.
Now is the old proverb really performed,
More hair than wit.
How like a Senator he looks?
What a world of gravity's harboured in that beard?
Surely the world can take him for no other
Than the third Cato that should fall from heaven.
But here's the Ensign of learning,
The badge of the seven Liberal Sciences,
Operculum ingenij, the silken Case of wit,
The Cap of knowledge; Clap this upon thy
Empty hog shed, put this on, and then thy head
Will become a Helicon, and thy brain a Pyrene.

It fits me exceeding well.

Dost not perceive thy head begin to ache
With mere abundance of knowledge?

Now, me thinks, I could confute a College of Divines
A Synod of Doctors, a Lycaeum of Philosophers;
Yet me thinks my brains are not right,
And somewhat too weak to maintain a paradox.

Away fond idiot, do not conceit
That this Cap can infuse any thing real into thy pate,
That is incapable of all art and science.
Under the protection of this Cap, thou may be bold
To traduce thy betters, to censure the best,
To decide controversies without discretion,
To torment all companies with thy discourse,
And weary ears of iron with thy impertinences;
Do but wear this head-peece over the Coyfe of
Selfe-conceit (always provided) that thou forget
Not to leave off a brazen face; and I dare
Undertake it, thou in a short time, shalt gain
More respect (especially among Plebeian Coxcombs)
Then ever Pythagoras, had of his auditors.

I am thy slave, divine Poneria:
Oh admirable rare Artist that I am!

But yet, me thinks, there's somewhat else to do
To make thee more accomplished and complete.
'Slight, the political gown; I had as clean forgot it*
As the time since I lost my maiden* head.
Here 'tis: dispatch. and put it on,
And then be reputed both grave, --
Learned, and wise.
Doubtless it will become thee exceeding well.
Now looks he not like a maine stud of a Corporation?

How heavy is the burden of authority?

'Tis true, authority is heavy, I confess,
But not so heavy but an Ass may beare't.
Since now, Agnostus, that we are well fitted
With habits meet, to act what we intend;
Thou seeming like a grave and learned Sire;
Though thou indeed then that be nothing less,
And I like to a virtuous maiden dight,
Though I all virtue deeply do abhor;
We thus disguised, will all the world delude,
And set the flowers at ods among themselves,
That they in civil enmities embroyl'd,
Shall of their pride and glories be despoiled.

TO hinder the conjunction of those stars,
We must try all our skill, Cynosbatus.

I jealous am of their maligne aspect,
And therefore hold it best to take away
That cause which may produce such bad effects;
For I shall never cease t'applaud his skill,
That in the shell, the Cockatrice doth kill.

The Serpent will be hatched, I shrewdly fear,
E're we the mischief can prevent, if thus
We should delay to act our purposes:
For late, a ccrtaine rumour, through my ear,
Did strike me to the heart; when 'twas reported
That Rhodon on Hymettus hill was seen;
Where by Anthophotus, and his sister Iris,
He was with such solemnity received,
That all surmise there is a match intended
Between the Shepherd Rhodon and fair Iris.

If once they be conjoined in Hymens rites,
Then all our toyle's ridiculous and vain;
For Hymens obligations are (we see)
Seldom by any cancelled, but by death.

Then let us set some Stratagem abroach,
The Cords of their new amity to break.
The tender twig may easily be broke,
But who's so strong to bow the sturdy Oak.
Our friends will say (if we procrastinate)
That, like the Troians, we were wise too late.

SInce that the gods will not my woe redress,
Since men are altogether pitiless,
Ye silent ghosts unto my plaints give ear;
Give ear (I say, ye ghosts) if ghosts can hear:
And listen to my plaints that do excel
The dol'rous tune of ravished Philomel.
Now let Ixions wheel stand still a while,
Let Danaus daughters now surcease their toil:
Let Sisyphus rest on his restless stone,
Let not the Apples fly from Plotas son;
And let the full gorged Vulture cease to tear
The growing liver of the ravisher;
Let these behold my sorrows, and confess
Their pains do far come short of my distress.
Were I but Lady of more wealthy store
Then e're the Sun beheld; or had I more
Then Midas e're desired; I would (in brief)
Give all to be delivered from this grief.
Rocks of rich Indian pearl, shores paved with gems,
Mountains of gold, and Empires Diadems,
These would I give, yea, and my self to boot,
My self and these prostrating at his foot,
To enjoy him whom I so dearly love.
Aye me, fond love, that art a sweet sower evil,
A pleasant torture, a well-favour'd devil.
But why do I, weak wretch, prolong my grief?
Why do I live, since death affords relief?
Do thou (sweet poniard) all my sorrows ease,
That art a medicine for all grievances,
Assist my hand, thou goddess of revenge,
That on my self, I may my self avenge.

Hold, hold thy hand, fair Shepherdess,
Attempt not to commit a fact so horrid.

What Fury sent you hither, Caitiffes vile,
Thus to prolong my sorrow, and my toil.

No Fury, but your happy Genius
Brought us to these uncomfortable shades,
For to prevent your mischievous intent.

Death is a plaster for all ills (they say)
What mischief then can be in death, I pray.

'Tis true; death is a mortal wound that cures all wounds
Of body, and of mind: it is the souls potion
That purges her from corporal pollution.
But you must not your own Physician prove,
Not be the Doctor, and the Patient too:
For if thy soul be sickly, and grow weary
Of this unwholesome earthly habitation,
Because this airs spissitude suits not
With her Celestial Constitution,
She must not like a bankrupt Tenant prove,
That flies by night from an unprofitable Farm,
Before the term of his Lease be expired:
But stay till heaven shall give her egress free
Unto the haven of rest and happiness.

Were I not plunged in a grievous plight,
Perhaps I would not think thy counsel light.

Art not thou the sister of Cynosbatus,
Lord of the silver mines, and golden mountains.
And art not thou as fair a Shepherdess
As trips upon the plains of Thessaly?

For being great, I am maligned by Fate,
For being fair, I am unfortunate.

I know thy sorrows, sweetest Eglantine;
Thy Rhodons absence hath wrought all thy woe,
Who now, they say, doth beauteous Iris court.
But if thov wilt make me thy instrument,
I'll undertake to break the match,
If not, renew the love which erst he bare to thee.

Do this, and I will live (Poneria)
To give thy merit ample satisfaction.
I will adore thy skill, and thee adorn
With what may make thee famous through all Thessaly.

Then banish all these melancholy thoughts,
And deck thy self in thy most sumptuous weeds.
Make hast unto the Fane of gentle Venus,
A pair of Turtles of a snowy hue,
Upon her altars offer thou to her,
And her beseech to intercede for thee
Unto her angry boy: Then shalt thou find
The god and goddess to true lovers kind.

My dear Poneria, I am truly thine.
But tell me, I prethe, what grave Sr. is this
That looks like one of Greeces Sages;
His reverent Countenance makes me surmise
That he's a man of sublime qualities.

He is but what he seems, fair Shepherdess:
His head's the officine of art; his tongue
The oracle of truth; he is the man
Whom only Nature hath vouchsas'd to make
Her privy Counsellour.
Those abstruse secrets which no mortal eye
Did ever view, he plainly can descry;
He is the man that's destined to find out
That grand mysterious secret, in whose discovery
So many bold adventurous wits have perished:
I mean the Elixar, the Philosophers precious stone.
Heis the man who by strange policies
Can break the strong Confederacies of Kings,
And overthrow more Empires by his plots,
Then mighty Alexander ever did by strength:
Agnostus is his name, renowned no less
For honesty, than skill in Sciences.

His silence argues something extraordinary.

Belphegor, Zazel, Astragoth, Golguth,
Machon Malortor.

Aye me, Poneria.

Agnostus, not a word more for thy life.
Stay, stay, sweet Eglaentine, and dread no harm,
This is the language which the Persian Magi used
When they with their familiars did converse,
To which he is so frequently accustomed,
That oft he speaks it e're he be aware.
(Agnostus) vouchsafe to use your native language,
That Eglantine may know what you are.
I hope you know your lesson,
Twice twenty times and ten, c.

Twice twenty times and ten, hath Titan run
Quite through the Zodiac, since I begun
To converse with wise fiends, that I might get
The golden key of Natures Cabinet.
By industry I got immortal same,
For ignorance begets contempt and shame:
So perfect in the Magic Arts I grew,
That natures secrets most abstruse I knew;
The spirits of air and earth did me dread,
And did at my venite come with speed;
The silly ghosts from graves I did forth call.
The earth I make to bellow, stars to fall.
The world at my great awful charms did quake,
Nature her self for very fear did shake:
To change midday to midnight, or to cause
Estiuall snowes, or break the vipers jaws,
Or to drive rivers back to their spring heads,
And make seas stand unmoved, or to strike dead
The vernal blossom, or the harvest ear:
A man would think these strange conclusions were,
But I account them of small weight: I know
The use of herbs, and whatsoever grow;
The cause to the effect I can apply,
And work strange things by hidden sympathies.
I do exactly know the compositions
Of unctious Philters, and loves potions:
Figures, suspensions, and ligations,
Characters and suffumigations.
For I the virtues of all simples know
From whence; effects that seem impossible I show.
The gall of shriek Owls, harsh night Ravens tongus
Guts of Panthers, and Chamelions lungs,
A black Bulls eyes, a speckled ^oads dried head,
Frankincense, camphor, and white poppie-seed;
Poysenous Melanthion, and a white Cocks blood,
Sweet Myrrh, Bay-berries, precious balsam wood,
A Harts marrow that hath devoured a snake,
And scalps which from a wild beasts jaws we take,
The bone that lies in the left side of a Frog,
A stone that is bitten with a mad dog.
The Mandrake root, the blood of a black Cat,
A Turtles liver, the brains of a Batt,
Hyaenas heart, the Cockatrices blood,
That are against so many evils good:
The hair of a thief that hangs on a tree;
The nailes of ships that wracked be,
The blood of a wretched man that was slain,
The eyes of a Dragon and Weasels brains.
These precious simples, and a thousand more
I could produce; I have them all in store:
And though they seem to men mere trifling things,
Each one (I vow) ore'weighes ransomes of Kings.
The blindness of these times cannot descry
The virtues rare that in these simples lye.

Enough Agnostus: Now fair Shepherdess,
I hope you have a fair expression
Of this learned mans sublime desert, and art?

I do admire his skill, and see (by hap)
Good stuff may be beneath a fatten Cap.

KNow Martagon, that as no dynasties can stand,
No Empires long subsist, unless they be
Supported by the Columns of true equity:
So shall that government of thine decay,
Since thy oppression makes the weak a pray.

Tis no oppression for to punish those,
That have transgressed the Laws, as I suppose.

The laws (Colossus) proud, uniust tyrant,
That dost observe nor equity nor law,
But by the torrent of ambition hurried,
Dost act what lawless passion prompts thee to:
What Laws have I transgressed? it is thy might,
That into seeming wrong hath changed our right:
Had Fortune been as just as was our cause,
We that are censured now for breach of Laws,
Maugre thy viprous hate, had now bin free,
And for thy foul injustice censured thee.

And is your pride Virago still so high?
That it doth over-top your misery.
Cannot sorrow strike thee dumb, can no disaster,
The liberty of thy tongue over-master.

Nay, be assured (proud man) not any smart,
Can cure the courage of a valiant heart:
No force a heart of adamant can break;
And losers must, and shall have leave to speak.

No more Acanthus: hear me Martagon:
Wilt thou give Violetta what's her own?
Wilt thou restore her right and due possessions?
And make a recompense for all oppressions,
That happy peace with joy and plenty crowned,
May in the fields of Thessaly be found?

This will I do,
When seas shall be drunk dry by Phoebus beams,
And when the lesser stars shall drink the streams.
This will I do,
When of my life and freedom I am weary,
Non minor est virtus quam quae rear parta tueri.

Before this guiltless woman shall endure
Such shameful injuries: thy self assure
I'll empty all these azure rivulets
Of their virmilion streams; and quite discharge
This contemned bulk of mine, of living air;
And stretched upon the gelid bed of death,
I'll to the world this Epitaph bequeath,
Here lies a Swain that spent his dearest blood,
To kill a Tyrant for a Virgins good.

Bold hero do thy worst, what I have won
I ne'er will part withal till life be done.

Tenacious Tyrant, in whose flinty heart
Nor equity, nor justice ere had part:
Assure thy self thy guilty soul shall feel
Revenges hand, armed with a scourge of steel.

well, if I were but once rid of her service,
If I ever served love-sicke mistress again,
I would feed all my life time on Agnus Castus,
And give all the world leave to let me dye a maid:
I even spoiled a good mother wit
With beating my head about these knick knacks,
Which my mistress, Madam Eglantine
Hath enioyn'd me to procure her,
For now seduced by the old bawd Poneria,
She thinks to recover her old sweet-heart Rhodon.
Here is a Catalogue as tedious as a Taylors bill,
Of all the devices which I am commanded to provide, videlicet:

Chains, coronets, pendans, bracelets and eare-rings,
Pins, girdles, spangles, embroyderies, rings,
Shadows, rebatos, ribbands, roughs, cuffs and falls:
Scarfes, feathers, fans, masks, muffes, laces and calls;
Thin tiffanies. copweb-lawne and fardingals,
Sweet-bals, veils, wimples, glasses, crisping-pins;
Pots, ointments, combs, with poking-sticks bodkins;
Coyfes, gorgets, fringes, rowles, fillets and haire-laces;
Silks, damasks, velvet, tinsels, cloth of gold,
And tissue, with colours of a hundredth fold.
But in her tyres so new fangl'd is she,
That which doth with her humour now agree,
To morrow she dislikes, now doth she swear,
That a loose body is the neatest wear;
But ere an hour be gone, she will protest
A strait gown graces her proportion best:
Now calls she for a boisterous fardingall,
Then to her hips shele have her garments fall:
Now doth she praise a sleeve that's long and wide,
Yet by and by that fashion doth deride:
Sometimes sh'applauds a pavement-sweeping train,
And presently dispraiseth it again.
Now she commends a shallow band so small,
That it may seem scarce any band at all;
But soon to a new fancy doth she reel,
And calls for one as big as a coach-wheele:
She'll wear a flowery coronet to day,
The symboll of her beauties sad decay,
To morrow she a waving plume will try,
The emblem of all female lenity,
Now in her hat, then in her hair she's dressed,
For of all fashions she thinks change the best.

Good fellow servant, honest Clematis,
Let me conclude thy tedious tale with this;
I say the rest less sea and flitting wind,
Are constant in respect of women kind.

Nor in her weeds alone is she so nice,
But rich perfumes she buys at any price.
Storax and Spiknard she burns in her Chamber,
And daubes her self with Civit, Musk and Amber.
With limbecks, viols, pots, her Closet's filled,
Full of strange liquors by rare art distilled:
She hath Vermilion and Antimony,
Cerusse and sublimated Mercury.
Waters she hath to make her face to shine;
Confections eke to clarify her skin;
Lipsalues, and clothes of a pure scarlet dye
She hath, which to her cheeks she doth apply:
Ointments wherewith she pargets ore her face,
And lustrifies her beauties dying grace.
She waters for the Morphewes doth compose,
And many other things, as strange as those;
Some made of Daffodils, some of lees,
Of scarwolfe some, and some of rinds of trees,
With Centory, sower Grapes, and Tarragon,
She makes many a strange lotion:
Her skin she can both supple and refine,
With juice of Lemons and with Turpintine:
The marrow of the Hernshaw and the Dear,
She takes likewise to make her skin look clear:
Sweet waters she distils, which she composes
Of flowers of Oranges, Woodbine or Roses:
The virtue of Iesmine and three-leav'd grass,
She doth imprison in a brittle glass,
With Civet, Musk, and odours far more rare,
These liquors sweet incorporated are:
Lees she can make which turn a hair that's old
Or coloured ill, into a hue of gold.
Of horses, bears, cats, camels, conies, snakes,
Whales, Herons, bittours, strange oils she makes,
With which dame natures errors she corrects,
Using arts help to supply all defects.
She in the milk of Asses bathes her skin,
As did the beautiful Poppea, when
She tempted Nero to forsake the bed
Of great Octavia, and her self to wed.

If there be any Gentlewoman here,
That will with gracious acceptance use
The service of a tattling Chambermaid,
I would advise her to make choice of this Frisketta,
That is as chaste as Helen, or Corinthian Lais,
As chary of betraying secrets as was Echo:
Oh she would prove a rare Privy Councellor
In some great Ladies privy Chamber.
The perpetual motion for which Artists have so labor'd
Is discovered no where so plainly as in her tongue,
Which scarce finds any leisure to rest,
No not when she is asleep:
But of her courtesy she is so charitable,
And so heroically magnificent,
That she will both vouchsafe to commiserate
The lowe estate of an humble groom of the stable,
And also satisfy the desire
Of a high and mighty Gentleman-usher
In a kiss or any other amorous encounter:
Gentlemen believe me in few, she is a pearl,
Whose worth the age cannot value.
If there be any Gentleman here
That will bestow a small pension upon her,
With a kiss or two once a fortnight,
To make her his intelligencer of state
In his wives common-wealth;
I will undertake he shall be able to make good
A faction against his wife,
Had she an Amazons stomach, a Zenobia's,
Or a Xanthippes tongue.

Out you prattling Parachito,
Come you hither to abuse me.
Take this for your pains.

Now thank thy stars, that with a female signature
Did stamp thy sex, audacious strumpet,
Shall I draw? no, now I think ont I will not;
For reason and experience shows, that no man
Ere gained repute by drawing against a woman.

Stripling, dost think I fear a naked blade;
I'll meet thee where thou dare, and whip thee too
For thy unruly tongue, thy sauciness.

Well minion, remember this,
If I do not cry you quit for this abuse,
Then let me ne'er be trusted:
Your Mistress shall know how you have used me,
So she shall.

Skippiake tell what you can, I weigh't not this,
I'll make you know that you have done amiss.

FOrget you not the powder for your breath,

I took a dram of it this morning,
According to your appointment.

Your pallid cheek requires, in mine opinion,
A deeper tincture of vermilion.

And I am of the same mind:
But 'twas my Maids fault.
I think she goes about utterly to undo me:
She is as good a servant as ere was
Married to the whipping. post.

I tell you true I would not for twenty crowns
That Rhodon had seen you with this face.
That Ceruse on your brow is extremely dull,
There is no lustre, no resplendency in it.
S'light I have seen often times a stained cloth
Over a smokey chimney in an Alehouse
Present me with a better face.

Nay, I could not for my heart persuade
The wicked pertinacious harlot,
To lay more colour on then pleased her fancy;
Bat if I live I will cashier the queen.

If you do not, you are no friend to your self.

How lik'st thou the colour of my hair.

Oh that is exceedingly well died.

Me thinks the hue is not high enough.

Nay, pardon me Madam: tis passing well.
The browne hue is the most incomparable colour
For a hair of all other.
Those golden wires that on fair Hero's sholders dangl^
And those fair flaxen threads that made Jove
Dote upon fair Nonacrine,
May not be compared with the lovely browne.

Discreet Poneria, thy wise approbation
Doth give my fancy ample satisfaction.
But hear me Poneria, will you undertake
That I shall meet with the Shepherd Rhodon,
As you oft have promised me.

Fair shepherdess I will.

But 'tis a thing impossible I fear.

Why so good Eglantine?

Because I hear he deeply is engaged
To Iris, that proud Damsel of Hymettus.

I grant he is: and since things are thus,
I will so act my part, that his new love
Shall be the means to renew that good will
That hath bin heretofore twixt him and you.

Nor Circes drugs, nor all Vlysses wits,
I tell thee Beldam, can accomplish this.

Good daughter undervalue not my skill,
For 'tis contrived how it shall be effected,
And to satisfy thy curiosity,
I will declare how I have laid the plot.

I prethe bless my ears with this relation.

I will a message bear in Iris name,
Unto the Shepherd Rhodon, which shall show,
That she desires an amorous interview
With him, in such a privacy
That day must not be guilty of it:
A solitary glade shall be the place,
Where you protected by the veil of conscious night,
Instead of Iris shall present your self
Unto the Shepherd Rhodon,
Whom you shall entertain with sweet discourse,
And so comport your self, that he shall think,
You are his dearest Iris.
But to assure him yours, I have provided
A precious Philter of rare efficacy,
Composed according to the rudiments of art.
This shall you cause him to carouse
As water of inestimable worth.
Which done, he is your own;
And Iris then shall be forgotten clean,
As one whom he had ne'er scarce known or seen.

Tis bravely plotted sweet Poneria:
But what hour wilt thou allot for this design.

Provide your self to meet him in the myrtle grove
Upon eleven at night.

Very good.

Now I'll to Rhodon go, and him invite,
To meet you at the appointed place this night.

Now most auspicious be thy stars and mine,
Let all good luck attend our great design.

BUt is the angry swain (sai'st thou) so hot,
Is Rhodon grown so zealous in his sisters cause?

If that his actions with his words agree,
I must expect a sudden storm.

I am resolved to take part in thy fortunes,
Be they the worst that ere to any fell.

Thanks noble friend, then here lets join our hand
In sign of most unseparable bands.

But there's Acanthus a jolly swain,
He frets (they say) like a furious Mirmidon.

In braving language he exceeded so,
That Martagon ne'er saw so bold a foe,
Surcharged with swelling passion, he did vow
To take a full revenge on me and you.

And is the youth so filled with valrous heate?
Who would have thought the frozen mountains could
Have bred so brave a hot-spurre.

These raging Lyons must, Cynosbatus,
Be undermined by some egregious slight;
We must pitch some strong toil for these fierce Beasts,
Where we may take them captive at our pleasure:
For if we should assail them openly,
Much peril then we might incur thereby.

What thy high judgment shall conclude to do,
I am resolved to condescend unto.

Then hear what I propound. Cynosbatus,
Within a place nigh hand, resides
A Beldam much renowned for sacred skill
In magic mysteries.
She with her awful Charms wonts to call forth
All sorts of noisome Creatures that are bred
In Sandy Lybia, or cold Scythia,
From whom she takes her choice of poison strong.
The Herbs which grow on precipitious Erix,
She with her bloody Sickle crops:
And whatsoever poisonous weed springs on
The craggy top of snowy Caucasus,
That's sprinkled with the blood of wise Prometheus,
She carefully selects;
Those venomes which the warlike Medians, and
The nimble Parthians, or Arabians rich,
Use to annoynt their deadly shafts withal.
She doth by Moone-light gather;
Each Herb that in this fertle vernal season
Puts forth its head from Opses pregnant bosom
She searches for; whether the same be bred
In the cold Forest of Hercynea,
Or in the deserts of parched Africae,
What flower so ever doth in his seed or root
Strange causes of great mischief nourish,
She never fails to find out:
Whether the same on banks of Tigris grows,
Or on the sun-burnt brink of warm Hydaspes,
Whose golden channels paved with precious stones;
Some of these herbs she doth by twilight gather,
At midnight some, and some at break of day.
Nor is she ignorant how to apply
The panting heart of the dull melancholy Owl,
Or the breathing entrails cut from a living Cat.
The proudest Swain that lives in Thessaly
Is glad to be obsequious to her will;
For in her power it is to cure or kill.
Unto this reverent Sybill let us go,
And her advice request in this design;
By her instructions let us our actions regulate,
Providing for our own security:
She can divine of all events, and tell
Whether things shall succeed or ill or well.

What thy sound judgement thinks fit to be done,
I condescend to, noble Martagon.

SInce that the proud usurper Martagon
Will not restore what he hath taken away
By force and injury from Violetta,
We are resolved to put on lawful arms,
To swag the pride of that great Termagant;
That of his prowess doth so vainly vaunt.
Therefore dear friends address your selves to show
Your true and faithful fortitudes, for know
An ignominious peace may not compare,
With any just and honourable war.

Out upon this Fabian valour,
These tedious cunctations: I tell thee Rhodon,
I must needs chide thee for our loss of time,
My troops are all in perfect readiness,
And long to meet their foes in open field;
If we deliberate a day longer
The edge of their valour (I fear) will be quite taken off.

Now fie upon that valour which depends
On circumstance of time or place,
Tis relative virtue, that like glass is brittle,
Whose force soon dyes and perfects very little,

Now recollect thy spirits Rhodon,
Let Spartan resolution spread it self
Into each angle of thy noble heart.
For now our hostile forces are assembled,
Covering the fields from Ossa to Olympus.
Their painted banners with the winds are playing:
Their pampered coursers thunder on the plains:
The splendour of their glistering arms repels
The bashful sun-beames back unto the clouds.
Their bellowing drums and trumpets shrill,
Do many sad corrantos sound,
Which danger grimand sprawling death must dance.
Now therefore Rhodon, do reflect thy eye
Upon the glories of thy ancestors,
And strive by emulation to transcend
Those trophies which were yet ne'er paralleled.

Surcease this needless talk, let us to action,
The loss of time consists in protraction.

Your noble courages, endeared friends,
A good event to our designs portends.

within the precincts of this grove Poneria dwells,
Here nightly she hath coventicles
With her wise spirits; see how the trees are carved
With Magical mysterious characters,
See how the fiery fiends with their frequent resort have
Scorched the leaves, and changed the
Merry livery of the spring into a mournfu hue.
Behold the grass died with the swarthy gore
Of some great sacrifice, that late was offered up
To the infernal powers.

The black aspect of this strange uncouth place
Doth make my heart to quake.

Within a vault hewn from the stony bowels,
Of you high precipicious rock she dwells.
Cheer up (Cynosbatus) and come away,
Let's to her Cell, and I'll show thee the way.

CVrst was the wight that did in murder first
Imbrue his guilty hands: cursed was that hand
Which first was taught by damned hellish art
To forge the killing blade in Vulcans flames:
What raging fury reigns in mortal breasts,
That man should man pursue with deadly hate;
Oh what maglignant power hath defaced,
That specious image of the gods above?
Who hath inspired man with that bestial quality
Of murderous revenge?
The Lybian Lyons seldom are at odds,
The Tigers of Hyrcania do agree,
But man to man's become a very devil:
That Thracian god which is delighted most
With humane sacrifices, is now adored;
Blood-thirsty Mars now bears the only sway,
Who direful devastations doth affect,
Peace hath forsook the earth, and fell debate
Shaking his battered arms, now stalks every where.
I hoped for nuptials sweet, of late, but now
I may have cause to fear a funeral.
Hymen affrighted with the confused noise
Of brutish war, is fled I know not whither.
My dearest Rhodon must depart from me,
And in the field engage his tender Corps
To all extremities of death, of wounds, of danger,
Of sickness and unrest:

Strike not the air with this vain language, Iris,
Wound not thy soul with these unseemely plaints,
But be content to wait the will of Jove,
Who will crown our designs with blessed success.
For in a cause that's honest, just, and right,
The gods themselves will take up arms and fight.

Then oh ye powers, that are the grand protectors
Of Hyblas happiness and welfare;
Whether ye do delight in our flower-crown'd mountains,
Our od'rous vales, or in our Crystal fountains,
Your gracious favour I implore, besceching you
To guard the person of my dearest Rhodon;
Fond woman, how forgetful have I bin?
Here is a gem whose price doth far transcend
All estimation: my faithful Panace
Deliver't thou unto my gentle Shepherd,
And pray him wear it for my sake.

Madam, I will.

It from the bowels of a Cock was taken,
And whosoever wears the same (as wise men say)
Shall ever be victorious in war.

Commend me to my brother, gentle nymph,
And bear this token of my love to him:
It is the precious herb called Latice,
Which whosoever wears shall never want
Sufficient sustenance both for himself and his;
Besides, it frustrates quite the divellish force
Of strongest poisons or enchantments.
Now Iris, let us haste to Floras fane,
With our devotions let's importune her,
These horrid stirs and troublous broils to cease,
That we again may live in happy peace.

DIvinest Matron; god-inspired Sybill
Do this, and be what thou can desire.

Doubt not great Martagon but I will effect it.

Now dear Cynosbatus let us prepare
To resist th'impression of our foes:
Since that our powerful forces ready stand,
To be obedient to our great command.

With thee I am resolved to spend my breath,
Indifferent in the choice of life or death.

Agnostus come forth: black cloud of ignorance,
Advance thy leaden pate* dull Camel.

I cannot brooke this thin and piercing air.

Thou son of sleep; that hat'st the lightsome day,
Clap on thy spectacles of judgment, and behold
How I have plaid my part.
Thou flow'st with gall (Agnostus) I confess,
But thou hast a brain intolerably dry,
As empty of wit, as the world is of conscience.

What hast plucked up the flowers by the roots,
Or is all Thessaly in a combustion?

Surcharged with deep despite and viprous hate,
Their forces they against each other bend.

Then I hope their painted pride shall quickly be abated.

But I have a plot, old plumbeous dotard,
To crop the proudest flower that grows
In Hybla or Hymettus.

Poneria, I adore thy art and wisdom.

This glass contains a rare confectign:
Tis vipers blood mixed with the juice of Aconite:
This is the Philter, the sweet love-potion
Which Eglnatine poor love-sick fool,
Must commend to the Shepherd Rhodon,
Who this night by my appointment,
Is to meet her in the myrtle grove, under the
Name of Iris: now I'll to Eglantine,
And bless her longing ears with these glad tidings.

Oh great profound Poneria: never yet
Was any that could parallel thy wit.

what hour of night is't friend Acanthus?

Th'eleventh at least: for see Orion hath
Advanced very high his starry locks in our horizon.

Me thinks the stars look very ruddy,
As if they did portend tempestuous weather.

They do but blush to see what crimes are acted
By mortal under covert of the night.

Saw thou yon star that Northward fell.

I saw the blazing meteor stoup,
And bend his course toward the humble Center.

This seemed a glorious, and resplendent star,
Yet was it but a gross ill tempered meteor.
This meteor seemed as if it had bin fixed
In an orb for a perpetuity,
Yet in a moment is it fallen, thou see,
And who regards this foolish and ignoble fire,
Or looks upon the place from whence it fell.

He that by honourable means is raised,
And hath his seat established on the square
Of never sliding virtue, cannot fall.

But if young Phaeton shall undertake
To guide the Charret of the great Apollo,
And in that action shall miscarry, so
That the whole universe shall be engaged
To utter ruin and destruction,
Then ought great Jove to have a special care
For to preserve and keep the common good.
And if he shall dismount the Chariotter,
And with a deadly blow lay him along,
The world then for his justice shall thank Jove,
And Phaetons foole-hardinesse reprove.

Who dares contest with Jove, or question what
His Sovereign highness shall do or determine.

Tis altogether wicked uniust: (Acanthus) retire.
For now me thinks I see a glimpse of Iris,
Who promised to meet me here this night.
Lo how the lustre of her beauty penetrates
The en vyous clouds of these nocturnal shades.

See yonder the beguiled lover walks
In vain, expecting the coming of his dear Iris,
Now, Eglantine remember my instructions,
Have a care that your tongue betray you not.
Be not too talkative in any case.
Forget not the posture I so oft told you of,
Under pretence that these cold nightly dews are
Offensive, you may knit your veil more close,
And conceal your feature.

Poneria, retire: I will address my self unto him.

But be sure you persuade him to take the
Potion before he sleeps;
You'll remember those virtues which I told you it contains.
Forget not to declare them amply.

Make no doubt on it: thou hast armed me
For all assays.

Thou brightest star that shin'st this night,
Auspicious be thy influence to thy Rhodon.
My dearest Iris, I am surcharged with joy
To meet thee here.

(Dear Rhodon) who, like the vernal Sun,
Dost lend refreshing heats to my affections.
Tak't not amiss, that I have chose this hour
And unfreqrented place t'enioy thy company.

Sweet Iris know that I esteem this hour of night,
Since I enjoy thy sweet society,
'Bove all the days that I e're hitherto beheld.

But from a maidens modesty (fair Sir)
It may seem much to derogate,
To be abroad so late at night.

Since no immodest act is here intended,
The time cannot be prejudicial
To thy unstained modesty.

Great pity tis indeed, Sir, that true love
Should be disparaged, because 'tis so true.

I tell thee, I till now was never happy:
All those delights which I ere saw before,
Were but mere transitory dreams,
Compared with that felicity which now I find.

The sudden news of this late kindled war,
Wherein I hear (to my great grief) you are engaged,
Made me transgress the bounds of modesty so far,
That I desired once more to see your face,
Ere your departure to the field of danger.

Since my good fortune and thy constant love
Have joyed me once again with thy sweet presence,
I bless my lot, and to the field will hasten,
As ready to out-face danger, as scorn death;
And if I there find fortunate success,
Of all my good I'll count thee patroness.

And here on you I do bestow this vial,
Which such a precious dosis doth contain,
That it doth far exceed the height of value.
It is a potion made by wondrous art,
Nectar is no more comparable to it,
Then Bonniclabar is to Husquobath;
And Aurum potabile is as far short of it,
As poor Metheglin is of rich Canary:
All the confections even from the lowest degree
Of Sage-ale, to the height of Aqua-Celestis,
Are no more like it then the beer of the Low-countries
Is to the High-country wine:
A dram of it taken before you go to bed
Cheers the heart, prevents the Incubus
And all frightful dreams; cheers the blood,
Comforts the stomach, dispels all collickes,
Cures all aches, repair the liver, helps
The lungs, rectifies the brain, quenches
All the senses, strengthens the memory, refreshes
The spirits.
Taken fasting it breaks the stone in bladder
Or kidnyes, cures the gout, expels a quartain ague:
Outwardly applied it kills the gangrene,
And destroys the wolf, heales all sorts of wounds,
Bruses, boils, and sores.
And not to use more multiplicity of words,
I tell you gentle Rhodon you shall find,
It cures all griefs of body and of mind.

(Fair one) verbal expression cannot show
What I to thee for this great gift do owe:
But till for all I full requital make,
My constant love thou for a pledge shalt take.

But (gentle Sir) although your constitution
So well attempered seems, that no disease
Can either hurt or over-throw your health,
Yet if my counsel might prevail with you,
I should persuade you to make trial of this
Rare water this night before you sleep.

Since thou vouchsaf'st to be my kind Physician,
For this time I will act a patients part,
And ere that sleep shall with his leaden keys
Locke up the portals of my drowsy eyes,
I'll taste of this most precious liquor:
But lest the gealed moisture of the night
Should prejudice thy health, (sweet Iris)
Let me conduct thee homeward.

Since these nocturnal distillations
May be offensive to your health (sweet Rhodon)
I will be well contented to be gone,
Though wondrous loath from you to part so soon.

But in my absence be assured of this,
That Rhodons heart in thy possession is.

Upon this shady bank with laurels crowned,
The gentle Shepherd Rhodon dwells:
His Cottage seated is upon a Crystal River,
The sweetest stream that e're in valley crept.
Two precious presents I to him must bear:
The one from his true love, the beaut'ous Iris,
And that's a gem of admirable virtue;
The bounty of the Eastern mines could ne'er bestow
A Jewel of such worth as this,
Which from the entrails of a Cock was ripped;
For whosoever shall possess the same,
Shall be invincible in fight.
But his dear Sister, lovely Violetta,
Commends to him this admirable plant,
The noblest herb that e're in garden grew.
For, setting many precious properties aside,
It is the best and strongest antidote
That Art or Nature ever made.
No deadly poison can withstand its power,
But is expulst by it with great facility.
These noble gifts beseeming well
Both the receivers and the givers qualities,
I will deliver to the honoured Swain.

SAge Dame, how fares thy grand design?
Dost think thy plot will take?

Nay, if you doubt it, I wish it ne'er might take.
Have I made hell a party in the action,
And laid such snares, that more then humane force
Cannot withstand my well knit stratagem;
Yet will you still torment me with these doubts?

Nay gentle mother, be not so impatient.

You tempt my patience, while you thus mistrust
My skill and my ability.

We do adore thy matchless skill and wisdom,
Thou grace and wonder of thy sex.

Me thinks I see the merry Post at hand,
That brings us joyful news of Rhodons death:
And not behind him much me thinks I see
Another Post, who comes with better news,
That Rhodons army is discouraged and discarded,
Yea quite disbanded and dispersed.

Oh happy news (divine Poneria)

Yet ye account me a mere silly Dame,
Yea as silly as some simple simpering Citizen.
That hath but manners enough to take
The upper end of a Table at a feast,
And to carve a Capons leg to a Coxcomb.

The en Sybils were no more comparable to thee,
Than an old Gentlewoman is to a young Chambermaid.
Sweet Poneria, I am even in love with thee:
Yea, I durst almost swear I should kiss thee,
If thou had but three rotten teeth in thy head.

Well, my Masters, I hope you'll thank me
When you hear that I have made proud Rhodon
A Legier Ambassador in Don Pluto's Court.

Thy thanks, Poneria, shall be duly paid
In eye bewitching talents;
We'll rip the matrice of our grandam earth
To see the place where riches are conceived;
And from her pregnant womb we'll draw
A golden age for thee to live in (Dear Poneria)

Who would leave any villainy undone,
To be thy slave, most noble Martagon.

Now Martagon let us go put on arms,
And toward Hybla march in strong array.
Let us deface the glory of their flowers,
If Rhodon be but dead, the day is ours.

THou speak of things beyond belief, Acanthus,

Too true it is, I shrewdly fear,
For every circumstance makes it appear
That Rhodon in the myrtle grove, last night,
Had private conference with Iris,
From whom (it seems) he took the venomed potion,
For now he doth, in his extremest fits,
Exclaim on the untruth of woman kind,
Bewailing the unlucky hour that did present
Your sister Iris to his sight.

Anthophotus and Acanthus, you're well met.

Nay, never worse, thou would say, gentle Panace,
If thou knew all.

What dire disastre hath befallen you, honoured friends?
How fares the noble Shepherd Rhodon?

Rhodon's mishap's the cause of all our sorrow:
Rhodon's betrayed, poisoned, and lies at point of death.

Cursed be the hand that did attempt
A villainy so impious and foul.
But if you love your selves, and Rhodons health,
Conduct me to him immediately:
I have an antidote that shall cure him,
If any breath be left within his bulk.

Oh happy comfort! come sweet Panace,
To our sick friend, we'll thy Conductors be.

A happy morn be this to thee (friend Martagon,)

Nay, 'tis the happiest morn. that ever we two beheld
Rhodon is dead;
And is by this time, served up in a wooden dish,
To feast the worms upon an earthen table;
The purple bosomed rose whose glorious pride
Disdained the beauties of all other flowers, is cropped,
Yea the ambitious bramble is quite withered,
And now is laid in the contemned dust:
Ponerias wit hath done this noble act.

This is good news, I must confess, yet could I wish
That noble Rhodon had not so ignobly died.

Thou art too ceremonious for a politician,
And too superstitious: our duties 'tis to judge
Of the effect as it concerns the state of our affairs,
And not to look back on the means by which 'twas wrought.
He is unfit to rule a Civil state
That knows not how in some respects to favour
Murder, or treason, or any other sin,
Which that subtle animal, called man,
Doth openly protest against, for this end,
That he may more freely act it in private,
As his occasions shall invite him to it.
But 'tis no disputing now; the deed is done,
We are in a fair way to victory,
Conquest, triumph, and renown;
We have a fair bginning, and what's well begun,
(If that the proverb speaks truth) is half done.

NOw Agnostus, since by the death of Rhodon
We have endeared our selves to Martagon,
'Tis meet we provide for a back winter,
That we purchase some eminence of place,
To make us glorious in the worlds ill-sighted eye,
That being great we may the greater mischief do:
And since a war is newly set abroach,
I will a suitor be to General Martagon;
To place thee in some military office
Of high regard and special consequence,
Where by thy ignorant conduct and base carriage,
Thou mai'st a thousand heroic souls send packing
Unto the Stygian shore.

Nay good Poneria, I find my self unfitting for the wars.


What neither hart nor brains; out inglorious Iozel,
Thou most unwieldy burden of the earth:
I could find in my heart to kick thy soul out
Of thy carcass: art all composed of earth and water?
Hast not a spark of air or fire in that bulk?

Nay sweet Poneria, I am thy slave.

I tell thee I will procure thee a Captains place.

But I am altogether ignorant in the words of command,

And know not one posture neither of Musket or Pike.

Hast wit enough to swallow the dead pays,
And to patch up thy Company in a Mustering day:
Hast valour enough to wear a Buffe-jerken
With three gold laces.
Hast strength enough to support a Dutch felt
With a flaunting Feather?
Can thy side endure to be wedded to a Rapire
Hatched with gold, with hilt and hangers of the new fashion?

Can drink, drab, and dice:
Can damn thy self into debt among
Believing Tradesmen;
Hast manners enough to give thy Lievetenant,
Ancient or Sergeant leave to go before thee
Upon any piece of danger?
Hast wit enough, in thy anger, not to draw a sword?
These are the chief properties that pertain
To our modern Captains; and if thou
Could but be taught these military rudiments,
I doubt not but thou might prove a very
Excellent new soldier.

If this be all, I hope, in time, to be as famous
As e're was Caesar, or great Pompey.

Agnostus, come along, thy self prepare
To be a servant to the god of war.

THis strange imposture hath amazed me so,
That I am almost to a statue struck,
Not knowing what to speak, or what to think.

Assure your self it was a strange Collusion:
For this, on my fidelity, believe,
That 'twas not Iris whom you met last night.

Then 'twas some hellish hag, that, in her shape,
Gave me the venomous confection
Which had undone me quite, if thou in time
Had not applied thy precious antidote.
But yet, me thinks, that heaven should not permit
The subt'lest hellish power to counterfeit
The feature of so beautiful an angel.

Doubtless it was the false Ponerias plot,
Whom Martagon hath lately entertained,
With her companion; old Agnostus;
For, know the malice of your foes is such,
That if by open force they can't destroy you,
By hidden plots they'll seek your overthrow.

Then I must pardon crave of gentle Iris,
To whom I did ascribe this treacherous fact.

If she were guilty of so black a deed,
These hands should chain her to a fatal stake,
And sacrifice her Corps in hideous flames,
Unto the awful goddess of revenge;
(Which done) I'd throw her hateful ashes up
Against the furious gusts of boisterous winds,
That being so dispersed, there might remain
Not the least relic of so vile a wretch.

My Iris is as clear as innocence it self;
And since my treacherous foes have gone about,
By wicked slights, to wrong so sweet a saint,
And bring me also to a shameful end,
I here enjoin ye (honourable friends)
Upon my sword to take a solemn oath,
Ne'er to lay down your just and lawful arms,
Until we be avenged to the full,
For such unkindly and disloyal wrongs:
True honour, that with dearest blood is sought,
Is like a precious gem that's cheaply bought.

Ill is a life bestowed upon that wight
That dares not loose it to maintain the right:
Him I account a base inglorious sot,
That dares not honour pull from dangers throat.

LAdy Poneria, upon your commendation,
We bestow a regiment upon this Gentleman.

Thanks (worthy Martagon) believe it Sir,
Those good respects which I to your affairs owe,
Urged me t'importune you for his employment,
Because I know him to be a tried soldier,
Of great experience, worth and merit:
How say you, Colonel Agnostus,
I hope your actions shall make good my words hereafter.

I am at your service, Madam Poneria:
I am a man of action, I confess.

Trust me sir, although he wants verbal expression,
He is a Gentleman of singular abilities.

And I think no less, for they are not good words
That makes deserving soldiers, but good swords.

He looks as if he had bin bred, borne,
And brought up in a Leaguer all his life time.

Noble General; the beaut'ous Eglantine
Wishes all happiness to your designs,
Desiring that this paper may kiss your hands for her.

Tis about a place, I'll pawn my life on it:
Hear me Monsieur, I understand the business:
Her request is granted.
She when she please, may at my hands command
A greater courtesy then this.

Thanks honoured Sir.

On you I bestow a Captains place.

Now I perceive that the readi'st way to attain
Preferment in the Court of Mars,
Is to creep into the favour of Venus.

I understand you are a man of real worth,
And very sufficient for such an office.

Imperious Martagon, that art no less
Known for thy power, then thy wickedness:
In Rhodons name I do defy thee here,
Who challenges the Combat at thy hands,
To be avenged on thee for thy foul wrongs:
But if thou dare not in a single fight,
Give satisfaction to the noble Shepherd;
Then thee and all thy troops he doth invite,
To a bloody breakfast to morrow morn.
Attended by a vigorous army he
Stands in the confines of his own dominions,
Swearing that he will prove it in the field,
That thou a tyrant and a traitor art.

Bold friend, I prethe speak ingeniously,
Doth this defiance come from Rhodons mouth.

Upon my life, by the honour of a soldier it doth.

Then tell him, I'm resolved to be a guest,
More bold then welcome at his bloody feast.

I will great Martagon; and misdoubt not,
But that your cheer shall be exceeding hot.

Dissembling witch: how hast thou beguiled us?

What adverse power hath crossed our plot?

Did not thou with thy deep protestatios force us
To give strong credence to thy false relations,
When thou affirm'dst that thou had poisoned Rhodon.

The opposition of the cursed fates
Hath brought us to deserved confusion.

Avaunt you hag, abominable sorceress,
Here I do thee on pain of death enjoin,
With that Impostor thy companion,
Immediately to depart out of my Dominions.

Now I accursed wretch have seen too well,
That heaven will not be overruled by hell.

How suddenly by one contrary gust,
Is all our honour tumbled into dust.

Since that our braving foe is now at hand,
(Cynosbatus) we must not think of a retreat.

What your discretion holds fit to be done,
I condescend to noble Martagon.

Then let us meet our proud foe face to face,
And with our swords and spears that right maintain,
Which lately we by sword and spear did gain.

DEserving friends and fellow soldiers,
Now arm your selves with Roman fortitude:
First call to mind the justice of our cause,
And then let each remember that true honour,
Which must be valued above health and life:
Consider also that we must contend,
Against a tyrant and a mere usurper;
A person guilty of no mean offences,
Which must be justly punished by our swords.

Thrice noble Rhodon, in whose noble breast
True pity dwells, vouchsafe a pardon
To us distressed Caitives.

I neither know what your offencesare, nor yet yourselves.

I am the unfortunate Poneria,
That was suborned by uniust Martagon
To work thy utter ruin:
I did conduct the love-sicke Eglantine
Unto thy presence instead of Iris:
I caused her to give thee a poisonous drink,
Under the pretence that it was a love-potion.
I have deserved to dye, and crave life at your hands.

And are you the grand incendiary
That have so many mischiefs wrought in Thessaly?
Now I remember I have seen your elvish countenance,
Nor have I altogether forgot your reverent mate,
Who with his personated gravity deludes the world,
Being accounted a man of profound art.
Acanthus, see them committed to safe custody,
See you make them sure for starting.

Nay worthy sir.

You must away, for no entreaties can prevail.

The apprehension of these wretches doth presage
Auspicious fortunes to our actions;
List, list, Anthophotus, our enemies are at hand,
Their thundering drums warn us of their approach.
Wee'le bid them nobly welcome then: this day will I
Victorious be (I vow) or bravely dye.

Thy honoured resolution I commend,
And take it for a sign of good success.

Arm, arm: the hostile forces are in sight,
And thus come marching on in proud array:
The battaile's led by Martagon himself,
Wherein are marshalled near five thousand Bill men,
All clad in coats of red:
A furious Amazon called Tulipa,
Brings on three thousand burley Swissers,
Arai'd in gorgeous Coats of red and yellow;
And these make up the vanne:
To which are added for a forlorn hope,
Two hundred melancholy Gentlemen.
The fierce Cynosbatus brings up the Rear,
Wherein about two thousand soldiers be
Clad all in green, and armed with pikes of steel.
Narcissus with a thousand Daffodils,
Clad in deep yellow coats doth flank
The right side of the battle.
The left wing is by Hyacinthus led,
Wherein a thousand Soldiers march,
Arraid in purple coats.

What fury tempted thee unhappy Rhodon,
In hostile manner thus to invade my confines.

For Violettas sake I took up arms,
Whom thou unjustly hast oppressed.

What I have done my sword shall justify.

Whence comes this most harmonious melody.

Put up those murdering blades on pain of my displeasure,

Confine them to perpetual prison in the scabbard,
That they may ne'er come forth to manage civil broils.

We must obey, and will, Oh awful goddess.

While in my flowery bowers I took repose,
I heard the noise of these tumultuous broils,
Which struck me with a wonderful amazement.
Then hastily I left my banks of pleasure,
And hither came to end these mortal jars;
Therefore I charge you both on that ^llegance
And respect which you do owe to me,
Quite to dismiss your armed bands.
And you Martagon, who have fair Violetta wronged,
To her shall make an ample restitution,
Of what y'have taken from her;
And entertain a friendly league with Rhodon,
Which you Cynosbatus must also condescend to:
But as for you fond Madam Eglantine,
Since you have broke the sacred laws of love,
And by unlawful means sought to accomplish
Your designs, and make the Shepherd Rhodon
Enamoured on you:
You to a vestal Temple shall be confined,
Where with ten years penance
You shall expiate your folly.
But where be those two intruders
Poneria and Agnostus.
These that have crept in among us, and with false slights
Sought to ore-throw our state.
We banish them quite
Out of Thessaly for ever.
What I have decreed you must assent unto.

We do, because we must.

Rhodon, I here bestow on thee this noble shepherdess.

Thanks for your precious gift, renowned Queen.

And now since all things are reduced to joyful peace,
Let us betake our selves to sweet delights,
And solemnize with mirth your nuptial rites.

SInce Ignorance and Envy now are banished;
Since discord from among the flowers is vanished;
Since Rhodon is espoused to Iris bright;
Since war hath happy Thessaly left quite,
Let every one that loves his Countries peace,
His height of gladness with his hands express.

