S Some back again, this way my self will take,
And as you go, call those chaster wood-men
To your aide, who often help us in the chase,
Mingle with every step a call, and if
An echo but resound her name, utter't
Again, until you're confirmed.
I've lost a Nymph in whom I gloried more
Then all those prouder Trophies to my name,
She excelled in Fame, in Birth, in Beauty,
And being Patroness of her, well I might
Be called the goddess of Strict Chastity.
She was her self a guard unto her self,
Her Beauty so commanding good, did keep
Her chastity; and her chastity, made
Her beauty safe, lust might sooner gaze to
Virtue in her eyes, then spy one of its
Known Deformities. --
And much I fear, some Satire, or worse power
Hath betrayed her innocent Steps, and now
Detains her, adoring yet what he means
To spoil, or Jove again in some various
Shape of Love, wrongs both his Deity, and me --

And why bright Phoebe, may not a more
Equal Love. Endimion, Hippolitus,
Or a fairer youth persuade her not from
Her chastity, but you? --

Juno on the earth?

But this thoughts too likely, and to common
To be entertained: you think if ought be
Lost, it must be lost a far, pass Hymen's
Temple that borders on your groves, and search
The Caves. Nay believe heaven's a nearer
Enemy, if Jove do court her tis in
The shape of Ganimede, for such was he
That led her from your train. But turn and prove
How much you're lost in fears, not she in love.
See in this glorious perspective, where sits
Your so deplored Nymph, and the lovely Satyr
That insnar'd her. Can you against his nobler
Breast bend a dart? or wish it thither?
See where Cupid stands, and laughs, ready
In his just offence, if you shoot, to shoot
Another. Tempt him not at so great ods,
Oft times such beauty hath inflamed the gods.
It seems you little deal in marriages,
That could be so ignorant of this day,
Then which, none was ever more expected,
More proclaimed. This was no midnight bargain,
Nor stolen match: but like unto the lovers,
Known and eminent. First, by their Parents
Thought on and concluded who were not sad
Judges, but Prophets of their after loves,
Then deferrd till Minerva had enriched
The one, and your purer Laws the other.
And last of all, when in this high manner,
Fame with her lowdest blast had ask the bonds,
And none was found so boldly bad, nor proudly
Envious to intrude, joined they were by the
Sacred hand of Majesty.
Why droopes Diana?

Thus daily to behold the noblest of my train
Snatched from me, and Hymens torch out-shine the
Virgin Taper.

This day your power is not diminished, her
Name, and not her Chastity is lost; she's
Only chaing'd from a pure virgin, to as
Pure a Bride.

And yet it joys me to see
My fears thus ended.

Express it in welcome of this Royal
Pair, who thsis have caused it; grace them with your
Best endeavours, and what the others want
Of Honour, they daily can bestow.
Let us join, and perform something, that may be worthy of their presence,
who of our ready Servants shall we grace with this employment?


Me, great goddess.

Tragedia? the enemy of thtngs
Fair and prosperous; what hath she to do
With loves, or marriages, unlesse't be to
Confound them? who so oft before the Altar
(Happy with the Flowers and Virgins hands
That decked it) hath offered up the Lovers,
A sad sacrifice. Delighting still, ere
Phoebus could withdraw, to hasten a night
Of sorrow ore the day.
From these solemnities be far away,
Thou, thy Buskins, Crown, and Robe, filling the
Scene with tumults, and with blood. Thy milder
Sister, gentle Comaedy, far sitter
For these sports. we'll entertain; who can present
Soft, and sweet loves, Examples of this night,
Beginning sour, but ending with delight.

How much Divinest Juno speaks below
Her self, in preferring what she must scorn
To name. Can she desire to do something
In honour of this assembly? something,
As when the gods are pleased, and wish to see it
In so low a Strain? entertain Princes?
And in Comedies poor vain? would she have
An Epithalamion in these Lovers praise.
And hear it chanted in rude roundelays?
As all profane. Let these be far away
Unworthy in this night to bear a part,
What a mockery would such be of their
Noble Love, to have its pure name smothered
By so gross a fire? their brave actions
Parralel'd with such country Jiggs, of Cupid,
Ridiculously immitating with
Their long passions? No, if Juno do
Desire to crown these hours above the rest,
And make 'em welcome, yet before the best
These do enjoy, through peace, and innocence
Let her perform something that's god-like, they
Which are happy need no shows of mirth. Their
State is Comedy enough, sports do not fit
This night but glory. If it be haeroicke,
Then 'tis opposite, which makes me offer
Thus my service, as most due to me, to
Show the will, that speaks the language of the
Gods, and as I am thus taxed with blood, and
Crewelty, 'tis not my lines that wounds them
But their faults represent.
And though they are with vice, and fate oppressed
Yet those which see a Tragedy, are blessed.

Thou hast prevailed, make this night such as thou hast spoke, or if thy
thoughts are higher, equal them.

For know the gods o're-see These hours solemnity.


If Juno smile, here I shall favour find
These like the gods accept the will, and mind.

Tragedia. Blessed Theatre: how fair, and glorious shine
Hathfild thy several spaces! how divine,
And heavenly Lustre! all the lights above,
Leaving their mansions where they nightly move
To shade, and darkness. Have in this one Sphere
Combined their aspects, and consented here.
Never was Roof (as at these Nuptial ties)
^ild with so bright auspicious Deities,
Such glad presages; all they once did mean
By Hymens, Cupids, all their Genial seen
Of loves, and laughters, that were wont to appear
To make an union fortunate are here,
All in this presence; from you Royal Throne
They fly throughout this Round, on every one
That here beholds, with hovering wings they light,
And breed in all a cheerful appetite
To what we shall present, which if you deign
Still to send forth (great Princes) and maintain
'Twill make even Tragedy her self to smile,
Even me grow jocound, and forget the while
My dreadful person to prevaricate
From what I am, and change my sadder cries
To Peans, and to Epithalamies.
It will from those two lovers by its sway
Ravish their plighted hearts another way,
From them to their great guests, when they shall spy
The powers, that formerly vouchsaf't to tie
Their lasting knot again with the same grace
With which they once encouraged their embrace,
To smile upon their service, 'twill bring on
In their dear Breasts a Rare contention
Of zeal to your delight -- Such grace commands,
A strife of duty though from joined hands.
SO, dispatch, dispatch, what wines are those?


The late present from the Merchants.


Tis well.


Are all things ready fellows? the King' son entering. 1 They are my Lord.


Ha, ha, ha, no happiness like the Fools, Comastes?


No, none Sir, hes mirth it self, and the cause of it in others, they say all
pleasure is a shadow, then that which we enjoy is but the shadow of a shadow,
hardly the Picture of what he embraces; our Delights are faint, thwarted by the
Conscience, started with fears, and after an hour of pleasure a week of
repentance; in which time we live by rule, and not by custom, laugh not
though the jest be good, nor rage though at a just cause; but sickly whisper
out our sayings, as though they were our last and eat our chickens with the
curtains drawn, when the Fool lusts with his whole soul too, and sins
till he's weary, knows no Conscience but his want that way; nor remorse but
disability.


Hah, ha, ha.


Nature never showed her liberality more than to those she was sparing of her
best gifts to, she houses wisdom in a body full of decays, and requires her
whole strength to bear off the ruin, measures his legs with the spiders,
gives him pale and wan looks, scarce altered from the earth he was made of,
where to the Idiot she bestows a body equal with the bulk of trees, and
arms as Thunder-proofe, makes him a strong, a large, and healthy fool.


Ha, ha; ha.


Fit Lectures for such a Sholler.


Well Comastes, thou shalt not want for a coat, if that will do it.


Send me a mind to with it, and you have not a greater present for your
neighbour Princes.


Come my Lords, let's sit and fill up our cups,
Make them like our joys, still full, and flowing,
Thus it should be my Lords in a State that
Knows no troubles, let unhappy Princes,
Whom losses do afflict, and fears affright,
Make yearly feasts: But we, whose even affairs
Do follow one another, and do keep
There just Periods, though the reins are loose
And their guide sleep, seeming rather, so to
Have fallen out, than so caused; each day shall
Be a triumph, each hour a feast.

We may chance to find one out for Funerals.


A health to all, and a long peace.


You are melancholy Aratus.


You are rude Comastes, and let me tell you --


His Lordship is one of those which say their Prayers backward for the State,
and ends in black wishes.


You are the Foxes that thrive by it.

Phro. Aratus your anger is unseasonable, and the King marks it.


How now Aratus, whats the matter? our table should know no frowns, then least
of all when we our self forbears them.


Royal Sir I ask your pardon, he waked me something rudely, and got a
froward answer.


What, all dead, fill another round, our wine moves not, here Polyander, to
thee, what think thou of Comastes happiness?


I think Sir, 'tis as dull as foolish, there cannot be a sense of pleasure,
where there is so little sense. Greatness is the center of all happiness, and
felicity like our lands, at first is tied to the Crown, kings come ne'er unto
the gods, and are like them both in power and pleasure, do command all, enjoy
all, are miserable only in too much, and want but what to wish for, this is
the dazzling happiness. Tis vain therefore to prefer private joys before
the Crowne-pleasures, the King may throw by his greatness when he please, and
be poorly happy, the beggar will ne'er sigh unto a Sceptre.


Why I Polyander there's some life in this, a little heaven even in the
apprehension. Aratus art not thou of this opinion?


Not I Sir, nor of my Lord the Foole's there,
Kings are more miserable than they seem
Happy, flattered by themselves and others
Into a Joy that is not, and what they
Feel, they rather do believe, than find so.
Yet I grant too, a King may be happy
But never as a King. Felicity
Is a purchase, and no inheritance,
Nor hath the prerogative more than one
Life in it neither, it dies still with the buyer,
Troubles are the good kings profession,
In the wars the first dart is thrown at him,
Where his happiness is in a glorious death,
Or else his God-like rays plucked from him
By some accursed hand, and so falls less
Happy, being but wished so by a poor
Revenge he knows not.

Very grave and unseasonable, thus your Lordship gets the reputation of
singularity, which the vulgar suspect to be wisdom.


Sir, you see how this place and my freenes are injurd.


Mirth, only mirth Aratus, he means 'twould better become a counsel than a
banquet.


Timeus welcome, nay, keep your seats, would thou had been partaker of our
sports.


When that my actions or mine age shall make me worthy of your ease and
pleasures, I shall be a thankful sharer, but till then, your troubles will
become me better than your sports, and cares will sit more lovely on my brow
than roses. Sir, those that are about you seek to drown your virtues.


Your Lordship means none here?


I name none here my Lord.


Nay Timeus thou ne'er look friendly on our pleasures


I must confess Sir, I had rather see you bloody than thus wet, nor are my
wishes impious: Poliander?


My Lord:


How basely that smile becomes thee: I had
Rather thou had answered me with a blow,
Than such a look: I thought to have asked thee
Something, but I see thou art unworthy
Of a brave demand. Thy skill lies only
In the curiosity of a meal.
To say at the first touch a th tongue, this is
A Chian, this a Falernian wine.
Straight by the colour of the flesh to know
Whether the foul were cram d, or whether fed:
Prithee Polyander how sat the wind
When this Bore was slain? were not these apples
Pulled the Moon increasing? Degenerate,
I have seen thee put thy face into a frown,
And were it so constant in that look, as if
Thou had no other.

Sir, when you shall find or make a cause, I'll put them on again, here they'll
but sour the entertainment.


You see, my Lord, they are not drowned, they live still under water.


Like thine, beast.


Prithee Timeus let us enjoy our mirth while the gods give it, the time will
come that we shall wish for it, and not have it; on my Conscience thou wish
for enemies that thou might cut them off.


I am sorry I have offended against your mirth, twas not my intent, I came to
bring you news.


News, what is't good?


Tis as you shall esteem on it, Sir, There's a Stranger Prince arrived.


Hither?


Yes Sir, his visits forced by a storm as he pretends.


What ere the occasion be, he shall be welcome. The time's far spent.
Aratus it shall be thy employment, from us fairly salute the Prince, and tell
him though the Seas have been unfriendly, the land shall court him.


Great sir you highly honour me.


So, now we have time to speak, what think thou Aratus of these passages?


Well, bravely well.


Your speech struck desperately at the King, he will not swallow it without
some touch of Jealousy.


Tis no matter, he cannot cross us now,
None but the Gods can do it, nor they without
a miracle, great as was their providence
Which hitherto hath saved us, we have not
Taken so many years to build a work up
And then to have it ruined with a push:
No, he that will shook, must first orethrow
A Kingdom, a Prince, a Law, so large
The extents are, ne'er did plot thrive like it:
It has infected with the holy sore
The greatest part o'th Realm, and catches daily
Like some unheard of new opinions
Streigthned at first, and prisoned in the breasts
Of two or three, gains strength by time, and ears,
And daily fed by curiosity,
Thrusts out at last the old and most received,
And grows the whole religion of the place.
When we have called our party forth, the work
Will seem done, the thin numbers which are left
Not deserving the name of enemies.
The Tyrant then will see himself no more
A Klng, only the wretched cause of war
His power being ravishd from him.

While the fruit^ thus ripe, why do we let it grow?


And spoil perhaps.


We will not longer, only a little ceremony detains us, to crown our King,
that past, our actions, and our thoughts shall then contend in motion.


How sped your visit to the young Prince?


Most happily,
Oh had you seen with me there the dear cause
Of this our danger, you would have thought it
So no more, but stood contemning life,
Thinking your blood ill stord within your veins,
When that his service called it. Sure twas some such
Shape and sweetness, which first slav'd men
And gained a Rule before there was a kingdom.

You forgot your message to the Prince.


O tis true, our next part is to delight our selves in doing something, pray
bear me company, we may get thanks for it another day.


Devil, whether wilt thou hurl me? the ship
Sunk under so much ill, nor can the earth
Bear us both together, the greatest hills
Press not her face with half that load; one thought
Of goodness made me lighter than the waves
And at an instant taught me how to swim.

Harpastes?


Melampus?


Are we only escaped?


I hope so.


Then the storm has plaid the hangman, and saved us innocent.


Innocent? what's that? it has saved us so much labour and a broken head
perhaps.


The wrack was great and full of horror.


How the rogues praid, and rored above the waves, vowed whole herds of
offerings for their safety. But Neptune saved em charges and took the verger
beasts.


We escaped miraculously.


I hope you'll burn no bullocks to the Sea.


No, my vows were of another nature, I vowed To live well, and changed my
bloody purpose.


Thou did not mean in earnest?


I did then, but I no sooner touched the shore and safety but my old thoughts
returned.


Come we'll go claim our hire, and swear we killed him before the storm, our
fellows dead pay will fall to us, we'll demand for losses, I, and our dangers
too.


If mine eyes deceive me not, here comes one will deny the payment.


Tis he, be resolute and follow me.


How now friends, amazed at what's past: dangers oreblowne are dreams, no more
to be esteemed of, within this hour you would have given a world to stand
thus, were it yours, let not smaller losses then afflict you, the greatest
goods are trifles after such deliverance, our birth day was not half to us so
happy as is this minute, then we had no sense of life, now we perceive and
joy in it.


What moved these villains hatred? sure they know me not, nor did I ere see
them before this voyage, they could not hope for money, there's more in it,
here's a paper which

I am glad to hear you have found Pallantus, receive this man the bearer into
your company and council, and if your secret practises fail you, assault him
openly, and by violence perform the murder: let the one or other be done
speedily, my employments here for you, are many and instant.

Your Lord and friend, Timeus.

Art thou the Lord? my wonder then is done,
Thy treacheries is greater than thy hate,
And that too is something more than malice
Above the search of innocence, a knot
Unto the subtilest Traitors, a riddle
To thy self; were not thy home villainies
Enough, but thou must maintain thy Factors
Out for lives in foreign Kingdoms? bloody
Merchant. I have lain hid so long, am now
So new formed by time, no friend can know me.
Hate, thine eyes are more perceiving far than
Friendship; I have not dared to name my self,
Because with it I do name my Father,
And yet thou hast it perfect; him with
Many more, who were too good to look on
So much ill, as thine and thy fathers lives,
Were made away -- ease; my breast, or too much
Rage, instead of a Revenger, will turn me
A stock, a fool; Hear me you banished gods,
For I may justly fear, if that your Powers
Are absent any where, 'tis from this place
Where tyranny doth reign; on this Altar
I do vow to be your Martyr, if not
Your surviving instrument, ne'er to let
Fall your vengeance, till it light on those which
Slew the King, your King, the image of your
Goodness, which killed the Prince, and dared to say
That he was lost, lost indeed; which on the
Princess do intend a rape, their marriage is
No better, which killed my father, and last
Resolved on me:
Had I a thousand lives I'd gage them here
And think your Indgement yet not bought too dear.

In the name of wonder what art thou?


Why? what am I Sir?


Nay, I know not, not does any but an Antiquary or a Conjurer, certainly thou
art no man, or if be, I am sure, none of the last Edition.


Were your troop absent I'd make you find, I were without those helps,
'twas so long since you saw a man, a true one, that you know not when you meet
one, your Lordships glass showed you none this morning.


Whence came thou?


I, that i'd fain know, here's no hole open In the earth.


From Sea.


From the bottom of it I think, there's nothing like thee above water.


Of what profession art thou, a Soldier?


Yes.


Thou should be hanged for thy very looks, if thou were not, they are
excusable in no calling else.


These are some insolent scoffers which breath their wits on all they see
weaker then themselves against they meet the fool next, I wrong my self to
talk with 'em.


Dost hear?


None of your wit yet.


Thou bleedest!


Was it that made me such a wonder? I do so.


And much blood is spilt upon the ground know thou the cause?


Yes, I was assaulted by two rank rascals which I let blood and cured?


Hast thou not killed, and robbed 'em?


Sr. your thoughts are base, and you do ill thus to insult upon mine
innocence. Robbed 'em? monies more below my thoughts then Earth, my education
hath been noble, and though the Mid-wife lapped me not in Purple, nor Princes
gossiped at my birth, I have dard to be as honest as the richest, my word hath
commanded more then all your Land or money. Those deeds which I have donne,
dishonestly dard not to have looked on, they would have frighted your Lordship
if but told you towards bed time.


I never saw such fierceness.


I begin to admire this fellow.


Where hast thou bestowed 'em?


Behind there, if you search 'em you may find more, if they had any money the
Sea washed them clean on it before their deaths.


Why, were they cast away?


Yes, but it seems they had a land-fate.





Her's a Paper confirms them most notorious Villains.


Sure I have seen some faces like them.


They were proper men.


They were so, did kill them both alone,


I told you once so, Jam no proud on it, to boast it ore again, and tell you
how I did it.


Trust me, thou art a brave fellow, and I admire thy stoutness, thou look as
if thou had been nursed in perils: dare thou withstand a bold one, but as
honest as tis great? what say thou, can thou like of us?


Thou shalt not find us as we appeared at first.


While you talk thus I can, and in your business if honesty go yoked with
danger: it cannot fright me then though it have more terror then Seamen feign
at their return, or Cowards fears suggest, horrid even unto a lie. I dare face
it, and wager a life i'll conquer it.


Thy words go high as Thunder.


Pardon my words if my actions prove as fatal.


I believe thee, and dare promise thou wilt do wonders, let me embrace thee,
thou art welcome to our friendship; mine eyes did look on thee unworthyly
before, methinks thart comely now, thy scars are so many graces, not set by an
effiminate but by a manly and warlike Skill Business calls us hence, thou shalt
not part one minute from me, thy wound needs help, Come, thou shalt heal
before me.


Have you commanded all the Mariners aboard each Captain to his charge; bid
the Soldiers fill the decks with their full numbers, and display their
colours. Let nothing wanting that may add to the glory of the Navy.


Sr there is not, all things are in their pride and height, the Captains seem
to lend brightness to the day, and like the Sun throws rays, and light about
them; nor looks their gold less awful then the Soldiers Steel, on the
Ships appear the joy and riches of a conquest, and yet keeps the strictness
of a joining battle, there want's nothing to make a warlike like, princely and
well commanded, Navy but your presence, Sr.


I would not have them think us such poor men that we are drove to seek for
their relief, to due for bread, and water, but rather that we come like Noble
wooers, full of rewards and presents able to return all favours we receive,
and equally to honour them which honour us. As great as they, It shall appear
he that is master of such a Fleet, may Stile himself King, though Lord of
nothing else.


The people flock upon the shore, and with one voice say you come to fetch
their Princess, you have more then their consents already you have their
wishes too.


I marry Haimantus such a Jewell would
Make the rest look dim, there are two Ladies in this
I'll, if fame say true, the wonders of the World.
When nature made 'em she summoned her whole
God-head, and unwearied wrought till she
Had don, formed each limb as if she had begun there,
She seemed to practise on the
World till now, and what like beautiful she
Framed before, were but degrees to this height,
These the assent from which she now must fall
They made her older then the labour of
A thousand years.
What's the matter?


There's a great Train, it seems from Court coming to your grace.


How nigh are they?


They are on entering my Lord.


We'll meet 'em.


Sr. the King congratulates your safety and is glad of your arrival, though
the cause were dangerous, you would have obliged him much, Sr. if you had been
bound for Creta.


The King is royal and chides me kindly, he binds a stranger ever to his
Service.


His Majesty expects you'll honour him with your presence this night at Court.


I shall wait upon him, but my Lord I must first desire, you'll honour me with
your company a Ship-board, I shall not need to excuse a Soldiers
entertainment, I doubt not but your Lordship knows it well, plainness is
half the praise on it.


Sir, you are the envy of our neighbour Princes, you so far exceed them in a
brave command. I ne'er was happy in the like sight before, and my Lord, they
that can boast the strangest, have not seen one so common and so rare; your
Navy looks as if she wore the spoils of a whole Land, or came to buy them.


My Lord, you'll make me proud, your presence yet will add unto its glory.


Found dead upon the Shore?


I my Lord, thrown into a cliffe by certain Fishermen.


Were they drowned?


No my Lord, there were many wounds found upon their bodies, and yet their
clothes were wet.


Tis strange, were there but two?


No my Lord.


That's stranger yet, reward the men, and command them make no further search,
nor speak of it, let it die with you too, do ye hear?

The villains have robbed at their return, and got their Deaths that way, I
near could spare them worse, the State stands in greater need of theirs, than
of the sword of Justice. Rodia?


My Lord.


Is your Lady to be spoke with?


Always my Lord by you, but now she's coming forth.


Save you sweet sister.


O you are welcome Sir.


Sure Eudora, Venus and the Graces had their hands to day about you, you look
fairer than your self, and move in the Sphere of love and beauty. Cupid has
taken his stand up in your eyes, and shoots at all that come before him; pray
Venus he miss me.


When begins your serious?


These are the sweet looks that captivate the Prince in a free country, and
this the dress that must enchant him, ha?


There is no charm in it certainly, it pleased me the least of many, no, tis
your fair Mistress which bears those Love-nets about her, if the Stranger
escape her he's safe.


Had better kill his father, and then gaze upon the spectacle, than look upon
her with the eyes of love.


Nay then you are cruel, would you have him strongger then your self was? if
he be guilty the same doom must light on you too.


But I have prevaild so far that he shall be free from the Danger both of
love and seeing, she'll not be there; nor must you make up his entertainment.


I was commanded to be ready and attend there.


But now the Commissions altered and runs in another sense.


I shall be content to obey either. May I not know the cause?


You may, we would not feed the Prince here with hopes to get a wife, this was
the storm that drove him in, nor must you only for this time forbear his
presence, but while he stays; he is unworthy of you.


If you know him so, I shall then without
Excuse deny his visits, But I think
This business may be borne a nobler way,
Nor will the end fail though the means be fair
Leave it with me, if he sue with honour,
He will take an honourable answer.
Though he gain none from me, I'll get his love,
And send him home, no less a friend, than if
He were a husband, by my restraint you'll
Only gain unto your self the marks of
Jealousy and malice, and fouler staines
If that the crime were named to the desert.
Besides it does proclaim in me too, such
A weakness as I am much ashamed of;
Had he a face adorned with the graces
Of both Sexes, beauty and manliness,
And these ingrafted on the body of
A god, I could look on, converse, I, and
Neglect him too, when I have reason; fear
Not me then.

I do not, I know thee strong, the honour of a Kingdom may lean with safety
on thee, but he will linger here too long, besot the State with feastings, and
in this ease give safety to treacherous undertakings, he must be used ill,
there's reason for it.


Is there then a policy in rudeness?
Why don't you rather send a defiance
To him, proclaim him enemy; this were
Nobler far, than to receive him in your arms
And then affront him, say health and wish
Poison in the cup, are you so much below him?

There's greater thoughts in hand than curious rules of Ceremony, if he send any
present to you, return it back with scorn.


Pride is ill becoming, and hated by the next proud man.


Then take um and laugh at him.


No, where my thanks are too much, I'll rather return gifts for gifts; I would
be loath to have my faults reach further than my goodness.


He will wear those gifts for favours.


They will not prove so, yet he will deserve some as he is a stranger.


Not from you, rewards the State will give him, you hear my fathers will, you
must not see him while he stays.


I do, and shall easily keep that I do not care to break.


Farewell.


Must you be gone?


There's a little business calls me.


If be but a little stay.


Only the welcome of the Stranger.


Tis too much to hinder,
I see a causeless and a nee lesserage
Hid in your breast the Prince may be noble,
Valiant, if you receive him then with scorn,
He will prove a stronger enemy than those
Unworthy ones you fear at home, whose own
Actions daily ruin, and whose ill made
Knots will loosen faster than they tie them;
You have prevaild with me, I'll not be won
To see him now: but let it not appear
By your default, and that my retirement
Is only in scorn to him, which will be
Made plain, if that you change not this face you
Have put on, it becomes you at no time;
A Prince should always smile or look indifferent,
He has no need of frowns, as other men,
All lives are in his breath, and if they do
Offend, his revenge is known, and need not
Be declared by face expressions, where there's
Power to punish tis tyranny to rage,
Anger is no attribute of Justice;
Tis true, she's painted with a sword, but looks
As if she held it not, though war be in
Her hand, yet peace dwells in her face; learn once
Of me, and when you have no cause of a
Distemper, express none; now you have made
All sure, doubt not, but receive the Stranger
With fearless and confident embraces.

I will, or at least I'll tell theeso when thou perswadst me thus. Farewell.


Thy subtle plots will ruin thee at last,
Valour and policy do seldom meet,
Yet here they are in their extremes in one,
But do most strangely divide the owner,
Makes him dread none, and yet confirms him not
Within a guard.

What can our wishes deprecate.
When vice is made both Law and fate!
When for the good o'th Commonwealth
The counsels called to Plot a Meal,
And Beasts brought in with solemn cry.
As spoils got from the enemy.
Chorus. Whose life's the Table and the Stage,
He doth not spend but loose his age.
The Kings eyes, like his Jewels, be
Set to Adorn, not to foresee:
And as his Crown: he thinks each thing
Runs round in a continved Ring.
But Sacrifices crowned be
And Gardlands fit for Destiny.
Chorus. Fates then we fear, have writ this lot
That Wine shall loose what blood hath got.
Is this your royal entertainment? a Common host would have given one as
civil; shown his guests their quarter, and then left them to stumble out
again; my receavers are all vanished -- An undeserving scorn will trouble me
-- neither of the two Princes were in the train; they might have trusted 'em,
I could have gaged a Kingdom for their security. The meanest things displease
me not, if they are the fullest offerings of the place, and gratefully I can
submit to the necessity: but where they are afforded I can relish nothing but
the choicest, and look on ought but what invites the general and first eye,
here a continual Spring and Harvest make but one season, no scarsity doth
dwell but in their minds, and then I think my self neglected with the best
things.

Was not the fellow drunk?

Now they begin to muster up again, here I stand like one that learnes to make
his first honour.

When comes the fourth? three of the Elements have past by simple and unmixed,
Water, Earth and Air, livelier expressed than in a Masque: the fourth was in the
Prince, he singd my face with a complement. I am arrived among a stranger
people, than ever I heard lyde of yet, at my return I shall have undiscoverd
story enough to fill a map, though the Land be known, I have past some two
degrees, and may lawfully extend my lines to twenty, and fill the vacuity with
monsters and Fish-heads.

Sir, by your favour, if your business call you not, pray let me entreat your
company awhile.


Troth, an't like your Grace, I am in hast, in very great hast, the King has
sent for me, and I know he's thirsty till I come; I would your Grace were as
resolute, and as well armed this way as I Stomach, besides your Navy and
attendants are too great, he would have esteemed more on you, had they been fewer,
enough only to lean on, when you are oretaken, or if you had wanted those,
and borrowed his unto your chamber it had been better where he finds worth,
the pomp delights him not, your pardon Sir.


This is stranger than all, with what licence this fellow abuses his Master, or
speaks truths altogether, as unpardonable; sure he has a patent for it: I see
I shall want names for all the monsters.


Though your grace are here a Strangor, I may demand of you where the King is?


If none know more than I, my Lord, you have lost your king.


Sure he is not well, I hope he is not, with a safe loyalty I may wish he
hath a dangerous cause rather than none, to take him from a Prince the first
night of his arrival in Court.


My Lord, I have found much honour in you, one that knows to show more civility
to a Stranger than he can deserve, and only are unhappy at this time in an
unworthy choice, but if you still can continue this nobleness, though the King
frown, I shall gladly make some stay, at least till I have satisfied a
strangers curiosity, and may seem rather to have left the place, than to have
been thrust from it.


Believe me (my Lord) both your entertainment, and this necessity, that you are
drove to use so mean a service as mine, doth shame me much. Tis not the nature
of this place to be thus uncivil, nor is tour custom, as it hath been this
day, to coop our Ladies up as if the sight were dangerous, their beauties will
endure the Test: and we will put them too't; twas unkindly done, I know one
look of theirs would have given a welcome to a young man above the greatest
cost.


My Lord, you know to speak a pleasing language.


We have two Princesses Sir, few Kingdoms can show such Jewels, but only
one is oriental, the other's artificial, but an excellent Gem too; one of
them, the true one, I doubt not but I have credit for to show you, but tis not
to be purchased, that happy opportunity is already past, and the now owner
esteems it above his wealth, his life, I, and his honour too.


Yet my Lord bless me with the sight, I can rejoice at so much excellence,
though another do possess it, and no doubt as much of the owners felicity
lies in others admiration, as in his own possession.


All but jealous men think so, and they count themselves robbed of all
happiness in their wives another doth receive, are as covetous of their
beauties as many husbands of their persons, think themselves cuckolded by a
woman's commendation. But, my Lord, I'll leave you, I was going to the Princess
before I met your grace. I know few words will gain so easy a request, to
morrow and daily I'll wait upon your Lordship.


Sir you have engaged Me your servant beyond my hope of freedom.


Nay, you must bear it patiently, my dominion extends no further than these
rooms, and beyond them I grant nothing: how will you endure the Strangers
delays, that thus hardly brooke his coming, the King in complement will not
admit the winds to servesooner than a month, were that all his stay; but here
must be Masques and triumphs before he goes, and the Subject yet not known
for the one, nor ornaments made for the other; perhaps a league must be
concluded, and then I would not live to be so old as to see the end on it, the
meanest persons will require a month to fit themselves, a Prince cannot turn
in less than a season.


May you not see the Garden, Madam?


No, nor the day, but through a window.


We'll petition to him under the title of distressed Damsels, that must pass
the flower of their age in imprisonment, unless he will travel to his own, or
some other Country, to gain 'em freedom.


Madam, he will think we are held by enchantment, that his absence, and not his
sword must gain our liberty. Faith wenches, what would you do with such a
servant that will lay commands on you, and be your Lord before Himen hath made
him so?


Madam, I'd change him.


Leave him I would but change him's a harder matter, and will require more
consideration, I have not the faith that I can work so great a miracle as to
persuade mine, to any thing he has not a mind to, and yet he swears he loves
me, as he loves a Kingdom.


You may believe him, Madam, you are his best Title were the Sword away.


Melissa broke loose, and gone to the show.


No Madam, she's returned.


Is she so, and what hath she seen?


The scurviest entertainment, I did not think it possible so short a time
could have prepared one so ill, 'twas thought on before, and pains taken to
order it so much for the worse: This was the first day that e're me thoughts
the King and my Lord Timeus looked like the Father and the Sun, The King had
on his old council face, which all hope^ he had forgot and this was the only
time these many years he should not have worn it, they both embraced the
Stranger, as cold, and carelessly as if they had been to fight after, this
behaviour in the great ones, was presently observed like a new fashion, and in
an instant the whole train was in, from the bravest to those which follow a
fashion only, when tis to leave off something, and then look not as if they
were hot: but wanting a cloak. Marry their wit's were not so changeable, as
their faces, and having but one Sure of Complement, and that now unfashonable,
they were fain to supply it with Legs, and Silence.


How looked the Prince on their behaviour?


He looked much above it in my opinion, two foot higher then my Lord Timeus
though not altogether so tall, these sower looks were all the without-dore
show, which endeed in a solemn March, they returned all into the Palace,
expected, I found the Prince all alone where any body might have seen him for
nothing, the Grecian, and the Trojan Captains in the hangings were all his
company, with whom he seemed well suited, had they been alive his looks were
as challinging as theirs, and standing so, bred much comparison.


Know you the reason of this behaviour?


No Madam, yet if I would I might have learnt of many, indeed all could give a
reason, those which only from this occasion knew what belonged to any the
whole company were Polliticians, there was one Yeoman, Statesman informd most
about him, and left them to write his letters for certain news into the
Country.


Well, now turn your wit unto our mirth, we have more need of that, what have
you got there?


That which shall save my wit blameless that is unpractised 'tis a rare piece
of Poetry, which I have been Patroness of from the first nonsense in it, that
is, from the first line, there much mirth intended in it, and I doubt not, but
your grace will find it, the Author, himself is an Emblme of the first
Comedies, where one acted all, and will make you laugh though you saw him every
day, I have brought him along with me, he stays but without till his admittance
be granted.


No, prithee Melissa, 'twill be too much.


I beseech your grace, and do but smile upon his learning. Domine, Domine.


Look, look, I told you what you'd do, you are so forward.


I can presume most humble Lady.


Ladies ha, ha, ha.


Hold your peace, with your presuming, you should let the Princess speak.
This is the author Madam.


Ladies. ha, ha, ha,


What think you your Play will do when

One Scene of your self breeds all this mirth?


Ham.


Melissa?


Your Grace?


Prithee discharge him I am not able to look so much laughter in the face and
keep it in to save my Modesty.


So, tis well Sir, the Princess hath taken notice of your worth, and commanded
me to reward your. Attend tomorrow and you shall receive it, and pray see that
her grace have all your labours (as you call 'em) and your fooling.


O tis well we dress us not, but was this a Poet, Mel. believe it Madam but I
hope his work will satisfy that Question her's rare stuff i'll warrant it.

Will your grace examine it?


Who were they past by?


But certainly they know what they do They are so confident.


Where are we now?


Certainly in no danger Sir.


The Prince.


Madam, our bold mistake hath thrust us on too far, to retire without excuse,
which we shall hardly make unless, your favour meet us, we are Strangers
that thus have er'd, unfortunately I must not say, that were a sin great as
our rudeness, yet we ought to esteem a fault, though it is to us a blessed
one, and hath conferred a happiness, our best deeds could not have deserved.


This entrance was something abrupt, and beyond the intent of our Poet.


A strange accident, was it the Prince that spoke?


I Madam, but 'twas impropper here.


Art thou sure 'twas he?


I am Madam, does your grace incline, I see a Prince is too high a personage
and spoils a Commedy, shall not our Play go on?


We have had too much on it.


Nay, Madam, take us along with you, we cannot maintain the Stage without our
parts.


Madam, a little of your company I beseech you.


My Lord Aratus, save you.


A good salutation for a fair Lady whose beauties so destructive.


Your Lordship's very conceited, on my conference tis the first left hath been
made on that poor saying this thousand years.


What do you look at? do you want a servant?


Bless me, my Lord, what pale man have you got there?


Why pray? because he's black; the sitter for a Lady.


For a Lady? I never saw such a Devils play-fellow.


He's white within, all snow and milk.


They are put into an inke-bottle.


What, would you have one that spends more milk about his face than he sucked
in his childhood, that dresses himself in gloves as if one part were too good
to do service for the other, and dares not show his hands for shaming of his
Mistress, nor commend hers because his own are whiter, and when he is a bed,
none can distinguish whether he be the husband, nor hardly she herself. This
is one neglects his outside beyond a common cleanness, and bestows that care
upon his mind, there wastes his four hours of dressing, and what the other
doth exceed in sprucenes he will make good in service, pay respects unto his
Ladies person, and not unto her muffe, and if at any time danger do approach
her, fearless he dares beat it back, or make it welcome by his noble fall,
himself in presence guards her, and his memory in his absence. Come, pray
spoil not his hopes among the Ladies he's a young Courtier and wants a
Mistress.


I am turned when I hear reason. I beseech, my Lord, let me be she.


I thought 'twould come to this, you make the furthest way about, the nighest
to your ends, love by discommending, pray let him salute you then.


Not unless you'll* stand by me.


Well, I warrant you; my friend?


My Lord?


Pray draw near, here's a fair Lady gladly would salute you, now you are at
Court you must lay by your warlike thoughts, and plot how you shall overcome in
complement and conquer in civility.


My Lord, I shall be a shamed to pretend so much unto the Soldier, as to make
my self incapable of so great an honour this Lady does me by her fair
salutation, though I am unworthy, I can be proud to be her Servant.


What think you?


I know not what to think of so much wonder, what rarities shall I be mistress
of, and none envy me.


Well, to leave you in that rapture, May I speak with the Princess?


Yes, she went hence but now.


May I adventure to go in?


You may, but call my servant along with you.


You are a longing again, but not a bit, tis sweet meat, not a bit.


Why should I fear to entertain a guest
So honourable as love is, that fills
The mind with noble thoughts, and strengthens men
To act such deeds themselves stile gods. Pallas
Mars and Mercury, are but the proper names
For virtues, loves effects, without some kind
Of which there could be no society,
The world is held up with Loves Deity,
But it appears most god-like, when beauty
Is its sphere. I will embrace thee therefore
Gentle spirit. Fools do profane thy fires
And call thee a Disease. Thou were the old
And first Religion, not taught, but borne
Within us, the only and first law, which
None that loved could err in, thou hast too long
Been absent, and unkindly never would
Vouchsafe a Dart till now. Dwell in my breast
And teach me all thy laws. Let not thy shades
And flowery banks withdraw thee, when thou may
Inhabit here, make Paphies but thy refuge,
The heart's thy native soil, thy mothers lap's
A banishment to it. How well thou hast
Already taught me, each Lover is thy Priest
And speaks thy Power, without thy aide
Beauty appears dead, and cold to all, as it hath
Hitherto to me, nor sinks it deeper than
the eye. Thou art the Organ that bears
The species inward.
When thou sitst multiply de in every part,
Thou make each limb as sensible as the Heart.

And Madam, I doubt not but shortly I shall bring you news of greater joys,
and see you in that height you were borne, a Queeue, not to be approachd but by
ceremony, and the humblest services.


My Lord, that happiness you wish me through my Lord Timeus will come too
soon upon me. But as I said before, my Lord, the Princes coming, if it be
known, will cause much jealousy and danger.


Madam, leave that to me, none but my self, and this Gentlemen (which I
beseech your Grace to know) shall be acquainted with it, and we will wait upon
him.


Amongst those many voices, and knees which daily do you honour. I gladly would
receive an humble place, and pay my duties at your feet too, you may demand
what they are. A heart and careless life to do you service just so, what was
Licence on an Alter to a Deity that had no sent: or a Cake and Wine to a power
that had not Stomach? yet they harkened to those which offered such trifles,
and liked and approved the worship, with the same hopes I present my flight but
most devoted Services.


Sr. your Love is welcome.


We are both your humble creatures.


While Morpheus thus doth gently lay
His powerful charge upon each part,
Making thy spirits even obey
The silver charms of his dull Art:
I thy good Angel from thy side,
As smoke doth from the Alter rise,
Making no noise as it doth glide
Will leave thee in this soft surprise.
And from the Clouds will fetch thee down
A holy vision to express,
Thy right unto an earthly Crown:
No power can make this Kingdom less.
But gently, gently least I bring
A start in sleep by sudden flight,
Playing a loose, and hovering,
Till I am lost unto the sight.
This is a motion still, and soft
So free from noise or cry,
That Jove himself who hears a thought
Knows not when we pass by.


There he sits, and sleep hath seized on him, which seldom does so at a
seasoned hour, but still he takes it when it comes, not when tis due, when
weariness and not the warnings of the night do prompt him to it. He says to
sleep because the day is gon, is to perform a duty not a necessity, and to
eat at a certain hour to satisfy the time, and not his hunger. Nature is
the Mistress of his faculties and no custom, which are rude and stubborn and
will admit not Laws but what themselves enact, nor strictly observe them
neither. Tis a strange distraction for 16. years, a deeper discontent
possesses him then doth the memories of those, which have run the miseries,
and sins of a long life. This desolate happiness is all that he enjoys, and
this I am commanded to break from him.


Why are you thus cruel in your care? did you but know the felicityes you
have waked me from, you would have rocked my sleep for ever, thought it a
greater mercy to have killed, then thus to have divor'st me, I was wrapped into
the company of men, of gods, if compared with those we here converse with,
enjoyed the most excellent things, there more, excellent, and glorified, was
Crowned a King over all and with a traitorous push you have deposed me. Alas
how fading is my happiness, which a small noise or motion can dissolve, nay
turn to nothing.


Let that reason make you scorne'em, and aim at lasting ones.


Were their longest life but three minutes, and that time uncertain, they were
to be preferred before the reallest, and most continuing you could think on,
these are pure and celestial pleasures, to be fed on only by the fantasy,
I'll in and again invite them with a slumber.


I must forbear my remedies 'tis dangerous applying Physic in a fit.


Poliander, Menetius, well met; what have you seen the thing yet?


What thing?


The thing that haunts the Court, it has something like a man, and pretends to
be one, he comes among the Ladies like a Rough water Dog to a Flock of Foul,
and flutter as fast from him, scattering feathers as they pass, I mean their
Fanns and such movables, he has done no hurt yet, the Guard dare not mingle
with him, he's too boisterous for their company, one glance of him as he past
by broke the Kings draught, which a cubit Cup could nee'r do.

See, see, here he comes, with as many patches and such like properties as
would furnish a whole casheer'd Company to beg with, sure he was Scarr-bearer
to some Army lett's observe it what it will do, look, look, 'tis pleased
with the hangings.


He cannot be thus by nature, nor by accident, he has studied to appear
horrid.


Danger is not so dreadful in it self as it appears in him.


I cannot forbear, for curiosity sake, i'll enter parley with it, what rare
things shall I know if I can get him speak, I'll inquire the fortune of the
Kingdom for the next thousand years, that's not worth the asking. I'll
inquire the age of the World and where her treasure lies, he cannot choose but
know the very heart of the earth. If I cannot persuade, I'll conjure something
from him.

Bow, bow, O Bull-begger! what art thou? who let thee loose? where is any gold
hid? my fears were just, nothing but a charm will do it.

This was not terrible enough.

This won't do it, it must be more terrible yet, I adjure thee by those
Boots, thy Velvet eye, by all the Taylors work about thee --


Peace Fool --


Oah.


The King will hear thee and thou wilt be whipped for balling.


Prithee good devil something of the other World.


Ha, ha, ha.


I hope he has satisfied your curiosity Comastes, Ha, ha, ha.


Nay, I'll not leave him thus, be bafled by a Goblin? I'll follow it to the
place where it shakes the Chain, that certain.


Ha, ha, ha, come let's see the end of the Conjuration.


My Lord, Cupid put his hood-winke on you that he used to aim with, and than
you could not miss the mark, I fear the second view will not be so
delightful, the most excellent things scarce please twice.


My Lord, think not so, for were the World dark about her, or I blind to all
things else, in her I could find variety enough, and so long as she were not
eclipsed I could not envy him that were so placed, that he at once could see
the whole earth as in a Map.


These habits then my Lord will bring you thither, me thinks your Grace becomes
them really well, now you are a Person most Sacrosanct, twice holy, made so by
your Majesty and order. Tis time that you were going, the guide is ready to
attend you to the place from whence you must seem to come, I with a private
guard will wait you at the Princess lodgings for fear of any sudden
danger.


My Lord, I shall ever owe my life to you, as much as if you had saved it, and
that I lived wholly by your gift, but here can be no danger where she wishes
safety.


When this is past, then for the great work, this is but a flourish to recreate
the Senses inrespect of that, it now grows toward an end, and heavier like
many things at first light in themselves, and hardly to be caught for every
air, being condensed and thickened to a bottom, do press the shoulders and
make the veins groan under.


Aratus?


How now friends, me thinks your looks are lively, how succeeds your
undertakings?


Too well to fail a minute of the time.


All the places we named, are sided with us, and those parts which Pallantus
heretofore commanded are ready to sacrifice their new Lords to any that can but
say he knew their old.


Why this is the life of every action, and makes it pleasant, when fortune is
no enemy to industry, nor turns her wisdom into folly, makes not that a
ruin which was a well ordered safety, when they both consent the burthen's
light, and labour but a serious sport.


The young Prince is come, but we have given command to keep him close, least
his face discover what his fortune is, a Gentleman at the first sight started
at him, and called him the Prince's Picture.


You must look to that. The time now grows precious, we must weigh each dram,
and till this be over, count all lost we spend in sleep or eating: come,
every man to his charge. I doubt not on the day, to have a Prince help us to
set the Crown upon our King.


But these are things for the following age, we are hedged in beyond all
fear, if loyalty may prove destructive, there is yet some danger.


Because you see a calm enwrap all round
About ye, you conceive 'twillbe
As lasting as tis pleasing. Tempests, sir,
May contradict you even whiles you think so,
Evils are silent now, not done away,
They couch and lyein wait. Sedition walks
With claws bowd in, and a close mouth, which only
She keeps for opportunity of prey.
Your ruin yet appears not and you think
Because it lurks, you are safe,
He that will be truly secure must found
A peace on the destruction of all things
That can impeach it: enemies reconcild
Are like wild beasts brought up to hand, they have
More advantage given them to be cruel.

Can the grave
Quicken her ashes into Soldiers? shall
Stench and corruption yield us enemies?
We are safe from those that live, they will not hurt,
And those that sleep in the forgotten dust
Cannot. There is nothing now remaining
To our care, but to give thanks we are safe
Enough, if that we can rejoice. Thou letst
Thy best days pass without receiving fruit
That should be cropped from them. I did expect
Thou should have urgd me to thy Nuptials,
Such cares befit thee best; how the Triumphs
Should be ordered, and Hymens torch well lighted.

Pray Heaven no other flames break out
But such as mirth show forth, when treason laughs
Upon your sports you call it piety,
Cause it looks smoothly on your strength when't runs
Out in an idle pomp, suffering your vigour
To wast it self in triumph, and diminish
In a continued jollity, that so, Sir,
Ruin may be quiet, and you perish
Without disturbance, nor are all things yet
So free from our suspicion as you make 'em,
You do suppose that all close eyes must sleep,
When they are ne'er more watchful, than when thus
They counterfeit neglect. Severely prying
Into the depth of things, by seeming not
T'observe the face and outside; Treason doth
Walk in a whisper yet, their hate is busy
And makes no noise; think not that it is their fear,
But their advice and council makes it silent.
Do you expect a Proclamation, or
A Herald from Sedition? tis too late
To say you were deceived, when that the Trumpet
Shall summon to your ruin, you do slumber,
Girt you, before the fire hath gained your Cabin,
And do not trust your preservation to
A Miracle, or a chance; you have an heir,
Yet he is none of yours, he that begot me
Did perish long ago. I was the child
Of Vigour, not of Luxury.
I must tell you, Sir,
A few flattering Lords gild ore the defects
And ruins of your State, they make you call
A Lethargy, Security; and that a Kingdom
Which, like to childrens houses on the sand,
Reared up in sport and toying, will become
A Prey unto the wave that first approaches,
They can perhaps judge well of meates and wines,
Good Table States-men, Soldiers at a banquet,
Strong, to overcome a Goblet, or a Charger:
But Kingdoms safeties are not owed unto
The Palate, and the Stomach; if that these
Were State affairs, your Council were most found,
And every breast a Synod; if that Musique could now
Raise Walls and Cities as of old,
Your Realm would be impregnable.

Hast thou yet done?
Not all the Ghosts that I have made, have been
Thus cruel to me, nor, as yet, their graves
Have threated half these evils, thy mothers
Labour was a conception to these pains
Thou hourly bring upon me.

Sir, I am sorry, 'twas my love, my love
That so did dictate to me, my desire
That your sports might follow one another,
And succeed so just that they may seem to
Bring the season on, and not the season,
Them, that thus they might continue ever,
But 'twas that they might continue, and not
Fall by treason. But Sir, I will no more,
I shall hereafter think it more piety
Hand in hand to fall in perils with you,
Then my self to bring them.

What would thou have?
The power I have is wholly thine, if that
I never did deny, was not thought given,
Now I do, take all the means thou can by
Law or Majesty to remove thy fears.

Sir, I thank you, humbly thus low I thank you,
Nor will I in a complement return
It back again, till I have made you safe;
I shall go to work like a resolute,
But skilful Surgeon, that dares feel and search
A wound, and if he find dead flesh dares cut
It off, or more corruption will not spare
A limb.

May I hope to see such happiness?


To enjoy it hourly, and to the end, or I shall curse my self else.


It is the power of Princes for to change
The place the come in to a Court, but this
Lady bears such divinity about her,
That where she comes, she consecrates the place
A Temple, me thinks a sacred awe doth
Fill the room resulting from her presence.
How happy were those times which saw a King
And Council of the same blessed temper,
Informd with souls like hers; that knew no vice
But what they punished, nor learnt it further
Than the law and common place instructed;
In that great Massaker (I may rathersay)
Of virtues than of men, all that fled not
To this holy Sanctuary were crushed to nothing.

Can I no way be a helper?


Only with your prayers, the men will overcome, and the Gods, who must with
piety be conquered, we'll leave to your goodness, but madam you must yet
conceal your joys, and not speak them with a look.


This is the hardest task, the first is so just and righteous that in it self
it is both prayer and sacrifice.


There are but a few days now, as I may truly say, to crown our labours, our
greatest care is how we shall provide for your grace before the time, your stay
here may be dangerous.


Take no care for me, my Lord, which way so ere the fortune goes, I shall be
safe from all, but from my self.


Madam the Prince.


So fell the cloud from off the Trojan Lord,
Not able to embrace such rays within,
But being piercd, turned all at once to air,
And left thin closed as dazzling as the Sun.

Sure I was rude and barbarous; before
This softer fire did touch my heart, and from
The wild inhabitants of the wood, differed
In passion only, and not reason; that
Without more respect, my dull eyes could gaze
Upon such brightness, and with a ready rudeness
Could excuse the fault committed.
The unhewne Clown not faltering with his tongue
Or in his looks abashed, could answer to
The Emperor of the world, when he that's
Better taught and nearer to the Majesty
That speaks, beats for a word, and answers but
With looks: although at other times his learned
Soul can dictate such as would be: if that the god of
Wit his Deity were called in question,
And forcd to show some excellent
Piece above all was ever writ, as the
Tenure by which he holds his God-head:
Pardon that, like the assendants of the
Alter thus by degrees I come, and pause
At each step, and bend unto that nearness,
Rashness was my fault before, and brought me
Into shame. Though no adoration,
Yet there is a duty to be paid at
Your fair shrine.

Sir, It was not yours, but the rudeness of the Court that would leave you to
so unhappy a mistake.


If I would set a spectacle to the
World, it should be such a close, where beauty
Adored beauty and greatness bowd to greatness,
Me thinks the heavens do open, and the clouds
Are spun into a thread, to let down some
God unto this contract. Let us withdraw,
The Power is now descended, and all
Within is sacred and mysterious,
And if we do pry into these secrets,
Our curiosity will be punishd.

This honourable admittance you have granted me shall hereafter be my only
glory, the sweet meditation that accompanies my old age, nor shall the much
envied youth, make me wish one day back to be partaker of their lesser
pleasures, when I shall call these greater unto mind, what cordial will it
be; when I can silently boast within my self, my younger days were graced by
a Princess, the fairest in the world; so I may say.


O my Lord, when you talk thus, though I am loath, you do compel me to turn
my face away.


I humbly crave your pardon. Tis strange so much seriousenesse can produce such
follies, yet I have fair grounds for what I said, which most excellently show
themselves in every part.


They show but to the fantasy, there's no such beauty here, tis borrowed from
your speech and fair esteem, which thus I'll pay you back again; you are all
that you have said, and when I first saw you, so you did appear to me, and I
think to all the world, the first sight promises all virtues, and the next
performs 'em, nothing seemed then so low in you as this passion.


What honours you have laid upon me, I may bleed for, but cannot purchase any
like 'em; nor return such back again, there all must submit, your gifts, as
your beauties, are excelling. But away vain words, I will endeavour to grow
strong in those virtues, and not melt in the passion you have named, I'll set
new Laws to all noble Lovers, that shall make all their idle passions appear
as fond unto themselves as others, make them throw by their Pen, and with their
Sword to act those Fictions nor daring to name nor think upon the Saint they
worship, but when they have an offering some virtuous increase to bring them
near. Thus is a Love that's free to all, none is injured by it Himens. Torch
burns brighter by such flames, and Vestas fires more lasting and more pure,
who can complain the want of beauty, when any (any that dares be good) may
adore any, and she like her Picture though she truly look one way may, seem
to cast a gracious eye over all.


How his soul labours to soar above the pitch of honour.


How glad, how much greater should I grow, if I could promise to my self, but
one of those seeming looks from you.


My Lord, I have not heard you without admiration and wish I could bestow
favours rich, and lovely worthy your acceptance; but seeing that I cannot: I'll
strive to honour you, not with peevish and womanish commands, but such as shall
be worthy of your valour, and make you yet more a Prince. The bravery you have
shown hath not raised a vain passion in me, but a confidence, a noble
confidence, that all those virtues were not nam d by you but spoke in you,
which thus i'll show my Lord, my Lord, Aratus.

But I must leave you to an instructor, 'tis fit for your Sword, and therefore
above my power to utter, shame not, Sir, that I put a tutor to you, you are but
to ground with him, you may build to what height you please. Come my Lord, you
must lay off all Strangeness here, and receive a noble helper whole bring both
Strength, and honour to your Cause.


I may stand amazed at the nobleness
in you both, but not at this agreement
in you, I know virtues are still a kin
though the persons are strangers they are in.
Whiles this old Puppy thus doth sleep
And doth in vice, as age grow deep
Benumbing all these Plants are nigh
Into a drowsy Let bargie,
Behold a nobler Branch appears,
As far from his manners as his years,

O shed thou then thy influence,
And we'll return fresh beauties thence.

The feircer sweetness of his face
Presents a rigour mixed with grace.
And though there were, a want of blood
His worth would make his Title good.
Virtues so grown in so few years
Make him even such, become their fears,

On then, and make the Sceptre be
Thought but reserud, not snatched from thee.

Are all things ready for the ceremony; the Crown, and robes?


They are, there's nothing wanting if the Prince were come.


He's come now.


Your grace is welcome, but it may seem to a Strange place and person; what
think you my Lord, are not you fallen into the company of so many traitorous
and lost men.


Sir, say not so, you have not warrant, though you rank your self within the
number. The place, and persons rather appear to me, as if there were some
Religion towards.


My Lord, you understand it right, there is a Religion towards, and I may
truly say that this our private meeting and close Counsel is more just, and
glorious then the lowdest deed in Court, that all our public Acts, edicts,
and forms of Law, are dark and impious compared to it; nay, that this time
and place made holy by our purposes hath the gods more manifest and present,
then the Sacrifice and Temples, long since made void and empty of a Deity, by
those which sue for favours and request for him, who justly hear deserves
their horridst vengeance, we are not met here to plot a general ruin for a
private injury, we know and teach the greatest Donne by the King unto the
Subject, can not give him cause to throw off his faith. Kings are petty gods
and may tempt us, nor is it want or desire of Innovation that thus Stirs us,
we are in the best ill State already, nor ambition to Strike at that Laurel
which the Thunder spares, no we reverence it, and know that as men are the
works of nature, so Kings of Jove. But 'tis our oath the Sacrament we took,
which still holds us though our Lord be dead, until his successor do quit us
from it, by taking of a new one, we are not subjects, but slaves to him we now
obey, and therefore as slaves we ought to hate our Master; he was borne less
then we, and hides the private man under the public gown; the purple which
he wears was dipped deep in the blood of Innocents to collour't so. But I
vainly wast my self in words, here are no minds to be persuaded, nor ears to
be instructed; the sins we are to punish, we all know, and the gods remember,
our Strength then is all we are to speak of, which is the greatest half of
the Jsle 16. years undisturbed provision, so carelessly was that provided for
which was got by blood, there is but one Lordship, small in respect of others,
the Tyrants own possession that will stand strong for him, but they are so
besotted with their fortunes that their greatest aide will be but in their will
to do him service. They may offer up their lives, like so many Sacrifices for
his sake, but not like Soldiers, they are unworthy of that name: They may die
but never conquer, war is never talked of but in their banquets, nor dare they
fight beyond a Brawl.


And if we would count part of our Strength in their weakness, we have no
opposition. In the City where they and their vices are daily seen, nothing is
to contemptible; and in the remoter parts, where Majesty is no more
reverenced, being known only by the Power and laws, and where the name of
King hears like the name of God, even there those sons of the earth (as I
may so call them) dare minace at him, and pile hills on hills to set their
bodies equal to their hates.


Here we are three, can each of us raise such forces, which, though they could
not, yet could make the Kingdom fear a conquest.


You are a Soldier my Lord, and though but young perhaps have seen already
what others whole lives have not shown them, yet we'll play a game we dare
invite you to, though you were accompanied with all the ancient Heroes, who had
they leave but in their airy shapes to sit on a Tribunal, spectators of the
war, this their second leaving of the earth, should be more grievous to them
than their former deaths, and they would wish this Kingdom might be their
Elizium.


You see, my Lord, how each can bring his forces in and prompt the other, those
which have none on earth can bring them down from heaven; in stead of men
bring manly spirits, words and looks confirming more than Armies.


If you have not yet done, I can hear you still, and with such lectures be
content to have my self persuaded to that thing, whose embraces I would leap
into; would I could lend aides equal to yours, but there's none so good, yet if
you can stay so long, I can command worthy helpers.


My Lord, it shall not need, all that we desire is to have you not our enemy.


Are you ready for the Priest yet?


Yes, pray call him in. Though we need


Here let us all before the sacred witness of faith and perjury, make a holy vow
of loyalty to our selves and cause, and as we draw near to so divine an
Essence, consider tis not gold or marble that we touch, but a modle of a
sensible and living Power, which has vouchsafd to be imbracd by one hand, when
the vastness of our thoughts could not comprehend it.


Now we are ready for the Prince, Eurilochus prithee do thou conduct him in.


Your grace shall see a stronger perswation than any you have yet heard, the
lively image of her you so much serve, he knows not yet his fortunes, but I
dare warrant he will bear them bravely, he has read the lives of kings though
he never acted any, and you shall perceive he's princely borne, though not
bred in Court.


This way, Sir.


Royal Sir you are welcome. Start not at the name, it is your due, you were
borne to that title, and I doubt not, though you never heard it thus applied
before, tis not altogether a Stranger to you, there was a spark which in the
first womb after a special manner was insufd into you, and is as another
soul within you, as the one informs your body, so this informs that soul,
we may call it the difference of a King, that will tell you we are all here
your subjects, and this no strange Philosophy I teach, and though this rich
persume hath hitherto been wrapped in this disguise of learning, and defended
from the air oath court, tis not decayde, but grown stronger by such keeping,
which when it shall be opened will cast a fragrant smell ore all the Kingdom,
and cure the infections of the former age; to open it we are met, it is a
medicine we too long have languishd for. And Sir, though it be a short warning
to so great a matter, you must presently prepare to be a King; we have no
time now to instruct you in your right, and how you lost it, it was years a
doing, and will require years for to relate it. In the mean time, let what
you see persuade you, our serious looks, respects, and the presence of these
holy rights.


I need not excuse my want of answer to you, there is nothing fit for me to
say, which way so ever I open my mouth to this purpose will appear foolish,
whether I refuse, or grant both are alike ridiculous. I cannot turn my self
in this place, without committing shame, 'tis not with me as with elder years
they may deny such offers and be admired for their modesty, or accept them and
be honoured for that Nobleness, I have nothing yet at my dispose, obedience is
my best part; here I am; you may use me as you please, command me, even to
wear a Crown, and make me submit unto the highest honours, set me on the
Throne you speak of, and when I have had it long enough, take it again from
me like other toys I play with, yet my Lords, I am not so young, but that I
know I am a subject, and that I have a King; that thus, though but a sport, to
use his titles is a fault, or for any to acknowledge such a spirit as you my
Lord have spoken, is no less a traitor then he which strikes the Crown from
off his head.


You have been heavenly taught, and shall be ever instructed in such Lectures.
But the treason which is committed is committed against your self, your spirit
is usurped, and he that holds it is your servant as I am, or at least should be
so, please you to aslend. Sir yond place is provided for you.


My Lord, set me not such a spectacle of shame.


It must be so.


Submit now, and command ever. My Lord', will you honour us with your help.


The gods preserve the King.


We have now performed the one half of our duty, which was to seat you thus,
the other is with our lives to keep you at this height.


If I may yet take confidence to speak, and it will become me to say something
of my self. I could tell you how this day hath been familiar to me, and in a
dream I have seen things so often, that did not these shouts confirm me,
which were then Still the concluders of my happiness, I could not yet believe
but all that I have now suffered is only airy, and these shapes I see, merely
phantastique.


It was a good and prosperous Omen; which prefag'd your quiet here. The gods
would not suffer you to rest in a wrong place.


May it be so.


And shall I alone in such a glorious Action walk unseen? and as a fault
perform my duties in disguise? I rather will proclaim it, here fall my mist
away, now thou only barrest me from my joys, to which I am not near enough
unless I can embrace. Give me leave my Lords that as my life, so I may throw
my body at his feet; I have a share in him, I, though a Stranger to you, it
was my Fathers purchase, with his life, he bought it, nor desire I to hold it
by another patent, may such be the noted end successively of all our name, no
disease but our Mistress cause to die on. Here let me kneel and pray all
happiness and the best things may fall, and then rise, and with my Sword procure
those blessings I have praid for, know me my Lords, I am Pallantus. --


Pallantus?


Pallantus! My dearest friend proved my dearest kinsman? could I be so dull as
to imagine such valour could be in a shape so low as thy outside promised, or
so common as to be met by chance. That I could love thee so, and yet have no
interest in thee? where hast thou been thus long dead? Sr. look upon this man
that turns our joys thus from you, your party is made strong by his
discovery, he has brought such unexpected aide within himself.


My Lord, I am yet as in a new World, and know no more then if I now began to
live, the most common things are wonders to me, you must excuse me therefore if
I know not how to entertain such accidents as these, yet I can love, if you
point me where I should, and being that I want art, and reason I'll lay on the
more.


Sir as I; new friend, let me embrace you, but this alteration shall not give
me leave to forget those former favours I am to serve you for, what I receive
in your disguise, I shall be ever ready to pay unto your self.


How it greeves me to see thy beauties thus blasted in thy youth, war hath
been too rough a Mistress to thee, and set thy glories in too eminent a
place: had Venus been in the Camp she would have covered thee with Marses
Shield, although the god himself had wanted it, I can remember when the
lovelyest face compared with thine, could not have taken from thee, when in the
brightest ring of beauty thou appearst but well set, and had thou been
attired like one of them thou mighst have won the Prize of Fairness from a
Court of Ladies.


My Lord, they are well lost, both those which were the causers of it, shall
receive wounds as Deep though not so disfiguring, and afford their blood to
wash the scars they have made.


They shall, and we will help to bath thee. 'Tis time that we broke up, our
longer stay my prove dangerous, Phronimus and Euril. you must post this night
to your command, your Majesty must bear them company, and now without more
delay show your selves, we will be ready here upon the first news, my Lord,
your Navy will require a Strict watch and guard on the first motion that will
be attempted.


Haimantus you shall presently away, and take the whole charge upon your self.


Pray do so my Lord, all we have to do is to mingle our selves in the Court
again, when these troubles are once over a perpetual ease will follow.


My Lord, I never enjoyed safety like these dangers.

My Lord,

Now to leave suspicions, I can write certain news of the conspiracy we have
a long time feared, the swarms are now flown out, the Hives are grown too
narrow for their numbers, and they keep their murmurings abroad, every petty
Jnmate upon his Country grievance dares threaten a State-revenge, and what the
Law takes from him, will repay with ruin. Aratus, Phronimus, Eurildchus the
three great diseases --


But not incurable. I know which way
To handle them: there must be some sudden
Remedy applied, that will work strongly;
This night I'll send it. Be absent all ye
Lazy medicines that the Law doth bring,
Ye are more treacherous than the villain
You examine, and where there was none, give
Time for to act mischife: the summons are
The traitors watchword, and drive him to take
That opportunity, which otherwise
His fears would have let slip; my self will be
The accuser and the Judge; when public
Means are dangerous, each Prince hath the Courts
Of Justice in his breast.
What fiend is this that causes such antipathy within me? the midnight ghost
take not shapes so horrid. I have not slept since first he crossed me.


We are both alone, the Gods have given this time for my revenge.


What does he mutter to himself?


I'll not loose this opportunity.


Coracinus, Argestes?


Kill that Dog.


My Lord?


Kill that Dog. cowardly


He was a Devil, the power of hell was in his arm, Night threw her shades
about him to defend him: he could not have escaped unless he had vanishd. Is he
oretaken yet.


No my Lord, but tis impossible he should pass the Court, sure he has taken
covert in lodgings thereabout.


Let there be search made, and give command that when he appears again, he
that first meets him without more delay do kill him. Promise a reward for him
that brings his head.


How do you, my Lord?


Well.


Is your Grace hurt?


And may be again, if I look not warily, would your Lordships sword were
sheathed.


Sir, it was drawn in your defence, and if you are jealous, you wrong it, and
a ready hand to do you service.


Sir, is not the Traitor known that did it?


No doubt he is.


My Lord, you speak very doubtful. I hope you do not think but I am sorry
for the accident.


I know not what to think, your disposition is as great a stranger to me as
your self.


I see my Lord, you know to bestow injuries, though no courtesies, to a
stranger.


Injuries are deserving to an intruding guest.


You are unworthy --

And though I am encompast with all the dangers I may justly fear from so
barbarous a place, which dares do any thing it lusts unto, without regard of
laws or hospitality, I'd tell you so, and were you from the Dung-hill that
you stalk on (it is no better) I'd pull down that unmannered pride within
you.


Let me go, nothing shall privilege him to talk thus.


They hold you in your safety, nor is the distance twixt your life and death
longer than this space that parts us. If you dare, oretake me, I'll stay you out
a days sail at Sea. I challenge you to a princely combat, where come with
all your Power, that I may destroy so many bruit beasts from of the earth.


Shall I be tied while I am baited? I'll send those that shall oretake you, and
cut you off before your shipping yet. Coracinus hast unto the City presently,
and in my fathers name command them to raise all speedy Power to stop the
Prince, bid them fire his ships in the Haven.


O my Lord, consider a little more before you lay a scandal on the Kingdom,
which future ages cannot wipe off, no story can parallel such a fact; your
grace moved him much and gave him cause of choler.


Does he help your Lordship with ships, that thus you plead his cause? shall
I be tutored by a Traitor?


Sir, you are happy if you can find a Tutor, when you thus much need one, and
for your other language, if I understood it I'd give you an answer, in the
mean time it must return upon you.


Well Sir, I shall find other ways than words to answer you.


How now Timeus, what bloody?


No more than you see Sir, the sword rather left it on me then drew it out.


Who is the traitor that durst attempt such outrage?


He's escaped unknown.


Unknown? that cannot be, when he has past thus far in the court some must
take notice of him. Can you describe him?


He was habited like a Soldier, but his looks had more of Devil than of
man.


Upon my life I saw him: but tis some two days since, he must be known in all
this time, enquire who brought in any such man, or was seen with him.


This can be no body but my Hobgoblin. An't please your grace, was he not in
a buff Coat, and his face all to be dab'ld with patches?


Yes he was so.


Then do I know him, he belongs to my Lord Aratus there, no body durst
speak to him but he, he showed his teeth at every body else, he had like to
have bit me once.


Aratus do you hear? they say he that committed this outrage belongs to you.


To me Sir? he wrongs me that thinks so, I maintain none that dare commit
such insolence.


My Lord, I saw him with you.


Who? pray make me know the man.


A black sterne Soldier that followed you.


I fear I understand you now, there is such a one does follow me, but I never
discovered any disloyal spirit in him; his outside, tis true, was as you
describe, not moulded after the common frame of men, but threatened more than
any I have seen; yet twas but his outside that threatened so, within he was
gentle, all a Courtier, to be wound and turned by the smallest courtesy. I must
confess, if he were injurd, then he was proud, and Lordly storms rose within
his looks, and thunder was in his voice.


And you knowing this, how durst you turn such a wild beast loose into the
Court, whom had I met and chancd to have angered my fortune had been the same.
Lay hands upon him, you shall find that such a Spirit lodges in my breast too,
and when tisstird will raise Tempests as great; we shall find other matters to
examine you of. Through this seeming neglect we do put on, we can observe all
your actions, and with a half and sleeping eye see into your darkest plots.


Then the Gods send their aid or all is lost, yet Sir hear me speak, the
jealousies you have on me, I shall not be able to clear, but will leave them
to the trial of my innocence and your favour: Yet Sir, to show you in this
last accident how much I am guiltless, I will relate unto you how first I met
the actor of it. Twas on that day I was employed on an honourable message from
your Majesty, to the Stranger Prince, on the shore I found him having lately
escaped a Shipwreck, and as great a danger on the Land, for he was assaulted by
two Villains that were in the same voyage with him, but the cause of their
hate himself he could not tell, he had no acquaintance with them but in the
Ship, but as he had before the waves, so in this Tempest too (as I may call it)
he bore himself above and left them both as calm as death upon the shore, In
the instant when he was yet hot in his anger and, their blood we came upon him
--


Pray Sir, let me speak to you, there is a wonder discovered to me by his
relation, and under this Monster he hath spoke of a greater doth lie hid, one
that you would rather have in Chains, then all the list of Traitors I have
named, Sir commit the uncasing him to me, and suffer me to free Aratus, let it
suffice I am an eye upon him, and the rest, and will suddenly by their
destruction, destroy their Plot.


Take your way, I'll leave him to you.


My Lord, with the persuasion of your innocence, I have procured your freedom
of my father, and do desire in requital of this kindness (if it be such) to
let me see the face of this my enemy once more: if your acquantance as appears
by your words, be not too late to know his abode, My Lord, I shall receive him
otherwise then you expect, the relation you have made of him, and what my self
was witness on, hath turned my hate into admiration, and if I can move his
Love, as I have donne his anger: I shall be happy in his valour. 'Tis no
strange thing that the valour of enemies have made them friends, and that
wounder have been the first seal of Love. I do consider how much (...) him,
and that on such occasion, he could not have don least, at first sight I called
him dog, and without more circumstance commanded for to kill him.


Now, Sir, I must kneel to you, you have the mercy of a Prince; he shall
submit for his offence, or suffer for it, and if you find not that noble spirit
in him, I have told you of in the most dangerous business you shall implory him.
Let him be punish't for this his ill placed valour.


My Lord, I'll take no other surety but your word, ever engage me thus.


But my ^ord, though I can answer, I cannot give credit to your smooth tongue,
this last accident had like to have broke all, and had there not been help
above, there had been none beneath. I must be no more so venturous, our
Conspiracy begins to be discovered, and that we are suspected is the least
fear, we must not longer defer our breaking out; there is no safety now but
in a public danger.


I am come to tell you, the infection.
That caused this your retyrement, is now
Vanished, and abroad you may easily bless
Us with your beauties. It shames me to say this
I can pronounce, you may do something that
May command all.
I ever as a servant did approach
You, but now as an offender, as one
That is guilty of a sin of so high
A nature as this your sadness is. Can
I do less then condemn my self that would
Have killed the man that would have don it? yet
I hope this my action hath not made me
Appear, to throw of that honourable name
As servant to you, 'tis a title I am most
Ambitious of, and never did
Engage my self a more humble one
Then by my last command. Before I was
A votary to your beauty, now to
Your goodness, there is no earthly thing I
So much reverence (if I may call that
Earthy that's so divine) I bend but at
Two places the Alter, and your virtues.

My Lord, though your complement be such, as to esteem this my retirement for
your sake so great a favour. I must not so account it, nor think I have laid
so deep ingagments on you, in granting that I voluntary, unask't perform:
your respects may claim greater services, and your last words had been
requital to a Stranger.


There's a Gentleman desires access unto your grace, from Prince Clearchus, and
my Lord Aratus.


Prithee go stay him within, as soon as this troubles over, I will come to
him. Sure 'tis to warn me of their breaking out.

The time of their great birth is now complete.
The hours are finished. O let it not you
Which look down, which favourably look down
Upon this Isle, want your power which first
Did strengthen it, let the same hands that hid
Disclose it too, shame not at so glorious
An off-spring, when it is heavenly, and doth
Confess the father, when none but gods dare
Call it their's, nor without blasphemy can
Own it, you were kind fathers at the first,
Show your self still so, and breed the child you
Have gotten, where humane strength shall fail, there
Hold it up, and make that want the Strongest,
Yet when I look this way it doth distract
My prayers, and makes me wish a conquest
Without destruction of the enemy.
O 'tis pity that so much nobleness
Should fall to earth, although no love, I can
Afford him tears.

Why, well said Timeus, now I like thee, here thy ears and services are bent
the right way would I could see thee once look pale in these, but thou art so
worldly that thou appearst still as if thou were it not in it. Can a young man
when he may have leave to breath in such a Paradise as this, draw a common
air, an air of the people? Madam, I don't think but you find him a rude
servant, one that pays his courtship as a business, and not as a delight, that
has one eye upon the door to be gone, when the other's fixed on you.


My Lord, I was never witness of any others courtship and therefore can
compare it only with what I can imagine: and 'tis above my highest fantasy.


Why dost thou not answer? I am ashamed to see thee, O my conscience at these
years, I could ont woo thee my self; I think we had best change business,
neither will go forward else, i'll court for thee, and thou shall rule for me:
thoul't never get a wife without the help of a commission.


Though nothing is more just then a Noble
Love, yet nothing ought to be more secret,
None are to be admitted to the rights
Of it, but the god, and the two parties,
Sir, you are not acquainted with the laws,
Of a deviner love, that may imagine
The progress of it a tedious Pilgrimage,
And that they languish which do live in hope
The means is more delightful then the end,
Then is the bloom and spring of joy when it
Is green: as it grows riper, the blossom
Falls and turns to profit, the perfection
Is the first decay of love, there is a
Marriage of the Soul, preceeds the other
In time, and excellence, and is performed
By a Hymen of a more extracted
Deity, whose Torch is purer then the
Element of Fire, these are laws unknown
To your unfashioned Cupid, who perhaps
May wound a breast among those ruder Souls,
Who think they ought to exchange heart for heart,
And love only in requital, but here
A nobleness must tip the Shaft as well
As goodness, or else it peirces but to pity.

Ha, ha, ha, say thou so? thar't killed in a Philosophy, I thought thou had
never dreamt of, I am loath to put it out of thee with other thoughts: but I
think this business I am to tell thee of will confirm thee more: and remove
all thy jealousies. The suspicion thou had of a Treason was not in vain,
since it hath broken out, but 'tis already cured, the two chief of them are
taken in their passage as they went to raise commotions. And I have commanded
that they be set so as they may have a full view of that earth they were so
ambitious of, and then to Strangle them at that height.


Were there but two, Sr, flatter not your self, had they been thousands they
had yet left more behind, you account that a victory which they scorn to
account a loss, and think you are safe when they are not endangered. Is
Aratus, Phronimus or Eurylochus among them?


No, nor suspected by any but your self.

How now, what's the matter?


Sr, yonder are two fellows we have laid hold on, that call themselves
messengers from Aratus to your Majesty. But they have behaved themselves so
traitorously that we have used them accordingly, and clapped bolts upon 'em, till
they shall be further determined of, what their business is, they will declare
to none but to your self, and they have spoke those things which they are sure
would bring them thither. They answered when they were urged, they came to defy
the King, and us, and if they are not mad, they are the most desperate
villains I ere heard speak.


These were the evils I was a Prophet of, I saw them when they were yet
disguised.


Where are they?


They are under guard here in the Court, there's a messenger too from the
Governor of the City, desires admittance to your Majesty, he says a broad are
many signs of tumults.


Sr, this is no time to delay, if we believe not yet, the next news will be
brought us home by the Traitors themselves, you may perceive their Strength,
and readynes in this, that they dare make such bold declarations and in the
open day produce their black Plotts. If we haste not to o're-take them now; our
greatest speed hereafter will not reach them.


Madam, we must entreat your pardon, that thus we have offended against your
quiet, and made you the first witness of our Troubles, that ought to have
known them last.


Sr, The trouble is too sad to be excused.


Whiles he that should be eye, and ear,
Through sloth doth neither see nor hear,
Behold like Thunder comes a Sound,
Which doth at once amaze and wound:
That dart sure hits what clouds did hide,
And safely kills, cause undiscride.
Chor. Where dangers urge, he that is slow,
Takes from himself and adds to's foe.
They're come beyond a whisper now,
And boldly dare proclaim their vow,
When the prey's sure, to show the snare,
Begets not Council, but despair,
Like Lightning it awakes the sense,
Only to see, and grow blind thence.
Chor. Tis Love, not Faction, where the good
Conspire to spill usurping Blood.
OUr message you say, is returned again upon us.


In a manner, the same words, accompanied only with a few threats more.


We expected no other, yet it was fit to neglect no part that belongs to the
justice of our cause, though it were but merely formal, we ought to claim
the right we had, before we use the means to conquer it; the same
circumstance is to be observed as well in the Court of war, as in the Courts
of Law, no trial till the demand be past.


There is but one of the messengers returned: the other for his stout demanding
of the Crown lost his head, there his fellow reports he delivered those words
you put into him, with such resolution, that he appeared not to denounce, but
bring those evils on him. The Tyrant grew pale, and seemed to feel them in
his threats, nor could he think himself safe encompast with his friends and
guard, till he had silenced that voice that so could wound him through all
their swords.


Alas poor man, yet he fell nobly, his sword might have purchased him a higher
name in war, but not in honour. In our days of triumph he shall not be
forgotten, nor his glory though he perceive it not, be defend behind those that
live.


Do ye hear the news my Lord?


No, my Lord, what is't?


All's lost.


Bless us, my Lord, how?


Yet it may be but a rumour and scattered by the enemy, Phronimus and Eurilochus
in their convoy with the young King are taken. The Camp is ready to mutiny on
the report.


There cannot be such an evil, it is a sin to give credit to it. Pray, my
Lord, relate some particulers of the report, was there any made mention of the
kings age?


No, The rumour goes that two Lords were taken on the way by a Troop of horse
of the adverse party, the young King being in his disguise, and not yet known,
past undiscovered as one of their followers.


O tis most likely.


Where are all our great words now? those
Mighty sounds that made a trembling in the air,
And caused no less a deafness with their fall,
Then if thunder, the voice of heaven were turned
Articulate, and spake the threats of Jove
Unto the world? changed to as great a silence,
Such when a Tempest ceases is the calm
That follows, no noise is heard, as if the
Wind with blasts were breath less grown, and the Seas
Sat down, and after so much toil required ease.
Not able for to lift that from a Rock,
Whose Keele struck hell, and Mast the Clouds did knock,
Why had we not bodies equal to our minds?
That when we durst meet Perils, we might
Bear them too, and not with a fading trunk
Lose thoughts invincible: yet I will do
Something, and where the gods have given a will
We ought not in their service to sit still.

My Lord, raise your self, the news may be false, and all the danger they are
in may be by this your belief, give not your self cause to morn hereafter,
that all perishd on a mistake, if that this the worst of evils be befallen, it
ought not to be the reason of your neglect, but greater care and vigilance.


My Lord, I thank you, and will take your advice; Pardon me that I was
stupefied at the greatest amazement that could befall, and appeared dead when
that the life of all my action was taken from me; yet twas not a slumber I was
lost in, but a confusion of various thoughts, not knowing which to choose,
until you pointed me one out, we will do something presently, and not give
them leave to put their black intents in practice. hark.


The Soldiers are in a mutiny.


Demophilus, what news?


What news, my Lord?


Such as is not to be named without a Sacrifice. O see, my Lord, though we have
lost, we are not yet undone; there's a Relapse, but not a total ruin of our
fortunes; the King, Phronimus, and Eurilochus are all safe, and never were in
danger, this night they will be here with their full power, the occasion of the
mistake is now plain.


Till this fell out we had no sense of the happiness we were in. Pray my
Lord, what are they which are taken?


Two that stood strongly for our party, more besides their names here, and that
they were virtuous I am not to instruct you, you may perceive they which have
no such cause of joy as we have, do lament them much: we shall have a time
too to morn their deaths, then, when we have leave to laugh at theirs which
slew them, in the mean time fare'em well; such a leave, were I in their
misfortune, I would have expected, they have only out-stript us in the payment
of a debt we all owe unto our Master, ours is due, though not yet called for.
And how fares the young King?


As one the gods take care on, his words and looks have gained many unto his
party, and put courage in all the rest.


And we'll make use of it while it is yet hot, after this nights rest they
shall give battle to the enemy, hark the Mutiny increases let us away, least
we loose all here,


Sr, though there are troubles in your affairs
Let none be in your countenance: your eyes
Should like those blessed twin fires upon the Ship
Display a vigorous flame. A light of joy,
And comfort round about, that they which toil
In the rage and fury of this tempest
May from thence foresee a calm, and nourish
Hopes of safety. Thus you wrong your Kingdom
Destroying it your self cause others would.
The people groan just as you groan, their Pulses
Have the same motion, and their hearts do beat
Both hope or fear, according as yours doth
Either dilate or else contract it else.
All omen comes from you, your Passion is not,
A single sadness, 'tis your Subjects too.
When you confess a fear, who dares bebold?
They do account it a disloyallty to have a
Thought that shall run cross to yours.
Your mirth were now discretion, and a face
Cheerful as at a Feast, were policy,
T'wouldbe one kind of succour.

Why Timeus, I thank thee, but these joys come
From above, are not to be taken
When we please, no man can resolve he will
Be happy, yet I will struggle with my
Thoughts, and endeavour to force that quiet
They have taken from me. But let not this thing
Discomfort you, 'tis but a course of humours
Perhaps a little Physic will remove it.

Now Sir, you put a new life into me,
And I dare say we shall be victorious,
Nay, we will, no power doth stand against us,
Now that is favourable which attends upon
Your person, to whose protection I will leave you,
And go see how the Camp fares.
Shall I bear any of your commands thither?

Only my love, the care of all things else do thou take upon thee, and to
morrow, if this fit leave me, before the battle I'll visit you.

How every thing is irksome to me: clouds
And darkness are before mine eyes, all things
Dissenting one from the other yet conspire
In this, that they present death to my view,
I have that idle comfort only, that
He that despairs of all, ought to fear nothing
When things cannot grow worse, all fortune then
Is on his side that suffers. But my injustice
Strengthened with murder, doth forbid success,
A Kingdom got by blood, is built upon
A slippery foundation. I have been
Nourishd in peace thus long, that being grown
Specious and great, I may at last fall down
A Sacrifice worth slaughter. Thoughts urge thoughts,
Suspicion gets suspicion, Danger, danger;
I have not that small setlednesse of mind,
As to think one thing twice: were I but innocent,
I would provoke misfortune, call for Fate
With as undaunted courage as the Lord
And ruler of it doth --

Stay.

What a nothing tis that I have thus much feared
And labor'd to escape, when twas my good:
Childishly dreading every thought of cure,
Then most offended when my health was near?
How well I'am after this little wound?
Quiet of mind and peace of Conscience,
Those blessed companions do possess me now,
I see nothing but blood can appease blood
In sacrifice, that to the guilty there's
No ease like death, no mercy like the cross.
Oh, oh.
Hold in your rage, have you not already
Acted mischiefs enough by my command.
But thus you seek to pull more upon ye?
Ye are deceived, though I have been hitherto
A Tyrant, now I am merciful, and can
Command things that are just and innocent.

He faints the villain must not live.


I command you hold, my power is yet good
You are the villains, the first causers of
This my misery, and you should lay hands
Upon your selves; how ridiculous is this
Your rage? suppose I should give way to
Your desires, what were you the safer,
Or I the better? you would have one foe
The less, and I one sin more that am already
Laden. Does not this judgment affright you
Rather? I am not only guilty, your
Hands were dipped in the same blood and performed
Such things I often durst but wish: that you
Were commanded will not excuse you, your
Loyalty to me was but at best a
Broken faith unto another; and when
You observed it most, you were most periurd.
What can you expect? you see when that I
Was guarded by an host, needed not fear
What the power of earth, or men could do
Unto me, one man (as I may say) one
Handful of that earth broke through them all, and
With a single arm forced what a million
Could not keep, and when there was no means left,
Yet there was a miracle to conquer me.
To you I turn now, no more my ternor,
In return of this favour you have found,
Show the like to these, and others, that shall
Be guilty of that name, as friends to me,
Though you are nothing yet, this deed
Will make you powerful and you that have given them all
May demand so small a share: now you have been
So much my enemy change something
To a friend. How vainly I take care for
Lesser things neglecting my greatest charge.
O my Timeus! my poor Eudora!
Leave me not yet, my soul, thou can not mount
Until the load be taken from thy wing,
Thou could inhabit here when it was Hell,
Now it is Paradise, -- O stay -- and dwell --

Though the fall be great it cannot shake me
When I know 'tis just. The malefactors
Penitence, takes not the justice of his
Doom a way, though he be changed that remains
Unstaind, he may die with pity, but not
With innocence. They mind me not I'll endeavour
To escape while they are thus stupefied with grief,
I will not trust their obedience to a dead command.

Leave your sad embraces,
They will bring no comfort to you, though you persisted in them till you were
such as thus you hold. Death, like a coy mistress, makes no return of love for
all that is bestowed, you may wast your selves but not your sorrows here. This
ground will afford a perpetual supply of moisture; which your eyes, like two
Suns, may draw up and power down for ever.

Let's to the Prince, and to him
Offer up our lives and griefs together,
Th'ones the only medicine for the other.

The Traytor's escaped.


We were to soft to obey a dying speech.


His scape's as Strange as was his entrance
We had power to hinder neither.

Give me a power mighty as my rage,
That my revenge may reach unto the Clouds
And unthrone those gods that joined hands with men
To commit so black a deed: it were but
Justice they should loose their deity that
So would throw it off. O my father! did
I unload thy shoulders of the Kindgome
That thou might fall under a less weight,
And bereft thee of all thy jealousies, to
Ruin thee with more assurance only?
Where are all those flattering tongues that when
There was no need would in a complement
Hourly suffer for thee? not one to die
In thy defence, or by his fall to make
Thine more decent? how dismal is this place?
The graves where death inhabits are not so
Dreadful. I'll fly thee though I run amongst
The thickest of my foes, they can present
No dangers like this lonenesse the cries, the
Sword, the Trumpet in the battle strike not
So deep amazement, what ho, Clitus
Charisius, Erastus, Amanthes, Not one voice?
I walk like Aeneus among the shades.
All is hell about me: I see nothing
But what my Fantasy frames in horrid shapes,
O the vain fears of guilty men! all are
Unreasonable, but yours ridiculous,
When you have contemned the greatest powers
On earth, threatening with strength, and hatred,
You tremble at a ghost, a thing less then is
A man, and when the substance could not, the
Shadow frights you. There is no way but this
To set me above my fears, when I am
Less I shall be equal to them --

O hold my Lord, offer not up your self
A sacrifice when there are so many
That gladly would relieve you with their lives;
Let that thought prevail with you, hat you ought
To live for them, that so willingly would
Die for you, you're the prop of thousands, and
If you fall, you sink a Kingdom with you.
Take the Sword by the other end, and so
Holding it, seek to appease this Sacred
Ghost: such a will exceeds this performance
If you can't confirm the Crown, yet confirm
Your memory by the loss of it. This
Object makes your grief a burden to your
Honour. Lean on me my Lord, I'll bear you
To the Camp.

What shout is that among the enemies?


Tis the acclamation of the Camp, at the receaving of their fellows, this
night they expected their other forces, and it seems they are now arrived.


I am glad on it, I hope we shall have command to try the fortune of the Field
to morrow, would the whole knot of them were there, that we might make quick
work; and like Alexander, untie it with a blow.


I, and a wall round about 'em to keep them to the slaughter, that we may not
be troubled to kill a thousand in a thousand places: I don't like this pursuing
'tis the greatest evil next to the being pursued, the wine near tastes well
when 'tis so jumbled. Give me a Standing Camp that florishes like a peaceful
City, and want's hoe necessaries, here stand your Engines, there your beef, on
this hand a Palesado defends you, on the other, a Baracado of Porke-Tubs
impregnable, before a Ditch is cut of some two hundred paces, and the
Soldiers tippling in it, behind a Coop runs out of the same length, the
Poultry tippling in their Trenches, whose body are too delicate and tender for
bare travel, here a man may even among the Tents forget to be a Soldier.


Ha, ha, ha,


O, my conscience Comastes thou art weary o'th Camp already.


Yes, faith as your selves are, if you'd confess the truth.


Why, me thinks there is no pleasure to be compared with it, every man hath
his delights here as if he took his leave on 'em: and if he chance to return
at night, like friends which parted in the morn two dangerous and hopeless
ways of ever seeing, they meet with a multiplied and unexpected joy, these very
wounds are pleasures, and Elizium comes faster on them then their deaths.


When honour is the prize, and wronged Justice
The cause that thrusts them on, they throw of one
That they may get a better life, a life
Of fame, which is eternal even on earth,
That they enjoyed before was fading
Sustained only by the infirmities
Of one weak body; now 'tis supported
By the memories of all, the charge of it
Is committed unto a world of men,
Nor is't extinguished before the fame o'th
Whole universe, none are so surviving
As the Sons of glorious War. Jove gave
Life to Hercules, and Theseus; but Mars
Eternity, they breathed from one, but gained
Heaven by the other, these were the great thoughts
Which when I was yet young, and not able
To embrace them, did dwell in me: they did
Suggest unto my soul, that I ought to raise, my hand
Against the gods, if they slept.
At perjury and favoured injustice.

Holloe. what aylst thou?


What meanst thou Comastes?


To show you how easy a thing it is, to talk like a Soldier, and be as brave
a fellow as either of you.


Ha, ha, ha,.


Thou would make an excellent runne-away Soldier, such a speech on the
high-way were greater violence than bidding stand a long staff, would not get
an alms so soon.


What wilt thou say now Comastes to a jovial round or two beyond the Court
healths, those at the Kings own Table?


I think I shall say more than you at this, as well as in the other.


Captain prithee command them to bring some wine in, Come let us sit in the
mean time, and take away these fearful things from Comastes.


And why from me, me I pray?


Why they will fright thy mirth away, look, it gapes upon thee, but won't bite.


No more than your Lordships sword. Is this the terrible thing? I know not what
it may do in a dark night with a candle in it, but in the day, and your
Lordship looking through it, I shall never turn my back unless it be to
laugh. Pray God the enemy think of no such stratagem with a pitcher in the
Progenerall-ship, it may be as much as the Kings Army lies on.


Ha, ha.


Take this away too, is not this a Devils hand Comastes?


Yes, There's a couple, pray remove 'em both, and his wit that is so devilish,
that we may fall a little to our business.

if we must, let's to itstoutly, and like Soldiers, what say ye? shall we
drink a battle? the trial of to morrows victory, I'll take the Kings part
against you all. I am the strongest, and when I have overcome, I'll send him word
of the good omen, tis worth a thousand of your paltry birds, and ox entralls,
tis a piece of service will gain the favour from you all.


Come, we'll undertake you begin, that honour belongs to your side.


Here's -- how now, what's this? what does such a boy do in the war? disroole
him, I scorn to be Captain of such a youngster.


O whilst you live, begin with your light Armature, the Legionaries follow.


^s that the trick on it? Here then for the King I throw the first reed, this
boy can manage no greater weapon.


I marry, there stands a rank of lusty fellows, a man may rely upon such
valours, their very looks will overcome common stomachs. I long to see them
buckle to it, this is too much sport.


Reach them down then.


Give it me, and found an assault? Pallas and victory for the King -- why I,
this was a tall fellow. I don't think but Alexander had always a Guard of
such attending on his Person; He have a dozen of them, and call them my twelve
Labours.

O for a shout, a little noise would gain the conquest.


In good time, but not so easily.


You do but dream a victory yet.


No? help me then old Soldier.


Hold up Comastes for the greatness of your cause, hold up, you show signs of
fainting, how now?


Hah, goethy ways, ne'er a Goblet the King has ere got the honour to struggle
so long with me.


I fear we must lose in loyalty, you'll ne'er overcome else.


I warrant you, I retired but to an ambush. But who keeps the door all this
while? Say the enemies should come and cut all our throats. I can tell you I
have read such pretty stories.


How now Comastes, what words are these? does Wine breed fears in you?


A pox on this War twill be my undoing, I shall come out with some such
roguish question or other at the Kings Table and have my bones broken by the
Guard.


The Wine works not at all, Comastes you begin not fast enough.


Fill another -- So now bring me the Armour again


What will you do with it?


Bring it again I say, I'll put mirth into you all, pray let him help me that
has nothing to do.


Here will you take this?


No I shall have no need of that.


O I had forgot, thy Face is always armed enough.


Well Sr, when I return I'll pay you that.


O the King's killed!


The King!


Thou look distractedly, speak it again.


He's slain, my self was present at his fall.


By what accursed hand?


That devil that wounded the Prince, hath murderd him, he was before his
terror, and was now his death.


O the heavy hand of Justice. Is the Prince safe?


Slain too, if report be true, but by what hand I know not, he left the King
just before his fall to come hither, and being that he is not here, we have
much cause to fear the worst.


Fear not now, you have past the greatest danger, when we have made an end of
these there's none left to punish us, the King and Prince are killed, and those
which remain, we do the business for, and will reward us richly according to
the service, and their great promises. We have no other way to gain ought by
this alteration, our pardons all that we can hope for, if we still, let us on
presently least some others do prevent us, follow me, I'll give the first
blow.


How now? what gaze you at? know you where you are? does your feet lead you
without the council of your head? get you to your quarter or i'll stretch you
up in it.


These Villains dare do any thing, Captain follow 'em and see 'em punish't.


What shall we do? here we stand like so many trunks of men, headles, and
liveless, none to obey, nor able to command, there is no way can present us
safety, but this we are now in is the most unworthy danger: So beasts when they
have been fed unto the slaughter, submit unto it, let us not stand still, but
resolve to turn our Swords upon our enemies, or bend them against our own
breasts; either ways a victory, and will bring us happiness and glory.

I am for the last, it is the safest way, and in our griefs the noblest.


Sr, These fellows came to kill us, one of the weakest on 'em, when he saw
himself laid hold on for his other fault, suspecting he was discovered out of
mere guiltiness confessed, that unwillingly he was brought into the plot, by the
perswation of his fellows, who in hope of preferment from the enemy had
decreed on all our deaths, he says too that himself, and many more were
attempted by some of the adverse party with promises, and threats to lay down
their Arms, and that the Camp is full of such commotors.


This then will confirm our former resolutions, come let us number up our
selves, and if we are equal each man set his sword against his fellows breast,
and with a friendly wound (in spite of Fate or Fortune, being our selves Lords
of a greater power) give happiness to either. Then these wild Beasts will
deplore the loss of that they so endeavour to throw away, and leap like
head-lesse bodies into flames, and ruin.


O! my Lord, let us embrace you with such a love, as dead, and revived friends
would express to either, to us you were dead, and are alive again. And have
bestowed this life we now enjoy, we must not owe it to another Parent. So is
the Judge a Father to the guilty, your sentence was past upon us, and the hand
held up to put it into practise, when you, as if from heaven you had fallen,
set all right that was in such confusion, what trifles will the greatest
dangers appear to us.


Rise, you have no less quickened me, that was as nigh my end as you your
selves were, but now I live, and again can think of life and vengeance to our
enemies, which presently we'll put in practice, and seeing that our spirits are
redoubled, our losses shall no longer fright us.


Tis time Sr, you showed your self unto the Army, there you are dead still,
and their faith on the belief little better, but your presence, will enliven it
again, and make them fight on hatred of their former fault, and shame of their
present desperation.


Let us away.


Never did Justice appear so eminent this was a deed, as if her own hand had
wrought it, who can complain the want of providence, or say the guilty, and
the innocent make one heap, when this is told. A Tyrant in the height of all
his glory guarded with friends, and crewelty what either power or violence
could make him safe with, by a mortal hand Strengthened with Justice, was
snatched from the midst of all, the lightning melts not the enclosed gold with
half that wonder: leaving that's more combustible, nor doth the plague in a
multitude of men make a choice so curious.


Where is the great worker, of it?


Again departed to perform greater things, If be possible, I did prophecy,
though not the nature of them, that he could act us wonders, we'll strive to
second his first blow, and now the gods and he have done, play our parts. I
could almost give him divine honours, and say when he is in the Camp, there is
no need of any other power, Soldiers are but charge, and troubles only.


Tis time, that my troops were gone, that we may reach the place of ambush,
ere the break of day.


Tis true you shall presently away, Phronimus is already gone with his Forces
to stop the passage between the enemy, and the City, we in front will stand
against them, so that in the morning when they rise it shall appear to them as
if they were inhabited with foes, not being able to turn away they shall not
loose their sight in our large number.


Some of those which were sent to corrupt the enemies are returned, and say
their words were harkened to, beyond their expectation: and if a present assault
were given, there were no doubt of victory, all is in such a tumult.


Such evils increase by delay, we'll let 'em grow until the morning, and then
our sight will gain the conquest; if it be possible we'll order't so, that we
may rather show them war than bring it on them, though they are given into our
hands we ought not to show our mercy, and not our power.


Oh, O!


Madam they break in upon us.


O my father! when thou art slain I cannot fear what after does befall me,
the same that was their cruelty to thee, will to me be pity.


Hold, I command you hold, he that takes a life shall pay one back again.


What stays thee monster, and makes thee pant thusore the prey? here I stand
ready and do invite thy fury, come and save my hand a labour, if thou art
surfeited I'll whet thy thine appetite. Thou art a Murderer, a villain, These
name thee not, nor drawn in the same Table would express thee, such offenders
the Magistrates can punish, They are but diseases of the State, thou the death,
the Law comprehends them within her virge, thy giant faults do so much oretop
her, that justice cannot reach thee. And if there were no gods thou then were
innocent, and would stand safe because thou art so wicked. Thou hast killed
thy King; O no, thou had no share in him, he was a King of men, thou a
beast, the bloodiest in the Forest, yet he was they Sovereign too, the herds
were under him, and the wildest knew no other Lord.


My revenge how false thy beauty was?


How monstrous thou appear, thou represenst unto me all ill I ever heard of.


And thou all that ever I heard of good.


Thou move like so many living mischiefs, had the Priests beheld thee, they
might have divinde all these future evils so exactly in thy feature, that what
they told would rather seem a Story than a Prophecy, and saved us from thee.
Nature was never guilty of such a Work, some hellish power hath given the
birth, and Spirit, and sent thee on earth to destroy all that's fair and holy.


Sir, raise your self, can you endure such words as these? Soldiers on, and
make them feel those evils she hath uttered.


Hold villains dare you make an offer to such a deed, and not in that thought
expect a bolt upon your breasts? he that heaves his hand shall know I have
that thunder here. Thou worse than she hath named, unhallowed Traitor, can
thou command such Sacrilege? if that thy faults were told thee from above,
thou'ldst blaspheme the voice that spoke to thee. If shalt dare to speak such
things as these, I'll make thy soul pass faster than thy words, think not to
wrong me with a seeming show. I'll not take your bitterness, though gilded in
the name of friendship, withdraw and show your love this way.


Sir, will you stay? there may be treachery in the place.


Still you injure me with your kindness.


What next intendst thou? what master-peace of wickedness wilt thou glory in
alone? know thou can not force me, here within thy reach I am as safe as if
an army all resolute to death divided us. This hand something weaker than a
woman's, can resist all thy strength, were in as great mischief as thy will.


Though I seem all that you have named, and fouler yet, this is a sin
blacker than all; such as I dare not do. O think me not worse than you have
said already, and then I may again be happy. The beasts are noble, meek to
Chastity, and humbly like the feet of Majesty. Judge me not by show, our eyes
deceive us, and as oft persuade us to the wrong, as do the blind mans feet,
falsely do prompt us. All that is white is innocent, and all that's black is
sinful, without exception. Should those which look on you be led so by the
sense, they must kneel down before you, and adore you as some Deity, not
being able to fantasy so much god, as they do see in you; such forms their
power have given you, that you may become a rival in their worships.


Why talk thou thus? thy tongue hath no more Power than hath thy hands.


Neither intend violence, would you could entertain of me one thought of
goodness, as hopeless as you think me, I de undertake to make it good, and
better't daily.


Why delayest thou? what would thou have?


Forgiveness, I dare not say love.


Love? thy thoughts are more misshapen than thy self, even in thy hopes you are
cruel. This base imagination hath wronged me more than all thy actions,
before thou only soughtst my ruin, now the ruin of my name, that thou
intendst a rape it was a glory to me, and though I had lost it, would have got
me same, the honour of a ravished virgin. Did thou woe me with the greatest
services, as thou come in my fathers blood, I could reward thee, but could
never yield thee love; I was too long a Princess, and lost the name too late
to entertain so low a thought.


The world of causes that part me and happiness.


Love is soft, and full of courtesy a greater opposite to lust than hate; the
flames thou feelst are more preposterous than those which burn the breasts of
Satyrs, and of beasts, which kill the young and in that blood enjoy the Damme.
Think thou that any is so bold in lust to embrace such fears thy love bring
with it.


My youth and comeliness whither are you fled?


My miseries have put a new nature in me, changed that calmness I had wont
t'enjoy, into the looks and language of a fury: how ill doth rage become a
virgins breast? I will suppress it, and if it must break forth, dissolve it
into tears. An age worn out in thought cannot present one comfort to me, I
am so wretched.

Oh, my soule's more earthly than my body.
This war that is within me, will gain a victory ore me.
I find decays already.

Accursed that I am, to be the Author of such misery, is there no way to
restore that peace which you have lost? if there be any, despair not of it,
though it be held in the jaws of death, I'll snatch it for you; though it were
lost in the darkest mass of things, my love would distinsh't in a Chaos: if it
have no being but what your thought gives life too, I'll wish it for you. So
strong my fantasy is to serve you; let it be any thing to be done I'll do it,
can I, the wretched cause removed bring ease unto you, here on my knee I yield
my life unto your taking, or if you had rather, I'll offer't up my self.


No, and yet there is a way, and thou may do it.


Is there a way? O my joys, the gods are merciful, name it, name it to me.


If thou'lt vow to do it presently.


Need I an oath to confirm I would be happy? tis my own happiness I thus
eagerly pursue in yours, every sigh you give doth make me breathless, and
every tear which you let fall doth bow me nearer to the earth, than all the
years and wounds that I have suffered; yet I will swear by all things holy,
all that I fear and reverence, to refuse no labours, deaths, to gain your
ease --


Then --


And restore joy unto your life again.


Now thou can not, thy last words have rendered thee unable. The ease was
death, which yet I beg from thee.


From what a heaven of happiness am I fallen?


Assist me all my Strength, the gods this way you have ordained I should come
to you, pardon that Fate then which your selves did give me.


O my Lady.


Stay, O; stay that hand, let that goodness in you which would spare things
fair, and holy, preserve the fairest, and the holiest. The angels would be
proud to take such shape upon them when they visit earth, 'tis such as your
self ought to look with reverence on.


There's a weapon hid within my heart, which none can take away: it wounds
deeply. Now Death thou art a lover, and dost court me mildly.


O my Lady, help, help, O my Lady.


Give her more air.


She's gone, my times no longer, our lives were woven on the same web, the
destynies condemned me to see her death, and then to follow.


She breathes, stand off.


My Brother, O my Father.


How do you Madam?


Too well, my Strength returns too fast upon me.


Were my Soul fled, that voice would call it back again, it self would
return: and choose this Paradise on earth, I'll not disturb her with my
longer stay.

If that your Lady shall need any thing, you may have it with a thought, a
long peace shall not present it with more care, and speed: she shall not find
less tenderness, and honour then if her Father still ruled all.

The Guards at your command, and shall stay only for your safety.


Soldier, thart noble, may the gods reward thy goodness, Madam, you had best
go in.


Fortune, glory, Victory, all are fled
Unto their several habitations,
And have left Dishonour, Losses, Danger
In their Stead, not so much praise to all our
Dead Story, as that we lost one man to
Save a Kingdom, not bleed a drop for the
Whole bodies safety.

My Lord, let not the treachery of such Villains trouble you more then your
thought of safety, show your hate unto their false-hood by seeking to revenge
it, you have yet hopes left, if timely you put your former Resolution into
practise, when we have gained the Forte, there's means to escape the I'sle,
and seek foreign aide, you have many friends that you may trust too. This
our obscure flight will make our return more glorious, which shall be in the
face of the whole Kingdom, nor will we choose another way, but what passes
over Cities, Armies, and through a general ruin to our Revenge.


He who injustly swayed the State
Lives no where now, but in their Hate.
There's nothing left of him but shame.
Which both preserves, and Clouds his name.
When civell Beasts fall, Let it be
Called slaughter, and not Victory.
Cho. When that he dies, that lived a shade
His sleeps continued then, not made.
Arise thou Star of honour there
And in his stead shine round our Sphere
Grace thou the Throne, and let us see
Thy father once more Reign in thee.
We'll now in nought but love conspire,
And no breast burn, but with true fire.
Cho. While that such manners rule the Throne
Live all by his, he by his own.
This quiet we enjoy doth strike amazement in me, sure they have slain the
body with the head, which makes this general calm.


Madam, 'tis more innocent, I had news brought by one I sent to learn that
did astonish me, that the people knew no cause of grief or gladness, but
rose to their affairs as in a time when neither enemies, nor holidays do
distract them from their labours. The Kings death was news this morning in the
City, such care the Victors took least, the many headed but unbrained
multitude, should pull a slaughter on them.


Their piety is too late, nor will it satisfy the gods, when they have spilt
so much blood, that they will spill no more.


The Soldiers, though their charge was gone, kept their Guard Still, they of
the party durst not disclose it for their own safety. Some there were which
whispered it, but they seemed rather curious in the State, then those dull which
knew it not.


Can a Kingdom fall, and the ruin not wake the people.


The messenger with this doubted what he had seen and heard; nor durst he be
confirmed least his question might seem Treason, the first opening of it was
by Proclamation, with such secrecy the plot was carried, that now it was a
labour to discover it. After this Aratus, and the rest of the Conpirators went
into the Market-place, where the ^eople were commanded to attend by public
voice, and there to the assembly when they had declared the Justice of their
action, they produced the young Prince, which in the last alteration of the
State was lost. But by all supposed to have been murdered, which that he was
the Kings Son was confirmed by Aratus his conferring the Kingdom on him:
himself being the next heir unto the Crown, if the Kings Issue failed. The
Story of the Princes life bred much Love, and Pity, and his looks were able to
have led them to a civil War, had he been Counterfeit.


This may be true, they who can believe there is a providence, may easily give
credit to this Justice, our sins were mightier then our sufferings, and had
we a greater debt then life, we ought to pay it, my Miseries are due to me. I
was a party, and enjoyed my Fathers violence.


Madam you are as Innocent, as at that time your age was, and only do offend
in your tears, and too much love, which on this occasion spent excessively, is
not to greeve but to repine, the King was old, and taking his latest leave, and
was hastened only a little sooner to show the Justice of the gods; 'tis true, my
Lord Timeus was young, yet had no patent for his life, but as all brothers, was
an uncertain joy.


How ill these words become thee, and me to hear, think thou my Fathers
faults can bring a comfort to me.


Madam, 'twould be no glory to you that an unworthy grief should be your
death, your enemies no doubt are noble, sure they chose the crewellest to
execute their business, and him though his churlish out-side promised not, we
found more courteous, then they which do profess it, his words were the laws
of Complement. One that simpathizd in all your sufferings, and though his
manliness would not suffer him faint, he died together with you.


See who 'tis disturbs us. Who is't?


Madam, I know not, nor did I ere see any like him, his beauties beyond all
similitude, he speaks like the Soldier we were talking of, but him it cannot
be, he was the terror, this the darling of mankind.


Whether wilt thou loose thy self in commendation? in men beauties the least
part.


Madam, it appears so in him, yet such features lay a necessity of nobleness
on the mind, he humbly craves admittance, nor would he take it before that
it were granted.


Call him in, we must endure their pleasures, it will not become our state to
deny commands, much less when they entreat.


The Kingdom owes a Sacrifice for your life, all will joy to hear it, which
had it failed, would have pulled more guilt upon us, than the sins of a whole
age.


It is my fault you tell me of, and a great share of my grief that thus I stay
to grieve.


My offensive tongue can utter nothing pleasing to you, so great are your
misfortunes, and your honour so tender to you, the wounds that I have given you
are beyond my cure.


Thou art not he that gave them.


If my repentance can make me clear, I am not, otherways tis I that partially
hearing my own cause, believed and judged for it, that hastily without
examining what I did, decreed on all your woe.


Thart strangely altered, if thou be he.


Nothing so strangely as my hopes are, at first they did appear in a divine
and holy form, beyond all that I can fantasy, such a mind though ravishd with
the beauty, could not express then, and promised all should be as heavenly as
their shape, called me the instrument of Justice, the saver of my Country: set
all the sins before me, I was to punish, told me there was no heaven, but
what their clouds did veil; thus they crept into me, and won me with the
most specious shows unto their service, on my bare resolution gave me part of
that happiness I was to aim at. Then they clothed me in a body, foul as the
Tragedy I was to act, and made me dote on those deformities which all did
loath, when they had bewitched me with these false, yet glittering names, and I
obeyed their black commands, in a moment they changed into Repentance, a
mournful figure: and sadly left me as they first did find me, and as I now
appear to you.


Thou had no cause for all that thou hast done, the faults were general, and
concerned not thee, but thou were ready, for all ill; as well as goodness.


Yet, I had a cause (Pardon me that I say) and being that I saw not you before
I did it, a just one. I lost a Sovereign, as ne'er to me in blood, as love; and
if this cause may seem remote, I had a father murdered, whose death, as it
becomes you thus to morn, so it did me for to revenge, my self was banished,
loyalty was both our faults, and when they had heaped these sorrows on me,
left me not one hope to lean on; they were not yet content with my despair,
but sought my life, which was so poor, it could not be distinguisht then from
death; their injuries forcd a new one in me, and blew the spark until the
flame consumed them. But had I beheld you before their danger, it would have
turned my soul within me, changed me from a Foe unto their party. I cannot
now believe I had a Justice, that there could be any where you were iniurd in
it, so much my love doth mount above my grief, that it makes me think I have
only lost your father. Why weep you thus? Could that recall him, I'd bear
you company, and break those stubborn gates, which from my childe-hood to
this present hour hath kept them back, and spend my whole store here. But
nothing can redeem him, let that common remedy which all apply, and helps
all, give ease unto you, that nothing can redeem him. O learn a strength of
me (that is the worst name for it) to bear a fathers loss. Let the innocence
of mine excuse my violence to yours, we are the wretchedest two alive, made so
by our selves, and can be only happy in our selves.


Oh, O.


Look on this, it may bring you comfort, with making out of love with the
subject of your grief.


Ha?


Falls not my deformityes away?


Pallantus? art thou Pallantus?


This is the first time I dared to be so.


And to all this villainy is signed Tymeus, could thou be thus cruel, thus
basely cruel? unworthy brother. This hath made a mercy of all that hath
befallen thee, thou dost deserve to have thy punishments out-live thee, to have
engraven on thy Tomb, Here lies the treacherous, bloody, and to make thee
monstrous, have thy age add to it, The young Timeus, that was subtle in his
youth, what remains for me? that happiness the most wretched do enjoy, is
taken from me, a worthy cause of grief. Now I can neither live, nor die,
without a stain.


Can you yet read a resemblance but of Justice in my Actions.


I know not how to answer. The tongue must be as wicked as the will that did
commit 'em, that can defend such deeds, had equity pointed all your Actions
out, given you Rules to work by, told you how much, how far you must have
gone, you could not have done more justly, there wants not any thing to crown
your judgment but my death, the only issue of that sinful race. I have a
long time loathed my life, and now I loath my self too. I find I know not how,
a guiltiness within me, my fathers faults flow like his blood within me.


You are not at all allide unto his vices. Profane not then your goodness, it
is a sin though you your self commit it; that you was a Princess was not
your ambition but obedience, you are only guilty in thinking of your self so,
why then do yue talk of death thus?


Can any life be noble after such losses?


My self, and the many which have suffered them do think so, and are
received of all with pity, and with honour, can you expect to find less
humanity? you are not fallne so low, but the greatest Prince would be proud to
do you service. Tis vainenes to profess, all civility is your due.


You reward me good for bad, before that I was certain of a cause, I slandered
your virtues with those names foul deeds deserve, or a worse nature could
invent, I falsely did apply to you that which was true in me.


You are a Judge too cruel to your self, I did deserve them at the least from
you, it was a noble passion, and owed unto your friends, had they been worse,
yet if you'de make amends, where there was no wrong, give one comfort to your
self, and I shall receive a million: ample and satisfactory.


You have given me many, more than I did hope, or wish for, and removed those
killing doubts within me. I shall remember you no more the cause, but mourner
of my fathers death. O that name of father, how ever thou deserve, thou dost
deserve these tears of me.


Fall not to a relapse again, I dare not leave you thus.


You may there is no danger in it, they were but tears, and are already wiped
away.


All about you does minister to your grief. The King would gladly comfort you,
can you admit his visit?


I find hereafter that I may, yet tis too soon, Pray excuse me.


May peace and quiet return to their home, again to this place.


People Jove, Neptune, Apollo, and the gods of Greece; preserve, and bless the
King.

Through the happiness of my people, may I know no other joy or sadness, but
what passes you, still the middle way of blessings twixt the gods and me.


The gods preserve your Majesty.


Sir, give us leave too, to ease our selves of that joy that doth oppress us,
how hath these your virtues rewarded all our travel, made our deed
honourable, and to our faith have joined discretion, in showing your self thus
worthy of the place you are chose too, you have made it plain, as none ought,
so none but your self can rule: what praises will afterages give us for this
our loyalty? Had you been brought in with fire, with blood, with desolation,
as you, with wonder, are given a gift of peace in the height of war, yet your
endowments would have made all innocent, and like a year of good things made
the bad forgotten. Sir I hope you do not think I flatter.


My Lord, I do not, you that have so many virtues for to live by, need no
dishonest Arts, nor by such ways seek to endear me, when you have already
so really engaged me, that I am not able to give you a thanks, much less a
return that's equal not to say if I could what I would do deserving you, and
if you cannot in some kind reward your self, tis not in my power to do it:
These praises you have given me, do tell, if not what I am, yet what I should
be, they shall not make me proud, but good, nor will I glory in them, but make
them still my aim. I'll first offer them to the gods, and humbly from their
hands pray for them again, and at the second gift account them mine.


These men wrought hard too for, you.


My Lord, I know it, and could I thank them in it, I'd stoop lower than the
place from whence they raised me.


See Sir, what joys approach you, your royal Sister.


This way let me express a brothers love
Before I speak it -- O my Sister, you're
My Throne, my Sceptre, and my Crown, or what
Is more dear and estimable with me,
The Grace, the Majesty that rises from them.
Pardon, if my much love make me a rude
Brother, and too credulously soon I
Proudly call my self by that honourable
Name, when so lately I had leave to do it:
Yet had it not been before declared
Unto me, I could not so easily
Consent to the belief; your face before
Did joy me, but then an Angel wore it,
And appeared more heavenly in your borrowed
Shape than in his own. I cannot blame the
Troubles of my former life, when I was
Barred from such felicities as these.

The gods were not so favourable to me
As in a Dream, faintly and a far off
To show the Blessings I was to hope, how
Gladly J would have changed my greatest joys
For such your troubles; This I may call my
Birth-day, I walked, and breathed, and spoke before.
But lived not till this hour. I had a being
Then, but not a life till now.

Tis so to both of us. And we will ever celebrate it, as the first day that we
were borne Brother and Sister, before we were Strangers, now we are twinns of
love. My Lord, I understand the holy League betwixt you, and though I lay my
hand thus on it, I Intend not for to break it, nor make a divorse, though thus
I part you: pardon me that I seem covetous of so great a happiness; and show a
loathnes to part from it, before I have my self enjoyed it. She must sit some
time my Queen, before she be crowned yours.


It were a creuelty to wish it other, I will not be guilty of such desires, if
after a brother, I an humble servant shall be thought on, 'tis the time and
place I am ambitious off. I will withdraw Sir, and though there is no
happiness, I can enjoy so great, as beholding yours, I will deny my self the
view.


O my Lord, say not so, though I am kind I am not fond, I'll give up my
interest, or any thing rather then you shall leave us; I spoke it as a means
to stay you make it not then a parting word: help me to persuade him.


My Lord.


Tis enough, I obey, my business is much below my love, and I will rather
destroy the one, then offend the other, yet now I have granted I'll entreat
again, as for a new favour. I may persuade, though deny nothing. My voyage was
bound to another place, before happily I was cast upon this shore, and though I
call my self a Prince, I am a servant to my employments, and obey the
Commission of a Father, the expense, and expectation of a Kingdom,


My Lord, if your employments are so great, we would not make you guilty of a
dishonourable Stay.


If with your leaves I shall depart, as a man that is pulled from his delights,
with a strong hand, being freed recoyles again to them, so speedy shall be my
return, and in my absence account al violence, that does detain me, by that
time too, your first troubles will be settled, you more fit to receive an
idleman.


Our passion ought to give way unto your reason.


Aratus you are in a maze.


Hah, I must confess I am so. These Princes play their parts so rarely, that
there is nothing left for us, but wonder.


My Lord, shall we entreat you to bear us company unto the Temple: thither
we're a going; to give that perfection to our joys which yet is wanting, and
for unusual benefits offer unusual thanks.


Sr, I humbly crave your pardon, that thus tardily after the people and your
enemies, I present my service to you, and wish you happiness.


I cannot be deceived, thou must be my Pallantus, there's none can speak, or
look like thee, thy least resemblance is above all men, 'tis no wonder to see
thee Changed, thy deed has thus transformed thee, it sits upon thy brow and
Casts a glory round about thy face.


Me thinks the times had such a visor on, and till this day showed not a true
face, Sr, you shall see him each day make new discoveries of virtues.


My Lord, you promise too highly for me.


Thou look sadly after all thy Honours.


So me thought, what can be the cause? A King they say's the best Physician for
a discontent. If I cannot bring you comfort, I sacrifice in your behalf.


Sr, I bow to you. But that which is my grief will be no longer mine alone,
then while I do conceal it, all that hearsed will also have their share in
it, 'tis a disease that good men catch merely by the fantasy. Justice could
never yet with all her care so carve out her punishment, but that the Innocent
were wounded with the blow, and felt the Judgement of another sin, while with
her Sword she cuts off the offending parent the child is made an Orphan in the
Cradle, and mourns hereafter because he had no fault.


Whether doth this sad beginning tend?


To this Sr, as we have slain withal religion a bloody tyrant, one that was
greater in his sins then in the Kingdom he purchased by them. So too we have
causeless slain the father of a Lady, that knew not so much guilt as to
satisfy her, why she lost him: for want of whose life she now contemns her
own, a Jewell of inestimable value with all that does behold it but her self,
Sr, you cannot call her an enemy, though her goodness hath stood against you,
and preserved her Father so many years in spite of all his sins, she ought
to resist all piety if it were an enemy to her own.


Her cause of grief is mighty, and if care be not taken, as their faults have
donne the rest, her goodness will destroy her, we that beheld the past
deformities, can bear witness of her virtues, she was the only mine of honour,
and when we have been wearied in seeking one grain, in her we could find a
treasure, nor wast a beauty set of only with the blemishes of others, or foild
by general vices, but a real, and a native excellence, which as it could not
be obscured with thickest darkness: so neither could it be outshind by other
lights.


Her grief concerns us all, and ought to be considered before our joys,
bear these tears to her, we wish the excess of ours may lessen her's, and
say that comfort which is left we will preserve, and carefully offer to her.
Her brother with many of her friends are fled unto the Fort, and are there shut
up -- would I could give them life, what say you my Lord? may I do this? Is
not mercy in this place folly?


Sir, 'tis so at no time; you may do this or any thing you have a mind too,
even in your fantasiy there is a secret council, and seeing that all your
actions, nay all your pleasures, are in some exercise of virtue, we will not
cross you, but make it our greater care to preserve you in them, and have a
more diligent eye least your pity may prove cruel to your self


You have given me resolution, hast presently unto 'em (twas their desire this
morning to have conference with one of note) and if you find 'em fit for mercy
or to be made fit, offert to them.


No answer yet returned?


Not yet, Sir.


One Look out again.

Polyander, I remember I heard thee once say, when I condemned thee for thy
smiles, that if I had a cause thou would frown, why look thou sadly then?
our fortunes ought rather to stir our anger than our grief.


Were they Sir, my misfortunes alone, and not yours, I would not now fall below
my words, the greatest should not move any affection in me, unless it were
some glory.


There's now one arrived Sir, who certainly hath brought us news.


Let us seat our selves before he enters, that he may see on what strength we
do demand, every man put on a face of mirth, now we are at a Banquet that will
refresh us after all our toil.


Now retire, but on the least call be ready for to enter.


Who's this? do any of you know him?


Not I my Lord.


Sir, you're welcome, but we invite you only to look on, these cates are not
easy of digestion; the gods give not life more certain than this gives death,
do you think you can endure the sight? would Aratus himself were here, that
once he might be satisfied with a spectacle of blood. You look pale on us
already, sure they have a plot upon you, and sent you hither to see your death,
had they none to send us to behold our resolutions but such a trifle.


What shape can I put on, and thou not injure me in it. I never yet appeared to
thee in any form, but that I suffered by thee, at first I was thy fear, as
all that were innocent did fright thee, because thou were guilty I was banished,
not to remove me, but my death, which with treachery thou soughtst. And when I
had, with wonder escaped thy intended mischiefs, by chance thou would have
slain me when thou had no cause of hatred, my disguise wronged thee not,
twas as much a stranger to thee, as an inhabitant of remotest Africa --


I know thee now, thou needs not further declare thy self, and you are come
past all my wishes to satisfy my revenge.


Hold, I came to bring peace and not destruction, do you yet perceive how
vain is all your malice?


If thou art that man thou would seem to be, and equally with me dost honour
a dead father, yet (setting by these helpers) let us singly try our hatred; the
grant of this will please above all our demands, I had rather see thee dead, or
by this means not see thee live, then again be Master of the fortunes I have
lost, I am unfit for life. I shall but curse the givers of it.


If I thought so, I'd grant to your request, and kill you; I could do it, I
have strength, and justice enough to make me able, but you are not so bad, as
you suppose, these are despairing, and not malicious thoughts; yet ere I go
one way or other I'll give you satisfaction, I came for that intent. Let me see
your Articles --

And if these may not be granted, that thus accompanied, we may depart the
Isle. How poor are these requests? without more commission I dare grant you
greater. Why, these are demands within the compass of a subjects breast,
deceive not your selves, you were not so safe in your own reign, as in your
enemies. The State is not translated from one tyranny to another, but to a
kingdom. A Prince governs now, which is the name of mercy, as well as power,
which he truly knows, and in his first deeds desires to show on you; he does not
think he's then like Jove when he can thunder, but when he can hold it in, not
when he is the voice of death, but when he sits harmless, with the power of
death about him. Revenge, Torments, Executions, are not expressions of a king,
but a destruction, he rivals not the immortal powers in Temples, statues,
adoration, but transcendent virtues, divine performances, these are the
additions by which he climbs heaven, and appears a god on earth.


Why should I be a stranger to these virtues, more than this man? I was not
borne for less things than he, certainly when nature made this frame, she
intended it for the noblest actions.


Have you yet resolved on any thing?


If you will go on, I can hear you still.


I will go on in mercy, tis my commission, and if you will not dam against its
streams, it may flow to you: yet the way is even; why look you strangely at
the word? tis no wonder to the sender of it, nor they which live about him.
Though the dangers may seem great, twere not worthy of the high name of his
mercy, if the offence were not such. This is but the least of his expressions,
that his enemies were courted for to live, but presently you think tis not to
save you, but to defer your death. A vain thought, when can it be done more
safely, and more justly, you are now as far from those to help you, as to
pity you. None but himself has any care of you. Tis true, there is a Lady that
had a share in you, but with your honour you threw her off, nor can you claim
an interest, when you have neglected her in all her miseries; not in your
flight, your articles, no, not in your thoughts providing for her. And, had she
not fallen into the hands of enemies that were servants too, to honour; you had
thrown away a Jewell that had a first thought, even among the gods.


O Sir, you have underminde my pride, and removed me from that advantage ground
I stood on, to my own low height. These your last words comes near unto me,
and makes me with reverence believe all that you have spoken; before your
virtues only stirred my hate and envy, this deed first taught me to admire, and
cannot doubt there is a want of any nobleness, when you have shown such
passionate care in preserving a distressed Virgin, whom I durst not think of,
least I should think too, of her dishonour.


Sir, keep in your joy, we do not think our selves such high deservers, in
doing that which barbarous people would have done, they which would have burnt
the Temples, would have kneeled to her, and what duties they neglected to the
Altar, would have paid at her feet. Think you we could desire to save such
enemies as you, and not adore an enemy of her virtues.


Give me not scorn and honour in the same breath, you have made me leave my
self, hate me not now I am nothing.


Now I meet you: and first give me leave with this to throw away all danger
that does threaten you.

Next my request is (if you dare trust me) to leave this place, and presently
go with me whether I shall lead you.


I breath, am warm -- all alive -- The Sun shines too, I have not heard of
any of his rays in the other world. Tis earth I tread on at least, if I am not
mounted higher, and yet I hope I am not in heaven, for let them say what they
will, tis to be dead to be there; and I like not the society, though they be
Angels; what do I see? I begin to mis-doubt, I do behold some such shapes
here. Faces heavenly, and di -- Divine, or else my fantasy abuses me, if I be
alive and on the earth, then there was poison in that cup. A pox o my
curiosity,


My father, my brother, why do you fly me? your welcome, and loved shapes.
O my sad fantasy!


Madam, The King wishes you joy and comfort.


The King, what King? oh.


And desires to visit you.


Return all duty and service to the King.


Joy attend you Madam.


My Comforter.


Your unfortunate one, to see that little he had wrought with much care so soon
decayed again, yet I hope I shall this time be more happy in my cure, before
I brought but Physic for your grief, but now I bring you joy it self, it
makes me bold and assures me of my welcome, though thus without leave I enter.
He needs no ceremony that can say your brother lives.


My brother? O where? and how? alas it cannot be, why do ye mock my sadness?
thus such false hopes as these make more wretched.


I dare not play with holy things, nor would I defer your hopes, much less
delu'd 'em; he came along with me, and stayed but till I had thus prepared his
way: I know to have given him you, as you imagine, had been twice only to
have taken him away, no danger threatened him but his own discontent. The
King among his first cares provided for his safety: he shall himself confirm
my words.


Pray stay, I do believe and ask you pardon, but now I am certain of him. I
would not at first show any signs of joy, I have thought a way to entertain
him, Rodia, fetch the paper that lies within upon the Table, so: now Sr, you
may admit him.


Here let me alone be happy, without a covetous wish of what I have lost. O
Eudora! wonder not at my excessive passion, misery lays stronger bonds of love
then nature, and they are more one whom the same misfortune joined together,
then whom the same womb gave life.


But stay my brother, I knowledge that you say most true, and was no less
surprised at first to hear of this your safety, for when I once believed you
dead that you were alive again, was a greater good then I could give credit
to. But when I consider the cause of my greese and gladness: and found it was
merely the name of brother, nay not so much the dishonour of our name only,
with tears I threw away, what with tears I sought for, look on this unworthy
man.

Here you are discected, and see if I ought to morn for any part being lost,
or rejoice for any that safe in the whole Anotamy.


O be not too severe, but suddenly give that joy you have prepared for him.


Now I meet your love, pardon me my brother, I was to rejoice at this your
sadness, before I could share with you in another joy.


Madam, the King's hard by.


The King?


Yes, he sent before that he would visit me, what will you do?


Not see him willingly at this time.


Sir, you need not, he understands the nature of, your losses, and will not
expect so suddenly to see you.


Stay within till he be gone.


Madam, I'll meet the King, and meet upon him in.


Did you say this was the King's mercy?


I did Madam.


And does she know of it yet?


She lives only by the favour.


Madam, fall not so low, we have already too much dejected you, and would our
selves gladly submit in recompense, you're still in the esteem of all, that
which you have been, not by the sins of others but by your own endowments,
admired Princess, and may a curse light, light on those, who shall dare to
unthrone a Majesty which the gods themselves have seated; we are come confident
in these your virtues, that you will not disdain when nobly we endeavour it,
to have your grief lessened by your enemies, Madam, though unpropper, yet we
are willing comforters, and have as true a sense of what you suffer as those,
who in a nearer name do share their losses with you.


Sr, admit me to kneel before you, I ought not to stand an equal height with
Majesty, and virtue, so much above me, what undeserving name is due to me, when
you are pleased to call your self an enemy, if you are one, it is to your
self, in thus preferring your mercy before your safety, you have given my
brother life, to bring your own in danger, and removed my grief, which
hereafter may be the cause of it to your self. Sr, think me unworthy, but not
a scorner, of these favours, were my sorrows heaver. (Thus offered) twere but
religion to bow, and to receive 'em,


You make us all happy, and show a virtue above your sex, in being able so much
to love, and yet to loose a Father, if still you can resist this passion, and
rejoice with us, with you we will observe your days of mourning. We are now
going to pay some Funeral duties to our dead predecessor, for your sake so we
will ever call him. Spare these tears, and we will weep them for you, morn
all as if we had lost a general parent.


Sir, there is much joy in them, which the softenesse of your words, and not my
grief causes to flow from me.


Fame, thou spokst loudly of these Ladies, and yet thy voice was narrow in
their Praise.


I have past hitherto, and perceive no great alteration, I thought the
subversion of a State would have made such a clatter among the houses, and
there's no such matter, it has not changed a suite of hangings here, yonders
our Princess too, I am among friends, now fortune direct me, which is the King
-- The least change that ever I saw, nay then I perceive I may do even what I
list.


My Lord Comastes?


Your servant my Lord, I hope you have forgot all those little unkindnesses that
past betwixt us, and will speak a noble word in my behalf unto the young King.


Ha, ha, ha, would thou be fool again.


No my Lord, you know I was never called so in the last reign.


Ha, ha, ha, why I tell thee the King's too serious, he never laughs nor
smiles, but very seldom, and then 'tis still at something excellent, he hates
a jest, look, twice he hath cast his eye upon thee, and yet keeps his
countenance, despair of ever pleasing him, there's no mirth that thou can
make, worthy to be compared with this thy misery.


My Lord, who's that?


One Sr, that was master of the dead King's mirth, he never laughed without his
allowance. Twas in his power to have jeasted any head off in the whole
Kingdom, but I think he was never guilty of any other sin, but Luxury.


What does he expect?


To hold the same place under you.


Sr, we understand you, and your desires, go leave the Court upon your life,
be not seen in it after this day, and look hereafter warily to your actions,
if you deserve a light judgement you shall feel the Heauyest


Stay my Lord, you have doomed him as if you had been witness of his follies,
and if there were not hopes, that he might redeem hereafter what he has so ill
spent, he does deserve a greater punishment; I beseech you Sir, let me entreat
for him, he is yet young, and if he have leave, may be virtuous, continue as
you have begun, to change the men, and not destroy 'em: he thrust himself
with confidence on your mercy, let it not be said that was a Snare to any,
besides you have made this place a Sanctuary to all those who can claim an
interest in that excellent Lady.


My Lord, I would be ever taught thus by you. Sir, I recall what I have said,
and wish to see those virtues we see in you.


I'll not despair to be Master of them:


My Lord, do'e still intend to leave us so suddenly, as tomorrow. If I durst
presume so much of you^ ill entertainment, I would persuade you to a longer
stay.


Sir, I have found a royal welcome, such as cannot be bettered but by your
own wishes, which are the only things above your actions. Yet ere I go, I
have a request to you, but 'tis such as I must not receive, unless another
will be content to ask it for me, you are the man, my Lord, and your company
I desire, which if I can obtain, I dare promise to my self a victorious
enterprise.


Sir, you much honour me, and entreat me to that I am most ambitious of, my
will I freely offer, but the greater part is wholly devoted to your service
Sir, and none besides ought to dispose of it.


I thus give it with the rest, by this request, My Lord, I perceive you'll keep
your word, and suddenly return, you would not else at once bereft us of your
self, and so near a servant.


How gladly I would think my self so much concerned, as to ask a leave of
you, but I have ever made my self a stranger to you or whats worse, a known
enemy, and can expect only ill wishes from you.


Sir, I think not so, you have deserved better from me, and if I give you not
a leave, tis because I am loath to have you go, twas you confirmed my life,
when I thought it not in the power of Art, or heaven to have done it, and that
before I made not these large expressions, twas because they then became me
not, if I had owed less, I would have said more.


You have given me a happiness, which neither envy, malice, nor the worst of
fortune can take from me. I stand the only man above the stroke of Fate, may I
hope to see that joy dwell in your face again, which I was never yet so blessed
as to behold?


You may.


And will you leave off these mourning Habits?


I will: I will do that that's noble.


I hope I understand you, and that I may yet expect a happiness, equal to the
happiness of this day. Hitherto our Kingdom hath been like the Kingdom of
the gods. Felicity upon felicity, joy crow'nd with joy; and though this day
concluded what it hath begun. I have reigned a perfect reign, having beheld in
few hours the numerous changes of an age.


Sacred Peans to Mars sing
Notes of Triumph, not of woe,
Hence your Ewe, and Cypress fling,
Who adorns a Trophy so?
These are the spoils of our great Enemy,
Hang Garlands on them of the Laurel tree.

Hence impure and bloody voice,
Far be from our Mysteries,
Bidentalls are Joves proper choice,
Holier then the Sacrifice.
Each unskillfull hand, and rude,
At his Altar dares obtrude.

Touch not then with lips profane
What Heavens Fire hath purifide,
Whose tears have washd away his stain,
Whose black deeds in his blood are died.
He for his sins hath paid, with death and sorrow,
His Credits more that pays, than doth not borrow.

He for his sins, c.

None hear after of thy faults,
But that thou ought's
To die, remembered be,
The rest shall sleep with thee.

Least our too partial favour this way bent,
Excuse the ill, and blame the innocent.

Least our too partial favour, c.

GReat and good Powers,
That from your reared, and exalted Throne,
Have deigned to visit your Creation,
And bless what once you fashioned; we know
That what you please to breath on, and bid grow,
Shall once prove fruitful, and its glory spread
To many branches, from one single bed;
Still teeming new, and Noble Families,
Great as the Stock from whence themselves did rise.
Tis true; but this is future, and far less
Then this their present richer happiness,
Which now they have enjoyed, by your long pains,
And mercy showed unto these humble strains.
And since their service and their thanks do please,
They'll count their joyfull'st issues such as these.

