DVnston, how ^ighlie are we bound to praise
The Eternal God that still provides for us,
And gives us leave to rule in this our land,
Like wise Vaspasian, Romes rich Emperor:
Suppressing sinue, that daily reigns in us?
First, murder we reward with present death,
And those that do commit felonious crimes,
Our laws of England do award them death:
And he^ that doth despoil a Virgins chastity,
Must likewise suffer death by laws decree,
And that decree is trreuocable.
Then as I am Gods Vicegerent here on earth,
By Gods appointment here to reign and rule,
So must I seek to cut abuses down,
That like to Hydras heads, daily grows up one in another place,
And therein makes the land infectious,
Which if with good regard we look not to,
We shall, like Sodom, feel that fiery doom,
That God in Justice did inflict on them.

Your Graces care herein I much cummend,
And England hath just cause to praise the Lord,
That sent so good a King to govern them,
Your life may be a Lantern to the state,
By perfect sign of humility.
Howe blessed had Sodome been in sight of God,
If they had had so kind a Governor,
They had then undoubtedly e^capt that doom,
That God in justice did inflict on them:
Then England kneel upon thy hearty knee,
And praise that God, that so provides for thee.
And virtuous Prince, thou Salomon of our age,
Whose years I hope shall double Nestors reign,
And bring a thousand profits to the land:
My self (dread Prince) in token of my love,
And dutiful obedience to your Grace,
Will study daily, as my duty wills,
To root sins from the flourishing common wealth.
That Fame in every angle of the world,
May sound due praise of Englands vetuous King.

Dunston. live thou, and counsel still the king,
To maintain Justice, were it on himself,
Rather than soothing him in his abuse,
To see subversion of his common wealth.
I tell thee Dunston, thou hast pleased the King,
And proved thy self a virtuous counsellour:
Thy counsel is to me as North stars light,
That guides the Sailor to his wished port:
For by that star he is so comforted,
That he sails daungerlesse on dangerous seas,
And in his deepest sadness comforts him:
So Dunstons knowledge is that star of joy,
That will with help conduct me to my happiness.

And yet thou art not happy Edgar,
Because that sins, like swarms, remain in thee.

Why, tis impossible, for I have studied still,
To root abuses from the common wealth,
That may infect the king or communaltie.
Therefore, base Peasant, wilful as thou art,
I tell thee troth, thou hast displeased the King.

Nay, the King hath displeased himself,
In trusting every one that speaks him fair:
For through fair words, Kings many times are fain
To countenance Knaves by their authority:
I will not say your Grace doth so.

No sir, you were not best.

Why, if I should, I might make good my wor^,
And find a Knave, I fear, before I part.

Why, what art thou?

Mary I go plain, and my name is Honesty,
A friend to your Grace, but a foe to Flatterers,
And one that hath a Knack to know a Knave.

As how sir, by art, or by some foolish gift God hath given you,
You are some Uissitian, or skilled in Uisognomy, or in palmes^ry
For I am sure, you can never do it by Astronomy,
Because there are no stars to know a knave.

True, but many an honest man knows a knave to his cost,
And is neither Uisitia, Uisognomer, palmester, nor astronomer
But a plain man of the country, like me.
That knows a knave, if he do but see his cap.

That were pretty I faith, to see Honesty know a knave by his cap,
Tis more than I can do with al the skill I have:
But tel me I pray thee, how I should know a knave.

I believe you well, for offenders never bewray their offences
Till the Law find them, and punish them:
But you would fain tell how to know a knave,
Then thus, the first man you meet in the morning,
If he salute you, draw near him,
And smell to his hat, and after smell to your own,
And my cap to a noble, if his smell like yours, he is a knave,
I think I spoke with you now.

Base Villain, were it not ^hat the Kings presence doth privilege thy
presuptio, I wold teach you to jest with your fellows*


Forbear, honesty, thou art a good plain fellow,
And I commend thy wit, that hast such ways to know a knave.

Honesty is plain my Lord, but no good fellow,
For good fellows be purse-takers now a days:
And there be so many of such good f^ll^wes,
That Honesty may walk the stre^tes without company,
Not that there wants company, but honest company I mean,
And yet Honesty* can clap a knave on the shoulder for al his bravery.

Why (base companion) mean you me?

Not base (sir) because I was truly begotten,
For Honesty may be suspected, but never detected:
But you think I had a bayliefe to my father as you had,
And that my mother could return a writ of error,
As yours did, when such a Gallant as you were gotten.

Believe me, Perin, he hath touched you now,
And I perceive, though Honesty be simple,
Yet many times he speaks truth.

True, if it please your Grace, for honest men will not lie:
But if your Grace vouchsafe to give me leave,
You shall see me find more knaves than one.
If my cunning fail me not, or else say Honesty had no honesty

But tel me, Dunston, how think thou of this motion?
Were it not good think thou we gave him leave
To stifle such Catterpillers as corrupt the common wealth:
For many times such simple men as he,
Bewray much matter in simplicity:
Then tell me Dunston, what think thou of his motion?

If it please your Grace to think it good,
Dunston will say as once Hefestion did,
When Alexander wan rich Macedone,
That what so ere the King himself thought meet,
He would in dutiful obedience yield unto:
And so saith Dunston to your Majesty.
For many times such simple men bring that to pass*
That wiser heads cannot attain unto,
For doubtless he hath some device in hand,
Whereby to find such subtle knavery.

Well, Dunston, then as thou hast counseld me,
I will for once make proof of Honesty: sir, come hither,
In hope you will, as your profession is,
In honest sort to find deceivers out:
And finding them, to give us notice straight,
That we may punish them for their amiss:
We give thee lean to work what means thou may,
So it be not prejudice to the state nor us.

My gracious Lord, if Honesty offend,
In any thing that he hath promised,
And do not as your Grace hath given in charge,
Stifle such Caterpillars as corrupt the state.
Let Honesty receive such punishment,
As he deserves that leazes to the king.

Honesty it is enough, but tel me now what moved thee first,
To undertake this task to visit us, speak truth, desemble not:

If I should tel your Grace twold make you laugh
To hear how Honesty was entertained,
Poor, lame and blind when I came once ashore,
Lord, how they came in flocks to visit me,
The shepherd with his hooke, and Thrasher with his flail,
The very peddler with his dog, and the tinker with his male.
Then comes a soldier counterfeit, with him was his Jug,
And Will the whipper of the dogs had got a bounsing trug:
And coging Dick was in the crew, that swore he cam sro Frace
He swore that in the Kings defence, he lost his arm by chance,
And yet in conscience, if I were put to swear,
I would be bound to lay a pouud, the knave was never there,
And happening amongst this company by chance one day,
I had no sooner named my name, but they ran all away,
But now I will to my task, and leave your Grace,
And so I take my conge of your Majesty.

Honesty, farewell, and look unto your charge.

My gracious Lord, if I might not offend,
I would entreat a favour at your hand,
Tis so, I heard of late, my gracious Lord,
That my kind father lay at point of death,
And if (my Lord) I should not visit him,
The world (I fear) would find great fault with me.

Nay, Perin, if your business be of weight,
We are content to give you leave to go:
Provided this, that you return again,
When you have seen your Father and your friends.

My gracious Lord, I will not stay there long.
Only but see my father and return again.
Till when my grations Lord, I take my leave.

Perin farewell, and tel me Dunston, now we are alone,
What doest thou think of beauteous Alfrida,
For she is reported to be be passing fair:
They say she hath a white pit in her chin,
That makes her look like to the Queen of love,
When she was dalying with Endymion:
Believe me Dunston, if she be so fair,
She will serve our turn to make a Concubine,
Me thinks tis good some time to have a love
To sport withal, and pass away the time.

I, my good Lord, Dunston could well allow of it,
If so your Grace would marry Alfrida.

What, would thou have me marie her I never sa^
Then men would say I doted on a wench:
But Dunston, I have found a policy,
Which must indeed be followed to the full:
Earl Ethenwald, welcome, I thought to send for you,
You must go do a message for us now,
Tis nothing but to (...) a Wench, which you can do:
You must not woo her for your self but me.
Tell her, I sit and pine like Tantalus:
An^ if you can, strain forth a tear for me,
Tell her, she shall be honoured in my Love,
And bear a child that one day may be King:
Bid her not stand on terms, but send me word.
Whether she be resolved to love me, yea or no.
If she say no, tell her I can enforce her Love:
Or tis no matter though you leave that out,
And tell her this, we hear she is as wise,
As eloquent and full of Oratory, as Thaly was, daughter of Iupiter
Whose speeches were so pleasing mong the Greeks
That she was tearmde a second Socrates.
For some report, women love to be praised,
Then in my cause I pray thee love thou Alfrida.

My gracious Lord, and Ethenwald shall not fail
To show his humble duty to your Majesty:
I will, my Lord, woe her in your behalf,
Plead love for you, and strain a sigh to show your passions,
I will say she is fairer than the Dolphins eye,
At whom amazed, the night stars stand and gaze,
Then will I praise her chin, and cheek, and pretty hand,
Long made like Venus, when she used the harp,
When Mars was revelling in loves high house.
Besides, my Lord, I will say she hath a pace,
Much like to Iuno in Idea vale,
When Argus watched the Heifer on the mount:
These words, my Lord, will make her love, I am sure,
If these will not my Lord, I have better far.

Nay, this is well, now Ethenwald be gone,
For I shall long to hear of thy return.

My gracious Lord, I humbly take my leave.

Ethenwald farewell: Dunston, how likest thou this?
What, have I done well in sending Ethenwald:
But in good time, how if he like the maid,
Believe me Dunston, then my game is mard.

I do not think, my gracious Lord,
My Nephew Ethenwald bears that bad mind,
For hether^od he hath been termed just,
And kept your Grace his gracious favourer.

True Dunston, yet have I read that Love
Hath made the son ^eceiue the father oft:
But Dunston, leaving this, come lets to court.

I will attend upon your Majesty,

MY sons you see how age decays my state,
And that my life like snow before the sun:
Gins to dissolve into that snbstance now,
From whose enclosure grew my sire of life,
The earth I mean, sweet mother of us all,
Whom death authorised by heavens high power,
Shall bring at last, from whence at first I came,
Yet ere I yield my self to death, my sons,
Give ear, and hear what rules I set you down,
And first to thee my son, that lives by wit,
I know thou hast so many honest sleights,
To shift and cousin smoothly on thy wit,
To cog and lie, and brave it with the best,
That twere but labour lost to counsel thee,
And therefore to the next, Walter, that seems in show a husbandman:
My son, when that thy master trusts thee most,
And thinks thou deal as truly as himself,
Be thou the first to work deceit to him:
So by that means thou may enrich thy self,
And live at pleasure when thy maister's dead:
And when to market thou art sent with woll,
Put sand amongst it, and twill make it weigh,
The weight twice double that it did before,
The overplus is thine into thy purse.
But now my son, that keeps the Court,
Be thou a means to set the Peers at strife,
And currifauour for the commons love.
If any but in conference name the King.
Inform his Majesty they ^uie him.
And if the king but move or speak to thee,
Kneel on both knees, and say, God save your Majesty.
If any man be favoured by the King,
Speak thou him fair, although in heart thou envy him.
But who is next?

That am I father, that use the word of God,
And live only by the heavenly Manna.

Who? the Priest, Give ear my son,
I have a lesson yet in store for thee:
Thou must (my son) make show of holiness,
And blind the world with thy hypocrisy*
And sometime give a penny to the poor,
But let it be in the Church or market place,
That men may praise thy liberality.
Speak against usury, yet forsake no pawnes,
So thou may gain three shillings in the pound:
Warn thou the world from sin and v^le excess,
And now and then speak against drunkenness,
So by this means thou shall be termed wise,
And with thy purenes blind the peoples eyes.
But now (my sons) discourse to me in brief,
How you have lived, and how you mean to die.

Then (father) thus live I that use me wit,
Unto my self I love still to be wise,
For when I am driven to shift for meat or coin,
Or gay apparel to maintain me brave,
Then do I flaunt it out about the change,
As if I were some landed Gentleman,
And falling in with some rich merchant there,
I take commodities for six months day,
The bill being made, I must set to my hand,
Then if I pay not, they may burn the band.

Then father, hark how I have profited,
Walter your son that keeps the country,
I have raised the markets, and oppressed the poor,
And made a thousand go from door to door:
And why did I (think you) use this extremity,
Because I would have corn y^ough to feed the enemy,
Father, you know we have but a while to live,
Then while we live, let each man shift for one:
For he that can not make shift in the world,
They say hes unworthy to live in it.
And he that lives must still increase his store,
For he that hath most wealth of all (...) more.

Brethren you have spoken well, I must needs say,
But now give ear to me, to me that keeps the court.
Father, I live as Aristipus did, use my wits to flatter with the king.
If any in private conference name the king,
I straight inform his Grace they envy him:
Did Sinon live with all his subtlety?
He could not tell a flattering tale more cunningly:
Some time I move the King to be effeminate,
And spend his time with some coy Courtesan:
Thus with the King I currie fa^our still,
Though with my heart I wish him any ill:
And sometime I can counterfeit his hand and seal,
And borrow money of the communalty:
And thus I live and flaunt it with the best,
And dice and card inferior unto none:
And none dares speak against me in the court,
Because they know the King doth favour me.

And I among my brethren and my friends
Do still instruct them with my doctrine,
And Yea and nay goes through the world with us*
Fie, not an oath we swear for twenty pound,
Brethren (say we) take heed by Adams fall,
For by his sins we are condemned all.
Thus preach we still unto out brethren,
Though in our heart we never mean the thing:
Thus do we blind the world with holiness,
And so by that are termed pure Precisians.

Full well and wisely have you said my sons,
And I commend you for your forward minds:
That in your lives bewray whose sons ye are:
Here have I hene a Bayliefe three score years,
And used exaction on the dwellers by,
For if a man were brought before my face,
For cosenage, theft, or living on his wit,
For counterfeiting any hand or seal,
The matter heard, the witness brought to me,
I took a bribe, and set the prisoners free:
So by such dealings I have got the wealth,
Which I would have disbursed among you al,
With this proviso, that you all shall live,
And lead such lives as I have set you down,
Carve to your selves, and care not what they say,
That bid you fear the fearful Judgment day.
Live to your selves while you have time to live,
Get what you can, but see ye nothing give:
But hark my sons, me thinks I hear a noise,
And gastlie visions makes me timorous,
Ah see my sons, where death, pall Death appears,
To summon me before a fearful Judge:
Me thiuks revenge stands with an iron whip,
And cries repent, or I will punish thee:
My heart is hardened, I cannot repent.
Ah hark, me thinks the Judge doth give my doom,
And I am damn^d to ever burning fire:
Soul, be thou safe, and body fly to hell.

Br^ther, why do you not read to my father?

Truly my book of exhortation is at my place of Exercise, and without it I
can do nothing: Gods peace be with him.


FAther say on, for now my leisure serves,
And Edgar gives thee leave to tell thy mind,
For I perceive thine eyes are full of ^eares,
Which shows that many inward passions troubles thee.
If any here have wronged thine aged years,
In keeping that from thee that is thy ^ue,
Name but the man, and as I am Englands King,
Thou shalt have all the favour I can show.

Then virtuous Prince, mirror of courtesy,
Whose Judgements, and whose laws for government,
And punishing of every foul abuse,
Is like the judgment of great Alexander,
Third of that name, whom some termed the Severe,
Or like Vaspasian, Romes virtuous governor,
Who for a blow his son did give a Swain,
Did straight command that he should loose his hand.
T^en virtuous Edgar, be Vaspasian once,
In giving sentence on a graceless child,
Know (virtuous Prince) that in my pride of years,
When lustful pleasure pricked my wanton mind:
Even in the April of my flourishing time,
I was betr^th'd, and wedded to a wife,
By whom, too soon, I had that unkind boy,
Whose disobedience to his aged Sire,
The Lord will plague with torments worse than death,
This disobedient child, nay base Abstranogant,
Whom I with care did nourish to this state,
Puffed with a pride, that upstart Courtiers use,
And seeing that I was brought to poverty,
He did refuse to know me for his Sire.
And when I challenged him by Natures laws,
To yield obedience to his Fathers age,
He told me straight, he took it in great scorn,
To be begot by one so base as I.
My age that ill could brook his sharpe reply,
Did with this wand (my Lord) reach him a blow:
But he contrary laws of God and ^en,
Did (...) me such a blow in wild dis^aine,
That with the stroke I fell to earth again.

Unkind Philarchns, how hast thou misdon
In wilful disobedience to thy Sire:
Art thou grown proud because I favoured thee?
Why, I can quickly make thee bare again,
And then, I think, being in thy former state,
Thou (...) remember who thy father was:
And gentle Sophocles, in good time I recount*
Thy ancient saying, not so old as true,
For saith, he that hath many children.
Shall never be without some mirth,
Nor die without some sorrow, for if they
Be virtuous, he shall have cause to rejoice,
But if vicious, stubburne, or disobedient,
Ever to live in continual sadness.
I am sorry (Philarchus) that my favours have made thee insolent,
Well, I will see now if my frowns will make thee penitent.
Now Father, see how Nature gins to work,
And how salt tears, like drops of peely dew
Falls from his eyes, as sorrowing his amiss.

Most gracious Prince, vouchsafe to hear me speak,
I cannot but confess (most gracious Sovereign)
That I have erd in being obstinate in wilful disobedience to my sire
Wherein I have wronged nature and your Maies^y
But I am not the first whom oversight
Hath made forgetful of a Fathers love:
But Fathers love shall never be forgot,
If he but deign to pardon my amiss:
But if your wrath will no ways be appeased,
Rip up this breast where is incl^sde that heart,
That bleeds with grief to think on my amiss.
Ah Father pardon, sweet Father pardon me.

No (graceless Imp, degenerate and unkind)
Thou art no son of mine, but Tigers whelp,
That hast been fostered by some Lyons pap,
But as the tallest Ash is cut down, because it yields no fruit,
And an unprofitable cow, yielding no milk, is slaughtered,
And the idle ^rone, gathering no honey, is contemned,
So ungrateful children, that will yield no natural obedience,
Must be cut off, as unfit to bear the name Christians.
Whose lives digress both from reason and humanity,
But as thou hast dealt vnnaturall^ with me,
So I resolve to pull my heart from thee,
Therefore dread Prince, vouchsafe to pity me,
An grant I may have Justice on my son.

Dunston, how counsailest thou the King in this?
I promise thee I am sorry for the Youth,
Because in heart I ever wished him well.

My gracious Lord, if I might counsel you,
I would counsel you to judge as be deserves,
He that disdains his Father in his want,
And wilfully will disobey his Sire,
Deserves (my Lord) by Gods and Natures laws,
To be rewarded with extremest ills:
Then as your Grace hath stablisht laws for government,
So let Offenders feel the penalties,

I Dunston, now thou speak as fits a counsellor,
But not as friend to him whom Edgar loves:
Father, what would thou have me do in this?
Thou see thy son is sorry for his fault,
And I am sure thou would not wish his death,
Because a fathers care commands the contrary,
Then (gentle Father) let me plead for him,
And be his pledge for shunning wilful ills.

Will Edgar now be found a partial Judge,
In pleading pardon for a graceless child?
Is it not true, that one cole of fire will burn many houses?
And one small brack in finest cloth that is,
Will both disgrace and blemish the whole piece:
So wilful children, spotted with one ill,
Are apt to fall to twenty thousand more.
And therefore (mighty Sovereign) leave to speak,
And pass just sentence on Philarchus life.

My life (dear father) that sentence were too hard,
Let me be banished from my countries bounds,
And live as exiled in some wilderness,
Bard from society and sight of men,
Or let me hazard fortune on the seas,
In setting me aboard some helmlesse ship,
That either I may split upon so me rock,
Or else be swallowed in the purple Maine,
Rather than die in presence of my King,
Or bring that sorrow to your aged years:
If this suffice not, then let me be armed,
And left alone ^ ^ousand foes,
And if my weapon cannot set me free,
Let them be means to take my life from me.

Father, what say you to Philarchus now?
Are you content to pardon his amiss:
Dunston, I promise thee, it grieves me much,
To hear what piteous moan Philarchus makes:
^
And his humility argues him penitent.
But Father, for I will not be the Judge,
To doom Philarchus either life or death,
Here take my robes, and judge him as thou wilt,

Then vertu^us Prince, seeing you will have it so,
Although the place be far unfit for me,
I am content your Grace shall have your mind,
Thus like an Ass attired in costly robes,
Or like a ring thrust in a foul Sows snout,
So do these robes and sceptre fit mine age:
But for I am Judge, Philarchus, stand thou forth,
And know, as there is nothing so good, but it hath some inconvenience,
So there is no man whatsoever without some fault:
Yet this is no argument to maintain thy wilful disobedience,
As the Rose hath his prickle, the finest Velvet his brack,
The fairest flower his bran, so the best wit his wanton will:
But (Philarchus) thou hast been more than wanton,
Because thou hast disobeyed the laws both of God and nature,
The tears that thou hast shed, might warrant me
That thou art penitent for thy amiss:
Besides (my son) a fathers natural care,
Doth challenge pardon for thy first amiss.

Father, well said, I see thou pitiest him.

Nay, stay my Lord, this did I speak as father to Philarchus
But now my (Lord) I must speak as a Judge.
And now Philarchus, mark what I set down,
Because thou hast been disobedient,
And wronged thy aged father wilsullie,
And given a blow to him that nourished thee.
And thereby hast incurd thy mothers (...)
And in that curse to (...) the wrath of God,
And so be hated on the earth amongst men.
And for I will be found no partial Judge,
Because I sit as Gods Utzegerent now:
Here I do banish thee from Englands bounds,
And never to

There stay, now let me speak the rest:
(...), thou hast heard thy fathers doom,
And what thy disobedience moved him to,
Ye^ for thou wast once bedfellow to the king,
And that I loved thee as my second self,
Thou shalt go live in France, in Flanders, Scotland, or else where,
And have annual pension sent to thee,
There may thou live in good and honest sort,
U^till thou be r^called by the King.

Thanks, gracious King, for this great favour shown,
And may I never live, if I forget,
Your Graces kind and unexpected love,
In favouring him, whom all the world forsook:
For which my Orisons s^all still he spent:
Heavens may protect your princely Majesty.
And loving Father, here upon my knee,
Sorry for my amiss, I take my leave,
Both of your self, my King, and countrymen*
England, farewell, more dearer unto me,
Than pen can write, or hart can think of thee.

Farewell Philarchus, and father come to court,
(...) for Philarchus sake thou shalt not want.

Thanks (virtuous king) I humbly take my leave.

Dunston, I promise thee I was like to weep,
To hear^ what piteous moan Philarchus made.

Here your Grace hath showed your se^fe to be
Edgar so famed for love and virtuous government.
And I pray God your Grace may live to be
Long Englands king to reign with verity.

TIs strange to see how men of honesty,
Are troubled many times with subtle knavery:
For they have so many cloaks to colour their abuses,
That Honesty may well susye^t them, but dares not detect the
For if he should, they have by their knavery
G^t so many friends, that though never so bad,
They will stand in defence with the best.
I was at the water side, where I saw such deceit,
I dare not say k^auerie, in paying and receiving
Custom for out^andish ware, that I wondered to see,
Yet durst not complain of, the reason was,
They were countenanced with men of great wealth,
Richer than I a great deal, but not h^nester:
Theu I went i^to che markers, where I saw petie knavery:
In false measuring corn, and in scales,
That wanted no less than two ounces in the pound.
But all this was nothing, scant worth the talking of:
But when I came to the Exchange, I espied in a corner of an I'll,
An Arch-cosoner, a Conicatcher I mean.
Which used such gross cosoning, as you would wonder to hear:
But here he comes fine and brave,
Honesty marks him down^ for a kuaue.

Why so, tis an il wind blues no man to profit
And he is but a fool that when al fails cannot live upon his wit,
I have attired my self like a very civil citizen,
To draw four score pound from a couple of fools,
A Gentleman having made over his land by deed of gift,
Means to cousin a broker with a false conveyance:
Al's one to me, I shall loose nothing by the bargain,
But here comes the Broker, I will walk as I regarded him not

God save you sir, I see you keep your hour,
But hear you sir, hath the Gentleman that conveyance you told me of ready, I
hope sir, I shall need misdoubt no deceit in the matter, for I mean plainly,
and so I hope do you.


Sir, as concerning the conveyance, I assure you tis so good
And he hath such good interest in it,
That were I furnished with so much money presently,
No man in the world should have it but my self,
An^ for my own part, yuu need not suspect me,
For I would not discredit my self for a thousand pound,
For the Gentlem^n is my very friend,
And being in some want, is enforst to pawn land.
For the supplying of a present necessity.
Tush, the interest is good, I warrant you.

And that's much worth, some will say,
A crafty knave needs no broker,
But here is a crafeie knave and a broker to:
Then imagine there wants not a knave.

But tell me sir, when did he promise to be here,
What, will it be long ere be come?

Nay, it will not be long ere he come,
For the conveyance was made ere I came from the scriuenars,
And in good time, here he comes, God save you sir,
Here is the man I told you of, that wold lend you the money,
He is a very honest man, and but for my sake I know
He would not do it, but is the land dispatcht another way:
If you be ready to seal, he is ready with the money,
H^are you (sir) you have a good bargain, dispatch it quickly.

Being advertised by my friend, this honest merchant,
That you have certain land to pawn for present money,
Now I had not so much money of mine own at this time,
But I made mea^es to borrow so much of a friend of mine,
Because I would not have you fall into bad men's handling

I thank you sir for this unspeakable favour,
If you deal amiss with me, I am undone for ever.

I would not deal amiss with any man for a thousand pound,

And yet he will cut a mans throat for twelve pence,
Here is a cluster of (...) here lacks but the daily of Hexham

Well sir, here is the money, will it please you seal the assurance

With all my heart.

God save her sirs, and her good friends, is a poor Welshman, come as far as
Carnaiuan in Wales to receive a little money, and here a has paid her I cannot
tell what. Here you master, wat is it not brass money?


No, honest fellow, tis a good Angel in gold.

Wh^ told him my name? hear you master, a has a great deal more in her
bosom, but a will take her leave.


Nay, stay and dine with me: I must fetch him over for all his gold.


Mary I thank her good Master, I will weight upon her I warrant you.


Now sir, have you sealed and subscribed?

I have sir.

And you deliver this as your deed to my use?

With all my heart Sir, and hope you will use me well.

We will talk of that another time, here is your money.

I thank you sir, I'll be gone.

Hear you sir, was not this bravely done?

Excellent: hold, here is forty pound, as I promised thee.

I thank you sir: do you hear Sir, you have got a thousand pound by the
bargain: but much good may it do you.


God a marcy, and here's ^ourty pound for thy pains,
Such another match, and I'll give thee a hundred pound.

I thank you sir, God bwy: n^w to my welshman:
Sir, let me see thy piece of gold,
I'll tell thee whether it be weight or no?
Hast thou any more, I'll give thee white many for it.

Yes, a has a great deal more in her bosom,
But a will have no wit money: O a loves led money.

Well, I'll keep the for thee till thou come to my house.

Why Cutbert, wilt thou never leave thy old knauery'^
Why, we should gre together like belles,
If thou were but hanged first,
Why we are as near kin together,
As the Cats of Banbery be to the hells of Lincolne.
Why man, we are all birds of a feather,
And whasoeuer says nay, we will hold together.
C^me you mad slave, thou doest not know me,
Tush, I have done many better tricks than this.

Why (you base slave) take you me for your fellow?
Why, I am of good reputation in the city,
And held in account with the best.

And yet thou art Cutbert the Conicatcher,
The Bailiefs son of Hexham, whose father being dead,
The devil carried to hell for his knavery:
How say thou, art not thou his son?
This grave black cloak makes you so proud,
You have forgotten who was your father.

Nay, I have not forgotten that my father was a Bailiefe,
A man that would live to himself.
And yet in faith, he gave me nothing at his death,
But good counsel, how to live in the world.
But sir, as thou know me, I pray thee bewray me not,
And in any thing I can, command me.

Tush, fear not me, I will be as secrete as thy self:
^ut sir, tis thus, if thou wilt do one thing,
I shall tell thee, I will give thee an hundred pound,
Tis nothing with thee I am sure.

Tush, tel me what it is: I'll do it, I warrant thee.

Nothing but this, to swear upon a book
That thou saw a Gentleman pay a Farmer
Four hundred pound, as the last payment of a Farm,
That the said Gentleman bought of him.

Tush, if this be all, let me alone. I will do it.
Why, tis nothing for me to swear,
For I am forsworn already, but when is the day?

Why to morrow.

But where shall I meet you?

Why upon the exchange at eight a clock.

I will not miss, till that time fare well.

Farewell, nay, you will scant farewell
By that time I have done, but I must about my business,
To find some knack to know this knave at large.

THe night draws on, Phoebus is declining towards the West.
Now shepherds bear their flocks unto the folds*
^
Now leave to feed, and gin to take their rest,
Black dusky clouds inuyron round the globe,
And heaven is covered with a Sable r^be,
Now am I come to do the kings command*
To court a Wench win her for the King*
But if I like her well, I say no more,
Tis good to have a hatch before the door:
But first I will move her Father to pre^er
The earnest suit I have in canuasing,
So may I see the Maid, woo, wed, I and bed her to:
Who is here? what ho.

Earl Ethenwald, welcome, how fares our friends at court
What cause constrains your Honour, that thus late
You visit us, that dream not of your coming?

My Lord, I am come unlooked for, very true,
So is my cum^ing yet concealed from you.

Your Honour shall repose you here to night,
And early as you please, begin your task,
Time serves not now, come Ethenwald,
As welcome as the King himself to me.

Now Ethenwald, if Fortune favour thee,
Thou may prove happy love to Alfrida.

This is the place, and this the appointed time,
I know heel keep his word, for he thinks me his friend,

But tell me Honesty, am I not well disguised,
Can any man discern me by my looks to be the King,
Take heed of that, for then our game is mard:
And hast thou promised him what reward he shall have.

Tush fear not you, for you never knew honest man dissemble with his friend,
Though many friends dissemble with honest men:
But, my Lord, the cards be shuffled, and here comes a knave.

Tis strange to see how men of our knowledge live,
And how we are hated of the baser sort,
Because (forsooth) we live upon our wit:
But let the baser sort think as they will,
For he may best he termed a Gentleman,
That when all fails, can live upon his wit.
And if all fails, then have I got a wench,
That cuts and deals, to maintain my expense,
Now I use her, as men use sweetest flowers,
That while they are sweet and pleasant to the eye,
I do regard them for their pleasant smell:
But when their colour fades, and sent decays,
I cast them off for men to trample on:
But to the purpose, here is the Gentleman
My honest friend did lately tell me of.
Sir, though I had another business of import,
That might have hindered me for coming here,
Yet in regard I am loath to break my word,
I have set my other business clean apart,
Because you should not judge amiss of me,

I find you kind Sir, and your self shall see
How I will labour to requite your courtesy.
This is the honest man I told you of,
One that will do you pleasure in the cause,
So be it you will content him for his pains.

Else God forbid, and good sir, thus it is,
I bought a farm of one that dwells here by,
And for an earnest gave an hundred pound,
The rest was to be paid as six weeks past,
Now sir, I would have you as witness,
That at my house you saw me pay three hundred pound,
And for your pains I will give you a hundred pound:
Besides, I will stand your friend in what I may,
You hear the cause, what will your conscience serve you to do it?

How say you sir, my conscience, then you touch me,
I tell you sir, my conscience will serve me to do more than this:
Why, I have been a post knight in Westminster this xii. year,
And sworn to that which no one else would venture on.
Why, I have sworn against mine own father for money:
I have sworn right or wrong any ways for money,
when I have rereiued money before witness, I swore to the contrary
And do you misdoubt me in so slight a matter as this,
When I have sworn against father, mother and all my kin?

I told you sir how resolute you should find him,
He doth it without fear I warrant you:
I think that in London you could not have found a man so fit for your purpose,
I knew his father (sir) a man of honest reputation,
And one whose life was witness to the life he led,
He was a Bailtefe (sir) though I say it, but no Bay^iefe that used deceit,
He had too good a conscience for that.

Al the better for that, for it should seem by his behaueor
That he hath had good bringing up.

Indeed my father in his life time was a man,
Given to the fear of God, and to use much devotion.

I, but he gave nothing for Gods sake, except it were hard words or blows, and
they had been better kept that given: But husht, here comes the Judge.


Hear you sir, if you be in readiness, here is the Judge.

I sir, fear not, I warrant you, is that your adversary?
What an old crust it is?

I think the villain hath a face hardened with steel,
He could never be so impudent else.

It it please your Worship, this is the man,
That wrongfully would have my farm from me,
Facing me down that ^he hath paid me that,
Which he never offred, nor I never received:
And this day he hath promised to make proof,
That he hath paid me full four hundred pound.

And so I can, and here's my witness to it,
That saw me when I paid the money.

Why, I am sure he will not say it,
I never saw the man in all my life.

No sir? but I saw you, and was a witness,
When this Gentleman paid you three hundred pound
As the last payment for the farm he bought.

But where was the money tendered?

At the Gentleman's house.

You see father, this merchant will be witness
That he saw so much money tendered,
And you received it, being full satisfied,
As the last payment for the farm he bought,
And if this merchant take his oath against you,
That seven days past he saw the money tendered,
I must pass sentence then against you needs.
But will you swear on the bible this is true?

I sir, and to that intent I came hither,
For I will never refuse to swear a truth while I live

Yet ere thou speak, vouchsafe to hear me speak,
Full three score Winters Gentle sir I have past,
And age hath brought gray hairs upon my head.
Look but upon my face, and thou shalt see,
The perfect pattern of humility.
Thou man of worth, or citizen, what ere thou be,
Weigh but my charge, and then thou wilt not swear
I have five sons, al pretty tender ba^es,
That live upon the farm that he would have,
Twelve hundred sheep do feed upon the plains,
That year lie bring a great increase to me,
Besides a hundred Oxen fatly fed:
That every Winter feed within my stalls,
And twenty poor men living near my house,
I daily feed, and all upon my Farm:
Go but among my neighbours, where I dwell,
And hear what good report they give of me.
The poor man never yet went from my door,
But to my power I did relieve his want:
I was no Farmer that enriched my self:
By raising markets and oppressing poor,
But I have sold my corn full many times
A^ better rate, than I could well affoord,
And all to help my needy brethren:
Then ere thou swearst, cal al these things to mind,
And thou wilt weep, and leave to swear vntrueths,
Confusion to thy body and thy soul.

Well, if thou be well advised, take thy oath,
But yet remember before whom thou swearest,
The God of truth and perfect equity,
Which will revenge wrong to the innocent,
with thousand plagues and tortors worse than death.

By the holy contents of this Bible,
And by that just God, before whom I stand, I saw this man,

Peace, shameless villain, execrable wretch,
Monster of nature, degenerate miscreant,
Who ever knew or heard so vile an oath,
Uildly pronounced by such a damned slave,
Have I such monstrous vipers in my land,
That with their very breaths infect the air,
Say Dunston, hast thou ever heard the like.

My Liege, such loathsome weeds must needs infect the corn,
Such Cankers perish both the root and branch,
Unless they be soon spied and weeded out:

I'll be the husbandma^ to mow such Tares,
Here Honesty, let him be manacled:
And scar his forehead, that he may be known,
As Cain for murder, he for perjury.
^ I beseech your Grace be good to me.
^ I, you sha^ have a cold iron (...) in your forehead,
^ I would say, you are a (...) ind^ede.
^onicatcher. Goo^ Honesty.

Good villain, there's no help for you.

My fancies thoughts, like the labouring Spider,
That spreads her nets, to entrap the silly Fly:
Or like the restless billows of the seas,
That ever alter by the fleeting air,
Still hovering past their wonted passions,
Makes me amazed in these extremities,
The King commands me on his embassage,
To Osricks daughter, beauteous Alfrrida,
The height and pride of all this bounding ill,
To post amain, plead love in his behalf,
To court for him, and woo, and wed the maid,
But have you never heard that theme,
Deceit in love is but a merriment,
To such as seek a^riuall to prevent,
Whether (distraught) romes my unruly thoughts,
It is the King I cousin of his choice,
And he nil brook Earl Ethenwald should prove
False to his Prince, especially in love.
The thus it shall be, I'll tel the king the maid is fair,
Of nut browne colour, comely and fair spoken,
Worthy companion to an Earl or so:
But not a Bride for Edgar, Englands King,
This will allay the strong effects in love.
Fame wrought in Edgars mind of Alfrida.
Well, I'll to court, and dalie with the King,
And work some means to draw his mind from love.

NEighbour Walter I cannot but admire to see
How housekeeping is decayed within this thirty year,
But where the fault is God knows, I know not:
My father in his life time gave hospitality to all strangers, and
Distressed traueillers, his table was never empty of bread, beef
And beer, he was wont to keep a hundred tall men in his hall.
He was a feaster of all comers in general,
And yet was he never in want of money:
I think God did bless him with increase, for his bountiful mind

Truly sir, I am sorry, you are fallen into decay,
In that you want to maintain household charge,
And whereof comes this want, I will tell you sir,
Tis only throw your great housekeeping:
Be ruled by me, and do as I advise you:
You must learn to leave so great a tra^e of men,
And keep no more than needs of force you must,
And those you keep, let them be simple men,
For they will be content with simple fare,
Keep but a boy or two within your house,
To run of errants, and to wait on you,
And for your kitchen, keep a woman cooke,
One that will serve for thirty shillings a year:
And by that means you save two liveries,
And if ye will keep retainers towards you,
Let them be Farmers, or rich husbandmen,
For you shall find great profit (sir) in keeping them:
For if you stand in need of corn or hay,
Send but to them, and you may have it strait:
And if you kill a Beef, let it be so lean
The Butcher nor the Grasyer will not buy it,
Your drink is too strong, and tastes too much of malt,
Tush, single beer is better far, both for your profit, and your servants
health
And at a Christmasse time feast none at al,
But such as yield you some commodity:
I mean such as will send you now and then,
Fat Geese and Capons to keep house withal,
To these and none else would I have you liberal.

Why neighbor, my goods are lent me to no other end
But to relieve my needy brethren, but God I hope hath in store for me.

I, trust you to that, you may hap die a beggar:

Why sir, if he should not trust in God, in whom should he trust, for God is
the giver of all good whatsoever.


True, and yet tis good for a man to trust to himself now and then: for if you
be down, and bid God help you up, and do not help your self, you may fortune
lie and perish: and therefore, serve God on Sundays, as you are appointed, and
thereby hope to be saved, for by your alms deeds you cannot, for if you give
to the poor, there be many will say, he thinks to be saved by his alms
deeds: and thus you shall be ill thought on for your good will, and therefore
learn to provide for your self, let God provide for the pore


I tel you neighbor, my great grandfather, all my predecessors have been held
in good regard for their good housekeeping, and (God willing) their good names
shall never take an exigent in me, for I will (God willing) keep such
hospitality to my death, as my state can maintain, and I will rather sell my
land, to maintain hous-keeping, then keeping my land make sale of my good name
for housekeeping, but stay, who comes here.


God save you sir, I pray be good to me for cham a poor man, and I cannot tell
what you will do, for you say my horse hath broken into your corn, or your
corn into my horse, But indeed my neighbor saw your boy drive my horse into a
field But I'll stand to nothing, now I am warnd with a piece of paper, and a
little wax, to prepare or proceed to London, And there I am invented, I cannot
tell for what: The Bailiefe here hath arrested me ere I was weary against my
will: he said it was upon your suit, yet he laid his hands on me, Nay more, on
my shoulder.


And sir, and it may please you, I borrowed certain corn, and I brought you your
corn again, and yet you rest me.


True sir, but then was corn sold for four shillings a bushel, and now tis
sold for two.


I sir, but he borrowed corn, and promised to pay you corn again, and you can
have but so much as you lent:

For if he should pay you at the rate you demand,
You wold have for the twenty bushels you lent, forty,
Which were neither right nor conscience.

O sir, I pray let me alone with my conscience,
You would have me give al I have away to the poor, want as you do, I pray let
me alone to deal for my self: hear you, have you rested them?


I have sir as you commanded me.


Then to prison with them, till they have paid such damages as the law shall
award them.


Hear you sir, if you should bid your boy break down a gap, and drive in my
horse, twere little better than plain knavery, for my horse is as honest a
horse, as any is in this town.


Well neighbor, we will have the horse examined before an officer, and my boy
Jack shall write what the horse speaks and if the horse say a was driven in
against his will,

Then you may have the law of him, neighbor,
For all the horses in the parish will be sworn for his ^orse.
But I'll stand to nothing.

Well, to prison with the till they have paid your due, away with them.


Nay, I pray, be more miserable to me, and I will give you forty shillings
when I have it.


^y the Mas the knave hath a pretty cottage,
I'll see and I can get that: sir, you have an old cottage,
If you will make me that over by deed of gift,
I am content to draw my action.

My house? why tis my goods, my wife, my land,
My horse my ass, or any thing that his his: no you Caterpillar,
I will never make away my house, I will die first.

But tel me sir, howe much wold you have of them for their trespass?


Mary, for forty shillings, and yet I befriend them,
Why sir, I hope you will not pay it for ^hem?

But I will: sir Bailey, I will answer the poor men's debts, and come home
(...) for thy fee anon, go old men.

Get you home and praise God.

Mary Iesus bless you: naibor, how many such good Knights have you now a
days?


Too few, neighbor, the more is the pity.
But come lets away.

But who comes her?


God save you gentlemen, the king greets you, and at this time, Having some
occasion, to use money, hath sent to know

What you that be Knights and Squires will lend his Grace,
And you master Farmer, be brief (sir) for I cannot stay.

Sir, though hous-keeping be some hindrance to my willing mind by reason it
robs me of that, which should bewray my loving mind both to my prince country,
money I mean which at this time I stand in some want of, yet of that small
store that I have, am willing to impart the lending of the king xx. pound, and
more I assure you I am not able.


Very well, and what say you master Squire.


I say that my revenues are but small, yet I will lend his Majesty ten pound:


Very well, but what saith the Farmer?
What can he spare the King?

Marry sir, I am a poor Farmer, yet I can affoord
To lend the King a hundred or two of pounds,
And hear you sir, if you prefer a suit I have to the King,
I will give you forty Angels for your pains:
Besides, I will give you the keeping of a dozen jade:
And now and then meat for you and your horse.
If you come to my house and lie a whole year.

Why that's well said, and I commend thy honest mind,
Would all men were of thy mind:
I warrant thee, thou art an honest man, one that loves the king
But tel me, what would thou have me do?

Nothing but procure me the Kings letter to convey corn beyond seas, for in
England it is so good cheap, that a man can make no living by selling thereof:
therefore if the King will grant me his letter, I will at any time, lend him five
or six hundred and perhaps never ask it again, and I will not forget your
pains.


Sir, fear not, I will do it for you, I warrant you, For I tel you, I can do
much with the King.


I believe you will do more than you will be commended for, The Courtier
resembles the Iay, that decks her self with the feathers of other birds, to
make her self glorious: So the Courtier must be brave, tho he be hanged at the
gallous.


Well sir, will it please you to come and dine with me.


I thank you sir heartily.


But whats he there in your company.


A plain fellow, and his name is Honesty.


O let him go where he will, for he shall not dine with me.


See how the Farmer fears my name,
What wold he do if he knew my nature?
But hear you (master Courtier) shall I dine with you?
I promise you sir, I am very hungry,

Truly Honesty, if I were furnished with money,
I would not stick to give thee thy dinner,
But now thou see I am but a guest my self.

Truly honest fellow, if I were certain of my cheer, I
wold bid thee to dinner, but know not my provision I promise thee

Hear you sir, will it please you to take part of a piece of
beef with me, you shall be welcome.

I thank you sir, but I must dine with my honest friend
here, else I would not refuse your gentle offer.

See how he can use my name and not me,
But I perceive I may go dine with Duke Humfrie,
God bwy Gentlemen, for none here hath occasion to use Honesty

Yes Honesty, thou shalt be my brothers guest and mine.

Mary and I thank you to, for now the world may say,
That Honesty dines with Hospitality to day,

DAughter, see that you entertain the Earl,
As best beseems his state and thy degree:
He comes to see whether Fame have worthily
Been niggard, in commending thee or no,
So shall thy virtues be admired at the court.
And thou be praised for kind and debonair,
For courtesy contents a Courtier oft:
When nothing else seems pleasant in his eyes.

Father, you shall perceive that Alfrida
Will do her best in honouring of your age,
To entertain the Earl of Cornwell so,
That he shall think him highly favoured,
Throw loving speech and courteous entertain.

How fares my L. of Cornwel, what displeased
Or troubled with a mood that's male content?

Not male content, and yet I am not well,
For I am troubled with a painful rum,
That when I would be merry, troubles me,
And commonly it holds me in my eyes.
With such extremes, that I can scantly see.

How long have you been troubled with the pain,
Or is it a pain that you have usual?
Or is it some water, that by taking cold,
Is fallen into your eyes, and troubles you?

I cannot tel, but sure it pains me much,
Nor did it ever trouble me till now,
For till I came to lodge within your house,
My eyes were clear, and I never felt the pain.

I am sorry that my house should cause your grief
Daughter, if you have any skill at all,
I pray you use your cunning with the Earl,
And see if you can ease him of his pain.

Father, such skill as I received of late,
By reading many pretty pend receipts,
Both for the ache of head, and pain of eyes.
I will, if so it please the Earl to accept it,
Endeavour what I may to comfort him.
My Lord, I have waters of approved worth,
And such as are not common to be found:
Any of which, if it please your honour, use them,
I am in hope, will help you to your sight,

No (matchless Alfrida) they will do me no good.
For I am troubled only when I look.

On what (my Lord) or whom?

I cannot tell.

Why let me see your eyes (my Lord) look upon me.

Then twil be worse.

What, if you look on me? then I'll be gone.

Nay stay, sweet love, stay beauteous Alfrida*
And give the Earl of Cornwel leave to speak:
Know Alfrida, thy beauty hath subdued,
And captivate the Earl of Cornwels heart
Briefly, I love thee, seem I near so bold,
So rude and rashly to prefer my suit,
And if your father give but his consent,
Eased be that pain that troubles Ethenwald.
And this considered, Osricke shall prove,
My father, and his daughter be my love,
Speak Osrick, shall I have her I or no?

My Lord with al my hart, you have my consent
If so my daughter please to condescend.

But what saith Alfrida?

I say (my Lord) that seeing my father grants,
I will not gainsay, what his age thinks meet,
I do appoint my self (my Lord) at your dispose,

Well Osrick, now you see your daughter's mine,
But tel me when shall be the wedding day,

On Monday next, till then you are my guest.

Well Osricke, when our nuptial rites are past,
I must to Court, of business to the King.

Let that be as you please my Lord,
But stay not long, for I shall hardly brooke your absence then.

Fear not Alfrida, I will not stay there long,
But come, let us in Father, pray lead the way.

TEl me Dunston, what think thou of the favours of Kings

^ of (...) favours as of a Marigold flower,
^ shines opens her leaves,
And with the least cloud closes again:
Or like the Violets in America, that in summer yield an odifferous smell,
And in winter a most infectious savour:
For at every full sea they flourish, or at every dead open they vade:
The fish Palerna being perfect white in the calm,
Yet turns black with every storm:
Or like the trees in the deserts of Africa,
That flourish but while the southwest wind blows:
Even so (my Lord) is the favours of kings to them they favour,
For as their favours give life, so their frowns yield death.

Well said, Dunston, but what merits he that dissembles with his Sovereign?


In my opinion (my Lord) he merits death.

Then assure thy self, if Ethenwald dissemble, he shall die: but who comes
here? Perin, what news, that thou comes in such hast? and what is he that
bears thee company?


It is my gracious Lord and honest man,
And one it seems that loves you Majesty:
For as your Grace gave me in charge,
I went about into the country, to see what sums of money I could make,
Among the chiefest of the communaltie:
And amongst the richest Knights that I could find,
They would lend your Grace at most but twenty ponnd,
And every Squire would lend you Grace but ten:
Then came I amongst the rest to this plain man,
And asked him what he would lend the king,
He answered sir, you see I am but poor,
Not half so wealthy as a Knight or Squire,
And yet in sign of duty to his Grace,
I will lend his Majesty two hundred pound.

Thanks honest fellow, for thy love to us,
And if I may but pleasure thee in ought,
Command me to the uttermost I may:
England hath too few men of thy good mind.
Honesty, what news? where hast thou been so long?

A my Lord, I have been searching for a privy knave
One (my Lord) that feeds upon the poor commons,
And makes poor Piers ploughman wear a thread bare coat,
It is a farmer (my Lord) which buys up all the corn in the market, and sends
it away beyond seas, thereby feeds the enemy.


Alas, poor piers plowman, what ail thou? why doest thou weep, peace man,
if any have offended thee,

Thou shalt be made amends unto the most.

I beseech your Grace to pity my distress,
There is an unknown thief that robs the common wealth,
And makes me and my poor wife and children beg for maintenance,
The time hath been (my Lord) in diebus illis,
That the Plowmans coat was of good homespun russet cloth,
Whereof neither I nor my servants had no want,
Though now both they and I want,
And all by this unknown Farmer:
For there cannot be an aker of ground to be sold,
But he will find money to buy it: nay my Lord, he hath money
to buy whole Lordships, and yet but a Farmer,
I have kept a poor house where I dwell this four score year,
Yet was I never driven to want till now:
I beseech your Grace, as you have still been just,
To seek redress for this oppression
I beseech your Grace read my humble petition.

Let me see the humble petition, of poor piers plowman,
Alas poor piers, I have heard my father say,
That piers plowman was one of the best members in a common wealth,
For his table was never empty of bread, beef, and beer,
As a help to all distressed traueilers: but where thou tell me,
I harbour him, and he is daily under my elbow,
I assure thee tis more than I know, for I harbour none but this which is my
honest frie^d.

Is this your honest friend? the devil a is (my Lord)
This is he: if you doubt my word to be true, call in Clarke of the
Assyses, now shall your Grace see,
How Honesty can shake out a knave in this company:
Sir, tell me who hath most poor men in suit at this Syses?

That hath Walter would have more*
He hath one poor man in suit for certain Barlie,
And another for that his horse was taken in his corn.

But what inditemennts are against him, read them

F^rst, he hath conueyed corn out of the land to feed the Enemy. Next, he
hath turned poor Piers Plowman out of doors by his great raising of rents.

Next, he is known to be a common disturber of men of their quiet, by serving
Writs on them, and bringing them to London, to their utter undoing.

Also, he keeps corn in his barn, and suffers his brethren and neighbours to
lie and want, and thereby makes the market so dear, that the poor can buy no
corn.


Enough: now fie upon thee, thou monster of nature,
To seek the utter undoing of many, to enrich thy self:
Honesty, take him, and use him as thou wil^.

Come sir, I think I found out your knavery,
Away sir, and bear your fellow company.

Health and good hap befall your Majesty,

Ethenwald welcome, how fares our beauteous love,
Be breese man, what, will she love or no?

Then as your Grace did give to me in charge,
I have discharged my duty every way,
And communed with the maid you so commend:
For when the Sun, rich Father of the day,
E^e of the world, King of the spangled vale,
Had run the circuit of the Horizon,
And that Artofelex, the nights bright star,
Had brou^ fair L^na from the purpled mayne,
Where (...) was (...) with her wanton love,
To lend her light to weary traueilers.
Then twas my chance to arrive at Osricks house?
But being late I could not then unfold
The message that your Grace had given in charge:
But in the morn Aurora did appear,
At sight of whom the Welkin straight did clear.
Then was the spangled ^ale of heaven drawn in,
And phoebus rose like heavens imperial King:
And ere the Sun was mounted five degrees
The maid ca^e down and gave me the good day,

But being come, what said she then?
How like thou her, what is she fair or no?

My Lord, she is colloured like the Scythia Maid,
That challenged Lucio at the Olympian games,
Well bodied, but) her face was something black,
Like those that follow household business:
Her (...) were hollow sunk into her head,
Which makes her have a cloudy countenance,
She hath a pretty tongue, I must confess,
And yet (my Lord) she is nothing eloquent.

Why then (my Lord,) there's nothing good in her.

Yes my Lord, she is fit to serve an Earl or so,
But far unfit for ^dgar Englands King.

So then she is fit for Ethenwald our Cornish Earl,
But far unfit for Edgar Englands king:
Well Ethenwald, I found your policy:
But tell me in faith, doest thou love the maid.
Speak truly man, dissemble not.

I do (my gracious Lord) and therewithal,
Entreat your Majesty to pardon me.

Ethenwald, I am content to pardon thee,
And will be with thee my self ere long,
To do thee honour in thy marriage,
And therefore Ethenwald thou may depart,
And leave us till we visit thee at home.

My gracious Lord I humbly take my leave.

If is please your Grace pardon me, and give me leave
I would gladly bring my Nephew on the way.

With all my heart Dunston, but stay not long.

I humbly take my leave of your Majesty.

Farewell Ethenwald, but Perin tell me now,
What doest thou think of Alfrida,
Is she so foul as Ethenwald reports her,
Believe me then she had been unfit for me.

My gracious Lord, Ethenwald hath dissembled with your Majesty,
For Alfrida is fair and virtuous:
For last night, being in private conference,
He told me he had devised a mean
To colour with the King by forged excuse,
No, no, (quoth he) my Alfrida is fair,
As is the radiant North star Crystalline,
That guides the wet and weary Traveller,
Soust with the surge of Neptunes watery main,
And thus my Lord, he fell to praising her,
And from his pocket straight he drew this counterfeit,
And said twas made by beauteous Alfrida.

A face more fair than is the Suns bright beams,
Or snow white Alps beneath fair Cynthea,
Who would refuse with Hercules to spin,
When such fair faces bears us company.
Fair Pollyxena never was so fair:
Nor she that was proud love to Troylus.
Great Alexanders love, Queen of Amazons,
Was not so fair as is fair Alfrida.
But perin, be thou secrete to the King,
And I will sound these subtle practizes,
And Ethenwald, be sure I will quittance thee,
And teach thee how to dally with thy King,
But perin lets to Court until to morn,
And then we'll take horse and away.

Now let us constult among our selves,
How to misbehaue our selves to the Kings worship,
Iesus bless him: and when he comes, to deliver him this petition
I think the Smith were best to do it, for hes a wise man.

Naighbor, he shall not do it, as long as Iefferay the
Translater is Mayor of the town.

And why, I pray, because I would have put yo^ from the Mace?

No, not for that, but because he is no good fellow,
Nor he will not spend his pot for company.

Why (sir) there was a god of our occupation, and I charge you by virtue of his
godhed, to let me deliver the petitio.


But soft you, your God was a Cuckold, and his Godhead was the horne, and that's
the Arms of the Godhead you call upon. Go, your are put down with your
occupation, and now I will not grace you so much as to deliver the petition, for
you.


What, dispraise our trade?

Nay, neighbour, be not angry, for I'll stand to nothing
only but this.

But what? bear witness a gives me the But, and I am not willing to shoot:
Cobbler, I will talk with you: nay, my bellows, my coletrough, and my water
shall enter arms with you for our trade: O neighbour, I can not bear it, nor
I will not bear it.


Hear you, neighbour, I pray co^swade your self and be not wilful, let the
Cobbler deliver it, you shall see him mar all,


At your request I will commit my self to you,
And lay my self open to you, like an Oyster.

I'll tell him what you say: Hear you naighbor, we have cons^ulted to let you
deliver the petition, do it wisely for the credit of the t^wne.


Let me alone, for the Kings Carminger was here, He says the King will be here
anon.

But hark, by the Mas he comes.

How now Perin, who have we here?

We the towns men of Goteham,
Hearing your Grace would come this way,
Did think it good for you to stay,
But hear you, neighbours, bid somebody ring the bells,
And we are come to you alone to deliver our petition,

What is it Perin, I pray thee read.

Nothing but to have a license to brew strong Ale thrice a we^k, and he that
comes to Goteham, and will not spend a penny on a pot of Ale, if he be a dry,
that he may fast.


Well sirs, we grant your petition.

We humbly thank your royal Maie^y.

Come Dunston, lets away.

Ethenwald, be advised, the King hath sent to thee,
Nay, more, he means to come and visit thee,
But why, I there's the question?
Why tis for this, to see if he can find,
A front whereon to graft a pair of horns*
But in plain terms, he comes to Cu^kold me,
And for he means to do it without suspect,
He sends me word he means to visit me:
The King is amorous, and my wife is kind,
So kind (I fear) that she will quickly yield
To any motion that the king shall make:
Especially if the motion be of love:
For Pliny writes, women are made like wax^,
Apt to receive any impression:
Whose minds are like the Ianamy^,
That eats, yet cries, and never is satisfied:
Well, be as it is, for I'll be sure of this,
It shall be no ways prejudice to me:
For I will set a screen before the fire,
And so prevent what otherwise would ensue:
Twere good I q^estioned with my father first,
To hear how he affected towards the King.
What ho.

Ethenwald, my son, what news?

Why ask you? I am sure you have heard the news.

Not yer, I promise you my Lord.

Why then tis thus, the King doth mean to come and visit you.

And welcome shall his Majesty be to me,
That in the wane of my decreasing years,
Uouchsafes this honour to Earl Osricks house.

So then, you mean to entertain him well?

What else my Son?

Nay, as you will, but hear you wife, what do you think in this, that Edgar
means to come and be your guest?


I think my Lord he shall be welcome then,
And I hope that you will entertain him so:
That he may know how Osrick honours him:
And I will be attired in cloth of Bis,
Beset with Orient pearl, fetched from rich Indian
And all my chamber shall be richly,
With Aras hanging, fetched from Alexandria,
Then will I have rich Counterpoints and musk,
Calamon, and Casia, sweet smelling Amber Greece,
That he may say, Venus is come from heaven.
And left the Gods to marie Ethenwald.

Zwouns, they are both agreed to cuckold me.
But hear you wife, while I am master of the Bark,
I mean to keep the helmster in my hand:
My meaning is, you shall be ruled by me,
In being disguised till the King be gone,
And thus it shall be, for I will have it so.
The King hath never seen thee I am sure,
Nor shall he see thee now, if I can choose:
For thou shalt be attyrde in some base weeds,
And Kate the kitchen maid shall put on thine:
For being richly tyred, as she shall be,
She will serve the turn to keep him company.

Why, men that bear of this will make a scorn of you.

And he that lies with this will make a horne for me.
It is enough, it must be so.

Me thinks twere better otherways.

I think not so, will you be gone?
Father, let me alone, I'll break her of her will,
We that are married to young wives, you see,
Must have a special care unto their honesty:
For should we suffer them to have their will:
They are apt (you know) to fall to any ill.
But here comes the King.

Earl Osricke, you must needs hold us excused,
Though boldly thus vnbid we visit you:
But know the cause that moved us leave our Court,
Was to do honour to Earl Ethenwald:
And see his lovely Bride, fair Alfrida.

My gracious Lord, as welcome shall you be,
To me, my Daughter, and my son in Law,
As Titus was unto the Roman Senators,
When he had made a conquest on the Goths:
That in requ^tall of his service done,
Did offer him the imperial Diadem:
As they in Titus, we in your Grace still find,
The perfect figure of a Princely mind.

Thanks Osrick, but I think I am not welcome,
Because I cannot see fair Alfrida:
Osricke, I will not stay, nor eat with thee,
Till I have seen the Earl of Cornwels wife.

If it please your Majesty to stay with us,
My wife shall wait as handmaid on your Majesty:
And in her duty show her husbands love:
And in good time, my Lord, see where she comes:

you must leave your kitchen tricks,
And use no words but princely Majesty.

Now Iesus bless your honourable Grace,
C^me I pray, sit down, you are welcome by my tr^th,
As God save me here's never a napkin, fie, fie,
Come on, I pray eat some plums, they be sugar,
Here's good drink by Lady, why do you not eat?

May, pray thee eat Alfrida, it is enough for me to see thee eat,

I thank you heartily: by my troth here's never a cushen
By my troth I'll k^ock you anon, go to.

My Lord, this is not Alfrida, this is the kitchen maid,

Peace Perin, I have found their subtlety,
Ethenwald, I pray thee let me see thy kitchen Maid,
Me thinks it is a pretty homely Wench:
I promise thee, Ethenwald, I like her well.

My Lord, she is a homely kitchen maid,
And one whose bringing up hath been but rude:
And far unfit for Edgars company:
But if your Grace want merry company,
I will send for Ladies wise and courteous.
To be associates with your Majesty.
Or if you Grace will have Musicians sent for,
I will fetch your Grace the best in all this land.

Etherwald, no, I will have the kitchen maid,
And therefore, if you love me, send for her.
For till she come I cannot be content.

Father, I will not fetch her: zwouns, see where she comes

Successful fortune and his hearts content,
Daily attend the person of the King.
And Edgar know that I am Alfrida, daughter to Osrick,
And lately made the Earl of Cornwals wife.

Why, is not this Alfrida?

No, mygood Lord, it is the kitchen maid,
Whom Ethenwald in too much love to me,
Hath thus attyrde to dally with the King.

By my troth (my Lord) she lies, go to, I'll course you by and by.

Away (base strumpet) get the from my sight.

Go your ways, you are a cogging knave I warrant you.

Base Ethenwald, dissembler thae thou art,
So to dissemble with thy Sovereign,
(...) afterward under a show of love,
Thou came to sooth thy leasing to the King,
Meaning by that to make me to conceive,
That thy intent was just and honourable:
But see, at last thou hast deceived thy self,
And Edgar hath found out thy subtil^ie,
Which is requite, think Edgar is thy enemy,
And vows to be revenged for this ill.
Go to thy husband beauteous Alfrida,
For Edgar can subdew affects in love.

Thanks, gracious King, mirror of curteste,
Whose virtuous thoughts bewray thy princely mind
And makes thee famous amongst thy enemies:
For what is he that hears of Edgars name,
And will not yield him praise as he deserves.
Nor hath your Grace ever been praised more,
Or termed more just in any action,
Than you shall be in conquering your desires,
And yielding pardon to Earl Ethenwald.

Will you be gone?

My gracious Lord, I humbly take my leave.

H^w am I wronged, and yet without redress?

Have patience good my Lord, and call to mind
How you have lived praised for virtuous government,
You have subdued lust unto this day,
(...) been reputed wise in government,
And will you ^lemish all your honours got,
(...) being tearme^ a foul Adulterer.

Dunston, forbear for I will have it so,
It boots thee not to counsel me in this,
For I have sworn the death of Ethenwald.
And he shall ^ie, or Edgar will not live.
Dunston, it is enough, I am resolved.

Nay, if it be so, then Ethenwald shall not die,
(...) since ^reaties can not serve the turn:
I ^ll make make proof for once what Art will do,

What wilt thou?

Tel me what means the King?

I will not tell thee.

I charge thee by the eternal living God,
That keeps the Prince of darkness bound in chains,
And by that Sun, that thou would gladly see,
By heaven and earth, and every living thing,
Tel me that which I did demand of thee.

Then thus, the king doth mean to murder Ethenwald

But where is the king?

Seeking for Ethenwald.

But I'll prevent him, follow me invisible.

I will.

I have been this morning with a friend of mine,
That would borrow a small sum of money of me,
But I have learned the best assurance a man can have,
In such a matter is a good pawn of twice the value,
Or bonds sufficient for five times the quantity.
He is my near kinsman, I confess, and a Clergy man,
But fifty shillings is money, though I think I might trust him simply with it
for a twelvemonth, where he craves it but for a month, yet simply I will not
be so simple:

For I will borrow his gelding to ride to the Term,
And keep away a just fortnight:
If then he pay me my money, I will deliver him his horse,
I wold be loath to lose my money, or crave assurance of my kinsma,
But this may be done to try me, I mean likewise to try him.
This is plain, though truly (brethreu) something subtle.
But here comes one would fain take my house of me.

Sir, I am a poor man, and I will give you thirty shillings a year, if I may
have it you shall be sure of your money.


Truly brother in Christ, I cannot affoord it of the price.
I must let my house to live, I ask no gains, but who comes ^ere?

I beseech you (good master) for Gods sake, give one penny to the poor, lame,
and blind, good master give something.


Fie upon thee lazy fellow, art thou not ashamed to beg? Read the blessed saying
of S. Paul, which is, thou shalt get thy living with the sweat of thy brows,
and he that will not labour is not worthy to eat.


I, but he remembers not where Christ saith, he that gives a cup of cold
water in my name shall be blessed.


Alas sir, you see I am old.


But that's no reason you should beg.


Alas sir, age coming on me, and my sight being gone, I hope sir, you will
pardon me though I beg, and therefore for Gods sake one penny, good master.


Why I cel thee no, for the Spirit doth not move me thereunto: and in good
time, look in the blessed Proverb of Salomon, which is, good deeds do not
iustify a man, therefore I count it sin to give thee any thing.


See how he can turn and wind the Scripture to his own use, but he remembers
not where Christ saith,

He that gives to the poor lends unto the Lord,
And he shall be repaid seven fold: but the Priest forgets that, or at least
wise he will not remember it.

Now fie upon thee, is this the purenes of your religion*
God will reward you no doubt for your hard dealing.

Care not thou for that, well neighbor, if thou wilt have my house, fr^e^d, and
brother in Christ, it will cost you forty shillings, tis well worth it truly,
provided this, I may not stay for my rent, I might have a great deal more, but
I am loath to exact on my brother.


And yet he will sell all a poor man hath to his shirt, for one quarters rent.


Gods blessing on your heart sir, you made a godly exhortation an Sunday.


I brother, the Spirit did move me thereunto: Fie upon usury, when a man will
cut his brothers throat for a little Lucre, fie upon it, fie, we are borne one
to live by another, and for a man to let his own as he may line, tis allowed
by the word of God, but for usury and oppression, fie on it, tis ungodly, but
tell me will you have it?


I will give you, as I have proffered you.


Truly I cannot affoord it, I would I could, but I must go to our exercise of
prayer, after I must go see a Farm that I should have.


MOst gracious Prince, vouchsafe to hear me speak,
In that the law of kindred pricks me on,
And though I speak contrary to your mind,
Yet do I build on hope you will pardon me.
Were I as eloquent as Demosthenes,
Or like Isocrates were given to Oratory:
Your Grace no doubt will think the time well spent,
And I should gain me commendations:
But for my note is tuned contrary,
I must entreat your Grace to pardon me, if I do jar in my delivery.

Why Dunston, thou hast found us gracious still,
Nor will we pull our settled love from thee,
Until we find thy dealings contrary:
But if thy parley be for Ethenwald,
That base dissembler with his sovereign.
Twere better leave to speak in his excuse,
Than by excusing him game our ill will:
For I am minded like the Salamander stone,
That fired with anger, will not in hast be quenched:
Though wax be soft, apt to receive any impression.
Yet will hard mettell take no form, except you melt the same.
So mean men's minds may move as they think good,
But Kings just dooms are irrevocable.

Tis not enough, where lust doth move the offence.

Why, Counsellers may not with Kings dispense.

A Counseller may speak if he see his prince offend.

And for his Counsel rue it in the end.
But Dunston, leave, you urge us over far,
We pardon what is past, but speak no more

May pardon me, for I will speak my mind,
Your Grace may call to mind proud Marius fall,
That through his wilful mind, lost life and empire,
And Nimrod, that built huge Babylon,
And thought to make a tour to check the clouds,
Was soon dismayed by unknown languages:
For no one knew what any other spake,
Which made him to confess, though twere too late,
He had made offence in temp^ing of the Lord.
Remember Dauid, Salomon and the rest,
Nor had proud Holofernes lost his head,
Had he not been a foul Adulterer.

Dunston, forbear, and let this answer thee
Thou art too presumptuous in reproouing me,
For I have sworn as truly as I live,
That I will never pardon Ethenwald.

Did you but see the man, I am assured,
You would not choose but pardon Ethenwald.

Why Dunston, you have seen as well as I,
That Ethenwald hath dissembled with the King,
My gracious Lord, first cut that Traitor down.
And then will others fear the like amysse.

I tell thee perin, were the Earl in place,
Thou would eat these words uttered in his disgrace,
Veni Asmoroth, in good time see where he comes.

But tel me Dunston, is this Alfrida?

It is my gracious ^rd, this is Ethewald
That lays his breast wide open to your Grace,
If so it please your Grace to pardon him.

Yes, Dunston, I am well content to pardon him,
Ethenwald stand up, and rise up Alfrida,
For Edgar now gives pardon to you both.

Asmoroth away, My gracious Lord, Dunston will not forget
This unknown favour shown Earl Ethenwald,
For which account my Nephew and my self,
Do yield both lyfes and goods at your dispose.

Thanks Dunston for thy honourable love,
And thou deserve to be a Counsellour,
For he deserves not other to command,
That hath no power to master his desire,
For Locrin being the eldest son of B^ute,
Did dote so far upon an Almaine maid,
And was so ravished with her pleasing sight,
That full seven years he kept her under earth,
Even in the life time of fair Guendolin:
Which made the Cornish men to rise in Arms,
And never left till Locrin was slain:
And now though late, at last I call to mind,
What wretched ends fell to Adulterers.

And if your Grace cal Abrams tale to mind,
When that Egyptian Pharo craved his wife,
You will no doubt forgive my Nephews guilt,
Who by the merry jest he showed your Grace,
Did save your Honour and her chastity.

We take it so, and for amends
Ethenwald, give me thy hand and we are friends,
And love thy wife and live together long,
For Edgar hath forgot all former wrong.

Thanks gracious King, and here upon my knee,
I rest to be disposed as you please:

Enough Ethenwald, but who comes here.

Why, I think I have taken in hand an endless task,
To smell a Knave, tis more than a Dog can do:
I have disguised my self of purpose to find
A couple of Knaves, which are yet behind,
The next Knave is a Priest, called Iohn the precise,
That with counterfeit holiness blinds the peoples eyes,
This is one of them that will say it is a shame,
For men to swear and blaspheme Gods holy name:
Yet if a make a good Sermon but once in a year,
A will be forty times in a Tavern making good cheer,
Yet in the Church he will read with such sobriety,
That you would think him very precise, and of great honesty.

What Honesty, hast thou dispatcht and found these privy knaves?


I shall do anon, I have them in sent, but I will be gone.

Good Lord, I praise God I am come from our mornings exercise,
Where I have profited my self, and eified my brethren,
In showing the way to salvation by my doctrine:
And now I am going to the Court to prefer my petition.
I would give a hundred pound it were granted:
Tis a thing of nothing, but here comes one of the Court,
God save you, brother in Christ, are you towards the King.

I mary am I, what then, why doest thou ask?

Nothing sir, but I would desire you to stand my friend
To get me the Kings hand and seal to this letter:
I would not use it (sir) to hinder any man for a thousand pound:
For indeed I am a Clergy man by my profession:
Tis nothing sir, but as you see, to have the Kings seal,
T carry Tin, Lead, Wool and broad Clothes beyond seas,
For you know (sir) every man will make the most he can of his own
And for my part, I use it but for a present necessity*
If you will undertake to do it, I'll give you a hundred pound.

I thank you sir, but I am afraid the King will
hardly grant it: why, tis an undoing to the common wealth,
But truly I will move the King to hang you Priest in faith.
May it please you Grace to grant me my petition,
For I offer it your Grace in pure devotion.

O monstrous: Dunston, did thou ever hear the like,
Now fie upon thee base villain* lay hands on him.

On me? nay, on him: Priest, I gave your petition to the King,
And I will speak to him you may be but hanged,
For if you should live till the King granted your petition,
The very Ravens would pick out thine cies living:
And therefore twere better you were hanged to save the birds a labour.

Now Honesty, hast thou done, is here all*

O no, my Lord, for there are so many behind,
That I am afraid my work will never have an end:
But I see by the Priests looks, he lacks company,
Stay a while, my Lord, I'll fetch another presently.

Fie, Graceless man, hast thou no fear of God,
To withhold thee from these lawless motions,
Why, thou should be as Messenger of God,
And hate deceit and wicked avarice:
But thou art one of those whom God doth hate,
And thy wild deeds will witness against thy soul:
And make the most abominable in his sight,
That made thee (wretch) but to a better end,
Then thus to wrong his sacred Deity.
Now fie upon thee monster of a man,
That for to gain thy self a private gain,
Would seek the undoing of a common wealth.
And though thou bid ten thousand torments here
They cannot quit thee where thou shalt appear.

A Prize, though it be long, I have found him at last,
But I could not bring him with me,
And therefore I pind a paper on his shoulder,
Meaning thereby to mark him for the gailous:
But husht, here he comes.

What Perin? I cannot think that Perin will be false to me

Why no, for he is false to himself, look in his pocket see,
This is but a false writ that he hath used,
Unknown to your Majesty, and levied great sums of money,
And bribed upon your poor Commons extremely,
How say you my Lord, is this true or no?

Honesty, thou say true, why, impious wretch,
Ungrateful wretch that thou art to injure him that always held thee dear,
Believe me Dunston, I durst well have sworn,
That Perin had not hatched so base a thought,

I, but your Grace sees you are deceived.
But will your Grace grant me one boon?

Whats that Honesty?

That I may have the punishing of them,
Whom I have so laboured to find.

With all my hart Honesty, use them as thou wilt.

I thank your Grace: go fetch the other two:
Now to you Cutbert Cutpurse the Conicatcher,
Thy judgment is to stand at the Market cross,
And have thy cursed tongue pind to thy breast,
And there to staud for men to wonder at:
Till Owls and night-Rauens pick out thy cursed eyes.

Good Honesty be more merciful.

You know my mind: O Walter that wold have more,
And you shall have judgment I mean, which is,
To be carried into a corn field, and th^r have your legs and hands cut off,
because you loved corn so well, and there rest till the crows thereunto, pick
out thine eyes.

But now to you that will do nothing except the spirit move you
You shall for abusing the blessed word of God,
And mocking the divine order of Ministry,
Whereby you have led the ignorant into errors,
You (I say) as you were shameless in your shameful dealing,
Shall to your shame, the utter shame of al bad minded men,
That live as thou hast done,
Stand in Finsburie fields, near London,
And there (as a dissembling Hypocrit) be shot to death.

Good Honesty, be more favourable than so.

Truly no, the spirit doth not move me thereunto,
But who is next, what Perin, a Courtier, and a Cosoner to,
I have a judgment yet in store for thee,
And for because I will use thee favourably,
In faith thy judgment is to be but hanged,
But where? even at Tyborne in a good two-peny hal^er,
And though you could never abide the seas,
Yet now against your will, you must bear your sail, namely your sheer,
And in a cart be towde up Holburne hill,
Would all men living like these in this land,
Might be judged so at Honesties hand.

Well Honesty come follow us to Court,
Wheee thou shalt be rewarded for thy pain.

I thank your Grace: you that will damn your selves for lucres sake
And make no conscience to deceive the poor:
You that be enemies of the common wealth:
To send corn over to enrich the enemy:
And you that do abuse the word of God,
And send over woolle and Tin, broad cloth and lead,
And you that counterfeit Kings privy seals,
And thereby rob the willing minded Communaltie,
I warn you all that use such subtle villainy,
Beware least you like these be found by Honesty,
Take heed I say, for if I catch you once,
Your bodies shall be meat for Crows,
And the Devil shall have your bones,
And thus though long at last we make an end,
Desiring you to pardon whats amiss,
And way the work, though it be grossy pend,
Laugh at the faults, and weigh it as it is,
And Honesty will pray upon his knee,
God cut then off that wrong the Prince or Communaltie.
And may her days of bless never have end,
Upon whose life so many lives depend.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Ihones, and are to be sold, at the sign of
the Rose and Crown, ne'er to S. Andrewes Church in Holborn. 1594.


