THus from the high Imperial Seat of Jove,
Romes awful Goddess, Chance, descends to view
This Stage and Theater of mortal men,
Whose acts and scenes divisible by me,
Sometime present a swelling Tragedy
Of discontented men: sometimes again
My smiles can mould him to a Comic vain:
Sometimes like Niobe, in tears I drown
This Microcosm of man; and to conclude,
I seal the Lease of mans beatitude:
Amongst the several objects of my frowns,
Amongst the sundry subjects of my smiles,
Amongst so many Kings housed up in clay,
Behold, I bring a King of Cambria:
To whom great Pyrrhus, Hector poysde in scales
Of dauntless valour, weighs not this Prince of Wales.
Be dumb you scornful English, whose black mouths
Have dim'd the glorious splendour of those men,
Whose resolution merits Homers pen:
And you, the types of the harmonious spheres,
Call with your silver tones, that reverend Bardh,
That long hath slept within his quiet urn,
And let his tongue this Welshmans Crest adorn.

Who's this disturbs my rest?

None, Poet Laureate: but a kind request
Fortune prefers unto thy airy shape,
That once thou would in well-tunde meeter sing
The high-swolne fortunes of a worthy King,
That valiant Welshman, Caradoc by name,
That foiled the haughty Romanes, cracked their fame.

I well remember, powerful Deity,
Arch-gouernesse of this terrestrial Globe,
Goddess of all mutation man affords,
That in the reign of Romes great Emperor,
Ycleped Claudian, when the Bryttish I'll
Was tributary to that conquering See,
This worthy Prince survived, whose puissant might
Was not inferior to that son of Jove,
Who, in his cradle chokte two hideous Snakes.
Which, since my Fortune is to speak his worth,
My utmost skill alive shall paint him forth.

Then to thy task, grave Bardh: tell to men's ear,
Fame placed the valiant Welshman in the sphere.

Then, since I needs must tell the high designs
Of this brave Welshman, that succeeding times,
In leaves of gold, may register his name,
And rear a Pyramys unto his fame;
This only do I crave, that in my song,
Attention guide your ears, silence your tongue.
Then know all you, whose knowing faculties
Of your diviner parts scorn to insist
On sensual objects, or on naked sense,
But on mans highest Alps, Intelligence.
For to plebeyan wits, it is as good,
As to be silent, as not under stood.
Before fair Wales her happy Union had,
Blessed Union, that such happiness did bring,
Like to the azure roof of heaven full packed
With those great golden Tapers of the night,
Whose spheres sweat with their numbers infinite;
So was it with the spacious bounds of Wales,
Whose firmament contaynd two glorious sons,
Two Kings, both mighty in their arch-comands,
Though both not lawful in their government:
The one Octauian was, to whom was left,
By lineal descent, each government:
But that proud Earl of Munmouth stealing fire,
Of high ambition did one throne aspire,
Which by base usurpation he detains.
Of lawful (right) unlawful treason gains.
Twice, in two haughty set Battalions,
The base usurper Munmouth got the day:
And now Octauian spurde with grief and rage,
Conducted by a more propitious star,
Himself in person comes to Shrewsbury,
Where the great Earl of March, great in his age,
But greater in the circuit of his power,
Yet greatest in the fortunes of his sons,
The Father of our valiant Welshman called,
Himself, his warlike sons, and all doth bring,
To supplant Treason, and to plant their King.
No more I'll speak: but this old Bard entreats,
To keep your understanding and your seats.

Gloster, Lord Codigune,
And Noble Morgan, Earl of Anglesey,
Can the usurping name of Monmouth live
Within the airy confines of your souls,
And not infect the purest temprature
Of loyalty and sworn allegiance,
With that base Apoplexy of revolt,
And eager appetite of sovereign might,
Counting the greatest wrong, the greatest right?
Full many Moons have these two aged lights
Beheld in peaceful wise: Now, to my grief,
When the pure oil, that fed these aged Lamps,
Is almost spent, and dimly shines those beams,
That in my youth darted forth spriteful rays,
Must now die miserable and undone,
By monstrous and base usurpation.

Thrice noble king, be patient, this I read,
The Gods have feet of wool, but hands of lead:
And therefore in revenge as sure, as slow.
What though two Royal Armies we have lost?
He that bears man about him, must be crossed:
And that base Monmouth, that with his goldehead
Salutes the Sun, may with the Sun fall dead.
For base Rebellion draws so short a breath,
That in the day she moves, she moves to death:
And like the Marigold opens with the Sun,
But at the night her pride is shut and done.

Hark you, me Lord Codigune,
By the pones of Saint Tany, you have prattled to the King a great deal of
good Physic, and for this one of her good lessons and destructions, how call
you it, be Cad, I know not very well, I will fight for you with all the George
Stones, or the Vrsa majors under the Suns. Hark you me, Kings: I pray you
now, good Kings, leave your whimbling, and your great proclamations: let death
come at her, and ha can catch her, and pray God bless her. As for the Rebel
Monmouth, I kanow very well what I will do with her. I will make Martlemas
beef on her flesh, and false dice on her pones for every Conicatcher: I
warrant her for Case bobby and Metheglin: I will make her pate ring noone for
all her resurrections and rebellions.


But soft, what Drum is this,
That with her silent march salutes the air?
Herald, go see.

And't please your Grace, Cadallan, Earl of March
Spurred on by duty and obsequious love,
Repining at the Fortune of your foe,
Whose ravening tyranny devours the lives
Of innocent subjects, now in person comes,
To scourge base usurpation with his sons.

Conduct them to our presence.
Welcome, brave Earl, with these thy manly sons:
Never came rain unto the Sunne-parcht earth,
In more auspicious time, then thy supply,
To scourge usurping pride and sovereignty.

Oh my gracious Lord,
Cadallan comes drawn by that powerful awe
Of that rich Adamant his soul adores.
The needles point is not more willing to salute the North,
Man ioyfuller to sit inshrinde in heaven,
Then is my loyalty to aid my King.
I know, dread Liege, that each true man should know,
To what intent dame Nature brought him forth:
True subjects are like Commons, who should feed
Their King, their Country, and their friends at need.

Brave Earl of March, I need not here delude
The precious time with vain capituling
Our own hereditary right. Graves to the dead,
Balsum to green wounds, or a soul to man
Is not more proper, then Octauian
To the usurped Title Monmouth holds.
Then once more on: this be our only trust:
Heavens suffer wrongs: but Angels guard the just.

Now valiant Countrymen, once more prepare
Your hands and hearts unto a bloody fight.
Sterne Mars begins to buckle on his helm,
And waives his sanguine colours in the air:
Recount, brave spirits, two glorious victories,
Got with the death of many thousand souls.
Think on the cause, for which we stand ingagde,
Even to the hazard of our goods and lives:
That were Octauians forces like the stars,
Beyond the limits of Arithmetike:
Or equal to the mighty Xerxes host:
Yet like the poles, our dauntless courage stands,
Unshaken by their feeble multitudes.
But soft: what Drum is this? Soldiers, look out.
Did Caesar come, this welcome he should have,
Strong arms, big hearts, and to conclude, a grave.

My Lord Octauian,
Backed with the Earl of March and his three sons,
Intends to give you battle.

No more, no more: fond doting Earl:
Is not there room enough within Churchyards,
To earth his aged body, with his sons,
But he must hither come to make their graves?
Drums, beat aloud. I'll not articulate.
My soul is drowned in rage. This bloody fight
Shall tomb their bodies in eternal night.

Rot from his cursed trunk that villains arm,
That gave this fatal wound to reverend age.
How fares our Princely father?

As fares the sick man, when the nights black bird
Beats at his casements with his sable wings:
Or as the half dead captive being condemned,
Awaits the churlish Jailers fearful call
Out of his loathsome dungeon to his death:
So fares it with the wounded Earl of March:
The current of my blood begins to freeze,
Touched by the Icy power of gelid death:
A sad Eclipse darkens these two bright lights:
My vital spirits faint, my pulses cease,
And natures frame dissolves to natures peace,
All by that damned usurper.

Eternal peace, free from the hate of men,
Inspheare thy soul, and mount it to the stars.
Brothers, surcease your grief, go to the field,
Cheer up the Soldiers, whilst I single forth
This bloody Monmouth, that I may sacrifice
His canceld life unto my fathers ghost,
And rid the land of this Egean filth,
His usurpation stables. Oh, tis good,
To scourge with death, that crying sin of blood.

Cousin Caradoc, well, in all these pribble prabbles, I pray you, how doth our
uncle Cadallan? be Cad, I heard he had got a knock: if it be so, I pray you
look that the lean Caniball, what do you call him that eat up Iulius Cesars
and Pompeyes: a saucy knave, that cares no more for Kings, then lousy beggars
Chimney-sweepers.


Why, death, man.


I, I, Death, a pox on her: as Cad shudge me, he will eat more Emperors
and Kings at one meal, then some Taylors halfepenny loaves, or Usurers decayed
gentlemen in a whole year: therefore I pray you Cousin, have a care of her
uncle.


He is in heaven already.


In heaven! why did you let her go thither?


It is a place of rest, and Angels bliss.


Angels! Cots blue-hood: I warrant her, there is ne'er a Lawyer in the whole
world, but had rather have eleven shillings, then the best Anshell in heaven. I
pray you who sent her thither?


I cannot tell, but from his dying tongue
He did report Monmouth the bloody means.

Monmouth! Iesu Christ! did he send her uncle to Saint Peters and Saint
Paules, and not suffer her cousin Morgan to bid her Nos Dhi^u? hark you,
Cousin, I'll seek her out be Cad. Farewell, Cousin, I'll make her pring pack
her Nuncle with a venshance.


Farewell, good Cousin; whilst I range about
The mangled bodies of this bloody field,
To find the Traitor forth, whose spo^ted soul
I'll send posthaste unto that low Abisse,
That with the snaky furies he may dwell,
And ease Prometheus of his pains in hell.

Turn thee, Usurper, Harpey of this Clime,
Ambitious villain, damned homicide.

Fondling, thou speak in too mild consonants:
Thy airy words cannot awake my spleen:
Thou woundst the subtle body of the air,
In whose concauity we stand immured:
Thou gives me cordials, and not vomits now:
Thy Physic will not work: these names thou speak,
Fill up each spongy pore vviihin my flesh,
With joy intolerable: and thy kind salutes
Of villainy, and ambition, best befits
The royal thoughts of Kings: Read Machiauell:
Princes thus would aspire, must mock at hell.

Out, thou incarnate Devil; guard thee, slave:
Although thou fear not hell, I'll dig thy grave.

Stay, Prince, take measure of me first.

The Devil hath done that long ago.

Surcease, brave brother; Fortune hath crowned our brows
With a victorious wreath; Their Soldiers flee,
And all their Army is discomfited.
The King sounds a retreat. What is the Traitor dead?
This act hath purchased honour to our name,
And crowned thee with immortal memory.
Off with his head: and let the King behold,
His greatest foe and care lies dead and cold.

Here ends the life and death of bloody war,
Whose graue-like Paunch did never cry, Enough:
And welcome, Peace, that long hath lined exiled,
Immurde within the Ivory walls of bliss.
Ambition now hath thrown her snaky skin,
From off her venomde back. Oh may she die,
Congealed, and never move again to multiply.

God plesse her. Be Cad, Kings, all the Sybilles in the whole world speak not
more tales and prophesies, then our Cousin Morgan: Look you now Kings, our
cousin Caradoc, and our cousin Constantine, break our fasts with mince-pyes
and Gallymawfryes of legs and arms. Is your Grace a hungry? If you be, I have
brought you a Calves head in wool, be Cad; tis in my Knappesacke.


Thanks, gentle Earl.


Thanks for a Pig in a poake, tis pleeding new; and I pray you thank our
cousin Caradoc for it: for as Cad shudge me, he was the Caterer: be Cad, he
did kill her with one blow in the crag, as you use to kill Conies.


Why, Cousin Morgan, I use not to kill Conyes.


Do you not? Hark you me: you were a gteat deal petter to kill al the Conyes
in Wales, then they to kill her. Be Cad, I have known tall men as Hercules,
been wounded to death, and kick up her heals in an Hospital, by the biting
of a tame Conyes in the City: therefore your wild Conyes in the Suburbs, that
eat of nothing but Mandrakes Turne-her-vps, mark you me now, by Sheshu, are
worse then Dog days.


Well, Cousin, you are merry.
But now, brave plants of that unhappy tree,
Whom chance of war hath leveled with the earth,
And in our cause: We cannot but lament
The sudden downfall of that aged Earl.
But since the will of heaven is not confined
Unto the will of man: his soule's at rest.
Our bounties and our love to you alive,
Shall well confirm the love we owe him dead.
And first, because your worthy selves shall see,
Our Royal thoughts adore no peasants god,
Or dung-hill baseness: but in that sphere we move,
Where honour sits coequal with high Jove.
To thee brave Knight, heavens chiefest instrument
Of our new-borne tranquillity and peace,
We give for thy reward, this golden Fleece,
Our Royal daughter, beauteous Guiniuer,
And after our decease, our Kingly right.
Speak, valiant Knight, wilt thou accept of this?

Accept of it, great King!
The Thracian Orpheus never entertained
More Joy in sight of his Euridice,
When with his silver tunes he did enchant
The triple-headed dog, and reassumde,
His souls beatitude, from Plutoes Court,
Then your devoted servant in this gift,
Wherein such unrespected joy concurs,
That every sense dances within his blessed circumference,
And calls my bliss, A Newyeeres gift from Jove;
And not from that which reason or discourse
Proudly from beasts doth challenge, as from man.
In brief, my Lord,
Look how proud Nature in her store,
Because she hath one Phoenix and no more,
Whose indiuiduall substance being but one,
Makes Nature boast of her perfection:
So is't with me, great King; more blessed in this,
Then man turned constellation, starred in bliss.
Her gracious answer, and I am content.

Her consent, Cousin Caradoc, I warrant her there is never a Lady in England,
but consent to give prike and praise to a good thing; go you together: I
warrant her.


How now, my Lord, do you play the Priest?


Priests! Cads blue-hood, I should be mad fellow to make Priests: for mark you
now, my Lord: the Priests say, Let no man put her asunder: that's very good. But
believe me, and her will, it is a great deal petter to put her between;
because the one is a curse, and the fruits of the womb is a great plessing.


Now Princely son, reach me each others hand.
Here in the sight of heaven, of God and men,
I join your Nuptial hands. Oh, may this howre
Be guided by a fair and kind aspect.
Let no malevolent Planet this day dart
Her hateful influence, against these hallowed rites.
You heavenly Pilots of the life of man,
Oh, be propitious to this sacred cause,
That God and men may seal it with applause.
So now to Ceremonies. Music, sound shrill thy note:
'Tis Hymens holiday; Let Bacchus flote.

Go you unto the Church, and with your holy fires
Perfume the Altars of your country gods,
Whilst I in curses, swifter in pursuit,
Then winged lightning, execrate your souls,
And all your Hymeneal jollity,
Now swells the womb of my invention,
With some prodigious project, and my brain
Italianates my barren faculties
To Machiuilian blackness. Welshman, stand fast;
Or by these holy raptures that inspire
The soul of Politicians with revenge,
Black proiects, deep conceits, quaynt villainies,
By her that excommunicates my right
Of my creation, with a bastards name,
And makes me stand nonsuted to a crown;
I'll fall my self, or pluck this Welshman down.
Cornwall, he killed thy brother. There's the base,
Whereon my envy shall erect the frame
Of his confusion. Gloster, I know,
Is Natures master-piece of envious plots,
The Cabinet of all adulterate ill
Envy can hatch; with these I will begin,
To make black envy Primate of each sin.
Now, in the heate of all their revelling,
Hypocrisy, Times best complexion,
Smooth all my rugged thoughts, let them appear
As brothel sins benighted, darkly clear.
Lend me thy face, good Ianus, let me look
Just on Times fashion, with a double face,
And clad my purpose in a Foxes case.

Sit, Princes, and let each man, as befits
This solemn Festival, tune his sullen senses,
To merry Carols, and delightsome thoughts,
Comic inventions, and such pleasant strains
As may decipher time to be well pleased.
All things distinguisht are into their times
And Jovial hours, unfit for grave designs.
A health unto the Bride and Bridegroom. Lords,
Let it go round.

How fares our princely Daughter?
Me thinks, your looks are too composde for such a holiday.

Oh my good Lord, to put your Highness out of your suspect,
Which your weak argument draws fro my looks:
Tis true, that heathen Sages have affirmed,
That Natures Tablet fixed within our look,
Gives scope to read our hearts, as in a book.
Yet this affirmative not always holds;
For sometimes as the urine, that foretells
The constitution of each temperature,
It falsely wrongs the judgment, makes our wit
Turn Mountybanke in falsely judging it:
And like the outward parts of some fair whore,
Deceives, even in the object we adore:
My Lord, my soule's so rapt
In contemplation of my happy choice,
That inward silence makes it more complete,
By how much more it is remote
From custom of a superficial joy,
That's merely incorporeall, a mere dream,
To that essential joy my thoughts conceive.

How learnedly hath thy persuasive tongue
Discovered a new passage unto joy,
In mental reservation? True joy is strung
Best with the heart-strings, sounds only in the tongue.
But where's Sir Morgan, Earl of Anglesey?
He promised us some pleasant masking sight,
To crown these Nuptials with their due delight.

Oh my Lord, my father is coming to your Grace, with such a many of Damsons
and she Shittlecockes: They smell of nothing in the world but Rosin and
Cobblers wax; such a many lights in their heals, lungs in their hands, above
all cry, in faith.


By my troth, my stomach rumbleth at the very conceit of this Iamall love,
even from the sole of my head, to the crown of the foot. Surely, I will have
more acquaintance of that Gentlewoman; me thinks she dances like a
Hobby-horse.


Thanks, Cousin Morgan.
But soft, what Trumpets this?

A messenger, my Lord, from King Gederus, King of Brytayne, desires access
unto your Majesty.


Admit him to our presence.


Health to this princely presence, and specially to great Octauian; for unto
him I must direct my speech.


To us? then freely speak the tenor of thy speech,
And we as freely will reply to it.
Thy Master is a Prince, whom we affect,
For honourable causes known to us:
Then speak, as if the power we have to grant,
Were tied to his desire.

Then know, great King, that now Gederus stands,
As in a Labyrinth of hope and fear,
Uncertain either of his life and Crown.
The Roman* Claudius Caesar, with an host
Of matchless numbers, bold and resolute,
Are marching towards Brittayn, armed with rage,
For the denying Tribute unto Rome,
By force and bloody war to conquer it,
And either win Brittayne with the sword,
Or make her stoop under the Roman yoke.
Now, mighty King, since Brittayne, through the world,
Is counted famous for a generous I'll,
Scorning to yield to foreign servitude,
Gederus humbly doth desire your aid,
To back him against the pride of Roman Caesar,
And force his Forces from the British shores:
Which being done with speed, he vows to tie
Himself to Wales, in bonds of amity.

Legate, this news hath pleased Octauian well.
The Bryttaynes are a Nation free and bold,
And scorn the bonds of any foreign foe;
A Nation, that by force was ne'er subdued,
But by base Treasons politically forced.
Claudius forgets, that when the Bryttish I'll
Scarce knew the meaning of a strangers march,
Great Iulius Caesar, fortunate in arms,
Suffered three baserepulses from the Cliffs
Of chalky Dover:
And had not Bryttayne to her self proved false,
Caesar and all his Army had been toombde
In the vast bosom of the angry sea.
Son Caradoc, how think you of this worthy enterprise?
Yet tis unfit, that on this sudden warning,
You leave your fair wife, to the Theoricke
Of matrimonial pleasure and delight.

Oh my good Lord, this honourable cause
Is able to inflame the coward breast
Of base Thersites, to transform a man,
That's Planet-strooke with Saturne, into Mars;
To turn the Caucasus of peasant thoughts,
Into the burning Aetna of revenge,
And manly Execution of the foe.
What man is he, if Reason speak him man,
Or honour spurs on, that immortal fame
May canonize his Acts to after times,
And Kingly Homers in their Swanlike tunes
Of sphearelike Music, of sweet Poesy,
May tell their memorable acts in verse;
But at the name of Romanes, is all war,
All courage, all compact of manly vigour
Totally magnanimous, fit to cope
Even with a band of Centaurs, or a host
Of Cretan Minotaures? Then let not me be bard:
The way to honour's craggy, rough, and hard.

Go on, prosper, brave resolved Prince.

Fair Princess, be not you dismayed at this;
Tis honour bids me leave you for a while.
'Twill not long be absent. All the world,
Except this honourable accident,
Could not entreat, what now I must perform,
Being ingadgde by honour. Let it suffice,
That joy that lives with thee, without thee dies.

Sweet Lord, each howre whilst you return, I'll pray,
Honour may crown you with a glorious day.

Then here I'll take my leave;
First, as my duty binds, of you great King.
Next, of you, fair Princess.
Come brothers, and Lord Morgan, I must entreat
Your company along.

Fare you well, great King: our Cousin ap Caradoc and I, will make Cesars, with
all her Romanes, run to the Teuils arse a peak, I warrant her.

I pray you look unto her son there: be Cad, he hath no more wit in his
pa^es, then the arrantest Cander at Coose fair.


Come, daughter, now let's in.
He that loves honour, must his honour win.

Thus have you seen, the vali^nt Caradoc,
Mounting the Chariot of eternal fame,
Whom, mighty Fortune, Regent of this Globe,
Which Navigators call terrestrial,
Attends upon: and like a careful Nurse,
That sings sweet Lullabies unto her babe,
Crowns her beloved Minion with content,
And sets him on the highest Spire of Fame.
Now to Gederus, King of warlike Brittayne,
Oppressed with Roman Legions is he gone,
Spurred oh with matchless resolution,
And in the battle, as your selves shall see,
Fights like a Nemean Lyon,
Or like, those Giants, that to cope with Jove,
Hurled Osla upon Peleon, heaped hill on hill,
Mountain on mountain, in their boundless rage.
But in the mean time dreadlesse of treacherous plots,
The Bastard plays his Rex, whose ancient sore
Begins to fester, and now breaks the head
Of that Impostume malice had begot.
Now Cornwall, Gloster, twins of some Incubus,
And son and heir to hells Imperial Crown,
The Bastard Codigune, conspire the death
Of old Octauian. Those that fain would know
The manner how, observe this silent show.

The treacherous Bastard, with his accomplices,
Cornwall and Gloster, did inuit the King,
Fair Guiniuer and beauteous Voada,
The sister of renowned Caradoc,
Unto a sumptuous feast, whose costly outside
Gave no suspicion to a foul intent.
And had Cassandra (as she did at Troy
Foretell the danger of the ^re^ian ho^se,
That Sinon counterfeited with his tears,)
Presaged this Treason; like to some nightly dream
Of some superfluous brain begot in wine,
It had been only fabulous, and extinct
Even with the same breath, that she brought it forth,
Like some abortive Oracle, so beguiles
The Sirens songs, and tears of Crocodiles.
At this great banquet, great Octauian
Was poisoned, and the wife of Caradoc,
Together with his beauteous sister led
Unto a loathsome prison, and the Crown
Invested on the head of Codigune
The envious Bastard. Here leave we them a while:
And now to Bryttayne let us steer the course
Of our attention, where this worthy Sun
That shines within the firmament of Wales,
Was like himself, thrice welcomed, till the spleen
Of that malicious Gloster did pursue
In certain letters, sent to Goderus King,
Whose sister he had married, his defame
Wales lost, in lively Scenes we'll show the same.

Once more, brave Peers of Wales, welcome to Bryttayne.
Herein Octauian shows his kingly love,
That in this rough sea of invasion,
When the high swelling tempests of these times
Oreflow our Bryttish b^ks, and C^sar's rage,
Like to an Inundation, drowns our land,
To send so many warlike Soldiers,
Conducted by the flowers of famous Wales.
Now Caesar, when thou dare, vvee are prepared.
Britains would rather die, then be outdared.
But soft, what messenger is this?
Speak Messenger, from whom, or whence thou comes.

From Wales, my Lord, sent in all post-haste,
From noble Earl of Gloster, to your Grace,
With this letter.

From Wales! I pray you, good posts and messengers, tell us, how fares all our
friends, our Cousin ap Guiniuer, ap Caradoc, ap Voada.


I know them not.


Cads blue-hood, know not our Cousin? I'll give her such a blow on the pate, I'll
make her know her cousins. Cads zwownes, he had best tell her, he knows not
her nose on her face. This fellow was porne at hogs Norton, where pigs play
on the Organ. Posts call you her? Sploud, were a simple Carpenter to build
house on such posts: not know our Cousins?


This letter from our brother Gloster sent,
Entreats me, not to trust the gilded outsides
Of these strangers. We know our brother well:
He is a man of honourable parts,
Judicious, upon no slight surmise,
Gives us intelligence, it shall be so.
We'll trust a friend, before an unknown foe.
Prince Caradoc, you with your forces lye upon you hill;
From whence, unless you see our Army faint,
Or discouraged by the Roman bands,
There keep your standing.
Hark, Roman Caesar comes: now Brittaynes fight,
Like Brutus sons, for freedom and for right.

Disgraced by letters? shifted to a hill?
Fond King, thy words, and all the treacherous plots
Of secret mischief, sink into the gulf
Of my oblivion: memory, be dull,
And think no more on these disgraceful airs,
My fury relished. King,
Set punies to keep hills, that scarce have read
The first material Elements of war,
That wink to see a Canoneere give fire,
And like an Aspen, shakes his coward joints,
At musket shot. Within these noble veins,
There runs a current of such high-borne blood,
Achilles well may father for his own.
These honourable sparks of man we keep,
Descended linially from Hectors race,
And must be put in action. Shall I stand,
Like gazing Figure-flingers on the stars,
Observing motion, and not move my self?
Hence with that baseness. I that am a star,
Must move, although I move irregular.
Go you unto the hill, in some disguise.
I'll purchase honour by this enterprise.

Hold, valiant Bryttaine, hold thy warlike hands.

Then yield thy self, proud Roman,
Or by those gods the Bryttaines do adore,
Not all thy Roman host shall save thy life.

Then soldier, (for thy valour speaks thee so,)
Know, that thou hast no common prisoner,
But such a one, whose eminence and place
Commands officious duty through Rome:
Then if thy inward parts deserve no less
In honours eye, then thy mean habit shows,
Release me, that a public infamy
Fall not upon me by the scandalous host,
Whose Critic censure, to my endless shame,
Will run division on the chance of war,
And brand my fortune with black obloquy:
And by my honour, that the Romanes hold
As dear as life, or any other good
The heavens can give to man, the battle donne,
I'll pay my ransom in a treble some.

Know, Roman, that a Bryttayne scorns thy gold.
Let Midas brood adore that Deity,
And dedicate his soul unto this saint:
Soldiers have mines of honourable thoughts,
More wealthy then the Indian veins of gold,
Beyond the value of rich Tagus shore:
Their Eagle-feathered actions scorn to stoop
To the base lure of usurers and slaves.
Let painful Merchants, whose huge riding ships
Tear up the furrows of the Indian deep,
To shun the slavish load of poverty,
Gape after massy gold: the wealth we crave,
Are noble actions, and an honoured grave.
I'll take no money, Roman:
But since thou seem no counterfeit impression,
But bear the Royal Image of a man,
Give me some private token from thy hands,
That's generally known unto thy friends,
That if by chance I come to Rome,
I may be known to be your friend.

Here, worthy Bryttayne, take this golden Lyon,
And wear it about thy neck: This when thou comes,
Will quickly find me out. Soldier, adieu.
Caesar is bound both to the gods and you.

The Roman Eagle hangs her haggard wings,
And all the Army's fled; all by the strength
And opposition of one common man,
In show, not far superior to a Soldier,
That's hired with pay, or pressed unto the field:
But in his manly carriage, like the son
Of some unconquered valiant Mermedon.
Sure, tis some god-like spirit, that obscures
His splendour in these base and borrowed clouds
Of common Soldiers habit. All my thoughts
Are wrapped in admiration, and I am deep in love
With those perfections, only that my eye
Beheld in that fair object. Thus have I left the field,
To interchange a word or two with him.
And see, in happy time he walks alone.
Well met, brave soldier: may a Prince be bold
To ask thy name, thy nation and thy birth?

Fair Prince, you question that you know already.
I am not what I seem, but hither sent,
On honourable terms, to aid this King;
Which he unkingly, basely did refuse,
And in reward of this his proffered good,
Ungratefully returned (what other Kings
With princely donatiues would recompense)
My service with injurious contempt:
But I, in lieu of this disgraceful wrong,
Have done him right, and through the jaws of death,
Have brought a glorious triumph to his Crown,
And hung sweet peace about his palace gates.
True honour should do that, which envy hates.

Fair Map of honour, where my reason reads
Each navigable circle, that contains
My happy voyage to the land of fame:
Say, virtuous Prince, may Gald become so blessed
To follow thy fair hopes, and link his soul
In an united league of endless love:
Nor scorn a Princes proffer: for by heaven,
What I intrude, thy virtue hath enforced,
And like the powerful Loadstone, drawn my thoughts
To limne out virtue: for exactly done,
By artificial nature, to the life,
In thy fair model shadowed curiously,
How like Pigmalion, do my passions dote
On this fair picture! will you accept me Prince?

Most willingly, kind Prince:
And may as yet this Embryo of our loves
Grow to his manly vigour: 'tis love alone,
That, of divided souls, makes only one.
Who then adores not love, whose sacred power
Vnites those souls, division would devour?
Come, gentle Prince, let us go see our friends
I left upon you Hill, to keep our forts,
And thence to Wales, where double joys attend
A beauteous wife, and a most constant friend.

Come, Ratsbane: Oh the intolerable pain that I suffer for the love of the
Fayry Queen! my heals are all kybde in the very heate of my affection, that
runs down into my legs: me thinks I could eat up a whole Brokers shop at
a meal, to be eased of this love.


Oh master, you would have a villainous many of pawnes in your belly. Why, you
are of so weak a nature, you would hardly digest a Seruingmans Livery in
your belly, without a vomit.


I assure thee, thou fayest true, tis but gross meat. But Ratsbane, thou
toldst me of a rare fellow, that can tell misfortunes, and can conjure:
prithee bring me to him. I'll give him somewhat, to help me to speak with the
Fayry Queen.

Whose face like to a Butchers doublet looks,
Varnished with tallow of some beauteous Ox;
Or like the aprons of some Pie-corner Cooks,
Whose breath smells sweeter then a hunted Fox:
Whose eyes, like two great foot-balls made of leather,
Were made to heate the gods in frosty weather.

Oh, happy that man, that hath a bedfellow of these amiable parts. Oh master,
if her visible parts be such, her invisible parts are able tomake an Italian
run mad: he loves an armful. But master, see, here's the man I told you of.


You know my mind, sir, be gone.
I have observed this Idiot, and intend,
To gull the Coxcomb: therefore I did translate
My self this day into this cunning shape.
I oft have heard the fool strongly persuade
Himself, to be the Fayry Queenes chief Love,
And that by her he shall subdue the Turk,
And pluck great Otoman from off his throne.
This I will work on.

Sir, and't shall please you, I come to know some of that excellent skill, the
world hath blisterde mine ears with.


Sir Thomas Morion, for so are you called,
Darling unto the beauteous Fayry Queen;
Your fortunes shall be such, as all the world
Shall wonder at Pheanders noble name:
For otherwise, so are you also named.
I know to what intent you hither come:
You come to see your Love, the Fayry Queen.
And talk with her here in this silent place,
Her nimble Fairies, and her self do use
Oft to repair: and long it will not be,
Ere she com hither: but thus much you must know
You must not talk to her, as to a Queen
Of earthly substance: for she is a pure
And simple spirit, without Elements:
Wherefore, without any mortal thing
That may annoy her most immortal sense,
You must go, humbly creeping on your hands,
Without your Doublet, Rapier, Cloak or Hose,
Or any thing that may offend her nose.
And see, see, yonder she comes; if you will speak with her,
You must do as I tell you.

Oh help me quickly;
Come, Ratsbane, uncase, my love is come.
Great Queen, thou sovereign of Pheanders heart,
Vouchsafe a word unto thy Maiden Knight,
That bows his guts unto thy mighty face.

Follow me this way.

Help, Ratsbane, help, help.

Help? why, where are you? I thought you had been in the hole by this time;
Come, give me your hand. You follow the Fayry Queen?


Come, come, say nothing: we'll go home like fools as we came.

Come, my clothes, my clothes.


Cods lid, clothes! Now we may go home worse fools then we came. Sfoot, this
cunning Rascal means to set us a hay making. Sfoote, we are fit for the
Doggehouse, we are flayed already.


Well, we may go home with the naked truth. Its no matter, A mans a man,
though he have but a hose on his head.


Now friends and fellow Soldiers in just Arms,
Prepare your selves against the haughty foe,
Who, as we hear, marches not far from hence.
What we have done, by force we'll make it good,
Or seal our bold attempts, with death and blood.

King, keep your own; maugre all opposition,
If he come hither to demand your right,
And with his rebel troops disturb the peace
Of what both gods and men have made your own,
Maintain the quarrel with your awful power,
Be it right or wrong; behave your self like Jove,
And strike with thunder his base insolence:
Discourse not what is done, nor how, nor when.
Only Kings wills are Laws for other men.

What tidings brings this sweating Messenger?

My Lord, Prince Caradoc, returned from Britain,
Is with his Army marching hitherwards.

He comes unto his death. Now, Codigune,
Banish al timorous thoughts: think what thou art;
A King. That word is able to infuse
Boldness, as infinite, as that we call
The worlds first mover. Why, the name of King
Were able to create a man of stone,
With more then animal courage, to inspire
Dullness, with nerued resolution.
Then, Codigune, like Atlas, on thy back,
Support thy Kingdoms Arch, until it crack.
March forward.

I was not wont, dear friends, to be so dull.
I am all lead, as if my subtle soul
Had left his lodging in this house of clay.
Each empty corner of my faculties,
And understanding powers, swell with dreams
And dire presages of some future ill:
Ghastly and fearful specters haunt my sleep.
And, if there be, as Heathen men affirm,
Some godlike sparks in mans divining soul,
Then my prophetic spirit tells me true,
That some sad news attends my steps in Wales.
I long to hear what mischief, or what good,
Hath happened, since I parted from the King.

Oh father, father, ffoot, I sweat, as if I had been buried in a Tun of hot
grains.


Come you Coxcomb, leave your proclamations and your preambles, and tell her
the naked truth.


My Father knows all.

Indeed, father, the naked truth is, that the Fayry Queen robbed me of all my
clothes: you might have seen me as poor as an Open-arse. But I can tell you
news; the King is poisoned; Lord Codigune crowned; The Lady Guiniuer, the
young Gentlewoman imprisoned.


But hark you me, son Morion; is all this true, or invented of her own
foolish pates and imaginashions?


Why, I pray you, father, when did you hear a Gentleman of Wales tell lies?


Her tell her true in that; tis the prauest Nation under the Suns for that
Hark you me, sons; be Cad, it is a great teale petter to be a thief, then a
liar, I warrant her.


What, Royal Prince, can chance predominate
Over a mind, that, like the soul, retaynes
A harmony of such concordant tunes?
No sudden accident should make to jar.
This tenement of clay, in which our soul
Dwells in, until the Lease of life endures,
Of learned men was well called, Microcosm,
Or, little world: over whose mortal parts
The stars do govern, whose immortal power
Sometimes begets a fatal birth of woe;
Sometimes again inuerts their sullen course
To unexpected Revels, turns our Critic hours
To Cricket merriment; yet is there means that bars
Their hateful influence. Wisdom rules the stars.
You have lost a Father: Use the Athenians breath,
Grave Solons; No mans happy until death.

Oh, loving Prince, thus the Physician speaks
To the disordered Patient: thus healthful Art
Confers with wounded Nature. Tis a common trick,
Men being sound, give Physic to the sick.
Fair Prince, misconstrue not my discontent;
I grieve not, that Octauian is depriued
Of life; but that he hath exchanged
His life, for such a miserable death.
What villain, but a prodigy of nature,
Engendered by some Comet, would have forced
His aged soul to wander in the air?
Bearing a packet of such ponderous sins,
Would crack the Axel-tree of heaven to bear.
And not have given him liberty to pray?
But I am armed with patience. First with words
We'll seek to conquer; and if not, by swords.
March round; I hear their Drums.

Now, Caradoc, what is't thou can demand?

Cousin Caradoc, I pray you hold her peace a little.

I'll hear no mad men speak.

Cads blu-hood, take her for Bedlems, mad men's?

Be patient, Cousin. Codigune, in brief,
I come to claim my right, that thou usurp,
And by sinister means, black as thy sins,
Hast basely stolen: surrender first my wife,
My sister, and the Kingdom of Southwales;
Or by the gods, to whom I stand obliged,
In sacred bonds of Orisons and thanks,
For life and motion: if thou refuse to do it,
Or move that blood boils within my veins,
At the memorial of thy hellish sin,
I'll tear the Crown from off thy cursed head,
And either die my self, or strike thee dead.

Caradoc, thou claymest South-Wales of us.
Nor that, nor wife, nor sister shalt thou have;
But if thou long for any, ask a grave.
The high-swolne pride of Majesty and love,
Brookes no competitors; its thus decreed,
Who shares with them, must for the booty bleed.
Each Planet keeps his Orb, which being resigned,
Perhaps, by greater lights would be outshinde.

Sweet Patience, yet instruct my tongue awhile
To speak the language of a temperate soul.
Codigune, mark what I'll offer thee:
Since that the wrongs, which basely thou hast bred
Cannot be reconciled, but by the death
Of millions, that must suffer for us two;
And we the authors of what wars and blood
Shall in her frantic outrage lavish out:
(For tis a thing that honour'scornes to do,
That multitudes should perish for us two:)
Thou art a man, if actions like thy words,
Be but proportionable, that disdain
To fight with craven baseness all on ods:
Nor do I think thy honour so profuse,
That guiltless men should bleed for thy abuse:
Then, if thou dare: And once more to augment
Thy Bastard courage, again, I dare thee fight,
Even in a single Monomachy, hand to hand:
And, if by chance (as man is nought but chance)
Thou conquerest me, I will become thy slave,
Confirm my right to thee, and to thy heirs;
And if I overcome, do thou the like.
How say thou? wilt thou accept this offer?

It pleases me, and here in sight of heavens,
By all my hopes of immortality,
I will perform what thou hast bravely spoke.
I love thee for these honourable terms,
And will as fearless entertain this fight,
As a good conscience doth the cracks of Jove.

Then as we are, Soldiers, begirt us round,
And let no man disturb the Combatants,
Till one, or both, fall to our mother earth.
For thus be well assured, the cause being right,
Immortal spirits do for justice fight.

Now, Gloster, fly and hide thy head with shame.

Cads blue-hood, peat out her praynes, for calling her Bedlems.

Rise. I'll spare thy life.
Revenge sufficient for thy damned facts;
For to a seared conscience these do well,
Long life, men's hate, and a perpetual hell.
Yet, that thou may live, to atone thy soul
Unto the angry heavens, I freely give
The Kingdom of North-Wales for term of life,
To thy dispose; only reserving tribute to my self,
In just acknowledgement of me and mine.

Know, Caradoc, since by the chance of war,
I must be forced to render up that right,
That like a slave I might have kept by might,
I scorn thy gifts, and rather choose to live
In the vast wilderness with fatal Owls,
Free from the malice of base buzzard Chance,
And there in husht up silence raving go;
Then earth, except be hell, no place so low.
Then with high alms,
I'll to the Romanes, and there plot, pell mell.
Vessels that once are seasoned, keep their smell.
Welshmen, farewell; and Caradoc adieu;
Under the heavens, we have no foe but you.

Now Royal Prince, since happy victory
Hath set a period to a bloody fight,
Cornwall, in humble manner, here presents
Himself and service to your Princely Grace.

Cornwall, although thy actions not deserve
The least respect of us, in taking part
With the aspiring Bastard, and the rest
Of his adherents; yet we do omit
All former injuries, and reunite
Cornwall unto our love.

Then Princes, join with Cornwall, and enthrone
True honour and deserts; with what's her own.
Ascend your Chair, fair Prince.

Long live Caradoc, King of Wales.

We thank you Princes. This being done, we'll see
Our beauteous Queen and sister both set free.
Now, Gloster, in this still and silent wood,
Whose unfrequented paths do lead thy steps
Unto the dismal cave of hellish fiends;
With whom, a Witch, as ugly to confront,
As are the fearful Furies she commands,
Lives in this solitary uncouth place;
Begin thy damned plots, banish that thred-bare thought
Of Virtue,
Which makes us men so senseless of our wrong,
It makes us bear the poison of each tongue.
No, Gloster, no; he, whose meek bloud's so cool
To bear all wrongs, is a religious fool:
Or he that cannot finely knit revenge,
Like to Aracne, in a curious web,
May wounds still fit a Nightcap for his head.
Since I am forced to fly with foul disgrace,
And since of gods or men no hope I find,
I'll use both hell and Fiends to ease my mind.
Here dwells a famous Witch, who, with her son,
As black in art, as art it self is black,
Both memorable for their Magic skill,
That can command sterne vengeance from beneath
The center of the earth, for to appear
As quick as thought. To her I'll tell the tale
Of my revenge, and with the golden Chimes
Of large rewards, enchant her hellish ears.
And see: their monstrous shapes themselves appears.

Thou famous Mistress of the unknown depths
Of hells infernal secrets, oh what reward
Shall a dejected, miserable man,
Chased from the confines of his native land,
By wrong oppression, and insulting pride,
Disgrace, contempt, and endless infamy,
Give, for redress from thy commanding art?

Gloster, I know thee well, although disguisd:
Thou come to crave our help, for thy revenge
Against Caradoc, who now hath vanquished
The Bastard Codigune in single fight.
Know Gloster, that our skill
Commands the Moon drop from her silver sphere,
And all the stars to veil their golden heads,
At the black horror that our Charms present.
Atlas throws down the twinkling Arch of heaven,
And leaves his burden at our dreadful spells.
This pendant element of solid earth,
Shakes with amazing Earthquakes, as if the frame
Of this vast continent would leave her poles.
Neptune swells high, and with impetuous rage
Dashes the haughty Argosey with winds,
Against the Crystal battlements of heaven.
The troubled air appears in flakes of fire,
That, till about the airs circumference,
We make the upper Region
Thick, full of fatal Comets, and the sky
Is filed with fiery signs of armed men.
Hell roars, when we are angry, and the Fiends,
As schole-boyes, tremble at our Charming rod.
Thus, when we are displeased, or male-content,
Both hell obeys, and every Element.

Thou matchless wonder, work but my revenge,
And by the triple Hecate, and the povvers
Your Charms adore, I'll load you with a vvaight
Of gold and treasure, till you cry, No more.
Invent, great soul of art, some stratagem,
Whose fame may draw him to these dismal woods.
No danger can out-dare his thirsty soul
In honourable enterprises: he is a man,
Should hell oppose him, of such dauntless mettle,
That were but fame the end of his achievement,
He would as boldly cope with it, as with things
Of common danger.

Then Gloster, hark: Here in this dismal Grove,
By art I will create a furious beast,
Moved by a subtle spirit, full of force
And hellish fury, whose devouring jaws
Shall havoc all the borderers of Wales,
And in short space vnpeople all his Towns.
Now, if he be a man that seeks for fame,
And grounds his fortunes on the popular love,
Or Kinglike do prefer a common good,
Before a private loss; this famous task,
Whose fearful rumour shall amaze the world,
Will egg him on: where being once but come,
He surely meets with his destruction.
Son, to this purpose, straitway to thy book,
Enter the Cave, and call a powerful spirit by thy skill,
Command him instantly for to appear,
And with thy Charms, bind him unto the shape
Of a devouring Serpent, whilst without
We do await his coming.
Now whirl the angry heavens about the Pole,
And in their fuming choler dart forth fires,
Like burning Aetna, being thus enraged
At this imperious Necromantike art.
Dis trembles at our Magical command,
And all the flaming vawtes of hells Abisse,
Throw forth sulphurous flakes of scorching fire.
The jangling hell-hounds, with their hellish guizes,
Dance damned rounds, in their infernal rage.
And to conclude, earth, water, air, and fire,
And hell grow sick, to see mans art aspire.
A general envy makes them male content,
To see deep art command each element.
See, Gloster, see, thinks he, this monstrous shape
Will not abate the courage of his foe,
And quell the haughty pride of Caradoc?

Yes, mighty Artist, were he thrice inspirde
With more then humane courage, he may as soon
Conquer those matchless Giants, that were set
To keep the Orchard of Hesperides,
Or match the labours of great Hercules.

Go shroud thy horrid shape within this wood,
And seize on all thou meetst. Come, Gloster, in,
And here awhile abide within this Cave.
Thy eyes shall see what thy vexed soul did crave.

Now, valiant Romanes, once more do we tread
Upon the bosom of the Bryttish ground:
And by the gods that do protect great Rome,
We'll now acquit great Cesars foul disgrace,
Or die like Romanes in this forray no place.

Me thinks, it is a shame to Rome and us,
That have been counted famous through the world,
For matchless victories, and feats of arms,
That such a petty Island should repulse
So huge an army of the Roman strength,
Able to sack the spacious walls of Troy,
To level Babels pride even with the ground:
An I'll, that in respect of Cesars power,
Is like the Center, to the ample heavens;
A point, unto a large circumference;
Small atoms, to the body of the Sun.
Sure, this Welshman works by Magic spells,
Or, tis impossible, if he be a man,
Composed of flesh and blood, sinews and nerues,
He should out-dare so puissant an host.

Great General, that which he holds, is mine;
And though infor'st by violence and wrong,
From that which Nature left my heritage:
Yet, since I see such hopes, so fairly sprung
From such an honourable head, as Rome,
Whose fame for honour, cheualry and arms,
Out-shines all Nations with her glorious rays:
This Caradoc, whom men do causeless fear,
Is of condition insolent and proud,
Ambitious, tyrannous, speckled with every vice
The infectious time can harbour. Say, we confess him bold,
And of a courage that grim visaged death,
The object of true valour, cannot daunt;
Though Proteus-like, he came in thousand shapes,
What's he, compared to numbers infinite?
Or that Imperial Rome, whose Eagle eyes
Have gazed against the sun of matchless triumphs,
Should basely fear a weak and silly Fly?
This Welshman is all superficial,
Without dimensions, and like a mountain swells,
In labour only with great airy words,
Whose birth is nothing, but a silly Mouse;
Actions without their measure or their weight.
Then, Romanes, derogate not from the worth,
That time in ancient Chronicles records
Of your eternal honours got in war.
But if you prize your honours more than life,
Or humane happiness, here's a noble cause
Of wrong and usurpation, to erect
A statue to your dying memory.
Then on, great General, wave the Roman Eagle,
Even to the Tents of haughty Caradoc,
And with my blood I'll second this brave fight,
Or hide my shame by death in endless night.

Bravely resolved* Ere long, assure thy self,
We'll seat thee in thy ancient dignity,
And force to Caesar homage, and to Rome:
And, though we fear not one particular man,
Yet, for because we truly are informed,
That Caradoc is strong and puissant,
For ten days we intend to make a truce,
And in the mean time to make strong our host:
Which if he do refuse, the time expired,
To render up thy right, which he detains;
War, like some gnawing vulture shall attend
Unto their final ruin, and their end.
And to that purpose, Marcus Gallicus
Shall as a Legate both from Rome and us,
Instantly give them knowledge: the time's but short:
And till the date's expired, prepare for sport.

Now, beauteous Queen sister, though our tedious absence
In warlike Bryttaine, hath been the cause
Of your imprisonment, yet, at our return,
The gods in justice have repayed the wrong,
Done to your beauties by base treachery,
And forced that damned instrument of sin,
To hide his bastard head in endless shame.
Then, Royal Queen, (for that's a stile befits
The royal virtues of such peerless lustre)
Ascend your Throne, whilst equally with me,
You part, with full applause, your sovereignty.

Long live Queen Guiniuer, Queen of Cambria.

Thanks, Royal Lord. Oh, may these smiling stars,
That kindly have conioynd each others love,
And of two bodies lovingly made one,
Crovvne all thy actions with a gracious look,
And make thee fortunate in peace and war.
Not all the treacherous complots of that Fiend,
Restraint of free air, close imprisonment,
Could with their strange appearances imprint
Such feeling Characters of sudden woe.
As your great conquest doth create new joy,
And exultation of your dangers past.

Thanks, gentle Love. Now sister Voada,
The duty and the care that ever since
My reason could distinguish, and that fraternal love
Nature imposed, that many Moons and years
Have been employed unto the good I owe
Thy riper years, shall in this minutes space
Be full discharged: Therefore, thrice noble friend,
I give unto thy hand an Orient Pearl
Of more esteem, then that, which at a health
Great Cleopatra did carouse in wine,
To Roman Anthony. Love her well, sweet Prince;
Let it suffice; part of our Royal blood
Runs through the channels of her Azure veins,
And that she is our sister.

Right noble Prince, when Gald in lieu of this
So Kingly and so rare a benefit,
(In whom the mirror of bright Excellence
So clear, and so transparantly appears)
Forgets to honour thee or her in love,
May he live branded with some heavy curse,
Worse then oppression of the vviddowes right:
Or when I shall forget to offer up
A sacrifice of my immaculate love,
Unto thy beauteous altar, let me have
A base deformed object to my grave.

And Princely Lord, may no delightsome gale
Of sweet content blow on this mortal state
Of what I now possess, if from my heart
The deep impression of my love depart.

Cousin Morgan, look what Trumpet's this.


I warrant her, tis for more knocks on the pate. Romans call you her? Be Cad,
scurvy Romanes, that cannot let her alone, in her own Countries. I'll choke some
of her with cause bobby, or drown her in hogsheads of Perry and Metheglin.

I pray you, from whence come her?


From Rome.


From Rome! And I pray you, what a pox ails her, that you cannot keep her at
home? have you any Wasps in her tails? or live Eels in her belly, you cannot
keep her at home? Hark you me: I pray you, how toth M. Caesar? toth he need
era parbour? Look you now: let him come to Wales, and her Cousin Caradoc shall
trim his crowns, I warrant her.


I understand you not.


Cads nails? Cood people, doth Morgan speak Hebrewes or no? Understand her
not?


Now, Roman, for thy habit speaks thee so:
Is it to us thy message is directed?

Yes, Prince. And thus the Roman General says,
If within ten days space thou wilt resign
Thy Kingdom to the heir, Lord Codigune,
From whom thou doest detain it wrongfully,
Thou shalt have peace; but if thou doest deny,
Sterne war by force, shall force it presently.

Hark you now, Cousin, Cads blue-hood, if you had beat out her praynes, you
had peene quiet. Shesu, more troubles and fexashions! what a world is this?


Dares that damned Traitor open his hellish throat
Against our right? Or is't your Roman guise,
To back black Treasons and conspiracies?
Ambassador, return unto thy Lord:
Within these ten days he shall hear from us.
But by the gods that do uphold the frame
And fabric of the world, lest it should fall
Upon the head of that damned murderer,
It shall be to his cost. Come, let's a way.

O mighty King, pity thy peoples wrongs,
And cease the clamours of both young and old,
Whose eyes do penetrate the gates of heaven,
To look upon the tragical mishaps,
And bloody spoil of every passenger.
Our sheep devoured, our shepherds daily slain,
All by a furious Serpent, not far hence,
Whom less, great King, you do prevent in time,
A timeless massacre ouerruns your land,
And danger waits, even at your Palace gates,
And your selfe's as incident to death,
As every common Hynde it hath devoured.
Therefore delay not, mighty Sovereign.

A Serpent? where? when? how came it thither?
I'll not demur, Shepherd, lead on the way.
I'll follow thee. There's danger in delay.
Come, Cousin Morgan, go along with us.
Princes, farewell awhile.

Cads blue-hood, fight with Teuils. I warrant her, some Ambassadors from
Belzebubs shortly. Here's a great teale of sturies. I pray Cad plesse her from
T^uils. They are a great teale worse then Marshall men, and Bum-Bayly. From all
of them, Cood Lord deliver her. I come, Cousin.


Good Angels guide thy dangerous enterprise,
And bring thee back, with conquest to thy friends.
Some powerful Spirit hover over the head
Of my dear Lord, and guard him from the rage
Of that fell Monster. Come, Princes, let's away.
A woman's fears can hardly stint or stay.

I have not seen a beauty more divine,
A gate more like to Iunoes, Queen of heaven.
I cannot tell; but if there be a Cupid,
Arrows and flames, that from the sacred fires
Of love and passion, that fond men inspires
With desperate thoughts, kindles our vain desires:
Then in this breast their local place must be.
Oh Love, how powerful is thy Deity,
That binds the understanding, blinds the eye!
Yet here's an object for the eye so rare,
Deceit can ne'er beguile, it is so fair.
This chase I'll keep, and either win the game,
Or lose the golden Fleece unto my shame.

Now, shepherd, are we yet within the ken
Of this fell monster?

Not yet, my Lord: and yet, me thinks, this place should not be far.


Then here we'll stay: it may be, being hungry,
The dreadful monster now will seek his prey,
And range towards us. Come, let's walk about.

Stay venturous Prince, and from an old mans hand,
Receive the means, that sacred heavens decree,
To rid thy Land from this perplexity.
No force of sword can conquer hellish fiends,
By black enchantments made to take thy life:
Thou may with greater ease cleave rocks asunder,
Or with thy hands break Adamants in twain,
Which nought but blood of Goats can mollify,
Then pierce the skales of this infernal Monster.
About thee take this precious sovereign herb,
That Mercury to wise Vlisses gave,
To keep him from the rage of Cyrces charms.
This precious herb, maugre the force of hell,
From blackest sorcery keeps sound and well.
Farewell, great Prince.

Thanks, gentle Father. And see, the Serpent comes.
Now Caradoc, pursue this hellish Fiend.
Cursed Impostor, damned Inginer of plots,
As black in cursed purposes, as night,
When by your hellish charms, she mourns in black
And sable vestments; tell me, thou son of darkness,
Where that Inuentor of mischievous ills
Gloster remaynes.

There in that cave: but he is fled from thence,
And being frantic with the horrid sight
Of fearful apparitions, in despair
Runs up and down these solitary Groves,
Where shortly Furies, with their devilish haunts,
Will lead him to a sad and violent death.

Were thou the author? tell upon thy life.

No, Prince: for in this horrid Cave
There lives my aged mother, deep in skill
Of Magic Exorcisms, as the art it self
Exceeds the boundless depth of humane wit.
With her the Earl conspired, to draw you hither
By this invention.

Rise, come forth, thou ugly Hag, from thy dark Cell.
Cousin Morgan, throw her into the flames
Of the burning Temple.

I warrant her. By shesu, tis a hot whore.


On this condition do I give thee life,
That first, if such an hellish art as this
May serve to virtuous uses, then direct
The scope of all thy skill, to aid poor men,
Distressed by any casualty or chance,
And specially our friends.

This Bluso vows to keep inviolable.

Come, Cousin Morgan, Kings in this are known,
That for their subjects lives, neglect their own.

How now, Sirs, what heavy spectacle affronts our eyes?


Come, my masters, every man his part, he shall be examined, ere we part with
him.


Tis fit, neighbour, for he that has no more care of himself, what will he
have of another fellow?


Whose body is that, my friends?


Tis not a body, Sir, tis but a carcass, sir, some Gentleman it seems; for if
he had been a poor man, that labours for his living, he would have found
somewhat else to do, and not to have hanged himself.


Alack, alack, a wretched case.


Nay truly, never bestow pity on him, that could not pity himself.


Tis Glosters body, noble Caradoc.


A Traitors body, then heavens justice shown.
That in contriving mischief for his own.

If his head were taken from his shoulders, 'twere very well, and poale his
head on a high crag.


You may poale his head here, if it please you, but truly it is not worth the
labour, for it is a fleece of the lovvzest hair that ever was hanged.


You are a prattling Coxcomb, I would have his head mounted on a poale, for
all false knaves to see and behold.


Why sir, you may see it now, and the rest shall see it hereafter.


The rest sir, mercy upon us, do you reckon me a false knave? by S. Dauie, I
will melt a stone of tallow from your kidneyes.


Nay, good Sir Morgan.


Pray you Cousin, let me go.


Let your Cousin, let him come, you shall have diggon of Chymr^de, I warrant
you.


Hark you, hark you Cousin, he speaks British, by shesu, I not strike him
now, if he call me three knaves more. God plesse us, if he do not speak as
good British, as any is in Troy-walles. Give me both your right hands, I pray
you, let us be friends for ever and ever.


Sir, you shall be friends with a man of credit then: for I have a hundredth
pound in black and white, simple as I stand here: and simple as I stand here,
I am one of the Crowners quest at this time.


I, for, simple as we all stand here, we are no less at this time.


And it may be, as simple as we are here, if we say, he shall be buried, he
shall, and if we say not, it may not be neither.


But he is dead, whether you will or no.


Not so, for he died with my good will, for I never wept for him.


And his body shall be dust, whether you will, or no.


It may be not neither, as in our wisdoms we shall conclude, perhaps we'll
burn him, then he shall be burned to ashes.


By S. Dauies, it is very true.


For anter, not so neither, we'll sell him to the Apothecaries for mumey. For
anter not so neither, it may be we'll hang him up for the Crows meats, and
then he shall be turned to that that falls upon their heads, that has no new
clothes at Whitsontide.


Hold your tongue there, I beseech you.


You must take it as it falls, and as the foolish Fates, and so the quest
decrees.


Leave it to themselves, they cannot dispose too ill of the remainder of so
black a villain. Our hideous work is done.


My masters, and fellow questmen, this is the point, we are to search out the
course of law, whether this man that has hanged himself, be accessory to his
own death or no.


Tis a hard case burlady neighbours, to judge truly.


Sure, I do think he is guilty.


Take heed, your conscience must be vmpler in the case. I put this point to
you, whether every one that hangs himself, be willing to die or no?


I, I, sure he is willing.


I say no, for the hangman hangs himself, and yet he is not willing to die.


How dos the hangman hang himself?


I mary dos he, sir; for if he have not a man to do his office for him, he
must hang himself: ergo, every man that hangs himself is not willing to die.


He says very true indeed: but now sir, being dead, who shall answer the King
for his subject?


Mary sir, he that hanged his subject.


That was himself.


No sir, I do think it was the halter that hanged him.


I, in a sort, but that was, se offendendo, for it may be, he meant to have
broke the halter, and the halter held him out of his own defence.


But is not the Ropemaker in danger that made it?


No, for he goes backward, when tis made, and therefore cannot see before,
what will come after; neither is the halter in fault, for he might urge the
halter, nolens volens, (as the learned say) neither is he in fault, because his
time was come that he should be hanged: and therefore I do conclude, that he
was conscious and guiltless of his own death: Moreover, he was a Lord, and a
Lord in his own precinct has authority to hang and draw himself.


Then neighbour, he may be buried.


Of great reason, always he that is alive must die, and he that is dead must
be buried.


Yet truly in my conscience, he dos not deserve to be buried.


Oh, you speak partiously neighbor Crabtree, not deserve to be buried? I say,
he deserves to be buried alive that hangs himself.


But for his clothes neighbour.


His clothes are the Hangmans.


Why then he must have them himself.


This is a shrewd point of law, this might he do now, because he would save
charges, and defeat the Hangman: this must be well handled, did he make a Will?


No, he died detestable.


Why then, they fall to his right heir male, for a female cannot inherit no
breeches, unless she wears them in her husbands days.


But where shall we find him?


Tis true, well then for want of issue, they fall to the chief mourner; I will
be he to save you all harmeles, I will take his clothes upon mine own back, I
will begin with his cloak, do you take every man his quarter, and I will follow
with dole and lamenration.


Then thus the verdict is given up.


I, I.


Alas Neighbour, how mournfully you speak already


It is the fashion so to do.


Bear up the body of our hanged friend,
Silk was his life, a halter was his end:
The Hangman hangs too many (graceless else)
Then why should any man, thus hang himself?
If any ask, why I in tears thus swim?
Know, I morn for his clothes, and not for him.

Thus have you seen a man, whose daring thoughts,
Even hell it self, the treasury of terrors,
Whose very shapes make Nature look aghast,
Cannot outface. Now once more turn your eyes,
And view the sudden mutabilities,
That wait upon the greatest favourite
That ever Fortune fauourde with her love,
Sterne Caradoc, virtuously returned,
Hoping to see his beauteous Queen and friends,
His sister Voada, whom he had left
With treacherous Cornwall, who villain-like betrayed
The Town and Voada, as yet a maid,
Unto the hands of Marcus Gallicus,
Son to the Roman General, who, as we saw,
Was far inamor'd of that warlike Dame,
And to the Roman Band conducts her safe,
Whilst Gald, her husband, flies to save his life,
And in disguise, seeks the Magician forth,
Entreating him by prayers, sighs and tears,
To help him by his Art, whilst Caradocs fair Queen,
Together with her daughter, made escape,
And fled unto her Lord, who being enraged,
His manly courage doubled his resolve,
The Roman host pursuing of his Queen
And her young daughter. Who, when Caradoc espied,
Armed with a strength invincible, he fought
In single opposition against an host:
Which famous battle, because histories,
Above the rest, to his immortal fame,
Have quoted forth, willing to give it life
And everlasting motion, with the rest
Shall be in lively Sceanes by him expressed.

Cads blue-hood, Cousin, take her to her heals: was never in such tanshers.
Will her not stir? why look you now, the Romanes come upon her with as many
men, as Mercers keep Wenches; or Wenches decayed gentlemen. Hark you: I'll
call her Cousin Mauron, and our Cousin Constantine, and come to her presently.


Damned Cornwall, may thou sink to hell for this,
Wracked by the Furies on Ixions wheel,
And whipped with steel for this accursed treason.

Yield thee, proud Welshman, or we'll force thee yield.

Art thou a Roman, and can speak that language,
The mother tongue of fugitives and slaves?
No, Romanes: spare these two; and if I fly,
The Roman host shall bear me company.

Come, Lady, you must go along with us.

Even where you will, if Caradoc survive,
My dying soul and joys are yet alive.

Fashion thy self, thou great and glorious light,
To my disguise, and mask thy sub till sight,
That peepes through every cranny of the world;
Put on thy night-gowne of black foggy clouds,
And hide thy searching eye from my disgrace.
Oh Cornwall, Cornwall, this thy treacherous act,
That hath eclipsed the glory of great Wales,
Shall to succeeding ages tell thy shame,
And honour sound, to hear of Cornewals name.
The gods with forked thunder strike thy wrong,
And men in shameful Ballads sing thy fact,
That basely thus hast recompenst thy King.
But curses are like arrows shot upright.
That often times on our own heads do light:
And many times our selves in rage prove worst.
The Fox ne'er better thrives, but when accursed.
This is a time for policy to move,
And lackey with discretion, and not rage.
My thoughts must now be suited to my shute;
And common patience must attend the helm,
And stere my reason to the Cape of hope.
At York the noble Prince Venusius dwells,
That bears no small affection to our self,
To him I'll write a letter, whose contents
Shall certify th'affaires concern my self,
Which I my self in this disguise will bear,
And sound the depth of his affection,
Which if but like a friend, he lend his hand,
I'll chase the Romanes from this famous land.

Dear Bluso, thus far have my weary steps,
Through passages, as craggy as the Alps,
Silent and unknown ways, as intricate,
As are the windings of a Labyrinth,
Searched out the uncouth Cell of thy abode.
The Roman host have seizd my beauteous wife,
And with the rude and ruggy hand of force,
As Paris kept bright Hellen from the Greekes,
Denying ransom, more like Cannibals
Then honourable Romanes, keep her still.
And never more shall Gald enjoy the sight
Of his souls flourishing object, till thy skill,
Exceeding humane possibilities,
Work her enlargement, and my happiness.

Fair Prince, I were ungrateful unto him,
That next to heaven, preserved, and gave me life:
And more, by solemn other I am obliged,
In forfet of my soul, and hope of bliss,
To use the skill I have, to virtuous ends;
Amongst the which, this is the capital.
Then doubt not, Prince, but ere this night be spent,
She shall be free, and you shall rest content.

Thanks, learned Bluso, this thy courtesy
Hath bound Prince Gald, in endless bonds of love,
To thee, and to thy art. Now stretch thy spells,
And make the winds obey thy fearful Charms.
Strike all the Romanes with amazing terror
At our approaches: let them know,
That hell's broke loose, and Furies rage below.

I long have mist those honourable wars,
Which warlike Rome against the Bryttaines hold:
But since we hear, and that by true report,
And credible intelligence from many,
Who lately have returned from the Camp,
That Wales and Rome begin fresh bleeding war,
I do intend with speed to see the Army,
And pay my love, as tribute unto Rome.
But yet I grieve, that such intestine jar
Is fallen betwixt such an heroike Prince,
As is the King of Wales, and powerful Rome.
The Romanes do in multitudes exceed,
He, well instructed in true fortitude,
A Graduate in Martial discipline,
And needs no Tutor: for in pupil age
He was brought up in honours rudiments,
And learned the elements of warlike Arts.
Then much I muse, why Caesar should begin,
That scarce hath ended with the Bryttish wars;
Or who's the Author of these firebrands
Dissention thus hath kindled.

It may be, noble husband, the desire
Of Principality and Kingly rule,
As yet is boundless and vncircumscribde:
But if our reasons eye could see our selves,
That's nearest to us, and not like prospectiues,
Behold afar off, great men were themselves:
Or, if like Philip King of Macedon,
Whose boundless mind of sovereign Majesty
Was like a Globe, whose body circular
Admits no end, seeing by chance, the length
Of the impression, which his body made
Upon the sands, and only by a fall,
Wondered, that such a little space contained
The body, when the mind was infinite,
And in this Moral plainly did foresee
The longitude of mans mortality.
But soft, what Souldiour's this?

And't please you, Madam, from the King of Wales,
I bring this letter to Venusius,
Your Royal husband.

Come, soldier, prithee let me see:
I long to hear from noble Caradoc.

Say, soldier, came thou from Wales?
What news betwixt the Welshmen and the Romanes?

Madam, a glorious victory to Rome,
The Town of Gloster vildely being betrayed
By Cornewals complots and conspiracies,
Even in the dead of night: and to augment
His Treasons to the height of his desert,
Even in the absence of his Lord and King,
Whilst Caradoc, at his return, in rage,
Though single, and environed round with foes,
Fought like a Lybian Lion: But to conclude,
Not Hercules against a multitude.
And thus at ods was forced to flee the place.

Soldier, come hither, where is Caradoc?

In Wales, my Lord, and stays for your reply.

Soldier, I wish, if wishes could prevail,
Thy princely Master were with us awhile,
Till all these clouds of black contention
Were either overblown, or else dissolved.
Fame hath not left a man, more fit for talk
Or disputation in bright honours schools,
Then is thy noble Master. When I behold
His noble portraiture but in conceit,
Me thinks, I see the real thing it self
Of perfect Honour and Nobility,
And not fantastically apprehend
Only the airy fictions of the brain.
I now repent, that thus long I have spent
My honour and my time, in aiding Rome,
And thus far have digressed from Natures laws,
To aid a foreign Nation against mine own.
Were but thy Master here, he soon should see,
He hath his wish, and Wales her liberty.

Then know, kind Prince, that thus I have presumed,
To put thy honoured love unto the test,
In this disguise, and with auricular boldness
Have heard your tale of professed amity.
And noble friend, then here stands Caradoc,
Who now is come petitioner to thy aid,
Betrayed unto the Romanes by a villain.
And whilst by dint of sword I fearless past,
Thorough the Legions of the puissant host.
My Queen and daughter they have prisoners taken,
Whose memory quickens my dangers past,
And adds new fuel to my bleeding soul.
Then, if thou be not verbal, but thy tongue
Is with a single string strung to thy heart,
All Wales shall honour thee and thy desert.

Brave Prince, as welcome to Venusius,
As sleep to wearied Nature. But now the time
Fits not for frivolous complements. Awhile
Repose your self with me, where you shall be
As secret, as men would keep their sins
From the worlds eye, whilst in the mean time, I
Prepare my forces. Wife, view this noble Prince:
This is that man, that, in despite of Rome,
This nine years space hath bravely waged war,
And now by Treason's forced unto his friends.
Then, wife, as thou doest tender our regard,
Respect this Prince, and keep him privately,
Until I do return. Farewell, noble Prince.

Welcome, great Prince. Here think your self secure,
As in a Sanctuary, from your foes.
My husband oftentimes hath worn out time,
Discoursing of your worths superlative:
And I am proud of such a worthy guest.

Lady, I shall be troublesome: but ere long,
I hope once more to meet this traitorous host,
And seal my wrongs with ruin of my foes.
Fame wrongs the Romanes with these noble stiles
Of honour, and vnseconded deserts.
These attributes are only fit for men,
That God-like should be qualified with hate
Of such infectious sins as Treasons are.
Weake-pated Romanes! what fidelity
Can be in Traitors, who are so unjust,
That their own Country is deceived in trust?
Come, Madam, will you show the way?

Now, Bluso, thus far have we by thy Art,
Even to their private lodgings, fearless past
Invisible to any mortal eye.
But, Bluso, tell me, are we yet arrived
At our expected Haven?

This is her Chamber: here will we stand unseen,
And yet see all that pass.
Tis almost dead of night: and now begins
Sleep, with her heavy rod to charm the eyes
Of humane dullness. Here stand we yet awhile,
And in this silent time observe the love,
The Roman Generals son bears to your wife,
Who long hath borne the siege of his hot lust:
And now behold, like bloody Tarquin comes,
Being non-suted, to satisfy the heate
Of his insatiate and immoderate blood,
That boiling runs through his adulterous veins.
A little while give way unto his practise,
And when we see a time, prevent his purpose.

Night, that doth basely keep the door of sin,
And hide gross murders and adulteries,
With all the mortal sins the world commits,
From the clear eye-sight of the morning Sun:
Thou, that ne'er change colour for a sin,
Worse then Apostasy, stand Sentinel this hour,
And with thy Negroes face veil my intent,
Put out thy golden candles with thy fogs,
And let original darkness, that is fled
With Chaos to the Center, guard my steps.
How husht is all things! and the world appears
Like to a Churchyard full of dead.
Deaths picture, Sleep, looks, as if passing bells
Went for each vital spirit, and appears,
As if our souls had took their general flight,
And cheated Nature of her motion.
Then on, unto thy practise: none can descry
Thy black intent, but night and her black eye.
Behold the local residence of love,
Even in the Rosie tincture of her cheek.
I am all fire, and must needs be quenched,
Or the whole house of nature will be burnt.
Fair Voada, awake: tis I, awake.

Am I adreamd? Or, do I wake indeed?
I am betrayed. Fond Lord, what make you here
At this unseasonable time of night?
Is't not enough that you importune
Each hour in the day? but in the night,
When every creature nods his sleepy head,
You seek the shipwreck of my spotless honour?
For shame forbear, and clear a Romans name,
From the suspicion of so foul a sin.
Perhaps you'll say, that you are flesh and blood.
Oh my good Lord, were you but only so:
It were no sin, but natural instinct:
And then that noble name that we call man,
Should vndistinguisht pass, even like a beast.
But man was made divine, with such a face,
As might behold the beauty of the stars,
And all the glorious workmanship of heaven.
Beasts only are the subjects of bare sense:
But man hath reason and intelligence.
Beasts fowls die with them: but mans soule's divine:
And therefore needs must answer for each crime.

Thy speeches are like oil unto a flame.
I must enjoy thee. If thou wilt yield to me,
I'll be thy friend for ever: but if denied,
By force I will attempt, what by fair means
I cannot compass. Besides, thou art my captive,
And standst a suitor for thy liberty.

I, for my body: but my soul is free.

I can no longer hear these arguments.
Come, Bluso, help me to convey her hence.

What Fury hath depriued me of my joy,
And crossed my blood, even in the heat of lust?
What, is she gone? Oh all you sacred powers,
Remit this sin, vnacted, but by thought:
And by those heavenly patrones of chaste minds,
Virtue, like to my soul, shall wholly be
Diffused through every member. Thus powers above
Do, with unknown means, scourge unlawful love.

Already I have posted to the General,
To tell him, Caradoc is in our hands,
And bid him make haste: for this, ere the day,
A woman's wit shall serve for to betray.
And see, he comes. Welcome, thrice-honoured Lord.
Warily, Soldiers; there his Chamber is,
And he not yet abed. Beset him round.
What wars have mist, a woman shall confound.

Now Caradoc, thy life is in our hands:
Behold, thou art in girt with a whole host.
And could thou borrow force of beasts and men,
Thou could by no means escape.

What! Soldiers in every corner set?
The Roman General. I am betrayed.
Inhospitable woman, this with your sex began:
The Serpent taught you to betray poor man.
When God, like Angels, man created first,
God man him blessed, but woman most accursed.
And since that time, the chiefest good in women*
Is to beguile most men, and true to few men.
Yet Romanes, know, that Caradoc here stands,
In bold defiance, were you like the sands.

Assault him then.

Hold, noble Welshman.
Thou see it is impossible to escape,
Had thou the strength of mighty Hercules.
If thou wilt yield, I vow by all the gods
That do protect Caesar and mighty Rome,
By all the honours that the Roman power
Have won, since Romulus did build their walls,
Because thou art a man unparalleled,
Of honourable courage, I'll engage
My life for thine to Caesar for thy freedom.
Caesar himself admires thy fortitude,
And will with honour welcome thee at Rome.
He is a King, whom baseness never touched,
And scorns to pluck a Lyon by the beard,
Being a carcass. Speak, will you trust our oath?

I take thy word, great General.
And think not, for any fear of death,
I prostitute my life to Cesars hands:
But for I know, Caesar is like a King,
And cannot brooke a base mechanic thought:
But for to see those famous towers of Rome,
This golden Lion shall enlarge me soon.

Then, Manlius Valens, you shall bear him thither;
And for your guard, take the ninth Legion,
Surnamed, The valiant: and by the way,
At London stays his daughter, wife and brother:
Let them to Caesar bear him company.
Farewell, brave Prince. Now Romanes once again,
Seeing the Welshmens glory is eclipsed,
Let us provide to meet Lord Morgan,
And Lord Constantine,
Venusius, and the rest that gather head,
And seat Prince Codigune in what's his right,
That now have gathered strong and fresh supply.
This battle shall add honour to our name,
And with triumphant Laurel crown our fame.

Thus, noble Lords, Venusius armed comes,
In love to Wales, and that much wronged Prince,
Who now at York, lives private from his foes,
From whence we now will call him, and awake
His ancient courage, that long time hath slept,
Upon the downy pillows of repose.
Good Angels, guide us: this our latest strife
Shall set a period to our death or life.

Me thinks, right noble Lord, yet I presage
The horror of this battle we intend,
Will cost a mass of blood; nor do I stand
Firmly resolved: and the least spark of valour
Turns to a Flame of Magnanimity.
Oh, were my brother Caradoc but here,
Our minds were made invincible, all our thoughts
Were fixed on warlike Music, or any thing
Beyond a common venture. And see, in time
Our princely brother, and our sister comes.
Welcome, dear brother, how escapte you danger,
And purchased such a happy liberty?

All that I have, I freely do ascribe
Unto this learned man, whose secret Art,
Beyond the strain of deep Philosophy,
Or any natural science under heaven,
Possessed me of this Jewel of my soul,
And through the Roman host invisible,
Conuayde us both safe, as you see we are.

Hark you me, you remember our Cousin Caradoc and Morgan, do you not? Give me
your hands. Be Cad, I shall love the Teuill, till breath's in her pody, for this
trick. Be Cad, he hath done more good then any Justice of Peace this seven
years, for all her stocks and whipping posts. Hark you me now.


Hark, hark, the Romanes march to us with speed*
Now Royal Princes, think on our wild disgrace,
Their Treasons, falsehoods, and conspiracies;
And double resolution whet your rage.
Oh Caradoc, there's nothing wants but thee,
And now too late to buckle on thy Arms.
If in this bloody skirmish I survive,
Triumphs shall crown the glorious brow of Wales.
Bastard, begot at the back door of nature,
Cornwall the author of these bleeding wounds,
That many a wretch shall suffer for their wrongs.
Behold, we come armed with a triple rage,
To scourge your base indignities with steel.
Noble Prince Gald, here in our brothers stead,
Conduct our Army forth as General.
Romanes, come on, your pride must catch a fall.

Now Bryttaines, though the wrongs done to this Prince.
And to our selves, deserve a sharpe revenge;
Yet, for we pity the effusion
And havoc that these cruel broils intend,
Once more in peace we crave this Princes right,
Which your weak Army can no way detain.
Perhaps you stand upon the idle hopes
Of Caradoc: Know then, you are deceived:
For he's our prisoner, and to Rome is sent
With Manlius Valens to the Emperor.
Then yield your selves, or try the chance of war.

Then so we will, base Romanes.
Henceforth, in stead of honourable names,
Succeeding times shall brand your slavish thoughts,
With the black coals of treasons and defame.
Princes, since now you know the worst of all,
Let vengeance teach your valiant minds to mount
Above a common pitch, inspire your souls
With the remorseless thoughts of blood and death;
And this day spit defiance in the face
Of treacherous Rome, and think on this disgrace.

Stay, Prince, and let me speak.


Some Cannon shot ram up thy damned throat.
Peace, hell-hound, for thou sing a Ravens note.

Well met, thou Fiend of hell: by heaven I'll die,
Or be revenged for all thy treachery.

Weak Prince, first keep a diet for a time,
To add fresh vigour to thy feeble limbs,
And then, perhaps, we'll teach thee how to fight.

Villain, the heavens have strength enough against Treason.


Cad plesse her. Cornewals, be Cad, you are as arrant a Knave, as any Proker in
Longlanes. Hark you me, I'll fight with her for all her treasons and
conjurations.


Fare you well, Cousin Cornwall, I pray you commend us to Plutoes and
Proserpines, and tell all the Teuils of your affinity and acquaintance, I
thank them for our Cousin Gald.


Lay down that haggard Eagle, and submit
Thy Roman Colours to the Bryttaines hands:
Or by that mighty Mover of the Orb,
That scourges Romes Ambition with revenge,
I'll pluck her haughty feathers from her back,
And with her, bury thee in endless night.

Know, Bryttaines, threats unto a Roman breast,
Swell us with greater force, like fire suppressed*
If thou wilt have her, win her with thy Arms.

Thus, not in honour, but in foul disgrace,
We wave the Roman Eagle spite of foes,
Or all the puissant Army of proud Rome.

Proud Welshman, redeliver up that Bird,
Whose silver wings thou flutterest in the air;
The Veruels that she wears, belong to Rome,
And Rome shall have, or I'll pawn my blood.

Roman, behold, even in disgrace of this and thee,
And all the factious rout of treacherous Rome,
I'll keep this Eagle; win it if thou dare.

Sound a Retreat. This day was bravely fought.
Cornwall and Codigune, whose infectious breath
Engendered noisome plagues of blood and death,
With all the Roman host is put to flight.
Thus by the hand of heaven, our peace is won,
And all our foes sunk to confusion.

Now famous Rome, that lately lay obscured
In the dark clouds of Bryttish infamy,
Appears victorious in her conquering Robes,
And like the Sun, that in the midst of heaven
Reflects more glory on the teeming earth:
So fares it with triumphant Rome this day.
Bring forth these Bryttish Captives: Let them kneel
For mercy, and submit to Cesars doom.

What's he that scorns to bow, when Caesar bids?

Caesar, a man, that scorns to bow to Jove,
Were he a man like Caesar: such a man,
That neither cares for life, nor fears to die.
I was not borne to kneel, but to the Gods,
Nor basely bow unto a lump of clay*
In adoration of a clod of earth.
Were Caesar Lord of all the spacious world,
Even from the Artic, to the Antarticke poles,
And but a man; in spite of death and him,
I'd keep my legs upright, honour should stand
Fixed as the Center, at no Kings command.
Thou may as well enforce the foaming surge
Of high-swolne Neptune, with a word retire,
And leave his flowing tide, as make me bow.
Thinks Caesar, that this petty misery
Of servile bonds, can make true honour stoop?
No, tis enough for Sycophants and slaves,
To crouch to Tyrants, that fear their graves.
I was not borne when flattery begged land,
And eat whole Lordships up with making legs.
Let it suffice: were Caesar thrice as great,
I'd neither bow to Rome, him nor his seat.

So brave a Bryttaine hath not Caesar heard.
But soft; I am deceived, but I behold
The golden Lyon hang about his neck,
That I delivered to a valiant Soldier,
That ransomless releast me of my bonds.
Great spirit (for thy tongue betrays no less)
If Caesar may entreat thee, kindly tell,
Where, or from whom had thou that golden lyon,
That hangs about thy neck?

From Caesar, or from such another man,
That seemed no less in power then Caesar is,
Whom I took captive, (and so Caesar was)
And ransomless sent back unto his Tents.
Then, if in all he like to Caesar be,
Caesar, I am deceyu'd, but thou art he.

But he that took me, was a common soldier.

No, Caesar: but disguised I left my troupes,
Being forbidden by the Bryttish King,
To fight at all, and rushed into the host,
Where, from thy hands I took this golden Lyon.

Thy words confirm the truth. For this brave deed,
And kind courtesy showed to Caesar in extremes,
We freely give you all your liberties,
And honourably will return you home
With everlasting peace and unity.
And this shall Caesar speak unto thy Fame,
The valiant Welshman merits honours name.

Time cuts off our valiant Welshmans worth,
When longer Sceanes more amply might have shown*
But that the Story's tedious to rehearse,
And we in danger of impatient ears,
Which too long repetition might beget.
Here leave we him with Caesar full of mirth:
And now of you old Bardh entreats to tell,
In good or ill, our Story doth excel.
If ill, then go I to my silent Tomb,
And in my shroud sleep in the quiet earth,
That did intend to give a second birth.
But if it please, then Bardh shall tune his strain,
To sing this Welshmans praises once again*
Bells are the dead mans music: ere I go,
Your Clappers sound will tell me I, or no.

We are your Tenants, and are come to know,
Whether the Rent we paid, hath pleased or no.
If not, our Lease is void: but tis your Lands;
And therefore you may seal it with your hands.

