IVpiter and Iuno willing to do honour to the Marriage of the two famous Rivers
Thamesis and Rhone, employ their Messengers severally, Mercurie and Iris for
that purpose. They meet and contend: then Mercurie for his part brings forth
an Anti-masque all of Spirits or divine Natures; but yet not of one kind or
livery (because that had been so much in use heretofore) but as it were in
consort like to broken Music: And preserving the propriety of the devise;
for that Rivers in nature are maintained either by Springs from beneath, or
Showers from above: He raises four of the Naiades out of the Fountains, and
brings down five of the Hyades out of the Clouds to daunce^ hereupon Iris
scoffs at Mercurie for that he had devised a dance but of one Sex, which
could have no life: but Mercurie who was provided for that exception, and in
token that the Match should be blessed both with Love and Riches calls forth
out of the Groves four Cupids, and brings down from Iupiters Altar four
Statuaes of gold and silver to dance with the Nymphs and Stars: in which
dance the Cupids being blind, and the Statuaes having but half life put into
them, and retaining still somewhat of their old nature, gives fit occasion to
new and strange varieties both in the Music and paces. This was the first
Anti-masque.

Then Iris for her part in scorn of this high-flying devise, and in token that
the Match shall likewise be blessed with the love of the Common People, calls
to Flora her confederate (for that the Months of flowers are likewise the
Months of sweet showers, and Rain bows) to bring in a May dance or Rural
dance, consisting likewise not of any suited persons, but of a confusion or
commixture of all such persons as are natural and proper for Country sports.
This is the second Anti-masque.

Then Mercurie and Iris after this vying one upon the other, seem to leave
their contention; and Mercurie by the consent of Iris brings down the Olympian
Knights, intimating that Iupiter having after a long discontinuance revived the
Olympian games, and summoned thereunto from all parts the liveliest actiuest
persons that were had enjoined them before they fell to their games to do
honour to these Nuptials. The Olympian games portend to the Match, Celebritie,
Victory, and Felicity. This was the maine Masque.

The Fabric was a Mountain with two descents, and severed with two
Trauesses.

THe first Travers was drawn, and the lower descent of the Mountain
discovered, which was the Pendant of a hill to life, with diverse boscages and
Grouets upon the steep or hanging grounds thereof; and at the foot of the
Hill, four delicate Fountains running with water and bordered with sedges and
water flowers.

Iris first appeared; and presently after Mercurie striving to overtake her.

Iris apparelled in a robe of discoulored Taffita figured in variable colours,
like the Raine-bowe, a cloudy wreath on her head, and Tresses.

Mercurie in doublet and hose of white Taffita, a white hat, wings on his
shoulders and feet, his Caduceus in his hand, speaking to Iris as follows:

STay, Stay.
Stay light foot Iris, for thou strive in vain,
My wings are nimbler then thy feet.

Away,
Dissembling Mercury; my messages
Ask honest haste, not like those wanton ones
Your thundering father sends.

Stay foolish Maid,
Or I will take my rise upon a hill,
When I perceive thee seated in a cloud,
In all the painted glory that thou hast,
And never cease to clap my willing wings,
Till I catch hold of thy discoloured Bow,
And shiver it beyond the angry power
Of your cursed Mistress, to make up again.

Hermes forbear, Iuno will chide and strike;
Is great Jove jealous that I am employed
On her love errands? she did never yet
Clasp weak mortality in her white arms,
As he hath often done: I only come
To celebrate the long wished Nuptials,
Here in Olympia, which are now performed
Betwixt two goodly Rivers, which have mixed
Their gentle rising waives, and are to grow
Into a thousand streams, great as themselves;
I need not name them, for the sound is load
In heaven and earth, and I am sent from her
The Queen of Marriage, that was present here,
And smiled to see them join, and hath not chid
Since it was done: good Hermes let me go.

Nay you must stay, Ioues message is the same,
Whose eyes are lightning, and whose voice is thunder,
Whose breath is any wind, he will, who knows
How to be first on earth as well as heaven.

But what hath he to do with Nuptial rights?
Let him keep state upon his starry throne,
And fright poor mortals with his thunderbolts,
Leaving to us the mutual darts of eyes.

Alas, when ever offered he t'abridge
Your Ladies power, but only now in these,
Whose match concerns his general government?
Hath not each god a part in these high joys?
And shall not he the King of gods presume
Without proud Iunoes licence? let her know
That when enamoured Jove first gave her power
To link soft hearts in Undissolved bonds,
He then foresaw, and to himself reserved
The honour of this Marriage: thou shalt stand
Still as a Rock, while I to bless this feast
Will summon up with my all charming rod,
The Nymphs of fountains, from whose watery locks
Hung with the dew of blessing and increase,
The greedy Rivers take their nourishment.
You Nymphs, who bathing in your loved springs,
Beheld these Rivers in their infancy,
And joyed to see them, when their circled heads
Refresht' the air, and spread the ground with flowers:
Rise from your Wells, and with your nimble feet
Perform that office to this happy pair;
Which in these plains, you to Alpheus did;
When passing hence through many seas vnmixt,
He gained the favour of his Arethuse.

Immediately upon which speech, four Naiades arise gently out of their
several Fountains, and present themselves upon the Stage, attired in long
habits of sea-greene Taffita, with bubbles of Crystal intermixed with
powdering of silver resembling drops of water^ bluish Tresses on their heads,
garlands of Water-Lillies. They fall into a Measure, dance a little, then make
a stand.

IS Hermes grown a lover, by what power
Unknown to us, calls he the Naiades?

Presumptuous Iris, I could make thee dance
Till thou forgott'st thy Ladies messages,
And rann'st back crying to her, thou shalt know
My power is more, only my breath, and this
Shall move fixed stars, and force the firmament
To yield the Hyades, who govern showers,
And dewic clouds, in whose dispersed drops
Thou form'st the shape of thy deceitful Bow.
You maids, who yearly at appointed times,
Advance with kindly tears, the gentle floods,
Descend, and power your blessing on these streams,
Which rolling down from heaven aspiring hills,
And now united in the fruitful vales;
Bear all before them ravished with their joy,
And swell in glory till they know no bounds.

Five Hyades descend softly in a cloud from the firmament, to the middle part
of the hill, apparelled in skie-coloured Taffita robes, spangled like the
Heavens, golden Tresses, and each a fair Star on their head; from thence
descend to the Stage, at whose sight the Naiades seeming to rejoice, meet and
join in a dance.

GReat wit and power hath Hermes to contrive
A lifeless dance, which of one sex consists.

Alas poor Iris, Venus hath in store
A secret Ambush of her winged boys,
Who lurking long within these pleasant groves;
First struck these Lovers with their equal darts,
Those Cupids shall come forth, and join with these,
To honour that which they themselves begun.

Enter four Cupids from each side of the Boscage, attired in flame coloured
Taffita close to their body, like naked Boys, with Bows, Arrows, and wings
of gold; Chaplets of flowers on their heads, hoodwinckt with Tiffiny scarfs,
who join with the Nymphs and the Hyades in another dance. That ended, Iris
speaks.

BEhold the Statuaes which wise Vulcan placed
Under the Altar of Olympian Jove,
Shall dance for joy of these great Nuptials:
And gave to them an Artificial life,
See how they move, drawn by this heavenly joy,
Like the wild trees, which follow'd Orpheus Harp.

The Statuaes enter, supposed to be before descended from Ioues Altar, and to
have been prepared in the covert with the Cupids, attending their call.

These Statuaes were attired in cases of gold and silver close to their body,
faces, hands and feet, nothing seen but gold and silver, as if they had been
solid Images of mettle, Tresses of hair as they had been of mettle imbossed,
girdles and small aprons of oaken leaves, as if they likewise had been carved
or molded out of the mettle: at their coming, the Music changed from
Violins to Hoboyes, Cornets, c. And the air of the Music was utterly turned
into a soft time, with drawing notes, excellently expressing their natures, and
the Measure likewise was fitted unto the same, and the Statuaes placed in such
several postures, sometimes all together in the Center of the dance, and
sometimes in the four utmost Angles, as was very graceful, besides the
novelty and so concluded the first Anti-masque.

ANd what will Iunoes Iris do for her?

Just match this show; or my Invention fails,
Had it been worthier, I would have inuok'd
The blazing Comets, Clouds and falling Stars,
And all my kindred Meteors of the Air
To have excelled it, but I now must strive
To imitate Confusion, therefore thou
Delightful Flora, if thou ever felt
Increase of sweetness in those blooming plants,
On which the horns of my fair bow decline;
Send hither all the Rural company,
Which deck the May-games with their Country sports;
Iuno will have it so.

The second Anti-masque rush in, dance their Measure, and as rudely depart;
consisting of a Pedant May Lord, May Lady, Serving-man, Chambermaid, A Country
Clown, or Shepherd, Country Wench, An Host, Hostess, A He Baboon, She
Baboon, A He Fool, She Fool ushering them in.

All these persons apparelled to the life, the Men issuing out of one side of
the Boscage, and the Women from the other: the Music was extremely well
fitted, having such a spirit of Country iolitie^ as can hardly be imagined;
but the perpetual laughter and applause was above the Music.

The dance likewise was of the same strain; and the Dancers, or rather Actors
expressed every one their part so naturally and aptly, as when a Mans eye was
caught with the one, and then past on to the other, he could not satisfy
himself which did best. It pleased his Majesty to call for it again at the
end, as he did likewise for the first Anti-masque; but one of the Statuaes by
that time was undressed.

IRis we strive,
Like winds at liberty, who should do worst
Ere we return. If Iuno be the Queen
Of Marriage, let her give happy way
To what is done, in honour of the State
She governs.

Hermes, so it may be done
Merely in honour of the State, and these
That now have proved it, not to satisfy
The lust of Iupiter, in having thanks
More then his Iuno, if thy snaky rod
Have power to search the heavens, or found the sea,
Or call together all the ends of earth,
To bring in any thing that may do grace
To us, and these; do it, we shall be pleased.

Then know that from the mouth of Jove himself,
Whose words have wings, and need not to be borne;
I took a message, and I bare it through
A thousand yielding clouds, and never stayed
Till his high will was done: the Olympian games
Which long have slept, at these wished Nuptials,
He pleased to have renewed and all his Knights
Are gathered hither, who within their tents
Rest on this hill, upon whose rising head.
Behold Ioues Altar, and his blessed Priests
Moving about it: come you holy men,
And with your voices draw these youths along,
That till Ioues music call them to their games,
Their active sports may give a blessed content
To those, for whom they are again begun.

THe second Travers is drawn, and the higher ascent of the Mountain is
discovered; wherein upon a level after a great rise of the Hill, were placed
two Pavilions: open in the front of them, the Pavilions were to sight as of
cloth of gold, and they were trimmed on the inside with rich Armour and
Military furniture hanged up as upon the walls; and behind the Tents there
were represented in perspective, the tops of diverse other Tents, as if it had
been a Camp. In these Pavilions were placed fifteen Olympian Knights, upon
seats a little imbowed near the form of a Croisant, and the Knights appeared
first, as consecrated persons all in veils, like to Coapes, of silver
Tiffinie, gathered, and falling a large compass about them, and over their
heads high Miters with long pendants behind falling from them; the Miters were
so high, that they received their hats and feathers, that nothing was seen but
veil: in the midst between both the Tents upon the very top of the hill,
being a higher level then that of the Tents, was placed Iupiters Altar gilt,
with three great Tapers upon golden Candlesticks burning upon it: and the four
Statuaes, two of gold, and two of silver, as supporters, and Iupiters Priests
in white robes about it.

Upon the sight of the King, the veils of the Knights did fall easily from
them, and they appeared in their own habit.

ARming doublets of Carnation satin embroidered with Blazing Stars of silver
plate, with powderings of smaller Stars betwixt; gorgets of silver maile;
long hose of the same, with the doublets laid with silver lace spangled, and
enriched with embroderie between the lace; Carnation like stockings embroidered
all over; garters and roses suitable; Pumps of Carnation satin embroidered as
the doublets; hats of the same stuff and embroderie cut like a helmet before,
the hinder part cut into Scallops, answering the skirts of their doublets; the
bands of the hats were wreathes of silver in form of garlands of wild Olives,
white feathers with one fall of Carnation; Belts of the same stuff and
embroidered with the doublet; Silver swords; little Italian bands and cuffs
embroidered with silver fair long Tresses of hair.

LOng robes of white Taffita; long white heads of hair: The high-Priest a cap
of white silk shag close to his head, with two labels at the ears, the
midst rising in form of a Pyramid, in the top thereof a branch of silver,
every Priest playing upon a Lute: twelve in number.

The Priests descend and sing this song following; after whom the Knights
likewise descend^ first laying aside their vailes^ belts, and swords.

SHake off your heavy trance,
And leap into a dance,
Such as no mortals use to tread,
Fit only for Apollo
To play to, for the Moon to lead,
And all the Stars to follow.
The Knighs by this time are all descended and fallen into their place, and
then dance their first Measure.

ON blessed youths, for love doth pause
Laying aside his graver laws
For this device,
And at the wedding such a pair,
Each dance is taken for a prayer,
Each song a sacrifice.
The Knights dance their second Measure.

MOre pleasing were these sweet delights,
If Ladies moved as well as Knights;
Run every one of you and catch
A Nymph in honour of this match;
And whisper boldly in her ear,
Jove will but laugh, if you forswear.
And this daye's sins he doth resolve
That we his Priests should all absolve.
The Knights take their Ladies to dance with them Galliards, Durets,
Corantoes, c. and lead them to their places. Then loud Music sound's,
supposed to call them to their Olympian games.

YE should stay longer if we durst,
Away, alas that he that first
Gave Time wild wings to fly away,
Hath now no power to make him stay.
But though these games must needs be plaid,
I would this Pair, when they are laid,
And not a creature nie them,
Could catch his scythe, as he doth pass,
And cut his wings, and break his glass,
And keep him ever by them.
The Knights dance their parting Measure and ascend, put on their Swords and
Belts; during which time, the Priests sing the fifth and last Song.

PEace and silence be the guide
To the Man, and to the Bride,
If there be a joy yet new
In marriage, let it fall on you,
That all the world may wonder.
If we should stay, we should do worse,
And turn our blessing to a curse,
By keeping you asunder.

