FRom all that's near the Court, from all that's great
Within the compass of the Citty-wals,
We now have brought our Scene.
Hold your peace good-man boy.


What do you mean sir?


That you have no good meaning: This seven years there hath been plays at
this house, I have observed it, you have still girds at Citizens; and now you
call your play, The London Merchant. Down with your Title boy, down with your
Title.


Are you a member of the noble City?


I am.


And a Free-man?


Yea, and a Grocer.


So Grocer, then by your sweet favour, we intend no abuse to the City.


No sir, yes sir, if you were not resolved to play the Jacks, what need you
study for new subjects, purposely to abuse your betters? why could not you be
contented, as well as others, with the legend of Whittington, or the life death
of sir Thomas Gresham? with the building of the Royal Exchange? or the story
of Queen Elenor, with the rearing of London bridge upon wool-sackes?


You seem to be an understanding man: what would you have us do sir?


Why present something notably in honour of the Commons of the City.


Why what do you say to the life and death of fat Drake, or the repairing of
Fleet-priuies?


I do not like that, but I will have a Citizen, and he shall be of my own
trade.


Oh you should have told us your mind a month since, our play is ready to
begin now.


'Tis all one for that, I will have a Grocer, and he shall do admirable things.


What will you have him do?


Marry I will have him --


Husband, husband.


Peace mistress.


Hold thy peace Raf, I know what I do I warrant tee. Husband, husband.


What say thou cunny?


Let him kill a Lyon with a pestle husband, let him kill a Lyon with a pestle.


So he shall, ll'e have him kill a Lyon with a pestle.


Husband, shall I come up husband?


I cunny. Raf help your mistress this way: pray gentlemen make her a little
room, I pray you sir lend me your hand to help up my wife: I thank you sir.
So.


By your leave Gentlemen all, Im'e something troublesome, Im'e a stranger here, I
was ne'er at one of these plays as they say, before; but I should have seen
Iane Shore once, and my husband hath promised me any time this Twelue-moneth to
carry me to the Bold Beauchams, but in truth he did not, I pray you bear with
me.


Boy, let my wife and I have a couple stools, and then begin, and let the
Grocer do rare things.


But sir, we have never a boy to play him, every one hath a part already.


Husband, husband, for Gods sake let Raf play him, beshrew me if I do not
think he will go beyond them all.


Well remembered wife, come up Raf: I'll tell you Gentlemen, let them but lend
him a suit of reparrell, and necessaries, and by Gad, if any of them all blow
wind in the tail on him, I'll be hanged.


I pray you youth let him have a suit of reparrell, I'll be sworn Gentlemen,
my husband tells you true, he will act you sometimes at our house, that all the
neighbours cry out on him: he will fetch you up a couraging part so in the
garret, that we are all as feared I warrant you, that we quake again: we'll
fear our chlidren with him if they be never so vn-ruly, do but cry, Raf
comes, Raf comes to them, and they'll be as quiet as Lambs. Hold up thy head
Raf, show the Gentlemen what thou can do, speak a huffing part, I warrant
you the Gentlemen will accept of it.


Do Raf, do.


By heaven me thinks it were an easy leap
To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac'd Moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the sea,
Where never fathame line touched any ground,
And pluck up drowned honour from the lake of hell.

How say you Gentlemen, is it not as I told you?


Nay Gentlemen, he hath played before, my husband says, Musidorus before the
Wardens of our Company.


I, and he should have played Ieronimo with a Shoemaker for a wager.


He shall have a suite of apparel if he will go in.


In Raf, in Raf, and set out the Grocery in their kind, if thou love me.


I warrant our Raf will look finely when he's dressed.


But what will you have it called?


The Grocers honour.


Me thinks The Knight of the burning Pestle were better.


I'll be sworn husband, that's as good a name as can be.


Let it be so, begin, begin, my wife and I will sit down.


I pray you do.


What stately mucsike have you? you have shawmes.


Shawnes? no.


No? Im'e a thief if my mind did not give me so. Raf plays a stately part,
and he must needs have shawnes: I'll be at the charge of them my self, rather
then we'll be without them.


So you are like to be.


Why and so I will be: there's two shillings, let's have the waits of
South-warke, they are as rare fellows as any are in England; and that will
fetch them all over the water with a vengeance, as if they were mad.


You shall have them: will you sit down then?


I, come wife.


Sit you merry all Gentlemen, Im'e bold to sit amongst you for my ease.


From all that's near the Court, from all that's great.
Within the compass of the Citty-walles,
We now have brought our Scene: fly far from hence
All private taxes, immodest phrases,
What ere may but show like vicious:
For wicked mirth never true pleasure brings,
But honest minds are pleased with honest things.
Thus much for that we do: but for Rafes part
You must answer for your self.

Take you no care for Raf, he will discharge himself I warrant you.


I faith Gentlemen I'll give my word for Raf.


Sirrah, I'll make you know you are my Prentice,
And whom my charitable love redeemed
Even from the fall of fortune, gave thee heate
And growth, to be what now thou art, new cast thee,
Adding the trust of all I have at home,
In foreign Staples, or upon the Sea
To thy direction, ti'de the good opinions
Both of my self and friends to thy endeavours,
So fair were thy beginnings, but with these,
As I remember, you had never charge,
To love your Masters daughter, and even then,
When I had found a wealthy husband for her,
I take it, sir, you had not; but how ever,
I'll break the neck of that commission,
And make you know you are but a Merchants Factor.

Sir, I do liberally confess I am yours,
Bound, both by love and duty, to your service;
In which, my labour hath been all my profit;
I have not lost in bargain, nor delighted
To wear your honest gains upon my back,
Nor have I given a pencion to my blood,
Or lavishly in play consumed your stock.
These, and the miseries that do attend them,
I dare, with innocence, proclaim are strangers
To all my temperate actions; for your daughter,
If there be any love, to my deservings,
Borne by her virtuous self, I cannot stop it?
Nor, am I able to refrain her wishes.
She's private to her self and best of knowledge,
Whom she'll make so happy as to sigh for.
Besides, I cannot think you mean to match her,
Unto a fellow of so lame a presence,
One that hath little left of Nature in him.

'Tis very well sir, I can tell your wisdom
How all this shall be cured.

Your care becomes you.

And thus it must be sir, I here discharge you
My house and service, take your liberty,
And when I want a son I'll send for you.

These be the fair rewards of them that love.
O you that live in freedom never prove
The travel of a mind led by desire.

Why, how now friend, struck with my fathers thunder?

Struck and struck dead unless the remedy
Be full of speed and virtue; I am now,
What I expected long, no more your fathers.

But mine.

But yours, and only yours I am,
That's all I have to keep me from the Statute,
You dare be constant still.

O fear me not,
In this I dare be better then a woman.
Nor shall his anger, nor his offers move me,
Were they both equal to a Princes power.

You know my rival?

Yes and love him dearly
Even as I love an ague, or foul weather,
I prithee Jasper fear him not.

O no,
I do not mean to do him so much kindness,
But to our own desires, you know the plot
We both agreed on.

Yes, and will perform
My part exactly.

I desire no more,
Fare-well, and keep my heart, 'tis yours.

I take it,
He must do miracles makes me forsake it.

Fie upon am little infidels, what a matters here now? well, I'll be hanged for
a halfe-penny, if there be not some abomination knavery in this Play, well,
let'em look toot, Raf must come, and if there be any tricks a brewing, --


Let'em brew and bake too husband, a Gods name, Raf will find all out I
warrant you, and they were older then they are, I pray my pretty youth is Raf
ready.


He will be presently.


Now I pray you make my commendations unto him, and withal carry him this
stick of Licoras, tell him his Mistress sent it him, and bid him bite a
piece, 'twill open his pipes the better, say.


Come sir, she's yours, upon my faith she's yours
You have my hand, for other idle lets
Between your hopes and her, thus, with a wind
They are scattered and no more: my wanton Prentice,
That like a bladder, blew himself with love,
I have let out, and sent him to discover
New Masters yet unknown.

I thank you sir,
Indeed I thank you sir, and ere I stir
It shall be known, how ever you do deem,
I am of gentle blood and gentle seem.

O sir, I know it certain.

Sir my friend,
Although, as Writers say, all things have end,
And that we call a pudding, hath his two
O let it not seem strange I pray to you,
If in this bloody simile, I put
My love, more endless, then frail things or gut.

Husband, I prithee sweet lamb tell me one thing, But tell me truly: stay
youths I beseech you, till I question my husband.


What is it mouse?


Sirrah, did thou ever see a prettier child? how it behaves it self, I
warrant ye, and speaks, and looks, and pearts up the head? I pray you
brother, with your favour, were you never none of M. Monkesters scholars?


Chicken, I prithee heartily contain thy self, the childer are pretty
childer, but when Raf comes, Lamb.


I when Raf comes conny; well my youth, you may proceed


Well sir, you know my love, and rest, I hope,
Assured of my consent, get but my daughters,
And wed her when you please; you must be bold,
And clap in close unto her, come, I know
You have language good enough to win a wench.

A whoreson tyrant has ben an old stringer in's days I warrant him.


I take your gentle offer and withal
Yield love again for love reciprocal.

What Luce within there.

Called you sir?

I did.
Give entertainment to this Gentleman
And see you be not froward: to her sir,
My presence will but be an eye-soare to you.

Fair Mistress Luce, how do you, are you well?
Give me your hand and then I pray you tell,
How doth your little sister, and your brother?
And whether you love me or any other.

Sir, these are quickly answered.

So they are.
Where women are not cruel: but how far
Is it now distant from this place we are in,
Unto that blessed place your fathers warren.

What makes you think of that sir?

Even that face
For stealing Rabbits meanwhile in that place,
God Cupid, or the Keeper, I know not whether
Unto my cost and charges brought you thither,
And there began.

Your game sir.

Let no game,
Or any thing that tends to the same.
Be evermore remembered, thou fair killer
For whom I sate me down and brake my Tiller.

There's a kind Gentleman, I warrant you, when will you do as much for me
George?


Beshrew me sir, I am sorry for your losses,
But as the proverb says, I cannot cry,
I would you had not seen me.

So would I.
Unless you had more maw to do me good.

Why, cannot this strange passion be withstood,
Send for a Constable and raise the Town.

O no, my valiant love will batter down
Millions of Constables, and put to flight,
Even that great watch of Mid-summer day at night.

Beshrew me sir, 'twere good I yielded then,
Weak women cannot hope, where valiant men
Have no resistance.

Yield then, I am full
Of pity, though I say it, and can pull
Out of my pocket, thus, a pair of gloves,
Look Lucy, look, the dogs tooth, nor the Doves
Are not so white as these; and sweet they be,
And whipped about with silk, as you may see.
If you desire the price, suit from your eye,
A beam to this place, and you shall epsy
F. S. which is to say, my sweetest honey,
They cost me three and two pence, or no money.

Well sir, I take them kindly, and I thank you,
What would you more?

Nothing.

Why then fare-well.

Nor so, nor so, for Lady I must tell,
Before we part, for what we met together,
God grant me time, and patience, and fair weather.

Speak and declare your mind in terms so brief.

I shall, then first and foremost for relief
I call to you, I if that you can affoord it,
I care not at what price, for on my word, it
Shall be repaid again, although it cost me
More then I'll speak of now, for love hath tossed me,
In furious blanket like a Tennis ball,
And now I rise aloft, and now I fall.

Alas good Gentleman, alas the day.

I thank you heartily, and as I say,
Thus do I still continue without rest,
In the morning like a man, at night a beast,
Roaring and bellowing mine own disquiet,
That much I fear, forsaking of my diet,
Will bring me presently to that quandary,
I shall bid all adeiw:

Now by S. Mary
That were great pity.

So it were beshrew me,
Then ease me lusty Luce, and pity show me.

Why sir, you know my will is nothing worth
Without my fathers grant, get his consent,
And then you may with assurance try me.

The Worshipful your sire will not deny me.
For I have asked him, and he hath replied,
Sweet Master Humfrey, Luce shall be thy Bride.

Sweet Master Humfrey then I am content.

And so am I in truth.

Yet take me with you,
There is another clause must be annexed,
And this it is, I swore and will perform it;
No man shall ever joy me as his wife
But he that stole me hence, if you dare venture
I am yours; you need not fear, my father loves you,
If not farewell for ever.

Stay Nymph, stay,
I have a double Gelding culored bay,
Sprung by his father from Barbarian kind,
Another for my self, though somewhat blind,
Yet true as trusty tree.

I am satisfied,
And so I give my hand, our course must lie
Through Waltham Forest, where I have a friend
Will entertain us, so fare-well sir Humfrey,
And think upon your business.

Though I die,
I am resolved to venture life and limb,
For one so young, so fair, so kind, so trim.

By my faith and troth George, and as I am virtuous, it is even the kindest
young man that ever trod on shoe leather, well, go thy ways if thou hast her
not, 'tis not thy fault faith.


I prithee mouse be patient, a shall have her, or i'll make some'em smoke
for it.


That's my good lamb George, fie, this stinking Tobacco kills men, would there
were none in England, now I pray Gentlemen, what good does this stinking
Tobacco? do you nothing, I warrant you make chimneys a your faces: o husband,
husband, now, now, there's Raf, there's Raf.


Peace fool, let Raf alone, hark you Raf; do not strain your self too
much at the first, peace, begin Raf.


Then Palmerin and Trineus snatching their Lances from their Dwarses, and
clasping their Helmets galloped amain after the Giant, and Palmerin having
gotten a sight of him, came posting amain, saying: Stay traitorous thief, for
thou may not so carry away her, that is worth the greatest Lord in the world,
and with these words gave him a blow on the shoulder, that he stroke him
besides his Elephant, and Trineus coming to the Knight that had Agricola
behind him, set him soon besides his horse, with his neck broken in the fall,
so that the Princess getting out of the throng, between joy and grief said;
all happy Knight, the mirrout of all such as follow Arms, now may I be well
assured of the love thou bear me, I wonder why the Kings do not raise an
army of fourteen or fifteen hundred thousand men, as big as the Army that
the Prince of Portigo brought against Rocicler, destroy these Giants, they do
much hurt to wandering Damsels, that go in quest of their Knights.


Faith husband and Raf says true, for they say the King of Portugall cannot
sit at his meat, but the Giants the Ettins will come and snatch it from him,


Hold thy tongue, on Raf.


And certainly those Knights are much to be commended, who neglecting their
possessions, wander with a Squire and a Dwarf through the Deserts to relieve
poor Ladies.


I by my faith are they Raf, let 'em say what they will, they are indeed, our
Knights neglect their possessions well enough, but they do not the rest.


There are no such courteous and fair well spoken Knights in this age, they
will call one the son of a whore, that Palmerin of England, would have called
fair sir; and one that Rosicler would have called right beauteous Damsel, they
will call damned bitch.


I'll besworn will they Raf, they have called me so an hundred times about a
scurvy pipe of Tobacco.


But what brave spirit could be content to sit in his shop with a flappet of
wood and a blew apron before him selling Methridatum and Dragons water to
visited houses, that might pursue feats of Arms, through his noble
achievements procure such a famous history to be written of his heroic
prowess.


Well said Raf, some more of those words Raf.


They go finely by my troth.


Why should not I then pursue this course, both for the credit of my self and
our Company, for amongst all the worthy books of Achievements I do not call
to mind that I yet read of a Grocer Errant, I will be the said Knight, have
you heard of any, that hath wandered unfurnished of his Squire and Dwarf, my
elder Prentice Tim shall be my trusty Squire, and little George my Dwarf,
Hence my blew Aporne, yet in remembrance of my former Trade, upon my shiled
shall be purtraide, a burning Pestle, and I will be called the Knight oath
burning Pestle.


Nay, I dare swear thou wilt not forget thy old Trade, thou were ever meek.


Anon.


My beloved Squire, George my Dwarf, I charge you that from hence-forth you
never call me by any other name, but the Right Courteous and Valiant Knight of
the burning Pestle, and that you never call any female by the name of a woman
or wench, but fair Lady, if she have her desires, if not distressed Damsel,
that you call all Forests Heaths Deserts, and all horses Palfries.


This is very fine, faith, do the Gentlemen like Raf, think you, husband?


I, I warrant thee, the Players would give all the shoes in their shop for
him.


My beloved Squire Tim, stand out, admit this were a Desert, and over it a
Knight errant pricking, and I should bid you inquire of his intents, what would
you say?


Sir, my Master sent me, to know whether your are riding?


No, thus; fair sir, the Right Courteous and Valiant Knight of the burning
Pestle, commanded me to enquire, upon what adventure your are bound, whether to
relieve some distressed Damsels, or otherwise.


Whoresome blockhead cannot remember.


I'faith, Raf told him on it before, all the Gentlemen heard him, did he not
Gentlemen, did not Raf tel him on it?


Right Courteous and Valiant Knight of the burning Pestle, here is a distressed
Damsel, to have a half penny-worth of pepper.


That's a good boy, see, the little boy can hit it, by my troth it's a fine
child.


Relieve her with all courteous language, now shut up shop, no more my
Prentice, but my trusty Squire and Dwarf, I must be speak my shield and
arming-pestle.


Go thy ways Raf, as Im'e a true man, thou art the best on 'em all.


Raf, Raf.


What say you mistress?


I prithee come again quickly sweet Raf.


By and by.


Give thee my blessing? No, I'll ner'e give thee my blessing, I'll see thee
hanged first; it shall ner'e be said I gave thee my blessing, you are thy
fathers own son, of the right blood of the Merri-thoughts, I may curse the
time that ever I knew thy father, he hath spent all his own, and mine too, and
when I tell him of it, he laughs and dances, and sings, and cries, A merry
heart lives long-a. And thou art a wast-thrift, and art run away from thy
master, that loved thee well, and art come to me, and I have laid up a little
for my younger son Michael, and thou think to bezell that, but thou shalt
never be able to do it. Come hither Michael, come Michael, down on thy knees,
thou shalt have my blessing.


I pray you mother pray to God to bless me.


God bless thee: but Jasper shall never have my blessing, he shall be hanged
first, shall he not Michael? how say thou?


Yes forsooth mother and grace of God.


That's a good boy.


I faith it's a fine spoken child.


Mother, though you forget a parents love,
I must preserve the duty of a child.
I ran not from my master, nor return
To have your stock maintain my Idleness.

Ungracious child I warrant him, hark how he chops logic with his mother:
thou had best tell her she lies, do tell her she lies.


If he were my son, I would hang him up by the heals, and flea him, and
salt him, whoore-sonne haltersacke.


My coming only is to beg your love,
Which I must ever, though I never gain it,
And howsoever you esteem of me,
There is no drop of blood hid in these veins,
But I remember well belongs to you
That brought me forth, and would be glad for you
To rip them all again, and let it out.

I faith I had sorrow enough for thee (God knows) but I'll hamper thee well
enough: get thee in thou vagabond, get thee in, and learn of thy brother
Michael.


Nose, nose, jolly red nose, and who gave thee this jolly red nose?


Hark, my husband he's singing and hoiting,
And Im'e fain to cark and care, and all little enough.
Husband, Charles, Charles Merithought.

Nutmegs and Ginger, Cinnamon and Cloves,
And they gave me this jolly red Nose.

If you would consider your state, you would have little lust to sing, I-wisse.


It should never be considered while it were an estate, if I thought it would
spoil my singing.


But how wilt thou do Charles, thou art an old man, and thou can not work,
and thou hast not forty shillings left, and thou eatest good meat, and
drinkest good drink, and laugh?


And will do.


But how wilt thou'come by it Charles?


How? why how have I done hitherto this forty years? I never came into my
dining room, but at eleven six a clock, I found excellent meat and drink
a'th table, my clothes were never worn out, but next morning a Taylor brought
me a new suit; and without question it will be so ever: use makes perfectness.
If all should fail, it is but a little straining my self extraordinary, laugh
my self to death.


It's a foolish old man this: is not he George?


Yes Cunny.


Give me a penny in the purse while I live George.


I by Lady cunnie, hold thee there.


Well Charles, you promised to provide for Jasper, and I have laid up for
Michael, I pray you pay Jasper his portion, he's come home, and he shall not
consume Michaels stock: he says his master turned him away, but I promise you
truly, I think he ran away.


No indeed mistress Merrithought, though he be a notable gallows, yet I'll
assure you his master did turn him away, even in this place 'twas I'faith
within this half hour, about his daughter, my husband was by.


Hang him rougue, he served him well enough: love his masters daughter! by my
troth Cunnie if there were a thousand boys, thou would spoil them all with
taking their parts, let his mother alone with him.


I George, but yet truth is truth.


Where is Jasper, he's welcome how ever, call him in, he shall have his
portion, is he merry?


I foul chiue him, he is too merry. Jasper, Michael.


Welcome Jasper, though thou runst away, welcome, God bless thee: 'tis thy
mothers mind thou should receive thy portion; thou hast been abroad, and I
hope hast learned experience enough to govern it, thou art of sufficient
years, hold thy hand: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine,
there's ten shillings for thee, thrust thy self into the world with that, and
take some settled course, if fortune cross thee, thou hast a retiring place,
come home to me, I have twenty shillings left, be a good husband, that is,
wear ordinary clothes, eat the best meat, and drink the best drink, be
merry, and give to the poor, and believe me, thou hast no end of thy goods.


Long may you live free from all thought of ill,
And long have cause to be thus merry still.
But father?

No more words Jasper, get thee gone, thou hast my blessing, thy fathers spirit
upon thee. Farewell Jasper, but yet or ere you part (oh cruel!) kiss me,
kiss me sweeting, mine own dear jewel: So, now begone; no words.


So Michael, now get thee gone too.


Yes forsooth mother, but I'll have my fathers blessing first.


No Michael, 'tis now matter for his blessing, thou hast my blessing, begone;
I'll fetch my money jewels, and follow thee: I'll stay no longer with him I
warrant thee, truly Charles I'll begone too.


What you will not.


Yes indeed will I.


Hey ho, fare-well Nan, I'll never trust wench more again, if I can.


You shall not think (when all your own is gone) to spend that I have been
scraping up for Michael.


Farewell good wife, I expect it not; all I have to do in this world, is to
be merry: which I shall, if the ground be not taken from me: and if it be,
When earth and seas from me are rest,
The skies aloft for me are left.



I'll be sworn he's a merry old Gentleman for all that. Hark, hark husband,
hark, fiddles, fiddles; now surely they go finely. They say, 'tis present
death for these fiddlers to tune their Rebeckes before the great Turks grace,
is't not George? But look, look, here's a youth dances: now good youth do a
turnea'th toe, sweet heart, I'faith I'll have Raf come and do some of his
Gambols; he will ride the wild mare Gentlemen, 'twould do your hearts good to see
him. I thank you kind youth, pray bid Raf come.


Peace Cunnie. Sirrah, you scurvy boy, bid the players send Raf, or by Gods
-- and they do not, I'll tear some of their periwigs beside their heads: this
is all Riffe Raffe.


And how faith? how goes it now son Humphrey?


Right worshipful, and my beloved friend
And father dear, this matters at an end.

'Tis well, it should be so, Im'e glad the girl
Is found so tractable.

Nay she must whirl
From hence, and you must wink: for so I say,
The storietels, to morrow before day.

George, dost thou think in thy conscience now'twil be a match? tell me but
what thou think sweet rogue, thou see the poor Gentleman (dear heart) how
it labours and throbs I warrant you, to be at rest: I'll go move the father
fort.


No, no, I prithee sit still hony-suckle, thoul't spoil all, if he deny him,
I'll bring half a doze good fellows my self, in the shutting of an evening
knocked up, there's an end.


I'll bus thee for that i'faith boy; well George, well, you have been a wag
in your days I warrant you: but God forgive you, and I do with all my heart.


How was it son? you told me that to morrow
Before day break, you must convey her hence.

I must, I must, and thus it is agreed,
Your daughter rides upon a browne-bay steed,
I on a sorrel, which I bought of Brian,
The honest Host of the red roaring Lion
In Waltham situate: then if you may
Consent in seemly sort, lest by delay,
The fatal sisters come and do the office,
And then you'll sing another song.

Alas
Why should you be thus full of grief to me?
That do as willing as your self agree
To any thing so it be good and fair,
Then steal her when you will, if such a pleasure
Content you both, I'll sleep and never see it,
To make your joys more full, but tell me why
You may not here perform your marriage?

Gods blessing a thy soul old man, i'faith thou art loath to part true hearts,
I see, a has her Georg, I'm as glad on it, well, go thy ways Humphrey, for a
fair spoken man, I believe thou hast not thy fellow within the walls of London,
I should say the Suburbs too, I should not lie, why dost not rejoice with me
George?


If I could but see Raph again, I were as merry as mine Host i'faith.

The cause you seem to ask, I thus declare,
Help me o Muses nine, your daughter swear
A foolish oath, the more it was the pity,
Yet none but my self within this City,
Shall dare to say so, but a bold defiance
Shall meet him, were he of the noble Science.
And yet she swear, and yet why did she swear?
Truly I cannot tell, unless it were
For her own ease, for sure sometimes an oath,
Being sworn thereafter is like cordial broth.
And this it was she swore, never to marry,
But such a one, whose mighty arm could carry
(As meaning me, for I am such a one)
Her bodily away through stick and stone,
Till both of us arrive, at her request,
Some ten miles off, in the wild Waltham Forest.

If this be all, you shall not need to fear
Any denial in your love, proceed,
I'll neither follow, nor repent the deed.

Good-night, twenty good-nights, twenty more.
And 20 more good-nights, that makes three-score.

Come Michael, art thou not weary boy?


No for-sooth mother not I.


Where be we now child?


Indeed for-sooth mother I cannot tell, unless we be at Mile-end, is not all
the world Mile-end, Mother?


No Michael, not al the world boy, but I can assure thee Michael, Mile-end is a
goodly matter, there has been a pitch-field my child between the naughty
Spaniels and the English-men, and the Spaniels ran away Michael, and the
English-men followed, my neighbour Coxstone was there boy, and killed them all
with a birding piece.


Mother forsooth.


What says my white boy?


Shall not my father go with us too?


No Michael, let thy father go snicke-vp, he shall never come between a pair
of sheets with me again, while he lives, let him stay at home sing for his
supper boy, come child sit down, and I'll show my boy fine knacks indeed, look
here Michael, here's a Ring, and here's Bruch, here's a Bracelet, and here's
two Rings more, and here's money and gold bi'th eye my boy.


Shall I have all this mother?


I Michael thou shalt have all Michael.


How lik'st thou this wench?


I cannot tell, I would have Raph, George; I'll see no more elseindeed-law, I
pray you let the youths understand so much by word of mouth, for I tell you
truly, I'm afraid a my boy, come, come George, let's be merry and wise, the
child's a father-lesse child, and say they should put him into a straight pair
of Gaskins, 'twere worse then knot-grasse, he would never grow after it.


Here's Raph, here's Raph.


How do you Raph? you are welcome Raph, as I may say, it's a good boy, hold up
thy head, and be not afraid, we are thy friends Raph, the Gentlemen will praise
thee Raph, if thou plaist thy part with audacity, begin Raph a Gods name.


My trusty Squire unlace my Helm, give me my hat, where are we, or what
Desert may this be?


Mirror of Knight-hood, this is, as I take it, the perilous Waltham down, In
whose bottom stands the enchanted Valley.


O Michael, we are betrayed, we are betrayed here be Giants, fly boy, fly boy,
fly.


Lace on my helm again: what noise is this?
A gentle Lady flying? the embrace
Of some discourteous knight, I will releiue her.
Go squire, and say, the Knight that wears this pestle,
In honour of all Ladies, swears revenge
Upon that recreant coward that pursues her.
Go comfort her, and that same gentle squire
That bears her company.

I go brave Knight.

My trusty Dwarf and friend, reach me my shield,
And hold it while I swear: First by my knight-hood,
Then by the soul of Amadis de Gaul,
My famous Ancestor, then by my sword,
The beauteous Brionella girt about me,
By this bright burning pestle of mine honour,
The living Trophy, and by all respect
Due to distressed Damsels, here I vow
Never to end the quest of this fair Lady,
And that forsaken squire, till by my valour
I gain their liberty.

Heaven bless the Knight
That thus relieves poor errant Gentlewomen.

I marry Raf, this has some savour in it, I would see the proudest of them all
offer to carry his books after him. But George, I will not have him go away
so soon, I shall be sick if he go away, that I shall; Call Raf again
George, call Raf again, I prithee sweet heart let him come fight before me,
and let's ha some drums, and some trumpets, and let him kill all that comes
near him, and thou love me George.


Peace a little bird, he shall kill them all and they were twenty more on 'em
then there are.


Now Fortune, if thou be not only ill,
Show me thy better face, and bring about
Thy desperate wheel, that I may clime at length
And stand, this is our place of meeting,
If love have any constancy. Oh age!
Where only wealthy men are counted happy:
How shall I please thee? how deserve thy smiles?
When I am only rich in misery?
My fathers blessing, and this little coin
Is my inheritance, a strong reuenew,
From earth thou art, and to the earth I give thee,
There grow and multiply, whilst fresher air,
Breeds me a fresher fortune, how, illusion!
What hath the Devil coined himself before me?
'Tis mettle good, it rings well, I am waking,
And taking too I hope, now Gods dear blessing
Upon his heart that left it here, 'tis mine,
These pearls, I take it, were not left for swine.

I do not like that this unthrifty youth should embecill away the money; the
poor Gentlewoman his mother will have a heavy heart for it God knows.


And reason good, sweet heart.


But let him go, I'll tell Raph a tale in's ear shall fetch him again with a
Wanion I warrant him, if he be above ground, and besides George, here are a
number of sufficient Gentlemen can witness, and my self, and your self, and
the Musicians, if we be called in question, but here comes Raph, George, thou
shalt here him speak, an he were an Emperall.


Comes not sir Squire again?

Right courteous Knight,
Your Squire doth come and with him comes the Lady,
For and the Squire of Damsels as I take it.

Madam if any service or deuoire
Of a poor errant Knight may right your wrongs,
Command it, I am pressed to give you succour,
For to that holy end I bear my Armour,

Alas sir, I am a poor Gentlewoman, and I have lost my money in this forest.


Desert, you would say Lady, and not lost
Whilst I have sword and lance, dry up your tears
Which ill befits the beauty of that face:
And tell the story, if I may request it,
Of your disastrous fortune.

Out alas, I left a thousand pound, a thousand pound, even all the money I had
laid up for this youth, upon the sight of your Maistership, you looked so grim,
and as I may say it, saving your presence, more like a Giant then a mortal
man.


I am as you are Lady, so are they
All mortal, but why weeps this gentle Squire.

Has he not cause to weep do you think, when he hath lost his inheritance?


Young hope of valour, weep not, I am here
That will confound thy foe and pay it dear
Upon his coward head, that dares deny,
Distressed Squires and Ladies equity.
I have but one horse, on which shall ride
This Lady fair behind me, and before
This courteous Squire, fortune will give us more
Upon our next adventure; fairelie speed
Beside us Squire and Dwarf to do us need.

Did not I tell you Nel what your man would do? by the saith of my body
wench, for clean action and good delivery they may all cast their caps at
him.


And so they may i'faith, for I dare speak it boldly, the twelve Companies of
London cannot match him, timber for timber, well George, and he be not
inveigled by some of these paltry Players, I ha much marvel, but George we
ha done our parts if the boy have any grace to be thankful.


Yes I warrant thee duckling.


Good Mistress Luce how ever I in fault am
For your lame horse; you're welcome unto VValtham.
But which way now to go or what to say
I know not truly till it be broad day.

O fear not Master Humphrey, I am guide
For this place good enough.

Then up and ride,
Or if it please you walk for your repose,
Or sit, or if you will go pluck a rose:
Either of which shall be indifferent,
To your good friend and Humphrey, whose consent
Is so entangled ever to your will,
As the poor harmless horse is to the Mill.

Faith and you say the word we will even sit down
And take a nap.

'Tis better in the Town,
Where we may nap together, for believe me
To sleep without a snatch would mickle grieve me.

You're merry Master Humphrey.

So I am,
And have been ever merry from my Dam.

Your nurse had the less labour.

Faith it may be,
Unless it were by chance I did beray me.

Luce dear friend Luce.

Here Jasper.

You are mine.

If it be so, my friend, you use me fine,
What do you think I am?

An arrant noddy

A word of obloquy, now by Gods body,
I'll tell thy master for I know thee well.

Nay, and you be so forward for to tell,
Take that, and that, and tell him sir I gave it,
And say I paid you well.

O sir I have it,
And do confess the paiement, pray be quiet.

Go, get to your night-cap and the diet,
To cure your beaten bones.

Alas poor Humphrie
Get thee some wholesome broth with sage and comfrie:
A little oil of Roses and a feather,
To noint thy back withal.

When I came hither,
Would I had gone to Paris with Iohn Dorrie.

Fare-well my pretty Nump, I am very sorry
I cannot bear thee company.

Fare-well,
The Devils Dam was ne'er so banged in hell.

This young Jasper will prove me another Things, a my conscience and he may be
suffered; George, dost not see George how a swaggers, and flies at the very
heads a folks as he were a Drago; well if I do not do his lesson for wronging
the poor Gentleman, I am no true woman, his friends that brought him up might
have been better occupied, I wis, then ha taught him these fegaries, he's even
in the high-way to the gallows, God bless him.


You're too bitter, conny, the young man may do well enough for all this.


Come hither Master Humfrey, has he hurt you? now beshrew his fingers for it,
here sweet heart, here's some green ginger for thee, now beshrew my heart but
a has pepper-nel in's head, as big as a pullets egg, alas sweet lamb, how thy
Tempels beat; take the peace on him sweet heart, take the peace on him.


No, no, you talk like a foolish woman, I'll ha Raph fight with him, and swing
him up welfauourdlie, sirrah boy come hither, let Raph come in and fight with
Jasper.


I, and beat him well, he's an unhappy boy.


Sir you must pardon us, the plot of our Play lies contrary, and 'twill
hazard the spoiling of our Play.


Plot me no plots, I'll ha Raph come out, I'll make your house too hot for you
else.


Why sir he shall, but if any thing fall out of order, the Gentlemen must
pardon us.


Go your ways good-man boy, I'll hold him a penny he shall have his
bellie-full of fighting now, ho here comes Raph, no more.


What Knight is that Squire, ask him if he keep
The passage, bound by love of Lady fair,
Or else but prickant.

Sir I am no Knight,
But a poor Gentleman, that this same night,
Had stolen from me on yonder Green,
My lovely wife, and suffered to be seen
Yet extant on my shoulders such a greeting,
That whilst I live, I shall think of that meeting.

I Raph he beat him unmercifully, Raph, and thou spar'st him Raph I would
thou were hanged.


No more, wife no more.

Where is the caitiff wretch hath done this deed.
Lady your pardon, that I may proceed
Upon the quest of this injurious Knight.
And thou fair Squire repute me not the worse,
In leaving the great venture of the purse,
And the rich casket till some better leisure,

Here comes the Broker hath purloined my treasure.

Go, Squire, and tell him I am here,
An Errant Knight at Arms, to crave delivery
Of that fair Lady to her own Knights arms.
If he deny, bid him take choice of ground,
And so defy him.

From the Knight that bears
The golden Pestle, I defy thee Knight.
Unless thou make fair restitution.
Of that bright Lady.

Tell the Knight that sent thee
He is an Ass, and I will keep the wench
And knock his Head-peece.

Knight, thou art but dead,
If thou thou recall not thy discourteous terms.

Breake's pate Raph, breake's pate Raph, soundly.

Come Knight, I am ready for you, now your Pestel
Shall try what temper, sir, your Morters off
With that he stood upright in his stirrups,
And gave the Knight of the Calue-skinne such a knock,
That he forsook his horse and down he fell,
And then he leaped upon him and plucking of his Helmet.

Nay, and my noble Knight be down so soon,
Though I can scarcely go I needs must run.

Run Raph, run Raph, run for thy life boy, Jasper comes, Jasper comes.


Come Luce, we must have other Arms for you, Humphery and Golden Pestle both
adieu.


Sure the devil, God bless us, is in this Springald, why George, did ever
see such a fire-drake, I am afraid my boie's miscaried, if he be, though he
were Master Mery-thoughts son a thousand times, if there be any Law in
England I'll make some of them smart for it.


No, no, I have found out the matter sweete-heart, Jasper is enchanted, as sure
as we are here, he is enchanted, he could no more have stood in Raph's hands,
then I can stand in my Lord Majors, I'll have a ring to discover all
enchantments, and Raph shall beat him yet: be no more vexed for it shall be so.


O husband here's Raph again, stay Raph let me speak with thee, how dost
thou Raph? art thou not shrodly hurt? the soul great Lungeis laid unmercifully
on thee, there's some suger-candy for thee, proceed, thou shalt have another
bout with him.


If Raph had him at the Fencing-schoole, if he did not make a puppy of him,
and drive him up and down the school he should ne'er come in my shop more.


Truly Master Knight of the Burning Pestle I am weary.


Indeed law mother and I am very hungry.


Take comfort gentle Dame, and you fair Squire,
For in this Desert there must needs be placed,
Many strong Castles, held by courteous Knights,
And till I bring you safe to one of those,
Is wear by this my Order ne'er to leave you.

Well said Raph, George, Raph was ever comfortable, was he not?


Yes Duck.


I shall ne'er forget him, when we had lost our child, you know, it was strayed
almost, alone, to Puddle-wharfe and the Criers were abroad for it, and there it
had drowned it self but for a Sculler, Raph was the most comfortablest to me:
peace Mistress, says he, let it go, I'll get you another as good, did he not
George? did he not say so?


Yes indeed did he mouse.


I would we had a mess of Pottage, and a pot of drink, Squire, and were going
to bed.


Why we are at Waltham Towns end, and that's the Bell Inn.


Take courage valiant Knight, Damsel, Squire
I have discovered, not a stones cast off,
An ancient Castle held by the old Knight
Of the most holy order of the Bell,
Who gives to all Knights errant entertain:
There plenty is of food, and all prepared,
By the white hands of his own Lady dear.
He hath three Squires that welcome all his Guests.
The first high Chamberlino, who will see
Our beds prepared, and bring us snowy sheets,
Where never foote-man stretched his buttered Hams.
The second hight Tastero, who will see
Our pots full filled and no froth therein.
The third a gentle Squire Ostlero hight,
Who will our Palfries slick with wisps of straw,
And in the Manger put them Oats enough,
And never grease their teeth with candle snuff.

That same Dwarfe's a pretty boy, but the Squire's a grout-nole.

Knock at the Gates my Squire with stately lance.

Who's there, you're welcome Gentlemen, will you see a room?

Right courteous and valiant Knight of the burning Pestle,
This is the Squire Tapstero.

Fair Squire Tapstero, I a wandering Knight,
Hight of the burning Pestle, in the quest
Of this fair Ladies Casket, and wrought purse,
Loosing my self in this vast Wilderness
Am to this Castle well by fortune brought,
Where hearing of the goodly entertain
Your Knight of holy Order of the Bell
Gives to all Damsels, and all errant Knights,
I thought to knock, and now am bold to enter.

An't please you see a chamber, you are very welcome.


George I would have something done, and I cannot tell what it is.


What is it Nel?


Why George, shall Raph beat no body again? prithee sweete-heart let him.


So he shall Nel, and if I join with him, wee'le knock them all.


O George here's master Humphery again now, that lost Mistress Luce, and
Mistress Lucies father, Master Humphery will do some-bodies errant I warrant
him.


Father, it's true, in arms I ne'er shall clasp her,
For she is stolen away by your man Jasper.

I thought he would tell him.

Unhappy that I am to loose my child,
Now I begin to think on Iaspers words,
Who oft hath urged to me thy foolishness,
Why did thou let her go? thou loust her not,
That would bring home thy life, and not bring her.

Father forgive me, shall I tell you true,
Look on my shoulders they are black and blew.
Whilst too and fro fair Luce and I were winding,
He came and basted me with a hedge binding.

Get men and horses straight, we will be there
Within this hour, you know the place again.

I know the place, where he my loins did swaddle,
I'll get six horses, and to each a saddle.

Mean time I'll go talk with Iaspers father.

George, what wilt thou lay with me now, that Master Humphery has not
Mistress Luce yet, speak George, what wilt thou lay with me?


No Nel, I warrant thee Jasper is at Puckeridge with her, by this.


Nay George, you must consider Mistress Lucies feet are tender, and, besides,
'tis dark, and I promise you tuely, I do not see how he should get out of
Wa^im forest with her yet.


Nay Cunny, what wilt thou lay with me that Raph has her not yet.


I will not lay against Raph honey, because I have not spoken with him, but
look George, peace, here comes the merry old Gentleman again.


When it was grown to dark midnight,
And all were fast asleep,
In came Margarets grimely Ghost,
And stood at VVilliams feet.
I have money, and meat and drink before hand, till to morrow at noone, why
should I be sad? me thinks I have half a dozen Jovial spirits within me, I
am three merry men, and three merry men, To what end should any man be sad in
this world? give me a man that when he goes to hanging cries, troule the
black bowl to me: and a woman that will sing a cath in her Travel. I have
seen a man come by my door, with a serious face, in a black cloak, without a
hat-band, carrying his head as if he looked for pins in the street, I have
looked out of my window half a year after, and have spied that mans head upon
London-bridge: 'tis vile, never trust a Tailor that does not sing at his work,
his mind is of nothing but filching.


Mark this George, tis worth noting: Godfrry my Tailor, you know, never sings,
and he had fourteen yards to make this Gown, and I'll be sworn Mistress
Pennistone the Drapers wife had one made with twelve.


'Tis mirth that fills the veins with blood,
More then wine, or sleep, or food.
Let each man keep his heart at ease,
No man dies of that disease.
He that would his body keep
From diseases, must not weep,
But who ever laughs and sings,
Never he his body brings
Into fevers, gouts, or rhumes,
Or lingringly his longs consumes:
Or meets with aches in the bone,
Or Catharhes, or griping stone:
But contented lives for aye,
The more he laughs, the more he may.

Look George, how say thou by this George? is't not a fine old man? Now Gods
blessing a'thy sweet lips. When wilt thou be so merry George? Faith thou art
the frowningst little thing when thou art angry, in a Country.


Peace Coney, thou shalt see him taken down too I warrant thee; here's Luces
father come now.


As you came from Walsingham, fro that holy land, there met you not with my
tru-loue by the way as you came


Oh Master Merri-thought! my daughter's gone.
This mirth becomes you not, my daughters gone.

Why an if she be, what care I?
Or let her come or go, or tarry.

Mock not my misery, it is your son,
Whom I have made my own, when all forsook him,
Has stolen my only joy, my child away.

He set her on a milk-white steed, himself upon a gray,
He never turned his face again, but he bore her quite away.

Unworthy of the kindness I have shown
To thee, and thine: too late I well perceive
Thou art consenting to my daughters loss.

Your daughter, what a stur's here we yer daughter? Let her go, think no
more on her, but sing loud. If both my sons were on the gallows, I would sing,
down, down, down: they fall down, and arise they never shall.


Oh might I behold her once again,
And she once more embrace her aged sire.

Fie, how scurvily this goes: and she once more embrace her aged sire? you'll
make a dog on her, will ye? she cares much for her aged sire I warrant you.

She cares cares not for her daddy, nor she cares not for her mammie,
For she is, she is, she is, she is my Lord of Low-gaues Lassie.

For this thy scorn, I will pursue
That son of thine to death.

Do, and when you ha killed him,
Give him flowers i'now Palmer: give him flowers i'now,
Give him red, and white, and blew, green, and yellow.

I'll fetch my daughter.

I'll hear no more a your daughter, it spoils my mirth.


I say I'll fetch my daughter.

Was never man for Ladies sake, down, down,
Tormented as I poor sir Guy? de derry down,
For Lucies sake, that Lady bright, down, down,
As ever men beheld with eye? de derry down.

I'll be revenged by heaven.

How dost thou like this George?


Why this is well coney: but if Raph were hot once, thou should see more.


The Fiddlers go again husband.


I Nell, but this is scurvy music: I gave the whoreson gallows money, and I
think he has not got me the waits of South-warke, if I hear him not anon,
I'll twinge him by the ears. You Musicians, play Baloo.


No good George, lets ha Lachrimae.


Why this is it cony.


It's all the better George: now sweet lamb, what story is that painted upon
the cloth? the confutation of Saint Paul?


No lamb, that's Raph and Lucrece.


Raph and Lucrece? which Raph? our Raph?


No mouse, that was a Tartarian.


A Tartarian? well, I'wood the fiddlers had done, that we might see our Raph
again.


Come my dear dear, though we have lost our way,
We have not lost our selves: are you not weary
With this nights wandering, broken from your rest?
And frighted with the terror that attends
The darkness of these wild vn-peopled place?

No my best friend, I cannot either fear,
Or entertain a weary thought, whilst you
(The end of all my full desires) stand by me.
Let them that loose their hopes, and live to languish
Amongst the number of forsaken lovers,
Tell the long weary steps, and number time,
Start at a shadow, and shrink up their blood,
Whilst I (possessed with all content and quiet)
Thus take my pretty love, and thus embrace him.

You have caught me Luce, so fast, that whilst I live
I shall become your faithful prisoner,
And were these chains for ever. Come sit down,
And rest your body, too too delicate
For these disturbances; so, will you sleep?
Come, do not be more able then you are,
I know you are not skilful in these watches:
For women are no soldiers; be not nice,
But take it, sleep I say.

I cannot sleep,
Indeed I cannot friend.

Why then we'll sing,
And try how that will work upon our senses.

I'll sing, or say, or any thing but sleep.

Come little Mer-maid, rob me of my heart
With that enchanting voice.

You mock me Jasper.

Tell me (dearest) what is love?

'Tis a lightning from above,
'Tis an arrow, 'tis a fire,
'Tis a boy they call desire.
'Tis a smile
Doth beguile

The poor hearts of men that prove.
Tell me more, are women true?

Some love change, and so do you.

Are they fair, and never kind?

Yes, when men turn with the wind.

Are they froward?

Ever toward,
Those that love, to love a new.

Dissemble it no more, I see the God
Of heavy sleep, lay on his heavy mace
Upon your eye-lids.

I am very heavy.

Sleep, sleep, quiet rest crown thy sweet thoughts:
Keep from her fair blood, distempers, startings,
Horrors, and fearful shapes: let all her dreams
Be joys, and chaste delights, embraces, wishes,
And such new pleasures, as the ravished soul
Gives to the senses. So, my charms have took.
Keep her you powers divine, whilst I contemplate
Upon the wealth and beauty of her mind.
She is only fair, and constant: only kind,
And only to thee Jasper. Oh my joys!
Whither will you transport me? let not fullness
Of my poor buried hopes, come up together,
And ouer-charge my spirits: I am weak
Some say (how ever ill) the sea and women
Are governed by the Moon, both ebb and flow,
Both full of changes: yet to them that know,
And truly judge, these but opinions are,
And heresies to bring on pleasing war
Between our tempers, that without these were
Both void of ater-loue, and present fear.
Which are the best of Cupid. Oh thou child!
Bred from despair, I dare not entertain thee,
Having a love without the faults of women,
And greater in her perfect goods then men:
Which to make good, and please my self the stronger,
Though certainly I am certain of her love,
I'll try her, that the world and memory
May sing to after times, her constancy.
Luce, Luce, awake.

Why do you fright me, friend,
With those distempered looks? what makes your sword
Drawn in your hand? who hath offended you?
I pre'chee Jasper sleep, thou art wild with watching.

Come make your way to heaven, and bid the world
(With all the villainies that stick upon it)
Fare-well; you're for another life.

Oh Jasper!
How have my tender years committed evil,
(Especially against the man I love)
Thus to be cropped untimely?

Foolish girl,
Can thou imagine I could love his daughter,
That flung me from my fortune into nothing?
Discharged me his service, shut the doors
Upon my poverty, and scorned my prayers,
Sending me, like a boat without a mast,
To sink or swin? Come, by this hand you dye,
I must have life and blood to satisfy
Your fathers wrongs.

Away George, away, raise the watch at Ludgate, and bring a Mittimus from the
Justice for this desperate villain. Now I charge you Gentlemen, see the Kings
peace kept. O my heart what a varlet's this to offer man-slaughter upon the
harmless Gntlewoman?


I warrant thee (sweet heart) we'll have him hampered.


Oh Jasper! be not cruel,
If thou wilt kill me, mile and do it quickly.
And let not many deaths appear before me.
I am a woman made of fear and love,
A weak, weak woman, kill not with thy eyes,
They shoot me through and through. Strike I am ready,
And dying still I love thee.

Where abouts.

No more of this, now to my self again.

There, there he stands with sword like martial knight
Drawn in his hand, therefore beware the fight
You that be wise: for were I good sir Beuis,
I would not stay his coming, by your leaves.

Sirrah, restore my daughter.

Sirrah, no.

Upon him then.

So, down with him, down with him, down with him: cut him in the leg boys,
cut him in the leg.


Come your ways Minion, I'll provide a Cage
For you, your grown so tame. Horse her away.

Truly Ime glad your forces have the day.

They are gone, and I am hurt, my love is lost,
Never to get again. Oh me unhappy!
Bleed, bleed, and dye, I cannot: Oh my folly!
Thou hast betrayed me. Hope where art thou fled?
Tell me if thou be any where remaining.
Shall I but see my love again? Oh no!
She will not deign to look upon her butcher,
Nor is it fit she should; yet I must venture.
Oh chance, or fortune, or what ere thou art
That men adore for powerful, hear my cry,
And let me loving, live; or loosing, die.

Is a gone George?


I cony.


Marie and let him go (sweet heart,) by the faith a my body a has put me into
such a fright, that I tremble (as they say) as 'twere an Aspine leaf: look a
my little singer George, how it shakes: now i truth every member of my body is
the worse for it.


Come, hug in mine arms sweet mouse, he shall not fright thee any more:
alas mine own dear heart, how it quivers.


O Raf, how dost thou Raf? how hast thou slept to night? has the knight used
thee well?


Peace Nell, let Raf alone.

Master, the reckoning is not paid.

Right courteous knight, who for the orders sake
Which thou hast taken, hang out the holy bell,
As I this flaming pestle bear about,
We render thanks to your puissant self,
Your beauteous Lady, and your gentle Squires,
For thus refreshing of our wearied limbs,
Stiffened with hard achievements in wild desert.

Sir, there is twelve shillings to pay.

Thou merry Squire Tapstero, thanks to thee,
For comforting our souls with double Jug,
And if adventurous fortune prick thee forth,
Thou Jovial Squire, to follow feats of arms,
Take heed thou tender every Ladies cause,
Every truery true Knight, and every damsel fair fair;
But spill the blood of treacherous Sarazens,
And false inchanters, that with magic spells,
Have done to death full many a noble Knight.

Thou valiant Knight of the burning Pestle, give ear to me, there is twelve
shillings to pay, and as I am a true Knight, I will not bate a penny.


George, I pray thee tell me, must Raf pay twelve shillings now?


No Nell, no, nothing but the old Knight is merry with Raf.


O is't nothing else? Raf will be as merry as he.


Sir Knight, this mirth of yours becomes you well,
But to requite this liberal courtesy,
If any of your Squires will follow arms,
He shall receive from my heroic hand
A Knight-hood, by the virtue of this Pestle.

Fair Knight I thank you for noble offer,
Therefore gentle Knight,
Twelve shillings you must pay, or I must cap you.

Look George, did not I tell thee as much, the Knight of the Bell is in
earnest, Raph shall not be beholding to him, give him his money George, and
let him go snickvp.


Cap Raph? no; holdy our hand sir Knight of the Bell, there's your money, have you
any thing to say to Raph now? Cap Raph?


I would you should know it, Raph has friends that will not suffer him to be
capt for ten times so much, and tea times to the end of that, now take thy
course Raph.


Come Michael, thou I will go home to thy father, he hath enough left to keep us
a day or two, and we will set fellows abrod to cry our Purse our Casket, Shalwe
Michael?


I, I pray Mother, in truth my feet are full of chilblaines with travelling.


Faith and those chilblanes are a foul trouble, Mistress Merie-thought when
your youth comes home let him rub all the soles of his feet, and the heals,
and his ankles, with a mouse skin, or if none of your people can catch a
mouse, when he goes to bed, let him roll his feet in the warm embers, and I
warrant you he shall be well, and you may make him put his fingers between
his toes smell to them, it's very sovereign for his head if he be costive.


Master Knight of the burning Pestle, my son Michael and I, bid you farewell, I
thank your Worship heartily for your kindness.


Fare-well fair Lady and your tender Squire,
If, pricking through these Deserts, I do hear
Of any traitorous Knight who through his guile,
Hath light upon your Casket and your Purse,
I will despoil him of them and restore them.

I thank your Worship.

Dwarf bear my shield, Squire elevate my lance,
And now fare-well you Knight of holy Bell.

I, I Raph, all is paid.

But yet before I go, speak worthy Knight,
If ought you do of sad adventures know,
Where errant Knights may through his prowess win,
Eternal fame and free some gentle souls,
From endless bonds of steel and lingering pain.

Sirrah go to Nick the Barber, and bid him prepare himself, as I told you
before, quickly.


I am gone sir.


Sir Knight, this wilderness affords none
But the great venture, where full many a Knight
Hath tried his prowess and come off with shame,
And where I would not have you loose your life,
Against no man, but furious fiend of hell.

Speak on sir Knight, tell what he is, and where,
For here I vow upon my blazing badge,
Never to blaze a day in quietness;
But bread and water will I only eat,
And the green herb and rock shall be my couch,
Till I have queld that man, or beast, or fiend,
That works such damage to all Errant Knights.

Not far from hence, near to a craggy cliffe,
At the North end of this distressed Town,
There doth stand a lowly house
Ruggedly builded, and in it a Cave,
In which an ugly Giant now doth won,
Yelped Barbaroso: in his hand
He shakes a naked lance of purest steel,
With sleeves turned up, and him before he wears,
A motley garment, to preserve his clothes
From blood of those Knights which he massacres,
And Ladies Gent: without his door doth hang
A copper balon, on a piickant spear:
At which, no sooner gentle Knights can knock,
But the shrill sound, fierce Barbaroso hears,
And rushing forth, bings in the errant Knight,
And sets him down in an enchanted chair.
Then with an Engine which he hath prepared,
With forty teeth, he claws his courtly crown,
Next makes him wink, and underneath his chin,
He plants a brazen piece of mighty board,
And knocks his bullets round about his cheeks,
Whilst with his fingers, and an instrument
With which he snaps his hair off, he doth fill
The wretches ears with a most hideous noise.
Thus every Knight Aduenturer he doth trim,
And now no creature dares encounter him.

In Gods name, I will fight him, kind sir,
Go but before me to this dismal Cave,
Where this huge Giant Barbaroso dwells,
And by that virtue that brave Rosicleere,
That damned brood of ugly Giants slew,
And Palmerin Frannarco overthrew:
I doubt not but to curb this Traitor foul,
And to the Devil send his guilty soul.

Brave sprighted Knight, thus far I will perform.
This your request, I'll bring you with in sight
Of this most loathsome place, inhabited
By a more loathsome man: but dare not stay,
For his maine force soopes all he sees away.

Saint George set on before, march Squire and page.

George, dost think Raph will confound the Giant?


I hold my cap to a farthing he does: why Nel I saw him wrestle with the great
Dutch-man and hurl him.


Faith and that Ducth-man was a goodly man, if all things were answerable to
his bigness, and yet they say there was a Scotsh-man higher then he, and that
they two and a Knight met, and saw one another for nothing, but of all the
sights that ever were in London, since I was married, me thinks the little
child that was so fair grown about the members was the prettiest, that, and
the Hermophrodite.


Nay by your leave Nel, Niniuy was better.


Niniuie, O that was the story of Ione and the Wall, was it not George?


Yes lam.


Look George, here comes Mistress Merry-thought again, and I would have
Raph come and fight with the Giant, I tell you true, I long to see it.


Good Mistress Merry-thought be gone, I pray you for my sake, I pray you
forbear a little, you shall have audience presently, I have a little
business.


Mastresse Merry-thought if it please you to refrain your passio a little, till
Raph have dispatch the Giant out of the way we shalthink our selves much bound
to you, I thank you good Mistress Merry-thought.


Boy, come hither, send away Raph and this whore-sonne Giant quickly.


In good faith sir we cannot, you'll utterly spoil our Play, and make it to be
hist, and it cost money, you will not suffer us to go on with our plot, I pray
Gentlemen rule him.


Let him come now and dispatch this, and I'll trouble you no more.


Will you give me your hand of that?


Give him thy hand George, do, and I'll kiss him, I warrant thee the youth
means plainly.


I'll send him to you presently.


I thank you little youth, feth the child hath a sweet breath George, but I
think it be troubled with the worms, Carduus Benedictus and Mares milk were
the only thing in the world for it, O Raph's here George, God send thee good
luck Raph.


Puissant Knight yonder his Mansion is,
Lo where the spear and Copper Basin are,
Behold that string on which hangs many a tooth,
Drawn from the gentle iaw of wandering Knights,
I dare not stay to sound, he will appear.

O faint not heart, Susan my Lady dear,
The Cobblers Maid in Milke-streete, for whose sake,
I take these Arms, O let the thought of thee,
Carry thy Knight through all adventurous deeds,
And in the honour of thy beauteous self,
May I destroy this monster Barbaroso,
Knock Squire upon the Basin till it break.
With the shrill strokes, or till the Giant speak.

O George, the Giant, the Giant, now Raph for thy life.

What fond unknowing wight is this? that dares
So rudely knock at Barbarossa's Cell,
Where no man comes but leaves his fleece behind?

I, traitorous Caitiff, who am sent by fate
To punish all the sad enormities
Thou hast committed against Ladies Gent
And errant Knights, traitor to God and men:
Prepare thy self, this is the dismal hour
Appointed for thee, to give strict account
Of all thy beastly treacherous villainies.

Foole-hardy Knight, full soon thou shalt aby
This fond reproach, thy body will I bang,
And lo upon that string thy teeth shall hang:
Prepare thy self, for dead soon shalt thou be,

Saint George for me.


Gargantua for me.


To him, Raph to him, hold up the Giant, set out thy leg before Raph.


Falsify a blow Raph, falsify a blow, the Giant lies open on the left side.


Beare't off, beare't of still; there boy, O Raphe's almost down, Raph's
almost down.


Susan inspire me, now have up again.


Up, up, up, up, up, so Raph, down with him, down with him Raph.


Fetch him ore the hip boy.


There boy, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, Raph.


No Raph get all out of him first.


Presumptuous man, see to what desperate end
Thy treatchery hath brought thee, the just Gods,
Who never prosper those that do despise them,
For all the villainies which thou hast done
To Knights and Ladies, now have paid thee home
By my stiff arm, a Knight adventurous,
But say vile wretch, before I send thy soul
To sad Auernus whether it must go,
What captives holdst thou in thy sable cave.

Go in and free them all, thou hast the day.

Go Squire Dwarf, search in this dreadful Cave
And free the wretched prisoners from their bonds.

I crave for mercy, as thou art a Knight,
And scornst to spill the blood of those that beg.

Thou showdst no mercy, nor shalt thou have any,
Prepare thy self for thou shalt surely die.

Behold brave Knight here is one prisoner,
Whom this wild man hath used as you see.

This is the first wise word I heard the Squire speak.

Speak what thou art, and how thou hast been used,
That that I may give condign punishment,

I am a Knight that took my journey post
North-ward from London, and in courteous wise,
This Giant trained me to his loathsome den,
Under pretence of killing of the itch,
And all my body with a powder strewed,
That smarts and stings, and cut away my beard,
And my curled locks wherein were ribands ti'de,
And with a water washed my tender eyes,
Whilst up and down about me still he skipped,
Whose virtue is, that till mine eyes be wiped
With a dry cloth, for this my foul disgrace,
I shall not dare to look a dog in the face.

Alas poor Knight, relieve him Raph, releiue poor
Knights whilst you live.

My trusty Squire convey him to the Town,
Where he may find relief, adieu fair Knight,

Puissant Knight of the burning Pestle hight,
See here another wretch, whom this foul beast
Hath scorched and scored in this inhumaine wise.

Speak me thy name and eke thy place of birth,
And what hath been thy usage in this Cave.

I am a Knight, Sir Pocke-hole is my name,
And by my birth I am a Londoner
Free by my Copy, but my Ancestors
Were French-men all, and riding hard this way,
Upon a trotting horse, my bones did ache,
And I faint Knight to ease my weary limbs,
Light at this Cave, when straight this furious fiend,
With sharpest instrument of purest steel,
Did cut the gristle of my Nose away,
And in the place this velvet plaster stands,
Relieve me gentle Knight out of his hands.

Good Raph releiue sir Pocke-hole and send him away, for, in truth, his breath
stinks,


Convey him straight after the other Knight,
Sir Pocke-hole fare you well.

Kind sir good-night.

Deliver us.


Deliver us.


Hark George, what a woeful cry there is, I think some woman lies in there.


Deliver us.


Deliver us.


What ghastly noise is this? speak Barbarose,
Or by this blazing steel thy head goes off.

Prisoners of mine whom I in diet keep,
Send lower down into the Cave,
And in a Tub that's heated smoking hot,
There may they find them and deliver them,

Run Squire and Dwarf, deliver them with speed.

But will not Raph kill this Giant, surely I am afraid if he let him go he
will do as much hurt, as ever he did.


Not so mouse neither, if he could convert him.


I George if he could convert him, but a Giant is not so soon converted as
one of us ordinary people: there's a pretty tale of a Witch, that had the
devils mark about her, God bless us, that had a Giant to her son, that was
called Lob-lie-by-the-fire, did never here it George?


Peace Nel, here comes the prisoners.

Here be these pined wretches, manful Knight,
That for these six weeks have not seen a wight.

Deliver what you are, and how you came
To this sad Cave, and what your usage was?

I am an Errant Knight that followed Arms,
With spear and shield, and in my tender years
I stricken was with Cupids fiery shaft,
And fell in love with this my Lady dear,
And stole her from her friends in Turne-bull-streete,
And bore her up and down from Town to Town,
Where we did eat and drink and Music hear,
Till at the length, at this unhappy Town
We did arrive, and coming to this Cave
This beast us caught and put us in a Tub,
Where we this two months sweat, and should have done
Another Month if you had not relieved us.

This bread and water hath our diet been,
Together with a rib cut from a neck
Of burned Mutton, hard hath been our fare,
Release us from this ugly Giants snare.

This hath been all the food we have received,
But only twice a day for novelty,
He gave a spoonful of this hearty broth,
To each of us, through this same slender quill.

From this infernal monster you shall go,
That uses Knights and gentle Ladies so,
Convey them hence.

Cony, I can tell thee the Gentlemen like Raf.


I George, I see it well enough. Gentlemen I thank you all heartily for
gracing my man Raf, and I promise you you shall see him oftner.


Mercy great knight, I do recant my ill,
And henceforth never gentle blood will spill.

I give thee mercy, but yet shalt thou swear
Upon my burning pestle, to perform
Thy promise vtterd.

I swear and kiss.

Depart then, and amend.
Come squire and dwarf, the Sun grows towards his set, and we have many
more adventures yet.


Now Raf is in this humour, I know he would ha beaten all the boys in the
house if they had been set on him.


I George, but it is well as it is, I warrant you the Gentlemen do consider
what it is to overthrow a giant: but look George, here comes mistress
Merri-thought and her son Michael; now you are welcome mistress Merri-
thought, now Raf has done you may go on.


Micke my boy?


I forsooth mother.


Be merry Micke we are at home now; where I warrant you, you shall find the
house flung out at the windows: Hark, hey dogs, hey, this is the old world
I'faith with my husband, if I get in among 'em, I'll play em such a lesson, that
they shall have little list to come scraping hither, again. Why master
Merri-thought, husband, Charles Merri-thought.


If you will sing and dance, and laugh, and hollow, and laugh again, and then
cry there boys, there: why then One, two, three, and four,
We shall be merry within this hour.



Why Charles, do you not know your own natural wife? I say, open the door,
and turn me out those mangy companions; 'tis more then time that they were
fellow and fellow like with you: you are a Gentleman Charles, and an old man,
and father of two children; and I my self (though I say it) by my mothers
side, Niece to a worshipful Gentleman, and a Conductor, ha has been three
times in his Majesties service at Chester, and is now the fourth time, God
bless him, and his charge upon his journey.


Go from my window, love, go;
Go from my window my dear,
The wind and the rain will drive you back again,
You cannot he lodged here.
Hark you Mistress Merrithought, you that walk upon adventures, and forsake
your husband, because he sings with never a penny in his purse; What shall I
think my self the worse? Faith no, I'll be merry.

You come not here, here's none but lads of mettle, lives of a hundred years,
and upwards, care never drunk their bloods, nor want made 'em warble.

Hey-ho, my heart is heavy.


Why Mr. Merrithought, what am I that you should laugh me to scorn thus
abruptly? am I not your fellow-feeler (as we may say) in all our miseries? your
comforter in health and sickness? have I not brought you Children? are they
not like you Charles? look upon thine own Image hard-hearted man; and yet for
all this --


Begone, begone, my Iuggy, my puggy, begone my love, my dear.

The weather is warm, twill do thee no harm, thou can not be lodged here.

Be merry boys, some light music, and more wine.


He's not in earnest, I hope George, is he?


What if he be, sweet heart?


Marie if he be George, I'll make bold to tell him he's an Ingrant old man, to
use his bed-fellow so scurvily.


What how does he use her honey?


Marie come up sir sauce-box, I think you'll take his part, will you not? Lord
how hot you are grown: you are a fine man an you had a fine dog, it becomes
you sweetly.


Nay prithee Nell chide not: for as I am an honest man, and a true Christian
Grocer, I do not like his doings.


I cry you mercy then George; you know we are all frail, and full of
infirmities. Dee hear Mr. Merri-thought, may I crave a word with you?


Strike up lively lads.


I had not thought in truth, Mr. Merrithought, that a man of your age and
discretion (as I may say) being a Gentleman, and therefore known by your
gentle conditions, could have used so little respect to the weakness of his
wife: for your wife is your own flesh, the staff of your age, your
yoke-fellow, with whose help you draw through the mire of this transitory
world: Nay, she's your own rib. And again --


I come not hither for thee to teach,
I have no pulpit for thee to preach,
I would thou had kissed me under the breech,
As thou art a Lady gay.

Marie with a vengeance.
I am heartily sorry for the poor gentlewoman: but if I were thy wife, I'faith
gray-beard, I'faith --


I prithee sweet hunny-suckle, be content.


Give me such words that am a gentlewoman borne, hang him hoary rascal. Get
me some drink George, I am almost molten with fretting: now beshrew his
knaves heart for it.


Play me a light Laualto: come, be frolic, fill the good fellows wine.


Why Mr. Merrithought, are you disposed to make me wait here: you'll open I
hope, I'll fetch them that shall open else.


Good woman if you will sing I'll give you something, if not-


You are no love for me Margret, I am no love for you.
Come aloft Boys, aloft.
Now a Churls fart in your teeth sir: Come Micke, we'll not trouble him, a
shall not ding us in the teeth with his bread and his broth: that he shall not:
come boy, I'll provide for thee, I warrant thee: we'll go to master
Venterwels the Merchant, I'll get his letter to mine Host of the Bell in
Waltham, there I'll place thee with the Tapster; will not that do well for
thee Micke? and let me alone for that old Cuckoldly knave your father, I'll use
him in his kind, I warrant ye.


Come George, wher's the beer?


Here love.


This old fornicating fellow will not out of my mind yet; Gentlemen, I'll begin
to you all, and I desire more of your acquaintance, with all my heart. Fill the
Gentlemen some beer George.


Look George, the little boy's come again, me thinks he looks something
like the prince of Orange in his long stocking, if he had a little harness
about his neck. George I will have him dance Fading; Fading is a fine Jig
I'll assure you Gentlemen: begin brother, now a capers sweet heart, now a turn
a'th toe, and then tumble: cannot you tumble youth?


No indeed forsooth:


Nor eat fire?


Neither.


Why then I thank you heartily, there's two pence to buy you points withal.


There boy, deliver this: but do it well. Hast thou provided me four lusty
fellows?

Able to carry me? and art thou perfect
In all thy business?

Sir, you need not fear,
I have my lesson here, and cannot miss it:
The men are ready for you, and what else
Pertains to this employment.

There my boy,
Take it, but buy no land.

Faith sir 'twere rare
To see so young a purchaser: I fly,
And on my wings carry your destiny.

Go, and be happy. Now my latest hope
Forsake me not, but fling thy Anchor out,
And let it hold: stand fixed thou rolling stone,
Till I enjoy my dearest: hear me all
You powers that rule in men celestial.

Go thy ways, thou art as crooked a sprig as ever grew in London; I warrant
him he will come to some naughty end or other: for his looks say no less:
Besides, his father (you know George) is none of the best, you heard him take
me up like a flirt Gill, and sing bawdy songs upon me: but I faith if I live
George --


Let me alone sweet-heart, I have a trick in my head shall lodge him in the
Arches for one year, and make him sing Peocani, ever I leave him, and yet he
shall never know who hurt him neither.


Do my good George, do.


What shall we have Raf do now boy?


You shall have what you will sir.


Why so sir, go and fetch me him then, and let the Sophy of Persia come and
christen him a child.


Believe me sir, that will not do so well, 'tis stale, it has been had before
at the red Bull.


George let Raf travel over great hills, let him be very weary, and come to
the King of Cracouia's house, covered with velvet, and there let the Kings
daughter stand in her window all in beaten gold, combing her golden locks with
a comb of Ivory, and let her spy Raf, and fall in love with him, and come
down to him, and carry him into her fathers house, and then let Raf talk
with her.


Well said Nell, it shall be so: boy let's have it done quickly.


Sir, if you will imagine all this to be done already, you shall hear them
talk together: but we cannot present a house covered with black velvet, and
a Lady in beaten gold.


Sir boy, lets have it as you can then.


Besides it will show ill-fauouredly to haue'a Grocers prentice to court a
kings daughter.


Will it so sir? you are well read in Histories: I pray you what was sir
Dagonet? was not he prentice to a Grocer in London? read the play of the Four
Prentices of London, where they toss their pikes so: I pray you fetch him in
sir, fetch him in.


It shall be done, it is not our fault gentlemen.


Now we shall see fine doings I warrant tee George. O here they come; how
prettily the king of Cracuioa's daughter is dressed.


I Nell, it is the fashion of that country, I warrant tee.


Welcome sir Knight unto my fathers Court.
King of Moldauia, unto me Pompiona
His daughter dear: but sure you do not like
Your entertainment, that will stay with us
No longer but a night.

Damsel right fair,
I am on many sad adventures bound,
That call me forth into the wilderness:
Besides, my horses back is something galled,
Which will enforce me ride a sober pace.
But many thanks (fair Lady) be to you,
For using errant Knight with courtesy.

But say (brave knight) what is your name birth?

My name is Raf, I am an English man,
As true as steel, a hearty Englishman,
And prentice to a Grocer in the strond,
By deed Indent, of which I have one part:
But Fortune calling me to follow Arms,
On me this holy order I did take,
Of Burning pestle, which in all men's eyes,
I bear, confounding Ladies enemies.

Oft have I heard of your brave country-men,
And fertile soil, and store of wholesome food:
My Father oft will tell me of a drink
In England found, and Nipitato called.
Which drives all the sorrow from your hearts.

Lady 'tis true, you need not lay your lips
To better Nipitato then there is.

And of a wild-fowle he will often speak,
Which poudred beef and mustard called is:
For there have been great wars 'twixt us and you,
But truly Raf, it was not long of me.
Tell me then Raf, could you contented be,
To wear a Ladies favour in your shield?

I am a knight of religious order,
And will not wear a favour of a Ladies
That trusts in Antichrist, and false traditions.

Well said Raf, convert her if thou can.

Besides, I have a Lady of my own
In merry England, for whose virtuous sake
I took these Arms, and Susan is her name,
A Cobblers maid in Milke-street, whom I vow
Ne'er to forsake, whilst life and Pestle last.

Happy that Cobbling dame, who ere she be,
That for her own (dear Raf) hath gotten thee.
Unhappy I, that ne'er shall see the day
To see thee more, that bear my heart away.

Lady fare-well, I needs must take my leave.

Hard-harted Raf, that Ladies dost deceive.

Hark thee Raf, there's money for thee; give something in the King of
Cracouia's house, be not beholding to him.


Lady before I go, I must remember
Your fathers Officers, who truth to tell,
Have been about me very diligent.
Hold up thy snowy hand thou princely maid,
There's twelve pence for your fathers Chamberlaine,
And another shilling for his Cooke,
For by my troth the Goose was roasted well.
And twelue-pence for your fathers horse-keeper,
For nointing my horse back; and for his butter
There is another shilling. To the maid
That washed my boot-hose, there's an English groat;
And two pence to the boy that wiped my boots:
And last, fair Lady, there is for your self
Three pence to buy you pins at Bumbo fair.

Full many thanks, and I will keep them safe
Till all the heads be off, for thy sake Raf.

Advance my Squire and Dwarf, I cannot stay.

Thou kilst my heart in parting thus away.

I commend Raf yet that he will not stoop to a Craconian, there's properer
women in London then any are there I-wis. But here comes Master Humphrey and
his love again now George.


I cony, peace.


Go get you up, I will not be entreated.
And gossip mine, I'll keep you sure hereafter
From gadding out again with boys and unthrifts,
Come, they are women's tears, I know your fashion.
Go sirrah, locke her in, and keep the key,
Safe as you love your life. Now my son Humfrey,
You may both rest assured of my love
In this, and reap your own desire.

I see this love you speak of, through your daughter,
Although the hole be little; and hereafter
Will yield the like in all I may, or can,
Fitting a Christian, and a gentleman.

I do believe you (my good son) and thank you:
For 'twere an impudence to think you flattered.

It were indeed, but shall I tell you why,
I have been beaten twice about the lye.

Well son, no more of complement, my daughter
Is yours again; appoint the time, and take her,
We will have no stealing for it, I my self
And some few of our friends will see you married.

I would you would i'saith, for be it known
I ever was afraid to lie alone.

Some three days hence then.

Three days, let me see,
'Tis some-what of the most, yet I agree,
Because I mean against the appointed day,
To visit all my friends in new array.

Sir, there's a Gentlewoman without would speak with your Worship.


What is she?


Sir I asked her not.


Bid her come in.


Peace be to your Worship, I come as a poor Suitor to you sir, in the behalf
of this child.


Are you not wife to Merrie-thought?


Yes truly, would I had ne'er seen his eels, ha has undone me and himself and
his children, there he lives at home sings, hoights, Revels among his drunken
companions, but, I warrant you, where to get a penny to put bread in his mouth,
he knows not: and therefore if it like your Worship, I would entreat your
letter, to the honest Host of the Bell in VValtham, that I may place my child
under the protection of his Tapster, in some settled course of life.


I'm glad the heavens have heard my prayers: thy husband
When I was ripe in sorrows laughed at me,
Thy son like an unthankful wretch, I having
Redeemed him from his fall and made him mine,
To show his love again, first stole my daughter,
Then wronged this Gentleman, and last of all,
Gave me that grief, had almost brought me down
Unto my grave, had not a stronger hand
Relieved my sorrows, go, and weep, as I did
And be unpitied, for I here profess
An everlasting hate to all thy name.

Will you so sir, how say you by that? come Micke, let him keep his wind to
cool his Porrage, we will go to thy Nurces Micke, she knits silk stockings
boy, and we will knit too boy, and be beholding to none of them all.


Sir, I take it you are the Master of this house.

How then boy?

Then to your self sir comes this letter.

From whom my pretty Boy?

From him that was your servant, but no more
Shall that name ever be, for he is dead,
Grief of your purchased anger broke his heart,
I saw him die, and from his hand received
This paper, with a charge to bring it hither,
Read it, and satisfy your self in all.

Sir, that I have wronged your love, I must confess, in which I have purchased
to my self, besides mine own undoing, the ill opinion of my friends, let not
your anger, good sir, out live me, but suffer me to rest in peace with your
forgiveness; let my body (if a dying man may so much preuails with you) be
brought to your daughter, that she may truly know my hate flames are now
buried, and, withal, receive a testimony of the zeal I bore her virtue:
farewell for ever, and be ever happy. Jasper.

Gods hand is great in this, I do for give him,
Yet I am glad he's quiet, where I hope
He will not bite again: boy bring the body
And let him have his will, if that be all.

'Tis here without sir.

So sir, if you please
You may conduct it in, I do not fear it.

I'll be your Usher boy, for though I say it,
He owed me something once, and well did pay it.

If there be any punishment inflicted
Upon the miserable, more then yet I feel,
Let it together cease me, and at once
Press down my soul, I cannot bear the pain
Of these delaying tortures: thou than art
The end of all, and the sweet rest of all;
Come, come o death, bring me to thy peace,
And blot out all the memory I nourish
Both of my father and my cruel friend.
O wretched maid still living to be wretched,
To be a say to fortune in her changes,
And grow to number times and woes together,
How happy had I been, if being borne
My grave had been my cradle?

By your leave
Young Mistress, here's a boy hath brought a coffin,
What a would say I know not, but your father
Charged me to give you notice, here they come.

For me I hoped 'tis come, and 'tis most welcome.

Fair Mistress let me not add greater grief
To that great store you have already; Jasper
That whilst he lived was yours, now dead,
And here enclosed, commanded me to bring
His body hither, and to crave a tear
From those fair eyes, though he deserved not pity,
To deck his funeral, for so he bid me
Tell her for whom he di'de.

He shall have many:
Good friends depart a little, whilst I take
My leave of this dead man, that once I loved:
Hold, yet a little, life and then I give thee
To thy first heavenly being; O my friend!
Hast thou deceived me thus, and got before me?
I shall not long be after, but believe me,
Thou were too cruel Jasper against thy self,
In punishing the fault, I could have pardoned,
With so untimely death; thou did not wrong me,
But ever were it most kind, most true, most loving;
And I the most unkind, most false, most cruel.
Did thou but ask a tear? I'll give thee all,
Even all my eyes can power down, all my sigh's
And all my self, before thou go from me
There are but sparing rites: But if thy soul
Be yet about this place, and can behold
And see what I prepare to deck thee with,
It shall go up, borne on the wings of peace
And satisfied: first will I sing thy dirge,
Then kiss thy pale lips, and then die my self,
And fill one Coffin and one grave together.
Come you whose loves are dead,
And whiles I sing
Weep and wring
Every hand and every head,
Bind with Cypress and sad Ewe,
Ribands black, and candles blew,
For him that was of men most true.
Come with heavy mourning,
And on his grave
Let him have
Sacrifice of sighs and groaning,
Let him have fair flowers enough,
White and purple, green and yellow,
For him that was of men most true.
Thou sable cloth, sed cover of my joys
I lift thee up, and thus I meet with death.

And thus you meet the living

Save me heaven.

Nay do not fly me fair, I am no spirit,
Look better on me, do you know me yet?

O thou dear shadow of my friend.


Dear substance,
I swear I am no shadow, feel my hand,
It is the same it was, I am your Jasper,
Your Jasper that's yet living, and yet loving,
Pardon my rash attempt, my foolish proof
I put in practise of your constancy,
For sooner should my sword have drunk my blood,
And set my soul at liberty, then drawn
The least drop from that body; for which boldness
Doom me to any thing: if death I take it
And willingly.

This death I'll give you for it,
So, now I am satisfied: you are no spirit,
But my own truest, truest, truest friend,
Why do you come thus to me.

First to see you,
Then to convey you hence.

It cannot be,
For I am locked up here and watched at all hours,
That 'tis impossible for me to escape.

Nothing more possible, within this coffin
Do you convey your self, let me alone,
I have the wits of twenty men about me,
Only I crave the shelter of your Closet
A little, and then fear me not; creep in
That they may presently convey you hence:
Fear nothing dearest love, I'll be your second,
Lie close, so, all goes well yet; Boy.

At hand sir.

Convey away the Coffin, and be wary.

'Tis done already.

Now must I go conjure.

Boy, Boy.


Your servant sir.


Do me this kindness Boy, hold here's a crown: Before thou bury the body of
this fellow, carry it to his old merry father, and salute him from me, and bid
him sing, he hath cause.


I will sir.


And then bring me word what tune he is in, and have another crown: but do it
truly.

I have fitted him a bargain, now, will vex him.

God bless your VVorships health sir.


Fare-well boy.


Ah old Merry-thought, art thou there again, let's here some of thy songs.


Who can sing a merrier noate,
Then he that cannot change a groat?
Not a Denier left, and yet my heart leaps, I do wonder yet, as old as I am,
that any man will follow a Trade, or serve, that may sing and laugh, and walk
the streets, my wife and both my sons are I know not where, I have nothing
left, nor know I how to come by meat to supper, yet am I merry still; for I
know I shall find it upon the Table at six a clock, therefore hang Thought.

I would not be a Scruigman to carry the cloke-bag still,
Nor would I be a Fawleconer the greedy Hawlkes to fill.
But I would be in a good house, have a good Master too.
But I would eat drink of the best, no work would I do.
This is it that keeps life and soul together, mirth, this is the
Philosophers stone that they write so much on, that keeps a man ever young.


Sir, they say they know all your money is gone, and they will trust you for no
more drink.


Will they not? let am choose, the best is I have mirth at home, and need not
send abroad for that, let them keep their drink to themselves.

For Iillian of Berry she dwells on a Hill,
And she hath good Beer and Ale to sell.
And of good fellows she thinks no ill,
And thither will we go now, now, now, now, and thither
Will we go now.
And when you have made a little stay,
You need not ask what is to pay,
But kiss your Hostess and go your way, And thither, c.

Sir, I can get no bread for supper.


Hang bread and supper, let's preserve our mirth, and we shall never feel
hunger, I'll warrant you, let's have a Catch, boy follow me, come sing this
Catch.

Ho, ho, no body at home, meat, nor drink, nor money ha we none, fill the
pot Eedy, never more need I.


So boys enough, follow me, let's change our place and we shall laugh afresh.


Let him go George, a shall not have any countenance from us, nor a good word
from any in the Company, if I may strike stroke in it.


No more a shannot love; but Nel I will have Raph do a very notable matter
now, to the eternal honour and glory of all Grocers, sirrah you there boy, can
none of you hear?


Sir, your pleasure.


Let Raph come out on May-day in the morning and speak upon a Conduit with all
his Scarfes about him, and his feathers and his rings and his knacks.


Why sir you do not think of our plot, what will become of that then?


Why sir, I care not what become on it, I'll have him come out, or I'll fetch
him out my self, I'll have something done in honour of the City, besides, he
hath been long enough upon Adventures, bring him out quickly, or if I come in
amongst you --


Well sir he shall come out, but if our play miscarry, sir you are like to pay
for it.


Bring him away then.


This will bebraue i'faith, George shall not he dance the morris too for the
credit of the Strand.


No sweet heart it will be too much for the boy, o there he is Nel, he's
reasonable well in reparell, but he has not rings enough.


London, to thee I do present the merry Month of May
Let each true Subject be content to hear me what I say:
For from the top of Conduit head, as plainly may appear,
I will both tell my name to you and wherefore I came here.
My name is Raph, by due descent, though not ignoble I,
Yet far inferior to the Flock of gracious Grocery.
And by the Common-councell, of my fellows in the Strand,
With gilded Staff, and crossed Scarf, the May-lord here I stand.
Rejoice, o English hearts, rejoice, rejoice o Lovers dear,
Rejoice o City, Town, and Country, rejoice eke every Shire;
For now the fragrant Flowers do spring and sprout in seemly sort,
The little Birds do sit and sing, the Lambs do make fine sport.
And now the Birchen Tree doth bud that makes the School boy cry
The Morris rings while Hobby-horse doth foot it feateously:
The Lords and Ladies now abroad for their disport and play,
Do kiss sometimes upon the Grass, and sometimes in the Hey.
Now Butter with a leaf of Sage is good to Purge the blood,
Fly Venus and Phlebotomy for they are neither good.
Now little fish on tender stone, begin to cast their bellies,
And sluggish snails, that erst were mute, do creep out of their shelies
The rumbling Rivers now do warm for little boys to padle,
The sturdy Steed, now goes to grass, and up they hang his saddle.
The heavy Hart, the bellowing Buck, the Rascal and the Pricket,
Are now among the Yeomans Peas, and leave the fearful thicket.
And be like them, o you, I say, of this same noble Town,
And lift aloft your velvet heads, and slipping of your gown:
With bells on legs, and napkins clean unto your shoulders tide,
With Scarfes Garters as you please, Hey for our Town cried
March out and show your willing minds by twenty and by twenty,
To Hogsdon or to Newington, where Ale and Cakes are plenty:
And let it ne'er be said, for shame, that we the youths of London,
Lay thrumming of our Caps at home, and left our custom undone.
Up then, I say, both young and old, both man and maid a Maying
With Drums and Guns that bounce aloud, merry Taber playing.
Which to prolong, God save our King, and send his Country peace
And root out Treason from the Land, and so, my friends I cease.

I will have no great store of company at the wedding, a couple of neighbours
and their wives, and we will have a Capon in stewed broth, with marrow, and a
good piece of beef, stuck with rose-mary.


Forbear thy pains fond man, it is too late.

Heaven bless me: Jasper?

I, I am his Ghost
Whom thou hast injured for his constant love:
Fond worldly wretch, who dost not understand
In death that true hearts cannot parted be.
First know thy daughter is quite borne away,
On wings of Angels, through the liquid air,
To far out of thy reach, and never more
Shalt thou behold her face: But she and I
Will in another world enjoy our loves,
Where neither fathers anger, poverty,
Nor any cross that troubles earthly men
Shall make us sever our united hearts.
And never shalt thou sit, or be alone
In any place, but I will visit thee
With ghastly looks, and put into thy mind
The great offences which thou did to me.
When thou art at thy Table with thy friends
Merry in heart, and filled with swelling wine,
I'll come in midst of all thy pride and mirth,
Invisible to all men but thy self,
And whisper such a sad tale in thine ear,
Shall make thee let the Cup fall from thy hand,
And stand as mute and pale as Death it self.

Forgive me Jasper; Oh! what might I do?
Tell me, to satisfy thy troubled Ghost?

There is no means, too late thou think of this.

But tell me what were best for me to do?

Repent thy deed, and satisfy my father,
And beat fond Humphrey out of thy doors,

Look George, his very Ghost would have folks beaten.

Father, my bride is gone, fair mistress Luce,
My soule's the fount of vengeance, mischiefs sluice.

Hence fool out of my sight, with thy fond passion
Thou hast undone me.

Hold my father dear,
For Luce thy daughters sake, that had no peer.

Thy father fool? there's some blows more, begone.
Jasper, I hope thy Ghost be well appeased,
To see thy will performed, now will I go
To satisfy thy father for thy wrongs.

What shall I do? I have been beaten twice,
And mistress Luce is gone? help me device:
Since my true-loue is gone, I never more,
Whilst I do live, upon the sky will pore;
But in the dark will wear out my shooe-soles
In passion, in Saint Faiths Church under Paules.

George call Raf hither, if you love me call Raf hither, I have the bravest
thing for him to do George; prithee call him quickly.


Raf, Why Raf boy.


Here sir.


Come hither Raf, come to thy mistress boy.


Raf I would have thee call all the youths together in battle-ray, with
drums, and guns, and flags, and march to Mile end in pompous fashion, and there
exhort your Soldiers to be merry and wise, and to keep their beards from
burning Raf, and then skirmish, and let your flags fly, and cry kill, kill,
kill: my husband shall lend you his Jerkin Raf, and there's a scarf; for the
rest, the house shall furnish you, and we'll pay for it: do it bravely Raf,
and think before whom you perform, and what person you represent.


I warrant you mistress if I do it not for the honour of the City, and the
credit of my master, let me never hope for freedom.


'Tis well spoken I faith; go thy ways, thou art a spark indeed.


Raf, Raf, double your files bravely Raf.


I warrant you sir.


Let him look narrowly to his service, I shall take him else, I was there my
self a pike-man once in the hottest of the day, wench; had my feather shot
sheer away, the fringe of my pike burnt off with powder, my pate broken with a
scouring-sticke, and yet I thank God I am here.


Hark George the drums.


Ran, tan, tan, tan; ran, tan: O wench an thou had but seen little Ned of
Algate, drum Ned, how he made it roar again, and laid on like a tyrant: and
then stroke softly till the ward came up, and then thundered again, and
together we go: sa, sa, sa, bounce quoth the guns: courage my hearts, quoth the
Captains: Saint George, quoth the pikemen; and withal here they lay, and
there they lay: And yet for all this I am here wench.


Be thankful for it George, for indeed 'tis wonderful.


March fair my hearts, Lieutenant beat the rear up: Ancient, let your
colours fly; but have a great care of the Butchers hooks at white-Chappell,
they have been the death of many a fair Ancient. Open your files that I may
take a view both of your persons and munition: Sergeant call a muster.


A stand, William Hamerton peuterer.


Here Captain.


A Corslet, and a spanish pike; 'tis well, can you shake it with a terror?


I hope so Captain.


Charge upon me, 'tis with the weakest: put more strength William Hammerton,
more strength: as you were again. Proceed Sergeant.


George Greene-goose, Poulterer?


Here.


Let me see your piece neighbour Greene-goose, when was she shot in?


And like you master Captain, I made a shot even now, partly to scour her,
and partly for audacity.


It should seem so certainly, for her breath is yet inflamed: besides, there
is a maine fault in the touch-hole, it runs, and stinks; and I tell you
moreover, and believe it: Ten such touch-holes would breed the pox in the Army.
Get you a feather, neighbour, get you a feather, sweet oil, and paper, and
your piece may do well enough yet. Where's your powder?


Here.


What in a paper? As I am a Soldier, and Gentleman, it craves a Martial
Court: you ought to dye for it. Where's your horne? answer me to that.


An't like you sir, I was oblivious.


It likes me not you should be so; 'tis a shame for you, and a scandal to all
our neighbours, being a man of worth and estimation, to leave your horne
behind you: I am afraid 'twill breed example. But let me tell you no more
on it; stand, till I view you all. What's become o'th nose of your flask?


Indeed law Captain, 'twas blown away with powder.


Put on a new one at the Cities charge. Wheres the stone of this piece?


The Drummer took it out to light Tobacco.


'Tis a fault my friend, put it in again: You want a Nose, and you a Stone;
Sergeant, take a note on it, for I mean to stop it in the pay. Remove and
march, soft and fair Gentlemen, soft and fair: double your files, as you
were, faces about. Now you with the sodden face, keep in there: look to your
match sirrah, it will be in your fellows flask anon. So, make a crescent
now, advance your pikes, stand and give ear. Gentlemen, Countrymen, Friends,
and my fellow-Souldiers, I have brought you this day from the Shops of
Security, and the Counters of Content, to measure out in these furious fields,
Honour by the ell; and prowess by the pound: Let it not, o let it not, I say,
be told hereafter, the noble issue of this City fainted: but bear your
selves in this fair action, like men, valiant men, and freemen; Fear not the
face of the enemy, nor the noise of the guns: for believe me brethren, the rude
rumbling of a Brewers Carre is far more terrible, of which you have a daily
experience: Neither let the stink of powder offend you, since a more valiant
stink is nightly with you. To a resolved mind, his home is every where: I
speak not this to take away the hope of your return; for you shall see (I do
not doubt it) and that very shortly, your loving wives again, and your sweet
children, whose care doth bear you company in baskets. Remember then whose
cause you have in hand, and like a sort of true-borne Scauingers, scour me
this famous Realm of enemies. I have no more to say but this: Stand to your
tacklings lads, and show to the world you can as well brandish a sword, as
shake an apron. Saint George and on my hearts.


'Twas well done Raf, I'll send thee a cold Capon a field, and a bottle of
March-beere; and it may be, come my self to see thee.


Nell, the boy has deceived me much, I did not think it had been in him: he
has performed such a matter wench, that if I live, next year I'll have him
Captain of the Gallyfoist, or I'll want my will.


Yet I thank God, I break not a rinkle more then I had, not a stoop boyce:
Care live with Cats, I defy thee, my heart is as sound as an Oak; and though I
want drink to wet my whistle, I can sing: Come no more there boys, come no
more there:
For we shall never whilst we live, come any more there.



God save you sir.


It's a brave boy: can thou sing?


Yes sir, I can sing, but 'tis not so necessary at this time.


Sing we, and chant it, whilst love doth grant it.


Sir, sir, if you knew what I have brought you, you would have little list to
sing.


O the Mimon round, full long long I have thee sought,
And now I have thee found, what hast thou here brought?

A Coffin sir, and your dead son Jasper in it.

Dead? why fare-well he:
Thou wast a bonny boy, and I did love thee.

Then I pray you sir do so still.

Iaspers ghost? thou art welcome from Stygian lake so soon,
Declare to me what wondrous things in Pluto's court are done.

By my troth sir, I ne'er came there, tis too hot for me sir.

A merry ghost, a very merry ghost.
And where is your true-loue? o where is yours?

Marie look you sir.

Ah ha! Art thou good at that I faith?
With hey trixie terlery-whiskin, the world it runs on wheels,
When the young mans -- up goes the maidens heals.

What Mr. Merri-thought, will you not let's in? what do you think shall become
of us?


What voice is that that calls at our door?


You know me well enough, I am sure I have not been such a stranger to you.


And some they whistled, and some they sung, Hey down, down: and some did
loudly say, ever as the Lord Barnets horne blew, away Musgraue, away.


You will not have us starve here, will you Mr. Merri-thought?


Nay good sir be persuaded, she is my mother: if her offences have been great
against you, let your own love remember she is yours, and so forgive her.


Good Mr. Merri-thought let me entreat you, I will not be denied.


Why Mr. Merri-thought, will you be a vexed thing still?


Woman I take you to my love again, but you shall sing before you enter:
therefore dispatch your song, and so come in.


Well, you must have your will when al's done.
Micke what song can thou sing boy?

I can sing none forsooth, but a Ladies daughter of Paris properly.


Song. It was, a Ladies daaghter, c.


Come, you're welcome home again.
If such danger be in playing, and jest must to earnest turn,
You shall go no more a maying.

Are you within sir, Master Merri-thought?

It is my masters voice, good sir go hold him in talk whilst we convey our
selves into some inward room.


What are you? are you merry? you must be very merry if you enter.


I am sir.


Sing then.


Nay good sir open to me.


Sing, I say, or by the merry heart you come not in.


Well sir, I'll sing.
Fortune my Fee, c.

You are welcome sir, you are welcome, you see your entertainment, pray you be
merry.


O Mr. Merri-thought, I am come to ask you
Forgiveness for the wrongs I offered you,
And your most virtuous son, they're infinite,
Yet my contrition shall be more then they.
I do confess my hardness broke his heart,
For which, just heaven hath given me punishment
More then my age can carry, his wandering spirit
Not yet at rest, pursues me every where,
Crying, I'll haunt thee for thy cruelty.
My daughter she is gone, I know not how,
Taken invisible, and whether living,
Or in grave, 'tis yet uncertain to me.
O Master Merry-thought, these are the weights,
Will sink me to my grave, forgive me sir.

Why sir, I do forgive you, and be merry,
And if the wag, in's life time, plaid the knave,
Can you forgive him too?

Withal my heart sir.

Speak it again, and heartily.

I do sir,
Now by my soul I do.

With that came out his Paramour,
She was as white as the Lilly flower,
Hey troule trollie lolly.
With that came out her own dear Knight,
He was as true as ever did fight. c.
Sir, if you will forgive ham, clap their hands together, there's no more to be
sad in the matter.


I do, I do.


I do not like this, peace boys, hear me one of you, every bodies part is
come to an end but Raphes, and he's left out.


'Tis long of your self sir, we have nothing to do with his part.


Raph come away, make on him as you have done of the rest, boys come.


Now good husband let him come out and die.


He shall Nel, Raph come away quickly and die boy.


'Twill be very unfit he should die sir, upon no occasion, and in a Comedy too.


Take you no care of that sir boy, is not his part at an end, think you, when
he's dead? come away Raph.


When I was mortal, this my costive corps
Did lap up Figs and Raisons in the Strand,
Where sitting I espi'd a lovely Dame,
Whose Master wrought with Lingell and with All,
And under ground he vampied many a boot,
Straight did her love prick forth me, tender sprig
To follow feats of Arms in warlike wise,
Through VValtham Desert, where I did perform
Many achievements, and did lay on ground
Huge Barbaroso that insulting Giant,
And all his Captives soon set at liberty.
Then honour pricked me from my native soil,
Into Meldauia, where I gained the love
Of Pompiana his beloved daughter:
But yet proved constant to the black thum'd maid
Susan, and skorn'd Pompianaes love:
Yet liberal I was and gave her pins,
And money for her fathers Officers.
I then returned home, and thrust my self
In action, and by all men chosen was
Lord of the May, where I did flourish it,
With Skarfes and Rings, and Posy in my hand,
After this action, I preferred was,
And chosen City Captain at Mile-end,
With hat and feather and with leading staff,
And trained my men and brought them all off clear,
Save one man that berai'd him with the noise.
But all these things I Raph did undertake,
Only for my beloved Susans sake.
Then coming home, and sitting in my Shop
With Apron blew, death came unto my Stall
To cheapen Aqua-vitae, but ere I
Could take the bottle down, and fill a taste,
Death caught a pound of Pepper in his hand,
And sprinkled all my face and body ore,
And in an instant vanished away.

'Tis a pretty fiction i'faith.

Then took I up my Bow and Shaft in hand,
And walked into Moore-fields to cool my self,
But there grim cruel death met me again,
And shot this forked arrow through my head,
And now I faint, therefore be warned by me,
My fellows every one of forked heads.
Fare-well all you good boys in merry London,
Ne'er shall we more upon Shroue-tuesday meet
And pluck down houses of iniquity.
My pain increases, I shall never more
Hold open, whilst another pumps both legs,
Nor daube a Satin gown with rotten eggs:
Set up a stake, o never more I shall,
I die, fly, fly my soul to Grocers Hall. oh, oh, oh, c.

Well said Raph, do your obeisance to the Gentlemen and go your ways, well
said Raph.


Me thinks all we, thus kindly and unexpectedly reconciled should not depart
without a song.


A good motion.


Strike up then.


Better Music ne'er was known,
Then a quire of hearts in one.
Let each other that hath been,
Troubled with the gall or spleen:
Learn of us to keep his brow,
Smooth and plain as ours are now.
Sing though before the hour of dying
He shall rise and then be crying.
Hey ho, 'tis nought but mirth.
That keeps the body from the earth.
Come Nel, shall we go, the Plays done.


Nay by my faith George, I have more manners then so, I'll speak to these
Gentlemen first: I thank you all Gentlemen, for your patience and countenane
to Raph, a poor fatherless child, and if I might see you at my house, it
should go hard, but I would have a pottle of wine and a pipe of Tobacco for
you, for truly I hope you do like the youth, but I would be glad to know the
truth: I refer it to your own discretions, whether you will applaud him or
no, for I will wink, and whilst you shall do what you will, I thank you with
all my heart, God give you good night; come George.



