BRother, is your last hope past to mollify Moorecrafts heart about your
Mortgage?


Hopelessly past: I have presented the Usurer with a richer draught, then ever
Cleopatra swallowed; he hath sucked in ten thousand pownds worth of my Land,
more then he paid for at a gulp, without Trumpets.


I have as hard a task to perform in this house.


Faith mine was to make a Usurer honest, or to loose my land.


And mine is to persuade a passionate woman, or to leave the Land.

Sauill make the boat stay, I fear I shall begin my unfortunate journey this
night, though the darkness of the night and the roughnes of the waters might
easily dissuade an unwilling man.


Sir, your fathers old friends hold it the sounder course for your body and
estate, to stay at home, and marry, and propagate, and govern in your
Country, then to travel for diseases, and return following the Court in a
nightcap, and die without issue.


Sauill, you shall gain the opinion of a better servant, in seeking to
execute, not alter my will, how soever my intents succeed.


Yonders Mistres Yongloue brother, the grave rubber of your mistres toes.


Mistres Yongloue.


Mr. Loveless, truly we thought your sails had been hoist: my Mistres is
persuaded you are Se^-sicke ere this.


Loves she her ill taken up resolution so dearly? Did thou move her for me?


By this l^ght that shines, theirs no removing her, if she get a ^iffe opinion
by the end. I attempted her to day when they say a woman can deny nothing.


What critical minute was that?


When her smock was over her ears: but she was no more pliant then if it hung
about her heals.


I prithee doliuer my service, and say I desire to see the dear cause of my
banishment; and then for France.


I'll do it: hark hither, is that your Brother?


Yes, have you lost your memory?


As I live he's a pretty fellow.


O this is a sweet Brache.


Why she knows not you.


No, but she offered me once to know her: to this day she loves youth of
eighteen; she heard a tale how Cupid ftrooke her in love with a great Lord in
the Tilt-yard, but he never saw her; yet she in kindness would needs wear
a willow garland at his wedding. She loved all the Players in the last Queenes
time once over: She was struck when they acted lovers, and forsook some when
they plaid murderers. She has nine Spurroyals, and the servants say she hoards
old gold; and she herself pronounces angrily, that the Farmers eldest son,
or her Mistres husbands Clark that shall be, that marries her, shall make her a
jointure of fourscore pounds a year; she tells tales of the s^ruing-men.


Enough, I know her brother. I shall en^reate you only to salute my Mistres,
and take leave, we'll part at the staiers.


Now Sir, this first part of your will is performed: whats the rest?


First let me beg your notice for this Gentleman my Brother.


I shall take it as a favour done to me, though the gentleman hath received but
an v^timely grace from you, yet my charitable disposition would have been ready
to have done him freer courtesies as a stranger, then upon those cold
commendations.


Lady, my salutations crave acquaintance and leave at on^e.


Sir I hope you are the n^aster of your own occasions.


Would I were so. Mistres, for me to praise over again that worth, which all
the world, and you your self can see.


Its a cold Rome this; Servant.


Mistres.


What think you if I have a chimney fort out heer?


Mistres another in my place, that were not tied to believe all your actions
just, would app^ehend himself wronged: But I, whose virtues are constancy
obedience.


Yongloue, make a good fire above to warm me after my servants Exordiums.


I have heard and seen your affability to be such, that the servants you give
wages to may speak.


Tis true, tis true; but they speak to the purpose.


Mistres your will leads my speeches from the purpose. But as a man --


A Simile servant? This room was built for honest meaners, that deliver
themselves hastily and plainly, and are gone. Is this a time or place for
Exordiums, and Similes, and metaphors? If you have ought to say, break
intoo't; my answers shall very reasonably meet you.


Mistres I came to see you.


That's happily dispacht, the next.


To take leave of you.


To be gon?


Yes.


^ou ^eede not have despaired of that, nor have used so many circumstances to
win me to give you leave to perform my com^nd: Is there a third.


Yes, I had a third, had you been apt to hear it.


I never apter. Fast (good servant) fast.


Twas to entreat you to hear reason.


Most willingly, have you brought one can speak it?


Lastly, it is to kindle in that barren heart love and forgiveness.


You would stay at home?


Yes Lady.


Why you may, and doubtlessly will, when you have debated that your commander is
but your M^stres, a woman, a weak one, wildly overborne with p^ssions: but the
thing by her commanded, is to see Douers dreadful cliffe, p^ssing in a pore
waterhouse; the dangers of the merciless merc^lesse twixt that and Callis,
five long hours sail, with three pore weeks victuals.


You wrong me.


Then to land dumb, unable to enquire for an Engglish host, to remove from
City to City, by most chargeable post-horse, like one that rod in quest of
his mother tongue.


You wrong me much.


And all these (almost invincible labours) performed for your mistres to be in
danger to for sake her, and to put on new alleagance to some French Lady, who
is content to change language with you for laughter, and after your whole year
spent in tennis and broken speech, to stand to the hazard of being laughed at at
your return, and have tales made on you by the chamber-maids.


You wrong me much.


Louder yet.


You know your least word is offorce to make me seek out dangers, move me
not with toys: but in this banishment, I must take leave to say, you are
unjust: was one kiss forced from you in public by me so unpardonable? why all
the hours of day and night have seen us kiss.


Tis true, and so you satisfied the company that heard me chide.


Your own eyes were not dearer to you then I?


And so you told um.


I did, yet no singne of disgrace need to have stained your cheek: you your
self knew your pure and simple heart to be most unspotted, and free from the
least baseness.


I did: But if a Maids heart doth but once think that she is suspected, her
own face will write he^ guilty.


But where lay this disgrace? The world that knew us, knew our resolutions
well: And could it be hoped that I should give away my freedom, and venture a
perpetual bondage with one I never kissed? or could I in (...) wisdom take ^oo
much lou^ upon me, from he^ that chose me for her husband?


Believe me; if my w^dding smock were on,
Were the gloves bought and given, the Licence com^,
Were the Rosemary branches dipped, and all
The Hipochrists and cakes (...) and drunk off,
Were these two arms inc^mpast with the hands
Of Bachelers, to l^ade me to the Church;
Were my feet in the door, were I Iohn, said,
If Io^n should boast a favour done by me,
I would not wed that year: And you I hope,
When you have spent his year commodiously,
In atcheiuing Languages, will at your return
Acknowledge me more coy of parting with mine eyes,
Then such a friend. More talk I hold not now,
If you dare go!

I dare you know; First let me kiss.


Farewell sweet servant, your ta^ke performed,
On a new ground as a beginning suitor,
I shall be apt to hear you.

Farewell cruel Mistres.


Brother you'll hazard the loosing your tide to Grauesend: you have a long half
mile by land to Greenewich.


I go: but brother, what yet unheard of course to live, doth your imagination
flatter you with? your ordinary means are deuourd.


Course? why horse-coursing I think. Consume no time in this: I have no es^te
to be mended by meditation: he that busies himself about my fortunes, may
properly be said to busy himself about no^hing.


Yet some course you must take, which for my satisfaction resolve and open: If
you will shape none, I must inform you, that that man bu^ persuades himself
he means to live, that imagines not the means.


Why live upon others, as others have lived upon me.


I apprehend not that: you have fed others, and consequently disposed of um: and
the same measure must you expect from your maintainers, which will be too heavy
an alteration for you to bear.


Why i'll purse; if that raise me not, I'll bet at bowling-alleys, or man
whores; I would fain live by others: but I'll live whilst I am vnhangd, and
after the thoughts taken.


I see you are tide to no particular employment then.


Faith I may choose my course: they say nature brings forth none but she
provides for em: I'll try her liberality.


Well, to keep your feet out of base and dangerous paths, I have resolved you
shall live as Master of my house. It shall be your care Sauill to see him fed
and clothed, not according to his present estate, but to his birth and former
fortunes.


If it be referd to him, if I be not found in Carnation Iearsie stockings, blew
devils breeches, with three guards down, and my pocket ith sleeves, i'll ne'er
look you in the face again.


A comlier wear I wusse it is then those dangling slops.


To keep you ready to do him all service peaceably, and him to command you
reasonably, I leave these further direcitons in writing, which at your best
leisure together open and read.


S^r my Mrs. commends her love to you in this token, and these words; It is a
Jewel (she says) which as a favour from her she would request you to wear
till your years t^auell be performed: which once expired, she will has^ly
expect your happy return.


Return my service with such thanks, as she may imagine the heart of a suddenly
ouer-ioyed man would willingly utter: and you (I hope) I shall with slender
arguments persuade to wear this Diamond, that when my Mistres shall through my
long absence, and the approach of new suitors, offer to forget me; you may call
your eye down to your finger, and remember and speak of me: She will hear
thee better then those allied by birth to her; as we see many men much swayed
by the grooms of their chambers, not that they have a greater part of their
love or opinion on them, as on others, but for they know their secrets.


A my credit I swear, I think twas made for me: Fear no other suitors.


I shall not need to teach you how to discredit their beginnings, you know how
to take exception at their shirts at washing, or to make the maids swear they
found plasters in their beds.


I know, I know, and do not you fear the suitors.


Farewell, be mindful and be happy: the night calls me.


The Gods of the winds befriend you Sir: a constant and a liberal lover thou
art; more such God send us.


Let um not stand still, we have rid hard.


A suitor I know by his riding hard, I'll not be seen.


A pretty Hall this, No servant in it? I would look freshly.


You have delivered your arrand to me then: there's no danger in a handsome
young fellow: I'll show my self.


Lady may it please you to bestow upon a stranger the ordinary grace of
salutation: Are you the Lady of this house?


Sir, I am worthily proud to be a servant of hers.


Lady I should be as proud to be a sernant of yours, did not my so late
acquaintance make me despair.


Sir, it is not so hard to achieve, but nature may bring it about.


For these comfortable words I remain your glad debtor. Is your Lady at home?


She is no stragl^r Sir.


May her occasions admit me to speak with her?


If you come in the way of a Suitor, No.


I know your a^ble virtue will be moved to persuade her, that a Gentleman
benighted and strayed offers to be bound to her for a n^ghts lodging.


I will commend this message to her: but if you aim at her body, you will be
de^uded: oth^r women the households of good carriage and government; upon any
of which if you can cast your affection, they will perhaps be found as
faithful, and not so coy.


What a skin full of lust is this? I thought I had come awoeing, and I am the
courted party. This is right Court fashion: Men, women, and all woe; catch
that catch may. If this soft hearted woman have infused any of her tenderness
into her Lady, there is hope she will be pliant. But who's here?


God save you Sir, My Lady lets you know she desires to be acquainted with
your name before she confer with you.


Sir my name calls me Welford.


Sir, you are a gentleman of a good name. I'll try his wit.


I will uphold it as good as any of my Ancestors had this two hundred years
Sir.


I knew a worshipful and a religious gentleman of your name in the Bishopricke
of Durham. Call you him Cousin?


I am only allied to his virtues Sir.


It is modestly said: I should carry the badge of your Christianity with me to.


VVhats that, a Cross? there's a tester.


I mean the name which your Godfathers Godmothers gave you at the Font.


Tis Harry: but you cannot proceed orderly now in your Catechism: fo^ you
have told me who gave me that name. Shall beg your names.


Roger.


What room fill you in this house?


More rooms then one.


The more the merrier. But may my boldness know, why your Lady hath sent you
to decipher my name?


Her own words were these; To know whether you were a formerly denied suitor,
disguised in this message: For I can assure you she delights not in Thalame:
Himen and sh^ are at variance, I shall return with much hast.


And much speed Sir I hope: certainly I am arrived amongst a Nation of new
found fools: on a Land where no Na^igator has yet planted wit, If I had
foreseen it, I would have laded my breeches with bells, knives, copper a^d
glasses to trade with the women for their virginities: yet I fear I should
have betrayed my self to an (...) charge then: here's the walking night-cap
again.


Sir, my Ladies pleasure is to see you: who hath commanded me to acknowledge
her sorrow. that you must take the pains to come up for so bad entertainment.


I shall obey your Lady that sent it, and acknowledge you that brought it to be
your Arts Master.


Jam but a Bachiler of Art Sir; and I have the mending of all under this roof,
from my Lady on her down bed, to the maid in the peas straw.


A Cobbler Sir?


No Sir. I inculcate Divine service within these walls,


But the inhabitants of this house do often employ you on errands, without any
scruple of conscience.


Yes, I do take the air many mornings on foot, three or four miles for
eggs: but why move you that?


To know whether it might become your function to bid my man to neglect his
horse a little, to attend on me.


Most properly Sir.


I pray ye do so then: and whilst I will attend your Lady. You direct all this
house in the true way?


I do Sir.


And this door (I hope) conducts to your Lady?


Your understanding is ingen^ous.


By your favour Sir you shall pardon me.


I shall beat your favour Sir, cross me no more; I say they shall come in.


Sir you forget one, who I am.


Sir I do not; thou art my brothers Steward, his cast off mill-money, his
Kitchen Arethmatick.


Sir I hope you will not make so little of me.


I make thee not so little as thou art: for indeed there goes no more to the
making of a Steward, but a fair Imprimis, and then a reasonable Item infused
into him, and the thing is done.


Nay then you stir my duty, and I must tell you.


What would thou tell me, how Hoppes go, or hold some rotten discourse of
sheep, or when our Lady day falls? Prithee farewell, and entertain my friends,
be drunk, and burn thy Table-bookes: and my dear spark of velvet thou and
I


Good Sir remember.


I do remember thee a foolish fellow, one that did put his trust in
Almanacs, and horse-faiers, and rose by honey and pot-butter. Shall they come
in yet?


Nay then I must unfold your Brothers pleasure, these be the lessons Sir, he
left behind him.


Prithee expound the first.


I leave to keep my house 300 pounds a year; and my Brother to dispose of it.


Mark that my wicked Steward, and I dispose of it.


Whilst he bears himself like a Gentleman, and my credit falls not in him.
Mark that my good young Sir, mark that.


Nay if it be no more I shall fulfil it: whilst my legs will carry me i'll
bear my self gentleman-like, but when I am drunk, let them bear me that
can. Forward dear steward.


Next it is my will, that he be furnished (as my brother) with attendance,
apparel, and the obedience of my people.


Steward this is as plain as your old minikin breeches. Your wisdom will
relent now, will it not? Be mollified or -- you understand me Sir, proceed.


Next, that my Steward keep his place, and power, and bound my brothers
wildness with his care.


I'll hear no more this Apocripha, bind it by it self steward.


This is your Brothers will, and as I take it, he makes no mention of such
company as you would draw un to you. Captains of Gallifoists, such as in a
clear day have seen Callis, fellows that have no more of God, then their
oaths comes to: they wear swords to reach fire at a Play, and get there the
oyld end of a pipe for their guerdon: then the remnant of your regiment are
wealthy Tobacco merchants, that set up with one ownce, and break for three;
together with a forlorn hope of Poets, and all these look like Carthusians,
things without linen: Are these fit company for my Mafters Brother?


I will either convert thee (O thou Pagan steward) or presently confound thee
and thy reckonings, who's there? call in the Gent.


Good Sir.


Nay you shall know both who I am, and where I am.


Are you my masters Brother?


Are you the sage Master Steward, with a face like an old Ephimerides?


Then God help all, I say.


I, and tis well said my old peer of France: welcome gentlemen, welcome
gentlemen; mine own dear lads, you're richly welcome. Know this old
Harrygroate.


Sir I will take your love.


Sir you will take my purse.


And study to continue it.


I do believe you.


Your honourable friend and masters brother, hath given you to us for a worthy
fellow, and so we hug you Sir.


Has given himself into the hands of varlets, not to be carved out. Sir are
these the pieces?


They are the Morrals of the age, the virtues. Men made of Gold.


Of your gold you mean Sir.


This is a man of war, that cries go on; and wears his Colours.


In's nose.


In the fragrant field. This is a Traveller Sir, knows men and manners, and has
plowd up the Sea so far, till both the poles have knocked, has seen the Sun
take Coach, and can distinguish the colour of his horses, and their kinds, and
had a Flanders Mare leapt there.


Tis much.


I have seen more Sir.


Tis even enough a conscience; sit down, and rest you, you are at the end of
the world already. Would you had as good a living Sir as this Fellow could
lie you out of has a notable gift in it.


This ministers the Smoke, and this the Muses.


And you the clothes, and meat, and money, you have a goodly generation of um,
pray let um multiply, your Brothers house is big enough, and to say truth,
ha's too much Land, hang it dirt.


Why now thou art a loving stinkeard. Fire off thy annotations and thy rent
books; thou hast a weak brain Sauill, and with the next long Bill thou wilt
run mad. Gentlemen you are once more welcome to three hundred pounds a year;
we will be freely merry, shall we not?


Merry as mirth, and wine my lovely Loveless.


A serious look shall be a Jury to excommunicate any man from our company.


We will have nobody talk wisely neither.


What think you gentlemen by all this Reuenew in drink?


I am all for drink.


I am dry till it be so.


He that will not cry Amen to this, let him live sober, seem wise, and die
ath Corum.


It shall be so, we'll have it all in drink, let meat and lodging go,
they are transitory, and show men merely mortal: then we'll have wenches, every
one his wench, and every week a fresh one: we'll keep no powderd flesh: all
these we have by warrant under the Title of things necessary. Here upon this
place I ground it: the obedience of my people, and all necessaries: Your
opinions Gentlemen?


Tis plain and evident that he meant wenches.


Good Sir let me expound it.


Here be as sound men as your self Sir.


This do I hold to be the interpretation of it; In this word Necessary, is
concluded all that be helps to man: woman was made the first, and therefore
here the chiefest.


Believe me tis a learned one, and by these words; The obedience of my people,
(you steward being one) are bound to fetch us wenches.


He is, he is.


Steward attend us for instructions.


But will you keep no house Sir?


Nothing but drink, three hundred pounds in drink.


O miserable house, and miserable I that live to see it. Good Sir keep some
meat.


Get us good whoores, and for your part, I'll board you in an Alehouse, you
shall have cheese and onyons.


What shall become of me, no chimney smoking? Well prodigal, your brother
will come home.


Come lads I'll warrant you for wenches, three hundred pounds in drink.


Sir now you see your bad lodging, I must bid you goodnight.


Lady if there be any want, tis in want of you.


A little sleep will ease that complement. Once more good night.


Once more dear Lady, and then all sweet nights.


Dear Sir be short and sweet then.


Shall the morrow prove better to me, shall I hope my suit happier by this
nights rest.


Is your suit so sickly that rest will help it? Pray ye let it rest then till
I call for it. Sir as a stranger you have had all my welcome: but had I known
your errand ere you came, your passage had been straighter: Sir, good night.


So fair, and cruel, dear unkind goodnight.

Nay Sir you shall stay with me, I'll press your zeal so far.


O Lord Sir,


Do you love Tobacco?


Surely I love it, but it loves not me; yet with your reverence i'll be bold.


Pray light it Sir. How do you like it.


I promise you it is notable stinging gear indeed. It is wet Sir, Lord how it
brings down Reume?


Handle it again Sir; you have a warm text of it.


Thanks ever premised for it. I promise you it is very powerful, and by a
Trope, spiritual: for certainly it moves in sundry places.


I, it does so Sir, and me especially to ask Sir, why you wear a night cap.


Assuredly I will speak the truth unto you; you shall understand Sir, that my
head is broken, and by whom; even by that visible beast the Butler.


The Butler? certainly he had all his drink about him when he did it. Strike
one of your grave Cassock? The offence Sir?


Reproving him at Tra-trip Sir, for swearing: you have the total surely.


You told him when his rage was set atilt, and so he cract your Cannons. I
hope he has not hurt your gentle reading: But shall we see these Gentleweomen
to night?


Have patience Sir, until our fellow Nicholas be deceased, that is, a sleep:
for so the word is taken; to sleep to die, to die to sleep: a very Figure
Sir.


Cannot you cast another for the Gentleweomen?


Not till the man be in his bed, his grave; his grave, his bed; the very same
again Sir. Our Comic Poet gives the reason sweetly; Plenus rimarum est, he is
full of loopeholes, and will discover to our Patroness.


Your comment Sir has made me understand you.


Sir be addressed, the graces do salute you with the full bowl of plenty. Is
our old enemy entombed?


He's fast?


And does he snore out supinely with the Poet?


No, he out-snores the Poet.


Gentlewoman, this courtesy shall bind a stranger to you, ever your servant.


Sir, my S^sters strictness makes not us forget you are a stranger and a
Gentleman.


In sooth Sir were I changed into into my Lady, a Gentleman so well endued with
parts, should not be lost.


I thank you Gentlewoman, and rest bound to you. S^e how this foul familiar
ch^wes the Cud: From thee and three and fifty, good l^ue deliver me.


Will you sit down Sir, and take a spoon?


I take it kindly Lady.


It is our best banquet Sir.


Shall we give thank,?


I have to the Gentlewoman already Sir.


Good Sir Roger keep that breath to cool your part o'th posset, you may
chance have a scalding zeal else: and you will needs be doing, pray tell
your twenty to your self. Would you could like this Sir?


I would your Sister would like me as well Lady.


Sure Sir she would not eat you: but banish that imagination; she's only
wedded to herself, lies with herself, and lou^s herself; and for an other
husband then herself, he may knock at the gate, but ne'er come in: be wise
Sir, she's a woman, and a trouble, and has her many faults, the least of which
is, she cannot love you.


God pardon her, she'll do worse, would I were worthy his least grief Mistres
Martha.


Now I must ouer-heare her.


Faith would thou had them all withal my heart: I do^ not think they would
make thee a day older.


Sir will you put in deeper, tis the sweeter.


Well said old sayings.


She looks like one indeed. Gentlewoman you keep your word, your sweet self
has made the bottom sweeter.


Sir I begin a frolic, dare you change Sir?


My self for you, so please you. That smile has turned my stomach. This is
right the old Emblem of the Moyle cropping off thistles: Lord what a hunting
head she carries, sure she has been ridden with a Martingale. Now love deliver
me.


Do I dream, or do I wake? surely I know not: am I rubbed off? is this the
way of all my mornings prayers? Oh ^ger, thou art but grass, and woman as a
flower. Did I for this consume my quarters in meditation, vows, and wooed her
in Heroical Epistles? Did I expound the Owl, and undertook, with labour and
expense the recollection of those thousand Pieces, consumed in Cellors and
Tobacco shops of that our honoured Englishman Ni. Br.? Have I done this, and am
I done thus too? I will end with the Wise-man, and say, He that holds a woman,
has an Eel by the tail.


Sir, 'tis so late, and our entertainment (meaning our posset) by this is
grown so cold, that 'twere an unmannerly part longer to hold you from your
rest: let what the house has be at your command Sir.


Sweet rest be with you Lady; and to you what you desire too.


It should be some such good thing like your self then.


Heaven keep me from that curse, and all my Issue. Good night Antiquity.


Solamen Miseris socios habuisse doloris: but I alone.


Learned Sir, will you bid my man come to me? and requesting a greater measure
of your learning, good night, good Mr Roger.


Good Sir, peace be with you.


Adieu dear Domine. Half a dozen such in a Kingdom would make a man forswear
concession: for who that had but half his wits about him would commit the
counsel of a serious sin to such a cruel nightcap?

Why how now, shall we have an Antique?

Whose head do you carry upon your shoulders, that you jowl it so against the
post? Is't for your ease? or have you seen the S^llor? Where are my slippers
sir?


Here Sir.


Where Sir? have you got the pot verdugo? have you seen the horses Sir?


Yes Sir.


Have they any meat?


Faith Sir they have a kind of wholesome rushes, hay I cannot cal it.


And no provender?


Sir so I take it.


You are merry Sir, and why so?


Faith Sir, here are no oats to be got, unless you'll have um in porridge:
the people are so mainly given to spoonemeate: yonders a cast of Coach-mares
of the gentlewoman's, the strangest Cattle.


Why?


Why they are transparent sir, you may see through them: and such a house?


Come Sir, the truth of your discovery.


Sir they are in tribes like Iewes: the Kitchen and the Dayrie make one tribe,
and have their faction and their fornication within themselves; the Buttry and
the Laundry are an other, and there's no love lost; the chambers are entire, and
what's done there, is somewhat higher then my knowledge; but this I am sure,
between these ^opulations, a stranger is kept virtuous, that is, fasting. But
of all this the drink Sir.


What of that Sir?


Faith Sir I will handle it as the time and your patience will give me leave.
This drink, or this cooling Iulip, of which three spoonefuls kills the
Calenture, a pint breeds the cold Palsy.


Si^ you belly the house.


I would I did Sir. But as I am a true man, if twere but one degree colder,
nothing but an asses hoof would hold it.


I am glad on it Sir: for if it had proved stronger, you had been tongue-tide of
these commendations. Light me the candle Sir, I'll hear no more.


Come my brave man of war, trace out thy darling,
And you my learned Council, set and turn boys
Kiss till the Cow come home, kiss close, kiss close knave s.
My modern Poet, thou shalt kiss in couplets.
Strike up you merry varlets, and leave your peeping,
This is no pay for Fiddlers.

O my dear boy, thy Hercules, thy Captain
Makes thee his Hilas, his delight, his solace.
Love thy brave man of war, and let thy bounty
Clap him in Shamois: Let there be deductedd out of our maine potation
Five Marks in hatchments to adorn this thigh,
Cramped with this rest of peace, and I will fight
Thy battles.

Thou shalt hau't boy, and sly in Feather, Lead on a march you Michers.


O my head, O my heart, what a noise and change is here; would I had been cold
ith mouth before this day, and ne'er have liud to see this dissolution. He that
lives within a mile of this place, had as good sleep in the perpetual noise
of an iron mill. There's a dead Sea of drink ith Sellor, in which goodly
vessels lie wract, and in the middle of this deluge appears the tops of
^lagons and black jacks, like Churches drown ith marshes.


What art thou come? My sweet Sir Amias welcome to Troy. Come thou shalt kiss
my Hellen, and court her in a dance.


Good Sir consider.


Shall we consider gentlemen. How say you?


Consider? that were a simple toy in faith, Consider? whose morrals that? The man
that cries Consider, is our foe: let my steel know him.


Stay thy dead doing hand, he must not die yet: prithee be calm my Hector.


Peasant, slave, thou groom, composde of grudgeings, live and thank this
Gentleman, thou had seen Pluto else. The next consider kil^ thee.


Let him drink down his word again in a gallon of Sack.


Tis but a snuff, make it two gallons, and let him do it kneeling in
repentance.


Nay rather kill me, there's but a lay-man lost. Good Captain do your office.


Thou shalt drink Steward, drink and dance my Steward. Strike him a
horne-pipe (...), take thy striuer, and pace her till she stew.


Sure Sir I cannot dance with your Gentlewoman, they are too light for me,
pray break my head, and let me go.


He shall dance, he shall dance.


He shall dance, and drink, and be drunk and dance, and be drunk again,
and shall see no meat in a year.


And three quarters.


And three quarters be it.


Who knocks there? let him in.


Some to deliver me I hope.


Gentlemen, God save you all, my business is to one Mr Loveless.


This is the Gentleman you mean; view him, and take his Inuentory, he's a
right one.


He promises no less Sir.


Sir your business?


Sir, I should let you know, yet I am loath, yet I am sworn too't, would some
other tongue would speak it for me.


Out with it a Gods name.


All I desire Sir is, the patience and sufferance of a man, and good Sir be not
moved more,


Then a pottle of Sack will do, here's my hand, prithee thy business?


Good Sir excuse me, and whatsoever you hear, think, must have been known
unto you, and be your self discreet; and bear it nobly.


Prithee dispatch me.


Your brothers dead Sir.


Thou dost not mean dead drunk?


No, no, dead and drowned at sea Sir.


Art sure he's dead?


Too sure Sir.


I, but art thou very certainly sure of it?


As sure Sir as I tell it.


But art thou sure he came not up again?


He may come up, but ne'er to call you brother.


But art sure he had water enough to drown him?


Sure Sir he wanted none.


I would not have him want, I loved him better; here I forgive thee: and ^aith
bec plain, how do I bear it?


Very wisely Sir.


Fill him some wine. Thou dost not see me moved, these transitory toys ne'er
trouble me, he's in a better place my friend, I know it. Some fellows would
have cried now, and have cursed thee, and fallen out with their meat, and kept a
pother; but all this helps not, he was too good for us, and let God keep him:
there's the right use on it friend. Off with thy drink, thou hast a spice of
sorrow makes thee dry: fill him another, Sauill, your Masters dead, and who am
I now Sauill? Nay, let's all bear it well, wipe, Sauill, wipe, tears are but
thrown away: we shall have wenches now, shall we not Sauill? Drink to my
friend Captain.


Yes Sir.


And drink innumerable.


Yes forsooth Sir.


And you'll strain curtsy and be drunk a little.


I would be glad, Sir, to do my weak endeavour.


You may be brought in time to love a wench too.


In time the sturdy Oak Sir.


Some more wine for my friend there.


I shall be drunk anon for my good news: but I have a loving brother, that's
my comfort.


Here's to you sir, this is the worst I wish you for your news: and if I had
another elder brother, and say it were his chance to feed more fishes, I
should be still the same you see me now, a poor contented Gentleman. More
wine for my friend there, he's dry again.


I shall be if I follow this beginning. Well, my dear brother, if I escape this
drowning, 'tis your turn next to sink, you shall duck twice before I help
you. Sir I cannot drink more, 'pray let me have your pardon.


O Lord sir, 'tis your modesty: more wine, give him a bigger glass; hug him
my Captain, thou shalt be my chief mourner.


And this my pennon. Sir a full rouse to you, and to my Lo. of Land here.


I fecle a buzzing in my brains, pray God they bear this out, and I'll ne'er
trouble them so far again. Heers to you Sir.


To my dear Steward, down a your knees you in^del, you Pagan; be drunk and
penitent.


Forgive me Sir and i'll be any thing.


Then be a Bawd: I'll have thee a brave Baud.


Sir I must take my leave of you, my business is so urgent.


Lets have a bridling cast before you go. Fills a new stoup.


I dare not Sir by no means.


Have you any mind to a wench? I would fain gratify you for the pains you
took Sir.


As little as to the the other.


If you find any stirring, do but say so.


Sir you are too bounteous, when I find that itching, you shall assuage it Sir
before another: this only, and farewell Sir. Your brother when the storm was
most extreme, told all about him, he left a will, which lies close behind a
chimney in the matted chamber: and so as well Sir, as you have made me able, I
take my leave.


Let us embrace him all: if you grow dry before you ^d your business, pray
take a bait here, I have a fresh hogshead for you.


You shall neither will nor choose sir. My Master is a wonderful fine
Gentleman has a fine state, a very sine state Sir, I am his steward Sir, and
his man.


Would you were your own Sir, as I left you. Well I must cast about, or all
sinks.


Farewell Gentleman, Gentleman. Gentleman.


What would you with me Sir?


Farewell Gentleman.


O sleep Sir, sleep.


Well boys, you see whats fallen, lets in and drink, and give thanks for it.


Let's give thanks for it.


Drunk as I live.


Drunk as I live boys.


Why now thou art able to discharge thine office, and cast up a reckoning of
some weight; I will be knighted, for my state will bear it, 'tis sixteen
hundred boys: off with your husks, I'll skin you all in satin.


O sweet Loveless!


All in satin? O sweet Loveless.


March in my Noble Compeers: and this my Countess shall be led by two: and so
proceed we to the will.


And Widow, as I say be your own friend: your husband left you wealthy, I and
wise, continue so sweet duck, continue so. Take heed of young smooth varlets,
younger brothers, they are worms that will eat through your bags: they are
very lightning, that with a slash or two will melt your money, and never singe
your purse strings: they are colts, wench, colts, heady and dangerous, till we
take um up, and make um fit for bonds; look upon me, I have had, and have yet
matter of moment girl, matter of moment; you may meet with a worse back, I'll
not commend it.


Nor I neither Sir.


Yet thus far by your favour vviddow, 'tis tuffe.


And therefore not for my diet, for I love a tender one.


Sweet widow leave your frumps, and be edified: you know my state, I sell no
Perspectiues, Scarses, Gloves, nor Hangers, nor put my trust in Shoo-ties: and
where your husband in an age was rising by burnt figs, dreg'd with meal and
powdered sugar, saunders and grains, wormeseed and rotten reasons, and such
vile tobacco, that made the foot-men mangy; I in a year have put up hundreds
incios'd, my widow, those pleasant meadows, by a forfeit mortgage: for which
the poor Knight takes a lone chamber, owes for his Ale, and dare nor beat his
Hostess: nay more --


Good Sir no more, what ere my husband was, I know what I am, and if you marry
me, you must bear i^ bravely off Sir.


Not with the head, sweet widow.


No, sweet sir, but with your shoulders: I must have you dubbed, for under that I
will stoop a feather. My husband was a fellow loved to toil, feed ill, made
gain his exercise, and so grew costive, which for I was his wife, and gave way
to, and spun mine own smocks course, and sir, so little; but let that pass.
Time, that vveares all things out, vvore out this hu^band, who in penitence of
such fruitless five years marriage, left me great with his wealth, which
if you'll be a worthy gossip to, be knighted Sir.


Now sir, from whom come you? whose man are you Sir?


Sir, I come from young Mr Loveless.


Be silent sir, I have no money, not a penny for you, he's sunk, your
Master's sunk, a perished man sir.


Indeed his brother's sunk Sir, God be with him, a perished man indeed, and
drowned at Sea.


How said thou, good my friend, his brother drowned?


Untimely, Sir, at sea.


And thy young Master left sole heir?


Yes, Sir.


And he wants money?


Yes, and sent me to you; for he is now to be knighted.


Widow, be wise, there's more land coming, widow be very wise, and give
thanks for me vviddow.


B^ you very wise, and be knighted, and then give thanks for me Sir.


What says your Worship to this money?


I say, he may have money if he please.


A thousand Sir?


A thousand Sir, provided any wise Sir, his land lye for the payment, otherwise
--


He's here himself Sir, and can better tell you.


My notable dear friend, and worthy Mr Loveless, and now right worshipful,
all joy and welcome.


Thanks to my dear incloser, Mr Moorecraft; prithee old Angel gold, salute
my family, I'll do as much for yours; this, and your own desires, fair
Gentlewoman.


And yours Sir, if you mean well; 'tis a handsome Gentleman.


Sirrha, my brothers dead.


Dead?


Dead, and by this time souc't for Ember week.


Dead?


Drowned, drowned at sea: Man, by the ne^t fresh Conger that comes we shall
hear more.


Now by the faith of my body it moves me much.


What, will it thou be an Ass, and weep for the dead? why I thought nothing but
a general inundation would have moved thee: prithee be quiet, he hath left his
land behind him.


O, ha's he so?


Yes faith, I thank him for it, I have all boy, hast any ready money?


Will you sell Sir?


No not outright good Gripe; marry, a mortgage, or such a slight security.


I have no money Sir for mortgage; If you will sell, and all or none, I^e work
a new Mine for you.


Good Sir look before you, hee'le work you out of all else: if you sell all
your Land, you have sold your Country, and then you must to sea to seek your
brother, and there lye pickled in a poudering tub, and break your teeth with
biscuits and hard beef that must have watering Sir: and where's your 300.
pounds a year in drink then? I^ you'^e tun up the straights you may, for you
have no calling for drink there, but with a Cannon, nor no scoring but on your
ships sides, and then if you escape with life, and take a faggot boat, and a
bottle of Vsq^baugh, come home poo^e men, like a type o^ Theames Str^t stinking
of pitch and poor Iohn. I cannot tell Sir, I woul^ be ^th to s^ (...).


Steweard, you are an Ass, a measel'd mongrel, and were it not again the
peace of my sovereign f^iend here, I would break your forecasting coxcomb,
dog I would, even with thy s^affe of ^ffice there, thy pen and Inkhorn.
Noble boy, the god of gold here has sed thee well, take money for thy (...):
(...) believe, thou art cold of cons^tion, thy seat vnhealthful, sell be wise;
we are three that will adorn thee, and live according to thine own heart
child: mirth shall be only ou^s, and only ours shall be the black eyed
beauties of the time. Money makes men eternal.


Do what you will, 'tis the noblest course, then you may live without the
charge of people, only we four will make a family, I and a^ age that shall
beget new Annals, in wh^ch I'll write thy life my son of pleasure, equal with
Nor^ or Cali^ula.


What mean they Captain?


Two roaring boys of Rome that made all split.


Come Sir, what dare you give?


You will not sell Sir?


Who told you so Sir?


Good Sir have a care.


Peace, or I'll tack your tongue up to your roof. What money? speak.


Six thousand pound Sir.


Take it, he has ouerbidden by the Sun: bind him to his bargain quickly.


Come, strike me luck with earnest, and draw the writings.


There's a Gods penny for thee.


Sir, for my old Masters sake let my Farm be excepted, if I become his tenant
I am undone, my children beggars, and my wife God knows what: consider me
dear Sir.


I'll have all in or none.


All in, all in: dispatch the writings.


Go, thou art a pretty forehanded fellow, would thou were wiser.


Now do I sensibly begin to feel my self a rascal: would I could teach a
School, or beg, or lye well, I am utterly undone; now he that taught thee to
deceive and cousin, take thee to his mercy: so be it.


Come widow, come, never stand upon a knighthood, 'tis a mere paper honour,
and not proof enough for a Sergeant. Come, come, I'll make thee --


To answer in short, 'tis this Sir, No knight, no widow: if you make me any
thing, it must be a Lady; and so I take my leave.


Farewell sweet widow, and think of it.


Sir I do more then think of it, it makes me dream sir.


She's rich and sober, if this itch were from her: and say I be at charge to
pay the Footmen, and the Tru^pett, I and the Horsemen too, and be a Knight, and
she refuse me then: then am I hoist into the Subsidy, and so by consequence
should prove a Coxcomb: I'll have a care of that. Six thousand pound, and then
the Land is mine, there's some refreshing yet.


IF he but follow me, as all my hopes tells me he's man enough, up go^s my
rest, and I know I shall draw him.


This is the strangest pamperd piece of flesh towards fifty, that ever frailty
cop't withal, what a trim Lenuoy here she has put upon me: these women are a
proud kind of cattle, and love this whoreson doing so directly, that they will
not stick to make their very skins Bawds to their flesh. Here's dogskin and
storax sufficient to kill a H^ke: what to do with it, beside nayling it up
amongst Irish heads of Teere, to show the mightiness of her palm, I know not:
there she is, I must enter into Dialogue. Lady you have lost your glove.


Not Sir if you have found it.


It was my meaning Lady to restore it.


'Twill be vnciuell in me to take back a favour, Fortune hath so well bestowed
Sir, 'pray wear it for me.


I had rather wear a Bell. But hark you Mistress, What hidden virtue is
there in this glove, that you would have me wear it? Is't good against sore
eyes, or will it charm the toothache? Or these red tops, being steeped in white
wine soluble, will it kill the itch? or he has it so concealed a providence to keep
my hand from bo^ds? If it have none of these, and prove no more but a bare
glove of half a crown a pair, twill be but half a courtesy, I wear two
always: faith let's draw cuts, one will do me no pleasure.


The tenderness of his years keeps him as yet in ignorance: he's a well
moulded fellow, and I wonder his blood should stir no higher; but (...) his
want of company: I must grow nearer to him.


God save you both.


And pardon you Sir: this is somewhat rude, how came you hither?


Why through the doors, they are open.


What are you? and what business have you here?


More I believe then you have.


Who would this fellow speak with? Art th^u sober?


Y^s, I come not here to sleep.


Prithee what a^t thou?


As much (gay man) as thou art, I am a Gentleman.


Art thou no more?


Yes, more then thou dare be, a So^ldier.


Thou dost not come to quarrel?


No, not with women; I come to speak here with a Gentlewoman.


Why I am one.


But no^ with one so gentle.


This is a fine fellow.


Sir I am not fine yet, I am but new come over, direct me with your ticket to
your Taylor, and then I shall be fine Sir. Lady, if there be a better of your
sex within this house, say I would see her.


Why am not I good enough for you Sir?


Your way you'll be too good, 'pray ^nd my business. This is another Su^er: O
srayle woman.


This fellow with his bluntnes hopes to do more then the long suites of a
thousand could: though he be sour he's quick I must not trust him. Sir, this
Lady is not to speak with you, she is more serious: you smell as if you were
new ralkt; go and be handsome, and then you may sit with her Serving-men.


What are you Sir?


Guess by my outside.


Then I take you Sir for some new silken thing weaned from the country, that
shall (when you come to keep good company) be beaten into better manners.
'Pray good proud Gentlewoman help me to your Mistres.


How many lives hast thou, that thou talk thus rud^ly?


But one, I am neither cat nor woman.


And will that one life Sir maintain you ever in such bold sauciness?


Yes amongst a nation of such men as you are, and be no worse for wearing Shall
I speak with this Lady?


No by my troth shall not you.


I must stay here then.


That you shall not neither.


Good fine thing tell me why.


Good angry thing I'll tell you:
This is no place for such companions,
Such lousy Gentlemen shall find their business
Better in the the Suburbs; there your strong pitch persume,
Mingled with lees of Ale, shall re^ke in fashion:
This is no Thames street Sir.

This Gentleman informs you truly:
Prithee be satisfied, and seek the Suburbs,
Good Captain, or whatever title else,
The warlike Eelcboats have bestowed upon thee,
Go and resorme thy s^lfe: prithee be sweeter,
And know my Lady speaks with no such swabbers.

You ca^not talk me out with your tradition
Of wit you pick from plays, go too, I have found ye:
And for you, tender Sir, whose gentle blood
Runs in your nose, and makes you snuff at all
But three piled people, I do let you know,
He that be got your worships satin suit,
Can make no men Sir: I will see this Lady,
And with the reverence of your silkenship,
In these old Ornaments.

You will not sure.


Sure Sir I shall.


You would be beaten out.


Indeed I would not, or if I would beaten,
Pray who shall beat me? this good Gentleman
Looks as he were o'th peace.

Sir you shall see that: will you get you out?


Yes, that, that shall correct your boys tongue,
Dare you fight? I will stay here st^ll.

O their things are out, help, help for Gods sake,
Madam; Iesus they foyne at one another,
Madam, why who is within there?

Who breeds this rudeness?


This uncivil sellow:
He says he comes from sea, where I believe
He has purged away his manners.

What of him?


Why he will rudely, without once God bless you,
Press to your privacies, and no de^all
Must stand betwixt your person and his business;
I let go his ill language.

Sir, have you ^usinesse with me?


Maddame some I have,
But not so serious to (...) my life for it:
If you keep this qua^ter, and maintain about you
Such Knights o'th Sun (...) this is, to defy
Men of (...) ye, you may live,
But in what some?

Pray stay Sir, who he has wronged you?


Wrong me he cannot, though uncivilly
He (...) his wild words at me: But to you
I think he did no honour, to deny
The haste I come withal, a passage to you,
Though I seem course.

Excuse me, gentle (...), twas from my knowledge,
And shall have no protection. And to you Sir,
You have showed more heat then wit, and from your self
Have borrowed power, I never gave you here,
To do these wild unmanly things: my house
Is no blind street to swagger in: and my favours
Not doting yet on your unknown deserts
So far, that I should make you Master of my business:
My credit yet, stands fairer with the people
Then to be tried with swords: And they that come
To do meseruice, must not think to win me
With hazard of a murder: If your love
Consist in fury, carry it to the Camp,
And there in honour of some common mistres,
Shorten your youth. I pray be better tempered,
And give me leave a while Sir.

You must have it.


Now Sir, your business?


First I thank you for schooling this young fellow,
Whom his own follies, which is prone enough
Daily to fall into, if you but frown,
Shall level him away to his repentance:
Next I should rail at you, but you are a woman,
And anger lost upon you.

Why at me Sir?
I never did you wrong, for to my knowledge
This is the first sight of you.

You have done that,
I must confess I have the least curse in,
Because the least acquaintance: But there be
(If there be honour in the minds of men)
Thousands, when they shall know what I deliver,
(As all good men must share (...)) will to sham^
Blast your black memory.

How is this good Sir?


Tis that, that if you have a soul will choke it:
Y'aue killed a Gentleman:

I killed a Gentleman?


You and your cruelty have killed (...) woman;
And such a man (let me be angry in it)
Whose least worth vvaighed above all vveomens virtues
That are, I spare you all to come too: guess him now.

I am so innocent I cannot Sir.


Repen^ you mean: you are a perfect woman,
And as the first was, made for mans undoing.

Sir you have mist your way, I am not she.


Would he had mist his way too, though he had
VVandered farther (...) vveomen are ill spoken of,
So he had (...) this misery, you Lady.

How do you do Sir?


(...) I hope,
While I can keep my self from such temptations.

Pray leap into this matter, whither would ye?


You had a Servant that your peenishnes
Enjoined to travel.

Such a one I have
(...), and should be grieved 'twere otherwise.

Then have your asking, and be grieved, he's dead;
How you will answer for his worth I know not,
But this I am sure, either he, or you, or both
Were stark mad, else he might have lived
To have given a stronger testimony to the world
Of what he might have been. He was a man
I knew but in his evening: ten Suns after,
(...) by a tyrant storm our beaten bark
Bulged under us; in which sad parting blow,
He called upon his Saint, but not for life,
On you unhappy woman; and whilst all
Sought to preserve their souls, he desperately
Embraced a wave, crying to all that see it,
If any live, go to my Fate, that forced me
To this untimely end, and make her happy:
His name was Loveless: And I escaped the storm.
And now you have my business.

Tis too much.
Would I had been that storm, he had not perished.
If you'll rail now I will forgiu^ you Sir,
Or if you'll call in more, if any more
Come from this ruin, I shall justly suffer
What they can say: I do confess my self
A guilty cause in this. I would say more,
But grief is grown to great to be delivered.

I like this well: these women are strange things.
Tis somewhat of the latest now to weep,
You should have wept when he was going from you,
And chained him with those tears at home.

Would you had told me then so, these two arms had been his Sea.


Trust me you move me much: but say he lived, these were forgotten things
again.


I, say you so? Sure I should know that voice: this is kna^uery. I'll fit you
for it: Were h^ living sir, I would persuade you to be charitable, I, and
confess we are not all so ill as your opinion holds us. O my friend, what
penance shall I pull upon my fault, upon my most unworthy self for this?


Leave to love others, 'twas some jealousy
That turned him desperate.

I'll be with you straight: are you wrung there?


This works amain upon her.


I doc confess there is a Gentleman
He has borne me long good will.

I do not like that.


And vowed a thousand services to me; to me, regardless of him: But since
Fate, that no power can withstand, he has taken from me my first and best Love,
and to weep away my youth is a mere folly: I will show you what I determine
sir: you shall know all: Call Mr. Welford there: That Gentleman I mean to make
the model of my Fortunes, and in his chaste embraces keep alive the memory of
my lost lovely Loveless: he is somewhat like him too.


Then you can Love?


Yes certain sir.

Though it please you to think me hard and cruel,
I hope I shall persuade you otherwise.

I have made my self (...) fool.


Would you have spoke with me Maddame?


Yes Mr. Welford, and I ask your pardon before this gentleman, for being
froward: This kiss, and henceforth more affection.


So, 'tis better I were drowned indeed.


This is a sudden passion, God hold it.
This fellow out of his fear sure ha's
Persuaded her, I'll give him a new suit on it.

A parting kiss: and good Sir let me pray you
To wait me in the Gallery.

I am in another world. Maddame where you please.


I will to Sea, an't shall go hard but I'll be drowned indeed.


Now Sir you see I am no such hard creature,
But time may win me.

You have forgot your lost Love,


Alas Sir, what would you have me do? I cannot call him back again with
sorrow; I'll love this man as dearly, a^d beshrow me, I'll keep him far
enough from sea: and twas told me, now I remember me, by an old wise woman,
that my first Love should be drowned: and see Tis come about.


I would she had told you your second should be hanged to, and let that Come
about: but this is very strange.


Faith Sir, consider all, and then I know you'll be of my mind: if (...)
would redeem him, I would weep still.


But say that I we^e Loveless,
And escaped the storm, how would you answer this?

Why for that Gentleman I would leave all the world.


This young thing too?


That young thing too,
Or any young thing else: why I would lose my stare.

Why then he lives still, I am he, your Loveless.


A as I knew it S^r, and for that purpose prepared this Pageant: get you to
your task. And leave these Players tricks, or I shall leave you, indeed I
shall. Travel, or know me not.


Will you then marry?


I will not promise, take your choice. Farewell.


There is no ^er Purgatory but a woman.
I must do something.

Mistres I am (...)


You are indeed.


You have so overjoyed me Lady.


Take heed you surfeit not, pray fast and welcome.


By this light you love me extremely.


By this, and tomorrowes light, I care not for you.


Come, come, you cannot hide it.


Indeed I c^n, ^here you shall never find it.


I like this mirth well Lady


^ou shall have more on it.


I must kiss you.


No fir.


Indeed I must.


What must be, must be; I'll take my leave, you have your parting blow: I pray
commend me to those few friends you have, that sent you hi^er, and tell them,
when you (...) next, 'twere fit you brought less bravery with you, and more
wit, you'll never get a wise else.


Are you in earnest?


Yes sai^h. Will you eat sir? your horses will be ready straight, you shall have
a ^apkin laid in the buttery for ye.


Do not you love me then?


Yes, for tha^ face.


It is a good one Lady.


Yes, if it were not warpt, the fire in time may mend it.


Me thinks yours is none of the best Lady.


No by my troth Sir: yet o'my conscience,
You could make shift with it.

Come, 'pray no more of this.


I will not: Fare you well. Ho, who's within there? bring out the Gentleman's
hor^es, he's in haste; and set some cold meat on the table.


I have too much of that, I thank you Lady: take your Chamber when you please,
there goes a black one with you Lady.


Farewell young man.


You have made me one. Farewell: and may the curse of a great house fall upon
thee, I mean the Butler. The D^uell and all h^s works are in these women:
would all of my sex were of my mind, I would make um a new Lent, and a long
one, that flesh might be in more reverence with them.


I am sorry Mr. Welford.


So am I, that you are here.


How does my Lady use you?


As I would use you, scurvily.


I sh^uld have been more kind Sir.


I should have been undone then. 'Pray leave me, and look to your sweet
meats: hark, your Lady calls.


Sir I shall borrow so much time without offending.


You're nothing but offence: for Gods love leave me.


Tis strange ^y Lady should be such a tyrant.


To send you to me. 'Pray go stitch, good do, you're more trouble to me then
a Term.


I do not know how my good will, if I said love I lied not, should any way
deserve this.


A thousand ways, a thousand ways: sweet creature let me depart in peace.


What creature Sir? I hope I am a woman.


A hundred I think by your noise.


Since you are angry sir, I am bold to tell you, that I am a woman, and a
rib.


Of a roasted horse.


Construe me that.


A Dog can do it better. Farewell Countess, and commend me to your Lady:
tell her she's proud, and scurvy; and so I commit you both to your tempter.


Sweet Mr. Welford.


Avoid old Satanus: Go daube your ruins, your face looks fowler then a
storm: the footcman stays you in the Lobby Lady.


If you were a Gentleman I should know it by your gentle conditions? are these
fit words to give a gentlewoman?


As fit as they were made for ye: Sirrah, my horses. Farewell old Adage, keep
your nose warm, the Reume will make it horne else.


The blessings of a prodigal young heir be thy companions Welforde, Marry
come up my gentleman, are your gummes grown so tender they cannot bite? A
skittish Filly will be your fortune Welford, and fair enough for such a
packsaddle. And I doubt not, (if my aim hold) to see her made to amable to
your hand.


Save thy brave shoulder, my young puissant Knight, and may thy back-sword bite
them to the bone, that love thee not: thou art an errant man, go on. The
circumcisde shall fall by theeLet land and labour fill the man that tils, thy
sword must be thy plough, and Jove it speed. Mecha shall sweat, and Mahomet
shall fall, and thy dear name fill up his monument.


It shall Captain, I mean to be a worthy.


One worthy is too little, thou shalt be all.


Captain I shall deserve some of your love too.


Thou shalt have heart and hand to noble Mooreraft, if thou wilt lend me money.
I am a man of Garrison, be ruled, and open to me those infernal gates, whence
none of thy evil angels pass again, and I will stile thee Noble; nay Don
Diego, I'll woe thy Infanta for thee, and my Knight shall feast her with high
meats, and make her apt.


Pardon me Captain, you're beside my meaning.


No Mr. Moorecraft, it is the Captains meaning
I should prepare her for ye.

Or provoke her. Speak my modern man, I say pro^oke her.


Captain I say so too, or stir her to it. So says the Critics.


But howsoever you expound it Sir, she's very welcome, and this shall serve for
witness. And widow, since you're come so happily, you shall deliver up the
keys, and free possession of this house; whilst I stand by to ratify.


I had rather give it back again believe me,
'Tis a misery to say you had it. Take heed.

'Tis past that widow, come, sit down; some wine there: there is a scur^y
banquet if we had it. All this fair house is yours Sir. Sauill.


Yes Sir.


Are your keys ready, I must ease your burden.


I am ready Sir to be undone, when you shall call me to it.


Come come, thou shalt live better.


I shall have less to do, that's all, there's half a dozen of my friends ith
fields, sunning against a bank, with half a breech among um, I shall be with
um shortly. The care and continual vexation of being rich eat up this
rascal. What shall become of my poor family? they are no sheep, and they
must keep themselves.


Drink Mr. Moorecraft, pray be merry all:
Nay and you willl not drink there's no society.
Captain speak loud, and drink: widow a word.

Expound her thoroughly Knight. Here God a gold, here's to thy fair
possessions: Be a Baron, and a bold one: leave off your tickling of young
heirs like trouts, and, let thy chimneys smoke. Feed men of war, live and be
honest, and be saved yet.


I thank you worthy Captain for your counsel. You keep your chimneys smoking
there, your nostrils, and when you can, you feed a man of war: this makes not
you a Baron, but a bareone: and how or when you shall be saved, let the clarke
o'th company (you have commanded) have a just care of.


The man is much is much moved. Be not angry Sir, but as the Poet sings; Let
your displeasure be a short fury, and go out. You have spoke home, and
bitterly, to me Sir? Captain take truce the Miser is a tart and a witty
whoreson.


Poet you fain perdie, the wit-of this man lies in his fingers ends, he must
tell al: his tongue fills but his mouth like a nearstongne, and only serves to
lick his hungry chaps after a purchase: his brains and brimstone are the
Devils diet to a fat usurers head. To her Knight, to her: clap her abourd and
stow her. Wheres the brave Steward?


Here's your poor friend, and Sauil Sir.


A way, you are rich in ornaments of nature. First in thy face, thou hast a
serious face, a betting, bargaining, and saving face, (...) face, pawn it to
the Usurer; a face to kindle the compassion of the most ignorant and frozen
Justice.


'Tis such, I dare not show it shortly sir.


By blithe and bonny Steward: Master Moorecraft, Drink to this man of
reckoning.


Here's even to him.


The Devil guide it downward: would there were in it an acre of the great
broom field he bought, to sweep your dirty conscience, or to choke ye, 'tis
all one to me Usurer.


Consider what I told you, you are young, unapt for worldly business: Is it fit
one of such tenderness, so delicate, so contrary to things of care, should
stir and break her better m^ ditations, in the bare brokage of a brace of
Angels? or a new kirtell, though it be of satin? Eat by the hope of surfeits,
and lie down only in expectation of a morrow that may undo some easy har-
ted fool, or reach a widows curses? Let out money, whose use returns the
principal? and get out of these troubles, a consuming heir: For such a one
must follow necessary, you shall die hated, if not old and miserable; and that
possessed wealth that you got with pining, live to see tumbled to another hands,
that is no more akin to you, then you to his cosenage.


Sir you speak well, would God that charity had first begun here.


Tis yet time. Be merry, me thinks you want wine there, there's more in the
house: Captain, where rests the health?


It shall go round boy?


Say you can suffer this, because the end points at much profit, can you so
far bow below your blood, below your too much beauty, to be a partner of this
fellows bed, and lie with his diseases? If you can, I will not press you
further: yet look upon him: there's nothing in that hide-bound Usurer; that man
of mat, that all d^ai'd, but aches: for you to love, unless his peris^t lungs
his dry cough, or his scurvy. This is truth, and so far I dare speak yet: he
has yet past cure of Physic, spaw, or any diet, a primatiue pox in his bones;
and a' my knowledge he has been ten times rowell'd: ye may love him; he had
a basta^d, his own toward issue, whipped, and then cropped for washing out the
roses, in three farthings to make um pence.


I do not like these Morrals.


You must not like him then.


B^ your leave Gentlemen.


By my troth Sir you are welcome, welcome fai^h: Lord what a stranger you are
grown; pray know this Gentlewoman, and ^f you please these friends here: We
are merry, you see the worst on's: your house has been kept warm Sir:


I am glad to hear it brother, pray God you are wise too.


Pray Mr. Moorecraft know my elder brother, and Cap^ine do your complement.
Sauil, I dare svvere is glad at heart (...) you: Lord, we heard Sir you were
droun'd at Sea, and see how luckily things come about?


This money must be paid again Sir?


No Sir, pray keep the sale, t'wil make good Tailors measures? I am well I
thank you.


By my troth the Gentleman has stewed him in his own sauce, I shall love ^im
fort.


I know not where I am, I am so glad: your worship is the welcom'st man alive;
upon my knees I bid you welcome home: here ha^ been such a hu^y, such a din,
such dismal d^king, swearing, and whoring, 'thas almost made me mad: We hauc
al hu'd in a continual Turneball street; Sir blessed be Heaven, that sent you
safe again. Now shall I eat and go to bed again.


Brother dismiss these people.


Captain be gone a while, meet me at my ol^ Randeuouse in the evening, take
your small Poet with you Mr. Moorecraft, you we^e ^st go prattle with your
learned Counsel, I shall preser^ your mon^y. I was cozened when time was, we
are quit Sir.


B tter and better still:


What is this fellow brother?


The thirsty Usurer that supped my Land off:


What does he (...) for?


Sir to b Land-lord of your house and state: I was hold to make a little sale
Sir.


A^ Iouer-reacht? if there be law, I'll hamper ye.


Pre^hee be gone, and ra^e at home, thou art so base (...) fool I cannot
laugh at thee (...), (...) c^mes of c^usening, home and spare, cate (...) till
you raise your sums again. I^ you stir far in this, I'll have you whipped,
your ears nailed for intelligencing, o'th pillory, and your goods forfeit: you
are a stale Cousener, leave my house: no more.


A pox upon your house. Come VViddow, I shall yet hamper this young gamester.


Good twelve (...) hundred keep your way, I am not for your diet: marry in
your own Tribe Iow, and get a Brokes.


Tis well said widow: will you jogge on Sir?


Yes, I will go, but 'tis no matter whither:
But when I trust a wild fool, and a woman,
May I lend gratis, and build Hospitals.

Nay good sir make all even, here's a vviddow wants your good word for me:
she's rich, and may renew me my Fortunes.


I am glad you look before you. Gentlewoman, here is a poor distressed
younger brother.


You do him wrong Sir, he's a Knight.


I ask your mercy: yet 'tis no matter, his Knighthood is no inheritance I take
it: whatsoever he is, he's your servant, or would be Lady. Faith be not
merciless, but make a man; hes young and handsome, though he be my brother,
and his obseruances may deserve your love: he shall not fall for means.


Sir, you speak like a worthy brother: and so much I do cerdit your fair
language, that I shall love your brother: and so love him, but I shall blush to
say more.


Stop her mouth. I hope you shall not live to know that hour when this shall
be repented. Now brother I should chide, but I'll give no distaste to your fair
Mistress, I will instruct her in it, and she shall do it: you hau^ bin wild, and
ignorant, 'pray mend it.


Sir every day now sp^ng comes on.


To you, good Mr. Sauill, and your Office, thus much I have to say: You're from
my Steward become, first your own Drunkard, then his Bawd: they say you're
excellent grown in both, and perfect: give me your keys Sir Sauill.


Good Sir consider who you left me too.


I left you as a curb for, not to provoke my brothers follies: Where's the
best drink now? come, tell me Sauill: where's the soundest whores? Ye old he
Goat, ye dried Ape, ye lamestallion, must you be leading in my house your
whores, like Fairies dance their night rounds, without fear either of King or
Constable, within my walls? Are all my Hangings safe? my sheep vnsold yet? I
hope my Plate is currant, I have too much on it. What say you to 300. ponnds in
drink now?


Good Sir forgive me, and but hear me speak.


Me thinks thou should be drunk still, and not speak, 'tis the more
par^onable.


I will sir, if you will have it so.


I thank ye; yes even pursue it Sir: do you hear? get a whore soon for your
recreation: go loo^e out Captain Brokenbreech your fellow, and quarrel, if
you date: I shall deliver these k^yes to one shall have more honesty, though
not so much fine wit Sir. Ye may walk and gather Crosses sir to cool your
liver; there's something for you to begin a diet, you^ have the pox else.
Speed you well, Sir Sauill: you may ^ate at my house to prescrue life; but
keep no fornications in the stables.


Now must I hang my self, my friends will look for it. Eating and sleeping, I
do despise you b^th now: I will run mad first, and if that get not pity,
I'll drown my self, to a most dismal ditty.


A Lass poor Gentlewoman, to what a misery hath age brought thee to? to what
scurvy Fortune? thou that hast been a companion for Noble men, at the worst of
those times for Gentlemen: now like a broken Serving-man, must beg for favour
to those that would have crawled like Pilgrims to my chamber, hut for an
apperition of me: you that be coming on, make much of fifteen, and so till
five and twenty: use y^ur time with reverence, that your profit may arise: it
will not tarry with you Ec^e si^num: here was a face, but time that like a
su^set eats our youth, plague of his Iron teeth, and draw um for it, he has been
a little bolder here then welcome: and now to say the truth I am fit for no
man. Old men in(...) house, of fifty, call me Granam; and when they are
drunk, e'ene then, when Ione and my Lady are all one, not one will do me
reason. My little L^uite hath forsaken me, his silver sound of Cytterne quite
abolish't, his doleful hymmes under my chamber window, digested into tedious
learning: well fool, you leaped a Haddock when you left him: he's a clean
man, a good Ed^fier, twety nobles is his state de Claro, besides his pigs in
posse. To this good Homilist I have been ever stubborn, which God forgive me
for, and mend my manners: and Love, if ever thou had care of forty, of such
a piece of lap ground, hear my prayer, and fire his zeal so far forth that
my faults, in this renewed impressi^ of my love, may show corrected to our
gentle Reader.

See how neglectingly he passes by me: with what an Equipage Canonical, as
though he had broke the heart of Bellarmine, or added some thing to the singing
Brethren. Tis scorn, I know it, and dese^ue it. Mr. Rogor.


Fair Gentlewoman, my name is Roger.


Then gentle Roger.


Ungentle Abigall.


Why Mr. Reger will you set your wit to a weak woman's.


You are weak indeed: for so the Poet sings.


I do confess my weakness sweet Sir Roger.


Good my Ladies Gentlewoman, or my ^ood Ladies Gentlewoman (this trope is lost
to you now) leave your prating, you have a season of your first Mother in ye:
and surely had the devil been in love, he had been abused too, go Dalid^;
you make men fools, and wear fig breeches.


Well, well, hard hearted man; dilate upon the weak infirmities of w^men:
these are fit texts: but ^ce there was a time, would I had never seen those
eyes, those eyes, those orient eyes.


I they were pearls once with you.


Saving your reverence Sir, so they are still.


Nay, nay, I do beseech you leave your cogging, what they ate, they are, they
serve me without Spectacles I thank um,


O will you kill me?


I do not think I can,
You're like a Coppy-hold with nine lives in it.

You were wont to bear a Christian fear about you:
For your own VVorships sake.

I was a Christian fool then: Do you remember what a dance you led me? how I
grew quaum'd in love, and was a dunce? could expound but once a quarter, then
was out too: and then at prayers once (out of the stinking stir you put me in)
I praid for mine own royal issue. You do remember all this?


O be as then you were.


I thank you for it; surely I will be wiser Abigall: and as the Ethnic Poet
sings, I will not loose my oil and labour too. You're for the worshipful I take
it Abigall.


O take it so, and then I am for thee.


I like these tears well, and this humbling also, they are Symptoms of
contrition, as a Father saith. If I should fall into my fit again, would you
not shake me into a quotidian Coxcomb? Would you not use me scurvily again,
and give me possets with purging comsets in it? I tel thee Gentlewoman, thou
hast been harder to me then a long chapter with a pedigree.


O Curate cure me: I will love thee better, dearer, longer, I will do anything,
betray the secrets of the maine household to thy reformation. My Lady shall
look lovely on thy learning; and when true time shall point thee for a Parson,
I will ennuert thy eggs to penny custards, and thy tithe goose shall grase and
multiply.


I am mollified: as well shall testify this faithful kiss: and have a great
care Mistres, Abigall, how you depress the spirit any more with your rebukes
and mo^kes: for certainly the edge of such a folly cuts it self.


O sir you have pierced me thorough. Here I vow a recantation to those malicious
faults I ever did against you. Never more will I despise your learning never
more pin cards and cunny tails upon your Cassock, never again reproach your
reverend nightcap, and cal it by the mangy name of murrin, never your reverend
person more, and say, you look like one of Baals Priests a hanging; never
again, when you say grace, laugh at you, no^ put you out at prayers: never
cramp you more with the great Book of Martyrs; nor when you ride, get soap
and thistles for you. No my Roger, these faults shall be corrected and amended,
as by the tenor of my tears appears.


Now cannot I hold if I should be hanged, I must cry to. Come to thine own
beloved, do even what thou wilt withme, sweet, sweet, Abi. I am thine own for
^uer: heers my hand, when To. proves a recreant, hang him in the Bel-ropes.


Why how now Mr. Roger, no prayers down with you to night? did you hear the
bell ring? You are courting, your slock shall fat well for it.


I humbly ask your pardon: I'll clap up Prayers (but staic a little) and be
with you again.


How dare you being so unworthy a Fellow,
Presume to come to move me any more?

Ha, ha, ha.


What ails the fellow.


The fellow comes to laugh at you. I tell you Lady, I would not for your Land,
be such a Coxecome, such a whining Ass, as you decreed me for when I was last
here.


I joy to hear you are wise Sir, tis a rare Jewel
In an elder Brother: pray be wiser yet.

Me thinks I am very wise: I do not come a woeing;
Indeed I'll move no more love to your Ladyship.

What make you here then?


Only to see you, and be merry Lady: that's all my business. Faith lets be
very merry. Wher's little Roger? he's a good fellow: an hour or two well
spent in wholesome mirth is worth a thousand of these puling passions. Tis an
ill world for Lovers.


They were never fewer.


I thank God there's one less for me Lady.


You were never any Sir.


Till now; and now, I am the prettiest fellow.


You talk like a Taylor Sir.


Me thinks your faces are no such fine things now.


Why did you tell me you were wise. Lord what a lying age is this, where will
you mend these faces?


A hogs face soust is worth a hundred of um.


Sure you had some Sow to your Mother.


She brought such fine white pigs as you: fit for none but Parsons Lady.


Tis well you will allow us our Clergy yet.


That shall not save you. O that I were in love again with a wish.


By this light you are a scurvy fellow, pray be gone.


You know I am a clean skinned man.


Do I know it?


Come, come, you would know it; that's as good: but not a snap, never long
for it, not a snap dea^e Lady.


Hark ye Sir, ha^ke ve, get ye to the Suburbs, there's horseflesh for such
hounds: will you go Sir?


Lord, how I l^u'd this woman, how I worshipped this pretty calfe with the white
face here: as I live, you were the prettiest fool to play withal, the
wittiest little varlet, it would talk: Lord how it talk^; and when I angered
it, it woul^ cry out, and scratch, and eat no meat, and yet would say, Go
hang.


It will say so still, if you anger it.


And when I asked it, if it would be married, it sent me of an errant into
France: and would abuse me, and be gladi^ it did so.


Sir, this is most unmanly, 'pray begone.


And tw^e (even when it twitterd to be a^ me) I was vnha^some.


Have you no manners in you?


And say my back was melted, when the gods knows (...) kept it at a cha^ge:
Feure Flaunders Mares would have been easier to me, and a Fencer.


You think all this is true now.


Faith whether it be or no, 'tis too good for you.
But so much for our mirth: Now have at you in earnest.

There is enough Sir, I desire no (...).


Yes faith, we'll have a cast at your best parts now,
And ^en the devil take the worst.

Pray Sir ^o more, I am not much affected with your com^dations: tis almost
dinner, I know they stay you at the Ordinary.


E'^ne a short Grace, and then I am gone: You are a woman, and the prou^st that
ever loved a C^ach: the scornfull^st, scuru^t, and most (...) woman; the
greediest to be prays'd, and never moved, though it be gro^e and open; the most
envious, that at the poor f^me of another face, would eat your own, ^nd
more then is your own, the p^int b^nging to it: of such a self opinion, that
you thi^ke none can dese^ue your glove: and for your mali^e, you are so
exce^ent, you might have been your Tempters tutor: Nay, (...) c^y.


Your own hea^t knows you wrong me: I cry for ye?


You shall before I leave you


Is all this spoke in ca^st?


Yes, and more as so^ as I can get it out.


Well, out with it.


You are, let me see.


One that has used you with too much respect.


One that hath used me (since you will have it so) the basest, the most
Foot-boy like, without respect of what I was, or what you might be by me: you
have used me, as I would use a jade, ride him off's legs, then turn him into
the Commons: you have used me with discretion, and I thank ye. If you have
many more such pretty Servants, pray build an Hospital, and when they are
old, keep um for shame.


I cannot think yet this is serious,


Will you have more on it?


No faith, there's enough if it be true:
Too much by all my part: you are no Lou^r then?

No, I had rather be a Carrier.


VV^y the gods amend all.


Neither do I think there can be such a fellow found in the world, to be in
love with such a froward woman: if there be such, they are mad, Jove comfort
um. Now you l aue all, and I as new a man, as light, spirited, that I feel my
self clean through another creature. O'tis brave to be ones own man. I can
see you now as I would see a Picture, sit all day by you and never kiss your
hand: hear you sing, and never fall backward; but with as set a temper, as I
would hear a Fiddler, rise and thank you. I can now keep my money in my
purse, that still was gadding out for Scarfes and Waistcoats: and keep my hand
from Mercers sheepskins finely. I can eat Mutton now, and feast my self with
my two shillings, and can see a Play for eighteen pence again: I can my Lady.


The carriage of this fellow vexes me. Sir, pray let me speak a little
private ^ith you, I must not suffer this.


Ha, ha, ha, what would you with me?
You will not ravish me? Now, your set speech.

Thou perjurd man.


Ha, ha, ha, this is a fine Exordium:
And why I pray you p^jurd?

Did you not swear a thousand thousand times you loved me best of all things?


I do confess it: make your best of that.


Why do you say, you do not then?


Nay (...) swear it,
And give sufficient reason, your own usage.

Do you not love me now then?


No faith.


Did you ever think I loved you dearly?


Yes, but I see but rotten fruits on it.


Do not deny your hand, for I must kiss it, and take my last farewell: now
let me die so you be happy.


I am too foolish: Lady, speak dear Lady.


No let me die.


O my sister.


O my Lady, help, help.


Run for some Rosasolis.


I have plaid the fi^e ass: bend her body, Lady, best, dearest, worthiest
Lady, hear your servant: I am not as I showed: O wretched fool to fling away
the Jewel of thy life thus. Give her more air, see she begins to (...), sweet
Mistres hear me.


Is my servant well.


In being yours I am so.


Then I care not.


How do ye, reach a chair there: I confess my fault not pardonable, in
pursuing thus upon such tenderness my wilful error: but had I known it would
have rought thus with ye, thus strangely; not the world had won me to it,
and let not (my best Lady) any word spoke to my end disturb your quiet peace:
for sooner shall you know a general ruin, then my faith broken. Do not doubt
this Mistres: for by my life I cannot live without you. Come come, you shall
not grieve, rather be angry, and heap i^fliction on me: I will suffer. O I
could curse my self, pray smile upon me. Upon ^y faith it was but a trick to
try you, knowing you loved me dea^ly, and yet strangely that you would never
show it, though my means was all humility.


Ha, ha.


How now?


I thank you fine fool for your most fine plot: this was a sub^ile one, a
(...) device to have caught Do^ls with. Good senseless Sir, could you imagine
I should swoune for you, and know your self to be an a^t ass? I, a discovered
one. Tis quit I Thank^ you Sir. Ha, ha, ha.


Take heed sir, she may chance to swoune again?


Ha, ha, ha.


Step to her sir, see how she changes colour.


I'll go to h^ ^irst, and bebetter welcome.
I am fooled, I do confess it, ^y ^o'd,
Lady fooled Madam, and I thank you for it.

Faith '(...) not so much worth Sir:
But if I know when you come n^xt a burding.
I'll have a stronger noose to hold the woodcock.

Ha, ha, ha.


I am glad to see you merry, pray laugh on.


Had a hard heart that could not laugh at you Sir. ha, ha.


Pray Sister do not laugh, you'll anger him,
And then he will (...) like a rude (...),
That Schooleboies had cozned of his apples,
As loud and senseless.

I will not rai^.


Faith then lets hear him sister.


Yes you shall hear me.


Shall we (...) the better for it then?


No. He that makes a woman better by his words,
I'll have him Sainted: blows will not do it.

By this light h^'l beat us.


Yo^ do deserve it richly,
And may live to have a Beadle do it.

Now he rai^.


Come (...) full Folly,
If this be railing, you shall hear me rail.

^ay put it in good words then.


The worst are good enough for such a trisle,
Such a proud (...) of Cobw^b lawn.

You (...) Sir.


I would till the bones cracked, and I had my will.


We had best mussell him, he grows (...).


I would twere (...) in the next great sickness to have the dogs spared; those
harmless creatures, and knock i^ head these hot continual plagues, women,
that are more (...). I hope the stat^ will think on it.


Are you w^l sir?


He looks as though he had a grecuous fit ath Colic.


(...) will you cure me?


He heate a trencher for him.


Dirty December do. Thou with a face as old as Erra Pater, such a
prog^osticating nose: thou thing that ten years since has left to be a woman,
outworn the expectation of a Bawd; and thy dry bones can reach at nothing
now, but gords or ninepinnes; pray go fetch a trencher, go:


Let him alone, 'is cracked:


I'll see him hanged first, 'is a beastly fellow, to loose a woman of my
breeding thus; I marry is a: would I were a man, I'd make him eat his knaves
words.


Tie your she Otter up, good Lady Folly, she stinks worse then a
beare-bayting.


Why will you be angry now?


Go paint and purge, call in your kennel with you: you a Lady?


Sir, look too't against the quarter Sessions, if there be good behaviour in
the world, I'll have thee bound to it.


L. You must not seek it in your Ladies house then: pray send this Ferret
home, and spin good Abigall. And Maddame, that your Ladyship may know, in
what base manner you have used my service, I do from this hour hate thee
heartily: and though your folly should whip you to repentance. and waken you at
length to see my wrongs, tis not the endeavour of your life shall win me: not
all the friends you have in intercession, nor your submissive letters, though
they spoke as many tears as words; not your knees grown to the ground in
penitence, not all your state, to kiss you: nor my pardon nor will to give you
Christian burial, if you dye thus: so farewell. When I am married and made
sure, I'll come and visit you again, and vex you Lady. By all my hopes I'll be
a torment to you, worse then a tedious winter. I know you will recant and sue
to me, but save that labour: I'll rather love a Fever and continual thirst,
rather contract my youth to drink, and safer dote upon quarrels, or take a
drawn whore from an Hospital, that time, diseases, and Mercury had eaten,
then to be drawn to love you.


Ha, ha, ha, pray do, but take heed though.


From thee, false dice, lades. Cowards, and plaguy Summers, good Lord deliver
me.


But hark you servant, hark ye: is he gone? call him aine:


Hang him Padocke.


Art thou here still? fly, fly, and call my servant, fly or ne'er see me more.


I had rather knit again then see that rascal, but I must do it.


I would be loath to anger him too much: what fine foolery (...) this in a
woman, to use those men most frowardly they love most? If I should loose him
thus, I were rightly served. I hope is not so much himself to take it ^h
heart: how now? will he come back?


Never he swears whilst he can hear men say there's any woman living: he swore
he wood ha me first.


Did thou entreat him wench?


As well as I could Madam. But this is still your way, to love being absent,
and when he's with you, laugh at him and abuse him. There is another way if
you could hit on it.


Thou say true, get me paper, pen, and ink, I'll write to him, I'd be loath he
should sleep in's anger.

Women are most fools, when they think they are wise^.


Pray Sir cast off these fellows, as unfitting for your bare knowledge, and
far more your company: is't fit such Ragamuffins as these are should bear the
name of friends? and furnish out a civil house? you're to be married now, and
men that love you must expect a course far from your old carrire: If you will
keep um, turn um to the stable, there make um grooms: and yet now I consider
it, such beggars once set a horse back, you have heard will ride, how far you
had best to look to.


Hear you, you that must be Lady, pray content your self and (...) upon your
carriage soon at night, what dressing will best take your knight, what
wastcote, what cordial will do well in the morning for him, what triers have
you?


What do you mean Sir?


Those that must switch him up: if he start well, fear not but cry S. George,
and bear him hard: when you perceive his wind grows ho^, and wanting, let him
a little down, `is ^eet ne'er doubt him, and stands sound.


Sir, you hear these fellows?


Merry companions, wench, merry companious:


To one another let um be companions, but good Sir not to you: you shall be
civil and slip off these base trappings.


He shall not need, my most sweet Lady grocer, if he be civil, not your
powdered Sugar, nor your Reasens shall persuade the Captain to live a Coxcome
with him: Let him be civil and eat in the Arches, and see what will come ont.


I et him be civil, do: undo him: I, that's the next way. I will not take
(if he be civil once) two hundred pounds a year to live with him: be
civil? there's a trim pe^swasion.


If thou be civil Knight, as Jove defend it, get thee another nose, that
will be pulled off by the angry boys, for thy conversion: ^he Children thou shalt
get on this Civilian cannot inherit by the law, they are Ethnickes, and all thy
sport mere Moral lechery: when they are grown having but little in um, they
may p^ooue Haberdashers, or gross Grosers, like their dear damme there:
prethe be civil Knight, in time thou may read to thy household and be drunk
once a year: this would show finely.


I wonder sweet heart you will offer this, you do not understand these
Gentlemen: I will be short and pithy: I had rather cast you off by the way of
charge: these are Creatures, that nothing goes to the maintenance of but Corn
and Water. I will keep these fellows just in the Competency of two Hens:


If you can cast it so Sir, you have my liking; if the^ eat less, I should not
be offended: But how these, Sir, can live upon so little as Co^ne and Wa^er. I
am vnbeleeuing.


Why prithee sweet heart what's your Ale? is not that Corn and Water my sweet
Widow?


I but my sweet Knight, wheres the meat to this, and clothes that they must
look for?


In th^ short sentence Ale, is all included: Meat, Drink, and Cloth: these
are no ravening foot-men, no fellows tha^ at Ordinaries dare (...) their
eighteen pence thrice out before they rise, and yet go hungry to play, and
crack more nuts then would suffice a dozen Squirrels; besides the din, which is
damnable: I had rather rail, and be confined to a Boat maker, then hue among
such rascals; these are people of such a clean discretion in their diet, of
such a moderate sustenance, that they sweat if they but smell hot meat.
Porridge is poison, they hate a kitchen as they hate a counter, and show em but
a Featherbed they swooned. Ale is their (...), and their drinking surely, which
keeps their bodies clear, soluble. Bread is a binder, and for that abolisht
even in their ale, whose lost room fills an apple, which is mo^ air, a^d of
(...) Nature. The rest they take, is little, and that little, as little easy:
For like strict men of order, they do correct their bodies with a bench, or a
poor stubborn table; if a chimney (...) it (...) with some few broken rushes,
they are in down: when they are sick, that's drunk, they may have fresh shaw,
else they do despise these worldly pamperings. For their poor apparel, tis
worn out to the diet; new they seek none, and if a man should offer, they are
angry: scarce to be reconcyl'd again with him: you shall not hear em ask one
a cast doublet, once in a year, which is a modesty besitting my poor friends:
you see their (...) pe, though slender, competent: For shirts I take it, they
are things worn out of their remembrance. Lousy they will be, when they list,
and M^ngie, which shows a fine variety: and then to cure em, a Tanners
lymepit, which is little charge, two dogs, and these; these two may be cured
for three pence.


You have half persuaded me, pray use your pleasure: and my good f^iends since
I do know your diet, I'll take an order, meat shall not offend you, you shall
have ale.


We ask no more, let it be mighty, Lady: and if we perish, then our own
sins on us.


Come forward gentlemen, to Church my boys, when we have done, I'll give you
cheer in boules.


This senseless woman vexes me to the heart, she will not from my memory: would
she were a m^n for one two hours, that I might beat her. If I had bin (...),
old, or ^t'had bin an even lay she might have scorned me: but to be young, and
by this light I think as proper as the proudest; made as clean, as straight,
and strong backed; means and manners equal with the best cloth of silver Sir
in the kingdom: But these are things at some time of the Moon, below the cut of
Canvas: Sure she has some Mecching rascal in her house, some hind, that she
hath seen bear (like another Milo) quarters of Malt upon his back, and sing
with it, thrash all day, and ith evening in his stockings, strike up a
hornepipe, and there stink two hours, and ne'er a whit the worse man; these are
they, these (...) ^hind rascals that undo us all. Would I had bin a carter,
or a Coachman, I had done the deed ere this time:


Sir there's a Gentleman without would speak with you:


Bid him come in:


By your leave Sir.


You are welcome, whats your will Sir?


Have you forgotten me?


I do not much remember you.


You must Sir. I am that gentleman you plea^d to wrong, in your disgu^se I have
inquired you out.


I was disguised indeed Sir if I wronged you. Pray where and when?


In such a Ladies house Sir: I need not name her.


I do remember you: you s^'d to be a suitor to that Lady:


If you remember this, do not forget how scuruyly you used me: that was no
place to quarrel in, pray you think of it: If you be honest you dare fight
with me, without more viging, else I must provoke ye:


Sir I dare fight, but never for a woman, I will not have her in my cause,
she's Mort^ll and so is not my anger: If you have brought a Nobler subject for
our swords, I am for you: in this I would be loath to (...) my finger. And where
you say I wronged you, (...) so ^ar from my profession, that (...) ^y fears, to
do^ wrong is the greatest: credit me we hau^ bin both abused. (not by our
selves, for that I ho^d a spleen no (...) of Malice, and may with man enough
be lest forgotten,) but by that wilful, (...) piece of hatred, that much (...)
Lady: For whose sake, if we should leave our reason, and run on upon our
sense, like Rams: the little world of good men would laugh at us, and despise
us, fixing upon our desperate memories the neuer-worne ou^ names of Fools, and
(...). Sir tis not fear, but reason makes me tell you: in this I had rather
help you Sir, then hurt you, and you shall find it, though you throw your
self into as many dangers as she offers, though you redeem her lost name
every day, and find her out new honours with your sword, you shall but be h^r
mitth, as I have bin.


I ask you mercy Sir, you have taken my edge off: yet I wou^d fain be even
with this Lady.


In which i'll be your helper: we are two, and they are two: two sisters, rich
alike, only the elder has the prouder dowry: In troth I pity this disgrace in
you, yet of mine own I am (...): do but follow my counsel, and i'll pawn my
spirit, we will ou^ach em yet; the means is this.


Sir there's a Gentlewoman will needs speak with you: I cannot keep her out,
she's entered Sir:


It is the waiting woman, pray be not seen: sir hold her in discourse
awhile: hark in your ear, go, and dispatch it quickly, when I come in I'll
tell you all the project.


I care not which I have.


Away, tis done, she must not see you: now Lady Gwiniuer, what news with you?


Pray leave these frumps Sir, and receive this letter.


From whom good vanity?


'Tis from my Lady Sir: alas good soul, she cri^s and takes on:


Does she so good soul? wod she not have a Caudle? does she send you with your
fine Oratory goody Tully to tie me to belief again? Bring out the Cat hounds,
i'll make you (...) a tree whore, then with my tyller bring down your Gibship,
and then have you cast, and hung up ith warren.


I am no beast Sir: would you knew it:


Wod I did, for I am yet very doubtful: what will you say now?


Nothing not I:


Art thou a woman, and say nothing?


Unless you'll hear me with more moderation; I c^ speak wise enough:


And loud enough: will your Lady love me?


It seems so by her letter, and her lamentations: but you are such another
man:


Not such another as I was, Mumps; nor will not be: i'll read her fine Epistle:
ha, ha, ha: is not thy Mistress mad?


For you she will be, 'tis a shame you should use a poor gentlewoman so
untowardly: she loves the ground you tread on: and you (hard hart) because she
jested with you, mean to kill her: 'tis a fine conquest as they say:


Hast thou so much moisture in thy whitleather hyde yet, that thou can cry?
I wod have sworn thou had been^ touchwood five year since: Nay let it
rain, thy Face chops for a shower like a dry dunghill.


I'll not endure this Ribaldry: Farewell in the Devils name: if my Lady die, i'll be
sworn before a Jury, thou art the caus^ o^'t:


Do Maukin do: deliver to your Lady from me this: I mean to see her, if I
have no other business; which before i'll want to come to her, I mean to go
se^ke byrds nests: yet I may come too: but if I come, from this door till I
see her, will I think how to rail wildly at her; how to v^ her, and make her
cry so much, that the Physician if she fall sick upon it shall want v^yne to
find the cause by: and she remedil^sse die in her heresy: Farewell old Adage,
I hope to see the boys make Potguns on thee.


You are a vile man; God bless my issue from thee.


Thou hast but one, and that's in thy left c^upper, that makes thee hobble so;
you must be ground ith breech like a top, you'll ne'er spin well else: Farewell
Fytchocke.


Is it not strange that every woman's will should track out new ways to
disturb her self? if I should call my reason to account, it cannot answer
why I stop my self from mine ^owne wish; and stop the man I love from his;
and every hour repent again, yet still go on: I know 'tis like a man, that
wants his natural sleep, and growing dull, would gladly give the remnant of
his life for two hours rest: yet through his frowardness, will rather choose
to watch another man. Drowsy as he, then take his own repose. All this I
know: yet a strange peuish^s and anger, not to have the power to do things
unexpected, carries me away to mine own rui^ had rather dye sometimes then not
disgrace in public him whom people think I love, and do it with oaths, and am
in earnest then: O what are we! Men, you must answer this, that d^ obey such
things as we command. How now? what news?


Faith Madam none worth hearing.


Is he not come?


No truly.


Nor has he writ?


Neither. I pray God you have not undone your self:


Why, but what says he?


Faith he talks strangely:


How strangely?


First at your Letter he laughed extremely:


What in contempt?


He laughed monstrous loud, as he would dye, and when you wrote it, I think you
were in no such merry mood, to provoke him that way: and having done he cried
ala^ for her, and violently laughed again.


Did he?


yes till I was angry:


Angry, why? why were thou angry? he did do but well, I did deserve it, he
had been a fool, an unfit man for any one to love, had he not laughed thus at
me: you were angry, that showed your folly; I shall love him more for that,
then all that (...) he did before: but said he nothing else?


Many uncertain things: he ^aid though you had mock't him, because you were a
woman, he could wish to do you so much sauout as to see you: yet he said, he
knew you rash, and was loath to offend you with the sight of one, whom now he
was bound not to leave.


What one was that?


I know not, but truly I do fear there is a making up there: for I heard the
servants, as I past by some, whisper such a thing: and as I came back through
the hall, there were two or three Clarks writing great conveyances in hast,
which they said were for their Mistress jointure.


(...) very like and fit it should be so, for he does think, and reasonably
think, that I should keep him with my idle tricks for ever (...) he married.


At last he said, it should go hard but he would see you for your
satisfaction.


All we that are called Women, know as well as men, it were a far more Noble
thing to grace where we are graced, and give respect there where we are
respected: yet we practise a wilder co^rse, and never bend our eyes on men with
pleasure, till they find the way to give us a neglect: then we, too late,
(...) the loss of what we might have had, and dote to death.


Sister yonders your Servant, with a gentlewoman with him.


Where?


Close at the door.


Alas I am undone, I fear he is betrothed.
What kind of woman is she?

A most ill favoured one, with her Masque on:
And how her face should mend the rest I know not.

But yet her mind is of a milder stuff then mine was.


Now I see him, if my heart swell not again (away thou woman's pride) so that I
cannot speak a gentle word to him, let me not live.


By your leave here.


How now, what new trick invites you hither?
Have you a fine device again?

Faith this is the finest device I have now:
How dost thou sweet heart?

Why very well, so long as I may please
You my dear Lover: I nor can, nor will
Be ill when you are well, well when you are ill.

O thy sweet temper: what would I have given, that lady had been like thee:
see thou her? that face (my love) joined with thy humble mind, had made a
wench indeed.


Alas my love, wha^ God hath done, I dare not think to mend: I use no paint,
nor any drugs of Art, my hands and face will show it.


Why what thing have you brought to show us there? do you take money for it?


A Godlike thing, not to be bought for money: tis my Mistres: in ^hom there is
no passions, nor no scorn: what I will is for law; pray you salute her.


Salute her? by this good light I would not kiss her for half my wealth.


Why, why pray you?
You shall see me do it before you: look you.

Now fie upon thee, a beast would not have don^ I would not kiss thee of a
month to gain a Kingdom.


Marry you shall not be troubled.


Why was there ever such a Meg as this?
Sure thou art madd^.

I was mad once, when I loved pictures: for what (...) shape and colours else,
but pictures? in that tawny hide there lies an endless mass of virtues; when
all your red white ones want it.


And this is she you are to marry, is't not?


Yes indeed is^.


God give you joy.


Amen.


I thank you, as unknown, for your good wish.
The like to you, when ever you shall wed.

O gentle spirit.


You thank me? I pray
Keep your breath nearer you, I do not like it.

I would not willingly offend at all:
Much less a lady of your worthy parts.

Sweet, Sweet.


I do not think this woman can by nature be thus,
Thus ugly: sure she's some common Strumpet,
Deformed with exercise of sin.

O Sir believe not this: for heaven so comfort me as I am free from foul
pollution with any man: my honour taken away, I am no woman.


Arise my dearest soul: I do not credit it. Alas, I fear her tender heart
will break with this reproach: fie that you know no more civility to a weak
virgin. Tis no matter Sweet, let her say what she will, thou art not worse to
me, and therefore not at all: be careless.


For all things else I would, but for mine honour: Me thinks.


Alas, thine honour is not stained.
Is this the business that you sent for me about?

Faith Sister you are much to balm, to use a woman, whatsoever she be, thus:
^e salute her: You are welcome hither.


I humbly thank you.


Mild still as the Dove, for all these injuries. Come, shall we go, I love
thee not so ill to keep thee h^re a jesting stock. Adieu to the vvorlds end.


Why whither now?


Nay you shall never know, because you shall not find me.


I pray let me speak with you.


Tis very well: come.


I pray you let me speak with you.


Yes for another mock.


By heaven I have no mocks: good Sir a word.


Though you deserve not so much at my hands, yet if you be in such earnest, I
will speak a word with you: but I beseech you be brief; for in good faith
there's a Parson, and a licence stay for us in the Church all this while: you
know tis night.


Sir, give me hearing patiently, and whatsoever I have heretofore spoke
jestingly, forget: for as I hope for mercy any where, what I shall utter now
is from my heart, and as I mean.


Well, well, what do you mean?


Was not I once your Mistres, and you my Servant?


O 'tis about the old matter.


Nay good Sir stay me out: I would but hear you excuse your self, why you
should take this woman, and leave me.


Prithee why not, deserves she not as much as you?


I think not, if you will look
With an indifferency up on us both.

Upon your faces, tis true: but if judicially we shall cast our eyes upon your
minds, you are a thousand women of her in worth: She cannot sound in jest,
nor set her lover tasks, to show her pe^uishnes, and his affection: nor cross
what he says, though it be Canonicoll. She's a good plain wench, that will
do as I will have her, and bring me lusty boys to throw the Sledge, and lift
at Pigs of lead: and for a wife, she's far beyond you: what can you do in a
household, to provide for your issue, but lye a bed and get um? your business
is to dress you, and at idle hours to eat; when she can do a thousand
profitable things: She can do pre^ty well in the Pastry, and knows how pullen
should be crammed: she cuts Camb^icke at a third: weaues bone-lace, and quilts
balls: And what are you good for?


Admit it true, that she were far beyond me in all respects, does that give
you a licence to forswear your self?


Forswear my self, how?


Perhaps you have forgot the innumerable oaths you have uttered in disclaiming
all for wives but m^: I'll not remember you: God give you joy.


Nay but conceive me, the intent of oaths is ever understood. Admit I should
protest to such a friend, to see him at his lodging to morrow: Divines would
never hold me perjured, if I were struck blind, or he hid him where my
diligent search could not find him: so there were no cross act of mine own
in it. Can it be imagined I meant to force you to marriage, and to have you
whether you will or no?


Alas you need not. I make already tender of my self, and then you are
forsworn.


Some sin I see indeed must necessarily fall upon me, as whosoever deals
with women shall never v^terly avoid it: yet I would choose the least ill; which
is to forsake you, that have done me all the abuses of a malignant woman,
contemned my service, and would have held me prating about marriage, till I had
be^ne past getting of children: then her that hath forsook her family, and put
her tender body in my hand, upon my word.


Which of us swore you first to?


Why to you.


Which oath is to be kept then.


I prithee do not urge my sins unto me,
Without I could amend um.

Why you may by wedding me.


How will that satisfy my word to her?


Tis not to be kept, and needs no satisfaction,
Tis an error fit for repentance only.

Shall I live to wrong that tender hearted virgin so? It may not be.


Why may it not be?


I swear I had rather marry thee then her: but yet mine honesty.


What honesty? Tis more preserved this way:
Come, by this light servant thou shalt, I'll kiss thee on it.

This kiss indeed is sweet, pray God no sin lie under it.


There is no sin at all, tri^ but another.


O my heart.


Help sister, this lady swoons.


How do you?


Why very well, if you be so.


Suce a puiet mind lives not in any woman: I shall do (...) most ungodly
thing. Hear me one word more, which by all my hopes I will not alter. I did
make an oath when you delayed me so; that this very night I would be marrted.
Now if you will go without delay, suddenly, as late as it is, with your own
Minister to your own Chapel, I'll wed you, and to bed.


A match dear servant.


For if you should forsake me now, I care not, she would not though for all her
iniu^ies, such is her spirit, If I be not ashamed to kiss her now I part, may
I not live.


I see you go, as sliely as you think to steal away: yet I will pray for
you; All blessings of the world light on you two, that you may live to be an
aged pair. Al curses on me if I do not speak what I do wish indeed.


If I can speak to purpose to her, I am a vill^ine.


Servant away.


Sister, will you marry that inconstant man? think you he will not cast you
off to morrow, to wrong a lady thus, looked she like dirt, twas basely done.
May you ne'er prosper with him.


Now God forbid, Alas I was unworthy, so I told him.


That was your modesty, too good for him.
I would not see your vvedding for a world.

Choose, choose, come Yo^gloue.


Dri^ up your (...) forsooth, you shall not think we are all uncivil, all
such beasts as these. Would I knew how to give you a revenge.


So would not I: No let me suffer truly, that I desire.


Pray vvalke in with me, tis very late, and you shall stay all night: your bed
shall be no vvorse then mine; I wish I could but do you right.


My humble thanks:
God grant I may but live to quit your love.

Did your Master send for me Sauil?


Yes he did send for your worship sir.


Do you know the business?


Alas Sir I know nothing, nor am employed beyond my hovvers of eating. My
dancing days are done sir.


What art thou now then.


If you consider me in little, I am with your vvorships reverence sir, a
rascal: one that upon the next anger of your brother, must raise a sconce by
the high way, and sell svvitches. My wife is learning new sir to vveaue
inckle.


What dost thou mean to do with thy children Sauill?


My eldest boy is half a rouge already, he was borne burst, and your
worship knows, that is a pretty steppe to men's capassions. My youngest boy I
purpose sir to bind for ten years to a Ioaler, to draw under him, that he
may show us mercy in his function.


Your family is quartered with discretion: you are resolved to cant then: where
Sauil shall your scene lie.


Beggars must be no choosers:
In every place (I take it) but the stocks.

This is your drinking, and your who^ing Sauil,
I told you of it, but your heart was hardened.

Tis true, you were the first that told me of it, I do remember yet in
tears, you told me you would have whores, and in that passion sir, you broke
our thus; Thou miserable man, repent, and brew three strikes more in a hogshed.
Tis noone ere we be drunk now, and the time can tarry for no man.


You're grown a bitter Gentlememan. I see misery can can clear your head
better then mustard. I'll be a suitor for your keys again sir.


Will you but be so gracious to me sir? I shall be bound.


You shall sir,
To your bunch again, or I'll miss foully.

Save you gent. save you.


Now Pole-cat, what young Rabets nest have you to draw?


Come, pre thee be familiar Knight.


Away Fox, I'll send for Terriers for you.


Thou art wide yet: I'll keep thee company.


I am about some business; Indentures,
If ye follow me I'll beat you: take heed,
As I live I'll cancel your (...).

Thou art cozened now, I am no usurer:
What poor fellow's this?

I am poor indeed sir.


Give him money Knight.


Do you begin the offering.


There pore fellow, here's an angel for thee.


Art thou in earnest Moorcraft?


Yes faith K^ight. I'll follow thy example: thou had land and thousands, thou
spendst, and flungst away, and yet it flows in double: I purchasde, wrung, and
wierdraw'd for my wealth, lost, and was cozend: for which I make a vow, to
try all the ways above ground. but I'll find a constant meane^ to riches
without curses.


I am glad of your conversion Mr. Moorcraft:
you're in a fair course, pray pursue it still.

Come, we are all gallants now, I'll keep thee company; Here honest fellow,
for this gentleman's sake, there's two angels more for thee.


God quit you sir, and keep you lunge in this mind.


Wilt thou persevere?


Till I have a penny. I have brave clothes a making, and two horses; can thou
not h^lpe me to a Match Knight, I'll lay a a thousand pound upon my crop-eare.


Foot thit is stranger then an Africa monster,
There will be no more talk of the Cleave wars
Whilst this lasts, come, I'll put thee into blood.

Would all his damb'd tribe were as tender hearted. I beseech you let this
gent. join with you in the recovery of my Keys; I like his good beginning
sir, the whilst I'll pray for both your worships.


He shall sir.


Shall we go noble Knight? I would fain be acquainted.


I'll be your servant sir.


Faith my sweet Lady, I have caught you now, maugre your s^btilties, and fine
devises, be coy again now.


(...) sweeteheart tell true.


By this light, by all the pleasures I have had this night, by your lost
maidenhead, you are cozend merely. I have cast beyond your wit. That gent. is
your retainer Welford.


It cannot be so.


Your sister has found it so, or I mistake: mark how she blushes when you see
her next. Ha, ha, ha, I shall not travel now, ha, ha, ha.


Prithee sweet heart be quiet, thou hast angerd me at heart.


I'll please you soon again.


Welford.


I Welford, he's a young handsome fellow, well bred and landed: your sister can
instr^ct you in his good parts better then I by this time.


Vdsfoote, am I fetched over thus?


Yes in faith.
And over shall be fetched again, never fear it.

I must be patieut, though it torture me:
You have got the Sun Sir.

And the Moon too, in which I^ be the man.


But had I known this, had I but surmiz'd it, you should have hunted three
trains more, before you had come to'th course, you should have hanckt o'th
bridle, Sir, in faith.


I knew it, and mined with you, and so blew you up.
Now you may see the Gentlewoman: stand close.

For Gods sake Sir be private in this business,
You have undone me else. O God, what have I done?

No harm I warrant thee.


How shall I look upon my friends again?
With what face?

Why even with that: tis a good one, thou can not find a better: look upon
all the faces thou shalt see there, and you shall find um smooth still, fair
still, sweet still, and to your thinking honest: those have done as much as you
have yet, or dare do Mistres, and yet they keep no stir.


Good Sir go in, and put your woman's clothes on.
If you be seen thus, I am lost for ever.

I'll watch you for that Mistres: I am no fool, here will I ^arry till the
house be up and witness with me.


Good dear friend go in.


To bed again if you please, else I am fixed here, till there be notice taken
what I am, and what I have done: If you could juggle me into my woman-hood
again, so cog me out of your company, all this would be forsworn, and I
again an asinego, as your Sister left me. No, I'll have it known and publis^t;
then if you'll be a whore, forsake me, be shamed: when you can hold out no
longer, ma^ry some cast Cleue Captain, and sell Bottle-ale.


I dare not stay sir, use me modestly, I am your wife.


Go in, I'll make up all.


I'll be a witness to your naked truth Sir: this is the gentlewoman, prithee
look upon him, this is he that made me break my faith Sweet: but thank your
sister, she hath soderd it.


What a dull ass was I, I could not see this wencher from a wench: twenty to
one, if I had been but tender like my sister, he had served me such a slippery
trick too.


Twenty to one I had.


I would have watched you Sir, by your good patience, for ferretting in my
ground.


You have been with my Sister.


Yes, to bring.


An heir into the world he means.


There is no chafing now.


I have had my part on it: I have been chaft this three hours, that's the
least, I am reasonable cool now.


Cannot you fare well, but you must cry rost-meat?


He that fares well, and will not bless the founders, is either surfeited, or
ill taught, Lady: for mine own part, I have found so sweet a diet, I can
commend it, though I cannot spare it.


How like you this dish, Welford, I made a supper on it, and fed so heartily, I
could not sleep.


By this light, had I but scented out your train, ye had slept with a bare
pillow in your arms, kissed that, or else the bed-post, for any wife ye had got
this twelue-month yet: I would have vexed you more then a ^yr'd post-horse: bin
longer bearing, then ever after-game at Irish was. Lord, that I were unmarried
again.


Lady, I would not undertake ye, were you again a Haggard, for the best
cast of sore Ladies in the Kingdom: you were ever tickle footed, and would not
truss round?


Is she fast?


She was all night locked here boy.


Then you may lure her without fear of loosing: take off her Cranes. You have
a delicate Gentlewoman to your sister: Lord what a pretty fury she was in,
when she perceived I was a man: but I thank God I satisfied her scruple,
without the Parson o'th town.


What did ye?


Maddame, can you tell what we did?


She has a shrewd guess at it I see by her.


Well you may mock us: but my large Gentlewoman, my Mary Ambree, had I but
seen into you, you should have had another bedfellow, fitter a great deal for
your itch.


I thank you Lady, me thought it was well,
You are so curious.

Get on your doublet, here comes my brother.


Good morrow brother, and all good to your Lady.


God save you, and good morrow to you all.


Good morrow. Here's a poor brother of yours.


Fie how this shames me.


Prithee good fellow help me to a cup of Beer.


I will Sir,


Brother what make you here? will this Lady do?
Will she? is she not nettel'd still?

No, I have cured her.
Mr. Welford, pray know this Gentleman, is my brother.

Sir, I shall long to love him.


I shall not be your debtor Sir. But how is't with you?


As well as may be man'; I am married: your new acquaintance hath her Sister:
and all's well.


I am glad on it. Now my pretty Lady Sister,
How do you find my brother?

Almost as wild as you are.


A will make the better husband: you have tried him?


Against my will Sir.


Hee'le make your will amends soon, do not doubt it. But Sir, I must entreat
you to be better known To this converted Jew here.


Here's Beer for you Sir.


And here's for you an angel:
Pray buy no Land, twill never prosper Sir.

How's this?


Bless you, and then I'll tell: He's turned Gallant.


Gallant?


I Gallant, and is now called, Cutting Moorecraft:
The reason I'll inform you, at more leisure,

O good Sir let me know him presently.


You shall hug one an other.


Sir I must keep you company.


And reason.


Cutting Moorcraft faees about. I must present another.


As many as you will Sir, I am for um.


Sir I shall do you service.


I shall look for it in good faith sir.


Prithee good sweet-heart kiss him.


Who, that fellow?


Sir will it please you to remember me: my keys good sir.


I'll do it presently.


Come thou shalt kiss him for our sport sake.


Let him come on then, and do you hear, do not instruct me in these tricks,
for you may repent it.


That at my peril. Lusty Mr. Moorecraft,
Here is a Lady would salute you.

She shall not loose her longing Sir: what is she?


My wife Sir.


She must be then my Mistres.


Must I Sir:


O yes, you must.


And you must take this ring, a poor pawn,
Of some fifty pound.

Take it by any means, tis lawful prise.


Sir I shall call you servant.


I shall be proud on it: what fellow's that:


My Ladies Coach-man.


There's something. (my friend) for you to buy whips,
And for you sir, and you sir.

Under a miracle this is the strangest,
I ever heard of.

What shall we play, or drink? what shall we do?
Who will hunt with me for a hundred pound?

Stranger and Stranger!
Sir you shall find sport after a day or two.

Sir I have a suit unto you,
Concerning your old servant Sauill.

O, for his keys, I know it,


Now sir, strike in.


Sir I must have you grant me.


Tis done Sir, take your keys again:
But hark you Sauill, leave of the motions
Of the flesh, and be honest, or else you shall graze again.
I'll try you once more.

If cuer I be taken drunk, or whoring,
Take off the biggest key in the bunch, and open
My head with it Sir: I humbly thank your worships.

Nay then I see we must keep holiday
Heers the last couple in hell.

Joy be amongst you all.


Why how now sir, what is the meaning of this Emblem?


Marriage an't like your worship.


Are you married?


As well as the next priest could do it, Madam.


I think the signs in Gemini here's such coupling.


Sir Roger, what will you take to lie from your sweeteheart to night?


Not the best benifice in your worships gift Sir.


A whoreson, how he swells.


How many times to night Sir Roger?


Sir you grow scurrilous:
What I shall do, I shall do: I shall not need your help.

For horse flesh Roger.


Come prithee be not angry, tis a day
Given wholly to our mirth.

It shall be so sir: Sir Roger and his Bride,
We shall entreat to be at our charge.

Welford get you to Church: by this light,
You shall not lie with her again, till you're married.

I am gone.


To every Bride I dedicate this day:
Six healths a piece, and it shall go hard,
But every one a Jewel: Come be mad Boys.

You are in a good beginning: come who leads?
Sir Roger, you shall have the Van: lead the way:
Would every dogged wench had such a day.


