THe Kings Majesties Masque being performed, the Queen commanded Inigo Iones
Surveyor of her Majesties works, to make a new subject of a Masque for her
self, that with high and hearty invention, might give occasion for variety of
Scenes, strange aparitions, Songs, Music and dancing of several kinds; from
whence doth result the true pleasure peculiar to our English Masques, which by
strangers and travellers of judgement, are held to be as noble and ingenious,
as those of any other nations: This being suddenly done and showed her
Majesty, and she approving it, the work was set in hand, and with all
celerity performed in shorter time, than any thing here hath been done in this
kind.

The invention consisting of darkness and light, the night presents the first
Antimasques and sleep with his three principal children, the Antimasques of
dreams: The subject of the maine Masque of light, was thus introduced. The
Muses being long since drawn out of Greece by the fierce Thratians, their
groves withered and all their springs dried up, and out of Italy by the
barbarous Goths and vandals, they wandered here and there indecently without
their ornaments and instruments: The Arch-Flamines and Flamines their
Prophetic Priests being constrained either to live in disguises, or hide their
heads in caves, and in some places, whenever they began to appear, they were
together with peace driven out by war, and in the more civilised parts, where
they hoped to have taken some rest, envy and avarice by clipping the wings of
Fame drave them into a perpetual storm, till by the divine minds of these
incomparable Pair, the Muses and they were received into protection, and
established in this monarchy, to the encouragement and security of those
well-borne wits represented by the Prophetic Priests of the Britanides. The
Scene where this goddess of brightness was discovered, was stiled the garden
of the Britanides, or Muses of great Britain, not inferior in beauty to
that of the Hesperides, or that of Alcinous, celebrated by Homer. The
conclusion of all was an applause and confirmation of those Deities or second
causes by whose influence at this prefixed time, the Britanides and their
Prophetic Priests were to be established in this garden, by the unanimous and
magnificent virtues of the King and Queenes Majesties making this happy Island
a pattern to all Nations, as Greece was amongst the Ancients.

The ornament which served as a Bordure to enclose the Scene, was raised on two
round Basements, on which were Satyrs bigger than the life, bearing baskets of
fruits, and knots of young Satyrs clinging about their legs in extravagant
postures: above these ran comicements, which made the ground of a second order,
wherein were terms of women fained of silver, and children in their natural
colours standing on arches, some wantonising about those terms, and others
holding great vizards before their faces: On the heads of the Terms were
cushions which served for capitals, that bore the finishing of composed
frontispices of great scrolls with frutages, from whence hung lighted Lamps.

In the Freeze above was other young Satyrs, which seemed oppressed with the
burden of great festons, the husks of which were tied up in knots to a double
compartment composed of scrolls, quadratures, and Masque heads, in the midst
hung a drapery fained, of cloth of silver, and in it was written LVMINALIA:
under all this ran a large valens of gold embroidered with flowers and great
Tassels.

The Kings Majesty being seated under the State, the curtain in an instant
disappeared discovering a Scene all of darkness, the nearer part woody, and
farther off more open with a calm River, that took the shadows of the Trees
by the light of the Moon, that appeared shining in the River; there being no
more light to lighten the whole Scene than served to distinguish the several
grounds, that seemed to run far in from the eye, with this Scene of darkness
was heard the voices of Birds of Night.

This strange Scene having a while entertained the sight of the spectators,
there arose out of the hollow caverns of the earth a dusky cloud, and on it a
Chariot enriched and drawn by two great owls, on this sate a matron in a
purple robe, with stars of gold and large black wings displayed, her browne
hair loose, and on her head a veil of russet cyprus, with a picked crown
and a golden Sceptre in her hand; Representing night: she tells she came to give
repose to the labours of mortals: but seeing all things here tending to feasts
and revels, she with her attendants will give her assistance, though it serve
but as a foil to set off more nobler representations.

In wet and cloudy mists, I sloowly rise,
As with mine own dull weight oppressed.
To close with sleep the jealous lovers eyes,
And give forsaken Virgins rest.
The adventurous Merchant and the Mariner,
(Whom storms all day vex in the deep)
Begin to trust the winds when I appear,
And lose their dangers in their sleep.
The studious that consume their brains and sight,
In search where doubtful knowledge lies,
Grow weary of their fruitless use of light,
And wish my shades to ease their eyes.
The ambitious toiling Statesman that prepares
Great mischiefs ere the day begins,
Not measures day by hours, but by his cares;
And night must intermit his sins.
Then why, when my slow Chariot used to clime,
Did old mistaking Sages weep?
As if my Empire did usurp their time,
And hours were lost when spent in sleep.
I come to ease their labours and prevent
That weariness which would destroy:
The profit of their toils are still miss-spent
Till rest enables to enjoy.
There came out from the sides of the Scene six persons, Oblivion, Silence, and
the four nocturnal hours or vigils, all attendants on the night.

Oblivion a young man naked, and a green mantle tucked about his shoulders,
and upon his head a cuckoo.

Silence an old man in a skin coat close to his body set full of eyes, his
mantle tawny, and a girland of Peach-tree about his head.

The first vigill in a robe of blue, with a red mantle, her hair hanging down
in locks, and a bat setting before.

The second habited as the former, but the colours somewhat darker, on her head
a scritch-owle.

The third in purple, and black, on her head a dormouse.

The fourth in watchet and carnation, her hair mixed with silver like dew, and
a little Swan on her head, all these colours were appropriated to the several
nocturnal hours.

The Chariot of Night being arrived to the middle of the air, staid, and after
some dialogue with her attendants, she ascends singing, and is hidden in the
clouds.

Why dreadful Queen dost thou appear,
So early in this Hemisphere?
Where all to triumphs are addressed,
As they did need as little rest
As wandering Planets have above;
Who ne'er are tired, yet ever move.
As little weary as are they;
As free from sufferings and decay,
Or fear of fleeting times expense;
Not tired, with weight, or vexed with sense.
Why would Oblivion mix with these that strive,
To raise new joys, and keep the old alive?
What is the use of silence here?
Thou see (great Empress) every eye,
Doth watch for measures, every ear
Doth hearken after harmony.
Why are we come to give their labours ease?
That reckon sleep a death, rest a disease:
And all this Isle their triumphs now express,
Not to beget, but show their happiness:
A precious sign, they know their own estate,
And that makes Nations chiefly fortunate:
For it alike should often valued be,
To know, as to deserve felicity.
You just, and careful Registers of hours,
And you whose sev'rall ever useful powers,
Dispose and make me pleasing whilst I sway,
Produce fantastic creatures of the night,
Though not to advance, yet vary their delight;
Perhaps these triumphs may defer the day.
All that our striving mystery presents
Will be but foils to nobler ornaments,
Yet I so trust the causes of their joy,
And am so envious of those glistering shows
The Sun in pride, not favour doth disclose,
That I would lengthen what I can't destroy.
2 Thieves.

2 Watchmen.

1 Belman.

The two Thieves enter to share a booty, the watchmen and Belman first affright
them, as they are dividing their booty, but in the end they were contented to
share with the Thieves, and so they all joined in a dance.

1 Wafer-man, and 4 Lacquyes with torches.

Five Fairies, of which Master Ieffery Hudson, the Queenes Majesties dwarf,
presented Piecrocall a principal Captain under King Auberon.

Coyners.



These Antimasques being past, the scene of night vanished; and a new and
strange Prospect of Chimeras appea'rd, with some trees of an unusual form,
Mountains of gold, Towers falling, Windmils, and other extravagant edifices,
and in the further part a great City sustained by a Rain-bow, all which
represented the City of Sleep.

One of the Vigils in song called forth Sleep, who appeared coming out of a
dark cave, with three of his principal sons.

Morpheus the presenter of humane shapes.

Iceles, of fearful visions.

And Phantaste, of any thing that may be imagined.

Sleep, a fat man in a black robe, and over it a white mantle, on his head a
girland of Grapes, with a Dormouse sitting before, in his hand a golden wand.

Morpheus in a robe of cloth of gold, his mantle Blue, on his head a girland of
Poppy.

Iceles, in a brownish flesh colour close to him, like the naked, a red mantle,
great Bats wings on his shoulders; on his head a bend set with flames.

Phantaste, in a white robe of cloth of silver, a green mantle, and on his
head a dressing of several coloured feathers.


(Dull sleep!) in gloomy shades with Poppy spread?
If thou dost steal our hours, is it a crime?
Thou dost but lay them by for men's relief,
And art at worst a profitable thief;
Pay'st Nature double what thou steal from Time.
Invoke thy chiefest sons, and straight appear,
To make these pleasures sit to last a year!

My Morpheus I have brought, and Iceles,
With wild Phantaste; each of them hath power
To raise Ideas from my shady Bower:
Those dreams of humane forms; of worse estate
That reason want, and things inanimate.

To show the souls fond business every night;
When she doth inwardly contract her beams,
To figure out her influence in dreams!
How they will smile, that mans immortal part,
Works things less perfect than if ruled by Art!
The song ended, the sons of Sleep bring in these Antimasques of dreams.

An Ignis Fatuus, leading 4. Clowns that seem to walk in their sleep.

4. Witches.

1. Devil in the shape of a Goat.

Robin-goodfellow.

1. Dairy-maid.

1. Kitchin-maid.

Of five feathered men, inhabitants of the City of Sleep.Presented by

Here an Antique ship was seen far within the Scene, sailing in the air.

From the Temple of the Cock, seated by the haven of the City of Sleep, the
principal Mariners or Masters Mates in rich habits, but proper to the subject,
come forth and make their entry. Presented by

Five Sentinels guardians of the Ivory gate of the City of Sleep: Presented
by

A cavilier in a dream being enamord of a beautiful Gentlewoman, seeks by his
Page to win her to his love, which she seems to entertain, but he coming
near to court her she suddenly is turned into a fury, which much affri'ghts
them. Represented by

These Antimasques being past, the Heaven began to be enlightened as before the
Sun rising, and the Scene was changed into a delicious prospect; wherein
were rows of Trees, Fountains, Statues, Arbors, Grota's, walks, and all such
things of delight, as might express the beautiful garden of the Britanides.

The morning Star appears in the Air, sitting on a bright Cloud, in form
of a beautiful youth naked, with a mantle of watchet Cyprus, on his head a
Star. On the other side of the Heaven came forth Aurora in a Chariot touched
with gold, borne up by a rosie coloured cloud, her garment white trimmed with
gold, loosely tucked about her, and cut down on the sides; her arms bare with
bracelets of gold, with a veil of Carnation flying, as blown up by the wind,
her wings white spotted with gold, her fair hair disheveled, and on her head
a Girland of Roses.

Hesperus asks Aurora, why the Sun is so long in coming, and whether being
weary of his last journey, he is gone to take his rest. Aurora answers, that
her brother the Sun hath for this time given up his charge of lightning this
Hemisphere to a terrestrial Beauty, in whom intellectual and corporeal
brightness are joined, and therefore bids him descend and summon the
Arch-Flamines and Flamines to celebrate with divine hymns: this Goddess of
brightness with those fair Nymphs dependants on her splendour.


Doth now too long the day defer,
Can he grow old,
Or, in his fiery chariot cold,
Or weary cause he still one course doth run?
Hesperus thou dost mistake the Sun:
Though's journeys never can be past,
But must for ever last,
Though 'tis not limited how far,
Because it still is circular,
Yet sure he cannot tire,
Nor mortally wax old,
Nor's universal beams grow cold,
Since fed with immaterial fire.


Throughout this Hemisphere,
To a terrestr' all beauty here.

He knows the way how to preserve his eyes,
This earthly Star (long since the boast of Fame)
Is both become his envy and his shame.

And eclipsed though in his pride of noone.

She darkens those with beauties of her mind.

And in thy Sphere still safely move,
Descend, and summon strait
Apollo's Priests that wait
In the garden o'th Britanides.

That they with Hymns may celebrate
Her virtues ever blessed estate.

Because daily kindled by her fire,
Must needs be ravished with those lays,
Since as their own they love her praise.
The Song ended, the morning Star descends singing, and Aurora passes
through the Air: As he descended the Chorus of Arch-Flamines and Flamines of
the Britainides come forth, they were habited in rich habits ofseverall
colours, as they are described by the Ancients. Hesperus leads them down into
the room near to the State.


That ruled Mythology,
No vest for Truth afford,
But to each eye
Ordained her body naked still, to show
Some kind of truths men bashfully should know;
Thy praises being truths are silenced so.
Yet mighty spirits raise
Their actions up to Fame,
When lifted high with praise:
Then who will blame
Great virtue for ambition when it strives
To feed on praise (the food by which it thrives?)
Who earn'st, yet hat'st, himself of truth deprives.
We know it is more lawful far
Than possible to sing your praise,
Who shows how gentle, wise, and just you are,
Must trace wide measures, not in common ways.
As some in war near a defeat,
Confess betimes the are overcome,
To save their desperate honours byretreat;
so we retire, lest wonder strike us dumb.
After this song they return back in a measure, and mount the degrees, and
stand on each side of the Scene.

How dull and uneffectuall is that rage,
Which swells our Poets when their numbers flow?
Resembling sillily, in every ago,
Things excellent, to what they least do know.
How poorly have they done, when they compare
A beauty that can rule severest eyes,
Unto some pretty twinkling senseless Star?
Yet think they mend her by such similes.
If it be safe to gaze on beauty in extremes,
Look there, correct your judgements by your sight!
Those beauties near her, are made up of beams,
They gathered from her useless scattered light.
Now judge (if fairest Stars no more contain
Than what is certain to the Astrologer)
Whether compared to Stars she so much gain,
As Stars have gotten when compared to her?
Here the further part of the Garden opened, and the Masquers are seen, the
Queenes Majesty being seated high, and the Ladies somewhat lower on two
degrees, the figure of the seat was half an Oval, about which were Terms,
the upper parts like Cupids, and the under part enriched with leaves. At the two
ends of this seat were figures of women like Sirens converted into Foliage and
Scrolls, all which seemed to be enchased of Gold-smiths work; behind all was
a bright sky, and in the midst about the Queenes Majesties seat was a Glory
with Rays, expressing her to be the Queen of Brightness.

The habit of the Masquers was close bodies, open before the breasts, of Aurora
colour, richly embroidered with silver, about the waste ran a short Basis, cut
in starre-like beams of white, and under these were lower labels, large at the
bottom, and cut in a Trefoile, tacked together with small twists of gold, the
ornament at the shoulders coming down to the bowing of the arm, was of the
same colour and form as the Basis, their arming-sleeves and skirts of their
gowns as that of the bodies; they wore well-proportioned roughs, and on their
hair stood a small bend or diadem of jewels and startes between, which in the
hinder part had a scroll, large at the bottom and narrow toward the top, to
which their falls of white feathers were fastened.

The song being ended, the Masquers came down from their seat into the room
and made their entry, betwixt this and the second dance was this song.

Was there no other way
Our wonder to allay
But thus to falsify relief?
For seeing quickly tired,
What moving we admired,
You turn our wonder into grief.
Renew your measures now
Though but awhile, to show
This respite was not weariness;
But you by thee did please
To give our pleasures ease,
Which if continued, had grown less,
The Masquers dance their second dance, which ended, and her Majesty seated
under the state by the King, in the further part of the Scene appeared a heaven
full of Deities or second causes, with instruments and voices, which together
with the Muses of Great Britain and Chorus of Arch-Flamines and Flamines sing
this last song.

You that are chief in souls, as in your blood,
And nothing bettered by your high descent,
Even in your passions as in reason good,
To whom vast power can add no ornament.
Though Men the blessed estate of Angels praise,
Because not perplexed with what we sexes call;
Yet you by such a humane difference raise
Your virtue more, because 'tis conjugal.
Be long expected in your Thrones above!
And stay on earth until our judgements know
The noble use of that we so much love;
Thus heaven still lends what we would ever owe.
After this song, the upper part of the heaven opened, and a bright and
transparent cloud came forth far into the Scene, upon which were many Zephyri
and gentle breasts with rich, but light garments tucked about their wastes, and
falling down about their knees, and on their heads girlands of flowers: These
to the Violins began a sprightly dance, first with single passages, and then
joining hands in rounds several ways. Which Apparition for the newness of
the Invention, greatness of the Machine, and difficulty of Engining, was much
admired, being a thing not befo^ tempted in the Air.

The Masquers dance the Revels with the Lords*


