THey that fear the flinging of Wasps make fans of Peacokes tails, whose
spots are like eyes. And Lepidus, which could not sleep for the chattinge of
birds, set up a beast, whose head was like a Dragon: and we which stand in
awe of report, are compelled to set before our owl Pallas shield, thinking
by her virtue to cover the others deformity. It was a sign of famine to
Aegypte, when Nylus flowed less then twelve Cubittes, or more then eighteen,
and it may threaten despair unto us, if we be less curious then you look
for, or more cumbersome. But as Theseus being promised to be brought to an
Eagles nest, and travailing all the day, found but a wrenne in a hedge, yet
said, this is a bird: so we hope, if the shower of our swelling mountain seem
to bring forth some Eliphant, perform but a mouse, you will gently say, this
is a beast? Basil softly touched, yields a sweet sent, but chafed in the
hand, a rank savour. We fear even so that our labours slylye glanced on,
will breed some content, but examined to the proof, small commendation. The
haste in performing shall be our excuse, There went two nights to the
begetting of Hercules. Feathers appear not on the Phoenix under seven
months, and the Mulberry is twelve in buddinge, but our travails are like the
Hares, who at one time brings forth, nourishes, and engenders again, or
like the brood of Trasbylus, whose eggs in the same moment that they are
laid, become birds. But howsoever we finish our work, we crave pardon, if we
offend in matter, and patience if we transgress in manners. We have mixed
mirth with counsel, and discipline with delight, thinking it not amiss in the
same garden to sow pothearbes, that we set flowers. But we hope, as Harts
that cast their horns, Snakes their skins, Eagles their bills, become more
fresh for any other labour: so our charge being shaken off, we shall be fit for
greater matters. But least like the Mindyans, we make our gates greater then
our town, and that our play runs out at the preface, we here conclude:
wishing that although there be in your precise judgements an universal
mislike, yet we may enjoy by your wonted courtesies a general silence.


We are ashamed that our bird, which fluttered by twilight seeming a Swan,
should be proved a Bat set against the sun. But as Iupiter placed Silenus
Ass among the stars, and Alcebiades covered his pictures being Owls and
Apes, with a courtaine embroidered with Lyons and Eagles, so are we enforced
upon a rough discourse to draw on a smooth excuse, resbling Lapidaries, who
think to hide the crack in a stone by setting it deep in gold. The Gods
supped once with poor Baucis, the Persian kings sometimes shaved sticks, our
hope is your heighnesse will at this time lend an ear to ^n idle pastime.
Appion raising Homere from hell, demaded only who was his father, and we
calling Alexander from his grave, seek only who was his love. Whatsoever we
present, we wish it may be thought the dancing of Agrippa his shadows, who in
the moment they were seen, were of any shape one would conceive: or Lynces,
who having a quick fight to discern, have a short memory to forget. With
us it is like to fare, as with these torches, which giving light to others,
consume themselves, and we showing delight to others, shame our selves.


PArmenio, I cannot tel whether I should more commend in Alexanders victories,
courage, or courtesy, in the one being a resolution without fear, in the other
a liberality above custoe: Thebes is raised, the people not racked, towers
thrown down, bodies not thrust aside, a conquest without conflict, and a cruel
war in a mild peace.


Clytus, it becomes the son of Phillip to be none other then Alexander is:
therefore seeing in the father a full perfection, who could have doubted in the
son an excellency. For as the moon can borrow nothing else of the sun but
light, so of a fire, in whom nothing but virtue was, what could the child
receive but singular? It is for Turks to stain each other, not for Dyamordes,
in the one to be made a difference in goodness, in the other no comparison.


You mistake me Parmenio, if whilst I commend Alexander, you imagine I call
Phillyp into question, unless happily you conjecture (which none of judgment
will conceive) that because I like the fruit, therefore I heave at the tree, or
coveting to kiss the child, I therefore go about to poison the teat.


I but Clytus I perceive you are borne in the East, and never laugh but at the
sun rising, which argues though a duty where you ought, yet no great
devotion where you might.


We will make no controversy of that which there ought to be no question, only
this shall be the opinion of us both, that none was worthy to be the father of
Alexander but Phillip, nor any meet to be the son of Phillip but Alexander.


Soft Clytus, behold the spoils prisoners, a pleasant sight to us, because
profit is joined with honour, not much paineful to them, because their
captivity is eased by mercy.


Fortune, thou did never yet deceive virtue, because virtue never yet did
trust fortune. Sword and fire will never get spoil, where wisdom and
fortitude bears sway. O Thebes, thy walls were raised by the sweetness of
the harp, but rased by the shrillness of the trumpet. Alexander had never come
so near the walls, had Epaminondas walked about the walls, and yet might the
Thebanes have been merry in their streets, if he had been to watch their
towers. But destiny is seldom foreseen, never prevented. We are here now
captives, whose necks are yoked by force, but whose hearts can not yield by
death. Come Campaspe and the rest, let us not be ashamed to cast our eyes on
him, on whom we feared not to cast our darts.


Madame, you need not doubt, it is Alexander, that is, the conqueror.


Alexander hath overcome, not conquered.


To bring al under his subjection is to coquer.


He cannot subdue that which is divine.


Thebes was not.


Virtue is.


Alexander as he tendreth virtue, so he will you, he drinks not blood, but
thirsts after honour, he is greedy of victory, but never satisfied with
mercy. In fight terrible, as beecommeth a captain, in conquest mild, as
beseems a king. In al things then which nothing can be greater he is
Alexander.


Then if it be such a thing to be Alexander, I hope it shall be no miserable
thing to be a virgin. For if he save our honours, it is more the; to restore our
goods. And rather do I wish he preserve our fame then our lives, which if
he do, we will confess there can be no greater thing then to be Alexander.


Clytus, are these prisoners? of whence these spoils?


Like your majesty they are prisoners, of Thebes.


Of what calling or reputation?


I know not, but they seem to be Ladies of honour.


I will know: Madam, of whence you are I know, but who, I cannot tell.


Alexander, I am the sister of Theagines, who fought a battle with thy father,
before the City of Chyeronie, where he died, I say which none cagainsay,
valialy.


Lady, there seem in your words sparks of your brothers deeds, but woorser
fortune in your life then his death: but fear not, for you shall live without
violence, enemies, or necessity: but what are you fair Lady, an other sister
to Theagines?


No sister to Theagines, but an humble handmaid to Alexander, borne of a mean
parentage, but to extreme fortune.


Well Ladies, for so your virtues show you, whatsoever your births be, you
shall be honourably entreated. Athens shall be your Thebes, you shall not be as
abiectes of war, but as subjects to Alexander* Parmenio, conduct these
honourable Ladies into the City, charge the soldiers not so much as in words
to offer them any offence, and let all wants be supplied so far forth as
shall be necessary for such persons and my prisoners.

Hephestion, it rests now that we have as great care to govern in peace, as
conquer in war: that whilst arms cease, Arts may flourish, and joining
letters with lances we endeavour to be as good Philosophers as soldiers, knowing
it no less praise to be wise, the commendable to be valiant*


Your Majesty therein shows that you have as great desire to rule as to
subdue: needs must that common wealth be fortunate, whose Captain is a
Philosopher, and whose Philosopher is a Captain.


I serve in steed of a master, a mouse, whose house is a tub, whose dinner is
a crust, and whose board is a bed.


Then art thou in a state of life, which Philosophers commend. A crumb for thy
supper, an hand for thy cup, and thy clothes for thy sheets. For Natura
paucis contenta.


Manes, it is pity so proper a man should be cast away upon a Philosopher:
but that Diogines that dog should have Manes that dogbolte, it grieves
nature and spiteth art: the one having found the so dissolute, absolute I
would say, in body, the other so single singular in mind.


Are you merry, it is a sign by the trip of your tongue, and the toys of your
head, that you have done that to day, which I have not done these three days.


Whats that?


Dined.


I think Diogines keeps but cold cheer.


I would it were so, but he keeps neither hot nor cold.


What then, luke warm? That made Manes run from his master last day.


Manes had reason: for his name foretold as much.


My name? how so sir boy?


You know that it is called Mons, a mouendo, because it stands still.


Good.


And thou art named Manes, a manendo, because thou runst away.


Passing reasons, I did not run away, but retire.


To a prison, because thou would have leisure to contemplate.


I will prove that my body was immortal: because it was in prison.


As how?


Did your masters never teach you that the soul is immortal?


Yes.


And the body is the prison of the soul.


True.


Why then, thus to make my body immortal, I put it to prison.


Oh bad.


Excellent ill.


You may see how dull a fasting wit is: therefore Psyllus let us go to supper
with Granichus: Plato is the best fellow of al Philosophers. Give me him that
reads in the morning in the school, and at noone in the kitchen.


And me.


Ah firs, my master is a king in his parlour for the body, a God in his study
for the soul. Among all his men he commends one that is an excellent
Musician, then stand I by and clap another on the shoulder and say, this is a
passing good Cooke.


It is well done Granichus, for give me pleasure that goes in at the mouth,
not the ear, I had rather fill my guts, then my brains.


I serve Apelles, who feeds me, as Diogenes doth Manes, for at dinner the
one preaches abstinence, the other commends counterfeiting: when I would eat
meat, he paints a spit, when I thirst, O faith he, is not this a fair pot,
and points to a table, which conteines the banquet of the Gods, where are
many dishes to feed the eye, but not to fill the gut.


What dost thou then?


This doth he then bring in many examples that some have lived by favours,
proves that much easier it is to fat by colours, and tells of birds that
have been fatted by painted grapes in winter: howe many have so fed their eyes
with their mistress picture, that they never desired to take food, being
glutted with the delight in their favours. Then doth he show me couterfeites,
such as have furfeited with their filthy loathsome vomits, and with the riotous
Bacchanalles of the God Bacchus, and his disorderly crew, which are painted al
to the life in his shop. To conclude, I fare hardly, though I go richly, which
makes me when I should begin to shadow a Ladies face, to draw a Lambs head,
and sometime to set to the body of a maid a shoulder of mutton: for semper
animus meus est in patinis.


Thou art a God to me: for could I see but a Cooks shop painted, I would make
mine eyes fat as butter. For I have nought but sentences to fill my maw, as,
plures occidit crapula quam gladius: musateiunantibus amica: repletion kills
delicately: an old saw of abstinence, Socrates: The belly is the heads grave.
Thus with sayings not with meat he makes a gallymafrey.


But how doest thou then live?


With fine jests, sweet air, the dogs alms.


Well, for this time I will stanch thy gut, and among pots and platters thou
shalt see what it is to serve Plato.


For joy of Granichus lets sing.


My voice is as clear in the evening as in the morning.


An other commodity of emptines.


I had never such ado to warn schollers to come before a king: First, I came
to Crisippus a tall lean old mad man, willing him presently to appear before
Alexander, he stood staring on my face, neither moving his eyes nor his body,
I urging him to give some answer, he took up a book, sate down and said
nothing: Melissa his maid told me it was his manner, and that oftetimes she was
fain to thrust meat in to his mouth: for that he wold rather starve the cease
study. Well thought I, seeing bookish men are so blockish, so great clerks
such simple courtiers, I will neither be partaker of their commons nor their
commedations. Fro thence I came to Plato and to Aristotle, and to diverse other
none refusing to come, saving an old obscure fellow, who sitting in a tub
turned towards the son, read Greek to a young boy, him when I willed to
appear before Alexander, he answered, if Alexander would fain see me, let him
come to me, if learn of me, let him come to me, whatsoever it be, let him
come to me: why, said I, he is a king, he answered, why I am a Philosopher,
why, but he is Alexander, I but I am Diogenes. I was half angry to see one so
crooked in his shape, to be so crabbed in his sayings. So going my way, I said
thou shalt repent it, if thou come not to Alexander: nay, smiling answered
he, Alexander may repent it, if he come not to Diogenes: virtue must be
sought, not offered: and so turning himself to his cell, he grunted I know not
what, like a pig under a tub. But I must be gone, the Philosophers are coming.


It is a difficult controversy, Aristotle, and rather to be wondered at, then
believed, how natural causes should work supernal effects.


I do not so much stand upon the apparition is seen in the Moon, neither the
Demonium of Socrates, as that I cannot by natural reason give any reason of
the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, which makes me in the depth of my studies
to cry out, O ^ns entium miserere mei.


Cleanthes, and you attribute so much to nature by searching for things which
are not to be found, that whilst you study a cause of your own, you omit
the occasion it self. There is no man so savage in whom rests not this
divine particle, that there is an omnipotent, eternal and divine mover, which
may be called God.


I am of this mind, that that first moouer, which you term God, is the
instrument of all the mouinges, which we attribute to nature. The earth which
is mass, swims on the sea, seasons divided in themselves, fruits growing
in themselves, the majesty of the sky, the whole firmament of the world, and
whatsoever else appears miraculous, what man almost of mean capacity but
can prove it natural.


These causes shall be debated at our Philosophers feast, in which controversy I
will take part with Aristotle, that there is Naturanaturans, and yet not God.


And I with Plato, that there is Deus optimus maximus, and not nature.


Here comes Alexander.


I see Hephestion, that these Philosophers are here attending for us.


They were not Philosophers, if they knew not their duties.


But I much marvel Diogenes should be so dogged.


I do not think but his excuse will be better then Melippus message.


I will go see him Hephestion, because I long to see him that would command
Alexander to come, to whom all the world is like to come. Aristotle the rest
sithence my coming from Thebes to Athens, from a place of conquest to a
palace of quiet, I have resolved with my self in my court to have as many
Philosophers as I had in my camp soldiers. My court shall be a school, wherein I
will have used as great doctrine in peace, as I did in war discipline.


We are al here ready to be commanded, glad we are that we are commanded, for
that nothing better becomes kings then literature, which makes them come as
near to the Gods in wisdom, as they do in dignity.


It is so Aristotle, but yet there is among you, yea of your bringing up, that
sought to destroy Alexander, Calistenes, Aristotle, whose treasons against his
prince shall not be borne out with the reasons of his Philosophy.


If ever mischief entered into the heart of Calistenes, let Calistenes suffer
for it, but that Aristotle ever imagined any such thing of Calistenes,
Aristotle doth deny.


Well Aristotle, kindred may blind thee, and affection me, but in kings
causes I will not stand to schollers arguments. This meeting shall be for a
commandment, that you all frequent my court, instruct the young with rules,
confirm the old with reasons: let your lives be answerable to your
learnings, least my proceedings be contrary to my promises.


You said you would ask every one of them a question, which yester night
none of us could answer.


I will. Plato, of all beasts, which is the subtlest?


That which man hitherto never knew.


Aristotle, how should a man be thought a God?


In doing a thing unpossible for a man.


Crisyppus, which was first, the day or the night?


The day by a day.


In deed strange questions must have strange answers, Cleanthes, what say
you, is life or death the stronger?


Life, that suffers so many troubles.


Crates, how long should a man live?


Till he think it better to die then live.


Anaxarchus, whether doth the sea or the earth bring forth most creatures?


The earth, for the sea is but a part of the earth.


Hephestion, me thinks they have answered all well, and in such questions I
mean often to try them.


It is better to have in your court a wise manne, then in your ground a golden
mine. Therefore would I lean war, to study wisdom, were I Alexander.


So would I, were I Hephestion. But come let us go and give release, as I
promised to our Theba^ thralls.


Thou art fortunate Aristotle, that Alexander is thy scholar.


And all you happy that he is your sovereign.


I could like the man well, if he could be contented to be but a man.


He seeks to draw near to the Gods in knowledge, not to be a God.


Let us question a little with Diogines, why he went not with us to Alexander,
Diogenes, thou did forget thy duty, that thou went not with us to the
king.


And you your profession, that you went to the king.


Thou take as great pride to be peevish, as others do glory to be virtuous.


And thou as great honour being a Philosopher to be thought courtlike, as others
shame that be courtiers, to be accounted Philosophers.


These austere manners set aside, it is well known that thou did counterfeit
money.


And thou thy manners, in that thou did not counterfeit money.


Thou hast reason to contemn the court, being both in body and mind too
crooked for a courtier.


As good be crooked, and endeavour to make my self straight from the court, as
to be straight, and learn to be crooked at the court.


Thou think it a grace to be opposite against Alexander.


And thou to be jump with Alexander.


Let us go: for in cotemning him, we shall better please him, then in wondering
at him.


Plato, what doest thou think of Diogenes?


To be Socrates furious, let us go.


Behold Manes where thy master is, seeking either for bones for his dinner, or
pins for his sleeves. I will go salute him.


Do so, butmum not a word that you saw Manes.


Then staye thou behind, and I will go with Psyllus.


All hayle Diogenes to your proper person.


All hate to thy peevish conditions.


O Dog.


What dost thou seek for here?


For a man and a beast.


That is easy without thy light to be found, be not all these men?


Called men.


What beast is it thou look for?


The beast my man Manes.


He is a beast in deed that will serve thee.


So is he that begat thee.


What would thou do, if thou should find Manes?


Give him leave to do as he hath done before.


Whats that?


To run away.


Why, hast thou no need of Manes?


It were a shame for Diogenes to have need of Manes, and for Manes to have no
need of Diogenes.


But put the case he were gone, would thou entertain any of us two?


Upon condition.


What?


That you should tell me wherefore any of you both were good.


Why, I am a scholar, and well seen in Philosophy.


And I a prentice, and well seen in painting.


Well then Granichus, be thou a painter to amend thine ill face, and thou
Psyllus a Philosopher to correct thine evil manners. But who is that Manes?


I care not who I were so I were not Manes.


You are taken tardy.


Let us slip aside Grauickiis, to see the salutation between Manes and his
master.


Manes, thou know the last day I threw away my dish to drink in my hand,
because it was superfluous, now I am determined to put away my man, and serve
my self: Quia non egeo ^ui velte.


Master, you know a while ago I ran away, so do I mean to do again,
quia'scio ^ibi esse argentum.


I know I have no money, neither will I have ever a man: for I was resolved
long sithece to put away both my slaves, money and Maues.


So was I determined to shake off both my dogs, hunger and Diogenes.


O sweet concent between a crowd and a Iewes harp.


Come, let us reconcile them


It shall not need: for this is their use, now do they dine one upon another.


How now Manes, art thou gone from thy master.


No, I did but now bind my self to him.


Why, you were at mortalliars.


In faith no, we brake a bitter jest one upon another.


Why, thou art as dogged as he.


My father knew them both little whelps.


Well, I will hie me after my master.


Why, is it supper time with Diogenes?


I, with him at al times when he hath meat.


Why then every man to his home, and let us steal out again anon.


Where shall we meet.


Why, at Ala vendibili suspensa badera non est epus.


O Psyllus habeo te leco parentis, thou blessestme.


Stand aside sir boy, till you be called. Hephestion, how do ye like the
sweet face of Campaspe?


I cannot but commend the stout courage of Timeclea.


Without doubt Campaspe had some great man to her father.


You know Timoclea had Theagines to her brother.


Timoclea still in thy mouth, art thou not in love?


Not I.


Not with Timoclea you mean, wherein you resemble the Lapwing, who cries most
where her nest is not. And so you lead me from espying your love with
Campaspe, you cry Timoclea.


Could I as well subdue kingdoms, as I can my thoughts, or were I as far
from ambition, as I am from love, all the world would account me as valiant in
arms as I know my self moderate in affection.


Is love a vice?


It is no virtue.


Well, now shalt thou see what small difference I make between Alexander and
Hephestion. And since thou hast been always partaker of my triumphs, thou
shalt be partaker of my torments. I love Hephestion, I love I love Campaspe, a
thing far unfit for a Macedonian, for a king, for Alexander. Why hangest
thou down thy head Hephestion? blushing to hear that which I am not ashamed to
tell.


Might my words crave pardon and my counsel credit, I would both discharge
the duty of a subject, for so I am, and the office of a friend, for so I will.


Speak Hephestion, for whatsoever is spoken, Hephestion speaks to Alexander.


I cannot tell Alexander, whether the report be more shameful to be heard, or
the cause sorrowful to be believed? What, is the son of Phillip, king of
Macedon become the subject of Campaspe, the captive of Thebes? Is that mind,
whose greatness the world could not contain, drawn within the compass of an
idle alluring eye? Will you handle the spindle with Hercules, when you should
shake the spear with Achilles? Is the warlike sound of drum and trump
turned to the soft noise of lire and lute, the neighing of barbed steeds,
whose loudnes filled the air with terror, and whose breathes dimmed the sun
with smoke, converted to delicate tunes and amorous glances? O Alexander,
that soft and yielding mind should not be in him, whose hard and unconquered
heart hath made so many yield. But you love, ah grief, but whom? Campaspe, ah
shame, a maid forsooth unknown, unnoble; and who can tell whether immodest?
whose eyes are framed by art to inamour, and whose heart was made by nature to
enchant. I, but she is bewtiful, yea, but not therefore chaste: I, but she is
comely in al parts of the body: yea, but she may be crooked in some part of
the mind; I, but she is wise, yea, but she is a woman: Beauty is like the
blackberry, which seems red, when it is not ripe resembling precious stones
that are polished with honney, which the smother they look, the sooner they
break. It is thought wonderful among the sea men that Mugil of all fishes the
swifteste is found in the belly of the Bret of all the slowest; And shall it not
seem monstrous to wise men, that the heart of the greatest conqueror of the
world, should be found in the hands of the weakest creature of nature? of a
woman? of a captive? Hermyns have fair skins, but foul livers; Sepulcher's
fresh colours but rotten bones, women fair faces, but false hearts. Remember
Alexander thou haste a camp to govern, not a chamber, fall not from the
armour of Mars to the arms of Venus, fro the fiery assaults of war, to the
maidenly skirmishes of love from displaying the Eagle in thine ensign, to
set down the sparrow. I sigh Alexander that where fortune could not
counquer, folly should overcome. But behold al the perfection that may be in
Campaspe, a hair curling by nature, not art: sweet alluring eyes, a fair
face made in despite of Venus; and a stately port in disdain of ia^, a wit
apt to conceive, and quick to answer a skin as soft as silk, and as smooth
as jet, a long white hand, a fine little foot, to conclude, all parts
answerable to the best part, what of this? Though she have heavenly gifts,
virtue and beauty, is she not of earthly mettle flesh and blood? You Alexander
that would be a God, show your self in this worse then a man, so soon to be
both overseen and overtaken in a woman, whose false tears know their true
times, whose smooth words wound deeper then sharpeswordes. There is no
surfeit so dangerous, as that of honeye, nor any poison so deadly, as that of
love, in the one physic cannot preuaile, nor in the other counsel.


My case were light Hephestion, and notworthy to be called love, if reason were
a remedy, or senteses could salve, that sense cannot conceive, Little do you
know, and therefore slightly do you regard the dead embers in a private
person, or live coals in a great prince, whose passions and thoughts do as far
exceed others in extremity, as their callinges do in Majesty. An Eclipse in
the Sun is more then the falling of a star, none can conceive the
torments of a king, unless he be a king; whose desires are not inferior to
their dignities. And then judge Hephestion if the agonies of love be dangerous
in a subject, whether they be not more then deadly unto Alexander, whose deep
and not to be conceived sighs, cleave the heart in shivers, whose wounded
thoughts can neither be expressed nor endured. Cease then Hephestion with
arguments to seek to refel that, which with their deity the Gods cannot
resist, and let this suffice to answer thee, that it is a king that loves
and Alexander, whose affections are not to be measured by reason, being
immortal, nor I fear me to be borne being intolerable.


I must needs yield, when neither reason nor counsel can be heard.


Yield Hephestion, for Alexander doth love, therefore must obtain.


Suppose she loves not you, affection comes not by appointmente or birth, and
then as good hated as enforced.


I am a king, and will command.


You may, to yield to lust by force, but to consent to love by fear you
cannot.


Why, what is that, which Alexander may not conquer as he list?


Why, that which you say the Gods cannot resist, Love.


I am a conqueror, she a captive, I as fortunate, as she fair: my greatness
may answer her wants, and the gifts of my mind, the modesty of hers: Is it
not likely then that she should love? Is it not reasonable?


You say that in love there is no reason, and therefore there can be no
likelihood.


No more Hephestion: in this case I will use mine own counsel, and in all
other thine advice, thou may be a good soldier, but never good lover. Call my
page. Sirha, go presently to Apelles, and will him to come to me without
either delay or excuse.


I go.


In the mean season to recreate my spirits, being so near, we will go see
Diogenes. And see where his tub is, Diogenes.


Who calls?


Alexander: how happened it that you would not come out of your tub to my
palace?


Because it was as far from my tub to your palace, as from your palace to my
tub.


Why then doest thou ow no reverence to kings?


No.


Why so?


Because they be no Gods.


They be Gods of the earth.


Yea, Gods of earth.


Plato is not of thy mind.


I am glad of it.


Why?


Because I would have none of Diogenes mind, but Diogenes


If Alexander have any thing that may pleasure Diogenes, let me know, and take
it.


Then take not from me, that you cannot give me, the light of the world.


What dost thou want?


Nothing that you have.


I have the world at command.


And I in contempt.


Thou shalt live no longer then I will.


But I shall die whether you will or no.


How should one learn to be content?


Vnlearne to covet.


Hephestion, were I not Alexander, I would wish to be Diogenes.


He is dogged, but discrete, I cannot tell how sharpe with a kind of
sweetness, full of wit, yet too to wayward.


Diogenes, when I come this way again, I will both see thee, and confer with
thee.


Do.


But here comes Apelles, how now Apelles, is Venus face yet finished?


Not yet: Beauty is not so soon shadowed, whose perfection comes not within
the compass either of cunning or of colour.


Well let it rest imperfect, come you with me, where I will show you that
finished by nature, that you have been trifling about by art.


Lady, I doubt whether there be any colour so fresh, that may shadow a
countenance so fair.


Sir, I had thought you had been commanded to paint with your hand, not to
gloss with your tongue, but as I have heard, it is the hardest thing in
painting to set down a hard favour, which makes you to despair of my face, and
then shall you have as great thanks to spare your labour, as to discredit your
art.


Mistress, you neither differ from your self nor your sex: for knowing your
own perfection, you seem to dispraise that which men most commend, drawing the
by that mean into an admiration, where feeding themselves they fall into an
ecstasy, your modesty being the cause of the one, and of the other, your
affections.


I am too young to understand your speech, though old enough to withstand your
devise: you have bin so long used to colours, you can do nothing but colour.


Indeed the colours I see, I fear, will altar the colour I have: but come
Madam, will you draw near: for Alexander will be here anon. Psyllus, stay you
here at the window, if any enquire for me, answer, Nonlubet esse domi.


It is always my masters fashion, when any fair gentlewoman is to be drawn
within, to make me to stay without. But if he should paint Iupiter like a Bull,
like a Swan like an Eagle, then must Psyllus with one hand grind colours,
and with the other hold the candle. But let him alone, the better he shadows
her face, the more will he burn his own heart. And now if a manne could mere
with Manes, who I dare say, looks as lean, as if Diogenes dropped out of his
nose.


And here comes Manes, who hath as much meat in his maw, as thou hast
honesty in thy head.


Then I hope thou art very hungry.


They that know thee, know that.


But doest thou not remember that we have certain liquor to confer withal.


I, but I have business, I must go cry a thing.


Why, what hast thou lost?


That which I never had, my dinner?


Foul lubber wilt thou cry for thy dinner?


I mean, I must cry, not as one wold say cry, but cry, that is, make a noise.


Why fool, that is all one, for if thou cry, thou must needs make a noise.


Boy, thou art deceived Cry hath diverse significations, and may be alluded to
many things, knave but one, and can be applied but to thee.


Profound Manes.


We Cynickes are mad fellows, didste thou not find I did quip thee?


No verily, why, whats a quip?


We great girders call it a short saying of a sharp wit, with a bitter sense
in a sweet word.


How can thou thus divine, divide, define, dispute, and all on the sudden?


Wit will have his swing, I am bewitched, inspirde, inflamed, infected.


Well, then will not I tempt thy gybing spirit.


Do not Psyllus, for thy dull head will be but a grindstone for my quick wit,
which if thou whet with ouertwhartes, peristi, actum est de te. I have drawn
blood at ones brains with a bitter bob.


Let me cross my self: for I die, if I cross thee.


Let me do my business, I my self am afraid, least my wit should wax warm, and
then must it needs consume some hard head with fine pretty jests. I am
sometimes in such a vain, that for want of some dull pate to work on, I begin
to gird my self.


The Gods shield me from such a fine fellow, whose words melt wits like wax.


Well then, let us to the matter. In faith my master means tomorow to fly.


It is a jest.


Is it a jest to fly? shouldest thou fly so soon, thou shouldest repent it
in earnest.


Well, I will be the crier.


O is, o is, o is, All manner of men, women, or children, that will come to
morrow into the market place, between the hours of nine and ten, shall see
Diogenes the Cynic fly.


I do not think he will fly.


Tush, say fly.


Fly.


Now let us go: for I will not see him again, till midnight, I have a back way
into his tub.


Which way call thou the backwaye, when every way is open.


I mean to come in at his back.


Well, let us go away, that we may return speedely.


I shall never draw your eyes well, because they blind mine.


Why the, paint me without eyes, for I am blind?


Were you ever shadowed before of any?


No. And would you could so now shadow me, that I might not be perceived of
any.


It were pity, but that so absolute a face should furnish Venus temple
amongst these pictures.


What are these pictures?


This is Laeda, whom Jove deceived in likeness of a swan.


A fair woman, but a foul deceit.


This is Alcmena, unto who Iupiter came in shape of Amphitrio her husband, and
begat Hercules.


A famous son, but an infamous fact.


He might do it, because he was a God.


Nay, therefore it was evil done, because he was a God.


This is Danae, into whose prison Iupiter drisled a golden shewre, and obtained
his desire.


What gold can make one yield to desire?


This is Europa, whom Iupiter ravished, this Antiopa.


Were al the Gods like this Iupiter?


There were many Gods in this like Iupiter.


I think in those days love was well ratified among men on earth, when lust
was so full autorised by the Gods in heaven.


Nay, you may imagine there were women passing amiable, whether were Gods
exceeding amorous.


Were women never so fair, men would be false.


Were women never so false, men wold be fond.


What counterfeit is this Apelles?


This is Venus, the Goddess of love.


What, be there also loving Goddesses?


This is she that hath power to command the very affections of the heart.


How is she hired, by prayer, by sacrifice, or bribs?


By prayer, sacrifice and bribes.


What prayer?


Vows irrevocable.


What sacrifice?


Hearts ever sighing, never dissembling.


What bribes?


Roses and kisses? but were you never in love?


No, nor love in me.


Then have you injuried many.


How so?


Because you have been loved of many.


Flattered perchance of some.


Is it not possible that a face so fair, and a wit so sharp, both without
comparison, shulde not be apt to love.


If you begin to tip your tong with cunning, I pray dip your pencil in
colours, and fall to that you must do, not that you would do.


Parmenio I cannot tell howe it comes to pass, that in Alexander now a days
there grows an vnpaciet kind of life, in the morning he is melacholye, at
noone solomne, at all times either more sower or severe, then he was
accustomed.


In kings causes I rather love to doubt then conjecture and think it better
to be ignorant then inquisitive: they have long ears and stretched arms, in
whose heads suspicion is a proof, and to be accused is to be condemned.


Yet between us there canne be no danger to find out the cause: for that
there is no malice to withstand it. It may be an unquenchable thirst of
conquering makes him unquiet: it is not unlikely his long ease hath altered his
humour: that he should be in love, it is not impossible.


In love Clytus, no, no, it is as far from his thought, as treason in ours:
he, whose ever waking eye, whose never tired heart, whose body patient of
labour, whose mind unsatiable of victory hath always bin noted, cannot so
soon be melted into the weak conceits of love: Aristotle told him there were
many worlds, and that he hath not conquered one that gapes for all, galls
Alexander. But here he comes.


Parmenio, and Clitus, I would have you both ready to go into Persia about an
embassage no less profitable to me, then to your selves honourable.


We are ready at all commands, wishing nothing else, but continually to be
commanded.


Well, then withdraw your selves, till I have further considered of this
matter.

Now we will see how Apelles goes forward: I doubt me that nature hath overcome
art, and her countenance his cunning.


You love, and therefore think any thing.


But not so far in love with Campaspe, as with B^cephalus, if occasion serve
either of conflict or of conquest.


Occasion cannot want, if will do not. Behold all Persia swelling in the pride
of their own power, the Scithians careless what courage or fortune canne do:
the Egyptians dreaming in the southsayinges of their Augures, and gaping over
the sinoak of their beasts intralles. All these Alexander are to be subdued,
if that world be not slipped out of your head, which you have sworn to conquer
with that hand.


I confess the labours fit for Alexander, and yet recreation necessary among
so many assaults, bloody wounds, intolerable troubles: give me leave a
little, if not to sit, yet to breath. And doubt not but Alexander can when he
will throw affections as far from him, as he can cowardice. But behold
Diogenes talking with one at his tub.


One penny Diogenes, I am a Cynic.


He made thee a beggar, that first gave thee any thing.


Why, if thou wilt give nothing, no body will give thee.


I want nothing, till the springs dry, the earth perish.


I gather for the Gods.


And I care not for those gods, which want money.


Thou art a right Cynic, that will give nothing.


Thou art not, that will beg anything.


Alexander, king Alexander, give a poor Cynic a groat.


It is not for a king to give a groat.


Then give me a talent.


It is not for a beggar to ask a talent. Away. Apelles?


Here.


Now Gentlewomanne, doth not your beauty put the painter to his trump?


Yes my lord, seeing so disordered a countenance, he fears he shall, shadow a
deformed counterfeit.


Would he could colour the life with the feature. And me thinks Apelles, were
you as cunning as report saith you are, you may paint flowers as well with
sweet sinels, as fresh colours, observing in your mixture such things as
should draw near to their savours.


Your majesty must know, it is no less harde to paint savours then virtues,
colours can neither speak nor think.


Where do you first begin, when you draw any picture?


The proportion of the face in just compass, as I can.


I would begin with the eye, as a light to all the rest.


If you will paint, as you are a king, your Majesty, may begin where you
please, but as you wold be a painter, you must begin with the face.


Aurelius would in one hour colour four faces.


I marvel in half an hour he did not four.


Why, is it so easy?


No, but he doth it so homely.


When will you finish Campaspe?


Never finish: for always in absolute beauty there is somewhat above art.


Why should not I by labour be as cunning as Apelles?


God shield you should have cause to be so cunning as Apelles.


Me thinks four colours are sufficient to shadow any countenance, so it was in
the time of Phy^ias.


Then had men fewer fancies, women not so many favours. For now, if the hair of
her eye brows be black, yet must the hear of her head be yellow: the attire
of her head must be different from the habit of her body, else would the
picture seem like the blazon of ancient Armoury, not like the sweet delight
of new found amiablenes. For as in garden knots diversity of odours make a
more sweet savour, or as in music diverse strings cause a more delicate
consent, so in painting, the more colours, the better counterfeit, observing
black for a ground, and the rest for grace.


Lend me thy pencil Apelles, I will paint, and thou shalt judge.


Here.


The coal breaks.


You lean too hard.


Now it blacks not.


You lean too soft.


This is awry.


Your eye goes not with your hand.


Now it is worse.


Your hand goes not with your mind.


Nay, if all be too hard or soft, so many rules and regards, that ones hand
ones eye, ones mind must all draw together, I had rather be setting of a
battle, then blotting of a board. But how have I done here?


Like a king.


I think so: but nothing more unlike a Painter. Well Apelles, Campaspe is
finished as I wish, dismiss her, bring presently her counterfeit after me.


I will.


Now Hephestion, doth not this matter cotton as I would, Campaspe looks
pleasantly, liberty will increase her beauty, and my love shall advance her
honour.


I will not contrary your majesty, for time must wear out that love hath
wrought, and reason wean what appetite nursed.


How stately she passes bye, yet howe soberlie, a sweet consent in her
countenance with a chaste disdain, desire mingled with coyness, and I cannot
tell howe to term it, a cursed yielding modesty.


Let her pass.


So she shall for the fairest on the earth.


I shall be hanged for tarrying so long.


I pray God my master be not flown before I come.


Away Manes, my master doth come.


Where have you bin all this while?


No where but here.


Who was here sithence my coming?


No body.


Ungracious wag, I perceive you have been a loitering, was Alexander no body?


He was a king, I meant no mean body.


I will cogell your body for it, and then will I say it was no body, because
it was no honest body. Away in.

Unfortunate Apelles, and therefore unfortunate, because Apelles. Haft thou by
drawing her beauty brought to pass, y^ thou can scarce draw thine own
breath? And by so much the more hast thou increased thy care, by how much the
more thou hast showed thy cunning: was it not sufficient to behold the fire, and
warm thee, but with Satyrus thou must kiss the fire and burn thee? O
Campaspe, Campaspe, art must yield to nature, reason to appetite, wisdom to
affection, Could Pigmalion entreat by prayer to have his Ivory turned into
flesh? and cannot Apelles obtain by plaints to have the picture of his love
changed to life? Is painting so far inferior to carving? or doest thou
Venus more delight to be hewed with Chizels, then shadowed with colours? what
Pigmadion, or what Pyrgoteles, or what Lysippus is he, that ever made thy face
so fair, or spread thy fame so far as I? unless Venus, in this thou enuiest
mine art, that in colouring my sweet Campaspe, I have left no place by
cunning to make thee so amiable. But alas, she is the paramour to a prince.
Alexander the Monarch of the ^arth hath both her body and affection. For what
is it that kings cannot obtain by prayers, threats and promises? Will not
she think it better to sit under a cloth of estate like a queen, the in a
poor shop like a huswife? and esteem it sweeter to be the concubine of the
Lord of the world, then spouse to a painter in Athens? Yes, yes Apelles, thou
may smimme against the stream with the Crab, and feed against the wind
with the dear, and peck against the steel with the Cockatrice: stars are
to be looked at, not reached at. Princes to be yielded unto, not contended with,
Campaspe to be honoured, not obtained, to be painted, not possessed of thee: O
fair face, O unhappy hand, why did thou draw it so fair a face? O beautiful
countenance, the express image of Venus, but sowhat fresher: the only pattern
of that eternity which Iupiter dreaming of asleep, could not conceive again
waking. Blush Venus, for I am ashamed to end thee. Now must I paint things
unpossible for mine art, but agreeable with my affections: deep and hollow
sighs, sad and melancholy thoughts, wounds and slaughters of conceits, a
life posting to death, a death galloping from life, a wavering constancy, an
unsettled resolution, and what not, Apelles? And what but Apelles? But as they
that are shaken with a fever are to be warmed with clothes, not groans, and
as he that melts in a consumptio is to be recured by Colices, not conceits:
so the feeding canker of my care, the never dying worm of my heart, is to be
killed by counsel, not cries, by applying of remedies, not by replying of
reasons. And since in cases desperate there must be used medicines yt are
extreme, I will hazard that little life that is left, to restore the greater
part that is lost, and this shall be my first practise: for wit must work, where
authority is not. As soon as Alexander hath viewed this portraiture, I will by
devise give it a blemish, that by that means she may come again to my
shop, and then as good it were to utter my love, and die with denial, as
conceal it and live in despair.


This is the place, the day, the time, that Diogenes hath appointed to fly.


I will not loose the flight of so fair a foul as Diogenes is, though my
master cogel my no body, as he threatened.


What Psyllus, will the beast wag his wings to day?


We shall hear: for here comes Manes: Manes will it be?


Be, he were best be as cunning as a Be, 'or else shortly he will not be at
all.


How is he furnished to fly, hath he feathers?


Thou art an ass, Capons, Geese and Owls have feathers. He hath found Dedalus
old waxen wings, and hath been peecing them this month, he is so broad in the
shoulders. O you shall see him cut the air even like a Tortoys.


Methinks so wise a man should not be so mad, his body must needs be too
heavy.


Why, he hath eat nothing this seuennight but cork and feathers.


Tutch him Manes.


He is so light that he can scarce keep him from flying at midnight.


See they begin to flock, and behold my master bustels himself to fly.


Ye wicked and bewitched Athenians, whose bodies make the earth to groan, and
whose breathes infect the air with stench. Come ye to see Diogenes fly?
Diogenes comes to see you sink: ye call me dog, so I am, for I long to
gnaw the bones in your skins. Ye term mean hater of men: no, I am a
hater of your maers. Your lives dissolute, not fearing death, will prove your
deaths desperate, not hoping for life. What do you else in Athens but sleep in
the day, and surfeit in the night: back Gods in the morning with pride, in
the evening belly Gods with gluttony. You flatter kings, call them Gods, speak
truth of your selves, and confess you are devils. From the Be you have take
not the honey, but the wax to make your religion, framing it to the time, not
to the truth. Your filthy lust you colour under a courtly colour of love,
injuries abroad under the title of policies at home, secrete malice creeps
under the name of public justice. You have caused Alexander to dry up springs
and plant vines, to sow roket and weed endisse, to shear sheep, and shrine
foxes. All conscience is sealed at Athens. Swearing comes of a hot mettle:
lying of a quick wit: flattery of a flowing tong, indecent talk of a merry
disposition. Al things are lawful at Athes. Either you think there are no Gods,
or I must think ye are no men. You build as though you should live for ever,
and surfeit as though you should die tomorow. None teaches true Philosophy but
Aristotle, because he was the kings schoolmaster. O times, O men, O
corruption in manners. Remember that green grass must turn to dry hay. When
you sleep, you are not sure to wake, and when you rise not certain to lye
down. Look you never so hye, your heads must lye level with your feet. Thus
have I flown over your disordered lives, and if you will not amend your
manners, I will study to fly further from you, that I may be nearer to
honesty.


Thou rauest Diogenes, for thy life is different fro thy words. Did not, I
see thee come out of a brothel house? was it not a shame?


It was no shame to go out, but a shame to go in.


It were a good deed Manes, to beat thy master.


You were as good eat my master.


Hast thou made us all fools, and wile thou not fly?


I tell thee, unless thou be honest, I will fly.


Dog, dog, take a boane.


Thy father need fear no dogs, but dogs thy father.


We will tel Alexander, that thou reproouest him behind his back.


And I will tell him, that you flatter him before his face.


We will cause all the boys in the street to hiss at thee.


In deed I think the Athenians have their children ready for any vice, because
they be Athenias.


Why master, mean you not to fly?


No Manes, not without wings.


Every body will account you alyar.


No, I warrant you: for I will always say the Athenians are mischievous.


I care not, it was sportynogh for me to see these old huddles hit home.


Nor I.


Come, let us go, and hereafter when I mean to raise upon any body openly, it
shall be given out, I will fly.


Campaspe, it is hard to judge whether thy choice be more unwise, or thy
chance unfortunate. Doest thou prefer, but stay, utter not that in words,
which makes thine ears to glow with thoughts. Tus^ better thy tongue wag,
then thy heart break. Hath a painter crept further into thy mind then a
prince? Apelles then Alexander? Fond wench, the baseness of thy mind bewrays
the meanness of thy birth. But alas, affection is a fire, which kindles
as well in the bramble as in the oak, and catches hold where it first lights,
not where it may best burn, Larks that mount aloft in the air, build their
neastes below in the earth, and women that cast their eyes upon kings, may
place their hearts upon vassals. A needle will become thy fingers better then a
lute, and a distasfe is fitter for thy hand then a sceptre. Aunts live safely,
till they have gotten wings, and Juniper is not blown up, till it hath gotten
an high top. The mean estate is without care as long as it continues without
pride. But here comes Apelles, in whom I would there were the like affection.


Gentlewoman, the misfortune I had with your picture, will put you to some
pains, to sit again to be painted.


It is small pains for me to sit still, but infinite for you to draw still.


No Madame, to paint Venus was a pleasure, but to shadow the sweet face of
Campaspe it is a heaven.


If your tongue were made of the same flesh that your heart is, your words
would be as your thoughts are: but such a common thing it is amongst you to
commend, that oftentimes for fashion sake you call the beautiful, whom you know
black.


What might men do to be believed?


Whet their tongues on their hearts.


So they do, and speak as they think.


I would they did.


I would they did not.


Why, would you have them dissemble?


Not in love, but their love. But will you give me leave to ask you a question
without office?


So that you will answer me an other without excuse.


Whom do you love best in the world?


He that made me last in the world.


That was a God.


I had thought it had been a man: but whom do you honour most Apelles?


The thing that is likest you Campaspe.


My picture?


I dare not venture upon your person. But come, let us go in: for Alexander
will think it lunge till we return.


We hear nothing of our Embassage, a colour belike to blear our eyes, or
tickle our ears, or inflame our hearts. But what doth Alexander in the mean
season, but use sor Tantara, Sol. Fa. La. for his harde couch, down beds,
for his handful of water, his standing Cup of wine?


Clytus, I mislike this new delicacy and pleasing peace: for what else do we
see now then a kind of softness in every mans mind, Bees to make their hives in
soldiers helmets, our steeds furnished with foot clothes of gold, instead
of saddles of steel: More time to be required to scour the rust of our
weapons, the there was wont to be in subdewing the countries of our enemies.
Sithence Alexander fell from his harde armour to his soft robes, behold the
face of his court, youths that were wont to carry devises of victory in their
shields, engrave now posies of love in their rings: they that were accustomed
on trotting horses to ch^ge the enemy with a lance, now in easy coch^ ^de up
down to court Ladies: in steed of sword and target to hazard their lives,
use pen and paper to paint their loves. Yea, such a fear and faintness is
grown in court, that they wish rather to hear the blowing of a horne to
hunt, the the sound of a trumpet to fight? O Phillip, were thou alive to see
this alteration, thy men turned to women, thy soldiers to lovers, gloves worn
in velvet, caps in steed of plumes in graven helmets, thou would either dye
among them for sorrow, or confound them for anger.


Cease Permenio, least in speaking what becomes thee not, thou feel what
likes thee not: truth is never without a scratched face, whose tongue although
it cannot be cut out, yet must it be tied up.


It grieves me not a little for Hephestion, who thristeth for honour, not
ease, but such is his fortune nearness in friendship to Alexander, that he
must lay a pillow under his head, when he would put a targette in his hand.

But let us draw in, to see how well it beecomes them to tread the measures in
a dance, that were wont to set the order for a march.


I have now Campaspe almost made an end.


You told me Apelles, you would never end.


Never end my love: for it shall be eternal.


That is, neither to have beginning nor ending.


You are disposed to mistake, I hope you do not mistrust.


What will you say, if Alexander perceive your love?


I will say, it is no treason to love.


But how if he will not suffer thee to see my person?


Then will I case continually on thy picture.


That will not feed thy heart.


Yet shall it fill mine eye: besides the sweet thoughts, the sure hopes, thy
protested faith, will cause me to embrace thy shadow continually in mine
arms, of the which by strong imagination I will make a substance.


Well, I must be gon: but this assure your self, that I had rather be in thy
shop grinding colours, then in Alexanders court, following higher fortunes.

Foolish wench, what hast thou done? that alas which cannot be undone, and
therefore I fear me undone. But content is such a life, I care not for
abundance. O Apelles, thy love comes from the heart, but Alexanders from
the mouth. The love of Kings is like the blowing of winds, which whistle
sometimes gently among the leaves, and straight ways turn the trees up by
the roots, or fire which warms a far off, and burns near hand, or the
sea, which makes men hoise their sails in a flattering calm, and to cut
their mastes in a rough storm. They place affection by times, by policy, by
appointment, if they frown, who dares call them inconstant, if bewray
secretes, who will term them untrue, if fall to other loves, who trembles not,
if he call them unfaithful. In kings there can be no love, but to Queenes:
for as near must they meet in majesty, as they do in affection. It is
requisite to stand aloof from kings love, love, and lightening.


Now Apelles, gather thy wits together: Campaspe is no less wise then fair,
thy self must be no less cunning then faithful. It is no small matter to be
rival with Alexander.


Apelles, you must come away quickly with the picture, the king thinks that
now you have painted it, you play with it.


If I would play with pictures, I have enough at home.


None perhaps you like so well.


It may be I have painted none so well.


I have known many fairer faces.


And I many better boys.


I have brought my sons Diogenes, to be taught of thee.


What can thy sons do?


You shall see their qualities: Dance sirha.


How like you this? doth he well?

The better, the worser.


The music very good.


The Musicians very bad, who only study to have their strings in tune,
never framing their manners to order.


Now shall you see the other: tumble sirha.


How like you this? why do you laugh?

To see a wag, that was born to break his neck by destiny, to practise it by
art.


This dog will bite me, I will not be with him.


Fear not boy, dogs eat no thistles.


I marvel what dog thou art, if thou be a dog.


When I am hungry, a mastiff, and when my belly is full, a spaniel.


Doest thou believe that there are any gods, that thou art so dogged?


I must needs believe there are Gods: for I think thee an enemy to them.


Why so?


Because thou hast taught one of thy sons to rule his legs, and not to
follow learning, the other to bend his body every way, and his mind no way.


Thou doest nothing but snarle, and bark like a dog.


It is the next way to drive away a thief.


Now shall you hear the third, who signs like a Nightingale.


I care not: for I have heard a Nightingale sing her self.


Sing sirha.


Lo Diogenes, I am sure thou can not do so much.


But there is never a Thrush but can.


What hast thou taught Manes thy man?


To be as unlike as may be thy sons.


He hath taught me to fast, lye hard, and run away.


Howe says thou Perim, wilt thou be with him?


I, so he will teach me first to run away.


Thou need not be taught, thy legs are so nimble.


Howe say thou Milo wilt thou be with him*


Nay, hold your peace, he shall not.


Why?


There is not room enough for him and me both to tumble in one tub.


Well Diogenes, I perceive my sons brook not thy manners.


I thought no less, when they knew my virtues.


Farewell Diogenes, thou neededst not have scraped roots, if thou would have
followed Alexander.


Nor thou have followed Alexader, if thou had scraped roots.


I fear me Apelles, that thine eyes have blabbed that, which thy tongue dared
not. What little regard had thou, whilst Alexander viewed the counterfeit
of Campaspe, thou stoodest gazing on her countenance? If he espy or but
suspect, thou must needs twice perish with his hate, and thine own love. Thy
pale looks, when he blushed, thy sad countenance, when he smiled, thy
sighs, when he questioned, may breed in him a jealousy, perchance a frenzey.
O love, I never before knew what thou were, and now haste thou made me that
I know not what my self am? Only this I know, that I must endure intolerable
passions, for unknown pleasures. Dispute not the cause wretch, but yield to
it: for better it is to melt with desire, then wrestle with love. Cast thy
self on thy careful bed, be content to live unknown, and die vnfounde. O
Campaspe, I have painted thee in my heart, painted? nay, contrary to mine
art, imprinted, and that in such deep Characters, that nothing can race it
out, unless it rub thy heart out.


It shall go hard, but this peace shall bring us some pleasure.


Down with arms, and up with legs, this is a world for the nonce.


Sweet youths, if you knew what it were to save your sweet blood, you would
not so foolishly go about to spend it. What delight can there be in gasshinge,
to make foul scars in fair faces, crooked malmes in straight legs? as
though men being borne goodly by nature, would of purpose become deformed by
folly, and all forsooth for a new found term, called valiant, a word which
breeds more quarrels then the sense can commendation.


It is true Lays, a featherbed hath no fellow, good drink makes good blood,
and shall pelting words spill it?


I mean to enjoy the world, and to draw out my life at the wiredrawers, not to
curtal it off at the cuttelers.


You may talk of war, speak big, conquer worlds with great words: but
stay at home, where in steed of Alarms you shall have dances, for hot
battles with fierce men, gentle skirmishes with fair women. These pewter
coats canne never sit so well as satin dublets. Believe me, you cannot
conceive the pleasure of peace, unless you despise the rudeness of war.


It is so. But see Diogenes prying over his tubbe: Diogenes, what says thou
to such a morsel?


I say, I would spit it out of my mouth, because it should not poison my
stomach.


Thou speak as thou art, 'it is no meat for dogs.


I am a dog, and Philosophy rates me from carrion.


Uncivil wretch, whose manners are answerable to thy calling, the time was
thou would have had my company, had it not been, as thou said too
dear.


I remember there was a thing, that I repented me of, and now thou haste told
it, indeed it was too dear of nothing, and thou dear to no body.


Down villain, or I will have thy head broken?


Will you couch?


Avaunt cur: Come sweet Lays, let us go to some place, and possess peace.
But first let us sing, there is more pleasure in tuning of a voice, then in a
vollye of shot.


Now let us make haste, least Alexander find us here.


Me thinks Hephestion you are more melancholy then you were accustomed; but
I perceive it is all for Alexander. You can neither brooke this peace, nor my
pleasure, be of good cheer, though I wink, I sleep not.


Melancholy I am not, nor well content: for I know not how there is such a
rust crept into my bones with this long ease, that I fear I shall not scour
it out with infinite labours.


Yes, yes, if all the travails of conquering the world will set either thy
body or mine in tune, we will undertake them. But what think you of Apelles?
Did ye ever see any so perplexed? He neither answered directly to any
question, nor looked steadfastly upon any thing. I hold my life the painter is
in love.


It may be: for commonly we see it incident in artificers to be enamoured of
their own works, as Archidamus of his wooden douc, Pygmalion, of his ivory
Image, Arachue of his wodde swan, especially painters, who playing with their
own conceits, now coveting to draw a glancing eye, then a rolling, now a
winking; still mending it, never ending it, till they be caught with it, and
then poor souls they kiss the colours with their lips, with which before
they were loath to taint their fingers.


I will find it out. Page, go speedily for Apelles, will him to come hither,
and when you see us earnestly in talk, sadenly cry out, Apelles shop is on
fire.


It shall be done.


Forget not your lesson


I (...) what your device shall be.


The event shall prove.


I pity the poor painter, if he be in love.


Pity him not, I pray thee, that severe gravity set aside, what do you think
of love?


As the Macedonians do of their Herb Beet, which looking yellow in the
ground; and black in the hand, think it better seen then touched.


But what do you imagine it to be.


A word by superstition thought a God, by use turned to an humour, by self will
made a slattering madness.


You are too hard hearted to think so of love. Let us go to Diogenes. Diogenes,
thou may think it somewhat, that Alexander comes to thee again so soon


If you come to learn, you could not come soon enough, if to laugh, you be
come too soon.


It would better become thee to be more courteous, and frame thy self to please.


And you ^ loss, if you durst displease.


What dost thou think of the time we have here?


That we have lit be; and lose much.


If one be sick, what would thou have him do?


Be sure that he make not his Phisit^on his hi^e.


If thou might have thy will, how much ground would content thee?


As much as you in the end must be contented withal.


What, a world?


No, the length of my body.


Hephestion, shall I be a little pleasant with him?


You may: but he will be very perverse with you.


It skills not, I cannot be angry with him. Diogenes, I pray thee, what dost
thou think of love?


A little worser then I can of hate.


And why?


Because it is better to hate the things, which make to love, the to love the
things, which give occasion of hate.


Why, be not women the best creatures in the world?


Next men and Bees.


What dost thou dislike chiefly in a woman?


One thing.


What?


That she is a woman.


In mine opinion thou were never born of a woman, that thou think so hardly
of women. But not comes Apelles, who I am sure is as far from thy thoughts, as
thou art fro his cunning. Diogenes, I will have thy cabin removed nearer to my
court, because I will be a philosopher


And when you have done so, I pray you remove your court further from my
cabinne, because I will not be a courtier.


But here comes Apelles. Apelles, what piece of work have you now in hand?


None in hand, if it like your majesty: but I am devising a platform in my
head.


I think your hand put it in your head. Is it nothing about Venus?


No, but some thing about Venus.


Apelles, Apelles, look about you, your shope is on fire.


Ay me, if the picture of Campaspe be burnt, I am undone.


Stay Apelles, no haste, it is your hart is on fire, not your shop, if Camp.
hang there, I wold she were burnt. But have you the picture of Campaspe?
Beelike you love her well, that you care not though al be lost, so she be safe.


Not love her: but your Majesty knows that painters in their last works are
said to excel themselves, and in this I have so much pleased my self, that the
shadow as much delights me being an artificer, as the substance doth
others that are amorous.


You lay your colours grosely, though I could not paint in your shop, I ca spy
into your excuse. Be not ashamed Apelles, it is a Gentleman's sport to be in
love. Call hither Campaspe. Me thinks I might have bin made privy to your
affection, though my counsel had not been necessary, yet my countenance might
have bin thought requisite. But Apelles forsooth loves under hand, yea under
Alexanders nose, and, but I say no more.


Apelles loves not so: but he lives to do as Alexander will.


Compaspe, here is news, Apel. is in love with you.


It pleases your majesty to say so.


Hephestion, I will try her to. Campaspe, for the good qualities I know in
Apelles and the virtue I see in you, I am determined you shall enjoy one the
other. Howe say you Campaspe, would you say, I?


Your handmaid must obey, if you command.


Think you not Hephestion that she would fain be commanded?


I am no thought catcher, but I guess unhappily.


I will not enforce marriage, where I cannot copel love.


But your majesty may move a question, where you be willing to have a match.


` Hephestion, these parties are agreed, they would have me both priest and
witness. Apelles, take Campaspe, why move ye not? Campaspe, take Apelles, will
it not be? If you be ashamed one of the other, by my consent you shall never
come together. But dissemble not Campaspe, do you love Apelles?


Pardon my Lord, I love Apelles.


Apelles, it were a shame for you, being loved so openly of so fair a virgin,
to say the contrary. Do you love Campaspe?


Only Campaspe.


Two loving worms, Hephestion, I perceive Alexander cannot subdue the
affections of men, though he coquer their countries. Love falls like dew
as well upon the low grass, as upon the high Caedar. Sparks have their heate,
Antes their gall, Flies their spleen. Well, enjoy one an other, I give her thee
frackly Apelles. Thou shalt see that Alexander makes but a toy of love, and
leads affection in setters, using facie as a fool to make him sport, or as a
minstrel to make him merry. It is not the amorous glance of an eye can settle
an idle thought in the heart, no no, it is childrens game, a life for
seamesters and schollers, the one pricking in clouts have nothing else to
think on, the other picking fancies out of books, have little else to marvel
at. Go Apelles take with you your Campaspe, Alexander is cloied with looking on
that, which thou wondredst at.


Thanks to your majesty on bended knee; you have honoured Apelles.


Thanks with bowed heart* you have blessed Campaspe.


Page, go warn Clitus and Parmenio and the other Lords to be in a readiness,
let the trumpet sound, strike up the drum, and I will presently into Persia.
How now Hephestion, is Alexander able to resisle love as he lift?


The conquering of Thebes was not so honourable, as the subdueing of these
thoughts.


It were a shame Alexander should desire to command the world, if he could not
command himself. But come, let us go, I well try whether I can better bear
my hand with my heart, then I could with mine eye. And good Hephestion, when,
al the world is won, and every country is thine and mine, either find me out
an other to subdue, or of my word I will fall in love.


WHere the Rainbow touches the tree, no Caterpillars will hang on the
leaves* where the Gloworm creeps in the night, no Addar will go in the day. We
hope in the ears where our travails be lodged, no carping shall harbour in
those tongues. Our exercises must be as your judgment is, resembling water,
which is always of the same colour into what it runs. In the Troiane horse
lay couched soldiers with children, and in heaps of many words we seat,
diverse vnsitte, among some allowable. But as Demosthenes with often breathing
up the hill amended his stammering, so we hope with sundry labours against the
hair, to correct our studies. If the tree be blasted that blossoms, the
fault is in the wind, and not in the root, and if our pastimes be misliked,
that have bin allowed, you must impute it to the malice of others, and not our
endeavour. And so we rest in good case if you rest well content.

WE cannot tell whether we are fallen among Diomedes birds or his horses, the
one received some me with sweet notes, the other bit all men with sharp
teeth. But as Homer* Gods conveyed them into clouds, whom they would have kept
from curses, and as Venus, least Adonis should be pricked with the stings of
Adders, covered his face with the wings of Swans: so we hope being shielded
with your highness countenance, we shall, though hear the neighing, yet not
feel the kicking of those jade, and receive, though no praise (which we
cannot deserve) yet a pardon, which in all humility we desire As yet we
cannot tell what we should term our labours, iron or bullyon, only it
belongs to your majesty to make the fit either for the forg or the mint,
currant by the stamp, or counterfeit by the anuill. For as nothing is to be
called white, unless it had bin named white by the first creature, so can there
be nothing thought good in the opinion of others, unless it be christened good
by the judgment of yourself. For our selves again, we are like these torches
wax, of which being in your heighnesse hands, you may make Doves or Vultures,
Roses or Nettles, Lawril for a garland, or elder for a disgrace.


