MOst high and happy Princess, we must tell you a tale of the Man in the
Moon, which if it seem ridiculous for the method, or superfluous for the
matter, or for the means incredible, for three faults we can make but one
excuse. It is a tale of the Man in the Moon.

It was forbidden in old time to dispute of Chymera, because it was a fiction,
we hope in our times none will apply pastimes, because they are fancies; for
there lives none under the Sun, that knows what to make of the Man in the
Moonee. VVee present neither Comedy, nor Tragedy, nor story, nor any thing,
(...) whosoever hears may say this, Why here is a tale of the Man in the
Moon.


I Find Eumenides in all things both variety to content, satiety to glut,
saving only in my affections, which are so stayed, and withal so stately,
that I can neither satis-fie my hart with love, nor mine eyes with wonder. My
thoughts Eumenides are stitched to the stars, which being as high as I can
see; thou may imagine how much higher they are then I can reach.


If you be enamoured of any thing above the Moon, your thoughts are ridiculous,
for that things immortal are not subject to affections, if allured or
enchanted with these transitory things under the Moon, you show your self
senseless, to attribute such lofty tytles, to such love trifles.


My love is placed neither under the Moon nor above.


I hope you be not sotted upon the man in the Moon.


No but settled, either to die, or possess the Moon herself.


Is Endimion mad, or do I mistake? do you love the Moon Endimion?


Eumenides the Moon.


There was never any so peevish to imagine the Moon either capable of
affection, or shape of a Mistress: for as impossible it is to make love fit to
her humour which no man knows, as a coat to her form, which continues not
in one bigness whilst she is measuring. Cease of Endimion to feed so much
upon fancies. That melancholy blood must be purged, which draws you to a
dotage no less miserable then monstrous.


My thoughts have no veins, and yet unless they be let blood, I shall
perrish.


But they have vanities, which being reformed, you may be restored.


O fair Cynthia, why do others term thee inconstant, whom I have ever found
unmovable? Injurious time, corrupt manners, unkind men, who finding a
constancy not to be matched, in my sweet Mistress, have christened her with the
name of wavering, waxing, and waning. Is she inconstant that keeps a settled
course, which since her first creation alters not one minute in her moving?
There is nothing thought more admirable, or commendable in the sea, then the
ebbing and flowing, and shall the Moon, from whom the Sea takes this virtue,
be accounted fickle for increasing, decreasing? Flowers in their buds, are
nothing worth till they be blown, nor blossoms accounted till they be ripe
fruit, and shall we then say they be changeable, for that they grow from
seeds to leaves, from leaves to buds, from buds to their perfection? then, why
be not twigs that become trees, children that become men, and Mornings that
grow to Evenings, termed wavering, for that they continue not at one stay? I
but Cynthia, being in her fulness, decays, as not delighting in her greatest
beauty, or withering when she should be most honoured. When malice cannot
object any thing, folly will, making that a vice, which is the greatest virtue.
What thing (my Mistress excepted) being in the pride of her beauty, latter
minute of her age, that waxes young again? Tell me Eumenides, what is he
that having a Mistress of ripe years, infinite virtues, great honours, and
unspeakable beauty, but would wish that she might grow tender again?
getting youth by years, and never decaying beauty, by time, whose fair face,
neither the Summers blase can scorch, nor Winters blast chappe, nor the
numbering of years breed altering of colours. Such is my sweet Cynthia, whom
time cannot touch, because she is divine, nor will offend because she is
delicate. O Cynthia, if thou shouldest always continue at thy fulness, both
Gods and men would conspire to ravish thee. But thou to abate the pride of our
affections, dost detract from thy perfections, thinking it sufficient, if once
in a month we enjoy a glymse of thy majesty, and then, to increase our
griefs, thou dost decrease thy glemes, coming out of thy royal robes,
wherewith thou dazelist our eyes, down into thy swath clowtes, beguiling our
eyes. And then


Stay there Endimion, thou that committest Idolatry, wilt straight blaspheme,
if thou be suffered. Sleep would do thee more good then speech: the Moon
hears thee not, or if she do, regards thee not.


Vain Eumenides, whose thoughts never grow higher the the crown of thy head.
Why trouble thou me, having neither head to conceive the cause of my love,
or a hart to receive the impressions? follow thou thine own fortunes, which
creep on the earth, suffer me to fly to mine, whose fall though it be
desperate, yet shall it come by daring. Farewell


Without doubt Endimion is bewitched, otherwise in a man of such rare virtues,
there could not harbour a mind of such extreme madness. I will follow him, least
in this fancy of the Moon, he deprive himself of the sight of the Sun.


Treacherous and most periurde Endimion, is Cynthia the sweetness of thy life,
and the bitterness of my death? What revenge may be devised so full of shame, as
my thoughts are replenished with malice? Tell me Floscula if falsenes in love
can possibly be punished with extremity of hate. As long as sword, fire, or
poison may be hired, no traitor to my love shall live unrevenged. Were thy
oaths without number, thy kisses without measure, thy sighs without end,
forged to deceive a poor credulous virgin, whose simplicity had been worth
thy favour and better fortune? If the Gods sit unequal beholders of
injuries, or laughers at Lovers deceipts, then let mischief be as well
forgiven in women, as perjury winked at in men.


Madame, if you would compare the state of Cynthia with your own, and the
height of Endimion his thoughts, with the meandness of your fortune, you would
rather yield then contend, being between you and her no comparison, and
rather wonder then rage at the greatness of his mind, being affected with a
thing more then mortal.


No comparison Floscula? and why so? is not my beauty divine, whose body is
decked with fair flowers, and veins are Vines, yielding sweet liquor to the
dullest sprits, whose ears are Corn, to bring strength, and whose hears are
grass, to bring abundance? Doth not Frankincense, Mirth breath out of my
nostrils, and all the sacrifice of the Gods, breed in my bowels? Infinite are
my creatures, without which, neither thou nor Endimion, nor any could love, or
live.


But know you not fair Lady, that Cynthia governs all things? Your grapes
would be but dry husks, your Corn but chafe, and all your virtues vain,
were it not Cynthia that preserves the one in the bud, and nourishes the
other in the blade, and by her influence both comfort all things, and by her
authority commands all creatures; Suffer then Endimion to follow his
affections, though to obtain her be impossible, and let him flatter himself
in his own imaginations, because they are immortal.


Loath I am Endimion thou shouldest die, because I love thee well, and that thou
shouldest live it grieves me, because thou love Cynthia too well. In these
extremities what shall I do? Floscula no more words, I am resolved. He shall
neither live, nor die.


A strange practise, if it be possible.


Yes, I will entangle him in such a sweet net, that he shall neither find the
means to come out, nor desire it. All allurements of pleasure will I cast
before his eyes, insomuch that he shall slake that love which he now vows to
Cynthia, and burn in mine, of which he seems careless. In this languishing,
between my amorous devises, and his own loose desires, there shall such
dissolute thoughts take root in his head, and over his hart grow so thick a
skin, that neither hope of preferment, nor fear of punishment, nor counsel
of the wisest, nor company of the worthiest, shall alter his humour, nor make
him once to think of his honour.


A revenge incredible, and if it may be, unnatural.


He shall know the malice of a woman, to have neither mean, nor end, and
of a woman deluded in love, to have neither rule, nor reason. I can do it, I
must, I will. All his virtues will I shadow with vices, his person (ah sweet
person) shall he deck with such rich Robes, as he shall forget it is his own
person, his sharp wit (ah wit too sharpe, that hath cut off all my joys) shall
he use, inflattering of my face, and devising Sonnets in my favour. The prime
of his youth and pride of his time, shall be spent in melancholy passions,
careless behaviour, untamed thoughts, and unbridled affections.


When this is done what then, shall it continue till his death, or shall he
dote for ever in this delight?


Ah Floscula, thou rendest my hart in sunder, in putting me in remembrance of
the end.


Why if this be not the end, all the rest is to no end.


Yet suffer me to imitate Iuno, who would turn Iupiters lovers to beasts on
the earth, though she knew afterwards they should be stars in heaven.


Affection that is bred by enchantment, is like a flower that is wrought in
silk, in colour and form most like, but nothing at all in substance or
savour.


It shall suffice me if the world talk that I am favoured of Endimion.


Well, use your own will, but you shall find that love gotten with
witch-craft, is as unpleasant, as fish, taken with medicines unwholesome.


they that be so poor that they have neither net nor hooke, will rather
poison dow then pine with hunger: and she that is so oppressed with love, that
she is neither able with beauty, nor wit to obtain her friend, will rather
use unlawful means, then try untolerable pains. I will do it.


Then about it. Poor Endimion, what traps are laid for thee, because thou
honour one that all the world wonders at. And what plots are cast to make
thee unfortunate, that studiest of all men to be the faithfullest.


Now our Masters are in love up to the ears, what have we to do, but to be
in knavery, up to the crowns.


O that we had Sir Tophas that brave Squire, in the midst of our mirth, ecce
autem, vvyl you see the devil?


Epi.


Here sir.


I brooke not this idle humour of love, it tickles not my liver, from whence
the Loue-mongers in former age seemed to infer they should proceed.


Love sir may lye in your lunges, and I think it doth, and that is the cause
you blow, and are so pursy.


Tush boy, I think it but some devise of the Poet to get money.


A Poet? whats that?


Dost thou not know what a Poet is?


No.


Why fool, a Poet is as much as one should say, a Poet. But soft, yonder be
two Wrennes, shall I shoot at them?


They are two lads.


Larks or wrennes, I will kill them.


Larks? are you blind? they are two little Boys.


Birds, or boys, they are both but a pittance for my breakfast, therefore
have at them, for their brains must as it were imbroder my bolts.


Stay your courage valiant Knight, for your wisdom is so weary that it
stays it self.


Why Sir Tophas have you forgotten your old friends?


Friends? Nego argumentum.


And why not friends?


Because Amicitia (as in old Annuals we find) is inter pares, now my pretty
companions, you shall see how unequal you be to me, but I will not cut you
quite off, you shall be my half friends, for reaching to my middle, so far
as from the ground to the wast I will be your friend.


Learnedly. But what shall become of the rest of your body, from the wast to
the crown?


My children quod supra vos nihil ad vos, you must think the rest immortal,
because you cannot reach it.


Nay I tell ye my Master is more then a man.


And thou less then a mouse.


But what be you two?


I am Samias, page to Endimion.


And I Dares, page to Eumenides.


Of what occupation are your Masters.


Occupation, you clown, why they are honourable, and warriors.


Then are they my prentices.


Thine, and why so?


I was the first that ever devised war, and therefore by Mars himself given
me for my Arms a whole Armoury, and thus I go as you see, clothed with
Artillary, it is not Silks (milksops) nor Tyssues, nor the fine wool of
Cares, but iron, steel, swords, flame, shot, terror, clamour, blood, and ruin,
that rocks a sleep my thoughts, which never had any other cradle, but
cruelty. Let me see, do you not bleed?


Why so?


Commonly my words wound.


What then do your blows?


Not only confound, but also confound.


Howe dare thou come so near thy Master Epi? Sir Tophas spare us.


You shall live. You Samias because you are little. You Dares, because you are
no bigger, and both of you, because you are but two; for commonly I kill by the
dozen, and have for every particular adversary, a peculiar weapon.


May we know the use for our better skill in war?


You shall. Here is a burbolt for the ugly beast the Black-bird.


A cruel sight.


Here is the Muskit, for the untamed, (or as the vulgar sort term it) the
wild Mallard.


O desperate attempt.


Nay my Master will match them.


I if he catch them.


Here is a spear and shield, and both necessary, the one to conquer, the
other to subdue, or overcome the terrible Trowte, which although he be under
the water, yet tying a string to the top of my spear, and an engine of iron to
the end of my lyne, I overthrow him, and then herein I put him.


O wonderful war. Dares, did thou ever hear such a dolt?


All the better, we shall have good sport hereafter, if we can get leisure.


Leisure, I will rather loose my Masters service then his company, look howe
he stroutes; But what is this, call you it your sword?


No, it is my Simiter, which I by construction often studying to be
compendious, call my Smyter.


What, are you also learned sir?


Learned? I am all Mars and Ars.


Nay you are all Mass and Ass.


Mock you me? You shall both suffer, yet with such weapons, as you shall make
choice of the weapon wherewith you shall perrish. Am I all a mass or lump, is
there no proportion in me? Am I all Ass? is there no wit in me. Epi, prepare
the to the slaughter.


I pray sir hear us speak, we call you Mass, which your learning doth well
understand, is all Man, for Mas maris is a man. Then As (as you know) is a
weight, and we for your virtues account you a weight.


The Latin hath saved your lives, the which a world of silver could not have
ransomde. I understand you, and pardon you.


Well Sir Tophas we bid you farewell, at our next meeting, we will be ready to
do you service.


I thank you. Dares I thank you, but especially I thank you both.


Wisely. Come, next time we'll have some pretty Gentle-women with us to
walk, for without doubt with them he will be very dainty.


Come let us see what our Masters do, it is high time.


Now will I march into the field, where if I cannot encounter with my foul
enemies, I will withdraw my self to the River, there fortify for fish: for
there rests no minute free from fight.


Behold Floscula, we have met with the Woman by chance that we sought for by
travel; I will break my mind to her without ceremony or circumstance, least
we loose that time in advise, that should be spent in execution.


Use your discretion, I will in this case, neither give counsel nor consent,
for there cannot be a thing more monstrous, then to force affection by
sorcery, neither do I imagine any thing more impossible.


Tush Floscula, in obtaining of love, what impossibilities will I not try? and
for the winning of Endimion, what impieties will I not practise? Dipsas, whom
as many honour for age, as wonder at for cunning, listen in few words to my
tale, answer in one word to the purpose, for that neither my burning desire
can afford long speech, nor the short time I have to stay many delays. Is it
possible by herbs, stones, spells, incantantation, enchantment, exorcisms,
fire, metals, planets, or any practise to plant affection where it is not,
and to supplant it where it is?


Fair Lady, you may imagine that these horie hears are not void of
experience, nor the great name that goes of my c^nning to be without cause. I
can darken the Sun by my skill, and remove the Moon out of her course; I can
restore youth to the aged, and make hills without bottoms; there is nothing that
I can not do, but that only which you would have me do, and therein I differ
from the Gods, that I am not able to rule harts, for were it in my power to
place affection by appointment, I would make such evil appetites, such
inordinate lusts, such cursed desires, as all the world should be filled both
with superstitious heates, and extreme love.


Unhappy Tellus, whose desires are so desperate, that they are neither to be
conceived of any creature, nor to be cured by any art.


This I can, breed slackness in love, though never root it out. What is he
whom you love, what she that he honours?


Endimion, sweet Endimion is he that hath my hart, and Cynthia, too too fair
Cynthia, the miracle of Nature, of time, of Fortune, is the Lady that he
delights in, and dotes on every day, and dies for ten thousand times a day.


Would you have his love, either by absence of sickness aslaked. Would you that
Cynthia should mistrust him, or be jealous of him without colour?


It is the only thing I crave, that seeing my love to Endimion unspotted,
cannot be accepted, his truth to Cynthia (though it be unspeakable) may be
suspected.


I will undertake it, and overtake him, that all his love shall be doubted of,
and therefore become desperate: but this will wear out with time, that
treads all things down but truth.


Let us go.


I follow.


O Fair Cynthia, o unfortunate Endimion. Why was not thy birth as high as thy
thoughts, or her beauty less then heavenly? or why are not thine honours as
rare as her beauty? or thy fortunes as great as thy deserts? Sweet Cynthia,
how would thou be pleased, how possessed? will labours (patient of all
extremities) obtain thy love? There is no Mountain so steep that I will not
climb, no monster so cruel that I will not tame, no action so desperate that
I will not attempt. Desire thou the passions of love, the sad and melancholy
moods of perplexed minds, the not to be expressed torments of racked
thoughts? Behold my sad tears, my deep sighs, my hollow eyes, my broken
sleeps, my heavy countenance. Would thou have me vowed only to thy
beauty and consume every minute of time in thy service, remember my solitary
life, almost these seven years, whom have I entertained but mine own
thoughts, and thy virtues? What company have I used but contemplation? Whom
have I wondered at but thee? Nay whom have I not contemned, for thee? Have I not
crept to those on whom I might have trodden, only because thou did shine
upon them? Have not injuries been sweet to me, if thou vouchsafe I should
bear them? Have I not spent my golden years in hopes, waxing old with
wishing, yet wishing nothing but thy love. With Tellus, fair Tellus, have I
dissembled, using her but as a cloak for mine affections, that others seeing
my mangled and disordered mind, might think it were for one that loves me,
not for Cynthia, whose perfection allows no companion, nor comparison.

In the midst of these distempred thoughts of mine, thou art not only jealous
of my truth, but careless, suspicious, and secure: which strange humour makes my
mind as desperate as thy conceits are doubtful. I am none of those Wolves
that bark most, when thou shynest brightest. But that fish, (thy fish Cynthia
in the flood Aranis) which at thy waxing is as white as the driven snow, and
at thy waning, as black as deepest darkness. I am that Endimion (sweet
Cynthia) that have carried my thoughts in equal balance with my actions,
being always as free from imagining ill, as enterprysing; That Endimion, whose
eyes never esteemed any thing fair, but thy face, whose tongue termed nothing
rare but thy virtues, and whose hart imagined nothing miraculous, but thy
government. Yea that Endimion, who diuorsing himself from the amiablenes of
all Ladies, the bravery of all Courts, the company of al men, hath chosen in
a solitary Cell to live, only by feeding on thy favour, accounting in the
world (but thy self) nothing excellent, nothing immortal; thus may thou
see every vain sinew, muscle, and artery of my love, in which there is no
flattery, nor deceit; error, nor art. But soft, here comes Tellus, I must
turn my other face to her like Ianus, least she be as suspicious as Juno.


Yonder I epsy Endimion, I will seem to suspect nothing but sooth him, that
seeing I cannot obtain the depth of his love, I may learn the height of his
dissembling; Floscula and Dipsas, with-drawe your selves out of our sight, yet
be within the hearing of our saluting; How now Endimion, always solitary? no
company but your own thoughts? no friend but melancholy fancies?


You know (fair Tellus) that the sweet remembrance of your love, is the only
companion of my life, and thy presence, my paradise, so that I am not alone
when no body is with me, and in heaven it self when thou art with me.


Then you love me Endimion.


Or else I live not Tellus.


Is it not possible for you Endimion, to dissemble?


Not Tellus, unless I could make me a woman.


Why, is dissembling joined to their sex inseparable? as heate to fire,
heaviness to earth, moisture to water, thinness to air?


No, but found in their sex, as common, as spots upon Doves, moles upon faces,
Caterpillars upon sweet apples, cobwebs upon fair windows.


Do they all dissemble?


All but one.


Who is that?


I dare not tell. For if I should say you, then would you imagine my flattery
to be extreme, if another, then would you think my love to be but
indifferent.


You will be sure I shall take no vantage of your words. But in sooth Endimion,
without more ceremonies, is it not Cynthia?


You know Tellus, that of the Gods we are forbidden to dispute, because their
deities come not within the compass of our reasons, and of Cynthia we are
allowed not to talk but to wonder, because her virtues are not within the
reach of our capacities.


Why, she is but a woman.


No more was Venus.


She is but a virgin.


No more was Vesta.


She shall have an end.


So shall the world.


Is not her beauty subject to time?


No more then time is to standing still.


Wilt thou make her immortal?


No, but incomparable.


Take heed Endimion, lest like the Wrestler in Olimpia, that striving to lift
an impossible weight, caught an incurable strain, thou by fixing thy thoughts
above thy reach, fall into a disease without al recure? But I see thou art now
in love with Cynthia.


No Tellus, thou know that the stately Cedar, whose top reaches unto the
clouds, never bows his head to the shrubs that grow in the valley, nor Ivy
that climbs up by the Elm, can ever get hold of the beams of the Sun;
Cynthia I honour in all humility, whom none ought, or dare adventure to love,
whose affections are immortal, virtues infinite. Suffer me therefore to gaze
on the Moon, at whom, were it not for thy self, I would die with wondering.


Come Samias, did thou ever hear such a sighing, the one for Cynthia, the
other for Semele, both for moon shine in the water?


Let them sigh, and let us sing, how say you gentlewomen, are not our Masters
too far in love?


Their tongues happily are dipped to the root in amorous words and sweet
discourses, but I think their hearts are scarce tipped on the side, with
constant desires.


How say you Fauilla, is not love a lurcher, that takes men's stomachs away
that they cannot eat, their spleen that they cannot laugh, their harts that
they cannot fight, their eyes that they cannot sleep, and leaves nothing but
livers to make nothing but Lovers?


Away peevish boy, a rod were better under thy girdle, than love in thy
mouth: it will be a forward Cock that crows in the shell.


Alas good old gentlewoman, how it becomes you to be grave,


Fauilla though she be but a spark, yet is she fire.


And you Scintilla be not much more then a spark, though you would be
esteemed a flame.


It were good sport to see the fight between two sparks.


Let them to it, and we will warm us by their words.


You are not angry Fauilla?


That is Scintilla, as you list to take it.


That, that.


This it is to be matched with girls, who coming but yesterday from making of
babies, would before to morrow be accounted Matrons.


I cry your Matronship mercy; because your Pantables be higher with cork,
therefore your feet must needs be higher in the insteppes: you will be mine
elder, because you stand upon a stool, and I on the flower.


Good, good.


Let them alone, and see with what countenance they will become friends.


Nay, you think to be the wiser, because you mean to have the last word.


Step between them least they scratch. In faith gentlewomen, seeing we came
out to be merry, let not your jarring mar our jests: be friends, how say
you?


I am not angry, but it spited me to see howe short she was.


I meant nothing, till she would needs cross me.


Then so let it rest.


I am agreed.


And I, yet I never took any thing so unkindly in my life.


Tys I have the cause, that never offered the occasion.


Excellent and right like a woman.


A strange sight to see water come out of fire.


It is their property, to carry in their eyes, fire, and water, tears and
torches, and in their mouths, honey and gall.


You will be a good one if you live, but what is yonder formal fellow?


Sir Tophas, sir Tophas, of whom we told you: if you be good wenches make as
though you love him, and wonder at him.


We will do our parts.


But first let us stand aside, and let him use his garb, for all consists in
his gracing.


Epi.


At hand sir.


How likest thou this Martial life, where nothing but blood besprinkleth our
bosoms? Let me see be our enemies fat?


Passing fat: and I would not change this life to be a Lord, and your self
passes all comparison, for other Captains kill and beat, and there is
nothing you kill, but you also eat.


I will draw out their guts out of their bellies, and tear the flesh with
my teeth, so mortal is my hate, and so eager my vnstaunched stomach.


My master thinks himself the valiantest man in the world if he kill a wren:
so warlike a thing he accounts to take away life, though it be from a Lark.


Epi, I find my thoughts to swell, and my spirit to take wings, in so much
that I cannot continue within the compass of so slender combats.


This passes.


Why is he not mad?


No, but a little vain glorious.


Epi.


Sir.


I will encounter that black and cruel enemy, that bears rough and vntewed
locks upon his body, whose Sire throws down the strongest walls, whose
legs are as many as both ours, on whose head are placed most horrible horns,
by nature, as a defence from all harms.


What mean you Master to be so desperate?


Honour inciteth me, and very hunger compels me.


What is that monster?


The Monster Ouis. I have said, let thy wits work.


I cannot imagine it; yet let me see, a black enemy with rough locks it may be
a sheep, and Ouis is a sheep: his Sire so strong, a Ram is a sheep Sire: that
being also an engine of war, horns he hath, and four legs, so hath a sheep:
without doubt this monster is a black sheep; Is it not a sheep that you
mean?


Thou hast hit it, that Monster will I kill and sup with.


Come let us take him off Sir Tophas all hail.


Welcome children, I seldom cast mine eyes so low as to the crowns of your
heads, and therefore pardon me that I spake not all this while.


No harm done, here be fair Ladies come to wonder at your person, your
valour, your wit, the report whereof, hath made them careless of their own
honours, to glut their eyes and harts upon yours.


Report cannot but injure me, for that not knowing fully what I am, I fear
she hath been a niggard in her praises.


No gentle knight, Report hath been prodigal, for she hath left you no
equal, nor her self credit, so much hath she told, yet no more than we now
see.


A good wench.


If there remain as much pity toward women, as there is in you courage
against your enemies, the shall we be happy, who hearing of your person, came
to see it, and seeing it, are now in love with it.


Love me Ladies? I easily believe it, but my tough heart receives no
impression with sweet words. Mars may pearce it, Venus shall not paint on it.


A cruel saying.


There's a girl.


Will you cast these Ladies away, and all for a little love? do but speak
kindly.


There comes no soft syllable within my lips, custom hath made my words
bloody, and my hart barbarous: that pelting word love, how waterish it is in my
mouth, it carries no sound, hate, horror, death, are speeches that nourish my
spirits. I like honey but I care not for the bees, I delight in music but I
love not to play on the bagpipes, I can vouchsafe to hear the voice of women,
but to touch their bodies I disdain it, as a thing childish, and fit for such
men as can digest nothing but milk.


A hard heart, shall we dye for your love, and find no remedy.


I have already taken a surfeit.


Good master pity them.


Pity them Epi? no I do not think that this breast shall be pestered with such
a foolish passion. What is that the gentlewoman carries in a chain?


Why it is a Squirrill.


A Squirril? O Gods what things are made for money.


Is not this gentleman ouerwise?


I could stay all day with him, if I feared not to be shent.


Is it not possible to meet again.


Yes at any time.


Then let us hasten home.


Sir Tophas, the God of war deal better with you, than you do with the God
of love.


Our love we may dissemble, digest we cannot, but I doubt not but time will
hamper you, and help us.


I defy time, who hath no interest in my heart: come Epi. let me to the
battle with that hideous beast, love is pap and hath no relish in my taste,
because it is not terrible.


Indeed a black sheep is a perilous beast, but let us in till another time.


I shall long for that time.


No rest Endimion? still uncertain how to settle thy steps by day, or thy
thoughts by night? thy truth is measured by thy fortune, and thou art judged
unfaithful because thou art unhappy. I will see if I can beguile my self with
sleep, if no slumber will take hold in my eyes, yet will I embrace the golden
thoughts in my head, and wish to melt by musing: that as Ebone, which no fire
can scorch, is yet consumed with sweet savours, so my heart which cannot be
bent by the hardness of fortune, may be bruised by amorous desires, On yonder
bank never grew any thing but Lunary, and hereafter I will never have any bed
but that bank. O Endimion, Tellus was fair, but what avails Beauty without
wisdom? Nay Endimion she was wise, but what avails wisdom without honour?
She was honourable Endimion, belie her not, I but howe obscure is honour
without fortune? Was she not fortunate whom so many followed? Yes, yes, but
base is fortune without Majesty: thy Majesty Cynthia al the world knows and
wonders at, but not one in the world that can imitate it or comprehend it.
No more Endimion, sleep or dye; Nay die for to sleep it is impossible, and
yet I know not how it comes to pass, I feel such a heaviness both in mine
eyes and hart, yt I am suddenly benumbed, yea in every iont: it may be
weariness, for when did I rest? it may be deep melancholy, for when did I
not sigh? Cynthia, I so, I say Cynthia.


Little dost thou know Endimion when thou shalt wake, for had thou placed
thy heart as lowe in love, as thy head lies now in sleep, thou might have
commanded Tellus, whom now in stead of a Mistress, thou shalt find a tomb.
These eyes must I seal up by Art, not Nature, which are to be opened neither
by Art nor Nature. Thou that laist down with golden locks, shalt not awake
until they be turned to silver hairs: and that chin, on which scarcely
appears soft down, shall be filled with brissles as hard as broom: thou shalt
sleep out thy youth and flowering time, and become dry hay before thou knew
thy self green grass, ready by age to step into the grave when thou wake,
that was youthful in the Court when thou laidst thee down to sleep. The
malice of Tellus hath brought this to pass, which if she could not have
entreated of me by fair means, she would have commanded by menacing, for
from her gather we all our simples to maintain our sorceries. Fan with this
hemlock over his face, and sing the enchantment for sleep, whilst I go in
and finish those cerimonies that are required in our Art: take heed ye touch
not his face, for the Fan is so seasoned that who so it touches with a leaf
shall presently dye, and over whom the wind of it breaths, he shall sleep
for ever.


Let me alone, I will be careful. What hap had thou Endimion to come
under the hands of Dipsas. O fair Endimion, how it grieves me that that fair
face must be turned to a withered skin, taste the pains of death before it
feel the reward of love. I fear Tellus will repent that which the heavens
themselves seemed to few, but I hear Dipsas coming, I dare not repine, least
she make me pine, and rock me into such a deep sleep, that I shall not awakd
to my marriage.


How now, have you finished?


Yea.


Well then let us in, and see that you do not so much as whisper that I did
this, for if you do, I will turn thy hairs to Adders, and all thy teeth in
thy head to tongues, come away, come away.


IS the report true, that Endimion is stricken into such a dead sleep, that
nothing can either wake him or move him?


Too true Madame, and as much to be pitied as wondered at.


As good sleep and do no harm, as wake and do no good.


What makes you Tellus to be so short? the time was Endimion only was.


It is an old saying Madame, that a waking dog doth a far off bark at a
sleeping Lyon.


It were good Eumenides that you took a nap with your friend for your speech
begins to be heavy


Contrary to your nature Semele, which hath been always accounted light.


What have we hear before my face, these unseemly and malepart ouerthwarts? I
will tame your tongues, and your thoughts, and make your speeches answerable to
your duties, and your conceits fit for my dignity, else will I banish you
both my person and the world.


Pardon I humbly ask; but such is my unspotted faith to Endimion, that
whatsoever seems a needle to prick his finger, is a dagger to wound my
heart.


If you be so dear to him, howe happens it you neither go to see him, nor
search for remedy for him?


I have seen him to my grief, and sought recure with despair, for that I
cannot imagine who should restore, him that is the wounder to all men: your
highness, on whose hands the compass of the earth is at command, (though not
in possession) may show your self both worthy your sex, your nature, and your
favour, if you redeem that honourable Endimion, whose ripe years foretell rare
virtues, and whose unmellowed conceits promise ripe counsel.


I have had trial of Endimion, conceive greater assurance of his age, then I
could hope of his youth.


But timely Madam crookes that tree that will be a camock, and young it pricks
that will be a thorne, and therefore he that began without care to settle his
life, it is a sign without amendment he will end it.


Presumptuous girl, I will make thy tongue an example of unrecoverable
displeasure, Corsites carry her to the Castle in the Desert, there to remain
and weave.


Shall she work stories or poetries?


It skylleth not which, go to, in both, for she shall find examples infinite
in either, what punishment long tongues have. Eumenides, if either the
Soothsayers in Egipt, or the Enchaunters in Thessaly, or the Philosophers in
Greece, or all the Sages of the world, can find remedy, I will procure it,
therefore dispatch with al speed: you Eumenides into Thessalie. You Zontes
into Greece, (because you are acquainted in Athens.) You Panthon to Egypt,
saying that Cynthia sends, and if you will, commands.


On bowed knee I give thanks, and with wings on my legs, I fly for remedy.


We are ready at your highness command, hope to return to your full content.


It shall never be said that Cynthia, whose mercy and goodness fills the
heavens with joys, the world with marvels, will suffer either Endimion or
any to perrish, if he may be protected.


Your Majesties words have been always deeds, and your deeds virtues.


Here is the Castle (fair Tellus) in which you must weave, till either time
end your days, or Cynthia her displeasure. I am sorry so fair a face should
be subject to so hard a fortune, and that the flower of beauty, which is
honoured in Courts, should here wither in prison.


Corsites, Cynthia may restrain the liberty of my body, of my thoughts she
cannot, and therefore do I esteem my self most free, though I am in greatest
bondage.


Can you then feed on fancy, and subdue the malice of envy by the sweetness
of imagination.


Corsites, there is no sweeter music to the miserable then despair, and
therefore the more bitterness I feel, the more sweetness I find, for so vain
were liberty, and so unwelcome the following of higher fortune, that I choose
rather to pine in this Castle, then to be a Prince in any other Court.


A humour contrary to your years, and nothing agreeable to your sex: the one
commonly allured with delights, the other always with sovereignty.


I marvel Corsites that you being a Captain, who should sound nothing but
terror, and suck nothing but blood, can find in your hart to talk such smooth
words, for that it agrees not with your calling to use words so soft, as that
of love.


Lady, it were unfit of wars to discourse with women, into whose minds
nothing can sink but smoothness; besides, you must not think that Soldiers
be so rough hewn, or of such knotty mettle, that beauty cannot allure, and
you being beyond perfection enchant.


Good Corsites talk not of love, but let me to my labour: the little beauty I
have, shall be bestowed on my Loom, which I now mean to make my Lover.


Let us in, and what favour Corsites can show, Tellus shall command.


The only favour I desire, is now and then to walk.


Epi.


Here sir.


Vnrigge me. Hey ho.


Whats that?


An interiection, whereof some are of mourning: as eho, vah.


I understand you not.


Thou see me.


I.


Thou hearst me.


I.


Thou feel me.


I.


And not vnderstand'st me?


No.


Then am I but three quarters of a Nowne substantiue. But alas Epi, to tell
thee the troth I am a Nowne Adiectiue.


Why?


Because I cannot stand without another.


Who is that?


Dipsas.


Are you in love?


No: but love hath as it were milkt my thoughts, and drained from my hart the
very substance of my accustomed courage; it works in my head like new Wine,
so as I must hoop my skonce with iron, least my head break, and so I bewray
my brains: but I pray thee first discover me in all parts, that I may be like
a Lover, and then will I sigh and die. Take my gun, and give me a gown:
Caedant arma togae.


Here.


Take my sword and shield, and give me beard, brush, and Cyssers: bella
gerant alii tu pari semper ama.


Will you be trimd sir?


Not yet: for I feel a contention within me, whether I shall frame the bodkin
beard or the bush. But take my pike and give me pen: dicere que puduit,
scriber iussit amor.


I will furnish you sir.


Now for my bow and bolts, give me ink and paper, for my Smiter a pen-knife:
for Scalpellum calami, atramentum, charta libelli, sint semper studiis arma
parata meis.


Sir will you give over wars, play with that babble called love?


Give over wars? no Epi, Militat omnis amans, et habet sua castea Cupido.


Love hath made you very eloquent, but your face is nothing fair.


Non formosus erat, sed erat facundus Vlisses.


Nay I must seek a new Master if you can speak nothing but verses.


Quicquid conabar dicere versus erat. Epi, I feel all Ouid de art amandi lie
as heavy at my heart as a load of logs. O what a fine thin hair hath
Dipsas, what a pretty low forehead? What a tale stately nose? What little
hollow eyes? What great and goodly lyppes? Howe harmless she is being
toothless, her fingers fat and short, adorned with long nails like a
Bitter. In howe sweet a proportion her cheeks hang down to her breasts like
dugs, and her paps to her waste like bags. What a lowe stature she is,
and yet what a great foot she carries? Howe thrifty must she be in whom
there is no waste? Howe virtuous is she like to be, over whom no man can be
jealous?


Stay Master, you forget your self.


O Epi. even as a dish melts by the fire, so doth my wit increase by love.


Pithily, and to the purpose, but what? begin you to nod.


Good Epi let me take a nap: for as some man may better steal a horse, then
another look over the hedge: so diverse shall be sleepy when they would
fainest take rest.


Who ever saw such a woodcock, love Dipsas? without doubt all the world will
now account him valiant, that ventures on her, whom none durst undertake.
But here comes two wags.


Thy Master hath slept his share.


I think he doth it because he would not pay me my board wages.


It is a thing most strange, and I think mine will never return, so that we
must both seek new Masters, for we shall never live by our manners.


If you want Masters, join with me and serve Sir Tophas, who must needs
keep more men, because he is toward marriage.


What Epi, wher's thy Master?


Yonder sleeping in love.


Is it possible?


He hath taken his thoughts a hole lower, and saith, seeing it is the fashion
of the world, he will veil bonet to beauty.


how is he attired?


Lovely.


Whom loves this amorous knight?


Dipsas.


That ugly creature? Why she is a fool, a scold, fat, without fashion, and
quite without favour.


Tush you be simple, my Ma. hath a good marriage.


Good? as how?


Why in marrying Dipsas, he shall have every day twelve dishes of meat to
his dinner, though there be none but Dipsas with him. Four of flesh, four of
fish, four of fruit.


As how Epi?


For flesh these, woodcock, goose, bitter, rail.


Indeed he shall not miss, if Dipsas be there.


For fish these, crab, carpe, lump, and pouting.


Excellent, for of my word, she is both crabbish, lumpish, and carping.


For fruit these, fretters, meddlers, hartichockes, and Lady longings. Thus you
see he shall fare like a King, though he be but a beggar.


Well Epi, dine thou with him, for I had rather fast then see her face. But see
thy Ma. is a sleep, let us have a song to wake this Amorous knight.


Agreed.


Content.


Sleep is a bynding of the senses, love a loosing.


Let us hear him awhile.


There appeared in my sleep a goodly Owl, who sitting upon my shoulder, cried
twyt, twyt, before mine eyes presented her self the express image of Dipsas.
I marveled what the Owl said, till at the last, I perceived twyt twyt, to it,
to it: only by contraction admonished by this vision, to make account of my
sweet Venus.


Sir Tophas, you have ouer-slept your self.


No youth, I have but slept over my love.


Love? Why it is impossible, that into so noble and unconquered a courage, love
should creep, having first a head as hard to pearce as steel, then to pass
to a hart armed with a shirt of male.


I but my Master yawning one day in the Sun, love crept into his mouth before
he could close it, and there kept such a tumbling in his body, that he was
glad to untruss the points of his hart, and entertain Love as a stranger.


If there remain any pity in you, plead for me to Dipsas.


Plead? Nay we will press her to it. Let us go with him to Dipsas, and
there shall we have good sport. But sir Tophas when shall we go? for I find
my tongue voluble, and my hart venturous, and all my self like my self.


Come Dares, let us not loose him till we find our Masters, for as long as he
lives, we shall lack neither mirth nor meat.


We will trauice. Will you go sir?


I praesequar.


Father, your sad musique being tuned on the same key that my harde fortune
is, hath so melted my mind, that I wish to hang at your mouths end, tell my
life end.


These tunes Gentleman have I been accustomed with these fifty Winters,
having no other house to shroud my self, but the broad heavens, and so
familiar with me hath use made misery, that I esteem sorrow my chiefest
solace. And welcomes is that guest to me, that can rehearse the saddest
tale, or the bloodiest tragedy.


A strange humour, might I enquire the cause?


You must pardon me if I deny to tell it, for knowing that the revealing of
griefs, is as it were a renewing of sorrow, I have vowed therefore to conceal
them, that I might not only feel the depth of everlasting discontentment, but
despair of remedy? But whence are you? What fortune hath thrust you to this
distress?


I am going to Thessalie, to seek remedy for Endimion my dearest friend, who
hath been cast into a dead sleep, almost these twenty years, waxing old,
and ready for the grave, being almost but newly come forth of the cradle.


You need not for recure travel far, for who so can clearly see the
bottom of this Fountain, shall have remedy for any thing.


That me thinks is unpossible, why what virtue can there be in water?


Yes, who soever can shed the tears of a faithful Lover, shall obtain any
thing he would, read these words engraven about the brim.


Have you known this by experience, or is it placed here of purpose to delude
men?


I only would have experience of it, and then should there be an end of my
misery. And then would I tell the strangest discourse that ever yet was
heard.


Ah Eumenides.


What lack you Gentleman, are you not well?


Yes Father, but a qualm that often comes over my hart doth now take hold
of me, but did never any Lovers come hither?


Lusters, but not Lovers; for often have I seen them weep, but never could I
hear they saw the bottom.


Came there women also?


Some.


What did they see?


They all wept that the Fountain overflowed with tears, but so thick became
the water with their tears, that I could scarce discern the brim, much
less behold the bottom.


Be faithful Lovers so scant?


It seems so, for yet heard I never of any.


Ah Eumenides, howe art thou perplexed? call to mind the beauty of thy sweet
Mistress, and the depth of thy never dying affections, howe oft hast thou
honoured her, not only without spot, but suspicion of falsehood? And howe
hardly hath she rewarded thee, without cause or colour of despite?

Howe secrete hast thou been these seven years, that hast not, nor once
dare not, to name her for discontenting her? Howe faithful? that hast
offered to dye for her, to please her. Unhappy Eumenides.


Why Gentleman did you once love?


Once? I Father and ever shall.


Was she unkind, and you faithful?


She of all women the most froward, and I of all creatures the most fond.


You doted then, not loved: for affection is grounded on virtue, and virtue is
never peevish: or on Beauty, and Beauty loves to be praised.


I but if all virtuous Ladies should yield to all that be loving, or all
amiable gentlewomen entertain all that be amorous, their virtues would be
accounted vices, and their beauties deformities, for that love can be but
between two, and that not proceeding of him that is most faithful, but most
fortunate.


I would you were so faithful, that your tears might make you fortunate.


Yea father, if that my tears clear not this fountain, then may you swear
it is but a mere mockery.


So saith every one yet, that wept.


Ah, I faint, I dye. Ah sweet Semele let me alone, and dissolve by weeping
into water.


This affection seems strange, if he see nothing without doubt this
dissembling passes, for nothing shall draw me from the belief.


Father, I plainly see the bottom, and there in white marble engraven these
words, Ask one for all, and but one thing at all.


O fortunate Eumenides, (for so have I heard thee call thy self) let me see,
I cannot discern any such thing. I think thou dream.


Ah Father thou art not a faithful lover, and therefore can not behold it.


Then ask that I may be satisfied by the event, and thy self blessed.


Ask? so I will: and what shall I do but ask, and whom should I ask but
Semele, the possessing of whose person, is a pleasure that cannot come within
the compass of comparison, whose golden locks seem most curious, when they
seem most careless, whose sweet looks seem most alluring, when they are
most chaste: and whose words the more virtuous they are, the more amorous they
be accounted. I pray thee fortune when I shall first meet with fair Semele,
dash my delight with some light disgrace, least embracing sweetness beyond
measure, I take a surfit without recure: let her practise her accustomed
coyness, that I may diet my seife upon my desires: otherwise the fullness of
my joys will diminish the sweetness, and I shall perrish by them before I
possess them.

Why do I trifle the time in words? The least minute being spent in the
getting of Semele, is more worth then the whole world: therefore let me ask.
What now Eumenides? Whether art thou drawn? Hast thou forgotten both
friendship and duty? Care of Endimion, and the commandment of Cynthia?
Shall he dye in a leaden sleep, because thou sleep in a golden dream? I,
let him sleep ever, so I slumber but one minute with Semele. Love knows
neither friendship nor kindred.

Shall I not hazard the loss of a friend, for the obtaining of her for whom I
would often loose my self? Fond Eumenides, shall the intycing beauty of a
most disdainful Lady, be of more force then the rare fidelity of a tried
friend? The love of men to women is a thing common, and of course: the
friendship of man to man infinite, and immortal. Tush, Semele doth possess
my love. I but Endimion hath deserved it. I will help Endimion. I found
Endimion unspotted in his truth. I but I shall find Semele constant in her
love. I will have Semele. What shall I do? Father thy gray hairs are
Ambassadors of experience. Which shall I ask?


Eumenides, release Endimion, for all things (friendship excepted) are subject
to fortune: Love is but an eye worm, which only tickles the head with
hopes, and wishes: friendship the image of eternity, in which there is
nothing moveable, nothing mischievous. As much difference as there is between
Beauty and Virtue, bodies and shadows, colours and life: so great odds is
there between love and friendship.

Love is a Camelion, which draws nothing into the mouth but air, and
nourishes nothing in the body but lunges: believe me Eumenides, Desire dyes
in the same moment that Beauty sickens, and Beauty fades in the same instant
that it flourishes. When adversities flow, then love ebbes: but friendship
stands stifflie in storms. Time draws wrinkles in a fair face, but
adds fresh colours to a fast friend, which neither heate, nor cold, nor
misery, nor place, nor destiny, can alter or diminish. O friendship of all
things the most rare, and therefore most rare because most excellent, whose
comforts in misery is always sweet, and whose counsels in prosperity are ever
fortunate. Vain love, that only coming near to friendship in name, would
seem to be the same, or better, in nature.


Father I allow your reasons, and will therefore conquer mine own. Virtue
shall subdue affections, wisdom lust, friendship beauty. Mistresses are in
every place, and as common as Hares in Atho, Bees in Hybla, fowls in the air:
but friends to be found, are like the Phaenix in Arabia, but one, or the
Philadelphi in Arays, never above two. I will have Endimion, sacred Fountain,
in whose bowels are hidden divine secrets, I have increased your waters with
the tears of unspotted thoughts and therefore let me receive the reward you
promise: Endimion, the truest friend to me, and faithfullest lover to
Cynthia, is in such a dead sleep, that nothing can wake or move him.


Dost thou see any thing?


I see in the same Pillar, these words: When she whose figure of all is the
perfectest, and never to be measured: always one, yet never the same: still
inconstant, yet never wavering, shall come and kiss Endimion in his sleep,
he shall then rise, else never. This is strange.


What see you else?


There comes over mine eyes either a dark mist, or upon the fountain a
deep thickness: for I can perceive nothing. But howe am I deluded? or what
difficult (nay impossible) thing is this?


Me thinks it easy.


Good father and howe?


Is not a circle of all Figures the perfectest?


Yes.


And is not Cynthia of all cyrcles the most absolute?


Yes.


Is it not impossible to measure her, who still works by her influence, never
standing at one stay?


Yes.


Is she not always Cynthia, yet seldom in the same bigness, always
wavering in her waxing or waning, that our bodies might the better be
governed, our seasons the daylier give their increase, yet never to be
removed from her course, as long as the heavens continue theirs?


Yes.


Then who can it be but Cynthia, whose virtues being all divine, must needs
bring things to pass that be miraculous. Go, humble thy self to Cynthia,
tell her the success, of which my self shall be a witness. And this assure
thy self, that she that sent to find means for his safety, will now work
her cunning.


How fortunate am I, if Cynthia be she that may do it.


Howe fond art thou, if thou do not believe it?


I will hasten thither, that I may entreat on my knees for succour, and embrace
in mine arms my friend.


I will go with thee, for unto Cynthia must I discover all my sorrows, who
also must work in me a contentment.


May I now know the cause?


That shall be as we walk, and I doubt not but the strangeness of my tale
will take away the tediousness of our journey.


Let us go.


I follow.


I Marvel Corsites gives me so much liberty: all the world knowing his
charge to be so high, and his nature to be most strange, who hath so ill
entreated Ladies of great honour, that he hath not suffered them to look out
of windows, much less to walk abroad: it may be he is in love with me,
for (Endimion, hard hearted Endimion, excepted) what is he that is not enamourd
of my beauty? But what respect thou the love of all the world, Endimion
hates thee. Alas poor Endimion, my maylce hath exceeded my love: and thy faith
to Cynthia, quenched my affections. Quenched Tellus? nay kindled them a fresh;
in so much that I find scorching flames, for dead embers, and cruel
encounters of war in my thoughts, in steed of sweet parleys. Ah that I
might once again see Endimion, accursed girl, what hope hast thou to see
Endimion? on whose head already are grown gray hairs, and whose life must
yield to Nature, before Cynthia end her displeasure. Wicked Dipsas, and most
devilish Tellus, the one for cunning too exquisite, the other for hate too
intolerable. Thou wast commanded to weave the stories Poetries, wherein were
showed both examples punishments of tattling tongues, and thou hast only
embroidered the sweet face of Endimion, devises of love, melancholy
imaginations, and what not, out of thy work, that thou should study to
pick out of thy mind. But here comes Corsites, I must seem yielding and
stout, full of mildness, yet tempered with a Majesty: for if I be too
flexible, I shall give him more hope then I mean, if too froward, enjoy less
liberty then I would, love him I cannot, therefore will practise that which is
most contrary to our sex, to dissemble.


Fair Tellus, I perceive you rise with the Lark, and to your self sing with
the Nightingale.


My Lord I have no play-fellow but fancy, being barred of all company I must
question with my self, and make my thoughts my friends.


I would you would account my thoughts also your friends, for they be such as
are only busied in wondering at your beauty, wisdom: some such as have
esteemed your fortune too hard, and diverse of that kind that offer to set you
free, if you will set them free


There are no colours so contrary as white and black, nor Elements so
disagreeing as fire and water, nor any thing so opposite as men's thoughts their
words.


He that gave Cassandra the gift of prophecying with the curse, that spake she
never so true, she should never be believed, hath I think poisoned the fortune
of men, that uttering the extremities of their inward passions, are always
suspected of outward perjuries.


Well Corsites I will flatter my self, and believe you. What would you do to
enjoy my love?


Set all the Ladies of the Castle free, and make you the pleasure of my life:
more I cannot do, less I will not.


These be great words, and fit your calling: for Captains must promise things
impossible. But will you do one thing for all.


Any thing sweet Tellus, that am ready for all.


You know that on the Lunary bank sleeps Endimion.


I know it.


If you will remove him from that place by force, and convey him into some
obscure cave by policy, I give you here the faith of an unspotted virgin,
that you only shall possess me as a lover, and in spite of malice, have me
for a wife.


Remove him Tellus? Yes Tellus, he shall be removed, and that so soon, as
thou shalt as much commend my diligence as my force. I go.


Stay, will your self attempt it?


I Tellus: as I would have none partaker of my sweet love, so shall none be
partners of my labours: but I pray thee go at your best leisure, for Cynthia
begins to rise, and if she discover our love we both perish, for nothing
pleases her but the fairness of virginity. All things must be not only
without lust, but without suspicion of lightness.


I will depart, and go you to Endimion.


I fly Tellus, being of all men the most fortunate.


Simple Corsites, I have set thee about a task being but a man, yt the gods
themselves cannot perform: for little dost thou know howe heavy his head
lies, howe hard his fortune: but such shifts must women have to deceive men,
and under colour of things easy, entreat that which is imposible: otherwise we
should be cubred with importunities, oaths, sighs, letters, and all
implements of love, which to one resolved to the contrary, are most loathsome. I
will in and laugh with the other Ladies at Corsites sweating.


Will thy master never awake?


No, I think he sleeps for a wager: but how shall we spend the time? Sir
Tophas is so far in love that he pines in his bed, and comes not
abroad?


But here comes Epi, in a pelting chafe.


A pox of all false Proverbs, and were a Proverb a Page, I would have him by
the ears.


Why art thou angry?


Why? you know it is said, the tide tarries no man.


True.


A monstrous lye; for I was tide two hours, and tarried for one to vnlose me.


Alas poor Epi.


Poor? No, no, you base conceited slaves, I am a most complyt Gentleman,
although I be in disgrace with sir Tophas.


Art thou out with him.


I, because I cannot get him a lodging with Endimion, he would fain take a
nap for forty or fifty years.


A short sleep, considering our long life.


Is he still in love?


In love? why he doth nothing but make Sonnets.


Can thou remember any one of his Poems?


I, this is one. The beggar Love that knows not where to lodge: At last within
my hart when I slept, he crept, I waked, and so my fancies began to fodge.


That's a very long verse.


Why the other was short, the first is called from the thombe to the little
finger, the second from the little finger to the elbow, and some he hath made
to reach to the crown of his head, and down again to the soul of his foot:
it is set to the tune of the black Saunce, ratio est, because Dipsas is a
black Saint.


Very wisely, but pray thee Epi how art thou complete, and being from thy
Master what occupation wilt thou take?


No my harts, I am an absolute Microcosmus, a petty world of my self, my
library is my head, for I have no other books but my brains: my wardrobe on
my back, for I have no more apparel then is on my body; my armoury at my
fingers ends, for I use no other Artillarie then my nailes; my treasure in my
purse. Sie omnia mea mecum porto.


Good.


Now sirs, my Palace is paved with grass, and tyled with stars: for celo
la qui non habet vrnam, he that hath no house, must he in the yard.


A brave resolution, But how wilt thou spend thy time?


Not in any Melancholy sort, for mine exercise I will walk horses.


Too bad.


Why is it not said: It is good walking when one hath his horse in his hand?


Worse, and worse, but how wilt thou live?


By angling; O tis a stately occupation to stand four hours in a cold
Morning, and to have his nose bytten with frost, before his bait be mumbled
with a Fish.


A rare attempt, but wilt thou never travel?


Yes in a Western barge, when with a good wind and lusty pugges, one may go
ten miles in two days.


Thou art excellent at thy choice, but what pastime wilt thou use, none?


Yes the quickest of all.


What dice?


No, when I am in hast, xxj. games at Chess, to pass a few minutes.


A life for a little Lord, and full of quickness.


Tush let me alone, but I must needs see if I can find where Endimion lies,
and then go to a certain fountain hard by, where they say faithful Lovers
shall have althings they will ask. If I can find out any of these, ego et
Magister meus erimus in tuto, I and my Master shall be friends. He is
resolved to weep some three or four payle-fuls, to avoid the rum of love
that wambleth in his stomach.


Shall we never see thy Master Dares?


Yes, let us go now, for to morrow Cynthia will be there.


I will go with you. But howe shall we see for the Watch?


Tush let me alone, I'll begin to them. Masters God speed you.


Sir boy, we are all sped already.


So me thinks, for they smell all of drink, like a beggars beard.


But I pray sirs, may we see Endimion?


No, we are commanded in Cynthias name that no man shall see him.


No man? Why we are but boys.


Mass neighbours he says true, for if I swear I will never drink my liquor
by the quart, and yet call for two pints, I think with a safe conscience I may
carouse both.


Pithily, and to the purpose.


Tush tush neighbours, take me with you.


This will grow hot.


Let them alone.


If I say to my wife, wife I will have no Reysons in my pudding, she puts in
Corance, small Reysons are Reysons, and boys are men. Even as my wife should
have put no Reysons in my pudding, so shall there no boys see Endimion.


Learnedly.


Let Master Constable speak: I think he is the wisest among you.


You know neighbours tis an an old said saw, children and fools speak true.


True.


Well, there you see the men be the fools, because it is provided from the
children.


Good.


Then say I neighbours, that children must not see Endimion, because children
fools speak true.


O wicked application.


Scurvily brought about.


Nay he sais true, therefore till Cynthia have been here he shall not be
uncovered. Therefore away.


A watch quoth you? a man may watch 7. years for a wise word, yet go without
it. Their wits are all as rusty as their bills. But come on Ma. Constable. shall we
have a song before we go? Constable. With all my hart.


I am come in sight of the Lunary bank, without doubt Tellus dotes upon me,
and cunningly that I might not perceive her love, she hath set me to a
task that is done before it is begun. Endimion, you must change your
pillow, and if you be not weary of sleep, I will carry you where at ease
you shall sleep your fill. It were good that without more ceremonies I took
him, least being espied, I be entrapped, and so incur the displeasure of
Cynthia, who commonly sets watch that Endimion have no wrong.

What now, is your Maistership so heuie? or are you nayld to the ground? Not
stir one whit? then use all thy force though he feel it and wake. What
stone still? turned I think to earth, with lying so long on the earth. Did
not thou Corsites before Cynthia pull up a tree, that forty years was fastened
with roots and wrethed in knots to the ground? Did not thou with maine
force pull open the iron Gates, which no Ram or Engine could move? Have my weak
thoughts made braunfallen my strong arms? or is it the nature of love or the
Quintessence of the mind to breed numnesse, or lythernesse, or I know not
what, languishing in my joints and sinews, being but the base strings of my
body? Or doth the remembrance of Tellus so refine my spirits into a matter
so subtle and divine, that the other fleshie parts cannot work whilst they
muse? Rest thy self, rest thy self: nay rent thy self in pieces Corsites,
and strive in spite of love, fortune and nature, to lift up this dulled
body, heavier then dead, and more senseless then death.

But what are these so fair fiends that cause my hairs to stand upright, and
spirits to fall down? hags, out alas, Nymphs I crave pardon. Aye me, out what
do I here.


You see Pythagoras what ridiculous opinions you hold, and I doubt not but you
are now of another mind.


Madam, I plainly perceive that the perfection of your brightness, hath
pierced through the thickness that covered my mind; in so much that I am no
less glad to be reformed, then ashamed to remember my grosenes.


They are thrice fortunate that live in your Palace, where Truth is not in
colours but life, virtues not in imagination, but execution.


I have always studied to have rather living virtues then painted Gods, the
body of Truth, then the tomb. But let us walk to Endimion, it may be it
lies in your Arts to deliver him, as for Eumenides, I fear he is dead.


I have alleged all the natural reasons I can for such a long sleep.


I can do nothing till I see him.


Coin Floscula, I am sure you are glad that you shall behold Endimion.


I were blessed if I might have him recovered.


Are you in love with his person.


No, but with his virtue.


What say you Semele?


Madame, I dare say nothing for fear I offend.


Belike you cannot speak except you be spiteful. But as good be silent as
saucy. Panelion, what punishment were fit for Semele, in whose speech and
thoughts, is only contempt and sowrenesse?


I love not Madam to give any judgment. Yet since your highness commands, I
think, to commit her tongue close prisoner to her mouth.


Agreed; Semele, if thou speak this twelue-month, thou shalt forfet thy
tongue. Behold Endimion, alas poor Gentleman, hast thou spent thy youth in
sleep, that once vowed all to my service. Hollow eyes? gray hairs? wrinkled
cheeks? and decayed limbs? Is it destiny, or deceit that hath brought this
to pass? If the first, who could prevent thy wretched stars. If the latter,
I would I might know thy cruel enemy. I favoured thee Endimion for thy
honour, thy virtues, thy affections: but to bring thy thoughts within the
compass of thy fortunes, I have seemed strange, that I might have thee stayed,
and now are thy days ended before my favour begin. But whom have we here,
is it not Corsites?


It is, but more like a Leopard then a man.


Awake him. Howe now Corsites, what make you here? How came you deformed?
Look on thy hands, and then thou see the picture of thy face.


Miserable wretch, and accursed. How am I deluded? Madame, I ask pardon for my
offence, and you see my fortune deserves pity.


Speak on, thy offence cannot deserve greater punishment: but see thou
rehearse the truth, else shalt thou not find me as thou wish me.


Madam, as it is no offence to be in love being a man mortal, so I hope can
it be no shame to tell with whom, my Lady being heavenly. Your Majesty
committed to my charge fair Tellus, whose beauty in the same moment took my
hart captive, that I undertook to carry her body prisoner. Since that time
have I found such combats in my thoughts between love and duty, reverence and
affection, that I could neither endure the conflict, nor hope for the
conquest.


In love? A thing far vnsitting the name of a Captain, and (as I thought)
the tough and vnsmoothed nature of Corsites. But forth.


Feeling this continual war, I thought rather by parley to yield, then by
certain danger to perrish, I unfolded to Tellus the depth of my affections,
and framed my tongue to utter a sweet tale of love, that was wont to found
nothing but threats of war. She too fair to be true, and too false for one
so fair, after a nice denial, practised a notable deceit, commanding me to
remove Endimion from this Caban, and carry him to some dark Cave, which I
seeking to accomplish, found impossible. And so by Fairies or fiends have
been thus handled.


Howe say you my Lords, is not Tellus always practising of some deceits? In
sooth Corsites thy face is now too foul for a Lover, and thine hart too
fond for a Soldier. You may see when VVarriors become wantons, howe their
manners alter with their faces. Is it not a shame Corsites, that having lived
so long in Mars his Camp, thou shouldest now be rocked in Venus Cradle. Dost
thou we are Cupids Quiver at thy girdle, and make Lances of looks? Well
Corsites rouse thy self, and be as thou hast been, and let Tellus who is made
all of love, melt herself in her own looseness.


Madam I doubt not but to recover my former state, for Tellus beauty never
wrought such love in my mind, as now her deceit hath despite, and yet to be
revenged of a woman, were a thing then love it self more womanish.


These spots Gentleman are to be worn out, if you rub them over with this
Lunarie, so that in place where you received this maine, you shall find a
medicine.


I thank you for that. The Gods bless me fro love these pretty Ladies that
haunt this green.


Corsites, I would Tellus saw your amiable face.


How spitefully Semele laughs, that dare not speak.


Could you not stir Endimion with that doubled strength of yours?


Not so much as his finger with all my force.


Pythagoras and Gyptes, what think you of Endimion? what reason is to be
given, what remedy?


Madame it is impossible to yield reason for things that happen not in
compass of nature. It is most certain, that some strange enchantment hath
bound all his senses.


What say you Gyptes.


With Pythagoras, that it is enchantment, and that so strange that no Art
can undo it, for that heaviness argues a malice unremoveable in the
Enchantress, and that no power can end it, till she die that did it, or the
heavens show some means more then miraculous.


O Endimion, could spite it self devise a mischief so monstrous as to make
thee dead with life, and living being altogether dead? Where others number
their years, their hours, their minutes, and steppe to age by stairs, thou
only hast thy years and times in a cluster, being old before thou remember
thou wast young.


No more Floscula, pity doth him no good, I would any thing else might, and I
vow by the unspotted honour of a Lady he should not miss it: but is this all
Giptes, that is to be done?


All as yet. It may be that either the Enchantress shall dye, or else be
discovered, if either happen I will then practise the utmost of my art. In the
mean season, about this Grove would I have a watch, and the first living thing
that touches Endimion, to be taken.


Corsites what say you, will you undertake this?


Good Madame pardon me, I was overtaken too late, I should rather break into
the midst of a maine battle, then again fall into the hands of those
fair babies.


Well, I will provide others. Pithagoras and Giptes, you shall yet remain in
my Court, till I hear what may be done in this matter.


We attend.


Let us go in.


EVmenides hath told such strange tales, as I may well wonder at them, but
never believe them.


The other old man, what a sad speech used he, that caused us almost all to
weep. Cynthia is so desirous to know the experiment of her own virtue, and
so willing to ease Endimions harde fortune, that she no sooner heard the
discourse, but she made her self in a readiness to try the event.


We willl also see the event, but whist here comes Cynthia, with all her
train: Let us sneak in amongst them.


Eumenides, it cannot sink into my head, that I should be signified by that
sacred Fountain, for many things are there in the world, to which those
words may be applied.


Good Madame vouchsafe but to try, else shall I think my self most unhappy,
that I asked not my sweet Mistress.


Will you not yet tell me her name?


Pardon me good Madame, for if Endimion awake he shall: my self have sworn,
never to reveal it.


Well, let us to Endimion. I will not be so stately (good Endimion) not to
stoop to do thee good: and if thy liberty consist in a kiss from me, thou
shalt have it. And although my mouth hath been here tofore as untouched as my
thoughts, yet now to recover thy life, (though to restore thy youth it be
impossible) I will do that to Endimion, which yet never mortal man could bost
of heretofore, nor shall ever hope for hereafter.


Madame he begins to stir.


Soft Eumenides, stand still.


Ah, I see his eyes almost open.


I command thee once again stir not: I will stand behind him.


What do I see, Endimion almost awake?


Endimion, Endimion, art thou deaf or dumb? or hath this long sleep taken
away thy memory? Ah my sweet Eudimion, see thou not Eumenides? thy faithful
friend, thy faithful Eumenides, who for thy safety hath been careless of
his own content. Speak Endimion, Endimion, Endimion.


Endimion? I call to mind such a name.


Hast thou forgotten thy self Endimion? then do I not marvel thou remember
not thy friend. I tell thee thou art Endimion, and I Eumenides: behold also
Cynthia, by whose favour thou art awaked, and by whose virtue thou shalt
continue thy natural course.


Endimion, speak sweet Endimion, know thou not Cynthia?


O heavens, whom do I behold, fair Cynthia, divine Cynthia?


I am Cynthia, and thou Endimion.


Endimion, What do I here? What, a gray beard? hollow eyes? withered body:
decayed limbs? and all in one night?


One night? thou hast here slept forty years, by what Enchantress as yet
it is not known: and behold the twig to which thou laiedst thy head, is now
become a tree, call thou not Eumenides to remembrance?


Thy name I do remember by the sound, but thy favour I do not yet call to
mind, only divine Cynthia, to whom time, fortune, destiny, death, are
subject, I see and remember, and in all humility, I regard and reverence.


You have good cause to remember Eumenides, who hath for thy safety forsaken
his own solace.


Am I that Endimion, who was wont in Court to lead my life, and in Justs,
turneys, and arms to exercise my youth? am I that Endimion?


Thou art that Endimion and I Eumenides, wilt thou not yet call me to
remembrance?


Ah sweet Eumenides, I now perceive thou art he, and that my self have the
name of Endimion, but that this should be my body I doubt: for howe could my
curled locks be turned to gray hairs, and my strong body to a dying
weakness, having waxed old, and not kowing it.


Well Endimion arise, a while sit down, for that thy limbs are stiff, and
not able to stay thee, and tell what hast thou seen in thy sleep all this
while? What dreams, visions, thoughts, and fortunes? For it is impossible, but
in so long time, thou shouldest see things strange.


Fair Cynthia I will rehearse what I have seen, humbly desiring, that when I
exceed in length, you give me warning, that I may end: for to utter all I
have to speak would be troublesome, although happily the strangeness may
somewhat abate the tediousness.


Well Endimion begin.


Me thought I saw a Lady passing fair, but very mischievous, who in the one
hand carried a knife, with which she offered to cut my throat: and in the
other a looking-glasse, wherein seeing how ill anger became Ladies, she
refrained from intended violence. She was accompanied with other Damsels, one
of which with a sterne countenance, as it were with a settled malice engraven in
her eyes, provoked her to execute mischief: an other with visage sad and
constant only in sorrow, with her arms crossed, and watery eyes, seemed to
lament my fortune, but durst not offer to prevent the force. I started in my
sleep, feeling my very veins to swell, and my sinews to stretch with fear,
and such a cold sweat bedewed all my body, that death it self could not be
so terrible, as the vision.


A strange sight. Giptes at our better leisure shall expound it.


After long debating with her self, mercy overcame anger, and there appeared
in her heavenly face such a divine Majesty, mingled with a sweet mildenes,
that I was ravished with the sight above measure, and wished that I might have
enjoyed the sight without end, and so she departed with the other Ladies, of
which the one retained still an unmovable cruelty, the other a constant
pity.


Poor Endimion, how wast thou affrighted? What else?


After her immediately appeared an aged man, with a beard as white as snow,
crying in his hand a book with three leaves, speaking as I remember these words.
Endimion, receive this book with three leaves, in which are contained
counsels, policies, and pictures, and with that he offered me the book, which
I rejected: wherewith moved with a disdainful pity, he rent the first leaf
in a thousand shivers, the second time he offered it, which I refused also: at
which bending his brows, and pitching his eyes fast to the ground, as though
they were fixed to the earth, and not again to be removed: then suddenly
casting them up to the heavens, he tore in a rage the second leaf, and offered
the book only with one leaf. I know not whether fear to offend, or desire
to know some strange thing, moved me: I took the book, and so the old man
vanished.


What did thou imagine was in the last leaf?


There I portraid to life, with a cold quaking in every joint. I beheld many
wolves barking at thee Cynthia, who having ground their teeth to bite, did with
striving bleed themselves to death. There might I see ingratitude with an
hundred eyes, gazing for benefits, and with a thousand teeth, gnawing on the
bowels wherein she was bred. Treachery stood all clothed in white, with a
smiling countenance, but both her hands bathed in blood. Envy with a pale and
megar face, (whose body was so lean, that one might tell all her bones, and
whose garment was so totterd, that it was easy to number every thread) stood
shooting at stars, whose darts fell down again on her own face. There
might I behold Drones, or Beetles, I know not howe to term them creeping
under the wings of a princely Eagle, who being carried into her nest, sought
there to suck that vein, that would have killed the Eagle. I mused that
things so base, should attempt a fact so barbarous, or durst imagine a thing
so bloody. And many other things Madame, the repetition whereof, may at your
better leisure seem more pleasing: for. Bees surfeit sometimes with honey,
and the Gods are glutted with harmony, and your highness may be dulled with
delight.


I am content to be dieted, therefore let us in. Eumenides, see that
Endimion be well tended, least either eating immoderatlie, or sleeping again
too long, he fall into a deadly surfeit, or into his former sleep.

See this also be proclaimed, that whosoever will discover this practise,
shall have of Cynthia infinite thanks, and no small rewards.


Ah Endimion, none so joyful as Floscula, of thy restoring.


Yes Floscula, let Eumenides be somewhat gladder, and do not that wrong to the
settled friendship of a man, as to compare it with the light affection of a
woman. Ah my dear friend Endimion suffer me to dye, with gazing at thee.


Eumenides, thy friendship is immortal, and not to be conceived, and thy
good will Floscula, better then I have deserved. But let us all wait on
Cynthia: I marvel Semele speaks not a word.


Because if she do, she loses her tongue.


But how prospers your love?


I never yet spake word since your sleep.


I doubt not but your affection is old, and your appetite cold.


No Endimion, thine hath made it stronger, and now are my sparks grown to
flames, and my fancies almost to frenzies: but let us follow, and within we
will debate all this matter at large.


Epi, love hath iustled my liberty from the wall, and taken the upper hand of
my reason.


Let me then trip up the heals of your affection, and thrust your goodwill
into the gutter.


No Epi, Love is a Lord of misrule, and keeps Christmas in my corps.


No doubt there is good cheer: what dishes of delight doth his Lordship
feast you withal?


First, with a great platter of plum-porrige of pleasure, wherein is stewed the
mutton of mistrust.


Excellent love lap.


Then comes a Pie of patience, a Hen of honey, a Goose of gall, a Capon of
care, and many other Viands, some sweet, and some sour, which proves love
to be as it was said of, in old years. Dulce venenum.


A brave banquet.


But Epi. I pray thee feel on my chin, some thing prycketh me. What
dost thou feel or see.


There are three or four little hairs.


I pray thee call it my beard, howe shall I be troubled, when this young
spring shall grow to a great wood?


O sir your chin is but a quyller yet, you will be most majestic when it
is full fledge. But I marvel that you love Dipsas that old Crone.


Agnosco veteris vestigia flammae, I love the smoke of an old fire.


Why she is so cold, that no fire can thaw her thoughts.


It is an old goose Epi, that will eat no oats, old Kine will kick, old
Rats gnaw cheese, and old sackes will have much patching. I prefer an old
Cony before a Rabbit sucker, and an ancient hen before a young chicken
peeper.


Argumentum ab antiquate, My master loves antique work.


Give me a pippin that is withered like an old wife.


Good sir.


Then, a contrario sequitur argumentum. Give me a wife that looks like an old
pippin.


Nothing hath made my master a fool, but flat Schollership.


Know thou not that old wine is best?


Yes.


And thou know that like will to like?


I.


And thou know that Venus loved the best Wine.


So.


Then I conclude, that Venus was an old woman in an old cup of wine. For,
est Venus in vinis, ignis in igne fuit.


O lepidum caput, O mad cap master. You were worthy to win Dipsas, were she
as old again, for in your love, you have worn the nap of your wit quite
off, and made it threadbare. But soft who comes here?


My solicitors.


All hail sir Tophas, how feel you your self?


Stately in every joint, which the common people term stifnes. Doth Dipsas
stoop? vvyll she yield? will she bend?


O sir as much as you would wish, for her chin almost touches her knees.


Master, she is bent I warrant you.


What conditions doth she ask?


She hath vowed she will never love any that hath not a tooth in his head
less then she.


How many hath she?


One.


That goes harde Master, for then you must have none.


A small request, and agreeable to the gravity of her years. What should a
wise man do with his mouth full of bones like a channel house. The Turtle true
hath ne'er a tooth.


Thy Master is in a notable vain, that will loose his teeth to be like a
Turtle.


Let him loose his tongue to, I care not.


Nay you must also have no nails, for she long since hath cast hers.


That I yield to, what a quiet life shall Dipsas and I lead, when we can
neither byte nor scratch? You may see youths, how age provides for peace.


How shall we do to make him leave his love, for we never spake to her?


Let me alone. She is a notable Witch, and hath turned her maid Bagoa to an
Aspen tree, for betraying her secretes.


I honour her for her cunning, for now when I am weary of walking on two
legs, what a pleasure may she do me to turn me to some goodly Ass, and
help me to four.


Nay then I must tell you the troth, her husband Geron is come home, who this
fifty years hath had her to wife.


What do I hear? Hath she an husband? Go to the Sexteene, and tell him
desire is dead, and will him to dig his grave. O heavens, an husband? What
death is agreeable to my fortune?


Be not desperate, and we will help you to find a young Lady,


I love no grissels they are so brittle, they will crack like glass, or so
dainty, that if they be touched, they are straight of the fashion of wax:
Animus maioribus instate. I desire old Matrons. What a sight would it be to
embrace one whose hair were as orient as the pearl? whose teeth shall be so
pure a watchet, that they shall stain the truest Turkis? whose nose shall
throw more beams from it then the fiery Carbuncle? whose eyes shall be
enuirond about with redness, exceeding the deepest Coral? And whose lips
might compare with silver for the paleness? Such a one if you can help me to,
I will by peece-meale curtoll my affections towards Dipsas, and vvalke my
swelling thoughts till they be cold.


Wisely provided. How say you my friends, will you angle for my Masters
cause?


Most willingly.


If we speed him not shortly, I will burn my cap, we will serve him of the
spades, and dig an old wife out of the grave, that shall be answerable to his
gravity.


Youths adieu; he that brings me first news, shall possess mine
inheritance.


What, is thy Master landed?


Know you not that my Master is Liber tenens? Samias What's that?


A Free-holder. But I will after him.


And we to hear what news of Endimion for the conclusion.


Who would have thought that Tellus being so fair by nature, so honourable by
birth, so wise by education, would have entered into a mischief to the Gods so
odious, to men so detestable, and to her friend so malicious.


If Bagoa had not betrayed it, howe then should it have come to light? But we
see that Gold and fair words, are of force to corrupt the strongest men; And
therefore able to work silly women like wax.


I marvel what Cynthia will determine in this cause.


I fear as in all causes, hear of it in justice, and then judge of it in
mercy; for howe can it be that she that is unwilling to punish her deadliest
foes with disgrace, will revenge injuries of her train with death.


That old witch Dipsas in a rage, having understood her practise to be
discovered, turned poor Bagoa to an Aspen tree, but let us make hast and bring
Tellus before Cynthia, for she was coming out after us.


Let us go.


Dipsas, thy years are not so many as thy vices, yet more in number then
commonly nature doth afford, or justice should permit. Hast thou almost
these fifty years practised that detested wickedness of witchcraft? Wast thou
so simple, as for to know the nature of Simples, of all creatures to be most
sinful?

Thou hast threatened to turn my course awry, and alter by thy damnable Art,
the government that I now possess by the eternal Gods. But know thou Dipsas,
and let all the Enchaunters know, that Cynthia being placed for light on
earth, is also protected by the powers of heaven. Breath out thou may words,
gather thou may herbs, find out thou may stones agreeable to thine Art,
yet of no force to appall my heart, in which courage is so rooted, and constant
persuasion of the mercy of the Gods so grounded, that all thy witch-craft I
esteem as weak, as the world doth thy case wretched.

This noble Gentleman Geron, once thy husband, but now thy mortal hate, did
thou procure to live in a Desert, almost desperate. Endimion the flovvre of my
Court, and the hope of succeeding time, hast thou bewitched by Art, before
thou would suffer him to flourish by nature.


Madam, things past may be repented, not recalled: there is nothing so wicked
that I have not done, nor any thing so wished for as death. Yet among al the
things that I committed, there is nothing so much torments my rented and
ransacked thoughts, as that in the prime of my husbands youth, I divorced him by
my devilish Art, for which, if to die might be amends, I would not live till
to morrow. If to live and still be more miserable would better content him, I
would wish of all creatures to be oldest and ugliest.


Dipsas, Thou hast made this difference between me and Endimion, that being
both young, thou hast caused me to wake in melancholy, loosing the joys of
my youth, and him to sleep, not remembering youth.


Stay, here comes Tellus, we shall now know all.


I would to Cynthia thou could make as good an excuse in truth, as to me
thou hast done by wit.


Truth shall be mine answer, and therefore I will not study for an excuse.


Is it possible Tellus, that so few years should harbour so many mischiefs? Thy
swelling pride have I borne, because it is a thing that beauty makes
blameless, which the more it exceeds fairness in measure, the more it
stretches it self in disdain. Thy devises against Corsites I smile at, for
that wits the sharper they are, the shrewder they are. But this unacquainted
and most unnatural practise with a vile Enchantress, against so noble a
Gentleman as Endimion, I abhor, as a thing most malicious, and will revenge,
as a deed most monstrous.

And as for you Dipsas, I will send you into the Desert amongst wild beasts,
and try whether you can cast Lyons, Tygars, Bores, and Bears, into as dead a
sleep as you did Endimion, or turn them to trees, as you have done Bagoa.
But tell me Tellus, what was the cause of this cruel part, far unfitting thy
sex, in which nothing should be but simpleness: and much disagreeing from thy
face, in which nothing seemed to be but softness.


Divine Cynthia, by whom I receive my life, and am content to end it. I can
neither excuse my fault without lying, nor confess it without shame; Yet were
it possible that in so heavenly thoughts as yours, there could fall such
earthly motions as mine, I would then hope, if not to be pardoned without
extreme punishment, yet to be heard without great marvel.


Say on Tellus, I cannot imagine any thing that can colour such a cruelty.


Endimion, that Endimion in the prime of his youth, so ravished my hart with
love, that to obtain my desires, I could not find means, nor to resit them
reason.

What was she that favoured not Endimion, being young, wise, honourable, and
virtuous; besides, what mettle was she made of (be she mortal) that is not
affected with the spice, nay infected with the poison of that (not to be
expressed, yet always to be felt) Love? which breaks the brains, and never
brooseth the brow: consumes the hart, and never touches the skin: and
makes a deep scar to be seen, before any wound at all be felt. My hart
too tender to vvithstande such a divine fury, yielded to Love. Madame I not
without blushing confess, yielded to Love.


A strange effect of love, to work such an extreme hate. How say you
Endimion, all this was for love?


I say Madam then the Gods send me a woman's hate.


That were as bad, for then by contrary you should never sleep. But on
Tellus, let us hear the end.


Feeling a continual burning in all my bowels, and a bursting almost in every
vain, I could not smoother the inward fire, but it must needs be perceived
by the outward smoke, and by the flying abroad of diverse sparks, diverse
judged of my scalding flames.

Endimion as full of art as wit, marking mine eyes, (in which he might see
almost his own,) my sighs, by which he might ever hear his name sounded,
aimed at my hart, in which he was assured his person was imprinted, and by
questions wrung out that, which was ready to burst out. When he saw the
depth of my affections, he swear, that mine in respect of his, were as fumes to
Aetna, valleys to Alps, Ants to Eagles, and nothing could be compared to my
beauty but his love, and eternity. Thus drawing a smooth shoe upon a crooked
foot, he made me believe, that (which all of our sex willingly acknowledge)
I was beautiful. And to wonder, (which indeed is a thing miraculous) that any
of his sex should be faithful.


Endimion, how will you clear your self?


Madam, by mine own accuser.


Well Tellus proceed, but breefelie, least taking delight in uttering thy
love, thou offend us with the length of it.


I will Madame quickly make an end of my love my tale. Finding continual
increase of my tormenting thoughts, and that the enjoying of my love, made
deeper wounds then the entering into it. I could find no means to ease my
grief, but to follow Endimion, and continually to have him in the object of
mine eyes, who had me slave and subject to his love.

But in the moment that I feared his falsehood, and fried my self most in
mine affections, I found, (ah grief, even then I lost my self.) I found him
in most melancholy and desperate terms, cursing his stars, his state, the
earth, the heavens, the world, and all for the love of


Of whom? Tellus speak boldly.


Madame, I dare not utter for fear to offend.


Speak I say; who dare take offence, if thou be commanded by Cynthia?


For the love of Cynthia.


For my love Tellus, that were strange. Endimion is it true?


In all things Madame. Tellus doth not speak false.


What will this breed to in the end? Well Endimion, we shall hear all.


I seeing my hopes turned to mishaps, and a settled dissembling towards me, and
an unmovable desire to Cynthia, forgetting both my self and my sex; fell
unto this unnatural hate; for knowing your virtues Cynthia to be immortal, I
could not have an imagination to withdraw him. And finding mine own
affections unquenchable, I could not carry the mind that any else should
possess what I had pursued. For though in majesty, beauty, virtue, and
dignity, I always humbled and yielded my self to Cynthia, yet in affections,
I esteemed my self equal with the Goddesses, all other creatures according to
their states with my self. For stars to their bigness have their lights, and
the sun hath no more. And little pytchers when they can hold no more, are as
full as great vessels that run over. Thus Madam in all truth, have I uttered
the unhappiness of my love, and the cause of my hate, yielding wholly to that
divine judgment which never erred for want of wisdom, or envied for too much
partiality.


How say you my Lords to this matter? But what say you Endimion, hath Tellus
told troth?


Madame in all things, but in that she said I loved her, and swore to honour
her.


Was there such a time when as for my love thou did vow thy self to death,
and in respect of it loth'd thy life? speak Endimion, I will not revenge it
with hate.


The time was Madam and is, and ever shall be that I honoured your highness
above all the world, but to stretch it so far as to call it love, I never
durst. There hath none pleased mine eye but Cynthia, none delighted mine ears
but Cynthia, none possessed my hart but Cynthia. I have forsaken all other
fortunes to follow Cynthia, and here I stand ready to die if it please
Cynthia. Such a difference hath the Gods set between our states, that all
must be duty, loyalty, and reverence, nothing (without it vouchsafe your
highness) be termed love. My unspotted thoughts, my languishing body, my
discontented life, let them obtain by princely favour that, which to
challenge they must not presume, only wishing of impossibilities: with
imagination of which, I will spend my spirits, and to my self that no
creature may hear, softly call it love. And if any urge to utter what I
whisper, then will I name it honour. From this sweet conteplation if I be not
drinen, I shall live of al men the most content, taking more pleasure in mine
aged thoughts, then ever I did in my youthful actions.


Endimion, this honourable respect of thine, shall be christened love in thee, my
reward for it favour. Persevere Endimion in loving me, I account more strength in
a true hart, then in a walled City. I have laboured to win all, and study to
keep such as I have won, but those that neither my favour can move to
continue constant, nor my offered benefits get to be faithful, the Gods
shall either reduce to truth, or revenge their trecheries with justice.
Endimion continue as thou hast begun, and thou shalt find that Cynthia shines
not on thee in vain.


Your Highness hath blessed me, and your words have again restored my
youth: me thinks I feel my joints strong, and these mouldy hairs to molt,
all by your virtue Cynthia, into whose hands the Balance that weighs time
fortune, are committed.


What young again? then it is pity to punish Tellus.


Ah Endimion, now I know thee and ask pardon of thee: suffer me still to wish
thee well.


Tellus, Cynthia must command what she will.


Endimion, I rejoice to see thee in thy former estate.


Good Floscula, to thee also am I in my former affections.


Endimion, the comfort of my life, howe am I ravished with a joy matchless,
saving only the enjoying of my mistress.


Endimion, you must now tell who Eumenides shrineth for his Saint.


Semele Madame.


Semele Eumenides? is it Semele? the very wasp of all women, whose tongue
stings as much as an Adders tooth?


It is Semele, Cynthia: the possessing of whose love, must only prolong my
life.


Nay since Endimion is restored, we will have all parties pleased. Semele, are
you content after so long trial of his faith, such rare secrecy, such
unspotted love, to take Eumenides? Why speak you not? Not a word?


Silence Madame consents: that is most true.


It is true Endimion. Eumenides, take Semele. Take her I say.


Humble thanks Madame, now only do I begin to live.


A harde choice Madame, either to be married if I say nothing, or to lose my
tongue if I speak a word. Yet do I rather choose to have my tongue cut out,
then my heart distempered: I will not have him.


Speaks the Parrot? she shall nod hereafter with signs: cut off her tongue,
nay her head, that having a servant of honourable birth, honest manners, (...)
true love, will not be persuaded.


He is no faithful I ^or then would he have asked his Mistress.


Had he not been faithful, he had never seen into the fountain, and so lost
his friend and Mistress.


Thine own thoughts sweet Semele, witness against thy words, for what hast
thou found in my life but love? and as yet, what have I found in my love but
bitterness? Madame pardon Semele, and let my tongue ransom hers.


Thy tongue Eumenides? what should thou live wanting a tongue to blaze the
beauty of Semele. Well Semele, I will not command love, for it cannot be
enforced: let me entreat it.


I am content your Highness shall command, for now only do I think Eumenides
faithful, that is willing to lose his tongue for my sake: yet loath, because it
should do me better service. Madame, I accept of Eumenides.


I thank you Semele.


Ah happy Eumenides, that hast a friend so faithful, and a mistress so fair:
with what sudden mischief will the Gods daunt this excess of joy? Sweet
Semele, I live or dye as thou wilt.


What shall become of Tellus? Tellus you know Endimion is vowed to a service,
from which death cannot remove him. Corsites casts still a lovely looks
towards you, how say you will have your Corsites, and so receive pardon for all
that is past?


Madame most willingly.


But I cannot tel whether Corsites, be agreed.


I Madame more happy to enjoy Tellus then the Monarchy of the world.


Why she caused you to be pinched with Fairies.


I but her fairness hath pinched my hart more deeply.


Well enjoy thy love. But what have you wrought in the Castle Tellus?


Only the picture of Endimion.


Then so much of Endimion as his picture comes to, possess and play withal.


Ah my sweet Tellus, my love shall be as thy beauty is, matchless.


Now it rests Dipsas, that if thou wilt forswear that vile Art of
Enchanting, Geron hath promised again to receive thee, otherwise if thou be
wedded to that wickedness, I must and will see it punished to the uttermost.


Madam, I renounce both substance and shadow of that most horrible and hateful
trade, vowing to the Gods continual penance, and to your highness obedience.


Howe say you Geron, will you admit her to your Wife?


I with more joy then I did the first day: for nothing could happen to make me
happy, but only her forsaking that lewd and detestable course. Dipsas I
embrace thee.


And I thee Geron, to whom I will hereafter recite the cause of these my first
follies.


Well Endimion, nothing rests now but that we depart. Thou hast my favour,
Tellus her friend, Eumenides in Paradise with his Semele, Geron contented with
Dipsas.


Nay soft, I cannot handsomely go to bed without Bagoa.


Well Sir. Tophas, it may be there are more virtues in me then my self
knows of, for Endimion I awaked, and at my words he waxed young, I will try
whether I can turn this tree again to thy true love.


Turn her to a true love or false, so she be a wench I care not.


Bagoa, Cynthia puts an end to thy harde fortunes, for being turned to a tree
for revealing a truth, I will recover thee again, if in my power be the effect
of truth.


Bagoa? a bots upon thee.


Come my Lords let us in, you Gyptes and Pythagoras, if you cannot content
your selves in our Court, to fall from vain follies of Philosophers, to such
virtues as are here practised, you shall be entertained according to your
deserts, for Cynthia is no stepmother to strangers.


I had rather in Cynthias Court spend ten years, then in Greece one hour.


And I choose rather to live by the sight of Cynthia, then by the possessing of
all Egipt.


Then follow.


We all attend.


A Man walking abroad, the wind and Sun strove for sovereignty, the one with
his blast, the other with his beams. The wind blew hard, the man wrapped his
garment about him harder: it blustred more strongly, he then girt it fast to
him: I cannot preuaile said the wind. The Sun casting her Crystal beams,
began to warm the man: he vnlosed his gown. yet it shined brighter: he then
put it off. I yield said the wind, for if thou continue shining, he will also
put off his cote.

Dread Sovereign, the malicious that seek to overthrow us with threats, do
but stiffen our thoughts, and make them sturdier in storms: but if your
Highness vouch safe with your favourable beams to glance upon us, we shall not
only stoop, but with all humility, lay both our hands and hearts, at your
Majesties feet.


