I Cannot see, Montanus, why it is feigned by the Poets, that Love sat upon the
Chaos and created the world; since in the world there is so little love.

thou can not see that which cannot with reason be imagined; for it the
divine virtues of Love, had dispersed themselves through the powers of the
world, so forcibly as to make them take by his influence, the forms and
qualities impressed within them, no doubt they could not c^se, but favour more of
his Divinity.


I do not think Love hath any spark of Divinity in him; since the end or
his being is earthly. In the blood is he begot by the frail fires of the eye,
quench by the frayler shadows of thought. What reason have we then to soothe
his humour with such zeal, and follow his fading delights with such passion.


We have bodies, Siluestris, and humane bodies; which in their (...) natures
being much more wretched then beasts, (...) (...) more miserably then beasts
pursue their own (...): And since it will ask longer labour and study to
subdue the powers of our blood, to the rule of the soul, then to satisfy them
with the fruition of our loves, let us be constant in the worlds errors, and
seek our own torments.


As good yield indeed submissively, and satisfy part of our affections; as be
stubburne without ability to resist, and enjoy none of them: I am in worst
plight, since I love a Nymph that mocks love.


And I one that hates love.


I, one that thinks her self above love.


Let us not dispute whose mistress is most bad, since they be all cruel; nor
which of our fortunes be most froward, since they be all desperate. I will
hang my Skutchin on this tree in honour of Ceres, and write this verse on the
tree in hope of my success, Penelopen ipsam perstes, mode tempore vinces.
Penelope will yield at last: continue and conquer.


I this: Fructus abest facies cum bona teste caret. Fair faces lose their
favours, if they admit no lovers.


But why studiest thou? What wilt thou write for thy Lady to read?


That which necessity makes me to endure, love reverence, wisdom wonder at.
Riualem patienter h^e.


Come, let us every one to our walks, it may be we shall meet them walking.


It is time to hang up our Garlands, this is our harvest holiday, we must both
sing and dance in the honour of Ceres: of what colours or flowers is thine
made of, Niobe?


Or Salamints, which in the morning are white, (...) at noone, and in the
Evening purple, for in my affections shall there be no staidness but in
vnstaiedues: bue what is yours of, Nisa?


Of Holly, because it is most holy, which lovely green neither the Suns
beams, nor the winds blasts can alter or diminish. But Celia, what Garland
have you?


Mine all of Cypres leaves, which are broadest and beautifullest, yet bears
the least fruit; for beauty makes the brightest show, being the slightest
substance; and I am content to wither before I be worn, and deprive my self
of that which so many desire.


Come, let us make an end, lest Ceres come and find us slack in performing
that which we owe: But soft, some have been here this Morning before us.


The amorous Foresters, or none, for in the woods they have eaten so much
wake-Robin, that they cannot sleep for love.


Alas poor souls, how ill love founds in their lips, who telling a long tale
of hunting, think they have bewrayed a sad passion of love!


Give them leave to love, since we have liberty to choose, for as great sport
do I take in coursing their tame hearts, as they do pains in hunting their
wild Harts.


Niobe, your affection is but pinned to your tongue, which when you lift you
can unloose* But let us read what they have written: Penelope^ ipsam perstes
mode tempore vinces. That is for you Nisa, whom nothing will move, yet hope
makes him hover.


A fond Hobbie to hover over an Eagle.


But Foresters think all Birds to be Buntings. What's the next Fructus abest
facies cum bona teste care^, Celia, the Forester gives you good counsel, take
your pen^worth whiles the market serves.


I hope it will be market day till my deaths day.


Let me read to Ri^tem patienter babe, Heetoucheth you, Niobe, on the quick,
yet you see how patient he is in your constancy.


Inconstancy is a vice, which I will not swap for all the virtues; though I
throw one off with my whole hand, I can pull him again with my little finger;
let us encourage them and write something; if they censure in favourably, we
know them fools; if angrily, we will say they are fro^ard.


I will begin. Cedit amor rebus, res age, tutus eris.


Indeed better to tell stars then be idle, yet better idle then ill employed;
Mine this, Sat ^ihi sifacies, sit been nota mihi.


You care for nothing but a Glass, that is a flatterer.


Then all men are Glasses.


Some Glasses are true.


No men are; but this is mine: Victoriatecum stabit.


Thou gives hope.


He is worthy o^e, that is patient.


Let us sing, and so attend on Ceres; for this day, although into her heart
never entered any motion of love, yet usually to the Temple of Cupid, he
offereth^ vo white Doves, as entreating his favour, and one Eagle, as
commanding his power. Praecibus{que} minaes regaliter addet.


What noise is this, what assembly, what Idolatry Is the modesty of virgins
turned to wantonness? The honour of Ceres accounted immortal? And Erisicthon
ruler of this Forest, esteemed of no force? Impudent giglots, that you are, to
disturb my game, or dare do honour to any but Erisicthon. It is not your
fair faces as smooth as lea^e, nor your entysing eyes, though they drew vron
like Adamai^ts, nor your filed speeches, were they as forcible, as Thessalides,
that shall make me any way flexible.


Erisicthon, thy sterne looks joined with thy stout speeches; thy words as
vnkembd as thy locks, were able to affright men of bold courage, and to make
us silly girls frantic, that are full of fear; but know thou, Erisicthon,
that were thy hands so vnstated as thy tongue, and th'one as ready to execute
mischief, as the other to threaten it; it should neither move our hearts to
ask pity, or remove our bodies from this place; we are the handmaids of
divine Ceres, to fair Ceres is this holy tree dedicated, to Ceres, by whose
favour thy self lives, that are worthy to perish.


Are you addicted to Ceres, that in spite of Erisicthon you will use these
sacrifices? No, immodest girls, you shall see that I have neither regard of
your sex which men should tender, nor of your beauty which foolish love would
dote on, nor of your goddess, which none but pieuish girls reverence: I will
destroy this tree in ^spite of all, and that you may see my hand execute, (...)
my heart intends; and that no mean may appea^e my malice, my last word shall
be the beginning of the first blow.


Our alas, what hath he done?


Our selves, I fear, must also minister matter to his fury.


Let him alone: but see, the tree powers our blood, and I hear a voice.


What voice? If in the tree there be any body, speak quickly, left the next
blow hit the tale out of thy mouth.


Monster of men, hate of the heavens, and to the earth a burden, what hath
chaste Fidelia committed? It is thy spite, Cupid, that having no power to wound
my vnsported mind, procurest means to mangle my tender body, and by violence to
gash those sides, that enclose a heart dedicate to virtue: or is it that savage
satire, that feeding his sensual appetite upon lust, seeks now to quench it
with blood, that being without hope to attain my love, he may with cruelty
end my life? Or doth Ceres, whose nymph I have been many years, in recompense
of my inviolable saith, reward me with unspeakable torments? Divine Phoebus
that pursued Daphne till she was turned to a Bay tree, ceased then to trouble
her. I, the gods are pitiful; and Cineras, that with fury followed his
daughter Miretia, till she was changed to a Mirretree, left then to prosecute
her; yea parents are natural: Phoebus lamented the loss of his friend,
Cineras of his child: but both gods, and men either forget or neglect the
change of Fidelia; nay follow her after her change, to make her more
miserable: so that there is nothing more hateful then to be chaste, whole
bodies are followed in the world with lust, and prosecuted in the graves with
tyranny. Whose minds the freer they are from vice, their bodies are in the
more danger of mischief; so that they are not safe when they live, because of
men's love; nor being changed, because of their hates; nor being dead, because
of their defaming. What is that chastity which so few women study to keep, and
both gods and men seek to violate? If only a naked name, why are we so
superstitious of a hollow found? If a rare virtue, why are men so careless of
such an exceeding rareness: Go, Ladies, tell Ceres I am that Fidelia, that so
long knit Garlands in her honour, and chased with a Satire, by prayer to the
gods became turned to a tree, whole body now is grown over with rough bark,
and whose golden locks are covered with green leaves; yet where ^nd nothing
can alter, neither the fear of death, nor the torments. If Ceres seek no
revenge, then let virginity be not only the scorn of Savage people, but the
spoil. But alas, I feel my last blood to come, therefore must end my last
breath. Farewell Ladies, whose lives are subject to many mischiefs; for if you
be fair, it is hard to be chaste; if chaste, impossible to be safe; if you be
young, you will quickly bend; if bend, you are suddenly broken. If you be
soul, you shall seldom be flattered: if you be not flattered, you will ever
be sorrowful. Beauty is a firm sicklenes, youth a feeble staidness,
deformity a continual sadness.


Thou monster, can thou hear this without grief?


Yea, and double your griefs with my blows.


Ah poor Fidelia, the express pattern of chastity, and example of
misfortune.


Ah cruel Erisicthon, that not only defacest these holy trees, but murtherest
also this chaste nymph.


Nymph or goddess it skills not, for there is none that Erisicthon cares
for, but Erisicthon: let Ceres the Lady of your harvest revenge when she will,
nay when she dares, and tell her this, that I am Erisicthon.


Thou art none of the gods.


No, a contemner of the gods.


And hope thou to escape revenge being but a man?


Yea, I care not for revenge being a man and Erisicthon.


Come, let us to Ceres and complain of this unacquainted and incredible
villain; if there be power in her deity, in her mind pity, or virtue in
virginity, this monster cannot escape.


Doth Erisicthon offer force to my Nymphs, and to my deity disgrace? Have I
stuffed his barnes with fruitful grain, and doth he stretch his hand against
me with intolerable pride? So it is, Ceres, thine eyes may witness what thy
Nymphs have told, here lies the tree hacked in pieces, and the blood scarce
cold of the fairest virgin. If this be thy cruelty, Cupid, I will no more
hallow thy temple with sacred vowes^t thy cankered nature, Erisicthon, thou
shalt find as great misery, as thou show malice: I am resolved of thy
punishment, and as speedy shall be my revenge, as thy rigour barbarous.
Tirtenae, on yonder lull where never grew grain nor lease, where nothing is
but barrenesse and coldness, fear and paleness, lies famine, go to her,
and say that Ceres commands her to gnaw on the bowels of Erisicthon, that
his hunger may be as unquenchable as his fury.


I obey, but how should I know her from others?


Thou can not miss of her, if thou remember but her name; and that can
thou not forget, for that coming near to the place, thou shalt find gnawing
in thy stomach. She lies gaping, and swallows noughe but air; her face
pale and so lean, that as easily thou may, through the very skin behold
the bone, as in a glass thy shadow; her hair long, black and shaggy; her
eyes sunk so far into her head, that she looks out of the nape of her
neck; her lips white and rough; her teeth hollow and red with rustinesse; her
skin so thin, that thou may as lively make an Anatomy of her body, as she
were cut up with Chirurgios; her maw like a dry bladder, her heart swo^ne
big with wind, and all her bowels like snakes working in her body. This
monster when thou shalthehold, tell her my mind, and return with speed.


I go, fearing more the sight of famine, then the force.


Take thou these few cares of corn, but let not (...) so much as smell to
them; and let her go aloose from thee: Now shall Erisicthon see that Ceres is
a great goddess, as full of power as himself of pride; and as pitiless, as
he presumptuous; how think you Ladies, is not this revenge apt for ^o great
injury?


Yes Madam: To let men see, they that contend with the gods, do but confound
themselves.


But let us to the Temple of Cupid, and offer sacrifice; they that think it
strange for chastime to humble it self to Cupid, know neither the power of
love, nor t^e nature of virginity: th'one having absolute authority to
command, the other difficulty to resist: and where such continual war is
between love and virtue, there must be some parties, and continual perils:
Cupid was never conquered, and therefore must be flattered; Virginity hath,
and therefore must be humble.


Into my heart, Madam, there did never enter any motion of love.


Those that often say, they cannot love, or will not love, certainly they
love. Did thou never see Cupid?


No, but I have heard him described at the full, and as I imagined, foolishly.
First that he should be a god blind and naked, with wings, with bow, with
arrows, with free-brands; swimming sometimes in the Sea, playing sometimes on
the shore; with many other devices, which the Painters being the Poets Apes,
have taken as great pains to shadow, as they to lie. Can I think that gods
that command all things, would go naked? What should he do with wings that
knows not where to slice? Or what with arrows, that sees not howe to aim?
The heart is a narrow marks go hit, and rather requires Angus eyes to take
level, there a blind boy to shoot at random: If he were fire, the Sea would
quench those coals, or the flame turn him into cinders.


Well Nisa, thou shalt see him.


I fear Niobe hath felt him.


Not I, Madam, yet must I confess, that oftentimes I have had sweet thoughts,
sometimes hard conceits, betwixt both a kind of yielding; I know not what. But
certainly I think it is not love: sigh I can, and (...) ease in melancholy:
smile I do and take pleasure in imagination, I feel in my self a pleasing
pain, a chill heate, a delicate bitterness, how to term it I know not;
without doubt it may be love, sure I am it is not hate.


Niobe is tender hearted, whose thoughts are (...) water, yielding to every
thing, and nothing to be seen.


Well, let us to Cupid, and tak^ ^eede (...) your stubbernesse yo'i offend him
not, whom by entreaties you ought to follow Dianas Nymphs were as cha^t as
Ceres virgins, as fair, as wife: how Cupid tormented them, I had rather you
should hear then feel, but this is truth, they all yielded to love: look not
scornfully, my Nymphs, I say they are yielded to love. This is the temple,
thou great god Cupid, whom the gods regard and men reverence, let it be
lawful for Ceres to offer her sacrifice.


Divine Ceres, Cupid accepts any thing, that comes from Ceres, which
feeds my Sparrows with ripe corn, my Pigeons with wholesome seeds; and
honour my Temple with chaste virgins.


Then Love, to thee I bring these white and spotless Doves, in token that my
heart is as free from any thought of love, as these from any blemish, and as
clear in virginity, as these perfect in whiteness. But that my Nymphs may
know both thy power and thy laws, and neither err in ignorance nor pride; let
me ask some questions to instruct them that they offend not th^, who^e resist
they cannot. In virgins what dost thou (...) desire?


In those that are not in love, reverent thoughts of love, in those that be,
faithful vows.


What doest thou most hate in virgins?


Pride in the beautiful, bitter taunts in the witty, (...) in all.


What may protect my virgins that they (...) ne^r love?


That they be never idle.


Why did thou so cruelly torment all Dianas Nymphe^ wit^ ^oue?


Because they thought it impossible to love.


What is the substance of love?


Constancy and secrecy.


What the signs?


Sighs and tears.


What the causes?


Wit and idleness.


What the means?


Opportunity and Importunity.


What the end?


Happiness without end.


What require^ thou of men?


That only shall be known to men.


What (...) for those that will not love?


To be deceived when they do.


Well, Cupid, entreat my Nymphs with favour and though to love it be no vice,
yet spotless virginity is the only virtue: let me keep their thoughts as
chaste as their bodies, than Ceres may be happy, they praised.


Why, Ceres, do you think that lust follows love? Ceres, lovers are chaste:
for what is love, divine love, but the quintescens of chastity, and affections
binding by heavenly motions, thou cannot be undone by earthly means, ^ by any
man?


^ continual sacrifice, warm us with mild ^ we seem immodest ^ ^ble like
stocks.


Ceres, ^ be light nor obstina^, ^ and faithful; so shall your flames warm,
but not burn, delight and never discomfort.


How say you, my Nymphs, doth not Cupid speak like a ^o^* Counsel you I will
not to love, but conjure you I ^u^t that you be not disdainful, let us in,
and see how Er^sictson speeds; famine f^eth swiftly, and hath already seized
on his stomach.


Stay, cruel Nisa, thou know not from whom thou fliest, and therefore
fliest; I come not to offer violence, but that which is inviolable, my thoughts
are as holy ^s thy vows, and I as constant in love as thou in cruelty: lust
follows not my love as shadows do bodies, but truth is woven into my love,
as veins into bodies; let me touch this tender arm, and say my love is
endless.


And to no end.


It is without spot.


And shall be without hope.


Dost thou disdain Love and his laws?


I do not disdain that which I think is not, yet laugh at those that honour
it if it be.


Time shall bring to pass, that Nisa shall confess there is love.


Then also will love make me confess, that Nisa (...) a fool.


Is it folly to love, which the gods account honourable, and men esteem holy?


The gods make any thing lawful, because they be gods, and men honour shadows
for substance, because they are men.


Both gods and men agree that love is a consuming of the heart, and restoring a
bitter death in a sweet life.


Gods do know, and men should, that love is a consuming of wit, and restoring
of folly, a staring blindness, and a blind gazing.


Would thou allot me death?


No, but discretion.


Yield some hope.


Hope to despair.


Not so long as Nisa is a woman.


Therein, Ramis, you show your self a man.


Why?


In flattering your self, that all women will yield.


All may.


Thou shalt swear that we cannot.


I will follow thee, and practise by denials to be patient, or by disdaining
die, and so be happy.


Though thou hast ouer-taken me in love, yet have I ouer-taken thee in running:
fair Celia, yield to love, to sweet love.


Montanus, thou art mad, that having no breath almost in running so fast, thou
wilt yet spend more in speaking so foolishly: yield to love! cannot, or if I
do, to thy love I will not.


The fairest Wolf chooses the foulest, if he be faithfullest, and he that
endures most grief, nor he that hath most beauty.


If my thoughts were wolfish, thy hopes might be as thy comparison is, beastly.


I would thy words were, as thy looks are, lovely.


I would thy looks were, as thy affection is, blind.


Fair faces should have smooth hearts.


Fresh flowers have crooked roots.


Women's beauties will wane, and then no art can make them fair?


Men's follies will ever wax, and then what reason can make them wise?


To be amiable and not to love, is like a painted Lady, to have colours, and no
life.


To be amorous, and not lovely, is like a pleasant fool full of words, and no
deserts.


What call you deserts, what lovely*


No lovelier thing then wit, no greater desert then patience.


Have not I an excellent wit?


If thou think sothy self, thou art an excellent fool.


Fool? No, Celia, thou shalt find me as wise, as I do thee proud, and as
little to digest thy taunts, as thou to brooke my love.


I thought, Montanus, that you could not deserve, when I told you what it was,
Patience.


Sweet Celia, I will be patient and forget this.


Then want you wit, that you can be content to be patient.


A hard choice, if I take all well, to be a fool, if find fault, then to want
patience.


The fortune of love, and the virtue is neither to have success, nor mean.
Farewell.


Farewell, nay I will follow, and I know not how it comes to pass; disdain
increases desire, and the farther possibility stands, the nearer
approaches hope.


Polypus, Niobe, is ever of the colour of the stone it slicketh to, and thou
ever of his humour thou talk with.


Find you fault that I love?


So many.


Would you have me like none?


Yes one.


Who shall make choice but my self?


My self.


For another to put thoughts into my head, were to pull the brains out of my
head; take not measure of my affections, but weigh your own: the Oak finds
no fault with the dew, because it also falls on the bramble. Believe me,
Sil^str^, the only way to be mad, is to be constant. Poets make their
wreathes of Laurel, Ladies of sundry flowers.


Sweet Niobe, a river running into diverse brookes becomes shallow, and a
mind divided into sundry affections, in the end will have none: what ^oy can I
take in the fortune of my love, when I shall know many to have the like
favours? Turtles slocke by couples, and breed both joy and young ones.


But Bees in swarms, and bring forth wax and honey.


Why do you covet many, that may find sweetness in one?


Why had Argus an hundred eyes, and might have seen with one?


Because whilst he slept with some, he might wake with other some.


And I love many, because being deceived by the inconstancy of diverse, I might
yet have one.


That was but a device of Inno, that knew I^p^ors love.


And this a rule of Venus, that knew (...) light^es.


The whole heaven hath but one Sun^.


But stars ins^.


The Rainbow is ever in one compass.


But of sundry colours.


A woman hath but one heart.


But a thousand thoughts.


My Lute, though it have many strings, makes a sweet consent, and a Ladies
heart, though it harbour many fancies, should embrace but one love.


The strings of my heart are tuned in a contrary key to your Lute, and make
as sweet harmony in discords, as yours in concord.


Why, what strings are in Ladies hearts? Not the base.


There is no base string in a woman's heart.


The mean?


There was never mean in woman's heart.


The treble*


Yea, the treble double and treble, and so are all my heart strings. Farewell.


Sweet Niobe, let us sing, that I may die with the Swan.


It will make you sigh the more, and live wi^ the Salamich.


Are thy tunes fire?


Are yours death?


No, but when I have heard thy voice, I am content to die.


I will sing to content thee.


Inconstant Niobe! unhappy Siluestris! yet had I rather she should rather
love all then none: for now though I have no certainty, yet do I find a
kind of sweetness.


Cruel Nisa, borne to slaughter men!


Coy Celia, bred up in skoftes!


Wavering, yet witty Niobe, but are we all mo^


Yea, and met withal, if your fortunes be answerable to mine, for I find my
M^stris immovable, and the hope I have is to despair.


Mine in pride intolerable, who bids me look for no other comfort then
contempt.


Mine is best of all, and worst, this is my hope, that either she will have
many or none.


I fear our fortunes cannot thrive, for Erisicthon hath felled down the holy
tree of Ceres, which will increase in her choler, and in her Nymphs cruelty:
let us see whether our Garlands be there which we hanged on that tree, and let
us hang our selves upon another.


A remedy for love irremoveable, but I will first see whether all those that
love Niobe, do like in the mean season I will content my self with my share.


Here is the tree. O mischief scarce to be believed, in possible to be
pardoned!


Pardoned it is not, for Erisicthon perishes with famine, and is able to
starve those that look on him. Here hang our Garlands, something is written,
read mine.


Cedit amor rebus, res age, tutus eris.


And mine.


Sat mihi si facies, sit been nota mihi.

Now for my self,

Victoriatecum stabit scilicet.


You see their posies is as their hearts; and their hearts as their speeches,
cruel, proud and wavering: let us all to the Temple of Cupid, and entreat his
favour, if not to obtain their loves, yet to revenge their hates, Cupid is a
kind god, who knowing our vnsported thoughts, will punish them, or release us.
We will study what revenge to have, that our pains proceeding of our own
minds, then plagues may also proceed from theirs. Are you all agreed*


I consent; but what if Cupid deny help?


Then he is no god.


But if he yield, what shall we ask?


Revenge.


Then let us prepare our selves for Cupids sacrifice.


Come, Protea, dear daughter, that name must thou buy too dear, necessity
causes thee to be sold, nature must frame thee to be contented. Thou see in
how short a space I have turned all my goods into my guts, where I feel a
continual fire, which nothing can quench, my famine increases by eating,
resembling the Sea which receives all things, and cannot be filled: life is
sweet, hunger sharpe, between them the contention must be short, unless
thou, Protea, prolong it. I have acknowledged my offence against Ceres, make
amends, I cannot, for the gods holding the balance in their hands, what
recompense can equally weigh with their punishments? Or what is he that having
but one ill thought of Ceres, that can race it with a thousand dutiful
actions? such is the difference, that none can find defence: this is the ods,
we miserable, and men, they immortal, and gods.


Dear father, I will obey both to sale and slaughter, accounting it the only
happiness of my life, should I live an hundred years, to prolong yours but
one my^te: I yield father, chop and change me, I am ready, but first let me
make my prayers to Neptune, and withdraw your self till I have done, long it
shall not be, now it must be.


Stay, sweet Protea, and that great god hear thy prayer, though Ceres stop
her ears to mine.


Sacred Neptune, whose godhead conquered my maiden-head, be as ready to hear
my passions, as I was to believe thine, and perform that now I entreat, which
thou did promise when thy self did love. Let not me be a pray to this
Merchant, who knows no other god then Gold, unless it be falsely swearing
by a god to get gold; let me, as often as I be bought for money, or pawnd for
meat, be turned into a Bird, Hare, or Lamb, or any shape, wherein I may be
safe, ^o shall I preserve mine own honour, my fathers life, and never repent
me of thy love, and now bestir thee, for of all men, I hate that Merchant,
who, if he find my beauty worth one penny, will put it to use to gain ten,
having no Religion in his mind, nor word in his mouth but money. Neptune, hear
now or never. Father, I have done.


In good time, Protea, thou hast done, for lo, the Merchant keeps not only
day, but hour.


If I had not been here, had I been forfeited^


No; Protea, but thy father famished. Here, Gentleman, I am ready with my
daughter.


Gentleman?


Yea, Gentleman, fair maid, my conditions make me no less.


Your conditions in deed brought in your obligations, your obligations, your
Usury, your Usury, your Gentry.


Why, do you judge no Merchants Gentlemen?


Yes, many, and some no men.


You shall be well entreated at my hands.


It may. Commmaunded I will not be.


If you be mine by bargain, you shall.


Father, hath this Merchant also bought my mind?


He cannot buy that, which cannot be sold.


Here is the money.


Here the maid: farewell, my sweet daughter, I commit thee to the gods, and
this mans courtesy, who I hope will deal no worse with thee, then he would
have the gods with him, I must be gone, left I do starve as I stand.


Farewell, dear Father, I will not cease continually to pray to Ceres, for thy
recovery.


You are now mine, Protea.


And mine own.


In will, not power.


In power if I will.


I perceive, Nettles gently touched, sting, but roughly handled, make no smart.


Yet roughly handled, Nettles are Nettles, and a Wasp is a Wasp, though ^hee
lose her sting.


But then they do no harm.


Nor good.


Come with me, and you shall see, that Merchant know their good, as well as
Gentlemen.


Sure I am, they have Gentlemen's goods.


This is the Temple of our great god, let us offer our sacrifice.


I am ready.


And I. Cupid, thou god of love, whose arrows have pierced our hearts, give
ear to our plaints.


If you come to Cupid, speak boldly, so must lovers, speak faithfully, so
must speeders.


These ever burning Lamps, are signs of my never to be quenched flames; this
bleeding heart, in which yet sticks the head of the golden shaft, is the
lively picture of inward torments: mine eyes shall bedew thine Altars with
tears, and my sighs cover thy Temple with a dark smoke, pity poor Ramis.


With this distaff have I spun, that my exercises may be as womanish as my
affections, and so did Hercules: and with this halter will I hang my self, if
my fortunes answer not my deserts, and so did Iphis. Yo thee, divine Cupid, I
present not a bleeding, but a bloodless heart, dried only with sorrow, and
worn with faithful service.

This picture Toffer, carved with no other instrument then Love; pity poor
Montanus.


This fan of Swans and Turtles feathers, is token of my truth and jealousy:
jealousy, without which love is dotage, and with which love is madness,
without the which love is lust, and with which love is folly. This heart,
neither bleeding nor bloodless, but ^wolne with sighs, I offer to thy
godhead, protesting, that all my thoughts are as my words without lust; and all
my love, as my fortune without sweetness. This Garland of flowers, which hath
all colours of the Rainbow, witnesses that my heart hath all torments of the
world: pity poor Silvestris.


I accept your offers not without cause, and wonder at your loves, not without
pleasure: but be your thoughts as true as your words?


Thou Cupid, that gives the wound, know the heart, for as impossible it is
to conceal our affections, as to resist thy force.


I know, that where mine arrow lights, there breeds love, but shooting
every minute a thousand shafts, I know not on whose heart they light, though
they fall on no place but hearts. What are your mistresses?


Ceres maidens: mine most cruel, which she calls constancy.


Mine most fair, but most proud.


Mine most witty, but most wavering.


Is the one cruel, the other coy, the third inconstant?


Too cruel.


Too coy.


Too fickle.


What do they think of Cupid?


One saith he hath no eyes, because he hits he knows not whom.


The other, that he hath no ears, to hear those that call.


The third, that he hath no nose, for savours are not found of lovers.


All, that he hath no taste, because sweet and sower is all one.


All, that he hath no sense, because pains are pleasures, and pleasures
pains,


All, that he is a foolish god, working without reason, and suffering the
repulse without regard.


Dare they blaspheme my god-head, which Jove doth worship, Neptune reverence,
and all the gods tremble at? To make them love, were a revenge too gentle for
Cupid: to make you hate, a recompense too small for lovers. But of that anon:
what have you used in love?


All things that may procure love, gifts, words, oaths, sighs, and swounings.


What said they of gifts?


That affection could not be bought with gold,


What of words?


That they were golden blasts, out of Leaden bellows.


What of oaths?


That Iupiter never swear true to Iu^.


What of sighs?


That deceit kept a forge in the hearts of fools.


What of swounings?


Nothing, but th^ they wished them deaths.


What reasons gave they, not to love?


Women's reasons, they would not, because they would not.


Well, then shall you see Cupid requite their reasons with his rigour. What
punishment do you desire, that Cupid will deny?


Mine being so hard as stone, would I have turned to stone, that being to
lovers pitt^lesse, she may to all the world be senseless.


Mine being so fair and so proud, would I have turned into some flower, that
she may know beauty is as fading as grass, which being fresh in the morning,
is withered before night.


Mine divine, Cupid, whose affection nothing can make stayed, let her be turned
to that Bird, that ^ueth only by air, and dies if she touch the earth,
because it is constant. The bird of Paradise, Cupid, that drawing in her bowels
nothing but air, she may know her heart fed on nothing but fickleness.


Your revenges are reasonable, and shall be granted. Thou Nisae, whose heart
no tears could pearce, shalt with continual waives be wasted: in stead of thy
fair hair, shalt thou have green mos^e, thy face of fl^t, because thy heart
is of marble, thine ears shall be holes for fishes, whose ears were more
deaf then fishes. Thou Celia whom beauty made proud, shalt have the fruit
of beauty, that is, to fade whiles it is flourishing, and to blast before it
is blown. Thy face, as fair as the Damask rose, shall perish like the
Damask rose, the canker shall eat thee in the bud, and every little wind
blow thee from the stalk, and then shall men in the morning wear thee in
their Hats, and at night cast thee at their heals. Thou Niobe, whom nothing
can please (but that which most displeases Cupid, inconstancy) shalt only
breathe and suck air for food, and wear feathers for silk, being more
wavering then air, and lighter then feathers. This will Cupid do. Therefore,
when next you shall behold your Ladies, do but send a faithful sigh to Cupid,
and there shall arise a thick mist which Proserpine shall send, and in the
moment you shall be revenged, and they changed, Cupid prove himself a great
god, and they peevish girls.


With what sacrifice shall we show our selves thankful, or how may we
requite this benefit?


You shall yer^ly at my Temple offer true hearts, and hourly bestow all your
wits in loving devices, think all the time lost, that is not spent in love,
let your oaths be without number, but not without truth, your words full of
alluring sweetness, but not of broad flattery, your attires neat, but not
womanish, your gifts of more price for the fine device, then the great value,
and yet of such value, that the device seem not beggarly, nor your selves
blockish, be secrete that works miracles, be constant that bring^th
secrecy; this is all Cupid doth command. Away.


And to this we all willingly consent.

Now what r^steth, but revenge on them, that have practised malice on us, let
mine be any thing, seeing she will not be only mine.


Let us not now stand wishing, but presently seek them out, using as great
speed in following revenge, as we did in pursuing our love: certainly we
shall find them about Ceres tree, singing or sacrifizing.


But shall we not go visit Erisicthon?


Not I, left he eat us, that devours all things; his looks are of force to
famish: let vsin, and let all Ladies beware to offend those in spite, that
love them in honour, for when the Crow shall ^et his foot in their eye, and
the black Ox tread on their foot, they shall find their misfortunes to be
equal with their deformities, and men both to loath, and laugh at them.


Come, Protea, tell me, how did thou escape from the Merchant?


Neptune, that great god, when I was ready to go with the Merchant into the
ship, turned me to a Fisherman on the shore, with an Angle in my hand, and on
my shoulder a net; the Merchant missing me, and yet finding me, asked me who I
was, and whether I saw not a fair maiden? I answered no? He marue^ling and
raging, was forced either to lose his passage, or secke for me among the
Pebbles? To make short, a good wind caused him to go I know not whither, and
me (thanks be to Neptune) to return home.


Thou art happy, Protea, though thy Father be mi^erable: and Neptune
gracious, though Ceres cruell^thy escape from the Merchant, breeds in me
life, joy, and fullness.


My father cannot be miserable, if Protea be happy, for by selling me every
day, he shall never want meat, nor I (...) to escape. And now, Father, give
me leave to enjoy my Petulius, that on this unfortunate shore still seeks me
sorrowing.


Seek ^m, dear Protea; find and enjoy him; and live ever hereafter to th^ne
own comforts, that hast ^ther^o been the preserver of mine.


Aye me, behold, a Siren haunts this shore, the gods forbid she should
entangle my Petulius.


Accursed men, whose loves have no other mean then extremities, nor hates end
but mischief.


Unnatural monster, no maid that accuses men, whose loves are built on
truth, and whose hearts are removed by courtesy: I will hear the depth of her
malice.


Of all creatures most unkind, most cunning, by whose subtilties I am half
fish, half flesh, themselves being neither fish nor flesh, in love luke warm,
in cruelty red hot, if they praise, they flatter; if flatter, deceive; if
deceive, destroy.


She rails at men, but seeks to entangle them, this slight is prepared for
my sweet Petulius, I will withdraw my self close, for Petulius follows, he
will without doubt be enamoured of her, enchanted he shall not be, my charms
shall countervail hers, it is he hath saved my Fathers life with money, and
must prolong mine with love.


I marvel, Protea is so far before me, if she run, i'll fly: sweet
Protea, where art thou^ it is Petulius calls Protea.


Here comes a brave youth, Now Siren, leave out nothing that may allure, thy
golden locks, thy enticing looks, thy tuned voice, thy subtle speech, thy
fair promises, which never misled the heart of any but Vlisses.


What divine goddess is this? What sweet harmony? My heart is ra^ished with
such tickling thoughts, and mine eyes stayed with such a bewitching beauty,
that I can neither find the means to remove my affection, nor to turn aside
my looks.

I yield to death, but with such delight, that I would not wish to live,
unless it were to hear thy sweet lays.


Live still so thou love me: why stand thou amazed at the word Love?


It is high time to prevent this mischief: Now Neptune, stand to thy promise,
and let me take suddenly the shape of an old man; so shall I mar what she
makes.


Not yet come to my self, or if I be, I dare not credit mine ears. Love thee
divine goddess? Vouchsafe I may honour thee, and live by the imagination I
have of thy words and worthiness.


I am a goddess, but a Lady and a virgin, whose love if thou embrace, thou
shalt live no less happy, then the gods in heaven.


Believe not this Enchantress (sweet youth) who retains the face of a
Virgin, but the heart of a F^end, whose sweet tongue sheadeth more drops of
blood, then it utters syllables.


Out dottrell, whose dim eyes cannot discern beauty, nor doting age judge
of love.


If thou listen to her words, thou shalt not live to repent: for her malice is
as sudden, as her joys are sweet.


Thy silver hairs are not so precious, as her golden locks, nor thy crooked
age of that estimation, as her flowering youth.


That old man measures the hot assault of love, with the cold skir^hes of age.


That young cruel resembles old Apes, who kill by culling; from the top of
this Rock whereon she sits, will she throw thee headlong into the Sea,
whose song is the instrument of her witchcraft, never smiling but when she
means to smite, and under the flattery of love, practises the shedding of
blood.


What are thou, which so blasphemest this divine creature?


I am the Ghost of Vlisses, who continually hover about these places, where
this Siren haunteth, to save those which otherwise should be spoiled: stop
thine ears, as I did mine, and succour the fair, but by thy folly, the most
unfortunate Protea.


Protea? What dost thou hear, Petulius? Where is Protea?


In this thicket, ready to hang her self, because thou care not for her,
that did swear to follow: curse this hag^ who only hath the voice and face of
a Virgin, the rest all fish and feathers, and filth; follow me, and strongly
stop thine ears, left the second encounter make the wound incurable.


Is this a Siren, and thou Vlisses? cursed be that hellish carcass, and blessed
be thy heavenly spirit.


I shrink my head for shame. O Vlisses, is it not enough for thee to escape,
but also to teach others? Sing and die, nay ^ie, and never sing more.


Follow me at this door, and out at the other.


How am I delivered! the old man is vanished, and here for him stands Protea.


Here stands Protea, that hath saved thy life, thou must also prolong hers:
but let us into the woods, and there I will tell thee howe I came to Vlisses,
and the sum of all my fortunes, which happily will breed in thee both love
and wonder.


I will, and only love Protea, and never cease to wonder at Protea.


Cupid, thou hast transformed my Nymphs and incensed me, them to shapes
unreasonable, me to anger immortal, for at one time I am both robbed of mine
honour and my Nymphs.


Ceres, thy Nymphs were stubborn, and thy self speaking so imperiously to
Cupid, somewhat stately. If you ask the cause in choler, Sic volo, sic iubeo:
if in courtesy, Quae venu ex merito poena dolenda venit. They were
disdainful, and have their deserts; thou Ceres, doest but govern the guts of
men, I the hearts: thou seek to starve Erisicthon with thy ministered famine,
whom his daughter shall preserve by my virtue love.


Thou art but a god Cupid.


No Ceres, but such a god as makes thunder fall out of Ioues hand, by throwing
thoughts into his heart, and to be more terrified with the sparkling of a
Ladies eye, then men with the flashes of his lightning: such a god that hath
kindled more fire in Neptunes bosom, then the whole Sea which he is king of
can quench: such power have I, that Plutoes never dying fire, doth but scorch
in respect of my flames. Diana hath felt some motions of love, Vesta doth,
Ceres shall.


Art thou so cruel?


To those that resist, a Lyon, to those that submit, a Lamb.


Can thou make such difference in affection, and yet shall it all be love?


Yea, as much as between sickness and health, though in both be life: those
that yield and honour Cupid, shall possess sweet thoughts, and enjoy pleasing
wishes: the other shall be tormented with vain imaginations and impossible
hopes.


How may my Nymphs be restored?


If thou restore Erisicthon, they embrace their loves, and all offer sacrifice
to me.


Erisicthon did in contempt hew down my sacred tree.


Thy Nymphs did in disdain, scorn my constant love.


He slew most cruelly my chaste Fidelia, whose blood lies yet on the ground.


But Diana hath changed her blood to fresh flowers, which are to be seen on
the ground.


What honour shall he do to Ceres? What amends can he make to Fidelia?


All Ceres grove shall he deck with Garlands, and account every tree holy; a
stately monument shall he erect, in remembrance of Fidelia, and offer yearly
sacrifice.


What sacrifice shall I and my Nymphs offer thee? For I will do any thing to
restore my Nymphs, and honour thee.


You shall present in honour of my mother Venus, Grapes and Wheat, for Sine
Cerere Baccho friget Venus. You shall suffer your Nymphs to play, sometimes to
be idle, in the favour of Cupid, for Otiasitollas, periere Cupidinis arcus. So
much for Ceres. Thy Nymphs shall make no vows to continue Virgins, nor use
words to disgrace love, nor fly from opportunities that kindle affections: if
they be chaste, let them not be cruel; if fair, not proud; if loving not
inconstant. Cruelty is for Tigers, pride for Peacocks, inconstancy for
fools.


Cupid, I yield, and they shall: but sweet Cupid, let them not be deceived by
flattery, which takes the shape of affection, nor by lust, which is clothed
in the habit of love; for men have as many slights to delude, as they have
words to speak.


Those that practise deceit, shall perish: Cupid favours none but the
faithful.


Well, I will go to Erisicthon, and bring him before thee.


Then shall thy Nymphs recover their fames, so as they yield to love.


They shall.


A strange discourse, Protea, by which I find the gods amorous, and Virgins
immortal goddesses, full of cruelty, and men of unhappiness.


I have told both my Fathers misfortunes, grown by stoutness, and mine by
weakness, his thwarting of Ceres, my yielding to Neptune.


I know, Protea, that hard iron falling into fire, waxes soft, and then the
tender heart of a Virgin being in love, must needs melt: for what should a
fair young and witty Lady answer, to the sweet enticements of love, but,


I have heard too, that hearts of men stiffer then steel, have by love been
made softer then wool, and then they cry,


Men have often fained sighs.


And women forged tears.


Suppose I love not.


Suppose I care not.


If men swear and lie, howe will you try their loves?


If women swear they love, how will you try their dissembling?


The gods put wit into women.


And nature deceit into men.


I did this but to try your patience.


Nor I, but to prove your faith. But see, Petulius, what miraculous
punishments here are for deserts in love; this Rock was a Nymph to Ceres, so
was this Rose, so that Bird.


All chaung'd from their shapes?


All chaung'd by Cupid, because they disdained love, or dissembled in it.


A fair warning to Protea; I hope she will love without dissembling.


An Item for Petulius, that he delude not those that love him; for Cupid can
also change men. Let (...).


This goes luckily, that Cupid hath promised to restore our mistresses, and
Ceres, that they shall accept our loves.


I did ever imagine, that true love would end with sweet joys, though ^o was
begun with deep sighs.


But how shall we look on them when we shall see them smile? We must, and
perchance they will frown.


Push, let us endure the bending of their fair brows, and the scorching of
their sparkling eyes, so that we may possess at last the depth of their
affections.


Possess? Never doubt it, for Ceres hath restored Erisicthon, and therefore
will persuade with them, nay, command them.


If it come by commandment of Ceres, not their own motions, I rather they
should hate: for what joy can there be in our lives, or in our loves
sweetness, when every kiss shall be sealed with a curse, and every kind
word proceed of fear, not affection? enforcement is worse then enchantment.


Art thou so superstitious in love, that wast wont to be most careless? Let
them curse all day, so I may have but one kiss at night.


Thou art worse then Siluestris, he not content without absolute love, thou
with indifferent.


But here comes Ceres with Erisicthon: let us look demurely, for in her
heart she hates us deeply.


I will hallow thy woods with solemn feasts, and honour all thy Nymphs with
due regard.


Well, do so, and thank Cupid that commands, nay, thank my foolish Nymphs,
that know not how to obey; here be the lovers ready at receipt: How now
Gentlemen, what seek you?


Nothing but what Ceres would find.


Ceres hath found those, that I would she had lost, vain lovers.


Ceres may lose that, that Cupid would save, true lovers.


You think so one of another.


Cupid knows so of us all.


You might have made me a counsel of your loves.


I madame, if love would admit counsel.


Cupid, here is Erisicthon in his former state, restore my N^mphs to theirs,
then shall they embrace these lovers, who wither out their youth.


Honoured be mighty Cupid, that makes me live.


Honoured be mighty Cupid, that makes me love.


And me.


What, more lovers yet? I think it be impossible for Ceres to have any follow
her in one hour, that is not in love in the next.


Erisicthon, be thou careful to honour Ceres, and forget not to please her
Nymphs. The faithful love of thy daughter Protea, hath wrought both pity in
me to grant her desires, and to release thy pu^ish^ents. Thou Petuliu^ shalt
enjoy thy love, becaused know thee loyal.


Then shall Petulius be most happy.


And Protea most fortunate.


But do you, Ramis, continue your constant love, and you, Montanus, and you,
Siluestris.


Nothing can alter our affections which increase, while the means decrease,
and wax stronger in being weakened.


Then Venus, send down that shower, wherewith thou were wont to wath those
that do thee worship, and let love by thy beams, be honoured in all the
world and feared, wished for, and wondered at: here are thy Nymphs, Ceres.


Whom do I see? Nisa?


Divine Celia, fairer then ever she was!


My sweet Niobe.


Why stare you, my Nymphs, as amazed triumph rather because you have your
shapes: this great god Cupid, that for your prides and follies changed, hath by
my prayer and promise restored you.


You see, Ladies, what it is to make a mock of love, or a scorn of Cupid; see
where your lovers stand, you must now take them for your husbands; this is my
judgment, this is Ceres promise.


Happy Ramis.


Happy Montanus.


Happy Siluestris.


Why speak you not, Nymphs? This must be done, and you must yield.


Not I.


Nor I.


Nor I.


Not yield? Then shall Cupid in his fury turn you again to senseless, and
shameful shapes.


Will you not yield? How say you Ramis? Do your loves continue? Are your
thoughts constant? yours Montanus? And yours Siluestris?


Mine most unspotted.


And mine.


And mine, Cupid, which nothing can alter.


And will you not yield, Virgins?


Not I, Cupid, neither do I thank thee that I am restored to life, nor fear
again to be changed to stone: for rather had I been worn with the
continual beating of waives, then dulled with the importunities of men, whose
open flatteries make way to their secret lusts, retaining as little truth in
their hearts, as modesty in their words; how happy was Nisa, which felt
nothing, pined yet, not felt the consumption! unfortunate wench, that now have
ears to hear their cunning lies, and eyes to behold their dissembling looks!
turn me, Cupid, again; for love I will not.


Miserable Ramis, unhappy to love, to change the Lady, accursed, and now lose
her, desperate!


Nor I Cupid: well could I content my self to bud in the Summer, and to die in
the Winter: for more good comes of the Rose, then can by love: when it is
fresh, it hath a sweet favour, love a sour taste: the Rose when it is old,
loses not his virtue; love when it is state waxes loathsome. The Rose
distilled with fire yields sweere water: love in extremities kindles
jealousies: in the Rose how ever it be, there is sweetness; in love nothing but
bitterness. If men look pale, and swear, sigh, then forsooth women must
yield, because men say they love, as though our hearts were tied to their
tongues, and we must choose them by appointment, our selves feeling no
affection, and so have our thoughts bound prentices to their words: turn me
again. Yield I will not.


Which way shalt thou turn thy self, since nothing will turn her heart? Die,
Montanus, with shame and grief, and both infinite.


Nor I Cupid: let me hang always in the air, which I found more constant then
men's words: happy Niobe, that touched not the ground where they go, but
always holding thy beak in the air, did never turn back to behold the
earth. In the heavens I saw an orderly course, in the earth nothing but
disorderly love, and preuishnesse: turn me again, Cupid, for yield I will
not.


I would my self were stone, flower, or foul, seeing that Nisa hath a heart
harder then stone, a face fairer then the Rose, and a mind lighter then
feathers.


What have we here? Hath punishment made you perverse? Ceres, I vow here by my
sweet mother Venus, that if they yield not, I will turn them again, not to
flowers, or stones, or birds, but to monsters, no less filthy to be seen,
then to be named hateful: they shall creep that now stand, and be to all men
odious, and be to themselves (for the mind they shall retain) loathsome.


My sweet Nymphs, for the honour of your sex, for the love of Ceres, for regard
of your own country, yield to love, yield, my sweet Nymphs, to sweet love.


Shall I yield to him that practised my destruction, and when his love was
hotest, caused me to be changed to a rock?


Nisa, the extremity of love is madness, and to be mad is to be senseless,
upon that Rock did I resolve to end my life: fair Nisa, forgive him thy
change, that for himself provided a harder chance.


Shall I yield to him, that made so small account of my beauty, that he
studied how he might never behold it again?


Fair Lady, in the Rose did I always behold thy colour, and resolved by
continual gazing to perish, which I could not do when thou wast in thine own
shape, thou wast so coy and swift in flying from me.


Shall I yield to him that caused me have wings, that I might fly farther from
him.


Sweet Niobe, the farther you did seem to be from me, the nearer I was to my
death, which to make it more speedy, wished thee wings to she into the air, and
my self lead on my heals to sink into the Sea.


Well, my good Nymphs, yield let Ceres entreat you yield.


I am content, so as Ramis, when he finds me cold in love, or hard in belief,
he attribute it to his own folly; in that I retain some nature of the Rock,
he changed me into.


O my sweet Nisa, be what thou wilt, and let all thy imperfections be
excused by me, so thou but say thou love me.


I do.


Happy Ramis.


I consent, so as Montanus, when in the midst of his sweet delight, shall find
some bitter ouerthwarts, impute it to his folly, in that he suffered me to be a
Rose, that hath prickles with her pleasantnes, as he is like to have with my
love shrewdnes.


Let me bleed every minute with the prickles of the Rose, so I may enjoy but
one hour the savour: love, fair Celia, and at thy pleasure comfort, and
confound.


I do.


Fortunate Montanus.


I yielded first in mind, though it be my course last to speak: but if
Siluestris find me not ever at home, let him curse himself that gave me wings
to fly abroad, whose feathers if his jealousy shall break, my policy shall
nip.


My sweet Niobe, fly whither thou wilt all day, so I may find thee in my nest
at night, I will love thee, and beloue thee.


I am glad you are all agreed, enjoy your loves, and every one his delight.
Thou Erisicthon art restored of Ceres, all the lovers pleased by Cupid, she
joyful, I honoured. Now, Ladies, I will make such unspotted love among you,
that there shall be no suspicion nor jar, no unkindness nor jealousy: but
let all Ladies hereafter take heed, that they resist not love, which works
wonders.


I will charm my Nymphs, as they shall neither be so stately, as not to
stoop to love, nor so light as presently to yield.


Here is none but is happy: but do not as Hippomanes did, when by Venus ay^
he won Atlanta, defile her Temple with unchaste desire^ ^nd forgot to
sacrifice vows. I will soar up into heaue^, to settle the loves of the gods,
that in earth have disposed the affections of men.


I to my harvest, whose corn is now come out of the blade, into the ear, and
let all this amorous troupe to the temple of Venus, there to consummate what
Cupid hath commanded.


Im the honour of Cupid, and Ceres, will solemnize this feast within my house,
and learn, if it be not too late, again to love. But you Foresters were
unkind, that in all my maladies would not visit me.


Thou know, Erisicthon, that lovers visit none but their mistresses.


Well, I will not take it unkindly, since all ends in kindness.


Let it be so; these lovers mind nothing what we say.


Yes, we attend on Ceres.


Well, do.



