INnough, these loud sounds deafes my passions
How long shall love make me a slave to hope,
And mix my calm desires with tyranny?
O Phylocles it is heresy I hold,
Thought and affection cannot be controld.

Yet mai't be bent and suppled with extremes,
Since few dare see the end of violence
What makes the skilful Leech to use the fire,
Or war her engines, or states policy,
But to recover things most desperate?
Revolt is recreant when pursuit is brave,
Never to faint doth purchase what we crave

True my Phylocles, yet my recreant soul,
Slaued to her beauty, would renounce all war,
And yield her right to love, did not thy spirit
Mixed with my longing, fortify these arms.
But I am now resolved and this sad hour,
Shall give an end to my disemprature.
Summon a parley.

What says our tyrant suitor, our disease in love,
That makes our thoughts a slave unto his sword:
What says my Lord?

Madame attend me, this is my latest summons,
The many suns my sorrows have beheld,
And my sad nights of longings, all through hope,
T'enioy the joy of earth, (your own dear self)
Are grown so infinite in length and weight,
That like to wearied Atlas, I enforce
These wars as Hercules, to bear my load:
Briefly I must enjoy you, or else loose
The breath of life, which to prevent, behold,
My sword must be my Cupid, and with feathered steel,
Force pity from your breast, your Cities walls,
Chidden with my Canons, have set open a path
And boldly bids me enter, all your men of war,
Feebled with famine, and a weary siege,
Take danger from mine actions, only your self,
Strong in your will, oppose even destiny:
And like the giants war offend the heavens,
Which to prevent, do but descend and give
Peace to my loue-suit, and as overcome thereby,
I'll yield my self your prisoner, and be drawn,
A thrall in your triumphant victory.
If otherwise, behold these fatal swords,
Shall never be sheathed, till we be conquerours:
And not respecting innocence nor sex,
The cries of infants, nor the prayers of age,
All things shall perish, till within my arms
I fouled your self my thrall and conqueror.

Thou may be master of my bodies Tomb
But for my soul and mind, they are as free
As their creation: and with Angels wings
Can soar beyond thy reach; trust me king of Cypres
Those coals the Roman Portia did devour,
Are not burnt out, nor have th'Egiptian worms,
Yet lost their stings, steel holds his temper still,
And these are ransomes from captivity.
But art thou noble, hast thou one royal thought?

Approve me by your question.

Then briefly thus:
To shun the great effusion of their bloods,
Who feel no touch in mine affections,
Dare you to single combat, two to two,
Refer your right in love?

Who are your combatants? we love equality.

This is the first, the Epyre duke, a man,
Sprung from the line, of famous Scanderbag:
The next Alphonso, sprung from noble blood:
Who laden with rich lusitanian prize,
Hath rod through Syracusa twice in pomp.

Their likings to the motion.

They are like wrath,
Never unarmed to beat weak injury.

Nay more, we are the sons of destiny:
Vertu's our guide, our aim is dignity.

S'foot king, shalt not forsake them: this I see,
Love, fight, and death, are ruled by destiny.

My spirit speaks thy motion.
Madame, although advantage might euade,
And give my love more hope, yet my bent will,
Bowd to your pleasure, doth embrace your law,
We do accept the combat, and our self
Will with that Duke try fortunes, this my friend,
The more part of my self, me dearest Philocles,
One of an Angels temper, shall with that that Lord
Try best and worst the place, the time, the sword.

They are your rights, we claim as challengers.

And we would lose that vantage, but since fame
Makes virtue dulat, we embrace our rights:
The place before these walls, the hour next sun,
The pollax and the hand axe for the fight.

It is enough,
My hostage is my person and my love:

And mine my hope, my faith and royalty.

They are of poysse sufficient, and one light
Shall at one instant, give us day and night.

She's gone my Philocles: and as she goes even so,
The sun forsakes the heavens to kiss the sea,
Day in her beauty leaves us, and methinkes,
Her absence doth exile all happiness.
Tell me my Philocles, nay pray thee tell me true,
Even from that love
Which to us both should bend one sympathy:
Discharge an open breast, dost thou not think,
She is the mirror of her beauteous sex?
Unparalleled, and vncompanioned.

Envy will say she's rare, then truth must vow,
She is beyond compare, since in her looks,
Each motion hath a speaking majesty,
She is herself, compared with her self:
For but her self, she hath no companion.
But when I think of beauty, wit and grace,
The elements of active delicacy,
Those all eie-pleasing harmonies of sight
Which do enchant men's fancies, and stir up
The life blood of dull earth, O then methinkes,
Fair Mariana hath an equal place
And if not outshine, it shows more beautiful.

More then my Queen?

More in the gloss of beauty, less in worth,
Of wisdom and great thoughts, the one I find
was made for wonder, the other for admire.

Thine equal praises makes my facnies rich:
And I am pleased with thy comparisons,
Things of like nature live in best consent,
Beauty with subjects, majesty with Kings,
Then let those two Ideaes lively move,
Spirit beyond all spirit, in our breasts,
That in the end of our great victory,
we may attain both love and majesty.

Although my first creation and my birth,
My thoughts and other tempers of my souls,
Took all their noble beings from the sword,
And made me only for the use of wars:
Yet in this combat, something methinkes apeares,
Greater then greatest glory, and doth raise
My mind beyond her self,
S'foot methinkes Casars Pharsalia,
Nor Scipios Carthage, nor Emilias acts,
Were worthy chairs of triumph, they ore men's
Poor mangled bodies, and fire-wasted climes,
Made their triumphant passage, but we two
Must conquer thoughts and love, more then the gods can do.

True, and therein
Consists the glorious garland of our praise,
But we neglect th'affaires of preparation. Florio be it your charge
To see th'erection of the squared lists,
Fit ground for either army, and what else,
Belongs unto such royal eminence.

How near will your majesties hand the lists extend
Unto the Cities walls?

So as the dullest eye,
May see the heedfulst passage in the fight.

What square or circuit?

Threescore pace each way.

Your majesty shall have your will performed.

Do, and you do us grace; and now thou sun,
That art the eye of heaven, whose pure sight,
Shall be our guide, and Ioues great Chronicler,
Look from thy sphere,
No guilt of pride, of malice or of blood,
Puts on our armour, only pure naked love
Tutors our hopes, and doth our actions move.

Enough my Philocles, thine orisons are heard.
Come lets away.

Now fie upon it, who would be an Orators wife, and not a Gentlewoman if she
could choose? a Lady is the most sweet lascivious life, conieyes and kisses, the
tire, O the tire, made castle upon castle, jewel upon jewel, knot upon
knot, crowns, garlands, gardins, and what not? the hood, the rebato, the
french fall, the loose bodied gown, the pin in the hair, now clawing the
pate, then picking the teeth, and every day change, when we poor souls must
come and go for every mans pleasure, and what's a Lady more then another body?
we have legs and hands, and rolling eyes, hanging lips, sleek brows,
cherry cheeks, and other things as Ladies have, but the fashion carries it
away.


Why how now Mistress Prat? in the old disease still, will it never be better,
cannot a woman find one kind man amongst twenty? O the days that I have
seen, when the law of a woman's wit, could have put her husbands purse to
execution.


O Mistress Collaquintida, mine is even the vnnaturallest man to his wife.


Faith for the most part, all schollers are so: for they take so upon the to
know al things, that indeed they know nothing: besides, they are with study and
ease, grown so unwieldy, that a woman shall near want a sore stomach that's
troubled with them.


And yet they must have the government of all.

True, and great reason they have for it, but a wise man will put it in a
woman's hand, what? she'll save what he spends.


You have a pretty ruff, how deep is it?

Nay this is but shallow, marry I have a ruff is a quarter deep, measured by
the yard.


Indeed, by the yard?

By the standard I assure you: you have a pretty set too, how big is the steel
you set with?


As big as a reasonable sufficient; pity of my life, I have forgot my self,
if my husband should rise from his study, and miss me, we should have such a
coil.


A coil, why what coil? if he were my husband and did but thwart me, I would
ring him so many alarms, sound him so many brass trumpets, beat him so many
drums to his confusion, and thunder him such a peal of great shot, that I
would turn his brain in the pan, and make him mad with an eternal
silence.


O mistress Coloquintida, but my husbands anger is the worst fauouredst
without all conscience of any mans in all Sicilie, he is even as peevish as a
sick munkie, and as waspish as an ill pleased bride the second morning.


Let your wrath be reciprocal, and pay him at his own weapon: but to the
purpose for which I came, the party you wot of, commends him to you in this
diamond, he that met the party you know, and said the parties party was a
party of a partly pretty understanding.


O the Lord, Alphonso.

The very same believe it, he loves you, and swears he so loves you, that if
you do not credit him you are worse then an infidel.


Indeed mistress Coloquintida, he hath the right garb for apparel, the true
touch with the tongue in the kiss, and he dances well but falls heavily: but
my husband woman, my husband, if we could put out his cattes eyes, there were
something to be said but they are ever peeping prying that they are able to
pierce through a millstone: besides: I may say to you, he is a little jealous
too, and see where he comes, we shall have a coil now.


Begin you to pout first, for that's a woman's prevention.

What Lollia I say, where are you my house looks you, my men lack you, I seek
you, and a whole quest of inquiry cannot find you, fie, fie, fie, fie, Idleness is
the whip of thrift, a good huswife should ever be occupied?


Indeed I have much joy to be occupied in any bodies company.

Why, whats the matter?

Why Orators wives shortly will be known like images on water stairs, ever
in one weatherbeaten suite, as if none wore hoods but Monks and Ladies, nor
feathers but fore-horses and waiting gentlewomen, nor chains but prisoners and
Lords officers, nor periwigs but players and hot brains, but the weakest
must to the walls still.


Go to, you shall have what you will.

Nay nay, 'twas my hard fortune to be your wife, time was I might have done
otherwise, but it matters not, you esteem me as you do your self, and think
all things costly enough that covers shame, and that a pair of silken
foresleeues to a satin brestplate, is a garment good enough for a capital:
but is master Wrangle, master Tangle, or master Trobleare of that opinion? in
faith sir no.

There's never a gallant in our state
That goes more rich in gaudy bravery:
And yet I hope for quality of speech,
Audacious words or quirks or quidities,
You are not held their much inferior.
Fie, fie, I am ashamed to see your baseness.

Indeed master Prate she tells you truly; I wonder that you being a proper
man and an Orator will not go brave, according to the custom of the country.


Go to neighbour, he that will rise to the top of a high ladder must go up, not
leap up: but be patient wench, and thou shalt shortly see me gallant it with
the best, and for thy self my Lollia,

Not Lollia Paulina, nor those blazing stars,
Which makes the world the Apes of Italy:
Shall match thy self in sun-bright splendency.

Nay, verily for my self I care not, tis you that are my pride, if you would
go like your self I were appeasd.


Believe it wench so I will, but to the purpose for which I came, the end of
this great war is now brought to a combat, two to two, the Duke of Epyre and
Alphonso for our Queen against the King and Prince Philocles: now wench if
thou wilt go see the fight, I will send and provide thee of a good standing.


Indeed, for you have ne'er a good one of your own.

What, President I say?

Anon, anon sir.

Why when I say, the villains belly is like a bottomless pit, ever filling
and yet empty, at your leisure sir.


I can make no more haste then my teeth will give me leave.


Well sir, get you without the town, to the place for the combat, and provide
me for my wife some good standing, to see the conflict.


How master how, must I provide a good standing for you for my mistress? truly
Master I think a mary bone pie, candi'd erringoes, preserved dattes, or
marmaladd of cantharides were much better harbingers, cock sparrows stewed,
doves brains or swans pizels are very provocative, roasted potatoes or boild
skerrets are your only lofty dishes, me thinks these should fit you better
then I can do.


Whats this, whats this I say? provide me a standing for my wife upon a
scaffold.


And truly Master, I think a private chamber were better.

I grant you, if there were a chamber convenient.

Willing minds will make shift in a simple hole, close windows, strong locks,
hard bed and sure posts, are your only ornaments.


I think the knave be mad, sir you chop logic, blockhead, you that have
your brain pan made of dry leather, your wit ever wetshod: pack about your
business, or I'll pack your pen and inkhorn about your cares.


Well sir, I may go or so, but would my mistress take a standing of my
preferment, I would so mount her, she should love strange things the better
all her life after.


Why when sir.
And come sweet wife, nay neighbour let us have your company too.

Holla, what are you?

High marshall for the King, your Character.

I likewise for the Queen, where lies your equal ground?

Here underneath these walls, and there and there ground for the battles.


Place there the Queenes seat,
And there and there chaiers for the combatants.

Place here the lists, fix every joint as strong
As 'twere a wall, for on this foot of earth
This day shall stand two famous monuments,
The one a throne of glory bright as gold,
Burnished with angels luster, and with stars,
Plucked from the crown of conquest, in which shall sit
Men made half Gods through famous victory:
The other a rich tomb of memorable fame,
Built by the curious thoughts of noble minds,
In which shall sleep these valiant souls in peace,
Whom Fortunes hand shall only overthrow.
Heaven in thy Palm, this day the balance hings.
Which makes Kings Gods, or men more great then Kings.

So now let the heralds give the champions sign
Of ready preparations.

What are you that appear, and what deuoyre
Draws you within these lists?

I am the Duke of Epyre, and the mine,
Which doth attract my spirit to run this marshall course,
Is the fair guard of a distressed Queen,
Would wed to hate and in equality and brutish force,
Which to withstand I boldly enter thus,
And will defaile, or else prove recreant.

And what are you or your intendiments?

I am Alphonso marshall of this realm,
Who of like tempered thoughts and like desires,
Have grounded this my sanctimonious zeal,
And will approve the Dukes assertions,
Or in this field lie slain and recreant.

Enter and prosper as your cause deserves.

What are you that appear, and what deuoyre
Draws you within these lists?

I am the King of Cypres, who led on
By the divine instinct of heavenly love,
Come with my sword to beg that royal maid,
And to approve by gift of heaven and fate
She is a one to me appropriate:
Which to maintain I challenge entrance here,
Where I will live a King or recreant.

And what are you or your intendiments?

I am less then my thoughts, more then my self,
Yet nothing but the creature of my fate,
By name my nature only is obscured,
And yet the world baptis'd me Philocles.
My entrance here is proof of holy zeal,
And to maintain that no severe disdain,
False shape of chastity, nor woman's will,
Neglective petulace, or uncertain hope,
Foul vizard coins, nor seducing fame
Should rob the royal temper of true love
From the desired aim of his desires,
Which my best blood shall witness, or this field
Entomb my body made a recreant.

Enter and pro sper as your cause deserves.

Princes, lay your hands on these swords points
Here you shall swear by hope, by heaven, by love;
And by the right you challenge in true fame,
That here you stand not armed with any guile,
Malignant hate, or usurpation
Of philters charms, of nightspels characters,
Or other black infernal vantages,
But even with thoughts as pure
As your pure vallures, or the suns pure beams,
T'approue the right of pure affection;
And howsoe're your fortunes rise or fall,
To break no faith in your conditions,
So help you Jove.

We swear.

How often doth my maiden thoughts correct
And chide my froward will, for this extreme
Pursuit of blood! believe me, fain I would
Recall mine oaths vow, did not my shame
Hold fast my cruelty, by which is taught
Those gems are prized best, are dearest bought,
Sleep my loves softness then, waken my flame,
Which guards a vestal sanctity; Princes behold,
Upon those weapons sits my God of love,
And in their powers my loves severity.
If them you conquer, we are all your slaves,
If they triumph, we'll morn upon your graves.

Now by my maiden modesty I wish
Good fortune to that Philocles, my mind
Presages virtue, in his eaglets eyes.
S'foot he looks like a sparrow hawk, or a wanton fire
A flash of lightning, or a glimpse of day,
His eye steals to my heart, and lets it see
More then it would, peace, blab no secrecy,
He must have blows.

Sound cornets, Princes respect your guards.

I crave the Queenes conditions, or this blow
Sends this afflicted soul to heaven or hell.
Speak madame, will you yield or shall he die?

Neither bold Prince, if thou but touch a hair,
The kings breath shall redeem it: madame your love
Is safe in angels guarding, let no fear
Shake hands with doubtfulness, you are as safe
As in a tower of Diamonds.

O it is but glass,
And cannot bear this axes massinesse.
Duke, thy brave words that second thy brave deeds,
Fills me with emulation, only we two
Stand equal victors; then if thou hast that tie
And bond of well knit valor, which vnites
Virtue and same together, let us restore
Our captives unto freedom, and we two,
In single combat try out the mastery.
Where whosoever falls each other, shall subscribe
To every clause in each condition.

Thou art the index of mine ample thought,
And I am pleased with thine election.
Speak madame, if ever I deserved grace,
Grace me with your consent.

It is all my will.
Thy noble hand erect and perfect me.

What says his majesty?
My stars are writ in heaven, nor death nor fate
Are slaves to fear, to hope or human state.

I neither fear thy fortune nor my ruin;
But hold them all beyond all prophecy.
Thou hast my free consent, and on thy power
Lies my lives date or my deaths hour.

Then rise and live with safety.

Alphonso, here my hand,
Thy fortune lends thy peace no infamy.
And now thou glorious issue of Ioues brain,
That burnt the Telamonian Ravisher,
Look from thy sphere, and if my heart contain
An impure thought of lust, send thy monsters forth
And make me more then earthly miserable.

Yield, recant or dye.

Thine axe hath not the power to wound my thought,
And yields a word my tongue could never sound,
I say you are worthy valiant, for my death,
Let the Queen speak it, tis an easy breath.

Not for the worlds large circuit, hold gentle Prince,
Thus I do pay his ransom, lowe as the ground,
I tender mine unspotted virgin love,
To thy great wills commandment, let not my care
My woman tyranny, or too strict guard,
In bloody purchase take away those sweets
Till now have governed your amazd desires:
For trust me king, I will redeem my blame,
With as much love, as Philocles hath fame.

Thus comes a calm unto a Sea-wract soul,
Ease to the pained, food unto the starved,
As you to me my best creation.
Trust me my Queen, my loves large chronicle
Thou never shalt ore read, because each day
It shall beget new matter of amaze:
And live to do thee grace eternally,
Next whom my Philocles my bounteous friend,
Author of life, and sovereign of my love,
My heart shall be thy throne, thy breast the shrine,
Where I will sit to study gratefulness
To you and you my Lords, my best of thoughts,
Whose loves have showed a duteous carefulnes,
To all free thanks and graces, this unity
Of love and kingdoms, is a glorious sight.
Mount up the royal Champion, music cornets sound.
Let shouts and cries make heaven and earth rebound.

How like the suns great bastard ore the world,
Rides this man mounted engine, this proud prince
And with his breath sindges our continents
Sit fast proud Phaeton, for by heaven i'll kick
And plunge thee in the sea: if thou'lt needs ride,
Thou should have made thy seat upon a slave,
And not upon mine honours firmament.
Thou hast not heard the God of wisdoms tale,
Nor can thine youth curb greatness, till my hate,
Confound thy life with villain policy.
I am resolved since virtue hath disdained
To cloth me in her riches, henceforth to prove
A villain fatal, black and ominous:
Thy virtue is the ground of my dislike:
And my disgrace, the edge of envies sword,
Which like a razor shall vnplumbe thy crest;
And rob thee of thy native excellence,
When great thoughts give their homage to disgrace
Thers's no respect of deeds, time, thoughts or place.

COme wife, me thought our party stood stiffly to it.

Indeed they were stiff whilst they stood, but when they were down, they
were like men of a low world, a man might have wound their worst anger about
his finger.


Go to sir, you must have your fools bolt in every bodies quiver.


Indeed mistress, if my master should break his arrow with foul shooting or
so, I would be glad if mine might supply the whole.


I find you kind sir.

True sir, according to my kind, and to pleasure my kind Mistress.


Go to sir, I will not have your kindness to intermeddle with her kind, she
is meat for your master.


And your man sir, may like your foul trencher.

I but not eat of his mutton.

Yet I may deep my bread in the wool, Mistress Colloquintida.

Go to sir, you will be obscene, and then I shall knock you; but to the
combat, me thought our side were the more proper men.


True, and therefore thoy had the worse fortune: but see here is the Lord
Florio.


Master Orator, it is the King and Queenes majesties pleasure, that you
presently repair unto the Court, touching the drawing out of certain Articles
for the benefit of both the kingdoms.


My Lord, I will instantly attend their majesties.

Do, for they expect you seriously.

Wife you can have my service no longer. Sir, President, attend you upon your
mistress home: and wife, I would have you to hold your journey directly
homeward, and not to imitate princes in their progress, step not out of your
way to visit a new gossip, to see a new garden-house, to smell the perfumes of
Court jerkins, or to handle other tools then may fit for your modesty: I
would not have you to step into the Suburbs, and acquaint your self either
with monsters or motions, but holding your way directly homeward, show your
self still to be a rare housewife.


I'faith, I'faith, your black out-side will have a yellow lining.

Content thee wife, it is but my love that gives thee good counsel. But here
comes one of my clients.


Sir, master Orator, I am bold to trouble you about my suit.

Si, Mr. country gentleman, I am now for present business of the kings.

You may the better remember me.

Hey day, I shall mix your business with the kings.

No but you may let his majesty know my necessity.

Sir, sir, you must not confine me to your seasons, I tell you I will collect
mine own leasures.


Master Orator, is it your pleasure I attend you about my dispatches?


Sir, it is my pleasure you dispatch your self from mine encumbrance, I tell
you I am for instant business of the Kings,


Sir, I have borne mine attendance long.

Bear it till your bones ache, I tell you I cannot bear it now, I am for new
business.


Yet the old would be dispatcht, it was first paid for.

If you be gentlemen do not make me mad.

Sir, our suits are of great weight.

If you be Christians do not make me an Atheist, I shall profane if you vex me
thus.

What more vexation? my Lord, my Lord, save your breath for your broth, I am
not now at leisure to attend you.


A word good Mr. Orator.

Not a word I beseech your Lordship, I am for the Kings business, you must
attend me at my chamber.


And every where else, we will not leave you.

Now methinkes my master is like a horse-leech, and these suitors so many sick
of the gout, that come to have him suck their blood: O it is a mad world.


Go to sir, you will never leave your crabtree similes; but pity of me who
have we hear?

O it is the Lord Alphonso.

Mistress God save: nay your lip I am a stranger; how doth Mistress
Colloquintida, O you are an excellent seasoner of city stomachs.


Faith my Lord I have done my best to make somebody relish your sweet meates;
but hark you my Lord, I have struck the stroke, I have done the deed, there
wants nothing but time, place and her consent.


Call you that nothing?

A trifle, a trifle, upon her, upon her my Lord, she may seem a little rough
at the first; but if you stand stiffly to her, she'll fall; a word with you Mr.
President.


Mistress Prat, I am a soldier, and can better act my love then speak it, my
suit you know by your neighbour, my love you shall prove by my merit, to both
which my tokens have bin petty witnesses and my body shall seal deliver upon
thee such a brave confirmatio, that not all the Orators in Sicill shall be
able to cancel the deed.


Truly my Lord, methinkes you being witty should be honest.


Nay wench, if I were a fool, there's no question but I would be honest; But to
the purpose, say wench, shall I enjoy, shall I possess?


To enjoy my love, is not to possess my body.

Tut wench, they be words of one signification, and cannot be separated.


Nay then I should wrong my husband.

S'foot, thou shouldest but do for him as he does for the whole world; why an
Orator were a needle name, if it were not to defend wrong: then wench, do as he
doth, write by a president.


O my Lord, I have a husband,
A man whose waking jealousy survives,
And like a Lion, sleeps with open eyes;
That not a minute of mine hours are free
From the intelligence of his secret spies.
I am a very toward Danae
Thorough whose roof, suspicion will not let,
Gold showers have passage, nor can I deceive,
His Argus eyes, with any policy:
And yet I swear I love you.

Death of affection, if thou love me, as thou says thou dost,
Thou can invent some means for our delight.
The rather since it ever hath been said,
That walls of brass withstand not willing minds:
And women when they are prone make love admired:
For quaint endeavours, come instruct thy wit:
And find some scale to our hie hight of bliss.

Then briefly thus my Lord.
To morrow doth the Senate sit to judge,
Causes both criminal and of the stave;
Where of necessity my husbands place,
Must be filled by himself, because his tongue,
Must guild his clients causes, Now if you please,
All that self hour, when he is turmoiled,
About those serious trifles, to vouchsafe
To visit me, his absence and my care
Shall give us liberty of more delight.
You know my meaning, and I am ashamed
My love should thus betray my modesty;
But make the use according to your fancy.

What hour assures his absence?

Eight is the latest time.

This kiss leave my faith with thee, farewell.
You have given me double glory from thy breath,
Nothing shall lose me time but certain death.

Truly Mistress Collaquintida, you are an excellent piece of sweet gall.


Well sir, will you lead the way homeward?

To your bed chamber mistress, or your privy lodging.

Night clad in black mourns for the loss of day,
And hides the silver spangles of the air,
That not a spark is left to light the world,
Whilst quiet sleep the nourisher of life
Takes full possession on mortality.
All creatures take their rest in soft repose
Save malcontents, and we accursed lovers,
Whose thoughts perturbed, makes us passions slave:
And robs us of the juice of happiness.
Dear Mariana, shaped in an Angels mould,
Thou thral'st my senses, and inflam'st my blood,
Love, power, by wisdom cannot be withstood.
But see the morning star breaks from the East,
To tell the world her great eye is awaked
To take his journey to the western vales:
And now the court begins to rise with him.
There goes the Physician, the waiting maid,
And a fine straight legged Gentleman Usher,
The preface to a kirtill all puff past.
One that writes sonnets in his Ladies praise,
And hides her crimes with flattering poesy.
But peace amazement, see the day of life,
Natures best work, the worlds chief paragon.
Madame one word.

I; so now farewell.

You do mistake me.

That your self can tell,
You asked me one word, which I gave, said I,
A word of least use in a virgins breath,
Urge not my patience then with fond reply.

Dear Lady lend an ear unto my voice
Since each were made for others happiness:
My tong's not oild with courtly flatterings,
Nor can I paint my passions to the life;
But by that power which shaped this heavenly form,
I am your bond-slaue, forced by loves command,
Then let soft pity with such beauty dwell.
Madame I love you.

As I am a virgin so do I.

But Madame whom?

My self, no Lady better.

But will you love me?

No by my chastity.

I hope you do but jest.

Nay i'll keep mine oath,
Men shall abandon pride and jealousy
Ere i'll be bound to their captivity,
They shall live continent, and leave to range,
But men like to the moon, each month must change.
Yet we must seek that nought their sight displeases,
And mix our wedlock sweets with loathd diseases:
When we consume our selves and our best beauty,
All our reward is why, t'was but our duty.

Judge not so hard of all for some offenders;
For you are subject to the self same crimes,
Of men and women always have been had
Some good of each.

But for the most part bad:
Therefore i'll have none at all but die a perfect maid.

That humour like a flower soon will fade,
Once did mine own thoughts sing to that delight,
Till love and you reformd my barbarousnesse:
Therefore dear Lady, pity my wounded heart.

A Surgeon here for this loue-wounded man.
How deep's your vlcerd orifice, I pray you tell?

Quite thorough my heart.

It is strange and look so well;
Yet Ladies eyes have power to murder men,
And with one smile to make them whole again.
Achilles lance to a hair, but do you love me prince?

Dearer then my soul.

Would I could love you.

Madame so you may.

As yet I cannot, therefore let me go.

O do not leave me, grant me but one request,
And here I vow by that divinest power,
The salt-seas glorious issue, whose bright sphere
Rules my sick heart, and knows my chaste intent,
That if you please t'impose on me that task
Which neither men nor monster can achieve,
Which even Angels have a dread to touch,
Deeds which outstretch all possibility,
S'foot more then can be thought, and i'll effect,
Or else i'll perish in th'accomplishment.

Let your request fit virgin modesty,
And you obey your vow, I am content
To give your thoughts contented happiness,

It is but a kiss I ask, a minutes joy.

Now Cupid help thee, is thy grief for this,
Keep thy strong vow, freely take a kiss.

I have obtained my heaven, and in this touch,
I feel the breath of all delitiousnesse:
Then freely give the sentence of my work,
Muster up all the engines of your wit,
Teach Iuno rules beyond malitiousnesse,
What ear it be, i'll die but i'll perform it.

Thou shalt not kill thy self, nor fight with monsters,
Nor bring the great Turks berd to show thy zeal:
Thy life thou shalt not hazard for my love,
Nor will I tie thee to an endless task,
But even with ease, and gentle rangled knots,
Thou shalt vntwind thy clew of miseries,

Let it have passage, madame give me my doom.

Then Philocles knit silence to my words,
And mark thy doom: for thus my strickter will
Loads grief upon thy vainer levity.
Hence for the space and compass of one year
Thou shalt abjure the liberty of speech,
Thou shalt not speak for fully twelve months space,
For friend nor foe, for danger nor for death;
But live like air, with silent emptiness.
Break thou this vow, i'll hold thee for a villain:
And all the world shall know thy perjury.

Be heaven and earth a witness of my vow,
And mine eternal silence, I am dumb.

Why so, now shall I not be troubled with vain chat
Or idle prate of idle wantonness:
For love I cannot, therefore tis in vain,
Would all my suitors tongues I thus could rain,
Then should I live free from faind sighs and groans,
With O take pity, tis your servant moans,
And such harsh stuff, that frets me to the heart:
And sonnets made of Cupids burning dart.
Of Venus lip, and Iunoes majesty.
Then were I freed from fools and foolery.
In May the cuckoo sings, then sheel'e come hither,
Her voice and yours will rarely tune together.

Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you:
Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you,
Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you.

The pox rot off your fingers for this blow,
It is coronation day, thorough all my scull,
There's such a fatal ringing in my brain,
Has won the selt, has laid five fingers on;
But twas a knavish part of him to play so.
Hear me you Gods for this my open wrong,
Make short his fingers as you have his tongue.

Tis not mans fortune, envy or neglect,
Which makes him miserable, but tis mean fate,
Even sole predestination, a firm gift,
Fixed to his birth, before the world was made,
For were it otherwise, then within our lives,
We should find some distractions, errors change.
And other toys of much uncertainty:
But my mishaps are fixed so to my blood,
They have no sire but my creation:
The Queen out of suspicion that my love,
First set an edge upon the Kings desires,
And made him woo her with a victors sword,
Casts me from favour, seazes all my lands,
And turns my naked fortunes to the cold.
The King made proud with purchase of his wish
Neglects my sufferance for him, and ore looks,
The low-tide of my fortunes; lest my woes
Should speak my wrongs to his ingratitude;
The whilst those lords whose supple hams have bowed
To do me formal reverence, now despise
And slight me in their meanest compliments:
O tis a torment more then hell yet knows
To be an honest flatterer, or to live
A saint in Limbo, which that I may prevent,
I'll be nor best nor worst, but all indifferent.
But here comes a noble man, I must turn petitioner.
My Lord, may I not see the king?

You may not.
His majesty is now down pressed with seriousness:
As for your suit it is with Prat the Orator.
I heard his highness give him a special charge
For your dispatch with favour.

O but he doth neglect,
And sleights me like his weak orations,
And by your Lordships leave, I do not think
His wisdom worthy of the conference.

Nay if you will correct the kings coin you are not for my conference, Fare
you well.


Why, and fare you well, S'foot this is more then strange,
That being grieved I may not say i'm pained.
But here comes another: Mine honourable Lord
May I not have some conference with the king?

You may not, business of greater weight
Imports both him and us: nay pray you cease;
As for your suit tis with the Orator.

Yet methinkes twere meet

That you would rather trouble him then me.

Its strange.

Its strange indeed, to see you wrong your ease.
I am not now for idle conferences, adieu.

Why this is court grace to men in misery,
And thus these taile-lesse Lions with their roar,
Affright the simple heard: O I could now
Turn rebel against their pride.
But here comes the Duke:
My gracious Lord, vouchsafe to hear my griefs.

For Gods love cease your trouble, we are all
Troubled with griefs of stranger qualities.

Words are no heavy burden.

No, had I no other weight;
But we are all down pressed with other poise:
As for your suit it is referred to Prat:
And he must give you fair dispatch with favour;
Which if he slight for envy or for bribe,
Repair to me, and I will not forget
To give you ease, and chide his negligence.
Mean space I pray you leave me, for we all
Are troubled now with greatest miracles.

Your grace doth do me comfort, and I will
Study with service to deserve your favours,
And so I take my leave.

Your own content^ts follow you.
Now gentlemen what news within, can this dumb wonder speak?
Have you cut off those lets that tied his speech.
And made your fame to sound thorough Sicille?

All hopeful means that man or art can find,
Have we made trial of, but tis in vain:
For still my Lord, the cur'es invincible.

Those Organs nature gave to move the tongue,
He fully doth possess as well as we;
Which makes us think his sudden apoplexe,
Is either will, vow, or a miracle.

I should think strangely, had we strange things on earth;
But wonders now are most familiar:
But here comes his majesty, now we shall see
If this dumb beast can speak before the king.

My best of friends, my dearest Philocles,
Thy griefs run in my spirit, make me sad,
And dulls my sense with thine affliction.
My soul with thine doth sympathize in woe,
And passion governs him that should rule all.
What say our Doctors is there no hope of help?

No hope my Lord, the cure is desperate.

Then I am king of grief, for in his words
Found I more music then in quires of Angels,
It was as silver as the chime of spheres.
The breath of Lutes, or ioues deliciousness:
Next to my Queen, he is my joy on earth:
Nor shall the world contain that happy good
Which with my tears I will not woo for him.
My Lord of Epyre, let it be straight proclaimed
Thorough all the cities in our kingdoms verdge,
That who so will avow to cure this prince,
And bring his work to wished effectualnesse
Shall have ten thousand crowns and our best love;
But if he fail in his great enterprise,
His daring is the loss of present life,
Since no man hitherto could do him good,
The next shall help him or else loose his blood.

Your Majesty shall have your will performed.

Not all so soon dear brother, what if a woman now
Should turn Aesculapius and restore
This dumb Hypolitus? nay do not look strange,
I dare avow and undertake the cure.

You sister, are you in your wits?

Faith of the out side of them brother, yet a womans tongue
Whose burden still is superfluity,
May lend a man an ages complement.

Madam I would not have you with the bark
Play your self into day net, this great cure,
I fear is far beyond your Physics help.

My Lord, you know not how Apollo loves me,
I have been thought as fair as Oenon was,
And dare be bold to claim this miracle.

Mariana attend, glory ruin compass thee about
This hand shall raise thee to a golden throne,
And grace thee with all stiles of dignity;
This cast thee down.
Lower then lives misfortune and orewhelme
Thy beauties with thy grave, perform be great,
Fail and be worse then worst calamity.

Stay gentle friend, my love doth bid thee stay,
Attempt not, and be safe from misery.

Sister you shall not grasp with mischief thus,
My blood doth challenge interest in your ill,
And I conjure you from this desperatnes.

Brother content your self, words but augment our strife,
I will perform or else my pawn's my life.

Proceed fair virgin.

Vouchsafe me privacy: now Venus be my speed,
Speak gentle Philocles, thine oaths bond I untie
And give thy vows a free infranchisment,
Thy well kept league hath showed thy strength of truth,
And doth confirm me in my vertuousnesse:
Thy martyrdom and sufferance is too long,
And I restore it to new liberty.
Then speak my Philocles, speak gentle Prince
To her whose love respects and honours thee.

How now, what virtue from thy charms?

No hope is left, dear Philocles regard my miseries.
Untie that wilful let which holds in speech,
And make me happy through thy noble pity.
I see the face of mine ill shaped contempt,
Where like with like hath quit most injury:
Then speak my Lord, utter one Angel breath
To give me joy, and save me from strange death.
What not a word, hath this small silence brought
An utter detestation to thy speech?
Wilt thou nor hear, nor speak, nor pity me,
The gentle Gods move thee to more remorse.

What, wilt not be?
Fond maid thou hast drawn affliction on thy head,
And thrald thy self to worst calamity:
Till morrow sun thy incantations use,
But then effectless, all hopes desperate,
Were thou my bosom love thou die the death,
Best ease for madness is the loss of breath.

O Philocles I am no courts disgrace,
No cities Prostitution, countries shame,
Nor one shall bring Troys fire unto thy house,
Turn not away hard hearted Mirmidon,
See, on my knees I'll follow thee in court,
And make the world condemn thy cruelty:
Yet if my tears may mollify thy heart,
Receive them as the floods of strangest rides,
Turn not thy face from her that doates on thee,
Love now hath made me subject to thy will,
And pale disdain hath taken revenge on me.
Behold my nerues I'll wear upon this earth,
And fill this roof with lamentations.
What dost thou smile, hath fury so much sway
As even to banish poor civility?
Then be thy self, and break thine itching spleen:
For I disdain thy ransomes victory,
Life thou art weary brought, welcome my death,
Sweet because wished for, good because my choice:
Yet when I am dead, this of me shall be said,
A cruel Prince murdered a loving maid.
And after ages to th'unborne shall tell,
Thy hate, my love, thy envy and my hell.
Nay do not speak I charge thee, go let nothing move thee,
Death is my glory, since thou wilt not love me.

Grief which controles the motions of our thoughts,
Rains in my blood and makes me passions slave,
My sisters misery torments my soul,
And breaks my gall when I but think of her:
She was bewitched with spells to her misfortune,
Or else borne haplesse under a lowering star,
And tis her fate to be thus miserable:
O Philocles had thou no other scale
To mount thy heaven but by our miseries,
Must all the noble fame of our great house
Waste down her royal pillars to make steps
For thee to climb to glory? well I see
Thou plots our shames in thy great dignity.

Patience great Lord, me thinks these ill raised storms
Have not more violence then may be borne,
Come we will both go sue unto the King.
We there will kneel and pray eternally,
And never rise till he remit his dome:
It shall be so, I will unto the King,
To beg great favour for a small offence:
But if she die for this, then King take heed,
Thee and thy fortunes by this hand shall bleed.

Come my harts, lets make all things ready for the execution, here's a maiden
head must be cut off without a featherbed.


Its a sign she deals with sharp tools a cruel heads man.

If I had been her judge, she should have been tossed to death in a blanket.


No, I would have had her smothered in a featherbed.

They say she would not plead at her trial.

No that's true, for she had a great desire to be pressed.

And I have known some of her sex, have got that favour to be pressed for
speaking.


Then she was unwise to hold her tongue being a woman.

What is her crime that she must loose her head?

Because she lived honest, contrary to the statute.

There is a great number of my neighbours well never suffer for that fault.


No nor thou neither if the truth were known, for my part I shun that
danger.


I think we are all out of danger of the law for that crime.

I know I am free, for I am a knave if I have not forgot what wench had my
maiden head.


Make room there, his Majesty is coming to the execution.

Come, now all things are ready: lets away.

Mercy is banished courts, the King like flint,
Hardens his royal temper against our plaints,
And makes our woes most vnauoidable.
What inauspicious star raignd at her birth,
That heaven thus frowns upon her misery;
And my good Lord, now innocence must die.
As white as vntroade snow, or cvluer down,
Kings words are laws, and cannot be withstood;
Yet it is false greatness, which delights in blood.

Patience my Lord, I do not think this ill
Is yet so big as unrecoverable.
The king doth hold you in most choice respect,
And whom kings love, they study to oblige.
Then call your reason home, make not this civil ware,
To suffer makes woes lesser then they are.

How well the sound can salve the sicke-mans grief!
But O how ill he can digest his pills!
O my good Lord, you shall not lose a sister,
That is the joy and comfort of your breath,
It is not your blood shall issue from her wound,
But mine that runs in rivers from her tears:
And rounds my face in her calamity.
Well, let her perish, since her soul is clear,
And for her death, i'll make a massacrie.

Your suits are bootless: for my vows have glewd
And closed mine ears that they retain no sound
Of your entreaties, and even now the time
Doth run upon his latest minutes, and
Save but by speech, there's no recovery.

Have mercy good my Lord, O let my tears intrude
Betwixt your vows and her calamity.
In her you take from me my best of life,
My joy, my comfort and my play-fellow.

Content you madame, for my vow is past,
And is like fate still vnreuocable:
Ascend poor model of calamity.

As lightly burdened with the weight of crimes,
As spotesse infants, or poor harmless lambs,
Thus I ascend my heaven, this first step lower,
Mounts to this next, this, thus and thus hath brought
My bodies frame unto its highest throne;
Here doth her office end, and hence my soul
With golden wings of thought shall mount the sky,
And reap a palace of pure sanctity.
Farewell my soueragine, madame within your thoughts
Make me a tomb, and love my memory.
Brother farewell, nay do not morn my death,
It is not I that die to spot our house,
Or make you live in after obloquy.
Then weep no more, but take my last adieu,
My virtues not my faults preserve with you.
Lastly, to you that are my last of hope,
Nay do not hide your eyes, I love them still:
To part friends now is greatest charity.
O be thy days as fruitful in delights,
As Eden in choice flowers, thine honours such
As all the world may strive to imitate.
Be master of thy wishes: only this,
When the sad nurse to still the wrangling babe,
Shall sing the careful story of my death,
Give me a sigh, from thy hearts purest breath:
And so farewell.

Madame kneel here, forgive me for your death.

With all my heart, thou art but laws poor hand,
Thus to my death I bow, and yet arise,
Angels protect my spirits in the skies.

Hold, or thine own hand shall be thine own destruction.

Never did music sound with better voice.
Unbind the Lady.

The fear of death hath brought her to a swooned.

Endeavour her recovery.

Sister, dear sister call thy spirits back;
Sister, O sister, hearken to my woes,
Recover breath and live with happiness.

She stirs, give way to air that she may breath.
Speak Mariana, thy woes are cancelled:

You are not charitable unto my moans,
Thus to afflict me with a double punishment:
One death for one poor fault might well suffice,
They are most wretched who twice lives and dies.

Madame to save your life I kill my soul:
And speckle that which was immaculate.
Black perjury that open eyed disease,
Which is the plague sore of society,
Brands me with mischief, and protests I hold
Nothing within me but unworthiness:
And all these ils are your creation.

Which to wash off; lo here I yield my self
An humble sacrifice to love and thee:
All my best hopes, my fortunes and my love,
My faith, my service, and my loyalty,
Shall as thy slaves attend on thy commands,
And make me famous in my suffrages.

Receive her Philocles, for it pleases us.

But not me my thrice royal sovereign.
I'll rather wed a sooty blackamoore,
A Leper, monster, Incubus or hag,
A wretch deformd in nature, loathed of men
Then her that hath bemonster'd my pure soul,
Her scorn and pride had almost lost her life,
A maid so faulted, seldom proues' good wife.

What is the reason you not love her now,
And were so passionate in love before?

Not that I love her less, but rather more,
Run I this backward course; only my vow,
Since vnperform'd craves satisfaction;
Which thus I reconcile, when this fair maid,
Shall with as strong a love, as firm a zeal,
A Faith as constant, and a shame as strong,
Requite my care, and show as ample proof
In mine extremes, as I have in her death,
Then will I love, enjoy and honour her.
Till when, I will not think a loving thought;
Or give the easy temper of my mind
To loue-sicke passion, or delitiousnesse.
Only with those which do adore the sun,
I'll give her all respect and reverence,

I am well pleased, and with a doubtful foe,
You have good reason thus to capitulate,
Then hang your colours forth, exted your thought
Muster your strongest powers, of stricktest wit,
And when your reasons best artilleries bent
Love not my love, if it be not excellent.

I have not seen a war breed better wit,
Or passion draw on more delightfulness:
Proceed in your contention, for we boast,
That love is best, which is approved most.
But now to revels, since our tragic scene
Is turned to comic mirthful constancy;
In stead of mourning we will dance and banquet
And fill our empty veins with all delights:
For oft we find that storms and sorrows prove
The best forerunners of a happy love.

He will, but he will not, loves but cannot like,
Will and affection in this Prince are like
Two buckets which do never both ascend:
Or those star twins which shine not in one sphere.
O Philoceles, I see thy soul grows fat,
And feeds upon the glories of my same;
But I'll forestall thine Epileptique fits;
And by my plots breed thy destruction.
Revenge now rules as soueragine of my blood,
And others ruins shall advance my good.
Which once attained to, I will prove ambitious,
Great men like Gods, are ne'er thought-vitious.
Now Philocles stand fast, King guard thy crown,
For by this brain, you both shall tumble down.

This is his chamber, lets enter, here's his clarke.

Fondling, said he, since I have hemmed thee here,
Within the circuit of this Ivory pale.

I pray you sir help us to the speech of your master.

I'll be a park, and thou shalt be my Dear:
He is very busy in his study.
Feed where thou wilt, in mountain or on dale.
Stay a while he will come out anon.
Graze on my lips, and when those mounts are dry,
Stray lower where the pleasant fountains lie.
Go thy way thou best book in the world.

I pray you sir, what book do you read?

A book that never an Orators clarke in this kingdom but is beholden unto; it
is called maids philosophie, or Venus and Adonis: Look you gentlemen, I have
diverse other pretty books.


You are very well stored sir, but I hope your master will not stay long.


No he will come presently.

Who have we here? another Client sure, crows flock to carcasses; O tis the
Lord Meshant.


Save you Gentlemen; sir is your master at any leisure?

Here sit thee down where never serpent hisses,
And being set i'll smother thee with kisses.
His businesses yet are many, you must needs attend a while.

We must attend, um, even snails keep state
When with slow thrust their horns peep forth the gate.
We must attend, tis customs fault not mine
To make men proud, on whom great favours shine,
Its somewhat against my nature to attend.
But when we must, we must be patient,
A man may have admittance to the king
As soon as to these long robes, and as cheap.
Come gentlemen shall we walk?
Thus are the pavement stones before the doors
Of these great tongue guilt Orators, worn smooth
With clients dancing for them.

It's strange to see how the world waits upon them, therein they are the only
men now.


O only; they of all men in request.
Your physician is the lawyer for your health:
And moderate unruly humours best.
Others are no body compared with him:
For all men neglect their health in regard of their profit.

True, and that's it makes these men grow so fat,
Swell with rich purchases.

Yea with golden fees,
And golden titles too, they can work miracles,
And like creators, even of empty nothing
Erect a world of goodly livings, fair demeans,
And gallant manors, heaped one on another.

They gain indeed excessively, are not like us citizens
Exposed to hazard of the seas and traffic.

Why here's a fellow now, this Orator
Even Prat, you would little think it, his father was
An honest proiner of our country vines;
Yet he's shot to his foot-cloath.

O he is; he proind him well and brought him up to learning.

Faith reasonable learning, a smattring in the Latin tongue,
A little Rhetoric, with wrangling sophistry,
Were his preparatives unto his art.

After these preparatives (if you call them so)
The physic wrought well for a few years practise,
Brought him in wondrous credit, and preferments
Came tumbling in: O such a sudden rise,
Hath fortune for her minions, blame him not then,
Though he look high on it.

Nay for his pride, of weaker souls termed state,
It hurts none but himself.

Yet to my seeming it is very strange,
That from so base beginning, men can breath
Such soaring fames.

Srange; it's not strange a whit,
Dunghills and marrish bogs, dart store of vapours,
And viscous exhalations, against heaven,
Which borrowing luster there (though basly bred)
Seem yet like glorious planets fairest stars:
To the weak eyes of wondering ignorance,
When wise men know they are but Meteors.
But here comes the Orator.

What President I say, come and attend me to the senate house.

I am ready sir, if you have Copia verborum, I have Copia rerum in a buckram
bag here.


Your Lordships pleasure.

Master Orator, tis not unknown my suit

Nay your Lordship must be brief, I not attend
The shallow slight of words, your suit, your suit.

The restoration of my lands and honours.

They are confiscat.

My lands confiscat, and my body free?

My Lord, my Lord, the Queen's more merciful.

Sir, you forget my place.

Sir you forget your faith,
T'was known unto the Queen, the state and us,
Your malcontented spirit, your disease in duty:
Your diligent purturbance of the peace:
Your passages, occurrences and --

Sir.

Sir me no sirs.
Do not I know you were the chief of those
Which raised the wars in Sicill? and long since
Wrought in the kings loves bloody business.
Did not you hold fair quarter and commerce
With all the spies of Cypres? fie I am ashamed,
Blind impudence should make you be so bold,
To bear your face before authority.

But hear me.

I will hear no reply, go home, repent, pray die.
Come Gentlemen, what's your businesses?

Your confirmation to his highness grant, touching our trade with Spain, in
which if it please you to assist us, we have a thousand crowns which shall
attend you.


O I have you in my memory, the suit is great:
And I must squeisse forth more then a thousand crowns.
Well attend me to the senate, you shall have fair dispatches

I not attend the shallow slight of words,
Go home repent, pray and die.
Excellent precepts for an Orators chamber.
Where speech must bath a handful deep in gold,
Till the poor givers conduit being dry,
The wretch goes home, doth curse, repent and die.
It is thy counsel Orator, thy tale breath
Good only but to season infamy.
From this reproach, this incarressing humour
Hath taught my soul a new philosophie.
I will go home and there repent all good
Done to thy name or thy profession.
I will go home and there new frame my self
More thirstily pernicious to thy state,
Then war or vnabated mutiny.
As for my prayers Orator, they are for thee;
Thou hast a pretty, lovely, witty wife:
O may thou live, both to be known and know
Thy self the greatest cuckold in our land;
And yet not dare to amend or greiue at it.
May thou embrace thy shame with thankful arms,
Hug thy disgrace, make thy black poison wine,
And cap and crouch to thy dishonour,
May thy remembrance live, upon my knees I pray,
All night in belmens mouths, with Pasquill in the day.

Day be my speed, night shall not cloak my sin,
If I have nought to do, its by the Sun,
The light gives leave to all mine Idleness.
Quick business and open eyes cease on mine orator,
Whilst I create him horny presidents.
But here's my bed broker. Now my great armefull of good intelligence, where is
my Mistress?


Fast locked in her bed with a close ward to devour thee my brave Paraquito;
but husht no words, there is a calm before the tempest.


Tut, tell me of no storms, but direct me to her bed chamber, my noble
firelock of a flesh pistol.


Follow thy colours my brave worthy, mount up thy standard, so enter and
prosper.

Thou hast a rich room, safe locks, sweet sheets, a choice armefull, with o
the rare, rare thought of imagination.


Whats this, whats this, doth this Lord Alphonso turn the
Orator to an Antilop? tis more then excellent,
And from the juice of this despite I suck
Delight more great then all my miseries,
Observe, dear eyes observe.

Nay go thy way for a Camel or a Camelion, thou may compare with all Europe,
Africa and Asia, and one that will change tricks, though thou were worthy to
be schoolmaster either to Proteus or Aritine: what an excellent gift did God
give unto man when he gave him woman, but how much more when that woman was
made fair? but o the most of all when she had wit to use every member of her
creation. Well I'll stand to it, theirs nothing but beauty, use and old age
that puts women of my rank out of request, and yet like old bucklers though
few of your gallant cauileres will wear us, yet many of your stale Ruffians
will employ us, and that's our comfort still.


Was ever heard a bawd more damnable?
A very mountebank of wench flesh, an Emperick,
A dog-leech for the putrefied sores,
Of these Iust-cankerd great ones, O I could
Even mad my self with railing at their vices.
But hark one knocks, O for the orator,
Heavens I beseech thee, O for the orator.

How now, who knocks so rudely at the door?

Tis I I say, open the door, I am in hast.

Tis he, just heavens tis he, fore God the orator.

Soul of my bawdy office, how are we betrayed,
Anon, anon sir, what Mistres Prate I say?
Arise for shame, your husbands at the door,
I come, I come, Lord God how dull you are
When danger's at your heals, rise quickly.

Open the door, or I will break it open.

I come, I come, I think he's mad with hast,
What Iohn, what Thomas, Robert, wher's these knaves,
What Iulian, Mary, Sislie, near a maid within.

For Gods love stay, i'll find the key straight way.
O mistres Coloquintida, what shall become of us?

Nay I am at my wits end, and am made
Duller then any spurgald, tired Jade.

Sfoote if he enter, I will break his neck.

Not for a world dear love, step into my closet.

Did ever slave come thus unluckily?

Nay now's no time for passion, good Lord in.

Fie I have almost broke my hart with running.

How now dear husband, what hath moved this hast?

I think I was not blessed this morning when I rose: for through my forgetfulness
I have left behind me in my study the breuiates of all my causes, and now the
Senate is fain to dance attendance on my leisure, fie, fie, fie.


Nay if he smell nothing but papers, I care not for his dry foot hunting, nor
shall I need to puff pepper in his nostrils, but see he comes again.


I think the Devil have laid his horns in my way.

Yes, and if you had wit you might conjure him out of your wives closet.


Sancte benedicite, what have we here, hath the golden snake cast his skin
upon my bed, go toe wife, I smell I smell, me thinks your plain rug should
not agree with this rich counterpoint.


Husband, either I have fitted you now, or else I shall never fit you whilst I
breath.

You oft have told me, that like those of your rank,
Who both adorn their credits and them selves,
Yea even their causes with their costly clothes,
Your self in like sort would strive to imitate,
And now my neighbour here hath brought this suite,
Which if you please to buy, tis better cheap
Then ere t'was made by full five thousand crowns.

Say thou me so wench, a kiss for that in faith,
Fore God it is a delicate fine suite, rich stuff, rare work, and of the
newest fashion; nay if the Senats business were never so hasty, I will stay to
try it on, come, help good wenches help, so there, there there.


Sfoote will the ox put on the Lions hyde,
He will, he will, tis more then excellent,
So guild the tomb which holds but rottennes,
Laughter I fear will burst me, look how he struts,
O God that ever any man should look
Upon this maumet and not laugh at him,

Fit fit: excellent fit as though,
The body it was made for wore my mould,
Wife I will have it, we'll dispute no price.

Master Orator, the Senate are set, and can dispatch no causes through your
absence, therefore they earnestly entreat your presence.


I come, I come, good friend go say I come,
And wife see that you pay for this suite, what so ere it cost.

Not above making you cuckold, that's the most.

What is he gone?

He is.

Why then come forth poor naked Lord.

What is he gone, may the Devil and his horns both follow him.


He is gone: but yet he hath discovered your treason.

How?

Yes, and in revenge thereof hath vowed, that in this naked sort as you are,
you shall do penance through the City for your sin of unchastity.


I pray thee leave thy woman's phrase, and speak like a man, plainly, plainly.


Then plainly thus, he is gone and hath taken away your apparel.


Upon what accident?

This, when your negligence had left your clothes upon my bed, he espied them,
taskt me for the owner, I in excuse told him it was a suite brought by my
gossip to be sold, he straight like a child proud of a new coat, presently
puts it on, presently is sent for to the Senate, and at this present hath left
you that the world may behold your naked doings.


I would it were washed in the blood of a Centaur, that when he puts it off,
his skin might follow it, but how shall I get to my chamber?


Truly I know not, except you will wear a smocks vpper-coate.

What a petticoat, you mad me with your mirth.

Then seriously thus, as he hath taken your clothes, you must take his, and let
the world know you have had more then fiddlers fare, for you have meat, money
and cloth.


Sfoote how shall I look in this Devils suite, sure I shall grow sick to see
my shape.


Well extremity must then be your physic, but come, you shall attire your
self in my chamber.


Are these the winding turns of female shames,
Loose woman's gamboles, and the tricks of sin?
And are we borne to bear these suffrages?
O he that's tide unto a brothel bed,
Feels his worst hell on earth, and may presume
There is no sickness like his pestilence:
Well, what the issue of this jest will prove,
My wit but yet conceives and after time
Shall perfect it and give it liberty,
In such sort, that if it true fire strike,
A world of Apes shall study for the like.

My thoughts are troubled, Joy forsakes me quite,
And all my meditations are revenge:
Ambition and fell murder join in me,
And aid each other to untwine a state,
And make whole millions prove unfortunate.
Now must I practise court art flattery,
And wisely temporise with blackest deeds:
I'll smile and stab now weep, then laugh, then frown,
And with sly tricks of state kill all suspicion.
Devils must seem like Angels, saith ambition,
The blackest thoughts I'll study to excel,
Crowns and revenge have made men dive to hell.
My plot is currant and it cannot miss,
Whilst wisdom winds me on the clew of bliss.
The King shall kill the Queen, that acted right,
I soon will turn his brightest day to night.
Hes simple, honest, and loves downy rest,
Then he must fall, tis policy in state
To hurl them down are blessed with happy fate.
Thus each shall scourge himself with his own rod,
Who is all policy, avows no God.
Who is within there hoe?

Did your grace call?

I did, where is the King?

He is in his privy chamber playing at chess.

Go straight and tell him I must speak with him,
And say my business doth import great haste.

I go my Lord.

Be a blessed Mercury, now mount thee up my spirit,
And show thy self a Politician,
Let slander rule thy tongue, envy thy hart,
And let destruction be thy period
Of what thou speak; for this my maxim is,
But rule no heaven, and but revenge no bliss.

Here comes the King, my Lord we must be private,
Remove your hearings from our conference,
Now speak my Lord, speak freely as to heaven.

First with my knee I kiss this prostrate earth,
And humbly beg, that which my tongue shall speak,
So it proceed from love and vassallage,
May bear a pardon or forgetfulness.

You have it, arise, discharge an open breast.

O my dread Liege, my speech will make you sad,
(And Kings do seldom relish their distastes)
And from that sadness such a storm will rise
As will even droune up all credulity.
O that my loyal hart could cover sin,
Or that my tongue inured unto grief,
Might lose his spleen ere it distemper you,
But love and mine alleagance bid me speak.

Then speak, and do not rack me with delay.

Women, why were you made for mans affliction,
The first that ever made us taste of grief,
And last of whom in torments we complain,
You devils shaped like Angels, through whose deeds,
Our forked shames are made most visible,
No soul of sense would wrong bright Majesty,
Nor stain their blood with such impurity.

Nay good Lord leave this Allegorick speech,
And give me knowledge from a plainer phrase.

Then plainly thus, your bed is pressed with lust.
I know you do not credit, nay whats more,
I know you hate me for my vertuousnes,
Your Queen behaves her like a courtesan,
I know you hold me for a wild impostor,
O foolish zeal that makes me be so fond
To leave my faith unto black censuring,
O she hath sinned and done a double wrong
To you, to her and sacred chastity.

Duke thou art valiant, and with a valiant mind,
Slander is worse then theft or sacrilidge,
Nay more then murder, or the height of treason,
A step beyond the utmost plagues in hell.
Then thou which in that nature wrongst a Queen,
Deserve a scourge beyond their punishments,
Virtue should kill thee now.

Nay do, my breast is bare unto thy steel,
Kill me because I love thee and speak true,
Is this the merit of a Roman faith,
For this have I observed, pried in unto,
And searched each secret shift of vanity?
Nay pray you kill me, faith I'll patient stand,
Live still a monster, hold shame in your hand.

Speak a word more, a King shall be thy death.

Death is a slave to him that is resolved,
And my soul loathes this servile flattery:
Nor will I cover such intemperate sin,
But to the world make them and that transparent,
Unless your self will seek to right your self.

Thou hast awaked me, and thy piercing words
Have split my sense in sunder: yet what ground ha?
Remains whereon to ground suspicion? a cuckold, cuckold

Your absence is the baud to her desires,
For their masks, dancings, gaming, banqueting,
Strange private meetings and all to^fes in love.
As wanton speeches to stir Appetite,
And all enchantments that inflame desire.
When you return, then all is husht and still,
And she demurely walks like virtues Ghost:
Before your face she's like a Puritan,
Behind your back a blushes courtesan.

O I have drunk in poison at mine ears,
which makes my blood boil with vnqueched flames,
But speak who is it that dishonours me?

He that you prize a line before your life,
I know you will not credit faith you will not.

Nay if thou cease to speak, thou hatst my life,
Take thou delight to kill me, then forbear,
Sfoote I am mortal man kill me, do do do.

Your best of friends, your dearest Philocles
Usurps your bed and makes you a cornute,
A creature vncreate in paradise.
And one that's only of a woman's making.

Is't possible? can I give faith to this?

Nay be but patient, smooth your brow a little,
And you shall take them as they clip each other.
Even in their height of sin then dam them both,
And let them stink before they ask God pardon,
That your revenge may stretch unto their souls.

To be a cuckold doth exceed all grief.

To have a pleasant scoff at Majesty.

To taste the fruit forbidden from my tree.

But he shall loose his paradise for that.

The slave will make base songs in my disgrace.

And wound your reputation in strange Lands.

This injury sad all my joys on earth.

Horns are not shunned by wisdom, wealth or birth

Watch their close meetings, the give us notice,
Mean space my love shall in thy bosom rest,
My grief is like my birth great, great and hie:
Give close intelligence, till then farewell,
Lust is the broadest path which leads to hell.

He's gone with black suspicion in his heart:
And made his soul a slave to jealousy,
My plots shall drive him to his own destruction;
And I gain both revenge and dignity.
He shall no sooner put his Queen to death,
But i'll proclaim her spotless innocence.
All men will hate him for so vile an act,
And mad with rage depose him from his crown.
Then I will be his death, his state doth give,
Kings once deposd, long after must not live;
For like a Phoenix rare in jealousy,,
He shall consume himself in scorching flames,
Whilst from his ashes I a Phoenix spring:
Many renounce their God to be a king,
And i'll be one to kill men with a frown.
None dare dispute the actions of a crown.

THe Queen is all for revels, her light heart,
Unloaded from the heaviness of state,
Bestows it self upon delightfulness.

She follows her creation and her sex.
In my conceit it is as vile a thing,
To see the worthy model of a woman,
Who had not been at all; but to give life,
And stirring spleen to mans allacrity,
To sit orewhelmd with thought, with dark amuse
And the sad sullenness of a grieved dislike;
As to behold an old man in his furs,
Whose well spent youth, hath given his age full strength
To be his countries best physician,
To caper to his grave, and with vain gauds
Trick up his coffin, and upon his tomb,
To leave no knowledge but his levity.

Tis true indeed, and nature in her self,
Doth give us still distaste in contraries.
And in my thoughts it is as base to see a woman man
As see a man a long roab'd feminine.

Well, we forget our selves my Lord, What is the music ready? I pray you
command the guard to take their halberds in their hands, the Ushers should have
seen this room perfumed, in faith they are too negligent: here comes the
Queen.


Loud music there, and let the God of Harmony
Ravish our senses with delightful aires,
Tuned to the music of the higher sphere,
And with that mortal sign rarely show,
The joys in Ioues high court, to feast the Gods,
Making that place abound in happinsse.
Come noble Philocles I cease you first,
( Mariana there are choice of other Lords)
In gracing you, it is the king I grace.

Come honest Lord, tis you must stand to me,
The Queen in mine doth challenge interest,
And I must fly for shelter to my friends.

And i'll be glad to be your coverture.

O no my Lord, not till the weather change.

Well when you please, mean time you do me grace.

Nay my Lord, there's a Lady worth the handling.
Sound music then, fill earth with heavens pleasure,

My Queen is out of time, though she keep measure.

Be lucky villainy,
Hit now the mark that mine ambition aims at
Me thinks I see that lean Italian devil, jealousy, dance
In his eyes: possess him spirit of rage,
Mufflle his understanding with black thoughts,
Let passion govern reason, falsehood truth,
Oblivion hide his age, hate kill his youth.

Thou dauncest on my heart lascivious Queen,
Even as upon these rushes, which thou treads:
See how her motions wind about his eyes,
And doth present to him her passions,
Now doth her moistning palm glow in his hand
And courts him unto dalliance: she dies, tis just,
She's slave to murder that is slave to lust.

Thou curse of greatness, waking ei'd suspicion,
Now help thy poor friends, murder and ambition.

This strain contained a preticke change.
Proceed unto the next.

Sin follows sin, and change on change doth wait,
Thy change doth change my love to cruel hate.

Madam methinks this change is better then the first.

I if the music would not alter it.

Methinks tis worse, come we will have another strain

I pleased, let us proceed.

Rivals in crowns and beds of kings must bleed,
Can that fair house contain so foul a guest.
As lust, or cloak inordinate and base desires,
Under so fair a coverture; O yes,
Women can blind our sense when we se best,
And set fair landscapes on inconstancy,
Making us blind with seeing the dance ends,
Your sins are blackest, breach of love and friends.

Now to the king, blow rage till it flame hate,
A politician thrives the best in state.

Come sweet Prince Philocles,
Devise some new delights to shorten time,
This dullness hath no relish in my sense,
It hath no pith, and sloth in my conceit
Is but a tip of pride in best constructions.

Madame i'll stand, that a fair woman must be proud or else a fool.


I would fain hear that I'faith.

Thy reason wench, I pray the come disburse.

A woman fair is like a full blown rose,

Which holds the fair no longer then it grows.

A woman fair is like the finest gold.

Which kept from use is good though ne'er so old.

Nay good Lord leave a little,
She that is fair is wise, and ought to know it,
For to that end did nature first bestow it.
Now of this knowledge if we be not proud,
We wrong the author, and we are allowed
To rank with senseless beasts, since careless we
For want of pride detract our dignity.
Now knowing it, we know truth in the same,
Not to be proud of truth asks follies name.
This lesson still is read in beauties school,
She that is fair and humble is a fool:
For neither know she how to hold her good,
Or to keep safe the treasure of her blood.

a notable declamation.

Nay madame by your leave,
Pride gives a luster to a woman's fair,
Things that are highest prizd, are ever dear.
Why is the Diamond the Saphyrs king,
But for esteem and rareness? both which spring
From the stones pride, which is so chaste and hard,
Nothing can pierce it, it self is it selfes guard,
Now what is pride? self love, our own esteem,
A strength to make us of our selves well deem:
From whence this maxim I collect amongst other,
Who hates her self can never love another.
And to conclude, mans appetite grows dull
To what it may have, empty hope is full,
To all our sex on earth, maid, widow, wife and bride,
They happy live, when they live with chaste pride.

My Queen will speak as much for lust as she for pride, if the toy take her.


Your Ladyship sows dangerous seed abroad.

But I hope my lord all grounds are not fruitful.

Well wench, shalt be the proud woman's champion.

And i'll defend them against all men, as at single tongue.

I had rather fight with a giant, then you at that weapon.

My Lord go forth, return in your own shape, say I am coming.

I go my Lord.

I'll note their countenance when they hear of me.
Kings often see that which they would not see.

Dancing hath made me weary, what sport is next?

What your highness will command.

she will command you sir to play with her.

Madame his majesty is returned to court.

Nay then away with revels and with sports,
Lie husht, and still this vainer idleness,
It now hath lost his spleen, come Lords away.
My sun is risen, brings a brighter day.

Darkness is thy delight lascivious Queen,
And thou would have thy sun pent up in cloud:
If I be he, O falsnesse did I for this,
In single opposition hand to hand,
Hazard my royal blood for thee to be
My greatest shame, the scandal of my blood,
Whilst rumour crowns me king of infamy?
But I will be revenged: watch gentle Lord,
When next I see them, they shall taste of death,
Such power hath baseness over great defame
That monarchs cannot cover their own shame.

My plot yet holds a true proportion,
And I do see, an even way to rule,
A crown like a bold champion bids me on,
And fame shall chronicle mine enterprise:
The Queen being dead, I must oppose my self,
Against her tyrant husband, that's my claim
And with strong courage, stand the shock of war:
If of my self I can withstand the King,
Then all the Land will flock unto mine aide, if not,
The king is Gods anointed, my head fits the block,
And that's the worst, yet future times will tell:
I sunk not slightly, for a crown I fell.

Come on my masters, you know the tenure of the kings command,
And what in this great business you must do,
Which is to keep him safe, and not vouchsafe
That any creature speak or visit him,
Till he be brought to the presence of the king,
You must not start for bounty nor for threats.
No though he say he is a noble man,
As it may be, he may prove mighty borne,
Yet what for that? you must perform your office
Or else expect to taste sharp punishment.

Tut, fear not my Lord, we that have had Cerberus office so many years under
a gate, are not to learn now to play either diules or tyrants, let us but see
him, and then take no care for his safety.


Nay he shall be put into safe keeping, for my wife shall take charge of him.


Tis well deui'sd, see where he comes,
He may not see my presence, think upon it,
Your charge is trusty, and of mighty weight.
Farewell.

Fear not: come my ^arts, compass him about, and cease on him all at once,
like so many Ravens on a dead horse.


Now an eternal sleep, an apoplex, a swooned
Cease on their senses, who in this disguise
Shall view or note my vile deformity.
I was bewitched with spells to my misfortune:
Or else star crossed with some hags hellishnesse.
Sure I said my prayers, ris'd on my right side,
Washed hands and eyes, put on my girdle last;
Sure I met no splea-footed baker,
No hare did cross me, nor no bearded witch,
Nor other ominous sign, O then why
Should I be thus damn'nd in the devils nets?
Pst possible? this habit which I wear
Should become any man? now of my soul,
I loath to see my self, and willingly
I would even vomit at my counteneance.

Stand sir, we arrest you.

Arrest me, why I injure no man but my self.

You are the more unkind, he that wrongs himself, will not stick to wrong the
whole world also.


Nay strive not for we arrest you by virtue of the Kings commission.


Well my masters be careful, you may mistake me.

Indeed it is no marvel you are so like other men.

Indeed at this time, I am hardly like one of Gods making.

Faith and I am sure you are no man of a good taylors making, you are but peest
work.


Well yet I may hap to prove a noble man.

A whoremaster or an unthrift, away with him, and let no man man catachise him
upon pain of my displaesure.


Roll on the chariot wheels of my dear plots,
And bear mine ends to their desired ^kes:
As yet theirs not a rub of wit, a gulf of thought,
No rocky misconstruction, thorny amaze,
Or other let of any doubtfulness;
As yet thy way is even smooth and plain,
Like the green Ocean, in a silent calm.
Blessed credulity, thou great God of error,
That art the strong foundation of huge wrongs,
To thee give I my vows and sacrifice,
By thy great deity he doth believe
Falsehoods, that falsehoods self could not invent,
And from that misbeleefe doth draw a course
To overwhelm even virtue, truth and sanctity.
Let him go on blessed stars, tis meet he fall,
Whose blindfold judgment hath no guide at all.
But O these shadows have bewitchted long,
To threat and not to do, doth malice wrong;
And see here comes the Queen.

My Lord the Duke, your presence and my wish,
Jump in an even line together: come we must to cards,
I have some crowns I needs must lose to you.

I humbly beseech your highness pardon me,
I have important business of the Kings,
Which doth command mine instant diligence.

Brother, indeed you shall attend the Queen,
Another time will serve those state dispatches.

Sister content you, the affairs of state
Must give their best attendance on the times,
And great occurrents must not lose their minutes.

Now i'll stand to it, that to be a states man or a lawyer, is to be of the most
thankless occupation that ever was derived from humain invention.


Why I pray thee wench?

Because they bestow all the laborious toil of the mind until they be forty,
that they may live imprisoned in a study chamber till they be fourscore, only
this worlds Mammon, which is great name and riches, like a string between a
galley slaves legs, is the only ease of their fetters.


A notable construction of a noble labour: but shall we not have your company my
Lord?


My service Madam, but my presence the King hath employed, only if you please,
I will send Prince Philocles to your Majesty.


No creature better for his skill in play,
Is equal with our knowledge, good my Lord,
Send him to my privy chamber presently.

I will, and send affliction after him,
And see where he comes, My Lord your presence hath
Saved me much labour, and a little care,
I was in quest for your fair company:
The Queen my Lord entreats you earnestly
You will attend her in her privy chamber.

Unto what end?

Only to waste some time at cards with her,
The lasy hours stick heavy on her thoughts,
Which she would lose with some forgetfulness.

Faith, play ne'er relished worse within my thoughts,
I know not how, but laden heaviness
Draws me to be in love with melancholy.

The fitter for you with more light sports
To chase that blood consumer from your breast,
Who with a honey poison doth devour,
And kill the very life of livelihood.

Tis true, therefore shall your counsel tutor me,
Where is her Majesty?

Gone to her privy chamber where she doth expect you.

I will attend her presently.

Do, and I will attend thee to thy grave,
Poor shallow Lord, by much too virtuous.
Hoe, whose within there?

Your graces pleasure.

Go tell his Majesty that I must speak with him.

I go.

Come my Lord take your place, here are cards, and here are my crowns.


And here are mine, at what game will your Majesty play?

At mount saint.

A royal game, and worthy of the name,
And meetest even for Saints to exercise:
Sure it was of a woman's first invention.

It is not Saint, but Cent, taken from hundreds.

True, for amongst millions hardly is found one saint

Indeed you may allow a double game,
But come list for the dealing, it is my chance to deal.

An action most, most proper to your sex.

How now my waking dragon, thou whose eyes
Do never fall or close through Lethean sleep,
What is there a Hercules that dare to touch,
Or enter the Hesperian Rosaries?

Speak softly gentle Lord behold, behold
The silly birds are tangled in your snare,
And have no way to escape your punishment:
See how her eyes do court him, and his looks pay to her
love a double interest: fie fie, they are toe blame.

What are you my Lord?

Your highness servant, but misfortunes slave.

Your game I mean.

Nothing in show, yet somewhat in account,
Madam I am blank.

You are a double game, and I am no less, there's an hundred, all cards made
but one knave.


Mark that, of my life she means your Majesty.

True, I know she holds me as her varlet,
And that I am imperfect in her game,
But my revenge shall give me better place,
Beyond the hate of her foul impudence.

Nay good my Lord observe, they will confirm you better.

Whats your game now?

Four Kings as I imagine.

Nay I have two, yet one doth me little good.

Indeed mine are 2 Queenes, one I'll throw away.

Doth your Majesty mark that?
You are the King that she is weary of,
And my sister the Queen that he will castaway.

Can you decard Madam?

Hardly but I must do hurt.

But spare not any to confirm your game.

Would you have more plain proof of their foul treason?
They do not plot your highness death alone.

But others which they think depend on me.

My self and those which do you services,
They are bloody minded, yet for my self,
Were it not for your safety, I could wish
You would remit and blot these errors out,
In hope that time would bring them to more virtue.

O then thou did not love me, nor thy faith
Took hold upon my scandals, fie I am mad,
Shamed and disgrac't, all wit-stung, wisdomlesse.
Within there ho?

Did your majesty call?

Go instantly, (nay do not look sad or pale,
Neither dispute with me nor with thy thoughts:
But as thou love thy life, effect my will)
Call all my guard, ascend the Queenes privy chamber,
And in my name arrest her and Prince Philocles of treason:
Make no delay but in thy diligence
Show how thou dost respect me, arrested once,
Convey them unto straightest prison: away.
For you my Lord, go instantly prepare,
And summon all the Princes of our land
Unto an instant Parliament, where we
Will have them both condemned immediately,
Without their answers plaints or pitiousnes.
Since women's tears do blunt revenges sword,
I will not see nor hear the speak one word.

Madam and Prince Philocles, in the Kings name I arrest you both of high
treason.


He lies that saith I ever knew the word.

I pray thee do not affright me gentle Lord,
Thy words do cary death even in their sound.

Madam I am most sorry tis my fortune,
But what I do is by the Kings commission.

Whence is that warrant grounded, or whats our treason?

I am his instrument but not his counsailor.

Witness my tears that I am innocent.

Madam be patient, that we do not know,
We have no cause to grieve at, as for envies toil,
Let her even break her own gall with desire,
Our innocence is our prevention.
Be cheerful Madam, tis but some villains sound,
Made only to amaze, not to confound.
And what must we do my Lord?

To prison are the words of my commission.

Then lead the way; he hath of grief no sense,
Whose conscience doth not know of his offence.

HOw now mad sister, your dear love is condemned,
A sweet adulterer.

How, condemned before their trial?

No they were condemned by Act of Parliament.

I do not hold thee brother for a man,
For it is reasonless to mock calamity,
If he die innocent, thrice happy soul;
If guilty, weep, that man should so transgress:
Nature of reason thus much doth importune,
Man should partake in grief with mans misfortune.

For him, if ere mine eyes weep, may they drop out
And leave my body blinder then my sense:
Pity my foe the ruin of my house,
My valours scandal, and mine honours poison!
No let him fall, for blood must still quench lust,
Law hath condemned him, then his death is just.

Spit out that monster envy, it corrupts you,
And mildly hear me answer for my love,
What did he against you was not honourable,
Which you against him would not have gladly done?
Will you hate him for acting your own thoughts?
Can it be ill in him yet good in you?
Let reason weigh this difference then you'll find
His honour poizes down his infamy.

Can thou love him that brought thee to thy death?

No like a God he made me with his breath.

Did he not win thy love and then reject thee?

His honour not his love doth now neglect me.

Fond maid thy foolish dotage doth mistake him.

Hell shall have mercy ere I will forsake him.

Farewell then sister, friend to my greatest foe,
Revenge strikes home, being ended with one blow.

Prevention thou best midwife to misfortune,
Unfold this ugly monsters treachery,
And let his birth be ominous struck dead,
Ere it have being in this open world:
Loves commands nature, brother pardon me,
Thine envy di^s by my loves liberty.
Invention (hart of wit) possess my brain,
For treason is to treason her own bane.
And you bright heavens, now aid me in my plots,
That truth may shine through falsehoods leporous spots.
My life I'll hazard to redeem my love,
Firm constancy like rocks can never move.
Be bold then maiden hart in his defence
He saved thy life, thy life's his recompense.
My wit and hopes have furnished me with all
The helps of art, to bring forth treasons fall.
Now to the means: some say that gold hath power,
To enter without force a gatelesse tower;
And I'll try that, which if it take fast hold,
I'll never blame them more that dote on gold.
Hoe, whose within there?

Who calls, what would you have? I thought you were a woman you were so hasty:
O Madam is it you? I cry you mercy.


My grief speaks loud sir, and my swift desire
Ore rules my tongue, makes it keep time with thought,
I long to see a prisoner in this ill built house.

What prisoner Madam?

The worthy Prince, the famous Philocles.

Madame I dare not, without especial warrant.

I have my brothers strong commission, hold there is gold.

This golden calfe is an excellent Idol; and sew of my profession but serves
it this dumb god gives tongue to all men, wit to all me, honour to any man, but
honesty to no man; and therefore as for honesty I mean not to deal with so
dear a commodity, but leave it to my better: Madam those stairs direct you to
his lodging.


I thank you sir.

This is a worthy Lady to give thus much for the bare sight of a man in
affliction, if he were at liberty it were nothing: but being as it is, it is
most bountiful, but it may be it is for the past hours of former recreations,
well let it be what it shall be, I am sure it was not that I should hold this
disputation: but see here she comes again.


Madame my soul cannot consent to leave
Your life in this great hazard, nor can death
Carry such ugly shape as doth the thought
That you are left in this extremity:
Indeed I will not leave you.

Will you grow mad? what shall your nobler spirit
Which is the school of wisdom grow so fond,
As to revolt from all our happiness?
Our plots you know, and how to manage cares,
Whose true events have true proportions.
Then dear Lord rest resolved, the Gailer over hears:
Live you with safety, most worthy maid farewell.

Farewell fair Prince; thanks M Jailer and a kind commend.

As much unto your Ladyship. So now I'll lock my doors.

Is our commission, as we gave in charge,
Delivered ore to the Corigidors?

It is, and with such strictnes and advice,
For speedy execution of the same,
That by this time I know they are in the way
Unto their execution, for the hour
Of death doth run upon his latest minutes.

Tis well: for till their shameless lives have end,
There can no comfort creep into my thoughts,
Or ought save mifchief keep me company.
Why was I borne to this malignity
And lowness of base fortune: yet my place
Above the level of the vulgars sight,
O it is but to let me know thus much,
That those which lie within the richest graves
Were at the best but fortunes glorious slaves.
But see, here comes my shame.

My dearest Lord.

Pass and respect me not lascivious woman,
Thy tears are of the spears of Crocodils,
See how I stop mine ears against thy plaints,
And glue mine understandings from thy charms,
Nay call on him thou hast offended most,
Mercy from me were worse then cruelty.

My dearest dread, my best best sovereign,
Whom I have ne'er offended but with zeal
And constant love, loyal and honourable,
Vouchsafe me though a Queen a subjects right,
And let me know for what offence I perish.

For thine adulterat and monstrous lust,
Shameful and gross and most unsufferable.

Who doth accuse us?

Our self, and our own soul that have beheld
Your vile and most lascivious passages.

O that my tongue would not betray my knowledge
Then would I amaze them all with mine assertions:
Madame, challenge the law.

My gracious Lord, since no desert in me,
Can merit your belief, nor that your eye,
Can rightly judge my pure complexion:
Yet as your handmaid, let me beg the right,
Due unto wretches from our countries laws.

The tenure of the law you do demand.

That in the case of slander, where the proof
Proceeds as much from envy as from truth,
We are allow'd our champions to defend
Our innocence, with a well ordered sword.

I looked for this objection and allow it,
Nor am I unprovided for your best
And strongest hope in any victory; Lords attend in my Champion.

Will you my Lord approve the Kings assertion.

Madame, although against the nature of my spirit,
And my first duty, bound to your allegiance,
Yet now compelled by duty and by truth,
I must of force become your opposite.

Thou art no true Italian, nor true gentleman,
Thus to confound the glory of thy judgment.
Hath not that arm which now is armed against me
That valour, spirit, judgment and that worth,
Which only makes you worthy, stood t'approue
More then my self will challenge to my virtues?
And are you now basely turned retrograde?
Well, I perceive there's nought in you but spleen,
And times observance, still to hold the best:
Still I demand the Law.

And you shall have it in the amplest manner. Sound cornets.

There is a cobatant on the defedats part; your majesties pleasure.

Give him his oath according to the laws.

Are the fair ends of this your warlike posture,
To prove the innocence of these two condemned?
So help you Jove.

They are.

Then give the warlike signal to the fight.

Thou art my slave, either confess or die.

Did thou speak true, I would not sound a word
To save the world from cinders; yet that thou may
With more resolved fury murder me,
This I confess, twas I that only stirred,
Out of strong falsehoods hate and jealousy
The kings eternal wrath, and made him think
Untruths, that even untruth would not suggest:
And all my malice sprung from that Prince Philocles.

No twas from me that still am Philocles.

My Philocles, my Queen, O double pardon me,
My jealousy, his envy, and your virtues:
Are sprung from such impatient contraries,
I cannot reconcile them; yet O pardon me:
My faith in life shall make you recompense:
For thee rare Mariana; thou hast wrought
A work of noble constant magnitude.
As for this monster, this my tempting devil,
Whose forfait life is witness to his shame:
I give his life and fortunes to the Queen,
She whom his malice would have brought to death,
Shall now be judge and Iurer of his breath.

In which commission, (madame) let it be inrold
He is my brother and my best of blood.

And only that is charter for his life:
Live envious Lord, more envious then you are great,
Live to lament thy worst of wretchedness,
Live to repent, since this I certain know:
Thine own gald conscieuce will be thy worst woe.

Come bring him away, thrust him forward, though favour and a great purse were
against him.


How now, what tamult have we there?

And it please your majesty we have brought you here a slip a piece of false
coin: one that is neither stamped with true coin for his excuse, nor with good
clothes for his redemption.


Alphonso, in the name of madness how comes this Metamorphosis? Nay stand forth,
discourse, if thou dost lie, thou art mine enemy.


Nay more, if thou stick in any bog, and by a trick seek to wind out, I
will discover you.


This conjuration (believe it my Lord) shall make me leap out of all fetters,
and briefly thus I have long time loved the fair wife of the Orator; having no
opportunity but his absence at the senate, I took that season: he out of
negligence, omitting his papers returned unseasonably, found me insufficiently,
and forced me to take sanctuary strangely, which however I purchased, yet he
found mine apparel, and mistaken in the tenure, reached it presently, put it
on immediately: and now in the senate house is pleading in it seriously.


I cannot blame him, you having got so much within his inward garment.


Of all which my Lord, I being (in a strict conceit) a bawdy witness: and
having both from the Orators scorns and delays received many indignities;
though by this discovery to cry quittance with my proud enemy.


And you have amply done, yet this jest,
So perfect doth deserve more memory.
Florio, go bid the Orator attend us presently.
And now to you Drap and Velous, I did
Refer you long since to the Orator.
Yet I note your attention: come there is
Some too close fisted hardness in your hearts,
You gripe too hard, your bribes will not disburse,
Come tell me truly, as you look for heaven,
What must you pay for your dispatches?

A thousand crowns we offred willingly.

And will your suit avail with such disbursment?

It will, and we most richly satisfied.

Will you bestow the money on our self,
We will see the business perfited.

With all our hearts, and be full joyed thereat, here are the crowns.


You shall have your dispatches.
See here comes the Orator, Prat come hither.
These Gentlemen whom long since I referd
To Your dispatches, are yet unsatisfied.

Alas my Lord the state,

I know implores you, yet there's many minute^
May give your best cares leisure; come there is
Some odd disburse, some bribe, some gratulance,
Which makes you lock up leisure, come tell true,
What bribe must they give, what is your v^ost price

But five hundred crowns of my best conscience.

Tut it is nothing, hold here is the coin,
And let them have their pattens presently:
Or look to loose both place and sovereignty.

Legions of devils haunt their diligence.

Fie, I would not have a man of your high place,
Or for respect of wealth or base observance
In smallest things thus to neglect your credit.
Why look you my Lords, this Orator is not like others of his rank,
Who from their ganish and fantastic humours,
Go thorough the streets, spotted in peacocks plumes.
Wearing all colours, laces, broderies,
Sattans and silks, so antike garnished,
That when their gowns are off, you cannot find
In Italy a master shaped more nice.
But this fellow Prate, here's of another sort,
Clothed like himself, demure and soberly:
Nay you shall see him for a president.
Passion of mine eie-sight, who have we here?
This is Alphonso, there's the Orator.

Heart of impatience, I am then a Cuckold,
A scorn, a by word and a laughing stock.
What is my wife turned whoreand must her depth
Be sounded by the plumes of foreigners?
Well, the revenge that I will take for this my shame,
Shall make all whores hereafter dread my name.

Not for thy life, not for my love I charge thee:
Thy wife is honest, chaste and virtuous:
Only this wanton Lord, with lust and come
Hath much attempted, but prevailed in nought,
For proof see here the crowns he would have given
T'haue purchased her beds honour but she would not,
Which I bestow on you for recompense.
Therefore as thou dost hope my grace to find,
So to thy wife, be loving, gentle kind.

Your majesty may mould me to your pleasure

I thank you and will quittance it.
Now Meshant, we restore to you your lands,
Your honours and near places, next our self,
To all that feel distaste in any sore,
We give to cure them, all our grace and favour,
Thus storms bring gentle sun-shine, and our hands,
May after shipwreck bring us to safe lands.


