Grande Lady mother of every mortal thing:
Nurse of the woorlde conseruatyue of kind
Cause of increase, of life and soul the spring,
At whose instinct, the noble Heaven doth wind,
To whose award all Creatures are assynde,
I come in place, to treat with this my son,
For his avail howe he the path may find,
Whereby his Race in honour he may run:
Come tender Child, vnrype and green for age,
In whom the paret sets her chief delight,
Wit is thy name, but far from wisdom sage,
Till tract of time shall work and frame aright,
This peerless brain, not yet in perfect plyght:
But when it shall be wrought me thinks I see
As in a glass before hand with my syghte
A certain perfect piece of work in the,
And now so far as I guess by signs
Some great attempt is fixed in thy breast:
Speak on my son where thy heart inclynes
And let me deal to set thy hart at rest,
He salves the fore that knows the patient best
As I do thee my son my chiefest care,
In whom my special praise and joy doth rest,
To me therefore these thoughts of thine declare

Nature, my sovereign Queen and paret passing dere
Whose force I am enforced to know and knowledge every where,
This care of mine though it be bread within my breast,
Yet it is not so ripe: as yet to breed me great unrest,
So run I to and fro, with hap such as I find,
Now fast, now lose, now hot, now cold, vncostant as that wind,
I feel my self in love yet not inflamed so,
But causes move me now and then, to let such fancies go,
Which causes preuailyng sets each thing else in doubt
Much like the nail that last came in, dryues the former out.
Wherefore my su^te is this, that it would please your grace,
To settle this unsettled head in some assured place:
To lead me through the thyck, to guide me al the way,
To point me where I may atcheue my most desired pray,
For now again of late I kindle in desire
And pleasure pricks fourth my youth to feel a greater fire,
What though I be to young to show her sport in bed,
Yet are there many in this land that at my years do wed,
And though I wed not yet, yet am I old inowe
To serve my Lady to my power and to begin to woe.

What is that Ladies son which thus thy hart doth move

A Lady whom it might be seem high Jove him self to love

Who taught the her to love, or hast thou seen her face.

Nor this nor that, but I ha^d men talk of her apace.

What is her name?

Reason is her sire, Experience her dame,
The Lady now is in her flowers and Science is her name
Lo where she dwells, lo where my heart is all possessed,
Lo where my body would abide, lo where my soul doth rest.
Her have I borne good will, these many years tofore,
But now she lodges in my thought a hundred parts the more,
And since I do persuade my self that this is she
Which ought above all earthly wyghtes to be most dear to me
And since I wot not howe to compass my desire,
And since for shame I can not now nor mind not to retire,
Help on I you beseech and bring this thing about
Without your hurt to my great ease, and set all out of doubt.

Thou ask more, then is in me to give,
More then thy cause, more then thy state will bear
They are two things to able thee to live,
And to live so, that none should be thy pear,
The first fromme, proceeds every where,
But this by tail and practise of the mind,
Is set full far god wot and bought full dear,
By those that seek the fru^te thereof to find,
To match thee then with Science in degree,
To knit that knot, that few may reach unto
I tel the plain, it lyethe not in me,
Why should I challenge that I cannot do
But thou must take another way to woe,
And beat thy brain and bend thy Curious head,
Both ride and run and travail too and ^roe
If thou entend that famous Dame to wed.

You name your self the Lady of this world.

It is true.

And can there be within this world, a thing ^o hard for you.

My power it is not absolute in Jurisdiction
For I cognise an other Lord above
That hath received unto his disposition
The soul of man which he of special love
To gifts of grace and learning eke doth move.
A work so far beyond my reach and call,
That in to part of praise with him my self to show
Might soon procure my well deserved fall.
He makes the frame and receive it so,
No jot therein altered for my head,
And as I it reciue I let it go,
Causing therein such sparkles to be bred
As he commyttes to me by whom I must be led
Who guides me first and in me guides the rest,
All which in their due course and kind are sped
Of gifts from me such as may serve them best,
To thee son wit he wild me to infpire
The love of knowledge and certain seeds divine
Which ground might be a mean to bring thee hiere,
If thereunto thy self thou wilt incline
The massy gold, the counyng hand makes fine:
Good grounds are tilde, as well as are the worst
The rankest flower will ask a springing time,
So is mans wit vnperfit at the first.

If conning be the key and well of wordly bliss
My thinks god might at ye first as well endue al with this.

As conning is the kay of bliss, so it is worthy praise
The worthiest thigs are won with pain in tract of time always,

And yet right worthy things there are, you will confess I trow,
Which notwithstanding at our birth god doth on us bestow.

There are but such as unto you that have the great to name,
I rather that bestow then win thereby ymmortal fame,

Fain would I learn what harm or detriment ensued,
If any man were at his birth with these good gifts endued.

There should be nothing left, wherein men might excel,
No blame for sin, no praise to the that had defyned well
Virtue should lose her price, and learning would abound
And as man wold admire the thing that echewher might be ^oud,
The great estate that have of me and fortune what they will
Should have no need to loke to those, whose heads are fraght with skill
The meaner sort that now excells in virtues of the mind,
Should not be once accepted there where now they succour find
For great men should be sped of al wold have need of none
And he that were not borne to land should lack to live upon
These and five thousand causes more which I forbear to tel,
The noble virtue of the mind have caused there to dwell
Where none may have access, but such as can get in
Through many doble doors, through heat, through cold, through thick and
thin.

Suppose I would address my self to seek her out
And to refuse no pain that lies there about
Should I be suer to speed?

Trust me and have no doubt,
Thou can not Choose but speed with travel and with time
These two are they that must direct thee how to clime

With travel and with time, must they neds join in one?

Nor that nor this can do the good, if they be toke alone.

Time works all with ease, and gyves the greate^ dynt
In time soft water dropes can hollow hardest flint
Again. with labour by it self, great matters compaste be
Even at a gyrde in very little time or none we see
Wherefore in my conceit good reason it is
Either this with out that to look, or that with out this.

Set case thou did attempt to climb Pernasus hill
Take time five hundredth thousand years lodger if thou will
Trow thou to touch the top there of by standing still
Again, work out thy heart and spend thy self with toil
Take time with all or else I dare assure the of the foil

Madame, I trust I have your licence and your leave
With your good will so much help as you to me can give
With further aid also, when you shall spy your time,
To make a proffe to give attempt this famous hill to clime
And now I here request your blessing and your prayer
For sure before I sleep I will to yonder forte repair

I bless thee here with al such gifts as nature can bestow
And for thy sake I would they were as many hundred more
Take therewith all this child, to wait upon the still.
A bird of mine some kin to thee, his name is Will.

Welcome to me my will, what service can thou do,

All things forsooth, sir when me list and more to.

But when wilt thou list, when I shall list I trow

Trust not to that, peradventure yea, peradventure no,

When I have need of thee thou wilt not serve me so,

If ye bid me run, perhaps I will go:

Cock soul this is a boy for the nonse amongst twenty more,

I am plain I tell you at a word and a bloe,

Then must I prick you child if you be drowned in sloth

Agree you twain for I must leave you both,
Farewell my son: farewell mine own good Will,
Be ruled by Wit, and be obedient still,
Force the I cannot but as far as lies in me,
I will help thy master to make a good servant of thee
Farrewell.

Adieu Lady mother with thanks for al your peine
And now let me bethincke my self again eke again
To match with Science is the thing that I have toke in hand,
A matter of more weight I see, then I did understand
Will must be won to this, or else it will be hard
Will must go break the matter first, or else my gain is marde,
Sir boy are you content to take such part for me
As god shall send, and help it forth as much as lies in thee.

Ye a Master by his wounds or else cut of his head.

Come then let us two devise what trace were best to tredde,
Nature is on my side and Will my boy is fast,
There is no doubt I shall obtain my joys at last.

What Will I say Will boy come again foolish elf

I cry you mercy sir you are a tall man your self,

Such a cokbraine as thou art I never saw y^ like to it

Truth in respect of you that are nothing else but Wit

Cast thou tel me thy errad because thou art gone so soon,

Can I remember a lunge tale of a man in the moon,
With such a circumstance and such flym flam
I will tell at a word whole servant I am
Wherefore I come and what I have to say,
And cal for her answer, before I come away
What should I make a broad tree, of every little shrubbe,
And keep her agreat while with a tale of a tubbe.

Yet thou must commend me to be rich, lusty pleasant and wise.

I can not commend you, but I must make twenty lies
Rich quoth you, that appears by the port that you keep,
Even as rich as a new shorn sheep
Of pleasant conceits, ten busshells to the peck,
Lusty like a herringe, with a bell about his neck,
While as a woodcock: as brage as a bodylouse,
A man of your hands, to match with a mouse:
How say you, are not these proper qualities to praise you with.

Leave these mad toys of thine and come to the pythe
One part of the errand should have been,
To give her this picture of mine to be seen,
And to request her the same to accept
Safely until my coming to be kept,
Which I suspense till thy return and then
If it like her Ladyshipppe to appoint me where and when
I will wait upon her gladly out of hand.

Sir let me alone your mind I understand,
I will handle the matter so that you shall owe me thanks,
But what if she find fault with these spindle thanks
Or else with these black spots on your nose.

In faith sir boy this talk deserves blows.

You will not misvse your best servant I suppose
For by his nails, and by his fingers toe.
I will mar your marriage if you do clitter.

I pray the go thy ways and leave this clatter.

First shall I be so bold to break to you a matter.

Tush thou art disposed to spend words in wast,
And yet thou know this business asks hast

But even two words, and then I am gon.

If it be worth the hearing, say on.

I would not have you think that I for my part
From my promise or fro your service will depart,
But yet now and then it goes to my hart,
When I think how this marriage may be to my smar^

Why so?

I would tell you the cause if I durst for shame.

Speak hardly what thou wilt without any blame.

I am not disposed as yet to be tame,
And therefore I am loath to be under a Dame,
Now you are a Bachiler a man may soon win you
Me thinks there is some good fellowship in you,
We may laugh and be meery at board and at bed,
You are not so testy as those that be wed,
Mild in behaviour and loath to fall out,
You may run, you may ride rove roud about,
With wealth at your will and all thing at ease,
Free frank and lusty, esye to please,
But when you be clogged and tied by the toe,
So fast that you shall not have power to let go,
You will tell me another lesson soon after
And cry peccaui too except your luck be the better:
Then farewell goodfellowshyp then come at a call
Then wait at an inch you idle knaves all,
Then sparing and pynchinge and nothing of gift,
No talk with our master, but al for his thrift,
Solemn and sower and angry as a wasp,
Althinges must be kept under locke and haspe,
At that which will make me to fare full ill.
All your care shall be to hamper poor will.

I warrant the for that take thou no thought,
Thou shalt be made of, whosoever be set at nought
As dere to me, as mine own dere brother,
Whosoever be one, thou shalt be an other.

Yea but your wife will play the shrew, perdy it is she that I fear

Thy message will cause her some favour to bear,
For my sake and thy sake and for her own likewyse
If thou use thy self discreetly in this enterprise.

She hath a father, a testy sower old man,
I doubt lest he and I, shall fall out now and than,

Give him fair words, forbear him for his age,
Thou must consider him to be ancient and sage,
Show thy self officious and seruisable still,
And then shall Reason make very much of Will.

If your wife be ever complaining, how then?

My wife will have nothing to do with my men.

If she do, believe her not in any wise.
And when you once perceive her stomach to arise,
Then cut her short at the first and you shall see
A meruaylouse virtue in that medisen to be,
Give her not the bridle for a year or twain
And you shall see her bridle it without a reine,
Break her betimes and bring her under by force
Or else the gray Mare, will be the better horse.

If thou have done begone, and spend no time in vain.

Where shall I find you, when I come again.

At home.

Good enough take your ease let me alone with this
Surely a treasure of all treasures it is,
To serve such a master, as I hope him to be,
And to have such a servant as he hath of me,
For I am quick, nimbell, proper and nise,
He is full good, gentle, sober and wise,
He is full loath to thide or to check,
And I am as willing to serve at a beck,
He orders me well and speaks me so fair
That for his sake no travail I must spare,
But now am I come to the gate of this Lady,
I will pause a while to frame mine errante fynelye
And lo where she comes yet will I not come ny her,
But among these fellows will I stand to eye her.

My Parents ye know, howe many fall in laps
That do ascribe to me the cause of their mishaps?
Howe many seek that come to short of their desire?
Howe many do attempt that daily do retire?
Howe many rove about the mark on every side?
How many think to hit when they are much to wide?
Howe many run to far how many light to lowe?
Howe few to good effect, their travail do bestow,
And howe all these impute their losses unto me.
Should I have joy to think of marriage now trow ye
What doth the world my love alone say they
Is bought so dere that life and goods for it must paye
Strong youth must spend it self, and yet when al is done,
We here of few or none that have this Lady won.
On me they make outcries and charge me with the blood
Of those that for my sake adventure life and good
This grief doth wound my hart so, ye suitors more as yet
I se no cause nor reason why I should admit.

Ah daughter say not so there is great cause and skill,
For which you should mislike to live unmarried thus alone
What comfort can you have remaining thus unknown
How shall the common wealth by you advanced be
If you abide enclosed here where no man may you see
It is not for your state, your self to take the payne
All strangers that resort to you to entertain
To suffer free access of all that come and go
To be at each man cal to travail too and fro,
What the, since god hath placed such treasure in your breast
Wherewith so many thousand think by you to be refreshed
Needs must you have some one of hyd and secret trust
By whom these things may be, well ordered and discuste:
To him you must disclose the depth of all your thought
By him as time shall serve all matters must be wrought
To him above you must content your self to be at call
Ye must be his, he must be yours, he must be al in all.

My Lord your father tells you truth perdie
And that in time your self shall find and try.

I could aledge more then as yet I have said,
But I must yield, and you must be obeyed
Fall out as it will there is no help I see,
Some one or other in time must mary me,

In time nay out of hand, Madame if it please you,
In faith I know a yonker that will ease you,
A lyuelye young gentleman, as fresh as any flower,
That will not stick to mary you within this hour.

Such haste might hapelye turn to wast to sum,
But I pray thee my pretty boy whence art thou come.

If it pleace your good Ladyshype to accept me so,
I have a solemn message to tel or I go,
Not any thing in secrete your honour to stain,
But in the presence and hearing of you twain.

Speak.

The Lady of this world which Lady Nature hight,
Hath one a peerless son in whom she takes delight,
On him she charge m^n to be antendant styll,
Both kind to her, his name is Wit, my name is Will,
The noble child doth feel the force of cupydes flame
And sends now for ease by counsel of his dame,
His mother taught him first to love while he was young
Which love with age increases sore and waxes wondrous strong
For very fame displays your bounty more and more,
And at this pyntch he burns so as never heretofore
Not fanteses force, not vain and Idle toys of love,
Not hope of that which commenlye doth other suitors move,
But fixed fast good will that never shall relent,
And virtues force yt shines in you bade him give this attempt,
He hath no neade of wealth, he woos not for your good,
His kynred is such he need not to seek to match with noble blood,
Such store of friends that where he lest he may command,
And none so hardy to presume his pleasure to withstand,
Your self it is, your virtue and your grace,
Your noble gifts your endless prays in every place,
You alone I say the mark that he would hit,
The hoped joy the dearest pray that can befale to wit,

I have not harde a meyssage more trymlee done,

Nor I, what age art thou of my good son,

Between eleven and xii, Madame more or less.

He hath been instructed this errand as I guess.

How old is the gentleman thy master can thou tell?

Seuentene or there about I wot not very well.

What stature of what making what kind of port bears he

Such as your Ladyshipe can not mislike trust me.
Well grown, well made, a stripling clean and taule,
Well favoured, somewhat black and manlye therewithal,
And that you may conceive his personage the better,
Lo hear of him the vearye shape and lively picture,
This hath he sent to you to view and to behoulde,
I dare aduouch no Joint therein no Jot to be controulde,

In good faith I thank thy master with my hart,
I perceive that nature in him, hath done her part.

Farther, if it please your honour to know:
My master would be glad to run ride or go,
At your commandment to any place far or neer^,
To have but a sight of your Ladyship there,
I beseech you appoint him the place and the hour,
You shall se how redyly to you he will scour.

Do so.

Ye in any wise daughter, for here you me,
He seems a right worthy and trim young man to be.

Commend me then to Wit, and let him understand,
That I accept with all my hart this present at his hand,
And that I would be glad, when he doth see his time,
To hear and se him face to face, within this house of mine
Then may he break his mind and talk with me his fill,
Till then adieu both he and thou mine own sweet little Will.

Ah flattering Queen, how neatly she can talk
How minionly she tryps, how sadly she can walk
Well wanton yet beware that ye be ^ound and sure,
Fair words are wont oft times, fair women to allure,
Now must I get me home and make report of this:
To him that thinks it lunge, till my return I wis.
Say thou me so boy, will she have me in deed

Be of good cheer sir I warrant you to speed

Did both her parents speak well to her of me^.

As hart can think go on and you shall see,

How toke she the picture, how likes she my person.

She never had done toting and looking thereon.

And must I come to talk with her my fill.

When soever you please, and as oft as you will.

O my sweat boy, how shall I recompense,
Thy faithful hart and painful diligence,
My hope, my stay, my wealth, the kaye of al my joy.

I pray you sir call me your man, and not your boy,

Thou shalt be what thou wilt all in all.

Promise me faithfully that if your wife brawl
Or set her father to check me out of measure,
You will not se me abused to their pleasure

Give me thy hand take here my faith and troth,
I will maintain thee, how soever the world goes.

What shall we do? shall we stand lingering here?

If you be a man preasse in, and go near.

What if there be some other suitor there.

And if there be, yet need you not to fear,
Until I bring his head to you, upon a spear.
I will not loke you in the face, nor in your sight appear.

Nay Wit, advise your self and pause a while,
Or else this hast of yours will you beguile.

No hast but good, take time and learn to fight,
Learn to assault, learn to defend a right:
Your match is monstrous to behoulde and full of might,
Whom you must vanquish, not by force but by slyght:

Madame stand to your promise if I win I am sped,
Am I not?

Yea truly.

Good enough, if we fight not I would we wear dead,
No man shall stay us, that beeres a head.

Young man a word or twain, and then adieu.
Your years are few your practise grene and new,
Mark what I say, and ye shall find it true:
You are the first that shall this rashness rue,
Be ruled here, our coun^ell do thereafter,
Lay good ground, your work shall be the fas^er:
This headlong hast, may sooner miss then hit,
Take heed both of Wits will, and wilful wit,
We have within a gentleman our retayner and our friend,
With servants twain that do on him attend,
Instruction, Study, Diligence these three,
At your commandment in this attempt shall be,
Here them in stead of us, and as they shall deuyse,
So hardly cast our cards in this enterprise
I will send them to you, and leave you for now.

The more company the merier, boy what say thou?

It is a good fault to have more then enough,
I care not, so as we may pull the knaves down,
I would we were at it, I pass not how soon.

If it shall please you to send those three hither,
We will follow your counsel and go together.

I warrant her a shrew whosoever be an other,
God make the daughter good, I like not the mother,

Yet would not I for no good to have forgone her.

Mary sir in deed she talks and takes on her:
Like a Dame, nay like a Dutches^ or a queen:
With such a solemnity as I have not seen.

She is a queen I tell thee in her degree,

Let her be what she list, with a vengeance for me:
I will keep me out of her reach if I can.

If this marriage go forward, thou must be her man.

Marriage or marriage not, be shrew me than,
I have but one master, and I will serve no more,
And if he anger me, I will forsake him to.

She shall not hurt the unless her cause be juster.

By the faith of my body sir, I intend not to trust her.

Why.

Take me this woman that talks so roundly,
That be so wise, that reason so soundly:
That loke so narrow, that speak so shrill:
Their words are not so cursed, but their deeds are as ill.

It is but thy fancy, I see no such thing in her.

Perhaps you had never occasion to try her.

That were great marvel in so many years.

She hath won the mastery of you it appears.

Well quiet your self thou shalt take no wrong,
Me think our three companions tarry very lunge.

Sir we are come to know your pleasure.

You are come in good time, Instruction our treasure,
This Gentleman craves your acquaintance aid.
What you may do for him let him not be denayed,

Welcome good fellows, will ye dwell with me.

If all parts be pleased, content are we.

Welcome Instruction with al my hart.

What three new servant, then farewell my part.

I heartily thank you, and loke what I can do,
It shall be always ready to pleasure you.

Consider and talk together with these,
And you shall find in your travail great (...)
Take here of me before I take my leave,
This glass of Crystal clear which I you geaue
Accept it and reserve it for my sake most sure,
Much good to you in time it may procure,
Be^old your self therein, and view and pry,
Mark what defects it will discover and discrye,
And so with indgement ripe, and curious eye,
What is a miss endeavour to supply,
Farewell.

Farewell to you, right honourable sir:
And commend me to my love my hearts desire,
Let her think on me when she sees me not and wish me well.

Farewell master Reason, think upon us, when you see us not.
And in any wise, let not Will be forgot.

Since I must take advise and counsel of you three,
I must entreat you all, to dwell in house with me,
And loke what order you shall prescribe as needful,
To keep the same you shall find me as heedful:
Come,

Come,

Go.

Tush tush Instruction, your talk is of no force,
You tell us a tale of a roasted horse,
Which by his wounds except we set to it,
As fast as we make, this fellows will undo it,
Their talk is nothing but soft and fair and tarry,
If you follow their counsel you shall never mary.

To follow our counsel your charge and promys was,

I would I had never known you by the mass.
Must I look so lunge and spend my life with toil
Nay sure, I will either win it, or take the foil.

The surer is your ground, the better you shall bear it.

Ground us no ground, let him win it and wear it.

Good sir be ruled and leave this peevish elf.

I had even as leaf ye bad me hang my self,
Leave him: no no I would you all knew,
You be but loiterers to him, my Will tells me true,
I could be content with a weke, yea a month or twain,
But 3. or 4. years, mary that were a payne,
So lunge to keep me, and lye like a hog.

A life withal my hart I would not wish a dog.

Will a weke serve.

No.

A month.

Neyther^

No.

Not so.

No nor so many more.

Then farewell all for as I hope to thrive,
I will prove him or I sleep, if I be alive,
And if ye be mine and good fellows all three,
Go thither, out of hand and take your chance with me.

For my part, I know I can do you no good.

You are a proper man of your hands by the Rood,
Yet welfare him that never his master forsakes.

What say thou Study.

My head aketh.

Out upon the coward: speak Diligence,
Against Instructions mind, I am loathe to go hence,
Yet I will make one, rather then you should lack.

Perhaps we may find them at this time in bed.

So much the rather loke you to be sped,
Care for no more, but once to come within her,
And when you have done: then let another win her.

To come within her child, what meanst thou by that.

One mass for a penny, you know what is what.

Hard you ever such a counsel of such a Jack sprot.

Why sir do ye think to do any good,
If ye stand in a corner like Roben hood,
Nay you must stout it, and face it out with the best.
Set on a good countenance, make the most of the lest,
Who soever skip in, loke to your part,
And while you live beware of a false hart.

Both blame and shame, rash boldness doth breed.

You must adventure both, spare to speak, spare to speed,
What tell you me of shame, it is shame to steal a horse.

More hast then good speed, makes many fare the worse.

But he that takes not such time while he may,
Shall leap at a whyting when time is a way.

But he that leaps before he loke, good son,
May leap in the mire, and miss when he hath done.

Me think I hear the voice of Will, VVites boy.

I see her come, her sorrow and my Joy,
My salve, and yet my sore, my comfort, and my care,
The causer of my wound, and yet the will of my welfare:
O happy wight, that have the saint of your request,
O hoples hope that holds me fro ye which likes me best,
Twixt hope and fear I stand, to mar or else to make,
This day to be relived quit, or else my death would to take.

Here let us rest a while and pause all three:

Daughter sit down, belike this same is he.

Be of good chere sir be ruled by me
Women are best pleased, till they be used homely,
Loke her in the face and tell your tale stoutly.

O pearl of passing pryse, sent down from god on hye,
The sweetest beauty to entice that hath been scene with eye^
The well of wealth to all, that no man doth annoy:
The kaye of Kingedomes the steal of everlasting joy.
The treasure and the store, whom al good things began,
The nurse of Lady wysedoms lore, the link of ma ma.
What words shall me suffice, to utter my desire,
What heate of talk shall I devise, for to express my fire
I burn and yet I freeze, I flame and cool as fast,
In hope to wyn and for to leese my pensiveness doth last,
Why should my dulled spryte, apal my courage so.
O salve my sore, or slay me quite, by saying yea, or no,
You are the mark at whom, I shot to hit or miss,
My life it stays on you alone, to you my suit it is,
Amity not much vnmete with you some grief to find,
Dame Natures son, my name is Wit ye fancies you by kind,
And here I come this day, to wait and to attend
In hope to have my hoped pray, or else my life to end.

Good cause there is wherefore I should embrase,
This loving hart which you have borne to me
And glad I am that we be both in place,
Each one of us each others looks to see,
Your picture and your person doth agree,
Your princelike port and ecke your noble face,
Wherein so many signs of virtue be:
That I must needs be moved in your case:

Friend Wit? are you the man in dede which you inted,
Can you be well content until your life doth end,
To join and knit most sure with this my daughter here,
And unto her alone your fixed faith to bear.

As I am bent to this so let my suite be sped,
If I do fail ten Thousade plagues more, light on my head.

There are that promise fair, and mean as well,
As any hear can think, or tongue can tell,
Which at the first are hot, and kindle in desire,
But in one month or twain, quit quenched is the fire.
Such is the trade of youth whom famies force doth led,
Whose love is only at the plonge cannot lunge proceed.

Credit my words, and ye shall find me true.

Suppose you keep not touch, who should this bargain rue.

I will be sworn here solemnly before you both.

Who breaks promise, will not stick likewyse to break his other.

I will be bound in all that ever I can make.

What good were that to us if we thaduantage take.

Will neither promise serve: nor other nor bands,
What other assurance will ye ask at my hands.

My master is a gentleman. I tell you and his word,
I would you knew it shall with his deeds accord.

We know not whom to trust, the world is so ill.

In dede sir as you say you may mend when ye will,
But in good earnest Madam, speak of or on,
Shall we speed at your hand, or shall we begone,
I love not this delays, say so if we shall have you,
If not, say no, and let another ^raue you.

Soft and fair sir boy, you talk you wot not what?

Can you abide to be driven of with this and that,
Can they ask any more then good assurance at your hands.

All is now to little son, as the matter stands,

If al be to little both goods and lands,
I know not what will please you, except Darbyes bands
I have an enemy, my friend Wit a mortal fo to me^
And therewithal the greatest plague that can befall to the.

Must I fight with him,

Can you fight if need be.

If any such thing ^all, count the charge to me,
Trouble not your self.

Hold thy peace elf.

Here out my tale, I have a mortal foe:
That lurks in the wood, hearby as you come and go,
This monstrous Giant, bears a grudge ^o me and mine,
And will attempt to keep thee back, from this desser of thine.
The bane of youth^ the root of rufne and destres:
Devouring those that sue to me, his name is Tediousness.
No sooner he espies, the noble Wit begin:
To styr and payne it self the love of me to win.
But forth he steppes and with strong hands by might and maine:
He beats and buffets down, the force and liuelynes of brain.
That done in deep despair, he drowns him villainously,
Ten thousand suitors in a year, are cast away thereby.
Now if your mind be surely fixed so,
That for no toil nor cost, my love you will forgo.
Bethink you well, and of this monster take good heed,
Then may you have with me, the greater hope to speed.
Herein use good advise, to make you strong and stout,
To send and keep him of a while, until his rage be out.
Then when you feel your self, well able to prevail:
Bid you the battle, and that so coragiously assail.
If you can wyn the field, present me with his head,
I ask no more and I forth with, shall be your own to bed.

Il might I thrive, and lack that likes me best,
If I be not a scourge to him, that bredes your unrest.
Madam assare your self, he lives not in the land,
W^th whom I would not in your cause, encounter hand to hand^
And as for Tediousness that wretch, your common foe,
Let me alone, we twain shall cope before I sleep I troe.

Lustely spoken, let me claw thee by the back:
Howe say you now sir, here are three against twain,

Go that go list, I will at home remain,
I have more need to take a nap in my bed.

Do so and here you couch a coddes head.

Well since it will none otherwise frame.
Let v^ twain Study, retourn from whens we came.

Agreed.

And let us three bestyre our selves like men.
Unlikely things are brought to pass, by courage now and then^
My will be always pressed, and ready at an ynche^
To save thy self to succour me, to help at every pinch.
Both twain on either side, assault him if ye can,
And you shall see me in the midst, howe I will play the man
This is the deadly den, as far as I perceive,
Approach we near and valiantly let us the vnset give.
Come forth thou monster fell, in drowsy darkness hid,
For here is wit Dame Natures son, y^ doth thee battle bid.

What pryncox have we here, that dares me to assail,
Alas poor boy, and winest thou, against me to preua^le.
Full small was he thy friend, whoeuer sent the hither,
For I must drive the back with shame, or slay thee altogether.

Great bost small roast, I warrant thee do thy best,
Thy head must serve my turn, this day to set my hart at rest.

And I must have a leg of the if I can catch it.

First I must quise this brain o^ thine, if I can reach it.

Well shifted Will, now have at thee sir knave.

These friscoles shall not serve your turn for al your hants so brave
Ho ho, did I not tell thee thou came to thy payne.

Help, help, help, our master is slain.

Help, help, help c.

Where are these lust^e blood, that make their match with me?
Here lies a pa^torne for them all, to loke at and to see.
To teach them to conspire against my force and might,
To promise for their woman's love, to vanquish me in fight:
Now let them go and crake, howe wisely they have sped,
Such is the end of those, that seek this curious Dame to wed.
Ho ho ho.

Rub and chafe him.
For gods love hast, see lo where he doth lye.

He is not cold, I warrant him, I.

Gi^e a leg, give an arm, arise, arise,
Hold up thy head, lift us thy eyes,
1 A leg to stand up right^
2 An arm to fight a mayne,
1 The head to hold thy brains in plight,
2 The eyes to loke again.
A wake ye drowned powers.
Ye sprites for dull with toil:
Resyne to me this care of yours,
And from dead sleep recoil.
Think not upon your loathsome lu^ke,
But arise and dance with us a pluck.
2 What though thou hast not hit,
The top of thy desire,
Time is not so far spent as yet
To cause the ^o retire,
A rise and ease thy self of payne^
And make thee strong to fight again,
Let not thy foes re^oyse,
Let not thy friends lament,
Let not thy Ladies ruful voice,
In sobs and sighs be spent,
Thy ^ayth is plight forget it not,
Twixt her and the to knit the knot.

Give a leg c.
This is no deadly wound,
It may be cured well.
Se here what Physic we have found,
Thy sorrows to expel.
The way is plain, the marcke is fair,
Lodge not thy self in deep despair.

What noise is this that ringeth in my ears,
Her noise that grieves my mishap with tears,
Ah my mishap my desperate mishap,
In whom ill fortune pours down, all mishap at a clap,
What shall become of me, where shall I hyde my head?
Oh what a death is it to live for him that would be dead?
But since it chances so, what ever wight thou be,
That finds me here, in heavy plight, go tel her this from me.
Causles I perish here, and cause to curse I have.
The time that erst I lived to love, and now must die her slave,
The match was over much for me, she understood,
Alas why hath she this delight, to lap in giltles blode.
How did I give her cause to show me this despyght,
To match me where she wist full well, I should be slain in fight.
But go and tell her plain, although to late for me,
Accursed be the time and hour, which first I did her see.
Accursed be the wight, that wild me first thereto,
And cursed be they all at once, that had therewith to do.
Now get the hence in hast, and suffer me to die.
Whom scornful chance lawles love, have slain most trayterouslye

O noble Wit the miracle of God, and eke of Nature:
Why cursest thou thy self, and every other creature.
What causes the thine innocent dear Lady to accuse?
Who would lament it more then she, to here this woeful news.
Why will thou dye, whereas thou may be sure of health?
Whereas thou sees a plain path way, to worship and to wealth.
Not every foil doth make a fall, nor every soil doth slay,
Comfort thy self be sure thy luck, will mend from day to day.

This gentil news of good Will, are come to make you sound,
They know which way to salve your sore, and how to cure your would
Good sir be ruled by her then, a^d pluck your spirit to you:
There is no doubt, but you shall find, your loving lady true.

Ah Will art thou alive, that doth my hart some ease,
The sight of the sweet boy, my sorrows doth appeace:
How hast thou escaped, what fortune the befell?

It was no trusting to my hands, my heals did serve me well
I ran with open mouth, to cry for help amain,
And as good fortune would, I hit upon these twain.

I thank both thee and them, what will ye have me do.

To rise and dance a little space with us two?

What then.

That done, repair again to Study and Instruction,
Take better hold by their advise, your foe to set upon.

Can any recompense recover this my fall?

My life to yours it may be mended all.

Speak Will.

I have no doubt sir it shall be as you would wish.

But yet this repulse of mine, they will lay in my dish.

No man shall let them know thereof, unless your self do it.

On that condition a gods name, fall we to it.

Nay stand we to it, and let us fall no more.

Will daunsi^g serve, and I will dance until my bones be sore,
Pipe us up a Galliard mynstrel, to begin,
Let will call for dances, one after an other.

Come Damsel in good faith and let me have you in^
Let him practise in dancing al things to make himself brethles.

Enough at once, now leeue, and let us part.

This ex^rcise hath done me good, even to the very hart.
Let us be bold with you^ more acquaintance to take
And dance a round, yet once more for my sake,
Enouge is enough, farewell, and at your need:
Use my acquaintance if it may stand you in steed.
Right worthy Damsels both, I know you seek no gains,
In recompense of this desert your undeserved pains.
But loke what other thing my service may devise,
To show my thankful heart in any enterprise.
Be ye as bold therwyth, as I am bold on you,
And thus with hearty thanks, I take my leave as now.

Farewell friend Wit, and since you are relieved,
Think not upon your foil, whereat you were so grieved.
But take your hart to you, and give attempt once more:
I warrant you to speed, much better then before.

One dance for the and me, my boy come on.

Dance you sir if you please, and I will loke upon.

This gear doth make me sweat, and breath a pace.

Sir ease your selse a while, hear is a resting place.

Home Will and make my bed, for I will take a nap.

Sure and it please your mastership here in my Dames lap.

Come come lye down and thou shalt see,
Non like to me to entertain,
Thy bones and thee oppressed with payne,
Come come and ^ase thee in my lap,
And if it pleace thee take a nap,
A nap that shall delight thee so,
That fancies all will thee forgo,
Bye mu^inge styll what can thou find,
But wants of will and restless mind,
A mind that mars and mangles all,
And breads jars to work thy fall,
Come gentle Wit thee require,
And thou shalt hytt thy chief desire,
Thy chief desire thy hooped pray,
First ease thee here and then away,

My bones are styff and I am wearied sore,
And still me thynck I faint and feeble moore and moore,
Wake me again in time for I have things to do,
And as you will me for mine ease, I do assent thereto,

Welcome with all my heart: Sir boy houlde here this fan,
And softly cool his face sleep sowndly gentleman,
This chayer is chared well now ignorance my son,
Thou see all this howe fittlye it is done,
But wo^ste thou why?

Nay bumfaye mother not I,
Well I wot tis agaye whorchit trick and tryme,
Choulde reiounce my heart to chance cootes with him,

Dost thou remember how many I have served in the like sort,

It doth my hart good to thyncke on this sporte

Will thou see this proper fellow served so,

Choulde give twaye pence to see it and tway pence moore,

Come of then, let me see thee in thy voublet and thy hose.

You shall see a taule fellow mother, I suppose,

Help of with this sleue softly, for fear of waking,
We shall leave the gentleman, in a pretty taking.
Give me thy Cote, hold this in thy hand:
This fellow would be married to Science I understand.
But or we leave him^ t^ll me an other tale:
Now let us make him loke, some what stale.
There lay and there be, the proverb is verified,
I am neither idle, nor yet well occupied.

Mother must I have his Cote, now mother must?
Chal be a lively lad, with hey tistye tosty.

Sleep sound and have no care, to occupy thy head,
As near unto thy body now, as if thou had ben dead.
For Idelnes hath won, and wholly the possessed,
And utterly dishabled thee^ from having thy request.
Come on wi^h me my son let us go coutche again,
And let this lusty ruffling Wit, here like a fool remain.

Up and to go, why sleep I here so sound:
How falls it out that I am left upon the naked ground.
God grant that all be well, whylest I lye dreaming here:
Me thinckes all is not as it was, nor as I would it were,
And yet I wot not why, but ^o my fancies gives mee^
That some one thing or other, is my tryer that gre^es me.
That are but fancies let them go, to Science now will I,
My suit and business yet once again, to labour and aplye.

What is become trow ye, of Wit, our spouse that would be:

Daughter I fear all is not, as it s^ould ^ee.

Yes yes have ye no doubt, all is and shall be well:

What one art thou? thereof howe can thou tell.

Reason most noble sir, and you my Lady dear:
How have you done in all this time, since first I saw you here?

The fool is mad I wene, stand back and touch me not.

You speak not as you think, or have you me forgot,

I never saw thee in my life, until this time I wot,
Thou art some mad brain, or some fool, or some disguised Scot.

Gods fish hostess and know you not me.

I had been well at ease in deed, to be acquainted with thee.

Hope haliday, mary this is preety cheer,
I have lost my self, I can not tell where
An old said saw it is, and to true I find,
Soon hot, soon cold, out of sight, out of mind.
What madam, what means this sudden change,
What means this scornful look, this countenance so strange.
It is your fashion so to use, your lovers at the first:
Or have all women this delight, to s^ould and to be cursed.

Good fellow whence art thou, what is thy name?

I wean ye are disposed to make at me some game.
I am the son of Lady Nature, my name is Wit.

Thou shalt say so lunge enough, or we believe it.

Thou Wit? nay thou art some mad brain out of thy wit.

Unto your selves, this trial I remit.
Loke on me better, and mark my personne well,

Thy loke is like to one, that came out of hell:

If thou be Wit, let see, what tokens thou can tell.
How come thou first acquainted here? what said we?
How did we like thy suit, what intertaynment made we?

What tokens?

Yea what tokens? speak and let us know?

Tokens good store I can rehearse a row.
First as I was advised, by my mother Nature:
My lackey Will, presented you with my picture.

Stay there? now loke how these two faces agree:

This is the very same that you received from me.

From thee? why loke, they are no more like:
Then chalk to cheese, then black to white.

To put thee out of doubt, if thou think we say not true,
It wear good for thee, in a glass thy face to view.

Well remembered, and a glass I have in deed,
Which glass you gave me, to use at need.

Hast thou the glass, which I to Wit did give.

I have it in my purse, and will keep it while I live.

These marks me muse, howe should he come thereby:

Sir muse no more for it is even I.
To whom you gave the glass, and here it is.

We are content thou try thy case by this.

Either my glass is wonderfully spotted,
Or else my face is wonderfully blotted.
This is not my Cote, why where had I this weed,
By the Mass I loke like a very fool in ^eede.
O heaps of haps, O rueful chance to me,
O Idleness woo worth the time, that I was ruled by thee.
Why did I lay my head, within thy lap to rest?
Why was I not adu^d by her, that wissht and will me best.
O ten times troble blessed wights, whose corpse in grave do lye:
That are not driven to behold, these wretched cares which die.
On me your furies all on me, have poured out your spite,
Come now and slay me at the last, and rid my sorrows quite.
What coast shall me receive, where shall I show my head:
The world will say this same is he, that if he list had sped.
This same is he that toke, an enterprise in hand,
This same is he that scarce one blow, his ennemy did withstand.
This same is he that fought, and fell in open field:
This same is he that in the songe, of Idleness did yield.
This same is he that was in way, to win the game
To join himself whereby he should have won immortal fame.
And now is wrapped in woe, and buried in despair,
O happy case for the if death would rid the quite of care.

Shame.

Who calls for shame?

Here is a merchant Shame, for thee to tame.

A shame come to you all^ for I am almost lame,
With trudging up and downe^ to them that lose their game,

And here is one whom thou must rightly blame,
That hath preferde his folly to his fame.

Who? this good fellow, what call you his name?

Wit? that on wooing, to Lady Science came.

Come aloft child let me see, what friscoles you can ^et,

He hath deserved it, let him be well bet.

O spare me with the whip, and sley me with thy knife:
Ten thousand times more dear to me, were present death then life

Nay nay my friend, thou shalt not die as yet.

Remember in what case, Dame Nature left thee Wit,
And how thou hast abused the same.
Thou hast deceived all our hope as all the world may see.

A shame come to it.

Remember what fair words, and promises thou did make,
That for my daughters love, no pains thou would forsake.
Remember in what sort, we had a care of the:
Thou hast deceived all our hope, as all the world may see.

A shame come to it.

Remember how I^struction, should have been followed styll,
And howe thou would be ruled, by none but by Will.
How Idelnes hath crept, and reigns in thy breast,
How Ignorance her son, hath wholly thee possessed.

A shame come to it.

O woofull wretch to whom shall I complain,
What sa^ue may serve to salve my fore, or to redress my payne.
Nay I ^an tell the more: remember howe,
Thou was subdued of Tediousness right now.
Remember with what ^rakes thou went unto his den,
Against the good advise, and Counsel of thy men,
What Recreation did for the, in these thy rueful haps,
And howe the second time, thou fell into the lap.

A shame come to thee.

O let me breath a while, and hold thy heavy hand,
My greuouse faults with shame enough I understand.
Take ruth and pity on my plaint, or else I am forlorn,
Let not the world continue thus, in laughing me to scorn.
Madame if I be he, to whom you once were bent,
With whom to spend your time, sometime you were content.
If any hope be left, if any recompense,
Be able to recover this for passed negligence.
O help me now poor wretch in this most heavy plight,
And furnish me yet once again, with Tediousness to fight.

Father be good to these yonge tender years,
See howe he doth bewail his folly past with teares^

Hold slave take thou his Coofe for thy labour,
We are content at her request, to take you to our favour.
Come in and dwell with us, till time shall serve:
And from Instruction rule, loke that thou never swerve
Within we shall provide, to set you up once more,
This scourge hath taught you, what default was in you heretofore

Once in my life I have, an od haulfe hour to spare:
To ease my self of all, my travail and my care.
I stood not still so lunge this xx. days I wean,
But ever more sent forth on messages I have been.
Such trudging and such toil, by the mass was never seen,
My body is worn out, and spent with labour clean.
And this it is that makes me loke so lean.
That lets my groth, and makes me seen a squall,
What then although my stature be not ^all.
Yet I am as proper as you, so neat and clenlye,
And have my joints at commandment full of acteuitie,
What should a seruaunt do, with all this flesh and bones,
That makes them run with leaden heals, stur them self like stones
Give me a proper squire much after my pitch
And mark howe he from place, to place will squite^e.
Fair or foul, thick or thin, mire or dusty,
Clouds or rain, light or dark, clear or mystie.
Ride or run, to or fro, bad or good,
A neat little fellow, on his busynes will scud.
These great labores are neither active nor wise,
That feed till they sleep, and sleep out their eyes.
So heavy, so dull, so untoward in their doing,
That it is a good sight, to see them leave working.
But all this while, while I stand prating here,
I see not my master, I left him snorting here,

Mine one dear Wit, the hope of mine avail,
My care, my comfort, my treasure and my trust,
Take hart of grace, our ennemye to assail,
Lay up these things, which you have hard discust.
So doing, vndoubtingly you can not fail.
To win the field to escape. all these unhappy showers,
To glad your friends, to cause your foes to whale,
To match with us, and then the gain is yours.
Here in this Closet our self, will set and see,
Your manly feats, and your success in fight:
Strike home courageously, for you and me,
Learn where and howe to fend, and howe to smite:
In any wise, be ruled by these three,
They shall direct both you, and Will aright.
Farewell and let our loving counsel be
At every hand before you in your fight,

Here in my sight good Madam sit and view:
That when I lift, I may loke up on you.
This face this noble face, this lively hew,
Shall harden me, shall make our enemy rue.
O faithful mates, that have this care of me:
How shall I ever recompense, your pains with gold or ^ee.
Come now and as you please, enjoin me how to do it,
And you shall see me pr^est, and s^u^sable to it.

Why master wither way, what hast am I no body?

What Will, we may not miss thee, for no money.

Welcome good Will, and do as thou art bid,
This day or never, must Tediousness be rid.

God speed us well, I will make one at all assayes^

Thou shalt watch to take him at certain baize,
Come not in the throng, but save thy self always.
You twain on either side, first with your sword and buckler.
After the first conflict, fight with your sword and daggers,
You sir with a Iaueling and your Targett^ in your hand,
See how ye can, his deadly strokes wythstand.
Keep at the soyne, come not within his reach,
Untyll you see, what good aduauntage you may ketche.
Then hardly leave him not, till time you strike him dead,
And of all other parts, especially save yonr head.

Is this all, for I would fain ha^e done?

I would we wear at it, I care not how soon.

Now when ye please. I have no more to tell,
But heartily to pray for you, and wish you well.

I thank you, go thou and bid the battle Will.

Come out thou monster fell, that hast desire to spill,
The knot and linked love, of Science and of Wit,
Come try the quarrel in the field, and fight with us a fit.

A dought^e durte these iiii. ^oyes will do,
I will eat them by morsels two and two.
Thou fyghteste for a wife a rod a rod,
Had I wist this, I would have laid on load,
And beat thy bra^ne and this my cloobe together,
And made thee safe enough for retourninge hither,

A foul horesone what a sturdy thife it is?
But we will pelt thee knave until for woe thou peace,

Let me come to that elf.

Nay nay thou shalt have work enough to save thy self, Fight.

Take breath and change your weapones play the men,
Some what it was that made thee come agaen,
Thou stick some what better to thy takling I see,
But what, no force ye are but Jack sprot to me.

Have houlde hear is a morsel for thee to eat,

Here is a pelt to make your knaves hart freete,

There is a blow able to f^ll a hog,

And here is a foyne behind for a mad dog,
Houlde houlde houlde the lubber is down,

Oh

Stryke of his head while I houde him by the crown,

Thou monstrous wretch, thou mortal foe to me and m^ne,
Which evermore at my good luck and fortune did repyne,
Take here thy just desert and payment for thy hire.
Thy head this day shall me prefer unto my hearts desire,

O noble Wit, the praise, the game is thine,

Hove up his head upon your spear, so here a joyful sign.

O valiant knight, O conquest full of praye^.

O blessed of god to see these happy days.

You you, my faithful Squires deserves no less,
Whose tried trust, well known to me in my distress.
And certain hope of your fixed faith, and ^aste good will,
Made me attempt this famous fact most needful to fulfil,
To you I yeald great thancks, to me redownds the gain.
Now home a pace, and ringe it out, that Tediousness is slain.
Say all at once, Tediousness is slain.

I hear and see the joyful news, wherein I take delight,
That Tediousness our mortal foe, is ouerc^me in ^ight.
I see the sign of victory, the sign of manlines:
The heap of happy haps: the joy y^ tongue cannot express.
O welcome fame from day to day for ever shall arise.

Avaunt ye griping cares, and lodge no more in me,
For you have lost, and I have won continual joys and see.
Now let me freely touche, and freely you embrace,
And let my friends with open mouth proclaim my blissful case.

The world shall know doubt not, and shall blow out your fame,
Then true report shall send abroad, your everlasting name.
Now let our parents dear, be certified of this,
So that our marriage may forth with proceed as meet it is.
Come after me all five, and I will lead you in.

My payne is paste, wy gladness to begin,
My task is done, my hart is set at rest,
My foe subdued, my Ladies love possessed.
I thank my friends, whose help I have at need,
And thus you see, howe Wit and Science are agreed,
We twain hence forth one soul, in bodies twain must dwell
Rejoice I pray you all with me, my friends and fare ye well.


