LEt those once know that herewith malice lurk,
Tis base to be too wise, in others work.
The rest, sit thus saluted:
Spectators know, you may with freest faces
Behold this Scene, for here no rude disgraces
Shall taint a public, or a private name,
This pen at viler rate doth value fame,
Than at the price of others infamy,
To purchase it: Let others dare the rope,
Your modest pleasure is our authors scope.
The hurdle and the rack to them he leaves,
That have nought left to be accounted any,
But by not being: Nor doth he hope to wyn
Your louder hand, with that most common sin
Of vulgar pens, rank bawdry, that smells
Even thorough your masks, vsque ad nauseam:
The venus of this Scene doth loath to wear
So vile, so common, so immodest cloathings,
But if the nymble form of commody,
Mere spectacle of life, and public manners
May, gracefully arrive to your pleased ears,
We boldly dare the utmost death of fears
For we do know that this most fair filled room
Is Laden with most Atick judgements, ablest spirits,
Then whom, there are none more exact, full, strong,
Yet none more soft, benign in censuring,
I know there's not one Ass in all this presence,
Not one Callumnious rascal, or base villain
Of emptiest merit, that would tax and slander
If Innocence her self should write, not one we know it.
O you are all the very breath of Phebus
In your pleased gracings all the true life blood
Of our poor author lives, you are his very graces.
Now if that any wonder why he's drawn
To such base soothings, know his play's; The Fawn.

SEe yonder's Vrbin those far appearing Spires, rise from the City, you
shall conduct me no further, return to Ferrara, my Dukedom by your care in
my absence shall rest constantly united, and most religiously loyal.


My Prince and brother, let my blood and love challenge the freedom of one
question.


You hau't.


Why? in your stedier age in strength of life,
And firmest wit of time, will you break forth
Those stricter Limits of regardful state
(Which with severe distinction you still kept)
And now to unknown dangers you'll give up
Your self Ferraras Duke, and in your self
The state; and us. Oh my loved brother,
"Honour auoyds not only just defame:
"But flies all means that may ill voice his name.

Busy your self with no fears, for I shall rest most wary of our safety,
only some glimses I will give you for your satisfaction why I leave Ferrara, I
have vowed to visit the Court of Vrbin in some disguise, as thus: my son as
you can well witness with me, could I never persuade to marriage, although my
self was then, an ever resolved Widower, and tho I proposed to him this very
Lady, to whom he is gone in my right to negotiat: now how cooler blood will
behave it self in this business, would I have an only testimony, other contents
shall I give my self; as not to take love by attorney, or make my election out
of tongues, other suffisings there are which my regard would fain make sound
to me: something of much you know, that and what else you must not know, bids
you excuse this kind of my departure.


I commend all to your wisdom, and yours to the wisest.


Think not but I shall approve that more than folly which even now appears in
a most ridiculous expectation: be in this assured. " The bottom of gravity is
nothing like the top, once more fare you well.

And now thou Ceremonious souerainty
Ye proud severer statefull Complements
The secret arts of Rule, I put you off;
Nor ever shall those manacles of form
Once more lock up the appetite of blood.
Tis now an age of man, whilst we all strict
Have lived in awe of carriage reguler
Apted unto my place, not hath my life
Once tasted of exorbitant affects
Wild Longings, or the Least of disranct shapes.
But we must once be wild, tis ancient truth
O fortunate, whose madness falls in youth!
Well, this is text, who ever keeps his place
In servile station, is all low and base.
Shall I because some few may cry, Light, vain,
Beat down affection from desired rule,
He that doth strive to please the world's a fool
To have that fellow cry. O mark him, grave,
See how austerely he doth give example,
Of repressed heate and steady life
Whilst my forced life against the stream of blood
Is tugged along, and all to keep the God
Of fools and women: Nice opinion:
Whose strict preserving makes oft great men fools
And fools oft great men: no thou world know thus
"There's nothing free but it is generous.

How now my little more then nothing, what news is stirring?


All the Citi's afire.


On fire?


With joy of the Prince Dulcimels birth day, there's show upon show, sport upon
sport.


What sport, what sport?


Marry sir to solemnize the Princes birth-day, there's first Crackers which
run into the air, and when they are at the top, like some ambitious strange
heretic, keep a cracking, a cracking, and then break, and down they come.


A pretty crab, he would yield tart juice and he were squeezed.


What sport else?


Other fire-workes.


Spirit of wine, I cannot tell how these fire-works should be good at the
solemnising the birth of men or women, I am sure they are dangerous at their
begetting, what more fire-works sir?


There be squibs sir, which squibs running upon lines like some of our gawdie
Gallants sir, keep a smother sir, with flishing and flashing, and in the end
sir, they do sir


What sir?


Stink sir.


Fore heaven, a most sweet youth.


News, news, news, news.


What, in the name of prophecy?


Art thou grown wise?


Doth the Duke want no money?


Is there a maid found at 24?


Speak, thou three legedd Tripos, is thy ship of Fools a flote yet?


I ha many things in my head to tell you.


I, thy head is always working, it roles, and it roles Dondolo, but it gathers
no most Dondolo.


Tiberio the Duke of Ferraraes son excellently horsed, all upon Flaunders
Mares, is arrived at the Court this very day, somewhat late in the night time.


An excellent nuntius.


Why my Gallants, I have had a good wit.


Yes troth, but now tis grown like an Almanake for the last year, past date,
the mark's out of thy mouth Dondolo.


And whats the Princes Embassage? thou art private with the Duke, thou
belongest to his close stool.


Why? every fool knows that, I know it my self man as well as the best man,
he is come to solicit a marriage betwixt his Father the Duke of Feraraes, and
our Duke of Vrbins daughter Dulcimel.


Pity of my passions, Nymphadoro shall loose one of his mistresses.


Nay, if thou hast more than one, the loss can ne'er be grievous since tis
certain he that loves many formally, never loves any violently.


Most trusted Frappatore, is my hand the weaker because it is divided into many
fingers? no, tis the more strongly nimble. I do now love threescore and nine
Ladies al of them most extremely well, but I do love the Princes most
extremely best: but in very sighing sadness, I ha lost all hope, and with
that hope a Lady, that is most rare, most fair, most wise, most sweet, most


Any thing true but remember still this fair, this wise, this sweet, this all
of excellency has in the tail of all, a Woman.


Peace, the presence fills against the Prince approaches: Mark who enters?


My Brother, sir Amoroso-debilidosso.


Not he.


No, not he?


How is he changed?


Why, grown the very dregs of the drabs cup.


O Babylon thy walls are fallen; Is he married?


Yes, yet still the Ladies common, or the common Ladies servant.


How does his own Lady bear with him?


Faith like the Romaine Milo, bore with him when he was a Calfe, and now
caries him when he's grown an Ox.


Peace the Duk's at hand.


Daughter, for that our last speech leaves the firmest print, be thus advised;
when young Tiberio negotiates his fathers love, hold heedie guard over thy
passions still keep this full thought firm in thy reason, tis his old Fathers
love the young man moves, (is't not well thought my Lord, we must bear
brain,) and when thou shalt behold, Tiberios life-full eyes and well filled
veins, complexion firm, and hairs that curls with strength of lusty
moisture, (I think we yet can speak, we ha been eloquent) thou must shape
thy thoughts to apprehend his father well in years,

A grave wise Prince, whose beauty is his honour,
And well past life, and do not give thy thoughts
Least liberty to shape a diverse scope,
(My Lord Granuffo: pray ye note my phrase.)
So shalt thou not abuse thy younger hope.
Nor afflict us, who only joy in life,
To see thee his.

Gracious my father fear not, I rest most duteous to your dispose.


Set on then, for the Music gives us notice the Prince is hard at hand.


You are most welcome to our long desiring Father, to us you are come. --


From our long desiring Father.


Is this your fathers true proportion?


No Lady, but the perfect counterfeit.


And the best graced.


The Painters Art could yield.


I wonder he would send a counterfeit to move our love,

Hear, that's my wit, when I was 18. old such a pretty joying wit had I, but
age hath made us wise (hast not my Lord?)


Why fairest Princes, if your eye dislike that deader piece, behold me his true
form and livelier image, such my Father hath been.


My Lord, please you to scent this flower.


Tis withered Lady, the flowers scent is gone.


This hath been such as you are, hath been sir; they say in England, that a
far famed Friar had guirt the Island round with a brass wall, if that they
could have catched, Time is, but Time is past, left it hill clipped with aged
Neptunes arm.


Aurora yet keeps chaste old Titheus bed.


Yet blushes at it when she rises.


Pretty, pretty, just like my younger wit: you know it my Lord.


But is your Fathers age thus fresh, hath yet his head so many hairs?


More, more, by many a one.


More say you?


More.


Right sir, for this hath none, is his eye so quick as this same piece makes
him show?


The courtesy of Art hath given more life to that part, than the sad cares of
state would grant my father.


This model speaks above forty.


Then doth it somewhat flatter, for our father hath seen more years, and is a
little shrunk from the full strength of time.


Somewhat coldly prays'd.


Your father hath a fair Solicitor,
And be it spoke with virgin modesty,
I would he were no elder, not that I do fly
His side for years, or other hopes of youth,
But in regard the malice of lewd tongues
Quick to deprave on possibilities,
(Almost impossibilities) will spread
Rumours, to honour dangerous.

What? whisper? I, my Lord Granuffo twere fit
To part their lips: men of discerning wit
That have read Plinie can discourse, or so,
But give me practise: well experienc't age
Is the true Delphos. I am no Oracle
But yet I'll prophecy: well my Lord Granuffo,
Tis fit to interrupt their privacy,
Is't not my Lord? now sure thou art a man
Of a most learned silence, and one whose words
Have bin most precious to me, right, I know thy heart,
Tis true, thy legs discourse with right and grace,
And thy tongue is constant. Fair my Lord,
Forbear all all pruat closer conference,
What from your father comes, comes openly,
And so must speak: for you must know my age
Hath seen the beings and the quide of things,
I know Dimensions and the termini
Of all existens: Sir I know what shapes
Appetite forms; but pollice and states
Have more elected ends: your fathers suit
Is with all public grace received, and private love
Embraced, as for our daughters bent of mind
She must seem somewhat nice, tis virgins kind
To hold long Out, if yet she chance deny,
Ascribe it to her decent modesty:
We have been a philosopher and spoke
With much applause; but now age makes us wise,
And draws our eyes to search the heart of things,
And leave vain seemings, therefore you must know,
I would be loath the gaudie shape of youth
Should one provoke, and not allowed of heate
Or hinder, or -- for sir I know, and so,
Therefore before us time and place affords
Free speech, else not: wise heads use but few words
In short breath, know the Court of Vrbin holds
Your presence and your embassage so dear,
That we want means once to oppress our heart
But with our heart: plain meaning shuns art,
You are most welcome (Lord Granuff a trick,
A figure, note) we use no Rhetoric.

Did not Tiberio call his father fool?


No, he said years had weakened his youthful quickness.


He swore he was bald.


No; but not thick hayr'd.


By this light, I'll swear he said his father had the hipgout, the strangury,
the fistula in ano, and a most vnabydable breath, no teeth, less eyes, great
fingers, little legs, an eternal flux, and an everlasting cough of the
longues.


Fie, fie, by this light he did not.


By this light he should ha done then: home on him, three score ann five, to
have and to hold, a Lady of fifteen. O (...) a tyranny equal if not above
thy torturing; thou did bind the living and the dead bodies together, and
forced them so to pine and rot, but this cruelty, binds breast to breast, not
only different bodies, but if it were possible most unequal minds together,
with an enforcement even scandalous to Nature. Now the layle deliver me, an
intelligencer, be good to me ye Cloisters of bondage, of whence art thou?


Of Ferrara.


A Ferrares what to me, came thou in with the Prince Tiberio?


With the Prince Tiberio, what to that, you will not rail at me will you?


Who I? I rail at one of Ferrara, a Ferazes, no? did thou ride?


No.


Hast thou worn socks?


No.


Then blessed be the most happy gravel betwixt thy toes I do prophecy thy
tirannising ytch shall be honourable, and thy right worshipful, Love shall
appear in full presence; art thou an officer to the Prince?


I am, what a that?


My cap, what officer?


Yeoman of his bottles, what to that?


My lip, thy name good yeoman of the bottles?


Fawnus.


Fawnus? an old Courtier, I wonder thou art in no better clothes and place
Fawnus?


I may be in better place sir, and with you of more regard if this match of our
Dukes intermarriage with the heir of Vrbin proceed, the Duke of Vrbin dying,
and our Lord coming in his Ladies right of title to your dukedom.


Why then shalt thou oh yeoman of the bottels become a maker of Magnificees,
thou shalt beg some od suit, and change thy old shirt, pare thy beard, cleanse
thy teeth, and eat Apricots, marry a rich widow, or a cracked Lady, whose
case thou shalt make good. Then my Pythagoras shall thou and I make a
transmigration of souls, thou shalt marry my daughter, or my wife shall be
thy gracious mistress. Seventeen puncks shall be thy proporcion. Thou shalt
beg to thy comfort of clean lynnen, eat no more fresh beef at supper, or
save the broth for next days porridge, but the flesh potts of Egypt shall
fatten thee, and the Grasehopper shall flourish in thy summer.


And what dost thou think of the Dukes overture of marriage?


What do you think?


May I speak boldly as at Alleppo?


Speak till thy lungs ache, talk out thy teeth, here are none of those
cankers, these mischiefs of society, intelligencers, or informers, that will
cast rumour into the teeth of some Lalius Baldus, a man cruelly eloquent and
bluddily learned, no, what say thou Fawnus?


With an undoubted breast thus, I may speak boldly,

By this night i'll speak broadly first and thou wilt man, our Duke of Vrbin is
a man very happily mad, for he thinks himself right perfectly wise, and most
demonstratiuely learned; nay more.


No more, I'll on, me thinks the young Lord our Prince of Ferrara so
bounteously adorned with all, of grace, feature and best shaped proportion,
fair use of speech, full opportunity, that which makes the sympothie of all
equality, of heate, of years, of blood, me thinks these Loadstones should
attract the mettle of the young Princes rather to the son than to the
noisome, cold, and most weak side of his half rotten father.


Tha'rt ours, tha'rt ours now dare we speak as boldly as if Adam had not
fallen, and made us all slaves, hark ye, the Duke is an arrant doting Ass, an
Ass, and in the knowledge of my very sense, will turn a foolish animal, for
his son will prove like one of Balls priests, have all the flesh presented
to the Idol his father, but he in the night will feed on it, will devour it,
he will yeoman of the bottels, he will.


Now gentlemen, I am sure the lust of speech hath equally drenched us all, know
I am no servant to this Prince Tiberio.


Not?


Not, but one to him out of some private urging most vowed, one that pursues
him but for opportunity of safe satisfaction, now if ye can prefer my service
to him, I shall rest yours wholly.


Just in the devils mouth, thou shalt have place, Fawns thou shalt, behold this
generous Nymphadoro a gallant of a clean boot, straight back, and beard of a
most hopeful expectation, he is a servant of fair Dulcimels her very creature
borne to the Princes sole adoration, a man so spent in time to her, that piety
(if no more of grace) must follow him when we have gained the room, second his
suite Hercules. I'll be your intelligencer.


Our very heart, and if need be work to most desperate ends.


Well urged.


Words fit acquaintance, but full actions friends.


Thou shalt not want Fawnus.


You promise well.


Be thou but firm, that old doting iniquity of age, that only eyed lecherous
Duke thy Lord shall be baffuld to extremest derision, his son prove his
fool fathers own issue.


And we, and thou with us blessed and enriched past all misery of possible
contempt, and above the hopes of greatest conjectures.


Nay as for wealth vilia miretur vulgus. I know by his physiognomy, for wealth
he is of my addiction, bid's a fico for it.


Why thou art but a younger brother, but poor Baldazozo.


Faith to speak truth, my means are written in the book of fare, as yet
unknown, and yet I am at my fool, and my hunting gelding, come, Viah, to this
feastfull entertainment.


I never knew till now, how old I was,
By him by whom we are, I think a Prince
Whose tender sufferance never felt a gust
Of boulder breathings, but still lived gently fanned
With the soft gales of his own flatterers lips
Shall never know his own complexion.
Dear sleep and lust I thank you, but for you,
Mortal till now, I scarce had known my self
Thou gratefvll poison, sleek mischief Flattery
Thou dreamefull slumber (that doth fall on kings
As soft and soon as their first holy oil,)
Be thou for ever damned, I now repent
Severe indictions to some sharpe stiles,
Freenes, so't grow not to licentiousness
Is gratfull to just states. Most spotless kingdom,
And men o happy borne under good stars.
Where what is honest, you may freely think,
Speak what you think, and write what you do speak,
Not bound to servile soothings. But since our rank
Hath ever been afflicted with these flies
(That blow corruption on the sweetest virtues)
I will revenge us all upon you all
With the same stratagem, we still are caught,
Flattery it self, and sure all knows the sharpness
Of reprehensiue language is even blunted
To full contempt, since vice is now termed fashion
And most are grown to ill even with defence,
I vow to wast this most prodigious heat
That falls into my age, like scorching flames
In depth of numbed December, in flattering all
In all of their extremest vitiousnesse,
Till in their own loved race they fall most lame,
And meet full butte, the close of Vices shame.

Come Sir, a stool boy, these Court Feasts are to us Servitors Court Fasts,
such scambling, such shift for to eat, and where to eat, here a Squire of
lowe degree hath got the carcass of a Plouer, there Pages of the Chamber
divide the spoils of a tattered Pheasant, here the Sewer has friended a Country
Gentleman with a sweet green goose, and there a young fellow that late has
bought his office, has caught a Woodcock by the nose, with cups full ever
flowing.


But is not Faunus preferred with a right hand?


Did you ever see a fellow so spurted up in a moment, he has got the right ear
of the Duke, the Prince, Princess, most of the Lords, but all the Ladies, why
he is become their only Minion, Usher, and Supporter.


He hath gotten more loved reputation of virtue, of learning, of all graces, in
one hour, than all your snarling reformers have in --


Nay, that's vnquestionable, and indeed what a fruitless labour, what a filling of
Danaes tubbe, is it become to inveigh against folly, community takes away the
sense, and example the shame: no, praise me these fellows, hang on their
chariot wheel,

And mount with them whom fortune heaves, nay drives:
A stoycall sower virtue seldom thrives.
Oppose such fortune, and then burst with those are pitied.
The hill of Chance is paved with poor men's bones,
And bulks of luckless souls, over whose eyes,
Their chariot wheels must ruthless grate, that rise.

Behold that thing of most fortunate, most prosperous, impudence, Don Fanus
himself.


Blessed and long lasting be thy carnation ribbon; O man of more than wit,
much more than virtue, of fortune! Fawnus wilt eat any of a young spring
sallet?


where did the herbs grow my gallant, where did they grow?


Hard by in the City here.


No, I'll none, I'll eat no City herbs, no City roots, for here in the
City a man shall have his excrements in his teeth again within four and
twenty hours, I love no City fallets: has't any Canary?


How the poor snake wriggles with this sudden warmth.


Here Fawnus a health as deep as a female.


Fore Jove, we must be more endeared.


How dost thou feel thy self now Fawn?


Very womanly with my fingers, I protest I think I shall love you, are you
married? I am truly taken with your virtues, are you married?


Yes.


Why I like you well for it.


No troth Fawn, I am not married.


Why I like you better for it; fore heaven I must love you;


Why Fawn, why?


Fore-heauen you are blessed with three rare graces, fine linen, clean linings,
a sanguine complexion, and I am sure, an excellent wit, for you are a gentleman
borne.


Thank thee sweet Fawn, but why is clean linen such a grace, I prithee.


Oh my excellent, and inward dearly approved friend, -- What's your name sir?
clean linen is the first our life craves, and the last our death enjoys.


But what hope rests for Nymphadora, thou art now within the buttons of the
Prince: shall the Duke his Father marry she Lady?


Tis to be hoped, not.


That's some relief as long as there's hope.


But sure sir tis almost undoubted the Lady will carry him.


O pestilent air, is there no plot so cunning, no surmise so false, no way of
avoidance?


Hast thou any pity, either of his passion, or the Ladies years, a Gentleman
in the summer hunting season of her youth, the Lady met in the same warmth,
were it not to be wept that such a sapless chafing-dish using old dotard as the
Duke of Ferrara with his withered hand, should pluck such a bud, such a: Oh
the life of sense!


Thou art now a perfect Courtier of just fashion, good grace, can not relieve
us?


Ha ye any money?


Pish Fawn, we are young Gallants.


The liker to have no money. But my young Gallants to speak like my self, I
must hug your humour. Why look you there is fate, destiny, constellations,
and Planets, (which though they are under nature, yet they are above women,)
who hath read the book of chance? no, cherish your hope, sweeten your
imaginations, with thoughts of, ah why women are the most giddy, uncertain
motions under heaven, tis neither proportion of body, virtue of mind,
amplitude of fortune, greatness of blood, but only mere chancefull appetie
sways them: which makes some one like a man, be it but for the paring of his
nales, viah, as for inequality, art not a gentleman?


That I am, and my beneficence shall show it.


I know you are, by the only word beneficence, which only speaks of the
future tence (shall know it,) but may I breath in your bosoms; I only fear
Tiberio will abuse your fathers trust, and so make your hopes desperate.


How? the Prince? would he only stood cross to my wishes, he should find me
an Italian.


How, an Italian:


By thy aid an Italian, dear Fawnus, thou art now wrigled into the Princes
bosom, and thy sweet hand should Minister that Nectar to him, should make him
immortal; Nymphadoro in direct phrase, thou should murder the Prince, so
revenge thine own wrongs, and be rewarded for that revenge.


Before the light of my eyes, I think I shall admire, wonder at you. What? ha
ye plots, proiects, correspondences, and stratagems: why are not you in better
place?

Who's this Herod my eldest Brother sir Amoroso Debilidoso?


Oh I know him, God bless thine eyes sweet sir Amoroso, a rous, a vin de
monte, to the health of thy Chyne my dear sweet Seignior.


Oh no sir, he takes the diet this spring always, boy my brothers bottle.


Faith Fawn, an odd unwholesome cold, makes me still hoarse and rhumatique.


Yes in troth a paltry murre, last morning he blew nine bones out of his nose
with an odd unwholesome murre: how does my sister your Lady, what does she
breed?


I perceive Knight you have children, oh tis a blessed assurance of heavens
favour, and long lasting name to have many children.


But I ha none, Fawn, now;


O that's most excellent, a right special happiness, he shall not be a
Drudge to his cradle, a slave to his child, he shall be sure not to cherish
another blood, nor toil to advance peradventure some Rascals lust; without
children a man is vnclog'd, his wife almost a Maid: Messalina, thou cryedst
out, O blessed barrenness, why once with child the very Venus of a Ladies
entertainment hath lost all pleasure.


By this ring Fawnus I do hug thee with most passionate affection, and shall
make my wife thank thee.


Nay my Brother grudges not at my probable inheritance, he means once to give
a younger brother hope to see fortune.


And yet I hear sir Amorosus, you cherish your loins with high art, the only
ingrosser of Eringoes, prepared Cantharides, Cullesses made of dissolved
Pearl, and brus'd Amber, the pith of Parkets and canded Lamstones are his
perpetual meats, Beds made of the down under pigeons wings and Goose-necks,
fomentations, bathes, electuaries, frictions, and all the nurses of most
forcible excited concupiscence he uses with most nice and tender industry.


Pish Zuccoli, no Nymphadoro, if sir Amorous would ha children, let him lie on
a mattres, plow or thresh, eat onyons, garlic, and leek porridge, Pharaoh
and his council were mistaken, and their devise to hinder the increase of
procreation in the Israelites, with enforcing them to much labour of body,
and to feed hard, with beetes, garlic, and onions, (meat that make the
orriginall of man most sharpe, and taking) was absurd. No he should have given
barlie bread, lattice, mellones, cucumers, huge store of veale, and fresh
beef, blown up their flesh, held them from exercise, rolled them in
feathers, most suerely seen them drunk once a day, then would they at their
best have begotten but wenches, and in short time their generation enfeebled to
nothing.


Oh divine Fawnus, where might a man take up forty pound in a commodity of
garlic, and onions? Nymphadoro thine ear.


Come what are you fleering at? there's some weakness in your brother you
wrinkle at thus, come prithee impart, what we are mutually incorporated, turned
one into another, biued together, come I believe you are familiar with your
sister, and it were known.


Witch, Fawnus witch, why how dost dream I live? is't four score a year
think thou maintains my geldings, my pages, foote-clothes, my best feeding,
high play, and excellent company? no tis from hence, from hence, I mynt some
four hundred pound a year.


Dost thou live like a porter by the back boy?


As for my weak raind brother hang him, he has sore shins* dam him
Hetoroclite, his braine's perished, his youth spent his foder so fast on others
Cattle, that he now wants for his own winter, I am fain to supply Fawn,
for which I am supplied.


Dost thou branch him boy?


What else Fawn.


What else? nay tis enough, why many men corrupt other men's wives, some their
maids, others their neighbours daughters, but to lie with ones brothers
wedlock, O my dear Herod his vile and vncommon lust.


Fore heaven I love thee to the heart, well I may praise God for my brothers
weakness, for I assure thee, the land shall descend to me my little Fawn.


To thee my little Herod? oh my rare Rascal, I do find more and more in thee
to wonder at, for thou art indeed; if I prosper thou shalt know what. Whose
this?


What? know you not Don Zuccone the only desparatly railing Lord at's Lady
that ever was confidently melancholy, that egregious idiot, that husband of the
most witty, fair (and be it spoken with many men's true grief) most chaste
Lady Zoya, but we have entered into a confederacy of afflicting him.


Plots ha you laid? Inductions, dangerous?


A quiet bosom to my sweet Don, are you going to visit your Lady.


What a clock is't, is it past three?


Past four I assure you sweet Don.


Oh then I may be admitted, her afternoons private nap is taken, I shall take
her napping. I hear there's one jealous that I lie with my own wife, and
begins to withdraw his hand: I protest I vow, and you will, on my knees, I'll
take my sacrament on it, I lay not with her this four year, this four year;
lee her not be turned upon me I beseech you.


My dear Don?


Oh Faunus dost know our Lady?


Your Lady?


No our Lady, for the love of charity incorporate with her, I would have all
nations and degrees, all ages know our Lady for I covet only to be undoubtedly
notorious.


For in deed sir, a repressed fame mounts like Camomyll, the more trod down,
the more it grows, things known common and undoubted, lose rumour.


Sir I hope yet your conjectures may err; your Lady keeps full-face, vnbated
roundness, cherefull aspect, were she so infamously prostitute, her cheek would
fall, her colour fade, the spirit of her eye would die.


Oh young man, such women are like Danaus tubbe, and in deed all women are
like Achillous, with whom Hercules wrestling, he was no sooner hurled to the
earth, but he rose up with double vigour, their fall strengthens them.


News, news, news, news, oh my dear Don be raised, be Iouiald, be
triumphant, ah my dear Don.


To me first in private, thy news I pree thee.


Will you be secret?


A my life:


As you are generous?


As I am generous:


Don Zuccones Lady's with child.


Nymph: Nymph: what i'st? what's the news?


You will be secret.


Silence it self,


Don Zuccones Lady's with child apparently.


Herod, Herod, whats the matter pree thee, the news?


You must tell no body:


As I am generous --


Don Zuccones Lady's with child apparently.


Fane whats the whisper, whats the fools secret news?


Truth my Lord, a thing, that, that, well, I faith it is not fit you know it?


Not fit I know it, as thou art baptis'd tell me, tell me.


Will you plight your patience to it.


Speak, I am a very block, I will not be moved, I am a very block.


But if you should grow disquiet (as I protest, it would make a Saint
blaspheme) I should be unwilling to procure your impatience.


Yes do, burst me, burst me, burst me with longing:


Nay faith tis no great matter, hark ye, you'll tell no body.


Not.


As you are noble.


As I am honest.


Your Lady wife apparently with child.


With child?


With child.


Fool.


My Don.


With child? by the pleasure of generation, I proclaim I lay not with her this
-- give us patience, give us patience.


Why? my Lord tis nothing to wear a forker.


Heaven and earth.


All things under the Moon are subject to their mistress grace; horns, lend me
your ring my Don, I'll put it on my finger, now tis on yours again, why is the
gold now ere the worse in lustre or fitnes?


Am I used thus?


I my Lord true, nay to be (look ye mark ye) to be used like a dead ox, to
have your own hide plucked on, to be drawn on, with your own horne, to have
the Lordship of your father, the honour of your ancestors, maugre your
beard, to descend to the base lust of some groom of your stable, or the page
of your chamber.


Oh Phalaris thy Bull.


Good Don. ha patience, you are not the only Cuckold, I would now be separated.


Alas that's but the least drop of the storm of my revenge, I will
vnlegittimate the issue, what I will do, shall be horrible but to think.


But Sir.


But Sir? I will do what a man of my form may do, and-laugh on, laugh on, do
Sir Amorous, you have a Lady too.


But my sweet Lord.


Do not anger me, least I most dreadfully curse thee, and wish thee married,
oh Zuccone, spit white, spit thy gall out, the only boon I crave of heaven
is -- but to have my honours inherited by a bastard, I will be most tyrannous,
blooddily tyrannous in my revenge, and most terrible in my curses: live to grow
blind with lust, senseless with use, loathed after, flattered before, hated
always, trusted never, abhorred ever, and last may she live to wear a foul
smock seven weeks together; heaven I beseech thee.


Is he gone: is he blown of? now out upon him vnsufferably jealous fool.


Lady:


Did thou give him the famed report? does he believe I am with child? does he
give faith?


In most sincerity, most sincerely.


Nay tis a pure fool, I can tell ye he was bred up in Germany.


But the laughter rises, that he vows he lay not in your bed this four
year with such exquisite protestations.


That's most full truth, he hath most unjustly severed his sheets ever since
the old Duke Pietro (heaven rest his soul.)


Fie, you may not pray for the dead, tis indifferent to them what you say.


Well said fool.


Ever since the old Duke Pietro, the great Devil of hell torture his soul.


O Lady yet charity.


Why? tis indifferent to them what you say fool, but does my Lord rauell out,
does he fret? for pity of an aflicted Lady load him soundly, let him not go
clear from vexation, he has the most dishonourably, with the most sinful,
most vicious obstinacy, persevered to wrong me that were I not of a male
constitution, twere impossible for me to survive it, but in madness name, let
him on, I ha not the weak fence of some of your soft-eyed whimpering Ladies,
who, if they were used like me, would gall their fingers with wringing their
hands, look like bleeding Lucresses, and shed salt water enough to powder all
the beef in the Dukes larder. No, I am resolute Donna Zoya; ha; that wives
were of my mettle, I would make these ridiculously jealous fools, howl like
a starved dog, before he got a bit, I was created to be the affliction of
such an vnsanctified member, and will boyle him in his own sirupe.


Peace the woolfes ear takes the wind of us.


The enemy is in ambush.


If any man ha the wit, now let him talk wantonly, but not baudily; come
Gallants who'll be my servants: I am now very open hearted, and full of
entertainment.


Grace me too call you mistres.


Or me.


Or me.


Or me.


Or all, I am taken with you all, with you all.


As indeed, why should any woman only love any one man, since it is
reasonable, women should affect al perfection, but al perfection never rests in
one man; many men have many virtues, but Ladies should love many virtues,
therefore Ladies should love many men; for as in women, so in me, some woman hath
only a good eye, one can discourse beautifully, if she do not laugh, one's
well favoured to her nose, another hath only a good brow, the other a plump
lip, a third only holds beauty to the teeth, and there the soil alters,
some peradventure hold good to the breast, and then downward turn like the
dreamed of Image, whose head was gold, breast silver, thighs iron, and all
beneath clay and earth, one only winks eloquently, another only kisses well,
the other only talks well, a fourth only lies well: So in men, one Gallant has
only a good face, another has only a grave methodical beard, and is a
notable wise fellow, until he speaks, a third only makes water well, and
that's a good provoking quality, one only swears well, another only speaks
well, a third only does well, all in their kind good, goodness is to be
affected, therefore they, it is a base thing and indeed an impossible for a
worthy mind to be contented with the whole world, but most vile and abject to
be satisfied with one point of the world.


Excellent Faunus I kiss thee for this, by this hand.


I thought as well, kiss me to dear mistress.


No, good sir Amorous, your teeth hath taken rust, your breath wants ayring,
and indeed I love sound kissing. Come Gallants, who'll run a Caranto, or leap
a Leualto.


Take heed Lady fro offeding or bruising the hope of your wob.


No matter, now I ha the slight, or rather the fashion of it, I fear no
barrenness.


O, but you know not your husbands aptness.


Husband? husband? as if women could have no children without husbands.


I, but then they will not be so like your husband.


No matter, thei'le be like their father, tis honour enough to my husband, that
they vouchsafe to call him father, and that his land shall descend to them
(does he not gnash his very teeth in anguish) like our husband? I had rather
they were vngroand for, like our husband? prove such a melancholy jealous ass
as he is: Does he not stamp?


But troth, your husband has a good face.


Faith good enough face for a husband, come gallants I'll dance to mine own
whistle, I am as light now as: ah,


I shall loose my wits.


Be comforted dear Don, you ha none to leeze:


My wife is grown like a Dutch-crest always rampant, rampant, fore I will
endure this affliction, I will live by raking cockles out of kennels, nay, I
will run my Country, forsake my religion, go weave Fustians, or roll the
wheele-barrow at Rotterdam.


I would be divorced despite her friends, or the oath of her Chamber-maide.


Nay, I will be divorced in despite of em all, I'll go to law with her.


That's excellent, nay, I would go to law.


Nay, I will go to law.


Why that's sport alone, what though it be most exacting, wherefore is money?


True, wherefore is money?


What though you shall pay for every quill, each drop of Ink, each minnam,
letter, tittle, comma, prick, each breath, nay, not only for thine own
Orators prating, but for some other Orators silence, though thou must buy
silence with a full hand, tis well known Demosthenes took above 2000. pound
once only to hold his peace, though thou a man of noble gentry, yet you must
weight, and besiege his study door, which will prove more hard to be entered,
than old Troy, for that was gotten into by a wooden horse, but the entrance of
this may chance cost thee a whole stock of Cattle, Oues boues caetera
pecoracampi, though then thou must sit there thrust and contemned bare-headed
to a grograine scribe ready to start up at the door creaking, pressed to get in,
with your leave Sir, to some surly groom, the third son of a Rope-maker;
what of all this?


To a resolute mind these torments are not felt.


A very arrant Ass, when he is hungry will feed on though he be whipped to
the bones, and shall a very arrant Ass Zuccone, be more virtuously patient,
than a noble.


No Fawn, the world shall know I have more virtue, than so.


Do so and be wise.


I will I warrant thee, so I may be revenged, what care I what I do?


Call a dog worshipful,

Nay, I will embrace, nay I will embrace a Iakes-farmer after eleven a clock
at night, I will stand bare, and give wall to a Bellows mender, pawn my
Lordship, sell my foot-cloth, but I will be revenged, does she think she has
married an Ass?


A Fool?


A Coxcomb?


A Ninny-hammer?


A Woodcock?


A Calfe?


No, she shall find that I ha eyes.


And brain.


And nose.


And Fore-head.


She shall in faith Fawn, she shall, she shall, sweet Fawn, she shall in faith
old boy, it joys my blood to think on it, she shall in faith; farewell loved
Fawn, sweet Fawn farewell, she shall in faith boy.


We would be private only Faunus stay, Granuffo, you may likewise stay for, I
know you'll say nothing, say on Daughter.


And as I told you sir, Tiberio being sent,
Graced in high trust as to negotiate
His royal fathers love, if he neglect
The honour of this faith, just care of state,
And every fortune that gives likelihood
To his best hopes, to draw our weaker heart
To his own love (as I protest he does)

I'll rate the Prince with such a heat of breath
His ears shall glow, nay, I discovered him
I read his eyes, as I can read an eye,
Tho it speak in darkest Characters I can,
Can we not Fawn, can we not my Lord?
Why I conceive you now, I understand you both:
You both admire, yes, say is't not hit?
Though we are old, or so, yet we ha wit.

And you may say, (if so your wisdom please
As you are truly wise) how weak a creature
Soft woman is to beat the siege and strength,
Of so prevailing feature, and fair language,
As that of his is ever: you may add,
(If so your wisdom please, as you are wise)

As mortal man may be

I am of years, apt for his love, if he should proceed
in private urgent suit, how easy twere,
To win my love, for you may say (if so
Your wisdom please) you find in me
A very forward passion to enjoy him,
And therefore you beseech him seriously
Straight to forbear, with such close cunning art,
To urge his too well graced suite: for you
(If so your Lordship please) may say I told you all.

Go to go to, what I will say or so,
Until I say none but my self shall know.
But I will say go to, does not my colour rise?
It shall rise for I can force my blood
To come and go, as men of wit and state,
Must sometimes fain their love, sometimes their hate.
That's policy now, but come with this free heate,
Or this same Estro or Enthusiasme,
(For these are phrases both poetical)
Will we go rate the Prince, and make him see
Himself in us; that is our grace and wits,
Shall show his shapeles folly, vice kneels whiles virtue fits.
But see we are prevented daughter, in
It is not fit thy self should hear what I
Must speak of thy most modest wise, wise mind
For Tha'rt careful, sober, in all most wise.
And in deed our daughter. My Lord Tiberio
A horse but yet a Colt may leave his trot
A man, but yet a boy may well be broke,
From vain addictions, the head of Rivers stopped,
The Channel dries, he that doth dread a fire,
Must put out sparks, and he who fears a bull,
Must cut his horns off when he is a Calfe,
Principiis obsta; saith a learned man
Who, tho he was no Duke yet he was wise,
And had some sense or so.

What means my Lord?


Lah sir, thus men of brain can speak in clouds
Which weak eyes cannot pearce; but my fair Lord
In direct phrase thus, my daughter tells me plain
You go about with most direct entreats
To gain her love, and to abuse her father,
O my fair Lord, will you a youth so blessed
With rarest gifts of fortune, and sweet graces
Offer to love a young and tender Lady,
Will you I say abuse your most wise father?
Who tho he freeze in August, and his calves
Are sunk into his toes, yet may well wed our daughter
As old as he in wit: will you I say
(For by my troth my Lord I must be plain)
My daughter is but young, and apt to love
So fit a person as your proper self,
And so she prayed me tell you, will you now
Entice her easy breast to abuse your trust,
Her proper honour, and your fathers hopes?
I speak no figures, but I charge you check
Your appetite, and passions to our daughter
Before it head, nor offer conference
Or seek access, but by, and before us;
What judge you us as weak, or as unwise?
No you shall find that Venice Duke has eyes; so think on it.

Astonishment and wonder, what means this?
Is the Duke sober?

Why ha not you endeuour'd
Courses that only seconded appetite?
And not your honour, or your trust of place,
Do you not court the Lady for your self?

Fane thou dost love me: if I ha done so
Tis past my knowledge, and I prithee Fane
If thou obseru'st, I do I know not what
Make me to know it, for by the dear light
I ha not found a thought that way; I apt for love?
Let lazy idleness filled full of wine,
Heated with meates, high fed with lustful ease
Go dote on culler, as for me: why death a sense
I court the Lady? I was not borne in Cyprus,
I love, when? how? whom? think, let us yet keep
Our reason sound; I'll think, think, sleep.

Amazd, even lost in wondering, I restful
Of covetous expectation: I am left
As on a rock, from whence I may discern
The giddy sea of humour slow beneath,
Upon whose back the vayner bubles float
And forthwith break, o mighty flattery
Thou easiest, commonst, and most grateful venom
That poisons Courts, and all societies,
How grateful dost thou make me? should one rail
And come to fear a vice, beware legge-ringes
And the turned key on thee, when if softer hand
Suppling a sore that itches (which should smart)
Free speech gains foes, base fawnings steal the heart,
Swell you impostumbd members till you burst
Since tis in vain to hinder, on i'll thrust
And when in shame you fall, I'll laugh from hence,
And cry, so end all desperate impudence.
An others court shall show me where and how
Vice may be cur'de, for now beside my self
Possessed with almost phrenzie, from strong fervor
I know I shall produce things mere divine,
Without immoderate heate, no virtues shine
For I speak strong, tho strange, the dews that steep
Our souls in deepest thoughts, are Fury and Sleep.

Faith Fane tis my humour, the natural sin of my sanguine complexion, I am
most inforcedly in love with all women, almost affeicting them all with an
equal flame.


An excellent justice of an upright virtue, you love all Gods creatures with an
unpartial affection.


Right, neither am I inconstant to any one in particular.


Tho you love all in general, true, for when you vow a most devoted love to
one you swear not to tender a most devoted love to another, and indeed why
should any man ouer-loue any thing, tis judgment for a man to love every
thing proportionably to his virtue. I love a dog with a hunting pleasure, as
he is pleasurable in hunting, my horse after a iourneing easines as he is easy
in iournying, my hawke, to the goodness of his winge, and my wench --


How sweet Fawn, how?


Why according to her creation, nature made them pretty, toying, idle
phantastique imperfect creatures, even so I would in justice affect them, with
a pretty toying idle phantastique imperfect affection, and as indeed they are
only created for show and pleasure, so would I only love them for show and
pleasure.


Why that's my humour to the very thread, thou dost speak my proper thoughts.


But Sir with what possibility can your constitution be so boundlesly amorous
as to affect all women of what degree, form or complexion soever?


I'll tell thee, for mine own part, I am a perfect Ouidian, and can with him
affect all, if she be a virgin of a modest eye, shame faced, temperate
aspect, her very modesty inflames me, her sober blushes fires me, if I behold
a wanton, pretty, courtly petulant Ape, I am extremely in love with her,
because she is not clownishly rude, that she assures her lover of no ignorant,
dull, vnmouing venus, be she sourly severe: I think she wittily counterfeits,
I love her for her wit, if she be learned and sensures poets, I love her soul,
and for her soul her body, be she a Lady of professed ignorance, oh I am
infinitely taken with her simplicity, as one assured to find no sophistication
about her, be she slender and lean, she's the Greekes delight, be she thick
and plump, she's the Italians pleasure, if she be tall, she's of a goodly
form, and will print a fair proportion in a large bed, if she be short
and low, she's nimbly delightful, and ordinarily quick witted, be she young
she's for mine eye, be she old she's for my discourse as one well knowing,
there's much amiablenes in a grave matron, but be she young or old, lean, fat,
short, tall, white, red, browne, nay even black, my discourse shall find
reason to love her, if my means may procure opportunity to enjoy her.


Excellent Sir, nay if a man were of competent means, were not a notable
delight for a man to have for every month in the year?


Nay for every week of the month?


Nay for every day of the week?


Nay for every hour of that day?


Nay for every humour of a man in that howre, to have a several Mistress to
entertain him, as if he were Saturnine, or melancholy to have a black
hayred, pall-fac'de, sallowe thinking Mistress to clip him: If Jovial and
merry, a sanguine, light tripping singing, indeed a mistress that would
dance a caranto as she goes to embrace him, if choleric, impatient or
ireful, to have a Mistress withered hair, little Ferreteyes, a lean cheek,
and a sharpe nose to entertain him. And so of the rest.


O sir this were too great ambition: well I love and am beloved of a great
many, for I court all in the way of honour, in the trade of marriage Fawn, but
above all I affect the Princes, she's my utmost end. O I love a Lady whose
beauty is joined with Fortune, beyond all, yet one of beauty, without fortune
for some uses, nay one of fortune without beauty for some ends, but never any
that has neither fortune nor beauty but for necessity such a one as this is
Dona Donetta. Here's one has loved all the Court just once over.


O this is the fair Lady with the foul teeth, Natures hand shook when she
was in making, for the red that should have spread her cheeks, nature let
fall upon her nose, the white of her chin slipped into her eyes, and the gray of
her eyes leapt before his time into her hayer, and the yeallownes of her haier
fell without providence into her teeth.


By the vow of my hart, you are my most only elected and I speak by way of
protestation, I shall no longer wish to be, then that your only affection
shall rest in me, and mine onele in you.


But if you shall love any other.


Any other? can any man, love any other that knows you, the only perfection
of your sex, and astonishment of mankind?


Fie ye flatter me, go wear and understand my favour, this snail slow, but
sure.


This kiss.


Farewell.


The integrity and only vow of my faith to you, ever urge your well deserved
requital to me.


Excellent.


See here's an other of --

Of your most only elected,

Right, Donna Garbetza.


O, I will acknowledge this is the Lady made of cutwork and all her body like a
sand box, full of holes, and contains nothing but dust, she chooses her
servants, as men choose dogs, by the mouth, if they open well and full, their
cry is pleasing, she may be chaste, for she haz a bad face, and yet
questionles, she may be made a strumpet, for she is covetous.


By the vow of my hart, you are my most only elected, (and I speak it by way
of protestation) I shall no longer wish to be, then all your affections shall
only rest in me, and all mine only in you.


Excellent, this piece of stuff is good on both sides, he is so constant, he
will not change his phrase.


But shall I give faith, may you not love another?


An other, can any man love another, that knows you, the only perfection of
your sex, and admiration of mankind?


Your speech flies too high, for your meaning to follow, yet my mistrust shall
not preceede my experience, I wrought this favour for you.


The integrity and only vow of my faith to you ever urged, your well deserude
requital to me.


Why this is pure wit, nay judgment.


Why look the Fawn observe me.


I do sir.


I do love at this instant some nineteen Ladies all in the trade of marriage,
now sir, whose father dies first, or whose portion appears most, or whose
fortunes betters soonest, her with quiet liberty at my leisure will I elect,
for that's my humour.


You profess a most excellent mystery sir.


Fore heaven, see the Princes she that is.


Your most only elected too.


Oh I, oh I, but my hopes faint yet, by the vow of my heart you are my most
only elected and --


There's a ship of fools going out, shall I prefer thee Nymphodoro, thou
may be masters mate, my father hath made Dondilo Captain, else thou should
have his place.


By Jove Fawn, she speaks as sharply and looks as sourly, as if she had
been new squeased out of a crab orange


How term you that Lady, with whom she houldes discourse?


O Fawn it is a Lady even above ambition, and like the vertical sun, that
neither forces others to cast shadows, nor can others force or shade her, her
stile is Dona Philocalia.


Philocalia, what that renowned Lady whose ample report hath stroke wonder
into remotest strangers? and yet her worth above that wonder, she whose noble
industries hath made her breast rich in true glories, and vndying habilities,
she that whilst other ladies spend the life of earth, Time, in reading their
glass, their Jewels, and (the shame of Poesy) lustful sonnets gives her soul
meditations, those meditations wings, that cleave the Aier, fan bright
celestial fierce, whose true reflections makes her see her self and them: She
whose pity is ever above her envy, loving nothing less then insolent
prosperity, and pitittying nothing more then virtue destitute of fortune.


There were a Lady for Ferraraes Duke, one of great blood, firm age,
undoubted honour, above her sex, most modestly artful, tho naturally modest,
too excellent, to be left vnmatcht, tho few worthy to much with her.


I cannot tell my thoughts grow busy,

The Princes would be private, void the presence.


May I rest sure thou wilt conceal a secret?


Yes Nadam.


How may I rest truly assur'de?


Truly thus, Do not tell it me.


Why, can thou not conceal a secret?


Yes, as long as it is a secret. but when tow know it. how can it be a secret?
and indeed with what justice can you expect secrecy in me that cannot be
private to your self?


Faith Philocalia, I must of force trust thy silence, for my breast breaks, if
I confer not my thoughts upon thee.


You may trust my silence, I can command that, but if I chance to he
questioned I must speak truth, I can conceal but not deny my knowledge, that
must command me.


Fie on these Philosophical discoursing women, prithee confer with me like a
creature made of flesh and blood, and tell me, if it be not a scandal to the
soul of all being proportion, that I a female of 15. of a lightsome and civil
discretion, healthy, lusty, vigorus, full and idle, should for ever be
shackled to the crampie shins of a wayward, dull, sower, austere, rough,
rhewmy, threescore and four.


Nay, threescore and ten at the least,

Now heaven bless me, as it is pity that every knave is not a fool, so it
is shame, that every old man is not, and rests not a widower. They say in
China, when women are past child-bearing, they are all burnt to make
gun-powder. I wonder what men should be done withal, when they are past
child-getting, yet upon my love Philocalia (which with Ladies is often above
their honour) I do even dote upon the best part of the Duke.


VVhats that?


His son, yes sooth, and so love him, that I must marie him.


And wherefore love him, so to marry him.


Because I love him, and because he his virtuous, I love to marry.


His virtues.


I, with him his virtues.


I with him, alas sweet Princes, love or virtue are not of the essence of
marriage.


A jest upon your understanding, i'll maintain that wisdom in a woman is most
foolish quality: A Lady of a good complexion, naturally well witted,
perfectly bred and well exercised, in discourse of the best men, shall make
fools of a thousand of these book thinking creatures, I speak it by way of
justification, I tell thee, (look that no body eauesdroppe us.) I tell thee I
am truly learned, for I proteigrance and wise, for I love my self* and
virtuous enough for a Lady of fifteen.


How virtuous?


Shall I speak like a creature of a good healthful blood and not like one of
these weak green sickness, leave tisicke, staruelinges: First for the virtue
of magnanimity, I am very valiant, for there is no heroic action so
particularly noble glorious to our sex, as not to fall to action, the greatest
deed we can do is not to do* (look that no body listen) Then am I full of
patience, and can bear more then a Sumpter horse, for (to speak sensibly)
what burden is there so heavy to a Porters back, as Virginity to a well
complectioned young Ladies thoughts? (look no body hearken) By this hand the
noblest vow is that of Virginity, because the hardest, I will have the Prince.


But by what means sweet Madam?


Oh Philocalia, in heavy sadness vnwanton phrase there lies all the brain
work, by what means I could fall into a miserable blank verse presently.


But dear madam your reason of loving him.


Faith only a woman's reason, because I was expressly forbidden to love him, at
the first view I likte him, and no sooner had my fathers wisdom mistrusted my
liking, but I grew loath his judgment should err. I pitied he should prove
a fool in his old age, and without cause mistrust me?


But when you saw no means of manifesting your affection to him, why did not
your hopes perish?


O Philocalia that difficulty only inflames me, when the enterprise is easy,
the victory is inglorious, no let my wise aged, learned, intelligent Father,
that can interpret eyes understand the language of birds, interpret the
grumbling of dogs the coference of cats, that can read even silence, let him
forbid all enterviewes, all speeches, all tokens, all messages, all (as he
thinks) human means, I will speak to the Prince, court the Prince, that he
shall understand me, nay I will so stalk on the blind side of my all knowing
fathers wit, that do what his wisdom can, he shall be my only mediator, my
only messenger, my only honourable spokesman, he shall carry my favours, he
shall amplify my affection nay he shall direct the Prince the means the very
way to my bed, he and only he, when he only can do this, and only would
not do this, he only shall do this.


Only you shall then deserve such a husband, O love how violent are thy
passages!


Pish Philocalia, tis against the nature of love, not to be violent.


And against the condition of violence to be constant.


Constancy? constancy and patience are virtues in no living creatures but
Sentinels and Anglers: here's our father.


What did he think to walk invisibly before our eyes, and he had Giges ring I
would find him.


Fore Jove you rated him with Emphasis.


Did we not shake the Prince with enargie?


With Ciceronian Elocution?


And most pathetic piercing Oratory?


If he have any wit in him, he will make sweet use of it.


Nay he shall make sweet use of it ere I have done, Lord what overweening
fools these young men be, that think us old men sottes.


Arrant Asses.


Doting idiots, when we God wot, ha, ha, las silly souls.


Poor weak creatures to men af approved reach.


Full years.


Of wise experience.


And approved wit.


Nay as for your wit --


Count Granuffo, as I live this Faunus is a rare vnderstander of men, is a not
Faunus? this Granuffo is a right wise good Lord, a man of excellent discourse,
and never speaks his signs to me, men of profound reach instruct aboundatly,
he begs suites with signs, gives thanks with signs puts off his hat ley
surely, maintains his beard learnedly, keeps his lust privately, makes a
nodding leg courtly, and lives happily.


Silence is an excellent modest grace, but especially before so instructing a
wisdom, as that of your excellencies, as for his advancement, you gave it
most royally, because he deserves it least duly, since to give to virtuous
desert, is rather a due requital, then a Princely magnificence, when to
vndeseruingnesse, it is merely all bounty and free grace.


Well spoke, it is enough, Don Granuffo this Fawnus is a very worthy fellow, and
an excellent Courtier, and beloved of most of the princes of Christendom I can
tell you, for howsoever some severer dissembler, grace him not when he affronts
him in the full face, yet if he comes behind, or on the one side heel leer
and put back his head upon him be sure, be you two precious to each other.


Sir my self, my family, my fortunes, are all devoted I protest most
religiously to your service. I vow my whole self only proud, in being
acknowledged by you, but as your creature, and my only utmost ambition is by
my sword or soul to testify, how sincerely I am consecrated to your
adoration.


Tis enough, art a Gentleman Fawn?


Not oneminently disceded, for were the pedigrees of some fortunately mounted,
searched, they would be secretly found to be of the blood of the poor Fawn.


Tis enough, you two I love heartily, for thy silence never displeases me, nor
thy speech ever offend me: See our daughter attends us, my fair, my wise, my
chaste, my dutieous, and indeed, in all my daughter, (for such a pretty soul
for all the world have I been) what I think we have made the Prince to
feel his error, what did he think he had weak fools in hand? no he shall
find, as wisely said Lucullus, Young men are fools, that go about to gull
us.


But sooth my wisest father, the young Prince is yet forgetful, and rests
resolute, in his much unadvised love.


Is't possible?


Nay I protest what ere he fain to you (as he can fain most deeply)


Right we know it, for if you marked he would not once take sense of any such
intent from him, O impudence, what mercy can thou look for?


And as I said, royally wise, and wisely royal Father --


I think that eloquence is hereditary.


Tho he can fain, yet I presume your sense is quick enough to find him.


Quick, is't not?


Is't not Fawn, why I did know you fained, nay I do know (by the just sequence
of such impudence) that he hath laid some second siege unto thy bosom, with
most miraculous conveyances of some rich present on thee.


O bounteous heaven, how liberal are your graces to my Nestor-like Father.


Is't not so, say?


Tis so oraculous Father, he hath now more then courted with bare Phrases.

See Father see, the very bane of honour,
Corruption of justice and Virginity,
Gifts hath he left with me, O view this scarf,
This as he called it most envied silk,
That should embrace an arm, or wast, or side,
Which he much feared should never, this he left,
Despite my much resistance.

Did he so giu't me, I'll giu't him, I'll regiue his token with so sharpe
advantage*


Nay my worthy Father, read but these cunning letters


Letters? where, prove you but justly loving coceiu me
Till justice leave the Gods, I'll never leave thee.
For tho the Duke seem wise, heel find this strain,
Where two hearts yield consent, all thwartings vain,
And dare thou then aver this wicked write,
O world of wenching wiles, where is thy wit?

But other talk for us were far more fit,
For see here comes the prince Tiberio.

Daughter upon thy obedience instantly take thy chamber

Dear father in all duty, let me beseech your leave, that I may but --


Go to, go to, you are a simple fool, a very simple animal

Yet let me, (the loyal servant of simplicity.)


What would you do? what are you wiser then your father, will you direct me?


Heavens forbid such insolence, yet let me denounce my hearty hatred.


To what end?


Tho't be but in the Princes ear, (since fit's not maids blush to rail
aloud.


Go to, go to.


Let me but check his heate.


Well, well.


And take him down dear father, from his full pride of hopes.


So, so, I say once more go in.
I will not loose the glory of reproof;
Is this th'office of Ambassadors my Lord Tyberio?
Nay duty of a son, nay pity of a man.
(A figure called in art Gradatio.
With some learned Climax) to court a royal Lady,
For's master, father, or perchance his friend,
And yet intend the purchase of his beauty,
To his own use.

Your grace doth much amaze me.


I, fain, dissembe, Las we are now grown old, weak sighted, alas any one
fools us.


I deeply vow my Lord.


Peace, be not damnde, have pity on your soul,
I confess sweet Prince for you to love my daughter,
Young and witty, of equal mixture both of mind and body,
Is neither wondrous nor unnatural,
Yet to forswear and vow against ones heart,
Is full of base, ignoble cowardice,
Since tis most plain, such speeches, do contemn
Heaven, and fear men (that's sentious now)

My gracious Lord if I vnknowingly have er'de,

Vnknowingly, can you blush my Lord:
Vnknowingly, why can you write these lines?
Present this scarf, vnknowingly my Lord,
To my dear daughter? um, vnknowingly?
Can you urge your suite, prefer your gentlest love,
In your own right, to her too easy breast:
That God knows takes too much compassion on ye,
(And so she praide me say) vnknowingly my Lord?
If you can act these things vnknowingly,
Know we can know your actions so unknown,
For we are old? I will not say in wit,
(For even just worth must not approve it self)
But take your scarf, for she vows sheele not wear it.

Nay but my Lord --

Nay but my Lord, my Lord.
You must take it, wear it, keep it,
For by the honour of our house and blood;
I will deal wisely, and be provident,
Your father shall not say I pandarizde,
Or fondly winkt at your affection,
No we'll be wise, this night our daughter yields
Your fathers answer, this night we inuit
Your presence therefore to a feastfull waking,
To morrow to Ferrara you return,
With wished answer to your royal father,
Mean time as you respect our best relation
Of your fair bearing, ( Granuffo is't not good?)
Of your fair bearing, rest more anxious,
(No anxious is not a good word) rest more vigilant
Over your passion, both forbear and bear,
Anexou e ampexou, (that's Greek to you now.)
Else your youth shall find,
Our nose not stuffed, but we can take the wind,
And smell you out, I say no more but thus,
And smell you out, what, ha not we our eyes,
Our nose and ears, what, are these hairs unwise?
Look too't. quos ego, a figure called Aposiopesis or Increpatio.

Prove you but justly, loving and conceive me,
Justice shall leave the gods before I leave thee:
Imagination prove as true, as thou art sweet
And tho the Duke seem wise, heel find this strain
When two harts yield consent, all thwartinges vain.
O quick deuisefull strong brained Dulcimel
Thou art too full of wit to be a wife,
Why dost thou love? or what strong heat gave life
To such faint hopes? O woman thou art made
Most only of, and for deceit, thy form
Is nothing but delusion of our eyes,
Our ears, our hearts, and sometimes of our hands,
Hypocrisy and vanity brought forth,
Without male heat, thy most most monstrous being
Shall I abuse my royal fathers trust,
And make my self a scorn, the very food
Of rumour infamous? shall I that ever loathede,
A thought of woman, now begin to love,
My worthy fathers right, break faith to him that got me
To get a faithless woman?

True my worthy Lord, your grace is vere pius.


To take from my good father the pleasure of his eyes,
And of his hands, imaginary solace of his fading life.

His life that only lives to your sole good,

And my self good, his lifes most only end.


Which O may never end.


Yes Fawn in time, we must not prescribe to nature, every thing: there's some
end in every thing.


But in a woman, yet as she is a wife, she is
Oftentimes the end of her husband

Shall I, I say? --


Shall you I say confound your own fair hopes,
Cross all your course of life, make your self vain,
To your once steady grauenes, and all to second
The ambitious quickness of a monstrous love,
That's only out of difficulty borne,
And followed only for the miracle,
In the obtaining? I would ha ye now,
Tell her father all.

Vncompassionate wild man, shall I not pity, if I cannot love?
Or rather shall I not for pity love,
So wondrous wit in so most wondrous beauty,
That with such rarest art and cunning means
Entreats? what (I thing valules) am not,
Worthy but to grant, my admiration,
Are fathers to be thought on in our loves?

True right sir, fathers or friends, a crown,
And love hath none, but are allied to themselves alone,
Your father I may boldly say, he's an Ass,
To hope that you'll forbear to swallow,
What he cannot chew, nay e't is injustice truly,
For him to judge it fit, that you should starve.
For that which only he can feast his eye withal,
And not digest.

O Fawn what man of so cold earth
But must love such a wit in such a body,
Thou last and only rareness of heavens works,
From best of man made model of the Gods:
Divinest woman, thou perfection
Of all proportions Beauty, made when, Jove was blithe,
Well filed with Nectar, and full friends with man,
Thou dear as air, necessary as sleep,
To careful man: woman, O who can sin so deeply,
As to be cursed from knowing of the pleasures,
Thy soft society, modest amorousnes,
Yields to our tedious life. Fawn, the Duke shall not know this

Unless you tell him, but what hope can live in you,
When your short stay, and your most shortened conference.
Not only actions, but even looks abstrude,
Cut off all possibilities of obtaining.

Tush Fawn, to violence of women's love and wit
Nothing but not obtaining is impossible,
Notumque furens quid foemina possit.

But then how rest you to your father true?


To him that only can give dues, she rests most due.


Even so? he that with safety would well lurk in courts,
To best elected ends, of force is wrung,
To keep broad eyes, soft feet, long ears, most short tongue.
For tis of knowing creatures the maine art,
To use quick hams, wide arms and most close heart.

Why tis a most well in fashion affection Dona Garbetza your Knight S. Amaros
is a man of a most unfortunate back, spits white, has an ill breath, at three
after dinner goes to the Bath, takes the diet, nay which is more, takes
Tobacco, therefore with great authority you may cuckold him.


I hope so, but would that friend my brother discover me, would he wrong
himself, to prejudice me?


No prejudice dear Garbetza, his brother your husband right, he cuckold his
eldest brother, true, he gets her with child, just.


Sure theirs no wrong in, right, true, and just.


And indeed since the virtue of procreation growed hopeless in your husband, to
whom should you rather commit your love and honour to, then him that is most
like and near your husband, his brother, but are you assured your friend and
brother rests entirely constant solely to you?


To me? O Fawn, let me sigh it with joy into thy bosom, my brother has been
woed by this that and the other Lady to entertain the (for I ha seen their
letters) but his vow to me O Faw, is most immutable, vnfaining, peculiar,
indeed deserved.


Never entreat me, never beseech me, to have pity forsooth on your Master, M.
Herod: Let him never be so daringly ambitious, as to hope withal his vows and
protestations to gain my affection, gods my discretion? has my my sutlery,
tapstry, laundrie, made me be taken up at the Court, preferde me to a
husband, and have I adaunc't my husband with the labour of mine own body,
from the black guarde, to be one of the Dukes drumers, to make him one of the
court forkers? shall I that purefy many Lords some Ladies ca tel who wears
perfumes who plasters, and for why, know whose a gallant, of a chaste shirt and
who not; shall I become, or dares your master think I will become, or if I
would become, presumes your Master to hope I would become one of his common
feminines? no let M. Herod brag of his brothers wife, I scorn his letters,
and her leavings at my heel, in faith and so tell him.


Nay costly, dear Puttotta, Mistres Puttotta, madam Puttotta O be merciful
to my languishing master, he may in time grow great and well graced Courtier,
for he wears yellow already, mix therefore your loves, as for madam Garbetza
his brothers wife, you see what he writes there.


I must confess he says she is a spinie, green creature, of an unwholesome
barren blood and cold embrace, a bony thing of most unequal hyppes, uneven
eyes, ill ranked teeth, and indeed one, but that she hires him, he endures
not, yet, for al this does he hope to dishonest me: I am for his betters, I
would he should well know it, for more by many then my husband, know I am a
woman of a known, sound and upright carriage and so he shall find if he deal
with me, and so tel him I pray you, what does he hope to make me one of his
gils, his pucks, pole cats, flirrs and feminines?


Alas my miserable master, what suds art thou washed into? thou art borne to be
scorned of every carted community, and yet heel out crack a Germaine when he
is drunk, or a Spaniard after he hath eaten a Fumatho, that he haz lain with
that and that, and the other Lady, that he lay last night in such a madonnas
chamber, the other night he lay in such a Countesses couch, to night he lies in
such a Ladies closet, when poor I know all this while he only lied in his
throat.


Madam let me sigh it in your bosom, how immutable and vnfainting and indeed
--


Fawn I will undo that rascal, he shall starve for any further maintenance.


You may make him come to the covering and recovering of his old dublets.


He was in fair hope of proving heir to his elder brother, but he has gotten
me with child.


So, you withdrawing your favour, his present means fail him, and by getting
you with child, his future means for ever rest despairful to him.


O heaven that I could curse him beneath damnation, impudent varlet: by my
reputation Fawn, I only lou'de him, because I thought I only did not love
him, he vowed infinite beauties doted on him, alas I was a simple country Lady,
wore gold buttons, trunk sleeves, and flagon bracelets, in this state of
innocence was I brought up to the Court.


And now in stead of country innocence, have you got court honesty: well Madam
leave your brother to my placing, he shall have a special cabin in the ship of
fools.


Right, remember he got his elder brothers wife with child, and so depriude
himself of th'inheritance.


That will stow him under hatches I warrant you.


And so depriude himself of inheritance, dear Fawn be my champion.


The very scourge of your most basely offeding brother


Ignoble villain, that I might but see thee wretched without pity, and
recovery, well.


Stand Herod, you are full met sir.


But not met, full sir, I am as gaunt as a hunting gelding after 3. trained
scents, fore Venus fan I have been shaling of peascods, upon four great
Madonnas have I this after noone grafted the forked tree,


I'st possible?


Possible? fie on this satiety, tis a dull, blunt* weary, drowsy passion; who
would be a proper fellow to be thus greedily devoured swallowed among Ladies?
faith tis my torment, my very rack.


Right Herod, true, for imagine all a man possessed with a perpetual pleasure,
like that of generation, even in the highest lushiousnes, he straight sinks as
unable to bear so continual, so pure, so universal a sensuality.


By even truth tis very right, for my part would I were eunuch't rather then
thus sucked away with kisses, infeebling dalliance, O the falling sickness on them
all, why did reasonable nature give so strange, so rbellious, so tyrannous, so
insatiate parts of appetite to so weak a governs a woman.


Or why O custom did thou oblige them to modesty, such cold temperance, that
they must be wooed by men, courted by men? why all know, they are more full of
strong desires, those desires most impatient of delay, or hinderace, they have
more unruly passios then men, and weaker reason to temper those passions then
men.


Why then hath not the discretion of nature thought it just, that customary
coins, old fashions, terms of honour of modesty for sooth, all laid aside,
they court not us, beseech not us, rather for sweets of love, then we them,
why? by Ianus women are but men turned the wrong side outward.


O sir nature is a wise workman, she knows right well that if women should
woo us to the art of love, we should all be utterly shamd, how often should
they take us unprovided when they are always ready.


I sir, right sir, to some few such unfortunate handsome fellows as my self
am to my grief I know it.


Why here are two perfect creatures, the one Nymphadoro, loves all, and my
Herod here eioyes all.


Faith some score or two of Ladies or so, ravish me among them, divide my
presents, and wold indeed engross me were I indeed such an ass as to be made
a Monopoly of: look sirrah what a wild hand one of them writes, who would
ever take this for a. d. dearest, or read this, for only, only dearest.


Here's a lye indeed.


True, but here's another much more legible, a good secretary my most affected
Herod, the utmost ambition of my hopes and only.


There is one lye better shaped by ods.


Right, but here's a Ladies roman hand to me is beyond all, look ye, to her
most elected servant, and worthy friend, Herod Baldonzozo Esquier, I believe
thou know what Countesses hand this is, I'll show thee another.


No good Herod, I'll show thee one now: To his most elected Mistress and worthy
laundress, divine mistress Puttotta at her tent in the wood-yeard, or else
where give these.


Prithee ha silence whats that?


If my tears or vows, my faithfulst protestations on my knees.


Good hold.


Fair and only loved laundress.


Forbear I beseech thee.


Might move thy stony heart to take pity on my sighs.


Do not shame me to the day of judgment.


Alas I write it in passion, alas thou know besides my loathed sister thou
art.


For the Lords sake.


The only hope of my pleasure, the only pleasure of my hopes, be pleased
therefore to


Cease I beseech thee.


Pish, near blush man, it is an vncourtly quality, as for thy lying as long as
there's policy int, it is very passable, wherefore haz heaven given man tong but
to speak to a mans own glory? he that cannot swell bigger then his natural
skin nor seem to be in more grace then he is, has not learned the very
rudiments or A.B.C. of courtship.


Upon my heart Fawn thou please me to the soul, why look you for mine own
part I must confess.

See here's the Dukes fool.


A board, a board, a board, al manner of fools of Courteytie or country of what
degree sex or nature.


fool.


Herod.


What, are ye full fraughted, is your ship well foold?


O'twas excellently thronged full, a Justice of peace, tho he had been one of
the most illiterat asses in a Country could hardly ha got a hanging cabin. O we
had first some log fortunate great Politicians that were so sottishlie
paradized as to think when popular hate seconded Princes displeasure to them,
any unmerited violence could seem to the world injustice, some purple fellows
whom chance reared, and their own deficiences of spirit hurled down, we
had some courtiers that ore bought their offices yet durst fall in love,
Priests that for-sooke their functions to avoid a thawart stroke with a wet
finger. But now alas Fawn, now theirs space and place.


Why / how gat al these forth, was not the warrant strong?


Yes, yes, but they got a supersedes, al of them proved them selves either
knaves or mad men, and so were all let go, theirs none left now in our ship,
but a few Citizens, that let their wives keep their shop books, some
philosophers, and a few Critiques; one of which Critiques has lost his flesh
with fishing at the measure of Plautus verses, another has vowed to get the
consumption of the lungues, or to leave to posterity the true orthography and
pronunciation of laughing, a third hath melted a great deal a suet, worn out
his thumbs with turning, read out his eyes and studied his face out of a
sanguine into a meagre spawling fleamy lothsomenes, al to find but why mentula
should be the feminine gender since the rule is Propria quae maribut tribuuntur
mascilla dicas. These Philosophers, Critiques and all the maids we could find
at 16. are all our fraught now.


O then, your ship of fools is full.


True the maids at 17. fill it.


Fill it quoth you alas we have very few and these we were fain to take up
in the country too.


But what Philosophers ha ye.


O very strange fellows one knows nothing, dares not aver, he lives, goes,
sees, feels.


A most insensible Philosopher.


An oher that there is no present time, and that one man to day, and to morrow
is not the same man, so that he that yesterday owed money to day owes none,
because he is not the same man.


Would that Philosopher would hold good in law.


But why has the Duke thus labord to have all the fools shipped out of his
dominions.


Marry because he would play the fool himself alone without any rival.


Ware your breech fool.


I warrant thee old lad tis the privilege of poor fools to talk before an
intelligencer, mary if I could fool my self into a Lordship as I know some
ha fool them selves out of a Lordeship were I grown some huge fellow got the
leer of the people upon me if the fates had so decreed it, I should talk
treason tho I near opend my lips.


In fatis agimur, cedite fatis, but how runs rumour what breath's strongest in
the Palace, now I think you know all.


Yes we fools think we know all the Prince hath audience to night, is
feasted and after supper is intertainde with no comedy mask or barriers but
with.


What I prethe?


What I prethe?


With a most new and special shape of delight.


What for Ioues sake?


Marie gallants, a session, a general council of love summoned in the name of
Don Cupid to which upon pain of their mistres displeasure shall appear all
favour wearers, sonnet mongers, health drinkers, neat in riches of barbers,
perfumers, to conclude al that can wy he or wag the tail, are upon grievous
pains of their back sumond to be assistant in that Session of love.


Hold, hold, do not paule the delight before it come to our palate, what other
rumour keeps air on men's lungs.


Other egregiousnes of folly ha you not heard of Don. Zucone.


What of him good fool.


He is separated.


Diuorcd.


That salt that criticism, that very all epigram of a woman, that Analysis,
that compendium of witness.


Now Iesu what words the fool has.


We ha still such words but I will not vnshake the jest before it be ripe and
therefore kissing your worships fingers in most sweet terms without any sense
and with most fair looks without any good meaning I most courtlike take my
leave ba suus manus devostro Signioria.


Stay fool we'll follow thee, for fore heaven we must prepare our selves for
this session.


I will have no mercy, I will not relent, justice beard is shaven, and it shall
give thee no hold, I am separated and I will be separated.


Dear my Lord husband.


Hence creature, I am none of thy husband or father of thy bastard, no I will be
tyrannous and a most deep revenger the order shall stand ha, thou Queen I ha
no wife now.


sweet my Lord.


Hence avaunt I will marie a woman with no womb, a creature with two noses, a
wench with no hair rather then remarie thee, nay I will first marry, mark me I
will first marry, observe me, I will rather marie a woman that with thirst
drinks the blood of man: nay, heed me a woman that will thrust in crowds, a lady
that being with child ventures the hope of her womb, nay gives two crowns for
a room to behold a goodly man three parts a live quartered, his privities
hacled off, his belly launcht up. Nay I'll rather marry a woman to whom this
smoking, hideous, bloudful, horrid, tho most just spectacles, are very lust,
rather, then reaccept thee, was I not a handsome fellow from my foot to my
feather, had I not wit, nay, which is more, was I not a Don. and did thou
Acteon me, did I not make thee a Lady.


And did she not make you a more worshipful thing, a Cuckold.


I married thee in hope of children.


And has not she showed herself fruitful that was got with child without
help of her husband?


Ha thou vngratful, immodest, unwise, one that gods my witness I ha loved, but
go thy ways twist with whom thou wilt, for my part tha'st spun a fair
thread, whole kiss the now whole court the now, whole ha the now?


Pity the frailty of my sex sweet Lord.


No, pity is a fool, and I will not wear her coxcomb, I have vowed to loath
thee, the Irish man shall hate aquauity, the welsh man cheese, the dutch man
shall loath salt butter before I reloue thee, does the babe pule? thou should
ha cried before, it is to late now, no, the trees in autumn shall sooner call
back the spring with sheding of their leeues; then thou reverse my just
irrevocable hatred with thy tears, away go vaunt.


Nay but most of this is your fault that for many years only upon mere
mistrust severed your body from your Lady and in that time gave opportunity
turn'de a jealous ass hired and some to try and tempt your Ladies honour
whilst she with all possible industry of apparent merit diverting your
unfortunate suspicion.


I know it I confess, all this I did and I do glory in it, why? cannot a young
Lady for many months keep honest? no, I misthought it, my wife had wit,
beauty, health, good birth, fair clothes and a passing body, a Lady of rare
discourse, quick eye, sweet language, alluring behaviour, and exquisite
entertainment. I misthought it, I feared, I doubted, and at the last I found it
out, I praise my wit I knew I was a Cuckold.


An excellent wit.


True Fawn, you shall read of some Lords that have had such a wit I can tell
you, I found it out, that I was a Cuckold


Which now you have found you will not be such an ass as Caesar, great Pompey,
Lucullus, Anthony, or Cato diverse other Romans, cuckolds, who all knew it,
yet were ne'er diuorc'd upon it, or like that smith-God Vulcan who having take
his wifetaking, yet was presently appeased, and entreated to make an Armour for
a bastard of hers Eneas.


No the Romans were asses* thought that a woman might mix her thigh with a
strnager wantonly, yet still love her husband band matrimonially.


As indeed they say many married men, lye sometime with strange women, whom,
but for the instant use, they abhor.


And as for Vulcan t'was humanity more then humane; such excess of goodness
for my part only belong to the Gods.


Ass for you.


As for me my Fawn I am a bachelor now.


But you are a Cuckold still, and one that knows himself to be a cuckold.


Right, that's it and I knew it not, 'twere nothing and if I had not pursued it
too, it had lain in oblivion, and shadowed in doubt, but now I ha blaz'de it.


The world shall know what you are.


True, i'll pockit up no horns, but my revenge shall speak in thunder.


Indeed I must confess I know twenty are Cuckolds honestly decently enough a
worthy gallant spirit (whose virtue suppresses his mishap) is lameted but not
disesteemed by it: Yet the world shall know --


I am none of those silen Coxcombs, it shall out.


And although it be no great part of injustice, for him to be struck with the
scabbard that haz struck with the blade (for there is few of us but hath made
some one cuckold or other)


True I ha don't my self.


Yet. --


Yet I hope a man of wit may prevent his own mishap or if he can prevent it.
--


Yet --


Yet make it known yet, and so known that the world may tremble with only
thinking of it. Well Fawn whom shall I marie now? O heaven! that God made
for a man no other means of procreation and maintaining the world peopled but
by weome, O that we could increase like roses by being slipped one fro another or
like flies procreat with blowing, or any other way then by a woman, by women who
have no reason in their love, or mercy in their hate, no rule in their pity, no
pity in their revenge, no judgement to speak, yet no patiece to hold their
tongues; mas opposite, the more held down; they swell, above the nought but will,
beneath the nought but hell


Or that since heaven hath given us no other means to allay our furious
appetite, no other way of increasing our progeny, since we must entreat and
beg for asswagement of our passions, and entertainment of our affections, why
did not heaven make us a nobler creature then weome to show unto, some
admirable, deity of an vncorruptible beauty that be worth our knees, the
expense of our heat, and the crinkling of our.


But that we must court, sonnet, flatter, bribe, kneel, sue to so feeble and
imperfect, in constant, idle, vain, hollow, bubble, as woman is. O my face.


O my Lord look who here comes.


Death a man, is she delivered?


Delivered, yes. O my Don. delivered, yes Dona Zoya the grace of society, the
musik of sweetly agreeing perfection, more clearly chaste then ice or frozen
rain, that glory of her sex, that wonder of wit, that beauty more freshy
then any cool and trembling wind, that now only wish of a man is delivered, is
delivered.


how

Fro Don. Zuc. that dry skalines, that sarpego, that barren drouth and shame of
all humanity.


What fellows that.


your sometime husband.


alas poor creature.


The Princes prays your company. All but Hercules,

I wait upon her pleasure. Zuccone* Herod, and Nim. depart.


Gentlemen why hazard you your reputation in shameful company with such a
branded creature,


Miserable man whose fortune were beyond tears to be pitied, but that thou
art the ridiculous author of thine own laughed at mischief.


Without paraphrase your meaning.


Why thou woman's fool?


Good gentlemen let one die but once.


Was not thou most curstfully mad to sever thy self from such an vnequalde
rarity.


Is she not a strumpet? Is she not with Child?


yes with feathers.


why weakness of reason, could not perceive all was faind to be rid of thee?


Of me.


she with child, vntrodde snow is not so spotless

Chaste as the first voice of a new borne infant,

know she grew loathing of thy jealousy,

thy most pernicious curiosity,

whose suspicions made her unimitable graces motive of thy base ielousy.


why beast of man?


wretched above expression that snoredst over a beauty which thousands
desired, neglecst her bed, for whose enjoying a very saint would have sued.


defamed her.


suggested privily against her.


gave foul language publicly of her.


and now lastly don that for her which she only praide for, and wished as
wholesome air for, namely to be from such an unworthy.


senseless.


inuirious.


malicious.


suspicious.


mishapped.


ill languidg'd*

unworthy

ridiculous.


jealous.


arch cox-combe as thou art.


O I am sick, my blood ha's the cramp, my stomach or'eturnes; O I am very
sick.


why my sweet Don. you are no cuckold.


that's the grief on it


that's, the grief ont that I ha wronged so sweet (and now in my knowledge) so
delicate a creature, O me thinks I embrace her yet.


alas my Lord you have done her no wrong, no wrong in the world, you have done
her a pleasure, a great pleasure, a thousand gentlemen, nay dukes will be
proud to accept your leavings, your leavings, now is she courted, this heir
sends her jewels, that lord proffers her ioynters, the other knight proclaims
challenges, to maintain her, the only not beautiful, but very beauty of
women.


but I shall never embrace her more.


nay that's true, that's most true (I would not afflict you, only think how
vnrelentles you were to her but supposed fault.


O tis true, too true.


think how you scorned her tears,


most right,

Tears that were only shed I would not vex you in very grief to see you
covet your own shame.


Too true, too true.


For indeed she is the sweetest modest soul, the fullest of pity.


O yes, O yes.


The softness and very courrtesie of her sex as one that never loved any --


But me.


So much that he might hope to dishonour her, nor any so little that he might
fear she disdained him. O the graces made her a soul as soft as spotless down
upon the swans fair breast, that drew bright Cythereas chariot, yet think (I
would not vex you) yet think how cruel you were to her.


As a Tiger, as a very Tiger.


And never hope to be reconcild, never dream to be reconcild, never

Never, alas good Fawn what would wish me to do now?


Faith go hang your self my Don. that's best sure.


Nay that's too good, for I'll do worse then that, I'll marie again; where can
pick out a morsel for me Fawn?


There is a modest matron like creature --

What years Fawn.


Some four score wanting one.


A good sober age, is she wealthy?


Very wealthy.


Excellent.


She has three hairs on her scalp and four teeth in her head, a brow
wrinkled and puckred like old parchment half burnt, she haz had eyes, no
woman's jaw-bones are more apparent, her sometimes envious lips, now shrink in,
and give her nose and her chin leave to kiss each other very moistlye; as for
her reverend mouth it seldom opens, but the very breath that flies out of it,
infects the fowls of the air, and makes them drop down dead, her breasts hang
like cobwebs, her flesh will never make you cuckold, her bones may.


But is she wealthy

Very wealthy,

And will she ha me art sure?

No sure, she will not have you, why do you think that a waiting woman of
three bastards, a strumpet nine times carted or a hag whose eyes shoot poison,
that has been an old witch, and is now turning into a gib-cat will ha you?
mary Don. Zucone the contempt of women, and the shame of men, that has
afflicted, contemnd, so choice a perfection as Dona Zoyas.


Alas Fawn I confess, what would ha me do?


Hang your self you shall not, marry you cannot, i'll tell ye what you shall
do, there is a ship of fools setting forth, if you make good means entreat
hard, you may obtain a passageman, be masters mate I warrant you.


Fawn, thou art a scurvy bitter knave, and dost flout Dons to their faces,
twas thou flatteredst me to this, and now thou laugh at me, dost? though
indeed I had a certain procliuity, but thou made me resolute, dost grin
and gearne? O you comforters of life, helps in sickness, joys in death,
preservers of us, in our children, after death, women, have mercy on me.


O my Don, that God made no other means of procreation but by these women, I
speak it not to vex you.


O Fawn, thou hast no mercy in thee, dost thou leer on me? well, i'll creep
upon my knees to my wife, dost laugh at me? dost gearne at me? dost smile?
dost leer on me, dost thou? O I am an Ass, true, I am a Coxcomb, well, I am
mad, good: A mischief on your cogging tongue, your soothing throat, your oily
iavves, your supple hams, your dissembling smiles, and O the grand Devil on
you all: when mischief favours our fortunes, and we are miserably, tho
justly wretched

More pity, comfort, and more help we have
In foes professed, then in a flattering knave.

Thus few strike sail until they run on shelf,
The eye sees all things but his proper self,
In all things curiosity hath been
Vicious at least, but herein most pernicious,
What madness is't to search and find a wound,
For which there is no cure? and which vnfound
Near rankles, whose finding only vvoundes
But he that upon vain surmise forsakes
His bed thus long, only to search his shame,
Gives to his wife youth, opportunity,
Keeps her in idlefull delitiousnesse,
Heates and inflames imagination,
Provokes her to revenge with churlish vvronges,
What should he hope but this? why should it lie in women,
Or even in chastity it self (since chastiti's a female)
T'auoide desires so ripened, such svvetes so canded;
But she that hath out-borne such mass of wrongs,
Out-dur'de all persecutions, all contempts,
Suspects, disgrace, all wants, and all the mischeifs
The baseness of a cankerd churl could cast upon her,
With constant virtue, best fainde chastity,
And in the end turns all his jealousies,
To his own scorn, that Lady I emplore,
It may be lawful not to praise, but even adore.

Are our sports ready, is the Prince at hand?


The Prince is now arrived at the Court gate.


What means our daughters breathless hast?


O my princely father now or never let your princely wisdom appear.


Fear not our daughter, if it rest within human reason I warrant thee, no I
warrant thee, Granuffo if it rest in mans capacity, speak dear daughter.


My Lord the Prince.


The Prince, what of him dear daughter?


O Lord what wisdom our good parents need, to shield their chickens from
deceipts, wiles of kite like youth.


Her very phrase displays whose child she is.


Alas had not your grace been provident, a very Nestor in advise and
knowledge, ha, where had you poor Dulcimel been now, what veins had not I
been drawn into?


Fore God, she speaks very passionately. Alas daughter, heave gives every man
his talent, indeed virtue wisdom are not fortunes gifts, therefore those that
fortune cannot make virtuous, she commonly makes rich, for our own part we
acknowledge heavens goodness, and if it were possible, to be as wise again as
we are, we would near impute it to our selves: for as we be flesh and
blood, alas we are fools, but as we are Princes, Scholars, and have read
Cicero de Oratore, I must confess there is another matter int, what of the
Prince dear daughter?


Father do you see that tree, that leanes just on my chamber window?


What of that tree?


O sir, but note the policy of youth, mark but the stratagems of working
love, The prince salutes me, and thus greetes my ear.


Speak softly, he is entered.


Although he knew, I yet stood wavering, what to elect, because though I
affected, yet destitute of means to enjoy each other, impossibility of
having, might kill our hope and with our hope desires to enjoy. Therefore to
avoid all faint excuses, and vain fears, thus he devised: to Dulcimels
chamber window. A well grown plain tree spreads his happy arms, by that in
depth of night one may ascend, (despite all fathers jealousies and fears)
into her bed.


Speak low, the Prince both marks and listens.


You shall provide a Priest (quoth he) in truth I promised so you well may tell
him, for I temporised and only held him off.


Politically, our daughter to a hair.


With full intention to disclose it all, to your preventing wisdom.


I let me alone for that: but when intends he this invasion? when will this
Squirrile clime?


O Sir in that is al, when but this night?


This night?


This very night when the court revels had over waked your spirits, and made
them full of sleep, then --


Then, verbum sat sapienti: go take your chamber, down upon your knees, thank
god your father is no foolish sotte but one that can foresee and see.


What means the Duke?


And if to morrow past you rest in Vrbin, the privilege of an ambassador is
taken from you.


Good your grace some reason?


What, twice admonished twice again offeding?
And now grown blushles; you promised to get into
Her chamber, she to get apriest,
Indeed she wished me tell you she cofest it,
And there despite all fathers Jealous fears,
To consummate full joys: know Sir our daughter
Is our Daughter, and has wit at will
To gull a thousand easy things like you:
But sir depart, the parliament prepared
Shall on without you, all the Court this night
Shall triumph, that our daughter has escaped,
Her honours blowing up; your end you see,
We speak but short but full, Socratice.

What should I think, what hope, what but imagine of these Enigmas?


Sure sir the Lady loves you
With violent passion, and this night prepares
A Priest with nuptial rights to entertain you
In her most private chamber.

This I know,
With too much torture, since means are all unknown,
To come unto these ends, wheres this her chamber?
Then what means shall without suspicion
Convey me to her chamber? O these doubts,
End in despair --

Sir sir this plain tree was not planted here
To get into my daughters chamber: and so she praide me tell you
What though the maine arms spread into her window?
And easy labour climes it: Sir know
She has a voice to speak, and bid you welcome,
With so full breast that both your ears shall hear ant,
And so she praide me tell you: ha we no brain;
Youth thinks that age, Age knows that youth is vain.

Why now I have it Fawn, the way, the means, meaning, good Duke, and 'twere
not for pity, I could laugh at thee, Dulcimel I am thine most miraculously, I
will now begin to sigh, read Poets, look pale, go neatly, and be most
apparently in love, as for --


As for you old father.


Alas he and all know, this an old saw hath bin,
Faiths-breach for love, and kingdoms is no sin.

Where are we now, Cyllenian Mercurie?
And thou quick issue of Ioues broken pate
Aide and direct us: you better stars to knowledge
Sweet constellations that affect pure oil,
And holy vigill of the pale cheeckt Muses,
Give your best influence, that with able spright,
We may correct and please, giving full light,
To every angle of this various sense,
Works of strong birth, end better then commence.

Thou mother of chaste dew, nights modest lamp,
Thou by whose saint shine, the blushing lovers,
Join glowing cheeks, and mix their trembling lips.
In vows well kiste, rise all as full of splendour,
As my breast is of ioy- You Genitall,
You fruitful well mixed heates: O bless the sheets,
Of yonder chamber, that Ferraraes Dukedom,
The race of princely issue be not cursde,
And ended in abhorred barrennes.
At length kill all my fears, nor let it rest,
Once more my tremblinges, that my too cold son,
(That ever scorner of humainer loves)
Will still contemn the sweets of marriadge,
Still kill our hope of name in his dull coldness,
Let it be lawful to make use ye powers,
Of human weakness, that pursues still,
What is inhibited, and most affects,
What is most difficult to be obtained:
So we may learn, that nicer loue's a shade,
It follows fled, pursued, flies as afraid,
And in the end close all the various errors
Of passages, most truly comical:
In moral learning with like confidence,
Of him that vowed good fortune of the scene,
Shall neither make him fat, or bad make lean.

Ha, ha, ha.


Why dost laugh fool, here's no body with thee.


Why, therefore do I laugh, because there's no body with me, would I were a
fool alone I faith, I am come to atted let me go, I am sent to the Princes,
to come attend her father to the end of Cupids Parliament.


Why, ha they sat already upon any statutes?


Sat I, all's agreed in the nether house:


Why, are they divided?


O Im Cupids Parliament, all the young gallants are a the nether house, and
all the old signiors that can but only kiss are of the upper house: is the
Princes above?


No sure, I think the Princes is beneath, man, ha they supped fool?


O yes, the confusion of tongues, at the large Table is broke up, for see the
presence filles; A fool, a fool, a fool my Coxcomb for a fool.


Stop Ass, whats matter idiot?


O gallants, my fools that were appointed to weight on Don Cupid. have launcht
out their ship to purge their stomachs on the water, and before Iupiter I
fear, they will prove defective in their attendance.


Pish, fool, they'll float in with the next tide.


I, but whens, that? lets see mine Almanac or prognostication.


What, is this for this year?


In true wisdom sir it is, Let me see the moon, fore pity, tis in the
wayne, what grief is this? that so great a planet should ever decline or loose
splendore -- full sea at-


Wheres the sign now fool?


In Capricorne, Sir Amoroso.


What strange thing dos this Almanac speak of fool?


Is this your lady Sir Amorous?


It is, kiss her fool.


You may kiss her now, she is married.


So he might ha done before,

In sober modesty Sir, I do not use to do it behind.


Good fool be acquainted with this lady to, she's of a very honest nature I
assure thee.


I easily believe you sir, for she hath a very vile face, I assure you.


But what strange things dos thy Almanac speak of good fool?


That this year no child shall be begotten, but shall have a true Father.


That's good news in faith, I am glad I got my wife with child this year,


Why Sir Amaros this may be, and yet you not the true father, may it not Herod?


But what more says it good Fawn?


Faith Lady very strange things, it says, that some Ladies of your hair,
shall have feeble hams, short memories and very weak eye sight, so that they
shall mistake their own Page, or even brother in law, sometimes for their
husbands.


Is that all Fawn?


No sir Amaros, here's likewise prophesied a great skarsitie of Gentry to
ensue, and that some Bores shall be dubbed Sir Amoroso. A great scarsitie of
Lawyers is likewise this year to ensue, so that some one of them shall be
entreated to take fees a both sides.


Most dear, dear Lady, wife, Lady, wife, O do not but look on me, and ha
some mercy.


I will ha no mercy, I will not relent.


Sweet Lady.


The order shall stand, I am separated, and I will be separated.


Dear, my love, wife.


Hence fellow, I am none of thy wife, no I will be tyrannous and a most deep
revenger, the order shall stand, I will marry a fellow that keeps a fox in his
bosom, a goat under his arm holes, and a polecat in his mouth, rather then
reaccept thee.


Alas, by the Lord Lady what should I say? as heaven shall bless me -- what
should I say?


Kneel and cry man.


Was I not handsome, generous, honest enough from my foot to my feather, for
such a fellow as thou art?


Alas I confess I confess.


But go thy ways wive with whom thou wilt for my part, thou hast spun a fair
thread, whole kiss thee now? whole court thee now? whole ha thee now?


Yet be a woman -- and for Gods sake help me.


And do not stand too stiffly.


And do not stand too stiffly, do you make an Ass of me? but let these
raskals laugh at me, Alas what could I do withal? t'was my destiny that I
should abuse you.


So it is your destiny that I should thus revenge your abuse: No the Irishman
shall hate Aquauitae, the Welshman cheese and the Dutchman salt butter before
i'll love or receive thee, dos he cry? dos the babe pule? it is to late now,
thou shouldest ha cried before, it is to late now, go bury thy head in silence,
and let oblivion be thy utmost hope.


Gallats to dancing, loud music, the dukes upon entrace

Are the sports ready?


Ready.


Tis enough, of whose invention is this Parliament?


Ours.


It is enough, this night we will exult, O let this night
Be ever memorizd with prouder triumphs,
Let it be writ in lasting Character,
That this night our great wisdom did discover
So close a practise, that this night I say,
Our policy found out, nay dashed the drifts
Of the young Prince, and put him to his shifts,
Nay past his shifts, (fore Jove we could make a good Poet)
Delight us, on, we dain our princely care
We are well plesd to grace you, then scorn fear.
Stand it is wisdom to acknowledge ignorance,
Of what we know not, we would not now prove foolish.
Expound the meaning of your show.

Triumphant Cupid that sleeps on the soft cheek
Of rarest beauty, whose thron's in Ladies eyes,
Whose force writhed lightning from Ioues shaking hand,
Forced strong Alcides to resign his club.
Plucked Neptunes trident from his mighty arm,
Vnhelmed Mars, he (with those trophes borne,
Led in by Sloth, Pride, Plenty, Drunkenness.
Followde by Folly, War, Laughter, Beggary,
Takes his fair throne, sit pleased for now we move,
And speak not for our glory, but for love.

A pretty figure, what, begins this sessio with ceremony?


With a full health to our great Mistress Venus,
Let every state of Cupids parliament,
Begin the session, quod bonum faustumque sit precor.

Giu't us, we'll pledge, nor shall a man that lives,
In charity refuse it, I will not be so old,
As not be graced to honour Cupid, giu't us full,
When we were young, we could ha trold it off.
Drunk down a Dutchman.

It is lamentable, pity your grace has forgot it: Drunkenness, O it is a most
fluent and swelling virtue, sure the most just of all virtues, it is justice it
self, for if it chance to oppress and take too much, it presently restores it
again. It makes the king and the peasant equal, for if they are both drunk
alike, they are both beasts alike: As for that most precious light of heaven
Truth, if time be the father of her, I am sure drunkenness is oftentimes the
mother of her, and brings her forth, Drunkenness brings all out, for it
brings all the drink out of the pot, all the wit out of the pate, and all
the money out of the purse.


My Lord Granuffo, this Fawn is an excellent fellow.


Silence.


I warrant you for my Lord here.


Since multitude of laws are signs either of much tyranny in the prince, or
much rebellious disobedience in the subject, we rather think it fit to study,
how to have our old laws thoroughly executed, then to have new statutes
comborously invented.


Before Jove he speaks very well.


O sir, ove is very eloquent, makes all men good Orators, himself then must
needs be eloquent.


Let it therefore be the maine of our assembly, to survey our old laws, and
punish their transgressions, for that continually the complaints of lovers ascend
up to our deity, that love is abused, and basely bought and sold, beauty
corrupted, affection fainde, and pleasure her self sophisticated. That young
Gallants are proud in appetite, and weak in performance, that young Ladies are
phantastically inconstat, old Ladies impudently unsatiate: wives complain of
unmarried women, that they steal the dews belonging to their sheets: and
maids exclaim upon wives, that they unjustly engross all into their own
hands, as not content with their own husbands, but also purloining that
which should be their comfort: Let us therefore be severe in our justice: And
if any of what degree soever have approuedly offended, let him be instantly
vnpartially arrested and punished, read our statutes.


A statute made in the five thousand, four hundred, threescore and three year
of the easeful reign of the mighty potent Don Cupid Emperor of sighs, and
protestations, great king of kisses: Archduke of dalliance, and sole lou'de of
him, for the maintaining and relieving of his old soldiers, maimed or
dismembered in love.


Those that are lightly hurt, shame to complain; those that are deeply
struck, are past recovery.


On to the next.


An Act against the plurality of Mistresses.


Read.


Whereas some over amorous and unconscionable covetous young gallants without
all grace of Venus, or the fear of Cupid in their minds, have at one time
engrossed the care or cures of diverse mistresses, with the charge of Ladies,
into their own tenure or occupation, whereby their mistresses must of
necessity be very ill and vnsufficiently served, and likewise many able
portly Gallants, live unfurnished of competent entertainment to the merit of
their bodies: and whereas likewise some other greedy strangers have taken in the
purlues, outset land, and the ancient commons of our sovereign Liege Don
Cupid, taking in his very high ways, and enclosing the, and annexing them to
their own Lordships, to the much empouerishing and putting of diverse of Cupids
true harts and loyal subjects, to base and abominable shifts: Be it
therefore enacted by the sovereign authority and erected ensign of Don Cupid,
with the assent of some of the Lords, most of the Ladies, and all the Commons,
that what person or persons soever, shall in the trade of honour, presume to
wear at one time two Ladies favours, or at one time shall earnestly court two
women in the way of marriage, or if any under the degree of a Duke, shall keep
above twenty women of pleasure, a Dukes brother fifteen, a Lord ten, a knight
or a Pentioner, or both four, a gentleman two. shall ipso facto, be arrested
by follies mace, and instantly committed to the ship of fools, without either
bail or maine-prize, Millessimo centesimo, quingintesimo, quadragesimo nono.
Cupidinis semper vnius. Nymphadoro to the bar.


Shame afolly, will Fawn now turn an informer? dos he laugh at me?


Domina Garbetza, did he not ever protest, you were his most only elected
Mistres.


He did.


Domina Donella, did he not ever protest you were his most only elected
Mistress?


He did.


Domina Poueia, did he not ever protest, that you were his most only elected
Mistress.


He did.


Mercy.


Our mercy is nothing, unless some Lady will beg thee.


Out upon him, dissembling perfidious liar.


Indeed tis no reason Ladies should beg liers.


Thus he that loves many if once known, is justly plagued to be belou'de of
none.


An act against counterfeiting of Cupids royal coin, abusing his subjects
with false money. To the bar Sir Amaros. In most lamentable form complains
to your blind celsitude, your distressed Orators, the women of the world, that
in respect that many spend thriftes, who having exhausted and wasted their
substance, and in stranger parts have with empty shows, treasonably
purchased Ladies affections, without being of ability to pay them for it with
currat money, and therefore have deceitfully sought to satisfy the with
counterfeit mettell, to the great displeasure, and no small loss of your
humblest subjects. May it therefore with your pitiful assent been acted,
that what Lord, Knight, or gentleman soever, knowing himself insufficient,
bankrupt, exhausted and wasted, shall traitorously dare to entertain any lady,
as wife, or mistress, ipso facto to be severed from all commercement with
women, his wife or mistress in that state offeding, to be forgiven with a
pardon of course, and himself instantly to be pressed to sail in the ship of
fools, without either bail or main-prise.


Sir Amorous is arrested.


Judgment of the court.


I take my oath upon thy brothers body, tis none of thine.


By the hart of dissemblance, this Fawn has wrought with us as strange Taylors
work in corporate cities, where they are not free all inward, inward, he lurkt
in the bosom of us, yet we know not his profession: Sir let me have counsel?


It is in great Cupids case, you may have no counsel.


death a justice, are we in Normandy, what is my Ladies doom then?


Acquitted by the express parol of the statute, hence and in thy ignorance be
quietly happy, away with him. on.


An Act against forgers of love letters, false braggarts of ladies favours, and
vain boasters of counterfeit tokens.


Tis I, tis I, I confess guilty, guilty.


I will be most human and right courteously languaged in thy correctio, and
only say, thy vice fro apparat here, has made thee an apparent beggar, and now
of a false knave, hath made thee a true fool: Folly to the ship with him,
and twice a day let him be duckt at the mayne-yeard.


Proceed.


An Act against slanderers of Cupids liege ladies names, and lewd defamers of
their honours.


Tis I, tis I, I weep and cry out, I have been a most cotumelious offender,
my only cry is misercre.


If your relenting Lady will have pity on you, the fault against our Deity be
pardoned.


Madam if ever I have found favour in your eyes, if ever you have thought me a
reasonable handsome fellow, as I am sure before I had a beard, you might. O be
merciful!


Well, upon your apparent repentance, that all modest spectators may witness, I
have for a short time only thus faynedly hated you, that you might ever after
truly love me, upon these cautions I reaccept you: first you shall vow.


I do vow, as heaven bless me, I will do.


What?


What ere it be, say on I beseech you.


You shall vow.


Yes.


That you shall never.


Never.


Fain love to my waiting woman or chamber maid.


No

Never promise them such a farm to their mariadge.


No.


If sheele discover but whom I affect.


Never.


Or if they know none that theil but take a false oath; I do, only to be rid
of me.


I swear I will not, I will not only not counterfetlie love your women, but I
will truly hate them an't be possible, so far from maintaining them that I
will beggar them, I will never pick their trunks for letters, search their
pockets, ruffle their bosoms, or tear their foul smocks, never, never.


That if I chance to have a humour to be in a mask, you shall not grow Jealous.


Never.


Or grudge at the expense.


Never, I will eat mine own arms first.


That you shall not search, if my chamber door hinges be oyld to avoid
creaking.


As I am a sensible creature --


Nor ever suspect the reason why my bedde-chamber floor is double matted.


Not as I have blood in me.


You shall vow to wear clean linen, and feed wholsomelie.


I and highly, I will take no more Tobacco, or come to your sheets drunk, or
get wenches, I will ever feed on fried frogs, broild snails, and boiled
Lamstones, I will adore thee more then a mortal, observe and serve you as more
then a Mistress, do all duties of a husband, all offices of a man, all
services of thy creature, and ever live in thy pleasure, or die in thy service.


Then here my quarrel ends, thus cease all strife.


Until they loose, men know not whats a wife,
We slight and dully vievv the lamp of heaven,
Because we daily feet, which but bereaved,
And held one little vveeke from darkened eyes,
With greedy wonder, we should all admire,
Opinion of command, puts out loves fire.

An Act against mummers, false seemers, that abuse ladies with counterfeit
faces, courting only by signs; seeming wise only by silence.


The penalty.


To be urged to speak, the if inward ability answer not outward seeming, to be
committed instantly to the ship of fools, during great Cupids pleasure. My
Lord Granuffo to the bar, speak, speak, is not this law just?


Just sure, for in good truth, or in good sooth, when wise men speak, they
still must open their mouth.


The brazen head haz spoken.


Thou art arrested.


Me?


And judged away.


Thus silence, and grave looks with hums and hawes,
Makes many worshipped, when if tried the'are daws:
That's the morality or lenuoy of it lenuoy of it, on.

An act against privy conspiracies, by which if any with ambitious wisdom,
shall hope and strive to outstrip love to cross his words, and make
frustrate his sweet pleasures, if such a presumptuous wisdom fall to
nothing, die in laughter, the wizard so transgressing is ipso facto adjudged to
offend in most deep treason, to forfeit all his wit at the will of the Lord,
and be instantly committed to the ship of fools for ever.


I marry sir, O might Edipus riddle me out such a fellow, of all creatures
breathing I do hate those things that struggle to seem wise, and yet are
indeed very fools, I remember when I was a young man in my fathers days,
there were four gallant spirits for resolution, as proper for body, as witty
in discourse as any were in Europe, nay Europe had not such, I was one of them;
we four did all love one lady, a modest chaste virgin she was, we all
inioyde her, I well remember, and so inioyde her, that despite the strictest
guard was set upon her, we had her at our pleasure, I speak it for her honour
and my credit: where shall you find such witty fellows now a days: Alas how
easy it is in these weaker times to cross love tricks, ha ha ha alas, alas,
I smile to think I must confess with some glory to mine own wisdom, to think
how I found out and crossed, and curbed, and ierkt, and firkte, and in the end
made desperate Tiberios hope, Alas good silly youth, that dares to cope with
age, and such a beard: I speak it without glory.


But what yet might your well known wisdom think
If such a one, as being most severe,
A most protested opposite to the match
Of two young lovers, who having bard them speech,
Alt internewes, all messages, all means,
To plot their wished ends, even he himself,
Was by their cunning made the go between.
The only messenger, the token carrier,
Told them the times when they might fitly meet,
Nay, showed the way to one another bed.

May one have the sight of such a fellow for nothing;
Doth their breath such an egregious Ass,
Is there such a foolish animal in rerum natura?
How is it possible such a simplicity can exist? let us not lose our laughing
at him for gods sake, let follies sceptre light upon him, and to the ship of
fools with him instantly.


Of all these follies I arest your grace.


Me? ha, me? me verlet? me fool? ha, toot'h Jail with him: what varlet call
me Ass, me?


What grave Vrbins Duke, dares Follies sceptre touch his prudent shoulders, is
he a Coxcomb, no, My Lord is wise, for we all know that Vrbines Duke has
eyes.


God a mercy Fawn, hold varlet, hold thee good Fawn railing reprobate?


Indeed I must confess, your grace did tell,
And first did intimate your daughters love,
To otherwise most cold Tiberio,
After conveyed her private favour to him,
A curious scarf, wherein her needle wrought,
Her private love to him.

What I do this? ha.


And last by her persuasion shewde the youth,
The very way and best elected time,
To come unto her chamber.

Thus did I sir?


Thus did you sir, but I must confess,
You meant not to do this, but were ranckly gulde,
Made a plain natural. This sure sir you did.
And in assurance Prince Tiberio,
Renowned, witted, Dulcimel appear,
The acts of constant honour cannot fear.

Royally wise, and wisely royal father.


That's sententious now, a figure called in art Ironia.


I humbly thank your worthy piety, that through your only means I have
obtained so fit, loving desired a husband.


Death, a discretion, if I should prove a fool now am not I an Ass, think
you, ha? I will have them both bound together, and sent to the Duke of Ferrara
presently.


I am sure good Father we are both bound together as fast as the Priest can
make us already, I thank you for it kind father, I thank you only for it.


And as for sending them to the Duke of Ferrara, See my good Lord, Ferraraes
ore ioid prince, meets the in fullest wish.


By the Lord I am ashamed of my self, that's the plain troth, but I know now
wherefore this Parliament was: what a slumber have I been in?


Never grieve or wonder, all things sweetly fit.


There is no folly to protested wit.


What still in wondering, ignorance doth rest,
In private conference, your dear loved breast,
Shall fully take. But now we change our face.

And thus in bold, yet modest phrase we end,
He whose Thalia with swiftest hand hath pend,
This lighter subject, and hath boldly torn,
Fresh baize from Daphnes arm, doth only scorn,
Malicious censures of some envious few,
Who think they loose if others have their due.
But let such Addars hiss, know all the sting,
All the vain some of all those snakes that rings
Mineruas glassefull shield can never taint,
Poison or pierce, firm art disdains to faint,
But yet of you that with impartial faces,
With no prepared malice, but with graces,
Of sober knowledge, have suruaide the frame,
Of his slight scene, if you shall judge his flame,
Distemperately, weak, as faulty much,
In stile, in plot, in spirit, lo if such
He deigns in self accusing phrase to crave,
For praise but pardon which he hopes to have.
Since he protests he ever hath aspirde,
To be beloude, rather then admired.

