THE wreath of pleasure, and delicious sweets,
Begirt the gentle front of this fair troop:
Select, and most respected Auditors,
For wits sake do not dream of miracles.
Alas, we shall but falter, if you lay
The least sad weight of an unused hope,
Upon our weakness: only we give up
The woorthlesse present of flight idleness,
To your authentic censure; Othat our Muse
Had those abstruse and synowy faculties,
That with a strain of fresh invention
She might press out the rarity of Art;
The pur'st elixed joyce of rich conceit,
In your attentive ears; that with the lip
Of gracious elocution, we might drink
A sound carouse unto your health of wit.
But O, the heathy dryness of her brain,
Foil to your fertile spirits, is ashamed
To breath her blushing numbers to such ears:
Yet (most ingenious) deign to veil our wants;
With sleek acceptance, polish these rude Sceanes:
And if our slightness your large hope beguiles,
Check not with bended brow, but dimpled smiles.

HEART, wilt not break! thou abhorred life
Wilt thou still breath in my enraged blood?
Veins, synewes, arteries, why crack ye not?
Burst and diuul'st, with anguish of my grief.
Can man by no means creep out of himself,
And leave the slough of viperous grief behind?
Antonio, hast thou seen a fight at sea,
As horrid as the hideous day of doom;
Betwixt thy father, duke of Genoa,
And proud Piero, the Venetian Prince?
In which the sea hath swollen with Genoas blood,
And made spring tides with the warm reeking gore,
That gushed from out our Galleys scupper holes;
In which, thy father, poor Andrugio,
Lies sunk, or leapt into the arms of chance,
Choked with the laboring Oceans brackish some;
Who even, despite Pieros can cred hate,
Would with an armed hand have seized thy love,
And linked thee to the beauteous Mellida.
Have I outliu'd the death of all these hopes?
Have I felt anguish pourd into my heart,
Burning like Balsamum in tender wounds;
And yet dost live! could not the fretting sea
Have rolled me up in wrinkles of his brow?
Is death grown coy? or grim confusion nice?
That it will not accompany a wretch,
But I must needs be cast on Venice shore?
And try new fortunes with this strange disguise?
To purchase my adored Mellida.
Hark how Piero's triumphs beat the air,
O rugged mischief how thou grat'st my heart!
Take spirit, blood, disguise, be confident:
Make a firm stand, here rests the hope of all,
Lower then hell, there is no depth to fall.

Victorious Fortune, with triumphant hand,
Hurleth my glory about this ball of earth,
Whilst the Venetian Duke is heaved up
On wings of fair success, to ouer-looke
The low cast ruins of his enemies,
To see my self adored, and Genoa quake,
My fate is firmer then mischance can shake.

Stand, the ground trembles.

Hah? an earthquake?

Oh, I smell a sound.

Piero stay, for I descry a fume,
Creeping from out the bosom of the deep,
The breath of darkness, fatal when 'tis whist
In greatness stomach: this same smoke, called pride,
Take heed she'll lift thee to improvidence,
And break thy neck from steep security,
She'll make thee grudge to let Iehoua share
In thy successful battles: O, she's ominous,
Entices princes to devour heaven,
Swallow omnipotence, out-stare dread fate,
Subdue Eternity in giant thought,
Heaves up their hurt with swelling, puffed conceit,
Till their souls burst with venomed Arrogance:
Beware Piero, Rome it self hath tried,
Confusions train blows up this Babell pride.

Pish, Dimitto superos, summa votorum attigi.
Alberto, hast thou yielded up our fixed decree
Unto the Genoan Ambassador?
Are they content if that their duke return,
To send his, and his son Antonios head,
As pledges steeped in blood, to gain their peace?

With most obsequious, sleek-brow'd intertain,
They all embrace it as most gracious.

Are Proclamations sent through Italy,
That whosoever brings Andrugios head,
Oryoung Anthonios, shall be guerdoned
With twenty thousand double Pistolets,
And be indeened to Pieros love?

They are sent every way: sound policy.
Sweet Lord.

Confusion to these limber Sycophants.
No sooner mischief's borne in regenty,
But flattery christens it with policy.
Why then: O me Celitum excelsissimum!
The intestine malice, and inveterate hate
I always bore to that Andrugio,
Glories in triumph ore his misery:
Nor shall that carpet-boy Antonio
Match with my daughter, sweet cheekt Mellida.
No, the public power makes my faction strong.

Ill, when public power stregthneth private wrong.

Tis horse-like, not for man, to know his force.

Tis god-like, for a man to feel remorse.

Pish, I prosecute my families revenge,
Which I'll pursue with such a burning chase
Till I have dri'd up all Andrugios blood;
Weak rage, that with slight pity is withstood.
What means that fresh triumphal flourish sound?

The prince of Millane, and young Florence heir Approach to gratulate your
victory.

VVeele girt them with an ample waste of love;
Conduct them to our presence royally.
Let volleys of the great Artillery
From of our galleys banks play prodigal,
And soud loud welcome fro their bellowing mouths.

What prince was that passed through my fathers guard?

Twas Galeatzo, the young Florentine.

Troth, one that will besiege thy maidenhead,
Enter the walls in faith (sweet Mellida)
If that thy flankers be not Canon proof.

Oh Mary Ambree, good, thy judgment wench;
Thy bright electious clear, what will he prove?

Hath a short finger and a naked chin;
A skipping eye, dare lay my judgment (faith)
His love is glibbery; there's no hold ont, wench:
Give me a husband whose aspect is firm,
A full cheekt gallant, with a bouncing thigh:
Oh, he is the Paradizo dell madonne contento.

Even such a one was my Antonio.

By my nine and thirteth servant (sweet)
Thou art in love, but stand on tiptoed fair,
Here comes Saint Tristram Tirlery whiffe in faith.

S. Mark, S. Mark, what kind of thing appears?

For fancies passion, spit upon him; figh:
His face is varnished: in the name of love,
What country bred that creature?

What is he Flauia?

The heir of Millane, Segnior Matzagent.

Matzagent? now by my pleasures hope,
He is made like a tilting staff; and looks
For all the world like an ore-rosted pig:
A great Tobacco taker too, that's flat.
For his eyes look as if they had been hung
In the smoke of his nose.

What husband, will he prove sweet Rossaline?

Avoid him: for he hath a dwindled leg,
A lowe forehead, and a thin cole-black beard,
And will be jealous too, believe it sweet:
For his chin sweats, and hath a gander neck,
A thin lip, and a little monkish eye:
Precious, what a slender waste he hath!
He looks like a May-pole, or a notched stick:
Heel snap in two at every little strain.
Give me a husband that will fill mine arms,
Of steady judgment, quick and nimble sense:
Fools relish not a Ladies excellence.

The tryumph's ended, but look Rossaline,
What gloomy soul in strange accustrements
Walks on the pavement.

Good sweet lets to her, pree the Mellida.

How covetous thou art of novelties!

Pish, tis our nature to desire things
That are thought strangers to the common cut.

I am exceeding willing, but --

But what? pree the go down, lets see her face:
God send that neither wit nor beauty wants
Those tempting sweets, affections Adamants.

Come down, she comes like: O, no Simile
Is precious, choice, or elegant enough
To illustrate her descent: leap heart, she comes,
She comes: smile heaven, and softest Southern wind
Kiss her cheek gently with perfumed breath.
She comes: Creations purity, admired.
Adored, amazing rarity, she comes.
O now Antonio press thy spirit forth
In following passion, knit thy senses close,
Heap up thy powers, double all thy man:
She comes. O how her eyes dart wonder on my heart!
Mount blood, soul to my lips, taste Hebes cup:
Stand firm on deck, when beauties close fight's up.

Lady, your strange habit doth beget
Our pregnant thoughts, even great of much desire,
To be acquaint with your condition.

Good sweet Lady, without more ceremonies,
What country claims your birth, sweet your name?

In hope your bounty will extend it self,
In self same nature of fair courtesy,
I'll shun all niceness; my nam's Florizell,
My country Scythia, I am Amazon,
Cast on this shore by fury of the sea.

Nay faith, sweet creature, we'll not veil our names.
It pleased the Font to dip me Rossaline.
That Lady bears the name of Mellida,
The duke of Venice daughter.

Madam, I am obliged to kiss your hand,
By imposition of a now dead man.

Now by my troth, I long beyond all thought,
To know the man; sweet beauty deign his name.

Lady, the circumstance is tedious.

Troth not a whit; good fair, lets have it all:
I love not, I, to have a jot left out,
If the tale come from a loved Orator.

Vouchsafe me then your hushed obseruances.
Vehement in pursuit of strange novelties,
After long travail through the Asian maine,
I shipped my hopeful thoughts for Britany;
Longing to view great natures miracle,
The glory of our sex, whose fame doth strike
Remotest ears with adoration.
Sailing some two months with inconstant winds,
We viewed the glistering Venetian forts;
To which we made: when lo, some three leagues off,
We might descry a horrid spectacle:
The issue of black fury strewn the sea,
With tattered carcasses of splitted ships,
Half sinking, burning, floating, topsy turuie.
Not far from these sad ruins of fell rage,
We might behold a creature press the waives;
Senseless he sprauld, all notcht with gaping wounds:
To him we made, and (short) we took him up:
The first word that he spake was, Mellida;
And then he swouned.

Aye me!

Why sigh you, fair?

Nothing but little humours: good sweet, on.

His wounds being dressed, and life recovered,
We began discourse; when lo, the sea grew mad,
His bowels rumbling with wind passion,
Straightswarthy darkness popped out Phoebus eye,
And blurd the jocund face of bright cheekt day;
Whilst crudl'd fogs masked even darkness brow:
Heaven bad's good night, and the rocks gron'd
At the intestine uproar of the maine.
Now gustie flaws struck up the very heals
Of our maine mast, whilst the keen lightning shot
Through the black bowels of the quaking ayte:
Straight chops a wave, and in his sliftred paunch
Down falls our ship, and there he breaks his neck:
Which in an instant up was belkt again.
When thus this martyrd soul began to sigh;
" Give me your hand (quoth he) now do you grasp
" Th'vnequall mirror of ragged misery:
" Is't not a horrid storm? O, well shaped sweet,
" Could your quick eye strike through these gashed wouds,
" You should behold a heart, a heart, fair creature,
" Raging more wild then is this frantic sea.
" VVolt do me a favour, if thou chance survive?
" But visit Venice, kiss the precious white
" Of my most; nay all all Epithets are base
" To attribute to gracious Mellida:
" Tell her the spirit of Antonio
" VVisheth his last gasp breathed upon her breast.

Why weeps soft hearted Florisell?

Alas, the flinty rocks groaned at his plaints.
Tell her (quoth he) that her obdurate sire
Hath cracked his bosom; therewithal he wept,
And thus sighed on. The sea is merciful;
Look how it gapes to bury all my grief
Well, thou shalt have it, thou shalt be his tomb:
My faith in my love live; in thee, die woe,
Dye vnmatcht anguish, dye Antonio:
With that he totterd from the reeling deck,
And down he sunk.

Pleasures body, what makes my Lady weep?

Nothing, sweet Rossaline, but the ayer's sharpe.
My fathers Palace, Madam, will be proud
To entertain your presence, if you'll deign
To make repose within. Aye me!

Lady our fashion is not curious.

Faith all the nobler, tis more generous.

Shall I then know how fortune fell at last,
What succour came, or what strange fate insew'd?

Most willingly: but this same court is vast,
And public to the staring multitude.

Sweet Lady, nay good sweet, now by my troth
VVeele be bedfellows: dirt on complement froth.

HAH Catzo, your master wants a clean trencher: do you hear?


calls for your diminutive attendance.


The belly hath no ears Dildo.


Good pugge give me some capon.


No capon, no not a bit ye smooth bully; capon's no meat for Dildo: milk,
milk, ye glibbery vrchin, is food for infants.


Upon mine honour


Your honour with a paugh? slid, now every Jack an Apes loads his back with
the golden coat of honour; every Ass puts on the Lyons skin and roars his
honour, upon your honour. By my Ladies pantable, I fear I shall live to hear
a Vintners boy cry; tis rich neat Canary, upon my honour.


My stomack's up.


I think thou art hungry.


The match of fury is lighted, fastened to the linstock of rage, and will
presently set fire to the touchhole of intemperance, discharging the double
couluering of my incensement in the face of thy opprobrious speech.


I'll stop the barrel thus; god Dildo, set not fire to the touch-hole.


My rage is stopped, and I will eat to the health of the fool thy master
Castilio.


And I will suck the juice of the capon, to the health of the Idiot thy master
Balurdo.


Faith, our masters are like a case of Rapiers sheathed in one scabberd of
folly.


Right dutch blades. But was't not rare sport at the sea-battle, whilst rounce
robble hobble roared from the ship sides, to view our masters pluck their
plumes and drop their feathers, for fear of being men of mark.


Slud (cried Signior Balurdo) O for Don Bessiclers armour, in the Mirror of
Knighthood: what coil's here? O for an armour, Canon proof: O, more cable,
more fetherbeds, more fetherbeds, more cable, till he had as much as my cable
hatband, to fence him.


Buxom Flauia: can you sing? song, song.


My sweet Dildo, I am not for you at this time: Madam Rossaline stays for a
fresh ruff to appear in the presence: sweet away.


Twill not be so put off, delicate, delicious, spark eyed, sleek skinned, slender
wasted, clean legedd, rarely shaped.


Who, I'll be at all your service another season: nay faith there's reason in
all things.


Would I were reason then, that I might be in all things.


The brief and the semiquauer is, we must have the descant you made upon our
names, ere you depart.


Faith, the song will seem to come off hardly.


Troth not a whit, if you seem to come off quickly.


Peart Catzo, knock it lustily then.


Make place gentlemen; pages, hold torches, the prince approaches the
presence.


What squeaking cart-wheel have we here? ha? Make place gentlemen, pages hold
torches, the prince approaches the presence.


Faugh, what a strong sent's here, some body uses to wear socks.


By this fair candle light, tis not my feet, I never wore socks since I sucked
pap.


Sauourly put off.


Hah, her wit stings, blisters, galls off the skin with the tart acrimony of
her sharpe quickness: by sweetness, she is the very Pallas that flew out of
Iupiters brainepan. Delicious creature, vouchsafe me your service: by the
purity of bounty, I shall be proud of such bondage.


I vouchsafe it; be my slave. Signior Balurdo, wilt thou be my servant too?


O god: forsooth in very good earnest, law, you wold make me as a man should
say, as a man should say.


Slud sweet beauty, will you deign him your service?


O, your fool is your only servant. But good Feliche why art thou so sad? a
penny for thy thought, ma.


I sell not my thought so cheap: I value my meditation at a higher rate.


In good sober sadness, sweet mistress, you should have had my thought for a
penny: by this crimson Satin that cost eleven shillings, thirteen pence,
three pence, half penny a yard, that you should, law.


What was thy thought, good servant?


Marry forsooth, how many strike of peas would feed a hog far against
Christide.


Paugh; servant rub out my rheum, it soils the presence.


By my wealthiest thought, you grace my shoo with an unmeasured honour: I will
preserve the soale of it, as a most sacred relic, for this service.


I'll spit in thy mouth, and thou wilt, to grace thee.


O that the stomach of this queasy age
Digestes, or brookes such raw unseasoned gobs,
And vomits not them forth! O slavish sots.
Servant quoth you? faugh: if a dog should crave
And beg her service, he should have it straight:
Shed give him favours too; to lick her feet,
Or fetch her fan, or some such drudgery:
A good dogs office, which these amorists
Triumph of: tis rare, well give her more Ass,
More sot, as long as dropping of her nose
Is sworn rich pearl by such low slaves as those.

Flauia, attend me to attire me.

In sad good earnest, sir, you have touched the very bare of naked truth; my
silk stocking hath a good gloss, and I thank my planets, my leg is not
altogether vnpropitiously shaped. There's a word: vnpropitiously? I think I
shall speak vnpropitiously as well as any courtier in Italy.


So help me your sweet bounty, you have the most graceful presence,
applasiue elecuty, amazing volubility, polished adornation, delicious
affability.


Whop: fut how he tickles yon trout under the gills! you shall see him take
him by and by, with groping flattery.


That ever ravished the ear of wonder. By your sweet self, then whom I know
not a more exquisite, illustrate, accomplished, pure, respected, adored,
observed, precious, real, magnanimous, boutious: if you have an idle rich cast
jerkin, or so, it shall not be cast away, if; hah? here's a forehead, an eye, a
head, a hair, that would make a: or if you have any spare pair of silver
spurs, i'll do you as much right in all kind offices


Of a kind Parasite


As any of my mean fortunes shall be able to


As I am true Christian now, thou hast won the spurs


For flattery.
O how I hate that same Egyptian louse;
A rotten maggot, that lives by stinking filth
Of tainted spirits: vengeance to such dogs,
That sprout by gnawing senseless carrion.

Gallants, saw you my mistress, the Lady Rossaline?


My mistress, the Lady Rossaline, left the presence even now.


My mistress, the Lady Rossaline, withdrew her gracious aspect even now.


My mistress, the Lady Rossaline, withdrew her gracious aspect even now.


Well said echo.


My mistress, and his mistress, and your mistress, the dogs mistress:
precious dear heaven, that

Alberto lives, to have such rivals.
Slid, I have bin searching every private rome,
Corner, and secret angle of the court:
And yet, and yet, and yet she lives concealed.
Good sweet Feliche, tell me how to find
My bright faced mistress out.

Why man, cry out for lantern and candlelight. For tis your only way, to
find your bright flaming wench, with your light burning torch: for most
commonly, these light creatures live in darkness.


Away you heretike, you'll be burnt for


Go, you amorous hound, follow the sent of your mistress shoe; away.


Make a fair presence, boys, advance your lights:

The Princess makes approach.


And please the gods, now in very good deed, law, you shall see me tickle the
measures for the heaves, Do my hangers show?


Beauteous Amazon, sit, and seat your thoughts
In the reposure of most soft content.
Sound music there. Nay daughter, clear your eyes,
From these dull fogs of misty discontent:
Look sprightly girl. What? though Antonio's droun'd,
That peevish dotard on thy excellence,
That hated issue of Andrugio:
Yet may thou triumph in my victories;
Since, lo, the high borne bloods of Italy
Sue for thy seat of love.
Beauty and youth run descant on loves ground.

Lady, erect your gracious summetry:
Shine in the sphere of sweet affection:
Your eye as heavy, as the heart of night.

My thoughts are as black as your beard, my fortunes as ill proportioned as
your legs; and all the powers of my mind, as leaden as your wit, and as dusty
as your face is swarthy.


Faith sweet, i'll lay thee on the lips for that jest.

I pree thee intrude not on a dead mans right.

No, but the livings just possession.
Thy lips, and love, are mine.

You ne'er took seizin on them yet: forbear:
There's not a vacant corner of my heart,
But all is filled with dead Antonios loss.
Then urge no more; O leave to love at all;
Tis less disgraceful, not to mount, then fall.

Bright and refulgent Lady, deign your ear:
You see this blade, had it a courtly lip,
It would divulge my valour, plead my love,
Jostle that skipping feeble amorist
Out of your loves seat; I am Matzagent.

Hark thee, I pray thee taint not thy sweet ear
With that sots gabble; By thy beauteous cheek,
He is the flagging'st bulrush that ere droopt
With each slight mist of rain. But with pleased eye
Smile on my courtship.

What said you sir? alas my thought was fixed
Upon another object. Good, forbear:
I shall but weep. Aye me, what boots a tear!
Come, come, lets dance. O music thou distill'st
More sweetness in us then this jarring world:
Both time and measure from thy strains do breath,
Whilst from the channel of this dirt doth flow
Nothing but timeless grief, unmeasured woe.

O how impatience cramps my cracked veins,
And cruddles thick my blood, with boiling rage!
O eyes, why leap you not like thunderbolts,
Or canon bullets in my rivals face;
Oy me infeliche misero, o lamenteuol fato!

What means the Lady fall upon the ground?

Belike the falling sickness.

I cannot brooke this sight, my thoughts grow wild:
Here lies a wretch, on whom heaven never smiled.

What servant, ne'er a word, and I here man?
I would shoot some speech forth, to strike the time
With pleasing touch of amorous complement.
Say sweet, what keeps thy mind, what think thou

Nothing. on?

Whats that nothing?

A woman's constancy.

Good, why, would thou have us sluts, never shift the vestur of our
thoughts? Away for shame.


O no, thart too constant to afflict my heart,
Too too firm fixed in vnmooued scorn.

Pish, pish; I fixed in vnmooued scorn?
Why, I'll love thee to night.

But whom to morrow?

Faith, as the toy puts me in the head.

And pleased the marble heavens, now would I might be the toy, to put you in
the head, kindly to conceit my my my: pray you give in an Epithet for love.


Roaring, roaring.

O love thou hast murdered me, made me a shadow, and you hear not Balurdo, but
Balurdos ghost.


Can a ghost speak?


Scurvily, as I do.


And walk?


After their fashion.


And eat apples?


In a sort, in their garb.


Pree thee Flauia be my mistress.


Your reason, good Feliche?


Faith, I have nineteen mistresses already, and I not much disdeigne that
thou shold'st make up the full score.


Oh, I hear you make common places of your mistresses, to perform the office
of memory by. Pray you, in ancient times were not those satin hose? In good
faith, now they are new dyed, pinkt scoured, they show as well as if they were
new.

What, mute Balurdo?


I in faith, twere not for printing, and painting, my breech, and your face
would be out of reparation.


I, an faith, and twere not for printing, pointing, my breech, and your face
would be out of reparation.


Good again, Echo.


Thou art, by nature, too foul to be affected.


And thou, by Art, too fair to be beloved.
By wits life, most spark spirits, but hard chance.
La tie dine.

Gallants, the night grows old; downy sleep
Courts us, to entertain his company:
Our tyred limbs, brus'd in the morning fight,
Entreat soft rest, and gentle husht repose.
Fill out Greek wines; prepare fresh cressit-light:
We'll have a banquet: Princes, then good night.

What means these scattred looks? why tremble you?
Why quake your thoughts, in your distracted eyes?
Collect your spirits, Madam; what do you see?
Dost not behold a ghost?
Look, look where he stalks, wrapped up in clouds of grief,
Darting his soul, upon thy wondering eyes.
Look, he comes towards thee; see, he stretches out
His wretched arms to girt thy loved waste,
With a most wished embrace: see him not yet?
Nor yet? Ha, Mellida; thou well may err:
For look; he walks not like Antonio:
Like that Antonio, that this morning shone,
In glistering habiliments of arms,
To seize his love, spite of her fathers spite:
But like himself, wretched, and miserable,
Banished, forlorn, despairing, struck quite through,
With sinking grief, rowld up in seauen-fould doubles
Of plagues, vanquishable: hark, he speaks to thee.

Alas, I can not hear, nor see him.

Why? al this night about the room he stalked,
And groaned, and houl'd, with raging passion,
To view his love (life blood of all his hopes,
Crown of his fortunes) clipped by strangers arms.
Look but behind thee.

O, Antonio; my Lord, my Love, my

Leave passion, sweet; for time, place, air, earth,
Are all our foes: fear, and be jealous; fair,
Lets fly.

Dear heart; ha, whether?

O, tis no matter whether, but lets fly.
Ha! now I think ont, I have ne'er a home:
No father, friend, no country to embrace
These wretched limbs: the world, the All that is,
Is all my foe: a prince not worth a doit:
Only my head is hoised to high rate,
Worth twenty thousand double Pistolets,
To him that can but strike it from these shoulders.
But come sweet creature, thou shalt be my home;
My father, country, riches, and my friend:
My all, my soul; and thou and I will live:
(Lets think like what) and thou and I will live
Like vnmatcht mirrors of calamity.
The jealous ear of night eaue-drops our talk.
Hold thee, theirs a jewel; look thee, theirs a note
That will direct thee when, where, how to fly;
Bid me adieu.

Farewell bleak misery.

Stay sweet, lets kiss before you go.

Farewell dear soul.

Farewell my life, my heart.

IS not yon gleam, the shuddering morn that flakes,
With silver tinctur, the east vierge of heaven?

I think it is, so please your excellence.

Away, I have no excellence to please.
Pree the observe the custom of the world,
That only flatters greatness, States exalts.
And please my excellence! O Lucio.
Thou hast bin ever held respected dear,
Even precious to Andrugios in most love.
Good, flatter not. Nay, if thou giu'st not faith
That I am wretched, O read that, read that.
EXCELLENT, the just overthrow, Andrugio took in the Venetian gulf, hath so
assured the Genowaies of the justice of his cause, and the hatefulness of his
person, that they have banished him and all his family: and, for confirmation of
their peace with us, have vowed, that if he, or his son, can be attached, to
send us both their heads. We therefore, by force of our united league, forbid
you to harbour him, or his blood: but if you apprehend his person, we entreat
you to send him, or his head, to us. For we vow by the honour of our blood,
to recompense any man that brings his head, with twenty thousand double
Pistolets, and the indeering to our choicest love.

From Venice: PIERO SFORZA.


My thoughts are fixed in contemplation
Why this huge earth, this monstrous animal,
That eats her children, should not have eyes ears.
Philosophie maintains that Natur's wise,
And forms no useless or imperfect thing.
Did Nature make the earth, or the earth Nature?
For earthly dirt makes all things, makes the man,
Moulds me up honour; and like a cunning Dutchma,
Paints me a puppit even with seeming breath,
And gives a sot appearance of a soul,
Go to, go to; thou lie Philosophy.
Nature forms things imperfect, useless, vain.
Why made she not the earth with eyes and ears?
That she might see desert, and hear men's plaints:
That when a soul is splitted, sunk with grief,
He might fall thus, upon the breast of earth;
And in her ear, halloo his misery:
Exclaming thus. O thou all bearing earth,
Which men do gape for, till thou cramst their mouths,
And choakst their throts with dust: O chaune thy breast,
And let me sink into thee. Look who knocks;
Andrugio calls. But O, she's deaf and blind.
A wretch, but lean relief on earth can find.

Sweet Lord, abandon passion, and disarm.
Since by the fortune of the tumbling sea,
We are rolled up, upon the Venice marsh,
Lets clip all fortune, least more lowering fate

More lowering fate? O Lucio, choke that breath.
Now I defy chance. Fortunes brow hath frowned,
Even to the utmost wrinkle it can bend:
Her venom's spit. Alas, what country rests,
What son, what comfort that she can deprive?
Tryumphes not Venice in my overthrow?
Gapes not my native country for my blood?
Lies not my son tomb'd in the swelling maine?
And yet more lowering fate? There's nothing left
Unto Andrugio, but Andrugio:
And that nor mischief, force, distress, nor hell can take.
Fortune my fortunes, not my mind shall shake.

Speak like your self: but give me leave, my Lord,
To wish your safety. If you are but seen,
Your arms display you; therefore put them off,
And take

Would thou have me go unarmed among my foes?
Being besieged by passion, entering lists,
To combat with despair and mighty grief:
My soul beleaguered with the crushing strength
Of sharpe impatience. Ha Lucio, go unarmed?
Come soul, resume the valour of thy birth;
My self, my self will dare all opposits:
I'll muster forces, an vnuanquisht power:
Cornets of horse shall press th'vngratefull earth;
This hollow wombed mass shall inly groan,
And murmur to sustain the weight of arms:
Ghastly amazement, with vpstarted hair,
Shall hurry on before, and usher us,
Whilst trumpets clamour, with a sound of death.

Peace, good my Lord, your speech is al too light.
Alas, survey your fortunes, look what's left
Of all your forces, and your utmost hopes?
A weak old man, a Page, and your poor self.

Andrugio lives, and a fair cause of arms,
Why that's an army all invincible.
He who hath that, hath a battalion
Royal, armour of proof, huge troops of barbed steeds,
Maine squares of pikes, millions of harguebush.
O, a fair cause stands firm, and will abide.
Legions of Angels fight upon her side.

Then, noble spirit, slide in strange disguise,
Unto some gracious Prince, and sojourn there,
Till time, and fortune give revenge firm means.

No, i'll not trust the honour of a man:
Gold is grown great, and makes perfidiousness
A common water in most Princes Courts:
He's in the Chekle-roule: I'll not trust my blood;
I know none breathing, but will cog a dye
For twenty thousand double Pistolets.
How goes the time?

I saw no sun to day.


No sun will shine, where poor Andrugio breaths,
My soul grows heavy: boy let's have a song:
We'll sing yet, faith, even despite of fate.

Tis a good boy, by my troth, well sung.
O, and thou felt my grief, I warrant thee,
Thou would have struck division to the height;
And made the life of music breath: hold boy: why so?
For Gods sake call me not Andrugio,
That I may soon forget what I have bin.
For heavens name, name not Antonio;
That I may not remember he was mine.
Well, ere yon sun set, i'll show my self my self,
Worthy my blood. I was a Duke; that's all.
No matter whether, but from whence we fall.

Castilio? Alberto? Balurdo? none up?
Forobosco? Flattery, nor thou up yet:
Then there's no Courtier stirring: that's firm truth?
I cannot sleep: Feliche seldom rests
In these court lodgings. I have walked all night,
To see if the nocturnal court delights
Could force me envy their felicity:
And by plain troth; I will confess plain troth:
I envy nothing, but the Trauense light.
O, had it eyes, and ears, and tongues, it might
See sport, hear speech of most strange surquedries.
O, if that candle-light were made a Poet,
He would prove a rare firking Satyrist,
And draw the core forth of impostum'd sin.
Well, I thank heaven yet, that my content
Can envy nothing, but poor candle-light.
As for the other glistering copper spangs,
That glisten in the tyer of the Court,
Praise God, I either hate, or pity them.
Well here i'll sleep till that the scene of up
Is past at Court. O calm husht rich content,
Is there a being blessedness without thee?
How soft thou down'st the couch where thou dost rest,
Nectar to life, thou sweet Ambrosian feast.

Am not I a most sweet youth now?

Yes, when your throat's perfumed; your very words
Do smell of Amber greece. O stay sir, stay;
Sprinkle some sweet water to your shoes heals,
That your mistress may swear you have a sweet foot.

Good, very good, very passing passing good.

Fut, what treble minikin squeaks there, ha? good? very good, very very good?


I will warble to the delicious concave of my
Mistress ear: and strike her thoughts with
The pleasing touch of my voice.

Feliche, health, fortune, mirth, and wine,

To thee my love divine.

I drink to thee, sweeting.

Plague on thee for an Ass.

Now thou hast seen the Court; by the perfecction of it, dost not envy it?


I wonder it doth not envy me.
Why man, I have been borne upon the spirits wings,
The souls swift Pegasus, the fantasy:
And from the height of contemplation,
Have viewed the feeble joints men totter on.
I envy none; but hate, or pity all.
For when I view, with an intent thought,
That creature fair; but proud; him rich, but sot:
The other witty; but unmeasured arrogant:
Him great; yet boundless in ambition:
Him high borne; but of base life: to there feared;
Yet feared fears, and fears most, to be most loved:
Him wise; but made a fool for public use:
The other learned, but selfe-opinionate:
When I discourse all these, and see my self
Nor fair, nor rich, nor witty, great, nor feared:
Yet amply suited, with all full content:
Lord, how I clap my hands, and smooth my brow,
Rubbing my quiet bosom, tossing up
A grateful spirit to omnipotence!

Ha, ha: but if thou knew my happiness,
Thou would even grate away thy soul to dust,
In envy of my sweet beatitude:
I can not sleep for kisses; I can not rest
For Ladies letters, that importune me
With such unused vehemence of love,
Straight to solicit them, that

Confusion seize me, but I think thou lie.
Why should I not be sought to then as well?
Fut, me thinks, I am as like a man*
Troth, I have a good head of hair, a cheek
Not as yet wan'd; a leg, faith, in the full.
I ha not a red beard, take not tobacco much:
And S'lid, for other parts of manliness

Pew waw, you ne'er accourted them in pomp:
Put your good parts in presence, graciously.
Ha, and you had, why they would ha come of, sprung
To your arms: and sued, and prayed, and vowed;
And opened all their sweetness to your love.

There are a number of such things, as then
Have often urged me to such loose belief:
But S'lid you all do lye, you all do lie.
I have put on good clothes, and smugd my face,
Struck a fair wench, with a smart speaking eye:
Courted in all sorts, blunt, and passionate;
Had opportunity put them to the ah:
And, by this light, I find them wondrous chaste,
Impregnable; perchance a kiss, or so:
But for the rest, O most inexorable.

Nay then in faith, pree thee look here.

To her most esteemed, loved, and generous servant, Sig.
Castilio Balthazar.
Pree the from whom comes this? faith I must see.
Nay, god's my comfort, I must see the rest;
I must, sans ceremony, faith I must.

O, you spoil my ruff, vnset my hair; good away.


Item for strait canvas, thirteen pence, half penny. Item for an elle and a
half of taffeta to cover your old canvas dubblet, foureteen shillings, three
pence. S'light, this a tailors bill.


In sooth it is the outside of her letter; on which
I took the copy of a tailors bill.

But tis not crossed, I am sure of that. Lord have mercy on him, his credit hath
given up the last gasp. Faith i'll leave him; for he looks as melancholy as a
wench the first night she


Honest musk-cod, twill not be so stitched together; take that, and that, and
belie no Ladies love: swear no more by Iesu: this Madam, that Lady; hence
go, forswear the presence, travail three years to bury this bastinado:
avoid, puff paste, avoid.


And tell not my Lady mother. Well, as I am true gentleman, if she had not
wild me on her blessing, not to spoil my face; if I could not find in my
heart to fight, would I might ne'er eat a Potato pie more.


More fool, more rare fools! O, for time and place, long enough, and large
enough, to act these fools! Here might be made a rare Scene of folly, if the
plat could bear it.


By the suger-candy sky, hold up the glass higher, that I may see to swear
in fashion. O, one aloof more would ha made them shine; gods neakes, they would
have shone like my mistress brow. Even so the Duke frowns for all this
Cursond world: oh that gerne kills, it kills. By my golden What's the richest
thing about me?


Your teeth.


By my golden teeth, hold up; that I may put in: hold up, I say, that I may see
to put on my gloves.


O, delicious sweet cheekt master, if you discharge but one glance from the
level of that set face: O, you will strike a wench; you'll make any wench love
you.


By Iesu, I think I am as elegant a Courtier, as How lik'st thou my suite?


All, beyond all, no peregal: you are wondered at, for an ass.


Well, Dildo, no christen creature shall know hereafter, what I will do for
thee heretofore.


Here wants a little white, Flauia.


I, but master, you have one little fault; you sleep open mouthed.


Pew, thou iestst. In good sadness, I'll have a looking glass nailed to the
the testarn of the bed, that I may see when I sleep, whether tis so, or not;
take heed you lye not: go to, take heed you lie not.


By my troth, you look as like the princess, now I, but her lip is lip is a
little redder, a very little redder: but by the help of Art, or Nature, ere I
change my perewigge, mine shall be as red.


O, I, that face, that eye, that smile, that writhing of your body, that
wanton dandling of your fan, becomes prethely, so sweethly, tis even the goodest
Lady that breathes, the most amiable Faith the fringe of your satin petticoat
is ripped. Good faith madam, they say you are the most bounteous Lady to your
women, that ever O most delicious beauty! Good Madam let me kith it.


Rare sport, rare sport! A female fool, and a female flatterer*


Body a me, the Duke: away the glass.


Take up your paper, Rossaline.


Not mine, my Lord.


Not yours, my Lady? I'll see what tis.


And how does my sweet mistress? O Lady dear, even as tis an old say, Tis
an old horse can neither wighy, nor wag his tail: even so do I hold my set
face still: even so, tis a bad courtier that can neither discourse, nor blow
his nose.


Meet me at Abrahams, the Iewes, where I bought my Amazons disguise. A ship
lies in the port, ready bound for England; make haste, come private.

Antonio, Forobosco, Alberto, Feliche, Castilio, Balurdo? run, keep the
Palace, post to the ports, go to my daughters chamber: whether now? scud to
the Iewes, stay, run to the gates, stop the gundolets, let none pass the
marsh, do all at once. Antonio? his head, his head. Keep you the Court, the
rest stand still, or run, or go, or shout, or search, or scud, or call, or
hang, or do do do, su su su, something: I know not who who who, what I do do
do, nor who who who, where I am.

O trista traditriche, rea, ribalda fortuna,
Negando mi vindetta mi causa fera morte,

Ha ha ha. I could break my spleen at his impatience.


Alma gratiosa fortuna sia^e favour evole,
Et fortunati siano vnoti del mia dulce Mellida, Mellida.

Alas Antonio, I have lost thy note.
A number mount my stairs; i'll straight return.

Antonio,
Be not affright, sweet Prince; appease thy fear,
Buckle thy spirits up, put all thy wits
In wimble action, or thou art surprised.

I care not.

Art mad, or desperate? or

Both, both, all, all: I pree thee let me lie;
Spite of you all, I can, and I will die.

You are distraught; O, this is madness breath.

Each man take hence life, but no man death:
He's a good fellow, and keeps open house:
A thousand thousand ways lead to his gate,
To his wide mouthed porch: when niggard life
Hath but one little, little wicket through.
We wring our selves into this wretched world,
To pule, and weep, exclaim, to curse and rail,
To fret, and ban the fates, to strike the earth
As I do now. Antonio, curse thy birth,
And die.

Nay, heavens my comfort, now you are perverse;
You know I always loved you; pree thee live.
Wilt thou strike dead thy friends, draw mourning tears

Alas, Feliche, I ha ne'er a friend;
No country, father, brother, kinsman left
To weep my fate, or sigh my funeral:
I roll but up and down, and fill a seat
In the dark cave of dusky misery.

Fore heaven, the Duke comes: hold you, take my key,
Slink to my chamber, look you; that is it:
There shall you find a suite I wore at sea:
Take it, and slip away. Nay, precious,
If you'll be peevish, by this light, I'll swear,
Thou rail'dst upon thy love before thou dyedst,
And called her strumpet.

Sheele not credit thee.

Tut, that's all one: i'll defame thy love;
And make thy dead trunk held in vile regard.

Wilt needs have it so? why then Antonio,
Viue esperanza, in despetto dell fato.

O, my sweet Princes, was't not bravely found?
Even there I found the note, even there it lay.
I kiss the place for joy, that there it lay.
This way he went, here let us make a stand:
I'll keep this gate my self: O gallant youth!
I'll drink carouse unto your countries health,
Even in Antonio's scull.

Lord bless us: his breath is more fearful then a Sergeants voice, when he
cries; I arrest.


Stop Antonio, keep, keep Antonio.

Where, where man, where?

Here, here: let me me pursue him down the marsh.

Hold, there's my signet, take a gundelet:
Bring me his head, his head, and by mine honour,
I'll make thee the wealthiest Mariner that breathes.

I'll sweat my blood out, till I have him safe.

Speak heartily in faith, good Mariner.
O, we will mount in triumph: soon, at night,
I'll set his head up. Lets think where.

Up on his shoulders, that's the fittest place for it. If it be not as fit as
if it were made for them; say, Balurdo, thou art a sot, an ass.


Sprightly, in faith. In troth he's somewhat like
My daughter Mellida: but alas poor soul,
Her honour heals, god knows, are half so light.

Escaped I am, spite of my fathers spite.

Ho, this will warm my bosom ere I sleep.

O my Lord, your daughter.

I, I, my daughter's safe enough, I warrant thee.
This vengeance on the boy will lengthen out
My days vnmeasuredly.
It shall be chronicled, time to come;
Piero Sforza slew Andrugio's son.

I, but my Lord, your daughter.

I, I, my good wench, she is safe enough.

O, then, my Lord, you know she's run away.

Run away, away, how run away?

She's vanished in an instant, none knows whether.

Pursue, pursue, fly, run, post, scud away.
Fly, call, run, row, ride, cry, shout, hurry, haste:
Haste, hurry, shout, cry, ride, row, run, call, fly
Backward and forward, every way about.
Maldetta fortuna ^hy condura sorta
Che faro, che diro, pur fugir tanto mal!

Twas you that struck me even now: was it not?

It was I that struck you even now.

You bastinadoed me, I take it.

I bastinadoed you, and you took it.

Faith sir, I have the richest Tobacco in the court for you; I would be glad to
make you satisfaction, if I have wronged you. I would not the Sun should set
upon your anger; give me your hand.


Content faith, so thou'lt breed no more such lies. I hate not man, but mans
lewd qualities.


STOP, stop Antonio, stay Antonio.
Vain breath, vain breath, Antonio's lost;
He can not find himself, not seize himself.
Alas, this that you see, is not Antonio,
His spirit hovers in Piero's Court,
Hurling about his agill faculties,
To apprehend the sight of Mellida:
But poor, poor soul, wanting apt instruments
To speak or see, stands dumb and blind, sad spirit,
Rolled up in gloomy clouds as black as air,
Through which the rusty coach of Night is drawn:
Tis so, i'll give you instance that tis so.
Conceit you me. As having clasp't a rose
Within my palm, the rose being taken away,
My hand retains a little breath of sweet:
So may mans trunk; his spirit slipped away,
Holds still a faint perfume of his sweet guest.
Tis so; for when discursiue powers fl^e out,
And rome in progress, through the bouds of heaven,
The soul it self gallops along with them,
As chiefetaine of this winged troop of thought,
Whilst the dull lodge of spirit stands waste,
Until the soul return from What wast I said?
O, this is nought, but speckling melancholy.
I have been
That Morpheus tender skinp Cousin germane
Bear with me good
Mellida: clod upon clod thus fall.
Hell is beneath; yet heaven is over all.

Come Lucio, lets go eat: what hast thou got?
Roots, roots? alas, they are seeded, new cut up.
O, thou hast wronged Nature, Lucio:
But boots not much; thou but pursu'st the world,
That cuts off virtue, fore it comes to growth,
Least it should seed, and so orerun her son,
Dull pore-blinde error. Give me water, boy.
There is no poison in it I hope, they say
That lukes in massy plate: and yet the earth
Is so infected with a general plague,
That he's most wise, that thinks there's no man fool:
Right prudent, that esteems no creature just:
Great policy the least things to mistrust.
Give me Assay How we mock greatness now!

A strong conceit is rich, so most men deem:
If not to be, tis comfort yet to seem.

Why man, I never was a Prince till now.
Tis not the bared pate, the bended knees,
Guilt tipstaues, Tyrrian purple, chairs of state,
Troops of pied butterflies, that flutter still
In greatness summer, that confirm a prince:
Tis not the unsavoury breath of multitudes,
Shouting and clapping, with confused din;
That makes a Prince. No Lucio, he's a king,
A true right king, that dares do aught, save wrong,
Fears nothing mortal, but to be unjust,
Who is not blown up with the flattering puffs
Of spungy Sycophants: Who stands vnmou'd,
Despite the jostling of opinion:
Who can enjoy himself, maugre the throng
That strive to press his quiet out of him:
Who sits upon Ioues footestoole, as I do,
Adoring, not affecting, majesty:
Whose brow is wreathed with the silver crown
Of clear content: this, Lucio, is a king.
And of this empire, every man's possessed,
That's worth his soul.

My Lord, the Genowaies had wont to say

Name not the Genowaies: that very word
Vnkings me quite, makes me vile passions slave.
O, you that made open the glibbery Ice
Of vulgar favour, view Andrugio.
Was never Prince with more applause confirmed,
With louder shouts of triumph launched out
Into the surgy maine of government:
Was never Prince with more despite cast out,
Left shipwrecked, banished, on more guiltless ground.
O rotten props of the crazed multitude,
How you still double, falter, under the lightest chance
That strains your veins. Alas, one battle lost,
Your whorish love, your drunken healths, your houts and shouts,
Your smooth God saue's, and all your devils last
That tempts our quiet, to your hell of throngs.
Spit on me Lucio, for I am turned slave:
Observe how passion domineres ore me.

No wonder, noble Lord, having lost a son,
A country, crown, and

I Lucio, having lost a son, a son,
A country, house, crown, son. O lares, misereri lares.
Which shall I first deplore? My son, my son,
My dear sweet boy, my dear Antonio.

Antonio?

I, echo, I; I mean Antonio.

Antonio, who means Antonio?

Where art? what art? know thou Antonio?

Yes.

Lives he?

No.

Where lies he dead?

Here.

Where?

Here.

Art thou Antonio?

I think I am.

Dost thou but think? What, dost not know thy self?

He is a fool that thinks he knows himself.

Upon thy faith to heaven, give thy name.

I were not worthy of Andrugio's blood,
If I denied my name's Antonio.

I were not worthy to be called thy father,
If I denied my name Andrugio.
And dost thou live? O, let me kiss thy cheek,
And dew thy brow with trickling drops of joy.
Now heavens will be done: for I have lived
To see my joy, my son Antonio.
Give my thy hand; now fortune do thy worst,
His blood, that lapped thy spirit in the womb,
Thus (in his love) will make his arms thy tomb.

Bless not the body with your twining arms,
Which is accursed of heaven. O, what black sin
Hath bin committed by our ancient house,
Whose scalding vengeance lights upon our heads,
That thus the world, and fortune casts us out,
As loathed objects, ruins branded slaves.

Do not expostulate the heavens will:
But, O, remember to forget thy self:
Forget remembrance what thou once hast bin.
Come, creep with me from out this open air.
Even trees have tongues, and will betray our life.
I am a raising of our house, my boy:
Which fortune will not envy, tis so mean,
And like the world (all dirt) there shalt thou rip
The inwards of thy fortunes, in mine ears,
Whilst I sit weeping, blind with passions tears:
Then i'll begin, and we'll such order keep,
That one shall still tell griefs, the other weep.

I'll follow you. Boy, pree thee stay a little.
Thou hast had a good voice, if this cold marsh,
Wherein we lurk, have not corrupted it.
I pree thee sing, but sir (mark you me)
Let each nor breath the heart of passion,
The sad extracture of extremest grief.
Make me a strain; speak, groaning like a bell,
That towels departing souls.
Breath me a point that may enforce me weep,
To wring my hands, to break my cursed breast,
Rave, and exclaim, lie groueling on the earth,
Straight start up frantic, crying, Mellida.
Sing but, Antonio hath lost Mellida,
And thou shalt see me (like a man possessed)
Howl out such passion, that even this brinish marsh
Will squease out tears, from out his spungy cheeks,
The rocks even groan, and
Pree thee, pree thee sing:
Or I shall ne'er ha done when I am in.
Tis harder for me end, then to begin.
For look thee boy, my grief that hath no end,
I may begin to plain, but pree thee sing.

Heaven keep you sir.

Heaven keep you from me, sir.

I must be acquainted with you, sir.

Wherefore? Art thou infected with misery,
Seared with the anguish of calamity?
Art thou true sorrow, hearty grief, can weep?
I am not for thee if thou can not rave,
Fall flat on the ground, and thus exclaim on heaven;
O trifling Nature, why enspiredst thou breath

Stay sir, I think you named Mellida.

Know thou Mellida?

Yes.

Hast thou seen Mellida?

Yes.

Then hast thou seen the glory of her sex,
The music of Nature, the unequalled lustre
Of unmatched excellence, the united sweet
Of heavens graces, the most adored beauty,
That ever struck amazement in the world.

You seem to love her.

With my very soul.

Shele not requite it: all her love is fixed
Upon a gallant, on Antonio,
The Duke of Genoas son. I was her Page:
And often as I waited, she would sigh;
O, dear Antonio; and to strengthen thought,
Would clip my neck, and kiss, and kiss me thus.
Therefore leave loving her: fa, faith me thinks,
Her beauty is not half so ravishing
As you discourse of; she hath a freckled face,
A lowe forehead, and a lumpish eye.

O heaven, that I should hear such blasphemy.
Boy, rogue, thou lie, and
Spauento dell mio core dolce Mellida,
Di graua morte restor^ vero dolce Mellida,
Celesta saluatrice sovrana Mellida
Del mio sperar; trofeo vero Mellida.

Diletta soaue anima mia Antonio,
Godeuole belezza cortese Antonio.
Signior mio virginal amore bell' Antonio
Gusto delli mei sensi, car' Antonio.

O suamisce il cor in un soaue baccio,

Murono i sensi nel desiato dessio:

Nel Cielo puo lesser belta pia chiara.

Nel mondo pol esser belta pia chiara?

Dammi un baccio da quella bocca beata,
Bassiammi, coglier l' aur a odorata
Che in sua neggia in quello dolce labra.

Dammi pimpero del tuo gradit' amore
Che beam, cosempiterno honore,
Cosi, cosimi conuerra morir.
Good sweet, scout ore the marsh: for my heart trembls
At every little breath that strikes my ear,
When thou return: and i'll discourse
How I deceived the Court: then thou shall tell
How thou escapt'st the watch: we'll point our speech
With amorous kissing, kissing comaes, and even suck
The liquid breath from out each others lips.

Dull clod, no man but such sweeet favour clips.
I go, and yet my panting blood persuades me stay.
Turn coward in her sight? away, away.
I think confusion of Babell is fallen upon these lovers, that they change
their language, but I fear me, my master having but fained the person of a
woman, hath got their unfeigned imperfection, and is grown double tongued: as
for Mellida, she were no woman, if she could not yield strange language. But
howsoever, if I should sit in judgment, tis an error easier to be pardoned by
the auditors, then excused by the authors; and yet some private respect may
rebate the edge of the keener censure.


This way she took: search, my sweet gentlemen. How now Balurdo, can thou
meet with any body?


As I am true gentleman, I made my horse sweat, that he hath ne'er a dry thread
on him: and I can meet with no living creature, but men beasts, In good
sadness, I would have sworn I had seen Mellida even now: for I saw a thing
stir under a hedge, and I peep't, and I spied a thing: and I peered, and I
tweerd underneath: and truly a right wise man might have been deceived: for it
was


What, in the name of heaven?

A dun cow.

Sh'ad ne'er a kettle on her head?

Boy, did thou see a young Lady pass this way?

Why speak you not?

Gods neakes, proud elf, give the Duke rouerence, stand bare with a

Whogh! heavens bless me: Mellida, Mellida.


Where man, where?

Turned man, turned man: women wear the breaches, lo here,


Light and vnduteous! kneel not, peevish elf,
Speak not, entreat not, shame unto my house,
Curse to my honour. Where's Antonio?
Thou traitress to my hate, what is he shipped
For England now? well whimpering harlot, hence.

Good father

Good me no goods. See thou that sprightly youth? ere thou can term to
morrow morning old, thou shalt call him thy husband, Lord and love.


Ay me.

Blirt on your ay mees, guard her safely hence.
Drag her away, i'll be your guard to night.
Young Prince, mount up your spirits, and prepare
To solemnize your Nuptials eve with popme.

The time is scant: now nimble wits appear:
Phoebus begins gleam, the welkin's clear.

Now nimble wits appear: i'll my self appear,
Balurdo's self, that in quick wit doth surpass,
Will show the substance of a complete

Ass, ass.

I'll mount my courser, and most gallantly prick

Gallantly prick is too long, and stands hardly in the verse, sir.


I'll speak pure rime, and will so bravely prank it, that i'll toss love like
a prank, prank it: a rime for prank it?


Blankit.


That i'll toss love, like a dog in a blanket: ha ha, in deed law. I think,
ha ha; I think ha ha, I think I shall tickle the Muses. And I strike it not
dead, say, Balurdo, thou art an arrant sot.


Balurdo, thou art an arrant sot.


Now, come united force of chap-falne death:
Come, power of fretting anguish, leave distress.
O, thus infoulded, we have breasts of proof,
Against all the venomed stings of misery.

Father, now I have an antidote,
Against all the poison that the world can breath.
My Mellida, my Mellida doth bless
This bleak waste with her presence. How now boy,
Why dost thou weep? alas, where's Mellida?

Ay me, my Lord.

A sodden horror doth invade my blood,
My sinews tremble, and my panting heart
Scuds round about my bosom so go out,
Dreading the assailant, horrid passion.
O, be no tyrant, kill me with one blow.
Speak quickly, briefly boy.

Her father found, and seized her, she is gone.

Son, heat thy blood, be not frose up with grief.
Courage, sweet boy, sink not beneath the weight
Of crushing mischief. O where's thy dantlesse heart
Thy fathers spirit! I renounce thy blood,
If thou forsake thy valour.

See how his grief speaks in his flow-pac't steps:
Alas, tis more than he can utter, let him go.
Dumb solitary path best sureth woe.

Give me my arms, my armour Lucio.

Dear Lord, what means this rage, when lacking use
Scarce safes your life, will you in armour rise?

Fortune fears valour, presses cowardice.

Then valour gets applause, when it hath place,
And means to blaze it.

Nunquam potest non esse.

Patience, my Lord, may bring your ils some end.

What patience, friend, can ruined hopes atted?
Come, let me die like old Andrugio:
Worthy my birth. O blood-true-honour'd graves
Are far more blessed then base life of slaves. Exeunt.

AND are you a painter sir, can you draw, can you draw?


Yes sir.


Indeed law? now so can my fathers forehore horse. And are these the
workmanship of your hands?


I did lymne them.


Lymne them? a good word, lymne them: whose picture is this? Anno Domini 1599.
Believe me, master Anno Domini was of a good settled age when you lymn'd him.
1599. years old? Lets see the other. Etatis suae 24. Bir Lady he is somewhat
younger. Belike master Etatis suae was Anno Dominies son.


Is not your master a


He hath a little procliuitie to him


Procliuitie, good youth? I thank you for your courtly procliuitie.


Approach good sir. I did send for you to draw me a devise, an Imprezza, by
Sinecdoche a Mott. By Phoebus crimson taffeta mantle, I think I speak as
melodiously, look you sir, how think you ont? I wold have you paint me, for
my device, a good fat leg of ewe mutton, swimming in stewde broth of plummes
(boy keele your mouth, it runs over) and the word shall be; Hold my dish,
whilst I spill my pottage. Sure, in my conscience, 'twould be the most sweet
device, now.


'twould sent of kitchen stuff too much.


Gods neakes, now I remember me, I ha the rarest devise in my head that ever
breathed. Can you paint me a drivelling reeling song, let the word be, Vh.


A belch.


O, no no: Vh, paint me vh, or nothing.


It can not be done sir, but by a seeming kind of drunkenness.


No? well, let me have a good maff^e ring, with your own poesy graven in it,
that must sing a small treble, word for word, thus; And if you will my true
lover be,

Come follow me to the green wodde.


O Lord, sir, I can not make a picture sing.

Why? z'lid, I have seen painted things sing as sweet:
But I hau't will tickle it, for a conceit in faith.

O dear Feliche, give me thy device.
How shall I purchase love of Rossaline?

S'will, flatter her soundly.

Her love is such, I can not flatter her:
Bu with my utmost vehemence of speech,
I have adored her beauties.

Hast writ good moving vnaffected rimes to her.


O, yes, Feliche, but she scorns my writ.

Hast thou presented her with sumptuous gifts?

Alas, my fortunes are too weak to offer them.

O, then I have it, I'll tell thee what to do.

What, good Feliche?

Go and hang thy self, I say, go hang thy self,
If that thou can not give, go hang thy self:
I'll rime thee dead, or verse thee to the rope.
How think thou of a Poet that sung thus;
Munera sola pacant, sola addunt munera formam:
Munere solicits Pallada, Cypris erit.
Munera, munera.

I'll go and breath my woes unto the rocks,
And spend my grief upon the deafest seas.
I'll weep my passion to the senseless trees,
And load most solitary air with plaints.
For woods, trees, sea, or rocky Appenine,
Is not so ruthless as my Rossaline.
Farewell dear friend, expect no more of me,
Here ends my part, in this loves Comedy.

Now master Balurdo, whether are you going, ha?


Signior Feliche, how do you faith, by my troth, how do you?


Whether art thou going, bully?

And as heaven help me, how do you?
How, do you in faith he?

Whether art going man?

O god, to the Court, i'll be willing to give you grace and good countnance, if
I may but see you in the presence.


O to court? farewell.


If you see one in a yellow taffeta dubblet, cut upon carnation valor, a
green hat, a blew pair of velvet hose, a gilt rapier, and an orange ^ny pair
of worsted silk stockings, that's I, that's I.


Very good, farewell.


Ho, you shall know me as easily, I ha bought me a new green feather with a
red sprig, you shall see my wrought shirt hang out at my breeches, you shall
know me.


Very good, very good, farewell.


Marry in the mask twill be somewhat harde. But if you hear any body speak
so wittily, that he makes all the room laugh; that's I, that's I. Farewell
good Signior.


Advance the musiques prize, now capering wits,
Rise to your highest mount; let choice delight
Garland the brow of this triumphant night.
Sfoote, a sits like Lucifer himself.

Good sweet Duke, first let their voices, strain for musics price. Give me
the golden harp: faith with your favour, i'll be vmperesse.


Sweet niece content: boys clear your voice sing.


By this gould, I had rather have a servant with a short nose, and a thin
hair, then have such a high stretched minikin voice.


Fair niece, your reason?


By the sweet of love, I should fear extremely that he were an Eunuch.


Spark spirit, how like you his voice?

Spark spirit, how like you his voice?
So help me, youth, thy voice squeakes like a dry cork shoe: come, come; lets
hear the next.


Trust me, a good strong mean, Well sung my boy.


Hold, hold, hold: are ye blind, could you not see my voice coming for the
harp. And I knock not division on the head, take hence the harp, make me a
slip, and let me go but for nine pence. Sir Mark, strike up for master
Balurdo.


Judgement gentlemen, judgement. Wast not above line?
I appeal to your mouths that heard my song.
Do me right, and dub me knight Balurdo.
Kneel down, and i'll dub thee knight of the golden harp.


Indeed law, do, and i'll make you Lady of the silver fiddlestick,


Come, kneel, kneel.


My troth, I thank you, it hath never a whistle in it.


Nay, good sweet cousin raise up your drooping eyes, I were at the point of To
have to hold, from this day forward, I would be ashamed to look thus lumpish.
What my pretty Cousin, tis but the loss of an od maidenhead: shall's dance?
thou art so sad, hark in mine ear. I was about to say, but i'll forbear.


I come, I come, more then most hunny-suckle sweet Ladies, pine not for my
presence, i'll return in pomp. Well spoke sir Ieffrey Balurdo. As I am a true
knight, I feel honourable eloquence begin to grope me already.


Faith, mad niece, I wonder when thou wilt marry?


Faith, kind uncle, when men abandon jealousy, forsake taking of Tobacco, and
cease to wear their beards so rudely long. Oh, to have a husband with a mouth
continually smoking, with a bush of furs on the ridge of his chin, ready
still to slop into his foaming chaps; ah, tis more than most intolerable.


Nay faith, sweet niece, I was mighty strong in thought we should have shut
up night with an old Comedy: the Prince of Millane shall have Mellida, thou
should have


No body, good sweet uncle. I tell you, sir, I have 39. servants, and my
munkey that makes the fortieth. Now I love al of them lightly for something,
but affect none of them seriously for any thing. One's a passionate fool, and
he flatters me above belief: the second's a testy ape, and he rails at
me beyond reason: the third's as grave as some Censor, and he strokes up his
moustaches three times, and makes six plots of set faces, before he speaks one
wise word: the fourth's as dry, as the bur of an heartichoke; the fifth
paints, and hath always a good colour for what he speaks: the sixth


Stay, stay, sweet niece, what makes you thus suspect young gallants worth.


Oh, when I see one were a perewig, I dread his hair; another wallow in a
great slop, I mistrust the proportion of his thigh; and wears a ruffled
boot, I fear the fashion of his leg. Thus, something in each thing, one
trick in every thing makes me mistrust imperfection in all parts; and there's
the full point of my addiction.


The roome's too scant: boys, stand in there, close.

In faith, fair sir, I am too sad to dance.

How's that, how's that? too sad? By heaven dance,
And grace him to, or, go to, I say no more.

A burning glass, the word splendente Phoebo?
Tis too curious, I conceit it not.

Faith, i'll tel thee. I'll no longer burn, then you'll shine and smile upon my
love. For look ye fairest, by your pure sweets,

I do not dote upon your excellence.
And faith, unless you shed your brightest beams
Of sunny favour, and acceptiue grace
Upon my tender love, I do not burn:
Marry but shine, and i'll reflect your beams, with fervent ardor. Faith I wold
be loath to flatter thee fair soul, because I love, not dote, court like thy
husband; which thy father swears, to morrow morn I must be. This is all, and
now from henceforth, trust me Mellida, I'll not speak one wise word to thee
more.


I trust ye.


By my troth, I'll speak pure fool to thee now.


You will speak the liker your self.


Good faith, I'll accept of the cockescombe, so you will not refuse the babble.


Nay good sweet, keep them both, I am enamoured of neither.


Go to, I must take you down for this. Lend me your ear.


A glow worm, the word? Splendescit tantum tenebris.


O, Lady, the glow worm figurates my valour: which shines brightest in most
dark, dismal and horrid achievements.


Or rather, your glow worm represents your wit, which only seems to have fire
in it, though indeed tis but an ignis fatuus, and shines only in the dark
dead night of fools admiration.


Lady, my wit hath spurs, if it wet disposed to ride you.


Faith sir, your wits spurs have but walking rowels; dull, blunt, they will not
draw blood: the gentlemen ushers may admit them the Presence, for any wrong
they can do to Ladies.


Truly, I have strained a note above Ela, for a devise; look you, tis a fair
ruled singing book: the word, Perfect, if it were pricked.


Though you are masked, I can guess who you are by your wit. You are not the
exquisite Balurdo, the most rarely shaped Balurdo.


Who, I? No I am not sir Ieffrey Balurdo. I am not as well known by my wit, as
an alehouse by a red lattice. I am not worthy to love and be beloved of Flauia.


I will not scorn to favour such good parts, as are applauded in your rarest
self.


Truly, you speak wisely, and like a Iantlewoman of fourteen years of age.
You know the stone called lapis; the nearer it comes to the fire, the hotter it
is: and the bird, which the Geometricians cal Auis, the farther it is from the
earth, the nearer it is to the heaven: and love, the nigher it is to the flame,
the more remote (there's a word, remote) the more remote it is from the frost,
Your wit is quick, a little thing pleases a young Lady, and a small favour
contents an old Courtier; and so, sweet mistress I truss my codpeece
point.


What might import this flourish? bring us word.


Stand away: here's such a company of flibotes, hulling about this galleasse
of greatness, that there's no boarding him.

Do you hear yon thing called, Duke?


How now blunt Feliche, what's the news?


Yonder's a knight, hath brought Andrugio's head, craves admittance to your
chair of state.


Conduct him with attendance sumptuous,
Sound all the pleasing instruments of joy:
Make triumph, stand on tiptoe whilst we meet:
O sight most gracious, O revenge most sweet!

We vow, by the honour of our birth, to recompense any man that brngeth
Andrugio's head, with twenty thousand double Pistolets, and the endeering to
our choicest love.


We still with most vnmou'd resolved confirm
Our large munificence: and here breath
A sad and solemn protestation:
When I recall this vow, O, let our house
Be even commanded, stained, and trampled on,
As worthless rubbish of nobility.

Then, here, Piero, is Andrugios head,
Royally casked in a helm of steel:
Give me thy love, and take it. My dauntless soul
Hath that unbounded vigour in his spirits,
That it can bear more rank indignity,
With less impatience, then thy cankered hate
Can sting and venom his untainted worth,
With the most viperous sound of malice. Strike,
O, let no glimpse of honour light thy thoughts,
If there be any heat of royal breath
Creeping in thy veins, O stifle it.
Be still thy self, bloody and treacherous.
Fame not thy house with an admired act
Of princely pity. Piero, I am come,
To soil thy house with an eternal blot
Of savage cruelty; strike, or bid me strike.
I pray my death; that thy ne'er dying shame
Might live immortal to posterity.
Come, be a princely hangman, stop my breath.
O dread thou shame, no more then I dread death.

We are amazed, our royal spirits numm'd,
In stiff astonished wonder at thy prowess,
Most mighty, valiant, and high towering heart.
We blush, and turn our hate upon our selves,
For hating such an vnpeer'd excellence.
I joy my state: him whom I loathed before,
That now I honour, love; nay more, adore.
But stay: what tragic spectacle appears,
Whose body bear you in that mournful hearse?

The breathless trunk of young Antonio.


Antonio (aye me) my Lord, my love, my


Sweet precious issue of most honoured blood,
Rich hope, ripe virtue, O untimely loss.
Come hither friend. Pree thee do not weep:
Why, I am glad he's dead, he shall not see
His fathers vanquished, by his enemy.
Even in princely honour, nay pree thee speak.
How died the wretched boy?

My Lord

I hope he dyed yet like my son, in faith.

Alas, my Lord

He died vnforst, I trust, and valiantly.

Poor gentleman, being

Did his hand shake, or his eye look dull,
His thoughts reel, fearful when he struck the stroke?
And if they did, I'll rend them out the hearse,
Rip up his cearecloth, mangle his bleak face;
That when he comes to heaven, the powers divine
Shall ne'er take notice that he was my son.
I'll quite disclaim his birth: nay pree thee speak:
And twere not hoopt with steel, my breast wold break.

O that my spirit in a sigh could mount,
Into the Sphere, where thy sweet soul doth rest.

O that my tears, bedeawing thy wan cheek,
Could make new spirit sprout in thy could blood.

Verily, he looks as pitifully, as a poor Iohn: as
I am true knight, I could weep like a stoned horse.

Villain, tis thou hast murdered my son.
Thy unrelenting spirit (thou black dog,
That took no passion of his fatal love)
Hath forced him give his life untimely end.

Oh that my life, her love, my dearest blood
Would but redeem one minute of his breath.

I seize that breath. Stad not amazed, great states:
I rise from death, that never lived till now.
Piero, keep thy vow, and I enjoy
More vnexpressed height of happiness,
Then power of thought can reach: if not, lo here
There stands my tomb, and here a pleasing stage:
Most wished spectators of my Tragedy,
To this end have I feigned, that her fair eye,
For whom I lived, might bless me ere I die.
Mell, Can breath depaint my vncoceiued thoughts?
Can words describe my infinite delight,
Of seeing thee, my Lord Antonio?
O no; conceit, breath, passion, words be dumb,
Whilst I instill the dew of my sweet bliss,
In the soft pressure of a melting kiss;
Sic, sic la ire sub vmbras.

Fair son (now I'll be proud to call thee son)
Enjoy me thus; my very breast is thine:
Possess me freely, I am wholly thine.

Dear father*


Sweet son, sweet son; I can speak no more:
My joys passion flows above the shore,
And choakes the current of my speech.

Young Florence prince, to you my lips must beg,
For a remittance of your interest.

In your fair daughter, with all my thought,
So help me faith, the naked truth I'll unfold;
He that was ne'er hot, will soon be cold.

No man else makes claim unto her.

The valiant speak truth in brief: no

Truly, for sir Ieffrey Balurdo, he disclaims to have had any thing in her,


Then here I give her to Antonio.
Royal, valiant, most respected prince,
Let's clip our hands; I'll thus observe my vow;
I promised twenty thousand double Pistolets,
With the indeering to my dearest love,
To him that brought thy head; thine be the gold,
To solemnize our houses unity:
My love be thine, the all I have be thine.
Fill us fresh wine, the form we'll take by this:
We'll drink a health, while they two sip a kiss.
Now, there remains no discord that can sound
Harsh accents to the ear of our accord:
So please your niece to match.

Troth uncle, when my sweet faced cousin hath told me how she likes the thing,
called wedlock; may be I'll take a survey of the checkroll of my servants; he
that hath the best parts of, I'll prick him down for my husband.


For passion of love now, remember me to my mistress, Lady Rossaline, when she
is pricking down the good parts of her servants. As I am true knight, I grow
stiff: I shall carry it.


I will.
Sound Lidian wires, once make a pleasing note,
On Nectar streams of your sweet airs, to flote.

Here ends the comic crosses of true love:
Oh may the passage most successful prove.

GEntlemen, though I remain an armed Epilogue, I stand not as a peremptory
challenger of desert, either for him that composed the Comedy, or for us that
acted it: but a most submissive supplyant for both. What imperfection you have
seen in us, leave with us, we'll amend it; what hath pleased you, take with
you, cherish it. You shall not be more ready to embrace any thing commendable,
then we will endeavour to amend all things reproueable. What we are, is by your
favour. What we shall be, rests all in your applausiue encouragements.


