THE rawish dank of clumzie winter ramps
The fluent summers vain: and drizling sleete
Chilleth the wan bleak cheek of the numd earth,
Whilst snarling gusts nibble the iuyceles leaves,
From the nak't shuddering branch; and pills the skin
From off the soft and delicate aspects.
O, now, me thinks, a sullen tragic Scene
Would suite the time, with pleasing congruence.
May we be happy in our weak deuoyer,
And all part pleased in most wished content:
But swear of Hercules can ne'er beget
So blessed an issue. Therefore we proclaim,
If any spirit breathes within this round,
Incapable of weighty passion
(As from his birth, being hugged in the arms,
And nuzzled twixt the breasts of happiness)
Who winks, and shuts his apprehension up
From common sense of what men were, and are,
Who would not know what men must be; let such
Hurry amain from our black visaged shows:
We shall affright their eyes. But if a breast,
Nailed to the earth with grief: if any heart
Pierced through with anguish, pant within this ring:
If there be any blood, whose heate is choked
And stifled with true sense of misery:
If ought of these strains fill this consort up,
Th'arriue most welcome. O that our power
Could lackey, or keep wing with our desires;
That with unused paize of stile and sense,
We might weigh massy in judicious scale.
Yet here's the prop that doth support our hopes;
When our Sceanes falter, or invention halts*
Your favour will give crutches to our faults.
HO, Gasper Strotzo, bind Feliches trunk
Unto the panting side of Mellida.
Tis yet dead night, yet al the earth is cloucht
In the dull leaden hand of snoring sleep:
No breath disturbs the quiet of the air.
No spirit moves upon the breast of earth,
Save howling dogs, nightcrowes, screeching owls,
Save meager ghosts, Piero, and black thoughts.
One, two* Lord, in two hours what a topless mount
Of vnpeer'd mischief, have these hands cast up!
I can scarce coop triumphing vengeance up,
From bursting forth in braggart passion.

My Lord, tis firmly said that

Andrugio sleeps in peace: this brain hath choked
The organ of his breast. Feliche hangs,
But as a bait upon the line of death,
To tice on mischief. I am great in blood,
Vnequald in revenge. You horrid scouts,
That sentinel swart night, give load applause
From your large palms. First know, my hart was raised
Unto Andrugios life, upon this ground:

Duke, tis reported

We both were rivals in our May of blood,
Unto Maria, (...) Ferraras heir.
He wan the Lady, to my honours death:
And from her sweets, cropped this Antonio:
For which, I burnt in inward sweltring hate,
And festered rankling malice in my breast,
Till I might belke revenge upon his eyes:
And now (o blessed now) tis done. Hell, night,
Give load applause to my hypocrisy.
When his bright valour even dazzled sense,
In offering his own head, public reproach
Had blurd my name. Speak Strotzo, had it not?
If then I had

It had, so please

What had so please? Unseasoned Sycophant,
Piero Sforza is no numbed Lord,
Senseless of all true touch; stroke not the head
Of infant speech, till it be fully borne*
Go to.

How now? Fut, I'll not smother your speech.


Nay, right thine eyes: twas but a little spleen:
(Huge plunge!
Sinn's grown a slave, and must observe slight evils.
Huge villains are enforced to claw all devils.)
Pish, sweet thy thoughts, and give me

Stroke not the head of infant speech? Go to?


Nay, calm this storm. I ever held thy breast
More secret, and more firm in league of blood,
Then to be struck in heate with each-slight puff.
Give me thy ears; Huge infamy
Press down my honour; if even then, when
His fresh act of prowess bloomed out full,
I had taken vengeance on his hated head

Why it had

Could I avoid to give a seeming grant
Unto fruition of Antonios love?

No.


And did thou ever see, a Iudas kiss,
With a more covert touch of fleering hate?

No.


And having clipped them with pretence of love,
Have I not crushed them with a cruel wring?

Yes.


Say, faith, did thou ere hear, or read, or see
Such happy vengeance, unsuspected death?
That I should drop strong poison in the boawle,
Which I my self carous't unto his health,
And future fortune of our unity,
That it should work even in the husht of night,
And strangle him on sudden; that fair show
Of death, for the excessive joy of his fate,
Might choke the murder? Ha Strotzo, is't not rare?
Nay, but weigh it. Then Feliche stabbed
(Whose sinking thought frighted my conscious hart)
And laid by Mellida, to stop the match,
And hale on mischief. This all in one night?
Is't to be equalled think thou? O, I could eat
Thy fumbling throat, for thy lagd censure. Fut,
Is't not rare?

Yes.


No? yes? nothing but no, and yes, dull lump?
Can thou not honey me with fluent speech,
And even adore my topless villainy?
Will I not blast my own blood for revenge?
Must not thou straight be perjured for revenge*
And yet no creature dream tis my revenge.
Will I not turn a glorious bridal morn
Unto a Stygian night? Yet nought but no, and yes?

I would have told you, if the incubus,
That rides your bosom, would have patience:
It is reported, that in private state,
Maria, Genous Duchess, makes to Court,
Longing to see him, whom she ne'er shall see,
Her Lord Andrugio. Belike she hath received
The news of reconciliation:
Reconciliation with a death?
Poor Lady shall but find poor comfort in it.

O, let me swoon for joy. By heaven, I think
I ha said my prayers, within this month at least;
I am so boundless happy. Doth she come?
By this warm reeking gore, I'll marry her.
Look I not now like an inamorate?
Poison the father, butcher the son, marry the mother; ha!
Strotzo, to bed: snort in securest sleep:
For see, the dapple gray coursers of the morn
Beat up the light with their bright silver hooves,
And chase it through the sky. To bed, to bed.
This morn my vengeance shall be amply fed.

STAY gentle Luceo, and vouchsafe thy hand.


O, Madam

Nay, pree thee give me leave to say, vouchsafe,
Submiss entreats beseem my humble fate.
Here let us sit. O Luceo, fortunes gilt
Is rubbed quite off from my slight tin-foild state,
And poor Maria must appear vngrac't
Of the bright fulgor of glossed majesty.

Cheer up your spirits Madam; fairer chance
Then that which courts your presence instantly,
Can not be formd by the quick mould of thought.

Art thou assured the dukes are reconciled*
Shall my wombs honour wed fair Mellida?
Will heaven at length grant harbour to my head?
Shall I once more clip my Andrugio?
And wreath my arms about Antonio's neck?
Or is glib rumour grown a parasite,
Holding a false glass to my sorrows eyes,
Making the wrinkled front of grief seem fair,
Though tis much rivaled with abortive care.

Most virtuous Princess, banish straggling fear;
Keep league with comfort. For these eyes beheld
The Dukes united; you faint glimmering light
Ne'er peeped through the crannies of the east,
Since I beheld them drink a sound carouse,
In sparkling Bacchus,
Unto each others health;
Your son assured to beauteous Mellida:
And all clouds cleared of threatening discontent.

What age is morning of?


I think about five.


Nutriche, Nutriche.


Beshrow your fingers marry, you have disturbed the pleasure of the finest
dream. O God, I was even coming to it law* O Iesu, twas coming of the
sweetest. I'll tell you now, me thought I was married, and me thought I spent (O
Lord why did you wake me) and me thought I spent three spur Roials on the
Fiddlers for striking up a fresh hornepipe. Saint Vrsula, I was even going to
bed, you, me thought, my husband was even putting out the tapers, when you,
Lord I shall never have such a dream come upon me, as long as


Peace idle creature, peace.
When will the Court rise?

Madam, twere best you took some lodging up,
And lay in private till the soil of grief
Were cleared your cheek, and new burnished lustre
Clothed your presence, before you saw the Dukes,
And entered, among the proud Venetian States.

No Lucio, my dear Lord's wise, and knows
That tinsill glitter, or rich purfled robes,
Curled hairs, hung full of sparkling Carcanets,
Are not the true adornements of a wife.
So long as wives are faithful, modest, chaste,
Wise Lords affect them. Virtue doth not waste,
With each slight flame of crackling vanity.
A modest eye forces affection,
Whilst outward gainesse light looks but entice.
Fairer then Natures fair is foulest vice.
She that loves Art, to get her cheek more lovers,
Much outward gauds slight inward grace discovers.
I care not to seem fair, but to my Lord.
Those that strive most to please most strangers sight,
Folly may judge most fair, wisdom most light.
But hark, soft musique gently moves the air:
I think the bridegroom's up. Lucio, stand close.
O, now Marya, challenge grief to stay
Thy joys encounter. Look Lucio, tis clear day.

DARKNESS is fled: look, infant morn hath drawn
Bright silver curtains, about the couch of night:
And now Auroras horse trots azure rings,
Breathing fair light about the firmament,
Stand, what's that?

And if a horned devil should burst forth,
I would pass on him with a mortal stock.

Oh, a horned devil would prove ominous,
Unto a bridegrooms eyes,

A horned devil? good, good: ha ha ha, very good.


Good tand prince laugh not. By the joys of love,
When thou dost girne, thy rusty face doth look
Like the head of a roasted rabbit: fie vpont.

By my troth, me thinks his nose is just colour de Roy

I tel thee fool, my nose will abide no jest.


No in truth, I do not ieast, I speak truth. Truth is the touchstone of all
things: and if your nose will not abide the truth, your nose will not abide the
touch: and if your nose will not abide the touch, your nose is a copper nose,
and must be nailed up for a slip.


I scorn to retort the obtuse ieast of a fool.


Retort and obtuse, good words, very good words.


Young Prince, look sprightly; fie, a bridegroom sad!


In truth, if he were retort, and obtuse, no question, he would be merry:
but and please my Genius, I will be most retort and obtuse ere night. I'll tell
you, what I'll bear soon at night in my shield, for my device.


What, good Balurdo?


O, do me right: sir Gefferey Balurdo: sir, sir, as long as ye live, sir.


What, good sir Gefferey Balurdo?


Marry forsooth, I'll carry for my device, my grand fathers great stone-hors,
flinging up his head, ierking out his left leg. The word; Wighy Purt. As I am
a true knight, will it not be most retort and obtuse, ha?


Blow hence these faplesse jests. I tell you bloods
My spirit's heavy, and the juice of life
Creeps slowly through my stifned arteries.
Last sleep, my sense was steep't in horrid dreams:
Three parrs of night were swallowed in the gulf
Of ravenous time, when to my slumbering powers,
Two meager ghosts made apparition.
The on's breast seemed fresh pauncht with bleeding wounds:
Whose bubbling gore sprang in frighted eyes.
The other ghost assumed my fathers shape:
Both cried Revenge. At which my trembling joints
(Iced quite over with a froz'd cold sweat)
Leaped forth the sheets. Three times I gasp't at shades:
And thrice, deluded by erroneous sense,
I forced my thoughts make stand; when lo, I op't
A large bay window, through which the night
Struck terror to my soul. The verge of heaven
Was ringd with flames, and all the upper vault
Thick laced with flakes of fire; in midst whereof
A blazing Comet shot his threatening train
Just on my face. Viewing these prodigies,
I bowed my naked knee, and pierced the star,
With an outfacing eye; pronouncing thus;
Deus imperat astris. At which, my nose straight bled:
Then doubled I my word, so slunk to bed.

Verily, sir Gefferey had a monstrous strange dream the last night. For me
thought I dreamt I was asleep, and me thought the ground yaun'd and belkt up
the abominable ghost of a misshapen Simile, with two ugly Pages; the one
called master, even as going before; and the other Mounser, even so following
after; whilst Signior Simile stalked most prodigiously in the midst. At which
I bewrayed the fearfulness of my nature: and being ready to forsake the
fortress of my wit, start up, called for a clean shirt, eat a mess of
broth, and with that I awaked.


I pree thee peace. I tell you gentlemen,
The frightful shades of night yet shake my brain:
My gellied blood's not thawed: the sulphur damps,
That flow in winged lightning about my couch,
Yet stick within my sense, my soul is great,
In expectation of dire prodigies.

Tut, my young Prince, let not thy fortunes see
Their Lord a coward. He, that's nobly borne,
Abhors to fear. Base feare's the brand of slaves.
He that observes, pursues, slinks back for fright,
Was never cast in mould of noble spright.

Tush, there's a fun will straight exhale these damps
Of chilling fear. Come, shal's salute the bride?

I pree the mix thy breath with his:
Sing one of Signior Renaldo's airs,
To rouse the slumbering bride from gluttoning,
In surfeit of superfluous sleep. Good Signior, sing.
What means this silence and vnmooued calm!
Boy, wind thy Cornet: force the leaden gates
Of lasy sleep fly open, with thy breath,
My Mellida not up? not stirring yet? vmh.

That voice, should be my sons Antonio's. Antonio?


Here, who calls? here stands Antonio.


Sweet son.


Dear mother.


Fair honour of a chaste and loyal bed,
Thy fathers beauty, thy sad mothers love,
Were I as powerful as the voice of fate,
Felicity complete should sweet thy state:
But all the blessings, that a poor banished wretch,
Can power upon thy head, take gentle son:
Live, gracious youth, to close thy mothers eyes,
Loved of thy parents, till their latest hour:
How cheers my Lord, thy father? O sweet boy,
Part of him thus I clip, my dear, dear joy.

Madam, last night I kissed his princely hand,
And took a treasured blessing from his lips:
O mother, you arrive in Iubile,
And firm atonement of all boisterous rage:
Pleasure, united love, protested faith,
Guard my loved father, as sworn Pensioners:
The Dukes are leagued in firmest bond of love,
And you arrive even in the Solsticie,
And highest point of sun-shine happiness.
Hark Madam, how you Cornet ierketh up
His straind shrill accents, in the capering air;
As proud to summon up my bright cheeked love.
Now, mother, open wide expectation:
Let loose your amplest sense, to entertain
Th'impression of an object of such worth,
That life's too poor to*

Nay leave Hyperboles.


I tel thee prince, that presence straight appears,
Of which thou can not form Hyperboles,
The trophy of triumphing excellence:
The heart of beauty, Mellida appears.
See, look, the curtain stirs, shine natures pride,
Loves vital spirit, dear Antonio's bride.
What villain bloods the window of my love?
What slave hath hung you gorie ensign up,
In flat defiance of humanity?
Awake thou fair unspotted purity.
Death's at thy window, awake bright Mellida:
Antonio calls.

WHO gives these il-befitting attributes
Of chaste, unspotted, bright, to Mellida,
He lies as load as thunder, she's unchaste,
Tainted, impure, black as the soul of hell.

Dog, I will make the eat thy vomit up,
Which thou hast belk't against taintlesse Mellida.
Ramm't quickly down, that it may not rise up
To imbraid my thoughts. Behold my stomack's:
Strike me quite through with the relentless edge
Of raging fury. Boy, I'll kill thy love
Pandulfe Feliche, I have stabbed thy son:
Look, yet his lifeblood reekes upon this steel.
Albert, you hangs thy friend* Have none of you
Courage of vengeance? Forget I am your Duke.
Think Mellida is not Pieros blood.
Imagine on slight ground, I'll blast his honour.
Suppose I saw not that incestuous slave,
Clipping the strumpet, with luxurious twines:
O, numme my sense of anguish, cast my life
In a dead sleep, whilst law cuts off yon maine,
Yon putred ulcer of my royal blood.

Keep league with reason, gracious Sovereign.


There glow no sparks of reason in the world;
All are raked up in ashy beastliness.
The bulk of man's as dark as Erebus,
No branch of Reasons light hangs in his trunk:
There lives no reason to keep league withal.
I ha no reason to be reasonable.
Her wedding eve, linked to the noble blood
Of my most firmly reconciled friend,
And found even clingd in sensuality!
O heaven! O heaven! Were she as near my heart
As is my liver, I would rend her off.

WHITHER, O whither shall I hurl vast grief?


Here, into my breast: tis a place built wide
By fate, to give receipt to boundless woes.

O no; here throb those hearts, which I must cleave
With my keen piercing news. Andrugio's dead.

Dead?


O me most miserable.


Dead, alas, how dead?
Fut weep, act, fain. Dead, alas, how dead?

The vast delights of his large sudden joys
Opned his powers so wide, that's native heate
So prodigally flowed, t'exterior parts,
That thinner Citadel was left vnmand,
And so surprised onsodaine by cold death.

O fatal, disastrous, cursed, dismal!
Choke breath and life* I breath, I live too long.
Andrugio my Lord, I come, I come.

Be cheerful Princess, help Castilio,
The Lady's swouned, help to bear her in.
Slow comfort to huge cares, is swiftest sin.

Courage, courage sweet Lady, tis sir Gefferey Balurdo bids you courage. Truly
I am as nimble as an Elephant about a Lady.


Dead?


Dead.


Dead?


Why now the womb of mischief is delivered,
Of the prodigious issue of the night.

Ha, ha, ha.


My father dead, my love attaint of lust:
That's a large lye, as vast as spacious hell:
Poor guiltless Lady. O accursed lye.
What, whom, whether, which shall I first lament?
A dead father, a dishonoured wife. Stand.
Me thinks I feel the frame of nature shake.
Cracks not the joints of earth to bear my woes?

Sweet Prince, be patient.


S'lid sir, I will not in despite of thee.
Patience is slave to fools: a chain that's fixed
Only to posts, and senseless log-like dolts.

Tis reasons glory to command affects.


Lies thy cold father dead, his glossed eyes
New closed up by thy sad mothers hands?
Hast thou a love as spotless as the brow
Of clearest heaven, blurd with false defames?
Are thy moist entrails crumpled up with grief
Of parching mischiefs? Tel me, does thy hart
With punching anguish spur thy galled ribs?
Then come and let's sit and weep wreath our arms:
I'll hear thy counsel.

Take comfort

Confusion to all comfort: I defy it.
Comfort's a Parasite, a flattering Jack:
And melts resolved despair. O boundless woe,
If there be any black yet unknown grief:
If there be any horror yet unfelt,
Unthought of mischief in thy fiendlike power,
Dash it upon my miserable head.
Make me more wretch, more cursed if thou can.
O, now my fate is more than I could fear:
My woes more weighty than my soul can bear.

Ha, ha, ha,

Why laugh you uncle? That's my cousin, your son,
Whose breast hangs cased in his cluttered gore.

True man, true: why, wherefore should I weep?
Come sit, kind Nephew: come on: thou and I
Will talk as Chorus to this tragedy*
Entreat the music strain their instruments,
With a slight touch whilst we. Say on fair cousin.

He was the very hope of Italy,
The blooming honour of your drooping age.

True cousin, true. They say that men of hope are crushed:
Good are suppressed by base desertlesse clods,
That stifle gasping virtue. Look sweet youth,
How provident our quick Venetians are,
Least houes of jade should trample on my boy:
Look how they lift him up to eminence,
Heave him, above reach of flesh. Ha, ha, ha.

Uncle, this laughter ill becomes your grief.


Would have me cry, run raving up down,
For my sons loss? would have me turn rank mad,
Or wring my face with mimic action;
Stamp, curse, weep, rage, then my bosom strike?
Away tis apish action, player-like.
If he is guiltless, why should tears be spent?
Thrice blessed soul that dies innocent.
If he is leapred with so foul a guilt,
Why should a sigh be lent, a tear be spilt?
The gripe of chance is weak, to wring a tear,
From him that knows what fortitude should bear.
Listen young blood. Tis not true valors pride,
To swagger, quarrel, swear, stamp, rave, and chide,
To stab in fume of blood, to keep load coil,
To bandy factions in domestic broils,
To dare the act of Sins, whose filth excels.
The blackest customs of blind Infidels.
No, my loved youth: he may of valour vaunt;
Whom fortunes lowdest thunder can not daunt,
Whom fretful gaules of chance, sterne fortunes siege;
Makes not his reason slink, the souls fair liege,
Whose well pais'd action ever rests upon
Not giddy humours, but discretion.
This heart in valour even Jove out-goes:
Jove is without, but this above sense of woes:
And such a one eternity: Behold,
Good morrow son: thou bid a fig for cold.
Sound louder music: let my breath exact,
You strike sad Tones unto this dismal act.

ROT there thou cearcloth that infolds the flesh
Of my loathed foe; moulder to crubling dust:
Oblivion choke the passage of thy fame.
Trophies of honoured birth drop quickly down:
Let nought of him, but what was vicious, live.
Though thou art dead, think not my hate is dead:
I have but newly twone my arm in the curled locks
Of snaky vengeance. Pale beetle-brow'd hate
But newly bustles up. Sweet wrong, I clap thy thoughts.
O let me hug my bosom, rub my breast,
In hope of what may hap. Andrugio rots:
Antonio lives: vmh: how long? ha, ha; how long?
Antonio packed hence, I'll his mother wed,
Then clear my daughter of supposed lust,
Wed her to Florence heir. O excellent.
Venice, Genoa, Florence, at my beck,
At Piero's nod, Balurdo, o ho.
O, twill be rare, all unsuspected donne.
I have bin nursed in blood, and still have sucked
The steeme of reeking gore. Balurdo, ho?

When my beard is on, most noble prince, when my beard is on.


Why, what dost thou with a beard?


In truth, one told me that my wit was bald, that a Meremaide was half fish,
and half fish: and therefore to speak wisely, like one of your counsel, as
indeed it hath pleased you to make me, not only being a fool, of your
counsel, but also to make me of your counsel, being a fool; If my wit be
bald, and a Mermaid be half fish and half cunger, then I must be forced to
conclude the tyring man hath not glewd on my beard half fast, enough. Gods
bores, it will not stick to fall off.


Dost thou know what thou hast spoken all this while?


O Lord Duke, I would be sorry of that. Many men can utter that which, no man,
but themselves can conceive: but I thank a good wit, I have the gift to speak
that which neither any man else, nor my self understands.


Thou art wise. He that speaks he knows not what, shall never sin against his
own conscience: go to, thou art wise.


Wise? O no. I have a little natural discretion, or so: but for wise, I am
somewhat prudent: but for wise, o Lord*


Hold, take those keys, open the Castle vault, put in Mellida.


And put in Mellida? well, let me alone,

Bid Forobosco, and Castilio guard,
Indeere thy self Piero's intimate.

Indeere, and intimate: good, I assure you. I will indeere and intimate Mellida
into the dugeon presently.


Will Pandulfo Feliche wait on me?


I will make him come, most retort and obtuse, to you presently. I think, sir
Ieffrey talks like a counseller. Go to, gods neaks, I think I tickle it.


I'll seem to wind you fool with kindest arm.
He that's ambitious minded, and but man,
Must have his followers beasts, dubbed slavish sots:
Whose service is obedience, and whose wit
Reaches no further then to admire their Lord,
And stare in adoration of his worth.
I love, a slave raked out of common mud
Should seem to sit in counsel with my heart.
High honoured blood's too squeamish to assent,
And lend a hand to an ignoble act*
Poison from roses who could ere abstract?
How now Pandulfo, weeping for thy son?

NO no, Piero, weeping for my sins:
Had I bin a good father, he had bin a gracious son.

Pollution must be purged.


Why taintst thou then the air with stench of flesh,
And humane putrifactions noisome sent?
I pray his body. Who less boon can crave,
Than to bestow upon the dead, his grave?

Grave? why? think thou he deserves a grave,
That hath defiled the temple of

Peace, peace:
Me thinks I hear a humming murmur creep
From out his gelli'd wounds. Look on those lips,
Those now lawn pillows, on whose tender softness,
Chaste modest speech, stealing from out his breast,
Had wont to rest it self, as loath to post
From out so fair an Inn: look, look, they seem to stir,
And breath defiance to black obloquy.

Think thou thy son could suffer wrongfully?


A wise man wrongfully, but never wrong
Can take: his breast's of such well tempered proof,
It may be raced, not pearc't by savage tooth
Of foaming malice: showers of darts may dark
Heavens ample brow: but not strike out a spark;
Much less pearce the Suns cheek. Such songs as these,
I often dittied till my boy did sleep:
But now I turn plain fool (alas) I weep.

Fore heaven he makes me shrug: wold a were dead:
He is a virtuous man. What has our court to do
With virtue, in the devils name! Pandulpho, hark.
My lustful daughter dies: start not, she dies.
I pursue justice, I love sanctity,
And an undefiled temple of pure thoughts.
Shall I speak freely? Good Andrugio's dead:
And I do fear a fetch; but (vmh) would I durst speak.
I do mistrust; but (vmh) death: is he all, all man:
Hath he no part of mother in him, ha?
No licorish womanish inquisitiveness?

Andrugio's dead!


I, and I fear, his own unnatural blood,
To whom he gave life, hath given death for life.
How could he come on, I see false suspect
Is vicde; wrung hardly in a virtuous heart.
Well, I could give you reason for my doubts.
You are of honoured birth, my very friend.
You know how god-like tis to root out sin.
Antonio is a villain. Will you join
In oath with me, against the traitors life,
And swear, you knew, he sought his fathers death?
I loved him well, yet I love justice more:
Our friends we should affect, justice adore.

My Lord, the clapper of my mouth's not glibd
With court oil, twill not strike on both sides yet.

Tis just that subjects act commands of kings.


Command then just and honourable things.


Even so my self then will traduce his guilt.


Beware, take heed least guiltless blood be spilt.


Where only honest deeds to kings are free,
It is no empire, but a beggary.

Where more than noble deeds to kings are free,
It is no empire, but a tyranny.

Tush iuicelesse graybeard, tis immunity,
Proper to princes, that our state exactes,
Our subjects not alone to bear, but praise our acts.

O, but that prince that worthfull praise aspires,
From hearts, and not from lips, applause desires.

Pish, true praise, the brow of common men doth ring,
False, only girts the temple of a king,
He that hath strength, and's ignorant of power,
He was not made to rule, but to be ruled.

Tis praise to do, not what we can, but should.


Hence doting Stoic: by my hope of bliss,
I'll make thee wretched.

Defiance to thy power, thou rifted Iawne.
Now, by the loved heaven, sooner thou shalt
Rince thy soul ribs from the black filth of sin,
That soots thy heart, then make me wretched. Pish,
Thou can not coupe me up. Had thou a Jail
With treble walls, like antic Babilon,
Pandulpho can get out. I tell thee Duke,
I have old Fortunatus wishing cap:
And can be where I list, even in a trice.
I'll skip from earth into the arms of heaven:
And from tryumphall arch of blessedness,
Spit on thy froathy breast. Thou can not slave
Or banish me; I will be free at home,
Maugre the beard of greatness. The port holes
Of sheathed spirit are ne'er corb'd up:
But still stand open ready to discharge
Their precious shot into the shrouds of heaven*

O torture! slave, I banish thee the town,
Thy native seat of birth.

How proud thou speak! I tell thee Duke, the blasts
Of the swollen cheekt winds, nor all the breath of kings
Can puff me out my native seat of birth.
The earth's my bodies, and the heauen's my souls
Most native place of birth, which they will keep:
Despite the menace of mortality.
Why Duke:
That's not my native place, where I was rocked.
A wise mans home is wheresoever he is wise.
Now that, from man, not from the place doth rise.

Wold I were deaf (o plague) hence dotard wretch:
Tread not in court. All that thou hast, I seize.
His quiet's firmer then I can disease.

Go, boast unto thy flattering Sycophants;
Pandulpho's slave, Piero hath orethrowne.
Loose Fortunes rags are lost; my owne's my own.
Tis true Piero, thy vexed heart shall see,
Thou hast but tripped my slave, not conquered me.

NAY sweet be comforted, take counsel and

Alberto, peace: that grief is wanton sick,
Whose stomach can digest and brooke the diet
Of stale ill relished counsel. Pygmy cares
Can shelter under patience shield: but giant griefs
Will burst all covert.

My Lord, tis supper time.


Drink deep Alberto: eat, good Lucio:
But my pined heart shall eat on nought but woe.

My Lord, we dare not leave you thus alone.


You cannot leave Antonio alone.
The chamber of my breast is even thronged,
With firm attendance, that forsweares to flinch.
I have a thing sits here; it is not grief,
Tis not despair, nor the most plague
That the most wretched are infected with:
But the most greefull, despairing, wretched,
Accursed, miserable. O, for heavens sake
Forsake me now; you see how light I am,
And yet you force me to defame my patience.

Fair gentle prince

Away, thy voice is hateful: thou dost buzz,
And beat my ears with intimations
That Mellida, that Mellida is light,
And stained with adulterous luxury:
I cannot brook't. I tell the Lucio,
Sooner will I give faith, that vertue's scant
In princes courts, will be adorned with wreath
Of choice respect, and indeerd intimate.
Sooner will I believe that friendships rain.
Will curb ambition from utility,
Then Mellida is light. Alas poor soul,
Did ere see her (good heart) hast heard her speak?
Kind, kind soul* Incredulity it self
Would not be so brass hearted, as suspect so modest cheeks

My Lord

Away, a selfe-one guilt doth only hatch distrust:
But a chaste thought's as far from doubt, as lust.
I entreat you leave me,

Will you endeavour to forget your grief?


I faith I will, good friend, I faith I will.
I'll come and eat with you. Alberto, see,
I am taking Physic, here's Philosophie.
Good honest leave me, I'll drink wine anon.

Since you enforce us, fair prince, we are gone.


Ferte fortiter: hoc est quo deum antecedatis. Ille enim extra patientiam
malorum; vos supra. Contemnite dolorem: aut soluetur, aut soluet. Contemnite
fortuna: nullu telu, quo feriret animum habet.




Pish, thy mother was not lately widowed,
Thy dear affied love, lately defamed,
With blemish of foul lust, when thou wrot'st thus.
Thou wrapped in furs, breaking thy limbs before fierce,
Forbidst the froze Zone to shudder. Ha, ha: tis nought,
But fomie bubbling of a fleamie brain,
Nought else but smoke. O what dank marrish spirit,
But would be fired with impatience,
At my No more, no more: he that was never blessed,
With height of birth, fair expectation
Of mounted fortunes, knows not what it is
To be the pitied object of the world.
O, poor Antonio, thou may sigh.

Aye me.


And curse.


Black powers.


And cry.


O heaven.


And close laments with


O me most miserable.


Woe for my dear dear son.


Woe for my dear, dear husband.


Woe for my dear dear love.


Woe for me all, close all your woes in me:
In me Antonio, ha? Where live these sounds?
I can see nothing; griefe's invisible,
And lurks in secret angles of the heart*
Come sigh again, Antonio bears his part.

O here, here is a vent to pass my sighs.
I have surcharged the dungeon with my plaints.
Prison, and heart will burst, if void of vent*
I, that is Phoebe, empress of the night,
That gins to mount; o chastest deity:
If I be false to my Antonio,
If the least soil of lust smeers my pure love,
Make me more wretched, make me more accursed
Then infamy, torture, death, hell and heaven
Can bound with amplest power of thought: if not,
Purge my poor heart, with defamations blot.

Purge my poor heart from defamations blot!
Poor heart, how like her virtuous self* she speaks.
Mellida, dear Mellida, it is Antonio:
Slink not away, tis thy Antonio.

How found you out, my Lord (alas) I know
Tis easy in this age, to find out woe.
I have a suit to you.

What is't, dear soul?


Kill me, I faith I'll wink, not stir a jot.
For God sake kill me: insooth, loved youth,
I am much injured; look, see how I creep.
I cannot wreak my wrong, but sigh and weep.

May I be cursed, but I credit thee.


To morrow I must die*


Alas, for what?


For loving thee; tis true my sweetest breast*
I must die falsely: so must thou, dear heart.
Nets are a knitting to entrap thy life.
Thy fathers death must make a Paradise
To my (I shame to call him) father. Tell me sweet,
Shall I die thine? dost love me still, and still?

I do.


Then welcome heavens will.


Madam, I will not swell like a Tragedian, in forced passion of affected
strains.

If I had present power of ought but pitying you, I would be as ready to
redress your wrongs, as to pursue your love. Throngs of thoughts crowd for
their passage, somewhat I will do.

Reach me thy hand: think this is honours bent,
To live vnslau'd, to die innocent.

Let me entreat a favour, gracious love.
Be patient, see me die, good do not weep:
Go sup, sweet chuck, drink, and securely sleep.

I faith I cannot, but I'll force my face
To palliate my sickness.

Give me thy hand. Peace on thy bosom dwell:
That's all my woe can breath: kiss. Thus farewell.

Farewell: my heart is great of thoughts,
Stay dove:
And therefore I must speak: but what? o Love!
By this white hand: eno more: read in these tears,
What crushing anguish thy Antonio bears.

God night good heart,

Thus heate from blood, thus souls from bodies part.


He grieves, laugh Strozzo: laugh, he weeps.
Hath he tears? o pleasure! hath he tears?
Now do I scourge Andrugio with steel whips
Of knotty vengeance. Strozzo, cause me straight
Some plaining ditty to augment despair.
Triumph Piero: hark, he groans, o rare!

Behold a prostrate wretch laid on his tomb.
His Epitaph, thus; No plus ultra. Ho.
Let none out* woe me: mine's Herculean woe.

MAY I be more cursed then heaven can make me;
If I am not more wretched
Then man can conceive me. Sore forlorn
Orphan, what omnipotence can make thee happy?

How now sweet son? good youth, what dost thou?


Weep, weep.


Dost nought but weep, weep?


Yes mother, I do sigh, and wring my hands,
Beat my poor breast, and wreath my tender arms.
Hark ye; I'll tel you wondrous strange, strange news.

What my good boy, stark mad?


I am not.


Alas, is that strange news?


Strange news? why mother, is't not wondrous strange
I am not mad? I run not frantic, ha?
Knowing my fathers trunk scarce cold, your love
Is sought by him that doth pursue my life?
Seeing the beauty of creation,
Antonio's bride, pure heart, defamed, and stoad
Under the hatches of obscuring earth.
Heu quo labour, quo vota ceciderunt mea!

Good evening to the fair Antonio,
Most happy fortune, sweet succeeding time,
Rich hope: think not thy fate a bankrupt though

Vmh, the devil in his good time and tide forsake thee.


How now? hark ye Prince.


God be with you.


Nay, noble blood, I hope ye not suspect


Suspect, I scorn't. Here's cap leg; good night:
Thou that wants power, with dissemblance fight.

Madam, O that you could remember to forget


I had a husband and a happy son.


Most powreful beauty, that enchanting grace


Talk not of beauty, nor enchanting grace.
My husband's dead, my son's distraught, accursed.
Come, I must vent my griefs, or heart will burst.

She's gone ( yet she's here) she hath left a print
Of her sweet graces fixed within my heart,
As fresh as is her face. I'll marry her.
She's most fair, true, most chaste, most false: because
Most fair, tis firm I'll marry her.

MY Lord,

Ha, Strotzo, my other soul; my life,
Dear, hast thou steeled the point of thy resolve?
Wilt not turn edge in execution?

No.


Do it with rare passion, and present thy guilt,
As if twere wrung out with thy conscience gripe.
Swear that my daughter's innocent of lust,
And that Antonio bribed thee to defame
Her maiden honour, on inveterate hate
Unto my blood; and that thy hand was feed
By his large bounty, for his fathers death.
Swear plainly that thou chok'tst Andrugio,
By his sons only egging. Rush me in
Whilst Mellida prepares her self to die:
Halter about thy neck, and with such sighs,
Laments and acclamations lyfen it,
As if impulsiue power of remorse

I'll weep.


I, I, fall on thy face and cry; why suffer you
So lewd a slave as Strotzo is to breath?

I'll beg a strangling, grow importunate

As if thy life were loathsome to thee: then I
Catch straight the cords end; and, as much incensed
With thy damned mischiefs, offer a rude hand,
As ready to gird in thy pipe of breath:
But on the sudden straight I'll stand amazed,
And fall in exclamations of thy virtues.

Applaud my agonies, and penitence.


Thy honest stomach, that could not digest
The crudities of murder: but surcharged,
Vomited'st them up in Christian piety.

Then clip me in your arms.


And call thee brother, mount thee straight to state,
Make thee of counsel; tut, tut, what not, what not?
Think ont, be confident, pursue the plot.

Look here's a troop, a true rogues lips are mute*
I do not use to speak, but execute.

So, so; run headlong to confusion:
Thou slight brained mischief, thou art made as dirt,
To plaster up the bracks of my defects.
I'll wring what may be squeas'd from out his use:
And good night Strozzo. Swell plump bold heart.
For now thy tide of vengeance rowleth in:
O now Tragoedia Cothurnata mounts*
Piero's thoughts are fixed on dire exploits.
Pell mell: confusion, and black murder guides
The organs of my spirit: shrink not heart.
Capienda rebus in malis praeceps via est.

THE black jade of swart night trot foggy rings Bout heavens brow. (12) Tis
now stark dead night.

Is this Saint Marks Church?

It is, my Lord.


Where stands my fathers hearse?


Those streamers bear his arms. I, that is it.


Set tapers to the tomb, lamp the Church.
Give me the fire, Now depart and sleep.
I purify the air with odorous fume.
Graves, valts, and toumbes, groan not to bear my weight,
Cold flesh, bleak trunks, wrapped in your half-rot shrouds,
I press you softly, with a tender foot.
Most honoured sepulchre, vouchsafe a wretch,
Leave to weep ore thee, Toumb, I'll not be long
Ere I creep in thee, and with bloodless lips
Kiss my cold fathers cheek. I pree thee, grave,
Provide soft mould to wrap my carcass in.
Thou royal spirit of Andrugio, where ere thou houerst
(Airy intellectt) I heave up tapers to thee (view thy son)
In celebration of dew obsequies.
Once every night, I'll dew thy funeral hearse
With my religious tears,
O blessed father of a cursed son,
Thou died most happy, since thou lived not
To see thy son most wretched, and thy wife
Pursued by him that seeks my guiltless blood.
O, in what orb thy mighty spirit soars,
Stoop and beat down this rising fog of shame,
That strives to blur thy blood, and girt defame
About my innocent and spotless brows.
Non est mori miserum, sed misere mori.

Thy pangs of anguish rip my cerecloth up:
And lo the ghost of old Andrugio
Forsakes his coffin. Antonio, revenge.
I was impoyson'd by Piero's hand:
Revenge my blood; take spirit gentle boy:
Revenge my blood. Thy Mellida, is chaste:
Only to frustrate thy pursuit in love,
Is blazed unchaste. Thy mother yields consent
To be his wife, give his blood a son,
That made her husbandless, and doth complot
To make her sonlesse: but before I touch
The banks of rest, my ghost shall visit her.
Thou vigour of my youth, juice of my love,
Seize on revenge, grasp the sterne bended front
Of frowning vengeance, with vnpaized clutch.
Alarm Nemesis, rouse up thy blood,
Invent some stratagem of vengeance:
Which but to think on, may like lightning glide,
With horor through thy breast; remember this.
Scelera non vlcisceris, nisi vincis.

WHERE left you him? show me good boys, away.


Gods me, your hair.


Nurse, tis not yet proud day:
The neat gay mists of the light's not up,
Her cheeks not yet flurd over with the paint
Of borrowed crimsone; the vnpranked world
Wears yet the night-cloathes: let flare my loosed hair.
I scorn the presence of the night.
Where's my boy? Run: I'll range about the Church,
Like frantic Bachanell, or Iasons wife,
Invoking all the spirits of the graves,
To tell me where. Hah? O my poor wretched blood,
What dost thou up at midnight, my kind boy?
Dear soul, to bed: o thou hast struck a fright
Unto thy mothers panting
O quisquis nova
Supplicia functis dirus vmbrarum arbiter
Disponis, quisquis exeso iaces
Pauidus sub antri, quisquis venturi times
Montis ruinam, quisquis auidorum feres,
Rictus leonum, dira furiarum agmina
Implicitus horres, Antonii vocem excipe
Properantis ad vos Vlciscar.

Alas my son's distraught. Sweet boy appease*
Thy mutining affections.

By the astonning terror of swart night,
By the infectious damps of clammie graves,
And by the mould that presses down
My dead fathers sculle: I'll be revenged.

Wherefore? on whom? for what? go, go to bed
Good duteous son. Ho, but thy idle

So I may sleep toumb'd in an honoured hearse,
So may my bones rest in that Sepulcher,

Forget not duty son: to bed, to bed.


May I be cursed by my fathers ghost,
And blasted with incensed breath of heaven,
If my heart beat on ought but vengeance,
May I be numd with horror, and my veins
Pucker with sing'ing torture, if my brain
Digest a thought, but of dire vengeance:
May I be fettered slave to coward Chance,
If blood, heart, brain, plot ought save vengeance.

Wilt thou to bed* I wonder when thou sleepst*
In faith thou look sunk-ey'd* go couch thy head:
Now faith tis idle: sweet, sweet son to bed.

I have a prayer or two, to offer up,
For the good, good Prince, my most dear, dear Lord,
The Duke Piero, and your virtuous self:
And then when those prayers have obtained success,
In sooth I'll come (believe it now) and couch
My head in downy mold: but first I'll see
You safely laid. I'll bring ye all to bed.
Piero, Maria, Strotzo, Lucio,
I'll see you all laid: I'll bring you all to bed,
And then, in faith, I'll come and couch my head,
And sleep in peace.

Look then, we go before.


I, so you must, before we touch the shore
Of wished revenge. O you departed souls,
That lodge in coffined (...), which my feet press
(If Pythagorian Axioms be true,
Of spirits transmigration) floote no more
To humane bodies, rather live in swine,
Inhabit wolves flesh, scorpions, dogs, and toads,
Rather then man, The curse of heaven rains
In plagues unlimited through all his days,
His mature age grows only mature vice,
And ripens only to corrupt and rot
The budding hopes of infant modesty.
Still striving to be more then man, he proves
More then a devil, devilish suspect, devilish cruelty:
All hell-straid juice is powered to his veins,
Making him drunk with fuming surquedries,
Contempt of heaven, vntam'd arrogance,
Lust, state, pride, murder.

Murder.


Murder.


Murder.


I, I will murder: graves and ghosts
Fright me no more, I'll suck red vengeance
Out of Pieros wounds Piero's wounds.

Maria, love Maria: she took this I'll.
Left you her here? On lights away:
I think we shall not warm our beds to day.

Ho, father? father?


How now Iulio, my little pretty son?
Why suffer you the child to walk so late.

He will not sleep, but calls to follow you,
Crying that bug-beares spirits haunted him.

No, not so.
This shall be sought for; I'll force him feed on life
Till he shall loath it. This shall be the close.
Of vengeance strain.

Away there: Pages, lead on fast with light.
The Church is full of damps: tis yet dead night.

BROTHER Antonio, are you here in faith?
Why do you frown? Indeed my sister said,
That I should call you brother, that she did,
When you were married to her. Bus me; good
Truth, I love you better then my father, deed.

Thy father? Gracious, o bounteous heaven!
I do adore thy Justice; Venit in nostras manus
Tandem vindicta, venit tota quidem.

Truth, since my mother dyed, I loved you best.
Something hath angered you; pray you look merrily.

I will laugh, and dimple my thin cheek,
With capering joy; chuck, my heart doth leap
To grasp thy bosom. Time, place, and blood,
How fit you close together! Heavens tones
Strike not such music to immortal souls,
As your accordance sweets my breast withal.
Me thinks I pace upon the front of Jove,
And kick corruption with a scornful heel,
Griping this flesh, disdain mortality.
O that I knew which joint, which side, which limb
Were father all, and had no mother in it:
That I might rip it vain by vain; and carve revenge
In bleeding races: but since 'tis mixed together,
Have at adventure, pel mell, no reverse.
Come hither boy. This is Andrugio's hearse.

O God, you'll hurt me. For my sisters sake,
Pray you do not hurt me. And you kill me, deed,
I'll tell my father

O, for thy sisters sake, I flag revenge.


Revenge.


Stay, stay, dear father, fright mine eyes no more.
Revenge as swift as lightning bursts forth,
And clears his heart. Come, pretty tender child,
It is not thee I hate, not thee I kill.
Thy fathers blood that flows within thy veins,
Is it I loath; is that, Revenge must suck.
I love thy soul: and were thy heart lapped up
In any flesh, but in Piero's blood,
I would thus kiss it: but being his: thus, thus,
And thus I'll punch it. Abandon fears.
Whilst thy wounds bleed, my brows shall gush out tears.

So you will love me, do even what you will.


Now barks the Wolf against the full cheekt Moon.
Now Lyons halfe-clamd entrails roar for food.
Now croaks the toad, night-crowes screech aloud,
Fluttering about casements of departing souls.
Now gapes the graves, and through their yawns let loose
Imprisoned spirits to revisit earth:
And now swarte night, to swell thy hour out,
Behold I spurt warm blood in thy black eyes.

Howl not thou pury mould, groan not ye graves.
Be dumb all breath. Here stands Andrugio's son,
Worthy his father. So: I feel no breath.
His jaws are fallen, his dislodged soul is fled:
And now there's nothing, but Piero, left.
He is all Piero, father all. This blood,
This breast, this heart, Piero all:
Whom thus I mangle. Spright of Iulyo,
Forget this was thy trunk. I live thy friend.
May thou be twined with the sofest embrace
Of clear eternity: but thy fathers blood,
I thus make incense of, to vengeance.
Ghost of my poisoned Sire, suck this fume:
To sweet revenge perfume thy circling air,
With smoke of blood. I sprinkle round his gore,
And dew thy hearse, with these fresh reeking drops.
Lo thus I heave my blood-died hands to heaven:
Even like insatiate hell, still crying; More.
My heart hath thirsting Dropsies after gore.
Sound peace, and rest, to Church, night ghosts, and graves.
Blood cries for blood; and murder murder craves.

FIE, fie; to morrow your wedding day, and weep! Gods my comfort. Andrugio
could do well: Piero may do better. I have had four husbands my self. The
first I called, Sweet Duck; the second, Dear Heart; the third, Pretty Pugge:
But the fourth most sweet, dear, pretty, all in all: he was the very
cockeall of a husband. What, Lady? your skin is smooth, your blood warm,
your cheek fresh, your eye quick: change of pasture makes fat calves: choice
of linen, clean bodies; and (no question) variety of husbands perfect wives*
I would you should know it, as few teeth as I have in my head, I have red
Aristotles Problems, which saith; that woman receives perfection by the man.
What then be the men? Go to, to bed, lye on your back, dream not on Piero. I
say no more: to morrow is your wedding: do, dream not of Piero.


What an idle prate thou keep? good nurse go sleep.
I have a mighty task of tears to weep.

Lady, with a most retort and obtuse leg I kiss the curled locks of your
loose hair. The Duke hath sent you the most musical sir Gefferey, with his
not base, but most ennobled Viol, to rock your baby thoughts in the Cradle of
sleep.


I give the noble Duke respective thanks.


Respective; truly a very pretty word. Indeed Madam, I have the most
respective fiddle* Did you ever smell a more sweet sound. My ditty must go
thus; very witty, I assure you: I my self in an humorous passion made it, to
the tune of my mistress Nutriches beauty. Indeed, very pretty, very
retort, and obtuse; I'll assure you tis thus.

My mistress eye doth oil my joints,
And makes my fingers nimble:
O love, come on, untruss your points,
My fiddlestick wants Rozzen.
My Ladies dugs are all so smooth,
That no flesh must them handle*
Her eyes do shine, for to say sooth,
Like a new snuffed candle.

Truly, very pathetic, and vnuulgar.


Pathetic, and vnuulgar; words of worth, excellent words. In sooth, Madam, I
have taken a murre, which makes my nose run most patheticallie, and
vnvulgarlie. Have you any Tobacco?


Good Signior, your song.


Instantly, most vnvulgarlie, at your service.
Truly, here's the most pathetic rozzen. Vmh.

In sooth, most knightly sung, like sir Gefferey.


Why, look you Lady, I was wade a knight only for my voice; a counseller,
only for my wit.


I believe it. God night, gentle sir, god night.


You will give me leave to take my leave of my mistress, and I will do it most
famously in rime.

Farewell, adieu: Saith thy love true,
As to part loath.
Time bids us part, Mine own sweet heart,
God bless us both.

God night Nutriche. Pages, leave the room.
The life of night grows short, tis almost dead.
O thou cold widow bed, sometime thrice blessed,
By the warm pressure of my sleeping Lord:
Open thy leaves, and whilst on thee I tread,
Groan out. Alas, my dear Andrugio's dead.
Amazing terror, what portent is this?

DISLOYAL to our Hymniall rites,
What raging heat rains in thy strupet blood?
Hast thou so soon forgot Andrugio?
Are our loue-bands so quickly cancelled?
Where lives thy plighted faith unto this breast?
O weak Marya! Go to, calm thy fears.
I pardon thee, poor soul. O shed no tears.
Thy sex is weak. That black incarnate fiende
May trip thy faith, that hath orethrowne my life:
I was impoyson'd by Piero's hand.
Join with my son, to bend up straind revenge.
Maintain a seeming favour to his suite,
Till time may form our vengeance absolute.

See, vnamaz'd, I will behold thy face,
Outstare the terror of thy grimm aspect,
Daring the horred'st object of the night.
Look how I smoke in blood, reeking the steam*
Of foaming vengeance. O my soule's inthroan'd
In the triumphant chariot of revenge.
Me thinks I am all air, and feel no weight
Of humane dirt clog. This is Iulios blood.
Rich musique, father; this is Iulio's blood.
Why lives that mother?

Pardon ignorance. Fly dear Antonio:
Once more assume disguise, and dog the Court
In fained habit, till Piero's blood
May even ore-flowe the brim of full revenge.
Peace, and all blessed fortunes to you both.
Fly thou from Court, be peerless in revenge:
Sleep thou in rest, lo here I close thy couch.
And now ye sooty coursers of the night,
Hurry your chariot into hells black womb.
Darkness, make flight; Graves, eat your dead again:
Let's repossesse our shrouds. Why lags delay?
Mount sparkling brightness, give the world his day.

AWAY with this disguise in any hand.


Fie, tis vnsuting to your elate spirit:
Rather put on some transshap't cavalier,
Some habit of a spitting Critic, whose mouth
Voids nothing but gentile and vnuulgar
Rheum of censure: rather assume*

Why then should I put on the very flesh
Of solid folly. No, this cockscombe is a crown
Which I affect, even with unbounded zeal.

Twil twhart your plot, disgrace your high resolve.


By wisdoms heart there is no essence mortal,
That I can envy, but a plump cheekt fool:
O, he hath a patent of immunities
Confirmed by custom, sealed by policy,
As large as spacious thought.

You can not press among the courtiers,
And have access to

What? not a fool? Why friend, a golden ass,
A babl'd fool are sole canonical,
Whilst pale cheekt wisdom, and lean ribbed art
Are kept in distance at the halberds point:
All held Apocrypha, not worth survey.
Why, by the Genius of that Florentine,
Deep, deep observing, sound brained Macheueil,
He is is not wise that strives not to seem fool.
When will the Duke hold feed Intelligence,
Keep wary observation in large pay,
To dog a fools act?

I, but such faining, known, disgraces much.


Pish, most things that morally adhere to souls,
VVholly exist in drunk opinion:
Whose reeling censure, if I value not,
It valewes nought.

You are transported with too slight a thought,
If you but meditate of what is past,
And what you plot to pass.

Even in that, note a fools beatitude:
He is not capable of passion,
Wanting the power of distinction,
He bears an vnturnd sail with every wind:
Blow East, blow West, he stirs his course alike.
I never saw a fool lean: the chub-fac'tfop
Shines sleek with full crammed fat of happiness,
Whilst studious contemplation sucks the juice
From wisards cheeks: who making curious search
For Natures secrets, the first innating cause
Laughs them to scorn, as man doth busy Apes
When they will zany men. Had heaven bin kind,
Creating me an honest senseless dolt,
A good poor fool, I should want sense to feel
The stings of anguish shoot through every vain,
I should not know what twere to loose a father:
I should be dead of sense, to view defame
Blur my bright love; I could not thus run mad,
As one confounded in a maze of mischief,
Staggerd, stark field with bruising stroke of chance.
I should not shoot mine eyes into the earth,
Poring for mischief, that might counterpoise Lucio?

My Lord, the Duke, with the Venetian States,
Approach the great hall to judge Mellida.

Asked he for Iulio yet?


No motion of him: dare you trust this habit?


Alberto, see you straight rumour me dead:
Leave me, good mother, leave me Luceo,
Forsake me all. Now patience hoop my sides,
With steeled ribs, least I do burst my breast
With struggling passions. Now disguise stand bold.
Poor scorned habits, oft choice souls infould.

ENTREAT me not: there's not a beauty lives,
Hath that imperial predominance
Ore my affects, as your enchanting graces:
Yet give me leave to be my self.

A villain.


Just.


Most just.


Most just and upright in our judgment seat.
Were Mellida mine eye, with such a blemish
Of most loathed looseness, I would scratch it out.
Produce the strumpet in her bridal robes,
That she may blush t'appeare so white in show,
And black in inward substance. Bring her in.
I hold Antonio, for his fathers sake,
So very dearly, so entirely choice,
That knew I but a thought of prejudice,
Imaigin'd against his high ennobled blood,
I would maintain a mortal feude, vndying hate
Against the conceiuers life. And shall Justice sleep
In fleshly Lethargy, for mine own bloods favour,
When the sweet prince hath so apparent scorn
By my (I will not call her) daughter. Go,
Conduct in the loved youth Antonio:
He shall behold me spurn my private good.
Piero loves his honour more then's blood.

The devil he does more then both.


Stand back there, fool; I do hate a fool most most pathetically. O these
that have no sap of of retort and obtuse wit in them: faugh.


Puff; hold world: puff, hold bubble; Puff, hold world: puff, break not
behind: puff, thou art full of wind; puff, keep up by wind: puff, 'tis
broke: now I laugh like a good fool at the breath of mine own lips, he, he,
he, he, he.


You fool.


You fool, puff.


I cannot digest thee, the vnuulgar fool. Go fool.


Forbear, Balurdo, let the fool alone,
Come hither ( ficto) Is he your fool?

Yes, my loved Lord.


Would all the States in Venice were like thee.
O then I were secured.
He that's a villain, or but meanly sowl'd,
Must still converse, and cling to routes of fools,
That can not search the leaks of his defects.
O, your vnsalted fresh fool is your only man:
These vinegar tart spirits are too piercing,
Too searching in the vnglewd joints of shaken wits.
Find they a chink, they'll wriggle in and in,
And eat like salt sea in his siddowe ribs,
Till they have opened all his rotten parts,
Unto the vaunting surge of base contempt,
And sunk the tossed galleasse in depth
Of whirlepoole Scorn. Give me an honest fop:
Dud a dud a? why lo sir, this takes he
As grateful now, as a Monopoly.

ALL honour to this royal confluence.


Forbear (impure) to blot bright honours name,
With thy defiled lips. The flux of sin
Flows from thy tainted body: thou so foul,
So all dishonoured, can no honour give,
No wish of good, that can have good effect
To this grave senate, and illustrate bloods.
Why stays the doom of death?

Who rises up to manifest her guilt?


You must produce apparent proof, my Lord.


Why, where is Strotzo? he that swore he saw
The very act: and vowed that Feliche fled
Upon his sight: on which, I brake the breast
Of the adulterous lecher, with five stabs.
Go fetch in Strotzo. Now thou impudent,
If thou hast any drop of modest blood
Shrouded within thy cheeks; blush, blush for shame,
That rumour yet may say, thou felt defame.

Produce the devil,; let your Strotzo come:
I can defeat his strongest argument,
Which

With what?


With tears, with blushes, sighs, clasped hands,
With innocent vpreared arms to heaven:
With my vnnookt simplicity. These, these
Must, will, can only quit my heart of guilt.
Heaven permits not taintlesse blood be spilt.
If no remorse live in your savage breast

Then thou must die

Yet dying, I'll be blessed.


Accursed by me.


Yet blessed, in that I strove
To live, and die

My hate.


Antonyo's love.


Antonio's love!


O what vast ocean of repentant tears
Can cleanse my breast from the polluting filth
Of ulcerous sin! Supreme Efficient,
Why cleau'st thou not my breast with thunderbolts
Of winged revenge?

What means this passion?


What villainy are they decocting now? Vmh.


In me convertite ferrum, O proceres.
Nihil iste, nec ista.

Lay hold on him. What strange portent is this?


I will not flinch. Death, hell more grimly stare
Within my heart, then in your threatening brows.
Record, thou threefold guard of dreadest power,
What I here speak, is forced from my lips,
By the pulsiue strain of conscience,
I have a mount of mischief clogs my soul,
As weighty as the high-nol'd Appenine:
Which I must straight disgorge, or breast will burst.
I have defamed this Lady wrongfully,
By instigation of Antonio:
Whose reeling love, tossed on each fancies surge,
Began to loath before it fully joyed.

Go, seize Antonio, guard him strongly in.


By his ambition, being only bribed,
Feed by his impious hand, I poisoned
His aged father: that his thirsty hope
Might quench their dropsy of aspiring drought,
With full unbounded quaff.

Seize me Antonio.


O why permit you now such scum of filth
As Strotzo is, to live, and taint the air,
With his infectious breath!

My self will be thy strangler, vnmatcht slave.


Now change your

I, pluck Castilio: I change my humour? pluck Castilio.
Dye, with thy deaths entreats even in thy jaws.
Now, now, now, now, now, my plot begins to work.
Why, thus should States-men do,
That cleave through knots of craggy policies,
Use men like wedges, one strike out another;
Till by degrees the tough and knurly trunk
Be riu'd in sunder. Where's Antonio?

O black accursed fate. Antonyo's drowned.


Speak, on thy faith, on thy allegiance, speak.


As I do love Piero, he is drowned.


In an inundation of amazement.


I, is this the clofe of all my strains in love?
O me most wretched maid.

Antonio drowned? how? how? Antonio drowned?


Distraught and raving, from a turrets top
He threw his body in the high swollen sea,
And as he headlong topsy turuie dingd down,
He still cried Mellida.


My loves bright crown.


He still cried Mellida?


Daughter, me thinks your eyes should sparkle joy,
Your bosom rise on tiptoe at this news.

Aye me.


How now? Ay me? why, art not great of thanks
To gracious heaven, for the just revenge
Upon the author of thy obloquies!

Sweet beauty, I could sigh as fast as you,
But that I know that, which I weep to know,
His fortunes should be such he dare not show
His open presence.

I know he loved me dearly, dearly, I:
And since I cannot live with him, I dye.

Fore heaven, her speech falters, look she swouns.
Convey her up into her private bed.
I hope sheele live. If not

Antonio's dead, the fool will follow too, he, he, he,
Now works the scene; quick observation scud
To coat the plot, or else the path is lost:
My very self am gone, my way is fled:
I, all is lost, if Mellida is dead.

Alberto, I am kind, Alberto, kind.
I am sorry for thy couz, in faith I am.
Go, take him down, and bear him to his father:
Let him be buried, look ye, I'll pay the priest.

Please you to admit his father to the Court?


No.


Please you to restore his lands goods again?


No.


Please you vouchsafe him lodging in the city?


Gods fut, no, thou odd uncivil fellow:
I think you do forget sir, where you are.

I know you do forget sir, where you must be.


You are too malapert, in faith you are.
Your honour might do well to

Peace Parasite, thou bur, that only sticks
Unto the nap of greatness.

Away with that same yelping cur, away.


I, I am gone: but mark, Piero, this.
There is a thing called scourging Nemesis.

Gods neakes he has wrong, that he has: and
S'fut, and I were as he, I would bear no coals, law I,
I begin to swell, puff.

How now fool, fop, fool?

Fool, fop, fool? Marry muffe. I pray you, how many fools have you seen
go in a suite of Satin? I hope yet, I do not look a fool in faith: a fool?
Gods bores, I scorn't with my heel. S'neaks, and I were worth but three
hundred pound a year more, I could swear richly: nay, but as poor as I am, I
will swear the fellow hath wrong.


Young Galeatzo? I, a proper man.
Florence, a goodly city: it shall be so.
I'll marry her to him instantly.
Then Genoa mine, by my Mariaes match,
Which I'll solemnize ere next setting Sun.
Thus Venice, Florence, Genoa, strongly leagued.
Excellent, excellent. I'll conquer Rome,
Pop out the light of bright religion:
And then, helter skelter, all cock sure.

Go to, tis just, the man hath wrong: go to.


Go to, thou shalt have right. Go to Castilio,
Clap him into the Palace dungeon:
Lap him in rags, and let him feed on slime
That smeares the dungeon cheek. Away with him.

In very good truth now, I'll ne'er do so more; this one time and


Away with him, observe it strictly, go.


Why then, o wight, alas poor knight.
O, welladay, sir Gefferey. Let Poets roar,
And all deplore: for now I bid you god night.

O piteous end of love: o too too rude hand
Of vnrespectiue death! Alas, sweet maid.

Forbear me heaven. What intend these plaints?


The beauty of admired creation,
The life of modest vnmixt purity,
Our sexes glory, Mellida is

What? o heaven, what?


Dead.


May it not sad your thoughts, how?


Being laid upon her bed, she grasped my had,
And kissing it, spake thus; Thou very pore,
Why dost not weep? The Jewel of thy brow,
The rich adornment, that inchac't thy breast,
Is lost: thy son, my love is lost, is dead.
And do I live to say Antonio's dead?
And have I lived to see his virtues blurd,
With guiltless blots! O world thou art too subtle,
For honest natures to converse withal.
Therefore I'll leave thee; farewell mart of woe,
I fly to clip my love, Antonio.
With that her head sunk down upon her breast:
Her cheek changed earth, her senses slept in rest:
Until my fool, that pressed unto the bed,
Screch't out so loud, that he brought back her soul,
Called her again, that her bright eyes began open,
And stared upon him: he audatious fool,
Dared kiss her hand, wished her soft rest, loved bride;
She fumbled out, thanks good, and so she did.

And so she did: I do not use to weep:
But by thy love (out of whose fertile sweet,
I hope for as fair fruit) I am deep sad:
I will not stay my marriage for all this.
Castilio Forobosco, all
Strain all your wits, wind up invention
Unto his highest bent: to sweet this night,
Make us drink Lethe by your quaint conceits;
That for two days, oblivion smother grief:
But when my daughters exequies approach,
Let's all turn sighers. Come, despite of fate,
Sound lowdest music, lets pace out in state.

I Heaven, thou may, thou may omnipotence.
What vermin bred of putrifacted slime,
Shall dare to expostulate with thy decrees!
O heaven, thou may indeed: she was all thine,
All heavenly, I did but humbly beg
To borrow her of thee a little time.
Thou gau'st her me, as some weak breasted dame
Gives her infant, puts it out to nurse;
And when it once goes high-lone, takes it back.
She was my vital blood, and yet, and yet,
I'll not blaspheme. Look here, behold,
I turn my prostrate breast upon thy face,
And vent a heaving sigh. O hear but this;
I am a poor poor Orphan; a weak, weak child,
The wrack of splitted fortune, the very Ouze,
The quick sand that devours all misery.
Behold the valiant'st creature that doth breath.
For all this, I dare live, and I will live,
Only to numme some others cursed blood,
With the dead palsy of like misery.
Then death, like to a stifling Incubus,
Lie on my bosom. Lo sir, I am sped.
My breast is Golgotha, grave for the dead.

ANTONIO, kiss my foot: I honour thee,
In laying thwart my blood upon thy breast.
I tell thee boy, he was Pandulphos son:
And I do grace thee with supporting him,
Young man.
The dominering Monarch of the earth,
He who hath nought that fortunes gripe can seize,
He who is all impregnably his own,
He whose great heart heaven can not force with force,
Vouchsafes his love. Non seruio Deo, sed assentio.

I ha lost a good wife.


Did find her good, or did thou make her good?
If found, thou may refined, because thou had her.
If made, the work is lost: but thou that made her
Liu'st yet as cunning. Hast lost a good wife?
Thrice blessed man that lost her whilst she was good,
Fair, young, vnblemisht, constant, loving, chaste.
I tell thee youth, age knows, young loves seem graced,
Which with gray cares, rude jars, are oft defaced.

But she was full of hope.


May be, may be: but that, which may be, stood,
Stands now without all may; she died good,
And dost thou grieve?

I ha lost a true friend.


I live encompassed with two blessed souls.
Thou lost a good wife, thou lost a true friend, ha?
Two of the rarest lendings of the heavens:
But lendings: which at the fixed day of pay
Set down by fate, thou must restore again.
O what unconscionable souls are here?
Are you all like the spoke-shaues of the Church?
Have you no maw to restitution?
Hast lost a true friend, cousin? then thou had one.
I tell thee youth, tis all as difficult
To find true friend in this apostate age
(That balkes all right affiance twixt two hearts)
As tis to find a fixed modest heart,
Under a painted breast. Lost a true friend?
O happy soul that lost him whilst he was true.
Believe it cousin, I to my tears have found,
Oft durts respect makes firmer friends vnsounde.

You have lost a good son.


Why there's the comfort ont, that he was good:
Alas, poor innocent.

Why weeps mine uncle?


Ha, dost ask me why? ha? ha?
Good cousin, look here.
Man will break out, despite Philosophie.
Why, all this while I ha but plaid a part,
Like to some boy, that acts a Tragedy,
Speaks burly words, and raves out passion:
But, when he thinks upon his infant weakness,
He droopes his eye. I spake more then a god;
Yet am less then a man.
I am the miserablest soul that breathes.

S'lid, sir ye lye: by th'heart of grief, thou lie.
I scorn't that any wretched should survive,
Outmounting me in that Superlative,
Most miserable, most vnmatcht in woe:
Who dare assume that, but Antonio?

Wilt still be so? and shall you blood-hound live?


Have I an arm, a heart, a sword, a soul?


Were you but private unto what we know


I'll know it all; first let's inter the dead:
Let's dig his grave, with that shall dig the heart,
Liver, and entrails of the murderer.

Wilt sing a Dirge boy?


No, no song: twill be vile out of tune.


Indeed he's hoarce: the poor boys voice is cracked.


Why cousin? why should it not be hoarce cracked,
When all the strings of natures symphony
Are cracked, jar? why should his voice keep tune,
When there's no music in the breast of man?
I'll say an honest antic rime I have;
(Help me good sorrow-mates to give him grave.)
Death, exile, plaints, and woe,
Are but mans lackeys, not his foe.
No mortal scapes from fortunes war,
Without a wound, at least a scarre.
Many have led these to the grave:
But all shall follow, none shall save.
Blood of my youth, rot and consume,
Virtue, in dirt, doth life assume:
With this old saw, close up this dust;
Thrice blessed man that dies just.

The gloomy wing of night begins to stretch
His lasy pinion over all the air:
We must be stiff and steady in resolve.
Let's thus our hands, our hearts, our arms involve.

Now swear we by this Gordian knot of love,
By the fresh turned up mould that wraps my son;
By the dead brow of triple Hecate:
Ere night shall close the lids of you bright stars,
We'll sit as heavy on Pieros heart,
As Aetna doth on groaning Pelorus.

Thanks good old man.
We'll cast at royal chance.
Let's think a plot; then pell mell vengeance.

Venit dies, tempusque, quo reddat suis
Animam squallentem sceleribus.
The fist of strenuous vengeance is clutched,
And sterne Vindicta towreth up aloft,
That she may fall with a more weighty paise,
And crush lives sap from out Pieros veins.
Now gins the leprous cores of vlcered sins
Wheal to a head: now is his fate grown mellow,
Instant to fall into the rotten jaws
Of chap-falne death. Now down looks providence,
T'attend the last act of my sons revenge.
Be gracious, Observation, to our scene:
For now the plot vnites his scattred limbs
Close in contracted bands. The Florence Prince
(Drawn by firm notice of the Dukes black deeds)
Is made a partner in conspiracy.
The States of Venice are so swollen in hate
Against the Duke, for his accursed deeds
(Of which they are confirmed by some odd letters
Found in dead Strotzos study, which had past
Betwixt Piero and the murdering slave)
That they can scarce retain from bursting forth
In plain revolt. O, now tryumphes my ghost;
Exclaiming, heauen's just; for I shall see,
The scourge of murder and impiety.

HOE, who's above there, hoe? A murren on all Proverbs. They say, hunger
breaks thorough stone walls; but I am as gant, as lean ribbed famine: yet I
can burst through no stone walls. O, now sir Gefferey, show thy valour,
break prison, and be hanged. Nor shall the darkest nook of hell contain the
discontented sir Balurdos ghost. Well, I am out well, I have put off the prison
to put on the rope. O poor shotten herring, what a pickle art thou in! O
hunger, how thou dominer'st in my guts! O, for a fat leg of Ewe mutton in
stewde broth; or drunken song to feed on. I could belch rarely, for I am all
wind. O cold, cold, cold, cold, cold. O poor knight, o poor sir
Gefferey; sing like an Unicorn, before thou dost dip thy horne in the water of
death; o cold, o sing, o cold, o poor sir Geffrey, sing, sing.


VINDICTA.


Mellida.


Alberto.


Antonio.


Hath the Duke supped?


Yes, and triumphant revels mount aloft.
The Duke drinks deep to ouerdowe his grief.
The court is racked to pleasure, each man strains
To fain a jocund eye. The Florentine

Young Galeatzo?


Even he is mighty on our part. The States of Venice


Like high-swoln floods, drive down the muddy dams
Of pent allegiance. O, my lusty bloods,
Heaven sits clapping of our enterprise.
I have been labouring general favour firm,
And I do find the citizens grown sick
With swallowing the bloody crudities
Of black Pieros acts; they fain would cast
And vomit him from off their government.
Now is the plot of mischief ripped wide open:
Letters are found twixt Strotzo and the Duke,
So clear apparent: yet more firmly strong
By suiting circumstance; that as I walked
Muffled, to eues-drop speech, I might observe
The graver States-men whispering fearfully.
Here one gives nods hums, what he would speak:
The rumour's got among troop of citizens,
Making load murmur, with confused din:
One shakes his head, and sighs; O ill used power:
Another frets, and sets his grinding teeth,
Foaming with rage; and swears this must not be.
Here one complots, and on a sudden starts,
And cries; o monstrous, o deep villainy!
All knit there nerues, and from beneath swoln brows
Appears a gloting eye of much mislike:
Whilst swart Pieros lips reake steam of wine,
Swallows lust-thoughts, devours all pleasing hopes,
With strong imagination of, what not?
O, now Vindicta; that's the word we have:
A royal vengeance, or a royal grave.

Vindicta.


I am acolde.


Who's there? sir Geffrey?


A poor knight, god wot: the nose of thy knighthood is bitten off with cold. O
poor sir Geffrey, cold, cold.


What chance of fortune hath tripped up his heels,
And laid him in the kennel? ha?

I will discourse it all. Poor honest soul,
Had thou a beaver to clasp up thy face,
Thou should associate us in masquery,
And see revenge.

Nay, and you talk of revenge, my stomack's up,
For I am most tyrannically hungry. A beaver? I have a headpeece, a skull, a
brain of proof, I warrant ye.


Slink to my chamber then, and tyre thee.


Is there a fire?


Yes.


Is there a fat leg of Ewe mutton?


Yes.


And a clean shirt?


Yes.


Then am I for you, most pathetically, vnvulgarly, law.


Resolved hearts, time curtals night, opportunity shakes us his foretop. Steel
your thoughts, sharp your resolve, imbolde your spirit, grasp your swords;
alarm mischief, with an vndated brow, out scout the grim opposition Of most
menacing peril.

Hark here, proud pomp shoots mounting triumph up,
Borne in load accents to the front of Jove.

O now, he that wants soul to kill a slave,
Let him die slave, and rot in peasants grave.

Give me thy hand, and thine, most noble heart,
Thus will we live, and, but thus, never part.

SIt close unto my breast, heart of my love,
Advance thy drooping eyes,
Thy son is drowned,
Rich happiness that such a son is drowned.
Thy husband's dead, life of my joys most blessed,
In that the sapless log, that pressed thy bed
With an unpleasing weight, being lifted hence,
Even I Piero, live to warm his place.
I tell you, Lady, had you viewed us both,
With an vnprtiall eye, when first we wooed
Your maiden beauties, I had borne the prize,
Tis firm I had: for, fair, I ha done that

Murder.


Which he would quake to have adventured;
Thou know I have.

Murdered my husband.


Borne out the shock of war, done, what not,
That valour durst. Dost love me fairest? say.

As I do hate my son, I love thy soul.


Why then Io to Hymen, mount a lofty note:
Fill red cheekt Bacchus, let Lyeus flote
In burnished gobblets. Force the plump lipped god,
Skip light lauoltaes in your full sapt veins.
Tis well brim full. Even I have glut of blood:
Let quaff carouse; I drink this Bordeaux wine
Unto the health of dead Andrugio,
Feliche, Strotzo* and Antonios ghosts.
Would I had some poison to infuse it with;
That having done this honour to the dead,
I might send one to give them notice ont.
I would indeere my favour to the full.
Boy, sing aloud, make heavens vault to ring
With thy breaths strength. I drink. Now loudly sing.

CALL Iulio hither; where's the little foul?
I saw him not to day. Here's sport alone
For him, in faith; for babes and fools, I know,
Relish not substance, but applaud the show.

All blessed fortune crown your brave attempt.
I have a troop to second your attempt.
The Venice States join hearts unto your hands.

By the delights in contemplation
Of coming joys, 'tis magnificent.
You grace my marriage eve with sumptuous pomp.
Sound still, load music. O, your breath gives grace
To curious feet, that in proud measure pace.

Mother, is Iulios body

Speak not, doubt not; all is above all hope.

Then will I dance and whirl about the air.
Me thinks I am all soul, all heart, all spirit.
Now murder shall receive his ample merit.

Bring hither suckets, canded delicates.
We'll taste some sweet meats, gallants, ere we sleep.

We'll cooke your sweet meats, gallants, with tart sower sauce.

Here will I sit, spectator of revenge,
And glad my ghost in anguish of my foe.

Marry and shall; in faith I were too rude,
If I gainesaide so civil fashion.
The maskers pray you to forbear the room,
Till they have banqueted. Let it be so:
No man presume to visit them, on death.
Only my self? O, why with all my heart*
I'll fill your consort; here Piero sits:
Come on, unmask, lets fall to

Murder and torture: no prayers, no entreats.


We'll spoil your oratory. Out with his tong.


I haue't Pandulpho: the veins panting bleed,
Trickling fresh gore about my fist. Bind fast; so, so.

Blessed be thy hand. I taste the joys of heaven,
Viewing my son triumph in his black blood.

Down to the dungeon with him, I'll dungeon with him; I'll fool you: sir
Gefferey will be sir Geffrey. I'll tickle you.


Behold, black dog.


Grinst thou, thou snurling cur?


Eat thy black liver.


To thine anguish see
A fool triumphant in thy misery.
Vex him Balurdo.

He weeps: now do I glorify my hands,
I had no vengeance, if I had no tears.

Fall to, good Duke. o these are worthless cares,
You have no stomach to them; look, look here:
Here lies a dish to feast thy fathers gorge.
Here's flesh and blood, which I am sure thou love.

Was he thy flesh, thy son, thy dearest son?


So was Andrugio my dearest father.


So was Feliche my dearest son.


So was Andrugio my dearest husband.


My father found no pity in thy blood.


Remorse was banished, when thou slew my son.


When thou impoysoned'st my loving Lord,
Exiled was piety.

Now, therefore, pity, piety, remorse,
Be aliens to our thoughts: grim fier-ey'd rage
Possess us wholly.

Thy son? true: and which is my most joy,
I hope no bastard, but thy very blood
Thy true begotten, most legitimate
And loved issue: there's the comfort ont.

Scum of the mud of hell.


Slime of all filth.


Thou most detested road.


Thou most retort and obtuse rascal.


Thus charge we death at thee: remember hell,
And let the howling murmurs of black spirits,
The horrid torments of the damned Ghosts
Affright thy soul, as it descends down
Into the entrails of the ugly deep.

Sa, sa; no, let him die, and die, and still be dying,
And yet not die, till he hath died and died
Ten thousand deaths in agony of heart.

Now pel mell; thus the hand of heaven chokes
The throat of murder. This for my fathers blood.

This for my son.


This for them all.
And this, and this; sink to the heart of hell.

Murder for murder, blood for blood doth yell.


Tis done, and now my soul shall sleep in rest.
Sons that revenge their fathers blood, are blessed.

WHOSE hand presents this gory spectacle?


Mine.


No: mine.


No: mine.


I will not loose the glory of the deed,
Were all the tortures of the deepest hell
Fixed to my limbs. I pearc't the monsters heart,
With an undaunted hand.

By yon bright spangled front of heaven twas I:
Twas I sluc't out his life blood.

Tush, to say truth, twas all.


Blessed be you all, and may your honours live
Religiously held sacred, even for ever and ever.

To Antonio. Thou art another Hercules to us,
In ridding huge pollution from our State.

Antonio, belief is fortified,
With most invincible approuemets of much wrong,
By this Piero to thee. We have found
Beadroles of mischief, plots of villainy,
Laid twixt the Duke and Strotzo: which we found
Too firmly acted.

Alas poor Orphan.


Poor? standing triumphant over Beelzebub?
Having large interest for blood; yet deemed poor?

What satisfaction outward pomp can yield,
Or chiefest fortunes of the Venice state,
Claim freely. You are well seasond props,
And will not warp, or lean to either part*
Calamity gives man a steady heart.

We are amazed at your benignity:
But other vows constrain another course.

We know the world, and did we know no more,
We would not live to know: but since constraint
Of holy bands forces us keep this lodge
Of durts corruption, till dread power calls
Our souls appearance, we will live enclosed
In holy verge of some religious order,
Most constant votaries.

First let's cleanse our hands,
Purge hearts of hatred, and intoumbe my love:
Over whose hearse, I'll weep away my brain
In true affections tears,
For her sake, here I vow a virgin bed.
She lives in me, with her my love is dead.

We will attend her mournfu exequies,
Conduct you to your calm sequestered life,
And then

Leave us, to meditate on misery;
To sad our thought with contemplation
Of past calamities. If any ask
Where lives the widow of the poisoned Lord?
Where lies the Orphan of a murdered father?
Where lies the father of a butchered son?
Where lives all woe? conduct him to us three;
The downe-cast ruins of calamity.

Sound doleful tunes, a solemn hymn advance,
To close the last act of my vengeance:
And when the subject of your passion's spent,
Sing Mellida is dead, all hearts will relent,
In sad condolement, at that heavy sound,
Never more woe in lesser plot was found.
And, o, if ever time create a Muse,
That to th'immortall fame of virgin faith,
Dares once engage his pen to write her death,
Presenting it in some black Tragedy.
May it prove gracious, may his stile be decked
With freshest bloomes of purest elegance;
May it have gentle presence, and the Sceans sucked up
By calm attention of choice audience:
And when the closing Epilogue appears,
In stead of claps, may it obtain but tears.


