SIR, the Gentlemen will be angry if you sit hear.


Why? we may sit upon the stage at the private house: thou doest not take me
for a country gentleman, doest? doest think I fear hissing? I'll hold my life
thou took me for one of the players.


No sir.


By gods slid if you had, I would have given you but six pence for your stool:
Let them that have stale suites, sit in the galleries, hiss at me: he that
will be laughed out of a Tavern or an Ordinary, shall seldom feed well or be
drunk in good company. Where's Harry Cundale, D: Burbidge, and W: Sly, let me
speak with some of them.


An't please you to go in sir, you may.


I tell you no; I am one that hath seen this play often, can give them
intellegence for their action: I have most of the ieasts here in my
table-booke.


Save you Coose.


O Cousin, come you shall sit between my legs hear.


No indeed cousin, the audience then will take me for a viol de gambo, and
think that you play upon me.


Nay, ^her that I work upon you coose.


We stayed for you at supper last night at my cousin Hony-moones the woollen
Draper: After supper we drew cuts for a score of Apricoks, the longest cut
still to draw an Apricoke: by this light t'was Mistress Frank Hony-moones
fortune, still to have the longest cut: I did measure for the women. What be
these coose?


The Players. God save you.


You are very welcome.


I pray you know this Gentleman my cousin, it is Master Doomesdaies son the
usurer.


I beseech you sir be coverd.


No in good faith for mine ease, look you my hat's the handle to this fan:
Gods so, what a beast was I, I did not leave my father at home. Well, but I'll
take an order with you.


Why do you conceal your feather sir?


Why? do you think I'll have ieasts broken upon me in the play to be laughed at:
this play hath beaten all your gallants out of the feathers: Black friars hath
almost spoiled black friars for feathers.


Gods so, I thought t'was for somewhat our gentlewomen at home counseld me to
wear my feather to the play, yet I am loath to spoil it.


Why coose?


Because I got it in the tilt-yard: there was a Harralde broke my pate for
taking it up: but I have worn it up down the strand, and met him forty times
since, and yet he dares not challenge it.


Do you hear sir, this play is a bitter play.


Why sir, tis neither Satire nor Moral, but the mean passage of a history:
Yet there are a sort of discontented creatures that bear a stingeles^e envy
to great ones, and these will wrest the doings of any man to their base
malicious appliment: but should their interpretation come to the teste, like
your marmasite, they presently turn their teeth to their tail eat it.


I will not go so far with you, but I say, any man that hath wit, may censure
(if he sit in the twelve-penny room:) and I say again, the play is bitter.


Sir you are like a Patron that presenting a poor scholar to a benefice,
inioynes him not to rail against any thing that stands within compass of his
Patrons folly: Why should not we enjoy the ancient freedom of poesy? Shall
we protest to the Ladies that their painting makes them Angels, or to my young
gallant, that his expense in the brothel shall gain him reputation? No sir,
such vices as stand not accountable to law, should be cured as men heal
tetters, by casting ink upon them. Would you be satisfied in any thing else
sir?


I marry would I.
I would know how you came by this play?

Faith sir the book was lost, a^d because twas pity so good a play should be
lost, we found it and play it.


I wonder you would play it, another company having interest in it?


Why not Maleuole in folio with us, as Ieronimo in Decimo sexto with them. They
taught us a name for our play, we call it One for another.


What are your additions?


Sooth not greatly needful, only as your sallet to your great feast, to
entertain a little more time, and to abridge the not received custom of
music in our Theater. I must leave you sir.


Doth he play the Malecontent?


Yes sir.


I durst lay four of mine ears, the play is not so well acted as it hath
been.


O no sir, nothing Ad Parminonis Suem.


Have you lost your ears sir, that you are so prodigal of laying them?


Why did you ask that friend?


Marry sir because I have heard of a fellow would offer to lay a hundred pound
wager, that was not worth five bau-bees: (...) in this kind you might venture
four of your elbows: yet God defend your coat should have so many.


Nay truly, I am no great censurer, and yet I might have been one of the
College of Crittickes once: my cousin here (...) an excellent memory indeed
sir.


Who I? I'll tell you a strange thing of my self, and I can tell you for one
that never studied the art of memory, tis very ^ange too.


Whats that sir?


Why I'll lay a hundred pound I'll walk but once down by the gold-smiths row in
Cheap, take notice of the signs, and tell you them with a breath instantly.


Tis very strange.


They begin as the world did, with Adam and Eve.
There's in all just five and fifty.
I do use to meditate much when I come to plays too.
What do you think might come into a mans head now, seeing all this company?


I know not sir.


I have an excellent thought: if some fifty of the Grecians that were cramd in
the horse belly had eaten garlic, do you not think the Troians might have
smelt out their knavery.


Very likely.


By God I would he had, for I love Hector horribly.


O but coose coose.
Great Alexander when he came to the tomb of Achilles
Spake with a big loud voice, O thou thrice blessed happy.

Alexander was an ass to speak so well of a filthy cullion.


Good sir will you leave the stage, I'll help you to a private room.


Come coose, lets take some Tobacco. Have you never a prologue?


Not any sir.


Let me see, I will make one extempore.
Come to them and fencing of a congey with arms and legs.
Be round with them.
Gentlemen, I could wish for the women's s^kes you had all s^ft (...): and
Gentlewomen, I could wish that for the men's sakes you had all more easy
standings. What would they wish more but the play now, and that they shall have
instantly.


WHy how now? are ye mad? or drunk? or both? or what?


Are ye building Babilon there?


Here's a noise in Court, you think you are in a Tavern, do you not?


You think you are in a brothel house, do you not? This room is ill scented.

So, perfume, perfume; some upon me I pray thee: The Duke is upon instant
entrance; so, make place there.


Where breath's that musique?


The discord rather then the Musique is heard from the Malecontent Male^oles
chamber.


Male^ole.


Ganimed Iunoes jealous of thy long stockings: shadow of a woman, what would
Weesell? thou lamb a Court: what dost thou bleat for? a you smooth chind
Catamite!


Come down thou ragged cur, and s^arle here, I give thy dogged sullenness free
liberty: trot about and be-spurtle whom thou please.


I'll come among you, you gotish blooded Toderers, as Gum into Taffeta, to fret,
to fret: I'll fall like a sponge into water to suck up; to suck up. Howl
again. I'll go to church and come to you.


This Maleuole is one of the most prodigious affections that ever conversed with
nature; A man, or rather a monster; more discontent then Lucifer when he was
thrust out of the presence, his appetite is unsatiable as the Grave; as far
from any content, as from heaven: his highest delight is to procure others
vexation, and therein he thinks he truly serves heaven; for it is his position,
whosoever in this earth can be contented, is a flaue and damned; therefore
does he afflict al in that to which they are most affected; the Elements
struggle within him; his own soul is at variance within her self: his speech
is halter-worthy at all hours: I like him; faith, he gives good intelligence
to my spirit, makes me understand those weaknesses which others flattery
palliates: hark, they sing;


Sce: he comes: now shall you hear the extremity of a Malecontent: he is as
free as air: he blows oues every man. And (...), whence come you now?

From the public place of much dissimulation,


What did there*


Talk with a Usurer: take up at interest.


I wonder what religion thou art of.


Of a soldiers religion.


And what dost think makes most infidells (...)*


Sects, sects, I have seen seeming Piety change her roabeso oft, that sure
none but some arch-diuell can * shape her a Pe^icote.


O^ a religious policy.


But damnation on a politic religion: I am weary, would I were one of the
Dukes hounds now.


But what's the common news abroad Male^ole, thou dogst rumour still?


Common news? why common words are, God save ye, Fare ye well: common
actions, Flattery and Cosenage: common things, Women and Cuckolds: and how does
my little Ferra^d^ a ye lecherous Animal, my little Ferret, he goes sucking
up and down the palace into every hens nest like a Weesell: and to what dost
thou addict thy time to now, more then to those Antique painted drabs that are
still affected of young Courtiers, Flatt^ry, Pride, and Venery.


I study languages: who dost think to be the best linguist of our age?


Phew, the Devil, let him possess thee, hee'le teach thee to speak all
languages, most readily and strangely, and great reason mary, hes traveld
greatly in the world; is every where.


Save ith Court.


I, save ith Court: and how does my old muckhill overspread with fresh snow:


Out you improvident rascal.


Do, kick thou hugely hornd old Dukes Ox, good Master make-pleece.


How dost thou live now a days Maleuol^?


Why like the Knight S. Patrik Penlolians, with killing a spiders for my Ladies
Munkey.


How dost spend the night, I hear thou never sleep?


O no, but dream the most fantastical: O heaven: O fubbery, fubbery*


Dream, what dreamst?


Why me thinks I see that Signior pawn his foot-cloth: that Metreza her Plate:
this madam takes physic: that the other Me^si^ur may minister to her: here is a
Pander jeweld: there is a fellow in shift of Satin this day, that could not
shift a shirt the other night: here a Paris supports that Hellen: there's a Lady
Guineuer bears up that sir Lancel^t. Dreams, dreams, visions, fantasies,
Chimeraes, imaginations, tricks, conceits, Tristram Trimtram come a loft Ia^ke
a napes with a whim wham, here's a Knight of the land of Catit^ shall play at
trap with any page in Europe; Do the sword-dance, with any Morris dancer in
Christendom; ride at the Ring till the ^inne of his eyes look as blew as the
welkin, and run the wilde-goose chase ^uen with Pompey the huge.


You run.


To the devil: now Signor Guerchin^; that thou from a most pitied prisoner
should grow a most loathd flatterer: Alas poor Celso, thy starr's oppressed,
thou art an honest Lord, tis pity.


Is't pity?


I marry is't philosophical Equato, it is pity that thou being so excellent a
scholar by art, should be so ridiculous a fool by nature: I have a thing to
tell you Duke; bi^ v^ avaunt, bid um avaunt.


Leave us, leave us, now sir what is't?


Duke thou art a Beco, a Cornut^.


How?


Thou art a Cuckold.


Speak; vnshale him quick.


With most tumbler-like nimbleness.


Who? by whom? I burst with desire.


Mendoza is the man makes thee a hornd beast^
Duke it is Mendoza cornutes thee.

What conformance* relate, short, short.

As a Lawyers beard,
There is an old Crone in the Court, her name is Maquerelle,
She is my mistress sooth to say, and she doth ever tell me,
Blirt a rime; blirt a rime; Maquerelle is a cunning bawd, I am an honest
villain, thy wife is a close drab, and thou at ^ cuckold, farewell Duke.


Stay, stay.


Dull, dull Duke, can lazy patience make lame reueng^? O God for a woman to
make a man that which God never created, never made!


What did God never make?


A cuckold: To be made a thing that's hud-wink^ with kindness, whilst every
rascal philips his brows; to have a coxcomb with egregious horns, pind to a
Lords back, every page sporting himself with delightful laughter, whilst he
must be the last must know it; Pistols and Poniards, Pistols and Poniards.


Death and damnation!


Lightning and thunder!


Vengeance and torture!


Catz^!


O revenge!


Nay, to select among ten thousand fairs,
A Lady far inferior to the most,
In fair proportion both of limb and soul:
To take her from austerer check of parents,
To make her his by most deuoutfull rights,
Make her commandress of a better essence
Then is the gorgeous world even of a man.
To hug her with as raised an appetite,
As usurers do their delv'd up treasury,
(Thinking none tells it but his private self*)
To meet her spirit in a nimble kiss,
Distilling panting ardor to her hart.
True to her sheets, nay diets strong his blood,
To give her height of Hymeneal sweets.

O God!

Whilst she lispes, gives him some court quelqu^hose
Made only to provoke, not satiate:
And yet even then, the thaw of her delight
Flows from lewd heate of apprehension,
Only from strange imaginations rankenes,
That forms the adulterers pre^ence in her soul,
And makes her think she clips the ^oule kna^es loins.

Affliction to my bloods root.

Nay think, but think what may proceed of this,
Adultery is often the mother of i^cest.

Incest.


Yes incest: mark, Mendoz^ of his wife begets perchance a daughter. Mendo^
die^. His son marries this daughter. Say you? Nay tis frequent, not only
probable, but no question often acted, whilst ignorance, fearless ignorance
clasps his own seed.


Hideous imagination!


Adultery? why next to the sin of Symony, it is the most horrid transgression
under the cope of salvation.


Next to Simony?


I, next to Symony, in which our men in next age shall not sin.


Not sin? Why?


Because (thanks to some church-men) our age will leave them nothing to sin
with. But adultery! O dullness! shu, should exemplary punishment, that
intemperate bloods may freeze, but to think it. I would dam him and all his
generation my own hands should do it; ha, I would not trust heaven with my
vengeance any thing.


Any thing, any thing Male^ele thou shalt see instantly what temper my spirit
holds; farewell, remember I forget thee not, farewell.


Farewell.
Lean thoughtfulnes, a sallow meditation,
Suck thy veins dry, distemperance rob thy sleep,
The hearts disquiet is revenge most deep.
He that gets blood, the life of flesh but spills,
But he that breaks hearts peace, the dear soul kills.
Well, this disguise doth yet afford me that
Which kings do seldom hear, or great men use,
Free speech: and though my stat's vsurpt,
Yet this affected strain gives me a tongue,
As fetterlesse as is an Emperors.
I may speak foolishly, I knavishly,
Always carelessly, yet no one thinks it fashion
To poise my breath, "for he that laughs and strikes,
"Is lightly felt, or seldom struck again.
Duke, I'll torment thee: now my just revenge,
From thee than crown a richer gem shall part.
Beneath God naught's so dear as a calm heart.

My honoured Lord.

Peace, speak low; peace, O Celso, constant Lord,
(Thou to whose faith I only rest disconered,
Thou, one of full ten millions of men,
That love virtue only for it self,
Thou in whose hands old OPS may put her soul:)
Behold for ever banished Alt^fron^
This Genoas last years Duke, O truly noble,
I wanted those old instruments of state,
Dissemblance, and Suspect: I could not time it Celso,
My throne stood like a point in midst of a circle,
To all of equal neerenes, bore with none:
Raignd all alike, so slept in fearless virtue,
Suspectlesse, too suspectlesse: till the croude:
(Still liquorous of untried novelties,)
Impatient with severer government:
Made strong with Florence: banished Altofron^.

Strong with Florence, I, thence your mischief rose,
For when the daughter of the Florentine
Was matched once with his Pietr^ now Duke,
No stratagem of state vntride was left, till you of all*

Of all was quite bereft,
Alas Maria, too close prisoned:
My true faith'd Duchess in the Citadel.

I'll still adhere, lets mutiny and die.

O no, clime not a falling tower Celso,
Tis well held, desperation, no zeal:
Hopeless to strive with fate (peace) Temporize.
Hope, hope, that never for ^ak'st the wretchedest man,
Yet bid me live, and lurk in this disguise.
What? play I well the free breathed discontent?
Why man we are all Philosophical Monarchs or natural ^ooles, Celso, the
Courts after, the Dutch sheets will smoke for it ere it be long: Impure
Mendoza that sharpe nosed Lord, that made the cursed match linked Gen^a with
Florence now broad horns the Duke, which he now knows: Discord to
Malcontents is very Manna, when the ranks are burst, then scuffle Altofront.


I but durst.


Tis gone, tis swallowed like a mineral, some way 'twill work, phewt I'll not
shrink, " Hes resolute who can no lower sink.


O the father of May-poles, did you never see a fellow whose strength consisted
in his breath, respect in his office, religion on his Lord, and love in
himself? why then behold.


Sinior.


My right worshipful Lerd,
Your court night-cap makes you have a passing high fore-head.

I can tell you strange news, but I am sure you know them already. The Duke
speaks much good of you.


Go to then, and shall you and I now enter into a strict friendship?


Second one another.


Yes.


Do one another good offices.


Just, what though I called thee old Ox, egregious Withal, Broken-bellied
Coward, Rotten Mummy,

Yet since I am in favour:

Words of course, terms of disport.
His grace presents you by me a chain, as his grateful remembrance for -- I
am ignorant for what, marry ye may impart: Yet howsoever -- come -- dear
friend:

Dost know my son?

Your son?


He shall eat wood-cocks, dance jigges, make possets, and play at
shuttle-cocke with any young Lord about the Court: he haz as sweet a Lady too:
dost know her little bitch?


Tis a dog man.


Believe me, a she bitch? O tis a good creature, thou shalt be her servant,
I'll make thee acquainted with my young wife too: what, I keep her not at Court
for nothing: Tis grown to supper time, come to my table, that any thing I have
stands open to thee.


How smooth to him that is in state of grace,
How servile is the ruggedst Courtiers face.
What Profit, nay what Nature would keep down,
Are heaved to them, are minions to a crown.
Envious ambition never sates his thirst,
Till sucking all, he swells, and swells, and burstes.

I shall now leave you with my always best wishes, only let's hold betwixt us
a firm correspondence, a mutuall-frendly-reciprocall-kinde of
steddie-vnanimous-hartily leagued. --


Did your sinniorship ne'er see a pigeon house that was smooth, round, and
white without, and full of holes and stink within, ha ye not old Courtier?


O yes, tis the form the fashion of them all.


Adieu my true Court-friend, farewell my dear Castilio.


Yonders Mendoza.


True, the privy key.


I take my leave, sweet Lord.


Tis fit, away.


Leave your suites with me, I can and will: attend my Secretary, leave me.


Mendoza, hark ye, hark ye. You are a treacherous villain, God bwy ye.


Out you base borne rascal.


We are all the sons of heaven, though a Tripe wife were our mother; a you
whore-sonne hot rainde he Marmoset, Egistus did ever hear of one Egistus?


Gistus?


I Egistus, he was a filthy incontinent Flesh-monger, such a one as thou art.


Out grumbling rogue.


Orestes, beware Orestes.


Out beggar.


I once shall rise.


Thou rise?


I at the resurrection.
"No vulgar seed, but once may rise, and shall,
"No King so huge, but fore he die, may fall.

Now good Elizium, what a delicious heaven is it for a man to be in a Princes
favour: O sweet God! O pleasure! O fortune! O all thou best of life! what
should I think: what say? what do? to be a favourite? a minion? to have a
general timorous respect, observe a man, a statefull silence in his presence,
solitariness in his absence, a confused hum, and busy murmure of obsequious
suitors training him; the cloth held up, and way proclaimed before him:
Petitionary vassalls licking the pavement with their slavish knees, whilst some
odd palace Lampreel^s that engender with snakes, and are full of eyes on both
sides, with a kind of insinuated humbleness, fix all their delights upon
his brow: O blessed state, what a ravishing prospect doth the Olympus of favour
yield* Death, I cornute the Duke: sweet women, most sweet Ladies, nay
Angels; by heaven he is more accursed then a devil that hates you, or is
hated by you, and happier then a God that loves you, or is beloved by you; you
preservers of mankind, life blood of society, who would live, nay who can live
without you? O Paradise, how majestic is your austerer presence? how
imperiously chaste is your more modest face? but O! how full of ravishing
attraction is your pretty, petulant, langushing, laciuiously-composed
countenance: these amorous smiles, those soule-warming sparkling glances,
ardent as those flames that singed the world by heedless Phaeton; in body how
delicate, in soul how witty, in discourse how pregnant, in life how wary, in
favours how iuditious, in day how sociable, and in night how? O pleasure
vnutterable, indeed it is most certain, one man cannot deserve only to enjoy
a beauteous woman: but a Duchess? in despite of Phoebus I'll write a sonnet
instantly in praise of her.


And is't possible? Mendoza slight me, possible?


Possible? what can be strange in him that's drunk with favour, Grows insolent
with grace? speak Maq^erelle, speak.


To speak feelingly, more, more richly in ^ol^ide sense then worthless
words, give me those jewels of your ears to receive my enforced duty, as
for my part tis well Emilia with high appetite; and as she told me (as you know
we women impart our secrets one to another,) when she repulsed his suite, in
that he was possessed with your endeared grace: Mendoza most ingratefully
renounced all faith to you.


Nay, called you, speak Maquerelle, speak.


By heaven witch: dried bisquet, and contested blushlesly he loved you but for
a spurt, or so.


For maintenance.


Advancement and regard.


O villain! O impudent Mendoza.


Nay he is the rustiest jade, the foulest mouthd knave in railing against our
sex: he will rail against women.


How? how?


I am ashamed to speak't, I.


I love to hate him* speak.


Why when Emillia scorned his base vnsteddines the black throated rascal
scolded, and said.


What?


Troth it is too shameless.


What said he?


Why that at four women were fools, at fouret^e drabbes, at forty bawds, at
fourscore witches, and a hundred cattes.


O vnlimitable impudency!


But as for poor Fernezes fixed heart,
Was never shadelesse meadow drier parcht,
Under the scorching heate of heavens dog,
Then is my heart with your enforcing eyes.

A hot simile.

Your smiles have been my heaven, your frowns my hell,
O pity then; G^ace should with beauty dwell.

Reasonable perfect bir-lady.

I will love thee, be it but in despite
Of that Mendoza: witch! Ferneze: witch!
Ferneze thou art the Dutch favourite,
Be faithful, private, but tis dangerous.

"His love is lifeless, that for love fears breath,
"The worst that's due to sin, O would 'twere death.

Enjoy my favour, I will be sick instantly take physic, Therefore in depth
of night visit.


Visit her chamber, but conditionally, you shall not offend her bed: By this
diamond.


By this diamond --


Nor tarry longer than you please: By this ruby.


By this ruby. --


And that the door shall not creak.


And that the door shall not creak.


Nay but swear.


By this purse. --


Go to, I'll keep your oaths for you: remember, visit.


Dri'd bisquet! look where the base wretch comes.


Beauties life, heavens model, loves Queen.


That's his Aemilia.


Natures triumph, best on earth.


Meaning Aemilia.


Thou only wonder that the world hath seen.


That's Aemilia.


Must I then hear her praised Mendoza?


Madam, your excellency is graciously encountered;
I have been writing passionate flashes in honour of. --

Out villain, villain: O judgment, where have been my eyes? what bewitched
election made me dote on thee? what sorcery made me love thee? but be gone,
bury thy head: O that I could do more then loathe thee: hence worst of ill: No
reason ask, our reason is our will.


Women? nay furies, nay worse, for they torment only the bad, but women good
and bad.

Damnation of mankind: breath, hast thou praised them for this? And is't you
Ferneze are wrigled into smock grace? sit sure, O that I could rail against
these monsters in nature, modells of hell, curse of the earth, women that dare
attempt any thing, and what they attempt, they care not how they accomplish,
without all premeditation or prevention, rash in asking, desperate in working,
impatient in suffering, extreme in desiring, slaves unto appetite, mistresses
in dissembling, only constant in inconstancy, only perfect in counterfeiting:
their words are fained, their eyes forged, their sights dissembled, their
looks counterfeit, their hair false, their given hopes deceitful, their very
breath artificial* Their blood is their only God: Bad clothes, and old age,
are only the devils they tremble at.

That I could rail now!

A mischief fill thy throat, thou foul iaw'd slaue^ Say thy prayers.


I ha forgot um.


Thou shalt die.


So shalt thou; I am heart mad.


I am horne mad.


Extreme mad.


Monstrously mad.


Why?


Why? thou, thou hast dishonoured my bed.


I? come, come, sit, here's my bare heart to thee,
As steady as is this centre to the glorious world.
And yet hark, thou art a Cornuto; but by me?

Yes slave by thee.

Do not, do not with tart and spleenful breath,
Loose him can loose thee; I offend my Duke.
Bear record O ye dumb and raw-ayrde nights,
How vigilant my sleepelesse eyes have been,
To watch the traitor; record thou spirit of truth,
With what debasement I ha thrown my self,
To under offices, only to learn
The truth, the party, time, the means, the place,
By whom, and when, and where thou were disgraced.
And am I paid with slave? hath my intrusion
To places private, and prohibited,
Only to observe the closer passages,
Heaven knows with vows of revelation,
Made me suspected, made me deemed a villain?
What rogue hath wronged us?

Mendoza, I may err.

Err? tis too mild a name, but err and err,
Run giddy with suspect, for through me thou know
That which most creatures save thy self do know:
Nay since my service hath so loathed reject,
Fore I'll reveal, shalt find them clipped together.

Mendoza, Thou know I am a most plain breasted man.


The fitter to make a cuckold: would your brows were most plain too.


Tell me, indeed I heard thee rail.


At women, true, why what cold fleam could choose,
Knowing a Lord so honest, virtuous,
So boundless loving, bounteous, faire-shapt, sweet,
To be contemned, abused, defamde, made cuckolo:
Hart, I hate all women for it, sweet sheets, wax lights, antique
bed^postes, cambric smocks, villainous curtai^es, arras pictures, oy^de
hinges, and all the tongue-tide lascivious witnesses of great creatures
wantonness: what salvation can you expect?


Wilt thou tell me?


Why you may find it your self, observe, observe.


I ha not the patience, wilt thou deserve me; tell, give it.


Tak't, why Ferneze is the man, Ferneze, I'll proou't, this night you shall take
him in your sheets, wilt serve?


It will, my bozom's in some peace, till night.


What?


Farewell.


God! how weak a Lord are you,
Why do you think there is no more but so?

Why?

Nay then will I presume to counsel you,
It should be thus; you with some guard upon the sudden
Break into the Princes chamber, I stay behind
Without the door, through which he needs must pass,
Ferneze flies, let him, to me he comes, he's killed
By me, observe by me, you follow, I rail,
And seem to save the body: Dutch comes
On whom (respecting her advanced birth,
And your fair nature,) I know, nay I do know
No violence must be used. She comes, I storm,
I praise, excuse Ferneze, and still maintain
The Dutch honour, she for this loves me,
I honour you, shall know her soul, you mine,
Then nought shall she contrive in vengeance,
(As women are most thoughtful in revenge)
Of her Ferneze, but you shall sooner know it
Then she can think it.
-- Thus shall his death come sure,
Your Dutch braine-caught; so your life secure.

It is too well, my bozome, and my heart,
"When nothing helps, cut off the rotten part.

" Who cannot fain friendship, can ne'er produce the effects of hatred: Honest
fool Duke, subtle lascivious Dutch, seely novice Ferneze; I do laugh at
ye, my brain is in labour till it produce mischief, and I feel sudden
throws, proofs sensible, the issue is at hand.

"As Bears shape young, so I'll form my devise,
"Which grown proves horrid: vengeance makes men wise.

Fool, most happily encountered, can sing fool?


Yes I can sing fool, if you'll bear the burden, and I can play upon
instruments, scurvily. as gentlemen do; O that I had been gelded, I should
then have been a fat fool for a chamber, a squeaking fool for a tavern,
and a private fool for all the Ladies.


You are in good case since you came to court fool; what guarded, guarded!


Yes faith, even as footmen and bawds wear velvet, not ^or an ornament of
Honour, but for a badge of drudgery: for now the Duke is discontented I am
fain to fool him asleep every night.


What are his griefs?


He hath sore eyes.


I never observed so much.


Horrible sore eyes; and so hath every Cuckold, for the roots of the horns
spring in the eye-balles, and that's the reason the horne of a cuckold is as
tender as his eye; or as that growing in the woman's forehead twelve years
since, that could not endure to be touched. The Duke hangs down his head like a
columbine.


Passarell^, why do great men beg fools?


As the Welshman stole rushes, when there was nothing else to filch; only to
keep begging in fashion.


Pue, thou gives no good reason,
Thou speak like a fool.

Faith I utter small fragments as your knight courts your City (...) with
jingling of his guilt spurs, advancing his bush coloured beard, and taking
Tobacco. This is all the mirror of their knightly complements: Nay I shall
talk when my tongue is a going once; tis like a Citizen on horseback, evermore
in a false gallop.


And how doth Maquerelle fare nowadays?


Faith I was wont to salute her as our English women are at their first landing
in Flushing; I would call her whore; but now that antiquity leaves her as an
old piece of plasticke t'work by, I only ask her how her rotten teeth fare
every morning, and so leave her: she was the first that ever invented perfumd
smocks for the gentlewomen, and woollen shoes for fear of creaking: for the
visitant, she were an excellent Lady, but that her face peeleth like Muscouie
glass.


And how doth thy old Lord that hath wit enough to be a flatterer, and
conscience enough to be a knave?


O excellent, he keeps beside me fifteen jeasters, to instruct him in the Art
of fooling, and viters their jeastes in private to the Duke and Duchess;
heel lie like to your Switzer, or Lawyer; heel be of any side for most money.


I am in haste, be brief.


As your Fiddler when he is paid,
Heel thrive I warrant you, while your young courtier stands like Good-friday
in Lent, men long to see it, because more fatting days come after it, else
hes the leanest and pittifulst actor in the whole Pageant; Adieu Maleuole.


O world most wild, when thy loose vanities
Taught by this fool, do make the fool seem wise!

You'll know me again Maleuole.


O I, by that velvet.


I, as a petti-fogger by his buckram bag,
I am as common in the Court as an hostesses lips in the country; knights,
and clowns, and knaves, and all share me: the Court cannot possibly be
without me. Adieu Maleuole.


Hes caught, the woodcockes head is ith noose,
Now treads Ferneze in dangerous path of lust,
Swearing his sense is merely deified.
The fool graspes clouds, and shall beget Centaurs;
And now in strength of panting faint delight,
The Goat bids heaven envy him; good Goose,
I can afford thee nothing but the poor comfort of calamity, Pity
"Lust's like the plummets hanging on clock lines,
"Will ne'er ha done till all is quite undone.
Such is the course salt sallow lust doth run,
Which thou shalt try; I'll be revenged. Duke thy suspect,
Durchesse thy disgrace, Ferneze thy rival ship
Shall have swift vengeance; nothing so holy,
No band of nature so strong,
No law of friendship so sacred,
But I'll profane burst, violate,
Fore I'll endure disgrace, contempt and poverty:
Shall I, whose very humm struck all heads bare;
Whose face made silence, creaking of whose shoe
Forcde the most private passages fly open,
Scrape like a servile dog at some latcht door?
Learn now to make a leg? and cry, beseech ye,
Pray ye, is such a Lord within? be awde
At some odd Ushers scofft formality?
First seat my brains; Vnde cadis non quo refert;
My heart cries, perish all: how! how! What fate
"Can once a^oyde revenge, that's desperate,
I'll to the Duke; if all should open, if! tush;
"Fortune still dotes on those who cannot blush.

Bless ye cast a Ladies: ha dip-sawce, how dost thou old Cole?


Old Cole?


I old Cole; me thinks thou lie like a brand under billets of green wood.
He that will inflame a young wenches heart, let him lay close to her: an old
Cole that hath first been fired, a pandre^ my half burnt lint, who though
thou can flame thy self, yet art able to set a thousand virgins tapers
afire: and how doth Ianiuere thy husband, my little periwincle, is he
troubled with the cough of the lungs still? doos he hawke a nights still, he
will not bite.


No by my troth, I took him with his mouth empty of old teeth.


And he took thee with thy belly full of young bones: Marie he took his
maim by the stroke of his enemy.


And I mine by the stroke of my friend.


The close stock! o mortal wench: Lady, ha ye now no restoratives for your
decayed Iasons? Look ye, crabs guts baked, distild oxe-pith, the puluerized
hairs of a lions upper lip, gellie of cocke^sparrowes, he monkeys marrow, or
powlder of foxe-stones. And whither are you ambling now?


To bed, to bed.


Do your husbands lie with ye?


That were country fashion in faith.


Ha ye no foregoers about you: come, whither in good deed law now?


In good indeed law now, to eat the most miraculously, admirably, astonishable
composed posset with three curds, without any drink: will ye help me with a
he fox? here's the Duke.


Fride frogs are very good French like too: --


The night grows deep and foul, what hour is't?


Upon the stroke of twelve.


Save ye Duke.


From thee; be gone, I do not love thee, let me see thee no more, we are
displeased.


Why God be with thee, heaven hear my curse,
May thy wife and thee live long together.

Be gone sir.


When Arthur first in Court began, -- Agamemnon: Menelnm -- was ever any Duke
a Cornuto?


Be gone hence.


What religion wilt thou be of next?


Out with him.


With most servile patience time will come,
When wonder of thy error will strike dumb,
Thy bezeld sense, slaves I favour, I mary shall he, rise,
"Good God! how subtle hell doth flatter vice,
"Mount^ him aloft, and makes him seem to fly,
"As Foul the Tortoise mocked, who to the sky,
"Th'ambitious shell-fish raised; th'end of all,
"Is only, that from height he might dead fall.

Why when? out ye rogue, be gone ye rascal.


I shall now leave ye with all my best wishes.


Out ye cur.


Only lets hold together a firm correspondence.


Out.


A mutual friendly reciprocal perpetual kind of steady unanimous heartily
leagued.


Hence ye gross jawed pesantly, out, go.


Adieu pigeon house: thou Bur th^t only stick to nappy fortunes, the
Sarpego, the Strangury, an eternal vneffectuall Priapisme seize thee.


Out rogue.


May thou be a notorious wittally pander to thine own wife, and yet get no
office but live to be the utmost misery of mankind, a beggarly cuckold.


It shall be so.


It must be so, for where great states revenge,
"This requisite the parts with piety,
"And lo^t respect forbears, be closely dogd,
"Lay one into his breast shall sleep with him,
"Feed in the same dish, run in self faction,
"Who may discover any shape of danger;
"For once disgraced, displayed in offence,
"It makes man blushless, and man is (all confess)
"More prone to vengeance than to gratefulness.
"Favours are writ in dust, but stripes we feel,
"Depraved nature stamps in lasting steel.

You shall be leagued with the Duchess.

The plot is very good.

You shall both kill, and seem the course to save.

A most ^ine brain trick.

Of a most cunning knave.

My Lords, the heavy action we intend,
Is death and shame, two of the ugliest shapes
That can confound a soul; think, think of it:
I stri^e, but yet like him that against stone walls
Directs his shafts, rebounds in his own face,
My Ladies shame is mine; o God tis mine.
Therefore I do conjure all secrecy,
Let it be as very little as may be; pray ye, as may be.
Make frightlesse entrance, salute her with soft eyes,
Strain nought with blood, only Ferneze dies,
But not before her brows: O Gentlemen,
God knows I love her; nothing else, but this,
I am not well. If grief that sucks veins dry,
Riuels the skin, casts ashes in men's faces*
Be-dulls the eye, vnstrengthens all the blood:
Chance to remove me to another world,
As sure I once must die: let him succeed:
I have no child; all that my youth begot,
Hath bin your loves, which shall inherit me:
Which as it ever shall, I do conjure it.
Mendoza may succeed, he's noble borne,
With me of much desert.

Much.

Your silence answers I,
I thank you, come on now: o that I might die
Before her shame's displayed! would I were forcde
To burn my fathers Tomb, vnheale his bones,
And dash them in the dirt, rather than this:
This both the living and the dead offends:
"Sharpe s^gery where nought but death amends.

Even here it is, three curdes in three regions individually distinct.

Most methodical according to art composed without any drink.


Without any drink?


Upon my honour, will you sit and eat?


Good, the composure, the receipt, how is't?


Tis a pretty pearl, by this pearl, (how dost with me,) thus it is, seven
and thirty yelkes of Barbary hens eggs, eighteen spoonefulles and a half
of the i^yce of cockesparrow bones, one ounce, three drammes, four scruples,
and one quarter of the syrup of Ethiopian dates, sweetened with three quarters
of a poond of pure candid Indian Eringos, strewed over with the powder of
pearl of America, amber of Cataia, and lamb stones of Muscouia.


Trust me the ingredients are very cordial, and no question good, and most
powerful in restoration.


I know not what you me^ne by restoration, but this it doth, it purifieth the
blood, Imootheth the skin, in^feneth the eye, strengthens the vemes,
mundefieth the teeth, comfort the stomach, fortifies the back, and
quickneth the wit; that's all.


By my troth I have eaten but two spoonefulls, and me thinks I could discourse
most swiftly and wittily already.


Have you the art to seem honest?


I thank advise and practise.


Why then eat me of this posset, quicken your blood, and preserve your
beauty. Do you know doctor Plaster-face, by this curd, he is the most
exq^isite in forging of veins, sprightning of eyes, dying of hair, sleeking
of skins, blushing of cheeks, surpheleing of breasts blanching and
bleaching of teeth that (...) made an old Lady gracious by torch^ light: by
this curd law.


We we are resolved what god haz given us weel ch^rish.


Cherish any thing saving your husband, keep him not too high, lest he leap
the pale^ but for your beauty, let it be your saint, b^quea^h two hours to it
every morning in your closet: I ha been young, and yet in my conseience I am
not above five and twenty, but believe me, preserve and use your beauty; for
youth and beauty once gone, we are like bee-hiues without honey: out a fashion,
apparel that no man will wear, therefore use me your beauty.


I but men say.


Men say? let men say wha^ they will, life a woman, they are ignorant of your
wants, the more in years, the more in perfection they grow: if they loose
youth beauty, they gain wisdom discretion: But when our beauty fades,
goodnight with us: there cannot be an vglier thing to see, then an old woman,
from which, O pruning, pinching, painting, deliver all sweet beauties.


Hark, music.


Peace, tis in the Dutch bed-chamber, good rest most prosperously graced
Ladies.


Good-night sentinel.


Night dear Maquerelle.


May my possets operation send you my wit honesty* And me your youth beauty:
the pleasingest rest.


Strike, strike.


Save my Ferneze, O save my Ferneze.


Follow, pursue.


O save Ferneze.


Pierce, pierce, thou shallow fool drop there.
"He that attempts a Princes lawless love,
"Must have broad hands, close heart, with Argos eyes,
"And back of Hercules, or else he dies.

Follow, follow.

Stand off, forbear, ye most uncivil Lords.

Strike.

Do not; tempt not a man resolved,
Would you inhumane murderers more then death?

O poor Ferneze.

Alas, now all defence too late.

He's dead.

I am sorry for our shame: go to your bed:
Weep not too much, but leave some tears to shed
When I am dead.

What weep for thee? my soul no tears shall find.

Alas, alas, that women's souls are blind.

Betray such beauty, murder such youth, contemn civility.
He loves him not that rails not at him.

Thou can not move us: we have blood enough.
And please you Lady we have quite forgot
All your defects: if not, why then.

Not.

Not: the best of rest, good night.

Despite go with thee.

Madam, you ha done me foul disgrace.
You have wronged him much, loves you too much.
Go to; your soul knows you have.

I think I have.

Do you but think so?

Nay, sure I have, my eyes have witnessed thy loue^
Thou hast stood too firm for me.

Why tell me fair cheekt Lady, who even in tears,
Art powerfully beauteous, what unadvised passion
Struck ye into such a violent heate against me?
Speak, what mischief wronged us? what devil injured us?
Speak.

That thing ne'er worthy of the name of man; Ferneze,
Ferneze swore thou love Emilia,
Which to advance with most reproachful breath,
Thou both did blemish and denounce my love.

Ignoble villain, did I for this bestride
Thy wounded limbs; for this? O God! for this?
Sunk all my hopes, and with my hopes my life,
Ripped bare my throat unto the hangmans axe.
Thou most dishonoured trunk -- Emillia.
By life I know her not -- Emillia.
Did you believe him?

Pardon me, I did.

Did you? and thereupon you graced him.

I did.

Took him to favour, nay even clasped with him.

Alas I did.

This night?

This night.

And in your lustful twines the Duke took you*

A most sad truth.

O God! O God! how we dull honest souls,
Heavy brained men are swallowed in the bogs
Of a deceitful ground, whilst nimble bloods,
Light jointed spirits spent, cut good men's throats,
And escape; alas, I am too honest for this age,
Too full of fleam, and heavy steddines^e:
Stood still whilst this slave cast a noose about me;
Nay then to stand in honour of him and her,
Who had even sliced my heart.

Come, I did err, and am most sorry, I did err.

Why we are both but dead, the Duke hates us.
"And those whom Princes do once groundly hate,
"Let them provide to die, as sure as fate,
"Prevention is the heart of policy.

Shall we murder him?

Instantly.

Instantly? before he castes a plot?
Or further blaze my honours much known blot.
Lets murder him.

I would do much for you, will ye marry me?

I'll make thee duke: we are of Medices.
Florence our friend, in court my faction
Not meanly strengthfull; the Duke then dead,
We well prepared for change: the multitude
Irresolutely reeling, we enforce:
Our party seconded, the kingdom mazed,
No doubt of swift success, all shall be graced.

You do con^irme me, we are resolute,
To morrow look for change rest confident.
Tis now about the immodest waste of night,
The mother of moist dew with pallide light,
Spreads gloomy shades about the numbed earth.
Sleep, sleep, whilst we contrive our mischiefs birth;
This man I'll get inhumde; farewell, to bed;
I (...) the pillow, dream, the Duke is dead.
So, so, good night, how fortune dotes on impudence,
I am in private the adopted son of yon good Prince.
I must be Duke; why if I must, I must,
Most ^eely Lord, name me? O heaven!
I see God made honest fools, to maintain crafty knaves:
The Duchess is wholly mine too; must kill her husband
To quit her shame; much; then marry her: I,
O I grow proud in prosperous treachery!
As wrestlers clip, so i'll embrace you all,
Not to support, but to procure your fall.

God arrest thee.

At whose suite?

At the devils; ah you treacherous damnable monster!
How dost? how dost, thou treacherous rogue?
Ah ye rascal, I am banished the Court sir.

Prithee lets be acquainted, I do love thee faith.

At your service, by the Lord law, shall's go to supper, let's be once drunk
together, and so unite a most virtuously strengthened friendship, shall's
Huguenot, shall's?


Wilt fall upon my chamber to morrow morn?


As a raven to a dunghill; they say there's one dead here, pricked for the pride
of the flesh.


there he is, prithee bury him.


O most willingly, I mean to turn pure Rochel churchman, I.


Thou church man! why? why?


Because I'll live lazily, rail upon authority, deny kings supremacy in things
indifferent, and be a Pope in mine own parish.


Wherefore dost thou think churches were made?


To scour ploughshares, I have seen oxen plow up Altares: Et nunc sedges vbi
Zion fuit.


Strange.


Nay monstrous, I ha seen a sumptuous steeple turned to a stinking privy; more
beastly, the sacredst place made a dogs kennel: nay most inhumane, the
stoned coffins of long dead christians burst up, and made hogs-troughs -- Hic
sinis Pri^ni. Shall I ha some sack and cheese at thy chamber?

Good night good mischievous incarnate devil, good night Mendoza, ah you
inhumane villain, goodnight, night fub.


Good night: to morrow morn.


I, I will come ^riendly Damnation, I will come:
I do descry crosse-poynts, honesty and court-ship, straddle as far as^nder,
as a true Frenchmans legs.


O!


Proclamations, more proclamations.


O a Surgeon.


Hark, lust cries for a Surgeon, what news from Limbo?
How doth the grand cuckold Lucifer?

O help, help, conceal and save me.

Thy shame more than thy wounds do grie^e me far,
"Thy wounds but leave upon thy flesh some scar;
"But fame ne'er heales, still ranckles worse and worse,
"Such is of uncontrolled lust the curse.
"Think what it is in lawless sheets to lie:
"But O Ferneze, what in lust to die.
"Then thou that shame respects, o fly converse
"With women's eyes, and lisping wantonness:
"Stick candles against a virgin walls white back,
"If they not burn, yet at the least thei'le black.
Come, i'll convey thee to a private port.
Where thou shalt live (o happy man) from court.
The beauty of the day begins to rise,
From whose bright form Nights heavy shadow flies,
Now gins close plots to work, the Scene grows full,
And craves his eyes who hath a solide skull.

Tis grown to youth of day, how shall we waste this light?
My heart's more heavy than a tyrants crown.
Shall we go hunt? Prepare for field.

Would ye could be merry.

Would God I could: Mendoza bid um haste:
I would fain shift place; O vain relief!
"Sad souls may well change place, but not change grief:
As Dear being struck fly thorough many soll^s,
Yet still the shaft sticks fast, so;

A good old simile, my honest Lord.

I am not much unlike to some sick man,
That long desired hurtful drink; at last
Swilles in and drinks his last, ending at on^
Both life and thirst: O would I ne'er had known^
My own dishonour! good God that men should
Desire to search out that, which being found, kills all
Their joy of life, to taste the tree of knowledge,
And then be driven from out Paradise.
Can give me some comfort?

My Lord, I have some books which have been dedicated to my honour, and I ne'er
read um, and yet they had very fine names: Physic for Fortune: Lozinges of
sanctified sincerity, very pretty works of Curates, Scriveners and
Schoolemaisters Mary I remember one Seneca, Lucius Anneus Seneca.


Out upon him, he writ of Temperance and fortitude, yet lived like a voluptuous
epicure, and died like an effeminate coward. Haste thee to Florence: here,
take our Letters, see um sealed; away; report in private to the ho^ored Duke,
his daughters forced disgrace, tell him at length,

We know, too much due complements advance,
"There's nought that's safe and sweet but ignorance.

Madam, I am going Ambassador for Florence, twill be great charges to me.


No matter my Lord, you have the lease of two manors come out next
Christmasse; you may lay your tenants on the greater rack for it: and when you
come home again, I'll teach you how you shall get two hundred pounds a year
by your teeth.


How Madam?


Cut off so much from house-keeping, that which is saved by the teeth, you know
is got by the teeth.


Fore God, and so I may, I am in wondrous credit Lady.


See the use of flattery, I did ever counsel you to flatter greatness, and you
have profited well: any man that will do so shall be sure to be like your
Sco^ch Barnacle, now a block, instantly a worm, and presently a great goose:
this it is to rot and putrefy in the bosom of greatness.


Thouia rte ever my politician, O how happy is that olde^ ord that hath a
politician to his young Lady! I'll have fifty gentlemen shall attend upon me;
mary the most of them shall be Farmers sons, because they shall bear their
own charges, and they shall go appar^ld thus, in sea-water green suits,
ash-color (...), wetchet stockings, and popinj^y green feathers, will not the
colours do excellent?


Out vpont, theile look like Citizens riding to their friends at
Whitsontide, their apparel just so many several pa^ishes.


I'll have it so, and Passarello my fool shall go along with me, mary he shall
be in velvet?


A fool in velvet.


I, tis common for your fool to wear satin, i'll have mine in velvet.


What will you wear then my Lord?


Velvet too, mary it shall be embroidered, because i'll d^ffer from the ^oole
somewhat. I am horribly troubled with the got, nothing grieves me but that my
doctor hath forbidden me wine, and you know your Ambassador must drink. Did
thou ask thy doctor what was good for the got?


Yes, he said, e^s^, wine and women, were good for it.


Nay, thou hast such a wit, what was good to cure i^, said he?


Why the racke^al your Empericks could never do the like cure upon the got the
rack did in England: or your Scotch boot. The French Herlakeene will instruct
you.


Surely I do wonder, how thou having, for the most part of thy life time
been a country body, shouldest have so good a wit.


Who I? why I have been a Courtier thrice two months.


So have I this twenty year, and yet there was a gentleman usher called me
cocks-coombe the other day, and to my face too: wast not a backe-biting rascal? I
would I were better trauaild, that I might have been better acquainted with
the fashions of several country-men: but my Secretary, I think he hath
sufficiently instructed me.


How my Lord?


Mary my good Lord quoth he, your Lordship shall ever find amongst a hundred
French-men, forty hot shottes: amongst a hundred Spaniardes, threescore
bragarts: amongst a hundred Dutch-men, fourscore drunkardes: amongst a hundred
English-men, fourscore and ten mad-men: and amongst an hundred Welch-men.


What my Lord?


Fourscore and nineteen gentlemen.


But since you go about a sad imbasie, I would have you go in black my Lord.


Why dost think I cannot morn, unless I wear my hat in cipers like an
Aldermans heir, that's vile, very old, in faith.


I'll learn of you shortly; O we should have a fine gallant of you, should not
I instruct you: how will you bear your self when you come into the Duke of
Florence Court?


Proud enough, and to will do well enough; as I walk up and down the
chamber, I'll spit f^ownes about me, have a strong perfume in my jerkin, let my
beard grow to make me look terrible, salute no man beneath the fourth button,
and 'twill do excellent.


But there is a very beautiful Lady there, how will you entertain her?


I'll tell you that when the Lady hath entertained me: but to satisfy thee,
here comes the fool: fool thou shalt stand for the fair Lady.


Your fool will stand for your Lady most willingly and most uprightly.


I'll salute her in Latin.


O your fool can understand no Latin.


I but your Lady can.


Why then if your Lady take down your fool, your fool will stand no longer
for your Lady.


A pestilent fool: fore God I think the world be turned vp^side down too.


O no sir, for then your Lady, and all the Ladies in the palace should go
with their heals upward, and that were a strange sight you know.


There be many will repine at my preferment.


O I, like the envy of an elder sister that hath her younger made a Lady before
her.


The Duke is wondrous discontented.


I, and more melancholic, then a usurer having all his money out at the death
of a Prince.


Did thou see Madam Floria to day?


Yes, I found her repairing her face to day, the red vpo^ the white showed as
if her cheeks should have been served in for two dishes of Barbaries in
stewed broth, and the flesh to them a wood-cocke.


A bitter foul: Come Madam, this night thou shalt enjoy me freely, and to
morrow for Florence.


What a natural fool is he that would be a pair of bodies to a woman's
petti-cote, to be trusst and pointed to them. Well, I'll dog my Lord, and the
word is proper: for when I fawn upon him he feeds me; when I snap him by the
fingers, he spittes in my mouth. If a dogs death were not strangling, I had
rather be one then a feruing-man: for the corruption of coin, is either the
generation of a usurer, or a lousy beggar.


I cannot sleep, my eyes ill neighbouring lids
Will hold no fellowship: O thou pale sober night,
Thou that in sluggish fumes all sense dost sleep:
Thou that gives all the world full leave to play,
Vnbendst the feebled veins of sweaty l^bour;
The gally-slaue, that all the to^lesome day,
Tugs at his oar, against the stubburne wa^e,
Straining his rugged veins, s^ores fast:
The stooping sithe-man that doth barb the field
Thou make wink sure: in night all creatures sleep,
Only the Malecontent, that against his fate
Repines and quarrels, alas he's goodman tell-clocke.
His sallow iaw-bones sink with wasting moan,
Whilst others beds are down, his pillows stone.

Maleuole.


Elder of Israell, thou honest defect of wicked nature and obstinate ignorance,



I am going Ambassador to Florence.


Ambassador? now for thy countries honour: prithee do not put up mutton
porridge in thy cloke-bagge: thy young Lady wife goes to Florence with thee too,
dooes she not?


No, I leave her at the palace.


At the palace? now discretion shield man, for Gods love lets ha no more
cuckolds: Hymen begins to put off his saffron robe, keep thy wife in the
state of grace, hart a truth, I would sooner leave my Lady singled in a
Bordello, then in the Genoa Palace, sin there appearing in her ^luttish
shape,

Would soon grow loathsome, even to blushessence,
Surfeit would cloak intemperate appetite,
Make the soul scent the rotten breath of lust.
When in an Italian lascivious palace, a Lady gardianlesse,
Left to the push of all allurement,
The strongest incitements to immodesty,
To have her bound, incensed with wantor sweets,
Her veins filled hie with heating delicates:
Soft rest, sweet music, amorous Masquerers, lascivious banquets, sin it
self gilt over, strong phantafie tricking up strange delights, presenting it
dressed pleasingly to sense, sense leading it unto the soul, confirmed with
potent example, impudent custom, enticed by that great bawd Opportunity,
thus being prepared, clap to her easy ear, youth in good clothes, well shaped,
rich, faire-spoken, promising-noble, ardent blood-full, witty, flattering:
V^isses absent, O Ithacan, chastest Penelope hold out.


Mass I'll think on it, farewell.


Farewell, take thy wife with thee, farewell.
To Florence, um? it may prove good, it may,
And we may once unmask our brows.

My honourde Lord.


Celso peace, how is't? speak low, pale fears suspect that hedges, walls and
trees have ears: speak, how runs all?


I faith my Lord, that beast with many heads
The staggering multitude recoiles apace,
Though thorough great men's envy, most men's malice,
Their much intemperate heate hath banished you.
Yet now they find envy and malice near,
Produce faint reformation.
The Duke, the too soft Duke lies as a block,
For which two tugging factions seem to saw,
But stil^ the iron through the ribs they draw.

I tell thee Celzo, I have ever found
Thy breast most far from shifting cowardice
And fearful baseness: therefore I'll tell thee Celzo,
I find the wind begins to come about,
I'll shift my suite of fortune, I know the Florentine whose only force,
By marrying his proud daughter to this Prince,
Both banished me, and made this weak Lord Duke,
Will now forsake them all, be sure he will:
I'll lie in ambush for convenience,
Upon their severance to confirm my self.

Is Ferneze interred?


Of that at leisure: he lives.


But how stands Mendoza, how is't with him?


Faith like a pair of snuffers, snibbes filth in other men, and retains it in
it self.


He doo's fly from public notice me thinks, as a hare does from hounds, the
feet whereon he flies betrays him.


I can track him Celso.
O my disguise fools him most powerfully:
For that I seem a desperate Malecontent,
He fain would clasp with me; he is the true slave
That will put on the most affected grace,
For some wild second cause.

He's here.


Give place.
Illo, ho, ho, ho, art there old true penny?
Where hast thou spent thy self this morning? I see flattery in thine eyes,
and damnation in thy soul. Ha thou huge rascal*


Thou art very merry.


As a scholar futuens gratis: How doth the devil go with thee now?


Maleuole, thou art an arrant knave.


Who I, I have been a Sergeant man.


Thou art very poor.


As Iob, an Alcumist, or a Poet.


The Duke hates thee.


As Irishmen do bum-crackes.


Thou hast lost his amity.


As pleasing as maids loose their virginity.


Would thou were of a lusty spirit, wold thou were noble.


Why sure my blood gives me I am noble, sure I am of noble kind; for I find
my self possessed with all their qualities; love Dogs, Dice* and Drabs, scorn
wit in stuff clothes, have ^eat my Shoemaker, knocked my Semsters, cuckold my
Potecary* and undone my Tailor. Noble, why not? since the Sto^cke said,
Neminem seruum non ex regibus, neminem regem non ex seruis esse ^ri^ndum, only
busy fortune towses, and the provident chances blends them together; i'll give
you a simil^; Did you ere see a well with two buckets, whilst one comes up full
to be emptied, another goes down empty to be filled; such is the state of all
humanity: why look you, I may be the son of some Duke; for believe me,
intemperate lascivious bastardy makes Nobil^tie doubtful: I have a lusty
daring heart Mendoza.


Let's grasp, I do like thee infinitely, wilt inact one thing for me?


Shall I get by it?
Command me, I am thy slave, beyond death and hell.

Murder the Duke.


My hearts wish, my souls desire, my fantasies dream,
My bloods longing, the only height of my hopes, how
O God how? o how my united spirits throng together*
So strengthen my resolve.

The Duke is now a hunting.


Excellent, admirable, as the devil would have it, lend me, lend me, Rapier,
Pistol, Crossebow; so, so, i'll do it.


Then we agree.


As Lent fishmongers, come a cape a pe, how in form


Know that this weak brained duke, who only stands on Florence stilts, hath out
of witless zeal made me his heir, and secretly confirmed the wreathe to me
after his lifes full point.


Upon what merit?


Merit! by heaven I horne him, only Ferne^ ae^ death gave me states life: tut
we are politic, he must not live now.


No reason mary: but how must he die now?


My utmost project is to murder the Duke, that I might have his state, because
he makes me his heir; to banish the duchess, that I might be rid of a cunning
Lacedemonian, because I know Florence will forsake her, and then to marry Maria
the banished duke Altofr^nts wife, that her friends might strengthen me and my
faction; this is all law.


Do you love Maria?


Faith no great affection, but as wise men do love great women, to innoble
their blood, and augment their reuenew ^ to accomplish this now, thus now. The
Duke is in the forest next the Sea, single him, kill him, hurl him in the
maine, and proclaim thou saw wolves eat him.


Um, not so good: me thinks when he is slain, to get some hipocrite, some
dangerous wretch that's muffled, or with fained holiness, to swear he heard the
duke on some steep cliffe lament his wives dishonour, and in an agony of his
hearts torture hurled his groaning sides into the ^wolne sea: This circumstance
well made, sounds probable: and hereupon the Dutch.


May well be banished: O vnpeerable invention ^tare, Thou god of policy, it
honies, me.


Then fear not for the wife of Al^ofront, i'll close to her.


Thou shalt, thou shalt, our excellency is pleased: why were not thou an
Emperor? when we are Duke, i'll make thee some great man sure.


Nay, make me some rich knave, and ^le make my self some great man.


In thee be all my spirit, retain ten souls, unite thy virtual powers;
resolve, ha, remember greatness: heart, farewell

"Th^ fate of all my hopes in thee doth dwell.

Celzo, did hear? O heaven, did hear?
Such devilish mischief, suffer thou the world
Carouse damnation even with greedy swallow,
And still dost wink, still duz thy vengeance slumber*
"If now thy brows are clear, when will they th^nder*

The dogs are at a fault.


Would God nothing but the dogs were at it? let the Dear pursue safely, the
dogs follow the game, and do you follow the dogs; as for me, tis unfit one
beast should hunt an other; I ha one chase me: and 't please you, I would be
rid of you a little.


Would your grief would as soon leave you as we to quietness.


I thank you; boy, what dost thou dream of now?


Of a dry summer my Lord, for here's a hot world towards: but my Lord, I
had a strange dream last night.


What strange dream?


Why me thought I pleased you with singing, and then I dreamt you gave me that
short sword.


Prettily begged: hold thee, i'll prove thy dream true, tak't.


My duty: but still I dreamt on my Lord, and me thought, and 't shall please
your excellency, you would needs out of your royal bounty give me that jewell
in your hat.


O thou did but dream boy, do not believe it, dreams prove not always
true, they may hold in a short sword, but not in a jewell. But now sir, you
dreamt you had pleased me with singing, make that true as I have made the
other.


Faith my Lord, I did but dream, and dreams you say prove not always true:
they may hold in a good sword, but not in a good song: the truth is, I ha lost
my voice.


Lost thy voice, how?


With dreaming faith, but here's a couple of Syrenicall rascals shall
enchant ye: what shall they sing my good Lord?


Sing of the nature of women, and then the song shall be surely full of
variety; old crochets and most sweet closes, it shall be humorous, grave,
fantastike, amorous, melancholy, sprightly, one in all, and all in one.


All in one?


Byr'lady too many; sing, my speech grows culpable of unthrifty idleness,
sing.


A, so, so, sing, I am heavy, walk off, I shall talk in my sleep; walk off.

Brief, brief, who? the Duke? good heaven that fools should stumble upon
greatness! do not sleep Duke, give ye good morrow: you must be bri^fe Duke;
I am feed to murder thee, start not: Mendoza, Mendoza hired me, here's his
gold, his pistol, crossebow, and sword, tis all as firm as earth: O fool,
fool, choked with the common maze of easy idiots, Credulity, ma^e him thine
heir: what thy sworn murderer?


O can it be?


Can?


Discovered he not Ferneze?


Yes; but why, but why, for love to thee; much, much, to be revenged upon his
rival, who had thrust his jaws awry, who being slain, supposed by thine
own hands; defended by his sword, made thee most loathsome, him most gracious
with thy loose Princess, thou closely yielding egr^sse and regress to her,
made him heir, whose hot unquiet lust strait towzde thy sheets, and now
would seize thy state, politician, wise man, death to be led to the stake like
a bull by the horns, to make even kindness cut a gentle throat; l^fe, why
art thou numbed? thou foggy dullness, speak: lives not more faith in a
home^hiusting tongue, than in th^se fencing tip tap Courtiers?


Lord Maleuole, if this be true.


If? come shade thee with this disguise, if? thou shalt handle it, he shall
thank thee for killing thy self, come follow my directions, and thou shalt
see strange sleights.


World whither wilt thou?


Why to the devil: come, the morn grows late,
Astedi^ quickenes is the soul of state.

Medam, Medam, are you stirring Medam? if you be stirring Medam, if I thought
I should disturb ye.


My Lady is up forsooth.


A pretty boy, faith how old art thou?


I think fou^eteene.


Nay, and ye be in the teenes: are ye a gentleman borne? do you know me? my
name is Medam Maquerelle, I lie in the old cunny court.

See here the Ladies.


A fair day to ye Maquarelle.


Is the Dutch up yet Sentinel?


O Ladies, the most abhomin^ble mischance, O dear Ladies, the most piteous
disaster, Ferneze was taken last night in the Dutch chamber: alas the Duke
caught him and killed him.


Was he found in bed?


O no, but the villainous certainty is, the door was not bolted, the
tongue^tied hatch held his peace: so the naked troth is, he was found in his
shirt, whilst I like an arrand beast, lay in the outward chamber, heard
nothing, and yet they came by me in the dark, and yet I felt them not, like a
senseless creature as I was. O beauties, look to your buske-pointes, if not
chastely, yet charily: be sure the door be bolted: is your Lord gone to
Florences?


Yes Maquarelle.


I hope you'll find the discretion to purchase a fresh gown for his return:
Now by my troth beauties I would ha ye once wi^e: he loves ye, pish: he is
witty; bubble: fair proportioned, meaw: nobly borne, wind: let this be still
your fixed position, esteem me every man according to his good gifts, and so ye
shall ever remain most dear, and most worthy to be most dear Ladies.


Is the Duke returned from hunting yet?


They say not yet.


Tis now in midst of day.


How bears the Dutch with this blemish now?


Faith boldly, strongly defies defame, as one that haz a Duke to her father.
And there's a note to you: be sure of a stowt friend in a corner, that may
always awe your husband. Mark the hauior of the Dut^hes now: she dares
defame, cries Duke, do what thou can, I'll quite mine honour: nay, as one
confirmed in her own virtue against ten thousand mouths that mutter her
disgrace, she's presently for dances.


For dances?


Most true.


Most strange: see, here's my servant young Ferrard: how many servants think
thou I have Maquerelle?


The more, the merrier: t'was well said; use your servants as you do your
smocks, have many, use one, and change often, for that's most sweet and
courtlike.


Save ye fair Ladies, is the Duke returned?


Sweet sir no voice of him as yet in Court.


T is very strange.


And how like you my servant Maquorelle?


I think he could hardly draw Vlisses bow, but by my fidelity, were his nose
narrower, his eyes broader, his hands thinner, his lips thicker, his legs
bigger, his feet lesser, his hair blacker, and his teeth whiter, he were a
tolerable sweet youth in faith. And he will come to my chamber, I will read
him the fortune of his beard.


Not yet returned I fear, but
The Dutch approaches.

We will dance, music, we will dance.


Les quanto (Lady) pens^s bien, passaregis, or Beanch^es brawl.


We have forgot the brawl.


So soon? it is wonder.


Why? it is but two singles on the left, two on the right, three doubles
forward, a traverse of six round: do this twice, three singles side, galliard
trick of twenty, curranto pace; a figure of eight, three singles broken
down, come up, meet two doubles, fall back, and then honour.


O Dedalus! thy maze, I have quite forgot it.


Trust me so have I, saving the falling back, and then honour.


Music, music.


Who saw the Duke? the Duke?


Music.


The Duke, is the Duke returned?


Music.


The Duke is either quite invisible, or else is not.


We are not pleased with yo^r intrusion upon our private retirement: we are
not pleased: you have forgot your selves.


Boy, thy master: where's the Duke?


Alas, I left him burying the earth with his spread ioylesse limbs: he told
me, he was heavy, would sleep, bid me walk off, for that the strength of
fantasy, oft made him talk in his dreams: I straight obeyed, not ever saw
him since: but where so e're he is, he's sad.


Music, sound high, as is our heart, sound high.


The Duke, peace, the Duke is dead.


Music.


Is't music?


Give proof.


How?


Where?


When?


Rest in peace as the Duke duz, quietly sit: for my own part I beheld him but
dead; that's all: mary here's one can give you a more particular account of
him.


Speak holy father, nor let any brow within this \presence fright thee from
the truth: speak confidently freely.


We attend.


Now had the mounting suns al-ripening wings
Swept the cold sweat of night from earths dank breast,
When I (whom men call ^ermite of the Rock,)
Forsook my Cell, and clamberd up a cliffe,
Against whose Base, the heady Neptune dashed
His high cu^lde brows: there t'was I eased my limbs,
When lo, my entrails melted with the moan
Some one, who far above me was climbed, did make:
I shall offend.

Not.

On.

Me thinks I hear him yet, O female faith!
Go sow the ungrateful sand, and love a woman:
And do I li^e to be the scoff of men?
To be the withal cuckold, even to hug my poison?
Thou know O truth!
Sooner hard steel^ will melt with Southern wind;
A Sea-mans whistle calm the Ocean;
A town on fire be extinct with tears,
Then women vowed to blushless impudence,
With sweet behaviour and soft minioning,
Will turn from that where appetite is fixed.
O powerful blood! how thou dost slave their soul,
I washed an Ethiope, who for recompense,
Sullyde my name. And must I then be forced
To walk, to live thus black: must, must, fie,
He that can bear with must, he cannot die.
With that he sighed too passionately deep,
That the Dull air even groaned: at last he cries,
Smke shame in seas, sink deep enough: so dies.
For then I viewed his body fall and sows
Into the fomie maine, O then I s^w
That which me thinks I see; it was the Duke,
Whom straight the nicer stomached sea
Belched up: but then.

Then came I in, but las all was too late,
For even straight he sunk.

Such was the Dukes sad fate.

A better fortune to our Duke Mendoza.

A guard, a guard, we full of hearty tears,
For our good fathers loss,
For so we well may call him:
Who did beseech your loves for our succession,
Cannot so lightly ouer-iumpe his death,
As leave his woes reuengelesse: * woman of shame,
We banish thee for ever to the pla^e,
From whence this good man comes,
Nor permit on death unto the body any ornament*
But base as was thy life, depart away.

Ungrateful.

Away.

Villain hear me.
Prepas^o and Guerino lead away the Dutch.

Be gone, my Lords addres^e to public counsel*
It is most (...),
The train of Fortune is borne up by wit.
Away, our presence shall be sudden, haste.

Now you egregious devil, ha ye murthering Politician, how dost Duke? how
dost look now? brave Duke in faith.


How did you kill him?


Slatted his brains o^t, then sowft him in the briny sea.


Brained him and drowned him too*


O t'was best, sure work:

For he that strikes a great man, let him srtike home, or elseware, hee'le
prove no man: shoulder not a huge fellow, unless you may be sure to lay him in
the kennel.


A most sound braine-pan.
I'll make you both Emperors.

Make us christians, ma^e us christians.

I'll hoist ye, ye shall mount.

To the gallows say ye? Come: Praemium incertum petit certum scelus. How
stands the Prog^esse?


Here, take my ring unto the Citadel,
Have entrance to Maria the grave Dutch
Of banished Altofront. Tell her we love her:
Omit no circumstance to grace our person, (do it.)

I'll make an excellent pander: Duke farewell, due, adieu Duke.


Take Maquarelle with thee; for it is found,
None cuts a diamon, but a diamond.
Hermit, thou art a man for me, my confessor:
O thou selected spirit, borne for my good,
Sure thou would make an excellent Elder in a deformed church.
Come, we must be inward, thou and I all one*

I am glad I was o^dained for ye.

Go to then, thou must know that Maleuole is a strange villain: dangerous,
very dangerous: you see how broad a speaks, a gross jawde rogue, I would have
thee poison him: hee^s like a corn upon my great toe, I cannot go for him: he
must be kored out* he must: wilt do it, ha?


Any thing, any thing.
Men. Heart of my life, thus then to the Citadel,
Thou shalt consort with this Mal^uole,
There being at supper, poison him:
It shall be l^id upon Maria, who yields love, or dies:
Sk^d quick like lightning.

"Good deeds crawl, but mischief flies.

Your diuelships ^ing haz no virtue, the buffe-captaine, the sallo-westfalian
gamon-faced zaza cries, stand out must have a stiffer warrant, or no pass into
the Castle of Comfort.


Command our sudden Letter: not enter? shat, what place is there in Genoa,
but thou shalt, into my heart, into my very heart: come, lets love, we must
love, we two* so^le and body.


How did like the Hermit? a strange Hermit sirrah.


A dangerous fellow, very perilcus: he must die.


I, he must die.


Thoust kil' him: we are wise, we must be wise.


And provident.


Yea p^ouident; beware an hypocrite.
A Church man once corrupted* oh avoid
A fellow that makes Religion his stawking horse,
He breeds a plague: thou shalt poison him.

Ho, t^is wondrous necessary: how?

You both go jointly to the Citadel,
There sup there poision him: and Maria,
Because she is our opposite, shall bear
The sad suspect, on which she dies, or loves us.

I run.

We that are great, our sole self good still moves us.
They shall die both, for their deserts craves more
Than we can recompense, their presence still
Imbraides our fortunes with beholdingness,
Which weabhorre like deed, not doer: then conclude,
They live not to cry out ingratitude.
One stick burns the other steel cuts steel alone:
It is good trust few, but O, it is best trust none.

How do you? how dost Duke?

O let the last day fall, drop, drop on our cursed heads;
Let heaven vncla^pe it self, vomit forth flames.

O do no^ rand, do not turn plaier, there's more of them than can well live
one by another already.

Wh^t, art an infidel still?

I am amazed, struck in a swoon with wonder: I am commanded to poison thee.


I am commanded to poison thee at supper.


At supper?


In the Citadel.


In the Citadel?


Cross capers, tricks, truth a heaven, he would discharge us as boys do
elderne gunnes, one pellet to struck out another: of what faith art now?


All is damnation, wickedness extreme, there is no faith in man.


In none but usurers and brokers, they deceive no man, men take um for
blood-suckers, and so they are: now God deliver me from my friends.


Thy friends?


Yes, from my friends, for from mine enemies i'll deliver my self. O,
cutte-throate friendship is the ranckest villainy: Mark this Mendoza, mark him
for a villain; but heaven will send a plague upon him for a rogue.


O world!


World! Tis the only region of death, the greatest shop of the Devil, the
cruellest prison of men, out of the which none pass without paying their dearest
breath for a fee, there's nothing perfect in it, but extreme extreme
calamity, such as comes yonder.


To banishment, led on to banishment.

Lady, the blessedness of repentance to you.

Why? why? I can desire nothing but death, nor deserve any thing but hell.
If heaven should give sufficiency of grace
To clear my soul, it would make heaven graceless:
My sins would make the stock of mercy poor;
O they would tire heavens goodness to reclaim^ theme
Judgment is just yet from that vast villane:
But sure he shall not miss sad punishment
Fore he shall rule* On to my cell of shame.

My cell tis Lady, where instead of masks,
Music, tilts, tournies, and such court like shows,
The hollow murmure of the checklesse winds
Shall groan again, whilst the unquiet sea
Shakes the whole rock with foamy battery:
There Vsherlesse the air comes in and out:
The rheumy vault will force your eyes to weep,
Whilst you behold true desolation:
A rocky barrenness shall pierce your eyes,
Where all at once one reaches where he stands,
With brows the roof, both walls with both his hands.

It is too good, blessed spirit of my Lord,
O in what orb so ere thy soul is throand,
Behold me worthily most miserable:
O let the anguish of my contrite spirit
Entreat some reconciliation:
If not, o joy, triumph in my just grief,
Death is the end of woes, and tears relief.

Belike your Lord not loved you, was unkind.

O heaven!
As the soul loved the body, so loved he,
Twas death to him to part my presence,
Heaven to see me pleased:
Yet I, like to a wretch given over to hell,
Brake all the sacred rites of marriage,
To clip a base ungentle faithless villain.
O God, a very Pagan reprobate:
What should I say? ungrateful, throws me out,
For whom I lost soul, body, fame and honour:
But tis most fit; why should a better fate
Attend on any, who forsake chaste sheets,
Fly the embrace of a devoted heart,
Joined by a solemn vow fore God and man,
To taste the brackish blood of beastly lust,
In an adulterous touch? o ravenous immodesty,
Insatiate impudence of appetite;
Look, here's your end, for mark what sap in dust,
What sin in good, even so much lou^ in lust:
Joy to thy ghost, sweet Lord, pardon to me.

Tis the dukes pleasure this night you rest in court.

Soul lurk in shades, run shame from brightsome skies, In night the blind
man misses not his eyes.


Do not weep* kind cuckold, take comfort man, thy betters have been
Beccoes: Agamemnon Emperor of all the merry Greekes that tickeled all the true
Troyans, was a Cornuto: Prince Arthur that cut off twelve Kings beards, was a
Cornuto: Hercules, whose back bore up heaven, and got forty wenches with
child in one night.


Nay twas fifty.


Faith fortie's enough a conscience, yet was a Corn^to: patience, mischief
grows proud, be wise.


Thou pinchest too deep, art too keen upon me.


Tut, a pitiful Surgeon makes a dangerous sore. I'll tent thee to the ground.
Think I'll sustain my self by flattering thee, because thou art a Prince? I
had rather follow a drunkard, and hue by licking up his vomit, than by
servile flattery.


Yet great men ha doon't.


Gr^at slaves fear better than love, borne naturally for a coale-basket,
though the common usher of Princes presence fortune hath blindly given them
better place, I am vowed to be thy affliction.


Prithee be, I love much misery, and be thou son to me.


Because you are an usurping Duke.
Florence.

Well returned, I praise my horse.


What news from the Florentines?


I will conceal the great Dukes pleasure, only this was his charge, his
pleasure is, that his daughter die, Duke Pietro be banished, for ban^shing his
bloods dishonour, and that Duke Altofront be re-accepted: this is all, but I
hear Duke Pietro is dead.


I, and Mendoza is Duke, what will you do?


Is Mendeza strongest?


Yet he is.


Then yet I'll hold with him.


But if that A^tofrom should turn strait again?


Why then I would turn strait again.
Tis good run still with him that haz most might:
I had rather stand with wrong, than fall with right.

What religion will you be of now?


Of the Dukes religion, when I know what it is*


O Hercules!


Hercules? Hercules was the son of Iupiter and Alkmena.


Your lordship is a very withal.


Withal?


I, all-wit.


Amphitrio was a cuckold.


Your lordship sweats, your young Lady will get you a cloth for your old
worships brows.

Here's a fellow to be damned, this is his inviolable maxim, (flatter the
greatest, and oppress the least:) a whoreson flesh-fly, ^at still gnawes upon
the lean gawld backs.


Why dost then salute him?


In faith as bawds go to church, for fashion sake: come, be not confounded,
thou art but in danger to loose a dukedom: think this: This earth is the
only grave and Golgotha wherein all things that live must rot: tis but the
draught wherein the heavenly bodies discharge their corruption, the very
muckhill on which the sublunary orbs cast their excrements: man is the slime
of this dongue^pit, and Princes are the governors of these men: for, for our
souls, they are as free as Emperors, all of one piece, there goes but a pair
of shears betwixt an Emperor and the son of a bag piper, only the dying,
dressing, pressing, glossing makes the difference: now what art thou like to
loose?

A Iaylers office to keep men in bonds,
Whilst toil and trea^on, all lifes good confounds.

I here renounce for ever regencie:
O Altofront, I wrong thee to supplant thy right:
To trip thy heele^ up with a devilish slight.
For which I now from throne am thrown, world tricks abjure:
For vengeance though't comes slow, yet it comes sure.
O I am changed; for heerefore the dread power,
In true contrition! do dedicate,
My breath to solitary holiness,
My lips to prayer, and my breasts care shall be,
Restoring Altofront to regencie.

Thy vows are heard, and we accept thy faith.
Banish amazeme^t; co^e, we four must stand full shock of Fortune, be not so
wonder-st^icken.


Doth Ferneze live?


For your pardon.


Pa^don and love, give leave to recollect
My thoughts dispersed in wild aston^shment:
My vowe^ stand fi^t in heaven, and from hence
I crave all love and p^rdon.

Who doubts of providence,
That sees this change, a hearty faith to all:
He needs must rise, can no lower fall:
For still impetuous vicissitude
Towzeth the world, then let no maze intrude
Upon your spirits: wonder not I rise;
For who can sink, that close can temporize?
The time grows ripe for action, I'll detect
My priuatst plot; left ignorance fear suspect:
Lets close to counsel, leave the rest to fate,
Mature discretion is the life of state.

Fool, how dost thou like my calfe in a long stocking?


An ^xcellent calfe my Lord.


This calfe hath been a reveller this twenty year, when monsieur Gundi lay
here Ambassador, I could have carried a Lady up and down at arms end in a
platter; and I can tell you there were those at that time, who to try the
str^ngth of a mans back, and his arm, would be coisterd: I have measured
calves with most of the palace, and they come nothing near m^e; besides, I
think there be not many armours in the Arsinall will fit me, especially for
the head-pe^ce. I'll tell thee.


What my Lord?


I can eat stewed broth as it comes seething off the fire; or a custard, as it
comes reeking out of the oven; and I think there are not many Lords can do
it: a good pomander a little decayed in the scent, but six grains of musk
ground with rosewater, and tempered with a little ciuit, shall fetch her again
presently.


O I, as a bawd with aqua vitae.


And what dost thou rail upon the Ladies as thou were wont?


I were better roast a live ^at, and might do it with more safety. I am as
secret to thieves as their painting: there's Maquarelle oldest bawd, and a
perpetual beggar. Did you never hear of her tic to be known in the City?


Never.


Why she gets all the Picter-makers to draw her picture, when they have done,
she most courtly finds fault with them one after another, and never fetches
them: they in revenge of this, execute her in Pictures as they do in Germanie,
and hang her in their shops: by this means is she better known to the
stinkards, then if she had been five times carted.


Fore God and excellent policy.


Are there any Revels to night my Lord.


Yes.


Good my Lord give me leave to break a fellows pate that hath abused me.


Whose pate.


Young Ferrard my Lord.


Take heed he's very valiant, I have known him fight eight quarrels in five
days, believe it.


O is he so great a quarrelle? why then hes an arrant coward.


How prove you that?


Why thus, He that quarrels seeks to fight; and he that (...) to fight, seeks
to dye; and he that seek^ to dye, seeks never to fight more; and he that will
quarrel and seeks means never to answer a man more, I think hes a ^oward.


Thou can prove any thing.


Any thing but a rich knave, for I can flatter no man.


Well be not drunk good fool, I shall see you anon in the presence.


The Dutchm^n for a drunkard.


The Daue for golden locks:


The Irishman for Vsquebath.


The Frenchman for the ()


O thou art a blessed creature, had I a modest woman to conceal, I would put
her to thy custody, for no reasonable creature would ever suspect her to be in
thy company: ha, thou art a melodious Maquerelle, thou picture of a woman, and
substance of a beast.


O fool will ye be ready anon to go with me to the revels; the hal will be so
pestered anon.


I as the country is with Attorneys.


What hast thou there fool.


Wine, I have learnt to drink since I went with my Lord Ambassador, I'll drink
to the health of madam maquerelle.


why thou wast wont to rail upon her.


I but since I borrowed money of her.
I'll drink to her health now as gentlemen visit brokers.
Or as knights send venison to the City.
Eather to take up more money, or to procure longer forbearance.

Give me the boule I drink a health to Altofront out deposed duke.


I'll take it so^now i'll begin a health to madam Maquerelle.


Pew I will not pledge her.


Why I pledgd your Lord.


I care not.


Not pledge madam Maquerelle, why then will I spew up your Lord again with
this fools finger.


Hold I'll take it.


Now thou hast drunk my health; fool I am friends with thee.


Art? art?
When Griffon saw the reconciled que an,
offering about his neck her arms to cast:
He threw of sword and hearts malignant stream,
and lovely her below the loins imbrast.
adieu madam Maqueaelle.

And how dost thou think a this transformation of state now.


Verily very well, for we women always note, the falling of the one, is the
rising of the other: some must be fat, some must be lean, some must be
fools, and some must be Lords, some must be knaves, and some must be
officers: some must be beggars, some must be Knights: some must be cuckolds,
and some must be citizens: as for example, I have two court dogs the most
fawning cures, the one called Watch, the other Catch: now I, like lady Fortune,
sometimes love this dog, sometimes raise that dog, sometimes favour Watch,
most commonly fancic Catch: now that dog which I favour I feed, and he's so
ravenous, that what I give he never chawes it, gulpes it down whole, without
any relish of what he haz, but with a greedy expectation of what he shall have:
the other dog, now:


No more dog, sweet Maquarelle, no more dog: and what hope hast thou of the
duchess Maria, will she stoop to the Dukes lewre, will she cow think^t?


Let me see, where's the sign now? ha ye ere a calender, where's the sign
trow you.


Sign! why is there any moment in that?


O! believe me a most secret power, look ye a Chaldean or an Assyrian, I am
sure t'was a most sweet lieu told me, court any woman in the right sign, you
shall not miss: but you must take her in the right vain then: as when the
sign is in Pisces, a Fishmongers wife is very sociable: in Cancer, a
Precisians wife is very flexible: in Capricorne, a Merchants wife hardly holds
out: in Libra, a Lawyers wife is very tractable, especially, if her husband be
at the term: only in Scorpio it is very dangerous meddling: haz the Duke sent
any jewel, any rich stones?


I, I think those are the best signs to take a lady in. By your favour
signeor, I must discourse with the Lady Maria, Altofronts dutch: I must enter
for the Duke.


She here shall give you interview: I received the guardship of this Citadel
from the good Altofront, and for his use I'll keep't till I am of no use.


Wilt thou? O heavens, that a christian should be found in a Buff jerkin!
captain Conscience: I love thee Captain.

We attend, what hope hast thou of this Dutch easiness?


'twill go hard, she was a cold creature ever, she hated monkeys, fools,
jeasters, gentlemen-vshers extremely: she had the wild trick on it, not only
to be truly modestly honourable in her own co^science, but she would avoid
the least wanton carriage that might-incurre suspect, as God bless me, she had
almost brought bed pressing out of fashion: I could scarce get a fine for the
lease of a Ladies favour once in a fortnight.


Now in the name of immodesty, how many maiden-heads hast thou brought to the
block?


Let me see: heaven forgive us our misdeeds:
Here's the Duchess.

God bless thee Lady.


Out of thy company.


We have brought thee tender of a husband.


I hope I have one already.


Nay, by mine honour Madam, as good ha ne'er a husband, as a banished husband,
he's in an other world now. I'll tell ye Lady, I have heard of a sect that
maintained, when the husband was a sleep, the wife might lawfully entertain
another man: for then her husband was as dead, much more when he is banished.


Dishonest creature!


Pish, honesty is but an art to seem so: pray ye whats honesty? whats
constancy? but fables fained, odd old fools chat, devised by jealous fools,
to wrong our liberty.


Mully, he that loves thee, is a Duke, Mendoza, he will maintain thee royally,
love thee ardently, defend thee powerfully, marry thee sumptuously, keep thee
in despite of Rosciclere or Dozel del Phoebo: theirs jewels, if thou wilt, so;
if not, so.


Captain, for Gods sake save poor wretchedness
From tyranny of lustful insolence:
Enforce me in the deepest dungeon dwell
Rather then here, here round about is hell.
O my dearest Altofront, where ere thou breath,
Let my soul sink into the shades beneath,
Before I stain thine honour, this thou hast;
And long as I can die, I will live chaste,

Against him that can enforce, how vain is strife?

She that can be enforced haz ne'er a knife?
She that through force her limbs with lust enroules,
Wants Cleopatres aspes and Portiaes coals.
God amend you.

Now the fear of the devil for ever go with thee. Marquerelle I tell thee, I
have found an honest woman faith I perceive when all is done, there is of
women, as of all other things: some good, most bad: some saints, some-sinners:
for as now adays, no Courtier but haz his mis^ris, no Captain but haz his
cockatrice, no Cuckold but haz his horns, no fool but haz his feather: even
so, no woman but haz her weakness feather too, no sex but haz his: I can hunt
the letter no farther: o God, how loathsome this toying is to me, that a duke
should be forced to fool it: well, Stultorum plena sunt omnia, better play the
fool Lord, then be the fool Lord: now, where's your slights Madam Maquarelle?


Why, are ye ignorant that tis sed, a squeamish affected nicences is natural
to women, and that the excuse of their yielding, is only (forsooth) the
difficult obtaining. You must put her too't: women are flax, and will fire in
a moment.


Why, was the flax put into thy mouth, yet thou? thou set fire? thou inflame
her?


Marry, but I'll tell ye now, you were too hot.

The fitter to have inflamed the flaxwoman.

You were to boisterous, spleeny, for indeed.

Go, go, thou art a weak pandresse, now I see.
Sooner earths fire heaven it self shall waste,
Then all with heate can melt a mind that's chaste.
Go thou the Dukes lime-twig, I'll make the Duke turn thee out of thine office.
what, not get one touch of hope, had her at such advantage.


Now a my conscience, now I think in my discretion, we did not take her in the
right sign, the blood was not in the true vein, sure.


Make way there the Duke returns from the inthronmet Maleuole.


Out roage.


Maleuole.


Hence ye gross iawd pessantly, out go.


Nay sweet Maleuole, since my return, I hear you are become the thing I
always prophesied would be, an advanced virtue, a worthily employed
faithfulness a man a grace, dear friend.

Come; what? Si quoties peccant homines. If as often as courtiers play the
knaves honest men should be angry. Why look ye, we must collouge sometimes,
forswear sometimes.


Be damned sometimes.


Right Nemo omnibus horis sapit. No man can be honest at all hours. Necessity
often depraves virtue.


I will commend thee to the Duke.


Do let us be friends man.


And knaves man.


Right, let us prosper and purchase, our lordships shall live and our knavery
be forgotten.


He that by any ways gets riches his means never shames him.


True.


For impudency and faithlesnes are the maine stays to greatness.


By the Lord thou art a profound lad.


By the Lord thou art a perfect knave. out ye ancient damnatio.


Peace, peace, and thou wilt not be a friend to me as I am a knave, be not a
knave to me as I am thy friend and disclose me, peace Cornets.


On on, leave us leave us: stay, where is the Hermit?


With Duke Pietro, with Duke Pietro.


Is he dead? is he poisoned?


Dead as the Duke is,


Good, excellent: he will not blab, securenes lives in secrecy, come hither,
come hither.


Thou hast a certain strong villainous sent about thee, my nature cannot
endure.


Sent man? what returns Maria? what answer to our suit?


Cold frosty, she is obstinate,


Then she's but dead, tis resolute, she dies,
Black deed only through black deed, safely fles.

Pew, per scelera semper sceleribus tutum est iter.


What art a scholar? art a politician? sure thou art an arrand knave.


Who I? I have been twice an under sheriff, man.


Hast bin with Maria.


As your scrivener to your usurer I have dealt about taking of this commodity,
but shes could-frosty.

well I will go rail upon some great man, that I may purchase the bastinado,
or else go marry some rich Genoan lady and instantly go travail.


Travail when thou art married.


I tis your young Lords fashion to do so, though he was so lafy being a
bachelor, that he would never travail so far as the University yet when he
married her tales of, and Catsoe for Ingland.


And why for Ingland.


Because there is no Prothelhouses there.


Nor Courtesans.


Nether; your whore went down with the stews and your punk came up with
your Puritan.


Can thou impoyson? can thou impoyson?


Excellently, no lieu, Potecary, or Politician better* look ye, her's a box, who
would thou impoison? her's a box which opened, the fume taken up in condites,
thorough which the brain purges it self, doth instantly for 12. hours space,
bind up all show of li^e in a deep cesles sleep: here's another which being
opened under the sleepers nose, chokes al the power of life, kills him
suddenly.


I'll try experiments, Catzo.

Who would fear that may destroy, death hath no teeth, or tong,
And he that's great, to him are slaves
Shame, Murder, fame and wrong.

My honoured Lord.


The good Maleuole, that plain-tongued man, alas, is dead on sudden wondrous
strangely, he held in our esteem good place. Celso see him buried, see him
buried.


I shall observe ye.


And Celso, prithee let it be thy care to night
To have some pretty show, to solemnize
Our high instalement, some music, maskery:
We'll give fair entertain unto Maria
The Duchess to the banished Altofront:
Thou shalt conduct her from the Citadel
Unto the Palace, think on some Maskery,

Of what shape, ^weete Lord?

Why shape? why any quick done fiction,
As some brave spirits of the Genoan Dukes,
To come out of Elizium forsooth,
Led in by Mercury, to gratulate
Our happy fortune, ^ome such any thing, some far ^et trick, good for Ladies,
some stale toy or other, no matter so't be of our devising.

Do thou prep^r't, tis but for a fashion sake,
Fear not, it shall be graced man, it shall take.

All service.

All thanks, our hand shall not be (...) to thee farewell.
Now is my treachery secure, nor can we fall:
Mischief that prospers men do virtue call,
I'll trust no man, he that by tricks gets wreathes,
Keeps them with steel, no man securely breathes,
Out of deserved ranks the crowd will mutter, fool:
Who cannot bear with spite, he cannot rule,
The chiefest secret for a man of state,
Is, to live senseless of a strenghles hate.

Death of the damned thief:

Brave spirits of the antique Dukes.

My Lord, what strange dilusion?


Most happy, dear Celso, poisond with an empty box? I'll give thee all anon:
my ^ady comes to court, there is a whurle of fate comes tumbling on, the
Castles captain stands for me, the people pray for me, and the great leader of
the just stands for me: then courage Celso.

For no disastrous chance can ever move him,
That leaves nothing but a God above him.

Make room there room for the Ladies: why gentlemen, will not ye suffer the
Ladies to be entered in the great chamber? why gallants? and you sir, to drop
your Torch where the beauties must sit too,


And there's a great fellow plays the knave, why dost not str^ke him?


Let him play the knave a Gods name, think thou I have no more wit then to
strike a great fellow: the music. more lights, revelling, scaffolds: do you
hear? let there be oaths enough ready at the door, swear out the devil
himself, Lets leave the Ladies, and go see if the Lords be ready for them.


And by my troth Beauties, why do you not put you into the fashion, this is a
stale cut, you must come in fashion: look ye, you must be all felt, fealt and
feather, a fealt upon your bare hair: look ye, these tiring things are
justly out of request now: and do ye hear? you must wear falling bands, you
must come into the falling fashion: there is such a deal a pinning these
roughs, when the fine clean fall is worth all: and a gen, if you should chance
to take a nap in the afternoon, your falling band requires no poting stick to
recover his form believe me, no fashion to the falling I say.


And is not sinnior S. Andrew a gallant fellow now.


By my maiden-head la, honour and he agrees as well together as a satin suit
and woollen stockings.


But is not Marshall Make-rome my servant in reversion, a proper gentleman.


Yes in reversion as he had his office, as in truth he hath all things in
reversion: he haz his Mistress in reversion, his clothes in reversion, his wit
in reversion: and indeed is a suitor to me, for my dog in reversion: but in
good verity la, he is as proper a gentleman in reversion as: and indeed, as
fine a man as may be, having a red beard and a pair of wrapped legs.


But I saith I am most monstrously in love with count Quidlibet in Quodlibet,
is he not a pretty dapper vnydle gallant?


He is even one of the most busy fingered Lords, he will put the beauties to
the squeak most hiddeously.


Room, make a lane there, the Duke is entring^stand handsomely for beauties
sake, take up the Ladies there. So, cornets, cornets.


Madam, with gentle ear receive my suit,
A kindomes safety should over paize flight rites,
Marriage is merely Natures policy:
Then, since unless our royal beds be joined,
Danger and civil tumult frights the state.
Be wise as you are fair, give way to fate.

What would thou, thou affiction to our house?
Thou ever devil, twas thou that banishedst my truly nobleLord.

I?

I, by thy plottes, by thy black stratagems,
Twelve Moons have suffered change since I beheld
The loved presence of my dearest Lord.
O thou far worse than death, he parts but soul
From a weak body: but thou, soul from soul
Disseuerest, that which Gods own hand did knit.
Thou scant of honour, full of devilish wit.

We'll check your too intemperate lavishness I can will.


What Can?

Go to, in banishment thy husband dies.

He ever is at home that's ever wise,

Youst never meet more, reason should love controuble,

Not meet?
She that dear loves, her loue's still in her soul.

You are but a woman Lady, you must yield,

O save me thou innated bashfulness,
Thou only ornament of woman's modesty.

Modesty, Death I'll torment thee,

Do, urge all torments, all afflictions try,
I'll die my Lords, as long as I can die,

Thou obstinate, thou shalt die. Captain, that Ladies
life is forteified to Justice, we have axamined her,
And we do find, she hath impoysoned
The reverend Hermi^: therefore we command
Severest custody. Nay, if you'll dooes no good,
Youst dooes no harm, a Tyrants peace is blood.

O thou art merciful, O gracious devil,
Rather by much let me condemned be
For seeming murder, than be damned for thee.
I'll morn no more, come girt my brows with flowers,
Reu^l and dance; soul, now thy wish thou hast,
Die like a Bride, poor heart thou shalt die chaste.

Life is a frost of could felicity,
And death the thaw of all our vanity,
Wast not an honest Priest that wrote so?

Who let her in?

Forbear.

Forbear^

Alas calamity, is every where.
Sad misery despite your double doors,
Will enter even in court.

Peace.

I ha done? one word, take heed, I ha done.

Cillenian Mercurie, the God of ghosts,
From gloomy shades that spread the lower coasts,
Calls sour high samed Genoan Dukes to come
And make this presence their Elizium:
To pass away this high triumphal night,
With song and dances, courts more soft delight.

Are you God of ghosts, I have a suit depending in hell betwixt me and my
conscience, I would fain have thee help me to an advocate.


Mercurie shall be your lawyer, Lady.


Nay faith, Mercurie haz too good a face, to be a right lawyer.


Peace, forbear: Mercurie presents the mask.


Celso, Celso, count Maria for our love; Lady, be gracious, yet grace.


With me Sir?


Yes, more loved then my breath:
With you I'll dance.

Why then you dance with death,
But come Sir, I was ne'er more apt to mirth.
Death gives eternity a glorious breath:
O, to die honoured, who would fear to die.

They die in fear, who live in villainy.

Yes believe him Lady, and be ruled by him.

Madam,

Would then be miserable?

I need not wish.

O yet forbear my hand, away, fly, fly,
O seek not her, that only seeks to die.

Poor loved soul.

What, would court misery?

Yes.

Sheele come too soon, O my grieved heart!

Lady, ha done, ha done.
Come, lets dance, be once from sorrow free.

Art a sad man.

Yes sweet.

Then we'll agree.


Believe it Lady,


I had rather you would swear by your body: I think that would prove the more
regarded other with you.


I'll swear by them both, to please you.


O, dam them not both to please me, for Gods sake.


^a^th, sweet creature, let me enjoy you to night, and I'll mary you to morrow
fortnight, by my troth la.


On his troth la, believe him not, that kind of cunnica^ching is as stale as
sir Oliuer Anchoues persumde jerkin: promise of matrimony by a young gallant, to
bring a virgin Lady into a fools paradise: make her a great woman, and then
cast her off: tis as common as natural to a Courtier, as jealousy to a Citizen,
gluttony ot a Puritan, wisdom to an Alderman, pride to a Tailor, or an empty
handbasket to one of these sixpeny damnations: of his troth la, believe him
not, traps to catch polecats.


Keep your face constant,


O my Altofront.


A tyrants jelosies
are very nimble, you receive it all.

My heart, though not my knees, doth vmbly fall,
Lowe as the earth to thee.

Peace, next change, no words.


Speech to such, ay, O what will affords?


Maleuole?


No.


Altofront, Duke Pietro, Ferneze. hah?


Duke Altofront, Duke Altofront.


Are we surprised? what strange delusions mo^ke Our senses, do I dream? or
have I dreamt.

This two days space? where am I?


Where an arch-vilaine is.

O lend me breath, till I am fit to die.
For peace with heaven, for your own souls sake,
Vouchsafe me life.

Ignoble villain, whom neither heaven nor hell, goodness of God or man, could
once make good.


Base treacherous wretch, what grace can thou expect That (...) grown
impudent in gracel^snesse.


O life!

Slave, take thy life.
were thou defenced through blood and wounds,
the sternest horror of a ciuell fight
Would I achieve thee: but prostrat at my feet
Iscorne to hurt thee: itis the heart of slaves
That deigns to triumph over peasants graves.
For such thou art, since birth doth near inrole
A man mong monarchs, but a glorious soul.
O I have seen strange accidents of state,
The flatterer like the Ivy clip the Oak,
And wast it to the hart: lust so confirmed
That the black act of sin it self not shamd
To be termed Courtship.
O they that are as great as be their sins,
Let them remember that th'inconstant people,
Love many men merely for their faces,
And outward shows: and they do covet more
To have a sight of these then of their virtues,
Yet thus much let the great ones still conceal,
When they observe not Heavens imposd conditions,
They are no men, but forfeit their commissions.

O good my Lord, I have lived in the Court this twenty year, they that have
been old Courtiers and come to live in the City, they are spited at and
thrust to the walls like Apricokes, good my Lord.


My Lord, I did know your Lordship in this disguise, you heard me ever say if
Altofront did return I would stand for him: besides twas your Lordships
pleasure to call me Wittol and Cuckold; you must not think but that I knew you
I would have put it up so patiently.

You ore-ioy'd spirits wipe your long wet eyes,

Hence with this man: an Eagle takes not flies.
You to your vows:
You to my worst friend I would hardly give:
Thou art a perfect old knave, all pleased live.

The rest of idle actors idly part,
And as for me I here as^ume my right,
To which I hope all's pleased: to all goodnight.
TO wreast each hurtless thought to private sense,
Is the soul use of ill bred Impudence:
Imm^dest censure now grows wild,
all ouer-running.
Let Innocence be ne'er so chaste,
Yet at the last
She is defild.
With too nice-brained cunning.
O you of fairer soul
control
With an Herculean arm
this harm:
And once teach all old freedom of a pen,
Which still must write of fools, whilst writes of men.

