FRom iygging veins of riming mother wits,
And such conceits as clownage keeps in pay,
We'll lead you to the stately tent of War.
Where you shall hear the Scythian Tamburlaine:
Threatening the world with high astounding terms
And scourging kingdoms with his coquering sword
View but his picture in this tragic glass,
And then applaud his fortunes as you please.
BRother Cosroe, I find my self agreeud,
Yet insufficient to express the same:
For it requires a great and thundering speech:
Good brother tell the cause unto my Lords,
I know you have a better wit than I.

Unhappy Persea, that in former age
Hast been the seat of mighty Conquerors,
That in their prowess and their policies,
Have triumph over Affrike, and the bounds
Of Europe, where the Sun dares scarce appear,
For freezing meteors and coniealed cold:
Now to be ruled and governed by a man,
At whose byrth-day Cynthia with Saturne ioinde,
And Jove, the Sun and Mercurie denied
To shed his influence in his fickle brain,
Now Turks and Tartars shake their swords at th^
Meaning to mangle all thy Provinces,

Brother, I see your meaning well enough.
And thorough your Planets I perceive you think,
I am not wise enough to be a king,
But I refer me to my noble men,
That know my wit, and can be witnesses:
I might command you to be slain for this,
Meander, might I not?

Not for so small a fault my sovereign Lord

I mean it not, but yet I know I might,
Yet live, yea, live, Mycetes wills it so:
Meander, thou my faithful Counsellor,
Declare the cause of my conceived grief,
Which is (God knows) about that Tamburlaine.
That like a Fox in midst of harvest time,
Doth pray vpnon my flocks of Passengers.
And as I hear, doth mean to pull my plumes,
Therefore tis good and meet for to be wise.

Oft have I heard your Majesty complain,
Of Tamburlaine, that sturdy Scythian thief,
That robs your merchants of Persepolis,
Treading by land unto the Western Isles,
And in your confines with his lawless train,
Daily commits incivil outrages.
Hoping (misled by dreaming prophesies)
To reign in Asia, and with barbarous Arms,
To make himself the Monarch of the East:
But ere he march in Asia, or display
His vagrant Ensign in the Persean fields,
Your Grace hath taken order by Theridimas,
Chardg'd with a thousand horse, to apprehend
And bring him Captive to your Highnese throne,

Full true thou speak, like thy self my lord
Whom I may term a Damon for thy love.
Therefore tis best, if so it lik you all,
To send my thousand horse incontinent,
To apprehend that paltry Scythian.
How like you this, my honourable Lords?
Is it not a kingly resolution?

It cannot choose, because it comes from you.

Then hear thy charge, valiant Theridimas
The chiefest Captain of Mycetes host,
The hope of Persea, and the very legs
Whereon our state doth lean, as on a staff,
That holds us up, and foils our neighbour foes,
Thou shalt be leader of this thousand horse,
Whose foaming gall with rage and high disdain,
Have sworn the death of wicked Tamburlaine.
Go growning forth, but come thou smiling home,
As did Sir Paris with the Grecian Dame,
Return with speed, time passes swift away,
Our life is frail, and we may die to day.

Before the Moon renew her borrowed light,
Doubt not my Lord and gracious Sovereign,
But Tamburlaine, and that Tartarian rout,
Shall either perish by our warlike hands,
Or plead for mercy at your highness feet.

Go, stout Theridimas, thy words are swords
And with thy looks thou conquerest all thy foes:
I long to see thee back return from thence,
That I may view these milk-white steeds of mine.
All laden with the heads of killed men,
And from their knees, even to their hooves below,
Besmer'd with blood, that makes a dainty show.

Then now my Lord, I humbly take my leave.

Therid. farewell ten thousand times,
Ah, Menaphon, why staiest thou thus behind,
When other men press forward for renown?
Go Menaphon, go into Scythia,
And foot by foot follow Theridamas:

Nay, pray you let him stay, a greater
Fits Menaphon, than warring with a Thief:
Create him Prorex of Africa,
That he may win the Babylonians hearts,
Which will revolt from Persean government,
Unless they have a wiser king than you.

Unless they have a wiser king than you?
These are his words, Meander set them down.

And ad this to them, that all Asia
Lament to see the folly of their King.

Well here I swear by this my royal seat.

You may do well to kiss it then.

Embost with silk as best beseems my state.
To be revenged for these contemptuous words.
O where is duty and allegiance now?
Fled to the Caspean or the Ocean maine?
What, shall I call thee brother? No, a foe,
Monster of Nature, shame unto thy stock,
That dare presume thy Sovereign for to mock.
Meander come, I am abused Meander.

How now my Lord, what, mated and amazed
To hear the king thus thraten like himself?

Ah Menaphon, I pass not for his threats,
The plot is laid by Persean Noble men,
And Captains of the Medean garrisons,
To crown me Emperor of Asia,
But this it is that doth excruciate
The very substance of my vexed soul!
To see our neighbours that were wont to quake
And tremble at the Persean Monarchs name,
Now sits and laughs our regiment to scorn,
And that which might resolve me into tears:
Men from the farthest Equinoctial line,
Have swarmed in troops into the Eastern India:
Lading their ships with gold and precious stones:
And made their spoils from all our provinces.

This should entreat your highness to rejoice,
Since Fortune gives you opportunity,
To gain the title of a Conqueror,
By curing of this maimed Empery,
Affrike and Europe bordering on your land,
And continent to your Dominions:
How easily may you with a mighty host,
Pass into Graecia, as did Cyrus once.
And cause them to withdraw their forces home,
Least you subdue the pride of Christendom!

But Menaph. what means this trumpets sound

Behold, my Lord Ortigius, and the rest,
Bringing the Crown to make you Emperor.

Magnificent and mighty Prince Cosroe,
We in the name of other Persean states,
And commons of this mighty Monarchy,
Present thee with th'Emperiall Diadem.

The warlike Soldiers, the Gentlemen,
That heretofore have filled Persepolis
With Affrike Captains, taken in the field:
Whoose ransom made them march in coats of gold,
With costly jewels hanging at their ears,
And shining stones upon their lofty Crestes,
Now living idle in the walled towns,
Wanting both pay and martial discipline.
Begin in troops to threaten civil war.
And openly exclaim against the King.
Therefore to stay all sudden mutinies,
We will invest your Highness Emperor:
Whereat the Soldiers will conceive more joy,
Then did the Macedonians at the spoil
Of great Darius and his wealthy host.

Well, since I see the state of Persea droop,
And languish in my brothers government:
I willingly receive th'mperiall crown,
And vow to wear it for my countries good:
In spite of them shall malice my estate.

And in assurance of desired success,
We here do crown thee Monarch of the East,
Emperor of Asia, and of Persea,
Great Lord of Medea and Armenia:
Duke of Africa and Albania,
Mesopotamia and of Parthia,
East India and the late discovered Isles,
Chief Lord of all the wide vast Euxine sea,
And of the ever raging Caspian Lake:
Long live Cosroe mighty Emperor.

And Jove may never let me longer live,
Then I may seek to gratify your love,
And cause the soldiers that thus honour me,
To triumph over many Provinces.
By whose desires of discipline in Arms,
I doubt not shortly but to reign sole king,
And with the Army of Theridamas,
Whether we presently will fly (my Lords)
To rest secure against my brothers force.

We knew my Lord, before we brought the crown,
Intending your inuestion so near,
The residence of your despised brother,
The Lord would not be too exasperate,
To injure or suppress your worthy title.
Or if they would, there are in readiness
Ten thousand horse to carry you from hence,
In spite of all suspected enemies.

I know it well my Lord, thank you all,

Sound up the trumpets then,
God save the King.

COme lady, let not this appal your thoughts
The jewels and the treasure we have taken
Shall be reserved, and you in better state,
Than if you were arrived in Siria.
Even in the circle of your Fathers arms:
The mighty Souldan of Egyptia.

Ah Shepherd, pity my distressed plight,
(If as thou seem, thou art so mean a man)
And seek not to enrich thy followers,
By lawless rapine from a silly maid.
Who traueiling with these Medean Lords
To Memphis, from my uncles country of Medea,
Where all my youth I have vene governed,
Have past the army of the mighty Turk:
Bearing his privy signet and his hand:
To safe conduct us thorough Africa:

And since we have arrived in Scythia,
Besides rich presents from the puissant Cham,
We have his highness letters to command
Aide and assistance if we stand in need.

But now you see these letters commands,
Are countermanded by a greater man:
And through my provinces you must expect
Letters of conduct from my mightiness,
If you intend to keep your treasure safe.
But since I love to live at liberty,
As easily may you get the Souldans crown,
As any prizes out of my precinct.
For they are friends that help to wean my state,
Till men and kingdoms help to strengthen it:
And must maintain my life exempt from servitude.
But tell me Madam, is your grace betrothed:

I am (my Lord,) for so you do import.

I am a Lord, for so my deeds shall prove,
And yet a shepherd by my Parentage:
But Lady, this fair face and heavenly hew,
Mud grace his bed that conquers Asia:
And means to be a terror to the world,
Measuring the limits of his Empery
By East and west, as Phoebus doth his course:
Lie here ye weeds that I disdain to wear,
This complete armour, and this curtle-axe
Are adiuncts more beseeming Tamburlaine.
And Madam, whatsoever you esteem
Of this success, and loss vnvallued,
Both may invest you Empress of the East:
And these that seem but silly country Swains,
May have the leading of so great an host,
As with their weight shall make the mountains quake.
Even as when windy exhalations,
Fighting for passage, tilt within the earth.

As princely Lions when they rouse themselves,
Stretching their paws, and threatening herds of Beasts.
So in his Armour looks Tamburlaine:
Me thinks I see kings kneeling at his feet,
And he with frowning brows and fiery looks,
Spurning their crowns from off their captive heads.

And making thee and me Techelles, kings,
That even to death will follow Tamburlaine.

Nobly resolved, sweet friends and followers,
These Lords (perhaps) do scorn our estimates:
And think we prattle with distempered spirits,
But since they measure our deserts so mean,
That in conceit bear Empires on our spears,
Affecting thoughts coequal with the clouds,
They shall be kept our forced followers,
Till with their eyes thee view us Emperors.

The Gods, defenders of the innocent,
Will never prosper your intended drifts,
That thus oppress poor friendles passengers.
Therefore at least admit us liberty,
Even as thou hop'st to be eternized,
By living Asias mighty Emperor.

I hope our Ladies treasure and our own,
May serve for ransom to our liberties:
Return our Mules and empty Camels back,
That we may travail into Siria,
Where her betrothed Lord Alcidamus,
Expects th'arriuall of her highness person.

And wheresoever we repose our selves,
We will report but well of Tamburlaine.

Disdains Zenocrate to live with me?
Or you my Lords to be my followers?
Think you I way this treasure more than you?
Not all the Gold in Indies wealthy arms,
Shall buy the meanest soldier in my train.
Zenocrate, lovelier than the Love of Jove,
Brighter than is the silver Rhodolfe,
Fairet than whitcst snow on Scythian hills,
Thy person is more worth to Tamburlaine,
Than the possession of the Persean Crown.
Which gracious startes have promised at my birth,
A hundredth Tartars shall attend on thee,
Mountrf on Steeds, swifter than Pegasus.
Thy Garments shall be made of Medean silk,
Enchast with precious jewels of mine own:
More rich and valurous than Zenocrates.
With milke-white Hearts upon an Ivory sled,
Thou shalt be drawn amidst the frozen Pooles,
And scale the ysie mountains lofty tops:
Which with thy beauty will be soon resolved.
My martial prises with five hundred men,
Wun on the fifty headed Vuolgas waives.
Shall all we offer to Zenocrate,
And then my self to fair Zenocrate.

What now? In love?

Techelles, women must be flaterrd.
But this is she with whom I am in love.

News, news.

How now, what's the matter?

A thousand Persean horsemen are at hand,
Sent from the King to overcome us all.

How now my Lords of Egypt Zenocrate?
Now must your jewels be restored again:
And I that triumph so be overcome.
How say you Lordings, Is not this your hope?

We hope your self will willingly restore the.

Such hope, such fortune have the thousand horse.
Soft ye my Lords and sweet Zenocrate.
You must be forced from me ere you go:
A thousand horsemen: We five hundred foot?
An ods too great, for us to stand against:
But are they rich: And is their armour good?

Their plumed helmes are wrought with beaten gold.
Their swords enameld, and about their necks
Hangs massy chains of gold down to the waste,
In every part exceeding brave and rich.

Then shall we fight courageously with them.
Or look you, I should play the Orator?

No: cowards and fainthearted runawaies,
Look for orations when the foe is near.
Our swords shall play the Orators for us.

Come let us meet them at the mountain foot,
And with a sudden and an hot alarm
Drive all their horses headlong down the hill.

Come let us march.

Stay Techelles, ask a parley first,
Open the Males, yet guard the treasure sure,
Lay out our golden wedges to the view,
That their reflexions may amaze the Perseans.
And look we friendly on them when they come:
But if they offer word or violence,
We'll fight five hundred men at arms to one,
Before we part with our possession.
And against the General we will lift our swords.
And either launch his greedy thirsting throat,
Or take him prisoner, and his chain shall serve
For Manackles, till he be ransomed home.

I hear them come, shall we encounter them?

Keep all your standings, and not stir a foot,
My self will bide the danger of the brunt.

Where is this Scythian Tamberlaine?

Who seekst thou Persean? I am Taburlain.

Tamburlaine? A Scythian Shepherd, so embellished
With Natures pride, and richest furniture,
His looks do menace heaven and dare the Gods,
His fiery eyes are fixed upon the earth.
As if he now deuis'd some Stratagem:
Or meant to pierce Auernas darksome vaults.
To pull the triple headed dog from hell.

Noble and mild this Persean seems to be,
If outward habit judge the inward man,

His deep affections make him passionate.

With what a majesty he rears his looks:
In thee (thou valiant man of Persea)
I see the folly of thy Emperor:
Art thou but Captain of a thousand horse,
That vi Characters graven in thy brows,
And by thy martial face and stout aspect,
Deserve to have the leading of an host?
Forsake thy king and do but join with me
And we will triumph over all the world.
I hold the Fates bound fast in iron chains,
And with my hand turn Fortunes wheel about,
And sooner shall the Sun fall from his Sphere,
Than Tamburlaine be slain or overcome.
Draw forth thy sword, thou mighty man at Arms,
Intending but to race my charmed skin:
And Jove himself will stretch his hand from heaven.
To ward the blow, and shield me safe from harm,
See how he rains down heaps of gold in showers.
As if he meant to give my Soldiers pay,
And as a sure and grounded argument,
That I shall be the Monark of the East.
He sends this Sculdans daughter rich and brave,
To be my Queen and portly Empress,
If thou wilt stay with me, renowned man,
And lead thy thousand horse with my conduct,
Besides thy share of this Egyptian prise,
Those thousand horse shall sweat with martial spoil
Of conquered kingdoms, and of Cities sacked,
Both we will walk upon the lofty cliffs,
And Christian Merchants that with Russian stems
Plow up huge furrows in the Caspian sea.
Shall veil to us, as Lords of all the Lake.
Both we will reign as Consuls of the earth,
And mighty kings shall be our Senators,
Jove sometime masked in a Shepherds weed,
And by those steps that he hath scaled the heavens,
May we become immortal like the Gods.
Join with me now in this my mean estate,
(I cal it mean, because being yet obscure,
The Nations far remoou'd admire me not)
And when my name and honour shall be spread,
As far as Boreas claps his brazen wings,
Or fair Botees sends his cheerful light.
Then shalt thou be Competitor with me,
And sit with Tambulaine. in all his majesty.

Not Hermes Prolocutor to the Gods,
Could use persuasions more pathetic.

Nor are Apollos Oracles more true,
Then thou shalt find my vaunts substantial.

We are his friends, and if the Persean king
Should offer present Duke domes to our state,
We think it loss to make exchange for that,
We are assured of by our friends success.

And kingdoms at the least we all expect.
Befides the honour in assured conquests:
Where kings shall crouch unto our conquering swords,
And hostess of soldiers stand amazed at us,
When with their fearful tongues they shall cenfesse
Theise are the men that all the world admires,

What strong enchantments tice my yielding soul
Are these resolved noble Scythians?
But shall I prove a Traitor to my King?

No, but the trusty friend of Tamburlaine.

Won with thy words, conquered with thy looks,
I yield my self, my men horse to thee:
To be partaker of thy good or ill,
As long as life maintains Theridamas.

Theridamas my friend, take here my hand.
Which is as much as if I swore by heaven,
And call'd' the Gods to witness of my vow,
Thus shall my heart be still combined with thine,
Until our bodies turn to Elements:
And both our souls aspire celestial thrones.
Techelles, and Casane, welcome him.

Welcome renowned Persean to us all.

Long may theridamas remain with us.

These are my friends in who I more rejoice,
Than doth the King of Persea in his Crown:
And by the love of Pyllades and Orestes,
Whose statutes we adore in Scythia,
Thy self and them shall never part from me,
Before I crown you kings in Asia.
Make much of them gentle Theridamas,
And they will never leave thee till the death.

Nor thee, nor them, thrice noble Tambutlain
Shall want my heart to be with gladness pierced
To do you honour and security.

A thousand thanks worthy theridamas:
And now fair Madam, and my noble Lords,
If you will willingly remain with me,
You shall have herors, as your merits be:
Or else you shall be forced w^h slavery.

We yield unto thee happy Tamburlaine

For you then Madam, I am out of doubt

I must be pleased perforce, wretched Zenocrate.

THus far are we towards Theridamas,
And valiant Tamburlaine, the man of fame,
The man that in the forehead of his fortune,
Bears figures of renown and miracle:
But tell me, that hast seen him, Menaphon,
What stature wields he, and what personage:

Of stature tall, and straightly fashioned,
Like his desire, lift upwards and divine,
Sa large of limbs, his joints so strongly knit,
Such breadth of shoulders as might mainly bear
Old Atlas burden, twixt his manly pitch,
A pearl more worth, then all the world is plaste:
Wherein by curious sovereignty of Art,
Are firt his piercing instruments of sight:
Whose fiery cyrcles bear encompassed
A heaven of heavenly bodies in their Spheres:
That guides his steps and actions to the throne.
Where honour sits invested royally:
Pale of complexion: wrought in him with passion,
Thrirsting with souerainty with love of arms,
His lofty brows in folds, do figure death,
And in their smoothness, amity and life:
About them hangs a knot of Amber heir.
Wrapped in curls, as fierce Achilles was,
On which the breath of heaven delights to play,
Making it dance with wanton majesty:
His arms and singers long and snowy,
Betokening valour and excess of strength:
In every part proportioned like the man,
Should make the world subdued to Tamburlaine.

Well hast thou pourtraid in thy terms of life,
The face and personage of a wondrous man:
Nature doth strive with Fortune and his stars,
To make him famous in accomplished worth:
And well his merits show him to be made:
His Fortunes m^ister, and the king of men.
That could persuade at such a sudden pinch,
With reasons of his valour and his life,
A thousand sworn and ouermatching foes:
Then when our powers in points of swords are joined
And closed in compass of the killing bullet,
Though straight the passage and the port be made,
That leads to Palace of my brothers life,
Proud is his fortune if we pierce it not.
And when the princely Persean Diadem,
Shall ouerway his weary witless head,
And fall like mellowed fruit, with shakes of death,
In fair Persea noble tamburlaine
Shall be my Regent, and remain as King:

In happy hour we have set the Crown
Upon your kingly head, that seeks our honour,
In joining with the man, ordained by heaven
To further every action to the best.

He that with Shepherds and a little spoil,
Durst in disdain of wrong and tyranny,
Defend his freedom against a Monarchy.
What will he do supported by a king:
Leading a troop of Gentlemen and Lords,
And stuffed with trasure for his highest thoughts,

And such shall wait on worthy Tamburlaine.
Our army will be forty thousand strong,
When Tamburlain and brave Theridamas
Have met us by the river Araris:
And all conioin'd to meet the witless King.
That now is marching near to Parthia.
And with unwilling soldiers faintly armed,
To seek revenge on me and Tamburlaine.
To whom sweet Menaphon, direct me straight.

I will my Lord.

COme my Meander, let us to this geere,
I tel you true my heart is swollen with wrath,
On this same thievish villain tamburlaine.
And of that false Cosroe, my traitorous brother
Would it not grieve a King to be so abused.
And have a thousand horsemen taken away?
And which is worst to have his Diadem
Sought for by such scald knaucs as love him net.
I think it would: well then, by heavens I swear,
Aurora shall not peep out of her doors,
But I will have Cosroe by the head,
And kill proud Tamburlaine with point of sword.
Tell you the rest (Meander) I have said.

Then having past Armenian deserts now,
And pitch our tents under the Georgean hills.
Whose tops are covered with Tartarian thieves,
That lie in ambush, waiting for a pray:
What should we do but bid them battle straight,
And rid the world of those detested troops;
Least if we let them linger here a while,
They gather strength by power of fresh supplies.
This country swarntes with vile eutragious men,
That live by rapine and by lawless spoil,
Fit Soldiers for the wicked Tamburlaine.
And he that could with gifts and promises.
Inveigle him that lead a thousand horse,
And make him false his faith unto his King,
Will quickly win such as are like himself.
Therefore cheer up your minds, prepare to fight,
He that can take or slaughter tamburlaine,
Shall rule the Province of Albania.
Who brings that Traitors head theridamas,
Shall have a government in Medea:
Beside the spoil of him and all his train:
But if Cosroe (as our Spials say,
And as we know) remains with tamburlaine,
His Highness pleasure is that he should live,
And be reclaimed with princely lenity.

An hundred horsemen of my company
Srowting abroad upon these champion plains,
Have vtew'd the army of the Scythians,
Which make reports it far exceeds the Kings.

Suppose they be in number infinite,
Yet being void of Martial discipline,
All running headlong after greedy spoils:
And more regarding gain than victory:
Like to the cruel brothers of the earth,
Sprung of the teeth of Dragons venomous,
Their careless swords shall launch their fellows threats
And make us triumph in their overthrow.

Was there such brethren, sweet Meander, say
That sprung of teeth of Dragons venomous.

So Poets say, my Lord.

And tis a pretty toy to be a Poet.
Well, well (Meander) thou art deeply read:
And having thee, I have a jewel sure:
Go en my Lord, and give your charge I say,
Thy wit will make us Conquerors to day.

Then noble soldiers, to entrap these thieves,
That live confounded in disordered troops,
If wealth or riches may preuaile with them,
We have our Camels laden all with gold:
Which you that be but common soldiers,
Shall fling in every corner of the field:
And while the base borne Tartars take it up,
You fighting more for honour than for gold,
Shall massacre those greedy minded slaves.
And when their scattered army is subdued:
And you march on their slaughtered carcasses,
Share equally the gold that bought their lives,
And live like Gentlemen in Persea,
Strike up the Drum and march corragiously,
Fortune her self doth sit upon our Crests.

He tells you true, my masters, so he does.
Drum{is}, why sound ye not when Meand. speak{is}.

NOw worthy Tamburlaine, have I reposed,
In thy approved Fortunes all my hope,
What think thou man, shall come of our attempts.
For even as from assured oracle,
I take thy doom for satisfaction.

And so mistake you not a whit my Lord.
For Fates and Oracles, heaven have sworn,
To roialise the deeds of tamburlaine:
And make them blessed that share in his attempts.
And doubt you not, but if you favour me,
And let my Fortunes and my valour sway,
To some direction in your martial deeds,
The world will strive with hostess of men at arms.
To swarm unto the Ensign I support,
The host of Xerxes, which by fame is said
To drink the mighty Parthian Araris,
Was but a handful to that we will have.
Our quivering Lances shaking in the air,
And bullets like Ioues dreadful Thunderbolts,
Enroled in flames and fiery smoldering mists,
Shall threat the Gods more than Cyclopian wars,
And with our Sun-bright armour as we march,
Weel chase the Stars from heaven, and dim their eyes
That stand and muse at our admired arms.

You see my Lord, what working words he hath.
But when you see his actions stop his speech,
Your speech will stay, or so extol his worth,
As I shall be commended and excusde
For turning my poor charge to his direction.
And these his two renowned friends my Lord,
Would make one thrust and strive to be retained
In such a great degree of amity.

With duty not with amity we yield
Our utmost service to the fair Cosroe.

Which I esteem as portion of my crown.
Vsumeasane and techelles both,
When she that rules in Rhamnis golden gates,
And makes a passage for all prosperous Arms:
Shall make me solely Emperor of Asia,
Then shall your meeds and valour be aduaunst
To rooms of honour and Nobility.

Then haste Cosroe to be king alone.
That I with these my friends and all my men,
May triumph in our long expected Fate,
The King your Brother is now hard at hand,
Meet with the fool, and rid your royal shoulders
Of such a burden, as outwaies the sands
And all the craggy rocks of Caspea.

My Lord, we have discovered the enemy
Ready to chardge you with a mighty army.

Come tamburlain, now whet thy winged sword
And lift thy lofty arm into the clouds,
That it may reach the King of Perseas crown,
And set it safe on my victorious head.

See where it is, the keenest Cutle-axe.
That ere made passage thorough Persean Arms,
These are the wings shall make it fly as swift,
As doth the lightening: or the breath of heaven,
And kill as sure as it swiftly flies.

Thy words assure me of kind success:
Go valiant Soldier, go before and charge
The fainting army of that foolish King.

Vsumeasane and techelles come,
We are enough to scarre the enemy,
And more than needs to make an Emperor.

Accursed be he that first invented war,
They knew not, ah, they knew not simple men,
How those were hit by pelting Cannon shot,
Stand staggering like a quivering Aspen leaf,
Fearing the force of Boreas boisterous blasts.
In what a lamentable case were I,
If Nature had not given me wisdoms lore?
For Kings are clouts that every man shoots at,
Our Crown the pin that thousands seek to cleave,
Therefore in policy I think it good
To hide it close: a goodly Stratagem,
And far from any man that is a fool.
So shall not I be known, or if I be,
They cannot take away my crown from me.
Here will I hide it in this simple hole.

What fearful coward straggling from the camp
When Kings themselves are present in the field.

Thou lie.

Base villain, dare thou give the lie?

Away, I am the King: go, touch me not.
Thou breakst the law of Arms unless thou kneel.
And cry me mercy, noble King.

Are you the witty King of Persea?

I marie am I: have you any suite to me?

I would entreat you to speak but three wise words.

So I can when I see my time.

Is this your Crown?

I, Did thou ever see a fairer?

You will not sell it, will ye?

Such another word, and I, will have thee executed.
Come give it me.

No, I took it prisoner.

You lie, I gave it you.

Then tis mine.

No, I mean, I let you keep it.

Well, I mean you shall have it again.
Here take it for a while, I lend it thee,
Till I may see thee hemmed with armed men.
Then shalt thou see me pull it from thy head:
Thou art no match for mighty Tamburlaine.

O Gods, is this tamburlaine the thief,
I marvel much he stole it not away.

Hold thee Cosroe, wear two imperial Crowns.
Thinks thee Invested now as royally,
Even by the mighty hand of tamburlaine,
As if as many kings as could encompass thee,
With greatest pomp had crowned thee Emperor.

So do I thrice renowined man at arms,
And none shall keep the crown but tamburlaine:
Thee do I make my Regent of Persea,
And General Lieutenant of my Armies.
Meander, you that were our brothers Guide,
And chiefest Counsailor in all his acts,
Since he is yielded to the stroke of War,
On your submission we with thanks excuse,
And give you equal place in our affairs.

Most happy Emperor in humblest terms
I vow my service to your Majesty.
With utmost virtue of my faith and duty.

Thanks good Meander, then Cosroe reign
And govern Persea in her former pomp:
Now send Embassage to thy neighbor Kings,
And let them know the Persean King is changed:
From one that knew not what a King should do,
To one that can command what longs thereto:
And now we will to fair Persepolis,
With twenty thousand expert soldiers.
The Lords and Captains of my brothers camp,
With little slaughter take Meanders course,
And gladly yield them to my gracious rule:
Ortigius and menaphon, my trusty friends,
Now will I gratify your former good,
And grace your calling with a greater sway.

And as we ever and at your behoof,
And sought your state, all honour it deserved,
So will we with our powers and our lives,
Endeavour to preserve and prosper it.

I will not thank thee (sweet Ortigius)
Better replies shall prove my purposes.
And now, Lord tamburlaine, my brothers Camp
I leave to thee, and to theridamas,
To follow me to fair Persepolis.
Then will we march to all those Indian Mines,
My witless brother to the Christians lost:
And ransom them with fame and usury.
And till thou overtake me tamburlaine,
(Staying to order all the scattered troops)
Farewell Lord Regent, and his happy friends,
I long to sit upon my brothers throne,

Your Majesty shall shortly have your wish.
And ride in triumph through Persepolis.

And ride in triumph through Persepolis?
Is it not brave to be a King, techelles?
Vsumeasane and theridamas,
Is it not passing brave to be a King,
And ride in triumph through Persepolis?

O my Lord, tis sweet and full of pomp.

To be a King, is half to be a God.

A God is not so glorious as a King:
I think the pleasure they enjoy in heaven
Can not compare with kingly joys in earth,
To wear a Crown enchac'd with pearl and gold,
Whose virtues carry with it life and death,
To ask, and have: command, and be obeyed.
When looks breed love, with looks to gain the prize;
Such power attractive shines in princes eyes.

Why say theridamas, wilt thou be a king?

Nay, though I praise it, I can live without it.

What says my other friends, will you be kings?

I, if I could with all my heart my Lord.

Why, that's well said techelles, so would I,
And so would you my masters, would you not?

What then my Lord?

Why then Casanes shall we wish for ought
The world affords in greatest novelty,
And rest attmplesse faint and destitute?
Me thinks we should not, I am strongly moved,
That if I should desire the Persean Crown,
I could attain it with a wondrous ease,
And would not all our soldiers soon consent,
If we should aim at such a dignity?

I know they would with our persuasions.

Why then theridamas, I'll first assay,
To get the Persean Kingdom to my self:
Then thou for Parthia, they for Scythia and Medea.
And if I prosper, all shall be as sure,
As if the Turk, the Pope, Affrike and Greece,
Came creeping to us with their crowns apace.

Then shall we send to this triumphing King,
And bid him battle for his novel Crown?

Nay quickly then, before his room be hot.

Twil prove a pretty jest (in faith) my friends.

A jest to chardge on twenty thousand men?
I judge the purchase more important far.

Judge by thy self theridamas, not me,
For presently techelles here shall haste,
To bid him battle ere he pass too far,
And lose more labour than the gain will quite.
Then shalt thou see the Scythian tamburlaine,
Make but a jest to win the Persean crown.
techelles, take a thousand horse with thee,
And bid him turn his back to war with us,
That only made him King to make us sport.
We will not steal upon him cowardly,
But give him warning and more warriors.
Haste the techelles, we will follow thee.
What saith theridamas?

Go on for me.

What means this devilish shepherd to aspire
With such a Giantly presumption.
To cast up hills against the face of heaven:
And dare the force of angry Iupiter.
But as he thrust them underneath the hills,
And pressed out fire from their burning jaws:
So will I send this monstrous slave to hell,
Where flames shall ever feed upon his soul.

Some powers divine, or else infernal, mixed
Their angry seeds at his conception:
For he was never sprung of human race,
Since with the spirit of his fearful pride,
He dares so doubtlessly resolve of rule.
And by profession be ambitous.

What God or Feend, or spirit of the earth,
Or Monster turned to a manly shape,
Or of what mould or mettel he be made,
What star or state soever govern him,
Let us put on our meet incountring minds,
And in detesting such a devilish Thief,
In love of honour defence of right,
Be armed against the hate of such a foe,
Whether from earth, or hell, or heaven he grow.

Nobly resolved, my good Ortygius.
And since we all have sucked one wholesome air,
And with the same proportion of Elements,
Resolve, I hope we are resembled,
Vowing our loves to equal death and life,
Let's cheer our soldiers to encounter him,
That grievous image of ingratitude:
That fiery thirster after Soueraingtie:
And burn him in the fury of that flame,
That none can quence but blood and Empery.
Resolve my Lords and loving soldiers now,
To save your King and country from decay:
Then strike up Drum, and all the Stars that make
The loathsome Circle of my dated life,
Direct my weapon to his barbarous heart,
That thus opposes him against the Gods,
And scorns the Powers that govern Persea.

Barbarous and bloody Tamburlaine,
Thus to deprive me of my crown and life.
Treacherous and false theridamas,
Even at the morning of my happy state,
Scarce being seated in my royal throne,
To work my downfall and untimely end.
An uncouth pain torments my grieved soul,
And death arrests the organ of my voice.
Who entering at the breach thy sword hath made,
Sacks every vain and artier of my heart,
Bloody and insatiate Tamburlain.

The thirst of reign and sweetness of a crown,
That caused the eldest son of heavenly Ops,
To thrust his doting father from his chair,
And place himself in the Imperial heaven,
Moved me to manage arms against they state,
What better president than mighty Jove?
Nature that framed us of four Elements,
Warring within our breasts for regiment,
Doth teach us all to have aspiring minds:
Our souls, whose faculties can comprehend
The wondrous Architecture of the world:
And measure every wandering planets course.
Still climbing after knowledge infinite,
And always moving as the restless Spheres.
Wills us to wear our selves and never rest.
Until we reach the ripest fruit of all.
That perfect bliss and sole felicity.
The sweet fruition of an earthly crown.

And that made me to join with tamburlain
For he is gross and like the massy earth,
That moves not upwards, nor by princely deeds
Doth mean to soar above the highest sort.

And that made us the friends of Tamburlaine.
To lift our swords against the Persean King.

For as when Jove did thrust old Saturn down.
Neptune and Dis gained each of them a Crown.
So do we hope to reign in Asia,
If tamburlain be placed in Persea.

The strangest men that ever nature made,
I know not how to take their tyrannies.
My bloodless body waxes chill and cold,
And with my blood my life slides through my wound.
My soul begins to take her flight to hell.
And sommons all my senses to depart:
The heat and moisture which did feed each other,
For want of nourishment to feed them both.
Is dry and cold, and now doth ghastly death
With greedy talents gripe my bleeding hart,
And like a Harpyr tires on my life.
Theridamas and Tamburlaine, I die,
And fearful vengeance light upon you both.

Not all the curses which the furies breathe,
Shall make me leave so rich a prize as this:
Teridamas, techelles, and the rest,
Who think you now is king of Persea?

Tamburlaine, tamburlaine.

Though Mars himself the angry God of arms,
And all the earthly Potentates conspire,
To dispossess me of this Diadem:
Yet will I wear it in despite of them,
As great commander of the Eastern world,
If you but say that tamburlaine shall reign.

Long live tamburlaine, and reign in Asia.

So, now it is more surer on my head,
Than if the Gods had held a Parliament:
And all pronounst me king of Persea.

GReat Kings of Barbary, and my portly Bassoes,
We hear, the Tartars the Eastern thieves
Under the conduct of one Tamburlaine,
Presume a bickering with your Emperor:
And thinks to rouse us from our dreadful siege
Of the famous Grecian Constantinople.
You know our Army is invincible:
As many circumcised Turks we have,
And warlike bands of Christians renied,
As hath the Ocean or the Terrene sea
Small drops of water, when the Maon begins
To join in one her semi-circled horns:
Yet would we not be brau'd with foreign power,
Nor raise our siege before the Gretians yield.
Or breathless lie before the city walls.

Renowned Emperor, and mighty General
What if you sent the Bassoes of your guard.
To charge him to remain in Asia.
Or else to threaten death and deadly arms,
As from the mouth of mighty Baiazeth.

Hie thee my Bassoe fast to Persea,
Tell him thy Lord the Turkish Emperor,
Dread Lord of Affrike, Europe and Asia.
Great King and conqueror of Grecia,
The Ocean, Terrene, and the cole-blacke sea,
The high and higest Monarch of the world.
Wills and Commands (for say not I entreat)
Not once to set his foot in Africa,
Or spread his colours in Grecia.
Least he incur the fury of my wrath.
Tell him, I am content to take a truce,
Because I hear he bears a valiant mind.
But if presuming on his silly power,
He be so mad to manage Arms with me,
Then stay thou with him, say I bid thee so.
And if before the Sun have measured heaven
With triple circuit thou regreet us not,
We mean to take his mornings next arise.
For messenger, he will not be reclaimed,
And mean to fetch thee in despite of him.

Most great and puissant Monarch of the earth,
Your Bassoe will accomplish your behest:
And show your pleasure to the Persean.
As fits the Legate of the stately Turk.

They say he is the King of Persea.
But if he dare attempt to stir your siege,
Twere requisite he should be ten times more,
For all flesh quakes at your magnificence.

True (Argier) and tremble at my looks.

The spring is hindered by your smoothering host,
For neither rain can fall upon the earth,
Nor Sun reflere his virtuous beams thereon.
The ground is mantled with such multitudes.

All this is true as holy Mahomet,
And all the trees are blasted with our breathes.

What thinks your greatness best to be atchieu'd
In pursuit of the Cities overthrow?

I will the captive Pioners of Argier,
Cut of the water, that by leaden pipes
Runs to the city from the mountain Carnon,
Two thousand horse shall forage up and down,
That no relief or succour come by Land.
And all the sea my Galleys countermand.
Then shall our footmen lie within the trench,
And with their Cannons mouthed like Orcus gulf
Batter the walls, and we will enter in:
And thus the Grccians shall be conquered.

MAdam Zenocrate, may I presume
To know the cause of these unquiet fits:
That work such trouble to your wonted rest:
Tis more then pity such a heavenly face
Should by hearts sorrow wax so wan and pale.
When your offensive rape by tamburlaine,
(Which of your whole displeasures should be most)
Hath seemed to be digested long ago.
Although it be digested long ago
As his exceeding favours have deserved,
And might content the Queen of heaven as well:
As it hath changed my first conceived disdain.
Yet since a farther passion feeds my thoughts,
With ceasclesse and discorsolate conceits.
Which dies my looks so lifeless as they are.
And might, if my extremes had fuil events,
Make me the ghastly counterfeit of death.

Eternal heaven sooner be dissolved.
And all that pierces Phoebes silver eye,
Before such hap fall to zenocrate.

Ah, life, and soul still hover in his Breast.
And leave my body senseless as the earth.
Or else unite you to his life and soul,
That I may live and die with tamburlain.

With tamburlaine? Ah fair zenocrate.
Let not a man so vile and barbarous,
That holds you from your father in despite,
And keeps you from the honours of a Queen.
Being supposed his worthless Concubine.
Be honoured with your love, but for necessity.
So now the mighty Souldan hears of you,
Your Highness needs not doubt but in short time,
He will with Tamburlaines destruction
Redeem you from this deadly servitude.

leave to wound me with these words.
And speak of tamburlaine as he deserves:
The entertainment we have had of him,
Is far from villainy or servitude.
And might in noble minds be counted princely.

How can you fancy one that looks so fierce,
Only disposed to martial Stratagems?
Who when he shall embrace you in his arms,
Will tell how many thousand men he slew.
And when you look for amorous discourse,
Will rattle forth his facts of war and blood.
Too harsh a subject for your dainty ears.

As looks the sun through Nilus flowing stream,
Or when the morning holds him in her arms.
So looks my Lordly love, fair tamburlaine:
His talk much sweeter than the Muses song,
They sung for honour against Pierides.
Or when Minerua did with Neptune strive,
And higher would I rear my estimate,
Than Iuno sister to the highest God.
If I were matched with mighty tamburlaine,

Yet be not so inconstant in your love,
But let the young Arabian live in hope,
After your rescue to eioy his choice.
You see though first the King of Persea
(Being a Shepherd) seemed to love you much,
Now in his majesty he leaves those looks,
Those words of favour, and those comfortings,
And gives no more than common courtesies.

Thence rise the tears that so distain my checks,
Fearing his love through my unworthiness.

Betrayed by fortune and suspicious love.
Threatened with frowning wrath and jealousy.
Surpriz d with fear of hideous revenge.
I stand aghast: but most astonished
To see his choler shut in secrete thoughts,
And wrapped in silence of his angry soul.
Upon his brows was pourtraid ugly death,
And in his eyes the fury of his hart.
That shine as Comets, menacing revenge,
And casts a pale complexion on his cheeks.
As when the Sea-man sees the Hyades
Gather an army of Cemerian clouds,
( Austere and Aquilon with winged Steads
All sweating, tilt about the watery heavens,
With shivering spears enforcing thunderclaps.
And from their shields strike flames of lightening)
All fearful folds his sails, and sounds the maine,
Lifting his prayers to the heavens for aid,
Against the terror of the winds and waives.
So fares Agydas for the late felt frowns
That sent a tempest to my daunted thoughts,
And makes my soul divine her overthrow.

See you Agidas how the King salutes you.
He bids you prophecy what it imports.

I prophesied before and now I prove,
The killing frowns of jealousy and love.
He needed not with words confirm my fear,
For words are vain where working tools present
The naked action of my threatened end.
It says, Agydas, thou shalt surely die.
And of extremities elect the least,
More honour and less pain it may procure,
Tody by this resolved hand of thine,
Than stay the torments he and heaven have sworn.
Then haste Agydas, and prevent the plagues:
Which thy prolonged Fates may draw on thee:
Go wander free from fear of Tyrants rage.
Removed from the Torments and the hell:
Wherewith he may excruciate thy soul.
And let Agidas by Agidas die.
And with this stab slumber eternally.

Vsumeasane, see how right the man
Hath hit the meaning of my Lord the King.

Faith, and techelles, it was manly done;
And since he was so wise and honourable,
Let us affoord him now the bearing hence.
And crave his triple worthy burial.

Agreed Casane, we will honour him.

BAssoe, by this thy Lord and master knows,
I mean to meet him in Bithynia:
see how he comes? Tush. Turks are full of brags
And menace more than they can well perform:
He meet me in the field and fetch thee hence?
Alas (poor Turk) his fortune is to weak,
T'incounter with the strength of Tamburlaine.
View well my Camp, and speak indifferently,
Do not my captains and my soldiers look
As if they meant to conquer Africa.

Your men are valiant but their number few,
And cannot terrefie his mighty host,
My Lord, the great Commander of the world,
Besides fifteen contributorie kings,
Hath now in arms ten thousand Ianisaries,
Mounted on lusty Mauritanian Steeds.
Brought to the war by men of Tripoly.
Two hundred thousand footmen that have served
In two set battles fought in Grecia:
And for the expedition of this war,
If he think good, can from his garrisons,
Withdraw as many more to follow him.

The more he brings, the greater is the spoil,
For when they perish by our warlike hands,
We mean to seat our footmen on their Steeds.
And rifle all those stately Ianisars.

But will those Kings accompany your Lord?

Such as his Highness please, but some must stay
To rule the provinces he late subdued.

The fight courageously, their crowns are yours
This hand shall set them on your conquering heads:
That made me Emperor of Asia.

Let him bring missions infinite of men,
Vnpeopling Western Africa and Greece:
Yet we assure us of the victory.

Even he that in a trice vanquished two kings,
More mighty than the Turkish Emperor:
Shall rouse him out of Europe, and pursue
His scattered army till they yield or die.

Well said theridamas, speak in that mood,
For Will and Shall best fitteth Tamburlain,
Whose smiling stars gives him assured hope
Of martial triumph, ere he meet his foes:
I that am termed the Scourge and Wrath of God,
The only fear and terror of the world,
Will first subdue the Turk, and then enlarge
Those Christian Captives, which you keep as slaves,
Burdening their bodies with your heavy chames.
And feeding them with thin and slender fare,
That naked row about the Terrene sea.
And when they chance to breath and rest a space,
Are punished with Bastones so grievously,
That they lie panting on the Galleys side.
And strive for life at every stroke they give,
These are the cruel pirates of Argeire,
That damned train, the scum of Africa.
Inhabited with straggling Runagates,
That make quick havoc of the Christian blood.
But as I live that town shall curse the time
That Tamburlaine set foot in Africa:

Bassoes and Ianisaries of my Guard,
Attend upon the person of your Lord,
The greatest Potentate of Africa.

Techelles, and the rest prepare your swords
I mean t'incounter with that Baiazeth.

Kings of Fesse, Moroccus and Argier,
He calls me Baiazeth, whom you call Lord.
Note the presemption of this Scythian slave:
I tell thee villain, those that lead my horse
Have to their names tytles of dignity,
And dare thou bluntly call me Baiazeth?

And know thou Turk, that those which lead my horse,
Shall lead thee Captive thorough Africa.
And dare thou bluntly call me tamburlaine?

By Mahomet, my Kinsmans sepulcher.
And by the holy Alcaron I swear,
He shall be made a chaste and lustlesse Eunuk^,
And in my Sarell tend my Concubines:
And all his Captaincs that thus stoutly stand,
Shall draw the chariot of my Empress.
Whom I have brought to see their overthrow.

By this my sword that conquered Persea,
Thy fall shall make me famous through the world:
I will not tell thee how I'll handle thee,
But every common soldier of my Camp
Shall smile to see thy miserable state.

What means the mighty Turkish Emperor
To talk with one so base as tamburlaine.

Ye Moors and valiant men of Barbary.
How can ye suffer these indignities.

Leave words and let them feel your lances points.
Which glided through the bowels of the Greekes.

Well said my stout contributory kings,
Your threefold army and my huge host,
Shall swallow up these base borne Perseans,

Puissant, renowned and mighty tamburlain,
Why stay we thus prolonging all their liues'?

I long to see those crowns won by our swords
That we may reign as kings of Africa.

What Coward wold not fight for such a prize?

Fight all courageously and be you kings.
I speak it, and my words are oracles.

Zabina, mother of three braver boys,
Than Hercules, that in his infancy
Did pash the jaws of Serpents venomous:
Whose hands are made to gripe a warlike Lance.
Their shoulders broad, for complete armour fit,
Their limbs more large and of a bigger size
Than all the brats ysprong from Typhons loins:
Who, when they come unto their fathers age,
Will batter Turrets with their manly sists.
And on thy head wear my Imperial crown,
Until I bring this sturdy tamburlain,
And all his Captains bound in captive chains.

Such good success happen to Baiazeth,

zenocrate, the loveliest Maid alive,
Fairer than rocks of pearl and precious stone,
The only Paragon of tamburlaine,
Whose eyes are brighter than the Lamps of heaven.
And speech more pleasant than sweet harmony:
That with thy looks can clear the darkened Sky:
And calm the rage of thundering Iupiter:
Sit down by her: adorned with my Crown,
As if thou were the Empress of the world.
Stir not zenocrate until thou see
Me march victoriously with all my men,
Triumphing cuer him and these his kings.
Which I will bring as Vassals to thy feet.
Till then take thou my crown, vaunt of my worth,
And manage words with her as we will arms.

And may my Love, the king of Persea
Return with victory, and free from wound.

Now shalt thou feel the force of Turkish arms,
Which lately made all Europe quake for searc:
I have of Turks, Arabians, Moors and Iewes
Enough to cover all Bythinia,
Let thousands die, their slaughtered Carcasses
Shall serve for walls and bulwarks to the rest:
And as the heads of Hydra, so my power
Subdued, shall stand as mighty as before:
If they should yield their necks unto the sword,
Thy soldiers arms could not endure to strike
So many blows as I have heads for thee.
Thou know not (foolish hardy Tamburlaine)
What tis to meet me in the open field,
That leave no ground for thee to march upon.

Our conquering swords shall marshal us the way
We use to march upon the slaughtered foe:
Trampling their bowels with our horses hooffes:
Brave horses, bred on the white Tartarian hills:
My Camp is like to Iulius Caesars host,
That never fought but had the victory:
Nor in Pharsalia was there such hot war,
As these my followers willingly would have:
Legions of Spirits fleeting in the air,
Direct our Bullets and our weapons points
And make our strokes to wound the senseless lure,
And when she sees our bloody Colours spread.
Then Victory begins to take her flight,
Resting her self upon my milk-white Tent:
But come my Lords, to weapons let us fall.
The field is ours, the Turk, his wife and all.

Come Kings and Bassoes let us glut our swords
That thirst to drink the feeble Perseans blood.

Base Concubine, must thou be placed by me
That am the Empress of the mighty Turk?

Disdainful Turkesse and unreverend Boss,
Call thou me Concubine that am betroath'd
Unto the great and mighty tamburlaine?

To tamburlaine the great Tartarian thief?

Thou wilt repent these lavish words of thine,
When thy great Bassoe, master and thy self.
Must plead for mercy at his kingly feet,
And sue to me to be your Advocates.

And sue to thee? I tell thee shameless girl,
Thou shalt be Laundress to my waiting maid.
How lik'st thou her Ebea, will she serve?

Madame, she thinks perhaps she is too fine.
But I shall turn her into other weeds.
And make her dainty fingers fall to work.

hearst thou Anippe, how thy drudge doth talk,
And how my slave, her mistress menaces.
Both for their sausinesse shall be employed,
To dress the common soldiers meat and drink.
For we will scorn they should come ne'er our selves.

Yet sometimes let your highness send for the
To do the work my chamber maid disdains.

Ye Gods and powers that govern Persea.
And made my lordly Love her worthy King:
Now strengthen him against the Turkish Baiazeth,
And let his foes like flocks of fearful Roes,
Pursued by hunters, fly his angry looks,
That I may see him issue Conqueror.

Now Mahomet, solicit God himself,
And make him rain down murthering shot fro heaven
To dash the Scythians brains, and strike them dead,
That dare to manage arms with him,
That offered jewels to thy sacred shrine.
When first he warred against the Christians.

By this the Turks lie weltering in their blood sound,
And tamburlaine is Lord of Africa:

Thou art deceived, I heard the Trumpets
As when my Emperor overthrew the Greeks:
And led them Captive into Africa.
Straight will I use thee as thy pride deserves:
Prepare thy self to live and die my slave.

If Mahomet should come from heaven and swear,
My royal Lord is slain or conquered.
Yet should he not persuade me otherwise.
But that he lives and will be Conqueror.

Now king of Bassoes, who is Conqueror?


Thou, by the fortune of this damned foil,


Where are your stout contributorie kings?


We have their crowns their bodies strowe the field.


Each man a crown? why kingly fought in faith
Deliver them into my treasury.

Now let me offer to my gracious Lord.
His royal Crown again, so highly won:

Nay take the Turkish Crown from her, zen.
And crown me Emperor of Africa.

No tamburlain, though now thou gat the best
Thou shalt not yet be Lord of Africa.

Give her the Crown Turkesse you were best.

Injurious villains, thieves, runagates,
How dare you thus abuse my Majesty?

Here Madam, you are Empress, she is none,

Not now theridamas, her time is past:
The pillars that have bolstered up those terms,
Are fallen in clusters at my conquering feet.

Though he be prisoner, he may be ransomed:

Not all the world shall ransom Baiazeth.

Ah fair zabina, we have lost the field.
And never had the Turkish Emperor
So great a foil by any foreign foe.
Now will the Christian nusc reants be glad,
Ringing with joy their superstitious belles:
And making bonfires for my overthrow.
But ere I die those foul Idolaters
Shall make me bonfires with their filthy bones,
For though the glory of this day be lost.
Affrik and Greece have garrisons enough
To make me Sovereign of the earth again.

Those walled garrisons will I subdue,
And write my self great Lord of Africa:
So from the East unto the furthest West,
Shall tamburlain extend his puissant arm.
The Galls and those pilling Briggandines,
That yearly sail to the Venetian gulf,
And hover in the straightes for Christians wrack,
Shall lie at anchor in the Isle Asant.
Until the Persean Fleet and men of war,
Sailing along the Oriental sea,
Have fetched about the Indian continent:
Even from Persepolis to Mexico,
And thence unto the straightes of Iubalter:
Where they shall meet, and join their force in one
Keeping in awe the Bay of Portugal.
And all the Ocean by the British shore:
And by this means I'll win the world at last.

Yet set a ransom on me tamburlaine.

What, think thou tamburlain esteems thy gold,
I'll make the kings of India ere I die,
Offer their mines (to sew for peace) to me,
And dig for treasure to appease my wrath:
Come bind them both and one lead in the Turk.
The Turkesse let my Loves maid lead away.

Ah villains, dare ye touch my sacred arms.
O Mahomet, Oh sleepy Mahomet.

O cursed Mahomet that make us thus
The slaves to Scythians rude and barbarous.

Come bring them in, for this happy conquest
Triumph, and solemnize a martial feast.

AWake ye men of Memphis, hear the clange
Of Scythian trumpets, hear the Basilisks,
That roaring, shake Damascus turrets down,
The rogue of Volga holds zenocrate,
The Souldans daughter for his Concubine,
And with a troop of thieves and vagabonds.
Hath spread his colours to our high disgrace:
While you faint-hearted base Egyptians,
Lie slumbering on the flowery banks of Nile,
As Crocodiles that vnaffrighted rest,
While thundering Cannons rattle on their Skins.
Nay (mighty Souldan) did your greatness see
The frowning looks of fiery Tamburlaine,
That with his terror and imperious eyes,
Commands the hearts of his associates,
It might amaze your royal majesty.

Villain. I tell thee, were that tamburlaine,
As monstrous as Gorgon, prince of Hell,
The Souldane would not start a foot from him.
But speak, what power hath he?

Mighty Lord,
Three hundred thousand men in armour clad,
Upon their pransing Steeds, didainfully
With wanton paces trampling on the ground.
Five hundred thousand footmen threatening shot,
Shaking their swords, their spears and iron bills,
Enuironing their Standard round, that stood
As bristle-pointed as a thorny wood.
Their warlike Engines and munition
Exceed the forces of their martial men.

Nay could their nubers counteruail the stars
Or ever drisling drops of April snowers,
Or withered leaves that Autume shakes down.
Yet would the Souldane by his conquering power:
So scatter and consume them in his rage,
That not a man should live to rue their fall,

So might your highness, had you time to sort
Your fighting men, and raise your royal host.
But tamburlaine, by expedition
Advantage takes of your vnreadinesse.

Let him take all th'aduantages he can,
Were all the world conspird to sight for him,
Nay, were he Devil, as he is no man,
Yet in revenge of fair Zenocrate,
Whom he detameth in despite of us,
This arm should send him down to Erebus.
To shroud his shame in darkness of the night.

Pleases your mightiness to understand,
His resolution far exceeds all:
The first day when he pitches down his tents,
White is their hew, and on his silver crest
A snowy Feather spangled white he bears,
To signify the mildness of his mind.
That satiate with spoil refuses blood:
But when Aurora mounts the second time,
As red as scarlet is his furniture,
Then must his kindled wrath be quenched with blood.
Not sparing any that can manage arms:
But if these threats move not submission.
Black are his colours, black Pavilion,
His spear, his shield, his horse, his armour, plumes,
And Jetty Feathers menace death and hell,
Without respect of Sex, degree or age.
He raceth all his foes with fire and sword.

Merciless villain, Peasant ignorant,
Of lawful arms, or martial discipline:
Pillage and murder are his usual trades.
The slave usurps the glorious name of war.
See Capolin the fair Arabian king,
That hath been disapointed by this slave:
Of my fair daughter, and his princely Love:
May have fresh warning to go war with us,
And be revenged for her dispardgement.

BRing out my foot-stoole.

Ye holy Priests of heavenly Mahomet,
That sacrificing slice and cut your flesh,
Staining his Altars with your purple blood:
Make heaven to frown and every fired star
To suck up poison from the moorish Fens,
And pour it in this glorious Tyrants throat.

The chiefest God first moouer of that Sphere,
Enchacd with thousands ever shining lamps,
Will sooner burn the glorious frame of Heaven.
Then it should so conspire my overthrow.
But Villain, thou that wish this to me,
Fall prostrate on the lowe disdainful earth.
And be the foot-stoole of great Tamburlain,
That I may rise into my royal throne.

First shalt thou rip my bowels with thy sword,
And sacrifice my heart to death and hell,
Before I yield to such a slavery.

Base villain, vassal, slave to Tamburlaine:
Unworthy to embrace or touch the ground.
That bears the honour of my royal weight.
Stoop villain, stoop, stoop for so he bids,
That may command thee peecemeale to be torn,
Or scattered like the lofty Cedar trees,
Strocke with the voice of thundering Iupiter.

Then as I look down to the damned Feends.
Feends look on me, and thou dread God of hell.
With Evan Sceptre strike this hateful earth,
And make it swallow both of us at once.

Now clear the triple region of the air,
And let the majesty of heaven behold
Their Scourge and Terror tread on Emperors,
Smile Stars that reigned at my nativity:
And dim the brightness of their neighbor Lamps,
Disdain to borrow light of Cynthia,
For I the chiefest Lamp of all the earth,
First rising in the East with mild aspect,
But fired now in the Meridian line,
Will send up fire to your turning Spheres,
And cause the Sun to borrow light of you.
My sword stroke fire from his coat of steel,
Even in Bythinia, when I took this Turk:
As when a fiery exhalation
Wrapped in the bowels of a freezing cloud,
Fighting for passage, make the Welkin crack,
And casts a flash of lightning to the earth.
But ere I march to wealthy Persea,
Or leave Damascus and th'Egyptian fields,
As was the fame of Clymeus brain-sicke son,
That almost brent the Axeltree of heaven,
So shall our swords, our lances and our shot.
Fill all the air with fiery meteors.
Then when the Sky shall wax as red as blood,
It shall be said, I made it red my self,
To make me think of nought but blood and war.

Unworthy king, that by thy cruelty,
Unlawfully usurp the Persean seat:
Dare thou that never saw an Emperor,
Before thou met my husband in the field,
Being thy Captive, thus abuse his state,
Keeping his kingly body in a Cage,
That rooffes of gold, and sun-bright Palaces,
Should have prepared to entertain his Grace?
And treading him beneath thy loathsome feet,
Whose feet the kings of Africa have kissed.

You must devise some torment worse, my Lord
To make these captives reine their lavish tongues.

zenocrate, look better to your slave:

She is my Handmaids slave, and she shall look
That these abuses flow not from her tongue:
Chide her Anippe.

Let these be warnings for you then my slave,
How you abuse the person of the king:
Or else I swear to have you whipped stark naked.

Great tamburlaine, great in my overthrow,
Ambitious pride shall make thee fall as low.
For treading on the back of Baiazeth,
That should be horsed on four mighty kings.

Thy names and tytles, and thy dignities
Are fled from Baiazeth, and remain with me,
That will maintain it against a world of Kings.
Put him in again.

Is this a place for mighty Baiazeth?
Confusion light on him that helps thee thus.

There whiles he lives, shall Baiezeth be kept,
And where I go be thus in triumph drawn:
And thou his wife shalt feed him with the scraps
My seruitures shall bring the from my board.
For he that gives him other food than this:
Shall sit by him and starve to death himself.
This is my mind, and I will have it so.
Not all the Kings and Emperors of the Earth:
If they would lay their crowns before my feet,
Shall ransom him, or take him from his cage.
The ages that shall talk of Tamburlain,
Even from this day to Platoes wondrous year,
Shall talk how I have handled Baiazeth.
These Mores that drew him from Bythinia,
To fair Damascus, where we now remain,
Shall lead him with us wheresoever we go.
Techelles, and my loving followers,
Now may we see Damascus lofty towers,
Like to the shadows of Pyramides,
That with their beauties graced the Memphion fields*
The golden stature of their feathered bird
That spreads her wings upon the city walls,
Shall not defend it from our battering shot.
The townes-men mask in silk and cloth of gold.
And every house is as a treasury.
The men, the treasure, and the town is ours.

Your tents of white now pitched before the gates
And gentle flags of amity displayed.
I doubt not but the Governor will yield,
Offering Damascus to your Majesty.

So shall he have his life, and all the rest.
But if he stay until the bloody flag
Be once advanced on my vermilion Tent,
He dies, and those that kept us out so long.
And when they see me march in black array,
With mournfu streamers hanging down their heads,
Were in that city all the world contained.
Not one should escape: but perish by our swords.

Yet would you have some pity for my sake,
Because it is my countries, and my Fathers.

Not for the world Zenocrate, if I have sworn:
Come bring in the Turk.

ME thinks we march as Meliager did,
Environed with brave Argolian knights:
To chase the savage Caldonian Boar,
Or Cephalus with lusty The bane youths.
Against the Woolfe that angry Themis sent.
To waste and spoil the sweet Aonian fields.
A monster of five hundred thousand heads,
Compact of Rapine, Pyracie, and spoil.
The Scum of men, the hate and Scourge of God,
Raves in Egyptia, and annoys us.
My Lord it is the bloody Tamburlaine.
A sturdy Felon and a base-bred Thief.
By murder raised to the Perse an Crown.
That dares control us in our Territories.
To tame the pride of this presumotuous Beast,
Join your Arabians with the Souldans power:
Let us unite our royal bands in one,
And hasten to remove Damascus siege.
It is a blemish to the Majesty
And high estate of mighty Emperors,
That such a base usurping vagabond
Should brave a king, or wear a princely crown.

Renowned Souldane, have ye lately heard
The overthrow of mighty Baiazeth,
About the confines of Bythinia?
The slavery wherewith he persecutes
The noble Turk and his great Empress.

I have, and sorrow for his bad success:
But noble Lord of great Arabia,
Be so persuaded, that the Souldan is
No more dismayed with tidings of his fall,
Than in the haven when the Pilot stands
And views a strangers ship rent in the winds,
And shivered against a craggy rock,
Yet in compassion of his wretched state,
A sacred vow to heaven and him I make,
Confirming it with lbis holy name,
That Tamburlaine shall rue the day, the hour,
Wherein he wrought such ignominious wrong.
Unto the hallowed person of a prince,
Or kept the fair zenocrate so long.
As Co^tubine, I fear to feed his ^ust.

Let grief and fury hasten on revenge,
Let Tamburlaine for his offences feel
Such plagues as heaven and we can pour on him.
I long to break my spear upon his crest,
And prove the weight of his victorious arm:
For Fame I fear hath been too prodigal:
In sounding through the world his partial praise:

Capolin, hast thou surveyed our powers.

Great Emperors of Egypt and Arabia.
The number of your hostess united is,
A hundred and fifty thousand horse,
Two hundred thousand foot, brave men at arms,
Courageous and full of hardiness:
As frolic as the hunters in the chase:
Of savage beasts amid the desert woods.

My mind presages fortunate success,
And tamburlaine, my spirit doth foresee
The utter ruin of thy men and thee.

Then rear your standards, let your sounding Drums
Direct our Soldiers to Damascus walls.
Now Tamburlaine, the mighty Souldane comes,
And leads with him the great Arabian King.
To dim thy baseness and obscurity.
Famous for nothing but for theft and spoil,
To race and scatter thy inglorious crew,
Of Scythians and slavish Persians.

NOw hang our bloody colours by Damascus.
Reflexing hues of blood upon their heads.
While they walk quivering on their city walls,
Half dead for fear before they feel my wrath:
Then let us freely banquet and carouse
Full bowles of wine unto the God of war,
That means to fill your helmets full of gold*
And make Damascus spoils as rich to you,
As was to Iason Colchos golden fleece.
And now Baiazeth, hast thou any stomach?

I, such a stomach (cruel tamburlane) as I could
Willingly feed upon thy blood-raw hart.

Nay, thine own is easier to come by, pluck out that,
And twil serve thee and thy wife: Well zenocrate,
techelles, and the rest, fall to your victuals.

Fall to, and never may your meat digest,
Ye Furies that can mask invisible,
Dive to the bottom of Auernas poole,
And in your hands bring hellish poison up.
And squease it in the cup of tamburlain.
Or winged snakes of Lerna cast your stings,
And leave your venoms in this Tyrants dish.

And may this banquet prove as omenous,
As Prognes to th'adulterous Thracian King.
That fed upon the substance of his child.

My Lord, how can you suffer these outrageous curses
By these slaves of yours?

To let them see (divine zenocrate)
I glory in the curses of my foes.
Having the power fro the Imperial heaven,
To turn them al upon their proper heads.

I pray you give them leave Madam, this speech is a goodly refreshing to them.


But if his highness would let them be fed, it would do them more good.


Sir, why fall you not too, are you so daintily brought up, you cannot eat
your own flesh?


First legions of devils shall tear thee in pieces.


Villain, know thou to whom thou speak


O let him alone: here, eat sir, take it from my swords point, or I'll thrust it
to thy heart.


He stamps it under his feet my Lord.


Take it up Villain and eat it, or I will make thee slice the brawns of thy
arms into carbonadoes, and eat them.


Nay, twere better he killed his wife, then she shall be sure not to be starved,
he be provided for a months victual before hand.


Here is my dagger, dispatch her while she is fat, for if she live but a while
longer, she will fall into a comsumption with freatting, and then she will not
be worth the eating.


Dost thou think that Mahomet will suffer this


Tis like he will, when he cannot let it.


Go to, fall to your meat: what not a bit? belike he hath not been watered to
day, give him some drink.

Fast and welcome sir, while hunger make you eat. How now zenocrate, doth not
the Turk and his wife make a goodly show at a banquet?


Yes. my Lord.


Me thinks, tis a great deal better than a consort of music.


Yet music would do well to cheer up ze nocrate: pray thee tel, why art
thou so sad? If thou wilt have a song, the Turk shall strain his voice: but
why is it?


My lord, to see my fathers town besieged,
The country wasted where my self was borne,
How can it but afflict my very soul?
If any love remain in you my Lord,
Or if my love unto your majesty
May merit favour at your highness hands,
Then raise your siege from fair Damascus walls,
And with my father take a frindly truce.

Zenocrate, were Egypt Ioues own land,
Yet would I with my sword make Jove to sto^pe,
I will confute those blind Geographers
That make a triple region in the world,
Excluding Regions which I mean to trace
And with this pen reduce them to a Map.
Calling the Provinces, Cities and towns
After my name and thine zenocrate:
Here at Damascus will I make the Point
That shall begin the Perpendicular.
And would thou have me buy thy Fathers love
With such a loss? Tell me zenocrate?

Honour still weight on happy tamburlaine:
Yet give me leave to plead for him my Lord.

Content thy self, his person shall be safe.
And all the friends of fair Zenocrate,
If with their lives they will be pleased to yield,
Or may be forced to make me Emperor.
For Egypt and Arabia must be mine.
Feed you slave, thou may think thy self happy to be fed from my trencher.

My empty stomach full of idle heat,
Draws bloody humours from my feeble parts,
Preserving life, by hasting cruel death.
My veins are pale, my sinews hard and dry,
My iointes benumbed, unless I eat, I die.

Eat Baiazeth, Let us live in spite of them,
Looking some happy power will pity and enlarge us.

Here Turk, wilt thou have a clean trencher?

I Tyrant, and more meat.

Soft sir, you must be dieted, too much eating will make you surfeit.


So it would my lord, specially having so small a walk, and so little exercise.


Theridamas, techelles and Casane, here are the cates you desire to finger, are
they not?


I (my Lord) but none save kings must feed with these.


Tis enough for us to see them, and for tamburlaine only to enjoy them.


Well, Here is now to the Souldane of Egypt the King of Arabia, and the
Governor of Damascus. Now take these three crowns, and pledge me, my
contributorie Kings.

I crown you here ( Theridamas) King of Argier: Techelles King of Fesse, and
Vsumeasane King of Morocus. How say you to this (Turk) these are not your
contributorie kings.


Nor shall they long be thine, I warrant them.


Kings of Argier, Morocus, and of Fesse.
You that have marched with happy Tamburlaine,
As far as from the frozen place of heaven.
Unto the watery mornings ruddy hour.
And thence by land unto the Torrid Zone,
Deserve these tytles I endow you with.
By value and by magnanimity.
Your byrthes shall be no blemish to your fame.
For virtue is the fount whence honour springs.
And they are worthy she inuesteth kings.

And since your highness hath so well vouchsafed,
If we deserve them not with higher meeds
Then erst our states and actions have retained,
Take them away again and make us slaves.

Well said Theridamas, when holy Fates
Shall stablish me in strong Egyptia.
We mean to travail to th'Antatique Pole,
Conquering the people underneath our feet.
And be renowm'd, as never Emperors were.
zenocrate, I will not crown thee yet,
Until with greater honours I be graced.

Still doth this man or rather God of war,
Batt^r our walls, and beat our Turrets down
And to resist with longer stubbornness,
Or hope of rescue from the Souldans power,
Were but to bring our wilful overthrow,
And make us desperate of our threatened lives:
We see his tents have now been altered,
With terrors to the last and cruellest hew:
His cole-blacke colours every where aduaunst,
Threaten our city with a general spoil:
And if we should with common rites of Arms,
Offer our safeties to his clemency,
I fear the custom proper to his sword,
Which he observes as parcel of his fame:
Intending so to terrify the world,
By any innovation or remorse,
Will never be dispensed with till our deaths,
Therefore, for these our harmless virgins sakes,
Whose honours and whose lives rely on him:
Let us have hope that their unspotted prayers
Their blubbered cheeks and hearty humble moans
Will melt his fury into some remorse:
And use us like a loving Conqueror.

If humble suites or imprecations,
(uttered with tears of wretchedness and blood,
Shed from the heads and hearts of all our Sex.
Some made your wives, and some your children)
Might have entreated your obdurate breasts.
To entertain some care of our securities.
Whiles only danger beat upon our walls,
These more than dangerous warrants of our deat^
Had never been erected as they be,
Nor you depend on such weak helps as we

Well, lovely Virgins, think our count^s care
Our love of honour loath to be enthral'd
To foreign powers, and rough imperious yokes:
Would not with too much cowardice or fear,
Before all hope of rescue were denied,
Submit your selves and us to servitude.
Therefore in that your safeties and our own
Your honours, liberties and lives were weighed
In equal care and balance with our own,
Endure as we the malice of our stars.
The wrath of Tamburlain, and power of wars.
Or be the means the ouerweighing heavens
Have kept to qualify these hot extremes.
And bring us pardon in your cheerful looks.

Then here before the majesty of heaven,
And holy Patrones of Egyptia,
With knees and hearts submissive we entreat,
Grace to our words and pity to our looks
That this devise may prove propitious,
And through the eyes and ears of tamburlaine,
Convey events of mercy to his heart:
Grant that these signs of victory we yield
May bind the temples of his conquering head,
To hide the folded furrows of his brows,
And shadow his displeased countenance,
With happy looks of ruth and lenity,
Leave us my Lord, and loving countrymen,
What simple Virgins may persuade, we will.

Garewell (sweet Virgins) on whose safe return
Depends our city, liberty, and lives.

WHat, are the Turtles afraid out of their neastes?
Alas poor fools, must you be first shall feel
The sworn destruction of Damascus.
They know my custom: could they not as well
Have sent ye out, when first my milkwhite flags
Through which sweet mercy threw her gentle beams
Reflexing them on your disdainful cies:
As now when fury and incensed hate
Flings slaughtering terror from my coleblack tents.
And tells for truth, submissions comes too late.

Most happy King and Emperor of the earth.
Image of Honour and Nobility.
For whom the Powers divine have made the world.
And on whose throne the holy Graces sit.
In whose sweet person is comprised the Sum
Of natures Skill and heavenly majesty.
Pity our plightes, O pity poor Damascus:
Pity old age, within whose silver hairs
Honour and reverence evermore have reigned,
Pity the marriage bed, where many a Lord
In prime and glory of his loving joy.
Embraces now with tears of ruth and blood,
The jealous body of his fearful wife,
Whose cheeks and hearts so punished with conceit,
To think thy puissant never stayed arm
Will part their bodies, and prevent their souls
From heavens of comfort, yet their age might bear,
Now wax all pale and withered to the death,
As well for grief our ruthless Governor
Have thus refused the mercy of thy hand,
(Whose sceptre Angels kiss, and Furies dread)
As for their liberties, their loves or lives,
O then for these, and such as we our selves,
For us, for infants, and for all our bloods,
That never nourished thought against thy rule,
Pity, O pity, (sacred Emperor)
The prostrate service of this wretched town.
And take in sign thereof this gilded wreath,
Whereto each man of rule hath given his hand,
And wished as worthy subjects happy means,
To be inuesters of thy royal brows,
Even with the true Egyptian Diadem.

Virgins, in vain ye labo^ to prevent
That which mine honour swears shall be performed:
Behold my sword, what see you at the point?

Nothing but fear and fatal steel my Lord.

Your fearful minds are thick and misty then
For there sits Death, there sits imperious Death.
Keeping his circuit by the slicing edge.
But I'am pleased you shall not see him there,
He now is seated on my horsmens spears:
And on their points his fleshless body feches.
Techelles, straight go charge a few of them
To chardge these Dames, and show my servant death:
Sitting in scarlet on their armed spears.

O pity us.

Away with them I say and show them death.
I will not spare these proud Egyptians.
Nor change my Martial observations,
For all the wealth of Gehons golden waives.
Or for the love of Venus, would she leave
The angry God of Arms, and lie with me.
They have refused the offer of their lives,
And know my customs are as peremptory
As wrathful Planets, death, or destiny.
What, have your horsemen shown the virgins Death?

They have my Lord, and on Damascus walls
Have hoisted up their slaughtered carcases.

A sight as baneful to their souls I think
As are Thessalian drugs or Mithradate.
But go my Lords, put the rest to the sword.
Ah fair Zenocrate, divine Zenocrate,
Fair is too foul an Epithet for thee,
That in thy passion for thy countries love,
And fear to see thy kingly Fathers harm,
With hair discheweld wip'st thy watery cheeks:
And like to Flora in her mornings pride,
Shaking her silver treshes in the air.
Rain'st on the earth resolved pearl in showers,
And sprinklest Saphyrs on thy shining face,
Where Beauty, mother to the Muses sits,
And comments vollumes with her Yuory pen:
Taking instructions from thy flowing eyes,
Eyes when that Ebena steps to heaven.
In silence of thy solemn Evenings walk.
Making the mantle of the richest night.
The Moon, the Planets, and the Meteors light,
There Angels in their crystal armours fight
A doubtful battle with my tempted thoughts,
For Egypt freedom and the Souldans life:
His life that so consumes Zenocrate,
Whose sorrows lay more siege unto my saule,
Than all my Army to Damascus walls.
And neither Perseans Sovereign, nor the Turk
Troubled my senses with conceit of foil,
So much by much, as doth zenocrate.
What is beauty saith my sufferings then?
If all the pens that ever poets held,
Had fed the feeling of their masters thoughts,
And every sweetness that inspired their harts,
Their minds, and muses on admired theames:
If all the heavenly Quintessence they still
From their immortal flowers of Poesy,
Wherein as in a mirror we perceive
The highest reaches of a human wit.
If these had made one Poems period
And all combined in Beauties worthiness,
Yet should there hover in their restless heads,
One thought, one grace, one wonder at the least,
Which into words no virtue can digest:
But how unseemly is it for my Sex
My discipline of arms and Chivalry,
My nature and the terror of my name.
To harbour thoughts effeminate and faint?
Save only that in / Beauties just applause,
With whose instinct the soul of man is touched.
And every warrior that is rapt with love,
Of fame, of valour, and of victory
Must needs have beauty beat on his conceits,
I thus conceiving and subduing both:
That which hath stopped the tempest of the Gods,
Even from the fiery spangled veil of heaven,
To feel the lovely warmth of shepherds flames,
And march in cottages of strewn weeds,
Shall give the world to note for all my birth,
That Virtue solely is the sum of glory,
And fashions men with true nobility.
Who's within there? Baiazeth been fed to day?

I, my Lord.


Bring him forth, let us know if the town be ransacked.


The town is ours my Lord, and fresh supply
Of conquest, and of spoil is offered us:

That's well techelles, what's the news?

The Souldan and the Arabian king together
March on us with such eager violence,
As if there were no way but one with us.

No more there is not I warrant thee techelles

We know the victory is ours my Lord,
But let us save the reverend Souldans life,
For fair Zenocrate, that so laments his state.

That will we chiefly see unto, theridamas.
For sweet zenocrate, whose worthiness
Deserves a conquest over every hart:
And now my footstool, if I loose the field,
You hope of liberty and restitution:
Here let him stay my masters from the tents,
Till we have made us ready for the field.
Pray for us Baiazeth, we are going.

Go, never to return with victory:
Millions of men encompass thee about.
And gore thy body with as many wounds,
Sharpe forked arrows light upon thy horse:
Furies from the black Cocitus lake,
Break up the earth, and with their firebrands,
Enforce thee run upon the baneful pikes.
Volleys of shot pierce through thy charmed Skin.
And every bullet dipped in poisoned drugs,
Or roaring Cannons sever all thy joints.
Making thee mount as high as Eagles soar.

Let all the swords and Lances in the field,
Stick in his breast, as in their proper rooms,
At every pore let blood comme dropping forth.
That lingering pains may massacre his heart.
And madness send his danmed soul to hell.

Ah fair zabina, we may curse his power,
The heavens may frown, the earth for anger quake,
But such a Star hath influence in his sword,
As rules the Skies, and countermands the Gods,
More than Cymerian Styx or Distinie:
And then shall we in this detested guise,
With shame, with hungar, and with horror ay
Griping our bowels with retorqued thoughts,
And have no hope to end our ecstasies.

Then is there left no Mahomet, no God,
No Feend, no Fortune, nor no hope of end?
To our infamous monstrous slaueries:
Gape earth, and let the Feends infernal view,
As hell, as hopeless and as full of fear
As are the blasted banks of Erebus:
Where shaking ghosts with ever howling groans,
Hover about the ugly Ferriman, to get a passage to Elisia
why should we live, O wretches, beggars slaves
Why live we Baiazeth, and build up nests,
So high within the region of the air,
By living long in this oppression,
That all the world will see and laugh to scorn.
The former triumphs of our mightiness,
In this obscure infernal servitude:

O life more loathsome to my vexed thoughts,
Than noisome parbreak of the Stygian Snakes,
Which fills the nookes of Hell with standing air,
Infecting all the Ghosts with cureless griefs:
O dreary Engines of my loathed sight,
That sees my crown, my honour and my name,
Thrust under yoke and thraldom of a thief.
Why feed ye still on days accursed beams,
And sink not quite into my tortured soul.
You see my wife, my Queen and Empress,
Brought up and propped by the hand of fame,
Queen of fifteen contributory Queens,
Now thrown to rooms of black abiection,
Smeared with blots of basest drudgery:
And Villanesse to shame, disdain, and misery:
Accursed Baiazeth, whose words of ruth,
That would with pity cheer zabinas heart:
And make our souls resolve in ceasles tears,
Sharp hunger bites upon and gripes the root:
From whence the issues of my thoughts do break,
O poor zabina, O my Queen, my Queen,
Fetch me some water for my burning breast,
To cool and comfort me with longer date,
That in the shortened sequel of my life,
I may pour forth my soul into thine arms,
With words of love: whose moaning intercourse
Hath hitherto bin staid, with wrath and hate
Of our expreslesse band inflictions:

Sweet Baiazeth, I will prolong thy life,
As long as any blood or spark of breath
Can quench or cool the torments of my grief.

Now Baiazeth, abridge thy baneful days,
And beat thy brains out of thy conquered head:
Since other means are all forbidden me,
That may be ministers of my decay.
O highest Lamp of euerliuing Jove,
Accursed day infected with my griefs,
Hide now thy stained face in endless night,
And shut the windows of the lightsome heavens,
Let ugly darkness with her rusty coach
Engyrt with tempests wrapped in pitchy clouds,
Smother the earth with never fading mists:
And let her horses from their nostrils breathe
Rebellious winds and dreadful thunderclaps:
That in this terror tamburlaine may live.
And my pined soul resolved in liquid ay,
May still excruciat his tormented thoughts.
Then let the stony dart of senseless cold,
Pierce through the center of my withered heart,
And make a passage for my loathed life.

What do mine eyes behold, my husband dead?
His Skul al riuin in twain, his brains dashed out?:
The brains of Baiazeth, my Lord and Sovereign?:
O Baiazeth, my husband and my Lord,
O Baiazet, O Turk, O Emperor, give him his liquor Not I, bring milk and fire,
and my blood I bring him again, tear me in pieces, give me the sword with a
ball of wildefire upon it. Down with him, down with him. Go to my child,
away, away, away. Ah, save that Infant, save him, save him. I, even I speak to
her, the Sun was down. Streamers white. Red, Black, here here, here. Fling
the meat in his face. Tamburlaine, tamburlaine, Let the soldiers be buried.
Hell, death, tamburlain, Hell, make ready my Coch, my chair, my jewels, I come,
I come, I come.


Wretched Zenocrate, that lives to see,
Damascus walls died with Egytian blood.
Thy Fathers subjects and thy countrymen:
Thy streets strewn with dissevered iointes of men,
And wounded bodies gasping yet for life.
But most accursed, to see the Sun-bright troop
Of heavenly virgins and unspotted maids,
Whose looks might make the angry God of arms,
To break his sword, and mildly treat of love,
On horsmens Lances to be hoisted up,
And guiltlesly endure a cruel death.
For every fell and stout Tartarian Stead,
That stamped on others with their thundering hooves
When al their riders chardg'd their quivering spears
Began to check the ground, and rain themselves:
Gazing upon the beauty of their looks:
Ah Tamburlaine, were thou the cause of this
That tearm'st Zenocrate thy dearest love?
Whose lives were dearer to Zenocrate
Than her own life, or ought save thine own love.
But see another bloody spectacle.
Ah wretched eyes, the enemies of my hart,
How are ye glutted with these grievous objects,
And tell my soul mor tales of bleeding ruth?
See, se Anippe if they breathe or no.

No breath nor sense, nor motion in them both
Ah Madam, this their slavery hath Enforced,
And ruthless cruelty of Tamburlaine.

Earth cast up fountains from thy entralles,
And wet thy cheeks for their untimely deaths:
Shake with their weight in sign of fear grief:
Blush heaven, that gave them honour at their birth,
And let them die a death so barbarous.
Those that are proud of fickle Empery,
And place their chiefest good in earthly pomp:
Behold the Turk and his great Empress.
Ah tamburlaine, my love, sweet tamburlaine,
That fights for Scepters and for slippery crowns,
Behold the Turk and his great Empress,
Thou that in conduct of thy happy stars,
Sleep every night with conquest on thy brows,
And yet would shun the wavering turns of war,
In fear and feeling of the like distress,
Behold the Turk and his great Empress.
Ah mighty Jove and holy Mahomet,
Pardon my Love, oh pardon his contempt,
Of earthly fortune, and respect of pity,
And let not conquest ruthlessly pursewde
Be equally against his life incensed,
In this great Turk and haplesse Empress.
And pardon me that was not moved with ruth,
To see them live so long in misery:
Ah what may chance to thee zenocrate?

Madam content your self and be resolved,
Your Love hath fortune so at his command,
That she shall stay and turn her wheel no more,
As long as life maintains his mighty arm,
That fights for honour to adorn your head.

What other heavy news now brings Philemus?

Madam, your father and the Arabian king,
The first affecter of your excellence,
Comes now as Turnus against Eneas did.
Armed with lance into the Egyptian fields,
Ready for battle against my Lord the King.

Now shame and duty, love and fear presents
A thousand sorrows to my martyred soul:
Whom should I wish the fatal victory,
When my poor pleasures are divided thus,
And racked by duty from my cursed heart:
My father and my first betrothed love,
Must fight against my life and present love:
Wherein the change I use condemns my faith,
And makes my deeds infamous through the world.
But as the Gods to end the Troyans toil,
Preuent'd Turnus of Lauinia.
And fatally enriched Eneas love.
So for a final Issue to my griefs,
To pacify my country and my love,
Must Tamburlaine by their resistless powers,
With virtue of a gentle victory,
Conclude a league of honour to my hope,
Then as the powers divine have preordainde,
With happy safety of my fathers life,
Send like defence of fair Arabia.

What cursed power guides the murthering hands,
Of this infamous Tyrants soldiers.
That no escape may save their enemies:
Nor fortune keep them selves from victory.
Lye down Arabia, wounded to the death,
And let Zenocrates fair eyes behold
That as for her thou bear these wretched arms.
Even so for her thou die in these arms:
Leaving thy blood for witness of thy love.

Too dear a witness for such love my Lord,
Behold Zenocrate, the cursed object
Whose Fortunes never mastered her griefs:
Behold her wounded in conceit for thee,
As much as thy fair body is for me.

Then shall I die with full contented heart,
Having beheld divine Zenocrate,
Whose sight with joy would take away my life,
As now it brings sweetness to my wound,
If I had not bin wounded as I am.
Ah that the deadly pangs I suffer now,
Would lend an hours license to my tongue:
To make discourse of some sweet accidents
Have chanced thy merits in this worthless bondage.
And that I might be privy to the state,
Of thy deserved contentment and thy love:
But making now a virtue of thy sight,
To drive all sorrow from my fainting soul:
Since Death denies me further cause of joy.
Deprived of care, my heart with comfort dies.
Since thy desired hand shall close mine eyes.

Come happy Father of Zenocrate,
A title higher than thy Souldans name:
Though my right hand have thus enthralled thee
Thy princely daughter here shall set thee free.
She that hath calmed the fury of my sword.
Which had ere this bin bathed in streams of blood,
As vast and deep as Euphrates or Nile.

O sight thrice welcome to my joyful soul.
To see the king my Father issue safe,
From dangerous battle of my conguering Love.

Well met my only dear Zenocrate,
Though with the loss of Egypt and my Crown.

Twas I my lord that gat the victory,
And therefore grieve not at your overthrow.
Since I shall render all into your hands.
And ad more strength to your dominions
Then ever yet confirmed th'Egyptian Crown.
The God of war resignes his room to me,
Meaning to make me General of the world,
Jove viewing me in arms, looks pale and wan,
Fearing my power should pull him from his throne,
Where ere I come the fatal sisters sweat,
And grisly death by running to and fro,
To do their ceassles homag to my sword:
And here in Africa where it seldom rains,
Since I arrived with my triumphat host,
Have swelling clouds drawn from wide gasping wounds.
Been oft resolved in bloody purple showers,
A meteor that might terrify the earth,
And make it quake at every drop it drinks:
Millions of souls sit on the banks of Styx,
Waiting the back return of Charons boat,
Hell and Elisian swarm with ghosts of men,
That I have sent from sundry foughten fields.
To spread my fame through hell and up to heaven:
And see my Lord, a sight of strange import,
Emperors and kings lie breathless at my feet,
The Turk and his great Empress as it seems,
Left to themselves while we were at the fight.
Have desperately dispatcht their slavish lives:
With them Arabia too hath left his life,
Al sights of power to grace my victory:
And such are objects fit for Tamburlaine.
Wherein as in a mirror may be seen,
His honour, that consists in shedding blood,
When men presume to manage arms with him.

Mighty hath God Mahomet made thy hand
(Renowned tamburlain) to whom all kings
Of force must yield their crowns and Emperies,
And I am pleased with this my overthrow:
If as beseems a person of thy state,
Thou hast with honour used Zenocrate.

Her state and person wants no pomp you see,
And for all blot of foul inchastity,
I record heaven, het heavenly self is clear:
Then let me find no further time to grace
Her princely Temples with the Persean crown:
But here these kings that on my fortunes wait:
And have been crowned for proved worthiness,
Even by this hand that shall establish them,
Shall now, adjoining al their hands with mine,
Invest her here my Queen of Persea,
What saith the noble Souldane and Zenocrate:

I yield with thanks and protestations
Of endless honour to thee for her love.

Then doubt I not but fair Zenocrate
Will soon consent to satisfy us both.

Else should I much forget my self, my Lord,

Then let us set the crown upon her head,
That long hath lingered for so high a seat.

My hand is ready to perform the deed,
For now her marriage time shall work us rest:

And her's the crown my Lord, help set it on

Then sit thou down divine Zenocrate,
And here we crown thee Queen of Persea,
And all the kingdoms and dominions
That late the power of Tamburlaine subdued:
As Iuno, when the Giants were suppressed,
That darted mount aines at her brother Jove:
So looks my Love, shadowing in her brows
Triumphs and Trophies for my victories:
Or as Latonas daughter bent to arms,
Adding more courage to my conquering mind,
To gratify the sweet zenocrate,
Egyptians, Moors and men of Asia,
From Barbary unto the Westeme Indie,
Shall pay a yearly tribute to thy Sire.
And from the bounds of Africa to the banks
Of Ganges, shall his mighty arm extend.
And now my Lords and loving followers,
That purchased kingdoms by your matiall deeds,
Cast off your armour, put on scarlet robes.
Mount up your royal places of estate,
Environed with troops of noble men,
And there make laws to rule your provinces:
Hang up your weapons on Alcides post,
For Tamburlaine takes truce with al the world,
Thy first betrothed, Love Arabia,
Shall we with honour (as beseems) entomb,
With this great Turk and his fair Empress:
Then after all these solemn Exequies,
We will our celebrated rites of marriage solemnize,


