THe general welcomes Tamburlain receiud,
When he arrived last upon our stage,
Hath made our Poet pen his second part*
Where death cuts off the progres of his pomp.
And murdrous Fates throws al his triumphs down,
But what became of fair Zenocrate,
And with how many cities sacrifice
He celebrated her said funeral,
Himself in presence shall unfold at large.
EGregious Viceroys of these Eastern parts
Placed by the issue of great Baiazeth:
And sacred Lord the mighty Calapine:
Who lives in Egypt, prisoner to that slave,
Which kept his father in an iron cage:
Now have we marched from fair Natolia
Two hundred leagues, and on Danubius banks,
Our warlike host in complete armour rest,
Where Sigismond the king of Hungary
Should meet our person to conclude a truce.
What? Shall we parle with the Christian?
Or cross the stream, and meet him in the field.

King of Natolia, let us treat of peace,
We all are glutted with the Christians blood,
And have a greater foe to fight against,
Proud Tamburlaine, that now in Asia,
Near Guyrons head doth set his conquering feet,
And means to fire Turkey as he goes:
Against him my Lord must you address your power.

Besides, king Sigismond hath brought from Christendom,
More then his Camp of stout Hungarians,
Sclauonians, Almans, Rutters, Muffes, and Danes,
That with the Holbard, Lance, and murthering Axe,
Will hazard that we might with surety hold.
Though from the shortest Northern Parallel,
Vast Gruntland compassed with the frozen sea,
Inhabited with tall and sturdy men,
Giants as big as huge Polypheme:
Millions of Soldiers cut the Arctic line,
Bringing the strength of Europe to these Arms.
Our Turkey blades shall glide through al their throats,
And make this champion mead a bloody Fen,
Danubius stream that runs to Trebizon,
Shall carry wrapped within his scarlet waives,
As martial presents to our friends at home.
The slaughtered bodies of these Christians.
The Terrene main wherein Danubius falls,
Shall by this battle be the bloody Sea.
The wandering Sailers of proud Italy,
Shall meet those Christians fleeting with the tide,
Be ating in heaps against their Argoses.
And make fair Europe mounted on her bull,
Trapt with the wealth and riches of the world,
Alight and wear a woeful mourning weed.

Yet stout Orcanes, Prorex of the world,
Since Tamburlaine hath mustered all his men,
Marching from Cairon northward with his camp,
To Alexandria, and the frontier towns,
Meanung to make a conquest of our land:
Tis requisite to parle for a peace
With Sigismond the king of Hungary:
And save our forces for the hot assaults
Proud Tamburlaine intends Natolia.

Viceroy of Byron, wisely hast thou said:
My realm, the Center of our Empery
Once lost, All Turkie would be overthrown:
And for that cause the Christians shall have peace.
Slauonians, Almains, Rutters, Muffes, and Danes
Fear not Orcanes, but great Tamburlaine.
Nor he but Fortune that hath made him great.
We have revolted Grecians, Albanees,
Cicilians, Iewes, Arabians, Turks, and Moors,
Natolians, Sorians, black Egyptians,
Illicians, Thracians, and Bythimans,
Enough to swallow forceless Sigismond
Yet scarce enough t'encounter Tamburlaine,
He brings a world of people to the field,
From Scythia to the Oriental Plage
Of India, where raging Lantchidol
Beats on the regions with his boisterous blows,
That never sea-man yet discovered:
All Asia is in Arms with tamburlaine,
Even from the midst of fiery Cancers Tropic,
To Amazonia under Capricorne.
And thence as far as Archipellago.
All Affrike is in Arms with tamburlaine.
Therefore Viceroies the Christians must have peace.

ORcanes (as our Legates promised thee)
We with our Peers have crossed Danubius,
to treat of friendly peace or deadly war:
Take which thou wilt, for as the Romans used stream
I here present thee with a naked sword,
Wilt thou have war, then shake this blade at me,
If peace, restore it to my hands again:
And I will sheath it to confirm the same.

Stay Sigismond, forgetst thou I am he
That with the Cannon shook Vienna walls.
And made it dance upon the Continent:
As when the massy substance of the earth,
Quiver about the Axeltree of heaven.
Forgetst thou that I sent a shower of darts
Mingled with powdered shot and fethered steel
So thick upon the blink-ei'd Burghers heads,
That thou thy self, then County-Pallatine,
The king of Boheme, and the Austrich Duke,
Sent Herralds out, which basely on their knees
In all your names desired a truce of me?
Forgetst thou, that to have me raise my siege,
Wagons of gold were set before my tent:
Stamped with the princely Foul that in her wings
Caries the fearful thunderbolts of Jove,
How can thou think of this and offer war?

Vienna was besieged, and I was there,
Then County-Pallatine, but now a king:
And what we did, was in extremity:
But now Orcanes, view my royal host,
That hides these plains, and seems as vast and wide,
As doth the Desert of Arabia.
To those that stand on Badgeths lofty Tower,
Or as the Ocean to the Traueiler
That rests upon the snowy Appenines:
And tell me whether I should stoop so low,
Or treat of peace with the Natolian king?

Kings of Natolia and of Hungarie,
We came from Turkey to confirm a league,
And not to dare eeh other to the field:
A friendly parle might become ye both.

And we from Europe to the same intent,
Which if your General refuse or scorn,
Our Tents are pitched, our men stand in array.
Ready to charge you ere you stir your feet.

So pressed are we, but yet if Sigismond
Speak as a friend, and stand not upon terms,
Here is his sword, let peace be ratified
On these conditions specified before,
Drawn with advise of our Ambassadors.

Then here I sheath it, and give thee my hand,
Never to draw it out, or manage arms
Against thy self or thy confederates:
But whilst I live will be at truce with thee.

But (Sigismond) confirm it with an oath,
And swear in sight of heaven and by thy Christ.

By him that made the world and saved my soul
The son of God and issue of a Maid,
Sweet Iesus Christ, I solemnly protest,
And vow to keep this peace inviolable.

By sacred Mahomet, the friend of God,
Whose holy Alcaron remains with us,
Whose glorious body when he left the world,
Closed in a coffyn mounted up the air,
And hung on stately Mecas Temple roof,
I swear to keep this truce imnolable:
Of whose conditions, and our solemn oaths
Signed with our hands, each shall retain a scroll,
As memorable witness of our league.
Now Sigismond, if any Christian King
Encroche upon the confines of thy realm,
Send word, Orcanes of Natolia
Confirmed this league beyond Danubius stream,
And they will (trembling) sound a quick retreat,
So am I feared among all Nations.

If any heathen potentate or king
Invade Natolia, Sigismond will send
A hundred thousand horse trained to the war,
And backed by stout Lanceres of Germany.
The strength and sinews of the imperial seat.

I thank thee Sigismond, but when I war,
All Asia Minor, Africa, and Greece
Follow my Standard and my thundering Drums:
Come let us go and banquet in our tents:
I will dispatch chief of my army hence
To fair Natolia, and to Trebizon,
To stay my coming against proud Tamburlaine,
Friend Sigismond, and peers of Hungary,
Come banquet and carouse with us a while,
And then depart we to our territories.

SWeet Almeda, pity the ruthful plight
Of Callapine, the son of Baiazeth,
Born to be Monarch of the Western world:
Yet here detained by cruel Tamburlaine.

My Lord I pity it, and with my heart
With your release, but he whose wrath is death,
My soueraigue Lord, renowned tamburlain.
Forbids you further liberty than this.

Ah were I now but half so eloquent
To paint in words, what I'll perform in deeds,
I know thou would depart from hence with me.

Not for all Affrike, therefore move me not.

Yet hear me speak my gentle Almeda.

No speech to that end, by your favour sir.

By Cario runs.

No talk of running, I tell you sir.

A little further, gentle Almeda.

Well sir, what of this?

By Cario runs to Alexandria Bay,
Darotes streams, wherein at anchor lies
A Turkish Gally of my royal fleet,
Waiting my coming to the river side,
Hoping by some means I shall be releast,
Which when I come aboard will hoist up sail,
And soon put forth into the Terrene sea:
Where twirt the Ifles of Cyprus and of Creete,
We quickly may in Turkish seas arrive.
Then shalt thou see a hundred kings and more
Upon their knees, all bid me welcome home.
Amongst so mady crowns of burnished gold,
Choose which thou wilt, all are at thy command,
A thousand Galleys manned with Christian slaves
I freely give thee, which shall cut the straights,
And bring Armados from the coasts of Spain,
Fraughted with gold of rich America:
The Grecian virgins shall attend on thee,
Skilful in music and in amorous lays:
As fair as was Pigmalions Ivory girl,
Or lovely Io metamorphosed.
With naked; Negros shall thy coach be drawn,
And as thou rid'st in triumph through the streets,
The pavement underneath thy chariot wheels
With Turkey Carpets shall be covered:
And cloth of Arras hung about the walls,
Fit objects for thy princely eye to pierce.
A hundred Bassoes clothed in crimson silk
Shall ride before the on Barbarian Steeds:
And when thou go, a golden Canapie
Enchac'd with precious stones, which shine as bright
As that fair vail that covers all the world:
When Phoebus leaning from his Hemi-Spheare,
Descends downward to th'Antipodes.
And more than this, for all I cannot tell.

How far hence lies the Galley, say you?

Sweet Almeda, scarce half a league from hence.

But need we not be spied going aboard?

Betwixt the hollow hanging of a hill
And crooked bending of a craggy rock,
The sails wrapped up, the mast and tacklings down,
She lies so close that none can find her out,

I like that well: but tel me my Lord, if I should let you go, would you be
as good as your word? Shall I be made a king for my labour?


As I am Callapine the Emperor,
And by the hand of Mahomet I swear,
Thou shalt be crowned a king and be my mate,

Then here I swear, as I am Almeda,
Your Keeper under Tamburlaine the great,
(For that's the style and title I have yet)
Although he sent a thousand armed men
To intercept this haughty enterprise,
Yet would I venture to conduct your Grace,
And die before I brought you back again.

Thanks gentle Almeda, then let us haste,
Least time be past, and lingering let us both.

When you will my Lord, I am ready,

Even straight: and farewell cursed Tamburlaine.
Now go I to revenge my fathers death.

NOw bright zenocrate, the worlds fair eye,
Whose beams illuminate the lamps of heave,
Whose cheerful looks do clear the cloudy air
And cloth it in a crystal livery,
Now rest thee here on fair Larissa Plains,
Where Egypt and the Turkish Empire parts,
Between thy sons that shall be Emperors,
And every one Commander of a world.

Sweet tamburlain, when wilt thou leave these arms
And save thy sacred person free from scathe:
And dangerous chances of the wrathful war.

When heaven shall cease to move on both the poles
when the ground whereon my soldiers march
Shall rise aloft and touch the horned Moon,
And not before my sweet zenocrate:
Sit up and rest thee like a lovely Queen.
So, now she sits in pomp and majesty:
When these my sons, more procious in mine eyes
Than all the wealthy kingdoms I subdued:
Placed by her side, look on their mothers face,
But yet me thinks their looks are amorous,
Not martial as the sons of Tamburlaine
Water and air being simbolisde in one:
Argue their want of courage and of wit,
Their hair as white as milk and soft as Down.
Which should be like the quills of Porcupines.
As black as Jet, and hard as Iron or steel,
Bewrays they are too dainty for the wars.
Their fingers made to quaver on a Lute,
Their arms to hang about a Ladies neck:
Their legs to dance and caper in the air:
Would make me think them Bastards, not my sons,
But that I know they issued from thy womb,
That never looked on man but Tamburlaine.

My gracious Lord, they have their mothers looks
But when they list, their coquering fathers hart:
This lovely boy the youngest of the three,
Not long ago bestrid a Scythian Sceed:
Trotting the ring, and tilting at a glove:
Which when he tainted with his slender rod,
He reigned him straight and made him so curuet,
As I cried out for fear he should have fallen,

Well done my boy, thou shalt have shield and lance
Armour of proof, horse, helm, Cuttle-axe
And I will teach thee how to charge thy foe,
And harmless run among the deadly pikes.
If thou wilt love the wars and follow me,
Thou shalt be made a King and reign with me.
Keeping in iron cages Emperors.
If thou exceed thy elder Brothers worth,
And shine in complete virtue more than they,
Thou shalt be king before them, and thy seed
Shall issue crowned from their mothers womb,

Yes father, you shall see me if I live,
Have under me as many kings as you,
And march with such a multitude of men,
As all the world shall tremble at their view.

These words assure me boy, thou art my son,
When I am old and cannot manage arms,
Be thou the scourge and terror of the world,

Why may not I my Lord, as well as he,
Be termed the scourge and terror of the world?

Be al a scourge and terror to the world,
Or else you are not sons of Tamburlaine.

But while my brothers follow arms my lord
Let me accompany my gracious mother,
They are enough to conquer all the world
And you have won enough for me to keep.

Bastardly boy, sprung fro some cowards lions:
And not the issue of great Tamburlaine,
Of all the provinces I have subdued
Thou shalt not have a foot, unless thou bear
A mind corragious and invincible:
For he shall wear the crown of Persea,
Whose head hath deepest scars, whose breast most wounds,
Which being wroth, sends lightning from his eyes.
And in the furrows of his frowning brows,
Harbors revenge, war, death and cruelty:
For in a field whose superfluities
Is covered with a liquid purple veil,
And sprinkled with the brains of slaughtered men,
My royal chair of state shall be advanced:
And he that means to place himself therein
Must armed wade up to the chin in blood.

My Lord, such speeches to our princely sons,
Dismaies their minds before they come to prove
The wounding troubles angry war affords.

No Madam, these are speeches fit for us,
For if his chair were in a sea of blood,
I would prepare a ship and sail to it.
Ere I would loose the title of a king,

And I would strive to swim through pooles of blood,
Or make a bridge of murdered Carcases,
Whose arches should be framed with bones of Turks,
Ere I would loose the title of a king.

Well lovely boys, you shall be Emperors both
Stretching your conquering arms from east to west:
And sirha, if you mean to wear a crown,
When we shall meet the Turkish Deputy
And all his Viceroies, snatch it from his head,
And cleave his Pericranion with thy sword.

If any man will hold him, I will strike,
And cleave him to the channel with my sword,

Hold him, and cleave him too, or I'll cleave thee
For we will march against them presently.
Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane
Promised to meet me on Larissa plains
With hostess apiece against this Turkish crew,
For I have sworn by sacred Mahomet,
To make it parcel of my Empery,
The trumpets sound Zenocrate, they come.

WElcome Theridamas, king of Argier,

My Lord the great and mighty Tamburlain,
Arch-Monarke of the world, I offer here,
My crown, my self, and all the power I have,
In all affection at thy kingly feet.

Thanks good theridamas.

Under my collors march ten thousand Greeks
And of Argier and Affriks frontier towns,
Twice twenty thousand valiant men at arms,
All which have sworn to sack Natolia:
Five hundred Briggandines are under sail,
Meet for your service on the sea, my Lord,
That launching from Argier to Tripoly,
Will quickly ride before Natolia:
And batter down the castles on the shore.

Well said Argier, receive thy crown again.

KIngs of Morocus and of Fesse, welcome.

Magnificent peerless Tamburlaine,
I and my neighbor King of Fesse have brought
To aide thee in this Turkish expedition,
A hundred thousand expert soldiers:
From Azamor to Tunys near the sea,
Is Barbary unpeopled for thy sake,
And all the men in armour under me,
Which with my crown I gladly offer thee.

Thanks king of Morocus, take your crown again.

And mighty Tamburlaine, our earthly God,
Whose looks make this inferior world to quake,
I here present thee with the crown of Fesse,
And with an host of Moors trained to the war,
Whose coalblack faces make their foes retire,
And quake for fear, as if infernal Jove
Meaning to aid them in this Turkish arms,
Should pierce the black circumference of hell,
With ugly Furies bearing fiery flags,
And millions of his strong tormenting spirits:
From strong Tesella unto Biledull,
All Barbary is unpeopled for thy sake.

Thanks king of Fesse, take here thy crown again
Your presence (loving friends and fellow kings)
Makes me to surfeit in conceiving joy,
If all the crystal gates of Ioues high court
Were opened wide, and I might enter in
To see the state and majesty of heaven,
It could not more delight me than your sight.
Now will we banquet on these plains a while,
And aster march to Turkey with our Camp,
In number more than are the drops that fall
When Boreas rents a thousand swelling clouds,
And proud Orcanes of Natolia,
With all his viceroies shall be so afraid,
That though the stones, as at Deucalions flood,
Were turned to men, he should be overcome:
Such lavish will I make of Turkish blood,
That Jove shall send his winged Messenger
To bid me sheath my sword, and leave the field:
The Sun unable to sustain the sight,
Shall hide his head in thetis watery lap,
And leave his steeds to fair Boetes charge:
For half the world shall perish in this fight:
But now my friends, let me examine ye,
How have ye spent your absent time from me:

My Lord our men of Barbary have marched
Four hundred miles with armour on their backs,
And lain in leagre fifteen months and more,
For since we left you at the Souldans court,
We have subdued the Southern Guallatia,
And all the land unto the coast of Spain.
We kept the narrow straight of Gibralter,
And made Canarea cal us kings and Lords,
Yet never did they recreate themselves,
Or cease one day from war and hot alarms,
And therefore let them rest a while my Lord.

They shall Casane, and tis time in faith.

And I have marched along the river Nise
To Machda, where the mighty Christian Priest
Called Iohn the great, sits in a milk-white robe,
Whose triple Myter I did take by force,
And made him swear obedience to my crown.
From thence unto Cazates did I march,
Where Amazonians met me in the field:
With whom (being women) I vouchsafed a league,
And with my power did march to zansibar
The Western part of Affrike, where I viewed.
The Ethiopian sea, rivers and lakes:
But neither man nor child in al the land:
Therefore I took my course to Manico.
Where unresisted I remoou'd my camp:
And by the coast of Byather at last,
I came to Cubar, where the Negros dwell,
And conquering that, made haste to Nubia,
There having sacked Borno the Kingly seat,
I took the king, and lead him bound in chains
Unto Damasco, where I staid before.

Well done Techelles: what saith Theridamas:

I left the confines and the bounds of Afrik
And made a voyage into Europe,
Where by the river Tyros I subdew'd
Stoka, Padalia, and Codemia.
Then crossed the sea and came to Oblia.
And Nigra Silua, where the Devils dance,
Which in despite of them I set on fires
From thence I crossed the Gulf, call by the name
Mare magiore, of th'inhabitantes;
Yet shall my soldiers make no period
Until Natolia kneel before your feet.

Then will we triumph, banquet and carouse,
Cooks shall have pensions to provide us eats,
And glut us with the dainties of the world,
Lachrima Christi and Calabrian wines
Shall common Soldiers drink in quaffing boules,
I, liquid gold when we have conquered him.
Mingled with corrall and with oriental pearls:
Come let us banquet and carrouse the whiles.

NOw say my Lords of Buda and Bohemia,
What motion is it that inflames your thoughts,
And stirs your valures to such sudden arms?

Your Majesty remembers I am sure
What cruel slaughter of our Christian bloods,
These heathnish Turks and Pagans lately made,
Betwixt the city Zula and Danubius
How through the midst of Verna and Bulgaria
And almost to the very walls of Rome,
They have not long since massacred our Camp,
It rests now then that your Maiesly
Take all advantages of time and power,
And work revenge upon these Infidels:
Your Highness knows for Tamburlaines repair,
That strikes a terror to all Turkish hearts,
Natolia hath dismissed the greatest part
Of all his army, pitched against our power
Betwixt Cutheia and Orminius mount:
And sent them marching up to Belgasar,
Acantha, Antioch, and Caesaria,
To aid the kings of Soria and Jerusalem.
Now thou my Lord, advantage take hereof,
And issue suddenly upon the rest:
That in the fortune of their overthrow,
We may discourage all the pagan troop,
That dare attempt to war with Christians.

But calls not then your Grace to memory
The league we lately made with king Orcanes,
Confirmed by oath and Articles of peace,
And calling Christ for record of our truss?
This should be treachery and violence,
Against the grace of our profession.

No whit my Lord: for with such Infidels,
In whom no faith nor true religion rests,
We are not bound to those accomplishments,
The holy laws of Christendom inioine:
But as the faith which they profanely plight
Is not by necessary pollycy,
To be esteemed assurance for our selves,
So what we vow to them should not infringe
Our liberty of arms and victory.

Though I confess the oaths they undertake,
Breed little strength to out security,
Yet those infirmities that thus defame
Their faiths, their honours, and their religion,
Should not give us presumption to the like,
Our faiths are sound, and must be consummate,
Religious, righteous, and inviolate.

Assure your Grace tis superstition
To stand so strictly on dispensiue faith:
And should we lose the opportunity
That God hath given to avenge our Christians death
And scourge their foul blasphemous Paganism:
As fell to Saule, to Balaam and the rest,
That would not kill and curse at Gods command,
So surely will the vengeance of the highest
And jealous anger of his fearful arm
Be poured with rigour on our sinful heads,
If we neglect this offered victory.

Then arm my Lords, and issue suddenly,
Giving commandment to our general host,
With expedition to assail the Pagan,
And take the victory our God hath given.

GAzellus, Vribassa, and the rest,
Now will we march from proud Orminus mount
To fair Natolia, where our neighbour kings
Expect our power and our royal presence,
T'incounter with the cruel tamburlain,
That nigh Larissa sways a mighty host,
And with the thunder of his martial tools
Makes Earthquakes in the hearts of men and heaven,

And now come we to make his sinews shake,
With greater power than erst his pride hath felt,
An hundred kings by scores will bid him arms,
And hundred thousands subjects to each score:
Which if a shower of wounding thunderbolts
Should break out off the bowels of the clouds
And fall as thick as hail upon our heads,
In partial aid of that proud Scythian,
Yet should our courages and steeled crestes,
And numbers more than infinite of men,
Be able to withstand and conquer him.

Me thinks I see how glad the christian King
Is made, for joy of your admitted truce:
That could not but before be terrified:
With unacquainted power of our host.

Arm dread Sovereign and my noble Lords
The treacherous army of the Christians,
Taking advantage of your slender power,
Comes marching on us, and determines straight,
To bid us battle for our dearest lives.

Traitors, villains, damned Christians,
Have I not here the articles of peace,
And solemn covenants we have both confirmed,
He by his Christ, and I by Mahomet:

Hell and confusion light upon their heads,
That with such treason seek our overthrow,
And cares so little for their prophet Christ.

Can there be such deceit in Christians,
Or treason in the fleshly heart of man,
Whose shape is figure of the highest God?
Then if there be a Christ, as Christians say,
But in their deeds deny him for their Christ:
If he be son to euerliuing Jove,
And hath the power of his outstretched arm,
If he be jealous of his name and honour,
As is our holy prophet Mahomet,
Take here these papers as our sacrifice
And witness of thy servants perjury.
Open thou shining veil of Cynthia
And make a passage from the imperial heaven
That he that sits on high and never sleeps,
Nor in one place is circumscriptible,
But every where fills every Continent,
With strange infusion of his sacred vigour,
May in his endless power and purity
Behold and avenge this Traitors perjury.
Thou Christ that art esteemed omnipotent,
If thou wilt prove thy self a perfect God,
Worthy the worship of all faithful hearts,
Be now revenged upon this Traitors soul,
And make the power I have left behind
(Too little to defend our guiltless lives)
Sufficient to discomfort and confound
The trustless force of those false Christians.
To arms my Lords, on Christ still let us cry,
If there be Christ, we shall have victory.

Discomfited is all the Christian host,
And God hath thundered vengeance from on high,
For my accursed and hateful perjury.
O just and dreadful punisher of sin,
Let the dishonour of the pains I feel,
In this my mortal well deserved wound,
End all my penance in my sudden death,
And let this death wherein to sin I die,
Conceive a second life in endless mercy.

Now lie the Christians bathing in their bloods,
And Christ or Mahomet hath been my friend.

See here the perjured traitor Hungary,
Bloody and breathless for his villainy.

Now shall his barbarous body be a pray
To beasts and fowls, and al the winds shall breath
Through shady leaves of every senseless tree,
Murmurs and hisses for his heinous sin.
Now scaldes his soul in the Tartarian streams,
And feeds upon the baneful tree of hell,
That zoacum, that fruit of bytternesse,
That in the midst of fire is engraft,
Yet flourishes as Flora in her pride,
With apples like the heads of damned Feends,
The Dyuils there in chains of quencelesse flame,
Shall lead his soul through Orcus burning gulfs
From pain to pain, whose change shall never end:
What says thou yet Gazellus to his foil:
Which we referd to justice of his Christ,
And to his power, which here appears as full
As rays of Cynthia to the clearest sight?

Tis but the fortune of the wars my Lord,
Whose power is often proved a miracle.

Yet in my thoughts shall Christ be honoured,
Not doing Mahomet an injury,
Whose power had share in this our victory:
And since this miscreant hath disgraced his faith,
And died a traitor both to heaven and earth,
We will both watch and ward shall keep his trunk
Amidst these plains, for Fowls to pray upon.
Go Vribassa, give it straight in charge.

I will my Lord.

And now Gazellus, let us haste and meet
Our Army and our brother of Jerusalem,
Of So^, Trebizon and Amasia,
And happily with full Natolian bowles
Of Greekish wine now let us celebrate
Our happy conquest, and his angry fate.

Black is the beauty of the brightest day,
The golden balle of heavens eternal fire,
That danced with glory on the silver waives:
Now wants the fuel that enflamde his beams
And all with faintness and for foul disgrace,
He binds his temples with a frowning cloud,
Ready to darken earth with endless night:
Zenocrate that gave him light and life,
Whose eyes shot fire from their Ivory bowers,
And tempered every soul with lively heat,
Now by the malice of the angry Skies,
Whose jealousy admits no second Mate,
Draws in the comfort of her latest breath
All dassed with the hellish mists of death.
Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven,
As Sentinels to warn th'immortall souls,
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
Apollo Cynthia, and the ceaslesse lamps
That gently looked upon this loathsome earth,
Shine downwards now no more, but deck the heavens
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
The crystal springs whose taste illuminates
Refined eyes with an eternal sight,
Like tried silver runs through Paradise
To entertain divine zenocrate.
The Cherubins and holy Seraphins
That sing and play before the king of kings,
We all their voices and their instruments
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
And in this sweet and currious harmony,
The God that tunes this music to our souls:
Holds out his hand in highest majesty
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
Then let some holy trance convey my thoughts,
Up to the palace of th'imperiall heaven:
That this my life may be as short to me
As are the days of sweet Zenocrate:
Physicians, will no physic do her good?

My Lord, your Majesty shall soon perceive*
And if she pass this fit, the worst is past.

Tell me, how fares my fair Zenocrate:

I fare my Lord, as other Emperesses,
That when this frail and transitory flesh,
Hath sucked the measure of that vital air
That feeds the body with his dated health,
Wanes with enforst and necessary change.

May never such a change transform my love
In whose sweet being I repose my life,
Whose heavenly presence beautified with health,
Gives light to Phoebus and the fixed stars,
Whose absence make the sun and Moon as dark
As when opposde in one Diamiter:
Their Spheres are mounted on the serpents head,
Or else descend to his winding train:
Live still my Love and so conserve my life,
Or dieng, be the anchor of my death.

Live still my Lord, O let my sovereign live,
And sooner let the fiery Element
Dissolve, and make your kingdom in the Sky,
Than this base earth should shroud your majesty:
For should I but suspect your death by mine,
The comfort of my future happiness
And hope to meet your highness in the heavens,
Turned to despair, would break my wretched breast,
And fury would confound my present rest.
But let me die my Love, yet let me die,
With love and patience let your true love die:
Your grief and fury hurts my second life,
Yet let me kiss my Lord before I die,
And let me die with kissing of my Lord.
But since my life is lengthened yet a while,
Let me take leave of these my loving sons,
And of my Lords whose true nobility
Have merited my latest memory:
Sweet sons farewell, in death resemble me,
And in your lives your fathers excellency.
Some music, and my fit will cease my Lord.

Proud fury and intollorable fit,
That dares torment the body of my Love,
And scourge the Scourge of the immortal God:
Now are those Spheres where Cupid used to sit,
Wounding the world with wonder and with love,
Sadly supplied with pale and ghastly death:
Whose darts do pierce the Center of my soul,
Her sacred beauty hath enchanted heaven,
And had she lived before the siege of Troy,
Hellen, whose beauty sommond Greece to arms,
And drew a thousand ships to Tenedos,
Had not been named in Homers Iliads:
Her name had been in every line he wrote:
Or had those wanton Poets, for whose birth
Old Rome was proud, but gasde a while on her,
Nor Lesbia, nor Corrinna had been named,
zenocrate had been the argument
Of every Epigram or Eligie.

What, is she dead? Techelles, draw thy sword,
And wound the earth, that it may cleave in twain,
And we descend into the infernal vaults,
To hail the fatal Sisters by the hair,
And throw them in the triple more of Hell,
For taking hence my fair zenocrate.
Casane and theridamas to arms,
Raise Caualieros higher than the clouds:
And with the cannon break the frame of heaven,
Batter the shining palace of the Sun,
And shiver all the starry strmament:
For amdrous Jove hath snatched my love from hence,
Meaning to make her stately Queen of heaven,
What God so ever holds thee in his arms,
Giving thee Nectar and Ambrosia,
Behold me here divine zenocrate,
Raving, impatient, desperate and mad,
Breaking my steeled lance, with which I burst
The rusty beams of Ianus Temple doors,
Letting out death and tyrannising war:
To march with me under this bloody flag,
And if thou pitiest Tamburlain the great,
Come down from heaven and live with me again.

Ah good my Lord be patient, she is dead,
And all this raging cannot make her live,
If words might serve, our voice hath rent the air,
If tears, our eyes have watered all the earth:
If grief, our murdered harts have straind forth blood
Nothing prevails, for she is dead my Lord.

For she is dead: thy words do pierce my soul
Ah sweet theridamas, say so no more,
Though she be dead, yet let me think she lives,
And feed my mind that dies for want of her:
Where ere her soul be, thou shalt stay with me
Embalmed with Cassia, Amber Greece and Myrre,
Not lapped in lead but in a sheet of gold,
And till I die thou shalt not be interrd.
Then in as rich a tomb as Mausolus,
We both will rest and have one Epitaph
Writ in as many several languages,
As I have conquered kingdoms with my sword,
This cursed town will I consume with fire,
Because this place bereft me of my Love:
The houses burnt, will look as if they mourned
And here will I set up her stature,
And march about it with my mourning camp,
Drooping and pining for zenocrate.

CAlepinus Cyricelibes, otherwise Cybelius, son and successive heir to the
late mighty Emperor Baiazeth, by the aid of God and his friend Mahomet,
Emperor of Natolia, Jerusalem, Trebizon, Soria, Amasia, Thracia, Illyria,
Carmonia And al the hundred and thirty Kingdoms late contributory to his
mighty father. Long live Callepinus, Emperor of Turkey.


Thrice worthy kings of Natolia, and the rest,
I will requite your royal gratitudes
With all the benefits my Empire yields:
And were the sinews of th'imperiall seat
So knit and strengthened, as when Baiazeth
My royal Lord and father filled the throne,
Whose cursed fate hath so dismembered it,
Then should you see this Thief of Scythia,
This proud usurping king of Persea,
Do us such honour and supremacy,
Bearing the vengeance of our fathers wrongs,
As all the world should blot our dignities
Out of the book of base borne infamies.
And now I doubt not but your royal cares
Hath so provided for this cursed foe,
That since the heir of mighty Baiazeth
(An Emperor so honoured for his virtues)
Revives the spirits of true Turkish hearts,
In grievous memory of his fathers shame,
We shall not need to nourish any doubt,
But that proud Fortune, who hath followed long
The martial sword of mighty Tamburlaine,
Will now retain her old inconstancy,
And raise our honours to as high a pitch
In this our strong and fortunate encounter,
For so hath heaven provided my escape,
From al the cruelty my soul sustained,
By this my friendly keepers happy means,
That Jove sir char dg'd with pity of our wrongs,
Will pour it down in showers on our heads:
Scourging the pride of cursed tamburlain.

I have a hundred thousand men in arms,
Some, that in conquest of the perjured Christian.
Being a handful to a mighty host,
Think them in number yet sufficient,
To drink the river Nile or Euphrates,
And for their power, ynow to win the world.

And I as many from Jerusalem,
Iudaea, Gaza, and Scalonians bounds,
That on mount Sinay with their ensigns spread,
Look like the parti-coloured clouds of heaven,
That show fair weather to the neighbor morn.

And I as many bring from Trebizon,
Chio Famastro and Amasia,
All bordring on the Mare-major sea:
Riso, Sancina, and the bordering towns,
That touch the end of famous Euphrates.
Whose courages are kindled with the flames,
The cursed Scythian sets on all their towns,
And vow to burn the villains cruel heart.

From Soria with seventy thousand strong,
Taken from Aleppo, Soldino, Tripoly,
And so unto my city of Damasco,
I march to meet and aide my neigbor kings,
All which will join against this Tamburlain,
And bring him captive to your highness feet.

Our battle then in martial manner pitched,
According to our ancient use, shall bear
The figure of the semi-circled Moon:
Whose horns shall sprinkle through the tainted air,
The poisoned brains of this proud Scythian.

Well then my noble Lords, for this my friend,
That freed me from the bondage of my foe:
I think it requisite and honourable,
To keep my promise, and to make him king,
That is a Gentleman (I know) at least.

That's no matter sir, for being a king,
For Tamburlain came up of nothing.

Your Majesty may choose some pointed time,
Performing all your promise to the full:
Tis nought for your majesty to give a kingdom.

Then will I shortly keep my promise Almeda

Why, I thank your Majesty.

SO, burn the turrets of this cursed town,
Flame to the highest region of the air:
And kindle heaps of exhalations,
That being fiery meteors, may presage,
Death and destruction to th'inhabitants
Over my Zenith hang a blazing star,
That may endure till heaven be dissolud,
Fed with the fresh supply of earthly dregs,
Threatening a death and famine to this land,
Flieng Dragons, lightning, fearful thunderclaps,
singe these fair plains, and make them seem as black
As is the Island where the Furies mask
Compassed with Lethe, Styx and Phlegeton,
Because my dear Zenocrate is dead.

This Pillar placed in memory of her,
Where in Arabian, Hebrew, Greek, is writ
This town being burnt by Tamburlaine the great,
Forbids the world to build it up again.

And here this mourful streamer shall be placed
Wrought with the Persean and Egyptian arms,
To signify she was a princess borne,
And wife unto the Monarch of the East.

And here this table as a Register
Of all her virtues and perfections.

And here the picture of zenocrate,
To show her beauty, which the world admyr'd,
Sweet picture of divine Zenocrate,
That hanging here, will draw the Gods from heaven:
And cause the stars fixed in the Southern arc,
Whose lovely faces never any viewed,
That have not past the Centers latitude.
As Pilgrims travail to our Hemi-spheare.
Only to gaze upon Zenocrate.
Thou shalt not beautify Larissa plains.
But keep within the circle of mine arms.
At every town and castle I besiege,
Thou shalt be set upon my royal tent.
And when I meet an army in the field,
Whose looks will shed such influence in my camp,
As if Bellona, Goddess of the war
Threw naked swords and sulphur balls of fire,
Upon the heads of all our enemies.
And now my Lords, advance your spears again,
Sorrow no more my sweet Casane now:
Boys leave to morn, this town shall ever morn,
Being burnt to cinders for your mothers death.

If I had wept a sea of tears for her,
It would not ease the sorrow I sustain.

As is that town, so is my heart consumed,
With grief and sorrow for my mothers death.

My mothers death hath mortified my mind,
And sorrow stops the passage of my speech.

But now my boys, leave off, and ^ist to me,
That mean to teach you rudiments of war:
I'll have you learn to sleep upon the ground,
March in your armour throw watery Fens,
Sustain the scorching heat and freezing cold,
Hunger and cold right adiuncts of the war.
And after this, to scale a castle wall,
Besiege a fort, to undermine a town,
And make whole cities caper in the air.
Then next, the way to fortify your men,
In champion grounds, what figure serves you best,
For with the quinque-angle form is meet,
Because the corners there may fall more flat:
Whereas the Fort may fittest be assailed,
And sharpest where th'assault is desperate.
The ditches must be deep, the Counterscarps
Narrow and steep, the walls made high and broad,
The Bulwarks and the rampires large and strong,
With Caualieros and thick counterforts,
And room within to lodge six thousand men.
It must have privy ditches, countermines,
And secret issuing to defend the ditch.
It must have high Argins and covered ways
To keep the bulwark fronts from battery,
And Parapets to hide the Muscatiers:
Casemates to place the great Artillery,
And store of ordinance that from every flank
May scour the outward curtains of the Fort,
Dismount the Cannon of the adverse part,
Murder the Foe and save their walls from breach.
When this is learned for service on the land,
By plain and easy demonstration,
I'll teach you how to make the water mount,
That you may dryfoot march through lakes pooles,
Deep rivers, havens, creeks, and little seas,
And make a Fortress in the raging waives,
Fenced with the concave of a monftrous rock,
Invincible by nature of the place.
When this is done, then are ye soldiers,
And worthy sounes of Tamburlain the great,

My Lord, but this is dangerous to be done,
We may be slain or wounded ere we learn.

Villain, art thou the son of Tamburlaine,
And fear to die, or with a Curtle-axe
To hew thy flesh and make a gaping wound:
Hast thou beheld a peal of ordinance strike
A ring of pikes, mingled with shot and horse,
Whose shattered limbs, being tossed as high as heaven,
Hang in the air as thick as sunny motes,
And can thou Coward stand in fear of death:
Hast thou not seen my horsemen charge the foe,
Shot through the arms, cut overthwart the hands,
Dieng their lances with their streaming blood,
And yet at night carrouse within my tent,
Filling their empty veins with aerie wine,
That being concocted, turns to crimson blood,
And wilt thou shun the field for fear of wounds:
View me thy father that hath conquered kings,
And with his host march round about the earth,
Quite void of skars, and clear from any wound,
That by the wars lost not a dram of blood,
And see him lance his flesh to teach you all.
A wound is nothing be it ne'er so deep,
Blood is the God of Wars rich livery.
Now look I like a soldier, and this wound
As great a grace and majesty to me,
As if a chair of gold enamiled,
Enchac'd with Diamonds, Sapphires, Rubies
And fairest pearl of wealthy India
Were mounted here under a Canapie:
And I sat down, clothed with the massy robe,
That late adorned the Affrike Potentate.
Whom I brought bound unto Damascus walls.
Come boys and with your fingers search my wound,
And in my blood wash all your hands at once,
While I sit smiling to behold the sight.
Now my boys, what think you of a wound?

I know not what I should think of it,
Me thinks tis a pitiful sight.

Tis nothing: give me a wound father.

And me another my Lord.

Come sir, give me your arm.

Here father, cut it bravely as you did your own

It shall suffice thou dare abide a wound
My boy, Thou shalt not loose a drop of blood,
Before we meet the army of the Turk.
But then run desperate through the thickest throngs,
Dreadlesse of blows, of bloody wounds and death:
And let the burning of Larissa walls
My speech of war, and this my wound you see
Teach you my boys to bear courageous minds,
Fit for the followers of great tamburlaine.
Vsumeasane now come let us march
Towards Techelles and Theridamas,
That we have sent before to fire the towns,
The towers and cities of these hateful Turks,
And hunt that Coward, faintheart, runaway,
With that accursed traitor Almeda,
Till fire and sword have found them at a bay.

I long to pierce his bowels with my sword,
That hath betrayed my gracious Sovereign,
That cursed and damned Traitor Almeda.

Then let us see if coward Calapine
Dare levy arms against our puissance,
That we may tread upon his captive neck,
And treble all his fathers slaueries.

THus have we marched Northwarde from Tamburlaine,
Unto the frontier point of Soria:
And this is Balsera their chiefest hold,
Wherein is all the treasure of the land.

Then let us bring our light Artillery,
Minions, Fauknets, and Sakars to the trench,
Filling the ditches with the walls wide breach,
And enter in, to seize upon the gold:
How say ye Soldiers, Shall we not?

Yes, my Lord, yes, come lets about it,

But stay a while, summon a parle, Drum,
It may be they will yield it quietly,
Knowing two kings, the friend to tamburlain,
Stand at the walls, with such a mighty power.

What require you my masters?

Captain, that thou yield up thy hold to us.

To you. Why, do you think me weary of it?

Nay Captain, thou art weary of thy life,
If thou withstand the friends of Tamburlain.

These Pioners of Argier in Africa,
Even in the ca^ous face shall raise a hill
Of earth and faggots higher than thy Fort,
And over thy Argins and covered ways
Shall play upon the bulwarks of thy hold
Volleys of ordinance till the breach be made,
That with his ruin fills up all the trench.
And when we enter in, not heaven it self
Shall ransom thee, thy wife and family.

Captain, these Moors shall cut the leaden pipes,
That bring fresh water to thy men and thee,
And lie in trench before thy castle walls:
That no supply of victual shall come in,
Nor issue forth, but they shall die:
And therefore Captain, yield it quietly.

Were you that are the friends of Tamburlain
Brothers to holy Mahomet himself,
I would not yield it: therefore do your worst.
Raise mounts, batter, entrench, and undermine,
Cut off the water, all conuoies that can,
Yet I am resolute, and so farewell.

Pioners away, and where I stuck the stake,
Entrench with those dimensions I prescribed:
Cast up the earth towards the castle wall,
Which till it may defend you, labour low:
And few or none shall perish by their shot.

We will my Lord.

A hundred horse shall scout about the plains
To spy what force comes to relieve the hold.
Both we (theridamas) will entrench our men,
And with the Iacobs staff measure the height
And distance of the castle from the trench,
That we may know if our artillery
Will carry full point blancke unto their walls.

Then see the bringing of our ordinance
Along the trench into the battery,
Where we will have Galions of six foot broad,
To save our Cannoniers from musket shot,
Betwixt which, shall our ordinance thunder forth,
And with the breaches fall, smoke, fire, and dust,
The crack, the Ecchoe and the soldiers cry
Make deaf the air, and dim the Crystal Sky.

Trumpets and drums, alarm presently,
And soldiers play the men, the holds is yours.

Come good my Lord, let us haste fro hence
Along the cave that leads beyond the foe,
No hope is left to save this conquered hold.

A deadly bullet gliding through my side,
Lies heavy on my heart, I cannot live.
I feel my liver pierced and all my veins,
That there begin and nourish every part,
Mangled and torn, and all my entrails bathed
In blood that strains from their orifex.
Farewell sweet wife, sweet son farewell, I die.

Death, whether art thou gone that both we live:
Come back again (sweet death) strike us both:
One minute end our days, and one sepulcher
Contain our bodies: death, why comn'st thou not:
Well, this must be the messenger for thee,
Now ugly death stretch out thy Sable wings,
And carry both our souls, where his remains.
Tell me sweet boy, art thou content to die?
These barbarous Scythians full of cruelty,
And Moors, in whom was never pity found,
Will hew us peecemeale, put us to the wheel,
Or else invent some torture worse than that,
Therefore die by thy loving mothers hand,
Who gently now will lance thy Ivory throat,
And quickly rid thee both of pain and life.

Mother dispatch me, or I'll kill my self,
For think ye I can live, and see him dead:
Give me your knife, good mother) or strike home:
The Scythiens shall not tyrannise on me.
Sweet mother strike, that I may meet my father.

Ah sacred Mahomet, if this be sin,
Entreat a pardon of the God of heaven,
And purge my soul before it come to thee.

How now Madam, what are you doing?

Killing my self, as I have done my son,
Whose body with his fathers I have burnt,
Least cruel Scythians should dismember him.

Twas bravely done, and like a soldiers wife,
Thou shalt with us to Tamburlaine the great,
Who when he hears how resolute thou were,
Will match thee with a viceroy or a king.

My Lord deceased, was dearer unto me,
Than any Viceroy, King or Emperor.
And for his sake here will I end my days.

But Lady go with us to Tamburlaine,
And thou shalt see a man greater ^n Mahomet.
In whose high looks is much more majesty
Than from the Concave superficies.
Of Ioues vast palace the imperial Orb,
Unto the shinining bower where Cynthia sits,
Like lovely thetis in a Crystal robe,
That treads Fortune underneath his feet,
And makes the mighty God of arms his slave:
On whom death and the fatal sisters wait,
With naked swords and scarlet liveries:
Before whom (mounted on a Lions back)
Rhammusia bears a helmet full of blood,
And strowes the way with brains of slaughtered men*
By whose proud side the ugly furies run.
Harkening when he shall bid them plague the world,
Over whose zenith clothed in windy air,
And Eagles wings joined to her feathered breast,
Fame houereth, sounding of her golden Trump:
That to the adverse poles of that straight line,
Which measures the glorious frame of heaven,
The name of mighty Tamburlain is spread:
And him fair Lady shall thy eyes behold. Come.

Take pity of a Ladies ruthful tears,
That humbly craves upon her knees to stay,
And cast her body in the burning flame,
That feeds upon her sons and husbands flesh.

Madam, sooner shall fire consume us both,
Then scorch a face so beautiful as this.
In frame of which, Nature hath showed more skill,
Than when she ga^e eternal Chaos form,
Drawing from it the shining Lamps of heaven.

Madam, I am so far in love with you,
That you must go with us, no remedy.

Then carry me I care not where you will,
And let the end of this my fatal journey,
Be likewise end to my accursed life.

No Madam, but the beginning of your joy,
Come willingly, therefore.

Soldiers now let us meet the General,
Who by this time is at Natolia,
Ready to charge the army of the Turk.
The gold, the silver, and the pearl ye got,
Rifling this Fort, divide in equal shares:
This Lady shall have twice so much again,
Out of the coffers of our treasury.

Renowned Emperor, mighty Callepine,
Gods great lieutenant over all the world:
Here at Alepo with an host of men
Lies Tamburlaine, this king of Persea:
In number more than are the quyuering leaves
Of Idas forest, where your highness hounds,
With open cry pursues the wounded Stag:
Who means to girt Natolias walls with siege,
Fire the town and overrun the land.

My royal army is as great as his,
That from the bounds of Phrigia to the sea
Which washes Cyprus with his brinish waives,
Covers the hills, the valleys and the plains.
Viceroies and Peers of Turkey play the men,
Whet all your swords to mangle Tamburlain
His sons, his Captains and his followers,
By Mahomet not one of them shall live.
The field wherein this battle shall be fought,
For ever, term, the Perseans sepulchre,
In memory of this our victory.

Now, he that calls himself the scourge of Jove,
The Emperor of the world, and earthly God,
Shall end the warlike progress he intends,
And travail headlong to the lake of hell:
Where legions of devils knowing he must die
Here in Natolia, by your highness hands)
All brandishing their brands of quenchless fire,
Streching their monstrous paws, grin with their teeth.
And guard the gates to entertain his soul.

Tel me Viceroies the number of your men,
And what our Army royal is esteemed.

From Palestina and Jerusalem,
Of Hebrewes, three score thousand fighting men
Are come since last we showed your majesty.

So from Arabia desert, and the bounds
Of that sweet land, whose brave Metropolis
Reedified the fair Semyramis,
Came forty thousand warlike foot and horse,
Since last we numbered to your Majesty.

From trebizon in Asia the less,
Naturalised Turks and stout Bythinians
Came to my bands full fifty thousand more,
That fighting, knows not what retreat doth mean,
Nor ere return but with the victory,
Since last we numbered to your majesty.

Of Sorians from Halla is repaired
And neighbor cities of your highness land,
Ten thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot,
Since last we numbered to your majesty:
So that the Army royal is esteemed
Six hundred thousand valiant fighting men.

Then welcome Tamburlaine unto thy death.
Come puissant Viceroies, let us to the field,
(The Perseans Sepulchre) and sacrifice
Mountains of breathless men to Mahomet.
Who now with Jove opens the firmament,
To see the slaughter of our enemies.

HOw now Casane? See a knot of kings,
Sitting as if they were a telling tidles.

My Lord, your presence makes them pale and wan.
Poor souls they look as if their deaths were near.

Why, so he is Casane, I am here,
But yet I'll sane their lives and make them slaves.
Ye petty kings of Turkye I am come,
As Hector did into the Grecian camp.
To ouerdare the pride of Groecia.
And set his warlike petson to the view
Of fierce Achilles, rival of his fame,
I do you honour in the simile.
For if I should as Hector did Achilles,
(The worthiest knight that ever brandish sword)
Challenge in combat any of you all,
I see how fearfully ye would refuse,
And fly my glove as from a Scorpion.

Now thou art fearful of thy armies strength,
Thou would with over match of person fight,
But Shepherds issue, base borne tamburlaine,
Think of thy end, this sword shall lance thy throat.

Villain, the shepherds issue, at whose birth
Heaven did affoord a gracious aspect,
And joined those stars that shall be opposite,
Even till the dissolution of the world;
And never meant to make a Conqueror;
So famous as is mighty Tamburlain:
Shall so torment thee and that Callapine,
That like a roguish runaway, suborned
That villain there, that slave, that Turkish dog,
To false his service to his Sovereign,
As ye shall curse the birth of Tamburlaine.

Rail not proud Scythian, I shall now revenge
My fathers vile abuses and mine own.

By Mahomet he shall be tied in chains,
Rowing with Christians in a Brigandine,
About the Grecian Isses to rob and spoil:
And turn him to his ancient trade again.
Me thinks the slave should make a lusty thief.

Nay, when the battle ends, al we will meet,
And sit in council to invent some pain,
That most may vex his body and his soul:

Sirha, Callapine, I'll hang a clog about your neck for running away again,
you shall not trouble me thus to come and fetch you.

But as for you (Viceroy) you shall have bits,
And harnessed like my horses, draw my coch:
And when ye stay, be lashed with whips of wier,
I'll have you learn to feed on prouander,
And in a stable lie upon the planks:

But Tamburlaine, first thou shalt kneel to us
And humbly crave a pardon for thy life.

The common soldiers of our mighty host
Shall bring thee bound unto the Generals tent.

And all have jointly sworn thy cruel death,
Or bind thee in eternal torments wrath.

Well sirs, diet your selves, you know I shall have occasion shortly to journey
you.


See father, how Almeda the Jailer looks upon us.


Villain, traitor, damned fugitive,
I'll make thee wish the earth had swallowed thee:
See thou not death within my wrathful looks.
Go villain, cast thee headlong from a rock,
Or rip thy bowels, and rend out thy heart,
T'appease my wrath, or else I'll torture thee,
Searing thy hateful flesh with burning irons,
And drops of scalding lead, while all thy joints
Be racked and beat asunder with the wheel,
For if thou lives, not any Element
Shall shroud thee from the wrath of tamburlaine

Well, in despite of thee he shall be king:
Come Almeda, receive this crown of me,
I here invest thee king of Ariadan,
Bordering on Mare Roso near to Meca.

What, take it man.


Good my Lord, let me take it.


Dost thou ask him leave: Here, take it.


Go too sirha, take your crown, and make up the half dozen.
So sirha, now you are a king you must give arms.

So he shall, and we are thy head in his Scutcheon:


No, let him hang a bunch of keys on his standerd, to put him in remembrance
he was a Jailer, that when I take him, I may knock out his brains with them,
and lock you in the stable, when you shall come


Away, let us to the field, that the villain may be slain.


Sirha, prepare whips, and bring my chariot to my Tent: For as soon as the
battle is done, I'll ride in triumph through the Camp.

How now ye pety kings, lo, here are Bugs
Will make the hair stand upright on your heads,
And cast your crowns in slavery at their feet.
Welcome theridamas and techelles both,
See ye this rout, and know ye this same king:

I, my Lord, he was Calapines keeper.


Well, now you see he is a king, look to him theridamas, when we are fighting,
least he hide his crown as the foolish king of Persea did.


No Tamburlaine, he shall not be put to that Exigent, I warrant thee.


You know not sir:
But now my followers and my loving friends,
Fight as you ever did, like Conquerours,
The glory of this happy day is yours:
My sterne aspect shall make fair Victory,
Hovering betwixt our armies, light on me,
Laden with Laurel wreathes to crown us all.

I smile to think, how when this field is fought,
And rich Natolia ours, our men shall sweat
With carrieng pearl and treasure on their backs,

You shall be princes all immediately:
Come fight ye Turks, or yield us victory.

No, we will meet thee slavish taburlain.

NOw in their glories shine the golden crowns
Of these proud Turks, much like so many suns
That half dismay the majesty of heaven:
Now brother follow we our fathers sword,
That flies with fury swifter than our thoughts,
And cuts down armies with his conquerings wings,
Call forth our laisie brother from the tent,
For if my father miss him in the field,
Wrath kindled in the furnace of his breast,
Will send a deadly lightening to his heart.

Brother, ho, what, given so much to sleep
You cannot leave it, when our enemies drums
And rattling cannons thunder in our ears
Our proper ruin, and our fathers foil:

Away ye fools, my father needs not me,
Nor you in faith, but that you will be thought
More childish valorous than manly wise:
If half our camp should sit and sleep with me,
My father ware enough to scar the foe:
You do dishonour to his majesty,
To think our helps will do him any good.

What, dare thou then be absent fro the fight,
Knowing my father hates thy cowardice,
And oft hath warned thee to be still in field,
When he himself amidst the thickest troops
Beats down our foes to flesh our taintlesse swords.

I know sir, what it is to kill a man,
It works remorse of conscience in me,
I take no pleasure to be murderous,
Nor care for blood when wine will quench my thirst.

O cowardly boy, fie for shame, come forth.
Thou dost dishonour manhood, and thy house.

Go, go tall stripling, fight you for us both,
And take my other toward brother here,
For person like to prove a second Mars,
Twill please my mind as well to hear both you
Have won a heap of honour in the field,
And left your slender carcasses behind,
As if I lay with you for company.

You will not go then:

You say true.

Were all the lofty mounts of Zona mundi,
That fill the midst of farthest Tartary,
Turned into pearl and proffered for my stay,
I would not bide the fury of my father:
When made a victor in these haughty arms.
He comes and finds his sons have had no shares
In all the honours he proposde for us.

Take you the honour, I will take my ease,
My wisdom shall excuse my cowardice:
I go into the field before I need:
The bullets fly at random where they list.
And should I go and kill a thousand men,
I were as soon rewarded with a shot,
And sooner far than he that never fights.
And should I go and do nor harm nor good,
I might have harm, which all the good I have
Joined with my fathers crown would never cure.
I'll to cards: Perdicas.

Here my Lord.


Come, thou and I will go to cards to drive away the time.


Content my Lord, but what shall we play for?


Who shall kiss the fairest of the Turks Concubines first, when my father hath
conquered them.


Agreed in faith.


They say I am a coward, (Perdicas) and I fear as little their tara, tantaras,
their swords or their cannons, as I do a naked Lady in a net of gold, and
for fear I should be afraid, would put it off and come to bed with me.


Such a fear (my Lord) would never make ye retire.


I would my father would let me be put in the front of such a battle once, to
try my valour.

What a coil they keep, I believe there will be some hurt done anon amongst
them.


See now ye slaves, my children stoops your pride
And leads your glories sheep-like to the sword.
Bring them my boys, and tel me if the wars
Be not a life that may illustrate Gods,
And tickle not your Spirits with desire
Still to be trained in arms and chivalry:

Shall we let go these kings again my Lord
To gather greater numbers against our power,
That they may say, it is not chance doth this,
But matchless strength and magnanimity.

No, no Amyras, tempt not Fortune so,
Cherish thy valour still with fresh supplies:
And glut it not with stale and daunted foes,
But wher's this coward, villain, not my son,
But traitor to my name and majesty.
Image of sloth, and and picture of a slave,
The obloquy and scorn of my renown,
How may my hart, thus fired with mine eyes,
Wounded with shame, and killed with discontent,
Shroud any thought may hold my striving hands
From martial justice on thy wretched soul.

Yet pardon him I pray your Majesty.

Let al of us entreat your highness pardon

Stand up, ye base unworthy soldiers,
Know ye not yet the argument of Arms?

Good my Lord, let him be forgiven for once,
And we will force him to the field hereafter.

Stand up my boys, and I will teach ye arms,
And what the jealousy of wars must do.
O Samarcanda, where I breathed first,
And joyed the fire of this martial flesh,
Blush, blush fair city, at thine honours foil,
And shame of nature with Iaertis stream,
Embracing thee with deepest of his love,
Can never wash from thy distained brows.
Here Jove, receive his fainting soul again,
A Form not meet to give that subject essence,
Whose matter is the flesh of Tamburlain,
Wherein an incorporeall spirit moves,
Made of the mould whereof of thy self consists.
Which makes me valiant, proud, ambitious,
Ready to levy power against thy throne,
That I might move the turning Spheres of heave,
For earth and al this aerie region
Cannot contain the state of Tamburlaine.
By Mahomet, thy mighty friend I swear,
In sending to my issue such a soul,
Created of the massy dregs of earth,
The scum and tartar of the Elements,
Wherein was neither corrage, strength or wit,
But folly, sloth, and damned idleness:
Thou hast procured a greater enemy,
Than he that darted mountains at thy head.
Shaking the burden mighty Atlas bears:
Whereat thou trembling hid'st thee in the air.
Clothed with a pitchy cloud for being seen.
And now ye cankered cures of Asia,
That will not see the strength of Tamburlaine,
Although it shine as brightly as the Sun.
Now you shall feel the strength of Tamburlain,
And by the state of his supremacy,
Approve the difference twixt himself and you.

Thou show the difference twixt our selves and thee.
In this thy barbarous damned tyranny.

Thy victories are grown so violent,
That shortly heaven, filled with the meteors
Of blood and fire thy tyrannies have made,
Will pour down blood and fire on thy head:
Whose scalding drops will pierce thy seething brains,
And with our bloods, revenge our bloods on thee.

Villains, these terrors and these tyrannies
(If tyrannies wars justice ye repute)
I execute, enioin'd me from above:
To scourge the pride of such as heaven abhors,
Nor am I made Arch-monark of the world,
Crowned and invested by the hand of Jove,
For deeds of bounty or nobility:
But since I exercise a greater name,
The Scourge of God and terror of the world,
I must apply my self to fit those tearnies,
In war, in blood, in death, in cruelty,
And plague such Peasants as resisting me,
The power of heavens eternal majesty.
Theridamas, techelles, and Casane,
Ransack the tents and the pavilions
Of these proud Turks, and take their Concubines.
Making them bury this effeminate brat,
For not a common Soldier shall defile
His manly fingers with so faint a boy.
Then bring those Turkish harlots to my tent,
And I'll dispose them as it likes me best,
Mean while take him in.

We will my Lord.

O damned monster, nay a Feend of Hell,
Whose cruelties are not so harsh as thine,
Nor yet imposo, with such a bitter hate.

Revenge it Radamanth and Eacus,
And let your hates extended in his pains,
Expel the hate wherewith he pains our souls.

May never day give virtue to his eyes,
Whose sight composde of fury and of fire
Doth send such sterne affections to his heart,

May never spirit, vain or Artier feed
The cursed substance of that cruel heart,
But (wanting moisture and remorsefull blood)
Dry up with anger, and consume with heat.

Well, bark ye dogs, I'll bridle al your tongues
And bind them close with bits of burnished steel,
Down to the channels of your hateful throats,
And with the pains my rigour shall inflict,
I'll make ye roar, that earth may echo forth
The far resounding torments ye sustain,
As when an heard of lusty Cymbrian Bulls,
Run mourning round about, the Femals miss,
And stung with fury of their following,
Fill all the air with troublous bellowing:
I will with Engines, never exercised,
Conquer, sack, and utterly consume
Your cities and your golden palaces,
And with the flames that beat against the clouds
Incense the heavens. and make the stars to melt,
As if they were the tears of Mahomet
For hot consumption of his countries pride:
And till by viston, or by speech I hear
Immortal Jove say, Cease my Tamburlaine,
I will persist a terror to the world,
Making the Meteors, that like armed men
Are seen to march upon the towers of heaven,
Run tilting round about the firmament,
And break their burming Lances in the air,
For honour of my wondrous victories.
Come bring them in to our Pavilion.

Distressed Olympia, whose weeping eyes
Since thy arrival here beheld no Sun,
But closed within the compass of a tent,
Hath stained thy cheeks, made thee look like death
Devise some means to rid thee of thy life.
Rather than yield to his detested suit,
Whose drift is only to dishonour thee.
And since this earth, dewed with thy brinish tears,
Affords no herbs, whose taste may poison thee,
Nor yet this aier, beat often with thy sighs,
Contagious smells, and vapors to infect thee,
Nor thy close Cave a sword to murder thee,
Let this invention be the instrument.
Well met Olympia, I sought thee in my tent
But when I saw the place obscure and dark,
Which with thy beauty thou wast wont to light,
Enraged, I ran about the fields for thee,
Supposing, amorous Jove had sent his son,
The winged Hermes, to convey thee hence:
But now I find thee, and that fear is past.
Tell me Olympia, wilt thou grant my suit?

My Lord and husbands death, with my sweet sons,
With whom I buried al affections,
Save grief and sorrow which torment my heart,
Forbids my mind to entertain a thought
That tends to love, but meditate on death,
A fitter subject for a pensive soul.

Olympia, pity him, in whom thy looks
Have greater operation and more force
Than Cynthias in the watery wilderness,
For with thy view my joys are at the full,
And eb again, as thou departst from me.

Ah, pity me my Lord, and draw your sword,
Making a passage for my troubled soul,
Which beats against this prison to get out,
And meet my husband and my loving son.

Nothing, but still thy husband and thy son?
Leave this my Love, and listen more to me,
Thou shalt be stately Queen of fair Argier,
And clothed in costly cloth of massy gold,
Upon the marble turrets of my Court
Sit like to Venus in her chair of state,
Commanding all thy princely eye desires,
And I will cast off arms and sit with thee,
Spending my life in sweet discourse of love.

No such discourse is pleasant in mine eaxes,
But that where every period ends with death,
And every line begins with death again:
I cannot love to be an Empress.

Nay Lady, then if nothing will preuaile,
I'll use some other means to make you yield,
Such is the sudden fury of my love,
I must and will be pleased, and you shall yield:
Come to the tent again.

Stay good my Lord, and will you save my honour,
I'll give your Grace a present of such price,
As all the world cannot affoord the like.

What is it.

An ointment which a cunning Alcumist
Distilled from the purest Balsamum,
And simplest extracts of all Minerals,
In which the essential form of Marble stone,
Tempered by science metaphysical,
And Spells of magic from the mouths of spirits,
With which if you but noint your tender Skin,
Nor Pistol, Sword, nor Lance can pierce your flesh.

Why Madam, think ye to mock me thus palpably?


To prove it, I will noint my naked throat,
Which when you stab, look on your weapons point,
And you shall se't rebated with the blow.

Why gave you not your husband some of it, if you loved him, and it so
precious?


My purpose was (my Lord) to spend it so,
But was prevented by his sudden end.
And for a present easy proof hereof,
That I dissemble not, try it on me,

I will Olympia, and will keep it for
The richest present of this Eastern world.

Now stab my Lord, and mark your weapons point
That will be blunted if the blow be great.

Here then Olympia.
What, have I slain her? Villain, stab thy self:
Cut off this arm that murdered my Love:
In whom the learned Rabies of this age,
Might find as many wondrous miracles,
As in the Theoria of the world.
Now Hell is fairer than Elisian,
A greater Lamp than that bright eye of heaven,
From whence the stars do borrow all their light
Wanders about the black circumference,
And now the damned souls are free from pain,
For every Fury gazes on her looks:
Infernal Dis is courting of my Love,
Inventing masks and stately shows for her,
Opening the doors of his rich treasorie,
To entertain this Queen of chastity,
Whose body shall be combed with all the pomp
The treasure of my kingdom may affoord.

HOlla, ye pampered Jade of Asia:
What, can ye draw but twenty miles a day,
And have so proud a chariot at your heals,
And such a Coachman as great Tamburlaine?
But from Asphaltis, where I conquered you,
To Byron here where thus I honour you:
The horse that guide the golden cie of heaven,
And blow the morning from their nosterils,
Making their fiery gate above the clouds,
Are not so honoured in their Governor,
As you (ye slaves) in mighty Tamburlain.
The headstrong Jade of Thrace, Alcides tamed,
That King Egeus fed with human flesh,
And made so wanton that they knew their strengths,
Were not subdew'd with valour more divine,
Than you by this unconquered arm of mine.
To make you fierce, and fit my appetite,
You shall be fed with flesh as raw as blood,
And drink in pails the strongest Muscadell:
If you can live with it, then live, and draw
My chariot swifter than the racking clouds:
If not, then die like beasts, and fit for nought
But perches for the black and fatal Ravens.
Thus am I right the Scourge of highest Jove,
And see the figure of my dignity,
By which I hold my name and majesty.

Let me have coach my Lord, that I may ride,
And thus be drawn with these two idle kings.

Thy youth for bids such ease my kingly boy,
They shall to morrow draw my chariot,
While these their fellow kings may be refreshed,

O thou that swaiest the region under earth,
And art a king as absolute as Jove,
Come as thou did in fruitful Scicilie,
Surveying all the glories of the land:
And as thou took the fair Proserpina,
Joying the fruit of Ceres garden plot,
For love, for honour, and to make het Queen,
So for just hate, for shame, and to subdew
This proud contemner of thy dreadful power,
Come once in fury and survey his pride,
Haling him headlong to the lowest hell.

Your Majesty must get some byts for these,
To bridle their contemptuous cursing tongues,
That like unruly never broken Jade,
Break through the hedges of their hateful mouths,
And pass their fixed bounds exceedingly.

Nay, we will break the hedges of their mouths
And pull their kicking colts out of their pastures,

Your Majesty already hath devised
A mean, as fit as may be to restrain
These coltish coach-horse tongues from blasphemy.

How like you that sir king? why speak you not?

Ah cruel Brat, sprung from a tyrants loins,
How like his cursed father he begins,
To practise taunts and bitter tyrannies?

I Turk, I tel thee, this same Boy is he,
That must (aduaunst in higher pomp than this)
Rifle the kingdoms I shall leave vnsackt.
If Jove esteeming me too good for earth,
Raise me to match the fair Aldeboran,
Above the threefold Astracisme of heaven,
Before I conquer all the triple world.
New fetch me out the Turkish Concubines,
I will prefer them for the funeral
They have bestowed on my abortive son.
Where are my common soldiers now that fought
So Lion-like upon Asphaltis plains?

Here my Lord.

Hold ye tal soldiers, take ye Queens apiece
(I mean such Queens as were kings Concubines)
Take them, divide them and their jewels too,
And let them equally serve all your turns.

We thank your majesty.

Brawl not (I warn yon for your lechery,
For every man that so offends shall die,

Injurious tyrant, wilt thou so defame
The hateful fortunes of thy victory,
To exercise upon such guiltless Dames,
The violence of thy common Soldiers lust.

Live content then (ye slaves) and meet not me
With troops of harlots at your sloothful heals

O pity us my Lord, and save our honours.

Are ye not gone ye villains with your spoils?

O merciless infernal cruelty.

Save your honours? twere but time indeed,
Lost long before you knew what honour meant.

It seems they meant to conquer us my Lord,
And make us ieasting Pageants for their Trulls.

And now themselves shall make our Pageant,
And common soldiers jest with all their Truls,
Let them take pleasure soundly in their spoils,
Till we prepare our march to Babylon,
Whether we next make expedition.

Let us not be idle then my Lord,
But presently be pressed to conquer it.

We will techelles, forward then ye Jade:
Now crouch ye kings of greatest Asia,
And tremble when ye hear this Scourge will come,
That whips down cities, and controwleth crowns,
Adding their wealth and treasure to my store,
The Euxine sea North to Natolia,
The Terrene west, the Caspian north north-east,
And on the south Senus Arabicus.
Shall al be laden with the martial spoils
We will convey with us to Persea.
Then shall my native city Samarcanda
And crystal waives of fresh Iaertis stream,
The pride and beauty of her princely seat,
Be famous through the furthest continents,
For there my Palace royal shall be placed:
Whose shining Turrets shall dismay the heavens,
And cast the fame of Ilions Tower to hell.
Thorough the streets with troops of conquered kings,
I'll ride in golden armour like the Sun,
And in my helm a triple plume shall spring,
Spangled with Diamonds dancing in the air,
To note me Emperor of the threefold world.
Like to an almond tree ymounted high,
Upon the lofty and celestial mount,
Of every green Selinus queintly dect
With bloomes more white than Hericinas brows,
Whose tender blossoms tremble every one,
At every little breath that thorough heaven is blown:
Then in my coach like Saturnes royal son,
Mounted his shining chariots, gilt with fire.
And drawn with princely Eagles through the path,
Paved with bright Crystal, and enchac'd with stars,
When all the Gods stand and gazing at his pomp.
So will I ride through Samarcanda streets,
Until my soul dissevered from this flesh,
Shall mount the milk-white way and meet him there.
To Babylon my Lords, to Babylon.

WHat saith Maximus?

My Lord, the breach the enemy hath made
Gives such assurance of our overthrow,
That little hope is left to save our lives,
Or hold out city from the Conquerours hands.
Then hang out flags (my Lord of humble truce,
And satisfy the peoples general prayers,
That Tamburlains intollorable wrath
May be suppressed by our submission.

Villain, respects thou more thy slavish life,
Than honour of thy country or thy name?
Is not my life and state as dear to me,
The citic and my native countries weal,
As any thing of price with thy conceit?
Have we not hope, for all our battered walls,
To live secure, and keep his forces out,
When this our famous lake of Limnasphaltis
Makes walls a fresh with every thing that falls
Into the liquid substance of his stream,
More strong than are the gates of death or hell,
What faintness should dismay our courages,
When we are thus defenc'd against our Foe,
And have no terror but his threatening looks?
My Lord, if ever you did deed of truth,
And now will work a refuge to our lives,
Offer submission, hang up flags of truce,
That Tambur lain may pity our distress,
And use us like a loving Conqueror,
Though this be held his last days dreadful siege,
Wherein he spares neither man nor child,
Yet are there Christians of Georgia here,
Whose state he ever pitied and relieved:
Will get his pardon if your grace would send.

How is my soul environed,
And this eternisde city Babylon,
Filled with a pack of faintheart Fugitives,
That thus entreat their shame and servitude?

My Lord, if ever you will win our hearts,
Yield up the town, save our wives and children:
For I will cast my self from off these walls,
Or die some death of quickest violence,
Before I bide the wrath of Tamburlaine.

Villains, cowards, Traitors to our state,
Fall to the earth, and pierce the pit of Hell,
That legions of tormenting spirits may ver
Your slavish bosoms with continual pames,
I cate not, nor the town will never yield
As long as any life is in my breast.
Thou desperate Governor of Babylon,
To save thy life, and us a little labour,
Yield speedily the city to our hands,
Or else be sure thou shalt be forced with pains,
More exquisite than ever Traitor felt.

Tyrant, I turn the traitor in thy throat,
And will defend it in despite of thee.
Call up the soldiers to defend these walls.

Yield foolish Governor, we offer more
Than ever yet we did to such proud slaves,
As durst resist us till our third days siege:
Thou see us pressed to give the last assault,
And that shall bide no more regard of parley.

Assault and spare not, we will never yield.

The stately buildings of fair Babylon,
Whose lofty Pillars, higher than the clouds,
Were wont to guide the seaman in the deep.
Being carried thither by the cannons force,
Now fill the mouth of Limnasphaltes lake,
And make a bridge unto the battered walls,
Where Belus, Ninus and great Alexander
Have rode in triumph, triumphs Tamburlaine,
Whose chariot wheels have burst the Assirians bones,
Drawn with these kings on heaps of carcasses,
Now in the place where fair Semiramis,
Courted by kings and peers of Asia,
Hath trod the Meisures, do my soldiers march,
And in the streets, where brave Assyrian Dames
Have rid in pomp like rich Saturnia,
With furious words and frowning visages,
My horsemen brandish their unruly blades.
Who have ye there my Lords?

The sturdy Governor of Babylon,
That made us all the labour for the town,
And used such slender reckoning of you majesty.

Go bind the villain, he shall hang in chains,
Upon the ruins of this conquered town,
Sirha, the view of our vermillion tents,
Which threatened more than if the region
Next underneath the Element of fire,
Were full of Comets and of blazing stars,
Whose flaming trains should reach down to the earth
Could not affright you, no, nor I my self,
The wrathful messenger of mighty Iouc,
That with his sword hath quail'd all earthly kings.
Could not persuade you to submission,
But still the ports were shut: villain I say,
Should I but touch the rusty gates of hell,
The triple headed Cerberus would howl,
And wake black Jove to crouch and kneel to me.
But I have sent volleys of shot to you,
Yet could not enter till the breach was made,

Nor if my body could have stopped the breach,
Should thou have entted, cruel tamburlaine:
Tis not thy bloody tents can make me yield,
Nor yet thy self, the anger of the highest,
For though thy cannon shook the city walls,
My heart did never quake, or corrage faint.

Well, now I'll make it quake, go draw him up,
Hang him up in chains upon the city walls,
And let my soldiers shoot the slave to death.

Vile monster, borne of some infernal hag,
And sent from hell to tyrannise on earth,
Do all thy wurst, nor death, nor Tamburlaine,
Torture or pain can daunt my dreadlesse mind.

Up with him then, his body shall be scard.

But Tamburlain, in Lymnasphaltis lake,
There lies more gold than Babylon is worth,
Which when the city was besieged I hid,
Save but my life and I will give it thee.

Then for all your valour, you would save your life,
Where about lies it?

Under a hollow bank, right opposite
Against the Western gate of Babylon.

Go thither some of you and take his gold,
The rest forward with execution,
Away with him hence, let him speak no more:
I think I make your courage something quail,
When this is done, we'll march from Babylon,
And make our greatest haste to Persea:
These Jade are broken winded, and half tired,
Vnharnesse them, and let me have fresh horse:
So, now their best is done to honour me,
Take them, and hang them both up presently.

Wild Tyrant, barbarous bloody Tamburlain

Take them away Theridamas, see them dispatcht.

I will my Lord.

Come Asian Viceroies, to your tasks a while
And take such fortune as your fellows felt.

First let thy Scythyan horse tear both our limbs
Rather then we should draw thy chariot.
And like base slaves abject our princely minds
To vile and ignominious servitude.

Rather lend me thy weapon Tamburlain,
That I may sheath it in this breast of mine,
A thousand deaths could not torment our hearts
More than the thought of this doth vex our souls.

They will talk still my Lord, if you do not bridle them.

Bridle them, and let me to my coach.

See now my Lord how brave the Captain hangs.

Tis brave indeed my boy, well done,
Shoot first my Lord, and then the rest shall follow.

Then have at him to begin withal.

Yet save my life, and let this wound appease
The mortal fury of great Tamburlain.

No, though Asphaltis lake were liquid gold,
And offered me as ransom for thy life,
Yet should thou die, shoot at him all at once.
So now he hangs like Bagdets Governor,
Having as many bullets in his flesh,
As there be breaches in her battered wall.
Go now and bind the Burghers hand and foot,
And cast them headlong in the cities lake:
Tartars and Perseans shall inhabit there,
And to command the city, I will build
A Cytadell, that all Africa
Which hath been subject to the Persean king,
Shall pay me tribute for, in Babylon.

What shall be done with their wives and children my Lord.

Techelles, Drown them all, man, woman, and child,
Leave not a Babylonian in the town.

I will about it straight, come Soldiers.

Now Casane, wher's the Turkish Alcaron,
And all the heaps of superstitious books,
Found in the Temples of that Mahomet?
Whom I have thought a God, they shall be burnt.

Here they are my Lord.

Well said, let there be a fire presently,
In vain I see men worship Mahomet,
My sword hath sent millions of Turks to hell.
Slew all his Priests, his kinsmen, and his friends,
And yet I live untouched by Mahomet:
There is a God full of revenging wrath,
From whom the thunder and the lightning breaks,
Whose Scourge I am, and him will I obey.
So Casane, fling them in the fire.
Now Mahomet, if thou have any power,
Come down thy self and work a miracle,
Thou art not worthy to be worshipped,
That suffers flames of fire to burn the writ
Wherein the sum of thy religion rests.
Why send 'st thou not a furious whyrlwind down,
To blow thy Alcaron up to thy throne,
Where men report, thou sitt'st by God himself,
Or vengeance on the head of Tamburlain,
That shakes his sword against thy majesty.
And spurns the Abstracts of thy foolish laws.
Well soldiers, Mahomet remains in hell,
He cannot hear the voice of Tamburlain,
Seek out another Godhead to adore,
The God that sits in heaven, if any God,
For he is God alone, and none but he.

I have fulfil'd your highness will, my Lord,
Thousands of men drowned in Asphal^is Lake,
Have made the water swell abore the banks,
And fishes feed by human carcasses,
Amazed, swim up and down upon the waives,
As when they swallow Assafitida,
Which makes them fleet aloft and gasp for air,

Well then my friendly Lords what now remains
But that we leave sufficient garrison
And presently depart to Persea,
To triumph after all our victories.

I, good my Lord, let us in hast to Persea,
And let this Captain be remoou'd the walls,
To some high hill about the city here.

Let it be so, about it soldiers:
But stay, I feel my self distempered suddenly.

What is it dares distemper Tamburlain?

Something techelles but I know not what,
But forth ye vassals, what so ere it be,
Sickness or death can never conquer me.

KIng of Amasia, now our mighty host,
Marches in Asia mayor where the streams,
Of Euphrates and Tigris swiftly runs,
And here may we behald great Babylon,
Circled about with Limnasphaltis Lake,
Where tamburlaine with all his army lies,
Which being faint and weary with the siege,
We may lie ready to encounter him.
Before his host be full from Babylon,
And so revenge our latest grievous loss,
If God or Mahomet send any aide.

Doubt not my lord, but we shall conquer him
The Monster that hath drink a sea of blood,
And yet gapes still for more to quench his thirst,
Our Turkish swords shall headlong send to hell,
And that vile Carcass drawn by warlike kings,
The Fowls shall eat, for never sepulchre
Shall grace that base-borne Tyrant tamburlaine.

When I record my Parents slavish life,
Their cruel death, mine own captivity,
My Viceroies bondage under tamburlaine,
Me thinks I could sustain a thousand deaths,
To be revenged of all his Villainy.
Ah sacred Mahomet, thou that hast seen,
Millions of Turks perish by Tamburlaine,
Kingdoms made waste, brave cities sacked burnt,
And but one host is left to honour thee.
And thy obedient servant Callapine,
And make him after all these overthrows,
To triumph over cursed Tamburlaine.

Fear not my Lord, I see great Mahomet
Clothed in purple clouds, and on his head
A Chaplet brighter than Apollos crown,
Marching about the air with armed men,
To join with you against this Tamburlaine.
Renowned General mighty Callapine,
Though God himself and holy Mahomet,
Should come in person to resist your power,
Yet might your mighty host encounter all,
And pull proud Tamburlaine upon his knees,
To sue for mercy at your highness feet,

Captain the force of Tamburlaine is great,
His fortune greater, and the victories
Wherewith he hath so sore dismayed the world,
Are greatest to discourage all our drifts,
Yet when the pride of Cynthia is at full,
She wains again, and so shall his I hope,
For we have here the chief selected men
Of twenty several kingdoms at the least:
Nor plowman, Priest, nor Merchant stays at home.
All Turkie is in arms with Callapine.
And never will we sunder camps and arms,
Before himself or his be conquered.
This is the time that must eternize me,
For conquering the Tyrant of the world.
Come Soldiers, let us lie in wait for him
And if we find him absent from his camp,
Or that it be reioin'd again at full,
Assail it and be sure of victory.

Weep heavens, and vanish into liquid tears
Fall stars that govern his nativity,
And summon al the shining lamps of heaven
To cast their bootless fires to the earth.
And shed their feeble influence in the air.
Muffle your beauties with eternal clouds,
For hell and darkness pitch their pitchy tents,
And Death with armies of Cymerian spirits
Gives battile against the heart of Tamburlaine.
Now in defiance of that wonted love,
Your sacred virtues poured upon his throne,
And made his state an honour to the heavens,
These cowards invisibly assail his soul,
And threaten conquest on our Sovereign:
But if he die, your glories are disgraced,
Earth droopes and says, that hell in heaven is placed,
O then ye Powers that sway eternal seats,
And guide this massy substance of the earth,
If you retain desert of holiness,
As your supreme estates instruct our thoughts,
Be not iuconstant, careless of your fame,
Bear not the burden of your enemies joys,
Triumphing in his fall whom you aduaimst,
But as his birth, life, health and majesty
Were strangely blessed and governed by heaven,
So honour heaven till heaven dissolved be,
His birth, his life, his health and majesty.

Blush heaven to loose the honour of thyname,
To see thy foot-stoole set upon thy head,
And let no baseness in thy haughty breast,
Sustain a shame of such inexcellence:
To see the devils mount in Angels throanes,
And Angels dive into the pooles of hell.
And though they think their painful date is out,
And that their power is puissant as Ioues,
Which makes them manage arms against thy state,
Yet make them feel the strength of Tamburlain,
Thy instrument and note of Maisty.
Is greater far than they can thus subdue.
For if he die, thy glory is disgraced,
Earth droopes and says that hell in heaven is placed.

What daring God torments my body thus,
And seeks to conquet mighty Tamburlaine,
Shall sickness prove me now to be a man,
That have been termed the terror of the world?
Techelles and the rest, come take your swords,
And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul,
Come let us march against the powers of heaven,
And set black streamers in the firmament,
To signify the slaughter of the Gods,
Ah friends, what shall I do I cannot stand,
Come carry me to war against the Gods,
That thus inuie the health of Tamburlaine,

Ah good my Lord, leave these iinpatient words,
Which ad much danger to your malady.

Why shall I sit and languish in this pain,
No, strike the drums, and in revenge of this,
Come let us chardge our spears and pierce his breast,
Whose shoulders bear the Axis of the world,
That if I perish, heaven and earth may fade,
theridamas, haste to the court of Jove,
Will him to send Apollo hither straight,
To cure me, or I'll fetch him down my self.

Sit still my gracious Lord, this grief will cease,
And cannot last, it is so violent.

Not last techelles, no, for I shall die,
See where my slave, the ugly monster death
Shaking and quivering, pale and wan for fear,
Stands aiming at me with his murthering dart,
Who flies away at every glance I give,
And when I look away, comes stealing on:
Villain away, and hie thee to the field,
I and mine army come to lode thy bark
With souls of thousand mangled carcasses,
Look where he goes, but see, he comes again
Because I stay, techelles let us march,
And weary Death with bearing souls to hell.

Pleases your Majesty to drink this potion.
Which will abate the fury of your fit,
And cause some milder spirits govern you.

Tel me, what think you of my sickness now?

I viewed your urine, and the Hipostates
Thick and obscure doth make your danger great,
Your veins are full of accidental heat,
Whereby the moisture of your blood is dried,
The Humidum and Calor, which some hold
Is not a parcel of the Elements,
But of a substance more divine and pure,
Is almost clean extinguished and spent.
Which being the cause of life, imports your death.
Besides my Lord, this day is Critical,
Dangerous to those, whose Chrisis is as yours:
Your Artiers which along the veins convey
The lively spirits which the heart ingenders
Are partcht and void of spirit that the soul
Wanting those Organnons by which it moves,
Can not endure by argument of art.
Yet if your majesty may escape this day,
No doubt, but you shall soon recover all.

Then will I comfort all my vital parts,
And live in spite of death above a day.

My Lord, young Callapine that lately fled from your majesty, hath now gathered
a fresh Army, and


See my Physicians now, how Jove hath sent,
A present medicine to recure my pain:
My looks shall make them fly, and might I follow,
There should not one of all the villains power
Live to give offer of another fight.

I joy my Lord, your highness is so strong,
That can endure so well your royal presence,
Which only will dismay the enemy.

I know it will Casane: draw you slaves,
In spite of death I will go show my face.
Thus are the villains, cowards fled for fear,
Like Summers vapours, vanished by the Sun.
And could I but a while pursue the field,
That Callapine should be my slave again.
But I perceive my martial strength is spent,
In vain I strive and rail against those powers,
That mean t'inuest me in a higher throne,
As much too high for this disdainful earth.
Give me a Map, then let me see how much
Is left for me to conquer all the world,
That these my boys may finish all my wants,
Here I began to march towards Persea,
Along Armenia and the Caspian sea,
And thence unto Bythinia, where I took
The Turk and his great Empress priseners,
Then marched I into Egypt and Arabia,
And here not far from Alexandria,
Whereas the Terren and the red sea meet,
Being distant less than still a hundred leagues,
I meant to cut a channel to them both,
That men might quickly sail to India.
From thence to Nubia near Borno Lake,
And so along the Ethiopian sea,
Cutting the Tropicke line of Capricorne,
I conquered all as far as Zansibar,
Then by the Northern part of Africa.
I came at last to Graecia, and from thence
To Asia, where I stay against my will,
Which is from Scythia, where I first began,
Backward and forwards ne'er five thousand leagues,
Look here my boys, see what a world of ground,
Lies westward from the midst of Cancers line,
Unto the rising of this earthly globe,
Whereas the Sun declining from our sight,
Begins the day with our Antypodes:
And shall I die, and this unconquered?
Lo here my sons, are all the golden Mines,
Inestimable drugs and precious stones,
More worth than Asia, and the world beside,
And from th'Antartique Pole, Eastward behold
As much more land, which never was descried,
Wherein are rocks of Pearl, that shine as bright
As all the Lamps that beautify the Sky,
And shall I die, and this unconquered?
Here lovely boys, what death forbids my life,
That let your lives command in spite of death.

Alas my Lord, how should our bleeding harts
Wounded and broken with your Highness grief,
Retain a thought of joy, or spark of life?
Your soul gives essence to our wretched subjects.
Whose matter is incorporoat in your flesh.

Your pains do pierce our souls, no hope survives,
For by your life we entertain our lives,

But sons, this subject not of force enough,
To hold the fiery spirit it contains,
must part, imparting his impressions,
By equal portions into both your breasts:
My flesh divided in your precious shapes,
Shall still retain my spirit, though I die,
And live in all your seeds immortally:
Then now remove me, that I may resign
My place and proper title to my son:
First take my Scourge and my imperial Crown,
And mount my royal chariot of estate,
That I may see thee crowned before I die,
Help me (my Lords) to make my last remove.

A woeful change my Lord, that daunts our thoughts,
More than the ruin of our proper souls.

Sit up my son, let me see how well
Thou wilt become thy fathers majesty.

With what a flinty bosom should I joy.
The breath of life, and burden of my soul,
If not resolved into resolved pains,
My bodies mortified lineaments
should exercise the motions of my heart,
Pierced with the joy of any dignity?
O father, if the unrelenting ears
Of death and hell be shut against my prayers,
And that the spiteful influence of heaven.
Deny my soul fruition of her joy,
How should I step or stir my hateful feet,
Against the inward powers of my heart,
Leading a life that only strives to die,
And plead in vain, unpleasing soueranity.

Let not thy love exceed thine honour son,
Nor bar thy mind that magnanimity,
That nobly must admit necessity;
Sit up my boy, and with those silken rains,
Bridle the steeled stomachs of those Jade.

My Lord, you must obey his majesty,
Since Fate commands, and proud necessity.

Heavens witness me, with what a broken hart
And damned spirit I ascend this seat,
^nd send my soul before my father die,
His anguish and his burning agony.

Now fetch the hearse of fair Zenocrate,
Let it be placed by this my fatal chair,
And serve as parcel of my funeral.

Then feels your majesty no sovereign ease,
Nor may our hearts all drowned in tears of blood,
Joy any hope of your recovery?

Casane no, the Monarch of the earth,
And eielesse Monster that torments my soul,
Cannot behold the tears ye shed for me,
And therefore still augments his cruelty.

Then let some God oppose his holy power,
Against the wrath and tyranny of death,
That his teare-thyrsty and unquenched hate,
May be upon himself reuerberate.

Now eyes, enjoy your latest benefit,
And when my soul hath virtue of your sight,
Pierce through the ^fin and the sheet of gold,
And glut your longings with a heaven of joy.
So, reign my son, scourge and controlle those slaves
Guiding thy chariot with thy Fathers hand.
As precious is the charge thou vndertak'st
As that which Clymens brainsick son did guide,
When wandering Phoebes Ivory cheeks were scortcht
And all the earth like AEtna breathing fire:
Be warned by him, then learn with awful eye
To sway a throne as dangerous as his:
For if thy body thrive not full of thoughts
As pure and fiery as Phyteus beams,
The nature of these proud rebelling Jade
Will take occasion by the slenderest hair,
And draw thee peecemeale like Hyppolitus,
Through rocks more steep and sharp than Caspian cliftes.
The nature of thy chariot will not bear
A guide of baser temper than my self,
More then heavens coach, the pride of Phaeton.
Fa^l my boys, my dearest friends, farewell,
My body feels, my soul doth weep to see
Your sweet desires deprived my company,
For Tamburlaine, the Scourge of God must die.

Meet heaven earth, here let al things end
For earth hath spent the pride of all her fruit,
And heaven consumed his choicest living fire.
Let earth and heaven his timeless death deplore,
For both their woorths will equal him no more,


