THe Scene is Lybia, and the subject thus.
Whilst Carthage stood the only awe of Rome,
As most imperial seat of Lybia,
Governed by Statsmen each as great as Kings
(For 17. Kings were Carthage feodars)
Whilst thus she florishd, whilst her Hannibal
Made Rome to tremble, and the Walls yet pale:
Then in this Carthage Sophonisba lived
The far famed daughter of great Asdruball*
For whom (amongst others) potent Syphax sues
And well graced Massinissa rivals him
Both Princes of proud Scepters: but the lot
Of doubtful favour Massinissa graced
At which Syphax grows black: For now the night
Yields loud resoundings of the nuptial pomp:
Apollo strikes his Harp: Hymen his Torch
Whilst lowering Iuno with ill-boding eye
Sits envious at too forward Venus: Lo
The instant night: And now ye worthier minds
To whom we shall present a female glory
(The wonder of a constancy so fixed
That Fate it self might well grow envious)
Be pleased to sit such as may merit oil
And holy dew styled from diviner heat,
For rest thus knowing, what of this you hear,
The Author lowly hopes, but must not fear.
For just worth never rests on popular frown,
To have done well is fair deeds only crown.

Syphax, Syphax, why wast thou cursd a King?
What angry God made thee so great, so vile?
Contemd, disgraced, think, were thou a slave
Though Sophonisba did reject thy love
Thy low neglected head unpointed at
Thy shame vnrumord and thy suit vnskoffd
Might yet rest quiet: Reputation
Thou awe of fools and greatmen: thou that choakst
Freest addictions, and makst mortals sweat
Blood and cold drops in fear to loose, or hope
To gain thy never certain seldom worthy gracings.
Reputation!
Were not for thee Syphax could bear this scorn
Not spouting up his gall among his blood
In black vexations: Massinissa might
Enjoy the sweets of his preferred graces
Without my dangerous Envy or Revenge
Were not for thy affliction all might sleep
In sweet oblivion: But (O greatness skourge!)
We cannot without Envy keep high name
Nor yet disgraced can have a quiet shame.

Scipio: --

Some light in depth of hell: Vangue what hope?

I have receaud assured intelligence
That Scipio Romes sole hope hath raised up men
Drawn troupes together for invasion --

Of this same Carthage.

With this policy
To force wild Hannibal from Italy --

And draw the war to Affricke.

Right.

And strik
This secure country with unthought of arms

My letters bear he is departed Rome
Directly setting course and sailing up. --

To Carthage, Carthage, O thou eternal youth
Man of large fame great and abounding glory
Renounefull Scipio, spread thy too-necked Eagles,
Fill full thy sails with a revenging wind,
Strike through obedient Neptune, till thy prows
Dash up our Lybian ouse, and thy just arms
Shine with amazfull terror on these walls,
O now record thy Fathers honoured blood
Which Carthage drunk, thy Uncle Publius blood
Which Carthage drunk, 30000. souls
Of choice Italians Carthage set on wing:
Remember Hannibal, yet Hannibal
The consul-queller: O then enlarge thy hart
Be thousand souls in one, let all the breath
The spirit of thy name and nation be mixed strong
In thy great hart: O fall like thunder shaft
The winged vengeance of incensed Jove
Upon this Carthage: for Syphax here flies off
From all allegiance, from all love or service
His (now freed) sceptre once did yield this City
Ye universal Gods, Light, Heate, and Air
Prove all vnblessing Syphax if his hands
Once rear them selves for Carthage but to curse it.
It had been better they had changed their faith,
Denied their Gods, then slighted Syphax love
So fearfully will I take vengeance.
I'll interleague with Scipio. Vangue.
Dear Ethiopian Negro, go wing a vessel
And fly to Scipio. say his confederate
Vowed and confirmed is Syphax: bid him hast
To mix our palms and arms: will him make up
Whilst we are in the strength of discontent
Our unsuspected forces well in arms
For Sophonisba, Carthage, Asdruball
Shall feel their weakness in preferring weakness
And one less great then we, to our dear wishes
Haste gentle Negro, that this heap may know strong
Me, and their wrong:

Wrong?

I, tho twere not, yet know while Kings are
What thei'le but think and not what is, is wrong
I am disgraced in, and by that which hath
No reason, Love, and Woman, my revenge
Shall therefore bear no argument of right
Passion is Reason when it speaks from Might
I tell thee, man, nor Kings, nor Gods exempt
But they grow pale if once they find Contempt: haste.

Watch at the dors: and till we be reposed
Let no one enter: Zanthia undo me.

With this motto under your girdle
You had bin undone if you had not bin undone humblest service.

I wonder Zanthia why the custom is
To use such Ceremony such strict shape
About us women: forsooth the Bride must steal
Before her Lord to bed: and then delays
Long expectations all against known wishes
I hate these figures in locution
These about phrases forced by ceremony
We must still seem to fly what we most seek
And hide our selves from that we fain would find us
Let those that think and speak and do just acts
Know form can give no virtue to their acts
Nor detract vice.

alas fair Princes, those that are strongly formed
And truly shaped may naked walk, but we
We things called women, only made for show
And pleasure, created to bear children
And play at shuttle-coke, we imperfect mixtures
without respective ceremony used
And ever complement, alas what are we?
Take from us formal custom and the courtesies
Which civil fashion hath still used to us
We fall to all contempt, O women how much
How much are you beholding to Ceremony,

You are familiar. Zanthia my shoe,

Tis wonder Madam you tread not awry.

Your reason Zanthia.

You go very high.

Hark, Music, Music.

The Bridgrome.

The Bridgrome

Hast good Zanthia, help, keep yet the doors

Fair fall you Lady, so, admit admit.

You powers of joy: Gods of a happy bed
Show you are pleased, sister and wife of Jove
High fronted Iuno and thou Carthage Patron
Smooth chind Appollo, both give modest heat
And temperate graces.

draws a white ribbon forth of the
bed as from the waste of Sopho.

Lo I unloose thy waste
She that is just in love is Godlike chaste:

A modest silence thought be thought
A virgins beauty and her highest honour
Though bashful feignings nicely wrought
Grace her that virtue takes not in, but on her
What I dare think I boldly speak
After my word my well bold action rushes
In open flame then passion break
Where Virtue prompts, thought word, act never blushes.
Revenging Gods whose Marble hands
Crush faithless men with a confounding terror
Give me no mercy if these bands
I covet not with an unfeigned fervor
Which zealous vow when ought can force me t'lame
Load with that plague Atlas would groan at, shame.

Live both high parents of so happy birth
Your stemms may touch the skies and shadow earth
Most great in fame more great in virtue shining
Prosper O powers a just, a strong divining.

To bold harts Fortune, be not you amazd
Carthage O Carthage: be not you amazd.

Jove made us not to fear, resolve, speak out
The highest misery of man is doubt: Speak Carthalo.

The stooping Sun like to some weaker Prince
Let his shads spread to an unnatural hugeness
When we the camp that lay at Vtica
From Carthage distant but five easy leagues
Discride from of the watch three hundred sail
Upon whose tops the Roman Eagles streachd
Their large spread wings, which fan'd the evening air
To us cold breath, for well we might discern
Rome swam to Carthage.

Hanniball our ancor is come back, thy slight
Thy Stratagem to lead war unto Rome
To quite our selves, hath taught now desperate Rome
T'assaile our Carthage, Now the war is here.

He is nor blessed nor honest that can fear.

I but to cast the worst of our distress. - -

To doubt of what shall be is wretchedness
Desire, Fear, and Hope, receive no bond
By whom, we in our selves are never but beyond. On.

Th'allarum beats necessity of fight
Th'vnsober evening draws out reeling forces
Soldiers half men, who to their colours troupe
With fury, not with valor: whilst our ships
Vnrigd, vnusd, fitter for fire then water
We save in our bard haven from surprise.
By this our army marches toward the shore,
Vndisciplind young men most bold to do
If they knew how, or what, when we descry
A mighty dust beat up with horses houes
Straight Roman ensigns glitter: Scipio.

Scipio.

Scipio advanced like the God of blood
Leads up grim war, that father of foul wounds
Whose finowy feet are steepd in gore, whose hideous voice
Makes turrets tremble, and whole Cities shake
Before whose brows flight and disorder hurry
With whom March Burnings, murder, wrong, waste, rapes
Behind whom a sad train is seen, Woe, Fears
Tortures, Lean, Need, Famine, and helpless tears
Now make we equal stand in mutual view
We judged the Romans 18. thousand foot
5000* Horse, we almost doubled them
In number not in virtue: yet in heate
Of youth and wine jolly and full of blood.
We gave the sign of battle: shouts are raised
That shook the heavens: Pell Mell our armies join
Horse, targets, pikes all against each apposd
They give fierce shoke, arms thundered as they closed
Men cover earth which straight are covered
With men and earth: yet doubtful stood the fight
More fair to Carthage; when lo as oft you see
In mines of gold, when laboring slaves delve out
The richest ore, being in sudden hope
With some unlooked for vain to full their buckets
And send huge treasure up, a sudden damp
Stifles them all, their hands yet stuffd with gold
So fell our fortunes for look as ye stood proud
As hopeful victors, thinking to return
With spoils worth triumph, wrathful Syphax lands
With full ten thousand strong Numidian horse
And ions to Scipio, then lo we all were damp't
We fall in glusters and our wearied troops
Quit all: slaughter ran throw us straight, we fly
Romans pursue, but Scipio sounds retraite
As fearing trains and night: we make amain
For Carthage most, and some for Vtica
All for our lives: new force, fresh arms with speed
You have said truth of all: no more. I bleed.

O wretched fortune.

Old Lord spare thy hay^s
What dost thou think baldness will cure thy grief
What decree the Senate?

Ask old Gelosso who returns from them
Informd with fullest charge strong Asdruball
Great Massinissa Carthage General
So speaks the Senate: Counsel for this war
In Hanno magnus, Bytheas, Carthalon.
And us Gelosso rests: Embrace this charge
You never yet dishonord. Asdruball
High Massinissa by your vows to Carthage
By God of great-men Glory, fight for Carthage
Ten thousand strong Massulians ready troupt
Expect their King, double that number waits
The leading of loud Asdruball; beat load
Our Affrike drums, and whilst our o're-toild foe
Snores on his vnlacd cask, all faint though proud
Through his successful fight strike fresh alarms
Gods are not if they grace not bold just arms.

Carthage thou straight shalt know
Thy favours have been done unto a king.

My Lords t,is most unusual such sad haps
Of suddeine horror, should intrude mong beds
Of soft and private loves; but strange events
Excuse strange form's. O you that know our blood
Revenge if I do fain: I here protest
Though my Lord leave his wife a very maid,
Even this night instead of my soft arms
Clasping his well strong limbs with glossfull steel,
Whats safe to Carthage shall be sweet to me.
I must not, nor I am once ignorant
My choice of love hath given this suddein dagger
To yet strong Carthage: t'was I lost the fight,
My choice vexed Syphax enraged Syphax struk
Arms fate: yet Sophonisba not repents,
O we were Gods if that we knew events.
But let me Lord leave Carthage, quit his virtue
I will not love him, yet must honour him,
As still good Subjects must bad Princes: Lords
From the most ill-grac'd Hymeneal bed
That ever Iuno frowned at, I entreat
That you'll collect from our loose formed speech
This firm resolve: that no lo Appetite
Of my sex weakness, can or shall overcome
Due grateful service unto you, or virtue.
Witness ye Gods I never until now
Repined at my creation; now I wish
I were no woman, that my arms might speak
My hart to Carthage: but in vain, my tongue
Swears I am woman still: I talk to long.

Ye Carthage Lords: know Massinissa knows
Not only terms of honour: but his actions
Nor must I now enlarge how much my cause
Hath dangerd Carthage but how I may show
My self most pressed to satisfaction
The loathsome stain of Kings Ingratitude
From me O much be far, and since this torrent
Wars rage admits no Ancor: since the billow
Is risen so high we may not hull but yield
This ample state to stroke of speedy swords
What you with sober hast hath well decreed
We'll put to sudden arms: no not this night
These dainties this first fruits of nuptials
That well might give excuse for feeble lingrings
Shall hinder Massiuissa. Appetite
Kisses, loves, dalliance and what softer joys
The Venus of the pleasingest ease can minister
I quit you all: Virtue perforce is Vice
But he that may, yet holds, is manly wise
Lo then ye Lords of Carthage, to your trust
I leave all Massinissas treasure by the oath
Of right good men stand to my fortune just.
Most hard it is for great harts to mistrust.

We vow by all high powers.

No do not swear.
I was not borne so small to doubt or fear.

Worthy my Lord.

Peace my ears are steel
I must not hear thy much enticing voice.

By Massinissa, Sophonisba speaks
Worthy his wife: go with as high a hand
As worth can rear, I will not stay my Lord
Fight for our country, vent thy youthful heate
In field not beds, the fruit of honour Fame
Be rather gotten then the oft disgrace
Of haplesse parents, children, go best man
And make me proud to be a soldiers wife
That valews his renoune above faint pleasures
Think every honour that doth grace thy sword
Trebbles my love: by thee I have no lust
But of thy glory: best lights of heaven with thee
Like wonder stand, or fall, so though thou die
My fortunes may be wretched, but not I.

Wondrous creature, even fit for Gods not men
Nature made all the rest of thy fair sex
As weak essaies, to make thee a pattern
Of what can be in woman. Long Farewell.
Hes sure vnconquer'd in whom thou dost dwell
Carthage Palladium. See that glorious lamp
Whose lifefull presence gives sudden flight
To fancies, togs, fears, sleep, and slothful night
Spreads day upon the world: march swift amain
Fame got with loss of breath is godlike gain.

My hand? my hand? rot first, wither in aged sha^

Will you be so unseasonably wood?

Hold such preposterous zeal as stand against
the full decree of Senate? all think fit.

Nay most vneuitable necessary
For Carthage safety, and the now sole good
Of present state, that we must break all faith
With Massinissa: whilst he fights abroad
Lets gain back Syphax, making him our own
By giving Sophonisba to his bed.

Syphax is Massinissas greater, and his force
Shall give more side to Cartthage; as fors queen
And her wise father, they love Carthage fate,
Profit, and Honesty, are one in state.

And what decrees our very virtuous senate
Of worthy Massinissa that now fights
and (leaving wife and bed) bleeds in good arms
For right old Carthage?

Thus tis thought fit
Her father Asdruball on sudeine shall take in
Revolted Siphax; so with doubled strength
Before that Massinissa shall suspect,
Slaughter boeth Massinissa and his troupes,
And likewise strike with his deep stratagem
A suddeine weakness into Scipios arms,
By drawing such alim from the maine body
Of his yet powerful army: which being don
Dead Massinissas kingdom we decree
To Sophonisba and great Asdruball
For their consent, so this swift plot shall bring
Two crowns to her, make Asdruball a king.

So first faiths breach, adultery, murder, theft,

What else? Gel. Nay all is don no mischeifleft

Pish prosperous success gives blackest actions glory,
The means are unremembered in most story.

Let me not say Gods are not.

This is fit
Conquest by blood is not so sweet as wit,
For how so ere nice virtue censures of it,
He hath the grace of war, that hath wars profit.
But Carthage well advised, that states comes on,
With slow advice, quick execution,
Have here an Engineere long bred for plots,
Called an impoisner, who knows this sound excuse,
The only dew that makes men sprout in Courts, is use,
Be it well or ill, his thrift is to be mute,
Such slaves must act commands, and not dispute.
Knowing foul deeds with danger do begin
But with rewards do end: Sin is no sin
But in respects --

Politic Lord, speak low tho heaven bears
A face far from us, Gods have most long ears,
Jove has a hundred marble marble hands

O I, in Poetry or Tragic scene.

I fear Gods only know what Poets mean.

Yet hear me: I will speak close truth and cease,
Nothing in Nature is vnseruisable,
No, not even Inutility it selse,
Is then for nought dishonesty in being,
And if it be somtines of forced use,
Wherein more urgent then in saving nations
State shapes are sodderd up, with base, nay faulty
Yet necessary functions; some must lie,
Some must betray, some murder, and some all,
Each hath strong use, as poison in all purges
Yet when some violent chance shall force a state,
To break given faith, or plot some stratagems,
Princes ascribe that vile necessity
Unto Heavens wrath: and sure tho't be no vice,
Yet it is bad chance: states must not stick to nice
For Massinissas death sense bids forgive
Beware to offend great men and let them live
For tis of empires body the mayne arm,
He that will do no good shall do no harm: you have my mind

Although a stagelike passion weak heate
Full of an empty wording might suit age
Know I'll speak strongly truth: Lords near mistrust
That he who'll not betray a private man
For his country, will near betray his country
For private men; then give Gelosso faith
If treachery in state be serviceable,
Let hangmen do it: I am bound to loose
My life but not my honour for my country;
Our vow, our faith, our oath, why they are our selves
And he that's faithless to his proper self,
May be excusd if he break faith with princes:
The Gods assist just hearts, states that trust,
Plots before Providence are tossed like dust.
For Massinissa: (O let me slake a little
Aust^ discourse and feel Humanity)
Me th^nkes I hear him cry. O fight for Carthage,
Charge home, wounds smart not, for that so just so great
So good a City: me thinks I see him yet
Leave his fair bride even on his nuptial night
To buckle on his arms for Carthage: Harke-
Yet, yet, I hear him cry -- Ingratitude
Vile stain of man. O over be most far
From Massinissas breast: up, march amain,
Fame got with loss of breath, is godlike gain.
And see by this he bleeds in doubtful fight:
And cries for Carthage, whilst Carthage -- Memory
Forsake Gelosso, would I could not think:
Nor hear, nor be, When Carthage is
So infinitely vile: see see look here,
Who speaks? what mute? fair plot: what? blush to break it?
How lewd to act when so shamed but to speak it.

Is this the Senates firm decrees

It is.

Is this the Senates firm decree?

It is

Hath Syphax entertained the stratagem?

No doubt he hath, or will.

My answers thus,
Whats safe to Carthage, shall be sweet to me

Right worthy

Roialest

O very woman!

But tis not safe for Carthage to destroy,
Be most unjust, cunningly politic,
Your heads still under Heaven, O trust to fate,
Gods prosper more a just then crafty state.
Tis less disgrace to have a pitied loss
Then shameful victory.

O very Angel!

We all have sworn good Massinissa faith,
Speech makes us men, and theirs no other bond
Twixt man and man, but words: O equal Gods
Make us once know the consequence of vows --

And we shall hate faith-breakers worse then man-eaters

Ha! good Gelosso is thy breath not here?

You do me wrong as long as I can die,
Doubt you that old Gelasso can be vile?
States may afflict, tax, torture, but our minds
Are oly sworn to Jove: I greiue and yet am proud
That I alone am honest: high powers you know
Virtue is seldom seen with troupes to go.

Excellent man Carthage Rome shall fall
Before thy fame: our Lords know I the worst.

The Gods foresaw, tis fate we thus are forced.

Gods nought foresee, but see, for to their eyes
Nought is to come, or past, Nor are you vile
Because the Gods foresee: for Gods and We
See as things are things are not, for we see
But since affected wisdom in us Women
Is our sex highest folly: I am silent,
I cannot speak less well, unless I were
More void of goodness: Lords of Carthage, thus
The air and earth of Carthage owes my body,
It is their servant; what decree they of it?

That you remove to Cirta, to the palace
Of well formed Syphax, who with longing eyes
Meets you: he that gives way to Fate is wise.

I go: what power can make me wretched? what evil
Is there in life to him, that knows lifes loss
To be no evil: show, show thy ugliest brow
O most black chance: make me a wretched story
Without misfortune Virtue hath no glory
Opposed trees makes tempests show their power
And waives forced back by rocks makes Neptune tower
Tearelesse O see a miracle of life
A maid, a widow, yet a haplesse wife.

A prodegy! let nature run cross legedd
Ops go upon thy head, let Neptune burn
Cold Saturne crack with heate for now the world
Hath seen a Woman:
Leap nimble lightning from Ioues ample shield
And make at length, an end, the proud hot breath
Of thee contemning Greatness, the huge drought
Of sole self loving vast Ambition.
Th'vnnaturall scorching heate of all those lamps
Thou reard'st to yield a temperate fruitful heat
Relentless rage whose hart hath no one drop
Of humane pity: all all loudly cry
Thy brand O Jove, for know the world is dry
O let A general end save Carthage fame
When worlds do burn vnseens a Cities flame.
Phoebus in me is great: Carthage must fall
Jove hats all vice but vows breach worst of all.

Mount us again, give us another horse

Uncle your blood flows fast, pray ye withdraw

O Iugurth I cannot bleed too fast. too much
For that so great, so just so royal Carthage
My wound smarts not, bloods loss makes me not faint
For that lou'de City, O Nephew let me tell thee,
How good that Carthage is: it nourishde me,
And when full time gave me fit strength for love,
The most adored creature of the city.
To us before great Syphax did they yield,
Fair, noble, modest, and above all, my,
My Sophonisba, O Iugurth my strength doubles
I know not how to turn a coward, drop
In feeble baseness, I cannot: give me horse,
Know I am Carthage very creature, and I am graced,
That I may bleed for them: give me fresh horse.

He that doth public good for multitude,
Finds few are truly grateful.

O Iugurth, fie you must not say so, Iugurth,
Some common weals may let a noble hart,
Too forward bleeds abroad and bleed bemond,
But not reuengd at home, but Carthage, fie
It cannot be vngrate, faithless through fear,
It cannot Iugurth: Sophonisba's there,
Beat a fresh charge.

Sound the retraite, respect your health brave Prince,
The waste of blood throw's paleness on your face,

By light, my harts not pale: O my loved father,
We bleed for Carthage Balsum to my wounds,
We bleed for Carthage: shals restore the fight?
My squadron of Massulians yet stands firm.

The day looks off from Carthage cease all arms
A modest temperance is the life of arms,
Take our best surgeon Gisco, he is sent
From Carthage to attend your chance of war,

We promise sudden ease.

Thy coforts good

That nothing can secure us but thy blood:
Infuse it in his wound, 'twill work amain,

O Jove,

What Jove? thy God must be thy gain
And as for me.
Thou know, a statist must not be a man.

Forbear, how art thou called?

Gisco my Lord.

Um, Gisco, ha, touch not mine arm, most only man,
Sirrha, sirrha, art poor?

not poor.

Nephew command
Our troupes of horse make indisgracde retraite,
Trot easy off: not poor: Iugurth give charge,
My soldiers stand in square battalia,
Entirely of themselves: Gisco you are old,
Tis time to leave off murder, thy faint breath.
Scarce heaves thy ribs, thy gummy bloud-shut eyes,
Are sunk a great way in thee, thy lank skin,
Slides from thy fleshlesh veins: be good to men,
Judge him ye Gods, I had not life to kill
So base a Creature, hold Gisco () live,
The God-like part of Kings is to forgive,

Command astonishd Gisco.

No return.
Haste unto Carthage: quit thy abject fears,
Massinissa knows no use of murderers.
Speak, speak, let terror strike slaves mute.
Much danger makes great hearts most resolute,

Uncle I fear foul arms, my self beheld,
Syphax on high speed run his well breathed horse,
Direct to Cirta that most beauteous City,
Of all his kingdom: whilst his troupes of horse
With careless trot pace gently toward our camp,
As friends to Carthage, stand on guard dear uncle
For Asdrubal with yet his well ranked army,
Bends a deep threatening brow to us as if,
He waited but to join with Syphax horse
And hew us all to pieces: O my King
My Uncle, Father, Captain O over All
Stand like thy self or like thy self now fall
Thy troops yet hold good ground: Unworthy wounds
Betray not Massinissa.

Iugurth pluck
Pluck, so, good cousin.

O God do you not feel?

Not Iugurth no, now all my flesh is steel.

Of base disguise: High lights scorn not to view
A true old man: up Massinissa throw
The lot of battle upon Syphax troops
Before he join with Carthage: then amain
Make through to Scipio, he yields safe abods
Spare treachery, and strike the very Gods.

Why wast thou borne at Carthage, O my fate
Divinest Sophonisba! I am full
Of much complaint, and many passions,
The least of which expresd would sad the Gods
And strike compassion in most ruthless hell
Up vnmaimd hart spend all thy grief and rage
Upon thy foe: the fields a soldiers stage
On which his action shows: If you are just
And hate those that contemn you, O you Gods
Revenge worthy your anger, your anger, O,
Down man, up hart, stoup Jove and bend thy chin
To thy large breast, give sign you are pleased, and just
Swear, good men's for heads must not print the dust

What Carthage hath decreed, Hanno is done
Aduauncd and borne was Asdruball for state
Only with it his faith, his love, his hate
Are of one piece: were it my daughters life
That fate hath song to Carthage safety brings
What deed so red but hath been done by Kings?
^phiginia, he that's a man for men,
Ambitious as a God, must like a God
Live clear from passions, his full aimde attend
Immence to others, sole self to comprehend
Round in's own globe, not to be clasped but holds
Within him all, his hart being of more folds
Then shield of Telamon not to be pierced tho struck
The God of wisemen is themselves, not luck.
See him by whom now Massiuissa is not
Gisco i'st done?

Your pardon worthy Lord,
It is not don, my heart sunk in my breast,
His virtue mazd me, faintness seasd me all,
Some Gods in Kings that will not let them fall.

His virtue mazed thee, (um) why now I see
Thart that just man that hath true touch of blood,
Of pity and soft piety: Forgive?
Yes honour thee, we did it but to try
What sense thou had of blood: go Bytheas
Take him into our private treasury
And cut his throat, the slave hath all betrayed.

Are you assured? As. A feared for this I know
Who thinks to buy villainy with gold,
Shall ever find such faith so bought so sold.
Reward him thoroughly.

What means this shout?

Hanno tis don: Scyphax revolt by this
Hath securd Carthage: and now his force come in
And ioynde with us give Massinissa charge,
And assured slaughter: O ye powers forgive,
Through rottenst dung best plats both sprout live
By blood vines grow.

But yet think Asdruball
Tis fit at least you bear griefs outward show,
It is your kinsman bleeds: what need men know.
Your hand is in his wounds, tis well in state,
To do close ill; but void a public hate*

Tush Hanno let me prosper let routs prate,
My power shall force their silence or my hate.
Shall scorn their idle malice: men of weight
Know, he that fears envy let him cease to reign,
The peoples hate to some hath bin their gain.
For how so ere a Monarch faines his parts,
Steal any thing from Kings but subjects hearts.

Guard, guard the camp, make to the trench stand firm

The Gods of boldness with us, how runs chance?

Think, think how wretched thou can be, thou art,
Short words shall speak long woes:

mark Asdruball.

Our bloody plot to Massinissas ear
Untimely by this Lord was all betrayed.

By me, it was, by me vile Asdruball,
^oy to speakt.

Down slave.

I cannot fall.

Our trains disclosd, straight to his well used arms
He took himself, rose up with all his force,
On Syphax careless troupes ( Syphax being hurried
Before to Cirta fearless of success
impatient Sophonisba to enjoy.)
Gelosso rides to head of all our squadrons
Commands make stand in thy name Asdruball,
In mine, in his, in all: dull rest our men,
Whilst Massinissa now with more then fury,
Charge the loose and much amazed ranks,
Of absent Syphax: who with broken shout,
(In vain expecting Carthage secondings)
Give faint repulse: a second charge is given
Then look as when a Falcon towrs alo ft
Whole shoals of foul and flocks of lesser birds,
Crouch fearfully and dive some among sedge,
Some crepein brakes: so Massinissas sword
Brandished aloft, tossd'bout his shining cask,
Made stoop whole squadrons, quick as thought he strikes,
Here hurles he darts? and there his rage strong arm,
Fights foot to foot: here cries he strike: they sink
And then grim slaughter follows, for by this
As men betrayed, they curse us, dye, or fly, or both
Often six thousand fell: Now was I come
And straight perceaud all Bled by his vile plot.

Vile? good plot, my good plot Asdruball.

I forcd our army beat a running march,
But Massinissa struck his spurs apace
Upon his speedy horse, leaves slaughtering
All fly to Scipio who with open ranks
In view receaues them: Al I could effect
Was but to gain him.

Dye.

Do what thou can,
Thou can but kill a weak old honest man.

scipio and Massinissas by this strike
Their clasped palms, then vow an endless love,
straight a joint shout they raise, then turn they breasts
Direct on us march strongly toward our camp
As if they dared us fight, O Asdruball.
I fear theile force our camp*

Break up and fly,
This was your plot.

But t'was thy shame to choose it.

He that forbids not offence he dos it.

The curse of women's words go with you: fly,
You are no villains, Gods and men, which way?
Advise vile things.

Vile?

I.

Not?

you did al

Did you not plot?

Yielded not Asdruball?

But you enticed me.

How?

With hope of place.

He that for wealth leaves faith is abject.

base

Do not provoke my sword, I live.

More shame.
T'out live thy virtue and thy once great name.

Up braid ye me?

Hold.

Know that only thou
Art treacherous: thou should have had a crovvne.

Thou did all, all he for whom mischiefs don
He dos it.

-- Broad scorn oppen faind povvers
Make good the camp, no, fly, yes, what? wild rage,
To be a prosperous villane yet some heate some hold,
But to burn temples and yet freeze, O cold,
Give me some health, now your blood sinks: thus deeds
Ill nourished rot, without I ove nought succeeds.

Must we entreat? sue to such squeamish ears,
Know Syphax has no knees, his eyes no tears,
Enraged love is senseless of remorse,
Thou shalt, thou must. Kings glory is their force.
Thou art in Cirta, in my Palace Fool
Dost think he pities tears, that knows to rule.
For all thy scornful eyes thy proud disdain,
And late contempt of us now we'll revenge,
Break stubborn silence: look I'll tack thy head
To the low earth, whilst strength of too black knaves,
Thy limbs all wide shall strain: prayer fitteth slaves.
Our courtship be our force: rest calm as sleep,
Else at this quake, hark, hark, we cannot weep.

Can Sophonisba be enforced?

Can? see.

Thou may enforce my body but not me.

Not?

No.

No?

No off with thy loathed arms
That lye more heavy on me then the chains,
That wear deep wrinkles in the captives limbs
I do beseech thee.

What?

Be but a beast,
Be but a beast.

Do not offend a power
Can make thee more then wretched: yield to him
To whom fate yields: Know Massinissas dead,

dead?

dead.

To Gods of goodmen shame

Help vangue my strong blood boils.

O save
thine own (yet) fame.

All appetite is deaf, I will I must.
Achilles armour could not bear out lust.

Hold thy strong arm and hear my Syphax know,
I am thy servant now: I needs must love thee
For (O my sex forgive) I must confess,
We not affect protesting feeblenes.
Entreats faint blushings, timorous modesty,
We think our lover is but little man,
Who is so full of woman: Know fair Prince
Loves strongest arms not rude: for we still prove
Without some fury theirs no ardent love.
We love our loves impatience of delay,
Our noble sex was only borne t'obay
To him that dares command.

Why this is well.
Th'excuse is good: wipe thy fair eyes our Queen,
Make proud thy head now feel: more friendly strength
Of thy Lords arm: come touch my rougher skin.
With thy soft lip Zanthia dress our bed,
Forget old loves and clip him that through blood,
And hell acquir's his Wish think not but kiss,
The flourish fore loves fight is Venus bliss.

Great dreadful Lord by thy affection
Grant me one boon, know I have made a vow,

Vow? what vow? speak.

Nay if you take office
Let my soul suffer first and yet.

offence?
Not Sophonisba, hold, thy vow is free,
As: -- come thy lips.

Alas cross misery
As I do wish to live I long to enjoy,
Your warm embrace, but O my vow tis thus,
If ever my Lord died I vowed to him,
A most, most private sacrifice, before
I touched a second spouse: all I implore.
Is but this liberty:

This go obtain
What time

One hour.

sweet good speed speed adieu
Yet Syphax trust no more then thou may view.
Vangue shall stay

He stays.

Zanthia, Zanthia
Thou art not foul, go to, some Lords are oft
So much in love with their known Ladies bodies,
That they oft love their vails, hold, hold thou'st find,
To faithful care Kings bounty hath no shore,

You may do much.

But let my gold do more.

I am your creature.

Be, get, tis no stain
The God of service is however gain.

Zathia, where are we now? speak worth my service
Ha we don well?

Nay in haight of best.
I feared a superstitious virtue would spoil all,
But now I find you above women rare,
She that can time her goodness hath true care
Of her best good. Nature at home begins
She whose integritye her self hurts sins.
For Massinissa, he was good and so,
But he is dead, or worse, distressed, or more
Then dead, or much distressed, O sad, poor
Who ever held such friends: no let him go
Such faith is praisd, then laughed at, for still know,
Those are the living women that reduce,
All that they touch unto their ease and use.
Knowing that wedlock, virtue or good names,
Are courses and varietyes of reason
To use or leave as they advantage them
And absolute within themselves reposed,
Only to Greatness Open, to all else closed.
Weak sanguine fools, are to their own good nice
Before I held you virtuous but now wise.

Zanthia victorious Massinissa liu's.
My Massinissa lives: O steddye powers
Keep him as safe as heaven keeps the earth.
Which looks upon it with a thousand eyes,
That honest valiant man and Zanthia,
Do but record the justice of his love,
And my for ever vows, for ever vows.

I true Madam: nay think of his great mind
His most just heart his all of excellence
And such a virtue as the Gods might envy
Again this Syphax is but* -- and you know.
Fame lost what can be got that's good: for:

hence
Take nay with one hand.

My service.

Prepare
Our sacrifice.

But yield you, I or no?

When thou dost know.

what the?

then thou wilt know
Let him that would have counsel void th'aduice
Of friends made his with weighty benefits
Whose much dependence only strives to fit
Humour not reason, and so still devise
In any thought to make their frieud seem wise
But above all O fear a servants tongue,
Like such as only for their gain to serve
Within the vast capacity of place
I know no vilenes so most truly base.
Their Lords, their gain: and he that most will give,
With him (they will not dye: but) they will live.
Traitors and these are one: such slaves once trust
Whet swords to make thine own blood lick the dust.
Withdraw, withdraw All but Zauthia Vangue depart
I not invoke thy arm thou God of sound
Nor thine, nor thine, although in all abound.
High powers immense: But Jovial Mercury
And thou O brightest female of the sky
Thrice modest Phoebe, you that jointly fit
A worthy chastity and a most chaste wit
To you corruptles Honey, and pure dew
Vpbreathes our holy fire. Words just and few
O deign to hear if in poor wretches cries
You glory not: if drops of withered eyes
Be not your sport, be just: all that I crane
Is but chaste life or an untainted grave.
I can no more: yet hath my constant tongue
Let fall no weakness, tho'my heart were wrung
With pangus worth hell: whilst great thoughts stop our tears
Sorrow unseen, unpitied in ward wears.
You see now where I rest, come is my end.
Cannot heaven, virtue, against weak chance defend?
When weakness hath outborne what weakness can,
What should I say tis Ioues, not sin of man.
Some stratagem now let wits God be shown,
Celestial powers by miracles are known.
I hau't tis don. Zanthia prepare our bed
Vangue

Your servant.

Vangue we have performed
Due rites unto the dead.
Now to thy Lord great Syphax healthful cups: which don,
The King is right much welcome.

Were it as deep as thought off it should thns -- he drinks

My safety with that draught.

Close the vaults mouth least we do slip in drink,

To what use gentle Negro serves this cave
Whose mouth thus opens so familliarly,
Even in the Kings bedchamber?

O my Queen
This vault with hideous darkness and much length
stretches beneath the earth into a grove
One league from Cirta (I am very sleepy)
Through this when Cirta hath beeue strong begirt
With hostile siege the King hath safely escaped
To, to,

The wine is strong.

strong?

Zanthia

What means my princes?

Zanthia rest firm
And scilent, help us: Nay do not dare refuse.

The Negros dead.

No drunk.

Alas.

Too late,
Her hand is fearful whose minds desperate.
It is but sleepy Opium he hath drunk,
Help Zanthia, They lay Vangue in Syphax bed draw the curtains, there lye
Syphax bride, a naked man is soon undressed;
There bide dishonoured passion they knock within, forthwith Syphax comes.

Way for the King.

Straight for the King: I fly
Where misery shall see nought but it self.
Dear Zanthia close the vault when I am sunk
And whilst he slips to bed escape be true
I can no more, come to me: Hark Gods, my breath
Scorns to crave life grant but a well famde death she descends

Each man withdraw, let not a creature stay
Within large distance.

Sir?

hence Zanthia,
Not thou shalt hear, all stand without eare-reach
Of the soft cries nice shrinking brides do yield
When --

But Sir --

Hence -- stay, take thy delight by steps,
Think of thy joys, and make long thy pleasures,
O silence thou dost swallow pleasure right,
Words take away some sense from our delight;
Musique: be proud my Uenus, Mercury thy tong,
Cupid thy flame, above all O Hercules
Let not thy back be wanting: for now I leap
To catch the fruit none but the Gods should reap
Hah! can any woman turn to such a Devil?
Or: or: Vangue, Vangue --

Yes, yes.

speak slave,
How came thou here?

Here?

Zanthia, Zanthia,
Wher's Sophonisba? speak at full, at full,
Give me particular faith, or know thou art not --

Your pardon just moved prince private ear

Ill actions have some grace, that they can fear

How cam I laid? which way was I made druk?
Where am I? think, or is my state advanced?
O Jove how pleasant is it but to sleep
In a kings bed!

Sleep there thy lasting sleep
Improvident, base, o're-thirsty slave.
Die pleased a kings couch is thy too proud grave.
Through this vault say thou?

As you give me grace
To live, tis true.

We will be good to Zanthia;
Go cheer thy Lady, and be private to us.

As to my life.

I'll use this Zanthia,
And trust her as our dogs drink dangerous Nile,
only for thirst, the Fly the Crocodile:
Wise Sophonisba knows loves tricks of art,
Without much hindrance, pleasure hath no hart;
Despite all virtue or weak plots I must
Seven waled Babell cannot bear out lust

Let not the virtue of the world suspect
Sad Massinissas faith: nor once codemne
Our just revolt: Carthage first gave me life,
Her ground gave food, her air first lent me breath
The Earth was made for men, not men for Earth.
Scipio I do not thank the Gods for life,
Much less vile men, or earth: know best of Lords,
It is a happy being breath well famed,
For which Jove sees these thus; Men be not foold
With piety to place: traditions fear,
A just mans contry Jove makes every where.

Well urges Massinissa, but to leave
A City so ingrate, so faithless, so more vile
Then civil speech may name, fear not, such vice
To scourge is heavens most grateful sacrifice.
Thus all confess first they have broke a faith
To the most due, so just to be observed
That barborousnes it self may well blush at them
Where is thy passio? they have shared thy crown
Thy proper right of birth; contrived thy death.
Where is thy passion? given thy beauteous spouse.
To thy most hated rival: statue, not man,
And last thy friend Gelosso (man worth Gods)
With tortures have they ret to death.

O Gel.
For thee full eyes

No passion for the rest.

O Scipio my grief for him may be expressd by tears
But for the rest silence secret anguish
Shall wast: shall wast: -- Scipio he that can weep,
Grieves not like me private deep inward drops
Of blood: my heart -- for Gods rights give me leave
To be a short time Man.

stay prince.

I cease;
Forgive if I forget thy presence: Scipio
Thy face makes Massinissa more then man,
And here before your steady power a vow
As firm as fate I make: when I desist
To be commanded by thy virtue, ( Scipio)
Or fall from friend of Romes, revenging Gods
Aflict me worth your torture: I have given
Of passion and of faith my heart.

To counsel then
Grief fits weak hearts, revenging virtue men.
Thus I think fit, before that Syphax know
How deeply Carthage sinks, lets beat swift march
Up even to Cirta, and whilst Syphax snores
With his, late thine --

With mine? no Scipio,
Libea hath poison, aspes, knives, to much earth
To make one grave, with mine? not, she can dye,
Scipio, with mine? Jove say it thou dost lie.

Temperance be Scipios honour.

Cease your strife
She is a woman.

But she is my wife.

And yet she is no god.

And yet she's more
I do not praise Gods goodness but adore.
Gods cannot fall, and for their constant goodness
(Which is necessited) they have a crown
Of never ending pleasures: but faint man
(Framed to have his weakness made the heavens glory
If he with steady virtue holds all siege
That power, that speech, that pleasure, that full sweets
A world of greatness can assail him with,
Having no pay but self wept misery,
And beggars treasure heaped, that man I'll praise
Above the Gods.

The Libean speaks bold sense

By that by which all is, Proportion,
I speak with thought.

No more.

Forgive my admiration
You touched a string to which my sense was quick,
Can you but think? do, do; my grief! my grief
Would make a Saint blaspheme: give some relief,
As thou art Scipio forgive that I forget,
I am a Soldier; such woes Ioues ribs would burst,
Few speak less ill that feel so much of worst.
My ear attends

Before then Syphax join
With new strength'd Carthage, or can once vnwind
His tangled sense from out so wild amaze
Fall we like suddeine lightning fore his eyes;
Boldness and spead are all of victories.

Scipio, let Massinissa clip thy knees;
May once these eyes view Syphax? shall this arm
Once make him feel his sinue? O ye Gods
My cause, my cause! Justice is so huge odds
That he who with it fears, Heaven must renounce
In his creatio.

Beat then a close quick march
Before the morn shall shake cold dews through skies,
Syphax shall tremble at Romes thick alarms.

Ye powers I challenge conquest to just arms.
With a full flourish of Cornettes they depart.

Where are we Zanthia?

Vangue said the cave
Op'ned in Belos forest.

Lord how sweet
I sent the air? the huge lunge vaults close vain,
What dumps it breathed? In Belos forest say?
Be valiant Zanthia; how farr's Vtica
From these most heavy shades?

Ten easy leages.

Theirs Massinissa, my true Zanthia
Shals venture nobly to escape, and touch
My Lords just arms: Loves wings so justly heave
The body up, that as our toes shall trip
Over the tender and obedient grass,
Scarce any drop of dew is dashed to ground.
And see the willing shade of friendly night
Makes safe our instant haste: Boldness and speed
Make actions wost impossible succeed.

But Madam know the forest hath no way
But one to pass the which holds strictest guard.

Do not betray me Zanthia.

I Madam.

No
I not mistrust thee, yet, but,

Here you may
Delay your time.

I Zanthia delay
By which we may yet hope, yet hope, Alas
How all be numd's my sense Chance hath so often
I scarce ca feel: I should now curse the Gods *struck
Call on the furies: stamp the patient earth
cleave my streachd cheeks with sound speak from all sense
But loud and full of players eloquence
No, no, What shall we eat.

Madam i'll search
For some ripe Nuts which Autumn hath shook down
From the vnleau'd Hasel, then some cooler air
Shall lead me to a spring: Or I will try
The courteous pale of some poor forrestres,
For milk.

Do Zanthia, O happiness,
Of those that know not pride or lust of city,
There's no man blessed but those that most men pity.
O fortunate poor maids, that are not forced,
To wed for state nor are for state diuorc'd!
Whom policy of kingdoms doth not marry,
But pure affection makes to love or vary,
You feel no love, which you dare not to show,
Nor show a love which doth not truly grow:
O you are surely blessed of the sky,
You live, that know not death before you die,
You are:

In Syphax arms, thing of false lip,
What God shall now release thee,

Art a man?

Thy limbs shall feel, despite thy virtue know
I'll thredd thy richest pearl: this forests deaf,
As is my lust: Night and the God of silence,
Swells my full pleasures, no more shalt thou delude,
My easy credence* Virgin of fair brow,
Well featured creature, and our utmost wonder,
Queen of our youthful bed be proud,
I'll use thee,

Look thee, view this, show but one strain of force
Bow but to seas this arm, and by my self,
Or more by Massinissa this good steel,
Shall set my soul on wing* thus formed Gods see,
And men with Gods worth envy nought but me.

Do strike thy breast, know being dead, I'll use,
With highest lust of sense thy senseless flesh,
And even then thy vexed soul shall see,
Without resistance, thy trunk prostitute,
Unto our appetite.

I shame to make thee know,
How vile thou speak: Corruption then as much,
As thou shalt do: but frame unto thy lusts,
Imaginatious utmost sin: Syphax,
I speak all frightles, know I live or die
To Massinissa, nor the force of fate
Shall make me leave his love, or slake thy hate*
I will speak no more,

Thou hast amazed us, Woman's forced use,
Like unripe fruits, no sooner got but waste,
They have proportion, colour but no taste,
Think Syphax -- Sophonisba rest thine own,
Our Guard,
Creature of most astonishing virtue,
If with fair usage, love and passionate courtings,
We may obtain, the heaven of thy bed,
We cease, no suit from other force be free.
We dote not on thy body, but love thee,

Wilt thou keep faith?

By thee by that power
By which thou art thus glorious, trust my vow,
Our guard, convey the roialst excellence
That ever was called Woman, to our Palace,
Observe her with strict care:

Dread Syphax speak
As thou art worthy: is not Zanthia false*

To thee she is.

As thou art then thy self
Let her not be.

She is not.

Thus most speed when two foes are grown friends
Partakers bleed.

When Plants must flourish
Their manure must rot.

Syphax be recompensed.
I hate thee not.

A wasting flame feeds on my amorous blood
Which we must cool or dye? what way all power,
All speech full Opportunity can make,
We have made fruitless trial. Infernal Jove,
You resolute Angels that delight in flames,
To you all wonder working spirits I fly
Since heaven helps not, deepest hell we'll try.
Here in this desert the great soul of Charms,
Dreadful Erictho lives whose dismal brow,
Contemns all roofs or civil coverture.
Forsaken graves and tombs the Ghosts forcd out
She joys to inhabit.
A loathsome yellow leanness spreads her face
A heavy hell-like paleness loads her cheeks
Unknown to a clear heaven: but if dark winds.
Or thick black clouds drive back the blinded stars
When her deep magique makes forced heaven quake
And thunder spite of Jove. Erichtho then
Fro naked graves stalks out, heaves proud her head
With log vnkede hair laden, and strives to snatch
The Nights quick sulphar: then she bursts up tombs
From half rot searcloaths then she scrapes dry gums
For her black rites: but when she finds a corse
New graud whose entrails yet not turn
To fly my filth with greedy havoc then
she makes fierce spoil: swells with wicked triumph
To bury her lean knuckles in his eyes
Then doth she know the pale and or'egrowne nailes
From his dry hand: but if she find some life
Yet lurking close she bites his gelled lips,
And sticking her black tongue in his dry throat,
She breathes dire murmurs, which enforce him bear
Her baneful secrets to the spirits of horror.
To her first sound, the Gods yield any harm,
As trembling once to hear a second charm,
She is:

Here Syphax here, quake not, for know
I know thy thoughts, thou would entreat our power,
Nice Sophonisba's passion to enforce
To thy affection be al full of Jove,
Tis done, tis done, to us heave earth* sea, air,
And Fate it self obayes, the beasts of death,
And all the terrors angry Gods invented,
(T'afflict the ignorance of patient man),
Tremble at us: the roulde up snake vncurlde,
His twisted knots at our affrighting voice,
Are we incensd? the King of flames grows pale,
Least he be choakde with black and earthy fumes,
Which our charms raise: Be ioi'd, make proud thy lust
I do not pray you Gods, my breathes: You must.

Deep knowing spirit, mother of all high
Mysterious science, what may Syphax yield,
Worthy thy art, by which my soule's thus eased,
The Gods first made me live, but thou live pleased.

Know then our love, hard by the reueret ruins
Of a once glorious temple reared to Jove,
Whose very rubbish (like the pitied fall,
Of Virtue much unfortunate) yet bears,
A deathless Majesty though now quite raced,
Hurled down by wrath, and lust of impious Kings
So that where holy Flamins wont to sing,
Sweet Hyms to heaven, there the daw and crow,
The ill voic'de Raven, and still chattering Pie:
Send out ungrateful sound, and loathsome filth,
Where statues and Ioues acts were viuely limed
Boys with black coals, draw the veiled parts of nature,
And lecherous actions of imaginde lust,
Where tombs and beauteous vrns of well dead men.
Stood in assured rest, the shepherd now,
Vnloads his belly: Corruption most abhord
Mingling it self with their renowned ashees,
Our self quakes at it.
There once a Charnel house, now a vast cave,
Over whose brow a pale and vnt rod grove
Throws out her heavy shade, the mouth thick arms
Of darksome Ewe, (Sun proof) for ever choke
Within rests barren darkness, fruitless drough
Pines in eternal Night: The steam of Hell
Yields not so lasy air: there that's my cell
From thence a charm which Jove dare not here twic^
Shall force her to thy bed: but Syphax know
Love is the highest rebel to our art.
Therefore I charge thee by the fear of all
Which thou know dreadful, or more, by our self*
As with swift hast she passes to thy bed,
And easy to thy wishes yields: speak not one word*
Nor dare as* thou dost fear thy loss of joys
T'admit one light, one light,

As to my Fate^
I yield my guidance.

Then when I shall force
The air to music and the shads of night
To form sweet sounds: make proud thy raised delight.
Mean time behold I go a charm to rear
Whose potent sound will force our self to fear.

Whither is Syphax heaved? at length shalls joy
Hopes more desired then Heaven? Sweet laboring Earth
Let Heaven be vnform'd with mighty charms,
Let Sophonisba only fill these arms.
Ione we'll not envy thee: Bloods appetite
Is Syphax God: My wisdom is my sense,
Without a man I hold no excellence.
Give me long breath young beds and sicklesse ease
For we hold firm that's lawful which doth please
Hark, hark, now rise jnfernall tones
The deep fetched groans
Of laboring spirits that attend
Erichtho.

Erichtho.

Now crack the trembling earth and send
Shrieks that portend
Affrightment to the Gods which hear
Erichtho.

Erichtho
Hark hark, now softer melody strikes mute
Disquiet nature: O thou power of sound
How thou dost melt me. Hark, now even Heaven
Gives up his soul amongst us: Now's the time
When gready expectation strains mine eyes
For their loved object: now Erichtho willed
Prepare my appetite for loves strict gripes
O you dear founts of pleasure Blood and Beauty
Raise active venus worth fruition
Of such provoking sweetness. Hark: she coms*
Now nuptial Hymes enforced Spirits sing
Hark, ( Syphax) hark:
Now Hell and Heaven rings
With Musique spigh of Phoebus: Peace:
She coms:
Fury of bloods impatient: Erichtho
Above thunder sit; to thee egregious soul
Let all flesh bend. Sophonisba thy flame
But equal mine, and we'll joy such delight
That Gods shall not admire, but even spite.

Ha, ha, ha,

Light, light,

Ha, ha,

Thou rotten scum of Hell --
O my abhorred heat! O loathed delusion!

Why fool of kings, could thy weak soul imagine
That it is within the grasp of Heaven or Hell
To enforce love? why know Love doates the Fates
Jove groans beneath his weight: more ignorant thing,
Know we Erichtho, with athirsty womb
Have coveted full threescore Suns for blood of kings,
We that can make enraged Neptune toss
His huge curled locks without one breath of wind:
We that can make Heaven slide from Atlas shoulder:
We in the pride and haight of covetous lust
Have wished with wo mans gredines to fill
Our longing arms with Syphax well strong limbs:
And dost thou think if Philters or Hells charms
Could have enforced thy use, we would hau'dam'd
Brain slights? no, no, Now are we full
Of our dear wishes: thy proud heat well wasted
Hath made our limbs grow young: our love farewell,
Know he that would force love, thus seeks his Hell.

Can we yet breath? is any plagued like me?
Are we? lets think: O now contempt, my hate
To the, thy thunder, sulphur and scorned name.
He whose lifes loathed, and he who breathes to curse
His very being; let him thus with me
Fall fore an Aultar sacred to black powers,
And thus dare Heavens: O thou whose blasting flames
Hurl barren droughes upon the patient earth,
And thou gay God of riddles and strange tales
Hot-brained Phebus, all add if you can
Something unto my misery; if ought
Of plagues lurk in your deep trench'd brows
Which yet I know not: let them fall like bolts
Which wrathful Jove drives strong in *o my bosom,
If any chance of war, or news ill voiced,
Mischief unthought of lurk, come gift us all,
Heap curse on curse, we can no lower fall.

Lower, lower,

What damned air is formed
Into that shape? speak, speak, we cannot quake,
Our flesh knows not ignoble tremblinges, speak,
We dare thy terror: me thinks Hell and fate
Should dread a soul with woes made desperate.

Know me the spirit of great Asdruball
Father to Sophonisba, whose bad heart
Made justly most unfortunate: for know
I turned unfaithful, after which the field
Chanced to our loss, when of thy men there fell
6000 souls next fight of Lybeans ten.
After which loss we unto Carthage flying,
Th'inraged people cried their army fell
Through my base treason: straight my revengeful fury
Makes them pursue me, I with resolute hast*
Made to the grave of all our Ancestors
Where poisoned, hoped my bones should have long rest.
But see the violent multitude arrives
Tear down our monument, and me now dead
Deny a grave: hurl us among the rocks
To stanch beasts hunger; therefore thus vngrau'd
I seek slow rest: now doest thou know more woes
And more must feel: Mortals O fear to slight
Your Gods and vows: Ioues arm is of dread might.

Yet speak shall I overcome approaching foes.

Spirits of wrath know nothing but their woes.

My liedge, my liedge, the scouts of Cirta bring intelligence
Of sudden danger, full ten thousand horse
Fresh and well ^id strong Massinissa leads
As wings to Roman legions that march swift
Led by that man of conquest* Scipio,

Scipio

Direct to Cirta.
Hark their march is heard even to the cittye.

Help, our guard, my arms, bid all our leaders march.
Beat thick alarms, I have seen things which thou
Would quake to hear,
Boldness and strength the shame of slaves be fear.
Up heart, hold sword: though waives roll thee on shelf,
Though fortune leave thee leave not thou thy self.

Stand*

Give the word stand.

Part the fyle.

give way
Scipio by thy great name, but greater virtue,
By our eternal love give me the chance
Of this days battle: Let not thy envied fame
Vouchsafe t'appose the Roman legious
Against one weakened Prince of Lybea
This quarrels mine: mine be the stroke of fight
Let us and Syphax hurl our well forcd darts
Each unto others* breast, O (what should I say)
Thou beyond epithet thou whom proud Lords of fortune
May even envy: (alas my joys so vast
Makes me seem lost let us thunder and lightning
Strike from our brave arms, look, look, seas that hill.
Hark he comes near: From thence discern us strike
Fire worth Jove, mount up, and not repute
Me very proud tho wondrous resolute.
My cause: my cause, is my bold hartning ods,
That seeuen fold shield, just arms should fright the Gods

Thy words are full of honour take thy fate,

Which we do scorn to fear, to Scipio state
Worthy his heart. Now let the forced brass
Sound on.
Iugurth clasp sure our cask
Arm us with care, and Iugurth if I fall
Through this days malice, or our fathers sins
If it in thy sword lye, break up my breast
And save my heart that never fell nor's adieu
To ought but Jove and Sophonisba. Sound
Sterne hartners unto wounds and blood, sound loud
For we have named Sophonisba.
So.
Hark hark, he comes, stand blood, now multiply
Force more then fury, sound high, sound high, we strike
For Sophonisba.

For Sophonisba.

Syphax.

Massinissa.

Be twixt us too
Let single fight try all.

Well urged,

Well granted
Of you my stars as I am worthy you
I implore aide, and O if angels wait
Upon good harts my Genius be as strong
As I am just.

Kings glory is their wrong.
He that may only do just act's a slave
My Gods my arm, my life, my heaven, my grave
To me all end.

Give day Gods, life and death
To him that only fears blaspheming breath
For Sophonisba.

For Sophonisba.

Unto thy fortune not to thee we yield

Lives Sophonisba yet unstained, speak just
Yet ours vnforcd?

Let my heart fall more low
Then is my body, if only to thy glory
She lives not yet all thine.

Rise, rise, cease strife.
Hear a most deep revenge, from us take life.
To you all power of strength: and next to thee
Thou spirit of triumph borne for victory.
I heave these hands: March we to Cirta straight,
My Sophonisba with swift hast to win
In honour in love all mean is sin* Ex. Ma. Jug.

As we are Romes great General thus we press
Thy Captive neck* but as still Scipio
And sensible of just humanity
We weep thy bondage: speak thou ill chanced man
What spirit took thee when thou were our friend
(Thy right hand given both to Gods and us
With such most passionate vows and solemn faith)
Thou fledst with such most foul disloyalty
To now weak Carthage stregthning their bad arms
Who lately scorned thee with all lothd abuse
Who never entertain for love but use

Scipio my fortune is captiud not I
Therefore I'll speak bold truth* nor once mistrust
What I shall say, for now being wholly yours
I must not fain, Sophomsba t'was she
T'was Sophonisba that solicited
My forced revolt, t'was her resistles suit
Her love to her dear Carthage'tic'd me break
All faith with men: t'was she made Syphax false
She that lou's Carthage with such violence
And hath such moving graces to allure
That she will turn a man that once hath sworn
Himself on's fathers bones her Carthage foe
To be that cities Champion and high friend
Her Himeneall torch burnt down my house
Then was I captiud when her wanton arms
There moving clasped about my neck, O charms
Able to turn even fate: but this in my true grief
Is some iustioy, that my love sotted foe
Shall seas that plague, that Massinissas breast
Her hands shall arm, and that ere long you'll try
She can force him your foe as well as I,

Lelius, Lelius, take a choice troupe of horse
And spur to Cirta. To Massinissa thus
Syphax palace* crown, spoil cities sack
Be free to him but if our new laughd friend
Possess that woman of so moving art
Charge him with no less weight then his dear vow
Our love, all faith, that he resign her thee
As he shall answer Rome will him give up
A Roman prisoner to the Senates doom
She is a Carthaginian, now our laws
Wise men prevent not actions, but ever cause

Good malice, so, as liberty so dear
Prove my revenge: what I cannot possess
Another shall not: that's some happiness.

Princes O fly, Syphax hath lost the day,
And captiu'de lies, the Roman Legeons
Have seisde the town, and with inveterate hate,
Make slaves or murder all: Fire and steel,
Fury and night hold all: fair Queen O fly,
We bleed for Carthage, all of Carthage die.

March to the Palace. So* What ere man thou art
Of Libea, thy fair arms speak: give hart,
To amazed weakness, hear her, that for long time,
Hath seen no wished light. Sophonisba,
A name for misery much known, tis she,
Entreats of thy graced sword, this only boon,
Let me not kneel to Rome, for though no cause,
Of mine deserves their hate, though Massinissa,
Be ours to hart, yet Roman Generals
Make proud their triumphs, with what ever captives
O tis a Nation which from soul I fear,
As one well knowing the much grounded hate,
They bear to Asdrubal and Carthage blood,
Therefore with tears that wash thy feet, with hands
Vnusde to beg I clasp thy manly knees,
O save me from their fetters and contempt,
Their proud insultes, and more then insolence,
Or if it rest not in thy grace of breath,
To grant such freedom, give me long wished death,
For tis not much loathde life, that now we crave,
Only an vnshamd death, and silent grave
We will now deign to bend for.

Rarity
By thee and this right hand thou shalt live free.

We cannot now be wretched.

Stay the sword.
Let slaughter cease, Sounds soft as Ledas breast, Soft Musique.
Slide through all ears, this night be loves high feast,

Over whelm me not with sweets, let me not drink,
Till my breast burst, O love thy Nectar, think

She is overcome with joy.

Help, help to bear
Some happiness ye powers, I have joy to spare,
Enough to make a God, O Massinissa.

Peace,
A silent thinking makes full joys increase.

Massinissa.

Lelius.

Thine ear.

Stand off

From Scipio thus: by thy late vow of faith,
And mutual league of endless amity,
As thou respects his virtue or Romes force,
Deliver Sophonisba to our hand,

Sophonisba?

Sophonisba.

My Lord,
Looks pale, and from his half burst eyes a flame,
Of deep disquiet breaks, the Gods turn false,
My sad presage.

Sophonisba?

Even she,

She kilde not Scipios father nor his uncle,
Great Cneius.

Carthage did.

to her whats Carthage?

Know twas her father Asdrubal struck off
His fathers head, give place to faith and fate,

Tis cross to honour.

But tis just to state,
So speaks Scipio, do not thou detain,
A Roman prisoner, due to this great triumph,
As thou shalt answer Rome and him.

Lelius.
We now are in Romes power, Lelius,
View Massinissa do, a loathed act,
Most sinking from that state his hart did keep,
Look Lelius look, see Mas^inissa weep,
Know I have made a vow more dear to me,
Then my souls endless being: she shall rest,
Free from Romes bondage.

But dost thou forget,
Thy vow yet fresh thus breathed: When I desist:
To be commanded by thy virtue: Scipio,
Or fall from friend of Rome, Revenging Gods,
Afflict me with your torture.

Lelius enough:
Salute the Roman, tell him we will act
What shall amaze him.

Wilt thou yield her then?

She shall arrive there straight.

Best fate of men,
To thee.

and Scipio: Have I lived O Heavens,
To be inforcedly perfidious?

What unjust grief afflicts my worthy Lord,

Thank me ye Gods, with much beholdingnes*
For mark, I do not curse you:

Tell me sweet
The cause of thy much anguish.

Ha, the cause?
Lett's see, wreath back thine arms, bend down thy neck*
Practise base Prayers, make fit thy self for bondage,

Bondage.

Bondage, Roman bondage.

No, No.

How then have I vowed well to Scipio?

How then to Sophonisba?

Right which way
Run mad impossible distraction,

Dear Lord thy patience; let it maze all power,
And list to her in whose sole heart it rests,
To keep thy faith upright.

Wilt thou be slau'd,

No free.

How then keep I my faith?

My death*
Giu's help to all: From Rome so rest we free,
So brought to Scipio, faith is kept in thee.

Thou dare not die, some wine, thou dare not die.

How near was I v^to the curse of man, Joy,
How like was I yet once to have been glad:
He that near laughed may with a constant face,
Contemn Ioues frown. Happiness makes us base.
Behold me Massinissa, like thy self,
A king and soldier, and I pree thee keep,
My last command,

Speak sweet.

Dear do not weep
And now with vndismaid resolve behold,
To save You, you, (for honour and just faith.
Are most true Gods, which we should much adore)
With even disdainful vigour I give up,
An abhord life.
You have been good to me,
And I do thank thee heaven, O my stars,
I bless your goodness, that with breast unstained,
Faith pure: a Virgin wife, tried to my glory,
I die of female faith, the long lived story,
Secure from bondage, and all servile harms,
But more most happy in my husbands arms.

Massinissa, Massinissa,

Covetous
Fame greedy Lady, could no scope of glory,
No reasonable proportion of goodness
Fill thy great breast, but thou must prove immense
Incomprehence in virtue, what would thou,
Not only be admired, but even adored?
O glory ripe for heaven? Sirs help, help, help,
Let us to Scipio with what speed you can.
For piety make haste, whilst yet we are man.

What answers Massinissa will he send,
That Sophonisba of so moving tongs

Full of dismayed vnsteddines he stood,
His right hand looked in hers, which hand he gave
As pledge from Rome, she ever should live free
But when I entered, and well urged this vow
And thy command his great hart sunk with shame:
His eyes lost spirit, and his heat of life,
Sank from his face, as one that stood benumbde,
All mazed, t'effect, impossibilities,
For either unto her or Scipio,
He must break vow, long time he tossd his thoughts
And as you see a snow ball being rolde
At first a handful, yet long bold about,
Infensibly acquires a mighty globe,
So his cold grief through agitation grows,
And more he thinks, the more of grief he knows
At last he seemed to yield her.

Mark Scipio,
Trust him that breaks a vow?

How the trust thee?

O misdoubt him not, when he's thy slave like me

Scipio,

Massinissa,

General.

King.

Liu's there no mercy for one soul of Carthage
But must see baseness?

Would thou joy thy peace,
Deliver Sophonisba straight and cease,
Do not grasp that which is too hot to hold,
We grace thy grief, and hold it with soft sense.
Enjoy good courage, but void insolence.
I tell thee Rome and Scipio deign to bear,
So low a breast as for her say, we fear.

Do not, do notilet not the fright of Nations
Know so vile terms. She rests at thy dispose

To my soul joy, shall Sophonisba then
With me go bound and wait on Scipios wheel?
When th'whole worlds giddy one man cannot reel,

Starve thy lean hopes, and Romans now behold
A sight would sad the Gods? make Phoebus cold.
Look Scipio, see what hard shift we make
To keep our vows; here, take I yield her thee,
And Sophonisba I keep vow thou art still free.

Burst my vexed heart, the torture that most rackes
An enemy, is his foes royal acts.

The glory of thy virtue live for ever,
Brave hearts may be obscured, but extinct never.
Take from the General of Rome this crown,
This robe of triumph, and this conquests wreath
This sceptre, and this hand for ever breath,
Romes very minion: Live worth thy fame
As far from faintings as from now base name.

Thou whom like sparkling steel the strokes of Chance
Made hard and firm; and like wild fire turned
The more cold fate, more bright thy virtue burned,
And in whole seas of miseries did flame.
On theelou'd creature of a deathless fame
Rest all my honour: O thou for whom I drink
So deep of grief, that he must only think,
Not dare to speak) that would express my woe,
Small rivers murmur, deep gulfs silent flow,
My grief is here, not here, heave gently then,
Women's right wonder, and just shame of men.

And now with lighter passion, though with most just fear
I change my person, and do hither bear
Another voice, who with a phrase as weak
As his deserts now willed me* (thus formed) speak,
If words well senc'd, best suiting subject grave,
Noble true story may once boldly crave,
Acceptance gracious, if he whose fierce,
Envy not others nor him self admires.
If sceans exempt from ribaldry or rage,
Of taxinges indiscreet, may please the stage,
If such may hope applause, he not commands
Yet craves as due, the justice of your hands
But freely he protests how ere it is,
Or well or ill, or much, not much amiss,
With constant modesty he doth submit,
To all, save those, that have more tongue then wit.
After all, let me entreat my Reader not to tax me, for the fashion of the
En^ances and Musique of this Tragedy, for know it is printed only as it was
presented by youths, after the ^shion of the private stage. Nor let some easily
amended (...) in the Printing afflict thee sinc^ thy own discours^ will ^


