O Fie some lights, sirs fie, let there be no deeds of darkness done among us.
-- I so, so, pree thee Tyer-man set Sineor Snuff a fire, he's a choleric
Gentleman, he will take Pepper in the nose instantly, fear not, fore Heaven I
wonder they tolerate him so ne'er the Stage.


Faith Doricus, thy brain boils, keele it, keele it, or all the fatt's in the
fire: in the name of Phoebus, what merry Genius haunts thee to day, thy lips
play with Feathers.


Troth they should pick straws before they should be idle,


But why, but why dost thou wonder they dare suffer Snuff so near the Stage?


O well recald, marry Sir sineor Snuff, Mounsieur Mew, and Caualiero Blirt,
are three of the most to be feared Auditors that ever --


Pish for shame, stint thy idle chat.


Nay dream what-so-ere your fantasy swims on Phylomuse, I protest in the
love you have procured me to bear your friend the Author, I am vehemently
fearful, this threefold halter of contempt that choakes the breath of wit,
these aforesaid tria sunt omnia, Knights of the Meaw will sit heavy on the
skirts of his Sceanes, if --


If what? believe it Doricus his spirit,
Is higher blouded then to quake and pant
At the report of Skoffes Artillery;
Shall he be creast-falne, if some looser brain,
In flux of wit vnciuely befilth
His slight composures? shall his bosom faint
If drunken Censure belch out sower breath,
From Hatreds surfeit on his labours front?
Nay say some half a dozen rancorous breasts
Should plant them-selues on purpose to discharge
Impostum'd malice on his latest Scene
Shall his resolve be struck through with the blirt,
Of a goose breath? What imperfect borne?
What short lived Meteor? what cold hearted Snow
Would melt in dolor? cloud his mudded eyes
Sink down his jaws, if that some iuicles husk
Some boundless ignorance should on sudden shoot
His gross knob'd burbolt, with that's not so good,
Mew, blirt, ha, ha, light Chaffy stuff?
Why gentle spirits what loose waving fane?
What any thing would thus be skru'd about
With each slight touch of od Phantasmatas?
No let the feeble palseid lamer joints,
Lean on opinions crutches, let the --

Nay, nay, nay, Heavens my hope, I cannot smooth this strain,
Wits death I cannot, what a leaprous humour
Breaks from rank swelling of these bubbling wits?
Now out vp-pont: I wonder what tight brain:
Wrung in this custom to maintain Contempt
Against common Censure: to give stiff counter buffes
To crack rude scorn even on the very face
Of better audience. Slight is't not odious,
Why hark you honest, honest Phylomuse
(You that indeauor to indeere our thoughts,
To the composers spirit) hold this firm:
Music and Poetry were first approved
By common sense; and that which pleased most,
Held most allowed pass: not rules of Art
Were shaped to pleasure, not pleasure to your rules,
Think you if that his sceanes took stamp in mint
Of three or four deemed most iuditious,
It must enforce the world to currant them
That you must spit defiance on dislike?
Now as I love the light were I to pass
Through public verdict, I should fear my form
Least ought I offered were vnsquard or warped,
"The more we know, the more we know we want
"What Bayard boulder then the ignorant?
"Believe me Phylomuse: in faith thou must
"The best best seal of wit, is wits distrust.

Nay gentle Doricus.


I'll here no more of him, nay and your friend the Author, the composer: the
What you will: seems so fair in his own glass, so straight in his own
measure that he talks once of squinting Critickes, drunken Censure,
splay-footed Opinion, iuicles husks, I ha done with him, I ha done with him.


Pew nay then --


As if any such vnsanctified stuff could find a being monge these ingenuous
breasts.


Come, let pass, let pass, lers see what stuff must cloth our ears: what's
the plays name?


What you will.


1st Commedy, Tragedy, Pastoral, Moral, Nocturnal or History.


Faith perfectly neither, but even What you will, a slight toy, lightly
composed, to swiftly finished, ill plotted, worse written, I fear me worst
acted, and indeed What you will.


Why I like this vain well now.


Come, we strain the spectators patience in delaying their expected
delights. Lets place our selves within the Curtains, for good faith the Stage
is so very little we shall wrong the general eye else very much.


If you'll stay but a little I'll accompany you, I have engaged my self to the
Author to give a kind of inductiue speech to his Commedy.


Away: you neglect your self, a gentleman --


Tut I have vowed it, I am double charged, go of as't twil, I'll set fire to it.


I'll not stand it, may chance recoil, and be not stuffed with salte-peeter,
well mark the report, mark the report.


Nay pree thee stay, slid the female presence; the Genteletza; the women will
put me out.


And they strive to put thee out, do thou endeavour to put them.


In good faith if they put thee out of countenance; put thou them out of
patience; hew their ears with hacking imperfect utterance.


Go stand to it, show thy self a tale man of thy tongue, make an honest
leg, put off thy Cap with discreet carriage: and so we leave thee to the
kind Gentlemen, and most respected Auditors.


NOR labours he the favour of the rude,
Nor offers sops unto the Stigian Dog
To force a silence in his viperous tongues:
Nor cares he to insinuate the grace,
Of loathed detraction, nor pursues the love
Of the nice Critics of this squeamish age,
Nor strives he to bear up with every sail
Of floating Censure: nor once dreads or care's
What envious hand his guiltles Muse hath struck,
,,Sweet breath from tainted stomachs who can suck:
But to the fair proportioned loves of wit,
To the just scale of even paized thoughts:
To those that know the pangs of bringing forth
A perfect feature: to their gentle minds,
That can as soon slight of, as find a blemish,
To those as vmbly lowe as to their feet
I am obliged to bend: to those his Muse,
Makes solemn honour, for their wished delight:
He vows industrious sweat shall pale his cheek,
But heel gloss up sleek objects for their eyes:
For those he is ashamed, his best's too bad,
A silly subject too too simply clad
Is all his present, all his ready pay,
For many many debts. Give further day
I'll give a Proverb, Sufferance gives ease:
So you may once be paid, we once may please.
O O I beseech you Sir reclaim his wits,
My masters mad, stark mad, alas for love,

For love? nay and he be not mad for hate,
Tis amiable fortune; I tell thee youth
Right rare and geason: strange? mad for love,
O show me him I'll give him reasons straight.
So forcible so all invincible,
That it shall drag love out: run mad for love?
What mortally exsistes, on which our hearts
Should be enamoured with such passion?
For love? come Phylus; come I'll haung his fate,
In steed of love I'll make him mad for hate.
But troth say what strains his madness of?

Fantastical.


Immure him, skonce him, barrecadoe him int,
Fantastical mad, thrice blessed heart;
Why hark good Phylus: (o that thy narrow sense,
Could but contain me now) all that exsists,
Takes valuation from opinion:
A giddy minion now: pish, thy taste is dull,
And can not relish me, come wher's Iacomo.

Look where he coms: O map of boundless wo!


You gleam is day, darkness, sleep and fear,
Dreams, and the ugly visions of the night
Are beat to hell by the bright palm of light,
Now romes the swain and whissells up the morn:
Deep Silence breaks: all things start up with light,
Only my hart, that endless night and day,
Lies bed-red, crippeld by coy Lucea,

There's a strain law.
Nay now I see he's mad most palpable,
He speaks like a player, hah! poetical.

The wanton spring lies dallying with the earth,
And powers fresh blood in her decayed veins,
Look how the new sapt branches are in child
With tender infants, how the Sun draws out,
And shapes their moisture into thousand forms
Of sprouting buds, all things that show or breath,
Are now instaur'd, saving my wretched breast,
That is eternally congeald with Ice
Of froz'd, despair. O Celia, coy, to nice.

Still saunce question mad?


O where doth Piety and Pity rest?


Fetch cords he's irrecoverable, mad, rank mad,
He calls for strange Chymeras, fictions
That have no being since the curse of death
Was thrown on man: Pity and Piety,
Whole deign converse with them? alas vain head,
Pity and Piety are long since dead.

Ruin to Chance, and all that strive to stand,
Like swollen Colosses on her tottering Base.
Fortune is blind --

You lye, you lye,
None but a mad man would term Fortune blind,
How can she see to wound desert so right?
Just in the speeding place: to girt lewd brows
With honoured wreath; ha? Fortune blind? away,
How can she hud-winkt then so rightly see,
To starve rich worth and glut iniquity?

O Love!


Love? hang love,
It is the abject out-cast of the world,
Hate all things, hate the world, thy self, all men,
Hate knowledge, strive not to be ouer-wise,
,,It drew destruction into Paradise,
Hate Honour, Virtue, they are baits,
That tice men's hopes to sadder fates,
Hate beauty, every ballad-monger,
Can cry his idle soppish humour
Hate riches, wealths a flattering Jack,
A dors to face, mews hind thy back.
He that is poor is firmly sped,
He never shall be flattered*
All things are error, dirt and nothing,
Or pant with want or gorged to loathing,
Love only hate, affect no higher
Then praise of heaven, wine, a fire.
Suck up thy days in silent breath,
When their snuffs out come Sinior death.
Now Sir adieu run mad and twilt,
The worst is this my rimes but spilt.

Thy rimes are spilt who would not run rank mad,
To see a wandering French man rival, nay
Out-strip my suit. He kissed my Celias cheek,

Why man I saw my dog even kiss thy Celias lips,

To morrow morn they go to wed,

Well then I know.
Whether to morrow night they go.

Say quick.


To bed


I will invoke the triple Heccate,
Make charms as potent as the breath of Fate,
But I'll confound the match,

Nay then good day,
And you be conjuring once I'll slink away,

Boy could not Orpheus make the stones to dance?


Yes Sir.


Bir Lady a sweet touch: did he not bring Euridice out of hell with his lute.


So they say Sir,

And thou chanced bring Celias head out of the window with thy Lute, well hazard
thy breath: look Sir hears a ditty.

Tis foully writ slight wit crossed here and there,
But where thou findst a blot, their fall a tear.
Fie peace, peace, peace, it hath no passion int.
O melt thy breath in fluent softer tunes
That every note may seem to tricle down
Like sad distilling tears and make: O God
That I were but a Poet now t'expresse my thoughts
Or a Musician but to sing my thoughts
Or any thing but what I am, sing't ore once more
My griefs a boundless sea that hath no shore.
Is this my favour? am I crowned with scorn?
Then thus I manumit my slau'd condition.
Celia but hear me execrate thy love.
By heaven that once was consious of my love
By all that is that knows my all was thine
I will perseu with detestation.
Thawart without stretched vehemence of hate
Thy wished Hymen: I will craze my brain
But all disceauer all: thy hopes unite
What rage so violent as love turned spite?

Humbly complaining kissing the hands of your excelence your pore orators
Randolfo and Andrea beseeches forbidding of the dishonord match of their Niece
Celia Widow to their Brother -- O twill do, twill do, it can not choose but
do.


What should one say what should one do now; vmph
If she do match with you same wandering knight
She's but undone, her estimation, wealth --

Nay sir her estimations mounted up
She shall be Ladi'd and sweet Madam'd now.

Be Ladi'd ha, ha, O could she but recaule
The honoured Port of her deceased love;
But think whose wife she was, God wot no knights
But one (that title of) was even a Prince
A Sultane Sollyman: thrice was he made
In dangerous arms Venice prouidetore.

He was a Merchant, but so bounteous
Valiant, wise, learned, all so absolute
That naughts, was valued praisfull excellent
But in it was he most praisfull excellent.

O I shall ne'er forget how he went clothed
He would maintaine't a base ill used fashion
To bind a Merchant to the sullen habit
Of precise black, chiefly in Venice state.
Where Merchants guilt the top
And therefore should you have him pass the bridge
Up the Rialto like a soldier
(As still he stood a Potestate at sea)

In a black beaver felt, ash colour plain
A Florentine cloth of silver Jerkin, sleeves
White satin cut on tinsel, then long stock.

French pains imbroder'd, Gold-smithes work, O God!
Me thinks I see him now how he would walk:
With what a jolly presence he would pace
Round the Rialto. Well he's soon forgot
A straggling sir in his rich bed must sleep
Which if I can not cross* I'll curse and weep.
Shall I be plain as Truth, I love your Sister
My education birth and wealth deserves her
I have no cross, no rub to stop my suit
But Lauardur's a knight, that strikes all mute.

I there's the devil, she must be Ladi'd now.


O ill nursed custom no sooner is the wealthy Merchant dead
His wife left great in fair possessions
But giddy rumour graspes it twixt his teeth
And shakes it bout our ears. Then thither flock
A rout of crazed fortunes whose cracked states
Gape to be sodderd up by the rich mass
Of the deceased labores, and now and then
The troupe of I beseech and I protest
And believe it sweet, is mixed with too or three
Hopeful, well stocked, neat clothed Citizens

But as we see the son of a Divine
Seldom proves Preacher, or a Lawyers son
Rarely a pleader, (for they strive to Run
A various fortune from their Ancestors)
So tis right geason for the Merchants widow,
To be the Citizens loved second spouse.

Variety of objects please us still
One dish though ne'er so cookt doth quickly fill.
When diverse cates the palates sense delight
And with fresh fast creates new appetite
Therefore my widow she casheers the blacks
For swears turns of the furd-gownes, and suruaies
The bedrowle of her suitors thinks and thinks,
And straight her questing thoughts springs up a knight,
Have after then a maine the gam's a foot
The match clapped up, tut tis the knight must do it.

Then must my pretty peat be Fan'd and Coached.


Muffd Masked and Ladied, with my more then most sweet Madam,
But how long doth this perfume of sweet Madam last?
Faith tis but a wash sent. My Riotous sir
Begins to crack Gestes on his Ladies front,
Touches her new stamped gentry, takes a glut
Keeps out, abandons home, and spends and spends
Till stock be melted, then sir takes up here
Takes up there, till no where ought is left.
Then for the Low-countries, hay for the French
And so (to make up rime) god night sweet wench.

By blessedness we'll stop this fatal lot.


But how* but how?


Why stay lets think a plot.


Was not Albano Beletzo honourable rich?


Not peered in Venice, for birth, fortune love.


Tis scarce three months since fortune gave him dead.


In the black fight in the Venetian gulf.


You hold a truth.


Now what a giglet is this Celia?


To match so sudden so unworthily?


Why she might have --

Who might not Celia have?
The passionate mamord Iacomo.

The passionate mamord Iacomo.


Of honoured linage, and not meanly rich.


The sprightful Piso, the great Florentine,
Aurelius Tuber.

And to leave these all,
And wed a wandering Knight Sir Lauerdure,
A God knows what?

Brother she shall not, shall our blood be moungreld with the corruption of a
straggling French?


Saint Mark she shall not,

She shall not fathers by; our brother souls.


Good day.


Wish me good day? it stands in idle stead,
My Celias lost, all my good days are dead.
Hark Lorenzo Celso the loose Venice Duke,
Is going to bed* tis now a forward morn
Fore he take rest. O strange transformed sight,
When Princes make night day the day there night.

Come we'll petition him,

Away away,
He skornes all plaints makes jest of serious suit.

Fall out as't twill I am resolved to do it.


Saint Mark Saint Mark.


Did not I tell you, loose no more rich time,
What can one get but mier from a swine?

Lets work a cross, we'll fame it all about
The French mans gelded.

O that's absolute.


Fie ont away, she knows to well tis false,
I fear it to well. No no I hau't will strongly do it,
Who knows Francisco Soranza?

Pish, pish, why what of him?


Is he not wondrous like your decea'sd kinsman Albano.


Exceedingly the strangest nearly like
In voice, in gesture face in --

Nay he hath Albanos imperfection too,
And stuttes when he is vehemently moved.

Observe me then, him would I have disguised,
Most perfect like Albano: giving out,
Albano saved by swimming (as in faith
'Tis known he swome most strangely) rumour him,
This morn arrived in Venice, here to lurk
As having heard the for-ward Nuptials,
T'obserue his wives most infamous lewd hast
And to revenge --

I hau't, I hau't, I hau't, 'twill be invincible.


By this means now some little time we catch,
For better hopes at least disturb the match.

I'll to Francisco.


Brother Adrian
You have our brothers picture, shape him to it.

Precise in each but Tassell, fear it not.


Saint Mark then prosper once, our hopeful plot.


Good souls, good day, I have not slept last night,
I'll take a nap, then pell mell broach all spite.

Ho Bydett Lackey.


Sinior?


See who knocks, look you boy, peruse their habits, return perfect notice, la
la lie to.


Quadratus.


Quadratus, mor dieu, ma vie: I lay not at my lodging to night, I'll not see him
now on my soul, he's in his old Perpetuana suit, I am not within.


He is fair, gallant, rich, neat as a Bridegroom, fresh as a new-minted
six-pence, with him Lampatho Doria, Symplicius Faber.


And in good clothes.


Accoutred worthy a presence.


Vdes so: my gold wrought Wast-coate and Night-cap open my Trunk, lay my
richest suit on the top, my Velvet slippers, cloth of gold gamashes, where are
my cloth of silver hose, lay them. --


At pawn sir.


No sir, I do not bid you lay them at pawn Sir.


No sir, you need not for they are there already.


Mor du garzone: set my richest Gloves, Garters, Hats, just in the way of
their eyes, so let them in, observe me withal duteous respect, let them in.


Phoebus, Phoebe, Sun, Moon, and seven Stars make thee the dilling of
Fortune, my sweet Lauerdure, my rich French blood, ha ye dear rogue, hast any
pudding Tobacco?


God morrow Sinior.


Mounsieur Lauerdure, do you see that Gentleman, he goes but in black Satin
as you see, but by Hellicon he hath a cloth of Tissue wit, he breaks a jest,
ha, heel rail against the Courttil the gallants -- O God he is very Nectar,
if you but sip of his love, you were immortal, I must needs make you known
to him: I'll induce your love with dear regard. Sinior Lampatho heers is a
French Gentleman Mounsieur Lauerdure a Traveller, a beloved of heaven, courts
your acquaintance.


Sir I protest I not only take distinct notice of your dear rarities of
exterior presence, but also I protest I am most vehemently inamor'd, and very
passionately dote on your inward adornements and habilities of spirit, I
protest I shall be proud to do you most obsequious vassalage.


Is not this rare now: now by Gorgons head,
I gape and am struck stiff in wonderment,
At sight of these strange beasts. You Chamblet youth,
Symplicius Faber that Hermophrodite,
Party par pale, that bastard Moungerell soul,
Is nought but admiration and applause,
Of you Lampatho Doria, a fusty cask,
Devote to mouldy customs of hoard eld,
Doth he but speak, O tones of heaven it self,
Doth he once write, O Iesu admirable
Cries out Symplicius: then Lampatho spittes,
And says faith 'tis good. But O to mark you thing
Sweat to unite acquaintance to his friend,
Labour his praises and indeere his worth
With titles all as formally tricked forth,
As the Cap of a Dedicatorie Epistle,
Then sir to view Lampatho, he protests,
Protests and vows, such suddeine heate of love,
That O twere warmth enough of mirth to dry,
The stintlesse tears of old Heraclitus
Make Nyobe to laugh.

I protest I shall be proud to give you proof, I hold a most religious
affiance with your love.


Nay gentle Sinior:

Let me not live else, I protest I will strain my utmost sineus, in
strengthening your precious estimate, I protest, I will do all rights in all
good offices that friendship can touch, or amplest virtue deserve.


I protest believe him not, I'll beg thee Lauerdure
For a concealed Idiot if thou credit him,
He's a Hyena, and with Ciuitt scent
Of perfumed words, draws to make a prey
For laughter of thy credit. O this hot crackling love
That blazes on an instant, flames me out
On the least puff of kindness, with protest, protest,
Catzo I dread these hot protests, that press
Come on so fast, no, no, away, away*
You are a common friend or will betray.
Let me clip amity, that's got with suit,
I hate this whorish love that's prostitute.

Horne on my Tailor, could he not bring home,
My Satin Taffeta, or Tissue suit:
But I must needs be clothed in Woollen thus.
Bydett, what says he for my Silver hose?
And Prim-rose Satin Doublet, Gods my life,
Gives he no more observance to my body.

O in that last suit gentle Lauerdure,
Visit my lodging: by Appollos front
Do but inquire my name; O straight theile say
Lampatho suits him-selfe in such a hose.

Mark that Quadratus.


Consorts him-selfe with such a doublet.


Good, good, good, O Iesu admirable.


La la lie to Sir.


O Pallas! Quadratus, hark, hark, a most complete phantasma, a most
ridiculous humour, pree-thee shoot him through and through with a jest, make
him lye by the lee, thou Basilisco of wit.


O Iesu, admirably well spoken, Angelical tongue.


Gnathonicall Coxcomb,

Nay pre-thee, fut fear not he's no edge tool, you may jest with him.


No edge-toole, oh!


Tones of heaven it self.


Tones of heaven it self.


By blessedness I thought so.


Nay when, when?


Why thou Pole-head, thou Ianus, thou poltroon, thou protest, thou Eare-wig
that wrigglest into men's brains: thou dirty cur that be-mierst with thy
fawning, thou --


Obscure me, or --

Synior Lauerdure, by the hart of an honest man, this Iebusite, this confusion
to him, this worse then I dare to name, abuses thee most incomprehensibly; is
this your protest of most obsequious vassalage, protest to strain your utmost
sum, your most --


So Phoebus warm my brain, I'll rime thee dead,
Look for the Satire, if all the sower juice
Of a tart brain, can sows thy estimate,
I'll pickle thee.

Ha he mount Chirall on the wings of fame.
A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse,
Look the I speak play scraps. Bydet I'll down
Sing, sing, or stay we'll quasse or any thing
Riuo, Saint Mark, lets talk as loss as air
Vn-wind youths coullors, display our selves
So that you enuy-starued Cur may yealpe
And spend his chappes at our Phantasticknesse.

O Lord Quadratus.


Away Idolater, why you Don Kynsayder
Thou Canker eaten rusty cur, thou snaffle
To freer spirits.
Think thou a libetine, am vngiu'd breast
Skornes not the shacklesse of thy envious clogs
You will traduce us unto public scorn.

By this hand I will.


A fuotra for thy hand, thy heart, thy brain,
Thy hate, thy malice, Envy, grinning spite
Shall a free-borne that holds Autypathy.

Antypathy.


I Antypathy.
A native hate unto the curse of man, bare-pated servitude,
Quake at the frowns of a ragged Satyrist
A skrubbing railer whose course hardened fortune
Grating his hide, gauling his starved ribs
Sits howling at Deserts more battle fate
Who out of dungeon of his black Dispairs
Skoules at the fortune of the fairer Merit.

Tut Via let all run glib and square.


Vds foot he cogges and cheats your simpler thoughts,
My spleen's a fire in the heate of hate
I bear these gnats that humm about our ears,
And sting blister our credit's in obscured shades.

Pewte bougra la, la, la, titt shaugh
Shall I forbear to caper, sing, or vault
To wear fresh clothes or wear perfumed sweets
To trick my face, or glory in my fate,
To abandon natural propensitudes
My fancies humour, for a stiff jointed,
Tattr'd nasty taber faced, puh, la, la, lie to

Now by thy Ladies cheek I honour thee
My rich free-bloud, O my dear libertine
I could suck the juice, the syrup of thy lip,
For thy most generous thought. My Elysium.

O Sir you are so square you scorn repoofe.


No sir should discreet Mastigophoros
Or the dear spirit acute Canaidus
(That Aretine; that most of me beloved
Who in the rich esteem I prize his soul
I term my self) should these once menace me
Or curb, my humours with well governed check
I should with most industrious regard,
Observe abstain, and curb my skipping lightness
But when an arrogant od impudent,
A blushles fore-head only out of sense.
Of his own wants, baules in malignant questing
At others means of waving gallantry
Pipht foutra.

I fail at none you well squared Syneor.


I can not tell, tis now grown fashion,
Whats out of railyng's out of fashion:
A man can scarce put on a tuckt up cap
A buttoned frizado suit, scarce eat good meat,
Anchoues, cauiare, but he's Satyred
And termed Fantastical: by the muddy spawn
Of slymie Neughtes, when troth, Phantasticknesse,
That which the natural Sophysters term
Phantusia incomplexa, is a function
Even of the bright immortal part of man.
It is the common pass, the sacred door,
Unto the priue chamber of the soul
That bared nought passes past the baser Court:
Of outward sense by it th'inamorate,
Most lively thinks he sees the absent beauties
Of his loved mistres.
By it we shape a new creation,
Of things as yet unborn, by it we feed:
Our ravenous memory, our intention feast
Slid he that's not Phantasticall's a beast.

Most Fantastical protection of Phantasticknesse.


Faith tis good.


So 't be fantastical tis wits life blood.


Come Sinior my legs are girt.


Phantastically.


After a spetiall humour a new cut.


Why then tis, rare, tis excellent. vds fut
And I were to be hanged I would be chokt
Phantastically, he can scarce be saved
That's not fantastical, I stand ferme to it.

Nay then sweet sir give reason, come on, when.


Tis hell to run in common base of men.


Hast not run thy self out of breath bulley.


And I have not iaded thy ears more then I have tierd my tongue, I could run
discourse, put him out of his full pace.

I could poer speech till thou crid'st ho, but troth,
I dread a glut, and I confess much love
To freer gentry whose pert agill spirits
Is t'o much frost-bit numbed with il straind snibbes
Hath tender-reach'd my speech. By Brutus blood
He is a turf that will be slave to man.
But he's a beast that dreads his mistress fan.

Come all merth and folace, capers, healths and whiffes
To morrow are my nuptials celebrate:
All friends all friends.

I protest --

Nay leave protestes, pluck out your snarling phanges. When thou hast means be
Fantastical and sociable; go to, here's my hand and you want forty shillings
I am your Maecenas though not Atauis Edite regibus.


Why content and I protest --

I'll no protest.


Well and I do not leave these fopperies do not lend me forty shillings,
there's my hand, I embrace you, love you, nay adore thee, for by the juice of
worm-woode, thou hast a bitter brain.


You Simplicius? woult leave that staring fellow Admiration, and Adoration of
thy acquaintance wilt. A scorn out tis odious, too eager a defence argues a
strong opposition, to vehement a praise, draws a suspicion of others worthy
disparigement.

Set tapers to bright day, it ill befittes
Good wines can vent themselves, and not good wits.

Good truth I love you, and with the grace of Heaven,
I'll be very ciuell and --

Fantastical.


I'll be some thing, I have a concealed humore in me and twere broached twold
spurty faith.


Come then Saint Mark lett's be as light as air
As fresh and iocond as the breast of May:
I pree thee good French knight good plump cheekt chub
Run some French passage, come lets see thy vain,
Dances, sceanes, and songs, royal entertain.

Petite lacque* page, page, Bydet sing
Give it the French ierk, quick spart, lightly, ha,
Ha hers a turn unto my Lucea.

Stand stiff ho stand, take footing firm stand sure
For if thou fall before thy mistres
Thy man-hod's damned; stand firm -- ho good, so, so.

Come now via aloune to Celia.


Stay take an old rime first though dry and lean
Twill serve to close the stomach of the Scene.

This is thy humour to berime us still,
Never so slightly pleased but out they fly.

They are mine own, no gleaned Poetry,
My fashions known, out rime takt as you list:
A fico, for the sower browd Zoilist.
Music, Tobacco, Sack and Sleep,
The tide of Sorrow backward keep.
If thou art sad at others fate,
Riuo drink deep give care the mate,
On us the end of time is come,
Fond fear of that we cannot shun,
Whilst quickest sense doth freshly last,
Clip time about, hug pleasure fast.
The Sisters rauell out our twine,
He that knows littl's most divine.
Error deludes; whole beat this hence,
Naughtes known but by exterior sense,
Let glory blazon others deed,
My blood then breath craves better mead,
Let twattling fame cheatd others rest,
I am no dish for Rumours feast.
Let honour others hope abuse,
I'll nothing have so nought will loose:
I'll strive to be nor great nor small,
To live nor die, fate helmeth all,
When I can breath no longer then,
Heaven take all, there put Amen.
How is't, how is't?

Faith so, so, telamant, quelamant, as't please Opinion to currant it.


Why then via letts walk,

I must give notice to an od pedant as we pass of my nuptials, I use him for
he is abscure and shall marry us in private, I have many enemies but secrecy is
the best evasion from envy.


Holds it to morrow?


I firm absolute,

I'll say amen if the Priest be mute.


Epythalamiums will I singe my chuck,
Go on, spend freely, out on dross tis muck.

Salve Magister.


Saluete pueri estote salui, vos saluere exopto vobis salutem, Bat my fili,
fili mi Bat.


Quid vis.


Stand forth repeat your lesson with out book.


A nowne is the name of a thing that may be seen felt heard or understood.


Good boy, on on,

Of nouns some be substantiues and some be substantiues.


Adiectiues.


Adiectiues, a nowne substantiue ether is proper to the thing that it
betokneth.


Well to numbers.


In Nouns be two numbers, the Singular and the Plural, the Singular number
speaks of one as Lapis a Stone, the Plural speaks of more then one, as
Lapides stones.


Good child, now thou art past Lapides Stones, proceed to the cases Nous, say
you next Nous, wher's your lesson Nous.


I am in a verb forsooth.


Say on for sooth say say.


A verb is a part of speech declined with mood and tence and betokneth doing
as Amo I love,


How many kind of verbes arthere?


2. Personal and impersonall,

Of verbs personalls, how many kinds.


Five, Active Passive Neuter Deponent and Common. A Verb Active ends in O
and beetokneth to do as Amo I love and by putting to R it may be a passive as
Amor I am loved.


Very good child, now learn to know the Deponent and common: Say you slip.


Cedant arma togae, concedant lauria linguae.


What part of speech is lingua, inflecte, inflecte.


Singulariter, nominatiuo Hec lingua.


Why is lingua the Feminine gender?


Forsooth because it is the Femenine gender.


Ha thou Ass, thou Dolt, Idem per idem, mark it: lingua is declined with Hec
the Femenine, because it is a household stuff particularly belonging, and most
commonly resident under the roof of Women's mouths. Come on you Nathaniell say
you, say you next, not too fast, say tretably, say.


Mascula dicuntur Monosilaba nomina quedam.


Faster, faster.


Vt, sal, sol, ren splen: car, ser, vir, was, vadis, as, mas,
Bes, cries, pres pes, glis, glirens habens genetiuo,
Mos, flos, ros tros, muns, dens, mons, pons.

Rup, tup, snup, slup, bor, hor, cor, mor: holla, holla, holla, you Holifernes
Pippo, put him down, wipe your Nose: fie on your sleeve, where's your
Muckender your Grand-mother gave you? well say on* say on.


Pree Master what words this?


Ass, Ass.


As in presenti perfectum format in, in, in.


In what Sir?


Perfectum format in what Sir?


In what Sir in avi?


In what Sir in avi.
Vt no, nas, naui, vocito, vocitas, voci, voci, voci --

What's next?


Voci, What's next?


Why thou ungracious child, thou simple animal, thou barnacle. Nous snare him,
take him up, and you were my father you should up.


Indeed I am not your Father, O Lord now for God sake; let me go out, my
mother told a thing, I shall bewray all else. Hark you Master, my Grand-mother
entreats you to come to dinner to morrow morning.


I say untruss take him up, Nous, dispatch what not perfect in an Ass in
presenty?


In truth I'll be as perfect an Ass in presenty as any of this Company, with
the grace of god law, this once, this once, and I do so any more --


I say hold him up.


Ha let me say my prayers first. You know not what you ha done now, all the
surrup of my brain is run into my buttocks ye spill the juice of my wit
well, ha sweet, ha sweet, honey barbary sugar sweet Master.


Sance tricks trifles, delays, demurrers procrastinations or retarations
mount him, mount him.


Be merciful my gentle Sinior.


We'll sue his pardon out.


He is reprieved: and now Appollo bless your brains Facundius and Elaborate
ellegance, make your presence gracious in the eyes of your Mistres.


You must along with us, lend private ear.


What is your name.


Holifernes Pippo.


Who gave you that name. Nay let me alone for sposing of a scholar.


My godfathers and god-mothers in my baptism.


Truly gallants I am inamord on thee boy wilt thou serve me.


Yes and please my grand-mother when I come to years of discretion.


And you have a propensitude to him, he shall be for you: I was solicited to
grant him leave to play the Lady in commedies presented by Children, but I
knew his voice was to small and his stature to lo, sing, sing a treble
Holifernes; sing.

A very small sweet voice I'll assure you.


Tis smally sweet indeed.


A very pretty Child, hold up thy head, there, buy thee some plummes.


Nay they must play, you go a long with us.


Ludendi venia est petita concessa.


Gratias.


Pippo's my page, how like you him, ha has he not a good face, ha.


Exceeding amiable; come away,
I long to see my love my Celia.

Carry my rapier hold up so, good child, stay gallants vmph a sweet face.


I relish not this mirth, my spirit is vntwist,
My heart is raueld out in discontents,
I am deep thoughtful, and I shoot my soul
Through all creation of omnipotence.

What art melancholy Lamp. I'll feed thy humour
I'll give thee reason straight to hang thy self
Marked marked: In heavens handiwork theirs nought
Believe it.

In heavens handiwork there's nought
None more vile, accursed, reprobate to bliss
Then man, and mong men a scholar most.
Things only fleshly sencitiue, an Ox or Horse,
They live and eat, and sleep, and drink, and die
And are not touched with recollections
Of things ore-past or staggerd infant doubts
Of things succeeding: but leave the manly beasts,
And give but pence a piece to have a sight:
Of beastly man now.

What so Lampatho, good truth I will not pay your Ordinary if you come not.


Dost thou hear that voice. I'll make a parrot now,
As good a man as he in fourteen nights
I never heard him vent a syllable:
Of his own creating since I knew the use
Of eyes and ears? Well he's perfect blessed,
Because a perfect beast. I'll gage my heart
He knows no difference essential
Twixt my dog and him. The horeson sot is blessed
Is rich in ignorance, makes fair usance on it
And every day augments his barbarism
So love me Calmnes I do envy him forts.
I was a scholar: seven vse-full springs
Did I deflower in quotations
Of crossed oppinions bout the soul of man
The more I learnt the more I learnt to doubt
Knowledge and wit faiths foes, turn faith about

Nay come good Sinior, I stay all the gentlemen here, I wood fain give my
prity page a pudding pie.


Honest Epicure.
Nay mark list delight, delight my spaniel slept, whilst I bausd leaves.
Tossd ore the dunces pored on the old print
Of titled words, and still my spaniel slept.
Whilst I wasted lampoile, bated my flesh
Shrunk up my veins, and still my spaniel slept.
And still I held converse with Zabarell
Aquinas Scotus, and the musty saw
Of antic Donate, still my spaniel slept
Still on went I, first an sit anima
Then and it were mortal, O hold hold
At that they are at brain buffets fell by the ears,
A maine pell mell together, still my spaniel slept.
Then whether twere Corporeal, Local, fixed,
Extraduce, but whether't had free will
Or no, ho Philosophers
Stood banding factions all so strongly propped,
I staggerd, knew not which was firmer part.
But thought, quoted, read, observed and pried,
Stuffed noting books, and still my spaniel slept.
At length he waked and yawnd and by yon sky,
For aught I know he knew as much as I.

Dellicat good Lampatho come away. I assure you i'll give but two pence more.


How, twas created, how the soul exsistes
One talks of motes, the soul was made of motes,
An other fire, the other light, a third a spark of Star-like nature
Hippo water, Anaximenes air,
Aristoxenus Music; Critias I know not what,
A company of odd phrenetici
Did eat my youth, and when I crept abroad,
Finding my numnesse in this nimble age,
I fell a railing, but now soft and slow,
I know, I know nought, but I nought do know,
What shall I do, what plot, what course persew?

Why turn a Temporist, row with the tide,
Pursew the cut, the fashion of the age,
Well here's my Schollers course, first get a School,
And then a ten-pound Cure, keep both, then buy,
(Stay marry, I marry) then a farm or so,
Serve God and Mammon, to the Devil go,
Affect some sect, I 'tis the sect is it,
So thou can seem 'tis held the precious wit:
And O if thou can get some higher seat,
Where thou may sell your holy portion,
(Which charitable providence ordained
In sacred bounty for a blessed use)
Alien the gleabe, entail it to thy loins,
Entomb it in thy grave
Past resurrection to his native use.
Now if there be a hell, and such swine saved,
Heaven take all, that's all my hopes have craved.

My Simplicias Master.


Your Master Simplicius.


Has come to you to sent.


Has sent to me to come.


Ha, ha, has bought me a fine dagger, and a Hat and a Feather, I can say As
in presenti now.


Quadratus Quadratus, away, away.

We come sweet gallants; and grumbling hate lye still
And turn Phantastique: he that climbs a hill
Must wheel about, the ladder to account
Is sly dissemblance, he that means to mount,
Must lye all level in the perspective
Of eager sighted greatness, thou would thrive,
The Venice state is young, loose, and vnknit,
Can relish nought but lushious vanities
Go fit his tooth, O glauering flattery,
How potent art thou: front look brisk and sleek,
That such base dirt as you should dare to reeke,
In Princes nostrils. Well my scene is long.

I come hot bloods, those that their state would swell,
Must bear a counter-face: the devil and hell
Confound them all, that's all my prayers exact,
So ends our chat, sound Music for the Act.

For God-sake remember to take special marks of me, or you will ne'er be able
to know me.


Why man?


Why good faith I scarce know my self already me thinks I should remember to
forget my self, now I am so shining brave. Indeed Francisco was always a
sweet youth, for I am a Persumer, but thus brave? I am an alien to it, would
you make me like the drowned Albano, must I bear't mainly up, must I be he.


What else man? O what else?


I warrant you give him but fair rich clothes,
He can be taken, reputed any thing,
Apparail's grown a God and goes more neat,
Makes men of rags, which straight he bears aloft,
Like patched up scar-Crowes to affright the rout
Of the Idolatrous vulgar, that worship Images,
Stand awed and bare-skalp't at the gloss of silks,
Which like the glorious Aiax of Lincolnes Inn,
(Suruai'd with wonder by me when I lay,
Factor in London:) laps up nought but filth
And excrements, that bear the shape of men,
Whose in-side every day would peck and tear,
But that vain skar-crow clothes entreats forbear.

You would have me take upon me Albano,
A valiant gallant Venetian Burgomasco,
Well my beard, my feather, short sword and my oath
Shall do it fear not. What I know a number
By the sole warrant of a Lapy-beard,
A rain beat plume, and a good chop filling oath,
With an odd French shrug, and by the Lotd or so,
Ha leapt into sweet Captain with such ease,
As you would-feart not, I'll gage my heart I'll do it,
How sits my Hat, ha, Jack doth my feather wag.

Me thinks now in the common sense of fashion,
Thou should grow proud, and like a fore-horse view,
None but before-hand gallants, as for sides*
And those that rank in equal file with thee,
Study a faint salute, give a strange eye,
But as to those in rere-ward O be blind,
The world wants eyes, it cannot see behind.

Where is the strumpet, where's the hot vain'd French,
Lives not Albano, hath Celia so forgot,
Albanos love, that she must forth-with wed,
A runne-about* a skipping French-man --

Now you must grow in heate and stut.


An odd phantasma, a beggar, a Sir, a who who who what you will, a straggling
go go go gunds, f f f f fut --


Passing like him, passing like him, O 'twill strike all dead.


I am ravished 'twill be peerless exquisite,
Let him go out instantly.

O not till twy-light, mean time I'll prop up
The tottering Rumour of Albanos skape.
And safe arrival, it begins to spread,
If this plot live Frenchman thy hopes are dead.

And if it live strike of this little head.


Can it be? is't possible? is't within the bounds of faith? O villainy.


The clapper of Rumour strikes on both sides ringing out the French knight is in
firm possession of my Mistress your wife.


Is't possible I should be dead so soon?
In her affects, how long is't since our shipprack?

Faith I have little arithmetic in me, yet I remember the storm made me
cast up perfectly the whole sum of all I had received, three days before I was
liquord soundly my guts were rinc'd for the heavens: I look as pale ever since
as if I had taken the diet this spring.


But how long is't since our ship-wrack?


Mary since we were hung by the heals on the batch of Cycily to make a jail
delivery of the sea in our mawes tis just three months: shall I speak like a
Poet?


Talk not of horns. O Celia how oft
(When thou hast laid thy cheek upon my breast
And with lascivious petulance sewed.
For Hymeneal dalliance marriage rights)
O then how oft with passionate protestes
And zealous vows hast thou obliged thy love,
In dateles bands unto Albanos breast?
Then did I but mention second Marriage
With what a bitter hate would she inuaigh
Against retaild wedlockes. O would she lisp
If you should die, (then would she slide a tear,
And with a wanton languishment in-twist
Her hands) O God and you should die. Marry?
Could I love life; my dear Albano dead
Should any Prince possess his widows bed?
And now see, see, I am but rumord drowned.

Sheele make you Prince, your worship must be crowned
O master you know the woman is the weaker creature,
She must have a prop: the maid is the brittle mettell
Her head is quickly cracked: the wife is queasy stomached
She must be fed with novelties; but then whats your widow,
Custom is a second nature, I say no more but think you the rest.

If love be holy, if that mystery,
Of co-vnited hearts be sacrament?
If the unbounded goodness have infused.
A sacred ardor if a mutual love
Into our Speties, of those amorous joys,
Those sweets of life, those comforts even in death
Spring from a cause above our reasones reach?
If that clear flame deduce his heate from heaven?
Tis like his cause's eternal always one
As is the instiller of deuinest love
Vnchangd by time immortal maugre death.
But O tis grown a figment: love a jest:
A commick Poesy: the soul of man is rotten
Even to the core no sound affection.
Our love is hollow vaulted, stands on proppes,
Of circumstance, profit or ambitious hopes.
The other tissue Gown or Chain of pearl
Makes my coy minx to nussell twixt the breasts
Of her lulled husband, the other Carkanet,
Deflowres that Ladies bed: one hundred more
Marries that loathed blowze, one ten pound odds
In promised jointure makes the hard palmed sire,
Enforce his daughters tender lips to start
At the sharpe touch of some loathed stubbed beard,
The first pure time the golden age is fled,
Heaven knows I lie tis now the age of gold,
For it all mars and even virtues sold.

Master will you trust me and I'll.


Yes boy I'll trust thee, babes fools i'll trust
But servants faith, wives love, or femalls lust,
A usurer and the devil sooner. Now were I dead,
Me thinks I see a huff-cap swaggering sir,
Pawning my plate, my jewels, mortgage? Nay
Selling out right the purchase of my brows,
Whilst my poor fatherless lean totterd son,
My gentries relics, my houses only prop,
Is sawed a sunder, lies forlorn, all bleak,
Unto the griefs of sharpe Necessities,
Whilst his father in law, his father in Devil, or d d d d Devil,
f f f father,
Or who who who who; What you will,
When is the marriage morn?

Even next rising son.


Good, good, good, go to my brother Adrian,
Tell him I'll lurck, stay, tell him I'll lurck, stay,
Now is Albanos marriage bed new hung
With fresh rich Curtains, now are my valence up,
Embossed with orient Pearl, my Gransires gift,
Now are the Lawn sheets fum'd with Vyolets,
To fresh the pawld lascivious appetite,
Now work the Cooks, the pastry sweates with slaves,
The March-panes glitter, now now the musicians
Hover with nimble sticks ore squeaking crowds,
Ticling the dried guts of a Mewing Catt,
The Taylors, Starchers, Semsters, Butchers, Pulterors, Mercers, all, all, all,
now now now, none think a me, the f f f French is te f f f fine man, de p p p
pock man, de --


Peace, peace, stand concealed, yonder by all discriptions is he would be
husband of my Mistress: your wife hah meat hah.


Vds so, so, so, soul that's my velvet cloak.


O peace, observe him, hah.


'Tis most true Sir, I heard all, I saw all, I tell all, and I hope you believe
all, the sweet Francisco Soranza, the Perfumer is by your rival Iacomo, and
your two brothers that must be, when you have married your wife, that shall be.


With the grace of Heaven.


Disguised so like the drowned Albano to cross your suit, that by my little
honesty 'twas great consolation to me to observe them, passion of joy, of
hope. O excellent cried Andrea, passingly cried Randolfo; vnparraleld lispes
Iacomo, good, good, good, says Andrea, now stut says Iacomo, now stut says
Randolfo, whilst the ravished Perfumer had like to have waterd the seames of his
breeches for extreme pride of their applause.


Sest, I'll to Celia, and maugre the nose of her friends, wed her: bed her,
my first son shall be a Captain, and his name shall be what it please his
God-fathers, the second if he have a face bad enough, a Lawyer, the third a
Merchant, and the fourth if he be maimd, dull brained, or hard shaped, a
scholar, for that's your fashion.


Get them, get them man first; now by the wantonness of the night, and I were
a wench I would not ha-thee, were thou an heir, nay (which is more) a fool.


Why I can rise high, a straight leg, a plump thigh, a full vain, a round
cheek, and when it pleases the firtility of my chin to be delivered of a
beard, 'twill not wrong my kissing, for my lips are rebels, and stand out.


Ho but there's an old fusty Proverb, these great talkers are never good
dooers.


Why what a babell arrogance is this?
Men will put by the very stock of fate,
They'll thwart the destiny of marriage,
Strive to disturb the sway of providence,
Theile do it?

Come, you'll be snarling now.


As if we had free-will in supernatural
Effects, and that our love or hate
Depended not on causes above the reach
Of human stature.

I think I shall not lend you forty shillings now.


Dirt upon dirt, fear is beneath my shoe,
Dreadlesse of rackes, strappados, or the sword,
Maugre Informer and sly intelligence,
I'll stand as confident as Hercules,
And with a frightlesse resolution,
Rip up and lance our times impieties.

Vds so peace.


Open a bounteous ear for I'll be free,
Ample as Heaven, give my speech more room,
Let me unbrace my breasts, strip up my sleeves,
Stand like an executioner to vice,
To strike his head off with the keener edge,
Of my sharpe spirit.

Room and good licence, come on, when, when.


Now is my fury mounted, fix your eyes,
Intend your senses, bend your listening up,
For I'll make greatness quake, I'll tawe the hide
Of thick-skind Hugenes.

Tis most gracious we'll observe thee calmly.


Hang on thy tongues end, come on pree-thee do.


I'll see you hanged first, I thank you Sir, I'll none,
This is the strain that chokes the theaters:
That makes them crack with full stuffed audience,
This is your humour only in request
Forsooth to rail, this brings your ears to bed*
This people gape for, for this some do stare
This some would hear, to crack the Authors neck,
This admiration and applause pursues,
Who cannot rail, my humours changed 'tis clear,
Pardon I'll none, I prise my joints more dear.

Master, Master, I ha descried the Perfumer in Albanos disguise, look you,
look you, rare sport, rare sport.


I can contain my impatience no longer, you Mounsieur Cauelere, Saint Dennis,
you Caprichious Sir, Sinior Caranto French brawl, you that must marry Celia
Galanto, is Albano drowned now? go wander, avaunt Knight, errant Celia shall
be no Cuck-queane, my heir no beggar, my plate no pawn, my land no mortgage,
my wealth no food for thy luxuries, my house no harbour for thy Comrades* my
bed no booty for thy lusts, my any thing shall be thy nothing, go hence
pack, pack, avaunt, caper, caper, aloun, aloun, pass by, pass by, cloak
your nose, away, vanish, wander depart, slink by away.


Hark you perfumer, tell Iacomo Randulfo, and Adrean, 'twill not do, look you
say no more, but 'twill not do.


What perfumer? what Iacomo?


Nay assure thee honest Perfumer good Francisco, we know all man, go home to
thy Ciuitt Box, look to the profit, commodity or emolument of thy Mus-cats
tail, go clap on your round Cap, my what do you lack sir, for in faith good
rogue alls descried.


What Perfumer? what Mus-cat? what Francisco, what do you lack, is't not enough
that you kissd my wife?


Enough.


I enough, and may be, I fear me too much, but you must flout me, deride me,
scoff me, keep out, touch not my porch, as for my wife --


Stir to the door: dare to disturb the match, And by the --


My sword: menace Albano fore his own doors.


No not Albano but Francisco, thus, Perfumer, I'll make you stink if you stir
a; for the rest: well via via.


Iesu, Iesu, what intends this? ha?


O God Sir, you lye as open to my understanding as a Courtesan, I know you as
well --


Some body knows me yet, praise heaven some body knows me yet.


Why look you Sir, I ha paid for my knowing of men and women too in my days,
I know you are Francisco Soranza the Perfumer, I maugre Sinior Satin I.


Do not tempt my patience, go to, do not.


I know you dwell in Saint Marks lane, at the sign of the Mus-cat as well --


Fool, or mad, or drunk no more.


I know where you were dressed, where you were --


Nay then take all, take all, take all --


And I tell not my father, if I make you not loose your office of gutter
Maister-ship; and you be Skauenger next year well: Come Holifernes come good
Holifernes, come servant.


Francisco Soranza and perfumer and muscat, and gutter master hay, hay, hay,
go, go, go, gods f, f, f, fut; I'll to the Duke and I'll so ti, ti, ti, tickle
them.


Precious, what means he to go out so soon,
Before the dusk of twilight might deceive
The doubtful priers. What holla.

Whop what devil now?


I'll fain I know him not, what business fore those doors.


Whats that to thee


You come to wrong my friend Sir Lauerdure
Confess or --

My sword boy s, s, s, s, soul my sword.


O my dear rogue thou art a rare dissembler.


See see.


Francisco did I not help to cloth thee even now
I would has worn thee Albano my good sweet slave.

See, see, Iesu, Iesu, impostors, connicatchers, Sancta Maria?


Look you, he walks he faines most excellent.


Accost him first as if you were ignorant
Of the deceit.

O dear Albano now thrice happy eyes
To view the hope-lesse presence of my brother.

Most loved kinsman praise to Heaven yet,
You know Albano, but for yonder slaves -- well.

Success could not come on more gracious.


Had not you come (dear brother Adrian)
I think not one would know me. Vlisses dog
Had quicker sense then my dull Countrymen,
Why none had known me.

Doubt you of that? would I might die,
Had I not known the guile I would ha sworn
Thou had bin Albano, my nimble couzning knave.

Whip, whip, Heaven preserve al Saint Mark Saint Mark.
Brother Adrian, be frantic pree-thee be
Say I am a Perfumer Francisco, hay hay
Is't not some feast day you are all rank drunk
Rratts ra, ra, ra, rats knights of the be, be, be, bell, be, be, bell.

Go go proceed thou dost it rare farewell.


Farewell? ha? is't even so? boy who am I?


My Lord Albano,

By this breast you lie
The Samian faith is true, true, I was drowned
And now my soul is skipped into a perfumer a gutter-master.

Believe me sir --

No no I'll believe nothing, no,
The disadvantage of all honest hearts
Is quick credulity, perfect state pollecy
Can crosse-bite even sense, the worlds turned Juggler,
Castes mists before our eyes Haygh pass re pass
I'll credit nothing.

Good Sir.


Hence ass.
Doth not Opinion stamp the currant pass,
Of each mans value, virtue, quality?
Had I engrossed the choice commodities
Of heavens traffic, yet reputed vile
I am a rascal; O dear vnbeleefe,
How wealthy dost thou make thy owners wit?
Thou train of knowledge, what a privilege
Thou giu'st to thy possessor: anchorst him,
From floating with the tide of vulger faith:
From being damned with multitudes dear vnbeleefe,
I am a Perfumer, I, think thou my blood,
My brothers know not right Albano yet?
Away tis faites, if Albanos name,
Were liable to sense, that I could taste or touch
Or see, or feel it, it might tice belief,
But since tis voice, and air, come to the Muscat boy,
Francisco, that's my name tis right, I, I,
What do you lack? what is't you lack right that's my cry.

Proclaim our titles


Bosphoros Cormelydon Honorificacuminos Bydet.


I think your Majesties a Welshman, you have a horrible long name.


Death or silence proceed.


Honorificacuminos Bidet Emperor of Cracks, Prince of Pages, Marks of
Mumchance, and sole regent over a bale of false dice, to all his under
Ministers health, Crowns, Sack, Tobacco, and stockings vncrakt above the
shoe.


Our self will give them their charge, Now let me stroke my beard and I had
it, speak wisely if I knew how: most vnconsionable, honest little, or little
honest good subjects, inform our person of your several qualities and of the
prejudice that is foisted upon you that our self may peruew, prevent, and
preoccupie the pustulent dangers incident to all your cases.


Here is a petition exhibited of the particular greeuances of each sort of
pages.


We will vouchsafe in this our public session to peruse them, pleases your
excellent wagship to be informed that the division of pages is tripartite
(tripartite) or three fold, of pages, some be Court pages, others Ordinary
gallants pages, the third-apple squires, basket-bearers or pages of the
placket, with the last we will proceed first, stand forth page of the placket,
what is your mistres?


A kind of puritan.


How live you?


Miserably coplayning to your crack-ship though we have light Mistresses we are
made the Children and servants of darkness, what profane use we are put to, al
these gallants more feelingly know then we can lively express, it is to be
comiserated and by your royal insight only to be prevented that a male
Mounkey and the diminutive of a man should be Synonima no sense. Though we
are the dross of your subjects, yet being a kind of page, let us find your
Celsitude kind and respective of our time-fortunes and births abuse, and so in
the name of our whole tribe of empty basket-bearers, I kiss your little
hands.


Your case is dangerous and almost desperate stand forth ordinary gallants page,
what is the nature of your Master?


He eats well and right slovenly, and when the dice favour him goes in good
clothes, and scowers his pink colour silk stockings: when he hath any money he
bears his crowns, when he hath none I carry his purse, he cheats well,
swears better, but swaggers in a wantons Chamber admirably, he loves his boy
and the rump of a crammed Capon, and this summer hath a passing thrifty humour to
bottle ale: as contemptuous as Lucifer, as arrogant as ignorace can make him,
as libidinous as Priapus, he keeps me as his adamant to draw mettell after
to his lodging, I curl his periwig, paint his cheeks, perfume his breath, I
am his froterer or rubber in a Hot-house, the prop of his lies, the bearer of
his falls dice, and yet for all this like the Persian Louse that eats biting,
and biting eats, so I say sithing and sithing say my end is to paste up a Si
quis my Masters fortunes are forced to cashere me and so six to one I fall to
be a Pippin squire. Hic finis priami, this is the end of pick pockets.


Stand forth Court-page, thou lokest pale and wan.


Most ridiculous Emperor.


O say no more, I know thy miseries, what betwixt thy Lady, her Gentlewoman and
thy Masters late gaming thou may look pale. I know thy miseries and I
condole thy calamities, thou art borne well, bred ill, but die worst of al,
thy blood most commonly gentle, thy youth ordinarily idle, and thy age to often
miserable. When thy first suit is fresh, thy cheeks clear of Court soils,
and thy Lord fallen out with his Lady, so lunge may be heel chuck thee under
the chin, call thee good pretty ape and give thee a scrap from his own
trencher, but after he never beholds thee, but when thou squierst him with a
torch to a wantons sheets, or lights his Tobacco pipe. Never uses thee but
as his pander never, regards thee but as an idle bur that stickst upon the
nap of his fortune, and so naked thou came into the world and naked thou must
return; whom serve you.


A fool.


Thou art my happiest subject, the service of a fool is the only blessedest
slavery that ever put on a chain and a blew cote, they know not what nor for
what they give, but so they give tis good, so it be good they give: fortunes
are ordained for fools, as fools are for fortune, to play with all not to
use, hath he taken an oath of allegiance is he of our brotherhood yet?


Not yet right venerable Honorificac cac cac cacuminos Bidet: but as little an
infant as I am I will, and with the grace of wit I will deserve it.


You must perform a valorous Virtuous, and religious exploit first in desert
of your order.


What is't?


Cousin thy master, he is a fool, and was created for men of wit such as thy
self to make use of.


Such as my self. Nay faith for wit I think for my age or so, but on, sir.


That thou may the easier purge him of superfluous blood I will describe thy
Masters constitution, he loves and is beloved of himself and one more; his
dog. There is a company of vnbrac'd vntrussd, rutters in the town, that
crinkle in the hams swearing their flesh is their only living, and when they
have any crowns, cry god a marcy Mol, and shrugging let the Cockholds pay
fort: intimating that their maintenance flows from the wantonness of
Merchants wives, when in truth the plain troth is, the plain and the stand, or
the plain stand and deliver, delivers them all their living. These comrades
have persuaded thy Master that there's no way to redeem his peach colour
satin suit from pawn but by the love of a Citizens wife, he believes it,
they slout him he feeds them, and now tis our honest and religious meditation
that he feed us. Holyfernes Puppi.


Pippo and shall please you.


Pippo tis our will and pleasure thou suit thy self like a Merchants wife,
leave the managing of the sequence unto our prudence.


Or unto our Prudence truly she is a very witty wench and hath a stammel
petticoat with three guards for the nonce; but for your Merchants wife alas I am
to little, speak to small, go to gingerly, by my troth I fear I shall look
to fair.


Our majesty dismounteth, and we put of our greatness, and now my little
knaves I am plain Crack, as I am Bosphoros Carmelidon Honorificacuminos Bydet
I am imperious: honour sparkles in mine eyes; but as I am Crack I will convey
crosbite and cheat upon Simplicius, I will feed, satiat and fill your panches:
replenish, stuff or furnish your purses, we will laugh when others weep, sing
when others since, feed when others starve, and be drunk when others are
sober, this my charge at the loose, as you love our brother-hood, avoid true
speech square dice, small liquor, and above all, those to vngentlemanlike
protestations of indeed and verily, and so gentle Appollo touch thy nimble
string our scene is donne yet fore we cease we sing.


Faith sister I long to play with a feather,
Pree-thee Lucia bring the shuttle-cock.

Out on him light pated Fantastic, he's like one of our gallants at. --


I wonder who thou speak well of?


Why of my self, for by my troth I know none else will.


Sweet sister Meletza lets sit in judgment a little, faith of my servant
Monsieur Lauerdure.


Troth well for a servant, but for a husband (figh) I.


Why why?


Why he is not a plain fool, nor fair, nor fat, nor rich, rich fool. But he
is a knight, his honour will give the passado in the presence to morrow night,
I hope he will deserve: Al I can say is as, as the common fiddlers will say in
their God send you well to do.


How think thou of the amorous Iacomo.


Iacomo why on my bare troth.


Why bare troth.


Because my troth is like his chin tath no hair on it; gods me his face
looks like the head of a taber, but trust me he hath a good wit.


Who told you so.


One that knows, one that can tell?


Whose that.


Him self.


Well wench, thou had a servant one Fabius what hast thou done with him.


I donne with him? out of him puppy, by this feather his beard is directly brick
colour, and perfectly fashioned like the husk of a cheessnut, he kisses with
the driest lip; figh on him.


O but your servant Quadratus the absolute Courtier.


Fie, fie, speak no more of him, he lives by begging?
He is a fine Courtier flatters admirable, kisses
Fair Madam, smells surpassing sweet, wears
And holds up the arras, supports the tapestry,
When I pass into the presence very gracefully and
I assure you.

Madam here is your shuttle-cock


Sister is not your weighting wench rich?


Why sister why?


Because she can flatter: pree-thee call her not,
She has 24. hours to Madam yet; come you
You prate in faith I'll toss you from post to pillar.

You post and I pillar.


No, no, you are the only post, you must support prove a wench and bear, or
elce all the building of your delight will fall --


Down.


What must I stand out?


I by my faith till you be married.


Why do you toss then?


Why I am wed wench.


Pree thee to whom.


To the true husband right head of a woman, my will, which vows never to marry
till I mean to be a fool, a slave, starch cambric roughs, and make candells
(pur) tis down serve again good wench.


By your pleasing cheek you play well.


Nay good creature pree thee do not flatter me, I thought twas for something
you go casd in your veluit skabberd, I warrant these laces were ne'er stiched
on with true stich, I have a plain weighting wench she speaks plain, and
faith, she goes plain, she is virtuous and because she should go like virtue
by the consent of my bounty she shall never have above two smocks to her
back, for that's the fortune of desert, the maine in fashion or reward of merit
(pur)just thus do I use my servants, I strive to catch them in my racket, and
no sooner caught but I toss them away, if he fly well and have good feaethers
I play with them till he be down, and then my maid serves him to me again,
if a slug and weak winged if he be down there let him lie.


Good Mell I wonder how many servants thou hast.


Troth so do I, let me see Dupatzo.


Dupatzo which Dupatzo.


Dupatzo the elder brother the fool, he that bought the half penny rib and
wearing it in his ear* swearing twas the duchess of Millans favour, he into
whose head a man may travel 10. leagues before he can meet with his eyes,
then there's my chub my Epicure Quadratus, that rubs his guts, clappes his
paunch cries Riuo, intertayning my ears perpetually with a most strong
discourse of the praise of bottle ale red Herrings, then there's Simplicius
Faber.


Why he is a fool.


True or else he would ne'er be my servant, then there's the cap cloakt Courtier
Baltazar he wears a double treble quadruple ruff, I in the summer time,
faith I ha servants inow and I doubt not but by my ordinary pride and
extraordinary cunning to get more. Monsieur Lauerdure with a troupe of gallants
is entering.


He capers the lascivious blood about
Within heart pantes, nor leaps the eye nor lips:
Prepare your selves to kiss for you must be kissd.

By my troth tis a pretty thing to be towards marriage, a pretty loving: look
where he comes ha ha.


Good day sweet love.


Wish her good night man.


God morrow sister.


A curtsy to you caper, to morrow morn I'll call you brother.


But much much falls betwixt the cup and lip.


Be not to confident the knot may slip.


Bounty, blessedness, and the spirit of wine attend my Mistres.


Thanks good chub.


God ye god morrow heartily mistres, and how do you since last I saw you.


Gods me you must not inquire how she does, that's privy counsel, fie, there's
manners indeed.


Pray you pardon my incivility, I was som-what bold with you, but believe me
I'll never be so saucy to ask you how you do again, as long as I live la.


Square chub, what sullene black is that.


A tassell that hangs at my purse strings, he dogs me and I give him scraps
and pay for his ordinary, feed him, he liquors himself in the juice of my
bounty, and when he hath sucked up strength of spirit he squeaseth it in my
own face, when I have refind and sharp'd his wits with good food, he cuts my
fingers, and breaks jests upon me, I bear them, and beat him: but by this
light the dull eyed thinks he dos well, dos very well, and but that he and I
are of two faiths -- I fill my belly, and feeds his brain, I could find in my
heart to hug him, to hug him.


Pree-thee persuade him to assume spirit and salute us.


Lampatho, Lampatho, art out of countenance, for wits sake salute these
beauties, how dost like them?


Vds fut, I can liken them to nothing, but great men's great horse upon great
days, whose tails are trust up in silk and silver.


To them man, salute them.


Bless you fair Ladies, God make you all his servants.


God make you all his servants.


He is helped well had need of you, for be it spoken without prophanisme he
hath more in this train, I fear me you ha more servants then he, I am sure
the Devil is an Angel of darkness.


I but those are Angels of light.


Light Angels, pree-thee leave them, with-draw a little and hear a Sonnet
pree-thee, hear a Sonnet.


Made of Albanos widow that was, and Mounsieur Lauerdures wife that must be.


Come leave his lips and command some liquor, if you have no Bottle-Ale,
command some Claret-wine and Bourrage, for that's my predominate humour sleek
billid Bacchus, lets fill thy guts.


Nay hear it, and relish it iuditiously.


I do relish it most iuditially.


Adored excellence, delicious sweet.


Delicious sweet good, very good.


If thou can taste the purer juice of love.


If thou can taste the purer juice, good still, good still.


I do relish it, it tastes sweet.


Is not the metaphor good, is't not well followed?


Passing good, very pleasing.


Is't not sweet.


Let me see it I'll make it sweet,
I'll soak it in the juice of Helicon.
Bir Lady, passing sweet, good, passing sweet.

You wrong my Muse.


The Irish flux upon thy Muse, thy whorish Muse,
Here is no place for her loose brothelry,
We will not deal with her, go, away, away,

I'll be revenged.

How pree-thee in a play? come, come, be sosiable
In private severance from society,
Here leaps a vain of blood inflamed with love,
Mounting to pleasure, all adict to mirth,
Thoult read a Satire or a Sonnet now,
Clagging their aerie humour with --

Lamp oil, watch Candles, Rug-gownes small juice,
Thin commons, four a clock rising, I renounce you all,
Now may I ternally abandon meat
Rust fusty you which most embraced disuse,
You a made me an Ass, thus shaped my lot,
I am a mere Scholar, that is a mere sot.

Come then Lamp, i'll power fresh Oil into thee,
Apply thy spirit that it may nimbly turn,
Unto the habit, fashion of the age,
I'll make thee man the Scholar, enable thy behaviour,
Apt for the entertain of any presence:
I'll turn thee gallant, first thou shalt have a Mistress,
How is thy spirit raised to yonder beauty?
She with the sanguine cheek, the dimpled chin,
The pretty amorous smile that clips her lips,
And dallies bought her cheek --
She with the speaking eye,
That castes out beams as ardent as those flakes,
Which singed the world by rash brained Phaeton,
She with the lip, O lips! she for whose sake,
A man could find in his heart to in-hell himself,
There's more Philosophy, more theoremes,
More demonstrations, all invincible,
More clear divinity drawn on her cheek,
Then in all volumes tedious paraphase,
Of musty eld, O who would staggering doubt,
The souls eternity, seeing it hath
Of heavenly beauty, but to case it up,
Who would distrust a supreme existence,
Able to confound when it can creale,
Such heaven on earth able to entrance,
Amaze: O I 'tis providence, not chance.

Now by the front of Jove me thinks her eye
Shoots more spirit in me, O beauty feminine!
How powerful art thou, what deep magic lies
Within the circle of thy speaking eyes.

Why now could I eat thee, thou dost please mine appetite, I can disist thee,
God made thee a good fool, and happy and ignorant, and amorous, and rich and
frail, and a Satyrist, and an Essayest, and sleepy, and proud, and indeed a
fool and then thou shalt be sure of all these. Do but scorn her she is
thine own, accost her carelessly, and her eye promises she will be bound to
the good abbearing.


Now sister Meletza dost mark their craft, some straggling thoughts transport
thy attentiveness from his discourse, wast Iacomos or our brothers plot?


Both, both, sweet Lady, my Page heard all, we met the rogue, so like
Albano, I beat the rogue.


I but when you were gone the rogue beat me.


Now take my counsel, listen.


A pretty youth, a pretty well shaped youth, a good leg, a very good eye, a
sweet ingenious face, and I warrant a good wit, nay which is more, if he
be poor I assure my soul he is chaste and honest, good faith I fancy, I
fancy him, I and I may chance, well I'll think the rest.


I say be careless still, court her without complement take spirit.


Were not a pleasing ieast for me to cloth
Another rascal like Albano, say
And rumour him returned without all deceit,
Would not beget errors most ridiculous.

Meletza bella belletza, Madonna, bella bella genteletza pree-thee kiss this
initiated gallant.


How would it please you I should respect ye.


As any thing, What you will as nothing.


As nothing, how will you value my love.


Why just as you respect me, as nothing, for out of nothing, nothing is bred,
so nothing shall not beget any-thing, any-thing bring nothing, nothing bring
any-thing, any-thing nothing shall be What you will, my speech mounting to the
valieu of my self which is.


What sweet --


Your nothing light as your self scencelesse as your sex, and just as you
would ha me, nothing.


Your wit skips a morisco, but by the brightest spangle of my tier, I vouchafe
you entire vnaffected favour, were this gentle spirit be not proud.

Believe it youth slow speech, swift love doth often shroud.

My soul's entranced your favour doth transport,
My sense past sense, by your adored graces,
I dote, am rapt.

Nay if you fall to passion and past sense,
My breasts no harbour for your love, go pack, hence.

Vds fut thou gull, thou inky scholar, ha, thou whoreson fop,
Wilt not thou clap into our fashioned gallantry,
Could not be proud and skornfull, aloof and vain
Gods my hearts object, what a plague is this:
My soul's intraunc'd, fut could not clip and kiss,
My soul's intraunc'd, ten thousand crowns at least
Lost lost, my soul's intraunc'd, loves life O beast!

Celia open, open Celia, I would enter, open Celia.


Celia, open, open Celia, I would enter open Celia.


What Celia let in thy husband Albano what Celia.


What Celia let in thy husband Albano what Celia


Vds f, f, f, fut let Albano enter.


Vds f, f, f, fut let Albano enter.


Sweet breast you ha played the wag in faith.


Believe it sweet not I.


Come you have attired some fiddler like Albano to fright the perfumer, there's
the jest.


Good fortunes to our sister.


And a speedy marriage.


Then we must wish her no good fortunes.


For shame, for shame straight clear your house; sweep out this dust, fling
out this trash, return to modesty your husband I say your husband Albano that
was supposed drowned is returned I and at the door.


Ha ha, my husband, ha ha.


Laugh you, shameless? laugh you?


Come, come, your plots discovered, good faith kinsmen I am no skold: to shape a
Perfumer like my husband, O sweet jest.


Last hopes all known.


For penance of your fault will you maintain a jest now, my love hath tired
some fiddler like Albano, like the Perfumer.


Not I by blessedness not I.


Come tis true, do but support the jest and you shall surfeit, with laughter.


Faith we condescend, twill not be crosd I see,
Marriage and hanging go by destiny.

B, b, b, bar out Albano, O Adulterous impudent.


B, b, b, bar out Albano, O thou matchless g, g, g, giglet.


Let them in, let them in, now, now, now observe, observe, look, look, look.


That sames a fiddler, shaped like thee, fear nought, be confident thou shalt
know the jest hereafter, be confident; fear nought, blush not, stand firm.


Now brothers, now gallants, now sisters now call a Perfumer a gutter-maister,
bar me my house, beat me: baffle me, scoff me, deride me, ha that I were a
young man again, by the mas I would ha you all by the ears, by the mas law; I
am Francisco Soranza am I not giglet: strumpet, cutters, swaggerers, brothel
haunters, I am Francisco, O god, O slaves, O dogs, dogs, cures.


No sir pray you pardon us, we confess you are not Francisco nor a Perfumer,
but even.


But even Albano.


But even a fiddler, a miniken tickler, a pum, pum.


A scraper, scraper.
Art not ashamed before Albanos face,
To clip his spouze, O shameless impudent!

Well said perfumer.


A fiddler a scraper, a miniken tickler, a pum, a pum, even now a Perfumer, now
a fiddler, I will be even What you will, do, do do, k, k, k, kiss my wife be,
be, be, be, fore.


Why would have him kiss her behind?


Before my own f, f, f, face.


Well done fiddler.


I'll f, f, fiddle ye.


Dost f, f, flout me.


Dost m, m, m, mock me.


I'll to the Duke I'll p, p, p, paste up infamies on every post.


Twas rarely, rarely done, away, away.


I'll f, f, follow, though I st, st, st, stut, i'll stumble to the Duke in p, p,
plain language, I pray you use my wife well, good faith she was a kind soul
and an honest woman once, I was her husband and was called Albano before I was
drowned, but now after my resurrection I an I know not what indeed brothers,
and indeed sisters and in deed wife I am: What you will, dost thou laugh, dost
thou ge, ge, ge, gerne; a p, p, p, perfumer a fiddler, a Diabalo, matre de
Dios, I'll f, f, f, firk you by the Lord now, now I will.


Ha ha tis a good rogue, a good rogue.


A good rogue ha, I know him not.


No good sweet love come come dissemble not,


Nay if you dread nothing happy be my lot
Come Via sest, come fair cheeks, come lets dance,
The sweets of love is amorous dalliance.

All friends, all happy friends, my veins are light,

Thy prayers are now god send it quickly night.


And then come morning.


I that's the hopeful day*


I there thou hitst it.


Pray God he hit it.


Play.


They say there's revels and a Play at Court.


A Play to night?


I tis this gallants wit,


Is't good is't good?


I fear twill hardly hit.


I like thy fear, well, twil have better chance,
There's nought more hateful then rank ignorance.

Come gallants the table spread will you to dinner?


Yes first a maine at dice and then we'll eat.


Truly the best wits have the bad fortune at dice still.


Whole Play, whole play.


Not I, in truth I have still exceeding bad fortune at dice.


Come shall we in, infayth thou art sudden sad,
Dost fear the shadow of my long dead Lord.

Shadow ha I cannot tel
Time tries all things well. well, well.

Would I were time then, I thought twas for some thing that the old fornicator
was bald behind; go pass on pass on.


Feed and be fat my fair Calipolis,
Riuo here's good juice, fresh Burrage boy?

I commend, commend my self to ye Lady.


In troth Sir you dwell far from neighbours that are enforced to commend your
self.


Why Simplicius, whether now man, for good fashions sake stir not, fit still,
sit still.


I must needs rise, much good do it you.


Dost thou think thy rising will do them much good, sit still, sit still,
carve me of that good Melletza: fill Bacchus fill.


I must needs be gone, and you'll come to my Chamber to morrow morning, I'll
send you a hundred crowns.


In the name of Prosperity, what tide of happiness so suddenly is flou'd
upon thee.


I'll keep a horse and four boys with grace of fortune now.


Now then in faith get up and ride.


And I do not? I'll thwack a Jerkin till he groan again with Gold lace: let
me see, what should I desire of God, mary a Cloak lined with rich Taffeta,
white Satin suit, and my gilt Rapier from pawn, nay she shall give me a
Chain of Pearl that shall pay for all, good boy, good Sinior, good boy, good
Sinior.


Why now, thou speaks in the most embraced fashion that our time hugges, no
sooner a good fortune, or a fresh suit falls upon a fellow that would ha been
gulled to ha should into your society, but and he met you he fronts you with a
faint eye, throws a squint glance over a wried shoulder and cries twixt the
teeth, as very parsimonious of breath, good boy, good Sinior, good boy, good
Sinior death: I will search the life blood of your hopes.


And a fresh Pearle-colour silk stocking o IIII, I'll go to the half crown
ordinary every meal, I'll have my Ivory box of Tobacco, I'll converse with none
but Counts and Courtiers -- now good boy, good Sinior, a pair of massy silver
Spurs, to a hatch short sword, and then your imbroderd hanger, and good Sinior.


Shut the windows, darken the room, fetch whips, the fellow is mad, he
raves, he raves, talks idly, lunatic, who procures thy --


One that has eat fat Capon, sucked the boild Chicken, let out his wit with the
fool of bounty, one Fabius, i'll scorn him, he goes upon Fridaies in black
satin.


Fabius, by this light, a cogging Chetor, he lives on love of Merchants wives,
he stands on the base, of mains, he furnishes your ordinary, for which he
feeds scot-free, keeps fair gold in his purse, to put on upon mains, by
which he lives and keeps a fair boy at his heals, he is damned Fabius.


He is a fine man law, and has a good wit for when he list he can go in black
Satin, I and in a cloak lined with unshorn Velvet.


By the salvation of humanity he's more pestilent then the plague of Lice that
fell upon Egipt, thou hast bin knave if thou credit it, thou art an Ass if
thou follow it, shalt be a perpetual Idiot if thou pursue it, renounce the
world, the flesh, the Devil, and thy trust in men's wives for they will double
with thee, and so I betake my self to the sucking of the juice Capon, my ingle
Bottle-ale, his Gentleman usher that squires him red herring, a fool I found
thee a fool I leave thee, bear record heave tis against the providence of my
speech, God boy good Sinior.


Ha, ha, ha, God boy good Sinior, what a fool 'tis, ha, ha, what an Ass 'tis,
save you young Gentlemen, is she coming, will she meet me, shal's encounter
ha?


You were not lapped in your Mothers smock, you ha not a good cheek, an enticing
eye, a smooth skin, a well shaped leg, a fair hand, you cannot bring a wench
into a fools parradize for you?


Not I by this garter, I am a fool, a very Ninny I, how call you her? how call
you her?


Call her, you rise on your right side to day marry, call her, her name is
Mistress Perpetuana, she is not very fair, nor goes extraordinary gay.


She has a good skin?


A good skin? she is wealthy, her husbands a fool, sheele make you, she wears
the breeches: sheele make you.


I'll keep two men and they shall be Taylors, they shall make suits
continually, and those shall be cloth of silver.


You may go in beaten precious Stones every day, marry I must acquaint you with
some obseruances which you must pursue most religiously, she has a fool, a
natural fool weights on her, that is indeed her pander to him, at the first
you must be bounteous, what-so-ere he craves, be it your Hat, Cloak,
Rapier, Purse, or such trifle, giu't, giu't, the night will pay all: and to
draw all suspect, from pursuing her love for base gain sake.


Giu't by this light, I'll giu't, were, gain, I care not for her Chain of
Pearl, only her love; gain? the first thing her bouty shall fetch is my blush
colour Satin suit fro pawn: gain?


When you hear one wind a Cornet, she is coming down Saint Marks street,
prepare your speech, suck your lips, lighten your spirits, fresh your blood,
sleek your cheeks, for now thou shalt be made for ever (a perpetual and
eternal gull)


I shall so ravish her with my court-ship, I have such variety of discourse,
such copy of phrase to begin, as this; sweet Lady Vlisses Dog after his
Masters ten years travel, I shall so tickle her, or thus, Pure beauty there
is a stone.


Two stones man.


Called, 'tis no matter what; I ha the eloquence, I am not to seek I warrant
you. Vlisses dog, there's a stone called --, O Lord what shall I say.


Is all your eloquence come to this?


The glorious radiant of your glimmering eyes, your glittering beauties blind
my wit, and dazzled my --


I'll put on my mask and please you, pray you wink, pray you.


O fine man, my mistress loves you best, I dreamt you ga me this sword and
dagger, I love your Hat and Feather, O.


Do not cry man, do not cry man, thou shalt ha them I and they were --


O that purse with all the white pence in it, fine man I love you, give you the
fine red pence soon at night, he, I thank you where's the fool now?


He has all my money, I have to keep my self, and --


Poght.


Sir the fool shall lead you to my house, the fool shall not, at night I
expect you, till then take this seal of my affection.


What Simplicius.


I come Quadratus, Gentlemen as yet I can but thank you, but I must be
trusted for my ordinary soon at night, or stay I'll -- the fool has vnfurnisht
me, but 'twill come again, good boy.


What ho Simplicius?


Good boy, good boys, I come, I come, good boys, good boys.


The fool shall weight on thee, Now do I merit to be yclipped Bosphoros
Carmelydon Honorificacuminos Bydett, who who has any square Dice?


Marry Sir that have I.


Thou shalt loose thy share for it in our purchase.


I pray you now, pray you now.


Sooner the whissell of a Mariner,
Shall sleek the rough curbs of the Ocean back,
Now speak I like my self thou shalt loose thy share.

Ha take all then, ha.


Without cloak or hat or rapier figh,


Gods me, look yonder, who gave you these things?


Mistress Perpetuanos fool.


Mistress Perpetuanos fool, ha, ha, there lies a jest, Sinior the fool
promised me he would not leave me.


I know the fool well, he will stick to you, dos not use to for-sake any
youth that is inamord on an other mans wife, he strives to keep company with
a crimson satin suit continually, he loves to be al one with a Critique, a
good wit self conceited, a hawk bearer, a dog keeper, and great with the
nobility, he doates upon a mere scholar an honest flat fool, but above all
he is all one with a fellow whose cloak hath a better inside then his
out-side, and his body richer lined then his brain.


Vds so I am cosoned.


Pray you master pardon me, I must loose my share.


Give me my purse again.


You gave it me and I'll kept.


Well done my honest crack thou shalt be my ingle fort.


He shall keep all maugre thy beardless chin thy eyes.


I may go starve till Midsomer quarter.


Fool get thee hence,


I'll to school again that I will, I left in Ass in presenti, and I'll begin
in Ass in presenti and so good night fair gentry.


The triple Ideotts coxcomb crowns thee,
Bitter epigrames confound thee.
Cucold be when ere thou bride thee,
Through every comic scene be drawn,
Never come thy clothes from pawn.
Never may thy shame be sheathed,
Never kiss a wench sweet breathed.

Seace the Duke approaches tis almost night,
For the Dukes up, now begins his day
Come grace his entrance; lights lights now gins our play.

Still these same bawling pipes, sound softer strains
Slumber our sense, tut these are vulger strains,
Cannot your trembling wiers throw a chain
Of powerful rapture bout our mazed sense
Why is our chair thus cushion'd tapestry
Why is our bed tired with wanton sports?
Why are we clothed in glistering attiers,
If common bloudes can hear, can, feel,
Can sit as soft, lie as lascivious
Stut all as rich as the greatest Potentate,
Soul, and you cannot feast my thrifting ears
With aught but what the lip of common berth can taste,
Take all away your labours idly wast
What sport for night.

A Commedy, entitled Temperance.

What sot elects that subject for the Court,
What should dame Temperance do here, away,
The itch on Temperance your moral play.

Duke, Prince, royal blood, thou that hast the best means to be damned of any
Lord in Veince, thou great man, let me kiss thy flesh, I am fat and therefore
faithful, I will do that which few of thy subjects do; love thee, but I will
never do, that which all thy subjects do; flatter thee, thy humours real, good,
a Commedie?

No and thy sense would banquit in delights,
Appropriat to the blood of Emperors;
Peculier to the state of Majesty,
That none can relish but dilated greatness.
Vouchafe to view the structure of a scene
That stands on tragike solid passion,
O that's fit trafick to commerce with births:
Straind from the mud of base vnble brains,
Give them a scene may force their struggling blood
Rise up on tiptoe in attention,
And fill their intellect with pure elixed wit,
O that's for greatness apt, for Princes fit.

Dare thou then undertake to suit our ears,
With such rich vestment.

Dare; yes my Prince I dare, nay more, I will,
And I'll present a subject worth thy soul:
The honoured end of Cato Vtican.

Whole personate him.


Marry that will I on sudden without change.


Thou want a beard.


Tush a beard ne'er made Cato, though many men's Cato hang only on their chin.

Suppose this flower the City vtica,
The time the night that prolonged Catos death:
Now being placed moung his Philosophers,
These first discourse the souls eternity.

Cato grantes that I am sure, for he was valiant, and honest, which an Epicure
ne'er was, and a coward never will be.


Then Cato holds a distinct notion,
Of indiuiduall actions after death:
This being argued his resolve maintains,
A true magnanimous spirit should give up dirt
To dirt, and with his own flesh dead his flesh,
Fore chance should force it crouch unto his foe:
To kill ones self some I, some hold it no,
O these are points would entice away ones soul:
To breaks indenture of base prentisage,
And run away from his body in swift thoughts
To melt in contemplation lushious sweets,
Now my voluptious Duke i'll feed thy sense,
Worth his creation: give me audience.

My leidge my royal leidge, hear, hear my suit.


Now may thy breath ne'er smell sweet as long as thy loungs can pant for
breaking my speech, thou Muscouite, thou stinking perfumer.


Is not this Albano our some times Courtier?


No troth but Francisco your always perfumer.


Lorenzo Celso our brave Venice Duke, Albano Belletzo, thy Merchant, thy
soldier, thy Courtier, thy slave, thy any-thing, thy What thou wilt, kisses
thy noble blood, do me right or else I am canonised a cuckold, canonised a
cuckold, I am abused, I am abused, my wives abused, my clothes abused, my shape,
my house my all abused, I am sworn out of my self, beated out of my self
baffled, geird at, laughed at, bard my own house, debarred my own wife, whilst
others swill my wines, gurmandize my meat, meat, kiss my wife, O gods, O gods,
O gods, O gods, O gods.


Who is't? who is't?


Come sweet this is your waggery in faith, as if you knew him not.


Yes I fear I do too well, would I could slide away invisible.


Assured this is he.


My worthy leidge the jest comes only thus.
Now to stop and cross it with mere like deceit:
All being known the French knight hath disguisd,
A fiddler like Albano too, to fright the perfumer, this is all.

Art sure tis true.


Tis confessed tis right.


It is right, tis true, right, I am a fiddler, a fiddler, a fiddler vds fut a
fiddler; I'll not believe thee thou art a woman, and tis known veritas non
querit angulos, truth seeks not to lurk under varthingalls, veritas non
querit angulos, a fiddler?


Worthy sir pardon, and permit me first to confess your self, your deputation
dead hath made my love live, to offend you.


I, mock on, scoff on, flout on, do do do.


Troth sir in serious.


I good, good, come hither Celia,
Burst breast, rive heart a sunder? Celia
Why startest thou back: see thou this Celia
O me how often with lascivious touch thy lip,
Hath kissd this mark? how oft this much wronged breast
Hath borne the gentle weight of thy soft cheek?

O me my dearest Lord, my sweet, sweet love.


What a fiddler, a fiddler? now thy love.
I am sure thou skornst; it nay Celia, I could tell
What on the night before I went to sea,
And took my leave with Hymeneal rights
What, thou lispsd
Into my ear, a fiddler and perfumer now.

And --

Dear brother.


Most respected Sinior,
Believe it by the sacred end of love,
What much, much wrong hath forced your patience
Proceeded from most dear affied love,
Devoted to your house.

Believe it brother.


Nay your self when you shall hear the occurrances will say tis happy,
commicall.


Assure thee brother.


Shall I be brave, shall I be my self now, love, give me thy love, brothers
give me your breasts, French knight reach me thy hand, perfumer thy fist. Duke
I inuit thee, love I forgive thee: Frenchman I hug thee, I'll know all, i'll
pardon all, and I'll laugh at all.


And i'll curse you all.
O ye ha interrupt a scene.

Quadratus we will hear these points discussd,
With apter and more calm affected hours.

Well, good, good.


Wast even so in faith why then caprichious mirth,
Skip light moriscoes in our frolic blood,
Flaggd veins, sweet, plump with fresh infused joys:
Laughter pucker our cheeks, make shoulders shog,
With chucking lightness, love once more thy lips,
For ever clasp our hands, our hearts, our Creasts,
Thus front, thus eyes, thus cheek, thus all shall meet.
Shall clip, shall hug, shall kiss, my dear, dear sweet,
Duke wilt thou see me revel, come love dance,
Court gallants court; suck amorous dalliance.

Beauty your heart.


First sir accept my hands.
She leaps too rash, that falls in suddeine bands.

Shall I despair? never will I love more.


No sea so boundless vast but hath a shore.


Why marry me.
Thou can have but soft flesh, good blood, sound bones.
And that which fills up all your bracks, good stones.

Stones, Trees and beasts in love still firmer prove,
Then man, I'll none no hold-fastes in your loves.

Since not the Mistress, come on Faith the maid:

Ten thousand Ducats too to boat are laid.


Why then wind Cornets* lead on jolly lad.


Excuse me gallants though my legs lead wrong*
'Tis my first footing, wind out nimble tongue.

'Tis well, 'tis well, how shall we spend this night*

Gulp (...) Wine my liedge* let our paunch (...)*
Suck merry Jellies, preuiew but not prevent
No mortal can the miseries of life.

I home inuit you all, come sweet, sweet wife,
My liedge vouchsafe thy presence, drink till the ground look blew, boy.

Live still springing hopes, still in fresh new joys,
May your loves happy hit in fair cheekt wives,
Your flesh still plump with sap'd restoratives,
That's all my honest frolic heart can wish,
A Fico for the mew and Envious pish,
Till night, I wish good food and pleasing day,
But then found rest so ends or slight writ play.



