NOW to be modest Madam, when your are
A suitor for your father, would appear,
Courser then boldness you a while must part
with soft silence, and the blushings of a virgin,
Though I must grant (did not this cause command
it) They are rich jewels you have ever worn
To all men's admiration, in this age,
If by our own forced importunity,
Or other^ purchasd intercession, or
Cor^upting bribes we can make our approaches
To justice guarded, from us by sterne power,
We bless the means, and industry.

Here's music
In this bag shall wake her, though she had drunk Opium,
Oraaten Mandrakes, let commanders talk
Of cannons to make breaches, give but fire
To this petarde, it shall blow open Madam
The iron doors of a judge, and make you entrance,
When they (let them do what they can) with all
Their mines, their culverins, and Basiliscos
Shall cool their feet without, this being the pickelocke
That neverfailes.

Tis true, gold can do much,
But beauty more, were I the governor,
Though the Admiral your father stood convicted
Of what he's only doubted, half a dozen
Of sweet close kisses from these cherry lips,
With some short active conf^rence in private,
Should sign his general pardon.

These light words ^ir
Do ill become the weight of my sad fortune
And I much wonder you that do profess
Your self to be my fathers bosom friend,
Can raise mirth from his misery.

You mistake me,
I share in his calamity, and only
Deliver my thoughts freely, what I should do
For such a rare petitioner, and if
You'll follow the directions, I prescribe
With my best judgement I'll mark out the way
For his enlargement.

With all real joy,
I shall put what you counsel into act,
Provided it be honest.

Honesty
In a fair she client (trust to my experience)
Seldom or never prospers, the world's wi^ked.
We are men, not saints sweet Lady, you must practice
The manners of the time, if you intend
To have favour from it, do not deceive your self
By building too much on the false foundations
Of chastity and virtue, bid your wayters
Stand farther of, and i'll come nearer to you.

Some wicked counsel on my life.

Ne'er doubt it,
If it proceed from him.

I wonder that
My Lord so much affects him.

Thou art a child and dost not understand on what strong bases this frindship's
raised between this Mountrevile and our Lord Monsieur. Malefort, but i'll teach
thee from thy years they have been joint purchasers, in furs, water-works, and
trucked together.


In fire and water works,

Commodities boy
Which you may know hereafter.

And deal in'em
When the trade has given you over, as appears (by the increase of your high
forehead.

Heare's a crack,
I think they suck this knowledge in their milk.

I had had an ignorant nurse else^ I have tide sir
My Ladies garter, and can guess.

Peace infant,
Tales out a school take heed you will be britchd else.

My Ladies colour changes.

She falls off too.

You are a naughty man, indeed you are,
And I will sooner perish with my father
Then at this price redeem him.

Take your own way,
Your modest legal way, tis not your veil
Nor mourning habit, nor these creatures taught
To howl, and cry, when you begin to whimper,
Nor following my Lords coach in the dirt,
Nor that with you rely upon, ^ bribe
Will do it when there's something he likes better.
These courses in an old crone of three score,
That had seven years together tired the court
With tedious petitions and clamours,
For the recovery of a strangling husband,
To pay forsooth the duties of one to her,
But for a Lady of your tempting beauties,
Your youth and ravishing features to hope only
In such a suite as this is, to gain favour
Without exchange of courtesy, you conceive me,
Were madness at the height, here's brave young Beaufort
The meteor of Marsellis, one that houlds
The governor his fathers will and power
In more awe then his own, come, come advance,
Present your bag crammed with crowns of the sun,
Do you think he cares for money? he loves pleasure,
Burn your petition, burn it, he dotes on you,
Upon my knowledge, to his cabinet, do
And he will point you out a certain course,
Be the cause right or wrong to have your father
Releasd with much facility.

Do you hear?
Take a pander with you.

I tell thee there is neither
Employment yet nor money.

I have commanded
And spent my own means in my countries service,
In hope to raise a fortune.

Many have hoped so,
But hopes prove seldom certainties with soldiers.

If no preferment, let me but receive
My pay that is behind, to set me up
A tavern, or a vaulting house; while men love
Or drunkenness, or lechery, they'll ne'er fail me:
Shall I have that?

As our prises are brought in,
Till then you must be patient.

In the mean time,
How shall do for cloths?

As most captains do
Philosopher like, carry all you have about you.

But how shall I do to satisfy C^lon Mounsieur,
There lies the doubt.

That's easily decided,
My fathers tables free for any man
That hath borne arms.

And there's good store of meat?

Never fear that.

I'll seek no other ordinary then,
But be his daily guest without invitement,
And if my stomach hold, lle feed so heartily
As he shall pay me suddenly to be quit of me.

Tis she.

And further.

Away you are troublesome,
Designs of more weight.

Ha fair Theocrine,
Nay if a velvet petticoat move in the front
Buff jerkins must to the rear, I know my manner^
This is indeed great business, (...) no a gugawe
I may dance attendance, this must be dispatched,
And suddenly, or all will go to wrack.
Charge her home in the flank my Lord, nay I am gone sir, Belgarde

Nay pray you Madam rise, or I'll kneel with you.

I would bring you on your knees, were I a woman.

What is it can deserve so poor a name,
As a suite to me? this more then mortal form
Was fashioned to command and not entreat,
Your will but known is served.

Great Sir, my father
My brave deserving father, but that sorrow
Forbids the use of speech.

I understand you,
Without the aids of those interpreters
That fall from your fair eyes, I know you labour,
the liberty of your father, at the least
an equal hearing to acquit himself:
and 'tis not to endear my service to you,
though I must add and pray you with patience hear it,
'tis hard to be effected, in respect
the State's incensed against him: all presuming
the world of outrages his impious son,
turned worse than Pirat in his cruelties
expres'd to this poor Country, could not be
with such ease put in execution, if
your father (of late our great Admiral)
held not or correspondency, or connived
at his proceedings.

And must he then suffer,
his cause unheard?

As yet it is resolved so,
in their determination. But suppose,
for I would nourish hope, not kill it in you,
I should divert the torrent of their purpose,
and render them that are implacable,
impartial Judges, and not swayed with spleen:
will you, I dare not say in recompense,
for that includes a debt you cannot owe me,
but in your liberal bounty, in my suit
to you be gracious?

You entreat of me, Sir,
what I should offer to you, with confession
that you much undervalue your own worth,
should you receive me. Since there come with you
not lustful fires, but fair and lawful flames.
but I must be excused, '^is now no time
for me to think of Hyme^ae^ll joys.
Can he (and pray you, Sir, consider it)
that gave me life, and faculties to love,
be, as he is now ready to be devoured
by ravenous wolves, and at that instant, I
but entertain a thought of those delights.
in which perhaps my ardor meets with your?
duty and pie^ie forbid it, Sir.

But this effected, and your father free,
what is your answer?

Every minute to me
will be a tedious age till our embraces
are warrantable to the world.

I urge no more, confirm it with a kiss.

I doubly feale it.

This would do better a bed, the business ended,
they are the lovingest Couple.

Here comes my father
with the Council of war, deliver your petition,
^nd leave the rest to me.

I am sorry, Lady,
your fathers guilt compels your innocence
(...) ask what I in justice must deny.

For my sake, Sir, pray you receive, and read it.

Thou foolish boy, I can deny thee nothing.

Thus far we are happy. Madam quit the place,
^ou shall hear how we succeed.

Goodness reward you.

It is apparent, and we stay too long
^o censure Malefort as he deserves.

There is no colour of reason that makes for him:
^ad he discharged the trust committed to him,
^ith that experience and fidelity
he practised heretofore, it could not be
our Navy should be blocked up, and in our sight
our goods made prize, our Sailors sold for slaves,
^y his prodigious issue.

I much grieve,
^fter so many brave and high achievements,
he should in one ill forfeit all the good
he ever did his Country.

Well, 'tis granted.

I humbly thank you, Sir.

He shall have hearing,
his irons too struck off, bring him before us;
but seek no further favour.

Sir, I dare not.

Monsieur Chamont, Montaigne, Lanour, assistants
by a Commission from the most Christian King
in punishing, or ^reeing Malefort
our late great Admiral: though I know you need not
instructions from me, how to dispose of
your selves in this mans trial (that exacts
your clearest judgements) give me leave with favour
to offer my opinion: we are to hear him,
a little looking back on his fair actions,
loyal, and true demeanour, not as now
by the general voice, already he's condemned.
But if we find (as most believe) he hath held
intelligence with his accursed son,
fal^e off from all allegiance, and turned
(but for what cause we know not) the most bloody
and fatal enemy, this Country ever
repented to have brought forth, all compassion
of what he was, or may be, if now pardoned,
we sit engaged to censure him with all
extremity and rigour.

Your Lordship shows us
a path which we will tread in.

He that leaves
to follow, as you lead, will lose himself.

I'll not be singular.

He comes, but with
a strange distracted look.

Live I once more
to see these hands and arms fre? these, that often
In the most dreadful horror of a fight,
Have been as sea-markes to teach such as were
Seconds in my attempts, to steer between
The rocks of too much dating, and pale fear,
To reach the Port of victory? When my sword,
Advancd thus, to my enemies appeared
A hairy comet, threatenning death and ruin
To such as durst behold it. These the legs
That when our ship were grappled, carried me
With such swift motion from deck to deck,
As they that saw it, with amazement cried;
He does not run, but flies.

He still retains
The greatness of his spirit.

Now cramped with irons,
Hunger, and could, they hardly do support me.
^ut I forget my self. O my good Lords
That ^it there as my judges to determine
The life and death of Malefort, where are now
Those shouts, those cheerful looks, those loud applauses
With which when I returned laden with spoil
You entertained your Admiral (...) all's forgotten,
And I stand here to give account for that
Of which I am a^ free, and innocent
As he that never saw the eyes of him,
^or whom I stand suspected.

Monsieur Malefort
^et not your passion so far transport you
(...) to believe from any private malice,
^r envy to your person you are questioned,
^or do the suppositions want weight,
That do invite us to a strong assurance,
Your son.

My shame.

Pray you hear with patience, ever
Without assistance, or sure aids from you,
Could with the pirates of Argers and Tun^,
even those that you had almost twice defeated,
acquire such credit, as with them to be
made absolute commander? (p^y you observe me)
if there had not some (...) pas^'d between you,
that when occasion ^v'd you would (...) y^ with 'em
to the ruin of Marcellis?

More, what urged
your son to turn Aposta^?

Had he from
the State, or Governor, the least n^glect
which envy could interpret for a wrong?

Or if you slept not in your charge, how could
so many ships as do infest our Coast
and have in our own Harbour shut our Navy
come in unfought with?

They put him hardly ^o it.

My Lords, with as much brev^ie as I can,
I'll answer each particular objection
with which you charge me. The mai^ ground, on which
you raise the building of your accusition,
hath reference to my so^e should I now curse him,
or wish in the agony of my troubled soul,
lightning had found him in his mothers (...)
you'll say is from the purpose, and I therefore
betake him to the Devil, and so leaves (...)
Did never loyal father but my self
beget a treacherous issue? was't in me
with as much ease to fashion up his mind,
as in his generation to form,
the organs to his body? must it follow
because that he is impious, I am false?
I would not boast my actions, yet ^is lawful
to upbraid my benefits to unthankful men.
Who sunk the Turkish galleys in the Scraights.
but Malefort? who rescued the French (...),
when they were boarded, and stowed under harches
by the Pirats of Argie^when every (...)
they did expect to be chained to the oar,
but your now doubted Admiral? then you filled
the air with shouts of joy, and did proclaim
when hope had left them, and gr^m, looked Despair
hovered with saile-stretche wings over their heads,
to me, as to the Neptune of the Sea,
they owed the restitution of their goods,
their lives, their liberties. O can it then
be probable, my Lords, that he that never
became the master of a Pirat^ ship,
but at the maine yard hung the Captain up,
and caused the rest to be thrown over board,
should after all these proofs of deadly ha^e,
so oft expres'd against'em, entertain
a thought of quarter with'em, but much less
(to the perpetual ruin of my glories)
to join with them to lift a wicked arm
against my mother Country, this Marsellis,
which with my prodigal expense of blood
I have so oft protected.

What you have done
is granted, and applauded, but yet know
this glorious relation of your actions
must not so blind our judgements, as to suffer
this most unnatural crime you stand accused of,
to pass unquestioned.

No, you must produce
reasons of more validity, and weight,
to plead in your defence, or we shall hardly
conclude you innocent.

The large volume of
your former worthy deeds, with your experience,
both what, and when to do, but makes against you.

For had your care and courage been the same
as heretofore, the dangers we are plunged in
had been with ease prevented.

What have ^
Omitted in the power of flesh, and blood,
Even in the birth to strangle the designs
Of this hell-bred wolf my son? alas my Lords,
I am no god, nor like him could foresee
His cruel thoughts, and cursed purposes,
Nor would the sun at my command forbear
To make his progress to the other world,
Affording to us one continued light.
Nor could my breath dispresse those foggy mists
Coverde with which, and darkness of the night,
Their navy undiscernd, without resistance
Beset our harbour? make not that my fault,
Which you in justice must ascribe to fortune.
But if that nor my former acts, nor what
I have delivered, can prevail with you
To make good my integrity and truth:
Rip up this bosom; and pluck out the heart
That hath been ever loyal.

How! a trumpet!
Enquire the cause.

Thou searcher of men's hearts,
And sure defender of the innocent,
(My other crying sins, a while not looked on)
If I in this am guilty strike the dead,
Or by some unexpected means confirm,
I am accusd unjustly.

Speak the motives
That brings thee hither.

From our Admiral thus,
He does salute you fairly, and desires
It may be understood no public hate,
Hath brought him to Marse^lis, nor see (...) he
The ruin of his country, but aims only
To wreak a private wrong; and if from you
He may have leave, and liber^y to decide it
In a single combat, he'll give up good pledges
If he fall in the trial of his right,
We shall weigh anchor and no more molest
This town with hostile arms.

Speak to the man,
(If in this presence he appear to you)
To whom you bring this challenge.

Tis to you;

His father^

Can it be!

Strange and prodigious.

Thou feest I stand unmovd were thy voice thunder
It should not shake me, say what would the viper?

The reverence a fathers name may challenge,
And duty of a soon, no more remembered
He does defy thee to the death.

Go on.

And with his sword well prove it on thy head,
Thou art a murderer, an Atheist
And that al attributes of men turned furies
Cannot express thee, this he will make good
If thou dare give him meeting.

Dare I live,
Dare I when mountains of my sins ore whelm me
At my last gasp ask for mercy? how I bless
Thy coming Captain, never man to me
Arrived so opportunely; and thy message,
However it may seem to threaten death,
Does yield to me a second life in curing
My wounded honour, stand I yet suspected
As a confederate with this enemy,
Whom of all men, against all ties of nature
He marks out for destruction? you are just
Immortal powers, and in this merciful,
And it takes from any sorrow, and my shame
For being the father to so bad a son,
In that you are pleased to offer up the monster
To my correction. Blush and repent
As you are bound my honourable Lords
Your ill opinions of me, not great Brutus
The father of the Roman liberty
With more assured constancy beheld
His traitor sons, for labouring to call home
The banished Tarquins, scourged with rods to death,
Then I will show when I take back the life
This prodigy of mankind received from me.

We are sorry Monsieur Malefort for our error
And are much taken with your resolution
But the disparity of years, and strength
Between you, and your son, duly considerd
We would not so expose you

Then you kill me
Under pretence to save me. O my Lords
As you love honour, and a wronged mans fame
Deny me not this fair, and noble means
To make me right again to all the world.
Should any other but my self be chosen
To punish this Apostata with death,
You rob a wretched father of a justice
That to all after times will be recorded,
I wish his strength were ^uple, his skill equal
To my experience, that in his fall
He may not shame my victory, I feel
The powers, and spirits of twenty strong men in me.
Were he with wild fire circl'd, I undaunted
Would make way to him, as you do affect Sir
My daughter Theocrin^, as you are
My true and ancient friend, as thou art valiavt,
And as all love a soldier, second me
In this my just petition, in your looks
I see a grant my Lord.

You shall orebeare me,
And since you are so confident in your cause,
Prepare you for the combat.

With more joy
Then yet I ever tasted, by the next sun,
The disobedient rebel shall hear from me
And so return in safety, my good Lords,
To all my service, I will di^ or purchase
Rest to Marsellis, nor can I make doubt,
But his impiety is a potent charm,
To edge my sword and add strength to my anne.

HE did accept the challenge then?

Nay more,
Was over joyd in it; and as it had been
A fair invitement to a solemn feast,
And not a comb^ to conclude with death,
He cheerfully embraced it.

Are the articles
Signed to on both parts?

At the fathers suit,
With much unwillingness the governor
Consented to'em.

You are inward with
Our Admiral; could you yet never learn
What the nature of the quarrel is, that renders
The son, more then incensed, implacable
Against the father?

Never; yet I have
As far as manners would give warrant to it,
With my best curiousness of care observed him,
I have sa^e with him in his cabin a day together,
Yet not a syllable exchanged between us,
Sigh he did often, as if inward grief,
And melancholy at that instant would
Choke up his vital spirits, and now and then
A tear, or two, as in derision of
The toughness of his rugged temper would
Fall on his hallow cheeks, which but once felt,
A sudden flash of fury did dry up,
And laying then his hand upon his sword,
He would murmure, but yes so as I oft hard him,
We shall meet cruel father, yet we shall,
When i'll exact for every womanish drop
Of sorrow from these eyes, a strict account
Of much more from thy heart.

Tis wondrous strange.

And past my apprehension.

Yet what makes
The miracle greater, when from the maine top
A sayle's descried, all thoughts that do concern
Himself laid by, no Lyon pinchd with hunger,
Rowzes himself more fiercely from his den,
Then he comes on the deck, and there how wisely
He gives directions, and how stout he is
In his executions, we to admiration,
Have been eye-witnesses, yet he never minds
The booty when tis made ours, but as if
The danger, in the purchase of the prey
Delighted him much more then the reward,
His will made known he does retire himself
To his private contemplation, no joy
Express^d by him for victory,

Hear he comes
But with more cheerful looks then ever yet
I saw him wear.

It was long since resolved on
Nor must I stagger now, may the cause
That forces me to this unnatural act,
Be buried in everlasting silence,
And I find rest in death, or my revenge,
To either I stand equal. Pray you Gentlemen
Be charitable in your censures of me,
And do not entertain a false belief
That I am mad, for undertaking that
Which must be, when effected, still repented.
It adds to my calamity that I have
Discourse and reason, and but too well know
I can nor live, nor end a wretched life,
But both ways I am impious. Do not therefore
Ascribe the perturbation of my soul
To a servile fear of death: I oft have viewed
All kinds of his inevitable darts,
Not are they terrible. Were I condemned to leap
From the cloud-covered brows of a steep rock
Into the deep; or Curtius-like to fill up,
For my Countries safety and an after name,
A bottomless A bysse, or charge through fire,
It could not so much shake me, as the encounter
Of this days single enemy.

If you please, Sir,
You may shunit, or defer it.

Not for the world:
Yet two things I entreat you, the first is,
You'll not enquire the difference between
My self and him, which as a father once
I honoured, now my deadliest enemy,
The last is, if I fall, to bear my body
Far from this place, and where you please inter it.
I should say more, but by his sudden coming
I am cut off.

Let me, Sir, have the honour
To be your second.

With your pardon, Sir,
I must put in for that, since our tried friendship
Hath lasted from our infancy.

I have served
U^der your command, and you have seen me fight,
And handsomely, though I say it, and if now
At this downright game, I may but hold your cards,
I'll not pull down the side.

I rest much bound
To your so noble offers, and I hope
Shall find your pardon, though I now refuse'em,
For which I'll yield strong reasons, but as briefly
As the time will give me leave. For me to borrow
(That am supposed the weaker) any aid
From the assistance of my Seconds sword,
Might write me down in the black list of those,
That have nor fire, nor spirit of their own;
But dare, and do, as they derive their courage
From his example, on whose help and valour
They wholly do depend. Let this suffice
In my excuse for that. Now if you please
On both parts to retire to yonder mount,
Where you, as in a Roman Theater,
May see the bloody difference determined,
Your favours meet my wishes.

'Tis approved of
By me, and I command you lead the way,
And leave me to my fortune.

I would gladly
Be a spectator (since I am denied
To be an Actor) of each blow, and thrust,
And punctually observe'em.

You shall have
All you desire; for in a word or two
I must mak^ bold to entertain the time,
If he give suffrage to it.

Yes, I will,
I'll hear thee, and then kill thee: nay farewell.

Embrace with love on both sides, and with ^s
Leave deadly hate, and fury.

From this place
You ne'er shall see both living.

What's past help, is
Beyond prevention.

Now we are alone, Sir,
And thou hast liberty to unlode the burden
Which thou groan'st under. Speak thy griefs.

I shall, Sir;
But in a perplexed form and method, which
You only can interpret; would you had not
A guilty knowledge in your bosom of
The language which you force me to deliver,
So I were nothing. As you are my father
I bend my knee, and uncompelled profess
My life, and all that's mine, to be your gift;
And that in a sons duty I stand bound
To lay this head beneath your feet, and run
All desperate hazards for your ease and safety.
But this confessed on my part, I rise up,
And not as with a father, (all respect,
Love, fear, and reverence cast off,) but as
A wicked man I thus expostulate with you.
Why have you done that which I dare not speak,
And in the action changed the humble shape
Of my obedience, to rebellious rage
And insolent pride? and with shut eyes constrained me
To run my Bark of honour on a shelf,
I must not see, nor if I saw it, shun it?
In my wrongs nature suffers, and looks backward,
And mankind trembles to see me pursue
What beasts would fly from. For when I advance
This sword, as I must do against your head,
Piety will weep, and filial duty morn,
To see their altars which you built up in me,
In a moment razed and ruined, that you could
(From my grieved soul I wish it) but produce
To qualify, not excuse your deed of horror,
Ou^ seeming reason that I might fix here,
And move no father.

Have I so far lost
A fathers power, that I must give account
Of my actions to my son? or must I plead
As a fearful prisoner at the bar, while he
That owes his being to me sirs a Judge
To censure that, which only by my self
Ought to be questioned? mountains sooner fall
Beneath their valleys, and the lofty Pine
Pay homage to the Bramble, or what else is
Preposterous in nature, ere my tongue
In one short fillable yields satisfaction
To any doubt of thine, nay though it were
A certainty disdaining argument.
Since though my deeds wore Hel^ black livery,
To thee they should appear triumphal robes,
Set off with glorious honour, thou being bound
To see with my eyes, and to hold that reason,
That takes or birth or fashion from my will.

This sword divides that slavish knot.

It cannot,
It cannot wretch, and if thou but remember
From whom thou had this spirit, thou dare not hope it.
Who trained thee up in arms but I? Who taught thee
Men were men only when they durst look down
With scorn on death and danger, and contemned
All opposition, till plumed victory
Had made her constant stand upon their helmets?
Under my shield thou hast fought as securely
As the young Eglet, covered with the wings
Of her fierce Dam, learnes how and where to prey.
All that is manly in thee, I call mine;
But what is weak and womanish, thine own.
And what I gave, since thou art proud, ungrateful,
Presuming to contend with him, to whom
Submission is due, I will take from thee.
Look therefore for extremities, and expect not
I will correct thee as a son, but kill thee
As a Serpent swollen with poison, who surviving
A little longer, with infections breath,
Would render all things near him, like it self
Contagious. Nay, now my anger's up,
Ten thousand virgins kneeling at my feet,
And with one general cry howling for mercy,
Shall not redeem thee.

Thou incensed Power,
A while forbear thy thunder, let me have
No aid in my revenge, if from the grave
My mother.

Thou shalt never name her more.

They are at it.

That thrust was put strongly home.

But with more strength avoided.

Welcome in,
He has drawn blood of him yet, well done old Cock.

That was a strange miss.

That a certain hit.

He's fallen, the day is ours.

The Admiral's slain.

The father is victorious!

Let us haste
To gratulate his conquest.
1. We to morn
The fortune of the son.

With utmost speed
Acquaint the Governor with the good success,
That he may entertain to his full merit,
The father of his Countries peace and safety.

Were a new life hid in each mangled limb,
I would search, and find it. And howere to some
I may seem cruel, thus to tyrannize
Upon this senseless flesh, I glory in it.
That I have power to be unnatural,
Is my security, die all my fears,
And waking jealousies, which have so long
Been my tormentors, there's now no suspicion;
A fact, which I alone am conscious of,
Can never be discovered, or the cause
That called this Duel on. I being above
All perturbations, nor is it in
The power of Fate, again to make me wretched.

All honour to the Conqueror.
Who dares tax
My friend of treachery now?

I am very glad, Sir,
You have sped so well. But I must tell you thus much,
To put you in mind that a low ebb must follow
Your high swollen tide of happiness, you have purchased this
^our at a high price.

'Tis Belgards,
Above all estimation, and a little
To be exalted with it cannot savour
Of arrogance: that to this arm and sword,
Mar^ellis owes the freedom of her fears,
Or that my loyalty not long since eclipsed,
Shines now more bright than ever, are not things
to be lamented. Though indeed they may
Appear too dearly bought, my falling glories
Being made up again, and cemented
With a sons blood. 'Tis true, he was my son
While he was worthy, but when he shook off
His duty to me, (which my fond indulgence
Upon submission might perhaps have pardoned)
And grew his Counties enemy, I looked on him
As a Stranger to my family, and a Traitor
Justly proscribed, and he to be rewarded
That could bring in his head. I know in this
That I am censured rugged and austere,
That will vouchsafe not one sad sigh or tear
Upon his slaughtered body. But I rest
Well satisfied in my self, being assured
That extraordinary virtues, when they soar
Too high a pitch for common fights to judge of,
Losing their proper splendour, are condemned
For most remarkable vices.

Tis too true, Sir,
In the opinion of the multitude:
But for my self that would be held your friend,
And hope to know you by a nearer name,
They are as they deserve, received.

My daughter
Shall thank you for the favour.

I can wish
No happiness beyond it.

Shall we have leave
To bear the corps of our dead Admiral,
As he enjoined us from this Coast?

Provided
The articles agreed on be observed,
And you depart hence with it, making oath
Never hereafter but as friends to touch
Upon this shore.

We'll faithfully perform it.

Then as you please dispose of it. Tis an object
That I could wish removed. His sins die with him,
So far he has my charity.

He shall have
A Soldiers funeral.

Farewell.

These rites
Paid to the dead, the Conqueror that survives
Must reap the harvest of his bloody labour.
Sound all l^d instruments of joy and triumph,
And with all circumstance, and ceremony
Wait on the Patron of our liberty,
Which he at all parts merits.

I am honoured.
Beyond my hopes.

'Tis short of your deserts.
Lead on: Oh Sir you must: you are too modest.

Talk not of comfort, I am both ways wretched,
And so distracted with my doubts and fears,
I know not where to fix my hopes. My loss
Is certain in a father, or a brother,
Or both, such is the cruelty of my fate,
And not to be avoided.

You must bear it
With patience, Madam.

And what's not in you
To be prevented, should not cause a sorrow
Which cannot help it.

Fear not my brave Lord
Your noble father; fighting is to him
Familiar as eating. He can teach
Our modern Duellists how to cleave a button,
And in a new way, never yet found out
By old Caranza.

May he be victorious,
And punish disobedience in his son,
Whose death in reason should at no part move you,
He being but half your brother, and the neernesse,
Which that might challenge from you, forfelted
By his impious purpose to kill him, from whom
He received life.

A general shout.

Of joy.

Look up dear Lady, sad news never came
^sherd with loud applause.

I stand prepared,
To endure the shock of it.

I am out of breath
With running to deliver first.

What?

We are all made,
My Lord has wont the day, your brother's slain,
The pirats gone, and by the governor,
And states, and all the men of war he is
^ought home in triumph, nay no musing, pay me
For my good news hereafter.

Heaven is just!

Give thanks at leisure, make all hast to meet him
I could wish I were a horse that I might bear you
To him upon my back.

Thou art an ass,
And this is a sweet burden.

Peace you crackrope.

All honours we can give you and rewards
Though all that's rich, or precious in Marsellis
Were laid down at your feet, can hold no weight
With your deservings, let me glory in
Your action as if it were mine own,
And have the honour with the arms of love,
To emb^ce the great performer of a deed,
Transcending all this Country ere could boast of.

Imagine, noble Sir, in what we may
Express our thankfulness, and rest assured
It shall be freely granted.

He's an enemy
To goodness and to virtue, that dares think
There's any other thing within our power to give,
Which you in justice may not boldly challenge.

And as your own, for we will ever be
At your devotion.

Much honoured Sir,
And you my noble Lords, I can say only,
The greatness of your favours overwhelm me,
And like too large a sail, for the small bark
Of my poor merits, sinks me. That I stand
Upright in your opinions, is an honour
Exceeding my deserts, I having done
Nothing but what in duty I stood bound to:
And to expect a recompense were base,
Good deeds being ever in themselves rewarded.
Yet since your liberal bounties tell me that
I may with your allowance be a Suitor,
To you my Lord I am an humble one,
And must ask that, which known, I fear you will
Censure me over. bold.

It must be something
Of a strange nature, if it find from me
Denial or delay.

Thus then my Lord,
Since you encourage me: You are happy in
A worthy son, and all the comfort that
Fortune has left me is one daughter; now
If it may not appear too much presumption,
To seek to match my lowness with your height,
I should desire (and if I may obtain it,
I write Nilultra to my largest hopes)
She may in your opinion be thought worthy
To be received into your family,
And married to your son: their years are equal,
And their desires I think too, she is not
(...) noble, not my state contemptible,
And if you think me worthy your alliance,
(...) is all I do aspire to.

You demand
That which with all the service of my life
I should have laboured to obtain from you.
O, Sir, why are you slow to meet fo fair
And noble an offer? Can France show a virgin
That may be paralleled with her? Is she not
The Phoenix of the time? the fairest star
In the bright sphere of women?

Be not raped so:
Though I dislike not what is motioned, yet
In what so near concerns me, it is fit
I should proceed with judgement.

Here she comes,
Look on her with impartial eyes, and then
Let envy if it can, name one graced feature
In which she is defective.

Welcome Girl:
My joy, my comfort, my delight, my all,
Why dost thou come to greet my victory
(...) such a sable habit? this showed well
When thy father was a prisoner, and suspected;
^ut now his faith and loyalty are admired,
Rather than doubted, in your outward garments
You are to express the joy you feel within;
Nor should you with more curiousness and care,
Pace to the Temple to be made a Bride,
Than now, when all men's eyes are fixed upon you,
You should appear to entertain the honour
From me descending to you, and in which
You have an equal share.

Heaven has my thanks
With all humility paid for your fair fortune,
And so far duty binds me, ye a little
To mou^ne a brothers loss however wicked,
The tenderness familiar to our sex
May if you please excuse

Thou art deceived,
He living was a blemish to thy beauties,
But in his death gives ornament, and lustre
To thy perfections, but that they are
So exquisitely rare, that they admit not
The least addition. H^a! here^ yet a print
Of a sad tear on thy cheek, how it takes from
Our present happiness! with a fathers lips,
A loving fathers lips, i'll kiss it off
The cause no more remembered.

You forget Sir
The presence we are in.

Tis well considered,
And yet who is the owner of a treasure,
Above all value, but without offence,
May glory in the glad possession of it.
Nor let it in you excellence beget wonder,
Or any here that looking on the daughter,
I feast my self in the imagination
Of those sweet pleasures, and allowed delights,
I tasted from the mother, who still lives
In this her perfect model, for she had
Such smooth high archd brows, such sparkling eyes
Whose every glance stord Cupids emptied quiver;
Such ruby lips, and such a lovely browne,
Disdaining all adulterate aids of art,
Kep'd a perpetual spring upon her face,
As death himself lamented being forced
To blast it with his paleness, and if now,
Her brightness dimd with sorrow, take and please you,
Think think young Lord, when she appears her self
(This veil removed) in her own natural pureness
How far she will transport you.

Did she need it,
The praise which you (and well deserved) give to her
Must of necessity raise new desires
In one indebted more to years; to me
Your words are but as oil powered on a fire,
That flames already at the height.

No more;
I do believe you, and let me from you
Find so much credit, when I make her yours
I do possess you of a gift, which I
With much unwillingness part from. My good Lords
For bear your further trouble, give me leave, for on the sudden I
am indisposd to retire to my own house, and rest. Tomorrow
As you command me I will be your guest,
And having decked my daughter like her self,
You shall have farther conference.

You are Master
Of your own will but fail not i'll expect you.

Nay I will be excusd, I must part with you
My dearest Theocrine give me thy hand,
I will support thee.

You gripe it too hard Sir.

Indeed I do, but have no farther end in it,
But love and tenderness such as I may challenge
And you must grant. Thou art a sweet one ye^
And to be cherished.

May I still deserve it.

HAve you been careful?
With my best endeavours,
Let them bring stomachs, there's no want of meat Sir:
Portly and curious viands are prepared,
To please all kinds of appetites.

Tis well.
I love a table furnish with full plenty,
And store of friends to eat it, but with this caution,
I would not have my house a common Inn,
For some men that come rather to devour me,
Than to present their service. At this time too
It being a serious and solemn meeting,
I must not have my board pestered with shadows,
That under other men's protection break in
Without invitement.

With your favour then,
You must double your guard, my Lord, for on my knowledge
There are some so sharp se^, not to be kept out
By a file of Musket^e^s, And 'els less danger,
I'll undertake, to stand at push of pike
With an enemy in a breach, that undermined too,
And the Cannon playing on it, than to stop
One Harpy, your perpetual guest, from entrance,
When the dresser, the Cooks drum, thunders come on,
The service will be lost else.

What is he?

As tall a trencher-man, that is most certain,
As ere demolisht Pie-fortification
As soon as battered; and if the rim of his belly
Were not made up of a much tougher stuff
Than his Buff jerkin, there were no defence
Against the charge of his guts: you needs must know him,
He's eminent for his eating.

O Belgarde!

The same, one of the Admirals cast Captains,
Who swear, there being no war, nor hope of any,
The only drilling is to eat devoutly,
And to beever drinking, (that's allow'd of)
But they know not where to get it, there's the spi^e on'^.

The more their misery, yet if you can
For this day put him off.

It is beyond th'invention of man.

No: say this only,
And as from me; you apprehend me?

Yes Sir.

But it must be done gravely.

Never doubt me Sir.

We'll dine in the great room, but let the music
And banquet be prepared here.

This will make him
Lose his dinner at the least, and that will vex him.
As for the sweet meats, when they are trod under foot,
Let him take his share with the Pages and Lacqueyes,
Or scramble in the rushes.

Tis near twelve,
I keep a watch within me never misses.
Save thee Master Steward.

You are most welcome, Sir.

Has thy Lord slept well to night? I come to enquire.
I had a foolish dream, that against my will
Carried me from my lodging, to learn only
How he's disposed.

He's in most perfect health, Sir.

Let me but see him feed heartily at dinner,
And I'll believe so too, for from that ever
I make a certain judgment.

It holds surely
In your own constitution.

And in all men's
Tis the best symptom, let us loose no time,
Delay i^ dangerous.

Troth Sir if I might
Without offence deliver what my Lord has
Committed to my trust, I shall receive it
As a special favour.

Weell fee't, and discourse
As the proverb says for health sake after dinner,
Or rather after supper, willingly then
I'll walk a mile to here thee.

Nay good Sir
I will be brief and pi^hee.

Prithee be so.

He bid me say of all his guests, that he
Stands most affected to you, for the freedom,
And plainness of your manners. He ne'er observed you
To twirl a dish about, you did not like of
All being pleasing to you; or to take
A say of venison, or stale foul by your nose,
(Which is a solecisme at another table)
But by strong ea^ing of 'em did confirm
They never were delicious to your palate,
But when they were mortifi'd, as the Huguenot says,
And so your part grows greater, nor do you
Find fault with the sauce, keen hunger being the best,
Which ever to your much praise, you bring with you;
Nor will you with impertinent relations
Which is a master-peece, when meates before you
Forget your teeth to use your nimble tongue
But do the fea^e you come for.

Be advised
A^d end your jeering; for if you proceed
You'll feel, as I can eat I can be angry,
And beating may ensue.

I'll take your counsel,
And roundly come to the point, my Lord much wonders^
That you, that are a courtier as a soldier,
In all things else, and every day can vary
Your actions and discourse, continue constant
To this one suite?

To one? tis well I have one, Unpawnd, in these days, every cast commander is
not ble^ with the fortune, I assure you, but why this question? does this
offend him?


Not much: but he believes it is the reason,
You ne'er presume to fit above the salt,
And therefore this day (our great Admiral
With other states being invited guests)
He does entreat you to appear among'em,
In some fresh habit.

This staff shall not serve
To beat the dog off, these are soldiers garments,
And so by consequence grow contemptible.

It has stung him.

I would I were acquainted with the players,
In charity they might furnish me, but there is
No faith in Brokers, and for believing Taylors
They are only to be read of, but not seen,
And sure they are confined to their own hells,
And there they live invisible, well I must not
Be fubd off thus, pray you report my service
To the Lord governor. I will obey him
And though my wardrop's poor, rather then loose
His company at this feast, I will put on
The richest s^i^e I have, and fill the chair,
That makes me worthy of --

We are shut of him, he will be seen no more here, how my fellows
Will bless me for his absence, he had starv'dem
Had he stayed a little longer, would be cood,
For his own sake shift a shirt, and that's the utmost
Of his ambition, adieu good Captains --

Tis a strange fondness.

Tis beyond example,
His resolution to part with his estate,
To make her dower the weightier is nothing,
But to observe how curious he is
In his own person to add ornament
To his daughters ravishing features, is the wonder.
I sent a page of mine in the way of courtship,
This morning to her to present my service,
From whom I understand all: there he found him
Sollicitous in what shape she should appear,
This gown was rich, but the fashion stale, the other
Was quaint, and neat, but the stuff not rich enough,
Then does he curse the Taylor, and in rage
Falls on her Shoemaker, for wanting art
To express in every circumstance, the form
Of her most delicate foot, then s^s in counsel
With much deliberation to find out
What tire would best adorn her; and one chosen
Varying in his opinion, he tears off,
And stamps it under foot, then tries a second
A third and fourth, and satisfied at length
With much a do in that, he grows again,
Perplexd and troubled where to place her Jewels
To be most marked, and whether she, should wear
This diamond on her forehead, or between
Her milke-white paps, disputing on it both ways,
Then taking in this hand, a rope of pearl,
(The best of France) he seriously considers
Whither she should dispose it on her arm
Or on her neck, with 20 other tri^es, too redious to deliver.

I have known him from his first youth, but never yet observed
In all the passages of his life, and fortunes,
Virtues so mixed with vices, valiant the world speaks him,
But with that bloody; liberal in his gi^ts too.
But to maintain his prodigal expense,
A fierce extortioner, an impotent lover
Of women for a flash, but his fires quenched,
Hating as deadly, the truth is I am not
Ambitious of this match: nor will I cross you in your affections.

I have ever found you,
(And tis my happiness) a loving father,
And careful of my good: -- by the loud music,
As you gave order for his entertainment,
He's come into the house two long hours since,
The Colonels, commissioners and captains,
To pay him all the rites his worth can challenge,
Went to wait on him hither.

You are most welcome,
And what I speak to you, does from My heart
disperse it self to all.

You meet my Lord your trouble.

Rather Sir increase of honour,
When you are pleased to grace my house.

The Favour (...) doubled on my part, most worthy Sir,
Since your fair daughter, my incomparable Mistress,
Deigns us her presence.

View her well brave Beaufort,
But yet at distance, you hereafter may
Make your approaches nearer, when the priest
Hath made it lawful, and were not she mine,
I durst aloud proclaim it. Hymen never
Put on his s^on coloured robe to change
A barren virgin name with more good omen^,
Then at her nup^ialls, look on her again,
Then tell me if she now appear the (...)
That she was yesterday.

Being her self
She cannot but be excellent, these rich
And curious dressing^, which in others might
Cover deformities, from her take lustre
Nor can add to her.

You conceive her right,
And in your admiration of her sweetness,
You only can deserve her; blush not girl,
Thou art above his praise, or mine, nor can
Obsequiou^ fl^ery though she should use
Her thousand oyldtongues to advance thy worth,
Give ought (for that's impossible) but take from
Thy more then humane graces, and even then
When she hath spent her self with her best strength,
The wrong she has done thee shall be so apparent,
That loosing her own servile shape and name,
She will be thought detraction, but I
Forget my self, and something whispers to me,
I have said too much.

I know not what to think on it,
But there's some mystery in it, which I fear
Will be too soon discovered.

I much wrong
Your patience noble Sir, by too much hugging
My proper issue, and like the foolish crow
Believe my black brood sw^.

There needs not Sir
The least excuse for this, nay I must have
Your arm, you being the master of the feast,
And this the mistress.

I am anything
That you shall please to make me.

Nay tis yours
Without more complement.

Your will's a law ^ir.

Would I had been borne a Lord^

Or I a Lady.

It may be you (...) both be got in court,
Though bred up in the City, for your mothers,
As I have heard loved the lobbie, and there nightly
Are seen strange apparitions, and who knows
But that some noble fawn, heated with wine,
And cloyed with partridge, had a kind of longing
To trade in sprats? this needs no exposition,
But can you yield a reason for your wishes?

Why had I been borne a Lord, I had been no servant.

And where as now necessity makes us wayters,
We had been attended on.

And might have slept then,
As long as we pleased, and fed when we had stomachs,
And worn new cloths, nor lived as now in hope
Of a cast gown, or petticoat.

You are fools,
And ignorant of your happiness, ere I was
Sworn to the pantofle, I have heard my tutor
Prove it by logic, that a servants life
Was better then his masters, and by that
I learn from him, if that my memory fall not,
I'll make it good.

Proceed my little wit
In decim^ sex^e.

Thus then from the king
To the beggar, by gradation all are servants,
And you must grant the slavery is less
To study to please one, then many.

True.

Well then, and first to you Sir, you complain
You serve one Lord, but your Lord serves a thousand,
Besides his passions (that are his worst masters)
You must humour him, and he is bound to sooth
Every gri^me Sir above him, if he frown,
For the least neglect you fear to loose your place,
But if, and with all slavish observation,
From the mignions self, to the groom of his close stool,
He hourly seeks not favour, he is sure
To be eas'^ of his office, though perhaps he bought it.
Nay more, that high disposer of all such
That are subordinate to him, serves, and fears
The fury of the many-headed monster,
The giddy multitude^ And as a horse
Is still a horse, for all his golden trappings,
So your men of purchased titles, at their best are
But serving-men in rich liveries.

Most rare infant,
Where learnd'st thou this morality?

Why thou dull pate,
As I could thee, of my tutor.

Now for us boy.

I am cut of the governor.

Quick, quick ^irs,
See all things perfect.

Let the blame be ours else.

And as I said when we are at the banquet,
And high in our cups, for tis no feast without it,
Especially among soldiers: Theocrine
Being retired, as that's no place for her,
Take you occasion to rise from the table,
And lose no opportunity.

Tis my purpose,
And if I can win her to give her heart,
I have a holy man in readiness
To join our hands, for the Admiral her father repents him of his grant to
me, and
So far transported with a strange opinion
of her fair features, that should we desire it,
I think ere long he will believe, and strongly,
The Daulphine is not worthy of her, I
Am much amazd with it.

Nay dispatch there fellows.

We are ready when you please, sweet forms your pardon,
It has been such a busy time I could not
Tender that ceremonious respect
Which you deserve, but now the great work ended,
I will attend the less, and with all care
Observe, and serve you.

This is a pend speech,
And serves as a perpetual preface to
A dinner made of fragments.

We wait on you.

YOU are not merry Sir.

Yes my good Lord,
You have given us ample means to drown all cares,
And yet I nourish strange thoughts, which I would
Most willingly destroy

Pray you take your place,

And drink a health, and let it be if you please
To the worthiest of Women, now observe him.

Give me the bowl, since you do me the honour,
I will begin it.

May we know her name Sir?

You shall, I will not choose a foreign Queenes,
Nor yet our own, for that would relish of
Tame flattery; nor do their height of title,
Or absolute power confirm their worth and goodness,
These being heavens gifts and frequently conferred
On such as are beneath em; nor will I
Name the king Mistress howsoever she
In his esteem may carry it, but if I^
As wine gives liberty, may ^s^ my freedom;
Not swayd this way, or that with confidence,
(And I will make it good on any equal)
If it must be to her, whose outward form
Is bettered by the beauty of her mind,
She lives not that with justice can pretend
An interest to this so sacred health,
But my fair daughter. He that only doubts it,
I do pronounce a villain, this to her then.

What may we think of this?

It matters not.

For my part I will sooth him rather then
Draw on a quarrel, Chamont.

Tis the safest course, and one I mean to follow.

It has gone round Sir.

Now you have done her right, if there be any
Worthy to second this, propose it boldly,
I am your pledge.

Lets pause here if you please,
And entertain the time with something else,
Music there in some lofty strain, the song too
That I gave order for; the new one called
The soldiers delight?
The song ended: enter Belgarde in armour a case of C^rbi^es by his side.

Who stops me now?
Or who dares only say that I appear not
In the most rich and glorious habit that
Renders a man complete? what court so set off
With state and ceremonious pomp, but thus
Accoutred I may enter? or what feast
Though all the elements at once were ransacked,
To store it with variety transcending
The curiousness, and cost, on Traians birth day,
(Where princes only, and confederat kings
Did sit as guests, served, and attended on
By the senators of Rome, sat with a soldier
In this his natural, and proper shape
Might not and boldly fill a seat, and by
His present make the great solemnity
More honoured and remarkable?

Tis acknowledged,
And this a grace done to me unexpected.

But why in armour?

What's the mystery?
Pray you reveal that.

Soldiers out of action,
That very rare, but like unbidden guests
Bring their stools with^em, for their own defence,
At court should feed in gauntle^s, they may have
Their fingers cut else; there your carpet knights,
That never charged beyond a mistress lips,
Are still most keen, and valiant, but to you
Whom it does most concem, my Lord, I will
Address my speech, and with a soldiers freedom
In my reproof return the bitter scoff,
You threw upon my poverty, you contemned
My courser outside, and from that concluded,
(As by your groom you made me understand)
I was unworthy to sit at your table,
Among these tissues, and imbroideries,
Unless I changed my habit, I have done it,
And show my self in that which I have worn
In the heate and servor of a bloody fight,
And then it was in fashion, not as now
Ridiculous, and despised, this hath past through
A wood of pikes, and every one aimed at it,
Yet scorned to take impression from their fury
Wi^h this, as still you see it fresh and new
I have charged through fire that would have singed your sables
Black fox, and ermins, and changed the proud colour
Of Skatlet though of the right Tirian die;
But now as if the trappings made the man, such only are
Admired that come adorned
With what's no part of them, this is mine own
My richest suit, a suite I must not part from,
But not regarded now, and yet remember
Tis we that bring you in the means of feasts,
Banquets, and revels, which when you possess,
With barbarous ingratitude you deny us
To be made sharers in the harvest, which
Our sweat and industry reaped, and sowed for you.
The silks you wear, we with our blood spin for you;
This massy plate, that with the ponderous weight
Does make your cupboods crack, we (unaffrighted
With tempests, or the long and tedious way,
Or dreadful monsters of the deep, that wait
With open jaws still ready to devour us)
Fetch from the other world. Let it not then
In after ages to your shame be spoken,
That you wi^h no relenting eyes look on
Our wants that feed your plenty; or consume
In prodigal, and wanton gifts on Drones
The Kingdoms treasure, yet d^raine from us.
The debt that with the hazard of our lives,
We have made you stand engaged for: or force us
Against all civil government in armour
To require that, which with all willingness
Should be tendered, ere demanded.

I commend
This wholesome sharpness in you, and prefer it
B^fore obsequious tamenesse, it shows lovely:
No^ shall the rain of your good counsel fall
Upon the barren sands, but spring ^p fruit
Such as you long have wished for. And the rest
Of your profession like you discontented
For want of means, shall in the^r present payment
Be b^und to pra^se your b^ldnesse: and hereafter
I will take order you sh^ll have no cause,
For want of change to put your armour on
But in the face of an enemy; not as now
Among your friends. To that which is due to you,
To furnish you like your self, of mine own bountle
I'll add five hundred crowns.

I to my power
Will follow the example.

Take this Captain,
Tis ^ll my present store, but when you please,
Command me further.

I could wish it more.

This is the luckiest jest ever came from me.
Let a Soldier use no other Scribe to draw
The form of his petition. This will speed
When your thrice humble supplications,
With prayers for increase of health and honours
To their grave Lordships shall as soon as read
Be pocketred up, the cause no more remembered.
When this dumb Rhetoric. -- Well, I have a life,
Which I in thankfulness for your great favours,
My noble Lords, when you please to command it,
Must never think mine own. Broker, be happy,
These golden birds fly to thee.

You are dull, Sir,
And seem not to be taken with the passage
You saw presented.

Passage? I observed none,
My thoughts were elsewhere busied. Ha! she is
In danger to be lost, to be lost for ever,
If speedily I come not to her rescue,
For so my Genius tells me.

What Chi^ra's
Work on your fantasy?

Fantasies? They are truth^.
Where is my Theocrine? You have plotted
To rob me of my Daughter ^ bring me to her,
Or I'll call down the Saints to witness for me:
You are inhospitable.

You amaze me^
Your Daughter'^ sake, and now exchanging (...)
With my son her servant, why do you hear this
With such distracted looks? since to that end
You brought her hither?

Tis confessed I did,
But now pray you pardon me, and if you please
Ere she deliver up her virgin fort,
I would observe what is the art he uses
In planting his artillery against it,
She is my only care, nor must she yield
But upon noble terms.

Tis so determined.

Yet I am jealous.

Overmuch I fear.
What passions are these?

Come I will bring you
Where you, with th^se if they so please, may see
The love-s^aene acted.

There is something more
Then fatherly love in this.

We wait upon you.

Since then you meet my flames with equal order
As you profess, it is your bo^ty mistress,
Nor must I call it debt, yet tis your glory,
That your excess supplies my want, and makes (...)
Strong in my weakness, which could never be,
But in your good opinion.

You teach me Sir,
What I should say, since from your san of favour,
I like dim Phoebe, in her ^elfe (...)
Borrow that light I have.

Which you return
With large increase (since that you will ^recome^
And I dare ^ pleased
To make what's yet divided one.

I have
Already in my wishes, modesty
Forbids me to speak more.

but what assurance,
(But still without offence) may I demand
That may secure me that your heart tongue
Join to make up this harmony?

Choose any
Suiting your love distinguished from lust,
To ask and mine to grant.

Yonder they are.

At distance too, ^is yet well.

I may take then
This hand, and with a thousand burning kisses,
Swear tis the anchor to my hopes?

You may Sir.

This is somewhat too much.

And this done, view my self
In these true mirrors.

Ever ^rew to you Sir,
And may they aloof the ability of fight,
When they seek other object.

This is more
Then I can give consent to.

And a kiss,
Thus printed on your lips will not distaste you?

Her lips!

Why where should he kiss? are you distracted?

Then when this holy man hath made it lawful.

A priest so ready too I must break ^n.

And what's spoke here is registered above,
I must ingtosse those favours to my self
Which are not to be named.

All I can give,
But what they are I know not.

I'll instruct you.

O how my blood boils!

Pray you contain your self,
Me thinks his courtship's modest.

Then being mine,
And wholly mine, the river of your love
To kinsmen and allies, nay to your father,
(Howere out of his tenderness he admires you)
Must in the Ocea^ of your affection
To me be swallowed up, and want a name
Compared with what you owe me.

Tis most ^i^, Sir,
The stronger bond that binds me to you, must
Dissolve the weaker.

I am ruined if
I come not fairly off.

There's nothing wanting
But your consent.

Some strange invention aid me.
This! yes, it must be so.

Why do you stagger,
When what you seemed so much to wish is offered?

Both parties being agreed to.

I'll not court
A grant from you, nor do I wrong your Daughter,
Though I say my son deserves her.

Tis far from
My humble thoughts to undervalue him
I cannot prize too high. For howsoever
From my own fond indulgence I have sung
Her praises with too prodigal a tongue,
That tenderness laid by, I stand confirmed
All that I fancied excellent in her
B^llanc'd, with what is really his own,
Holds weight in no proportion.

New turnings!

Whither tend^ this?

Had you observed, my Lord,
With what a sweet gradation he wood,
As I did punctually, you cannot blame her,
Though she did listen with a greedy ear
To his fair modest offers: but so great
A good as then flowed to her, should have been
With more deliberation entertained,
And not with such haste swallowd, she shall first
Consider seriously what the blessing is,
And in what ample manner to give thanks for it,
And then receive it. And though I shall think
Short minutes years till it be perfit^ed,
I will defer that which I most desire,
And so must she, till longing expectation,
That heightens pleasure, makes her truly know
Her happiness, and with what out-strea^cht arms
She must embrace it.

This is curiousness
Beyond example.

Let it then begin
From me, in whats mine own I'll use my will,
And yield no further reason. I lay claim to
The liberty of a subject. Fall not off,
But be obedient, or by the hair
I'll drag thee home. Censure me as you please,
I'll take my own way, O the inward fires
That wanting vent consume me!

Tis most certain
H^s mad, or worse.

How, worse?

Nay, there I leave you,
My thoughts are free.

This I foresaw.

Take comfort,
H shall walk in clouds, but I'll discover him:
And he shall find, and feel, if he excuse not,
And with strong reasons this gross injury,
I can make use of my authority.

WHat flames are these my wild desires fan in me?
The torch that feeds them, was not lighted at
Thy altars, Cupid: vindicate thy self,
And do not own it: and confirm it rather,
That this infernal brand that turns me cyndars,
Was by the snake-hair'd Sisters thrown into
My guilty bosom. O that I was ever
Accursed in having issue: my sons blood,
(That like the poisoned shirt of Hercules
Grows to each part about me) which my hate
Forced from him with much willingness, may admit
Some weak defence; but my most impious love
To my fair daughter Theocrine, none.
Since my affection (rather wicked lust)
That does pursue her, is a greater crime
Than any detestation, with which
I should afflict her innocence. With what cunning
I have betrayed my self, and did not feel
The scorching heat that now with fury rage^
Why was I tender of her? covered with
That fond disguise, this mischief stole upon me.
I ^hought it no offence to kiss her often,
O^ twine mine arms about her softer neck,
And by false shadows of a fathers kindness
I long deceived my self: but now the effect
Is too apparent. How I strove to be
In her opinion held the worthiest man
In courtship, form, and feature, envying him
That was preferred before me, and yet then
My wishes to my self were not discovered.
But still my fires increased, and with delight
I would call her mistress, wilfully forgetting
The name of daughter choosing rather she
Should stile me servant, then with reverence father,
Yet mocking^ I ne'er cherished obscene hopes,
But in my troubled slumbers often thought
She was too near to me, and then sleeping blushed
At my imagination which passed
My eyes being open, not condemning it,
I was ravished with the pleasure of the dream,
Yet spite of these temptations I have reason
That pleads against'em, and commands me to
Extinguish these abominable fires,
And I will do it, I will send her back
To him that loves her lawfully, Within there?
Sir did you call?

I look no sooner on her,
But all my boasted power of reason leaves me,
And passion again usurps her Empire, does none else wait me?

I am wretched sir, should any owe more duty.

This is worse then disobedience, leave me.

On my knees sir, as I have ever squard my will by yours.
And liked, and loathed with your eyes: I beseech you
To teach me what the nature of my fault is,
That hath incensd you, (sure^is one of weakness
And not of malice) which your gentler temper
On my submission I hope will pardon,
Which granted by your piety, if that I
Out of the least neglect of mine hereafter,
Make you remember it, may I sink ever
Under your dread command.

O my stars! who can but dote on this humility
That sweetens, lovely in her tears? the fetters
That seemed to lessen in their weight; but now
By this grow heavier on me.

Dear sir:

Peace, I must not hear thee.

Not look on me.

No, thy looks and words are charms.

May they have power then
To calm the tempest of your wrath, alas sir,
Did I but know in what I give offence
In my repentance I would show my sorrow,
For what is past, and in my care hereafter
Kill the occasion or cease to be
Since life without your favour is to me a load I would cast off.

O that my heart were rent in sunder, that I might expire,
The cause in my death buried: yet I know not
With such prevailing Oratory 'tis begged from me
That to deny thee would convince me to
Have sucked the milk of Tigers, rise, and I
But in a perplexd, and mysterious method.
Will make relation that which all the world
Admires and cries up in thee for perfections,
Are to unhappy me foul blemishes,
And mulcts in nature. If thou had been borne
Deformd and crooked, in the features of
Thy body, as the manners of thy mind,
Moore lipped, flat not'd, (...) eyed, and beetle browed
With a dwarfs (...) to a giant was^e,
Sower breathed, with claws for fingers on thy hands,
Splay footed, gouty legged, and over all
A loathsome leprosy had spread it self,
And made thee flaun'd of humane fellowships:
I had been blessed.

Why would you wi^h a monster
For such a one or worse you have described,
To call your father.

Rather then a^ now,
Though I had drow^d thee for it in the sea
Appearing as thou do^ a new Pando^,
With Iunos fair cow eyes, Minerva's brow
Aurora's blushing cheeks, Hebes fresh youth,
Venus soft paps, with Thetis silver feet.

Sir you have liked and loved them, and oft forced
(With your hyperboles of praise poured on them)
My modesty to a defensive red,
Strowd ore that paleness, which you then were pleased
To stile the purest white.

And in that cup I drank the poison I now feel dispersed
Through every vain and artery, wherefore art thou
So cruel to me? This thy outward shape
Brought a fierce war against me, not to be
By flesh and blood resisted: but to leave me
No hope of freedom from the Magazine
Of thy minds forces, treacherously thou drewst up
Auxiliary helps to strengthen that
Which was already in it self too potent,
Thy beauty gave the first charge, but thy d^ty
Seconded with thy care, and watchful studies
To please, and serve my will in all that might
Raise up content in me, like thunder brake through
All opposition, and my ranks of reason
Disbanded, my victorious passions fell
To bloody execution, and compelled me
With willing hands to tis on my own chains,
And with a kind of flattering joy to glory in my captivity.

I, in this you speak, sir, am ignorance it self.

And so continue, for knowledge of the arms thou bear against me
Would make thee curse thy self, but yield no ^yds
For thee to help me, and 'twere cruelty
In me to wound that spotless innocence
How ere it make me guilty, in a word
The pl^ifie of goodness is thy ill,
Thy virtues vices, and thy humble lowness
Far worse than stubborn ^ullennesse, and pride,
Thy looks that ravish all beholders ^lse
As killing a^ the (...), their (...)
Expressd in sorrow for the much I suffer,
A glorious insultation, and no sign
Of pity in thee, and to hear thee speak
In thy defence, though but in silent action,
Would make the hurt already deeply festerd
Incurable, and therefore as thou would not
By thy presence raise fresh furies to torment me
I do conjure thee by a fathers power,
(And tis my curse I dare not think it lawful
To sue unto thee in a nearer name)
Without reply to leave me.

My obedience never learned yet to question your commands,
But willingly to serve 'em, yet I must
Since that your will forbids the knowledge of
My fault, lament my fortune.

O that I have reason to discern the better way
And yet pursue the worse, when I look on her
I burn with heat, and in her absence freeze
With the cold blasts of jealousy, that another
Should ere taste those delights that are denied me,
And which of their afflictions bring less torture
I hardly can distinguish, is there then
No mean? no, so my understanding tells me,
And that by my cross fates it is determined
That I am both ways wretched.

Yonder he walks sir,
In much vexation: he hath sent my Lady
His daughter weeping in, but what the cause is
Rests yet in supposition.

I guess at it, but must be further satisfied, I will sift him
In private therefore, quit the room.

I am gon, sir.

Hal who disturbs me? Montrevile? your pardon,

Would you could grant one to your self. (I speak it
With the assurance of a friend) and yet
Before it be too late, make reparation
Of the gross wrong, your indiscretion offered
To the governor and his son, nay to your self,
For there begins my sorrow.

Would I had no greater cause to morn
Then their displeasure, for I dare justify.

We must not do all that we dare private friend
I observed your alterations with a stricter eye
Perhaps then others, and to loose no time
In repetition, your strange demeamour
To your sweet daughter.

Would you could find out some other theme to treat of.

None but this; and this I'll dwell on, how ridiculous
And subject to construction?

No more.

You made your self, amazes me, and if
The frequent trials interchanged between us
Of love and friendship, be to their desert
Esteemed by you, as they hold weight with me,
No inward trouble should be of a shape
So horrid to your self, but that to me
You stand bound to discover it, and unlock
Your secretest thoughts: though the most innocent were
Loud crying sins.

And so perhaps they are.
And therefore be not curious to learn that
Which known must make you hate me.

Think not so, I am yours in right and wrong, not shall you find
A verbal friendship in me, but an active,
And here I vow, I shall no sooner know
What the disease is, but if you give leave
I will apply a remedy, is it madness?
I am familiarly acquainted with a deep read man
That can with charms and herbs
Restore you to your reason, or suppose
You are bewitched, he with more potent spells
And magical rites shall cure you, is't heavens anger?
With penitence and sacrifice appease it,
Beyond this, there is nothing that I can
Imagine dreadful, in your fame and fortunes
You are secure, your impious son removd to
That rendered you suspected to the state,
And your fair daughter.

Oh press me no farther.

Are you wrung there? why what of her? hath ^he
Made shipwreck of her honour, or conspird
Against your life? or sealed a contract with
The devil of hell, for the recovery of her young Inamorato?

None of these,
And yet what must increase the wonder in you
Being Innocent in her self, she hath wounded me,
But where enquire not. Yet I know not how
I am persuaded from my confidence
Of your vowed love to me, to trust you with
My dearest secret, pray you chide me for it,
But with a kind of pity, not insulting
On my calamity.

Forward.

This same daughter.

What is her fault?

She is too fair to me.

^a! how is this?

And I have looked upon her
More than a father should, and languish to
Enjoy her as a husband.

Heaven forbid it,

And this is all the comfort you can give me,
Where are your promised a^d^, your charm^, your herbs?
Your deep read scholar, spells, and magic rites?
Can all these disenchau^ me? no, I must be
My own Physician, and upon my self
Practice a desperate cure.

Do not conte^me,
Enjoin me what you please with any hazard,
I'll undertake it, what means have you practis^
To quench this hellish fire?

All I could think on,
But to no purpose, and yet sometimes absence
Does yield a kind of intermission to
The fury of the fit.

See her no more then.

Tis my last refuge, and twas my intent
And still tis, to desire your help.

Command it.

Thus then, you have a fort of which you are
The absolute Lord, whither I pray you bear her:
And that the sight of her may not again
Nourish those flames, which I feel something lessend,
By all the ties of friendship I conjure you
And by a solemn oath you must confirm it,
That though my now calmd passions should rage higher
Then ever heretofore, and so compel me
Once more to wish to see her; though I use
Persuasions mixd with threatenings; nay add to it
That I this failing should with hands held up thus
Kneel at your feet, and bathe them with my te^te^,
Prayers or curses, vows or imprecations
Only to look upon her though at distance,
You still must be obdurate.

If it be
Your pleasure sir that I shall be unmoved, I will endeavour.

You must swear to be
Inexorable as you would prevent
The greatest mischief to your friend, that fate
Could throw upon him.

Well, I will obey you.
But how the governor will be answered, yet
And tis material, is not considered.

Leave that to me. (...) presently give order
How you shall surprise her, be not frighted with
Her exclamations.

Be you constant ^o
Your resolution I will no fail
In what concerns my part.

Be ever blessed for it.

Not to be spoke with, say you?

No.

Nor you
Admitted to have conference with her?

Neither.
His doors are fast locked up, and solitude
Dwells round about em, no access allow'd
To friend or enemy, but --

Nay be not moved sir,
Let his passion work, and like a hot reined horse
'T will quickly tire it self.

Or in his death
Which for her sake till now I have forborne
I will revenge the injury he hath done
To my true and lawful love.

How does your father
The Governor relish it?

Troth he never had
Affection to the match: yet in his pity
To me, he's gone in person to his house,
Nor will he be denied, and if he find not
Strong and fair reasons Malefort will hear from him
In a kind he does not look for.

In the mean time
Pray you put on cheerful looks.

Mine suite my fortune.

O here's Montaigne.

I never could have met you
More opportunely. I'll not stale the jest
By my relation: but if you will look on
The malecontent Belgard^, newly rigde up
With the train that follows him, 't will be an object
Worthy of your noting.

Look you the Comedy
Make good the Prologue, or the scorn will dw^ll
Upon your self.

I'll hazard that, observe now;

Nay, Captain, glorious Captain:

Fall back Rascall^,
Do you make an Owl of me? this day I will
Receive no more Petitions,
Here are bills of all occasions, and all fi^!
If this be the pleasure of a rich suite, would I were
Again in my buff jerkin, or my armour,
Then I walked securely by my creditors noses,
And not a dog marked me, every officer sh^d me,
And not one lowzie prison would receive me;
But now, as the Ballade says, I am turned gallant:
There does not live that thing I ow a sows to,
But does torment me, a faithful Cobbler told me
With his awl in his hand, I was behind hand with hi^
For setting me upright, and bad me look to my self.
A Sempstresse too, that traded but in socke^,
Swore she would set a Se^jeant on my back
For a borrowed shirt: my pay and the benevolence,
The Governor and the States bestowed upon me,
The city cormorants, my monie-mongers,
Have swallowed down already, they were sums,
I grant, but that I should be such a fool
Against my o^he, being a cashir'd Captain,
To pay debts, though grown up to one and twenty,
Deserves more reprehension, in my judgement,
Then a shop-keeper, or a Lawyer that lends money,
In a long (...) vacation.

How do you like
His meditation?

Peace, let him proceed.

I cannot now go on the score for shame,
And where I shall begin to pawn, I marry,
That is considered timely, I paid for
This train of yours Dame Ostrich foureteen crowns,
And yet it is so light, '^will hardly pass
For a Tavern reckoning, unless it be
To save the charge of painting, naild on a post
For the sign of the feathers; p^x upon the fashion,
That a Captain cannot think himself a Captain,
If he wear not this like a fore-horse; yet it is not
Staple commodity; these are perfumed too,
Of the Roman wash, and yet a stale red herring
Would fill the belly better, and hurt the head less:
And this is Venice gold, would I had it again
In french crowns in my pocket. O you commanders
That like me have no dead pa^es, nor can cousin
The Commissary at a muster, let me stand
For an example to you, as you would
Enjoy your privileges: videlicet,
To pay your debts, and take your lechery gratis
To have you^ issue warmed by others fires,
To be often drunk, and swear, yet pay no forfeit,
To the poor, but when you share with one another,
With all your other choice immunities,
Only of this I seriously advise you:
Let Courtiers trip like Courtiers,
And your Lords of dirt and dung hills mete
Their woods and acres, in velvets, s^ttins, tissues,
But keep you constant to doth and (...),

Have you hea^d of such a penite^ homily,

I am studying now
Where I shall hide my self till the rumour of
My wealth^ and bravery vanish, let me see,
There is a kind of a vaulting house not far off,
Where I used to spend my afternoones, among
Suburb shee-gamesters; and yet now I think on it
I have crackd a ring or two there, which they made
Others to solder, no,

O, have we spied you.

Upon him without ceremony, now^ the time
While he is in the paying vein.

Save you brave Captain.

S'light, how she stares, they are worse then she-wolves to him.

Shame me not in the streets, I was coming to you.

O Sir, you may in public pay for the fiddling
You had in private.

We hear you are full of crowns, Sir.

And therefore knowing you are open-handed,
Before all be destroyed, I'll put you in mind, Sir,
Of your young heir here.

Here's a second, Sir,
That looks for a child's portion.

There are reckonings
For Muskadine and Eg^ too, must be thought on.

We have not been hasty, Sir.

But staid your leisure;
But now you are ripe, and laden with fruit.

Tis fi^ you should be pulled; here's a boy, Sir,
Pray you kiss him, tis your own, Sir,

Nay, bus this first,
It hath just your eyes, and such a promising nose,
That if the sign deceive me not, in time
Twill prove a notable striker, like his father.

And yet you laid it to another.

True,
While you were poor, and it was pol^cy,
But she that has variety of fathers,
And makes nor choice of him that can maintain ^t,
Ne'er studied Aristotles Problems.

A smart queen.

Why branches will you whurry me?

No, but ease you
Of your golden burden, the heavy carriage may
Bring you to a sweating sickness.

Very likely,
I soame all ore already.

Will you come off, Sir?

Would I had ne'er come on: hear me with patience,
Or I will anger you. Go to, you know me
And do not vex me further: by my sins
And your diseases, which are certain truths,
What ere you think, I am not master at
This instant, of a livre.

What, and in
Such a glorious suite?

The liker wretched things
To have no money.

You may pawn your clothes, Sir,

Will you see your issue starve?

Or the mothers beg?

Why, you unconscionable strumpets, would you have me
Transform my hat to double elout^ and biggins?
My corselet to a cradle? or my belt
To swaddlebands? or turn my cloak to blankets?
Or to sell my sword and spurs for soap and candles?
Have you no mercy? what a chargeable devil
We carry in our breeche^?

Now tis t^me.
To ^etch him off.

Your father does it for us.

The Governor!

What are these?

And it like your Lordship,
Very poor sp^n^er^.

I am his Nurse and (...),

You have (...)'d and lander'd me, hell take you for it^
Vanish.

Do, do, and talk with him hereafter.

Tis our best course

We'll find a time to fit him.

Why, In this heat, Belgarde

You are the cause of 't.

Who, I?

Yes, your pied livery, and your gold
Draw these vexations on me, pray you strip me
And let me be as I was: I will not lose
The pleasures and the freedom which I had
In my certain poverty; for all the wealth
Fair France is proud of?

We at better leisure
Will learn the cause of this.

What answer, Sir,
From the Admiral?

None, his daughter is removed
To the sort of Montrevile, and he himself
In person fled, but where is not discovered,
I could tell you wonders, but the time denies me
Fit liberty. In a word, let it suffice
The power of our great master is contemned,
The sacred laws of God and man profaned,
And if I sit down with this injury,
I am unworthy of my place, and thou
Of my acknowledgement: draw up all the troops,
As I go, I will instruct you to what purpose.
Such as have power to punish, and yet spare
From fear, or from co^nivence, others ill
Though not in act assist them in their w^ll

Bind them, and gag their mouths sure, I alone
Will be your convoy.

Madam,

Dearest Lady,

Let me fight for my Mistress.

Tis in vain,
Little Cockerell of the kind.

Away with them,
And do as I command you,

Montrevile
You are my fathers friend, nay, more a soldier,
And if a right one, as I hope to find you,
Though in a lawful war you had surprised
A City, that bowd humbly to your pleasure,
In honour you stand bound to guard a virgin
From violence; but in a free estate
Of which you are a limb, to do a wrong
Which noble enemies never consent to
Is such an insolence.

How her heart beats!
Much like a Partridge in a Sparhawkes foot,
That with a panting silence does lament
The fate she cannot fly from! sweet, take comfort,
You are safe, and nothing is intended to you
But love and Service.

They came never clothed
In force, and outrage, upon what assurance
(Remembering only that my father lives)
Who will not tamely suffer the disgrace.
Have you presumed to hurry me from his house,
And as I were not worth the waiting on,
To snatch me from the duty, and (...)
Of my poor servants.

Let not that afflict you,
You shall not want observance, I will be
Your Page, your Woman, Para^ite or Fool,
Or any other property, provided
You answer my affection.

In what kind?

As you had done young Beauforts.

How?

So Lady,
Or, if the name of wife appear a yoke
Too heavy for your tender neck, so I
Enjoy you as a private friend, or mistress,
Twill be sufficient.

Blessed Angels guard me
What frontlesse impudence is this? What d^vell
Hath to thy certain ruin tempted thee
To offer me this motion? by my hopes
Of after joys, submission, not repentance
Shall expiate this soul intent.

Intent?
Tis more, I'll make it act

Ribald, thou dare not,
And if (and with a fever to thy soul)
Thou but consider that I have a father
And such a father, as when this arrives at
His knowledge, as it shall, the terror of
His vengeance, which as sure as sa^e must follow,
Will make thee curse the hour in which lust caught thee
To nourish these b^se hopes, and tis my wonder
Thou dare forget how tender he is of me
And that each shadow of wrong done to me
Will raise in him a tempest not to be
But with thy heart-blood calmed: this when I see him.

A^ thou shalt never.

Wilt thou murder me?

No, no, ti^ otherwise determined, fool,
The master which in passion kills his slave
That may be useful to him, does himself
The injury: Know thou most wretched creature,
That father thou presum'st upon, that father,
That when I sought thee in a noble way,
Denied thee to me, fancying in his hope
A higher match from his excess of do^age,
Hath in his bowels kindled such a flame
Of impious most unnatural lost,
That now he fears his furious desires,
May force him to do that he shake^ to think on.

O me most wretched.

Never hope again
To blast him with those eyes, their golden beam^
Are unto him arrows of death and hell,
But unto me divine artillery.
And therefore since what I so long in vain
Purfu'd, is offered to me, and by him
Given up to my possession: do not flatter
Thy self with an imaginary hope,
But that I'll take occasion by the forelock,
And make use of my fortune; as we walk
I'll tell the more.

I will not stir.

I'll force thee:

Help, help,

In vain,

In me my brothers blood
I^ punished at the height.

The Coach there.

Dear Sir,

Tears, curses, prayer^, (...) alike to me,
I can, and must enjoy my present pleasure,
And shall take time to (...) for it at leisure.

I have played the fool, the gross fool, to believe
The bosom of a friend will hold a secret,
Mine own could not contain, and my industry
In taking liberty from my innocent daughter,
Out of false hopes of freedom to my self,
Is in the little help it yields me, punished.
She's absent, but I have her figure here,
And every grace, and rarity about her,
Are by the pencil of my memory
In living colours painted on my heart.
My fires too, a short interim closed up
Break out with greater fury. Why was I
Since 'twas my fate, and not to be declined
In this so tender consciened? Say I had
Injoyd what I desired, what had it been
But incest? and there's something here that tells me
I stand accountable for greater sins,
I never checkd at: neither had the crime
Wanted a praesident. I have read in story
Those first great Heroes that for their brave deeds
Were in the worlds first infancy styled gods,
Freely enjoyd what I deny my self.
Old Saturne in the golden age embraced
His sister Ops and in the same degree
The thunderer Iuno, Neptune, Thetis, and
By their example after the first deluge
Deucalion Pirrhae. Universal nature
As every day tis evident allows it
To creatures of all kinds. The gallant horse
Covers the Mare to which he was the fire,
The bird with fertile seed gives new increase
To her that hatchd him. Why should envious man then
Brand that close act which adds proximity
To whats most near him, with the abhorred title
Of incest? or our later laws forbid
What by the first was granced? let old men
That are not capable of these delight^
And solemn superstitions fools prescribe
Rules to themselves, I will not curb my freedom
But constantly go on, with this assurance,
I but walk in a path which greater men
Have trod before me, h^ this is the fort,
Open the gate. Within there.

With your pardon
We must forbid your entrance.

Do you know me?

Perfectly my Lord.

I am this Captains friend.

It may be so, but till we know his pleasure
You must excuse us.

We'll acquaint him with
Your waiting here.

Waiting slave, he was ever
By me commanded.

As we are by him.

So punctual, pray you then in my name entreat
His presence.

That we shall do.

I must use
Some strange persuasions to work him to
Deliver her, and to forget her vowis,
And horrid oaths I in my madness made him.
Take to the contrary, and may I get those
Once more in my possession, I will bear her
Into some close cave, or desert, where we'll end
Our lusts and lives together.

Fail not, on
The forseit of your lives to execute
What I commanded.

how (...) friend?

I am glad to see you wear such cheerful looks,
The worlds well altered.

Yes I thank my star^
But me thinks thou art troubled.

Some light cross,
But of no moment.

So I hope, beware
Of sad and impious thoughts, you know how far
They wrought on me.

No such come near me sir.
I have like you no daughter, and much wish
You never had been cursed with one.

Who I?
Thou art deceived, I am most happy in her.

I am glad to hear it.

My incestuous fires
Towards her are quite burnt out, I love her now
As a father, and no further.

Fix there then
Your constant peace, and do not try a second
Temptation from her.

Yes friend though she were
By millions of degrees more excellent
In her perfections, Nay though she could borrow
A form Angel call to take my fraylty
It would not do, and therefore Montrevile
(My chief delight next her) I come to tell thee
The governor and I are reconciled,
And I confirmed, and with all possible speed
To make large satisfaction to young Beaufort
And her whom I have so much wronged, and fo^
thy trouble in her custody, of which
I'll now discharge thee, there is nothing in
My nerve^ or (...), but shall ever be
At thy devotion.

You promise faintly,
No^ doubt I the performance, yet I would not
Hereafter be reported, to have been
The principal occasion of your falling
Into a relapse, or but suppose out of
The easiness of my nature, and assurance
You are firm, and can hold out, I could consent:
You needs must know there are so many lets
That make against it, that it is my wonder
You offer me the motion, having bound me
With oaths and imprecations on no terms,
Reasons, or argumen^s, you could propose,
I ever should admit you to her sight,
Much less restore her to you.

Are we soldiers, and stand on oaths?

Tis beyond my knowledge
In what we are more worthy, then in keeping
Our words, much more our vows.

Heaven pardon all,
How many thousands in our heate of wine,
Quarrels and play, and in our younger days
(In private, I may say) between our selves
In points of love, have we to answer for,
Should we be scrupulous that way.

You say well,
And very aptly call to memory
Two oaths against all ties and rites of friendship
Broken by you to me.

No more of that.

Yes tis material, and to the purpose
The first (and think upon it) was when I brought you
As a visitant to my mistress then, the mother
Of this same daughter, whom with dreadful words
Too hideous to remember, you swore deeply
For my sake never to attempt, yet then,
Then, when you had a sweet wife of your own,
I know not with what arts, philtres, and charms,
(Unless in wealth and fame you were above me)
You won her from me, and her grant obtained,
A marriage with the second waited on,
The burial of the first (that to the world
Brought your dead son) this I sate tamely down by,
Wanting indeed occasion and power
To be at the height revenged.

Yet this you seemed
Freely to pardon.

As perhaps I did.
Your daughter Theocrine growing ripe,
(Her mother too deceased) and fit for marriage
I was a suitor for her, had your word
Upon your honour, and our friendship made
Authentical, and ratified with an oath,
She should be mine, but vows with you being like
To your religion, a nose of wax
To be turned every way, that very day
The governors son but making his approaches
Of Courtship to her, the wind of your ambition
For her advancement scattered the thin sand
In which you wrote your full consent to me,
And drew you to his party. What hath pas'd since
You bear a register in your own bosom
That can at large inform you.

Montrevile
I do confess all that you charge me with
To be strong truth, and that I bring a cause
Most miserably guilty, and acknowledge
That though your goodness made me mine own judge^
I should not show the least compassion,
Or mercy to my self. O let not yet
My foulness ^int your pur^esse, or my falsehood
Divert the torrent of your loyal faith.
My ills, if not returned by you, will add
Lustre to your much good, and to or^come
With noble sufferance will express your strength,
And triumph ore my weakness. If you please to
My black deeds being only known to you,
And in surrendering up my daughter buried:
You not alone make me your ^ve (for I
At no part do deserve the name of friend)
But in your own breast raise a monument
Of ^ty to a wretch on whom with justice
You may express all cruelty.

You much move me.

O that I could but hope it, to revenge
An injury is proper to the wishes
Of feeble women, that want strength to act it:
But to have power to punish, and yet pardon
Peculiar to Princes, see these knees,
That have been ever ^iffe to bend to heaven
To you are supple, Is there ought beyond this
That may speak my submission? or can pride
(Though I well know it is a stranger to you)
Desire a feast of more humility
To kill her growing appetit^?

I required not
To be sought to this poor way, yet tis so far
A kind of satisfaction that I will
Dispense a little with those serious o^ths
You made me take, your daughter shall come to you,
I will not say as you delivered her,
But as she is you may d^pose of her
As you shall think most requisite.

His last words are niddles to me.
Here the lyo^ force
Would have proved useless and against my nature
Compelled me from the Crocodile to borrow
Her counterfeit (...), there ^
May I but quench these fires th^ rage ^,
And fall what can fall, I am (...) to (...) is,

You must be packing^

Hath he ^ob'd me of
Mine honour, and denies me now a room
To hide my shame?

My Lord the Admiral
Attends your Ladyship.

Close the port, and leave (...).

Ha! who is this? how altered! how deformed!
It cannot be. And yet this creature has
A kind of a resemblance to my d^ghter,
My Theocrine! but as different
From that she was, as bodies dead are (...)
Their best perfections, from what they were
When they had life and motion.

Tis most true fir,
I am dead indeed to all but misery.
O come not near me sir, I am infectious,
To look on me at distance is as dangerous
As from a pinnacles cloud-kissing spire,
With giddy eyes to view the steep descent
But to acknowledge me a certain ruin.
O sir.

Speak Theocrine, force me not
To farther question, my fears already
Have choked my vital spirits.

Pray you turn away
Your face and hear me, and with my last breath
Give me leave to accuse you. What offence
From my first infancy did I commit
That for a punishment you should give up
My Virgin chastity to the treacherous guard
Of Gotish Montrevile?

What hath be done?

Abused me fir by violence, and this told
I cannot live to speak more: may the cause
In you find pardon, but the speeding curse
Of a ravished maid fall heavy, heavy on him,
Beaufort my lawful love, farewell for ever.

Take not thy flight so soon immaculate spirit.
Tis fled already, how the innocent
As in a gentle slumber pass away,
But to cut off the knotty thread of life
In guilty men, must force sterne Atropos
To use her sharpe knife often. I would help
The edge of hers with the sharpe point of mine
But that I dare not die, till I have rent
This dogs heart peecemeale. O that I had wings
To scale these walls, or that my hands were Canons
To bore their flinty sides, that I might bring
The villain in the reach of my good sword,
The Turkish Empire offered for his ransom
Should not redeem his life. O that my voice
Were loud as thunder and with horrid sounds
Might force a dreadful passage to his ears,
And through them reach his soul, libidinous monster
Foul ravisher, as thou du^st do a deed
Which forced the Sun to hide his glorious face
Behind a sable Masque of clouds appear,
And as a man defend it, or like me
Show some compunction for it.

Ha, ha, ha.

Is this an object to raise mirth?

Yes, yes.

My daughter's dead.

Thou had best follow her,
Or if thou art the thing thou art reported,
Thou shoulst have led the way. Do tear thy hair
^ike a village nurse, and mourn while I laugh at thee.
Be but a just examiner of thy self
And in an equal balance poise the nothing
Or little mischief I have done compared
With the ponderous weight of thine, and how can thou
Accuse or argue with me? (...) was a rape
And she being in a kind contracted to me,
The fact may challenge some qualification:
But thy i^nt made natures self run backward,
And done, had c^u^'d an earth-quake.

Captain.

Ha,

Our outworkes are surprised, the sentinel slain,
The corps du guard defeared too.

By whom?

The sudden storm and darkness of the night
Forbid^ the knowledge, make up speedily,
Or all is lost.

In the dive is name, whence comes this!

Do, do, rage on, rend open AEolus
Thy brazen prison, and let loose at once
Thy stormy issue blustering Boreas,
Aided with all the gales, the Pilot numbers
Upon his compass, cannot raise a tempest
Through the vast region of the ^yre, like that
I feel within me: for I am possessed
With whirle-winds, and each guilty thought to me is
A dreadful Hurricano; though this centre
Labour to bring forth earthquake, and bell open
Her wide stretched ^awes, and let out all her furies,
They cannot add an atom to the mountain
Of fears and terrors that each minute threaten
To fall on my accursed head. Ha, is't fancy?
Or hath hell heard me, and makes proof if I
Dare stand the trial? yes, I do, and now
I view these apparitions I feel,
I once did know the (...) For what come you?
Are your^eriall ^o^es deprived of language,
And so denied to tell me? that by ^ignes
You bid me ask here of my self? tis so
And there is something here makes answer for you.
You come to lance my seared up conscience? Yes,
And to instruct me, that those thunderbol^,
That hurled me headlong from the height of glory,
Wealth, honours, worldly happiness, were forged
Upon the anvil of my impious wrongs
And cruelty to you? I do confess it;
And that my lust compelling me to make way
For a second wife, I poisoned thee, and that
The cause (which to the world is undiscovered)
That forced thee to shake off thy filial duty
To me thy father, had it's spring and source
From thy impat^ence to know thy mother,
That with all duty, and obedience served me
(For now with horror I acknowledge it)
Removed unjustly: yet thou being my son,
Were it not a competent judge marked out by heaven
For her revenger, which thy falling by
My weaker hand confirmed. Tis granted by thee.
Can any penance expiate my guilt?
Or can repentance save me? they are vanished.
What's left to do then? I'll accuse my face
That did not fashion me for nobler uses^
Or if those stars cross to me in my birth,
Had not denied their prosperous influence to it
With peace of conscience like to innocent men,
I might have ceased to be, and not as now,
To curse my cause of being.

Here is a night
To season my silks. Bu^e-jerkin, now I mi^e thee,
Thou hast endured many ^oule nights, but never
One like to this; how fine my feather looks now!
Just like a Capons tail^ stol^ out of the pen
And hid in the sink, and yet't had been dishonour
To have charged me without it, wilt thou fever cease,
Is the petarde, as I gave directions, fastened
On the portcullis?

It hath been attempted
By divers, but in vain.

These are your gallants,
That at a feast take the first place, poor I,
Hardly allow'd to follow; marry in
These foolish businesses they are con^ent
That I shall have precedence, I much thank
Their manne^, or their fear; second me Soldier,
They have had no time to undermine, or if
They have, it is blowing up, and setching
A caper or two in the air, and I will do it,
Rather then blow my nailes here.

O brave Captain!

Rackes cannot force more from me then I have
Already told you. I expect no favour
I have cast up my acco^pt.

Take you the charge
Of the fort^ Belgarde, your dangers have deserved it.

I thank your excellence, this will keep ^e safe yet
From being pulled by the sleeve, and bid remember
The thing I wot of.

All that have eyes to weep,
Spare one tear with me. Theocrin^'s dead,

Her father too lies breathless here, I think,
Struck dead with thunder.

'Tis apparent: ^ow
His carcass smell^.

His face is altered to
Another colour.

But here's one retaine^
Her native innocence, that never ye^
Called down heavens anger.

Tis in vain to morn
For whats past help. We will refer bad ma^
Your sentence to the King: may we make use of
This great example, and learn from it, that
There cannot be a want of power above
To punish murder, and unlawful love.

Imprimatur.

T^O. WY`KES.

