GOod day to your Lordship:

Thanks Adorni.

May I presume to ask if the Ambassador
Employed by Ferdinand, the Duke of Vrbin
Hath audience this morning?

'Tis uncertain,
For though a counsaylor of state, I am not
Of the Cabinet counsel. But there's one if he please
That may resolve you.

I will move him Sr.

If you have a suite, ^hew water, I am blind else.

A suite, y^t of a nature, not to prove
The quarry that you hawke for: If your words
Are not like Indian wares^ and every scruple
To be waigh'd and rated, one poor syllable
Vouchsafed in answer of a fair demand,
Cannot deserve a fee.

It seems you are ignorant,
I neiher speak, nor hold my peace for nothing:
And yet for once, I care not if I answer
One single question, grati^.

I much thank you.
Hath the Ambassador audience Sir to day?

Yes.

At what hour?

I promised not so much.
A syllable you begged, my Charity gave it.
Move me no further.

This you wonder at?
With me 'tis usual.

Pray you Sr. what is he?

A Gentlemaan, yet no lord. He hath some drop^
Of the Kings blood running in his veins, derived
Some ten degrees off. His revenue lies
In a narrow compass, the Kings ear, and yields him
Every hour a fruitful harvest. Men may talk^
Of three croppes in a year in the fortunate Islands.
Or profit made by wool. But while there are sutors^
His sheep sheering, ^ay ^having to the quick
Is in every quarter of the Moon, and constant,
In the time of trussing a point, he can undo
Or make a man. His play or recreation
Is to raise ^ihs up, o^ pu^l down that, and though
He never yet took orders, makes more Bishops
In Sicilie, then the Pope himself.

Most strange!

The presence fills. He in the Malta hab^t
Is the natural brother of the King, a by blow.

I understand you.

Morrow to my Uncle.

And my late Guardian. But at length I have
The reigns in my own hands.

Pray you use 'em well,
Or you'll too late repent it.

With this Jewel
Presented to Camiola, prepare
This night a uisit for me. I shall have
Your company Gallants I perceive, if that
The King will hear of war.

Sr. I have horses
Of the best breed in Naples, fitter far
To break a rank, then crack a lance, and are
In their carer of such incredible swiftness
They out-strip swallows.

And such may be useful
To run away with, should we be defeated.
You are well provided Signior

Sr. excuse me.
All of their race by instinct know a Coward.
And scorn the burden. They come on like lightning,
Foundered in a retreat.

By no means back 'em.
Unless you know your courage sympathize
With the daring of your horse.

My lord, this is ^itter.

I will raise me a company of foot,
And when at push of pike I am to enter
A brea^h, to show my valour, I have bought me
An armour cannon proof

You will not leap then
Ore an out-worke in your shirt^

I do not like
Activity that way.

You had rather stand
A mark to try their muskets on?

If I do
No good, I'll do no hurt.

'Tis in you Sign^or
A Christian resolution, and becomes you,
But I will not discourage you.

You are Sr.
A knight of Malta, and as I have heard^
Have served aga^nst the Turk.

'Tis true.

Pray you show us
The difference between the city valour.
And service in the field.

'Tis somewhat more
Then roaring in a t^verne, or a brothel,
Or to steal a Constable from a sleeping watch;
Then burn their halberds; or safe guarded by
Your tenants sons, to carry away a Maypole
From a neighbour village; you will not find there
Your Masters of Dependencies to take up
A drunken brawl, or to get you the names
Of valiant Cheivaleirs, fellows that will be
For a clo^ke with thrice died velvet, and a cast suite
Kicked down the stairs. A knave with half a britch there,
And no shirt (being a thing superfluous,
And worn ou^ of his memory) if you bear not
Your selves both in, and upright with a provant sword
Will slash your skarlets, and your plush a new way;
Or with the hilts thunder about your ears
Such music as will make your worships dance
To the doleful tune of La^yr^ma,

I must tell you,
In private, as you are my princely friend,
I do not like such Fiddlers.

No? they are useful
For your imitation; I remember you
When you came first to the Court, and talked of nothing
But you rents, and your entradas; ever chiming
The golden bells in your pockets, you belieu'd
The taking of the wall, as a tribute due to
Your gaudy clothes; and could not walk at m^d-night
Without a causeless quarrel, as if men
Of courser outsides were in duty bound
To suffer your affronts: but when you had been
Cud^ell'd well, twice or thrice, and from the doctrine
Made profitable uses, you concluded
The sovereign means to teach irregular heirs
Civility, with conformity of manners,
Were two or three sound beatings.

I confess
They did much good upon me.

And on me -- the principles that they read were sound.

You'll find
The like instructions in the Camp.

The King.

VVee sit prepared to hear.

Your Majesty
Hath been long since familiar, I doubt not,
With the desperate fortunes of my Lord, and pity
Of the much that your confederate hath suffered
(You being his last refuge) may persuade you
Not alone to compassionate, but to lend
Your royal aids to stay him in his fall
To certain ruin. He too late is conscious,
That his ambition to encroach upon
His neighbours territories, with the danger of
His liberty, nay his life, hath brough in question
Hi^ own inheritance: but youth and heat
Of blood^ in your interpretation, may
Both plead, and ^ediate for him. I must grant it
An error in him, being denied the favours though
Of the fair Princess of Siena
He sought her in a noble way) t'andeavou^
To for^ affection, by surprise of
Her principal seat Siena.

Which now proves
The seat of his captivity^ not triumph.
Heaven is still just.

And yet that justice is
To be with mercy tempered, which heau'^s Deputies
Stand bound to minister. The injured Duche^se
By reason taught, as nature, could not with
The reparation of her wrongs, but aim at
A brave revenge, and my Lord feels too late
That innocence will find friends. The great Gonzaga,
The honour of his Order, I must praise
Virtue, though in an enemy. He whose fights
And conquests hold one number, rallying up
Her scattered troops, before we could get time
To victual, or to man the conquered City,
Sate down before it, and presuming that
'Tis not to be releev'd, admits no parley,
Our s^ags of truce hung out in vain, nor will he
Lend an ear to composition, but exacts
With the rendering up the ^owne, the goods, and lines
Of all within the walls, and of all Sexes
To be at his discretion.

Since injustice
In your Duke, meets this correction, can you press us
With any seeming argument of reason,
In foolish pity to decline his dangers,
To draw 'em on our self? Shall we not be,
Warned by his harms? The league proclaimed between us.
Bound neither of us farther then to aid
Each other, if by foreign force invaded,
And so far in my honour I was tied.
But ^ince without our counsel, or allowance,
He hath took arms, with his good leave, he must
Excuse us, if we steer not on a rock
We see, and may avoid. Let other Monarchs
Contend to be made glorious by proud war,
And with the blood of their poor subjects purchase
Increase of Empire, and augment their cares
In keeping that which was by wrongs extorted;
Guilding unjust invasions with the trimne
Of glorious conquests; we that would be known
The father of our people in our study,
And vigilance for their safety, must not change
Their plough-shares into swords, or force them from
The secure shade of their own vines to be
Scorched with the flames of war, or for our sport
Expose their lives to ruin.

Will you then
In his extremity forsake your friend?

No, but preserve our self:

Cannot the beams
Of honour thaw your icy fears?

VVho's that?

A kind of brother, Sir, how ever your subject,
Your father's Son, and one who blushes that
You are not heir to his brave spirit, and vigour,
As to his Kingdom.

How's this?

Sir, to be
His living Chronicle, and to speak his praise
Cannot deserve your anger.

VVhere's your warrant
For this presumption?

He^e, Sir, in my heart.
Let Sycopha^ts, that feed upon your favours,
Stile coldness in you caution, and prefer
Your ease before your honour; and conclude
To eat and s^eepe supinely, is the end
Of humane blessings: I must tell you Sir,
Virtue, if not in action, is a vice,
And when we move not forward, we go backward;
Nor is this peace (the nurse of drones, and cowards)
Our health, but a disease.

Well urged my Lord.

Perfect what is so well begun.

And bind,
My Lord, your servant:

Hare-braind fool! what reason
Can thou infer to make this good?

A thousand
Not to be contradicted. But consider
Where your command lies? 'Tis not, Sir, in France,
Spain, Germany, Portugall, but in Sicilie,
An Island, Sir. Here are no mines of gold,
Or silver to enrich you, no worm spinnes
Silk in her womb to make distinction
Between you, and a Peasant, in your habits.
No fish lives near our shores, who's blood can die
Scarlet, or purple; all that we possess
With beasts, we have in common: Nature did
Design us robe warriors, and to break through
Our ring the sea, by which we are environed;
And we by force must fetch in what is wanting,
Or precious to us. Add to this, we are
A populous nation, and increase so fast,
That if we by our providence, are not sent
Abroad in colonies, or fall by the sword,
Not Sicilie (though now, it were more fruitful,
Then when 'twas styled the granary of great Rom^)
Can yield our numerous fry bread, we must starve,
Or eat up one another.

The King hears
With much atten^ion.

And seems moved with what
Bertoldo hath delivered.

May you live long, Sir,
The King of peace, so you deny not us
The glory of the war; let not our nerves
Shrincke up with ^loth, nor for want of employment
Make younger brothers theves; 'tis their swords, Sir,
Must sow and re^pe their harvest; if examples
May move you more then arguments, look on England,
The Empress of the European Isles,
And unto whom alone ours yields procedence,
When did she flourish so, as when she was
The Mistress of the Ocean. Her navies
Putting a girdle round about the world,
When the Iberian quaked, her worthies named;
And the fair flower Deluc^ grew pale, set by
The red Rose and the white: let not our armour
Hung up, or our unrig'd Armada make us
Ridiculous to the late poor snakes our neighbours
VVarm'd in our bosoms, and to whom again
We may be terrible: while we spend our hours
Without variety, confined to drink,
Dice, Cards, or whores. Rowze us, Sir, from the sleep
Of idleness, and redeem our mortgaged honour^.
Your birth, and justly, claims my fathers Kingdom;
But his Heroic mind descends to me,
I will confirm so much.

In his looks he seems
To break open Ianu^ Temple.

How these younglings
Take fire from him!

It works an alteration
Upon the King.

I can forbear no longer:
War, war, my Sovereign.

The King appears
Resolved, and do^s prepare to speak.

Think not
Our counsel's built upon so weak a base,
As to be overturned, or shaken with
Tempestuous winds of words. As I, my Lord,
Before resolved you, I will not engage
My person in this quarrel; neither press
My Subjects to maintain it: yet to show
My rule is gentle, and that I have feeling
Of your Masters sufferings, since these Gallants weary
Of the happiness of peace, desire to taste
The bitter sweets of war, we do consent
That as Adventures, and Volunteers
(No way compelled by us) they may make trial
Of their boasted valours.

We desire no more.

'Tis well, and but my grant in this, expect not
Assistance from me. Govern as you please
The Province you make choice of, for I vow.
By all things sacred, if that thou miscarry
In this rash undertaking, I will hear it
No otherwise then as a sad disaster,
Fallen on a stranger: nor will I esteem
That man my Subject, who in thy extremes
In purse or person aids thee. Take your fortune:
You know me, I have said it. So my Lord
You have my absolute answer.

My^ Prince pays
^n me his duty.

Follow me, Fulgentio,
And you, Astutio.

What a frown he threw
At his departure, on you.

Let him keep
His smiles for his state Catamite, I care not.

Shall we aboard to night?

Your speed, my Lord,
Doubles the benefit.

I have a business
Requires dispatch, some two hours hence I'll meet you.

Nay Signior^ this is too much ceremony in my own house.

What's gracious abroad, must be in private practised.

For your mirth-sake
Let him alone, he has been all this morning
In practice with a perugd Gentleman usher,
To teach him his true amble and his postures,
When he walks before a Lady

You may, Madame,
Perhaps, believe that I in this use art,
To make you dote upon me by exposing
My more then most rare features to your view.
But I as I have ever done, deal simply,
A mark of sweet simplicity ever noted
In the family of the Syllies. Therefore Lady,
Look not with too much contemplation on me,
If you do, you are in the suds.

You are no Barber?

Fie no, not I, but my good parts have drawn
More loving hearts out of fair Ladies bellies,
Then the whole trade have done teeth.

Is't possible?

Yes, and they live too, marry much condoling
The scorn of their Narcissus, as they call me,
Because I love my self.

Without a rival;
What philtres or love-powders do you use
To force affection? I see nothing in
Your person, but I dare look on, yet keep
My own poor heart still.

You are warned, be armed,
And do not lose the hope of such a husband
In being too soon enamoured.

Hold in yo^r head,
Or you must have a martingale.

I have sworn
Never to take a wife, but such a one
(O may your Ladyship prove so strong) as can
Hold out a month against me.

Never fear it,
Though your best taking part, your wealth were trebl'd
I would not woo you. But since in your pity
You please to give me caution, tell me what
Temp^ations I must fly from?

The first is
That you n^ver hear me sing, for I am a Syri.
If you observe, when I warble, the dogs howl
As ravished with my D^tties, and you will
run m^d to hear me.

I will stop my ears,
And ^e^pe me little wits.

Next when I dance
And come alo^t thus, cast not a sheep eye
Upon the quivering of my calfe.

Proceed, Sir,

But on no ter^es, for 'tis a ^aine point, drea^e not
Of the strength of my back, though it will bear a burden
With any porter.

I mean not to ride you,

Nor I your little Ladyship, 'till you have
Performed the Covenants. Be not taken with
My pretty spider fingers, nor my eyes,
That twinckle on both sides.

Was there ever such
A piece of motlie heard of! who's that? you may spare
The Catalogue of my dangers.

No good Madam,
I have not told you half.

Enough good Signior,
If I ^te more of such sweet meats, I shall surfeit.
Who is't?

The brother of the King.

Nay start not,
The brother of the King! is he no more?
Were it the King himself, I'll give him leave
To speak his mind to you, for I am not jealo^s,
And to assure your Ladyship of so much,
I'll usher him in, and that done, hide my self.

Camiola if ever, now be constant
This is indeed a suitor, whose sweet presence,
Cou^tship and loving language would have staggered
The chaste Penelope. And to increase
The wonder, did not modesty forbid it
I should ask that from him, he sues to ^e for;
And yet my reason like a tyrant, tells ^e
I must nor give, nor take it.

I must tell you
You loose your labour. 'Tis enough to prove i^,
Signior Sylli came before you, and you know
First come first served yet you ^all have my countenance
To parley with her and I'^ take special care
That none shall interru^t you

You are courteous.

Come wench wilt thou hear wisdom?

Yes from you Sr.

If forcing this sweet favour from your lips
Fair Madam, argue me of too much boldness
When you are pleased to understand, I take
A parting kiss, if not excuse, at least
'Twill qualify the offence.

A parting kiss Sr.?
What Nation envious of the happiness
Which Sicilie enjoys in your sweet presence,
Can buy you from her? or what Climate yield
Pleasures transcending those which you enjoy here,
Being both beloved and honoured. The North-star
And guider of all hearts, and to sum up
Your full account of happiness, in a word,
The brother of the King.

Do you alone,
And with an unexampled cruelty,
Enforce my absence, and deprive me of
Those blessings, which you with a polished phrase
Seem to insinuate, that I do possess,
And yet tax me as being guilty of
My wilful exile? what are Titles to me?
Or popular suffrage? or my nearness to
The King in blood? or fruitful Sicilie,
Though it confessed no Sovereign but my self,
When you that are the essence of my being,
The anchor of my hopes; the real substance
Of my felicity, in your disdain
Turn all to fading and deceiving shadows?

You tax me without cause.

You must confess it.
But answer love with love, and seal the contract
In the uniting of our souls, how gladly
(though now I were in action, and assured,
Following my fortune; that plumed victory
Would make her glorious stand upon my tent)
Would I put off my armour, in my heate
Of conquest, and like Anthonie pursue
My Cleopatra! will you yet look on me
With an eye of Favour?

Truth bear witness for me,
That in the Judgment of my Soul, you are
A man so absolute, and circular
In all those wish'd-for rarities, that may take
A Virgin captive, that though at this instant
All sceptr'd Monarchs of our Western world
Were rivals with you, and Camiola worthy
Of such a competition, you alone
Should wear the ghirlond.

If so, what diverts
Your Favour from me?

No mulct in your self,
Or in your person, mind or fortune.

What then?

The Consciousnesse of mine own wants. Alas Sr.
We are not parallells, but like lines divided
Can ne'er meet in one Centre, your Birth Sir
(Without addition) were an ample Dowry
For one of fairer Fortunes, and this shape,
Were you ignoble, far above all value;
To this, so clear a mind, so furnished with
Harmonious faculties, moulded from heaven,
That though you were Thersites in your features
Of no descent, and Irus in your fortunes,
Vlisses like you would force all eyes, and ears
To love, but seen, and when heard, wonder at
Your matchless story. But all these bound up
Together in one Volume, give me leave
With admiration to look upon 'em,
But not presume in my own flattering hopes,
I may or can enjoy 'em.

How you ruin
What you would seem to build up. I know no
Disparity between us, you are an heir
Sprung from a noble family, fair, rich, young.
And every way my equal.

Sir excuse me^
One aerie with proportion, ne'er discloses
The eagle and the wren tissue, and freeze
In the same garment monstrous: But suppose
That what's in you excessive, were diminish'd^
And my desert supplied, the strongest bar,
Religion stops our Entrance, you are Sir
A Knight of Malta, by your order bound
To a single life, you cannot marry me,
And I assure my self you are too noble
To seek me (though my frailty should consent)
In a base path.

A dispensation Lady
Will easiely absolve me.

O take heed Sr.
When, what is vowed to heaven, is dispensed with,
To serve our ends on earth, a curse must follow,
And not a blessing.

Is there no hope left me?

Nor to my self, but is a neighbour to
Impossibility: true love should walk
On equal feet, in us it does not Sir.
But rest assured, excepting this, I shall be
Devoted to your service.

And this is your
Determinate sentence?

Not to be revoked.

Far^well then fairest cruel. All thoughts in me
Of Women perish. Let the glorious light
Of noble war extinguish loves dimne taper
That only lends me light to see my folly;
Honour, be thou my everliving Mistress,
And sond affection as thy bond-slave serve thee.

How soon my Sun is set: He being absent,
Never to rise again! what a fierce battle
Is fought between my passions! me thinks
We should have kissed at parting.

I perceive^
He has his answer, now must I step in
To comfort her, you have found, I hope, sweet Lady,
Some diff^rence between a youth of my pitch^
And this bug-beare Bertoldo, men are men,
The Kings brother is no more: good parts will do it,
When Titles fail, despair not, I may be
In time entreated.

Be so now to leave me,
Lights for my chamber, O my heart!

She now
I know is going to bed to ruminate
Which way to glut her self upon my person,
But for my o^th-sake I will keep her hungry,
And to grow full my self, I'll straight to supper.

Embarked to night do you say?

I saw him aboard, Sir,

And withou^ taking of his leave?

'Twas strange!

Are we grown so contemptible?

'Tis far from me Sir, to add fuel to your anger,
That in your ill opinion of him, burns
Too hot already, else I should affirm
It was a gros^e neglect.

A wilful scorn
Of duty and allegiance, you give it
Too fair a name. But we shall think on it: can you
Guess what the numbers were that follow'd him
In his desperate action?

More then you think, Sir.
All ill affected spirits in Palermo,
Or to your government, or person, with
The turbulent sword-men, such whose poverty forced 'em
To wish a change, are gone along with him;
Crea^ures devoted to his undertakings
In right or wrong, and to express their zeal,
And readiness to serve him, ere they went
Profanely took the sacrament on their knees,
To live and dye with him.

O most impious! their loyalty to us forgot?

I fear so.

Unthankful as they are.

Yet this deserves not
One troubled thought in you, Sir, with your pardon
I hold that their remove from hence makes more
For your security, then danger.

True; and as I'll fashion it, they shall feel it too^
Astutio, you shall presently be dispatch'd
With letters writ, and signed with our own hand,
To the Duchess of Sie^a, in excuse
Of th^se ^orces sent against her. If you spare
An oath to give it credit, that, we never
Con^ented to it, swearing for the King,
Though false, it is no perjury.

I know it.
They are not fit to be state agents, Sir,
That without scruple of their conscience, cannot
Be prodigal in such trifles.

Right, Astutio.

You must beside from us take some instructions
To be imparted, as you judge 'em useful,
To the General Gonzaga. Instantly
Pr^pare you for your journey.

With the wings
Of loyalty and duty.

I am bold to put your Majesty in mind.

Of my promise,
And aids, to further you in your amorous project
To the fair, and rich Camiola: there's my ring
Whatever you shall say that I entreat
Or can command by power, I will make good.

Ever your Majesties creature.

Venus prove propitious to you.

All sorts to my wishes:
B^rtoldo was my hindrance. He removed,
I now will court her in the conquerous stile,
Come, see, and overcome. Boy.

Sir, your pleasure.

Haste to Camiola, bid her prepare
An entertainment suitable to a fortune,
She could not hope for. Tell her, I vouchsafe
To honour her with a visit

'Tis a favour
Will make her proud.

I know it

I am gone, Sir.

Entreaties fit not me, a man in grace,
May challenge awe, and privilege by his place,

SO melancholy say you?

Never given
To such retirement.

Can you guess the ca^se?

If it hath not it's birth, and being from
The brave Bertoldo's absence, I confess
It is passed my apprehension.

You are wide,
The whole field wide. I in my understanding
Pity your ignorance: yet if you will
Swear to conceal it, I will let you know
Where her shoe rings her.

I vow, Signior,
By my virginity.

A perilous oath
In a waiting-woman of fifteen, and is indeed
A Kind of nothing.

I'll take one of something
If you please to minister it.

Nay, you shall not swear,
I had rather take your word, for should you vow:
Damn me, I'll do this, you are sure to breake^

I thank you Signior, but resolve us.

Know then,
Here walks the cause. She dar^s not look upon me,
My beauties are so terrible, and enchanting,
She cannot endure my sight.

There I believe you.

But the time will come, be comforted, when I will
Put off this visor of unkindness to her,
And show an amorous, and yielding face:
And until then, though Hercules himself
Desire to see her, he had better eat
His club then pass her threshold, for I'll be
Her Cerberus to guard her.

A good dog.

Worth twenty porters.

Keep you open house here?
No groom to attend a Gentleman? O, I spy one.

He means not me, I am sure.

You sirrha; Sheepes-head,
With a face cut on a cat-sticke, Do you hear?
You yeoman phewterer, conduct me to
The Lady of the mansion, or my poniard
Shall disemboge thy soul.

O terrible!
Disemboge! I talk of Hercules, and here is one
Bound up in decimo sext^.

Answer wretch.

Pray you little gentleman, be not so furious,
The Lady keeps her chamber.

And we present?
Sent in an Embassy to her? But here is
Her gentlewoman, Sirrah hold my cloak,
While I take a leap at her lips, do it and neatly;
Or having first tripped up thy heals, I'll make
Thy back my footstool.

Tamberlaine in little!
Am I turned Turk! what an office am I put to!

My Lady, gentle youth is indisposed.

Though she were dead and buried, only tell her,
The great man in the Court, the brave Fulgentio
Descends to v^it her, and it will raise her
Out of the grave for joy.

Here comes another!
The devil I fear in his holi-day clothes.

So soon,
My part is at an end then, cover my shoulders,
When I grow great, thou shalt serve me.

Are you Sirrah
An ^mplement of the house?

Su^e he will make
A joynes-stoole of me!

Or if you belong
To the Lady of the place, command her hither.

I do not wear her livery, yet acknowledge
A duty to her. And as little bound
To serve your peremptory will, as she is
To obey your summons. 'Twill become you Sir,
To wait her leisurue, then her pleasure known
You may present your duty.

Duty? Slave,
I'll teach you manners.

I am past learning, make not
A tumult in the house.

Shall I be brau'd thu^

O I am dead! and now I sown.

Help, murder!

Recover Sirrah, the Ladies here.

Nay then
I am alive again, and I'll be valiant.

What insolence is this? Adorni, hold,
Hold I command you.

Saucy groom.

Not so Sir,
However in his life, he had dependence
Upon my Father, He is a gentleman
As well borne as your self. Put on your hat.

In my presence, without leave?

He has mine Madam?

And I must tell you Sir, and in plain language,
How ever your glittering out-side promise gentry,
The rudeness of your carriage and behaviour
Speaks you a couser thing.

She means a clown S^.
I am her interpreter for want of a better.

I am a Queen in mine own house, nor must you
Expect an Empire here.

Sure I must love her
Before the day, the pretty Soule's so valiant.

What are you? and what would you with me?

Proud one,
When you know what I am, and what I came for,
And may on your submission proceed ^o,
You in your reason must repent the coursenesse
Of my entertain^ment.

Why fine man? what are you?

A kinsman of the Kings.

I cry you mercy,
For his sake, not your own. But grant you are so,
'Tis not impossible, but a king may have
A fool to his kinsman, no way meaning you Sir.

You have heard of Fulgen.

Long since Sir,
A suit-broker in Court. He has the worst
Report among good men I ever heard of,
For bribery and extortion. In their prayers
Widows and Orphans curse him for a canker,
And caterpill^r in the state. I hope Sir,
You are not the man, much less employed by him
As a smocke-agent to me.

I reply not
As you deserve, being assured you know me,
Pretending ignorance of my person, only
To give me a ^ast of your wit; 'Tis well and courtly,
I like a sharpe wit well.

I cannot endure it,
Nor any of the Sylli^s.

More I know too,
This harsh induction must serve as a foil
To the well tuned observance and respect,
You will hereafter pay me, being made
Familiar with my credit with the King,
And that, contain your joy, I deign to love you.

Love me? I am not raped with it.

Hear't again.
I love you honestly, now you admire me.

I do indeed, it being a word so seldom
Heard from a courtiers mouth. But pray you deal plainly,
Since you find me simple. what might be the motives
Inducing you to leave the freedom of
A bachelors life, on your so^t neck to wear
The stubborn yoke of marriage? And of all
The beauties in Palerm^, to choose me,
Poor me? that is the maine point you must treat of.

Why I will tell you. Of a little thing
You are a prettle peat, indifferenly fair too;
And like a new-rigg'd ship both tight, and you're
Well trussed to bear. Virgins of Giant size
Are ^luggards at the sport: but for my pleasure,
Give me a near well ^imbred gamester like you,
S^ch need no sp^rres, the quickenes of your eye
Assures an active spirit.

You are pleasant Sir,
Yet I presume, that there was one thing in me
Unmentioned yet, that took you more then all
Those parts you have remembered.

What?

My wealth Sir.

You are in the right, without that beauty is
A flower worn in the morning, at night trod on^
But beauty, youth, and fortune meeting in you,
I will vouchsafe to marry you.

You speak well,
And in return excuse me Sir, if I
Deliver reasons why upon no terms
I'll marry you, I fable not.

I am glad
To hear this, I began to have an ague.

Come^ your wise reasons.

Such as they are, pray you take them.
First I am doubtful whether you are a man,
Since for your shape trimmd up in a Ladies dressing
You might pass for a woman: now I love
To deal on certainties. And for the fairness
Of your complexion, which you think will take me,
The colour I must tell you in a man
Is weak and fa^nt, and never will hold out
If put to labour, give me the lovely browne.
A thick curled hair of the same dye; broad shoulders,
A brawny arm full of veins, a leg without
An artificial calfe, I suspect yours,
But let that pass.

She means me all this while,
For I have every one of those good parts,
O Sylli, fortunate Sylli!

You are moved Sir.

Fie no, go on.

Then as you are a courtier;
A gr^c'd one too, I fear you have been too forward,
And so much for your person. Rich you are,
Devilish rich, as 'tis reported, and sur^ have
The aides of Satans little fiends to get it,
And what is got upon his back, must be
Spent you know where, the proverb's sta'e, one word more
And I have done.

I'll ^ase you of the trouble,
Coy, and disdainful.

Save me, or else he'll beat me.

No, your own folly shall, and since you put me
To my last charm, look upon this, and tremble.

At the sight of a fair ring? the Kings, I take it.
I have seen him wear the like; if he hath sent it
as a favour to me.

Yes, 'tis very likely,
His dying mothers gift, prized at his crown,
By this he does command you to be mine,
By his gift you are so: you may yet redeem all.

You are in a wrong account still. Though the King may
Dispose of my life and goods, my mind's mine own,
And shall be never yours. The King (Heaven bless him)
Is good and gracious, and being in himself
Abstemious from base and goatish looseness,
Will not compel against their wills, cha^te Madiens,
To dance in his magnious circles. I believe
Forgetting it, when he washed his hands, you stole it
With an intent to awe me. But you are coozin'd,
I am still my self, and will be.

A proud haggard,
And not to be reclaimed, which of your grooms,
Your coach-man, fool, or foot-man, ministers
Night phisicque to you?

You are soule-mouth'd,

Much fairer
Then thy black soul, and so I will proclaim thee.

Were I a man, thou durst not speak this.

Heaven
So prosper me, as I resolve to do it
To a^l men, and in every place, scorned by
A tit of pen-pence?

Now I begin to be valiant
Nay, I will draw my sword. O for a butche^!
Do a friends part, pray you carry him the length of't.
I give him three years, and a day to match my ^oledo,
And then we'll fight like Dragons.

Pray have patience.

I may live to have vengeance; My Bertoldo
Would not have heard this.

Madam.

'Pray you spare
Your language; Prithee fool, and make me merry:

That is my Office ever.

I must do,
Not talk, this glorious gallant shall hear from me.

IS the breach made assaultable?

Yes, and the moat
Filled up, the Canonier hath don his parts,
We may enter six a breast.

There's not a man
Dares ^hew himself upon the wall^

Deseate not
The soldiers hop'd-for spoil.

If you, Sir,
Delay the assault, and the City be given up
To your discretion, you in honour cannot
Use the extremity of war, but in
Compassion to 'em, you to us prove cruel.

And an enemy to your self.

A hindrance to
The brave revenge you have vowed

Temper your heat,
And loose not by too sudden rashness, tha
Which be but patient, will be offered to you
Security ushers ruin; proud contempt
Of an enemy three parts vanquished with desire
And greediness of spoil, have often wrested
A certain victory from the Conquerours gripe.
Discretion is the tutor of the war,
Valour the pupil, and when we command
With lenity and your directions follow'd
With cheerfulness, a prosperous end must crown
Our works well undertaken.

Ours are finished

If we make use of fortune.

Her false smiles
Deprive you of your judgements. The condition
Of our affairs exacts a double care,
And like bifronted Ianus, we must look
Backward, as forwards: though a flattering calm
Bids us urge on, a sudden tempest raised,
Not feared, much less expected, in our reere
May foully fall upon us, and distract us
To our confusion. Our scout! what brings
Thy ghastly looks, and sudden speed?

Th'assurance
Of a new enemy.

This I fore-saw^ and feared.
What are they, know it thou?

They are by their colours
Sicilians, brav^ly mounted, and the brightne^
Of their rich armours doubly gilded with
Reflection of the Sun.

From Sicilie?
The King in leagu^! no warr^ proclaimed ^ 'tis foule^
But this must be prevented, not disputed
Ha, how is this? your Ostrich plumes, that but
Even now like quills of Porcupines seemed to threaten
The sta^es, drop at the ^umor of a sh^wer?
And like to captive colours sweep the earth?
Bear up, but in great dangers, greater minds
Are never proud. Shall a few loose troops untrain'd
But in a customary oftentatiou,
P^sented as a sacrifice to your valours
Cause a dejection in you?

No dejection.

However startled, where you lead, we'll follow

'Tis bravely said. We will not stay their charge,
But meet'^m man to man, and horse to horse.
Pierio in our absence hold our place,
And with our foot-men, and those sickly troupes,
Prevent a sally. I in mine own person,
With part of the cavallery, will bid,
These hunters welcome to a bloody breakfast,
But I lose time.

I'll to my charge.

And we
To ours. I'll bring you on.

If we come off
It is not amiss, if not, my state is settled

NO aids from Sicilie? Hath hope forsook us?
And that vain comfort to affliction, pity
By our vowed friend denied us? we can nor live,
Nor die with honour: like beasts in a toil
We wait the leisure of the bloody hunter,
Who is not so far reconciled u^to us,
As in one death to give a period
To our calamities, but in delaying
The fate we cannot fly from, starved with wants,
We die this night to live again to morrow,
And suffer greater torments.

There is not
Three days provision for every soldier,
At an ounce of bread a day left in the City.

To dye the beggars death with hunger, made
Anatom es while we live, cannot but crack
Our heart-strings with vexation.

Would they would break,
Break altogether, how willingly like Cato
Could I tear out my bowels, rather then
Look on the conquerors insulting face,
But that religion, and the horrid dream
To be suffered in the other world denies it.
What news with thee?

From the turret of the fort
By the rising clouds of dust, through which, like lightning
The spendor of bright arms sometimes brake through,
I did descry some forces making towards us,
And from the camp, as emulous of their glory,
The General, (for I know him by his horse)
Tnd bravely seconded. encountered 'em.
Their greetings were to rough for friends, their swords
And not their tongues exchanging courtesies.
By this the maine Battalias are joined,
And if you please to be spectators of
The horrid issue, I will bring you where
As in a Theater you may see their fates
In purple gore presented.

Heaven. If yet
Thou art appeased for my wrong done to Aurelia,
Take pity of my miseries. Lead the way, friend.

WE have 'em yet, though they cost us deer. This was
Charged home, and bravely follow'd. Be to yourselves
True mirrors to each others worth, and looking
W^th noble Emulation on his wounds,
(^he glorious Livery of t^iumphant war)
Imagine these with equal grace appear
Upon your self. The bloody ^wsat you have suffered
In this laborious, nay toilsome harvest,
Yields a rich crop of conquest, and the spoil
Most precious balsum to a souldies hu^s
Will ^ase and cure 'em. Let me look up^n
T^e prisoners faces. O how much transformed
From what they were. O Mars! were the^e toys fashioned
To undergo the burden of thy service?
The weight of their defe^sive armour bruised
Their weak, effe^inate limbs, and would have forc'd'em
In a hot day without a blow to yield.

This insultation shows not manly in you.

To men I had for^orne it, you are women,
Or at the best loose carpet knights, what fury
Seduced you to exchange your ^ase in Court
For labour in the field? Perhaps you thought.
To charge through dust, and blood, an armed foe,
Was but like graceful running at the ring
For a want on mistress glove, and the encounter
A soft impression on her lips. But you
A^e gawdi^ butterflies, and I wrong my self
In parling with you.

Vae victis. Now we prove it.

But here's one fashioned in another mould,
And made of tougher mettle.

True, I owe him
For this wound bravely given.

O that mountains
Were heaped upon me, that I might expire
A wretch no more remembered.

Look up Sr.
To be overcome deserves no shame. If you
Had fallen ingloriously, or could accuse
Your want of courage in resistance, 'twere
To be lamented: But since you performed
As much as could be hoped for from a man,
(Fortune his enemy) you wrong your self
In this direction^ I am honoured in
My victory ore you: but to have these
My prisoners, is in my true judgement rather,
Captivity then a triumph; you shall find
Fair quarter from me, and your many wounds
(Which I hope are not mortal) with such care
Looked to, and cured, as if your nearest friend
Attended on you.

When you know me better,
You will make void this promise: Can you call me
Into your memory.

The brave Bertoldo!
A brother of our order! By Saint Iohn,
(our holy patron) I am more amazed,
Nay thunderstrooke, with thy Apostasy,
And praecipice from the most solemn vows
Made unto heaven, when this, the glorious badge
Of our redeemer was conferred upon thee,
By the great master, then if I had seen
A reprobate Jew, ^n Atheist, Turk, or Tartar
Bap^z'd in our religion.

This I looked for,
And am resolved to suffer.

Fellow Souldiers^
Behold this man, and taught by his example
Know that 'tis safer far to play with lightning,
Then trifle in things sacred. In my rag
I shed these at the funeral of his virtue,
Faith and r^ligion; why I will tell you
He was a gentleman, so trained up, and fashioned
For noble uses, and his youth did promise
Such c^rt^inties, more then hopes, of great achievements,
As if the Christian world had stood opposed
Against the Ottoman race to try the fortune
Of one encounter, this Bertoldo had been
For his knoweldge to direct, and matchless courage
To execute, without a rival, by
The votes of good men chosen general,
As the prime soldier, and most deserving,
Of all that wear the cross, which now in justice
I thus tear from him.

Let me dye with it,
Upon my breast.

No, by this thou were it sworn
On all occasions, as a knight to guard
Weak Ladies from oppression, and never
To draw thy sword against 'em, where as thou
In hope of gain or glory, when a Princess
And such a Princess as Aurelia is,
Was dispossessed by violence, of what was
Her true inheritance, against thine oath,
Hast to thy uttermost laboured to ^phold
Her falling enemy. But thou shalt pay
A heavy forfeiture, and learn too la^e,
Valour, employed in an ill quarrel, turns
To cowardice, and vertve then puts on
Foul vices vizard. This is that which cancells
All friendsh^ps bands between us Bear 'em off
I will hear no reply. And let the ransom
Of these, for they are yours, be highly rated.
In this I do but right, and let it be
Styled justice, and not wilful cruelty.

what I have done Sr by the law of arme^
I can, and will make good.

I have no commission
To expostulate the act. These letters speak
The King my Masters love to you, and his
vowed service to the Duchess, on who^e person
I am to give attendance.

At this instant.
She's at Pienza; you may sp^re the trouble
Of riding thither: I have advertised her
Of our success, and on what humble terms
Siena stands: though presently I can
Possess it I defer it, that she may
Enter her own, and as she please dispose of
The prisoners and the spoil.

I thank you, Sir.
In the mean time, if I may have your licence,
I have a Nephew, and one once my ward
For whose liberties and ransomes, I would gladly
Make composition.

They are, as I take it,
Called Gasparo, and Anthonio,

The same, Sir,

For them you must treat with these, but for Bertoldo,
He is mine own, if the King will ransom him,
He pays down fifty thousand crowns, if not
He lives, and dies my slave,

Pray you a word.
The King will rather thank you ^o ^taine him,
Then give one crown to free him.

At his pleasure.
I'll send the p^oners under guard^ my business
Ca^l^ me another way.

My service waits you,
Now Gentlemen do not deal like Merchants with me,
But noble Captains, you know in great minds
Posse, nolle no^le.

Pray you speak
Our language.

I find not in my commission
An officers bound to speak or understand
More then his Mother tongue.

If he speak that
After midnight 'tis remarkable.

In plain terms then,
Anthonio is your prisoner. Gasparo yours

You are in the right.

At what sum do you rate
Their several ransomes.

I must make my market
As the commodity cost me.

As it cost you?
You did not buy your Captainship? your desert
I hope advanced you.

How? it well appears
You are no soldier. Desert in these days?
Desert may make a Sergeant to a Colonel,
And it may hinder him from rising higher,
But if it ever get a company,
^ company, pray you mark me, without money
Or private service done for the Generals Mistress,
With a commendatory Epistle from her,
I will turn Lansprizadoe.

Pray you observe, Sir:
I served two prenticeships, just fourteen year,
Trailing the puissant pike; and half so long
Had the right hand file, and I fought well, 'twas said too:
But I might have served, and fought, and served ti^doomsday
And never have carried a ^lagge, but for the legacy
A buxsome widow of threescore, bequeathed me,
And that too, my back knows, I labour hard for,
But was better paid.

You are merry with your selves
But this is from the purpose.

To the point then.
Prisoners are not taken every day, and when
We have 'em we must make the best use of 'em.
Our pay is little to the part we should bear,
And that so long a coming, that 'tis spent
Before we have it, and hardly wipes off scores
At the Tavern, and the Ordinary.

You may add to
Our sport took up on trust.

Peace, thou smo^ke vermin.
Discover commanders, secrets! In a word, Sir,
We have required, and find our prisoners rich:
Two thousand crowns a piece, our companies cost us,
And so much each of us will have, and that
In present pay.

It is too little; yet
Since you have said the word, I am content,
But will not go a gazet less.

Since you are not
To be brought lower, there is no evading^
I'll be your pay-master.

We desire no better.

But not a word of what's agreed between us,
'Till I have schoold my gallants.

I am dumb, Sir.

And where removed now? hath the Tyrant found out
Worse usage for us?

VVorse it cannot be.
My grewhound has fresh straw, and scraps in his kennel,
But we have neither.

Did I ever think
To wear such garters on silk stockings? or
That my too curious appetite, that turned
At the sight of godwits, pheasant, partidge, quases
Larks, wood-cocks, caluerd sammon, as course diet,
Would leap at a mouldy crust?

And go without it;
So of^ as I do, O how have I jeered
The City entertainment. A huge shoulder
Of glorious fat Ram Mutton, seconded
With a pair of taine cats, or conies, a crab tart
With a worthy loyne of veale, and valiant Capon,
Mortifi'd to grow tender. These I scorned
From their plentiful horne of abu^dance, though invited:
But now I could carry my own stool to a tripe,
And call their chitterlings charity, and bless the founder.

O that I were no farther sensible
Of my miseries then you are! you like beasts
F^ele only stings of hunge^, and complain not
But when you are empty: but your narrow souls
(If you have any) cannot comprehend
How insupportable the torments are,
Which a free and ^oble soul made capti^e, suffers:
Most miserable men! and what am I then,
That envy you? Fetters though made of gold,
Express base thraldom and all delicates
Prepared by Median cooks for Epicures,
When not our own, are bitter quilts filled high
With gossamire and roses, cannot yield
The body soft repose, the mind kept waking
With anguish and affliction.

My good Lord.

This is no time, nor place for flaterry Sir,
Pray you stile me as I am, a wretch forsaken
Of the world, as my self.

I would it were
In me to help you.

I if that you want power Sir,
Lip comfort cannot cure me, pray you leave me
To mine own private thoughts.

My valiant Nephew!
And my more then warlike-ward! I am glad to see you
After your glorious conquests. Are these chains
Rewardee for your good service? If they are
You should wear 'em on your ne^ks (since they are massy)
Like Aldermen of the war.

You jeer us to!

Good uncle name not (as you are a man of honour)
That fatal word of war, the very sound of't
Is more dreadful then a Cannon.

But redeem us
From this Captivity, and I'll vow hereafter
Never to wear a sword, or cut my meat
With a knife, that has an edge or point. I'll starve first

I will cry broom or cats meat in Pal^rm^;
Turn porter, carry burdens; any thing,
Rather then live a soldier.

This should have
Been thought upon before. At what price think you
Your two wise heads are rated?

A calves head is
More worth then mine, I am sure it had more brains in it
Or I had never come here.

And I will eat it
With bacon, if I have not speedy ransom.

And a little garlic too, for your own sake Sir
I will boyle in your stomach else.

Beware of mine
Or the horns may choke you. I am married Sir.

You shall have my row of houses near the palace

And my vil^a all.

All that we have.

Well, have more wit hereafter
For this time you are ransomed.

Off with their irons.

Do do^ If you are ours again, you know your price.

Pray you dispatch us: I shall ne'er believe
I am a freeman, till I set my foot
In Sicilie again, and drink Palermo,
And in Palermo too.

The wind fits fair,
You shall aboard to night with the rising Sun
You may touch upon the coast. But take your leaves
Of the late General first.

I will be brief.

And I, my lord heaven keep you.

Yours to use
In the way of peace, but as your soldiers never.

A pox of war no more of war.

Have you
Authority to loose their bonds, yet leave
The brother of your King, whose worth disdains
Comparison with such as these, in irons?
If ransom may redeem them, I have lands,
A patrimony of mine own assigned me,
By my deceased sire to satisfy
What ere can be demanded for my freedom.

I wish you had Sir, but the king who yeelds^
No reason for his will, in his displeasure
Hath seas'd on all you had; nor will Gonzaga,
Whose prisoner now you are, accept of less
Then fifty thousand crowns.

I find it now
That misery ne'er comes alone. But grant
The King is yet inexorable, time
May work him to a feeling of my sufferings.
I have friends, that swore their lives and fortunes were
At my devotion, and among the rest
Your self my lord, when forfeited to the Law
For a foul murder, and in cold blood done,
I made your life my gift, and reconciled you
To this incensed king, and got your pardon.
Beware ingratitude. I know you are rich
And may pay down the Sum.

I might my lord,
But pardon me.

And will Astutio prove then
To please a passionate man, the kings no more,
False to his maker and his reason? which
Commands more then I ask? o summer friendship,
Whose flattering leaves that shadowed us in
Our prosperity, with the least gust drop off
In th'Autumne of adversity! How like
A prison is to a grave! when dead we are
With solemn Pomp brought thither, and our heirs,
(Masking their joy in false dissembled tears)
Weep ore the hearse, but earth no sooner covers
The earth brought thither, but they turn away
With inward smiles, the dead no more remembered.
So entered in a prison.

My occasions
Command me hence my lord.

Pray you leave me, do;
And tell the cruel king, that I will wear
The^e ^etters 'till my flesh, and they are one
Incorporated substance. In my self,
As in a glass, I'll look on humane frailty,
And curse the height of Royal blood: since I
In being borne near to Jove, am near his thunder.
Cedars once shaken with a storm, their own
Weight gr^b^ their roots out. Le^d me where you please;
I am his, not fortunes martyr, and will dye
The great example of his cruelty.

HE undergoes my challenge, and contemns it,
And threatens me with the late Edict made
Against duellists, then altar cowards fly to.
But I that am engaged, and nourish in me
A higher aim then fair Camiola dreams of,
Must not sit down thus. In the court I dare not
Attempt him; and in public, he's so guarded
With a heard of Parasites, Clients, fools and suitors,
That a musket cannot reach him, my designs
Admit of no delay. This is her birth-day,
Which with a fit and due solemnity
C^miola celebrates; and on it, all such
As love or serve her, usually present
A tributary duty. I'll have something
To give, if my intelligence prove true,
Shall find acceptance. I am told, near this grove
Fulgentio very morning makes his makets
With his petitioners. I may present him
With a sharpe petition. H^, 'tis he^ my sate
Be ever blessed for it.

Command such as wait me
Not to presume at the least for half an hour
To pre^e on my rettirements.

I will say, Sir, you are at your prayers^

That will not find belief,
Courtiers have something else to do, be gon, Sir,
Ghalleng'd ^ 'tis well I and by a grome! still better ^
Was this shape made to ^ight? I have a tongue yet,
How ever no sword to kill him, and what way
This morning, I'll resolve of.

I shall cross
Your resolution, or suffer for you.

what are all these?

Sevants with serverall presents,
And rich ones too.

With her best wishes, Madam,
Of many such days to you, the Lady Petula
Presents you with this fan.

This Diamond
From your Aunt Honoria.

This piece of plate
From your Uncle, old Vincentio, with your arms
Graven upon it.

Good friends they are too.
Munificent in their love, and favour to me.
Out of my cabinet return such jewels
As this directs you, for your pains; and yours;
Nor must you be forgotten. Honour me
With the drinking of a health.

Gold on my life!

She scorns to give base silver.

Would she had been
Borne every month in the year!

Month? every day.

Show such another maid.

All happiness wait you.

I'll fee your will done.

How, Adorny wounded?

A scratch got in your service, else not worth
Your observation; I bring not Madame
In honour of your birth-day, anticque plate,
Or pearl, for which the savage Indian dives
Into the bottom of the Sea; nor Diamonds
Hewn from steep rocks with danger: Such as give
To those that have what they themselves want, aim at
A glad return with profit: yet despise not
My offering at the altar of your favour;
Nor let the lowness of the giver lessen
T^e height of whats presented. Since it is
A precious jewell, almost forfeited,
And dimn'd with clouds of infamy redeemed
And in in its natural splendour, with addition,
Restored to the true owner.

How is this?

Not to hold you in suspense, I bring you, Madame,
Your wounded reputation cured, the sting
Of virulent malice, festring your fair name,
Plucked out and trod on. That proud man, that was
Denied the honour of your bed, yet durst
With his untrue reports, ^trumpet your ^ame,
Compelled by me, hath given himself the lye,
And in his own blood wrote it, you may r^d
Fulgentio subscribed.

I am amazed!

It does deserve it, Madam. Common service
Is fit for hinds, and the reward proportioned
To their conditions. Therefore look not on me
As a follower of your fathers fortunes, or
One that subsists on yours, you frown I my service
Merits not this aspect.

Which of my savo^rs,
I might say bounties, hath begot, and nourished
This more then rude presumption? since you had
An itch to try your desperate valour, wherefore
Went you not to the war? could thou suppose
My innocence could ever fall so low,
As to have need of thy rash sword to guard it
Against malicious slander? O how much
Those Ladies are deceived and cheated, when
The clearness and integrity of their actions
Do not defend themselves, and stand secure
On their own bases? Such as in a colour
Of seeming service give protection to 'em,
Betray their own strengrhes. Malice scorned, puts out
It self, but argued, gives a kind of credit
To a false accusation. In this
This your most memorable service, you believed
You did me right, but you have wronged me more
In your defence of my undoubted honour,
Then false Fulgentio could.

I am sorry, What
Was so well intended, is so ill received,
Yet under your correction you wished
Bertoldo had been present.

True I did:
But he and you, Sir, are not parallells,
Nor must you think your self so.

I am what
You'll please to have me.

If Bertoldo had
Punished Fugentio's insolence, it had shown
His love to her, whom in his judgement he
Vouchsafe to make his wife. A height I hope
Which you dare not aspire to. The same actions
Suit not all men alike: but I perceive
Repentance in your looks. For this time leave me
I may forgive, perhaps forget your folly,
Conceal yourself till this storm be blown over.
You will be sought for, yet for my estate
Can hinder it, shall not suffer in my sevice.

This is something yet, tho I mist the mark I shot at.

This Gentleman is of a noble temper.
And I too harsh, perhaps in my reproof,
Was I not Clarinda?

I am not to censure
Your actions Madame: but there are a thousand
Ladies, and of good fame, in such a cause.
Would be proud of such a servant.

It may be;
Let me offend in this kind. Why uncalled for?

The Signiors, Madame, Gasparo and Anthonio,
(Selected friends of the renowned Bertoldo)
Pu^ a shore this morning.

Without him?

I think so.

Never think more then.

They have been at Court.
Kissed the Kings hand; and there first duties done
To him, appear ambitions to tender
To you their second service.

Wait 'em hither.
Fear do not rack me, reason, now if ever,
Haste with thy aid, and tell me such a wonder,
As my Bertoldo is, with such care fashioned,
Must not, nay cannot, in hev'ns providence,
So soon miscarry; pray you forbear, ere you
Take the priveledge, as strangers to salute me,
(Excuse my manners) make me first und^rstaud,
How it is with Bertoldo?

The relation
Will not I fear deserve your thanks.

I wish
Some other should inform you.

^he dead?
You see, though with some fear, I dare enquire it.

Dead! Would that were the worst, ^ debt were paid then,
Kings in their birth owe nature.

Is there ought
More terrible then death?

Yes to a spirit
Like his. Cruel imprisonment, and that
Without the hope of freedom.

You abuse me,
The royal King cannot in love to virtue,
(Though all springs of affection were dri'd up)
But pay his ran^ome.

When you know what 'tis
You will think otherwise; No less will do it
Then fifty thousand crowns.

A pretty sum,
The price waigh'd, with the purchase, 50. thousand?
To the King 'tis nothing. He that can spare more
To his minion for a masque, cannot but ransom
Such a brother at a million, you wrong
The Kings magnificence.

In your opinion,
But 'tis most certain. He does not alone
In himself refuse to pay it, but forbids
All other men.

Are you sure of this?

You may read
The edict to that purpose, published by him,
That will resolve you.

Possible! pray you stand off,
I^ I do not mutter treason to my self
My heart will break; yet I will not curse him,
He is my king. The news you have delivered,
Makes me weary of your company, we'll salu^e
When we meet next. I'll bring you to the door.
Nay pray yo^ no more ^complements.

One thing more
And that's substantial. Let your Adorni.
Look to himself.

The king is much incensed
Against him for Fulgentio.

As I am
For yuor slowness to depart

Farewell swoet Lady.

O more then impious times! when not alone
Subordinate Ministers of justice are
Corrupted, and seduced, but kings themselves,
(The greater wheels by which the le^ser move)
Are broken or disjonted; could it be else
A king, to sooth his politic ends, should so far
Fo^sake his honour, as at once to break
Th'Adamant chains of nature and religion,
To bind up Atheism, as a defence
To his dark counsels? will it ever be
That to deserve too much is dangerous,
And virtue, when too eminent a crime?
Must she serve fortune still? or when stripped of
Her gay, and glorious favours, loose the beauties
Of her own natural shape? O my Bertoldo!
Thou only Sun in honours Sphere, how soon
Art thou eclipsed and darkened! not the nearness
Of blood prevailing on the king; nor all
The benefits to the general good dispensed
Gaining a retribution! But that
To owe a courtesy to a simple Virgin
Would take from the deserving, I find in me
Some sparks of fire, which fanned with honours breath
Might rise into a flame, and in men darken
Their usurped splendour. H^! my aim is high,
And for the honour of my sex to fall so,
Can never prove inglorious. 'Tis resolved:
Call in Adorni.

I am happy in
Such employment, Madam.

He's a man,
I know that at a reverend distance loves me,
A^d such are ever faithful: What a Sea
Of melting ice I walk on! what strange censures
Am I to undergo! but good intent^
Deride all future rumours.

I obey
Your summons, Madam.

Leave the place Clarinda,
One woman, in a secret of such weight,
Wisemen may think too much, nearer Adorni.
I warrant it with a smile.

I cannot ask
Safer protection, what's your will?

To doubt
Your ready desire to serve me, or prepare you
With the repetition of former merits,
Would in my diffidence wrong you. But I will
And without circumstance, in the trust that I
Impose upon you, free you from suspicion.

I foster none of you.

I know you do not.
You are Adorni by the love you owe me.

The surest conjuration.

Take me with you,
Love borne of duty, but advance no further,
You are Sir as I laid to do me service,
To undertake a task, in which your faith,
^udgement, discretion, in a word, your all
That's good, must be engaged, nor must you study
In ^he execution, but what may make
For the ends I aim at.

They admit no rivals.

You answer well, you have heard of Bertoldo's
Cap^ivity? and the kings neglect? the greatness
Of his ransom, fifty thousand crowns, Adorni,
Two parts of my estate.

To what tends this?

Yet I so love the gentleman (for to you
I will confess my weaknesses) that I purpose
Now, when he is forsaken by the king,
And his own hopes to ransom him, and receive him
Into my bosom as my lawful husband,
Why change you colour

'Tis in wonder of
Your virtue, Madam.

You must therefore to
Si^na for me, and pay to Gonzaga
This ransom for his liberty, you shall
Have bills of exchange along with you. Let him swear
A solemn contract to me, for you must be
My principal witness, if he should. But why
Do I entertain these jealousies? you will do this?

Faithfully, Madam. But not live long after

One thing I had forgot. Besides his freedom
He may want accommodations, furnish him
According to his birth. And from Camiola
Deliver this kiss, printed on your lips
Sealed on his hand! you shall not see my blushe^,
I'll instantly dispatch you.

I am half
Hanged out of the way already, was there ever
Poor lover so employed against himself
To make way for his rival? I must do it,
Nay more, I will. If loyalty can find
Recompense beyond hope, or imagination
Let it fall on me in the other world,
As a reward, for in this I dare not hope it.

YOu have seized upon the Citadel, and disarmed
All that could make resistance

Hunger had
Done that before we came; nor was the soldier
Compel^'d to seek for prey the famished wretches,
In hope of mercy, as a sacrifice offered
All that was worth the taking.

You proclaimed,
On pain of death, no violence should be offe^'d
To any woman.

But it needed not,
For famine had so humbled 'em and took off
The care of their sexes honour, that there was not
So coy a bea^y in the town, but would
For half a mouldy biscuit sell her self
To a poor besognion, and without shrieking

Where is the Duke of ^rbin.

Under guard,
As you directed

See the Soldiers set.
In rank, and file, and as the Du^chesse passes
Bid 'em veil their ensigns, and charge 'em on their lives
Not to cry whores.

The devil cannot fright 'em
From their military licence, though they know
They are her subjects, and will part with being,
To do her service; yet since she is a woman,
They will touch at her britch with their tongues, and that is all
That they can hope for.

O the devil! they are at it.
Hell, stop, their bawling throats; again! make up
And cudgel them into jelly.

To no purpose,
Though their mouths were there,
They would have the same name for 'em.

I Do beseech your high^esse not to ascribe
To the want of discipline, the barbarous rudeness
Of the souldie^ in his profanation of
Your sacred name, and virtues

No, Lord General,
I have heard my father say oft, 'twas a custom,
Usual in the camp, nor are they to be punished
For words, that have in fact deserved so well.
Let the one excuse the other.

Excellent Princess!

But for these aids from Sicily sent against us
To blast our ^pring of conquest in the bud:
I cannot find, my Lord Ambassador,
How we should entertaine't but as a wrong.
With purpose to detain us from our own.
How ever the King endeavours in his letters
To mitigate the affront.

Your grace hereafter
May hear from me such strong assurances
Of his unlimited desires to serve you,
As will, I hope, drown in forgetfulness
The memory of what's past.

We shall take time
To search the depth of't further, and proceed
As our counsel shall direct us.

We present you
With the keys of the City, all lets are removed,
Your way is smooth and easy, at your feet
Your proudest enemy falls.

We thank your valoures
A victory without blood is twice achieved,
And the disposure of it to us tendered,
The greatest honour, worthy captains thanks.
My love extends it self to all

Make way there.

Tis here determined (great examples armed
With arguments produced to make it good)
That neither tyrants, nor the wrested laws;
The peoples ^ranticke rage, sad ex^le, want,
Nor that which I endure, captivity,
Can do a wise man any injury:
Thus Seneca, when he wrote it, thought. But then
Fecliity courted him; his wealth exceeding
A private man's happy in the em^races
Of his chaste wife Paulina,; his house ^ull
Of childr, enclyents, servants, flattering friends
Soothing his lip-positions, and created
Prince of the Senate, by the general voice,
As his pupil news suffrage: then no doubt
H^ held, and did believe this^ But no sooner
The Princes frowns, and iealosies had throw'n him
Out of securities lap, and a centurion
Had off^r'd him what choice of death he pleased,
But told him dye he must: when straight the armour
Of his so boasted fortitude, fell off
Complaining of his frailty. Can it then
Be censured womanish weakness in me, if
Thus clogged with irons, and the period
To close up all calamities, denied me,
(Which was presented Senica) I wish
I ne'er had being, at least, never knew
What happiness was, or argue with heavens justice?
Tea^ing my locks, and in defiance throwing
Dust in the air? or falling on the ground, thus
With my nails, and teeth to dig a grave or rend
The bowels of the earth, my stepmother,
And not a natural parent? or thus practise
To dye, and as I were insensible,
Believe I had no motion

There he is:
I'll not enquire by whom his ransome's paid
I am satisfied that I have it: nor allege
One reason to excuse his cruel usage,
As you may interpret it, let it su^fice
It was my will to have it so, he is yours now,
Dispose of him as you please

How ever I hate him,
As one preferred before me, being a man,
He does deserve my pity. Sir, he sl^epes:
Or is he dead? would he were a Saint in heaven;
'Tis is all the hurt I wish him. But was not
Borne o such happiness. No he breaths, come near,
A^d if '^ be possi^le, without his f^eling
T^ke off his yrons^ so, now leave ^s private
He does begin to stir, and as transported
With a joyful dream, how he stares! and feels his legg^s,
As yet uncertain, whether it can be
True or fantastical.

Ministers of mercy
Mock not calamity. Ha! 'tis no vision!
Or if it be, the happiest that ever
Appeared to sinful flesh! who's here! His face
Speaks him Adorni! but some glorious Angel
Concealing its divinity in his shape,
Hath done this miracle, it being not an act
For wolvish man. Resolve me, if thou look for
Bent knees in adoration?

O forbear Sir,
I am Adorni, and the instrument
Of your deliverance; but the benefit
You owe another.

If he has a name,
As soon as spoken, 'tis writ on my heart,
I am his bond^man.

To the shame of men,
This great act is a woman's.

The whole sex
For her s^ke must be deified. How I wander
In my imagination, yet cannot
Guess who this Phoenix should be!

'Tis Camiola.

Pray you sp^ake't again, there's music in her name
Once more I pray you Sir.

Camiola,
The Maid of honour,

Cursed Atheist that I was,
Only to doubt it could be any other,
Since she alone in the abstract of her self,
Tha^ small, but ravishing substance comprehends
What ever (...), or can be wished, in the
I^dea of a woman. O what service,
Or sacrifice of duty can I pay her!
I^ not to live, and dye her charities slave,
Which is resolved already.

She expects not
Such a dominion ore you: yet ere I
Deliver her demands, give me your hand:
On this, as she enjoined me, with my lips
I print her love and service by me sent you,

I am orewhelm'd with wonder!

You must now
(Which is the sum of all that she desires)
By a solemn contract bind your self, when she
Requires it as a debt, due for your freedom
To marry her.

This does engage me further,
A payment! an increase of obligation!
To marry her! 'twas my uil ultra ever!
The end of my ambition! O that now
The holy man, she present, were prepared
To join our hands, but with that speed, my heart
Wishes, mine eyes might see her.

You must swear this.

Swear it? Collect all oaths, and imprecations
Whose least breach is damnation, and those
Ministered to me in a form more dreadful,
Set heaven, and hell before me, I will take 'em:
False to Camiola? Never. Shall I now
Begin my vows to you?

I am no Church-man,
Such a one must file it on record, you are free,
And that you may appear like to your self
(For so she wished) her's gold with which you may
Redeem your trunks and servants, and what ever
Of late you lost. I have found out the Captain
Whose spoil they were. His name is Roderigo.

I know him.

I have done my parts.

So much Sir
As I am ever yours for it, now me thinks
I walk in air! divine Camiola,
But words cannot express thee. I'll build to thee
An altar in my soul, on which I'll offer
A still increasing sacrifice of duty.

What will become of me now is apparent!
Whether a poniard, or a halter be
The nearest way to hell (for I must thither,
After I have killed my self) is somewhat doubtful?
This Roman resolution of selfe-murther,
Will not hold water, at the high Tribunal,
When it comes to be argued; my good Genius
Prompts me to this consideration. He
That kills himself, to avoid mis^ry, fears it,
And at the best shows but a bastard valour,
This lifes a fort co^mitted to my trust,
Which I must not yield up, till it be forced,
Nor will I: He's not valiant that dares die,
But he that boldly bears calamity.

A Seat here for the Duke. It is our glory
To overcom with courtesies, not rigour;
To Lordly Roman, who held it the height
Of humane happiness, to have kings and Queenes
To wait by his triumphant chariot wheels
In his insulting pride, deprived himself
Of drawing near the nature of the gods,
Best known for such, in being merciful,
Yet give me leave, but still with gentle language,
And with the freedom of a ^riend to tell you,
To seek by force, what courtship could not win,
was not harsh, and never taught in loves mild school.
Wise Poets fain that Venus coach is draw'n
By doves, and sparrows, not by bears, and tigers.

I spare the application.
In my fortune,
Heavens justice hath confirmed it, yet great Lady,
Since my offence grew from excess of love,
And not to be resisted, having paid too,
With the loss of liberty, the forfeiture
Of my presumption, in your clemency
It may find pardon

You shall have just cause
To say it hath. The charge of the long siege
Defraid, and the loss my subjects have sustained
Made good, since so far I must deal with caution,
You have your liberty

I could not hope for gentler conditions.

My Lord Gonzaga.
Since my coming to Siena, I have heard much
Of your prisoner; brave Bert^ldo.

Such ^n one, Madam, I had.

And have still, Sir, I hope.

Your hopes deceive you. He is ransom'd^ Madame,

By whom, I pray you, Sir.

You had best enquire
Of your intelligencer. I am no informer.

I like not this.

He is, as 'tis reported,
A goodly gentleman, and of noble parts,
A brother of your order.

He was, Madam,
Till he against his oath wronged you, a princess,
Which his religion bound him from.

Great minds
For trial of their valours oft maintain
Quarrels that are unjust, yet without malice,
And such a fair construction I make of him.
I would see that brave enemy;

My duty
Commands me to seek for him.

Pray you do:
And bring him to our presence.

I must blast
His entertainment; may it please your excellency,
He is a man debauched, and for his riots
Cast off by the King my Master, and that, I hope, is
A crime sufficient

To you his subjects,
That like as your king likes

But not to us;
We must weigh with our own scale. This is he, ^are!
How soon mine eye had found him! what a port
He bears! how well his bravery becomes him!
A prisoner! nay, a princly suitor rather!
But I am too sudden.

Madame, 'twas his suite,
Unsent for, to present his service to you,
Ere his departure.

With what Majesty
He bears himself!

The devil I think supplies him,
Ransomed, and thus rich too!

You ill deserve
The favour of our hand; we are no^ well,
Give us more air.

What sudden qualm is this?

That lifted yours against me.

Thus once more,
I sue for pardon

Sure his lips are poisoned,
And through th^se veins, force passage to my heart
Which is already ^eaz'd upon.

I wait, Madam,
To know what your commands are; my designs
Exact me in another place.

Before
You have our licence to depart; if manners,
Civility of manners cannot teach you
T'attend our leisure, I must tell you, Sir,
That you are still our prisoner, ^or had you
Commission to free him.

How's this, Madam?

You were my substitute, and wanted power
Without my warrant to dispose of him.
I will pay back his ransom ten times over,
Rather then quit my interest.

This is
Against the law of arms.

But not of love:
Why, hath your entertainment, Sir, been such
In your restraint, that with the wings of fear
You would fly from it?

I know no man, Madame,
Enamoured of his fetter^, or delighting
In cold or hunger, or that would in reason
Prefer straw in a d^ngeon, before
A down bed in a Palace.

How, come nearer;
Was his usage such?

Yes, and it had been worse,
Had I foreseen this.

O thou mis-sh^p'd monster!
In thee it is confirmed, that such as have
No share in na^ures bounties, know no pity
To such as have 'em^ Look on him with my eyes,
And answer then, whether this were a man,
Whose ^heekes of lovely fullness should be made
A prey to meagre famine? or these eyes
Whose every glance store Cupids empti'd quiver,
To be dimmed with tedious watching? or these lips,
These rudie lips, of whose fresh colour, cherries
And roses were but copies, should grow pale
For want of Nectar? or these legs that bear
A burden of more worth, then is supported
By Atla^ wearied shoulders, should be cramped
With the weight of iron? O I could dwell ever
On this description!

Is this in di^ision
Or pity of me?

In your charity
Believe me innocent. Now you are my prisoner
You shall have fairer quarter, you will shame
The place where you have been, should you now leave it
Before you are recovered. I'll conduct you
To more convenient lodgings, and it shall be
My care to cherish you. Repine who dare;
It is our will. You'll follow me?

To the centre,
Such a Sybilla guiding me.

Who speaks first?

We stand, as we had seen Medusas head!

I know not what to think, I am so amazed!

Amazed! I am thunderstrooke!

We are enchanted,
And this is some illusion.

Heaven forbid!
In dark despair, it shows a beam of hope.
Contain thy joy, Adorni.

Such a Princess,
And of so long experienced reservednesse
Break forth, and on the sudden, into flashes
Of more then doubted looseness.

They come again,
Smiling, as I live: His arm circ^ing her wast:
I shall run mad: Some fury hath possessed her.
If I speak, I may be blasted. H^, I'll ^u^bl^
A prayer or two, and cross my self, and then
Though the devil fart fire, have at him.

Let not, Sir,
The violence of my passions nourish in you
An ill opinion; or grant my carriag^
Out of the rode, and ga^be of private women,
'Tis still done with decorum. As I am
A Princess, what I do, is above cens^re,
And to be imitated.

Gracious Madam,
Vouchsafe a little pause, for I am so r^pt
Beyond my self, that 'till I have collected
My scattered faculties, I cannot tender
My resolution.

Consider of it,
I will not be long from you,

Pray I cannot!
This cursed object strangles my devotion!
I must speak, or I burst. Pray you fair Lady,
If you can in courtesy, direct me to
The cha^te Aurelia.

Are you blind^? who are we^?

Another kind of thing. Her blood was governed
By her discretion, and not ruled her reason^
The reverence and Maj^sty of Iun^
Shined in her looks, and coming to the camp,
Appeared a second Palla^. I can see
No such divinities in you. If I
Without offence may speak my thoughts, you are,
As it were, a wanton H^len.

Good, ere long
You shall know me better.

Why, if you are Aurelia^
How shall I dispose of the Soldier?

May it please you
To hasten my dispatch?

Prefer your s^ites
Unto Bertoldo, we will give him hearing,
And you'll find him your best advocate.

This is rare!

What are we come to?

Grown up in a moment
A favourite!

He does take state already.

No, no, it cannot be, yet but Ca^i^la,
There is no stop between me and a crown,
Then my ingratitude! a sin in which
All sins are comprehended! Aide me virtue,
Or I am lost.

May it please your excellence
Second me, Sir.

Then m^ so horrid oaths,
And hell. deep i^precations made against it.

The king your brother will thank you for t^advacment
Of his affairs

And yet who can hold out
Against such batteries, as her power and greatness^
Raise up against my weak defences!

Sir,
Do you dream waking, Slight, she's here again.

Walks she on woollen fee^e!

You dwell too long
In your deliberation, and come
With a cripples pace to that which you should ^ly to

It is confessed, yet why should I to win
From you, that hazard all to my poor nothing,
By false play send you o^f a looser from me?
I'am already too too much engaged
To the king my brothers anger; and who knows
But that his doubts, and politic fears, should you
Make me his equal, may draw war upon
Your ^rritories, were that breach made up
I should with joy embrace, what now I fear
To touch but with due reverence.

That hind^rance
Is easily removed. I owe the king
For a royal visit^ which I straight will pay him,
And having first reconciled you to his favour,
A dispensation shall meet with us,

I am wholly yours.

On this book seal it.

What hand and lip too, then the barga^ne's sure,
You have no employment for me?

Yes Gonzaga,
Provide a royal ship.

A ship? Saint Iohn,
Whither are we bound now?

You shall know hereafter,
My lord your pardon, for my too much trenching upon your patience.

Camiola.

How do you

Indisposed, but I attend you.

The heavy curse that waits on perjury,
And foul ingratitude, pursue thee ever.
Yet why from me this? In this breach of faith
My loyalty finds rew^rd! what poisons him
Proves Mithridate to me! I have performed
All she commanded punctually, and now
In the clear mirror of my truth, she may
Behold his fal^ehood. O that I had wings
To b^are me to Palermo! This once known,
Must change her love into a just disdain,
And work her to compassion of my pain.

Undone! undone! poor I that meanwhile was
The top and ridge of my house, am on the sudden
Turned to the pittifullest animal
Of the lineage of the Sylli^!

What's the matter?

The king! break girdle, break!

Why? what of him?

Hearing how far you doted on my person,
Growing envio^s of my happiness, and knowing
His brother, nor his favourite Fulgentio,
Could get a sheepe^ eye from you, I being present,
Is come himself a suitor, with the awl
Of his authority to bore my nose,
And take you from me, Oh, oh, oh.

Do not roar so;
The king!

The king! yet loving Sylli is not
So sorry for his own, as your misfortune,
If the king should carry you, or you bear him,
What a looser should you be? He can but make you
A queen, and what a simp^e thing is that
To the being my lawful spouse. The world can never
Affoord you such a hu^band.

I believe you,
But how are you sure the king is so inclined?
Did not you dream this?

With these eyes I saw him
Dismiss his train, and lightn^g from his co^ch,
Whispering Fulgentio in the ear^.

If so
I guess the business

It can be no other
But to give me the bob, that being a matter
Of maine importance, yonder they a^e, I dare not
Be seen, I am so desperate, if you forsake me,
Send me word that I may provide a willow ghyrlond
To wear when I drown my self. O Sylli, o Sylli!

It will be wo^th your pains Sir to observe
The constancy and brav^ry of her spirit,
Though great men tremble at your frowns, I dare
Hazard my head, your majesty set off
With terror, cannot fright her.

May she answer
My expectation.

There she is.

My knees thus
Bent to the ear^ (while my vows are sent upward
For the safety of my Sover^igne) pay the duty
Due for so great an honour, in this favour
Done to your humblest hand-maid.

You mistake me,
I come not (Lady) that you may report,
T^e king to do you honour, made your house
(He being there) his court, but to correct
Your stubborn disobedience. A pardon
For that, could you obtain it, were well purchased
With this humility.

A pardon Sir?
'Till I am conscio^s of an offence.
I will not wrong ^y innocence to beg one,
What is my crime Sir?

Look on him I favour,
By you sco^n'd and negelected.

Is that all Sr.

No minion, though that were too much. How can you
Answer the setting on your desperate bravo
To murder him?

With your leave, I must not kneel Sir.
Whi^e I reply to this: But thus rise up
In my defence, and tell you as a man
(since when you are ^njust, the deity
Which you may challenge as a King, part^ from yo^
'Twas never read in holy writ, or moral,
That subject^ on their loyalty were obliged
To love their Sovereigns vices, your grace, Sir,
To such an undeserver is no virtue.

What ^hinke you now Sir?

Say you should love wine,
You being the King, and c^se I am your subject,
Must I beever dr^nke? Tyrants, not King^
By violence, from humble vassails force
The liberty of their s^les. I co^ld not love him^
And to compel a^ection, as I take it,
Is not found in your prer^ative.

Excellent virgin!
How I admire her confidence^

He complains
Of wrong done him: but ^e no mo^ a King,
Unless you do me right. Bu^ne yo^r decrees,
And of ^r laws and statutes make a fire
To th^we^e froz^ nu^e^e of deli^quent^,
If he escape unpun^sh'd. Do your ^dicts
Call it death in any man that breake^ into
Another house to rob hi^, though of trifles^
And shall Fulg^ y^ur Fulgentio live?
Who hath committed more then sacrilege
In the pollution of my clear fame
By his malicious slanders^

Have you done this?
Answer truly on your life.

In the heat of blood
Some such thing I reported.

Out of my sight,
For I vow, if by t^ue pen^t^nce thou win n^
This injured L^dy to sue out thy pardo^,
Thy g^ve is dug already.

By my own folly
I have made a fair hand of't,

You shall know Lady
While I w^e a crown, justice ^hall use her sword
To cut offenders o^f, though nearest to ^s.

I, now you sh^w whose Deputy you are,
I now I bath your fe^t with tears, it cannot
Be censured superstition.

You must rise.
Rise in our favour, and protection ever:

Happy are ^u^jects^ when the prince is s^ill
Guided by justice, not his passionate will.

YOu see how tender I am of the q^iet
And peace of your a^fection, and what great ones
I put off ^n y^r f^vour.

Yo^ do wisely.
Exceeding wisely! and when I have said,
I thank you for'^, be happy^

And good reason,
In having such a blessing.

When yo^ h^ve it,
Bat the bait is not yet ready. Stay ^he time,
While I triumph by my self, King, by your leave,
I have wiped your royal nose, without a napkin,
You may cry willow, willow, for your brother,
I'll only say go by; for my fine favourite,
He may gra^, where b^ (...), ^is (...) may wate^
Like a puppies ore a (...) p^t, while Sylli
Out of his ^wo-leav'd cherry-stone dish drinks Nectar^
I cannot hold out any longer; he^v'n forgive me,
'Tis not tho first oath, I have broke, I must take
A little for a preparative.

By no means.
If you forswear your self we shall not prosper.
I'll rather loose my longing.

Pret^y soul!
How c^r^ull it is of ^e! let m^ b^sse yet
Thy little dai^ty foot ^or't: that I ^m sure
Is out of my oath.

Why, if thou can dispense with it
So fa^e, I'll not be scrupulous; such a favour
My amorous shoomak^r ste^les^

O most rare leather!
I do begin at the lowest, but in time
I may g^ow higher.

Fie, you dwell too long there^
Rise, preth^ rise^

O I am up already.

How I abuse my hours! what news with thee now?

Off with that gown, 'tis mine, mine by your promise
Signior Adore. is r^turn'd! now upon entrance;
Off with it, off with it, Madam.

Be not so hasty,
Wh^n I go to bed 'tis thine.

You have my grant too;
But do you hear Lady, though I give way to this,
You must her^after ask my leave b^fore
You part with things of moment.

Very good,
When I am yours, I will be governed.

Sweet obedience!

You are well returned.

I wish that the success
Of my service had deserved it.

Lives Bertoldo?

Yes, and ^eturn'd with safety.

'Tis not then
In the power of fate to ^dde ^o, or take from
My perfect happiness: and yet he sho^ld
Have made me his first visit. Adore. So I think too
But he

D^rst not appear, I being present,
That's his excuse, I warrant you.

Speak, where is he?
With whom? who hath d^erv'd mo^e from him? o^
Can be of equal merit? I in this
Do not except the King.

He's at the Palace
With the Du^hesse o^ Siena. One co^ch brought 'em hither.
Without a third. He's very gracious with h^r,
You may conceive the rest.

My jealous fears
Make me to apprehend.

Pray you dismiss
Signior wisdom, and i'll make relation to yo^
Of the particulars.

Servant, I would have you
To haste unto the Court.

I will out-runne
A foote-man for your pleasure.

There observe
The Duchess train and entertainment.

Fear not,
I will discover all that is of w^ight
To the liveries of her Pages, and her fo^temen.
This is fit employment for me.

Gracious with
The Duchess! sure you said so?

I will use
All possible brevity to inform you, Madam,
Of what was trusted to me, and discharged
With faith and loyal duty.

I believe it^
Yo^ ransomed him, and supplied his wants imagine
That is already spoken; and-what vows
Of service he made to me is apparent;
His joy of me, and wonder too perspicuous;
Does not your ^ry end so?

Would the end
Had answered the beginning, in a word,
Ingratitude, and perjury at the height
Cannot express him.

Take heed.

Truth is armed
And can defend it self. It must out, Madam.
I saw, the presence full, the amorous Duchess
Kiss and embrace him, on his part accepted
With equal ardor, and their willing hands
No sooner joined, but a remove was published,
And put in execution.

The proofs are
Too pregnant. O Bertoldo!

He's not worth
Your sorrow, Madam.

Tell me, when you saw this
Did not you grieve as I do now to hear it?

His precipice from goodness raising mine,
And serving as a foil to set my faith off,
I had little reason.

In this you confess
The divellish malice of your disposition.
As you were a man, you stood bound to lament it,
And not in flattery of false your hopes
To glory in it: when good men pursue
The path marked out by virtue, the blessed Saints
With joy look on it, and Seraphique Angels
Clap their celestial wings in heavenly plaudits,
To be a scene of grace so well presented,
The fiends and men made up of envy mourning;
Where as now on the contrary as far
As their divinity can partake of passion,
With me they weep, beholding a fair Temple
Built in Bertoldo's loyalty turned to ashes
By the flames of his inconstancy, the damned
Rejoicing in the object: 'Tis not well
In you Adorni.

What a temper dwells
In this rare Virgin, can you pity him
That hath shown none to you?

I must not be
Cruel by his example, you perhaps,
Expept now I should seek recovery
Of what I have lost by tears, and with bent knees
Beg his compassion. No; my towering virtue
From the assurance of my merit scorns
To stoop so low. I'll take a nobler course,
And confident in the justice of my cause,
The King his brother, and new M^stresse, judges,
Ravish him from her arms, you have the contract
In which he swore to marry her?

'Tis here Madam.

He shall be then against his will my husband,
And when I have him, I'll so use him, doubt not,
But that your honesty being unquestioned,
This writing with your testimony clears all.

And buries me in the dark mists of error.

I'll presently to Court, pray you give order
For my caroch.

A ca^t for me were sitter
To hurry me to the gallows

O false men!
Inconstant! perjured! my good Angel help me
In these my extremities!

If you ever will see brave sight,
Lose it not now. Bertoldo, and the Duchess
Are presently to be married. There's such pomp
And preparation.

If I marry, 'tis
This day or never.

Why with all my heart,
Though I break this, I'll keep the next oath I make
A^d then it is quit.

Follow me to my Cabinet,
You know my confessor, Father Paulo?

Yes. Shall he
Do the feat for us?

I will give in writing
Directions to him, and attire my self
Like a Virgin-bride, and something I will do
That shall deserve men's praise, and wonder too.

And I to make all know, I am not shallow
Will have my points of Cuechineale and yellow.

HAd our division been greater, Madam,
Your clemency, the wrong being done to you
In pardon of it, l^ke the rod of concord
Must make a perfect union, once more
With a brotherly affection we receive you
Into our favour. Let it be your study
Hereafter to deserve this blessing, far
Beyond your merit.

As the Princess grace
To me is without limit, my endeavours
With all obsequiousness to serve her pleasures
Shall know no bounds, nor will I being made
Her husband, forget the duty that
I owe her as a servant.

I expect not
But fair equality, since I well know
If that superiority be d^e
'Tis not to me, When you are made my consor^
All the prerogatives of my high birth cancelled
I'll practise the obedience of a wis^,
And freely pay it. Queenes themselves, if they
Make choice of their inferiors, only aiming
To feed their sensual appetites, and to reign
Over their husbands, in some kind commit
Authorised whoredom, nor will I be guilty
In my intent of such a crime.

This done,
As it is promised, Madam, may well stand for
A president to great women: but when once
The griping h^nger of desire is cloyed,
(And the poor fool advanced, brought on his kn^
Most of your Eagle breed, I'll not say all
(Ever excepting you) challenge again,
What in hot blood they parted from.

You are ever.
An enemy of our sex, but you I hope Sir
Have better thoughts.

I dare not entertain
An ill one of your goodness.

To my power
I will enable him to prevent all danger
Envy can raise against your choice. One word m^re
Touching the Articles.

In you alone
Lie all my hopes, you can or kill or save me,
But pity in you, will become you better,
(Though I confess in justice 'tis denied me)
Then too much rigour.

I will make your peace
As far as it lies in me, but must first
Labour to ri^ht my self.

Or add or alter
What you think fit. In him I have my all,
Heaven make me thankful for him.

On to the Temple

Stay royal Sir, and as you are a King
Erect one here, in doing justice to
An injured maid.

How's this?

O I am blasted!

I have given so^ proof, sweet Lady, of my promptness
To do you right, you need not therefore doubt me,
And rest assured, that this great work dispatch'd,
You shall have audience and satisfaction
To all you can demand.

To do me justice
Exacts your present care, and can admit
Of no delay. If ever my cause be heard
In favour of your brother, you go^ on Sir,
Your sceptre cannot right me. He's the man,
The guilty man, whom I accuse, and you
Stand bound in duty, as you are Supreme,
To be impartial. Since you are a Judge,
As a Delinquent, look on him, and not
As on a brother; justice painted blind
Inferres, her Ministers a^e obliged to hear
The cause and truth, the I^dge determine of it,
And not swayed, or by favour, or affection,
By a false gloss, or wrested comment alter
The true intent, and letter of the law.

Nor will I Madam,

You seem troubled, Sir,

His colour changes too.

The alteration
Grows from his guilt. The goodness of my cause
Begets such confidence in me, that I bring
No hired tongue to plead for me, that with gay
Rhetorical flourishes may palli^e
That, which stripped naked, will appear deformed.
I stand here, mine own advocate; and my ^ruth
Delivered in the plainest language, will
Make good it self, nor will I, if the King
Give suffrage to it, but admit of you,
My greatest enemy, and this stranger Prince,
To sit assistants with him.

I ne'er wronged you.

In your knowledge of the injury, I believe it,
Nor will you in your justice, when you are
Acquainted with my interest in this man
Which I lay claim to.

Let us take our seats,
What is your title to him?

By this contract
Sealed solemnly before a reveren'd man,
I challenge him for my husband.

Ha. was I
Sent for the Friar, for this? O Sylli! Sylli!
Some cordial, or I faint.

This writing is
Authentical.

But done in heat of blood,
(Charmed by her flatteries, as no doubt he was)
To be dispensed with.

Add this, if you please,
The distance and disparity between
Their births and fortunes.

What can inocence hope for
When such as sit her jugdes, are corrupted!
D^sparity of birth, or fortune urge you?
Or ^yren charms? or at his best in me,
Wants to deserve him? Call some few days back,
And as he was, consider him, and you
Must grant him my inferior. Imagine
You saw him now in fetters with his honour,
His liberty lost; with her black wings despair
Circling his miseries, and his Gonzaga.
Trampling on his afflictions; the great sum
Proposed for his redemption; the King
Forbidding payment of it; this near kinsmen,
With his protesting followers, and friends,
Falling off from him; by the whole world forsaken;
Dead to all hope, and buried in the grave
Of his calamities, and then weigh duly
What she deserved (whose merits now are doubted)
That as his better Angel in her bounties
Appeared unto him, his great ransom pa^d,
His wants, and with a prodigal hand supplied,
Whether then being my manumised slave,
He owed not himself to me?

Is this true?

In his silence 'tis acknoledg'd

If you want
A witne^e to this purpose, I'll depose it:

If I have dwel^ too long on my deserving^
To this unthankful man, pray you pardon me,
The cause required it. And though now I add
A little in my painting to the life
His barbarous ingratitude, to deter,
Others from imitation, let it meet with
A fair interpretation. This se^pent,
Frozen to numnesse, was no sooner warmed
In the bosom of my pity, and compassion,
But in return, he ruin'de his preserver
The prints the irons had made in his flesh
Still ulcerous; but all that I had done
(My benefits in sand, or water written)
As they had never been, no more remembered.
And on what ground; but his ambitious hopes
To gain this Duchess favour,

Yes, the object,
Look on it better (Lady) may excuse
The charge of his affection.

The object
In wha^? forgive me, modesty, if I say
You look upon your form in the false glass
Of flattery, and selfe^ love, and that dece^ves you,
That you were a Duchess, as I take it, was not
Character'd on your face, and that not seen,
For other feature, make all these that are
Experienced in women, judges of 'em,
And if they are not Parasites, they must grant
For beauty without art, though you storm at it,
I may take ^he righ hand file.

Well said i'faith;
I see fair women on no terms will yield
Priority in beauty.

Down proud heart!
Why do I rise up in defence of that,
Which, in my cherishing of it hath undone me.
No Madam, I recant, you are all beauty,
Goodness, and virtue, and poor I not worthy
As a soil to set you off; enjoy your conquest
But do not tyrannize. Yet as I am
In my lowness from your height, you may look on me,
And in your suffrage to me, make him know
That though to all men else I did appear
The shame and scorn of women, he stands bound
To hold me as her master-piece.

By my life
You have show'n your self of such an abject temper,
So poor, and low conditiou'd, as I grieve for
Your nearness to me.

I am changed in my
Opinion of you Lady, and profess
The virtues of your mind, an ample fortune
For an absolute Monarch.

Since you are resolved
To damn your self, in your forsaking of
Your noble order for a woman, do it
For this. You may search through the world, and meet not
With such another P^oenix.

On the sudden
I feel all fires of love quenched in the water
Of compassion, make your peace; you have
My free consent; for here I do disclaim
All interest in you: and to further your
Desires, fair Maid, composed of worth and honour,
The dispensation procured by me,
Fr^eing Bertoldo from his vow, makes way
To your embraces.

Oh, how have I strayed,
And wilfully, out of the noble tract
Marked me by virtue! 'Till now, I was never
Truly a prisoner; to excuse my late
Captivity, I might allege the malice
Of fortune; you that conquered me confessing
Courage in my defence was no way wanting
But now I have surrendered up my strengths
Into the power of vice, and on my forehead
Branded with mine own hand in capital letters
D^sloyall, and Ungrateful, though barred from
Humane society, and hissed into
Some desert ne'er yet haunted with the curses
Of men and women, sitting as a judge
Upon my guilty self, I must confess
It justly falls upon me, and one tear
Shed in compassion of my sufferings more.
Then I can hope for.

This compunc^ion
For the wrong that you have done me, though you should
Fix h^re, and your true sorrow move no further,
Will in respect I loved once, make these eyes
Two springs of sorrow for you.

In your pity
My cruelty shows more monstrous, yet I am not,
Though most ingratfull, grown to such a height
Of impudence, as in my wishes only
To ask your pardon. If as now I fall
Prostrate before your feet, you will vouchsafe
To act your own revenge, treading upon me
As a viper eating through the bowels of
Your benefits, to whom with liberty
I owe my being, 'twill take from the burden
That now is insupportable.

Pray you rise,
As I wish peace, and quiet to my soul
I do forgive you heartily, yet excuse me:
Though I deny my self a blessing that
By the favour of the Duchess seconded,
With your submission is offered to me
Let not the reason I allege for it grieve you,
You have been false once. I have done. And if
When I am married (as this day I will be)
As a perfect sign of your atonement with me
You wish ^e joy, I will ^eceive it for
Full satisfaction of all obligations
In which you stand bound to me.

I will do it,
And what's more, in despite of sorrow, live
To see my self undone, beyond all hope
To be made up again.

My blood begins
To come to my heart again.

Pray you Signior Syl.
Call in the holy Friar. He's prepared
For finishing the work.

I knew I was
The man. Heaven make me thankful

Who is this?

His Father was the banker of Palermo,
And this the heir of his great wealth, his wisdom
Was not hereditarie.

Though you know me not,
Your Majesty owes me a round Sum, I have
A se^le, or two to witness, yet if you please
To wear my colours, and dance at my wedding^
I'll never sue you.

And I'll grant yo^r suite,

Gracio^s Maddona, Noble, General,
Brave Captains and my quondam rivals we^r 'em
Since I am confident you dare not harbour
A thought, but that way currant.

For my part
I cannot guess the issue.

Do your duty,
And with all speed you can, you may despatch us.

Thus as a principal ornament to the Church
I sea^e her.

How.

So young and so religious.

She has forsook the world.

And Syllie too,
^ shall run mad.

Hence with the fool, proceed Sir

Look on this maid of honour now
Truly honoured in her vow
She pays to heaven, vain delight
By day, or pleasure of, the night,
She no more thinks of this fair hair
(Favours for great kings to wear)
M^w now be shorn. Her rich array
Changed into a homely gray.
The dainties with which she was fed
And her proud flesh pampered,
Must not be tasted, from the spring,
For wine^ cold water we will bring
And with fasting mortify
The feasts of sensuali^y.
Her jewels, beads, and she must look
Not in a glass, but holy book;
To teach her the ne'er erring way
To immortality. O may
She as she purposes to be
A Child new borne to piety,
Persevere in in it, and good men
With Saints and Angels say Amen

This is the marriage! this the port! to which
My vows must steer me, fill my spreading sails
With the pure wind of your devotions for me,
That I may touch the secure haven, where
Eternal happiness keeps her reside n^e,
Temptations to frailty never entering.
I am dead to the world, and thus dispose
Of what I leave behind me, and d^viding
My state into three parts, I thus bequeath it.
The ^rst to the fair Nunnery, to which
I dedicate the last, and better part
Of my frail life; a second portion
To pious uses; and the third to thee
Adorni, for thy true and faithful service.
And ere I mytake lu^ farewell with hope
To find a gran^, may suite to you is that
You wou^d for my sake pardon this young man
And to his merits love him, and no further.

I thus confirm it.

And as ere you hope
Like me to be made happy, I conjure you
To reassume your order; and in fighting
Bravely against the enemies of our faith
Redeem your mortgaged honour.

I restore this
Once more brothers in arms,

I'll live and die so.

To you my pious wishes. And to end
All differences, great Sir I beseech you
To be an arbitrator, and compound
The quarrel, long continuing between
The Duke and Duchess.

I'll take it into
My special care.

I am then at rest, now father
Conduct me where you please.

She well deserves
Her name, t^e Maid of Honour! Mny she stand
To all posterity, a fair example,
For noble Maids to imitate. Since to live
In wealth and pleasure is common; but to part with
Such poisoned baits is rare, there being nothing
Upon this S^oge of life to be commended,
Though well begun, till it be fully ended.


