THe marks and notions extant in each spirit,
Sealed by th'industrious hand of art merit,
Me thinks appear transparent (as the mind
By sense were bounded and might seem confined
In th'externall eye) nor shall our tragic muse,
(If strong hope fail not) need a coynd excuse
But to those marginall notes of yours do bring
(In following nombers from the learned spring)
Matter instructiue to enrich their parts
Where knowledge reigns crowned with it own deserts,
Let such with serious and impartial hearing
Sound sense, quick sight and judgment never erring:
Survey and censure the mineruall frame
Of his elaborate work: and if his name
Merit regard, and you vouchsafe to grace him
With eminent love, or amongst those lawreats place him,
That with the magic of sweet poesy,
Transfer Pernassus into Brittany,
He shall digest the Chaos of his brain,
To tunefull order and acquire a strain,
Near to the music of the heavenly spheres,
To fit Times guard and rawish choicest ears.
FAme and Opinion like the two vvingd cap
On Hermes head, do lift all Poets up:
Some, though deserving, yet abo^e the Sphere
Of true impartial censure, whose tuned ear
Listens to all and can with judgment say,
Others sing well, though Thracian Orpheus play.
Our Muse affects no excellence: if Fame tell
And through her shrill trompe at the Muses well
(Where the thrice trebled bench of learning sits
In strict examination of others wits)
Sound ours, though humbly strains, whose infant growth
Nor dares, nor will, with times hugd darlings quarrel,
Nor stand the lightning with the sacred Laurel)
We rest content: yet thus far may conceit
Carry each labouring Artist, where the weight
Of his ovld task is over, that his tongue
May like a father of his tender young
Speak natures lauguage and not be withstood,
When with our Muse he saith, that This is good.
This Epilogue should have been printed at the end of the book, but there was
no spare place for it.

HOw sweet are things known in their contraries
When only apprehension, and sick thoughts
Foster a greedy longing Amada?

Madame you breath: no covetous hand
Takes the air from you: no contrariety
Bandy's against your rest: as I am modest,
My fathers seeming harsh ungentleness
Is but a misty policy, to be guile some time.
Then be your self^ and Iomiall:

Yet why should I repine,
At this my foret restraint of liberty?
Our life is but a sailing to our death,
Through the worlds Ocean: it makes no matter then
Whether we put into the worlds vast Sea,
Shipped in a Pinasse or an Argosy:

No Matter: when we hope for change of vessels Lady
And in that hope beguile your passions:
Give your sight freedom over the city walls
And see what worthy obiectsmeete your eyes:
See where two Dukes, each like a god of war,
Lye both entrench't against the gates of Florence
To gain your love: on the west side, there's
Ferrara hangs his scarlet ensigns forth
And woos in blood: then from the East behold
In a white ensign filled with stars of gould,
Burns the Venitians love: the morning Sun
Courts not the world more amorously: he as mild
As Mi^has boy doth prove that lou's a child,
Not techy if not wronged. The other like Mars
Hemms in his Venus in his arms of steel.
And vows a conquest: Se where they appear:
Madame your love, which hand for a Dukedom?
Were I an Orator I could praise Ferrara,
He like the marble statue of some God,
Carries command in his proportion,
In him love seems a warrior for the fire,
Of best affection burns in hot desire.

And yet me thinks the smooth Venitian
Should more contenta Venus:
In him love seems as he is, calm and mild,
Pleasing and sportful: things rough and violent
Dye like abortive fruit before perf^ction.
They are pursy and short breathed: th'ardor of true love
Burns in a calm breast: in him affections
Are not like tempests raging: yet of force
Like an even gale of wind to bear loves ship
Unto the port of happiness: his fire
Burns, and consumes no^, but maintain desire.

Give over my claim: that should argue,
A too cold temperature in love: besies
It would disable the Venetian power
Not to make good his challenge: I dare not.

Why she is mine by promise.

I grant, that Borgias her Uncle and Protector
Promised you that which he cannot perform.
But know Ferrara that my claim takes root
And grows upon the promise of the State,
I by the Senate was assured her love,
And on that ground the justice of my cause
Pleads. Thus in arms against the city walls.

Herein you err: for know the Florentine
Dying a Prince powerful and absolute
(Not countermanded by a popular voice
Or by th'ambitious factions of a Senate)
Leaves the Protector in his daughters nonage
Free like himself, and absolute: of power
To promise and perform: on his assurance
Lives my loves right: then were you both
Direct opposers of what I claim, by heaven
And by that influence that made me great
I would pursue my challenge through your bloods.

Give not such passage to your heat my Lord

Then give my power a passage to my Love:

That I demand of you.

And I command:
That without stay you raise your powers
And leave this cities siege unto our arms,
Or what we aimd at them we will turn on you.

Although your power we're equal with your pride
I would dare stay Ferrara, and proclaim
Thy title weak, thy claim litigious:
Mine only just, apparent, righteous.
Yet let not fury so empeach our wisdoms
To jar for her another doth possess,
And make our follies laughter to our foes:
Will then Ferrara make his passions subject
To an indifferency that I shall propound?

If the indifferency you shall propound
Deuides not me from Iulia:

She's the maine claim of both our armed loves.

And with out her there's no indifferency.

You're ^riuolous:
Why know Ferrara, thy prerogative
Extends no further then thy sword can reach:
Then when thy conquests hath confirmed thy will
Thou may capitulate with ^ude commands,
Ti^l when proud Prince, stoup at imperious chance:
For did no other title then my sword
Make my claim righteous: yet the doubtful lot
Cast on the ends of war, carries my fate
Even with thy pride: the Lady as mine own
To show an eminence that over looks thy hope,
I chalendge and aver the right of war
Due to my sword.

Unsheathe it then.

Yes at thy bosom.

What means ^his sudden parley from the walls?

What are the Dukes at odde^?

Hark Madam from the walls --
A sudden parley speaks unto the Dukes

Was that that staid their swords.

I would fain have seen,
how like Esops warrior they could have fought,
For that a third carries away.
Some new devise of policy hath cau^d
This vnexepected change: not long since
I^ was resolved in council to maintain
The siege against the hottest opposition.

Did I not think my fortunes ebb at lowest?
It might amaze me.

My liberty
May soon give notice to you: then lets away:
A Sun may rise to maked a happy day.

To whom speaks Borgias?

Dukes to you both.
The present and unlooked for cause of grief,
That now hath took possession on our breasts,
Cuts of the feeling of all outward fear:
Our private griefs were desperate: did there not
A pubike care of others burden us
We think you wronged, I and the Senate here,
Causes of both the nonsuites of your loves,
Appeal unto remission.

But whether bends your far-fetcht Oratory?
Restore the Lady unto me: and on my honours pawn
I'll free your City from the arms of V^nice.

Senate, and you on whose authority,
And pawn of honour I engagde my love,
Slau'd my affections, and did prostitute
The freedom of my soul to Iulia:
Slight not your wisdoms and your worths in counsel^
To serve the ends of hidden policy:
Make good your words engagde, and as I live
A Prince vnstainde in honour, I will free
Your City from Ferraras hottest fury.

Alas my gracious and renowned Lords,
I grieve to see your passions,
Emptied of th'obiects that ^hey wrought upon:
I am the Ambassador of heavy news,
To you I am sure as heavy as to us.

Speak it.

O it doth press the Organs of my speech,
And like a lethargy doth numb those motions
should give it utterance.

Hold the Protector there from falling.
Some standersby help to unlade his bur^hen.
The Camel else will sink down under it.

Scoff not my gracious Prince: the grief I see^
Will be as heavy on ^hy now light head,
As tis on mine: the Lady whom you love --

Why what of her?

Where is she? speak:

Singing with Angels in the quire of heaven,
The Requiem o^ Saints.

She's dead!

She's dead!

I Lords unto your loves.

O my Loves hard fate.

Dead!

And now my Lords, seeing that she is dead,
For whom you raised these arms against our walls,
I hope your furious angers live no longer.

We are appeasd: Venice I thus salute thee,
and reconcile my fury in thy arms.
S'death dead?

Descend Protector, with her our arms are dead.

I am amazd: possess me patience,
Credulity F^rrara is a virtue,
I believe it: Borgias: oh my sple^ne,
That he should think me so ridiculous,
To fasten any faith on policy,
The stateliest general prop is jealousy,
On all men their actions: I know it not.

Should I think her murdered, or that she still doth live?
And feed some hope by deeming him a villain,
That sooths this sorrowful news into our ears?
I might herein seem politic, and nurse
Some mischief in my bosom for revenge,
Of that wherein I b^t suspect a wrong.
The tricks of State-moules that work under Princes,
Are at the best, but like the vipers young,
That how-so-ere prodigious and hurtful,
To many open and secure passengers,
Yet do they never live: without the death
Of him that first gave motion to their breath.
This keeps me honest still, the heavens and fate
Are the best guardians to a wronged s^ate.

Laying aside all fear of what you may,
Thus to your powers we do ^xpose our lives,
Your wrongs we do confess might speak revenge,
Did not this flood of sudden grief, take up
All passion in it self: speak mighty Dukes,
Lives Florence in your loves? with Iulias death
Dies the memorial of your former wrongs?

I forget them all.

I take no pleasure in revenge.

Then are our City gates open to your loves,
And beg a favour due unto the dead:
This night the funeral hearse of Iulia,
(I know that name is dear unto you both)
Returns again to her creation.
This night the ravenous mother of the world,
(The all corrupting earth that eats her young)
Swallows the body of your Iulia.
This night she takes a farewell of us all:
Then let it be a witness of your loves,
To give her hearse an honour with your presence.

Should we not grant this, we might be taxed
Of much dishonour.

I were not worthy that it should be said
I levied arms for love of Iulia,
Should I deny my presence at her hearse.

My love, the near alliance to her blood,
The dear remembrance of my Sovereign dead,
Whose love committed her unto my care,
Makes me accept this honour done to me:
And I stand bound in bonds of gratitude
To both yo^r princely worths: in lieu of which,
Let my emboldened weakness mighty Lords,
Presume t'inuite you to a funeral supper,
A banquet forced by ceremonius custom,
As a due obsequy.

The love of Iulia
Exacts f^om me all rights of custom.

I yield my presence.

Your guards shall be my honour for this night,
Your several armies during your stay in Florence,
Shall be maintained at our Cities charge,
In recompense of love to Iulia.

We thank you.

We thank yous

Nor give we expectation of proud pomp,
Of shows, or Pageants, for your entertainment:
Our bells ring forth our sorrows in sad peals,
No pleasant changes to give Princes welcome,
Our Churches stand not garnished with pictures,
To please devoted superstition with,
But morn in black. Our Church men
Leave their chanting Antheams, their daily Mass,
To sing continual requiems to her soul.
Sorrow sits sad and weeping in our streets,
All eyes are wet with tears, save those where grief
Hath dried all moisture up. Our sucking infants
Are pale and lean with hang^ng on the breasts,
Of griefe-spent mothers: If these may welcome you,
W^e'le give you prodigal welcome to our City.

Such welcome fits the death of Iulia.

So should all morn and weep for Iulia.

So do we morn and weep for Iulia.
Lead on unto the City: how slow paced is sorrow?
Grief is a Tortoyse to the nimble sense,
And chils their motions, the officers of love,
Live at our funeral, and in death do move.

Eunuchu^?


Madam.


What solemnity is that the City celebrates?


The Dukes of Venice and Ferrara,
Are with your father entered the walls
Unto the funerals of Iulia.

Why, is Iulia dead?


I hope your Ladyship --


I cry thee mercy: the remembrance of her
Makes me still think she lives.
And that's the cause they parleyed on the walls.

True Madam.


Remove a while.


At your service Lady.


Iulia given out for dead,
And live in durance at my fathers will?
Tis strange: the Dukes invited to her fu^nerall.
More mists of policy? O simplicity!
The clue of reason cannot guide the fate,
Of this Dedalion maze: were it not profane
In me to question nature for my birth,
And quarrel with my stars for being daughter
To him whom I suspect to be a villain:
Some inspiration of religious thoughts,
Make nature less in me, and bear my duty
Even with his awe whose vncontrould command,
Frees our obedience from our impious parents.
My father Borgias left in charge with me,
That I should keep fair Iulia: I am her Jailer,
To whom, both he and I do owe allegiance.
Distracted du^y, how should I bestow thee?
On the right owner, Justice I adore thee.

Amada.


My love and duty.


Alone?


My mothers Eunuch^


How fares Iulia?


Lives as you commanded, unseen private.


Thy mothers dead.


Defend it heauens^


Dead: no more: Eunuchus?


My love and service.


You gave it out last night as I commanded
Timoclea my wife was sick.

I did and't like your grace.


When sets the Sun?


Some six hours hence.


To night will be to soon: to morrow morning
Rumour't about the City, my wife is dead,
Say abroad she is dead.

It shall be done.


So shall thy duty keep me bound to thee.
Amada: some thing more I have to say,
Prepare for marriage.

For marriage?


Question me not, thou must be married,
Mulleasses is thy husband, my word hath sealed it.
Be still my Argus, and keep Iulia.
Death to my soul! Eunuc^us
Can thou unknown (to any save thy self)
Poison a groom to stuff a coffin with?

I can to please your Lordship:


O thou shalt please us highly! I have great use
Of such a thing, I prithee do it:
My wife last night was poisoned, her body
The world believes is Iulias, supposed dead.
Now for the second funeral of my wife.
Her coffin must be filled up with some slave,
He shall be hono^d princely to his grave.
The funeral stays my presence: Amada
See to my Iulia, if Mulleasses move,
Be kind and gentle to his proffered love.

Here's a distracted labori^th of wit,
Iulia alive, and yet her funeral kept:
My mother dead and never Sick: tis true:
To many, death is sudden and unlooked for:
So't was to her: and in the midst of death,
I must be married: death take me to,
Let me not live to see those tapers burn,
That lead me to his bed: where's sanctity?
Religion is the fools bridle, worn by policy:
As horse wear trappers to seem fair in sh^w,
And make the worlds eye dote on what we seem.
Be silent yet for duty stops thy mouth,
I'll in to Iulia, 'tis she and I,
That must be Chorus in this Tragedy.

How so'ere my fortunes make me now a slave
I was a free borne Christians son in Cyprus,
When Famagusta by the Turk was sacked:
In the division of which City spoils,
My fortunes fell to Mulleasses lot:
Nor was it Tyranny enough that I was Captive,
My parents robbed of me, and I of them,
But they wronged nature in me, made me an Eunuch,
Disabled of those masculine functions,
Due from our sex: and thus subjected,
These sixteen years unto the wild command,
Of an imperious Turk, I now am given
To serve the hidden secre^s of his lust,
Unto Timocl^a, the wife of Borgias,
Whose private mixtures I am guilty of:
Betwixt ^hese three I stand as in a maze,
I^ eg'd to al their sins, and made a baud
To lust and murder: Mulleasses first
Gives me unto Timoclea, that without suspect
I might procure their loves sec^rity:
For which they promise me my liberty.
Eut Borgias whether jealous of his wife,
Of reaching at some further policy,
Binds me with golden offers to his trust,
And first comaunds me rumour it abroad
Timoclea his wife was sick, when at that instant
She was in health and dancing with her Turk^.
Now I must second that report with death,
And say abroad Timoclea is dead:
Short warning for a journey unto heaven:
But (which amaz^th most) I must provide
The body of some groom to stop a coffin with.
This is a riddle of some Sphinx, let Oedipus
Unfold the meaning: I leave it to th'euent,
And think most safety in not knowing it.
I must provide some groom, that's my command.
Prosper me Saturne, and those stars of sin,
Whose influence makes villains fortunate.
^He kills by law that kills men for a state.
But who comes here? oh my spruce he -- lecher
That makes his boy save him the charges of a bawdy house,
Fore Mahomet an excellent fellow for my Lords coffin:
Assist me power of wit.

Pantofle.


At your pleasure sir?


Thou hast been at my pleasure indeed P^ntofle, I will retreat into the
country, hate this amorous, Court ^nd betake my self to obscurity: I tel thee
boy I will return by this Ci^cyan Isle without transformation since Hebe hath
discovered her secrets I will turn I^p^ter, hate the whole sex of women, and
only embrace thee my Gammede.


Sfoot sir you are as passionate for the disloyalty of your Sempstresse as some
needy knight would be for the loss of some rich magnificos widow: do you not
see how the supporters of the Court, the Lady of the labby gape after your good
parts like so many grigges after fresh water, and can you withhold the dew of
your moyster element?


I tel thee should the Lady Iulia when she was alive have proffered me her
cheek to kiss, I would not have bowed to that painted image for her whole
D^kedome: Mercury h^d no good aspect in the horoscope of my nativity: women and
lotium are recip^ocall, their savour is noisome.


Why her's a slave in folio will seem to slight the love of a P^inc^sse, when
he would willingly spend his talent on an oyster wi^e.


Sir Pantofle truss up my wardrobe: but withal publish my departure, I would
willingly put my creditors to the chardge of guarding me out of town.


^ ^ill much scandalize your reputation for to depart indebted: you will be
cursed heavily.


To depart in debted boy, is the only way to be praid for, seeing they know
it is my prosperity and welfare that must make them satisfaction.


Before heaven an excellent reason.


Pray Sir make even with your Taylor, he is poor.


Most willingly, for I am not possessed of a pennikin, and if he be not before
with me, I take it we are even, and may walk in campage. Pantofle vanish.


I go Sir.


I have it, thanks sweet Thalia, thou hast begot a child of mirth in my
brain, I will put it to this creature of Florence to n^rse: Saucy Seignior.


Eunuchus, Venus restore thee to thy generation: what doings are now in your
quarters?


Doings: in faith courtly and weak: Cupid help the poor Ladies.


you are above me, I mean not their ingenys or upper galleries:


Nor I neither: and yet I speak of their understandings, which by reason of a
general spring, halt and debility in their hams (heavens know) are most
falteringly feeble: but to present the message I am sent for: to your worthiest
self, from my Lady and mistress the protectors wife: you are intelligent?


The beauteous Timoclea.


Heavens grant she may have the virtue of attraction: for she hath laid open,
the luster of her best parts to your grace Sir: nay make not retreat Sir: she
knows you disdain her love.


The truth is I am earthly, and like not to participate with the element of the
fire: good Eunuchus commend me to your Lady, and tell her by importuning my
affection, she seeks the fall of an innocent.


True Sir, but with a firm belief of your rising again.


I see no hope of it.


The harder is her fortune: but hear me, me thinks reward should prick you
on with more courage, to such an honourable encounter.


Faith Eunuch I have made a vow not to uncase my self to any of that sex.


It may be you grounded your oath upon the vncleanes of your shirt.


Verily since the relapse of my Sempstresse, I have not addicted my self to
that neat cleanly carriage^


Sfoot I thought some soul cause or other, interposed it self twixt you and
my Lady: But sir, I'll see all wants supplied, thy debts satisfied, thy fortunes
eternally mounted: only be tractable to my poor loue-sicke Lady and
mistress, just and loving.


As I am, so fates assist me: and Eunuchus here's my hand thou shalt have ample
share in my fortunes.


By this hand sir but I will not: do not fail sir at eight of the clock to
meet me here, where I'll deliver you the key of my Ladies chamber: with further
instructions in the business, and with assuredness of preferment and
promotion.


Dear Eunuch let me hug thee: how I long to manifest thy service to my Lady
Timoclea. You will meet?


My hand and promise for it.


It shall suffice.
By women man first fell, by them I'll rise.

Ha ha ha: Protector, here's a slave
Shall stuff thy coffin: him thou shalt sacrifice
Unto Timocleas ghost, whose humerous soul
Shall in his passage over Acheron
Make Charon laugh, and the sterne judge of hell
Smile at his folly: this is the fatal key
Conducts him to those shades by Borgias hand.
Thus fools must fall, that wise men firm my stand.

SEt down that heavy load of misery,
SO would the easing you, might ease my heart!
Pure virgin Hark: O let it not impeach
The gravity of age to let some tears
Fall at thy funeral: true relic of that love
I did inherit from thy fathers mouth,
When to my charge he left his heir and Dukedom
In thee I am deprived of all that honour
I should have purchased by that thankful care
Was due unto thy fathers memory:
Did not my grief load all my powers of speech,
Oh I could spend my age in commenting
Of those ^rue virtues dyed with him and thee,
But sorrow shuts my breast: Prier, thine office.

By that great power is given to me
The gates of heaven I open to thee,
When amongst the Angels thou shalt sing
The song of Saints before a King,
That sits for ever on his throne,
And gives light to every one:
To him thy soul we do bequeath,
Thy body to the earth beneath:
And so we close thy tomb again,
And pray thy soul be free from pain.

Look from thy holy mansion sacred maid
And see how prostrate I adore thy bliss:
These arms in hope of conquest of thy love
That rolled themselue^ in ste^le, shall clasp the air,
And in their empty foldings live still ba^en
Of all the comfort my you^hs hope did promise.
And since thy death takes my loves joy from me,
I'll die a virgin-Saint and live with thee.

I cannot vent my breast in love sick terms,
Nor call to record all the gods of love
For my integrity: nor prostitute,
An oily pas^ion curiously composed
Of riming numbe^s at my mistres hearse:
Or tell her dead tr^ncke my true love in vearse:
But since by death her love I am denied,
To say I loud her is Ferraraes pride.

My honour, and that weak abillity
Our state affords, to do your graces service,
Lies at your princely feet, for this your love
Done to the dead: now is Iulia shut
For ever from your eyes: save that she lives
Like a pure relic of some holy Saint,
Shrind in our breasts for ever: let me now renew
My first request, to sup with us to night,
A ceremony due at funerals.
So shall you double honour unto me,
In doing double honour unto her.

I'll do all honour both to her and you.

I'll break no custom.

I humbly thank your graces, please you lead?
Here lives a lasting memory of the dead.
Thus far my pioning policies run even,
And level with my aims: Iulia lives,
And in her hearse Timoclea my wife,
Deludes the credulous Dukes: poisoned last night
By Mulleasses, to make way for me,
To marry Iulia my brothers daughter,
For which the Cardinal of Aniou my kinsman
Sollicites daily with his holiness,
For dispensation with our bloods alliance:
As for these weak men, whose pursuits in love,
Dies with my strong averring of her death,
I can command their lives: and then maintain
My actions with the sword: for which the Turk
By Mulleasses made unto my purpose,
Offers me forty thousand Ianisaries
To be my guard, against foreign outrages:
And more: hee'le make me king of Italy,
To give him but command upon the streights,
And land his force on this side Christendom
And I will do it: on my faith to God
And loyalty I owe unto the stars,
Should there depend all Europe and the states
Christened thereon: I'd sink them all,
To gain those ends I have proposd my aimes^
Religion (thou that ridst the backs of Slaves
Into weak minds insinuating fear
And superstitious cowardn^s^e) thou robst
Man of his chief bliss by bewitching reason.
Nature at these my brows bend: thy mysteries
Wrought by thine own hands in our active brains,
Give us the use of good: thou art my God,
If what I have of thee, or wit or art,
Or Serpent sliding through the minds of men,
Cunning confusion of all obstacles,
Be they my childrens lives, my dearest friends
May gain me what I wish, I stoop at thy renown^
And think al's vacuum above a crown,
For they that have the sovereignty of things,
Do know no God at all, are none but Kings.

Eternal substitute to the first that moved
And gave the Chaos form. Thou at whose nod
Whole Nations stooped, and hold thee still a God:
Whose holy-customd-ceremonious rites,
Live vnprophan'd in our posterity:
Thou God of Mecha, mighty Mahomet^
Thus Mulleasses at thy memory
Discends: accept his prone humility,
Great Prophet: let thy influence be free
Vncheckt by danger: mew not up my soul,
In the pent room of conscience:
Make me not moral Mahomet, cooped up
And fettered in the fools philosophy,
That points our actions unto honesty.
Give my plots fortune: let my hope but touch
The mark I aim at: then the gazing time
Shall in the present hide my former ill
Success like I^the to ^he souls in bliss
Makes men forget things past and crowns our sins
With name of valour, be we impious.
A Scelus felix styles us virtuous.

My honoured Lord:

What devil interrupts m?

My duty.

Your duty is too diligent that dares
P^ere into my retreats: now should I kill thee.

The Lord Protector Borgias my master --

Age and diseases breed consumptions
And rot him. What craves he?

Your instant presence.

I have instant business whose high import
Detains my speed: know you the matter?

A tumult amongst the fearful multitude,
Caused by an ominous terror in the heavens,
Is as I guess the reason of your want.

What heavens? what terror?

The Sun on sudden feels a dark eclipse
And hides his silver face behind the moon,
As loath to see some prodegies appear.

Make that eclipse eternal Mahomet.
Rise, rise ye mistie-footed Jade of night,
Draw your dark mistress with her sable veil,
Like a black Negro in an Ebone chair,
Athwart the wo^lds eye: from your foggy breaths
Hurl an Egiptian grossenes through the air,
That none may see my plots: Hast any greater news?

The days eyes out, a thousand little stars
Spread like so many torches, about the sky,
Make the world show like Churches hung with black,
And set with tapers at some funeral:
Amongst these stars directly from the East,
A fiery meteor points a burning rod
At Florence.

Perhaps tis thirsty for the blood of Princes,
Blase out prodigious star, and let the fire
Dart soul amazing terror to all eyes:
Be like the Basilisk fatal to behold:
I'll fat the slimy earth more then the plague,
And from her bosom send the blood of Kings
Stild into oily vapours borne on high,
To expiate those flames that else would die.

What answer shall I return unto my Lord?

That I will see him presently, be gone: Borgias,
Thou art no tutored Pollitition
To lay another in thy bosom.
Know a stat^-villaine must be like the wind,
That flies unseen yet lif^s an Ocean,
Into a mountains height. That on the sands
Whole Navies may be split in their descent.
I stand above thee, and as from a rock
Whose eminence outswelles the raging flood,
See thy hopes shipwrecked: O credulity,
Securities blind nurse^ the dream of fools:
The drunkards Ape, that feeling for his way
Even when he thinks in his deluded sense,
To snatch at safety, falls without defence.
Twice hath the Nemean Lyon breathed, forth fire,
And made the scalded Dogge-star pant with heate.
Twice the days planet through the burning signs
Hurred his fiery chariot since the time
I came to Florence in exchange for Iulia.
The son of Borgias here to learn the tongues,
The fashions and the arts of Ch^istendome:
Now by my sly and affable intrusion
I am made intimate with Borgias:
He thinks my thoughts are Osiars to be wrought
In any form: the Dukes (that claimed
The love of Iulia) he hath deluded
By a feigned rumour of a sudden death:
Her he detains until he fits his time
By murder of the Dukes to be secure,
In his own power to dacke his marriage:
Timoclea his wife (the death of all his plots
If she survives) he now beleues is dead
Poisoned by me: in lieu of which he grants
His daughter Amada to me for wife:
As if my hopes flew not as high as his:
Now to secure my flight and make my wings
Stronger then his that melted in the Sun,
His wife Timoclea lives within this tomb
Made seeming liueles^e by a sleepy juice
Infusd in stead of poison in her cup:
Here I must wake her and in her stir up
Revenge against Borgias.
Image of death and daughter of the night,
Sister to Lethe all oppressing sl^epe,
Thou that amongst a hundred thousand dreams
Crowned with a wreath of mandrakes sitst as Queene^
To whom a million of care-clogged souls,
Lye quaffing juice of Poppy at thy feet,
Refigne thy vsurpassion, and dislodge,
Hang on the eyes of sloth and make them sleep
Whose hearts are heavy, or whose sorrows weep,
Give way to motion: and thou whose blood
Stands in thy full veins like a charmed flood
Receive the air again: survive his hate
That on thy grave again climbs high to reach his fate.

Who speaks so loud?

He ^hat speaks life Timoclea.

You wake me.

Such power I challenge Lady in my voice,
To wake you from your grave.

Where am I?

In your grave.

Hah, my grave!

Be not amassed madame: you are safe.

Who speaks unto me? oh forbear:
I am not for your presence: see my bed
Lies much unseemly: who attends me there?
What means this impudent intrusion?

Take time to your amazement: know where you are
Tis Mulleasses speaks to you: him you once lou`d:
Tis not now time to fear.

I know your face and yet I fear my being
Gives cause of fear.

Give your self, to me and on those rites
Due to the sweets of love, here is no danger.

Accept me in your arms.

See where you are, know you this place?

Some Church I think.

And these the Trophies of your Ancestors.
This is the buriail common to your blood.

Oh free me from amazement, what strange accident
Brought me so n^ere my death? I am now my self
And truly capable of a discourse.

Then know madame your life hath been pursued,
And my self bribed to be your poisoner,
But that my love turned death unto a sleep,
And brought you thus alive unto your grave:

Say on my dearest Lord, who bribed thy love?
What barbarism, or what desert of mine
Moved this attempt against my life?

My soul durst justify your innocence,
But that desease that bred in Paradise,
Swells like the Presters poison in our veins
(To which al men are heirs ambition)
Desire to be like God: t'was that corruption
Gave me occasion thus to show my love
On your lives safety:

My love and life are thine: speak openly,
What breast could be so cruelly ambitious?
Whose honour or whose fortunes could my life
Eclipse or darken?

First madame you must swear,
By life, by love, and by that happiness
Your ^oule assures you in the faith you hold
With me, this night to prosecute revenge
On your lives enemy.

By life, by love and by that happiness,
My soul assures me in the faith I hold,
By that which binds me more -- by this
I swear this night to prosecute revenge
On my lives enemy.

Enough: thy resolution like a fire,
Makes my warm blood boyle: Borgias.

My husband.

Your husband: start not Lady,
Twas he that by a promise of your daughter
The fairest Amada to me for wife
Made my tongue say, that I would poison you:
Silence dear Lady: choke all passion,
And feminine complaints in thoughts of vengeance.
Forget you are a woman: and be like your wrongs
Full swollen with death: let your inventive brains
Carry more fate in their conception,
Then Hecubas womb to Troy: my plots are yours,
Are you revengeful?

As full as Jealousy: or the wife of Iason
Robbed by the fair Corinthian of her love.

Then thus we seal our resolution --
Thus I ascend, and from proud Fortunes wheel,
Pu^l my own fate: forgiveness Mahomet
My hopes make me profane; and my proud thoughts
Usurp above thy greatness: Apprehension?
Thou that gives food unto the soul of man,
The best companion to relieve the mind.
What sweet suggestions of my future bliss
Have I from thee? O I am transported
Beyond the power of reason! the present time
Craves a more sober temper. Madam this disguise
Must carry you unknown unto my chamber
Where we have much to do: release your thoughts,
Give freedom to those faculties of nature,
That made your sex first dare to reach at pleasure.
Be proud and lustful, let ambition sway
The power of action in you: murder and blood
Are the two pillars of a States-mans good.

A A Pollititian Proteus-like must alter
His face and habit, and like water seem
Of the same colour that the vessel is
That doth contain it, varying his form
With the Chameleon at each objects change.
Twice like a Serpent have I cast my skin,
Once when with mourning sighs I wept for Iulia,
And made the two Dukes weep for Iulia,
That coat is cast: now like an Amorist,
I come in loving terms to court my Iulia,
And seem a louer^ but of all shapes
This sits me worst: whose constellation
Stamped in my rugged brow the signs of death,
Envy and ruin: strong Antipa^hyes
Against love and pleasure: yet must my tongue
with passionate oaths and protestations,
With sighs, smooth glances, and officious terms,
Spread artificial mists before the eyes
Of credulous simplieity: he that will be high,
Must be a Parasite, to fawn and lye.

Your pleasure.

How stand your thoughts affected to the marriage
I lately did acquaint you with, are you resolved?

I am Rather to dye then live to see that hour

I would see Iulia, pray her company?

I will.

Your presence is most welcome:

What business of import?

Nought for the instant but a wooing scene,
Prepare your wit my Lord to fight with words.
The Champions straight approach, but two to two.

My loved dear Lady.

Beauteous Madam.

Fair as the morning^

Be as thy beauty seems, propitious, loving:

Attractive Sunshine: all affections moving.

More then a subject, and more humbly bent.

How supple seems ambition? Uncle you're too low:

Deuinest fair to whom all hearts should bow.

Fit attributes for heaven: my Lord, my feature
Is but earthmould, the weak frame of nature.

Yet graced with heavenly virtue, it seems divine

I know your lights above me, yet let it shine
Like the days beauty on the lowly plains.

Subjects are no fit loves for Sovereigns.

High comets from the earth draw up then nurture.

Yet from the Sun true stars have all their lustre.

True star on earth:

You flatter, pray 'forbeare.

Love Madam is importunate, you must hear:
Your niceness makes me be abrupt: I love
And must enjoy you.

Hell to my love: Borgias I'll prevent you.

I must be plain: love you me my Lord?

I by that power that made me.

Restore then that, that you have robbed me of,
My honour and my life: for I am dead,
So thought of in the world: give me what I am:
Return the title due unto my birth
Du^hesse of Florence, and thy Sovereign.
Make me as free as I was borne, and give my love
The liberty of nature: then shall I believe
And think you love me.

I will restore your honours and your life,
I will return the duties of your birth:
Duchess of Florence and my Sovereign,
The Sovereign of my heart: and kneel to you,
And make my thoughts as humble as my knees:
See: I am not ambitious, tis not a crown
The gorgeous title of a Sovereign,
Makes me so evil in your thoughts: the poise of love
Whom some term light, and gives him wings
To soar al oft in me is but the same
And makes me stoop thus low to Iulia.

Uncle I am a^ham'd that any blood of mine
Should harbour such an incest: you have an easier way
To gain what you desire: make good the fame
The world is now possessed of: murder me,
Then are you heir to Florence: tis not half so ill,
As this incestuous mixture you so plead for,
Against nature and the law of heaven: but on,
Use your usurped power; be still a villain:
My life is the utmost, and you may command it,
But my bloods vessel given unto my soul,
As a pure mansion to inhabit in
Shall while I am and breath, be vnprophan'd.
I'll be more cha^t then Lucrece, dye unstained.

You are a woman Lady, and will change:
The Protector's at a nonsuit in his love,
How now my Lord?

Thus crossed by superstitious obstinacy,
I'll use the power I have, and make -- How thrives your suit?

Vnthriftily like yours: we are no Venus darlings,
No delight for women: she cannot love.

She cannot love? your reason Lady
Is your blood holy? are you a sanctuary
That none may violate. What ease of conscience
Keeps you vnprophand? know that religion
Binds your obedience minion to my will.
Love him or I'll hate thee.

I tender up the duty of a child
And yield a fathers high prerogative
Ore what I am: yet for that affection
That you would have me captive in his breast,
Know it is prisoner at so dear a rate,
As all my strength can no way ransom it.

I'll use no rhetoric Lady to your ears:
But hear what I commaund^ and do my will,
Or thou shalt hear what will displease thy will.

Be these the precepts Christians give their children?

But Madam for your love.

I would forsake a God.

A more soft style beseems a subjects tongue,
I'll be no higher then my self: and not commaun'd
Whats in my power. Will you resign your love?

I to that God that thou hast so prophand,
Detested Atheist.

Be religious Madam still and rail not,
Think of my honest suit: and think what power
This hand doth gripe: we are troublesome
And leave you to your thoughts: these fits must end,
Trees are as easy broke that will not bend.

THis is the hour I should meet my catamite Signior Bordella: I cannot but
laugh to see the slave make a lecherous progress to Lucifer. The moral will
hold rarely: he shall have his brains fly about his ears in the hight of his
venery: this instead of going to Tymoclea shall conduct him to the bed of
Borgias: a midst whose waking plotts state volutios, the amorous youth must
needs be hartyly welcome: for mine own part, my handshall be clear from the
blood of the goate^ yet I could account it happiness to be within ear shot of
his departure, to here how lamentably the coxcomb would sigh out Tymoclea: but
the best is, neither Court nor country will much miss the fool: there are
elder brothers enough to supply his room:


Eunuchus?


The same: now I see thou wilt stand to thy word.


Thy Lady shall see that in my deeds Eunuchus if all the sweet meates in
Florence be provocative.


I Sir, but Ladies are of the nature of Idols and will be served on your knees.


True, were I not a man of war whose valour magnanimous courage is not to
be dejected so long as his weapon holds.


Then I perceive you will shortly be at my Ladies mercy


If I should, doubt not her gracious hand in my erection: but gentle Eunucus,
the key that opens to the Via lactea:


H^ere Sir, and look your entrance be wary, soft and circumspect.


I had thought an entrance rough, manly and boistrou^ had been more pleasing to
Ladies: Eunuchus I shall be troubled I shall be tormented with this court owl
if you assist me not: sfoote the flesh-fly hath espied me, she will never linne
sucking at me so long as I have any matter for her to work upon.


Who, Madam Fulsome the Governess of the maids? she is a good creature and
very musical: she sets mo^e instruments a-worke then a Fiddler: thou must needs
love her if it were but for her humility: she will bend her self to the
meanest page of the Scullery: and she hates the pride of the flesh exceedingly,
and is known to be a mortifier of carnality.


I verily believe it, for her very countenance and complexion shows she is able
to allay any mans courage living with a breath.


Phego do you epsy no motions behind the arras, no squals, musslings, or
pages standing sentinel? or because our head the Lady Iulia is dead, are al
her servants that is her members in the same predicament?


Surely I see no body stirring Lady: it is supper time and every man is
providing for the belly.


It will be shortly time for every woman to provide for the belly too, P^ego a
word with you.


What is that Ph^go Eunuchus^ do you know him?


How, know him, can I mistake him sir, that is never hoodwinckt? he is an
extreme enemy to Haberdashers: affecting no block, but that which nature
bestowed on him: and of that he hath been so curious that it is not a hair
amiss: he is sir the ^reface to your compoundresse of mans flesh, and Ushers
her to ^mployment: and is a creature of singular patience; contenting himself
with the Theory, when others are the Practique. In his pace he imitates
Fensers, and stands much upon distance: He is partly an Astronomer too, being
much given to observation of signs: for when the Sun is in Gemini the
Dog-starre attends without doors: he is a great friend to Aries but naturally
hates Pisces for it is a chill sign and cools his toes ouer-vehemently: in
brief sir he is a Gentleman Usher.


Sure Phego that should be sig^ior Bordello: I pray you entreat his approach:
of all our Courtiers I love men of his country and breeding, they are the
louingst, best spoken, well gract creatures in these parts extant: I think it
be given to those that be borne under your northern climb, to thaw and melt
away at the Sun-shine of beauty: you shall read in very late stories that many
of them have lost their best members in the service of Ladies and distressed
weighting Gentlewomen.


I should account it none of my nearest mishaps, being interdicted so worthy a
presence by more then urgent affairs. Sweet Sir bear my excuse with all
respective desire of pardon.


Whether Signior Bordello in such post-hast: you forget your old friends: when
you came first to Court, you and I were more inward man.


Being upon my departure Lady, I am enforced to see to the conveying of my
goods, and the trussing away of my baggage.


And that word baggage (I will besworn) had been an apt phrase for his bringing
in, but you purpose not I hope signior to depart Fl^rence altogether.


Oh no: his flight Lady is like the Ravens, that having spied a fat carckase,
romes about to calmore of her fellows to the prey.


But signior, have you so fully furnished your discours^ with observation, as
with so slight a view of our Gentlewomen to make a departure? indeed seignior
the Ladies of your country will exact some obseruatiue relate of your travels
upon your return.


For our Ladies Madam they are few or none, our country men are not so
addicted to titles of honour: they use knighthood as rich Jewellers desire
Iemms rather for traficque then ornament.


Is there any commodity to be had in the purchase ^ir?


Great Commodity, and that is the reason so many merchants and yeomen sons
hunt after it.


Belike this is one of your observations: pray sir be more open: I see you have
profited much since your coming.


For the bettring of mine inward parts, some few notions I have committed to
memory.


Impart them S^gn^or: it may be I shall add to your store: these La^yes will
n^t discover us for intelligencers: they are naturally given to the
concealment of private actions.


Since my coming to Florence I have seen ignorance in the shape of a Ci^tizen
muffled in the scarlet of magistracy that coul^ not write his own name.
Generally I have noted through the whole Country great enmity between wit and
cloaks lined through with velvet: and yet beggars gallants agree together very
f^miliarly. There is no thriving but by impudence and pan^arisme: he that is
furnished with one of these two qualities shall beg more of a foolish Lord at
a mar^bone breakfast, then all the Poets in the whole town shall rime out of
him in an age:


^ut th^se are but petty observations: I have seen since my coming to
Florence the son of a Peddler mounted on a foot cloth: a fellow created a
Lord for the sm^othn^sse of his chin: and which is more; I have seen a capp
most my raculously turned into a beaver hat without either trimming or
dressing.


That is strange indeed: Signior and Eunuchus, we are to press you to a
further courtesy in meeting us in the lobby some two hours hence at a posset.


You shall find us as forward in as hot a service in the Lobby or elsewhere at
your Ladyships appoint, but --


We must have no denial.


Cans^ not say the Court-grace? promise man promise.


Your Ladyship shall find us ready to put in -- our spoons.


Till then adieu Signior and Eunuchus. Phego forward.


So long as my ham-strings hold.


You see Eunuchus, familliarity and courtesy hath enwrapt me in the knowledge
of these meanest vassals of honour: but henceforth my countenance shall be
estranged, and I will bury my acquaintance in silence.


I think the Cuckoo foresings his own dirdge: Signior, you shall need no
further prescriptions: in the career of your delight, vouchsafe a thought of
Eunchus, you conceive me Sir, manifest my service to Timoclea.


I were inhumaine if I should forget you the latest minute of my life: pray
heavens my Page Pantofle have procured in my absence the embroidered shirt I
gave directions for upon both our wardrops: that care once over, I shall never
henceforth taste of lousy misfortune.

Venus supplying what Bordello most lacks,
Courtiers and Porters live by able backs.

THus our presumption hath prolongd your stay
At a ch^ape banquet: did not the rites of love
Exact your presence as a debt to Iulia,
Our boldness might have wanted an excuse
Thus to detain you.

You are too full of ceremony my Lord,
Knowing your welcome prodigal, and full of state,
And such as fits our mournful accidents.

The better part of love due to the living,
Appears in friends even when their friends are dead,
And think my Lord Protector that our love,
For which we came in arms against your walls,
Would not be wanting in one ceremony
Due unto Iulia at her obsequy.
Is Prusias returned from our Camp?

I my gracious Lord.

Doth our Liefetenant keep a careful watch
Are Sentinels set out?

They are and it like your grace.

Where is Philenzo?

Here my Sovereign.

Are all in safety at our Camp?

Safe and in quiet.

The night is old,
And drowsy sleep hangs heavy on our eyes:
Conduct us to our rest.

Never till now was Borgias fully blessed:
To lodge two mighty Princes in one night
Under his roof: where my sons son may say,
Here might^ Venic^ and F^rrara lay.
My Lord ^hese Tapers lead you to your chamber,
These great Ferrara unto yours.

Rest to you all.

Good night and sleep unto your sorrows.

Sweet quiet be a guard v^to you both,
So may you sleep for ever. Eun^c^us:
Remove with our attendance from our ears.
Now my hearts treasurer^ what now remains?
My resolution holds to murder them,
And with that force the town may now affoord,
Practise some sudden stratagem on their powers.

That were too violent: things done for state,
Must carry for me, and with an outward gloss,
Varnish and cover what would else seem gross,
Should they be murdered in their beds, or die,
Having your promise for their guard: th'offence
Could have no safety but in violence.
No let them sleep secure, and this nights safety
Will make them fearless, easy to be trapt
In a more cunning net.
To morrow at a banquet they shall drink
A drug, whose working in their breast shall sleep
Twice fifteen days, until their absence hence
May give you colour from suspicion.
But then dissolving like a fire that's hid,
Spreading a burning poison through the blood,
It scalds the heart, and through the body runs:
Turns to a hot quotidian and, doth leese
Although of poison in a mad desease:
So dying, no impute can touch your name:
Things are undone that are vnspoke by fame.

My fortunes on thy council noble Turk.
We will clime together: my daughters heddy will
Shall stoop unto thy pleasure: as for Iulias love
She must or yield or dye: he that is wise,
Will tread on any that may make him rise.

BLush not thou chaste and modest Queen of night,
Nor hide thy silver crescent in a cloud,
To see me thus Rhamnusia like attired:
Stare on ye Argus eyed heavens and se a woman
More full of vengeance, then your jealous Queen.
Medusa sometime the love of Neptune,
(But after for thy lust transformed a monster)
Lend me those serpents that about thy head
Curl up like Else-knots, at whose horrid sight
The Sun may vanish or stand still aff^ight.
Or you you Furies ministers of fear,
(That at Astreas feet lye bound in snakes
Attending her just sentence to begin
Terror of conscience in the breast of sin)
This night be powerful in me and inspire
My face with fear, my heart with rancke-swolne ire^
Venice, Venice, great Venice:

Who speaks to Venice?

Iulia thy love.

Delusiue voice, why dost renew my grief
By naming Iulia?

Did thou love Iulia?

Thou wrongst me to make question of my love.
Whatsoere thou art.

Then see thy Iulia and revenge her wrongs.

Dissolve ye glassy pearls and melt in drops,
Or with the teare-spent mother Niobe
Turn into stones: shall I believe my thoughts,
And credit what thy shape presents to me?
Thou art the Ghost of murdered Iulia.

I am.

Immortal essence Virgin-element
So may I term thy airy substance freed
From the gross mixture of our earthly load:
Oh I am thronged with passions each craving vent
None can have passage till some tears be spent,
Fall fall ye silver pearls, and of the ear^h
Purchase a soft relenting at my griefs.
Shower down like rainy drops, and pearce the stones
Make them receive my sorrows, or from mine eyes
Run like to crystal rivers through the world,
Slyde ore the flowery meadows that the Nymphs
Dancing in feary rings upon the grass,
May leave their sport, and weep to see you pass,
Where by the doleful murmur as you go,
The hills may here you morn and sound my woe,
Pardon: if I be tedious virgin spirit,
Or if my grief be too effeminate:
Thy habit is an Index to revenge,
Which thy wrongs seem to plead for of my love,
Speak them, or deal them through the yielding air
Into my ears, and they shall be to me
Like the sterne drum, or musique of the war
Unto the coward, or the fainting soldier.

Venice I was murdered.

Murder is open mouthd, and as the Sea
Whose covetous waives in prisond by thy land,
Bellow for grief and roar upon the sand.
So from the earth it cries, and like a child
Wronged by his careless nurse will not be stilld:
Are ye then deaf yea gods, ye cannot hear it?
Or is just Libra fallen out of your Spheres,
That wronged States must to the earth appeal
For justice and revenge. Then tis not profane
T'usurpe your functions: my hand shall be as just
As my soul loving: and they both shall leave
A story to the world of my revenge.
Nor in succeeding times shall be forgot.
Venice reuengd those wrongs the heavens would not.
I interrupt what that would say, and seem
To crown all vengeance in a passion.
Speak but his name.

My uncle Borgias.

Enough.
O that the genius that attends on man,
Should be a doubtful Oracle to the soul
And whispering to our intellect what fate
Hangs like a falling tower upon his state,
Yet be no more of force to length our ioy^
Then were Cassandras prophecies to Troy.
Disloyal treacherous villain Borgias,
Some Hydras poison, or the blood of Nessus
Cleave to thy flesh:
Oh my blood swells beyond my power: my voice
Louder then his that thunders through the clouds,
Shall speak this monstrous murder to the world,
I'll be thy Orator wronged spirit and plead
Blood and revenge for thee though thou best dead.

Stay.

What would thou more?

Hear and be advised:
To morrow when the Senate sits be there,
And in the ears of the whole state proclaim,
And justify my words against Borgias:
In this alone I will great Venice prove,
Do it as ever thou did Iulia love.

I will.

Whilst I borne upon air attend my bliss.

Peace to thy soule^ Adieu.

Remember Iulia.
Y^t prosper and go on, for Iulias ghost
My false shape takes: th'abused Duke's afire,
Through Borgias blood I'll run to my desire.
Whom have we here?

Priapus thou woman's God assist me with a Jovial ability: this night I may
beget a Hercules: Fortune I must confess thou hast turned up thy muffler, and
cast a gracious aspect on Bordello: for I am not only in the state of clean
linen; but also thou hast made me gracious in the eye of Signior Diaspermaton
my Apothecary, who hath furnished me with this receipt: here is a compound of
Cantharid^s Diositerion, marrow of an Ox, hairs of a Lyon, stones of a Goat,
Cock-sparrowes brains, and such like this after an hours receipt, hath a
fourefold operation: and least I should be like a Peacock all tail and no
heart, here is a distillation of ten pound a pint, that comforts the inward,
fires the brains, cheers up the spirit, and makes a man lay about him like a
dutchman. Let me see, it is more then time that I commit this divine pill to
his hopeful working: least my staff be out of the rest when my adversary is
in the career. So Cupids fair mother be thy mid wife: out and alas I am mare
rid, what Somners Ghost or limb of Lucifer, puts poor Bordello in mind of
penance before he hath trespassed?


I am espied: his fear doth apprehend me for a ghost,
And I must feed it.

Se, it makes toward me: unfortunate Bordello that the devil should be an
enemy to lechery.


Come let us set to our business, Phego,
Lend us your wind to cool this posset.

It is not the first time I have been constrained to puff and blow in your
Ladyships service.


It hath oft come in my mind to know the derivation and denomination of this
word posset?


I take it that it comes of the Latin word posse to make a man able: and that's
the reason ever after eating them, men desire to make experience of their
forces.


I rather conceive it comes of the word pono of putting together, for that your
possets are the usual means of congregating, putting and combining your Court
creatures together.


And that may well be: for I remember that reverent pedagoge William Lilly,
brings in gigno, pono, can^, one in the neck of another, gigno to beget, pono
to put in, and cano to sing.


That Lilly was a beastly knave to put pono behind gigno there is no musique in
it: but all this time we miss not Signior Bordello, it hath not be his custom
to be absent where his chops might have had employment.


You speak of the days of hunger, when the slave was a stranger in the land
of Hauilah: but the word is retrograde: the last age is a golden age with him.


See where the son of Saturne appears.


S^oot I thought the Dog-fish had been baiting Cerberus ere this time.


Ladies did you not see a spirit pass this way?


Thou see we are feeding the flesh man, what dost thou talk of the spirit?


Without jest a mere Ghost, standing bolt upright at Timocleas chamber, so ny
Court Incubus on my life.


Were you not much terrified Signior with the apparition?


How: terrefied? I no sooner beheld it, but drawing my better parts together


Fear and suspicion, two night-waking charms,
Banish all sleep, suggesting in my thoughts,
Falsehood and treason: I am slow and dull,
Descending like the earth: yet I know not what
Pricks like the thorne of Phil^mel at my breast:
And tells me ther^ is danger in my rest.
Sometime I think of Iulia: and that thought
Presents her loves in a living shape.
When not remembering death, I open my arms,
To tie a Gordian knot about her waste
And bid her welcome: but that empty clasp,
Deluding my false hopes with nought but air,
Makes my blood angry, and doth turn my passion
To seek a subject fit for my revenge:
And then I ever think of Borgias.
As if my love were wronged by Borgias.
What means these sudden tumults in mine ears?
Save me eternal guard of innocence:
Treason, treason, villain thou shalt buy my blood.

O spare me.

Distraction of my brain, what shape art thou?

Iulia^

Iulia: hah: stay tis gone: did I see?
Or did my fear and fancy frame this form?
Villain thou art some instrument of falsehood
Confess thy treason.

You are secure: that shape that named your love
Pursued me through the court, till for my rescue
Fear made me use this violence at your chamber.
O I am slain, and dye a causeles death,
I ne'er liud false to thee: all thou hast gained
Is that my soul dyes clear and leaves thine stained. He dyes.

To do thee good my soul shall say as much
And witness it before the Judge of souls,
When at the general Bar we meet together.
But I must use thy shape: this night I'll walk
Hid in thy habit from discerning eyes:
I'll pry about the Court, perhaps I may
Once more see Iulias ghost, and learn her wrongs,
By them to aim aright in my revenge.
My hand first dyes the scene: and it shall fill
The stage with vengeance: Nemesis shall wade
Up to the chin and bath herself in blood,
The dangling snakes that hang about her neck
Shall suck like Lethe of the purple gore
Shed for my Iulias death.
I'll feast the ravenous people of the air,
And fill the hungry wolves with sl^ughtered men.
The streets of Florence like t^e streets of Rome
(When dea^h S^ll^ raingd) ^hal^ run with blood^
Their swelling channels with a scarlet tide
Shall wash the stores, and for my Iuli^^ dea^h
The angry gods of wr^th shall smil^ as pleased
To s^ me so re^engd: Eunuchu, thy death
Is but a prologue to induce a plot,
May ^h^u be blessed, you are not w^rth my hate
I must reach higher, and on thy disguise,
Lay but the ground-worke for revenge to rise.

BE pleased ye powers of might, and bout me skip
Your antique measures: like to cole black moors,
Dancing their ^igh La^oltos to the Sun
Circle me round: and in the midst I'll stand^
And crack my sides with laughter at your sports.
Oh my hopes fat me: nor shall time grow old,
Or weary with attending my success.
One night shall crown me happy: Borgias wife
Appears unto the Dukes for Iu^ias ghost,
To breed suspit^on in them of her murder,
So that if Borgias chau^ce survive this night
(As he must dye if all my plots hi^s right)
The Dukes to morrow when the Senate sits
May prove what i'll affirm against his life.
Nor to redeem his sa^ety shall he bring
The Lady to disprove what we aver.
Here will I cease, and in some strange disguise
Keep till my growing faction be of force
To second my ambition for the crown.
If I plot well fair Amada must dye,
And by her mothers hand: she must not live
To speak her fathers wrongs. Timoclea
Thou, thou art next: I took thee from thy grave
Not for the love I bore Timoclea,
But to suck from thy use the sweets of love
I bore to Iulia: twas love and state.
^aue thee this time of life to str^ngth my fate:
But blab not: silence tongue: she comes.

My Lord, what, drowned in contemplation?
Mull^asses: love.

Heavenly creation, beauties abstract, natures wonder.

What means my Lord? awake, Timoclea speaks.

I must enjoy thee Amada: strong force of passion.

Ha: Amada: dearest Lord: your sense
And know me.

Ha Timoclea: thy love and pardon, I was oreborne,
And carried from my self with iole thoughts
Of what sad melancholy suggested in me:
What comfort bring thou? hath thy dead shape
Been powerful unto fear? stood they a mazd?
Their eyes like fired stars set on thy face:
Their speech abrupt and short: their hair upright?
Stiff like the quills of Porcupines? art blessed?

I am: if what you speak may make me blessed.

It makes us happy: gives our hope true life.

Neither my life nor hope to be so blessed
Makes me so happy as thy love dear Turk.
Were I a Venus thou should be my Mars,
And I would court thee even in Phebus sight,
Although it moved an envy in the gods.
Be Io^ial: like Salmecis, thy love
Shall cling about thy neck.

I am not sportful:

I'll dance before thee like a faiery Nymph,
And with my pleasing motions make thee spor^:
I'll court thee naked, as did the Queen of thoughts
Her sullen boy, and all to make thee sport.

You are not pleasing.

Not pleasing gentle Turk?
Time hath not set the characters of age
On my smooth brow: my pulses beat as high,
As when my first youth lifted up my blood,
I buy no beauty: nor hath nature been
A niggard in my face: I am yet young
Fresh and delight some, as the checkerd spring,
The Lilly and the Rose grow in my che^kes,
And make a bed for love to rest him on.

But I am restless.

Rest thee on my breast.

No I must pilgrine to a love divine.

Love me and unto love I'll build a shrine
And on an Altar offer to our loves,
The thighs of Sparrows and of Turtle Doves.

You are importunate.

Yield then and I have done.

No more:
Fair Amada's the saint that I adore.

Amada: minyon is it you?
Makes me thus sue unheard? my daughter Amada
Have I in my bosom nursed a snake:
No fierce streamd torrent^ nor no storm at Sea,
No stepdame is half so raging: my blood was not so strong,
When thou were got: now us like the Sea,
My soul a Bark that runs with wind and tide
And cannot stop: the Anchor of my thoughts
(Reason) is lost, and like the vine-gods pries^s
Running down Ni^a or from Pindus top,
I am unstaid and doubtful in my cou^se.
O the strong power of sense: I must do that
Which all succeeding times to come shall speak
Ye^ not believe; all say twas done, yet none
Say twas well done. Love is a God,
Strong, free, unbounded, and as some define,
Fears nothing, pities none: such love is mine.

O Had our souls no deeper sense then flesh,
Were they like waxen pictures formable:
Obsequiously to take impression
From every rude hand, and be like this will,
That wills us unto some defo^mity,
I should not Amada complain of wrong
But make religion of my forced restraint:
I then should sleep and pray: and on my beads
Number deuo^ion: my environed spirit
Sho^ld not thus swell beyond my present freedom:
Whisper my wrongs, and prompt my weaker powers
To prone impatience

Madam I am yours.
Let not the name of daughter unto him
That hath confined your hope, be prejudice
To those affections I bear your state:
I'll prove against reason and received truth,
Like breeds not like, in breeding every thing:
Clear streams may flow even from a troubled spring.

I am no infidel to thy posi^ion,
Sad thoughts oppress me: may I have no musique?

Yes Madam.

Some say that when the Thracian entered hell,
The to^tu^'d souls enchanted with his tunes,
Felt not their torments: Syciphus sate down,
Ixions wheel s^ood still: the thirsty son of Jove,
Forgot to drink, and all the r^st did stand
Ca^ching the air from his delicious hand:
I would I might partake their happiness.

Madam you shall: gi^e your ears a while,
And you shall hear such music as would make
The greedy wolf forsake the tender lamb,
And listen to it: such as the son of Neptune
Played to the Dolphins: when they in a ring
Danced their crookt measures but to hear him sing.
Madam how fare you now^

Even as the labouring dayman after sleep.
Refreshed and cherished: ha but Amada.

Some better Geniu^ assist my fear.

What would it Amada, it beckons to thee?

My mothers troubled spirit: O defend me heavens.

Away: Amada.

It commands my absence.

O for heavens sake stay.

Away.

S^mething it would unfold to thee: I go.

Contain thy fear, I live.

Such terror lives not in a living eye,
Death is not sha^per then those pointed beams
That pierce unto my heart.

Would they were poniards digging at thy breast.
Keep in thy short-drawne accents: let not the air
Carry the softest clamour to the ear
Of waking Iealo^sie: if it do --
How Lust and Nature do divide my soul?
The one doth plead prescription in my blood,
And sues as plaintive with such clamorous spells,
As might conjure the violent rape of Lust
To modest continence: O but it is a vice
Sooner condemned then banished: easily spoke against
But yet t'wil fawn as smoothly on our flesh,
As Circe on the Grecian trauellours,
When she detaind them in the shape of beasts.
Amada know thou my face?

I knew that outward Character of her
That sometimes I called mother.

Dost think I have no life?
Se^st not my blood in a continual pulse
Beat through the azure conduits of my flesh?
Feel how I burn: what star'^t thou on me?
Am I transparent? can see from my heart
Death in the shape of jealousy: stand
Like a chief organ guiding all my frame,
Unto some tragic action?

O give my sense some freedom
From fear and terror, that I may distinguish
Betwixt the credulous rumour of your death,
And what I see.

I live, the time befits not inquisition
Of tedious circumstance: Amada I live:
But thou must dye, and by thy mothers hand.

O be not a Medea.

Why like Creusa hast thou stolen my Iasen?
My Mulleasses he d^tes upon thee:
I am debarred his breast,
Robbed of his love by thy alluring looks.
Sad discontent wound in his folded arms,
Sighs nought but Amada: but by my better hopes
My blood shall like Medusas first turn to serpe^ts
And taint thy flesh, ere it shall loose that fire
Which makes it boyle and burn^ in his desire.

Deform my beauty fill my face with scars,
Make me more loath some then a dead mans scull:
Wash me with spiders blood, that I may swell,
And be more ugly then a Gorgons head,
That he may fear to see me: only let me live,
And spare me that that only you did give.

My pleasure gave thee life, and it resumes
That life again, because it kills my pleasure:
You are like an Ivy nourished at the root
Of some proud oak: that not content to creep
And feed upon the sap, but stretching up,
Proudly presumst to overlook the top:
So that the verdure of the ambitious imp,
Detains all admiration: the Oak wants grace,
Only because the Ivy is in place.
But I'll displant thee for no weed shall grow
So near the root f^om whence my sap doth flow.

Cruel unnatural: heaven my hopes in thee
If virgin pureness please, accept of me.

What, do you Christians sacrifice with flesh?
Or like the Laodiceans unto Pallas, offer
The blood of virgins? O inhumane deed,
Ungentle monster, beauteous Amada!

It was her beauty that I offered up
Unto thy love my dearest Mulleasses.

Worse then a Cammel in her time of lust,
Cruel unto thy child: loose thy snaky arms
O thou hast done

As Lucius Catalline
Romes terror did for Orestilla, killed
My child: no more: for Mulleasses love,
I would outgo examples, and exceed
As in desire, all others so indeed.

And yet I love thy cruelty: for this night thou must
Discard the timorous pity of thy Sex:
Be a Semiramis: let thy husbands death
Give thy hopes life: feed, feed upon his blood,
And let thy veins swell: now he prepares to bed
Be thine own ghost: and like the apparition
Of his be^eeu'd-dead wife call for revenge:
Incite his timorous conscience to despair,
Speak of damnanion: let one word contain
A hell of torments. But time slides.

I run.

Much ere the morning rises must be done,
I'll bear this body hence: ha ha ha,
O now me thinks I gin out-reach my self,
Now like some huge Collossus cold I strut,
And stride that Oak of Mahomet: that bears up
The ponderous center: whose divided horns
Measuring the passing of a thousand years,
Touch at both Polles, and toss the massy ball:
Makes mountains nod and curled Cedars reel
On Syrian Lybanus. But soft me thinks I hear
Some mutinous and distracted tumult.

Guard me ye just and intellectual powers
Thou triple eternal essence.

Borgias.

What dreadful summons calls on Borgias?
What art thou?

Timoclea thy poisoned wife.

What would thou, Hah.

Revenge and horror.

Terror to my soul: forbear those looks.

Despair and vengeance.

May thou be peaceful, in my prayers I wish it,
Let them expiate my sin: if thou be a spirit
Blessed and celestial: change that face of fear,
Or leave th'infectious grosnesse of our air,
And like an Angel dance about the Spheres,
Play with the Moon and make the Sun thy glass,
To see thy beauty as thy heavy pass.
Or if thou be --

A messenger of death.

Then like a Fury post to Tartarus,
Fetch up the snackie curled Eumenides:
From Orcus bottom where revengeful cares
Grief, pale diseases, sad and crooked age
Are ever resident: let them and their effects
Let fierce Erennis with her brazen feet,
Seize me at once, and strike me in my fall,
Lower then him that durst ascend the Sun.
Only be thou appeasd.

Not till I meet thee in the shades of death.

Which thou deny me: for thy fears keep in
My trembling soul: it dares not leave my breast,
Mount to the flaming girdle of the world,
And fetch me lightnings, I will swallow it.
Snatch from the Ciclops balls of Etnean fire
And I will eat them: steal thunder from the clouds
And dart it at me: quaff Stigian Nonocris
I will pledge thee.

I'll haunt thee to despair.

Pursue his fear to some effect of death,
Whilst I like stars that spread their sparkling fires
Beyond an usual light fore-shewe a tempest
Of the whole state of Florence. Amadas removed
Her near alliance unto Iulias blood,
Shall not distaste my hopes: Timocleas fear
Works death on Borgias: up Mulleasses
Sit like Saturnus on the highest orb,
And let starre-gazing wizards from thy fear,
Buzz sad Astrology in the peoples ear.

What night or what darcke Chaos can conceal^
My conscience horror? rather let me see
The fear of Hercules: let the Cretian Bull
Bellow and burst my brains: only may my ears
Be deaf to thy exclaims.

Thou art at farthest.

Then I can but fall.

Like Lucifer from heaven.

Oh now me thinks a Chorus all of Angels
Clad with the Sun and crowned with golden stars,
Should make more heavenly musique at thy fall
Then all the Spheres that dance about the ball:
Now should they poetize in verse for joy,
And out-sing Homer in the fall of Troy.

Villain triumphst thou?

O ye strong power of superstitious faith
It reigns on fools: that men of wit and state,
Men that like Eagles climb to be above,
And shroud themselves between the knees of Iou^^
Should be struke down by apparitions.

Delu^iue counterfeit.

Conterfeit!

I Valentine I liue^
And am the actor of mine own revenge.
That cup of poison made against my life,
Was by my dearest Mulleasses love
Turned to a philter: and my working sense,
Charmed in the silence of a quiet sleep,
Showed as if death had locked my pulses up,
But posting time brought motion on my blood.
And now my full veins like a water-brooke,
Tha^ sliding gently at some proud hills foot,
In pipes of lead are carried to the top,
And the^e in amorous branches spreading forth,
Courts the curled mountain thus, thus, and thus:

Lascivious strumpet.

My beloved Turk.

Incestuous Phedra.

Love Hipolitus.

Cruel Medea.

My kind Iason.

Whirl me ye just more au^pitious powers,
Amongst the thick and thunder darting clouds,
That being wrapped in flames I may be thrown,
Like Aetnean balls from heaven and strike you down:
Or would my dying breath wer^ more infectious
Then half rot bodies digd up from their graves,
Or then those mists felt by the souls of men,
When they descend^th Acharusian fen.
It should not strive within me, or be loath
To leave my body might it blast you both.

So with thy death the Embri^m of my love
Takes perfect shape. Now like the Sestian maid
May I court Leander swimming in my armes^
And with our pleasing motions mock the seas
That rose and fell to wanton with his thighs:
Now there's no Hellespont betwixt our loves:
I am not jealous: Agamemnons dead,
And Clitemnestra with A^g^sthus plays:
Pleasure is free.

Come there's no pleasure in you:
You're a lustful time sp^nt murderous strumpet,
The prostitution of your known Bordellos,
Where every itching lecher ^ents his blood,
Is not so loathsome.

You speak not like a lover.

No, for thou hast killed my love Amada:
And now thy husbands blood bids me beware
Of some new lust and third adulterer:
Such is your love to me.

Oh stop those killing accents, be more mild
I do forgive what you did speak: and ask
But a kind thought for all my loving task.
These eyes have seen you smile: look gently on me,
And let me read some milder characters:

Hence with thy Serpent twines.

I am no Lamia nor no Lostrigon,
No high-prizd Lais: that thou should esteem
Repentance purchasd at too dear a rate:
Kings shall not come to Corinth where thou may,
Not with a common Ephereian ^ull,
Purchase a minutes pleasure: but with me
(As fair but yet more chaste by far then she)
Spend years of sweet content.

Siren mine ears are stopped I will not hear thee.

Oh would I had a Sirens charming voice,
I'd use no incantations but to thy ears,
Or were my tongue like Orpheus golden lyre,
To which the winds were husht and heard it play^
It should be silent but to please thy ears,
Or like the dying swan, would I might sing
A funeral elegy to my parting soul,
So that the musique might but please thy ears:
What should I say?

Be dumb and leave me.

Not till thou love, or else of life bereave me.

Ha,
Are ye gone: all clear, damnation cease ye,
I, a known practiced pollititian,
And thus outreacht: O my shallow brains.
Fell I so high? would I had fallen from heaven:
So, like a Phaeton I had fired the world:
Or like a flash of lightning on your heads,
Consumd you for these tricks: I dyed in time^
Like a true coward, counterfeited death,
For fear to die indeed: well then for my life
I am beholding yet unto my wit:
But for my legs I know not how they stand,
Are my bonesstiffe still, not broken?
Ha?

I am at last freed of my lustful love,
My hope is yet despair will arm her hands
To her own death, and save my sword a labour:
If not, tis but the taking back of what I gave,
And send her once again into her grave.
Now for my Iulia, she is the maine of all,
Her will I cease and keep, until the Fleet
Now under sail for Florence be arrived,
From the grand Signior sent to make me strong,
And get command upon the straights: how soere
Twas promised Borgias to make strong his part,
Against the Dukes: she being had,
My title's firm for Florence, their claime's bad.
Eunuch.

Your pleasure.

See you this body?

I do.

Convey it to his bed there let it lye,
The murder I'll transport upon the Dukes,
Or on some treason by their means contrived:
See it be done.

It shall.

Now unto Iulia, on her lies my state,
If she consents: why so: if not I know
Death and command makes women's hearts to bow.

The death of slaves pursue thee. hah Borgias,
Protector: true true: clap clap ye furies,
Dance your black rounds, and with your iron whips,
Fetching eternal lashes as you skip
Strike a loud sounding music through the air,
And make the night Queen pale to hear your noise.
Be peaceful wronged Ghost where soere thou be,
Post to the blessed fields where souls take rest:
Drink Lethe freely for thou art reuengd.
Come thou enclosure of a damned soul,
I'll be obedient bear to thy bed,
Then in my chamber laugh that thou art dead.
What sudden pain assaults my yielding heart?

Ha ha, ha, you'll bear me to my bed,
Then in your chamber laugh that I am dead.

Lives thou damned villain?

I live, and laugh wild slave to see thy fall,
This is the enclosure of a damned soul,
Villain thou shalt not breath another word.

Stay but a minute longer, know that I have
Thy promise and thy oath to be my guard,
Thy slave I murdered and assumed his shape,
I am Ferrara.

Ferrara, ha? true true, clap clap ye furies
Dance your black rounds, and with your iron whips,
Fetching eternal lashes as ye skip,
Strike a loud sounding music through the air
And make the nights Queen pale to hear your noise:
You have my oath and promise for your guard:
So wise men promise fools, but their reward
Like thine Ferrara is the loss of breath.

Justice I thee implore, revenge my death

Mulleasses thinks me dead, and in his plots
Goes on securely: I'll return his policies,
And upon him transport Ferraras murder.
My wife he hath forsook: that sweetens danger
That I but live to see revenge on her.
My weak force built upon the Turkish fleet,
I see is ruined, and I but undermined:
No hope is left save in mine own command
And power with the state: whose light credulity,
I easily did delude with Iulias death.
But yet Timoclea lives, and may perhaps
Escape her false loves hate: which if she do,
This black nights horror falls like thunder on me:
She must not live till day: be ever dark.
Stand night upon the noonestead: and attend
My fates security: if ever blacknes pleased
Or deeds to which men may resemble thee,
Turn then thy sooty horse, and with their feet,
Beat at the rising morn: force the Sun,
Forbear his lustre till this black deed's done.

HEll and ye furies wheresoever you be,
show me your tortures, and present your selves
Or let the burning monarch clad in flame,
Make an infernal echo to my name.
I know not what I say: Timoclea wronged,
Loue-slighted and contemned: O my wish!
That like the crosse-eyd witch of Thessaly
My voice could through the rivets of the earth
Hello and call revenge: or rather: what?
My dangerous ghost attired like Nemesis
About her middle for a virgin Zone
Girt with a forckt-tooth'd serpent, vent at my breast
That did exceed a stepdame in my lust.
Forbear yet gentle maid; thy fathers soul
Kneels at the brazen Throne of Radamanth
And craves that office: Whither am I borne?
Despair, thou art a false glass to the soul,
And in the conscience dazeld with thy guilt
Of many sins, dost vary forms of fear.
I not believe thy forced suggestions,
I am seduced by passion: death and terror.

Error,

False air thou lie I err not: my loves wrong
I'll tear out of my breast: forget those hopes
Made my hands bloody: I am cleare^ unstained:

Stained:

Forbear thy thunder gentle, gentle voice,
Beat not my conscience torments against the walls,
To make the Court ring with thy clamorous answers:
Heavens let my tears redeem me unto life.

Life.

Of my terror: I desire not: speak of death.

Death.

Of my daughter: how easy through the air
Our sins are hurried: thou can tell of murder.

Murder.

I of my husband: night thy cole-blacke wings
Though darker then the Moons eclipsed brow
Are not fit Canopies for sin.

Timoclea.

Distraction of my soul, who breathes my name!

The airy breath of him that sometime lived
A tenant in the breast of Borgias,
By thee driven out the frame and house of life.

By me

And now like one whom sterne oppression throws
Naked out of all he did possess: being tobd and spoiled
Of the warm covert he inhabited,
I sigh my helpless wrongs^ and in the air
Counting all hope I had, find all despair.

Despair.

And empty longings for an end of pain,
Which I still wish and crave.

But never gain.

Never.

Forgive me.

Ask it of the heavens,
To whom my blood with ceasseles clamours calls
For Justice and revenge.

Justice in heaven is like my sin against thee
Cruel: and sooner may I with my knees
Eat through the center: from these pearly eyes
Should there fall down more tears of penitence
Then the clouds drop to purchase a new spring
I could not be forgiven.

Death is the winter dombd unto thy soul
Disrobe it of that warm and wanton flesh,
The mouth of Justice bids Timoclea dye.

Be thou then justice executioner
Revengeful spirit: in this flesh of mine
Carve thy revenge in characters of blood
Blast me: or from the centers hollow deep
Let loose some conjured tempests: whose loud storms
Driven through the air sings horror to the world,
And let them hurl me against the labouring clouds
Sink to the brazen-gated deep Abisse,
Where furies sit curling their snakes in knots,
And pull a viper from Alectos head,
And on these breasts that in thy heat of life,
Have been as pillows to advance thy lust
Let it suck freely: the Egyptian Queen
Ne'er dyed more daring.
And to the sterne commissioners of blood,
Be a glad Hermes: tell them, Timoclea
Takes vengeance on her selfe^ dull Element be gone.

The mornings saffron horse breathes from the East
Their spicy vapors, sucked from th'ndian plains
And through the gentle air hurl their perfumes.
I hear the Suns steeds trot towards the milky way,
And in a Coach of flames draw up the day:
Aurorat usher to the stars of night,
Tells the approaching of the God of light:
They gin to twinckle and take in their fires
At their eclipse we spirits leave the air,
And in a dismal vale of darkness groan,
Under the burden of a thousand chains:
I must away, thou only dost detain me,
With want of vengeance, which thy death must gain me.

It shall, it shall:
Hard hap of misery, it hath many hands,
That like the windings of a labyrinth,
Leads the despairing wretch into a maze:
But not an Ariadn^ in the world,
That lends a clew to led us out the world.
The very maze of horror.
Cease thou that stands first mover of the Spheres
From whose high concave all inferior fires
Derive successive motion.
Stand ye night-wandring planets in a maze,
And from your hollow Fabrics view Timoclea,
Or else ye heavens put in your flaring lights,
And on your azure-seiled arches hang
A rauen-blacke Canopy of congealed clouds
That you may seem a Chaos to the world,
And boade eternal darkness: thou were not made to kill,
Nor was the Diadem of her Ponticke Queen
Made as a fatal instrument of death,
And yet it was the engine stop her breath
As thou must mine. Soul of Borgias
Thus to thy ghost I sacrifice my life,
To buy thy requiem.

I accept it wife.
And thus return the fall of Borgias.
Nay nay repent not dear Timoclea,
You're caught in faith: th^n like a Lioness
Snar'd in the wary hunters tangled toils,
Grind the thin air: swell higher till thou burst,
And let the breath that like a vapour pressed
Struggle within thy bosom, hurl the up.
Soft -- the time spends fast, I have much to think of
Before the tell-tale god displays his light,
To show the world the horror of this night.
First for thy death the lustful Turk must dye,
My rival in the love of Iulia.
Him I'll accus^ for murdering thee. The Dukes
Because his claim may alienate my hopes
Him in my accusation I will join
As joint coagent in the Turk devises.
As for that rumour of fair Iulias death,
I'll first proclaim her life: and on Mulleasses
(Who now detains her) will transfer the falsehood,
As if my self had been by him deluded:
These mazes when like Theseus I have trod^
Fortune shall spread her wings to make me sails,
And with a strong air cut the angry tide,
That into mountains swells to stay my pride.
H^h! what heavy noise beats through my ears?
Hang heavy Morpheus on the eyes of men,
And make suspicion sleep.

The rumours strange I pray possess me with your proper knowledge.


You shall understand Sir, that according to my function, giving near
attendance to my Lady, she being fervently employed in the Lobby, ^bout a
mixture or composure of (as we vulgarly term it) a posset: upon our first
entrance, ere we had relished the sweet of her sweet, that is the fruit of her
labours, we were suddenly assailed by a she-goblin: to describe it Sir I am
not able, for my eye-sight turned inward to look after my heart that was
running from my heals, yet thanks to the lancknesse of my calfe they made
reasonable haste.


Heart of all mischief see the Court is up,
Hell and the darkness keep me from their sight.

At midnight did Ferrara leave his chamber,
Heavens be his safety.

A ghost a ghost.


Pursue it where it goes: fear shall not stop me.
Follow me sir, I'll speak to it, though death
Cease on my life: it shall not loose mine eyes
Unless it sink into the earth.

S'foot my office is italianated, I am fain to come behind.


Was ever man thus distracted between the flesh and the spirit? s'foot this
Pill hath so fired my mansion that unless I light on some water-worke, I
shall loose the rain^s like a second Phaeton, and burn my Fabric. Surely I
am that Tantalus the hungry Poets talk of, and am as dry as an Eel in a
sand-bagge, and yet want water for the reaching: Let me see, why should I fear
spirits that have raised up such an able one at my pleasure, that like a bold
Orator stands on tip-toes to speak in Bar: and yet me thinks he should be
no good pleader, he was so suddenly dejected and out of countenance with an
apparition. I would the case were laid open, that I might see how my young
mooter would bestir himself: Ha: who is this? no more ghosts I hope: if it be
it is the more womanly of the two. She lies as if she knew the end of her
creation. On my life some weighting maid that hath a Court Epilepsie come upon
her: I'll see if she some at the mouth. Out alas, the heavens have conspired
poor Bordellos overthrow. The virtuous Timoclea wretched and most accursed
hands, that have trust up my fortunes in thy Elfe-knot.


THese apparitions do import more weight
Then our distracted judgements can yet poise,
Yet mighty Duke suspend a while all fear
If both my power in state and worth in honour
May be sufficient gage to be your guarde
Then think you are in safety.

Sir we thank you: neither is there one
Known unto us in Florence, on whose worth,
I dard assure such safety as from you,
And to that end I brought this gentleman,
As well to acquaint you with this deep occurrence,
That much concerns your present state, as crave
A guard for our security against danger.

Respect your guard great Duke. Villain what art thou


A most dejected parcel of mans flesh.


Lend your eyes and see
A deed as black as is the time that hides it:
A murdered gentlewoman.

Ignoble villain, could thy coward-arme
Presume the least wrong to her feeble sex?

Wrong: heavens know I meant to have done her a^ much right as could have been
done to one of her sex.


Death hath not changed her form: see her face,
You may discern her by her character.

She bears the image of Timocl^
Wife hnto Borgias.

Soul of delusion, in this very shape
The ghost of Iulia was presented unto me.

Amazement and the giddy thought of fear
Run an unsteady circuit through my brain:
Thy fear and trembling doth proclaim thy guilt.

Alas Sir my shaking proceeds of a standing ague I have had this two hours.


The time importunates and craves sudden counsel.
Guard cease him safe, some bear this body hence,
Wee'le unto Borgias chamber, him wee'le wake,
Acquaint him with the ground of our suspicion:
Mean time be safe in me: nor love nor life
Shall turn mine honours current: I'll be your guard:
This hand seems your person, or my sword
Shall in the Traitors heart make good my word.

IF thou be humane, then forsake thy suit
Your words are strange to me: my virgin ears
Ne'er knew such sound: desist I will not bow.

We loose all pleasure that we do not know
Then like Pandora view those heavenly gifts.
The Gods have decked thee with: See but thy self
And taste more pleasure from thy proper good
Then from the full horne of the Protean flood:
Elisium is in thee, and I implore --

Sirens have left the Sea and sing on shore.

Could I out-^ing those Sirens Iulia,
Or were my voice as tunefull as that harp
That now vies music with the harmonious orbs,
To which each learned Sister naild a star,
Thou might with safety hear me: thy Uncles love
Cold as the white head of the Apennine
feels not my fire: ambition of rule
Tu^nes al the heate is left in him to incest.
If thy warm blood (that dallies in thy veins,
And through thy flesh like wanton riuile^s plays)
Desires with Nyle to rise above her banks,
And vent in pleasure on the neighbouring plains;
A carpet richer then the breast of Tempe,
Or Tagus yellow channel, shall be spread
And pr^st with Iulias weight.
Nor the blew Sea-god when in storms he treads
On pea^les as Orient as the rising East,
For which the toiling Negro dives in vain,
Are boasted of such wealth: thy bed as ^oft
As down feathers plucked from Ledas swans,
Shall yield unto thy dalliance,
A hundred boys like winged Cherubins
As fair as Psiches love shall --

Enough, too much: I am not fit for pleasure
Or if I were thy Mermaid eloquence
Sounds harsher in my ears then Sillas dogs
Unto the frighted Sea-man.

Lady.

Heathen profane.

Be gentle Madam.

If thou be gentle leave me Mahomet
Our loves like our religio^s are at wars
And I disclaim all peace.

And I a lovers smoothness: your Uncles dead
His power is mine, and you must go.

Soul of wrongs: whither? you're both to weak
There's more then woman in me: villain, slave:

You urge me unto violence come to my chamber.

In hell or in my grave: a rape, treason: treason.

A guard, a guard.

Dea^h of my hope the Court is up.

From hence the voice was heard, be circumpect.

Treason, treason.

Who speaks that word?

Iulia your Sovereign.

Silence or thou die.

Error of darkness in what Labirinth
Our souls are plunged: raise the Court: Iulia?

I.

Iulia and Mulleasses?

Iulia and Mulleasses fond Venitian
Prevented at the point of hapines:

Thus I redeem her.

And like Cephalus kill thine own Procris.

Save me.

Thy death shall be her freedom infidel.

Why stop you in your courses short breathed Christians?
Nail us together. Now me thinks I stand
L^k^ a pro^d Lyon with a richer prize
Then N^ssus would have stolen from Hercules
And dare your envies: my dea^h unto your state
S^albe as ominous as his poisoned shirt:
Your false Protec^or's dead: ^e mocked your griefs
And made you we^pe at Iulias f^nerall,
Who^e hope I vnderwrought, and now had worn
The wreath of Florence: Love and ambition,
Kindled my cold brain from their mutual heate
Sprung my aspiring aim: nor shall it sink
But in the dea^h of Iulia: since I cannot
Quench my hot thi^st of Lust, and cool the heat
That hotter then the coals of Parta
Burn in my liver: like the snowy Dragon,
Tangling the El^phant in his snarled orbs:
I'll dye in the pursuit of my desire,
And mix our bloods in death to sate my fire,

Hold monster.

Damnation on thy soul.

Thy death shall ransom her.

Death double thy feared force, and it some form
Affright pale Hecate darken the Moon,
I like the Sun, backed on th'Arcadian beast,
When in his burning progress he did singe
Adonis gardens: from my souls fair light
Chase cloudy fear: and like Thetis son,
When he was oynted with Ambrosia^
Am more then fire-proofe: lives Iulia yet?

She lives damned villain and out-liues thy hate.

Death had been kind in her: with her I might
Under the cool shades of Elisium
Played before Pluto and made Proserpine
As jealous as Iuno of my love --
But since I must not

Up from the dark earths exhalations
Thicker then Lernas foggy mists and hide me:
I cannot loose their sight, hell of fear!

It flies our eager steps: follow, follow.

What means these clamours: Borgias?

Hah, Borgias:

Horror of ^oules I am surprised.

Illusiue air, false shape of Borgias,
Could thy vain shadow work a fear in him
That like an Atlas vnderwent the earth
When with a firm and constant eye he saw
Hells fifty headed Porter: thus I'd prove
Thy apparition idle: -- runs at Borgias.

Treason: I live: Devils and Furies I am slain.

Wonder of admiration: what distraction is this?

Ha ha, ha: climb high my mounting spirit
And when thou hast aspird to thy full hight
Like a Collossus on a base of clouds
Stand and applaud thy fortunes: Borgias

Grin'st hellish Antique?

Should the Cecropian thief stretch my torn flesh
Racked on his bed of steel: if on Caucasus
My growing liver were exposd a prey
To ravening Vultures: I would still laugh
To see thee like a falling Pine-tree reel
In a rough tempest.

Hold up ye broken organs of my soul
Carry me high and make me stand as firm
As Oaks on Ossa: that advance their tops
Even till their roots break. Timoclea

For love of me killed her own child
Thy daughter Amada.

Amazement!

Blessed fates I thank you: I shall dye revenged
Fly, Jove loved Nemesis and at Justice feet
Shake thy triumphal Ash: I slue Timoclea

By thee before thought dead
I took her from the hearse of Iulia,
When in the habit of a murdered ghost,
This night she appeared to the Duke, to breed
Suspect in them of thee, and arm their hate
Unto my plotted faction.

Damned illusion.

Where is Ferrara?

Heavens be his guard.

So they are. He killed my sl^ue
And in his habit by this hand he dyed.

False periurd villain.

Sink, sink Cytheron, high P^ll^ne tremble
Green Tempe wither, and with me forgo
Your place and being, this whole world of flesh
With ^atall earth-quakes totters.
False Turk thy fate be but as cruel as is Borgias hate.

Stoop down thou Lydian mount, bend thy cold head
And hide it in thy brackish fathers waives
That as thou shrinkst, thy starry load may nod
At Mulleasses fall: or ever shroud
Those joyful bonfires in a mourning cloud.

Just end of treason.

Madame our duties joy your life
And wish your happiness.

As the just reward of danger.
My Lord I claim her love.

Not without Justice brave Venecian
She is herself and free.

And thus I give my self.

Heavens seal it for the the good of both our states.

Philenzo:
We can but grieve at great Ferraras loss:
Ambassadors from us shall plead our sorrows
Even to your Senats: mean time his obsequies
Shall want no honour: Signior Bordello
We give you liberty: what remains undone
Shall by the Senate be confirmed: lead on.


