SHame and dishonour to the Roman name
A triumph held at Alexandria
Only to honour Cleopatraes pride?

Ah Marcus, this Egyptian Queen was made
(...) be the ruin of Antonius.

(...) be the pleasure of Antonius.


^ow can you jest Canidius, on a theme
(...) sad?

(...) Plancus can you prophecy
(...) sadly on so merry an occasion,
As is the love of Ladies?

Let Canidius
Have his own way, Munatius, tis in vain
To talk to him.

Would you could let me have
Antonius his way, upon condition
I suffered you to censure gravely of it,
And prophecy my ruin. But my Lords,
You were as good be merry too, and take
Your share of pleasure in th'Aegyptian Court.
You'll do no good with these persuasions.
He loves the Queen, and will do so in spite.
Of our morality.

Tis too too true,
That face of hers, that beauty in the bud
Not fully blown, in years of innocence
(If any years of hers were innocent)
Set off with no adulterisme of art,
Nor clothed with state and pompous Majesty,
But in a fortune clouded and distressed
A wretched prisoner in her brother's Court,
Yet then I say that charming face could move
The manly temper of wise Julius Caesar,
That Ma^ in heat of all his active war,
When he pursued the flying Pompey hither,
His sword yet reeking in Pharsa^i^es slaughter
At sight of her became a dot^ng Lover:
And could we think that our Antonius
A man not master of that temperance
That Caesar had, could find a strength to guard
His soul against that beauty now set off
With so much wealth and majesty?

No surely.
I did not think Antonius was an Eunuch.
Nor could I have believed he had been worthy
To be a successor in Caesa^ power,
Unless he had succeeded him in her.
Great Julius noble acts in war and state
Assured the world that he was wise and valiant:
But if he had not fallen in love with her
I should have much suspected his good nature.

Nay then, Canidius, it shall be yours.


Or what indeed were greatness in the world
If he that did possess it, might not play
The wanton with ^t? this Egyptian Queen
Is a state beauty, and ordained by fate
To be possessed by them that rule the world.
Great Pompey's son enjoyed her first, and plucked
Her Virgin blossom. When that Family,
Whose ruin filled the World, was overthrown,
Great Iul^us next came in as conqueror
To have his share, and as he did in power,
Succeeded him in Cleopatrae, love.
Now our Antonius takes his turn, and thinks
That all the legions* all the swords, that came
To make his greatness up when Julius died,
Could give no greater privilege to him
Then p^wer to be the servant to this Queen.
Thus whosoere in Rome be conqueror
His laurel wreath is Cleopatraes love.
And to speak justly of her, Nature teem'd
To build this woman for no meaner height.
Her soul is full of greatness, and her wit
Has charms as many as her beauty has.
With Majesty beyond her sex she rules
Her spacious Kingdoms, and all neighbour Princes
Admire her parts. How many languages
Speaks she with elegance? Ambassadors
From the Aethiopians, Arabs, Troglodytes,
From the Hebrews, Syrians, Medes, and Parthians
Have in amazement heard this learned Queen
Without the aid of an interpreter
In all their several tongues return their answers;
When most of her dull predecessor Kings
Since Ptolemaeus Philadelphus time
Scarce understood the Egyptian tongue, and some
Had quite forgot the Macedonian.

How well Canidius descants on this theme!


I'll lay my life it pleases him; the man
Is deep in love, and pity tis he has
So great a rival as Antonius.

Well use your wit upon me; but I doubt
If any man could search your secret thoughts,
Tis envy, not morality that makes
You tax his love, how gravely ere you talk.

But can Canidius think it should be just
In our Antonius to forsake for her
His lawful wife the good Octavia?

Then like a Roman let me answer, Marcus.
Is it become a care worthy of us
What woman Antony enjoys? have we
Time to dispute his matrimonial faults,
That have already seen the breach of all
Romes sacred laws, by which the world was bound?
Have we endured our Consuls state and power
To be subjected by the lawless arms
Of private men, or Senators proscribed,
And can we now consider whether they
That did all this, may keep a wench or no?
It was the crime of us, and Fate it self
That Antony and Caesar could usurp
A power so great; beyond which we can suffer
No more worth thinking of. Nor were it to us
Any great fortune if Antonius
Were honest of his body.

Have we then,
Who have been greatest Magistrates, quite lost
All show of liberty, and now not dare
To counsel him?

A show of liberty
When we have lost the substance, is best kept
By seeming not to understand those faults
Which we want power to mend. For mine own pa^
I love the person of Antonius;
And through his greatest looseness can discern
A nature here, honester then Caesars.
And if a war do grow twixt them (as surely
Ambition would ere long find out a cause
Although Octavia had not been neglected)
Rather then Rome should still obey two Lords,
Could wish that all were Anthony's alone.
Who would, I think, be brought more easily
Then Caesar, to resign the government.

Would I could think that either would do so.
Here comes her servant Mardio.

Noble Lords,
The Queen by me entreats your company
At supper with the Lord Antonius.

Marcio return our humble services,
We 'll instantly attend her. Now my friends,
Can you a while put off austerity,
And rigid censures, to be freely merry?

It may be so. We'll try what wine can do.


Glaucus, let more of this perfume be got.


I have enough in readiness; or else
'Twould be too late to think on it now, the Queen
Is upon entrance.

Charmio, art thou sure
Those tapers stand just as the Queen commanded?

Tis the same order that Antonius
When last he feasted here, so much admired;
And said amongst all the curiosities
That he had seen, the placing of those lights.
Did not the least affect him.

Though the Romans
In power and warl^ke state exceed us far,
Yet in our Court of Egypt they may learn
Pleasure and bravery, but art thou sure
That all things here are well?

As exquisite
As the Queens wish would have it. Hark they come.

To say, my Lord, that you are welcome hither
Were to disparage you, who have the power
To make your self so, what ere you see
In Egypt is your own.

What Egypt holds
If I be judge, not all the world besides
Can equalise.

Will it please you take
Your place, and these your noble Roman friends?

Father Achoreus, sit you near to me.
Your holy Orders, and great age, which shows
The Gods have loved you well, may justly challenge
A reverence from us.

Great Julius Caesar
Did love my father well; he oft was pleased
At hours of leisure to confer with him
About the nature of our Nile, of all
The mysteries of Religion, and the wonders
That Egypt breeds.

He had a knowing soul,
And was a master of Philosophy
As well as War.

How like the spangled sky
These tapers make the high-arch'd roof to show?
While Cleopatra like bright Cynthia
In her full orb more guilds the cheerful night.
She's still at full; yet still me thinks she vexes,
And grows more fair and more majestic.

My Lords, you Romans, whose victorious arms
Have made you Masters of the world, possess
Such full and high delights in Italy,
That our poor Egypt can present no pleasure
Worth your acceptance: but let me entreat
You would be freely merry, and forgive
Your entertainment.

'Tis an entertainment
That might invite and please the Gods. Me thinks,
Jove should descend, while Cle^patra's here,
Disguised for love, as once for fear he was,
When bold Typh^us scaled the starry sky,
And all the Gods disguised in Egypt lurked.
Love were a nobler cause then fear to bring him,
And such a love as thine.

If I could think
That ere great Jove did play such feats as those,
I'd now believe that he were here disguised,
And took the noble shape of Anthony

This complement so far transcends, it leaves
No answer for a wit so dull as mine.
NOt he, that knows how to acquire
But to enjoy, is blessed.
Nor does our happiness consist
In motion, but in rest.
The Gods pass man in bliss, because
They toil not for more height;
But can enjoy, and in their own
Eternal rest delight.
Then, Princes, do not toil, nor care;
Enjoy what you possess.
Which whilst you do, you equallize
The Gods in happiness.

Minutius Plancus, I was thinking now
How Hannibal was charmed at Capua,
When that delicious place had mollified
His rough and cruel soul, and made him learn
The lessons of soft love, and luxury.

There was no cause, Marcus, for such a thought.
For our Antonius in the heat of all
His active life knew how to revel well.

Let this soft Musique cease, and louder sound.
This second course is mine. Call in Lucilius.
Fair Cleopatra, for addition
To what thou hold, the world-commanding Rome
Presents these Crowns, and by my hand invests
Thee, Cleopatra Queen of wealthy Cyprus,
Of Coelosyria, and Phoenicia.
Blush no^, my Love, nor let Romes bounty force
Thy modesty* these Crowns from thy fair brow
Receive more lustre then they can bestow.

I think he need not greatly fear her blushing.


No Marcus no; alas these petty Kingdoms
(Though too too great to be so ill bestowed)
Are not the scope of her ambitious aims!

My Lord, I dare not make excuse, or plead
Unworthiness, where once Antonius wisdom
Has made election to confer his favours.

Admire not, friends; the God-like power of Rome
Is more declared by what it gives away
Then what it holds. But these are still our own
And Cleopatra Romes deserving friend.

I cannot choose but think how fit a state
For Cleopatra Cyprus Kingdom is;
And shall believe that it was ominous
That noble Julius Caesar after all
Those four rich triumphs which he held at Rome
When he resolved with like magnificence
To build a Temple to the Goddess Venus,
From whom his house derive their pedigree
Within his stately Temple, to express
The Image of that Goddess, he set up
Fair Cleopatraes figure in the place
Supposing her to be the Queen of Love.
You know my Lord Antonius, this is true,
And Cyprus ever was fair Venus I'll.

'Twas well observed noble Canidius.


Fill me some wine. Health to the Cyprian Queen.


Drink it to me Canidius; and I thank thee.
Let it go round, my ftiends.

I ever thought
My self much bound to brave Canidius
Since I was happy in his company.

How fit it is, no other Cyprian Queen,
But Cleopatra shall the Poets know,
Whose fancies now shall raise that Kingdom higher.
More amorous now will Paphos mountains show,
And all those flowery Meads* the Fields of love,
Ore which no winds but Western ever blow.
The air it self will yield a sweeter breath
While Cleopatra reigns the Cyprian Queen.

How amorous in his language he is grown.


The times, I fear Minutius, will require
A rougher language shortly. We shall hear
As soon as any news can come from Rome.

But long ago was I enforced to know
That Cleopatra was the Queen of love,
When first I met thee in Cilicia,
And down the silver stream of Cydnus, thou
In Venus shape came sailing, while the air
Was ravished with thy Music, and the winds
In amorous gales did kiss thy silken sails.
Thy maids in Graces habits did attend,
And boys, like Cupids, painted quivers bore,
While thousand Cupids in those starry eyes
Stood ready drawn to wound the stoutest hearts.

You came like Mars himself in threatening arm^
To ruin me, and my poor Country then.
I took that shape, because I knew no strength
No power on earth was able to resist
The conquering fury of Antonius.

That face of thine resisted me, and did
So sweetly conquer, I was proud to yield;
And more rejoiced in that captivity,
Then any Roman in a triumph did.
How now, what news with thee?

Letters from Rome, my Lord.


From whom?


Geminius.


To morrow we'll peruse them. No affairs
Of what import or height so ere, shall have
Power to disturb the pleasures of this night.
Our theme to night is love, which oft has made
The Thunderer himself a while lay by
The weary burden of his government.
Come lead away.
'Twere fit to read them now.
None knows what gain a little time may be

You may peruse them Titius; lead away.
Can no affairs of what import so ere
Break one nights pleasure? well Antonius,
The tottering state thou holdst, must be supported
By nobler virtues, or it cannot stand.

Cyprus, Phoenice, Coelosyria,
Three wealthy Kingdoms got with Roman blood,
And our forefathers valour, given away
As the base hire of an adulterous bed.
Was Cyprus conquered by the sober virtue
Of Mar^us Cato, to be thus bestowed?

This act will please young Caesar.


'Twill displease
The Senate, Marcus, and Antonius friends.

Alas, he knows not what true friendship means,
But makes his friends his slaves, and which is worse
Slaves to his lusts and vices; could he else
Slight our advise so? men, whom Rome has seen
Wearing her highest honours, and of birth
As great as his. Unless he change his mind
I shall believe my friendship was ill placed,
And strive to place it better.

This last act
Will quickly be at Rome.

They have enough
Already, noble Plancus; think you not
It will be censured that the Roman name
Was much dishonoured by that base surprise
Of Artuvases the Armenian King?
Whom through the streets of Alexandria
He led in triumph bound with golden chains
Forcing the captive King, (if all his threats
Could have enforced so much) prostrate to adore
Proud Cleopatra, as if all his acts,
And all the honour of his arms were due
To her and not to Rome. Calvisius too
In Senate late accused him for bestowing
On Cleopatra that so far renowned
And famous Library of Pergamus,
In which there were two hundred thousand Books.
How many such wild actions have her charms
Enforced his weakness to?

His Testament,
Which now at Rome the Vestal Virgins keep,
Of which we two are privy to the sealing,
Should it be known, would stir all Romans hate,
Willing his body, though he died at Rome,
To be interred at Alexandria.
But if a war 'twixt him and Caesar grow
(As needs it must, although not yet declared)
For Caesar now is levying men and money
Through Italy, Spain, France and Germany,
Against what foe can his design be bent
But our Antonius? if a war I say
Twixt them should happen, tell me, noble Titius,
What should we do?

Fight for Antonius.


True friend, were he himself, or were there hope,
Or possibility he could be so.
But shall our valour toil in sweat and blood
Only to gain a Roman Monarchy
For Cleopatra, and th'eff^minate rout
Of base Canop^? shall her timbrels fright
Romes C^p toll, and her advanced pride
Tread on the ne^ks of captive Senators?
Or, which (...) more, shall the earths Imperial seat
Remove from Rome to Aegypts swarthy sands?
For who can tell if mad Antonius
Have promised her, as C^us Marius once
Promis^d^ the Samnites, to transfer the state?

It may be so, his dotage is enough
To grant it her, her pride enough to ask it.
Manutius Plan^us, in this whole discourse
Thou speak my very thoughts no more, here comes
^ucilius, whither so fast?

My Lords,
^own to the Fort to wait upon the Consuls,
^he Roman Consuls both, Titus Domitius,
^nd Caius S^ssius are from Rome arrived
^ere at Pelusium, what the matter is
^s not yet known.

We'll go along with thee;
This now begins to look like business, Marcus.

TIs not the place, nor marble walls that make
A Senate lawful, or decrees of power,
But convocation of the men themselves
The sacred order by true Magistrates.
Then Rome is here; here both her Consuls are,
Here are her axes, and her falces born,
And no small number of that sacred order
Are here assisting, when the barbarous Gaules
Had taken Rome, when all the Senate fled,
And with Cam^llus their Dictator then
At Veii lived, Rome then at Veii was,
As now in Egypt. Fathers, know the face,
Of your assembly, know your lawful power.
Consult, decree, and act what ere may be
Happy, and prosperous tor the Common-wealth.

Whilst power of laws, whilst reverence of the Senate,
And due respect to a Consuls dignity
Could give protection to the Consuls persons
We did maintain thy cause Antonius
Against proud Caesars faction. Now since laws
Are put to silence, and the Senate forced,
The Consuls sacred privilege infringed
By rage and lawless arms, we are expelled,
And suffer banishment to be restored,
And re-indeniz'd by thy conquering sword.
Now justly draw it. Fate approves thy cause,
And on thy conquest sets a glorious prize,
Greater then all thy former wars could give*
Sextus Pompeius, Marcus Lepidus
Are ruined both, and all competitors
Are taken away; Fortune has left but one
To share the world with thee; nor can thou share
The world with him, his pride would bar thy right*
And Caesar's glory dim Antonius light.
Thou can not shine unless alone thou shine.
Or all the world, or nothing must be thine.

The Consulship, that was designed to thee,
The Senate have revoked, and decree
Against Cleopatra war, but meant against thee.
What would their malice dare Antonius,
Had Fortune frowned, thy Kings and Provinces
Revolted from thee, that dare now p^ovoke
Thy growing fortunes and assisting Gods?
Their injury has made thy quarrel just.
Be speedy then, and lose no time of action:

Caesar is needy; his Italian soldiers
Are apt to mutiny for want of pay,
And might with ease be tempted to revolt.

We need them not; our strengths are greater far
Then Caesar's are; our praeparations readier.
Nought but delay can question our success.
Shall we decree the war?

^tay noble Romans;
^efore we publish a Decree, or show
^he reason our arms so justly taken;
^eigh but with me the means and strength we have.
^now worthy friends it is no desperate war
^our valours are engaged in; briefly thus:
^ur Roman strength is nineteen Legions.
^en Kings in person will attend our Camp,
^he Kings of Africa, Comagena, Thrace,
^pper Cilicia, Paphlagonia,
^f Cappadocia, Pontus, Palaestine,
^f rich Arabia, and Galatia.
^ur strength at Sea five hundred fighting ships
^ell rigged and manned: our treasuries are full;
^nd twenty thousand talents to the war
^oes Cleopatra freely contribute.
^hy speak I more? the Crown of all my strength,
^ur loves and spirits are. The injuries
(...) which we ground our just and lawful war,
(...) briefly these. Caesar unjustly holds
^hose Provinces, and armies all, that late
^long'd to Pompey and to Lepidus
^fusing to divide them, or deliver
^he moity which appertains to me
^ough oft demanded by my friends at Rome,
And letters from my self* besides he levies
Both men and money ore all Italy,
Which country, as you know, by our agreement
Belongs to both, and should be held in common.

Most true.


These wrongs are past all sufferance.
Thy war is but defensive, to regain
Thine own unjustly taken.

The warre's just.


And Caesar the beginner of these broils
From whom the wrong first sprung, most justly may
Be judged an enemy to the peace of Rome.

If Fortune aid us in a cause so just,
And we return victorious, noble Romans,
I make a vow, and let it be recorded,
Within two months after the war is ended,
I will lay down the government I hold,
And freely then resign my power again
Unto the Senate and the people of Rome.

Let it be six months rather; for two months
Will be too short a time to settle it.

S^ssius speaks well, my Lord.


Let it be so,
And all the Gods assist me as I mean
A just and true performance.

All the Gods
Preserve Antonius father of his Country.

Author and Champion of our liberty.


^et them believe that list; for me, I think
The resignation of a power so great
^ill be a temperance too great for him
^re to express.

^r if he would, he must
^ke leave of Cleopatra, and her pride
^ill hardly grant him that.

^or will I fight
To make her Mistress of the world and him*
^ave you considered, noble friend of what
^e lately spake?

^nd am resolved Marcus.
^he friends and followers we shall bring with us
^ill make us welcome guests to Caesars side.
(...) seems the City favours Caesar much
^hat both the Consuls fled from Rome for fear.
^or is our action base; the scorns and wrongs
(...) have endured at Cleopatraes hands
^ould tempt a moyle to fury, and both sides
^tand equal yet.

^ome let's away; tis time.


^gypt farewell.


^arewell Antonius.


How suddenly the Scene is changed here
From love and banquets to the rough alarms
And threatening noise of war!

The change, Seleucus
Is not so sudden as you speak; this storm
Has been expected long; the two great Lords
Of all the Roman world, Antonius
And Caesar have in heart been enemies
These many years; and every man has wondered
'T has been withheld so long, considering
How much complaining has been daily made
By them, their friends, and factions against each other
Whose cause is justest let the Gods determine.

No other justice then ambition
Makes them to draw their swords; no other cause
Then that the world cannot endure two Suns.

The thing that troubles me, Seleucus* is
I hear it spoken in the Court, the Queen
Her self in person will associate
Antonius to the war.

I hear that rumour;
But hope it is not true, how nakedly
And in what great confusion would this land
Be left! and what addition can her person
Among so many Roman Legions
Bring to Antonius?

Let us enquire
The certainty; I fain would be resolved.

(...) necessity must know, before
^he Queen can go, that order may be taken
^bout the Fort I keep, what strength she means
^o leave within it in her absence.

^rue,
^hat reason will excuse thee for enquiring.

^oble Canidius, I'll entrust no more,
^or use more circumstances; for I know
^o whom I have referred my business,
^nd trust your wisdom.

^oyall Cleopatra.
(...) so fortified with reasons now
^hat maugre Sossius and Domitius
^ith all their best persuasions, I'll prevail
(...) shall not stay behind; fear it not Madam.

^ave Roman, wear this jewell for my sake;
^nd be possessed of Cleopatraes love.
^cond my suit, there lies not in my power
^thing to grant I should deny Canidius.

^he favours, Madam, you can give, have power
(...) oblige the greatest Monarchs of the World.

(...) ready, worthy friend; he'll straight be here.
^one but Canidius has the power to work
^ntonius in this action, which the rest
^ll all oppose, I know; a thing on which
^y state, my hopes, and fortunes all depend.
He must persuade Antonius to take
Me with him to the war; for if I stay
Behind him here, I run a desperate hazard;
For should Octavia enterpose her self
In this great war (as once before she did)
And make her brother, and her husband friends
Wher's Cleopatra then? but here he comes.

Sweet Cleopatra, I should plead excuse
For leaving thee awhile, but that the cause
Is of a nature so immense and high,
And brings effects of such advantage home,
That thou I know art pleased it should be so;
And with a patience can resolve to bear
So small an absence, that my wished return
May call thee mistress of the subject world.

Cannot Antonius then be fortunate
If Cleopatra go? ^s there in me
So bad an Omen? did I think there were,
Not for the world would I desire to bear
You company but rather die at home.

Far are my thoughts from giving entertainment
To such fond dreams. I would not venture thee.

My life and fortunes both depend on yours.
As much in Egypt will my danger be,
As in your army, and my torment more,
To die each hour for fear: and to remain
In sad suspense till messengers can bring
The news so far: but if my company
Distaste my Lord, I cannot wish his grief.

Can Cleopatra think her heavenly presence,
Can be distasteful, or not valued more
Then all joys else; parted from thee I think,
All places sad, all lands disconsolate,
Before this life I prize thy company,
But must not have it now, do not entreat;
(...) have denied it to my self already.
^nd in the Camp should be ashamed to rise
^rom Cleopatraes arms, when wars ^ough noise
Shakes all the world, when Kings and Senators
Are venturing lives and fortunes in my service.
Oh stay behind! and let thy presence make
Egypt a place, to which I would desire
^f Caesar's fortune conquer, to retire.

^f that should happen (which the Gods avert)
What land, alas! could comfort me, or lend
A safe retreat to vanquished Antony?
Thou would disdain to draw a wretched breath,
And I as much should scorn captivity.
But I had thought the Roman Antony
Had loved so great a Queen with nobler love;
Not as the pleasure of his wanton bed
Or mistress only of some looser hours,
But as a partner in his highest cares,
And one whose soul he thought were fit to share
In all his dangers, all his deeds of honour.
Without that love I should disdain the other.

Do not mistake me, noble Queen, I know
Thy breast is full of high heroike worth.

How can you think it so, that could so long
^n times of peace and pleasure recreate
Your self with me in Egypt Court; yet now
When honour calls, reject my company?

I should desire it rather then my life;
But that my Roman friends are all against it.
See here they come, if they agree tis done.
Now noble friends on whose oraculous counsels
And matchless valour my whole fate depends,
Speak what you think, should Cleopatra go
In person to the war, or stay behind?

I have delivered my opinion,
And so has my Colleague.

What thinks Canidius?


I think tis fit, my Lord, the Queen, whose bounty
Has brought so great assistance to the war,
Should not be left behind, besides her presence
Will much encourage her Egyptian soldiers,
Of which a great part of the fleet consists.

Tis true Canidius.


Let not my sex
Disparage me, for which of all those Kings
That now in person serve Antonius
Have more experience in affairs of weight
Then I, my Lord, which have so long been privy
To your high counsels, and in love to you
And your designs who should compare with me?

What think you friends? you hear Canidius.


If you be pleased, I will subscribe.


(...) I,
(...) things go so.

(...) wishes are effected.


(...), and Plancus are both fled to Caesar.


(...) shall not need their help my Lord, at all.


(...) me, let's away.


(...) strengths are ready all,
(...) wait but your command.

^oke like Bellona.
^idius, return you to your charge
(...) bring those sixteen Cohorts down to sea; Plutarch.
(...) me at Samos with them, both the Consuls
(...) go along with me. Great Father Mars,
(...) all you Gods, that from the skies behold
(...) Roman labours, whose propitious aid
^vanc'd my fortunes to so great an height,
^ke perfect that, which you your selves begun.
(...) is the swords last work, the judging hour
(...) Nations fates, of mine and Caesar's power.
(...) which the stars and destinies attend,
(...) all the fortunes of Mankind depend.

^hat dire portents sent from the wrathful Gods?
^hreaten th'astonish'd world? What plagues are those
^hich in the skies prodigious face I read?
^umultuous Nature teems with monstrous births,
(...) if the throws would break her labouring womb.
What ruin less then Chaos shall involve
The mourning face of Nature? what great fate,
What kind of mischief is it? oh ye Gods,
Why did you add to wretched men a care
So past their strength to bear, to let them know
By sad presages their ensuing woe?
Unknown and sec^et let your vengeance be,
And none foresee their following misery;
But hope as well as fear. Jove hide thy dooms;
Keep shut, oh fates, your adamantine books!
Let not the bainfull curiosity
Of humane knowledge search your secret counsels,
And read your purposes, to nourish so
A killing fear before the danger grow.

That Comet's gone.


It moved directly upward,
And did not vanish till it seemed to reach
The firmament.

What talk you of my sons?


That Comet, father, ore the Grecian Sea.


It was a strange one both for form and greatness,
And bodes some mischief whersoere it light.
The Gods avert it from our Aegypts coast.

Pinnarius Scarpus had received news
That Italy and Rome it self are filled
With prodigies: an ugly Owl of late
Did fly into the house of Concord first,
Thence being driven away it pearch'd again
Within the Temple of the peoples Genius.
There, though all strived, it neither could be caught,
Nor driven away, but flew at leisure out.
A sacred Trophy on Mount Aventine,
Victoriaes Image on the Theater
By sudden tempests were thrown down and broken.

In Rome and other parts of Italy
Sudden and strangely kindled fires have done
Exceeding waste; and we are certifi'd
That now Sicilian Aetna nourishes
More horrid flames then usually it does,
And farther casts his scorching entrails forth,
Blasting the fields and burning up the corn.

A two-legged Dragon in Etruria
Full fourscore foot in length was lately seen,
Which after much annoyance of the Country
^t self with lightning was consumed at last.
But these portents do threaten Italy.

Alas, my son, there need no prodigies
To show the certain loss of Italy.
For on both sides do Roman Eagles stand,
And Rome must bleed who ere be conqueror,
Besides her liberty for ever lost
When this sad field is fought: but that's not all,
What clime so far, what region so remote,
But that the Roman fortune reaches thither?
All nations share in this.

What hast thou got
By all thy conquest Rome, by all the blood
Which thy ambition through the world has shed,
But raised a power, which now thou can not rule,
Nourished a Lion to devour thy self?

Would none but Roman blood might quench the fire
Of Romes dissentions, and no land beside
Be forced to pay the forfeit of their pride.
With evil Omen did Aeneas first
Transport the relics of Troyes fatal fire
To Italy, that kindled greater there
It might at last like lightning through the world
Rend every Nation. Was it not enough,
That first your conquests strewed the earth with slaughter
And died all Regions with their natives bloods,
But your dissentions still must tear the world?

I'll go within, and make an offering
To great Osiris.

Well may it succeed.
Egypt will flourish if Antonius conquer.

If he should fall, the fury of the war
Would light on Egypt most, and we should rue
That ere Antonius loved this haplesse land.
Oh Gentlemen, the strongest news, that ere
Was seen in Egypt.

What's that Mardio?


Thousands of people with astonishment
And fear beheld it: on those fruitful plains
That Southward lie from Alexandria,
Where never rain was known to fall before,
(...) whole showers of blo^d, whose colour set
A purple die upon those verdant fields;
And in the clouds that horrid noise was heard
That meeting armies make, beating of drums.
Shrill trumpets sound, armour against armour clashing,
As if the blood that fell, dropped from the wounds
Those aerie battles made.

This is more strange
Then all the rest: this is our own Seleucus.

Well Gentlemen, I'll to Pelusium,
And fortify the town to keep our foes,
^f foes be conquerours, from entering there.

Yes, and our friends, if they be vanquished,
Keep out our friends, Seleucus, if their presence
May pluck a war, and ruin on our heads.

As there's occasion we'll determine that.
Avert your ange^, Gods, if all too late
Our prayers came not now.

What is it father?
^our looks, I see, are full of ruth and wo.

(...) wretched Egypt, ah unhappy land
(...) what hast thou so stored the wrath of heaven?
^he grieved God refused his offering
^ellowing aloud that all the Temple rung,
^nd from his sacred eyes the tears run down.
^ould I could contradict, or not believe
^he skill which surest observations teach.
^his signifies a change of government.

What heaven is pleased to send, we much endure.


True son; and let a wise man place his strengths
Within himself, nor trust to outward aids.
That whatsoever from the Gods can come
May find him ready to receive their doom.

TIs not Antonius, worthy soldiers,
But Rome herself to whom you owe your valours
What he could claim, you have performed already;
And served him truly, whilst he was to you
A General, to Rome a Magistrate.
You are discharged from all obedience
You owed to him, by fate it self, and may
Nay, ought to follow him, whom Roman fates
Appoint your General, the noble Caesar
Great Julius heir, not to his name alone
But spirit and fortunes, which have both appeared
In this so great and final a defeat
Given to Antonius. Before we knew not
^o whom the Gods and Fortune had assigned
Our service soldiers; now they have declared.
^nd let us follow where they please to lead.
^or faith is impious striving to sustain
That side, whose fall the Gods themselves ordain.

^esar, Caesar, Caesar.


^our judgments guide you right; for could you think
^o small a strength as ours could raise again
The desperate state of fallen Antonius,
^nder whose ruin all those legions sunk?
^hat madness were it, soldiers to prefer
A hopeless civil war before the weal
And peace of Rome? and desperately provoke
The prosperous fortunes of victorious Caesar?
(...) have already to Cornelius Gal^us
By letter signified our purposes.
Who sent from Caesar now is marching hither,
To join his strength with ours: but ha^k his Drum
Give notice of his coming.
Hail Pinnarius.

Ah hail Cornelius Gallus,
Most wished for, an most happily arrived
At Paraetonium.

Victorious Caesar
With love and favour greets Pinnarius Scarpus,
Caesar, then whom the world acknowledges
No other power; whom Fortune now has made
^ole Lord of all.

I, and my soldiers
With Paraetonium are at Caesar's service.
Whither's Antonius fled?

Hither to Egypt
With Cleopatra? 'Twas a victory
So strangely given away, as not the like
In former times I think has ere been heard;
On which especially so great a price
As the sole sway of all the world depended.
The Fleets encountered both, while with the Camps
On either shore stood to behold the fight,
Heer the Caesarian, there the Antonian Fleet
With equal hopes came on, with fury equal.
And long maintained a sharpe and cruel fight,
With mutual slaughter, while the Oceans face*
Was forced to lose his colour, and rceive
A crimson die. The ships Antonius had
Were tall, and slowly did like Castles move.
But Caesar's small, yet quick and active, stirred
On every side with all advantages.
Long fortune doubted, and bright victory
Knew not which way to lean, but kept them both
In equal balance; till Antonius
Himself at last betrayed his glorious hopes.
For when his Mistress Cleopatra fled,
Although a while within his manly breast
The Roman honour strove against wanton love,
Love got the conquest, and Antonius
Fled after her, leaving his soldiers there
To sell their lives in vain; who many hours
Though he were fled, made good the naval fight.
And had Antonius stayed, it may be feared
Caesar had not prevailed: at last the Fleet
Wanting their Admiral, though not without
Much slaughter, fled, or yielded all to Caesar.

But what became of all his strength on land?


Nay, there's the wonder, there's Antonius madness,
And such a madness as will strike amazement
To all that hear it told: after his flight
He ne'er returned, though in the camp he had
Under the conduct of Canidius
And other Captains nineteen legions
Fresh and unfought, which might with reason hope
Had he been there, to have recovered all.
They still remained encamped, and though oft
^ollicited by Caesar to revolt
Were kept from yielding, by Canidius
^n hope of Antony's return. Until
^anidius fearing his own soldiers minds
^nd Caesar's anger fled away by night,
They then despairing yielded all to Caesar.
Who by this time I think's arrived in Egypt.
About Pelusium.

Will you view the town?


With all my heart, noble Pinnarius.


^ntonius then with Cleopatra's fled
To Alexandria.

Tis certain, Caesar.


They say the vanquished Queen most cunningly:
(Fearing it seems, to be excluded else
From her own Kingdom) feigned her self victorious,
Landing in Egypt with triumphant songs
Her ships all crowned with laurel, to deceive
The credulous people: where being entered once
She leaves unpractised no strange tyranny;
And, as we hear, to win the Parthan King
Unto her side, beheaded Artavasdes
King of Armenia, and the Parthians ^o,
Who was her prisoner, that Artavasdes,
Whom Anthony so basely had surprised.

Caesar, 'twere fit to take Pelusium
Before we march to Alexandria.

'Twas our intent, good Titius, not to leave
A town of that import behind our backs.
Go Proculeius, summon it, and know
W^e her the Governor will yield or no.
What news with thee?

Caesar, a messenger
From Cleopatra craves admittance.

Bring him.
Queen Cleopatra to great Caesar wishes
All health and victory; and humbly proffers
Her self and all her fortunes to his service:
In token of which she here presents by me
This Crown and Sceptre.

^rave and ominous.


^umbly entreating Caesar's noble favour
To her and hers; the rest of her desires
^o please it Caesar to peruse the same,
This letter holds.

^ warrant a love-lettet.


But tell me first, where is Antonius?


^ll truly tell (though it may seem to some
^ncredible) that great Antonius
A man of late in conversation
^o free, and full of jollity, in a strange
Deep melancholy has retired himself
To Pharos I'll; where like Athenian Timon,
Who did profess a hatred to mankind,
And fled all company, he lives alone;
And on the solitary shore has built
A little house to feed his frantic humour,
And imitate that Timon's life, whose name
He takes unto himself: no friends at all
Nor servants are admitted to his presence,
But only two, Roman Lucilius
And Aristocrates the Grecian.

Not Cleopatra? then I doubt the man
Grows weary of these worldly vanities.

^ never heard of such a change as this.
Give me the letter. I'll peruse it now

Here the woman writes
That for her liberty, and to confirm
The Crown of Egypt to her self and children
To gratify my favour she has hid
Within her palace a great mass of gold.
Unknown to Antonius.

'Tis like ennough,
For Cleoptraea's rich, and long has been,
Besides the sacrilege she lately did
In robbing all the Temples of the Gods
About these parts.

I would not lose this gold,
Nor willingly let Cleopatra die
Before her person have adorned my triumph.

That will be hard to bring to pass, and must
Be wrought with subtilty: you must not send
A threatening message back; for if you do,
All's lost, her life, her gold and all are vanished.
For Cleopatra, as in all her acts
It has appeared, is of a wondrous spirit,
Of an ambition greater then her fortunes
Have ever been, though she so long have swayed
A sovereignty ore half the Roman world,
Trod on the necks of humbled Kings, and ruled
Antonius as her slave: her haughty spirit
Will never stoop so much as to a thought
Of such captivity.

I do not mean
To let her know my mind, or once suspect
(...) I can help it, but I have it now.
^hyreus come hither; I must now rely
^pon thy wisdom, care, and diligence
(...) an employment that concerns me nearly.
^ut I am confident: go with this fellow
To Alexandria; use to the Queen
Thy best and most persuasive Oratory.
Tell her I love her, and extremely dote
On her admired beauty, thou art wise
^nd need no great instructions; the success
(...) do not doubt, the woman's credulous,
^nd thinks all men are bound to be in love
With that ensnaring face; if thou perceive
^he will be wrought on, win her to betray
^ntonius to my hand: the way to woo her
(...) leave good Thyreus to thy eloquence
And cunning working of it: spare thy reply
^id him come hither. Commend my hearty love
To Cleopatra; bid her fear no ill
From me at all. What I desire from her
My freed man Thyreus has commission
To utter to her self. Epaphroditus,
So see him well rewarded.

Health to Caesar.
The Governor is stout, and does resolve
To stand the extremest hazard of the war
Before he yield Pelusium.

Let him rue
His stubborn loyalty, soldiers make ready
For the assault; 'tis shame so small a town*
Should stay our fortune in the full career.
Here buried do I lie; thou gentle wave
Keep hateful man from treading Timons grave.
Reader be gone; enquire no more of me,
A curse upon thee whatsoere thou be.

Good, good; oh Timon, Athens ne'er could boast
A wise philosoher but thee. Thou knew
The nature of all men, that all were false;
True Timon, true, they are all Knaves indeed.
Thou wisely hat'st that wicked thing called man,
Whom other forced Philosophers admire,
And call a noble creature, and partaker
Of divine nature: they were fools, fools Timon,
All other Sects were fools, and I will follow
No sect but thine; I am a Timonist.
That's not enough, Timon himself I am.
Yonder he sits, see Aristocrates
How much unlike that great Antonius,
Whose person late so many legions guarded,
So many Kings attended as their Lord.

Antonius, where? thou art deceived Lucilius,
That's Timon man.

How can thou jest at this
This woeful passion, which alone's enough
To melt his foes and Caesar into tears.

We feed this foolish passion, to give way,
^nd keep aloof thus. I'll go to him. Timon.

^a! what art thou? be gone I say from me.
^et you to Caesar man: I hate you all.

(...) hate thee, Timon; dost thou think 'tis love
^as brought me hither? I am come to vex thee.

Oh welcome, what's thy name? i'st Alcibi^des?


Hast thou forgot me?


Dost thou hate all men?


Why dost thou think me so unnatural
To love a man? but may we not love women?

Yes, they may be beloved; provided always
That they be false.

True Timon, wicked women
May be beloved, because they ruin men.

Right, right; and now I better think upon it
I'll set no gallowses or gibbets up
As I intended once, for men to come
And hang themselves, I'll keep a bawdy house.

A better way by far, 'twill ruin more,
I wonder, Timon, at that foolish plot
That I have heard, that in thy gardens once
In Athens thou did set up gallowses
For men in discontent to hang themselves.
How few think thou would be so mad to do it?
But to a wench they'll come, and then the office
That thou shalt have will be of more account.
For where have you a man of any fashion
That now adays turns hangman; but a Pandar
Is on employment that befits a Statesman,
A thing requires good parts and gravity.

I'd try that course; but tis too slow a plot.
Oh for a speedy way to kill the world
I have done somewhat in my days; my wars
And bloody battles were not made in vain.
For I was once Antonius, and a Roman,
As in the wars of Troy Pythagoras
Before that transmigration of his soul,
Had been Euphorbus.

Thou art like him still.


And when I was Triumvir first at Rome,

That was a time indeed, then I could hear
Of those good deeds, which must be still a comfort
To your good consciences, though they be past.
When Rome was filled with slaughter, flowed with blood.
But they perchance were Knaves that were proscribed*
And might have done more mischief had they lived.

No, they were honest men; I looked to that.


'Twas well, and carefully.


Behold the list.
But one among the rest most comforts me,
That talking fellow Cicero, that used
To tax the vicious times, and was forsoeth
A lover of his Country.

Out upon him,
Then he was rightly served: for is it fit
In a well governed state such men should live
As love their Country? had 't not been for him
Catiline's plot had thrived.

Tis true, I'm sure
Caesar was on that side, he favoured it.

Yes, Caesar understood himself; there's hope
That this young Caesar too will prove as good
A Patriot as ere his father was.

He will do reason man: he is of nature
Cruel enough; in that proscription
^t did appear; but now he'll reign alone.

Oh for such factions as were then a foot
To rend the state, and fill the world with slaughter.

Oh, let me hug thee Alcibiade^.


^s that he yonder? w^t strange shape is that?


None talks with him but Aristocrates,
Who following his own way, and suiting just
With his conceit thinks to reclaim him so.

The news, that I shall bring, will make him worse,
And fright that little reason that is left
Quite from his breast.

It cannot so Canidius;
Perchance to hear th'extremity of all
Will cure his fit; it cannot make him worse.
For death it self were better and more noble.

How weak a thing is man that seats his hopes
In fortunes slippery, and unconstant favours,
And seeks no surer strengths to guard his soul?
Wanting a strong foundation, he is shaken
With every wind, orethrown by every storm.
And what so frequent as those storms in fortune?
Whose fairest weather never brings assurance
Of perpetuity but come what will
I'll tell him all.

Do, good Canidius.


Well Alcibiades, I am resolved
I'll to the wars again, and either conquer
Mine enemies, or take a course to starve
And kill up my own soldiers, and so be
Revenged on some body: One of these two
May easily be brought to pass. How think thou?

Yes, yes: but lets to Court, and there consult.
See who comes here, now for our bawdy project*
Here is a servant I must needs prefer
Well versed in bawdry, Master of the art.
Come near brave Mardio, come.

My business
Is not to you;

Mark him but well, and tell me
How he would execute the place.

My Lord,
The Queen entreats your presence at the Palace,
The grieved Queen, who in your absence pines,
Who suffers in your grief.

Well urged old Eunuch.


Ha! what of her? will she revolt to Caesar?


She's far from that, my Lord.


What i'st he says?


He says the constitution of her body
Cannot hold out unless you visit her.

The Queen shall know it, Aristocrates.


Did you not say she pined and languished Sir,
And what's the difference? tell your tale yourself.

What does she say? does she not hate me man?


Oh no my Lord, she loves you as her life.
No spite of fortune that she has endured,
Or can hereafter fear, grieves her so much
As does your absence and strange melancholy.

Well Mardio, thou art fittest for the place.


My Lord Antonius?


Ha! mo men upon us?


I come to bring thee heavy news Antonius.
The forces all, which thou did leave encamped
At Actium, horse and foot are gone to Caesar.
And all the auxiliary Kings; no strength
At all is left thee, but what here thou hast
At Alexandria.

Ha!


This sinks into him.


It makes a deep impression in his passion.


And may perchance expel his other fit.


All you here yet! then I have friends I see.
But tell me, can you be so merciful
As to forgive that most unmanly fit
I have been in? oh, I am all in blushes.

My Lord, take better comfort.


Dearest friends.
I will be proof against any fortune now.
Come let's together to the Court, and there
Drown sadness in rich cups of Meroe wine,
And laugh at Fortunes malice, for your sight
More cheers my spirits, then her frowns can dull them.

MAdam, all drugs with pain and torment kill
That kill with speed. No easy way to death
Is wrought but by a slow and lingering course,
Where Natures strength is by degrees subdued,
And yielding so decays insensibly.
No art at all can make a drug that's quick
And gentle too. No poison but the Asp
Of all the mortal brood of Libyaes Snakes
Kills with a sudden, and yet easy death
As if brought forth to contradict our skill
By envious Nature, who disdains frail man
Should hope to find her secrets wholly out.
None but that Serpent, Madam, can effect
What you desire; of which I here have brought.

Leave it good Glaucus; leave the potion too.
Tis quick, thou say.

Yes Madam; but too painful
And violent.

Well leave them both with me.
Let none adventure on prosperity
But with a spirit still prepared to die.
Let them keep certain death still in their power
That dare be great and happy, nought but that
Frees states when they are fallen. Well did wise
And liberal Nature on mankind bestow
A gift so sovereign as power to die,
An Antidote against Fortunes cruelty,
That is the dear preservative, that must
Control the spite of Fortune, and redeem
A woeful life from loathed servitude.
One venome's gentle; the other rough and cruel.
But tis not safe to trust mine honour so,
On doubtful props: the poisons both may fail*
Or differ far from what vain fame reports
Their operation. Tis experience
That must confirm me. Mardio is returned.

Here are two men, Madam, condemned for murder
To cruel death, and are to die to morrow.

Come nearer both, and tell me, dare you die?


Great Queen, necessities strict law imposes
That doom upon us; in forced actions
Courage can have no trial.

Dare you die
A less dishonourable way, to escape
The common hangman's hand, and from a Queen
Receive your death, and that an easier death?

Most willingly, great Queen; we are prepared.


Give them their lots, Mardio; the shortest lot
Is to die first.

That lot is mine.


The Asp shall be thy fate: now Asp confirm
What fame reports of thee; stay thou thy draught
Till he be dead: feel thou no pain?

A faintness seizes me, and I would sleep.


How gently he lies down? and scarcely strives
Against his death at all.

I think he's dead
Already. Sure he feels but little pain.
I am confirmed.

He's dead and stiff already.


We'll try no more, as for thy draught of poison
Thus we discharge thee of it, and from death
Doomed by the law our royal pardon frees thee.
Publish it Mardio.

The Gods preserve
Royal and gracious Cleoptrae's life.

I am resolvd'; nought but the Libyan Asp
Shall be renowned for Cleopatraes death.
Thou precious worm, that can redeem alone
The loss of honour at a rate so easy,
That kill as gently as the hand of age,
And art miscalled a plague of Africa,
Since thou alone make barren Afrike envied,
By other lands, though fruitful, wanting thee.
Who cross the Seas, and hence at highest price
Transporr the Asp as choicest Merchandise.
On thee I trust, one gentle touch of thine
Can free this life from loathed servitude,
From Caesar's triumph, the base peoples mocks,
Proud Liviaes scorn, and mad Octaviaes spite.
But why are all my thoughts turned to despair?
Why think I now of death? me thinks my Genius
Checks this cold fear, and Fortune chiding tells me
I am ungrateful to distrust, her now.
My race of life and glory is not run,
Nor Cle^patraes fortunes yet arrived
At that great height that must eternize her,
And fix her glorious name above the stars.
I long to hear what answer Caesar sends.
I do not know his temper, but he's young;
And why should I desp^ir? are Cupid's fires
Extinguished quite? are all his arrows spent?
Or is this beauty, that can boast the conquest
Of Julius Caesar; and great Antony,
So waned now, it cannot move the temper
Of one, whom youth makes fit for Cupid's conquest?

Madam, your gifts were more graciously received,
And Caesar with a smiling brow returned
All seeming love and friendship; he has sent
His free'dman Thyreus to attend your highness,
And to impart his counsels to your ea^e.

He's welcome to us. What's great Caesar's will.


Caesar's best wishes, royal Cleopatra,
None but your fairest self can ratify.
No power on earth can give what Caesar wants
But you, great Queen. For let your Majesty
Give credit to poor Thyreus though the meanest
Of all the servants that attend on Caesar,
There's none about him is more near in trust
To whom he's pleased to impart his thoughts*
And secret wishes: nothing but your love
Can crown his happiness.

We are no subject
For Caesar's mocks though in our worst of fortune

You are the Queen of Fortune, and still ho^
A lasting Sceptre ore that fickle Goddess
(Fickle to others, to you true and constant)
Your radiant light lends that blind Goddess eyes*
And guides her to your service, making all
Actions, nay losses steps to greater honour.
The late defeat at Actium, which your error
Perchance miscals a loss, was Fortunes labour
To make you greater, and remove your brightness
Which was ill placed (as Diamonds coursly set)
From old Antonius to young Caesar's love,
A fitter sphere for those fair eyes to shine in.

Without these courtings, Thyreus, if great Caesar
Please to embrace our friendship, we and Egypt
Shall do him faithful service.

Mighty Queen,
If my rude speech have erred, I humbly beg
That you would please to think it zeal in me
To do my master service, and such service
As he esteems the best, to gain your love,
I oft have heard him (let your Majesty
Not be offended with that truth I utter)
Ravished with fame of your perfections,
And noble spirit; call Antonius happy,
Whom fortune brought to Egypt, to behold
That Queen, whom he so much desired to see.
But when his ey^ beheld your portraiture
Drawn by a skilful, and a faithful hand;
He oft would say it was a likely seat
To hold those Graces. Such perfections
Were fit for none but Caesar's to admire.

There was a Caesar, loved me once; but I
Am not so proud to think it was my merit,
Though he would say I did deserve far more
Then he could utter, that great Julius,
Whose name and actions filled the triple world.

Though all in him were great, yet nothing greater
Then his adopting so divine an heir.
This Caesar, Madam, for your dearest love,
Besides that power and greatness, which the world
Both knows and fears, brings such a youth and beauty
To plead for him, as in a mean estate
Might move a Princess love: which that your eyes
may better read, I here from him present
His true, and most unflattered portrairure.

The fairest form that ere these eyes beheld.
Where all the best of each best model meets,
Cupid's sweet smiles, lodged in the eye of Mars,
Ga^ymed's che^k the Imperial brow of Jove
Where love and majesty are proud to dwell.

His age, great Queen, is yet not thirty years.


I ne'er till now saw beauty: but Thyreus
May we repose a confidence in thee
As our true friend? we will deserve thy love.

To do divinest Cleopatra service
Is all poor Thyreus pride: in serving you
I best discharge my duty to my master.

Then briefly thus; because I would not have
Any take notice of long privacy
Twixt thee and me, and instantly w'expect
Antonius here, I will devise some means
How to deserve great Caesar's love, and act
What he shall thank us for: mean while stay here
With us, good Thyreus, for we cannot yet
Dispatch thee with that message we entend.

I will attend your highness.


Till anon
Farewell, good Thyreus: but be near about us.
What more then this could all the fates contrive?
What more then Caesars love could I have wished
On which all power, all state, and Glories wait.
But oh the weak and fluctuating state
Of humane frailty still too much depressed
Or raised too much 'twixt fears and flattering hopes!
But hence base fear; a Princely confidence
Fits Cleopatraes mind and beauty better.
My dearest Lord.

Ah sweetest Cleopatra,
In this embrace, and this Ambrosiake kiss
I am again possessed of all my wealth,
Of all my fortunes. Had the angry Gods
Purposed to wreak their fury fully on me
They had not left my life so sweet a comfort.

Possessed of you I stand above the reach
Of Fortunes threatening, or proud Caesar's power.
Nought but your grief, and melancholy had
Power to deject my spirits.

Thy true worth
Deserves a happier friend, that could bestow
Not take alone his happiness from thee.
In thy sweet love, and these my faithful friends
I still am happy, I have lost no friends.
All that are gone from me to Caesar's side,
Ungrateful Titius and Domitius.
Plancus, Silanus, Dellius and Hipparchus,
Were Fortunes friends not mine.

Let's in and feas^*
This day we'll dedicate to mirth and freedom:
To crown your welcome hither.

Sweetly spoken.
Let not a woman teach us souldier^
To be magnanimous.

Thy? feast we'll stile
The feast of fellow-dyers: for no band
No tie of friendship is so firm as that
They live in love that mean to die together.

Grave Arius, in thy troubled looks I read
Fear for thy native Alexandria;
But banish fear, and know thy power with Caesar,
If they obey our summons, none shall die.
But though to the utmost they resist, thy will
Shall rule our Justice.

Humble Arius.
Is too much honoured in great Caesar's favour.

We give but what we owe, a debt so great
As mine to thee can ne'er be overpayed.
Great Alexander, whose victorious hand
Founded that City, whose eternized name
For ever honours it, though in great deeds
He past our glory far, shall not exceed
Caesar in piety: he oft would say
He ought a better being to his Master
Then to father; one mere natural,
The other mental, and diviner far.
Who's that?

Fergusiu^ the Philosopher
Condemned to death by you.

Dispatch him then.


He craves a word with Arius ere he die.


What is it brother?


Ah good Arius,
Wisemen, if truly wise, save wise men still.

Most mighty Caesar.


Arius, no more,
I know what thou desire; Fergusius live;
That thou know him has saved thee.

Victory,
And fame still wait on Caesar.

Let's away
And march with speed to Alexandria.

Caesar, your horse are weary: 'tis not fit
Too much to toil them, for I fear a sally
From Alexandria.

They dare not man.


Antonius is strong in well-provided
And skilful horsemen; and despair of favour
(Since twice you have refused his propositions)
Will put another valour into him.

What conquest can Antonius hope for here?


His hopes (as ne'er as I conjecture them)
Are to break through your troops, and get to Sea.
For yet he has a Fl^et, that may transport him
To other lands, to gather new supplies.
But any fortune would prove higher far
To him, then staying here, without all hope
To be shut up in a besieged town.
In my opinion let your march be (...)*
And gentle; that the horse may be refreshed.
And we prevent the worst.

Let it be so.


How formlesse is the form of man the soul,
How various still how different from it self?
How falsely called Queen of this little world?
When she's a slave, and subject not alone
Unto the bodies temperature, but all
The storms of Fortune.

What occasion
Make thee thus offer at Philosophy?

Where hast thou lived thou should not know the occasion?
The fits and changes of Antonius
Are theme enough: how strange a loving soul
Is the late hater of mankind become!

That is not strange, he's out of breath with cursing
And now 'tis time to stop his mouth with kissing.
But what can he conceive of this same Thyreus
That holds such secret conference with her?

He cannot choose but see it.


Unless love
Have blinded him, she carries it so plainly.
Well, I shall think if there be knavery in it,
(As knavery there must be) that Cleopatra
Is not so subtle as we took her for.

He must be told it, if he will not see
Upon my life there is some plot of treason
Which yet may be discovered.

Heer they come
Let us go fetch Antonius if we can.

Pelusium shall be rendered up to Caesar
By our command to our Lieutenant there
Seleucus, whose obedience we not doubt.

Noblest of Queens, you make Imperial Caesar
As much a debtor to your courtesy
As he's already captive to your beauty.

Nor do we wrong Antonius at all
In giving up a town which is our own*
It may be thought tis done to weaken him*
Alas, Antonius is already fallen
So low, that nothing can redeem him now
Nor make him able to contest with Caesar.
He has not only lost his armies strength
But lost the strength of his own soul, and is not
That Antony he was when first I knew him.
I can do Caesar now no greater service.
Though I shall never want a hear^ to do it.
But we shall quickly see the event of things;
Antonius now is desperate, and puts
His hopes upon the fortune of one sally,
Which will be suddenly performed, before
That thou can bear a message back to Caesar.

Hands on that Thyreus there, to prison with him.


To prison!


Yes; away with him I say.


Caesar would not have used your messenger
So ill.

Thou were no Messenger to me.


For my sake dearest Lord.


Oh for your sake?
I cry you mercy Lady, bear him hence.
I had forgot that Thyreus was your servant.
But what strange act should he perform for you?
Is it to help you to a happier friend?

Can you suspect it? was my truest love
So ill bestowed? Can he, for whose dear sake
A Queen so highly born as I preferred
Love before fame, and fondly did neglect
All names of honour when false Fulvia,
And proud Octavia had the name of wives,
Requite me thus? ungrateful Anthony;
For now the fury of a wronged love
Justly provokes my speech.

Oh Cleopatra,
It is not Thyreus but this heart of mine
That suffers now, deep wounded with the thought
Of thy inconstancy: did Fortune leave
One only comfort to my wretched state
And that a false one? for what conference
Could thou so oft, and in such privacy
With Caesar's servant hold, if true to me?
Which with the rack I could enforce from him.
But that I scorn to do.

You do not scorn
To wrong with base unworthy jealousies
A faithful heart: but if you think me false
Heer sheath your sword: make me the subject rather
Of manly rage then childish jealousy.
It is a nobler crime, and fitter far
For you to act, easier for me to suffer.
For live suspected I nor can nor will.
The lovely Asp, which I with care have kept*
And was intended a preservative
Against Caesar's cruelty, I now must use
Against Antonius baseness a worse fo
Then Caesur is: farewell, till death approve
That I was true, and you unjust in love.

Stay Cleopatra, dearest Love, forgive me
Let not so small a wind have power to shake
A love so grown as ours: I did not think
That thou were false: my heart gave no consent
To what my tongue so rashly uttered.
Nor could I have out-liv'd so sad a thought.
Let Thyreus be releast, and sent to Caesar.
Now is the time to sally forth, my Lord,
The fo is tired with marching, and your horse
Are ready all, and wait the signal only.
The least delay loses the action.

I come Canidius; dearest Love farewell.
Few hours will tell thee what Antonius is.

How timorous is guilt? how are my thoughts
Distracted sadly now? on every side
My dangers grow: for should Antonius
Return in safety home, and know what past
'Twixt me and Thyreus, I have lost his heart,
And cannot choose but fear him: if he die
I am not confident of Caesar's love.
'Twas but a servants tongue I built upon.
'Tis best to make all sure: within there, Ei^a.

Madam!


Are all things ready in the tomb?


Yes, Madam; Carmi^'s there and Mar^io.


Then thither will I go, if fate contrive
A future state of happiness for me,
It is my castle: if my death they doom,
I am possessed already of a tomb.

DEfeated are my troops, my fleet revolted,
The Seas and Lands are lost; and nothing now
Is left Antonius but a Roman hand,
A sword and heart to die. You truest servants,
Whose faith and manly constancy upbraids
This wicked age, and shall instruct the next,
Take from a wretched hand this legacy.
Fortune has made my will, and nought but this
Can I bequeath you. Carry it to Caesar;
If he be noble, it contains enough
To make you happier then Antonius can.
My glass of life and Empire now is run,
And from this hand expects a period.

My Lord, take fairer hopes.


Fie, fie, Lucilius;
Lose not thy former merits in persuading
A man, whom once thou lov'dst to such a shame
As to prefer a loathed captivity
Before a noble death.
Thy looks speak grief
Speak Eros, wher's the Queen?

She's dead my Lord.
When those unhappy tidings came to her
Of your defeat, she straight shut up her self
Within her tomb, and died.

Oh Cleopatra,
Why have I lingered thus, that thou a woman
Should teach so old a soldier how to die?
Fortune, I blame not thee; I have enjoyed
What thou could give, and on the envied top
Of thy proud wheel have long unshaken stood.
Whom Kings have served, and Rome her self obeyed;
Whom all the Zones of earths diffused Globe,
That know inhabitants, have known, and feared.
Nor is my fall so much degenerate.
My strength no arms but Roman arms subdue, Plutarch.
And none, but Monarch of the world succeeds.
Glutted with life and Empire now I go
Free and undaunted to the shades below.
Here Eros, take this sword, perform the promise
Which thou hast made, to kill me whensoere
I should command: make no reply in words.

I will be true or die. Stand fair; your Eros
Will be your Usher to th'Elizian fields.

What hast thou done unfaithful faithful Eros
Too kindly cruel, falsely virtuous?
I'll trust no more, to be no more directed
By such examples: but we must be speedy.
The gates ere this time are set open to Caesar.
Fair Cleopatra, I am coming now
To dwell with thee, and ever to behold
Thy heavenly figure, where nor time nor death
Shall make divorce of our eternal loves.
Thus, thus I come to thee: unfaithful sword*
I never knew thee slow in giving death
Till this sad hour, some friendly hand lend aid*
And with another wound release my soul.
Where is my Lord Antonius? Oh sad sight
The Queen enclosed in her tomb desired
To take her last leave of you.

Is she living?
Tis welcome news, convey me quickly, friends,
Oh quickly thither, that I may expire
That breath that's left in Cleopatrae's arms.

Go you, Epaphroditus, and besiege
The Palace, to surprise Antonius;
You Proculeius, and Cornelius Gallus,
Go presently to Cleopatraes tomb,
Wo her with all your art and eloquence
With all assurances of Caesar's love
To leave that place, and yield her person to him.
Spare no attempts of force or policy
To draw her thence: for you the Citizens
Of Alexandria, cheer your fainting hearts,
I'll mediate in your behalf to Caesar,
To spare the City.

Thanks to the most noble
And good Agrippa.

Heer he comes himself.


The paleness of your fear declares your guilt.
But that, though ne'er so great, shall not exceed
Our clemency, to let you know it was
Your happiness to be subdued by us.
Mercy shall rule our just severity.
First for your founder Alexanders sake,
Next for the love of reverent Arius
Our Master heer^ whose goodness far out-weighs
All your offences and rebellions.

Caesar in goodness, as in greatness, bears
Equality with Jove.

Hail mighty Caesar.


What's he?


Achor^us, Osiris Priest,
A good and holy man.

We dare believe thee,
And therefore welcome him.

Please it great Caesar,
To give Achoreus leave to wait on him
Into the ancient Temples of our Gods
To show the Egyptian rites and mysteries,
And all the Deities that we adore.

Most willingly Achoreus, I would see
Gods, but not Oxen.

He has blanked the Priest.


I fain would see great Alexander's hearse
The mansion once of so divine a soul
A spirit greater then the world it self,
Whom the world feared but could not satisfy.

Within the vault of our Pyramides
His body yet all whole may Caesar see.
And all the bodies of our Ptolomeys.

I'd see Kings only, not dead carcasses.
But see, Epaphroditus is returned.

Speak man, where is Antonius?


Slain, my Lord.


How? slain? what hand durst do it?


His own hand.


That was our fear: cruel Antonius.
Too cruel to thy self, to Rome, and me
How white a day have all the people lost?
How great might Caesar's happiness have been
Had but the fates permitted me to lay
These conquering arms aside, and once again
Embrace thee, dear Antonius, as a friend
Thou worthy aider of my infant fortunes,
Thou brave revenger of great Julius death,
Witness these tears, though I were forced to war
(Whilst thou preferring foreign love before
Caesar's alliance, did reject my kindred,
And scorn my love) I still could honour thee.
But since too cruel fate denies to me
So great an happiness as to express
This love to thee alive, let thy dear ghost
Behold my Piety, and see the honours
Caesar will do to thy sad funeral.

Most royal Caesar-like dissimulation.


I hope how ere 'twill serve our turns Lucilius.
Now is the fittest time.

What men are these?


Two of Antonius truest servants, Caesar,
Who bring a letter from their dying Lord.

Let me peruse it well, it shall be granted.
Your lives and fortunes both are safe, and since
We ever loved fidelity, you shall
If so you like, be welcome to our service,

'Tis our desire; our lives and fortunes ever
Shall do great Caesar true and faithful service
As they before did to Antonius.

Where did he die?


In Cleopatraes arms
By her with ropes let up into the tomb,
After his deadly wound.

Is she there still?
Now I shall know; speak Gallus, what's the news?

We came and called at Cleopatraes tomb,
Who from above made answer, and denied
To yield herself, but upon Caesar's word.
When I with best persuasions strove to win her,
And held her talk awhile, whilst Proculeius
On the other side the tomb espied a place
That open stood, by which the Queen received
Dying Antonius, which he scaling entered
Behind the Queen: but had he not been speedy
She there had slain herself: a maid of hers
Spied Proculeius entering, and aloud
Cried out oh Queen thou art surprised alive.
She drawing a short poniard was restrained
By Proculeius, who both held her hand
And spake her fair; at last obtained so much
By strong persuasions of your clemency
He drew her thence, and got her to the Palace.
Where now she is, and Proculeius stays.
But her desire is still to speak with you.
Till when from us she will admit no comfort.

We will in person presently go see her.
Protect me Pallas against false Venus charms.
Known mischiefs have their cure; but doubts have none,
And better is despair then fruitless hope
Mixed with a killing fear: my thoughts are now
More black and baleful then this sad attire.
If Caesar come, I do not fear his chiding
I have a certain Antidote against that.
'Tis not his anger, but his love afflicts
My doubting soul, whether that love will prove
Fained or true, yet may straight apppear.
He's not so old, nor I so ignorant
But that his actions, gestures, words, and looks
Will make his heart lie open to my view.

How sweet a sorrow dwells upon that brow!
How would she look in smiling dalliance?
Oh pardon me thou powerful God of love,
That durst presume to tempt thy Deity.
Forgive my confidence. I now excuse
Antonius weakness, but stay there my heart,
My virtuous Livia is more fair then she,

Hail mighty Prince; for that high name the Gods.
Who reft me of it, have bestowed on thee.

Rise Cleopatra, Caesar's victory
Takes nought from you.

Oh let me never rise
Till Caesar grant my suit.

Good Queen stand up,
And freely speak what you desire:

I beg
A boon but small, which Caesar ne'er denied
His greatest enemies.

And can you think
I should deny it you? Do but express it*

That thou would kill me Caesar; I have lived
These many years too long: I should have died
When that great Worthy, that renowned Caesar
Was basely murdered in Romes Capital.
Surviving him was my unhappiness.
But I have lived to see his son inherit
His state and Empire, and control the world.

Be cheery Cleopatra, fear no wrong
At Caesar's hands.

Death is no wrong at all.
I have deserved it, Sir.

But can you think
That we, whose clemency so many men
And stubborn enemies so oft have proved,
Should now at last be cruel to a Queen?
But we must chide you, that so long together
Have sided with Antonius, and with him
Conspired the wrack of Rome.

That's soon excused.
If 'twere a crime to love Antonius
(Which I confess I did, and his large favours
Truly deserved it) think it was not mine
But fates own crime, that first allotted me
To his protection: had your share of rule
In Egypt lain, I had been Caesars friend.

Besides with men and money you give aid
To Caius Cassius in Philippi field
Who murdered Caesar in the Capital.

Caesar, as false as truth it self is true.
I was accused to Antonius
For that before; but in Cilicia
I quickly cleared those causeless jealousies,
Witness thou glorious star, which the great soul
Of noble Julius, when he left the earth,
Added to heaven, how innocent I am
From any fault in that: but Caesar know
Against thy father not the act alone,
But even suspicion shall be purged with death.
I can no longer live.

What have I done?
I fear my rashness has too far betrayed
My thoughts to Cleopatra: gentle Queen
Be comforted; expect at Caesar's hand
Nothing but love and friendship: do not wrong
My goodness with unjust suspicion
All former grievances are quite forgot.
Your port and state shall be maintained at full.
Your household servants not diminished.
Epaphroditus, see the Queen attended
As fits her stare and honour; and till next
We visit you, rest with a full assurance
Of our best love and friendship.

All the payment
That my poor fortunes can return to Caesar
Is thanks and service.

Epaphroditus.


Caesar.


Yes. whisper on; you cannot over-reach
My jealousies: no signs of love at all,
No smile, nor amorous glance, I was deceived,
And merely coosen'd by base Thyreus.
But I must hide my fears, and clear this brow
The better to effect my purposes.

How fares your Majesty?


Never so well
As now I am, I did not think great Caesar
Had been so full of love and courtesy.

Oh Madam, Caesar's the unexampled mirror
Of royalty, and does as far exceed
All petie Kings in goodness as in power.
And if my humblest services in ought
May give content to royal Cleopatra
I shall be proud to be commanded still.

Thanks good Epaphroditus.
That love is true that's showed in mis^ry.
But what have I forgot? I had a note
Of some particulars I meant to give
To Caesar's hand and quite forgot it here.
Nor would I trust the carriage of a thing
Of so great consequence to every hand.

Will you command my service?


I shall rest
Indebted to your love; Caesar will thank you.
It much concerns both his estate and mine.
Be speedy good Epaphroditus, for
I long to hear his answer.

Fear not Madam.
A quick performance, it rejoices me
To see her look so cheerily again.

So now my trouble is removed, I come,
I come my dearest Lord Antonius,
Never till now thy true and faithful love.
My much abused Lord, do not disdain
Or blush t'acknowlege Cleopatra's name
When tears and blood have washed her spotted soul*
Were thou alive again, not all the world
Should shake my constancy, or make divorce
Twixt thee and me: but since too late, alas,
My tears of sorrow come, I'll follow thee,
And beg thy pardon in the other world.
All crimes are there for evermore forgot.
There Ariadne pardons Theseus falsehood.
Dido forgives the perjured Prince of Troy,
And Troilus repentant Cressida.
Though false to thee alive, I now am come
A faithful lover of thy dust and comb.

Marcus Agrippa, I have here provided
As Caesar gave in charge two Libyan Psyls.
All Afrik yields not fitter for his purpose.

They look like likely ones.


They have been proved,
And have already on my soldiers,
When they were bit by Serpents, done strange cures,
Past all belief or hope, recalled fled life
Back to his mansion, and beyond the power
Of Aesculapius have sucked and charmed
The mortal venom from their dying limbs.
These two, Agrippa in their infancy
Their doubting sires to try their lawful births
(As Eagles try their Eaglets against the Sun)
Exposed to mortal Serpents, and were so
Confirmed in what they sought, the trembling Snakes
Durst not assault the Infants.

Here he comes.


Are those the men?


Yes, Caesar.


Carry them
To Cleopatraes Palace; let them wa^
Near to Epaphroditus. What's the news?
How fares the Queen?

Never more cheery Sir.
Her looks express her hopes; nor in her words
Can she conceal her inward cheerfulness.
But one thing, Sir, she sai'd she had forgot,
Which nearly did concern both you and her;
And that in such a cause she durst not trust
A common messenger, requesting me
To give it to your hands.

She has deceived thee,
And all of us; the worst that I could fear
Is come to pass: oh run Epaphroditus,
I'll follow thee with all the speed I can.
But all too late, I fear, our speed will come.

This is my second Coronation day;
But nobler then the first, and fuller far
Of real honour, and magnificence.
Nor till this pompous hour was Cleopatra
A perfect Queen, alas, I did not sway
A Sceptre over fortune, or command
As now I do, the destinies themselves.
I wore a painted honour, a mere shadow
Of Royal state, and such a feeble Crown
As war could threaten, treason undermine,
And every puff of Fortune blow it off.
My state is constant now, my thoughts above
The fear of dangers or opposing foes.

What new addition has she got off state?


I cannot tell, nor can I guess her meaning.


Glaucus and Mardio, leave the room a while.
Come hither Girls, I will no longer hide
My joys from you; in such attire as this
I go to meet my dear Antonius.

Madam, he's dead.


Alas, thou art deceived.
He lives my Charmio in the other world,
And stays for me; I have been too too slack
In coming to him: this that here lies dead
Was but the house that lodged my dearest Lord,
That earthly Mansion, that did once contain
The kindest, noblest, and the truest soul
That ever lived; and this our second meeting
Is far more sweet, and full of noble love
Then when we first met in Cilicia,
When our magnificence and pomp did fill
The world with wonder and astonishment.
Why weep you girls? is it to see your Mistress
Greater then ere in Glory? if you loved me,
You'd weep to see great Cleopatra led
A wretched captive through the streets of Rome
Before proud Caesar's chariot, mocked and flouted,
And from a Queen become Octaviaes drudge.
No, no, my girls, I will be still my self
And from this seat of state look down in scorn
On Rome, and Caesar's threats as things below me.

Nor heer shall my attendance leave you, Madam,
I'll wait upon you to th'Elisian shades.

Nor will poor Charmi^ be left behind.


My earthly race is run, and I descend
As great a ghost as Theban Semele,
When her ambitious love had sought and met
The Thunderers embraces, when no Pile
Of earthly wood, but Jove's celestial fire
Consumed her beauties relics, and sent down
Her soul from that Majestic funeral.
Farewell thou fading remnant of my Love.
When I am gone, I'll leave these earthly parts
To keep thee company: never to part,
But dwell together, and dissolve together.
Come Asp, possess thy mansion; freely feed
On these two hills, upon whose snowy tops
The winged Cupid oft has taken stand,
And shot from thence the proudest hearts on earth.
Corruption now, and rottenness must seize
This once admired fabric, and dissolve
This flesh to common elements again*
When skilful nature, were she strictly bound
To search through all her store-house would be pos'd
To tell which piece was Cleopatra once.
Sweet Asp, I feel thy* touch, and life begins
From these cold limbs to take her gentle flight.
A slumber seizes me; farewell my girls.
Thus let the Romans find me dead, and know
Maugre the power of Rome, and Caesar's spleen
That Cleopatra lived, and died a Queen.

She's dead, and Eira too. I hear a noise.
There is no dallying now; I must bespeedy,
And use the common and sure way to death.

We come too late, and all in vain I fea^
Our care has been.

Here lies her servant bleeding,
Not dead: speak Charmio, how died the Queen?

A death that well beseemed her royal birth.


See Caesar, see; the mark upon her breast,
And here the fatal author.

'Twas the Asp.
Be speedy now, and use your utmost power
You skilful Psyls, call back this royal soul
To her fair seat, and take from Caesar's bounty
Above your wish: suck thou the wounded place,
And mutter thou thy strongest charms to fright
Pale death from thence, and you in^ernall Gods,
If ere to humane prayers you could lend
An exorable ear, 'tis Caesar begs,
Caesar, whose sword has sent to your black shades
A hundred thousand souls, and still has power
T'enlarge your Empire, begs in lieu of all
But restitution of one soul alone.

How royally she died?


No conquered Prince.
Did ever find a nobler way to death.
Had feeble Perseus known so brave a course,
He had redeemed his captive life from shame.
And not deprived the Conqueror of fame.

Is there no hope?


She's gone past all recovery.


We will no longer strive against destiny.
Though thou art dead, yet live renowm'd for ever;
And let this action speak thee to the world
A fo not shaming Caesar's victory.
No other Crown or Sceptre after thine
Shall Egypt honour: thou shalt be the last
Of all the reigning race of Ptolomey:
And all, and more then what thy letter craved
Will Caesar grant with dead Antonius
In richer state then ere proud Memphis saw
Her Kings interred shall Cleopatra lye.
Thy dying figure carved in fairest stone
Shall my triumphant chariot wear, for all
To gaze and wonder at thy form and worth.
Egypt no more a Kingdom, now a Province
Cornelius Gallus, is thy government.
And here let Caesar sheath the civil sword,
Whose fatal edge these twenty years has ripped
The bleeding ^ntrails of afflicted Rome.
Heer let our labours end: advance brave friends
Our prosperous Eagles home to Italy,
To reap the fruit of all our wars and toils,
And fill great Rome with conquered Aegypts spoils.



The Scene EGYPT.


