what of the Game, called Chesse-play can be made
To make a Stage-Play, shall this day be plaid.
First, you shall see the men in order set,
States, and their Pawnes, when both the sides are met:
The Houses well distinguished: In the Game
Some men entrapt, and taken to their shame,
Rewarded by their Play: And in the Close
You shall see Checque-Mate given to Virtues Foes.
But the fairest Jewel, that our hopes can deck,
Is, so to play our Game, t'auoid your Check.

HA? where? what Angle of the world is this;
That I can neither see the politic face,
Nor with my refined nostrells taste the foot-steps,
Of any of my Disciples, sons and heirs
As well of my designs, as institutions,
I thought they'd spread over the World by this time,
Covered the earths face, and made dark the land,
Like the Egyptian Grasse-hoppers,
Here's too much light appears, shot from the eyes
Of Truth and Goodness, never yet deflowered:
Sure they were never here, then is their Monarchy
Imperfect yet: A just reward I see
For their ingratitude so long to me,
Their father and founder;
'Tis not five years since I was saluted by'em,
Where slept my honour all the time before?
Could they be so forgetful to cannonize
Their prosperous Institutor, when they had saluted
They found no room in all their Kallender
To place my name, that should have removed Princes,
Pulled the most eminent Prelates by the roots up,
For my dear coming, to make way for me,
Lets every petty martire, and Saint Homile,
Roch, Main, and Pecronel, itch, and Ague curers,
Your Abbess Alde-gund, and Cuney-gund;
The Widow Marcell, Person Policary,
Sislie and Vrs^e, all take place of me;
And but for the Bissextile, or Leape-yeare;
And that's but one in three, I fall by chance,
Into the nine and twenteth day of February:
There were no room else for me; see their love,
Their conscience too, trust me a lame Soldier
In-to-Leape-yeare: My wrath's up, and me thinks
I could with the first syllable of my name,
Blow up their Colleges: up Error, awake
Father of Superogation rise:
It is Ignatius calls thee, Loyolla.

What have you done? oh I could sleep in ignorance
Immortality, the slumber is so pleasing.
I saw the bravest setting for a game now,
That ever my eye fixed on.

Game: what Game?


The noblest Game of all, A Game at Chess,
Betwixt our side, and the White House, the men set
In their just order, ready to go to it.

Were any of my sons placed for the Game?


Yes: and a daughter too, a secular daughter
That plays the Black^ Queenes pawn, he the Black Bishops.

If ever power cold show a maisterie in thee,
Let it appear in this,

'Tis but a Dream,
A vision you must think.

I care not what,
So I behold the Children of my cuuning,
And see what rank they keep,

You have your wish:
Behold there's the full number of the Game,
Kings and their Pawnes, Queenes, Bishops, Kinghts and Dukes.

Dukes they're called Rooks by some.


Corruptiuely:
Le roch, the word custody de La Rock,
The keeper of the forts in whom both Kings
Repose much confidence, and for their trust sake,
Courage and worth do well deserve those titles.

Thy answer's high, see my son and daughter.


Those are two pawnes the black Queen, black Bishops.


Pawnes argue but poor spirits, and light performents:
Nor worthy of the name of my Disciples:
If I had stood so nigh I would have cut
That Bishops throat, but I'd have had his place;
And told the Queen a love tale in her ear,
Would have made her best pulse dance, there's elixar
Of brain, and spirit amongst em.

Why? would you have em play against themselves.
That's quite against the Game ( Ignatius.)

Pish, I would rule my self, not observe rule.


Why you yould play a game all by your self.


I would do any thing to rule alone,
Tis rare to have the world ruled in by one.

See'em anon, and view em in their play,
Observe as in a dance they glide away.

Oh with what longing will this breast be tossed,
Until I see this great Game won and lost.

I Never see that face, but my pity rises,
When I behold so clear a Maister-peece
Of Heavens art, wrought out of dust and ashes,
In that not ours, but the Daughter of Heresy:
My soul bleeds at mine eyes.

Where should truth speak
If not in such a sorrow? they're tears plainly:
Beshrew me if she weep not heartily?
What is my peace to her to take such pains in it?
If I wander to loss, and with broad eyes
Yet miss the path she ran blind-fold in.
(Through often exercise) why should my ouer-sight,
Though in the game that ere Christian lost,
Raise the least spring of pity in her eye,
Tis doubtless a great charity, and no virtue,
Could win me surer.

Blessed things preuaile with it,
If ever goodness made a gracious promise,
It is in yonder look, what little pains
Would build a Fort for virtue to all memory
In that sweet creature, were the ground-worke firmer.

It has been all my glory to be firm,
In what I have professed.

That is the enemy
That steals your strength away, and fights against you,
Disarmes your soul, even in that heate of battle:
Your firmnes that way, makes you more infirm,
For the right Christian conflict* there I spied
A zealous primitiue sparkle, but now slew,
From your devoted eyes:
Able to blow up all the Heresies
That ever sate in Council with your spirit;
And here comes he whose Sanctimonious breath,
Can make that spark a flame: list to him (virgin)
At whose first entrance Princes will prostrate:
Women are weaker Vessels.

By my paenitence
A comely presentation, and the habit
To admiration reverend.

But the heart, the heart Lady
So meek, that as you see good Charity pictured still
With young ones in her arms, so will he cherish
All his young tractable sweet obedient daughters
E'ene in his arms, in his own bosom,
I am my self a secular Iesuitesse,
As many Ladies are of worth and greatness,
A second sort are Iesuits in voto,
Giving their vow into the father general:
That's the Black Bishop of our house, whose pawn
This Gentleman now stands, now to receive
The College habit at his holy pleasure.

But how are these in voto employed (Lady)
Till they receive the habit.

They're not idle,
He finds 'em all true labourers in the work
Of universal Monarchy, which he
And his Disciples princially aim at.
Those are maintained in many Courts and Palaces,
And are induced by noble Personages,
Into great Princes services, and prove
Some Counsellers of State, some Secretaries:
All serving in notes of intelligence:
(As Parish Clerks,) their mortuary bills,
To the father General, so are designs
Often times prevented, and importinant secrets
Of state discovered, yet no author found,
But those suspected oft that are most sound:
This mystery is too deep, yet for your entrance,
And I offend to set your zeal so back,
Checked by Obedience, with desire to hasten
Your grogresse to perfection, I commit you
To the great workers hands, to whose grave worth
I fit my reverence, as to you my wishes.

Dost find her supple?


There's a little passage made.


Let me contemplate,
With wholly wonder season my access;
And by degrees approach the Sanctuary
Of vnmatcht beauty, set in grace and goodness
Amongst the daughters of men I have not found
A more Cathalecall aspect, that eye
Dos promise single life and meek Obedience.
Upon those lips the sweet fresh buds of youth,
The holy dew of prayer lies like pearl,
Dropped from opening eye-lids of the morn,
Upon that bashful Rose, how beautiously
A gentle fast not rigorously imposed,
Would look upon that cheek, and how delightful
The courteous Physic of a tender penance,
Whose utmost cruelty should not exceed
The first fear of a bride to beat down frailty,
Would work to sound health your long festered judgment,
And make your merit well (through erring ignorance
Appears but spotted righteousness to me,
Far clearer then the innocence of Infants.

To the good work I bow and will become,
Obedience humblest daughter, scythence I find
The assistance of a sacred strength to aid me:
The labour is as easy to serve virtue
The right way since, 'tis she I ever served
In my desire, though I transgressed in Judgment.

It's easily absolved amongst the rest,
You shall not find the virtue, that you serve now
A sharpe and cruel mistress, her eare's open
To all your supplications; you may boldly
And safely let in the most secret sin
Into her knowledge, which like vanished man
Never returns into the World again:
Fate looks not up more trulier,

To the guilty,
That may appear some benefit.

Who so innocent
That never stands in need on it in some kind?
If every thought were blabbed that's so confessed,
The very air we breath would be imblest:
Now to the work indeed, which is to catch
Her inclination, that's the special use
We make of all our practise in all Kingdoms
For my disclosing their most secret frailties,
Things which once ours, they must not hide from us
That's the first article in the Creed we teach 'em,
Finding to what point their blood most inclines,
Know best to apt them, then to our designs:
Daughter the sooner you disperse your Errors,
The sooner you make haste to your discovery,
You must part with'em, to be nice or modest
Towards this good action, is to imitate
The bashfulness of one conceals an vlter,
For the uncomely parts that tumor vexes,
Til't be past cure. Resolve you thus fair (Lady)
The priuatst thought that runs to hide it self,
In the most secret corner of your heart, now
Must be of my acquaintance, so familiarlie
Never she friend of yours might counsel nearer.

I stand not much in fear of any account
Guilty of that black crime (most noble holiness,)
I must confess as in a sacred Temple,
Thronged with an auditory, some come rather
To feed on human object, then to taste
Of Angels food.
So in the Congregation of quick thoughts
Which are more infinite, then such assemblies,
I cannot for truths safely speak for all:
Some have bin wandrers, some sinful, some sound:
But those found ever poor entertainment.
They'd encouragement to come again,
The single life which strongly I profess now:
Heaven pardon me, I was about to part from.

Then you have past through love?


But left no stain
In all my passage (Sir) no print of wrong;
For the most chaste maid that may trace my foot-steps.

How came you off so clear?


I was discharged
By an inhumaine accident, which modesty
Forbids me to put any language too.

How you forget your self? all actions
Clad in their proper language, though mostsorded
My ear is bound by duty to let in,
And locke up everlastingly: Shall I help you;
He was not found to answer his creation?
A vestal Virgin in a slip of prayer,
Could noi deliver mans loss modestier:
T was the White Bishops pawn*

The same (blessed Sir)


An Heretic well pickled.


By base treachery,
And violence prepared by the Competitor:
The black Knights pawn whom I shall ever hate for it.

T was of revenge the most vnmanlist way
That ever riualltooke, a villain
That for your sake i'll never absolve him off.

I wish not so heavy.


He must feel it,
I never yet gave absolution
To any crime of that vnmatring nature:
It seems you refuse him for defect,
That other women have in the ends of marriage:
Pardon my boldness, if I sift your goodness
To the last gra^ne*

I reverence your pains (Sir)
And must confess, custom to enjoy
What other women challenge and possess,
More ruled me then desire: for my desires
Dwell all in Ignorance, and I'll never wish
To know that fond way, may redeem them thence.

I never was so taken, beset dubly
Now with her judgment what a strength it puts forth,
I bring work nearer to you, when you have seen
A maister-peece of man, composed by Heaven
For a great Princes favour, kingdoms love:
So exact Envy could not find a place
To stick a blot on person, or on fame:
Have you not found ambition swell your wishes then?
And desire stir your blood.

By virtue never:
I have only in the dignity of the creature,
Admired the works glory.

She's impregnable,
A second siege must not fall off so tamely:
She's one of those must be informed to know
A daughters duty which some take untaught;
Her modesty brings her behind hand much,
My old means I must fly too* yes 'tis it,
Please you peruse this small tract of Obedience,
'Twill help you forward well.

(Sir) that is a virtue:
I have ever thought on with especial reverence.

You will conceive by that,
My power your duty.

What makes yond troubler of all Christian water,
So near yon^ blessed spring? but I know
Her goodness is the rock from whence it issues.
Unmovable as fate, 'twould more afflict me
Then all my sufferings for her, which so long
As she holds constant to the house she come off,
The witness of the cause, the side, the quality
Are sacrifices to her worth and virtue,
And though confined in my religious joys,
I marry her and possess her.

Behold Lady,
The two inhuman enemies, the black Knights pawn,
And the white Bishops, the gelder and the gelded.

There's my grief, my hate.


What? in the Iesuites fingers? by this hand,
I'll give my part now for a Parrots feather,
She never returns virtuous, 'tis impossible:
I'll undertake, more wagers will be laid
Upon a Usurers return from hell,
Then upon hers from him now: have I bin guilty
Of such base malice, that my very conscience
Shakes at the memory of it, and when I look
To gather fruit find nothing but the Sauin tree:
Too frequent in Nuns Orchards, and there planted
By all conjecture to destroy fruit rather,
I will be resolved now most noble Virgin.

Ignoble villain, dare that unhallowed tongue
Lay hold upon a sound so gracious,
What's nobleness to thee, or virgin Chastity?
They're not of thy acquaintance, talk of violence,
That shames creation, deeds would make night blush
That's company for thee, hast thou the impudence
To court me with the Leprosy upon thee,
Able to infect the walls of a great building.

Son of offence forbear, go set your devil
Before your eyes, a paenitentiall vesture,
Would better become ye, some shirt of hair.

And you a three pound smock, steed of an Abbey,
An Epicene Cassible, this holy fellow
Robs safst and close, I feel a sting that's worse too:
White pawn, hast so much Charity to accept
A reconcilement, make thy own conditions,
For I begin to be extremely burthned.

No truth, no peace, of that black house, Protest
Is to be trusted, but for hope of acquittance,
And warned by difference, I may entrap him soonest,
I admit conference.

It is a nobleness
That makes confusion cleave to all my merits.

That treatise will instruct you fully.


So, so,
The business of the Universal Monarchy
Goes forward well now, the College pot
That should be always boiling with the fuel,
Of all intelligencers possible,
Through the Christian Kingdom is this fellow
Our prime incendiary? one of those
That promised the white Kingdom seven years since
To our blacke-house, put a new daughter to him,
The great worke-slaues, he minds nor Monarchy
Nor Hererazie (diviner principallities) I brag less,
But have done more then all the conclave on'em
Take their assistant fathers in all parts:
I, or their father general in to boot:
And what I have pone, I have done factiously
With pleasant subtilty, and bewitching court-ship,
Abuse all my believers with delight,
They took comfort to be cozened by me,
To many a soul I have let in mortal poison,
Whose cheeks have cracked with laughter to receive it,
I could so roll my pills in sugared syllables,
And strew such kindly mirth over all my mischief,
They took their bain in way of recreation,
A pleasure steals corruption into youth,
H^ee spies me now, I must uphold his reverence,
Especially in public (though I know)
Pryapus guardianof the cherry Gardens:
Bacchus and Venus chit is not more vicious.

Blessings accumiliation keep with you (sir.)

Honours d^ssimulation be your due (sir.)

How deep in duty in observance plunge?
His charge must needs be reverend.

I am Confessor
To this Black Knight too, you see douotion's fruitful,
Sh'as many sons and daughters.

I do this the more,
To maze our adversaries to behold,
The reverence we give these great ones,
And to beget a sound opinion
Of holiness in them, and zeal in us;
As also to enuite the like obedience
In other pupills, by our meek example:
So, is your trifle gone?

Trifle call you her, it's a good game (sir)
Sure she's the second pawn of the White house,
And to the opening of the game I hold her.

I you hold well: for that I know your play
Of old, if there were more Queenes pawnes you'd ply
The game a great deal harder (now sir we're in private)
But what for the maine work, the great existance?
The hope Monarchal?

It goes on in this.

In this? I cannot see it.

So you may deny
A Dyalls motion, because you cannot see
The hand move, or a wind that rends the Cedars.

Where stops the current of the intelligence;
Your father general Bishop of the blacke-house,
Complains for want of work.

Here's from all parts
Sufficient to to employ him, I received
A packet from the assistant fathers lately,
Look you there's Anglica, this Gallica.

I marry (sir) there's some quick flesh in this.

Germanica.

Think they'n sealed this with butter.

Italica this

They put their pens the hebrew way me thinks,

Hispanica there.

Hispanica, blind word this,
The Iesuite hath writ this with juice of Leamons sure
It must be held close to the fire of Purgatory
Ere't can be read.

You will not leave your jesting (Knight)
Though it wound your own fame.

Curanda pecunia.


Take heed (Sir) we're entrapped.


He's made our own (man half in Voto yours,
His heart's in the black house, leave him to me,
Most of all friends indeed pretiously special,

You see my outside, but not my heart,
Great difference in the colour, there's some intelligence,
And as more ripeness, so your knowledge st^l
Shall prove the richer, there shall nothing happen
(Believe it) to extenuate your cause.
Or to oppress her fr,ends, but I will strive
To cross it with my counsel, purse and power
Keep all supplies both in means and men,
That may raise against you, we must part,
I dare not longer of this theme discuss,
The ear of State is quick and jealous.

Excellent estemation, thou art valued
Above the fleece of gold, that came short home,
Poor Iesuite, ridden soul, how art thou foold
Out of thy faith, from thy allegance drawn,
Which way so ere thou take, you're the lost Pawn.

AND here again it is the daughters duty
To obey her fessors command in all things
Without exception, or expostulations;
Tis the most general rule that ere I heard of:
Yet when I think how boundless virtue is,
Goodness and grace lies gently reconciled,
And then it appears well to have the power
Of the dispensor are's vncircumscrib de'

She's hard upon it, twas the most modest key
That I could use to open my intents,
What little, or no pains goes to some people:
Hah? a sealed note, whence this,
To the black Bishops pawn these, how to me
Strange, who subscribes it? the black King what would he.
Sir after my desire has took a Tulip
For it's own inflammation, that yet scorches me,
I shall have cooler time to think of yours,
She's past the general rule of the large extent
Of our prescription for obedience;
And yet with what allacrity of soul,
Her eye moves on the Letter.

Holy Sir,
Too long, I have mist you, oh your absence starves me,
Hasten for times redemption (worthy Sir)
Lay your commands as thick and fast upon me
As you can speak em, how I thirst to hear em:
Set me to work upon this spacious virtue,
Which the poor span of life's, tomorrow for
Boundless obedience, the humblest, yet mightiest of all
Duties, well set her down a universal goodness.

By holiness of garment, her safe innocecne
Has frighted the full meaning from it self,
She's far off from understanding now
The language of my intent, then at first meeting

For virtues sake, good sir,
Command something,
Make trial of my duty in some small service,
And as you find the faith of my obedience there,
Then trust it with a greater.

You speak sweetly,
I do command you first then.

With what joy I do prepare my duty.


To meet me,
And seal a kiss of love upon my lips,

Hah.


At first disobedient in so little too.
How shall I trust you with a greater then?
Which was your own request?

Pray send not back
My Innocence to wound me, be more courteous,
I must confess much like a ignorant plaintiff
Who presuming on the fair path of his meaning
Goes rashly on, till on a sudden brought
Into the wilderness of Law, by words
Dropped unadvisedly, hurts his good cause,
And gives the Adversary advantage by it.
Apply it you can best (sir) if my obedience
And your command can find no better way,
Fond men command, and wantons best obey.

If I can at that distance send you a blessing,
Is it not nearer to you in my arms:
It flies abroad from these li^s dealt in parcels,
And I to honour thee above all daughters.
Invite thee home to the house, where thou may surfeit
On that, which others miserably pine for:
A favour which the daughters of great Potentates,
Would look of envies colour but to hear.

Good men may err sometimes, you're mistaken,
Sure if this be virtues path, tis a most strange one,
I never came this way before.

That's your ignorance,
And therefore shall that edict still conduct you,
That knows no way but one, nor ever seeks it,
Tis strange if virtue should be put to one,
If there be twenty ways to some poor Village.
Your fear is wondrous faulty, cast it from you,
'twill gather else in time a disobedience,
Too stubborn for my pardon.

Have I locked my self
At unawares into sins servitude
With more desire of goodness? is this the tie
Of all strict order, and the holiest
Of all societies, the three vowed people
For Poverty, Obedience, Chastity:
The last they most forget, when a Virgins rain
I see the great work of Obedience,
Is better then half finished.

What a stranger,
Are you to duty grown, what distance keep you,
Must I bid you come forwards to a happiness
Your self should sue for? 'twas never so with me
I dare not let this stubbornness be known,
'Twould bring such fierce hate on you, yet presume not
To make that courteous care a preuiledge
For wilful disobedience, it turns then
Into the blackness of a curse upon you,
Come, come, be nearer.

Nearer?


Was that in scorn?
I would not have it proved so for the hopes
Of the great Monarchy, if it were like it,
Let it not dare to fly abroad again,
A stronger I will coape with it.

Bless me, threatnes me,
And quite dismayes the good strength that should
Help me. I never was so doubtful of my safety.

'Twas but my jealousy, forgive me (sweetness)
Yours is the house of meekness, and no veonome lives
Under that roof, be nearer; why so fearful?
Nearer the Altar the more safe and sacred.

But nearer the offerors oft more wicked.


A plain and most insufferable contempt,
My glory I have lost upon this woman,
In freely offering that she should have kneeled
A year in vain for: my respect is darkened,
Give me my reverence again thou hast robbed me off
In thy repulse, thou shalt not carry it hence.

(Sir.)


You're too great a winner to depart;
And I too deep a looser to give way to it.

Oh Heaven!


Lay me down reputation,
Before thou sturst thy nice Virginity
Is recompense too little for my love.
'Tis well if I accept of that for both,
Thy loss is but thine own, there's art to help thee,
And fools to pass thee to; in my discovery
The whole society suffers and in that,
The hope of absolute Monarchy eclipsed,
Assurance thou can make me none for thy secrecy,
But by thy honours loss, that act must awe thee.

Oh my diftrest condition.


Dost weep?
If thou had any pity, this necessity
Would wring it from thee, I must else destroy thee:
We must not tust the policy of Europe,
Upon a woman's tongue.

Then take my life (Sir)
And leave my honour for to guide me to Heaven.

Take heed I take not both which I have vowed
Since, if longer thou resist.

Help, oh help.


Art thou so cruel for an honours babble:
To undo a whole fraternity, and disperse
The secrets of most nations locked in us?

For Heaven and virtues sake


Must force confound noise?
Hah, what's that? silence (if fair worth be in thee)

I'll venture my escape on all dangers now,


Who comes to take me, let me see that pawnes face,
Or his proud tympanous Mas-well with state wind,
Which being once pricked in the Convocation house,
The corrupt air puffs out, and he falls shrivelled.

I will discover the Arch-hypocrite,
To all the kinreds of the earth.

Confusion in that voice,
Rings the alarm of my undoing,
How, which way escaped she from me?

Are you mad?
Can lust infatuate a man so hopeful?
No patience in your blood: the dog-starre rains sure,
Time, and fire temper would have wrought her
Pliant: I spied a Pawn of the white House walk near us,
And made that noise of purpose to give warrant
For mine own turn: which ends in all I work for.

Methinkes I stand over a powder vault,
And the match now a kindling: what's to be done?
'Tis his own case, he will defend you mainly,
And happily here he comes with the black Knight too.

Oh you made noble work for the white house
This act will fill the aduersaryes mouth,
And blow the Luthrens cheeks, tilt crack again.

This will advance the state Monarchal business
In all parts well, and help the agents forward,
Which I have seven years laboured to accomplish.
One minute sets back by some codpiece Coledge still.

I dwell not (sir) alone in this default,
The black house yields me partners.

All more cautelous.


Qui caute, caste, that's my Motto still,
Iue travailed with that word over most Kingdoms,
And lain safe with most nations on a leaking bottom
I have been as often tossed on Venus seas
As trymer, and fresher barks, when sounder vessels
Have lain at anchor, that is kept the door.

She has no witness then?


Gross witness, when went one of his society?
To mischief with a witness?

I have don't then,
Away upon the wings of speed, take post horse,
Cast thirty leagues of earth behind thee suddenly,
Leave letters ante-dated at our house,
Ten days at least from this.

Bishop I taste thee,
Good strong Episcopall counsel, take a bottle on it,
Twill serve thee all thy journey.

But good (sir) how,
For my getting for the vnspied?

There's Check again.


No, I'll help that.


Well said my bouncing Iesuitesse.


There lies a secret valt.


Away, make hast then.


Run for my Cabinet of intelligences,
For fear they search the house, good Bishop burn'em,
I cannot stand to pick 'em now.

Begone the dangers all in you.


Let me see Queenes pawn,
How formerly has packed up his intelligences,
He has laid them all in truckell beds (me thinks)
And like Court harbingers has writ the names
In Chalk upon their Chambers: Anglica,
Oh this is the English house, what news there trow?
Hah by this hand most of these are bawdy epistles,
Time they were burnt indeed, whole bundles of 'em:
Here's from his daughter Blanch daughter Bridget:
From the safe sanctuary in the White-Friers:
Those from two tender sisters of compassion,
In the bowels of Blomsbury:
These three from the Nonnery in Drury lane:
A fire, a fire, (go Iesuitesse) a fire:
What have you there?

A note (sir) of State policy,
And an exceeding safe one.

Pray let's see it (Sir)
To sell away all the powder in the Kingdom,
To prevent blowing up, that's safe, i'll able it:
Here's a factious observation now,
That suits my humour better, he writes here
Some wives in England will commit adultery,
And then send to Room for a bull for their husbands.

Have they those shifts?


Oh no familiarity breathing
Sweeter, here wench take those papers,
Schorch em soundly, burn em to French russet,
And put em, in again.

Why, what's your mystery?


Oh (sir) 'twill mock the adversary strangely,
If ere the house be searched, 'twas done in Venis
Upon the Jesuitical expulse there,
Where the Inquesitors came all specktacl'd
To pick out syllables out of the dung of treason,
(As children pick their cherry-stones) yet found none;
But what they made themselves with ends of letters.
Do as I bid you Pawn.

Faith not in all,
I love rogarie too well to let it fall:
How now, what news with you?

The sting of conscience
Afflicts me so for that inhumane violence,
On the White bishops Pawn, it takes away
My joy, my rest.

This 'tis to make an Eunuch,
You made a sport on it then.

Cease agreuation,
I come to be obsolu'd for it, where is my Confessor,
Why dost thou point to the ground?

Because he went that way:
Come, come, help me in with this Cabinet,
I'll tell thee a strange Story.

If it be sad, tis welcome.


Tis not much troubled with mirth, sir. Ex.


Pawn.


I attend at your great holiness service.


For great, I grant you, but greatly holy,
There the sold alters fat Cathedral bodies,
Have very often lean, little souls,
Much like the Lady in the Lobstars head,
A great deal of shell and garbage of all colours,
But for the pure part, that should take wings and mount
That's at last gasp, as if a man should gape,
And from a huge bulk let forth a butter-flye,
Likethose big-bellied mountains, which the Poet
Delivers, that are brought to bed with mans flesh,
Are my book Printed pawn, my last invictiues against
Against the blacke-house?

Ready for publication:
For I saw perfect books this morning (sir.)

Fetch me a few, which I will instantly
Distribute amongst the White-house.

With all speed (sir.)


Tis a most Lordly life to rail at ease,
See, eat, and drink upon the fat of one Kingdom;
And rail upon an other with the juice on it:
I have writ this book out of the strength and marrow
Of six and thirty dishes at a meal:
But most on it out of cullishe of Cock sparrows,
Twill stick and glue the faster to the adversary,
Twill slit the root of their most Caluish cause,
And yet I eat but little butchers meat
In the conception:
Of all things I commend the White-house best,
For plenty and variety of victuals:
When I was one of the blacke-house professed,
My flesh fell half a Cubit, time to revolt,
When my own ribs revolted; but to say truth,
I have no preferment yet, that's suitable
To the greatness of my person and my parts:
I grant I live at ease, for I am made
The Master of the beds, the long acre of beds:
But there's no Marie-gold, that shuts and opens,
Flower gentlee Venis borth, apples of love,
Pinckes, Hyanths, Honie-suckles, Daffa-down-dillies,
There was a time I'd much more brab then beds,
Now I'ue more beds, then drabs:
Yet there's no eminent trader deals in whole-sayle;
But she and I have clap a barging up,
Let in at water-gate, for which I have racked
My tennants purse-strings, that then'ue twanged again:
Yonder black Knight, the Fistula of Europe,
Whose disease once I undertook to cure,
With a high Holborn halter, when he last
Vouchsafed to peep into my privileged lodgings
He saw good store of plate, and rich hangings:
He knew I brought none to the White-house with me,
I have not lost the use of my profession,
Since I turned White-house bishop:

Look, more books yet?
Yonder greasy gormundizing Prelate
Does work our house more mischief by his scripts,
His fat and fulsome Volumes,
Then the whole body of the aduers party.

Oh 'twere a Master-peece of serpent subtilty
To fetch him a this side again.

And then damme him
Into the bag for ever, or expose him
Against the adverse party, which now he feeds on;
And that would double dam him, my revenge
Has prompted me already, i'll confound him
A both sides for the physic he provided,
And the base Chyrurgion he invented for me,
I'll tell you what a most vncutholicall ieast
He put upon me once when my pain tortured me,
He told me he had found a present cure for me,
Which I grew proud on, and observed him seriously,
What think you 'twas, being execution day,
He showed the Hangman to me out at window.
The common Hangman.

I'll make him the baloom ball,
Of the Churches.
And both the sides shall toss him, he looks like one,
A thing swelled up with mingled drink and wine,
And will bound well from one side to another.
Come, you shall write our second bishops dead
Which has yet no employment in the Game
Perhaps nor ever shall, it may be won
Without his motion, it rest in ours:
He shall be flattered with Sede vacant,
Make him believe he comes into his place,
And that will fetch him with a vengeance to us,
For I know powder is not more ambitious,
When the match meet it, then his mind for mounting
As Covetous and Lecherous.

No more, now (Sir) both the sides fill.


This ha's bin looked for long.


The stronger sting it shoots into the blood
Of the black adversary, I'm ashamed now,
I was theirs ever, what a Lump was I?
When I was led in ignorance and blindness?
I must confess I'ue all my life time played
The Fool, till now.

And now he plays two parts, the fool and knave.


There's my recantation in the last leaf.
Were it like a Ciceronian in pure Latain.

Pure honesty, the better latain serves then,


Out of those pestilent pamphlets those are they
That wound our cause to the heart.

Here, more anger yet.


But we come well provided for this storm


Is this my Pawn? she that should
Guard our Person,

Or some pale figure of deiection,
Her shape usurping, sorrow and affrightment,
Has prevailed strangely with her.

King of Integrety,
Queen of the same, and all the house professors
Of noble Candor, uncorrupted justice,
And truth of heart, through my alone discovery
(My like and honour wondrously preserved)
I bring into your knowledge with my sufferings,
Fearful affrightments, and heart-killing terrors,
The great incendiary of all Christendom,
The absolute abuser of true sanctity,
Fairer peace, and holy order can be found
In any part of th'vniuefsall Globe:
Who making meek devotion keep the door,
(His lips being full of holy zeal at first)
Would have committed a foul rape upon me.

Hah?


A rape? that's foul indeed, the very sound
To our ear fowler then the offence it self
To some Kings of the earth.

Sir, to proceed,
Gladly I offered life to preserve honour,
Which would not be accepted without both:
The chief of his ill aim to be at mine honour,
Till heaven was pleased by some unlooked for accident,
To give me courage to redeem my self.

When we find desperate sins
In ill men's company,
We place a charitable sorrow there;
But custom and their leaprous inclination,
Quits us of wonder: for our expectation
Is answered in their lives, but to find sin
Under a robe of Sanctity, is able
To draw all number to that monster only,
And leave created monsters unadmired,
The pride of him that took first fall fo pride,
Is to be Angel shaped, and imitate
The form from whence he lell; but this offender,
Far, baser then sins master, fixed by vow
To holy order which is Angels method,
It grieves me that my knowledge must be tainted,
With his infested name,
Oh rather with thy finger point him out.

The place that he should fill is void my L.
His guilt has scared him the black Bishops pawn.

Hah, mine, my pawn? the glory of his order,
The prime and president zealot on the earth?
Impudent pawn, for thy sake at this minute
Modesty suffers, all that's virtuous blushes,
And truths self like the sun vexed with a mist,
Looks red with anger.

Be not thou drunk with rage too


Sober sincerity nor you a cup,
Spake with Hypocrisy.

You name their Bishop,
But your own Christmas bole you morning draught
Next your Episcopall heart all the twelve days,
Which smack you cannot leave all the year after.

A shrewd retorte
Has made our Bishop smell of burning too,
Would I stood farther off, were it no impeachment
To my honour orthe game, would they wold play faster
White Knight, there's acknowledged from our house
A reverence to you and respect
To that Lord Duke stands next you, with the favour
Of the white King, and th'afore-named respected,
I combat with this cause, if with all speed
Wast not one syllable, unfortunate pawn,
Of what I speak, thou dost not plead destruction
A plea which will but faintly take thee off neither,
From this Leuiathan scandal, that lies rolling
Upon the Crystal waters of devotion,
Or what may quit the more (though enough nothing)
Fall down, and foam, and by than pang discover,
The vexing spirit of falsehood strongly within thee,
Make thy self ready for perdition,
There's no remove in all the Game to escape it,
This pawn or this, the Bishop, or my self
Will take thee in the end, play how you can.

Spite of sins glorious ostentatio n;
And all blood-threats, that thunder cracks of pride,
Ushering a storm malice house of impudence,
Trust and aeqiuocation, my true cause
Shall keep the path it treads in.

I play thus then:
Now in the hearing of this high assembly,
Bring forth the time of this attempts conception.

It seems black Knight you are afraid to touch it


Well it's eruption, will she have it so then?
Or your white Bishop for her, the more unclean*
Vile and impious that you urge the strain to,
The greater will her shames heap now in the end,
And the wrongs meek mans glory, the time (pawn)

Yesterdays cursed evening.


Oh the treasure of my revenge I cannot spend on thee,
Ruin enough to spare for all thy kindred too,
For honours sake call in more slanderers,
I have such plentiful confusion,
I know not how to wast it, i'll be nobler yet,
And put her to her own house: King of meekness
Take the cause to thee, for our hands are too heavy,
Our proofs will fall upon her like a Tower,
And grind her bones to powder.

What new engine,
Ha's the devil raised in him now.

Is it he,
And that the time stands firm, now to your scandal,
Pray do not shift your slander.

Shift your treachery,
They'ue worn one suit too long.

That holy man,
So wrongfully accused by this lost pawn:
He has not been seen these ten days in these parts.

How.


Nay at this instant thirty leagues from hence.


Fadomlesse falsehood, will it escape vnblasted.


Can you make this appear?


Light is not clearer,
By his own letters (most impartial Monarch.)

How wrongfully may sacred virtue suffer, sir.


Bishop we have a treasure of that false heart.


Step forth and reach those proofs.


Amazement covers me,
Can I be forsaken of a cause
So strong in truth and equity, will virtue
Send me no aid in this hard time of friendship.

There's an infallible staff and a red hat
Reserved for you.

Oh, sir, indeed.


A staff
That will not easily break, you may trust to it,
And such a one had your corruction need of,
There's a state fig for you now,

Behold all,
How they were in one:
I always held a charity so good
To holiness professed I ever believed rather,
The accuser false you the professor vicious.

A charity like all your virtues else,
Gracious and glorious.

Where sets the offence,
Let the faults punishment be derived from thence:
We leave her to your censure.

Most just Majesty.


Calamity of virtue, my Queen leaves me too:
Am I cast off as the Olive casts her flower?
Poor friendless innocence art thou left a prey,
To the devourer?

Nor thou art not lost,
Let em put on their bloodiest resolutions,
If the fair policy I aim at prospers:
Thy counsel (noble Duke.)

For that work chiefly.


A man for speed now.


Let it be my honour, sir,
Make me that flight that owes my lives service.

Was not this brought about for our honours:


Pish, the Galician brain can work out wonders.


Let's use her, as upon like discovery
A maid was used at Venice, every one
Be ready with a penance being majesty
Vessel of foolish scandal, take thy fright
Had been in that Cabinet of niceness,
Half the virginities the earth locked up,
And all sweept at one cast, by the dexterity
Of a Jesuitical Gamester t'ad not valued
The least part of that general worth thou hast tainted.

First I enjoin thee to a three days fast for it.


You're to penurious, sir, ill make it four.


I to a twelve hours kneeling at one time.


And in a room filled al with Aretines pictures,
(More then the twelve labours of Luxury)
Thou shalt not so much as the chaste pummel see
Of Lucrece dagger peeping: nay I'll punish thee
For a discoverer, i'll torment thy modesty.

After that four days last, into the inquisition house.
Strengthened with bread and water for worse penance.

Why well said Duke of our house, nobly agriuated.


Virtue to show her influence more strong,
Fits me with patience mightier then my wrong.

I Know my pen draws blood of the black house,
There's never a book I writ but their cause bleeds,
It has lost many an ounce of reputation,
Since I came to this side, I deep in,
And leave the Orifex gushing were I come:
But wher's my advancement all this while I have got,
I'd have some round preferment, corpulent dignity
That bears some breath and compass in the gulf on it,
I am persuaded that this flesh would fit
The biggest chair Ecclesiastical,
If it were put to trial, to be made Master of an Hospital,
Is but a kind of disease-bred honour:
Or dream of the poor alms Knights that wear badges
There's but two lazy beggarly preferments,
In the white Kingdom, and I'ue got em both,
My merit does begin to be crop-sicke
For want of other Titles.

Oh here walks his fulsome holiness:
Now for the Maister-peece
To undo him everlasting, that's put home,
And make him hang in most seriously,
That ieasted with an halter upon,

The black Knight? I must look to play then.


I bring fair gretings to your reverend virtues,
From Cardinal Paulus your most princely kinsman.

Our princely kinsman saith thou? we accept ^m:
Pray keep your side and distance, I am chary
Of my Episcopall person:
I know the Knights walk in this Game too well,
He may slip over me, and where am I then?

There where thou shalt be
Shortly if art fail not,
(Hah, all my bodies blood mounts to my face,
To look upon this letter.)

The pill works with him,
Think on it seriously it is not yet too late then,
Through the submiss acknowledgment
Of your disobedience`
To be brotherly received into the loving
Bosom of the Conclave.

This was the chair of ease I ever aimed at,
I'll make a bonfire of my books immediately
All, that are left against that side i'll sacrifice:
Pack up my plate and goods, and steal away
By night at Water-gate: It is but penning
An other recantation, and in venting
Two or three bitter books against the white house,
And then I'm atother side again,
As firm as ere I was, as fat, and flourishing:
Black Knight, expect a wonder ere't belong,
Thou shalt see me one of the blacke-house.

Your holiness is merry with the messenger,
Too happy to be true, you speak what should be.
If natural compunction touched you truly:
Oh you'ue drawn-blood, live blood, blood of honour
From your most dear primitiue mothers heart:
Your sharpe invectives have been points of spears
In her sweet tender sides, the unkind wounds
Which the son gives, a son of reverence specially,
They rankle ten times more, you the adversaries:
I tell you, sir, your reverend revolt
Did give the feare-fullest blow to adoration
Our cause ere felt, it shook the very statues,
The veins and ashes of the Sainted sleepers.

Forbear, or I shall melt in the place I stand,
And let forth a fat Bishop in sad syrrop:
Suffice I am yours, when they least dream on it,
Ambitious fooder, power and riches draws me,
When I smell honour that's the locke of hay,
That lead me through the worlds field every way. Ex.
B. Knight. Here's a sweet pang to propogate belief on,
Like the foundation of a Chapel laid
Upon a quagmire, I may number him now
Amongst my inferior policies, and not shame em;
But let me a little solace my designs
With the remembrance of some brave ones past,
To cherish the futerrity of project,
Whose motion must be restless till that great work,
Called the possession of the world be ours:
Was it not procured a gallant fleet,
From the white Kingdom to secure our coasts,
Against th'infidell Pirates, under pretext
Of more necessities expedition,
Who made the Iayles fly open (without miracle)
And let the Locusts out, those dangerous flies.
Whose properti's to burn corn without touching
The Heritique Granaries, feel it to this minute;
And now they'ue got amongst the country Corps,
They stick so fast to the converted ears,
The loudest tempest that authority rowzes,
Will hardly shake 'em off, they have their dens
In Ladies coaches, their safe groves and fens:
Nay they were followed and found out by the sent
Palm oil will make a Pursuivant relent:
Whose policy was it to put a silenced muzle,
On all the barking tong-men of the time:
Made pictures that were enough before,
Poor sufferers in that politic restraint?
My light spleen skips, and shakes my ribs to think on it
Whilst our drift walked uncensured, but in thought
A whifle or a whisper, would be questioned,
In the most fortunate Angle in the World,
The Court has held the City by thy Horns,
Whilst I have milkt her: I have got good soups too
From Countries for their liberties,
From some for their most vainly hopd for preferments.
High offices, in the air, I should no live
But for this Mellacrim, this mirth Manna,
My pawn? how now, the new's.

Expect none very pleasing
That comes (sir) of my bringing, I'm so sad.

Thy conscience is so tender hooft a late,
Every nail pricks it.

This may prick yours too,
If there be any quick flesh in a yard on it.

Mine, mischief must find a deep nail and a driver.
Beyond the strength of any Matchauile:
The politic Kingdoms fatten to reach mine,
Prithee compunction needle prick a little,
Unbind this sore wound.

Sir, your plots discovered.


Which of the twenty thousand, nine hundredth
Threescore and five, can tell?

Bless us, so many?
How does poor Country men have but one plot
To keep a Cow o^, yet in law for that,
You cannot'em all sure by their names (Sir)

Yes were the number trebled: thou hast seen
A Globe stand on the table in my Closet.

A thing (sir) drawn with Countries and hard words.


True, with lines drawn
Some Tropicall, some oblique.

I scarce can read, I was brought up in blindness.


Just such a thing (if ere my scull be opened)
Will my brains look like.

Like a Globe of Countries.


I and some Master politician,
That has sharpe state eyes will go near to pick out
The plots and every climate where they fastened,
And will puzle em too.

I'm of your mind for that (sir.


Th'le find em too full upon so no countries,
The'd need use spectacles; but I turn to you now,
What plot is that discovered?

Your last bruit sir,
Begot 'twixt the black Bishop and your self,
Your ante-dated letters about the Iesuite.

Discovered, how?


The white Knights policy has out stripped yours it seems:
Joined with th'assistant council of this Duke:
The white Bishops pawn undertook the journey,
Who as they say, discharged it like a flight,
I made him for the business fit and light.

'Tis but a bawdy pawn out of the way a little,
There's enough of them in all parts.

You have heard all then.


The wonders past with me, but some
Shall down for it.

Set free that virtuous pawn from all her wrongs,
Let her be brought with honour to, the face,
Of her malicious Adversary.

Good.


Noble chaste Knight, a title of that Candor,
The greatest Prince on earth without impeachment
May have the dignity of his worth comprised in,
This fair delivering act virtue will register,
In that white book of the defence of Virgins,
Where the clear fame all preserving Knights,
Are to eternal memory consecrated;
And we embrace as partner of that honour,
This worthy Duke, the counsel of the act,
Whom we shall ever place in our respect.

Most blessed of Kings, throned in al royal graces,
Every good deed sends back it's own rewards,
Into the bosom of the enterpriser;
But you to express your self as well to be
King of munificency, as integrity
Adds glory to the gift.

Thy deserts claim it,
Zeal and fidelity appear, thou beauty
Of truth and innocence, best ornament
Of patience, thou that made thy sufferings glorious

I'll take no knowledge on it what makes she here?
How dare you pawn vnpennanc't with a cheek
Fresh as her false-hood yet, where castigation
Has left no pale print of her visiting anguish,
Appear in this assembly, let me alone,
Sin must be bold, that's all the grace 'tis bound too.

What's this?


I'm wonder strocke.


Assist me goodness,
I shall to prison again.

At least I'ue mazed em,
Scattered by admiration of her innocence,
(As the fired ships put in, severed the Fleet
In eighty eight) I'll on with it, impudence
Is mischiefs patrimony, is his Justice
Injured reverence no sharplier righted,
I ever held that Majesty impartial,
That like unequal, Heaven looks on the manners,
Not on the shapes they shroud in.

This black Knight
Will never take any answer, 'tis a victory
To make him understand, he does amiss,
When he knows in his own clear understanding,
That he does nothing else, show him the testimony
Confirmed by good men, how that foul attempter,
Got but this morning to the place from whence
He dated his forged lines six days past,

Why may not the corruption sleep in this,
By some connivence, as you have walked in ours,
By too rash confidence.

I'll undertake
That Knight shall teach the devil how to lye.

If sin were half so wise as impudent,
She'de near seek father for an advocate.

Now to act treachery with an angels tong,
Since all ours come out, i'll bring him in strongly again,
Where is his injured chastity? this goodness
Whose worth no transitory prize can equal,
This rock of constant, and invinceable virtue
That made sins tempest weary of his fury.

What is my pawn destracted?


I think rather
There's some notable Maister-prize of rogary,
This drum strikes up for.

Let me fall down with reverence
Before this blessed Altar.

This is madness.


Mark the end, I stand for rogery still,
I will not change my side,

I shall be taxed I know
I care not what the black house thinks of me.

What say you now?


I will not be vnlayed yet.


How ever sensure flies, I honour sanctity,
That is my object I intend no other,
I saw this glorious and most valiant virtue,
Fight the most noble combat with the devil.

If both the Bishops had bin there for seconds
T'ad been a complete Devil.

Then thou hast heard the violence intended?


Tis a truth, I joy to justify I was an agent
On virtues part, and raised that confused noise,
That started his attempt and gave her liberty.

Oh 'tis a righteous story she has told (Sir)
My life and same stands mutually engaged,
Both to the truth and goodness of this pawn.

Does it appear to you, yet clear as the Sun.


Lass I believed it long before 'twas done.


Degenerate


Base,


Perfidious.


Traitorous pawn


What are you al besides your selves?


But I remember that pawn.


May a fearful barrenness,
Blast both my hopes and pleasures, if I brought not
Her ruin in my pity, a new trap
For her more sure confusion.

Have I not won now,
Did not I say 'twas craft, and machination?
I smell conspiracy all the way I went,
Although the mess were covered I'm so used to it.

That queen would I fain finger.


You are too hasty (sir)
If she were took the game would be ours quickly,
My aims at that white Knight, t'entrap him first.
The Duke will follow too.

Would that Bishop were in my Diocese,
I'd soon change his whiteness.

(Sir) I could whip you up a pawn immediately,
I know where my game stands.

Do it suddenly,
Advantage least must not be lost in this play.

Pawn, thou art ours.


He's taken by default,
By wilful negligence, guard the sacred persons,
Look well to the white Bishop, for that pawn
Gave guard to the queen, and him in the third place.

See what sure piece you locke your confidence in,
I made this pawn here by corruption ours,
As soon as honour by creation yours,
The whiteness upon him is but the leaprosy
Of pure dissemulation: view him now,
His heart and his intents are of our colour.

Most dangerous Hypocrite


One made against us.


This truth of his complexion.


Has my goodneesse,
Clemency, love, and favour gracious raised thee
From a condition next to popular labour,
Took thee from all the dublitable hazards
Of Fortune? her most unsecure adventures?
And grafted thee into a branch of honour,
And dost thou fall from the top bough by the rottennes
Of thy alone corruption, like a fruit
That's ouer-ripned by the beams of favour,
Let thy own weight reward thee, I have forgot thee,
Integrity of life is so dear to me,
Where I find falsehood, or a crying trespass,
Be it in any whom our grace shines most on,
I'd tear em from my heart.

Spoke like Heavens substitute.


You have him, we can spare him, and his shame
Will make the rest look better to their Game.

The more cunning we must use then.


We shall match you,
Play how you can) perhaps, and make you too.

Is there so much amazement spent on him
That's but half black, there might be hope of that man
But how will this house wonder, if I stand forth
And show a whole one, instantly discover
One that's all black, where there's no hope at all.

I'll say, thy heart then justifies thy books,
I long for thy discovery.

Look no farther then,
Bear witness all the house I am the man,
And turn my self into the black house freely,
I am of this side now.

Monster near matched him.


This is your noble work Knight.


Now I'll halter him*


Next news you hear, expect my books against you,
Printed at Doway, Bruxells, or Spallato.

See his goods seized on.


Lass, they were all conueyed
Last night by water-gate, to a Taylors house:
A friend of Black house.

A prepared Hypocrite.


Premeditated tuene-coate.


Yes, rail on,
I'll reach you in my writings when I'm gone.

Flatter him a while with honours till we put him
Upon some dangerous service, and then burn him*

This came unlooked for.


How we rejoice to see you.


Now i'll discover all the white house to you.


Indeed that will both reconcile and praise you.


I rest upon you knight for my advancement.


Oh for the staff, the strong staff that will hold
And the red hat fit for the guilty mazure,
Into the empty bag, know the first way,
Pawnes that are lost, are ever out of play.

How's this?


No replication you know me,
No doubt e're long you'll have more company.
The bag is big enough t'wil hold v^a^

I sue to thee, prithee be one of us
Let my love win thee, thou hast done truth this day,
And yesterday my honour noble service.
The best Pawn of our house, could transcend it not.

My pity stands with zeal especially,
When I foresaw your marriage, then I amounted.

How? marriage?


That contaminating Art,
Would have spoiled al our fortunes a rape God bless us.

Thou talk of marriage.


Yes, yes, you do marry,
I saw the man.

The man.


An absolute handsome Gentleman, a complete one,
You'de say so when you see him, heir to the three red hats,
Besides his general hopes in the black house.

Sure thou art mistaken, for this man
I have promised single life to all my affections.

Promise you what you will, or I, or all's one,
There's fate rules us, and over rules us all me thinks.

How came you to see or know this mystery.


A Magical glass I bought of an Egyptian,
Whose stone retains that speculative virtue,
Presented the man to me, your name brings him
As often as I use it, and me thinks
I never have enough person and postures:
Are all so pleasing.

This is wondrous strange,
The faculties of soul are still the same,
I cannot feel one motion tend that way.

We do not always seek, the faith we live by,
Nor ever see our growth, yet both work* upward.

It was well applied, but may I see him too.


Surely you may without all doubt or fear,
Observing the right use as I was taught it,
Not looking back, nor questioning the specter.

That's no hard observation, trust it
With me, is't possible, I long to see this man.

Pray follow me then,
And I'll case you instantly.

I would so fain take one of these white pawnes now.
I'd make him do all under drudgery,
Feed him with ashes, milk, cromb'd with Goats cheese;
And all the white meates can be devised for him,
So make him my white Jennet when I prance it,
After the black Knights litter.

You'd look then,
Just like the Devil striding over a night mare.
Made of a Millers daughter.

A pox on you, were you so nigh, I'm taken
Like a Blacke-bird in the great snow, this white
Pawn grinning over me.

And now because I will not foul my clothes
Ever hereafter? for white quickly soils you know.

I prethe get thee gone,
Then I shall smut thee.

I'll put that to venture, now I have
Snapped thee, thou shalt do all the dirty drugery,
That slavery was ever put too.

I shall cousin you,
You may chance come and find your work undone,
For I'm too proud to labour, i'll starve first,
I tell you that before hand.

I will fit you then with a black
Whip, that shall not be behind hand.

Pish, I have been used to whipping,
I have whipped my self three miles out of Town
In a morning, I can fast a fortnight, and
Make all your meat stink, and lye upon your hands.

To prevent that, your food shall be
Black berries, and upon gaudy days a pickled
Spider cut out like Anchouis: Ime not to
Learn a months ordinary, come fir, will you firk.

Soft, soft you, you have no such
Bargain on it, if you look well about you.

I'm snapped too, a black
Pawn in the breech of me:
We three look like a bird spit, a white Chick
Between two russet Wood-cockes.

I'm glad of this.


But you shall have small cause, for i'll firk you.


And i'll firk you again.


And I'll firk you again.


Mas here will be old firking, I shall
Have the worst on it, for I can firk no body,
We draw together now for all the world.
Like three flies with one straw through their buttocks.

This is the room he did appear to me in,
And look you, this the Magical glass, that showed him.

I find no motion yet, what should I
Think on it? a sudden fear invades me,
A faint trembling under this omen
As oft felt the panting of a Turtle,
Under a stroking hand.

That boads good luck still,
Sign you shall chang state speedily: for that trembling
Is always the first symptom of a bride,
For any vain fears that may accompany
His apparitian, by my truth to friendship
I quite you of the least, never was object
More gracefully presented, the very air
Conspires to do him honour, and treats
Sweet vocal sin as if a bridegroom enters:
Which argues the biest harmony of your loves.

And will the using of my name produce him.


Nay of yours only, else the wonder halted,
To clear you of that doubt: i'll put the difference
In practise, the first thing I do, and make
His invocation in the name of others.

That will satisfy me much.


It shall be done.
Thou with gentle form and face,
Filled lately this Egypted Glass,
By th'emperious powerful name,
And the Vninersall fame,
Of the mighty black House Queen
I conjure thee to be seen.
What see you nothing yet?

Not any part: Pray try another.


You shall have your will:
I double my command and power,
And at the instant of this hour:
Invoke thee in the white queenes name,
With stay for time, and shape the same.
What see you yet?

There's nothing shows at all.


My truth reflects the clearer.
Then now fix and bless your fair eye,
With your own for ever.
Thou well composed by fates hand drawn,
To enjoy the white Queenes Pawn,
Of whom thou shalt (by virtue meet)
Many graceful issues get:
By the beauty of her fame,
By the whiteness of her name,
By her fair and fruitful love,
By her truth that mates the Dove,
By the meekness of her mind,
By the softness of her kind,
By the lustre of her grace,
By al these you're summoned to this place.
Hark how the air enchanted with your praises,
And his approach this words to sweet notes rayses.

Oh let him stay a while, a little longer.


That's a good hearing.


If he be mine, why should he part so soon?


Why, this is but the shadow of yours:
How do you?

Oh, I did in to give consent to see it,
What certainty is in our bloods our states?
What we still write is blotted out by fates:
Our wills are like a cause that is Law-tost,
What one Court orders, is by another-crost.

I find no fit place for this passion here,
Tis merely an intruder, he is a Gentleman,
Most wishfully composed, honour grows on him,
And wealth piled up for him, has youth enough too,
And yet in the sobriety of his Countenance,
Grave as a Tetrach, which is gracious
Ith'eye of modest pleasure, where's the emptiness,
What can you more request.

I do not know
What answer yet to make, it doth require,
A meeting 'twixt my fear and my desire.

She's caught, and which is strong, by her most wronger.


THE Iesuit in his gallant habit,
Tis he my Confessor, he might have passed me
Seven years together, had I not by chance
Advanced mine eye upon that lettered Hat bond:
The Jesuitical symbale to be worn,
By the brave Colledgians with consent,
Tis a strange habit for a holy Father,
A president of poverty especially:
But we the sons and daughters of Obedience,
Dare not once think awry, but must confess our selves
As humble to the father of that feather,
Long spear and poniard, as to the Abbey and Alter,
And happy we are so highly graced t'attaine to it,
Holy and reverend.

How has found me out?


Oh (sir) put on the sparlingst trim of glory*
Perfection will shine for most, and I know you
By the Catholicall mark you wear about you,
The mark above your fore-head.

Are you grown
So ambitious in your observance: well, your business,
I have my Game to follow.

I have a worm
Follows me, so that I can follow no game,
The most faint hearted pawn, if he could see
His play, might snap me up at pleasure:
I desire (sir) to be absolved, my conscience
Being at ease, I could then with more courage
Play my Game.

'Twas a base fact.


'Twas to a Schisamticke pawn (sir.)


What's that to the ability of revenge
Suffices I have neither will nor power
To give you absolution for that violence,
Make your petition to the penance Chamber,
If the Tax Regester relieve you in it,
By the black bishops clemency you hau'wrought out,
A single piece of favour with your money,
It's all your refuge now.

This sting shoots deeper.


Yonder's my Game, which like apoletick Chessner,
I must not seem to see.

Oh my heart.


That 'tis.


The very same that the Magical
Presented lately unto me.

And how like
A most regardless stranger he walks by,
Merely ignorant of that sate, you are not indeed
The principall'st part of him, what strange mysteries
Inscrutable love works by.

The time you see,
Is not yet come.

But 'tis in our power now
To bring time nearer, knowledge is a mastery,
And make it observe us, and not we it

I would force nothing
From it's proper virtue,
Let time have his full course. I'd rather die
The modest death of undiscovered love,
You have heavens least and lowest servant suffer,
Or in his motion receive check for me:
How is my souls growth altar'd that single life,
The fittest garment that peace ere made for it
Is grown too straight, too stubborn on the sudden.

He comes this way again.


Oh here's a Traitor
Leapt from my heart into my cheek all ready.
That will betray all to his powerful eye,
If it but glance upon me.

By my verity
Look, he's past by again, down in neglect
Without the prosperous hin't of so much happiness
To look upon his forrude, how close fate
Seals up the eye of human understanding,
Till like the Suns flower, time and love encloses it,
'Tis pity he should dwell in ignorance longer.

What will you do?


Yes, dye a bash full death, do
And let the remedy pass by unused skill,
You're chayn'd enough all ready, look into it,
Absolute (Sir) with your most noble pardon,
For this my rude intrusion I am bold
To bring the knowledge of a secret nearer,
By many days (sir) then would it arrive,
In its own proper revelation with you,
Pray turn and fix, do you know yon'd noble goodness,

Tis the first minute my eye blessed me with her,
And clearly shows how much my knowledge wanted,
Not knowing her till now.

She's to be liked then,
Pray view advisedly, there's strong reason,
That I'm so bold to urge it, you must guess
The work concerns you nearer then you think for.

Her glory and the wonder of this secret,
Puts a recipicall amazement on me.

And tis not without worth,
You two must be better acquainted.

Is their cause affinity,
Or any covetous help creation joys in,
To bring that work forward.

Yes, yes, I can show you,
The nearest way to that perfection,
Of a most virtuous one, that joy ere found,
Pray mark her once again you follow me,
And I will show you her, must be your wife (sir.)

The mystery exceeds, or else creation,
Has set that admirable piece before us,
To choose out chaste delight by.

Please you follow (Sir.)


What heart have you to put in on one object,
And cannot get me off? tis pain to part from it.

If there prove no check in the Magick-glasse.
But by proportion come as fair, and full
Into his eyes as his into mine lately,
You I'm confirmed he is mine for ever.

The very self same that my mirror blessed me, with
From head to foot, the beauty and the habit,
Kept you this place? still did not you remove Lady.

Not a foot (sir.)


Is't possible,
I would have sworn I'd seen the substance yonder,
'T was to that lustre, to that life presented.

Even so was yours to me (sir.)


Pawn, saw you mine.


Perfectly clear, no
Sooner my name used, but yours appeared.

Just so did yours at mine now.


Why stand you idle, will you let time
Cousin you, (protracting time) of those
Delicious benefits, that faith marked to you,
You modest pair of blushing,
Gamesters, and you (Sir) the bashful
I cannot flatter a foul fault in any,
Can you be more then man and wife assign,
And by a power the most irrevocable,
Others that be adventurers in delight,
May meet with crosses, shame or separation
You know the mind of fate, you must be coupled.

She speaks but truth in this,
I see no reason then,
That we should miss the relish of this night;
But we are both shame-fac't.

How this night (Sir)
Did not I know you must be mine, and therein
Your privilege runs strong, for that loose motion
You never should be, is it not by fortune
To match with a pure mind, then am I miserable,
The Doves and all chaste loving, winged creatures
Have their pairs fit, their desires justly
Mated is woman, more unfortunate, virgin?
The (may of woman) fate has ordained (Sir)
We should be man and wife, has not given
Warrant for aim act of knowledge till
We are so.

Tender eyed modesty, how it grieves at this,
I'm as far off for all this, strange imposture,
As at first enter-view, where lies our game now?
You know I cannot marry by my order.

I know you cannot (sir) yet you
May venture on a contract.

Hah!


Sure you may (sir,)
Without all question so far, without danger
Or any stain to your vow, and that make take her:
Nay do it with speed, sheele think you
Mean the better too.

Be not so lavish of that blessed spring,
You'ue wasted that upon a cold occasion now,
Would wash a sinful soul white by our love joys,
That motion shall near light upon my tongue more,
Till we're contracted, then I hope your mine.

In all just duty ever.


Then do you question it?
Pish, then you're man and wife,
All but Church Ceremonies:
Pray let's see it done first,
She shall do reason then:
Now i'll enjoy the sport, and cousin you both,
My bloods game is the wages I have
Worked for.

Pawn, I have spoke to the Fat bishop for thee,
I'll get thy absolution from his own mouth:
Reach me my Chair of ease, my Chair of cousinage
Seven thousand pounds in women, reach me that
I love a life to sit upon a bank
Of Heretic gold: Oh soft and gentle (sirrah)
There's a foul flaw in the bottom of my bum (pawn)
I near shall make sound soldier, but sound treacher
With any he in Europe, how now? quality
Thou hast the paultrest fool that ere I met with,
It cannot bear one suckling villain:
Mine can digest a monster without credit,
A finn as weighty as an Elephant,
And never wamble for it.

I, you have been used to it (sir)
That's a great help, the swallow of my conscience
Has but a narrow passage, you must think yet
It lies in the paenitent pipe, and will not down,
If I had got seven thousand pounds by Offices
And gulled down you, the bore would have bin bigger.

Nay, an thou prou'st factious, I shall hug thee,
Can a poore-pocht-soft rear iniquity
So rude upon thy conscience, I'm ashamed of thee,
Had thou betrayed the witness to the black,
Beggard a Kingdom by dissimulation,
Anointed the fair frame of peace, and traffic
Poisoned alleagance, set faith back and wrought
Weomens soft souls even up to the masculine malice,
To pursue truth to death if the cause roused em,
That stairs and parents as first taught to curse thee:
All these and ten times troubled has this brain
Bin parent too, they are my off-springs all.

A goodly brood.


Yet I can jest as lightly,
Laugh and tell strange stories to Court Madames,
(Daughters of myseducements) with alacrity,
As high and heartily, as youths time of innocence
That never knew a sin, to shapea sorrow by;
I feel no tempest, not a leaf wind stirring,
To shake a fault, my conscience is be calmed rather,

I'm sure there's a Whirle-winde huffes in mine.


Sirrah, I ha sold the Groom ath stool six times,
And received money of six several Ladies:
Ambitious to take place of Baronets wives*
To three old money Matrons I have promised,
The mother ship oath maids, I'ue taught our friends
To convey white house gold, to our black kingdom
In cold backed pasties, so cousin Searchers:
For venting halbow'd oil, beads, needles, pardons,
Pictures, veronices, heads in private presses,
That's done one in the habit of a Peddler:
Letters conveyed in roles, Tobaco-roles:
When a restraint comes, by my politic counsel;
Some of our Iesuites turn Gentle-men Ushers:
Some Falkners, some park-keeper, some hunts-men:
One took the shape of an old Ladies Cooke once,
And dispatcht two chares in a sunday morning,
The Altar and the Dresser: pray what use
Put I my summer recreation too?
But more t'enforme my knowledge in the state
And strength of the white Kingdom? no fortifications,
Haven, Creek, landing place, about the white Coast,
But I got draught, and plot-forme, learned the depth
Of all the Channels, knowledge of all sands,
Shelves, Rocks and Rivers for invasion:
A Catalogue of all the Navy Royal:
The burden of each ship, the brass murderers:
The number of the men, to what cape bound:
Again for the discovery of the Inlands:
Never a Shire but the State better known
To me, then to her best Inhabitants:
What power of men and horse, gentries, revenues,
Who well affected to your side, how ill,
Who neither will nor ill, all the new trality.
Thirty eight souls have been seduced (Pawn)
Since the Ioales vomited with the Pill I gave 'em.

Sure you put oil of toad into physic (sir)


I'm now about a maister-peece of play,
To entrap the Wh. Knight, and with false allurements,
Entice him to our black House, more will follow,
Whilst our Fat Bishop sets upon the Queen
Then will our game lye sweetly.

He's come now (sir.)


Here's Taxa Penitentiaris Knight,
The book of general pardons, of all prizes:
I have bin searching for his sin this half hour,
And cannot light upon it.

That is strange let me see it.


Wretched as I am, has my rage done that
There is no president of pardon for?

For wilful murder 13. pounds, 4. shillings
and sixe-pence, that's reasonable cheap, for killing,
killing, killing, killing, killing, killing.
Why here's nothing but killing of this side.

Turn ore the sheet, you shall find adultery
And other trivial sins.

Adultery, oh I'm met now; for Adultery
A couple of shillings, and for Fornication five pence,
Mas these are the good penny-worths,
I cannot see how a man can mend himself, for lying
With Mother, Sister, or Daughter, I marry (sir)
Thirty three pounds, three shillings and three pence,
The sins gradation right paid all in three too.

You have read the story of that monster (sir)
That got his daughter, sister wife, of his own mother

Symone nine pounds.


They may thank me for that, 'twas ninteene,
Before I came, I have mitigated many of the sums.

Sodomy six pence, you should have
Put that sum ever on the back side of your book
Bishop.

There's few on's very forward (sir)


What's here? a old presidents of incouragment.


I those are ancient notes.


Given as a gratitud for the kiling of an Heretical
Prince, with a poisoned knife ducats 5 thousand.

True (sir) that was payed.


Promised to Doctor Lopus for poisoning the Maiden Queen of the Whit Kingdom,
ducats twenty thousand, which said sum was afterwards given as a meritorious
alms to the Nunnery at Lisbone, having at this present, ten thousand pounds
more at use in the Towne-house of Antwerp.


What's all this to my conscience (worthy Holiness)
I sue for pardon, I have brought money with me.

You must depart, you see there is no president,
Of any price or pardon for that fact.

Most miserable, are fouler sins remitted?
Killing, nay wilful murder.

True, there is instance:
Were you to kill him I'd pardon you:
There's president for that, and price set down,
But none for Gelding.

I have picked out understanding now for ever,
Out of the Carbulistique bloody ridle,
I'll make away all my estate and kill him,
And by that act obtain full absolution.

Why Bishop, Knight, wher's your remooues?
Your troops? stand you now idle in the heart of game?

My life for yours black sovereign the game is ours,
I have wrought vnder-hand for the Whit Knight,
And this brave Duke, and find them very cunning

And for their Sanctimonius Queen's surprise,
In that State-puzell, and distracted hurry,
Trust my Arch subtilty with.

Oh Eagle pride,
Never was Game more hopeful of our side.

If Bishop bul-beife, be not snapped at next bout,
As the Game stands, I'll never trust art more.

True noble Duke, fair virtues most endeared one,
Let us prevent their rank insinuation,
With truth of cause, and cunning meet their plots:
With confident goodness, that shall strike them grauling.

(Sir) all the Gyns, traps, and alluring snares,
The Devil ha's bin at work since eighty eight,
Are laid for the great hope of this Game only.

The more noble will Truths triumphs be,
When they have wound about our constant courages,
The glittering serpent, that e're false-hood fashoned;
And glorying most, in his resplendent poisons,
Just Heaven can find a bolt to bruise his head.

Look would see destruction lie a sunning?
In yonder smile sits blood, and treachery basking, Ent.
In that perfidious model of face falsehood:
Hell is drawn grinning.

What a payne it is
For Truth to fain a little?

Oh fair Knight,
The rising glory of the House of Candor,
Have I so many protestations lost?
Lost, lost, quite lost, am I not worth your confidence?
I that have voyed the faculties of Soul,
Life, spirit, and brain, to your sweet Game of youth,
(Your noble fruitful Game) can you mistrust
Any foul play in me? that have bin ever
The most submiss observers of your virtues,
And no way taunted with ambition.
(Save only to be thought your first admirer,
How often have I changed (for your delight)
The Royal Presentation of my place?
Into a minicke Jester, and become
(For your sake, and the expulsion of sad thoughts)
Of a great state sic, a light son of pastime,
Made three score year a Tomboy, a mere wanton,
I'll tell you what I told a ( Sauoy) dame once:
New Wed, high, plumph, and lusting for an issue,
Within the year I promised her a child,
If she would stride over (Saint Rumbants) breeches,
A relic kept at Methlin, the next morning
One of my followers old hose was conueyed
Into her chamber, where she tried the feat,
By that, and a Court friend, after grew great.

Why who could be without thee)


I will change,
To please you, to any shape, and my aim
Has bin to win your love, in all this game.

Thou hast it nobly, and I long to see,
the Blacke-house pleasure, state and dignity.

Of honour you'll so surfeit and delight,
You'll ne'er desire again to see the Whit.

My love, my hope, my dearest, oh he's gon,
Entrapt, ensnard, surprised amongst the black on's,
I never felt extremity like this,
Thick darkness dwells upon this hour, Integrity
Like one of Heavens bright Luminaries now,
By errors dullest element interpose,
Suffers a black eclipse, I never was
More sick of love then now I am of horror:
I shall be taken, the games lost, I'm set upon:
Oh tis the turne-coate Bishop, having watched
Th'advantage of his play, comes now to seize on me:
Oh! I'm hard be set, distressed most miserable.

Tis in vain to stir, remove which way you can:
I take you now, this is the time we have hoped for,
Queen you must down.

No refcue, no deliverer.


The black Kings blood burns for thy prostitution,
And nothing but the spring of thy chaste virtue
Can cool his inflammation: instantly
He dyes upon a pleurisy of Luxury,
If he deflower thee not.

Oh straight of misery.


And is your holiness his divine procurer?


The devils in it, I'm taken by a Ring-doue:
Where stood this Bishop all this while, that I saw him not?

Oh you were so ambitious you looked over me,
You aimed at no less person, then the Queen
(The glory of the Game) if she were won,
The way were open to the Master-Checque,
Which (look you) he and his, lives to give you:
Honour and virtue guide him in his station.

Oh, my safe sanctuary.


Let Heavens blessings
Be no longer mine, then I am thy sure one:
The Doves house is not safer in the Rock,
Then thou in my firm bosom.

I am blessed in it.


Is it that lump of rank ingratitu de,
Swelled with the poison of Hypocrisy:
Could he be so malicious, he has pertaken
Of the sweet firtile blessings of our Kingdom, Bishop
Thou hast done our White House gracious service,
And worthy the fair reverence of thy place:
For (thee black Holiness) that works out thy death,
As the blind Moale the prop'rest son of earth,
Who in casting his ambitious hills up,
Is often taken and destroyed in the midst
Of his advanced work: 'twere well with thee,
If like that verminous labourer, which thou imitatest
In bills of pride and malice, when death puts thee up,
The silent grave might prove the bag for ever:
No deeper pit then that for thy vain ho pe
Of the white Knight, and his most firm assistant,
Two princely pieces, which I know thy thoughts
Give lost for ever now, my strong assurance
Of their fixed virtues, could you let in seas
Of populous untruths against that Fort,
'Twould burst the proudest billows.

My feare's past then.


Fear? you were never guilty of an injury
To goodness, but in that.

It stayed not with me (sir.)


It was too much, if it vsurp'd a thought,
Place a strong guard there.

Confidence is set (sir.)


Take that prize hence (you reverend of men)
Put covetousness into the bag again.

The Bag had need be sound, or it goes to wrack,
Sin and my weight will make a strong one crack.

HOld, hold,
Is the black Bishops pawn, the Iesuite
Planted for his consecration?

Ecce triumphanti, Me fixum Caesaris Art.


Art there (my holy boy) sirah, Bishop
Tumbrle is snapped in the Bag by this time.

Heretici pereant sic.


All Latin: Sure the Oration hath infected him:
Away, away make hast: they are coming.

Si quid mortalibus, in vnquam oculis hilarem
Et gratum aperuit diem: Si quid permantibus
Amicorum Animis gaudium attulit perperitur
Laetitiam (Eques candidissime pralucentissime,
Falic^m profecto tuum a Dome Candoris ad Domum
Nigritudinis Accessum promissssse peperisse, at tulisse fatemur:
Omnes aduentus Tui Conflagrantissimi, omni qua
Possumus laetitia, Gaudio, Congratulatione, Acclamations
Animis obseruantissimis, Affectibus diuotissimis, obsequijs
Uenerabundis Te Sospitim congratulamur?

(Sir) in this short congratulatory speech,
You may conceive how the whole House affects you.

The Colleges and Sanctimonious seed plots.


'Tis clear and so acknowledged royoll (Sir.)


What Honours, Pleasures, Rarities, Delights
Your noble thought can think.

Your fair eye fix on
That's comprehended in the spacious circuit
Of our black Kingdom, they are your servants all.

How amply you indeere us?


They are favours that equally enrich the Royal Giver.
As the receiver in the free donation.

Hark,
To enlarge your welcome: from all parts
Is heard sweet-sounding aires, abstruse things
Open of voluntary freenes: And yond Altar,
The seat of adoration, seems t'adore,
The virtues you bring with you.

There's a taste of the old vessel still.


The erroneous relish.


Wonder work some strange delight
( This place was never yet without)
To welcome thee the fair White House Knight,
And to bring our hopes about,
May from the Altar Flames aspire,
Those Tapers set themselves on fire.
May senseless things our joys approve,
And those brazen Statues move:
Quickened by some Power above,
Or what more strange to show our Love.
A happy Omen waytes upon this hour,
All move portentuously the Right-hand way.

Come let's set free all most choice delights,
That ever adorned Days or quickn'd Nights.

I see t'was but a trial of my duty now,
Has a more modest mind, and in that virtue
Most worthily hath Fate provided for me,
Hah! tis the bad-man in the Reverend habit,
Dares he be seen again? Traitor to Holiness,
Oh marble fronted Impudence, and knows,
How ill 'has used? I'm ashamed he blushes not,

Are you yet stoard with any woman's pity?
Are you the Mistress of so much Devotion?
Kindness, and Charity? as to bestow
An Alms of Love on your poor sufferer yet
For your sake only?

(Sir) for the reverend respect you ought
To give to Sanctity (though none to me)
In being her servant vowed, and wear her livery,
(If I might counsel) you should never speak,
The language of unchastity in that habit:
You will not think how ill it does with you,
The world's a stage on which all parts are played,
You'd think it most absurd to see a Devil
Presented there not in a Devils shape,
Or wanting one, to send him out in yours,
You'd rail at that for an absurdity,
No College ere committed, for Decorum sake then
For pities cause, for sacred virtues honour,
If you'll persist still in your diulish part,
Present him as you should, and let one
That carries up the goodness of the play,
Come in that habit: and I'll speak with him,
Then will the parts be fitted, and the spectators
Know which is which, they must have cunning judgments,
To find it else, for such a one as you
Is able to deceive a mighty Auditory.
Nay those you have seduced (if there be any
In the assembly) if they see what manner
You play the Game with me, they cannot love you.
Is there so little hope of you to smile (sir)

Yes at your fears, at th'ignorance of your power
The little use you make of time (youths fortune)
Knowing you have a Husband for lusts shelter,
You dare not yet make bold with a friends comfort:
This is the plague of weakness.

So hot burning?
The siliables of sin, fly from his lips,
As if the letter came new cast from Hell.

Well setting aside the dish you love so much,
(Which hath bin heartily tasted by your betters)
I come to marry you to the gentleman
That last inioyd you, I hope that pleases you.
There's no immodest relish in that office.

Strange of all men he should light on him,
To tie that holy knote that sought to undo me,
Were you requested to perform that business (sir)

I name you a sure toaken.


As for that (sir)
Now you're most welcome, and my fair hopes of you
You'd never break the sacred knote you tide once,
With any lewd solicitings hereafter.

But all the ctafts in getting of it knit,
You are all one fire to make your cousning market,
I am the marrier and the man, do you know me?
Do you know me nice Iniquity? strict luxury?
And holy whoredom, I would clap on marriage
With all hot speed to solder up the Game?
So what a strong Fate hath provided for thee,
You were a maid, swear still you're no worse now:
I left you as I found you, have I startled you?
I'm quit with you now for my discovery,
Your outcries, and your Cunning, farewell brookage.

Nay stay, and hear me but give thanks a
Little (if your care can endure a work so gracious,
Then you may take your pleasure.

I have done that.


That power that hath preserved me from this devil.


How?


This that may challenge the chief chair in Hell,
And sit above his Master.

Bring in merit.


That suffer him through blind lust to be led,
Last night to the action of some common bed.

Not over common neither.


Hah! what voice was that?


Of virgins be thou ever honoured.
Now you may go, you hear I have given thanks (sir)

Here is a strangt Game indeed, did not I lie with you.


No.


What a devil art thou?


I will not answer you (sir)
After thankes-giuing.

You made promise to me
After the contract.

Yes.


Mischief confound thee,
I speak not to thee: and you were prepared for it,
And set your joys more heigh.

Then you could reach (sir)


This is some bawdy P. i'll slit the throat on it.


What me your bedfellow,
To one that works so kindly without rape.

My bedfellow.


Do you plant your scorn against me?
Why, when I was Probationer at Bruxels.
That Engine was not known; then Adoration
Filled the place, and wonder was in fashion.
Is't turned to the wild seed of contempt so soon?
Can 5 years stamp a baud? pray look upon me (sir)
I'm youth enough to take it, 'tis no longer,
Since you were chief agent for the transportation
Of Ladies Daughters, if you be remembered,
Some of their portions I could name, you pursed em too
They were soon dispossessed of worldly cares,
That came into your fingers.

Shall I hear her?


Holy dirision yes, till thy ears swell
With thy own venom, thy prophaine lifes vomit:
Whose Niece was she you poisoned with child twice,
And gave her out possessed with a foul Spirit
When t'was indeed your Bastard?

I am taken
In mine own toils.

Yes, and tis just you should be.


And thou lewd Pawn, the shame of Womanhood.


I'm lost of all hands.


I connot feel
The weight of my affection: now he's taken,
It hath not the burden of a Grassehopper.

Thou whore of order, cockatrice in Voto.


Yonder's the Whit Bishops pawn, I'll play at's heart now


Oh bloody vilain, would thou heap a murder,
On thy first foul offences? O merciless bloodhound
'Tis time that thou were taken*

Death prevented.


For thy sake* and that partner in thy shame,
I'll never know man further then by Name.

You have enriched my knowledge royal (sir)
And my content together.

Steed of royot,
We set you only welcome, surfeit is
A thing that's sildom heard of in these parts.

I hear of the more virtue when I miss on it.


We do not use to bury in our bellies,
Two hundred thousand ducats, and then boast on it:
Or exercise the old Romaine painful idleness,
With care of fetching fishes far from home,
The golden headed Coracine out of Egypt:
The Salpa from Ebusis, or the Pelamis,
Which some call summer whiting from Calcedon:
Salmons from Aquitayne, Helops from Rhodes:
Cockles from Chyos, franckt and salted up,
With Far and Sapa flower, and cockted wine,
We cram no birds nor Epicurian like,
Enclose some creeks oath sea, as Sergius Crata did,
He, that invented the first stews for Oysters,
And other sea fish? who besides the pleasure of his
Own throat, got large revenues by the invention,
Whose fat example the nobility followed;
Nor do we imitate that Arch Gormandizer,
With twenty two courses at a Dinner;
And betwixt every course, he and guess
Washed, and used women, then sat down and strengthn'd:
Lust swimming in their dishes, which no sooner
Was tasted, but was ready to be vented.

Most impious Epicures.


We commend rather
Of two extremes the parsimonie of Pertinax,
Who had half Lettices set up to serve again,
Or his successor Iulian, that would make
Three meals of a lean Hare, and after sup
With a green fig, and wipe his beard (as we can)
The old bewaylers of excess in those days
Complained there were more coin bid for a
Cooke then for a Warre-horse; but now Cooks are
Purchased after the rate of Triumphant, and some
Dishes after the rate of Cooks, which must needs
Make some of th'white house gormundizers, especially
Your wealthy plump Plebeans, like the Hogs
Which Scaliger cites, that could not move for fat,
So insensible of either prick or goad,
That Mice made goles to needle in their buttocks
And they ne'er felt em: There was once a ruler
Cyrenes Governor choked with his own paunch,
Which death, fat Sanctius King of Castile, fearing
Through his infinite mass of belly, rather chose
To be killed suddenly, by a pernicious herb
Taken to make him lean, which old Cordeba
King of Morocco counselled his fear too,
Then he would hazard to be stung to death,
As that huge Cormorant that was choked before him.

Well you are as sound a spokes-man for parsimony,
And clear abstinance, and scarce one meal a day
As ever spake with tongue.

Censure him mildle (sir) 'twas but to find discourse.


Heel talk of any thing.


I shall be half a afraid to feed hereafter.


Or I beshrew my heart: for I fear fatness,
The fog of fatness as I fear a Dragon:
The comeliness I wish for, that's as glorious.

Your course is wondrous strict: I should transgress (sir)
Were I to change my side (as you have wrought me.)

How you misprize? tis not meant to you-ward:
You that are wound up to the hight of feedinh,
By clime and custom are dispensed withal,
You may eat, Cabrito, Calfe, and Ton's:
Eat, and eat every day, twice if you please*
Nay, the frank'd hen, fatted with Milk and Corn*
A riot which the Inhabitants of Delos
Were first inventers of: or the cramb'd Cockle.

Well for the food I'm happily resolved in;
But for the diet of my disposition,
There comes a trouble you will hardly find
Food to please that.

It must be a strange nature,
We cannot find a dish for it, having Policy
(The Master Cooke of Christendom) to dress it.
Pray name your natures diet.

The first mess, is hot Ambition.


That's but served in puff-paste:
Alas, the meanest of our Cardinals Cooks
Can dress that dinner: Your Ambition (sir)
Can fetch no further compass then the World?

That's certain (Sir.)


We are about that already,
And in the large feast of our vast Ambition,
We count but the white Kingdom (whence you came from)
The Garden for our Cooke, to pick his Salads:
The food's lean France larded* with Germany;
Before which comes the the Grave, chaste Signiory
Of Venice, served in (Capon-like) in White-broth:
From our chief Oven Italy the bake-meates:
Savoy the Salt: Genena the chip'd Mancher.
Below the Salt, the Netherlands are placed;
A common dish at lower end a'th table,
For meaner pride to fall too. For our second course,
A spit of Portuguese served in for Plouers:
Indians and Moors for blacke-birds: all this while
Holland stands ready melted to make sauce,
On all occasions, when the Voyder comes;
And with such cheer our full hopes we suffice,
Zealand says grace, for fashion when we rise.

Her's meat enough in conscience for ambition


If there be any want there is Switzerland,
Polonia, and such pickled things will serve
To furnish out the table.

You say well (sir)
Buthere's the misery* when I ha stopped the mouth
Of one vice, there's another stands gaping for food.
I'm as covetous as a barren womb,
The grave, or what's more ravenous?

Wee're for you (sir)
Call you that hanousnesse, that is good husbandry?
Why when we make money of our faith, our prayers,
We make make the very death bed buy her comforts,
Most dearly pay for all her pious Counsels,
Leave rich reuennues for a few weak orisons:
Or else they pass vnreconciled without em,
Did you but view the vaults within our Monesteries,
You'de swear then Pluto (whom the fiction calls)
The Lord of riches, were entombed there.

Is it possible.


You cannot walk for Tuns.


But how shall I bestow the vice I bring, sir,
You quite forget me, I shall be shut out,
By your strict key of life.

Is yours so wild (Sir)


Some that are pleased to make a wanton on it,
Call it infirmity of blood, flesh frailty;
But certain there's a worse name in your book for it.

The trifle of all vices, the mere innocent,
The very novice of this house of clay, verily
If I but hug thee hard, I show the worst on it,
Tis all the fruit we have here after supper:
Nay, at the ruins of a Nunnery once,
Six thousand Infants heads found in a fish-pond.

How?


I, how? how came they thither think you?
Huldricke Bishop of Ausberg in's Epistle
To Nicholas the first, can telly you how,
(May be he was at cleansing of the pond)
I can but smile to think, how it would puzzle
All mother maids that ever liver in those parts,
To know their own childes head; but is this all?

Are you ours yet?


One more, and I am silenc'st:
But this that comes now will divide up questionless
Tis ten times, ten times, worse then the fore-runners.

Is it so wild, there is no name ordained for it?
Toads have their titles, and creation gave
Serpents, and Adders those names to be known by.

This of all others bears the hidden'st poison,
The smoothest venom, I am an Arch-dissembler.

How.


Tis my natures brain turn from me (sir,)
The time is yet to come, that ere I spoke
What my heart meant.

And call you that a vice:
Avoid all profanation, I beseech you;
The only prime-state virtue upon earth,
The policy of Empires, oh take heed (Sir)
For fear it take displeasure and forsake you,
Tis a Jewel of that precious value,
Whose worth's not known, but to the skilful Lapidary
The instrument that pickes open Princes hearts,
And locks up our from them, with the same motion:
You never came so near our souls till now.

Now you're a brother to us.


What we have done, has bin dissemblance ever.


There you lye then:
And the Games ours, we give the check mate
By discovery, King the noblest mate of all.

I'm lost, I'm taken.


Ambitious, covetous luxurious falsehood.


Dissembler, that includes all.


All hopes confounded.


Miserable condition.


Oh let my arms be blessed,
With this dear treasure,
Truths glorious Master-peece, see Queen of sweetness
He's in my bosom safe, and this fair Stucture
Of comely honour, his true blessed assistant.

May their Integrities ever possess
That powerful Sanctuary.

As 'twas a Game (Sir)
Won with much hazard, so with much more triumph,
I gave him check mate by discovery (sir.)

Obcurity is now the fittest favour
Falsehood can sue for: it well snites Perdition,
Tis their best course that so hath lost their fame,
To put their heads into the bag for shame;
And there behold the bags mouth (like hell) opens
To take her due; and the lost sons appear,
Greedily gaping for increase of fellowship
In infamy, the last desire of wretches
Advancing their perdition, branded fore-heads
Like Envies issue, or a bed of Snakes.

Tis too apparent the Game's lost, King taken.


The white House has given us the bag (I thank em.)


They'd need have given you a whole bag
By your self,
Sfoot this black bishop has so over laid me,
So squelch'd and squeasde me, I have no Verjuce
Let in me, you shall find all my goodness if you
Look for it in the bottom of the Bag.

Thou Male-part Pawn,
The Bishop must have room, he will have room,
And room to lye at pleasure.

All the Bag I think
Is room too little for your Spalletto paunch.

Down viper of our Order, I abhor thee,
Thou't show thy whorish front.

Yes, monster Holiness.


Contention in the bag? is hell divided.


You'd need have some of Majesty and Power,
To keep good rule amongst you, make room Bishop.

I am not easily moved, when I'm once set,
I scorn to stir for any King on earth.

Here comes the Queen, what say you then to her?


Indeed a Queen may make a Bishop stir.


Room for the greatest Machiauill Politician,
That ere the Devil hatched of a Nuns-egge.

He will pick a hole in the bag, and get out shortly:
I'm sure to be the last man that creeps out;
And that's the misery of greatness ever.

Room for a sun-burn'd, Tanzy faced beloved,
An Olive coloured Ganimed; and that's all
That's worth the bagging.

Crowd in all you can,
The Bishop will be still uppermost man
Maugre King, Queen, or Politician.

So let the Bag close now (the fittest womb
For Treachery, Pride and Falshoold, whilst we winner like)
Destroying through Heavens power, what would destroy;
Welcome our white Knight with loud peals of Joy.

MY Mistress (the Whit Queen) hath sent me forth,

And bad me bow thus low, to all of Worth*

That are true Friends of the White House and Cause,

Which She hopes most of this assembly draws:

For any else, by Envies mark devoted,

To those night-Glow-wormes in the Bag denoted;

Where ere they sit, stand, or in private lurk,

They will be soon known by their deprauing work:

But She's assured, what they will commit to bayne,

Her white Friends hands will build up fair again.


