I Mary Sir, the only rising up in Arms, is in the arms of a woman: peace (I
say still) is your only Paradise, when every Adam may have his Christmas Eve:
and you take me lying any more by the cold sides of a brazen-face field-peice
unless I have such a Down pillow under me, I'll give you leave to knock up
both my golles in my Fathers hall, and hang hats upon these ten-penny nailes.


And yet brother, when with the sharpest hooks of my wit I laboured to pull
you from the wars, you broke loose, like a horse that knew his own strength,
and vowed, nothing but a man of war should back you.


I have been backed since and almost vnbackt too.

And swore that honour was never dyed in grain, till it was dipped in the
colours of the field.


I am a new man Sister, and now cry a pox a that honour, that must have none but
Barber-Surgions to wait upon it, and a band of poor straggling rascals, that
every twinkling of an eye, forfeit their legs and arms into the Lords hands
Wenches by Mars his sweatty Buff Jerkin, (for now all my (...) must smell a
the Soldado) I have seen more men's head (...) up and down like foote-balles
at a breake-fast, after the hungry Cannons had picked them; than are
Maiden-heads in Venice: and more legs of men served in at a dinner, then ever I
shall see legs of Capons in one platter whilst I live.


Perhaps all those were Capons legs you did see.

Nay mistress I'll witness against you for some of them.

I do not think for all this, that my brother stood to it so lustilie as he
makes his brags for.


No, no, these great talkers are never great doers.

Faith brother how many did you kill for your share?

Not so many as thou hast done with that villainous eye by a thousand.


I thought so much that's just none.

Tis not a Soldiers glory to tell howe many lives he has ended, but how many
he has saved: in both which honours the noble Hipolito had most excellent
possession. Believe it my fair Mistress, tho many men in a battle have done
more, your brother in this equalled him who did most: he went from you a worthy
Gentleman, he brings with him that title that makes a Gentleman most worthy;
the name of a Soldier, which how well and how soon he hath earned, would in me
seem glorious to rehearse, in you to hear: but because his own ear dwells so
near my voice, I will play the ill neighbour, and cease to speak well of him.


An argument that either you dare not, or love not to flatter.


No more then I dare or love to do wrong; yet to make a Cronicle of my friends
nobly-acted deeds, would stand as far from flattery in me, as cowardice did
from him.


S'foote if all the wit in this company have nothing to set it self about, but
to run Division upon me, why then Even burn off mine ears indeed, but my
little Mer-maides, Signior Camillo does this, that I now might describe the
Niniuiticall motion of the whole battle, and so tell what he has done: and
come, shall I begin?


O for beauties love, a good motion.

But I can tell you one thing, I shall make your hair stand up an end at some
things.


Prithee good brother Soldier keep the peace, our hair stand an end? pity a
my hart, the next end would be of our wits: we hang out a white flag most
terrible Tamberlaine, and beg mercy; come, come, let us neither have your
Niniuiticall motions nor your swaggering battles: why my Lord Camillo, you
invited me hither to a banquet, not to the Ballad of a pitched field.


And here it stands bright Mistress, sweetly attending what doom your lips
willay upon it.


I marie Sir, let our teeth describe this Motion.

We shall never describe it well, for fumbling in the mouth.


Yes, yes, I have a trick to make us understand one another and we fumble
never so --


Meddle not with his tricks sweet heart; under pardon my Lord, tho I am your
guest, I'll bestow my self, sit dear beauties: for the men, let them take up
places themselves; I prithee brother fighter sit, talk of any subject, but
this langling law at Arms.


The law at logs then.

Will you be so lusty? no nor legs neither, we'll have them tied up too, since
you are among Ladies: gallants, handle those things only that are fit for
Ladies.


Agreed so that we go not out of the compass of those things that are fit for
Lords.


Be it so, what's the Theme then?

Beauty, that fits us best.

And of Beauty what tongue would not speak the best? since it is the Jewel
that hangs upon the brow of heaven, the best cullor that can be laid upon the
cheek of earth: beauty makes men Gods immortal, by making mortal men to live
ever in love. (for love.


Ever* not so, I have heard that some men have dyed

So have I, but I could never see it: I'd ride forty miles to follow such a
fellow to Church, and would make more of a sprig of Rosemary at his burial,
than of a gilded Bride-branch at mine own wedding.


Take you such delight in men that dye for love?

Not in the men nor in the death, but in the deed; troth I think he is not a
sound man that will dye for a woman, and yet I would never love a man soundfie,
that would not knock at deaths door for my love.


I'd knock as long as I thought good, but have my brains knocked out when I
entered, if I were he.


What Uenetian Gentleman was there; that having this in his Burgonet, did not
(to prove his head worthy of the honour) do more than defy death to the very
face? trust us Ladies, our Signiory stands bound in greater sums of thanks
to your beauties for victory, than to our valour: my dear Uioletta one kiss
to this picture of your whitest hand, when I was even faint, (with giving and
receiving the doale of war)

Set a new edge on my sword: in so much that,
I singled out a gallant Spirit of France,
And charged him with my Lance in full career,
And after rich exchange of noble courage,
(The space of a good hour on either side)
At last crying, now for Uiolettaes honour,
I vanquished him, and him (dismounted) took
Not to my self, but prisoner to my love.

I have heard much praise of that French gallant, good my Lord, bring him
acquainted with our eyes.


I will, go boy fetch noble Fontinell.

Will your French prisoner drink well? or else cut his throat.


Oh no he cannot brooke it.

The pox he can, s'light me thinks a French man should have a good courage to
wine, for many of them be exceeding hot fiery whoresons, and resolute as
Hector, and as valiant as Troilus; then come off and on bravely and lye by it,
and sweat fort too, upon a good and a millitary advantage.


Prithee have done here comes the prisoner.

My Lord Camillo, is this the Gentleman,
Whose valour, by your valour is subdued?

It is fair Lady, and I yield him up,
To be your beauties worthy prisoner:
Lord Fontinell, think your captivity
Happy in this, she that hath conquered me,
Receives my conquest, as my loves fair fee.

Fair stranger droop not, since the chance of wars
Brings to the Soldier death, restraint, or scars.

Lady, I know the fortune of the field,
Is death with honour, or with shame to yield,
As I have done.

In that no scandal lies,
Who dyes when he may live, he doubly dyes.

My reputation's lost.

Nay that's not so,
You flee not but were vanquished by your foe,
The eye of war respects not you nor him,
It is our fate will have us loose or win,
You will disdain if I you prisoner call?

No, but reioyee, since I am beauties thrall.

Enough of this, come wenches shake your heals.

Music advance thee on thy golden wing,
And dance division from sweet string to string.

Camillo I shall curb thy tyranny,
In making me that Ladies prisoner:
She has an Angels body, but within't,
Her coy heart says there lies a heart of flint,
Such beauty be my Jailer? a heavenly hell!
The darkest dungeon, which spite can devise,
To throw this carcass in, her glorious eyes
Can make as lightsome, as the fairest chamber
In Paris Louure: come captivity,
And chain me to her looks; how am I tossed?
Being twice in mind, as twice in body lost.

Not the measure out fair Mistress?

No, fair servant, not the measure out, I have on the sudden a foolish desire
to be out of the measure.


What breeds that desire?

Nay I hope it is no breeding matter, tush, tush, by my maiden-head I will not,
the music likes me not, and I have a shoe wrings me to'th heart; besides I
have a woman's reason, I will not dance, because I will not dance: prithee
dear Hero take my prisoner there into the measure; fie I cannot abide to see a
man sad nor idle, I'll be out once, as the Music is (in mine care)


Lady, bid him whose heart no sorrow feels,
Tickle the rushes with his wanton heals,
I have too much lead at mine.

I'll make it light.

How?

By a nimble dance.

You hit it right.

Your Keeper bids you dance.

Then I obey,
My heart I feel grows light, it melts away.

In troth a very pretty French man, the carriage of his body likes me well; so
does his footing so does his face, so does his eye above his face, so does
himself, above all that can be above himself.

Camillo thou hast plaide a foolish part,
Thy prisoner makes a slave of thy loves heart.
Shall Camillo then sing willow, willow, willow? not for the world: no, no, my
French prisoner; I will use thee Cupid knows how, and teach thee to fall into
the hands of a woman: if I do not feed thee with fair looks, ne'er let me
live: if thou get out of my fingers till I have thy very heart, ne'er let me
love; nothing but thy life shall serve my turn, and how otherwise I'll plague
thee, Monsieur you and I'll deal, only this, because I'll be sure he shall not
start, I'll locke him in a little low room besides himself, where his wanton
eye shall see neither Sun nor Moon: So, the dance is done, and my heart has
done her worst, made me in love: farewell my Lord, I have much hast, you have
many thanks, I am angered a little, but am greatly pleased: if you wonder that
I take this strange leave; excuse it thus, that women are strange fools, and
will take any thing.


Tricks: tricks? kerry merry buff; how now lad, in a trance?


Strange farewell: after, dear Hippolito,
O what a maze is love of joy and woe!

Strange frenzy; after wretched Fontinell,
Oh what a heaven is love! oh what a hell!

Boy, I am melancholy because I burn.

And I am melancholy because I am a cold.

I pine away with the desire of flesh.

It's neither flesh nor fish that I pine for, but for both.

Pilcher, Cupid hath got me a stomach, and I long for laced mutton.


Plain mutton without a lace would serve me.

For as your tame Monkey is your only best, most only beast to your Spanish
Lady: or, as your Tobacco is your only smoker away of room, and all other
rewmeticke diseases: or as your Irish louse does bite most naturally fourteen
weeks, after the change of your Saffron seamed shir^ or, as the commodities
which are sent out of the Low-countries (and put in vessels called mother
Corneliu^ dry-fats) are most common in France: so it pleases the destinies,
that I should thirst to drink out of a most sweet Italian vessel, being a
Spaniard.


What vessel is that Signiort

A Woman Pilcher, the moist handed Madonna Imperia, a most rare and divine
creature.


A most rascallie damned Courtesan.

Boy, hast thou forrag'd the Country for a new lodging? for I have sworn to
lay my bones in this Chittie of Uenice.


Any man that sees us will swear that we shall both lay our bones, and nothing
but bones, and we stalk here longer; they tell me Signior, I must go to the
Constable, and he is to see you lodged.


Inquier for that busie-member of the Chitty.

I will, and here come a leash of Informers: save you plump youths.


And thee my lean stripling.

Which is the Constables house?

That at the sign of the browne Bill.

Farewell.

Why, and farewell; the roague's made of pye-crust he's so short.


The Officious Gentleman inherits here.

Knock, or enter, let thy voice pull him out by the ears.

Slid Dandiprat, this is the Spanish curtal that in the last battle, fled
twenty miles ere he looked behind him.


Doyt, he did the wiser: but sir, this block shall be a rare threshold for
us to whet our wits upon; come, lets about our business, and if here we find
him at our return, he shall find us this month in knavery.


What ho, no body speaks, where dwells the Constable?

Here dwells the Constable; call assistance, give them my full charge, raize
(if you see cause) now sir, what are you sir?


Follower to that Spanish-leather Gentleman.

And what are you sir, that cry out upon me? look to his tools. What are are
you sir? speak, what are you? I charge you what are you?


Most clear Mirror of Magistrates, I am a servitor to God Mars.


For your serving of God I am not to meddle, why do you raize me?


I desire to have a wide room in your favour: sweet blood, cast away your
name upon me; for I neither know you by your face, nor by your voice


It may be so Sir; I have two voices in any company: one, as I am Master
Constable: another, as I am Blurt: and the third, as I am Blurt Master
Constable.


I understand, you are a mighty pillar or post in the Chittie.


I am a poor post, but not to stand at every mans door, without my bench of
Bill-men: I am (for a better) the Dukes own Image and charge you in his name
to obey me.


I do so.

I am to stand Sir in any bawdy house, or sink of wickedness: I am the Dukes
own grace, and in any fray or resurrection, am to besturre my stumps as well
as he; I charge you know


Turn the Arms to him. (this staff.

Upon this may I lean no man say black's mine eye

Who so ever says you have a black eye, is a Camooche. most great Blurt; I
do vnpent-house the roof of my carcass touch the knee of thy Office in Spanish
complement, I desire to sojourn in your Chitty.


Sir, sir, for fault of a better, I am to charge you, not to keep a Soldiering
in our City without a Precept: besides, by my office I am to search examine
you: have you the Dukes hand to pass? (fingers.


Signior no, I have the Generals hand at large, and all his

Except it be for the general good of the Comonwealth, the General cannot
lead you up and down our City.


I have the Generals hand to pass through the world at my pleasure.


At your pleasure? that's rare; then rowlie, powlie, our wives shall lye at your
command: your General has no such authority in my Presincte, and therefore I
charge you pass no further.


I tell thee, I will pass through the world, thou little morsel of Justice,
and eat twenty such as thou art.


Sir, sir, you shall find Uenice out of the world: I'll tickle you for that.


I will pass through the world, as Alexander Magnus did, to Conquer.


As Alexander of Saint Magnus did? that's another matter, you might have
informed this at the first, you never needed to have come to your answer: let
me see your Pass, if it be not the Dukes hand, I'll tickle you for all this:
quickly I pray* this staff is to walk in other places.


There it is.

Slubber, read it over.

Read it your self, what Besonian is that?

This is my Clarke sir, he has been Clarke to a good many bonds and Bills of
mine, I keep him only to read, for I cannot, my Office will not let me.


Why do you put on your Spectacles then?

To see that he read right: how now Slubber, is't the Dukes hand? I'll tickle
him else.


Mastis not like his hand.

Look well, the Duke has a wart on the back of his hand.


Here's none on my word Master Constable, but a little blot.


Blot? lets see lets see; ho that stands for the wart, do you see the trick
of that? Stay stay, is there not a little prick in the hand for the Dukes hand
had a prick in it when I was with him, with opening Oysters.


Yes mas her's one, besides tis a goodly great long hand.

So has the Duke a goodly huge hand, I have shook him by it, (God forgive me)
ten thousand times: he must pass like Alexander of Saint Magnus; Well Sir,
(tis your duty to stand bare) the Duke has sent his fist to me, and I were a
Jew if I should shrink for it; I obey, you must pass, but pray take heed
with what dice you pass, I mean what company, for Satan is most busy, where
he finds one like himself* your name Sir?


Lazarillo de Tormes in Castile, cozen Germaine to the Adolantado of Spain.


Are you so Sir? Gods blessing on your heart: your name again Sir, if it be
not too tedious for you?


Lazarillo de Tormes in Castile, Cozen-germaine to the Spanish Adolantado.


I warrant he's a great man in his own Country.

Has a good name, Slubber set it down: write, Lazarus in torment at the
Castle, and a cozning Germaine, at the sign of the Palantido diddle in Spain:
So Sir you are engrossed, you must give my Officer a groat it's nothing to me
Signior.


I will cancel when it comes to a sum.

Well Sir, well he shall give you an Item for it, make a bill and hee'll tear
it he says.


Most admirable Blurt, I am a man of war and profess fighting.

I charge you in the Dukes name keep the peace.

By your sweet favour most dear Blurt, you charge too fast, I am a hanger on
upon Mars, and have a few Crowns.


Two: his own and mine.

And dezier you to point out a fair lodging for me and my Train.


Tis my Office Signior to take men up a nights, but if you will, my Maids
shall take you up a mornings, since you profess fighting; I will commit you
Signior to mine own house, but will you pitch and pay, or will your Worship
run --


I scorn to run from the face of Thamer C^am.

Then Sir, you mean not to run?

Signior no.

Bear witness Slubber, that his answer is Signior no: So now if he runs upon
the score, I have him strait upon Signior no; this is my house Signior, enter.


March excellent Blurt: attend Pilcher.

Upon your trencher Signior, most hungerly.

Now sir where's thy Master?

The Constable has pressed him.

What, for a Soldier?

I, for a Soldier; but ere he'll go, I think indeed, he I together shall
press the Constable.


No matter, squeze him, and leave no more liquor in him, than in a dried Neates
tongue: Sir thin-gut, what's thy name?


My name? you chops, why I am of the blood of the Pilchers.


Nay s'foote, if one should kill thee, he could not be hanged for it, for he
would shed no blood, there's none in thee: Pilcher? you are a most pitiful
dried one.


I wonder thy master does not slice thee, and swallow thee for an Anchoues.


He wants wine Boy to swallow me down, for he wants money to swallow down
wine: but farewell, I must dog my master.


As long as thou dog'st a Spaniard, thou'lt ne'er be fatter; but stay, our hast
is as great as thine, yet to endear our selves into thy lean acquaintance cry
Riuo Hogh, laugh and be fat, and for joy that we are met we'll meet and be
merry, sing:


I'll make a shift to squeak.

And I.

And I, for my profession is to shift as well as you, hem:

What meat eats the Spaniard?

Dried Pilchers and poor Iohn:

Alas thou art almost mard.

My cheeks are fallen and gone.

Would thou not leap at a piece of meat?

O how my teeth do water, I could eat
For the heavens; my flesh is almost gone
With eating of Pilcher and poor Iohn.

Am I so happy then?

Nay sweet Monsieur.

O, boy thou hast new winged my captived soul,
Now to my Fortune all the Fates may yield,
For I have won where first I lost the field.

Why sir, did my Mistress prick you with the Spanish needle of her love, before
I summoned you (from her) to this parley?


Doubts thou that boy*

Of mine honesty I doubt extremely, for I cannot see the little Gods tokens
upon you: there is as much difference between you and a Lover, as between a
Cuckold and a Unicorn.


Why boy?

For you do not wear a pair of ruffled, frowning, vngartred Stockings, like
a Gallant that hides his small timbered legs, with a quaile-pipe boot: your
hose stands upon too many points, and are not troubled with that falling
sickness, which follows pale, meager, miserable, melancholy Lovers: your hands
are not groping continually.


Where my little observer?

In your greasy pocket sir, like one that wants a Cloak for the rain, and
yet is still weather-beaten: your hat nor head are not of the true
hey-ho-blocke, for it should be broad brimmed, lymber, like the skin of a
white pudding when the meat is out: the Facing fattye: the Felt dustye, and
not entered into any band, but your hat is of the nature of a loose, light,
heauie-swelling wench, too strait laced: I tell you Monsieur, a Lover should
be all loose from the sole of the foot rizing upward; and from the Bases, or
confines of the Slop, falling downwards: if you were in my Mistresses Chamber,
you should find other-gates privy signs of love hanging out there.


Have your little eyes watched so narrowly?

Oh sir, a Page must have a Cats eye, a Spaniels leg, a whoores tongue (a
little tasting of the Cog) a Catch-poles hand, what he gripes is his own; and
a little little bawdy.


Fair Violetta I will wear thy love,
Like this French order, near unto my heart,
Via for fate, Fortune, lo this is all,
At griefs rebound I'll mount, although I fall.

Now by Saint Mark he's a most treacherous villain,
Dare the base French-mans eye gaze on my love?

Nay sweet rogue, wh^ would thou make his face a vizard, to have two
loope-holes only? when he comes to a good face, may he not do with his eyes
what he will: s'foote if I were as he, I'd pull them out, and if I wist they
would anger thee.


Thou ad'st heate to my rage, away, stand back,
Dishonoured slave, more tretch^rous then base,
This is the instance of my scorned disgrace.

Thou ill aduiz'd Italian whence proceeds
This sudden fury?

Villain from thee.

Hercules stand between them.

Villain by my blood;
I am as free borne as your Uenice Duke.
Villain, Saint Dennis and my life to boot,
Thy lips shall kiss this pavement or my foot.

Your foot with a pox? I hope you're no Pope Sir, his lips shall kiss my
Sisters soft lip: and thine, the tough lips of this: nay Sir, I do but show
you that I have a tool; do you heate Saint Dennis, but that we both stand
upon the narrow bridge of Honour, I should cut your throat now, for pure love
you bear to my Sister, but that I know you would set out a throat.


Wilt thou not Stab the peasant,
That thus dishonours both thy self and me?

Saint Mark set his marks upon me then: stab? I'll have my shins broken, ere
I'll scratch so much as the skin off, a the law of Arms: shall I make a
French-man cry oh, before the fall of the Leaf? not I by the Cross of this,
Dandyprat.


If you will Sir you shall coin me into a shilling.

I shall lay too heavy a cross upon thee then.

Is this a time to iest^ boy call my servants.

Gentlemen to the dresser.

You rogue what Dresser? cease on Fontenell,
And lodge him in a Dungeon presently.

He steps upon his death that stirs a foot.

That shall I try, as in the field before
I made thee stoop, so here I'll make thee bow.

Thou plaidst the Soldier then, the villain now.

Treacherous Italians.

Hale him to a Dungeon,
There if your thoughts can apprehend the form,
Of Uioletta; dote on her rare feature,
Or if your proud flesh with a sparing diet,
Can still retain her swelling spritefulnes;
Then Court (instead of her) the croaking vermin,
That people, that most solitary vault.

But sir Camillo, wilt thou play the wise and venerable bearded Master
Constable, and commit him indeed, because he would be meddling in thy Precincte
and will not put off the cap of his Love to the browne-bill of thy desires?
Well, thou hast given the Law of Arms a broken pate already, therefore if
thou wilt needs turn Broker, and be a cut-throat too, do: for my part, I'll
go get a sweet ball, and wash my hands of it.


Away with him, my life shall answer it.

To prison must I then? well, I will go,
And with a light-wing'd spirit insult ore woe,
For in the darkest hell on earth, I'll find
Her fair Idea to content my mind,
Yet France and Italy with blistered tongue,
Shall publish thy dishonour in my wrong
Oh now how happy were thou, could thou lodge me
Where I could leave to love her?

By heaven I can.

Thou can: Oh happy man!
This a kind of new invented law,
First feed the Axe, after produce the Saw,
Her heart no doubt will thy affections feel;
For thou'lt plead sighs in blood, and tears in steel.
Boy tell my love, her love thus sighing spake:
I'll veil my crest to death, for her dear sake.

Boy: what boy is that?

Is't you Sir Pandarus, the broking Knight of Troy, are your two legs the pair
of trestles, for the French-man to getvp upon my Sister?


By the nine Worthies, worthy Gallants not I; I a Gentleman for Conveyance? I
Sir Pandarus? would Troy then were in my breeches, and I burnt worse then poor
Troy: sweet Signior you know, I know, and all Uenice knows, that my Mistress
scorns double dealing with her heals.


With her heals? O here's a sure pocket Dag, and my Sister shoots him off
snipsnap at her pleasure. Sir Mephostophiles, did not you bring letters from
my Sister to the French-man?


Signior no.

Did not you fetch him out of the Tennis Court?

No point per mafoy, you see I have many tongues speak for me.


Did not he follow your cracke-ship, at a beck given?

Ita, true, certes, he spied, I spitting thus, went thus.

But were staide thus.

You hold a my side, and therefore I must needs stick to you, tis true: I
going, he followed; and following, fingered me, just as your worship does now:
but I struggled and stragled, and wragled and wragled, and at last cried Vale
valet, as I do now, with this fragment of a rime:

My Lady is grossly fallen in love, and yet her waste is slender,
Had I not slipped away, you wold have made my buttocks tether.

Shall Doyt I play the Bloud-hounds after him?

No, let him run.

Not for this wager of my Sisters love, run; away Dandipart, catch True-penny,
hold him, thy self shall pass more currant.


I fly Sir, your Dandiprat is as light as a clipped Angel.

Nay Gods lid after him Camillo, reply not but away.

Content, you know where to meet:

For I know that the only way to win a wench, is not to woe her: the only
way to have her fast, is to have her loose: the only way to triumph over her,
is to make her fall; and the way to make her fall, --


Is to throw her down.

Are you so cunning Sir?

O* Lord Sir; and have so perfect a Master.

Well Sir, you know the Gentlewoman that dwells in the midst of Saint Marks
street.


Midst of S. Marks street Sir?

A pox on you; the flea-bitten faced Lady.

Oh Sir, the freckle check Madonna, I know her Signior, as well --


Not as I do, I hope Sir.

No Sir I de be loath to have such inward acquaintance with her as you have.


Well sir slip go presently to her, and from me deliver to her own white
hands, Fontinels picture.


Indeed Sir she loves to have her chamber hung with the pictures of men.


She does, le keep my sisters eyes and his painted face a sunder; tell her
besides, the Mask holds and this the night, nine the hour; say we are all
for her away.


And she's for you all, were you an Army.

F^e, fie, fie, fie, by the light oath of my Fan, the weather is exceeding
tedious and faint: Triuia, Simperina, stir, stir, stir, one of you open the
Case-ments, the other take a ventoy and gently cool my face: fie, I ha such an
exceeding hye culler, I so sweat; Simperina, dost hear? prithee be more
compendious: why Simperina!


Here Madame.

Press down my ruff before; away, fie, howe thou blowst upon me, th^ breath
(gods me) thy breath, fie, fie, fie, fie, it takes off all the painting and
culler from my cheek: In good faith I care not if I go and be sick
presently; hey ho, my head so aches with carrying this Bodkin: in troth I'll try
if I can be sick.


Na good sweet Lady.

You know a company of Gallants will be here at night be not out of temper
sweet mistress.


In good troth if I be not sick I must be melancholy then: this same gown
never comes on but I am so melancholy, so hart-burnt: tis a strange garment, I
warrant Simperina the foolish Taylor that made it, was troubled with the
stitch, when he composed it.


That's very likely Madame, but it makes you have oh a most in-conie body.


No, no no, no by Saint Mark the waste is not long enough, (for I love a long
tedious waste, besides, I have a most ungodly middle in it; and fie, fie, fie,
fie, it makes me bend in the back: oh let me have some Music.


That's not the fault in your gown Madame, but of your bawdy.


Fa la la fa la la, indeed the bending of the back is the fault of the body
la, la, la, la; fa la la, fa la la, la la lah.


O rich!

O rare!

No, no, no no, no: tis slight and common all that I do, prithee Simperina do
not Ingleme; do not flatter me Triuia, I ha never a cast gown till the next
week, fa la la, la la la, fa la la, fa la la c. This stirring too and fro has
done me much good; a song I prithee, I love these French mo^uings; oh they are
so clean if you tread them true, you shall hit them to a hair; sing, sing,
sing some odd and fantastical thing, for I cannot abide these dull and
lumpish tunes, the Musician stands longer a pricking them then I would do to
hear them: no, no no giuemee your light ones that go nimbly and quick, and
are full of changes and carry sweet division; ho prithee sing, stay, stay,
stay, here's Hipolitoes Sonnet, first read it and then sing it.

In a fair woman what thing is best?
I think acurrall lip.
No no you jest,
She has a better thing.
Then tis a pretty eye.
Yet tis a better thing,
Which more delight does bring.
Then tis a cherry cheek.
No, no, you l ye.
Were neither lip, nor cheeks currall, nor cherry eyes,
Were not her swelling breast stuck with strawberies,
Nor had smooth hand, soft skin, white neck, pure eye,
Yet she at this alone your love can tie.
It is, O tis the only joy to men,
The only praise to women; what is't then?
This it is, O this it is, and in a woman's middle it is plaste,
In a most beauteous body, a hart most chaste:
This is the Jewel Kings may buy,
If women sell this Jewel, women bye.

Who the pox knocks?

One that will knock thy coxcomb if he do not enter.

If thou dost not enter, how can thou knock me?

Why then I'll knock thee when I do enter.

Why then thou shalt not enter, but instead of me knock thy heals.


Frisco I am Doyt Hypollitoes Page:

And I am Frisco, Squire to a bawdy house.

I have a Jewel to deliver to thy Mistress.

Is't set with precious stones?

Thick, thick thick.

Why enter then thick, thick, thick.

Fie, fie, fie, fie, fie who makes that yawling at door?

Here's Signtor Hipolitoes man (that shall be) come to hang you.


Triuia, strip that villain; Simperina pinch him, slit his wide nose; fie,
fie, fie, I'll have you gelded for this lustines.


And she threatens to geld me unless I be lusty; what shall poor Frisco
do?


Hang me.

Not I, hang me if you will, and set up my quarters too.


Hypolitoes boy come to hang me?

to hang you with Jewels, sweet and gentle; that's Friscoes meaning, and that's
my coming.


Keep the door.

That's my Office indeed, I have bin your doorkeeper so long, that al the
hindges, the spring-lockes and the ring, are worn to pieces; how if any body
knock at the door?


Let them enter, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, his great tongue does so run
through my little ears; tis more harsh then a yongerbothers courting of a
Gentlewoman, when he has no crowns, Boy?


At your service.

My service? alas alas, thou can do me small service, did thy Master send
this painted Iyntle man to me?


This painted Iyntleman to you.

Well, I will hang his picture up by the walls, till I see his face, and when
I see his face, I'll take his picture down: hold it Triuia.


It's most sweetly made.

Hang him up Simperina.

It's a most sweet man.

And does the Mask hold? let me see it again.

If their vizards hold, here you shall see all their blind cheeks; this is
the night, nine the hour, and I the lack that gives warning.


He gives warning Mistress, shall I set him out?

You shall not need, I can set out my self.

Flaxen hair, short too, oh that's the French Cu! but fie, fie, fie, this
Flaxen hayr'd men are such pu-lers, and such pidlers, and such Chicken-heartes
(and yet great quarrellers) that when they Court a Lady, they are for the
better part bound to the peace: no, no, no, no, your black hayred man (so he
be fair) is your only sweet man, in any service, the most active: a banquet
Triuia; quick, quick, quick.


In a twinkling; s'lid my Mistress cries like the rod-woman: quick quick,
quick, buy any Rosemary and Baize?


A little face, but a lovely face; fie, fie, fie, no matter what face he make,
so the other parts be Legitimate, and go upright: stir, stir Simperina, be
doing, be doing, quickly; move, move, move.


Most incontinently, move, move, move: o sweet!

Hey ho, as I live I must love thee, and suck kisses from thy lips; alack
that women should fall thus deeply in love, with dumbethings, that have no
feeling? but they are women's crosses, and the only way to take them is to take
them patiently; hey ho! set Music Frisco.


Music, if thou hast not a hard heart, speak to my Mistress.


Say he scorn to marry me, yet he shall stand me in some steed, by being
my Ganimede: if he be the most decayed Gallant in all Uenice, I will my self
undo my self, and my whole state to set him up again: though speaking truth
would save my life, I will lye to do him pleasure: yet to tell lies may hurt
the soul: fie no no, no, souls are things to be trodden under our feet, when
we dance after loves Pipe; therefore here hang this counterfeit at my beds
feet.


If he be ounterfeit, nail him up upon one of your poastes.


By the moist hand of love I swear, I will be his Lottery, and he shall never
draw, but it shall be a prize.


Who knocks?

Why tis I knave.

Then knave knock there still.

Wut open door?

Yes when I list I will.

Here's money.

Much:

Here's gold.

Away:

Knave open.

Call to our maids, God night, we are all a slopen.
Mistress, if you have ever a Pinnace to set out, you may now have it manned and
ryg'd; for Signior Curuetto, he that cries, I am an old Courtier, but lye
close, lye close, when our Maids swear he lies as wide as any Courtier in
Italy.


Do we care how he lies?

Anon, anon, anon, this old hoary red Dear, serves himself in at your
key-hole.


What Frisco?

Hark, shall he enter the breach?

Fie, fie, fie, I wonder what this Gurnets head makes here: yet bring him in,
he will serve for picking meat; let Music play, for I will feyne my self to
be a sleep.


Three pence, and here's a teston, yet take all,
Coming to Jump, we must be prodigal:
Hem, I am an old Courtier, and I can lye close;
Put up Frisco, put up, put, up, put up.

Any thing at your hands sir, I will put up, because you seldom pull out any
thing.


Softly sweet Signior Curuetto, for she's fast.

Ha, fast? my Roba fast? and but young night:
She's wearied, wearied, ah ha, hit I right?

How sir, wearied? marie foh.

Wearied Sir? mary muffe.

No words, here mouse, no words, no words sweet rose,
I am an hoary Courtier, lye close, lye close, hem:

An old hoary Courtier? why so has a Jowl of Ling, and a musty Whiting bin
(time out of mind) me thinks Signior, you should not be so old by your face:


I have a good heart knave; and a good heart
Is a good face-maker, I am young, quick, brisk,
I was a Reveller in a long stock;
(There's not a gallant now filles such a stock)
Plump hose, pained, stuffed with hair (hair then was held
The lightest stuffing) a fair Codpiece: ho,
An Eele-skin sleeve, lashed here and there with lace,
Hye collar, lashed again: breech lashed also:
A little simpering ruff, a dapper Cloak,
With Spanish buttoned Cape: my Rapier here,
Gloves like a Burgomaster here; hat here,
(Stuck with some ten-groate brooch:) and over al,
A goodly, long thick, Abram-colour'd beard;
Ho God, Ho God, thus did I Revel it.
When Mousieur Mot lay here Ambassador.
But now those beards are gone, our Chins are bare;
Our Corters now do all against the hair.
I can lye close and see this, but not see,
I am hoary, but not hoary as some be.

Hey ho; who's that? Signior Curuetto? by my virginity --

Hem, no more,
Swear not so deep at this years, men have eyes,
And though the most are fools, some fools are wise.

Fie, fie, fie, and you meet me thus at half weapon, one must down.


She for my life.

Some body shall pay for it.

He for my head.

Do not therefore come over me so with cross blows, no, no, no, I shall be
sick, if my speech be stopped: by my Virginity I swear: and why may not I
swear by that I have not, as well as poor musty Soldiers do by their
honour: Brides, at four twenty: ha, ha, ha, by their Maiden-heads: Citizens,
by their faith, and Brokers as they hope to be saved: by my Virginity I
swear, I dreamed that one brought me a goodly Codshead, and in one of the
eyes, there stuck (me thought) the greatest precious stone, the most
sparkling Diamond: oh fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, that Diamonds should make women
such fools.


A Codshead and a Diamond, ha, ha, ha,
Tis common, common, you may dream as well
Of Diamonds and of Codsheads, where's not one,
As swear by your Virginity where's none.
I am that Codshead, she has spied my stone,
My Diamond: noble wench, but nobler no see;
I am an old Courtier, and lye close, lye close.

No, no, no, if you shrink from me I will not love you: stay.


I am conjured, and will keep my circle.

Fie, fie, fie, by the neat tongue of eloquence, this measure is out of measure,
tis too hot, too hot, gallants be not ashamed to show your own faces: Ladies
vnapparell your dear beauties: So, so, so, so, here is a banquet; sit, sit,
sit Signior Curuetto, thrust in among them, soft Music there, do, do, do.


I will first salute the men, close with the women, and last sit.


But not sit last: a banquet? and have these Suckets here? oh I have a crew of
Angels prisoners in my pocket, and none but a good bale of dice can fetch them
out: Dice ho; come my little lecherous Baboon, by Saint Mark, you shall
venture your twenty crowns.


And have but one.

I swore first.

Right, you swore,
But oaths are now like Blurt our Constable,
Standing for nothing, a mere plot, a trick,
The Mask dogged me, I hit it in the nick;
A fetch to get my Diamond, my dear stone,
I am a hoary Courtier, but lye close, close, close;
I'll play Sir.

Come.

But in my to'ther hose.

Curuetto?

Let him go, I knew what hooke would choke him, and therefore baited that for
him to nibble upon: an old combepeckt rascal, that was beaten out a'th
Cocke-pit, when I could not stand a hye-lone without I held by a thing, to come
crowing among us: hang him lobster; come, the same oath that your Fore-man
took, take all, and Sing.

Love is like a Lamb, and Love is like a Lyon,
Fly from Love, he fights; fight, then does he fly on:
Love is all in fire, and yet is ever freezing,
Love is much in winning, yet is more in leezing.
Love is ever sick, and yet is never dying,
Love is ever true, and yet is ever lying.
Love does dote in liking, and is mad in loathing,
Love indeed is any thing, yet indeed is nothing.

Mars armipotent with his Court-of-guard, give sharpnes to my Toledo, I am
beleager'd, o Cupid grant that my blushing prove not a Linstocke, and give
fire too suddenly to the roaring Meg of my desires; most Sanguine cheekt
Ladies.


S'foote how now Don Dego; Sanguine cheekt? dost think their faces have been
at Cutlers? out you roring-tawnyfac'd rascal, 'twere a good deed to beat my
hilts about's coxcomb, and then make him Sanguine cheekt too.


Nay good Hipolito.

Fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, tho I hate his company, I wod not have my house to
abuse his countenance: no, no, no, be not so Contagious, I will send him hence
with a flea in's ear.


Do, or I'll turn him into a flea, and make him skip under some of your
petticoats.


Signior Lazarillo:

Most sweet face you need not hang out your silken tongue as a Flag of truce:
for I will drop at your feet, ere I draw blood in your Chamber; yet I shall
hardly drink up this wrong, for your sake I will wipe it out for this time: I
would deal with you in secret (so you had a void room) about most deep and
serious matters.


I'll send these hence; fie, fie, fie, I am so choked still with this man of
Ginger-bread, and yet I can never be rid of him, but hark Hipolito.


Good draw the Curtains, put out Candles, and girls to bed.


Venus, give me suck, from thine own most white and tender dugs, that I may
batten in love: dear instrument of many men's delight, are all these women?


No no, no, they are half men and half women.

You apprehend too fast, I mean by women, wives: for wives are no maids, nor
are maids women: If those vnbearded Gallants keep the doors of their
Wedlock, those Ladies spend their hours of pastime but ill, (o most rich
armefull of beauty) but if you can bring all those Feamales into one ring,
into one private place: I will read a Lecture of discipline, to their most great
and honourable ears; wherein I will teach them, so to carry their white
bodies, either before their husbands or before their Lovers, that they shall
never fear to have milk thrown in their faces; nor I, wine in mine, when I
come to sit upon them in courtesy.


That were excellent, I'll have them all here at your pleasure.


I will show them all the tricks and garbes of Spanish Dames, I will study
for apt and legant phrase to tickle them with; and when my devise is ready I
will come: will you inspire into your most divine spirits, the most divine
soul of Tobacco?


No, no, no; fie, fie, fie, I should be choaktvp if your pipe should kiss my
vnder-lip.


Hence forth, most deep stamp of Feminine perfection, my Pipe shall not be
drawn before you, but in secret.


Lament my case since thou can not provoke,
Her nose to smell, love fill thine own with smoke.

The wooden picture you sent her, hath set her on fire; and she desires you as
you pity the case of a poor desperate Gentlewoman, to serve that Monsieur in
at Supper to her.


The Frenchman, Saint Dennis, let her carve him up: Stay, here's Camillo; now
my fool in fashion, my sage Idiot, up with this brims, down with this
devil (Melancholy) are you decayed concupiscentious Inamorato? news, news,
Imperia dotes on Fontinell.


What comfort speaks her love to my sick heart?

Mary this Sir; here's a Yellow-hammer flew to me with thy water, and I cast
it, and find, that his Mistress being given to this new falling-sicknesse,
will cure thee: the Frenchman you see has a soft Mermaladie heart, and shall no
sooner feel Imperiaes liquerish desire to like at him, but straight hee'll
stick the brooch of her longing in it: then Sir, may you sir, come upon my
Sister sir, with a fresh charge Sir; Sa, sa, sa, sa, once giving back, and
thrice coming forward, she yield and the town of Breast is taken.


This hath some taste of hope, is that the Mercury
Who brings you notice of his Mistress love?

I may be her Mercury, for my running of errands; but troth is Sir, I am
Cerberus, for I am porter to hell.


Then Cerberus play thy part, here, search that hell,
There find, bring forth that false Fontinell,
If I can win his strayed thoughts to retire,
From her encountered eyes, whom I have singled
In Hymens holy Battle: he shall pass
From hence to France, in company and guard
Of mine own heart: he comes Hipolito.
Still looks he like a Lover, poor Gentleman,
Love is the minds strong physic, and the pill,
That leaves the heart sick, and ore-turnes the will.

O happy persecution I embrace thee
With an vnfettered soul; so sweet a thing
Is it to sigh upon the rack of love,
Where each calamity is groaning: witness
Of the poor Martirs faith: I never heard
Of any true affection, but t'was nipped
With care; that (like the Catter-piller) eats
The leaves off the springs sweetest book, (the Rose)
''Loue bred on earth, is often noure'd in hell.
''By rote it reads woe, ere it learn to spell.

God morrow French Lord.

Boneioure Monsieur.

To your secure and more then happy self,
I tender thanks, for you have honoured me;
You are my Jailer, and have pend me up,
Least the poor fly (your prisoner) should alight
Upon your Mistress lip; and thence derive,
The dimpled print of an infectiue touch.
Thou secure tyrant, (yet unhappy lover)
Could thou chain Mountains to my captive feet,
Yet Uiolettaes heart and mine should meet.

Hark swaggerer, there's a little dapple-colour'd rascal: ho a Bona Roba; her
name's Imperia, a Gentlewoman by my faith of an ancient house, and has goodly
rents, and comminges in of her own, and this Ape would fain have thee chayn'd
to her in the holy state: Sir, she's fallen in love with thy picture, yes
faith too her, woo her, and win her: leave my Sister, thy ransome's paid;
all's paid Gentlemen; bi'th Lord Imperia is as good a girl as any is in
Uenice.


Upon mine honour Fontinell tis true,
The Lady dotes on thy perfections,
Therefore resign my Uiolettaes heart,
To me the Lord of it: and I will send thee --

O whether, to damnation? wilt thou not?
Think thou the purity of my true soul
Can taste your lepperous counsel? no, I defy you,
Incestancie dwell on his rivaled brow,
That weddes for dirt; or on thin-forced heart,
That lags in Rereward of his Fathers charge,
When to some negro-gelderling he's clogged,
By the Injunction of a golden fee:
When I call back my vows to Violetta,
May I then slip into an obscure grave,
Whose mould (vnprest with stony monument)
Dwelling in open air, may drink the tears
Of the inconstant clouds to rot me soon,
Out of my private linen Sepulcher.

I, is this your settled resolution?

By my loves best divinity it is.

Then bear him to his prison back again,
This tune must alter ere thy lodging mend,
To death fond French-man, thy slight love doth tend.

Then constant heart, thy fate with joy pursue,
Draw wonder to thy death expiring true.

After him Frisco, enforce thy Mistresses passion, thou shalt have access to
him, to bring him loue-tokens: if they preuaile not, yet thou shalt still be in
presence, be it but to spite him: In honest Frisco.


I'll vex him to the heart Sir, fear not me,
Yet here's a trick perchance may set him free.

Come, wilt thou goelaugh, and lye down? now sure there be some rebels in thy
belly, for thine eyes do nothing but watch and ward, tho'ast not slept these
three nights.


Alas how can I? he that truly loves
Burns out the day in idle fantasies,
And when the Lamb bleating, doth bid Godnight
Unto the closing day; then tears begin
To keep quick time, unto the Owl, whose voice
Shreikes, like the Bell-man in the Lovers ears:
Loves eye the jewel of sleep, oh seldom wears!
The early Lark is wakened from her bed,
Being only by Loves plaints disquieted,
And singing in the mornings ear, she weeps
(Being deep in love) at lovers broken sleeps:
But say a golden slumber chance to tie,
With silken strings the cover of loves eye:
Then dreams (Magitian-like) mocking present
Pleasures, whose fading, leaves more discontent.
Have you these golden charms?

We have my Lord.

Bestow them sweetly; think a Lovers heart
Dwells in each instrument and let it melt
In weeping strains: yonder direct your faces,
That the soft summons of a frightles parley,
May creep into the Casement: So, begin;
Music speak moouinglye, assume my part,
For thou must now plead to a stony heart.
Pity, pity, pity,
Pity, pity, pity,
That word begins that ends a true-loue Ditty,
Your blessed eyes (like a pair of Suns,)
Shine in the sphere of smiling,
Your pretty lips (like a pair of Doves)
Are kisses still com-piling.
Mercy hangs upon your brow, like a precious Jewel,
O let not then,
(Most lovely maid, best to be loved of men:)
Marble, lye upon your heart, that will make you cruel:
Pity, pity, pity,
Pity, pity, pity:
That word begins that ends a true-loue ditty.

Who owes this salutation?

Thy Camillo.

Is not your shadow there too, my sweet bother?

Here sweet Sister.

I dreamt so: o I am much bound to you,
For you my Lord have used my love with honour.

Ever with honour.

Indeed, indeed you have.

S'light, she means her French garsoon.

The same, good night, trust me tis somewhat late,
And this bleak wind nippes dead all idle prate.
I must to bed, good night.

The God of rest,
Play music to thine eyes, whilst on my breast
The furies sit and beat, and keep care waking.

You will not leave my friend in this poor taking:

Yes by the velvet brow of darkness.

You scuruey Tyt: s'foote, scuruey anything,
Do you hear Susanna: you, puncke, if I geld not your Muske-Cat; I'll do it by
Iesu; lets go Camillo.


Nay but pure swaggerer, ruffiin; do you think
To fright me with your bug-beare threats? go by;
Hark tosse-pot in your ear, the French-man's mine,
And by these hands I'll have him.

Rareroage! fine!

He is my prisoner, (by a deed of gift)
Therefore Camillo you have wronged me much,
To wrong my prisoner: by my troth I love him,
The rather for the baseness he endures,
For my unworthy self: I'll tell you what;
Release him, let him plead your love for you;
I love a life to hear a man speak French,
Of his complexion: I would vnder-goe
The instruction of that language rather far,
Than be two weeks unmarried (by my life)
Because I'll speak true French, I'll be his wife.

O scorn to my chaste love, burst heart.

Swounds hold.

Come (gentle friends) tie your most solemn tunes,
By silver strings unto a leaden pace;
False fair, enjoy thy base-belou'd: adieu,
He's far less noble, and shall prove less true.

Lady Imperia (the Curtezans Zani) hath brought you this letter, from the poor
Gentleman in the deep dungeon, but would not stay till he had an answer.


Her groom employed by Fontinell? O strange!
I wonder how he got access to him:
I'll read, and (reading) my poor heart shall ache,
''True-loue is jealous, fears the best love shake.
Meet me at the end of the old Chapel, next Saint Lorenzos Monestarie,
furnish your company with a Friar, that there he may consummate our holy
vows, till midnight: farewell.

Hath he got opportunity to escape?
O happy period of our separation,
Blessed night, wrap Cynthia in a sable sheet:
That fearful lovers may securely meet.

Play you my part bravely; you must look like a slave, and you shall see, I'll
counterfeit the Frenchman most knauishl^; my Mistress (for your sake) charged
me on her blessing to fall to these shifts; I left her at Cards, shee'll sit
up till you come, because shee'll have you play a game at Noddy; you'll to her
presently:


I will upon mine honour.

I think she does not greatly care whether you fall to her upon your honour,
or no: So, all's fit, tel my Lady that I go in a suite of Durance for her
sake; that's your way, and this Pithole's mine; if I can escape hence, why so;
if not, he that's hanged. is nearer to heaven by half a score steps then he
that dyes in a bed, and so adieu Nonsieur.


Farewell dear trusty slave; shall I profane
This Temple with an Idol of strange love?
When I do so let me dissolve in fire;
Yet one day will I see this Dame, whose heart
Talks off my misery, I'll not be so rude,
To pay her kindness with ingratitude.

My dearest Fontinell.

My Violetta, oh God!

Oh God!

Where is this reverend Friar?

Here, over joyed, young man.

How did thou escape?
How came Imperiaes man?

No more of that.

When did Imperia? --

Questions now are thieves,
And lies in Ambush to surprise our joys,
My most happy stars shine still, shine on,
Away, come, love beset, had need be gone.

I must not stay thou say:

Gods me, away.

Bus, bus, again; here's sixepence; bus again,
Farewell, I must not stay then.

Foh.

Farewell;
At ten a clock thou say, and ring a Bell
Which thou wilt hang out at this window.

Lord I shee'll hear this fiddling.

No, close on my word:
Farewell just ten a clock, I shall come in,
Remember to let down the Corde; just ten
Thou'lt open mouse? pray God thou dost, Amen, Amen, Amen,
I am an old Courtier wench but I can spy
A young Duck: close mum; ten; close, tis not I.

Mistress, sweet Ladies.

Is his old rotten Aqua-vitae bottle stoptvp? is he gone? fie, fie, fie, fie,
he so smells of Ale and Onions, and Rosa-solis, fie; bolt the door, stop the
key-hole least his breath peep in, burn some Perfume: I do not love to
handle these dried stocke-fishes that ask so much tawing, fie, fie, fie.


Nor I, trust me Lady, fih!

No, no no no, stools and cushions, lowe stools, lowe stools, sit, sit, sit,
round Ladies round; So, so, so, so let, oursweet beauties be spread to the full
and most moving advantage, for we are fallen into his hands, who they say, has
an A B C, for the sticking in of the least white pin in any part of the body.


Madame Imperia, what stuff is he like to draw out before us?


Nay, nay, nay, tis Greek to me, tis Greek to me, I never had remnant of
his Spanish leather learning: here he comes, your ears may now fit
themselves out of the whole piece.


I do first deliver to your most Skreete, long-fingred hands, this head (or
top of all the members) bare and vncomb'd, to show how deeply I stand in
reverence of your naked Female beauties. Bright and vnclipt Angels, if I were
to make a discovery of any new-found land (as Virginia or so) to Ladies
Courtiers, my speech should hoist up Sails, fit to bear up such lofty and
well rigged vessels: but because I am to deal only with the ciuell Chittie
Matron; I will not lay upon your blushing and delicate cheek, any other
colours, than such as will give luster to your chittie faces, in to that
purpose, our Thesis is taken out of that most plentiful, but most precious
book: Entitled, the Oeconomicall Cornacopia.


The what?

The Oeconomicall Cornucopia; thus,
Wise is that wife, who (with apt wit) complains,
That she's kept under, yet rules all the rains.

Oh again sweet Signior? Complains.
That she's kept under? what follows?

Yet rules all the rains:
Wife is that wife, who (with apt wit) complains,
That she's kept under, yet rules all the rains.
Most pure and refined plants of nature, I will not (as this Distinction
entices) take up the parts as they lye here in order: As first, to touch your
wisdom, it were folly: next, your complaining, tis too common: thirdly, your
keeping under, tis above my capachitie: and lastly, the rains in your own
hands, that is the A-per-se of all, the very cream of all, and therefore how
to skim off that only, only listen: a wife wise, no matter: apt wit; no
matter: complaining, no matter: kept under, no great matter: but to rule the
roast, is the matter.


That ruling of the roast goes with me.

And me.

And me, I'll have a cut of that roast.

Since then, a woman's only desire is to have the rains in her own white
hand; your chief practise (the very same day that you are wived) must be to
get hold of these rains, being fully gotten, or wound about; yet to complain
(with apt wit) as tho you had them not.


How shall we know Signior, when we have them all or not?


I will furnish your capable understandings, out of my poor Spanish store,
with the chief implements, and their appurtenances: Observe, It shall be your
first and finest praise, to sing the note of every new fashion, at first sight;
and (if you can) to stretch that note above Eela.


Good.

The more you pinch your Servants bellies for this, the smoother will the
fashion sit on your back: But if your good man, like not this Music, (as
being too full of Crochets) your only way is, to learn to play upon the
Virginals, and so nail his ears to your sweet humours: if this be out of
time too, yet your labour will quit the cost; for by this means your secret
friend may have free and open access to you, under the colour of pricking you
lessons: Now, because you may tie your husbands love in most sweet knots, you
shall never give over labouring, till out of his purse you have dug a
garden: and that garden must stand a pretty distance from the Chittie; for by
repairing thither, much good fruit may be grafted.


Mark that.

Then (in the after noone) when you address your sweet perfumed body, to walk
to this garden, there to gather a nose-gay, sops-in-wine, cowslips, columbines,
hearts-ease; c. The first principle to learn is, that you stick black
patches for the room on your delicate blew Temples, tho there be no room for
the room; black patches are comely in most women, being well fastened, draw men's
eyes to shoot glances at you: Next, your ruff must stand in print, and for
that purpose, get poking sticks with fair and long handles, least they
scorch your lilly sweating hands: then your Hat with a little brim (if you
have a little face) if otherwise, otherwise. Besides, you must play the wag
with your wanton Fan; have your Dog (called Pearl or Min, or why ask you? or
any other pretty name) dance along by you: your Embroidered Muffe before you,
on your ravishing hands; but take heed who thrusts his fingers into your
Fur.


We'll watch for that.

Once a quarter take state upon you, and be chic; being chic, (thus
politically) lye at your garden; your lip-sworne servant may there visit you as
a Physician: where otherwise, (if you languish at home) be sure your husband
will look to your water: This chicknes may be increased, with giving out that
you breed yongbones; and to stick flesh upon those bones, it shall not be
amiss, if you long for Pescods, at ten groats the Cod; and for Cherries at a
crown the Cherry.


O dear Tutor!

Interrupt him not.

If while this pleasing fit of chicknes hold you, you be invited forth to
supper, whimper and seem unwilling to go; but if your good man (bestowing the
sweet duck, kiss upon your moist lip) entreat, go: marie my counsel is,
you eat little at Table, because it may be said of you, you are no cormorant;
yet at your coming home you may counterfeit a qualm, so devour a posset: your
husband need not have his nose in that posset: no, trust your Chamber-maide
only in this; and scarcely her, for you cannot be too careful into whose
hands you commit your secrets.


That's certain.

If you have Daughters capable, marry them by no means to Chittizens, but
choose for them some smooth chinned curld-headed Gentleman; for Gentlemen will
lift up your daughters to their own content: and to make these curl'd-pated
Gallants come off the more roundly, make your husband go to the Herald for
Arms; and let it be your daily care, that he have a fair and comely Crest;
yea, go all the ways your selves you can to be made Ladies, especially if
(without danger to his person, or for love or money) you can procure your
husband to be dubbed: The Goddess of memory locke up these Jewels which I
have bestowed upon you, in your sweet brains: let these be the rules to square
out your life by, tho you ne'er go leuill, but tread you shoes awry: If you
can get these rains into your Lilly hand you shall need no Coaches, but may
drive your husbands: put it down, and according to that wise saying of you, be
Saints in the Church, Angels in the street, devils in the Kitchen, and Apes in
your bed; upon which, leaving you tumbling; pardon me that thus abruptly and
openly I take you all up.


You have got so far into our books Signior, that you cannot escape without a
pardon here, if you take us up never so snappishlie.


Music there to close our Stomachs: how do you like him Madonna?


O trust me, I like him most profoundly: why, he's able to put down twenty
such as I am.


Let them build upon that; nay more, we'll henceforth never go to a cunning
woman, since men can teach us our lerrie.


We are all fools to him, and our husbands (if we can hold these rains fast)
shall be fools to us.


If we can keep but this Bias wenches, our good men may perchance once in a
month, get a fore-game of us: but if they win a rubbers, let them throw their
caps at it.


No, no, no, dear features, hold their noses to the grindstone and they're
gone; thanks worthy Signior: fie, fie, fie, you stand bare too long: come
bright Mirrors, will you withdraw into a gallery, and taste a slight banquet?


We shall cloy ourselves with sweets, my sweet Madonna.


Troth I will not Madonna Imperia.

No, no, no, fie, fie, fie, Signior Lazarillo, either be you our Fore-man, or
else put in these Ladies (at your discreation) nto the Gallery and cut of this
striving.


It shall be my Office, my Fees being (as they pass) to take told of their
Alabaster hands.

Imperia stays. Admired creature, I summon you to a parley, you remember this
is the night?


So, so, so, I do remember; here is a key, that is your Chamber; lights
Simperina: about twelve a clock you shall take my beauty prisoner; fie, fie,
fie, how I blush? at 12. a clock.


Rich Argosie of all golden pleasure.

No, no, no, put up, put up your joys till anon, I will come by my virginity;
but I must tel you one thing, that all my chambers are many nights haunted;
with what sprites none can see: but sometimes we hear Birds singing;
sometimes Music playing; sometimes voices laughing, but stir not you, nor
be frighted at any thing.


By Hercules, if any spirits rise, I will conjure them in their own Circles
with Toledo. (ready?


So, so, so, lights for his chamber: is the Trap-doore

Tis set sure.

So, so, so, I will be rid of this broilde red Sprat that stinks so in my
stomach, fih; I hate him worse, than to have a Tailor come a wooing to me: Gods
me, the sweet Ladies, the banquet, I forget: fie, fie, fie, follow dear
Signior.

The trap door Simperina.


Signior come away.

Cupid I kiss the neck of thy sweet bow,
A woman makes me yield, Mars could not so.

Just ten? tis ten just, that's the fixed hour,
For payment of my loves due fees; that broke:
I forfeit a huge sum of joys: ho love,
I'll keep time just to a minute, I,
A sweet guides loss, is a deep penalty.
A night's so rich a venture to taste wrack,
Would make a Lover banckrupt, break his back:
Noh, if to sit up late, early to rise,
Or, if this Gold-finch, that with sweet notes flies,
And wakes the dull eye even of a puritaine;
Can work, then wenches Curuetto is the man;
I am not young, yet have I youthful tricks,
Which peering day must not see; noh, close, close:
Old Courtier, peralous fellow; I can lye
Hug in your bosom, close; yet none shall spy.
Stay, here's the door, the window; hah, this, this,
Cord? vmh? dear Cord, thy blessed knot I kiss:
None peepes I hope, night clap thy velvet hand
Upon all eyes, if now my friend thou stand:
I'll hang a Jewel at thine ear sweet night,
And here it is, Lant-horne and candle-light.
A peal, a lusty peal, set, ring loves knell,
I'll sweat, but thus I'll bear away the bell.

Signior, who's there, Signior Curuetto?

Vmh! drowned? Noahs flood? duckt over head ears?
O sconce! o sconce! an old soaker, oh
I sweat now till I drop, what villains; oh?
Punckes, punkateeroes, nags, hags, I will ban,
I have caught my bane.

Who's there?

A Water-man.

Who rings that scolding peal? (by th'ounce

I am wringing wet, I am washed; foh, here's Rose-water sold
This sconce shall batter down those windows. Bounce:

What do you mean? why do you beat our doors?
What do you take us for?

You're all damned whoores.

Signior Curuetto?

Signior coxcomb, no;

What makes you be so hot?

You lye, I am cool,
I am an old Courtier, but stinking fool, foh!

Gods my life what have you done? you are in a sweet pickle if you pulled at
this rope:


Hang thy self in it, and I'll pull once again.

Mary Muff, will you up and ride, you're mine elder: by my pure Maiden-head
here's a jest: why this was a water-worke to drown a Ratte that uses to creep
in at this window.


Fire on your Water-workes, catch a drowned Rat:
That's me, I have it god-amercie head,
Rat? me; I smell a rat, I strike it dead.

You smell a sodden sheep shed; a Rat? I a Rat, and you will not believe me
marie foh; I have been believed of your betters, marie snicke up.


Simp, nay sweet Simp, open again, why Simperina?

Go from my window go, go from, c. away, go by old Ieronimo; nay and you
shrink in the wetting, walk, walk, walk.


I cry thee mercy, if the bowl were set,
To drown a Rat; I shrink not am not wet.

A Rat by this hemp, and you could ha smelt; hark you, here's the bell, ting,
ting, ting; would the clapper were in my belly, if I am not mad at your
foppery; I could scratch, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, (as my Mistress says) but
go, hye you home; shift you, come back presently; here you shall find a
ladder of cords, climb up, I'll receive you, my Mistress lies alone, she's
yours, away.


O Simp!

Nay scud, you know what you promised me: I shall have simple yawling for this,
be gone and Mum.


Thanks, mum dear girl; I am gone, twas for a Rat,
A Rat upon my life; thou shalt have gifts,
I love thee tho thou puts me to my shifts:
I know I could be ouer-reacht by none,
A Paulons head, lye close, lye close, I am gone.

Saint Iaques and the seven deadly sins (that is, the seven wise Masters of
the world) pardon me for this night, I will kill the devil.


Ha ha ha.

Thou Prince of Black-amoores, thou shalt have small cause to laugh, if I run
thee through: this chamber is haunted, would I had not been brought a bed in
it, or else were well delivered: for my heart tells me tis no good luck, to
have any thing to do with the devil, he's a paltry merchant.

Midnights bell goes ting, ting, ting, ting, ting,
Then dogs do howl, and not a bird does sing:
But the Nightingale, and she cries twit, twit, twit, twit:
Owls then on every bow do sit.
Ravens Croake on Chimneys tops,
The Cricket in the Chamber hoppes:
And the Cats cry mew, mew, mew,
The nibbling Mouse is not a sleep
But he goes, peep, peep, peep, peep, peep,
And the Cats cries, mew, mew mew,
And still the Cats cries mew, mew, mew.

I shall be mowz'd by pusse-cattes: but I had rather dye a dogs death; they
have nine lives (a piece like a woman) and they will make it up ten lives, if
they and I fall a scratching: Bright Helena of this house, wod thy Troy were a
fire, for I am a cold; or else wod I had the Greekes wooden Curtal, to ride
away: most Ambrosian-lipt creature, come away quickly, for this nights lodging
lies cold at my heart.

The Spanish Pauin: I thought the devil could not understand Spanish: but
since thou art my countryman, o thou tawny Satin, I will dance after thy
pipe.

He dances the Spanish Pauin.

Ho sweet devil, ho thou wilt make any man weary of thee, tho he deal with
thee in his shirt,

Sweet beauty; shee'll not come, I'll fall to sleep,
And dream of her, loue-dreames are ne'er too deep.

Ha, ha, ha.

Ho, ho, Frisco, Madonna, I am in hell, but heer is no fire; Hell fire is all
put out; what ho? so ho ho? I shall be drowned; I beseech thee, dear Frisco,
raise Blurt the Constable, or some Scauinger, to come and make clean these
kennels of hell, for they stink so, that I shall cast away my precious self.


Is he down Frisco?

He's down, he cries out he's in hell, it's heaven to me to have him cry so.


Fie, fie, fie, let him lye, and get all to bed.

Not all, I have fatting knavery in hand,
He cries he's damned in hell; the next shall cry,
He's climbing up to heaven, and here's the gin:
One woodcocke'staine, I'll have his brother in.

Brisk as a capering Taylor; I was washed,
But did they shave me? noh, I am too wise;
Lye close in the bosom of their knaveries,
I am an old hoary Courtier, and strike dead:
I hit my marks: ware, ware, a perelous head.
Cast, I must find a ladder made of roapes,
Ladder and rope, what follow? hanging;
But where? ah ha, there does the riddle lye.
I have escaped drowning; but, but, but, I hope,
I shall not escape the ladder and the rope.

Yonder's a light Master Constable.

Peace woodcock the sconce approaches.

Whew:

I, whisling? Slubber Iog the watch, give the Lantern a flap.


Whew, Symp, Symperina?

Who's there?

Who's there?

Signior Curuetto here's the ladder, I watch to do you a good turn, I am
Frisco, is not Blurt abroad and his Bill-men?


No matter if they be, I hear none ny:
I will snug close; out goes my candles eye,
My sconce takes this in snuff, all's one I care not.

Why when?

I come, close, close, hold rope and spare not.

Now the candle's out.

Peace.

Frisco, light, light, my foot is slipped, call help:

Help, help, help, thieves, thieves, help, thieves, c.


Thieves, where? follow close: Slubber the Lantern, hold; I charge you in
the Dukes name stand: Sir, you're like to hang for this: down with him.


Master Blurt, Master Constable, here's his ladder, he comes to rob my
mistress, I have bin scared out of my wits, above seven times by him, and it's
forty to one, if ever they come in again, I lay felony to his charge.


Felony? you cunny-catching slave.

Cunny-catching will bear an action; I'll cunny-catch you for this; if I can
find our key I will aid you: Master Blurt, if not, look to him, as you will
answer it upon your death-bed.


What are you?

A Venetian Gentleman.

Woodcock, how dost thou Woodcock?

Thank your worship.

Woodcock, you are of our side now, and therefore your acquaintance cannot
serve, and you were a Gentleman of velvet I would commit you.


Why, what are you sir?

What am I sir? do not you know this staff? I am sir the Dukes own Image; at
this time the Dukes tongue (for fault of a better) lies in my mouth; I am
Constable sir.


Constable, and commit me? marie Blurt Master Constable.

Away with him.

It's folly to strive,

I say away with him, I'll Blurt you, I'll teach you to stand covered to
Authority; your hoary head shall be knocked when this staff is in place.


I but Master Constable --

No, pardon me, you abuse the Duke, in me that am his Cipher, I say away with
him; Gulch, away with him; Woodcock, keep you with me, I will be known for
more then Blurt.


Thou honest fellow (the man in the Moon) I beseech thee set fire on thy bush
ofthornes, to light and warm me, for I am dung wet: I fell like Lucifer I
think into hell, and am crauld out, but in worse pickle than my lean Pilcher:
here about is the Hot-house of my love, ho, ho? why ho there?


Who's that? what Devil stands hohing at my door so late?


I beseech thee Frisco take in Lazarilloes ghost.

Lazarilloes ghost? haunt me not I charge thee, I know thee not, I am in a
dream of a drie-Summer, therefore appear not to me.


Is not this the mansion of the cherrie-lipt Madonna Imperia?


Yes, how than? you Fly-blowne rascal, what art thou?

Lazarilla de Tormes: sweet blood, I have a poor Spanish suite, depending in
your house; let me enter most precious Frisco, the Mistress of this mansion is
my beautiful Hostess.


How? you Turpentine pill, my wife your Hostess? away you Spanish vermin.


I beseech thee (most pitiful Frisco) allow my lamentation.

And you lament here, I'll stone you with Brick-bats, I am a sleep.


My Slop and Mandillion lye at thy mercy (fine Frisco) I beseech thee let not
my case be thine, I must and will lament.


Must you? I'll wash off your tears; away you hogsface.

Thou hast sowsed my poor hogs-face: O Frisco, thou art a scurvy Doctor, to
cast my water no better; it is most rammish Urine, Mars shall not save thee, I
will make a browne toast of thy heart, and drink it in a pot of thy strong
blood.


Such fellows must be taken down, stand: what white thing is yonder?


Who goes there? come before the Constable.

My dear host Blurt:

You have Blurted fair, I am by my Office to examine you, where you have spent
these two nights?


Most big Blurt, I answer thy great Authority, that I have been in hell,
and am scratched to death with Pusse-Cattes.


Do you run a'th score at an Officers house, then run above twelve score
off?


I did not run my sweet-fac'd Blurt; the Spanish fleet is bringing gold
enough to discharge all, from the Indies: lodge me most pitiful Bill-man.


Marie and will: I am (in the Dukes name) to charge you with despicious of
felony: and Burglary is committed this night, and we are to reprehend any
that we think to be faulty; were not you at Madonna freckle-faces house?


Signior sec.

Away with him, clap him up.

Most thundering Blurt do not clap me,
Most thundering Blurt do not clap me.

Master Lazarns, I know you are a sore fellow where you take, and therefore I
charge you (in the Dukes name) to go without wrasling, though you be in your
shirt.


Commendable Blurt.

The end of my commendations is to commit you.

I am kin to Don Dego the Spanish Adelantado.

If you he kin to Don Dego (that was smelt out in Paules) you pack; your
Lantedoes nor your Lanteeroes cannot serve your turn: I charge you, let me
commit you to the tuition. --


Worshipful Blurt, do not commit me into the hands of dogs.


Dogs?

Master Lazarus, there's not a dog shall bite you, these are true Bill-men, that
fight under the common wealths flag.


Blurt --

Blurt me no Blurts, I'll teach all Spaniards how to meddle with whoores.


Most cunning Constable, all Spaniards know that already, I have meddled with
none.


Your being in your shirt berayes you.

I beseech thee most honest Blurt, let not my shirt beraye me.


I say away with him: Music, that's in the Courtesans; they are about some
ungodly Act, but I'll play a part in it ere morning: away with Lazarus.


Come Spaniard.

Thy kites and thee, for this shall watch in dirt to feed on carrion.


Hence, ptrooh.

O base Blurt! O base Blurt! O base Blurt!

Gentlemen and Noble Italians, whom I love best; who know best what wrongs I
have stood under: being lay de on by him, who is to thank me for his life, I
did bestow him (as the prize of mine honour) upon my Love, the most fair
Violetta: my loves merit was basely sold to him, by the most false Violetta:
not content with this Felony, he hath dared to add the sweet theft of
Ignoble marriage; she's now, nones but his, and he (treacherous villain) any
ones, but hers; he dotes (my honoured friends) on a painted Courtesan, and in
scorn of our Italian laws, our family, our revenge, loathes Violettaes bed,
for a harlots bosom: I conjure you therefore, by all the bonds of Gentility,
that as you have solemnly sworn a most sharpe; so let the revenge be most
sudden.


Be not your self a bar, to that sodainnes, by this protraction.

Away Gentlemen, away then.

As for that light Hobby-horse my Sister, whose foul name, I will race out
with my Poniard; by the honour of my Family (which her lust hath profaned) I
swear (and Gentlemen be in this, my sworn brothers) I swear that as all
Uenice does admire her beauty, so all the world shall be amazed at her
punishment, follow therefore.


Stay, let our resolutions keep together: whether go; we first?


To the Strumpet Imperiaes.

Agreed, what then?

There to find Fontinell; found, to kill him.

And killed, to hang out his reeking body, at his Harlots window.


And by his body, the strumpets.

And between both, my Sisters.

The Tragedy is just: on then, begin.

As you go, every hand pull in a friend, to strengthen us against all
opposites: he that has any drop of true Italian blood in him, thus vow (this
morning) to shed others, or let out his own; if you consent to this, follow
me.


Via, away, the treacherous Frenchman dyes.

At so, Saint Mark my Pistol, thus death flies.

Ah you little effeminate sweet Cheueleere, why dost thou not get a loose
Periwig of hair on thy chin, to set thy French face off, by the panting
pulse of Uenus: thou art welcome a thousand degrees beyond the reach of
Arithmetic: Good, good, good, your lip is moist moving; it hath the truest
French close, even like Mapew; la, la, la c.


Dear Lady, o life of love, what sweetness dwells
In loves variety? the soul that plods
In one harsh book of beauty; but repeats
The stale and tedious learning, that hath oft
Faded the senses: when (in reading more)
We glide in new sweets, and are starved with store,
Now by the heart of love, my Violet
Is a foul weed (o pure Italian flower!)
She, a black Negro, to the white compare,
Of this vnequal'd beauty: O most accursed!
That I have given her leave to challenge me:
But Lady, poison speaks Italian well,
And in a loathed kiss, I'll include her hell.

So, so, so do, do, do, come, come, come; will you condemn the mute rushes
to be pressed to death by your sweet body? down, down, down, here, here,
here; lean your head upon the lap of my gown; good, good good: O Saint
Mark! Here is a loue-marke ableto wear more Ladies eyes for Jewels then --
oh! lye still, lye still, I will leuill a true Venetian kiss over your right
shoulder.


Shoot home (fair Mistress) and as that kiss flies,
From lip to lip, wound me with your sharpe eyes.

No, no, no, I'll beat this Cherry-tree thus, thus, and thus; and you name
wound.


I will offend so, to be beaten still.

Do, do, do, and if you make any more such lips, when I beat you, by my
Virginity you shall bus this rod: Music: I pray thee be not a puritaine.
Sister to the rest of the Sciences, I knew the time when thou could abide
handling.

Oh, fie, fie, fie, forbear, thou art like a punie-Barber (new come to the
trade) thou pick'st our ears too deep: So, so, so, will my sweet prisoner
entertain a poor Italian Song?


O most willingly my dear Madonna.

I care not if I persuade my bad voice to wrestle with this Music and catcha
strain; so, so, so, keep time, keep time, keep time.

Love for such a cherry lip,
Would be glad to pawn his arrows:
Venus here to take a Sip,
Would sell her Doves and teem of Sparrow.
But they shall not so,
Hey nony nony no:
None but I this lip must owe,
Hey nony nony no.

Your voice does teach the Music,

No, no, no.

Again, dear Love.

Hey nony nony no:
Did Jove see this wanton eye,
Ganimede must wait no longer:
Phoebe here one night did lye,
Would change her face and look much younger.
But they shall not so,
Hey nony nony no:
None but I this lip must owe,
Hey nony nony no.

O Madonna! Mistress! Madonna!

Case up this Gentleman, there's rapping at door; and one in a small voice,
says, there's Camilla and Hippolito.


And they will come in.

Upon their deaths they shall, for they seek mine.

No, no, no, locke the doors fast, Triuia, Simperina, stir.

Alas!

Come they in shape of Devils, this Angel by:
I am armed, let them come in; vds foot, they dye.

Fie, fie, fie, I will not have thy white body --

What ho; Madonna?

O hark! not hurt for the Rialta; go, go, go, put up: by my Virginity you
shall put up.


Here are Camilla and Hippolito.

Into that little room, you are there as safe as in France, or the Low
Countries.


Oh God!

So, so, so, let them enter; Triuia, Simperina, smooth my gown, tread down
the rushes, let them enter; do, do, do, no words pretty darling: la, la,
la, hey nony nony no.


Are two men transformed into one woman?

How now? what motion's this?

By your leave sweet beauty, pardon my excuse, which under the mask of
Camilloes and my brothers names, sought entrance into this house: good
Sweetness, have you not a property here, improper to your house, my husband?


Hah; your husband here?

Nay be as you seem to be (white Dove) without gall.

Gall? your husband? ha, ha, ha; by my ventoy (yellow Lady) you take your mark
improper, no, no, no, my Suger-candie Mistress) your good man is not here I
assure you; here? ha hah.


Here?

Much husbands here.

Do not mock me fairest Venetian; come, I know he's here: good faith I
do not blame him, for your beauty glides over his error; troth I am right
glad that you (my Country woman) have received the pawn of my affections: you
cannot be hard-harted, loving him, nor hate me, for I love him too: since we
both love him, let us not leave him, till we have called home the ill
husbandry of a sweet Straggler; prithee (good wench) use him well.


So, so, so.

If he deserve not to be used well (as I'd be loath he should deserve it) I'll
engage my self (dear beauty) to thine honest hart; give me leave to love him,
and I'll give him a kind of leave to love thee: I know he here's me; I prithee
try mine eyes, if they know him, that have almost drowned themselves in their
own salt water, because they cannot see him: In troth I'll not chide him; if I
speak words rougher then soft kisses, my penance shall be to see him kiss
thee, yet to hold my peace.


And that's torment enough, alas poor wench.

She's an Ass, by the crown of my Mayden-head,
I'd scratch her eyes out, if my man stood in her Tables.

Good partener, lodge me in thy private bed,
Where (in supposed folly) he may end,
Determined sin; thou smile, I know thou wilt;
What looseness may term dotage (truly read)
Is love ripe gathered, not soon withered.

Good troth (pretty wed-locke) thou makst my little eyes smart, with washing
themselves in brine; I keep your Cock from his own roost? and mar such a
sweet face? and wipe off that dainty red? and make Cupid told the bell for
your loue-sicke hart no, no, no, if he were Ioues own Ingle (Ganimed) fie, fie,
fie, I'll none; your Chamber-fellow is within, thou shalt enjoy my bed, and
thine own pleasure this night: Simperina conduct in this Lady; Frisco
silence, ha, ha, ha; I am sorry to see a woman so tame a fool; come, come,
come.


Star of Venetian beauty, thanks; o who
Can bear this wrong, and be a woman too?

We are dishonoured, give us way, he dyes, he dyes.

I charge you by your duties to the State,
And love to gentry, sheath your weapons.

Stand, I charge you put up your naked weapons, and we'll put up our rusty
Bills.


Up to the hilts, we will in his French body.
My Lord, we charge you by the ravished honour
Of an Italian Lady: by our wrongs,
By that eternal blot (which if this slave
Pass free without revenge) like Leprosy,
Will run over all the body of our fames;
Give open way to our just wrath, least bared --

Gentlemen --

Breaking the bonds of honour and of duty;
We cut a passage through you with our swoords.

He that withstands us, run him through.

I charge you in the Dukes name (before his own face) to keep the peace.


Keep thou the peace, that hast a Peasants heart.

Peasant?

Our peace must have her cheeks painted with blood.

Away, through --

Sweet Gentlemen: though you have called the Dukes own ghost Peasant, for I
walk for him in the night: (Kilderkin Pisse-breech hold out) yet here me,
(dear bloods) the Duke here for fault of a better and my self; (Cuckoo fly
not hence) for fault of a better, are to lay you by the heals, if you go thus
with fire and sword; for the Duke is the head, and I Blurt, am the
purtenaunce: Woodcock keep by my side: Now sir --


A plague upon this Woodcock; kill the Watch.

Now in the name of manhood I conjure ye,
Appear in your true shapes; Italians,
You kill your honours more in this revenge,
Than in his murder: Stay, stand, here's the house.

Right Sir, this is the whoore-house, here he calls and sets in his staff.


Sheath all your weapons worthy Gentlemen,
And by my life I swear, if Fontinell
Have stained the honour of your Sisters bed,
The fact being death, I'll pay you his proud head,

Arrest him then before our eyes; and see!
Our fury sleeps.

This honest Officer --

Blurt sir.

Shall fetch him forth: go sir, in our name
Attach the French Lord.

Garlic and the rest follow strongly.

O what a scandal were it to a State,
To have a stranger, (and a prisoner)
Murdered by such a troop? Besides, through Uenice
Are numbers of his Country-men dispearst;
Whose rage (meeting with yours) none can prevent
The mischief of a bloody consequent.

The Duke is within an Inch of your nose, and therefore
I dare play with it, if you put not up; deliver I advise you.

Yield up my weapons and my foe so ny?
My self and weapons shall together yield,
Come any one, come all.

Kill, kill the Frenchman, kill him.

Be satisfied my noble Countrymen,
I'll trust you with his life, so you will pawn
The faiths of Gentlemen, no desperate hand
Shall rob him of it; otherwise, he runs
Upon this dangerous point, that dares appose
His rage against our authority: French Lord,
Yield up this strength, our word shall be your Guard.

Who defyes death, needs none, he's well prepared.

My honest fellow, with a good defence,
Enter again, fetch out the Courtesan,
And all that are within.

I'll tickle her; it shall ne'er be said that a browne Bill looked pale.


Frenchman, thou art indebted to our Duke.

For what?

Thy life, for (but for him) thy soul
Had long ere this hung trembling in the air,
Being frighted from thy bosom with our swoords.

I do not thank your Duke; yet (if you will)
Turn bloody Executioners: who dyes
For so bright beauty, is a bright Sacrifice.

The beauty you adore so, is profane,
The breach of wedlock (by our law) is death.

Law give me law.

With all severity.

In my Loves eyes immortal joys do dwell,
She is my heaven; she from me, I am in hell:
Therefore your Law, your Law:

Make way, she comes.

Fie, Fie, Fie.

Your fie, fie, fie, nor your foh, foh, foh, cannot serve your turn; on must
now bear it off with head and shoulders.


Now fetch Curuetto, and the Spaniard heather,
Their punishments shall lye under one doom,
What is she maskt?

A puncke too; follow fellows, Slubber before:

She that is maskt, is leader of this Mask,
What's here? Bows, Bills and Gunnes? noble Camillo,
I am sure you are Lord of all this misrule: I pray
For whose sake do you make this swaggering fray?

For yours, and for your own we come resolved,
To murder him, that poisons your chaste bed;
To take revenge on you, for your false heart:
And (wanton Deign) our wrath here must not sleep,
Your sin being deep'st, your share shall be most deep.

With pardon of your grace, my self (to you all)
At your own weapons, thus do answer all.
For paying away my heart, that was my own,
Fight not to win that, in good troth tis gone,
For my dear loves abusing my chaste bed,
And her sweet theft: Alack, you are misled,
This was a plot of mine, only to try
Your loves strange temper; sooth I do not lye.
My Fontinell ne'er dallied in her arms;
She never bound his heart with amorous charms,
My Fontinell ne'er loathed my sweet embrace,
She never drew loves picture by his face;
When he from her white hand would strive to go,
She never cried fie, fie, nor no, no, no.
With prayers and bribes, we hired her (Both) to lye
Under that roof; for this must my love dye?
Who dare be so hard hearted? look you, we kiss,
And if he loath his Uioletta; judge by this.

O sweetest Violet; I blush --

Good figure,
Wear still that maiden blush, but still be mine.

I seal my self thine own, with both my hands,
In this true deed of gift: Gallants, here stands
This Ladies Champion, at his foot I'll lye,
That dares touch her: who taintes my constancy,
I am no man for him, fight he with her,
And yield, for she's a noble conqueror.

This combat shall not need; for see, ashamed,
Of their rash vows, these Gentlemen here break,
This storm; and do with hands, what tongues should speak,

All friends?
All friends.

Puncke you may laugh at this,
Here's tricks, but mouth I'll stop you with a kiss.

Room, keep al the scabs back, for heer comes Lazarus.

Oh here's our other spirits that walk in the night,
Signior Curuetto, by complaint from her,
And by your writing here, I reach the depth
Of your offence; they charge your climbing up
To be to rob her: if so, then by law
You are to dye unless she marry you.

I, Fie fie, fie, I will be burnt to ashes first.

How? dye? or marie her? then call me Daw,
Marry her? she's more common then the law,
For boys to call me Ox? noh, I am not drunk,
I'll play with her, but (hang her) wed no puncke.
I shall be a hoary Courtier then indeed,
And have a perilous head, then I were best.
Lye close, lye close, to hide my forked crest.
Noh; fie, fie, fie, hang me before the door,
Where I was drowned ere I marry with a whore.

Well Signior, for we rightly understand,
From your accusers, how you stood her guest,
We pardon you and pass it as a jest:
And for the Spaniard sped so hardly too,
Discharge him Blurt, Signior we pardon you.

Sir, he's not to be discharged, nor so to be shot off, I have put him into
a new suite, and have entered into him which an action, he owes me two and
thirty shillings.


It is thy honour to have me dye in thy debt.

It would be more honour to thee to pay me before thou die; twenty shillings
of this debt came out of his nose.


Bear witness great Duke, he's paid twenty shillings.

Signior no, you cannot smoke me so; he took twenty shillings of it in a
fewme, and the rest I charge him with for his lying.


My lying (most pitiful Prince) was abominable.

He did lye (for the time) as well as any Knight of the Poaste did ever lye.


I do here put off thy suite, and appeal; I warn thee to the Court of
Conscience, and will pay thee by two pence a week, which I will rake out of the
hot embers of Tobacco ashes, and then travail on foot to the Indies for more
gold, whose red cheeks I will kiss, and beat thee Blurt if thou watch for
me.


There be many of your Countrymen in Ireland Signior, travail to them.


No, I will fall no more into bogs.

Sir, his debt, our self will satisfy.

Blurt (my Lord dare take your word for as much more.

And since this heate of fury is all spent,
And Tragic shapes meet Comical event:
Let this bright morning, merrily be crowned
With dances, banquets, and choice Musickes sound.


