Have you played over all your old Lessons of the Virginals?


Yes.


Yes, you are a dull Maid alate, me thinks you had need have somewhat to
quicken your Green Sickness, do you weep? A Husband. Had not such a piece
of Flesh been ordained, what had us Wives been good for? To make Sallets, or
else cried up and down for Sampier. To see the difference of these Seasons,
when I was of your youth, I was lightsome, and quick, two years before I was
married. You fit for a Knights bed, drowsy browd, dull eyed, drossy sprited,
I hold my life you have forgot your Dancing: When was the Dancer with you?


The last week.


Last week, when I was of your board, he mist me not a night, I was kept at it,
I took delight to learn, and he to teach me, pretty browne Gentleman, he
took pleasure in my company, but you are dull, nothing comes nimbly from you,
you dance like a Plummers Daughter, and deserve two thousand pound in Lead to
your marriage, and not in Gold-Smithes Ware.


Now what's the din betwixt Mother and Daughter, ha?


Faith small, telling your Daughter Mary of her Errors.


Errors, nay the City cannot hold you Wife, but you must needs fetch words
from Westminster, I ha done I faith, has no Atturneys Clarke been here a late,
and changed his Halfe-Crowne-peece his Mother sent him, or rather cozend you
with a gilded Two-pence, to bring the word in fashion, for her faults or
cracks, in duty and obedience, term em eeue so sweet Wife. As there is no
Woman made without a Flaw, your purest Lawns have Frayes, and Cambrickes
Brackes.


But 'tis a Husband sowders up all Cracks.


What is he come Sir?


Sr Walters come.
He was met at Holbourne Bridge, and in his company, a proper fair young
Gentlewoman, which I guess by her red Hair, and other rank descriptions, to
be his landed Niece, brought out of Wales, which Tim our Son (the Cambridge
Boy) must marry.
'Tis a match of Sr Walters own making to bind us to him, and our Heirs for
ever.

We are honoured then, if this Baggage would be humble, and kiss him with
devotion when he enters.
I cannot get her for my life to instruct her Hand thus, before and after,
which a Knight will look for, before and after.
I have told her still, 'tis the waving of a Woman dose often move a Man, and
prevails strongly.
But sweet, ha you sent to Cambridge, (has Tim word an't?)

Had word just the day after when you sent him the Silver Spoon to eat his
Broth in the Hall, amongst the Gentlemen Commoners.


O 'twas timely.


How now?


A Letter from a Gentleman in Cambridge.


O one of Hobsons Porters, thou art well-come.
I told thee Maud we should hear from Tim. Amantissimis charissimis{que}
ambobus parentibus patri matri.

What's the matter?


Nay by my troth, I know not, ask not me, he's grown too verbal, this
Learning is a great Witch.


Pray let me see it, I was wont to understand him.
Amantissimus charissimus, he has sent the Carryers Man he says: ambobus
parentibus, for a pair of Boots: patri matri, pay the Porter, or it makes no
matter.

Yes by my faith Mistress, there's no true construction in that, I have took a
great deal of pains, and come from the Bell sweating. Let me come to'te, for
I was a Scholar forty years ago, 'tis thus I warrant you: Matri, it makes no
matter: ambobus parentibus, for a pair of Boots: patri, pay the Porter:
amantissimis charissimis, he's the Carryers Man, and his name is Sims, and
there he says true, forsooth my name is Sims indeed, I have not forgot all my
learning. A Money matter, I thought I should hit on it.


Go thou art an old Fox, there's a Tester for thee.


If I see your Worship at Goose Fair, I have a Dish of Birds for you.


Why dost dwell at Bow?


All my life time Sir I could ever say By, to a Goose. Farewell to your
Worship.


A merry Porter.


How can he choose but be so, coming with Cambridge Letters from our Son
Tim?


What's here, maximus diligo, Faith I must to my learned Counsel with this
geere, 'twill ne'er be discerned else.


Go to my Cousin then, at Innes of Court.


Fie they are all for French, they speak no Latin.


The Parson then will do it.


Nay he disclaims it, calls Latin Papistry, he will not deal with it. What
is't you lack Gentleman?


Pray weigh this Chain.


Now Wench thou art well-come to the Heart of the City of London.


Dugat a whee.


You can thank me in English if you list.


I can Sir simply.


'Twill serve to pass Wench, 'twas strange that I should lye with thee so
often, to leave thee without English, that were unnatural, I bring thee up to
turn thee into Gold Wench, and make thy fortune shine like your bright Trade,
a Gold-Smithes Shop sets out a City Maid. Dauy Dahanna, not a word.


Mum, mum Sir.


Here you must pass for a pure Virgin.


Pure Welch Virgin, she lost her Maidenhead in Brekenocke-Shire.


I hear you mumble Dauy.


I have Teeth Sir, I need not mumble yet this forty years.


The Knave bites plaguely.


What's your price Sir?


A hundred pound Sir.


A hundred marks the utmost, 'tis not for me else.
What Sr Walter Whorehound?

O Death.


Why Daughter.
Faith the Baggage a bashful Girl Sir, these young things are shamefast,
besides you have a presence sweet Sr Walter, able to daunt a Maid brought up
in the City,
A brave Court Spirit makes our Virgins quiver, and kiss with trembling
Thighs. Yet see she comes Sir.

Why how now pretty Mistress, now I have caught you. What can you injure so
your time to strey thus from your faithful Servant.


Pish, stop your words good Knight, 'twill make her blush else, which wound to
high for the Daughters of the Freedom, honour, and faithful Servant, they are
complements for the Worthy's of Whitehall, or Greenwitch, even plain,
sufficient, subsidy words serves us Sir. And is this Gentlewoman your worthy
Niece?


You may be bold with her on these terms, 'tis she Sir, Heir to some
nineteen Mountains.


Bless us all, you ouer-whelme me Sir with love and riches.


And all as high as Paul's.


Here's work I faith.


How say thou Dauy?


Higher Sir by far, you cannot see the top of 'em.


What Man? Maudline salute this Gentlewoman, our Daughter if things hit right.


My Knight with a brace of Footmen, is come and brought up his Ewe Mutton, to
find a Ram at London, I must hasten it, or else pick a Famine, her Bloods
mine, and that's the surest. Well Knight, that choice spoy is only kept for
me.

Sir?


Turn not to me till thou may lawfully, it but whets my stomach, which is
too sharpe set already. Read that note carefully, keep me from suspicion
still, nor know my zeal but in thy Heart: read and send but thy liking in
three words, I'll be at hand to take it.


O turn Sir, turn.
A poor plain Boy, an University Man, proceeds next Lent to a Bachelor of
Art, he will be called Sr Yellowhammer then over all Cambridge, and that's
half a Knight.

Please you draw near, and taste the well-come of the City Sir?


Come good Sr Walter, and your virtuous Niece here.


'Tis manners to take kindness.


Lead 'em in Wife.


Your company Sir.


I'll giue't you instantly.


How strangely busy is the Devil and riches,
Poor Soul kept in too hard, her Mothers Eye, is cruel toward her, being to
him, 'twere a good mirth now to set him a work to make her wedding Ring. I
must about it.
Rather then the gain should fall to a Stranger, 'twas honesty in me to
enrich my Father.

The Girl is wondrous peevish, I fear nothing, but that she's taken with some
other love, then all's quite dashed, that must be narrowly looked to, we cannot
be too wary in our Children. What is't you lack?

O nothing now, all that I wish is present.
I would have a wedding Ring made for a Gentlewoman, with all speed that may
be.

Of what weight Sir?


Of some half ounce, stand fair and comely, with the Spark of a Diamond.
Sir 'twere pity to lose the least grace.

Pray let's see it, indeed Sir 'tis a pure one.


So is the Mistress.


Have you the wideness of her Finger Sir?


Yes sure I think I have her measure about me, good faith 'tis down, I cannot
show it you,
I must pull too many things out to be certain.
Let me see, long, and slender, and neatly jointed,
Just such another Gentlewoman that's your Daughter Sir.

And therefore Sir no Gentlewoman.


I protest I never saw two Maids handed more alike
I'll ne'er seek farther, if you'll give me leave Sir.

If you dare venture by her Finger Sir.


I, and I'll bide all loss Sir.


Say you so Sir, let's see hither Girl.


Shall I make bold with your finger Gentlewoman?


Your pleasure Sir.


That fits her to a hair Sir.


What's your Posy now Sir?


Mass that's true, Posy I faith even thus Sir.
Love that's wise, blinds Parents Eyes.

How, how, If I may speak without offence Sir,
I hold my life

What Sir?


Go too, you'll pardon me?


Pardon you? I Sir.


Will you I faith?


Yes faith I will.


You'll steal away some Mans Daughter, am I ne'er you?
Do you turn aside? You Gentlemen are mad Wage, I wonder things can be so
warily carried, and Parents blinded so, but the're served right that have two
Eyes, and were so dull a fight.

Thy doom take hold of thee.


To morrow noone shall show your Ring well done.


Being so 'tis soon, thanks, and your leave sweet Gentlewoman


Sir you are well-come.
O were I made of wishes, I went with thee.

Come now we will see how the rules go within.


That robs my Joy, there I loose all I win.


Honesty wash my Eyes, I have spied a Witall.


What Dauy Dahanna, well-come from North Wales
I faith, and is Sr Walter come?

Now come to Town Sir.


Into the Maids sweet Dauy, and give order his Chamber be made ready instantly,
my Wife's as great as she can wallow Dauy, and longs for nothing but pickled
Coucombers, and his coming, and now she shall ha'te Boy.


She's sure of them Sir.


Thy very sight will hold my Wife in pleasure, till the Knight come himself.
Goin, in, in Dauy.
The Founders come to Town, I am like a Man finding a Table furnished to his
hand, as mine is still to me, prays for the Founder, bless the right
Worshipful, the good Founders life.
I thank him, he has maintained my House this ten years, not only keeps my
Wife, but a keeps me, and all my Family, I am at his Table, he gets me all my
Children, and pays the Nurse, monthly, or weekly, puts me to nothing, rent,
nor Church duties, not so much as the Scauenger, the happiest state that ever
Man was borne to.
I walk out in a morning, come to breake-fast,
Find excellent Cheer, a good Fire in Winter,
Look in my Coale-house about Midsommer-eeue,
That's full, five or six Chaldorne, new laid up,
Look in my back yard, I shall find a steeple
Made up with Kentish Fagot's, which o're-lookes
The Water-House and the Wind-milles, I say nothing
But smile, and pin the door, when she lies in,
As now she's even upon the point of grunting,
A Lady lies not in like her, there's her imbossings,
Embrodring, spanglings, and I know not what,
As if she lay withal the gaudy Shops
In Gressams Bursse about her, then her restoratives,
Able to set up a young Apothecary,
And richly stock, the Foreman of a Drug-shop.
Her Sugar by whole Loaves, her Wines by Rundlets.
I see these things, but like a happy Man,
I pay for none at all, yet Fools think's mine,
I have the name, and in his Gold I shine.
And where some Merchants would in Soul kiss Hell,
To buy a Paradise for their Wines, and dye
Their Conscience in the Bloods of prodigal Heirs,
To deck their Night-peece, yet all this being done,
Eaten with jealousy to the inmost Bone,
As what affliction Nature more constraynes,
Then feed the Wife plump, for another veins.
These torments stand I freed of, I am as clear
From jealousy of a Wife, as from the charge.
O two miraculous blessings, 'tis the Knight
Hath took that labour, all out of my hands,
I may sit still and play, he's jealous for me,
Watches her steps, sets spies, I live at ease,
He has both the cost and torment, when the strings
Of his Heart freats, I feed, laugh, or sing,
La dildo, dildo la dildo, la dildo dildo de dildo.

What has he got a singing in his Head now?


Now's out of work he falls to making Dildo's.


Now Sirs, Sr Walters come.


Is our Master come?


Your Master, what am I?


Do not you know Sir?


Pray am not I your Master?


O you are but our Mistresses Husband.


Ergo Knave, your Master.


Negatur argumentum. Here comes Sr Walter, now a stands bare as well as we,
make the most of him he's but one peep above a Serving-man, and so much his
Horns make him.


How dost Jack?


Proud of your Worships health Sir.


How does your Wife?


Even after your own making Sir,
She's a tumbler a faith, the Nose and Belly meets.

The i'll part in time again.


At the good hour, they will and please your worship.


Here Sir, pull off my Boots. Put on, but on Jack.


I thank your kind worship Sir.


Slippers, Heart you are sleepy.


The game begins already.


Pish, put on Jack.


Now I must do it, or he will be as angry now, as if I had put it on at first
bidding, 'tis but observing, 'tis but observing a Mans humour once, and he may
have him by the Nose all his life.


What entertainment has lain open here,
No strangers in my absence?

Sure Sir not any.


His jealousy begins, am not I happy now
That can laugh inward whilst his Marrow melts?

How do you satisfy me?


Good Sir be patient.


For two months absence I'll be satisfied.


No living Creature entered.


Entered, come swear.


You will not hear me out Sir.


Yes I'll heare't out Sir.


Sir he can tell himself.


Heart he can tell,
Do you think I'll trust him? As a Usurer
With forfeited Lordships. Him, o monstrous injury!
Believe him, can the Devil speak ill of Darkness?
What can you say Sir?

Of my soul and conscience Sir, she's a Wife as honest of her Body to me, as
any Lords proud Lady can be.


Yet by your leave, I heard you were once offering to go to bed to her.


No I protest Sir.


Heart if you do, you shall take all, I'll marry.


O I beseech you Sir,


That wakes the Slave, and keeps his Flesh in awe.


I'll stop that gap
Where e're I find it open, I have poisoned
His hopes in marriage already,
Some old rich Widows, and some landed Virgins,
And I'll fall to work still before I'll lose him,
He's yet too sweet to part from.

God-den Father.


Ha Villain, peace.


God-den Father.


Peace Bastard, should he hear em. (...) are two foolish Children, they do
not know the Gentleman that sits there.


Oh Wat, how dost Nick^? Go to School,
Ply your Books Boys, ha?

Where's your Legs Whore sons? They should kneel indeed if they could say
their Prayers.


Let me see, stay,
How shall I dispose of these two Brats now
When I am married, for they must not mingle
Amongst my Children that I get in Wedlock,
'Twill make foul work that, and raise many storms.
I'll bind Wat Prentice to a Goldsmith, my Father Yellowh.
As fit as can be. Nick with some Vintner, good, Goldsmith
And Vintner, there will be Wine in Boles I faith.

Sweet Knight
Welcome, I have all my longings now in Town,
Now well-come the good hour.

How cheers my Mistress?


Made lightsome, even by him that made me heavy.


Me thinks she shows gallantly, like a Moon at full Sir.


True, and if she bear a Male child, there's the Man in the Moon Sir.


'Tis but the Boy in the Moon yet Goodman Calfe.


There was a Man, the Boy had never been there else.


It shall be yours Sir.


No by my troth, I'll swear it's none of mine, let him that got it keep it,
thus do I rid my self of fear, Lye soft, sleep hard, drink Wine, and eat
good cheer.


'Twill be so tedious Sir to live from you,
But that necessity must be obeyed.

I would it might not Wife, the tediousness
Will be the most part mine, that understand
The blessings I have in thee, so to part
That drives the torment to a knowing Heart,
But as thou say, we must give way to need
All live awhile asunder, our desires
Are both too fruitful for our barren fortunes.
How aduers runs the destiny of some Creatures,
Some only can get riches and no Children,
We only can get Children and no riches,
Then 'tis the prudents part to check our wills,
And till our state rise, make our Bloods lye still.
'Life every year a Child, and some years two,
Besides, drinkings abroad, that's never reckoned,
This geere will not hold out.

Sir for a time, I'll take the courtesy of my Uncles House
If you be pleased to like on it, till prosperity
Look with a friendly Eye upon our states.

Honest Wife I thank thee, I ne'er knew
The perfect treasure thou brought'st with thee more
Then at this instant minute. A Man's happy
When he's at poorest that has matched his Soul
As rightly as his Body. Had I married
A sensual Fool now, as 'tis hard to escape it
Amongst Gentlewomen of our time, she would have hanged
About my Neck, and never left her hold
Till she had kissed me into wanton businesses,
Which at the waking of my better Judgment
I should have cursed most bitterly,
And laid a thicker vengeance on my act
Then misery of the Birth, which were enough
If it were borne to greatness, whereas mine
Is sure of beggary, though it were got in Wine.
Fullness of Joy shows the goodness in thee,
Thou art a matchless Wife, Farewell my Joy.

I shall not want your sight?


I'll see thee often,
Talk in mirth, and play at kisses with thee,
Any thing Wench but what may beget Beggars,
There I give over the Set, throw down the Cards,
And dare not take them up.

Your will be mine Sir.


This does not only make her honesty perfect,
But her discretion, and approves her Judgment.
Had her desire been wanton, they'd been blameless
In being lawful ever, but of all Creatures
I hold that Wife a most unmatched treasure,
That can unto her fortunes fix her pleasure,
And not unto her Blood, this is like wedlock,
The feast of marriage is not Lust but Love,
And care of the estate, when I please Blood,
Merely I sing, and suck out others, then
'Tis many a wisemans fault, but of all Men
I am the most unfortunate in that game
That ever pleased both Genders, I ne'er played yet
Under a Bastard, the poor Wenches curse me
To the Pit where e're I come, they were ne'er served so,
But used to have more words then one to a bargain,
I have such a fatal Finger in such business
I must forth with it, chiefly for Country Wenches,
For every Harvest I shall hinder Hay-making,
I had no less then seven lay in last Progress,
Within three weeks of one another time.

O Snaphance, have I found you.


How Snaphance?


Do you see your workmanship,
Nay turn not from it, nor offer to escape, for if you do,
I'll cry it through the Streets, and follow you.
Your name may well be called Tuchwood, a Pox on you,
You do but touch and take, thou hast undone me,
I was a Maid before, I can bring a Certificate for it,
From both the Church-Wardens.

I'll have the Parsons Hand too, or I'll not yield to it.


Thou shalt have more thou Villain, nothing grieves me, but Ellen my poor
cousin in Darbishiere, thou hast cracked her marriage quite, she'll have a bout
with thee.


Faith when she will I'll have a bout with her.


A Law bout Sir I mean.


True, Lawyers use such bouts as other Men do,
And if that be all thy grief, I'll tender her a Husband,
I keep of purpose two or three Gulls in pickle
To eat such Mutten with, and she shall choose one.
Do but in courtesy faith Wench excuse me,
Of this half yard of Flesh, in which I think it wants
A Nail or two.

No, thou shalt find Villain
It hath right shape, and all the Nails it should have.

Faith I am poor, do a charitable deed Wench,
I am a younger Brother, and have nothing.

Nothing, thou hast too much thou lying villain
Unless thou were more thankful.

I have no dwelling,
I brake up House but this morning, Pray thee pity me,
I am a good Fellow, faith have been too kind
To people of your Gender, if I ha'te
Without my Belly, none of your Sex shall want it,
That word has been of force to move a Woman.
There's tricks enough to rid thy Hand on it Wench,
Some rich-mans Porch, to morrow before day,
Or else anon in the evening, twenty devises,
Here's all I have, I faith, take purse and all,
And would I were rid of all the Ware in the Shop so.

Where I find manly dealings I am pitiful,
This shall not trouble you.

And I protest Wench, the next I'll keep my self.


Soft, let it be got first.
This is the fifth, if e're I venture more
Where I now go for a Maid, may I ride for a Whore.

what shift shele make now with this piece of flesh
In this strict time of Lent, I cannot imagine,
Flesh dare not peep abroad now, I have known
This City now above this seven years,
But I protest in better state of government,
I never knew it yet, nor ever heard of,
There has been more religious wholesome Laws
In the half cirkle of a year erected
For common good, then memory ever knew of,
Setting apart corruption of Promoters,
And other poisonous Officers that infect
And with a venomous breath taint every goodness.

O that e're I was begot, or bred, or borne.


Be content sweet Wife.


What's here to do now?
I hold my life she's in deep passion
For the imprisonment of Veale and Mutton
Now kept in Garets, weeps for some Calves Head now,
Me thinks her Husbands Head might serve with Bacon.

Hist.


Patience sweet Wife.


Brother I have sought you strangely.


Why what's the business?


With all speed thou can procure a Licence for me.


How, a Licence?


Cuds-foot she's lost else, I shall miss her ever.


Nay sure thou shalt not miss so fair a mark*
For thirteen shillings four pence.

Thanks by hundreds.


Nay pray thee cease, I'll be at more cost yet,
Thou know we are rich enough.

All but in blessings,
And there the Beggar goes beyond us. O, o, o,
To be seven years a Wife and not a Child, o not a Child.

Sweet Wife have patience.


Can any Woman have a greater cut?


I know 'tis great, but what of that Wife?
I cannot do with all, there's things making
By thine own Doctors advice at Poticaries,
I spare for nothing Wife, no if the price
Were forty marks a spoone-full,
I'd give a thousand pound to purchase fruitfulness,
'Tis but bating so many good works
In the erecting of Bridewels and Spittle-houses,
And so fetch it up again, for having none
I mean to make good deeds my Children.

Give me but those good deeds, and I'll find Children.


Hang thee, thou hast had too many.


Thouly'st brevity.


O horrible, dare thou call me brevity?
Dare thou be so short with me?

Thou deserve worse.
Think but upon the goodly Lands and Livings
That's kept back through want on it.

Talk not on it pray thee,
Thou'lt make me play the Woman, and weep too.

'Tis our dry barrenness puffs up Sr Walter,
None gets by your not-getting, but that Knight,
He's made by the means, and fats his fortunes, shortly
In a great Dowry with a Gold-Smiths Daughter.

They may be all deceived,
Be but you patient Wife.

I have suffered a long time.


Suffer thy Heart out, a Pox suffer thee.


Nay thee, thou desertlesse Slave.


Come, come, I have done,
You'll to the Gossiping of Mr Allwits Child?

Yes, to my much joy,
Every one gets before me, there's my Sister
Was married but at Bartholmew-eeue last,
And she can have two Children at a birth,
O one of them, one of them would have served my turn.

Sorrow consume thee, thou art still crossing me,
And know my nature.

O Mistress, weeping or railing,
That's our House harmony.

What say Iugg?


The sweetest news.


What is't Wench?


Throw down your Doctors Drugs,
They're all but Heretikes, I bring certain remedy
That has been taught, and proved, and never failed.

O that, that, that or nothing.


There's a Gentleman,
I happily have his Name too, that has got
Nine Children by one Water that he uses,
It never mis(...)es, they come so fast upon him,
He was fain to give it over.

His name sweet Iugg?


One Mr Tuchwood, a fine Gentleman,
But run behind-hand much with getting Children.

Is't possible?


Why Sir, he will undertake,
Using that Water, within fifteen year,
For all your wealth, to make you a poor Man,
You shall so swarm with Children.

I'll venture that I faith.


That shall you Husband.


But I must tell you first, he's very dear.


No matter, what serves wealth for?


True sweet Husband,
There's Land to come, Put case his Water stands me
In some five hundred pound a pint,
'Twill fetch a thousand, and a Kersten Soul.
I'll about it.
And that's worth all sweet Husband.

I'll go bid Gossips presently my self,
That's all the work I'll do, nor need I stir,
But that it is my pleasure to walk forth
And air my self a little, I am tied to nothing
In this business, what I do is merely recreation,
Not constraint.
Here's running to and fro, Nurse upon Nurse,
Three Chare women, besides maids neighbours children.
Fie, what a trouble have I rid my Hands on,
It makes me sweat to think on it.

How now Jack?


I am going to bid Gossips for your Wps child Sir,
A goodly Girl I faith, give you joy on her,
She looks as if she had two thousand pound to her portion
And run away with a Taylor, A fine plump black ei'd slut,
Under correction Sir,
I take delight to see her: Nurse.

Do you call Sir?


I call not you, I call the Wet Nurse hither,
Give me the wet Nurse, I 'tis thou,
Come hither, come hither,
Lets see her once again; I cannot choose
But bus her thrice an hour.

You may be proud on it Sir,
'Tis the best piece of work that e're you did.

Think thou so Nurse, What say to Wat and Nick?


They're pretty children both, but here's a wench
Will be a knocker.

Pup say thou me so, pup little Countess,
Faith Sir I thank your Worship for this Girl,
Ten thousand times, and upward.

I am glad I have her for you Sir.


Here take her in Nurse, wipe her, and give her Spoone-meat.


Wipe your Mouth Sir.


And now about these Gossips.


Get but two, I'll stand for one my self.


To your own Child Sir?


The better policy, it prevents suspicion,
'Tis good to play with rumour at all weapons.

Troth I commend your care Sir, 'tis a thing
That I should ne'er have thought on.

The more Slave,
When Man turns base, out goes his Souls pure flame,
The fat of ease o're-throwes the eyes of shame.

I am studying who to get for Godmother
Suitable to your Worship, Now I have thought on it.

I'll ease you of that care, and please my self in it
My Love the Goldsmiths Daughter, if I send,
Her Father will command her, Dauy Dahumma.

I'll fit your Worship then with a Male Partner.


What is he?


A kind proper Gentleman, Brother to Mr Tuchwood.


I know Tuchwood, has he a Brother living?


A neat Bachelor.


Now we know him, we will make shift with him
Dispatch the time draws near, Come hither Dauy.

In troth I pity him, he ne'er stands still,
Poor Knight what pains he takes, sends this way one,
That way another, has not an hours leisure,
I would not have thy toil, for all thy pleasure,
Ha, how now, what are these that stand so close
At the Street-corner, pricking up their Ears,
And snuffing up their Noses, like rich-mens Dogs
When the first Course goes in? By the mass Promoters,
'Tis so I hold my life, and planted there
To arrest the dead Corps of poor Calves and Sheep,
Like ravenous Creditors, that will not suffer
The Bodies of their poor departed Debtors
To go to the grave, but even in Death to vex
And stay the Corps, with Bills of Middlesex,
This Lent will fat the whoresons up with Sweetbreds,
And lard their whores with Lambe-stones, what their gols
Can clutch, goes presently to their Mols and Dols,
The Bawds will be so fat with what they earn,
Their Chins will hang like Vdders, by Easter-eeue,
And being stroak't, will give the Milk of Witches,
How did the Mungrels hear my wife lies in?
Well, I may baffle 'em gallantly, By your favour Gentlemen
I am a stranger both unto the City,
And to her carnal stricktnesse.

Good, Your will Sir?


Pray tell me where one dwells that kills this Lent.


How kills? Come hither Dicke,
A Bird, a Bird.

What is't that you would have?


Faith any Flesh,
But I long especially for Veale and Greene-sauce.

Greene-Goose, you shall be sau'st.


I have half a scornful stomach, no Fish will be admitted.


Not this Lent Sir?


Lent, what cares Colon here for Lent?


You say well Sir,
Good reason that the Colon of a Gentleman
As you were lately pleased to term your worship Sir,
Should be fulfilled with answerable food,
To sharpen Blood, delight Health, and tickle Nature,
Were you directed hither to this Street Sir?

That I was, I marry.


And the Butcher belike
Should kill, and sell close in some upper Room?

Some Apple-loft as I take it, or a Cole-house,
I know not which I faith.

Either will serve,
This Butcher shall kifse Newgate, less he turn up the
Bottom of the Pocket of his Apron,
You go to seek him?

Where you shall not find him,
I'll buy, walk by your Noses with my Flesh,
Sheepe-biting Mungrels, Hand-basket Freebooters,
My Wife lies in, a footra for Promoters.

That shall not serve your turn, what a Rogue's this, how cunningly he came
over us?


Husht, stand close.


I have escaped well thus far, they say the Knaves are wondrous hot and busy.


By your leave Sir,
We must see what you have under your Cloak there.

Have? I have nothing.


No, do you tell us that, what makes this lump stick out then, we must see
Sir.


What will you see Sir, a pair of Sheets, and two of my Wives foul Smocks,
going to the Washers?


O we love that sight well, you cannot please us better: What do you gull us,
call you these Shirts and Smocks?


Now a Pox choke you,
You have cozend me and five of my Wives kindred
Of a good Dinner, we must make it up now
With Herrings and Milke-potage.

'Tis all Veale.


All Veale, Pox the worse luck, I promised faithfully to send this morning a
fat quarter of Lamb, to a kind Gentlewoman in Turnebull street that longs, and
how I'm crossed.


Let's share this, and see what hap comes next then.


Agreed, stand close again, another booty,
What's he?

Sir, by your favour.


Meaning me Sir?


Good Mr Oliuer, cry thee mercy, I faith.
What hast thou there?

A Rack of Mutton Sir, and half a Lamb,
You know my Mistresses diet.

Go, go, we see thee not, away, keep close,
Heart let him pass, thou'lt never have the wit
To know our benefactors.

I have forgot him.


'Tis M. Beggerlands man the wealthy Merchant
That is in fee with us.

Now I have a feeling of him.


You know he purchased the whole Lent together
Gave us ten groats a piece on Ash-wensday.

True, true.


A Wench.


Why then stand close indeed.


Women had need of wit, if they will shift here,
And she that hath wit, may shift any-where.

Look, look, poor Fool,
She has left the Rump vncouer'd too,
More to betray her, this is like a Murdrer,
That will out-face the deed with a bloody Band.

What time of the year is't Sister?


O sweet Gentlemen, I am a poor Servant,
Let me go.

You shall Wench, but this must stay with us.


O you undo me Sir,
'Tis for a wealthy Gentlewoman that takes Physic Sir,
The Doctor does allow my Mistress Mutton,
O as you tender the dear life of a Gentlewoman,
I'll bring my Master to you, he shall show you
A true authority from the higher powers,
And I'll run every foot.

Well, leave your Basket then,
And run and spare not.

Will you swear then to me,
To keep it till I come.

Now by this light I will.


What say you Gentleman?


What a strange Wench 'tis?
Would we might perish else.

Nay then I run Sir.


And ne'er return I hope.


A politic Baggage,
She makes us swear to keep it,
I prethe look what market she hath made.

Imprimis Sir, a good fat Loyne of Mutton,
What comes next under this Cloth?
Now for a quarter of Lamb.

Not for a Shoulder of Mutton.


Done.


Why done Sir.


By the mass I feel I have lost,
'Tis of more weight I faith.

Some Loyne of Veale?


No faith, here's a Lambs Head,
I feel that plainly, why yet win my wager.

Ha?


Swounds what's here?


A Child.


A Pox of all dissembling cunning Whores.


Here's an unlucky Breakfast.


What shal's do?


The Queen made us swear to keep it too.


We might leave it else.


Villainous strange,
'Life had she none to gull, but poor Promoters,
That watch hard for a living.

Half our gettings must run in Suger-sope,
And Nurses wages now, besides many a pound of Soap,
And Tallow, we have need to get Loins of Mutton still,
To save Suet to change for Candles.

Nothing mads me, but this was a Lamb^ head with you, you felt it, she has made
Calves heads of us.


Prethe no more on it,
There's time to get it up, it is not come
To Mid-Lent Sunday yet.

I am so angry, I'll watch no more to day.


Faith nor I neither.


Why then I'll make a motion.


Well, what is't?


Let's even go to the Checker at Queene-hiue and roast the Loyne of Mutton,
till young Flood, then send the Child to Branford.


'Tis a busy day at our House Dauy.


Always the Kursning day Sir.


Truss, truss me Dauy.


No matter and you were hanged Sir.


How does this Suit fit me Dauy?


Excellent neatly, my Masters things were ever fit for you Sir, even to a Hair
you know.


Thou hast hit it right Dauy,
We ever jumped in one, this ten years Dauy,
So well said, what art thou?

Your Comfit-makers Man Sir.


O sweet youth, into the Nurse quick,
Quick, 'tis time I faith,
Your Mistress will be here?

She was setting forth Sir.


Here comes our Gossips now, O I shall have such kissing work to day, Sweet
Mistress Vnderman welcome I faith.


Give you joy of your fine Girl Sir,
Grant that her education may be pure,
And become one of the faithful.

Thanks to your Sisterly wishes Mr Vnderman.


Are any of the Brethrens Wives yet come?


There are some Wives within, and some at home.


Verily thanks Sir.


Verily you are an Ass forsooth,
I must sit all these times, or there's no Music,
Here comes a friendly and familiar payer,
Now I like these Wenches well.

How dost sir?


Faith well I thank you Neighbor, and how dost thou?


Want nothing, but such getting Sir as thine.


My gettings wench, they are poor.


Fie that thou'lt say so,
You have as fine Children as a Man can get.

I as a Man can get,
And that's my Master.

They are pretty foolish things,
Put to making in minutes,
I ne'er stand long about 'em,
Will you walk in Wenches?

The hapiest meeting that our souls could wish for
Here's the Ring ready, I am beholding unto your Fathers hast, he has kept his
howre.

He never kept it better.


Back, be silent.


Mistress and Partner, I will put you both into one Cup.


Into one Cup, most proper,
A fitting complement for a Gold-smiths Daughter.

Yes Sir, that's he must be your Worships Partner
In this days business, Mr Tuchwoods Brother.

I embrace your acquaintance Sir.


It vows your service Sir.


It's near high time, come Mr All-wit.


Ready Sir.


Will it please you walk?


Sir I obey your time.


Good Mris Yellowhammer.


In faith I will not.


Indeed it shall be yours


I have sworn I saith.


I'll stand still then.


So will you let the Child go without company
And make me forsworn.

You are such another Creature.


Before me, I pray come down a little.


Not a whit, I hope I know my place.


Your place, great wonder sure, are you any better then a Comfit-makers wife.


And that's as good at all times as a Pothicaries.


Ye lye, yet I forbear you too.


Come sweet Sister, we go in unity, and show the fruits of peace like
Children of the Spirit.


I love lowliness.


True, so say I, though they strive more,
There comes as proud behind, as goes before.

Every inch I faith.


O Sir, if ever you felt the force of love, pity it in me.


Yes, though I ne'er was married Sir,
I have felt the force of love from good men's daughters,
And some that will be Maids yet three years hence.
Have you got a Licence?

Here 'tis ready Sir.


That's well.


The Ring and all things perfect, she'll steal hither.


She shall be welcome Sir, I'll not be long
A clapping you together.

O here she's come Sir.


What's he?


My honest Brother.


Quick, make hast Sirs.


You must dispatch with all the speed you can,
For I shall be mist straight, I made hard shift
For this small time I have.

Then I'll not linger,
Place that Ring upon her Finger,
This the Finger plays the part,
Whose master Vein shoots from the Heart,
Now join Hands.

Which I will sever,
And so ne'er again meet never.

O we are betrayed.


Hard fate.


I am struck with wonder.


Was this the politic fetch, thou mystical baggage
Thou disobedient strumpet,
And were so wise to send for her to such an end,

Now I disclaim the end, you'll make me mad.


And what are you Sir?


And you cannot see with those two Glasses, put on a pair more.


I dreamt of anger still, here take your Ring Sir,
Ha this, life 'tis the same, abominable,
Did not I sell this Ring?

I think you did, you received money for it.


Heart, hark you Knight,
Here's no inconscionable villainy,
Set me a work to make the Wedding Ring,
And come with an intent to steal my Daughter,
Did ever run-a-way match it?

'This your Brother Sir?


He can tell that as well as I.


The very Poesy mocks me to my face,
Love that's wise, blinds Parents eyes,
I thank your wisdom Sir for blinding of us,
We have good hope to recover our sight shortly,
In the mean time I will locke up this baggage,
As carefully as my Gold, she shall see as little Sun
If a close Room or so can keep her from the light on it.

O sweet Father, for Loves sake pity me.


Away.


Farewell Sir, all content bless thee,
And take this for comfort,
Though violence keep me, thou can loose me never,
I am ever thine although we part for ever.

I we shall part you Minkes.


Your acquaintance Sir, came very lately,
Yet it came too soon,
I must here-after know you for no friend,
But one that I must shun like Pestilence,
Or the Disease of Lust.

Like enough Sir, you have taken me at the worst time for words that e're ye
picked out, faith do not wrong me Sir.


Look after him and spare not, there he walks
That never yet received baffling, you're blessed
More then e're I knew, go take your rest.

I pardon you, you are both losers.


How is't Woman, we have brought you home
A Kursen Soul.

I, I thank your pains.


And verily well kursend, in the right way,
Without Idolatry or Superstition,
After the pure manner of Amsterdam.

Sit down good Neighbours, Nurse.


At hand forsooth.


Look they have all low stools


They have forsooth.


Bring the Child hither Nurse, how say you now
Gossip, is't not a chopping Girl, so like the Father?

As if it had been spit out of his Mouth,
By'd, nosed, and browed as like a Girl can be,
Only indeed it has the Mothers Mouth.

The Mothers Mouth up and down, up and down.


'Tis a large Child, she's but a little Woman.


No believe me, a very spynie Creature, but all hart,
Well metteld, like the faithful to endure
Her tribulation here, and raise up seed.

She had a sore labour on it I warrant you, you can tell Neighbour.


O she had great speed,
We were afraid once,
But she made us all have joyful hearts again,
'Tis a good Soul I faith,
The Midwife found her a most cheerful Daughter.

'Tis the spirit, the Sisters are all like her,


O here comes the chief Gossip Neighbours.


The fatness of your wishes to you all Ladies.


O deer sweet gentleman, what fine words he has
The fatness of our wishes.

Calls us all Ladies.


I promise you a fine Gentleman, and a courteous.


Me thinks her Husband shows like a Clown to him.


I would not care what Clown my Husband were too, so I had such fine Children.


She's all fine Children Gossip.


I, and see how fast they come.


Children are blessings, if they be got with zeal,
By the Brethren, as I have five at home.

The worst is past, I hope now Gossip.


So I hope to good Sir.


Why then so hope I too for company,
I have nothing to do else.

A poor remembrance Lady,
To the love of the Babe, I pray accept of it.

O you are at too much charge Sir.


Look, look, what has he given her, what Is't Gossip?


Now by my faith a fair high standing Cup, and two great Postle Spoons, one
of them gilt.


Sure that was Iudas then with the red Beard.


I would not feed my daughter with that spoon for all the World, for fear of
colouring her Heir, Red Hair the Brethren like not, it consumes them much,
'tis not the Sisters colour.


Well said Nurse,
About, about with them amongst the Gossips,
Now out comes all the tasseled Handkerchers,
They are spread abroad between their Knees already,
Now in goes the long Fingers that are washed
Some thrice a day in Vrin, my Wife uses it,
Now we shall have such pocketing,
See how they lurch at the lower end.

Come hither Nurse.


Again, she has taken twice already.


I had forgot a Sisters Child that's sick.


A Pox it seems your purity loves sweet things well that puts in thrice
together, had this been all my cost now I had been beggerd, these Women have
no consciences at sweet meats, where e're they come, see and they have not could
out all the long Plumbs too, they have left nothing here but short
riggle-tayle-Comfits, not worth mouthing, no mar'le I heard a Citizen complain
once, that his Wives Belly only broke his Back: Mine had been all in fitters
seven years since, but for this worthy Knight, that with a prop vpholds my
Wife and me, and all my estate buried in Bucklers-berrie.


Here Mris Yellowhammer, and Neighbours,
To you all that have taken pains with me,
All the good Wives at once.

I'll answer for them,
They wish all health and strength,
And that you may courageously go forward,
To perform the like and many such,
Like a true Sister with Motherly bearing.

Now the cups trole about to wet the gossips whistles
It pores down I faith, they never think of payment.

Fill again Nurse.


Now bless thee, two at once, I'll stay no longer,
It would kill me and if I paid for it,
Will it please you to walk down and leave the women.

With all my Heart Jack.


Troth I cannot blame you.


Sit you all merry Ladies.


Thank your Worship Sir.


Thank your Worship Sir.


A Pox twice tipple ye, you are last lowest.


Bring hither that same Cup-Nurse, I would fain drive away this hup
Antichristian grief.


See Gossip and she lies not in like a Countess,
Would I had such a Husband for my Daughter.

Is not she toward marriage?


O no sweet Gossip.


Why she's nineteen?


I that she was last Lammas,
But she has a fault Gossip, a secret fault.

A fault, what is't?


I'll tell you when I have drunk.


Wine can do that I see, that friendship cannot.


And now I'll tell you Gossip, she's too free.


To free?


O I, she cannot lye dry in her Bed.


What, and nineteen?


'Tis as I tell you Gossip.


Speak with me Nurse, who is't?


A Gentleman from Cambridge,
I think it be your Soon forsooth.

'Tis my Soon Tim I faith,
Prethe call him up among the Women,
'Twill imbolden him well,
For he wants nothing but audacity,
'Would the Welch gentlewoman at home were here now.

Is your Son come forsooth?


Yes from the University forsooth.


'Tis great joy on ye.


There's a great marriage towards for him.


A marriage?


Yes sure, a hughe Heir in Wales,
At least to nineteen Mountains,
Besides her Goods and Cattle.

O, I'm betrayed.


What gone again, run after him good Nurse,
He's so bashful, that's the spoil of youth,
In the University they're kept still to Men,
And ne'er trained up to Women's company.

'Tis a great spoil of youth indeed.


Your Mother will have it so.


Why Son, why Tim,
What must I rise and fetch you? For shame Son.

Mother you do entreat like a fresh Woman,
'Tis against the Laws of the University,
For any that has answered under Bachelor
To thrust amongst married Wives.

Come we will excuse you here.


Call up my Tutor Mother, and I care not.


What is your Tutor come, have you brought him up?


I have not brought him up, he stands at door,
Negatur, there's Logic to begin with you Mother.

Run call the gentleman nurse, he's my sons tutor
Here eat some Plumbs.

Come I from Cambridge, and offer me six plumbs?


Why how now Tim,
Will not your old tricks yet be left?

Served like a Child,
When I have answered under Bachelor?

You'll never lin till I make your Tutor whip you, you know how I served you
once at the Free School in Paul's Churchyard?


O monstrous absurdity,
Ne'er was the like in Cambridge since my time,
'Life whip a Bachelor, yow'ld be laughed at soundly,
Let not my Tutor hear you,
'Twould be a Jest through the whole University,
No more words Mother.

Is this your Tutor Tim?


Yes surely Lady, I am the man that brought him in League with Logic, and red
the Dunces to him.


That did he Mother, but now I have 'em all in my own Pate, and can as well
read 'em to others.


That can he Mistress, for they flow naturally from him.


I'm the more beholding to your pains Sir.


No^ ideo sa^.


True, he was an Idiot indeed,
When he went out of London, but now he's well mended*
Did you receive the two Goose-pies I sent you?

And eat them heartily, thanks to your Worship.


'Tis my Son Tim, I pray bid him welcome Gentlewomen.


Tim, hark you Timothius Mother, Timothius.


How, shall I deny your Name? Timothius quoth he? Faith there's a name, 'tis my
Son Tim forsooth.


You're welcome Mr Tim.


O this is horrible, she wets as she kisses,
Your Handkercher sweet Tutor, to wipe them off, as fast as they come on.

Welcome from Cambridge.


This is intolerable, This woman has a villainous sweet breath, did she not
stink of Comfits, Help me sweet Tutor, or I shall rub my Lips off.


I'll go kiss the lower end the whilst.


Perhaps that's the sweeter, and we shall dispatch the sooner.


Let me come next, Welcome from the Welspring of discipline, that waters all
the Brethren.


Hoist I beseech thee.


O bless the Woman, Mr Vnderman.


'Tis but the common affliction of the faithful,
We must embrace our falls.

I'm glad I escaped it, it was some rotten kiss sure,
It dropped down before it came at me.

Here's a noise, not parted yet?
Hyda, a Looking-glasse, they have drunk so hard in Plate,
That some of them had need of other Vessels,
Yonder's the bravest Show.

Where? Where Sir?


Come along presently by the Pissing-conduit,
With two brave Drums and a Standert-bearer.

O Brave.


Come Tutor.


Farewell sweet Gossip.


I thank you all for your pains.


Feed and grow strong.


You had more need to sleep then eat,
Go take a nap with some of the Brethren, go,
And rise up a well edified, boldified Sister,
O here's a day of toil well past over,
Able to make a Citizen Hare mad,
How hot they have made the Room with their thick Bums,
Dost not feel it Dauy?

Monstrous strong Sir.


What's here under the Stools?


Nothing but wet Sir, some Wine spilt here belike.


Is't no worse think thou?
Fair Needle work Stools, cost nothing with them Dauy

Nor you neither I faith.


Look how they have laid them,
Ee'ne as they lye themselves, with their Heals up,
How they have shufflled up the Rushes too Dauy
With their short figging little shittle-corke-heels,
These Women can let nothing stand as they find it,
But what's the secret thou'st about to tell me
My honest Dauy?

If you should disclose it Sir.


Life rip my Belly up to the Throat then Dauy.


My Master's upon Marriage.


Marriage Dauy, send me to hanging rather.


I have story him.


When, where, what is she Dauy?


Even the same was Gossip, and gave the Spoon.


I have no time to stay, nor scarce can speak,
I'll stop those wheels, or all the work will break.

I knew 'twold prick, Thus do I fashion still
All mine own ends by him and his rank toil,
'Tis my desire to keep him still from marriage,
Being his poor nearest Kinsman, I may fare
The better at his death, there my hopes build
Since my Lady Kixe is dry, and hath no Child.

You're in the happiest way to enrich your self,
And pleasure me Brother, as Mans feet can tread in,
For though she be locked up, her vow is fixed only to me;
Then time shall never grieve me, for by that vow,
Even absent enjoy her, assuredly confirmed that none
Else shall, which will make tedious years seem gamefull
To me, In the mean space lose you no time sweet brother,
You have the means to strike at this Knights fortunes,
And lay him level with his bankrupt merit,
Get but his Wife with Child, perch at tree top,
And shake the golden fruit into her Lap,
About it before she weep her self to a dry ground,
And whine out all her goodness.

Prethe cease, I find a too much aptness in my blood
For such a business without provocation,
You might 'well spared this banquet of Oringoes,
Hartechokes, Potatoes, and your buttered Crab,
They were fitter kept for your own wedding dinner.

Nay and you'll follow my suit, save my purse too
Fortune dotes on me, he's in happy case
Finds such an honest friend in the Common place.

Life what makes thee so merry? thou hast no cause
That I could hear of lately since thy crosses,
Unless there be news come, with new additions.

Why there thou hast it right,
I look for her this Evening Brother.

How's that, look for her?


I will deliver you of the wonder straight Brother,
By the firm secrecy, and kind assistance
Of a good Wench in the House, who made of pity,
Weighing the case her own, she's lead through Gutters,
Strange hidden ways, which none but Love could find,
Or have the Heart to venture, I expect her
Where you would little think.

I care not where, so she be safe, and yours.


Hope tells me so,
But from your love and time my peace must grow.

You know the worst then brother, now to my Kix
The barren he and she, they're in the next Room,
But to say which of their two humours hold them
Now at this instant, I cannot say truly.

Thou lie Barrenness.


O is't that time of day, give you joy of your tongue
There's nothing else good in you, this their life
The whole day from eyes open to eyes shut,
Kissing or scolding, and then must be made friends,
Then rail the second part of the first fit out,
And then be pleased again, no Man knows which way,
Fall out like Giants, and fall in like Children,
Their Fruit can witness as much.

'Tis thy fault.


Mine, Drouth and coldness?


Thine, 'tis thou art barren.


I barren, o life that I durst but speak now,
In mine own Justice, in mine own Right, I barren,
'Twas otherwise with me when I was at Court,
I was ne'er called so till I was married.

I'll be deuorc't.


Be hanged, I need not wish it,
That will come too soon to thee:
I may say, Marriage and hanging goes by destiny,
For all the goodness I can find in it yet.

I'll give up House, keep some fruitful whore,
Like an old Bachelor in a Tradsmans Chamber,
She and her Children shall have all.

Where be they?


Pray cease,
When there are friendlier courses took for you,
To get and multiply within your House,
At your own proper costs in spite of censure,
Me thinks an honest peace might be establish't.

What with her? Never.


Sweet Sir.


You work all in vain.


Then he doth all like thee.


Let me entreat Sir.


Singleness confound her,
I took her with one Smock.

But indeed you came not so single,
When you came from Shipboard.

Heart she bit sore there,
Prethe make's friends.

Is't come to that, the peal begins to cease.


I'll sell all at an Out-cry.


Do thy worst Slave,
Good sweet Sir bring us into love again.

Some would think this impossible to compass,
Pray let this storm fly over.

Good Sir pardon me, I'm Master of this House,
Which I'll sell presently, I'll clap up Bills this Evening.

Lady friends come?


If e're ye loved Woman, talk not on it Sir, what friends with him? good faith
do you think I'm mad with one that's scarce the hinder quarter of a Man?


Thou art nothing of a Woman.


Would I were less then nothing.


Nay prethe what dost mean?


I cannot please you.


I faith thou art a good Soul, he lies that says it,
Bus, bus, pretty Rogue.

You care not for me.


Can any man tell now which way they came in?
By this light I'll be hanged then.

Is the Drink come?


Here's a little Vial of Almond-milke
That stood me in some three pence.

I hope to see thee wench within these few years,
Cirkled with Children, pranking up a Girl,
And putting Jewels in their little Ears,
Fine sport I saith.

I had you been ought Husband,
It had been done ere this time.

Had I bin ought, hang thee, had thou bin ought,
But a cross thing I ever found thee.

Thou art a Grub to say so.


A Pox on thee.


By this light they are out again at the same door,
And no Man can tell which way,
Come here's your Drink Sir.

I will not take it now Sir,
And I were sure to get three Boys ere Midnight.

Why there thou shew'st now of what breed thou come
To hinder generation, O thou Villain,
That knows how crookedly the World goes with us,
For want of Heirs, yet put by all good fortune.

Hang strumpet, I will take it now in spite.


Then you must ride upon it five hours.


I mean so, Within there?


Sir?


Saddle the white Mare,
I'll take a Whore along, and ride to Ware.

Ride to the Devil.


I'll plague you every way,
Look ye, do you see, 'tis gone.

A Pox go with it.


I curse and spare not now.


Stir up and down sir, you must not stand.


Nay I'm not given to standing.


So much the better sir for the --


I never could stand long in one place yet,
I learnt it of my Father, ever figient,
How if I crossed this Sir?

O passing good Sir, and would show well a Horseback: When you come to your
Inn, If you leapt over a ioynt-stoole or two, 'twere not amiss although you
brake your neck Sir.


What say you to a Table thus high Sir?


Nothing better Sir, if it be furnished with good Victuals. You remember how
the bargain runs about this business?


Or else I had a bad Head: you must receive Sir four hundred pounds of me at
four several payments:
One hundred pound now in hand.

Right, that I have Sir.


Another hundred when my Wives is quick: the third when she's brought a bed:
and the last hundred when the Child cries, For if it should be still borne, it
doth no good Sir.


All this is even still, a little faster Sir.


Not a whit Sir,
I'm in an excellent pace for any Physic,

Your white Mares ready.


I shall up presently: One kiss, and farewell.


Thou shalt have two Love.


Expect me about three.


With all my Heart Sweet.


By this light they have forgot their anger since,
And are as far in again as e're they were,
Which way the Devil came they, Haart I saw 'em not,
Their ways are beyond finding out. Come sweet Lady.

How must I take mine Sir?


Clean contrary, yours must be taken lying.


A Bed Sir?


A Bed, or where you will for your own ease,
Your Coach will serve.

The Physic must needs please.


Negatur argumentum Tutor.


Probo tibi Pupil, stultus non est animal rationale.


Faller is sane.


Quaso v^ taceas, probo tibi.


Quomodo proba^ domine.


Stultus non habet rationem, ergo non est animal rationale.


Sic argumentaris domine, stultus non habet rationem, ergo non est animal
rationale, negatur argumentum again Tutor.


Argumentum itterum probo tibi domine, qui non participat de ratione nullo modo
potest la rationalibus, but stultus non participat de ratione, ergo stultus
nullo modo potest dicere rationalis.


Participat.


Sic disputus, qui participat quomodo participat.


Vt homo, probabo tibi in silagismo.


Hunc proba.


Sic probo domine, stultus est homo sicut tu ego sum, homo est animal
rationele, sicut stultus est animal rationale.


Here's nothing but disputing all the day long with 'em.


Sic disputus, stultus est homo sicut tu ego sum homo est animal rationale,
sicut stultus est animal rationale.


Your reasons are both good what e're they be
Pray give them over, faith you'll tire your selves,
What's the matter between you?

Nothing but reasoning about a Fool Mother.


About a Fool Son, alas what need you trouble your heads about that, none of
us all but knows what a Fool is.


Why what's a Fool Mother?
I come to you now.

Why one that's married before he has wit.


'Tis pretty I faith, and well guest of a Woman never brought up at the
University: but bring forth what Fool you will Mother, I'll prove him to be
as reasonable a Creature, as my self or my Tutor here.


Fie 'tis impossible.


Nay he shall do it forsooth.


'Tis the easiest thing to prove a Fool by Logic,
By Logic I'll prove any thing.

What thou wilt not?


I'll prove a Whore to be an honest Woman.


Nay by my faith, she must prove that her self, or Logic will never do it.


'Twill do it I tell you.


Some in this Street would give a thousand pounds that you could prove their
Wives so.


Faith I can, and all their Daughters too, though they had three Bastards. When
comes your Taylor hither?


Why what of him?


By Logic I'll prove him to be a Man,
Let him come when he will.

How hard at first was Learning to him? Truly
Sir I thought he would never a took the Latin Tongue.
How many Accidences do you think he wore out e're he came to his Grammar?

Some three or four.


Believe me Sir some four and thirty.


Pish I made haberdins of 'em in Church porches


He was eight years in his Grammar, and stuck horribly at a foolish place
there called Ass in presenti.


Pox I have it here now.


He so shamed me once before an honest Gentleman that knew me when I was a Maid


These women must have all out.


Quidest Gramatica? Says the Gentleman to him (I shall remember by a sweet
sweet token) but nothing could he answer.


How now Pupil, ha, Quid est Gramatica?


Grammatica? Ha, ha, ha.


Nay do not laugh Son, but let me hear you say it now: There was one word
went so prettily off the Gentleman's tongue, I shall remember it the longest day
of my life.


Come, Quid est Gramatica?


Are you not ashamed Tutor, Gramatica? Why Recte scribendi at{que} loquendi
ars, ser-reuerence of my Mother.


That was it I faith: Why now Son I see you are a deep Scholar: And Mr
Tutor a word I pray, let us with-draw a little into my Husbands Chamber, I'll
send in the North-Wales Gentlewoman to him, she looks for wooing: I'll put
together both, and locke the Door.


I give great approbation to your conclusion.


I mar'le what this Gentlewoman should be,
That I should have in marriage, she's a stranger to me:
I wonder what my Parents mean I faith,
To match me with a stranger so:
A Maid that's neither kiss nor kin to me:
Life do they think I have no more care of my Body,
Then to lye with one that I ne'er knew,
A mere stranger,
One that ne'er went to School with me neither,
Nor ever play-fellowes together,
They are mightily o're-seene in it me thinks,
They say she has Mountains to her marriage,
She's full of Cattle, some two thousand Runts,
Now what the meaning of these Runts should be,
My Tutor cannot tell me,
I have looked in Riders Dixcionarie for the Letter R,
And there I can hear no tidings of these Runts neither,
Unless they should be Rumford Hogs,
I know them not,
And here she comes,
If I know what to say to her now
In the way of marriage, I'm no Graduate,
Me thinks I faith 'tis boldly done of her
To come into my Chamber being but a stranger,
She shall not say I'm so proud yet, but I'll speak to her,
Marry as I will order it,
She shall take no hold of my words I'll warrant her,
She looks and makes a coursey,
Salve tu quo{que} puella puleherima,
Quid vis nescio nec sane curo,
Tully's own phrase to a Hart.

I know not what he means,
A Suitor quoth a?
I hold my life he understands no English.

Ferter me hercule tu virgo,
Wallia vt opibus abundis maximis.

What's this fertur and abundundis?
He mocks me sure, and calls me a bundle of Farts.

I have no Latin word now for their Runts, I'll make some shift or other:
Itterum dico opibus abundat maximis montibus fontibus vt ita dicam Rontibus,
attamen vero homauculus ego sum natura simule art bachalarius lecto profecto
non parata.


This is most strange, may be he can speak Welch,
Auedera whee comrage, der due cog foginis.

Cog foggin, I scorn to cog with her, I'll tell her so too in a word near her
own Language: Ego non cogo.


Rhegosin a whiggin harle ron corid ambre.


By my faith she's a good scholar, I see that already
She has the Tongues plain, I hold my life she has travelled,
What will folks say? There goes the learned couple,
Faith if the truth were known, she hath proceeded.

How now, how speeds your business?


I'm glad my Mothers come to part us.


How do you agree forsooth?


As well as e're we did before we met.


How's that?


You put me to a Man I understand not,
Your Sonne's no English Man me thinks.

No English Man, bless my Boy,
And borne in the Heart of London?

I have been long enough in the chamber with him,
And I find neither Welch nor English in him.

Why Tim, how have you used the Gentlewoman?


As well as a Man might do Mother, in modest Latin.


Latin Fool?


And she recoyl'd in Hebrew.


In Hebrew Fool? 'Tis Welch.


All comes to one Mother.


She can speak English too.


Who told me so much?
Heart and she can speak English, I'll clap to her,
I thought you'd marry me to a stranger.

You must forgive him, he's so inur'd to Latin,
He and his Tutor, that he hath quite forgot
To use the Protestant tongue.

'Tis quickly pardoned forsooth.


Tim make amends and kiss her,
He makes towards you forsooth.

O delicious, one may discover her Country by her kissing, 'Tis a true saying,
there's nothing tastes so sweet as your Welch Mutton: It was reported you could
sing.


O rarely Tim, the sweetest British Songs.


And 'tis my mind I swear before I marry,
I would see all my Wives good parts at once,
To view how rich I were.

Thou shalt here sweet Music Tim.
Pray forsooth.

CUPID is VENVS only Joy,
But he is a wanton Boy,
A very very wanton Boy,
He shoots at Ladies naked Breasts,
He is the cause of most Men's Crests,
I mean upon the Forehead,
Invisible but horrid,
'Twas he first taught upon the way,
To keep a Ladies Lips in play.
Why should not VENVS chide her Son,
For the pranks that he hath done,
The wanton pranks that he hath done?
He shoots his Fiery Darts so thick,
They hurt poor Ladies to the quick,
Ah me, with cruel wounding,
His Darts are so confounding,
That life and sense would soon decay,
But that he keeps their Lips in play.
Can there be any part of bliss,
In a quickly fleeting kiss,
A quickly fleeting kiss,
To ones pleasure, leasures are but wast,
The slowest kiss makes too much hast,
And loose it ere we find it,
The pleasing sport they only know,
That close above and close below.
I would not change my wife for a Kingdom,
I can do somewhat too in my own Lodging.

Why well said Tim, the Bells go merrily,
I love such peals alife, wife lead them in a while,
Here's a strange Gentleman desires private conference.
You're welcome Sir, the more for your names sake.
Good Mr Yellowhammer, I love my name well,
And which a'the Yellowhammers take you descent from,
If I may be so bold with you, which I pray?

The Yellowhammers in Oxfordshiere,
Near Abbington.

And those are the best Yellowhammers, and truest bred: I came from thence my
self, though now a Citizen: I'll be bold with you, You are most welcome.


I hope the zeal I bring with me shall deserve it.


I hope no less, what is your will Sir?


I understand by rumours, you have a Daughter,
Which my bold love shall hence-forth title cousin.

I thank you for her Sir.


I heard of her virtues, and other confirmed graces.


A plaguy Girl Sir.


Fame sets her out with richer ornaments,
Then you are pleased to boast of, 'Tis done modestly,
I hear she's towards marriage.

You hear truth Sir.


And with a Knight in Town, Sr Walter Whorehound.


The very same Sir.


I am the sorrier for it.


The sorrier, Why cousin?


'Tis not too far past is't? It may be yet recal'd?


Recal'd, why good Sir?


Resolve me in that point ye shall hear from me.


There's no Contract past.


I am very joyful Sir.


But he's the Man must bed her.


By no means cus, she's quite undone then,
And you'll curse the time that e're you made the match,
He's an arrant whoremaster, consumes his time and state, -- whom in my
knowledge he hath kept this 7 years,
Nay cus, an other Mans Wife too.

O ahbominable!


Maintains the whole house, apparels the husband,
Pays servants wadges, not so much, but --

Worse and worse, doth the husband know this?


Knows? I and glad he may too, 'tis his living,
As other Trades thrive, Butchers by selling Flesh,
Poulters by venting Connies, or the like cous.

What an incomparable Witall's this?


Tush, what cares he for that?
Believe me cous, no more then I do.

What a base Slave is that?


All's one to him, he feeds and takes his ease,
Was ne'er the Man that ever broke his sleep,
To get a Child yet by his own confession,
And yet his Wife has seven.

What, by Sr Walter?


Sr Walter's like to keep 'em, and maintain 'em,
In excellent fashion, he dares do no less Sir.

Life has he Children too?


Children? Boys thus high,
In their Cato and Cordelius.

What you jest Sir?


Why, one can make a Verse,
And is now at Eaton College.

O this news has cut into my Heart cous.


It had eaten nearer if it had not been prevented.
One Allwit's Wife.

Allwit? 'Foot I have heard of him,
He had a Girl Kursned lately?

I that work did cost the Knight above a hundred mark.


I'll mark him for a Knave and Villain for it,
A thousand thanks and blessings, I have done with him.

Ha, ha, ha, this Knight will stick by my ribs still,
I shall not loose him yet, no Wife will come,
Where e're he woos, I find him still at home, Ha, ha,

Well grant all this, say now his deeds are black,
Pray what serves marriage, but to call him back,
I have kept a Whore my self, and had a Bastard,
By Mris Anne, in Anno
I care not who knows it, he's now a jolly fellow,
He has been twice Warden, so may his fruit be,
They were but base begot, and so was he,
The Knight is rich, he shall be my son-in-law,
No matter so the Whore he keeps be wholesome,
My Daughter takes no hurt then, so let them wed,
I'll have him sweat well e're they go to Bed.

O Husband, Husband.


How now Maudline?


We are all undone, she's gone, she's gone.


Again, Death which way?


Over the Houses:
Lay the Water-side, she's gone for ever else.

O venturous Baggage!


Thieves, Thieves, my Sister's stolen,
Some Thief hath got her:
O how miraculously did my Fathers Plate escape,
'Twas all left out Tutor.

Is't possible?


Besides three chains of Pearl a Box of Curral.
My Sister's gone, let's look at Trig-staires for her,
My Mother's gone to lay the Common-staires,
At Puddle-wharfe, and at the Dock below,
Stands my poor silly Father, Run sweet Tutor, run.

I had been taken Brother by eight Sergeants,
But for the honest Watermen, I am bound to them,
They are the most requiteful'st people living,
For as they get their means by Gentlemen,
They are still the forwardest to help Gentlemen,
You heard how one escaped out of the Blacke-Fryers,
But a while since from two or three Varlets
Came into the House with all their Rapiers drawn,
As if they'd dance the Sword-dance on the Stage,
With Candles in their Hands like Chandlers Ghosts,
Whilst the poor Gentleman so pursued and banded,
Was by an honest pair of Oars safely landed.

I love them with my Heart for it.


Your first Man Sir.


Shall I carry you Gentlemen with a pair of Oars?


These be the honest Fellows,
Take one pair, and leave the rest for her.

Barne-Elmes.


No more Brother.


Your first man.


Shall I carry your Worship?


Go, and you honest watermen that stay,
Here's a French-crowne for you,
There comes a Maid with all speed to take water,
Row her lustily to Barne-Elmes after me.

To Barne-Elmes, good Sir: make ready the boat Sam,
We will wait below.

What made you stay so long?


I found the way more dangerous then I looked for.


Away quick, there's a Boat waits for you,
And I'll take water at Pauls-wharfe, and ouer-take you.

Good Sir do, we cannot be too safe.


Life, call you this close keeping?


She was kept under a double locke.


A double Devil.


That's a buff Sergeant Tutor, he will ne'er were out.


How would you have Women locked?


With Padlockes Father, the Venetian uses it,
My Tutor reads it.

Heart, if she were so locked up, how got she out?


There was a little hole looked into the gutter,
But who would have dreamed of that?

A wiser Man would.


He says true Father, a wise man for love will seek every hole: my Tutor
knows it.


Verum poeta dicit.


Dicit Virgillius Father.


Prithee talk of thy Gills some-where else, she's played the Gill with me:
where's your wise Mother now?


Run mad I think, I thought she would have drowned her self, she would not
stay for Oars, but took a Smelt-boat: sure I think she be gone a fishing for
her.


She'll catch a goodly dish of Gudgeons now,
Will serve us all to Supper.

I'll tug thee home by the Hair.


Good Mistress spare her.


Tend your own business.


You are a cruel Mother.


O my Heart dyes!


I'll make thee an example for all the Neighbours Daughters.


Farewell life.


You that have tricks can counterfeit.


Hold, hold Maudline.


I have brought your Jewel by the Hair.


She's here Knight.


Forbear or I'll grow worse.


Look on her Tutor, she hath brought her from the Water like a Mermayd, she's
but half my Sister now, as far as the Flesh goes, the rest may be sold to
Fishwives.


Dissembling cunning baggage.


Impudent Strumpet.


Either give over both, or I'll give over:
Why have you used me thus unkind Mistress?
Wherein have I deserved?

You talk too fondly Sir, we will take another course and prevent all, we might
have don't long since, we will loose no time now, nor trust to it any longer, to
morrow morn as early as Sun rise we will have you joined.


O bring me Death to night, Love pitying Fates,
Let me not see to morrow up upon the World.

Are you content Sir, till then she shall be watched?


Baggage you shall.


Why Father, my Tutor and I will both watch in Armour.


How shall we do for Weapons?


Take you no care for that, if need be I can send for conquering mettle Tutor,
ne'er lost day yet, 'tis but at Westminster, I am acquainted with him that
keeps the Monuments, I can borrow Harry the Fifth's Sword, 'twill serve us
both to watch with.


I never was so near my wish, as this chance
Makes me, ere to morrow noone,
I shall receive two thousand pound in Gold,
And a sweet Mayden-head
Worth forty.

O thy news splits me.


Half drowned, she cruelly tugged her by the Hair,
Forced her disgracefully, not like a Mother.

Enough, leave me like my Joys,
Sir saw you not a wretched Maid pass this way?
Heart Villain, is it thou?

Yes Slave, 'tis I.


I must break through thee then, there is no stop
That checks my Tongue, and all my hopeful fortunes,
That Breast excepted, and I must have way.

Sir I believe 'twill hold your life in play.


Sir you'll gain the Heart in my Breast at first?


There is no dealing then, think on the Dowry for two thousand pounds.


O now 'tis quit Sir.


And being of even hand, I'll play no longer.


No longer Slave?


I have certain things to think on,
Before I dare go further.

But one bout?
I'll follow thee to death, but have it out.

A misery of a House.


What shall become of us?


I think his wound be mortal.


Think thou so Dauy?
Then am I mortal too, but a dead Man Dauy,
This is no world for me, when e're he goes,
I must even truss up all, and after him Dauy,
A Sheet with two knots, and away.

O see Sir,
How faint he goes, two of my Fellows lead him.

O me!


Hyday, my wife's laid down too, here's like to be
A good House kept, when we are altogether down,
Take pains with her good Dauy, cheer her up there,
Let me come to his Worship, let me come.

Touch me not Villain, my wound aches at thee,
Thou poison to my Heart.

He raves already,
His senses are quite gone, he knows me not,
Look up an't like your Worship, heave those Eyes,
Call me to mind, is your remembrance lost?
Look in my face, who am I an't like your Worship?

If any thing be worse then Slave or Villain,
Thou art the Man.

Alas his poor Worships weakness,
He will begin to know me by little and little.

No Devil can be like thee.


Ah poor Gentleman,
Me thinks the pain that thou endure.

Thou know me to be wicked for thy baseness
Kept the Eyes open still on all my sins,
None knew the dear account my soul stood charged with
So well as thou, yet like Hells flattering Angel,
Would never tell me an't, let me go on,
And join with Death in sleep, that if I had not waked
Now by chance, even by a strangers pity,
I had everlastingly slept out all hope
Of grace and mercy.

Now he is worse and worse,
Wife, to him wife, thou wast wont to do good on him.

How is't with you Sir?


Not as with you,
Thou loathsome strumpet: some good pitying Man
Remove my sins out of my sight a little,
I tremble to behold her, she keeps back
All comfort while she stays, is this a time,
Unconscionable Woman, to see thee,
Art thou so cruel to the peace of Man,
Not to give liberty now, the Devil himself
Shows a far fairer reverence and respect
To goodness then thy self, he dares not do this,
But part in time of penitence, hides his Face,
When Man with-drawes from him, he leaves the place,
Hast thou less manners, and more impudence,
Then thy instructor, prithee show thy modesty,
If the least grain be left, and get thee from me,
Thou should be rather locked many Rooms hence,
From the poor miserable sight of me*
If either love or grace had part in thee.

He is lost for ever.


Run sweet Dauy quickly,
And fetch the Children hither, sight of them,
Will make him cheerful straight.

O Death! Is this
A place for you to weep? What tears are those?
Get you away with them, I shall fare the worse,
As long as they are a weeping, they work against me,
There's nothing but thy appetite in that sorrow,
Thou weep for Lust, I feel it in the slackness
Of comforts coming towards me,
I was well till thou began to undo me,
This shows like the fruitless sorrow of a careless mother
That brings her Son with dalliance to the Gallows,
And then stands by, and weeps to see him suffer.

There are the children Sir, an't like your worship,
Your last fine Girl, in troth she smiles,
Look, look, in faith Sir.

O my vengeance, let me for ever hide my cursed Face
From sight of those that darkens all my hopes,
And stands between me and the sight of Heaven,
Who sees me now, ho to and those so near me,
May rightly say, I am o're-growne with sin,
O how my offences wrestle with my repentance,
It hath scarce breath,
Still my adulterous guilt hovers aloft,
And with her black Wings beats down all my prayers.
Ere they be half way up, what's he knows now,
How long I have to live? o what comes then,
My taste grows bitter, the round World, all Gall now,
Her pleasing pleasures now hath poisoned me,
Which I exchanged my Soul for,
Make way a hundred sighs at once for me.

Speak to him Nick.


I dare not, I am afraid.


Tell him he hurts his wounds Wat, with making moan.


Wretched, death of seven.


Come let's be talking somewhat to keep him alive
Ah sira Wat, and did my Lord bestow that Jewel on thee,
For an Epistle thou made in Latin,
Thou art a good forward Boy, there's great joy on thee.

O sorrow!


Heart will nothing comfort him?
If he be so far gone, 'tis time to moan,
Here's Pen, and Ink, and Paper, and all things ready,
Will it please your Worship for to make your Will?

My Will? Yes, yes, what else? Who writes apace now?


That can your man Dauy an't like your Worship,
A fair, fast, legible Hand.

Set it down then:
Inprimis, I bequeath to yonder Witall,
Three times his weight in Curses,

How?


All Plagues of Body and of Mind,


Write them not down Dauy.


It is his Will, I must.


Together also,
With such a Sickness, ten days ere his Death.

There's a sweet Legacy,
I am almost choak't with it.

Next I bequeath to that foul whore his Wife,
All barrenness of Joy, a drouth of Virtue,
And dearth of all repentance: For her end,
The common misery of an English Strumpet,
In French and Duch, beholding ere she dyes
Confusion of her Brats before her Eyes,
And never shed a tear for it.

Where's the Knight?
O Sir, the Gentleman you wounded, is newly departed.

Dead? Lift, lift, Who helps me?


Let the Law lift you now, that must have all,
I have done lifting on you, and my Wife too.

You were best locke your self close.


Not in my House Sir,
I'll harbour no such persons as Men-slayers,
Locke your self where you will.

What's this?


Why Husband.


I know what I do Wife.


You cannot tell yet,
For having killed the Man in his defence,
Neither his Life, nor estate will be touched Husband.

Away Wife, hear a Fool, his Lands will hang him.


Am I denied a Chamber?
What say you forsooth?

Alas Sir, I am one that would have all well,
But must obey my Husband. Prithee Love
Let the poor Gentleman stay, being so sore wounded,
There's a close Chamber at one end of the Garret
We never use, let him have that I prithee.

We never use, you forget sickness then,
And Physic times: Is't not a place for easement?

O Death! do I hear this with part
Of former life in me? What's the news now?

Troth worse worse, you're like to lose your land
If the Law save your life Sir, or the Surgeon.

Hark you there Wife.


Why how Sir?


Sr Oliuer Kixes Wife is new quickened,
That Child undoes you Sir.

All ill at once.


I wonder what he makes here with his consorts?
Cannot our House be private to our selves,
But we must have such Guests? I pray depart Sirs,
And take your Murderer along with you,
Good he were apprehended ere he go,
He has killed some honest Gentleman, send for Officers.

I'll soon save you that labour.


I must tell you Sir,
You have been some-what boulder in my House,
Then I could well like of, I suffered you
Till it stuck here at my Heart, I tell you truly
I thought you had been familiar with my Wife once.

With me? I'll see him hanged first, I defy him,
And all such Gentlemen in the like extremity.

If ever Eyes were open, these are they,
Gamsters farewell, I have nothing left to play.

And therefore get you gone Sir.


Of all Wittalles,
Be thou the Head. Thou the grand whore of Spittles.

So, since he's like now to be rid of all,
I am right glad, I am so well rid of him.

I knew he durst not stay, when you named Officers


That stopped his Spirits straight,
What shall we do now Wife?

As we were wont to do.


We are richly furnished wife, with Houshold-stuffe


Let's let out Lodgings then,
And take a House in the Strand.

In troth a match Wench:
We are simply stocked, with Cloth of Tissue Cussions,
To furnish out bay-windows: Push, what not that's quaint
And costly, from the top to the bottom:
Life, for Furniture, we may lodge a Countess:
There's a Cloase-stoole of tawny Velvet too,
Now I think on it Wife.

There's that should be Sir,
Your Nose must be in every thing.

I have done Wench,
And let this stand in every Gallants Chamber,
There's no Gamester like a politic sinner,
For who e're games, the Box is sure a winner.

O Husband, husband, she will dye, she will dye
There is no sign but death.

'Twill be our shame then.


O how she's changed in compass of an hour:


Ah my poor girl! good faith thou were too cruel
To drag her by the Hair.

You would have done as much Sir,
To curb her of her humour.

'Tis curbed sweetly, she catched her bane o'th water.


How now Tim.


Faith busy Mother about an Epitaph,
Upon my Sisters death.

Death! She is not dead I hope?


No: but she means to be, and that's as good,
And when a thing's done, 'tis done,
You taught me that Mother.

What is your Tutor doing?


Making one too, in principal pure Latin,
Cul'd out of Ouid de Tristibus.

How does your Sister look, is she not changed?


Changed? Gold into white Money was never so changed,
As is my Sisters colour into paleness.

O here she's brought, see how she looks like death


Looks she like Death, and ne'er a word made yet,
I must go beat my Brains against a Bed-post,
And get before my Tutor.

Speak, how dost thou?


I hope I shall be well, for I am as sick at Heart,
As I can be.

Alas my poor Girl,
The Doctor's making a most sovereign drink for thee,
The worst Ingredience, dissolved Pearl and Amber,
We spare no cost Girl.

Your love comes to late,
Yet timely thanks reward it: What is comfort,
When the poor Patients Heart is past relief?
It is no Doctors Art can cure my grief.

All is cast away then,
Prithee look upon me cheerfully.

Sing but a strain or two, thou wilt not think
How 'twill revive thy Spirits: strive with thy fit,
Prithee sweet Moll.

You shall have my good will Mother.


Why well said Wench.


Weep Eyes, break Heart,
My Love and I must part,
Cruel Fates, trew-loue do soonest sever,
O, I shall see thee, never, never, never.
O happy is the Maid, whose life takes end,
Ere it knows Parents frown, or loss of friend.
Weep Eyes, break Heart,
My Love and I must part.
O, I could die with Music: well sung Girl.


If you call it so, It was.


She plays the Swan, and sings her self to death.


By your leave Sir.


What are you Sir? Or what's your business pray?


I may be now admitted, tho the Brother
Of him your hate pursued, it spreads no further,
Your malice sets in death, does it not Sir?

In Death?


He's dead: 'twas a dear Love to him,
It cost him but his life, that was all Sir:
He paid enough, poor Gentleman, for his Love.

There's all our ill removed, if she were well now:
Impute not Sir, his end to any hate
That sprung from us, he had a fair wound brought that.

That helped him forward, I must needs confess:
But the restraint of Love, and your unkindness,
Those were the wounds, that from his Heart drew Blood,
But being past help, let words forget it too:
Scarcely three Minutes, ere his Eye-lids closed,
And took eternal leave of this Worlds light,
He wrote this Letter, which by Oath he bound me,
To give to her own Hands, that's all my business.

You may perform it then, there she sits.


O with a following look.


I trust me Sir, I think she'll follow him quickly.


Here's some Gold,
He wild me to distribute faithfully amongst your Servants.

Alas what doth he mean Sir?


How cheer you Mistress?


I must learn of you Sir.


Here's a Letter from a Friend of yours,
And where that fails, in satisfaction
I have a sad Tongue ready to supply.

How does he, ere I look on it?


Seldom better, he has a contented health now.


I am most glad on it.


Dead Sir?


He is: Now Wife let's but get the Girl
Upon her Legs again, and to Church roundly with her.

O sick to Death he tells me:
How does he after this?

Faith feels no pain at all, he's dead sweet Mistress.


Peace close mine Eyes.


The Girl, look to the Girl Wife.


Moll, Daughter, sweet Girl speak,
Look but once up, thou shalt have all the wishes of thy hart
That wealth can purchase.

O she's gone for ever, that Letter broke her hart.


As good now then, as let here lye in torment,
And then break it.

O Susan, she thou loved so dear, is gone.


O sweet Maid!


This is she that helped her still,
I'ue a reward here for thee

Take her in,
Remove her from our sight, our shame, and sorrow.

Stay, let me help thee, 'tis the last cold kindness
I can perform for my sweet Brothers sake.

All the whole Street will hate us, and the World
Point me out cruel: It is our best course Wife,
After we have given order for the Funeral,
To absent our selves, till she be laid in ground.

Where shall we spend that time?


I'll tell thee where Wench, go to some private Church,
And marry Tim to the rich Brecknocke Gentlewoman.

Mass a match,
We will not loose all at once, some-what we will catch.

Ho my Wives quickened, I am a Man for ever,
I think I have bestur'd my stumps I faith:
Run, get your Fellows altogether instantly,
Then to the Parish-Church, and ring the Belles.

It shall be done Sir.


Upon my love I charge you Villain, that you make a Bon-fier before the Door
at night.


A Bon-fier Sir?


A thwacking one I charge you.


This is monstrous.


Run, tell a hundred pound out for the Gentleman
That gave my Wife the Drink, the first thing you do.

A hundred pounds Sir?


A bargain, as our joys grows,
We must remember still from whence it flows,
Or else we prove ungrateful multiplyers:
The Child is coming, and the Land comes after,
The news of this will make a poor Sr Walter.
I have struck it home I faith.

That you have marry Sir.
But will not your Worship go to the Funeral
Of both these Lovers?

Both, go both together?


I Sir, the Gentleman's Brother will have it so,
'Twill be the pittifullest sight, there's such running,
Such rumours, and such throngs, a pair of Lovers
Had never more spectators, more Men's pities,
Or Women's wet Eyes.

My Wife helps the number then?


There's such drawing out of Handkerchers,
And those that have no Handkerchers, lift up Aprons.

Her Parents may have joyful Hearts at this,
I would not have my cruelty so talked on,
To any Child of mine, for a Monopoly.

I believe you Sir.
'Tis cast so too, that both their Coffins meet,
Which will be lamentable.

Come, we will see it.


Never could Death boast of a richer prize
From the first Parent, let the World bring forth
A pair of truer Hearts, to speak but truth
Of this departed Gentleman, in a Brother,
Might by hard censure, be called flattery,
Which makes me rather, silent in his right,
Then so to be delivered to the thoughts,
Of any envious hearer, starved in virtue,
And therefore pining to hear others thrive.
But for this Maid, whom Envy cannot hurt
With all her Poisons, having left to Ages,
The true, chaste Monument of her living name,
Which no time can deface, I say of her
The full truth freely, without fear of censure
What Nature could there shine, that might redeem
Perfection home to Woman, but in her
Was fully glorious, beauty set in goodness
Speaks what she was, that Jewel so infixt,
There was no want of any thing of life,
To make these virtuous presidents, Man and Wife.

Great pity of their deaths.


Ne'er more pity.


It makes a hundred weeping Eyes, sweet Gossip.


I cannot think, there's any one amongst you,
In this full fair assembly, Maid, Man, or Wife,
Whose Heart would not have sprung with joy gladness
To have seen their marriage day?

It would have made a thousand joyful Hearts.


Up then a pace, and take your fortunes,
Make these joyful Hearts, here's none but Friends.

Alive Sir? o sweet dear Couple.


Nay, do not hinder 'em now, stand from about 'em,
If she be caught again, and have this time,
I'll ne'er plot further for 'em, nor this honest chambermaid
That helped all at a push.

Good Sir a pace.


Hands join now, but Hearts for ever,
Which no Parents mood shall sever.
You shall forsake all Widows, Wives, and Maids:
You, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Men of Trades:
And if in hast, any Article misses,
Go inter-line it with a brace of kisses.

Here's a thing trould nimbly. Give you joy brother
Were it not better thou should have her,
Then the Maid should dye?

To you sweet Mistress Bride.


Joy, joy to you both.


Here be your Wedding Sheets you brought along with you, you may both go to
Bed when you please too.


My joy wants utterance.


Utter all at night then Brother.


I am silent with delight.


Sister, delight will silence any Woman,
But you'll find your Tongue again, among Maid Servants,
Now you keep House, Sister.

Never was hour, so filled with joy and wonder.


To tell you the full story of this Chamber-Mayd,
And of her kindness in this business to us,
'Twould ask an hours discourse: In brief 'twas she,
That wrought it to this purpose cunningly.

We shall all love her for it.


See who comes here now.


A storm, a storm, but we are sheltered for it.


I will prevent you all, and mock you thus,
You, and your expectations, I stand happy,
Both in your lives, and your Hearts combination.

Here's a strange day again.


The Knights proved Villain,
Al's come out now, his Niece an arrant Baggage,
My poor Boy Tim, is cast away this morning,
Even before Breakfast: Married a Whore
Next to his Heart.

A Whore?


His Niece forsooth.


I think we rid our Hands in good time of him.


I knew he was past the best, when I gave him over.
What is become of him pray Sir?

Who the Knight? he lies in the Knights ward now.
Your Belly Lady begins to blossom, there's no peace for him
His Creditors are so greedy.

Mr Tuchwood, hear thou this news?
I am so endeared to thee for my Wives fruitfulness,
That I charge you both, your Wife and thee,
To live no more asunder for the Worlds frowns,
I have Purse, and Bed, and Board for you:
Be not afraid to go to your business roundly,
Get Children, and I'll keep them.

Say you so Sir?


Prove me, with three at a birth, thou dare now.


Take heed how you dare a Man, while you live Sir
That has good skill at his Weapon.

'Foot, I dare you Sir.


Look Gentlemen, if ever you say the picture
Of the unfortunate Marriage, yonder 'tis.

Nay good sweet Tim.


Come from the University,
To marry a Whore in London, with my Tutor too?
O Tempora! O Mors!

Prithee Tim be patient.


I bought a Jade at Cambridge,
I'e let her out to execution Tutor,
For eighteen pence a day, or Brainford Horse-races,
She'll serve to carry seven Miles out of Town well.
Where be these Mountains? I was promised Mountains,
But there's such a Mist, I can see none of 'em.
What are become of those two thousand Runts?
Let's have about with them in the mean time.
A Vengeance Runt thee.

Good sweet Tim have patience.


Flectere si neguro Superos Acherouta mourbo, mother


I think you have married her in Logic Tim.
You told me once, by Logic you would prove
A Whore, an honest Woman, prove her so Tim
And take her for thy labour.

Troth I thank you.
I grant you I may prove another Mans Wife so,
But not mine own.

There's no remedy now Tim,
You must prove her so as well as you may.

Why then my Tutor and I will about her,
As well as we can.
Vxor non est Meritrix, ergo falacis.

Sir if your Logic cannot prove me honest,
There's a thing called Marriage, and that makes me honest.

O there's a trick beyond your Logic Tim.


I perceive then a Woman may be honest according to the English Print, when she
is a Whore in the Latin.
So much for Marriage and Logic. I'll love her for her Wit, I'll pick out my
Runts there: And for my Mountains, I'll mount upon --

So Fortune seldom deals two Marriages
With one Hand, and both lucky: The best is,
One Feast will serve them both: Marry for room,
I'll have the Dinner kept in Gold-Smithes-Hall,
To which kind Gallants, I inuit you all.


