ALL's gone! still you're a Gentleman, that's all; but a poor one, that's
nothing: What Milk brings thy Meadows forth now? where are thy goodly
Vp-lands and thy Downe-lands, all sunk into that little pit Lechery? why
should a Gallant pay but two shillings for his Ordnary that nourishes him, and
twenty times two for his Brothel that consumes him? but where's Long-acre? in
my Uncles conscience, which is 3. years voyage about; he that sets out upon
his conscience, ne'er finds the way home again, he is either swallowed in the
quick-sands of Law-quillits, or splits upon the Piles of a Praemunire; yet these
old Foxe-braind -- and oxe-browde Uncles, have still defences for their
Avarice, and Apologies for their practises, and will thus greet our follies.

He that doth his youth expose,
To Brothel, drink, and danger,
Let him that is his nearest Kin,
Cheat him before a stranger.
And that's his Uncle, 'tis a principle in Usury; I dare not visit the City,
there I should be too soon visited, by that horrible plague my Debts, and by
that means I loose a Virgins love, her portion and her Virtues, well, how
should a man live now, that ha's no living; hum? why are there not a million of
men in the world, that only sojourn upon their brain, and make their wits
their Mercers; and am I but one amongst that Million and cannot thrive upon it;
any Trick out of the compass of Law now, would come happily to me.


My love.


My loathing; hast thou been the secret consumption of my purse? and now come
to undo my last means, my wits? wilt leave no virtue in me and yet thou ne'er
the better? hence Courtesan, round webd Tarantula.
That dryest the Roses in the cheeks of youth.

I have been true unto your pleasure, and all your lands thrice racked, was
never worth the Jewel which I prodigally gave you, my virginity;
Lands mortgaged may return and more esteemed,
But honesty once pawnd, is ne'er redeemd.

For give I do thee wrong,
To make thee sin, and then to chid thee fort.

I know I am your loathing now, farewell.


Stay best invention, -- stay.


I that have been the secret consumption of your purse shall I stay now to
undo your last means, your wits? hence Currizan away.


I prithee, make me not mad at my own weapon, stay, (a thing few women can do
I know that, and therefore they had need wear stays;) be not contrary, dost
love me?

Fate has so cast it that all my means I must derive from thee.


From me! be happy then,
What lies within the power of my performance,
Shall be commanded of thee.

Spoke like an honest drab in faith, it may prove som-thing what Trick is not an
Embrion at first, until a perfect shape come over it.


Come I must help you where abouts left you,
I'll proceed.
Tho you beget, tis I must help to breed,
Speak what is't, I'd fain conceive it.

So, so, so, thou shall presently take the name and form upon thee of a rich
country widow four hundred a year valiant, in Woods, in Bullocks, in Barnes
and in Rye-stacks, we'll to London* and to my covetous Uncle.


I begin to applaud thee, our States being both desperate, they' are soon
resolute, but how for horses?


Mass that's true, the Jest will be of some continuance, let me see, Horses
now, a bottes on em; Stay, I have acquaintance with a mad Host, never yet
Bawd to thee, I have rinzde the whoresons gums in Mull-sack many a time and
often, put but a good Tale into his ear now, so it come off cleanly, and
there's Horse and man for us I dare warrant thee.


Arm your wits then speedily, there shall want nothing in me, either in
behaviour, discourse or fashion, that shall discredit your intended purpose.
I will so art-fully disguise my wants,
And set so good a courage on my state,
That I will be believed.

Why then all's furnished; I shall go nigh to catch that old Fox mine Uncle,
tho he make but some amends for my undoing, yet there's some comfort in it --
he cannot otherwise choose (tho it be but in hope to coozen me again) but
supply any hasty want that I bring to town with me, the Device well and
cunningly carried, the name of a rich Widow, and four hundred a year in
good earth, will so conjure up a kind of Usurers love in him to me, that he
will not only desire my presence, which at first shall scarce be granted him,
I'll keep off a purpose, but I shall find him so officious to deserve, so
ready to supply, I know the state of an old mans affection so well, if his
Nephew be poor indeed, why he letts God alone with him, but if he be once
rich, then heel be the first man that helps him.


Tis right the world, for in these days an old mans love to his kindred, is
like his kindness to his wife, 'tis always done before he comes at it.


I owe thee for that Jest, be gone, here's all my wealth; prepare thy self,
away? I'll to mine Host withal possible hast, and with the best Art, most
profitable form, power the sweet circumstance into his ear, which shall have
the gift to turn all the wax to honey; how no; oh the right worshipful
Seniors of our Country --


Whose that;


Oh the common Rioter, take no note of him.


You will not see me now, the comfort is ere it be long you will scarce see
your selves.


I wonder how he breathes, ha's consumed all upon that Courtesan?


We have heard so much.


You have heard all truth, his Uncle and my Brother, have been these three
years mortal Adversaries. Two old tough spirits, they seldom meet but
fight, or quarrel when tis calmest;
I think their anger be the very fire
That keeps their age alive:

What was the quarrel sir?


Faith about a purchase, fetching over a young heir; Master Hoard my brother
having wasted much time in beating the bargain, what did me old Lucre* but as
his conscience moved him, knowing the poor Gentleman* stepped in between em
and cozened him himself.


And was this all sir:


This was even it sir, yet for all this I know no reason but the match might go
forward betwixt his wives Son and my Niece, what tho there be a dissention
between the two old men, I see no reason it should put a difference between
the two younger, tis as natural for old folks to fall out, as for young to fall
in? A scholar comes a wooing to my Niece, well, he's wise, but he's poor,
her Son comes a wooing to my Niece, well, hes a fool, but hes rich --


I marry sir?


Pray now is not a rich fool better then a poor Philosopher.


One would think so in faith?


She now remains at London with my brother her second Uncle, to learn
fashions, practise Music, the voice between her lips, and the viol between
her legs, she'll be fit for a consort very speedily, a thousand good pound
is her portion, if she marry, we'll ride up and be merry, --


A match, if it be a match?


Mine Host?


Young master Wit-good.


I have been laying all the Town for thee.


Why what's the news Bully-Hadland?


What Geldings are in the house of thine own? answer me to that first.


Why man, why?


Mark me what I say, I'll tell thee such a tale in thine ear, that thou shalt
trust me spite of thy teeth, furnish me with some money, will, nille, and
ride up with me thy self Contra voluntatem et profession em.


How: let me see this trick, and I'll say thou hast more
Art then a Conjurer.

Dost thou joy in my advancement?


Do I love Sack and Ginger?


Comes my prosperity desiredly to thee?


Come forfeitures to a Usurer, fees to an officer, punkes to an Host, and Pigs
to a Parson desiredly? why then la.


Will the report of a Widow of four hundred a year boy, make thee leap,
and sing, and dance, and come to thy place again.


Wilt thou command me now? I am thy spirit, conjure me into any shape.


I ha brought her from her friends, turned back the Horses by a slight, not so
much as one amongst her six men, goodly large Yeomanly fellows, will she
trust with this her purpose: by this light all vnmand; regardless of her
state, neglectful of vaine-glorious ceremony, all for my love; oh 'tis a fine
little voluble tongue mine Host, that wins a widow.


No 'tis a tongue with a great T my boy that wins a widow.


Now sir, the case stands thus, good mine Host, if thou love my happiness
assist me.


Command all my beasts ith house.


Nay that's not all neither, prithee take truce with thy joy, and listen to me,
thou know I have a wealthy Uncle in the City, some-what the wealthier by my
follies; the report of this fortune well and cunningly carried, might be a
means to draw some goodness from the Vsuring Rascal, for I have put her in
hope already of some estate that I have either in land or money: now if I be
found true in neither, what may I expect but a sudden breach of our love,
utter dissolution of the match, and confusion of my fortunes for ever.


Wilt thou but trust the managing of thy business with me?


With thee? why will I desire to thrive in my purpose? will I hug four
hundred a year? I that know the misery of nothing? will that man wish a rich
widow, that has ne'er a hole to put his head in? with thee mine Host, why
believe it, sooner with thee then with a Couy of Counsellors?


Thank you for your good report in faith sir, and if I stand you not instead,
why then let an Host come off Hic haec hostis, a deadly enemy to Dice,
Drink, and Venery; come where's this widow?


Hard at Parke-end.


I'll be her Serving-man for once.


Why there we let off together, keep full time, my thoughts were striking
then just the same number.


I knew't, shall we then see our merry days again?


Our merry nights -- which ne'er shall be more seen.


Nay good Master Lucre, and you Master Hoard* anger is the wind which you*re
both too much troubled with all.


Shall my adversary thus daily afront me, ripping up the old wound of our
malice, which three Summers could not close up, into which wound the very sight
of him, drops scalding Lead instead of Balsamum.


Why Hoard, Hoard, Hoard, Hoard, Hoard; may I not pass in the state of
quietness to mine own house, answer me to that* before witness, and why?
I'll refer the cause to honest euen-minded Gentlemen, or require the mere
indifferences of the Law, to decide this matter, I got the purchase, true;
was't not any mans case? yes, will a wise-man stand as a Bawd, whilst another
wipes his nose of the bargain, no, I answer no in that case.


Nay sweet Master Lucre.


Was it the part of a friend: no, rather of a Jew, mark what I say, when I had
beaten the bush to the last bird, or as I may term it, the price to a pound,
then like a cunning Usurer to come in the evening of the bargain, and glean
all my hopes in a minute, to enter as it were at the back-doore of the
purchase, for thou ne'er came the right way by it.


Hast thou the conscience to tell me so, without any impeachment to thy self?


Thou that can defeat thy own Nephew, Lucre, lap his lands into bonds, and
take the extremity of thy kindreds forfeitures because he's a rioter, a
wast-thrift, a brothell-maister, and so forth -- what may a Stranger expect
from thee, but Vulnera delacerata, as the Poet says, delacerate dealing?


Vpbraidst thou me with Nephew? is all imputation laid upon me? what
acquaintance have I with his follies, if he riott, 'tis he must want it, if
he surfeit, 'tis he must feel it: if he Drab it, 'tis he must lye by it,
what's this to me?


What's all to thee? nothing, nothing; such is the gulf of thy desire, and the
Wolf of thy conscience, but be assured old pecunious lucre, if ever fortune so
bless me, that I may be at leisure to vex thee, or any means so favour me,
that I may have opportunity to mad thee, I will pursue it with that flame of
hate, that spirit of malice, vnrepressed wrath, that I will blast thy comforts.


Ha, ha, ha!


Nay master Hoard you*re a wise Gentleman.


I will so cross thee,


And I thee.


So without mercy fret thee.


So monstrously oppose thee?


Dost scoff at my just anger? oh that I had as much power as usury ha's over
thee?


Then thou would have as much power as the devil ha's over thee.


Toad!


Aspick.


Serpent.


Viper.


Nay Gentlemen, then we must divide you perforce.


When the fire grows too unreasonable hot, there's no better way then to take
of the wood.


A word good Signior.


How now, what's the news?


'Tis given me to understand, that you are a rival of mine in the love of
Mistress Joyce, master Hoards Niece: say me I, say me no.


Yes, tis so.


Then look to your self, you cannot live long, Ime practising every morning,
a month hence I'll challenge you.


Give me your hand upon it there's my pledge I'll meet you?


Oh, oh -- what reason had you for that sir to strike before the mouth, you
knew I was not ready for you, and that made you so cranck, I am not such a
coward to strike again I warrant you, my ear has the law of her side for it
burns horribly, I will teach him to strike a naked face, the longest day of
his life, slid it shall cost me some money, but I'll bring this box into the
Chancery.


Fear you nothing sir, I have lodgd her in a house of credit I warrant you.


Hast thou the writings?


Firm sir


Prithee stay, and behold two the most prodigious rascals that ever slipped into
the shape of men, Dampit sirrah, and young Gulf, his fellow Cater-piller.


Dampit? sure I have heard of that Dampit.


Heard of him? why man he that ha's lost both his ears, may hear of him, a
famous infamous Trampler of time; his own phraze: note him well, that Dampit
sirrah, he in the uneven Beard, and the Serge cloak, is the most notorious,
vsuring, blasphemous, Atheistical, Brothel, vomiting rascal, that we have
in these latter times now extant, whose first beginning was the stealing of a
mastie Dog from a Farmers house.


He looked as if he would obey the commandment well, when he began first with
stealing.


True, the next Town he came at, he set the Dogs together by the ears.


A sign he should follow the law by my faith.


So it followed indeed, and being destitute of all fortunes, stakte his Mastie
against a Noble, and by great fortune his Dog had the day, how he made it up
ten shillings I know not, but his own boast is, that he came to town but
with ten shillings in his purse, and now is credibly worth ten thousand
pound?


How the devil came he by it?


How the devil came he not by it, if you put in the devil once riches come
with a vengeance, has been a Trampler of the Law sir, and the devil has a
care of his footmen, the Rogue has spied me now, he nibbled me finely once
too; a pox search you, oh master Dampit, the very Loins of thee; cry you
mercy master Gulf, you walk so lowe I promise you I saw you not sir?


He that walks lowe walks safe, the Poets tell us.


And nyer hell by a foot and a half then the rest of his fellows, but my old
Harry.


My sweet Theodorus?


Twas a merry world when thou came to town with ten shillings in thy purse.


And now worth ten thousand pound my Boy, report it, Harry Dampit, a trampler
of time, say, he would be up in a morning, and be here with his Serge Gown,
dashed up to the hams in a cause, have his feet stincke about VVestminster hall
and come home again, see the Galleouns, the Galleasses the great Armadoes of the
Law, then there be Hoyes and petty vessels, Owers and Scullers of the time,
there be picklocks of the Time too, then would I be here, I would trample up
and down like a Mule; now to the Judges, may it please your reverend --
honourable father-hoods: then to my Counsellor, may it please your worshipful
patience, then to the examiners Office, may it please your Maistershippes
Gentleness, then to one of the Clarks, may it please your worshipful
Lowzinesse, for I find him scrubbing in his codpeice, then to the hall again,
then to the Chamber again;


And when to the cellar again?


Even when thou wilt again; Tramplers of time, Motions of Fleete-streete, and
Visions of Holborn, here I have fees of one, there I have fees of another, my
clients come about me, the Fooli-aminy and Cocks-combri of the Country, I still
trasht and trotted for other men's causes, thus was poor Harry Dampit made rich
by others laziness, who, tho they would not follow their own Suites, I made
em follow me with their purses.


Did thou so old Harry?


I, and I souc'st em with bills of Charges ifayth, twenty pound a year have
I brought in for boate-hire, and I ne'er stepped into boat in my life.


Tramplers of time.


I, Tramplers of time, Raskalls of time, Bulbeggars:


Ah you're a mad old Harrie? kind Master Gulf, I am bold to renew my
acquaintance.


I embrace it sir.


My Adversary evermore twittes me with my Nephew, forsooth my Nephew: why may
not a virtuous uncle have a dissolute Nephew? what tho he be a Brotheller, a
wast-thrift, a common Surfetter, and to conclude a beggar, must sin in him,
call up shame in me: since we have no part in their follies, why should we
have part in their infamies? for my strict hand toward his mortgage that I
deny not, I confess I had an Uncles penworth: let me see, half in half,
true, I saw neither hope of his reclayming, nor comfort in his being, and was
it not then better bestowed upon his Uncle, then upon one of his Aunts, I need
not say bawd, for every own knows what Aunt stands for in the last
Translation now sir.


There's a Country Serving-man sir, attends to speak with your worship.


Ime at best leisure now, send him in to me;


Bless your venerable worship.


Welcome good fellow.


He calls me thief at first sight, yet he little thinks I am an Host?


What's thy business with me?


Faith sir, I am sent from my Mistress to any sufficient Gentleman indeed, to
ask advise upon a doubtful point, 'tis indifferent sir, to whom I come, for
I know none, nor did my Mistres direct me to any particular man, for she's as
mere a stranger here as my self, only I found your worship within, and tis a
thing I ever loved sir to be dispacht as soon as I can:


A good blunt honesty, I like him well what is thy Mistres?


Faith a Country Gentlewoman and a widow sir, yesterday was the first flight of
us, but now she entends to stay till a little Term business be ended.


Her name I prithee?


It runs there in the writings sir, among her Lands, widow Medler?


Meddler? mass have I near heard of that widow?


Yes, I wa^nt you, have you sir, not the rich widow in Staffordsheere:


Cuds me, there tis indeed, thou hast put me into memory, there's a widow
indeed, ah that I were a batchiler again.


No doubt your worship might do much then, but she's fairly promised to a
bachiler already.


Ah what is he I prithee?


A Country Gentleman too, one whom your worship knows not Ime sure: has spent
some few follies in his youth, but marriage by my faith begins to call him
home, my Mistress loves him sir, and love covers faults you know, one master
VVit-good if ever you have heard of the Gentleman:


Ha? Wit-good say thou?


That's his name indeed sir; my Mistress is like to bring him to a goodly seat
yonder, four hundred a year by my faith,


But I pray take me with you.


I sir*


What Countryman might this young Wit-good be?


A Lestershire gentleman sir.


My Nephew, by th* mass my Nephew, I'll fetch out more of this in faith, a simple
Country fellow, I'll workte out of him, and is that Gentleman say thou
presently to marry her?


Faith he brought her up to town sir, has the best card in all the bunch fort,
her heart: and I know my Mistress will be married, ere she go down, nay I'll
swear that, for she's none of those widows that will go down first, and
be married after, she hates that I can tell you sir.


By my faith sir, she is like to have a proper Gentleman and a comely, I'll
give her that gift?


Why does your worship know him sir?


I know him! dos not all the world know him, can a man of such exquisite
qualities be hid under a bushel?


Then your worship may save me a labour, for I had charge given me to
enquire after him.


Enquire of him? if I might counsel thee, thou should ne'er trouble thy self
further, enquire of him of no more but of me, I'll fit thee? I grant he has
been youthful, but is he not now reclaimde; mark you that sir, has not your
Mistress think you been wanton in her youth? if men be wags, are there not
women wagtayles?


No doubt sir:


Does not he return wisest, that comes home whipped with his own follies.


Why very true sir.


The worst report you can hear of him I can tell you is that he has been a
kind Gentleman, a liberal and a worthy, who but lusty Wit-good, thrice
Noble Wit-good.


Since your worship has so much knowledge in him, can you resolve me Sir what
his living might be, my duty binds me sir to have a care of my mistress
estate, she has been ever a good mistress to me though I say it, many wealthy
Suitors has she Nonsuted for his sake, yet tho her Love be so fixed, a man
cannot tell whether his Non-performance may help to remove it sir; he makes
us believe he has lands and living.


Who young master Wit-good! why believe it he has as goodly a fine living out
yonder, what do you call the place?


Nay I know not in faith.


Hum, see like a Beast if I have not forgot the name, puh, and out yonder again,
goodly grown woods and fair meado ves, pax ont, I can ne'er hit of that place
neither, he; why hes Wit-good of Wit-good-Hall, he, an unknow thing.


Is he so sir, to see how rumour will alter, trust me sir we heard once he had
no lands, but all lay morgagde to an Uncle he has in town here.


Push, tis a tale, tis a tale.


I can assure you sir twas credibly reported to my Mistress.


Why do you think in faith he was ever so simple to mortgage his lands to his
Uncle? or his uncle so unnatural to take the extremity of such a mortgage.


That was my saying still sir.


Puh, ne'er think it.


Yet that report goes currant.


Nay then you urge me,
Cannot I tell that best that am his Uncle,

How sir! what have I donne.


Why how now in a Sown, man*


Is your worship his Uncle sir.


Can that be any harm to you sir.


I do beseech your sir do me the favour to conceal it, what a Beast was I to
utter so much: pray sir do me the kindness to keep it in, I shall have my
coat pulled ore my ears, ant should be known, for the truth is an't please
your worship, to prevent much rumour and many suitors, they entend to be
married very suddenly and privately.


And dost thou think it stands with my Judgment to do them injury, must I
needs say the knowledge of this marriage comes from thee? am I a fool at
fifty four? do I lack subtlety now that have got all my wealth by it?
there's a leash of Angels for thee, come let me wo thee, speak where lie
they?


So I might have no anger sir --


Passion of me not a jot, prethe come.


I would not have it known it came by my means, --


Why am I a man of wisdom?


I dare trust your worship sir, but I'm a stranger to your house, and to
avoid al Intelligencers I desire your worships ear.


This fellowe's worth a matter of trust -- come sir, why now you're an honest
lad: ah sirrah Nephew?


Please you sir now I have begun with your worship when shall I attend, for
your advice upon that doubtful point, I must come warily now.


Tut, fear thou nothing, to morrows evening shall resolve the doubt.


The time shall cause my attendance.


Fare thee well: there's more true honesty in such a Country Serving-man, then
in a hundred of our cloak companions, I may well call em companions, for
since blew coats have been turned into cloaks, we can scarce know the man
from the Master -- George --


Anon sir?


List hither, -- keep the place secret, commend me to my Nephew, I know no
cause tell him but he might see his Uncle?


I will sir.


And do you hear sir, take heed you use him with respect and duty.


Here's a strange alteration, one day he must be turned out like a Beggar, and
now he must be called in like a Knight!


Ah Sirrah, that rich widow, 400. a year, beside I here she lays Claim to a
title of a hundred more, this falls unhappily that he should bear a Grudge to
me now being likely to prove so rich, what is't trow that he makes me a Stranger
for? hum, I hope he has not so much wit to apprehend that I cozned him, he
decaues me then? good heaven, who would have thought, it would ever have come
to this pass, -- yet he's a proper Gentleman in faith, give him his due --
marry that's his Mortgage, but that I ne'er mean to give him, i'll make him rich
enough in words if that be good, and if it come to a piece of money I will not
greatly stick fort, there may be hope some of the widows lands too, may one
day fall upon me if things be carried wisely: now sir, where is he?


He desires your worship to hold him excusde, he has such weighty Business it
commands him wholly from all men.


Were those my Nephews words?


Yes indeed sir.


When men grow rich they grow proud too, I perceive that, he would not have
sent me such an answer once within this tweluemonth, see what tis when a mans
come to his lands, return to him again sir, tell him his Uncle desires his
company for an hour* I'll trouble him but an hour say, tis for his own good
tell him, and do you hear sir, put worship upon him, go too, do as I bid you,
he's like to be a Gentleman of worship very shortly.


This is good sport in faith.


Troth he uses his Uncle, discourteously now, can he tell what I may do for
him, Goodness may come fro me in a minute that comes not in Seven year again,
he knows my humour I am not so usually good, tis no small thing that draws
kindness fro me, he may know that, and he will; the chief cause that invites me
to do him most good, is the sudden astonishing of old Hoard my Adversary,
how pale his malice will look at my Nephews Advancement, with what a dejected
Spirit he will behold his Fortunes, whom but last day, he proclaymde
Riotter, Penurious Make-shift, despised Brothel Master; ha, ha, twill do me
more secret Joy then my last purchasse, more precious comfott then all these
widows Reuennewes, -- Now Sir. --


With much entrety he's at length come sir,


Oh Nephew, let me salute you sir, your welcome Nephew


Uncle I thank you.


Yaue a fault Nephew, your a Stranger here, well Heaven give you joy.


Of what Sir?


Hah, we can hear.
You might have known your Uncles house in faith, you and your widow, go too,
you were too blame; If I may tell you so without offence.

How could you hear of that sir?


Oh pardon me,
It was your will to have it kept from me I perceive now.

Not for any defect of Love I protest Uncle.


Oh twas Unkindness Nephew, fie, fie, fie.


I am sorry you take it in that sense sir.


Puh, you cannot colour it in faith Nephew.


Will you but hear what I can say in my just excuse sir.


Yes faith will I, and welcome.


You that know my danger ith City sir so well, how great my debts are, and how
extreme my Creditors could not out of your pure judgment sir, have wished us
hither.


Mass a firm reason indeed,


Else my Uncles house, why tad been the only make -- Match. --


Nay and thy credit.


My credit? nay my countenance, push, nay I know uncle you would have wrought
it so by your wit you would have made her believe in time the whole house had
been mine --


I and most of the goods too --


La you there; well, let em al prate what they will there's nothing like the
bringing of a widow to ones Uncles house.


Nay let Nephews be ruled as they list, they shall find their Uncles house,
the most natural place when all's done.


There they may be bold.


Life, they may do any thing there man, and fear neither Beadle nor Somner, an
Uncles house! a very coale-harbour? Sir, I'll touch thee near now, hast thou
so much interest in thy widow, that by a token thou could presently send for
her?


Troth I think I can uncle.


Go too, let me see that?


Pray command one of your men hither Uncle.


George?


Here sir.


Attend my Nephew? I love a life to prattle with a rich widow, tis pretty me
thinks when our tongues go together, and then to promise much and perform
little; I love that sport a life in faith, yet I am in the mood now to do my
Nephew some good, if he take me handsomely: what have you dispacht?


I ha sent sir?


Yet I must condemn you of unkindness Nephew.


Heaven forbid Uncle?


Yes faith must I; say your debts be many, your creditors importunate, yet the
kindness of a thing is all Nephew, you might have sent me close word on it,
without the least danger, or praeiudice to your fortunes.


Troth I confess it Uncle, I was too blame there, but indeed my intent was to
have clapped it up suddenly, and so have broke forth like a joy to my friends,
and a wonder to the world, beside there's a trifle of a forty pound matter
toward the setting of me forth, my friends should ne'er have known on it, I
meant to make shift for that my self*


How Nephew? let me not hear such a word again, I beseech you, -- shall I be
beholding to you?


To me alas, what do you mean Uncle?


I charge you upon my love: you trouble no body but my self.


Y'aue no reason for that Uncle.


Troth I'll ne'er be friends with you while you live and you do.


Nay and you say so Uncle, here's my hand, I will not doote --


Why well said, there's some hope in thee when thou wilt be ruled, i'll make
it up fifty faith, because I see thee so reclaimde; peace, here comes my wife
with Sam her the other husbands Son.


Good Aunt --


Couze Wit-good? I rejoice in my salute, your most welcome to this Noble City
governed with the sword in the Scabbard,


And the wit in the pummel, good Master Sam freedom I return the salute.


By the mass she's coming wife, let me see now how thou wilt entertain her.


I hope I am not to learn sir, to entertain a widow, tis not so long ago
since I was one my self?


Uncle?


She's come indeed?


My Uncle was desirous to see you widow, and I praesum'd to enuite you.


The praesumption was nothing Master Wit-good, is this yours Uncle sir?


Marry am I sweet widow, and his good Uncle he shall find me, I by this smack
that I give thee, you're welcome, wife, bid the widow welcome the same way
again.


I am a Gentleman now too, by my fathers occupation, and I see no reason but I
may kiss a widow by my Fathers Copy, truly I think the Charter is not
against it, surely these are the words, the Son once a Gentleman, may revel
it, tho his father were a dauber, tis about the 15 page, -- i'll to her --


You're not very busy now, a word with thee sweet widow --


Coades-Nigs, I was never so disgrac'st, since the hour my mother whipped me.


Beside, I have no child of mine own to care for, she's my second wife, old,
past bearing, clap sure to him widow, he's like to be my heir I can tell you?


Is he so sir?


He knows it already and the knaves proud on it, jolly rich widows have
been offered him here ith City, great merchants wives, and do you think he
would once look upon em? forsooth heel none, you are beholding to him ith
Country then; ere we could be, nay, i'll hold a wager widow if he were once
known to be in town, he would be presently sought after, nay and happy
were they, that could catch him first.


I think so?


Oh, there would be such running to and fro widow, he should not pass the
streets for em: he'ed be took up in one great house or other presently,
fah, they know he has it must have it; you see this house here widow, this
house and all comes to him, goodly Rooms ready furnished, seeld with plaster of
paris, and all hung above with cloth of arras. Nephew!


Sir --


Show the widow your house, carry her into all the Rooms, and bid her
welcome, -- you shall see widow -- Nephew? -- strike all sure above and thou
be a good boy -- ah --


Alas sir, I know not how she would take it:


The right way I warrant tee, a pox, art an ass, would I were in thy stead,
get you up, I am a shamde of you, so: let em agree as they will now? many a
match has been struck up in my house a this fashion, let em try all manner of
ways still there's nothing like an Uncles house to strike the stroke in, --
I'll hold my wife in talk a little, now Ginnee; your son there goes a wooing
to a poor Gentlewoman but of a 1000. portion, see my Nephew, a lad of less
hope, strikes at four hundred a year in good Rubbish*


Well we must do as we may sir.


I'll have his money ready told for him, again he come down, let me see too,
by the mass I must present the widow with some Jewel, a good piece a plate
or such a device, twill harten her on well, I have a very fair stranding cup,
and a good hie standing cup will please a widow above al other pieces.


Do you mock us with your Nephew, I have a plot in my head son, in faith
husband to cross you.


Is it a tragedy plot, or a comedy plot, good mother.


Tis a plot shall vex him, I charge you of my blessing Son Sam, that you
presently withdraw the Action of your love from Master Hoards Niece.


How mother.


Nay I have a plot in my head in faith, here take this chain of gold and this
fair diamond, dog me the widow home to her lodging, and at thy best
opportunity fasten em both upon her -- nay I have a Reach, I can tell you thou
art known what thou art son among the right worshipful; all the twelve
companies.


Truly I thank 'em for it.


He, he's a scab to thee, and so certify her, thou hast two hundred a year of
thy self, beside thy good parts -- a proper person and a lovely, if I were a
widow I could find in my heart to have thee my self, son, I, from em all.


Thank you for your good will mother, but in deed I had rather have a
Stranger: and if I wo her not in that Violent fashion, that I will make her be
glad to take these gifts ere I leave her, let me never be called the heir of
your body.


Nay I know there's enough in you son if you once come to put it forth.


I'll quickly make a Bolt, or a shaft ont.


Faith Master Hoard, I have bestowed many months in the Suite of your Niece,
such was the dear love I ever bore to her virtues, but since she hath so
extremely denied me, I am to lay out for my fortunes else where.


Heaven forbid but you should fir, I ever told you my Niece, stood otherwise
affected.


I must confess you did sir, yet in regard of my great loss of time, and the
zeal with which I sought your Niece, shall I desire one favour of your
worship.


In regard of those two tis hard but you shall sir.


I shall rest grateful, tis not full 3. hours sir, since the happy rumour of
a rich Country widow came to my hearing.


How a rich Country widow?


Four hundred a year landed.


Yea?


Most firm sir, and I have learnt her lodging, here my suite begins sir, if I
might but entreat your worship to be a countenance for me, and speak a good
word: for your words will pass, I nothing doubt, but I might set fair for the
widow, nor shall your labour sir end altogether in thanks, two hundred
Angels --


So, so, what suitors has she?


There lies the comfort sir, the report of her is yet but a whisper, and only
solicited by young Riotous Wit-good, Nephew to your mortal adversary.


Ha? art certain he's her suitor?


Most certain sir, and his Uncle very industrious to beguile the widow, and
make up the match!


So? very good?


Now sir you know this young Wit-good is a spend-thrift -- dissolute fellow.


A very Rascal:


A mid-night surfetter.


The spume of a Brothel-house.


True sir? which being well told in your worships phraze, may both heave him
out of her mind, and drive a fair way for me to the widows affections.


Attend me about 5.


With my best care sir.


Fool thou hast left thy treasure with a thief, to trust a widower with a
suite in love, happy revenge I hug thee, I have not only the means laid
before me, extremely to cross my adversary, and confound the last hopes of
his Nephew, but thereby to enrich my state; augment my reuennewes, and build
mine own fortunes greater, ha, ha.
I'll mar your phraze, ore-turne your flatteries,
Undo your windings, policies, and plots,
Fall like a secret and dispatchfull plauge on your secured comforts, why I am
able to buy 3. of Lucer, thrice out-bid him, let my out-monies be reckond and
all.

I am glad of this news.


So are we by my faith.


Young Wit-good will be a gallant again now.


Peace?


I promise you Master Cock-pit she's a mighty rich widow.


Why have you ever heard of her.


Who widow Medler, she lies open to much rumour.


Four hundred a year they say in very good land.


Nay tak't of my word if you believe that, you believe the least.


And to see how close he keeps it.


Oh sir there's policy in that to prevent better suitors.


He owes me a hundred pound, and I protest I near looked for a penny.


He little dreams of our coming, heel wonder to see his creditors upon him.


Good, his creditors, i'll follow, this makes for me, all know the widows
wealth tis well known, I can estate her fairly, I and will.
In this one chance shines a twice happy Fate,
I both deject my foe, and raise my state.

Why alas, my Creditors? could you find no other time to undo me but now,
rather your malice appears in this then the justness of the debt.


Master Wit-good I have forborne my money long.


I pray speak lowe sir, what do you mean?


We hear you are to be married suddenly to a rich Country widow?


What can be kept so close but you creditors here on it, well, tis a lamentable
state, that our chiefest afflicters should first hear of our fortunes, why
this is no good course in faith sirs, if ever you have hope to be satisfied, why
do you seek to confound the means that should work it, there's neither
piety, no nor policy in that, shine favourably now, why I may rize and spread
again, to your great comforts.


He says true in faith.


Remove me now, and I consume for ever.


Sweet Gentleman?


How can it thrive which from the Sun you sever.


It cannot indeed?


Oh then show patience, I shall have enough to satisfy you all.


I, if we could be content a shame take us.


For look you, I am but newly sure yet to the widow, what a Rend might this
discredit make: within these 3. days will I bind you lands for your
securities.


No, good Master Wit-good,
Would twere as much as we dare trust you with?

I know you have been kind, how ever now either by wrong report, or false
incitement your gentleness is iniurde, in such a state as this a man cannot
want foes.

If on the sudden he begin to rize,
No man that lives can count his enemies.
You had some intelligence I warrant ye, from an ill-willer.

Faith we heard you brought up a rich widow sir, and were suddenly to marry
her.


I, why there it was, I knew twas so, but since you are so well resolude of my
faith toward you, let me be so much fauor'd of you, I beseech you all --


Oh, it shall not need in faith sir, --


As to lie still a while, and bury my debts in silence, till I be fully possessed
of the widow, for the truth is, I may tell you as my friends --


Oh -- o -- o --


I am to raise a little money in the City, toward the setting forth of my
self, for mine own credit, and your comfort, now if my former debts should be
divulged, all hope of my proceedings were quite extinguished!


Do you hear sir, I may deserve your custom hereafter, pray let my money be
accepted before a strangers, here's forty pound I received as I came to you,
if that may stand you in any stead make use on it, nay pray sir, tis at your
service --


You do so ravish me with kindness, that I'm constrained, to play the maid
and take it?


Let none of them see it I beseech you.


Fah --


I hope I shall be first in your remembrance after the marriage rites.


Believe it firmly.


So, what do you walk sirs?


I go -- take no care sir for money to furnish you, within this hour i'll send
you sufficient: come Master Cock-pit we both stay for you.


I ha lost a ring in faith, i'll follow you presently -- but you shall find it
sir, I know your youth and expenses have disfurnisht you of all Jewels, there's
a Ruby of twenty pound price sir, bestow it upon your widow, -- what man,
twill call up her blood to you, beside if I might so much work with you, I
would not have you beholding to those bloud-suckers for any money.


Not I believe it.


The'ar a brace of cut-throates?


I know em.


Send a note of all your wants to my shop and i'll supply you instantly.


Say you so, why here's my hand then no man living shall do it but thy self.


Shall I carry it away from em both then.


I faith shalt thou?


Troth then I thank you sir.


Welcome good master Cock-pit!

ha, ha, ha? why is not this better now, then lying a bed, I perceive there's
nothing conjures up wit sooner then poverty, and nothing lays it down sooner
then wealth and lechery? this has some savour yet, oh that I had the mortgage
from mine Uncle as sure in possession as these trifles, I would forswear
Brothel at noone day, and Muscadine and eggs at midnight.


Master Wit-good? where are you?


Holla.


Rich News!


Would twere all in Plate,


There's some in chains and Jewels, I am so haunted with shuters Master
Wit-good, I know not which to dispatch first.


You have the better term by my faith


Among the number, one Master Hoard an Ancient Gentleman.


Upon my life my Uncles adversary.


It may well hold so, for he rails on you,
Speaks shamefully of him.

As I could wish it.


I first denied him, but so cunningly,
It rather promisde him assured hopes,
Then any loss of labour.

Excellent,


I expect him every hour, with Gentlemen,
With whom he labours to make good his words,
To approve you Riotous, your state consumed, your Uncle, --

Wench, make up thy own fortunes now, do thy self a good turn once in thy
Days, hes rich in money, movables, and lands, -- marry him, he's an old
doting fool, and that's worth all, marry him, 'twould be a great comfort to me
to see thee do well in faith, -- marry him, 'twould ease my conscience well to see
thee well destowd, I have a care of thee in faith.


Thanks sweet master Wit-good.


I reach at farther happiness; first I am sure it can be no harm to thee, and
there may happen goodness to me by it, prosecute it well, lets send up for out
wits, now we require their best and most pregnant Assistance!


Step in, I think I hear em.


Art thou the widows man, by my faith she as a company of proper men then.


I am the worst of six sir, good enough for blew-coates.


Hark hither, I hear say thou art in most credit with her.


Not so sir.


Come, come, you're modest, there's a Brace of royalls, prithee help me to'th
speech of her.


I'll do what I may sir always saving my self harmless.


Go too do it I say, thou shalt hear better from me.


Is not this a better place then 5. Mark a year standing wages; say a man had
but 3. such clients in a day, me thinks he might make a poor living ont,
beside I was never brought up with so little honesty, to refuse any mans money
never; what g^lles there are a this side the world, now know I the widows
mind, none but my young master comes in her clutches, ha, ha, ha.


Now my dear Gentlemen stand firmly to me, you know his follies, and my
worth.


We do sir.


But Master Hoard, are you sure he is not ith house now?


upon my honesty* I chose this time,
A purpose, fit, the spend-thrift is abroad,
Assist me: here she comes* now my sweet widow,

Y are welcome Master Hoard.


Dispatch, sweet Gentlemen, dispatch,
I am come widow, to prove those my words,
Neither of envy Sprung nor of false tongs,
But such as their desar^s and Actions,
Do merit and bring forth, all which these Gentlemen well known and better
reputted will confess.

I cannot tell,
How my affections may dispose of me,
But surely if they find him so desartlesse,
They'll have that reason to with-draw them-selues.
And therefore Gentlemen I do entreat you,
As you are fair in Reputation,
And in appearing form so shine in truth;
I am a widow and alas you know,
Soon ouerthowen, tis a very small thing,
That we with-stand, our weakness is so great,
Be partial unto neither, but deliver,
Without affection your opinion,

And that will drive it home,


Nay I besecch your silence Master Hoard,
You are a party.

Widow? not a word!


The better first to work you to belief,
Know neither of us owe him flattery,
Nor the other malice, but vnbribed censure,
So help us our best fortunes.

It suffizes?


That Wit-good is a riotous undone man,
Imperfect both in fame and in estate:
His debts welthier then he, and executions
In wait for his due body, we'ele maintain
With our best credit, and our dearest blood.

Nor land, nor living say you, pray take heed you do not wrong the Gentleman?


What we speak,
Our lives and means are ready to make good.

Alas, how soon are we poor souls beguiled!


And for his Uncle. --


Let that come to me,
His Uncle a severe extortioner,
A Tyrant at a forfeiture, greedy of others miseries,
One that would undo his brother; nay swallow
Up his father, if he can
Within the fadomes of his conscience.

Nay believe it widow,
You had not only matched your self to wants,
But in an evil and unnatural stock.

Follow hard, Gentlemen, follow hard?


Is my love so deceau'd, before you all
I do renounce him, on my knees I vow
He ne'er shall marry me, --

Heaven knows he never meant it?


There, take her at the bound, --


Then with a new and pure affection,
Behold you Gentleman, grave, kind and rich:
A match worthy your self, esteeming him,
You do regard your state.

I'll make her a jointure say.


He can join land to land, and will possess you of what you can desire.


Come widow come.


The world is so deceitful?


There tis deceitful,
Where flattery, want, and imperfection lies:
But none of these in him? push --

Pray sir.


Come you widows are ever most back-ward, when you should do your selves
most good, but were it to marry a chin not worth a hair now, then you would
be forward enough? come, clap hands, a match.


Withal my heart widow, thanks Gentlemen,
I will deserve your labour, and thy love.

Alas, you love not widows but for wealth,
I promise you I ha nothing sir,

Well said, widow, well said, thy Love is all I seek, before these
Gentlemen.


Now I must hope the best,


My joys are such they want to be expressed,


But Master Hoard, one thing I mus^ remember you of before these gentlemen
your friends, how shall I suddenly avoid the loathed Solleciting of that
periurd Wit-good, and his Tedious -- dissembling Uncle, who this very very day
hath appointed a meeting for the same purpose too, where had not truth come
forth I had been undone, utterly undone.


What think you of that Gentlemen.


Twas well deuized.


Hark thee widow, train out young Wit-good single, hasten him thither with
thee, somewhat before the hour where at the place appointed these Gentlemen
and my self will wait the opportunty, when by some slieght removing him from
thee we will suddenly enter and surprise thee, carry thee away by boat to
Coale-harbour, have a Priest ready and there Clap it up instantly, how lik'st
it widow?


In that it pleases you, it likes me well.


I'll kiss thee for those words, come* Gentlemen,
Still must I live a Suitor to your favours,
Still to your aide beholding.

We're engade sir.
Tis for our credits now to see it well ended.

Tis for your honours Gentlemen; nay look toote,
Not only in joy, but I in wealth excel,
No more sweet widow, but sweet wife, farewell.

Farewell sir. --


Oh for more scope, I could laugh eternally,
Give you joy Mistres Hoard, I promise your fortune was good forsooth, y'aue
fell upon wealth enough, and there's young Gentlemen enough can help you to the
rest; now it requires our wits: carry thy self but heedfully now, and we are
both --

Master Wit-good your Uncle --


Cuds me, remove thy self a while, i'll serve for him?


Nephew, good morrow, Nephew?


The same to you kind Uncle.


How fares the widow, does the meeting hold?


Oh no question of that sir?


I'll strike the stroke then for thee, no more days.


The sooner the better Uncle, oh she's mightily followed, --


And yet so little rumourd.


Mightily? here comes one old Gentleman, and heel make her a jointure of three
hundred a year forsooth, another wealthy suitor will estate his son in his
life time, and make him weigh down the widow, here a Merchants son will
possess, her with no less then three goodly Lordships at once, which were all
pawnes to his Father.


Peace Nephew let me hear no more of em, it mads me, thou shalt prevent em
all, no words to the widow of my coming hither, let me see, tis now upon
nine, before twelve. Nephew we will have the bargain struck, we will faith
boy.


Oh my precious Uncle.


Niece, sweet Niece, prithee have a care to my house, I leave al to thy
discretion, be content to dream a while, i'll have a husband for thee shortly,
put that care upon me wench, for in choosing wives and husbands I am only
fortunate, I have that gift given me.


But tis not likely you should choose for me,
Since Nephew to your chiefest enemy:
Is he whom I affect, but oh forgetful,
Why dost thou flatter thy affections so:
With name of him, that for a widows bed,
Neglects thy purer love, can in be so?
Or does report dissemble: how now sir?

A letter with which came a private charge.


Therein I thank your care -- I know this hard,
Dearer then sight, what the world reports of me yet believe not, rumour will
alter shortly, be thou constant, I am still the same that I was in love, and I
hope to be the same in fortunes.

Theodorus Wit-good.

I am resolude, no more shall fear or doubt,
Raise their pale powers to keep affection out.

You're very welcome Gentlemen, Dick show those Gentlemen the Pomgranite
there, --


Hist --


Up those stairs Gentlemen.


Pissed Drawer, --


Anon sir?


Prethe ask at the Bar, if a gentlewoman came not in lately?


William at the Bar did you see any Gentlewoman come in lately, speak you I,
speak you no.


No, none came in yet but mistres Florence.


He says none came in yet sir, but one Mistres Florence.


What is that Florence? a widow!


Yes a duch widow.


How?


That's an English drab sir, give your worship good morrow.


A merry knave in faith, I shall remember a dutch widow the longest day of my
life.


Did not I use most art to win the widow.


You shall pardon me for that sir, Master Hoard knows I took her at best
vantage.


What's that sweet Gentlemen, what's that?


He will needs bear me down that his art only, wrought with the widow most.


Oh you did both well Gentlemen, you did both well, I thank you.


I was the first that moved her.


You were in faith.


But it was I that took her at the bound.


I, that was you, faith Gentlemen, tis right.


I boasted least, but twas I joined their hands,


By the mass I think he did, you did all well gentlemen, you did al well,
contend no more:


Come you rooms fittest:


True tis next the door?


Your very welcome, please you to walk up stai^s cloths laid sir.


Up stairs! troth I am weary Master Wit-good


Rest your self here a while widow, wee'le have a cup of Muscadine in this
little Room.


A cup of Muscadine, you shall have the best sir.


But do you hear sirrah.


Do you call, anon sir.


What is there provided for dinner


I cannot readily tell you sir, if you please, you may go into the kitchen and
see your self sir, many Gentlemen of worship do use to do it, I assure you
sir?


A pretty familiar Priggin rascal, he has his part without book?


Against you are ready to drink to me, widow, i'll be present to pledge you.


Nay I commend your care, tis donne well of you? ass what have I forgot.


What Mistres?


I slipped my wedding Ring off when I washed, and left it at my lodging, prithee
run, I shall be sad without it, so, he's gon! -- boy?


Anon forsooth?


Come hither sirrah, learn secretly if one Master Hoard an ancient Gentleman
be about house?


I heard such a one named.


Commend me to him.


I be do thy commendations?


Oh you come well: away, to boat, be gon.


Thus wisemen are revenged give two for one.


I must request you sir, to show extraordinary care, my Uncle comes with
Gentlemen his friends, and tis upon a making?


Is it so?
I'll give a spetiall charge good Master Wit-good, may I be bold to see her?

Who he widow?
Withal my heart ifayth, i'll bring you to her?

If she be a Staffordsheere Gentlewoman, tis much if I know her not, --


How now, boy, drawer.


Hie?


Do you ca^l sir?


Went the Gentlewoman up that was here?


Up sir? she went out sir.


Out sir?


Out sir: one Master Hoard with a guard of Gentlemen carried her out at
backdoor, a pretty while since sir.


Hoard, death and darkness, Hoard.


The devil of ring I can find?


How now, what news, where's the widow?


My Mistress? is she not here sir?


More madness yet.


She sent me for a Ring.


A plot, a plot: to Boat she's stole away.


What?


Follow, enquire, old Hoard my Uncles Adversary --


Nephew, what's that?


Thrice miserable wretch.


Why what's the matter?


The widdow's borne away sir?


Ha, passion of me, a heavy welcome Gentlemen.


The widow gon?


Who durst attempt it?


Who but old Hoard, my Uncles adversary?


How?


With his confederates.


Hoard, my deadly enemy, Gentlemen stand to me,
I will not bear it, 'tis in hate of me,
That villain seeks my shame, nay thrifts my blood, he owes me mortal
malice,
I'll spend my wealth on this despiteful plot,
Ere he shall cross me and my Nephew thus.

So malitiouslie.


How now you treacherous Rascal?


That's none of my name sir.


Poor soul he knew not on it.


Ime sorry, I see then 'twas a mere plot.


I trac'de em nearly. --


Well.


And hear for certain, they have took Cole-harbor.


The Diuils Sanctuary,
They shall not rest, I'll pluck her from his arms,
Kind dear Gentlemen, if ever I had seat within your breasts --

No more good sir, it is a wrong to us,
To see you injured in a cause so just:
We'll spend our lives, but we will right our friends,

Honest, and kind, come, we have delayed to long,
Nephew take comfort; a Just cause is strong.

That's all my comfort Uncle, ha, ha, ha.
Now may events fall luckily, and well,
He that ne'er strives, says wit shall ne'er excel.

When did I say my prayers? In Anno 88. when the great Armado was coming, and
In Anno. 99. when the great Thundering and Lighting was I prayed heartily then
in faith, to overthrow Poouyes new buildings, I kneeled by my great iron chest I
remember.


Master Dampit, one may hear you, before they see you, you keep sweet hours
Master Dampit, we were all a bed 3 hours ago.


Audrey.


Oh yare a fine Gentleman.


So I am in faith, and a fine Scholar, do you use to go to bed Bed, so early
Audrey?


Call you this early Master Dampit.


Why is't not one of Clock ith morning is not that early enough? fetch me a
glass of fresh-Beere.


Here, I have warmd your Nightcap for you master Dampit.


Draw it on then -- I am very weak truly, I have not eaten so much as the
bulk of an Egg these 3. days.


You have drunk the more Master Dampit,


Whats that?


You mought, and you would Master Dampit.


I answer you I cannot, hold your prating, you prat too much, and understand
too little, are you answered, -- give me a glass of bear.


May I ask you how you do Master Dampit?


How do I? in faith nought.


I ne'er knenw you do otherwise,


I eat not one pennort of bread these 2. years, give me a glass of fresh
beer, -- I am not sick, nor I am not well. --


Take ths warm Napken about your neck sir, whilst I help to make you
unready.


How now Audrie-prater, with your skiruy devices, what say you now?


What say I Master Dampit? I say nothing but that you are very weak,


Faith thou hast more cunny catching devices then all London?


Why Master Dampit I never deceive*d you in al my life?


Why was that? because I never did trust thee.


I care not what you say Master Dampit?


Hold thy prating, I answer thee, thou art a beggar, a queen, and a bawd:
are you answered.


Fie Master Dampit, a Gentleman and have such words.


Why thou base drudge of infortunity, thou kitchen stuff drab of Beggary,
Roguery cockscombre, thou Cauernesed queen of foolery, knavery and
baudreaminy, i'll tell thee what, I will not give a louse for thy fortunes:


No, master Dampit, and there's a Gentleman comes a wooing to me, and he
doubts nothing but that you will get me from him:


I, if I would either have thee or lie with thee for two thousand pound, would
I might be damned, why thou base impudent queen of foolery, flattery, and
cockscombry, are you answered?


Come will you rise and go to bed sir?


Rise, and go to bed too Audrey? how does Misters Proserpine?


Fooh --


She's as fine a Philosipher of a stinkards wife, as any within the liberties,
-- fah, fah Audrey:


How now Master Dampit?


Fie upon it, what a choice of stinks here is, what hast thou don Audrey fie
vppon't, here's a choice of stinks indeed; give me a glass of fresh Beer,
and then I will to bed:


It waits for you above sir?


Foh, I think they burn horns in Barnards Inn, if ever I smelt such an
abominable stink, usury forsake me:


They be the stinking nailes of his trampling feet, and he talks of burning
of horns:


Join hearts, join hands, In wedlocks bands,
Never to part, till death cleave your heart,
You shall forsake all other women,
You Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Yeomen.
What my tongue slips, make up with your lips.

Give you joy Mistress Hoard, let the kiss come about,
Who knocks? convey my little Pig-eater out.

Hoard?


Upon my life, my adversary, Gentlemen.


Hoard, open the door, or we will force it open,
Give us the widow.

Gentlemen keepe'm out.


He comes upon his death that enters here.


My friends assist me.


He has assistants, Gentlemen.


Tut, nor him, nor them, we in this action fear.


Shall I in peace, speak one word with the widow?


Husband and Gentlemen, hear me but a word.


Freely sweet wife.


Let him in peaceably, you know we're sure, from any act of his.


Most true,


You may stand by and smile at his old weakness, let me alone to answer
him.


Content,
Twill be good mirth in faith, how think you Gentlemen?

Good gullery?


Upon calm conditions let him in.


All spite and malice --


Hear me Master Lucre, so you will vow a peaceful entrance with those your
friends and only exercise
Calm conference with the widow, without fury,
The passage shall receive you.

I do vow it.


Then enter and talk freely, here she stands.


Oh Master Hoard, your spite has wacht the hour, your excellent at vengeance
Master Hoard.


Ha, ha, ha.


I am the fool you laugh at, you are wise sir and know the seasons, well,
come hither widow, why is it thus!
Oh you have done me infinite disgrace,
And your own credit no small Injury,
Suffer mine enemy so despitefully
To bear you from my Nephew, oh,
I had rather half my substance had been forfet, and begged by some staru*d
Rascal.

Why what would you wish me do sir?
I must not overthrow my state for love,
We have too many presidents for that,
From thousands of our wealthy undone widows
One may derive some wit; I do confess,
I lou*d your Nephew, nay I did affect him,
Against the mind and liking of my friend:
Believed his promises, lay here in hope,
Of fla^terd living and the boast of lands,
Coming to touch his wealth and state indeed,
It appears dross, I find him not the man,
Imperfect, mean, scarce furnished of his needs:
In words, fair Lordships, in performance Houills,
Can any woman love the thing that is not?

Broke you for this?


Was it not cause too much?
Send to enquire his state, most part of it,
Lay two years mortgaged in his Uncles hands:

Why say it did, you might have known my mind; I could have soon restored
it.


I had I but seen any such thing performed why 'twould have tied my affection
and contaynd me in my first desires, do you think ifayth, that I could twine
such a dry, oak as this, had promise in your Nephew took effect:


Why and there's no time past, and rather then my adversary should thus thw'art
my hopes, I would --


^ut y'aue been ever full of golden ^peech,
If words were lands, your Nephew would be rich.

Widow, believe it I vow by my best bliss,
Before these Gentlemen I will give in
The mortgage to my Nephew instantly,
Before I sleep or eat.

We'll pawn our credits widow, what he speaks shall be performed in
fulness.


Nay more I will estate him
In farther blessings, he shall be my heir*
I have no Son,
I'll bind my self to that condition.

When I shall hear this done, I shall soon yield, to reasonable terms.


In the mean season,
Will you protest before these Gentlemen,
To keep your self, as you are, now at this present.

I do protest before these Gentlemen,
I will be as clear then, as I am now.

I do believe you, here's your own honest servant,
I'll take him along wi^h me.

I, with all my heart.


He shall see all performed and bring you word.


That's all I wait for.


What have you finished Master Lucre? ha, ha, ha, ha!


So, laugh Hoard, laugh at your poor enemy, do, the wind may turn you may be
laughed at too, yes marry may you sir -- ha, ha, ha?


Ha, ha ha, if every man that swells in malice,
Could be reuengd as happily as I:
He would choose hate, and forswear amity.
What did he say wife, prithee?

Faith spoke to ease his mind, --


Oh -- o -- o --


You know now, little to any purpose.


True, true, true.


He would do mountains now.


I, I, I, I.


Y'aue struck him dead Master Hoard.


I and his Nephew desperate:


I knowte sirs I,
Never did man so crush his enemy?

My son in law,
Sam Freedom? where's my Nephew?

O man in lamentation father?


How!


He thumps his breast like a gallant Dicer that has lost his doublet, and
stands in's shirt to do penance:


Alas poor gentleman.


I warrant, you may hear him sigh in a still evening to your house at Hyegate.


I prethe send him in.


Were it to do a greater matter, I will not stick with you sir, in regard you
married my Mother?


Sweet Gentlemen cheer him up, I will but fetch the mortgage, and return to
you instantly.


We'll do our best sir? -- see where he comes,
Even ioylesse and regardless of all form.

Why how Master Wit-good, fie, you a firm scholar, and an understanding
Gentleman, and give your best parts to passion.


Come fie?


Oh Gentlemen! --


Sorrow of me what a sigh was there sir, nine such widows are not worth it.


To be borne from me by that lecher Hoard.


That vengeance is your Uncles, being done
More in despite to him, then wrong to you,
But we bring comfort now, --

I beseech you Gentlemen.


Cheer thy self man, there's hope of her ifayth?


To gladsome, to be true.


Nephew what cheer? alas poor Gentleman how art thou changed? call thy fresh
blood into thy cheeks again, she comes --


Nothing afflicts me so much,
But that it is your Adversary, Uncle,
And merely plotted in despite of you.

I that's it mads me, spites me? i'll spend my wealth, e're he shall carry her
so, because I know tis only to spite me, I this is it, -- here Nephew, before
these kind Gentlemen I deliver in your mortgage, my promise to the widow, see
tis done, be wise your once more Master of your own, the widow shall
perceive now, you are not altogether such a beggar as the world reputes you,
you can make shift to bring her to 300. a year sir.


Berlady and that's no toy sir:


A word Nephew?


Now you may certify the widow?


You must conceive it a right Nephew now, to do you good, I am content to do
this.


I know it sir?


But your own conscience can tell I had it dearly enough of you?


I that's most certain.


Much money laid out, beside maney a journey to fetch the rent, I hope you'll
think on it Nephew.


I were worse then a beast else ifayth.


Although to blind the widow and the world I out of policy doote, yet there's
a conscience Nephew.


Heaven forbid else.


When you are full possessed,
Tis nothing to return it:

Alas a thing quickly done Uncle.


Well said, -- you know I give it you but in trust.


Pray let me understand you rightly, Uncle,
You give it me but in trust.

No.


That is, you trust me with it.


True, true:


But if ever I trust you with it again, would I might be trust up for my
labour.


You can all witness Gentlemen, and you sir yeoman?


My life for yours sir now, I know my Mistresses mind to well toward your
Nephew, let things be in preparation, and i'll train her hither in most
excellent fashion:


A good old boy, -- wife Girnne?


Whats the news sir?


The wedding days at hand, prithee sweet wife, express thy houswifery,
you're a fine Cooke I knowte, thy first husband married thee out of an
Aldermans kitchen, go too, he raised thee for raising of paste, what, here's
none but friends, most of our beginnings must be winckt at, Gentlemen I enuite
you all to my Nephews wedding against Thursday morning:


Withal our hearts, and we shall joy to see your enemy so mocked:


He laughed at me, gentlemen, ha, ha, ha:


He has no conscience, faith would laugh at them, they laugh at one another?
Who then can be so cruel, troth, not I,
I rather pity now, then ought envy,
I do conceive such joy in mine own happiness, I have no leisure yet, to
laugh at their follies.
Thou soul of my estate I kiss thee,
I miss lifes Comfort when I miss thee.
Oh never will we part again,
Until I leave the Sight of men,
We will ne'er trust conscience of our kin,
Since Coosenage brings that title in.

I'll wait these 7. hours but I'll see him caught,


Faith so will I.


Hang him prodigal, he's stripped of the Widow.


A my Troth she's the wiser, she has made the happier choice, and I wonder of
what Stuff those widows hearts are made of, that will marry vnfledgd Boys,
before comely thrumbchind Gentlemen.


News, news news,


What boy?


The Rioter is caught.


So, so, so, so, it warmes me at the heart, I love a life to see Dogs upon men;
oh here he comes.


My last joy was so great it took away the sense of all future afflictions,
what a day is here orecast? how soon a black tempest rises?


Oh we may speak with you now sir, whats become of your rich widow, I think
you may cast your cap at the widow, may you not sir.


He a rich widow? who a prodigal, a daily Rioter, and a nightly vomiter, he a
widow of account? he a hole ith counter.


You do well my masters, to tiranize over misery to afflect the affl^cted, tis
a custom you have here amongst you, I would wish you never leave it and I hope
you'll do as I bid you


Come, come sir, what say you extempore now to your bill of a hundred pound: a
sweet debt, for froating your doublets.


Here's mine of forty,


Here's mine of fifty.


Pray sirs* you'll give me Breath.


No sir, wel'e keep you out of breath still, then we shall be sure you will
not run away from us.


Will you but here me speak?


You shall pardon us for that sir, we know you have too fair a tong of your
own, you ouer-came us to lately, a shame take you, we are like to loose all
that for want of witnesses, we dealt in policy then, always when we strive to
be most politic we prove most cocskcombs, Non plus ultra. I perceive by us,
were not ordaynde to thrive by wisdom, and therefore we must be content to be
Trades-men.


Give me but reasonable time, and I protest I'll make you ample Satisfaction.


Do you talk of Reasonable time to us?


Tis true, beasts know no reasonable time,


We must have either money or carcass.


Alas what good will my carcass do you?


Oh tis a Secret delight we have amongst us, we that are used to keep birds in
cages, have the heart to keep men in prison, I warrant you.


I perceive I must crave a little more Aid from my wits, do but make shift for
me this once, and I'll forswear ever to trouble you in the like fashion
hereafter, I'll have better employment for you, and I live. You'll give me leave
my masters to make Trial of my friends and raise all means I can.


That's our desires sir.


Master Wit-good.


Oh art thou come!


May I speak one word with you in private sir?


No by my faith can thou. I am in hell here and the Devils will not let me
Come to thee.


Do you call us diuuills, you shall find us Puritanes bear him away, let em
talk as they go, we will not stand to hear 'em, ah sir, am I a deuile, I shall
think the better of my self as long as I live, a Devil in faith.


What a Sweet blessing hast thou Master Hoard above a multitude, wilt thou
never be thankeful? how dost thou think to be blessed another time? or dost thou
count this the full measure of thy hapines by my troth I think thou doest* not
only a wife large in possessions, but spacious in content, she's rich, she's
young, she's fair, she's wife, when I wake I think of her lands that revives
me, when I go to bed, I dream of her beauty, and that's enough for me, she's
worth 4. hundred a year in her very smock, if a man knew how to use it, but
the journey will be all in truth into the Country, to ride to her Lands in
state and order following my Brother other worshipful Gentlemen whose
companies I ha sent down for already, to ride along with us, in their goodly
Decorum beards, their broad Velvet chashocks, and chains of gold twice or
thrice double; against which time, i'll entertain some ten men of mine own,
into Liveries, all of occupations or qualities, I will not keep an idle man
about me, the sight of which will so vex my Adversary Lucre, for we'll pass
by his door of purpose, make a little stand for nonce, have our horses Curuet
before the window, certainly he will never endure it, but run up hang himself
presently? how now sir? what news? any that offer their service to me yet.


Yes sir, there are some ith hall, that wait for your worships liking, and
desire to be entertained.


Are they of occupation?


They are men fit for your worship sir.


Say so? send em all in! -- to see ten men ride after me in watchet
liveries with Orenge-tawny capes, twill cut his comb ifayth, how now? of what
occupation are you sir.


A Taylor, an't please your worship.


A taylor, oh very good, you shall serve to make all the Liveries -- what are
you sir?


A Barber sir.


A Barber very needful, you shall shave all the house, and if need require
stand for a Reaper ith Summer time, -- You sir?


A Perfumer?


I smelt you before, Persumers of all men had need carry themselves uprightly,
for if they were once knaves they would be smelt out quickly, -- to you sir?


A Fawlkner an't please your worship --


Sa ho, sa ho, sa ho -- and you sir?


A Huntsman sir.


There boy, there boy, there boy? I am not so old but I have pleasant days
to come, I promise you my Masters I take such a good liking to you, that I
entertain you all, I put you already into my countenance, and you shall be
shortly in my livery? but especially you two my ^olly Fawlkner, and my bonny
huntsman, we shall have most need of you at my wives Mannor-houses ith
Country, there's goodly parks and Champion-grounds for you, we shall have all
our sports within our selves, all the Gentlemen ath Country shall be beholding
to us and our pastimes:


And we'll make you worship admire sir:


Say thou ^o do but make me admire, and thou shalt want for nothing, -- my
Taylor?


Anon sir.


Go presently in hand with the liveries.


I will sir.


My Barber.


Here sir.


Make em all trim fellows, louse em well, especially my huntsman, and cut
all their beards of the Polonian fashion: my perfumer:


Under your nose sir:


Cast a better savour upon the knaves, to take away the sent of my Taylors
feet, and my Barbers Lotium-water:


It shall be carefully performed sir.


But you my Faulkner and Huntsman, the welcomst men alive ifayth:


And we'll show you that sir, shall deserve your worships favour?


I prithee show me that: go you knaves all, and wash your lungs ith Buttery,
go -- byth mass, and well remembered, i'll ask my wife that question, wife,
Mistrs Iane Hoard!


Sir? would you with me.


I would but know sweet wife, which might stad best to thy liking, to have the
wedding dinner kept here or ith Country?


Hum? faith sir 'twould like me better here, here you were married, here let all
rites be ended.


Could a Marquess give a better answer? Hoard bear thy head aloft, thou'st a
wife will advance it, what haste comes here now? ye a letter: some dregge of
my Adversaries malice: come hither, whats the news!


A thing that concerns my Mistress sir.


Why then it concerns me knave?


I and you knave too, (cry your worship mercy) you are both like to come into
trouble I promise you sir, a praecontract


How a praecontract say thou?


I fear they have too much proof on it sir, old Lucre he runs mad up and down
and will to law as fast as he can, young Wit-good laid hold on by his
creditors, he exclaymes upon you a the other side, says you have wrought his
undoing, by the injurious detaining of his contract.


Body a me?


He will have utmost satisfaction.
The law shall give him recompense he says.

Alas his creditors so merciless, my state being yet uncertain, I deem it
not unconscionable to further him.


True sir --


Wife, what says that letter let me construe it.


Cursed be my rash and unadvised words,
I'll set my foot upon my tongue,
And tread my inconsiderate grant to dust.

Wife --


A pretty shift in faith, I commend a woman when she can make away a letter from
her husband handsomely, and this was cleanly done by my troth.


I did sir?
Some foolish words I must confess did pass,
Which, now letigiously he fastens on me.

Of what force? let me ezamine em.


Too strong I fear, would I were well freed of him.


Shall I compound?


No sir, i'd have it done some Nobler way
Of your side; i'd have you come off with honour,
Let baseness keep with them: why have you not the means sir, the occasions
offered you.

Where? how? dear wife.


He is now caught by his creditors, the slaue's needy, his debts petty,
hee'le rather bind himself, to all inconveniences then rot in prison, by this
only means you may get a release from him, 'tis not yet come to his Uncles
hearing, send speedily for the creditors, by this time he's desperate, hee'le
set his hand to any thing, take order for his debts, or discharge em quite, a
pax on him, lets be rid of a rascal.


Excellent, thou dost astonish me, go, run, make hast, bring both the
creditors and Wit-good hither.


This will be some revenge yet.


In the mean space I'll have a release drawne-within there.


Sir.


Sirrah, come take derictions, go to my Scrivener.


Ime yet like those, whose riches lie in dreams,
If I be wakte the're false, such is my fate,
Who ventures deeper then the desperate state.
Though I have find yet could I become new,
For where I once vow, I am ever true.

Away, Dispatch, on my Displeasure, quickly, happy occasion, pray heaven he
be in the right Vain now to set his hand toot, that nothing alter him; grant
that al his follies may meet in him at once, to besot him enough.
I pray for him in faith, and here he comes;

What would you with me now, my Uncles spiteful adversary.


Nay I am friends,


I when your mischiefs spent.


I heard you were arrested.


Well, what then? you will pay none of my debts I am sure.


A wiseman cannot tell,
There may be those Conditions greed upon,
May move me to do much,

I when Tis thou perjured Woman, O no name
Is wild enough to match thy treachery,
That art the cause of my confusion.

Out you penurious slave.


Nay wife you are too froward,
Let him alone, give losers leave to talk.

Shall I remember thee of an other promise far stronger then the first.


I'd fain know that.


'twould call shame to thy cheeks.


Shame.


Hark in your ear. -- will he come of think thou, and pay my Debts roundly.


Doubt nothing, there's a Release a drawing and all to which you must set your
hand.


Excellent.


But me thinks in faith you might have made some shift to discharge this your
self, having in the mortgage, and never have burdened my conscience with it.


A my troth I could not, for my creditors cruelties extend to the present.


No more, -- why do your worst for that, I defy you.


You're impudent, i'll call up witnesses.


Call up thy wits for thou hast been devoted to follies a long time.


Wife, you're too bitter? Master Wit-good, and you my Masters, you shall hear
a mild speech come from me now, and this it is, tas been my fortune,
Gentlemen, to have an extraordinary blessing powered upon me alate, and here she
stands, I have wedded her and bedded her, yet she is little the worse, some
foolish words she hath past to you in the Country, and some peevish debts you
owe here in the City, set the Hares head to the Goose -- giblet, release you
her of her words, and i'll release you of your debts sir:


Would you so, I thank you for that sir, I cannot blame you ifayth.


Why are not debts better then words sir?


Are not words promises, and are not promises debts sir.


He plays at back-Racket with me.


Come hither Master Wit-good come hither, be ruled by fools once:


We are Citizens and know what belong toote.


Take hold of his offer pax on her, let her go, if your debts were once
discharged, I would help you to a widow my self worth ten of her.


Mass partner and now you remember me on it, there's Master Muligrubs sister
newly fallen a widow.


Cuds me, as pat as can be, there's a widow left for you, ten thousand in
money, beside Plate, Jewels et caetera I warrant it a match, we can do all in
all with her, prithee dispatch we'll carry thee to her presently.


My Uncle wi^l ne'er endure me, when he shall hear I set my hand to a release:


Hark, i'll tell thee a Trick for that, I have spent five hundred pound in
suites in my time, I should be wise, thou it now a prisoner, make a release,
takte of my word, whatsoever a man makes as long as he is in durance, tis
nothing in law, not thus much.


Say you so sir?


I have paid for it I know it.


Proceed then, I consent.


Why well said:


How now my Masters, what have you done with him?


With much a do sir, we have got him to consent.


Ah -- a -- a, -- and what came his debts to now?


Some eight score od pounds sir.


Nau, nau, nau, nau, naw, tell me the second time, give me a lighter sum,
they are but desperate debts you know, near called in but upon such an accident,
a poor needy knave he would starve and rot in prison, come, come, you shall
have ten shillings in the pound and the sum down roundly --


You must make it a mark sir, --


Go too then, tell your money in the mean time, you shall find little less
there, -- come Master Wit-good you are so unwilling to do your self good now,
welcome honest Scrivener, now you shall hear the release read, --


Be it known, to al men by these presents, that I Theodorus Wit-good,
Gentleman, sole Nephew to Pecunious Lucre, having unjustly made title and
claim, to one Iane Medler, late widow of Anthory Medler, and now wife to
Walkadine Hoard, in consideration of a competent some of money to discharge my
debts, do for ever hereafter disclaim any title, right, estate, or interest in
or to the said widow late in the occupation of the said Anthony Medler, and
now in the occupation of Walkadine Hoard, as also neither to lay claim, by
virtue of any former contract, grant, promise or demise, to any of her Manor,
Mannorhouses, Parks, Groves, Meadow-grounds, arrable lands, Barnes, stacks,
Stables, Doue-holes, and Cunny-borrowes, together with al her cattle, money,
plate, jewels, borders, chains, bracelets, furnitures, hangings, movables,
or immouerables in witness whereof I the said Theodorus Wit-good, have
interchangeably set to my hand and seal before these presents, the day, date
above written.


What a precious fortune hast thou slipped here like a beast as thou art?


Come, unwilling heart come.


well Master Hoard, give me the pen, I see
Tis vain to quarrel with our destiny.

Oh as vain a thing as can be, you cannot commit a greater absurdity sir, --
so, so, give me that hand now, before al these presents I am friends for ever
with thee.


Troth, and it were pit^y of my heart now, if I should bear you any grudge
in faith.


Content, i'll send for thy Uncle against the wedding dinner, we will be friends
once again.


I hope to bring it to pass my self sir?


How now? is't right my masters?


Tis something wanting sir, yet it shall be sufficient.


Why well said, a good conscience makes a fine show now a days, come my
Masters you shall all -- taste of my wine ere you depart.


We follow you sir?


I'll try these fellows now, -- a word sir, what will you carry me to that
widow now?


Why do you think we were in earnest in faith? carry you to a rich widow, we
should get much credit by that; a noted Rioter a contemptible prodigal, twas a
Trick we have amongst us, to get in our money, fare you well sir.


Farewell and be hanged, you short-pig-hayrde Ram-headed raskalls, he that
believes in you, shall ne'er be saved I warrant him, by this new league, I shall
have some access unto my love --


Master Wit-good?


My life.


Meet me presently, that note directs you, I would not be suspected our
happiness attends us, farewell?


A words enough.


Let the Usurer cram him, in interest that excel,
There's pits enough to dam him, before he comes to hell.
In Holborn, some: in Fleete-street some,
Where ere he come, there's some there's some.

Trahe, traheto, draw the Curtain, give me a sip of Sack more.


Look you, did not I tell you he lay like the devil in chains, when he was
bound for a thousand year.


But I think the devil had no steel Bedstaffes, he goes beyond him for that.


Nay do but mark the conceit of his drincking, one must wipe his mouth for
him with a muckinder, do you see sir.


Is this the sick trampler, why he is only bed-red with drincking.


True sir, he spies us.


What? sir Tristram? you come and see a weak man here, a very weak man, --


If you be weak in body, you should be strong in prayer sir.


Oh, I have prayed too much poor man.


There's a taste of his soul for you.


Fah, loathsome?


I come to borrow a hundred pound of you sir.


Alas you come at an ill time, I cannot spare it ifayth,
I ha but two thousand ith house.

Ha, ha, ha.


Out you gernatiue queen, the mullipood of villainy, the Spinner of
concupiscency.


Ye gentlemen are you here before us? how is he now?


Faith the same man still, the Tavern bitch has bit him ith head.


We shall have the better sport with him, peace, and how cheers Master
Dampit now?


Oh, my bosom sir Lancelot, how cheer I? thy presence is restorative:


But I hear a great complaint of you Master Dampit, among gallants.


I am glad of that ifayth; -- prithee what?


They say you are waxte proud alate, and if a friend visit you in the
afternoon, you'll scarce know him.


Fie, fie, proud? I cannot remember any such thing, sure I was drunk then.


Think you so sir?


There twas ifayth, nothing but the pride of the Sack and so certify em,
fetch Sack sirrah.


A vengeance Sack you once.


Why Master Dampit if you hold on as you begin, and lie a little longer, you
need not take care how to dispose your wealth, you'll make the Vintner your
heir.


Out you babliaminy, you vnfetherd cremitoryed queen, you cullisance of
scabiofity.


Good words Master Dampit, to speak before a maid and a virgin.


Hang thy virginity, upon the pole of carnality.


Sweet terms, my Mistress shall know em.


Note but the misery of this vsuring slave, here he lies like a noisome
dunghill, full of the poison of his druncken blasphemies, and they to whom he
bequeathes all, grudge him the very meat that feeds him, the very pillow that
eases him, here may a usurer behold his end, what profits it to be a slave in
this world, and a devil ith next.


Sir Lancelot? let me bus thee sir Lancelot, thou art the only friend that I
honour and respect.


I thank you for that Master Dampit.


Farewell my bosom sir Lancelot.


Gentlemen, and you love me, let me step behind you, and one of you fall a
talking of me to him.


Content -- Master Dampit.


So sir.


Here came sir Lancelot to see you even now.


Hang him rascal.


Who sir Lancelot.


Pythagoricall rascal.


Pythagoricall?


I he changes his cloak when he meets a Sergiant.


What a rogues this?


I wonder you can rail at him sir, he comes in love to see you.


A louse for his love, his father was a Combe-maker, I have no need of his
crawling love, he comes to have longer day, the superlative rascal:


Sfoote I can no longer endure the rogue, Master Dampit, I come to take my
leave once again sir?


Who? my dear and kind Sir Lancelot? the only Gentleman of England, let me
hug thee, farewell and a thousand.


Composde of wrongs and slavish flatteries.


Nay Gentlemen, he shall show you more Tricks yet, i'll give you another taste of
him:


I'st possible?


His memory is upon departing.


Another cup of Sack.


Mass then twill be quite gon: before he drink that, tell him there's a country
client come up, and here attends for his Learned advice,


Enough.


One Cup more, and then let the Bell toale, I hope I shall be weak enough by
that time.


Master Dampit.


Is the Sack spouting.


Tis coming forward sir, -- here's a countryman a client of yours, waytes for
your deep and profound advice sir.


A cockscombry? where is he? let him approach, set me up a pegge higher.


You must draw ne'er sir.


Now good-man fooleaminy, what say you to me now


Please your good worship, I am a poor man sir. --


What make you in my Chamber then?


I would entreat your worships device in a just and honest cause sir. --


I meddle with no such matters, I refer em, to Master No-mans Office.


I had but one house left me in all the world sir which was my fathers, my
Grand-fathers, my great Grandfathers, and now a Villain has unjustly wrung me
out, and took possession out.


Has he such feats? thy best course is to bring thy eiectione firm, and in
Seven year thou may shove him out by the Law.


Alas, ant please your worship, I have small friends and less money.


Hoyda, this geere will fadge well, hast no money, why then my advice is thou
must set fire ath house so get him out.


That will break strife indeed,


I thank your worship for your hot Counsel sir. -- altering but my voice
alitlle, you see he knew me not, you may observe by this that a drunkards
memory, holds longer in the voice then in the person, but Gentlemen shall I
show you a sight, behold the little diue-dapper of Damnation, Gulf the usurer,
for his time worse then the other.


What's he comes with him?


Why Hoard, that married lately the widow medler.


Oh, I cry you mercy sir.


Now gentlemen visitants? how dos master Dampit?


faith here he lies even drawing -- in sir, good canary as fast as he can sir,
a very weak creature truly, he is almost past memory.


Fie Master Dampit: you lie lazing a bed here, and I come to enuite you to my
wedding dinner, up, up, up.


Whose this master Hoard! who hast thou married in the name of foolery.


A rich widow.


A Duch widow.


A rich widow, -- one widow medler.


Medler she keeps open house.


She did I can tell you in her the other husbands days, open house for all
comers, horse and man was welcome, and Room enough for em all.


There's to much for thee then, thou may let out some to thy Neighbours.


What? hung a live in chains O Spectacle, bed staffs of steel, O monstrum,
horrendum, Inform, Ingens cui Lumen ademptum, O Dampit, Dampit, here's a Just
judgment, shown upon usury, extortion, and trampling Villainy.


This exlent, thief rails upon the Thief.


Is this the end of cut throat Usury, Brothel, and blasphemy? now may thou
see what Race a Usurer runs.


Why thou Rogue of vniuersality, do not I know thee? thy Sound is like the
cuckoo, the welch Ambassador, thou cowardly slave that offers to fight with a
sick man when his weapons down: rail upon me in my naked bed? why thou great
Lucifers little vicar, I am not so weak but I know a knave at first sight, thou
Inconscionable Rascal, thou that go upon middlesex Iuryes, and will make
hast to give up thy verdict, because thou wilt not loose thy dinner, are you
answered?


Ant twere not for shame. --


Thou would be hanged then.


Nay you must exercise patience Master Gulf, always in a sick-mans Chamber.


'Heele quarrel with none I warrant you, but those that are bedred.


Let him come Gentlemen, I am armed, reach my close stool hither.


Here will be a sweet fray anon, I'll leave you gentlemen.


Nay wel'e a long with you, Master Gulf.


Hang him vsuring rascal.


Push, set your Strenght to his, your wit to his.


Pray Gentlemen depart, his hours come upon him, sleep in my bosom, sleep.


Nay we have enough of him in faith, keep him for the house. -- Now* make your
best.
For thrice his wealth, I would not have his breast.

A little thing would make me beat him, now he's asleep.


Mass then twilbe a pitiful day when he wakes.
I would be loath to see that day, come.

You ouer-rule me gentlemen in faith.


Nay uncle, let me prevail with you so much,
In faith go, now he has enuited you,

I shall have great joy there, when he has borne away the widow.


Why la, I thought where I should find you presently;
Uncle, a my troth, tis nothing so.

Whats nothing so sir, is not he married to the widow.


No by my troth is he not Uncle.


How?


Will you have the truth out, he is married to a whore in faith.


I should laugh at that.


Uncle, let me perish in your favour if you find it not so and that tis I that
have married the honest woman.


Ha? I'd walk ten mile a foot to see that in faith.


And see'te you shall, or I'll ne'er see you again.


A Queen in faith? ha, ha, ha.


Pup, pup, pup, pup, I like not this wine, is there never a better Teirs in the
house.


Yes sir, there are as good Teirs in the house, as any are in England.


Desire your mistress you knave, to taste em all over, she^ has better Skill.


Has she so, the better for her* and the worse for you.


Arthur, is the cupbard of plate set out,


Al's inorder sir.


I am in love with my Liveries every time I think on em, they make a gallant
show by my troth. -- Niece.


Do you call sir?


Prithee show a little diligence, and ouer-looke the knaves a little, theile
filtch and steal to day and send whole pasties home to their wives, and thou
be a good Niece, do not see me purloynd.


Fear it not sir, I have cause, tho the feast be prepared for you, yet it
serves fit for my wedding dinner too.


Master Lamprey, and Master Spichcocke two the most welcome gentlemen alive,
your fathers and mine were all free a^h Fishmongers.


They were indeed sir, you see bold guests sir, soon entreated


And that's best sir -- how now sirrah?


There's a coach come to'th door sir.


My Lady Foxestone a my life. Mistress Iane Hoard, wife, mass tis her Ladyship
indeed, Madame you are welcome to an vnfurnisht house, dearth of cheer,
scarcsity of attendance.


You are pleased to make the worst sir.


Wife.


Is this your Bride.


Yes Madam salute my Lady Foxtone.


Please you Madam a while to taste the air in the garden?


Twill please us well.


Who would not wed the most delicious life,
No Joys are like the comforts of a wife.

So we bachilers think that are not troubled with them


Your worships brother with an other ancient Gentleman, are newly alighted
Sir.


Master Onesiphorus Hoard, why now our company begins to come in: my dear and
kind brother welcome in faith.


You see we are men at an hour brother.


I, I'll say that for you brother you keep as good an hour to come to a feast,
as any Gentleman in the Sheer* what old Master Limber and Master Kicks, do
we meet in faith Jolly Gentlemen?


We hope you lack guess sir?


Oh welcome, welcome, we lack still such guess as your worships.


Ah sirrah brother, have you caught up widow Medler.


From em all brother, and I may tell you, I had mighty enemies, those that
stuck sore, old Lucre is a sore fox I can tell you brother.


Where is she, i'll go seek her out, I long to have a smack at her lips.


And most wishfully brother see where she comes, give her a smerck now we may
hear it all the house over.


Oh heaven, I am betrayed, I know that face.


Ha, ha, ha, why how now? are you both a shamde? come Gentlemen, we'll look
another way --


Nay Brother, hark you, come you're disposed to be merry?


Why do we meet else man?


That's another matter, I was ne'er so fread in my life but that you had been
in earnest.


How mean you brother?


You said she was your wife?


Did I so? by my troth and so she is.


By your troth Brother?


What reason have I to dissemble with my friends, brother, if marriage can make
her mine, she is mine? why?


Troth I am not well of a sudden? I must crave pardon brother, I came to see
you, but I cannot stay dinner in faith.


I hope you will not serve me so brother.


By your leave Master Hoard.


What now? what now? pray Gentlemen, you were wont to show your selves wisemen.


But you have shown your folly too much here.


How?


Fie, fie, a man of your repute and name,
You'll feast your friends but cloy em first with shame.

This grows too deep pray let us reach the sense.


In your old age dote on a Courtesan --


Ha?


Marry a Srumpet?


Gentlemen!


And Wit-goods queen:


Oh, nor Lands, nor living?


Living?


Speak?


Alas you know at first sir,
I told you I had nothing:

Out, out, I am cheated, infinitely cozened.


Nay Master Hoard:


A dutch widow, a dutch widow, a dutch widow:


Why Nephew shall I trace thee still a lier? wilt make me mad is not yon thing
the widow.


Why la, you are so hard a belief Uncle, by my troth she's a whore.


Then you're a knave:


Negatur Argumentum Uncle.


Probo tibi, Nephew: He that knows a woman to be a queen must needs be a
knave, thou say thou know her to be one, ergo if she be a queen you're
a knave:


Negatur, sequela maioris, Uncle, he that knows a woman to be a queen, must
needs be a knave, I deny that.


Lucre, and Wit-good, you're both villains, get you out of my house:


Why did not inuit me to thy wedding dinner?


And are not you and I sworn perpetual friends before witness sir, and were
both drunk upon it.


Daintily abused y'aue put a Iunt upon me:


Ha, ha, ha:


A common strumpet?


Nay now you wrong her sir* if I were she i'd have the law on you for that, I
durst depose for her, she ne'er had common use, nor common thought.


Despise me, publish me I am your wife,
What shame can I have now but you'll have part,
If in disgrace you share, I sought not you:
You pursued me, nay force me,
Had I friends would follow it,
Less then your action has been proved a rape.

Brother?


Nor did I ever boast of lands unto you,
Money or goods: I took a playner course:
And told you true i'd nothing,
If error were committed twas by you.
thank your own folly, nor has my sin been so odious but worse has bin for
given, nor am I so deformd but I may challing the utmost power of any old mans
love, she that tastes not sin before, twenty to one but sheele taste it after:
most of you old men are content to mary young Virgins and take that which
follows, where marrying one of us, you both save a sinner, and are quit from a
cuckold for ever,
"And more in brief let this your best thoughts win,
"She that knows sin, knows best how to hate sin.

Cursed be all Malice, black are the fruits of spite,
And poison first their owners: O my friends,
I must embrace shame, to be rid of shame,
Concealed disgrace prevents a public name.
Ah Wit-good ah Theodorus,

Alas sir, I was prick tin conscience to see her well bestowd* and where
could I bestow her better then upon your pitiful worship: excepting but my
self, I dare swear she's a Virgin, and now by marrying your Niece I have
banished my self for ever from her, she's mine Aunt now by my faith, and there's
no Meddling with mine Aunt you know, a sin against my Nuncle.


Lo, Gentlemen, before you all.
In true reclaimed form I fall,
Hence-forth for ever I defy,
The Glances of a sinful eye,
Waving of Fans, which some suppose,
Tricks of Fancy, Treading of Toes,
Wringing of Fingers, biting the Lip,
The wanton gate the alluring Trip,
All secret friends and private meetings,
Close borne letters, and Bawds greetings,
Feigning excuse to weomens Labours,
When we are sent for to'th next Neighbours,
Taking false Physic, and ne'er start,
To be let blood, tho sign be at heart,
Removing chambers, shifting beds,
To welcome Friends in husbands steads,
Them to enjoy, and you to marry,
They first served, while you must tarry,
They to spend and you to gather,
They to get and you to father,
These and thousand thousand more,
New reclaimed I now abhore.

A, here's a lesson Rioter for you.


I must confess my follies, I'll down to
And Here for ever I disclaim,
The cause of youths undoing. Game:
Chiefly dice, those true outlanders,
That shake out Beggars, Thieves and Panders,
Soul wasting Surfeits, sinful Riotts,
Queens Evils, Doctors diets.
Apothecaries Drugs, Surgeons Glisters,
Stabbing of arms for a common Mistress,
Ribbon favours* Ribald Speeches,
Dear perfumde Iacketts, penniless breeches,
Dutch Flapdragons, healths in Urine,
Drabs that keep a man to sure in:
I do defy you all.
Lend me each honest hand, for here I rise,
A reclaymde man loathing the general vice.

So, so, all friends, the wedding dinner cools,
Who seem most crafty prove oft times most fools.


