I Have seen the old year fairly buried,
Good Gentleman he was, but toward his end
Full of Diseases, he kept no good Diet,
He Loved a wench in June, (which we' count Wild,
And got the latter end of May with child;
That was his fault, and many an old year smells on it.
How now? who's it is? oh, one ath' Fasting-dayes
That followed him to his grave;
I know him by his gauntnes, his thin chitterlings,
He would undo a Tripe-wise; Fasting-day!
Why art so heavy?

Oh, sweet Doctor Almanac,
I have lost a dear old Master, beside Sir,
I have been out of service, all this Kersmas;
No-body minds Fasting day, I have scarce bin thought upon a' Friday nights;
And because Kersmas this year fell upon it,
The Fridays have been ever since so proud
They scorn my company, the Butchers boys
At Temple-Barre, set their great Dogs upon me,
I dare not walk abroad, nor be seen yet,
The very Poulters Girls throw rotten Eggs at me,
Nay Fishstreete loves me, even but fro teeth outward,
(The nearest Kin I have) looks shy upon me,
As if t'ad forgot me, I met Plumporridge now,
My big-swolne Enemy, he's plump and lusty,
The only man in place, sweet Master Doctor,
Prefer me to the New-Yeere, you can do it.

When can I do it sir? you must stay till Lent.


Till Lent, you kill my heart, sweet M. Doctor, Thrust me into Candlemas Eve, I
do beseech you.


Away, Candlemas Eve will never bear thee in these days, 'tis so frampole,
the Puritanes will never yield to it.


Why they are fat enough.


Here comes Plumporridge.


I, he's sure of wel-come; me thinks he moves like one of the great Porridge
Tubs, going to the Counter.


Oh killing cruel sight, yonder's a Fasting day: A lean spinie Rascal with a
Dog in's belly, his very Bowels bark with hunger; avaunt, thy Breath
stinks, I do not love to meet thee fasting, thou art nothing but wind, thy
Stomack's full of Farts, as if they had lost their way, and thou made with the
wrong end upward, like a Dutch Maw, that discharges still into 'th Mouth!


Why thou whoreson Breakfast, Dinner, Nuntions, Supper and Beaver, Cellar, Hall,
Kitchen, and Wet-larder.


Sweet Master Doctor, look quickly upon his Water, that I may break the
Urinal about his pate.


Nay friendship, friendship.


Never Master Doctor, with any Fastingday, persuade me not.


Nor any thing belongs to Ember-weeke.
And if I take against a thing, I'm stomachful,
I was borne an Anabaptist, a fell foe,
To fish and Fridayes, Pig's my absolute Sweetheart.
And shall I wrong my Love, and cleave to Saltfish!
Commit adultery with an Egg and Butter?
Well setting this apart, whose water's this sir?


On, thereby hangs a tale, my M. Kersmasses.
It is his water, sir, he's drawing on.

Kersmas? why let me see,
I saw him very lusty a Twelfe-night.

I, that's true, sir, but then he took his bane,
With choosing King and Queen;
Ha's made his Will already, here's the Copy.

And what ha's he given away, let me see, Plumbroth.


He could not give away much, sir, his children have so consumed him before
hand.


IN primis I give and bequeath to my second Son In, and In; his perpetual
Lodging in the Kingsbench, and his Ordinary out of the Basket.



A sweet allowance for a second brother.


Item, I give to my youngest Sons Gleek and Priministe, the full consuming of
Nights and Days, and Wives and Children, together with one secret gift, that
is, never to give over, while they have a penny.

And if e're they do, I'll be hanged.


For the possession of all my Lands, Manors, Mannor-houses, I leave them full
and wholly to my eldest Son, Noddy, whom during his minority, I commit to
the custody of a pair of Knaves and one and thirty?

There's Knaves enough a conscience to coozen one Fool.


Item, I give to my eldest Daughter, Tickle me quickly, and to her sister my
Ladies Hole, free leave to shift for themselves, either in Court, City, or
Country.

We thank him heartily.


Item, I leave to their old Aunt, my Sow he has Pigd, a Litter of Courtesans to
breed up for Shroue-tide.

They will be good ware in Lent, when flesh is forbid by Proclamation.


Item, I give to my Nephew Gambols, commonly called by the name of Kersmas
Gambols, all my Cattle, Horse and Mare, but let him shoe 'em himself.

I have seen him shoe the Mare forty times over.


Also, I bequeath to my Coozen-Germane Wassel-Bowle, borne of Dutch Parents,
the Privilege of a free Denizen, that is, to be drunk with Scotch-Ale, or
English-Beere: and lastly, I have given by word of mouth, to poor Blind man
Buff, a flap with a Foxetayle.

I, so he has given 'em all for ought I see. But now what think you of his
Water, sir?


Well he may linger out till Candlemas: But ne'er recover it.


Would he were gone once, I should be more respected.


Here's New-yeere?


I have ne'er a gift to give him, I'll be gone.


Mirth a healthful time fill all your days. Look freshly, Sir.


I cannot, Master Doctor.
My fathers death sets the Spring backward i'm.
For joy and comfort yet, I'm now between
Sorrow and joy, the Winter and the Spring.
And as Time gathers freshness in it's season,
No doubt Affects will be subdued with reason.

Y'aue a brave mind to work on, use my rules,
And you shall cut a Caper in November,
When other years your Grandfathers lay bedrid.

What's he, that looks so piteously, and shakes so?


A Fasting-day?


How's that?


A foolish Fasting-day,
An unseasonable cock scomb, seeks now for a service,
Ha's hunted up and down, ha's been at Court,
And the Long-Porter broke his head a'crosse there,
He had rather see the Devil, for this he says,
He ne'er grew up so tall with Fasting-dayes,
I would not for the price of all my Almanacs;
The Guard had took him there, they would ha beat out his brains with
Bombards.
I bade him stay till Lent, and now he whimpers;
He would to Rome forsooth, that's his last refuge,
But would try awhile,
How well he should be used in Lancashire.

He was my Fathers servant, That he was, sir.


Tis here upon Record.


I served him honestly, and cost him little.


I, I'll besworn for that.


Those were the Times, sir,
That made your Predecessors rich, and able
To lay up more for you, and since poor Fasting-daies
Were not made reckoning on, the pampered flesh
He has plaide the knave, Maids have had fuller bellies,
Those meals that once were saved, have stirred, leapt,
And begot Bastards, and they must be kept,
Better keep Fasting-dayes, your self may tell you,
And for the profit of purse, back and belly?

I never yet heard Truth better whin'de out.


Thou shalt not al be lost, not for vainglory
Greedily welcomed, wee'le begin with Virtue,
As we may hold with it, that does Virtue right,
Set him down, Sir, for Candlemas Eve at night.

Well, better late then never.
This is my comfort, I shall come to make
All the Fat Rogues go to bed supperless,
Get dinners where they can.

How now? what's he?


Tis old Time, Sir, that belongd To all your Predecessors.


Oh I honour
That Reverend Figure, may I ever think
How precious thou 'rt in youth, how rarely
Redeemed in Age.
Time Observe, you have Times service.
There's all in brief.

Hah? Doctor? What are these?

Time The Rabble that I pity, these I have served too,
But few or none have ever observed me,
Amongst this dissolute Route, Candlemas day!
I'm sorry to see him so ill associated?

Why that's his cause of coming to complain,
Because Shrouetuesday this year dwells so near him.
But tis his place he cannot be removed.
You must be patient, Candlemas, and brooke it.
This Rabble, Sir, Shrouetuesday, hungry Lent,
Ill May-day, Midsummer Eve, and the first Dogge-day,
Come to receive their places due by custom,
And that they build upon.

Giu'em their charge, and then admit'em.


I will do it in Cone.

Stand forth Shrouetuesday, one'a the silenc'st Bricke-Layers,
Tis in your charge to pull down Bawdyhouses,
To set your Tribe aworke, cause spoil in Shorditch,
And make a Dangerous Leake there, deface Turnbul,
And tickle Codpiece Row, ruin the Cockpit, the
Poor Players ne'er thriud in it, a my Conscience some
Queen pissed upon the first Brick;
For you, lean Lent, be sure you utter first
Your rotten Herrings and keep up your best
Till they be rotten, then there's no deceit
When they be all alike. You Ill-Mayday,
Be as unruly a Rascal as you may,
To stir up Deputy Double Diligence,
That comes perking forth with Halberds:
And for you Midsomer Eve, that watches warmest,
Be but sufficiently drunk, and you're well harnessed,
You Dogday!

Woh.


A churlish maundring Rogue,
You must both beg and rob, curse and collogue,
In cooler Nights the Barn with Doxies fill,
In Harvest lye in Haycock with your Iill.
They have all their charge.

You have gin't at the wrong end,


To bid'em sin's the way to make em mend,
For what they are forbid, they run to head-long.
I have cast their Inclinations, now your service,
To draw fresh blood into your Mrs. cheeks, slaves!

What scornful looks the Abusiue Villains threw,
Upon the reverend form and face of Time!
Me thought it appeared sorry, and went angry.

'Tis still your servant.


How now? what are these?


These are your Good Days, and your Bad Days, Sir,
Those your Indifferent days, nor good, nor bad.

But is here all?


A wonder there's so many.
How these broke loose, every one stops their passage,
And makes inquiry after 'em.
This Farmer will not cast his seed in the ground
Before he look in Bretnor, there he finds
Some word which he hugs happily, as, Ply the Box,
Make Hay betimes, It falls into thy Mouth.
A punctual Lady will not paint forsooth
Upon his Critical days, twill not hold well,
Nor a nice Citie-Wedlocke eat fresh Herring,
Nor Perriwinkles;
Although she long for both, if the word be that day,
Gape after Gudgins, or some fishing phrase.
A Scriveners Wife will not entreat the Mony-master
That lies in the house, and gets her Husbands children
To furnish a poor Gentleman's Extremes,
If she find, Nihil in a Bag, that morning,
And so of thousand follies, these suffice
To show you Good, Bad, and Indifferent Days,
And all have their Inscriptions, here's, Cock a Hoop,
This the Geere cottens, and this, Faint Heart, never*
These, noted Black for Badness, Rods in peace.
This, Post for Puddings, this Put up thy Pipes,
These black and white indifferently inclining
To both their natures, neither Full nor Fasting,
In Dock, out Nettle, -- Now to your motion,
Black Knaves, and white Knaves, and you parcel Rascals,
Two hypocritical party-colord Varlets,
That play o'both hands.

I see these pleasures of low Births and Natures,
Add little freshness to your cheeks, I pity you,
And can no longer now conceal from you,
Your happy Omen, Sir, Blessings draw near you,
I will disclose a Secret in Astrology,
By the sweet Industry of Harmony,
Your white and glorious friend;
Even very Deities have conspired, to grace
Your fair Inauguration, here I find it,
Tis clear in Art,
The minute, nay, the point of Time's arrived,
Me thinks the blessings touch you, now they're felt, Sir.

NEw-yeere, New-yeere! hark, harken to me,
I am sent down
To crown,
Thy wishes, with me,
Thy fair desires in Virtues Court are fil'de,
The goodness of thy thought,
This blessed work hath wrought,
Time shall be reconcilde:
Thy Spring shall in all sweets abound,
Thy Summer shall be clear and sound,
Thy Autumn swell the Barn and Loft,
With Corn and fruits, ripe, sweet and soft,
And in thy Winter, when all go,
Thou shalt depart as white as Snow.
Behold, behold, hark, harken to me,
Glories come down,
To crown
Thy wishes, with me,
Bright Heroes in lasting Honour spher'd
Virtues eternal Spring,
(By making Time their King.)
See, they're beyond Time reared.
Yet in their love to humane good,
In which estate themselves once stood,
They all descend to have their worth
Shine, to Imitation, forth:
And by their Motion, Light and Love,
To Show how after Times should move!



Move on, Move on, be still the same,
You Beauteous Sons of Brightness,
You add to Honour Spirit and Flame,
To Virtue, Grace, and Vhitenesse;
You, whose every little motion
May learn Strictness more Devotion,
Every Pace, of that high worth,
It treads a fair Example forth;
Quickens a Virtue, makes a Story,
To your own Heroic Glory.
May your three times thrice Blessed Number
Raise Merit from his Ancient S'umber;
Move on, Move on, c.



SEe, whether Fate hath lead you, (Lamps of Honour)
(Fog Goodness brings her own reward upon her)
Look, turn your Eyes, then conclude, commending,
And say, you have lost no Worth by your Descending,
Behold a Heaven about you, Spheres more plenty,
There, for one Luna, here shines Ten,
And for one Venus, Twenty;
Then Heroes, double both your Fame and Light,
Each choose his Star, and full adorn this Night.


The Morning gray,
Bids, come away,
Every Lady should begin
To take her Chamber, for the Stars are in:
Live Long the Miracles of Times and Years,
Till with those Heroes, You sit fixed in Spheres.


