Captain, Regent, Principal,


What shall I call thee?
The Noble spark of bounty;
The life-bloud of Society.

Call me your Forecast, you whoresons, when you come drunk out of a Tavern,
it is I must cast your plots into form still; tis I must manage the Prank, or
I'll not give a louse for the proceeding: I must let fly my civil fortunes,
turn wilde-braine, lay my wits vpo'th Tenters, you raskals, to maintain a
company of villains, whom I love in my very soul and conscience.


A ha, our little forecast.


Hang you, you have bewitched me among you, I was as well given till I fell to
be wicked, my Grandsire had hope of me, I went all in black, swore but a
Sundays, never came home drunk, but upon fasting nights to cleanse my
stomach; sl'id now I'm quite altered, blown into light colours, let out
oaths by the minute, sit up late till it be early, drink drunk till I am
sober, sink down dead in a Tavern, and rise in a Tabacco-shop: her's a
transformation: I was wont yet to pity the simple, and leave em some money:
sl'id, now I gull em without conscience; I go without order, swear without
number, gull without mercy, drink without measure.


I deny the last, for if you drink ne'er so much, you drink within measure.


How prove you that sir?


Because the drawers never fill their pots.


Masle that was well found out all drunkerds may lawfully say, they drink
within measure by that trick, dna now I'm put in the mind of a trick can you
keep your countenance villains? yet I am a fool to ask that, for how can
they keep their countenance that have lost their credits?


I warrant you for blushing Captain.


I easily believe that Ancient, for thou lost thy colours once; Nay faith as
for blushing, I think there's grace little enough amongst you all, tis lent in
your cheeks, the flag's down; well, your blushing face I suspect not, nor
indeed greatly your laughing-face, unless you had more money in your purses:
then thus compendiously now, you all know the possibilities of my hereafter
fortunes, and the humour of my frolic Grandsire Sir Bounteous Progress; whose
death makes all possible to me: I shall have all, when he ha's nothing; but now
he ha's all, I shall have nothing: I think one mind runs through a million
of em; they love to keep us sober all the while the're alive, that when
the're dead we may drink to their healths; they cannot abide to see us merry
all the while the're above ground; and that makes so many laugh at their
fathers funerals: I know my Grandsire has his Will in a Box, and has
bequeathed all to me, when he can carry nothing away; but stood I in need of
poor ten pounds now, by his will I should hang my selte e're I should get
it, there's no such word in his Will I warrant you, nor no such thought in his
mind.


You may build upon that Captain.


Then since he ha's no will to do me good as long as he lives; by mine own
will, I'll do my self good before he dies, and now I arrive at the purpose.
You are not ignorant I'm sure, you true and necessary implements of mischief;
first, that my Grandsier Sir Bounteous Progress is a Knight of thousands, and
therefore no Knight since one thousand six hundred: next, that he keeps a
house like his name Bounteous, open for all comers: thirdly and lastly, that
he stands much upon the glory of his complement, variety of entertainment,
together with the largeness of his Kitchen, longitude of his Buttery, and
fecunditie of his Larder, and thinks himself never happier then when some
stiff L. or great Countess alights, to make light his dishes: these being
well mixed together may give my project better encouragement, and make my
purpose spring forth more fortunate: to be short, and cut off a great deal of
dirty way; I'll down to my Grandsire like a L.


How Captain?


A French ruff, a thin beard, and a strong perfume will do it: I can hire
blew coats for you all by Westminster clock, and that colour will be soonest
believed.


But prithee Captain?


Push, I reach past your fadomes; you desire crowns.


From the crown of our head, to the sole of our foot bully.


Why carry your selves but probably, and carry away enough with your selves.


Why there spoke a Roman Captain, M. Penitent Brothel.


Sweet M. Folly-wit..

Here's a mad brain a'th first, whose pranks scorn to have presidents; to be
second to any; or walk beneath any: madcaps inventions, has plaid more tricks
then the cards can allow a man, and of the last stamp too, hating imitation,
a fellow, whose only glory is to be prime of the company; to be sure of which,
he maintains all the rest: he's the Karion, and they the Kites that gorge
upon him.

But why in others do I check wild passions,
And retain deadly follies in my self?
I tax his youth of common received riot,
Times Comic flashes, and the fruits of blood;
And in my self sooth up adulterous motions,
And such an appetite that I know dams me,
Yet willingly embrace it, love to Harebraines wife,
Over whose hours and pleasures her sick husband
With a fantastic but deserved suspect,
Bestows his serious time in watch and ward;
And therefore I'm constrained to use the means
Of one that knows no mean, a Courtesan,
One poison for another, whom her husband
Without suspicion innocently admits
Into her company, who with tried art
Corrupts and loosens her most constant powers,
Making his ielousy more then half a wittoll,
Before his face plotting his own abuse,
To which himself gives aim.
Whilst the broad arrow with the forked head
Misses his brow but narrowly; see here she comes,
The close Courtesan, whose mother is her bawd.

Master Penitent Brothel.


My little pretty Lady gull-man, the news, the comfort?


You're the fortunate man sir, Knight a'th holland skirt: there wants but
opportunity and she's wax of your own fashioning, she had wrought her self
into the form of your love before my art set finger to her.


Did our affections meet? our thoughts keep time?


So it should seem by the music, the only jar is in the grumbling base
viol her husband.


Oh his waking suspicion!


Sigh not M. Penitent, trust the managing of the business with me, tis for my
credit now to see it well finished: if I do you no good sir, you shall give me
no money sir.


I am arrived at the Court of conscience; A Courtesan! O admirable times!
honesty is removed to the Common place. Farewell Lady.


How now daughter?


What news mother?


A token from thy keeper.


Oh from sir Bounteous Progress: he's my keeper in deed, but there's many a
piece of venison stolen that my keeper wots not on; there's no park kept so
warily, but looses flesh one time or other; and no woman kept so privately, but
may watch advantage to make the best of her pleasure: and in common reason one
keeper cannot be enough for so proud a park as a woman.


Hold thee there girl.


Fear not me mother.


Every part of the world shoots up daily into more subtilty: the very spider
weaues her caules with more art and cunning, to entrap the fly.

The shallow ploughman can distinguish now,
Twixt simple truth and a dissembling brow.
Your base mechanic fellow can spy out
A weakness in a L. and learnes to flout.
How dost behoove us then that live by slight,
To have our wits wound up to their stretched height?
Fifteen times thou know I have sold thy may denhead,
To make up a dowry for thy marriage, and yet
There's may denhead enough for old sir Bounteous still,
Heel be all his life time about it yet, and be as far to seek when he has
done.
The sums that I have told upon thy pillow!
I shall once see those golden days again:
Tho fifteen, all thy may den heads are not gone:
The Italian is not serude yet, nor the French:
The British men come for a dozen at once,
They engross all the market, Tut my girl,
Tis nothing but a politic conveyance;
A sincere carriage, a religious eyebrowe
That throws their charms over the worldlings senses;
And when thou spiest a fool that truly pities
The false springs of thine eyes,
And honourably doates upon thy love,
If he be rich, set him by for a husband;
Be wisely tempered and learn this my wench
Who gets the opinion for a virtuous name
May sin at pleasure, and ne'er think of shame:

Mother I am too deep a Scholar grown To learn my first rules now.


'twill be thy own, I say no more; peace, hark, remove thy self, oh, the two
elder Brothers.


A fair hour sweet Lady.


Good morrow gentlemen, Master Inesse, and M. Possibility.


Wher's the little sweet Lady your daughter?


Even at her book sir.


So religious?


Tis no new motion sir, sh'as took it from an infant.


May we deserve a sight of her, Lady?


Upon that condition you will promise me gentlemen, to avoid all profane
talk, wanton complements, indecent phrazes, and lascivious courtings* (which I
know my daughter will sooner die then endure,) I am contented your suits
shall be granted.


Not a bawdy syllable I protest.


Syllable was plac'st there, for indeed your one syllables are your bawdiest
words, prick that down.


She may make nightwork ont, twas well recovered, He Cats and Courtesans strowle
most in the night, Her friend may be receiude and conuayde forth, nightly, He be
at charge for watch and ward, for watch ward in faith, and here they come.


Give your worship good even.


Welcome my friends, I must deserve your diligence in an employment serious:
the troth is, there is a cunning plot laid, but happily discovered, to rob my
house: the night uncertain when, but fixed within the circle of this month: nor
does this villainy consist in numbers:

Or many partners, only some one
Shall in the form of my familiar friend,
Be receiude privately into my house,
By some perfidious servant of mine own,
Addressed fit for the practise.

O abominable!


If you be faithful watchmen, show your goodness, And with these Angels shore
up your eye-lids: Let me not be purloind, purloind indeed; the merry Greekes
conceive me: there is a Gem I would not loose, Kept by the Italian under locke
and key: we English men are careless creatures: well, I have said enough.


And we will do enough sir.


Why well said, watch me a good turn now, so, so, so,
Rise villainy with the Lark, why tis prevented,
Or steal't by with the leather winged Bat:
The evening cannot save it, peace; Oh Lady Gulman, my wives only company!
welcome; and how does the virtuous Matron, that good old Gentlewoman thy
mother? I persuade my self, if modesty be in the world she has part on it: a
woman of an excellent carriage all her life time, in Court, City, and
Country.


Sha's always carried it well in those places sir; witness three bastards a
piece: how does your sweet bedfellow sir? you see I'm her boldest visitant.


And welcome sweet Virgin, the only companion, my soul wishes for her; I
left her within at her Lute, prithee give her good counsel.


Alas, she needs none sir.


Yet, yet, yet, a little of thy instructions will not come amiss to her.


I'll bestow my labour sir.


Do, labour her prithee; I have conveyed away all her wanton Pamphlets, as
Hero and Leander, Venus and Adonis, oh two lushious mary-bone pies for a young
married wife, here, here, prethie take the resolution, and read to her a
little.


Sha's set up her resolution already sir.


True, true, and this will confirm it the more, there's a chapter of Hell, tis
good to read this cold weather, terrify her, terrify her; go, read to her
the horrible punishments for itching wantonness, the pains allotted for
adultery; tell her her thoughts, her very dreams are answerable, say so; rip
up the life of a Curtiza, show how loath some tis.


The gentleman would persuade me in time to disgrace my self, and speak ill
of mine own function.


This is the course I take, I'll teach the married man
A new selected strain, I admit none
But this pure virgin to her company,
Puh, that's enough; I'll keep her to her stint,
I'll put her to her pension,
She gets but her allowance, that's bare-one,
Few women but have that beside their own,
Ha, ha, ha, nay I'll put her hard toote.

Fain would I meet the gentleman.


Push, fain would you meet him, why, you do not take the course.


How earnestly she labours her, like a good wholesome sister of the family, she
will preuaile I hope.


Is that the means?


What is the means? I would as gladly to enjoy his sight, embrace it as the --



Shall I have hearing? listen?


She's round with her in faith.


When husbands in their ranck'st suspicions dwell,
Then tis our best Art to dissemble well,
Put but these notes in use, that I'll direct you,
Heal curse himself that ere he did suspect you,
Perhaps she will solicit you, as in trial
To visit such and such, still gived denial,
Let no persuasions sway you, they are but fetches
Set to betray you, Ielousies, slights and reaches,
Seem in his sight to endure the sight of no man,
Put by all kisses, till you kiss in common,
Neglect all entertain, if he bring in
Strangers, keep you your chamber, be not seen;
If he chance steal upon you, let him find,
Some book lie open against an unchaste mind,
And coted Scriptures, tho for your own pleasure,
You read some stirring pamphlet, and convey it
Under your Skirt, the fitest place to lay it,
This is the course my wench to enjoy thy wishes,
Here you perform best, when you most neglect,
The way to daunt, is to outuie suspect,
Manage these principles but with Art and life,
Welcome all Nations, you're an honest wife.

She puts it home in faith, even to the quick
From her Elaborate action I reach that,
I must requite this maid, faith Im'e forgetful.

Here Lady, convey my hart unto him in this Jewel,
Against you see me next you shall perceive
I have profited, in the mean season tel him
I am a prisoner yet, a'th masters side,
My husbands jealousy, that masters him, as he doth master me,
And as a keeper that locks prisoners up,
Is himself prison'd under his own key,
Even so my husband in restraining me,
with the same ward bars his own liberty.

I'll tell him how you wish it, and I'll wear
My wits to the third pile, but all shall clear.

I owe you more then thanks, but that I hope
My husband will requite you.

Think you so Lady? he ha's small reason for it.


What done so soon? away, too't again, too't again, good wench too't again,
leave her not so, where left you. come.


Faith I am weary sir.
I cannot draw her from her strict opinion.
With all the arguments that sense can frame.

No; let me come, Fie wife, you must consent; what opinion i'st, let's hear?


Fondly and wilfully she retains that thought, That every sin is damned.


Oh fie, fie, wife! Pea, pea, pea, pea, how have you lost your time? for shame
be converted: there's a diabalocall opinion indeed; then you may think that
usury were damned: you're a fine merchant in faith; or bribery? you know the law
well; or sloth? would some of the Clergy heard you in faith; or pride? you come
at Court; or gluttony? you're not worthy to dine at an Aldermans table:

Your only deadly sin's Adultery,
That villainous ring-worme, woman's worst requital,
Tis only lechery that's damned to'th pit-hole;
Ah, that's an arch-offence, believe it squall,
All sins are venial but veneriall.

I'ue said enough to her.


And she will be ruled by you.


Fah.


I'll pawn my credit ont; come hither Lady,
I will not altogether rest ungrateful,
Here, wear this Ruby for thy pains and counsel.

It is not so much worth sir, I am a very ill counsellor truly.


Goo too I say.


You're too blame in faith sir, I shall ne'er deserve it.


Thou hast don't already: farewell sweet Virgin, prithee let's see thee oftner.


Such gifts will soon entreat me.


Wife, as thou love the quiet of my breast,
Embrace her counsel, yield to her advices;
Thou wilt find comfort in em in the end;
Thou'lt feel an alteration, prithee think on it:
Mine eyes can scarce refrain.

Keep in your dew sir, least when you would, you want it.


I'ue pawnde my credit on it, ah did thou know, The sweet fruit once,
thoud'st never let it go.


Tis that I strive to get.


And still do so.


You have bin too much like your name Sir Bounteous.


Oh not so, good Knights, not so, you know my humour; most welcome good Sir
Andro Pelcut, Sir Aquitaino Colewort, most welcome.


Thanks good Sir Bounteous.


Oh, cry your worship heartily mercy Sir.


How now linen stockings, and threescore mile a day; whose footman art thou?


Pray can your worship tell me, Ho, ho, ho, if my L. be come in yet.


Thy L! what L?


My L. Owe-much sir.


My L. Owe-much! I have heard much speech of that L. he has great acquaintance
in the City; that L. has bin much followed.


And is still sir; he wants no company when he's in London: he's free of the
Mercers, and there's none of em all dare cross him.


And they did, he would turn over a new leaf with em; he would make em all
weary on it in the end: much fine rumour have I heard of that L. yet had I never
the fortune to set eye upon him; art sure he will alight here Footman? I am
afraid you're mistook.


Thinks your worship so sir? by your leave sir.


Puh; passion of me, Footman, why Pumps I say come back.


Does your worship call?


Come hither I say, I am but afraid on it, would it might happen so well, how
dost know? did he name the house with the great turret a'th top?


No saith did he not sir.


Come hither I say, did he speak of a cloth a gold chamber?


Not one word by my troth sir.


Come again you lowzie seven mile an hour?


I beseech your worship detain me not.


Was there no talk of a fair pair of Orgaines, a great guilt candlestick,
and a pair of silver snuffers?


'twere sin to belie my Lord, I heard no such words sir.


A pox confine thee, come again, puh,


Your worship will undo me sir.


Was there no speech of a long dining room, a huge kitchen, large meat, and a
broad dresser board?


I have a greater maw to that indeed, an't please your worship.


Whom did he name?


Why one Sir Bounteous Progress.


Ah, a, a, I am that Sir Bounteous you progressiue round-about Rascal.


Laughs, puh --


I knew I should have him in the end, there's not a Lord will mis me I thank
their good honours, tis a fortune laid upon me, they can sent out their best
entertainment, I have a kind of complemental gift given me above ordinary
country Knights, and how soon, tis smelt out I warrant ye, there's not one
Knight in the Sheer able to entertain a Lord in the kue, or a Lady in the nick like
me, like me, there's a kind of grace belongs too't, a kind of Art which
naturally slips from me, I know not on it I promise you, tis gon before Im'e
aware on it, cuds me I forget my self, where --


Does your worship call?


Run sirrah, cal in my chief gentleman in the chain of gold, expedite; and how
does my good Lord? I never saw him before in my life, a cup of bastard for this
footman.


My Lord has trauaild this five year sir.


Trauaild this five year? how many children has he? some bastard I say.


No bastard an't please your worship.


A cup of Sack to strengthen his wit, the footmans a fool; oh, come hither
master Gunwater, come hither, send presently to master Pheasant for one of his
hens, there's Partridge in the house.


And Wild-duck an't please your worship.


And Woodcock an't please thy worship.


And Woodcock an't please your worship, I had thought to have spoke before you.


Remember the Pheasant, down with some Plouer, clap down six Woodcocks, my
loue's coming; now sir.


Ant please your worship there's a Lord and his followers newly alighted.


Dispath I say, dispatch, why wher's my music? he's come indeed.


Footman.


My Lord.


Run swiftly with my commendations to S. Jasper Topas Wee'le ride and visit him
in the morning say.


Your Lordships charge shall be effected.


That Courtly comely form, should present to me Sir Bounteous Progress.


Y'aue found me out my Lord, I cannot hide my self, Your honour in most
spatiously welcome.


In this forgive me Sir, that being a stranger to your houses,
And you, I make my way so bold, and presume
Rather upon your kindness then your knowledge,
Only your bounteous disposition.
Fame hath diuulgd, and is to me well known.

Nay, and your Lordship know my disposition, you know me better then they that
know my person; your honour is so much the welcomer for that.


Thanks good sir Bounteous.


Pray pardon me, it has been often my ambition my L. both in respect of your
honourable presence, and the prodigal fame that keeps even stroke with your
unbounded worthiness;

To have wished your Lordship, where your Lordship is
A noble guest in this unworthy seat:
Your Lordship ne'er heard my Organs.

Heard of em sir Bounteous, but never heard em.


The're but double guilt my L. some hundred and fifty pound wilt fit your
Lordship with such another pair.


Indeed sir Bounteous?


O my L. I have a present suit to you.


To me sir Bounteous, and you could ne'er speak at fitter time? for I'm here
present to grant you.


Your Lordship has been a traveller.


Some five year sir.


I have a Grandchild my L. I love him; and when I die I'll do somewhat for him:
I'll tel your honour the worst of him, a wild lad he has been.


So we have been all sir.


So we have been all indeed my L. I thank your Lorships assistance; some
comic pranks he has bin guilty of; but I'll pawn my credit for him, an honest
trusty bosom.


And that's worth all sir.


And that's worth all indeed my L. for hes like to have all when I die;
imberbis Iuuenis, his chin has no more prickles yet then a midwives: there's
great hope of his wit his haire's so long a coming; shall I be bold with your
honour, to prefer this aforesaid Ganimed to hold a plate under your Lordships
cup?


You wrong both his worth, and your bounty, and you cal that boldness; Sir I
have heard much good of that young Gentleman.


Nay he has a good wit in faith my L.


He has carried himself always generously.


Are you advised of that my L.? he has carried many things cleanly: I'll show your
Lordship my Will, I keep it above in an Out landish box; the whoreson boy must
have all: I love him, yet he shall ne'er find it as long as I live.


Well sir, for your sake, and his own deserving, I'll reserve a place for him
nearest to my secrets.


I understand your good Lordship, you'll make him your Secretary: my music,
give my L. a taste of his welcome.


So, how like you our Airs my Lord? are they choice?


The're seldom matched believe it.


The Consort of mine own household.


Ye sir.


The Musicians are in Ordinary, yet no ordinary Musicians: your Lordship shall
hear my Organs now.


Oh I beseech you sir Bounteous.


My Organist.

Come my L. how does your honour relish my Organ?


A very proud Air in faith sir.


Oh, how can't choose, a Walloon plays upon em, and a Welshman blows wind in
their breech.


You must pardon us my L. hasty cates, your honour has had even a hunting meal
on it; and now I am like to bring your Lordship to as mean a lodging, a hard
Down bed in faith my L. poor Cambric sheets, and a cloth a Tissue Canopy,
the Curtains indeed were wrought in Venice, with the story of the Prodigal
child in silk and gold, only the Swine are left out my L. for spoiling the
curtains.


To was well prevented sir.


Silkin rest, harmonious slumbers, and venetiall dreams to your Lordship.


The like to kind Sir Bounteous.


Fie, not to me my L. I'm old, past dreaming of such vanities.


Old men should dream best.


Their dreams indeed my L. y'aue gi'nt us: tomorrow your Lordship shall see my
Cocks, my Fish-ponds, my Park, my Champion grounds; I keep Champers in my
house can show your Lordship some pleasure.


Sir Bounteous you even whelm me with delights.


Once again a musical night to your honour; I'll trouble your Lordship no more.


Good rest sir Bounteous; so, come, the vizards, where be the masking suits?


In your Lordships Portmanteau.


Peace Leiftenant.


I had rather have war, Captain.


Puh, the plot's ripe; come, to our business lad, Tho guilt condemns, tis gilt
must make us glad.


Nay, and you be at your distinctions Captain, I'll follow behind no longer.


Get you before then, and whelm your nose with your vizard, go.

Now Grandsire, you that hold me at hard meat,
And keep me out at the Dags end, I'll fit you;
Under his Lordships leave, all must be mine
He and his Will confesses, what I take then
Is but a borrowing of so much before hand;
I'll pay him again when he dies, in so many blacks,
I'll have the Church hung round with a noble a yard,
Or requite him in Scutchions, let him trap me
In gold, and I'll lap him in lead; quid pro quo: I
Must look none of his Angels in the face forsooth,
Until his face be not worth looking on; Tut lads,
Let Sires and Grandsires keep us low, we must
Live when the're flesh, as well as when the're dust.

Go, sirrah, run presently to M. Penitent Brothel; you know his lodging, knock
him up, I know he cannot sleep for sighing; tell him I'ue happily bethought a
mean,

To make his purpose prosper in each limb,
Which only rests to be approved by him:
Make hast, I know he thirsts for it.
Within. Oh.


Hark, the're at their business.


Thieves, thieves.


Gag that gaping rascal, tho he be my Grandsires chief Gentleman in the chain
of gold, I'll have no pity of him; how now lads?


Al's sure and safe, on with your vizard sir; the servants are all bound.


There's one care past then, come follow me lads, I'll lead you now to'th point,
and top of all your fortunes; yo'n lodging is my Grandsires.


So, so, lead on, on.


Her's a Captain worth the following, and a wit worth a mans love and
admiring!


Oh gentlemen, and you be kind gentlemen, what countrymen are you?


Linconsheere men Sir.


I am glad of that in faith.


And why should you be glad of that?


Oh, the honestest thieves of all come out of Linconsheere; the kindest naturde
Gentlemen; the'le rob a man with conscience: they have a feeling of what they
go about, and will steal with tears in their eyes: ah pitiful gentlemen.


Push, Money, money, we come for money.


Is that all you come for? Ah what a beast was I to put out my money the other
day: alas good gentlemen, what shift shall I make for you? pray come again
another time.


Tut, tut sir, money.


Oh not so loud sir, you're too shrill a Gentleman; I have a L. lies in my
house, I would not for the world his honour should be disquieted.


Who my L. Owemuch? we have took order with him before hand, he lies bound in
his bed and al his followers.


Who my L? bound my L? Alas what did you mean to bind my L? he could keep his
bed well enough without binding: y'aue undone me i'nt already, you need rob me
no farther.


Which is the Key, come?


Ah I perceive now, you're no true Linconsheere spirits; you come rather out of
Bedforesheere, we cannot lie quiet in our beds for you: so, take enough my
Masters; spur a free horse, my name's sir Bounteous, a merry world in faith; what
Knight but I keep open house at midnight? well, there should be a conscience,
if one could hit vppon't.


Away now, cease upon him, bind him.


Is this your Court of equity? why should I be bound for mine own money? but
come, come, bind me, I have need on it; I have been too liberal to night,
keep in my hands: nay, as hard as you list; I am too good to bear my L.
company, you have watched your time my Masters; I was Knighted at Westminster,
but many of these nights will make me a Knight of Windsor; y'aue deserude so
well my Masters; I bid you all to dinner to morrow, I would I might have your
companies in faith, I desire no more.


Oh ho sir!


Pray meddle not with my Organs, to put em out of tune.


Oh no, here's better music sir.


Ah pox feast you.


Dispatch with him, away; so, thank you good Grandsire; this was bounteously
done of him in faith; it came somewhat hard from him at first; for indeed nothing
comes stiff from an old man but money: and he may well stand upon that, when
he has nothing else to stand upon: where's our Port-mantua?


Here Bully-Captaine.


In with the purchase, 'twill lie safe enough there vnder's nose I warrant you:
what, is all sure?


All's sure Captain.


You know what follows now, one villane binds his fellows; go, we must be all
bound for our own securities raskals, there's no dallying' vppo'th point; you
conceit me: there is a L. to be found bound in the morning, and al his
followers, can you pick out that L. now?


O admirable spirit!


You ne'er plot for your safeties, so your wants be satisfied.


But if we bind one another, how shall the last man be bound?


Pox on it, I'll have the footman escape.


That's I, I thank you sir.


The Footman of all other will be supposed to escape, for he comes in no bed all
night; but lies in's clothes, to be first ready in the morning: the horse and he
lies in litter together; that's the right fashion of your bonny Footman: and
his freedom will make the better for our purpose; for we must have one in the
morning to unbind the Knight, that we may have our sport within our selves: we
now arrive at the most ticklish point, to rob, and take our ease, to be thieves
and lie by it, looker to it lads, it concerns every mans gullet; I'll not have
the jest spoiled, that's certain, tho it hazard a windepipe: I'll either go
like a L. as I came, or be hanged like a these as I am; and that's my
resolution.


Troth a match Captain, of all hands.


Oh M. Penitent Brothel!


What is't sweet Lady Gulman, that so seazes on thee with rapture and
admiration?


A thought, a trick, to make you sir especially happy, and yet I my self a
saver by it.


I would embrace that Lady with such courage, I would not leave you on the
loosing hand.


I will give trust to you sir, the cause then why I raised you from your bed so
soon; wherein I know sighs would not let you sleep, thus understand it: You
love that woman (M. Harebraines wife) Which no invented means can crown with
freedom, For your desires and her own wish, but this, Which in my slumbers
did present it self.


I'm covetous Lady.


you know her husband lingering in suspect, Locks her from all society, but
mine.


Most true.


I only am admitted, yet hitherto That ha's done you no real happiness; by my
admittance I cannot perform that deed, that should please you, You know:
wherefore thus I'ue conuaid'd it, I'll counterfeit a fit of violent sickness.


Good.


Nay tis not so good by my faith, but to do you good.


And in that sense I called it, but take me with you Lady; would it be probable
enough to have a sickness so suddenly violent?


Puh, all the world knows women are soon down; we can be sick when we have a
mind to it, catch an ague with the wind of our fans, surfeit upon the rump of a
Lark, and bestow ten pound in physic upon it; we're likest our selves when
we're down: tis the easiest Art and cunning for our sect to counterfeit sick,
that are always full of sits when we are well; for since we were made for a
weak imperfect creature, we can sit that best that we are made for: I thus
translated, and your self slipped into the form of a Physician.


I a Physician Lady, talk not on it I beseech you, I shall shame the whole
College.


Tutman, any guacksaluing terms will serve for this purpose; for I am
pitifully hanted with a brace of elder brothers, new perfumde in the first of
their fortunes, and I shall see how forward their purses will be to the
pleasing of my palate, and restoring of my health; lay on load enough upon em,
and spare em not, for the're good plump fleshly Asses, and may well enough
bear it: let gold, Ambre, and dissolved Pearl, be common ingrediences, and
that you cannot compose a cullisse without em: put but this cunningly in
practise, it shall be both a sufficient recompense for all my pains in your
love, and the ready means to make Mistress Harebraine; way, by the visiting of
me to your mutual desired company.


I Applaud thee, kiss thee, and will constantly embrace it.


Ho, Gunwater!


Singlestone!


Ienkin, wa, ha, ho.


Ewen!


Simcod!


Footman! whewe --


Oh good your worship, let me help your good old worship.


Ah poor honest footman, how did thou escape this massacre?


Even by miracle, and lying in my clothes sir.


I think so, I would I had lain in my clothes to Footman, so I had escaped em;
I could have but rise like a beggar then, and so I do now, till more money
come in; but nothing afflicts me so much, my poor Geometrical Footman, as
that the barbarous villains should lay violence upon my L. Ah, the binding of
my L. cuts my heart in two pieces; so, so, tis well, I thank thee, run to
thy fellows, undo em, undo em, undo em.


Alas, if my L. should miscarry, the're unbound already sir; they have no
occupation but sleep, feed, and fart.


If I be not ashamed to look my L in the face, I'm a Sarassen my L.


Who's that?


One may see he has been scard, a pox on em for their labours.


Singlestone!


Singlestone? I'll ne'er answer to that in faith.


Suchman-


Suchman? nor that neither in faith; I am not brought so low, tho I be old.


Who's that in the chamber?


Good morrow my L. tis I.


Sir Bounteous good morrow, I would give you my hand sir, but I cannot come at
it; is this the courtesy a'th country sir Bounteous?


Your Lordship grieves me more then al my loss; Tis the vnnatural'st sight
that can be found, To see a noble gentleman hard-bound.


Trust me, I thought you had been better beloved sir Bounteous; but I see you
have enemies sir, and your friends fare the worse for em: I like your talk
better then your lodging; I ne'er lay harder in a bed of Down; I have had a
mad nights rest on it: can you not gesle what they should be Sir Bounteous?


Faith Lincolneshire men my Lord.


How? fie, fie, believe it not sir, these lie not far off I warrant you.


Think you so my Lord?


I'll be burnt they do, some that use to your house sir, and are familiar with
all the couneiances.


This is the commodity of keeping open house my Lord, that makes so many shut
their doors about dinner time.


They were resolute villains, I made my self known to em, told em what I
was; gave em my honourable word not to disclose em.


O saucy unmannerly villains!


And think you the slaves would trust me upon my word?


They would not?


Forsooth no, I must pardon em, they told me Lords promises were mortal, and
commonly die within half an hour after they are spoken; they were but
gristles, and not one amongst a hundred come to any full groth, or perfection,
and therefore tho I were a L. I must enter into bond.


Insupportable Rascals.


Troth Im'e of that mind Sir Bounteous you fared the worse for my coming
hither.


Ah good my Lord, but Im'e sure your Lordship fared the worse.


Pray pity not me sir.


Is not your honour sore about the brawn of the arm? a murren meet em, I
feel it.


About this place Sir Bounteous?


You feel as it were a twinge my Lord?


I, ee'n a twinge, you say right.


A pox discover em, that twinge I feel too.


But that which disturbs me most Sir Bounteous lies here.


True, about the wrist, a kind of Tumid numnes.


You say true Sir.


The Reason of that my Lord is, the pulses had no play.


Mass so I gest it.


A mischief swell em, for I feel that to.


Sli'd her's a house haunted indeed.


A word with you sir.


How now Singlestone?


Im'e sorry my Lord your Lordship has lost.


Pup, pup, pup, pup, pup.


What have I lost? speak?


A good nights sleep say.


Speak, what have I lost I say?


A good nights sleep my Lord, nothing else. Curtens drawn


That's true, my cloth's come.


My Lords cloth's, his honor's rising.


Hist, well said, come hither, what ha's my Lord lost, tell me, speak softly?


His Lordship must know that Sir.


Hush, prithee tell me.


'twill do you no pleasure to know it Sir.


Yet again? I desire it I say.


Since your worship will needs know it, they have stolen away a jewel in a blew
silk ribbon of a hundred pound price, beside some hundred pounds in fair
Spur-Royals.


That's some two hundred it'h total.


Your worship's much about it Sir.


Come follow me, I'll make that whole again in so much money, let not my Lord
know on it.


Oh pardon me Sir Bounteous, that were a dishonour to my Lord, should it come to
his ear, I should hazard my undoing by' it.


How should it come to his ear? if you be my Lords chief man about him, I
hope you do not use to speak, unless you be paid for it, and I had rather give
you a Councellors double Fee to hold your peace, come, go too, follow me I say.


There will be scarce time to tell it sir, my Lord will away instantly.


His honour shall stay dinner by his leaue', I'll preuaile with him so far; and
now I remember a lest; I bad the whoreson thieves to dinner last night, I would
I might have their companies, a pox poison em.


Faith and you are like to have no other guess Sir Bounteous, if you have none
but us, I'll give you that gift in faith.


YOu see bold guests Master Hareb.


You're kindly welcome to my house; good Master Inesse, and Master Possibility.


That's our presumption Sir.


Raf?


Here Sir.


Call down your mistress to welcome these two Gentlemen my friends.


I shall Sir.


I will observe her carriage, and watch The slippery reuolotions of her eye,
I'll lie in wait for every glance she gives, And poyze her words it'h balance
of suspect, If she but swag she's gon, either on this hand Over familiar, or
this, too neglectful, It does behove her carry her self even.


But master Hareb.


True, I hear you sir; wa'st you said?


I have not spoke it yet Sir.


Right, so I say.


Is it not strange, that in so short a time, my little Lady Gulman should be so
violently handled?


Oh, sickness has no mercy sir,
It neither pities Ladies lip, nor eye,
It crops the Rose out of the Virgins cheek,
And so deslowres her that was ne'er deslorw'd,
Fools then are maids to locke from men that treasure,
Which death will pluck, and never yield em pleasure;
Ah gentlemen, tho I shadow it, that sweet Virgins sickness griues me not
lightly, she was my wives only delight and company;
Did you not hear her gentlemen, it'h midst
Of her extremest sit, still how she called upon my wife,
Remembered still my wife, sweet mistress Harebraine,
When she sent for me, a one side of her bed stood the Physician,
the Scrivener on the other, two horrible objects, but,
mere opposites in the course of their lives, for the Scrivener
binds folks, and the Physician makes them loose.

But not loose of their bonds Sir?


No by my faith sir, I say not so, if the Physician could make em loose of
their bonds, there's many a one would take Physic, that dares not now for
poisoning, but as I was telling of you, her Will was fashioning, Wherein I
found her best and richest Jewel, Given as a Legacy unto my wife, When I read
that, I could not refrain weeping, well of all other, my wife ha's most reason
to visit her, if she have any good nature in her, she'll show it there, now
sir wher's your mistress?


She desires you, and the gentlemen your friends, to hold her excused, sha's a
fit of an Ague now upon her, which begins to shake her


Where does it shake her most?


All over her body Sir.


Shake all her body? it is a saucy fit, Im'e jealous of that Ague, pray walk
in gentlemen, I'll see you instantly.


Now they are absent sir, tis no such thing.


What?


My mistress has her health Sir,
But tis her suit, she may confine her self
From sight of all men, but your own dear self Sir,
For since the sickness of that modest Vergin
Her only company, she delights in none;

No; visit her again, commend me to her, Tell her they are gon, and only I my
self Walk here to exchange a word or two with her.


I'll tell her so sir.


Fool that I am, and madman, beast! what worse?
Suspicious over a creature that deserves
The best opinion, and the purest thought,
Watchful over her that is her watch her self,
To doubt her ways, that looks too narrowly
Into her own defects; I, foolish-fearefull
Have often rudely, out of giddy flames
Bard her those objects which she shuns her self,
Thrice I'ue had proof of her most constant temper,
Come I at unawares by stealth upon her,
I find her cercled in with Divine Writs
Of heavenly meditations; here and there
Chapters with leaves tuckt up, which when I see
They either tax pride or adultery,
Ah let me curse my self, that could be jealous
Of her whose mind no sin can make rebellious.
And here the unmatched comes, now wife in faith they are gon,
Push, see how fearful tis, will you not credit me?
They are gon in faith, why, hinke you I'll betray you? come, come, thy delight and
mine, thy only virtuous friend, thy sweet instructresse is violently taken,
grievous sick, and which is worse, she mends not.


Her friends are sorry for that Sir.


She calls still upon thee, poor soul, remembers thee still, thy name whirls
in her breath, wher's mistress Harebraine says she?


Alas good soul,


She made me weep thrice, sh'as put thee in a jewel in her Will.


Eee'n to the last gasp a kind soul.


Take my man, go, visit her.


Pray pardon me sir, alas my visitation cannot help her.


Oh yet the kindness of a thing wife; still she holds the same rare temper; take
my man I say.


I would not take your man sir, tho I did purpose going.


No? thy reason?


The worlds condition is it self so wild Sir,
Tis apt to judge the worst, of those deserve not,
Tis an ill-thinking age, and does apply
All to the form of it own Luxury,
This censure flies from one, that, from another,
That man's her Squire, says he; her Pimp, the the other,
She's of the stamp, a third, fourth, I ha known her:
Iu'e heard this, not without a burning cheek:
Then our attires are taxed, our very gate
Is called in question, where a husbands presence
Scatters such thoughts, or makes em sink for fear
Into the hearts that breed em, nay surely if I went Sir,
I would entreat your company.

Mine? prithee wife, I have been there alreadle.


That's all one; although you bring me but to'th door Sir, I would entreat no
farther.


Thu'rt such a wife; why I will bring thee thither then, but not go up I
swear.


In faith you shall not, I do not desire it sir.


Why then content.


Give me your hand you will do so Sir.


Why there's my lip I will.


Why then I go Sir.


With me or no man, incomparable such a woman.


Lady?


Ha, what news?


There's one Sir Bounteous Progress newly alighted from his footecloth, and his
Mare waits at door, as the fashion is.


Sli'd, 'tis the knight that privately maintains me, a little short-olde.
spinye Gentleman, in a great doublet.


The same, I know em.


He's my sole Reuenew, meat, drink, and raiment; my good Physician work
upon him, Im'e weak.


Enough.


Why, where be these Ladies? these plump soft delicate creatures? ha?


Who would you visit sir?


Visit, who? what are you with the plague in your mouth?


A Physician sir.


Then you are a loose-liuer Sir, I have put you to your purgation.


But you need none, you're purged in a worse fashio,


Ah, Sir Bounteous.


How now? what art thou?


Sweet Sir Bounteous.


Pashion of me, what an alteration's here? Rosamond sick old Harry? her's a
sight able to make an old man shrink, I was lusty when I came in, but I am
down now in faith, mortality, yea? this puts me in mind of a hole seven foot
deep, my grave, my grave, my grave, hist, master Doctor a word sir, hark, tis
not the Plague? is't?


The Plague Sir, no?


Good.


He ne'er asks whether it be the Pox or no, and of the twain that had been
more likely.


How now my wench? how dost?


Huh, weak Knigh, huh.


She says true, he's a weak Knight indeed.


Where does it hold thee most, wench?


All parts alike Sir.


She says true still, for it holds her in none.


Hark in thine ear, you're breeding of young bones, I am afraid I have got
thee with child in faith.


I fear that much sir.


Oh, oh, if it should, a young Progress when al's done.


You have done your good will Sir.


I see by her, tis nothing but a surfeit of Venus in faith, and tho I be old, I
have gin't her, but since I had the power to make thee sick, I'll have the
purse to make thee whole, that's certain; master Doctor.


Sir.


Lets hear I pray, what i'st you minister to her?


Marry Sir, some precious cordial, some costly refocillation, a composure
comfortable and restorative.


I, I, that, that, that.


No poorer ingrediences then the liquor of Currall, clear Amber, or Succinum,
Unicorns horne six grains, Magisterium, Perlarum one scruple.


Ah.


Ossis de Corde Cerui half a scruple, Aurum Potabile or his tincture.


Very precious Sir.


All which being finely contunded, and mixed in a stone or glass mortar, with
the spirit of Diamber.


Nay pray be patient Sir.


That's impossible, I cannot be Patient and a Physician too Sir.


Oh, cry you mercy, that's true Sir.


All which aforesaid.


I, there you left Sir.


When it is almost exsiccate or dry, I add thereto olei Succini, olei Masi,
Sinamoni.


So Sir, olei Masi, that same oil of Maze is a great comfort to both the
Counters.


And has been of a long time Sir.


Well, be of good cheer wench, there's gold for thee; huh, let her want for
nothing M. Doctor, a poor kinsewoman of mine, nature binds me to have a care
of her; there I gulled you M. Doctor: gather up a good spirit wench, the fit will
away, tis but a surfeit of gristles: ha, ha, I have sitted her; an old Knight
and a cock a'th game still, I have not spurs for nothing I see.


No by my faith, the're hatched, they cost you an Angel sir.


Look to her good M. Doctor, let her want nothing, I'ue given her enough
already, Ha, ha, ha.


So, is he gone?


He's like himself gon.


Here's somewhat to set up with; how soon he took occasion to slip into his
own flattery, soothing his own defects; he only fears he has done that deed,
which I ne'er feared to come from him in my life, this purchase came unlooked for.


H'ist, the pair of sons and heirs.


Oh, the're welcome, they bring money.


M. Doctor.


I come to you Gentleman.


How does she now?


Faith much after one fashion sir.


There's hope of life sir.


I see no signs of death of her.


That's some comfort; will she take any thing yet?


Yes, yes, yes, she'll take still: sh'as a kind of facility in taking: how
comes your band bloody sir?


You may see I met with a scab sir.


Diuersa genera Scabierum, as Pliny reports, there arediners kind of Scabs.


Pray lets hear em sir.


An itching scab, that is your harlot; a sore scab, your usurer; a running,
your promooter; a broad scab, your intelligencer; but a white scabbe, that's a
scald knave and a Pander: but to speak truth, the only scabs we are now a
days troubled withal, are new officers.


Why now you come to mine sir, for I'll be sworn one of them was very busy
about my head this morning, and he should be a scab by that, for they are
ambitious and covet the head.


Why you saw I deriu'de him sir?


You Physicians are mad Gentlemen.


We Physicians see the most sights of any men living, you're Astronomers look
upward into'th air, we look downward into'th body, and indeed we have power
upward and downward.


That you have in faith sir.


Lady, how cheer you now?


The same woman still, huh.


That's not good.


Little alteration, Fie, fie, you have been to lavish Gentlemen.


Puh, talk not of that Lady, thy health's worth a million; here M. Doctor,
spare for no cost.


Look what you find there sir.


What do you mean gentlemen, put up, put up, you see I'm down and cannot
strive with you, I would rule you else; you have me at advantage, but if ever I
live, I will requite it deeply.


Tut an't come to that once, wee'le requite our selves well enough.


Mist. Harebrain, Lady, is setting forth to visit you too.


Hah, huh.


There struck the munit that brings forth the birth of all my joys and
wishes; but see the jar now, how shall I rid these from her?


Pray gentleman, stay not above an hour from my sight.


S'foot we are not going Lady.


Subtly brought about, yett' will not do, the'le stick by it; a word with
you gentlemen.


What says M. Doctor?


She wants but settling of her sense with rest, one hours sleep gentlemen
would set all parts in tune.


He says true in faith.


Get her to sleep M. Doctor, wee'le both sit here and watch by her.


Hells Angels watch you, no Art can preuaile with em; what with the thought of
joys, and sight of crosses, my wits are at Hercules pillars, non plus ultra.


M. Doctor, M. Doctor?


Here Lady.


Your physic works, lend me your hand.


Farewell sweet Lady.


Adieu M. Doctor.


So.


Let me admire thee,
The wit of man, wanes and decreases soon,
But women's wit is ever at full moon.
There shot a star from heaven,
I dare not yet behold my happiness.
The splendour is so glotious and so piercing.

Mistress Harebraine, give my wit thanks hereafter, your wishes are in sight,
your opportunity spacious.


Will you but hear a word from me?


Whooh --


My husband himself brought me to'th door, walks below for my return;
jealousy is prick-eard, and will hear the waging of a hair.


Pish, y' are a faint-liuer, trust your self with your pleasure, and me with
your security, go.


The fulness of my wish.


Of my desire.


Beyond this sphere I never will aspire.


I'll listen, now the flesh draws nie her end,
At such a time women exchange their secrets,
And ransack the close corners of their hearts;
What many years hath whelmed, this hour imparts.

Pray sit down, there's a low stool, good Mistress Harebraine, this was kindly
done; huh give me your hand; huh, alas how cold you are: even so is your
husband, that worthy wise Gentleman; as comfortable a man to woman in my case,
as ever trod -- huh -- shoe leather, love him, honour him, stick by him, he
lets you want nothing, that's fit for a woman; and to be sure on it, he will see
himself that you want it not.


And so I do in faith, tis right my humour.


You live a Ladies life with him, go where you will, ride when you will, and do
what you will.


Not so, not so neither, she's better looked to.


I know you do, you need not tell me that; 'twere ee'n pity of your life
in faith, if ever you should wrong such an innocent gentleman; fie Mistress
Harebraine, what do you mean? come you to discomfort me? nothing but weeping
with you?


She's weeping, t'as made her weep, my wife shows her good nature already.


Still, still weeping? huff, huff, huff, why how now woman? hey, hy, hy, for
shame leave; suh, suh, she cannot answer me for snobbing.


All this does her good, beshrew my heart and I pity her, let her shed tears
till morning; I'll stay for her, she shall have enough on it by my good will; I'll
not be her hinderance.


O no, lay your hand here Mistress Harebraine: I there, Oh there, there lies my
pain good gentlewoman: sore? Oh I, I can scarce endure your hand vppon't.


Poor soul, how she's tormented.


Yes, yes, I eat a Cullisse an hour since.


There's some comfort in that yet, she may escape it.


Oh it lies about my heart much.


I'm sorry for that in faith, she'll hardly escape it.


Bound, no, no, I'd a very comfortable stool this morning.


I'm glad of that in faith, that's a good sign, I smell, she'll escape it now.


Will you be going then?


Fall back, she's coming.


Thanks good Mistress Harebraine, welcome sweet Mistress Harebraine, pray commend
me to the good gentleman your husband.


I could do that my self now.


And to my uncle Winchcombe, and to my Aunt Lipsalue, and to my cousin Falsetop,
and to my cousin Lickit, and to my cousin Horseman, and to all my good cousins in
Clearken well, and Saint Ioneses.


At three days end my husband takes a journey.


Oh thence I derive a second meeting.


May it prosper still, Till then I rest a captive to his will: Once again
health, rest, and strength to thee sweet Lady: farewell, you witty squall;
good M. Doctor have a care to her body if yous stand her friend, I know you can
do her good.


Take pity of your waiter, go: farewell sweet Mistress Harebraine.


Welcome sweet wife, alight upon my lip, never was hour spent better.


Why, were you within the hearing sir?


I that I was in faith, to my great comfort; I deceiud you there wife, ha, ha;
I do entreat thee, nay conjure thee wife
Upon my love, or what can more be said?
Oftner to visit this sick virtuous maid.

Be not so fierce, your will shall be obaide.


Why then I see thou love me.


Art of Ladies.
When plots are ee'n past hope, and hang their head,
Set with a woman's hand, they thrive and spread.

Wast not well manag'de, you necessary mischiefs? did the plot want either life
or Art?


Tw's so well Captain, I would you could make such another Musse at all
adventures.


Dost call it a Musse? I am sure my Grandsire ne'er got his money worse in his
life, then I got it from him, if ever he did cozen the simple; why I was borne
to revenge their quarrel; if ever oppress the widow? I, a fatherles child
have done as much for him; and so tis through the world either in jest or
earnest, let the usurer look for it, for craft recoyles in the end, like an
ouercharg'd musket, and maims the very hand that puts fire too't; there needs
no more but a Usurers own blow to strike him from hence to hell, twil set him
forward with a vengeance; but here lay the jest whoresons, my Grandsire
thinking in his conscience that we had not robbed him enough over night, must
needs pity me it'h morning, and give me the rest.


Two hundred pounds in fair Rose-Nobles I protest.


Push, I knew he could not sleep quietly till he had paid me for robing of him
too, tis his humour, the humour of most of your rich men in the course of their
lives; for you know, they always feast those mouths that are least nedie, and
give them more, that have too much already; and what call you that, but robing
of themselves a Courtlyer way; Oh.


Cuds me, how now Captain?


A cold fit that comes over my memory, and has a shrode pull at my fortunes.


What's that Sir?


Is it for certain, Lieutenant, that my Grandsire keeps an uncertain
creature, a Queen?


I that's too true Sir.


So much the more 'preposterous for me, I shall
hop shorter by that trick; she carries away the thirds at least;
twill prove en-tayld land I am afraid when al's done, in faith
nay, I have known a vicious-old-thought-acting Father,
Damb'd only in his dreams, thirsting for game,
(When his best parts hung down their heads for shame,)
For his blancht harlot dispossess his son,
And make the pox his heir, twa's gravely done:
How had thou first knowledge on it Lieutenant?

Faith from discourse, yet all the policy That I could use, I could not get
her name.


Dull slave that ne'er could spy it.


But the manner of her coming was described to me.


How is the manner prithee?


Marry sir she comes, most commonly coached.


Most commonly coached indeed, for coaches are as common now adays, as some
that ride in em, she comes most commonly coached.


True, there I left sir, guarded with some leash of Pimps.


Beside the coachman?


Right sir, then alighting, she's privately received by master Gunwater.


That's my Grandsires chief Gentleman it'h chain of gold, that he should
live to be a Pander, and yet look upon his chain and his velvet jacket


Then is your Grandsire rounded it'h ear, the key given after the Italian
fashion, backward, she closly conveyed into his closet, there remaining, till
either opportunity smile upon his credit, or he send down some hot caudle to
take order in his performance.


Peace, tis mine own in faith, I haa'te.


How now Sir?


Thanks, thanks to any spirit, That mingled it amongst my inventions.


Why master Folly-wit?


Captain?


Give me scope and hear me,
I have begot that means which will both furnish me,
And make that queen walk under his conceit.

That were double happiness, to put thy self into money and her out of favour.


And all at one dealing?


S'foot I long to see that hand plaid,


And thou shalt see it quickly in faith; nay tis in grain, I warrant it hold
colour: Leiftenant, step behind yo'n hanging; if I mistook not at my entrance,
there hangs the lower part of a gentlewoman's gown, with a mask and a
chinclout; bring all this way: Nay, but do it cunningly now, tis a friends
house, and I'd vfe it so, there's a taste for you.


But prithee what wilt thou do with a Gentlewoman's lower part?


Why use it.


Y'aue answered me indeed in that, I can demand no farther.


Well said Leiftenant.


What will you do now sir?


Come, come, thou shalt see a woman quickly made up here.


But that's against kind Captain, for they are always long a making ready.


And is not most they do against kind I prithee? to lie with their
Horse-keeper, is not that against kind? to wear half moons made of another
hair, is not that against kind? to drink down a man, she that should set him
up, pray is not that monstrously against kind now? nay over with it Leiftenant,
over with it, ever while you live put a woman's clothes over her head: Cupid
plays best at blind-man buff.


You shall have your will maintenance, I love mad tricks as well as you for
your heart sir; but what shift will you make for upper bodies Captain?


I see now you're an Ass, why I'm ready.


Ready?


Why the Doublet serves as well as the best, and is most in fashion, weere all
Male to the middle, mankind from the Beaver to'th Bum, tis an Amazonian time,
you shall have women shortly tread their husbands; I should have a couple of
Locks behind, prithee Lieutenant find em out for me, and wind 'em about my
hatband, nay you shall see, we'll be in fashion to a hair, and become all with
probability, the most musty-visage Critic shall not except against me.


Nay i'll give thee thy due behind thy back, thou art as mad a piece of Clay --



Clay! dost call thy Captain Clay? indeed clay was made to stop holes, he
says true; did not I tell you rascals you should see a woman quickly made up?


I'll swear for it Captain.


Come, come, my mask and my chin-cloute -- Come into'th Court.


Nay they were both 'ith Court long ago sir.


Let me see, where shall I choose two or three for Pimps now? but I cannot choose
amiss amongst you all, that's the best; well, as I am a Queen, you were best
have a care of me, and guard me sure, I give you warning before hand, tis a
monckie taylde-Age. Life, you shall go ny to have half a dozen blithe
fellows surprise me cowardly, carry me away with a pair of owers, and put in
at Putney.


We should laugh at that in faith.


Or shoot in vppo'th coast of Cue.


Two notable fit landing places for Leachers, P. and C. Putney and Cue.


Well, say you have fair warning on it, the hair about the hat is as good as a
flag vppo'th pole at a common Playhouse to wast company, and a chin-cloute is
of that powerful a traction I can tell you, twill draw more Linen toot?


Fear not us Captain, there's none here but can fight for a whore as well as
some Innes a Court-man?


Why then set forward; and as you scorn two shilling brothel, twelve penny
Pandarisme, and such base bribes, guard me from bonny Scribs, and bony Scribes.


Hang 'em, pensions, and alowancces, four pence half penny a meal, hang 'em.


Ha? read that place again, -- Adultery
Draws the Divorce twixt heaven and the soul!
Accursed man that standst diuors't from heaven,
Thou wretched unthrift, that hast played away
Thy Eternal portion at a minutes game,
To please the flesh, hast blotted out thy name:
Where were thy nobler meditations busied?
That they durst trust this body with it self,
This natural drunkard that undoes us all,
And makes our shame apparent in our fall.
Then let my blood pay fort, and vex and boyle,
My soul I know would never grieve to the death,
The Eternal spirit that feeds her with his breath:
Nay I that knew the price of life and sin,
What Crown is kept for continence, what for lust?
The end of man, and glory of that end
As endless as the giver:
To dote on weakness, slime, corruption, woman?
What is she, took asunder from her clothes?
Being ready, she consists of hundred pieces,
Much like your German cloak, and ne'er allied
Both are so nice, they cannot go for pride.
Beside a greater fault, but too well known,
They'll strike to ten, when they should stop at one;
Within these three days the next meeting's fixed,
If I meet then, hell and my soul be mixed.
My lodging I know constantly, she not knows,
Sins hate is the best gift that sin bestows:
I'll ne'er embrace her more, -- never -- better witness, never.

What at a stand? the fitter for my company?


Celestial soldiers guard me,-


How now man? Lase did the quickness of my presence fright thee?


Shield me you ministers of faith and grace.


Leave, leave, are you not ashamed to use such words to a woman?


You are a Devil.


A devil? feel, feel man, has a devil flesh and bone?


I do conjure thee by that dreadful power --


The man has a delight to make me tremble;
Are these the fruits of thy adventurous Love?
Was I entisst for this? to be soon rejected?
Come, what has changed thee so, Delight;

Away.


Remember.


Leave my sight.


Have I this meeting wrought with cunning.
Which when I come I find thee shunning?
Rowze thy amorous thoughts and twine me,
All my interest I resign thee:
Shall we let slip this mutual hour,
Comes so seldom in her power?
Wher's thy lip, thy clip, thy fadome?
Had women such loves. would it not mad 'em?
Art a man? or dost abuse one?
A Love! and know not how to vse-one?
Come, i'll teach thee --

Do not follow.


Once so firm and now so hollow?
When was place and season sweeter?
Thy bliss in sight and dare not meet her?
Wher's thy courage youth and vigour?
Loves best pleased, whent's seard with rigour:
Ceare me then with veins most cheerful,
Women love no flesh that's fearful;
Tis but a sit, come Drinck't away,
And dance and sing, and kiss and play -- Fa le
La, le la, Fa le la, le la la; Fa le la, fa la le
La le la.

Torment me not.


Fa le la, fa le la, fa la la, loh.


Fury.


Fa le la, fa le la, fa la la loh.


Devil! I do conjure thee once again,
By that soule-quaking thunder to depart,
And leave this chamber, freed from thy damned Art.

Stamps --


It ha's preuayld -- Oh my sin-shaking Sinews! what should I think? Iesper,
why Iesper.


Sir! how now? what has disturbed you sir.


A sit, a qualm, -- is mistress Hargraue gone?


Who sir? mistress Hargraue?


Is she gone I say?


Gone? why she was never here yet.


No!


Why no sir.


Art sure ont.


Sure ont? if I be sure I breathe, and am my self?


I like it not; -- where kepst thou?


It'h next room sir.


Why she struck by thee man.


Youde make one mad sir, that a gentlewoman should steal by me and I not hear
her, sfoote, one may hear the rustling of their bums almost an hour before we
see 'em.


I will be satisfied, -- although to hazard,
What though her husband meet me? I am honest;
When men's intenes are wicked, their guilt haunts em,
But when they're just, they're armed, and nothing daunts 'em.

What strange humour call you this? he dreams of women and both his eyes
broad open!


Why how now master Gumwater? what's the news with your hast?


I have a thing to tell your worship --


Why prithee tell me, speak man.


Your worship shall pardon me, I have better bringing up then so.


How sir?


Tis a thing made fit for your Ear sir --


Oh -- o -- o -- cry you mercy, now I begin to taste you, -- is she come?


She's come sir?


Recovered, well and sound again?


That's to be feared sir.


Why sir?


She wears a Linen cloth about her Jaw,


Ha, ha, haw, -- why that's the fashion you whoreson Gumwater.


The fashion sir? live I so long time to see that a fashion, which rather was
an Emblem of dispraise, It was suspected much in Mounsiers days.


I, I, in those days, that was a queasy time, our age is better hardened now,
and put oftner in the fire, we are tried what we are: tut, the Pox is as
natural now, as an Ague in the Spring time, we seldom take physic without
it; here, take this key, you knew what duties belong too't, go, -- give order
for a Cullize, let there be a good fire made it'h matted chamber, do you hear
sir? --


I know my office sir.


An old mans venery is very chargeable my masters, there much cooquery belongs
too't.


Come Lady, you know where you are now?


Yes, good master Gumwater.


This is the old closet you know.


I remember it well sir.


There stands a Casket, I would my yearly revenue were but worth the wealth
that's locked int Lady; yet I have fifty pound a year wench.


Beside your apparel sir?


Yes faith have I.


But then you reckon your chain sir.


No by my troth do I not, neither: faith and you consider me rightly sweet
Lady, you might admit a choice gentleman into your service.


Oh, pray away sir.


Pusha come, come, you do but hinder your fortunes in faith, I have the command
of all the house, I can tell you, nothing comes intot'h kitchen, but comes
through my hands.


Pray do not handle me sir.


Faith you're too nice Lady: and as for my secrecy you know I have vowed it often
to you.


Vowed it? no, no, you men are fickle, --


Fickle? -- sfoote bind me Lady --


Why I bind you by virtue of this chain to meet me to morrow at the
Flowredeluce yonder, between Nine and Ten.


And if I do not Lady let me lose it, thy love and my best fortunes?


Why now i'll try you, go too.


Farewell sweet Lady.


Welcome sweet cockscombe; by my faith a good induction, I perceive by his
overworn phrase, and his action toward the middle region still there has bin
some saucy nibbling motion, and no doubt the cunning queen waited but for her
prey, and I think tis better bestowd upon me for his souls health; -- and his
bodies too; i'll teach the slave to be so bold yet, as once to offer to vault
into his masters saddle in faith: Now Casket, by your leave, I have seen your
outside oft, but that's no proof. Some have fair outsides that are nothing
worth: ha? -- now by my faith a gentlewoman of very good parts, Diamond, Ruby,
Sapphire, Onix cum prolo Silexque; if I do not wonder how the queen escaped
tempting, I'm an Hermophrodite, sure she could lack nothing, but the Devil to
point too't, and I wonder that he should be missing; well, tis better as it is,
this is the fruit of old-grunting-venerie. Grandsire, you may thank your Drab
for this; oh fie, in your crinckling days Grandsire, keep a Courtesan to
hinder your Grandchild, tis against Nature in faith, and I hope you'll be weary
ont: Now to my villains that lurk close below: Who keeps a Harlot tell him
this from me, He needs nor these, disease, nor enemy.


Ah sirrah, me think I feel my self well tosted, bombasted, rubbed and
refreshed; but in faith I cannot forget to think how soon sickness has altered
her -- to my taste, I gave her a kiss at bottom o'th stayres, and byth mass
me thought her breath had much ado to be sweet, like a thing compounded me
thought of wine, Beer, and Tobacco, I smelt much Pudding in it. It may be but
my fancy, or her physic: For this I know, her health gave such content, The
fault rests in her sickness, or my sent. How dost thou now sweet girl, what
well recovered? Sickness quite gone, ha? speak -- ha? wench? Frank Gulman,
why body of me, whats here? my Casket wide open, broke open, my Jewels stolen
-- why Gumwater --


Anon anon sir.


Come hither Gumwater.


That were small manners sir in faith, i'll find a time anon your worship's busy
yet.


Why Gumwater?


Fo nay then you'll make me blush in faith sir. --


Where's this Creature?


What creature is't you'de have sir?


The worst that ever breathes.


That's a wild Bore sir.


That's a wild whore sir; -- where did thou leave her Rascal?


Who? your Recreation sir.


My Execration sir.


Where I was wont, in your worships closet.


A pox engross her, it appears too true, See you this Casket sir.


My chain, my chain, my chain, my one and only chain.


Thou runst to much purpose now, Gumwater, ye? Is not a Queen enough to
answer for, but she must join a thief too't, a theeuing Queen, Nay I have
done with her in faith, tis a sign sh'as been sick a late, for she's a great
deal worse then she was, by my troth I would have paund my life upon it, did
she want anything? was she not supply de?

Nay and liberally, for that's an olds mans sin,
We'll feast our Lechery, though we starve our kin.
Is not my name Sir Bounteous, am I not expressed there?
Ah fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, but I perceive
Tho she have never so complete a friend,
a strumpets love will have a wast in the end,
and distaste the vessel: I can hardly bear this;
But say I should complain, perhaps she has pawnd 'em,
Sfoote the Judges will but laugh at it, and bid her borrow
more money of em, make the old fellow pay for's lechery,
that's all the mends I get, I have seen the same Cafe tried at
Newbery the last Sizes.
Well, things must slip and sleep, I will dissemble it,
because my credit shall not loose her lustre,
But whilst I live, i'll neither love nor trust her.
I ha done, I ha done, I ha done with her in faith.

Who'se that knocks?


A friend.


Whats your will sir?


Is master Hargraue at home?


No, newly gone from it sir.


Where's the gentlewoman his wife?


My mistress is within sir.


When came she in I pray?


Who my mistress? she was not out these two days to my knowledge.


No? trust me I'd thought I'd seen her, I would request a word with her.


I'll tell her sir.


I thank you -- It likes me worse and worse. --


Why how now sir? twas desperately aduenturd, I little looked for you until the
morrow.


No? why what made you at my chamber then even now?


I at your chamber?


Puh -- dissemble not, come, come, you were there.


By my life you wrong me sir.


What?


Firsty' are not ignorant what watch keeps over me, And for your chamber, as I
live I knowt not.


Burst into sorrow then, and greeses extremes, Whilst I beat on this flesh.


What is't disturbs you sir? --


Then was the devil in your likeness there.


Ha?


The very Devil assumde thee formally,
That face, that voice, that gesture, that attire,
Even as it sits on thee, not a pleate altered,
That Beaver band, the colour of that Periwig,
The Farthingale abone the Nauill, all;
As if the fashion were his own invention,

Mercy defend me.


To beguile me more.
The cunning Succubus told me that meeting
Was wrought a purpose by much wit and Art,
Wept to me, laid my vows before me, urged me,
Gave me the private marks of all our Love,
Wood me in wanton and effeminate rimes,
And sung and danst about me like a Fayry,
And had not worthier cogitations blessed me,
Thy form and his enchantments had possessed me.

What shall become of me my own thoughts doom me.


Be honest; then the Devil will ne'er assume thee,
He has no pleasure in that shape to abide,
Where these two sisters reign not, lust of pride;
He as much trembles at a constant mind
As looser flesh at him, -- be not dismayed:
Spring souls for joy, his policies are betrayed;
Forgive me mistress Hargraue, on whose soul
The guilt hangs double,
My lust and thy enticement: both I challenge,
And therefore of due vengeance it appeared
To none but me to whom both sins inher'd;
What knows the lecher when he clips his whore
Whether it be the Devil his parts adore:
They're both so like, that in our Natural sense,
I could discern no change nor difference.
No marvel then times should so stretch and turn
None for Religion, all for pleasure burn.
Hot zeal into hot lust is now transformed,
Grace into painting, charity into clothes,
Faith into false hair, and put off as often,
There's nothing but our virtue knows a mean,
He that kept open house now keeps a Queen.
He will keep open still, that he commends,
And there he keeps a table for his friends:
And she consumes more then her Sire could hoard,
Being more common then his house or board:
Live honest, and live happy, keep thy vows,
She's part a Virgin whom but one man knows:
Embrace thy husband, and beside him none,
Having but one heart, give it but to one.

I vow it on my knees, with tears true bred
No man shall ever wrong my husbands bed.

Rise, I'm thy friend for ever.


And I thine
For ever and ever, -- Let me embrace thee sir, whom I will
love, even next unto my soul, and that's my wife,
Two dear Rare Iems this hour presents me with,
A wife that's modest, and a friend that's right,
Idle suspect and fear, now take your flight.

A happy inward peace crown both your joys


Thanks above utterance to you, -- now? the news?


Sir Bounteous Progress sir,
Invites you and my mistress to a feast,
On Tuesday next; his man attends without --

Return both with our willingness and thanks.
I will entreat you sir, to be my guest.

Who I sir.


Faith you shall.


Well, i'll break strife.


A friend's so rare, i'll sooner part from life.


What so coy, so strict, come, come.


Pray change your opinion sir, I am not for that use.


Will you but hear me?


I shall hear that I would not.


Sfoote this is strange, I'ue seldom seen a wench Stand upon stricter points,
life she will not endure to be courted, does she ere think to prosper? I'll
ne'er believe that Tree can bring forth fruit, that never bears a blossom,
Courtships a blossom, and often brings forth fruit in forty weeks; Twere a
mad part in me, now to turn over: if ever there were any hope on it, tis at
this instant, shall I be madder now then ever I have been? 'ime in the way
in faith.

Mans never at hie height of madness full,
Until he love and prove a woman's gull;
I do protest in earnest I ne'er knew
At which end to begin to affect a woman,
Till this bewitching minute, I ne'er saw
Face worth my object, till mine eye met hers, I should laugh and I were caught
in faith, I'll see her again that's certain, what Ere comes ont, by your favour
Ladies.


You're welcome sir.


Know you the young gentlewoman that went in lateley?


I have best cause to know her, 'ime her mother sir.


Oh in good time, I like the gentlewoman well, a pretty contrived beauty,


I, nature has done her part sir.


But she has one uncomely quality.


Whats that sir?


Sfoote she's afraid of a man.


A lass, impute that to her bashful spirit, she's fearful of her honour.


Of her honour? slid 'ime sure I cannot get her maiden head with breathing upon
her, nor can she loose her honour in her tongue.


True, and I have often told her so, but what would you have of a foolish
virgin sir, a wilful virgin, I tell you sir, I need not have been in that
solitary estate that I am, had she had grace and boldness to have put her self
forward, always timorsome, always backward, ah that same peevish honour of
hers, has undone her and me both good gentleman: the suitors, the jewels, the
ioynters that has been offered her, we had been made women for ever, but what
was her fashion? she could not endure the sight of a man for sooth, but run and
hole her self presently, so choice of her honour, I am persuaded, when ere she
has husband, she will even be a president for all married wives, how to direct
their actions, and their lives.


Have you not so much power with her, to command her presence.


You shall see straight what I can do sir.


Would I might be hanged, if my love do not stretch to her deeper and deeper,
those bashful maiden humours take me prisoner when their comes a restraint ont
upon flesh, we are always most greedy vppont, that makes your merchats wife
oftentimes pay so dear for a monthfull: give me a woman as she was made at
first, simple of her self, without Sophistication, like this wench, I cannot
abide them when they have tricks, set speeches Artful entertainments, you
shall have some so impudently aspected, they will outcry the forehead of a man,
make him blush first, talk him into silence, this is counted manly in a woman,
it may hold so, sure womanly it is not, no, If ere I love, or any thing move
me,

T will be a woman's simple modesty.


Pray let me go, why mother what do you mean? I beseech you mother? is this
your conquest now? great glory tis to overcome a pore and silly virgin.


The wonder of our time sits in that brow,
I ne'er beheld a perfect man till now.

Thou childish thing, more bashful then thour't wise,
Why dost thou turn aside, and drown thine eyes?
Look fearful fool, there's no teptation ne'er thee,
Art not ashamed that any flesh should fear thee,
Why I durst pawn my life the gentleman means no other but honest and pure
love to thee, how say you sir?


By my faith not I Lady.


Hark you there? what think you now forsooth? what grieves your honour now?
Or what lascivious breath intends to rear
Against that maiden Organ your chaste care?
Are you resolved now better of men's harts?
Their faiths and their affections, with you none,
Or at most, few whose tongues and minds are one.
Repent you now of your opinion past,
Men love as purely as you can be chaste: to her your self sir,
The ways broke before you, you have the easier passage,

Fear not, come; erect thy happy graces in thy look;
I am no curious wooer, but infaith
I love thee honourably.

How mean you that sir?


Sfoot as one loves a woman for a wife,


Has the gentleman answered you, trow?


I do confess it truly to you both,
My estate is yet but sickly, but I'ue a Grandsire
Will make me Lord of thousands at his death.

I know your Grandsire well; she knows him better.


Why then you know no fiction; my state then will be a long days journey above
the wast wench.


Nay daughter he says true.


And thou shalt often measure it in thy coach,
And with the wheels tract make a griddle for it.

Ah twilll be a merry journey.


What is't a match, if it be clap hands lips;


Tis done, there's witness on it.


Why then mother I salute you.


Thanks sweet son; -- Son Folliwit, come hither, if I might counsel thee,
we'll even take her while the good moods upon her, send for a Priest, and clapped
up within this hour.


By my troth agreed mother.


Nor does her wealth consist all in her flesh,
Tho beauty be enough wealth for a woman,
She brings a Dowry of three hundred pound with her.

Sfoote that will serve till my Grandsire dyes I warrant you, heel drop away
at fall a'th leaf, if ever he reach to all Hollantide i'll be hanged.


O yes son, hes a lusty old gentleman.


Ah pox, he's given to women; he keeps a queen at this present.


Fie.


Do not tell my wife ont.


That were needless in faith.


He makes a great feast upon the leauenth of this month, tuesday next, and you
shall see Players there, -- I have one trick more to put upon him; my wife and
your self shall go thither before as my guests, and prove his entertainment,
I'll meet you there at night, the jest will be here, that feast which he makes
will, unknown to him serve fitly for our wedding dinner, we shall be royally
furnished, and get some charges by'te.


An excellent course (in faith) and a thrifty, why son, me thinks you begin to
thrive before you're married.


We shall thrive one day wench, and clep enough? Between our hopes there's but a
Grandsires puff.


So girl, here was a bird well caught.


If ever, here: but what fo'rs Grandsire, twill scarce please him well.


Who covets fruit, ne'er cares from whence it fell,
Thou'st wedded youth and strength, and wealth will fall:
Last thourt made honest.

And that's worth 'em all.


Have a care blew-coates; bestir your self Master Gumwater, cast an eye intoth
kitchen, orelooke the knaves a little, every lack has his friend to day, this
cousin and that cousin puts in for a dish of meat, a man knows not till he
make a feast how many varlets he feeds, acquaintances swarm in every corner,
like flies at Bartholmewtide that come up with drouers, sfoot I think they
smell my kitchen seven mile about master Shortrod and his sweet bedfellow,
yare very copiously welcome.


Sir, here's an especial dear friend of ours, we were bold to make his way to
your table.


Thanks for that boldness ever, good Master Shortrod, is this your friend
sir?


Both my wives friend and mine sir.


Why then compendeously sir, -- yare welcome.


In Octauo I thank you sir.


Excellently retorted in faith, hes welcome for's wit; I have my sorts of
salutes, and know how to place em Courtly; walk in sweet gentlemen, walk in,
there's a good fire it'h Hall, you shall have my sweet company instantly.


I good sir Bounteous


You shall indeed gentlemen; how now, what news brings thee in stumbling now?


There are certain Players come to town sir, and desire to enterlude before
your worship.


Players? by the mass they are welcome, the'yle grace my entertainment well,
but for certain players there thou lie boy; they were never more uncertain
in their lives, now up now down, they know not when to play, where to play,
nor what to play, not when to play for fearful fools, where to play for
Puritan fools, nor what to play for critical fools -- go call em in, --
how fitly the whorsons come vpo'th feast, troth I was even wishing for em, -- oh
welcome, welcome my friends.


The month of May delights not in her flowers, More then we joy in that sweet
sight of yours.


Well acted a my credit, I perceive hes your best Actor.


He has greatest share sir; and may live of himself sir.


What what? put on your hat sir, pray put on; go too, wealth must be respected,
let those that have least feathers stand bare; and whose men are you I pray? nay
keep on your hat still.


We serve my Lord Owemuch sir.


My L. Owemuch, by my troth the welcomst men alive give me all your hands at
once, that honourable gentleman? he lay at my house in a robbery once, and
took all quietly, went away cheerfully. I made a very good feast for him; I
never saw a man of honour bear things brauelier away, serve my L. Owemuch?
welcome in faith: some Bastard for my Lords Players, -- where be you boys?


They come along with the Waggon sir.


Good, good, and which is your Politician amongst you? now in faith he that
works out Restraints, makes best legs at Court and has a suit made of purpose,
for the companies business, which is he, come* be not afraid of him.


I am he sir.


Art thou he? give me thy hand, hark in thine ear, thou row lest too fast to
gather so much moss as thy fellow there, champ upon that, ah, and what play
shall we have my masters?


A pleasant witty Comedy sir.


I, I, I, a Comedy in any case, that I and my guests may laugh a little, whats
the name out?


Tis called the Slip.


The Slip? By my troth a pretty name, and a glib one: go all and slip intoot,
as fast as you can cover a table for the players. First take heed of a Lurcher,
he cu^s deep, he will eat up all from you. Some Shirry for my Lords players
there. Sir, why this will be a True feast, a right Mitre supper, a play and
all, more lights -- I called for light, here come in two are light enough for a
whole house in faith. Dare the thief look me in the face? O impudent times! go
too, dissemble it.


Bless you sir Bounteous.


O welcome, welcome, Thief, Queen, and Bawd, welcome all three.


Nay here's but two on's sir.


A my troth, I took her for a couple, I'd have sworn there had been two
faces there.


Not all under one hood sir.


Yes faith would I, to see mine eyes bear double.


He make it hold sir, my daughter is a couple, She was married yesterday. Sir
Boun. Buzz.


Nay to no buzzard neither, a right Hawk When ere you know him.


Away, he cannot be but a Rascal* walk in walk in, bold guests, that come
vnfent for -- post, I perceive how my Jewels went now, to grace her marriage.


Would you with me sir?


Ey, how hapt it wench, you put the slip upon me,
Not three nights since? I name it gently to you,
I term it neither Pilfer, Cheat, nor Shark.

Y'ear past my reach.


I'm old and past your reach, very good; but you will not deny this I trust.


With a safe conscience, sir.


Ye? give me thy hand, fare thee well, I have done with her.


Give me your hand, sir, you ne'er yet begun with me.


Whew, whew? O audacious age.
She denies me and all, when on her fingers,
I spied the Ruby sit, that does betray her,
And blushes for her fact, well there's a time sor't,
For al's too little now for entertainment.
Feast, mirth, I harmony, and the play to boot.
A Jovial Season. How now, are you ready?

Even upon readiness sir.


Keep you your hat on.


I have a suit to your worship.


Oh cry you mercy, then you must stand bare.


We could do all to the life of action sir, both for the credit of your
worships house, and the grace of our Comedy.


Cuds me, what else sir?


And for some defects (as the custom is) we would be bold to require your
worships assistance.


Why with all my heart, what is't you want? speak.


One's a chain for a Justices hat sir.


Why here, here, here, here whoreson, will this serve your turn?


What else lack you?


We should use a ring with a stone int.


Nay whoop, I have given too many rings already, talk no more of rings I pray
you, here, here, here, make this Jewel serve for once.


Oh this will serve sir.


What have you all now?


All now sir -- one y time is brought in the middle of the play, and I would
desire your worships watch time.


My watch, with all my heart, only give time a charge that he be not fiddling
with it.


You shall ne'er see that sir.


Well now you are furnish sir, make haste away.


Ee'n as fast as i can sir, -- I'll set my fellows going first, they must have
time and leisure, or they are dull else. He stay and speak a prologue, yet
o'retake em, I cannot have conscience in faith to go away and speak ne'er a word
to em, my Gradsire has given me three shares here, sure I'll do somewhat for
em.


More lights, more stools, sit sit, the play begins.


Have you players here Sir Bounteous?


We have em for you sir, fine nimble Comedians, proper actors most of them.


Whose men I pray you sir?


Oh* there's their credit sir, they serve an honourable popular Gentleman,
eclipped my Lord Ow-much.


My Lord Ow-much, he was in Ireland lately.


O you ne'er knew any of the name but were great travellers,


How is the Comedy called, Sir Bounteous?


Mary sir, the Slip.


The Slip?


I, and here the prologue begins to slip in vpon's.


Tis so indeed Sir Boun.


We sing of wand^ing knights, what them betide,
Who nor in one place, nor one thing abide,
They're here now, anon no scouts can reach em
Being every man well horsed like a bold Beacham,
The Play which we present, no fault shall mere
But one, you'll say tis short, we'll say tis sweet:
Tis given much to dumb shows, which some praise,
And like the Term, delights much in delays.
So to conclude, and give the name her due,
The play being called the Slip, I vanish too.

Excellently well acted and a nimble conceit.


The Prologues pretty in faith.


And went off well.


I that's the grace of all, when they go away well, ah-


A my troth and I were not married, I could find in my heart to fall in love
with that Player now, and send for him to a supper; I know some in the town that
have done as much, and there took such a good conceypt of their parts into'th
two-penny room, that the Actors have bin found ith morning in a less compass
then their Stage, tho twere ne'er so full of gentlemen.


But, passion of me, where be these knaves, will they not come away, me thinks
they stay very long.


Oh you must bear a little sir, they have many shifts to run into.


Shifts call you em, they're horrible long things.


A pox of such fortune the plots betrayed:

All will come out, yonder they come taken upon suspicion, and brought back by
a Constable, I was accursed to hold society with such Cockscombs, whats to be
done? I shall be shamde for ever, my wife here and al, ah pox -- by light
happily thought upon, the chain* Invention stick to me this once, and fail
me ever hereafter: so, so, --


Life I say, where be these Players, oh are you come, troth its time, I was even
sending for you.


How moodily he walks, what plays he trow?


A, Justice upon my credit, I know by the chain there.


Unfortunate Justice.


Ah -- a -- a --


In thy kin unfortunate.
Here comes thy Nephew now upon suspicion,
Brought by a Constable before thee, his wild associates with him,
But so disguizde, none knows him but my self,
Twice have I set him free from officers sangs,
And for his sake, his fellows: let him look too't:
My conscience will permit but one wink more.

Ye shall we take Justice winking.


For this time I have be thought a means to work thy
freedom, tho hazarding my self; should the Law cease him,
Being kin to me, 'twould blenush much my name, No;
I'd rather lean to danger, then to shame.

A very expleate Justice.


Thank you good neighbours, let me alone with em now.


Sfoote whose yonder?


Dare he sit there?

2. Follywit.

3. Captain -- puh --


How now Constable what news with thee?


May it please your worship sir, -- here are a company of auspicious fellows.


To me; puh -- turn to'th Justice you whoreson hobby horse, this is some new
player now, they put all their fools to the Constables part still.


Whats the matter Constable, whats the matter?


I have nothing to say to your worship -- they were all riding a horseback ant
please your worship


Yet again: a pox of all Asles still, they could not ride a foot unless twere
in a bawdy house.


The Oftler told me they were all unstable fellows sir.


Why sure the fellow's drunk.


We spied that weakness in him long ago sir, your worship must bear with
him, the mans much oreseene, only in respect of his office we obeyed him, both
to appear conformable to law, and clear of all offence: for I protest sir, he
found us but a horse back:


What he did?


As I have a soul, that's all, and all he can lay to us.


In faith, you were not all riding away then.


S'foot, being a horseback sir, that must needs follow.


Why true sir.


Well said Justice, he helps his kinseman well.


Why Sir, do you use to bring Gentlemen before us for riding away, what will
you have em stand still when they're up, like Smug vpo'th white horse yonder?
are your wits steeped? He make you an example for all dizzy Constables, how they
abuse justice, here bind him tot his chair.


Ha, bind him hoe?


If you want cords, use garters.


Help, help, Gentlemen.


As fast as we can sir.


Thieves, thieves.


A gag will help all this, keep less noise you knave.


Oh help, rescue the Constable -- oh, O.


Ho, ho, ho, ho.


Why la you who lets you now?
You may ride quietly, I'll see you to,
Take horse my self. I have nothing else to do.

Oh, -- oh -- oh --


Ha, ha ha, by my troth the maddest piece of Justice gentlemen, that ever was
committed.


He be sworn for the madness on it sir.


I am deceiu'de, if this prove not a merry Comedy and a witty.


A lass poor Constable, his mouth's open, and ne'er a wife word.


Faith he speaks now even as many as he has done, he seems wisest when he
gapes and says nothing, ha ha; -- he turns and tells his tale to me like an
ass, what have I to do with their riding away, they may ride for me, thou
whoreson Cockscombe th^n; nay thou art well enough seru'de in faith,


But what follows all this while sir, me thinks some should pass by before
this time, pity the Constable.


Byth mass and you say true sir, -- go sirrah, step in, I think they have
forgot themselves, call the knaves away they are in a wood I believe. --


I, I, I.


Hank, the Constable says I, they're in a wood, -- ha, ha, --


He thinks long of the time sir Bounteous.


How now? when come they?


A lass an't please your worship, there's not one of them to be found sir.


How?


What says the fellow?


Neither horse nor man sir.


Body of me thou lie.


Not a hair of either sir.


How now sir Bounteous.


Cheated and defeated, vngag that rascal, I'll hang him for's fellows, I'll
make him bring em out.


Did not I tell your worship this before, brought em before you for suspected
persons, Hayd em at towns end upon warning given, made signs that my very iaw
bone aches, your worship would not hear me, called me Asle, saving your worships
presence laughed at me.


Ha?


I begin to taste it.


Give me leave, give me leave, why art not thou the Constable it'h Comedy?


Ith comedy? why I am the constable in the common wealth sir.


I am gulled in faith, I am gulled, when wast thou chose?


On thursday last sir.


A pox go wit'ht, ther't goes.


I seldom heard Jest match it.


Nor I in faith.


Gentlemen shall I entreat a courtesy?


What is't sir?


Do not laugh at me seven year hence.


We should betray and laugh at our own folly then, for of my troth none here
but was deceiud int.


Faith that's some comfort yet, ha, ha, it was feately carried, troth I commend
their wits, before our faces, make us asses while we sit still, and only laugh
at our selves.


Faith they were some counterfeit rogues sir.


Why they confess so much them selves, they said theyd play the slip, they
should be men of their words, I hope the Justice will have more conscience
in faith, then to cary away a chain of a hundred mark of that fashion.


What sir?


I by my troth sir, besides a jewel, and a jewels fellow, a good fair watch
that hung about my neck sir.


Sfoote what did you mean sir?


Me thinks my Lord Owemuches players should not scorn me so in faith they will
come and bring all again I know, push they will in faith, but a ieast certainly.


Pray Grandsire give me your blessing?


Who? Son Folliwit?


This shows like kneeling after the play, I praying for my Lord Owemuch and
his good Countess, our honourable Lady and mistress.


Rise richer by a blessing, thou art welcome.


Thanks good grandsire, I was bold to bring those gentlemen my friends.


Their all welcome, salute you that side, i'll welcome this side. Sir to begin
with you.


Master Follywit.


I am glad tis our fortune so happily to meet sir.


Nay then you know me not sir.


Sweet Mistress Harebraine.


You cannot be too bold sir.


Our marriage known?


Not a word yet.


The better.


Faith son would you had come sooner with these gentlemen.


Why Grandsire?


We had a play here.


A play sir, no.


Yes faith, a pox a'th Author.


Bless us all, why were they such wild ones sir?


I am sure villainous ones sir.


Some rawe-simple fools.


Nay bith mass these were enough for the euish knaves.


What sir?


Which way came you gentlemen, you could not choose but meet em.


We met a company with hampers after em.


Oh those were they, those were they, a pox hamper em.


Bless us all again.


They have hamperd me finely sirrah.


Howe sir.


How sir, I lent the rascals properties to furnish out their play, a chain, a
jewel, and a watch, they watched their time, and rid quite away with em.


Are they such creatures.


Hark, hark gentlemen, by this light the watch rings alarm in his pocket,
theirs my watch come again, or the very Cousin German toot, whose is't, whose is't?
by the mass tis he, hast thou one son? prithee bestow it upon thy Grandsire,
I now look for mine again in faith, nay come with a good will or not at all. I'll
give thee a better thing a piece, a piece gentlemen.


Great or small,


At once I have drawn chain, jewel, watch all.


By my faith you have a fortunate hand sir.


Nay all to come at once.


A vengeance of this soolecy.


Have I escape the Constable to be brought in by the watch?


O destiny, have I married a Thief mother?


Comfort thy self, thou art before hand with him daughter.


Why son, why gentlemen, how long have you bin my Lord Ow-much his servants
in faith?


Faith Grandsire, shall I be true to you?


I think tis time, thoust been a these already.


I knowing the day of your feast, the natural inclination you have to pleasure
and pastime, presumde upon your patience for a jest as well to prolong your
days as --


Whoop, why then you took my chain along with you to prolong my days did
you?


Not so neither sir that you may be seriously assured of my herafter
stablenesse of life, I have took another course.


What?


Took a wife.


A wife? sfoot, what is she for a fool would marry thee a madman? when was the
wedding kept in Bedlam?


She's both a gentlewoman and a virgin.


Stop there, stop there, would I might see her.


You have your wish, she's here.


Ah, ha, ha, ha, this makes amends for all.


How now?


Captain do you hear? is she your wife in earnest?


How then?


Nothing but pity you sir.


Speak son is't true?
Can you gull us, and let a queen gull you.

Ha.


What I have bin is past, be that forgiven,
And have a soul true both to thee and heaven.

Is't come about, tricks are repaid I see.


The best is sirrah you pledge none but me
And since I drink the top, take her and hark,
I spice the bottom with a thousand mark.

By my troth, she is as good a cup of Nectar, as amy
Bachelor needs to sip at.
Tut give me gold, it makes amends for vice,
Maids without coin, are candles without spice.

Come gentlemen toth feast, let not time waste,
We have pleased our ear, now let us please our taste
Who lives by cunning mark it, his fates cast,
When he has gulled all, then is himself the last.


