On Monday and Tuesday in Easter week, 1620. the first Entertainment, at the
house of the right worthy, Sr. William Cokaine then L. Mayor: Which on the
Saturday following was fashioned into service for the Lords of his Majesties
most Hoble. Privy Council; upon which day, that noble Marriage was celebrated
betwixt the Right Hoble. Charles L. Howard Baron of Essingham, and Mary, eldest
Daughter of the said St. William Cokaine, then L. Mayor of London, and L.
General of the Military forces.

Room, room, make room,
You Friends to Fame,
Officers of worth and Name,
Make room, make room,
Behold the Bird of State doth come,
Make room,
Clear the place,
O do it all the grace;
It is the King of Birds, whose chanting,
And early morning Crowing,
So quick and strongly flowing,
Does make the King of Beasts lye panting;
How worthy then to be brought in with Honour,
That daunts the proudest in that humble manner.
TWo powers at strife about conceived wrong,
To whom this Bird should properly belong,
Were reconciled by Harmony: First, the Sun
Called it his Bird, cause still when day begun
To open her modest Eye, this Creature then,
Proclaims his glory to the world again;
Minerua next, Goddess of Arms and Art,
Claymd it for hers (not without just desert)
He, like the Morning being the Muses friend,
And then for courage, 'tis his life, his end;
Without wrong then those properties related,
To both, he may be justly consecrated:
But, Worthy Lord, how properly to you,
Whose place pertakes of both; it is so true
An Emblem of your worth, charge, power, state,
None, Nobler can express a Magistrate;
For all that is in this Bird, Quality,
Is in you Virtue, Justice, Industry,
What does his early morning note imply?
But in you, early care and vigilance;
A Duty that begets Duty to you,
So Virtue still pays, and receives her due:
What does the striking of his wings import,
Ere to his Neighbour he his sounds retort?
But the dear labours and incessant pains
Of a just Magistrate, that even constrains
His Nerues, to give more Virtue to his word,
And beat in sense into the most absurd:
The Sharpest is the easiest to apply,
For his quick Spur, Laws sword doth signify;
The execution of your Charge and Place,
To cut off all crimes that are bold and base:
``Virtues should be with kind embraces, heaped,
``But with a Sword, Sins harvest must be reaped.
My reverence next to you, to you, that are
The Fathers of this City; by whose care,
Wisdom watchfulnes, the good cause thrives,
You that are Lights and Presidents in Lives,
Noble Examples, Honours t'Age and Time,
This is the Top which your good cares must climb,
``A ceaslesse labour Virtue hath imposed,
``Upon all those, whom Honour hath enclosed;
And such are you, selected from the rest,
Works then that are most choice become you best;
Place before all your Actions and Intents,
The rare gifts of that Bird, this but presents:
Behold the very shape and Figure, now,
Serves for a Noble Welcome, turned into
A Cup of Bounty, and t'adorne the Feast,
Laden with love comes to each worthy Guest;
And but observe the manner, there's in that,
Freeness expressed, humility, yet State;
First you take off his head, to taste his heart,
Which shows at this time power is laid apart,
And bounty fills the place; then he goes round;
To show a Welcome of an equal Sound,
To every one a free one, through the Board,
So plain he speaks the goodness of his Lord,
Take then respectful Notice through the Hall,
That here the noble Health begins to All.
THe Health's begun,
In the Bird of the Sun,
pledge it round pledge it round,
With hearty welcome it comes crowned,
O pledge it round:
Th^ Ceremonies due
Forget not as they were begun to you,
When you are drank to, you're by duty led,
First to kiss your hand, then take off the head,
You cannot miss it then,
To put it on and kiss it again;
The next to whom the Health doth flow,
It taught to honour your Pledge so,
So round, round, round, round, let it go,
As above, so below;
For Bounty did intend it always so.
WHy this is nobly done, to come to grace
A Sport, so well becomes the Time Place,
Old Time made much on it, it thought no praise
Too dear for it, nor no honour in those days,
Not only Kings ordained Laws to defend it,
But shined the first Examples to commend it,
In their own Persons honoured it so far,
A Land of Peace showed like a field of War;
But chiefly Henry, (Memories Fame) the Eight,
And the Sixth Edward; gave it worth and weight,
By Act and favour, (not without desert)
It being the comliest and the Manliest Art,
And whereas meaner Crafts took their first form
From humble Things, as Twisting from a worm,
And Weaving from the Spiders limber frame;
Music and Archery from Apollo came:
He calls himself great Master of this Sport,
In whose bright name fair Wisdom keeps her Court:
Well may this Instrument be first in Fame,
Above all others that have got a Name,
In war or peace; when Heaven it self doth show,
`` The Covenant of Mercy, by a Bow:
And as each Creature, nay, each senseless Thing*
Is made a Glass to see Heavens goodness in;
So though this be a mere delight, a Game,
Justice may see here something she may claim,
(Without wrong done to State) and call it her own,
Since the greatst power is oft through weakness known.
What are Reproofs? with the I first begin,
But Arrows shot against the Breast of Sin;
Who hits Vice home, cleaves a wrong in twain,
So that it never comes to close again,
Shows not he noble Archery? I'll pray ever,
He may be followed, mended he can never:
And as a cunning Bowman marks his ground,
And fro light things (which being tossed up) is found
Where the wind sits (for his advantage best)
Before he let his Arrow pass his Breast;
So the grave Magistrate, discreetly wise,
Makes use of light occasions that arise,
To lead him on to weightier, winds a Cause,
Fro things but weakly told, much substance draws
And will the state of Truth exactly try,
Before he let the Shaft of Judgment fly:
Then in this Art, there's Virtue still expressed,
For every man desires here to be Best,
Their Aim is still Perfection, to outreach,
And go beyond each other; which does teach
A Noble Strife in our more serious Deeds,
Assuring Glory to him best exceeds:
And where some sports seek corners for their shame
Day-light and open Place, commends this Game;
Much like an Honest Cause, it appears Bold
In public Court, for all Eyes to behold;
On then, Apolloes Scholars, You ne'er found
Nobler Spectators compassed in this Ground;
To whom I wish (worthy their Virtuous Ways)
Peace to their Hearts, long Health, Blessed days.
HAh? let me clear mine Eyes, me thinks I see
Comforts approach, as if They came to me;
I am not used to em; I ha been long without,
How comes the Virtue of the Times about?
Ha's Ancient Custom yet a Friend? of Weight?
So many? rare I Goodness is waked alate
Out of her long Sleep sure; that ha's lain still
Many a dear Day, charmed with Neglect and Will,
I thought I'd been forsaken, quite forsook,
For none these 7. years, ha's bestowed a Look
Upon my watery Habitation here;
I mean, of Power, that ought to see Me clear,
For yon'd fair Cities health, which Sweetness bless
And Virtue in full Strength, ever possess;
Well fare thy Visitation, Noble Lord,
And this most Grave Assembly; that accord
In ways of Charity and Care with Thee;
Joys visit You, as Your Loves visit Me:
The Water stands so full now in mine Eyes
I cannot choose but weep; but the Tears rise
From Gladness, not from Sorrow, for that's lost
Now I see you, Unkindness yet ha's cost
Many a dear Drop, since I beheld the Face
Of the last Magistrate, in Power and Place;
I h'a done good Service; it is no boasting part
In one forgot, to speak her own desert:
I grant my kind and loving Sisters both
Chadwell and Amwell, have expressed no Sloth
In their Pipe-Pilgrimage, but fairly proved
Most excellent Servants, hous'de, and welbelou'd;
And have, when hard Necessity requires,
Given happy Quench to many merciless Fires;
Therefore am I neglected? An old Friend?
The Head? that to the Heart a'th City send
My best and clearest Service, take Delight
To be at hand, make your Dames Pure and White;
Who for their civil Neatness, are proclaimed
Mirrors of women, through all Kingdoms famed;
Can I be so forgot? and daily hear
The noise of Water-bearers din your care?
Those are my Alms folks, trotting in a Ring,
And live upon the bounty of my Spring,
Yet like dull worms that have no sense at all,
Lick up the Dews, ne'er look from whence they fall,
The head's not minded, whence the goodness flows:
So with the worlds condition right it goes;
``Blessings are swallowed with a greedy love,
``But Thanks fly slowly to yon'd place Above,
From whence the Euerliuing Waters spring,
Which to your souls eternal comforts bring:
The Dews of Heaven fall on you, prosperous Fates
Like fruitful Rivers, flow into your States.
WHy here's my wish, the Joy I live upon,
Wisdom and Valour when both meet in one,
Now tis a Field of Honour, Fames true Sphere,
Me thinks I could eternally dwell here;
Why here's persection, tis a place for me,
Pallas delights in such community;
This Bird of Courage, (Enemy to Fear)
Whose Figure on my Helmet now I wear,
And have done ever from my Birth in Heaven
Is consecrate to Me, as to Thee given,
Our Crest's alike, and fits both war and peace,
The Virtues are, Valour and Watchfulness,
And both shine clear now in thy present State,
Field-Generall, and City-Magistrate:
As I from Arts and Arms derive my name;
So thou supply two Offices, with Fame:
Why here the Ancient Roman Honour dwells,
A Praetor, General; Senators, Colonels;
Captains, grave Citizens; so richly inspired,
They can assist in Council, if required,
And set Court-Causes in as fair a Form,
As they do Men, here, without Rage or Storm:
Lieuetenants, Ensigners, Seriants of Bands,
Of worthy Citizens the Army stands,
Each in his place deserving fair respect;
I can complain of nothing but Neglect,
That such a noble Cities Armed Defence
Should be so seldom seen; I could dispense
With great occasions, but alas, whole years
To put off exercise, gives cause of fears;
``In getting wealth all care should not be set,
``But some, in the defending what you get:
There's few but have their providence so pure,
(Blessed with a fair estate) to make it sure,
By strength of writings, and in good men's hands
Putting their Coin, secured by Lifes and Lands,
This is the common Fort to which all fly,
Every man labours for Security;
But what's all this? (I speak in Truths behalf)
If neither Men, City, nor Deeds be safe
Where's now Security of State? that day,
When life stands doubtful of her house of clay;
A ruin, which neglect of glorious Arms
He has brought on many a Kingdom, rocked with charms
Of lazy dullness, by vnpractis'd men
Fit for no service; I resolve you then;
This is Security, if you'll rightly know,
And does Secure that Word which you call so:
Let not a small pecuniary Expense
(Which is but drossy dotage) keep you hence,
You lose all that you save, after that manner,
What i'st to rise in riches, fall in honour?
Nay to your Safeties to commit selfe-treason,
Which every thing provides for, blessed with reason,
Let this grave Lord's Example, (in its Prime)
Who perfects all his Actions with his Time,
Makes even with the Years, to his fair Fame,
Gives His Accounts up with a Glorious Name
In Field and Court, move all men to discharge
Their manly Offices and pains at large;
Let every Year (at least) once in his Round,
See you like Sons of Honour tread this Ground;
And Heaven that both gives, secures just wealth,
The City bless with Safety, You with Health.
IMagine now, each apprehensive Guest
The Year departed; this his Funeral Feast,
I, a chief Mourner, this a sad Pageant, here,
Set with the Orphans Sigh, the Widows Tear,
All seem to morn, as locked from their reliefes,
Till the New Sun of Justice dry their griefs;
And as there is no Glorious thing that ends,
But leaves a Fame behind it, that commends
Or disapproues the Progress of his Acts:
So in this Epitaph, sad Truth contracts
A spacious Story, which spread forth at large,
Might instruct All, built up for Power Charge
HEre ends a Year that never misspent day,
Through Fames celestial Signs made his own way,
By discrete judgment all his time still led,
Which is the only Sign governs the Head,
Mercy to wants, and Bounty to Desert,
The special Sign that rules the noble Heart,
A Year of goodness, and a Year of right,
In which the honest cause sued with delight.
A Year wherein nothing that's good, was dull,
Began at Moons Increase, and ends at Full;
Full cup, full welcome: adding the Suns gift,
Who nearer his declining, the more swift
In his illustrious course, more bright, more clear,
Such is the glorious setting of this Year,
His beamy substance shines even through his shroud
As the fair Sun shoots splendour through his cloud;
May every Year succeeding this, still have
No worse an Epitaph to deck his Grave,
And so my last farewell (this Tear for me)
Wishing that many may conclude like Thee.
The property, to which this Speech especially hath Respect, was a device like
a made Dish, expressing Two naked Arms breaking through a Cloud, supporting a
wreath of Laurel, being part of the Haberdashers Arms.

The First Entertainment, at his first Great Feast praeparde to give Welcome
to his Own Noble Fraternity, the Company of Haberdashers.

FRee Love, full welcome, bounty fair, clear,
Even as it flows from Heaven, inhabit here,
And with your Liberal Virtues bless the year,
Make this thy Palace thou smooth youth of Feasts,
Comus! and put Joy into all the Guests,
That they may truly taste in fewest words,
The Abundant welcome yon'd Kind Lord affords,
Especially to You, above the rest,
Of all most worthy to be First and Best;
You challenge two Respects, in Brotherhood, one,
Which had desert enough came it alone,
Without a second Virtue, but to add
Unto Your Worthiness, Your Love was clad
With Honour, Cost, and Care, and how applied,
The late triumphant Day best testified,
Stands in no need of my applause and praise,
Your Worth can of it self, it self best raise;
So much for Noble Action in your Right,
Which I presume his goodness will require:
Now for Himself, (not far to wade or swim)
I borrow of your Honours to fit him,
Which both preserves me in my first bounds still,
And may agree best with his Love and Will:
Behold in this rare Symbol of Renown,
The Emblem of all Justice, and the Crown
The fair reward for it, ever fresh and green;
Which imitates those Joys Eye hath not seen;
These Arms, that for their nakedness resemble
Even Truth it self, no covering, to dissemble,
Nor shift for Bribe, but open, plain, and bare,
Shows, Men of Power should keep their conscience
And were their Acts transparet, without veil (fair
Disguise or Vizard, and such never fail;
Observe this more, tis not one Arm alone
That bears this Laurel, but two joined in one,
Mercy and Justice, the two Props of State,
They must be both fixed in the Magistrate;
If wanting either, subject to much harm,
For he that ha's but one, ha's but one Arm;
Judge then the Imperfection; mark again,
They break both through a Cloud; which instructs Men
How they should place their Reverence and their Love,
Seeing all lawful power, comes from Above;
And as the Laurel (which is now your due)
Bring due to Honour, therefore most to you*
Fears no injurious Weather the Year brings,
But spite of Storms looks ever green and springs,
Apolloes Tree, which Lightnings never blast,
So ( Honoured Lord) should burning Malice cast,
Her pitchy Fires at your Triumphant State;
You are Apolloes Tree, a ( Magistrate,)
Which no foul Gust of Envy can offend,
Nor may it ever to your Lordships End,
Health and a Noble Courage bless your Days;
To this your worthy Brotherhood, fame and praise
WHy well said, thus should Christmas be
Lightsome, Iocond, blithe and free,
Now it looks like Bounties Palace,
Where every Cup ha's his full Ballace,
Drown Cares with Juice that Grapes have bled,
And make Times cheek look fresh and red,
Let nothing now but Healths go round,
And no sooner off, but crowned
With sparkling Liquors, bounding up,
Quick in Pallet, as in Cup:
To be heavy, to be dull,
Is a fault so pitiful,
We bar it from the course of Reason,
Care must not peep abroad this Season,
Nor a sad look dare appear
Within ten Mile of Christmas cheer;
Sighs are banished ten leagues farther,
Either Cellar, Hall or Larder;
To be Jovial then and blithe
Is truly to pay ( Christmas) Tithe,
And where free Mirth is and impartial,
Christmas there he has made me Marshiall.

Why how now? know you where you are? rude thing;
Bold and vnmanner'd Licence, dare you bring
Your free Speech hither, before me begin?
Who let this Skittish thing of Lightness in?
Some call the Porter hither, yet stay, stay,
I'ue power in words to chase this toy away;
I wonder that the Musique suffers thee
To come into their room?

Why Nicety?


Believe me honest Me (what e're yoube)
She's able to spoil all your Harmony,
Corrupt your airs with Lightness.

Oh fie, fie,
How ill you blaze my Coat, Severity?

Is this a place for you? can Lightness here
Under the Hazard of her Shame appear?

Why thou dull lumpish Thing, void of all fashion,
Mirths poison, Enemy to Recreation,
Thou Melancholy wretch, so filled with spite
Thou eat'st thy heart, when others take delight,
I must be merry, tis my nature --

Fool.


Dull dogbolt.


Skit.


What? this a Scolding School,
How now? so hie got? and so loud withal?
Whose doing wa'st plac'st you two there to brawl?
Pray mark the Assembly, look upon em well,
Think where you are, and let that rude thought quell
Your unbeseeming difference, tis not here
As at a Pit, here's Reverence, Worth, and Fear.

She says this place and season suites not me.


She says but right in that,


O Levity,


No, nor you neither,


You may be gon too,


You're Both Extremes, therefore no place for you,
Lightness becomes not, nor Severity,
It must me between both, and I am She,
Too Light, is bad, and too Severe as Wild,
But both well tempered, makes the mixture mild,
As I stand now between you, so it makes
A perfect Virtue up, when it pertakes
Of each, and comes no nearer then I do,
And Virtue made, We have no need of you,
Vanish, be gon.

I give glace willingly
To You, but not to Her.

Nor I to Thee,


So, Thus things should have their becoming grace,
For Temperance fits the Reverence of this place:
Grave Senators, in goodness still encreast!
Long may you Live to celebrate this Feast,
This blessed Season of true Joy compiled
In which fair Heaven and Man were reconcilde*
Musique? thou modest Servant to this place,
Raise chaste Delight, to do this Season grace.

Echo! Echo! by thy love once to Narcissus,
I now conjure thee not to miss us,
But make thy Sound
Upon the Woods rebound
And Mountains -- Ecch: And mountains,
And to thy neighbouring Sisters cal, -- Sisters cal,
Log'd in Cave or hollow Wall
And those resounding near fair Fountains
Ecch: Near fair Fountains,
Let em call to one another -- To one another
-- one another --
And one Sister raise up the other
Ecch. -- up the other --
Let it go from me to you -- From me to you
-- Me* To you,
From you to them, be just and true
-- Just and True
Never cease your Voices Flight,
Till you raise up chaste Delight
-- -- Up chaste Delight,
Delight -- Who calls me from my Cave
Twas I -- Twas I, Twas I;
This is no Time in silence now to lye
Delight -- Who I?
O I;
This is a Season of all I oy compiled,
In which fair Heaven and Man were reconcilde
Ecch -- Heaven and Man were reconcilde,
Ecch-Reconcilde,
Behold how many a worthy Guest
Are met to celebrate this Feast.
Delight -- I see it plain, O blame me then,
I ne'er will show such Sloth again;
For whose delight am I now raised?
Oh for the Cities!
Delight -- How? for the Cities?
Ecch -- For the Cities:
Del. To fail a Mistress so renowned it were a thousand pities,
Ecch -- Thousand pities.
Those are her Honoured Sons you now behold,
Del. Heaven bless them all, with Graces manifold.
Temp. So!
Tis thankfully accepted, you've expressed,
Your service well and fully to this Feast:
Adorned and honoured in each happy part,
With those most reverend Patrons to Desert:
Joy never fail your meetings, good success
All your Endeavours, and your Fortunes bless,
Gladness of heart dwell ever in your Breasts,
And Peace of fair Works bring you glorious Rests.


At the House of the Right Honourable SIR Francis Ihones, L. Mayor. For the
solemn feast of Easter last, upon the Times of that blessed and laudable
Custom of Celebrating the memory of Pious works in this City, at Saint Mary
Spittle.

FLora, Flora!
We call thee here,

We call thee here,
From forth thy fragrant Bower,

Thou Queen of every laughing Flower,
Appear!
Appear to us,

To us appear:
Thou Banquet of the Year,

Or if a Name may be more sweet, more dear.
Hark, Summer hark,

Mark, Autumn, mark,
How coughing Winter mourns to see
This smiling Hour,

Would it were nipped for me,
But soft I feel no such decay
But I may live to kiss fair May,
And in the Morn and Evening hours,
Leave my cold sweats upon the Flowers.

Alas poor Mumps, at thy weak power We laugh,


-- Oh -- Oh -- O --


He's struck cold
At Floraes first appearing,
Look, in a Sound,
Will drop to'th ground.
Help, help, help, he wants your cheering.

Oh I confess
Field Empress,
The Beauty of thy power amazes,
I am content to join
With those three Friends of thine,
And help to chant thy praises;

Now all the Seasons of the Year agree
To give, ( Fair Flora) the prime place to Thee.

Where's Hyacinth! the Boy Appollo loud,
And turned into a Flower?

Here, Queen of sweetness.


Adonis! thou that for thy beauteous chastity,
Were turned into the chastest of all Flowers,
(The closse-infolded Rose) blown into Blushes
It is so mayden-modest,

What's thy pleasure
Fair Empress of sweet Odours,

Willing Servants!
I have Employment for you both, and speedy,

We wait with much Joy to receive the charge on it;


Hast, to the two Assisting Magistrates,
Those worthy City Consuls,
Bear our sweet wishes to em, and speak Joy
From us, to both their Feasts,
And to that part of their Graue-worthy Guess
Which here we miss to day, though here be those
Whom we ought more especially to Honour,
Say though we cannot there our self appear,
Because we owe our greater service here,
Yet that they shall not fail of all their due,
We send the wishes of our Heart by you.

Which shall be faithfully tendered,


Tis presumed;
But to this fair Assembly present now
I, and these yielding Sweets all their heads bow
In honour of this Feast, of the Day, chief,
Made solemn by the works of your Relief,
Your Cares, your Charities, the holy Use
Of pious exercise; all which infuse
Blessings into your Fortunes, you abound
In temporal things, cause blessed fruits are found
Upon the Stocks you graft on, mark the Increase;
You plant poor Orphans in a ground of Peace,
And carefully provide, when fruit time comes,
You gather Heavens Joys for it, in infinite Summer;
This day you viewed the Garden of those Deeds,
That bless the Founders; and all those succeeds
In Zeal and Imitation; you saw there,
Virtues true Paradise, dressed with your Care;
(Your most religious Care) and those Blew Sets,
They are the Cities Bank of Violets
That smells most sweet to Heaven; never cease then
You worthy Praesidents for Times and Men,
Till Charity spring, (by your Examples given)
As thick on Earth, as Rewards stand in Heaven;
If there were sloth or faintness tow'ard good works;
(As blessed be Heaven there is not) Time instructs,
The Season of the Year, for as the Ground,
The heaviest and dul'st Creature can be found,
Yet now begins both in her Meads and Bowers
To offer up her Sacrifice, in Flowers,
How much more ought that Earth with a Soul blessed,
Which is of every of you here possessed,
To spring forth Works of Piety and Love,
To gratify those Dews fall from Above;
And as the humblest Flower that ever grew,
Ha's not his Sent alone, but Virtue too,
Good for Mans griefs; so tis not Mans full Fame
To have a Christian Savour, or a Name,
An empty voice of Charity and Relief,
He must apply Ease to his Brothers grief;
' Faith is the Sent and Odour of the Flower,
'But Work's the Virtue, that makes good the power;
Tis like the Tincture of those Robes you wear,
In which clear Vesture you to me appear
Like Borders of fair Roses; and worn hie
Upon the Cities forehead; that rich Dye
As it is reverend, honourable, grave,
So it is precious, wholesome; which doth crave
A double Virtue at the Wearers hands,
Justice and Mercy; by which goodness stands:
Thus Honour still claims Virtue for his Due,
And may both ever lay just claim to you:
What? the four Seasons of the Year struck dumb?
I looked for a kind Welcome, now Im'e come.



WElcome, O welcome, Queen of sweetness
welcome, in the noblest manner,
With all thy Flowers, thy sweet breath't Maids of Honour;

Flower guntle! I begin with Thee,


Fair Flower of Crystal! that's for me,


Apples of Love! there sweetness dwells;


Puh, give me Canterbury Bells;


Fair double- Gold cups, griefs expelling,


Agnus Castus, all excelling,


Venus Bath! the loveliest pride of June,


Give me that Flower, called, Go to bed at noone,


Blessed Thistle, famed for good,


Shepherds Pouch, for stanching blood,


Fair yellow Knight-wort, for a foul relapse,


And Ladies* Mantle, good for Maidens Paps,


Tuft Hyacinth! that crowns the Bower,
Called of some, the Virgins Flower;

Take that for me, more good I feel
In Ruffling Robin, and Larks Heel.

There is a Sweet, Unnamed yet,
The root is white, the Mark of pure Delight,
Bearing his Flowers fair and hie,
The colour like a purple Dye:

What is the name tis blessed withal?


Liue-long! it so the Shepherds call;


Liue-long? tis Virtues promised Due
And may it Long remain with You
Honoured Patrons,
Virtuous Matrons,
Whose Lifes and Acts this City graces,
Daily striving,
And reviving
Works worthy your renown and places.

So ya're confirmed; from your harmonious Closes
May Sweetness drop, as Hony-Dew from Roses,
A blessed Health possess you, and a long,
That in this latter Spring of your grave years,
You may be green in Virtues, and grow strong
In works of Grace, which souls to Heaven endeers;
your good Cares, here, Justice, and well spent hours
Crown you hereafter with eternal Flowers.



THe goddess Flora, Empress of the Spring,
Choosing (this Feast) her Flowery Sojourning,
Under the Roof of the chief Magistrate,
Whose power lays just claim to the greatest state,
Hath sent me forth, not meanest in her Grace,
To breath forth her sweet wishes to this place;
First to the Master of this bounteous Feast,
To speak her joy; next, to each worthy Guest;
And though she cannot now her Self appear,
Because she owes her greater Service there,
Yer her Hearts Love to every one I bring,
To whom sh'as sent a Present of the Spring.
Then falls into the former speech of Flora, making
Use of her divine instructions.
Here follows the worthy and Noble Entertainments of the Lords of his
Majesties most Honourable Privy Council; at the Houses of the Lord Mayor, and
Sheriffs.

The first Entertainment upon Thursday in Easter week being the fifth of
April, 1621. And upon the sixeteenth of the same Month those Persons of Honour
received their second Noble welcome, in a free and Generous Entertainment, at
the house of the Right Worshipful, Mr. Sheriff Allen; Flora the Person used
before, thus prepared for them.

Flo.

AM I so happy to be blessed again?
With These! the choice of many thousand
For Royal Trust selected, and a Care
That makes you Sacred; may the world compare men,
A Confidence with yours? from so complete
And excellent a Master? Or so great
And free a Love can any Nation show
In Subject to the Sovereign, then doth flow
From this most thankful City? Waives of Love
Ee'n overwhelm each other, as they move,
All striving to be first, they run in one
To'th Oceans Breast! (the Kings Affection.)
And you of Honour! that do oft appear
In presence of a Majesty so clear,
So mighty in Heavens blessings, be so kind
To grace with Words what He shall ever find,
And tis a glorious Truth, and well beseems
Places and Persons of your fair Esteems,
Not all the Kingdoms of the Earth, contain
A City freer to her Sovereign,
More faithful, and more careful; observe here
His Highness excellent Trial; Love and Fear
Make up a Subjects duty, to his King,
As Justice and sweet Mercy makes up Him;
So two fold Virtue two-fold Duty, cheers,
He knew their lones, now came touched their fears
To try their Temper, (O blessed Heaven) he found
It was the Fear he looked for, had it's ground
Upon Religion, Reverence, sweet Respect,
Love looked not Lovelier, nor Diuinelier decked,
Each reprehensiue word He did impart
Flew, and cleaude fast to their obedient Heart,
Twas fire within their bosom, 'could not rest,
Till in some serious manner, they'de expressed
Their duteous Care, with all speed put in Act
Their Sovereigns sacred pleasure, to coact
Where manners failed, and force, as with a Pill
From Humours rude, the Venom of the Ill;
He Kings own Admonition, against Crimes,
'Is Physic to the Body of the Times.
And herein did He Imitate the Highest,
(To whom it best becomes Him to be nighest)
To chasten, where he loves, it is the Seal
Of the Almighties favour, He doth deal
So with his Chosen, do not languish then,
Thou Prince of Cities, cause the King of Men
Divinely did reprove thee, Know, tis Love,
Thou art his Chosen City, and wilt prove
(As thou hast ever been) faithful and free,
The Chamber of his sweet Security:
Then in a Health of loy your Hearts express,
Whilst I breath welcome to those Noble Guess.
A Trust of Honour, and a Noble Care
Still to discharge that Trust, Keep your Fames fair,
You have proceeded carefully; go on,
And a full Praise Crown your Progression.
The last Entertainment full as Noble and worthy as the former, upon the
Saturday ensuing, being the 21. of the same Month, at the House of the equally
Generous and bounteous, the Right Worshipful, Master Sheriff Duty.

GOod Heaven


Fie, this is usurpation merely,
Speak thrice together? there's no right in this:

What's that?


I have the juster cause to take exceptions,
This is the place I served in, lately served in,
And by her own appointmet, my wrong's greatest.

Here's a strange sudden boldness a' both sides a' me,


Wa'st not sufficient grace for you to speak
At the chief Magistrates house, there, where that Bower
Was first erected, but to shift your seat
From place to place, pull down, and then set up,
I wonder how she scapes Informers, trust me.

Believe me so do I, sh'as favour shown her.


So, this becomes you well,


There's right in all things,
We might have kept our places as we held em,
There's little Conscience in your dealing, thus,
You might have left the Lower Books for us,
For our poor service.

Thus I answer you,
Taking my President from the just care
Of those clear Lights of Honour, shining fair
To their Works End; you see before your Eyes
The Trust that was committed to their wise
And discreet Powers (for his Highness Use)
They put not off to others, with excuse
Of weariness, or pains; as they begun,
In their own Noble Persons see all done:
So, by their sweet Example, I that am
Your Queen and Mistress, and may rightly blame,
And tax the boldness of your ruder blood,
I do not think, or hold my self too good
In mine own Person, to commend their Cares
That have so justly served their King, in Theirs,
Now you pull in your Heads.

Pardon sweet Queen.


Yet why should Anger in my brow be seen
They came but to show duty to the Time,
Contention to do Service was their Crime,
That's no ill looking fault; but 'tis still known,
They that give Honour, love to do it alone,
It brookes no Partnership: -- To give this last
Duty her Due, as others before past,
Though it came now from men of meaner Rank,
Where wealth was ne'er known to oreflow the bank
Like Spring-Tides of the Rich, that swell more hie,
Yet tak't for Truth, it comes as cheerfully,
All smiling Givers; and well may it come
With smooth and loving Faces, the small Sum
That they return, is thousand times repaid
In Peace and Safety, besides Sovereign Aid
For each Hearts Grievance, (to its full content)
By this high Synod of the Parliament;
Before whose fair, clear, and Unbribed Eyes,
(When it appears) Corruption sincks and dies,
Secure Oppression once, comes trembling thither
(Stead of her hard heart knoks her knees together
This Benefit is purchased, this Reward
To which all Coin is dross to be compar'de:

But, the fair Works concluded, on all parts,
Your Care, which I place first of all deserts,
And it becomes it, t'as been nobly Just,
You have discharged with Honour your hie Trust:
The Cities Love, I must remember next,
And faithful Duty, both devoutly mixed;
And (as the State of Court sets last, the Best,)
His boundless Goodness, not to be expressed,
That is your King and Master, Blessings fall
Upon His Actions; Honour, on you All.

