THis our Device, we do not call a Play,
Because we break the Stages Laws to day
Of Acts Sceanes, sometimes a Comic strain
Hath hit delight home in the Master-vayne:
Thalia's prize, Melpomine's sad stile,
Hath shook the Tragic hand another while;
The Muse of History hath caught your eyes,
And she chants the pastor all Psalteries:
We now lay claim to none, yet all present
Seeking out pleasure to find your content;
You shall perceive by what comes first in sight,
It was intended for a Royal Night.
There's one hours words, the rest in Songs Dances,
Lauds no mans own, no man himself aduances,
No man is lifted but by other hands,
Say he could leap, he lights but where he stands:
Such is our fate; if good, much good may it do you,
If not (sorry) we'll lose our labours wi you.

WHy, Richmond, Richmond, why art so heavy?


I have reason enough for that good sainted, Sister.

Am I not built with stone, fair, large, and free-stone, some part covered
with Lead too?


All this is but a light-headed understanding now.
I mean, why so melancholy, thou look, mustily, me thinks.

Do I so? and yet I dwell in sweeter air
Then you, sweet St Iames's: How three days
Warming has spirited you; you have sometimes
Your vacations as other of your friends have,
If you call your self to mind.

Thou never saw my new Gallery my Tennis-court, Richmond.


No: but I heard of it, and from whence it came too.


Why, from whence came it?


Nay, lawfully derived, from the Brickhils, as thou
Did thy self.

Thou breed'st Crikets, I think, that will serve for the
Anagram to a Critique, come, I know thy grief:
Thou fear that our late Rival, Denmarke-House,
Will take from our regard, and we shall want
The Noble presence of our Princely Master,
(In his so frequent visitation)
Which we were wont so fully to enjoy.

And is not that a cause of sorrow then?


Rather a cause of Joy, that we enjoy
So fair a fellowship, Denmark. Why, she's
A stately Palace, and majestic,
Ever of courtly breeding, but of late
Built up unto a Royal height of state,
Rounded with Noble prospects, by her side,
The siluer-footed Thamesis doth slide,
As (though more faintly) Richmond, does by thee.
Which I (denied to touch) can only see.

Who's this?


Tis she her self in faith,
Comes with a courteous brow.

Ye'are welcome, most nobly welcome.


Hark you now, Richmond, did not I tel thee
T was a Royal House?

Why, was there any doubt,
Of our kind gratulation? I am proud
Only to be in fellowship with you,
Co-mate and Servant to so great a Master.

That's Richmonds fear, thou'lt rob us both*
Thou hast such an enticing face of thine own.

Oh, let not that be any difference,
When we do serve, let us be ready for it.
And called at His great pleasure: the round year
In her circumferent arms will fold us all,
And give us all employment seasonable.
I am for colder hours, when the bleak air
Bites with an Icy tooth: when Summer ha's seared
And Autumn all discoloured, laid all Fallow,
Pleasure taken house, and dwells within doors,
Then shall my Towers smoke, and comely show:
But when again, the fresher morn appears,
And the soft Spring renues her Velvet head,
St Iames's take my blessed Inhabitants
For she can better entertain them then,
In larger bounds, in Park, sports, delights, and grounds.
A third season yet (with the Western Oars)
Calls up to Richmond, when the high-heated year,
Is in her Solsticie: Then she affords
More sweeter-breathing air, more bounds, more pleasures:
The Hounds loud Musique to the flying Stag,
The feathered Talenter to the falling bird,
The Bow-mans twelue-score prick, even at the door,
And to these I could add a hundred more.
Then let not us strive which shall be his homes:
But strive to give him welcome when he comes.

By my troth he shall be welcome to Richmond
When so ever he comes.

And to Saint Iames's in faith at midnight.


Mean time, 'tis fit I give him welcome hither;
But first, to you my Royal Royall'st guest,
And I could wish your Banquet were a Feast:
How e're your welcome is most bounteous,
Which, I beseech you take as gracious:
To you my Owner, Master, and my Lord,
Let me the second unto you afford,
And then, from you to all: for it is you
That gives indeed, what I but seem to do.
I was from ruin raised by a fair hand,
A Royal hand: in that state let me stand
For ever now: to bounty I was bred,
My cups full brimmed, and my free tables spread
To hundreds daily, even without my door,
I had an open hand unto the poor.
I know I shall so still, then shall their prayers
Pass by the Porters Keys, climb up each stayres,
And knit, and joint, my new reedifyde frames,
That I shall able be to keep your names
Unto eternity: Denmark House shall keep
Her high Name now, till Time doth fall asleep,
And be no more: mean time, welcome, welcome,
Heartily welcome; but chiefly you (great Sir,)
What e're lies in my power, command me all,
As freely as you were at your White-Hall.

SOldier, ta-ra-ra-ra-ra. How is't? thou look as if thou had lost a field to
day.


No, but I have lost a day ith field: if you take me a maunding but where I am
commanding, let (...) show me the house of correction.


Why, thou were not maunding, were thou? there's martial danger in that,
believe it.


No sir, but I was bold to show my self to some of my old and familiar
acquaintance; but being disguised with my wants, there's no body knew me.


Faith, and that's the worst disguise a man can walk in; thou were better have
appeared drunk in good clothes, much better* there's no superfluities shame a
man; as to be ouer-braue, ouer-bold, ouer-swearing, ouer-lying, ouer-whoring,
these add still to his repute; 'tis the poor indigence, the want, the lank
deficiency; as when a man cannot be brave, dares not be bold, is afraid to
swear, wants maintenance for a lye, and money to give a whore a supper: this
is pauper, cuius modicum non satis est; nay, he shall never be rich with
begging neither, which is another wonder; because many beggars are rich.


Oh Cauina Facundia! this dog-eloquence of thine will make thee somewhat one
day, Scholar; could thou turn but this prose into rime, there were a
pitiful living to be picked out of it.


I could make Ballads for a need.


Very well sir; and I'll warrant thee thou shalt never want subject to write of:
One hangs himself to day, another drowns himself to morrow, a Sergeant stabbed
next day, here a Petti-fogger ath' Pillory, a Bawd in the Carts nose, and a
Pander in the tail: Hic Mulier, Haec Vir, Fashions, Fictions, Felonies,
Fooleries, a hundred havens has the Ballad-monger to traffic at, and new ones
still daily discovered.


Prithee Soldier, no further this way, I participate more of Heraclitus then
Democritus, I could rather weep the sins of the people then sing um.


Shall I set thee down a course to live?


Faith, a coorse living I think must serve my turn; but why hast thou not
found out thine own yet?


Tush, that's resolved on, beg; when there's use for me,
I shall be brave again, hugged, and beloved:
We are like Winter garments, in the height
And hot blood-of Summer, putoff, thrown by
For moths-meate, never so much as thought on,
Till the Drum strikes up stormesagen; and then,
Come, my well-lin'd Soldier, (with valour,
Not Valor) keep me warm; Oh, I love thee;
We shall be trimmed and very well brushed then:
If we be faced with Fur, 'tis tolerable;
For we may pillage then and steal our prey,
And not be hanged for it; when the least fingering
In peaceful Summer choakes us: A Soldier,
At the best, is even but the forlorn hope
Unto his Country, sent desperately out
And never more expected: if he come,
Peace's war, perhaps, the Law providently
Has provided for him, some house or lands
May be suspenc't in wrangling controversy
And he be hired to keep possession:
For there may be swords drawn, he may become
The abject second to some stinking Bailey;
Oh, let him serve the Pox first, and dye a Gentleman.
Come, I know my ends, but would fain provide for thee:
Can thou make?

What? I have no handicraft, man.


Cuckolds, make Cuckolds, 'tis a pretty trade
In a peaceful City; 'tis women's work, man,
And they are good pay-masters.

I dare not:
'Tis a work of super-errogation, and the Church forbids it.

Prithee, what's Latin for a Cuckold, Scholar?
I could never learn yet.

Faith, the Latines have no proper word for it, that ever I read; Homo, I take
it, is the best,

Because it is a common name to all men.


You're mad fellows you Schollers; I am persuaded,
Were I a Scholar now, I could not want.

Every man's most capable of his own grief.
A Scholar said you? why there are none now a days:
Were you a Scholar, you'd be a singular fellow.

How no Schollers! What's become of um all?


I'll make it proof from your experience:
A Commander's a Commander, Captain, Captain;
But, having no Soldiers, where's the command?
Such are we, all Doctors, no Disciples now;
Every man's his own teacher, none learnes of others:
You have not heard of our Mechanic Rabbis,
That shall dispute in their own tongues backward and forward,
With all the learned Fathers of the Iewes?

Mechanic Rabbis! what might those be!


I'll show you sir, (and they are men are daily to be scene)
There's Rabbi Iob, a venerable Silkeweauer,
Iehu, a Throester, dwellingith Spittle fields;
There's Rabbi Abimelech, a learned Cobbler,
Rabbi Lazarus, a superstichious Taylor:
These shall hold up their Shittles, Needles, Awles,
Against the gravest Leuite of the Land,
And give no ground neither.

That I believe,
They have no ground for any thing they do.

You understand right: and these men by practique
Have got the Theory of all the Arts
At their fingers ends, and in that they will live;
How ere they will dye, I know not: for they change daily.

This is strange,
How come they to attain this knowledge?

As Boys learn Arithmetique, practise with Counters*
To reckon sums of silver: so with their Tools*
They come to Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric
And all the Sciences; as for example,
The devout Weaver sits within his Loom,
And thus he makes a learned Syllogisme:
His Woof the Mayor, and his Warp the Minor.
His Shuttle then the brain, and firm conclusion,
Makes him a piece of Stuff, that Aristotle,
Ramus, nor all the Logicians can take a pieces.

This has some likelihood.


So likewise by
His deep instructiue and his mistick tools,
The Taylor comes to be Rhetorical,
First, on the spread Velvet, Satin, Stuff, or Cloth,
He chalks out a circumferent Paraphrase,
That goes about the bush where the Thief stands.
Then comes his Shears in shape of an Eclypsis,
And takes away the t'others too long tail:
By his Needle he understands Ironia,
That with one eye looks two ways at once:
Metonymia ever at his fingers ends.
Some call his Pickadell, Synecdoche:
But I think rather that should be his Yard
Being but Pars pro toto, and by Metaphor
All know, the Selleridge under the shop-boord,
He calls his Hell, not that it is a place
Of Spirits abode, but that from that Abyss
Is no recovery or redemption
To any owners hand what ever falls.
I could run further, were it not tedious,
And place the stiffe-toed Cobbler in his form:
But let them mend themselves, for yet all's nought:
They now learn only never to be taught.

Let them alone; How shall we learn to live?


Without book is most perfect, for with 'vm
We shall hardly: thou may keep a Fence-Schoole, 'tis a Noble Science.

I had rather beith Crown Office:
Thou may keep School too, and do good service
To bring up children for the next age better.

'Tis a poor living that's picked out of boys buttocks.


'Tis somewhat better then the night-Farmer yet.


Hark, What sounds are these?

Ha? There's somewhat more,
There is in sight a glorious presence,
A presence more then humane.

An amazing one, Scholar; if ever thou could conjure, speak now.


In name of all the Deities, what art thou?
Thy shine is more then Sub-celestiall,
'Tis at the least heavenly Angelical.

A Patroness unto ye both, ye ignorant and undeserving Favourites of my Fame;
You are a Soldier?


Since these arms could wield A^mes
I have professed it, brightest Deity.

To thee I am Bellona: you are a Scholar?


In that poor Pilgrimage (since I could go)
I hitherto have walked.

To thee I am Minerua,
Pallas to both, Goddess of Arts and Arms,
Of Arms and Arts, for neither have precedence,
For he's the complete man partakes of both,
The soul of Arts joined with the flesh of valour;
And he alone participates with me.
Thou art no Soldier unless a Scholar,
Nor thou a Scholar unless a Soldier.
Ye 'aue Noble breedings both, worthy Foundations,
And will ye build up rotten Battlements
On such fair groundsels? That will ruin all:
Lay Wisdom on thy Valour, on thy Wisdom, Valour;
For these are mutual co-incidents,
What seeks the Soldier?

My maintenance.


Lay by thine Arms and take the City then.
There's the full Cup and Cap of maintenance;
And your grief is want too?

I want all but grief.


No: you want most, what most you do profess.
Where read you to be rich was happiest?
He had no bay from Phoebus, nor from me
That e're wrote so, no Minerua in him,
My Priests have taught, that poverty is safe,
Sweet and secure: for nature gives man nothing
At his birth. When life and earth are wedded,
There's neither Basin held nor Dowry given,
At parting nor is any garner stored,
Wardrobe or Warehouse kept for their return:
Wherefore shall then man count his Myriade's
Of gold and silver Idols: since thrifty Nature
Will nothing lend but she will haue't again,
And life and labour for her interest?
My Priests do teach, Seek thou thy self within,
Make thy mind wealthy, thy knowing conscience,
And those shall keep thee company from hence.
Or would you wish to emulate the gods,
Live (as you may imagine) careless and free,
With joys and pleasures crowned, and those eternal,
This were to (far) exceed 'vm: for while earth lasts
The Deities themselves abate their fullness,
Troubled with cries of ne'er contented man:
Man then to seek and find it, all that hope
Fled when Pandora's Fatal box flew open.

Divine Lady, there's yet a competence
Which we come short off.

That may as well be caused
From your own negligence, as our slow blessings:
But I'll prefer you to a greater power,
Even Iupiter himself, Father and King of Gods,
With whom I may well join in just complaint:
These latter Ages have dispoiled my Fame.
Minerua's Altars are all ruined now.
I had along adored Paladium.
Offerings and Incense fuming on my shrine;
Rome held me dear, and old Troy gave me worship,
All Greece renowned me, till the Ida prize
Joined me with wrathful Iuno to destroy 'vm,
(For we are better ruined, then profaned.)
Now let the latter ages count the gains
They got by wanton Venus sacrifice,
But I'll invoke great Iupiter.

Do, Goddess*
And re-erect the ruins of thy Fame
For Poesy can do it.

Altitonant
Imperial crowned, and thunder-armed Jove,
Unfold thy fiery Veil, the flaming Robe
And superficies of thy better brightness,
Descend from thine Orbicular Chariot,
Listen the plaints of thy poor Votaries,
'Tis Pallas calls, thy Daughter, Iupiter,
Taken from thee by the Lemnian Mulciber,
A Midwife god to the delivery
Of thy most Sacred fertile teeming brain.

Hark, these sounds proclaim his willing sweet descent,
If not full blessings, expect some content.
What would our Daughter?


Iust-iudging Jove,
I meditate the suite of humble mortals,
By whose large Sceptre all their Fates are swayd,
Adverse or auspicious.

Tis more then Iupiter
Can do to please 'vm, unsatisfied man
Has in his ends no end, not hells Abyss
Is deeper gulf'd then greedy Avarice,
Ambition finds no Mountain high enough,
For his aspiring Foot to stand upon.
One drinks out all his blessings into surfeits,
Another throws um out as all were his,
And the Gods bound for prodigal supply,
What is he lives content in any kind?
That long incensed nature is now ready
To turn all back into the fruitless Chaos.

These are two noble Virtues (my dread Sire)
Both Arts and Arms well-wishers unto Pallas.

How can it be, but they have both abused,
And would (for their ills) make our Justice guilty?
Show them their shames, Minerua: what the young world
In her unstable youth did then produce:
She should grow graver now, more sage, more wise,
Know Concord, and the harmony of goodness:
But if her old age strike with harsher notes,
We may then think she is too old, and dotes,
Strike by white Art, a Theomanticke power,
Magic Divine, not the Devils horror,
But the delicious Musique of the Spheres,
The thrice three Worthies summon back to life:
There let um see what arts and Arms comixed
(For they had both) did in the worlds broad face
Those that did propagate and beget their fames,
And (for posterity) left lasting names.

I shall, great Iupiter.


MVSES, Usher in those states,
And amongst 'vm choose your mates,
There wants not one, nor one to spare,
For thrice three, both your numbers are.
Learnings Mistress, fair Caliope,
Loud Euterpe, sweet Therpsichore,
Soft Thalia, sad Melpomine,
Pleasant Clio, large Eratho,
High aspiring eyed Vrania,
Hony-lingued Polihymnia;
Leave awhile your Thespian Springs,
And usher in those more then Kings:
We call them Worthies, 'tis their due,
Though long time dead, still live by you.
These three were Hebrewes,
This Noble Duke was he, at whose command
Hiperion reined his fiery Coursers in,
And fixed stood over Mount Gilboa,
This Mattathias son, the Macchabee,
Under whose arm no less then Worthies fell.
This the most sweet and sacred Psalmograph,
These of another sort, of much less knowledge,
Little less valour, a Macedonian borne,
Whom afterwards the world could scarcely bear,
For his great weight in Conquest, this Troy's best soldier;
This Romes first Caesar; these three of latter times,
And to the present more familiar.
Great Charles of France, and the brave Bulloine Duke,
And this is Britains glory, King'd thirteen times.
Ye*aue fair aspects, more to express Ioues power,
Show you have motion for a Jovial hour.

Were not these presidents for all future ages?


But none attains their glories (King of Stars:)
These are the fames are follow'd, and pursued,
But never overtaken.

The Fates below,
The gods arms are not shortened, nor do we shine
With fainter influence; who conquers now,
Makes it his Tyrants Prize, and not his Honours,
Abusing all the blessings of the gods.
Learnings and Arts are Theories, no practiques;
To understand is all they study too:
Men strive to know too much, too little do.

Plaints are not ours alone (great Iupiter.)
See, Time himself comes weeping.

Who ha's more cause?
Who more wronged then Time? Time passes all men
With a regardless eye, at best, the worst
Expect him with a greedy appetite.
The landed Lord looks for his Quarter day,
The big-bellied Usurer for his teeming gold
That brings him forth the child of Interest:
He that beyond the bounds of heavens large blessing,
Hath made a fruitless creature to increase:
Dull earthen Minerals to propagate,
These only do expect and entertain me:
But (being come) they bend their plodding heads,
And while they count their bags, they let me pass,
Yet instant wish me come about again.
Would Time deserve their thanks, or Jove their praise,
He must turn Time only to Quarter days.
Oh, but my wrongs they are innumerable!
The Lawyer drives me off from Term to Term,
Bids me (and I do it) bring forth my Alathae
My poor child Truth, he sees, and will not see her:
What I could manifest in one clear day,
He still delays a cloudy Iubile.
The Prodigal wastes, and makes me sick with surfeits:
The Drunkard (strong in Wine) trips up my heals,
And sets me topsie-turuy, on my head,
Waking my silent passage in the night
With Revels, noise, and Thunder-clapping oaths,
And snorting on my bright Meridian,
And when they think I pass too slowly by:
They have a new-found vapour to expel me,
They smoke me out: ask um but why they do it,
And he that worst can speak, yet this can say,
I take this whiffe to drive the Time away.
Oh, but the worst of all, women do hate me:
I cannot set impression on their checks
With all my circular hours, days, months, and years,
But 'tis wiped off with gloss and pensilrie,
Nothing so hateful, as gray hairs and Time;
Rather no hair at all; 'tis sins Autumn now:
For those fair Trees that were more fairer cropped,
Or they fall of themselves, or will be lopped:
Even Time it self (to number all his griefs)
Would waste himself unto his ending date:
How many would eternity wish here,
And that the Sun, and Time, and Age might stand
And leave their Annual distinction,
That nature were bed-rid, all motion sleep?
Time having then such foes, ha's cause to weep.
Redress it Iupiter.

I tell thee, glorious Daughter: and you things
Shut up in wretchedness, the world knew once
His age of happiness; blessed times ownde him,
Till those two ugly ills, Deceit, and Pride,
Made it a perished substance: Pride brought in
Forgetfulness of goodness, Merit, Virtue,
And placed ridiculous Officers in life;
Vaine-glory, Fashion, Humour, and such toys
That shame to be produced.
The phrenzie of Apparel, that's run mad,
And knows not where to settle Masculine painting;
And the five Starches, mocking the five Senses,
All in their different and ridiculous colours,
Which for their apish and fantastic follies,
I summon to make odious, and will fit um
With flames of their own colours.

What, no respect amongst you? must I wake you
In your forgetful duties? jet before me?
Take place of me? you rude presumptuous gossip:
'Pray who am I? not I the primitiue Starch?
You blew-eyde Frokin, looks like fire and brimstone;
You Cawdle-colour, much of the complexion
Of high Shroue-Tuesday Batter, yallow-hammer:
And you my Tanzy face, that shows like Pride,
Served up in Sorrill sops, green Sickness baggage:
And last, thou Red Starch, that wear all thy blushes
Under thy cheeks, looks like a strangled Moon calfe,
With all thy blood settled about thy neck,
The Ensign of thy shame, if thou had any;
Know, I'm Starch Protestant, thou Starch Puritan
With the blew nostril, whose tongue lies in thy nose.

Wicked interpretation!


I ha known a white-fac't hyppocrite, Lady Sanctity,
A Yellow ne'er came near her, and sh'as been
A Citizens wife too, starcht like Innocence;
But the Devils pranks not vglier: In her mind
Wears Yellow, hugs it, if her husbands trade
Could bear it, there's the spite: but since she cannot
Wear her own linen Yellow; yet she shows
Her love too't, and makes him wear Yellow hose.
I am as stiff in my opinion
As any Starch amongst you.

I, as you.


And I as any.


I scorn to come behind.


Then conclude thus:
When all men's several censures, all the Arguments
The world can bring upon us, are applyde;
The sinne's not in the colour, but the pride.

Oracle Yellow:


These are the youngest Daughters of deceit,
With which the precious time of life's beguiled,
Fooled, and abused; I'll show you straight their Father,
His shapes, his labours, that has vexed the world
From age to age, and tossed it from his first and simple state,
To the foul Center where it now abides;
Look back but into Times, here shall be shown,
How many strange Remooues the world has known. Music.

Who's this, great Iupiter?


Simplicity: he that had first possession; one that stumbled upon the world,
and never minded it.


Hah, hah! I'll go see how the World looks since I stepped aside from it, there's
such heaving and shouing about it, such toiling and moyling; now I stumbled
upon it when I least thought on it.

'Vds me, 'tis altered of one side since I left it: hah, there's a Milke-maid
got with child since, me thinks; what, and a Shepherd forsworn himself?
here's a foul corner: by this light, Subtilty has laid an egg too, and will
go ny to hatch a Lawyer; this was well foreseen: I'll mar the fashion on it;
so, the egg's broke, and 'tas a yolke* as black as buckrom: Whats here a this
side? Oh, a dainty world; here's one a sealing with his tooth, and poor man
he has but one in all, I was afraid he would have left it upon the paper,
he was so honestly earnest; here are the Reapers singing: I'll lay mine ear
to 'em:


Yonder's Simplicity whom I hate deadly,
He has held the world too long; he's but a fool,
A toy will coozen him: if I once fasten on it,
I'll make it such a Nurcery for Hell,
Planting black Souls in it, it shall ne'er be fit
For honesty to set her simples in.

Whop! Here's the coozningst Rascal in a Kingdom,
The Master villain, he has the thunders property,
For if he come but near the Harvest folks,
His breath's so strong, that he sours all their bottles,
If he should but blow upon the world now, the stain would never get out
again: I warrant, if he were ripped, one might find a swarm of Usurers in his
liver, a cluster of Scriveners in his kidneys, and his very puddings stuffed with
Bayliffes.


I must speak fair to the Fool.


He makes more near me.


Lass, who has put that load? that carriage
On poor Simlcity? had they no mercy?
Pretty, kind, loving worm; come, let me help it.

Keep off, and leave your cogging; foh, how abominably he smells of
controversies, Schismes and Factions! me thinks, I smell forty Religions
together in him, and ne'er a good one; -- his eyes look like false lights,
coozening trap-windowes.


The world, sweet heart, is full of cares and troubles,
No match for thee, thou art a tender thing,
A harmless quiet thing, a gentle fool,
Fit for the fellowship of Ewes and Rams:
Go, take thine ease and pipe; give me the burden,
The clog, the torment, the heart-breake, the world;
Here's for thee, Lamb, a dainty Oaten Pipe.

Pox a your pipe; if I should dance after your pipe, I should soon dance to
the Devil.


I think, some serpent sure has licked him over,
And given him only craft enough to keep,
And go no farther with him; all the rest
Is innocence about him, truth and bluntness.
I must seek other course; for I have learned
Of my Infernal Sire, not to be lazy,
Faint or discouraged at the tenth repulse:
Me thinks that world Simplicity now hugs fast,
Does look as if it should be Deceit's at last.

So, so, l'me glad hes vanished: me thought I had much ado to keep my self
from a smatch of knavery, as long as he stood by me; for certainly villainy is
infectious, and in the greater person the greater poison: as for example, he
that takes but the tich of a Citizen, may take the scab of a Courtier. Hark,
the Reapers begin to sing, they are come nearer me thinks too.


HAppy times we live to see,
Whose Master is Simplicity:
This is the age where blessings flow,
In joy we reap, in peace we sow;
We do good deeds without delay,
We promise and we keep our day,
We love for virtue, not for wealth,
We drink no healths, but all for health,
We sing, we dance, we pipe, we play,
Our work's continual Holiday,
We live in poor contented sort,
Yet neither beg, nor come at Court,
These Reapers have the merriest lives, they have music to all they do;
they'll sow with a Tabor, and get Children with a Pipe.


Sir, he's a fool, the world belongs to you,
You're mighty in your worth and your command,
You know to govern, form, make laws, and take
Their sweet and precious penalty, it befits
A mightiness like yours, the world was made
For such a Lord as you, so absolute
A Majesty in all Princely nobleness
As your self is; but to lye vse-lesse now,
Rusty or lazy in a Fools pre-eminence,
It is not for a glorious worth to suffer.

Thou'st said enough.


Now my hope ripens fairly.


Here's a brave glistering Thing looks me in the face,
I know not what to say too't.

What's thy name?


You may read it in my looks: Simplicity.


What make thou with so great a charge about thee?
Resign it up to me, and be my Fool.

Troth that's the way to be your Fool indeed;
But shall I have the privilege to fool freely?

As ever Folly had.


I'm glad I'm rid on it.


Pray let me case your Majesty.


Thou? hence
Base Sycophant, insinuating hell-hound,
Lay not a finger on it, as thou love
The state of thy whole body; all thy filthy
And rotten flatteries stink in my remembrance,
And nothing is so loath some as thy presence.

Sure this will prove a good Prince.


Still repulsed?
I must find ground to thrive on.

Pray remember now,
You had the world from me clean as a pick,
Only a little smutted a one side,
With a bastard got against it, or such a toy,
No great corruption nor oppression in it,
No knavery, tricks, nor cozenage.

Thou say true, fool, the world has a clear water.


Make as few Laws as you can then to trouble it, the fewer the better; for
always the more laws you make, the more knaves thrive by it, mark it when you
will.


Thou'st counsel in thee too.


A little against knavery, I'm such an enemy too't,
That it comes naturally from me to confound it.

Look, what are those?


Tents, Tents; that part of the world
Shows like a Fair: but pray take notice on it,
There's not a Bawdy-Boothe amongst 'em all,
You have 'em white and honest as I had 'em,
Look that your Laundresses pollute 'em not.

How pleasantly the Countries lye about,
Of which we are sole Lord: whats that in the middle?

Looks like a point, you mean a very prick?


I, that, that.


'Tis the beginning of Amsterdam: they say the first brick there was laid with
fresh Cheese and Cream; because mortar made of Lime and hair was wicked, and
committed fornication.


Peace, who are these approaching?


Blustering fellows; the first's a Soldier, he looks just like March.


Captain, 'tis you that have the bloody sweats,
You venture life and limbs 'tis you that taste
The stings of thirst and hunger,

There thou hast named
Afflictions sharper then the enemies swords.

Yet lets another carry away the World,
Of which, by right, you are the only Master,
Stand curtsing for your pay at your return
Perhaps with wooden legs to every Groom
That dares not look full right upon a sword,
Nor upon any wound, or slit of honour?

No more, I'll be my self; I that uphold
Countries and Kingdoms, must I halt down right,
And be propped up with part of mine own strength,
The least part too? Why, have not I the power
To make my self stand absolute of my self,
That keep up others?

How cheers our noble Captain?


Our own Captain,
No more a hireling; your great Foe's at hand,
Seek your defence elsewhere, for mine shall fail you,
I'll not be fellow-yoak't with death and danger
All my life time, and have the World kept from me,
March in the heate of Summer in a bath,
A furnace girt about me, and in that agony,
With so much fire within me, forced to wade
Through a cool river, practising in life
The very pains of hell, now scorched, now shivering,
To call diseases early into my bones,
Before I'ue age enough to entertain 'em:
No, he that has desire to keep the World,
Let him ee'n take the sour pains to defend it.

Stay, Man of Merit, it belongs to thee,
I cheerfully resign it, all my Ambition
Is but the quiet calm of peaceful days;
And that fair good, I know, thy arm will raise.

Though now an absolute master; yet to thee
Ever a faithful servant.

Giue't me sir to lay up, I am your Treasurer,
In a poor kind.

In a false kind I grant thee:
How many wild complaints from time to time
Has been put up against thee? they have wearied me
More then a Battle sixteen hours a' fighting,
I'ue heard the ragged Regiment so curse thee,
I looked next day for Leprosy upon thee,
Or puffs of pestilence as big as Wens,
When thou would drop asunder, like a thing
Inwardly eaten, thy skin only whole*
Avaunt, defrauder of poor soldiers rights,
Campe-Caterpiller, hence; or I will send thee
To make their rage a breakfast.

Is it possible?
Can I yet set no footing in the World?
I'm angry, but not weary; I'll hunt out still:
For, being Deceit, I bear the Devils name,
And he's known seldom to give ore his game.

Troth, now the World begins to be in Hucksters handling; by this light, the
Boothes are full of Cutlers, and yonders two or three queens going to vittaile
the camp: hah, would I were whipped, if yonder be not a Parsons daughter with a
soldier between her legs, bag and baggage.


Now 'tis the Soldiers time, great Iupiter,
Now give me leave to enter on my fortunes,
The Worlds our own.

Stay, beguiled thing, this time
Is many ages discrepant from thine,
This was the season when desert was stooped to,
By greatness stooped to, and acknowledged greatest;
But in thy time now, desert stoops it self
To every baseness, and makes Saints of Shadows:
Be patient, and observe, how times are wrought,
Till it comes down to thine that rewards nought.

Hah? what's the news?


Be ready if I call to give fire to the Ordnance.


Bless us all', herre's one spits fire as he comes, he will go ny to mull
the world with looking on it, how his eyes sparckle?


Shall the Land-Captaine, sir, usurp your right,
Yours that try thousand dangers to his one,
Rocks, shelves, gulfs, quick*sands, hundred hundred horrors,
That makes the Land-men tremble when they are told;
Besides the enemies encounter,

Peace Purser, no more, I'm vexed, I'm kindled.
You, Land Captain, quick, deliver.

Proud Salt-Rouer, thou hast the salutation of a thief.


Deliver, or I'll thunder thee a pieces,
Make night within this hour, even at high noone,
Belch from the Canon: dare expostulate
With me? my fury? What's thy merit, Land-worme,
That mine not centuples?
Thy lazy Marches and safe-footed battles
Are but like dangerous dreams to my encounters:
Why, every minute the Deep gapes for me,
Beside the fiery throats of the loud fight,
When we go too't, and our fell Ordnance play,
'Tis like the figure of a latter day.
Let me but give the word, night begins now,
Thy breath and prize both beaten from thy body:
How dare thou be so slow? Not yet -- then --

Hold.


I knew 'twould come at last.


For this resign,
Part thou shalt have still, but the greatest mine.
Only to us belongs the golden sway,
Th'Indies load us; thou liu'st but by thy pay.

And shall your Purser help you?


No in sooth Sir,
Coward and coozner; how many Sea-Battels
Hast thou compounded to be cabled up?
Yet when the fights were ended, who so ready
To cast sick soldiers and dismembered wretches,
Ouer-boord, instantly, crying, away
With things without Arms; 'tis an ugly sight;
When troth thine own should have been off by right:
But thou lay safe within a wall of hemp,
Telling the guns, and numbering 'em with farting:
Leave me, and speedily; I'll have thee ram'd
Into a Culuerin else, and thy rear flesh
Shot all into potcht eggs.

I will not leave yet;
Destruction plays in me such pleasant strains,
That I would purchase it with any pains.

The motion's worthy, I will join with thee,
Both to defend and enrich Majesty.

Hoyda* I can see nothing now for ships;
Hark a the Mariners.

HEy, the World's ours, we have got the time by chance;
Let us the carouse sing, for the very house doth skip and dance
That we do now live in:
We have the merriest lives,
We have the fruitfulst Wives Of all men.
We never yet came home,
But the first hour we come,
We find them all with child again.
What a crew of mad Raskalls are these, they are ready at every Can to fall into
the Haddocks mouths, the World begins to love Lap now.


Peace and the brightness of a holy love,
Reflect their beauties on you.

Whose this?


A Reverend shape.


Some Scholar.


A divine one.


He may be what he will for me, fellow Captain;
For I have seen no Church these five and twenty years;
I mean as people ought to see it, inwardly.

I have a virtuous sorrow for you Sir,
And 'tis my special duty to weep for you.
For to enjoy one world as you do there,
And be forgetful of another Sir;
Oh, of a better millions of degrees!
It is a frailty and infirmity
That many tears must go for; all too little.
What is't to be the Lord of many battles,
And suffer to be ouer-run within you?
Abroad to conquer, and be slaves at home,
Remember there's a battle to be fought,
Which will undo you, if it be not thought.
And you must leave that World, leave it betimes,
That reformation may weep of the crimes:
There's no indulgent hand the World should hold,
But a strict grasp, for making sin so bold.
We should be careless of it, and not fond,
Of things so held, there is the best command.

Grave Sir, I give thy words their deserved honour,
And to thy Sacred charge freely resign,
All that my Fortune, and the Age made mine.

If the world be not good now, 'twill ne'er be good,
There's no hope on it.

I have my wishes here, my sanctified Patron,
I'll first fill all the Chests in the Vestry,
Then there's a secret Vault for Great men's Legacies.

Art not confounded yet? struck blind or crippled,
For thy abusiue thought, thou horrid hypocrite?
Are these the fruits of thy long Orisons
Three hours together, of thy nine Lectures weekly,
Thy swooning at the hearing of an oath,
Scarce to be fetched again? Away, depart,
Thou white-fac't Devil, Author of Heresy,
Schismes, Factions, Controversies: now I know thee
To be Deceit it self, wrought in by Simony,
To blow corruption upon Sacred virtue.

I made my self sure here. Church fail me too?
I thought it mere impossible by all reason,
Since there's so large a bridge to walk upon
'Twixt negligence and Superstition.
Where could one better piece up a full vice?
One service lazy, the other ouer-nice:
There had been twixt, room enough for me.
I will take root, or run through each degree.

Whoop, here's an alteration: by this hand, the Ships are all turned to
Steeples; and the Bells ring for joy, as if they would shake down the Pinnacles.
How! the Masons are at work yonder, the free Masons, I swear it's a free time
for them: Ha! there's one building of a Chapel of ease: Oh, he's loath to take
the pains to go to Church: Why, will he have it in's house, when the Proverb
says, The Diuel's at home? These great rich men must take their ease in their
Inn: they'll walk you a long mile or two to get a stomach for their victuals;
but not a piece of a furlong to get an appetite to their prayers.


No more, the case is clear.


*Slid, who have we here?


He that pleads for the world, must fall
To his business roundly, most gracious
And illustrious Prince, thus stands the case:
The world in Greek is Cosmos, in Latin, Mundus,
In Law-French Lamonde, we leave the Greek,
And come to the Law-French, or glide upon the Latin,
All's one business; then vnde mundus? shall we come to that?
Nonne diriuatur a munditia?
The word cleanness, Mundus, quasi mundus, clean,
And what can cleanse or mundifie the world
Better then Law, the clearer of all Cases,
The Sovereign pill or potion that expels
All poisonous, rotten, and infectious wrongs,
From the vexed bosom of the Common-wealth?
There's a familiar phrase implies thus much,
I'll put you to* your purgation; that is,
The Law shall cleanse you: Can the sick world then
Tossed up and down from time to time, repose it self
In a Physicians hand better improu'd?
Upon my life and reputation,
In all the Courts I come at, be assured
I'll make it clean.

Yes, clean away, I warrant you, we shall n'er see it again.


I grant, my Pills are bitter, I, and costly;
But their effects are rare, Divine, and wholesome,
There's an Excomunicate Capiendo,
Capias post K. and an No exeat Regno.
I grant, there's bitter Egrimony in um,
And Antimony, I put money in all still:
And it works preciously, who eiects injuries,
Makes um belch forth in vomit but the Law?
Who clears the Widows case, and after gets her
If she be wealthy: but the Advocate? -- then to conclude,
If you'll have Mundus, a Mundo, clean, firm,
Give him to me, I'll scour him every Term.

I part with it gladly, tak't into thy trust,
So will it thrive, as thy intent is just.

Pity your Trampler, Sir, your poor Solicitor.


Thee! Infamy to our profession,
Which, without wrong to truth, next the Divine one,
Is the most grave and hono^rable Function
That gives a Kingdom blessed: but thou, the poison,
Disease, that grows close to the heart of Law,
And make rash censurers think the sound part perished,
Thou foul Eclipse, that interposing Equity,
As the dark Earth, the Moon, make the world Judge,
That blackness and corruption have possessed
The siluer-shine of Justice; when tis only
The smoke ascending from thy poys'nons ways*
Cos*nage, Demurs, and fifteen Terme-delayes:
Yet hold thee, take the Muck on it, that's thine own,
The Devil and all; but the fair Fame and honour
Of righteous actions, good men's prayers and wishes,
Which is that glorious portion of the World
The noble Lawyer strives for; that thy bribery,
Thy double-handed gripe shall never reach to:
Wit fat and filthy gain thy Lust may feast,
But poor men's curses beat thee from the rest.

I'll feed upon the Muck on it, that a while
Shall satisfy my longings, Wealth is known
The absolute step to all promotion.

Let this be called the Sphere of harmony,
In which being met, lets all move mutually.

Fair Love is in the motion, Kingly love.


Times suffer changes, and the world has been
Vexed with Remooues; but when his glorious peace
Firmly and fairly settles, here's his place,
Truth his defenor, and Majesty his grace:
We all acknowledge it belongs to you.

Only to you, Sir.


Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. -- Which shows,
That if the World form it self by the King,
'Tis fit the Former should command the thing.

This is no place for us.


Depart, away,
I thought all these had been corrupted Evils,
No court of Virtues, but a guard of Devils.

How blessed am I in Subjects! here are those
That make all Kingdoms happy, worthy Soldier,
Fair Churchman, and thou uncorrupted Lawyer,
Virtues great miracle, that hast redeemed
All Justice from her ignominious name.

You forget me, Sir.


What, Simplicity!
Who thinks of virtue, cannot forget thee.

I marry, my masters: now it looks like a brave world, indeed, how civilly
those fair Ladies go yonder! by this hand they are neither trimmed nor
trussed, nor ponyarded: Wonderment! O, yonder's a knot of
fine-sharpe-needle-bearded Gallants, but that they wear Stammel Cloaks (me
thinks) in stead of Scarles: 'Slid, whats he that carries out two Custards now
under the Porters long nose? oh, he leaves a bottle of Wine in the Lodge: and
all's pacified, cry mercy.


Continue but thus watchful o*r your selves,
That the great cunning Enemies, Deceit
And his too mighty Lord, beguile you not;
And y' are the precious ornaments of State,
The glories of the world, fellows to virtues,
Masters of honest and well-purchas'd fortunes,
And I am fortunate in your partnership;
But if you ever make your Hearts the houses
Of fals-hood and corruption, ugliness it self
Will be a beauty to you; and less pointed at:
Spots in deformed faces, are scarce noted,
Fair cheeks are stained, if ne'er so little blotted.

Ever the constant servants to great Virtue.


Her love inhabit you.


Now sons of vexation.
Envy, and discontent, what blame lay you
Upon these times now? Which does merit most
To be condemned, your dullness, or the Age?
If now you thrive not, Mercury shall proclaim
You're vndeseruers, and cry down your Fame:
Be poor still, Scholar, and thou wretch despised,
If in this glorious time thou can not prosper:
Upon whose breast Noble employments sit,
By Honours hand, in golden Letters writ:
Nay, where the Prince of Nobleness Himself,
Proves ou^ Minerua's valiant'st hopeful Son,
And early in his Spring puts Armour on.
Unite your worth's, and make of two, one brother,
And be each one perfection to the other.
Scholar and Soldier must both shut in one,
That makes the absolute and complete man:
So, now into the World, which if hereafter
You ever tax of foul ungrateful crimes,
Your dullness I must punish, not the times.

Scholar, Honour to mighty Iupiter.


The World's in a good hand now, if it hold, brother.


I hope for many ages.


Fare thee well then,
I'll over, yonder to the most glorious Wars
That ever famde Christian Kingdom.

And I'll settle
Here, in a Land of a most glorious Peace
That ever made joy fruitful: where the Head
Of him that rules, to Learnings fair renown,
Is doubly decked with Laurel, and a Crown:
And both most worthily.

Give me thy hand:
Prosperity keep with thee.

And the glory
Of Noble actions bring white hairs upon thee:
Present our wish with reverence to this Place:
For here't must be confirmed, or 'tas no grace.

GENTLEMEN, WE must confess, that we have vented ware
Not always vendible: Masques are more rare
Then Plays are common; at most, but twice a year
In their most glorious shapes do they appear.
Which if you please, accept, wee'le keep in store
Our debted loves, and thus entreat you more,
Invert the Proverb now, and suffer not,
That which is seldom seen, be soon forgot.

