IF Foreign Nations have been struck with admiration at the Form, State, and
Splendour of some yearly Triumphs, wherein. Art hath been but weakly imitated,
and most beggarly worded: there is fair hope that things where Invention
flourishes, Clear Art and her graceful proprieties, should receive favour and
encouragement from the content of the Spectator, which (next to the service of
his Honour, and honourable Society) is the principal Reward it looks for; and
not despairing of that common favour (which is often cast upon the vndeseruer,
through the distress and misery of Judgment) this takes delight to present
it self.

And first to begin early with the Love of the City to his Lordship, let me
draw your attentions to his Honours entertainment upon the water, where
Expectation big with the Joy of the Day, but beholding to free Love for
Language and expression, thus salutes the Great Master of the Day and Triumph.

Honour and Joy double their B^,
I, the Days Love, the Cities g^er all Love.
Salute thee in the Sweetness ^
All* that behold me worthily, may se^*
How full mine eye stands of the Joy ^
The more, because I may with Confidence say,
Desert and Love will be well matched too day:
And herein the greatest pity will appear,
This match can lust no longer then a year.
T^ let not that discourage thy good ways,
Men's Loves will last to crown thy end of days,
If those should fuile, which cannot easly dye,
Thy good works wed thee to Aeternity.
Let not the shortness then of Time dismay
The largeness of thy worth; gain every day,
So many years Thou against, that some have lost;
For they that think their Care is at great cost
If they do any good, in Time so small,
They make their Year but a poor Day in all.
For as a Learned Man, will comprehend
In Compass of his Howre, Doctrine so sound,
Which give another a whole year to mend,
He shall not equal, upon any ground:
So the Judicious when he comes to bear
This powerful Office, struck with Divine fear,
Collects his spirits, redeemes his hours with care,
Thinks of his Charge, and Oath, what Ties they are,
And with a Virtuous Resolution then
Works more good in one year, then some in Ten.
Nor is this spoken any to detract,
But all t'encourage to put Truth in Act.
Me thinks I see Oppression hang the head,
Falsehood and Injury with their guilt struck dead
At this Triumphant Hovvre, Ill Causes hide
Their Leprous Faces, daring not t'abide
The Brightness of this day; and in mine ear
Me thinks the Graces Silver Chimes I hear.
Good wishes are at work now in each hart,
Throughout this sphere of Brotherhood play their part,
Chiefly thy Noble own Fraternity,
As near in hart, as they're in place to thee.
The Ensigns of whose love Bounty displays,
Yet esteems all their Cost short of thy praise:
There will appear elected Sons of War,
Which this fair City boasts of for their Care,
Strength and experience, set in Truth of heart;
All great and glorious Masters in that Art
Which gives to man his Dignity, Name and Seal,
Prepared to speak Love in a Noble Peal.
Knowing two Triumphs must on this day dwell,
For Magistrate, one, and one for Coronell,
Return Lord General, that's the Name of State
The Soldier gives Thee; Peace, the Magistrate.
On then, Great Hope, here that good care begins,
Which now earths Love and* Heavens hereafter wins.
At his Lordships return from Westminster, those worthy Gentlemen, whose loves
works were prepared before in the conclusion of the former Speech by water, are
now all ready to salute their Lord General with a Noble Valley, at his
Lordships Landing: and in the best and most commendable Form, answerable to
the nobleness of their free Love and Service, take their march before his
Lordship, who being so Honourably conducted, meets the first Triumph by land,
waiting his Lordships most wished arrival, in Paules Church yard, near Paules
Chain, which is a Wilderness, most gracefully and artfully furnished with
diverse kinds of Beasts bearing Fur, proper to the Fraternity, the
Presenter, the Musical Orpheus, Great Master, both in Poesy and Harmony, who
by his excellent Music, drew after him wild Beasts, Woods and Mountains;
over his Head an Artificial Cock, often made to crow, and flutter with his
wings. This Orpheus at the approach of his Lordship, gives life to these words.

GReat Lord, Example is the Crystal Glass,
By which wise Magistracy sets his face,
Fits all his Actions to their comliest Dress,
For there he s^t honour and Seemelinesse;
Tis not like flauring glasses, those false Books
Made to set Age, back, in great Courliers Looks;
Like Clocks on Revelling nights, that ne'er go right,
Because the sports may yield more full delight,
But when they break off then they find it Late,
The Time and Truth appears, such is their State,
Whose death by flatteries is set back, awhile,
But meetes'em in the midst of then safe Smile.
Such horrors th^se forgetful things ^end,
That only mind their ends, but not their End;
Leave them to their false Trust; List Thou to me,
Thy power is great, so let thy virtues be,
Thy care, thy watchfulness, which are but things
Remembered to thy praise, from thence it springs,
And not from fear of any want in Thee,
For in this Truth I may be comely, free,
Never was man advanced, yet waited on
With a more Noble Expectation;
That's a great Work to perfect: and as Those
That have in Art a Mastry, can oppose
All comers, and come off with Learned Fame,
Yet think not scorn still of a Schollers name
(A Title which they had in ignorant youth:)
So he that deals in such a weight of Truth
As the execution of a Magistrates place,
Though never so exact inform and Grace,
Both from his own Worth, and mans free Applause,
Yet may he called a Labourer in the cause,
And be thought good to be so, in true care,
The Labour being so glorious, just, and fair.
Behold then in a rough Example here
The Rude and thonny ways thy care must clear,
Such are the vices in a City sprung,
As are yon' Thickets that grow close and strong:
Such is oppression, Cosnage, Bribes, false Hires,
As are yon' catching and entangling Briers:
Such is Gout-Iustice, that's, Delay in Right,
Demurs in Suites, that are as clear as Light.
Just such a Wilderness is a Common-wealth,
That is undressed, vnpruin'd, wild in her health;
And the rude multitude, the Beasts a'th wood,
That know no laws, but only Will and Blood:
And yet by fair Example, Musical Grace,
Harmonious government of the Man in place,
(Of fair Integrity, and wisdom framed)
They stand as mine do, ravished, charmde, and tamed.
Every wise Magistrate that governs thus,
May well be called a powerful Orpheus.
Behold yon' Bird of state, the vigilant Cock,
The Mornings Herald, and the Plow-mans Clock,
At whose shrill Crow the very Lyon trembles,
The sturdiest Prey-taker that here assembles;
How fitly d'os it match your Name, and power
Fixed in that Name now by this glorious Hour,
At your just Voice to shake the boldest offence
And sturdiest sin, that ere had residence
Insecure man, Yet with an equal Eye,
Matching grave Justice with fair Clemency;
It being the property He chiefly shower,
To give Wing-warning, still before he Crows,
To Crow before he strike, by his clapped Wing,
To stir himself up first (which needful thing
Is every mans first duty) by his Crow
A gentle call, or warning, which should flow
From every Magistrate, before he extend
The Stroke of Justice, he should reprehend,
And try the virtue of a powerful word,
If that preuaile not, then the Spur, the Sword.
See, herein honours to his Majesty
Are not forgotten, when I turn, and see,
The sever all Countries, in those faces, plain,
Allowing Fealty to one Sovereign,
The Noble English, the fair Thriving Scot,
Plain hearted Welch, the Frenchman bold and hot,
The civilly instructed Irish man,
And that kind Savage, the Virginian;
All lovingly assembled, ^n by Fate;
This thy Days Honour to congratulate.
On then; and as your service fills this place,
So through the City do his Lordship Grace.
At which words, this part of Triumph moves onward and meets the full Body of
the Show in the other Paules Church yard: then dispersing it self, according
to the ordering of the Speechess following, one part which is the Sanctuary of
Fame, plants it self near the little Conduit in Cheap; another which bath
the Title of the Parliament of Honour, at S. Laurence Lane end, Upon the
Battlements of that beauteous Sanctuary, adorned with six twenty bright burning
lamps, having Allusion to the six and twenty Aldermen, (they being for their
Justice, Government and Example, the Lights of the City) a Grave Personage,
crowned with the Title and Inscription of Example, breathes forth these sounds.

FRom that rough Wilderness, which did late present
The perplexed State, and cares of Government,
Which every painful Magistrate must meet;
Here the Reward stands for thee, a chief Seat
In Fames fair Sanctuary, where some of old
Crowned with their Troubles now, are here enroled
In Memories sacred sweetness, to all ages;
And so much the Worlds Voice of Thee presages.
And these that sit for many, with their graces
Fresh as the Buds of Roses, though they sleep,
In thy Society had once high places,
Which in their good Works they for ever keep;
Life called 'em in their Time, Honours fair Stars,
Large Benefactors, and sweet Governors.
If here were not sufficient Grace for Merit,
Next Object, I presume, will raise thy Spirit.
In this Maister-peice of Art, Fames Illustrious Sanctuary, the Memory of those
Worthies shine gloriously, that have been both Lord Majors of this City, and
Noble Benefactors, and Brothers of this worthy Fraternity, to wit,

S. Henry Barton, S. William Gregory, S. Stephen Iennings, S. Thomas Mirfen, S.
Andrew Iudd, S. Wolstone Dixe, S. Stephen Slanye, S. Richard Saltonstall: And
now the Right Honourable Sir William Cockayn.

That Sir Henry Barton an Honour to Memory, was the first, that for the safety
of Travellers, strangers by night through the City, caused lights to be hung
out fro Alhollontid to Candlemas; therefore in this Sanctuary of Fame, where
the beauty of good actions shine, he is most properly and worthily recorded.
His Lordship by this time Gracefully conducted toward that Parliament of
Honour, near S. Laurence Lane end, Anti quity from its Eminence, thus
gloriously salutes Him.

Grave City Governor! so much honour do me,
Vouchsafe thy presence and thy patience to me,
And I'll Reward that Virtue with a Story,
That shall to thy Fraternity add Glory,
Then to thy Worth no mean part will arise,
That art ordaynde Chief for that glorious Prize.
Tis I, that keep all the Records of Fame,
Mother of Truths, Antiquity, my Name;
No Year, Month, Day, or Hour, that brings in place
Good Works and Noble, for the Cities Grace,
But I Record; that After Times may see
What Former, were, and how they ought to be,
Fruitful, and Thankful, in fair Actions flowing,
To meet Heavens blessings, to which much is owing;
For instance, Let all Grateful Eyes be plac'st
Upon this Mount of Royalty, by Kings, grac'st,
Queenes, Prince, Dukes, Nobles, more by numbering gained
Then can be in this narrow Sphere contained.
7. Kings, 5. Queenes, only one Prince alone,
8. Dukes, 2. Earles, Plantagenets twenty one;
All these of this Fraternity made Free,
Brothers and Sisters of this Company;
And see with what propriety, the Fates
Have to this Noble Brotherhood knit such States;
For what Society, the whole City brings,
Can with such Ornaments Adorn their Kings,
Their only Robes of State, when they consent
To ride most glorious, to High Parliament;
And mark in this their Royal intent still,
For when it pleased the Goodness of their Will,
To put the richest Robes of their Loves on
To the whole City, the Most, ever came
To this Society, which Records here prove,
Adorning their Adoruers, with their Love;
Which was a Kingly AEquity:
Be careful then, Great Lord, to bring forth Deeds,
To match that Honour, that from hence proceeds.
At the close of which Speech, the whole Triumph takes leave of his Lordship,
for that Time, and till after the Feast at Guild-hall, rests from Service. His
Lordship accompanied with many Noble personages, the Honourable Fellowship of
Ancient Magistrates and Aldermen of this City, the two new Sheriffs, the one,
of his own Fraternity (the complete Brotherhood of Skinners) the Right
Worshipful M. Sheriff Deane, a very Bountiful and worthy Citizen, not
forgetting the Noble pains and loves of the Heroyick Captains of the City,
Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden, making with two glorious Ranks a manly
Maiestick passage for their Lord General, his Lordship, thorough Guild-hall
yard; and afterward their Loves to his Lordship resounding in a second Noble
Volley.

Now, that al the Honours before mentioned, in that Parliamet, or Mount of
Royalty, may arrive at a clear and perfect Manifestation, to prevent the
ouer-curious Inquisitive Spirit; the Names and Times of those Kings, Queenes,
Prince, Dukes and Nobles, free of the Honourable Fraternity of Skinners in
London, shall here receive their proper Illustrations.

Anno 1329. K. Edward the third, Plantagenet, by whom, in the first of his
Reign this worthy Society of Skinners was incorporate, He, their first Royal
Founder and Brother, Q Philip his wife, younger Daughter of William Earl of
Henalt, the first Royal Sister, so gloriously virtuous, that she is a rich
ornament to Memory, She both founded and endowed Queenes College in Oxford,
to the continuing estate of which, I my self wish all happiness: This Queen
at her death desired three courtesies, some of which are rare in these days.
First, that her debts might be paid to the Merchants; secondly, that her gifts
to the Church might be performed: thirdly, that the King when he died would at
Westminster be interred with her.

Anno 1357. Edward Plantagenet, surnamed the Black Prince, son to Edward the
third, Prince of Wales, Duke of Guien, Aquitaine, and Cornwall, Earl Palatine
of Chester.

In the Battle of Poitiers in France, he with 8000. English against 60000.
French, got the victory, took the King, Philip his son, seventeen Earles,
with diverse other Noble personages, prisoners.

King Richard the Second, Plantagenet, this K. being the third Royal brother
of this honourable Company, and at that time the Society consisting of two
Brotherhoods of Corpus Christi, the one at S. Mary Spittle, the other at S.
Mary Bethlem without Bishops Gate, in the eighteenth of his Reign granted
them to make their two Brotherhoods one, by the name of the Fraternity of
Corpus Christi of Skinners; which worthy Title shines at this day gloriously
amongst 'em: and toward the end of this kings reign, 1396. a great feast was
celebrated in Westminster Hall, where the L. Mayor of this City sate as Guest.

Anno 1381. Q. Anne his wife, daughter to the Emperor Charles the 4 and sister
to Emperor Wenzlaus, whose modesty then, may make this Age blush now; she being
the first that taught women to ride sidling on horseback; but who it was that
taught 'em to ride straddling, there is no Records so immodest that can show me,
only the impudent Time, and the open profession; this Fair President of
womanhood dyed at Sheine, now Richmond, for grief whereof K. Richard her Lord
abandoned and defaced that goodly house.

Anno 1399. K. Henry the 4. Plantagenet, Surnamed Bullingbrooke, a forth Royal
Brother: in his time, the Famous Guild hall in London was erected, where the
Honourable Courts of the City are kept, and this Bounteous Feast yearly
celebrated.

In the Twelfth year of his Reign, the River of Thames flowed thrice in one
day.

Q. Ioane, or Iane, Duchess of Britten, late wife to Iohn, D. of Britten, and
Daughter to the King of Navarre; another Princely Sister.

Anno 1412. K. Henry the 5. Plantagenet, Prince of Wales, proclaimed Mayor
Regent of France, He won that famous Victory on the French, at the Battle of
Agincourt.

Q. Catherine his Wife, Daughter to Charles 6. K. of France.

K. Henry the 6. Plantagenet, of the House of Lancaster.

K. Edward the 4. Plantagenet, of the House of York.

This King feasted the Lord Mayor, Richard Chawrye, and the Aldermen his
Brethren, with certain Commoners, in Waltham Forest; after dinner rode a
hunting with the King, who gave him plenty of Venison, sent to the Lady
Maioresse, and her Sisters the Aldermens Wives, 2. Harts, 6. Bucks, and a Tun
of Wine, to make merry, and this Noble feast was kept at Drapers Hall. An.
1463. Q. Elizabeth Grey, his Wife, Daughter to Richard, Wooduile, Earl Rivers,
to the Duchess of Bedford; she was Mother to the Lord Grey of Ruthen, that in
his time was Marquess Dorset.

K. Richard the 3. Brother to Edward 4. D. of Gloucester, and of the House of
York.

Lionel Plantagonet, 3 Son to the 3 Edward, D. of Clarence, and Earl of
Vlster; Philip his Daughter, and Heir, married Edward Mortimer, Earl of
March, from whom the House of York descends.

Henry Plantagenet, Grandchild to Edmond Crouchbacke, 2. Son to Henry 3.

Richard Plantagenet, Father of Edward 4. D. of York, and Albumarle, Earl of
Cambridge, Rutland, March, Clare, and Vlster.

Thomas Plantagenet, 2. Son of Henry 4.

Iohn Plantagenet, 3 Son of Henry 4. So Noble a Soldier, and so great a
terror to the French, that when Charles the 8. was moved to deface his
Monument (being buried in Roane) the King thus answered: Pray let him rest in
peace being dead, of whom we were all afraid when he lived.

Humfrey Plantagenet, 4 Son of Henry 4.

Iohn Holland D. of Exceter.

George Plantagenet brother to Edward the 4.

Edmond Plantagenet Brother to Edward the 4.

Richard Neuill Earl of Salisbury and Warwick. called the Great Earl of
Warwick.

Iohn Cornwell Knight, Baron Fanhope.

7: Kings, 5. Queenes, 1. Prince. 7. Dukes. 1. Earl 21. Plantagenets

7. Kings, 5. Queenes, 1. Prince. 8. Dukes. 2. Earles. 1. Lord, 24. Skinners.

The Feast ended at Guild-hall, his Lordship (as yearly Custom invites it)
goes accompanied with the Triumph before him towards S. Paules, to perform the
noble and reverend Ceremonies which Divine Antiquity religiously ordained, and
is no less then faithfully observed. Holy Service and Ceremonies accomplished,
his Lordship returns by Torch-light to his own house, the whole Triumph
plac'st in comely and decent order before him, the Wilderness, the Sanctuary
of Fame, adorned with Lights, the Parliament of Honour, and the Triumphant
Chariot of Love, with his Graceful Concomitants; the Chariot drawn with 2.
Luzarns: near to the entrance of his Lordships gate, Love, prepared with his
welcome, thus salutes him,

I Was the first, Grave Lord, that welcomed Thee
To this Days Honour, and I spake it free,
Just as in every heart I found it plac'st,
And tis my turn again now to speak last;
For love is circular (like the bright Sun,)
And takes delight to end where it begun,
Though indeed never ending, in true Will,
But rather may be said beginning still;
As all great works are of Celestial Birth,
Of which, Love is the Chief in Heaven and Earth.
To what Blessed state then are thy Fortunes come,
Since, That both brought thee forth, and brings thee home*
Now, as in common course which clears things best,
There's no free gift but looks for thanks at least;
A Love so bountiful, so free, so good
From the whole City, from thy Brotherhood,
(That Name I ought a while to dwell upon,)
Expect some fair Requital from the Man
They'ue all so largely Honoured. What's desired?
That which in Conscience ought to berequirde,
Oh thank 'em in thy Justice, in thy Care,
Zeal to right wrongs, Works that are clear fair,
And will become thy Soul (whence Virtue springs)
As those rich Ornaments thy Brother Kings.
And since we cannot separate Love and Care,
For where Care is, a Love must needs be there,
And Care where Love is; tis the Man and Wife,
Through every Estate that's fixed in Life;
You are by this the Cities Bridegroom proved,
And She stands wedded to her best Beloved;
Then be, according to your Morning-Vowes,
A Careful Husband, to a Loving Spouse;
And Heaven give you great Joy (both It and Thee;)
And to All Those that shall Match after Ye.
ERmine, Foyne, Sables, Martin, Badger, Bear,
Luzerne, Budge, Otter, Hipponesse and Hare,
Lamb, Wolf, Fox, Leopard, Minck, Stote, Miniuer,
Racoone, Moashye, Woluerine, Caliber,
Squirrel, Moale, Cat Musk, Civet, Wild Tame,
Cony white, Yellow, Black must have a Name;
The Ounce, Rows-Gray, Ginner, Pampilion,
Of Birds, the Vu lur, Bitter, Ostrich, Swan;
Some worn for Ornament, and some for Health,
All to the Skinners Art bring Fame and Wealth.
The Service being thus faithfully performed, both to his Lordships Honour, and
to the Credit and content of his most generously-bountifull Society, the Season
commends all to silence; yet not without a little leave taken, to reward Art
with the comely Dues that belong unto it, which hath been so richly expressed
in the Body of the Triumph, with all the proper Beauties of Workmanship, that
the City may (without Injury to Judgment) call it the Maister-piece of her
Triumphs; the Credit of which Workmanship, I must justly lay upon the Deserts
of Master Garret Crismas, and Master Robert Norman, ioyn'dPartners in the
performance.


