A Play (expected long) makes the Audience look
For wonders: -- that each Scoene should be a book,
Composed to all perfection; each one comes
And brings a play in's head with him: up he sums,
What he would of a Roaring Girl have writ;
If that he finds not here, he m^wes at it.
Only we entreat you think our Scoene.
Cannot speak high (the subject being but mean)
A Roaring Girl (whose notes till now never were)
Shall fill with laughter our vast Theater,
That's all which I dare promise: Tragic passion,
And such grave stuff, is this day out of fashion.
I see attention sets wide open her gates
Of hearing, and with covetous listening waits,
To know what Girl, this Roaring Girl should be.
(For of that Tribe are many.) One is she
That roars at midnight in deep Tavern bowles,
That beats the watch, and Constables controlls;
Another roars in the day time, swears, stabs, gives braves,
Yet sells her soul to the lust of fools and slaves.
Both these are Suburbe-roarers. Then there's (besides)
A civil City* Roaring Girl, whose pride,
Feasting, and riding, shakes her husbands state,
And leaves him Roaring through an iron grate.
None of these Roaring Girls is ours: she flies
With wings more losty. Thus her character lies,
Yet what need characters? when to give a guess,
Is better then the person to express;
But would you know who 'tis? would you hear her name?
She is called mad Moll; her life, our acts proclaim.


THe young gentleman (our young master) Sir Alexanders son, is it into his
ears (sweet Damsel) (emblem of fragility) you desire to have a message
transported, or to be transcendent.


A private word or two Sir, nothing else.


You shall fructify in that which you come for: your pleasure shall be
satisfied to your full contentation: I will (fairest tree of generation) watch
when our young master is erected, (that is to say up) and deliver him to this
your most white hand.


Thanks sir.

And withal certify him, that I have culled out for him (now his belly is
replenished) a daintier bit or modicome then any lay upon his trencher at
dinner -- hath he notion of your name, I beseech your chastity.


One Sir, of whom he be spake falling bands.

Falling bands, it shall so be given him, -- -- if you please to venture your
modesty in the hall, amongst a curlepated company of rude serving-men, and take
such as they can set before you, you shall be most seriously, and ingeniously
welcome.


I have dyed indeed already sir.

-- -- Or will you vouchsafe to kiss the lip of a cup of rich Orleans in the
buttry amongst our waiting women.


Not now in truth sir.

Our young Master shall then have a feeling of your being here presently it
shall so be given him.


I humbly thank you sir, but that my bosom
Is full of bitter sorrows, I could smile,
To see this formal Ape play Antic tricks:
But in my breast a poisoned arrow sticks,
And smiles cannot become me, Love woven slightly
(Such as thy false heart makes) wears out as lightly,
But love being truly bred ith the soul (like mine)
Bleeds even to death, at the least wound it takes,
The more we quench this, the less it slakes: Oh me!

A Sempster speak with me, say thou.

Yes sir, she's there, viva voce, to deliver her auricular confession.


With me sweet heart. What is't?

I have brought home your bands sir.

Bands: Neatfoote.

Sir.

Prithee look in, for all the Gentlemen are upon rising.

Yes sir, a most methodical attendance shall be given.

And dost hear, if my father call for me, say I am busy with a Sempster.


Yes sir, he shall know it that you are busied with a needle woman.


In's ear good Neat-foote,

It shall be so given him.

Bands, you're mistaken sweet heart, I bespake none, when, where, I prithee,
what bands, let me see them.


Yes sir, a bond fast sealed, with solemn oaths,
Subscribed unto (as I thought) with your soul:
Delivered as your deed in sight of heaven,
Is this bond canceld, have you forgot me.

Ha! life of my life: Sir Guy Fitz-Allards daughter,
What has transformed my love to this strange shape?
Stay: make all sure, -- so: now speak and be brief,
Because the wolfe's at door that lies in wait,
To prey upon us both albeit mine eyes
Are blessed by thine, yet this so strange disguise
Holds me with fear and wonder.

Mines a loathed sight,
Why from it are you banished else so long.

I must cut short my speech, in broken language,
Thus much sweet Moll, I must thy company shun,
I court another Moll, my thoughts must run,
As a horse runs, that's blind, round in a Mill,
Out every step, yet keeping one path still.

Vmh: must you shun my company, in one knot
Have both our hands byt'h hands of heaven been tied,
Now to be broke, I thought me once your Bride:
Our fathers did agree on the time when,
And must another bed-fellow fill my room.

Sweet maid, lets loose no time, tis in heavens book
Set down, that I must have thee: an oath we took,
To keep our vows, but when the knight your father
Was from mine parted, storms began to sit
Upon my covetous fathers brow: which fell
From them on me, he reckond up what gold
This marriage would draw from him, at which he swore,
To loose so much blood, could not grieve him more.
He then diswades me from thee, called thee not fair,
And asked what is she, but a beggars heir?
He scorned thy dowry of (5000) Marks.
If such a sum of money could be found,
And I would match with that, he would not undo it,
Provided his bags might add nothing to it,
But vowed, if I took thee, nay more, did swear it,
Save birth from him I nothing should inherit.

What follows then, my ship-wracke.

Dearest no:
Tho wildly in a labyrinth I go,
My end is to meet thee: with a side wind
Must I now sail, else I no haven can find
But both must sink for ever. There's a wench
Called Mol, mad Mol, or merry Moll, a creature
So strange in quality, a whole city takes
Note of her name and person, all that affection
I owe to thee, on her in counterfeit passion,
I spend to mad my father: he believes
I dote upon this Roaring Girl, and grieves
As it becomes a father for a son,
That could be so bewitched: yet i'll go on
This crooked way, sigh still for her, fain dreams,
In which i'll talk only of her, these streams
Shall, I hope, force my father to consent
That here I anchor rather then be rent
Upon a rock so dangerours, Art thou pleased,
Because thou see we are way-laid, that I take
A path that's safe, tho it be far about,

My prayers with heaven guide thee,

Then I will on,
My father is at hand, kiss and begone;
Hours shall be watched for meetings; I must now
As men for fear, to a strange I doll bow.

Farewell.

I'll guide thee forth, when next we meet,
A story of Moll shall make our mirth more sweet.

Thanks good Sir Alexander for our bounteous cheer:

Fie, fie, in giving thanks you pay to dear.

When bounty spreads the table, faith 'twere sin,
(at going of) if thanks should not step in.

No more of thanks, no more, I mary Sir,
Th'inner room was too close, how do you like
This Parlour Gentlemen?

Oh passing well.

What a sweet breath the air casts here, so cool,

I like the prospect best.

See how tis furnished.

A very fair sweet room.

Sir Dauy Dapper,
The furniture that doth adorn this room,
Cost many a fair gray groat ere it came here,
But good things are most cheap, when they are most dear,
Nay when you look into my galleries,
How bravely they are trimmed up, you all shall swear
Yare highly pleased to see whats set down there:
Stories of men and women (mixed together
Fair ones with foul, like sun-shine in wet whether)
Within one square a thousand heads are laid
So close, that all of heads, the room seeemes made,
As many faces there (filled with blithe looks)
Show like the promising titles of new books,
(Writ merrily) the Readers being their own eyes,
Which seem to move and to give plaudities,
And here and there (whilst with obsequious ears,
Thronged heaps do listen) a cut purse thrusts and leeres
With hawk eyes for his prey: I need not show him,
By a hanging villainous look, your selves may know him,
The face is drawn so rarely, Then sir below,
The very flower (as twere) waives to and fro,
And like a floating Island, seems to move,
Upon a sea bound in with shores above,

These sights are excellent.

I'll show you all,
Since we are met, make our parting Comical.

This gentleman (my friend) will take his leave Sir.

Ha, take his leave (Sebastian) who?

This gentleman.

Your love sir, has already given me some time,
And if you please to trust my age with more,
It shall pay double interest: Good sir stay.

I have been too bold.

Not so sir. A merry day
Amongst friends being spent, is better then gold saved.
Some wine, some wine. Where be these knaves I keep.

At your worshipful elbow, sir.

You are kissing my maids, drinking, or fast asleep.

Your worship has given it us right.

You varlets stir,
Chairs, stools and cushions: prithee sir Dauy Dapper,
Make that chair thine.

Tis but an easy gift,
And yet I thank you for it sir, I'll take it.

A chair for old sir Adam Appleton.

A back friend to your worship.

Mary good Neatfoot,
I thank thee for it: back friends sometimes are good.

Pray make that stool your perch, good M. Goshawk.

I stoop to your lure sir.

Son Sebastian,
Take Master Greenewit to you.

Sit dear friend.

Nay master Laxton -- furnish master Laxton
With what he wants (a stone) a stool I would say, a stool.

I had rather stand sir.

I know you had (good M. Laxton.) So, so --
Now here's a mess of friends, and (gentlemen)
Because times glass shall not be running long,
I'll quicken it with a pretty tale.

Good tales do well,
In these bad days, where vice does so excel.

Begin sir Alexander.

Last day I met
An aged man upon whose head was scored,
A debt of just so many years as these,
Which I owe to my grave, the man you all know.

His name I pray you sir.

Nay you shall pardon me,
But when he saw me (with a sigh that brake,
Or seemed to break his heart-strings) thus he spake:
Oh my good knight, says he, (and then his eyes
Were richer even by that which made them poor,
They had spent so many tears they had no more.)
Oh sir (says he) you know it, for you ha seen
Blessings to rain upon mine house and me:
Fortune (who slaves men) was my slave: her wheel
Hath spun me golden threads, for I thank heaven,
I ne'er had but one cause to curse my stars,
I asked him then, what that one cause might be.

So Sir.

He paused, and as we often see,
A sea so much becalmed, there can be found
No wrinkle on his brow, his waives being drowned
In their own rage: but when th'imperious wind,
Use strange invisible tyranny to shake
Both heavens and earths foundation at their noise:
The seas swelling with wrath to part that fray
Rise up, and are more wild, more mad, then they.
Even so this good old man was by my question
Stirred up to roughness, you might see his gall
Flow even in's eyes: then grew he fantastical.

Fantastical, ha, ha.

Yes, and talk oddly.

Pray sir proceed,
How did this old man end?

Mary sir thus.
He left his wild fit to read ore his cards,
Yet then (though age cast snow on all his hairs)
He joyed because (says he) the God of gold
Has been to me no niggard: that disease
(Of which all old men sicken) Avarice
Never infected me.

He means not himself i'm sure.

For like a lamp,
Fed with continual oil, I spend and throw
My light to all that need it, yet have still
Enough to serve my self, oh but (quoth he)
Tho heauens-dew fall, thus on this aged tree,
I have a son that's like a wedge doth cleave,
My very heart root,

Had he such a son,

Now I do smell a fox strongly.

Lets see: no Master Greene-wit is not yet
So mellow in years as he; but as like Sebastian,
Just like my son Sebastian, -- such another.

How finely like a fencer my father fetches hisby-blowes to hit me, but if I
beat you not at your own weapon of subtilty.


This son (saith he) that should be
The column and maine arch unto my house,
The crutch unto my age, becomes a whirlwind
Shaking the firm foundation,

Tis some prodigal.

Well shot old Adam Bell.

No city monster neither, no prodigal,
But sparing, wary, civil, and (tho wiuelesse)
An excellent husband, and such a traveller,
He has more tongues in his head then some have teeth,

I have but two in mine

So sparing and so wary,
What then could vex his father so.

Oh a woman.

A flesh fly, that can vex any man.

A scurvy woman,
On whom the passionate old man swore he doted:
A creature (saith he) nature hath brought forth
To mock the sex of woman. -- It is a thing
One knows not how to name, her birth began
Ere she was all made. Tis woman more then man,
Man more then woman, and (which to none can hap)
The Sun gives her two shadows to one shape,
Nay more, let this strange thing, walk, stand or sit,
No blazing star draws more eyes after it.

A Monster, tis some Monster.

She's a varlet.

Now is my cue to bristle.

A naughty pack.

Tis false.

Ha boy.

Tis false.

Whats false, I say she's nought.

I say that tongue
That dares speak so (but yours) sticks in the throat
Of a rank villain, set your self aside. --

So sir what then.

Any here else had lied.
I think I shall fit you --

Lye.

Yes.

Doth this concern him.

Ah sir boy.
Is your blood heated: boils it: are you stung,
I'll pierce you deeper yet: oh my dear friends,
I am that wretched father, this that son,
That sees his ruin, yet headlong on doth run.

Will you love such a poison.

Fie, fie.

You're all mad.

You are sick at heart, yet feelst it not: of all these,
What Gentleman (but thou) knowing his disease
Mortal, would shun the cure: oh Master Greenewit,
Would you to such an Idol bow.

Not I sir.

Here's Master Laxton, has he mind to a woman
As thou hast.

No not I sir.

Sir I know it.

There good parts are so rare, there bad so common,
I will have nought to do with any woman.

Tis well done Master Laxton.

Oh thou cruel boy,
Thou would with lust an old mans life destroy,
Because thou see I'm half way in my grave,
Thou shouelst dust upon me: wod thou might have
Thy wish, most wicked, most unnatural.

Why sir, tis thought, sir Guy Fitz-Allards daughter
Shall wed your son Sebastian.

Sir Dauy Dapper.
I have upon my knees, wood this fond boy,
To take that virtuous maiden.

Hark you a word sir.
You on your knees have cursed that virtuous maiden,
And me for loving her, yet do you now
Thus baffle me to my face: were not your knees
In such entreats, give me Fitz-Allards daughter.

I'll give thee rats-bane rather.

Well then you know
What dish I mean to feed upon.

Hark Gentlemen,
He swears to have this cut-purse drab, to spite my gall.

Master Sebastian.

I am deaf to you all.
Ime so bewitched, so bound to my desires,
Tears, prayers, threats, nothing can quench out those fires
That burn within me.

Her blood shall quench it then,
Loose him not, oh dissuade him Gentlemen.

He shall be weand I warrant you.

Before his eyes
Lay down his shame, my grief, his miseries.

No more, no more, away.

I wash a Negro,
Loosing both pains and cost: but take thy flight,
I'll be most near thee, when I'm least in sight.
Wild Buck i'll hunt thee breathless, thou shalt run on,
But I will turn thee when I'm not thought upon.
Now sir what are you, leave your Apes tricks and speak.

A letter from my Captain to your Worship.

Oh, oh, now I remember tis to prefer thee into my service.


To be a shifter under your Worships nose of a clean trencher, when there's a
good bit upon it.


Troth honest fellow -- humh -- ha -- let me see,
This knave shall be the axe to hew that down
At which I stumble, has a face that promises
Much of a villain, I will grind his wit,
And if the edge prove fine make use of it.
Come hither sir, can thou be secret, ha.

As two crafty Atturneys plotting the undoing of their clients.


Did never, as thou hast walked about this town
Hear of a wench called Moll, mad merry Moll.

Moll cutpurse sir.

The same, dost thou know her then,

As well as I know twill rain upon Simon and Iudes day next, I will sift all
the taverns ith city, and drink half pots with all the Watermen ath
bankside, but if you will sir I'll find her out.


That task is easy, doot then, hold thy hand up.
Whats this, is't burnt?

No sir no, a little sindgd with making fire works.

There's money, spend it, that being spent fetch more.

Oh sir that all the poor soldiers in England had such a leader. For fetching
no water Spaniel is like me.


This wench we speak of, strays so from her kind
Nature repents she made her. Tis a Mermaid
Has told my son to shipwreck.

I'll cut her comb for you.

I'll tell out gold for thee then: hunt her forth,
Cast out a line hung full of silver hooks
To catch her to thy company: deep spendings
May draw her that's most chaste to a mans bosom.

The jingling of Golden bells, and a good fool with a hobbyhorse, will draw all
the whoores ith to wneto dance in a morris,


Or rather, for that's best, (they say sometimes
She goes in breeches) follow her as her man.

And when her breeches are off, she shall follow me.

Beat all thy brains to serve her.

Zounds sir, as country wenches beat cream, till butter comes.


Play thou the subtle spider, weave fine nets
To ensnare her very life.

Her life.

Yes suck
Her heart-bloud if thou can, twist thou but cords
To catch her, I'll find law to hang her up.

Spoke like a Worshipful bencher.

Trace all her steps: at this shee-foxes den
Watch what lambs enter: let me play the shepherd
To save their throats from bleeding, and cut hers.

This is the goll shall doot.

Be firm and gain me
Ever thine own. This done I entertain thee:
How is thy name.

My name sir is Raph Trapdore, honest Raph.

Trapdore, be like thy name, a dangerous step
For her to venture on, but unto me.

As fast as your sole to your boot or shoe sir.

Hence then, be little seen here as thou can.
I'll still be at thine elbow.

The trapdores set.
Moll if you budge you're gon: this me shall crown,
A Roaring Boy, the Roaring Girl puts down,

God a mercy, loose no time.

Gentlemen what is't you lack. What is't you buy, see fine bands and roughs,
fine lawns, fine cambrickes, what is't you lack Gentlemen, what is't you buy?


Yonders the shop.

Is that she.

Peace.

She that minces Tobacco.

I: she's a Gentlewoman borne I can tell you, tho it be her hard fortune now to
shread Indian pot-hearbes.


Oh sir tis many a good woman's fortune, when her husband turns bankrupt, to
begin with pipes and set up again.


And indeed the raising of the woman is the lifting up of the mans head at all
times, if one flourish, the other will bud as fast I warrant ye.


Come you are familiarly acquainted there, I grope that.

And you grope no better ith dark you may chance lye ith ditch when you're
drunk.


Go you are a mystical lecher.

I will not deny but my credit may take up an ounce of pure smoke.


May take up an ell of pure smock; away go, tis the closest striker. Life I
think he comits venery 40 foot deep, no mans aware on it, I like a palpable
smockster go to work so openly, with the tricks of art, that I'm as aparantly
seen as a naked boy in a vial, were it not for a gift of treachery that I have
in me to betray my friend when he puts most trust in me (mass yonder he is too
--) and by his injury to make good my access to her, I should appear as
defective in courting, as a Farmers son the first day of his feather, that
doth nothing at Court, but woe the hangings and glass windows for a month
together, and some broken weighting woman for ever after. I find those
imperfections in my venery, that were it not for flattery and falsehood, I
should want discourse and impudence, and he that wants impudence among women,
is worthy to be kicked out at beds feet. -- He shall not see me yet.


Troth this is finely shred.

Oh women are the best mincers.

'Thad bin a good phrase for a Cooks wife sir.

But 'twill serve generally, like the front of a new Almanac; as thus:
Calculated for the meridian of Cooks wives, but generally for all
Englishwomen.


Nay you shall ha'te sir, I have filled it for you.

The pipe's in a good hand, and I wish mine always so.

But not to be used a that fashion.

O pardon me sir, I understand no french.
I pray be covered. Jack a pipe of rich smoke.

Rich smoke; that's 6. pence a pipe is't?

To me sweet Lady.

Be not forgetful; respect my credit; seem strange;
Art and Wit makes a fool of suspicion: -- pray be wary.

Push, I warrant you: -- come, how is't gallants?

Pure and excellent.

I thought 'twas good, you were grown so silent; you are like those that love
not to talk at victuals, tho they make a worse noise in the nose then a common
fiddlers prentice, and discourse a whole Supper with snuffling; -- I must speak
a word with you anon.


Make your way wisely then. (ners,

Oh what else sir, he's perfection it self, full of man-
But not an acre of ground belonging to 'em.

I and full of form, he has ne'er a good stool in's chamber.


But above all religious: he prays daily upon elder brothers.


And valiant above measure; he has run three streets from a Sergeant.


Puh, Puh.

Oh, puh, ho, ho.

So, so.

Whats the matter now sir?

I protest I'm in extreme want of money, if you can supply me now with any
means, you do me the greatest pleasure, next to the bounty of your love, as
ever poor gentleman tasted.


What's the sum would pleasure ye sir?
Tho you deserve nothing less at my hands.

Why 'tis but for want of opportunity thou know; I put her off with
opportunity still: by this light I hate her, but for means to keep me in
fashion with gallants; for what I take from her, I spend upon other wenches,
bear her in hand still; she has wit enough to rob her husband, and I ways
enough to consume the money: why how now? what the chin-cough?


Thou hast the cowardliest trick to come before a mans face and strangle him
ere he be aware, I could find in my heart to make a quarrel in earnest.


Pox and thou dost, thou know I never use to fight with my friends, thou'l
but loose thy labour in it. Jack Dapper!


Monsieur Dapper, I dive down to your anckles.

Save ye gentlemen all three in a peculiar salute.

He were ill to make a lawyer, he dispatches three at once.


So well said: but is this of the same Tobacco mistress Gallipot?


The same you had at first sir.

I wish it no better: this will serve to drink at my chamber.


Shall we taste a pipe on it?

Not of this by my troth Gentlemen, I have sworn before you.


What not Jack dapper.

Pardon me sweet Jack, I'm sorry I made such a rash oath, but foolish oaths
must stand: where art going Jack.


Faith to buy one feather.

One feather, the foole's peculiar still.

Gul.

Master.

Here's three halfepence for your ordinary, boy, meet me an howre hence in
Powles.


How three single halfepence; life, this will scarce serve a man in sauce, a
halporth of mustard, a halporth of oil, and a halporth of vinegar, whats left
then for the pickle herring: this shows like final beer ith morning after a
great surfeit of wine ore night, he could spend his three pound last night in a
supper amongst girls and brave baudy-house boys, I thought his pockets
cackeld not for nothing, these are the eggs of three pound, I'll go sup'em up
presently.


Fight, nine, ten Angles, good wench in faith, and one that loves darkness
well, she puts out a candle with the best tricks of any drugsters wife in
England: but that which mads her I rail upon opportunity still, and take no
notice on it. The other night she would needs lead me into a room with a candle
in her hand to show me a naked picture, where no sooner entered but the candle
was sent of an arrant: now I not intending to understand her, but like a puny
at the Innes of venery, called for another light innocently, thus reward I all
her cunning with simple mistaking. I know she cousins her husband to keep me,
and I'll keep her honest, as long as I can, to make the poor man some part of
amends, an honest mind of a whooremaister, how think you amongst you, what a
fresh pipe, draw in a third man.


No your a horder, you ingrose bith ounces.

Puh I like it not.

What feather is't you'd have sir.
These are most worn and most in fashion,
Amongst the Beaver gallants the stone Riders.
The private stages audience, the twelu penny stool Gentlemen,
I can inform you tis the general feather.

And therefore I mislike it, tell me of general.
Now a continual Simon and Iudes rain
Beat all your feathers as flat down as pancakes.
Show me -- -- a -- spangled feather,

Oh to go a feasting with,
You'd have it for a hinch boy, you shall.

Mass I had quite forgot,
His Honours footman was here last night wife,
Ha you done with my Lords shirt.

Whats that to you sir,
I was this morning at his Honours lodging,
Ere such a snake as you crept out of your shell.

Oh 'twas well done good wife.

I hold it better sir, then if you had don't your self.

Nay so say I: but is the Countesses smock almost donne mouse.


Here lies the cambric sir, but wants I fear me.

I'll resolve you of that presently,

Haida, oh audacious groom,
Dare you presume to noble women's linen,
Keep you your yard to measure shepherds holland,
I must confine you I see that.

What say you to this geere.

I dare the arrants critic in Tobacco
To lay one fault upon it.

Life yonders Mol.

Mol which Mol.

honest Mol.

Prithee lets call her -- Mol.

Mol, Mol, pissed Mol.

How now, whats the matter.

A pipe of good tobacco Mol.

I cannot stay.

Nay Moll puh, prithee hark, but one word in faith.

Well what is't.

Prithee come hither sir.

Hart I would give but too much money to be nibbling with that wench, life,
sh'as the Spirit of four great parishes, and a voice that will drown all the
City, me thinks a brave Captain might get all his soldiers upon her, and
ne'er be beholding to a company of mile-end milk sops, if he could come on,
and come off quick enough: Such a Moll were a maribone before an Italian, he
would cry bona roba till his ribs were nothing but bone. I'll lay hard siege to
her, money is that Aqua fortis, that eats into many a maidenhead, where the
walls are flesh blood I'll ever pierce through with a golden auguer.


Now thy judgment Moll, is't not good?

Yes faith tis very good tobacco, how do you sell an an ounce, farewell. God
b'y you Mistress Gallipot,


Why Mol, Mol.

I cannot stay now in faith, I am going to buy a shag ^uffe, the shop will be
shut in presently.


Tis the maddest fantasticalst girl: -- I never knew so much flesh and so much
nimbleness put together.


She slips from one company to another, like a fat Eel between a Dutchmas
fingers: -- I'll watch my time for her.


Some will not stick to say she's a man
And some both man and woman.

That were excellent, she might first cuckold the husband and then make him do
as much for the wife.


Save you; how does Mistress Tiltyard?

Mol.

Jack Dappper.

How dost Mol.

I'll tell the by and by, I go but to the next shop.

Thou shalt find me here this howre about a feather.

Nay and a feather hold you in play a whole hour, a goose will last you all the
days of your life. Let me see a good shag ruff.


Mistress Mary that shalt thou in faith, and the best in the shop.


How now, greetings, love terms with a pox between you, have I found out one
of your haunts, I send you for hollands, and you're ith the low countries with
a mischief, I'm served with good ware byth shift, that makes it lye dead so
long upon my hands, I were as good shut up shop, for when I open it I take
nothing.


Nay and you fall a ringing once the devil cannot stop you, I'll out of the
Belfry as fast as I can -- Moll.


Get you from my shop.

I come to buy. (shop

I'll sell ye nothing, I warn ye my house and

You goody Openworke, you that prick out a poor living
And sows many a bawdy skin-coate together,
Thou private pandresse between shirt and smock,
I wish thee for a minute but a man:
Thou should never use more shapes, but as you are
I pity my revenge, now my spleens up,
I would not mock it willingly -- ha be thankful.
Now I forgive thee.

Mary hang thee, I never asked forgiveness in my life.


You goodman swinesface.

What will you murder me.

You remember slave, how you abused me the other night in a Tavern.


Not I by this light.

No, but by candlelight you did, you have tricks to save your oaths,
reseruations have you, and I have reserved somewhat for you, -- as you like
that call for more, you know the sign again.


Pox ant, had I brought any company along with me to have borne witless on it,
'twold ne'er have grieved me, but to be struck and nobody by, tis my ill
fortune still, why tread upon a worm they say twill turn tail, but indeed a
Gentleman should have more manners.


Gallantly performed ifath Mol, and manfully, I love thee for ever fort, base
rogue, had he offered but the least counter-buffe, by this hand I was prepared
for him.


You prepared for him, why should you be prepared for him, was he any more then
a man.


No nor so much by a yard and a handful London measure..


Why do you speak this then, do you think I cannot ride a stone horse,
unless one lead him bith snaffle.


Yes and sit him bravely, I know thou can Mol, twas but an honest mistake
through love, and I'll make amends fort any way, prithee sweet plump Mol, when
shall thou and I go out a town together.


Whether to Tyburne prithee.

Mass that's out a town indeed, thou hangst so many jests upon thy friends
still. I mean honestly to Brainford, Staines or Ware.


What to do there.

Nothing but be merry and lye together, I'll hire a coach with four horses.


I thought 'twould be a beastly journey, you may leave out one well, three
horses will serve, if I play the jade my self.


Nay push you are such another kicking wench, prithee be kind and lets meet.


Tis hard but we shall meet sir.

Nay but appoint the place then, there's ten Angels in fair gold Mol, you see
I do not trifle with you, do but say thou wilt meet me, and I'll have a coach
ready for thee.


Why here's my hand I'll meet you sir.

Oh good gold, -- the place sweet Mol.

It shall be your appointment.

Somewhat near Holborn Mol.

In Graies-Inne fields then.

A match.

I'll meet you there.

The hour.

Three.

That will be time enough to sup at Braineford.

I am of such a nature sir, I cannot endure the house when she scolds, sh'has
a tongue will be hard further in a still morning then Saint Antlings-bell, she
rails upon me for foreign wenching, that I being a freema must needs keep a
whore ith subburbs, and seek to impoverish the liberties, when we fall out, I
trouble you still to make all whole with my wife.


No trouble at all, tis a pleasure to me to join things together.


Go thy ways, I do this but to try thy honesty Goshawk.


How lik'st thou this Mol.

Oh singularly, your fitted now for a bunch, he looks for all the world with
those spangled feathers like a nobleman's bedpost: The purity of your wench would
I fain try, she seems like Kent unconquered, and I believe as many wiles are
in her -- oh the gallants of these times are shallow lechers, they put not
their courtship home enough to a wench, tis impossible to know what woman is
thoroughly honest, because she's ne'er thoroughly tried, I am of that certain
belief there are more queens in this town of their own making, then of any
mans provoking, where lies the slackness then? many a poor soul would down,
and there's nobody will push Women are courted but ne'er soundly tried, (em: As
many walk in spurs that never ride.


Oh abominable.

Nay more I tell you in private, he keeps a whore ith subburbs.


O spittle dealing, I came to him a Gentlewoman borne. I'll show you mine arms
when you please sir.


I had rather see your legs, and begin that way.

Tis well known he took me from a Ladies service, where I was well beloved of
the steward, I had my Latin tongue, and a spice of the French before I came
to him, and now doth he keep a subberbian whore under my nostrils.


There's ways enough to cry quite with him, hark in thine ear.


There's a friend worth a Million.

I'll try one spear against your chastity Mist. Tiltyard
Though it prove too short by the burgh.

Mass here she is.


How now, what art thou?

A poor ebbing Gentleman, that would gladly wait for the young flood of your
service.


My service! what should move you to offer your service to me sir?


The love I bear to your heroic spirit and masculine womanhood.


So sir, put case we should retain you to us, what parts are there in you for
a Gentlewoman's service.


Of two kinds right Worshipful: moveable, and immovable: moveable to run of
arrants, and immovable to stand when you have occasion to use me.


What strength have you.

Strength Mistress Mol, I have gon up into a steeple, and staid the great bell
as 'thas been ringing; stopped a windmill going.


And never struck down your self.

Stood as upright as I do at this present.

Come I pardon you for this, it shall be no disgrace to you: I have struck up
the heals of the high Germans size ere now, -- what not stand.


I am of that nature where I love, I'll be at my mistress foot to do her
service.


Why well said, but say your Mistress should receive injury, have you the
spirit of fighting in you, durst you second her.


Life I have kept a bridge my self, and drove seven at a time before me.


I.

But they were all Lincolneshire bullocks by my troth.


Well, meet me in Graies-Inne fields, between three and four this afternoon,
and upon better consideration we'll retain you.


I humbly thank your good Mistreship,
I'll crack your neck for this kindness.

Remember three.

Nay if I fail you hang me.

Good wench In faith.

Whose this.

Tis I Mol.

Prithee tend thy shop and prevent bastards.

Wele have a pint of the same wine in faith Mol.

Hark the bell rings, come Gentlemen.
Jack Dapper where shals all munch.

I am for Parkers ordinary.

He's a good guest to'm, he deserves his board,
He draws all the Gentlemen in a term time thither,
We'll be your followers Jack, lead the way,
Look you by my faith the fool has fetherd his nest well.

Come shut up your shops, where's Master Openworke.


Nay ask not me Master Tiltyard.

Wher's his water dog, puh -- pissed -- her -- hur-pist

Come wenches come, we're going all to Hogsden.


To Hogsden husband.

I to Hogsden pigs ny.

I'm not ready husband.

Faith that's well -- hum -- pissed -- pissed.

Come Mistress Openworke you are so long.

I have no joy of my life Master Gallipot.

Push, let your boy lead his water Spaniel along, and we'll show you the
bravest sport at parlous pond, he trug, he trug, he trug, here's the best duck
in England, except my wife, he, he, he, fetch, fetch, fetch, come lets away Of
all the year this is the sportfulst day.


If a man have a free will, where should the use
More perfect shine then in his will to love.
All creatures have their liberty in that,
Tho else kept under servile yoke and fear,
The very bond slave has his freedom there,
Amongst a world of creatures voiced and silent.
Must my desires wear fetters -- yea are you
So near, then I must break with my hearts truth;
Meet grief at a back way -- well: why suppose.
The two leaud tongues of slander or of truth
Pronounce Mol loathsome: if before my love
She appear fair, what injury have I,
I have the thing I like? in all things else
Mine own eye guides me, and I find 'em prosper,
Life what should ail it now? I know that man
Ne'er truly loves, if he gainesayt he lies,
That winks and marries with his fathers eyes.
I'll keep mine own wide open.

Here's brave wilfulness,
A made match, here she comes, they met a purpose.

Must I carry this great fiddle to your chamber Mistress Mary.


Fiddle goodman hog-rubber, some of these porters bear so much for others,
they have no time to carry wit for themselves.


To your own chamber Mistress Mary.

Who'll hear an Ass speak: whither else goodman pagent-bearer: the're people
of the worst memories.


Why 'twere too great a burden love, to have them carry things in their minds,
and a'ther backs together.


Pardon me sir, I thought not you so near.

So, so, so.

I would be nearer to thee, and in that fashion,
That makes the best part of all creatures honest.
No otherwise I wish it.

Sir I am so poor to requite you, you must look for nothing but thanks of
me, I have no humour to marry, I love to lye about sides ath bed my self; and
again ath' other side, a wife you know ought to be obedient, but I fear me I
am too headstrong to obey, therefore I'll ne'er go about it, I love you so well
sir for your good will I'd be loath you should repent your bargain after, and
therefore we'll ne'er come together at first, I have the head now of my self,
and am man enough for a woman, marriage is but a chopping and changing, where a
maiden looses one head, and has a worse ith place.


The most comfortablest answer from a Roaring Girl, that ever mine ears
drunk in.


This were enough now to affright a fool for ever from thee, when tis the
music that I love thee for,


There's a boy spoils all again.

Believe it sir I am not of that disdainful temper, but
I could love you faithfully.

A pox on you for that word. I like you not now,
You're a cunning roarer I see that already.

But sleep upon this once more sir, you may chance shift a mind to morrow, be
not too hasty to wrong your self, never while you live sir take a wife
running, many have run out at heals that have don't: you see sir I speak
against my self, and if every woman would deal with their suitor so honestly,
poor younger brothers would not be so often gul'd with old cosoning widows,
that turn ore all their wealth in trust to some kinsman, and make the poor
Gentleman work hard for a pension, fare you well sir.


Nay prithee one word more.

How do I wrong this girl, she puts him of still.

Think upon this in cold blood sir, you make as much hast as if you were a
going upon a sturgeon voyage, take deliberation sir, never choose a wife as if
you were going to Virginia.


And so we parted, my too cursed fate.

She is but cunning, gives him longer time in it.

Mistress Mol, Mistress Mol: so ho ho so ho.

There boy, there boy, what dost thou go a hawking after me with a red clout on
thy finger.


I forgot to take measure on you for your new breeches.


Hoyda breeches, what will he marry a monster with two trinkets, what age is
this? if the wife go in breeches, the man must wear long coats like a fool.


What fidlings here, would not the old pattern have served your turn.


You change the fashion, you say you'll have the great Dutch slop Mistress
Mary.


Why sir I say so still.

Your breeches then will take up a yard more.

Well pray look it be put in then.

It shall stand round and full I warrant you,

Pray make em easy enough.

I know my fault now, the other was somewhat stiff between the legs, I'll make
these open enough I warrant you.


Here's good geere towards, I have brought up my son to marry a Dutch slop,.
and a French doublet, a codpice daughter.


So, I have gone as far as I can go.

Why then farewell.

If you go presently to your chamber Mistress Mary, pray send me the measure
of your thigh, by some honest body.


Well sir, I'll send it by a Porter persently.

So you had need, it is a lusty one, both of them would make any porters back
ache in England.


I have examined the best part of man,
Reason and judgment, and in love they tell me,
They leave me vncontrould, he that is swayd
By an unfeeling blood, past heat of love
His spring time must needs err, his watch ne'er goes right
That sets his dial by a rusty clock,

So, and which is that rusty clock sir you.

The clock at Ludgate sir, it ne'er goes true.

But thou go falser: not thy fathers cares
Can keep thee right, when that insensible work,
Obayes the workman's art, lets off the hour
And stops again when time is satisfied,
But thou runst on, and judgment, thy maine wheel,
Beats by all stoppes, as if the work would break
Begun with long pains for a minutes ruin,
Much like a suffering man brought up with care.
At last bequeathed to shame and a short prayer,

I taste you bitterer then I can deserve sir.

Who has bewitch thee son, what devil or drug,
Hath wrought upon the weakness of thy blood,
And betrayed all her hopes to ruinous folly?
Oh wake from drowsy and enchanted shame,
Wherein thy soul sits with a golden dream
Flatred and poisoned, I am old my son, (mine own
Oh let me preuaile quickly, for I have weightier business of
Then to chide thee: I must not to my grave,
As a drunkard to his bed, whereon he lies
Only to sleep, and never cares to rise,
Let me dispatch in time, come no more near her.

Not honestly, not in the way of marriage,

What say thou marriage, in what place, the Sessions house, and who shall
give the bride, prethe, an indictment.


Sir now ye take part with the world to wrong her.

Why, would thou fain marry to be pointed at,
Alas the numbers great, do not over burden't,
Why as good marry a beacon on a hill,
Which all the country fix their eyes upon
As her thy folly doates on. If thou longst
To have the story of thy infamous fortunes,
Serve for discourse in ordinaries and taverns
You are in the way: or to confound thy name,
Keep on, thou can not miss it: or to strike
Thy wretched father to untimely coldness,
Keep the left hand still, it will bring thee to it.
Yet if no tears wrung from thy fathers eyes,
Nor sighs that fly in sparkles, from his sorrows,
Had power to alter what is wilful in thee,
Me thinks her very name should fright thee from her,
And never trouble me.

Why is the name of Mol so fatal sir.

Many one sir, where suspect is entered,
For seek all London from one end to the other,
More whoores of that name, then of any ten other.

Whats that to her? let those blush for themselves.
Can any guilt in others condemn her?
I'ue vowed to love her: let all storms oppose me,
That ever beat against the breast of man,
Nothing but deaths black tempest shall divide us.

Oh folly that can dote on nought but shame.

Put case a wanton itch runs through one name
More then another, is that name the worse,
Where honesty sits possessed in it? it should rather
Appear more excellent, and deserve more praise,
When through foul mists a brightness it can raise.
Why there are of the devils, honest Gentlemen,
And well descended, keep an open house,
And some ath (good mans) that are arrant knaves.
He hates unworthily, that by rote contemns,
For the name neither saves, nor yet condemns,
And for her honesty, I have made such proof an't,
In several forms, so nearly watched her ways,
I will maintain that strict, against an army,
Excepting you my father: here's her worst,
Sh'has a bold spirit that mingles with mankind,
But nothing else comes near it: and oftentimes
Through her apparel somewhat shames her birth,
But she is loose in nothing but in mirth,
Would all Mols were no worse.

This way I toil in vain and give but aim
To infamy and ruin: he will fall,
My blessing cannot stay him: all my joys
Stand at the brink of a devouring flood
And will be wilfully swallowed: wilfully.
But why so vain, let all these tears be lost,
I'll pursue her to shame, and so al's crossed.

He is gon with some strange purpose, whose effect
Will hurt me little if he shoot so wide,
To think I love so blindly: I but feed
His heart to this match, to draw on the other.
Wherein my joy sits with a full wish crowned;
Only his mood excepted which must change.
By opposite policies, courses indirect,
Plain dealing in this world takes no effect.
This mad girl I'll acquaint with my intent,
Get her assistance, make my fortunes known,
Twixt lovers hearts, she's a fit instrument,
And has the art to help them to their own,
By her advise, for in that craft she's wise,
My love and I may meet, spite of all spies.

Coachman.

Here sir.

There's a tester more, prithee drive thy coach to the hither end of Marybone
park, a fit place for Mol to get in.


Marybone park fir.

I, its in our way thou know.

It shall be done fir.

Coachman.

A non sir.

Are we fitted with good phrampell jade.

The best in Smithfield I warrant your sir.

May we safely take the upper hand of any coached velvet cap or tuftaffety
jacket, for they keep a wild swaggering in coaches now a days, the hye ways
are stopped with them.


My life for yours and baffle em to sir, -- why they are the same jade believe
it sir, that have drawn all your famous whores to Ware.


Nay then they know their business, they need no more instructions.


The're so used to such iourneis sir, I never use whip to em; for if they catch
but the sent of a wench once, they run like devils.


Fine Cerberus, that rogue will have the start of a thousand ones, for whilst
others trot a foot, heel ride prancing to hell upon a coach-horse.

Stay, tis now about the hourse of her appointment, but yet I see her not,
hark whats this, one, two three, three by the clock Mol prithee make hast, or
the Coachman will curse us anon.


Oh here's my Gentleman: if they would keep their days as well with their
Mercers as their hours with their harlots, no bankrupt would give seven score
pound for a seriants place, for would you know a catchpoole rightly deririu'd,
the corruption of a Citizen, is the generation of a seriant, how his eye
hawks for venery. Come are you ready sir.


Ready, for what sir.

Do you ask that now sir, why was this meeting pointed.


I thought you mistook me sir,
You seem to be some young barrister,
I have no suite in law -- all my land's sold
I praise heaven for it; t'has rid me of much trouble,

Then I must wake you sir, where stands the coach,

Whose this, Mol: honest Mol.

So young, and purblind, your an old wanton in your eyes I see that.


You are admirably suited for the three pigeons at Brainford, I'll swear I knew
thee not.


I'll swear you did not: but you shall know me now.

No not here, we shall be spied efaith, the coach is better, come.


Stay.

What wilt thou untruss a point Mol.

Yes, here's the point that I untruss, 'thas but one tag, 'twill serve tho to
tie up a rogues tongue.


How. (here's her pace,

There's the gold with which you hired your hackney,
She rackes hard, and perhaps your bones will feel it,
Ten angels of mine own, I'ue put to thine, win em, wear em,

Hold Moll, Mistress Mary.

Draw or I'll serve an execution on thee
Shall lay thee up till dooms day.

Draw upon a woman, why what dost mean Mol?

To teach thy base thoughts manners: you are one of those
That thinks each woman thy fond flexable whore,
If she but cast a liberal eye upon thee,
Turn back her head, she's thine, or amongst company,
By chance drink first to thee: then she's quite gon,
There's no means to help her: nay for a need,
Wilt swear unto thy credulous fellow lechers.
That you are more in favour with a Lady at first sight
Then her monky all her life time,
How many of our sex, by such as thou
Have their good thoughts paid with a blasted name
That never deserved loosely or did trip
In path of whoredom, beyond cup and lip.
But for the stain of conscience and of soul,
Better had women fall into the hands
Of an act silent, then a bragging nothing,
There's no mercy in it -- what durst move you sir,
To think me whoorish? a name which I'd tear out
From the hye Germans throat, if it lay ledger there
To dispatch privy slanders against me.
In thee I defy all men, there worst hates,
And their best flatteries, all their golden witchcrafts,
With which they entangle the poor spirits of fools,
Distressed needlewomen and trade-fallne wives.
Fish that must needs bite, or themselves be bitten,
Such hungry things as these may soon be took
With a worm fastened on a golden hooke.
Those are the lechers food, his prey, he watches
For quarrelling wedlockes, and poor shifting sisters,
Tis the best fish he takes: but why good fisherman,
Am I thought meat for you, that never yet
Had angling rod cast towards me? cause youl'e say
I'm given to sport, I'm often merry, jest,
Had mirth no kindred in the world but lust?
O shame take all her friends then: but how ere
Thou and the baser world censure my life,
I'll send 'em word by thee, and write so much
Upon thy breast, cause thou shalt bear't in mind,
Tell them 'twere base to yield, where I have conquered.
I scorn to prostitute my self to a man,
I that can prostitue a man to me,
And so I greet thee.

Hear me.

Would the spirits of al my slanders, were clasped in thine.
That I might vex an army at one time,

I do repent me, hold,

You'll die the better Christian then.

I do confess I have wronged thee Mol.

Confession is but poor amends for wrong,
Unless a rope would follow.

I ask thee pardon.

I'm your hired whore fir.

I yield both purse and body.

Both are mine, and now at my disposing.

Spare my life.

I scorn to strike thee basely.

Spoke like a noble girl i'faith.
Heart I think I fight with a familiar, or the Ghost of a fencer, Sh'has
wounded me gallantly, call you this a lecherous viage? Here's blood would have
served me this seven year in broken heads and cut fingers, it now runs all out
together, pox athe three pigeons, I would the coach were here now to carry me
to the Chirurgions.


If I could meet my enemies one by one thus,
I might make pretty shift with 'em in time,
And make 'em know, she that has wit, and spirit,
May scorn to live beholding to her body for meat,
Or for apparel like your common dame,
That makes shame get her clothes, to cover shame.
Base is that mind, that kneels unto her body,
As if a husband stood in awe on's wife,
My spirit shall be Mistress of this house,
As long as I have time in it. -- -- oh
Here comes my man that would be: 'tis his hour.
Faith a good well set fellow, if his spirit
Be answerable to his vmbles; he walks stiff,
But whether he will stand to it stiffly, there's the point;
Has a good calfe for it, and ye shall have many a woman
Choose him she means to meke her head, by his calfe;
I do not know their tricks in it, faith he seems
A man without; I'll try what he is within,

She told me Gr^ies-Inne fields twixt three four,
I'll fit her Mistreship with a piece of service,
I'm hired to rid the town of one mad girl.
What a pox ails you sir?

He begins like a Gentleman,

Heart, is the field so narrow, or your eye-sight:
Life he comes back again.

Was this spoke to me sir.

I cannot tell sir.

Go you're a coxcomb.

Coxcomb.

You're a slave.

I hope there's law for you sir.

Ye, do you see sir.

Heart this is no good dealing, pray let me know what house your off.


One of the Temple sir.

Mass so me thinks.

And yet sometime I lye about chic lane.

I like you the worse because you shift your lodging*
I'll not meddle with you for that trick sir. (so often

A good shift, but it shall not serve your turn.

You'll give me leave to pass about my business sir.

Your business, I'll make you wait on me before I ha done, and glad to serve
me too.


How sir, serve you, not if there were no more men in England.


But if there were no more women in England
I hope you'd wait upon your Mistress then,

Mistress.

Oh your a tried spirit at a push sir,

What would your Worship have me do.

You a fighter.

No, I praise heaven, I had better grace more manners.

As how I pray sir.

Life, 'thad been a beastly part of me to have drawn my weapons upon my
Mistress, all the world would a cried shame of me for that.


Why but you knew me not.

Do not say so Mistress, I knew you by your wide straddle, as well as if I had
been in your belly.


Well, we shall try you further, ith mean time we give you entertainment.


Thank your good Mistreship.

How many suites have you.

No more suites then backs Mistress.

Well if you deserve, I cast of this, next week,
And you may creep into it.

Thank your good Worship.

Come follow me to S. Thomas Apostles,
I'll put a livery cloak upon your back, the first thing I do,

I follow my dear Mistress.

What Pru, Nay sweet Prudence.

What a pruing keep you, I think the baby would have a teat it kyes so, pray
be not so fond of me, leave your City humours, I'm vexed at you to see how
like a calfe you come bleating after me.


Nay honey Pru: how does your rising up before all the table show? and flinging
from my friends so vnciuily, fiye Pru, fie, come.


Then up and ride in faith.

Up and ride, nay my pretty Pru, that's far from my thought, duck: why mouse,
thy mind is nibbling at something, whats is't, what lies upon thy Stomach?


Such an ass as you: hoyda, you're best turn midwife, or Physician: you're a
Poticary already, but I'm none of your drugs.


Thou art a sweet drug, sweetest Pru, and the more thou art pounded, the more
precious.


Must you be prying into a woman's secrets: say ye?

Woman's secrets.

What? I cannot have a qualm come upon me but your teeth waters, till your
nose hang over it.


It is my love dear wife.

Your love? your love is all words; give me deeds, I cannot abide a man that's
too fond ouerme, so cookish; thou dost not know how to handle a woman in her
kind,


No Pru? why I hope I have handled. --

Handle a fools head of your own, -- fih -- fih.

Ha, ha, tis such a wasp; it does me good now to have her sing me, little
rogue.


Now fie how you vex me, I cannot abide these aperne husbands: such cotqueanes,
you ouerdoe your things, they become you scurvily.


Upon my life she breeds, heaven knows how I have straind my self to please
her, night and day: I wonder why we Citizens should get children so fretful
and untoward in the breeding, their fathers being for the most part as gentle
as milch kine: shall I leave thee my Pru.


Fie, fie, fie.

Thou shalt not be vexed no more, pretty kind rogue, take no cold sweet Pru.


As your wit has done: now Master Laxton show your head, what news from you?
would any husband suspect that a woman crying, Buy any scurui-grasse, should
bring love letters amongst her herbs to his wife, pretty trick, fine
conveyance? had jealousy a thousand eyes, a silly woman with scuruy-grasse
blinds them all; Laxton with baize crown I thy wit for this, it deserves
praise.

This makes me affect thee more, this proves thee wise,
Lack what poor shift is love forced to devise? (to the point)
Alas poor Gentleman, troth I pity him,
How shall I raise this money? thirty pound?
Tis thirty sure, a 3 before an 0,
I know his threes too well; my childbed linen?
Shall I pawn that for him? then if my mark
Be known I am undone; it may be thought
My husband's bankrupt: which way shall I turn?
Laxton, what with my own fears, and thy wants,
I'm (...) needle twixt two adamants.

Nay, nay, wife, the women are all up, ha, how, reading a letters? I smell a
goose, a couple of capons, and a gammon of bacon from her mother out of the
country, I hold my life, -- steal, -- steal.


O beshrow your heart.

What letter's that? I'll see it.

Oh would thou had no eyes to see the downfall of me and thy self: I'm
for ever, for ever I'm undone.


What ails my Pru? what paper's that thou tear'st?

Would I could tear
My very heart in pieces: for my soul
Lies on the rack of shame, that tortures me
Beyond a woman's suffering.

What means this?

Had you no other vengeance to throw down,
But even in height of all my joys?

Dear woman.

When the full sea of pleasure and content seemed to flow over me.


As thou desire to keep me out of bedlam, tell what troubles thee, is not
thy child at nurse fallen sick, or dead?


Oh no.

Heavens bless me, are my barnes and houses
Yonder at Hockly hole consumed with fire,
I can build more, sweet Pru.

Tis worse, tis worse.

My factor broke, or is the Ionas sunk.

Would all we had were swallowed in the waives,
Rather then both should be the scorn of slaves.

I'm at my wits end.

Oh my dear husband,
Where once I thought my self a fixed star,
Placed only in the heaven of thine arms,
I fear now I shall prove a wanderer,
Oh Laxton, Laxton, is it then my fate
To be by thee orethrowne?

Defend me wisdom,
From falling into frenzy, on my knees. (thy bosom.
Sweet Pru, speak, whats that Laxton who so heavy lies on

I shall sure run mad.

I shall run mad for company then: speak to me,
I'm Gallipot thy husband, -- Pru, -- why Pru.
Art sick in conscience for some villainous deed
Thou were about to act, did mean to rob me,
Tush I forgive thee, hast thou on my bed
Thrust my soft pillow under another head?
I'll wink at all faults Pru, las that's no more,
Then what some neighbours near thee, have done before,
Sweet honey Pru, whats that Laxton?

Oh.

Out with him.

Oh he's borne to be my undoer,
This hand which thou call thine, to him was given,
To him was I made sure ith sight of heaven.

I never heard this thunder.

Yes, yes, before
I was to thee contracted, to him I swore,
Since last I saw him twelve months three times told,
The Moon hath drawn through her light silver bow,
For ore the seas he went, and it was said,
(But Rumour lies) that he in France was dead.
But he's alive, oh he's alive, he sent,
That letter to me, which in rage I rent,
Swearing with oaths most damnably to have me,
Or tear me from this bosom, oh heavens save me,

My heart will break, -- shamed and undone for ever.


So black a day (poor wretch) went ore thee never.

If thou should wrestle with him at the law,
You are sure to fall, no odd slight, no prevention.
I'll tell him you are with child.

Vmh.

Or give out one of my men was taken a bed with thee.


Vmh, vmh.

Before I loose thee my dear Pru;
I'll drive it to that push.

Worse, and worse still,
You embrace a mischief, to prevent an ill.

I'll buy thee of him, stop his mouth with Gold,
Think thou twill do.

Oh me, heavens grant it would,
Yet now my senses are set more in tune,
He writ, as I remember in his letter,
That he in riding up and down had spent,
(Ere he could find me) thirty pounds, send that,
Stand not on thirty with him.

Forty Pru, say thou the word tis done, we venture lives for wealth, but must
do more to keep our wives, thirty or forty Pru.


Thirty good sweet
Of an ill bargain lets save what we can,
I'll pay it him with my tears, he was a man
When first I knew him of a meek spirit,
All goodness is not yet dried up I hope.

He shall have thirty pound, let that stop all:
Loves sweets taste best, when we have drunk down Gall.
Gods so, our friends; come, come, smooth your cheek;
After a storm the face of heaven looks sleek.

Did I not tell you these turtles were together?

How dost thou sir? why sister Gallipot?

Lord how she's changed?

Is your wife ill sir?

Yes indeed la sir, very ill, very ill, never worse,

How her head burns, feel how her pulses work.

Sister lie down a little, that always does me good.


In good sadness I find best ease in that too,
Has she laid some hot thing to her Stomach?

No, but I will lay something anon.

Come, come fools, you trouble her, shal's go Master Goshawk?


Yes sweet Master Tiltyard; sir Rosamond I hold my life Gallipot hath vexed
his wife.


She has a horrible high colour indeed.

We shall have your face painted with the same red soon at night, when your
husband comes from his rubbers in a false alley; thou wilt not believe me that
his bowles run with a wrong bias.


It cannot sink into me, that he feeds upon stale mutten abroad, having
better and fresher at home.


What if I bring thee, where thou shalt see him stand at rack and manger?


I'll saddle him in's kind, and spur him till he kick again.


Shall thou and I ride our journey then.

Here's my hand.

No more; come Master Tiltyard, shall we leap into the stirrups with our
women, and amble home?


Yes, yes, come wife.

In truth sister, I hope you will do well for all this.

I hope I shall: farewell good sister: sweet Master Goshawk.


Welcome brother, most kindly welcome sir.

Thanks sir for our good cheer.

It shall be so, because a crafty knave
Shall not out reach me, nor walk by my door
With my wife arm in arm, as 'twere his whore,
I'll give him a golden coxcomb, thirty pound:
Tush Pru what's thirty pound? sweet duck look cheerely.

Thou art worthy of my heart thou bui'st it dearly.

Vds light the tide's against me, a pox of your Potticarishp: oh for some
glister to set him going; 'tis one of Hercules labours, to tread one of these
City hens, because their cocks are still crowing over them; there's no
turning tale here, I must on.


Oh, husband see he comes.

Let me deal with him.

Bless you sir.

Be you blessed too sir if you come in peace.

Have you any good pudding Tobacco sir?

Oh pick no quarrels gentle sir, my husband
Is not a man of weapon, as you are,
He knows all, I have opned all before him, concerning you.

Zounes has she shown my letters.

Suppose my case were yours, what would you do.
At such a pinch, such batteries, such assaults*
O^ father, mother, kindred, to dissolve
The knot you tied, and to be bound to him?
How could you shift this storm off?

If I know hang me.

Besides a story of your death was read
Each minute to me.

What a pox means this ridling?

Be wise sir, let not you and I be tossed
On Lawyers pens; they have sharpe nibs and draw
Men's very heart blood from them; what need you sir
To beat the drum of my wives infamy,
And call your friends together sir to prove
Your precontact, when sh'has confessed it?

Vmh sir, -- has she confessed it?

Sh'has faith to me sir, upon your letter sending.

I have, I have.

If I let this iron cool call me slave,
Do you hear, you dame Prudence? think thou vile woman
I'll take these blows and wink?

Upon my knees.

Out impudence.

Good sir.

You goatish slaves,
No wild foul to cut up but mine?

Alas sir,
You make her flesh to tremble, frighr her not,
She shall do reason, and what's fit.

I'll have thee, were thou more common
Then an hospital, and more diseased. --

But one word good sir.

So sir.

I married her, have line with her, and goy
Two children on her body, think but on that;
Have you so beggarly an appetite
When I upon a dainty dish have fed
To dine upon my scraps, my leavings? ha sir?
Do I come near you vow sir?

Be Lady you touch me.

Would not you scorn to wear my clothes sir?

Right sir.

Then pray sir wear not her, for she's a garment
So fitting for my body, I'm loath
Another should put it on, you will undo both.
Your letter (as she said) complained you had spent
In quest of her, some thirty pound, I'll pay it;
Shall that sir stop this gap up twixt you two?

Well if I swallow this wrong, let her thank you:
The money being paid sir, I am gon:
Farewell, oh women happy's he trusts none.

Dispatch him hence sweet husband.

Yes dear wife: pray sir come in, ere Master
Thou shalt in wine drink to him,

With all my heart; -- how dost thou like my wit?

Rarely, that wile
By which the Serpent did the first woman beguile,
Did ever since, all women's bosoms fill;
You're apple eaters all, deceivers still.

Out with your tale Sir Dauy, to Sir Adam.
A Knave is in mine eye deep in my debt.

Nay: if he be a knave sir, hold him fast.

Speak softly, what egg is there hatching now.

A Ducks egg sir, a duck that has eaten a frog, I have cracked the shell, and
some villainy or other will peep out presently; the duck that sits is the
bouncing Ramp (that Roaring Girl my Mistress) the drake that must tread is
your son Sebastian.


Be quick.

As the tongue of an oyster wench.

And see thy news be true.

As a barbarians every saturday night -- mad Mol.

Ah.

Must be let in without knocking at your back gate.

So.

Your chamber will be made bawdy.

Good.

She comes in a shirt of male.

How shirt of male?

Yes sir or a male shirt, that's to say in mans apparel.

To my son.

Close to your son: your son and her Moon will be in conjunction, if all
Alminacks lie not, her black saueguard is turned into a deep slop, the
holes of her upper body to button holes, her waistcoat to a doublet, her placket
to the ancient seat of a codpice, and you shall take 'em both with standing
collers.


Art sure of this?

As every throng is sure of a pick-pocket, as sure as a whore is of the
clients all Michaelmas Term, and of the pox after the Term.


The time of their tilting?

Three.

The day?

This.

Away ply it, watch her.

As the devil doth for the death of a baud, I'll watch her, do you catch her.


She's fast: here weave thou the nets; hark,

They are made. (maintain't.

I told them thou did owe me money; hold it up:

Stiffly; as a Puritan does contention,
Fox I owe thee not the value of a halfepenny halter.

Thou shalt be hanged in it ere thou escape so.
Varlet I'll make thee look through a grate.

I'll do'tpresently, through a Tavern grate, drawer: pish.


Has the knave vexed you sir?

Asked him my money,
He swears my son received it: oh that boy
Will ne'er leave heaping sorrows on my heart,
Till he has broke it quite.

Is he still wild?

As is a russian Bear.

But he has left
His old haunt with that baggage.

Worse still and worse,
He lays on me his shame, I on him my curse.

My son Jack Dapper then shall run with him,
All in one pasture.

Proves your son bad too sir?

As villainy can make him: your Sebastian
Doares but on one drabb, mine on a thousand,
A noise of fiddlers, Tobacco, wine and a whore,
A Mercer that will let him take up more,
Dice, and a water spaniel with a Duck: oh,
Bring him a bed with these, when his purse gingles,
Roaring boys follow at's tale, fencers and ningles,
(Beasts Adam ne'er gave name to) these horse-leeches suck
My son, he being drawn dry, they all live on smoke.

Tobacco?

Right, but I have in my brain
A windmill going that shall grind to dust
The follies of my son, and make him wise,
Or a stark fool; pray lend me your advise.

That shall you good sir Dauy.

Here's the sprindge
Iha set to catch this woodcock in: an action
In a false name (unknown to him) is entered.
In the Counter to arrest Jack Dapper.

Ha, ha, he.

Think you the Counter cannot break him?

Break him?
Yes and breake's heart too if he lie there long.

I'll make him sing a Counter tenor sure.

No way to tame him like it, there he shall learn
What money is indeed, and how to spend it.

He's bridled there.

I, yet knows not how to mend it,
Bedlam cures not more madmen in a year,
Then one of the Counters does, men pay more dear
There for there wit then any where; a Counter
Why 'tis an university, who not sees?
As schollers there, so here men take degrees,
And follow the same studies (all alike.)
Schollers learn first Logic and Rhetoric.
So does a prisoner; with fine honied speech
At's first coming in he doth persuade, beseech,
He may be lodged with one that is not itchy;
To lie in a clean chamber, in sheets not lowsy,
But when he has no money, then does he try,
By subtle Logic, and quaint sophistry,
To make the keepers trust him.

Say they do.

Then he's a graduate.

Say they trust him not,

Then is he held a freshman and a sot,
And never shall commence, but being still bared
Be expulst from the Masters side, to the twopenny ward,
Or else in the hole, beg placed.

When then I pray proceeds a prisoner.

When money being the theme,
He can dispute with his hard creditors hearts,
And get out clear, he's then a Master of Arts;
Sir Dauy send your son to Woodstreet College,
A Gentleman can no where get more knowledge.

There Gallants study hard.

True: to get money.

'lies bith' heals i'faith, thanks, thanks, I ha sent
For a couple of bears shall paw him.

Who comes yonder?

They look like puttocks, these should be they.

I know 'em, they are officers, sir we'll leave you.

My good knights.
Leave me, you see I'm haunted now with spirits.

Fare you well sir.

This old muzzle chops should be he
By the fellows description: Save you sir.

Come hither you mad varlets, did not my man tell you I watched here for you.


One in a blew coat sir told us, that in this place an old Gentleman would
watchforvs, a thing contrary to our oath, for we are to watch for every wicked
member in a City.


You'll watch then fot ten thousand, what's thy name honesty?


Seriant Curtilax I sir.

An excellent name for a Seriant, Curtilax.
Seriants indeed are weapons of the law,
When prodigal ruffians far in debt are grown,
Should not you cut them; Citizens were orethrowne,
Thou dwel'st hereby in Holborn Curtilax.

That's my circuit sir, I conjure most in that circle.

And what young toward welp is this?

Of the same litter, his yeoman sir, my name's Hanger.

Yeoman Hanger.
One pair of shears sure cut out both your coats,
You have two names most dangerous to men's throats,
You two are villainous loads on Gentlemen's backs,
Dear ware, this Hanger and this Curtilax.

We are as other men are sir, I cannot see but he who makes a show of honesty
and religion, if his claws can fasten to his liking, he draws blood; all that
live in the world, are but great fish and little fish, and feed upon one
another, some eat up whole men, a Seriant cares but for the shoulder of a man,
they call us knaves and cures, but many times he that sets us on, worries
more lambs one year, then we do in seven.


Spoke like a noble Cerberus, is the action entered?

His name is entered in the book of unbelievers.

What booke's that?

The book where all prisoners names stand, and not one amongst forty, when he
comes in, believes to come out in hast.


Be as dogged to him as your office allows you to be.

Oh sir.

You know the unthrift Jack Dapper.

I, I, sir, that Gull? as well as I know my yeoman.

And you know his father too, Sir Dauy Dapper?

As damned a usurer as ever was among Iewes; if he were sure his fathers
skin would yield him any money, he would when he dyes flea it off, and sell
it to cover drums for children at Bartholomew fair.


What toads are these to spit poison on a man to his face? do you see (my
honest rascals?) yonder gray-hound is the dog he hunts with, out of that
Tavern Jack Dapper will sally sa, sa; give the counter, on, set upon him.


We'll charge him vppo'th back sir.

Take no bail, put mace enough into his caudle, double your files, traverse
your ground.


Brave sir.

Cry arm, arm, arm.

Thus sir.

There boy, there boy, away: look to your prey my true English wolves, and and
so I vanish.


Some warden of the Seriants begat this old fellow upon my life, stand close.


Shall the ambuscado lie in one place?

No uooke thou yonder.

Ralph.

What says my brave Captain male and female?

This Holborn is such a wrangling street,

That s because Lawyers walks to and fro in it.

Here's such jostling, as if every one we met were drunk and reeled.


Stand Mistress do you not smell carrion?

Carrion? no, yet I spy ravens.

Some poor winde-shaken gallant will anon fall into sore labour, and these
men-midwiues must bring him to bed in the counter, there all those that are
great with child with debts, lie in.


Stand up.

Like your new maypoll.

Whist, whew.

Hump, no.

Peeping? it shall go hard huntsmen, but I'll spoil your game, they look for
all the world like two infected maltmen coming muffled up in their cloaks in
a frosty morning to London.


A course, Captain; a bear comes to the stake.

It should be so, for the dogs struggle to be let loose.


Whew.

Hemp.

Hark Trapdore, follow your leader.

Gul.

Master.

Did ever see such an ass as I am boy?

No by my troth sir, to loose all your money, yet have false dice of your own,
why 'tis as I saw a great fellow used the other day, he had a fair sword and
buckler, and yet a butcher dry beat him with a cudgel.


Honest Sergeant fly, fly Master Dapper you'll be arrested else.


Run Gul and draw.

Run Master, Gull follows you.

I know you well enough, you're but a whore to hang upon any man.


Whores then are like Seri^ants, so now hang you, draw rogue, but strike not:
for a broken pate they'll keep their b^ds, and recover twenty marks damages.


You shall pay for this rescue, run down shoelane and meet him.


Shu, is this a rescue Gentlemen or no?

Rescue? a pox on 'em, Trapdore let's away,
I'm glad I have done perfect one good work to day,
If any Gentleman be in Scriveners bands,
Send but for Mol, she'll bail him by these hands.

Vnahppy in the follies of a son,
Led against judgment, sense, obedience,
And all the powers of nobleness and wit;
Oh wretched father, now Trapdore will she come?

In mans apparel sir, I am in her heart now,
And share in all her secrets.

Peace, peace, peace.
Here take my Germane watch, hanged up in sight,
That I may see her hang in English for it.

I warrant you for that now, next Sessions rids her sir,
This watch will bring her in better then a hundred constables.

Good Trapdore say thou so, thou cheer my heart
After a storm of sorrow, -- my gold chain too,
Here take a hundred marks in yellow links.

That will do well to bring the watch to light sir.
And worth a thousand of your Headborowes lanthornes.

Place that a'the Court cubbart, let it lie
Full in the view of her theefe-whoorish eye.

She cannot miss it sir, I see it so plain, that I could steal't my self.


Perhaps thou shalt too,
That or something as weighty; what she leaves,
Thou shalt come closely in, and filch away,
And all the weight upon her back I'll lay.

You cannot assure that sir.

No, what lets it?

Being a stout girl, perhaps she'll desire pressing,
Then all the weight must lie upon her belly.

Belly or back I care not so I'ue one.

You're of my mind for that sir.

Hang up my ruff band with the diamond at it,
It may be she'll like that best.

It's well for her, that she must have her choice, he thinks nothing too
good for her, if you hold on this mind a little longer, it shall be the first
work I do to turn thief my self; would do a man good to be hanged when he
is so well provided for.


So, well said; all haugs well, would she hung so too,
The sight would please me more, then all their gilsterings:
Oh that my mysteries to such streights should run,
That I must rob my self to bless my son.

Thou hast done me a kind office, without touch
Either of sin or shame, our loves are honest.

I'd scorn to make such shift to bring you together else*

Now have I time and opportunity
Without all fear to bid thee welcome love.

Never with more desire and harder venture.

How strange this shows one man to kiss another.

I'd kiss such men to choose Moll,
Me thinks a woman's lip tastes well in a doublet:

Many an old madam has the better fortune then,
Whose breathes grew stale before the fashion came,
If that will help 'em, as you think 'twill do,
They'll learn in time to pluck on the hose too.

The older they wax Moll, troth I speak seriously,
As some have a conceit their drink tastes better
In an outlandish cup then in our own,
So me thinks every kiss she gives me now
In this strange form, is worth a pair of two,
Here we are safe, and furthest from the eye
Of all suspicion, this is my fathets chamber,
Upon which floor he never steps till night.
Here he mistrusts me not, nor I his coming,
At mine own chamber he still pries unto me,
My freedom is not there at mine own finding,
Still checked and curbed, here he shall miss his purpose.

And what's your business now, you have your mind sir;
At your great suite I promised you to come,
I pitied her for names sake, that a Moll
Should be so crossed in love, when there's so many,
That owes nine lays a piece, and not so little:
My taylor fitted her, how like you his work?

So well, no Art can mend it, for this purpose,
But to thy wit and help we're chief in debt,
And must live still beholding.

Any honest pity
I'm willing to bestow upon poor Ring-doues.

I'll offer no worse play.

Nay and you should sir,
I should draw first and prove the quicker man,

Hold, there shall need no weapon at this meeting,
But cause thou shalt not loose thy fury idle,
Here take this vial, run upon the guts,
And end thy quarrel singing.

Like a swan above bridge,
For look you here's the bridge, and here am I.

Hold on sweet Mol.

I'ue heard her much commended sir, for one that was ne'er taught.


I'm much beholding to 'em, well since you'll needs put'vs together sir, I'll
play my part as well as I can; it shall ne'er be said I came into a Gentleman's
chamber, and let his instrument hang by the walls.


Why well said Mol i'faith, it had been a shame for that Gentleman then, that
would have let it hung still, and ne'er offred thee it.


There it should have been still then for Mol, for though the world judge
impudently of me, I ne'er came into that chamber yet, where I took down the
instrument my self.


Pish let'em prate abroad, you are here where thou art known and loved, there
be a thousand close dames that will cal the vial an unmannerly instrument for a
woman, and therefore talk broadly of thee, when you shall have them sit wider
to a worse quality.


Push, I ever fall a sleep and think not of'em sir, and thus I dream.


Prithee let's hear thy dream Mol.

I dream there is a Mistress,
And she lays out the money,
She goes unto her Sisters,
She never comes at any.

That's a free Mistresse' faith.

I, I, I, like her that sings it, one of thine own choosing.

But shall I dream again?
Here comes a wench will brave ye,
Her courage was so great,
She lay with one of the Navy,
Her husband lying in the Fleet.
Yet oft with him she cauel'd,
I wonder what she ails,
Her husbands ship lay grauel'd,
When her's could hoise up sails,
Yet she began like all my foes,
To call whore first: for so do those;
A pox of all false tails.

Marry amen say I.

So say I too.

Hang up the vial now sir: all this while I was in a dream, one shall lie
rudely then; but being awake, I keep my legs together; a watch, what's a
clock here.


Now, now, she's trapt.

Between one and two; nay then I care not: a watch and a musician are cossen
Germanes in one thing, they must both keep time well, or there's no goodness
in 'em, the one else deserves to be dashed against a wall, and the other to have
his brains knocked out with a fiddle case, what? a loose chain and a dangling
Diamond.

Here were a brave booty for an euening-theefe now,
There's many a younger brother would be glad
To look twice in at a window for it,
And wriggle in and out, like an eel in a sandbag,
Oh if men's secret youthful faults should judge 'em,
'T would be the general'st execution,
That ere was seen in England; there would be but few left to sing the
ballets, there would be so much work: most of our brokers would be chosen for
hangmen, a good day for them: they might renew their wardrops of free cost
then.


This is the roaring wench must do us good.

No poison sir but serves us for some use, which is confirmed in her.


Peace, peace, foot I did here him sure, where ere he be.

Who did you hear?

My father, 'twas like a sight of his, I must be wary,

No wilt not be, am I alone so wretched
That nothing takes? I'll put him to his plundge for it.

Life, here he comes, -- sir I beseech you take it,
Your way of teaching does so much content me,
I'll make it four pound, here's forty shillings sir.
I think I name it right: help me good Mol,
Forty in hand.

Sir you shall pardon me,
I have more of the meanest scholar I can teach,
This pays me more, then you have offred yet.

At the next quarter
When I receive the means my father 'lowes me.
You shall have the other forty,

This were well now,
Were it to a man, whose sorrows had blind eyes,
But mine behold his follies and untruths,
With two clear glasses -- how now?

Sir.

What's he there?

You're come in good time sir, I'ue a suite to you,
I'd crave your present kindness.

What is he there?

A Gentleman, a musician sir, one of excellent fingering*

I, I think so, I wonder how they escaped her.

Has the most delicate stroke sir,

A stroke indeed, I feel it at my heart,

Puts down all your famous musicians.

I, a whore may put down a hundred of 'em.

Forty shillings is the agreement sir between us,
Now sir, my present means, mounts but to half on it.

And he stands upon the whole.

I indeed does he sir.

And will do still, he will ne'er be in other tail,

Therefore I'd stop his mouth sir, and I could,

Hum true, there is no other way indeed,
His folly hardens, shame must needs succeed.
Now sir I understand you profess musique.

I am a poor servant to that liberal science sir.

Where is it you teach?

Right against Cliffords Inn.

Hum that's a fit place for it: you have many schollers.

And some of worth, whom I may call my masters.

I true, a company of whooremaisters; you teach to sing too?


Marry do I sir.

I think you'll find an apt scholar of my son, especially for pricke-song.


I have much hope of him.

I am sorry for it, I have the less for that: you can play any lesson.


At first sight sir.

There's a thing called the witch, can you play that?

I would be sorry any one should mend me in it.

I, I believe thee, thou hast so bewitched my son,
No care will mend the work that thou hast done,
I have bethought my self since my art fails,
I'll make her policy the Art to trap her.
Here are four Angels marked with holes in them
Fit for his cracked companions, gold he will give her,
These will I make induction to her ruin,
And rid shame from my house, grief from my heart
Here son, in what you take content and pleasure,
Want shall not curb you, pay the Gentleman
His latter half in gold.

I thank you sir.

Oh may the operation an't, end three,
In her, life: shame, in him; and grief, in me.

Faith thou shalt haue'em 'tis my fathers gift,
Never was man beguiled with better shift.

He that can take me for a male musician,
I cannot choose but make him my instrument,
And play upon him.

Is then that bird of yours (Master Goshawk) so wild?

A Goshawk, a Puttock; all for prey: he angles for fish, but he loves flesh
better.


Is't possible his smooth face should have wrinkles in it, and we not see them?


Possible? why have not many handsome legs in silk stockings villainous splay
feet for all their great roses?


Troth firra thou say true.

Did never see an archer (as tho'ast walked by Bunhill) look a squint when he
drew his bow?


Yes, when his arrows have flin'e toward Islington, his eyes have shot clean
contrary towards Pimlico.


For all the world so does Master Goshawk double with me.


Oh fie upon him, if he double once he's not for me.

Because Goshawk go* in a shag-ruffe band, with a face sticking up in it,
which shows like an agget set in acrampe ring, he thinks I'm in love with
him.


Alas I think he takes his mark amiss in thee.

He has by often beating into me made me believe that my husband kept a whore.


Very good.

Swore to me that my husband this very morning went in a boat with a tilt over
it, to the three pidgions at Brainford, and his puncke with him under his tilt.


That were wholesome.

I believed it, fell a swearing at him, curssing of harlots, made me ready to
hoise up sail, and be there as soon as he.


So, so.

And for that voyage Goshawk comes hither incontinently, but sir this
water-spaniell dives after no duck but me, his hope is having me at
Braineford to make me cry quack.


Art sure of it?

Sure of it? my poor innocent Openworke came in as I was poking my ruff,
presently hit I him in the teeth with the three pidgions: he forswore all, I up
and opened all, and now stands he (in a shop hard by) like a musket on a rest,
to hit Goshawk in the eye, when he comes to fetch me to the boat.


Such another lame Gelding offered to carry me through thick and thin,
(Laxton sir) but I am rid of him now.


Happy is the woman can be rid of 'em all; alas what are your whisking
gallants to our husbands, weigh 'emrightly man for man.


Troth mere shallow things.

Idle simple things, running heads, and yet let 'emrun over us never so fast,
we shop-keepers (when all's done) are sure to have 'em in our pursnets at
length, and when they are in, Lord what simple animals they are.


Then they hang head.

Then they droop.

Then they write letters.

Then they cog.

Then they deal under hand with us, and we must ingle with our husbands a
bed, and we must swear they are our cousins, and able to do us a pleasure at
Court.


And yet when we have donc our best, al's but put into a riuen dish, we are
but frumpt at and libell'd upon.


Oh if it were the good Lords will, there were a law made, no Citizen should
trust any of'em all.


Hush sir, Goshawk flutters.

How now, are you ready?

Nay are you ready? a little thing you see makes us ready.


Us? why, must she make one in the voyage?

Oh by any means, do I know how my husband will handle me?


'Foot, how shall I find water, to keep these two mils going? Well since you'll
needs be clapped under hatches, if I sail not with you both till all split,
hang me up at the maine yard, duck me; it's but lickering them both soundly,
then you shall see their cork heals fly up high, like two swans when their
tails are above water, and their long necks under water, diving to catch
gudgions: come, come, oars stand ready, the tyde's with us, on with those
false faces, blow winds and thou shalt take thy husband, casting out his net to
catch fresh Salmon at Brainford.


I believe you'll eat of a coddes head of your own dressing, before you reach
half way thither.


So, so, follow close, pin as you go.

Do you hear?

Yes, I thank my ears.

I must have a bout with your Poticariship,

At what weapon?

I must speak with you.

No.

No? you shall.

Shall? away soust Sturgeon, half fish, half flesh.

Faith gib, are you spitting, I'll cut your tail puscat for this,


Alas poor Laxton, I think thy tayle's cut already: your worst;


If I do not, --

Come, ha'you done?
Sfoote Rosamond, your husband. welcome,

How now? sweet May. Goshawk, none more
I have wanted your embraces: when friends meet,
The musique of the spheres sounds not more sweet,
Then does their conferenc: who is this? Rosamond:
Wife: how now sister?

Silence if you love me.

Why maskt?

Does a mask grieve you sir?

It does.

Then you're best get you a mumming.

S'footeyou'l spoil all.

May not we cover our bare faces with masks
As well as you cover your bald heads with hats?

No masks, why, they are thieves to beauty, that rob
Of admiration in which true love lies, (eyes
Why are masks worn? why good? or why desired?
Unless by their gay covers wits are fired
To read the vild'st looks; many bad faces,
(Because rich gems are treasured up in cases)
Pass by their privilege currant, but as caves
Dambe misers Gold, so masks are beauties graves,
Men ne'er meet women with such muffled eyes,
But they curse her, that first did masks devise,
And swear it was somebeldame. Come off with it.

I will not.

Good faces maskt are Jewels kept by spirits.
Hide none but bad ones, for they poison men's sights,
Show then as shop-keepers do their broidred stuff,
(By owl light) fine wares cannot be open enough,
Prithee (sweet Rose) come strike this sail.

Sail? (eyes:

Ha? yes wife strike sail, for storms are in thine

They are here sir in my brows if any rise.

Ha brows? (what says she friend) pray tel me
Your two flags were aduaunst; the Comedy, (why
Come what's the Comedy?

Westward hoe.

How?

'Tis Westward hoe she says.

Are you both mad?

Is't Market day at Braineford, and your ware not sent up yet?


What market day? what ware?

Apy with three pidgions in it, 'tis drawn and stays your cutting up.


As you regard my credit.

Art mad?

Yes lecherous goat; Baboon.

Baboon? then toss me in a blancket,

Do I it well?

Rarely.

Belike sir she's not well; best leave her.

No,
I'll stand the storm now how fierce so ere it blow.

Did I for this loose all my friends? refuse
Rich hopes, and golden fortunes, to be made
A stale to a common whore?

This does amaze me.

Oh God, oh God, feed at reversion now?
A Strumpets leaving?

Rosamond,

I sweat, wo'ld I lay in cold harbour.

Thou hast struck ten thousand daggers through my heart.


Not I by heaven sweet wife. (thee

Go devil go; that which thou swear by, damnes

S'heart will you undo me?

Why stay you here? the star, by which you sail, shines yonder above
Chelsy; you loose your shore if this moon light you: seek out your light
whore.


Ha?

Push; your Western png.

Zounds now hell roars.

With whom you tilted in a pair of oars, this very morning.


Oars?

At Brainford sir.

Rack not my patieuce: Master Goshawk, some slave has buzzed this into her,
has he not? I run a tilt in Brainford with a woman? 'tis a lie: What old baud
tells thee this? S'death 'tis a lie.


'Tis one to thy face shall iustify all that I speak.

Vd'soule do but name that rascal.

No sir I will not.

Keep thee there girl: -- then!

Sister know you this varlet?

Yes.

Swear true,
Is there a rogueso low damned? a second Iudas? a common hangman? cutting a
mans throat? does it to his face? bite me behind my back? a cur dog? swear
if you know this hell-hound.


In truth I do,

His name?

Not for the world;
To have you to stab him.

Oh brave girls: worth Gold.

A word honest master Goshawk.

What do you mean sir?

Keep off, and if the devil can give a name to this new fury, holla it
throngh my ear, or wrap it up in some hid character: I'll ride to Oxford, and
watch out mine eyes, but I'leheare the brazen head speak: or else show me but
one hair of his head or beard, that I may sample it; if the siend I mect (in
mine own house) I'll kill him: -- the street.

Or at the Church door: -- there -- (cause he seeks to untie
The knot God fastens) he deserves most to die.

My husband titles him.

Master Goshawk, pray sir
Swear to me, that you know him or know hiw not, (wives,
Who makes me at Brainford to take up a petticoat beside my

By heaven that man I know not.

Come, come, you lie.

Will you not have all out?
By heaven I know no man beneath the moon
Should do you wrong, but if I had his name,
I'd print it in text letters.

Print thine own then,
Did not thou swear to me he kept his whore?

And that in sinful Brainford they would commit
That which our lips did water at sir, -- ha?

Thou spider, that hast woven thy cunning web
In mine own house t'insnare me: hast not thou
Sucked nourishment even underneath this roof,
And turned it all to poison? spittiug it,
On thy friends face (my husband?) he as 'twere sleeping:
Only to leave him ugly to mine eyes,
That they might glance on thee.

Speak, are these lies?

Mine own shame me confounds:

No more, he's stung;
Who'd think that in one body there could dwell
Deformity and beauty, (heaven and hell)
Goodness I see is but outside, we all set,
In rings of Gold, stones that be counterfeit:
I thought you none.

Pardon me.

Truth I do.
This blemish grows in nature not in you,
For mans creation stick even moles in scorn
On fairest cheeks, wife nothing is perfect borne.

I thought you had been borne perfect.

What's this whole world but a gilt rotten pill?
For at the heart lies the old chore still.
I'll tell you Master Goshawk, I in your eye
I have seen wanton fire, and then to try
The soundness of my judgment, I told you
I kept a whore, made you believe 'twas true,
Only to feel how your pulse beat, but find,
The world can hardly yield a perfect friend.
Come, come, a trick of youth, and 'tis forgiven,
This rub put by, our love shall run more even.

You'll deal upon men's wives no more?

No: -- you teach me a trick for that.

Troth do not, they'll o're-reach thee.

Make my house yours sir still.

No.

I say you shall:
Seeing (thus besieged) it holds out, 'twill never fall.

How now?

With me sir?

You sir? I have gon snaffling up and down by your door this hour to watch
for you.


What's the matter husband?

-- I have caught a cold in my head sir, by sitting up late in the rose
tavern, but I hope you understand my speech.


So sir.

I cite you by the name of Hippocrates Gallipot, and you by the name of
Prudence Gallipot, to appear upon Crastino, do you see, Crastino sancti
Dunstani (this Easter Term) in Bow Church.


Where sir? what says he?

Bow: Bow Church, to answer to a libel of pre-contract on the part and behalf
of the said Prudence and another; you're best sir take a copy of the citation,
'tis but tweluepence.


A Citation?

You pocky-nosed rascal, what slave fees you to this?


Slave? I ha nothing to do with you, do you hear sir?

Laxton is't not? -- what fagary is this?

Trust me I thought sir this storm long ago had been full laid, when (if you
be remembered) I paid you the last fifteen pound, besides the thirty you had
first, -- for then you swore.


Tush, tush sir, oaths,
Truth yet I'm loath to vex vou, -- tell you what;
Make up the money I had an hundred pound,
And take your belly full of her.

An hundred pound?

What a 100 pound? he gets none: what a 100 pound?


Sweet Pru be calm, the Gentleman offers thus,
If I will make the monies that are past
A 100 pound, he will discharge all courts,
And give his bond never to vex us more.

A 100 pound? Alas; take sir but threescore,
Do you seek my undoing?

I'll not bate one sixpence, -- I'll mall you pusse for spitting.


Do thy worst,
Will fourscore stop thy mouth?

No.

You're a slave,
Thou Cheat, I'll now tear money from thy throat,
Husband lay hold on yonder tauny-coate.

Nay Gentlemen, seeing your women are so hot, I must loose my hair in their
company I see.


His hair sheds off, and yet he speaks not so much in the nose as he did
before.


He has had the better Surgeon, Master Greenewit, is your wit so raw as to
play no better a part then a Somners?


I pray who plays a knack to know an honest man in this company?


Dear husband, pardon me, I did dissemble,
Told thee I was his precontracted wife,
When letters came from him for thirty pound,
I had no shift but that.

A very clean shift: but able to make me lowsy, On.


Husband, I plucked (when he had tempted me to think well of him) Get feathers
from thy wings, to make him fly more lofty.


A'the top of you wife: on.

He having wasted them, comes now for more,
Using me as a ruffian doth his whore,
Whose sin keeps him in breath: by heaven I vow,
Thy bed he never wronged, more then he does now.

My bed? ha, ha, like enough, a shop-boord will serve to have a cuckolds coat
cut out upon: of that we'll talk hereafter: you're a villain*


Hear me but speak sir, you shall find me none.

Pray sir, be patient and hear him.

I am muzzled for biting sir, use me how you will.

The first howre that your wife was in my eye,
My self with other Gentlemen sitting by,
(In your shop) tasting smoke, and speech beng used,
That men who have fairest wives are most abused,
And hardly escaped the horne, your wife maintained
That only such spots in City dames were stained,
Justly, but by men's slanders: for her own part,
She vowed that you had so much of her heart;
No man by all his wit, by any wile,
Never so fine spun, should your self be guile,
Of what in her was yours.

Yet Pru 'tis well: play out your game at Irish sir: Who wins?


The trial is when she comes to bearing:

I scorned one woman, thus, should brave all men,
And (which more vexed me) a shee-citizen.
Therefore I laid siege to her, out she held,
Gave many a brave repulse, and me compelled
With shame to sound retreat to my hot lust,
Then seeing all base desires raked up in dust,
And that to tempt her modest ears, I swore
Ne'er to prsumne again: she said, her eye
Would ever give me welcome honestly,
And (since I was a Gentleman) if it run low,
She would my state relieve, not to o'rethrow
Your own and hers: did so; then seeing I wrought
Upon her meekness, me she set at nought,
And yet to try if I could turn that tide,
You see what stre^me I strove with, but sir I swear
By heaven, and by those hopes men lay up there,
I neither have, nor had a base intent
To wrong your bed, what's done, is merriment:
Your Gold I pay back with this interest,
When I had most power to do it I wroug'd you least.

If this no gullery be sir,

No, no, on my life,

Then sir I am beholden (not to you wife)
But Master Laxton to your want of doing ill,
Which it seems you have not Gentlemen,
Tarry and dine here all.

Brother, we have a jest,
As good as yours to furnish out a feast.

We'll crown our table with it: wife brag no more,
Of holding out: who most brags is most whore.

But prithee Master Captain Jack be plain and perspicuous with me; was it
your Megge of Westminsters courage, that rescued me from the Poultry puttockes
indeed.


The valour of my wit I ensure you sir fetched you off bravely, when you werre
in the forlorn hope among those desperates, Sir Bewtious Ganymed here, and sir
Thomas Long heard that cuckoo (my man Trapdore) sing the note of your ransom
from captiuty.


Vds so Mol, where's that Trapdore?

Hanged I think by this time, a Justice in this town, (that speaks nothing
but make a Mittimus a way with him to Newgate) used that rogue like a
fire-worke to run upon a line betwixt him and me.


how, how?

Marry to lay trains of villainy to blow up my life; I smelt the powder, spied
what linstocke gave fire to shoot against the poor Captain of the
Gallifoyst, away slid I my man, like a shouell-board shilling, he stroutes up
and down the suburbs I think: and eats up whores: feeds upon a bawds
garbadg.


Sir Jack Dapper.

What sai'st Tom Long?

Thou had a sweet faced boy hail fellow with thee to your little Gull: how
is he spent?


Troth I whistled the poor little buzzard of a my fist, because when he
waited upon me at the ordinaries, the gallants hit me in the teeth still, and
said I looked like a painted Aldermans tomb, and the boy at my elbow like a
deaths head. Sir Jack, Mol.


What says my little Dapper?

Come, come, walk and talk, walk and talk.

Mol and I'll be in the midst.

These Knights shall have squires places belike then: well Dapper what say y
ou?


Sir Captain mad Mary, the gull my own father (Dapper) Sir Dauy) laid these
London boote-halers the catch poles in ambush to set upon me.


Your father? away Jack.

By the tassels of this handkercher 'tis true, and what was his warlike
stratagem think you? he thought because a wicker cage tames a nightingale, a
lowsy prison could make an ass of me.


A nasty plot.

I; as though a Counter, which is a park, in which all the wild beasts of the
City run head by head could tame me.


Yonder comes my Lord Noland.

Save you my Lord.

Well met Gentlemen all, good Sir Bewtious Ganymed, Sir Thomas Long?, and how
does Master Dapper?


Thanks my Lord.

No Tobacco my Lord?

No faith Jack.

My Lord Noland will you go to Pimlico with us? we are making a boon voyage
to that ^appy land of spice-cakes


Here's such a merry ging, I could find in my heart to sail to the worlds end
with such company, come Gentlemen let's on.


Here's most amorous weather my Lord.

Amorous weather.

Is not amorous a good word?

Shall we set upon the infantry, these troops of foot? Zounds yonder comes Mol
my whoorish Master Mistress, wo^ld I had her kidneys between my teeth.


I had rather have a cow heel.

Zounds I am so patched up, she cannot discover me: we'll on.


Alla corago then.

Good your Honours, and Worships, enlarge the ears of commiseration, and let
the sound of a hoarse military organ-pipe, penetrate your pitiful bowels to
extract out of them so many small drops of silver, as may give a hard strawbed
lodging to a couple of maimed soldiers.


Where are you maimed?

In both our nether limbs.

Come, come, Dapper, lets give 'em something, las poor men, what money have
you? by my troth I love a soldier with my soul.


Stay, stay, where have you served?

In any part of the Low countries?

Not in the Low countries, if it please your manhood, but in Hungarie against
the Turk at the siege of Belgrad.


Who served there with you sir?

Many Hungarians, Moldauians, Valachians, and Transiluanians, with some
Sclauonians, and retiring home sir, the Venetian Galleys took us prisoners,
yet freed us, and suffered us to beg up and down the country.


You have ambled all over Italy then.

Oh sir, from Venice to Roma, Uecchio, Bononia, Romania, Bolonia, Modena,
Piacenza, and Tuscana, with all her Cities, as Pistoia, Valteria,
Mountepulchena, Arrezzo, with the Siennois, and diverse others.


Mere rogues, put spurs to 'em once more.

Thou look like a strange creature, a fat butterbox, yet speak English,

What art thou?

Ick mine Here. Ick bin den ruffling Teare-Cat.
Den, brave Soldade, Ick bin doric all Dutchlant.
Gueresen: Der Shellum das mere In Beasa
In woert gaeb.
Ick slaag vin strokes ou tom Cop.
Dastick Den hundred touzun Devil halle,
Frolic miue Here.

Here, here, let's be rid of their iobbering,

Not a cross Sir Bewtiout, you base rogues, I have taken measure of you,
better then a taylor can, and I'll fit you, as you (monster with one eye) have
fitted me,


Your Worship will not abuse a soldier.

Soldier? thou deserve to be hanged up by that tongue which dishonours so
noble a profession, soldier you skeldering varlet? hold, stand, there should
be a trapdore here abouts.


The balls of these glasiers of mine (mine eyes) shall be shot up and down in
any hot piece of service for my invincible Mistress.


I did not think there had been such knavery in black patches as now I see.


Oh sir he hath been brought up in the I'll of dogs, and can both fawn like a
Spaniel, and bite like a Mastiff, as he finds occasion.


What are you sir? a bird of this feather too.

A man beaten from the wars sir.

I think so, for you never stood to fight.

What's thy name fellow soldier?

I am called by those that have seen my valour, Tear-Cat.

Teare-Cat?

A mere whip-Iacke, and that is in the Common-wealth of rogues, a slave, that
can talk of sea-fight, name all your chief Pirats, discover more countries to
you, then either the Dutch, Spanish, French, or English ever found out, yet
indeed all his service is by land, and that is to rob a Fair, or some such
venturous exploit; Teare-Cat, foot sir I have your name now I remember me in
my book of horners, horns for the thumb, you know how.


No indeed Captain Mol (for I know you by sight) I am no such nipping
Christian, but a maunderer upon the pad I confess, and meeting with honest
Trapdore here, whom you had cashierd from bearing arms, out at elbows under
your colours, I instructed him in the rudements of roguery, and by my map made
him sail over any Country you can name, so that now he can maunder better then
my self.


So then Trapdore thou art turned soldier now.

Alas sir, now there's no wars, 'tis the safest course of life I could take.


I hope then you can cant, for by your cudgels, you sir are an upright man.


As any walks the high way I assure you.

And Teare-Cat what are you? a wild rogue, an angler, or a ruffler?


Brother to this upright man, flesh and blood, ruffling Teare-Cat is my name,
and a ruffler is my stile, my title, my profession.


Sir where's your Doxy, halt not with me.

Doxy Mol, what's that?

His wench.

My doxy I have by the Salomon a doxy, that carries a kitchen mort in her slat
at her back, besides my dell and my dainty wild del, with all whom I'll
tumble this next darkmans in the strommel, and drink ben baufe, and eat a fat
gruntling cheat, a cackling cheat, and a quacking cheat.


Here's old cheating.

My doxy stays for me in a bousing ken, brave Captain.


He says his wench stays for him in an alehouse: you are no pure rogues.


Pure rogues? no, we scorn to be pure rogues, but if you come to our lib ken,
or our stalling ken, you shall find neither him nor me, a quire cuffin.


So sir, no churl of you.

No, but a ben cave, a brave cave, a gentry cuffin.

Call you this canting?

Zounds, I'll give a schoolmaster half a crown a week, and teach me this
peddlers French.


Do but strowle sir, half a harvest with us sir, and you shall gabble your
belly-full.


Come you rogue cant with me.

Well said Mol, cant with her sir, and you shall have money, else not a penny.


I'll have a bout if she please.

Come on sir.

Ben mort, shall you and I heave a booth, mill a ken or nip a bung, and then
we'll couch a hogshead under the Ruffemans, and there you shall wap with me,
I'll niggle with you.


Out you damned impudent rascal.

Cut benar whiddes, and hold your fambles and your stamps.


Nay, nay, Mol, why art thou angry? what was his gibberish?


Marry this my Lord says he; Ben mort (good wench) shall you and I heave a
booth, mill a ken, or nip a bung? shall you and I rob a house, or cut a purse?


Very Good. (mans:

And then we'll couch a hogshead under the Ruffe-
And then we'll lie under a hedge.

That was my desire Captain, as 'tis fit a soldier should lie.


And there you shall wap with me, and I'll niggle with you, and that's all.


Nay, nay Mol what's that wap?

Nay teach me what niggling is, I'd fain be niggling.


Wapping and niggling is all one, the rogue my man can tell you.


'Tis fadoodling: if it please you.

This is excellent, one fit more good Moll,

Come you rogue sing with me.
A gage of ben Rom-bouse
In a bousing ken of Rom-vile.

Is Benar then a Caster,
Peck, pennam, lay or popler,
Which we mill in deuse a vile.
Oh I wud lib all the lightmans.
Oh I would lib all the darkemans,
By the sollamon under the Ruffemans.
By the sollamon in the Hartmans.

And scour the Quire cramp ring,
And couch till a pallyard docked my dell,
So my bousy nab might skew rome bouse well
Auast to the pad, let us bing,
Auast to the pad, let us bing.

Fine knaves i'faith.

The grating of ten new cart-wheeles, and the gruntling of five hundred hogs
coming from Rumford market, cannot make a worse noise then this canting
language does in my ears; pray my Lord Noland, let's give these soldiers
their pay.


Agreed, and let them march.

Here Mol.

Now I see that you are stal'd to the rogue, and are not ashamed of your
professions, look you: my Lord Noland here and these Gentlemen, bestows upon
you two, two boards and a half, that's two shillings six pence.


Thanks to your Lordship.

Thanks heroical Captain.

Away.

We shall cut ben whiddes of your Masters and Mistreship, wheresoever we
come.


You'll maintain sir the old Justices plot to his face.

Else trine me on the cheats: hang me.

Be sure you meet me there.

Without any more maundring I'll do it, follow brave Tear-Cat.


I prae, sequor, let us go mouse.

Mol what was in that canting song? (only milk

Troth my Lord, only a praise of good drink, the
Which these wild beasts love to suck, and thus it was:
A rich cup of wine, oh it is juice Divine,
More wholesome for the head,: hen meat, drink, or bread,
To fill my drunken pate, with that, I'd sit up late,
By the heals would I lie, under a lowsy hedge die,
Let a slave have a pull at my whore, so I be full
Of that precious liquor; And a parcel of such stuff my Lord
Not worth the opening.

What gallant comes yonder?

Mass I think I know him, 'tis one of Cumberland.

Shall we venture to shuffle in amongst yon heap of Gallants, and strike?


'Tis a question whether there be any silver shells amongst them, for all their
satin outsides.


Let's try?

Pox on him, a gallant? shadow me, I know him: 'tis one that cumbers the land
indeed; if he swim near to the shore of any of your pockets, look to your
purses.


Is't possible?

This brave fellow is no bettet then a foist.

Foist, what's that?

A diver with two fingers, a picke-pocket; all his train study the figging
law, that's to say; cutting of purses and foysting; one of them is a nip, I
took him once in the twopenny gallery at the Fortune; then there's a cloyer, or
snap, that dogs any new brother in that trade, and snappes will have half in
any booty; He with the wand is both a stale, whose office is, to face a man
in the streets, whilst shells are drawn by an other, and then with his black
conjuring rod in his hand, he by the nimbleness of his eye and juggling stick,
will in cheaping a piece of plate at a goldsmiths stall, make four or five
rings mount from the top of his caduceus, and as if it were at leape-frog,
they skip into his hand presently.


Zounds we are smoked.

Ha?

We are boiled, pox on her; see Moll the roaring drab.


All the diseases of sixteen hospitals boyle her: away.

Bless you sir.

And you good sir.

Dost not ken me man?

No trust me sir.

Heart, there's a Knight to whom I'm bound for many favours, lost his purse at
the last new play in the Swan, seven Angels in it, make it good you're best; do
you see? no more.


A Synagogue shall be called Mistress Mary, disgrace me not; pacus palabros, I
will conjure for you, farewell:


Did not I tell you my Lord?

I wonder how thou came to the knowledge of these nasty villains.


And why do the foul mouths of the world call thee Mol cutpursse? a name, me
thinks, damned and odious.


Dare any step forth to my face and say,
I have taken thee doing so Mol? I must confess,
In younger days, when I was apt to stray,
I have sat amongst such adders; seen their stings,
As any here might, and in full play-houses
Watched their quicke-diuing hands, to bring to shame
Such rogues, and in that stream met an ill name:
When next my Lord you spy any one of those,
So he be in his Art a scholar, question him,
Tempt him with gold to open the large book
Of his close villainies: and you your self shall cant
Better then poor Mol can, and know more laws
Of cheaters, lifters, nips, foists, puggards, curbers,
Withal the devils black guard, then it is fit
Should be discovered to a noble wit.
I know they have their orders, offices,
Circuits and circles, unto which they are bound,
To raise their own damnation in.

How dost thou know it?

As you do, I show it you, they to me show it.
Suppose my Lord you were in Venice.

Well.

If some Italian pander there would tell
All the close tricks of courtesans; would not you
Hearken to such a fellow?

Yes.

And here,
Being come from Uenice, to a friend most dear
That were to travel thither, you would proclaim
Your knowledge in those villainies, to save
Your friend from their quick danger: must you have
A black ill name, because ill things you know,
Good troth my Lord, I am made Mol cut purse so.
How many are whores, in small roughs and still looks?
How many chaste, whose names fill slanders books?
Were all men cuckolds, whom gallants in their scorns
Cal so, we should not walk for goring horns,
Perhaps for my mad going some reprove me,
I please my self, and care not else who loves me.

A brave mind Mol i'faith.

Come my Lord, shal's to the Ordinary?

I, 'tis noone sure. (or to the world:

Good my Lord, let not my name condemn me to you
A fencer I hope may be called a coward, is he so for that?
If all that have ill names in London, were to be whipped, (there
And to pay but twelve pence a piece to the beadle, I would ra-
Have his office, then a Constables.

So would I Captain Moll: 'twere a sweet tickling office i'faith.


My son marry a thief, that impudent girl,
Whom all the world stick their worst eyes upon?

How will your care prevent it?

'Tis impossible.
They marry close, thei'r gone, but none knows whether.

Oh Gentlemen, when ha's a fathers heart-strings
Held out so long from breaking: now what news sir?

They were met vppo'th water an hour since, sir,
Putting in towards the Sluice.

The Sluice? come Gentlemen,
'Tis Lambith works against us.

And that Lambith, joins more mad matches, then your six wet towns, twixt
that and Windsor-bridge, where fares lye soaking.


Delay no time sweet Gentlemen: to Black Friars,
We'll take a pair of Oars and make after 'em.

Your son, and that bold masculine ramp
My mistress, are landed now at Tower.

Hoyda, at Tower?

I heard it now reported.

Which way Gentlemen shall I bestow my care?
I'm drawn in pieces betwixt deceit and shame.

Sir Alexander.
You're well met, and most rightly served,
My daughter was a scorn to you.

Say not so fir.

A very abject, she poor Gentlewoman,
Your house had been dishonoured. Give you joy sir,
Of your sons Gaskoyne-Bride, you'll be a Grandfather shortly
To a fine crew of roaring sons and daughters,
'Twill help to stock the suburbs passing well sir.

O play not with the miseries of my heart,
Wounds should be dressed and healed, not vexed, or left
Wide open, to the anguish of the patient,
And scornful air let in: rather let pity
And advise charitably help to refresh 'em.

Who'd place his charity so unworthily.
Like one that gives alms to a cursing beggar,
Had I but found one spark of goodness in you
Toward my deserving child, which then grew fond
Of your sons virtues, I had cased you now.
But I perceive both fire of youth and goodness,
Are raked up in the ashes of your age,
Else no such shame should have come near your house,
Nor such ignoble sorrow touch your heart,

If not for worth, for pities sake assist me.

You urge a thing past sense, how can he help you?
All his assistance is as frail as ours,
Full as uncertain, where's the place that holds 'em?
One brings us wa^er-newes; then comes an other
With a full charged mouth, like a culuerins voice,
And he reports the Tower; whose sounds are truest?

In vain you flatter him sir Alexander.

I flatter him, Gentlemen you wrong me grossly.

He does it well i'faith.

Both news are false,
Of Tower or water: they took no such way yet. (plundges?

Oh strange: hear you this Gentlemen, yet more

They are nearer then you think for yet more close, then if they were further
off.


How am I lost in these distractions?

For your speeches Gentlemen,
In taxing me for rashness; fore you all,
I will engage my state to half his wealth,
Nay to his sons revenues, which are less,
And yet nothing at all, till they come from him;
That I could (if my will stuck to my power),
Prevent this marriage yet, nay banish her
For ever from his thoughts, much more his arms.

Slack not this goodness, though you heap upon me
Mountains of malice and revenge hereafter:
I'd willingly resign up half my state to him,
So he would marry the meanest drudge I hire.

He talks impossibilites, and you believe 'em.

I talk no more, then I know how to finish,
My fortunes else are his that dares stake with me,
The poor young Gentleman I love and pity:
And to keep shame from him, (because the spring
Of his affection was my daughters first,
Till his frown blasted all,) do but estate him
In those possessions, which your love and care
Once pointed out for him, that he may have room,
To entertain fortunes of noble birth,
Where now his desperate wants casts him upon her:
And if I do not for his own sake chiefly,
Rid him of this disease, that now grows on him,
I'll forfeit my whole state, before these Gentlemen.

Troth but you shall not undertake such matches,
We'll persuade so much with you.

Here's my ring,
He will believe this token: fore these Gentlemen,
I will confirm it fully: all those lands,
My first love lotted him, he shall straight possess
In that refusal.

If I change it not, change me into a beggar.

Are you mad sir?

'Tis done.

Will you undo your self by doing,
And show a prodigal trick in your old days?

'Tis a match Gentlemen.

I, I, sir I.
I akse no favour; trust to you for none,
My hope rests in the goodness of your son.

He holds it up well yet.

Of an old knight i'faith.

Cursed be the time, I laid his first love barren,
Wilfully barren, that before this hour
Had sprung forth friutes, of comfort and of honour;
He loved a virtuous Gentlewoman.

Life, here's Mol.

Jack.

How dost thou Jack?

How dost thou Gallant?

Impudence, where's my son?

Weakensse, go look him.

Is this your wedding gown?

The man talks monthly:
Hot broth and a dark chamber for the knight,
I see he will be stark mad at our next meeting.

Why sir, take comfort now, there's no such matter,
No Priest will marry her, sir, for a woman,
Whiles that shape's on, and it was never known,
Two men were married and conjoined in one:
Your son hath made some shift to love another.

What ere' she be, she has my blessing with her,
May they be rich, and fruitful, and receive
Like comfort to their issue, as I take in them,
Ha's pleased me now, marrying not this,
Through a whole world he could not choose amiss.

Glad you're so penitent, for your former sin sir.

Say he should take a wench with her smocke-dowry,
No portion with her, but her lips and arms?

Why? who thrive better sir? they have most blessing,
Though other have more wealth, and least repent,
Many that want most, know the most content.

Say he should marry a kind youthful sinner.

Age will quench that, any offence but theft and drun-
Nothing but death can wipe away. (kennesse,
There sins are green, even when there heads are gray,
Nay I despair not now, my heart's cheered Gentlemen,
No face can come unfortunately to me,
Now sir, your news?

Your son with his fair Bride is near at hand,

Fair may their fortunes be.

Now you're resolved sir, it was never she,

I find it in the music of my heart,
See where they come.

A proper lusty presence sir.

Now has he pleased me right, I always counseld him
To choose a goodly personable creature,
Just of her pitch was my first wife his mother.

Before I dare discover my offence, I kneel for pardon.

My heart gave it thee, before thy tongue could ask it,
Rise, thou hast raised my joy to greater height.
Then to that seat where grief dejected it,
Both welcome to my love, and care for ever,
Hide not my happiness too long, al's pardoned,
Here are our friends, salute her, Gentlemen.

Heart, who this Mol?

O my reviving shame, is't I must live,
To be struck blind, be it the work of sorrow,
Before age take it in hand.

Darkness and death.
Have you deceau'd me thus? did I engage
My whole estate for this.

You asked no favour,
And you shall find as little, since my comforts,
Play false with me, I'll be as cruel to thee
As grief to fathers hearts.

Why what's the matter with you?
Less too much joy, should make your age forgetful,
Are you too well, too happy?

With a vengeance.

Me thinks you should be proud of such a daughter,
As good a man, as your son.

O monstrous impudence.

You had no note before, an unmarked Kinght,
Now all the town will take regard on you,
And all your enemies fear you for my sake,
You may pass where you list, through crowdes most thick,
And come of bravely with your purse vnpickt,
You do not know the benefits I bring with me,
No cheat dares work upon you, with thumb or knife,
While y'aue a roaring girl to your sons wife.

A devil rampant.

Have you so much charity?
Yet to release me of my last rash bargain,
And I'll give in your pledge.

No sir, I stand to it, I'll work upon advantage,
As all mischiefs do upon me.

Content, bear witness all then
His are the lands, and so contention ends.
Here comes your sons Bride, twixt two noble friends.

Now are you gulled as you would be, thank me for it,
I'd a fore-singer in it.

Forgive me father,
Though there before your eyes my sorrow feigned,
This still was she, for whom true love complained.

Blessings eternal, and the joys of Angels,
Begin your peace here, to be signed in heaven,
How short my sleep of sorrow seems now to me,
To this eternity of boundless comforts,
That finds no want but utterance, and expression.
My Lord your office here appears so honourably:
So full of ancient goodness, grace, and worthiness,
I never took more joy in sight of man,
Then in your comfortable presence now.

Nor I more delight in doing grace to virtue,
Then in this worthy Gentlewoman, your sons Bride,
Noble Fitz-Alards daughter, to whose honour
And modest fame, I am a servant vowed,
So is this Knight.

Your loves make my joys proud,
Bring forth those deeds of land, my care laid ready,
And which, old knight, thy nobleness may challenge,
Joined with thy daughters virtues, whom I prise now,
As dearly as that flesh, I call mine own.
Forgive me worthy Gentlewoman, 'twas my blindness
When I rejected thee, I saw thee not,
Sorrow and wilful rashness grew like films
Over the eyes of judgment, now so clear
I see the brightness of thy worth appear.

Duty and love may I deserve in those,
And all my wishes have a perfect close,

That tongue can never err, the sound's so sweet,
Here honest son, receive into thy hands,
The keys of wealth, possession of those lands,
Which my first care provided, thei'r thine own,
Heaven give thee a blessing with 'em, the best joys,
That can in worldly shapes to man betide,
Are fertile lands, and a fair fruitful Bride,
Of which I hope you're sped.

I hope so too sir.

Father and son, I ha'done you simple service here,

For which thou shalt not part Moll unrequited.

Thou art a mad girl, and yet I cannot now condemn thee.


Condemn me? troth and you should sir,
I'd make you seek out one to hang in my room,
I'd give you the slip at Gallows, and cozen the people.
Heard you this jest my Lord?

What is it Jack?

He was in fear his son would marry me,
But never dreamt that I would ne'er agree.

Why? thou had a suitor once Jack, when wilt marry?

Who I my Lord, I'll tell you when in faith,
When you shall hear,
Gallants void from Sergeants fear,
Honesty and truth vnslandred,
Woman manned, but never pandred,
Cheats booted, but not coached,
Vessels older e're they are broached.
If my mind be then not varied,
Next day following, I'll be married.

This sounds like domes-day,

Then were marriage best,
For if I should repent, I were soon at rest.

In truth tho'art a good wench, I'm sorry now,
The opinion was so hard, I conceived of thee.
Some wrongs I'ue done thee.

Is the wind there now?
'Tis time for me to kneel and confess first,
For fear it come too late, and my brains feel it,
Upon my paws, I ask you pardon mistress.

Pardon? for what sir? what ha's your rogueship done now?


I have been from time to time hired to confound you, by this old Gentleman.


How?

Pray forgive him,
But may I connsell you, you should never do it.
Many a snare to entrapp your Worships life,
Have I laid privily, chains, watches, Jewels,
And when he saw nothing could mount you up,
Four hollow-hearted Angels he then gave you,
By which he meant to trap you, I to save you.

To all which, shame and grief in me cry guilty,
Forgive me now, I cast the worlds eyes from me,
And look upon thee freely with mine own:
I see the most of many wrongs before he,
Cast from the jaws of envy and her people,
And nothing foul but that, I'll never more
Condemn by common voice, for that's the whore,
That deceives mans opinion; mocks his trust,
Cozens his love, and makes his heart unjust.

Here be the Angels Gentlemen, they were given me
As a Musician, I pursue no pity,
Follow the law, and you can cucke me, spare not
Hang up my vyall by me, and I care not.

So far I'm sorry, I'll thrice double 'em
To make thy wrongs amends,
Come worthy friends my honourable Lord,
Sir Bewteons Ganymed, and Noble Fitz-Allard,
And you kind Gentlewoman, whose sparkling presence,
Are glories set in marriage, beams of society,
For all your loves give luster to my joys,
The happiness of this day shall be remembered,
At the return of every smiling spring:
In my time now 'tis borne, and may no sadness
Sit on the brows of men upon that day,
But as I am, so all go pleased away.

A Painter having drawn with curious Art
The picture of a woman (every part,
Limbed to the life) hung out the piece to sell:
People (who passed along) veiwing it well,
Gave several verdicts on it. some dispraised
The hair, some said the brows too high were raised,
Some hit her over the lips, mislik'd their colour,
Some wished her nose were shorter; some, the eyes fuller,
Others said roses on her cheeks should grow,
Swearing they looked too pale, others cried no,
The workman still as fault was found, did mend it,
In hope to please all; (but this work being ended)
And hung open at stall, it was so vile,
So monstrous and so ugly all men did smile
At the poor Painters folly. Such we doubt
Is this our Comedy, Some perhaps do flout
The plot, saying; 'tis too thin, too weak, too mean,
Some for the person will revile the Scoene.
And wonder, that a creature of her being
Should be the subject of a Poet, seeing
In the worlds eye, none weighs so light: others look
For all those base tricks published in a book,
(Foul as his brains they flowed from) of Cut-purse,
Of Nips and Foists, nasty, obscoene discourses,
As full of lies, as empty of worth or wit,
For any honest ear, or eye unfit. And thus,
If we to every brain (that's humerous)
Should fashion Sceanes, we (with the Painter) shall
In striving to please all, please none at all.
Yet for such faults, as either the writers wit,
Or negligence of the Actors do commit,
Both crave your pardons: if what both have done,
Cannot full pay your expectation,
The Roaring Girl her self some few days hence,
Shall on this Stage, give larger recompense. (you,
Which Mirth that you may share in, her self does woe
And craves this sign, your hands to beckon her to you.

