MY Lords,
Know that we far from any natural pride
Or touch of temporal sway, have seen our face
In our grave counsels foreheads: where doth stand
Our truest glass, made by Times wrinkled hand.
We know wee're old, my days proclaim me so:
Fortie-fiue years, I'ue gently ruled this Dukedom,
Pray heaven it be no fault,
For there's as much disease, though not to the eye,
In too much pity, as in Tyranny.

Your grace hath spoke it right.

I know that life
Has not long course in me, twill not be long
Before I show that Kings have mortal bodies
As well as Subjects, therefore to my comfort,
And your successful hopes I have a Son
Whom I dare boast of; --

Whom we all do boast off,
A Prince elder in virtues then in years,

His judgment is a Father to his youth,

I, I, would he were from Court,

Our largest hopes grow in him,

And tis the greatest pity Noble Lord,
He is vntraueld,

Tis indeed my Lord.

Had he but travail to his time and Virtue -- oh he should near return
again.


It shall be so, what is in hope begun,
Experience quickens, travail confirms the man,
Who's else lives doubtful, and his days oft sorry,
"Who's rich in Knowledge, ha's the stock of glory.

Most true my royal Lord.

Some one attend our Son.

See, here he comes my Lord.

Oh you come well.

Tis always my desire my worthy Father.

Your Serious studies, those fruitful hours
That grow up into judgment, well become
Your birth, and all our loves: I weep that you are my son,
But Virtuously I weep, the more my gladness:
We have thought good and meet by the consent
Of these our Nobles, to move you toward Travail,
The better to approve you to your self
And give your apter power, foundation:
To see affections actually praesented,
Ee'n by those men that owe them, yield more profit,
I more content, then singly to read of them,
"Since love or fear, make Writers partial,
The good and free example which you find,
In other Countries, match it with your own,
The ill to shame the ill, which will in time,
Fully instruct you how to set in frame,
A kingdom all in pieces.

Honoured Father,
With care and duty I have listened to you,
What you desire, in me it is obedience,
I do obey in all, knowing for right,
"Experience is a Kingdoms better sight.

Oh tis the very lustre of a Prince,
Travail! tis sweet and generous,

He that knows how to obey, knows how to reign
And that true knowledge have we found in you,
Make choice of your Attendants.

Their soon chose, only this man my Lord, a loving servant of mine.

What none but he?

I do entreat no more,
For that's the benefit a private Gentleman
Enjoys beyond our state, when he notes all,
Himself unnoted,
For should I bear the fashion of a prince,
I should then win more flattery, then profit,
And I should give em time warning then
To hide their Actions from me, if I appear a Sun,
Theile run into the shade with their ill deeds,
And so prevent me.

A little too wise, a little too wise to live long.

You have answered us with wisdom, let it be.
Things private are best known through privacy.

Stay you my elected servant.

My kind Lord.

The Duke my Father has a heavy burden,
Of years upon him.

My Lord it seems so, for they make him stoop.

Without dissemblance he is deep in age,
He bows unto his grave, I wonder much
Which of his wild Nobility it should be
(For none of his sad counsel has a voice in it)
Should so far travail into his consent,
To set me over into other Kingdoms.
Upon the stroke and minute of his death?

My Lord, tis easier to suspect them all,
Then truly to name one.

Since it is thus,
By absence, i'll obey the Duke my father,
And yet not wrong my self.

Therein my Lord,
You might be happy twice.

So it shall be,
I'll stay at home, and travail;

Would your Grace
Could make that good.

I can, indeed a Prince need no travail farther then his own Kingdom, if he
apply himself faithfully, worthy the glory of himself and expectation of
others: and it would appear far nobler industry in him, to reform those
fashions that are already in his Country, then to bring new ones in, which
have neither true form nor fashion; to make his Court an Owl, City an Ape,
and the Country a Wolf, preying upon the ridiculous pride of either, and
therefore I hold it a safer sterne upon this lucky advantage, since my father
is ne'er his setting, and I upon the Eastern hill to take my rise, to look into
the heart bowels of this Dukedom, and in disguise, mark all abuses ready for
Reformation or Punishment.


Give me but leave unfeignedly to admire you,
Your wisdom is so spacious and so honest,

So much have the complaints and suits of men, seven, nay seauenteene years
neglected, still interposd by coin and great enemies, prevailed with my pity,
that I cannot otherwise think but there are infectious dealings in most
offices, and foul mysteries throughout al Professions: and therefore I nothing
doubt but to find travail enough within my self, and Experience I fear too
much: nor will I be curious to fit my body to the humblest form and bearing,
so the labour may be fruitful: for how can abuses that keep lowe, come to the
right view of a Prince, unless his looks lie level with them, which else
will be longest hid from him, he shall be the last man sees 'em.

For oft between Kings Eyes, and subjects Crimes
Stands there a bar of bribes, the under office
Flatters him next above it: he the next,
And so of most, or many, Every Abuse will choose a brother,
Tis through the world, this Hand will rub the other.

You have set down the world briefly my Lord.

But how am I assured of faith in thee?
Yet I durst trust thee.

Let my soul be lost,
When it shall loose your secrets: nor will I only be a preserver of them,
but if you so please an assister.


It suffices:
That King stands sur'st who by his virtue rises
More then by birth or blood, that Prince is rare,
Who strives in youth to save his age from care,
Let's be prepared away.

I'll follow your Grace,
Thou wonder of all Princes, President, and Glory,
True Phoenix, made of an unusual strain,
"Who labours to reform is fit to reign.
How can that King be safe that studies not
The profit of his people? See where comes
The best part of my heart, my love.

Sir, I am bound to find you, I heard newly
Of sudden Travail which his grace intends
And only but your self to accompany him.

You heard in that, little beside the truth,
Yet not so sudden as to want those manners,
To leave you unregarded.

I did not think, so unfashionably of you:
How long is your return?

Tis not yet come to me, scarce to my Lord,
Unless the Duke refer it to his pleasure,
But long I think it is not, the Dukes age,
(If not his apt experience) will forbid it.

His grace commands, I must not think amiss, farewell

Nay stay, and take this comfort,
You shall hear often from us, i'll direct
Where you shall surely know, and I desire you
Write me the Truth, how my new father in law, the
Captain bears himself toward my Mother,
For that marriage, knew nothing of my mind,
It never flourished in any part of my affection.

Me thinks sha's much disgraced herself.

Nothing so: if he be good will abide the touch, a Captain may marry a Lady,
if he can sail into her good will.


Indeed that's all,

Tis al in al, commend me to thy breast, farewell.
So by my Lords firm policy we may see,
To present view, what absent forms would be.

There's Noble purchase Captain.

Nay admirable purchase.

Enough to make us proud for ever.

Hah?

Never was opportunity so Gallant.

Why you make me mad.

Three Ships not a poop less.

And euerieone so wealthily burdened upon my manhood.


Pox on it, and now am I tied ee'n as the Devil would have it.


Captain, of all men living I wold have sworn thou would ne'er have married.


S'foot, so would I my self man, give me my Due, you know I ha sworn all
heaven over and over:


That you have y faith.

Why go too then.

Of a man that has tasted salt water to commit such a fresh Trick.


Why tis abominable I grant you now I see it:

Had there been fewer Women --

And among those Women fewer Drabs --

And among those Drabs fewer pleasing --

Then t'ad been something:

But when there are more women, more common pretty sweet hearts, then ever any
age could boast off.


And I to play the Artificer and marry: to have my wife dance at home, and my
Ship at Sea, and both take in salt water together: oh Leiftenant you're
happy, thou keepst a Wench.


I hope I am happier then so Captain, for a my Troth she keeps me.


How? is there any such fortunate man breathing? and I so miserable to live
honest? I envy thee Lieutenant, I envy thee, that thou art such a happy
Knave, here's my hand among you, share it equally, I'll to sea with you.


There spoke a Noble Captain.

Lets hear from you, there will be news shortly.

Doubt it not Captain.

What lustful passion came aboard of me, that I should marry, was I drunk?
yet that cannot altogether hold, for it was four a clock 'ith morning, had
it been five, I would ha sworn it: that a man is in danger every minute to
be cast away, without he have an extraordinary Pilot that can perform more
then a man can do: and to say truth too, when 'ime abroad what can I do at
home? no man living can reach so far: what a horrible thing 'twould be to
have horns brought me at Sea, to look as if the Devil were 'ith ship: and
all the great Tempests would be thought of my Raising, to be the general
curse of all Merchants: and yet they likely are as deep in as my self, and
that's a comfort: O that a Captain should live to be married! nay, I that have
been such a Gallant salt-theefe, should yet live to be married: What a
fortunate Elder Brother is he, whose father being a Ramish Plough-man, himself
a perfumde Gentleman, spending the labouring reeke from his Fathers: Nostrils
in Tobacco: the sweat of his Fathers body in monthlye Phisickc for his pretty
quesie Harlot: he sows a pace 'ith Country: the Taylor oretakes him in the
City, so that often times before the Corn comes to Earning, tis up to the
ears in high Collars, and so at every harvest the Reapers take pains for the
Mercers, ha! why this is stirring happiness indeed, would my father had held
a plow so, and fed upon squeaz'd Curds and Onions, that I might have bathed
insensualitie: but he was too ruttish himself to let me thrive under him,
cansumde me before he got me, that makes me so wretched, now to be shackled
with a wife, not greatly rich neither.


Captain, my Husband.

S'life call me husband again, i'll play the Captain and beat you.

What ha's disturbed you sir, that you now look so like an Enemy upon me?


Go make a Widower, hang thy self,
How comes it that you are so opposite
To love and kindness? I deserve more Respect,
But that you please to be forgetful of it.

For love to you, did I neglect my state,
Chide better fortunes from me,
Gave the world talk, laid all my friends at waste.

The more fool you, could you like none but me?
Could none but I supply you?
I am sure you were sued to* by far worthier men,
Deeper in wealth and Gentry.
What could thou see in me, to make thee dote so on me,
If I know, I am a Villain: what a torments this? why did thou marry me?
you think as most of your insatiate Widows, that Captains can do wonders,
when 'lasse the name does often prove the better man.


That which you urge, should rather give me cause to repent then your self.


Then to that end I do it.

What a miserable state am I led into?

How now sir?

Count Proditer is now alighted.

What, my Lord: I must make much of him, heel one day write me Cuckold: tis
good to make much of such a man, ee'n to my face, he plies it hard I thank
him: --

what, my worthy Lord!


I'll come to you in order Captain.

Oh that's in order: a kiss is the Gammoth to pricksong.

Let me salute you Captain.

My dear esteemed Count, I have a life for you:

Hear you the news?

What may it be my Lord?

My Lord, the Dukes Son is upon his travail to several Kingdoms.


May it be possible my Lord, and yet so little rumord?


Tak't of my Truth, nay, twa's well managed, things are as they are handled:
but all my care is still, pray heaven he return safe, without danger
Captain.


Why, is there any doubt to be had of that my Lord?

I by my faith Captain.
Princes have private enemies, and great:
Put case a man should grudge him, for his Virtues:
Or envy him, for his wisdom: why you know
This makes him lye bare breasted to his foe.

That's full of certainty my Lord, but who be his Attendants?

Thence Captain comes the fear, but singlie attended neither (my best
gladness) only by your Son in Law Fidelio.


Is it to be believed? I promise you my Lord then I begin to fear him my
self, that fellow will undo him: I durst undertake to corrupt him with twelve
pence over and above, and that's a small matter: ha's a whorish Conscience,
he's an inseparable Knave, and I could near speak well of that fellow.


All we of the younger house, I can tell you do doubt him much, -- the Ladies
remoou'd, shall we have your sweet soscietie Captain?


Though it be in mine own house, I desire I may follow your Lordship.


I love to avoid strife,
Not many months Phoenix shall keep his life.

So, his way is in, he knows it,
We must not be discourteous to a Lord,
Warn him our house 'twere wild: his presence is an honour, if he lie with
our wives, tis for our credit, we shall be the better trusted, tis a sign
we shall live ith world: O Tempests and Whirlewinds (who but that man whom the
forefinger cannot daunt, that makes his shame his living:) Who but that man I
say, could endure to be thoroughly married? Nothing but a divorce can relieve
me: any way to be rid of her would rid my torment: if all means fail I'll kill,
or poison her, and purge my fault at sea: but first I'll make gentle Try of a
Divorce: But how shall I accuse her subtle honesty? I'll attach this Lords
coming to her, take hold of that: ask counsel: and now I remember, I have
acquaintance with an old crafty Client, who by the puzzle of suites shifting
of Courts, has more tricks starting holes, then the dizzy pates of fifteen
Atturneys: one that has been muzled in Law like a Bear, and lead by the Ring
of his spectacles from office to office: him I'll seek out with haste, all
paths I'll tread,

All deaths I'll die ere I die married.

Puh, you do resist me hardly.

I beseech your Lordship cease in this,
Tis never to be grated: if you come as a friend unto my honour and my husband,
you shall be ever welcome, if not, I must entreat it --


Why assure your self, Madame, tis not the fashion.

Tis more my grief my Lord, such as my self are judged the worse for such.


Faith y' are too nice, you'll see me kindly forth:

And honourably welcome.

Gentlemen, y' are most neatly welcome.

Y' are very cleanelye Sir, prithee have a care to our Geldings.

Your Geldings shall be well considered.

Considered?

Sirha, what Guess does this Inn hold now?

Some five and twenty Gentlemen besides their beasts.

Their Beasts?

Their wenches I mean sir, for your worship I nowes those that are vdder men
are beasts.


How does your Mother sit?

Very well in health I thank you heartily sir.

And so is my Mare y faith.

I'll do her commendations indeed sir.

Well kept up Shuttle-cocke:

But what old fellow was he that newly alighted before us?

Who he? as arrant a crafty fellow as ere made water on horseback: some say
he's as good as a Lawyer, (marry 'ime sure he's as bad as a Knave) if you
have any suites in law, he's the fittest man for your company: ha's been
so* toward and lugged himself* that he is able to affoo^d you more knavish
counsel for ten groats, then another for ten shillings.


A fine fellow: but do you know him to be a Knave, and will lodge him.


Your worship begins to talk idly, your bed shall be made presently; if we
should not lodge knaves, I wonder how we should be able to live honestly, are
there honest men enough think you in a Term time to fill all the Innes in the
town, and as far as I can see* a knaves Gelding eats no more hay then an
honest mans: nay thieves Gelding eats less, i'll stad too't, his Master
allows him a better Ordnarie: yet I have my eightpe^ce day night, twere more
for our profit I wus, you were all thieves, if you were so contented: I shall
be called for: give your worships good morrow.


A royal knave y faith: we have happened into a Godly Inn.

Assure you my L. they belong al to one church.

This should be some old busy turbulent fellow: villainous Law-worme, that
eats holes into poor mes causes.


May it please your worship to give me leave?

I give you leave sir, you have your Veniam, now fill me a browne Toste sirha.


Will you have no drink too't sir?

Is that a question in law?

Yes, in the lowest Court: 'ith Sellor sir.

Let me haa't removed presently sir.

It shall be done sir.

Now as you were saying Sir, i'll come to you immediately too.


Oh very well sir:

I'm a little busy sir,

But as how sir?

I pray sir?

Ha's brought me into the Court, marry my adversary ha's not declared yet.

Non declarauit Aduersarius say thou: what a Villain's that, I have a trick
to do thee good: I will get thee out a Proxe, make him declare with a Pox to
him.


That will make him declare to his fore grief, I thank your good worship: but
put case he do declare?

Si declarasset, If he should declare there,

I would be loath to stad out to the judgment of that Court

Non ad iudicium, do you fear corruption? then i'll relieve you agaen: you
shall get a Supers^diae, Non molest andam; and (...) it big her.


Very good.

Now if it should ever come to a Testificandum, what be his witnesses?


I little fear his witnesses.

Non metuis testes? more valiant man then Orestes

Please you sir to dissolve this into Wine, Ale, or Beer, I come a hundred
mile to you I protest, and leave all other counsel behind me.


Nay you shall always find me a sound Card, I stood not ath Pillory for
nothing in eighty eight, all the world knows that: now let me dispatch you
sir; I come to you Presenter.


Faith the party hath removed both body and cause with a habeas corpus.

Has he that knavery? But has he put in bail above can tell?


That I can assure your worship, he has not.

Why then thy best course shall be, to lay out more money, take out a
Procedendo, and bring down the cause and him with a Vengeance.


Then he will come indeed

As for the other party, let the Audita querela alone, take me out a special
Supplicauit, which will cost you enough, and then you pepper him. For the first
party after the Procedendo you'll get costs, the cause being sound, you'll have
a Judgment, Nunc pro Tunc, you'll get a Venire facies to warn your Jury, a
December tales to fill up the number, and a Capias vt Legatum for your execution.


I thank you my learned counsel.

What a busy Caterpiller's this? let's accost him in that manner.


Content my Lord.

O my old admirable fellow, how have I all this while thirsted to salute thee?
I knew thee in Octauo of the Duke. --


In Octauo of the Duke: I remember the year well.

Bi^h mass a lusty proper man.

Oh was I?

But still in law*

Still in Law. I had not breathed else now, tis very marrow, very manna to me
to be in law: i'd been dead ere this else: I have found such sweet pleasure in
the vexation of others, that I could wish my years over and over again, to see
that fellow a Beggar, that bawling Knave a Gentleman: a matter brough^ 'een to
a judgment to day, as far as ere t'was to begin again to morrow: O Raptures I
here a writ of Demur, there a Procedendo, here a Sui surrara, there a
Capiendo, Tricks, Delays* Money-lawes:


Is it possible old Lad?

I have been a Tearme-trotter my self any time this five and forty years,
a goodly time a gracious: in which space I ha been at least sixteen times
beggard, and got up again: and in the mire again, that I have stunk again, and
yet got up again.


And so clean and handsome how?

You see it apparently* I cannot hide it fro you: nay more, in foelice hora be
it spoken, you see i'm old, yet have I at this present, nine and twenty
suits in Law.


Deliver us man!

And all not worth forthy shillings.

May it ^ cu'd?

The pleasure of a man is all.

An old fellow and such a stinger.

A stake pulled out of my hedge, there's one: I was well beaten I remember, that's
two: I took one a bed with my wife again her will, that's three: I was called
cuckold for my labour* that's four: I took another a bed again, that's five
the one called me wittal that's six: he killed my Dog for Barking, sea^en: my
Maid Servant was knocked at that time, eight: my wife miscarried with a push,
Nine, sic de coeteris, I have so vexed and beggerd the whole parish, with
process, Suppoeneas, and such like molestations, they are not able to spare so
much ready money from a Term, as would set up a new Weather-cocke: the
Church-wardens are fain to go to law with the Poores money.


Fie, fie.

And I so fetch up al the men every Term time that tis impossible to be at
civil cuckoldry, within our selves, unless the whole country rise upon our
wives.


A my faith a pretty policy.

Nay an excellent stratagem: but of all I most wonder at the continual
substance of thy wit, that having had so many suits in law from time to time,
thou hast still money to relieve 'em.


Ha's the best fortune for that, I never knew him without.

Why do you so much wonder at that? why this is my course: my Mare and I come
up some five days before a Term.


A good Decorum.

Here I Lodge as you see amongst Innes, and places of most receipt --


Very wittily.

By which advantage I dive into Country men's causes, furnish 'em with knavish
counsel, little to their profit, buzzing into their Ears, this course, that
writ, this office, that Vltimum refugium, as you know I have words enough for the
purpose.


Enough a conscience y faith.

Enough a law, no matter for conscience. For which busy and laborious sweating
courtesy, they cannot choose but feed me with money, by which I maintain mine
own suits: ho, ho, ho.


Why let me hug thee, Caper in mine arms.

Another special trick I have, no body must know it, which is, to prefer most
of those men to one Attorney whom I affect best, to answer which kindness of
mine, he will sweat the better in my cause, and do them the less good, tak't
of my word, I helped my Attorney to more Clients the last Term then he will
dispatch all his life time: I did it.


What a noble memorable deed was there?

Sir.

Now sir.

There's a kind of captain, very robustiously enquires for you.


For me? a man of war: a man of law is fit for a man of war: we have no
leisure to say prayers: we both kill a Sunday mornings: I'll not be long from
your sweet company.


O no I beseech you.

What captain might this be?

Thou Angel sent amongst us, sober Law.
Made with meek Eyes, persuading Action,
No loud immodest Tongue, voiced like a virgin,
And as chaste from sale,
Save only to be heard, but not to rail.
How has abuse deformed thee to all Eyes?
That where thy virtues sat, thy vices rise,
Yet why so rashly for one villains fault*
Do I arraign whole man? Admired Law,
Thy upper parts must needs be sacred, pure,
And incorruptible, they are grave and wise,
It is but the dross beneath 'em, and the clouds
That get between thy glory and their praise,
That make the visible and foul Eclipse,
For those that are near to thee, are upright,
As noble in their conscience, as their birth,
Know that damnation is in every bribe,
And rarely put it from 'em: rate the Presenters,
And scourge 'em with five years imprisonment,
For off ring but to tempt 'em.
Thus is true justice exercised and used,
"Woe to the giver when the Bribe's refused.
Tis not their will, to have law worse then war,
Where still the poor'st die first,
To send a man without a sheet to his grave,
Or bury him in his Papers.
Tis not their mind it should be, nor to have
A suit hang longer then a man in chains
Let him be ne'er so fastened, they least know
That are above, the tedious steps below.
I thank my time, I do.

I long to know what captain this should be:

See where the Bane or every cause Returns.

S'foote tis the captain my father in law, my L.

Take heed.

The Diuorse shall rest then, and the five hundred crowns shall stand in full
force and virtue.


Then do you wisely Captain.

A way sail I, fare thee well.

A lusty crack or wind go with thee.

But ah!

Hah:

Remember a Scrivener

I'll have him for thee. Why thus am I sought after by all professions; here's a
weather beaten Captain, who not long since new married to a Lady widow,
would now fain have sued a Divorce between her and him, but that her honesty
is his only hinderance: to be rid of which, he does determine to turn her
into white money, and there's a Lord his Chapman has bid five hundred Crowns
for her already.


How?

Or for his part, or whole in her.

Why, do she ^eaue to sell his wife?

His wife? I bith mass, he would sell his soul if he knew what Merchant would
lay out money vppon't, and some of 'em have need of one they swear so fast.


Why, I never heard of the like.

Non audiuisti, didstnere here of that trick? why Pistor a Baker sold his
wife the other day to a cheesemonger, that made Cake and Cheese: another to a
Coferer: a third to a common player: why you see tis common: ne'er fear the
Captain, be ha's not so much wit to be a praesident himself: I promised to
furnish him with an odd Scrivener of mine own* to draw the bargain, and sale
of his Lady, your horses stand here Gentleman.


I, I, I.

I shall be busilye plunged till towards bed time, above the chin in
profundis.


What monstrous days are these?
Not only to be vicious, most men study,
But in it to be ugly, strive to exceed,
Each other in the most deformed deed.

Was this her private choice? did she neglect
The presence and opinion of her friends, for this?

I wonder who that one should be,
Should so disgrace that Reverend Name of Lord,
So loathsomly to buy Adultery?

We may make means to know.

Take courage man, we'll beget some defence.

I am bound by nature.

I by Conscience -- To sell his Lady: indeed she was a Beast to marry him, and
so he makes of her, come, i'll thorough now 'ime entered.


Is my sweet Knight coming, are you certain he's coming?


Certain for sooth, I am sure I saw him out of the Barbers shop, ere I would
come away.


A Barbers shop, O he's a trim Knight, would he venture his body into a
Barbers shop, when he knows tis as dangerous as a piece of Ireland: O yonder,
yonder, he comes, get you back again, and look you say as I aduiz'de you.


You know me mistress?

My mask, my mask.

My sweet Revenue!

My pleasure welcome: I have got single, none but you shall accompany me to
the Justice of peace my Fathers.


Why, is thy Father Justice of Peace, and I not know it?


My father! in faith sir I, simply tho I stand here a Citizens wife: I am a
Justice of Peaces Daughter.


I love thee the better for thy birth.

He's at thy service my sweet Revenue, for thy money paid for em.


Why then let him run a little before I beseech thee, for a my troth he will
discover us else.


He shall obey thee, before sirrha* trudge: but do you mean to lye at your
Fathers all night?


Why should I desire your company else?


S'foot where shall I lye then.


What an idle question's that? why do you hinke I cannot make room for you in
my Fathers house, as well as in my husbands, they are both good for nothing else?


A man so resolute in valour as a Woman in desire, were an absolute Leader.


May it please your good worship master Justice.


Please me and please are your self,
That's my word.

The party your worship sent for, will by no means be brought to appear.


He will not, then what would you aduize me to do therein?


Only to grant your worships warrant, which is of sufficient force to compel
him.


No by my faith: you shall not have me in that Trap: am I sworn Justice of
Peace, and shall I give my warrant to fetch a man against his will? why there
the peace is Broken, we must do all quietly, if he come he's welcome, and
as far as I can seeyet, hes a fool to be absent, I by this gold is he
(which he gave me this morning)


Why, but may it please your good worship. --


I say again please me and please your self, that's my word still.


Sir, the world esteems it a Common favour, upon the Contempt of the party,
the justice to grant his warrant.


I, tis so common, tis the worse again, twere the better for me twere otherwise.


I protest sir, and this Gentleman can say as much, it lies upon my half
undoing.


I cannot see yet, that it should be so -- I see not a cross yet.


I beseech your worship show me your immediate favour, and accept this small
trifle but as a remembrance to my succeeding Thankfulness.


Angels? i'll not meddle with them, you give em to my wife not to me.


I, I sir.


But I pray tell me now, did the party Vina Voce, with his own mouth
deliver that contempt, that that he would not appear, or did you but iestint?


Iest^ no a my troth sir, such was his insolent answer

And do you think it stood with my credit to put up such an abuse? will he
not appear says he? I'll make him appear with a Vengeance Latronello.


Does your worship call?


Draw me a strong limbed warrant for the Gentleman speedily, he will be
bountiful to thee: go and thank him within.


I shall know your worship hereafter.


I, I prithee do. Two Angels one party, four another: and I think it a
great spark of wisdom and policy (if a man come to me for Justice) first to
know his griefs by his fees, which be light and which be he ^ie: he may
couterfet else, make me do Justice for nothing: I like not that* for when I
mean to be just, let me be paid well for it: the deed so rare, purges the
bribe: how now, what's the news thou art come so hastily? how fares my
Knightly Brother?


Troth he ne'er fared worse in his life sir: he ne'er had less stomach to his
meat since I knew him.


Why sir?


Indeed he's dead sir.


How sir?


Newly deceasd I can assure your Worship: the Tabacco-pipe new dropped out of his
mouth before I took horse, a shrewd sign: I knew then there was no way but
one with him, the poor pipe was the last man he took leave off in this world,
who sell in three pieces before him, seemed to morn inwardly, for it looked as
blacke'th mouth as my master.


Would he die so like a Politician, not once write his mind to me?


No I'll say that for him sir: he dyed in the perfect state of memory, made
your worship his full and whole executor: bequeathing his Daughter, and with her
all his wealth, only to your disposition.


Did he make such a godly end say thou? did he die so comfortably, and
bequeath all to me?


Your niece is at hand sir, the will, the witnesses.

What a precious joy and comfort's this, that a Justices brother can die so
well, nay in such a good and happy memory, to make me full executor. Well he
was too honest to live, and that made him die so soon: now I beshrew my heart,
I am glad he's in heaven, has left all his cares and troubles with me, and
that great vexation of telling of Money, yet I hope he had so much grace
before he died to turn his white money into gold, a great ease to his Executor.


See here comes your Niece my young mistress sir,

Ah my sweet Niece, let me kiss thee, drop a tear between thy lips: one
tear from an old man is a great matter, the cocks of age are dry, thou hast
lost a virtuous father, to gain a notable uncle.


My hopes now rest in you next under heave

Let 'em rest, let 'em rest.

Sir?

You're most welcome ere ye begin sir.

We are both led by oath and dreadful promise,
Made to the dying man at his last sense,
First to deliver these into your hands,
The suerties and reuealers of his state.

Good.

With this his only daughter and your Niece,
Whose fortunes are at your disposing set,
Uncle and father are in you both met.

Good in faith, a well spoken Gentleman, you're not an Esquire sir?


Not sir.

Not sir? more's the pity: by my faith better men then you are, but a great
many worse: you see I have been a Scholar in my time, tho I'm a Justice
now: Niece you're most happily welcome, the charge of you is wholly and soly mine
own: and since you are so fortunately come Niece, I'll rest a perpetual
widower.


I take the meaning chaster then the words:
Yet I hope well of both, since it is thus,
His phrase off ends least that's known humourous.

I make my brother (says he) full and whole Executor, honestly done of him
in faith, seldom can a man get such a brother: and here again says he, very
virtuously, I bequeath all to him and his disposing: an excellent fellow a my
troth, would you might all die no worse, Gentlemen.


But as much better as might be.

Bless your uprightness master Justice,

You're most soberly welcome sir: daughter y'aue that ye kneel for, rise,
salute your weeping coozen.


Weeping coozen?

I coozen.

Eye to weeping is very proper, and so is the party that spake it believe me,
a pretty, fine, slender, straight, delicate knit body.

Oh how it moves a pleasure through our senses!
How small are women's wastes to their expenses?
I cannot see her face, that's under water yet.

News as cold to the heart as an old mans kindness: my uncle dead?


I have lost the dearest Father.

If she marry by your consent, choice and liking make her dowry five thousand
crowns: hum, five thousand crowns? therefore by my consent she shall ne'er
marry, I will neither choose for her, like of it, nor consent too't.


Now by the pleasure of my blood a pretty coozen: I would not care, if I were
as ne'er kin to her, as I have been to her kinswoman.


Daughter, what Gentleman might this be?

No Gentleman sir, he's a Knight.

Is he but a knight? troth, I would a sworn had been a Gentleman, to see, to
see, to see.


He's my husbands own brother, I can tel you (sir:

Thy husbands brother: speak certainly prithee.

I can assure you father, my husband and he has lain both in one belly.


I'll swear then he is his brother indeed, by the surer side: I crave hearty
pardon sweet kinsman that thou hast stood so long unsaluted in the way of
kindred.

Welcome to my board: I have a bed for thee,
My daughters husbands brother shall command,
Keys of my Chests and Chambers. -- I have stable for thy horse, chamber for
thy self, and a loft abou for thy lowzie lackey, all fit, away with
handkirchers, dry up eyes, at funeral we must cry: now let's be wise.


I told you his affection.

It falls sweetly.

But here I bar you from all plots to night,
The time is yet too heavy to be light.

Why, I'm content, i'll sleep as chaste as you,
And wager night by night who keeps most true.

Well we shall see your temper.

Fear not me Fidelio: become you that invisible Rope-maker the Scrivener, that
binds a ma as he walks yet all his joints at liberty, as well as i'll fit that
common folly of Gentry, the easie-affecting venturer, and no doubt our purpose
will arrive most happily.


Chaste duty my Lord works powerfully in me, and rather then the poor Lady
my mother should fall upon the common side of rumour to beggar her name, I
would not only undergo all habits, offices, disguiz'd professions, tho ee'n
opposite to the temper my blood holds: but in the stainlesse quarrel of her
reputation, alter my shape for ever.


I love thee wealthier, thou hast a noble touch, by this means which is the
only safe means to preserve thy mother from such an ugly land and sea monster
as a counterfeit Captain is, he resigning and basely selling all his estate,
title, right, and interest in his Lady, as the form of the writing shall
testify.

What otherwise can follow but to have,
A Lady safe delivered of a knave?

I am in debt my life, to the free goodness of your inventions.


Oh they must ever strive to be so good,
"Who sells his vow is stamped the slave of blood.

Away.

Captain, my husband.

Hence, we're at a price for thee, at a price, wants but the telling, and the
sealing, then --


Have you no sense, neither of my good name or your own credit?


Credit? pox of credit, that makes me owe so much: it had bine better for me by
a thousand Royals I had lost my credit, seven year ago, t'as undone me,
that's it that makes me fly: what need I to sea else, in the Spring time,
when Woods have leaves, to look upon bald Oak.

Happier that man say I, whom no man trusts,
It makes him valiant, dares outface the prisons,
Upon whose carcass no Gownde Raven jets,
Oh he that has no credit owes no debts.
Tis time I were rid on it.

Oh why do you so wilfully cherish your own poison? and breath against the
best of life, chaste credit.

Well may I call it chaste, for like a Maid
Once falsely broke it ever lives decaide.
O Captain, husband, you name that Dishonest,
By whose good power all that are honest live,
What madness is it to speak ill of that,
Which makes all men speak well, take away credit
By which men amongst men, are well reputed,
That man may live, but still lives executed.
Oh then show pity to that noble Title
Which else you do Usurp: you're no true Captain,
To let your enemies lead you, foul disdain,
And everlasting Scandal, Oh believe it!
The money you receive for my good name
Will not be half enough to pay your shame.

No, i'll sell thee then to the Smock: see here comes my honourable Chapman.


Oh my poison!
Him, whom mine honour and mine eye abhors.

Lady, what so vniouially departed?

Fine she policy? she makes my back her Bolster, but before my face, she
not endures him, Tricks.


Captain, how haps it she removed so strangely?


Oh for Modesties cause awhile my Lord: she must restrain her self, she's
not yours yet:

Beside, it wear not wisdom to appear,
Easy before my sight, fah, wherefore serves modesty but to pleasure a Lady
now and then, and help her from susspect, that's the best use tis put too.


Well observed of a Captain.

No doubt you'll be soon friends my Lord.

I think no less.

And make what hast I can to my ship, I durst wager you'll be under sail before
me.


A pleasant voyage Captain.

I, a very pleasant voyage as can be: I see the hour is Ripe, here comes the
Prisons Bawd the bond-maker, one that binds heirs before they are begot.


And here are the Crowns Captain, go? attend,
Let our bay Courser wait.

It shall be obeyed.

A Farmers son, is't true?

Has crowns to scatter?

I give you your salute sir.

I take it not unthankfully sir.

I hear a good report of you sir -- y'aue money.

I have so, true.

An excellent virtue.

I, to keeep from you -- hear you me Captain?
I have a certain generous itch sir, to loose a few Angels in the way of
profit: tis but a game at Tennis,

Where if the ship keep above line, tis three to one:
If not, there's but three hundred Angels gone.

Is your venture three hundred? you're very pretiously welcome: here's a
voyage toward will make us all. --


Beggarly fools, and swarming knaves.


Captain, whats he?

Fear him not my Lord, he's a Gull', he ventures with me, some filthy
Farmers son, the father's a Jew, and the son a Gentleman:pha. --


Yet he should be a Jew too, for he is new come from giving over swine.


Why, that in our Country makes him a Gentleman.

Go to, tell your money Captain.

Read aloft Scrivener. 1.2. --

To all good and honest Christian people, to who this present writing shall
come: know you for a certain, that I Captain, for and in the consideration of
the sum of five hundred crowns, have clearly bargained, sold, given,
granted, assigned and set over, and by these presents do clearly bargain,
sell, give, grant, assign and set over, al the right, estate, title,
interest, demand, possession, and term of years to come, which I the said
Captain have, or ought to have. --


If I were as good as I should be, --

In and to Madonna Castiza, my most virtuous, modest, loving, and obedient wife.
--


By my troth my Lord and so she is. -- 3.4.5.6.7.

The more Slave he that says it, and not sees it.

Together, with all and singular those admirable qualities with which her noble
breast is furnished.


Well said Scrivener, hast put'em all in: you shall hear now my L.


In primis, the beauties of her mind, chastity, temperance, and above all,
patience:

You have bought a Jewel in faith, my L, nine and thirty, forty.

Excellent in the best of Music, in voice delicious: in conference wise and
pleasing: of age contentful: neither too young to be a pish, nor too old to be
sottish


You have bought as lovely a penny-woorth my Lord, as ere you bought in your
life.


Why should I buy her else Captain?

And which is the best, of a wife a most comfortable sweet companion.


I could not affoord her so y faith, but that I am-going to sea and have need
of money.


A most comfortable sweet companion.

What again? the Scrivener reads in passion.

I read as the words move me: yet if that be a foul it shall be seen no more,
-- which said Madonna Casti^a lying, yet being in the occupatio of the said
captain


Ninteene -- occupation? Pox out, out with occupation, a Captain is of no
occupation, man.


Nor thou of no religion.

Now I come to the Habendum, to have and to hold, use and --


Use? put out use too for shame.
Till we are all gone, I prithee.

And to be acquitted of and from all former bargains, former sales:


Former sails, nine twenty thirty, by my troth my Lord, this is the first time
that ever I sold her.


Yet the writing must run so Captain.

Let it run on then, nine and forty, fifty, --

Former sales, Guiftes, Grants, Surrenders. Reentryes. --

For Reentryes, I will not swear for her.

And furdermore (I the said) of and for the consideration of the sum of five
hundred Crowns to set me a board before these presents utterly disclaim for
ever, any Title, estate, right, interest, demand, or possession, in or to the
said Madonna Castiza, my late virtuous, and unfortunate wife.


Unfortunate indeed, that was well placed.

As also neither to touch, attempt, molest, or encumber any part, or parts
whatsoever: either to be named or not to be named: either hidden or vnhidden,
either those that boldly look abroad, or those that dare not show their face.


Faces: I know what you mean by faces: Scrivener, there's a great figure in
faces.


In witness whereof, I the said Captain have interchangeably set to my hand
and seal: in presence of all these, the day and date above written.


Very good sir, I'll be ready for you presently, four hundred and twenty.
1.2.3.4.5. --


Of all deeds, yet this strikes the deepest wound
Into my apprehension,
Reverend, and honourable Matrimony,
Mother of lawful sweets, vnshamed mornings:
Dangerlesse pleasures, thou that make the bed,
Both pleasant, and legitimately fruitful: without thee,
All the whole world were soiled Bastardy.
Thou art the only and the greatest form.
That put a difference between our desires
And the disordered appetites of Beasts,
Making their mates, those that stand next their lusts.
Then, -- with what base injury is thy goodness paid
First, rare to have a Bride commence a Maid,
But does beguile joy of the purity:
And is made strict by power of Drugs and Art,
An Artificall Maid, a Doctord Virgin,
And so deiceues the glory of his bod:
A foul contempt, against the spotless power
Of sacred wedlock, but if chaste and honest,
There is another Devil hants marriage,
(None fondly loves but knows it) Jealousy,
That Wedlocks yellow sickness, that whispering separation every minute.
And thus the curse takes his effect or progress,
The most of men in their first sudden furies,
Rail at the narrow bounds of marriage,
And call it a prison then it is most just,
That the disease'ath prison, Jealousy
Should still affect a'm, but oh! here I am fixed,
To make sale of a wife, monstrous and foul,
An act abhord in nature, could in soul:
Who that ha's man in him, could so resign,
To make his shame, the poesye to the Coin?

Right in faith, my Lord fully five hundred,

I said how you should find it Captain, and with this competent sum you
rest amplye contented.


Amply contented.

Here's the Pen Captain: your name to the sale.

S'foote dost take me to be a pen-man? I protest I could ne'er write more then
A, B, C, those three letters in my life.


Why those will serve Captain.

I could ne'er get further.

Would you have got further then A B C? ah Base Captain, that's far enough
in faith.


Take the Seal off Captain.

It goes on hardly, and comes off easily.

I just like a Coward.

Will you write witness Gentleman?

He? he shall, prethe come and set thy hand for witness Rogue, thou shall
venture with me?


Nay, then I ha reason Captain that commands me?


What a fair fist the pretty whorsone writes, as if he had had manners and
bringing up, a farmers Son: his Father dam's himself to sell musty Corn,
while he ventures the Money, twill prosper well at Sea no doubt he shall ne'er
see it agein


So, Captain you deliver this as your deed.

As my deed, what else sir?

The ouglyest deed that ere mine eye did witness

So my Lord, you have her, clip her, enjoy her, she's your own, and let me be
proud to tell you now my Lord, she's as good a soul if a man had a mind to
live honest, and keep a wench, the Kindest, sweetest, comfortablest Rogue. --


Hark in thine ear,
The Baser slave art thou: and so i'll tell her,
I love the Pearl, thou soldst, hate thee the Seller --
Go, to Sea, the end of thee -- is Lousy.

This fine work: a very brave end, hum --

Well thought upon, this Scrivener may furnish me

Why should this fellow be a Lord by birth?
Being by blood a Knave, one that would sell
His Lordship if he likt her Ladyship.

Yes my Lord.

What's here Now?

I have employment for a trusty fellow, bold, sure --

What if he be a Knave my Lord?

There thou come to me, why he should be so, and men of your quill are not
unacquainted.


Indeed al our chief living my Lord, is by fools and knaves, we could not
keep open shop else* Fools that enter into bonds, and Knaves that bind em.


Why now we meet.

And as my memory happily leads me: I know a fellow of a standing estate,
never flowing: I durst convey treason into his bosom,

And keep it safe nine years.

A goodly Time.

And if need were would press to an attempt,
And cleave to Desperate action.

That Last fits me.
Thou hast the measure right, look I hear from thee.

With duteous speed.

Expect a large reward:
I will find time of her to find regard.

The end of me is lowzie.

Oh my Lord! I have strange words to tell you.

Stranger yet? i'll choose some other hour to listen to thee, I am yet sick of
this, discover quickly.


Why, will you make yourself known my Lord

I.
Who scourges sin let him do it dreadfully.

Pox of his dissemblance: I will to s^n.

Nay, you shall to sea, thou would poison the whole land else -- why how now
Captain?


In health.

What, drooping?

Or a shamde of the sale of thine own wife?

You might count me an ass then in faith.

If not a shamed of that, what can you be a shamd ofthen?

Prethe ha done, I am ashamed of nothing.

I easily believe that.

This Lord sticks in my stomach.

How? take one of thy feathers down, and fetch him up.

I'd make him come.

But what if the Duke should hear of this?

I, or your Son in Law, Fidelio knows of the sale of his mother.


What and they did, I sell none but mine own: as for the Duke, he's abroad by
this time, and for Fidelio he's in labour.


He, in labour?

What call you Travelling?

That's true: -- but let me tell you Captain: whether the Duke hear on it, or
Fidelio know on it: or both, or neither, twa's a most filthy loathsome part.


A base unnatural deed --

Slave and fool: -- ha, who? oh --

Thou hateful villain: thou should choose (to sink
To keep thy baseness shrouded.

Ugly wretch.

Who hath laid violence upon my husband?
My dear sweet Captain, help --

Lady you wrong your value,
Call you him dear that has sold you so cheap?

I do beseech your pardon good my Lord.

Rise.

My abused Mother:

My kind Son,
Whose liking I neglected in this match.

Not that alone, but you far happier fortunes.

Is this the Scrivener and the Farmers Son,
Fire on his Lordship he told me they Trauaild.

And see the sum told out to buy that Jewel
More precious in a Woman then her eye, her honour:
Nay take it to you Lady, and liudge it,
Too slight a recompense, for your great wrong, but that his riddance helps it.


S'foot he undoes me, I am a Rogue a Beggar,
The Egyptian plague creeps over me already,
I begin to be lousy.

Thus happily prevented, you're set free,
Or else made over to adultery.

To heaven and to you my modest thanks.

Monster, to sea, spit thy al herred foam,
Where it may do least harm, there's air and roeme.
Thour't Dangerous in a Chamber, Virulext Venem,
Unto a Ladies name, and her chaste breath
If past this evenings verge, the Dukedom hold thee,
Thou art reserved for abject punishment.

I do beseech your good Lordship consider the state of a poor downe-cast
Captain.


Captain, off with that noble title thou becomst it vildely, I ne'er saw the
name fit worse, i'll sooner allow a Pandar a Captain then thee.


More's the pity.

Sue to thy Lady for pardon.

I give it without suite.

I do beseech your Ladyship not so much for pardon, as to bestow a few of those
Crowns upon a poor vnfethered Rover that will as truly pray for you, and
wish you hanged, as any man breathing.


I give it freely all.

Nay by your favour:
I will contain you Lady, here* be gone:
Use slaves like slaves -- wealth keeps their faults vnkowne.

Well 'ime yet glad, i'ue liberty and these:
The Land has plagued me, and i'll plague the seas.

The Scene is cleared, the bane of brightness fled
Who sought the death of honour, is struck dead.
Come modest Lady:

My most honest mother.

Thy virtue shall live safe from reach of shames,
That Act ends nobly, preserves Ladies fames.

Why this is but the second time of your coming Kinsman, visit me oftner,
Daughter, I charge you bring this Gentleman along with you: Gentleman, I I cry
ye mercy sir, I call you Gentleman still: I forget you're but a Knight, you
must pardon me sir.


For your worships kindness -- worship I cry you mercy sir, I call you
worshipful still, I forget, you're but a Justice.


I am no more in faith.

You must pardon me sir.

Tis quickly done sir, you see I make bold with you Kinsman, thrust my
Daughter and you into one Chamber.


Best of all sir: Kindred you know may lye any where.

True, true sir, Daughter receive your blessing -- take heed the Coach iopper
not to much* have a care to the fruits of your body -- look to her Kinsman.


Fear it not sir.

Nay Father though I say it, that should not say it, he looks to me more like
a husband then a Kinsman.


I hear good commendations of you sir.

You hear the worst of me I hope sir, -- I salute my leave sir.

You're welcome all over your body sir: nay, I can behave my self courtly,
though I keep house 'ith Country: what, does my Niece hide herself, not
present, ha? Latronello.


Sir.

Call my Niece to me.

Yes sir.

A foolish, coy, bashful thing it is, she's afraid to lie with her own
Uncle: i'd do her no harm in faith, I keep my self a widower a purpose, yet
the foolish Girl will not look into it, she should have all in faith, she
knows I have but a time, cannot hold long, see where she comes, pray whom am
I Niece?


I hope you're your self.
Uncle to me, and Brother to my Father.

Oh am I so, it does not appear so, -- for surely you would love your Fathers
Brother for your Fathers sake, your Uncle for your own sake.


I do so.

Nay you do nothing Niece.


In that love which becomes you best I love (you.

How should I know that love becomes me best?

Because tis chaste, and honourable.

Honourable! it cannot become me then Niece.
For'ime scarce worshipful: Is this an age,
To entertain bare love without the fruits
When I received thee first, I looked
Thou should have been a wife unto my house
And saved me from the charge of marriage.
Do you think your Fathers five thousand pound wold ha made me take you else?
no, you should near a ha been a charge to me.

As far as I can perceive yet by you,
I'ue as much need to marry as ere I had: would not this be a great grief
to your friends think you, if they were alive again?


'twould be a grief indeed.

Y'aue confessed
All about house, that young Fidelio
Who in his Travails does attend the Prince,
Is your vowed love.

Most true, he's my vowed Husband.

And what's a Husband is not a Husband a stranger at first, and will you lye with
a stranger before you lie with your own Uncle? take heed what ye do Niece,
I counsel you for the best: strangers are drunken fellows I can tell you,
they will come home late a nights, beat their wives, and get nothing but
Girls: look too't, if you marry, your stubbernes is your Dowry: five thousand
Crowns were bequeathed to you, true, if you marry with my consent: but if ere
you go to marrying by my consent, i'll go to hanging by yours: go too* be
wise and love your Uncle.


I should have cause then to repent indeed.
Do you so far forget the Offices
Of blushing modesty? Uncles are half Fathers,
Why they come so near our bloods they are en part of it.

Why now you come to me Niece: if your Uncle be part of your own flesh and
blood, is it not then fit your own flesh and blood should come nearest to you?
answer me to that Niece.


You do allude all to incestuous will,
Nothing to modest purpose: turn me forth,
Be like an Uncle of these latter days,
Periurde enough, enough unnatural,
Play your Executorship, in Tyranny,
Restrain my fortunes, keep me poor, I care not,
In this alone most women i'll excel,
I'll rather yield to beggary then to hell.

Very good, a my troth my Niece is Valiant, sha's made me richer by five
thousand Crowns, the price of her Dowry: are you so honest, I do not fear
but I shall have the Conscience to keep you poor enough Niece, or else I am
quite altered a late -- The News, may it please you sir?


Sir, there's an old fellow, a kind of Law-driuer, entreats conference with
your worship.


A Law-driuer, prithee drive him hither.


No, no I say if it be for defect of Appearance, take me out a special
Significauit.


Very good sir.

Then if he purchase an Alias or Capias, which are Writs of custom, only to
delay time, your Procedendo does you Knights service -- that's nothing at all,
get your Distringas out as soon as you can for a Jury.


I'll attend your god worships coming out.

Do I prithee, attend me, i'll take it kindly, a Voluntate.

What, old Seigneur Tangle!

I am in debt to your worships remembrance.

My old master of Fence: come, come, come, I have not exerciz'd this twelve
Moons, I have almost forgot all my Law-weapons.


They are under fine and Recovery, your worship shall easily recover them.


I hope so: when there?

Sir.

The Rapler and Dagger foils instantly: and whats thy suite to me old
Tangle, i'll grant it presently.


Nothing but this sir, to set your worships hand to the commendation of a Knave
whom no body speaks well on.


The more shame for em, what was his offence I pray?

Vestras Deducite Culpas -- nothing but robbing a Vestrie.

What, what! alas poor Knave, give me the Paper, he did but save the
Churchwardens a labour: come, come, he has done a better deed in it then the
parish is a aware off, to prevent the Knaves, he robs but seldom, they once a
quarter: me thinks twere a part of good justice, to hang em at years end, wen
they come out of their office, to the true terrifying of all Collectors and
Sidemen.


Your worship would make a fruitful Commonwealths man, the Constable lets
em alone, looks on, and says nothing.


A lass good man, he lets em alone for quietness sake, and takes half a share
with em: they know well enough too, he ha's an impediment in his tongue, he's
always drunk when he should speak.


Indeed your worship speaks true in that sir: they blind him with beer, and
make him so narrow eyed, that he wincks naturally at all their Knaveries,


So, so, here's my hand to his commendations.

A Charitate, you do a charitable deed in it sir.

Nay, if it be but a Vestrie matter, visit me at any time, old Signeor
Law-thistle! O well done, here are the Foils, come, come sir, i'll try a
Law-bout with you.


I am afraid I shall overthrow you sir in faith.


Tis but for want of use then sir.


Indeed that same odd word Use, makes a man a good Lawyer, and a woman an
arrant -- tuh tuh, tuh, tuh, tuh, now am I for you sir: but first to bring you
into form, can your worship name all your weapons?


That I can I hope, let me see, Longswoord, what's Longsword? I am so duld with
doing justice, that I have forgot all in faith.


Your long sword, that's a writ of delay.

Mass that swords long enough indeed, I ha known it reach the length of
fifteen Terms.


Fifteen Terms, that's but a short sword.

Me thinks tis long enough, proceed sir.

A Writ of Delay, Long-sword.
Scandala Magnatum, Backesword.

Scandals are back-swords indeed

Capias cominus, Case of Rapyers.

Oh Desperate!

A Latitat, sword and Dagger.

A writ of Execution, Rapier and Dagger.

Thou art come to our present weapon, but what call you sword and Buckler then?


Oh! that's out of use now, sword and Buckler was called a good conscience, but
that weapons left long ago, that was too manly a fight, too sound a weapon for
these our days, sl'id we are scarce able to lift up a Buckler now, our arms
are so bound to the Pox: one good bang upon a Buckler would make most of our
Gentlemen fly a pieces, tis not for these lintie times, our Lawyers are good
Rapier and Dagger men, theile quickly dispatch your -- money.


Indeed since sword and buckler time, I have observed, there ha's been
nothing so much fighting: where be all our gallant Swaggerers? there are no
good frayes alate.


Oh sir, the properties altered, you shall see less fighting every day then
other, for every one gets him a Mistress, and she gives him wounds enough, and
you know, the Surgeons cannot beehere and there too, if there were red wounds
too, what wold become of the Reinish wounds?


Thou say true in faith, they would be but il favouredly looked to then.


Very well sir.

I expect you sir.

I lye in this court for you sir, my Rapier is my Attorney, and my Dagger his
Clarke.


Your Attorney wants a little oiling, me thinks, he looks very Rustily.


Tis but his proper colour sir, his Father was an Iremonger, he will ne'er look
brighter, the rust ha's so eat into him, ha's never any leisure to be made
clean.


Not in the vacation.

Non Vacat exiguis rebus adesse Ioui.

Then Jove will not be at leisure to scour him, because he ^ere came to him
before.


You're excellent at it sir -- and now you least think on it, I arrest you sir.


Very good sir.

Nay very bad sir by my faith -- I follow you still, as the Officers will
follow you as long as you have a penny.


You speak sentences sir -- by this time have I tried my friends, and now I
thrust in bail --


This bail will not be taken sir, they must be two Citizens that are no
Cuckolds.


Berlady then 'ime like to lye by it, I had rather twere a hundred that were.


Take heed I bring you not to an Nisiprius sir.

I must ward my self as well as I may sir.

Tis Court day now, Declarat Atturnatus, my Attorney gapes for money.


You shall have no Advantage yet, I put in my Answer.

I follow the suit still sir.

I like not this Court byr'lady -- I: take me out a writ of Remove, a writ of
Remove, do you see sir?


Very well sir.

And place my cause higher.

There you started me sir -- yet for all your Demurs, Plures, and
Sursurarers, which are all Longswords: that's Delays: al the comfort is, in
nine years a man may overthrow you.


You must thank your good friends then sir.

Let nine years pass, five hundred crowns cast away a both sides, and the
suite not twenty, my Counsellors wife must have another hood you know, and my
Attorneys wife will have a new fore-part, yet see at length law, I shall have
law: now beware, I bring you to a narrow exigent, and by no means can you
avoid the Proclamation --


Oh!

Now follows a writ of execution, a Capias, vt Legatum, gives you a wound
mortal, trips up your heals, and lays you ith Counter.


O Villain!

I cry your worship heartily mercy sir, I thought we had been in Law
together, Aduersarius contra aduersarium by my troth.


Oh! reach me thy hand, I ne'er had such an overthrow in my life.


Twa's long of your Attorney there, he might a staide the execution of Capias
vt Legatum, and removed you with a Supersedes non molestandum into the Court
of Equity.


Pox on him, he fell out of my hand when I had most need of him,

I was bound to follow the suite sir.

Thou could do no less then overthrow me,
I must needs say so.

You had recovered cost else sir.

And now by the mass I think I shall hardly recover without cost.


Nay, that's Certoscio, an execution is very chargeable.


Well, it shall teach me wit as long as I am a Justice: I perceive by this
trial, if a man have a sound fall in Law, he shall feel it in his bones all
his life after.


Nay, that's Recto upon Record, for I my self was overthrown in eighty eight
by a Taylor, and I have had a Stitch in my side ever since, oh!


Why Latronello, Furtiuo, Fucato, where be these lazy knaves that should
truss me, not one stirring yet?


Follow, follow, follow.


What news there?

This way, this way, follow, follow.

Hark you sluggish Soporiferous villains, there's knaves abroad when you are a
bed, are ye not a shamed on it, a Justices men should be up first, and give
example all knaves.


Oh I beseech your good worship.

Your worshipful worship.

Thieves, my two hand sword, ime robbed 'ith Hal, Latronello, Knaves, come down,
my two hand sword I


I am Latronello, I beseech your worship, (say.

Thou Latronello, thou lie, my men scorn to have beards.

We forget our beards, now I beseech your worship quickly remember us.


How now?

Nay there's no time to talk of how now, tis don.

Follow, follow, follow.

Four mark and a Livery is not able to keep life and soul together, we
must fly out once a quart, tis for your worships credit to have money in our
purse, our Fellow Furtiuo is taken in the Action.


A pox on him for a lazy knave, would he be taken?

They bring him along to your worship, your the next Justice, now or never show
your self a good master, an upright Magistrate, and deliver him out of their
hands.


Nay, he shall find me -- apt enough to do him good I warrant him.


He comes in a false beard sir.

S'foot what, should he do here else? there's no coming to me in a true on:
if he had one, -- the slave to be taken: do not I keep Geldings swift enough?


The goodliest Geldings of any Gentleman in the shire.


Which did the whoreson knave ride upon?


Upon one of your best sir.

Stand and deliver.

Upon Stand and Deliver: the very Gelding I choose for mine own riding, as
nimble as Pegasus the flying horse yonder: go shift your selves into your
coats, bring hither a great chair, and a little table.


With all present speed sir.

And Latronello.

I sir.

Sit you down, very soberly take the examnation.

I'll draw a few horse heads in a paper, make a show: I hope I shall keep my
countenence.


Pox on him again, would he be taken? he frets me: I have been a youth my
self, I ha seen the day I could have told money out of other men's purses
(Mass so I can do now) nor will I keep that fellow about me that dares not
bid a man stand: for as long as drunkenness is a vice, stand is a virtue: but
I would not have 'em taken. I remember now betimes in a morning I would have
peeped through the green boughs, have had the party presently, and then to
ride away sinelye in fear, twas even Venery to me in faith, the pleasantst
course of life, one would think every Woodcok a Constable, and every Owl an
officer, but those days are past with me: and a my troth I think I am a
greater thief now, and in no danger: I can take my ease, sit in my Chair,
look in your faces now, and rob you, make you bring your money by authority
put off your hat, and thank me for robbing of you, O there is nothing to a
thief under Covert Barn.


Come Officers bring him away.

Nay, I see thee through thy false beard, thou mid-winde chinde Rascal,

How now my Masters, whats he? ha?

Your worship knows, I never come but I bring a thief with me.


Thou hast left thy wont else Constable.

Sir, we understand you to be the only up rightnes of this place.


But I scare understand you sir.

Why then you understand not your self sir.

Such another word, and you shall change places with the Thief.


A maintainer of equal causes I mean.

Now I have you, proceed sir.

This Gentleman and my self, being led heather by occasion of business, have
been offered the discourtesy of the Country, set upon by three thieves and
robbed.


What are become of the other two, Latronello, and Fuca?

Here sir.

They both made away from us, the cry pursues em, but as yet none but this
taken.


Latronello.

Sir.

Take his examination.

Yes sir.

Let the Knave stand single.

Thank your good worship.

Ha's been a suitor at Court sure, he thanks me for nothing.

He's a Thief now sure.

That we must know of him, what are you sir?

A piece next to the Tail sir -- a Serving-man.

By my troth a pretty phrase and very cleanly handled, put it down
Latronello: thou may make use on it. Is he of honour or worship whom thou
serve?


Of both dear sir, honourable in mind, and worshipful in body.


Why would one wish a man to speak better?

Oh sir, they most commonly speak best, that do worst.

Say you so sir, then we'll try him farther, -- Does your right worshipful
master, go before you, as an ensample of Vice, and so encourage you to this
slinking iniquity? he is not a Lawer, is he?


Ha's the more wrong sir, both for his conscience, and honesty, he deserves to
be one.


Pity he's thief in faith, I should entertain him else.

I, if he were not as he is, he would be better then himself.


No tis well known sir, I have a master, the very picture of wisdom,


For indeed he speaks not one wise word.

And no man but will admire to hear of his Virtues.

Because he ne'er had any in all his life.

You write all down Latronello.

I warrant you sir.

So sober, so discrete, so judicious:

Hum.

And above all, of most reverend gravity.

I like him for one quality, he speaks well of his master, he will fare the
better: -- Now sir, let me touch you,


I sir.

Why, serving a Gentleman of such worship and wisdom, such sobriety and
virtue, such discretion and judgment as your master is, do you take such a
beastly course, to stop horses, hinder Gentlewomen from their meetings, and
make Citizens never ride but a Sundays, only to avoid Morning prayer and you:
is it because your worshipful Ma. feeds you with lean spits, pays you with
Irish money, or clothes you in northern dozes?


Far be it from his mind, or my report, Tis well known he kept worshipful
cheer the day of his wives burial, pays our four marks a year as duly by
twelve pence a quarter as can be.


His wisdom swallows it.

And for Northern dozens, fie, fie, we were ne'er troubled with so many.

Receiving then such plenteous blessings from your virtuous and bountiful
master, what cause have you to be thief now? answer me to that geere:


Tis ee'n as a man gives his mind too't sir.

How sir?

For alas, if the whole world were but of one trade; traffic were nothing:
if we were all truemen, we should be of no trade: what a pitiful world
would here be, heaven forbid we should be all truemen: then howe should your
worships next suite be made? not a Tailor left in the land: of what stuff
would you have it made? not a Merchant left to deliver it, would your worship
go in that suit still? You would ha more thieves about you then those you have
banished, and be glad to call the great ones home again, to destroy the little.


A notable Rogue.

A my troth, a fine knave, ha's answered me gloriously, what wages wilt thou
take after thou art hag'd?


More then your worship's able to give, I would think foul scorn to be a
Justice then.


He says true too yfayth, for we are all full of corruption here, -- hark
you my friends.


Sir.

By my troth if you were no crueller then I, I could find in my hart to let him
go.


Could you so sir, the more pitiful Justice you.

Nay I did but to try you, if you have no pity, I'll ha none, away he's a
Thief, to prison with him.


I am content sir.

Are you content, bring him back, nay then you shall not go.


I'll be as cruel as you can wish: you're content, belike you have a trick to
break prison, or a bribe for the Officers.


For us sir?

For you sir? what colour's silver I pray, you ne'er saw money in your life: --
I'll not trust you with him, Latronello and Fucato, lay hold upon him, to your
charge I commit him.


Oh, I beseech you sir.

Nay if I must be cruel, I will be cruel.

Good sir, let me rather go to prison.

You desire that* -- I'll trust no prison with you, I'll make you lye in mine own
house, or I'll know why I shall not.


Merciful sir.

Since you have no pity I will be cruel.

Very good sir, you please us well.

You shall appear to morrow sirs.

Upon my kees sir.

You shall be hanged out a'th way, away with him Latronello, and Fucato, --
Officers I discharge you my house, I like not your company.

Report me as you see me, fire and fuel,
If men be Iewes, Justices must be cruel.

So sir, Extremes set of all Actions thus,
Either too tame, or else too tyrannous:
He being bent to fury, I doubt now
We shall not gain access unto your love or she to us.

Most wishfully here she comes.

Is that she?

This is she my Lord.

A modest presence.

Virtue bless you Lady,

You wish me well sir.

I'd first in charge this kiss, and next this paper,
You'll know the language, tis Fidelios.

My ever vowed love, how is his health?

As fair as is his favour with the Prince.

I'm sick with joy, does the Prince love him so?

His life cannot requite it,
Not to wrong the remembrance of his love,
I had a token for you, kept it safe,
Till by misfortune of the way this morning,
Thieves set upon this Gentleman and my self,
And with the rest robbed that.

Oh me, I'm dearly sorry for your chance, was it your loss?
They boldly look you in the face that robbed you,
No farther villains then my uncles men.

What Lady?

Tis my grief I speak so true.

Why my Lord?

But give me pausing Lady: was he one that took the examination?

One and the chief.

Hence-forth hang him that is no way a thief,
Then I hope few will suffer, -- nay all the jest was, he committed him to the
charge of his fellows, and the rogue made it lamentable, cried to leaue'em.

None live so wise but fools may once deceive em?

An uncle so insaciate?

I, Is't not strange too,
That al should be by Nature vicious, and he bad against
Nature?

Then you have heard the sum of al my wrongs.

Lady, we have, and desire rather now
To heal 'em, then to hear 'em:
For by a letter from Fidelio
Direct to us, we are entreated jointly,
To hasten your remove* from this foul den,
Of theft and purposed incest:

I rejoice in his chaste care of me, I'll soon be furnished.

He writes that his return cannot be long.

I'm chiefly glad, -- but whither is the place?

To the safe seat of his late wronged mother.

I desire it, --
Her conference will fit mine, well you preuaile,

At next grove we'll expect you:

I'll not fail.

It stands upon the frame of my reputation I protest Lady.

Lady, that word is worth an hundred Angels at all times, for it cost more:
if I live till tomorrow night, my sweet pleasure thou shalt have them.


Could you not make 'em a hundred and fifty think you?

I'll do my best endeavour to multiply, I assure you.

Could you not make 'em two hundred?

No by my faith. --

Peace, i'll rather be confined in the hundred fifty.

Come ee'n much about this time, when Taverns give up their Ghosts, and
Gentlemen are in their first cast. --


I'll observe the season.

And do but whirl the Ring a'th door once about, my maid-seruant shall be
taught to understand the language.


Enough my sweet Reuenew.

Good rest my effectual pleasure.

Come hither Phoenix.

What makes your honour break so early?

A toy, I have a toy.

A toy my Lord.

Before thou lay thy wrath upon the duke, -- be aduiz'd.

I, I, I warran you my Lord.

Nay, give my words honour, hear me,
I'll strive to bring this Act into such form,
And credit amongst men, they shall suppose.
Nay verily believe the Prince his son,
To be the plotter of his Fathers murder.

Oh that were infinitely admirable!

Were not, it pleases me beyond my bliss:

Then if his son meet death as he returns,
Or by my hired Instruments turn up,
The general voice will cry -- O happy vengeance!

O blessed vengeance!

I, i'll turn my brain
Into a thousand uses, Tire my inventions,
Make my blood sick with study, and mine eye
More hollow then my heart, but I will fashion,
Nay I will fashion it, -- Can counterfeit?

The Princes hand, more truly, most direct,
You shall admire it.

Necessary mischief.
Next to a woman, but more close in secrets
You're all the kindred that my breast vouch safes,
Look into me anon, -- I must frame, and muse, and
fashion --

Twas time to look into thee, in whose heart
Treason grows ripe, and therefore fit to fall,
That slave first sinks, whose envy threatens all,
Now is his Venom at full height.

Lying, or being in the said County in the Tenor and occupation aforesaid.


No more then, a writ of course upon the matter of --


Silence.

Oh o-o-o-yes Carlo Turbulenzo, appear or loose twenty mark in the suites.


Ha? whether have my thoughts conueyed me? I am now within the Dizzy murmur of
the law.


So that then, the cause being found clear, upon the last Scitation.


Carlo turbulenzo, Come into the Court.

Now, now, now, now, now, upon my knees I praise Mercury the God of law, I have
two suits at issue, two suites at issue.


Do you hear sir?

I will not hear, i'ue other business.

I beseech you my learned Counsel.

Beseech not me, beseech not me, I am a mortal man, a Client as you are,
beseech not me.


I would do all by your worships direction.


Then hang thy self.

Shall I take out a special supplycauit.

Mad me not, torment me not, tear me not, you'll give me leave to hear mine
own cause, mine own cause


Nay moreover, and farther --


Well said my Lawyer, well said, well said.

All the opprobious speeches that man could invent all malicious invectives,
called Wittoll to his face.


That's I, that's I, thank you my learned counsel for your good remembrance: I
hope I shall overthrow him horse and foot.


Nay but good sir.

No more sir, he that brings me happy news first i'll relieve first.


Sound executions rot thy cause and thee.

I, I, I, pray so still, pray so still, theile thrive the better


I wonder how this fellow keeps out madness?
What stuff his brains are made on?

I suffer, I suffer, -- till I here a judgment.

What old Signior?

Prithee I will not know thee now, tis a busy time, a busy time with me.


What not me Signeur?

Oh cry thee mercy, give me thy hand, -- fare thee well, -- ha's no relief
again me then, -- his demurs will not help him, his Sursararaes will but play
the knaves with him.


The Justice: tis he


Have I found thee in faith? I thought where I should smell thee out old Tangle.


What old Signeur Justicer, -- embrace me another time and you can possible:
how does all thy wives children, -- well? that's well said yfayth.


Hear me old Tangle.

Prithee do not ravish me, let me go.

I must use some of thy counsel first.

Sirrah, I ha brought him to an Exigent* hark that's my cause, that's my cause
yoder, I twind'g him, I twind'g him.


My Niece is stolen away.


Ah, get me a no exeat Regno quickly, nay you must not stay vppo'nt, i'd fain
have you gone.


A no exeat Regno, i'll about it presently, -- adieu.

You seek to catch her Justice, sheele catch you.

A judgment, a judgment.

What, what, what?

Overthrown, overthrown, overthrown.

Ha, a, a.

News, news, news.

The devil, the devil, the devil.

Twice Tangle's overthrown, twice Tangles overthrown.

Hold:

Now old cheater of the Law,

Pray give me leave to be mad.

Thou that hast found such sweet pleasure in the vexation of others.


May I not be mad in quiet?

Very Marrow, very manna to thee to be in law.

Very syrup of Toads, and perseru'd Adders.

Thou that hast vexed, and beggerd the whole
Parish, and made the honest Church wardens go to
Law with the poores money.

Hear me, do but hear me, I pronounce a terrible, horrible curse upon you
al -- and wish you to my Attorney: see where a Praemunire comes a Dedimus
potestatem, and that most Dreadful Execution, Excommunicato Capiendo, there's
no bail to be taken, I shall rot in fifteen Iayles: make Dice of my bones, and
let my Counsellors Son play away his Fathers money with em; may my bones
revenge my quarrel! -- A Capias Cominus? here, here, here, here: quickly
dip your Quills in my blood, off with my skin and write fourteen lines of a
side -- there's an honest conscionable fellow, he takes but ten shillings of
a Bellows mender -- here's another deals all with charity, you shall give
him nothing, only his wife an embroidered Pettycoate, a gold frindge for her
tail, or a border for her head, ah sirrha! you shall catch me no more in the
sprindge of your Knaveries.


Follow, follow him still, a little thing now sets him forward.


None can except against him, the mans mad,
And priuiledgd by the Moon, if he say true:
Less madness tis to speak sin, then to do.
This wretch that loved before, his food, his strife,
This punishment falls even with his life.
His pleasure was vexation, all his bliss
The torment of another.
Their heart, his health: their starved hopes his store,
Who so loves Law, dies either mad or poor.

A miracle, a miracle!

How now Fidelio?

My Lord a miracle!

What is't?

I have found
One quiet, suffering, and vnlawyer'd man.
An opposite, a very Contrary
To the old turbulent fellow.

Why he's mad.

Mad, why he is in his right wits, could he be madder then he was, if he be any
way altered from what he was, tis for the better, my Lord.


Well, but where's this wonder?

Tis coming my Lord: A man so truly a man, so indifferently a creature, using
the world in his right nature but to tread upon, one that would not bruise, the
cowardly est enemy to man, the worm, that dares not show his malice till we
are dead: nay my Lord, you will admire his temper! see where he comes, I
promised your acquaintance, sir

Yon is the Gentleman I did commend for Temper.

Let me embrace you simply.
That's perfectly, and more in heart then hand:
Let affectation keep at Court.

I, let it.

Tis told me you love quiet

Above wealth.

I above life: I have been wild and rash
Committed many and unnatural crimes,
Which I have since repented.

Twa's well spent.

I was mad, stark mad, nine years together.

I pray! as how?

Going to law, in faith it made me mad.

With the like frenzy not an hour since
An aged man was struck.

Alas I pity him.

He's not worth pitying, for twa's still his gladness to be at variance.


Yet a mans worth pity,
My quiet blood ha's blessed me with this gift,
I have cured some, and if his wits be not
Too deeply cut, I will assay to help em.

Sufferance does teach you pity.

O Master, Master, your abominable next neighbor came into the house, being
half in drink, and took away your best Carpet.


Has he it?

Alas sir:


Let him go, trouble him not, lock the door quietly after him, and have a
safer care who comes in next.


But sir, might I aduize you, in such a cause as this, a man might boldly,
nay* with conscience go to Law.


Oh, i'll give him the table too first. Better endure a fist then a sharpe
sword: I had rather they should pull off my clothes then flea of my skin, and
hang that on mine enemies hedge.


Why, for such good causes was the law ordained:

True, and in it self tis glorious and divine,
Law is the very Master piece of heaven:
But see yonder.
There's many Clouds between the sun and us,
There's too much cloth before we see the Law:

I'm content with that answer, be mild still,
Tis honour to forgive those you could kill.

There do I keep.

Reach me your hand, I love you,
And you shall know me better.

Tis my suit.

The night grows deep -- and --

Come away, this way, this way.

Who be those? stand close a little.

Oh, you're come as well as ere you came in your life, my Maister's new gone to
bed, give me your Knightly hand, I must lead you into the blind Parlour, my
mistress will be down to you presently.


I tell you our safest course will be to arrest him when he comes out a'th
Tavern: for then he will be half drunk, and will not stand upon his
weapon.


Our safest course indeed, for he will draw.

That he will, though he put it up again, which is more of his courtesy, then
of our deserving.


The world is nothing but vexation,
Spite and uncharitable Action.

Did you see the Gentleman?

Not I.

Where should he be, it may be he's past by,
Good sir, lets overtake him.

Here sir, now you are there sir, sheele come down to you instantly, I must
not stay with you, my Mistress would be jealous, you must do nothing to me, my
mistress would find it quickly.


S'foot whether am I led? brought in byth hand? I hope it can be no harm to
stay for a woman, tho indeed they were never more dangerous, I have ventured
heatherto and safe, and I must venture to stay now, this should be a fair
Rome, but I see it not, the blind Parlour cal's she it?


Where art thou, O my Knight!

Your Knight, I am the Dukes knight.

I say you're my knight, for I'm sure I paid for you

Paid for you hum, -- S'foot a light. --

Now out upon the Marmoset, hast thou served me so long, and offer to bring in
a Candle?


Fair Room, villainous face, and worse woman, I ha learnt something by a
glimpse ath Candle:


How happened it you came so soon, I looked not for you these two hours: yet as
the sweet chance is, you came as well as a thing could come, for my hus:
band's newly brought a bed.


And what ha's Jove sent him?

He ne'er sent him any thing since I knew him, he's a man of a bad nature to
his wife, none but his Maids can thrive under him.


Out upon him.

I, judge whether I have a cause to be a Courtesan or no? to do as I do, an
elderly fellow as he is, if he were married to a young Virgin, he were able
to break her heart, tho he could break nothing else: here, here, there's just
a hundred and fifty, but I stole em so hardly from him, twold ee'ne have
grieud you to have seen it.


So 'twould in faith.

Therefore prithee my sweet pleasure, do not keep company so much, how do
you think I am able to maintain you? though I be a Jewellers wife, Jewels
are like women, they rise fall, we must be content to loose sometimes, to gain
often, but you're content always to loose, and never to gain: what need you
ride with a Footman before you?


Oh that's the grace,

The grace? tis sufficient grace that y'aue a Horse to ride upon, you should
think thus with your self every time you go to bed if my head were laid,
what would become of that horse? he would run a bad race then as well as his
Master.


Nay, and you give me money to chide me: --

No, if it were as much more, I would think it foul scorn to chide you, I
advise you to be thrifty, to take the time now, while you have it, you shall
seldom get such an other fool as I am, I warrant you: why there's Mettrezza
Auriola keeps her love with half the cost that I am at, her friend can go a
foot like a good Husband, walk in wosted Stockings, and enquire for the
Six-penny ordinary.


Pox on it, and would you have me so base?

No, I would not have you so base neither: but now and then, when you keep your
Chamber, you might let your Footman out for eighteen pence a day, a great
relief at years end I can tell you.


The age must needs be foul when vice reformes it.

Nay, I'ue a greater quarrel to you yet.

In faith, what is't?

You made me believe at first the Prince had you in great estimation, and would
not offer to Travail without you, nay, that he could not travail without your
Direction and intelligence.


I'm sorry I said so in faith, but sure I was ouerflowen when I spoke it, I
could ne'er ha said it else.


Nay more, you swore to me, that you were the first that taught him to ride a
great horse, and tread the Ring with agility.


By my troth I must needs confess I swore a great lye in that, I was a
villain to do it, for I could ne'er ride great horse in my life.


Why lo, who would love you now but a Citizens wife? so inconstant, so for
sworn: you say women are false Creatures, but take away men, and thei'd be
honester then you -- Nay last of all, which offends me most of all, you told
me you covld countenance me at Court, and you know we esteem a friend there,
more worth then a Husband here.


What I spake of that. Lady, i'll maintain.

You maintain? you seen it court?

Why by this Diamond --

Oh take heed, you cannot have that, tis always in the eye of my husband.


I protest I will not keep it, but only use it for th is virtue, as a token
to fetch you, approve my power, where you shall not only ye be received, but
made known to the best and chiefest.


Oh are you true?

Let me loose my Revenue else.

That's your word indeed, and upon that condition take it this kiss and my
love for ever.


Enough.

Give me thy hand, i'll lead thee forth.

I'm sick of al professions, my thoughts burn:
He travails best, that knows when to return.

Adieu, farewell, to bed you, I to my sweet Cittybird, my precious Revenue, the
very thought of a hundred fifty Angels, increases Oil and Spirit, ho:


I arrest you sir.

Oh!

You have made us wait a goodly time for you, have you not think you? you are
in your Rowses Mulwines a pox on you: and have no care of poor Officers
staying for you.


I drunk but one health I protest, but I could void it now: at whose suit I
pra'y?


At the suit of him that makes suits, your Taylor,

Why, he made me the last, this, this that I wear

Argo, nay, we have been Scholars I can tell you, we could not have been
knaves so soon else, for as in that notable City called London, stand two most
famous Universities, Poultry and Woodstreet, where some are of twenty years
standing, and have took all their degrees from the Masters side, down to the
Mistress side, the Hole, so in like manner --


Come, come, come, I had quite forgot the hundred and fifty Angels.


S'lid where be they?

I'll bring you to the sight of em presently.

A notable Lad, and worthy to be arrested: we'll have but ten for weighting, and
then thou shalt choose whether thou wilt run away from us, or we from thee.


A match at running, come, come, follow me.

Nay, fear not that.

Peace, you may happen to see toys, but do not see em.

Pah.

That's the Door.

This? -- knocks.

S foot Officer you have spoiled all already?

Why?

Why? you shall see, you should have but whirld the ring once about, and
there's a Maid servant brought up to understand it.


Whose at door?

Als well again: phist, tis I, tis I.

You, what are you?

Puh, where's thy mistress?

What of her?

Tell her One, she knows who, her Pleasure's here, say.

Her Pleasure? my mistress scorns to be without her pleasure at this time of
night: is she so void of friends think you? take that for thinking so: a
Box


The hundred and fifty Angels are locked up in a Box, we shall not see em
tonight.


Howe's this? am I used like a hundred pound Gentleman? Does my Revenue
forsake me? Dam me if ever I be her pleasure again. -- Well I must to prison.


Go prepare his room, there's no remedy, i'll bring him along, he's tame
enough now.


Dare my Tailor presume to use me in this sort?
He steals and I must lie in prison for it.

Come, come away sir.

Art sure thou saw him arrested Drawer?

If mine eyes be sober.

And that's a question, Mass here he goes, he shall not go to prison, I have
a trick shall bail him -- away.


Oh!

Guess, guess, who am I? who am I?

Who the Devil are you? let go, -- a Pox on you, who are you? I have lost my
prisoner.


Prisoner: I'ue mistook, I cry you heartily mercy, I have done you infinite
injury, a my troth I took you to be an honest man.


Where were your eyes? could you not see I was an Officer, stop, stop, stop,
stop.


Hah, hah, hah, ha.

Now Phoenix.

Now my Lord.

Let princely blood
Nourish our hopes, we being confusion now.

A terrible sudden blow.

I:what day is this hangs over us?

Bith Mass Monday.

As I could wish my purpose will thrive best.

Twa's first my birthday, now my fortunes day,
I see whom fate will raise needs never pray.

Never.

How is the air?

Oh full of trouble.

Does not the sky look pittiously black

As if twere hung with Rich men's Consciences.

Ah, Stuck not a Comet like a Carbuckle
Upon the dreadful brow of Twelve last night?

Twelve, no twa's about one.

About one most proper, for that's the Duke.

Well shifted from thy self.

I could have wished it between one and two
His son and him.

I'll give you comfort then.

Prithee.

There was a villainous Raven seen last night,
Over the presence chamber in hard Jostle
With a young Eglet.

A Raven! that was I, what did the Raven?

Mary my Lord the Raven -- to say truth,
I left the combat doubtful.

So tis still,
For all is doubt, till the deed crown the will,
Now bless thy loins with Freedom, wealth and honour,
Think all thy seed young Lords, and by this Act.
Make a foote-cloathd posterity: now imagine
Thou see thy Daughters with their trains borne up,
Whom else despised want, may curse to whoredom,
And public shames, which our state never threat,
She's never lewd, that is accounted great.

I'll alter that Court-Axiom* thus renewd,
She's never great, that is accounted lewd.

Stand close, the presence fills, here, here the place
And at his rizing, let his fall be base,

Beneath thy foot.

How for his Guard my Lord?

My gold and fear keeps with the chief of them

That's rarely well.

Bold heedless slave, that dares attempt a deed which shall in pieces rend
him my Lords both.


The happiness of the day.

Time my returning,
Treasons have still the worst, yet still are spurning.

The Duke!

I ne'er was gladder to behold him.

All. Long live your Grace.

I do not like that strain,
You know my age affords not to live long.

Spoke truer then you think for.

Bestow that wish upon the Prince our Son.

Nay, he's not to live long neither.

Him as the wealthy Treasure of our hopes,
You as posession of our present Comfort,
Both in one heart, we reverence in one.

Oh Treason of a good coplexion.

How now, what fresher news fills the Courts ear?

Fidelio!

Glad Tidings to your Grace,
The prince is safe returned, and in your Court.

Our joy breaks at our eyes, the Prince is come!

Soul qucking news -- pale vengeance to my blood.

By me presenting to your serious view,
A brief of all his Travails.

Tis most welcome.
It shall be Dear and precious to our Eye.

He Reads, i'm glad her reads.
Now take thyopportunitie, leave that place.

At his first rising let his fall be base.

That must be altered now.

Which? his rising or his fall?

Art thou dull now?
Thou hear the Prince is come.

What's here my Lord?

My Lord?

I have got such a large portion of knowledge, most worthy father, by the
benefit of my Travail,


And so he has no doubt my Lord.

That I am bold now to warn you of Lord
Proditors insolent Treason, who has irreligiouslye seduced a fellow, and
closely conveyed him ee'n in the presence-chaire to murder you:


Oh guilty, guilty.

What was that fell? whats he?

I am the man.

O slave!

I have no power to strike,

I'm gone, i'm gone.

Let me admire heauen's wisdom in my Son.

I confess it, he hired me --

This is slave,
Tis forged against mine honour and my life,
For in what part of reason can't appear,
The Prince being Trauaild should know Treasons here
Plain counterfeit --

Dost thou make false our Son?

I know the prince will not affirm it.

He can and will my Lord.

Most just, he may:

A guard.

We cannot but in loyal zeal our selves,
Lay hands on such a Villain. --

Stay you, I find you here too.

Us my Lord?

Against Lussurioso and Infesto, who not only most ryotouslye consume their
houses in vicious gaming, morgaging their livings to the Merchant, whereby he
with his heirs enter upon their lands, from whence this abuse comes, that in
short time the Son of the Merchant has more Lordships then the Son of the
Nobleman(which else was never borne to inheritance) but that which is more
impious, they most adulterously train out young Ladies to Mid-night banquets,
to the utter defamation of their own honours, ridiculous abuse of their
Husbands.


How could the Prince hear that?

Most true my Lord.
My Conscience is a witness against it self,
For to that execution of chaste honour,
I was both hyr'd and led.

I hope the Prince out of his plentious wisdom
Will not give wrong to us: as for this fellow
He's poor, and cares not to be desperate.

Justice my Lord, I have my Niece stolen from me
Sh'as left her Dowry with me, but she's gone,
I'd rather have had her love then her money I,
This, this, is one of them, Justice my Lord:
I know him by his face, this is the Thief.

Your grace may now in milder sense perceive
The wrong done to us by this impudent wretch,
Who ha's his hand fixed at the throat of law,
And therefore durst be desperate of his life,

Peace, you're too foul, your crime is in excess:
One spot of him, makes not your Ulcers less.

Oh!

Did your Violence force away his Niece?

No my good Lord; ilestil confess whats truth.
I did remove her from her many wrongs,
Which she was pleased to leave, they were so wild.

What are you named?

Falso my Lord, Justice Falso, i'm known by that name.

Falso, you came fitly,
You are the very next that follows here.

I hope so my Lord, my name is in all the Records
I can assure your good grace.

Against Justice Falso.

Ah.

Who having had the honest charge of his Niece committed to his trust, by the
last will and Testament of her deceased father, and with her all the power of
his wealth, not only against faith and conscience detains her Dowry, but
against Nature and humanity assays to abuse her body.


I'm present to affirm it my loved Lord.

How? what make I here?

Either I must agree.
To loathed lust, or despised beggary.

Are you the plaintive here?

I my good Lord,
For fault of a better.

Seldom comes a worse -- and moreover not contained in this vice only, which
is odious to much, but against the sacred use of Justice, maintains three
threeues to his men.


Cuds me!

Who only take Purses in their Masters liberty, where if any one chance to
be taken, he appears before him in a false Beard, and own of his own fellows
takes his examination.


By my troth as true as can be, but he shall not know on it.

And in the end will execute Justice so cruelly upon him, that he will not
trust him in a prison, but commit him to his fellows chamber.


Can a man do nothing in the Country but tis told at Court? there's some busy
informing knave abroad, a my life.


That this is true, and these, and more my Lord.
(Be it under pardon spoken for mine own)
He the disease of Justice, these of honour,
And This of Loyalty and Reverence:
The vnswept venom of the Palace,

Slave!

Behold the Prince to approve it.

Oh, where?

Your Eyes keep with your Actions, both look wrong.

An infernal to my spirit.

My Lord the Prince:

Tread me to dust, thou in who wonder keeps,
Behold the Serpent on his belly creeps.

Ranckle not my foot, away.
Treason, we laugh at thy vain-labouring strings,
Above the foot thou hast no power ore Kings

I cannot with sufficient joy receive thee,
And yet my ioye's too much,

My royal Father,
To whose unnatural murder I was hired,
I thought it a more natural course of travail,
And answering future expectation,
To leave far Countries, and enquire mine own,

To thee let Reverence all her powers engage,
That art in youth a miracle to age.
State is but blindness, ethou had piercing Art,
We only saw the knee; but thou the heart.
To thee then power and Dukedom we resign,
*He's fit to reign, whose knowledge can refine:

Forbid it my obedience.

Our word's not vain,
I know thee wise can both obey and reign,
The rest of life we dedicate to heaven.

A happy and safe reign to our new Duke.

Without your prayers safer, happier: Fidelio.

My royal Lord.

Here take this Diamond:
You know the virtue on it, it can fetch vice:
Madam Castiza:

She attends my Lord.

Place a guard near us.
Know you you fellow Lady?

My honours evil.

Torment again?

So ugly are thy crimes,
Thine eye cannot endure 'em.
And that thy face may stand perpetually
Turned so from ours, and thy abhorred self,
Neither to threaten wrack of state or credit,
An everlasting banishment cease on thee.

Oh Fiend!

Thy life is such it is too bad to end.

May thy Rule, life, and all that's in thee glad,
Have as short time -- as thy begetting had.

Away, thy curse is idle, the rest are under reformation, and therefore under
pardon.


Our duties shall turn edge upon our crimes.


S'lid I was afraid of nothing, but that for my theeuerie, and bawderie I
should have been turned to an Innkeeper: my daughter, I am ashamed her worship
should see me.


Who would not love a friend at Court? what fine Galleries and rooms am I
brought through? I had thought my knight durst not have shown his face here, I.


Now mother of pride, and daughter of lust, which is your friend now?


Ah me!

I'm sure you are not so unprovided to be without a friend here, you'll pay
enough for him first.


This is the worst room that ever I came in.

I am your servant Mistress, know you not me!

Your worship is to great for me to know: I'm but a small timbred-woman when
I'm out of my apparel, and dare not venture upon greatness.


Do you deny me then? know you this purse?

That purse? O death has the Knight served me so? given away my Favours?


Stand forth -- thou one of those, for whose close lusts the plague never
leaves the City.
Thou worse then common: private, subtle harlot,
That dost deceive Three with one feigned lip,
Thy husband, the worlds eye, and the laws whip.
Thy zeal is hot, for tis to lust and frawde,
And dost not dread to make thy book thy Bawd,
You're curse enough to husbands il-got gains,
For whom the Court reiects, his gold maintains:
How dear and rare was Freedom wont to be,
Now few but are by their wives copies free,
And brought to such a head that now we see,
City and Suburbs wear one livery.

Tis long of those, an't like your grace, that come in upon us, will never leave
marrying of our widows till they make 'em all as free as their first husbands.


I perceive you can shift a point well.

Let me have pardon I beseech your grace, and I'll peach 'em all, all the close
women that are, and upon my knowledge there's above five thousand within the
walls and the liberties.


A band* they shall be sent against the Turk, Infidels against Infidels.


I will hereafter live so modestly, I will not lie with mine own husband, nor
come near a man in the way of honesty.


I'll be her warrant my Lord.

You are deceived, you think y' are still a Justice.

S'foot, worse then I was before I kneeled, I am no Justice now, I know I shall
be some Inne-keeper at last.


My father! tis mine own father.

I should have wondered else, lust being so like.

Her birth was kin to mine, she may prove modest, for my sake I beseech you
pardon her.


For thy sake I'll do more, Fidelio hand her,
My favours on you both, next all that wealth
Which was committed to that Periur'ds trust.

I'm a beggar now, worse then an Inne-keeper.

Your Mittimus shall not serve, I'll set my self free with a Deliberandum, with
a Deliberandum, mark you:


What's he? a guard!

Under your sufferance, worthy Father,
His harm is to himself,
One that ha's loved vexation so much,
He cannot now be rid on it,
Has been so long in suits that he's Law-mad.

A judgment, I crave a judgment, yea! Nunc pro tunc, Corruption alicuius, I
peeped me a Raven in the face, and I thought it had been my Solister: oh the
pens prick me.


And here comes he (wonder for temperance:)
Will take the cure upon him.

A blessing to this fair assembly.

Awa, yile have none ont, give me an Audita querela, or a Testificandum, or a
dispatch in twelve Terms, there's a blessing, there's a blessing.


You see the unbounded rage of his disease,

Tis the foul fiend my Lord ha's got within him the rest are fair to this,
this breeds in Ink,

And to that colour turns the blood possessed,
For instance, now your grace shall see him dressed.

Ah hah I rejoice then he's puzzled* muzled too Is't come to a Soepe corpus?


Ah, good sir, this is for want of patience.

That's a fool.
She never saw the Dogs and the Bears fight,
A Country thing.

This is for lack of grace,

I'ue other business, not so much idle time.

You never say your prayers.

I'm, aduizde by my learned counsel,

The power of my charm come over thee,
Place by degrees thy wits before thee,
With silk en patience here I bind thee,
Not to move till I unwind thee.

Yea! is my cause so muddy? do I stick, do I stick (fast?
Advocate here's my hand, pull, art made of flint?
Wilt not help out? -- alas there's nothing in it.

Oh do you sluice the Vein now?


Yes my honoured Lord.

Pray let me see the issue.

I therefore seek to keep it, -- now burst out
Thou filthy stream of trouble, spite and doubt.

Oh an extent, a Proclamation, a Summons, a Recognisance, a Tachment. and
Injunction, a Writ, a Seysure, a Writ of praeisement, an Absolution, a Quietus
est.


You're quieter I hope by so much Dreggs.
Behold my Lord:

This, why it out frowns Ink:

Tis the diseases Nature, the Fiends drink.


Oh sick, sick, Signior Ply-fee, sick: lend me thy Nightcap, oh!


The Balsum of a temperate brain,
I pour into this thirsty vein,
And with this blessed oil of quiet,
Which is so cheap, that few men buy it,
Thy stormy Temples I allay,
Thou shalt give up the Devil and pray,
Forsake his works, the'yre foul and black,
And keep thee bare in purse and back.
No more shalt thou in paper quarrel,
To dress up Apes in good apparel.
He throws his stock, and all his flock,
Into a swallowing gulf,
That sends his Goose unto his Fox,
His Lamb unto his Wolf.
Keep thy increase,
And live at peace,
For war's not equal to this battle,
That eats but men this men and cattaile,
Therefore no more this combat choose:
Where he that wins, does always loose,
And those that gain all, with this curse receive it,
From fools they get it, to their sons they leave it.

Hail sacred patience, I begin to feel
I have a Conscience now, Truth in my words, Compassion in my hart, above al,
in my blood peaces music,

Use me how you can,
You shall find me an honest-quiet man.
Oh, pardon, that I dare behold that face,
"Now I'ue least law, I hope have most grace,

We both admire the work-man and his piece:
Thus when all hearts are tunde to Honours strings,
There is no music to the Quire of Kings.

THe marks and notions extant in each spirit,
Sealed by th'industrious hand of art merit,
Me thinks appear transparent (as the mind
By fence were bounded and might seem confined
In the external eye) nor shall our tragic muse,
(If strong hope fail not) need a coynd excuse
But to those marginall notes of yours do bring
(In following nombers from the learned spring)
Matter instructiue to enrich their parts
Where knowledge reigns crowned with it own deserts,
Let such with serious and impartial hearing
Sound sense, quick sight and judgment never erring:
Survey and censure the mineruall frame
Of his elaborate work: and if his name
Merit regard, and you vouchsafe to grace him
With eminent love, or mongstthose lawreats place him,
That with the magic of sweet poesy,
Transfer Pernassus into Brittany,
He shall digest the Chaos of his brain,
To tunefull order and acquire a strain,
Near to the music of the heavenly spheres,
To fit Times guard and ravish choicest ears.
FAme and Opinion like the two vvingd cap
On Hermes head, do lift all Poets up:
Some, though deserving, yet above the Sphere
Of true impartial censure, whose tuned ear
Listens to all and can with judgment say,
Others sing well, though Thracian Orpheus play.
Our Muse affects no excellence: if Fame tell
And through her shrill trompe at the Muses well
(Where the thrice trebled bench of learning sits
In strict examination of others wits)
Sound ours, though humbly strains, whose infant growth
Nor dares, nor will, with times hugd darlings quarrel,
Nor stand the lightning with the sacred Laurel)
We rest content: yet thus far may conceit
Carry each labouring Artist, where the weight
Of his oyld task is over, that his tongue
May like a father of his tender young
Speak natures language and not be withstood,
When with our Muse he saith, that This is good.
This Epilogue should have been printed at the end of the book, but there was
no spare place for it.


