Boy?


Here sit!


Lay by my conscience, give me my Gown,
That weed is for the country,
We must be civil now, and match out Evil,
Who first made Civil, black; he pleased the Devil;
So; now know I where I am, me thinks already
I grasp best part of the Autumnian blessing
In my contentious fadome, my hand's free,
From wronger and from wronged I have fee,
And what by sweat from the rough earth they draw,
Is to enrich this silver harvest, Law,
And so through wealthy variance, and fat brawl,
The Barn is made but Steward to the Hall;
Come they up thick enough?

Oh like hops and harlots sir!


Why dost thou couple them?


Oh very aptly, for as the hop well boiled will make a man not stand upon his
legs: so the harlot in time will leave a man no legs to stand upon!


Such another and be my heir, I have no Child,
Yet have I wealth would redeem beggary,
I think it be a curse both here and foreign,
Where bags are fruitful'st, there the womb's most barren,
The poor ha's all our children, we their wealth;
Shall I be prodigal when my life cools,
Make those my heirs whom I have beggared; Fools?
It would be wondrous; rather beggar more,
Thou shalt have heirs enough, thou keep a whore,
And here comes kindred too with no mean purses,
Yet strive to be still blessed with Clients curses.

What subtlety have we here? a fellow
Shrugging for lifes kind benefits, shift and heate,
Crept up in 3. Terms, wrapped in silk and silver,
So well appointed too with Page and Pandar,
It was a happy gale that blew him hither.

And like Asses use such men,
When their load's off, turn em to graze again.
And may our wish have full effect, Many a suite, and much neglect.
And as it hath been often found, Let the Clients cups come round.
Help your poor kinsmen when you ha got em. You may drink deep, leave us
the bottom;
Or when there is a lamb fallen in, Take you the lamb, leave us the skin.
Your duty and regard hath moved us,
Never till now we thought you loved us,
Take comfort from our words, and make no doubt,
You shall have suites come sixteen times about.

We humbly thank the patron of our hopes.

With what a vassal -- appetite they Gnaw,
On our reversions; and are proud,
Coldly to taste our meates, which eight returns
Serve in to us as courses;
One day our writs like wilde-fowle fly abroad,
And then return over Cities, Towns, and Hills,
With Clients like dried straws between their bills;
And 'tis no few birds pick to build their Nests,
Nor no small money that keeps Drabs and Feasts!

But Gentlemen, to spread my self open unto you, in cheaper Terms I salute
you, for ours have but sixpenny fees all the year long, yet we dispatch you
in two hours, without demur; your Suites hang not long here after Candles be
lighted: Why we call this play by such a dear and chargeable Title, Michaelmas
Term? Know it consents happily to our purpose, tho perhaps faintlie to the
interpretation of many; for he that expects any great quarrels in Law to be
handled here, will be fondly deceived, this only presents those familiar
accidents, which happened in Town in the circumference of those six weeks,
whereof Michaelmas Term is Lord: Sat sapienti, I hope there's no fools in the
house!

What Master Rerrage?


Master Salewood* Exceedingly well met in Town, comes your Father up this
Term?


Why he was here three days before the Exchequer gapte.


Fie, such an early Termer?


He's not to be spoke withal, I dare not ask him blessing, till the last of
November.


And how looks thy little venturing Cousin?


Faith like a Lute that ha's all the strings broke, no body will meddle with
her.


Fie, there are Doctors enough in Town will string her again, and make her
sound as sweet as ere she did, is she not married yet?


She as no luck, some may better steal a horse than others look on. I have
known a virgin of five bastards wedded, faith when all's donne we must be
fain to marry her into the North I'm afraid.


But will she pass so think you?


Puh, any thing that is warm enough is good enough for them; so it come in
the likeness, tho the Devil be in it, the'ile venture the fiering.


They're worthy spirits in faith, heard you the News?


Not yet.


Mistress Difficult is fallen a widow.


Say true, is Master Difficult the Lawyer dead?


Easily dead sir.


Pray when died he?


What a question's that? when should a Lawyer dye but in the vacation, he ha's
no leisure to die in the Tearmetime, beside the Noise there would fetch him
again.


Knew you the nature of his disease.


Faith some say he dyed of an old grief he had, that the vacation was
fourteen weeks long.


And very likely. I knew 'twould kill him at last, t'as troubled him a long
time, he was one of those that would fain have brought in the heresy of a
fifth Term, often crying with a loud voice, oh why should we loose Bartholomew
week?


He savours, stop your Nose, no more of him.


Young master Easy, let me salute you sir, when came you?


I have but Inned my horse since master Cockstone.


You seldom visit London master Easy,
But now your Fathers dead tis your only course,
Here's gallants of all sizes, of all lasts,
Here you may fit your foot, make choice of those
Whom your affection may rejoice in:

You have easily possessed me I am free,
Let those live hinds that know not liberty.

Master Rerrage?


Good master Salewood, I am proud of your society.


What gentleman might that be?


One master Essay, he has good ^nd in Essex,
a fair free-brested Gentleman, somewhat too open,
bad in man, worse in woman,
the Gentrye-fault at first, he is yet fresh
and wants the City powdering, but what news?
I'st yet a match twixt master Qomodoes the rich Drapers
daughter and your self.

Faith sir, I am wildly riuald!


Wildly? by whom.


One Andrewe Lethe crept to a little warmth, and now so proud that he forgets
all storms, one that ne'er wore apparel, but like ditches 'twas cast before
he had it, now shines bright in rich embroderies, him master Quomodo affects,
the daughter him, the mother only me, I rest most doubtful, my side being
wookest.


Yet the mothers side being surer than the Fathers, it may prove, men plead
for money best, women for love.


Slid master Quomodo?


How then, afraid of a woollen draper.


He warned me his house, and I hate he should see me abroad!


Oh my 2. spirits Shortyard and Falselight, you that have so enriched me, I have
industry for you both?


Then do you please us best sir.


Wealthy employment.


You make me icth sir.


You Falselight as I have directed you.


I am nimble.


Go, make my course commodities, look, seek, with subtle art beguile the
honest eye, be near to my trapwindowe, cunning Falselight.


I never failed it yet.


I know thou did not;
But now to thee my true and secret Shortyard,
Whom I dare trustee'n with my wife,
Thou ne'er did mistress harm, but master, good,
There are too few of thy name Gentlemen,
And that we feel, but Citizens abundance,
I have a task for thee my pregnant spirit,
To exercise thy pointed wits upon.

Give it me, for I thirst.

Thine care shall drink it,
Know then I have not spent this long Vacation
Only for pleasures sake, give me the man
Who out of recreation culls advantage,
Dives into seasons, never walks, but thinks,
Ne^ides, but plots, my journey was toward Essex.

Most true?


Where I have seen what I desire.


A woman?


Puh; a woman, yet beneath her, that which she often treads on. Yet commands
her land, fair neat Land.


What is the mark you shoot at.


Why the fairest to cleave the heir in twain, I mean his Title to murder his
estate, stifle his right in some some detested prison, there are means and
ways enough to hooke in Gentry, besides our deadly enmitye which thus stands
they are busy about our wives, We about their Lands.


Your revenge is more glorious,
To be a cuckold is but for one life,
When land remains to you, your heir, or wife!

Ah sirrah, do we stinge'm, this fresh gallant rode newly up before me!


I beseech his name.


Young master Easy.


Easy? It may fall right.


I have enquired his haunt, stay, ha, I that, 'tis, that's he, that's he!


Happily!


Observe, take surely note of him, he's fresh and free shift thy self
speedily into the shape of gallantrye, I'll swell thy purse with angels, keep
foot by foot with him, out-dare his expenses, flatter, dice, and brothel to
him, give him a sweet taste of Sensuality, train him to every wasteful sin,
that he may quickly need health, but especially money, ravish him with a dame
or two, be his bawd for once, I'll be thine for ever, drink drunk with
him, creep into bed to him, kiss him and undo him, my sweet spirit.


Let your care dwell in me soon shall it shine, What subtlety is in man, that
is not mine.


O my most cherefull spirit, go, dispatch, Gentry is the chief fish we
Tradesmen catch.


What's here?


Oh, they are bills for Chambers.


Against Saint Andrewes, at a Painters house, there's a fair chamber ready
furnished to be let, the house not only endowed with a new fashion fore-part,
but which is more convenient for a Gentleman, with a very provident
backe-doore.


Why here's virtue still; I like that thing that's necessary, as well as
pleasant.


What news in yonder paper.


Ha? seek you for news, there's for you!


Whose tis? in the name of the black Angels, Andro Gruill.


No, Andro Lethe!


Lethe?


Has forgot his fathers name, poor Walter Gruill that begot him, fed him, and
brought him up.


Not hither.


No; 'twas from his thoughts, he brought him up below.


But does he pass for Lethe.


Amongst strange eyes that no more know him, then he knows himself, that's
nothing now, for master Andro Lethe, a gentleman of most received parts,
forgetfulness, Lust, Impudence, and Falsehood, and one especial Courtly quality;
to wit, no wit at all, I am his Rival for Quomodoes daughter, but he knows
it not.


Has spied us ore his paper.


Oh that's a warning to make our duties ready.


Salute him, hang him.


Puh, wish his health a while, heel be laid shortly, let him gorge Venison
for a time, our doctors will bring him to dry mutton; seem respective to make
his pride swell like a Toad with dew.


Master Lethe!


Sweet master Lethe.


Gentlemen your pardon, I remember you not.


Why we supped with you last night sir!


Oh cry you mercy, 'tis so long ago,
I had quite forgot you, I must be forgiven,
Acquaintance, dear society, suites and things,
Do so flow to me; that had I not the better memory!
'twould be a wonder I should know my self,
Esteem is made of such a dizzy mettle;
I have received of many gifts ore night
Whom I have forgot ere morning, meeting the men,
I wished em to remember me again,
They do so: then if I forget again,
I know what helped before, that will help then,
This is my course, for memory I have been told
Twenty preserves, the best I find is gold;
Ey truly! are you not knights yet, Gentlemen.

Not yet!


No, that must be looked into, tis your own fault,
I have some store of Venison, where shall we devour it,
Gentlemen?

The horne were a fit place.

For Venison, fit,
The horne having chaste it,
At the horne -- we'll Rime to that. --

Taste it.


Wast it.


Cast it.


That's the true rime indeed, we hunt our Venison
twice I tell you, first out a'th park, next out a'th Belly.

First dogs take pains to make it fit for men,
Then men take payne to make it fit for dogs.

Right.

Why this is kindness, a kind Gallant, you,
And love to give the dogs more than their due,
We shall attend you sir.

I pray do so.


The horne.


Easily remembered that you know!


But now unto my present business, the Daughter yeildes, and Quomodo consents,
only my mistress Quomodo, her mother without regard runs full against me, and
sticks hard! Is there no law for a woman that will run upon a man at her own
peril. Why should not she consent, knowing my state, my sudden fortunes, I
can command a custerd, and other bakemeats, death of sturgeon, I could keep
house with nothing, what friends have I? how wellam I beloved, ee'n quite
throughout the scullery, not consent? tis ee'n as I have writ, I'll be hanged,
and she love me not herself wold rather preserve me, as a private friend to
her own pleasures, than any way advance her daughter upon me to beguile
herself, then how have I relieved her in that point, let me peruse this
letter. Good mistress Quomodo, or rather as I hope ere the Term end, mother
Quomodo, since only your consent keeps a aloof off and hinders the copulation
of your daughter, what may I think, but that it is a mere affection in you,
doting upon some small inferior virtue of mine, to draw me in upon your
self, if the case stand so, I have comfort for you: for this you may well
assure your self, that by the marriage of your daughter I have the better
means and opportunity to your self, and without the least suspicion. This is
moving stuff, and that works best with a Citizens wife, but who shall I get
to convey this now: my Page I halent forth, my Pandar I have employed about the
country, to look out some third sister, or entice some discontented
Gentlewoman from her husband, who the laying out of my appetite shall
maintain, nay I'll deal like an honourable Gentleman, I'll be kind to women,
that which I gather in the day, I'll put into their purses at night, you shall
have no cause to rail at me, no faith, I'll keep you in good fashion Ladies,
no meaner men then knights shall ransom home your gowns, and recover your
smocks, I'll not dally with you -- some poor widow woman would come as a
necessary bawd now: and see where fitly comes -- my mother! curse off poverty
does she come up to shame me, to betray my birth, and cast soil upon my new
Suite, let her pass me, I'll take no notice of her, Scuruye -- murrey --
Carsey!

By your leave and like your worship.


Then I must proudly venture it; to me good woman.


I beseech one word with your worship.


Prethe be brief then.


Pray can your worship tell me any tidings of one Andro Gruill, a poor son
of mine own.


I know a gallant Gentleman of the name, one master Andro Gruill and well
receiude amongst Ladies.


That not he then!

He is no Gentleman that I mean.


Good woman if he be a Gruill, he's a Gentleman in the mornings: that's a
Gentleman a'th first, you cannot tel me


No truly, his father was an honest upright Tooth-drawer.


O my teeth.


An't please your worship, I have made a fore journey out, all this vacant
time, to come up and see my son Andro, poor Walter Gruill his Father has
laid his life, and left me a lone woman, I have not one husband in all the
world, therefore my coming up is for relief an't like your worship, hoping
that my son Andro is in some place about the Kitchen.


Kitchen, puh, fah.


Or a serving-man to some Kinght of worship.


Oh let me not endure her! Know you not me good woman?


Alas, an't pleease your worship, I never saw such a glorious suite since
the hour I was ^ersend.


Good, she knows me not, my glory does disquire me,
Beside my poorer name being drenched in Lethe,
Sheele hardly understand me, what a fresh air can do!
I may employ her as a private drudge,
To pass my letters and secure my lust,
And ne'er be noted mine, to shame my blood,
And drop my staining birth upon my raiment, faith good
woman you will hardly get to the speech of master Andro,
I tell you.

No?

Marry hang him, and like your Worship, I have known the day when no body
card to speak to him!


You must take heed how you speak ill of him now I cantell you; he's so
employde.


Employed for what?


For his behaviour, wisdom, and other virtues.


His virtues? no tis well known, his father was too poor a man to bring him
up to any virtues; he can scarce write and read.


He's the better regarded for that amongst Courtiers, for that's but a needy
quality!


If it be so, then heel be great shortly, for he has no good parts about him.


Well good woman, or mother, or what you will.


Alack the day, I know your worship scorns to cal me mother: tis not a thing
fit for your worship indeed, such a simple old woman as I am.


In pity of thy long journey, there's six-pence British: tend upon me, I have
business for you.


I'll wait upon your Worship.


Two pole off at least.


I am a clean old woman, an't like your Worship.


It goes not by cleannes here good woman, if you were fowler, so you were
braver, you might come nearer.


Nay and that be the fashion, I hope I shall


Come, leave your puling and sighing.


Beshrew you now, why did you entice me from my father


Why? to thy better advancement, would thou a pretty beautiful -- Iuicy
squall, live in a poor thrumbd house in the country in such servile --
habiliments, and may well pass for a gentlewoman in the City, does not 5
hundred do so think thou, and with worse faces, oh, now in these latter
days, the Devil raygning tis an age for cloven creatures? but why sad now?
yet indeed tis the fashion of any Courtesan to be sea-sicke in the first Voyage,
but at next she proclaims open wars, like a beaten soldier: why
Northampton-shire Lass dost dream of virginity now? remember a loose-bodied
Gown wench, let it go, wires, tyres, bents and bums, felts and falls, thou
that shalt deceive the world, that Gentlewomen indeed shall not be known from
others; I have a master to whom I must prefer thee, after the aforesaid
decking, Lethe by name, a man of one most admired property, he can both love
thee and for thy better advancement be thy Pandar himself, an exlent spark of
humility.


Well heaven forgive you, you train me up too't.


Why I do acknowledge it, and I think I do you a pleasure in it.


And if I should prove a harlot now, I should be bound to curse you.


Bound? nay and you prove a harlot, you'll be loose enough.


If I had not a desire to go like a gentlewoman, you should be hanged, ere you
should get me too't I warrant you.


Nay that's certain, nor a 1000. more of you, I know, you are all chaste enough,
till one thing or other tempt you^ deny a Satin gown and you dare now?


You know I have no power to do it, and that makes you so wilful: for what
woman is there such a beast that will deny any thing that is good.


True they will not, most dissembler.


No, and she bear a brave mind she will not I warrant you.


Why, therefore take heart, faint not at all,
Women ne'er rise, but when they fall,
Let a man break, he's gone, blown up,
A woman's breaking sets her up,
Virginity is no City -- Trade,
You're out a'th Freedom, when you're a maid,
Down with the lattis tis but thin,
Let courser beauties work within:
Whom the light mocks, thou art fair and fresh,
The gilded flies, will light upon thy flesh.

Beshrew your sweet enchantments, you have wun.

How easily soft women are undone:
So farewell wholesome weeds where treasure pants,
And welcome silks, where lies disease and wants:
Come wench, now flow thy Fortunes in to bless thee,
I'll bring thee where thou shalt be taught to dress thee!

Oh as soon as may be, I am in a swone till I be a gentlewoman, and you know
what flesh is mans meat, tell it be dressed.


Most certain, no more a woman.


Gentlemen I ha sworn I'll change the room: dice?


You see I'm patient gentlemen*


I, the fiends in it, you're patient, you put up all. Devils.


Come set me gentlemen!


An Essexgenrleman sir.


An unfortunate one sir.


Indeed sir.


Hes second to my bosom.


I'll give you that comfort then sir, you must not want money as long as you are
in town sir.


No sir?


I am bound in my love to him to see you furnished, and in that comfort I
recover my salute again sir.


Then I desire to be more dear unto you.


I rather study to be dear unto you -- boy, fill some wine. -- I knew not what
fair impressier I receiud, at first, but I began to affect your society very
speedily.


I count my self the happier.


To master Alsup sir, to whose remembrance, I could love to drink till I were
past remembrance.


I shall keep Christmasse with him sit, where your health shall likewise
undoubtedly be remembered, and thereupon I pledge you: -- I would sue for your
name sir.


Your suite shall end in one Term sir: my name is Blastfield.


Kind master Blastfield, your dearer acquaintance.


Nay come, will ye draw in Gentlemen? set me:


Faith I'm scattered.


Sir, you shall not give out so meanly of your self in my company for a
Million: make Such privy to your disgrace? you're a Gentleman of fair
fortunes; keep me your reputation; set 'em all, there's crowns fo you.


Sir you bind me infinitely in these courtesies.


You must always have a care of your Reputation here in Town master Easy,
although you ride down with nothing, it skils not.


I'm glad you tell me that yet, then In,e indifferent. Well, come: who
throws? I set all these.


Why, well said.


This same master Lethe here begins to undo us again.


Ah sir, I came not hither but to win.


And then you'll leave us, that's your fashion.


He's base that visits not his friends:


But he's more base taht carries out his winnings.
None will do so but those have base beginnings

It is a thing in use and ever was, I pass this time.


I wonder you should pass. And that you're suffered.


Tut, the Dice are ours,
Then wonder not at those that have most powrs*

The Devil and his Angels.


Are these they? Welcome dear Angels, where you're cursed ne'er stay.


Here's luck.


Lets search him Gentlemen, I think he wears a smock:


I knew the time, he wore not half a shirt, just like a Pee.


No, how did he for the Rest?


Faith he compounded with a couple of Napkins at Barnet, and so trus'd up the
lower parts.


Twas a pretty shift in faith.


But master Lethe ha's forgot that too.


A mischief on it to loose all: I could --


Nay but good Ma Easy, do not do your self that tyranny I beseech you, I must
not ha you alter your body now for the Purge of a little money: you undo me
and you do.


Twas al I brought up with me, I protest master Blastsield, all my rent till
next quarter.


Pox of money, talk not on it I beseech you, what said I to you? Mass I am out
of cash my self too, -- Boy.


Anon sir.


Run presently to master Gum the Mercer, and will him to tell out two or three
hundred pound for me, or more according as he is furnished: I'll visit him ith
morning say.


It shall be said sir.


Do you hear boy?


Yes sir.


If master Gum be not sufficiently ready, call upon master Profit the
Goldsmith.


It shall be done sir.


Boy.


I know I was not sent yet now is the time.


Let them both rest till another occasion: you shall not need to run so far
at this time, take one nier hand go to Ma. Quomodo the Draper, and will him to
furnish me instantly.


Now I go sir.


It seems you're well known master Blastfield, and your credit very spacious
here ith City.


Master Easy, let a man bear himself portly, the whorsons will creep to him
a'th their bellies, and their wives a'th their backs: there's a kind of bold
grace expected throughout all the parts of a Gentleman: then for your
obseruances, a man must not so much as spit but within line and fashion. I tell
you what I ha done: sometimes I carry my water all London over, only to
deliver it proudly at the Standard, and do I pass altogether unnoted think
you? No, a man can no sooner peep out his head, but there's a bow bent at him
out of some watch tower, or other.


So readily sir.


Push, you know a bowe's quickly ready, tho a Gun belong a charging, and will
shoot five times to his once, Come, you shall bear your self Iouially: take
heed of setting your looks to your losses, but rather smile upon your ill
luck, and inuit 'em to morrow to another breakfast of Bones.


Nay i'll forswear dicing.


What? peace? I am ashamed to hear you: will you cease in the first loss,
show me one Gentleman that ere did it? Fie vppon't I must use you to company
I perceive, youde be spoiled else: forswear Dice? I would your friends heard
you in faith.


Nay I was but in jest sir.


I hope so, what would Gentlemen say of you? there goes a Gull that keeps his
money, I would not have such a report go on you, for the World as long as you
are in my company. Why man fortune alters in a Minute, I ha known those have
recovered so much in an hour, their purses were never sick after.


Oh worse then consumption of the Liver! consumption of the patrimony.


How now? mark their humours master Easy.


Forgive me, my poste^itie, yet vngotten.


That's a penitent Maudlen Dicer.


Few know the sweets that the plain life allows. Wild son that surfeits of
his fathers brows.


Laugh at him master Easy.


Ha, ha ha.


I'll be damned and these be not the bones of some queen that cozened me in
her life, and now consumes me after her death.


That's the true-wicked-blasphemous, and soul-shuddering Dicer, that will curse
you all service time, attribute his ill luck always to one Drab or other.


Dick, Hell-gill: the hapie News.


I have her for you sir.

Peace, what is she?


Young, beautiful and plump. -- a delicate piece of sin.


Of what parentage?


Oh a Gentlewoman of a great house.


Fie, fie.


She newly came out of a Barn; yet too good for a Tooth-drawers son.


Is she wife or maid?


That which is dantiest, Maid


I'd rather she would been a wife.


A wife sir, why?


Oh Adultery is a great deal sweeter in my mind.


Diseases gnaw thy bones. I think she has deserved to be a wife sir.


That will move well.


Her firstlinge shall be mine. Swine look but for the husks, the meat be
thine.


How now Boy?


Master Quomodo takes your worships greeting exceeding kindly, and in his
commendations returns this answer, that your worship shall not be so apt to
receive it, as he willing to lend it.


Why, we thank him in faith.


Troth, and you ha reason to thank him sir, t'was a very friendly answer.


Push, a Gentleman that keeps his days even here ith City (as I my self watch
to do) shall have many of those answers in a tweluemonth, master Easy.


I promise you sir I admire your carriage, and begin to hold a mor reu'rend
respect of you.


Not so I beseech you, I give my friends leave to be inward with me, -- will
you walk Gentlemen?


Wee're for you. Present her with this Jewel my first token.


There are certain Country-men without enquiring for master Rerage, and
master Salewood.


Tennants!


Thou reuiu'st us Rascal.


When's our next meeting Gentlemen?


To morrow night, This Gentleman, by me invites you all, Do you not Master
Easy?


Freely sir.


We do embrace your love -- a pure fresh Gull


Thus make you men at parting dutiful, And rest beholding to you, tis the
slight To be remembered, when you're out of sight.


A pretty virtue.


Where shall I seek her now? -- oh if she knew The Dangers that attend on
women's lives, She would rather lodge under a poor thatched Roof Then under
carved feelings: she was my joy, And all content that I received from life, My
dear and only Daughter: What says the Note she left, let me again With
stayeder grief peruse it -- Father? wonder not at my so sudden departure,
without your leave or knowledge, thus under pardon I excuse it, had you had
knowledge of it, I know you would have sought to restrain it, and hinder me
from what I have long desired, being now happily preferred to a Gentleman's
service in London; about Holborn, if you please to send, you may hear well of
me --

As false as she is disobedient,
Iy'e made larger inquiry, left no place
(Where Gentry keeps) unsought, yet cannot hear,
Which drives me most into a shameful fear:
Woe worth the infected cause that makes me visit
This man-deuouring City -- where I spent
My vnshapen youth, to be my ages curse,
And surfeited away my name and state,
In swinish Riots, that now being sober,
I do awake, a Beggar, -- I may hate her.
Whose youth voides wine, his age is cursed with water,
Oh heavens! I know the price of ill, too well,
What, the confusions are in whom they dwell,
And how soon Maids are to their Ruins won
One minute, and aeternally undone:
So in mine may it: may it not be thus? --
Though she be poor, her honours preceous,
May be my present form, and her found fear,
May chase her from me, if her eye should getme,
And therefore as my love and wants advise.
I'll serve until I find her in disguise.
Such is my care to fright her from base evils
I leave calm state to live amongst you, devils.

Were these fit words think you to be sent to any Citizens wise, to enjoy
the Daughter, and love the mother too for a need? I would foulye scorn that
man, that should love me only for a need I tell you: and here the Knave
writes again, that by the marriage of my Daughter, a has the better means and
opportunity to my self, he lies in his Throat like a villain, he has no
opportunity of me, for all that, tis for his betters to have opportunity of
me, and that he shall well know -- a base proud knave -- a has forgot how he
came up, brought two of his country men to give their words to my husband for
a suit of green Karsey, a has forgot all this, and how does he appear to me,
when his white Satin suttes on, but like a Magot crept out of a Nutshell, a
fair body and a foul neck, those parts that are covered of him, looks
indifferent well, because we cannot see em else for all his clensing, pruning
and paring, he's not worthy a Brokers Daughter, and so tell him.


I will indeed forsooth.


And as for my Child, I hope sheele be ruled in Time, though she be foolish yet
not be carried away with a cast of Manchets, a Bottle of wine, or a Custard,
and so I pray certify him.


He do your errant effectually.


Art thou his Ant -- or his --


Alas -- I am a poor drudge of his.


Faith and thou were his Mother, he would make thee his drudge I warrant him.


Marry out upon him, sir reverence of your mistrisship


Here's somewhat for thy pains, fare thee well.


Tis more then he gave me since I came to him.


How now, what prating have we hear? whispers, dumshowes? why Tomazin, goo too
-- my shop is not altogether so dark as some of my neighbours, where a man may
be made Cuckold at one end, while he's measuring with his yard at the other.


Only commendations sent from Master Lethe your worshipful Son in law that
should be.


Oh, that you like not* he that can make us rich in custom, strong in friends,
happy in suites, bring us into all the romes a sundays, from the leads to the
seller, pop us in with Venison till we crack again, send home the rest in an
honourable Napkin -- this man you like not forsooth?


But I like him father.


My blessing go with thy liking


A number of our Citizens hold our credit by it to come home drunk, and say we
ha been at Court: then how much more credit i'st to be drunk there indeed?


Tut, thy Mothers a fool -- pray whats Master Rerage whom you plead for so?


Why, first he is a Gentleman.


I, he's often first a Gentleman that's last a beggar.


My father tells you true, what should I do with a gentleman, I know not which
way to lye with him.


Tis truetoo -- thou know beside, we undo Gentlemen daily


That makes so few of em marry with our Daughters, unless it be one green
foot or other* next, M. Rerage has land living, the other but his walk in the
street, his snatching diet, he's able to entertain you in a fair house of
his own, the other in some nook or corner, or place us behind the cloth like a
company of Puppe^s: at his house you shall be served curiously, sit down eat
your meat with leisure, there we must be glad to take it standing, without
either salt, cloth, or trencher, and say we are befriended too.


Oh, that gives a Citizen a better appetite then his Garden.


So say I Father, me thinks it does me most good when I take it standing, I
know not how all women's minds are:


Faith I think they are al of thy mind for that thing, how now Falslight?


I have descried my fellow Short-yard, alias Blastfield, at hand with the
Gentleman.


Oh my sweet Short-yard! -- Daughter, get you up to your Virginalls: by your
leave Mistress Quomodo.


Why I hope I may sitith shop, may I not?


That you may, and welcome sweet hony-thye, but not at this season, there's a
Buck to be struck.


Well, since i'm so expressly forbidden, i'll watch above ith gallery, but i'll
see your knavery.


Be you prepared as I tell you.


You near feared me:


Oh that sweet, neat, comely, proper, delicate parcel of land, like a fine
Gentlewoman ith waste: not so great as pretty, pretty: the Trees in Summer
whistling, the silver waters by the Banks harmoniouslye gliding, I should have
been a Scholar, an excellent place for a student: fit for my Son that
lately commenced at Cambridge, whom now I have placed at Innes of Court: Thus
we that seldom get Lands honestly, must leave our heirs to inherit our
knavery: but whist, one turn about my shop and meet with em.


Is this it sir?


I, let me see, this is it: sign of three Knaves, tis it^


Do you hear sir, what lack you Gentlemen? see good Kersies or broad
clothes here, I pray come near -- Master Blastfield?


I thought you would know me anon.


You're exceeding welcome to Town sir, your worship must pardon me, tis always
misty weather in our shops here: we are a Nation the Sun ^ere shines upon,
-- Came this Gentleman with you?


O salute him fairly, he's a kind Gentleman, a very in ward of mine.


Then I cry you mercy sir, you're especially welcome.


I return you thanks sir.


But how shall I do for you now Master Blastfield?


Why whats the matter?


It is my greatest affliction at this instant, I am not able to furnish you.


How master Quomodo, pray say not so, sl'ud you undo me then.


Upon my Religion Master Blastfield, bonds lye forfeete in my hands, I expect
the receipt of a thousand every hour, and cannot yet set eye of a penny.


That's strange me thinks.


Tis mine own pity that plots against me Master Blastfield, they know I
have no conscience to take the for feture, and that makes em so bold with my
mercy.


I am sorry for this.


Never the less, if I might entreat your delay but the age of three days to
express my sorrow now, I would double the sum, and supply you with four or
five hundred.


Let me see, -- three days.


I good sir, and it may be possible.


Do you hear Master Blastfield,


Ha?


You know i'ue already enuited all the Gallants to sup with me to night.


That's true in faith.


T will be my everlasting shame, if I have no money to maintain my bounty.


I ne'er thought upon that -- I looked still when that should come from him, we
have strictly examined our expenses, it must not be three days Master
Quomodo.


No the^ 'me afraid twill be my grief sir.


Master Blastfield, i'll tell you what you may do now.


What good sweet bedfellow.


Send to Master Goome, or Master Profit, the Mercer and Goldsmith.


Mass that was well remembered of thee -- I perceive the Trout will be a
little troublesome ere he be caught -- Boy. ^ Boy* Here sir.


Run to Master Goome, or Master Profit, and carry my present occasion of
money to em.


I run sir.


Me thinks Master Blastfield, you might easily attain to the satisfaction of
3. days, here's a Gentleman your friend I dare say will see you sufficiently
possessed till then.


Not I sir, by no means: master Blastfield knows I'm further in want then
himself, my hope rests all upon him, it stands upon the loss of my credit to
Night, if I walk without money.


Why master Quomodo, what a fruitless Motion have you put forth, you might
wel^ assure your self this gentleman had it not if I wanted it: why our purses
are brothers we desire but equal fortunes: in a word we're man and wife, they
can but lie together, and so do we.


As ne'er as can be in faith.


And to say truth, tis more for the continuing of this Gentleman's credit in
Town then any incitement from mine own want only, that I cou^t to be so
immediately furnish^ -- you shall hear him confess as much himself.


Tis most certain master Quomodo.


Oh here comes the Boy now: How now Boy, what says master Goome, or master
Profit?


Sir, thei'r both walk forth this frosty morning to Brainford, to see a
Nurse-childe.


A Bastard be it, spite and shame.


Nay, never vex your self sweet master Blastfield.


Bewitched I think.


Do you hear sir? you can persuade with him.


A little sir.


Rather then he should be altogether destitute, or be too much a vexation to
himself, he shall take up a commodity of cloth of me tell him.


Why la! by my troth to was kindly spoken.


Two hundred pounds worth upon my Religion say.


So disastrously.


Nay, master Blastfield, you do not hear what master Quomodo said since,
like an honest true Citizen in faith: rather then you should grow diseasde
upon it, you shall take up a commodity of two hundred pounds ^orth of cloth.


The mealie Moth consume it, would he home turn Peddler now? what should I do
with cloth?


He's a very wilful Gentleman at this Time in faith: he knows as well what to
do with it, as I my self Iwis: there's no Merchant in Town but will be greedy
upon it, and pay down money vpo'th nail, the'l dispatch it over to
Middle-borrow presently, and raise double commodity by exchange, if not, you
know tis Tearme-time, and Michaelmas Term too, the Drapers harvest, for
footcloaths, riding suts, walking suits, chamber gowns, and hall gowns.


Nay, I'll say that, it comes in as fit a time as can be.


Nay take me with you again ere you go sir, I offer him no trash (...) him, but
present money, say, where I know some Gentlemen in town ha been glad, and are
glad at this time, to take up commodities in Hawks hoods, and browne paper.


Oh horrible, are there such fool^s in town?


I offer him no trash tell him, upon my Religion you may say, -- Now my sweet
Shortyand, -- now the hungry fish begins to nibble: one end of the worm is in
his mouth in faith.


Why stand I here (as late our graceless Dames
That found no eyes) to see that Gentleman
Al^ue in state and cred^ (...)
Help to rip up himself does all he can,
Why am I wife to him that is no man?
I suffer in that Gentleman's confusion.

Nay be persuaded in that master Blastfield tis ready money at, the (...)
beside, the (...) and all falls in as pa^ as can be (...) help it.


Well Master Easy, none but you could have persuaded me to that, come, would
you would dispatch then Master Quomodo, where's this cloth?


Full and whole within, all of this piece of my Religion Master Blastfield,
feel it, nay feel it and spare not, Gentlemen! your fingers and your judgment.


Clothe's good.


By my tro^h exceeding good cloth, a good wale t'as,


Falslight.


I'm near out 'athe shop sir.


Go, call in a Porter presently to carry away the cloth with the Star
mark, whither will you please to have it carried Master Blastfield?


Faith to Master Beggar-land, he's the only Merchant now: or his Brother
Master Stilliard-downe, there's little difference.


Y'aue happened upon the money men sir, they and some of their Brethren I can
tell you, will not stick to offer thirty thousand pound to be cursed still,
great monied men, their stocks lye in the Poores throats: but you'll see me
sufficiently discharged Master Blastfield ere you depart.


You have always found me righteous in that.


Falslight.


Sir.


You may bring a Scrivener along with you.


I'll remember that sir.


Have you sent for a Citizen Master Blastfield.


No faith not yet -- Boy!


What must you do with a Citizen sir?


A custom they're bound to alate by the default ofeuill debtors, no Citizen
must lend money without two be bound in the bond, the second Man enters but
for custom sake.


No, and must he needs be a Citizen?


Byth mass stay, i'll learn that Master Quomodo!


Sir.


Must the second party that enters into bond only for fashions sake needs be
a Citizen? what say you to this Gentleman for one?


A lass sir, you know he's a mere stranger to me, I neither am sure of his
going or abiding, he may Inn here to Night, and ride away to morrow,
(although I grant the chief burden lies upon you) yet we are bound to make
choice of those we know sir.


Why he's a Gentleman of a pretty living sir.


It may be so: yet under both your pardons I'd rather have a Citizen.


I hope you will not disparadge me so? tis well known I have three hundred pound
a year in Essex,


Well said, to him thy self, take him up roundly.


And how doubtfullie so ere you account of me, I do not think but I might
make my bond pass for a hundred pound'ith City.


What alone sir?


Alone sir: who says so? perhaps i'd send down for a Tenant or too.


I, that's another case sir.


Another case let it be then.


Nay, grow not into anger sir.


Not take me into a Bond, as good as you shall good man Goose-cap.


Well Master Blastfield, because I will not disgrace the Gentleman, i'm content
for once, but we must not make a practise on it.


No sir, now you would you shall not.


Cuds me, i'm undone, he's gone again.


The Nets broke.


Hold there dear Gentleman.


Deny me that small curtizie? s'foot a very Jew will not deny it me.


Now must I catch him warily.


A jest indeed, not take me into a Bond quo they.


Master Easy -- Mark my words, if it stood not upon the eternal loss of
thy credit against Supper --


Mass that's true.


The pawning of thy horse for his own Vittailes.


Right in faith.


And thy utter dissolution amongst Gentlemen for e^er.


Pox on it.


Quomodo should hang, rot, stink.


Sweet boy in faith.


Drop Dam.


Excellent Shortyard.


I forgot all this: what meant I to ^wagger before I had money in my purse? how
does master Quomodo? is the Bond ready?


Oh sir.


Come we must be friends, here's my hand.


Give it the Scrivener: here he comes.


Good day Master Quomodo, good morrow Gentlemen.


We must require a little aid from your pen, good master Dustbox.


What be the Gentlemen's names that are bound sir?


Master Iohn Blastfield Esquireith wild of Kent, and what do they call your
bed f^llowes name?


Master Richard Easy: you may easily hit on it.


Master Richard Easy of Essex Gentleman, both bound to Ephestian Quomodo
Citizen and Draper of London: the sum two hundred pound. What Time do you
take master Blastfield for the payment?


I never pass my Month you know.


I know it sir. October sixteenth to day, sixteenth of November say.


Is it your custom to return so soon sir?


I never miss you.


I am come for the rest of the same price master Quomodo.


Star-marke, this is it, are all the rest gone?


Thei'r all at Master Stilyard downs by this time.


How the poor raskall's all in a froth?


Push, their ordained to sweat for Gentlemen, -- Porters backs and women's
bellies bear up the world.


Tis true in faith, they bear men and money, and that's the world.


Ye'aue found it sir.


I'm ready to your hands Gentlemen.


Come Master Easy.


I beseech you sir.


It shall be yours I say.


Nay pray master Blastfield.


I will not in faith.


What do you mean sir?


I should show little bringing up, to take the way of a stranger.


By my troth you do your self wrong tho master Blastfield.


Not a whit sir.


But to avoid strife, you shall have your will of me for once.


Let it be so I pray.


Now I begin to set one foot upon the land, me thinks I am felling of
Trees already, we shall have some Essex Loggs yet to keep Christmasse with,
and that's a comfort.


Now is he quarting out the Executioner.
Strides over him: with his own blood he writes:
I am no Dame that can endure such sights.

So his right wing is cut, will not fly far
Past the two City hazards, Poultry, and Woodstreete.

How like you my Roman hand in faith?


Exceeding well sir, but that you rest too much upon your R. and make your ease
too little.


I'll mend that presently.


Nay tis done now, past mending: you both deliver this to master Quomodo as
your deed?


We do sir.


I thank you Gentlemen,


Would the Coin would come away now, we have deserved for it


By your leave a little Gentlemen.


How now? what's the matter? speak?


As fast as I can sir -- All the clothes come back a^ gen.


How?


What's the news?


The passage to Middle borrow is stopped, and therefore neither Master Still
yard-downe, nor Master Beggerland, nor any other Merchant will deliver present
money vppon't.


Why what hard luck have you Gentlemen?


Why Master Blastfield?


Pish --


You're so discontented too presently, a man cannot tell how to speak to you?


Why what would you say?


We must make some what on it now sir.


I where? how? the best is it lies all upon my neck, Master Quomodo, can you
help me to any money fort? speak


Troth Master Blastfield, since my self is so vnfurnisht, I know not the
means how, there's one 'ith street a new setter up, if any lay out money
vppon't twill be he.


His name:


Master Idem -- but you know we cannot give but greatly to your loss, because
we gain and live by it.


Sfoo't will he give any thing.


I, stand upon that.


Will he give any thing? -- the Brokers will give nothing? to no purpose.


Falslight.


Over your head sir.


Desire Master Idem to come presently and look vppo'th cloth.


I will sir.


What if he should offer but a hundred pound?


If he want twenty on it lets take it.


Say you so?


Master Quomodo we will have four or five hundred pound for you of his own
within three or four days.


Tis true, he said so indeed.


Is That your wife master Quomodo?


That's she, little Tomazin?


Under your leave sir, i'll show my self a Gentleman.


Do, and welcome Master Easy.


I have commission for what I do Lady from your Husband.


You may have a stronger commission for the next, an't please you, that's from
my self.


You teach me the best law Lady.


Beshrew my blood, a proper, springfull, and a sweet Gentleman.


My Son: Sim Quomodo? here's more work for you Master Easy, you must
salute him too, for he's like to be heir of thy land I can tell thee.


Vim, vitam, sprin{que} salutem.


He shows you there he was a Cambridge man sir, but now he's a Templer, ha's
he not good grace to make a Lawyer?


A very good grace to make a Lawyer.


For indeed he ha's no grace at all.


Some gave me counsel to make him a Divine.


Fie, fie.


But some of our livery think it an unfit thing, that our own Sons should
tell us of our vices: others, to make him a Physician, but then being my heir,
i'm afraid he would make me away: now a Lawyer thei'r all willing too,
because tis good for our trade and increases, the number of Cloath-gownes, and
indeed tis the fittest for a Citizens Son, for our word is, what do ye
lack? and their word is what do you give.


Exceeding proper.


Master Idem welcome.


I have seen the cloth sir.


Very well.


I am but a young setter up, the uttermost I dare ventture upon 'tis
three-score pound.


What?


If it be for me, so, I am for it: if not, you have your doth and I have my
money.


Nay, pray master Blastfield refuse not his kind offer.


A bargain then master Idem, clap hands -- he's finely cheated: come, let's
all to the next Tavern and see the money paid.


A match.


I follow you Gentlemen, take my Son along with you.

Now to my keys: ^me Master Idem, he must fetch the money, first have I
caught him in a bond for two hundred pound, and my two hundred pounds worth a
doath again for three-score pound: admire me all you studyents at Innes for
cousenage.


You talk of an alteration, here's the thing it self, what base birth does
not raiment make glorious? and what glorious births do not ^agges make
infamous? why should not a woman confess what she is now? fince the finest are
but deluding shadows, begot between Tyr^omen and Taylors? for instance,
behold their Parents.


Say what you will, this wire becomes you best, how say you Taylor?


I promise you tis a wire would draw me from my work seven days a week.


Why do you work a sundays Taylor?


Hardest of al a Sundaie, because we are most forbidden


Troth and so do most of us women, the better day the better deed we think.


Excellent exceeding in faith, a narrow card wire sets out a cheek so fat and so
full, and if you be ruled by me, you shall wear your hair still like a
Mock-face behind, tis such an Italian world, many men know not Before from
Behind.


How like you the sitting of this gown now Mistress Comings?


It sits at marvelous good Ease, and comely discretion.


Who would think now this fine Sophisticated squall came out of the Bosom of a
Barn, and the loins of a Haytosser.


Out you saucy pestiferous Pander, I scorn that in faith.


Excellent, already the true phrase and stile of a strumpet, stay, a little
more of the red, and then I take my leave of your Cheek for four twenty
hours -- Do you not think it impossible that her own Father should know her
now, if he saw her?


Why I think no less, how can he know me, when I scarce know my self.


Tis right.


But so well you lay wait for a man for me.


I protest I have bestowed much labour about it, and in fit Time, good news I
hope.


1 Iu'e found one yet at last, in whose preferment I hope to reap credit.

Is that the fellow?

1 Lady it is.


Art thou willing to serve me fellow?


So please you, he that ha's not the heart to serve such a Mistress as your
beautiful self, deserves to be honoured for a fool, or Knighted for a
Coward.


There's to many of them already.


Twere sin then to raise the number.


Well, we'll try both our likings for a month, and then either proceed, or
let fall the suite.


Be it as you have spoke, but tis my hope A longer Term.


No truly, our Term ends once a month, we should get more then the
Lawyers, for they have but four Terms a year, and we have twelve, that
makes em run so fast to us in the Vacation.


A mistress of of a choice beauty, amongst such imperfect creatures I ha not
seen a perfecter: I should have reckoned the fortunes of my Daughter amongst
the happiest, had she lighted into such a service, whereas now I rest doubt
full, whom or where she serves.


There's for your bodily advice Taylor, and there's for your head-counsell, and
I discharge you both till to morrow morning again.


At which time our neatest Attendance.


I pray have an especial care howsoever you stand or lye, that nothing fall
upon your hair to batter your wire.


I warrant you for that -- which Gown becomes me best now, the purple Satin
or this?


If my opinion might rule over you --


Come gallants, i'll bring you to a Beauty shall struck your eyes into your
hearts, what you see you shall desire, yet never enjoy.


And that's a Villainous torment.


And is she but your vnderput Master Lethe?


No more of my credit, and a Gentlewoman of a great house, Noble parentage,
unmatchable Education, my plain Pung. I may, grace her with the name of a
Courtesan, a Backslider, a Prostitution, or such a Toy, but when all comes ^o al
tis but a plain Pung, look you Gentlemen, that's she, behold her.


Oh my beloved strayer! I consume in thy absence.


La you now -- you shall not say i'll be proud to you Gentlemen, I give you
leave to salute her* I me afraid of nothing now, but that sheele utterly
disgrace em, turn tail to em, and place their kisses behind her, no by my
faith, she deceives me, by my troth sha's kissed am both with her lips: I thank
you for that music masters, sli'd they both court her at once, and see if she
ha not the wit to stand still and let em: I think if two men were brewde into
one, there is that woman would drink em up both.


A Cockscombe, he a Courtier.


He says he ha's a place there.


So ha's the Fool a better place then he, and can come where he dare not show
his head.


Nay, he are you me Gentlemen.


I protest you were the last man we spoke on, we're a little busy yet, pray
stay there a while, we'll come to you presently.


This is good in faith, endure this and be a slave forever, since you neither
savour of good breeding nor bringing up, I'll slice your hamstrings but i'll make
you show mannerly -- pox on you, leave courting, I ha not the heart to hurt an
Englishman in faith, or else --


What else?


Prithee lets be merry, nothing else -- here, fetch some wine.


Let my Servant go for it.


Yours, which is he?


This sir, but I scarce like my Mistress now: the loins can ne'er be safe where
the Flies be so busy -- Wit by experience bought foils wit at School: Who
proves a deeper knave then a Spent fool, I am gone for your worships wine sir.


Sir, you put up too much indignity, bring company to cut your own throat,
the fire is not yet so hot, that you need two Screenes before it, tis but new
kindled yet, if twere rise to a flame, I could not blame you the to put others
before you but alas all the heate yet is comfortable a cherrisher, not a
defacer.


Prethe let em alone, theile be ashamed o^t anon I troe, if they have any
grace in 'em.


I'd fain have him quarrel, fight, and be assuredly killed, that I might beg
his place: for there's ne'er a one void yet.


You'll make him mad anon.


Tis to that end.


Yet at last, Master Quomodo is as firm as his promise.


Did I not tell you still he would.


Let me see, I am seven hundred pound in bond now to the Rascal.


Nay you're no less Master Blastfield, look too't, by my troth, I must needs
confess sir, you ha been vncommonly kind to me, since I ha been in Town,
but master Alsup shall know on it.


That's my Ambition sir.


I beseech you sir. Stay, this is Lethes haunt, see, we have caught him.


Master Blastfield and Master Easy, you're kind Gentlemen both.


Is that the beauty you famde so?


The same.


Who be those so industrious about her?


Rerage and Salewood: ^le tell you the vnmannerlyest trick of em, that ever
you heard in your life.


Prithee whats that?


I ^nuyfed em hither to look upon her, brought em along with me, gave em
leave to salute her in kindness, what do they but most sawcilie fall in love
with her, very impudently court her for themselves, and like two crafty
Attorneys, finding a hole in my lease, go about to defeat me of my right.


Ha they so little conscience?


The most vnciuilst part that you have seen, I know theile be sorry for it
when they have done, for there's no man but gives a sigh after his sin of women,
I know it by my self.


You parcel of a rude, saucy and unmannerly nation.


One good thing in him, heel tell em ont roundly.


Cannot a Gentleman purchase a little fire to thaw his appetite by, but must
you that have been daily singed in the flame, be as greedy to beguile him
on it? how can it appear in you but maliciously, and that you go about to
engross hell to your selves? he auen forbid, that you should not suffer a
stranger to come in, the Devil himself is not so unmannerly, I do not think
but some of them rather will be wise enough to beg* Offices there before you,
and keep you out, marry all the spite will be they cannot sell em again.


Come, are you not to blame -- not to give place? -- To us I mean --


A worse and a worse disgrace.


Nay Gentlemen, you wrong us both then, stand from me, I protest i'll draw my
silver Bodkin upon you.


Clubs, clubs, -- Gentlemen stand upon your Guard.


A Gentlewoman must swagger a little now and then I perceive, there would be
no civility in her Chamber else, though it be my hard fortune to have my
keeper there a coward, the thing that's kept is a Gentlewoman borne.


And to conclude a Coward, infallible of your side, why do you think in faith I
took you to be a Coward? do I think you'll turn your back to any man
living? you'll be whipped first.


And then indeed she turns her back to some man living.


But that man shows himself a Knave, for he dares not show his own face
when he does it, for some of the common Counsel in Henry the eights days
thought it modesty at that time, that one Vizard should look upon another.


Twas honestly considered of em in faith.


How now? what piece of stuff comes here?


Now some good news yet to recover my Repute, and grace me in this company;
Gentlemen, are we friends among our selves?


Vinited.


Then here comes Reuish to confirm our Amity -- Wag* tail, salute ^hem all
they are friends.


Then saving my quarrel to you all.


Toe's all


Now be shrowe your hearts, and you do not.


To sweet Master Lethe.


Let it flow this way dear Master Blastfield, Gentlemen to you all.


This Re^ish wine is like the scowring-sticke to a gun, it makes the Barrel
clear: it ha's an excellent virtue, it keeps all the Sinckes in man and woman's
body sweet in June and July, and to say truth, if Ditches were not cast once
a year, and Drabs once a Month, there would be no abiding in the City.


Gentlemen, i'll make you privy to a letter I sent.


A letter comes well after privy, it makes amends.


There's one Quomodo* a Drapers Daughter in town whom for her happy portion
I wealthily affect.


And not for love? this makes for me his Rival, bear witness.


The Father does elect me for the man, The Daughter says the same.


Are you not well?


Yes all but for the mother, she's my sickness.


Byr'lady and the Mother is a pestilent, wilful, troublesome sickness I can
tell you, if she light upon you handsomlye.


I find it so: she for a stranger pleads: Whose name I ha not learned.


And en now he called me by it.


Now as my letter told her, since only her consent kept aloof of, what might
I think on it, but that she merely dooted upon me herself.


Very assuredly.


This makes still for you.


Did you let it go so in faith?


You may believe it sir, now what says her answer?


I, her answer.


She says you're a base proud knave, and like your worship.


How?


Nay, hear out her answer, or there's no goodness in you.


You ha forgot she says in what pickle your worship came up, and brought two
of your friends to give their words for a suit of green Kersye.


Drudge, peace, or --


Show your self a Gentleman, she had the patience to read your letter which
was as bad as this can be, what will she think on it, not hear her answer?
speak, good his drudge.


And as for her Daughter, she hopes sheele be ruled by her in time, and not be
carried away with a cast of Manchets, a bottle of Wine, and a Custard, which
once made her Daughter sick, because you came by it with a bad conscience.


Gentlemen, i'm all in a sweat.


That's very wholesome for your body, nay you must keep in your arms.


Then she demanded of me whether I was your worships Ant or no?


Out, out, out, Gru. Alas said I, I am a poor drudge of his.


Faith and thou were his Mother (quoth she) heed make thee his Dru dge I
warrant him --

Marry out upon him (quoth I) an't like your worship.

Horror, horror, i'm smothered, let me go, torment me not.


And you love me, lets follow him Gentlemen.


Agreed.


I count a hundred pound well spent to pursue a good jest Master Easy.


By my troth I begin to bear that mind too.


Well said in faith, hang money-good jests are worth silver at all times.


They are worth gold Master Blastfield.


Do you deceive me so? are you toward marriage in faith Master Lethe it shall
go hard but i'll forbid the Banes, i'll send a messenger into your bones, another
into your purse but i'll do it.


Thou fair and wicked Creature, steeped in Art,
Beauteous and fresh, the soul the foulest part.
A common Filth, is like a House possessed,
Where if not spoiled, you'll come out afraid at least,
This service likes not me, though I rest poor,
I hate the basest use to screen a whore.
The human stroke ne'er made him, he that can
Be Bawd to Woman, never leapt from man.
Some monster won his Mother,
I wished my poor child hither, doubled wrong,
A month and such, a mistress were too long,
Yet here a while in others lives i'll see,
How former follies, did appear in me.

Boy.


Anon sir.


Where left you Master Blastfield your master, say you?


An hour since I left him in Paules sir -- but you'll not find him the same
man again next time you meet him.


Methinks I have no being without his company tis so full of kindness and
delight, I hold him to be the only Companion in earth.


I, as Companions go now adays that help to spend a mans money.


So full of nimble wit, various discourse, praegnant apprehension, and vncommon
entertainment, he might keep Company with any Lord for his grace.


I, with any Lord that were past it.


And such a good free hearted honest, affable kind of Gentleman: Come Boy a
heaviness will possess me till I see him.


But you'll find your self heauyer then, by a seven hundred pound weight, --
Alas poor Birds that cannot keep the sweet Country, where they sly at
pleasure, but must needs come to London to have their wings clipped, and are
fain to go hopping home again.


So, No man is so impudent to deny that -- Spirits can change their shapes,
and soonest of all into Sergeants: because they are Cousin Germans to spirits,
for there's but two kind of arrests till Doomes-day, the Devil for the soul,
the Sergeant for the body, but afterward the devil arrests body and soul
Sergeant all, if they be knaves still, and deserve it* now my yeoman ^aslight.


I Attend you good Serjant Shortyard.


No more master Blastfield now -- poor Easy hardly be set.


But how if he should go to prison, weere in a mad state then, being not
Sergeants.


Never let^ come near thy belee^e that heel take prison, or stand out in
law, knowing the debt to be due, but still expect the presence of Master
Blastfield, kind M. Blastfield, worshipful M Blastfield -- and at the last --



Master Shortyard, master Falslight.


The Boy: a warning-piece, -- see where he comes.


Is not in paules.


He is not far off sure sir.


When was his hovre say thou?


Two sir.


Why two ha's struck.


No sir, they are now a striking.


Master Richard Easy of Essex we arrest you.


Ha?


Alas a Surgeon, he's hurt ith shoulder.


Deliver your weapons quietly sir.


Why what's the matter?


You're arrested at the suite of M. Quomodo.


Master Quomodo?


How strange you make it, you're a landed Gentleman sir, I knew tis but a
trisse, a bond of seven hundred pound.


La, I know you had mistook, you should arrest One Master Blastfield, tis
his bond, his debt.


Is not your name there?


True, for fashions sake.


Why and tis for fashions sake that we arrest you.


Nay, it be no more, I yield to that: I know Master Blastfield will see me
take no injury as long as i'm in town, for Master Alsups sake.


Whose that Sir?


An honest Gentleman in Essex.


Oh, In Essex! I thought you had been in London, where now your business lies,
honesty from Essex will be a great while a coming sir, you should look out
an honest pair of Citizens.


Alas sir, I know not where to find em.


No, there's enough in Town.


I know not one by my troth, I am a mere stranger for these parts, Master
Quomodo is all, and the honestest that I know.


To him then lets set forward: -- Yeoman Spiderman, castan eye about for
Master Blastfield.


Boy -- Alas the poor boy was frighted away at first.


Can you blame him sir -- we that daily fray away Knight's, may fright away
Boys I hope.


Ha? have they him say thou?


As sure as --


The land's mine, that's sure enough boy.
Let me advance thee knave, and give thee a kiss,
My pl^t's so firm I dare it now to miss.
Now shall I be diuulgde a landed man,
Throughout the livery: -- one points, another whispers,
A third frets inwardly: let him fret and hang,
Especially his envy I shall have,
That would be fain, yet cannot be a knave,
Like an old leather girt in furde Gown,
Whose mind stands stiff but his performance down.
Now come my golden days in: -- whither is the worshipful
master Quomodo, and his fair Bedfellow rid forth,
To his land in Essex? whence comes those goodly load of
Logs? from his land in Essex? where grows this pleasant
fruit, says one Citizens wife in the row; at master Quomodos
Orchard in Essex; oh, oh, does it so, I thank you for
that good news in faith.

Here they come with him sir.


Grant me patience in my joys, that being so great I run not mad with 'em.


Bless master Quomodo.


How now Sergeants? who ha you brought me here, master Easy?


Why la you now Sergeants, did I not tell you you mistook?


Did you not hear me say. I had rather ha had master Blastfield, the more
sufficient man a great deal?


Very true sir, -- but this Gentleman lighting into our hands first --


Why did you so sir?


We thought good to make use of that opportunity, and hold him fast.


You did well in that I must needs say, for your own securities, but twas not
my mind master Easy to have you first, you must needs think so.


I dare swear that master Quomodo.


But since you are come to me, I have no reason to refuse you, I should show
little manners in that sir.


But I hope you spake not in that sense sir, to impose the bond upon me.


By my troth that's my meaning sir, you shall find me an honest man, you see
I mean what I say, is not the day past, the money vntendred, you'd ha me live
uprightly master Easy?


Why sir, you know master Blastfield is the man.


Why sir, I know master Blastfield is the man, but is he any more then one man?
two entered into bond to me, or I'm fowly coozn'd.


You know my entrance was but for fashion sake.


Why, i'll a gre to you, you'll grant tis the fashion likewise when the Bond's
due to have the money paid again.


So we told him sir, and that it lay in your worships curtezie to arrest which
you please.


Marie does it sir, these fellows know the law, -- beside, you offred yourself
into Bond to me you know, when I had no stomach to you, now beshrew your heart
for your labour, I might ha had a good substantial Citizen, that would ha paid
the sum roundly, although I think you sufficient enough for seven hundred
pound, beside the forfeiture, I would be loath to disgrace you so much before
Sergeants.


If you would has patience sir, I do not think but master Blasefield is at
Carriers to receive the money.


He will prove the honester man then, you the better discharged, I wonder he
should break with me, t'was never his practise, you must not be angry with
me now, tho you were somewhat hot when you entered into Bond, you may easily go
in angrily, but you cannot come out so.


No, the Devils in it for that.


Do you here sir, a my troth we pity you, ha you any store of Crowns about
you?


Faith a poor store, yet they shall be at their service that will strive to
do me good, -- we were both drunk last night, and ^eer thought upon the bond.


I must tell you this, you have fell in to the hands of a most merciless
devourer, the very gul athe city, should you offer him money, Goods or lands
now, he would rather have your body in prison, he's a such a nature. Eas. Prison
we're undone then.


He's a such a nature, look? -- Let him owe any man a spite^ what's his
course: he will lend him money to day, a purpose to rest him tomorrow.


Defend me?


Has at least sixteen at this instant proceeded in both the Counters: some
batchler, some masters, some doctors of captivity of 20. years standing and he
desires nothing more then imprisonment.


Would Ma. Blastfield would come away.


I, then things would not be as they are -- what will you say to us if we
procure you two substantial subsidy Citizens to bail you spite on's heart,
and set you at liberty to find out master Blastfield.


Sergeant! here, take all, i'll be dear to you, do but perform it.


Much.


Enough sweet Sergeant, I hope I understand thee.


I love to prevent the malice of such a rascal, perhaps you might find master
Blastfield to night.


Why, we lie together man, there's the jest on it.


Fie. -- and you'll seek to secure your bail, because they will be two
Citizens of good account, you must do that for your credit sake.


I'll be bound to save them harmless.


A pox on him, you cut his throat then, -- no words.


What's it you require me master Quomodo?


You know that before this time I hope sir, present money, or present
imprisonment.


I told you so.


We ne'er had money of you.


You had commodities, an't please you


Well, may I not crave so much liberty upon my word, to seek out master
Blastfield?


Yes, and you would not laugh at me: we are sometimes Gulls to Gentlemen* I
thank 'em; but Gentlemen are never Gulls to us, I commend 'em.


Under your leave master Quomodo, the Gentleman craves the furtherance of an
hour, and it sorts well with our occasion at this time, having a little urgent
business at Guildhall, at which minute we'll return, and see what agreement is
made.


Nay take him along with you Sergeant.


I'm undone then.


He's your prisoner; and being safe in your house at your own disposing, you
cannot deny him such a request: beside, he hath a little faith in Ma.
Blastfields coming sir.


Let me not be too long delayed I charge you.


Not an hour in faith sir.


O master Easy, of all men living I never dream* you would ha done me this
injury: make me would my credit, fail in my commodities, ring my state into
suspicion: for the breaking of your day to me, has broken my day to others.


You tell me of that still, which is no fault of mine master Quomodo.


Oh whats a man but his honesty master Easy, and that's a fault amongst most
of us all, -- Mark but this note, I'll give you good counsel now, -- as often
as you give your name to a bond, you must think you christen a child, and take
the charge on it too: for as the one, the bigger it grows the more cost it
requires: so the other the longer it lies, the more charges it puts you too,
only here's the difference a child must be broke, and a bond must not, the
more you break children, the more you keep 'em under: but the more you break
bonds, the more they'll leap in your face, and therefore, to conclude, I would
never undertake to be Gossip to that bond which I would not see well brought
up.


Say you so sir? -- I'll think upon your counsel hereafter for it.


Ah fool, thou shouldest near ha tasted such wit but that I know tis too
late.


The more I grieve:


To put all this into the compass of a little hoop Ring
Make this account, come better days or worse,
So many bonds abroad, so many boys at nurse.

A good medicine for a short memory: -- but since, you have entered so far,
whose children are desperate depts I pray?


Faith they are like the of-springs of stolen lust, put to the hospital, their
fathers are not to be found, they are either too far abroad, or too close
within, and thus for your memories sake.

The desperate Debtor hence derives his name,
One that has neither money, land nor fame,
All that he makes, prove Bestards, and not Bonds,
But such as yours, at first are horn^ to lands.

But all that I beget hereafter ^le so one disinherit Master Quomodo.


In the mean time here's a shrewd knave will disinherit you.


Well, to put you out of all doubt Master Quomodo, i'll not trust to your
curtezie, I ha sent for bail.


How? y'aue co^z^ed me there y^aith.


Since the worst comes to the worst, I have those friends 'ith City, I hope
that will not suffer me to lye for seven hundred pound.


And you told me you had no friends here at all, how should a man trust you
now?


That was but to try your Courtesy M. Quomodo.


How vncoscionably he gulls himself -- they must be wealthy subsidie-men sir,
at least forty pound 'ith Kings Books I can tell you, that do such a feat
for you.


Here they come what so ere they are.


Berlady Aldermans Deputies, I am very sorry for you sir, I cannot refuse
such men.


Are you the Gentleman in distress?


None more then my self sir.


He speaks truer then he thinks, for if he knew, The hearts that owe those
faces -- a dark shop's good for somewhat.


That was all sir.


And that's enough, for by that meanes' you have made your self ^able to the
Bond, as well as that Basefield


Blastfield sir.


Oh (...) ^ou mercy tis Blastfield indeed.


But under both your worships favours I know where to find him presently.


That's all your refuge.


News, good news Master Easy.


What boy?


Master Blastfield ^y master ha^ received a tho (...) pound, and will be at
his lodging at supper.


Happy^ news, hear you that Master Quomodo?


Tis enough for you to hear that, you're the fortunate man sir.


Not now I beseech your good worships.


Gentleman, what's your to^her name?


Easy.


O Master Easy -- I would we could rather pleasure you otherwise Master
Easy, you should soon perceive it, i'll speak a proud word we have pitied
more Gentlemen in distress, then any two Citizens within the freedom -- but
to be bail to sea^en hundred pound action, is a matter of shroud weight.


I'll be bound to secure you.


Tut, what's your bond sir?


Body, goods, and Lands, immediately before Master Quomodo.


Shall we venture once again, that have been so often undone by Gentlemen?


I have no great stomach too't, it will appear in us more pity then
wisdom.


Why should you say so sir?


I like the Gentleman's face well, he does not look as if he would deceive
us.


O not I sir.


Come we'll make a desperate voyage once again, we'll try his honesty, and
take his single bond, of body Goods and Lands.


I dearly thank you sir.


Master Quomodo?


Your worships.


We have took a Course to set your prisoner free.


Your worships are good bail you content me.


Come then, and be a witness to a Re^ullisance.


With all my heart sir.


Master Easy, you must have an especial care now to find out that
Blastfield.


I shall have him at my lodging sir.


The (...) will ^ you selse, Master Quomodo will come upon vt, and (...) you.


I know that sir.


Well since I see you have such a good mind to be honest ^e lea^e some
greater ^ sweat with you to find him my self.


H^are then my mis^rie ends ^ A strangers kindness oft exceeds a friends.


Thou art deceiu^d thy misery but begins,
"To beguile goodness, is the coare of sins.
My love is such unto ^hee, that I die
As often as thou drink up (...)*
Yet have no means to warn thee from it, for he
"That sows in Craft, does rape in Jealousy.

Now the letters made up and all, it wants but the print of a s^ale, and away
it goes to Master Quomodo: Andrew Le^he is well whipped in it, his name stands in
a white sheet here, and do^s penance for him.


You have shame enough against him, if that be good.


First as a contempt of that reverend Ceremony, he has in hand, to wit,
marriage.


Why do you say to wit marriage, when you know there's none will marry that's
wise.


Had it not more need then, to have wit to put too't if it be grown to a
^olly?


Y'^ue ^un, i'll giue't you.


Tis no thanks now, -- but as I was saying: as a soul contempt to that sacred
ceremony, he most audaciouslye keeps a Drab in town, and to be free from
the interruption of blew Beadles, and other bawdy Officers, he most politically
lodges her in a Constables house.


That's a pretty point in faith.


And so the wa^ch that should fe^ch her out* are her chiefest guard to keepeher
in.


It must needs be for look how the Constable plays his Conscience, the
watch-men will follow the suite.


Why well then.


All night from me he's hurt, he's made away.


Where shall we seek him now? you lead me fair ^aunt's sir.


Pray keep a little patience sir, I shall find him at last you shall see.


A Citizen of my e^se and substance to walk so long a foot.


You should ha had my horse but that he ha's eaten out his head sir.


How would you had me hold him by the tail sir then?


Manners forbid, tis no part of my meaning sir, -- oh here's Master Rerage,
and Master Salewood, now we shall hear of him presently: -- Gntlemen both.


Master Easy, how fare you sir?


Very well in health, did you see Master Blastfield this morning?


I was about to move it to you.


We were all three in a mind then.


I ha not set eye on him these two days.


I wonder he keeps so long from us in faith.


I began to be sick.


Why, what's the matter?


Nothing in troth, but a great desire I had to have seen him.


I water you should miss on it lately, you're his bedfelow


I lay alone to night in faith, -- I do not know how, O here comes master Lethe,
he can dispatch me: Master Lethe!


What's your name sir? -- O cry you mercy master Easy.


When parted you from master Blastfield sir?


Blastfield's an Ass, I have sought him these two days to beat him.


Your self all alone sir?


I, and three more. --


I am glad, I am where I am then, I perceive twas time of all hands.


Content in faith, let's trace him.


What? have you found him yet? neither? what's to be done now? i'll venture my
body no further for any Gentleman's pleasure, I know not how soon I may be
called upon, and now to ouer-heate my self. --


Ime undone.


This is you that slept with him, you can make fools of us, but i'll turn you
over to Quomodo fort.


Good sir.


I'll prevent mine own danger.


I beseech you sir.


Tho I love Gentlemen well, I do not mean to be undone for 'em.


Pray sir, let me request you sir, sweet sir, I beseech you sir.


Made fools of us! not to be found!


What, what?


Do not undo me quite tho Ma Quomodo.


You're very welcome, master Easy, I ha nothing to say to you, i'll not touch
you, you may go when you please, -- I have good bail here I thank their
worships.


What shall I say, or whom shall I beseech*


Gentlemen, S'lid they were borne to undo us I think, but for my part, I'll make
an oath before master Qomodo here, ne'er to do Gentlemen good while I live.


I'll not be long behind you.


Away; if you had any grace in you, you would be ashamed to look us ith face,
iwis I wonder with what brow you can come amongst us, I should seek my
fortunes fa^re enough if I were you, and neither return to Essex, to be a
shame to my predecessors, nor remain about London, to be a mock to my
successors.


Subtle Shortyard!


Here are his lands forfeited to us master Quomodo, and to avoid the
inconscionable trouble of law, all the assi^^ance he made to us, we willingly
resign to you.


What shall I do with Rubbish, give me money: Tis for your worships to have
land, that keep great houses, I should be hoisted.


But master Quomodo, if you would but conceive it aright, the land would fall
fitter to you then to us.


Curtzing about my land.


You have a towardly son and heir as we hear.


I must needs say, he is a Templer indeed.


We have neither posterity in Town nor hope for any abroad; we have wives,
but the marks have been out of their mouths these twenty years, and as it
appears, they did little good when they were in: we could not stand about it
sir, to g^t riches and children too* tis more then one man can do. And I am of
those Citizens minds that say, let our wi^es make shift for children and they
will, they get none of us; and I cannot think, but he that has both much
wealth and many children, has had more helps coming in then himself.


I am not a Bow wide of your mind sir. -- And for the thirsty and covetous
hopes I have in my son and heir Sim Qmomodo, that he will never trust his
land in Wax and Parchment as many Gentlemen have done before him.


Al y-blow for me.


I will honestly discharge you, and recevue it in due form and order of law,
to strengthen it for ever to my son and h^yre, that he may undoubtedly enter
vppon't without the let or molestation of any man, at his or our pleasure
whenever.


Tis so assured unto you.


Why then master Basie you're a freeman sir, you may deal in what you please,
and go whether you will. Why Tomazin, master Easy is dome from Essex, bid
him welcome in a cup of small Bear.


Not only wild, but in it tyrannous.


If it please you sir, you know the house, you may visit us often* and dine
with us once a quarter.


Confusion light on you, your wealth and heir,
Worm gnaw your conscience, as the Moth your ware,
I am not the first heir that robbed, or begged.

Excellent excellent, sweet Spirits.


Landed master Quomodo.


Delicate shortyard, commodious Falslight,
Hug and away, shift, shift.
Tis slight, not strength that gives the greatest lift.
Now my desires are full -- for this time,
Men may have Cormorant wishes, but alas
A little thing three hundred pound a year,
Suffices nature, keeps life and soul together,
I'll have 'em l^pt immediately.
I long to warm my self by the wood, -- A fine journey in the Whitsun-holy
days ^yfaith, to ride down with a number of Citizens, and their wives, some
upon pillions, some upon S^de saddles, I, and little Tomazin ith middle our
some and heir S^m Quomodo in a peach colour Taffeta Iack^t, some hors^ length,
or a long ^ard before us, there will be a fine show on's I can tell you, where
we Citizens will laugh, and lie down ge^ all our wives with child against a
bank and get up again, ^stay, ha ^ast thou that wit in faith twil* be admirable,
to see how the very thought of green fields puts a man into sweet
inuenttions. I will presently possess Sim Quomodo of all the land, I have a
toy and i'll do it: and becau^e I see before mine eyes that most of our heirs
prove notorious Rioters after our deaths, and that cousinage in the father
wheels about to folly in the son, our posterity commonly foiled at the
same weapon, at which we plaide rarely. And being the world^ beaten word,
what's got over the Devils back, (that's by knavery) must be spent under his
belly, (that's by lechery) being awake in these knowings, why should not I
oppose 'em now, and break destiny of her custom, preventing that by
policy, which without it must needs be Destiny? and I have took the
course, I will forthwith sicken, call for my keys, make my Will, and dispose
of all, give my son this blessing, that he trust no man, keep his hand from
a queen, and a Scrivener, live in his fathers faith, and do good to no body:
then will I begin to rave like a fellow of a wide conscience, and for all the
world counterfeit to the life, that which I know I shall do when I die, take
on for my gold, my lands, and my wrytings, grow worse and worse, call upon
the Devil, and so make an end* by this time I have indented with a couple of
searchers, who to uphold my device shall fray them out a'th Chamber with report
of sickness, and so la, I start up, and recover again: for in this business I
will trust, no not my spirits Falslight shortyard, but in disguise note the
condition of al, how pitiful my wife takes my death, which will appear by
November in her eye, and the fall of the leaf inher body, but especially by
the cost she bestows upon my funeral, there shall I try her love and regard, my
daughters marrying to my will liking, and my sons affection after my
disposing: for to conclude* I am as jealous of this land as of my wife, to know
what would become of it after my decease.


Tho I be poor, tis my glory to live honest.


I prithee do not leave me.


To be bawd.
Hell has not such an office,
I thought at first your mind had been preserved,
In virtue and in modesty of blood,
that such a face had not been made to please the unsettled Appetites of
several men,
Those eyes turned up through prayer, not through lust,
But you are wicked, and my thoughts unjust.

Why thou art an unreasonable fellow in faith, do not al Trades live by their
ware, and yet called honest Livers? do they not thrive best, when they utter
most, and make it away by the great? is not hole-sale the chiefest
merchandise? do you think some Merchants could keep their wives so brave but
for their hole-sale? you're fowly deceived and you think so.


You are so glewde to punishent and shame, Your words ee'n deserve whipping --
to bear the habit of a Gentlewoman, and be in mind so distant.


Why you fool you, are not Gentlewomen Sinners? and there's no coragious
Sinner amongst us, but was a Gentlewoman by the Mothers side I warrant you:
besides, we are not always bound to think those our fathers that marry our
Mothers, but those that lye with our Mothers, and they may be Gentlemen borne
born again for ought we know, you know.


True: corruption may well be Generatious first, Wee're bad by nature, but by
custom worst.


Oh my Husband.


My Father, O my Father.


My sweet Master, dead!


Run boy, bid 'em ring out, he's dead, he's g^ne.


Then is as arrant a knave gone, as ere was called upon.


The happiest good that ever Shortyard felt,
I want to be expressed, my mirth is such,
To be struck now even when his joys were hye,
Men only kiss their knaveries, and so dye,
Iu'e often marked it.
He was a famous Coozner while he lived,
And now his Son shall reap it, i'll ha the lands,
Let him Study law after, tis no labour
to undo him for ever: but for Easy,
Only good confidence did make him foolish,
And not the lack of Sense, that was not it,
Tis worldly craft beats down a Scholars wit,
For this our Son and heir now, he
From his conception was entayl'd an Ass,
And he ha's kept it well, twenty five years now,
Then the sleights art will do it, the lands lye fair,
No Sin to beggar a deceivers heir.

Here Wenefride, here, here, here, I have always found thee secret.


You shall always find me so Mistress.


Take this letter and this Ring.


Yes forsooth.


Oh how all the parts about me shake, -- enquire for one Master Easy at his
old lodging 'ith the Blackfryers,


I will indeed forsooth.


Tell him the party that sent him a hundred pound the other day to comfort his
heart, ha's likewise sent him this Letter and this Ring, which has that virtue
to recover him again for ever say -- name no body Winifride.


Not so much as you forsooth.


Good Girl, thou shalt have a mourning Gown at the burial of mine honesty.


And i'll effect your will a my Fedelitie.


I do account my self the happiest Widow that ever counterfeited weeping,
in that I have the leisure now, both to do that Gentleman good, and do my
self a pleasure, but I must seem like a hanging Moonea little waterish a
while.


I entertain both thee and thy Device,
Twill put em both to shame.

That is my hope sir,
Especially that strumpet.

Save you sweet widow,
I suffer for your heaviness.

O Master Rerage, I have lost the dearest husband that ever woman did enjoy.


You must have patience yet.


Oh talk not to me of patience and you love me, good Master Rerage.


Yet if all tongues go right, he did not use you so well as a man mought.


Nay, that's true indeed Master Rerage, he ne'er used me so well as a woman
might have been used, that's certain in troth ta's been our greatest falling
out sir, and though it be the part of a widow, to show her self a woman for
her Husbands death, yet when I remember al his unkindness, I cannot weep a
stroke in faith Master Rerage, and therefore wisely did a great widow in this
land, comfort up another, go too Lady (quoth she) leave blubbering, thou
think upon thy husbands good parts when thou shed tears, do but
remember how often he ha's lain from thee, and how many naughty slippery
turns he has done thee, thou wilt ne'er weep for him I warrant thee -- you
would not think how that counsel ha's wrought with me Master Rerage, I could
not dispend another tear now, and you would give me ne'er so much.


Why I count you the wiser Widow, it shows you have wisdom, when you can
check your passion, for mine own part, I have no sense to sorrow for his
death, whose life was the only Rub to my affection.


Troth and so it was to mine, but take courage now, your'e a Landed Gentleman,
my Daughter is seven hundred pound strong to join with you.


But Lethe lyes'ith way.


Let him lye still, You shall tread ore him or i'll fail in will.


Sweet widow.


What a beloude man did I live? my Servants gall their fingers with ringing, my
wives cheeks smart with weeping, stand in every corner, you may take water in
my house -- but am not I a wise fool now? what if my wife should take my death
so to heart, that she should sicken vppon't, nay swone, nay dye? when did I
hear of a woman do so, let me see, -- Now I remember me, I think twas
before my Time; yes, I have heard of those wives that have wept, and s^bd, and
swooned -- marry I never heard but they recovered again, that's a comfort la,
that's a comfort, I hope so will mine -- peace, tis ne'er upon the time, I see,
here comes the worshipful livery, I have the Hospital Boys, I perceive little
Tomazin will bestow cost of me, -- I'll listen to the common censure now, how
the world tongues me when my ^are lies lowe.


Who Quomodo? merely enriched by shifts, And cousnages, believe it.


I see the world is very loath to praise me,
Tis Rawlye friends with me, I cannot blame it,
For what I have done, has been to vex and shame it.
Here comes my Son, the hope, the landed heir,
Ont whose rare thrift, will say men's tongues you lye,
I'll keep by law what was got craftily.
Me thinks I hear him say so:
He does salute the livery with good grace,
And solemn Gesture --

oh my young Worshipful M. you have parted from a dear Father, a wise and
proui-dent father.


Art thou grown an Ass now?


Such an honest Father --


Prithee Beadle leave thy lying, I am scarce able to endure thee in faith, what
honesty did thou ere know by my Father speak, rule your tongue Beadle least
I make you prove it, and then I know what will become of you, tis the scurvy
est thing in the earth to belie the dead so, and he's a beastly Son and heir
that will stand by, and hear his father belied to his face, he will ne'er
prosper I warrant him, Troth if I be not ashamed to go to Church with him, I
would I might be hanged, I fear such filthy Tales go on him, oh if I had
known he had been such a lewd fellow in his life he should ne'er have kept
me company.


Oh -- o -- o!


But I am glad he's gone, tho twere long first, Shortyard and I will revel it
in faith, I have made him my Rentgatherer already.


He shall be speedily disinherited, he gettes not a foot, not the Crown
of a Mole-hill, i'll sooner make a courtier my heir for teaching my wife
tricks then thee, my most neglectful Son? Oh now the coarse, I shall
observe yet farther.


O my most modest, virtuous and remembering wife, she shall have all when I
dye, she shall have all.


Master Easy? tis, oh what shift shall I make now? oh --


Sweet wife she sownes, i'll let her alone, i'll have no mercy at this time,
i'll not see her, i'll follow the coarse.


The Devil grind thy Bones, thou co^sning Rascal.


Give her a little more air, tilt up her head, comfort thy self good widow,
do not fall like a Beast for a husband, there's more then we can well tell
where to put em, good soul.


Oh, I shall be well anon.


Fie, you have no patience in faith, I have buried four Husbands, and never
offered em such abuse.


Cousin, how do you?


Sorry to see you ill Couze.


The worst is past I hope.


I hope so to.


Lend me your hand sweet Couze I have troubled you


No trouble indeed forsooth -- Good Cousin have a care of her, comfort her up
as much as you can, and all little enough I warrant ye.


My most sweet love.


My life is not so dear.


I have always pitied you.


Y'aue shown it here. And given the desperate hope?


Delay not now, y'aue understood my love, I have a priest ready, this is the
fittest season, no eye offends us, Let this kiss Restore thee to more wealth,
me to more bliss.


The Angels have provided for me.


I have not Scope enough within my breast,
To keep my joys contained: I'm Quomodoes
heir: the Lands assurances, and all are mine
(I have tripped his Sons heals up) above the ground,
His father left him: had I not encouragement?
Do not I know what proves the Fathers pray?
The Son ne'er looks on it, but it melts away.
Do not I know the wealth that's got by fraud?
Slaue's share it like the riches of a Bawd.
Why tis a curse unquenchable, ne'er cools.
Knaves still commit their consciences to fools:
And they betray who o'wde em, here's all the bonds,
All Easies writings, let me see:

Now my desires wear crowns.


My joys exceed, Man is near healthful, till his follies bleed.


Oh, behold the Villain, who in all those shapes Confounded your estate.


That slave, that villain.


So many Acres of good meadowe --


Rascal.


I hear you sir.


Rogue, Shortyard, Blastfield, Sergeant, Deputy, cousner


Hold, hold.


I thirst the execution of his ears.


Hate you that office,


I'll strip him bare for punishment and shame.


Why do but hear me sir, you will not think what I have done for you.


Given his Son my Lands.


Why look you, tis not so, your not told true,
I have Coosned him again merely for you,
Merely for you sir, twas my meaning then
That you should wed her, and have all again.
A my troth its true sir: look you then here sir, you shall not miss a
little scroll sir, pray sir, let not the City know me for a knave, there be
richer men would envy my preferment if I should be known before em.


Villain, my hate to more revenge is drawn,
When slaves are found, tis their base Art to fawn,
Within there --.

How now? fresh warders.


This is the other, bind him fast, have I found you Master Blastfield.


This is the fruit of Craft,
Like him that shoots up hye, looks for the shaft
And finds it in his fore-head, so does hit
The Arrow of our fate, wit destroys wit:
The head the bodies bane, and his own bears,
You have Corn enough, you need not reap mine ears,
Sweet Master Blastfield.

I loath his voice, away.


What happiness was here, but are you sure you have all?


I hope so my sweet wife.


What difference there is in Husbands, not only in one thing, but in all.


Here's good deeds and bad deeds, the writings that keep my lands to me, and
the bonds that gave it away from me.

These my good deeds shall to more safety turn,
And these my bad have their deserts and burn.
I'll see thee again presently, read there.

Did he want all, who would not love his care?


What a wife hast thou Ephestian -- Quomodo, so loving so mindful of her
duty not only seen to weep but known to swone, I knew a Widow about Saint
Antlings so forgetful of her first Husband, that she married again within the
tweluemonth, nay some berladye within the month: there were sights to be seen,
had they my wives true sorrows seven nor seven years would draw em to the
stake, I would most tradesmen had such a wife as I, they hope they have, we
must all hope the best: thus in her honour.


A modest wife is such a Jewel,
Every Gold-smith cannot show it:
He that's honest, and not cruel,
Is the likeliest man to owe it.
And that's I, I made it by my self, and coming to her as a Beadle for my
reward this morning, i'll see how she takes my death next her heart.

Now Beadle.


Bless your mistrisships eyes from too many tears, Although you have lost a
wise and worshipful Gentleman.


You come for your due Beadle, here 'ith house.


Most certain, the Hospital money and mine own poor forty pence.


I must crave a discharge from you Beadle.


Call your man, i'll heartily see my hand to a Memorandum.


You deal the truel yer.


Good wench still.


George, here is the Beadle come for his money, draw a Memorandum that he has
received all his due he can claim here ith house after this funeral.


What politic directions she gives him, all to secure her self, tis time
in faith now to pity her, i'll discover my self to her ere I go, but came it
off with some lively jest now, that were admirable: I have it? after the
memorandum is written and all, i'll set my own name too't Ephestian Quomodo,
sheele start, sheele wonder how Ephest* Quomodo came the there that was buried
yesterday: you're beset little Quomodo.


Ninteene, twenty five pound, 1, 2, 3, 4. d.


So, we shall have good sport, when tis read:


How now Lady, paying away money so fast?


The Beadles due here sir


Whose? tis Easy, what makes Easy in my house, He is not my wives over seer
I hope:


Whats here?


He makes me sweat.


Memorandum that I have received of Richard Easy, all my due I can claim here
in the house* or any hereafter for me: In witness whereof, I have set to mine
own hand, Ephestian Qommodo.


What have I done? was I mad?


Ephestian Quomodo.


I, well, what then sir? get you out of my house, First you master Prodigal
had land, away.


What is the Beadle drunk or mad? Where are my men to thrust him out a doors.


Not so good Tomazin not so.


This fellow must be whipped.


Thank you good wife.


I can no longer bear him.


Nay sweet husband.


Husband I me undone, beggard, couzend, confounded for ever: married already?
will it please you know me now mistress Harlot, and master Horner, who am I
now?


Oh, he's as like my the other husband as can be.


I'll have judgment, i'll bring you before a Judge, you shall feel wife whether
my flesh be dead or no, i'll tickle you in faith, in faith.


The Judge that heel solicit knows me well.


Lets on then, and our greeuances first tell.


Here they come.


O where.


Hart of shame, upon my wedding morning so disgracd*
Have you so little conscience Officers,
You will not take a bribe?

Master Lethe we may lie together lawfully hereafter, for we are coupled
together before people ynow in faith.


There goes the strumpet.


Pardon my wilful blindness and enjoy me.
For now the difference appears too plain,
Betwixt a base slave and a true Gentleman.

I do embrace thee in the best of love,
How soon affections fail, how soon they prove.

His cousnages are odious, he the plaintiff,
Not only framed deceitful in his life,
But so to mock his funeral.

Most just.
The Livery all assembled, mourning weeds,
Throughout his house even down to his last servant
The Herald richly hired to lend him Arms,
Faind from his Ancestors, which I dare swear knew no
other Arms but those they laboured with,
All preparations furnished, nothing wanted
Save that which was the cause of all, his death,
If he be living.

Twas an impious part.


We are not certain yet it is himself,
But some false spirit that assumes his shape,
And seeks still to deceive me.

Oh are you come? my Lord? their here, good morrow Tomazin.


Now what are you?


I am Quomodo my Lord, this my wife,
Those my two men, that are bound wrongfully.

How are we sure you're he?


Oh you cannot miss my Lord.


I'll try you. Are you the man that lived the famous cousner?


O no my Lord.


Did you deceive this Gentleman of his right,
And laid Nets ore his land?

Not I my Lord.


Then you're not Quomodo but a counterfeit,
Lay hands on him, and bear him to the whip.

Stay, stay a little I pray, now I remember me my Lord, I cozened him indeed,
tis wondrous true.


Then I dare swear this is no counterfeit.
Let all doubts cease this man is Quomodo.

Why la you now, you would not believe this, I am found what I am.


But setting these thy odious shifts apart,
Why did that thought profane, enter thy breast,
To mock the world with thy supposed death?

Conceive you not that my Lord? a policy.


So.


For having gotten the lands I thirsted still,
To know what fate would follow 'em.

Being ill got.


Your Lorpship apprehends me.


I think I shall anon.


And thereupon,
I out of policy possessed my son,
Which since I have found lewd, and now intend
To disinherit him for ever,
Not only this was in my death set down,
But thereby a firm trial of my wife,
Her constant sorrows, her remembering virtues,
All which are Dews, the shine of a next morning 'dries 'em up all I see it.

Did you profess wise cousenage, and would dare
To put a woman to her two days choice,
When of a minute does it?

Less, a moment
The twinkling of an eye, a glimpse, scarce something does it,
Your Lordship yet will grant she is my wife.

O heaven!


After some penance, and the Deues of law
I must acknowledge that.

I scarce like
Those Deues of law.

My Lord, although the law too gently lot his wife,
The wealth he left behind he cannot challenge.

How?


Behold his hand against it.


He does deuize all means to make me mad, that I may no more lie with my wife
in perfect memory, I know it b^t^et the lands will maintain me in my wits:
the land will do so much for me.


In witness whereof I have set to mine own hand,
Eph^stian Quomodo.
Tis firm enough your own sir.

A jest my Lord, I did I knew not what.


It should seem so, deceit is her own foe
Craftily gets, and childishly lets go.
But yet the lands are his.

I, warrant ye.


No my good Lord, the lands know the right heir, I am their master once more.


Have you the lands?


Yes truly I praise heaven.


Is this good dealing? are there such consciences abroad, how? which way could
he come by 'em?


My Lord i'll quickly resolve you that it comes to me
This cousner whom too long I called my patron,
To my thought dying, and the fool his son
Possessed of all, which my brain partly sweat for,
I held it my best virtue, by a plot
To get from him what for him was ill got.

O beastly Shortyard!


When no sooner mine,
But I was glad more quickly to resign.

Craft once discovered shows her abject line.


He hits me every where, for craft once known,
Does teach fools wit, leaves the deceiver none.
My deeds have cleft me, cleft me.

Room there.


A little yet to raise my spirit.
Here master Lethe comes to wed my Daughter.
That's all the joy is left me: ha? who's this?

What crimes have those brought forth?


The shame of lust,
Most viciously on this his wedding morning,
This man was ceazde in shame with that bold Strumpet.

Why, tis she he means to matrye.


No in truth.


In truth you do.
Who for his wife his Harlot doth prefer,
Good reason tis, that he should martie her.

I crave it on my knees, such was his vow at first,


I'll say so too
And work out mine own safety,
Such was his vow at first, indeed my Lord,
How ere his mood has changed him?

O wild slave!


He says it true my Lord,


Rest content,
He shall both marry and taste punishment.

Oh intolerable! I beseech your good Lordship if I must have an outward
punishment, let me not marry an inward, whose lastes will ne'er out, but grow
worse and worse: I have a wife stays for me this morning with seven hundred
pound in her purse, let me be speedily whipped and be gone, I beseech your
Lordship.


He speaks no truth my Lord, behold the Virgin,
Wife to a well esteemed Gentleman,
Loathing the Sin he follows.

I was betrayed, yes faith.


His own Mother my Lord,
Which he confessed through ignorance, and disdain,
His name so changed to abuse the world and her.

Marry a Hailot, why not? tis an honest mans fortune, I pray did not one of my
Coutriemen marry my Sister? why well then, if none should be married but those
that are honest where should a man seek a wife after Christmas? I pity that
Gentleman, that has nine Daughters to bestow, and seven of em Seeded
already, they will be good stuff by that time, I do beseech your Lordship to
remove the punishment, I am content to marry her.


There's no removing of your punishment.


O good my Lord.


Unless one here assembled
Whom you have most unnaturally a busde, beget your pardon.

Who should that be?
Or who would doote, that has been so abused?
A troublesome penance -- sir.

Knave in your face, leave your mocking, Andrew, marry your Qeane and be
quiet.


Master Easy.


I'm sorry you take such a bad course sir.


Master Quomodo.


Enquire my right name again next time, now go your ways like an Ass as you
came.


Mass I forget my mother all this while, I'll make her do it at first, pray
mother your blessing for once.


Call me Mother? out, I defy thee slave.


Call me slave as much as you will, but do not shame me now, let the world
know you are my Mother.


Let me not have this Villain put upon me I beseech your Lordship.


He's justly cursed, she loathes to know him now,
Whom he before did as much loath to know,
Wilt thou believe me woman?

That's soon done.


Then know him for a Villain, tis thy Son,


Art thou Andrew my wicked Son Andrew?


You would not believe me Mother.


How art thou changed? Is this suit fit for thee? a Tooth-drawers Son, this
country has ee'ne spoiled thee since thou came heather, thy manners better
then thy clothes, but now whole clothes and ragged manners, it may well be
said that truth goes naked, for when thou had scarce a shirt thou had more
truth about thee.


Thou art thine own affliction Quomodo:
Shortyard we banish, tis our pleasure.

Hence forth no woman shall complain for measure.


And that all Error from our works may stand,
We banish Falslight evermore the land.


