EXpect not here a stately Tragedy,
Nor Comedy set out, with graceful shows,
Of diverse kinds, to please men's greedy eyes:
Yet what we have, we give, accept it then
With patience, kindness, and with thankfulness.
The Authour's no Mechanic, writes not for gain;
Nor with this dish, thinks to fill all your tastes,
Only, for the learned, and iuditious sort;
Yet would please all, and no man here offend.
Here is no gall, nor any bitter stuff
To quip men's vices in particular,
Such snarling tricks, are free from him and his:
Then wrest not sense, to what was never meant;
If ought be wanting, it is want of skill,
Not want of willing minds to give content
To high and lowe, to all of each degree;
Then give me leave, kind friends, to beg this boon,
That you'll be silent, if we do amiss;
And if ought please you, though we dare not crave
An open plaudit, in our ears to ring:
Yet do us right, commend it afterwards;
And though some few of us, do take this pains,
Yet one mans head did only ache for this:
He makes me speak for him, and he for us;
And altogether join in this request,
That you will hear and see, and say the best.

YOunker, I come, your Father sends me forth,
To sell his corn, and bring him money in,
Each day he walks, and pries, and looks about
With watchful eyes, and ever in mistrust,
Least that my Dame,or I his trusty man,
Should nimme from him, or put up more then right;
I by my Dame am watched, and she by him,
And twixt them both in equal balance hangs
Poor Hans their man, their wakeful Argos eyes,
Do seldom wink, yet must I have a trick
To make large measure, fill the bushel full,
And jog it soft unseen, while they look on,
And still cry out for more, the measures scant;
And then the overplus.
What Hans, Come here.
My Master calls, and I must needs be gone.


As God doth bless the earth with great increase,
And in great measure sends us ten for one:
So must those blessings carefully be kept,
And not with wretchlesse heed, let run at large,
For so huge heaps of wealth consume to nought,
And like fair buildings vnrepayrde, decay.
Yet must not beastly miching niggardize,
Cause us forget our selves, and those that want,
But give relief from our abundant store:
We have enough, our charge it is not great,
One daughter she's bestowed richly, and
Her portion paid, no penny more in debt,
Two sons besides, and they provided for;
The yongst at School, the other trayles a Pike,
And for preferment looks each day, each hour:
What friendship fails, his fathers purse supplies;
He doth not want, nor shall, nor have too much
To please the fancies of unbridled youth:
Mine husband bids him use his means, no doyt
That he will send him, but alas poor I,
Must like my cream-pots, shake my winnow sheet
And all for coin, and often send him some.
Mine husband sees and knows, yet nothing says,
But is content with what he thinks I do;
My man plays fast and loose, I see it too,
And nothing say, for why, the knave is true,
And wrongs us not one cross, but what he gets
Is for my sons, not for himself, I am sure.
I see, but see not, give him oft a shilling,
Because to do for mine, he is so willing.
What Hans?
Your servant at command,
To run, to ride, to go by day or night.

How now sir sauce, your tong so early glyb;
What though the days be short, there's time enough
Ere night to make your pate ring noone.

Indeed,
Madame, you never saw me drunk as yet,
So much as to forget that due respect
I owe your service.

Well sir, then be gone,
Make haste, dispatch, and get you to the town;
Look to your business, what you buy and sell;
But ere you go, take that and give my son.

The heavens bless you mistress, that sayre hand,
Once more for the Se^ieant.

Away you Knave,
Take that Dutch shilling, drink amongst your Comrades.

She's gone, the best that ever trod on shoe:
I would not change my life to be Lord Mayor
Of the thy crown of London: my service
(...) freedom, labour but a pleasure,
^ what I ask, but half a word,
Tis done, she knew my mind, I would I have said,
That with the Sergeant I must crack a pot,
But (...) I could bringt out, she stopped my mouth
With Knave and shilling too: well let her doot
As often as she will, See who gets most
Of she or I.
As I went to Walsingham,
To that holy Land,
Met I with an old bald Mare,
By the way as I came.
Indeed you do full little think, how I
Am taken up amongst Soldiers in the town;
Hans Beer pot is a man of note, well known
To all under the degree of Officers.
But Sergeant Goodfellow, I love him best;
And why? because he loves my masters son*
My Master loves him too, for his honesty
And never sees him, but he gives him gold,
And sends him much provision for his house;
Heel drink his cup, swears not hates a whore,
Which if he used, I am sure my master
Brookes not the company of any such
To haunt his son: but with an angry frown,
Would look upon him: for he and Beeremonde
Are the only lads of all the Garrison;
I come my lads, my markets once ore-past,
At Flutterkins we'll have one brideling cast.
Come wife, help me on with my band: indeed
This fair morning invites me take the pains
To walk on foot, and see the town, visit
My friends, children, drink some Spanish wine:
And why, that wine? I am not yet grown old,
I can bestride, a bouncing Jennet still,
And with mine arm to frush a sturdy lance.

Talk you no more of martial exercise,
Good Sir, but take you to your Country Farm,
Keep you at home, leave that to younger bloods,
Your son is young enough, let him go forth,
And prove his fortune amongst those armed troupes,
I am contented, God his will be done.

I think dear wife thou speak more then thou think.
Thou would be loath to adventure him so much.

Not I sweet Sir, for God is God at sea,
And land, a God always omnipotent;
He can defend him from the gaping jaws
Of roaring Canons mouth, that dreadful flash
Cannot come near him, if it be his will;
Yet if he die, tis honours lofty bed
That shall entomb him, then I care the less.

Well spoke, brave Lass, I think fair Pallas shine,
Begirt thy temples with her glorious rays,
At thy days birth, the wonder of thy sex.

How now my Love, what do you Court me still?
This Phrase befits not, twixt a man and wife,
Tis time for you to leave such courting terms,

What courting call thou them, thou rubst me up,
To think upon the times forepast, I saw
In Englands Court so famous and renowmde
Of great Elizaes blessed memory.
That aided so these troubled Netherlands
With men and money; still oh, oh still me thinks
I see those Worthies marching on earths stage;
The famous Essex, Norreis, Sidney too,
And wisest Vere, that held Ostend so long,
Against hells foul mouth, and Spanish tyranny,
As yet his accomplices can testify.
That saw his works beyond the bounds of wit,
That now do live in noble fame and name;
Whom I'll ore-passe, for fear I should offend.

Offend not then (my Spouse) I counsel you,
But leave the mighty to their best contents,
And pass in silence, what they have to do;
Let us not meddle with the Magistrate,
But see, unseen, and hope for whats the best.

What hath Apollos sacred Oracle
Infused thy Soul with high Divinity,
Or deeper judgements, of I know not what,
Made thee know more then thy frail sex should do
I wonder: lets along, we'll to the town,
Where I not doubt but I shall find your son
A drinking, not at's book.

What if you do?
The elder Priest forgets that he was Clerk,
When you were young, you did as he now does.

Tis true indeed, but yet I'll tell thee what,
Twas strange to see a younker once but drunk
In Englands Kingdom, when I lived there,
For to be drunk, was beggar like they said,
Now Beggars say they are drunk like Gentlemen,
As since I have heard an old fantastic rime,
That thus imports if I be not deceiude.

Gentlemen are sick, and Parsons ill at ease,
But Serving men are drunk, and all have one disease.
God bless my son from such base foolery,
As to delight in drink, a beastly sin,
Yet with a friend, to drink a cup or more,
I'll not find fault, the times are now grown such.

Well wife, give but an inch, he takes an elue.


What then? his nature, education,
Composde him otherwise, you did your part
To give him learning, which will make him know
The good from evil: but his blooming youth
May be corrupted by bad company;
But that he seeks not, loves not, flies as much
As in him lies, I heard't with comfort too,
Else would I not.

My dear, what would you do,
Or not do, Women's witless wilful will,
Is strange sometimes, with reason limitlesse.

I will not tell you.


Why?


Because I will not.


A reason reasonless, Women,
Have oft such reason, for their wilfulness,
When as they ouerth wart their too kind husbands
In things not mere indifferent, else

What else?
Sometimes we know more then our husbands think,
And give advise worthy to be followde,
Not to be scorned, or to be contemnde
In weighty matters, matters of estate,
As ^ wife to great
(...); and Neroes mother too,
Another Agrippina, less virtuous,
But wise and politic, one that knew much,
And that great Queen, the Queen of Caria,
Nausolus wife, the wonder of her time.
And she whom former times ne'er paralleled,
She whom you named but now.

O stay, my wife,
Your mouth runs ore, she makes all women proud;
Are you so read in Roman Histories?
And I not know it: Welcome to the town;
We'll to your daughter straight, sheele be at home,
I hope, where ere her thriving husband be.
My back thin cloathde, my belly thinner lined,
Keeps out no cold, I like not I these planks,
But when my belly is full of double Beer;
Oh then I sleep like to mine Hostess Pigs,
And feel no cold, nor hardness; Feather-beds,
Stand further off, three stiuers and a half,
The canne of English Beer: my money's spent;
Pay days to morrow: tut, hangt, to day, I'll shift,
But yet were younker Harmants here; one can,
My mornings draught were good; or if to day
Hans Beere-pot come to town: Oh furious Mars,
Hes come, his Waggons yonder, now cock-sure,
For this whole day I am provided for.
Good morrow Pasquill, where's my brother, where's
That Younker? and the Sergeant Goodfellow.

You are welcome sir, what M. Garland?
I'st you, you know my mind; one tooth is dry,
Since yesternight I have not had one drink;
I am so cold.

Why dost not answer me?


What did you say? sure I remember not;
My wits want freshing.

I will thrash them straight
With good strong Beer, one cup will do no harm.

Will drive cold out, and keep my belly warm.


What riming so early, and thine eyes not
Washed yet: but where is Younger Harmants?
Where's his Companion, Sergeant Goodfellow?

Fast a sleep, his troubled head is so vexed
With this worlds cares.

What both.


The Sergeant, him
Lonely mean, lies sleeping yet within;
I'll call him to you, if you will go drink.

Not else.


Yes that I will, and more then that;
I'll do for you, or for your Brothers sake;
Like burning Drakes i'll split the empty air,
And run through thick or thin, at noon or night:
If you command, poor Pasquill will obey.

Where did thou learn such high stilde complements?


Out from the smoking of my Muskets mouth
Fetched from the fragments of some Poetry:
My nimble Muse comes from the Aquilone,
And flaps her wings against Austers frothy beard;
While Eurus blasts do pinch my tender sides.
And gentle Zephir, glads the Seamans heart;
Driving his ship, cross Neptunes foaming front.

How now turned Poet, or turned Conjurer;
Stares not mine hair: shall I be scarred hence:
I'll make a circle least Hobgoblin come,

You are disposed to jest M. Ganland.
I have many such conceits without book.

Of thine own making sure, they do so well
Concur in sweetest Diapason.

Die a pace on sir: whats that?
That's quite past
The reach or Center of my shallow brain:
But since with terms you think to put me down:
Once more have at you, i'll not yield it so.

Then did he make Heavens vault to rebound,
With rounce, robble hobble,
With riffe raffe, roaring, thwick, thwack,
Thurlerie bouncing.
O Heavens! why made you night to cover sin?
Had it been day, such things had never been.

Once more with patience, silence, be still:
You shall have Rhetoric against your will.

Mount thee my Phlegon Muse, and testify
How Saturne sitting on an Ebon cloud,
Disroabde his Podex, white as Ivory,
And through the Welkin thundered all aloud.
Read thou my riddle, take thou my fidle^
I met a man that wept and wailde,
I grieved to see him how he aylde;
He fared strangely, in such taking;
He said he was not of Gods making.

The Cuckoo sings not worth a groat,
Because she never changes note:
The man you speak of, young or old,
Indeed he is a plain Cucquolde.

O brains of a Burbate, wool of an Owl:
Where had thou so much wit? now tell me thine.

My Grandam taught me, I learnt by heart
This riddle of Saturnes far-fetcht sigh,
But here me Sir, you know that honest man
M. Flutterkin our Jovial Host.

Go seek my brother out, and then I will,
Show thee the way, and give thee thy desire.

I must not stir without my Corporal
Gives his consent, I must not so offend
For fear the varuels catch me by the feet.

Go to the Sergeant, I dare warrant thee,
And tell him that I stay to speak with him.

Swifter then thought, your errand shall be done
Good morrow M. Garland, what abroad
So early, can you leave so sweet a Fro;
By gisse I swear, were I so fairly wed,
This hour yet would I have kept my bed.

Good morrow Sergeant, dreaming, yet not waked
You are mistaken man, you see not well,
Such ware's not dainty, though you think it dear,
Where is enough, and market all the year.

I am glad to see you in so pleasant vain;
I hope we shall have a merry day on it.

Deed, Pasquill and I have been riming.


What?
That pretty Stripling, that mad Pastie-crust,
He rimeth best with lug or Pewter-can,
And oft doth quarrel with our honest Host
For spiced Ale, that hisseth with a toste:
But let these matters pass, I'll tell you news;
Last night your brother and I fell flat out
About an Argument we stiffly held
Which service was best on horseback, or on foot:
But what say you?

For Horsemen tooth and nail.


He called me ass, but since one predicament
Contains us both, I care not I'll not yield;
You know hes learned, had I but so much,
I'd make him fret, and stamp, and scratch his head;
Do you but second me, i'll vex him yet.

While you do talk, then I am sure of drink.


Let Pasquill seek him.


Sir, make haste, run;
My Captain called him, when I went to sleep.

I go, I run, I haste, I skip, I fly;
With nimbler heals then ere did Mercurie.

Ah poti maia sitis, how fast he
Runs for the liquours sake; now thinks he,
To stuff his guts with Huffcappe English Beer;
But hear me Sir, lets walk in the Church-yard
Until he comes again; for I must think
My self of pro and con, whats to be done
Against this lusty Younker; Oh he's here.
Good morrow brother Garland, why did you
Send Pasquill for me posting in such haste;
What is my Sister sick, or your young son,
Or some misfortune happened, that I know
Not of as yet, unto your house or goods,
Or ships at Sea: Speak, I am in suspense.
What? do you fool me, flout me to my face;
Is that for my good will? why then farewell.

Be not so angry brother, I protest,
I laugh not at you, but at Pasquill, what
Said he to you, what message did he bring?

The fool comes gaping, sets up such a throat,
Staring so madly, as if foul Cerberus
From pitchy Acheron, were come to affright
Poor men on earth: or else some accident
Of wonder strange, worse then a blazing star,
Had made men gaze, I know not what to think:
You sent him for me, and I must come straight:
I must not stay; my Captain asked him, what
The matter was: if the town were on fire:
There's fire in the town, quoth he, quite out
Of breath and wit, forgets to move his cap,
Cries out on's throat, that it was almost burnt
With soot and smoke, and dust I know not what:
My Captain gave him twelve pence, bad him go
And wash his face, he looked so reechilie,
Like Bacon hanging on the Chimneys roof;
Faring so ghastly, that we both did think,
Him worse then mad.

But whether is he gone?


I'll tell you, as we crossed the market place,
He spies my Fathers man, and then from me,
He flings as fast, as erst did Hercules,
Send that his fastest shafts to Nessus side;
When he from him stole Deianira fair
For whom he lost his life: I saw my youth,
And looked behind, to see what they would do;
In at next Tap-house, round as Jugglers box,
Went they two first, and then two Soldiers more.

Why then your Captains piece is half consumd
By this; if he have got such company.

Twill not belong, I am sure, befort be drowned,
Four men four Cans, whats that, but four fair draughts.

Yea for a Brewers horse, not for his man:
Oh my rumbling guts do ache to think ont;
A Canne a draught, I never sawe't but once,
And then I thought that man had burst his guts;
His eye-balls started, as the strings were cracked;
And though sometimes I love to drink my pot,
Strong drink should never more go down with me,
Before i'd swill so much at such huge draughts;
One civil glass or two, that warms my blood,
It is enough, me thinks.

Why? now I know,
Thou art not tong-tyde Sergeant, else I thought
It had been pawndith Lumbard for two doytes:
I'll buy a Calves tongue for four, that's good meat
For them that love it.

Why? there's none but Calves
Refuse good meat, or offered courtesies,

Why? how now Sergeant, do you cal me calfe?


No sir, not I, but by chance speak of them,
As by the way you light upon their tongues.

So now the game begins: fly to him, give
Him not one inch, let him wear gold that wins
It first: shrink back, I will never own thee
For a Sergeant.

Now we are two to one,
I care not.

What say, thou speak Hebrew, Greek,
Or English, Welsh, I know not what thou meanst.

Sauf vostre grace, vous estes bien venuz.


Hangs the French Ideon at thy tongs end too
Speak two words more, i'll make thee Port-enseigne
Si ce iemais aduient, en ma puissance.

Perform your words, and then I swear, I will.


I will.


Swear first, i'll not believe you else.


Without an oath I will.


Why, hear you then;
Admiranda canunt, sed non credenda Poetae.

That's Latin Sergeant, wiseman, that's not French.


You named no language, bid me speak two words,
And you would do it, i'll be judged by all
Here present, if the wager be not won.
I'll get a staff, the colours they are mine.

Tis well said Sergeant, I am on thy side,
I'll bear thee witness they are thine by right.

Though I meant French, yet will I yield, I lost;
Take thou the colours, I bestow them free,
In my conceit, as ere did Emperor,

I thank your greatness in conceit,
I do enjoy them, and I rest content.

A good conceit, for now me thinks I see,
The Sergeant Enseigne, only in conceit
Stepped up in place, and office of command;
I see, but see not, what I hope to see;
That once performed which now is but conceit.

I thank you M. Garland, your good word,
Is ever pressed to do an honest man good,
For my preferment think you would disburse
A score of pounds; or so, were come to that,
Rather then I should fail.

Sure that I would;
Thou should not want to furnish thy conceits;
If I have gold and silver at command,
Tis ready: Sergeant I would do thee good;
Get thou a place, try thy friends, thou shalt see
What I will do.

I thank God and friends, tis done;
I have bethought me, you shall see ere long
A Metamorphosis of me reformde.

Transformed, thou would say.


Call you it transformed;
Transformed, reformde; or call it how you will:
I do remember what I learned at School
In Ouid: Oh these verses made me whipped;
In nova fert animus, mutatas dicere formas
Corpora Dij caeptis, nam vos mutastis illas,
Aspirate meis.

Let thee alone Sergeant, thou wilt be like
To Pasquill, wild as a Buck, or Liueret
Bred in March: this or be it not contains thee
When thy brains flow with skilful Poesy;
Hast thou forgot what we came hither for.

I like thee Sergeant, when thou bring out pairs
Of Verses; one and singles alone is not
So good; as when by two and two in ranks,
They march in order: then they please mine ears.

You want a fellow to my the other verse,
Do you not.

Yes marry do I, make but one
To wipe my mouth, like to the first, I swear,
I'll give thee a pair of good stags leather gloves.

A match tis done, i'll fit you presently;
M. Garland will you see it performed?

Upon mine honest word, I will.


Why then,
I have it by this time: since your mouth is clean;
My noble Younker, wipe your nose with this;
Sic faciunt stulti, quos gloria vexat inanis.

You have hit me home with your Rhinoceros
Did near make that, that famous learned Knight,
Sir Philip Sidney, Scholars, soldiers pride
Was his, not yours.

What, though he made that verse,
Those words were made before, he made them not;
Twas well I hapt on his inventions.

Good wits do jump, good witty, witless sir:
You hatch those eggs that other birds have laid:
I bid you make me one, by your own wit.

Why so I did, that which sir Philip made,
Is now grown old, and like my Fathers gown,
Spun, weaude, and made, above fourscore years ago;
But this I made is new: as fresh as May
Or flowers in June, or eggs, but this day sprung,
A plain case Younker: sir the gloves are mine
Upon your honest word: forestoe you dat,
A merchants word, no price set down, i'll have
Them richly made, with gold and silken fringe.

I think the Sergeant is grown Mountebank
To cling by shifts, hey pass, pass,
Italian grown; a sharking Charlatan.

Italian, Spanish, English, Dutch, or French;
Shark what you will, you shall not shark me out
Of my stags leather gloves with Charlatan:
Your Glover knows my hand M. Garland,
To morrow morning early, Charlatan
Goes for his gloves, look to the payment sir,
Your honest words at stake; tis good I know,
You'll keep it sure, a merchant break his word,
His credits gone, no not for twice so much.

Go fetch thy gloves, i'll see the Glover paid:
Brother, tis lost, you shall pay me again.

Upon condition I will be content,
So he will make me but one true French verse.

I will and if I can.


Yea, that's well said;
That can was well.

I can and will; not for nought;
My learning cost me something; and my wit
Works quick and nimbly, if ought be to be got,
The Roman Consuls after victories,
Did crown with Baize triumphant Conquerours.
Set but a prize, auferre gloriam
Infuses spirit to a working brain,

It shall be done, what is't?


Why what you will.


A pair of Garters.


Garters? yea content.
I want a pair; What gloves and garters too,
I rose on the right side to day I am sure.

What time, a bargain wisely made's half won.


Ere you can go to Flutterkins mine Host,
And come again, or else i'll leese two fauns,
Or Beer, or Claret wine, or Spanish wine.

Beer, what Beer, Scar-Beere?


No of English Beer.


I'll not go thither, I was there too late,
Ere I can tell threescore distinctly: say
A match; I'll tell them plainly, one by one.

Agreed, begin.


I'll tell then, shall I?


Yes.


One, two, three, four.


Iesuis.


Seven, eight.
Nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, foureteen, fifteen.

Soft, you are too hasty for a parish Priest,
I am sure of your good word; five and six
Are lost, are they nothing: tell rightly, tell on,
And do your worst: some honest French man lend
Me but one handsome word or two.

Thirty.


I.
Gods me, half out, but two words yet, Vostre.

Thou make a verse, then i'll bake in a well.


There,s one word more, humble, nay treshumble


Fifty.


Seruiteur, life of my life, tis out:
Be it what it will, stand on thine even feet;
Then gloves and garters both are quickly won.

Brother, you have lost.


Then know I who must win.


I'll not believe you, I will have it scande,
Let them that know speak true: is it good French.

Ie suis vostre treshumble seruiteur.
The verse is true, consisting of five feet;
The case is plain in common law: no book
Can save you: Sergeant thou hast won; the garters
They are thine.

Younker, tis well; and your gloves too;
Both gloves and garters, they are fairly won;
Scratch not your head, its but a Iacobin
At most; Come let us in to Flutterkins,
A cup and toste will do me now no hurt.

Why then farewell, I care not I for Beer,
My Captain gave me some Canary wine:
The Churl he shall not ride the Gentleman.

You shall not flinch, if that your cap be wool,
You shall along; What, would you leave us so;
Turned Micher, that were not tolerable.

I will go with thee, do but promise me,
Rightly to construe those lines of Ouids,
Which thou readst but now.

I will, then let us hence;
I thank great Jove that blessed me so this day;
How others speed, I bear the prize away.

This way he went, and here they were ere while,
But now they are fled like birds that cut the air,
With clipping wings, and leave no trace behind.
But Hans my nose is quick and sharpe of sent,
Like those great Bears in nova Zembla found,
Whose smelling sense was better then their sight.
I cannot see, but smell where they are gone.

Whether dost thou think? straight to Flutterkins,
My jovial Host that longs to see my face,
My beauteous face, my proper physiognomy;
I soon despatcht, sold all my corn at once,
And bought my meat.

As straight as Circes vvande,
Not looking back, as oft Meander doth,

What of Meander? now my things be done,
I care not, i'll go where thou wilt; lets on;
But whats Meander? man, or maid, or wife.

A river fool, did never see a play,
Or hear these verses which I have by heart.
Whats he that talks of the banks of Poe,
And of the milk-white swans that in Meander swam
I'll down from hence and scour the Stygian lake:
To raise a fiend shall make his soul to quake.

O terrible, my Mistress sent you that,
And bid you drink it, not to hoorde it up.

An English shilling: hey; did she indeed?


Why Widgin, think thou I would give thee't else?


I'll drink her health upon my bended knees,
Until the Welkin roar, and ground looks blew;
Two shillings have I, not one penny spent;
I bless my stars, good fortune set me free;
This days mine own.

Take heed, your supple joints
Are tender, Bones are soon thrust out: a vvrinch
Comes quickly.

I am free from pox, good face.

If they be free from thee, it skils the less:
Do you remember, how you serude me once,
When to the Leaguer I was sent from home
With some provision to my masters son;
You brought me to a vvhore, a Leaguer vvhore;
Such stuff blind Polipheme would loath to touch:
An wholesome piece, I near loud Mutton since.
Near blush for shame.

Twas for thine honesty;
Now its on record, tis prooud, tis past the tutch.

Can you accuse me? no, and speak but true.

I saw no hurt, i'll sayt, and swear it too:
But good cause why; thou could nor go, nor stand
Thou were so drunk: unfit for Venus game,
A cart became thee better then a Coach.

Why thou telst all, thou might have hid some part,
And no I have shamde me so fore company,
But i'll requite you, if I live ten days.
It was no marvel, I will tell thee rest.
As through the camp I past in strange amaze,
Driving mine Ass before me with his load;
I thought to be devoured Ass and all
By hungry soldiers, they did look so thin:
My heals they were flung up, and headlong I,
Fell on a Sutlers hut a fortnights space,
I had no legs, nor could I quit that place.

What were thou shot?

And lamde: you know too well,
The grievous moan our Alips made for me,
Alas, poor girl, she thought I had been slain,
But had the Bullet hit me, as the wind,
Poor Beere-pot had been squasht, these hansom limbs
Had flown in pieces, nor splinter left vnbroke.

That had been pity, which way went the shot

To Calais as I think, or further off,
I escaped I am sure, that dreadful malling knock.

O hold my head my thumb begins to ache,
From hence to France if this be not a lye.

Is that good manners for to take my tale,
Out of my mouth, before I make an end.

I have no manners: had I such an one
As Amptill is, to which seven Parks belong,
I would keep thee to be my worships fool.

Why? where is Amptill.


In the Fayery land.
Where men eat mutton, pig, and goose, and beef,
Rabbits and chickens, partridge, pheasants, quails,
And drink rich wine, that France or Spain sends in,
And strong March Beer, of five or six years old,
But on with thy tale.

I'll hang thee first,
The Fayery land, wheres that? I am with child,
Good Pasquill tell me quickly, else I die;
My mind is ravished from this lower Orb,

Tis not far of, we'll go to Flutterkins,
And talk more on it.

Why then thou winst my heart,
I long to feet, to taste such wine, such cheer,
But more, I long for such unheard of Beer.
If that I speak my language natural,
I think there's few that understands it here:
Its Hebers tongue left with the Abderites;
Hestron, pangaeon, cacobomboton, Aphnes halenon,
Mydras, myphrasman, tyltura, pantha, teman,
Hogdon, camthompos, parathasta pidarda laronta,
Clastriae campharides, bulgida bartra bela.
I am a Moore borne in Numedia,
Parcht with the suns extreme and scorching heate;
My mothers name Abdela Sydan hight,
My Father was Don Ian de Vechia,
A noble Spaniard, brave Castilian:
I serude the King of swart Numidia,
And did command ten thousand barbarous horse
For two whole years; and then my fathers love
Drew me from thence to seek mount Atlas out;
And so to Spain: my Merchant played the jade,
And hoisted sails for great Byzantiums town;
From whence I ran, and so through Germanie,
With vveary steps I posted to this place.
If that you ask my name, and fain would know,
It is Don Abendaraes Quixote,
A Spaniard, Moore, half Turk, half Christian,
How ere my flesh escapte the whizzing shot,
My tatterde doublet sure, escaped not.
Good Wine, good Beer, they say, it needs no bush;
Yet have I looked abroad, and no man comes;
I have ore-peerde the market hill quite round,
My goodly front, mine eyes, my neatest beard.
My well fed corps: why, these are Adamants
To draw men's minds to lend me many a look,
But yet (none hears) all pass, none steps aside,
The soaring Falcon stoops not at my lure,
But clippes her wings, flees on, heeds not her prey,
I see no Younker, nor no Sergeant yet;
But Hans is busy with his masters corn,
His Markets done, I am sure he will be here,
O there's a man lives bravely, keeps an house,
Releeues the poor, his gates be never shut;
His tables free, there's meat for honest men:
He lived in England, learnt that countries guise,
For Hospitality, few such be here:
Yet frugal too, was never prodigal,
Spends nothing more, but what he well may spare,
He borrows nought, nor lends on usury:
Yet hath enough.

Mine Host, what all alone?
And market day, why this is wondrous strange.

My noble Younker: Welcome Gentlemen,
I want such guests, here's beer was never drunk,
Fresh set a broach: puts down the Diamont
For lively sparkling: of transparent view,
More clear then amber, or fair orient pearl,
Fetched from the farthest Inde,

How now mine Host?


Spare so much courtesy, lest we suspect
Some hidden craft.

In me? you know me well,
Plain Flutterkin, a down, right dealing man,
I have no guards to set me bravely out;
But what I think I speak, and freely too,
Without deceit or simulation.

Why then two cans of your best English beer


It shall be done with much celerity.


Come Sergeant, I must have construction
Of Ouids verses, i'll not bate an ace
Before you drink, I will not stay so long.

You are too hasty, spare me yet a while,
And then i'll fit you.

Pray thee quick, dispatch,
I have some business calls me soon from hence.

Think you I cannot, am I such a fool?


I know not truly, but I love to learn,


Why then give ear, take heed, mark me well,
You often watch to take me at the worst;
But I'll bar that, I'll have no cunning trick.
Fert animus; my mind provokes me: Dij
Coeptis aspirate meis: Ye gods
Bless my proceedings: dicere, to speak
Of: Corpora mutatas: Bodies changed,
In nova formas: to new shapes: nam vos
Mutastis illas: for you transformed
Those bodies strangely; yea and altered sore
Their shapes to that they never had before.

That same addition, adds life to the rest,
And wipes poor Priscians head, that's foully broke:

Why, is't not right?


Yes, there's none can mend it.


And now sir, for our other argument,
I'll not give of, before I am satisfied.

Fly to him Sergeant, I will take thy part,
To serve on horseback, is best service still,
I will maintain it, while I live one day.

Against him and you, but give me leave to speak,
I'll show my reasons what I think are fit.

They are here before us.


We come in time,
Here comes mine host propped up between two cans.

Tha'ts well, all good.


A pair of pretty youths;
Show me but one six pence Pasquill, then I'll say,
Thoul't quickly thrive.

Why, that I can, see there.
There's four, and all vnspent. believe your eyes.

God bless mine eyes, but Hans what news at home.
How fares my Parents, are they both in health?

They send their blessing, but your mothers, it
Is to be felt: tis leaquer on de tangde,
It cleaves fast to your palms: nay sir, tis gold,
The purest mettle that the earth affords.

Fill out some Beer mine Host.


Here's to that hand;
That blessed you so with crosses of that kind.

It shall be pledged.


Hang him says nay.


Not I.


Nor I, nor he, but with as good a will,
As ere I came from School, with leave to play.

Then give me leave I will begin this round;
This swelling cup I will drink lively out,
Not one word more, before I feet about.

In this i'll please you, but i'll drink no more.
The question which I prosecute is this,
If horse or foot should have pre-eminence:
They are needful both, to make an army up:
Yet those great Armies which the Tartars used,
Were all of horse; so were the Persians
Till later times the English Shirleis taught
The use of foot, and how to entrench a Camp.
What can they do but in such huge, vast plains,
As are Tyrauna, and that Cossoua
So oft made red with Turks Christians blood,
And great Pharsalia famous for the fight
Twixt Pompey and Caesar worthy Warriors both,
Both which did strive for Romes sole Monarchy.
On mountains, bogs or woods, or broken rocks:
Where are your horse, ore-turnde and swallowed up
What can they do against a stand of Pykes,
Well lined with shot in such vantageous place.

But what say you unto that Persian Prince
That beat the Turk with thirty thousand horse,
Selim the first, the bloudiest Ottoman
Of all his race; who brought into the field
Two hundred thousand strong of horse and foot.

Indeed you touch me now, that history,
Makes much for you, that Sophy Ismael,
Did meet the tyrant in the open field,
Whose multitudes did think to swallow him
With open jaws, like to a mighty whale:
But as an anchor he stuck in his throat;
And made him kecke and shrink, to quit himself.

As how good brother, I desire to hear:
This likes me well: mine host I drink to you.

I thank you sir, you shall not go vnpledgde:
Here Pasquill, Hans, you two shall have your shares:

We thank you both, we mean not to refuse.


Yea, toot and spare not, it will be your own,
Good drink breeds blood, blood makes able men

This warlike Prince divides his troops in two
The right hand battle he himself did lead,
The left, his vassal named Vstan Oghlie,
When Turks divided they did do the like,
And so escapte the thundering Ordinance.
Unhappy Vstan could not get so clear
As did his Master, for the Canon shot
Fell amongst his troupes, and did him greater harm.
This dreadlesse Prince with valour bravely armed,
Falls on amain, with Turkish routes enclosed
On every side, and from each side he sends
Such fiery balls, as made them know his force.
They forwards ride, and backewards send their shot
On either hand, no place from them was free,
He onward flings, amongst the ^anizars,
The chiefest guard that this grand Seigneur hath,
And drives them back within their strongest hold,
Amongst their packs, and Camels bound with chains,
No words, nor blows, nor fairest promises
Could make them budge, or move, or stir one foot.
The wounded Prince, that fainted bleeding sore,
Unable scarce to keep his Coursers back,
Perceiving this, with slow pac'te steps retired,
And wheelde about, leaving his richest tents
Unto their spoils, that durst not stir to see,
For three days space, what was become of him.
In this I yield, the worlds best service known
That ever Horsemen did, themselves alone.

Well Younker, have I caught you. I am glad
Of any thing, wherewith to stop your mouth.

Nay soft, good Sergeant, what can Horsemen do,
Before a town, when we beleaguer it.
They'll scale the walls, pass trenches, give assaults,
Or enter breaches, yes I warrant you.

They scour the Country, bring rich booties in,
While we lye starving here, they live at ease,
Eat, drink and sleep.

The more they answer for:
When they ride struggling forth for lawless spoil,
We keep our works in danger night and day,
No spoiled peasant cries on us for's goods,
Nor ravished maid, for lost Virginity,
Nor wronged wife for forced dishonesty.

What? would you have no Horsemen then,


Not so.
Mistake me not, but i'll not yield them chief,
Each body well composde, it doth consiste
Of diverse members, framed by art, yet natural;
The body where are lodged the chiefest parts,
I liken it unto the Infanterie;
The exterior parts to the Cauallerie.
The heart commands, the members execute;
So they to us, not we to them give way.

But where they are alone, all absolute:
What they can do, against your self you proud.

Why that's Barbarian, and not Christian-like,
Where multitude preuayles, not discipline,
And in such places, as I named before;
As witness are those three days cruel fight
Huniades maintained against mighty Amurath
The second: in Cosso^as fatal plains.
He kept an hill with thirty thousand men;
Ten thousand horse, the rest were all on foot
Against the Turks that lay like Grasshoppers,
Filling those plains, eight miles in compass round:
This little handful, roulde and turned about,
On that hills top in strong and close array,
Flamde like a Candle amongst a world of flies,
That burnt themselves, ere they could put it out:
At length with travel tyrde, with blows wounds
All rent and torn, choked up with smoke stench
Of bodies dead: match, poulder, bullets spent
This light did glimmer, flashed, and so went out*

What did the horsemen there, did none escape?


They quit their horse, and made them as a wall
For their defence, and fought it out on foot,
Almost to the last man, some few escapte;
And swam the river, got into a wood
Among the which, Huniades was one
The half beat conquering Turks had all enough,
Stood still and gazed, and glad to see him gone.

Was not the Seigneur proud, ons victory,
Rejoicing much at his Hungarian spoils.

So proud, he mournd: was sick with grief and hate,
Of this his Conquest, at so dear a rate.

This likes me well, but ere you do proceed,
I'll drink to you: now am I for the foot,
Here's to you all, my noble Fantassines.

Sir, one health more, your Fathers health, I mean,
That good old man, he must not be forgot.

Drink't out I pray thee, I will have no more.


Were you a Younker, made of beaten gold,
You should have this; What nor your Fathers health?

No, not his health* to drink away mine own*
But drink to Hans, I see by his lips he's dry;
He wants it, I do not, heel drink for me,
Or to the Sergeant, he can get no drink.

Nor him, nor he, i'll drink to none but you,
I'll keep my man, I learned that trick at School.

Am I your man, god Bacchus, tossepot Knight,
Would glass and drink were both besides thy guts;
I tell thee, i'll no more.

Come Pasquill, I
Will pledge thee, I can yet hold out, two cups,
Two slashes on the legs will not be felt.
I am as strong as Hercules near out.

Why how now Hans? what Planet struck? quite mute,
Or Bagge-pype-like, not speak before thou art full,
Not one wise word; why, where is all thy mirth.

Nor so, nor so, I can speak yet, if need,
I hear, I see, yet nothing say at all:
Mine Host hath learned, to play at Fox mine host;
He will grow kind, we shall have drink enough.

Enough my Lad, wilt drink an Ocean?
Me thinks a Whirle-poole cannot ore drink me.

Yet am I still for horse a Kingly fight.
Oh finely mounted, what a pleasure tis
A troupe of brave Launcers, a stately show,

More show then service, for our good Dragons,
Do wheel about untouched, and gall their sides,
Nor do our Pykemen care a straw for them:
Those troupes are good for execution,
To spoil a Kingdom, waste or havoc all:
Wheres no resistance, or at least small head,
Or else to run, when as a battles lost,
But for a strength, a brave battalion
Of Pikes and shot, empald two hundred square,
And flanckt with carts and packs on either side:
Your horsemen may go whistle, where are they,
This iron wall is impenetrable.
Witness that battle was at Varna fought,
A shame to Christians for their breach of truce.

Why? what was that? twixt whom, what was there don^


He pays you Sergeant now, you're well most gone.
Come I'll go home, I'll stay no longer here.
This Beer hath pepper, it begins to bite.

Yet stay a while, and I'll wait on you home,
I must needs hear an end of this discourse.

The Cardinal Iulian mooude this luckless War,
Causing the King and States of Hungarie
To break their truce; which they had solemn sworn;
The Pope dispensed with them, so would not God,
If he be witness: he wills faith be kept
Without exception, be it with Infidels,
As this was here; the sequel proud it true,
In manner thus: Huniades that mannadgde all,
Dislikte this war: yet Vladislaus
This youthful King, eggde on by Iulian,
Would needs break faith with mighty Amurath,
And near to Varna both their armies met,
Where he so placed his battles as a Lake,
Flanckt the left side; a wood was on the reere:
And on the right hand all their waggons went:
Had they kept so, Byzantium had been ours:
And Greece once more it had been Christendom;
The battles joined, and after furious charge,
The Turks turned back, like birds with scarlions scared;
So dreadful were those well known colours which
Huniades did bear: he gives them chase,
Heeds not the meaner troupes; but at hard heals,
Follows the fearful Amurath: mean while
The warlike Priest, more happy at his book
Doth quit his strength, falls on, thinks all is won,
Some chase the Turks, while others seek for prey,
And spoil their tents: they rued this greediness.
This when the Turks perceyude, they soon rallide,
And chac't them now, by whom they erst were chac'de.
Here dyes the periurde King, the luckless Priest
Falls in a ditch, and there was choked with mud.

Where was the General? what did he this while?


His warlike troupes, stood firm both horse and foot:
Held on his chase, none durst against him make head:
But when he saw all lost, with watered eyes,
True signals of his grief, all safe retired,
And watched the Seigneur till he left those bounds.

Why, this was strange, Oh fie on perjury,
I'll not believe spensations of the Pope,
Had that foul Cardinal, choked in's mothers womb,
This shameful loss had escaped Christendom.

That's true sir, pray drink one cup to me,
Deed I am dry.

I care not, soes not I.
Filt up, drinkte out, you are an honest man.
How dost Pasquill, perceiu'st thou nothing yet.

All well sit; nothing: I am prettily well,
And soes mine host, I think his brains do crow.

But leaving these to come near to our times,
And nearer home, I'll give you one for al.
When Henry th'eight of famous memory,
Wan Bolleigue from the French: near Ardres town
A great Commander lighted from his horse,
When against the English they were to make head,
And serude on foot, using such friendly speech:
You are the men I love, this like I best;
With you i'll live and dye: Let me ask this;
What service ever did the horse alone,
In these our Belgic wars, without the foot?
Can they endure hunger, thirst or want,
Or march in cold, or heate, like to the foot:
They'll dye like dogs, and you must eat them up;
Or they'll eat you.
Why whats the matter there?

Well Younker well, I will with you dispense,
I'll yield the foot the chief pre-eminence.

Your Worships welcome, you do grace mine house.


Thanks, good mine Host, is Phoebus past his height,
Or be times changed, is't Noone beforte be night?
Your house is altered, its grown a School
Of good discourse; of martial discipline.

Wilt please you sir to drink?


Some Claret Wine;
No Beer, I seldom use to drink twixt meals,
Observe good diet, to preserve mine health.
Drink fasting in the morning strong March Beer,
Small Beer at Meals, and when my stomachs raw,
A Cup of Spanish Wine: Eat light Suppers,
Near sit up late at night: and rise betimes;
Oft walk abroad, and use much exercise:
These midnight Revels, Surfeits, Wine, and Whores,
And private quarrels, have deuourde more men
Then have the wars of late.

Sir, here's a Chair,
Please you to sit and take Tobaccho with us.

Not I good Sergeant, I'll no Trinidade,
My nose shall not be reeyde, nor guts died black,
That dainty likes me not, that wholesome Weed,
Makes fulsome smell: a dying hound would choke
With Belgic fire, and with Spanish smoke.

You can endure the smell sir?


Wondrous well,
But not to take it; It doth purge mine head,
And makes me sneeze, as though I tookt my self.
Its well done Sergeant, you have held him up
With good discourse: All times not lost, I see,
Nor yet ill spent: place makes not men or good
Or bad, its lewdness, ill condition,
As vice or virtue doth in men abound;
Virtue from Heaven, Vice it comes from Hell,
And drags men's souls where monstrous Furies dwell.
Please you sir, I will drink one hearty draught
Unto your Worships welcome to the town;
In generous Claret, sparkling; this for me,
The only drink.

Drinkt out. -- I thank you kindly.
To drink one hearty draught, will do me good.

Yea twenty, if you will, here's Wine enough.
The town is full, good liquor wais it round,

The Moat thou meanest; thou speak in Metaphors:
You have been busy, I perceive the cup
Works his revenge, for ioaling it so oft.

A little sir, one civil cup or two.


That civil cup breeds incivility.
When wine sometimes makes men be not themselves
How dost thou Pasquill, I am glad thou art well?

I thank you sir, I want but Holidays.


What dost thou work so hard?


Pay-dayes I mean,
To make one meet another, and shake hands,
On even terms, is all that I care for.

Tis well thou lead a merry life.


Thank God.
My Mistress, and you sir: you are my friends
You make me drink, when others will not doot.

What news mine host, I like your humour well
Tis merry harmeles, free without offence:
But wheres my man, was not he here to day.

He was indeed, but went before you came
About his business.

Since you might have said;
I saw him when he slinkte behind mine host

Gods blessing on your hart, what ere you think
You find no fault.

What news sir? did you ask?
Here is small news: our Church-men disagree
About opinions, which ne'er troubles me:
I am a man, I hope, believes the right,
There's but one God, one true religion;
One way to heaven, two or three to hell,
If they teach right, according to Gods word.
I will believe them, otherwise i'll choose.

Why that's well said, indeed those deep disputes
Are fitter for the Universities
To be discust within the College walls
Amongst the learned, not to come abroad
In open Pulpits amongst the meaner sort,
Whose faith is weak, whose judgment cannot reach
Unto the depth of things: the Magistrate,
Whose sword I dare not touch, should look to this:
'twill breed combustions, hazard many souls;
Besides this place befits not this discourse;
Therefore i'll break it off, Come lets away;
I'll to my wife, I left her at your house:
Son Garland, there I mean to dine;
To morrow I enuite you to my house
To eat some venison, here tis novelty;
It came from England, baked in Rye paste,
Look that you come, mine host this recknings mine:
Let not my son score high: for if you do
Tis lost for me, I'll not pay one penny.

No sir, he does not, needs not, will not sir;
I will not miss you, if it shall please God
Nothing shall stay me, nought shall keep me back.

And I'll come too, and though I go on foot.


Why come welcome, that's your chiefest cheer
I keep no feast, but what lasts all the year.
If I escapte unseen, why so it is:
If not I care not much: it is but so;
Perhaps a chiding, sour look, or rap,
Its but a storm, it will be soon ore-past;
May be, just nothing: but i'll haste me home;
Set up mine horses, dress my stable up,
And do such things, as I do use to do,
So I be doing, tis no matter what:
If it be not ill, and may bring profit in,
Or otherwise, prevent a wilful waste.
Things must be handsome, idleness is nought,
My Mistress loves me for my cleanliness.
Our yard lies handsome, there's no scattered straw
Nor sticks, nor chippes, but all things be as neat,
As some mans house, not rooted hog-stye like;
Or else poor Hans his iacquet hums: my coat
Is sure to pay for it: ere my master comes
I'll be at home; if Pasquill ere come there
I'll sit on's skirts, fear't not, for out of doubt,
I'll use him so, the boys shall find him out.
I told you wife where I should find your son;
Your sons I might have said: for they were both
Fast at the pot, some talked, some drunk as fast;
The cups flew high, brains waxed something light
I do perceive wise men sometimes lash out,
And thrifty too: would you have thought my son
The Merchant M. Garland would have stepped
Into a tappe-house, there to spend his time,
And money both.

Why not? tis recreation,
Sometimes for company, always at home;
It makes it loathsome, dulls the brain and sense:
We must not think on profit always, win,
Spend now and then, though not to please our selves
For others sakes.

Well: you will still excuse,
Your son, this gives too much encouragement
To his amiss.

I speak not fore his face,
Nor do I like in him, what you dislike:
My will is yours; but should I say as you
We should not reason, so to pass the time;
For when I speak, and speak the same you do;
You'll not reply, then both our tongues are still;
But if I cross you, though it be not much,
I hear more of you, sometimes learn more wit*

Your answers sharpe, it cutteth razor like,
A woman's wit is quick, as quick her tongue,
As Aspen leaves, some say it is the last
Part of a woman dyes.

Alas poor souls, we women must bear all
We weaker vessels must abide your frumps:
But tis no matter, while they break no skin,
Our backs were made to bear.

Your bellyesfull,


Our children do you mean? that's Gyptia like:
For so they bear them, in their slats or sheets;
If otherwise, my modest cheeks would blush
To answer you.

Better and better still;
Your apprehension takes like tutch; its hard
To find a woman quick of wit, so mild,
So modest, shamefaced, and so debonair.
It joys me much, a woman's modesty,
And grieves my soul to hear a scolding queen,
That sets her husbands night-cap on with horns.

Be there such women?


No, there should not be,
I do not say there are; I know none such;
All women are alike to me, I'll swear,
If my skill fail not, thoult not cuckold me,
Nor bring more children, so thy planet says,
I found it, casting thy Nativity.

Oh sir, those studies are but fopperies,
They are conjectures, there's no certainty,
Scarce warrantable, by the word of God,
Yet Schollers use them, if not good, the more,
Their fault, my fancy tells me so.

Tis true:
The art is lawful, tis Astrology,
But th'arts abuse in those predictions
Stretching a string too far, mars all;
We must not attribute to creatures that
Which the Creator wills; its he alone,
That guides our bodies, not the influence
Of stars or Planets, without him their power
Is nothing; nor doth he reveal his will
In them; yet wonders strange they oft foreshew,
Which men may guess at, none knows till tis past;
Therefore I hold them idle vanity.

Now sir, you are welcome home, this idle chat
Hath shortened our way: I'll to my Dayerie;
I must spare time to see my house wifery.
Shall I not have a pleasant journey on it
Think you, that must take such provision
With me: a Tankard full of Spanish Wine
Like those in London Water-bearers use;
The which the Merchant sends to his Father
A baked Swan, and two huge Turky-cockes;
Two bottles of French Wine, the Sergeant sends
And M. Flutterkin. I am their man
Must do their business, must haste on a fore,
While they take leisure: Nay I'll get two more
To wait on me, and row me in a boat
With this my luggage: when I am dry, I'll drink,
And taste a bit: but that the Pies are whole;
O there's the grief: but yet I'll have a trick
Shall serve my turn, ere I will starve for meat.
Three English miles, and neither drink nor eat?
It is too great a journey, I shall scarce hold out
Without refreshing, something by the way,
Will do me good, but for mine honest men;
I'll keep them sober, give them never a drop
Till they come there, unto the Younkers house,
Where they shall have enough; too much I doubt
Without more heed; yet none will force them drink;
But if they'll takte, their Buttery is so free.
A drunkard will be caught, before he's ware;
There's Hans his man, that rascal Beere-pot,
He will be doing, though he gets the worst;
And when his head flies light, why then he runs
To look to his horse, and there he falls a sleep
Ore th'eares in litter; but I'll watch him now.
I'll keep him from the Stable; then I am sure
To nogge him soundly; I'll eorroborate
My Peare-pot bravely; I'll buffticulate,
And counter-ieere him with my terms of Art;
Ribrost his downs, fling up my Gallants heals;
Make him take heed hereafter: be he wise
To deal with Soldiers in a drinking prize.
But time hastes on, and I must hence with speed;
What's left with me in trust, I'll do it indeed.
Burston dantmarden, calaminthay pindara toekson,
Marnuta maltalton, tintima marra tolon.
I brought with me great store of Barbary gold;
But all is gone, my parrell quite worn out;
And in this fashion am ashamed to go,
For fear my father would not look on me;
But if good fortune furnish me again.
With your free wills I'll run from hence to Spain.
Here may you see how fortune turns her wheel:
I that before did many men command;
Am now constrained to serve my Masters man;
For Fortune I care not, that fickle Whore;
I will be merry still, though near so poor.

I thank you both, for you have made me fine;
These gloves and gartars they were quickly won:
Each day so set on work, I should be rich.
Blessed be my Grandam brought me up at School
Where I learned wit, more then you thought I had.

He hath drild us both, mocks us to our teeth
What shall we do with him? weel' canuase him.

I am too big.


VVee'l fling him in the graffe,
T'wil cool him sweetly; oh 'twill do him good.

Were I an Anabaptist, you might do it,
And witness for me that I were baptizde;
But that I had in the town where I was borne,
Ere eight days old, I do remember't yet.

O monstrous, fie, thy mouth is foully torn,
Art not ashamed?

As well I swear,
As the first smock that ere my Father vveare.

Let him alone he will maintain't with oths.


See, see how you are deceived, you thought I lyde,
There's no such matter, altered is the case,
As surely as I live, and walking in this place.

Riming again, I'll deal no more with you;
I had enough of late, I paid too dear
For your conceits, I'll have no more of them.

As often as you will, you know the price;
And for my skill I pass not, am not nice.

Well to him Sergeant, now i'll take thy part
Against him, as he did thine before against me;
I'll be revenged for his discourtesy.
I marvel much where's Master Flutterkin?
He stays so long I think he hath forgot himself.

O here he is, his guts they are so stuffed,
With his fat liquor he can scarcely run.

Scarce run, scarce go, this barreld Sturgeon
Is out of breath, his grease begins to melt.

Mock on my Gallants, see what will come on it,
A shame on Lurchers, you have kilde me up.
I ran so fast, ere I could oretake you.

A child of two year old would run as fast.

Then I'll be hanged, good sir, how can that run?
That doth but dade, can hardly go or stand.
Wheres Pasquill is he gone?

He's there by this?
I saw him at the Ports, that Gentleman
Is ats two men; takes boat, sits down at ease,
And takes Tobacco, while they row him on,
He keeps a bottle just betwixt his legs,
Drinks when he list, and so he sets it down.

Would I were with him in such aequipage;
Or he were here, for I am almost choak't.

Why, how Flutterkin, at your Brande-wine?
I pray thee give me some.

Not the least drop.
Were you a thousand Merchants;
Or Younkers not a drop,
Think you I'll dye
For want of wholesome drink? al's out, see there:
So now I am well, can walk a mile or two,
As lustique as a Boor, and near complain.

My fathers yonder, he comes here to meet's.


So nigh already; Oh, I see the house;
I smell the Kitchen, see the Chimneis smoke.
Come Sergeant; put the better leg before;
You shall speak first, if well, I'll second you.

Thanks good mine Host, your wit would help me much
For good conceits your wholesome guts have hatched,
When sod in sack, your brains begin to flow.

Out from the horror of infernal deeps;
Pass forwards on; for I must stay behind:
Some small occasion bids me stand aside.

Its well your come, for I did think you long:
And that you had forgot to keep your words.
I bid you welcome to my Country farm;
Take that for all, I'll use no ceremony.

I'll warrant you sir, we did not mean to fail,
To stay at home, and miss so good a feast,
Tis Christmas now, It comes but once a year;
And when it comes, men say, it brings good cheer.
Here's Flutterkin takes leisure, comes behind;
Good man he sweates, his guts keep him so warm.
But fear of fainting by the high way side,
He hath provided to preserve his health;
Brande-Wine a creuse, which he drinks out himself.

I hear you Sergeant, I can bear your mocks:
You never knew fat men but honest yet;
A good companion, full of mirth and wit;
Lean jade cast off, lye starving in a ditch;
When plumper steeds are steemde among the rich.

Are you so nigh, I thought you had been lost:
By your leave sir; I'll welcome here mine Host.

Ha Sergeant I have known thee to serve long,
And yet thou stick, belike thou lik'st thy game:
Try friends and fortune, may be it will hit
To make thee higher on preferments steppe;
Stand not on thorns: adventure, draw a card.

So may I draw, and draw my self quite out:
And striving to get more, loose that I have.
Times are not now as they were erst, when you
Did haunt the fields, and led a Soldiers life:
Men had respect, and then were looked upon
For their deserts; but now tis nothing so.
Reward goes backward, honour on his head,
And due deserts are slight regarded now:
He that wants gold, seeks place, may stand aloof;
Stand fast he that would rise, or else he falls;
That now is sold, which then was but free gift;
Promotions fall not, but are bought before;
He that mounts now, he doth not as of old;
Rise by his virtues, but helped up with gold.

With leave and reverence may I speak my mind;
What though my friends be rich? it grieves me much
To see poor Soldiers walk in mean attire;
And less respect that have deserved well,
Grown old in wars, and got nothing but blows,
Wide gaping wounds, lost limbs and broken bones,
And just preferment, which another gets,
And they deserved, and perhaps a man
That never saw the field, nor chimneis smoke;
But those at home within his native soil.
Each man would up, there's none I am sure would down;
And they may use their talents as their own
To their own good and glory; not the hurt
Of poor or rich, of Kingdoms, Common-wealthes;
I blame not those that seek to increase their wealth,
Or better their estates by honest means;
I wrong not Princes, touch not their affairs.
Carpe not at men, but times corruptions;
Some climb too fast, and climbing catch a fall;
If please God he can help it, he helps all.

The Romans used to make their Worthies known,
By honourde titles, and with ornaments,
As rings and chains, gilt swords, and spurs of gold,
Which none might wear but such as were allowde.
But now Jack Sauce will be in's gilded spurs,
Whose father brewde good Ale for honest men:
Lodged Peddlers, Tynkers, Bearewards such a crew,
The scum of men, the plain rascality,
Such was Auratus Eques miles called;
The French men now, call him Vncheualier;
We call them Rydders, the English name them Knights;
T'was strange to see, what Knighthood once would do;
Stir great men up, to lead a martial life,
Such as were nobly borne, of great estates
To gain this honour, and this dignity;
So noble a mark to their posterity.
But now alas, it's grown ridiculous,
Since bought with money, sold for basest prize;
That some refuse it, which are counted wise.

But here's the difference; for we use to say,
Is such one Knighted? he deserude it well;
He's learned, wise, an hopeful Gentleman;
Hath been abroad, hath seen and knows the wars:
He speaks more language then his mothers tongue,
He can does country service, or his Prince
At home, abroad by Sea, or else by land,
Maintain the sword of civil government:
But such ones made a Knight: What that Arch-Clowne!
His wit is like his mothers milking payle:
Brought up at home, or at Hogsnorton School:
His Father near gave arms, writ good-man Cluneh,
And he kept sheep, or beasts, drove plough or cart:
The first on's name, first Knight, then Gentleman.
God give him joy; his honour cost him dear:
A sotte in Crimson, grown a golden Knight;
Well may'te become him, he becomes not it:
More then an Ass, a rich caparison.

You are two bitter son, you speak too townsman like,
As one that envies Country Gentlemen:
He that doth raise his house, although a Clown,
Is happier far, then he that pulls it down.

Indeed that's true, for he may have a Son,
Whose better breeding may help those defects,
That beins father; may be fit to rule,
The Sword of Justice in a common-wealth,
Raises his house and name, sets it higher,
Writes second Knight, a Justice, or Esquier.

When I was in my flower of youth, and lived
In Englands Court, that swarmde with Martialists,
Seamen and Soldiers, there had great respect,
Were set by; honoured more then other men,
As Drake and Candish. Hawkins, Frobisher,
Williams, and Baskernile two valiant Knights,
Those worthy brothers known by Norreis name:
The Veres, the Shirleis, and the Constables,
Sir Thomas Morgan, brave Lord Willoughbie,
Whom Spaniards termed the fierce, the devil of hell;
Renowned Essex, famous Cumberland,
And both the Howardes prooude so oft at Sea
With tempests, roaring billows, Canon shot;
George Somers Knight, Carlisle and Lancaster,
Were not the least; these lived in my time;
And diverse more whose names I have forgot,
That serude in Ireland, whom those bloody wars*
Made famous unto all posterity,
Some living yet, some folded up in lead,
That died in honours lap; sleep in her bed.

Then was a time that soldiers were esteemed,
And if they lived they had preferment sure,
And those that died were well provided for;
Then did men rise from meanest parentage
By their deserts, to places of account,
As some you nam'de, not borne to any thing;
Did raise their fortunes to a great estate,
And gave no bribes, did not one penny pay,
To any cogging Claw-backe Sycophant,
And for deserts had freely what they had;
For happy was that man, though near so great,
That could do honour to a man of war,
As those that served in France amongst those broils,
And civil discords yet can testify,
When that rich kingdom pitteously torn
All stained with gore, half mared with fire sword
What there was got, how much account was had
Of them: when back they made their home return:
When happy Bourbon got those lillies three;
Began their peace: did end that misery.

I saw those wars, and saw that nauall fight
In eighty eight twixt Spain and English fleet.
With Norreis went I unto Portugall,
And was with Essex at the sack of Cales,
From thence to Ireland where I was a while,
But Newport battle that made up my mouth,
The last great service that I ere was at,
Where being sore hurt, was weak, and sick long time,
Ere I was well, and had my former health
Before that time, if ought were to be done.
Each summer was I wandering still abroad,
And what I got, encreast my livelihood,
Each year a little, till I had enough,
I thank my God, he tossed me to and fro,
And sent me home at last to live in peace;
Per mare, per terras, per tot discrimenarerum
Tendimus in Latium: this Aeneas said.
In Latin land when Trojan wars were past,
To live in peace we are arrived at last.
Blessed be that hand which brought this blessed peace;
And blessed be those that pray it never cease.

O happy you, that so did spend your time,
In dangers great abroad, by sea and land,
While lazy Lurdaines lay and slept at home,
You rayzde your fortunes, got a brave estate,
And after all, now lead a Country life,
Amongst your neighbours with a virtuous wife.

Why that's a comfort, far beyond compare*
This happy life cannot be paragonde,
My own conceit hath rapt me from my self,
Me thinks I am such one, my state is such,
And how I sit by mine own fire side
With my sweet wife, the life of my dear life,
And tell my children, what I erst have seen
To encourage them, to tread their Fathers steps;
To make them bold to banish servile fear.
Tis heaven on earth; the minds and hearts content,
A Kingdoms riches: can a man have more?
Then Gods sweet peace: the love of Common-wealth;
His minds desires and bodies perfect health.

Here comes my wife, and Pasquill with my man,
Think Dinners ready, we will leave discourse.

Please you come in, your meat is taking up,
And you may talk as well by th'fire side.

We come sweet wife, come give me thy fair hand;
We'll walk in couples one turn round about.
Tis Temple fashion, there observed yet.
By th'ancient Seniors, dancing in a ring,
Their stately measures, hand in hand by two
And two; upon their solemn revel nights,
And then we'll in, and drink full Nectar cups,
And taste such meat, as God hath given us,
Yet midst of mirth remember them that want,
To comfort them, with some part of our store
In harmless mirth; thus have we done our parts;
If you be pleased, how joyful are our hearts.
Revenge, revenge for Pasquils ugly whore,
I'll make him drunk, was never creature more.
You would but cannot, thank you good Sir Hans,
If I be drunk, your self shall lead the dance.

What? did he hear me? now this bargains made;
Once warned, half armed, so doth the Proverb say.
Now if I would, I cannot, he will none,
He not adventure, least I first be gone;
He saw me not, yet sees what I would do;
Him i'll requite, see not, and yet see too*
I'll give him what he wants, or drink or meat,
And all you too, if that you please to eat,
At your own costs, for my store will not do it,
My means are short, they will not reach vntoo't.
In such excess, I will not do amiss;
My mind is altered, you may see by this:
And for what's past: if it have moude delight,
I take my leave rejoice, and so good night.

WAlking in a shadow Grove,
Near silver streams fair gliding,
Where trees in ranks did grace those banks,
And Nymphs had their abiding.
Here as I stayde, I saw a maid.
Abeauteous lovely creature,
With Angels face, and Goddess grace,
Of such exceeding feature.
Her looks did so astonish me,
And set my heart a quaking,
Like stag that gazed, was I amazed,
And in a stranger taking:
Yet rouzde my self to see this elf,
And lo a tree did hide me:
Where I unseen beheld this Queen,
A while ere she espied me.
Her voice was sweet melodiously,
She sung in perfect measure:
And thus she said with trickling tears,
Alas my joy and treasure.
I'll be thy wife, or lose my life.
There's no man else shall have me,
If God say so: I will say no,
Although a thousand crave me.
Oh stay not long, but come my dear,
And knit our marriage knot,
Each hour a day, each month a year.
Thou know I think, God wot,
Delay not then like worldly men,
Good works till withered age
Above other things: the King of Kings
Blessed a lawful marriage.
Thou art my choice, I constant am,
I mean to die unspotted,
With thee i'll live, for thee I love,
And keep my name vnblotted.
A virtuous life, in maid and wife,
The Spirit of God commends it.
Accursed he, for ever be,
That seeks with shame to offendit.
With that she rose like nimble Roe,
The tender grass scarce bending,
And left me there, perplexed with fear,
At this her Sonnets ending.
I thought to move this dame of love,
But she was gone already:
wherefore I pray, that those that stay
May find their loves as steady.
HEre may you see how fortune turns her Wheel;
I that before did many men command:
Am now constrained to serve my masters man;
Regnau^, regno, regnabo, sum sine regno:
She makes the world her stage, or Tenniscourt:
Where men like balls are banded to and fro:
Or Player-like, come forth, to act their parts;
Speak big and strut, and stride Colossus like,
And when his turn is out steps in at door;
Another takes his room. comes out no more.
Soon up, soon down, now higst, then lowest of all,
Like Codrus poor: and straight as Croesus rat,
Thus glories fortune in inconstancy;
For her I care not, she's a fickle whore,
I will be merry, be I near so poor.

