THE ancient Romaines, who were the first Creators of Consuls and Senators for
public rule and honourable gonernment, used yearly triumphal shows and
devises, to grace their several Inauguration. From which famous and
commendable Custom, London (as well as other Magnificent Cities of the World)
hath (from time to time) both devised and continued the like love and careful
respect, at the Creation of her worthy Consuls and Magistrates: As instant
occasion may serve to testify, for the honourable enstaulment of Sir Iames
Pemberton, knight and Alderman, in the high and eminent office of Londons
Maioralty. For the better effecting whereof, the Ancient, Worthy, and Right
Worshipful Company of Gold-Smithes (sparing no cost; that might express their
love to so Honourable a Brother) added to his day of Triumph, diverse devises.

First then, concerning the services performed on the Water, when he took
Bardge, with all the other Companies towards Westminster; supposicion must
needs give some graceful help to invention; and be as ready in apprehension,
as the other in action. Imagine then, that from the rich and Golden Indian
Mines, sundry Ships, Frigates, and Galleys, are returned home; in one of which,
Ch^orison the Golden King, with Tumanama his peerless Queen, are (at their
own entreaty) brought into England, with no mean quantity of Indian Gold, to
behold the Countries beauty, and the immediate day of solemn triumph. Diverse
Sea-fights and skirmishes ^re actively performed, both in the passage on to
Westminster, and back again, each Gallant having his Indian Page attending on
him, laden with Ingots of Gold and Silver, and those Instruments that delved
them out of the earth. In which manner they march along by Land likewise, the
Indian King and his Queen being mounted on two Golden Leopards, that draw a
goodly triumphal Chariot.

No sooner lands the Lord Mayor at Baynard Castle, but there he is saluted
by Leofstane a Gold-Smith, the first Provost that bare authority in London,
who likewise is guarded by ten Halberdiers, to express the Martial government
then in use. His speech being ended, he conducts the Lord Mayor and his
worthy train on, till he comes to an ancient Tomb or Monument, standing in
apt place appointed for it: and by it is ordered the Triumphal Chariot, to
perform the services thereto appointed. In the Chariot we suppose the shapes
of king Richard the first, surnamed Cordelion, and King Iohn his Brother, that
succeeded him in the Kingdom, and each hath his several attending Virtue.
Richard was the first that gave London the dignity of a Lord Mayor, reducing it
from the rule of Portgreues, Provosts, and Bay liffes, to that more high and
honourable Title: yet with this restriction, that the election of the Mayor
consisted then in the King himself, as it did all King Richards life time, and
so continued till the fifteenth year of King Iohn, who then (most graciously)
gave the Citizens of London absolute power, to elect a Lord Mayor amongst
themselves, in which worthy condition it hath ever since continued. The
services at the Tomb performed, doth sufficiently speak it self in more
meet place appointed; and therefore needs here no further relation.

ON a Quadrangle frame, of apt constructure, and answerable strength, we erect
a Rock or Mount of Gold, in such true proportion, as Art can best present it
with cliffs, crannies, and passable places, such as may best inlustrate the
invention, and express the persons therein seated, according to their several
Character and Office. The Pioners, Miners, and Deluers, do first use their
endeavour and labour, to come by the Oar of gold and Silver hidden in the Rock;
which being (from them) conveyed to the industrious Finer, it is by him framed
into Ingots of diverse forms, according as further benefit is to be made of it,
and the same applied to most necessary uses, as likewise is apparently
discovered, in the Mint-Maister, Coyners, Gold Smiths, Jeweller, Lapidary,
Pearle-Driller, Plate-Seller, and such like, all lively acting their sundry
professions. To distinguish those precious Metals of Gold and Silver, from
base adulterating or corruption, we show there also an ingenious Say-Maister,
with his Furnaces, Glasses of parting each Mettle from other, his Table,
Balance, and Weightes, even to the very smallest quantity of true valuation,
in Ingots, Jewels, Plate or Monies, for the more honour of the Prince and
Country, when his Coins are kept from imbasing and abusing.

On the top or height of our Orferie, because the Societies creast or supremest
Emblem, may hold some correspondency with our invention (their Motto or word
being, Iustitia Virtutum Regina.) As Queen of all other Virtues, we figure
Chthoon, or Vesta (Mother to Saturn, and called likewise Terra, the breeding
and teeming Mother of al Gold, Silver, Mineral, and other Metals, and seat
her in the chiefest Soueraignetie. On her right hand sits Chrusas, Gold, her
eldest Daughter, and Argurion, Silver; the youngest, richly suited, according
to their several Natures and qualities. After a supposed long and tedious
journey, which al her daughters, Gold and Silver may seem to have had,
thorough their Mothers large limits and Rocky kingdom, leaving in every Vain,
Sinew, Artery, the rich and valuable virtue of their splendour: they are
returned again, and seated by her, to fulfil this solemn day of Triumph,
prepared for her eldest Daughter, Gold. Now, that it might be publicly
discerned, how unpartial an Empress she is, and vncorruptible in her rich
bounty to the World; thus she reveals it. That greedy and never satisfied
Lydian King, who desired, that whatsoever he touched might turn to Gold,
finding his own covetousness to be his ruin, he (imaginarily) Metamorphozed
into a Stone: Our Chthoon, finding this Lydian Stone fit for her use, termed
it Lithos; and because (in his life time) the King was so immeasurably affected
to Gold, she imposed this virtue on the Stone, that it should (for ever
after) be the Touch-Stone and Trier of both Gold and Silver, to warn other
Worldlings of the like auaritious folly. By this Stone she tries the virtue of
her Ingots, Jewels, Monies, c. and poyzing them afterward in her
euen-handed-Ballance, that every Mettle might be just and perfect: she not
only gave that Stone to her golden Sons, the Gold-Smiths, but her Daughter,
Goldes figure likewise, appointing her to sit on their Armories creast, with
the Touch-Stone in the one hand, and Balance in the other, to represent her
own sacred person in Justice, and to verify their word; Iustitia Virtutum
Regina.

Now, least the insatiable World (which never is surficed with gifts of
greatest esteem) should rob her again of her two precious Daughters, Chrusos
and Argurion: she linckes them fast to her Chair of State with a Chain of
Gold, fastened in the midst with a Golden Ouch or Buckle, the tongue where of
hath so intricate a virtue, as none but her self is able to untie it. On them
also do attend two beautiful Ladies, Philoponia and Mnaemae, Antiquity and
Memory, who make discovery of Empetria, or grave Experience in the Golde-Smiths
ancient profession, by the imagiued Character of learned Dunstane, who being
Bishop of Worcester, London, and Arch-Byshop of Canterbury, had no little
delight in the Art of Cold-Smithery, and shows himself now (as then) acting
that profession.

The Emblems going before this Orfery, a Mareman, and Mare-Maid (each quartered
with a golden Unicorn) do figure the long continued love and amity, which
(time out of mind) hath held between the Gold-Smiths and Fish-Mongers, as
Time (in his speech for that purpose) more at large declares.

IF it seem strange unto yon (Honourable and worthy Lord) that in this
manner I presume to saluce ye; the Justice of the present cause, and the
Suffrages due to such days of Triumph. shall instantly veild you ample
satisfaction. First for my self, I was sometime as you are now, Lieutenant or
Governor of this famous City, albeit not in so mild a form or temper; in
regard that those days of disturbance and rough combustion (after four
several Conquests of the whole Land, and unsettled assurance in the very last)
required a stearner strain of awful rule, then now these sweeter singing
times are able to endure. Portgreues, Prouostes, and Bayliffes, were Londons
first M^gistrates, and (of Provosts) I the first, being named Leofstane, and a
Gold Smith by my pro^ession, as the powerful command that raised me from my
Grave at Bermondsey, enstructes me that you are, and thought it fit, that the
first honoured Brother of our ancient Fraternity, should attend this day of
your solemn Inauguration, having a Brother Sheriff also of the same Society.
For these my followers that attend me now, as in my time of authority they
did: hostile still, to Londons enemies or rude disturbers, but peaceful to all
her friendly lovers. Then honourable Lord, and Brother Gold-Smith, seeing Time
privately tells me, that he hath further employment for me in this your day of
Triumph, as best occasion shall give way thereto: here ends my first
salutations to your self, and these grave Senators your worthy brethren, who
(in my time) were styled by the Name of Domesmen, Elder-men, or Judges of the
Kings Courts, were then assistant to me, in care, counsel, and fatherly
providence, for this Cities good, as these reverend men have bin to others;
and now will be the like to you. And so I leave ye to your further progression.

Leofstane, I charge thee stay.

What art thou, that dare bar me of my way?

He that suruaies what ever deeds are done,
Abridges, or gives scope, as likes me best;
Recalling to the present sight of Sun
Actions, that (as forgot) have lien at rest,
And now, out of thy long since buried Chest
At Bermondsey, raised thee to see this day:
Leofstane; tis he, that dares compel thy stay.

See in how short a while a quiet Soul,
Hid from this world five hundred years and more,
May be forgetful of great Times control,
By such gay sights as ne'er I saw before.
My self yer while could tell this worthy Lord,
Time had reuiu'd me, to attend this day:
Pardon me then, that I durst breath a word
In contestation, where all ought obey.
needs must these gaudier days yield greater crime,
When long gran'd Ghosts dare thus contend with Time.

Enough, no more; Now honourable Lord,
For whose instalment in this Dignity,
Thy loving Brethren liberally affoord,
Out of their loves their glad harts sympathy,
And what may else thy triumph dignify:
As thus I turn my Glass to Times of old,
So tune thine ears to what must now be told.
In this triumphal Chariot thus attending,
Sit the supposed shapes of two great Kings,
That to this City gave no small befriending,
Advancing it from mean to mightier things,
From whence thy very instant honour springs:
For where before, stern, Martial-Regiment
Bare sole command, grew this grave government.
Richard the first, Sur-named Lyon-heart,
For his undaunted courage and great mind,
When in Gods cause he plaid a Champions part,
In fair Iudea, where the Pagan blind
In Gods house would his mawmetry have shrinde
And full defaced Star-bright Hierusalem:
This royal Richard foild his forces then.
But ere he undertook that holy war,
This City (his chief Chamber) did he grace
With Dignity, beyond the former far,
For Portgreues, Provosts, Bailiffs held best place,
Such, and no other (then) was Londons case.
Till he bethought him of a Lord-Maiors name:
And so the Title of Lord Mayor first came.
And shall I tell ye what that first Lord was?
A Gold-Smith, of thine own profession,
Henrte Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofstane, of honourable race,
Judicious, learned, and of such discretion,
That even by Richards own direction,
All his whole time, he held the State still on;
And so, until the fifteenth of King Iohn.
Which did exceed full four and twenty years,
That this grave Gold-Smith held authority
Of the Lord Mayor, as by Records appears,
Nineteen whole years this stile of dignity
Came from the King: but then most graciously
Iohn gave the Citizens free leave t'elect
Yearly their Mayor, whom best they should respect.
Five years (each after other) till they chose
That grave Fitz-Alwine to his dying day,
When he was called hence to blessed repose.
Then justly may we be thus bold to say,
Four hundred years three, the L. Majors sway
Hath held in London, under their command,
Who still assignd that office to their hand.
How many Gold-Smiths have enjoyed the place,
Were needless to recount. Yet here sleeps one,
Whom in this ^ging and important case,
(He being Gold Smith too, and long since gone
Out of this world, old Nicholas Faringdon,
Four times Lord Mayor) I may not well omit,
Because I think him for thy triumph fit.
These gates he built, this ward of him took name,
And three and fifty years he did suruine
After his first being Mayor What plenty came
To greet his days, with former times did strive,
And ne'er the like as when he was alive:
Arise, arise I say, good Faringdon,
For in this triumph thou must needs make one.

AStonishment and frightful wonder,
Shakes and splits my soul in sunder.
Cannot graves contain their dead,
Where long they have lien buried,
But to Triumphs, sports, and shows
They must be raised? Alack, God knows
They count their quiet slumber hlest,
Free from disturbance, and unrest.

I know it well good man. Yet look about,
And recollect thy spirits free from fear,
Note what thou see.

How? Whence? or where
May I suppose my self? Well I wot,
(If Faringdon mistake it not)
That ancient famous Cathedral,
Hight the Church of blessed Paul.
And that this Ward well witness can,
Once thereof I was Alderman,
And gave it mine own proper name.
I built these gates, the very same.
But when I note this goodly train,
(Yelad in Scarlet) it should sayen
(And soothly too) that these are they
Who watch for London night and day,
Grave Magistrates; of which fair band,
When second Edward swayd this land,
Four several times the chief was I,
And Lord of Londons Maioralty.
As by the bearing of that sword,
It seems that ye are Londons Lord:
To whom becomes me lout full lowe,
Old duty yet (methinkes) I know.
Turn now thy Glass to instant day,
And let old Faringdon thee pray:
Good Time, resolve him, what is he,
Graced with this day of Dignity?

A Brother of the Gold-Smiths Company,
Whose virtues, worth, and special love of all,
Hath raised unto this high authority.
Moreover note, how fit his lot doth fall,
That time should likewise at this instant call,
A Sheriff of the same Society:
To bear a part in this Solemnity.
See how the Brethren of that worthy band,
Abound in love and liberality;
To grace this Jovial day; On tip-toe stand
Their iocond Spirits: Joying mutually,
In Mayor and Sheriff of their Company.
How can thy Ghost then, but rejoice to see:
This honour of thine own Society?

Joy and gladsome iouissance,
Doth old Faringdon in-trance,
To hear the tale that Time hath told,
Since those reverend days of old,
Unto this great Solemnity,
For Brethren of my Company.
Glad and golden be your days,
Live in Prince and peoples praise:
Honour London with your care,
Study still for her welfare:
And as Gold-Smiths both you are,
Such good and golden deeds prepare,
That may renown our Mystery,
To times of utmost memory.
My minute calls, and Ghosts must go.
Yet loath I am to leave ye so.
For I could well spend out this day,
And do what service else I may;
Were Time but pleased that I might stay.

Time, that in this days honour raised us both,
Means not (I trust) so soon to sunder us:
To see that separation, I am loath,
Be then to both so kind and gracious;
That we may wait upon this worthy man:
And do him yet what service else we can.

You have your own desires. Go Faringdon,
There in that Chariot is thy place prepared:
Here, I (as Coach-man) mean to guide ye on,
So long as well our respit may be spared.
On then, away, for we have held ye long:
And done (I doubt) your worthy Guests great wrong.

Here, my Lord, my charge was limited, to describe this rich and beauteous
Monument unto ye, with all relations thereto appertaining. But Time hath told
me, that Guests of great State and Honour are come to feast with you, and the
least delay now, may be both offensive and troublesome; therefore it is referred
to more apt conueniency, when we (with much better leisure) may attend ye.

THis Orferie, so styled by the ancient Epithet of your Companies profession,
or Gold-Smithery, doth speak it self unto your honour in this manner. Here
do the Miners and Pioners delve into the Earths entrails, to gain the Oar,
both of Gold and Silver; and having attained thereunto in plentiful measure,
the ingenious Fyner purges him from his first Nature, and shapes him into to
Ingots of variable form, according as his Art best guids and enstructs him.
From him, these precious Metals descend to diverse other dexterious Artezans;
as the Mint-Maister, his Coyners, and diverse others, who make them to serve in
public passage for general benefit, both in Coin, Plate, and Jewels, as
occasion best discovers the just necessity. Being brought into these
variant substances, to preserve those pure refined bodies from base
adulterating, the Essay-Maister or absolute Tryer of eythers virtue, makes
proof of them in his Furnaces, and of their true worth or value. So are they
commended to Sovereign Justice, attended by her gracious Daughters, Gold and
Silver, who bountifully hurl abroad their Mothers treasures, after she hath
(yet once again) tried them, by the Touch of vndeceiueable perfection. The
rest, that do sufficiently speak themselves in their distinguished places, as
the Jeweller, Lapidary, Pearle-Driller, Golde-Smith, and such like, your eye
of heedful observation may spare their further relating. Only I may not omit
these two virtuous Ladies, Antiquity and Memory, who, present (in apt place)
Grave Judgment or Experience in the Golde-Smiths ancient faculty, by the
supposed shape of venerable Dunstane, a man, sometime very practique, so well
skilled in Gold-Smithery, as (notwithstanding his more Divine profession) being
Bishop of Worcester, London, and lastly Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, delighted
therein to his utmost date of life.


So much for that; There Leofstane make a pause,
Till Time have certified this honoured Lord
Concerning these fair Emblems, And the cause
Of their combining in this kind accord.
The Argument doth instantly affoord,
The ancient love and cordial amity
Between the Fishmongers Gold-Smiths Company.
At Feasts and solemn meetings, on each side,
A Fish-Monger and Gold-Smith, hand in hand
Have long time gone, and nothing could divide
The rare continuance of that loving band:
Which (doubtless) to the end of time will stand.
And therefore, these Impress are thus borne:
The ones Fish, with the others Unicorn.
Yet let no censure stray so far at large,
To think the reason of that unity
Makes Fish-Mongers support the Gold-Smithes charge,
And their expenses shared equally:
No, tis the Gold-Smiths sole Society.
That in this Triumph bears the Purse for all:
As theirs the like, when like their lot doth fall.
Their loves (herein) may not be thought the less,
But rather virtual, and much stronger knit,
That each to other may the same express,
When honour (in each Science) makes men fit
On such a Seat of Dignity to fit.
Then Peters Keys, with Dauids Cup of Gold:
May freely march together, vncontroulde.

Now, as custom wills it so,
On to Paules Church must ye go,
To bless God for this bounteous day.
Till you return, here will we stay,
And usher then a gladsome guiding,
Home to the place of your abiding.
For such is your kind Bretherens will:
And Time hath tied us therevntill.

THus (honoured Lord) have we dutiously attended ye, till Time appoints our
departing, who hath tutourd Leofstanes tongue how to take his leave, with some
remarkable observations, not altogether unfitting your attention. First, the
day of your Election, falling out in such strange manner as it did, exceeded
the memory of Man to speak the like. And yet, notwithstanding, so great a
Snow, Sleete, and rough wind; at the very instant of your choice, the Sun
did as readily thrust forth his Golden beams, to guilde the instant of your
Inauguration, as harts and hands did cheerfully applaud it with free and full
confirmation. Next, three Names, all of equal syllables and sound, to happen
in the immediate choice; is a matter deserving regard, and (from the
Maioralties first beginning) never was the like. Pemberton, Swynnerton and
Middleton, Names of three most worthy Gentlemen, but of much greater worth in
sense and significancie, as your own (my Lord, for brevity) may yeilde an
instance. Pemberton derives it self from the ancient British, Saxon, and
eldest English, each Syllable suited with his apt meaning. Pem, implyeth the
head, chief or most eminent part of any thing; Bert, bears the Character of
bright shining and radiant splendour; and Tun, hath continued the long known
Word for any Town or City, as most Shires in England (to this day) doth
deliver the expression of their Towns; As London, sometime termed Ludstun, or
Luds-Towne, may serve as an example. A bright head of this famous City,
interpreting it self in the Name of Pemberton, and he being enstaulled in the
government, to be her bright-shining Head under his Sovereign, Leofstanes
desire is;

Since Pemberton doth bear so bright a Name,
And that from gold Goldsmiths grew his fame,
His deeds may prove to be like burnished Gold:
By no dim darkness any way controulde.

Well hast thou wished, therein Time joins with thee,
And tells this Lord, that such a goodly name,
Requires bright actions, from pollution free,
In word and deed to be alike, the same,
For then life stands on her fairest frame.
And when the Head in splendour seems divine,
The people learn (by his clear light) to shine.
Contrariwise, obscure and misty deeds,
Do give a harsh and hateful president:
And of fair flowers begets stinking Weeds.
For ill example, harms the innocent;
And makes him (in bad life) as violent.
Be to this City then, so bright an Head,
That all may say, it ne'er more flourished.
Consider likewise, Iames thy gracious King,
Sets Iames (his Subject) here his Deputy.
When Maiesste doth meaner persons bring
To represent himself in Sovereignty,
I'st not an high and great authority?
Let it be said, for this high favour done:
King Iames hath found, a just Iames Pemberton.
Let me not now they Bretherens love omit,
So worthily (this day) to thee declared,
If with like love thou kindly welcome it,
Their hope is to the highest pitch preferde,
For thus they wish, as Time himself hath heard:
That Pemberton, and Smiths, may both be,
An endless honour to their Company.

So wish I too, with all my hart,
And seeing now we needs must part,
From Faringdon one farewell take,
Who gives it for the Gold-Smiths sake.
You are Lieutenant to your King,
And tis a very worthy thing,
To mind Gods blessing, and his grace,
That brought ye to so high a place.
Oh soil it not with any blame,
That, may impeach it, or your name.
For they have told ye well before,
That whereof I need speak no more:
You are a Gold-Smith, Golden be
Your daily deeds of Charity.
Golden your hearing poor men's cases,
Free from partial bribes embraces.
And let no rich or mighty man
Injure the poor, if help you can.
The World well wots, your former care
Forbids ye now to pinch or spare,
But to be liberal, frank, and free,
And keep good Hospitality,
Such as beseems a Maioraltie,
Yet far from prodigality.
To be too lavish, is like crime
As being too frugal in this time.
I say no more, but God defend ye,
Many days of comfort send ye,
To whom (with all these) I commend ye.


