HOlla, holla, holla^follow, follow, follow. Like noise within. Now
benedicite, what foul absurdity, folly foolery had like to followed me! I
my mates, like addle pates, inviting great States, to see our last play, are
hunting the hay, with ho, that way, the goodly Heart ran, with follow little
Iohn, Much play the man; and I, like a sot, have wholly forgot the course of
our plot: but crosse-bowe lye down, come on Friars gown, hood cover my
crown, and with a lowe beck, prevent a sharpe check.

Blithe sit ye all, and wink at our rude cry,
Mind where we left, in Sheerewod merrily,
The king, his train, Robin, his yeomen tall
Gone to the wodde to see the fat dear fall*
We left maid Marian busy in the bower,
And pretty li^ny looking, every hour,
For their returning from the hunting game,
And therefore seek to set each thing in frame*
Warman all woeful for his sin we left.
Sir Doncaster, whose villainies and theft,
You never heard of, but too soon ye shall,
Hurt with the Prior; shame them both befall,
They two will make our mirth be short and small.
But least I bring ye sorrow ere the time,
Pardon I beg of your well judging eyne,
And take in part bad prologue, and rude play:
The hunters hello, Tucke must needs away.
Therefore down weed, bow do the deed, to make the Stag bleed, and if
my hand speed, hey for a cry, with a throat strained hie, a load yall, at the
beasts fall.

Where is our mother?

Mounted in a stand.
Six fallow dear have dyed by her hand.

Three Stags I slew.

Two Bucks by me fell down.

As many dyed by me.

But I had three.

Scathlocke, wheres Much

When last I saw him, may it please your Grace,
He and the Frierfooted it apace.

Scathlocke, no Grace, your fellow plain Iohn.

I warrant you, Much will be here anon.

Think^ thou little Io^n, that he must Iinny wed'^

No doubt ^e must.

Then to adorn he^ h^ad, we shall have horns good slore.

God, for thy grace,
How could I miss the Stag I had in chase!
Twice did I hit him in the very neck,
When back my arrows flew, as they had smit
On some sure armour. Where is Robin Hood,
And y^ wight Scarlet? Seek them little Iohn,
I'll have that Stag before I dine to day.

O the friar, the friar, the friar.

Why, how now Much?
Cry ye mercy, master king. Marry this is the matter; Scarlet is following the
Stag you hit, and has almost lodged him: now the Friar has the best bow, but
yours, in all the field: which and Scarlet had, he would have him straight.


Where is thy master?

Nay, I cannot tell, nor the Friar neither.

I hear them hello, far off in the wod.

Come Much, can lead us where as Scarlet is?

Never fear you; follow me,

You were resolved to have him poisoned,
Or killed, or made away, you cared not how.
What devil makes you doubtful now to do it?

Why Doncaster? his kindness in our needs.

Apla^ue upon his kindness, let him die.
I never tempered poison in my life, but I employed it.
By th'masse and I loose this,
For ever look to loose my company.

But will you give it him?

That can^ot be.
The Queen. Earl Chester, and Earl Salsbury,
If they once see me, I am a dead man:
Or did they hear my name, I'll lay my life,
They all would hunt me, for my life.

What hast thou done to them?

Faith, some odd toys,
That made me fly the south: but pass we them:
Here is the poison: will you give it Robin?

Now by this gold I will.

Or as I said, for ever I defy your company.

Well, he shall die, and in his jollity:
And in my head I have a policy
To make him die disgrac't.

O tell it Prior.

I will, but not as now: Call the Friar within.
We'll seek a place, the woods have many ears,
And some me thinks are calling for the Friar.

The Friar, the Friar?

Why, where's this Friar?

Here sir. what is your desire?

Why Friar, what a murren dost thou mean?
The King calls for thee. For, a mighty stag,
(That hath a copper ring about his neck,
With letters on it, which he would have read)
Hath Scarlet killed. I pray thee go thy way.

Master I will, no longer will I stay.

Good uncle be more careful of your health,
And you sir Doncaster, your wounds are green.

Through your great kindness, we are comforted.

And Warman, I advise you to more mirth.
Shun solitary walks, keep company,
Forget your fault: I have forgiven the fault.
Good Warman be more blithe, and at this time,
A little help my Marian and her maid:

shall come to you straight: a little now,
We must al strive to do the best we may.

On you and her I'll wait, until my dying day.

Warman a word, My good Lord Prior and I
Are full of grief, to see thy misery.

My misery, sir Doncaster? why? I thank God,
I never was in better state than now.

Why, what a servile slavish mind hast thou?
Art thou a man, and can be such a beast,
Asse-like to bear the burden of thy wrong?

What wrong have I? Is't wrong to be relieved?

Relieved say thou?
Why, shallow witted fool,
Dost thou not see Robins ambitious pride?
And how he clymes by pitying, and aspires,
By humble looks, good deeds, and such fond toys,
To be a monarch, reigning over us,
As if we were the vassals to his will?

I am his vassal, and I will be still.

Warman, thou art a fool. I do confess,
Were these good deeds done in sincerity,
Pity of mind, thine or this knights distress,
Without vain brags, it were true charity:
But to relieve our fainting bodies wants,
And grieve our souls with quips, and bitter braids,
Is good turns ouerturnd: no thanks we owe
To any, whatsoever helps us so.

Neither himself, nor any that he keeps,
Ever upbraided me, since I came last.

O God have mercy on thee, silly ass.
Doth he not say to every guest that comes;
This same is Warman, that was once my steward?

And what of that?

Is't not as much to say;
Why, here he stands that once did me betray.

Did he not bring a troop to grace himself,
Like Captives waiting on a conquerours chair,
And calling of them out, by one and one,
Presented them, like fairings, to the king?

O, I: there was a rare invention:
A plague upon the fool.
I hate him worse for that than all the rest.

Why should you hate him? why should you or you
Envy this noble Lord, thus as you do?

Nay rather, why dost thou not join in hate
With us, that lately liu'dst like us, in wealthy state?
Remember this, remember foolish man,
How thou hast been the Shrieue of Notingham.

Cry to thy thoughts, let this thought never cease,
I have been Justice of my Sovereigns peace,
Lord of fair livings: men with cap and knee,
In liveries waited hourly on me.

And when thou think, thou hast been such such,
Think then what tis to be a mate to Much,
To run when Robin bids, come at his call,
Be mistress Marians man.

Nay think withal

What shall I think? but think upon my need,
When men fed dogs, and me they would not feed:
When I despaird through want, and sought to die,
My piteous master, of his charity,
Forgave my fault, relieved and saved me:
This do I think upon, and you should think
(If you had hope of souls salvation)
First Prior, that he is of thy flesh and blood,
That thou art uncle unto Robin Hood:
That by extortion thou did get his lands:
God, and I know how it came to thy hands:
Now thou pursu'dst him in his misery,
And how heaven plagued thy hearts extremity:
Think Doncaster, when, hired by this Prior,
Thou came to take my master with the Friar,
And were thy self taken, how he set thee free,
Gave thee an hundred pound to comfort thee,
And both bethink ye how but yesterday,
Wounded and naked in the field you lay,
How with his own hand he did raise your heads,
Poured balm into your wounds, your bodies fed,
Watched when ye slept, wept when he saw your woe,

Stay Warman, stay: I grant that he did so,
And you, turned honest, have forsworn the villain?

Even from my soul, I villainy defy.

A blessed hour: a fit time now to die:

And you shall, Conscience.

O forgive me, God,
And save my master from their bloody hands.

What, hast thou made him sure?

Its dead sure: he is dead, if that be sure.

Then let us thrust the dagger in his hand,
And when the next comes, cry he killed himself.

That must be now: yonder comes Robin Hood.
No life in him.

No, no, not any life.
Three mortal wounds have let in piercing air,
And at their gaps, his life is clean let out.

Who is it uncle that you so bemoan?

Warman, good nephew, whom sir Doncaster I
Found freshly bleeding, as he now doth lye.
You were scarce gone, when he did stab himself.

O God, he in his own hand houlds his own harts hurt,
I dreaded too much his distressed look:
Belike the wretch despaird, and slew himself.

Nay, that's most sure, yet he had little reason,
Considering how well you used him.

Well, I am sorry; but must not be sad,
Because the King is coming to my bower.
Help me, I pray thee, to remove his body,
Least he should come and see him murdered.
Sometime anon he shall be buried.

Good, all is good: this is as I desire.
Now for a face of pure hypocrisy:
Sweet murder, cloth thee in religious weeds,
Reign in my bosom, that with help of thee,
I may effect this Robins Tragedy.

Nay, nay, you must not take this thing so heavily.

A bodies loss, sir Doncaster, is much:
But a souls too, is more to be bemoaned.

Truly I wonder at your virtuous mind:
O God to one so kind, who'ud be unkind?
Let go this grief, now must you put on joy,
And for the many favours I have found,
So much exceeding all conceit of mine,
Unto your cheer, I'll add a precious drink,
Of colour rich, and red, sent me from Rome*
There's in it Moly, Syrian Balsamum,
Golds rich Elixer: O tis precious!

Where is it uncle?

As yesterday,
Sir Doncaster and I rid on our way,
Thieves did beset us, bound us as you saw:
And among other things, did take from me,
This rich confection: but regardlesly,
As common drink, they cast, into a bush,
The bottle, which this day sir Doncaster
Fetched, and hath left it in the inner lodging:
I tell you cousin (I do love you well)
A pint of this ransomde the Sophies son,
When he was taken in Natolia.
I meant indeed to give it my liege Lord,
In hope to have his favour: but to you
I put my self, be my good friend,
And, in your own restoring, me restore.

Uncle I will, you need urge that no more.
But whats the virtues of this precious drink?

It keeps fresh youth, restores diseased sight,
Helps natures weakness, smothes the scars of wouds,
And cools the entrails with a balmy breath,
When they by thirst or travel boyle with heate.

Uncle I thank you, pray you let me have
A cup prepared, against the king comes in,
To cool his heate: my self will give it him.

And when he drinks, be bold to say he drinks
A richer draught than that dissolved pearl,
Which Cleopatra drank to Antonie.

I have much business; let it be your charge,
To make this rich draught ready for the King,
And I will quit it, pray ye do not fail.

I warrant you, good Nephew.

Better, and better still.
We thought before but to have poisoned him,
And now shall Robin Hood destroy the king.
Even when the King, y^ Queen, the Prince, the Lords
Joy in his virtues, this supposed vice
Will turn, to sharpe hate, their exceeding love.

Ha, ha, ha, I cannot choose but laugh,
To see my cousin cosend in this sort.
Fail him quoth you? nay hang me if I do.
But Doncaster art sure the poisons are well mixed?

Iut, tut, let me alone for poisoning:
I have already turned ore four, or five,
That angerd me. But tell me Prior,
Wherefore so deadly dost thou hate thy cousin?

Shall I be plain? Because if he were dead,
I should be made the Earl of Huntington.

A pretty cause: But thou a church-man art.

Cut man, if that would fall,
I'll have a dispensation, and turn temporal.
But tell me Doncaster, why dost thou hate him?

By the Mass, I cannot tel. O yes, now I have it*
I hate thy cousin, Earl of Huntington,
Because so many love him as there do,
And I my self am loved of so few.
Nay, I have other reasons for my hate;
He is a fool, and will be reconcilde,
To any foe he hath: he is too mild,
Too honest for this world, fitter for heaven:
He will not kill these greedy cormorants,
Nor strip base peasants of the wealth they have:
He does abuse a thieves name and an outlaws,
And is indeed no outlawe, nor no thief,
He is unworthy of such reverent names.
Besides, he keeps a paltry whinling girl,
And will not bed, forsooth, before he bride:
I'll stand too^t, he abuses maidenhead,
That will not take it, being offered:
Hinders the common wealth of able men.
Another thing I hate him for again:
He says his prayers, fasts eves, gives alms, does good:
For these and such like crimes, swears Doncaster,
To work the speedy death of Robin Hood.

Well said in faith. Hark, hark, the king returns:
To do this deed, my heart like fuel burns.

Gramercy Friar for thy glee,
Thou greatly hast contented me,
What with thy sporting and thy game,
I swear I highly pleased am.

It was my masters whole desire
That maiden, yeoman, swain and friar
Their arts and wits should all apply,
For pleasure of your Majesty.

Some Richard, look I pray you on the ring,
That was about the neck of the last stag.

Was his name Scarlet, that shot off his neck?

Chester, it was this honest fellow Scarlet:
This is the fellow, and a yeoman bold,
As ever courst the swift Hart on the mould.

Friar, here's somewhat graved upon the Ring,
I pray thee read it. Mean while list to me;
This while, most compassing the Friar about the Ring.
Scarlet a^d Scathlock, you bold brethren,
Twelve pence a day I give each for his fee,
And hence forth see ye live like honest men.

We will my Liege, else-let us dye the death.

A boon, a boon, upon my knee,
Good king Richard, I beg of thee.
For indeed sir, the troth is, Much is my father, and he is one of your
tenants in Kings Mill at Wakefield all on a green: O there dwells a jolly
pinder, at Wakefield all on a green: Now I would have you, if you will do so
much for me, to set me forward in the way of marriage to Iinny: the mill
would not be cast away upon us.


Much, be thou ever master of that mill,
I give it thee for thine in heritance.

Thanks precious Prince of courtesy.
I'll to Inny, and tell her of my lands in faith.

Here Friar, here, here it begins,

Harold hare-foote reigned king,
About my neck he put this ring.

In Harolds time, more than a hundred year,
Hath this ring been about this new slain Dear!
I am sorry now it died: but let the same
Head, ring and all be sent to Notingham,
And in the Castle kept for monuments.

My Liege, I heard an old tale long ago,
That Harold being Goodwins son of Kent,
When he had got fair Englands government,
Hunted for pleasure once within this wood,
And singled out a fair and stately Stag,
Which foot to foot, the king in running caught:
And sure this was the Stag.

It was no doubt.

But some my Lord affirm,
That Iulius Caesar many years before,
Took such a Stag, and such a Poesy writ.

It should not be in Iulius Caesars time:
There was no English used in this Land,
Until the Saxons came, and this is writ
In Saxon characters.

Well, 'twas a goodly beast.

How now earl Robert?

A forfet, a forfet, my liege Lord.
My masters laws are on record,
The Court-roll here your Grace may see.

I pray thee Friar, read them me.

One shall suffice, and this is he.
No man that comes in this wod,
To feast, or dwell with Robin Hood,
Shall call him Earl, Lord, Knight, or Squire,
He no such titles doth desire,
But Robin Hood, plain Robin Hood,
That honest yeoman stout and good,
O^ pain of forfetting a mark,
That must be paid to me his Clarke.
My liege, my liege, this law you broke,
Almost in the last word you spoke.
That crime may not acquitted be,
Till Friar Tuck receive his fee.

There's more than twenty marks, mad Friar.

If thus you pay y^ Clarke his hire,
Oft may you forfet, I desire.
You are a perfect penitent,
And well you do your wrong repent:
For this your Highness liberal gift,
I here absolve you without shrift.

Gramercies Friar. Now Robin Hood,
Since Robin Hood it needs must be,
I was about to ask before,
If thou did see the great Stags fall.

I did my Lord, I saw it all.
But missing this same prating Friar,
And hearing you so much desire
To have the lozels company,
I went to seek Small honesty.

But you found much, when you found me.

I, Much my man: but not a jot
Of honesty in thee, God wot.

Robin, you do abuse the Friar.

Madam, I dare not call him liar,
He may be bold with me, he knows.
How now Prince Iohn, how goes, how goes
This wod-mans life with you to day?
My fellow Wodnet you would be.

I am thy fellow, thou dost see:
And to be plain, as God me save,
So well I like thee, merry knave,
That I thy company must have:
Nay, and I will.

Nay, and you shall.

My Lord, you need not fear at all,
But you shall have his company,
He will be bold I warrant you.

Know you where ere a spring is nie?
Fain would I drink, I am right dry.

I have a drink within my bower,
Of pleasing taste, and sovereign power:
My reverend uncle gives it me,
To give unto your Majesty.

I would be loath indeed, being in heate,
To drink cold water. Let us to thy bower.

Run Friar before, bid my uncle be in readiness.

Gon with a trice, on such good vnsinesse.

What Much? What Iinny? Much? I say.

Whats the matter mistress?

I pray thee see, the fueller
Suffer the cooke to want no wodde.
Good Lord, where is this idle girl?
Why Iinny?
Within. I come forsooth.

I pray thee bring the flowers forth.

I'll go send her mistres, and help the cooks, if they have any need.

Dispatch good Much. What Iin I say?

Hie ye, hie ye: she calls for life.

Indeed, indeed, you do me wrong,
To let me cry, and call so long.

Forsooth, I strawed the dining bowers.
And smoth'd the walks with herbs flowers,
The yeomens tables I have spread,
Dressed salts, laid trenchers, set on bread:
Nay all is well, I warrant you.

You are not well I promise you,
Your foresleeues are not pind (fie, fie)
And all your hed-geere stands awry.
Give me the flowers: Go in for shame,
And quickly see you mend the same.

How busy mistress Marian is?
She thinks this is her day of bliss.

But it shall be the woefullest day
That ever chaunst her, if I may.

Why are you two thus in the air?
Your wounds are green,
Good cousin have care.

Thanks for your kindness, gentle maid.
My cousin Robert us hath praid,
To help him in this business.

Sir Doncaster, sir Doncaster?

Holla.

I pray you, did you see the Prior?

Why, here I am. What would thou Friar.

The king is heated in the chase,
And posts hitherward apace.
He told my master he was dry,
And he desires ye, presently
To send the drink whereof ye spake. Horns blow.

Come, it is here; haste let us make

Most gracious Sovereign, welcome once again:
Welcome to you, and all your princely train.

Thanks lovely hostess: we are homely guests.
Wheres Robin Hood? He promised me some drink.

Your hand maid. Robin will not then be long.
The Friar indeed came running to his uncle,
Who with sir Doncaster were here with me,
And altogether went for such a drink.

Well, in a better time it could not come,
For I am very hot and passing dry.

Traitor, I'll draw thee out before the king.

Come murderous Prior.

Come ye dogs face.

Why how now Robin? wheres y^ drink you bring?

Lay hold on these.
Far be it, I should bring your Majesty,
The drink these two prepared for your taste.

Why Robin Hood, be brief and answer me:
I am amazed at thy troubled looks.

Long will not my ill looks amaze your Grace.
I shortly look never to look again.

Never to look? What will it still be night?
If thou look never, day can never be.
What ails my Robin? Wherefore dost thou faint?

Because I cannot stand: yet now I can.
Thans to my king, and thanks to Marian.

Robin be brief, and tell us what hath chanced?

I must be brief, for I am sure of death,
Before a long tale can be half way told.

Of death, my son: bright sun of all my joy?
Death cannot have the power of virtuous life.

Not of the virtues, but the life it can.

What dost thou speak of death? how should thou die?

By poison, and the Priors treachery.

Why, take this sovereign powder at my hands,
Take it and live in spite of poisons power.

I, set him forward Powders quoth ye! nah,
I am a fool then, if a little dust,
The shaving of a horne, a Bezars stone,
Or any Antidote have power to stay
The execution of my hearts resolve.
Tut, tut, you labour lovely Qneene, in vain,
And on a thankless groom your toil bestow.
Now hath your foe revenged you of your foe:
Robin shall die, if all the world said no.

How the Wolf howls! Fly like a tender Rid
Into thy shepherds bosom. Shield me love.
Can thou not Robin? Where shall I be hid?
O God, these Ravens will seize upon thy Dove.

They cannot hurt thee, pray thee do not fear,
Base cures will couch, the Lyon being near.

How works my powder?

Very well, fair Q^eene.

Dost thou feel any ease?

I shall, I trust, anon:
Sleep falls upon mine eyes.
O I must sleep, they that love me, do not waken me.

Sleep in my lap, and I will sing to thee.

He should not sleep.

I must, for I must die:
While I live therefore let me have some rest.

I, let him rest, the poison urges sleep.
When he awakes, there is no hope of life.

Of life? now by the little time I have to live,
He cannot live one hour for your lives.

Villain what art thou?

Why, I am a knight.

Thou were indeed.
If it so please your Grace.
I will describe my knowledge of this wretch.

Do Chester.

This Doncaster, for so the felon hight,
Was, by the king your father, made a knight,
And well in arms he did himself behave.
Many a bitter storm, the wind of rage
Blasted this Realm with, in those woeful days,
When the unnatural fights continued,
Between your kingly father and his sons.
This cut-throat, knighted in that time of woe,
Seized on a beauteous Nun, at Barkhamsted,
As we were marching toward Winchester,
After proud Lincolne was compelled to yield,
He took this virgin straying in the field:
For all the Nuns and every Covent fled
The dangers that attended on our troops.
For those sad times too oft did testify,
Wars rage hath no regard of piety.
She humbly praid him, for the love of heaven,
To guide her to her fathers, two miles thence.
He swore he would, and very well he might:
For to the camp he was a Forager.
Upon the way they came into a wood.
Wherein, in brief, he stripped this tender maid:
Whose lust, when she in vain had long withstood,
Being by strength and torments overlaid,
He did a sacrilegious deed of rape,
And left her bathed in her own tears and blood.
When she reuiu'd, she to her fathers got,
And got her father to make just complaint,
Unto your mother, being then in camp.

Is this the villain Chester, that defiled
Sir Eustace Stutuiles chaste and beauteous child?

I Madam, this is he,
That made a wench dance naked in a wood:
And for she did deny what I desired,
I scourged her for her pride, till her fair skin
With stripes was checkred like a vinters grate.
And what was this? A mighty matter sure.
I have a thousand more than she defiled,
And cut the squeaking throats of some of them:
I grieve I did not hers,

Punish him Richard.
A fairer virgin never saw the sun.
A chaster maid was never sworn a Nun.

How escaped the villain punishment, that time?

I rent his spurs off, and disgraded him.

And then he raild upon the Queen and me.
Being committed, he his keeper slue,
And to your father fled, who pardond him.

God give his soul a pardon for that sin.

O had I heard his name, or seen his face,
I had defended Robin from this chance.
Ah villain, shut those gloomy lights of thine.
Remember thou a little son of mine,
Whose nurse at Wilton first thou rauishedst,
And slew two maids that did attend on them?

I grant, I dashed the brains out of a brat,
Thine if he were, I care not: had he bin
The first borne comfort of a royal king,
And should have yald when Doncaster cried peace,
I would have done by him as then I did.

Soon shall the world be rid of such a wretch,
Let him be hanged alive, in the high way, that joins to the power.

Alive or dead, I reck not how I die.
You, them, and these, I desperately defy.

Repent, or never look to be absolved,
But die accursed as thou deserve well.

Then give me my desert; curse one by one.

First I accurse thee, and, if thou persist,
Unto damnation leave thee wretched man.

What do I care for your damnation?
Am I not doomed to death? what more damnation
Can there ensue your loud and yelling cries?

Yes devil: hear thy fellow spirit speak,
Who would repent; O fain he would repent.
After this bodies bitter punishment,
There is an euer-during endless woe,
A quenchless fire, an vnconsuming pain,
Which desperate souls and bodies must endure.

Can you preach this, yet set me on sir Prior,
To run into this endless, quenchless fire?

High heavens show mercy to my many ils.
Never had this been done, but like a fiend,
Thou temptedst me with ceaseless devilish thoughts.
Therefore I curse, with bitterness of soul,
The hour wherein I saw thy baleful eyes.
My eyes I curse, for looking on those eyes.
My ears I curse, for harkening to thy tongue.
I curse thy tongue for tempting of mine ears.
Each part I curse, that we call thine or mine:
Thine for enticing mine, mine following thine.

A holy prayer. what Collect have we next?

My Marian wants words, such is her woe:
But old Fitzwater for his girl and him
Begs nothing, but worlds plague for such a foe.
Which causeless harmd a virtuous noble man,
A pitier of his griefs, when he felt grief:
Therefore be think thee of thy hateful deed,
Thou faithless Prior, and thou this ruthless thief.

Will no man curse me, giving so much cause?
Then Doncaster, our selves our selves accurse,
And let no good betide to thee or me.

Amen, amen: accursed may ye be,
For murdering Robin, flower of courtesy.

O ring not such a peal for Robins death,
Let sweet forgiveness be my passing bell.
Art thou there Marian? then fly forth my breath:
To die with in thy arms contents me well.

Keep in, keep in a little while thy soul,
Till I have powered my soul forth at thy feet.

I slept not uncle, I your grief did hear,
Let him forgive your soul that bought it dear:
Your bodies deed, I in my death forgive,
And humbly beg the king that you may live.
Stand to your Clergy uncle, save your life,
And lead a better life than you have done.

O gentle Nephew, ah my brothers son,
Thou dying glory of old Huntington,
Wish thou life to such a murdrous foe?
I will not live, since thou must life for go.
Oh happy Warman, blessed in thy end,
Now too too late thy truth I do commend.
O Nephew, Nephew, Doncaster and I
Murdered poor Warman, for he did deny
To join with us in this black tragedy.

Alas poor Warman. Friar, little Iohn,
I told ye both where Warmans body lay:
And of his burial I'll dispose anon.

Is there no law, Lord Ely, to convict,
This Prior, that confesses murders thus?

He is a hallowed man, and must be tried,
And punished by the censure of the Church.

The Church therein doth err: God doth allow
No Canon to preserve a murderers life.
Richard, king Richard,, in thy Grandsires days,
A law was made, the Clergy sworn thereto,
That whatsoever Church-man did commit
Treason, or murder, or false felony,
Should like a seculer be punished.
Treason we did, for sure we did intend
King Richards poisoning, Sovereign of this land.
Murder we did in working Warmans end,
And my dear Nephews, by this fatal hand.
And theft we did, for we have robbed the king,
The State, the Nobles, Commons, and his men,
Of a true Peer, firm Pillar, liberal Lord.
Fitzwater we have robbed of a kind son,
And Marians loue-ioyes we have quite undone.

Whoppe, what a coil is here with your confession?

I ask but judgment for my foul transgression.

Thy own mouth hath condemned thee.
Hence with him.
Hang this man dead, then see him buried:
But let the other hang alive in chains.

I thank you sir.

My self will go, my Lord,
And see sharpe Justice done upon these slaves.

O go not hence Prince Iohn: a word or two
Before I die, I fain would say to you.

Robin, we see what we are sad to see,
Death like a champion treading down thy life:
Yet in thy end somewhat to comfort thee,
We freely give to thy betrothed wife,
Beauteous and chaste Matilda, all those lands,
Fallen by thy folly, to the Priors hands,
And by his fault now forfetted to me:
Earl Huntington, she shall thy Countess be,
And thy wight yeomen, they shall wend with me,
Against the faithless enemies of Christ.

Bring forth a Beer, and cover if with green;
That on my death-bed I may here sit down.
At Robins burial let no black be seen,
Let no hand give for him a mourning gown:
For in his death, his king hath given him life,
By this large gift, given to his maiden wife.
Chaist maid Marilda, Countess of account,
Chase, with thy bright eyes, all these clouds of woe,
From these fair cheeks, I pray thee sweet do so.
Think it is bootless folly, to complain,
For that which never can be had again.
Queen Elianor, you once were Matilds foe:
Prince Iohn, you long sought her unlawful love:
Let dying Robin Hood entreat you both,
To change those passions Madame turn your hate,
To princely love; Prince Iohn, convert your love
To virtuous passions, chaste and moderate.
O that your gracious right hands would infolde,
Matildas right hand, prisoned in my palm,
And swear to do what Robin Hood desires.

I swear I will, I will a mother be.
To fair Matildas life and chastit^e.

When Iohn solicits chaste Matildaes ears,
With lawless suits, as he hath often done:
Or offers to the altars of her eyes,
Lascivious Poems, stuffed with vanities,
He craves to see but short and sower days,
His death be like to Robins he desires,
His perjured body prove a poisoned prey,
For cowled Monks, and barefoot begging Friars.

Enough, enough, Fitzwater, take your child:
My dying frost which no suns heat can thaw,
Closes the powers of all my outward parts,
My freezing blood runs back unto my heart,
Where it assists death, which it would resist:
Only my love a little hinders death.
For he beholds her eyes, and cannot smite:
Then go not yet Matilda, stay a while.
Friar, make speed, and lift my latest will.

O let me look, for ever in thy eyes,
And lay my warm breath to thy bloodless lips,
If my sight can restrain deaths tyrannies,
Or keep lives breath within thy bosom locked.

Away, away,
Forbear, my love: all this is but delay.

Come maiden daughter, from my maiden son,
And give him leave to do what must be done.

First I bequeath my soul to all souls saver,
And will my body to be buried,
At Wakefield, underneath the Abbey wall:
And in this order make my funeral;
When I am dead, stretch me upon this Beer,
My beads and Primer shall my pillow be:
On this side lay my bow, my good shafts here,
Upon my breast the cross, and underneath,
My trusty sword, thus fastened in the sheath.
Let Warmans body at my feet be laid,
Poor Warman, that in my defence did die,
For holy dirges, sing me wodmens songs,
As ye to Wakefield walk, with voices shrill:
This for my self: my goods and plate I give
Among my yeomen: them I do bestow,
Upon my Sovereign, Richard. This is all.
My liege farewell, my love farewell, farewell.
Farewell fair Queen, Prince Iohn and noble Lords.
Father Fitzwater heartily adieu,
Adieu my yeomen tall.
Matilda close mine eyes.
Friar farewell, farewell to all.

O must my hands with envious death conspire,
To shut the morning gates of my lives light?

It is a duty, and thy loves desire,
I'll help thee girl to close up Robins sight.

Laments are bootless, tears cannot restore
Lost life: Matilda, therefore weep no more.
And since our mirth is turned into moan,
Our merry sport, to tragic funeral,
We will prepare our power for Austria,
After earl Roberts timeless burial.
Fall to your w^d-songs therefore yeomen bol^,
And deck his hearse with flowers, that loved you dear,
Dispose his goods, as he hath them disposed.
Fitzwater and Matilda, bide you here,
See you the body unto Wakefield borne,
A little we will bear ye company,
But all of us at London point to meet:
Thither Fitzwater, bring earl Robins men:
And Friar, see you come along with them.

Ah my liege Lord, the Friar faints,
And hath no words to make complaints:
But since he must forsake this place,
He will await, and thanks your Grace.
Weep, weep, ye wod-men wail,
Your hands with sorrow wring:
Your master Robin Hood lies dead,
Therefore sigh as you sing.
Here lies his Primer and his beads,
His bent bow and his arrows keen,
His good sword and his holy cross,
Now cast on flowers fresh and green:
And as they fall, shed tears and say,
Wella, wella day, wella, wella day:
Thus cast ye flowers and sing,
And on to Wakefield take your way.

Here doth the Friar leave with grievance:
Robin is dead, that graced his entrance:
And being dead he craves his audience,
With this short play, they would have patience.

Nay Fryer, at request of thy kind friend,
Let not thy Play so soon be at an end.
Though Robin Hood be dead, his yeomen gone,
And that thou think there now remains not one,
To act an other Scene or two for thee:
Yet know full well, to please this company,
We mean to end Matildaes Tragedy.

Off then, I wish you, with your Kendall green:
Let not sad grief, in fresh array be seen.
Matildaes story is replete with tears,
Wrongs, desolations, ru^ns, deadly fears.
In, and attire ye: though I tired be,
Yet will I tell my mistress Tragedy.
Apolloes master done I invoke:
To whom henceforth my deeds I dedicate:
That of his Godhead, above all Gods divine,
With his rich spirit he would lighten mine:
That I may sing true lays of trothlesse deeds,
Which to conceive, my heart through sorrow bleeds.
Cheer thee, sad soul, and in a lofty line,
Thunder out wrong, compassed in cloudy tears.
Show to the eyes, fill the beholders ears,
With all the lively acts of lustful rage,
Restraind by modest tears, and chastities entreats,
And let king Iohn that ill part personage,
By suits, devices, practices and threats:
And when he sees all serves to no end,
Of chaste Matilda let him make an end.

We are all fitted, Friar, shall we begin?

Well art thou suited: would my order would Permit me habit equal to my heart.

If you remember, Iohn did take an oath,
Never again to seek Matildaes love.

O what is he, that's sworn affections slave,
That will not violate all laws, all oaths?
And being mighty, what will he omit,
To compass his intents, though ne'er so ill?
You must suppose king Richard now is dead,
And Iohn (resistless) is fair Englands Lord:
Who striving to forget Matildaes love,
Takes to his wife the beauteous Isabell,
Betrothed to Hugh de Briu, Earl of North March:
And picking quarrels under show of kin,
Wholly diuorces his first Queen away:
But yet Matilda, still, still trobles him,
And being in the Court, so oft he courts her,
That by her noble father, old Fitzwater,
She is removed from his lust-tempting eye.
But tides restraind, oreswell their bounds with rage:
Her absence adds more fuel to his fire.
In sleep he sees her, and his waking thoughts,
Study by day to compass his desire.

Friar, since now you speak of visions,
It was received by tradition,
From those that were right near unto king Iohn,
Of three strange visions, that to him appeared:
And as I guess, I told you what they were.

With them I will begin: draw but that veil,
And there king Iohn sits sleeping in his chair.

Ambition, that had ever waited on king Iohn,
Now brings him Austria, easy to be taken,
Being wholly tamed by Richards warlike hand,
And bids him add that Dukedom to his crown:
But he puts by Ambition, and contemns
All other kingdoms, but the English crown,
Which he holds fast, as if he would not loose.

The Lady and the child that did ascend,
Striving in vain to take the crown from Iohn,
Were Constance, and her son the Duke of Britain,
Heir to the elder brother of the king.
Yet he sleeps on, and with a little spurn,
The mother and the Prince doth overturn,
Again when Insurrection them assists,
Stirred by the French king, and the wronged Earl,
Whose troth-plight wife, king Iohn had taken to wife,
He only claps his hand upon his sword*
Mocks their threatenings, and in their attempts,
The harmless Prince receives recurelesse death*
Whom they too late with bootless tears lament.

Matilda, stay Matilda, do but speak:
Whoes there? Entreat Matilda to come back.

Who would you have, my Lord?

Why, my Lord Bonuill: I would have Matilda:
That but even now, past by toward the door.

I saw her not my Lord.

Had thou a lovers eye,
A gnat, a moat, a shadow thou would spy:
Come follow me, she cannot be so far,
But I shall overtake her: come away.

The last appearance shadowed the fair Queen,
And her two children, at whose sight king Iohn
Showed neither sign nor show of passion:
But when the sun came masked in a cloud,
And veiled beauty, ioynde with chastity,
Appeared in Matildaes lovely shape,
He starts, he clasps, he wakes, he calls, he seeks
The shadow of that substance he affects:
To her he sewes, but she his suit reiects:
To him she sewes, but he her suit neglectes:
He sues to be her love, she doth despise:
She sues to live a maid, which he denies.
What follows of this wilful will, and shall,
This no and nay, this quenchless, bootless fire,
This cold affection, and this hot desire,
The act it self shall tell, and the poor Friar,
Your partial favours humbly doth require.

Now I perceive, this only was a dream:
Divine Matildaes Angel did appear,
Decked like a Uestall, ready for heavens quire,
And to this earthly trunk will not come near.
Well, let her go: I must in faith, I must,
And so I will: kings thoughts should be divine:
So are Matildaes, so henceforth shall mine.

So doing, peace shall wait upon your crown,
And blessing upon blessing shall befall.

Its true my Lord, I know full well there shall.

Your people will wax proud of such a king,
That of himself is king, Lord of his thoughts:
Which by assertion of Philosophers,
Is held to be the greatest Empery.

And they said wisely, noble Anbery.

Then will Fitzwater with his gallant troops,
Again keep triumphs in the English Court.
Then will Matilda

Matilda, what of her?

Like a bright star, adorn the lovely train
Of beauteous Ladies, which attend the Queen,
Whose only beauty equalleth them all.

Like an old fool, whose dim eyes wanting sight,
Compar'st the sun, to common candle light.

Pardon my liege: I do comfesse, her fair
Exceeds all these, as far as day doth night.

Grossely allude^: night by moon, by stars.
By wandering fires, exhaled meteors,
By artificial lights, by eyes of beasts,
And little glow-wormes, glimpsing in the dark,
Hath some where brightness, lightness, and sometime
Under each Horizon in all parts clear:
But they at no time, no where can be said
To be less dark, then dungeon darkness is.
Pitch coloured, Eban faced, blacker than black,
While her fair eyes gives beauty to bright day.

To hear the Queen thus praised works my content.

The Queen? O, had I such a thought I would repent.

Further my Lord.

What shall we further wade?
I fear I shall be tyred with this jade.

The common-wealth will flourish increase.

Good Oxford of those things now hold your peace:
And take the pains to fetchin Isabell.
I have strange tidings sent me out of France,
Which she will take, I know, in as good part,
As I accept her praise: fetch her I say.
What is the old fool gone? now go thy way.
What think thou of him Hubert? tell me man.

As of a good old gentleman my Lord,
That speaks but what he thinks, thinks you think
As he doth: and I warrant you
Will not canceale those praises from the Queen,
Which as he deems you uttered in her praise.

I would have them believe it so indeed:
But I protest, is no part of my Creed.

I faith your Grace did Oxfords years great wrong,
To curtal his good work, that seemed so long:
He peradventure would have brought in more,
After his Preface, to rich plenties store.
Perchance he would have showed dame vanity,
That in your Court is suffered hourly:
And bad you punish ruffians with long hair,
New fashions, and such toys: a special care
Has that good man: he turns the statute book:
About his hall and chambers if you look,
The moral virtues in fair effigy,
Are lively painted: moral Philosophie
Has not a sencence, be it great or small,
But it is painted on his Honours wall.

Peace, peace, he comes, now lets be silent all.

I tell you I was proud of his good words.

God hold them Oxford: for its often seen,
A reconciled foe small good affords.

O forbear: trust me, I gage my Honour he doth hold you dear.

How cheer you Isabell? The earl, your spouse
Hath sent defiance to the king your husband,
And like a tried tall soldier, fled his holds
In Marchland; Where he knows, despite of him,
And all the men that he therein can raise,
King Iohn could have sent dogs enough to tear
Their ill armed bodies peece-meale, ere his bands
Should with base blood ha^e stained their noble hands.
And whether is this worshipful good Earl
(This first love, old love, new love if you will)
Gone thinks your Ladyship? Forsooth, good man,
To Normandy; and there he stirs up coals,
And urges strong aid for confederates,
Who, as he says, are treacherously disposed.

If he do so, the greater is his sin:
Poor man, I have no interest in him.

But he hath had in you, as it should seem,
Else would he not make sonnets of your brow,
Your eye, your lip, your hand, your thigh,
A plague upon him: how came he so nigh?
Nay, now you have the cursed queens counterfeit:
Through rage you shake, because you cannot rave.
But answer me; Why should the Bedlam slave
Entitle a whole Poem to your kiss,
Calling it cheri, ruby, this and this?
I tell you, I am jealous of your love,
Which makes me break into this passion.
Here's the kind noble Anbery de Vere,
Knows what I speak is true:
My Lord, my Lord, I do appeal to you:
Are these things to be borne?

No by the Rood,
These loue-rimes are the tokens of small good.

Why my good Lord, was never Poetry,
Offred unto a Ladies patronage?

Yes, but not taken.

Yes, and taken too.
Though muddy slaves, whose ballatizing rimes,
With words unpolished, show their brutish thoughts,
Naming their Maukins in each lustful line:
Let no celestial beauty look awry,
When well writ poems, couching her rich praise,
Are offered to her unstained virtues eye.
For Poetries high sprighted sons will raise,
True beauty to all wished eternity:
Therefore my Lord, your age is much to blame,
To think a taken Poem Ladies shame.

You see the King, that's better read than you,
And far more wronged than I, takes it not well.

Yes but I do: I think not Isabell, Lord,
The worse for any writing of Brunes.

Will you ha the troth my Lord: I think so too:
And though I be an old man, by my sword,
My arm shall justify my constant word.

After a long storm in a troublous sea,
The Pilot is no gladder of a calm,
Than Isabell to see the vexed looks
Of her loved Lord, changed into sweet aspects.

I will not tell thee what a world of foes,
For thy love (dear love) rise against my life.
( Matildaes love: few swords will fight for thee)
I will not number up the many woes
That shall be multiplied, strife upon strife
Will follow! But to shun ensuing ils,
I'll take shuch pledges as shall please me ask.
Of each proud Baron, dwelling in the Realm.
Bruise kinsman, and the deputy to March,
Hath a high-minded Lady to his wife,
An able son for arms, and a less bo^y,
That is the comfort of his fathers life:
Madame, I know you love the Lady well,
And of her wealth you may be bold to build,
By sending you four hundred white milch ki^e,
And ten like coloured bulls, to serve that heard:
So fair, that every cow did Io seem,
And every bull Europaes ravisher.
To friend my self with such a subjects truth,
Thus I command; You, and Earl Salsbury
Shall, with what speed conveniently ye may.
Hye ye to Gilford, there the Lady lies,
And her sons too, as I am told by spies:
All that she hath, I know she calls yours,
All that she hath, I gladly wo^ld call mine,
If she abuse ye: if she use ye well,
For ever be, what she retains, her own:
Only go by as Queenes in progress do,
And send me word how she receives you.

Well, I avouch she will, before I go,
Far be it, Iohn should prove Lord Bruses foe.
Come noble Oxford, I long to be at Gilford.

In such a business, Madam, so do I.

Go on, good stales, now Gilford is mine own.
Hubert, I charge you take an hundred horse,
And follow unto Gilford Castle gates,
The Queen, pretend, you come to tend upon,
Sent carefully from us: when you are in,
Boldly demand the Lady for her sons,
For pledges of her husbands faith and hers:
Whom when ye have, upon the Castle seize,
And keep it to our use until we come:
Mean while let me alone with Hugh your son,
To work a wonder, if no prodigy:
But, whatsoere, it shall attempted be.

Even that which to your Majesty
May seem contentfull, thereto I agree.

Go then to Gilford, and a victor be.
Moubray, our mask? are you and Chester ready?

We will before your Grace, I warrant you.

How think of it, Mowbray?

As on a mask; but for our torch-bearers,
Hell cannot rake so mad a crewe as I.

Faith, who is chief?

Will Brand, my Lord.
But then your Grace must curb his cruelty:
The reign once got, he's apt for villainy.

I know the villain is both rough and grim:
But as a ty-dogge I will muzzle him.
I'll bring him up to fawn upon my friends,
And worry dead my foes. But to our mask.
I mean this night to revel at the feast,
Where fair Matilda graces every guest:
And if my hidden courtesy she grace,
Old Bainards Castle good Fitzwaters place,
Iohn will make rich, with royal Englands wealth:
But if she do uot: not those scattred bands,
Dropping from Austria, and the Holy land,
That boast so much of glorious victories,
Shall stop the inundations of those woes,
That like a deluge I will bring on them:
I know the crew is there, banish all fears:
If wronged, they shall be ours, if welcome, theirs.

Why how now votary? still at your book?
Ever in mourning weeds? For shame, for shame,
With better entertainment cheer our friends.
Now by the blessed cross you are much too blame,
To cross our mirth thus; you are much too blame Isay.
Good Lord, hath never woe enough of well ada!
Indeed, indeed,
Some sorrow fits: but this is more than need.

Good father pardon me,
You saw I sate the supper and the banquet,
You know I cannot dance, discourse I shun:
By reason that my wit, but small before,
Comes far behind the ripe wits of our age.

You'll be too ripe for marriage,
If you delay, by day, and day, thus long,
There is the noble Wigmore, lord of the March,
That lies on Wye, Lug, and the Seuerne streams,
His son is like the suns syres Ganimede,
And for your love, hath sent a Lord to plead:
His absence, I did purpose to excuse:
But Lester to the man for him that sues.

My cousin Bruise hath been your Broker, Lester,
At least hath broke the matter to my girl.

O for a barber at the time of need,
Or one of these that dresses periwigs,
To deck my gray head with a youthful hair:
But I must too't. Matilda, thus it is;
Say, can ye love me? I am Wigmors son.

My cousin said, he looked like Ganimede:
But you, but you.

But I, but I, you say,
Am rather like old Chremes in a play.
But that's a nice objection: I am he,
But by attorney ship made deputy.

He's never like to speed well, all his life,
That by attorney sues to win a wife:
But grant you are, whom you seem nothing like,
Young Wigmore, the heir to this noble Lord:
He for his son hath yet sent us ne'er a word.

If you grant love, when his son doth woo,
Then in your jointure heel send, say, and do.

And for a dooer, cousin take my word,
Look for a good egg, he was a good bird:
Cock a the game in faith, never fear.

I, but I fear the match will fall out ill,
Because he says his son is named Will.

And why good daughter: Hath some Palmister,
Some Augur, or some dreaming Calculator
(For such I know you often hearken to)
Been prating against the name? Go too, go too,
Do not believe them. Lester, fall to woo.

I must believe my father, and tis you,
That if I ought misdid, reproou'd me still,
And chiding said, you're wedded to your will,

God for thy mercy, have ye caught me there?
Wigmore is William, woman. Lester, speak,
Thou art the simplest wooer in the world.

You have put me out, she hath took me down:
You with your talk, she with her ready tongue.
You told me I should find her mild and still,
And scarce a word come from her in an hour,
Then did I think, I should have all the talk,
Unhindred by your willingness to help,
Unanswerd till I had no more to say: And then

What then? she with a courtly curtsy saying nay.

Your friends attorney might have gone his way,
With as great credit, as did that Orator,
Which handling an Oration, some three hours,
Ill for the matter, worse than bad for phrase:
Having said Dixi; looked, and found not one,
To praise or dispraise his Oration:
For, wearied with his talk, they all were gone.

Now by my troth, if any troth I have,
I amas merry at Matildaes mirth,
As I was glad to see her first days birth.
For till this hour, so help me holidam,
Since the too timely death of Huntington,
Not a blithe word had passage through her lips.

See what a pleasing humour wooers bring.

O but ye leave too soon.

Yet she auerers
I stand too long, shall I choose yours or hers?

Either forbear, I pray ye, for a while.
Welcome Lord Richmond.

What, doth Matilda smile?
That still like sadness solitary sat:
Then off with widows weeds, and teach your feet,
(That have forgot for want of exercise,
And by the means your sorrow had no mean)
To tread a measure: for a gallant crew,
Of courtly maskers landed at the stairs,
Before whom vnintreated, I am come,
And have prevented, I believe, their page,
Who with his torch is entered.

Richmond, thanks:
If you have ought to say about the maskers,
Beseech the Gentlemen to enter in:
For they are welcome guests to old Fitzwater.
Son, son, I pray you fetch the Ladies in:
We have been talking here about a match,
And left our noble friends in discontent.

Nay by my faith, we had much merriment;
Yet thought it long, you neither came, nor sent.

How now Matilda? pray thee cheer thee girl.

I thought it was a lightning before death:
Too sudden to be certain: good pleasure stay.
Wilt thou not wanton? churl then go thy way.

What? changed so soon: so soon fallen to your dups?
Cheerly: the mask comes in. O God, this veil look
Fit not this sport.

I'll leave it.

Nay: for your love, Williams sake, fair maiden stay.
This is no courtship daughter, be not nice,
You both abuse him and disparage us:
His fellows had the Ladies they did choose,
And well you know, here's no more maids than Maud:
Your self are all our store: I pray you rise,
Or by my faith, I say you do us wrong.

I will do what you will: lead, lead your dance.

You know me by my speech.

I my Liege, I: O! that temptations tongue
Had no where to be placed but in your head.

Well, say I have her tongue, had I not need,
When you have both her eyes: nay all her shape:
Able to tempt even Jove himself to rape.

Good my Lord leave; or I will leave the place.

Dance out your Galliard: Gods dear holibread,
You're too forgetful: dance, or by my troth,
You'll move my patience more than I will speak.
Nay soft vnmannerd sir, you are too rough:
Her joints are weak, your arms are strong tough:
If ye come here for sport you welcome be,
If not, better your room than such bad company.
Dost threaten me? theu will I see thy face.

And so thou shalt, look on me rebel Lord;
Thou that were late a factious ring-leader,
And in the open field gau'st me fierce fight,
Art thou again gathering another head,
That with such rudeness thou dost entertain
The gentle coming of thy Sovereign?

My dread Lord, hear me, and forgive this fault:
What I have erst done, long since you forgave:
If I did lead the Barons in the field,
The Barons chose me, when they could not choose
But make some leader, you were so missed.
When better thoughts entered your royal breast,
We then obeyed you, as our Sovereign head.

You did even what you list, and so do still.
I am the king, but you must have your will:
The plain troth is, we are not come in sport,
Though for our coming, this was our best cloak:
For if we never come, till you do send,
We must not be your guests while banquets last,
Contentious brauls you hourly send to us:
But we may send and send, and you return,
This Lord is sick, that pained with the gout,
He rid from home. You think I find not out
Your close confederacies: yes I do, no doubt.

If there be here a close confederate,
Gods vengeance light upon him with my hate.

No, you are open Lester, that I know.

I by the Lord, my Lord, your open foe.

By thy Lords Lord, and mine, proud Raf of Chester,
Thou dare not say so, were thou from the king.

Yes, but he dares and shall.

Mowbray, if you stand by,
He dares perchance, else will the dastard fly.

My own sword shall maintain my tongues true speech:
For it is not frequented to such lies,
As wrangling Lester, and proud Richmond use:
It cannot set out like a thundering drum,
Or roaring Canon, stuffed with nought but brags,
The multitudes of seas died red with blood,
And famous cities into cinders turned,
By their two armed arms.

I Chester.
And then they show us rags, torn off belike,
From poor decayed Ladies petticotes:
For neither bill, nor feathered shot, nor pike
Made half or any of those rents they have:
These patched together, fastened unto staves,
They will not stick to swear, have been aduanc't
Against the Sophie Souldan, and the Turk,

Do not maintain proud Chester, my lives Liege.
Your words I must put up: his if I bear
Yes you shall bear them, Bear, and yet not bite:
We have you muzzeld now: remember once
You brau'd us with your Bombard boasting words:
Come briefly, Lester, Richmod, both Fitzwaters, Bruise,
Deliver up your swords immediately:
And either yield your bodies to our hands,
Or give such pledges as we shall accept,
Unto our Steward Winchester, with speed.

I will not leave my arms, nor break my word
Except I be provoked: your liege-man I am sworn:
That oath is pledge enough. If you mislike

Thou hear me say, I do.

And I reply, that pledge refused, I have no more for you.

And Richmond says as noble Lester saith;
Already have we plighted fame and faith:
Which being scorned, returns to us again,
And by the kings own mouth, we are discharged,

Fitzwater, what say you?

What pledge desires my Liege?

I ask your stubborn daughter.

That were a gage to be engaged.

Peace thou head-strong boy.
Pardon me sovereign: all my power is yours:
My goods you may command, my life you may:
My children too I know with both their lives,
Will readily adventure deaths worst wrongs,
To do such service as true subjects should:
But honourable fame, true chastity

Make no exceptions, yield her up to me,
Or look for ever for my enmity.

Nay then Fitzwater tells your Majesty,
You do him wrong; and well will let you wit,
He will defend his honour to the death.

And Bruise, you are no otherwise disposed,
You will not give your sons to me for pledge.

I have but one, being my lesserboy,
Who is at Gilford: for my other son,

He braves me with the rest.
Well it is night, and there's no sun to swear by,
But by Gods son: and by him I here protest,
A miserable storm this night to raise,
That shall not cease, while England gives rest,
To such vile traitors: Bruise I'll begin with you:
I will in faith, as true as God is true.

Then shall a storm be raised against a storm,
And tempest be with tempest beaten back.

But this firm Island like the sea will ^osse,
And many goodly buildings go to wrack,
Many a widow weep her dying son,
And many a mother to her helpless babes
Cry out vncomfortably; children peace,
Your crying unto me is all in vain,
Dead is my husband, your poor father slain.

We can not help it uncle.

No, you see entreats humble suits have now no power:
But lust and wrath the kingdom doth devour.

Me he did menace first, and much I fear
He will to Gilford, and besiege my wife.

O, hye to save her. Richmond ride with him.

Let us away Bruise, least we come to late,
And with us take some score of men well armed.

Do: Lester, and my self will keep the city,
Till we are furnished with an able army.
Your Nephew, Bruise, shall take an hundred armed men,
And post to Hartford Castle with your sister:
Since wrong will wake us, we will keep such watch,
As for his life, he shall not hurt us bring.

Be comforted good Madame, do not fear,
But give your son as pledge unto the king:
Your self at Court may keep him company.

I am betrayed, alas I am betrayed,
And little thought your Highness had been bent,
So much against me, for my many loves,
As to prepare an entrance for my foe.

As I shall live in heaven, I did not know
Of Huberts coming: but lament not this:
Your son you say is gone; what fear you then?

O madame, murder, mischief, wrongs of men
I fear, I fear: what is't I do not fear?
Since hope is so far of, despair so near.

Answer me good Hubert, I pray the Hubert do.
What think you of this matter, may I on your word
Persuade the woman that all things are well?

You may persuade her, if you can my Lord:
For I protest I know no other thing,
But that the king would have him for a pledge of the
Lord Bruses faith.

And reason too. Now by my Honour, Hubert, I protest it is good reason.
Bruise, I tell you plain,
Is no sound cloak, to keep Iohn from the rain.
I will go to her.

Do good simple Earl.
If not by threats, nor my entreats she yield,
Thy brain is barren of invention,
Dried up with care: never will she yield her son to thee, that having
power, want wit.

Wife, I overhear thee Hubert.

So do I dame Bruise:
But stir no coals: the man is well beloved,
And merits more than so.

But I will answer.
Hubert, thou fatal keeper of poor babes,
That are appointed hostages for Iohn,
Had I a son here, as I have not one
(For yesterday I sent him into Wales)
Think thou I would be so degenerate,
So far from kind, to give him unto thee?
I would not I protest: thou know my mind.

Lady, you fear more than you need to do,
Indeed you do, in very deed you do:
Hubert is wronged about the thing you mean,
About young Arthus: O, I thought twas so:
Indeed the honest, good, kind gentleman
Did all he might for safeguard of the child.

Believe me Madame Bruise, the man is wronged.

But he wrongs me, to keep my Castle thus,
Disarming my true servants, arming his.
Now more of outrage comes, what shall I do?

O this is well. Hubert, wheres Bruses son?

Where thou shalt never see him, Iohn.

Lady, we shall have talk with you anon.
Where is he Hubert?

Hid, or fled my Lord: we can by no means get her to confess.

Welcome to Gilford, Oxfords liefest Lord.

You scarce give welcome, ere I bid you go:
For you my Lord, the Queen and Winchester,
Shall march to Harford. Sweet Isabell,
And if thou love me, play the Amazon.
Matilda that hath long bewitched mine eye,
Is as I hear by spials, now in Harford Castle;
Besiege her there: for now her hauty father
Ruffians it up and down, and all the brood
Of viperous traitors whet their poisoned teeth,
That they may feed on us that foster them.
Go forward, and go with you victory:
Which to assure, my powers shall follow you.

Did I not tell you this: then trust me next:
Nay he is changed, and cares no more for her,
Than I do Madame.

Be gone I say, be gone:
Your speed, rich victory attends on:
But your delay
May give your foes the happy glorious day.

One boon my Liege, and part.

Be brief.

Show that poor Lady pity, I beseech.

I will indeed. Come Lady, let us in.
You have a son, go in and bring him me,
And for the Queenes sake I will favour ye.

I have no son: come, come: come in and search,
And if you find him, wretched may I be.

Chester and Hubert, see you keep good watch.
Not far of do I hear a warlike sound:
Bruise on my life: look too't while I go in
To seek this boy; for needs we must have him.
Come with us Mowbray.

The Castle gates are shut. what ho? what ho?
You that are servants to the Lady Bruise,
Arise, make entrance for your Lord and friends.

We will make issue ere ye enter here.
Who have we there, Richmond and Bruise? Is't you?
What, up so soon, are ye so early here?
In you in faith the Prouerb's verified:
You're early up, and yet are ne'er the near.

The worse our fortune, Bruise let us go hence,
We have no power to fight, nor make defence.

What Richmond, will you prove a Runaway?

From thee good Winchester: Now y^ Lord defen^.

we will stay and fight.

Tis to no end: we have but twenty men, they be tired.
But ere we do retire, tell me Lord Hubert,
Where are my wife and son?

Your wife is here, your son we cannot find.

Let son wife, high heavens, your comfort find.

Bruise hath been here, my Lord.

I, let him go: we have good pledges: though we see but one,
The other we are sure will come anon.

I do advise you, for your own discharge,
Deliver up your son unto the king.

Nay let her choose. Come hither Mowbray.

The king is angry; Lady Bruise advise you.

What? be advised by thee, to have my loving,
kind and pretty boy, given to an unkind killer of sweet boys?

Madame go too, take counsel of your friends,
I warrant you the king will use him well.

I, as he used his Nephew, Arthur Chester:
God bless my child from being used so.

Sir Hubert, what are all the people voided,
The horses and the cattle turned forth?

Mowbray, they be.

Then will I do the kings commandment.

What will he do! good lord, what will he do!

I pray you what is't you will do.

Why? fire the Castle.

The Castle Mowbray? tarry, tarry man,
Hold me not Chester, gentle Mowbray stay:
Good Hubert let me go.
To lead a many able men to fight.
And modest looking maid, I see you too:
And unfit sight, to view virginity
Guarded with other soldiers, than good prayers:
But you will say the king occasions it.
Say what you will, no king but would take cause?
Of just offence: yield you young Bruise: your mother is in hold.
Yield you young maid: your father is in hold.

Will the Queen keep me from the lustful king?
Then will I yield.

A plague upon this counterfeiting queen,

Gods blessed mercy, will you still be mad,
And wrong a noble virgin with vile speech?

Let me alone: Matilda, maiden fair,
Thou virgin spouse, true Huntingtons just heir,
Wilt thou come hither? and I do protest,
The Queen and I, to mitigate this war,
Will do what thou would have.

I come.

You shall not go: sound drums to war.

Alack, alack for woe: well God for us, since it will needs be so,

What stay you for?

Matildaes cries do stay us.

Oxford, I come in hope of thy defence.

First will I die, ere you shall yield your self,
To any coward Lord that serves the King.

Coward proud boy? thou find me no such beast,
And thou shalt rue in earnest this rude jest.

Rude hands, how hale you virtuous honour forth?
You do not well: away: now by my faith,
Ye do not well I say.
Take her, fair Queen, use her as she deserves:
She's fair, she's noble, chaste, and debonair.
I must, according to due course of war,
See that our soldiers scatter not too fare,
Least what care won, our negligence mray loose.

Is this the Helen, this the Paragon,
That makes the English Ilinnus flame so fast?

I am not she, you see I am not she:
I am not ravished yet, as Helen was,
I know not what will come of Iohns desire,
That rages like the sea, that burns like fire.

Plain Iohn, proud Ione? I'll tear your painted. face: thus, thus I'll use you.

Do, do. what you will.

How goes this geere? ha? foul fall so foul a deed,
Poor chaste child of Fitzwater dost thou bleed.
By Gods blessed mother this is more than need:
And more I tell you true than I would bear,
Were not the danger of the camp so near.

My Lord, the foes have gathered head:
Lord Bruise the father, joins with the son.

Why here's the matter, we must spend our time,
To keep your nailes from scratching innocence,
Which should have been bestowed for our defence.
What shall we now do! help me holy God,
The foe is come, and we are out of rank.

Is the field ours:

I, thanks to noble Lester.

Give God thanks, son, be careful to thy mother:
Commend me to Fitzwater, love thy brother,
If either arms, or prayers may him recover.

How cheers old Bruise?

His soul to joy is fled:
His gri^fe is in my bosom buried.

His life was dearly bought. For my eyes saw
A shambles of dead men about his feet,
Sent by his sword unto eternal shade:
With honour bury him: cease tears good Bruise.

Tears help not I confess: yet must I weep.
Soldiers, your help to bear him to my tent.

Be comforted great Queen: forget my wrongs.
It was my fortune and no fault of yours.

Is she thus mild? or doth she mock my chance?

Queen Elianor, are you a prisoner?
See what it is to be a soldier.
But what foul hand hath harmed Matildaes fair?
Speak honourable maid: who tore thy hair?
Did Oxford or the Queen this violence?

Ungentle grooms first took and sore me thus:
From whom old Oxford, chastising their wrong,
Mest kindly brought me to this gentle Queen:
Who laid her soft hand on my bleeding cheeks,
Gave kisses to my lips, wept for my woe:
And was devising how to send me back,
Even when your last alarm frighted us:
And by her kindness, fell into your hands.

Which kindness we return. Madame, be free.
Soldiers, conduct the Queen whether she please.

Farewell Matilda: if I live, believe,
I will remember this. O how I grieve,
That I should wrong so innocent a maid.
Come Lady, old Fitzwater is not far:
Heal weep to see these scars, full well I know.

Would I were from this woeful world of war:
Sure I will escape, and to some Nunnery go.

Had you her then? had you her in your power?

I marry had we; we had taken her.

O had she been in mine,
Not all earths power, from my power, should have freed her.

You are a king: and high are Princes thoughts:
It may be with your sight you could have chac't
An host of armed men: it may be so:
But we your subjects did the best we could:
Yet Bruise the father, backing Bruise the son,
Scattred our troops: brought rescue to Matilda,
And took your peerless Queen, their prisoner.

On all the race of Bruses, for this wrong,
I will have vengeance. Hubert, call in Brand.
My Lord of Oxford, give us leave a while to be alone.

I will my liege: but be you comforted,
The Queen will be recovered, do not fear.
As well as ere she was;

Oxford, for bear I pray.

Yet for the wrong she did unto Matilda, I fear, I fear,

The father and the son did rescue her:
The mother and the son shall rue the deed:
So it shall be: I am resolved thereon.
Matilda, my souls food, those have bereft:
And these of bodies food I will bereave.

Will Brand?

Your Majesty.

Less of your curtsy. Hubert, stand aside.
Post speedily to Windsor: take this ring:
Bid Blunt deliver Bruses wife and child,
Into your hands: and ask him for the key
Of the dark tower, ore the dungeon vault*
In that, see you shut up the dam and brat.
Pretend to Blunt that you have left them meat,
Will serve some seven-night: and unto him say,
It is my will you bring the key away.
And here you sir, I charge you on your life,
You do not leave a bit of bread with them.

I warrant you, let me alone.

Come back again with all the speed you may.

Some cruel task is pointed for that slave,
Which he will execute as cruelly.

No ruth, no pity shall have harbour here,
Till fair Matilda be within these arms,

Comfort my Lord, comfort my gracious Lord.
Your love is come again.

Ah Oxford, where?

Here my dread Sovereign.

Thou lie she is not there.

Under correction you wrong my age.
Say I beseech you, is not this the Queen?

I cry you mercy Oxford, tis indeed.
Where is Matilda?

Where virtue, chastity, and innocence remain, there is Matilda.

How comes she, pray, to be so chaste, so fair, so virtuous in your eye?

She freed me from my foes, and never urged
My great abuse, when she was prisoner.

What did you to her?

Raild upon her first,
Then tare her hair, and rent her tender cheeks.

O heaven! was not the day dark at that foul deed?
Could the sun see, without a red eclipse,
The purple tears fall from those tyrant wounds!
Out A^thiope, Gypsy, thick lipped Blackamoore:
Wolf, Tigress, worse than either of them both.

Are you advised my Lord?

Out doting Earl.
Could thou endure to see such violence?

I tell you plain* my Lord, I brooked it not,
But staid the tempest.

Rend my loves cheeks? that matchless Effigy,
Of wonder-working, natures chiefest work.
Tear her rich hair? to which, gold wyres,
Suns rays, and best of best compares
(In their most pride) have no comparison.
Abuse her name? Matildaes sacred name?
O barbarous outrage, rudeness merciless.

I told you Oxford, you mistook the king.

I did indeed: my liege Lord give me leave,
To leave the Camp.

Away old fool: and take with thee that trull:
For if she stay,

Come Lady, come away.
Tempt not his rage^ ruin wrath always brings:
Lust being lord, there is no trust in kings.

To arms king Iohn: Fitzwaters field is pitched,
About some mile hence, on a champain plain.
Chester hath drawn our soldiers in array:
The wings already have begun the fight.

Thither we will with wings of vengeance fly,
And win Matilda, or loose victory.

Why did my keeper put us in thy hands?
Wherein have we offended Blunt or thee?

You need not make these words:
You must remove your Iodging: this is all.
Be not afraid: come come, here is the door.

O God how dark it is!

Go in go in: its higher up the stairs.

My trembling heart forbids me to go in.
O if thou have compassion, tell me true,
What my poor boy and I must trust unto?

I tell thee true, compassion is my foe:
Yet have I bad of thee compassion.
Take in thy child: as I have faith or troth,
Thou and thy boy shall be but prisoners:
And I must daily bring you meat and drink.

Well, thou hast sworn: and God so give thee light,
As in this dark place thou remember us.
Poor heart, thou laughst, and h^st not wit to think,
Upon the many fears that me afflict.
I will not in^ help us, assist us Blunt.
We shall be murdered in a dungeon.

Cry without cause? I'll have ye in ^faith.

O let my boy and I but dine with Blunt,
And then I will with patience go in.

Will ye, or nill ye, zounds, ye must go in,
And never dine.

What sai^st thou? never dine?

No not with Blunt, I mean. Go in I say*
Or by this hand, ye get no meat to day.

My child is hungry, When shall he have meat?

Why, and ye would go in, immediately.

I will go in: but very much I doubt,
Nor I, nor my poor bay shall ere come out.

Ne'er while ye live, in faith: now are they sure.
Cry till their h^arts ache, no man can them hear.
A mis^rable death is famishment:
But what care ^? the king commanded me.

Now doth fair fortune offer hope of speed:
But howsoever we speed: good cousin Bruise,
March with three hundred bows pikes to Windsor,
Spreading a rumour that the day is ours:
As ours it shall be, with the help of heaven.
Blunt loves our part far better than the king's:
And will, I gage my life, upon the news,
Surrender up the Castle to our use.
By this means shall you help us to a hold,
How ere it chance, set free your Lady mother
That lives in prison there, with your young brother.

Away good uncle, to the battle go:
But that a certain good insues I know,
For all the world, I would not leave you so.

Away, away.
God send thee Win^sor: us this happy day.

You cannot hide your self Matilda: no disguise
Will serve the turn: now must you to the king:
And all these wars will with your presence cease.
Yield you to him, he soon will yield to peace.

They say thou took some pity of a child,
The king appointing thee to sear his eyes.
Men do report thee to be just of word,
And a dear lover of my Lord the king.
If thou did that, if thou be one of these:
Pity Matilda, prostrate at thy feet.

I saved young A^thurs eyes, and pity thee:
My word is just, which I have given the king.
The king I love: and thee I know he loves.
Compare these: then how can I pleasure thee?

By letting me escape to Dunmow Abbey,
Where I will end my life a votary.

And the king die with doting on thy love.

No, no: this fire of lust would be soon laid,
If once he knew me sworn a holy maid.

Thy tears and love of virtue have the power
To make me, at an instant, true and false:
True to distressed beauty and rare chastity:
False to king Iohn, that holds the sight of thee
Dearer than England, or earths Empery.
Go happy soul, that in so ill an age,
Hast such fair beauty for thy heritage:
Yet go not so alone. Dost hear tall soldier?
I know thee honest* guide this gentle maid,
To Dunmow Abbey: she is one I know.
I will excuse thee and content thee well.
My signet take, that ye may pass vnsearch^.

Kind Hubert, many prayers, for this good deed,
Shall on my beads be daily numbered.

O treble heat of honour, toil and rage!
How cheers earl Richmond?
Fitzwater, speak old man.
We are now near together; answer me.

Lester, the more our woe,
The likelier to be taken by the foe.

O let not such a thought abuse thy age:
We'll never yield us to the tyrants rage.

But if my girl be yielded,

If she be.

I, I: there's no man but shall have his time to die.

Now is our hour: which they shall dearly buy.

Lester, we'll stand like three Battalions:
What says our noble General thereto?

Why, I say do: while I can, I'll keep my place with you.

How now my bug-beare, will ye now submit?

To death, but not to thee*

Richmond, nor you?

Earl Richmond will not yield.

Me thinks Fitzwater, you should have more wit.

If it be wit to live, I have no will:
And so in this, my will orerules my wit.

Alarm then, with weapons will
We scourge your desperate will, and teach ye to have wit.

Of high heroic spirits be they all:
We will withdraw a little and confer:
For they are circled round, and cannot escape.

O that we three, who in the suns arise,
Were (like the three Triumuirates of Rome)
Guids of an host, able to vanquish Rome,
Are n^ alone, enclosed with enemies!

The glory of the world hath no more stay:
But as it comes, it fleets, and fades away.

Courage, and let us die; they come again:
Its Lord Hugh Burgh alone, Hughberr, what news?

This days fierce slaughter, Iohn, our King, lamets:
And to you three, great leaders of an host,
That now have not a man at all to lead:
You worthy captains without companies

Fitzwarer, Richmond; by the blessed Sun,
Lord Hubert mocks us.

By the Moon I do not, and put the blessed too't*
It is as good an oath as you have sworn.
My heart grieves, that so great hearts, as yours be,
Should put your fortunes on a sort of slaves,
That bring base fear within them to ^he field:
But to the matter. Since your state is such,
That without mercy you are sure of death
(Which I am sure, and well his Highness knows,
You do not fear at all) yet he gives grant,
On just conditions you shall save your lives.

On no condition will I save my life,
Except Matilda be returned again,
Unblemished, vnabus'd; and then I yield.

She now is where she never will return.

Never? O God! is my Matilda dead?

Dead to the world: dead to this woe she is.
She lives at Dunmow, and is vowed a Nun.

Do not delude me Hubert, gentle son.

By all the faith and honour of my kin:
By my unstained allegiance to the king:
By my own wor^, that hath reproouelesse bin,
She is at Dunmow.

O, how came she there?

When all these fields were walks for rage fear
(This, howling like a head of hungry wolves*
That, scudding as a heard of frighted dear)
When dust arising like a cole black fog,
From friend divided friend, joined foe to foe:
Yet neither those, nor these could either know,
Till here and there through large wide mouthed wouds
Proud life, even in the glory of his heat,
Losing possession, belched forth streams of blood:
Whose spouts in falling, made ten thousand drops,
And with that purple shower the dust alaid:
At such a time met I the trembling maid,
Seeming a dove, from all her fellows parted.
Seen, known, and taken: unseen unknown,
To any other that did know v^ both,
At her entreats I sent her safely guided,
To Dunmow Abbey: and the guide returned,
Assures me she was gladfully received,
Pitied: and in his sight did take her oath.

Hubert, for this thy honourable deed,
I and my house will reverence thy name.

Yet, I beseech you, hide it from the king:
At least that I conveyed her to the place.

Hubert, I will.

What, stand they st^ll on terms?

On honourable terms, o^ terms of right.
Our lives without our liberty we scorn.

You shall have life and liberty, I swear.

Then Lester bows his knee to his liege Lord,
And humbly begs his Highness to beware
Of wronging innocence, as he hath done.

The like Richmond desires; yields his sword.

I do embrace ye both, and hold my self
Richer by a whole Realm, in having you.

Much is my wrong: yet I submit with these,
Begging free leave, to live a private life.

Old brands of malice in thy bosom rest.
Thou shalt have leave to leave me, never doubt.
Fitzwater, see thou ship thee straight for France,
And never set thy foore on English shore,
Till I repeal thee. Go* go hence in peace.

Why doth your Highness wrong Fitzwater thus?

I right his wrong; he's weary of the land.

Not of the land, but of a public life.

Content ye Lords: in such quick times as these,
We must not keep a drone among our bees.

I am as glad to go, as you to send:
Yet I beseech this favour of your Grace,
That I may see Matilda ere I part.

Matilda? See Matilda, if thou can
Before Sun set; stay not another day.
The Abbey walls, that shroud my happy child,
Appear within her haplesse fathers sight.
Farewell my Sovereign. Lester, Richmond, Lords*
Farewell to all: grief gives no way to words.

Fitzwater stay! Lords, give us leave a while.
Hubert, go you before unto the Abbess,
And signify our coming; let her bring
Matilda to her father. Come old man;
Be not too froward, and we shall be friends.
About this girl our mortal ^arres began:
And if thou wilt, here all our quarrel ends.

Reserve my honour, and my daughters fame,
And no poor subject that your Grace commands,
Shall willinger submit, obey, and serve.

Do then but this; Persuade thy beauteous child,
To leave the Nunnery and return to Court:
And I protest from hence forth to for swear
All such conceits of lust as I have borne.

I will, my Lord, do all that I may do:
But give me leave, in this, to doubt of you.

This small thing grant, and ask me any thing:
Or else die in exile, loathed of the King.

You shall perceive I will do what I may.

Matilda is afraid to leave the h, ouse:
But lo, on yonder battlement she stands:
But in no case will come within your hands.

What? will my Lady Abbess wars with us:
Speak Lady: wherefore shut you up your gates?

Have we not reason, when an host of men,
Hunt and pursue religious chastity?
King Iohn, bethink thee what thou take in hand,
On pain of interdiction of thy Land.
Murdrers and felons may have sanctuary:
And shall not honourable maids distressed,
Religious virgins, holy Nuns professed,
Have that small privilege* Now out upon she, out?
Holy Saint Catherine shield my virginity:
I never stood in such extremity.

My Lord, the Abbess lies, I warrant you:
For I have heard, there is a Monk of Bury,
That once a weak comes thither to make merry.

Content thee Hubert, that same monk and she,
And the worst come, my instruments shall be.
Good Lady Abbess, fear no violence:
There's not one here shall offer you offence.

Daughter, all this while tears my speech have staid.
My Lord the King: Lords all draw near I pray:
And hear a poor mans parting from his child.
Matilda, still my unstained honours joy,
Fair Ornament of old Fitzwaters coat,
Borne to rich fortunes, did not this ill age
Bereave thee of thy birth-rights heritage*
Thou see our Sovereign, Lord of both our lives,
A long besieger of thy chastity,
Hath scattred all our forces, slain our friends,
Raced our Castles, left us ne'er a house
Wherein to hide us from his wrathful eye*
Yet God provides; France is appointed me:
And thou find house-roome in this Nunnery.
Here if the king should dote, as he hath done,
Its sacrilege to tempt a holy Nun:
But I have hope he will not: yet my fear
So drowns my hope, as I am forced to stay,
And leave abruptly, what I more would say.

O go not yet, my grieved hearts comforter,
I am as valiant to resist desire,
As ever thou were worthy in the field.
Iohn may attempt* but if Matilda yield,
O then.

I then Matilda, thou dost loose
The former glory of thy chaste resolves.
These seven years hast thou bid a Martyrs pains,
Resisting in thy self lust-growing fire:
For being mortal, sure thou had desire.
And five sad winters have their full course run,
Since thou did bury noble Huntington.
In these years, many months, and many days,
Have been consumed, thy virtues to consume:
Gifts have been heralds* Pandars did presume
To tempt thy chaste ears, with their unchaste tongues.
All in effect, working to no effect.
For I was still the watchman of thy tower,
The keeper of foul worms, from my fair flower:
But now, no more, no more Fitzwater may
Defend his poor Lamb, from the Lyons prey:
Thy order and thy holy prayers may.
To help thee, thou hast privilege by law:
Therefore be resolute, and nobly die,
Abhor base lust, defend thy chastity.

Dispat^h Fitzwater, hinder not thy child:
Many preferments do on her await.

I girl, I know thou shalt be offered wealth
(Which is a shrewd enticement in sad want)
Great honours to lift up thy lowe estate,
And glorious titles to eternize thee.
Al these do but gild over ugly shame:
Such wealth, my child, foreruns releaselesse need:
Such honour ever proves dishonourate.
For titles, none comes near a virtuous name:
O keep it ever, as thou hast done yet.
And though these dark times should forget thy praise,
An age will come, that shall eternize it.
Bid me farewell, and speak it in a word.

Farewell dear father.

Oh farewell sweet child.
My Liege farewell: Lester, Richmond, Hughbert,
Chester, and Mowbray: friends and foes farewell.
Matilda, see thou keep thy spotless fame,
And live eternized; else die soon with shame.

Amen, amen father, adieu, adieu:
Grief dwells with me, sweet comfort follow you.

Come daughter come: this is a woeful sight,
When good endeavours are oppressed by might.

^h Hubert, see thou not the sun go down,
Cloudy and dark? Matilda, stay one word.
She shakes her head, and scornfully says nay.

How cheer thou Lester?

Mad man, at my state:
That cannot raise true honour ruinate.

I will not be disdeignd: I ^owe to see
Quick vengeance on this girl, for scorning me.

Youg Bruise, my Lord, hath gotten Windsor castle,
Slain Blunt your Constable, and those that kept it:
And finding in a tower his mother dead,
With his young brother starved and famished:
That every one may see the rueful sight,
In the thick wall he a wide window makes:
And as he found them, so he lets them be
A spectacle to every commer by,
That heaven and earth, your tyrant shame may see.
All people cursing, crying fie upon
The tyrant merciless, inhumane Iohn.

Chester, and Mowbray, march away to Windsor:
Suppress that traitor Bruise. What if his dam,
In wilful fury, would receive no meat,
Nor suffer her young child any to eat,
Is it our fault* Haste ye with speed away,
And we will follow: go, be gon I pray.

O black and woeful deed! O pittous thing,
When slaves attend the fierce thoughts of a king.

My Lord, shall we go too?

Lester and Richmond, I: I pray ye do.

Get I my Bear ragged staff once more
Raised in the field, for these wrongs some shall roar.

Fetch in the Monk of Bury, that I talked off,
And bid Will Brand, my instrument of death,
Come likewise in. Convert, to raging hate,
My long resisted love. Welcome good Monk.

Thanks to my Liege.

Thou hast been long in suit,
To be installed Abbot of your house:
And in your favour many friends have stirred.
Now is the hour that you shall be preferred,
Upon condition, and the matter small.
Short shrift to make, good honest Confessor,
I love a fair Nun, now in Dunmow Abbey,
The Abbess loves you, and you pleasure her.
Now if, between you two, this pretty Lady
Could be persuaded to affect a king,
Your suit is granted; and on Dunmowe Abbey,
I will bestow a hundred marks a year.

A holy Nun, a young Nun, and a Lady*
Dear ware my Lord; yet bid you well as may be:
Strike hands; a bargain, she shall be your own:
Or if she will not

Nay, if she do refuse,
I'll send a deaths-man with you, this is he:
If she be wilful, leave her to his hands:
And on her own head be her hasted end*

The matter shall be done.

Sir, what poisons have you ready?

Store, store.

Await on the monk then, and ere we take horse,
I'll give you such instructions as you need.
Hughbert, prepare to Windsor with our host.

Your tyrannies have lost my love almost:
And yet I cannot choose but love eternally
This wanton king, replete with cruelty*
O how are all his princely virtues stained,
With lust abhorred, and lascivious heate!
Which kindling first to fire, now in a flame,
Shows to the whole world clearly his foul shame.
To quench this flame, full many a tide of tears,
Like overflowing full seas, have been spent:
And many a dry land drunk with humane blood,
Yet nothing helps his passions violent:
Rather they add oil to his raging fire,
Heate to his heate, desire to his desire,
Somewhat I fear, is now a managing.
For that prodigious bloody stigmatique,
Is never called unto his kingly sight,
But like a Comet he portendeth still
Some innovation, or some monstrons act,
Cruel, unkindly, horrid, full of hate:
As that vile deed at Windsor, done of late*
Gentle Matilda somewhat I mistrust:
Yet thee I need not fear, such is his love;
Again, the place doth give thee warrantise:
Yet I remember when his Highness said,
The lustful monk of Bury should him aid:
I so it is; if she have any ill,
Through y^ lewd shaueling will her shame be wrought.
If it so chance, Matildaes guiltless wrong
Will with the loss of many a life be bought.
But Hubert will be still his dread Lords friend,
However he deserves, his master serve:
Though he neglect, him will not I neglect:
Whoeuer fails him, I will Iohn affect.
For though kings fault in many a foul offence,
Subjects must sue, not mend with violence.

Now by my faith, you are too blame Madame:
Ever tormenting ever vexing you?
Cease off these fretting humours, pray ye do.
Gri^fe will not mend it, nought can pleasure you,
But patient suffering: nor by your Graces leave,
Have you such cause to make this hue and cry
After a husband; you have not in good sooth.
Yearly a child? this payment is not bad.
Content fair Queen, and do not think it strange,
That kings do sometimes seek delight in change:
For now and then, I tell you, poor men range.
Sit down a little, I will make you smile.
Though I be now like to the snowy Alps,
I was as hot as Aetna in my youth:
All fire in faith, true heart of oak, right steel,
A ruffian Lady: often for my sport,
I to a lodge of mine did make resort,
To view my dear I said; dear God can tell,
It was my keepers wife, whom I loved well.
My Countess (God be with her) was a shrowe,
As women be, your Majesty doth know:
And some odd pickth anke put it in her head,
All was not well: but such a life I led,
And the poor keeper, and his smoothed faced wife,
That will I, nil I, there she might not bide*
But for the people I did well provide:
And by gods mother, for my Ladies spite,
I tricked her in her kind, I served her right.
Were she at London, I the country kept;
Come thither, I at London would solourne:
Came she to court, from court I straight way stepped:
Return, I to the court would back return.
So this way, that way, every way she went,
I still was retrograde, seld opposite*
Till at the last, by mildness and submission,
We met, kissed, joined, and here left all suspicion.

Now out upon you Vere, I would have thought,
The world had not containd a chaster man.

Now, by my fay, I will be sworn, I am.
In all I tell you, I confess no ill,
But that I curbed a froward woman's will:
Yet had my keepers wife been of my mind,
There had been cause some fault with us to find:
But I protest, her noes and nayes were such,
That for my life she ever kept go much.

You would take nay: but our king Iohn says no:
No nay, no answer will suffice his turn:
He, for he cannot tempt true chastuie,
Filles all the Land with hostile trueltie.
Is it not shame, he that should punish sin,
Defend the righteous, help the innocent,
Carves with his sword, the purpose of his will,
Upon the guarders of the virtuous,
And hunts admired spotless maiden-head,
With all the darts of desolation,
Because she scorns to be dissolute.
Me, that he leaves, I do not murmur at:
That he loves her, doth no whit me perplex,
If she did love him, or my self did hate:
But this alone is it that me doth vex.
He leaves me that loves him, and her pursues,
That loath him and loves me: how can I choose,
But sadly grieve, and morn in my green youth?
When nor of her, nor me he takes ruth.

Ha dove, good Queen, for gods good love, ha don.
This raging humour will no doubt be staid.
Virtuous Matilda is professed a Nun:
Within a mile, at Dunmow lives the maid:
God will not suffer any thing so vile:
He will not sure, that he should her defile.

Nor Church, nor chapel, Abbey, Nunnery,
Are priuileg'd from his intemperance.
But leave we him, and let us, I e^treat,
Go visit fair Matilda: much I am
In debt unto the maid

You are indeed.
You wronged her, when with blows you made her bleed.
B^t if you please to visit her, fair dame,
Our coach is ready: we will soon be there.

Thanks Oxford; and with us I mean to bear
The beauteous garland, sent me out of Spain:
Which I will offer in the Abbey chapel:
As witness of Matildaes chastity:
Whom while I live, I ever vow to love,
In recompense of rash and causeless wrong.

Good, by this hand: exceeding, passing good.
The dog no sooner drank it, but, yugh, yugh quoth he:
So grins me with his teeth: lies down, and dies.
Yughst quoth I? by gogs blood go thy ways:
Of all thy line and generation,
Was never dog so worshipped as thou art,
For ere thou di'dst, thou were an officer:
I lie not, by these nailes, a squires place:
For the vile cur became a countess taster.
So dyed the dog. Now in our next account
The Countess comes, lets see a Countess a Nun*
Why so? why so?
What would she have the whole world quite undone?
We'll meet her for that trick. What, not a king?
Hanging's too good for her; I am but a plain knave,
And yet should any of these no forsooths,
These pray aways, these trip and goes, these tits.
Deny me: now by these:
A plague upon this bottle and this cup:
I cannot act mine oath: but too't again.
By these ten ends of flesh and blood, I swear:
First with this hand, wound thus about her hair,
And with this dagger lustilie lambackt:
I would in faith, I, by my villainy,
I would: but here, but here she comes,
Led by two doctors in sweet lechery:
If they speed, with my poison I go by;
If not, have at you maid: then steppe in I.

And as I said, fair maid, you have done well,
In your distress, to seek this holy place:
But tell me truly, how do you expel
The rage of lust-arising heat in you?

By prayer, by fasting, by considering
The shame of ill, and mead of doing well.

But daughter, daughter, tell me in my eat,
Have you no fleshly fightings now and then? whisper,

Fleshly quoth you? a maid of threescore years,
And fleshly fightings sticking in her teeth?
Well wench, you are matched in faith.

You do confess the king hath tempted you,
And thinking now and then on gifts and state,
A glowing heat hath proudly puffed you up:
But thanks to God, his Grace hath done you good.

Who, the kings Grace?

No: Gods Grace, holy monk.

The kings Grace fain would do you good, fair maid.

Ill good: he means my fame to violate.

Well* let that be.

Good baud, good mother B.
How fain you would that that good deed should he!

I was about to say somewhat upon a thing. O thus it is.
We maids that all the day are occupied,
In labour and chaste hallowed exercise,
Are nothing so much tempted while day lasts,
As we are tried and proved in the night.
Tell me Matilda, had you since you came,
No dreams, no visions, nothing worth the note?

No, I thank God.

Truly you will* you will;
Except you take good heed and bless your self.
For if ^ lie but on my back a while,
I am past recovery, sure of a bad dream.
You see yon reverend Monk: now God he knows,
I love him dearer for his holiness:
And I believe the devil knows it too:
For the foul f^end comes to me many a night,
As like the monk, as if he were the man.
Many a hundred nights, the Nuns have seen:
Pray, cry, make crosses, do they what they can.
Once gotten in, then do I fall to work,
My holy water bucket being near hand,
I whisper secret spells, and conjure him,
That the foul fiend hath no more power to stand*
He down, as I can quickly get him laid,
I bless my self* and like a holy maid,
Turn on my right side: where I sleep all night,
Without more dreams, or troubling of the spright,

An Abbess by the cross of my good blade,
An excellent mother to bring up a maid,
For me I mean, and my good master,
But never any for an honest man.
Now fie upon that word of honesty*
Passing my throat, 'thad almost choked me:
Sblood I'll for swear it for this trick.

We trifle time. Fair maid, its thus in brief;
This Abbey by your means may have relief*
An hundred marks a year: answer I pray,
What will you do herein?

Even all I may.

Its charitably spoken, my fair child:
A lit^le thing of yours, a little help
Will serve th^ turn, learn but to bear, to bear
The burden of this world, and it will do.

Well go thy ways: Is this no baud think you?

Madam, the heavy burden of the world
Hath long oppressed me.

But not pressed you right!
Now shall you bear a burden far more light.

What burden bearing? where tends this talk?

To ^ou, to us* this Abbey and King Iohn,

O God forefend he should be thought upon.

Lady make short, the king must lie with you.

With me, with me?

Sweet never look so strange:
He shall come closely, no body shall see.

How can he come but one hath eyes to see?

Your chamber windows shall be shadowed.

But no veil from my conscience shadows me.

And all the Nuns sent quietly to bed.

But they will rise, and, by my blushing red,
Quickly give guess of my lost maidenhead.

She goes in faith, by God she is their own.

Be not so nice, the sin is venial:
Considering you yield for charity,
And by your fall, the Nunnery shall rise.

Regard good counsel daughter, pray be wise.

Come, here's a stir: wilt do wench? will it do?

Say I, say I, forget the sound of no:
Or else say no and take it: wilt thou so?

Do you intend thus lewdely as you speak?

I by gogs blood do they: moppet, you were best
To take their proffers, least if they forsake you,
I play the devils part, step in and take you.

Some holy water, help me blessed Nuns.
Two damned spirits, in religious weeds,
Attempt to tempt my spotless chastity:
And a third devil gaping for my soul,
With horrid starings, ghastly frighteth me.

You may call while you will: but maid list what we say,
Or be assured this is your dying day.

In his name that did suffer for my sin,
And by this blessed sign, I conjure you:
Depart foul f^ends, return from whence ye came:
Avoid ye fiends, and cease to trouble me.

Zounds, she thinks us devils. Hear you conjurer?
Except you use that trick, to conjure down
The standing spirit of my Lord the King,
That your good mother there, the Abbess uses,
To conjure down the spirit of the Monk,
Not all your crosses have the power to bless
Your body from a sharpe and speedy death.

Are ye not fiends, but mortal bodies then?

Maid, maid: catch lower, when you feel youg men*
S^lood, I was never taken for the devil till now?

O where shall cha^itie have true defence,
When Churchmen lay this siege to innocence?
Where shall a maid have certain sanctuary,
When Lady Lust rules all the Nunnery?
Now fie upon ye both, false seeming Saints,
In carnate devils, devilish hypocrites.
A cowled Monk, an aged veiled Nun,
Become base Pandars! and with lustful^ speech,
Assay the chaste ears of true maidenhead!
Now fie upon this age, would I were dead.

Come leave her Lady; she shall have her wish.

Speed her I pray thee; should the baggage live,
Sheele slander all the chaste Nuns in the Land.

Well, well, go get you two unto your conjuring:
Let me alone to lay her on gods ground.

Why dost thou stay?

Why maid, because I must:
I have a message to you from the king.

And thou art welcome to his humble maid.
I thought thee to be grim and fierce at first:
But now thou hast asweete aspect, mild looks.
Art thou not come to kill me from the king?

Yes.

And thou art welcome, even the welcom^st man,
That ever came unto a woeful maid.
Be brief goodfellow: I have in the world,
No goods to give, no will at all to make:
But Gods will and the kings on me be done.
A little money kept to give in alms,
I have about me? deaths-man take it all?
Thou art the last poor alms-man I shall see.
Come, come, dispatch: what weapon will death wear,
When he assails me: Is it knife, or sword:
A strangling cord, or sudden flaming fire?

Neither, thou manly maid: look here, look here:
A cup of poison. Wherefore dost thou smile?

O God, in this the king is merciful.
My dear loved Huntington by poison dyed.
Good fellow, tell the king I thank his Grace,
And do forgive his causeless cruel^ie.
I do forgive thee to; but do advise
Thou leave this bloody course, and seek to save
Thy soul immortal, closed in thy breast:
Be brief I pray thee: now to King Iohns health
A full carouse* and god remember not
The curse he gave himself at Robins death,
Wishing by poison he might end his life,
If ever he solicited my love.
Farewell goodfellowe, now thy medicine works,
And with the labour, I am for^'t to rest.

Zounds she cares not, she makes death a ieast.

The guil^lesse fear not death. Farewell good fried*
I pray thee be no trouble in my end.

And say you Lady Abbess that there came
One from the King unto her: what was he?

Yonder he stands, I know not what he is.

Iesus have mercy* Oxford, come not nigh him.

Not nigh him Madame? yes: keep you away.

Come in good Queen: I do not mean to stay.
Nor I to stir, before I see the end.

Why starest thou thus? speak fellow, answer me,
Who art thou?

A bloody villain, and a murderer.
A hundred have I slain with mine ow^e hands.
Twas I that starved the Lady Bruise to death,
And her young son, at Windsor Castle late.
Tis I have slain Matilda, blessed maid,
And now will hurry to damnations mouth,
Forced by the gnawing worm of conscience.

Hold him for gods sake: stay the desperate wretch.

O some good pitying man compassionate*
That wretched man, so woeful desperate:
Save him for gods sake: he hath set me free,
From much worlds woe, much wrong, much misery.

I hear thy tongue, true perfect charity.
Chaste maid, fair maid look up and speak to me.

Whose here? my gr^ious sovereign Isabell?
I will take strength and kneel.

Matilda sit, I'll kneel to thee, Forgive me, gentle girl,
My most ungentle wrongs.

Fair beau^ious Queen,
I give god thanks, I do not think on wrongs.

How now Fitzwaters child? how dost thou girl?

Well, my good Lord of Oxford: pretty well:
A little travel more, and I shall rest:
For I am almost at my iorneyes end.
O that my head were raised a little up:
My drowsy head, whose ^im decaying lights,
Assure me it is almost time to sleep.
I thank your Highness, I have now some ease.
Be witness, I beseeth your Majesty,
That I forgive the King, with all my heart:
With all the little of my living heart,
That gives me leave to say, I can forgive:
And I beseech high heaven he long may live
A happy King, a king beloved and feared*
Oxford, for gods sake, to my father write
The latest commendations of his child:
And say, Matilda kept his Honours charge,
Dying a spotless maiden vndefilde.
Bid him be glad, for I am gone to joy:
I that did turn his weal to bitter woe.
The king and he will quickly now grow friends,
And by their friendship much content will grow,
Sink earth to earth, fade flower, ordained to fade:
But pass forth soul unto the shrine of peace,
Beg there atonement may be quickly made.
Fair Queen, kind Oxford, all good you attend:
Fly forth my soul, heavens king be there thy friend.

O pity, mourning sight, age pitiless:
Are these the messages king Iohn doth send!
Keep in, my tears, for shame, your conduits keep,
Sad woe beholding eyes: no, will ye not?
Why, then a Gods name weep.

I cannot weep for wrath: here, here, take in
The blessed body of this noble maid:
In milk white clothing let the same be laid,
Upon an open bier, that all may see
King Iohns unkingly lust and cruel^ie.

I, be it so. Your self, if so you please,
Will I attend upon, and both us wait
On chaste Matildaes body: which with speed,
To Windsor Castle we will hence convey:
There is another spectacle of ruth,
Old Bruses famished Lady and her son.

There is the king besieging of young Bruise,
His Lords are there* who when they see this sight,
I know will have small heart for Iohn to fight.

But where's the murderer, ha? is not he staid?

Borne with a violent rage, he climbed a tree,
And none of us could hinder his intent:
But getting to the top boughs, fast he tied
His garters to his neck, and a weak branch,
Which being unable to sustain his weight,
Down to the ground he fell, where bones and flesh
Lie pasht together, in a poole of blood.

Alas for woe: but this is just heavens doom
On those that live by blood: in blood they die.
May an example of it, honest friends,
Do well, take pains, beware of cruelty.
Come Madam, come, to Windsor let us go:
And there to Bruses grief, add greater woe.

Will not my bitter bannings and sad plaints,
My just and execrable execrations,
My tears, my prayers, my pittie-mouing moans
Preuaile, thou glorious bright Lamp of the day,
To cause thee keep an ^bit for their souls,
And dwell one month with the Antipodes?
Bright sun retire, gylde not this vault of death,
With thy illustrate rays: retire, retire,
And yield black night thy Empery a while:
A little while, till as my tears be spent,
My blood be likewise shed in raining drops,
By the tempestuous rage of tyrant Iohn.
Learn of thy love, the morning: she hath wept,
Shower upon shower, of silver dewy tears.
High trees, lowe plants, and pretty little flowers
Witness her woe: on them her grief appears:
And as she dre^pes on them, they do not let,
By drop and drop, their mother earth to wet.
See these hard stones, how fast small rouelets
Issue from them, though they seem issuelesse:
And wet eyed woe on every thing is viewed:
Save in thy face that smile at my distress.
O do not drink their tears thus greedily:
Yet let the mornings mourning garment dwell
Upon the sad earth. Wilt thou not, thou churl?
Then surfeit with thy exhalations speedily:
For all earths venomous infecting worms
Have belched their several poisons on the fields,
Mixing their simples in thy compound draught.
Well Phoebus well, drink on I say, drink on:
But when thou dost vngorge thee, grant me this,
Thou power those poisons on the head of Iohn.

How now my Lords: were ye last night so pleased
With the beholding of that property,
Which Iohn and other murderers have wrought,
Upon my starved mother and her son:
That you are come again? Shall I again
Set open shop, show my dead ware, dear bought,
Of a relentless merchant that doth trade
On the red sea, swollen mighty with the blood
Of noble, virtuous, harmless innocents?
Whose cole black vessel is of Ebony,
Their shrouds tackle (wrought wou'n by wrong)
Stretched with no other gale of wind, but grief:
Whose sighs with full blasts beats on her shrouds:
The Master murder is, the Pilot shame,
The Mariners rape, theft, and perjury:
The burden, tyrannous oppression,
Which hourly he in England doth unlade:
Say, shall I open shop, and show my wares?

No, good Lord Bruise, we have enough of that.

To Windsor welcome, Hubert^ Soft: me thinks
Bruise and our Lords are at a parley now?

Chester and Mowbray, you are Iohns sworn friends*
Will you see more? Speak, answer me my Lords:
I am no nig guard, you shall have your fill.

We have too much, and surfeit with the woe.

Are you all full? Here comes a ravening kite,
That both at quick, at dead, at all will smite.
He shall, he must, I, and bir Lady, may
Command me to give over holy day,
And set wide open, what you would not see.

Why stand ye Lords, and see this traitor pearcht,
Upon our Castles battlements so proud?
Come down young Bruise, set open the castle gates:
Unto thy sovereign, let thy knee be bowed,
And mercy shall be given to thee and thine,

O miserable thing:
Comes mercy from the mouth of Iohn our king?
Why then belike hell will be pitiful.
I will not open the gates, the gate I will:
The gate where thy shame, and my sorrow fits.
See my dead mother, and her famished son*
Open thy tyrants eyes: for to the world,
I will lay open thy fell cruelties.

We heard indeed, thy mother and her son.
In prison dyed, by wilful famishment.

Sin doubled upon sin. Slaunderst thou the dead?
Unwilling willingness it shall appear,
By then I have produced, as I will do,
The just presumptions against your unjust act,

Assail the castle Lords: Alarm drums:
And drown this scrietchowls cries with your deep sounds.

I tell thee drummer, if thy drum thou smite,
By heaven, I'll send thy soul to hells dark night,
Hence with thy drum: gods passion, get thee hence:
Be gone I say, move not my patience.

Are you advised Lester, what you do?

I am advised: for my Sovereign know,
The^'s not a Lord here will lift up his arm,
Against the person of you noble youth,
Till you have heard the circumstantial truth,
By good presumptions, touching this foul deed.
Therefore go on young Bruise, proceed, re^ell
The allegation that puts in this doubt,
Whether thy mother through her wilfulness,
Famished her self and her sweet son, or no?

Unlikely supposition: nature first denies,
That any mother, when her young ling cries,
If she have means, is so unnatural
To let it faint and starve, But we will prove
She had no means* except this monefull mean,
This torture of her self. Come forth, come forth,
Sir William Blunt, whom slander says I slew:
Come tell the king and Lords what you know true.

Thou hast betrayed our Castle,

No: God can tell it was surprised by politic report,
And affirmation that your Grace was slain.

Goo^, sir William Blunt:
Pass briefly to the Ladies famishment.

About some ten days since, there came one Brand,
Bringing a signet from my Lord the king,
And this commission signed with his hand,
Commanding me (as the contents express)
That I should presently deliver up
The Lady Bruise and her young son to him.

What time a day was this?

It was, Lord Mowbray, somewhat past eleauen:
For we were even then sitting down to dine.

But did ye dine?

The Lady and her son did not:
Brand would not stay.

No Lester, no: for here is no such sign
Of any meats digesture.

But by the way. Tell us I pray you Blunt,
While she remained with you, was she distraught
With grief, or any other passions violent?

She now and then would weep, often pray,
For reconcilement twixt the king and Lords.

How to her son did she affected stand?

Affection could not any more affect:
Nor might a mother show more mothers love:

How to my Lord the king?

O my Lord God! I never knew a subject love king more:
She never would blin telling how his Grace
Saved her young son from soldiers, from fire*
How fair he spake, gave her her son to keep:
And then, poor Lady, she would kiss her boy,
Pray for the king so hearty earnestly,
That in pure zeal, she wept most bitterly*

I weep for her, and do by heaven protest,
I honoured Bruses wife* How ere that slave
Rudely effected what I rashly wild:
Yet when he came again, and I bethought,
What bitter penance I had put them to,
For my conceived displeasure against old Bruise,
I had the villain post and bear them meat:
Which he excused, protesting pity moved him
To leave wine, bread, and other poudred meat,
More than they twain could in a fortnight eat.

Indeed, this can I witness with the king,
Which argues in that point his innocence:
Brand did bear in a months provision;
But locked it like a villain, far from them:
And locked them in a place where no mans ear
Might hear their lamentable woeful moves:
For all the issue both of vent and light,
Came from a loouer at the towers top,
Till now Lord Bruise made open this wide gap.

Had I not reason, think you, to make wide
The window that should let so much woe forth?
Where sits my mother martyrde by her self,
Hoping to save her child from martyrdom:
Where stands my brother martyrd by himself,
Because he would not taste his mothers blood.
For thus I gather this? my mothers teeth and chin
Are bloody with the savage cookery,
Which her soft heart, through pity of her son,
Respectless, made her practise on her self:
And her right hand, with offering it the child,
Is with her own pure blood stained and defiled,
My little brothers lips and chin, alone,
Are tainted with the blood: but his eauen teeth,
Like orient pearl, or snowe-white yuory,
Have not one touch of blood, one little spot:
Which is an argument the boy would not.
Once stir his lips, to taste that bloody food,
Our cruel gentle mother ministered:
But as it seemed (for see, his pretty
Palm is bloody too) he cast it on the ground:
For on this side these blessed relics lye,
By famines rage divided from this shrine,
Sad woeful mother in Jerusalem,
Who when thy son and thou did faint for food,
Buried his sweet flesh in thy hungry womb:
How merciless were thou, if we compare
Thy fact and this: For my poor Lady mother
Did kill her self, to save my dying brother.
And thou ungentle son of Miriam,
Why did thou beg life when thy mother lacked?
My little brother George did nobly act
A more courageous part; he would not eat,
Nor beg to live, it seemed he did not cry:
Few tears stand on his cheek, smooth is each eye:
But when he saw my mother bent to die,
He dyed with her: O childish valiancy!

Good Brufe have done: my heart can not contain
The grief it holds, my eyes must shower down rai^.

Which showers are even as good,
As rain in harvest, or a swelling flood
When neighbouring meadows lack the mowers sith.

List Lester, hearst thou not a mournfu march?

Yes Richmond, and it seems old de Vere.

Lords, by your leave, is not our sovereign here?

Yes good old Awbury.

Ah my gracious Lord,
That you so much your high state should neglect!
Ah god in heaven forgive this bloody deed.
Young Bruise, young Bruise, I weep,
Thy mothers and thy brothers wrong.
Yet to afflict thee more, more grief I bring*

O Houourable Awbery de Vere,
Let sorrow in a sable suit appear:
Do not misshape her garments, like delight.
If it be grief, why cloth'st thou her in white?

I cannot tell thee yet. I must sit down.
Attend young Bruise, and listen to the Queen:
Sheele not be tongue tied, we shall have a stir
Anon, I fear, would make a man half sick.

Are you here leatcher? O intemperate king,
Wilt thou not see me? come, come, show your face*
Your Graces graceless, kings, unkingly face.
What? mute, hands folded, eyes fixed on the earth?
Whose turn is next now to be murdered?
The famished Bruses are on yonder side:
On this another, I will name anon:
One for whose head this garland I do bear,
And this fair milke-white spotless pendant to^.
Look up king Iohn, see, yonder sits thy shame:
Yonder it lies: what, must I tell her name?
It is Matilda, poisoned by thee.

Matilda: O that foul swift foote^ slave,
That kills ere one have time to hid him save.
Fair gentle girl, ungently made away.

My banished uncles daughter, art thou there?
Then I defy all hope, and swear

Stay Bruise, and listen well what oath to swear.
Lewys the Dolphin, pitying one estate,
Is by the Christian king his father, sent
With aid to help us, and is landed too.
Lords that will fly the den of cruelty,
And fight to free your selves from tyranny,
Bruise, keep that Castle, to the only use
Of our elected king, Lewys of France.

Gods passion do not so: king Iohn is here.
Lords, whisper not with Lester^ Lester, fie:
Stir not again regardless ^utinie:
Speak to them Hugh: I know thou loou'st the king.
Madame, go to them, nay do, for gods sake do:
Down with your stomach: for if he go down,
You must down too, and be no longer Queen:
Advise you, go entreat them speedily.
My sovereign wherefore sit you sighing there?
The Lords are all about to follow Lewys:
Up and entreat them, else they will away.

Good Oxford let them go. Why should they stay?

What? are you desperate? that must not be.
Hear me my Lords.

This pendant let me see.
She was indeed of London the honour once,
When she was loved of virtuous Huntington:
Of chastity the honour, all her life:
To impure thoughts she never could be won.
And she of Honour was the honour too,
By birth, in life, she honour honoured.
Bring in two tapers lighted, quick, dispatch.

Remember Bruise, thy charge. Come Lords away.
Away, we will away.

Hark Lester but one word, a little stay.
Help me good Hubert, help me gentle Queen.

How dim these Tapers burn! they give no light.
Here were two beauteous Lamps, y^ could have taught
The Sun to shine by day, the Moon by night:
But they are dim too: clean extinguished.
Away with these, since those fair lights be dead.

And as I say, hark Bruise unto our talk.
Think you it is for love of England, Lewis comes?
Nay: France is not so kind: I would it were.
Advise your selves, hark, dost thou hear me Bruise?

Oxford, I do.

Can noble English hearts bear the French yoke?
No Lester* Richmond think on Lewys sire,
That le^t you, and your king, in Palestine.

And think beside, you know not Lewys nature,
Who may be as bad as Iohn, or rather worse than he.

And look my Lords upon his silent woe:
His soul is at the door of death I know.
See how he seeks to suck, if he could draw,
Poison from dead Matildaes ashy lips.
I'll be sworn his very heart strings nips.
A v^ng^ance on that slave, that cursed Brand,
I'll kill him if I live, with this right hand.

Thou can not Hubert, he hath killed himself:
But to our matter. Lester, pray thee speak.
Young Bruise, for gods sake let us know thy mind.

I would be loath to be a strangers slave:
For Englands love, I would no French king have.

Well Oxford, if I be deceived in Iohn again,
Its long of you, Lord Hubert, and the Queen.
Yield up the Castle Bruise, we'll once more try
King Iohns proceedings. Oxford, tell him so.

I will come down: but first farewell dear mother,
Farewell poor little George, my pretty brother.
Now will I shut my shambles in again.
Farewell, farewell.
In everlasting bliss your sweet souls dwell.

But you must mendy faith, in faith you must.

My Lord, once more your subjects do submit,
Besceching you to think how things have past,
And let some comfort shine on us your friends,
Through the bright splendour of your virtuous life.

I thank you all; and Lester I protest,
I will be better than I yet have been.

Of Windsor Castle here the keys I yield.

Thanks Bruise: forgive me, and I pray thee see
Thy mother and thy brother buried,
In Windsor Castle Church. Do, kiss her cheek:
Weep thou on that, on this side I will weep.

Chaste virgin, thus I crown thee with these flowers.

Let us go on to Dunmow with this maid:
Among the hallowed Nuns let her be laid:
Unto her tomb, a monthly pilgrimage
Doth king Iohn vow in penance for this wrong.
Go forward maids: on with Matildaes hearse,
And on her Tomb see you engrave this verse;

Within this Marble monument, doth lye
Matilda martyrde, for her chastity,
Thus is Matildaes story shown in act,
And rough heawen out by an vncunning hand*
Being of the most material points compackt,
That with the certainst state of truth do stand.

