WHy so? thus do I hope to please:
Music revives, and mirth is tolerable.
Comedy play thy part, and please,
Make merry them that coms to joy with thee:
Joy then good gentilles, I hope to make you laugh.
Sound forth Bellonas silver tuned strings.
Time fits us well, the day and place is ours.
Nay stay minion, there lies a block.
What al on mirth; I'll interrupt your tale.
And mix your music with a tragic end^

What monstrous ugly hag is this,
That dares comtrowle the pleasures of our will?
Vaunt churlish cur, besmeared with gorie blood,
That seem to check ^
And stifle the ^
Blush, monster blush, and post away with shame,
That seek disturbance of a goddess deeds.

Post hence thy self, thou counterchecking trul,
I will possess this habite^ spite of thee
And gain the glory of thy wished port,
I'll thunder music shall appal the nymphs,
And make them sheuer their clattering strings:
Flying for succour to their danes caves.
Hearken, thou shalt hear a noise
Shall fill the air with a shrilling sound,
And thunder music to the gods above:
Mars shall himsel^e breathe down
A peerless crowene upon brave envies head,
And raise his chiuall with a lasting fame
In this brave music Envy takes delight,
Where I may see them wallow in there blood,
To spurn at armes^ and legs quite shivered off,
And hear the cries of many thousand slain,
How likst thou this my ^r^ll, this sport alone for mee^

Vaunt bloody cur^e, nur^t up with tigers sap,
That so dost seek to quail a woman's mind,
Comedy is mild gentle, willing for to please,
And seeks to gain the love of all estates^
Delighting in mi^th^ mixed all with lovely ^ales^
And brings things with ^reble joy to pas^e,
Thou bloody, Envious, disdainer of men's joy,
Whose name is fraught with bloody stratagemes,
D^lights in nothing but in spoy^e and dea^h,
Where ^ blood,
And ^
Yet veil thy mind, revenge thou not on me,
A silly woman begs it at thy hands,
Give me the leave to utter out my play,
Forbear this place, I humbly crave thee hence,
And mix not death amongst pleasing comedies,
That treats nought else but pleasure and delight.
If any spark of human rests in thee,
Forbear, be gon, tender the suite of me.

Why so I will, forbearance shall be such
As tr^ble death shall cross thee with despite,
And make thee morn where most thou ioiest,
Turning thy mirth into a deadly dole:
Whirling thy pleasures with a peal of death,
And drench thy methodes in a sea of blood:
This will I do, thus shall I bear with thee
And more to vex thee with a deeper spite,
I will with th^eates of blood begin thy play:
Favouring thee with envy and with hate.

Then ugly monster do thy worst,
I will defend them in despite of thee:
And thought thou think with tragic fumes
To brave my play unto my deep disgrace.
I force it not, I scorn what thou can do
I'll grace it so, thy self shall it confess:
From tragic stuff to be a pleasant comedy

Why then (...) send thy actors forth
And I will cross the first steps of their tread:
Making them fear the very dart of death.

And I'll defend them mangre all thy spite
So ugly fiend frewell, tell time shall serve,
That we may meet to parle forth best

Conten^ C^medie, i'll go spread my branch,
And scattered blossoms from mine envious tree.

Oh fly Madam, fly or else we art but dead.

Help Segasto help, help sweat Segasto or eel I die.
Alas madam, there is no way but flight,
Then hast and save your self.

Why then I die, ah help me in distress,

Stay Lady stay, and be no more dismayed,
That cruel beast most mercelesse and fell,
Which have bereaved thousands of their lives,
Affrighted many with his hard pursues,
Prying from place to place to find his pray,
Prolonging thus his life by others death,
His carcass now lies headless void of breath.

That foul deformed monster is he dead?

Assure your self thereof, behold his head^
Which if it please you Lady to accept,
With willing heart I yield it to your majesty.

Thanks worthy shepherd, thanks a thousand times
This gift assure thy self contents me more,
Then greatest bounty of a mighty prince:
Although he were the monarch of the world.

Most gracious goddess, more then mortal wight,
Your heavenly hew of right imports no less,
Most glad am I in that it was my chance,
To undertake this enterprise in hand.
Which doth so greatly glad your princely minde^

No goddess shepherd, but a mortal wight
A mortal wight destressed as thou see:
My father here is king of Arragon.
I Amadine his only daughter am:
And after him sole heir unto the crown.
Now where as it is my fathers will,
To mary me unto Segasto,
On whose wealth through fathers former usury
Is known to be no less then wonderful,
We both of custom oftentimes did use,
Leaving the court to walk within the fields,
For recreation esecially the spring,
In that it yields great store of rare delights:
And passing further then our wonted walks,
Scarce were entered within these luckless woods,
But right before us down a steep fall hill
A monstrous ugly bear did hie him fast,
To meet us both, I faint to tell the rest,
Good shepherd, but suppose the ghastly looks,
The hiddious fears, the thousand hunderd woes,
Which at this instant Amadine susteind.

Yet worthy princes let thy sorrow cease,
And let this sight your former joys revive.

Believe me shepherd so it doth no less.

Long may they last unto your hearts content.
But tell me Lady what is become of him,
Segasto called, what is become of him?

I know not I, that know the powers diui^
But God grant this that sweet Segasto live.

Yet heard hearted he in such a case,
So cowardly to save himself by flight:
And leave so brave a princess to the spoil

Well shepherd for thy worthy valour tried,
Endangering thy self to set me free:
Vnrecompensed sure thou shalt not be.
In court thy courage shall be plainly known:
Throughout the Kingdom will I spread thy name,
To thy renown and never dying fame:
And that thy courage may be better known.
Bear thou the head of this most monstrous beast
In open sight to every courtiers view
So will the king my father thee reward.
Come lets away, and guard me to the court.

With all my heart.

When heaps of harms do hover over head,
Tis time as then, some say to look about,
And so ensuing harms to choose the least:
But hard, yea haplesse is that wretchesse chance,
Luckless his lot and caytiffe like acourste,
At whose proceedings fortune ever frowns.
My self I mean most subject unto thrall,
For I the more I seek to shun the worst:
The more by proof I find my self accursed:
Ere whiles assaulted with an ugly bear,
Fair Amadine in company all alone,
Forthwith by flight I thought to save my self,
Leaving my Amadine unto her shifts:
For death it was for to resist the bear.
And death no less of Amadines harms to hear.
Accursed I in lingering life thus long,
In leeuing thus each minute of an hour
Doth pierce my hart with darts of thousand deathe^:
If she by flight her fury do escape,
What will she think;
Will she not say; yea flatly to my face,
Accusing me of mere disloyalty,
A trusty friend is tried time of need:
But I when she in danger was of death
And needed me, and cried Segas^o help:
I turned my back and quickly ran away.
Unworthy I to bear this vital breath:
But what, what needs these plaints
If Amadine do live then happy I,
She will in time forgive and so forget,
Amadine is merciful, not Iuno like.
In harmful hart to harbour hatred long.

Clubs, prongs, pitchfo^ks, bills, O help, a bear, a bear, a bear.

Still bears, and nothing else but bears.
Tell me sir where she is;

O sir, she is run down the woods:
I see her wit head and her white belly.

Thou talk of wonders, to tell me of white bears.
But sir did thou ever see any such;

No faith I never saw any such,
But I remember my fathers words,
He bad me take he^de I was not caught with a white bear

A lamentable tale no dout.

I tell you what sir as I was going a field to serve my fathers great horse,
carried a bottly of hay upon my head, now do you see sir, I fast hudwinckt,
that I could see nothing, perceiving the bear coming, I threw my hay into the
hedge and ran away.

What from nothing;

I wa^rant you yes, I saw something, for there was tow load of thorns besides
my bottle of hay, and that made three.

But tell me sir, the bear that thou did see,
Did she not bear a bucket on her arm;

Ha ha, ha, I never saw bear go a milking in all my life.
But ha^k you sir, I did not look so hie as her arm:
I saw nothing but her whit head, and her whit belly.

But tell me sir, where dost thou dwell;

Why, do you not know me.

Why no, how should I know thee,

Why then you know no body, and you know not mee' I tell you sir I am the
goodman ^a^s son of the next parish over the hill.

Goodman rats son why whats thy name,

why I am very near kin unto him.

I think so, but whats thy name?

My name, I have very pretty name I'll tel you what my name is: my name is
Mouse,

what plain Monse.

I, plain mouse with out either welt or garde^
But do you hea^e sir I am but a very young mouse,
For my ^aile is scarce grown out yet, look you here ^ls.

But I pray thee, who g^ue thee that name?

Faith ^ir I know not that, but if you would fain know, ask my fathers g^eate
horse, for he hath bin half a year longer with my father then I have.

This seems to be a merry fellow,
I care not if I take him home with me,
Mirth is a comfort to a troubled mind,
A merry man, a merry master makes.
How say thou sir, wilt thou dwell with me?

Nay soft sir, tow words to a bargain, pray you what occupation are you?

No occupation, I live upon my landes^

Your lands, a way, you are no master for me, why do you think that I am so
m^d, to go s^ke my living in the lands amongst the stones, briars, and bushes,
and tear my holy day appa^ell, not I by your leave.

Why, I do not mean th^u shalt.

How th^n?

Why thou shalt be my man, and wait upon me at the court.

Whats that?

Where the King lies.

Whats that same King a man or woman?

A man as thou arte^

As I am, ha^ke you sir pray you what kin is he to good man king of our parish
the church warden?

No kin to him, he is the King of the whole land.

king of the land, I never see him.

If thou wilt dwell with me, thou shallt see him every day.

shall I go home again to be torn in pieces with bears, no not I, I will go
home put on a clean shirt, and then go drown my self.

Thou shallt not need, if thou wilt dwell with me, thou shalt want nothing.

Shall I not? then hears my hand, i'll dwell with you, And hark you sir, now you
have entertained me, I will tell you what I can do, I can keep my tougue from
picking and stealing, and my hands from lying and slandering, I warrant you,
as well as ever you had man^ in all your life.

Now will I to court with sorrowful hart, rownded with doubts, if Amadine do
live, then happy I: yea happy I if Amadine do^ live.

Now brave Lords, our wars are brought to end,
Our foes the foil and we in safety rest,
It us behooves to use such clemency in peace^
As valour in the warre^
It is as great honour to be bountiful at home,
As to be conquerors in the field.
There^ore my Lords the more to my conte^t,
Your liking, and your countries safeguard,
We are disposed in marriage for to give
Our daughter to Lord Segasto hear,
Who shall succeed the diadem af^er me:
And raigue heereaft^r as I tofore have done
Your sole and lawful King of Arragon:
What say you Lordings, like you of my aduise^

And please your Majesty, we do not only allow of your highness pleasure,
but also vow fathfully in what we may to further it.

Thanks good my Lords, if long Adr^stus li^e
Me will at full requite your cur^esies.
Tremelio in recompense of thy late valour done,
Take unto thee the Catalone a prince,
Lately our prisoner taken in the wars
Be thou his keeper, his ransom shallbe thine,
Weel^ think of it when leisure shall afford:
Meanewhile do use him well, his father is a King.

Thanks to your Majesty, his usage shall be such,
As he thereat shall think no cause to grutce.

Then march we on to court, and rest our wearied limbs
But Collen, I have a tale in secret kept for thee:
When thou shalt hear a watch word from thy king,
Think then some weighty matter is at hand
That highly shall concern our state,
Then Collen look thou be not far from me^
And for thy service thou to fore hast done,
Thy truth and valour proud in every point,
I shall with bounties thee enlarge therefore:
So guard us to the court.

What so my sovereign doth command me do^,
With willing mind I gladly yield consent

Tel me sir, how do you like your weapons;

O very well, very well, they keep my sides warm.

They keep the dogs form your shins very well do they not;

How, keep the dogs from my shins, I would scorn but my shins should keep the
dogs from them.

Well ^irra, leaving idle talk, tell me:
Dost thou know captain Tremelioes chamber;

I very well, it hath a door

I think so, for so hath every chamber^
But dost thou know the man.

I forsooth he hath a nose on his face.

Why so ha^h every on^

Tha^s more then I know.

But doest thou remember the captain, that was here with the king even now,
that brought the young prince prisoner?

O very well.

Go unto him and bid him come to me,
Tell him I have a matter in secret to impart to him,

I will master, master whats his name?

Why captain Tremelio.

O the meal man, I know him very well,
He brings meal every saturday: but hark you master must I bid him come to
you or must you come to him

No sir, he must come to me.

Hark you master, how if he be not at home.
What shall I do then?

Why then leaust word with some of his folks.

Oh master, if there be no body within,
I will leave word with his dog.

Why can his dog speake^

I cannot tell, wherefore doth he keep his chamber els^

To keep out such knaves as thou art.

Nay be lady then go your self.

You will go sir, will ye not;

Yes marry will I, O tis come to my head,
And a be not within, I'll bring his chamber to you.

What wilt thou pluck down the Kings house?

Nay be lady I'll know the price of it first.
Master it is such a hard name, I have forgotten it again I pray you tell me
his name,

I tell thee captain Tremelio.

Oh captain treble knave, captain treble knave

How now sir, dost thou call me?

You must come to my master captain treble knave

My Lord Segasto. did you send for me.

I did Tremel^o, sir^a about you^ business.

I marry, whats that can you te^le

No not well.

Marry then I can, straight to the kitchen dresser, to Iohn the cooke, and get
me a good piece of beef and brewis, and then to the buttery ^atch to Thomas
the butler, for a ^c^e of bear, and there for an hour ileso be labour my
self, therefore I pray you cal me not till you think I have done, I pray you
good master.

Wel^ sir away^
Tremelio this it is, thou know the valour of Segasto
Spread through all the kingdom of Arragon,
And such as hath found triumph and favours,
Never daunted at any time, but now a shepherd,
Admired at in court for worthiness.
And Segastoes honour laid a side.
My will therefore is this, that thou dost find some means to work the
shepherds death, I know thy streng^h sufficient to perform my desire, thy
love no other wise then to revenge my injuries.

It is not the frowns of a shepherd that Tremelio fears.
Therefore account it accomplished, what I take in hane

Thanks good Tremelio, and assure thy self,
What I promise that will I perform.

Thanks my good Lord, and in good time
See where he comes, stand by a while.
And you shall see me put in practise your intended, drifts.
Have at thee swain, if that I hit thee right.

Wild coward, so without cause to strike a man.
Turn coward turn, now strike and do thy worst.

Hold shepherd hold, spare him, kill him not,
ccursed villain, tell me what hast thou done.
Ah Tremelio, trusty Tremelio, I sorrow for thy death,
And since that thou living, did prove faithful to
Segasto, so Segasto now living shall honour the dead corpse of Tremlio with
revenge.
Blood thristy villain, borne and bred to merciless murder,
Tell me how durst thou be so bold.
As once to lay thy hands upon the least of mine.
Assure thy self, thou shalt be used according to the law.

Segasto cease, these threats are needless
Accuse not me of murder, that have done nothing but in mine own defence.

Nay shepherd reason not with me.
I'll manifest thy fact unto the King:
Whose doom will be thy death as thou deserust,
What hoe, Mouse come away.

Why how now, vvhats the matter.
I thought you would be calling before I had done.

Come help away with my friend.

Why is he drunk, cannot he stand on his feet.

No, he is not drunk, he is slain.

Flaine, no by Lady he is not flaine.

Hes killed I tell thee.

What, do you use to kill your friends.
I will serve you no longer.

I tell thee the shepherd killed him.

O did a so, but master, I will have al his appa^el^ if I carry him away.

Why so thou shalt.

Come then I will healpe, mas master I think his mother song looby to him he
is so heavy.

behold the fickle state of man, always mutable, never at one.
Sometimes we feed on fancies with the sweet of our desires.
Sometimes again we feel the heat of extreme misery.
Now am I infauour about the court and country.
To morrovv those favours will turn to frovvnes,
To day I live revenged on my foe,
To morrovv I die, my foe revenged on me,

No passengers this morning, what not one.
A chance that seldom doth befall.
What not one^ then lie thou there,
And rest thyself till I have further need:
Now Bremo since thy leisure so affords.
An endless th^ng, who knows not Bremoes strength
Who like a king commander within these woods,
The bear, the boar, da^es not abide my sight,
But hastes away to save themselves by flight:
The crystal waters in the bubbling brookes,
When I come by doth swiftly slide away,
And claps themselves in closets under banks,
Afraid to look bold Bremo in the face:
The aged oaks at Bremoes breath do bow,
And all things else are still at my command,
Else What would I?
Rent them in pieces and pluck them from the earth,
And each way else I would revenge my self,
Why who comes here with whom I dare not fight,
Who fights with me doth not die the death; not on:
What favour shows this sturdy stick to those,
That here within these woods are combataines with me?
Why death and nothing else but present death,
With restless rage I wander through these woods,
No creature here but fe^reth Bremoes force,
Man, woman, child, beast and bird,
And every thing that doth approach my sight,
Ar^ fo^st to fall if Bremo once but frown,
Come cudgel come, my partner in my spoils,
For here I see this day it will not be,
But when it falls that I encounter any,
One pa^ sufficed for to work my will.
What comes not one? then lets begone,
A time will serve when we shall better speed.

Shepherd, thou hast heard thine accusers,
Murder is laid to thy charge,
What can thou say, thou hast deserved death;

Dread sovereign, I must needs confess,
I slew this captain in mine own defence^
Not of any malice but by chance,
But mine accuser hath a further meaning.

words will not here preuaile,
I seek for i^stice, justice craves his death.

Shepherd thine own confession hath condemned thee.
Sir take him away, do him to execu^ion straight.

So he shall I warrant him, but do you hear master King, he is kin to a
monkey, his neck is bigger then is head.

Com sir away with him, and hang him about the middle.

Yes forsooth I warrant you, come on sir, a so like a sheep biter a looks.

Dread sovereign and well-beloved sire.
On bended kees I crave the life of this condemned shepherd, which heretofore
preserved the life of thy sometime distressed daughter.
K. preserved the life of my sometime distressed daughter
How can that be; I never knew the time
Whrein thou wast dist^est, I never knew the day
But that I have maintained thy state,
As best beseemd the daughter of a king
I never saw the shepherd until now,
How comes it then that he preserud thy life?

Once vvalkeing with Segasto in the woods,
Further then our accustomed manner was,
Right before us down a steep fall hill,
A monstrous ugly bear doth hie him fast
To meet us both, now whether this be true,
I refer it to the cerdit of Segasto.

Most true and like your majesty.

How then?

The bear being eager to obtain his pray;
Made forward to us with an open mouth,
As if he meant to swallow us both at once,
The sight whereof did make us both to dread,
But specially your daughter Amadine,
W^o for I saw no succour incident
But in Segastoes valour, I grew desperate,
And he most cowardlike began to fly.
Left me distressed to be deuourd of him,
How say you Segasto is it not true?

His silence verifies it to be true, what then;

Then I amasded stressed all alone,
Did hie me fast to escape that ugly bear,
But all in vain, for why he reached after me,
And hardly I did oft escape his paws,
Till at the length this shepherd came,
And brought to me his head.
Come hither boy, lo here it is, which I present unto your majesty.

The slaught^r o^ this bear deserves great ^ame.

The slaughter of a man des^rues great blame.

Indeed occasion oftentimes so falls out.

Tremelio in the wars. O King preserved thee,

The shepherd in the woods o king preserved me.

Tremelio fought when many men did yield.

So would the shepherd had he bin in field

So would my master, had he not r^n away^

Tremelioes force saved thousands from the ^oe^

The shepherds force have saved thousand, more.

Aye shipstickes, nothing else.

Segasto cease to accuse the shepherd,
His woorthynesse deserves a recompense,
All we are bound to do the shepherd good:
Shepherd, whereas it was my sentence, thou should die^
So shall my sentence stand, for thou shalt die.

Thanks to your maistie.

But soft Segasto, not for this offence,
Long may thou live, and when the sisters shall decree
To cut in twain the twisted thread of life,
Then let him die, for this I set thee free,
And for thy valour I will honour thee.

Thanks to your maiestie^

Come daughter let us now depart, to honour the worthy valour of the shepherd
with our rewards.

O master hear you, you have made a fresh hand now you would be ^lowe you,
why what will you do now? you have lost me a good occupation by the means,
Faith master now I cannot hang the shephe^rd, I pray you let me take^ the
pains to hang you, it is but half an hours exercise.


You are still in your knavery, but ^ith I cannot have his life I will procure
his banishment for ever. Come on ^irra.


Yes forsooth I come laugh at him I pray you.

From Amadine and from her fathers court,
With gold and silver and with rich rewards,
Flowing from t^e banks of golden tresuries,
More may I boast and say but I,
Was never shepherd in such dignity,

All hayle worthy shepherd.

All rain lousy shepherd.

Welcome my friends, from whence come you;

The King and Amadine greetes thee well,
And after greetings done, bids thee depart the court, shepherd begone.

Shepherd take law legs, fly away shepherd

Whose words are these? came these from Amadine?

Aye from Amadine.

Aye from Amladine.

Ah luckelesse fortune worse then Phaetons tale,
My former bless is now become my bale.

What w^lt thou poison thy self?

My former heaven is now become my hell.

The worst ale house that I ever came in, in al my life.

What shall I do.

Even go hang thy self half an nower.

Can Amadine so churelishly command.
To banish the shepherd from her Fathers court?

What should shepherds do in the court.

What should shepherrdes do amongst us, have we not Lords enough on us in the
court?

Why shepherds are men, and kings are no more.

Shephe^rdes are men and masters over their flock

That's a lie who pays them their wages the^?

Well you are always interrupting of me,
But you are best look to him least you hang for him when he is gone.

And you shall hang for company,
For leaving me alone.
Shepherd stand forth and hear thy sentence,
Shepherd begone within three days in payne of,
My displeasure, shepherd begone, shepherd begone, begone, begone, begone,
shepherd, shepherd, shepherd

And must I go, and must I needs depart?
Ye goodly groves partakers of my songs
In time tofore when fortune did not frown,
Power forth your plaints and wail a while with me
And thou bright sun my comfort in the cold,
Hide, hide thy face and leave me comfortless,
Ye wholesome herbs, and sweet smelling savours,
Ye each thing else prolonging life of man,
Change, change your wonted course,
That ^anting your aide, in woeful sort may die,

Arinea if any body ask for me,
Make some excuse till I return.

What and Segasto call.

Do thou the like to him, I mean not to stay long^

This voice so sweet my pining spirits revives

Shepherd, well met tel me how thou doest.

I linger life yet wish for speedy death.

Shepherd, although thy banishment already be decreed and all against thy
will, yet Amadine.

Ah Amadine, to hear of banishment is death,
I double death to me, but since I must depart, one thing I crave.

Say on with all my heart.

That in absence either far or near.
You honoor me as servant with your name.

Not so.

And why?

I honour thee as sovereign with my heart.

A shepherd and a sovereign nothing like.

Yet like enough where there is no dislike.

Yet great dislike or else no banishment.

Shepherd, it is only Segasto that procures thy banishment.

Unworthy wights are most in jealousy.

Would God they would freethe from banishment, or likewise bamish me.

Amen say I, to have your company.

Well shepherd, since thou suffer this for my sake, with thee in exile also
let me live.
On this condition shepherd thou can love.

No longer love no longer let me live.

O flat I loved one indeed, now love I none but only thee.

Thanks worthy princes I borne likewise,
Yet smother up the blast,
I dare not promise what I may perform,

Well shepherd, hark what I shall say,
I will return unto my Fathers court.
Therefore to provide me of such nescessaries,
As for our journey I shall think most fit,
This being done I will return to thee,
Do thou therefore appoint the place where we may meet.

Down in the valley where I slue the bear,
And there doth grow a ^aire broad branched beach,
That ouershades a well, so who comes first
Let them abid the happy meeting of us both.
How like you this?

I like i^ very well.

Now if you please you may appoint the time,

Full three hours hence God willing, I will return.

The thanks that paris gave the grecian queen the like doth Mucedorns yield.

Then Mucedorus forthreee hours farewell.

Your departure lady breeds a privy pain.

Tis well Segasto that thou h^st thy will,
Should such a shhephard, such a simple swain
As he, eclips thy credit ^amous through the court.
No ply Segasto ply; let it not in Arragon be saide^
A shepherd hath Segatoes honour won.

Wha^ hoe master will you come away;

Will you come hither I pray you, whats the matter?

Why, is it not past a leaven a clock.

How then sir.

I pray you com away to dinner:

I pray you come hither.

Here's such a do with you, will you never come.

I pray you sir what news of the message I sent you about,

I tell you all the mess^s be on the table already,
There wants not so much as a mess of mustard half an novver ago.

Come sir, your mind is all upon your belly.
You have forgotten what I did bid you do,

Faith I know nothing, but you bad me go to breakfast.

Was that all;

Faith I have forgotten it, the very sent of the meat made me hath forget it
quite.

You have forgotten the arrant I bid you do.

What arrant, an arrant knave, or arrant vvhore;

Why thou knave, did I not bid thee banish the shepherd.

O the shepherds bastard.

I tell thee the shepherds banishment.

I tel you the shepherds bastard shall be well kept i'll look to it my ^elfe
else, but I pray you come away to dinner.

Then you will not tell me whether you have banished him or no.

Why I cannot say banishment and you would give me a thousand pounds to say
so,

Why you whoreson slave, have you forgotten, that
I sent you, and another to drive away the shepherd.

What an ass are you^ heers a stir in dee^de here's message, arrant,
banishment, and I cannot tell what.

I pray you sir, shall I know whether you have drove him away.

Faith I think I have, and you will not believe me ask my stafe.

Why can thy staff tell.
Why he was with me to.

Then happy I that have obtained my will.

And happier I, if you would go to dinner.

Come sir, follow me.

I warrant you I will not loose an inch of you now you are going to dinner, I
promise you I thought seven year before I could get him away^

God grant my long delay procures no harm
Nor this my tarring frustrate my pretence,
My Mucedorus surly stays for me,
And thinks me over long, at length I come
My present promise to perform:
Ah what a thing is firm unfeigned love,
What is i^ which t^ue love dares not tempt
My fat^er he may make bu^ I must match,
Segasto l^ues b^t Amadine must like,
Whe^e likes he^ best c^mpulsion is a thrall,
No, no, the hearty choice is all in all,
The shepherds virtue Amadine esteems.
But what me thinks my shepherd is not come?
I muse at that, the hour is sure at hand,
Well here i'll rest till Mucedorus come.

A hapie pray, now Bremo feed on flesh,
Dainties Bremo dainties thy hungry paunch to fill,
Now glut thy greedy guts with luke warm blood,
Come fight with me, I long to see thee dead.

How can she fight that weapons cannot weeld?

What can not fight? then lie thou down and die.

What must I die?

W^at needs these words. I thirst to suck thy blood

Yet pity me and let me live a while.

No pity I, i'll feed upon thy flesh,
I'll tear thy body peecemeale joint from joint.

Ah now I want my shepherds company.

i'll crush thy bones betwixt tow oken trees.

Hast shepherd hast or else thou come to lat.

i'll suck the sweetness from thy marie bones.

Ah spare ah spare to shed my guiltless blood

With this my bat will I beat out thy brains
Down, down I say, prostrate thy self upon the ground

Then Mucedorus farevvel^ my hopedioi^s farewell.
Yea farewell life, and welcome present death,
To thee O God I yield my dying ghost.

Now Bremo play thy part,
How now what sudden chance is this.
My limbs do tremble and my s^evves shake
My vnvveakned arms have lost their former force:
Ah Bremo, Bremo, what a foil hast thou,
That yet at no time ever wast afraid
To dare the greatest gods to fi^ght with thee,
And now vva^tstrength for one down driving blow
Ah how my courage fails when I should strike,
Some new come spirit abiding in my breast,
Shall I spare her Bremo, spare her, do not kill,
Saith spare her which never spar^dany?
To it Bremo to it, say again.
I cannot weeld my weapons in my hand,
Me thi^kes I should not str^k so fair a one,
I think her beauty hath bewitched my sorce
Or else with in me altered natures course,
ay woman, wilt thou live in woods with me;

Fain would I live, yet loath to live in woods,

Thou shalt not choose, it shall be as I say the^efore follow me.

It was my will an hour a go and more,
As was my promise for to make return,
But other business hindered my pretence.
It is a world to s^e when man appoints,
And purposelie one ce^taine thing decrees
How many things may hinder his inten^.
What once would wish the same is farthest off:
But yet thappoynted time cannot be past,
Nor hath her pres^nce yet prevented we,
Well here i'll s^aie, and expect her coming.

Some one or oth^r is pursued no doubt
Perhaps some search for me, tis good to doubt the worst, there^ore i'll begone.


Hold him, hold him hold him, heers a stur in deed
Here came hew a^ter the crier, and I was set close
At mother Nips house, and there I called for three
Pots of ale, as tis the manner o^ us courtiers, now sir,
I had taken the maiden head of tow of them.
Now as I was lifting up the third to my mouth, there came hold him, hold him,
now I could not tell whom to catch hold on, but I am sure I caught one
perchance a may be in this pot, well i'll see, mas I cannot see him yet, well
i'll look a little ^urther, mas he is a little slave if a be here, why heers
no body, al this goes well yet: but if the old trot should come for her pot,
I marry there's the matter but I care not, i'll face her out, and cal her old
rusty dusty musty ^ustie crustkie firebran, and worse then al that, and so
face her out of her pot: but soft here she comes.


Come on you knawe wheres my pot you knave?

Go look your pot, come not to me for your pot twe^e good for you.

Thou lie thou knave thou hast my pot^

You lie and you say it, I your pot, I know what i'll say

Why what wilt thou say.

But say I have him and thou darste,

Why thou knave. thou hast not only my pot but my drink vnpaide for.

You lie like an old I will not say whore.

dost thou cal me whore, i'll cap thee my for pot.

Cap me thou dare, scarce me whether I have it or no.

How now sir, whats the matter;


Oh flies master flies.


Flies where are they?


Oh here master, all about your face.


Why thou lie I think thou art mad.


Why master, I have killed a duncart full at the least


Go to sir, leaving this idel talk give ear to me.


How, give you one of my ears? not you were ten masters.


Why sir I bid you give ear to my words,


I tell you I will no be made a curtal for no mans pleasure


I tell thee attend what I say go thy ways straight and rear the whole
town.


How rear the town even go your self, it is more then I can do, why do
you think I can rear a town, that can scarce rear a pot of ale to my head?
I should rear a town should I not;


Go to the cunstable and make a privy search, for the shepherd is run away
with the Kings daughter.


How? is the shepherd run away with the kin^s daughter. or is the kings
daughter run away with the shepherd.


I cannot tell, but they are both gon together


What a fool is she to run away with the shepherd, why I think I am a
little hansomer man then the shepherd my self, but tel me master, must I make
a privy search, or search in the privy;


why dost thou think they will be there;


I cannot tell.


Well then search every where. leave no place unsearched for them.


Oh now am I in office, vow will I to that old firbrads house will not leave one
place unsearched, nay i'll to her ale stand drink as long as I can stand, when I
have done i'll let out al the rest, to se if he be not hid in the barrel, I find
him not there, i'll to the cubord, i'll not leave one corner of her house
unsearched, ye faith ye old crust I will be with you now.


Now Mucedorns whither wilt thou go,
Home to thy father to thy native soil,
Or try some long abode within these woods;
Well I will hence depart and hie me home,
What hie me home said I? that may not be.
In Amadine rests my felicity
Then Mucedorus do as thou did decree,
Attire thee hermit like, within these grouees,
Walk often to the be^ch and view the well.
Make settles th^re and seat thy s^lfe thereon,
And when thou feel thy self to be a thrist,
Then drink a hearty draught to Amadine,
No doubt she thinks on thee,
And will one day com^ pleg thee at this we^l^
Come habit thou art fit fo^ me,
No shepherd now, a hermit I must be:
Me thinks this fits me very wel^,
Now must I learn to bear a walking staff,
And exercise some gravity with^ll.

Heers throw the woods, and throw the woods, to look out a shepherd a stray
kings daugter, but ^o^te who have we here, what art thou?


I am an hermit.


An^emmet, I never saw such big emmet in all my life before.


I tel you sir I am an hermit, one that leads a solitary life within these
woods.


O I know the now, thou art her that eats up al the hips and hawes, we could
not have one piece of fat bacon for thee al this year.


Thou dost mistake me, but I pray thee tell me what dost thou seek in these
wood?


What do I seek, for a stray Kings daughter run away with a shepherd:


A stray Kings daught^r run away with a sh^pheaarde. Wherefore can thou
tell?


Yes that I can, tis this, my master and Amadins walking one day abrod, nearer
to these woods then they wet used, about what I can not tell, but toward
them comes running a great bear, now my master he plaide the man and run
away, Amadine crying after him: now sir comes me a shepherd strikes off the
b^ares head, now whether the bear where dead before or no I cannot tell for
bring twenty b^ars before me and bind their hands feet and i'll kill them al:
now euer^ince Amadine hath bin in love with the sheph^ard, and for good will
she's even run away with the shepherd.


What manner of man was a, can describe him unto me;


Scrib h^m aye I war^ant you that I can, a was a litt^l, low, broad, tall,
narrow, big well favoured fe^low, a ie^kin of whit cloth, and buttons of the
same cloth


Thou discr^b^st him well, but if I chance to se any such pray you where sh^l I
find you, or whats your name


My name is called master mouse,


Oh m^ister mouse, I pray you what of^ice might you ^e^r^ in the ^ourt?


M^rry sir I am a ^usher of the stable.


O usher of the table-


Nay I say rusher and i'll prove mine office good, ^or look sir when any coms
f^om under ^he s^a or so, and a dog chance to blow his nose backward, then
with a whip I give him the good time of the day, and straw rushes presently,
therefore I am a rusher, a hie off^ce I promise ye.


But where shall I find you in the Court^?


Why where it is best being, ei^her in he ^itching a eating or in the buttery
drinking: but i^ you come I will provide for th^e a pe^ce of beef brew is
knockle d^epe in ^at, pray you take pains remember master mouse.


Ay sir, I warrant I will not forget you.
Ah Amadine, what should become of the.
whither should thou go so long unknown.
with watch and ward each passage is beset,
So that she cannot long escape unknown:
Doubtless she hath lost her ^elfe within these woods out
And wandering too and fro she seeks the well,
Which yet she cannot find, therefore will I seck he^s,

Amadine, how like you Br^mo his vvoodes?

As like the woods of Bremoes cruelty,
Though I were dombe and could not ansvver him,
The beasts themselves would with relenting tears
Bewail thy savage and unhumane deeds.

My love, why dost thou murmur to thy self?
Speak louder, for thy Bremo hears thee not.

My Bremo, no the shepherd is my love.

Have I not saved thee from sudden death,
Giving thee leave to live that thou might love?
And dost thou whet me on to cruelty;
Come kiss me swe^e for all my favours past.

I may not Bremo and therefore pardon me.

See how she flings away from me;
I will follow and give a rend to her,
Deny my love, ah worm of beauty
I will chastise the^ com, com, prepare thy head upon the block

Oh spare me Bremo love should limit life,
Not to be made a murderer of him self
If thou wilt glut thy loving heart with blood,
Encounter with the lion or the bear,
And a like wolf pray not upon a lamb.

Why then dost thou repine at me?
If thou wilt love me thou shalt be my que^ne,
I will crown thee with a complete made of Ivory,
And make the rose and lilly wait on thee,
I'll ^end the burley branches from the oak,
To shadow thee from buring sun.
The trees shall spread themselves where thou dost go,
And as they spread, i'll trace along with thee,

You may, for who but you?

Thou shalt be ^ed with quails and partridges
With black birds, larks, thrushes and nightingales.
Thy d^inke shall be goats milk and crystal water,
Distilled from the fountains the clearest springs.
And all the dainties that the woods afford.
I'll fre^ly give thee to obtain thy love.

You may, for who but you?

The day i'll spend to recreate my love,
With all the plea^u^es that I can devise,
An^ ^hy bedfellow,
An ^ thee in mine arms.

^, ^o may not you.

The satyrs the woodnimphs shall attend on the
And lull thee a sleep with musickes sound,
And in the morning when thou dost awake
The lark shall sing good morn to my queen,
And whilst he singes i'll kiss my Amadine.

You may, for who but you.

When thou art up, the wood lanes shall be strawed
With violets, cowslips and sweet marigolds.
For thee to trampel and to trace upon,
And I will teach thee how to kill the dear,
To chase the hart and how to rouse the roe^
If thou wilt live to love and honour me.

You may for who but you?

Welcomed sir, an howre ago I looked for such a gest
Be merry wench, we'll have a frollike feast,
Here's flesh enough for to suffice us both,
Stay sir, wilt thou fight or dost thou yeel to die?

I want a weapon, how can I fight?

Thou wants a weapon, why then thou yeelst to die.

I say not so, I do not yield to die.

Thou shalt not choose, I long to see thee dead

Yet ^pare him Bremo spare him

A way, I say, I will not spare him.

Yet give me leave to speak.

Thou shalt not speak.

Yet give him leave to speak for my sake.

Speak on, but be not over long.

In time of yore when men like brutish beasts^
Did lead their lives in loathsome c^lles and woods
And wholly gave them selves to wi^lesse will,
A rude unruly rout, then man to man became
A present pray, then might prevailed,
The weakst went to walls,
Right was unknown, for wrong was all in all^
As men thus lived in his great outrage,
Behold one Orpheus came as poets tell,
And them `from rudeness unto reason brought,
Who led by reasonson some forsook the woods,
Instead of ca^es ^hey built them castles strong,
Cities and towns were founded by ^hem then,
Glad wrethey, they found such ease,
And in the end they grew to perfect amity
Weighing their former wickedness,
They termed the time wherein they lived then
A golden age, a goodly golden age.
Now Bremo, for so I hear thee called.
If men which lived tofo^e as thou dost now,
Wily in wood, addicted al^ to spoil,
Returned were by worthy Orpheus means,
Let me like Orpheus cause thee to return
From murder, bloodshed and like cru^ltie,
What should we fight be^or we have a cause
No, lets live and love together faithfully.
I'll fight for thee.

Fight form or die, or fight or else thou die.

hold Bremo hold,

Away I say, thou trouble me,

You promised me to make me your queenne.

I did, I mean no less.

You promised that I should have my will,

I did I mean no less.

Then save this hermits life, for he may save us both:

A thy request i'll spare him, but never any after him
Say hermit what can thou do?

I'll wait on thee, sometime upon the queen, such sreuice shalt thou shortly
have as Bremo never had.


Come sirs what shall I never have you find out Amadine and the shepherd)

And I have bin through the woods, and through the woods, and could see nothing
but an emet.

Why I see thousand emets, thou meanest a little one,

Nay that emet that I saw was bigger then thou art

Bigger then I what a fool have you to your man, I pray you master turn him
away?

But dost thou hea^e, was he ^ot a man.

think he was, for he said he did lead a saltseller life about the woods.

Th^n would say a solitary li^e about the woods

I think it was so indeed^

I thought what a fool thou art.

Thou art a wise man, why he did nothing but sleep since he went

But tell me Mouse, how did he go;

In a whit gown and a whit hat on his head, and a staff in his hand.

I thought so, it was a he^mit that walked a solita^ie life in the woods.

Well, get you to dinner, and after never leave seeking till you bring some
news of them, or i'll hang you both.

How now Rombelo, what shall we do now;

Faith i'll home to dinner, and afterward to sleep^

Why then thou wilt be hanged.

Faith ^ care not, for I know I shall never f^nd them well i'll once more abroad,
if I cannot find them, i'll never come home again.

I tel thee what Rombelo, thou shal^ go in at one end of the wood and I at the
other, and we will meet both together at the midst.

Content, lets away to dinner^

Unknown to any here within these woods
With bloody Bremo do I lead my life,
The monster he doth murder all he meets,
He spares none and none doth him escape,
Who would continue, who but only I
In such a cruel cutthroates company.
Yet Amadine is there how can I choose:
Ah silly soul how often times she sits
And sighs, and calls come shepherd come,
Sweet Mucedorus, come and set me free,
When Mucedorus pesent stands hereby:
But here she comes, what news fair Lady as you vvalke. these woods.

Ah hermit, none but bad such as thou knovvest.

How do you like your Bremo and his woods;

Not my Bremo nor his Bremo woods;

And why, not yours, me thinks he loves you well

I like him not, his love to me is nothing vvroth

Lady, in this methinkes you offer wrong,
To hate the man that ever loves you best.

Ah hermit, I take no, pleasure in his love.
Neither yet doth Bremo like me best.

pardon my boldness fai^e lady, since we both
May safely talk now out of Bremos sight,
Vnfould to me if so you please, the full discourse
How, when and why you came into these woods,
And fell into this blodie burchers hands.

Hermit I will, of late a worthy shepherd I did love you.

A shepherd lady, sure a man unfit to match with

Hermit this is true, and when we had.

Stay there, the wild men comes
Refer the rest until another time.
What secret tale is this, what vvhispering have vvee here;
Villain I charge the tell thy tale again,

I needs I must, lo here it is again,
When as we both had lost the sight of thee
It greeud us both, but specially thy queen,
Who in thy absence ever fears the worst,
Least some misehance befall your royrll grace.
Shall my sweet ^ Bremo wander through the woods.
To^le to and fro for to redress my want,
Hazard his life and all to cherish me,
I like not this quoth she
And thereupon craude to know of me
If I could teach her handle weapons well.
My aunswe^h was I had small skill therein,
But gladmost mighty king to learn of thee.
And this was all.

Whast so, none can dislike of this^
I'll teach you both to fight, but first my queen begin,
Here take this weapon, se^ how thou can use it.

This is to big, I cannot weeld it in my arm.

Is't so, we'll have a knotty crabtree st^ffe for thee:
But sir tell me, what say thou^

With all my heart I willing am to learn.

Then take my stafe see how can weeld it.

First teach me how to hold it in my hand.

Thou houldest it well, look how he doth thou may the sooner learn.

Next tell me how and when tis best to strike.

Tis best to strike when time doth ^erue, tis best to loose no time.

Then now or never is my time to st^ike.

And when thou strike, be sure thou hit the head

The head;

The very head.

Then have at thine, so lie there and die,
A death no dout acording to desert.
Or else a vvorse as thou deserve a vvo^se.

It glads my heart this tyrants death to see.

Now lady it remains in you to end the tale you lately had begun, being
enterrupted by this wicked wight.
You said you loved a shepherd.

I so I do^, and none but only him.
And will do still as long as life shall last

But tell me lady, si^h I set you free,
What course of life do you intend to take?

I will disguised wander through the world
Till I have found h^m out,

How i^ you find your shepha^d in these woods^

Ah none so happy then as Amadine^

In tract of time a man may alter much,
Say Lady do you know your shepherd well?

My Mucedorus hath he set me fre^?

he hath set thee free.

And lived so long unknown to Amadine.

Ay that's a question where of you may not be resolved,
You know that I am banished from the court,
I know likewise each pas^age is be^et,
So that we cannot long escape unknown,
Therefore my will is this, that we return
Right throught the thickets to the wild mans cave:
And there a while live on his provision,
Until the search and n^rrow watch be past.
This is my counsel, and I think it best.

I think the very same.

Come lets begone.

Nay soft sir are you heere^ abots on you,
I was like to be hang^d for not finding you,
We would borrow a certain stray kings daughter of you, a wench, a wence sir
we wo^ld have.

A wench o^ me i'll make the eat my sword.

Oh Lord, nay and you are so lusty I'll cal a cooling card for you, ho master,
master come away quickly.

Whats the matter;

Look master, Amadine the shepherd, oh brave

What minion, have I found you out;

Nay that's ally, I found her out my slfe.

Thou gadding huswife, what cause had thou to gad abroad,
When as thou know our wedding day so nie?

Not so Segasto, no such thing in hand, show your assurance, then i'll answer
you.

Thy fathers promise my assurance is.

But what he promised he hath not performde^

It rests in thee for to perform the same:

No^ I.

And why;

So is my will and therefore even so.

Master with anon, none no.

A wicked villant art thou here?

What needs these words we way them not?

We way them not proud shepherd, I scorn thy company.

We'll not have a corner of thy company.

I scorn not thee, nor yet the least of thine.

That's a lie, a would have killed me with his pugs nondo.

This stoutness Amadine contents me not.

Then seek an other that may you better please

Well Amadine, it only rests in thee
Without delay to make thy choice of three,
There stands Segasto, here a shepherd stands,
There stands the third, now make thy choice,

A Lord at th^ least I am.

My choice is made, for I will none but thee.

A worthy mate no doubt for such a wife.

And Am^dine, why wilt thou none but m^?
I cannot keep thee as thy father did,
I have no lands fo^ to maintain thy state.
Mor^ouer if thou mean to be my wife,
Commonly this must be thy use,
To bed at midnight, up at four,
Drudge all day and ^rudge from place to place,
Whereby our da^li^ vittel for to win:
And last of all which is the worst of all,
No princes then but plain a shepherds wife.

Then god ge you god morrow goo^y shepherd

It shall not need if Amadine do live,
Thou shalt be crowned king of Arragon,

Oh master laugh, when hes King then i'll be a queen.

Then know that which ne'er tofore was known
I am no shepherd, no Arragonian I,
But borne of Royal blood, my fathers of Valentia
King, my mother q^eene, who for thy secret sake
Took this hard ^ask in hand.

Ah how I joy my fortune is so good,

Well now I see, Segasto shall not ^peede
But Mucedorus, I as much do joy
To see thee here within our Court of Arragon,
As if a kingdom had befallen me this time,
I with my heart surrender it to thee.
And look what right to Amadine I have.

What barnes door and borne where my father
Was cunstable^ abots on thee, how dost thee.

Thanks Segasto, but yet you leveled at the crowne^

M^ister bear this and bear all.

Why so sir.

He sees sees you take a goose by the crown.

Go to sir, away, post you to the king,
Whose har^ is fraught with careful doubts,
Glad him up and tell him these good news,
And we will follow as fast as we may.

I go master, I run master.

Break heart and end my paled woes,
My amadine the comfort of my life,
How can I joy except she were in sight.
Her absence breeds sorrow to my soul
And with a thunder breaks my heart in twain.

Forbear thos^ passions gentle King,
And you shall see twill turn unto the best,
And bring your soul to quiet and to joy.

Such joy as death, I do assure me that,
And nought but death, unless of her I hear,
And that with speed, I cannot sigh thus long
But what a tumult do I hear within.

I hear a noise of ouer-passing joy
Within the court, my Lord be of good comfort.
And here comes one in hast,

A King, a King, a King.

Why how now sir, whats the matter?

O tis news for a king'tis worth money.

Why sir, thou shalt have silver and gold if it be good.

O tis good, tis good, Amadine.

Oh what of her, tell me? I well make thee a knight

How a spirit? no by lady, I will not be aspirit^
Masters get ye away, if I be aspir^it, I shall be so lean
I shall make you all afraid.

Thou so^, the King means to make thee a ge^tleman.

Why I shall want parrell.

Thou shalt want for nothing.

Then stand away, trick up thy self, here they come.

My gracious father pardon thy disloyal daughter

What do mine eyes be hold my daughter Amadine
Rise up dere daughter let these my embracing arms
Show some token of thy father joy,
Which ever since thy departure hath la^guished in sorrow:

Dear father, never were your sorrows
Greater then my griefs,
Never you so deloate as I comfortless,
Yet nevertheless acknowledging my self
To be the cause of both, on bended knees
I humbly c^aue your pardon.

i'll pardon thee dear daughter^ but as for him.

Ah father what of him,

Assure as I am a king, and wear the crown,
I will revenge on that accursed wretch.

Ye^ worthy prince work not thy will in wrath show favour.

I, such favour as thou deserve.

I do deserve the daughter of a king.

Oh impudent, a shepherd and so insolent.

No shepherd I, but a worthy prince.

In far conceit, not princely borne.

Yes princely borne my father is a king.
My mother Queen, and of Valentia both.

What Mucedorns, welcome to our court,
What cause had thou to come to me disguised?

No cause to fear, I caused no offence,
But this desiring thy daughters virtues for to see
Disguised my self from out my fathers court,
Unknown to any in secret I did rest,
And passed many troubles near to death,
So hath your daughter my partaker bin,
As you shall know hereafter more at large,
Desiring you, you will give her to me,
Even as mine own and sovereign of my life
Then shall I think my travels are well spent.

With all my heart: but this.
Segasto claims my promise made to fore,
That he should have her as his only wife,
Before my counsel when we came from war
Segasto, may I crave thee let it pass.
And give Amadine as wife to Mucedorus;

With all my heart, were it far a greater thing,
And what ^ may to furnish up there rites,
With pleasing sports and pastimes you shall see.

Thanks good Segasto, I will think of this.

Thanks good my Lord, while I live
Account of me in what I can or may.

And good Segasto these great cur^esies
Shall not be forgot.

Why ha^ke you master, bones what have you done?
What given away the wench you made me take such pains for, you are wise
indeed, mas and I had known of that I would have had her my self. faith
master now we may go to breakfast with a woodcoke pie.

Go sir you were best leave this knauerie^

Come on my Lords, lets now to court
Where we may finish up the joyfullest day
That ever hapt to a distressed King,
With mirth and joy and great solemnity,
We'll finish up these hymens rights most pleasant lie,

Hoe Lords at the first, I am one to, but hear master King by your leave a
cast, now you have done with them, I pray you begin with me.

Why what would thou ^aue;

O ^ou forgot, now, a little apparel to makes
handsome what should Lo^des go so beggarly as I do^?

What I did promise thee, I will perform, attend^ on me, come le^s depart.
We'll wait on you with all our hearts.

And with a piece of my liver to.

How now Envy, what blush thou all ready,
Peep forth, hide not thy head with shame,
But with a courage praise a woman's deeds,
Thy threats were vain, thou could do me no hurt
Although thou seem to cross me with despite,
^ouerwhel^de, and turned upside down thy block
And made thy self to stumble at the same.

Though stumbled yet not overthrown,
Thou can not draw my heart to mi^denesse,
Yet must I needs confess thou hast don well,
And plaide thy part with merth and pleasant glee:
Say all this, yet can thou not conquer me,
Although this time thou hast got yet not the conquest neither.
A double revenge another time i'll have:

Then cai^ife cu^sed, stoop upon thy knee,
Yield to a woman, though not to me,
And pray we both together with our hearts,
That she thrice Nestors years may with us rest,
And from her foes high God defend her sti^l.
That they against her m^y never wooke thi^ will.

En^e were he never so stout
Would beck and bow unto her majesty,
^ndeede Comedy thou hast overrun me now.
And fo^st me stoop unto a woman's sway.
God grant her grace amongst us long may reign,
And those that would not h^ue it so,
Would that by envy soon their hea^tes they migh^ forgo.

The Counsel, Noble, and this Realm,
Lord guide it still with thy most holy hand,
The Commons and the subjects grant them grace^
Their prince to serve, her to obey, ^reason to deface:
Long may she rain, in joy and great felicity,
Each Christian heart do say amen with me,


