VAcation still: so little custom comes
To buy our Merchandise, and fill our rooms,
It would persuade us but for after hope
Of better takings quite to shut up shop.
But what's the reason? have we no goodware?
Or do the sights and motions in the fair
Please better with their cheap rates? 'tis not fit
That we should set so low a prize on wit.
For what we shall present you with to day
The Bride, we wish you not t'expect a play,
Wherein a nesslecock, or youth of the town
(Borne to more state then wit)'s a gallant grown:
When one amongst you laughing at the elf
And at his gullery, thinks upon himself.
Perhaps there will be some concluding that
A person or a place is pointed at;
Such make that satire which the pure intent
Of the author meant but harmless merriment;
Who only labours here in what he can
T'expresse a Citizen a Gentleman.
Mark well the weaving and the dressing, the^
Liking the stuff we hope you'll come again.

I Say, no more of this,
I'll have no brow contracted into wrinkles
Upon my wedding day: A day of mirth;
And thou stand like a mellancholick figure
Of weeping penitence, when joy should dress
Thy cheeks in dimples; it is prodigious
That thou should only
Wear mourning at my nuptials, that have fostered
Thee from an Infant; bred thee to a man;
Ranckt thee with Gentlemen, and made thee thought
To be what thou appear'st; and thou to grieve
For what I count my happiness!

Pray sir construe it
The expression of my duty. To your love
Were I possessed of many selves I ow them.
That love hath caused this passion out of fear^
Your reputation in the act will suffer
Rumour is apt to prey upon occasion:
And if the rude mouths of the multitude
Catch hold on a report, they'll multiply it;
And make it. grow to scandal. You an old man
Will marry a young woman.

Who calls me old! Dost thou? Now by my beard
(Is't not turned black again? I should be loath
To swear by a false coluor) I am young,
Like a new spring grown out of a barren winter.
In ave likewise strength and activenesse: look here else.
B^shrew't, the floor's uneven: would 'twere mended
Ple have my corns cut too. Child we must dance
Always at weddings. Am I again a Bridegroom!
And shall I not be lusty?

Pray Sir, do not
Flatter your weakness, and decay of strength.
Your age begins to grow to a disease:
And can you then express such youthful appetite
Without being censured?

Pray no more diswasion
Besides my will there is a reason for it:
And thou hast cause to joy, She brings a portion
Will be a large addition to thy state,
Which I but live t'encrease. I have no heir
Save thee? nor will get any: shalt have all.

Your welfare sir to me
Is an inheritance 'bove any state
Fortune can bless me with. Which to preserve
My knees should grow fast to some hallowed pavement,
Till mine own dissolution, and no thoughts
Busy my mind but prayers. Sir consider
The difference 'twixt your disabilite,
And her so hopeful fruitfullnesse. To increase
And propagate was the best end of marriage.
T^en if the means be wanting, the end cannot
Be perfected: and some in scruple stick not
To call it sin.

More urging! when I am dead
Thou shalt have her too. Ha! dost startle at it?

Why that would make even your ashes infamous.
And tempt the idle gazers on it to scratch
Libells upon your Marble. 'Twould be construed
That she in youthful heat longing for what
Your cold defects denied her, had enjoyd me
To lustful satisfaction, when she should
Have warmed your bed, and after married me
To prevent farther rumour. Nay sir more.
Hath she not settled her desire already
Upon some one of more proportioned years?
'Twere rare if such a beauty of that growth,
Should have her maiden thoughts untouched with the appetite
Of what instinct doth teach, though she were barred
Even all converse, so much as not to know
The difference of a sex.

A causles jelousy
She's noted to have more perfections
Lodged in her rich mind, then the outward structure
Though beautiful doth promise: she inherits
Her Parents virtues, and her education
Hath been their only care. I know she's free
From the lest thought may stain her purity.
Therefore no more.

Is my Bride yet come Cousin?


Not yet sir. Mounsieur Kickshaw the French Cook's come to prepare dinner.


He's welcome; let me see him
I'll have the feast seasoned with all variety
Of choice delights.

To me they will not relish;
But like those pills which an unwilling patient
Doubting their virtue takes, and turns the medicine
Into a worse disease.

Mounsieur you are welcome.

Me tank you Mounsieur.

I presume you'll show your best cunning.

Me make you de French dish; de pulpatone; de frigasie; de gran Kickeshaw an de
kickeshaw royal; de macarrone: and two tree dozen ting more for your wedding.


Pray Cousin take him first into the cellar.

Remerce Mounsieur. Me drink two tree cup a your Claret a your vite vine sall
make a me lusty.


I shall thankfully consider your pains.

Mounsieur ven a me vark is done, you give a me leave to dance two tree four
dance, an kiss a devench two tree four time. Oh de French man love a de fine
vench vary well. You be de old man Mounsieur, and you love a de young vench: me
make your de dish sall get sis Child.


Too many on conscience.

If de Madame love me, me get twenty.

To your business good Mounsieur.

Dat be good business, better den go to my vark.

Observe you sir this fellow! one that ought
To be kicked into manners how he taunts you?
'Twill be the streets discourse, the conduits lecture:
And not an idle tongue but will abuse.
Your reverend name, which hitherto hath awed
The unbridled rabble.

Once more I command thee
Leave off this counsel, growing but from fear,
That will admit no reason. Cousin Raven
Hasten my Bride: she makes my patience tyre
With so much expectation. And hark you cousin.

My sun of joy's ecclipst, and all the hopes
My fancy painted, by this accident
Are blotted out. How have I merited
Of heaven thus to be punished! But I must not
Tax providence with an injustice to me,
That have deserved worse curses for neglect
Of my religious duties. Only he,
My foster Father to possess those sweets
Love promised my inheritance! Were it another,
I'd from his rude hands snatch her in the Church,
Before the powerful words should knit that knot
Nothing but death dissolves.

Senior Maligo a most welcome guest.

Your Servant Senior.

And Mr. Rhenish.

The Spanish and Dutch Merchants! send there be no wars at the wedding.


We come to witness your solemnityes.

Welcome Mr. Rhenish: and since you are come so early lets spend the time in
conference about the wines we lately spake of.


Cousin you're sad. Would I might know the reason,
I'll help to put it from you.

Cousin Raven,
Since love, not blood, hath made you wear that title,
Though 'tis a secret I would gladly hide,
To you I will impart it. Sent with gifts
To the fair maid that this day must be Bride
To the old man, my treacherous eyes conveyed
Flames to my heart from hers: which being fixed
Upon me, shot their magic influence
Of love with such a violence, that I took
The impression e're my bosom was prepared
And tempered for it.

This may be a ground
For me to work on.

Duty now and honesty
Fought with my passions, and enforced them back
To their unwilling prison: though her eye,
Look, gesture; and at parting when I took
Her hand to kiss it: then she held mine hard:
For all these invitations to their liberty
I durst not free them; but concealed even that
Perhaps she wished to know.

How can you doubt it?
They were all signalls that you should assault,
And she would yield 'Tis but a modest custom
For men to woo. 'Tis women's only pride
To have men court them, not to be denied.
Indeed it was your fault.

My virtue rather.
Should I like the ungrateful serpent, sting
The bosom that hath warmed me into life?
Desire shall burst me first. Yet I must tell you,
I am resolved to give my passions
This satisfaction. When the bridal ceremonies
Have had their consummation, I will travail
And leave the cause behind. You may reveal it
When I am gone. I shall be praised or pitied,
For none can blame me.

None! Yes all that hear it.
Who will not tax your indiscretion,
And want of knowing what belongs to man,
That will deny your self that right, perhaps
None but your self can challenge. we are warranted
To be indulgent to our selves so far
As work our own contents by any means
Conscience or law calls just. Then if the time
Prevent it not, try your success: be sudden:
Steal her away and marry her.

Tempt me not
Out o^ my passion into one more dangerous.
'Twere but a just correction if I killed thee;
That would instruct me to an act of error,
Repentance could scarce win a pardon for.

My counsail's worth a better fee. Perhaps
You fear some treachery in me. Clear your understanding,
I'll prove you ought to do it, and I to aid you.
You are his foster son, and I his kinsman.
You he intends his heir, and yet he must not
Neglect me altogether. When they are married
Sshe'l find one to get Children.

Thou art base
In thy suspect of her; and but for peace
(To which this day ought to be consecrate)
It should be punish't.

You're too violent.
Be calm, and understand demonstrative reason,
Children being borne, then are you disinherited.
When marrying her there's an estate will follow
Worth thousands: For she is the only child
Her parents ever had.

And why should you
Advise to this, and aid it?

What more police.
Could I be guilty of? When his displeasure
Hath cast you of (for that way sure he will punish
The injury) stand not I fair to be
Possessed of what you loose, the old mans favour?
Were you the only object of my hate,
The good I'do my self would make the act
Show of sufficient malice: but my love
Guiding me to it --

'Tis well I am prevented;
My rashness else had executed justice
Upon thy guilt. Forbear to tempt me farther.
Thy friendship's but the shadow of a true one
Dare urge such counsel, goodness cannot choose but blush at.

Howsoever you receive it
I will attempt it. I'll prepare the Bride
With this discovery: if she hath desires
She'll some way give them liberty. The old man
I then will pre^ossesse with jelousy;
And so indeere me to him, that my ends
Stand always fair in their opinions.
A cunning villain must pretend to save.
When most of all he doth intend a grave

I like the rates: may the wines please as well
I'll not repent my bargain.

Trust me sir you have the best sack of Spain.

And Rhenish the swan hath none better: yet there's that will make the crookedst
horner in the lane speak latin with the Bedle of Vintiners hall.


Mr. Justice Ferret,
This was a large expression of your love
To come over the water:

'Twas my wives desire.

Kind Mistress Ferret.

Sir, the respects I bear you, and the obedience I owe my husband that
commanded it, brought me over willingly to offer my service to so noble a
friend.


Your courtesies overcome me.

A rot on the best linings of your three piled durable; your everlasting
almanac of high days, feasts and sessions: was it my desire? Thou lie thou
wrong side of a lawyer turned outwards: I had better business at home. I could
have seen if mother Whirl had spun the last pound of flax I sent her, or called
at Knocks the weavers for my new Napkins. I have no maids to cudgel their
tasks out of. Indeed I can hardly keep any for such a goat as thou art.


Are ye offended with your husband Mrs. Ferret?

Obedience forbid it; my head: or if I may use the honourable phrase here
without offence, my cap of maintenance.


No no sir; she was but excusing a few faults.

How sir lubber, must the world take notice by you that I have faults or
modesty to excuse them? I'll make thee complain a month of the fairies for
this: the fairies of my nails I mean; and pretend pinching for pissing in thy
shoes, or such night uncleanesse.


Sweet wife forbear a little. Thou wilt vex away thy eating stomach, and here
will be excellent cheer.


So, so: I thought a City seast with a Ram-mutton pasty, and a twelve nookt
custard, made with carryers eggs and the out scrapings of i^inglas, must tempt
you to the charge of six pence over, and six pence back again. Which with an
addition of Clerks fees shared, and some garrisoned westphalian neates tongue
or red deer pie out of my Chamber cupbord, might have been an entertainment for
the Masters of the Parish in your own dining room; and all have been paid for
too with the return of half emptied botles.


Your wife Mr. Ferret hath called something to mind deserves a chiding.


Fie no sir: She is somewhat shrewish at home, but the best wife abroad --


Fie, sweet heart now you flatter. 'Tis virtue enough in us to be obedient and
dutiful: we should lay our selves under our husbands feet if they command it.
But i'll exalt my self or somewhat else above your head, you malkin of suburb
authority set up only to fright crows from the carrion of the common wealth,
that it may lie still and corrupt government. Your worship had best bind my
tongue to the peace, my nails should soon bail it.


My Bride come?
The welcom'st guest that ever blessed this roof.

Joy Crown ye both.

May your wish be prophetic.
But why is she so sad?

'Tis only custom.
Maids have their fears which by degrees must leave them.

May she make him a happy wife; and prove obedient from my example.


Salute my Bride son: she should be thy joy
As well as mine.

I better shall express
Her entertainment in my pious wishes,
Then any complement I will be ready
To pay you my best duty.

Love you mean sir;
Give it no other name, might I own that
And call it my possession, soon this melancholy
Should leave it's mansion, and a Brides full joy
Inhabit here. You surely do repine;
And it may be this act begets your fear
Of being dispossessed a fathers love.
Which he must now in some proportion
Confer on me.

Let me with reverence swear
By this white hand --

Let me prevent your oath;
Or swear by another book. Perhaps 'twill be
The last warm kiss my lips shall ever feel.
I do believe you love me.

How shall I
Interpret this? how hard she clasped my hand,
And pressed my lips? as wishing their conjunction
Might be eternal. Tears with her last words fell:
And in their filent oratory taught me
To know my self more wretched by the knowledge
Of what should make me happy.

Can this be?

It hath both possibility and circumstance
To make it probable. Good ^ir observe
Their discontents: how they do sympathize,
And meet each other. Pray sir let them have
An opportunity; I'll be the spy:
And cal you to their billing.

'Tis well counsail'd
If 'tplease you Gentlemen I have within
Some rarities, whose fight shall be your business
'Till we are ready. Sweet you shall forbear them
'Till you are made their Mistress.

Whether will you go?
Wast not my plot to get this liberty
That you might put your purpose into act
If you have any? Why do you delay it?
You see she's willing; I prepared her to it.

Willing to what good Cousin?

To be your Bride.

My blusnes speak consent: then if you please
Prevent prevention. My desires were never
Settled on any other, though I durst not
Reveal my passions awed by feminine custom,
And my strict parents eyes. If you'll receive me,
The desperate state of my cross fortune arms me
To any enterprise you'll be my guide in

I shall be tempted to neglect that duty
I would not rashly violate, to possess
All that my wi^h can covet.

You may hereafter
Discourse your loves. Play not away the occasion.
Her's the key of the back gate: take water presently, and away to the --
whispers -- I'll follow, get ye a Licence and see all dispacht. Fear not
pursuit: that I'll hinder.

So, the foundations laid on which I'll build

My self a fortune, and with better safety

Then making him away: Yet he must not marry her.

That were t'enable him if my villainy

Should be discovered to revenge and punish it.


The old man! aide me now hypocrisy, Or all miscarries. Oh sir I have searched
for you all the house over.


Hast observed any thing?

I left them here so close condoling. They are questionles stolen to some
private place. I'll sent them out, and bring you word.

I must absent my self for fear my joy

For this fair entrance doth discover me.


Father in expectation I have suddenly
Bethought me of a business.

Pray what is't?

You see I am old; unfit for such a Bride.
Suppose I make a resignation,
And give my right up to another man,
One that your daughter and your self should like of.
What if my son were Bridegroom? '^were a match
Would carry more proportion.

None more gladly,
So you'll confer upon him an estate
Answering her portion.

It shall be considered of.
We'll know their likings.

Will you not Marry her your self then after all these preparations? Why sir
the world takes notice of it, and it may concern your credit.


Your husband counsels well Mrs. Ferret.

I cannot in obedience but allow of his wisdom. Thou changeling nursed with the
milk of an ass whence thou derivest thy great empty noddle: must you hinder a
good motion? Are there not cuckolds enough already?


Wher's the Bride Cousin?

Vanished sir, not to be found. They are questionless run away together: the
water gate is fast locked, and the key without. You were doubtful sir, and
would hardly give credit to my relation.


How! stolen away together! what plots are these?

Yours sir, to undo the reputation
Of an old man.

Rather your own, t^ ruin
My only comfort.

Proceed you sir in your late motion and this difference will soon find a
reconciliation. Is not the Gentleman his only son.


No son of mine, but the most monstrous birth
Of base ingratitude that ever made
Charity frozen. I found him in the fields,
An Infant almost starved, and bred him up.
It seems for this.

Alas our child's undone.

Pursue the villain. If the extremity
Of Law can do it, I will hang him for it.

I should be glad of that.

If I can prove sir your least knowledge makes you
A party in it, your state or mine shall crack for it.

Do you sir threaten me in mine own house.?
My credit's more at stake, then that I should
Be calm: but once I give you privilege.

Comelets' to water: we perhaps may take them.

Yes at the Tower questionless.

Sir if I find them in my precinct.

What will you do? If thou dost the least wrong to the loving couple, though I
burn for it, I will roast thee alive and sell thy greasy kidneys for
kitchinstuffe.


A good proceeding hitherto.

No vench, no veding? Me bid you adieu Mounsieur; you no need a me varke.


Farewell Mounsieur. Reward him Cousin.

Here be revard: two, tree silver dish, and tree, four spoon make Mounsieur a
jentleman an buy define vench beyond de water. Me no stay for de reward.


Ha hah hah he.

Why laugh you sir? make you no more account of so great an injury?


They are gone: and now I'll tell ye gentlemen,
I knew the boy did love her, and I meant
He only should enjoy her; but pretended
My self would marry her, thereby to work
A greater portion out of her covetous Father;
And to insinuate my self into
A perfect knowledge of his true estate.
Now since h'hath played the wag, preventing me
Of mine own plot, you all shall in and witness
My act of love to him: I'll instantly
Confirm him my full heir, reserving something
For you my kinsman: whom I desire
Use your best diligence to find them out,
And bring them home, but coupled. And you gentlemen
Dispense with this days accident, your cheer
To morrow shall be doubled.

How is this?
My plot's prevented too; curse on the charm
That witcheth you to love him. Bring them home,
But coupled: sine employment. Yet 'tis well
You tell me your intent. My brain must work
Some more successful mischief that may hit.
No villain can prosper without wit.

Your deligence knaves, or I shall canvas your pole davyes, deafen not a
gallant with your anon anon fit, to make hi^ stop his cares at an
over-reckoning. Can a mansion purchased and paid for be converted into a house
of entertainment, and subsist without comings In and goings Out? Now sir what
say you?


The reconing sir for Mr. Serge the Mercer, and the Scriveners wife, that have
been these two hours in the yellow bed-Chamber.


And what had they?

A dish of collops and eggs, and wine.

Sixteen shillings! 'tis well.

But her husband had half a quire of paper and bastard by himself in the
Buls-head: which would hardly keep him employed below stayres; he was going up
to peep through the key hole.


Saucy Scrivener! peep through a key hole! should have had him by the cares.


His peeping through a hole cost them long since.

And this came freely!

He woundred sir it was no more.

Go carry the blades in the Lion a pottle of sack from me: their roaring must
be maintained out of my profit. They are good procurers; and help now and then
to stane of an over heated Citizen that pursues his game, too egerly. Though
my ho ly-day squires of the city bring me in most gain, my free Knights of the
suburbs, the erants of Lincoln-Inn fields, where their randevous makes the
gunpowder house terrible, and the smock tribute due to their order is daily and
nightly exacted: these I say are the best mainteiners of my profits occasion;
and Squirrel must venture cracking to maintain them whilst his sign and bush
lasts.


The Master of the house!

The poor owner of some goods and chattels; movables and immoveables, with a
small stock to drive a trade.


We would desire the use of a room.

You shall be accommodated.

We expect a frieind; 'till he comes this may serve.

What you please sir. A towel firrah quickly.

Thou seem sweet hart as if the had fears within thee.
We may securely now discourse our loves,
And weary time with words, 'till we are fit
To act our wishes.

The fullness of my joys
Happening so sudden ere I was prepared
To taste them with an appetite, hath bred
A surfeit in me.

Now you smell of flattery
I would not have you court what you possess
with any attribute above its merit.
If my being yours you count your happiness,
Let us be sudden to confirm our selves
Mutually happy, e're our parents rage
Can reach us to prevent it.

That word parents.
Makes me reflecton my ingratitude:
Being greater far then infamous records
Did ever punish; and like pleasant dreams
My joys are changed to nothing.

Sudden dumbs:
Whence are they? to my self I am not guilty
Of a behaviour that should merit this.
I prithee let me blush, and kiss away
The clouds hang on thy brow. No discontent
Should interpose where equal love hath mixed
Equal desires; and for the noble end
No base dependence. For could I but think
Thy soul did harbour any bastard thought
Which goodness might not father, I would back
To my disgrace; and confidently meet
My parents anger; all the affronts of rumour;
And what the rabble pleased rather then stay
To nurse it to a growth.

Then pray return;
But not to your disgrace; all shall be thrown
Upon my guilt. And though my love (unstain'd
With the least blemish of impure affection)
Gave the act allowance, I'll belie my self,
And say I did enforce you; which the law
May punish with my life. I'll give it up,
To end the affliction of my soul, divided
'Twixt love to you, and duty to that man
I have so wronged.

Can love admit such scruples?
Or is't thy coldness? I was too too credulous.
But the necessity denied more trial.
Here's a pretence indeed.

Can there be greater?
Ingratitude's a monster. Shall I then
Repay that man with injury, that gave
My almost starved life warmth, and made me breathe
Though to be miserable

Thou dost surely
Want the best part of man, and art not capable.
Of resolution. Such a coward spirit
Lodges not here. I now suspect thy worth,
And blame my rashness.

Why should I be taxed
With such defect? Know then I dare deserve you
By any enterprise that may be credible.
Invention cannot fancy an employment
I would not manage to confirm my love
Worthy your best opinion, only this
My conscience frights me from.

Why then farewell.
Passion will guide me some where, goodness guard me
From a despair; and whatsoever end
I am disposed for, I'll remember thee
Deny thy self good in denying me.

What's your wine sir?

Presently. Stay.

Your pleasure sir.

I mean not you.

I know your meaning sir.

Why should those pearls be wasted,
Till they enrich my funeral? Distraction
Hurries my thoughts, and hinders them from ord'ring
Any resolve. Have I proceeded hitherto?
And shall I now give back? The infamy
Sticks on my name already; and the stain
Thrown on it by the black mouthed multitude
For being in grateful, by bare satisfaction
Cannot be washed away. Her virtue likewise
will be suspected. I must therefore on
Since reason prompts me to it. Love shall excuse
The act, and my neglect of other dues.
Sweet I am now resolved.

Resolved! to what?

To consummate our wishes.

Now I think on it
'Tis better not. I find my flame abated:
My lov's not half so violent, I can stay,
And try you first.

How's this? why will you now
Change your intent that seemed so resolute?
'Twill make us be the subject of discourse,
And libelling ballads; every goships feast
Will make mirth from our shame.

No matter for it
I now begin t'examine what's in you
S^king An indifferent handsome fra^;
The superficies neatly varnished over.
In it should dwell a soul rich as the building
Doth promise to the eye; but I suspect it.
Thy actions suite not with a noble spirit.
Thy lov's but wanton passion, not the virtue
Should give it warrant. He that would be mine,
Must in his mind as well as outward shine.
Again farewell.

Stay: I have fooled my self
Into a maze of errors, and do want
My instructive part to guide me. All my faculties
Of soul are puzzled, and at every turning.
Do mate themselves with doubts. Why should you feign
This cruelty to kill me, when my joys
Were almost strengthened in the life you gave them,
So far as not to fear a new relapse?
Having corrected all the accidents
Of my diseased love, will you now desist
To make a perfect cure?

Medicines applied
To an unwilling or distrustful patient
Their working's hindered. You have ill received
The means; and what succedes, your self is guilty of;
No cruelty of mine.

Are you resolved then
To send me back to my first misery?
And anew make me wretched?

'Till confirmed
There's merit in you.

Is my want of that
Only suspected by you? Hear me first,
And then farewell. May I be cursed beyond
Recovery by my penitence; let heaven
Ne'er make me master of a wish that may
Include my least good, if I marry you --

How's this?

Until your parents free consent,
And the good liking of that injured man
Allow it public ceremony

Thou can not
Figure a more impossibility.
It must be never then. Call in thy vow;
The rashness will dispense wich't

That might give
A new occasion for your cruel wit
To tax me with new weakness. Know I can
Be man as well as lover; and am fixed
In my resolve, beyond the power of change
By any passion.

I have played too long
With the false shadow of my happiness,
And mocked away the substance. By my love
Zealous as ever kindled a chaste flame
I^ any maidens breast, I but dissembled
To try thy patience, and beget discourse.
I am so well confirmed in my opinion
Of thy desert, that should a thousand tongues
Swoln with detraction, break their tum'rou^ bags,
Venting from thence the most corrupted malice
That ever made man infamous to me
It should be flattering praise.

Did you dissemble?
Could she who through her eyes conveyed her heart,
And the assurance of her best desires
When other means were filenst; sh^e that taugh^
My equal passion to interpret looks,
Tears, smiles, and read in those dumb characters
Her soul, dissemble? or with any counterfeit
Disturb his joy that only from her truth
Derives it true possession? Jealousy
May then be warranted, since 'tis a virtue
Noble and masculine when justly grounded.
Was not your love dissembled? meant you not
To make a property of these proceedings
For some ends of your own? Dispose your self
A ^ur will guides you; 'twill but make my life
Somewhat more tedious wanting your society:
Besides whom I renounce all woman kind.

I man besides thee. Do not tempt thy fate
Too far beyond a reconciliation
With opportunity; as yet it serves.
If this day give thee not possession of me
Never expect it. I shall find a place
To keep out shame. In some chaste fellowship
I'll learn to pay religious vows to heaven.
And pray since here we cannot, we may be
Happy heareafter in eternity.

Dissolve not with those tears my passive heart
That weeps within me. They will almost tempt me
To worse then sacrilege. Anon we will
Consult and practice something.

By the description he makes of you a gentleman below enquires for you. I was
not curious to ask your name, but I know hi^.


My cousin Raven!

The same sir.

Pray direct him to us.

What's your wine sir?

When he comes.

This is sure some hide-bound student, that proportions his exp^nce by his
pension; and wencheth at Tottenham court for stewed prunes and cheescakes.
He's not ^quainted with the generous way, and I shall have the less scruple
to cousin him.


Be not so cloudy sweet; our sun of joy
May shine at full, and clear those dusky mists;
Obscure it for a season. Welcome Cousin
Unto our exp^ctation.

The wine ^oye.

Anon anon sir: by and by.

Cousin the news? how go matters?

The tempest's laid, but they are scattered by it.
Some to the Tower; to Pancrace others run.
Noise fills the rooms within, and in the street
The rabble is convented; where a jury
Of wide mouthed oyster wives, to whom the foreman
A one legged ballad singer opens tunably
The merry case, not only do acquit you,
But praise the act; and swear a ballad of i^
Would out sell all the libells ever yet
M. P. subscribed to.

'Tis an act indeed
Deserves reproach

Deserves a Chronicle
A legend of delight. Which when 'tis read
By the learned youth of Hogsden after supper,
Shall cause such laughter amongst the attentive family,
That cheap-side wives shall curse the noise, for souring
The market women's cream and buttermilke.

You're very pleasant Cousin. Some mans jelousy.
Would soon interpret it to be but scorn.
What you intend it --

Cousin it is my zeal
Makes me thus light and aerie; yet rather
Then my behaviour should give way unto
The least suspicion, I'll put on a shape
Of like dejectedness, as seems to cloth
Your melancholic Bride; But how 'twould show
'Th occasion makes it doubtful. If she'll weep
Upon her wedding day, let it not be
But that she apprehends the ensuing night
Brings on her joyful fears. Cousin lets drink
A health to the effect: a jolly boy
Will follow fear not.

Yet the cause is hi^dred.
Pray let your counsels in our danger be
Movers unto ^ore serious thoughts and actions.
Our peace is not yet settled; and we doubt
What the success may be which our proceedings
Are destined to.

Success! the best that time,
And the application of endeavours can
Crown your desires with. Yet I must confess
Your parents storm, and threaten death if law
By any trick can urge it. But the old man
Seems to forgive you; only his intent
Is to dispose his state some other way
Then leave the least part yours. Which to comply for
With any least submission I should rather
Banish my self his sight, and cancelling
All the obligations of indebted duty,
Scorn to be flattered into payment of it.
Cousin be ruled by me; confirm yourself
In this possession. You may find delights
Enjoying one another though restrained
A general liberty. Get into the Country
Remote enough, but where you may receive
Weekly intelligence and means from me;
Which I'll supply you with in a proportion
For moderate expense. As things grow ripe
I can inform you. As it hath been ever,
It shall be still my care to do you offices
(For mine own ends.)

You have my dearest cousin
Given large testimony of your love;
Requital must be studied. But for this
You have advised to, a quite different course
Is here resolved on, and my ^ow hath sealed it.
I ^st return to labour a consent
F^om those I have so wronged; which if denied me,
I never must enjoy, what I desire
Above my self.

Consent. 'twould soon ^e had,
If I prevent it not.
What noise is that?
Perhaps some that pursue you; hide your selves*
Her's an inner room.

So, so, this is right gentlemen; one for another. Yet she looks not like
carrion of Mr. Ravens leaving; I have seldom known him turn over any flesh to
another that hath not been sufficiently tainted.


This accident what ere it was hath gained me an opportunity. Squirell thou
must be intelligent and trusty. Hast observed?


Why is she a wench?

There's a question now to bring thy wit in question, and condemn thee for a
puny politic in the s^ock state. What blades are in the house?


Rashbe, Spil^n, Po^ard, and others.

And they made the noise?

Right sir.

Will they attempt?

Any thing for you sir. Shall it be an affront?

More, more: send them up; and apply thy self with cunning as thou expect
ever to thrive by the chostly sins of wenching.


I have known you Mr. Raven a bird of the flesh these many years, and if I
should not respect an old standard.


Away then to the execution.
Co^in our fears was causeless.

Had they been
Such as it spake them, we might well have staid
And yielded to them. We had only seemed
Compelled to what we fre^ (...) (...).

Have you business with any here sir?

I do not use to answer sir. Sweet Lady.

What fellow's this?

Fellow? one that will admit no fellow sir. Fellow! Fellow your self.


More! I suspect some rudeness. Pray Cofin call the Master of the house.


The Master of the house is the master of the house; but we will master both
him and you unless you deliver.


My purse?

Your she familiar sir; we would be familiar with her.

You a^e foul mouthed

How sir Citizen! do you think e're you are quite fledge in the nest, with the
shell of your cuckows eg^ upon your head to confront us? We are blades; and
blades must be scoured.


What mean you sir?

Your servant sweet Lady.

She is none of your pleasure Ladies, 'tis a wrong direction of your base
thoughts.


Base! Cit. thou deserve the cane: but this Ladies goodness commands thy
pardon.


You are mistaken sir, I have no skill
In the art of prostitution.

You shall be instructed Lady; 'tis the Blades profession.

Forbear your rudeness; if you must be wicked.
Let your temptations be directed where
The sin is grown to custom. Her chaste ears
Never received such sounds.

Come come, you must sweet Lady.

What sir?

A long with us: we are company indeed. Who would (...) Cit. (whose teeth are
rotten out with sweet meates his mother brings him from goshippings) breathe
upon her varnish for the promise of a dry neats tongue and a pottle of Rhenish
at the stillyard, when she may command a Blade to toss and tumble her? and (if
she should pawn a petticoat) beat such a fellow as this is till he hath
redeemed it.


Advantage may do much; but I would wish ye
Desist, and be more civil: 'tis not the odds else
Shall fright me from attempting to correct you.

Correct us! nay then along Lady.

Help me sweet heart, will ye use violence?

Ye cowards, against an unarmed man!

May not I pass?

Not through me sir, unless you were a Blade; the fraternity may claim some
privildege.


Then arm me Justice.

Hold, for heavens sake hold.

Thy life! I scorn it: 'tis too base to pay
A satisfaction; she must be redeemed
At a far higher rate.

My wishes issue
In all things yet. Are you much hurt sir?

A scratch or so. If the rest escape no better, I shall believe there is more
valour in some, then what's only shown at a Finsbury muster.


Your aid master Raven, or we shall have murder done. The young gentleman sir,
the young gentleman --


I hope so, if my plot succeeds.
This was an unlooked business thrust upon me.
But I must practise my hypocrisy
With best art; else suspicion may discover.
The guilt that's in me. Sure he's dead by this time,
Unless his skin be proof against their points.
If one of them should fall, and he escape
The rest I will suborn to make his life
The laws. Thus villainy like a pregnant mother
From the success of one begets another.

Hold hold; I am hurt.

I bleed too.

If my sword had had a point, I had paid him home.

I beseech you sir be pacified.

Sir if your house be a place privileged
For such abuses, it must be informed of,
That law may punish it. But for these shadows,
Mockshapes of valour; ^were it not for staining
My innocent hands, I would compel your souls
Black as they are to give me satisfaction
As ye expire them.

Prithee sweet no more;
Tis well the art safe.

We do acknowledge an error sir; and for satisfaction sir and to preserve
peace, our weapons shall be delivered up to the Master of the house.


Mischief upon their baseness; how are they
Declined from men! I hoped one desperate thrust
Or stroke e're this had sent him to his quiet,
And cut off farther labour to contrive it;
It racks my invention. Yet I cannot rise
To what I aim at but by his ruin.

We hope you'll do the like sir.

If I were confident of safety.
But you must give me leave being one that can
Command my self and passion. This with me
Serves as an instrument of peace, and may
Fright an intended mischief from me. Good sir
Retain their weapons as you'll answer it
At your own peril.

Surely Mr. Raven, you were mistaken; this is no wench.

Baffled and hurt! we may revenge it sir.

Ye properties of men, made up of rags
And outside only, shoot your threats at those
That fear the bubbles. Think not here to triumph
As over your easy gulls, that must redeem
Their safties from the danger of your furies,
By battering down with the engine of their purse
Some sconch your drunken valour in a tavern
Hath built with sack.

So sir.

Be gone, for fear you urge me
To more impatience: Yet my charity
Affords ye this good counsel. The world's full
Of brave imploiments for men capable.
Y'have persons, but want minds for actions
That might ennoble ye. Honour attends
On war; ye only call your selves by names
Of Captains and Lieftenants here where peace
Is most secure, but when your drunken quarrels
Disturb her. Go to th'warres, and save the City
The chargeable repairing of their prisons.

We'll think upon your satire.

Take the scabbard too. My belt I'll pawn ^or a scarf to hang my arm in, that
the not wearing of a sword may have pretence; 'till whose recovery I am
degraded from a Blade to a Battoone.


How lovely shows this valour? That in men
There should be so much difference.

Why so sad Coz? What think you on?

I was contriving mischief.

Mischief! against whom?

I shall betray my self.
A merry harmless mischief; whose relation
Shall make the Ice of melancholic spleens
Dissolve with laughter. 'Tis a pretty plot
Upon those roarers.

Pray impart it then.

There is a passage in it unperfect yet
How apt is guilt to be its own discoverer?
I almost had spoiled all.

I do begin weighing the circumstance
To be possessed
With a suspect of his sincerity.
He's surely treacherous; and perhaps occasioned
The late attempt upon me, so to have
Removed the bar he fears might shut him out
From an inheritance I never coveted.
I must not be too credulous. What's the reason
You are so cloudy Cousin? In your eyes
Me thinks I read sad thoughts; your merry mischief
Promised more lightsomnesse.

I cannot yet
Fancy a good conclusion; it hath passages
That would be get a neat one. Are you Cousin
Resolved on your return? or will you practise
As I advised?

Doth that concern your plot?

I mind no plots; my mind is only busy
To make you safe.

Safe! which way mean you Cousin?

Pray wrest it not. Suppose those baffled roarers
Should in revenge way-lay you: they are mischievous;
And if you should miscarry --

No great matter:
There were an end of misery. You need not
Be much sollicitous to prevent my danger;
Since on my death depends the assurance
Of an estate to you. When you enjoy it,
If my cold ashes might be capable
Of such expressions, they should dance for joy
Fortune had so rewarded you, that merit
Above her flatter^: which she but practised
When I was interposed by great^r accident
Then ever yet made learned error give her
The profane attributes of a deity.

He surely doth suspect me.

Had I fallen
(As ten to one I might, had not the cause
Given me the greater ods.) Had you contrived it --

How's that! your jelousy is an unkindness
My love deserves not.

I hope you are not guilty,
That catch the uncertain meaning of my words
E're they are perfected; and preinterpret
Thoughts that had never being! I may then
Justly have doubts. For innocence unmoved
At a false accusation, doth the more
Confirm it self; and guilt is best discovered
By its own fears.

Pray fancy what you please
To strengthen your suspicion: 'tis indeed
So weakly grounded, that unless you prop it
With better circumstances, your own s^ame
Shall ruin it, and justify my truth.
I must out faced.

Your own impatience
May serve for one. This house you sent us to
For ought I know a Brothel. You are noted
For one that surfeits in the pleasant sin:
And he that without scruple dares pursue it,
Dares without scruple do or be consenting
To any mischief from whose execution
The means may be derived that will maintain
His lust and riot.

'Tis not well that you
Digress from your first plea to this foul satire.
You should not tax my life, since it hath done you
Those offices deserve (besides your thanks)
Your most indulgence to my greatest faults
Nor doth it show of noble nature in you
To credit infamy from a report,
Until confirmed by knowledge. Howsoever
You have declared your self in your suspicion;
And hence forth I desist: my practises
Have been so fruitless. One I had contrived
To Crown the expression of my zealous care
In your affairs. You might have used my love
To better ends.

Pray ^ir continue it,
And reconcile your passions, he shall be
No more in such an error, to mistake
The aim of your intentions. From my warrant
He shall again be settled in's opinion
Of your fidelity, not to be altered
By after accidents.

When once suspected,
Can I presume that any undertaking
Will be received well?

Prithee sweet remove
The ill grounded jealousy and hear him. He will
Propose what may be useful.

I shall never
But fear hereafter all my actions
Will not be fairly constred.

It must be
By that fear only. Cousin I ne'er brought
My doubts to such a positive conclusion,
But that they might be changed to better truth
By your least satisfaction. If you have
Designed ought for our good, and that my judgement
Gives it allowanc^, no suspicion shall
Hinder the execution.

Might I be
Confirmed no missinterpretation should
Wrest the intent.

I am not capable
Of a new doubt, unless your doubts beget it.
Then pray impart your counsel.

Thus it is.
I have a little country house near Epping;
Thither I would convey you. You may there
Conceal your self some time; In which I'll practise
A reconciliation with their loves
By all the means th^t my invention
Can work. Nor think I have sinister ends;
But fair, as ever perfect friendship made
Glorious in the success.

Prithee consent
To this fair motion.

Cousin to express
How far I am from fear of any treachery
You might be guilty of; what you advise to
Shall be put into instant act. This key
Will lead you where my husbandry hath stored
Something from honest gain, without least wronging
The old mans trust; I pray convey it hither
Where we'll expect you.

Please you to command
My store; what I am Master of is your^.
I shall gain time to plot; my sudden policies
Wanted a right foundation.

They are here an't please yo^r worship.

We are anew betrayed.

Mischief forbid it.

You shall have justice fear it not.

You may take my warrant gentlemen.

The Justice! then all's marred.

What Mr. Bridegroom?

And Mistress Bride! send you joy.

Are you the --

Let me speak sir parrot; must you be repeating your sessions lecture, and I
in place?


The Justice knows them. Best shift for your selve^ least you be found the
most delinquents, and forced from your ^wer of pleasure here to peep through a
grate or taste the charity of Bridewell.


You are complaind of by these --

Ha! whether are they gone that accused you?

Without their accusation I submit
My self to the law. And if you have direction
To use your power, let it acquit this gentlewoman
From the ensuing scandal, I'll be patient
With any punishment the just revenge
Of those I have so wronged can lay upon me.

Is she not your wife?

Heaven hath forbid it, and my penitence
Restores her back.

It shall not by my hopes
Of comfort in thy love. If your commission
Be for our apprehension. --

Truly Mistress Bride I should be glad to apprehend you in bed together: 'twas
expected all had been cock sure by this. 'Twas but a plot of your old foster
father to pretend marrying her himself when he meant her only for you.


They will discover all; curse on the accident
That brought them hither.

To express it more fully, and how dear you are to him, he hath conferred his
whole estate upon you. My Worshipful husbands hand is to the writing.


It is indeed sir.

Is it so sir? as if my word were not sufficient!

Hear them attentively, and then your care.

I do hear words that must be scan'd and constred.

He appointed that gentleman to find you out.

Amazement hath possessed me wholly.

Although my person came before you, sir,
You were the first deliverer of this joy,
Which I concealed for reasons: but desire
I now may finish all in private:

Talk your fill sir, whilst I drink mine.

Cousin I know you wonder at the strangeness
Of all: for which take this brief satisfaction.
You are betrayed to receive punishment,
For what you rather do deserve a Crown.
This Justice and my self had the instructions
All's nothing but a plot to get you back.

Why then would you pretending love conceal it?
And mock my fears with such diversity
Of dangerous accidents, you brought upon them?

Alas had I revealed the circumstance
Of his professed love; fiegn'd intentions
And the smooth traps were laid to catch you in,
I know your nature of such easy temper,
You rather would have flattered your self
Into belief of them, then your own danger.
'Twas my prevention.

How I shall determine,
And reconcile these differences to truth
Is hard. Be firm my resolution:
I will be satisfi^d, and yet prevent
The danger that is her. My Cousin Raven
Is certainly a villain. You have been sir
The con fortablest messenger of pardon
That ere engaged a man; and if you please
To be the instrument of farther good,
You'll find us grateful.

Command both me and mine husband.

Pray take this gentlewoman to your care,
Whilst I go back to make acknowledgemen^
Of the great benefits are done me.

I will along with thee likewise.

By no means*
Let him be satisfied of all that's past
Which I'll instruct him how without his danger,
Whilst you are absent.

Shall she be your charge?

She shall go to our house.

And welcome with my husbands good liking. To your house? as if the
entertainment of constables on a sharing day were not chargeable enough, but
you must complement away wine and sweet meats. 'Tis enough that we wish them
well; let others do them good.


Sweet wi^e (...); I have found out another way.

Observe me sir, I will discover more.
Do you think 'tis fit my cousin go alone sir?
Suppose those bassled roarers (whom he did
Justly correct) way l^y him; may there not
Be danger i^'t?

You say well sir. Standish and Dash my Clerks shall a long with him. Or what
think you of my neighbour Catch the Marshalls man? the sight of him would
fright them.


Do you mark that sir he would have you guarded.
Would you were off: I'll tell you more by the way.
I'll along with you Cousin, so I may
Borrow a weapon.

You may have one of these.

Lett's on; I will return to our full joys;
I go but to prepare them. And find out
The meaning of these riddles.

My prayers go with thee.

By this, wh^t I intend shall be conferred
Upon those roarers, that will carry circumstance
To make it creditted, and quit me wholly
Of all suspect. In mischief there's content,
When we on others lay the punishment.

Come Mistress Bride, we will walk and see some rarities and antiquities
till they return. There is one in the neighbourhood is stored with them; as if
he had translated the Capital hither.


The motion's good: it should have been mine sir. You shall see the feathers of
a Phoenix; the beak of a Pelican, and the skins of ^irds, beasts and fishes,
stuffed with hay, enough to bring down the marker. For coins and meddalls he
hath those with inscriptions that speak their date 500 years before the use
of letters. He hath the fingers and toes of a Colossus, and three hairs of a
giants upper lip, each of them as big as a bull rush. Then he hath the the
members of a pignie, that cannot be discerned but through a multiplying glass.
Yet it is thought he would gladly part with all he hath for the Philosophers
stone; I or the Unicorns horne at Windsor.


Come come, he hath those things a prince might glory to be owner of, and 'tis
bravely done of him to affect them.


Such sights will be delightful. I must strive
In what I may my sad thoughts to withstand;
Which do presage some mischief's near ^t hand.

Y' are welcome with a mischief to the occasion that brought you hither. Here
hath been attendance for a quart of win^and that not paid for. Some better
customers, or I shall crack without credit. My Blades baffled too! Their loss
must be repaired upon the next advantage.


You are welcome sir.


Pray take a me cloak: me back be so hot, will burn a hole in it.


Would you have a cooler sir?

You understand for bien: de vench, de veneh.

Excuse moy pur^la.

Parle Francois Monfieur?

Non intendo.

You fall intand dat me be de French jentleman; dat me have two tre^ crown in
me pocket and the vuld have a de vine and de vench, and be merry in de shamber.


I'll send one to you sir.

Remercie Monsieur. Voe call a me Cooke now! de greasy Larone! True; me make
de Franch dish for de Lor: h^ give me two tree piece; me steal two tree piece
of plate more, dat buy de sor, de ha^ an de seder; and Monsieur be so good a
jentleman as --


Who sit?

Me have noting to say to you

I had thought you had sent for me.

You be no vench Monsieur.

Would you have me to procure you one?

Me give you de vine and you fetch a de vench.

Do you take a Blade for a Pandare?

You no quarrel vid me?

Yes and peace upon your back canopy, that shadows your half roasted kidneis
if you dishonour a Blade with the least suspicion. Yet in a fair way I care not
to exchange a glass or two.


Vid all mine art. But pray Monsieur be you no so hot in de mout.


Do you disparage my Tobacco? I assure you sir it is right Spanish.


Me can no endure de Spanish.

Not your Blade? why your French temper will not bear an edge to chop rotten
litter for mortar.


You speak not like a jentelman dat love not to be a al mode.


Pox on your mode

Dat be no good vard Monsieur.

Doth it touch you sir? why 'tis your credit to be marked by that French Herald
for a gentleman of fashion.


Me can be no more patiant. Me cut in two tree twosand piece for dishonour the
French jentelman.


Will you so sir? we are for you.

Oh de base coward.

We shall be valiant enough to over come your mettle.

Help help; de teeves rob me.

No no Monsieur, you shall have a vench for your money, when you have entered
into bonds for your good behaviour.


De gran English ^on you all* Vat you do vid me?

Work a cure (if we can) on the itch in your blood, that hath infected many of
our wenches, and made them dangerous to us.


Oh diable! que faite vous?

He speaks ends out of a puppet play.

Help help; de teeves kill me beat me.

Peace Monsieur; you shall have a wench presently.
Wine, Music, and whilst you in dalliance, meet
We'll tread a measure with our nimble feet
Shall tempt you to be sportive, if desire
Want whetting and renew the active fire.
Come wenches. Monsieur there's a she for you.
Your meat is paid for; if you liked fall to.

Oh fie fee. De teef, rogue poison me vid de stinking Maquarell.


Lett's leave him now t'his patience, and go share.
And when you want a wench to cool you Monsieur,
You know wher's those can take your courage down sir.

Oh de villain, de Laroone! my sor an my money; and de slut leave a varse
stink behind her den de Fransh Cook kishin stuff


Oh Monsieur help me. Me go to de Constable, and de bedle sall vip for dis.


What's here? how came you bound? Not for any good behaviour.


De t^fes kill me and rob me. Fetch a me cloak, me go ^o de Justice and his
clerk. Fetch a me cloak I say.


Presently sir. But now I have releast you, who shall pay the reckoning? 'tis
five shillings you and your company have had in wine.


Oh Diable! me no drink vine: De teefe leave me no vine penny.


Your cloak then shall be your surety: it shall be forth coming when you
please to release it.


I say ^ill have a me cloak.

Not till you have paid the reckoning. I am not to take notice of all men's
behaviour; if you admit of company and they abuse you, you must suffer for it.
I mean not sir to be overreached with any of your French cheats.


Is English cheat to send me no vench -- but my cloak.

Not without the reckoning.

Me must den valke in quirpo.

A fashion of your own, and apt to be followed upon the like occasion.


Me sall fetch de Magistrate.

Even whom you please. My correspondence with these Blades and wenches helps
me and themselves to many such purchases; yet still my house is honest. Though
many will say,

No matter how so they have coming in,
And sin thrives best that is maintained by sin.

It should be he by the description was made of him.

Let us salute him then. If your name be Horten sir?

I own no other.

We are commended to you by some friends of yours, that request for us your
leave to see rarities and antiquities you have, and for which you are so much
spoken of abroad in the world.


The world I do believe speaks grossly of me;
And c^lls my curiosity in reposing
Such things, a prodigal vainesse being one
That lives by my endeavours: have no state
But what my labour purchases.

May we have leave to walk to your house?

And command
The sight of all. I must confess my care
Of knowing and possessing rarities
Makes me so skilful, I dare undertake
To pick a sallet out of Dioscorides,
Shall feast the Doctors college, with rare practises
Stranger then Aesons restitution
To youth by Magic. From my garden sir
I can produce those simples, shall out-worke
All the compounds of drugs, and show like miracles
Compared with them. What needs the weapon salve,
Condemned by some for witchraft? when each dunghill
Affords the Persicaria, that on wounds
Works the like Magic. Panax Coloni
Is known to every rustic; and Hipericon.
And yet we must from M^mphis and Iudea
Fetch Balsam, though sophisticate; there is not
An ounce in Europe, will endure the trial
Of milk or water. Yet my Ladies gentlewoman
Bit by her Monkey, swears by her lost maidenhead
The world hath not a Balsam like to that
Her closet yields; when 'tis perhaps but oil
A little aromatiz'd for lamps.

You are learned likewise in antiquities.

A little sir.
I should affect them more, were not tradition
One of the best assurances to show
They are the things we think them. What more proofs
(Unless perhaps a little circumstance)
Have we for this or that to be a piece
Of delphos ruins? or the marble statues
Made Athens glorious, when she was supposed
To have more images of men then men?
A weatherbeaten stone with an inscription
That is not legible but through an optic,
Tells us i^s age; that in some Sibills cane
Three thousand years ago it was an altar.
'Tis satisfaction to our curiosity;
But ought not to necessitate belief.

Antiquities fir are grown of late good merchandise.

The affection of some Princes hath begot
An imitation, and 'tis nobly done.
For by such things mans knowledge is informed
In principles of art, and many times
They light upon instruction by them, that
Direct invention to recover what
Neglect or ignorance hath lost.

Pray sir what are the rarities and antiquities you have?

Nor Pliny fir, nor Gesner ever made
Description of a creature, but I have
Some particle thereof: and for antiquity
I do not store up any under Grecian.
Your Roman antiques are but modern toys
Compared to them. Besides, they are so counterfeit
With mouldings, 'tis scarce possible to find
Any but copies.

Yet you are confident of yours that are of more doubt.

Others from their easiness
May credit what they please. My triall's such
Of any thing I own, all the impostors
That ever made antiquity ridiculous
Cannot deceive me. If I light upon
Ought that's above my skill, I have recourse
To those whose judgements at the second view
(If not the first) will tell me what Philosophers
That eylesse, noselesse, mouthlesse statue is,
And who the workman was, though since his death
Thousands of years have been revolved --

A good evening to you neighbour Horten.

And to your worship.

My husband will still be before me, to prevent the amen of a shrew.

You are happily met Mistress Bride.

But 'tis my sudden wonder what accident should guide her this way.


These gentlemen are witnesses to the old mans deeds, as well as my worshipful
husband


The fortune of this day hath led me through
Events both strange and dangerous. I hope
As you are Gentlemen that you will make
A fair construction of me, though the vulgar
Borrow discourse and pastime from my act.

You are a brave woman. Yet had I opportunity --

She is sure a light held wench, and if --

With all my heart and welcome.

Are you making motions now, before I can recover breath to begin my exordium
as my son at the University taught me to say. Neighbour Horten 'tis thus. My
self and my husband have this day been eyewitnessesses of strange accidents;
chance upon chance, and fortune upon fortune: one disaster hath been the cause
and cure of another. Now we desire the favour that we may see your trinkets,
knaks and knaveries (pardon me neighbour I mean no hurt) to delight this
melancholic gentlewoman that hath found and lost, and lost and found a husband
yet no husband --


You shall command me: but she chiefly.

And shall we see all?

All I assure you.

The great Sea horse what you call that cures women of the cramp.


What a wanton tempting eye she hath?

I will attempt her.

A handsome lass. I must have her home and give her a philter.


Vich be de Justice?

What justice sir?

Justice vat you call run up and down de cony hole.

My husbands name is Ferret: what's your business sir?

De he teefe and de she teefe rob me at vat you call de little nutcrack house?
and he take a me cloak an me have no var for my money.


I know the house he means; a place much suspected. But a few hours since
there happened a dangerous up roar about this gentlewoman; and the delinquents
came to complain first. But had they not conveyed themselves away, they
should have been punished.


With what trow? a reproof or a jeer out of your table book notes, enlarged
with a piece of a charge; then with a half bribe and single fees they are
released to boast how cheap they have escaped. Come come you shall back to this
house, and be severe, and wise and say little, let mine be the speaking part,
yours the doing: I'll make them come off and on roundly. Do you think I can
keep house with bare warrants and mittimusses?


Will you with us neighbour?

I desire to be excused.

By all means neighbour; you are an officer.

What shall become of this gentlewoman then?

Please these gentlemen to walk a turn or two with her? The evening's
pleasant if the mist rise not.


I had rather I had her at home.

We are her servants.

Is define vench.

We will along with you ^ir to this righteous --

Riotous you would say.

No sir 'tis routous place; and my husband shall ferret the he thieves and the
she thieves holes never fear it.


To have seen this wench and not to enjoy her, is such a Tantalizing to me.


Me sall turn back again from you to dis fine vench. Me give her my doublet cost
two tree pound for lye vid her two tree time. Oh fine vench!


Tis most opportune.

Could I but remove him?

Please you to walk, and let my hand support you.

Please her to be my charge.

I'll be your servant Lady.

What mean ye gentlemen?

To do you manly service.

If you could sir.

How sir?

I am betrayed unto a new misfortune.
There is a malice in the stars that guide me,
Which yet seem wanton, as their influence
Were but a sportive mockery to show
The various fates that do depend upon it.
I have had strange deliverance; but the event
Of this is full of horror. I pray gentlemen
Do not make me the object for a quarrel.
Your gravity should be judicious,
And not mind trifles: such as youthful blood
Heated with wine can no way be excused for.

He shall not touch you his belly is nothing but a tun full of red herring, and
boiled water.


And thou art a ^otten herring Jackalent Spanyard.

A word in private.

What you dare ^ir.

A challenge sure. Some happy chance direct
Aid to prevent a mischief:

Me be your servant madame.

Would you would guide me to some house?

To de house of good fellowship, or de nax dish.
Here be de fine moral.
Viles Dutch and Spanish make a fray
De Frenchman bear de pri^e a way.

You'll meet me then?

I will not fail you.

But wher's the gentlewoman? where hath the mist concleal'd you?


We have differed finely about a woman in a cloud.

We must not so loose her.

Saw you a gentlewoman sir?

Her sweet hart! let us avoid him least we be discovered.

I'll home and be drunk, and then perhaps grow friends with you.


The Merchants? were they not?

Doubtless the same.

What Gentlewoman should that be they asked for?

Some Bonaroba they have been sporting with. Your outlandish merchants are
notable barterers for such English ware Many of them keep their recreations at
pension; and sometimes two copartners will share as even nightly.


That's strange; if love will brooke no rivals, lust should Being the more
raging passion.


'Tis common.

How common?

Wenching is like friendship hath all things common.

The mist is great: have we not lost our way?
We might e're this have got to the waters side
Though we had trod a labyrinth.

Over this stile and then

Ha! what devil moved thee to attempt it.

Pox on these French blades; no point!
I have paid a debt to all my vain attempts
With mine own ruin. Hell hath left me yet
One means to express my malice. In my death
Dye to all knowledge of thy self; the world
Besides me owns it not-

I cannot give
Utterance unto my thoughts; the narrow passage
Is choked up with a multitude, that strive
Which should first issue forth. How fruitless envy
Brings on its own destruction! Innocence
Is proof against all the battery of malice:
And he that's armed with it needs not fear to encounter
The most severe tribunal. Though I am
Guiltless to heaven, yet I shall appear
Foul to opinion wanting testimony;
And the act makes me the laws; I am no more
The subject of my conscience, which by judgement
Must be determined. Can I not prevent it?
Flight may procure my safety. 'Twill bring on
A greater danger, and cause supposition
That I am guilty by the circumstance
Of mine own fears.

Help, help, a rape. Villain keep back.

Horrors on both sides round me.
Hath my cross fortune found new instruments
To draw more mischiefs on me! By the voice
(A woman's weakly uttered, as if fainting
Under some violence) 'tis near this hedge.
I'll aid her, though my ruin lay in ambush
With twenty murderers.

Out Villain:
Would I could spent a leprosy upon thee.
Help help.

My dearest!

Oh pardon moy Monsieur.

Villain thy end's upon thee.

I being safe
Prithee forbear him.

Is no fair play for give me de prick Monsieur.

How came thou hither sweet?

Soon as my fears
Have finished their effects of trembling,
And that my breath's recovered, shalt know all.

Monsieur stir not; I have employment for you
May win your pardon.

Vid all mine art; but mine art will be in mine eel anon; is fallen already into
me breeshes.


What object's this? Alas your Cousin Raven
Wounded or dead? what hand hath done it?

This;
Justice made this her instrument. He was
A villain to me, and betrayed my life
To all those dangers which I overcame
By the causes strength. And lastly his intents
To murder me, have brought upon himself
This punishment as due.

Why dost not fly then?
I'll bear thee company in all adversityes.
Thy person being safe time may effect
A pardon by some composition.
If thou be taken, thou meet thy certain end
Mingled with shame; and mine hath the same date:
I'll not out live thee.

Did you bid me fly
To shun the end's before me? sure there's difference
Twixt meritorious acts, and acts of shame.
I was but justice executioner.
His crime deserved death, and he had fair trial
By evidence: see here this pointlesse weapon;
If providence had not ordained it so.
As he so I had fallen; but innocent.
Should I then fly? and by my fears beget
A worse suspicion? No: I'll meet the event.
And though I now were circled with the terrors
Of racks and tortures; gibets; executioners;
And all the palsying apprehensions
That ever made a malefactor tremble,
Armed as I am, I would encounter all
With a fixed confidence. Just causes never
Did yet miscarry; or if any have
'Twas to the greater glory of the cause.
And Monsieur 'tis your imposition
To watch this corps, and give to passengers
What answers you have wit or language for.

Wilt thou not fly then? prithee do not rashly
Play away safety.

If I fly, and so
Provide for it, will you with me?

Even to death,
In that 'shalt find me resolute. I'll vi
Against thy courage with my constancy.

Let's go then

Me be glad you be gon, for me will no stay long vid de dead man. If de live
jentelvmanly so -- but me sall see vat you have in your pocket.


Oh? a surgeon.

De man be no dead: but me sall make you dead rader den go without your money.


What wilt thou villain?
'Tis time then to leave off counterfeting

Dis be de jentelman hire me to vark at de vedding; but he no know me, and day
be sure de jentelman and de jenteluman da^ run avay together.


I'm wounded, but I hope not mortally;
I have no feeling of those accidents
Are deaths forerunners. Would I had a surgeon.
If I survive, I will convert this mischief
Into a benefit; and by his flight
Possess my self as well of what I cove^,
As by his death. Sir you can witness for me
How and by whom I did receive this wound.
Although you know him not, make a description.

Pardon me Monsieur; me no see him do it.

You must dispense with scruple
If you will serve my purposes a little,
I can and will be thankful; otherwise
What e're you are I can betray your life
For your intent of rape.

Me be your servant Monsieur. Me do any ting; swear any ting; go to de devil
along vid you rader den be hang.


Go with me to a surgeon.

We need make greater haste; 'tis almost night;
The mist is risen much.

My Uncles voice. Help a surgeon: assist me now.

Look about knaves: I have heard that voice.

Here sir a man wounded.

'Tis Master Raven.

My cofin Raven? what misfortune brought
This ill upon him? hold that gentleman.

Me no do it Monsieur: he be de young jentelman in black, an de jenteluman.


What gentleman in black? Theophilus?

My cousin ^ir? alas; there's so much goodness
In him, I must not think he could be tempted
To wear such guilt about him. Good sir have me
Unto a surgeon; and that gentleman
Shall give you satisfaction, ere you give
Him a release.

Now mesall be discover, and hang for teefe.

Wee' I carry him to one Hortens house, and fetch a surgeon thither: 'tis close
by.


One call my friend justice Ferret; and post you over to Mistress Brides father:
his presence at the examination of these circumstances will be needful. 'Till
truth satisfies my desires I am in torment.


I have a new design.

And till I see
Theophilus.

Which I hope ne'er will be.

Sir we are troublesome: the accident
Hath made a subject for your charity
As well as for your art; and neither shall
Be unrewarded. But may I presume
He will need no other surgeon?

Doubt it not sir.
The wound's but slight; were it more dangerous,
The simples that I have applied would cure it
According to the first intention
As surgeons call it.

Truly sir my neighbour is very skilful; he cured my little shock of the mange
so perfectly, that it hath famed him through the neighbourhood for an excellent
dog-leech.


I ow much to your commendation Mrs Ferret.

Truly neigbour 'tis not so much worth.

I dare be sworn it is not.
I dare not with much confidence rely
Upon this mans endeavours. Would I had
A surgeon here, whose judgement and experience
Might give me further satisfaction.
Is the French gentleman disposed of safely?

I have confined him to a chamber sir,
A too delightful prison. He may feast
His eyes with rarities.

I think you are
Owner of more then all the town besides.

'Tis my affected riches.

I have some
You shall command sir.

I'll have gratitude,
And something to exchange. This accident
May bring me in a purchase:

Pray neighbour let's see the late giants boot, and the dwarfs shoe.


Pretty extremes no doubt.

Extremes sir! me thinks their differences shoul'd make a very good mean.
Suppose the one was a great drinker or wencher; the other must needs be a
little one. What the one wasted in boots the other sav's in shoes. But I'll in
to the wounded gentleman, and help to talk away his pain.


By no means: sleep would give him more ease, and prevent a distraction;
which he seems to occasion some fear of by his often digressions and
interruptions of discourse.


Indeed sir I am troubled when I weigh
The accident and circumstances of it.
Nor can we urge him to give satisfaction
With any positive truth, but all his answers
Are careless and imperfect; many times
The second contradicts the first: and then
He will name Theophilus, as if he were
The mischiefs worker. But of all kind friends
Your strange relations have begot most wonder.
The roarers, and Theophilus brave act;
My cousins not revealing my intents;
The maid left with the Merchants, and the Monsieurs
Stealing away, then found with my hurt kinsman,
What to conclude from these --

The news! what means your haste?

A lass sir you are robbed.

How's that?

The French gallant sir which you locked in the chamber, is run away with your
Remoras and Torpedos skins; and we know not what besides.


Pursue him. I'd not loose those rarities
For half my state. Alas sir they are valuable
'Bove any thing I own besides.

Hath Monsieur given you the slip as he gave us? He may chance be caught in a
halter for it.


Be patient sir, and with your best endeavour
Restore my cousin to his former safety,
I'll recompense your loss with things more valuable.
I have large trees of coral, and Zibet^s
Both of strange form and colour; I expect
Some living Ermines.

Would I had them, they
Should pacify me quickly,

Sure that french man
Is guilty of the fact: why should he fly else?
If by your servants industry that Monsieur
May be brought back again, 'twill be of consequence.
Something perhaps may be concluded from
A strict examination of him.

I'll employ all the servants I have about it.

They shall have my husbands authority with them; we'll make you a warran^.


How various are the events that may depend
Upon one action, yet the end proposed
Not follow the intention! Accidents
Will interpose themselves; like those rash men
That thrust into a throng occasioned
By some tumultuous difference, where perhaps
Their busy curiosity begets
New quarrels with new issues. I go on
From one consideration to another,
Yet can determine nothing.

Else my pains were fruitless.
Chance brought us hither, for what ends I know not.
But understanding you were here, I come
To ask a da^hter from you.

I from you
Must have a wounded reputation cured,
It bleeds worse then my kinsman, whom your son
And daughter are by circumstance suspected
To have attempted.

My son said you sir?
I hear that son of mine must be your heir;
And I have heard what plots and circumventions
You used to catch me: so you have sir f^ely.
My states mine own still, though my daughter's lost.

And pray sir keep it; doubt not but 'twill find
Some grateful heir, that will preserve the memory
Of such a benefit, with witty libells
Upon your glorious life.

Your scorn is well sir;
And well becomes that supercilious gravity,
Hath awed the city long, and frighted Rats
Into the Counter.

You are very free sir.
Yet these are not the Cittyes liberties.
Stand not too much upon your privilege.
If you can give fair satisfaction
For what concerns you, do; and let not passion
Kindle a new flame. I am calm; have quenched
My spleen that late was fired.

I acknowledge
(...) ^eare your kinsman's wounded, and there is
A supposition by my daughters sweet heart.
But how far this concerns me, be your self
The judge. Sir I have suffered in my fame already
Too much, to have more added by suspicion
Of being accessory to an act
Of such vile nature; and your self may sooner
Prove guilty, if the circumstance be weighed
You have made him your heir.

My intention
Had done it; neither did it want the form
Of law for confirmation: but 'twas when
I was too partial in affection: now
I am resolved to satisfy that error
With severe justice.

You'll revoke your act!

Hands stained with blood shall never have the power
To make a distribution of that wealth
Heaven hath blessed my fair endeavours with.
Should he be proved a murderer (for though
My cousin dye not, his intent was such)
Revenge would wait on all his actions;
And even his charity when he gave alms
Would to his conscience so present the fact
In bloody characters, that his best deeds
Would loose their merit.

I am hard put to it.
But sir suppose your kinsman did attempt
Some practice upon him; there's circumstance
To make it probable. Suppose your cousin
Repining at it that you should prefer
Adoption before natural succession,
Assaulted him first to remove him, who
Defending so himself made the act lawful.

From your suppose I raise a supposition,
That he to clear himself of after troubles
Which might arise by any kinsmans claim,
Attempted this preven ion by some others
If not himself: which yet we cannot urge
My kinsman to discover.

There are plots
In these proceedings. Might I sir be witness
To an examination of your kinsman?
The knowledge of the truth is of some consequence
And doth concern us.

If he may endure
Discourse without his danger.

Her's Mr. Plaster, the learned Surgeon, that speaks nothing but Latin,
because either he would not be understood, or not contradicted.


He is welcome.

There is no need sir of his trouble: the gentleman is past danger.


Are you a surgeon sir?

A simple one sir; one I mean that uses no compounds.


If you are rational as well as empericall, and that you practice secundum
artem 'tis well.


I dare secure his safety.

You may err sir. He hath a wound; and where there is continuitatis divortium,
you must consider whether it came per contusionem, punctionem, or how; and
whether a nerve, tendon, ligament or artery be in danger. The parts likewise
whether it be in principalibus vel minus principalibus. Then the adjuncts;
whether there be fractura or dislocatio; for these make it vulnus compositum.
Then the accidents; whether there be inflamma^ (...) o^*


Pray sir what is that?

It is sir copiosa (...) inter cutem diffusio; which many times causes a
dangerous apostema


You have satisfied very well sir.

Perhaps you have applied some Montebankes medicine which you believe will cure
secundum primam intentionem.


Pray sir how is that?

That is sine suppuratione vel cicatrice. We that work according to art begin
with alteratione substantiae in p^s: for ex corruption unius fit generatio
alterius. And then --


You have said enough sir more then we understand.

Pray sir give him leave to see my cousin and his wound: his judgment being a
professor may confirm us.


He is here sir.

The Brides Father and a surgeon! what new devise is towards?


I'll apply but one Emplastrum consolidans more: I think that's a term of art.



I come not to be jeered.

To be rewarded; accept of this sir.

My thankfullnesse. This is more then my practice would have deserved; for to
say truth though I can out face it with talking, though I am neither parson nor
vicar yet my cures serve to maintain sextons.

I take my leave sir.


The wound was very slight sir.

Indeed Mr. Raven you escaped a scouring in your belly: if you had miscarried,
the Monsieur for all the separation betwixt his doublet and breeches should
have trust for it, but that h^ is run away.


Esca^'t I'm glad of that: it shall be useful.

Being past danger cofin* we would gladly
Be satisfied who 'twas that did attempt
This mischief on you: you have hitherto
Seemed as unwilling he should be discovered.
If 'twere Theophilus, all diligence
Shall be employed to find him, that he may
Pay law her due: his flight makes it suspicious.

Good sir forbear that trouble.
If he be fled with his fair Mistress, 'tis
A discreet policy to shun the danger,
Her parents anger might bring on him. 'Twas
The French man wounded me.

On what occasion?

None sir that I know: I provoked him not;
Unless he meant to rob me.

Will you sir
Justify this on oath?

Were there necessity:
'Tis otherwise sufficient I have said it.

Bring in the Monsieur.

How sir! is he taken!

Yes sir; with many trinkets that were yours.

I am restored to my first state.

We met him:
And for some reason you shall know anon
Brought him back with us.

I am still discovered.

'Tis needful sir this man should be committed;
That being accused he may be soon produced
Upon occasion.

Me have no ^or to kill de man: de tee^es have mine, True; me take de
jenteluman from de dushman and de Spaniard: me offer too to kiss de
jenteluman; an de yongjentelman in black dat hurt de man, almost kill ^e but
dat me beg pardon.


I have lighted upon it.
Unto you all I do submit my self,
And what I shall discover. I confess
I may seem not to merit a belief
That have already feigned so many untruths:
But the officiousness of them considered
I hope you'll credit this. It was my cousin
Theophilus, that hurt me: But I know not
Whether 'twere chance or malice for this gentleman
Attempting rape upon your daughter sir,
I drew a pointlesse weapon I had got;
My cousins sudden apprehention
Perhaps mad him suspect me: and not knowing
I meant a rescue of the gentlewoman
(Whose voice I heard, but could not through the ^ist
Discern her person) made his rash hand wound me;
Which for his sake I joy is not proved mortal,
Nor will I hope.

I do believe all this
For certain truth. But why should you accuse
Another then?

I did presume this man
Unknown to any here was fled, nor would
Return to take a punishment: and being
A stranger was not capable of shame.
Now my concealing who the actor was
Neither his danger nor disgrace would follow.

Nephew I do admire thy love to him
So ill deserves it, and I now consider
What an injustice my election was.
Henceforth thou art mine heir. I will employ
A numerous search to find him that he may
Be punished for his ^act.

By no means sir:
Call him not back; my wound may yet have danger;
And if he should return to pay his life
For mine that's so unworthy --

But he shall
To make you give the law a satisfaction
For all your villainies. Come forth my son,
For so he is sir.

Humbly thus I beg
Your pardon sir

Pray ask your father blessing:
Y'have got one now.

He hath sir, and shall keep him
His fair desert won my conversion;
And changed me from intents of punishing
To an indulgent favourer. This hath been
A villain to his life, and to his fortunes;
Whetted by envy to such practises
As merit death when you shall hear the passages.
A man that's guilty; that from foul intents
Proceeded to an act would fly for safety:
Instead of which Theophilus repaired
To me, that then was laboring with revenge,
First offers restitution of my daughter;
Then passing on from declaration
To declaration, made ^o confident
By his sweet innocence, he satisfied
Mine anger, and gave peace unto my passions
Nor was I patient to defer their joys
(Which likewise are mine own but got them married
This evening with a dispensation for it
Before we came to you. Where by the way
We met this Monsieur, and enforced him back:
Whom straight his fears betrayed to a discovery
Of what he was; no gentleman, but Kick-shaw
In's wenching clothes.

Monsieur Kick-shaw ^e want plate Monsieur.

Now me sall be hang again.

And I want Jewels Monsieur.

Jewels! me have noting but two tree babble. Pray vat be dis?


A babble call you it? This gentlemen is the horne of an Ethiopian ^hinoceros.


An dis!

The Taleon of a Bird in terra austr^li la, which the inhabitants call
their great god Ruc, that preys upon Elephants, and will not be gorged under
two or three in a morning This stone of a strange form and colour was brought
by the learned traveller of Odcombe from the great Mogull.


How sir! One of the great mogul's stones,

Good sir forbear a little. Now he's mine
I'll own him and the rather if you will
Disclaim all interest in him. For your kinsman
Some wise and powerful authority
Must force truth from him.

My husbands authority sir is both wise and powerful

'Tis not in all my stock of cunning now
To hold out longer. Shame will be the end
Of all my undertakings.

Cousin your looks are strange, and seem as if
They would betray your thoughts. If you have guilt,
Let it not press your conscience with a weight
Will sink it into horror.

I have much sir.
Nor will there need another testimony
For confirmation of what I shall utter.
He that with grief doth publish his own shame,
Speaks from truths records.

What may this preface mean?

You had a son, whose birth deprived his mother
Of life; and what bestowed a joy upon you
Robbed you of one.

Why dost review a grief
Time had wor^ out? Indeed I had a son.

And have him still: enjoy him in Theophilus.

Was this the knowledge of my self he spake of,
That lived but in him self?

I fear his wound,
And a distraction.

Hear me sir and then
You will have faith. The child you did dispose
To be nursed by my mother, I being then
An in^ant likewise. She knowing by law
That I was capable of your estate
Your heir being once removed, soon plots
To make the child away; attempts, but fainting
In the execution left it in the fields;
A formal burial strengthening the report
That it was dead. By providence directed
You found and bred it up, and this is he.
My dying mother did reveal it to me
With tears of penitence, and an injunction
I should discover it: which my avarice
And envy would not suffer me, but tempted
My soul to those black practises, which now
Cease with my shame and my repentance.

Joys
Have filled me to the danger of a surfeit.
Welcome to life; I have a new begot thee.
How often have I wished in these embraces
The thing I did embrace but knew it not.
Cousin I hope your sorrow is not feigned
That it may merit pardon, and preserve me
A loving Uncle.

I forgive you Cousin,
You have at length in this discovery
Given large satisfaction.

I'll re^ove
All cause of after jealousy.

We by these
Are reconciled for ever.

But her's a dilinquent must be punished.

He shall be pardoned ^o upon condition
He will no more play the impostor thus,
To wear the habit of a gentleman
Having such vile conditions; ^o disgracing
His noble nation; making all suspected.
I'll likewise add something unto your storehouse.
And though 'tis late le^s have a wedding feast:
To which pray welcome every loving guest.

I Am a Maiden yet, how can I then
Without some fear and blushes speak to men?
Ladies and gentlewomen pray stick to me
If the rude men should offer to undo me.
Would they be kind, and say I have done well
I'd give them leave to clap me. I can tell
They'd take it for a favour if they might
Clap every Bride upon her wedding night.

