you're welcome Gentlemen to Tot'nam-Court,
Where You (perhaps) expect some lusty sport;
Such as rude Custom doth beget in MAY,
When straggling Numbers court that jovial day
With early Riot. No such thing must be
The Subject of our easy COMEDY.
What then! a humorous, fiery, red-fac'd Host,
That will discourse his Guest into more cost
Then's Cheer is worth: and lies with so much credit,
As if 'twere Truths Authority, He se'd it,
Nor this! The AVTHOR surely then intends
Some Gowne-man of the Town, that daily spends
A thrifty Penny, to preserve his Lungs,
For a full Voice amidst the contentious throngs.
But here is no such Satire: nor is't sit
Abuse should be the exercise of Wit.
To feast your sense and minds for Cakes and Ale,
New, and not stal'd with handling, here's a Tale
Dressed up of a fair Milke-maid; whose chaste Theme
Shall close your stomachs up instead of Cream.
Cook'ry and Wit are like: the self same Meat
Delights one's taste, another cannot eat.
So 'tis in Fancie's Work: this loves a jest;
That Language; Matter pleases the other best.
Our PLAY'S not larded with great store of these:
And how the relish of their salt will please
'Tis doubtful. Yet We are the less afraid;
Because Your Reck'ning is before-hand paid.

COme, my Delight; let not such painted griefs
Press down thy soul: the darkness but presents
Shadows of fear, which should secure us best From danger of pursuit.

Would it were day:
My apprehension is so full of horror,
I think each sound the ayre's light motion
Makes in these thickets, is my Uncles voice,
Threatening our ruins.

Let his rage persist
To enterprise a vengeance; we'll prevent it.
Wrapped in the arms of night (that favours Lovers)
We hitherto have escaped his eager search,
And are arrived near London. Sure I hear
The Bridges Catarracts, and such like murmurs
As night and sleep yield from a populous number.

But when will it be d^y? the light hath com^ort.
^ s^nses being lost,
The l^st are less delighted.

Th'early Cock
Hath sung his summons to the days approach:
'Twill instantly appear. Why, startled Bellamie!

Did no amazing sounds arrive your ear?
Pray listen.

Come, come; 'Tis thy fear su^gest's
Illusive fancies: under Loves protection
We may presume of sa^etie.

Follow, follow, follow.


Ay me,'tis sure mine Uncle. Dear Love.


Astonishment gath seized my faculties.
My Love, my Bellamie. Ha!

Dost thou forsake me Worthgood?


Where's my ^ove?
Dart from thy silver Crescent one fair beam
Through this black air thou Governess of night,
To show me whither she is led by fear.
Thou envious darkness to assi^t us hither,
And now prove fatal.

Follow, follow, follow.


Silence your noise, ye clamorous ministers
Of this injustice. Bellamie is lost;
She's lost to me. Nor her fierce Uncles rage
Who whets your eager aptnes to pursue me
With threats or promises; nor his painted terrors
Of laws severity, could ever work
Upon the temper of my resolute soul,
To soften't into fear, till she was lo^t:
Not all th'illusive horrors which the night
Presents unto th'imagination
T'affright a guilty conscience, could possess me,
Whilst I possessed my Love: the dismal shrieks
Of fatal Owls, and groans of dying Mandrakes,
Whilst her sustained palm warmed mine, were music to me,
And were this hand but once more clasp't in hers,
This should resist th'assault, inspired by love
With more then humane vigour.

Follow, follow, follow.


Their light appeare's. No safety doth con^ist
In passion or complaints. Night, let thine arms
Again receive me; and if no kind minister
Of better fate guide me to Bellamie;
Be thou eternal.

Follow, follow, follow.


Come, wing your hastes: I'll sweeten all your labours
With large rewards: do but recover them,
I'll ease your rents; exact no costly customs;
Quarrel no more about your commons title.
Good neighbours forward: London's not far off.

'Tis so far off, that I cannot see it.


The day will soon discover it.


That day is sure a notable informer; yet I believe
He spies more bad then he mends.

Come, follow me this way.


Yes, we will follow; but at some wiser distance: Stay neighbour let him go.
Shall we rob our carcasses of sleep all night, that have been sufficiently
tired with the days toils, for his reward? what will that be think you? a
Christmas dinner; with a Chine of his great Ox that died at watering of the
blayne.


You say well neighbour:
And a st^ale hare with a great pudding in her belly.

And the discourse of his Worships hunting her: how many doubles she made, and
mock't his Wor^hips hope of a better dinner so long, till he thought in his
conference she was a Lancashire Witch.


Yes neighbour, and a choler of Brawn that was fatten'd with stale porridge.


And a goose that broke her neck, creeping through the hedge into the Parsons
stubble.


No neighbour, let the young couple go, and much joy go with them. Let us take
up our rests in this thicket, or the next house; for I am as sleepy as if I had
eaten a Puppy.


How, eat a Puppy*


Yes, a Puppy; I heard our Landlords Carter speak it last Whitsontide in a
Play.


And I am as drowsy as a Constable at midnight.


Why then resolved: 'twill be day presently: let's put ont the candle, and go
to bed, and farewell Landlord.


The day begins to break; and trembling light
As if affrighted with this nights disaster,
Steals through the farthest air, and by degrees
Salutes my weary longings. Yet 'tis welcome,
Though it betray me to the worst of fate
Love and desire e're suffered. Oh my Worthgood,
Thy presence would have checked these passions;
And shot delight through all the mists of sadness,
To guide my fear safe through the paths of danger:
But thou art lost, and all my joys are fled
Not to return without thee.

New fears assault me. 'Tis a woman's voice.
She sings; and in her mus^cks cheerfulness
Seems to express the freedom of a heart
Not chained to any passions. Be propitious
Thou regent over my fate, and guide her hither
Unto my comfort.

What a dainty life the milke-maid leads?
When ov^ the flowery meads
She dabbles in the dew,
And sings to her Cow;
And feels not the pain
Of love or disdain.
She sleeps in the night, though she toils in the day;
And merrily passes her time away.
What a blessed state is this? the minds content
Sweeten's all sufferings of th'afflicted sense.
Those that are bred in labour think it sport
Above the soft delights which wanton appetite
Begets ^or others, whom indulgent fortune
Prefers in her degrees; though equal nature
Made all alike. Oh, might I change my misery
For such a shape of quiet.

She comes this way.
He venture to accost her.
Ha! what silken butterfly's yonder! She looks not like one that had kept her
self warm all night at the Brick-kils: yet silk petticoats many times are
glad with worse lodging.


Good morrow maid.


Should I salute you so, 'twould bring my wit in question. Pray you what are
you?


A distressed maid.


A maid at your years, and so near London; where the ^tate of one at 15. is as
rate a^ a light wenches conversion. Never an early walking gallant to take you
up this morning! The Park here hath fine conveniences: or Totenham Court's
close by: Tis suspected that fine City Ladies give away fine things to Court
Lords for a Country Banquet there.


I cannot const^ue it; my innocenc^ makes understanding useless. Good maid,
wife or widow (for sure you are a woman) do a courteous office to your sex
in me, and guide me to London.


It seems you are a kind Country Gentlewoman, that have bestowed your
Maidenhead on your Fathers serving-man, and are come up to have a Citizen foder
your brok^n ware. The policy is grown stale: 'twould hardly take ever since
the Ballad cursed the Carrier that brought her ^o town.


You're a bad woman sure: and from th'aboundance of you own foul ils suspect
all others.


The to, is angry, it would fain counterfeit something: perhaps to insinuate
her self, and make me her agent. But you are deceived my pretty morfell of
wantonness; my self and my Milke-paile are both honest: I have no disguised
tone of Come, or three penny thrip to cloak a procure^se. I am not the Blades
intelligence whether Frank or Moll remove their lodgings to escape the
Constables search and Bridewell. I will to my Cowes, and leave you to the fate
of the morning: despair not of a customer; but be sure I catch you not
napping; for if I do, I have less mercy then Prentices at Shrovetide. I hate
hedge-coupling worse then fasting at Christmas, or a Puritans long Grace over
short Commons.


If you are good, pray stay and comfort me.
The sense of my ^

Why let but an honest ^ in Middlesex) find you not guilty of any thing that
may make compassion deaf -- ^las, she sownes; poo^e gentlewoman, be
comforted. Should she miscarry, I were in danger, having no witness to purge
the suspicion of being her murderess.


Worthgood farewell.


Ha! what said she? Worthgood! I have heard my Father often speak that name,
and sigh after it. Alas, she is dead; her breath scarce moves.


Oh Father, you are come in time to see me undone: I met this Gentlewoman as I
was going to milking, and she is fallen dead. I shall be questioned.

Why what is she?


Nay that's as hard to tell, as the success of my danger. She named one
Worthgood.


That word strike's deep amazement. Is she quite dead!


Dead as a herring Sir.


And are not you in a pickle Cicely? She is not dead Sir; she breathes.


She may be recovered. Pull her by the nose.


Pull it off: no matter for spoiling her face if she be dead.


Wring her by the little finger.


Her little finger is ring'd; and I will wring it ^rom her.


No robbing the dead Slip.


Why should the dead partake of living ceremonies?


Cast water on her face.


Blow wind in her face. Can water make one alive that's dead? unless it be
hot water.


Her spirits are returned; give her more air.


A woman's spirits? they are divellish sure: I had best conjure them back
again.


Where am I! what a pleasant vision
Pleased my dead slumbers, and presented joys.
As I was passing through th'eternall shades
Towards Elisium, one of fates Ministers
Told me I should return; and this same day
Enjoy my Worthgood.

What's he should own that name! wonder and doubt
Have raised a war within me, Look up mistress:
You shall not want what comfort we can give you.

De^end me gentle powers: yet ye shall never
O'retake my heart: that's still with Worthgood.

For some blessed Oracle to unfold the meaning
Of this so oft repeated name.

Ere you return me to my angry Uncle.
My soul shall ^lie and meet with his embraces.

What mean you gentlewoman?


You are murderers
O^ that content in me goodness would cherish*
You serve the purposes of a passionate man
For base reward; and that shall render you
Base to opinion.

Pray sir, let me conjure down this Devil in her tongue; 'twill raise
tempests else. Murderers, and base! Pray Gentlewoman, to whom speak you all
this?


To you, the injurers of my true love
And Worthgoods.

Mistress, we know you not; and all your words
Appear distraction: Nor can they satisfy
Our yet amazement.

If you are not such
As my too fearful apprehension thought you,
Pray, what are ye?

Such as do compassionate
Your feeling sorrows, and would comfort you.

You'll then perform an act of piety
Worthy record. Since my distress hath made me
The object of your pity; pray conduct me
To some near house, for I am wondrous faint.

Go home with her daughter; use your best care in administering to her: we know
not what fate depends upon it. When I have walked the round I'll return.


But pray Ciceley, withal, neglect not my breakfast. Rising early and walking
gets us good stomachs: yet I could be content to fast with such laced mutton
and a good cullice more then hal^e a morning.


What passions fight within me, that beget
Several constructions of this accident?
But what my hope interprets cannot be.
How apt is misery to dream that blessings
Are all immediate, and no underworkings
Of means and counsel! I'll not sl^tter it;
(Tis but th'eff^ct of passion) but return
To my delight of labour. Saw you the heard
Last night sir^ah?

Yes, sir.


And how fed they?


With their mouths.


You'll not leave your saucy wit, until it be beaten out of you.


'T would be but saucily done of it to leave me so: but if it will not keep me
from beating, I'll keep it no longer; but be mannerly. The dear fed well sir,
only a mischance. Some Cuckolds cur (for I saw him run towards London) had
pulled down two or three young dear.


And what did you with them?


I sent a Fawn to a wanting poet, a friend of mine; who I presume will make
profitable use of it. Dress it in some lamentable ^pitaph and dedicate to his
ningle: whose c^mp^ssion to ^ounty must redeem his lavender'd plush, and
commend him again to converse with s^cke and good company.


You have surely glean'd from that Poet.


Something to make people laugh at me.


Wh^t did you with the rest?


A longing Lady in the strand had a pricket. Then I s^nt a soar to
Ba^ber-Surgeons Hall. A little soar makes them a great feast.


Well sirrah, round you the s^uth side oth'Parke; and meet me at the great
Oak. I'll this way.


Pray stay sir, who comes yonder?


He seems a discontented Gentl^man. S^me dueller perhaps.


Some hot spurred Gallant, that got a drunken fever last night, and must bleed
this morning.


Perhaps to revenge an affront done his Mistress.


His common Mistress you m^ane sir.


It needs no adjective the sense is common enough.


So is the creature; a Cart take them. They have infected more honest Alehouses
with bad names, then Cakes and Cream will ever restore again. A wench is
grown a necessary appendix to two pots at Totenham Court.


To your walk sirrah. I'll observe him.


And I'll home to observe how I can sleep after early rising. If my master
should catch me napping, 'tis but dreaming a lie to excuse it. I'll persuade
him 'tis as true Prophecy as Bookers Almanac.


After so many longings to sal^te
The welcome light, it hath betrayed my sense
To worse affliction, then if sights privation
Had made it useless; since it wants the object
Can both delight and feed it, Back blushing morn
To thy Mygdonian bed; there shake the dew
From thy wet locks; and teach thy guilty shame
To dye that red in an eternal black,
Unless it bring more comfort.

Discontent
Rides on his forehead; and doth seem to trample
Upon his souls dejection. Would I knew him.
Good morrow Sir.

Ha! tis a fair salute.
I do return your wish.

Sir, you must pardon me
If I seem curious in some few demands.
My office and this place are privilege
For more then questions. Pray Sir what are you?

This sure is Marrowbone-Parke, and he the Keeper.
A Gentleman that comes not to offend you.
I spoil no game: you see I am unfurnished
Of instruments for such a wanton mischief.

But Sir, without a better satisfaction
I must suspect you still. Mere recreation
To walk for health seldom invites young Gallants
To leave their beds so early. I must have more.

Must saucy groom! can any patience
Construe it manners? Your rude compulsion shall not
Enforce me to express so weak a spirit,
Whilst I have hands, and this.

At that guard Sir?
Then this must countercheck it. Either tell me
Your name, condition, and your business here;
By my just anger for this foul provoking
I shall not spare you else.

How happy now
Might this occasion make me, were she lost
Beyond that hope which whispers her yet safety!
I must preserve my sel^e. Yo^ thou t^iumph'st
In my submission, because I had rather lose
A little outward credit to prevent
Wo^se mischief, know I can devise revenge,
Shall be a fair example for b^se difference
From the pretence of any borrowed power
To overdoe it's duty. My name's Worthgood.

Enough; that word hath power to check the force
Of any passion, though the hottest rage
Enslam'd it to be active.

Here's a change.
Why sure my name's a sp^ll. How it hath calmed
The tempest of his fury!

What black star
Was found th'ascendant in my crooked birth:
That all my lifes sad accidents should be
Such pregnant ils begetting one another!
One sudden ra^nesse in a moment might
Perhaps have mined him my duty honours:
Making this hand a mover to his death,
Whose life I ought to cherish.

What would else?

Nothing but pardon Sir; or if you please
Th'occasion brought you hither. Lost you no company?

It cannot sure be fear that makes me jealous.
I dare the worst of fate. Be he an actor
In my pursuit, I'll venture all at once.
I have lost a Gentlewoman, and doubt her safety:
If any chance hath guided you to find her,
Do not delay my satisfaction.

I joy that chance made me the instrument
Of such a good. Please you to follow me.
I'll guide you to this pensive one, that grieves
More your feared loss then her own misery.
She named you oft; when (by her fit transported)
Recovering from a sown, she thought her self
Surprised by some that meant her injury.

Shall I give faith? my resolution's mad;
Yet it shall try th'event. Despair my bring
A good success to an indifferent thing.

FIe Frank; there's such a disproportion,
'Twill ne'er be brought to an equality.

Why George, dost think th'exterior goods of ^ortune,
Or titular greatness that derives it self
From larger springs, and slow's to swell the blood
With attributes of gentle, or of noble
Can make the difference such, that the free soul
Must have the limits of her large desires
Prescribed by them? Nature's impartial:
And in her work of man pre^er's not names
Of ancestors* She sometimes forms a piece
For admiration from the basest earth
That holds a soul: and to a Beggars issue
Gives those perfections make a beauty up;
When purer molds po'ish'd and g'oss'd with titles,
Honours and wealth, bestow upon their bloods
Deformed impressions; objects only fit
For sport or pity.

Yet never can the mixture
Of gold with clay make any transformation
Of that base matter into purer metal.

The Chemistry of Love can surely do it.
Wedlock confers all honour that's a husbands
Upon his wife.

And therefore you will marry
A milk wench; one that's drudge unto necessity.
'Twould be a credit to that long continuance
Of noble matches which your anncestors
Have linked to the chain of their own bloods*
To make the series of their Families
Spread in so many glorious divisions.
Come, let my counsel guide these passive Fires
To flame aright, and send their Pyramids
More upwards. Let the grosser stuff that feeds them,
By an inversion, choke them. From advice
Men must choose wives, not passion.

She is fair:
Upon her person all the graces wait,
And dance in rings about her. Her bright eye
Is Loves chief mansion where he keeps his Court.
Envy not fair ones, if my fancy doth
Give all your dues to her, save only those
Which your defects supply from wanton art.
Her white and red she borrow's not from any
Cosmetique drugs; nor puzzles the invention
Of learned practitioners for oil of Talxe
To blanch an Ethiops skin. Lillies and Roses
Are figures fitting common beauties: hers
Wants a comparison but its proper self.

You swell her praise too high; so mean a subject fits not these raptures.


She's a subject, George,
For larger volumes then invention
Yet ever filled with flattering hyperboles.
The very thought of her hath strained my heart-strings
Up to a pitch of joy; whose music makes
My spleen dance lusty measures.

If she be
So rare a piece, her low condition
Makes me suspicious she's some common wanton
Lurks in that mask for safety.

Did not friendship
Restrain't, I should be angry: nay more; punish
So great a sin against her innocence.
I have laid all the baits that might entice
Apt inclination to sweet wickedness;
But could not catch her that way. She hath shunned them
With witty scorn, and such imperious checks
Have made me blush at my intentions soulenesse:
Which now is cleared with noble resolution
To give my hot desires their satisfaction
In fair embraces, such as the reverence
Of lawful Wedlock sweetens.

Vertuou^ policy.
Kill reputation, that you may preserve
A little better conscience. Any judgement
Would make a fair construction of my life,
That surfeits in delights, and plays the Epicure
In all variety and choice of pleasures
Sooner then of thy act. Where ils do want
A fair excuse (as thine doth) they are doubled.

When thou hast seen her, thou wilt soon acknowledge
In what a misty error thy invectives
Have lost themselves.

Nay rather hide her from me.
She may raise motions; and if I should rival thee,
I must be served: nothing was ere devised
To fright libidinous nature from it's proneness,
That can restrain me.

Shall it not make me jealous*
Her soul is guarded with so many virtues
Temptations cannot b^tter it: and ^'th'way
Of noble love (though yet she n^ver sung
The music of consent) I dare prefer
My self the first accepted.

Still be confident.


But who comes yonder?

Some City loving couple.


What's that Gallant?


Surely 'tis Will Changelove;
The ^rotcus of affection: one that vary's
As many shapes of love as there are objects.
But what that shee-thing is I do not know.

She seems a handsome piece. That opportunity
Would play the Bawd a little.

You'd be nibbling.

Changlove is my acquaintance. If they come this way (as 'tis most likely
Tottenham-Court's the end of their early walking) I'll be thy introdu^tion.
Let's walk softly.


Whilst I do ruminate some policy.


Besides the recreation Sir, tis he althfull.


Indeed sloth dulls the spirits activenesse.
And too much sleeping blunts the senses quickness;
Though some be very needful; their affects
Are the preservers of their instruments.
I love early rising.

But me thinks a nap in a morning's good.


True Mris. Stitchwell; when the brain hath purged
It self of grosser fumes, the fancy yeeld's
Such solace to the inward waking sense
In pleasant dreams, that I have often wished
Those shadows real which they have presented;
Or their continuance to eternity.
Indeed I love to sleep in the morning.

But stirring and exercise, I say.


I would you would use it in bed then.


I tell you Mr. Changelove though I am a Taylor I keep servants that are stout
knaves. I love them well, and they look well to my business. On holidays I
give them leave to use exercise.


Yes husband, your finisher is a pretty a fellow as ever did tradesman or his
wife service. He pitches the barr, and throws the stone; it doth me good to
think of it.


I have a Cornish-Lad that wrastles well, and hath brought home Rabbits every
Bartholmew-tide these five years. At stool ball I have a North-west
stripling shall deal with ever a boy in the strand.


Now you speak of a ball, I would we had one here; tis a commendable
exercise: the great Physician Galen wrote a book, de exercitations parvae
pilae.


What's that, pray sir?


Concerning the exercise of the little ball.


It seems great Physicians will busy themselves about small things: but they
are not of my mind.


How lik'st the project?


As the end proves it; howsoever, it promises fairly.


They are arrived: let us prepare our selves.


Mr. Changelove; a happy day follow this pleasant morning.


Worthy friend, I return your salute with double wishes: pray know this
Gentleman and his bedfellow.


The day must needs be fortunate, that begins with such fair Omens.


I pray sir, why doth that Gentleman shun your company? I hope we fright him
not. It had been manners to salute me.


He always doth that by Attorney Mistress.


Then I must pay the fees.


The truth is, he is a great woman-hater.


Now out upon him. I thought he was gelt, he is so fat. Beast that I was to be
so unmerciful to a dumb thing; I had a dog served so for the same purpose.


It is a disposition in his will,
Not a defect of power.

How said you sir? cannot that Gentleman endure women?


Hardly their sight at distance. 'Tis affliction
Unto his very soul to hear their virtues
Discoursed, unless in scorn.

A strange unmanly humour: I love not that.


May all the curses our injured sex can study, fall upon him for it: and I
think we can curse.


I know, to him my company is dear;
And our intentions have the self same end
Of mutual enjoying: now, with what dejection
He doth expect I should divide my self
From you, may be conceived.

I beseech you kind sir leave us not.


I should love some witty plot upon him.


He is my friend: yet I would gladly aid
In any easy mischief, that might aim
At his reclaiming.

Let's get him arraigned as one was in a play. Let me alone to aggravate his
indictment to the Jury; which shall be twelve Midwives of my acquaintance: yet
I'll be sworn I never used any of them.


I have it.


Pray first hear mine: let's run to T^tenham-Court for a wager.


'Tis excellent; so his gross bodies toil
To follow us, shall be our laughter.

Right: or if he stay behind, let my wife alone ^o vex him.


Let's run then: 'tis a brave Olympicke exercise;
I love it well; but how shall we dispose
Of all these cumbers?

Let us not be foot-men.


Indeed a seeming careless stayed formality
In such like wantonnesses best becomes
A gentleman. I love it.

Forwards then.


The wager?


Every man his dozen.


Why sweetheart; why husband; why Iohn; do you leave your Wife behind, to be
taken up by every body? Now the love of mans society defend me from this
abuser of creation. Come not near me thou man of clouts; thou malkin of
virilitie; thou half woman, and all beast: or with these nails I will tear
out thine eyes, and all the double things are left about thee.


Be milder gentle mistress. There's nothing in me
Appears unto my self so full of guilt
It should deserve reproach from you a stranger.

There's nothing in you indeed sir; your friend hath given me your character.
You pretend to hate women, because women have reason to hate you.


I hate women!
Now by my love of pleasure, no delight
Hath any relish on the wanton palate
Of my desires; unless some mixture season it
That is derived from them.

Yes sir; you may take delight in them, but they little in you. Come not too
near, there's infection in it: my blood desires no freezing. The Summer of my
youth is not yet half spent; or if it were Autumn with me, high feeding and
ease requires something.


She takes me for an Eunuch. Sure my friend
Hath overdone his part; and drawn the counterfeit
Too near the life of truth. Sweet Mistress hear
The language of my heart that cannot gloss
My plainer thoughts with superficial words.
I love you; my desires are thoroughly fired,
And burn my blood: which but your free enjoying
Nothing can quench.

Why, I am a woman sir.


I think you are; and one made up for pleasure,
More then the dull converse of what's defective.

You say true sir: I hear it with a heavy heart.
But I hope sir, you would not have me make my husband a Cuckold.

Fie, that's a gross construction; only shame
And common knowledge doth it, not the act
Of a Wives wantonness.

I need no instructions for secrecy. Trust me a handsome Gentleman. The
wickedness of his friend to believe him so. Dare you kiss me sir?


A pledge for what should follow.


You shall do what you will with me, but making my husband Cuckold.


No more of that. Nay, this way.


What, back again! No by my Strand-honesty. I'll to Totenham-court after my
husband. If there be that necessity at any time that I must make my husband a
Cuckold, I'll do it before his face: any Citizens Wife can do it behind her
husbands back.


Your will disposes mine: we there may find
Handsome conveniences; and I'll renew
My counterfeit of woman-hater: it
May cast a mist before his jealous eyes
Would watch us else.

I hope you're satisfied: but to what end this change should serve, I would
fain be instructed.


I'll tell you. When we feared pursuit, we left our horses, and the high way.
The horses a^e surely found; and by them my being hereabouts may be
conjectured. Now this disguise shall help me to escape their search.


Now out upon it. Had I no better an opinion of your honesty, then of your wit
(both which smell all together of the country) I would againe-leave you to
seek out your own dang^r. You have gentle-side me with your clothe^; and you
are handsome enough in mine: for though I am but a milke-wench, I ever loved
neatness. Now you shall personate my maid, and wait upon me to London; I'll
personate you, and if any thing ^ise from the mistake, we'll turn it to the
best use. If I find not out your sweet-heart, let me never be counted a
Prophetess: and I am sure I have foretold weather from the turning up of my
Cowes tail.


Dispo^e me as you please, I dare the worst
Of my malicious. Now love hath armed me
With better resolution.

In this disguise I'll meet the Gallant courts me every morning at
Tottenham-Court, and sound the depth of his pretended honest meaning. My
condition is to low to win upon his desires to marry me: and the other thing
without it, he shall never have.


Why Ciceley, Ciceley, I say my breakfast A quick supply of meat, drink and
sleep, or I rage presently.


Bless me, who's that?


My fathers man.


He will spoil all.


Be you confident.


Where's this Maggoti-pie of Marrowbone? Come you clean washed chitterling,
and give me my breakfast. How now Ciceley, where hath your face been? at the
painters? Hay-day; Ciceley's own face, and this Mistress dye for love
Ciceley-^ide. Now I swear by hunger (and that's a strong oath) I think women
have more fegaries then the Divel would hav^ Clients, if he were a Lawyer and
pleaded without fees.


Keep counsel sirrah you had best; and if my father ask for me, tell him I
will not be lost long. So fare you well.


You will not be lost long: he is likely to have a sweet match of it that
finds you. Yet I could be content my seven ye^res service might be so
rewarded. But the baggage is as coy as an Alde^mans eldest daughter: she hath
beaten me a hundred times (coward as I was for suffering it) for attempting to
kiss her. But now I will revenge it upon her Creame-bowles; over whose sweets
I will triumph.


New mischief; I am again delayed. If I forbear my breakfast but two minutes
longer, my guts will shrink into minikins: which I bequeath the poor Fiddlers
at Totenham-Court, for a May-dayes Legacy.

You're welcome to this roof; too mean a covering
For such a guest.

Your first sir hath intitch't it.
And hallowed it into a Temple. Pray sir.
Conduct me to the Altar, where I may
Pay the due sacrifice of my desires
To her; and thanks to you.

Slip, call my daughter.


Which daughter sir? your daughter gentlewoman, or your gentlewoman daughter?


Your trifling's unseasonable sirrah.


Why sir, Ciceley's no more plain Ciceley, but Ciceley in laced satin. The
gentlewoman and she are run out of themselves one into another.


But where are they?


For ought I know, run away one with another.


Run you after, and call them back.


'Tis impossible: who knows which way they are gone. Besides, 'tis a mist
would choke a brewers horse; I cannot see one hand for the other.


Sir, my suspicion prompts me you are treacherous:
And these fair seeming undertakings traps
To catch me.

Sir, you make a worse const^uction
Of my good meaning, then so fair expressions
Can any w^y deserve. Pray sir go with me,
We'll overtake them.

I will share the pains;
And venture once again to try you thoroughly.

Follow you sirrah.


A kil^ing command. The best is, it will break my heart, no matter then for my
belly. Hunger, I defy thee; revenge I hug thee. I will lead you a wild-goose
chase, till we come to Toten-ham Court: where I will score two dozen, and
reckon with mine hostess maid, whose belly I hav^ raised with umbles.


You are the Olympian, Sir.


Do you think Gentlemen I'd let you out-strip me at exercise? I'll jump with
ye for a dozen more.


Pray Sir let's jump: I love it mightily.


My breaths not yet recovered. By this time sir. your Wife hath converted my
f^iend to a civilleer disposition.


Let her alone. If she do it not, I durst forswear exercise; and that would
be the greatest vexation.


Greater then if your maid should drop the candle on your festival satin
doublet?


Or the Cats peace upon your Military feather?


Or an inferior neighbour be preferred for a common counsel man?


Mere tri^les to the ^orbearing of exercise.


Or if a gallant should deal with your wife in your absence for body covering,
and give her Court payment.


A very likely matter. She that goe's thrice a week to morning exercise, and
will make rep^tition over sweet meates at a gossipping. I tell ye gentlemen, I
have trusted her to a Mask, and the Innes a Court revelling: she knew the way
home again without a Crier. She hath converted a hundred of her purer
neighbours, by her example.


Here's more then City confidence. But shall we enter?


You're welcome Gentlemen.


A handsome room sirrah.


The best in the house sir.


Your Wife's come, sir.


Welcome sweet-heart.


Kind gentlemen, hold my heart, oh. Nay one at once: pray hold it hard, oh*


Whats the matter chuck?


Oh my breath: there's not so much wind left in me, as would make a noise to
be excused with the creaking of ones shoo: oh* You are a kind husband to
leave me behind. Had it been with one that had loved a woman, showed her the
nearest way, or laid her down upon his cloak when she had been weary. But I
think I fitted him.


And beshrew him if he fitted not you.


Here he is likewise.


You blow hard George.


Come Gentlemen, shall we walk in.


I would enjoy my friend a little here.


You shall enjoy your friend sir.


And what success?


Why dost not hea^e her promise?
You shall enjoy your friend. She's pliant Frank
Unto my wishes: nothing no remains
But to deceive her husband; thou must aid me.

Would have me Pandarize?


I'll do it for thee.
These are sweet sins, and only do intend
The pleasure of desire, which would be killed
With two much scruple.

What are these?

What place is this? a common Ale-house?


Fear you nothing, but put on confidence.


I have seen that face, the figure's in my heart.
'Tis surely she: her habit cannot mock
My knowing sense. I'll venture on the trial.

This is his Milke-maid sure. I still suspected
'Twas some disguised name to conceal a Mistress.
Now by my life she's fair; I envy him;
And my desires have almost tempted me
To put in for a share: but friendship checks it.
She may perhaps be virtuous, and well borne.
And worthy his resolves: my City beauty
Shall serve at this time.

Did thou think that ma^ke
Could veil thee from my souls distinguishing?
Wherein thy form's imp^est, which fancy shows me
At every change of thoughts.

Clothes have not altered
My person nor condition. I am still
Plain Ciceley and your hand-maid. This exchange
Proceeds but f^om an honest merriment:
And when you understand the story right,
You'll make a fair const^uction.

'Twere a sin
To think amiss of thee; tears cannot expiate*
When thou art mine, I'll feed thy appetite
With pleasures best variety. Taylors daily
Sha^l shape proportions for thy dainty body,
To make invention pregnant of new fashions.
Th'Exchange shall be thy Wardrobe to supply
Thy will with choice of dressings t'hearken out*
A jewell to adorn thee, if the value
Exceed not my estate; I'll sell it all
To purchase thy content.

Your promises
Are much too large. My too unworthy service
Cannot deserve to be commanded by you.
Gallant I'll try you.

Th'extasie hath made me
Forget my friend: 'tis she George changed in habit

I am your servant fair one, and my heart
Vow's an obedience when your commands
Assign me any task.

I do not like
The courtship of these gallants: 'tis gross flattery,
And tends I fear to ill.

Come dearest will you
Accept the entertainment of this place?
Some worthy company within expects me.

I shall strain modesty, you excusing it.
Come maid.

Why should I fear; that have defence
From Worthgoods love, and mine own innocence?

you're welcome Gentlemen.


Now my parrot of froth, whose mouth is lined with tapestry; what company is in
the house?


None of your acquaintance but Mr. Changelove.


Will Changelove? prithee call him hither.


I shall sir; By and by. Some stewed pruines for the two costive Citiz^ns in
the Bulls head; and more rowles for the three Taylors in the Smithfield-Lyon.


How shall we spend the day Sam?


Let's home to our studies and put cases.


Hang cases and books that are spoiled with them. Give me Iohnson and
Shakespeare; there's learning for a gentleman. I tell thee Sam, were it not for
the dancing-schoole and Play-houses, I would not stay at the Innes of Court for
the h^pes of a chief Iustice-ship.


Time would be better spent in reading laws,
Teaching our knowledge how to argue doubts:
For in our after-states such may arise
That without policies help may ruin it.

Formality; a grave youth in a gown. Thou think 'tis becoming to walk
thus to Totenham-Court, and at home so punctual in confo^mitie. I had rather a
French consumption should wear my hair off then a round cap.


'Tis not to make it my profession,
(Although in some it be most necessary)
(For how can government and laws subsist
Without their ministers, whose skill and judgement
Distinguish right from wrong) but to be able
To man^ge what's mine own, as time shall send it,
You are likely to inherit fair possessions,
G^in'd by a fathers industry; perhaps
With some contention, and conveyances
M^y be defe^tive: were it not better fa^re
Your self could u^derstand it, then to trust
The honesty or skill of a bought counsel?

Hang state: I took no pains to get, why then should I take any to keep it?
if it will stay, so 'tis: if not, Shop-keepers that will trust, shall be paid
when they can get it. A law of necessity Sam, and always in force with
Gallants.


I had rather hear another resolution.


Will Changelove, well met at Totenham-Court.
What made thee rise so early?

The company of half a man: expound my Riddle, and be a whole Oedipus.


It must be more then thy Taylor.


Right, his Wife; who being half of himself, makes up the third part a half
man. I love his company man, and pay him with nothing but courtesies: a
Totenham-Courts kindness is principal, interest and security.


What shall we drink? Ale?


I love it best; the old English natural drink. But can this gentleman study
a^ter Ale?


If I avoid the excess.


Ale's muddy: what think you of Beer?


I love Beer best. The planting of hoppes was a rare projection in the Dutch;
it hath taught some of them English naturally.


Shall we hunt to day Will? I heard the common cry abroad.


Hunting! 'tis sport to make immortal activenes
Even in the dullest Earth. A well-mouth'd cry
Out-does the Sphaeres in Musique. Gods themselves
Have left their fabulous Heaven, to put on
The shapes of hunters: courting such delights
In these disguises, that hath made them wish
Th'exchange of their ethereal government
To live with mortals. I love hunting dearly.
What saith your friend?

Indeed sir, my affection
Is better pleased with solitary study:
A sober mornings walk, is exercise
Enough for me.

You a^e to be commended.
Why, Contemplation is the very being
Of Mans delight: it shows his nobler part
Converse with things divine; the nimble soul
Climbs by it to a height of happiness.
I must confess I love it.

Is there Musique with the company you left?


And good too: 'tis company of that curiosity, ordinary stuff will not please
them.


Would thou would enter me into their acquaintance; we might have a dance.


Why, I love dancing too. Agility
Commends the good composure of one's body;
And graceful garbs are taking. No perfection
Doth make the object of a handsome man
So pleasing in a Ladies eye, as Dancing.
This Room's more spacious: I'll invite them hither.

They have prevented me.

The room's posse^t.


You may command a resignation.


Please you t'admit us; we would fain partake
Your worth and company.

Your friends Will Changelove?


Yes, noble sir.


They are welcome to my knowledge.
Numbers addition will increase our mirth,
And swell it to more height.

Arm me now confidence,
And teach my tongue, that never spake untruth
From a consideration, practise lying,
And the d^nyall of my proper self.
It is my brother, he will discover me.

'Tis surely she: they are all her lineaments.
Had I ne'er seen her; had not knowing sense
Power to distinguish, n^turall instinct
Would tell me 'tis my sister. Why disguised?
And why come hithe^? it hath wrapped my reason
In mists of wonder. Yet I cannot fear
She hath betrayed her honour to base wantonness.
She had a guard of virtues; else hypocrisy
Taught her to seem a Saint, and paint that goodnes^e
With a false colour. Know you not my sweet heart?

No indeed sir.


Is not your name Bellamuel?


Neither sir.


Deny's her self.
There's something in't^ above my reach of fear.
Passion forbear me, and I'll work with policy,
To find the scope of all.

A sweet young Gentleman.
Is this your sweet-heart maid?

Is she your servant?
I wou^d have called her kinswoman for resemblance
She hath with one of mine.

Your Aunt or Cousin?


Means she in the mystical sense of ill?


Shall we dance gentlemen? Musicknesse, and let activenesse freeze! Shall I use
you sweet Mistress?


Kindly sir, or I am waspish. A wasp you know hath a sting.


Please that gross gentleman?


By no means sir: dancing will hurt his Sciati^a.


Do you know him then?


Yes, and will know him better if he come near me.
He is one into whom the spirit of Swetnam's crept.
I hope sir you are of a kinder disposition to our sex.

You see Mistress I am for their comp^ny any way.


Pray sir let's go nearer the women.


Pray sir forbear: you'll not compel me rudely.
Perhaps there's an aversion in my nature.
The company of women's mine affliction.

My wife shall vex you then.


And I love Mans society: solid souls,
Void of all light impressions; whose discourse
Tends not to superficial complement,
But hath more sense then sound.

You are for dancing;
Possess my room,

The women's creature sir.
There's Magic in their company that charms
All masculine affections, but of ple^sure
In their enjoying. I'll spin or thread their needles,
Read Spenser and the Arcadia for their company.

I'll dance with you Mr. Changelove.


One cup more, I'll be for the exercise.


You'll have more anon husband, then your head will well carry.


She means horns.
Which if I fail to give her, may I turn
Chastities convert, and be mortifi'd
From my concupiscence with hourly discipline.

Why how now husband? you'll be tippled presently.


Hold good wife, before strangers? The other dozen, and then I'm gone.


I would you were gone once for me.


So would I.


Gentlemen, a health to --


Whom sir?


All the Cuckolds in the strand.


Fie husband, you forget your self. Nay, gentlemen he is such another man;
when he hath got a cup or two he will not stick to abu^e his betters. I beseech
you bear with him, I shall be ready to bear with any of you.


Wife, you shall drink a health to all the Cuckold-maker in Cornwall.


You mean wrestlers sweet-heart; you are so taken with your Cornish P^entice.
I tell ye gentlemen, hearing him talk the other day of the hug, I wished him
to show me what 'twas: the stiff knave presently gives me a fall: but it was
upon a soft bed.


Otherwise there had been danger.


Come sweet Mistress, the other dance.


Will you make one sir?


Alas fair Mistress, my gross body wants
A mimic activenesse.

But you can move sir?


Bestir your stumps a little sir. Are women such bugbears, especially handsome
ones? for I have been flattered.


Well said Wife; to him Wife.


I durst undertake yet, had you one of us in a corner.


How she instructs me! nay then.


Will you be gone George?


After him Wife, put him too't, and tickle him home.


I'll warrant husband I'll bring him into play.


It seems this gentleman loves not the company of women.


At least wise tis pretended. Were it a plot
To gull her husband, I should love it dearly.
Why did not I attempt it, that have had
More opportunities then ever made
Sin fruitful in the pleasure? If it be so,
The next share shall be mine. I love a wench
As well as he or any.

The other health, and then farewell,


Mr. Stitchwell is your name?


A Taylor in the Strand; and I am as good a man there as Deputy Tag in the
City, though he think himself an Aldermans fellow, and no Cuckold.


You mind Cuckolds much: good sir remember your self.


By your leave then; I must, and I will, I will and I must.


What must you sir?


Why, you may do what you will; and I will do what I list.


The Taylor's paid.


By your favour, 'tis alye.


And his Wife too by this. Follow me gentlemen, and if he prevent it not,
we'll share some pastime. Sweet, I'll return presently.


Can my chaste thoughts within their spotless circuit
Retain a good opinion of this gentleman,
Who gives free scope to his libidinous will
In actions that stain conscience?

Can my ills
Grow to a greater height? my honours danger
Runs equal with my persons.

He hath courted
Almost beyond resistance, (had not goodness
Preserved me white) to ^ully me with lust;
And failing offered marriage.

Can a Brother
Construe this place, disguise, and company
Less then a lapse from virtue in a Sister,
Who laboured more to be good really,
Then ever hypocrite did to appear so.

I must not trust. Besides, mine eye hath seen
An object that delights it; and desire
Begins to burn my bosom with new flames
I yet ne'er felt. 'Tis an ambitious love,
And must be checked. Why? sure my Birth's more noble:
My spirit argues it, which never yet
Harboured a common thought; but all above
The lowness of my fortune. How now Mistress?

Distressed beyond recovery. 'Twas my brother;
Whose eye no sooner found me, but his looks
Expressed a troubled soul: but when he heard
My tongue deny my self; what passions then
Possessed him, may be thought.

Is he your Brother?
Fear not to be discovered: I have plots
To circumvent him, and prepare his temper
For mild impressions.
Prithee Friend show us a private room.

With convenience Mistress.


For a retirement.


This way Mistress. I smell the reward of a knaves office: howsoever sin
thrives by wickedness. Frothfill'd Cans and over-reckonings will hardly raise
a stock to set up with. Now will I inform the Gallants.


Pray sir, forbear. Is this a place to make ones husband a Cuckold in?


Let not such weak excuses rob my hopes
Of that delight, for whose enjoying
Danger and all that weakness can be frighted with --

Pray sir, talk not to me of weakness. The servants of the house will suspect
us presently.


Be expeditious then, we lose that time
Might make the pleasure fruitful.

Indeed sir I durst ee'n venture to make him cuchold, might I be sure you would
get a boy.


That's doubtless, sweet.


And shall he be like the father?


As ever Citizens son was.


I mean my husband.


I am a Courtier.


Kind sir, you even deserve it for your policy. But I am so afraid.


Mischief on these delays.


Sweet-heart, Wife.


Ay me.


Vexation racks me.
Prevented at the point of such a happiness!

Come Chuck and hold my head.


Pray sir, hide your self:


Where?


Happily, here's an empty tub.


My head aches Wife; where art chicken?


Here husband. You must press upon women's retirement.


Oh my stomach; 'tis very sick.


Empty it in the fields then; let not the servants take notice you are such a
sloven.


Why not in that rub?


Fie beast: defile a necessary implement of house-wifry? This 'tis to drink
healths to Cuckolds. You might have been one your self, were not I the
honester woman; which is more then many of your neighbours can say for
themselves.


Whet's Mr. Stitchw^ll? Fie, give out man, and steal away.


Oh gentlemen my head, my head; oh gentlemen.


Me thinks your forehead's swollen sir.


Truly no sir. There's no more then what hath been ever since I was his wife;
fifteen years and upwards, a long time of barrenness.


What the Devil make all these gentlemen in my Dames wash-house? Get ye up to
your chambers with a vengeance.


I wonder where my friend is.


Hold, hold; I am drowned.


George, what made you there?


Mischief on you sir: you have spoiled me a pail of conduit water cost me
many a weary step the fetching; beside the falls my sweet-heart Slip gave me.


Alas good gentleman; he hid himself from my Wife, and see what's happened.


Hell take your wife and you. Accursed women,
That in your curse made Man so.

Fie George, scold presently after your cucking.


Diogenes in dolio.


And lamentation.


Come forth George: now the Comedy is ended, away with the disguise.


Women or devils,
Made fair to be destructions instrument.

You seem to compassionate the mischance:


Good heart* but that he cannot endure a woman,
She should kiss him for amends.

I think it would grieve any woman. I came hither for something else then to be
railed at.


Let's vex him no more Gentlemen. Come wife,
He go sleep a little.

There will be a safe opportunity for me. I love this Cuckold-making.


Frank, though your self intend a reformation,
You might forbear me: this was your own plot.

Why mine? I ne'er had resolution yet
So stayed, but I could alter it for pleasure:
Nor can I hate or envy it in others.
I am sorry George you should drink water after your sweet-meats.

Do not abuse me left I think revenge:
I am almost tempted to attempt it.

The Gentlewoman hath withdrawn her self.


What Gentlewoman?


She in the satin gown. You know my meaning sir, she's as right --


Thanks honest Robin. Here's for thee.


I must thank you sir.


I'll take the first opportunity.


The gentlewoman is retired sir.


What gentlewoman?


You know my meaning. She's as right --


Pox on your Pandarising.


How now sir? I wonder what quantity of maiden modesty went to your making up.
Few gentlemen of your complexion would have been angry with an honest Tapster
for such intelligence.


My Sister turned a common prostitute?
I must discover it.

The gentlewoman's gone into another chamber Sir.


What gentlewoman?


She in the satin gown. There's a bed: you know my meaning. She's as right
--


You are a rogue sirrah.


Good sir, what mean you?


Mutter that thought again: I'll cut thy tongue out*


And kill anon, anon sir. But cold rewards. Had none any better; Pandars would
never purchase.


I'll take the Tapsters word, and try.


Come gentlemen, let's up again. By this time George your sorrow's dry.


And why should you think so Slip?


If I find them not, count me no wiser then an Apothecary, that looked for
Iewes ears on an old Pillory; When the dead wood bore none but Scriveners.


Enquire diligently, sirrah.


I will sir, and arm my self like a country Juror: I cannot hold out too fast
till I have given up my verdict.


My patience Sir hath hitherto made fair
The outside and appearance of that good
Your promise seemed to mean me. Circum^tance
Doth now instruct my fear, that this credulity
May be my danger. Treachery oft lurks
In complements. Y'have sent so many posts
Of undertakings, they out-ride performance.
And make me think your fair pretences aim
At some intended ill; which my prevention
Must strive t'avert. Then good sir, leave me.

Sir, though my outside's mean; I have a soul
Instructed in all dues belong to man.
I never yet mis-us'd a common action
With a prepared dissembling. My intents
Are fairer then your jealousy, which lives
But in the darkness of your ignorance.
'Tis a blind humour, let discretion guide it:
That th'end of your own good be not perverted
By ill receiving of the hopeful means
My freen^sse offers.

You have heardmy story;
But why it should so stir compassion
In any stranger, counsel cannot well
Remove the doubt.

Why Sir, I know a gentleman
Worthy in all things; but his crosser fortune
(On which mine had dependence as a servant)
Robbed him at once of all those gifts she lent him;
Estate, life, wife; his infant-Issue left
To her blind pity. Can I think you then,
Without some feeling, hear the sad relation
Of a misfortune, is so like to that,
As if the self same inauspicious stars
Were both their means. The news sirrah.

Very bad Sir. My incredulous hostess will not trust: therefore pray sir make
hast; for without some supply of drink I faint in the half way of my message.


Hast found them?


There's hopes or so: I he^rd an inkling. The house swarms with gallants; some
of which have surely taken up Ciceley, paltry Baggage, she p^ayes the Lady at
least, and makes mincing faces like a country Bride at the upper end of the
table.


Pray Sir let's in: we may perhaps find them here.


O fate, unless thy guiding kinder prove,
Despair kills all my hope, and ends my love.

Oh Cakes and Ale, if you your sweets deny,
Let Slip despairing in a halter die.

Fear not Mistress any of their attempts in my house: you have your
instructions and my aid. Make use of any thing I own for your honest ends,
and if you need my person, I am ready in my bar at your call.


We thank you Mistress.
Why should you fear the execution
Of my desires? why are women subject
To that disease? or else hath nature chose it
To show the difference? I was meant a man sure;
For I have Masculine resolutions,
Which no deluding spirits can abuse
With their mis-guiding; nor imperfect moone-light
Mock with false shadows. Danger frights not me.

Doubt of my loved friends safety (without whom
My souls abilities are dead to use)
Hath numbed the sense of action: I'm all passive.
Yet I have heard from him relations
Of horrid battai^es, and his persons danger;
When as the murdering Canons choak't the air
With their curled mists, their loud noise ushering death
To his black triumph. A little custom made it
To be my pastime. Those were dangers past;
But these to come.

You have a soldier sweet-heart,
And no more courage! what a race of Cowards
Would spring from that loves joining? for Physicians
Say women have most right in the conception.
Were but our causes changed (our cases are)
I'd tell this brother a^l; and if his love
From a pretence of care denied me aid,
I'd school him soundly. Come, come, you shall, tell
Your Brother that I love him.

Love my Brother?


Your Brother Mistress. If my beauty can
(Which ha's been slatter'd ^or a taking one)
Win upon his desires, I'll soon work him
To what you please. Nay, rather then the project
Should fail of a success, he shall enjoy me;
But fairly.

Aid me now discretion. Would you
Make mean agent to undo my Brother;
And but for such mean ends?

Why gentlewoman,
Disparage not my low condition.
Perhaps misfortune meant it not my birth;
That might be noble as your own, though boasted
From th'heraulds Catalogue of dead Ancestors.
My father oft hath told me when my fingers
Pressed the Cowes dugs, and from their fullness drew
Abundance of white streams, that Nature meant not
These limbs for labour. But this may appear
The flattery of my self.

Into what maze
My dangers lead me! ^'th middle there's a Monster,
If I go on, will ruin me: if back;
I want an Ariadnean Clue of policy
To be my guide.

If you'll preserve your self
From a discovery, you must counterfeit
Some other passions; or clothe these in mirth.

How now maid? why left you the door open?

'Tis shut again sweet Mistress. If it offend you, I will buy my pardon at your
own rate.


What would you have sir?


A little pleasure Sweet. Come, come, what's your price?


You sure mistake me sir.


As if I had not practised wenching su^iciently to understand a dissembled
modesty: because I am a stranger, I'll come to your lodging when I know where
'tis. But say your price? half a crown?


Have I found you gallant? I am dearer Sir; that's my maids rate. The truth is
I have my Maiden-head yet, and have bargained with a gentleman below for it.


Let me have it; I'll double his reward.


I love to be as good as my word. Sure sir he would kill you if he knew of your
attempt. That's he sir.


And my young valour dare not encounter him.


Your Citie-borne coward never make's fortunate whoremaster.


Would I were safe.


Best hide your self in this sir.


A handsome convenience. When he's gone, release me.


Fear it not sir, but be sure you lie still. Open the door maid; and do you
hear? get the key of the trunk.


What may this come to?


Pardon me fair one. My intrusion tends
To beg a happiness; please you to crown it
With your consent and welcome?

What's in me
To grant, you shall command.

I take your word.
The pleasure of your bed. I will reward it
With a new gown and angels; dally not
In any coy denial.

Not in this place.
But if you please --

New jealousy instructs.
My fear this woman's nought, and such a one
As sells her self to sin. What fates conspire
To make me miserable?

'Tis a motion
Suits with my liking. The pains will make the pleasure
More sweet in the enjoying.

Courting her!
George, 'tis not friendly.

Mischief on suspicion.
I've given you all the flattering commendations
That might confirm her love.

No more; I thank thee.


I leave ye. Now to my practice of revenge,
And the delight it comprehends within it
Above Elizium.

Dear, when shall my love
Be happy in enjoying what it makes
The object of desire? Shall this fair morning
Be consecrate to Hymen?

Worthy Sir,
Such is the difference 'twixt your birth and fortune,
And my condition (whose in^eriour aim
Da^e not be levelled higher then it's equality)
Makes (cowards policy,) fear, to be th'excuse
Of my delay. For were you satisfied
With that which you call pleasure; and satiety
Had taken the edge off, what's in me can whe^
New appe^ite, and revive a dying love?
Your estima^ion branded with the infamy
Of a base choice: taunts from the mouth of envy:
Aspersions to beget a killing jealousi^.
And when you shall re^l^ct --

Prithee no more
These needless doubts. I^m armed with preparations
For my resolves, that no assault can bitter.

Pardon me sir; th^re's ground of circumstance
To build a faith on, that your desires end
Is my enjoying for your sense^ pleasure.
N^t the conv^rse which love instructs the soul in.

Why should false fears make such a bad construction?
Prithee no more.

But I must search you thoroughly.
You're noble sir; and now I will unmask
This false complexion of an hypocrite,
Which hitherto deluded your opinion
But with a show of virtue. The truth is
My inclination's wanton; and thi^ day
I meant to make a sale of that, for which
You have so fairly bid: my Maiden-head.
You see I'm fitted ^or it.

What do I hear?


The gentleman that left me, is the Merchant.
A price is likewise set upon the ware.
The time and place of interchange appointed.
The means: a porter in that trunk must carry me
Unto his chamber: You seem troubled Sir
At the relation.

'Tis to try me sure:
She cannot mean it. How my thoughts rebel
Against their guide?

Troth sir, I must confess
Your person likes me better, and the love
You have professed deserves my gratitude.
Meet you this porter, and compel him with you;
You shall enjoy me first, and afterwards
When I set up the trade be still more welcome.

Should this be ea^nest. it would make me happy
Above mine own desire; and should she mock me,
'Twere but returning to my first intents.
Some way I must enjoy her. Shall this practice
Give me those sweets have been so long denied
With counterfeited modesty?

Be sure sir;
My Tutor in the Art left me instructions
To take the fairest offer.

My reward
Shall treble his. Be constant to my pleasure,
I'l^ keep thee like a wife; and serve thy will
With full content.

That as your liking pleases.
When you are weary, I'll but beg your bounty
For a new wardrobe to set up with.

How mans desire
Pursues contentment! 'tis the soul of action,
And the propounded reason of our life.
Yet as the choice appears, or gross or excellent,
We ^lye not from th'injoying; but are changed
In our opinion either of the object,
Or of the means that works it. Why should I
Alter a resolution? The contentment
Is still the same: and a far easier means
Without that tie necessitates the will
To a sixth bounds. Besides, my credit's safe.
To keep a Mistress youths excuse may serve;
But an inferior match brands my posterity,
If equal blood commix not. H^nce then scruple,
And all that frights saint conscience. Swe^t I welcome
The freeness of your kind and loving promise
With as much joy, as can possess a heart
Made jovial by th'effe^t of all it's wishes:
Be constant to it.

Be you confident;
I cannot be diverted from my purpose:
The end's too pleasant, Pray prepare your self;
The time draws on.

And till my expectation
Ends in that full possession of delight,
Times wings are clipped. So farewell sweet till then.

And farewell base desires. May thy soul lust
Make thee still credulous, till abuse and shame
Teach thee amendment. What an Orator
Is Sin? that paints it self with golden words
Of pleasure and delight; as if the soul
Had it's eternal being and full powers
But for the senses satisfaction:
And their enjoying it Creations end.
Now to our Comedy. Ha^ fast asleep!
This fits our purpose. Lock it fast.

Will not the feathers choke him?


He's armed against mischances. Give it the Porter,
I must withdraw.

Now I perceive
Goodness guides all her actions: her minds brightness
Out-shines her outward beauty. But what use
Can my misfortune make of't? yes; th'example
Shall teach me how to counterfeit, if I
Can force my passion to it.

Here's the Gentleman.

Now wench, is all ready?


I have packed her up in it, like a Bartholmew-babie in a box. I warrant you
for hurting her.


'Tis a good wench. I'll give thee a new gown for it.


I thank you sir. When you are weary of my mistress, and cast her o^f (as I
know you must have change) you shall have my maiden-head at the same rate if
you please: I'll keep it for you.


'Tis a bargain.


But two words to it. Pray sir use her ne'er the w^rse for my promise.


The better. I'll turn her off within this fortnight, and send for thee.


Oh sir, 'tis not fit a servant should shift her Mistress trencher before the
bones are clean picked. You have flesh enough to hold out a month.


It shall be a month then?


Be careful Porter of your carriage.


Married? that I am to a freemans widow, and I wear the Citie-Armes by her
first husbands copy.


The Porter is deaf sure.


Pray sir let me ask you one ques^ion.


Quickly then.


How many maiden-heads have you bought thus?


Some nineteen with thy mistresses.


Pray sir, let mine make up the score: an even reckoning.


It shall, it shall: here's for thee Robin.


The trunk is worth more sir, besides the feathers that are in it. But to do
you a pleasure.


Help him down stayres with it.


Here's a Totenham-Court project translated over the water from Holland.


Farewell wench.


Adieu good sir, with your fair bed-fellow that must be.
Had I ^y Worthgood here, this accident
Would strain my heart strings to a pitch of laughter,
And make my spleen^ dance. But his loss hath killed
All sense of joy.

Now Mistress, what think you of it?
Have I not taken a course to punish lust?
At least wise with disgrace. Though custom calls
Those actions only honest, that are glorious
In publiqu^ same; yet sometimes to dissemble
An ill that's not intended, when the end
Hath cl^e^'d it to opinion, it attains
The greater praise.

Indeed, I must confess
My fears possessed me strongly you were noughe:
Nor is suspicion grounded on due circumstance
To be accounted ill. But now my knowledge
Instructs me better to commend your virtue;
And steer mine own course by the fair example
Of your discretion, were the like attempted
Upon my chastity.

Alas, my Brother.

Now must I practise unaccustomed impudence. By your leave gentle creatures:
may I have my turn now for a little sport! Nay, nay, sweetheart, thou shalt
serve: thy Mistress is too dear; and I am loath to pay over-much for repentance.
'Tis but changing offices: let her hold the door for thee.


Pray sir, speak and mean civilly; you'll not be welcome else.


Good Lady light-heele; give your servant leave to practise the trade you have
taught her. That such perfections as appear in this woman should be sold to
every base desire. Come wench, thy browne complexion pleases me better then
thy Mistresses: thou dost not paint, and art the likelier to be wholesome.


Good gentleman, he is jealous, and would circumvent her.


He^re's half a crown wench; me thinks 'tis a fair rate. Ha! singer in the
eye? Keep thy tears for penance in Bride well. Cry when money's offered
thee?


Oh Brother.


Ha! are you my Sister?


Your S^ster Bellamie.


Why s^ee's in the Country at mine Uncles,
Teaching her hand some neat industrious practice;
Or painting with her needle the rare form
Of some choice flower; to her busy servant
Discoursing Moralls; or perhaps at prayers,
Or meditation: these were her exercises;
Not prostitution. What an impudence
Is this imposture?

Temper your anger brother,
For it appears in the wrinkles of your brow.
And let not passion burn your jealous fears
With an intemperate heat. I have a story
You'll pity, though all natural affection
Were quite extinguished.

Then you are my Sister?


Dissemble not those doubts; but hear me.


No.
I'm deaf to all excuse. 'Tis too apparent.
Possess me virtuous rage; make me the instrument
Of a religious justice.

Guard me innocence.


Oh that the knowing soul, which can distinguish
It self and powers; should yield her government
To the lascivious appetite of sense:
And under such a base subjection
Ruin her noble parts. True estimation
Is grounded on the actions of the mind:
And to determine bravely, well as honestly,
Must be the last, and most refined digestion
Of a high flying nature. Such should hers be.
She wanted not th'instruction, nor example
Of worthy Parents, that honour is the most
Essential part of life, and valewd 'bove it.

Good gentleman, he's troubled.


Oh hypocrisy,
Thy painted shows must likewise mock our judgments
Into an apt credulity, that makes
Bad worse by the dissembling. Had she wanted
Or means of power or fortune to discover
This inclination; like the Serpent numbed
With a long rigidnesse, forbeare's to sting
His warmers bosom, not because he hath not
A poison; but because the force thereof
Is feebled by the cold.

You seem disturbed sir.


Who'lever trust devotion, or believe
That any zeal is earnest? I should rather
Have called an Eremite hypocrite: or suspected
Th'austerities of an Anchorite to be
But for vaine-glory or a common fame,
Then her appearing goodness. Fury prompts me
To a black act. 'Tis well I have no sword.
But may she not survive her first repentance;
Which shame or punishment shall teach her quickly.
Lustful insatiate whore. Could not a husband
Have coold your blood?

You need no other weapon,
Those words have killed me.

Ay me, what have you done sir? help, help.


If it be earnest, cured a wounded fame.
My reputation would have bled a little,
Had she lived longer infamous: her death
May lose the memory of her dishonour.

Good gentlewoman she faints. Help, help.


The cry came from this Chamber.


'Sfoot sir, 'tis Mistress Ci^eley, and Ciceley Mistress. Ha, ha, sir; did you
put her to the squeak? I'll put you --


Hold sirrah.


Look up my love: ha! What malicious chance
Begets this new prevention of our happiness?
Oh let our souls together climb the height
Of their eternity; if fate denies
Other enjoying.

'Tis my Worthgoods voice.
That Orphean Music charms my senses back
From the dark shades of their privation.
Welcome again: I never more will lose thee.

What are you sir, that seem thus tender of her?


I give no answer to uncivil questions
With calmer words. And yet I scorn to strike,
Unless I saw some armour for resistance.

This is my Husband Brother, far as vows
Can join us, till Church-ceremony hath
Confirmed it stronger.

He your Brother sweet?
His pardon first; then leave I may embrace
His worthy love.

'Tis not your complement
Can win upon me. If your worth deserves
My Sisters love (I hope my Uncles care
Hath well examined it) freely enjoy
What you desire: But my opinion is
Scarce settled yet. You seem a Gentleman.

And am one: that was given me in my birth.
If not, my sword hath purchased it.

With leave
I would relate the accident to satisfy
Your curious love; which makes you doubt that ill
Ne'er stained a thought in her: and for my self,
My life's untouched by envy.

Gentle sir,
Let my persuasion work upon your temper;
And make it pliable to forgo all jealousy,
And misconstruction. Something is reserved
In mine own knowledge, shall disperse those clouds
That muffle error in their misty rowles;
And makes it blind in all things but in mischief.

If Bellamie be virtuous, she's my Sister;
And shall not lose that interest.

Now Ciceley,
'Tis time that you disrobe.

By no means father.
My part's not ended yet.

Please her accept
Th'exchange as my thanks gift; since to her care
And full discretion I must attribute
My safety. Something's now in action,
By her begun from an ingenious practice,
Will make the end more comic.

But 'twill turn
To a sad Tragedy, if I enjoy not
This worthy gentleman.

A larger room
Were more convenient. Please you sir the house
Is well accommodated.

What's more to be expected
Can cross or crown our loves with new events?

Go your ways and quarrel no more, lest I be stickler with this terrible
Emblem of a Butchers cruelty.


The effects of drinking, Mr. Changelove: his head should be troubled with
something else, were he ruled by me. But he cares not for my counsel, nor me.
I could even curse mine own kindness, that am ready still to make more of him
then he doth of me.


Why do you not then --


What sir? I warrant you mean make him a Cuckold.


That's a gross construction. Give a friend leave to do you a pleasure, or so.
The truth is Mistress I love you.


You were ever kind Mr. Changelove.


And would your freenes give me leave t'enjoy
Those sweets, although forbidden, 'twould be a happiness
'Bove my desire. Be assured my secrecy
Is firm as night and locks.

S^cresie, Mr. Changelove? I would have you know I will be open to all the
world. I'll do no more in the dark, then in this very place, were my husbands
eyes open.


Here then. He sleeps s^curely, never dreaming Of any foreheads arming.


Fie Mr. Changelove, you are such a tempter. Pray (...) many a woman would not
hold out so long.


Consent then sweet; wee'^ to it.


Ware horns there.


Mischief, what noise hath waked him?


An infirmity he hath to talk in's sleep. Nay I assure you he will rise
sometimes and do the office of a waking man in his dream, and not know of it
in the Morning.


Rome for one of the headmen in his Parish: a monster of his wives making.


Wicked man; he dreams now that I would make him a Cuckold.


Send it be no counterfeit.


And have I taken you sir Lancelot? would you be billing with my Gumiver?


Help me Mistress Stitchwell.


Take it patiently Sir: his sit will be over presently.


For this attempt King Arthur doth here degrade thee from a Knight of his round
Table, to be a Squire of his Wives body. So conduct me to her bed; where I
will beget a race of warriors shall cage thy great Turkship again, and
restore Constantinople to the Emperor.


You mistake: oh. My Periwig is not a Turban.


Peace follows victory, let us now to rest.


Pray sir, forgive him: I dare undertake he will be sorry for it when he wakes.
If any thing I can may make amends.


Prove his dream true. When the smart's over I shall forget it.


A quest of inquiry is sent all the house over to look you Mistress. The
gentlewoman's maid was in a swooned: they wanted your assistance.


Who wants assistance? who breaks the Kings peace? fetch me my Constables
staff.


He will dream again: had I best stay?


Now drunkard, are you recoverd yet?


Wife and Mr. Changelove, wheres the company?


Gone, being weary of such a sot as you make your self. Pretend a walk for
health and recreation, to be drunk so early? I had done well to have served
you in your kind: here were gentlemen enough that would have brought me home;
and some not far off that used me kindly, whilst you snorted to fright sl^as,
and dream't perhaps some wickedness of me.


Prithee peace sweet wife: I'll mend all.


I promise you, you shall never mend me, till you do better your self.


I'll buy my pardon for it with a new gown, and a journey into the Country
next vacation.


You know Iohn I am easy to be wrought upon.


Will you discharge the reckoning Mr. Changelove?


Not willingly: I do not love it. No revenge upon this dreaming tyrant over
unpaid for gallantry? A protection to defraud him is long since provided. What
is your reckoning, Robin?


Nine and three-pence sir.


The particulars.


Cakes two shillings. Ale as much. A quart of mortified Claret eight pence.
Stewed pruins twelve pence.


They were dear.


Truly, they cost a penny the pound of the one-handed Coster-monger, out of
his wives fish-basket. A quart of Cream, twelve-pence.


That's too excessive.


Not if you consider how many Carriers eggs miscarried in the making of it;
and the charge of Ising-glasse and other ingredients to cremifie the sour
milk.


All this is but a Noble.


Pray mark me sir, I'll make it more. Twelve-pence Sugar. You had bread sir.


And we had drink sir.


'Tis granted sir. A pound of sausedges, and other things, nine shillings and
three-pence. Our Bar never erres.


I'll talk with your Mistress. You know my meaning Robin.


Oh the extortion of Tottenham-Court!


No matter Wife: kind Mr. Changelove will pay for all. Ha! where is he?


Gone Sir.


Then give me my Cloak.


The reckoning first Sir.


How! must Taylors pay Gallants reckonings?


Sure husband, he intends this a satisfaction for his beating.


Have you such tricks? No great matter: 'tis but adding it to his bill in my
debt-booke, and presently arresting him with a fat Martiallist. Here sirrah.


You're welcome Sir. Some profit comes from hence:
I have ore-reckon'd one and twenty-pence.

A Heavy burden I assure you Sir.


That's strange: a light Wench, and feathers.


You say true Sir; 'tis enough to break a mans back.


His mistake hits upon truth. Rest thee Porter.
Oh this plots quaintness: witty luxury,
How it acutes invention, and makes pregnant
Even barren faculties to beget new issues
Of rare conceit. But my credulity
Was rash and sudden. If she hath abused it,
And mocked my hopes of pleasure, wh^t revenge
Can give m^ satisfaction? Here's the key,
Though late these doubts arise, I greatly long
To have mine eye resolve them. Company,
Forbear a little then, and rest thee Porter.

'Tis a fair circumstance, and may confirm
My first suspicion. Where found you the Horses?

In the high way near yonder houses. The place is called TOTENHAN-COURT.


Our intelligence hath something Landlord.


What's That?


The truth is being weary --


O^d men Landlord, old men. Labour agrees worse with us then wrangling with a
lean Parson that hath a fat Benefice.


P^ay' interrupt him not: Forwards Neighbour.


At a house yonder we prevailed to be let in: where the little time that
remained 'till morning we slept soundly.


And dreamt we were in Cranborne Church at a drowsy Sermon.


On good Neighbour.


Day no ^oon r^peet, but noise waked us. The house was presently full of
Gallants with Music, and to dancing they went. We a^kt the reason, they of
the house told us 'twas customary for Gentlemen to have early revels and
rendezvous there. At length we heard one speak of a Gentlewoman in a sat
gown: which we conceiving to be Mistres Bellamie, made haste to London to your
Son to info^me your worship.


Oh my cursed fate; they have prevented sure.
My care, by zeal and nature ^o instructed
To tender her good, that I have not left
Counsel or threats unurged to perfect it.
They are questionless matryed.

Might I advise your worship then let them alone 'till night: when they are in
bed together, they are the likelier to be caught napping.


My Nephew's gone abroad too. Is't the custom
Of Students that pretend a love to Learning
And noble Sciences, to make the morning
Their time of recreation? Or have they
Had correspondence, and his friendly aid
Is in the plot! Yon Porter may perhaps
Inform us something.

If these question the Porter, I must answer for him.


Good speed f^iend. Did see a Gentleman and a Gentlewoman abroad in the
Fields?


Betwixt nine and ten.


He means the clock: his hearing is surely imperfect.
Did see a Gentlewoman in a satin gown?

Indeed 'tis a heavy burden: I fetched it from TOTENHAM-COURT.


Did see a Gentlewoman?


A Gentlewoman in a Trunk of Feathers! that were very pretty.


Oh villain.


A Gentlewoman at TOTENHAM-COURT!


I saw many there Sir, and one in satin: but they are all upon parting.


I thank you Sir. Come let's hasten.


What may this be! It hath begot new jealousies.


And here's new mischief. Hath the Devil policy
To prevent ill? There's no avoiding him.
'Tis he: h'nath spied me; and his fears deject him.
Sweet constancy, how I could blame the good
Thy kindness means me, that had rather lose
Thine own white purity, then stain my credit
With spots time cannot wash out. Doubly happy
Shall I be in enjoying her, and punishing
A tr^cherous friend.
George, how long have you converst with the Frock-trade?
I thought the smock had bin your chief delight.

The Porter waits upon me.


With stuffing for your bed.


A light commodity I bought at Totenham-Court. Did ever think I should have
been so thrifty to buy feathers at the best hand? When I have used them
thoroughly, there are Suburb Upholsters will give me my money again.


Me thinks they are very heavy.


Let them alone.


Have not you stolen mine Hostess great brass Pot she boiled old marrow-bones
in, for the fat to make her Cakes with when Butter is scarce? Porter you shall
carry it along with me.


Prithee go back to thy milk Maid.


Dost thou deride me? Nay then Porter up with it, or h^re's a goud to force
you, and let out some of your Goats blood.


Thou dare not strike a friend basely.


Friendship is canceld.
You have broke the league that knit over our outward love:
For in consent of ill L^ve's never solid.
Had not abused that love with foul intents:
I would have thanked th^ pains, which she contrived
On^ly ^or m^ t'enjoy her.

Is't even so!
You shall hear from me Frank. Come hither Porter,
She hath legs to walk with you.

But that I think disgrace a punishment
Worthy the guilt, this instant hour should give
The wrongs thou did intend a satisfaction.
I must be bold sweet: mine are no Porters shoulders.
A Coach waits not far off.

Lie still a little, here's company.

Let me ruminate.


I paid the reckoning Mr Changelove, and am sorry for it, I mean the wrong I
did you.


'Twas no offence: or had it; you have satisfied.
I love the memory of it. 'Twill be a Story
To greet a ring of friends with: next I meet
Shall have it all.

It may pass indeed for a merry one by a good fire in Winter, which I love
dearly.


A good fire Mistress Stitchwell is Winters artificial Sun, that renews
Summer within doors. I love it.


With two or three good companions, and a gossips feast.


That's very right. Society is the use
Of mans best o^naments. Speech and discourse
Are reasons messengers, that carry errands
From one soul to another. I confess
I love good company.

'Tis a good exercise to rise in a frosty morning, and kill Birds.


You say well Sir, We that have youthful blood,
That capers in our veins, and swells their concaves
With active warmth, should be inur'd to hardness.
Tis healthful, and I love it.

I have it. Do you know these Frank?


Mischief, I must prevent them.


You may if please you, suffer the Porter to pass, and stay yourself. Credit
is precious: let me enjoy my sport, yours may be preserved. Otherwise your
trull and you shall both su^fer. I am desperately resolute, and will reveal
all.


And I as desperate. Up with it Porter.


Any thing: will you suffer this Gentleman?


Nay then Frank.


Help help.


If he be gone sweet heart, let me out. I am almost stifled.


Whence that voice?


The Gentlemen that were in our company! Let us prevent them. Be not afraid
Wife.


Alas I cannot endure such naked weapons.


What will this come to?


I beseech ye Gentlemen kill me not, I have been sufficiently mortified; and I
believe you may smell, the effects of my fear.


Is this the lovely piece, for whose enjoying
I have attempted what by ill success
Makes me ridiculous: yet I swell with laughter
To think how finely she hath gulled us both,
And mocked our easy trust.

Pray Sir how came you hither?


I think upon that Porte^s shoulders.


But how into this Trunk?


I'll tell you sir. Bargaining for a little sport with the Gentlewoman, whom I
thought to be a wanton, she possessed me with scare, (to which cowardice is
always apt, and I must acknowl^dge in my self) that a Gentleman (one of you
two I take it) had dealt with her for her Mayden-head, and that she expected
him. He came: and I fearing lust as well as love would brooke no rival, made
use of this for my safety. Wh^re being heavy headed with Ale, I have slept til^
your noise waked me.


An excellent conceit; how like you it Wife? This Gentleman cannot endure the
company of Women.


I knew before he did but dissemble: that made me so desir^us to try him. There
was a Tub at Totenham; you I now the success of it.


I ever thought Mistress Stitchwell that was your own plot; and I love you
dearly for it.


Love me Mr Changelove? Take heed my Husband do not dream of it.


That was her plot too. Now do I see, some Women can counterfeit wickedness,
as well as many dissemble hones^y. Come Sir, let you and I drown the memory of
our disasters in a cup of Sack.


You see gallants what success attends your ente^prises.
Henceforth account not every City Wife
Wanton, that on^ly loves a merry life.

And here's a double comfort; being wedded,
She's neither false, nor am I jealous headed.

Accursed credulity. Could not those doubts
I shaped my jealousy, preserve my first,
And noble resolution I Had I urged it
With greater zeal, she must have forced her reason
To understand m'intention without practise
Of farther trial. Now she's lost for ever;
Though I should with submission and repentance
Beg reconciliation with her thoughts,
(Whose purity cannot endure to mix
With mine that were so foul) she would reject it.
I'll back, and try. Lustful affections hence.
My Lov's new clothed in virtuous innocence.

Frank We are friends: since we have shared disgrace,
We kill all malice. Henceforth I shall strive
To live more chaste. Lust is a gilded pill,
Which sinful nature doth prescribe desire.
It mocks the sense with pleasure; but at last
The shining outside leaves a bitter taste.

But prithee tell me, what's her condition?


Womanish. She'll cry when she's angry; laugh when she's tickled, and be sick
when she cannot have her own will.


I mean her calling.


She is called Cicily.


Her profession then.


Not very honest, and yet very honest. She cheats all the world that thinks she
is wanton: but you may find by the late stories, that neither your Aunts nor
Cousins can keep their legs so close.


Here's money for thee.


You are as bountiful as a new made Knight, that cou^ts a City Widow by
Attorney for the officers fees.


P^et^ee te^l me how was she borne?


You had b^d a^k^ the Midwife.


This fellow trifles. Is the Keeper thy Master her own^ Fath^r?


Should you conjure th^ Devil into her dead Mother, he might chance to t^ll
you ^lye.


Is she a Gentlewoman or not?


She is* and she is not. She is a Gentlewoman as she loves pride: which makes
Gentlewomen apt to fall; especially those of the weighting form. Then she is no
Gentlewoman because -- because --


Prithee no more.


'Tis well you interrupted me, for I had no reason: But Sir I will bring her to
the bar of your presence, where she may answer for her self, whilst I
convert your bounty into wholesome nourishment from a black Pot, and have a
bout with mine own sweet Turneup.


Mine eye ne'er saw with aptness to desire
That beauty could enthrall m'unbounded thoughts
With passionate affection. Yet this piece
Is absolute, and ^uch as cannot choose
But have a glorious mind. Love is a cement
That joins not earthly parts above, but works
Upon th'eternall substance* making o^e
Of two agreeing souls. Were she borne nobly,
(As surely such perfections cannot be
The issue of base parents) so that infamy
Might not succeed, here would I fix my choice.
Besides she's virtuous, and her education
Beseeming ^reatnesse: her discourse; pure language;
Judgment, and full behaviour argue it.

She's come. How like an Angel, as if sent
On some celestial message to the soul
Of a departing Saint. White innocence
Is in each look and feature, as all goodness
Had built their mansion in her. Welcome fair one,
I hope my pardon's sealed for thus presuming
On what you might call rud enesse.
You have shaped
Needless apology to excuse a guilt,
When none appears. I owe much to your virtue
It doth command my thoughts.

Which are so glorious,
I must admire the actions that express them.
I hope your judgement doth not call it ill,
That my intemperate anger being grownded
On virtuous suspicion, did transport me
Beyond a moderate passion. I am satisfi'de.
Your innocence hath cleared my jealousy;
Which was I know instruction to my sister,
And th'onely working means that kept her safe.
The Gentleman she loves I find is worthy:
Though his estate through the improvidence
Of a free minded Father, low enough.
My Uncle may repair it: she hath hopes
T'inherite all. And trust me did I love
Where I perceived desert, no inequality
Of fortunes blind additions, birth or state,
Should interpose a let to my enjoying.

Sir, 'tis a noble resolution,
Pure love's a virtue Nature only teaches;
And's borne with generous Spirits that distinguish
The object truly; sleighting those respects
That work on grosser minds.

How she instructs me
In resolution? Fairest I shall use
None other circumstance, or paint a passion
My reasons eye allows: though first my sense
Conveyed the knowledge of your outward form,
And full perfections, which must needs contain
A richer inside. Virtue seldom dwells
But in a glorious frame. I love your goodness:
For that your beauty. In my new borne wishes
I have determined you the partner
Of all that's mine. My state's not very mean:
If'twere, zeal should supply; I'd strive to merit
The free gift of your self, and in exchange
Return my self.

Sir, I could answer you
With your own words: for I presume your thoughts
Are noble like your self; unmixed with slatt'ry,
Courtships infection; and the poisonous breath
That many times doth make pure love suspected
Whether it be found or plastered to deceive
Our credulous weakness, till it hath pos^est us
With some foul leprosy. Your handmaid yields
To what agrees with honour; if the meanness
Of her condition may presume to call
Her honest c^dit so.

How you do bless me
As suddenly as my desires could shape
A means to work it? Instantly the Church
Shall seal the bargain.

Would not you deliberate
Those acts are lasting, and concern the being
Of all your after life?

'Tis heavens providence
That hath disposed it. Thus I seal my vows

And here are witnesses.


My Uncle! what makes he here? new doubts arise.


See, see; my thoughts were prophecy: both here.


You are welcome to Totenham Court Uncle.


But you're ill come Cousin. I had thought.
Your judgement had been stronger than to aid
A foolish Sister with your fond indulgence
In her undoing. She may hide her face
My rage distracts me, and I know not how
To frame th'induction.

Why sir, this is not Mistress Bellamie but another in her clothes.


How's that knave? hay day wife how came you by these? wher^


I am your Niece.


You my Niece?


She's my Wife, Uncle.


Yet more plots I sure the Parson of (...) has been here.


Indeed I have heard he is a notable joiner.


And Totenham-Court Ale pays him store of tithe.
It causes questionless much unlawful coupling.

Pray where's your Sister? I'll not fright her
With many threats, but mildly work her reason
To understand her errors; and prevent
Her ruin with dissuasions. Coss she's lost:
My love and care made useless.

Is she married Sir?


Yea; that's my greatest fear, she's past recov'ry,
Woman, what ere you are, you have some hand in it:
These were her clothes.

Let h^ s^lf^ satisfy,
^f passion hath not made you too incapable.

Alas mine Uncle.


Killing spectacle.
Come from his arms: if any force restrain thee
But thine own freeness (which I most do fear)
I will reveng't with laws extremity.
Come from his arms I say.

Uncle I owe
You many duties. One from natures precepts;
And moral gratitude for your great love
I^structs me in another: but necessity
(...) ^his compels a virtuous disobedience.

Girl he's a beggar. He had a prodigal father
That spent all ere he dyed: his whole estate
Depends but on the love of a rich Uncle;
And that's uncertain.

Pray upb^aid me not
With a dead mans misfortune. I have been
A soldier, and perhaps am apt to anger.

Threaten your fill Sir, so my Niece forsake you.


Kind Uncle, call not poverty a sin.
Wealth's but the gloss and outside of desert.
And for my Sister, since she loves this Gentleman,
She hath some portion left her; your estate
Would be a fair addition: but the loves
Of Uncles are uncertain. The truth is,
I love this maid: she's but this Keepers daughter;
Yet I would marry her, please her good Father
To be consenting.

Blessings unexpected.
If she be willing. She's a poor girl Sir.

She's richer then the Indies.


Shall mine age
Be cursed to this misfortune. I'll build hospitals:
Where wooden legs and lazy hypocrites
Shall be mine heirs.

And the Devil your Executor.


They scorn my easiness.
I should have raged, and from a furious an
Sent threats, not calm entreaties.

That would likewise
Have been as useless. I conceive such joy
At these events, they almost have confounded
My preparations to begin the Story
Reserved to crown all. First do you embrace
A natural Sister.

Mine own Sister, sir,
Supposed to have died an infant!

I still thought it
By an instinct.

This is Cicilia Worthgood,
Whom my Wife nursed when both your Parents died.
I have been careful of her education
Well as her person; though my love concealed
The knowledge of her self still from her self.
Least I should lose her: being th'onely comfort
I wished from providence: Such was the du^y
With which I honoured your dead Ancestors
That brought me up.

Sir, this concerns not me.


It doth your Nephew, to whose loves embrace
I next commend her, and a portion too.
She shall inherit something that hath been
Stored from my care; nor hath her industry
Wanted a share.

Still let me call you Father;
Whose love deserves it for my preservation,
And after being.

What a knot of fortunes
Is here untied. Oh let me wear you ever
Upon my heart with these.
Mine Uncles servant! What new accident?

Oh Sir, never was endeavour so tired. But I am glad I have found you. Your
Vncle's dead, and hath made you his heir.


Ha, ha! is't come about! nay then; are you married niece? if not, about it
presently whilst 'tis morning. Thou shalt be mine heir likewise: love him; lye
with him; Getboyes, and any thing now; you have my consent.


And now I owe you duty.


With what impudence
Shall I apparel my prepared excuse,
To make it pass? What mean so many people?
I am returned to chide your cruel practice,
That mock't my virtue into wicked frailty,
And an abused belief. I am your convert;
And come with more then sorrow, satisfaction.
Let not the memory of my past errors
Pervert your thoughts into a worse opinion
Of my reclaiming, then if ill intents
Had ne'er expressed themselves.

What means that Gentleman?

He's one of those that --


If you'll have my Maidenhead,
A Husbands leave is light.

As your Commodity:
How did you like it Sir?

They will abuse me
Into a madness. Farewell virtuous Maid,
And bless his bed deserves thee. Here I banish
All after-thoughts of Women; but t'admire
The goodness makes them perfect; since such were
Added to be mans only comfort here.

Most opportunely Widow. I have solicited long; and if you will now consent,
let's bear these company.


With all my heart.


Why then to Pancras: each with his loved consort
And make it Holiday at Totenham-Court.

Again you're welcome. There's no more to pay.
But your kind liking. Tapster take away
If you deny it, as due for such mean Cheer;
And say your first paid reckoning was too dear,
I beg it as a bounty. If I win
Your kind commends, 'twill bring more custom in:
When others filled Rooms with neglect disdain ye
My little House (with thanks) shall entertain ye.
And if such Guests would daily make it shine.
Our POET should no more drink Ale but Wine.

