Do not expect the abuses of a Place;
Nor th'ills sprung from a Strumpets painted face
To be expressed. Our Author doth not mean
With such vile stuff to clothe his modest Scoene.
Nor doth he brand it with a Satyrs mark;
But makes a Justice wiser then his Clerk.
His Rustics likewise will pretend to Wit:
So all the Persons which we counterfeit.
He justifies that 'tis no borrowed Strain,
From the invention of another brain.
Nor did he steal the Fancy. 'Tis the same
He first intended by the proper Name.
'Twas not a toil of years: few weeks brought forth
This rugged Issue, might have been more worth
If he had licked it more. Nor doth he raise
From the imitation of authentic Plays
Matter or words to height: nor bundle up
Conceits at Taverns where the Wits do sup.
His Muse issolitary, and alone
Doth practise her low speculation.
He hath no faction in a partial way,
Prepared to cry it up, and boast the Play,
Swelling your expectations: he relies
Merely upon your ingenuities.
The Matter's weak: how can the Building stand?
Yes; if supported by a gracious Hand.

_(...) we are come to London, fellow Ralph what shall we do? or what course
will our Master take with us?


Why, Dobson; he may do what he will, and we will do what we list. A little
instruction and practice will make us wicked enough, I dare warrant thee.


I hope we are not to learn that. But all this while the Plough stands still.


Sha, Dobson; thy mind's upon nothing but dirt.


Indeed here's store of it, ankcle deep.


What place is this Ralph? thou know London.


It should be COVENT-GARDEN; but 'tis much altered since I was here last.


A Garden call you it! 'Tis a very barren one.


I would I were at home again, amongst the Creame-bowles.


I could be content to have the the other sm^cke at o^r Gillian the Dayry-Maids
sugar-candy --


How, fellow Ralph! you kiss my Sweet-heart Gillian! pronounce it again, and
by the faith of a new made Serving-man, that puts his whole trust in his Live^y
and the Quarter-dayes, I will kill thee presently, and challenge thee the next
Holi-day before the Congregation.


Kill me fi^st, and then challenge me! for a kiss or two! nay, good Dobsox;
she has lips big enough to serve us both. Prithee lets not fall o^t and beat
one another: these people would but laugh at us for it.


Indeed 'tis a jolly company. Dwell they all here abouts?


I scarce think they are all of one Parish, neither do they go to one
Church. They come only for an evening recreation ^o s^e COVENT-GARDEN.


Blessings on their hearts for it. 'Tis a goodly place.


And a god^y one too if rumour lie not.


What are all these things with rails?


I think mews for hawks, or ayrings for gentles. Other hawks are not here
in any request.


Mews for hawks, thou would make me a Buzzard.


Dost think we shall dwell hereabouts?


I hope so: we shall then be n^ere the Cock-p^t, and see a Play now and then.


But tell me Ralph, are those Players the ragged fellows that were at our
house last Christmas, that borrowed the red blanket off my bed to make their
Major a gown; and had the great Pot-lid for Guy of Warwicks Buckler?


No, Dobson; they are men of credit, whose actions are beheld by every one, and
allow'd for the most part with commendations. They make no yearly Progress
with the Anatomy of a S^mpter-horse, laden with the sweepings of Long-lane in a
dead Vacation, and purchased at the exchange of their own whole Wardrobes.
They buy not their Ordinary for the Copy of a Prologue; nor insinuate
themselves into the acquaintance of an admiring Ningle, who for his free
coming in, is at the expense of a Tavern Supper, and rinses their bawling
throats with Canarye.


But I would I had stayed still in the Country, now Sports are tolerated, in
despite of Justice, Troublesome's malicious Authority. I had rather see a
Morrisdance and a May-pole, then ten Plays: what care I for wit which I
understand not?


The duller Ass tho^.


How, Ass to my face! provoke me no more with such foul language, lest I
enter and act thy Tragedy.


Nay, prithee fellow Dobson; if we abuse our selves sometimes, 'twill be the
better taken when we ab^se others.


To morrow I'll have you acco^tred in liveries, and put my self into a gentile
garb. I am resolved to forsake the Country profession of mine Ancestors; and
mean to turn Gallant. I'll sell some few dirty Acres, and buy a Knighthood:
I'll translate my Farm of Dirt-all into the Manor of No-place. Would I were
acquainted with an honest Scrivener.


You wish an impossibility, unless the Pillory were more terrible.


But do you mean to sell your Land?


Yes indeed; I shall be the likelier to go to heaven when I forsake earth.


But 'tis a dangerous way through a Scriveners conscience.


What dost tell me of danger! 'Tis the Cowards bug-beare; a scar-crow to City
gulls, that dare not wear swords for fear of being challenged.


Nay, my Master is as tall a man of his inches.


Yes, Dobson; thou hast seen me do something. But sirrah, let it be your
charge to find out a good Inn; see Crop eat his meat.


I'll warrant Sir, he will cat his meat, and 'twere Good-friday.


Had he but cares then, he might make a very good Puritan horse.


Indeed, their best virtue is to hear well.


But their doing sometimes, begets a hotter zeal in the Sister-hood.


I'll have a lodging here. Prithee ask that Gentlewoman; she seems an
inhabitant.


Pray Master, know you hereabouts any convenient Lodgings?


Many Sir, for convenient persons.


Of credit, and unsuspicious.


It is not in my understanding; wherefore the satisfaction I can give you will
be doubtful. I know none of my neighbours better then my self. I have as
handsome Lodgings as any are in Covent Garden: my foreroomes have a fair
prospect, and my back-roomes a sweet air.


Which is not usual backwards.


May we see them?


If you please to let that Tavern receive you till I have made them ready, I
will return and give you notic^.


I'll sup there: shall I entreat your company?


I shall be ready to fulfil your desires.


And we our bellies: hitherto, we have had but a hungry journey of it.


My friend, pray what's your Masters name?


What if it be not in my Commission to tell you?


My demands are civil and for no hurt. I must know before my house can give
him entertainment.


But I must not tell you, till I have a mind to (...). You may be the agent to
an Informer: do you not correspond with the Summer and Apparitour, to keep
your self off some deserved punishment.


I am a patient bearer.


Not unlikely, I have heard there are many such in Covent-Garden.


I mean with your unmanerlinesse.


If a downright* Country thing will please you.


A downright! you make me blus^.


This interest then, and --


So Sir, the terms are not equal for such familiarity.


Why then you must seek you a more proportioned Schoole-master to enter you
farther, and teach you my Masters name. The Wine stays, and I want it.


Good friend stay a little, and tell me thy Masters name.


What again! Fare you well, I have forgot it.


Nay, prithee friend: my knowledge of it may much concern his, or (if not) thy
good. My daughter Iynny's a handsome girl, he that pleases me best shall have
her.


I rather think he shall have her that pleases her best, else I shall doubt
her for a woman. But how can s^e concern our goods? your instance.


Nay, credit me upon my word, 'tis earnest.


A Woman's word! 'tis not worth an ounce of feathers. Besides, you may be under
covert barn. Have you not a Husband?


Yes indeed.


What's his profession?


An under-Lawyer, an Attorney.


His word may be taken in the term for a gown-facing or so: but to do any man
good, is worth a double fee, if he perform it. Mistress, if you must know my
Masters name, go to Carterton in the County of Sussex, and there in the
Church-Register you shall find, that Roger the son of Rowland Dungworth of
Dirtall Farm in the Parish of Carterton aforesaid, was baptised -- But stay,
I'll know first if he be resolved to continue a Christian; 'tis ordinary to
change names with religion. Besides, he means to be a Knight; and Dungworth
will stink in the delicate nostrils of a Lady: it may make the heraul^s give
him a mock-coate with three kennell-rakers. Farewell sweet Mistress, and if my
Master chance to lie at your house, I should be glad if I might lie over your
Daughter.


Farewell good friend. The Gentleman to lye at my house! very good. I must
project a profit out of the accident; a new Gown, or a Beaver, or some
composition with a bond of assurance, when I procure him a good Wife. Perhaps
he shall have my Daughter Iynny. Who would think this little body of mine
were so busy in stirring actions, Master Theodore Art-love!


Mistress Tongall, you are delighting your self with these new erections.


Fair erections are pleasing things.


Indeed they are fair ones, and their uniformity adds much to their beauty.


How like you the Balconee's? They set off a Ladies person well, when she
presents her self to the view of gazing passengers. Artificial fucations are
not discerned at distance.


Pray which is Sir Generous Worthie's house?


Your desires (I believe) are bent towards his fair Daughter. Let me aid you:
my neighbour-hood hath interested me in her acquaintance; I can make way; and
truly Mr. Art-love I like you so well, that (were she worthy) you should have
my daughter Iynnye. But do you love Mistress Dorothy?


I have seen her beauty, and her nimble eyes
Have shot a fire into me, that inflam^'s
My cold desires. I that have resisted
The assaults of passion to a perfect conquest;
And called it (justly too) the height of folly
To give that wanton Power the attribute
Of a false Deity: I, that have out-gone
The example of Zenocrates, am captived;
But by a Beauty, such as would review
Heat in the frozen bosom of an Anchorite,
Who hath spent his age even to decrepitnesse
In such austerities as would mortify
The strongest pamperd wantonness. I cove^
A good success, but fail in it. Never yet
Could I be blessed with opportunity
To show her my desires, and to try
The fortune of persuasion.

And would you not use me! hath so long practise in match-making made me
politic to contrive, and my conversation with your self and the rest of the
Wits made me complemental, and do you think I cannot facilitate your
entrance to Mistress Dorothy?


Should I be fortunate in my attempts
To win her liking; should my person please her,
Or that annexion to my better part
Of education, yet the disparity
Betwixt our states, checks me from hoping
That the design can prosper. The lighter fire
Ne'er mixes with the earth, but to confusion: Or from their several natures
bringing forth Events prodigious.

Why, you are an Heir to a thousand pound a year. An officious lye may be
dispens't with.


But simple honesty
Clad in the naked livery of truth
Is a most glorious virtue, that preserves
White innocence unstain'd with falsehood.
Good means as well as good intention
Must make an act good.

If you have such a tender conscience, so religiously scrupulous, you'll never
be a Politician.


Let those that study mischief
To satisfy their sensualties
Practise such wickedness. I'd not abuse
A noble goodness to possess the Indies.

But here's one will, and I must aid him int* Mr. Littleword.


Friend Art-love, the good fortune of a petticoat light upon thee, in the name
of Venery what make thou here? art' in quest of a smock-bedfellow.


Thy old humour still friend.


Prithee salute this little gentleman my Cousin: he hath more age and wit then
his small proportion doth promise.


I shall be ready to serve him.


Your acquaintance will add much to my happiness.


He hath gotten leave of his Uncle to live here in my tuition. He thrive's
well in his conceit, a right Ierker; he begins to love a wench already.


Thy instruction and example will soon enable him that way.


Is not that a wench Cousin?


Try Cos. and satisfy your self.


My Little-word, if your salute be ended, pray resign. Nay, Mistress, I can
kiss you without the help of a joined stool: please you to walk, and let my
hand support you.


Whither pray you little sir?


To the next vaulting^schoole.


Alas, you cannot get up without a stirrup.


Yes, and ride too without falling; please you to try my activenesse.


Prithee recall thy wonted goodness home,
And with a virtuous scorn shake off this habit
Of loose desires; it hath infection in it.

Nothing comes from thee but documents. I swear I should love thee much better
if thou had less virtue. I prithee leave thy Stoicisme, and become an
Epicure with me. My little Cos. here shall prove with undeniable arguments that
drinking and wenching are the only virtues in a gentleman of the last edition:
to be excellent at them is a master-piece of education. Besides, they are the
only acumens of wit.


Yes, to disease it.


Take heed thy judgment be not brought in question. Why diseased wits are --


Better play at small game then sit out. A young gamester may throw in and in.


Very seldom with three dice. Can your littleness cog?


Fair play is a gamesters glory. I love to shake the box well, and than let
them run their length.


Yes, I confess it; where there is an union
Of loving hearts, the joy exceed's expression.
That love is virtuous whose desires do never
End in their satisfaction, but increase
Towards the object. When a beauteous frame
Garnish't with all the lustre of perfection
Invite's the eye, and tells the searching thoughts
It holds a richer mind, with which my soul
Would rather mix her faculties.

Judge not of a man by his outward dimensions: My shape is not so defective to
make you doubt performance: let's find out a convenient place and try.


Alas little one, you'll lose your self: you'll never hit the way home.


'Tis a bliss above the feigned Elysium
To clasp a dainty waste; to kiss a lip
Melts into Nectar; to behold an eye
Shoot amorous fires, that would warm cold Statues
Into a life and motion; play with hair
Brighter then that was stellifyed.
And when the wanton appetite is cloyed
With thousand satisfactions of this kind,
Then follow's the absolutenesse
Of all delight. But were desire restrained
From variation, soon 'twould satiate,
And glut it self to loathing.

Please you to drink a pint or two of wine? there may be provocation in it.


Preserve your courtesy child, and your money: Lent's at hand, and then every
street will afford boys recreation.


Why how now impudence! do you slout a man?


How, a man Cousin!


I want not so much of my full age to be called a boy.


But you must not fall out with the Gentlewoman.


I desire rather to have fallen in with her.


I would not have you so forward Cousin. You must be sure to deal with sound
ware.


What care I? 'tis but the loss of a mans hair; an excrementall ornament: wit
consists not in it. A man may cover his baldness with a periwig, and the
fashion take's away the suspicion. I hope I came to London to learn wit and
the fashion.


Come Mr. Little-word.


Adieu Mistress Tongall.


I took her rather for a Wag-taile.


What silent Gentleman's that?


His Character in his own language is I and no; yet he speaks well in paper.
He is a wit, but somewhat a dull one.


What serious affair have they together?


There are hidden policies in the world. Thou hast a bookish humour; I a
wenching one; and why may not his dullness dream of some rich match! Mris.
Tongal's the only match-maker in the Town.


Those words create a hell of torment in me.
Is there no love
But what's attended by vain jealousy!

Art thou in love?


Yes, passionately.
My dreamings, wakings, thoughts and actions
Are nothing but desire.

I can as soon credit an impossibility. Thou in love! why 'tis more improbable
then the projection of draining Marsh-land with a wind-mill. But prithee what
is she?


See where my comforts Sun
Breaks through a cloud. Oh that this unkind distance
Might be contracted into lesser air:
I'd then convey my whispers to her ears;
And teach her understanding what delight
Society hath in it.

Sure thou hast not boldness enough to speak to her. Thou would blush, and
fall into some pathetic book discourse, or tell her the story of Hero and
Leander, to make her tenderness whine. Tis not the way. Get access to her;
and after one mannerly salute, double and treble thy kisses; tumble her a
little, and if opportunity serve, offer the rest: Magic hath not a Philter
like it.


Is not that a house (Cousin) where the Wenches are?


Yes, questionless.


I mean in the sense of --


Yonder Gentlemen observe us: let's be gone.


Not yet (Mistress Dorothy.) Now I have drunk a cup of Sack, I must be in love
with one of them, him that seems most worthy of a gentleuman.


You have fallen my glove.


I'll fetch it.


Blessed accident;
Why do you stop my hast? let me embrace it.
Thus with religious worship do I kiss
What your white hand hath hallowed. Ha! she's gone*
What envious mischief intercepts the means
Of my desired happiness! or have mine eyes
Wasted their beams in gazing on the place
Where I first saw her, to imagination
Fancying her figure.

Sure Cousin the gentleman is in love; he talks very madly.


Where are the powers of my intellect?
Reason and understanding have forsaken
Their proper seats, and left strong passions
To triumph over this captived Microcosm.

Now I see thou art mad: but prithee strive to conceal it; the place is
public.


Pray you Sir, did you take up a Gentleumans glove?


It was my happiness, and 'twould be much increased, if I might kiss the hand
that wore it.


As I am a Gentleuman I shall be most careful to give your deservings their
due commendations.


May I be bold to enter with you?


You are a stranger Sir, and it may give occasion of jealousy. But I am my
Ladies Gentleuman: I keep the key of her secrets, and if you please, her
closet shall conceal you; where you may dispose of Suckets and Eringoe's for
your refreshment. I pray Sir, call not a gentleumans freeness immodesty.


My behaviour shall deserve your good opinion.


Truly Sir, a man could not stand better in the conceit of a gentleuman at
first sight, then you do in mine. I hope your goodness will not misconstrue my
readiness to humble my desires to your disposing.


You teach me language which my self should use:
But if my gratitude doth seem to want
Verbal expression, I had rather act
Then promise what I owe you.

This is pretty foolery, Cousin.


Sir, you appear so replete with goodness, that I presume you cannot but
answer the desires of a gentleuman, who proft^ates her love at the feet of
your acceptance.


Doth she love me? what greater secret
Hath Nature in her Works then sympathy!
I do^ conceive a thousand fond expressions,
Which throng so fast, they choke the passage up,
That none can find an issue.

Out of fools Paradise: thou art in it. But pray you Gentleuman protract not
his satisfaction with these circumstantial delays. Whilst Mris. Dorothy and
he are busy, you and I will taste the sweet-meats in your Ladies Closet.


I understand you not.


He means you should lie under him.


Fie little one, that you should so offend the chaste ears of a Gentleuman. But
to you Sir, the Load-stone of my heart, that turns it self at your motions
pointing still to the North of your Love.


Indeed Mistress 'tis a cold corner, pray turn it to the South, and let my
needle run in your Dial.


And since the ardor of my desires have urged my blushes to discover them; let
not your appearing worth suffer such a disparagement to conte^ne a Gentleumans
willingness.


How's this! why friend, did she not seem to come instructed (by direction)
with ^embassie As to prepare my love?


No, no, she loves thee her self. Take her. Me thinks she's very beautiful;
what pinken-eyes; what a sharpe chin! Why her features transcend Mopsa's in the
Arcadia.


Hath she not studied it Cousin, think you? and is transported to a humour of
loving every man she sees.

I have known it in the Country in an age-d^cayed waiting-woman.


I cannot answer her; my heart is big With other thoughts; which till I am
delivered of, I suffer torments.


Unfortunate Gentleuman as I am, to be thus rejected.


Will you resign your interest? I'll court her folly.


Take it,
But not t'abuse the others innocence.
Whilst I with sighs draw in the unwilling air
Which she perfumed at distance.

Pray Gentleuman could you love me a little? I'm very sportive.


Truly young Gentleman, I do not know what I may do when you come to your
full growth.


Blirt my Ladies Gentleuman, who taught you to scoff at a mans person?


Cry ye mercy little Sir; you may be the father of dwarfs. The sack begins to
leave working and by this time my Lady expects her gentleuman. Farewell,
unkind Sir.


Farewell loving Gentleuman. She hath prevented me. Sure friend she came but to
mock thee. 'Twas little less then downright impudence.


Let's to the Tavern Sir, and drown this passion in a cup of Canary.


Come, come; I was ordained to do thee good. Thou know I had a Mistress,
whose friends disliking my wildness, married her to the Father of the
Gentlewoman whom thou love (horns be his punishment for it.) She loves me
still; and I do not despair of making him Cuckold. We'll arm our selves with
a quart or two, and then I'll bring thee to her.


Aid me love, wit and fate; that my desires
Burn not themselves without her equal fires.

More passions yet! It thou the mark would hit,
Let Sack inspire thee: 'tis the Soul of Wit.

Sack that makes Prophets; gives a Poet birth:
And then a wench; Elysium upon Earth.

NOw I protest Mr. Warrant, you wrong the love of a Gentleuman, in not
imparting the cause of your discontent. Come not fees in roundly? Do not the
Delinquents understand, I'll speak a good word for you?


You are the only object of my thoughts. 'Tis your beauty hath animated my
presumptuous weakness to express how much my desires are yours.


Alas Mr. Warrant how can a poor Gentleuman deserve it?


Yes, you have power of my Lady, and she much acquaintance at Court. A pardon
might be got.


A pardon! bless me, for what?


Not for murder; but for killing (yet not a Man) fairly in the field.


Are you earnest?


'Tis not yet done; only I am resolved to do it, were I but sure of my
pardon.


If not a man, what then is it?


A mere superfluous complement of state formality. One of my Ladies raising. A
fellow that hath cross cape^'d himself out of a Taylor into a gentleman
Usher.


Who Mr. Spruce? but have you charng'd him?


Yes, with all ^ and circumstance. The weapon single Rapier; the place the
P^azz^; the time this mooneshine night presently before supper.


And your quarrel my love. Wel^ Mr. Warrant; I know a Gentleuman hath interest
in a Lord at Court, who hath long been inward with her. I'll warrant your
pardon. But my Lady expects me.


Dearest part of my self: to get my pardon, here's Spruce, now will I affront
him.


Our being my Ladi^s Gentleman Usher, her ^ not protect you in the compet^on ^.


Warrant, ^ shred of baseness to ^ favours, and mine own deservings. Mr. S.
Secretary is my Ladies gentl^woman, and ^ by privilege.


By privilege Spruce! Thou art a Baboon of forma^ty, and an ap^ of
(...)-ship. When I have killed thee, and get my pardon, I will have thy skin
stuhh't; and with a protection show the^ at country Fairs and Markets for a
Ginney Pygmy.


Warrant, thou art the Epitome of my Masters authority, and the abridgement of
(...) justiceship.


Spruce, thou art a very (...), bred in thy crosselegg^d profession; that
having sucked a little blood of Gentility, instead of thy usual bread
bre^kfast, art grown to a fancy familiarity, with thy maintainers. T^ou buy'st
thy laundry in Long-lane or Hounsditch with the impude^c of a cheater.


Warrant, thou lie.


How ^lie. That some-body were here to stand betwixt us. Come not near me,
lest I blast thee with the breath of my just indignation.


Keep at distance Warrant, lest I ^ame thee, and send thee from Constable to
Constable in a Wheelebarrow.


For this Spruce I will not compassionate the good parts which my Lady commends
in thee. Thy Fiddlestick shall not save thee; nor thy capering lift thee an
inch from the ground which I have laid for thy destruction.


Warrant, thou art the very parings of a Pedanticke to flout the compleatnesse
of education. Because thy dullness is capable of no more then to frame
Hetroclites from men's names, and scribble a warrant or a mittimus by a
president; yet thou art a Justices Clerk.


And thou a Ladies Gentleman Usher, a bundle of complemental follies stitched
up with how-dee's. I will send thee anon upon a visit to the Devil.


Fie Mr. Spruce and Mr. Warrant, how loud you are ^ my Lady hears your noise,
and is offended.


Yes, my Rapier and mine arm shall maintain it upon his life, I love you
best.


Indeed Mr. Spruce and I love you.


I'll maintain it against the life of all the world, I love you best.


Truly Mr. Warrant and I love you.


He that offers to love her besides my self, dies.


Mr. Spruce and Mr. Warrant, send but for one bottle of Sack, and be friends;
I'll love you both.


I'll brooke no Rival.


Nor I; death must determine it.


Remember then, I must to the Cutlers.


Though I am but a waiting-uman, I have more wit then to believe this is
earnest. As if I did not know them to be as arrant Cowards, as a Justices
Clerk or Gentleman Usher can be; and deserve rather to be whipped by a Satire,
then rewarded for their valours with the love of a gentleuman. But Mr. Spruce
do you mean to fight?


Yes, and kill him too. I fear nothing but death and the Gallows; from which
you may save me.


As how? the means.


Beg me, I say beg me. Let not my good parts be made unuseful by an untimely
turn at Tyburne. Me thinks I see the pitiful spectators condoling me. The
fish-wives drowning their dead soles with salt water from their eyes; the
Oyster-wives weeping for me in most lamentable pickle. An hundred Chamber-maids
running stark mad, and as many more falling into the green sickness with
longing for me. Beg me therefore (I say) resolve to beg me, and make great
hast. It is my fear above death, that otherwise some rich City Heir will
prevent you. Resolve therefore to be the first that shall beg me.


As I am a Gentleuman Mr. Spruce, if you kill him fairly in a duel; and upon
no base advantage I'll do it.


Confirm it then with a kiss, and inspire an Herculean valour into me.


By no means at this time. I'll kiss you at the gallows. My Lady.


You see how my obedient youth
Hath j^yn'd it self with an unequal mate;
You ag^d father, only to satisfy
The Provident will of Parents. Do you so.
Fortune hath made me now your Mother.
Had nature don't, my care could not be greater,
Nor more my providence to dispose your good.

Mother, the duty which I owe my Father
You (being his) must share: and this expression
Of more then common love, I must repay
With more then common gratitude.

There. tell me,
Now time hath given your age perfection;
Your roses are full blown, and fit for gathering,
Do you not long for a husband?

Not with much earnestness: I have as yet
No passionate desires; as yet no breath
Poisoned with Hyperbolical flatteries
Hath courted my poor beauty; no deep vows
Have paid idolatrous sacrifice of service
To my fair hand, whose whiteness if but kis't
Can purify a soul. Believe me yet
The ma^'s a stranger to my knowing memory
That ever said he loved me.

But take heed:
There are a sort of fond effeminate men,
Deep studied in discoursive complement,
That many times will wast more aerie language
To take a solemn leave, then would make up
A City Orator.
Beware that no such oyle-tongu'd amorist
Sigh forth his passions in thy credulous ears,
And captivate thy weakness. 'Tis their practise
To glory in diversity of Mistresses:
And when one frowns or chides their over-daring
With a repulse, will not stick to revenge it
With a foul defamation of her honour.

Neither can a Gentleuman be in love now and then out she is censured.


Let not thine ears drink in their Rhetoric charms,
Lest they bewitch thy glorious understanding
To dote on their pretences, which perhaps
Shall be chaste love for it's Creations end:
When but their c^vetous hopes prefer a portion
Before your beauty, birth or education;
And yet perhaps there is disparity
'Twixt lower fortunes, and their weak desert.
Deceit's a cunning baud, and many times
Makes virtue prostitute it self to misery.

There is a power
Called Fate, which doth necessitate the will,
And makes desire obedient to it's rule.
All the resisting faculties of reason,
Prevention, fear and jealousy are weak
To disanull what in it's firm decrees
Is once determined. Yet my heart is free;
Unbounded by the stricter limits of
Particular affection: so I'll keep it.
No proud ungrateful man shall ever triumph
Over the captived sweets of my Virgin love.
Nor a vain-glorious gull that offers service
To every noted beauty, boast my favour.
I'll cloth my thoughts in humorous observation;
And if on any that solicits love
I fix a liking, I'll refer my self
To what is destined for me.

The resolution's noble; I commend it.

Welcome Mistress Tongall; welcome. You are the only company in the
neighbour-hood. A Lady can ill be without you.


This Gentleman Madame, whom I presume to commend to your Ladyships
acquaintance, is of worthy birth and education: the Littlewords are not
modern; besides their Ancestors were great Philosophers.


And the latter great fools.


Go, and talk to her. I'll tell your Ladyship a strange thing of the
Little-words. In seven generations there was but one girl, and she dyed an
infant. Contrariwise of the Tongalls there's but one man left, that's my
Husband, and he's a Lawyer: now your Ladyship knows he gets nothing but
wenches. Speak to her Mr. Littleword.


Is the Gentleman of so good education?


Extraordinary Madame; he's a wit. I would my Iynny were worthy of him, he
should seek no further. I pray Mr. Littleword speak to her.


Can he Poetise Mris. Tongall?


Excellently Madame; he hath things in print. His next dedication shall be to
your Ladyship. Why do you not go and talk to her?


What estate hath he?


Five hundred a year present possession, more in reversion. This Gentleman,
Mris. Dorothy, is my friend, and desire's to be your servant. I have made way
now, why do you not speak to her? I am bold to commend him to your liking.


Pray you Mris. Tongall, what wages takes he?


You mistake Mris. Dorothy; 'tis your love he would serve you for.


That's a cold reward; a Livery would keep him warmer.


Fie, that you will not speak to her. And how doth your Ladyship like an old
man?


A cold bed fellow. But Religion and Conscience. Now 'tis done I must love him.
Would he were not jealous.


None are so confident (Madame) as cuckolds. But your Ladyships known virtue
will soon put out the eyes of his suspicion. Speak to her Mr. Littleword.


I would not now for all the Sack in Spain my loving humour were upon me.
This dumb Gentleman would make me forswear the quality.


Sure Mris. Tongall your friend would make an excellent midwife; he can keep
secrets.


'Tis his modesty Mris. Dorothy. Bless me that you would not speak to her.


Madame, I am bold to commend this Gentleman, who will deserve your
acquaintance.


As far as my power will extend to expression.


You are welcome Mr. Ierker and this Gentleman, and shall be whilst your
visits are seasonable. But you know I have a jealous husband.


There are medicines to cure it Madame.


May not I salute the Lady Cousin?


'Tis but courtesy and manners.


I am bold with your Ladyships lip.


'Tis marvel you blush not. So bold and so young! By that time you come to
your full growth pretty Gentleman, you'll make up the number of the ten
Worthies.


Madame, I am neither Infidel, Iew^ nor good Christian; though I am little, I
dare be your L^d^ships Champion in an active skirmish.


This 'tis to be backward: you'll never thrive in any thing unles you are more
forward. Lose such an opportunity with not speaking to her!


Secretary.


Madame.


Go, and direct the Cooke.


How on a sudden my resolves are numbed,
And frozen into silence, that confirms
The first distrust of my known indeservings,
I dare not speak.

Shall I have another dumb servant! Are you not well Sir?


Well Lady! yes. Health it self
Is a disease in others, if compared
With the absolute state of mine. Where you are present
Sickness can have no power over frailty.
The b^ames which you^ bright e^es shoot, purify
Th^ most infectious ayr^. Your words distill
A B^l^re more pr^cious then that Miracle
The Chymicks d^eame of.
At distance I have ^ften seen your beauty;
And thence received a fire, whose quickening flames
Did animate my soul, that else was earthy,
A lump of passive dullness; now 'tis active:
And if you please to cherish it, shall pay
All it's derivative abilities
Unto your lowest service.

You too much flatter my unworthiness:
And in that likewise derogate
From your own fullness of admired merit.
The vnskilful'st Physiognomist may read
In your bright forehead, and your forms exactness,
A man replete with all perfections.
Whose very superfluities might be
Additions to the barren worths of others.

And can there be greater disparity?
Would it not seem a Prodigy in nature,
To have green Summer with her rose-crown'd head
Kiss the white isicles from Winters beard?
Extinguish her bright fires in his cold bosom?
Madame, I know your sportive Youth desires
A more proportioned mixture. Come, let's try.
Fire put to fire increases active Flames;
Contraries dull each other with confusion:
Such are the frozen kisses of your Husband,
Unto your warm delights --

Lady, if any worth appear in me
It must derive it's fullness from your liking:
Had I in^u^'d into me all the excellence
Of those Heroics whom the Poets feigned;
Were I made up with all Perfections
That Fiction ever painted, to express
Desert in freshest colours;
Unless you called it worth, 'twere but a subject
For base contempt, though popular admiration
Gav't divine Attributes. Since you commend
The faculties your whiteness must dispose of --

Ask your husband leave! by this hand I would not ask an Alderman leave to
Cuckold him. So he might take example from a City kind one, whose Wife longed
to kiss a Lord: upon which he grew so proud for being exalted above the rest
of his neighbours, that he would suffer none to Cuckold him ever after but
Lords.


By no means Sir.
Wrong not your judgement, which must needs be absolute.
The choice of me
Is too inferior to your richer value.
The Cyprian Queen had she but seen your face,
Would ne'er have died the roses with her blood,
Wept on their paleness for Adonis loss:
But circled in a ring of all her graces
Court your celestial form upon the bosom
Of some more fragrant Tempe.

She mocks me sure.

Did Sirens hear your voice they would give over
Their own malicious charms: and through the witchcraft
Of it's more powerful music, rage with madness:
Leaving their proper element to dye
In the pursuit of sweeter melody.

This gross flattery, Lady,
Commends your wit, rather then your good nature.
My heart is a plain heart, and my desires
Are truly virtuous, not to be contemned.

Fie, Mr. Ierker! besides the words incivility, I did not expect such
absurdity in a reputed wit. Could you not have couched it better; shall I have
leave to do your Ladyship a piece of night service; or so. Come, come,
forbear these wicked solicits, or I shall disclaim the promise of my favours
reversion when my old Husband die's, if nature be not merciless, and I go
first.


Ha! what's here! Courtship on all hands?


My Husband.


My Father, and my Brother.


I like not this.


Mr. Ierker, you are welcome, I hope; having failed in his old, he hath not a
new suit; that as I made her a Lady, she should bestow an hornourable Crest
upon me.


Let his jealousy construe it into truth.


He shall never be but a Unicorn.


Madame, however I appear in my wildness, I shall continue to your Ladyship
in my first desires. So with this tribute of my devotion.


I would first kiss your hand.


My lip being too unworthy.


I take my leave Madame.


Farewell Mistress Tongall.


Son, school your Sister. Come with me Wife.


Sister, I can but wonder much, that you
Should make your self the object of their Courtship,
Who bear perhaps but the empty names of Gentlemen,
Without the real fullness.

What mean you (Brother) by this introduction?

Sister, to take the privilege of discretion,
And school your ignorant courtesy, that upon
The shadows and appearances of Men
Confer your favours.

Brother, you may pretend your love
In this distrust; but 'tis an ill expression.
Think not my judgement subject to such weakness,
That I can build a faith on Complements,
Or (with rash passion) run into an error.
Nothing but known desert shall tie my thoughts
To a staid liking, if I may distinguish it.
And when my choice is fixed, it shall be such
As your fraternal love must not dispute.

Sister, my counsel's mild.
Nor would I have you violent in defence
Of a suspected folly. Guilt is aptest
To make excuse. But if your resolution
Be bent thus wilfully to persist in actions
Of feared dishonour, be assured my Spirit
Shall rage with such an anger, plays ne'er painted.

Dishonour Brother, I have a spirit too,
That scorns as much an Act of foul dishonour,
As you, or any Masculine pretender
To noble Virtues. Guilt is aptest still
To be suspicious. If a maid be free
In her discourse, and courteous entertainment,
She straight is censured. But let a man appear
Stuck fu^l of apish Courtship; light, inconstant,
As talkative as Parrots, that are taught
A voices imitation; one that courts
Every tamed beauty with a seeming zeal;
As if his souls devotion were restrained
Only to her Divinity; this man's called
A well-bred complemental Gentleman.
Men's greatest follies, if compared with ours,
Are virtues, fit for our imitation.

Sister, your Satyr smart's not:
The lashes reach not me.

They are but suppositions Brother.
And pray suppose the Gentleman that seemed
To court my beauty, were indeed a man,
Not gilded imperfections; one whose words
Were full of weighty judgement, not mere sound;
Whose real virtues did beget an envy,
Perhaps an emulation in all others;
And from the freedom of his richer mind
He gave himself and them to be my servants;
What gratitude in me might equal this?

I know you are free.
And rather then a complemental servant
Should be discouraged in his serious wantonness,
You'll give it countenance to make him bold
In's amorous pursuit; perhaps to the impudence
Of a lascivious charge upon your modesty;
Because you scorn ingratitude.

Brother, did not the ties
Of love and nature check my forward aptness,
I'd tell you you're not noble, and suspect
Whether your mind hold that derivative goodness
Which generous blood communicates, to suspect
Her re^olute constancy whom you call Sister.
Think not your being a man prerogative
To be the only Counsellor in manners
Brother, though to your person I am partial.
Through confidence of your appearing virtue;
The general vices noted in your sex,
Such as with public ostentation
You glory to be guilty of, which in
Our very thoughts raise blushes --

Sister no more.
Leaving these circumstantial arguments,
Pray let a Fathers care and Brothers love
Commend him first whom you intend for Husband:
You'll find us tyrants else. Nature is kind;
But if provoked, she hath a Tigers mind.
I'll find him out and satisfy my self
How far he is deserving.

How is our weakness trodden and insulted on
By these imperious men! Aid me resolves
Against their threats and counsels, unless grounded
On stronger reasons then suspicion.
As the pure Oar refined exceeds in value
Treble proportions of the courser dross;
So true desert in Man an outward gloss.

Come Mris Dorothy; here's a Moon would make a great bellied woman long for
green chief. Me thinks 'tis pleasant taking the air by Moone-shine.


But 'tis not so healthful The night infects the air with unwholesome vapours.


A figg for these Physical observations. I have known a Doctors prescriptions
cast down a Gentleuman for three quarters of a year. But if ever I lie under
any of them for the green sickness.


Fie upon thee.


Why I do not mean naughtiness. But what do you think made me so earnest to
have you hither?


Some wanton humour. You have d^unke a cup of Sack, and want a handsome
Ge^leman to be in love with.


No such matter. I'll not drink a drop more till towards supper. I brought you
to see a Duel.


Bless me; betwixt whom?


My Ladies Gentle-man, and Mr. Warrant.


They are unequally weapon'd. Mr. Spruce, though he be a Tailor wears a --
the foolish rime runs in my head. I had almost said a dagger, but 'tis a sword;
and my Fathers Clerk hath only his inkhorn.


And that's a terrible one. But I saw the Cutler bring him a sword; I saw it
naked, which was enough to fright many a gentleuman. I saw him try it on a bar
of iron in the kitchen; and many more fearful preparations.


But will not you prevent them?


By no means, unless there were more danger. 'Twill be mirth for this
twelve-month, if our eyes (through this imperfect Moone-light) can but reach
the sight of them. What confident daring will be betwixt them at some great
distance?


And what's their quarrel?


The love of a Gentleuman, I assure you.


Your self perhaps.


No otherwise indeed. My beauty is the object of their valour. The Combatants
will enter presently. The Knight of the Inkhorue, and the Knight of the Spanish
Needle.


Both affecting the Lady of the Closet. But Mris. Secretary, what if my Lady
Mothers Chamber-maid and Ioane in the Kitchen were here?


For you to make them Ladies, as you have done me. Indeed they might serve by
Moone-light; the day perhaps would discover a greasy Gentry.


Fie; now you forget your self.


'Tis ordinary for a waiting-Gentleuman but newly made a Lady to forget her
self. But see, I am prevented from proceeding. Let us observe.


'Tis a good sword; it cost me two pieces. No matter. Many a mans death hath
cost more at the Physicians. Who would be afraid to kill a man; when he is
sure of his pardon?


He is now in some deep meditation of your beauty.


See Mistress, there's the other.


That sure is Warrant. I'll go this way. It shall never be said I went after a
man to kill him, though I am confident Mistress Secretary will beg me.


They go contrary ways. We shall not see the fight. They mean to meet and
end it at the Antipodes.


But what should I think of killing him? I know he dare as well take the wall
of a drunken Constable, or justle a Buffe-coat leading a wench, as meet me.


Me thinks I perceive them stand.


Yes, yes; 'tis Warrant: I smell him hitherto.


Is not that Spruce? certainly 'tis he. Me thinks I see him tremble hitherto.
He dare not come near me; and I scorn to go to him to kill him: It may
hinder my pardon. Therefore he shall assault me first.


Why, they are fixed. Hath not fear congealed them into stones?


Dissolved them rather into gelley.


That some good fellow would but come and beat the cowardly Rascal.


That some Shark would come now and take away his hat or cloak.


Now could I fancy in my imagination what they say. Mr. Warrant. O that I had
this Coward Spruce here: I would dismember him; and then what Gentleuman would
care a rush for him? Now Mr. Spruce hath studien the Arcadia. He says. Oh that
I had this Warrant here It would cut him into atoms; that wheresoever the Sun
shines, the trophces of my renowned victory might be visible.


That he would but come a little nearer.


That he were but within twice my swords length.


I would I had but a leg or an arm of him, since he will not come, that I may
kill him.


That I had but his head here; how I would shave it.


This is the virtue of Sack boy. Who would toil in dirt for why and
butter-milke, or the windy juice of Pome-waters upon Sundays? Now could I be
as valiant as -- nothing.


I could fight with an Army of Polecats, so they were not Women.


I could take the wall of three times three Taylors, though in the morning, and
at a Bakers stall.


That were a way to have thy skin bodkind full of ilet holes.


If I should throw down three or four posts.


What then?


What then! why, I would not stay to take them up.


Who are these? observe.


Give me an armour of Sack; I am shot-free.


Whilst my Master paye's the reckoning.


Mistress Dorothy, I have fastened on a design for rare sport. My friends.


Will you talk to strangers in the street?


What say you pretty pair of Wag-tailes? do you want Play-mates?


Will you do a courtesy for a Gentleuman?


Within doors, or without?


You seem to be valiant.


They that try us shall find our mettle.


Perceive you not two men yonder in several places?


We see something, but they may as well be flocks.


For any manhood that's in them. If you will but beat them a little, besides a
Gentleumans thanks, some other reward shall attend it.


How are we sure they are Cowards?


You may trust the word of a Gent^euman.


Come, come, thou stand doubting like a cowardly foo^e, These may be
Gentlewoemen of good fashion, and apt to take fire at valour. Who knows what
preferment's near us? We have persons.


Why then forwards: call upon sack, Dobson, sack.


Who are these come towards me? my courage begins to have an ague.


Who may these be? my wish (I hope) some good fellows to rob him.


What was our Commission Ralph? to beat them, and not kill them.


To kill them and not hurt them? Call upon Sack, Dobson: I begin to be
afraid. I can perceive his sword; he shakes it fearfully.


Draw thine-then; and sack, sack the walls of Troy.


The rogue Spruce hath sent them to beat me. 'Tis so. I must shift for my
self.


Sirrah, thou man of fear and trembling. Call upon Sack, Dobson.


Alas, what mean you Gentlemen?


Not so gentle neither. We are fiery furious, and command thee in the name of
Sack, resign thy weapon, and submit to be corrected by our valour.


Kind Gentlemen, I hope you'll not kill me. I'll do any thing, rather then be
killed.


A handsome beating shall assuage our fury.


Sweet Gentlemen, I'll do any thing rather then be beaten.


'Tis so; they are robbing him, and I scorn to aid him. Teach the rogue to be
such a coward: he might have come to me.


Are you prepared Sir?


Merciful Gentlemen; I have some money, a Cloak and a good Beaver: I'll give
you all, and forgive you too, so you'll not beat me.


This was beyond our expectation.


Our mercy may be brought to a composition. But should we be pitiful, could
you be content, since you cannot fight in your own defence, to lye in our
defence.


I'll say or swear any thing, rather then be killed or beaten.


That we did beat you?


That you left me dead. I'll lye at a Surgeons these two months; and pretend
that my skull was broken in twelve places: that half my brains were putrified
and taken out. I'll be mad all my life after to confirm people in the belief
of it.


Depart then, and praise us.


Yes, at the gallows. I'll have you hanged for ro^ing me: I shall teach you to
attempt any thing on a Ju^ces Clerk.


Nay: pray you stay a little longer.


I am weary; we'll imagine the rest done. I'll send my Brother forth to make
them friends.


'Tis done sure. Now will I home, proclaim him a coward, and triumph. Ha^l do
they way-lay me! the rogue hath hi^'d them to beat or rob me. An ague of fear
is upon me. Now could I wish my self transformed into a beast, and have four
legs. These two which have been my most useful members will surely fail.


Sirrah, you Rascal.


You mistake Sir, I am a Gentleman Usher.


Then thou abuser of wit and good clothes, be mannerly, and uncover to thy
betters.


I hope Gentlemen you d^e not mean to rob me? Trust me, I have no money, but a
few farthings of my Ladies to give poor people.


We will be satisfied with a small diminution of your plentiful Wardrobe. We
know you have more Cloaks and Beavers at home.


No I protest Gentlemen. I have but this only case for my Carcass: and 'twill
not be quite paid for till the next quarter.


Why then Sir, we will beat you handsomely, and that shall allay our fury.


Nay kind Gentlemen, I had rather stand to my Ladies bounty, then be beaten.


Why then thank our mercy and depart, whilst we like honest thieves share our
booty.


And I find out the Constable.


How glorious shows heaven with trembling lights
Sparkling their distant beams! The full orbed Moon
Borne on nights dewy wings, rides in her Sphoere;
And throws the shine which from her brothers rays.
She borrows to illuminate the earth
Through thinner air, where no condensed vapours
Are interposed to let her piercing eye
From seeing that which she gives sight to. Yet
My heart is wrapped in clouds of leaden sadness.
Love is not that in me which others feign it.
I dream not of delights; my busy fancy
Presents no fabulous heaven. A hell of torment
Darken's my mind's bright faculties; and reason suffers it self to be
eclipsed by passion.

Now we'e are entered Ralph. what if we made this our professi^n? many a one
lives by it.


And many a one is hanged for it.


Oft have these instruments of heavens influence
Seen my contemplative watchings;
When with profound and an unwearied search
I have scan'd the causes of their great effects;
And waded through the most inscrutable secrets
Both of the mediate and immediate nature*
But coming once to read a Woman's face,
There were so many heavens, that every thought
In me, required a several understanding,
To give each several grace a several name,
And definition.

Thou art afraid of the gallows?


Not much of the gallows without a hangman.


The Chaos and the earth were loves first Parents;
And yet the child did give the Parents form.
What Riddles are in nature!
Man's a disordered Mass, a mere confusion
Of rude, inanimate sense and understanding.
Until inspired with loves diviner soul.
The sense is tired, unless it varye's objects.
Knowledge would be finite, were not the mind
Delighted with diversity.
But love's a subject for eternal study;
And one fair book preserved so, a full library.

I am resolved; I'll nor spare man, woman nor child, whilst the sack works.


For women and children let me alone: if I fall upon the one, I'll soon get the
other.


What fabulous errors learning is attended with!
Plato's five Worlds; their sempiternitie;
Pythagoras transmigration; and opinions
Judgement would blush to father. But a woman,
Did men contemplate such a one as I do,
They'd Make her all those Worlds: and then include
All the famed excellence of former beauties
In her more perfect frame.

Is't possible such show of resolution
Should appear in Cowards! I'll make them friends.
And that being done mine own intentions
Must be pursued to find that Gentleman
Courted my Sister. Love of all sorts bends
It self to courses for it's several ends.

Now for a daring Constable.


Without his staff of authority, or a fortification of Sack. A Constable may
be valiant when he commands others what he cannot do himself.


What! my pair of valiant Cowards! friends already.


How! Cowards! swallow that word, or it shall choke thee.


These fellows have out-gone their Commission and robbed them. I was a wise man
to come abroad without a sword.


He hath never a sword. Sirrah, thou man of presumption, that hast profaned
our incomparable valour, redeem thy forfeited life of our mercy with some
gold or silver pictures out of thy silken pockets.


They'll rob me too: Why, Gentlemen; silk clothes have not money in them at all
times.


He looks terribly Dobson. Call upon Sack.


I will cleave him at one stroke.


Do you mean to murder a Gentleman?


Murder a Gentleman the voice came thence.
I'll rescue him, though danger and destruction
Met me with open mouths. Villains, desist.

You have done a benefit I must acknowledge.


That's to reward it sir; from which base ends
Good actions should be free. I'd gladly hear
A short relation of the Accident.

Why dost thou quake so Ralph?


Why dost thou tremble so Dobson? I dare be whipped if these be not some kin to
the Gentle woman that sent us hither from the thing at yonder house.


Were you sent to rob or kill me?


Alas Gentlemen, we are very ingrums.


Mere Country Animals. We have valour to steal a May-pole, or rob the
Parso^s Hens-nest: but to kill a man as far from our intents or daring, as
pity from an Executioner, or bashfulness from a Jingo.


Forbear the rest. This affords me matter: Return to that house, there leave
your booty and receive your reward; only this I'll keep.


With all our hearts: we had rather any body should have them, then the
hangman both them and us for them. Come Dobson, we have got the money yet; and
a little sack will animate us again. My soul's under foot; I must raise it:
But if ever I quarrel again by Mooneshine unless I am drunk, valour forsake
me.


Blessed Accident! 'tis surely the same.
After a stricter view, my memory
Unless it erres, tells me I have seen your person
Before this at my fathers.

If you are the son of Sir Generous Worthy.


It was the blessing
Nature and Fortune did bestow on me.

It is indeed a blessing, when the virtues
Of noble Races are hereditary;
And do derive themselves from the imitation
Of virtuous Ancestors. You have a fair Sister.

Her beaurie is not worth your commendations.


Your modesty is too severe
In your restraint from praising her pure excellence,
Which should be Poets study; not with fiction,
And common figures, but diviner attributes:
Then they must call it nothing but it self.

Have I found you? I shall search you deeper.


The subjects weight would make a Poem weighty;
And take away the imputation
Which seeming solidnesse would throw upon it
Of a light fancy.

It seems you love my Sister?


He were a Devil did not love such goodness.
It is the only virtue: frailty boasts of,
To love fair sensual objects: but my soul
Hath noted inward beauty in her mind,
Which makes me glory (though it be presumption)
That I do love her.

Call it not presumption sir, you do deserve her,
In that you have endeared me for my life
Who am her Brother. And I commend you wit,
Which I presume my Sisters love hath whetted.
'Twas a quaint Plot. Were the Actors here again,
I'd pay their wages.

Your Riddle needs some Oedipus to solve it.


Why sir, ridiculous fables
May sometimes serve for imitation.
Though twere a mere appointment in this rescue,
To show your love and valour.

What base suspicion
Poisons his jealous thoughts! 'Tis injury
Beyond all patience.

Alas sir, you are moved?


Yes, to an indignation, whose just heat
Burns me almost to rage. But there are charms
And spells about you conjure down my spirit.
You are her Brother.

It seems your guilt dare not deny the truth?


Dare not deny it!
Were thy hands armed with Thunder;
Had thou a Gorgons look, were it not her Brother,
Ring'd in the terror of a thousand Jibbets
And executioners, I have a point
Should find thy hart out.

But I must tell you sir,
Seldom high spirits that pursue their honours,
With earnest fllights, will stoop at weak respects:
But prey upon the opinion of those men
That scan their actions; tearing their reputations
Out of suspicions bowels. He's not a Gentle man
Will not preserve his honour.

Your speech, Sir,
Savours of strange severity. My honour
Is that part of my self, without which
The man that's in me can have no subsisting.
Honour's the greatest of exterior goods,
And must be still pursued as the reward
Due unto virtue, through the greatest dangers.
Yet fortitude is not the appetite
Of formidable things, nor inconsult
Rashness; but virtue fighting for a truth;
Derived from knowledge of distinguishing
Good or bad causes. Think me not a Coward
Because I am not rash: nor through defect
O^ better counsel, do not resist the force
Of will or passion; how so ever your jealousy
Proceeding from our better thoughts infection
Hath been a provocation. And perhaps
The love I bear your Sister, will appear
Your chiefest safety.

In an attempt of right
I have more safety here then your pr^ences
Can arm m^ with But if you love my Sister,
It must be honourable and not wanton:
She will find Champi^s ^eise.

I must be honourable!
Those words include a doubt works strangely in me.
Love must not wrack my reputation.
Sir, I begin to scan the circumstance,
And construe your intention. You would try me:
Bu^ your temptations have been too abusive.
And now my resolution is prepared
To do my credit justice.

You will not fight with me that am her Brother?


There's Magic in those words.


I do presume my Sister will reward you
For these expressions. She is free to pay
Her servants promised wages; be it kisses,
Or any other dalliance.

What a profane breath from his black mouth flies,
Would poison all the idolatrous religions
That e're awed wicked mortals.
He is not sure her brother, but some impostor,
That only counterfeit's his worthier person,
I could be patient at the lye, or Coward,
Or any thing that can make passion violent.
But her bright honour staind's a cause of justice
To arm a Nation. Draw, if you are a man;
And with the plea of valour, (if you have any)
Defend thy errors: Draw thy sword.

Not against him that loves my Sister.


Is my just anger mock't! love made ridiculous!
Draw; lest I make my self an Executioner.
And do an act of justice on thy guilt.

Never against your bosom, where a spirit
So truly noble dwel's, that hath converted
All my feigned jealousies to useful love.

I am confounded to amazement.

Pray reconcile all your distractions.
Let not the least distrust abuse your confidence
Of what I undertake. My Sister's yours,
If the advise of me that am her Brother,
And interested in her good or ill,
Can be prevailing.

Then requesting Sir,
That you'll presume no more upon the privilege
Of that pure love I bear your virtuous Sister
To admit a jealousy of any action,
Or thought of mine which tends not unto nobleness,
Next unto her my bosom holds you dear,
And shall do ever.

So mine the like. Thus noble causes
Put fire into the spirits of full men.
Though sometimes seeming valour may arise
Through lust or wine, from hateful cowardice.

ANon, anon Sir, by and by.


Some more wine Boy. Is Mr. Art love returned?


Not yet Sir.


Poor Gentleman; he's complaining to the Moon, or studying the event of his
love in the Stars. Me thinks I could make a counterfeit expression of his
passions to the life.


^ Ministresse
^ light; dance ^ quall motions
On thy four orbs; bu^ qu^ch thy paler fires
In Lovers tears, that (...) constancy
M^y so be drowned. I would I were in love Cousin.

Before you are capable of it.

Why Cousin, is it not defined to be youth's folly!
Indeed, all things in Youth are folly.

Not so Coz. all folly may be in Youth:
But many times 'tis mixed with grave discretion,
That tempers it to use; and make's it judgement
Equal if not exceeding that which Palseys
Hath almost shaken into a disease.
But why would you be in love Coz.

That I might Poetize: you know 'tis the only dancing Master to teach the Art
of Measures; though I have known Poets scarce able to stand on their feet.


Then you would write Satyrs Coz?


'Tis your dancing conceit. But the Grinkums Cousin cleaves not the feet.


Mr. Dasher, this freeness hath doubled the favour; vizit us of your own
accord!


Gentlemen my self, and all that depends on my self, or on any thing that
hath dependence on my self, is at your service.


I should desire your wife then.


Sweet young Gentleman, you are the Epitome of a fair body, and shall command
the Commander of my self and family. I will but present a glass of Greek
Sack to the hands of a noble Lord, and return to serve you.


You have a virtue Sir, I could wish communicated.


What's that Cousin?


To cozzen Cousin.


And would you learn it?


The Theory, but not the Practicke. I converse much in Taverns; and the use
should only be a thrifty prevention.


As my observation hath taught me something in a bawdy house, where they cannot
change money.


Now Gentlemen dispose of your servant.


Indeed Mr. Dasher our Wine's nought.


How I nought I who drew it? name but your drawer; he is punish't whilst you
pronounce it. I'll not keep an offensive mouse that eats the crumbs under my
table, but shall pay his life to do you service.


Why Cousin, the Wine's good.


I only gave him matter for a complement.


'Tis pity to abuse him that is so apt to abuse himself. But what do you
muse on Cousin?


I am studying a conceited health.


Why to the long standing of Banbury May-pole.


No Puritan will pledge that.


Yes, the Good-wives: they'll find dancing a more wholesome exercise for the
body, then some of their Doctrines for the Soul.


Ar't come friend, and Mr. Worthy?


Our mutual loves.


I am bound to serve you Gentlemen, and I wish my roof were worthier, and my
disordered household ordered to your content.


We are bound to thank your readiness.


Gentlemen, your servant will send his servants to wait upon you presently.


What accident brought you two together?


The mercy of my Startes: but what event
Their influence will direct, I cannot prophecy.
^re^hee be careful, he's a Cynic noter
Of men and of their manners

If he bite.
Here's that shall blunt his fangs.

Good friend be mild;
Temper thy passions here. Scandal may grow
From low foundations to an height of infamy.
Thou know my temperance doth not oft frequent
These public places.

Sir, the relation 'twixt a son and father
May make you jealous of my partial nature.
Trust me, I never yet was so indulgent
To mine own weakness, that until my judgement
Had made a full distinguishment of causes,
I could be violent in his defence
Farther then fisiall duty; which sometimes
Hath stretched it self to counsel and advice
Against suspicion. For though your wild behaviour
In some particular actions might provoke him,
She whom new duty makes me now call mother
Hath given large testimony of her virtue
Even to satisfaction of all goodness;
Although his age (in other things judicious)
Cannot so easily admit belief,
And safer confidence.

Though I appear
In outward carriage apt to make distrust
Condemn me vicious; yet my Soul retains
(Besides a generous disposition
Derived from noble blood) some scrupulous sparks
Of better conscience. Call it not selfe-flattery
In that I am mine own defenses instrument.
Report sufficiently may inform your knowledge,
(Nor is it error) that my interest
In her you now call Mother
Was beyond all dispute: our equal loves
Moved in one circle; and our thoughts were fixed*
Nor can I vary; she's the object still
Of my desires. I confess I use
Wanton sollicites; and should scarce resist
My wishes satisfaction she consenting.
But those delights would end in such a loathing,
That I should never more have merciful thought
There can be any goodness left in Woman.

This jarres upon my heart-strings.


Dos't distaste you Sir,
That I defend my self?

You must not wrong my Father.


I do abhor the thought of injury.
Nor shall my spirit fall in the just plea
Of mine own right.

But not to wrong my Father.


If he be abusive, Cousin challenge him. I'll be your second.


He's not a Crane Coz.


Nor I a Pygmy; you mock my love.


Your forwardness is dangerous.


Why, he can never have wit, that is not valiant.
I'll try him my self, if not to disturb you Sir.

I thank you little one.


How little one I Is not that an affront Cousin?


'Tis as you take it Coz.


Fill some Wine boy: never a Drawer here?


What Gentlemen, none to attend you? (whooh) An unlooked for happines^ that my
unworthy self is preferred.


An inferior servant may serve, Mr. Dasher.


I am the servant of my servant that shall serve you. And unless he serve you
he is not my servant. I'll tunre them all away presently for this neglect of
your worthy Persons.


Men wear swords Sir.


And boys too sometimes.


You'll answer it?


Answer what Child?


Little one! Boy! Child! I shall be degraded next to an infant.


Fie Cousin, contain. The Gentleman cannot brooke it.


Yes Sir, he can brooke any thing but wronging of his Father.


I pray no more, the subject is too harsh
To make good music in society.

Then here's a health to her that best deserves
The attribute of Fair: whose white and red
Prove what's lifes mixture. From whose forms exactnes
Rules of Proportion might be better drawn
Then from Arts Principles. To her whose Youth
Warmes Winters icy bosom with her Spring;
Yet will not wrong your Father. As it goes round,
Each give his Mistress some comm^nding Character.

Why then a health to her whose beauties are
Not a gross Earth, with painted superficies;
But a more spright^y Element of pure ^ire.
Within whose Sphaere a glorious M^nde doth move
All the orbs of virtue with celestial flame.
Whose active climbings carry her d^si^es
To the utmost height of nobleness and honour:
To her that calls you Brother.

Let not your love appear so full of flattery.


Nay, Coz; ^.


Then here's a health to her will freely put
Her sweets to use. Kiss, and be kissed again
Without a fie. Whose boldness will not blush
At an assault, or any wanton touch.
And if a man persist to farther doing,
Accounts it loss of time, a tedious wooing.
To her that I call Mistress.

Bravely come off Sir.


I can come on Sir.


Now Sir, 'tis yours.


This Sack shall then have my Encomium.
Which had the youthful Father ever tasted
He would have left his rites to Poetize;
And changed his Yvy Chaplets into Baize:
Vnchain'd his spotted Lynxes, and supplied
His Chariots loftier course with Pegasus.
And with bewitching numbers charmed the gods
To be his Bacchanalls, that they might feast
With this most heavenly Nectar.

Mr. Dasher, your Wine^s highly commended.


I can assure you Gentlemen, the Grape from whence this Sack was pressed --


Grew in Spain.


I would have fetched it farther Gentlemen to do you service. A voyage to the
Indies should be no more then a descending into my cellar, and up again.


You have handsomely contracted your journey.


But Mr. Dasher, you have an eminent House, extraordinary Wine and
entertainment; but no Sign at first to distinguish it.


Me thoughts Cousin, the Logger-heads was a pretty conceit.


Had there not been a third.


Gentlemen; I intended a pair of Scales with a glass of Wine in one Balance,
and a piece of gold in the other, or a jewell.


An excellent conceit, to show the value of good Wine.


Sweet Gentlemen, I am the servant of your noble wits. I must kiss the ^a^re
hand of an honourable Lord, who is now departing: I will then return to be
disposed by you.


Sir 'tis my father.


Ha! my son here, and Mr Ierker!
I came in the person of authority,
Invited by your noise. But that put off,
Out of my love borne to the general good,
I do advise you to be temperate:
That the fair hopes conceived of growing virtues
Might not be lost. 'Tis pity that your wits,
Which (joined with some experience) might deserve
To fill the seats of Magistracy, and be
A speaking law) should spend themselves in places
And acts of sin and shame; wherein severity
Of law and government must not be partial.
Therefore I pray no more of these disorders.

Pray Sir, take nothing ill. 'Tis the necessity
Of his place: his disposition else is milder.

Sir, we are Gentlemen; and by that privilege
Though we submit to politic Government
In public things may be our own law-makers
In moral life. If we offend the law
The law may punish us; which only strives
To take away excess, not the necessity
Or use of what's indifferent, and is made
Or good or bad by 'ts use. We do not drink
To a distemper, and from thence derive
The original of mischiefs: nor is pleasure
Our law but temperance. Creation made
Every thing good, if we abuse it not.
Then good Sir, (though you find enormitles
Amongst the rabble) be not so suspicious
Of our more careful carriage, that are gentlemen.

You have said to satisfaction
And more then I expected. Hark you son.

I did not think th'adst been so good an Oratou^.


Why friend? because wanton familiarity
Make's us less serious when we are alone,
Must it necessitate we cannot speak
In a high cause! Cousin, you must be careful
Of your behaviour: you are before a Justice.

Why Cousin, have Justices power over a mans will?


Some busy ones have arrogated much;
But being told their own have ever since
Given Gentlemen a due respect.

I'll make a trial here. Please you a little
To put off this severer gravity;
And drink a glass of Sack. Your age is Privilege
In what the law of moderation,
Denies our hotter blood.

Pretty sweet Gentleman. Is't possible
That one so young, should have so gray a wit;
'Tis wanting many times in graver beards.
Please you Mr. Ierker, to bring these Gentlemen to my house to supper. You'll
find some empty dishes.

We know your table's plentifully furnished.


This was very good Sack, neighbour. Pray send me home a dozen Bottles. And
keep good orders.


The best orders that can be kept in my hous^ or any office of my house shall
be at your Worships service.


^ogh; that complem^nt stinks.


You are very cou^t^ou, neighbour. Will you go along with me Gentlemen!


We are your servants. 'Tis a blessed opportunity.


You shall now make trial of my professed love.


The reckoning M. Dasher


We'll take the Barr^ our way.


You'll do me honour to pay it there. Ten thousand welcomes wait upon you
Gentlemen (whoo^) Come sirrah, be the Mercury of neatness, and nimbly set this
disordered room in order. Then give the gentleman below notice, that it is now
ready to do him service: He's like to be a bountiful guest. He talks of
selling his Land, and being a Wit: but how can that agree together I yes, very
well. A country Gentleman to s^ll his land, is as it were to change his copy:
leave his known trade to project a better profit. Which changing of Copy here
with us, ends many times in the city freehold at Ludgate.


Worthy Sir, I have now made ready a room to entertain your worthy person. My
house was so cramd with Lords; and this especially with most choice gentlemen,
some of the admired wits, to which very name I owe respect and service.


'Tis a fine Chamber, it shines like a Gold-smiths shop in Cheap-side.


'Twould much inde^re me to your kindness to bring me acquainted with some
of those Wits: you say they keep their rendezvous here many times. If I may
mold my self capable I should gladly add to their number. Indeed, I have had
but Country breeding.


City bringing up forsooth.


Yes; for we rid like mad men.


Questionless, Sir, there are of the wits some mercenary ones, whom your money
may command to be your servants. But these are of a nobler strain. Howsoever,
I will upon the next occasion show my desire to do you service.


Prithee Ralph, what be those Wits? A family?


No Dobson, they be of all tribes. Some are Iewes, and some are Gentiles. Some
are noble both in blood and condition, and some in neither. Some study Arts of
use; some of delight; some conceive well, but talk wickedly.


Those be the Women Ralph.


No interruptions. Some break jests; some break pates; some break Tailors;
and some break their fasts with Duke Humphrey.


A wise house-keeper belike.


Some wear Plush that others pay for. Some love Sack, and some love wenches.
Few will dye of the Aldermans Gout, and some will never be cured of their own
--


I understand thee Ralph. But how come thou to know all this?


Tut man; I lived in London before now; was servant to one that converst much
with the wits, and kept an Academy of Music. I tell thee Dobson, I have
picked up mo^e learning among the crumbs of a broken biscuit, after one of their
meetings at a Tavern, then would make twenty Ballad-makers commence
Po^tasters; and with the over-plus indoctrinate ten Justices Clerks, and an
under-Sheriffe.


Sweet Mistress, you are welcome to my expectation.


If my presumption to bring a worthy acquaintance along with me, seem's not
unmannerly.


You rather express kindness to a stranger that desires worthy company.


Sweet Mr. Dasher, you are the best Woman Vintener that ever loved a Gossips
tale. You have so many good things to pleasure a woman with. You were wont to
have an excellent neat tongue.


Sweet Mris. Tongall, my best tongue, and all is at your service.


Kind Master Dasher.


To your welcome Mistress.


My humbleness receives your favour thankfully. My service to you Mr. Dasher.


I kiss the hand of your servant.


And make a leg. This Vintener sure hath had very mannerly breeding. he came
not from the Banks side, where the surly Watermen live.


Noble sir, I presume to present my desires to do you service.


This Gentleman hath less manners. He answers nothing.


My friend (Sir) though he be of few words, is a fine wit, and a great
observer.


A Wit, Mistress; I shall be the prouder of his acquaintance. But when I am a
Wit, I shall prefer my talking before my observation.


I thank you Mr Little-word.


Mr. Littleword and Mris Tongall! very good. Sure this woman had a French-man
to her Father.


Indeed Mr. Dasher, 'tis excellent Sack. If you were unmarried you should have
my daughter ^inny, for keeping such good Wi^ in your house.


I retribute all due thanks for your kindness, that you would do me so great
an honour.


Mistress, you said I should have your daughter.


My friend, why so thou shalt. This Sack makes my heart merry.


Who then shall my Master have?


Why my Daughter linny.


A right woman: so her tongue go, no matter what she says.


What will that Gentleman with his table-booke!


Let's have a health to some body.


Please you Sir, to my daughter Iinny.


Let it go round then.


And he that will not pledge it, shall not have her.


I hope we shall drink now Ralph.


Else we lose both our share of the Sack, and our hopes of her daughter Iinny.


Some more Wine.


(Whooh) be nimble sirrah; and bring of my kingdom (that's my word for good
wine) that it may wait on these Gentlemen.


William, thou art an honest fellow; and if thou bring us good wine, thou
shalt have my daughter Iinny from them all.


Sure this Gentleman write's what I speak. I hope 'twas not treason to say my
Kingdom. I would I knew what he were.


The Vi^tener seem's troubled at this Gentleman's table-booke.


'Tis his practise of observation. He is taking a humour for a Play: perhaps
my talking of my daughter Iinny.


I'll hatch some mirth from it. Sir, you must not take it ill, if I tell you of
your errors. You have spoken something rashly.


Kind and worthy Sir, my life is your servant for this noble care.


That silent Gentleman is an intelligencer; a state spy. Hee'^ inform against
you. Therefore complie with him to prevent it. 'Tis his policy to say nothing
himself, that his observation may be the more, and his own danger the less.


Sir, I owe your goodness all that ever I have been, am, or shall be. He
writes again.


Now Mr. Little-word, you have some fine matter there to work upon.


To undo me. Sir, I desire you will command all that is to be commanded in my
house to do you service. Yes, yes; he writes again.


That word command is a word of great danger, I would you had not used it.


Alas Sir, Mris Tongall, 'twas not neighbourly done of you to bring an informer
into my hous^.


How, I bring an Informer! as I am a Matron, he's a Gentleman, a wit, and a
rare Projector.


I believe it, to undo a poor Vintener, that cannot complement a Gentleman
into a ten pounds expense; but his neck must be in danger. Sir, if I were a
King I would be your servant. He writes again.


Bless me Sir, you have spoken treason.


Alas, Sir, I, am undone then.


Master, the Constable and other officers are coming up.


Yes, yes; to apprehend me.


'Tis for us, Dobson.


The Constable* I hope we are not suspected persons.


If I thought you were, you should never have my daughter Iinny.


By your leave Gentlemen.


You are welcome Sir, and I pray be gone.


But not without you Sir. You are suspected, and must answer --


Answer what? here are neither Traitors nor (...).


I fear I shall be proved both.


No Sir, nor night-walkers that are taken up, and cast down I have declared my
self of as good carriage as any in the neighbour-hood; and my daughter Iinny
waits upon an honourable Lady.


Mr. Constable, I am your servant, I hope you suspect no Traitors in my house.
If you do, they shall wait upon you into the Cellar; and there commit what
treason you will against as good Sack as is in the King of Spaines Dominions.
The Gentleman writes still. I am utterly lost.


There are two suspected to be here, that have broken the peace, and committed
a robbery.


Deny it Ralph.


I tell you Constable, there are none here, but can break the peace, as well
as you that are a Constable.


They shall obey your authority, and in the Vinteners phraze wait upon you.


I fear I must wait upon the Gallows.


Being my servants, Ple go likewise along with you.


Yes, yes; a mere plot to go along, that he may witness against me.


Fear nothing Ralph, the Gentlewomen will not see us hanged.


But they may suffer us, and that's a word for hanging.


You seem apprehensive of your own danger. There's a reckoning to pay; if you
but forgive it, ^'le free you from this Gentleman's information.


Most gladly Sir, and be your servant. But how shall I be sure of it?


You shall hear it from his own mouth. You will not (Sir) inform any thing
against this man! I pray say no.


No.


I am satisfied: and will be your servant in any thing but treason.


But be sure you speak to Mistress Dorothy. Nay I'll along with you too, and
perhaps speak a good word.

I have acquaintance with the Justice, and his Clerk knows my daughter Iinny.


Let me be your servant Mr. Constable, and light you down. I hope my house
will receive no scandal by this.


'Twas a beginning yet, and more may hit.

Thus in the abused sense cheating is called wit.


THanks honest Nicholas. 'Tis time to cover: my Lady will to supper so soon as
my Master comes home. He brings strangers with him. This Butler is the kindest
fellow to a Gentleuman; and deserves my love more for this bottle of Sack,
then Warrant or Spruce for fighting. Come thou inspirer of a diviner soul,
that teach mysteries, of which without thee none are capable: to be
valiant; to love; to Poetise: suffer a thirsty gentleuman to delight her dry
palate with thy sweet moisture, and refresh her spirits with thy comfortable
operation. (Drinks) Excellent Sack, as I am a Gentleuman. Now am I in love with
my old Master for buying it; with the Vintener for selling it; with the Drawer
for drawing it; nay, with the very Porter that brought it home: but most of all
with kind Nicholas for bestowing it upon me; good heart, he hath v^nt^'d a
chiding if it should be mist. (Drinks.) What foolish Poets were they that made
the more foolish gods drink Nectar! Had Apollo presented Daphne but with a cup
of such Sack, sh^e would have loved him, as I d^e Nicholas: but not to lye with
him. A gentleuman must not humble her self to a Butler. (Drinks.) My Lady.


What is't should make my Husbands jealousy
Rage ^o within him to suspect the visits
Of every friend! Cannot my careful carriage
Kill his distrust, and make him confident!
Many a young Lady that had such excuses
As I may well pretend, his age, diseases,
And all the cold defects are incident
To a decaying strength, would privilege
Her rasher wills dispense with young desires.
Such are in me; but not to satisfaction:
I must not wrong my fame: though my hot blood
Should danc^ a lustful measure. But he's jealous;
And I must practise some strange cure upon it.
Secretary.

Madame.


Why do you gaze upon me?


I would not for th'exchange your Ladyship were a man.


And why so?


I should run mad, for love of your Ladyship.


What humour have you got? you have sure been tippling. Fie Secretary.


I hope your Ladyship hath a better opinion of your woman, then to be earnest
because she jests.


You know Mr. Ierker?


A very handsome gentleman. I wonder no worthy Gentleuman is in love with him:


No Secretary; what think you of me?


Doth your ^ truly and so do.


But not as I do*
I could betray mine honour to his l^ve;
And s^ll my fame for his ^ embraces*
Give those delights which are my Husbands due
To his enjoying.

And w^ll your Ladyship discover this to me? Truly I mean not to be
degraded from your Ladyships woman, to hold the door, and cry, my Master's
coming.


Thy employment shall be
Whe^ we are closely set at dalliance
Blush not what ere thou see; but call thy Master;
The service may be worth a new gown.

How, call my Master! Did ever any Lady enjoy a friend in a corner, and wish
her Husband (who is sufficiently jealous already) to see it! Now as I am a
Gentleuman, and had rather be a Lady, 'tis not my mind.


But 'tis mine;
His knowledge of't would add to the delight,
And make the offence less. City Dames can practise
Slights to deceive their Husbands, mine shall know it.

But is your Ladyship earnest?


As earnest as resolves can make me.


But I am resolved not to obey your Ladyship. Shall I that am my Ladies
Secretary as it were, be treacherous to her secrets? Then let me not be counted
a gentleuman. If it please your Ladyship I'll tell him you intend such a thing
that he may prevent it.


Dispute not my commands, but do them:
O^ I shall stop the current of my favours.
That hitherto have flowed so fully on thee.

I have brought you some guests Wife. Send your entertainment be worth their
labour.


I could wish it much better for Master Ierkers sake.


I fear you are too free that way.
I am yet a man, and my declining age
Hath not so weakened judgement in me,
That passion should betray my jealous thoughts.
Nor can I but suspect, and must be satisfied.
Her woman is the instrument. Mris. Susan.

Pray Sir, let me prepare her. No more will I
In the severer Person of a counsellour
Instruct your care. But since by curious search
I have informed my knowledge
Even to satisfaction of his worth,
Let me commend this noble gentleman
Unto your best desires; let him possess them.

Brother, without mature consideration
I dare not do an act; on which depends
Such dangerous events.

My love's your warrant.
Have not I searchd him thoroughly? have not I
Found him deserving all that's due to man,
Though malice were his judge. View but his person,
Art could not shape a m^re exact prep^rtion:
And through his Crystal bosom read his heart
Wherein such noble thoughts are character'd --

You shall command a poor Gentleuman any thing; neither do I expect reward. I
only desire you will accept it as an act of my love. But why should you be
jealous of my Lady.


Ask me no idle questions, but do it. Thou may be a Lady thy self, if it
lie in my power to raise thee.


Alas Sir, an old man raise a Gentleuman.


We have a father (Brother) to whose care
We owe another duty, then that only
Which Nature hath enjoined us for receiving
Our beings from him. Let not our rash wills
Swayed only by desire, run any course
Agrees not with his liking: Yet I'll tell
The Gentleman how much he owes your love
For thus commending him.

How now Sir Generous?
Courting my woman? am not I warm enough
To thaw your frozen appetite?

Truly Sir, if my Lady knew how much I loved
you, 'twould make her jealous.

Indeed it would not.
Revenge should be a remedy.

That's my fear.

Nay, to her again; you are not the first
That hath abused his Lady.

Wife, forgo these fond thoughts, and with care apply your self to entertain
these gentlemen. I'll to my closet.


I want but the opportunity of their absence,
Which I must straight contrive.

I am now animated
To come the nearest way without more circumstance;
And tell you how your beauty and your virtues
Have won on my desires to make them yours.

I thank you Sir, and could mine own eyes see
But half that worth my Brother says is in you,
My equal thoughts should answer.

What said she Sir?


It seems you did commend me!


Yes by my hopes of good, no otherwise
Then I desire to have my self commended
Upon the like occasion.

I must thank you Sir.


I do interpret it; and have thought upon
Another trial. Let me entreat you Sister
To construe my intentions right. Though I
Commended him, 'twas only to distinguish
Your passion and your reason. Now I find
The latter strongest, that you refuse the love
Of one so much defective.

How! defective!
Brother, my judgement hath as searching eyes
Can see the fullness of his manly worth
Through all the veils of your detraction.
And now to show how much I do prefer
The freedom of my will before your counsel;
I'll tell him I do love him.

Sister, I hope
You are not earnest!

As earnest as my love;
Which since I first beheld him took possession
Of all my though^s, though customary niceness
Restraind me from discovering them; but now --

Pray daughter oversee the servants.


Mother beshrew your heart, she was in a good ^eine. But come sir, wee^l pursue
it.


It hath been no small punishment for me to hold my peace all this while. My
Cousin is moral before company and counsel's my manners. But now I hope my
tongue shall have liberty; and her's my Ladies gentleuman to exercise it with.


Your little Cousin may stay. How like you the plot?


As the end proves it. And since your constancy
Hath held out against my lewd temptations,
Which have as well been trials of your virtues
As acts of wantonness, I here desist.
Henceforth my tongue shall never uttor sound
Offensive to your modesty.

Pray let's sit,
And enter on the project, though it be nice
When wit masks virtue in a cloak of vice.

They are going to it, and here's a little one will tell. Pray sir, can you
keep counsel?


As well as a woman.


Indeed they and children are kin.


You need not fear your secrets.


Then I shall love you heartily. But pray Sir, no meddling with a gentleumans
apron. Here's that will help your growth: Please you to partake.


She abuses me, I must fit her. What is't Mistress?


Sack I assure you Sir; and I hope you will love ^ poor gentleumans as she
loves you.


If the Butler be not too deeply interested.


Secretary.


Madame.


You forget your employment.


I saw your Ladyship do nothing yet.


Do we not kiss!


I run then, and dare not look back for fear of blushing.


What strange contrivement's this?


Nay, blush not Mr. Ierker, ours is no act of shame, but to be gloried in;
youth to youth. Sir Generous are your horns so lop-heavy they make you hang
the head. Never droop at it man. A Lord may be a Cuckold and never the wiser:
you have gotten the knowledge of what o^ did but suspect before.


Out of my warring thoughts discretion
Ha^ horder'd a resolve, whose practise shall
Preserve my credit. Though I much wonder
A woman's smooth hypocrisy should make
Even her secret'st actions to appear
Most virtuous; yet in this to stain her whiteness.

I did it Sir to cure your jealousy
More then for satisfaction of desire,
Which I have often satiated, when
Your cold abilities were comforted
With down and sileuce; when your dreams presented
The quiet of a grave.

I did it Sir,
In gratitude for your hospitality.
Please you to take my counsel. Be divore't.
You need no proofs, since she's her own accuser.
I'll then procure a dispensation
And we'll be marr^ed.

'Tis assented to.
Nay more, I'll give you all her portion back:
Nor shall the least disquiet in my thoughts
Make me remember it. Think not (young man) mine age
So weak* but I can conquer passion.
My act sh^l instantly have confirmation;
And be a president where such inequality
Of years are joined.

Pray good Sir Generous stay.
I have not yet consented; and I think
The Law cannot dispense whilst either live.
If you resolve divorce, you^l only force me
To an unwil^ing widdow-hood; and how little
My innocence deserves, the least suspect,
Though I did feign a guilt for better ends,
Just heaven can witness. There was no necessity
To tempt my woman to discover us.
It was my first command.

I hear strange words
Which must be scanned and construed.

Here my solicits cease. But I desire
I may ^em^ine the servant of your virtues,
And wear your favours livery, whose example
H^h won on my resolves to reconcile
My ^lder soul.

Whilst you persevere in it,
I shall preserve you in my purest thoughts;
But never to infect them.

The World reputes me
A man of full discretion; and mine age
Is not so rotten yet, to betwice child.
Hence ye vain jealousies, that in love diseased
Are peccant humours: therefore must be purged.
Come to my bosom pattern of true goodness.
Ne'er more those bug-beares to the minds blessed quiet
Shall fright thee thence.

Then will my joys be settled.


Good Sir forgive
The rashness of my passion. I'll no more
Be jealous of your visits; but desire
The love I bear your person may beusefull
To all g^od ends.

Nay, blush not Sister;
Though it be virtues colour. Say it again.
Here are more witnesses.

Whence growe's this exultation?


From in ward joy that she affects this gentleman,
Whose Virtues won
Upon my love to be his Orator;
And not respects infected with the mixture
Of any worse condition.

Do you love him?


I hope to your kind judgement 'twill appear
A virtuous truth.

If he be found deserving
In the dependences on blood and fortune
I shall consent, and then may mutual love
Render you happy.

How am I blessed that your white soul
Hath bounded it's desires within the circuit
Of my too narrow worth!

Supper not ready yet ^ my servants are musical; please you Gentlemen to dance
a little. 'Tis a healthful exercise; bid them prepare their instruments. Come,
come, settle to it.


I love to see a nimble activenesse
In noble youth; it argues active minds
In well shaped bodies, and begets a joy
Dancing within me.

Welcome neighbour Tongall: what mean these people?


I have brought them, an't please your Worshipp.


Whom, and't please you, Master Constable.


The thieves, and't please your Worship, that robbed your worships Clerk.


Now Warrant.


How! I robbed! the Constable is surely drunk. I was not robbed.


How's that! did not you bring me to the Tavern; show me the fellows, and
direct me to apprehend them? Did you not promise me a share if they might be
brought to a composition?


Who? I? verily I say I know thee not.


How! not know the Constable! Come Mr. Warrant, let me understand the mystery
without being farther abused. You forget the place where we had recreation for
nothing, only promising the wenches favour upon occasion: against whom we
afterwards informed to get fees.


Is't no otherwise? it shall raise some mirth.


Did not I tell thee Ralph, the Gentlewomen?


Well, 'tis a rare thing to be a Justice. Were I but swel'd with a little
authority, me thinks I could cry, you Rogue, you Rascal, or you Constable,
most gravely.


And 'tis as rare a thing to be a Constable; to command in the name of
authority, and be drunk at midnight, without danger of the st^ks.


I shall respect him Mris. Tongall. Mr. Constable I do conceive an abuse done
to my person, in that you here traduce two strangers, pretending appointment,
when none will accuse them; nor can I suddenly discover the error.


Now by all the painted authority of my staff --


No swearing Constable; I have determined to confer a power upon the accused,
to judge both it and you; and the most offenders shall suffer what shall be
due.


Whither shall I fall! from my Empire of command, to obey a mock-Constable!
(...) danger of example forbid it, that Clowns and fools b^ not made Justices
in earnest.


No more of this modesty: I'll have it so; and exercise your wit. I have
known a Country fellow full of knavish clinches.


Yes Sir, 'tis ordinary in a Smith.


Then if I fit you not for a Justice.


And I for a Constable. You shall hear my tone.


And I for an offender.


Can you write and read young gentleman?


Like a gentleman.


Then you shall be my Worships Clerk. And so I assume authority. (hem, hem)


Now shall we be jeered out of our skins.


Set a good face on it.


(hem, hem,) what are you sirrah?


I am Dobson, the Constable and'^ please your Worsh^p.


He lies and't please your Worship, I am the Constable.


You were the Constable; but your dignity is justly taken from you, and
conferred upon honest Iohn Dobson. Thou hast been a rascal sirrah, a corrupt
Constable. Thou hast converst with deeds of darkness, hating the all light,
but wenches and a lantern: which a married Constable can never want at
midnight. Thou hast watched little and prayed less: thou shalt therefore fast
thy self into amendment. And so I commit thee with thy guard of Bill-men to
the mercy of a Shrove-Tuesdayes rebellion. (hem, hem.)


Here's an other refendant, and't please your Worship.


N^w Sir, what are you?


A Justices Clerk.


Oh, I know you sirrah.

You write true Latin, not to be understood by the Worshipful bench.


Your Worship is misinformed. I cannot write true Orthographie without a Copy;
and for Latin, I have less then the Dean^ of Dunstable. I have read
Ignoramus: but finding hard words which were not in the Dictionary; I swear I
understand it no more then Ignoramus himself.


Make his Mittimus and send him to school; (hem, hem,) what are you Sir?


A Gentleman Usher.


You are a Malki^ of mock-Gentry; made up of silk and vaine-glory. You begin
to grow out of fashion. I will therefore have you stitched into a case of
complements, and commended to some thrifty house-keeping Lady in the Country,
where you may save her Ladyship the charge of a Taylor; and if you can read,
serve for a house-Chaplaine in rainy weather. (hem, hem.) Bring that Country
Gentleman before me.


You'^ grow saucy sirrah.


Pray let's uphold the jest. I'll not spare mine own person. Your servant's
witty.


You are a Country Gentleman; a Gallant out of fashion all the year; but
especially at Se^sions, and upon high Holi-dayes, when your satin doublet
draws away the eyes of the simple, and distracts their devotion almost into
Idolatry: giving it more worship then the Heralds ever gave your Ancestors.
You intend as I understand to come forth in a new Edition: and whe^ the Mercers
and Tailors have new printed you; and that some gentile wit may be read in your
Character to marry a Wife in the City. You shall then have a pass sealed upon
her by a Courtier; be ship't at Cuckolds haven, and so transported into
Cornwall. (Hem, hem.) Now Sir, what are you? never a wise word to answer a
Justice?


He is my friend Sir; and if you abuse him, you shall not have my daughter
Iinny.


There is a tempest in her tongue able to shake the foundation of the wisest
Justice-ship.


My Lady Sir.


Madame, I have heard complaints of your Ladyship, that you rise early every
morning before noone, and are ready before night, unless there be a mask at
Court. You are likewise a great frequenter of the balls, merely out of
charity to the poor Fiddlers.


He hits you home Wife.


And this is my Ladies Gentleuman.


Stop your ears Gentlewomen, here's a foul business towards. But you may
tell the man, the time and place, though not the manner.


Truly Sir, if I am with child, (...) but with a bottle of Sack.


Give it me; I'll keep it. Many a Justi^ in the City keeps children are none
of his own. (Drinks.)


A right Sack Justice.


And now for you Gentlemen. You are of the wits that give Poets Sack and old
Bevers, and vent their conceits in Taverns for your own.


Please you Sir, these Gentlemen are my friends.


How's that! a Justice take bribes! the example is too frequent, and I will
have it mended.


You begin now to overdoe.


Bribes have purchased more then the whole race of A^dermen since Luds time.


You are bitter now: 'tis time to resign.


'Tis time indeed, when I will not take bribes to be a Justice Quondam.


When Wit makes not abuse it's exercise,
The users of it then are truly wise:
But 'tis a foolish Vanity, not Wit,
When Conscience bounds are broke to practise it.

Y' Ave seen a Play, wherein was no disguise;
No Wedding; no impro^able devise:
But all an easy matter, and contained
Within the time of action. 'Tis arraigned;
And doubtful stands before your judgements bar,
Expecting what your several censures are.
Some that pretend commission to the Stage,
As th'only Cato's of this Critic Age;
Condemning all not done by imitation,
Because this new Play hath a new foundation
We fear will cry it down: our hope is then
That your fair hands will raise it up again.

