WHat horror wakes me! and disturbs the peace
I sate enthroned in? shall dissention ruin
Eternal acts? Hath the great deity
Made me his instrument, and shall my power
Be slighted so by their rebellious difference?
Cease mutiny, or be your own destructions.
Accursed confusion that neglects the form
Nature prescribes. I rather would preserve ye:
That in distinguisht order ye might show
The glory of my work; each in his sphere
Subscribing to my better government.
But my commands are useless. Their deaf wills
Persist to act their own and my sad ills.

Where's my delight I whence is this sad dejection?
How amazed Nature stands I Have our embraces
Brought forth a race of elemental forms
That live in simple bodies, to be made
Pregnant for other births, and will she now
Neglect their teeming? I would be a Grandfather,
And see my issue multiply.

Oh husband!
Our union hath been vain; our off-spring proves
A rebel to our peace, and natures laws.
Light fire descends to earth, beneath whose weight
He groans to be delivered, till with struggling
He lifts earth up, in whose repression air
Contracts his forces to extinguish fire.
Again; fire from this mutinous assault
Doubles his strength; when straight ambitious water
Climbing his seat consumes her self in flames.
Thus fire, air, water, earth, each would be all,
And are made neither; but a confused mass,
And indigested Chaos.

Am I Ianus,
(The figure of eternal providence)
And shall this disobedience escape the stroke
Of my sever'st correction? Fire I shall lash you,
And make your nimble pyramides skip upward.
I'll chain earth to her centre. Air had best
Confine himself to his three regions,
Or else I'll disinherit him. If water
Exceed her bounds.

See; the dissentious come
Mazed in the errors of their own confusion:
As if their dissolution should precede
Their yet not perfect being. How my griefs
Press down the organes of my utterance,
And choke words in their passage! Speak good Ianus.

Ye disobedient children of that love
That joined us to produce ye.

Stop good father,
Our wills are deaf to counsel.

Or to threats.
Set both your brows with wrinkles, and put on
The austerest anger, we'll be awed by none
But our own wills.

I'll quench my brothers flames,
Or burn my self into him. My cold moisture
Shall not be tied to embrace as cold a sister,
And not ascend above them.

I'll be active
As air or fire. Else with my ponderous weight*
I'll press their climbing heads beneath my centre;
And by inversion bury them within me,
'Till earthquakes shatter all, and small ruin
Dilate their passage.

Are we not one birth?
Why then should there be a precedence,
And not an equal power of all first qualities?
Be not you partial parents, we'll obey
The government of nature.

Otherwise
With our own strength we will prosecute this war
'Till ruin stop's it.

Stubborn boys, I'll yoke ye
In such a bondage.

Gentle husband try
Persuasions strength: Perhaps 'twill better work
Upon the temper of their fiercer nature.
I am your mother; let me reconcile ye:
That in your peace I may preserve the order
Of my intended work. Should fire forsake
His lofty mansion, and infect his flames
With grosser weight, it would benumbe his activenesse,
And make his motion dull. Were my pure air
Pent in his sisters entrails, her foul veins
Would soon infect him. What creation meaned
In your diversities, your rash ambitions
Must not pervert. Since providence hath made ye
The means for many ends, dispute not them,
Nor your own thought-defects: each i^ supplied
With a perfection, and an equal worth
Distinguisht in proportion; but the excellence
Of your own attributes cannot appear,
Whilst you disturb the distribution
Of them to other forms, which from your mixtures
Must enter different bodies of the first,
Second, third, fourth, fifth composition.
Vapours exhalations; meteors; vegetables
And minerals; animals, and lastly man,
Called so from concord* for he doth contain
A harmony of parts, and in them figure
His end of being. Let not then your wills
Persist in this rebellious mutiny,
And hinder high intendments. Pray agree,
And leave the reason of such acts to me.

Vain oratory. Think you us so easy
To be overcome by words! swell high my rage,
And with licentious fury break the ties
Of these too weak commands.

Let's on to fight,
Whilst the yet discord of the untuned spheres
Add's courage, and delights our warlike ears.

What shall we do? The universal fabric
Will be everted, if this war continue:
Let's sue to Love; his power may be prevailing.

See; Love appears at thy request.
Thou cause of motion and of rest.
Thou greater powers great substitute,
Whose will and acts none must dispute.
Thou that form'st the best of things
From thought-impossibles, and brings
Contrary matters to produce
Another difference, then the use
Of a mere quality in one
Can work unto perfection.
Thou that thy secrets dost unlock
To propagate a lasting stock;
And multiply that the issue might
Be little less then infinite.
Thou mother of all that is found
Within this universal round,
What is thy will with Love?

Oh gentle power
Thou that art Natures soul, and the beginning
Of every humane thing: that give them laws,
And to thy self art law. Figure of peace;
That to thy godheads attribute an next
The quiet order of the worlds vast frame
To have its form and being from thy rule;
Which must be now imperious or its ruin
Will prevent time. The mutinous elements
Have rased rebellion, and dis-joynted quite
The order of their fabric. The pure heavens
(Whose motion should be harmony) roll cross,
And bend their Axle-tree, 'till both the poles
Do kiss each others ends. Then rectify
Great Love this dire confusion.

Straight I'll do it.
Can Love deny if Nature woo it.
The heavens first in tune I'll set;
And from their music soon beget
A charm, of power to make light fire
Skip to his sphere, and earth retire
To her parch^ den. The subtle air
I'll calm from mists, and make it fair,
And water with her curled waves sweep
The bounded channels of the deep,
That order may succeed, and things
Grow perfect from their lasting springs.
Move right ye spheres in concord sound,
And with your music fill this round.

Hence confusion and dissention.
Be no more new forms prevention,
Crossing still
A mothers will,
And Natures great intention.
Concord is the soul of being.
Nothing's better than agreeing*
Then let embraces crown this times beginning,
Loves power is winning.
And when he throws the darts that arm his hands,
Who can resist his great commands?
Nature must pay Love thanks for this great work
Of reconciliation. May the peace
Be lasting as your selves, and no ambition
Move a new war: but from your loving mixtures
New generation follow.

Spheres again
Your brazen trebles higher strain.
And lusty moving sounds advance
To make us active whilst we dance.

Now to the other work^: our art
Shall make all perfect e're we part.
Come forth thou son of earth, and view the day
That glories in the presence of thy beauty.

What am I? My imperfect sense is yet
Vnapprehensive, and the intellect
My mother hath inspired, doth not instruct me
To know my self.

Look up thou master-peece
Of Natures workmanship, thou little world:
Thou that excel'st in form, that comprehends
All the perfections which her curious hand
Designed and finished: That when other cr^atures
Behold the earth, and with dejected eyes
Look downwards on it, hast an erected figure
To see the stars, and contemplate their beings,
Celestial causes, and their influence,
Whence great effects ensue: Thou that hast speech
To be thy thoughts interpreter, expect
A farther act of Love to crown thy life
By joining thee to an immortal wife.

Receive my thanks great power. I yet am mazed,
And wander in a labyrinth of thoughts,
That throng confusedly together, striving
Who should first issue, 'till their multitude
Choakes up the passage. Oh ye powers that made me
To be a King, and to have sovereignty
Annexed unto my difference, send me quickly
The glorious guide that may remove this darkn^sse.

Ha! what are these?


You may go look. Yet if you ask me mildly, perhaps I'll answer you.


We are sent to be your servants.


By whom?
Our parents, the four Elements.

Your names?


My name is Choler. I was beg^t by Fire on Natures Cooke-maide in the time of
a Feastivall. I was dry nursed by a lean Butterwife, and bred up in Mars his
Fencing-schoole: where I have learned a mystery that consists in lying,
distance and direction; pace, space and place; Time, motion and action;
progression, reversion and trav^rsion; blows, thrusts, falses, doubles, ships
and wards; closings, gripes and wrestlings; fights guardant, open, variable and
close. Then have we our stocatas, imbrocatas, mandritas, puintas and puintas
reversas; our stramisons, passatas, carricadas, amazzas and incartatas.


And what's all this?


Terms in our dialect to pusle desperate ignorance.


What's yours?


My name is Blood. Air was my father, and my mother a light-heel'd madame that
kept a vaulting-schoole at the sign of Virg^. As she was one day practising a
high trio^ she lost her hold, and fell down into my fathers regions, where
had not he kind man stopped her about tho middle, she had brake her neck
against a rock of Ice that hung beneath her, and Blood had not been as he is,
a Dancer sir.


What art skilled in?


Garbes and postures of the body. Here's an honour for a Lord; a back-fall for
a Lady, and a high rising is best in an active gallant. But pardonne moy
monsier, it do strain a de back too mush. Here's a traverse for a nimble
Lawyer. A hop and skip shall raise the son of a Cobbler well under-lay'd with
pieces to the government of a province, 'till over-much ambitious cutting
wears him into his Last. A turn above ground for a Mercuriall pick-pocket,
and an easy passage to destruction for him that dances after infected
wantonness* Cum multis alijs.


And what's your name?


Phlegm mine sir. Water was my mother, and she made me a Physician. I was
nursed by Apollo^s Hearbwife that dwells at the sign of the Crab, and she
taught me to go backwards.


And what can you do?


Live by the inspection of excrements, and draw aurum palpabile out of them.
Kill any one cum privilegio ar^is. I am Venus Midwife, and trusted with many
secrets, which I never reveal but to my Apothecary when we meet at Libra to
share and settle our correspondence. Your Physician will serve you at your
death sir.


Now your name?


I am called Melancholy. I was begotten on the earth after a great drought in
the time of barrenn^sse: who breeding me up hardly, enabled me the better for
this hungry profession. I would feign be in love; but having no other
mistress. I am enforced to love mine own humour.


All these are humours, and must be my servants.
What a vast bounty have the heavens given me?
But I must labour to preserve them regular,
And not exceeding their proportions
Of substance or of quality, for then
They will be masters. Disagreeing!

He hath stirred me sir, and I will be angry.


Then Phlegm must cool you.


Phlegme's a fool.


Or a Physician.


Choler, you must be taken down.


I'll soon be up again. Provoke me no more: I am adust with rage, and will
make you an odd number.


Come, this agrees not with a servants duty.
You must subscribe to order. Phlegm shall be
My substitute to moderate these jarrings.
And if hereafter any one transgress
But in the least dissention that disturbs
The quiet of my state, he shall correct it;
Nor spare himself. For in a government
The offence is greatest in the instrument
That hath the power to punish; and in laws
The authors trespass makes the foulest cause.
What admiration works upon my sense!
I hea^e and see such objects as would make
Creation doubtful whether she were perfect
Without these parts. Into what strange delights
I'm hurried on the sudden? ha!

Look hither
Thou comfort of my love that gave thee being
To figure greater power. See, Love hath brought
Thy wish a spouse of's own immortal race,
Clad in the glory of her innocence.
Do not defile her, yet she's virgin white,
And joined unto thee, that thou may enjoy
Knowledge and virtue, not thy sensual pleasures,
For being linked unto thee she is made
As sensible of thy corrupted passions,
As thou of mortal griefs. Let her direct
Thy powers of appetite. She'll show thee heaven,
And the reward of good; and if thou miss
The path she guides thee in, thou wil^ enforce her
To share thy ruin, and pervert the ends
Of her eternity. Which if thou tread
By her directions, she communicates,
And makes thee like her self. She must be changed
According to thy disposition.
Then let my counsel be so deep impressed
The prosecution of't may make thee blessed.

Fairest of all earthly things,
Mount thy thoughts upon the wings
Of contemplation, and aspire.
To reach at my supernal fire:
Whose heate shall purge thy spouse and th^e
From all dreggs of impurity.
Let no falser love delight
Thy sense deluding appetite
To seek out other wantons led,
So heaven at length shall crown thy head.

Descend thou fairest of all creatures,
Graced with all thy heavenly features,
In whom all perfections shin^;
P^r thou art
In every part
Little less than divine.
Take thy Bride and enjoy her,
But not with soul desires annoy her:
For she is white
And hath no true delight
But what is given
From the desire of heaven.
Now join, and each to other happy prove.
That neither ^ay
Be led astray
To seek a stranger love.
After ^y sacrifice of vows and thanks
Let me embrace with reverence, Oh my life*
And better soul: joy hath possession taken
Of all my faculties, and gives a welcome
To these delights.

Do not abuse them then*
For my pure substance will admit no mixture
With any thing that's earthy, lest it should
Be so defiled. Together with my self
I must bestow on thee two different servants.
The one is like my self, all innocence,
The other's clad in an infernal robe
Of malice to us, and will tempt thy frailty
To loose desires, from her black invention
Forging aspersions on me to divert
Thy love: which I so prize, my bliss or ruin
Hath sole dependence on it. If she urge
Those accusations, deaf thy understanding
To her suggestions, and inform thy reason
Only from the other, who best knows my passions,
Powers and habits: thou wast made for me
To be my instrument, and I for thee.

And when I do forsake thee, or infect
My looser thoughts with any other object
Then thy wished good, may I be made th'example
Of imbecility; the spoil of time;
Mockery of fortune; image of inconstancy;
The scale of envy and calamity.
And this fair structure (now by these upheld)
Be buried in it's own and their lad ruins.

I am angry at it. We shall have moral now instead of Martial discipline.
Challenges will be proclaimed cowardice: and every white-liver'd silk-skinn'd
Lady-courtier will answer a mans anger with, if it were not for the law and
conscience. If no body will provoke me, I'll quarrel with my self.


Take heed Choler of a halter.


Phlegm thou art a Mountebank, and I will make thee quake.


Not so hot good Choler. I am partaking, and as discontented at this match as
envy can make me. I could hatch a conspiracy to sever them, should cause
posterity attribute all Matchiavillianisme to Melancholy.


Blood's prevented, and the expectation of so many children begot on several
mothers that should dote on the quivering of my calves, and the strength of my
back is utterly frustrate. No Lady of liberty must admire this passage, or that
skipping, 'till her veins swell with my addition. I must no more run here and
there to tickle her sense, and fright the g^eene-sicknesse from her complexion.


Shall it be a plot?


Let's kill them presently.


But the means?


Why, is not Phlegm a Physician?


Come my kind servants, let your active limbs
Move to delight us, whilst the spheres agree
To guide your measures with their harmony.
I am disturbed within; a new desire
Whet's appetite of pleasure in some change,
Such as may touch the sense without a scruple
Of wedlocks breach. Hence with these laws of conscience
That would set limits to what's infinite.
Two kisses more will cloy me* nought can relish
But variation.

Hearken then to me.
Leave this strict Bride that curbs licentious will,
And rayn's it with her temperance. Liberty
Makes delight full and swelling: it must feed
On several objects, else 'twill glut it self
Into a loathing.

I applaud thy counsel,
And am prepared to act it.

Ha! Physander.
So suddenly forgetful of thy vows
Before full consummation of those rites
Crown Bridegrooms happy?

Be not thus mis-led
By her malicious envy. She but shows thee
The easy path to ruin, whose broad entrance
Painted with falsest pleasures, ends in a point
Of all the ^l^s attend our misery
Con^racted into one. Though virtues way
Be hard and straight to enter, yet the end
Reaches to heaven, where her fair hand bestows
Wreath^s of bright stars to crown deserving brows.

Whisper that still; each accent's musical.
The mee^e conceit of it makes me immortal.
Henc^; (...) converse is hateful. I'll not tie
Desire to such embraces. I'll enjoy
A mistress (...) and sportive; that can vary
All shapes of dalliance, and present delight
Each minute in a several fashion.
Guide me, I'll follow.

And we will attend.


Wretched Bellamina, that in the instant
Of thy expected comfort, should be thrown
Below all misery* O that lustful sense
Should cause divorce betwixt us! I am lost
Almost beyond recovery, since my substance
Must be partaking of his hated ills:
Such is the fate of wedlock. His content
In false delights, must be my punishment.

I'm bravely sitted; these are fitting ornaments.
Come my best prompter, with endeavours wings
Let's cut the air, and strain our motion,
'Till we attain this bower of Sensuality.
And let the repetition of her praise
Sweeten my painful longings. My desire
Fee'ls many throes of travail; 'till delivered
Of it's sweet issue.

You must suffer for it.
Pleasures whose means are easy, in the end
Do lose themselves. Things only are esteemed
And valued by their acquisition.
Should you win her delights without some pains,
They would not relish. Whilst your expectation
Labours with the event, prepare your self
To court it bravely. She's high-spirited;
And will not stoop to every common bait
That catches easy wantonness.

What's the best?


A rough Soldiers phrase; a strong back, and a brawny limb: bait her with
these she'll bite home. If she be coy, kick her in the breech, and cry
farewell: after a few dissembling tears she'll yield with the greater
appetite. If she refused me, I'd kill her.


Could you but dance sir, and show your self active before her, 'twere
impossible for her to hold out 'till the discovery of one knave amongst many
officers. Dancing is the most taking: if a man rise well, his Mistress cannot
choose but fall.


Court her with solid language, and such discourse as may relish of aged
experience. Express your thoughts such, and your actions such, as she may
conceive judgement to be intayl'd upon you. If she be virtuous, that wins
upon her soul, and let your Physician alone with her body: If she be wanton,
Phlegm can administer provocatives.


Might I advise you sir, a passion at Courtship were more powerful. Let a sigh
be the period of every amorous sentence. Sing her some pathetic madrigal full
of cromatick ^lats: 'twill sharpen her. I would have all lovers begin and end
their prick-song with Lachrym^, 'till they have wept themselves as dry as I am.


The air me thinks begins upon a sudden
To be perfumed, as if Arabian winds
Scattered their spices loosely on the ^ace
Of some rich ea^th, fruitful with aromates.
Music breathes forth the soul of harmony.
How egerly my senses catch these objects!
But what are these?

Servants to Sensuality
That wait her will, and with a diligence
Becoming duty do prepare her pleasures.
The'r sent to entertain you.

What their names,
And offices?

Seeing mine sir. I am my Ladies Chambermaid, and the daughter of a
Glasse-maker. A piece of brittle ware, and apt to be cracked. I have been
often cemented together, but could never hold above a month. Through me sir
you may see my Ladies secrets, and mine own are at your service when you shall
command their revelation.


My name's Hearing. I am usher of the Hall, and the trumpet that proclaims
dinner ready with, Gentlemen, and Yeomen. When my Lady removes to her City
privacy (for she keeps open house in the Country) I am the foreman at her
Gate, with an instrument of correction for the offensive beggars. If you love
noise sir, my wife and my self are at your service.


Pray sir your name?


Mine is Smelling. I am my Ladies Huntsman, and keep some lesser beagles for
her chamber-use to excuse the freeness of her necessities eruptions. I play
the Gardner likewise, and attend her always when she goes to pluck a Rose. My
Mistress Cloaca had a very stinking breath, before Misackmos perfumed her, and
she is now grown less common, then when her imperfections lay open. When you
will use me sir, you shall always have me under your nose.


And what's yours?


Tasting mine sir. I am my Ladies Cooke, and King of the Kitchen: where I rule
the roast; command imperiously, and am a very tyrant in my office. My Subjects
being all Soldiers are d^ily encountered by most fierce stomachs, and never
returned but maym'd and dismembered. Brawn, Beef, and Pork are always
mustered in the van, and bring up Veale, Mutton, Minc'tpye, Goose, Turkie,
Duck, and so forth. I have a sort of cowardly Custards, borne in the City, but
bred up at Court, that quake for fear: yet are as valiant in suffering as the
rest, and are all overcome even by the women with much noise. I then send forth
a fresh supply of Rabbits, Pheasant, Kid, Partridge, Quail, Lark, Plover,
Tele, Tarts, c. With a French troop of Pulpatoones, Mackaroones, Kickshaws,
grand and excellent. The battle ended, I survey the field; and those whom I
find untouched, I place in garrison in my larder: the rest endure a new and
fierce assault by the valiant Servingmen. I then repairs my broken army; see
their overthrow at supper; drink my self drunk; go to bed, and my that
days fury's over. I'll be your servant sir in spite of your teeth.


Now yours?


Touching mine. I am my Ladies Gentleman-usher, and kill Spiders for her
Monkey. I am always her foreman in public, ^nd sometimes in private: which
makes way for me to her favour in reversion, if she survive two or three
defective husbands, and her yet uncloyed appetite can pretend an expectation of
issue. Mean time a hand^ull of ^ringoes and a little tickling w^ds me and the
waiting women in her closet with more vows and protestations then a wanting
gallant makes when he borrows money. We will conduct my Lady to her Bower,
where she prepares to entertain you.


Me thinks I am transformed into a happiness
Cannot be figur*d. It before enjoying
The expectation can beget such bliss,
What will possession?

Shall I question you sir Cooke?


Qu^stionlesse a Cooke can answer a Physician.


What Physical observations have you in your sauces, and condiments? Shall I
instruct you?


I thank you sir. My method is to dress Pheasant, Partridge and Coney for
Lords, but their Ladies many times make the sauce. The waiting women are fed
with Wagtailes. I prepare tongues for Lawyers: most commonly Woodcocks for
Aldermens Heirs, and Puddings for costive Citizens; whose wives must have
flesh of a Court-dressing, or their bellies will never be full. Your
projectors feed upon Calves-braines, and your students upon innocent Mutton.


I hope sir our after familiarity will be the often taking down of Chollers
stomach. We should agree well; we both love fire.


And Choler shall not want his Brawn whilst Cookery and Winter feasts last. I
must in and look to my roast, of which at dinner you shall most plentifully
taste.


I am inflamed. My appetite begins
To burn with hot desires; and if protraction
Delay their satisfying, they'll consume
Themselves and me.

She comes: these sounds forerunne her.


Flow ^low delight,
And pleasures swell to height.
Drown every eye with joyful tears.
And fill the ears
With sounds harmonious as the spheres.
Let every sense be ravished quite
With a large fullness of delight.
Join all ye instruments of pleasure;
And from the abundance of your treasure
Choose out one t'enrich this bower,
And make the Mistress of this paramour.
Elysium sure is here, and that eternity
I lately dream't of.

Let mine eyes first gaze
Upon his figure. 'Tis a heavenly creature,
And worthy my embraces, I have yet
Converst with earthy shapes, the baser issue
Of that gross element, but here's a form
Mingled with fire, that moves the soul of sense,
And kindles passion in me. What was she
Durst aim to prepossesse her self of him
My mouth can only challenge? Welcome sir.
If my expressions suit not entertainment
Of such a guest, creation must be blamed
That gave none other; for what ere in nature
Is found that can affect you, here 'tis stored;
And shall be a^l exhausted to declare
How much I love you.

You in throne me Lady
In happiness, above the difference
Of that may b^th can boast. You make me perfect:
And every touch of this delicious hand,
Ch^k^, lip immortallize me.

O'pe my treasury,
And let it waste to emptiness. Wilt please
Thine eyes? We'll mount a Chariot made of diamonds,
Who^e lights reflection shall create a day
In the C^mmerian valleis. From some height
We will survey the earth, and where weak beams
Cannot extend themselves, we'll have an optic
Shall show us in an instant all the hemisphere.
We'll see the fair Arcadian Virgins hunt
In their Parthenian groves. We'll count the beasts
Lurk in Hucanias dens; number the pines
That crown Lycaus.

You are the only object
Mine eyes would gaze at.

Would thine cares be blessed
With pleasing sounds? The aerie Choristers
Shall strain their throats by art, and harmony
Call down the spheres to make her consort up.

Your words are only music.


For thy smell
Saba shall be translated where thou go,
And strew thy path with spices. Panthers skins
Shall be thy couch, and amber pave the floor
Where thy foot treads.
This breath's perfume enough
To create a Phoenix,
Would delight thy taste?
Then Samlan Peacocks, and Ambracian Kidd^,
Henns of Numidia, Phesants, Phenicopters,
Ta^tel^an Lamprayes; Eels of Benacus,
Cockles of Luc^ne; Eleusinian Plaise
Shall fill thy dish, and thousand changes more
To wh^t new appetite. Shalt drink no wine
But what ^al^r^us or Calabrian Aulon
Y^eld from their grapes.

This kiss is more then Nectar.


Shalt sleep upon a bed of purest down,
Driven from white necks of Caysters Swans,
And Peneus par^owes. With Assyrian silks
(...) cloth ^hy body.

But this touch is softer.
You ^avish me with jo^es beyond expression.

Why, this is rare. I am not angry.


I am very joyful: this tickles me.


And mak's me young.


And me merry.


Now my ^icen^iate murderer, what say you to a dish of gluttony will bread the
gout in a Lord before a beggar can break his fast with it? Are not we cooks
good instruments? who together with an Hospital of sin cause diseases faster
then you can cure them?


A livelier music, come sweet heart we'll dance.
How doth my sweetheart like it?
I do not with an O^conomick strictness
Observe my servants, and direct their actions:
Pleasure is free.
But what sad object's this?

I come to snatch a Husband from thine arms
Lascivious strumpet; thou whose looser eyes
Bewitched his ill affection, and entice
His thoughts with wanton appetite of sense,
From my chaste love. Doth not Physander see
Ruin hid under every bait of pleasure;
She lays to catch him?

Laugh at her sweet heart,
Thou art secure in the^e embraces.

Do not
Afflict me thus. Those false dissembling kisses
Wound me to death. Return unto my bosom,
That never shall be warm with others touch.
She's common, and will mix her lustful blood
Even with beasts.

Tis but her envy to me.


Let not her Syrene charms bewitch thee thu^
Unto a shipwreck. Every smile of hers
Shadow's a rock to split thee: in my arms
Shalt sleep as safe as if the clouds did guard thee.
Am I not fair? Shoot not mine eyes a fire
As liv^ly? grow not colours on my cheeks,
Brighter then those that paint her rottenness*
And will Physander leave me? Did I not
Forsake th'etheriall Palace of my father,
To be thine only? and a whore to rival me!
Oh misery!

The art barren of those pleasures
I here enjoy.

What pleasures? gilded ones,
To mock thy sense* their inside's bitterness.
Return, with me shalt find delights,
As far exceeding these as the great day Star
His pale cheeked sister, or nights lesser beauties.
A thousand winged intelligences daily
Shall be thy ministers, and from all parts
Inform thee of the Worlds new accidents.
Shalt from their scanning frame by my advice,
Rules of prevention* shalt command all arts*
As hand-mayds; Shalt converse with Heaven and Angels;
And after all I'll bring thee to Elysium.
Cold there compels no use of rugged furs,
Nor makes the mountains barren. There's no dog
To rage and scorch the harvest labourer*
Whilst the lascivious Landlord wastes th'increase
In prodigal contrivements, how to allay
The furious heat with artificial snowes,
And drinks his wine in ice. Spring's always there,
And paints the valleys: whilst a temperate air
Sweeps their embroidered face with his cursed gales,
And breaths perfumes, no Persian aromates:
Pontick Amomus, or Indian balsam
Can imitate. There night doth never spread
Her ^bon wings; but daylight's always there,
And one blessed ^eason crowns the eternal year.

He hear no more: nor can I be so credulous
Having possession, to expect such fables.
Here I am fixed.

And I made miserable.


Let's in to feast, and revel; and at night
Shalt be possessed of a more full delight.

Thus doth chaste wedlock suffer. Heavenly servant
Whisper some powerful counsel in his ear,
That may reclaim him. If it works, return,
And bring me comfort, who 'till then must mourn.

The other health my boys.


No more health if you love me.


Indeed health agrees not with your profession.


But we will have more health, and less health; or I will make a close stool
pan of your Physicians noddle.


Good brother Choler he pacified.


I will not be pacified. He that deny's health let him think himself dead e're
he pronounce it. Choller's dry.


So is Melancholy.


Blood would be heated better.


And Phlegm moistened.


Blood's a skip-jack, and I will make him caper.


Nay brother Choler, thou art so cross.


And will she not return? then may the Sun
Stable his horses ever, and no day
Gu^ld the black air with light. If in mine eye
Sh^e be not placed, what object can del^ght it?

Excellent amorist. He^e's to thee Melancholy.


What do I see? ^lush gray-ey'd morn, and spread
Thy purple shame upon the mountain topps:
O^ pale thy self with envy, since here com's
A brighter Venus, then the dull-eyd ^arre,
That lights thee up

Very fine Law now: Melancholy hath been some neglected Courtier: he's perfect
in she-flattery. If he mistake me for the idol of his passion, I'll abuse him.


Oh let me kiss those pair of red twinn'd cherries.
That do disti^l Nepen^he.

(...) and spare not.
Bite not the cherry stones and eat, I care not.

Oh turn not from me^ let me smell the gumms,
Which thy rich breath creates.

As for my gumms you 'l find
Sweeter here. I have no rotten teeth behind.

This leg's not right.


I know it. 'Tis my left.


Carry your toes wider.


Take been that I fo^te not you.


Now do your cinque pass cleanly.


My cinque pass cleanly! A cooke defyes it.


You lye too open. Guard your self better, or I shall bang your coat.


'Tis a dangerous w^ren. Here's an hypostas^s argues a very bad stomach.


Some Soldier perhaps that want's his Pay.


This sediment b^tokens a great swel^ing in the belly.


'Tis some Chamber-maide sick of a Midwifes timpany.


'Twere good she changed air. Remove her into the Country, and if she fall
again into the greene-sicknesse* she knows the (...). This water argues a great
heart-burning.


'Tis a Lovers that: or some misers that drank small beer in the Dog-dayes at
his own charges.


The owner of this hath an impostume in his head, and it is near breaking.


Perhaps 'tis a Fencers, or some Shopkeepers, whose wife sells underhand by
retayle.


Let him compound for his light wife, and he may b^ cu^'d without the charity
of an Hospital.


How on a sudden my delights are clouded?
As when a surfeit makes the pleasant dish
That caused it more dist^stefull then th'offence
Of any bitter potion. My dulled senses
Relish no objects. Colours do not take
My filmed eyes. Mine ears are deaf to sounds,
Though by a Ch^rus of those lovely maids
Which ^ove begot on fair Mu^m^sy^
Sung to Apollo's harp.

Is it thereabouts? I'll play the state knave, and inform presently.


Sickness begins
To make this ^ m^n^ion. Fevers burn it,
And shake the weak foundation: then a cold
Chills it again, as if a thousand Winters
Contracted into one scattered their snow
With Northern blasts, and froze the very centre.
Palseys dis-joynt the fabric: loosen all
The house-supporters, and at length they fall.
Help me good servants.

We cannot help our selves.


Let's kill him, or he will kill us.


Phlegm do thou choke him.


I'll empty his veins.


I'll do it. Bloud's not worthy the employment.


Worthier then Choler.


Thou lie in thy throat.


Thou hast inflamed me.


Hold I command ye: How dare ye insult
Upon my weakness thus? Oh I am wounded.
Perfidious villains, was this treachery
Your duties act? What fury prompted ye
To such inhuman^ violence? Will no hand
Of art or heaven supply me with a balm!
Then I must die, and bury all my glories
E're they are fully gazed at. Why did nature
Produce me for her darling; and not arm
My passive body with a proof against thunder?
Oh thou in whose embraces I have slept
And dream't of heaven, when my waking sense
Possessed delights in thee, I seemed to ride
Commanding pleasure as if she had been
My captive, and her spoils enriched the triumph;
Help now to save me: or with wonted kisses
Make me to lose the sense of this great pain
My bleeding wounds inflict. Let me expire
Within thy bosom, and I shall forget
That death hath any horror.

This Physander!
I know him not. The bloody spectacle
Is too offensive: Would it were removed.

Please you, I'll carry the Calfe into my Slaughterhouse. But I fear he will
hardly be dressed for your Ladyships too^h: he hath bled too much to be sweet
flesh.


Not know me Lady! how am I transformed!
The sand of many minutes hath not fallen
From times gray glass, since you vouchsaf't to call me
Lord of your self and pleasures.

Let me have
Another sweet heart^ one whose lusty heat
May warm my bosom. Gather all the flowers
Tempe is painted with, and strew his way.
Translate my Bower to Turias rosie banks,
There, with a Chorus of sweet nightingales
Make it continual Spring. If the Suns rays
Offend his tender skin, and make it sweat,
Fan him with silken wings of mildest air;
Breathed by Etesian winds. The briskest Nectar
Shall be his drink, and all the Ambrosian cates,
Art can devise for wanton appetite.
Furnish his banquet. As his senses tire,
Varye the object. Let delights be linck't,
So in a circled chain no end we see,
Pleasure is only my eternity.

Sick Sir farewell. By that time you are dead*
Will have made you a caudle.
I sure have dream't; all past was but illusion.
Hold out ye bloodless Organes until I
Have rayl'd upon this strumpet, then I'll dye.
How my distraction swells my tongue with curses?
That I could shoot the poison of a ^asiliske
From my inflamed eyes* or infect the air
With my last breath to kill her.

Ha, ha, he.


Who's that can laugh at mis^y?


'Tis!
That triumph in thy ruin. I contrived ^t,
And caused divorce betwixt thee and thy wife:
Whom now! will torment.

That wound is deeper
Then all the ^est Calling to mind my ills,
That left a chaste wi^e for the loose embraces
O ^n^ualitie, a painted whore,
^ with beasts. D^ath hold thy ashye hand,
Till (...) concil'd to my Bellanima,
Then st^i^e and spare not.

Fix^ in that resolution,
I'll bring her to thee.

That's my good Genius.
The horrors of a thousand nights made black
With pitchye tempests, and the Moons defect,
When ^hee's affrighted with the howlings of
C^otonean Wolves, and groans of dying Mandrakes
Gathered for charm^* the S^hritch^owles fatal dirge*
And Ghosts disturbed by fury^s from their p^ace.
Are all within me.

Wounded by the hands
Of hi^ d^stemper'd servants that are fled.

Look up Physander, I am come to help thee,
N^t to afflict: I share thy su^erings.
There's not an anguish but it is inflicted
As equally on me. Why would Physander
Cut wedlocks Gordian, and with looser eyes
Dote on a common wanton* what is pleasure
More then a lustful motion in the sense?
The prosecution full of anxious fears*
The end Repentance. Though content be called
The soul of action, and licentious man
Propounds it as the reason of his life;
Yet if intemperate appetite pursue it,
The pure end's lost, and ruin must attend it.
But I would comfort thee. Do but express
A detestation of thy former follies,
We will be reunited, and enjoy
Eternal pleasures.

Can Bellanima
Forgive the injuries that I have done her?
She's milder then thou Love, or pities self.
Let me be banished ever to converse
With Monsters in a desert* 'tis a punishment
Too little. Let me be confined to dwell
On the North pole, where a continual Winter
May bleak me to a statue; or inhabit
The Acherusian fenns, whose noisome air
May choke my nostrells with their poisonous fumes,
Yet linger death unto a thousand ages.

We'll live Physander, and enjoy each other
In new delights: thou shalt be cured by Temperance.
She's the Physician that doth moderate
Desire with reason, bridling appetite.
Yonder's her Cave, whose plain, yet decent roof
Shines not with ivory or plates of gold.
No Tyrian purples cover her low couch*
Nor are the carved supporters artists work
Bought at the wealth of provinces; she feeds not
On costly viands, in her gluttony,
Wasting the spoils of conquests: from a rock
That weeps a running crystal she doth fill
Her shell cup, and drinks sparingly.

She cannot
Heal my affliction; mercyes self denies
A time and means, and only black despair
Whispers th'approach of death.

Remove that sin,
And hope with sorrow. Greatest faults are small,
When that alone may make amends for all.

Might I yet live to practice my resolve
Of reformation, sooner should the day
Leave to distinguish night; the Sun should choke
His breathless horses in the western mayne,
And rise no more, the gray morn ushering in
His light approach, then my relapse from thee,
And goodness cause new miseries. Direct me,
Yet heavenly ministers; inform my knowledge
In the strict course that may preserve me happy,
Whilst yet my sighs suck in th'unwilling air,
That swells my wasted lunges. Though not in life,
In death I'll be Bellanima's.

Physander,
Expire not yet: thy wounds are not so mortal.
Help me to bear him yonder; gently raise
His weakened body. What can we not endure,
When pains are lessened by the hope of cure?

What wretched piece of miserable riot
Is this that needs the aid of Temperance*
What caused his sickness?

Liberty in ills
To please his senses, which have surfeited
With an excess: and if your art supply no^,
Death will divorce us. Pity then sweet Lady,
And from your treasure of instructions
Prescribe a powerful medicine that may quicken
His cold defects, which more and more increase,
Less'ning his weakened powers. To a chaste wife
Preserve (now 'tis reformed) her husbands life.

Let the earth be his bed; this rock his pillow;
His curteines heaven; the murmur of this water
Instead of music charm him into sleep.
And for the cates which gluttony invents
To make it called an art, confected juice
Of Pontick nuts, and Idumean palms
Candy'd with Ebosian sugar; lampreyes guts
Fetched from Carpathian straights, and such like wantonness,
Let him eat sparingly of what the earth
Produces freely* or is where 'tis barren
Enforced by industry. Then pour this balsam
Into his wounds, and whilst his senses rest
Free from their passive working, and endure
Partial privation of their means and objects,
His slumbers shall present what mor's required
To make him sound.

My endless thanks great power,
Mother of other virtues. Whilst he sleeps,
My cares shall watch him. Oh thou death like god,
That chayn'st the senses captive, and dost raise
Dreams out of humours, whose illusive shadows,
Oft work on fancy to beget belief
Of prophecies, let no black horrors mix
Their frightful presence, but with gentle shows,
(Yet such as are instructive) sweetly work
Upon what wakes within whilst the other cease;
Then sleeps the figure of eternal peace.

I feel quick sense return, and every Organ
Is active to perform its proper office:
I am not hurt. What miracle hath Heaven
Wrought on me?

Next to Heaven, the thanks are due
To this thy lifes restorer. She hath precepts,
By which thou may preserve it to a length,
And end it happy.

What thy dreams presented,
Put straight in act, and with a constancy
Persevere in it. Rewards will only crown
The end of a well prosecuted good.
Philosophie; religious solitude
And labour wait on Temperance: in these
Desire is bounded; they instruct the minds
And bodies actions. 'Tis lascivious ease
That gives the first beginning to all ills.
The thoughts being busied on good objects, sin
Can never find a way to enter in.

Let me digest my joys; I only now
Begin to live: the former was not perfect.

We'll shortly to my father, who with joy
Will entertain us.

I will meet ye there;
Where ye shall be invested by the hands
Of Justice, Prudence, Fortitude and me
In the bright robes of immortality.

My heart's too narrow to contain the joys
This reconciliation fills it with.
Chain me again to misery, and make me
Wretched beyond despair when next I fall.
Let this my resolution be enrolled
Amongst eternal acts not to be cancelled.
Then man is happy, and his bliss is full
When he's directed by his better soul.

It must not be; his glory is my shame.
Mischief attempted if it want success,
Is the contrivers punishment. As darts
Shot at resisting walls, in their return
May light on him that did direct them. Malice
Suggests a new attempt. I'll practise all
That hell can teach me, but I'll work his fall.
Who's here?

Into what misery hath riot
Brought my decayed state? Whilst I had the means
To purchase pleasures, all delights were sold me.
Those gone, necessity and lust then made me
A mercenary prostitute, and since
By the gradation of a wanton life,
I'm fallen to this. Want and a loathsome sickness
Make me reflect; nor can I but accuse my self
At Conscience bar, but not with penitence;
That's still in opposition with my will,
Now custom hath confirmed me in all ill.

To accuse Physander, thither will I go,
And if all fail try what despair can do.
He's here.

I shall not need your diligence.
Your treachery (although forgiven) hath made me
Watchful upon ye. I have gotten now
A careful guide to manage my affairs.
Retire. I do embrace thy fellowship
Prudence, thou virtue of the mind, by which
We do consult of all that's good or evil
Conducing to felicity. Direct
My thoughts and actions by the rule of reason.
Teach me contempt of all inferior vanities.
Pride in a marble portal gilded ore;
Assyrian carpets* chairs of ivory;
The luxury of a stupendous house;
Garments perfumed; gems valew'd not for use
But needless ornament; a sumptuous table,
And all the baits of sense. A vulgar eye
Sees not the danger which beneath them lye.

She's a majestic ruler, and commands
Even with the terror of her awful brow.
As in a throng sedition being raised,
The ignoble multitude inflamed with madness,
Firebrands and stones fly; fury shows them weapons:
'Till spying some grave man honoured for wisdom,
They straight are silent, and erect their ears,
Whilst he with his sage counsel doth assuage
Their minds disorder, and appease their rage.
So Prudence, when rebellious appetites
Have raised temptations, with their batteryes
Assaulting reason, she doth interpose,
And keep it safe. Th'attemps of sense are weak,
If their vain forces wisdom deign to break.

Temperance, to thee I owe my after life;
Thou that command over pleasures, hating some,
When thou dispens'st with others; still directing
All to a sound mean: under thy low roof
I'll eat and sleep, whilst grave Philosophy
Instructs my soul in Justice. What is she?

A habit of the mind by which just things
Perfect their working. Man's the best of creatures
Enjoying Law and Justice; but the worst
If separated from them. 'Tis established
By fear of Law, and by Religion;
Distributes due to all.

That is reward
To vrt^ue, and to vice it's punishment.
The thought of it hath horror in it. I fell
From height of goodness in forsaking thee,
And must be punished. Why is it delayed?
Inflict it straight; protraction makes it greater.

Physander is forgiven. Reflect not back
On thy past errors, but with sorrows eyes,
That may be guides to the prevention
Of after ills.

Distract me not with comforts.
If justice hath no other instrument.
I must and will be just unto my self.
When I have felt a torment that doth equal
The offence for which I suffer it, 'twill confirm me,
Bellanima is satisfied.

She is,
And can expect no greater. Think on Fortitude.
Be not dejected by a fear that's grounded
On such a weak foundation. Tis not th'appetite
Of things that carry horror makes men valiant;
But patient bearing of afflictions
That are necessited.

Can Fortitude
Be without Justice? Justice without Fortitude
Is perfect in it self. When I am just,
Valour is useful.

It begins to work;
I'll prosecute the rest. What he intends
For good, shall be inverted to my ends.

Dis^wade me not Bellanima, I cannot
Think the dimensions of thy goodness such,
That it may be extended to remit
So great an ill without it's satisfaction.
Then will I challenge thy forgiveness due
When I have suffered punishment; I dare not
Owe all unto thy gentleness.

Resist
This black temptation: thy ill Genius whispered it.

'Tis taught m^ here; justice instructs me in it.
Y^t when I feel the lashes of their snakes
Hells judges do employ: when vultures gnaw
My growing liver, and the restless wheel
Hu^ryes my racked limbs, (for these torments are
Less then my fault deserves,) I'll laugh at all,
And with a scorn provoke the executioners
'Till they are tired; and whilst they take in breath,
Contrive some yet unhear'd of. Fortitude
Shall teach me to bear all, (their end being justice)
With more delight, then when I did enjoy
Pleasures with Sensuality.

I'll try him.
Hells malice sometimes doth pretend that good
Which Heaven instructs, to make distinguishable
Their several acts. But like a ball that bounds
According to the force with which 'twas thrown:
So in afflictions violence he that's wise,
The more he's cast down will the higher rise.

Presume not yet Physander: thou art weak.
Fear, so Pusillanimous, is better
Then daring confidence.

I will encounter
With a whole host of deaths, though each were armed
In all th'artillery that ever conquered
Mortality; meet thunder if but warned
That it is coming, and be fixed unmoved
T'embrace the subtle fire, though one step
Might guard me in a grove of Magic Baize
Walled with Hien^s skins. The apprehension
Of horror shall not fright me, though presented
In the most hideous shape conceit can paint.
What apparition's this? or are ye Furies
Sent to torment me? Speak, and satisfy
My growing fears, which like an earthquake, when
Pent air dilates it self with violence
Do shake my trembling heart.

We are the daughters
Of night and Acheron; our number three,
Answering those three affects that bear then headlong
Into all wickedness. These knotted snakes
Shall sting thy bosom, and infect thy blood
With burning rage, until it hurry thee
Unto some desperate act, and on thy self
Thou be thine own revenger.

Now Physander,
Where is this boasted valour? Feare's expressed
Even in thy silence. Te^rour of an ill
In sometimes greater in the expectation,
Then th'ill it self: yet where true fortitude
Guard's the mind with resolves, 'tis lessened by it,
When it increases boldness. Chance may clear
Many of punishment, but none of fear.
Thou art not well instructed: go with me,
I'll teach thee how to shun them.

Hath he escaped us?
And left my vipers hissing for their prey,
Which should have been his heart? Then they must feed
Upon mine own.

Now my copartners
In this black fellowship, is it successful?

No; reason guards him; frustrates our design.
And we must back to be our own tormentors.

Will nothing prosper! Lend me Erinnis adders,
That from their poison my infected envy
May swell until it break, venting a sea
Of mischief to o'rewhelme him. One birth more
My malice labours with. If that miscarry*
I'll in content of heaven that gu^rds his bride
Eat mine own heart, and ne'er be satisfied.
The Judge is entering.

Make way there for my Lord Conscience: he is up^n coming, and I was afraid
the cushions had not been handsomely laid for his case. Long causes many times
require a nap. How I tremble to think of a long sitting before dinner; it makes
fear have but a cold stomach. Bless me* who's this? one of the devils she
lawyers? Her case must needs have a black box.


I come t'accuse Physander. Why dost quake so?


You never knew fear without an ague.


Fear often cur's it.


In the country where wise physicians practise.


Is the court ready to sit?


Instantly. But pray how long have you been a sollicitrix?


Never before.


I feared as much, when you ask an officer so many idle questions without some
feeling.


What officer art?


No worse th^n the mouth of the court, that re^eves all in with, O yes.

You see the power of that word;
They are here. Stand by there.

Hope must be ^till an advocate.


'Tis well.
Despaire's a subtle pleader, and employed
Only by hell.

Be winged, and fetch him hither:
Let me alone; I'll have a plea shall shake
His courage.

Fear call a court.


O yes, o yes, o yes: All wicked mortals that have any business in the court
of Conscience, let them come and accuse themselves, if they have so little wit*
and they shall be judged by the proverb.


List to my charge. Conscience the judge of actions
Is neither power, nor habit, but an act;
To wit an application of that knowledge
That sh^wes the difference. Its Synteresis,
Or purer part, is the instigation
Of will to good and honest things, and seats
The mind in a ^ich throne of endless quiet;
When being clogged with guilt of many ills,
Those leaden weight express it as it mounts,
And sink it into horror. Conscience stained
Is like a fretting ulcer, that co^rod's
The part ^t hath infected, and though cured
It leaves a sca^re. So heal a wounded Conscience:
Repentance stays as the vestigium,
Or mark impressed, by which the past disease
Is found to have been. There's no punishment
Like that, to bear the witness in ones breast
Of perpetrated evils, when the mind
Beat's it with silent stripes; guilty of blame.
But being unstain'd it laughs at lying fame.

Silence in the court, and hearken to the charge: it may indoctrinate ye for
Justices, if there be not too much of Conscience in it.


Hope is in opposition with despair;
And like a zealous advocate ^'th' cause
Of his afflicted client, labours still
To overthrow the fallacies and quirks
Despair is nimble in; whilst fear with trembling
Expects the trialls issue. By these three
M^ns acts informed of, scanned and canvas'd be,
At length by Conscience censured, thy are sent
To have reward, or suffer punishment.

Hem. Now enter that woman.


What are you?


A desperate piece of neglected mortality, that have been a Lady of pleasure,
and kep^ an open house where Lords took me up at high rates, 'till my bare
commons would no longer serve their high feeding.


And the Geese that gras'd on it would always be ever roasted.


I thence fell to inferior customers, and doted most on the junior actors, to
the danger of cracking many a voice. Night-walking then supplied me, whilst I
had any thing to pleasure a constable, or relieve the mortified watch with a
snatch and away. But now I am not worth the reversion of an almes-basket: and
those which heretofore would hire me to sin, do now deny me the benefit of a
Spittle. I have not strength to climb and hang my self; and having been so
light all my life time 'tis impossible I should be drowned.


Hope yet with grief, and mend.


My mending must be miraculous. Were it in art to repair this rotten carcase,
and in my stock of credit with the broker enough to case it, I might hope for
as golden days and coaching again. But now welcome a cart or a Shrove-tuesdayes
tragedy. Despair tells me there is a fire in hell, and why should I, that have
converst with heates all my life time, fear it!


Stand by there. What are you?


My Ladies ape, that imitated all her fashions; falling as she did, and running
the same course of folly: the difference only, that what was hers first was
mine in reversion; except her gentleman usher. Hell I fear not, for I have
prevented leading apes. Besides the whips of furies are not half so terrible
as a blew coat, and the shrieks of tormented ghosts nothing to the noise of
hemphammers.


Proceed quickly with the rest.


I would excuse my self; but I despair of being heard, now my Lady's decayed
and housekeeping broke up. I fear nothing so much as to be torn in pieces by
the revengeful beggars.


That punishment must I share. For I was an honest huntsman, and provided
burial for many a scavingers horse in my dogs bellies; but finding it
troublesome and unsavou^y, took an easier course, and converted the remains
of dinner and supper that should have fed the poor, into my dogs breakfast.
For which I expect to be pursued by the common hunt, till I come to hell; and
there the qu^st will be so hot, I shall not possibly escape it.


Thou seem to have been a good fellow: shall I speak a word in thy behalf?


No: Fear's an ill orator; he will be out. I have been the most notorious thief,
that ever robbed by privilege of his office. I have converted more butter into
kitchen stuff, then would have victualled a flemish garrison. I have cheated
butchers; gone on their scores, and paid them with horns: helping to undo my
Lady with the greatness of mine own credit. I have coney-catcht many a
poulterers wife, and she hath plucked my feathers: what I got by the back I
spent on the belly. But now short commons serve, licking my fingers and the
halfe-cold dripping pan. Since my Ladies decay I am degraded from a cooke, and
I fear the devil himself will entertain me but for one of his black guard;
and he shall be sure to have his roast burnt.


Stand by. You shall be sentenced presently.


I was a spruce observer of formality; wore good clothes at the second hand,
and paid for them quarterly. Together with my Ladies my fortune ^ell, and of
her gentleman usher I became her applesquire, to hold the door, and keep
sentinel at taverns. I can play the Bravo where my affronting is upon sure
advantage* otherwise I can be kick't with as much patience, as a hungry fiddler,
when he expects the reversion of a gallants oysters. I may yet be serviceable
to the Su^ubi in hell, but other preferment I despair of.


Custom in ill^ that do affect the sense
Makes reason useless, when it should direct
The ills reforming. Men habituate
In any evil, 'tis their greatest curse,
Advise doth seldom mend, but makes them worse.

He's come Now use your utmost skill in plea,
For fear our cause miscarry.

Who is this?


Her's his accuser that prefers th'indictment.


Let it be read.


Stand out Physander.


Thou ar^ in^icted ^y the name of Physander Lord of Microcosmus, for that being
wedded to the fair and chaste Bel^a^ma, daughter and heir of immortal Love,
thou hast u^ustly forsaken her, and been guilty of incontinence with a common
whore, Sensuality.


'Tis not denied, no^ needs it other witness;
I bear it in my Conscience. Yet reverend judge,
Sorrow for ills past doth restore frail man
To his first innocence. What mine hath been,
My earth bed wet with nightly tears can witness,
And sighs, have made the trembling air retire,
Unwilling to be lodged in a sad breast
Already filled with zeal. If a perseverance
Sprung from a constant resolution,
And joined unto this sorrow may prevayle
To the expiation of my former guilt,
I hope forgiveness.

But despair me thinks
Should fright that hope with apprehension
Of what eternal justice will inflict:
And fear of deserved punishment should make thee
Tremble with horror.

'Tis not so false orator,
Necessity may be a powerful strengthening
Of humane frailty: and as it acut's
Sloth often into Diligence, Despair
May be Hopes cause. The temple-robber to appease
The offended god head to the Altar flies;
Nor shames to beg his pardon with drowned eyes.
Let thy resolves be firm.

As fates decrees
Enrolled in steel. Nor will I be secure
In any confidence of mine own strength:
For such security is oft the mother
Of negligence, and that th'occasion
Of unremedied ru^e. From instructions
Found here, we will consult our after-safetyes.
And in all courses of my following life,
I will be guided by my heavenly wife.

I'll then pronounce ye happy. Man's a ship
Laden with riches. Tempests rage, and hell
Sends pirates out to rob him; heavens eye guards him;
His soule's the pilot, who through various seas
Of time and fortune brings him to the port
Of endless quiet. Now dismiss the court.

My malice burst me. I have toiled in vain:
And mine own torment is my only gain.

^e with thee to that place where horrors fright
The guilty conscience with eternal night.

N^w freely pass unto the blessed abodes,
Where those heroes that do merit it
In life, are crowned with glory, and enjoy
Pleasures beyond all comprehension.

All lets are now removed; hells malice falls
Beneath our conquest, and Loves palace gates
Ope'to receive our triumph.

Welcome, welcome happy pair
To those abodes, where spicie air
Breaths perfumes, and every sense
Doth find his objects excellence^
Where's no heate, nor cold extreme;
No winters ice, nor summers scorching beam.
Where's no sun, yet never night.
Day always springing from eternal light.
All mortal sufferings laid aside
Here in endless bliss abide.
Welcome to Love my now loved heir,
Elysium's thine; ascend my chair.
For following Sensuality
I thought to disinherit thee.
But being new reformed in life,
And reunited to thy wife,
Mine only daughter, fate allow's
That Love with stars should crown your brows.
Join ye that were his guides to this:
Thus I enthrone ye both. Now kiss,
Whilst you in active measures move,
Led on to endless joys by Love.


