IN every well-gouerned Kingdom and Common-wealth, the chiefest City and
Citizens therein, have evermore held the prime place and priority; as well in
matter of honour, as due right of Antiquity. And as the Lacedaemonians, the first
instructers of the old Romaines, and so (from them) we, and all other Nations
derived our form of rule; As they (I say) made a distinguishing of their most
memorable Societies, from other of much less note and merit: Even so this
famous City of London, whose continual teeming womb (from time to time)
brought forth many several Mysteries or Professions, hath referred them all in
eminency of place, to twelve only. Amongst which twelve gradations of honour
and dignity, the first original began in the first Company of all other in
this City the ancient fellowship or Society of Drapers.

To approve the society of Drapers of the first, when (as yet) there was none
other: it is avouched by William Fitzstephen, Iohn Bale, Roger Houeden, and
others, that the Wooll-winder, (who was the old Draper or Clothier, as
borrowed from the word Drappier) did card and spin his wool, then weave it
into cloth, full, row, shear, dress, and dye it, and sell in afterwards in
his shop, performing all these several offices thereto, by himself and
servants: which (since then) hath branched it self into diverse other
Companies, and of one entire Trade or Mystery, is become many.

Out of this list or band of Drapers, issued Sir Henrie Fitz-Alwine knight,
descended from that Alwine, Uncle to king Edgar, who made him Alderman of all
England, when as (till then) the name of Alderman, or Eldermen, was never
known. This Henrie Fitz-Alwine had the first honour to be stiled Maire, or
Mayor of London, by favour of King Richard the first, surnamed Cuer de Lyon,
and was himself (as is credibly avouched) a Brother of the same Society, in
honour of the man by him so advanced, before his journey to the Holy Land.
For, until his time, the troublesome combustions of the City being not fully
settled: the government thereof remained first in Portgreues, next in martial
Provosts, thirdly in Bayliffes, and lastly in Lord Majors, as in meet place is
more at large declared.

Here before I pass any further, it may appear as a blemish on mine own
brow, because in my Book in the worthy Company of Goldsmiths, I did set
down Henrie Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofstane to be a Goldsmith, and the first Lord
Mayor of London, alleging my authority for the same in the margent of the
same book, out of Iohn Stowe, which now I may seem to deny, and affirm the
same man to be a Draper, to the disgrace of the forenamed Company, and mine
own deep discredit. What then I did, was by warrant of my fore-alleaged
Author, who finding Henrie Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofstane, to be Master or
Guardian of the kings Mint, did therefore set him down to be a Goldsmith;
which was no error in me to do the like, being thereto secured by him, and
knowing (as then) no other proof to the contrary. But having per^sed more
assured authority in the Drapers Hall, that one, not named Henrie Fitz-Alwine
Fitz-Leofstane, but Henrie Fitz-Alwine, a brother of the old Drapers, was Lord
Mayor of London, four and twenty years and a half (by yearly election) and
longer had been if he had longer lived, who had also given his dwelling house
by London stone, to his own free brethren of the Drapers, with an annuity
yearly to be paid to the king, out of such land as is held of his by them;
and that he lies in the parish Church of S. Marie Bothawe buried, the Parish
wherein he lived and died; whereas Iohn Stowe affirms him to be buried in
the Priory of the holy Trinity, called Christs Church, on the right hand
within Aldegate, which is now called the Dukes place. Nay more, Master
Clarentius Cambden, with the advise of diverse other good Antiquaries beside,
hath (under his hand and Seal of Office) confirmed him to be none other then a
Draper. What more free confession can any man make, then of his blind
misleading by a blinder guide? In whose behalf I dare yet boldly maintain,
that no such error escaped from him wilfully or willingly, his care and
endeavour was so great, but mis-information, or incapacitie of reading, may (as
it hath done to many) wrong better men then any that are concerned in this
case, yet without any prejudice or dishonest taxation.

What offence then may the Company of Mercers take, who make challenge
likewise to the very same man, by mistaking Peter Fitz-Alwine (a Mercer indeed)
for Henrie Fitz-Alwine the old Draper? Or that of the Fishmongers, who deem
their worthy Wallworth, the first Knighted Mayor in the field, to be the same
man also, and that no man before him was Mayor of London? I answer freely for
my self, and appeal to an especial Gentleman in the imagined injured
Company of Goldsmiths (who took no mean pains to be resolved in this case)
that no certain assurance could be had therein, but that it remained doubtful
between both the Societies. And therefore we personated old Faringdon, not
Fitz-Alwine, as the book yet may be seen, to cut off all such contentious
questions. Seeing then that reverend antiquity, eminency of honour, and due
right of merit; bestowed so high a dignity upon the Drapers: I might well be
justly condemned, if I should seek after any other argument of credit for them
(when so maine a business doth necessarily require it) then their own due
deserving, so long time sleeping in oblivion, yet now revived, to their
endless honour.

The walls of any City, were termed by the Grocians, according as we title
our instant discourse, Himatia Poleos, The Clothing or garments of the City.
Intimating thereby, that as garments and clothing do ingirt the body,
defending it continually from the extremities of cold and heat: so walls,
being the best garments of any City, do preserve it from all dangerous
annoynances. Here on we lay the foundation of our devise, in the honour of
Draperie the rich Clothing of Englad* which (long before the knowledge of
fantastic habits) clothed both Prince people all a like, to the (...) mean
renown of the Kingdom, and admiration of foreign nations, to whom our
Draperie (abounding in her own plenty) by means of navigation and commerce,
afforded the rich Livery of this land; better embraced by them, and much more
highly esteemed, then all other trafficque whatsoever. As well appeared by that
famous Knight and trauayler, Sir Frances Drake, who having rouded the whole
world, and noted the riches best endowments of every naon found none to
equal the Draperie and clothing of England. In regard whereof, he chose to
be a loving Brother of the Drapers Society, before all other Companies of the
City. Wherefore our first land devise is a Ship, very artificially and
workmanly framed, called the Barke-Hayes, fitted with Captain, Master, Mate.
c. and supposedly laden with woollen clothes, to make exchange for other
Countries best commodities, and thought meet to usher the way to the residue of
the shows, which are directed to follow in this manner.

A beautiful Chariot, drawn by two golden pell^tted Lyons, and two golden
Wolves Erminnois, after the manner of the triumphal Chariots of the Romaine
Emperors, is graced with the supposed shape of King Richard the first, with
the several figures of so many Cities in England about him, as convenience
of place and carriage granted liberty unto. Those Cities are disciphered by
their Eschuchions of Arms, and that their best advantage ever ensued by making
of woollen Clothes, for the continual maintenance of Englands Draperie. But
London sitting nearest unto himself, as chief Mother and matron of them all:
he honours the head of his chiefest Chamber, with a triple imperial Crown of
gold, under battelled or branched with Clouds, and beams of the Sun, being
the Arms of the Drapers Society, and declaring his love and favour bestowed
on her, by his advancement of Sir Henrie Fitz-Alwine to the Maioraltie, in
whom began the old Drapers dignity.

After this Chariot, follows a Pageant or goodly Monument, figuring the whole
estate of Londons old Draperie. In the supreme and most eminent seat,
sits Himatia, of Clothing, as Mother, Lady and commaundresse of all the
rest, who by their distinct emblems and properties, (apted for the easiest
apprehension) do express their duty and attendance on so gracious a person,
in their several places and offices to them belonging; As in Carding,
Spinning, Weaving, Rowing, Fulling, Shearing Dressing, Dying, Tentering and
performing all other services to woollen Clothes, which at first was done
only by the Draper, or Clothier. Peace, Plenty, Liberality, Council and
Discreet Zeal, do support the flourishing condition of Himatiaes
Common-wealth, and strive to prevent all occasions which may seem sinister or
hurtful thereto.

Our devise which we spake last of, and yet is appointed the first in service,
serves both for the water and land. Till the year 1453. the L. Majors of
London used to ride on horseback to Westminster, at such time as each one went
to take his oath. But S. Iohn Norman Draper, being then Mayor, at his own cost
and charge, and for the relief of poor Watermen, who were much distressed in
those days: made a very goodly Barge for himself and his Brethren, to be
rowed therein by water to Westminster, and so to continue for a yearly
custom. It was a costly Barge, and the Oars are said to be covered with
silver: in memory whereof, and the honest benefit yearly found thereby: the
Watermen made a pleasant song called, Row thy Boat Norman, c. This honour
beginning likewise in the Draper, and falling out so fitly to help our
invention: in a goodly fair Barge, made meet for the purpose, attends the
supposed shadow of Sir Iohn Norman, with the seven liberal Sciences (all
attired like graceful Ladies) sitting about him, until such time as the Lord
Mayor comes to take water, and then he salutes him with this speech.

welcome to the water, worthy Brother Draper. Imagine me to be the true
resemblance of old S. Iohn Norman, sometime Lord Mayor of this famous City,
and the first that devised this water honour, making my Barge at mine own
proper cost, and rowed with silver Oars to Westminster, when (as you now) I
then went to take mine oath. In regard whereof, I was the first Mayor, that was
presented to the Barons, of the Exchecquer. The imaginary shapes of the seven
liberal Sciences, each one distinguished by their true character, are placed
as my companions in my Barge: in memory of the love I ever bare to learning,
and no mean bounties by me extended for the maintenance thereof. I joy, that
invention would make use of my remembrance in this manner, to do any service
to so desertfull a Brother, and to the Company of Drapers which I dearly
affected. On then my hearts, and as in those elder days you declared your love
to old Iohn Norman: so express somewhat now to delight my honoured Brother,
singing cheerfully, Row thy Boat Norman.

Which being no sooner ended, but diverse sweet singing youths, belonging to
the master that enstructeth the young Choristers of Paul's, being all attired in
fair wrought wastcoates, and caps belonging also to them, each having a silver
Oar in his hand; do sing a most sweet ditty of Row thy Boat Norman, and so
seem to row up along to Westminster, in honour of the Lord Majors attendance.

For the several peals of Ordinance, which make better report in the air,
then they can be expressed by pen: For the Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, and other
musical Instruments, whereof each Company makes their choice, to grace this
honourable service out and home again, in the true affection of loving
Citizens, not suffering their chief Magistrate to want any part of their kind
respect and furtherance: they can much better speak for themselves then I, and
serve but as a breathing time to me, until my Lords return and landing. When
all our devises being martialled in order, according as we have formerly
related, except a goodly Ram or Golden Fleece, with a Shepherd sitting by
it; as occasion serves, delivers his intention in this ensuing speech.

why gaze ye so upon me! am I not a man flesh, blood, and bone, as you are?
Or in these silken satin Towns, are poor plain meaning Shepherds wondered
at, like Comets or blazing Stars* Or is it this goodly beast by me, that
fills your eyes with admiration? If it be so, let me then resolve ye, that it
is an article of duty which we Shepherds of Cotswold owe to the old Drapers
of London, for keeping their flocks on the Cotswold hills, that when any worthy
Brother of their Society comes to be L. Mayor of this City, the very fairest
Ram in all their flocks is sent unto them as a solemn offering, as being the
Crest of their Companies Arms, and the chief maintainer of Wool for
clothing. In which respect, my Father about some six and twenty years since,
when S. Martin Calthrope (a Brother of the same Society) was Lord Mayor,
brought then the like goodly. Ram as his oblation; and I hearing, that his
man S. Thomas Hayes, and another Martin, Master Martin Lumley (by the blessing
of heaven and their own virtuous endeavours) were the next chosen Brethren of
the same Band, the one to succeed in the self same dignity of the Maioraltie,
and the other of the Shriuealty; have brought this as my hearts free offering,
in honour of them that so dearly affect them, and in my duty to them both,
with all my utmost service beside. For thus say we in Catswolde.

From the Ram
we have the Lamb
From both our finest
woolles are shorn.
Wool had thus from
the Ram and Lamb,
Makes the best Cloth,
that can be worn.
Thank then the Draper
that began:
To make such Clothing,
meet for man.
For, if we have no Ram, we are sure to have no Lamb: no Lamb, no Wool:
no wool, no Cloth: no Cloth, no Draper.

Heaven grant that we may never see these noes,
For we shall then feel twice as many woes:
But that of Ram, Lamb, Wool, Cloth, still we may have store:
So shall the Drapers then thrive more and more.
As mean additions, to give some small Juster to the Show, because over many
were thought inconvenient; we make use of a golden pelletted Lyon, a supporter
to the Companies Arms, with a Champion mounted on his back, and a golden
woolfe Erminnois, the Ensign or Imprese belonging to the Lord Majors Creast.
And with these few slender devises, we usher his Honours way toward
Guilde-Haule; until he come to S. Laurence-Lane, where the figure of S. Henrie
Fitz-Alwine, thus favourably stays him.

IN times of old Antiquity,
When men lived long and healthfully,
Detesting sloth and idleness,
Which breeds but surfeit and excess.
When yea and nay was greatest Oath,
And men's best wear, good woollen Cloth,
Yelped Englands Draperie,
More worth then gaudie bravery,
Of Silken twine, Silver and Gold,
Ne'er known in those blessed days of old:
Then lived that grave and worthy man,
That Londons honour first began,
By title of the Maioralty,
A high and famous dignity:
Henrie Fitz-Alwine was his name,
Noble by birth, and of much fame.
Whose substance though his grave hath kept,
Four hundred years, where he hath slept:
Yet is his shadow raised in me,
To grace this days solemnity.
For he being first that held the sway
Of Mayor in London, justly may
Challenge (by right) priority,
In honouring his own Company,
With all that sacred Poesy can
Devise, to grace so good a man,
As first with hearts, hands, and free voice,
Was thought meet in the peoples choice
To rank in that rich roll of fame:
That honoured first the Drapers name.
And worthy Brother here survey
Those several kinds of Londons sway
Till royal Richard first in me,
Altered the rule to Maioraltie.
Portgreues held first by strict command,
Next Provosts with a sterner hand,
Such from the Conquest was the case
Of Londons awe, till milder grace
Made choice of Bayliffes, men thought fit
In the Kings judgment Courts to sit,
And right all causes of contention:
By upright censure, or prevention.
Yet all this could not please the king,
In two men's rule grew varying,
By leaning to what part each listed,
So might by might was still resisted.
Wrongs vnredrest, offences flowing,
Garboils grudges each where growing.
Therefore as God had given him place,
Solely to rule, and judge each case,
So would he plant a deputy,
To figure his authority,
In the true form of Monarchy,
Then which, no better sovereignty.
Which office being imposde on me,
By such a gracious Majesty:
I held it four and twenty years,
(Yearly elected, as appears.)
Until my very dying day.
Since when (my Lord) I can well say,
The Science of old Draperie,
(Our loving kind Society)
Hath yielded many a Magistrate,
In the selfe-same degree of State.
And Time reserueth in his store,
For the like honour, many more.
On then before, for we must tend,
Till this days triumph have full end.
The solemnity of so pompous a feast being finished, and his Honour (according
to yearly custom) returning towards Paules, with all the former conceits
gracefully borne before him: he is mildly solicited for a minutes stay by old
Sir Iohn Norman, who (in this manner) gives him a reason for it.

Honourable Lord and Brother, it is imposed on old Iohn Norman, briefly to
describe these two beautiful devises to ye. In the first, which manifests
the Honour of Draperie, your well judging eye may easily conceive, each person
by their apt distinguishment. The Mother, Old Draperie, with her Daughters and
attendants placed about her, do deliver the Drapers true antiquity, and that
which he and his only performed, is since become the benefit of diverse trades
or occupations. Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Fulling, Rowing, Shearing,
Dressing, Dying, Tentering, and what else appertained to woollen cloth, was the
ancient Drapers sole profession, and the chief honour of this famous
Kingdom: flourishing thereby in so many happy blessings, and so fortefied by
Peace, Plenty, Bounty, Council and Discreet Zeal, that all other nations
sate and admired thereat. You have a taste of this felicity in that other
Devise, beautified with the chief Clothing Cities of this Land, for
maintenance of ancient Draperie, whereof London sits the highest advanced,
as being his choice Chamber that first made a Draper the only Governor
thereof. I am loath to hold ye long, and well I wot, more ample relation hath
been made unto ye; and therefore to God and your good devotions I heartily
commend ye.

Night folding up bright day in dim mantles of darkness, and those divine
ceremonies ended, which wait as Henchmen on that days duty, the Stars
seem to leave their places in their fixed Spheres, and become as so many
bright flaming Torches to grace our worthy Magistrate home, even to his house,
(as it were) in the malice of blacke-fac'd night, and to further the finishing
of so solemn a Triumph, which ends with this humble farewell given to his
Honour.

THe longest days have end at last,
And pleasures pomp is but a blast,
You see my Lord that sullen night,
Sworn enemy to days delight,
(For all the pride these Tapers make,)
Whispers, that we must farewell take.
To doubt of your ensuing care,
Or to advise ye, to prepare
For envies storms, or soothing smiles,
That wait on such high place some whiles:
Longs not to me. For in your eye
Such true Characters I epsy
Of virtue, zeal, and upright heed,
That you will prove the man indeed,
Meet such a charge to undergo:
Whereto heavens hand hath raised you so*
And that you'll equal any yet
That in the selfe-same place hath set.
Such is the hope of all that love ye,
Amongst whom, I cannot choose but move ye
With their remembrance, that this day
Have done as much as men well may
In honouring this Solemnity,
The Drapers worthy Company.
Their love and bounty hath expressed,
How with their favours you are blessed:
For, as their kindness hath not scanted:
So hath no needful service wanted.
For this days honour and delight:
And so my worthy Lord good night.
Thus the worthy and first honoured Company of Drapers, having (in loving and
bountiful manner) declared their kind affection to as affable a Magistrate: I
may not omit one thing more, wherein the duteous respect of themselves, and
love to the City very manifestly approved their worth: for, when many solemn
meetings have been made in the Guild Hall, for election of a Sheriff by
common consent, and as many refusals still happening day by day, to the great
disquiet of the Companies, and mighty delay of time; yet when no one would
undergo the Office and charge, a Draper hath done it, worthily and willingly,
though no Aldermans place as then was void, witness Master Benedict Barneham,
a learned and judicious Gentleman, who cheerfully undertook the Shrieualty in
Anno 1591. Next, Master Henrie Jay, but a year since, and Master Martin
Lumley now Sheriff of London, all of them loving Brethren of the Drapers
Society.

To conclude, as the several Inventions (with all their weaknesses and
imperfections) were mine own: so the worth and credit of their performance (if
any may wait on so mean a business) belongs to the exact and skilful
Painter Master Rowland Bucket, whose care, diligence, and faithful dealing I
must needs commend, and should wrong him overmuch if I did not give him due
praise to his merit. ({inverted })


