BEcause our present conceit, reaches unto the antiquity of Brytaine, which
(in many ^indes) hath carried as many and variable opinions: I thought it not
unnecessary, (being thereto earnestly solicited) to speak somewhat concerning
the estate of this our Country, even from the very first original, until her
honourable attaining the name of Brytannia, and then lastlye how she became to
be called England. Most Writers do agree, that after the Deluge, Noah was the
sole Monarch of all the World, and that he divided the dominion of the whole
earth to his three sons: all Europe with the Isles thereto belonging (wherein
this our Isle of Brytaine was one among the rest) fell to the lot and
possession of Iaphet his third son. Samothes the sixth son of Iaphet, Moses
Mesech, by others Dys, had for his portion the whole country lying between the
Ryner of Rhene and the Pyrenian mountains, where he founded his kingdom of
Celtica Celtae, which name, by the opinion of Bale our Country man, was
indifferent to them of Gallia, and us of this Isle of Britain. This Samothes
being the first King over these people, of him came lineally these kings
following: Magus, Sarron, Bruise and Bardus, all ruling severally over the Celts
and Brytons, who were not then so called, but Samotheans, after the name of
Samothes. Of Bardus, who, according to Berosus, was very famous for inventing
of Music and Duties, came an order of philosophical Poets or Heralds, called
Bardi, after his own name, whose excellent qualities were of such power, as
they could enforce armies of Enemies ready to fight fierce battle, to stand
at a gaze, and forbear their cruel intent, until these Bardes left singing,
and went out of the battle: According to Lucane. lib. 1. Vos quoque quifortes
animas belloque peremptas,
Laudius in longum vates dimittitis aeuum,
Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi.
Many of these Bards lined among the Britans, Plenid^us and Oronius. Since
then, Thalestine, the two Merlins, Melkin, Elaskirion and others. Among the
Welshmen now of late days, Dauid Die, Iollo Gough, Dauid ap-Williams, and
diverse others remaining yet amongst them, and called in their own language
Bardhes.

Thus continued the name of Samothes the space of 310. Neptune put his son
Albion the Giant in possession of this land, who subduing the Samotheans,
called this Island Albion after his own name. Concerning the coming hither of
Danaus 50. daughters, and that one of them should be called Albina, and so the
land to be named by her: First, not any one of them was so named, neither do I
think the story so authentical, but do hold Albions name for the truest.

The Country thus peopled with Giantes, and continuing after the name of Albion
for 600. years: Brute, (being directed by a vision in his sleep, to find out
a country situated in the West) with the remains of his Troyan folowers,
arrived and Landed at the haven now called Totnes, the year of the world,
2850. after the destruction of Troy, 66. before the building of Rome 368. and
1116. before Christs nativity. He, searching the land over from side to side,
found it to be very fertile, and inhabited by uncivil, monstrous huge men of
stature, termed Grants, whom he with his bold and resolved companions slew
and destroyed. One of them named Goemagot or Gogmagog, exceeding the rest in
strength and courag, Brute caused Corineus, one of his confederates, to wrestle
with the said Goemagot at a place beside Dover, where the Grant happened to break
a tib in the side of Corineus, which so sharply incensed him, that redoubling
his power to win the victory, he threw him headlong down from off one of the
Rocks, which place was after called Gogmagogs leap The Giant being thus
dispatched, in reward of this honourable piece of service, Brute gave unto
Corineus a part of his land, which according to his name, was, and yet is unto
this day, caled Cornwall.

Brute thus having the whole Land in his own quiet possession, began to build
a city, near to the side of the River Thamesis, in the second year of his
reign, which he named Troynouant, or as Humfrey Lhoyd saith, Troinewith; which
is, new Troy: in remembrance of that famous city Troy, whence he and his
people (for the greater part) were descended. Now began he to aiter the name
of the Island, and according to his own name, called it Brytaine, and caused
all the inhabitants to be named Brytons, for a perpetual memory, that he was
the first bringer of them into this land. In this time he had by his wife fair
Innogen, daughter to King Pandrasus king of the Greeks, three worthy sons,
the first named Locrine, the second Camber, and the third Albanact, to which
three (not long before his death) he divided his whole kingdom in several
partitions, giving to Locrine all that part which we know best by the name of
England, then termed by him Loegria or Logres. To Camber he limited the
Country of Wales, called Cambria after his name, and demded from Loegria by
the river of Sauerne. To Albanact his third son, he appointed al the North
part of the I'll, lying beyond the River of Humber, then called Albania, now
Scotland; and to that River then Albania did reach. But since that time, the
limits of Loegria were enlarged, first by the prowess of the Romanes, then by
our own conquests, that the Tvvede on the one side, and the Solve on the
other, were taken for the principal bounds between us and Scotland.

After Brute, I find not any other alteration of our Countries name, until
the reign of King Ecbert, who about the year of Grace 800. and the first of
his reign, gave forth an especial Edict, dated at Winchester: that it
should be named Angles Land, or Angellandt, for which (in our time) we do
pronounce it England. Nor can Hengyst the Saxon be the Father of this latter
name, for Ecbert, because his ancestors descended from the Angles, one of the
six Nations that came with the Saxons into Britain, (for they were not all of
one, but of diverse Countries, viz: Angles, Saxons, Germains, Switzers,
Norvvegians, Iutes, otherwise termed Iutons, Vites, Gothes, or Getes and
Vandales, and all comprehended under the name of Saxons, beca^ of Hengist the
Saxon and his company, that first arrived here before any of the other) and
thereto having now the Monarchy and pre-eminence, in manner of this whole
Island, called the same after the name of the country, from whence he derived
his original. So that neither Hengist, nor any Qu. named Angla, or derivation
ab Angulo, is to be allowed before this sound and sure authority. Thus much
briefly concerning the names of our Country, now come we to discourse the
whole frame and body of our devise, in this solemn triumph of re-vnited
Brytannia.

All hayle fair London, to behold thy Towers,
After our voyage long and dangerous:
Is Seamens comfort, thanks unto those powers.
That in all perils have preserved us.
Our Royal Exchange hath made a rich return,
Laden with Spices, Silks, and Indico,
Our wines that for our absence long did morn,
Now find release from all their former woe.

Master good news, our Owner, as I hear,
Is this day sworn in Londons Maioralty:

Master tis true, for, see what troupes appear,
Of Citizens, to bear him company.
Hark how the Drums and Trumpets cheerely sound,
To solemnize the triumph of this day,
Shall we do nothing, but be idle found,
On such a general mirthful Holiday?

Take of our Pepper, of our Cloves and Mace,
And liberally bestow them round about,
Tis our ships luggage, and in such a case,
I know our Owner means to bear us out.
Then, in his honour: And that company,
Whose love and bounty this day doth declare,
Hurl Boy, hurl Mate. And Gunner, see you ply
Your Ordinance, and of fireworks make no spare,
To add the very uttermost we may,
To make this up a cheerful Holi-day.

ON the Lyon and Camel, we do figuratively personate Neptune and his Queen
Amphitrita, who first seated their son Albion in this land. And in them we
figure Poetically, that as they then triumphed in their sons happy fortune,
so now they cannot choose but do the like, seeing what happy success hath
thereon ensued, to renown this Country from time to time. And as times have
altered former harsh inciuilities, bringing the state to more perfect shape of
Majesty, so (as occasion serves) do they likewise lay their borrowed forms
aside, and speak according to the nature of the present business in hand,
without any imputation of grosnesse or error, considering the laws of Poesy
grants such allowance and liberty. Corineus and Goemagot, appearing in the
shape and proportion of huge Giants, for the more grace beauty of the show, we
place as guides to Britaniaes mount, and being fetterd unto it in chains of
gold, they s^eme (as it were) to draw the whole frame, showing much envy and
contention, who shall exceed most in duty and service.

ON a Mount triangular, as the Island of Britayne it self is described to be,
we seat in the Supreme place, under the shape of a fair and beautiful
Nymph, Britania her self accosted with Brutes divided kingdoms, in the like
female representations, Loegria, Cambria, and Albania. Brytania speaking to
Brute her Conqueror, (who is seated somewhat lower, in the habit of an
adventurous warlike Troyan) tells him, that she had still continued her name of
Albion, but for his conquest of her virgin honour, which since it was by
heaven so appointed, she reckons it to be the very best of her fortunes. Brute
shows her, what height of happiness she hath attained unto by his victory,
being before a vast Wilderness, inhabited by Giantes, and a mere den of
Monsters: Goemagot and his barbarous brood, being quite subdued, his civil
followers, first taught her modest manners, and the means how to reign as an
Imperial lady, building his Troya nova by the river Thamesis, and beautifieng
his land with other Cities beside. But then the three Virgin kingdoms seem
to reprove him, for his overmuch fond love to his sons, and dividing her (who
was one sole Monarchy) into three several estates, the hurt and inconvenience
whereon ensuing, each one of them modestly delivered unto him. He stays their
further progres in reproof, by his and their now present reuyued condition,
being raised again by the powerful virtue of Poesy (after such length of
time) to behold Britaniaes former Felicity again, and that the same Albania,
where Humber slew his son Albanact, had bred a second Brute, by the blessed
marriage of Margaret, eldest daughter to king Henrie the seventh, to Iames the
fourth king of Scotland, of whom our second Brute (Royal king Iames) is truly
and rightfully descended: by whose happy coming to the Crown, England,
Wales, Scotland, by the first Brute severed and divided, is in our second Brute
re-united, and made one happy Britania again: Peace and quietness bringing
that to pass, which war nor any other means could attain unto. For joy of
which sacred Union and combination, L^crine, Camber, and Albanact, figured
there also in their antique estates, deliver up their Crowns and Scepters,
applauding the day of this long-wisht conjunction, and Troya-noua (now London)
incites fair Thamesis, and the rivers that bounded the severed kingdoms,
(personated in fair and beautiful Nymphs) to sing Paeans and songs of
triumph, in honour of our second Brute, Royal King Iames. Thamesis, as Queen
of all Britains rivers, begins the triumphal course of solemn rejoicing. Next
her, Sauerne, that took her name of Sabrina, begotten by Locrine on fair
Elstrid, and both mother and daughter were drowned in that river, by
Guendolenaes command, the wife to Locrine, doth the like. Lastly, Humber,
whose name was derived from Humber king of the Scythians, who being pursued by
Locrine and Camber, in revenge of their Brothers death, was enforced to leap
into that River, and there drowned himself, of whom I find these verses
written. Dum fugit obstat ei flumen submergitur illic,
Deque suo tribuit nomine aquae.
What further may be required, to express Britaniaes triumph more perfectly to
the life, with al the other personages her servants and attendants, is more at
large let down in the several speeches, which I have hereto annexed as most
meet convenient.

I that sometime was termed Albion,
After the name of Neptunes valiant Son:
Albion the Giant, and so had still held on,
But that my conquest, first by thee begun,
Hath in fames Chronicle such honour won,
That thy first setting from Albania,
Crowned me thy virgin Queen Britania.

Wherein, recount thy height of happiness,
Thou that before my honoured victory,
Were as a base and oregrowne wilderness,
Peopled With men of incivility,
Huge and stern Giants, keeping company
With savage monsters, thus was Albion then,
Till I first furnished thee with civil men.
Goentagot, and all his barbarous brood,
(When he was foyld by Corineus hand,)
Were quite subdued, and not one withstood
My quiet prograce over all thy land,
But, as sole Conqueror, I did command:
And then from Albion did I change thy name,
To Brutes Britania, still to hold the same.
Then built I my New Troy, in memory
Of whence I came, by Thanesis fair side,
And nature giving me posterity,
Three worthy sons, not long before I died,
My kingdom to them three I did divide.
And as in three parts I had set it down,
Each named his seat, and each did wear a Crown.

But she whom thou had made one Monarchy
To be so severed, to thy sons might show
Some sign of love, to her small courtesy,
When three possess what one did solie owe,
It makes more ways to harm then many know.
And so proved that division of the land,
It brought in wary that hellish fierbrand.

The king of Hunnes entered Albania,
Slew Albanact thy Son, and there bare sway,
Till Locrine rose with valiant Cambria,
And to reuendge their Brothers death made way,
Which instantly they did without delay,
And made that River bear the proud kings name,
That thus intruded, drowned him in the same.

Fair Elstrid taken in that fatal fight,
And Locrines love to her, wrong to his wife,
Duke Corineus daughter, dear delight,
That ^eft both her and Locrine of his life,
Opened a gap to much more dismal strife,
Of all which heavy haps there had bin none,
Had Brute left me one governor alone.

See, after so long slumbering in our tombs
Such multitudes of years, rich poesy
That does revive us to fill up these rooms
And tell our former ages History,
(The better to record Brutes memory,)
Turns now our accents to another key,
To tell old Britains new borne happy day.
That separation of her sinewed strength,
Weeping so many hundred years of woes
Whereto that learned Bard dated long length
Before those vlcerd wounds again could close,
And reach unto their former first dispose.
Hath run his course thorough times ^andie glass,
And brought the former happiness that was.
Albania, Scotland, where my son was slain
And where my follies wretchedness began,
Hath bred another Brute, that gives again
to Britain her first name, he is the man
On whose fair birth our elder wits did scan,
Which Prophet-like seventh Henry did foresee,
Of whose fair child comes Britains unity.
And what fierce war by no means could effect,
To re-vnite those sundried lands in one,
The hand of heaven did peacefully elect
By mildest grace, to seat on Britains throne
This second Brute, then whom there else was none.
Wales, England, Scotland, severed first by me:
To knit again in blessed unity.
For this Britannia tides in triumph thus,
For this these Sister-kingdomes now shake hands,
Brutes Troy, (now London) looks most amorous
And stands on tiptoe, telling foreign lands,
So long as Seas bear ships, or shores have sands:
So long shall we in true devotion pray,
And praise high heaven for that most happy day.

England, that first was called Loegria,
After my name, when I commanded here:
Gives back her due unto Britannia,
And doth her true borne son in right prefer,
Before divided rule, irreguler.
Wishing my brethren in like sort resign,
A sacred union once more to combine.

I yielded long ago, and did in heart,
Allow Britanniaes first created name,
My true borne Brutes have ever took her part
And to their last hour will maintain the same.

It is no marvel though you gladly yield,
When the all-ruling power doth so command,
I bring that Monarch now into the field,
With peace and plenty in his sacred hand,
To make Britannia one united land:
And when I brought him, after times will say
It was Britanniaes happy Holi-day.

Then you fair Swans in Thamesis that swim,
And you c^o^se N^mphes that do delight to play
On Humber and ^e Saue^ne, welcome him
In Canz^ ^gges and many a Roun-delay
that from the North brought you this blessed day.
And in one tuneful, harmony lets sing,
Welcome King Iames, welcome bright Britains King.

I that am Queen of all Britanniaes streams,
The Oceans darling and endeard delight,
that want on daily with the Suns guilt beams
and ore my bosom suffer day and night,
Fair flotes of ships to sail in goodly sight:
Unto my second Brute shall homely sing,
Welcome King Iames, welcome great Britains King.

Fair Elstrids and Sabrinaes fatal grave,
(Whereby the name of Sauerne fell to me:)
When Locrines Quendoline in anger gave,
My womb to be their dismal tragedy,
Whereof my Nymphs (as yet) talk mournfullie,
Unto my second Brute do likewise sing,
Welcome King Iames, welcome great Britains King.

Proud Scithians Humber that slew Albanact,
Whose brethren forest him to a shameful flight,
When in my watery arms his lite I wracked,
I took his name, and kept it as my right,
For which my Nymphs still dancing in delight,
With me these Peans and sweet Canzoni sing,
Welcome King Iames, our second Brute and king.

FAME that attends on Britains Monarchy,
Thus revnited to one state again,
Ushers this Chariot of true dignity,
Wherein seven kings that did in England reign,
These Royal virtues in their shields contain,
Expressing what great grace each Majesty,
Gave to the Marchant-Taylors Company
When they were first a Guilde, and bare the stile
Of Tayiors, and of Armourers beside
Of the Linen armoury: for no little while
Were they so known, and daily did provide,
Those coats of arms that quaild our soe-mens pride
When Englands bent-Bow, and the gray-goos wing
Our many victories abroad did sing.
From this employment for the States defence,
Their ancient title first unto them came,
and then their following care and diligence,
Squarde them the way to order well and frame,
all means to keep their Guilde in honest fame.
Now gracious virtues unto you I leave,
What further fortunes Time did them bequeath.

EDward the third, whose Noble name I bear,
Hearing the Love and royal amity,
That good report gave of them every where,
Preserving peace and kind socitie,
In his first year unto this Company,
He gave this Charter to confirm their Guilde:
And they ^oyd it, as his Highness wild.

To build this body on a stronger frame,
Richard the second gave authority,
A Master and four keepers they should name,
and full elect to sway their mystery,
Granting them power to have a Lyuerie,
and hold a Feast on saint Iohn Baptist day,
Yearly for ever, as they do and may.

To fortify a work so well begun,
Henrie the fourth did liberally create:
(Beside the former fouours to them done,)
Their Guilde a Brother-hood incorporate,
And thought it no disgrace to his high state,
To wear the Clothing of the Company,
A most Maiestike royal courtesy.

Henry the fifth my war-like Lord maintained
His fathers love to this socyetie,

Of my sixth Henry they as freely gained,
all former grants in self-same quality,
He wore their clothing, mild and graciously:
For Princes loose no part of dignity,
In being affable, it adds to Majesty.

Thus long a Master and four keepers stood.
Till my fourth Edward changed the keepers name
To Wardens: for the strength of Brother-hood,
And thus at first Master and Wardens came.

And for they traded, as no men did more,
With foreign Realms, by clothes and Merchandise,
Returning hither other Countries store,
Of what might best be our commodities,
Henry the seventh a gracious king, and wise,
To Merchant-Taylors did exchange their name:
Since when, with credit they have kept the same.

But sacred Lady, deign me so much grace,
As tell me, why that seat is vnsupplied*
Being the most eminent and chiefest place,
With State, with Crown and Sceptre dignified?

Have our discourses (Pheme) let thee know,
That seven Kings have borne free brethrens name,
Of this Society, and may not time bestow
an eight, when Heaven shall so appoint the same?

I find recorded in my Register,
Seven Kings have honoured this Society:
Fourteen great Dukes did willingly prefer,
Their love and kindness to this Company,
Threescore eight Lords declared like amity,
terming themselves all brethren of this band,
The very worthiest Lords in all the Land.
Three Dukes, three Earles, four Lords of Noble name
all in one year did join in Brother-hood:
IN the year 1390. Edward Duke of York. Thomas, Duke of Gloucester. Henry Duke
of Hereford and Earl of Darby, who afterward was K. Henry the fourth.
Edvvard, Earl of Rutlande. Thomas Earl of Warvvick. Iohn Holland, Earl of
Huntingdon. Iohn, Lord Ros^. Raf Lord Nevill. Thomas L. Furniuall. Reignald,
Lord Gray of Rithin.

I find beside great Lords from France there came
To hold like league, and do them any good:
Gaylard, Lord Danuers. Barard, Lord Delamote, Barard, Lord Montferrant, c.

Yet no imbasing to their height in blood:
For they accounted honour then most hie,
When it was held up by community.
Of Bishops, Knights and Deanes, to those before,
(Not spoke in vaunt* or any spirit of pride)
My Records could affoord as many more*
All Brethren, Marchant-Taylors signified
That lived in love with them, and when they did
Left me their names, to aftertimes to tell,
Thus then they did, and thought it good and well.

MY borrowed name of Neptune now I leave,
the like doth Amphitrita my fair Queen,
And worthy Lord, grant favour to receive
What in these mysteries we seem to mean,
Britanniaes glory hath been heard and seen,
Reuiu'de from her old Chaos of distress,
and now united in firm happiness.
Blessed be that second Brute Iames our dread king,
that set this wreath of Union on her head,
Whose very name did heavenly comfort bring,
When in despair our hopes lay drooping dead,
When comfort from most harts was gon and fled,
Immediately the trumpets tongue did say,
God save king Iames: Oh twas a happy day.

Our latest Phaenix whose dead cinders shine,
In Angels spheres, she, like a mother mild,
yielding to Nature, did her right resign
To times true heir, her God-son, and lou'de child,
When giddy expectation was beguiled:
And Scotland yielded out of Teudors race,
a true borne bud, to sit in Teudors place.
Which seat to him and his, heaven ever bless,
that we ne'er want a Rose of Teudors tree,
to maintain Britains future happiness,
to the worlds end in true tranquillity.

Sir Leonard Holiday, now unto thee,
My love in some mean measure let me show,
S^nce heaven hath called thee to this dignity,
Which (then my self) far better thou d^est know,
I make no doubt thou wilt thy time bestow,
A^s so great a Subjects place as this,
To govern justly, and amend each miss.
Bethink thee how on that high Holiday,
Which bears Gods Champion, th'Arch-angels name,
When conquering Satan in a glorious fray,
Michaell Hels-monster nobly overcame,
And now a sacred Saboath being the same,
A free and full election on all parts,
Made choice of thee, both with their hands and harts.
Albeit this day is usual every year,
For new election of a Magistrate,
Yet, now to me some instance doth appear,
Worth note, which to my self I thus relate,
Holiday, called on Holiday to state,
Requiers methinks a year of Holidays,
To be disposed in good and virtuous ways.
For I account tis a Lords Holiday,
When Justice shines in perfect Majesty,
When as the poor can to the rich man say,
The Maiestrate hath given us equity,
And lent no ear to partiality,
When sin is punished, lewdness bears no sway:
All that day long, each day is Holiday.
When good provision for the poor is made,
Sloth set to labour, vice curbed every where,
When through the City every honest trade,
Stands not of might or insolence in fear,
But Justice in their goodness does them bear:
then, as before, in safety I may say:
All that year long, each day is Holliday.
Now in behalf of that Society,
Whereof thou bear a loving brothers name,
What hath bin done this day to dignify,
they pray thee kindly to accept the same,
More circumstance I shall not need to frame:
But from the Marchant-Taylors this I say,
They wish all good to Leonard Holliday.


