THis famous and most Honourable City of London, having (for many hundred
years) had the Royal pre-eminence, to make choice of her chief Magistrate,
by the title of Lord Mayor, and two Sheireffes, as his worthy Assistants in
Office for the years authority, under the highest and supreme power, enjoying
the same by free voice sufferages of public election, in the Guild-Hall of
London. Now in this instant year 1618. Sir Sebastian Haruey, Knight, and
Aldermam of this Noble City, and free of the Right Worshipful Company of
Ironmongers, being chosen into that great and graceful dignity; his
affectionate kind Brethren (according to ancient and precedent custom,
observed to many more Lord Majors of the same Society) did thus tender their
willing and hearty service to him, upon the day of his inauguration, when
(passing by Barge with the other Aldermen his Brethren) he went to take his
Oath at Westminster, on Thursday the 29. of October.

The first devise, presenting it self for his Honours service, is an imaginary
Island, termed Lemnos, very ingeniously and artificially fitted, suitable to
the days solemnity. And, because favourable conceit, must needs supply the
defect of impossible performance, especially in so slender a compass: let the
Isle it self be swallowed up in the appearance of a goodly Mine, aptly seated
in the midst thereof. Therein Mulciber, the God of Mines and Metals
(especially such as consist of Steel Iron) shows his personal attendance,
with diverse of his one-eyed Cyclops about him, forming from the Mines Oar,
Gads of Steel, Bars of Iron, other such like matters out of the Metals, for
use of the Ironmongers Society, who are as Lords Masters of the said Mine,
and therefore it is called the Ironmongers Mine. These feigned Cyclops, suited
according to their service and diligence (each with his Hammer busily employed,
while others attend the Fire and Bellows) are nimble and dexterious youths,
such, as to the continual fall of their Hammers, in sweet Musical voices, and
delicate variety of pleasing changes; do out-weare their work merrily, as
accounting no toil tedious, thus bestowed in the Societies service: closing up
every Stanza with Acier Dure, the word or Motto belonging to the Company.

This Isle or Mine being seated quadrangle-wise, at the four corners sit four
beautiful Nymphs or Graces; being named Chrusos, Argurion, Calcos and
Sideros, figuring the four ages of the world, and habited according to their
true Characters and natures. The Golden-Age, the Siluer-Age, and the
Brazen-Age, having formerly triumphed, according to their several turns and
times of eminency: do now give way to the Iron-Age (wherein we live) to have
her degree of sovereignty, as holding chief predominance in this days
Triumph. For, she being sole Commandress, in Metals of most usual
employment; affords out of her bounteous Mine, all kinds of Martial and
Military weapons, honouring with them Arms and Soldiers. Likewise, for
Tillage and Husbandry, those instruments best agreeing therewith: because it is
the sustentation of life, and supporter of all other manuary Trades. Being not
unmindful also, of Navigation Commerce with foreign Nations, which can have
no consistence, but by her help.

Beside, the Companies Creast, of two Lizzards, linked together with a Golden
Terret (which in their Coat of Arms, is placed in the Cheueron) stands
fairly figured upon the Mine. Above them all is Iupiter, mounted upon his
Royal Eagle, with his three-forked Thunderbolt in his hand, made in the Isle
of Lemnos by Mulciber. He is also clad in a fair Armour, intended for the
service of Mars* but now bestowne on him, as an honourable present by Mulciber,
because he so graciously vouchsafed, to be personally present in this
Triumph, as Patron of all their pains, and protector from foule-mouthed slander
and detraction.

This devise is drawn by two goodly Ostriches, as being supporters of the
Sooieties Arms, and therefore aptly alluded as Guides to Mulcibers Mine,
befitting none other so well as that: for, naturally they dige^ both Steel and
Iron, as is avouched by many credible Authors.

One other Millitary Engine also, seeming to be forged in the same Mine, is
appointed to the second place, which is a fair and goodly Cannon, strongly
mounted upon her Carriage, with all necessary furnishment, for charging and
discharging, by her, as also diverse Chambers, to be shot off as occasion
serves, and as the Master Gunner and his Mate (there present) please to give
direction, or perform the service in their own persons.

Certain gallant Knights in Armour, well mounted on their Coursers for
service, and readily prepared with their Petronells; have the charge or guiding
of this Cannon* besides a brave troupe of Musketeers. This was first employed
on the water, in the mornings service, and afterward helps the days further
Triumph.

Where are you Mate?

Here Sir, at hand,
To do what ere the Master shall command.

This goodly Canon, forged for this day
In Lemnos, where great Mulciber bears sway,
He and his Cyclops using all their skill,
To frame it in best form, and for good will
They bear unto that ancient Company,
For whom their Hammers walk continually,
Still to supply them from their plenteous Mine
With Steel and Iron: which as they refine
From the earths Oar; So to all Lands they send,
And all Arts else do bounteously befrend.
Because, where Steel and Iron go to wrack:
Those Lands do feel a lamentable lack.
Now Mate, thou see, this is a Jovial day,
And every Trade triumphs as best it may,
(By yearly custom) gladly to express,
Their free affection, in full cheerfulness.
Be not we idle then, Seeing to our charge,
This Cannon is committed: But at large
Declare our diligence. Our Gunners Art,
In this Triumphal day must bear a part.
Fall to thy pains.

Master, with all my heart.
And no men shall deliver (more then we)
How much we honour this days dignity.
First then, I'll Sponge her, as she ought to be,
Then Lade her, to Report her lustily.
Next Ram her. Now this Bullet passes in,
Which Ramd again, louder Report shall win.
And shooting not Point blank, but out at length:
I'll mount her higher on her Carriage strength.
Now I have done Sir.

Then will I give Fire;
And may all speed no worse then we desire.

Next follows a silver Leopard, thickly bespotted with black Pellets, being
the Creast of the Lord Majors Arms. Upon the Leopard rides an ancient
British Bard; For Bardes were esteemed as Poets or Prophetical Soothsayers,
and (in those reverend times) held in no mean admiration and honour. He
guides the way to the Mount of Fame, being a Pageant, and aptly alluding to
the other devise; but in a more moral and significant manner. For therein is
figured, a model of Londons happy Government, in that supreme dignity of the
Maioraltie. Being a true type of that most sacred Majesty, by whose gracious
favour it is best supported, and borrows (from thence) all beams of true
light and splendour.

In the most eminent place sits Fame, seeming as if she sounded her Golden
Trumpet, the Banner whereof, is plentifully powdered with Tongues, Eyes and
Ears: implying, that all tongues should be silent, all eyes and ears wide
open, when Fame fills the world with her sacred memories.

This day, she seems to present the new sworn Lord Mayor to Sovereign
Majesty, whose Lieutenant and lawful Deputy he is now invested for London.
She shows him, what other gracious personages she hath there attending her,
for more honourable solemnity of this general Triumph; presaging a happy and
successful course to his year of government. By her is figured a goodly
Ship, whereby she conueighes all beatitudes of Kingdoms, Cities and Nations,
to the furthest remoate Countries. Intimating thereby, how the Magistrate may
honour his Prince, in that high trust and care committed to him, and supplying
the State still with all needful occasions, as by Traffic and Commerce are
continually required.

Expectation (sitting somewhat lower on Fames right hand) intimates to him,
that there will be more then ordinary matter expect from him* in regard, that
he is now mounted like a Beacon on an Hill, to flame forth brightly, and not
to burn dimly. Whereof Hope (sitting on the other side) seems to give a
gracious persuasion. In regard, that his worthy Father did formerly supply the
same place, and left such sensible instructions to his Son, as cannot but
edge his temper the more keenely, and quicken his spirits the more
industriously. Because it is no common thing, for a Son, to succeed his Father
in such eminency, and therefore binds him to the more serious observance.

Wherein to encourage him the more, she shows him all those sacred Virtues,
that gave his Father comfort in his Magistracy, Justice and Fortitude, who
will as forwardly further him; treading down those vile Incendiaries,
Ambition, Treason, and Hostility, which seek the subversion of all estates, by
Bribing, Corruption, and smoothing Insinuation, or else by open Fire and Sword.
But because this year may be the better secured, against all their violences
and treacherous attempts; they sit gyued, and manacled together in Iron
shackles, purposely made and sent from the Ironmongers Mine, to bind such base
villains to their better behaviour.

Now, because Fame cannot endure, that any part of her Mount should be vnfitly
furnished: In a degree more backward, somewhat lower then her Seat, sit her two
sober Sisters, Fear and Modesty; both veiled, but so sharpe-sighted, that they
can discern through the darkest obscurities, when any disorder threatens
danger to Majesty, or to his careful Deputy. When any such inconvenience
happens, forthwith they inform Vigilance Providence, sitting next to them.
Who hearing the Larum and striking clock in the Castle: they awake Care the
Sentinel, to ring the Bell in the Watch-Tower, which calls up Courage
Council, that every one may have imploimet, for safe preserving the Mout of
Fame.

For better understanding the true morality of this devise, the personages have
all Emblems and Properties in their hands, so near them, that the weakest
capacity may take knowledge of the; which course in such solemn Triumphs hath
always been allowed of best observation: both for avoiding trouble to the
Magistrate, by tedious and impertinent speeches, and devouring the time, which
craves diligent expedition.

Concerning our British Bard, raised to be our Speaker, by sacred power of
the Muses, he revolving over his ancient volumes, concerning the course of
times; finds, that in this year of 1618. the letter H. shall have
predominance in three distinct persons, as eminent Governors, namely in the
City of London, viz. the L. Mayor, and both the Shieriffes. And if his
predicting opinion doth not beguile it self, he saith that their names, will
be Haruey, Herne and Hamarsley, for so the book of Fate hath concluded of
them, against which can be no contradiction. Whereupon making trial of his
divination hy his staff (which usually directed him in all such courses) as
he speaks to the Lord Mayor; he smites the Staff upon his foot, suddenly
issues forth the three several letters of H. apparently to be discerned of
all. So, finding his judgment to be fallen out true, that the persons figured
by those three letters are also there present: he proceeds on in the rest of
his Speech, which according to the British garb, and as then he uttered it,
is here set down.

BLithe and bonny bin ye awe,
And meckle blissings still be faw
Upon so fair and gudly meany,
As thilke like, ne'er saw I eny.
A British Bard, that long hath slept,
And in his Grave would still ha kept:
But that the spirit of Poesy
(Which haudeth highest Sovereignty)
Hath raised me from my silent rest,
To make en in this Jovial Feast.
Awe for your seek, most worthy man,
(Lowting as lowly as I can)
To creue your favour, that I may,
For your Society somewhat sey,
Of thilke their buxom love to you*
Which they present but as your due.
As often they have done befere,
To mickle of their Brethren mere.
Among when was your Feather one,
Which this high charge did undergone.
O, let me sey it to your fece,
It is a sign of special greece,
^ee to supply your Feathers piece:
In sike an encient femous City,
Under yer King, chief Deputy.
And let me tell ye ey thing mere,
Of Records have I read good stere;
Yet near could find the like befere,
As now hath hapt. Thilke dignity,
Of Meire and Sheriffs authority,
Whilke London yearly greants to three*
Eyne letter H begins them awe,
And in so soot concordance faw:
That Heruey, Herne and Hemersley,
Maken ey pleasing Sympheny.
Eyne Enegreme ilke neme mey bliss,
With Honour, Heal and Happiness.
Honour to be sele Steffe and stey,
Heal to vphaude all eirie wey,
And Happiness sa to attend.
Yer year may heue a happy end.
Thaese Shows and Emblems ta express,
Mayne trouble ye with tediousness.
And ay, when wud na way offend,
Yer kenning of them do commend
Until thilke Buke, whilke speeks them awe,
Mere large than to my lot does faw.
Sa, Honour, Heal and Happiness,
Give awe yer actions good success.
THilke eye of day, whilke grec'de our spart,
Being clased up, mekes his resarte
Till vnder-dwellers. Seble-night,
Was gledly lengthen ant delight:
But stands fearful of offending,
Because awe joys mun heue an ending.
Not, that we desire to lieve ye,
But for yar awne heme mun receive ye.
And, thereto maken bauide intiusion,
Was clase up awe with rude confusion.
Whilke fare my Leard, my perting is,
Wishing ye mickle years of bliss,
That Justice, Zeal and Payetie,
Mayne shine in ye with Meiesty,
That he when puts ye in thilke trust,
Mey find yer rule sa true and just,
That efter times may talk, and sey
When Heruey, Herne and Hemersley
As Meire and Sheriffs did bear swey:
True Honour, Health and Heppinesse,
Thilke year did their endeavours bliss.
Yer Bretherens love I mun commend
To yer acceptance, sa I end.

