
NOctem peccatis, fraudibus obiice nubem. There is no such fine time to play
the knave in, as the night. I am a Goose or a Ghost at least; for what with
turmoil of getting my fools apparel, and care of being perfect, I am sure I
have not yet supped to night. Will Summers Ghost I should be, come to present you
with Summers last will, and Testament. Be it so, if my cousin Ned will lend me
his Chain and his Fiddle. Other stately paced Prologues use to attire
themselves within: I that have a toy in my head, more then ordinary, and use to
go without money, without garters, without girdle, without a hat-band, without
points to my hose, without a knife to my dinner, and make so much use of this
word without, in every thing, will here dress me without. Dick Huntley cries,
Begin, begin: and all the whole house, For shame come away; when I had my
things but now brought me out of the Lawndry. God forgive me, I did not see my
Lord before. I'll set a good face on it, as though what I had talked idly all
this while, were my part. So it is, boni viri, that one fool presents another;
and I a fool by nature, and by art, do speak to you in the person of the
Idiot our Playmaker. He like a Fop an Ass, must be making himself a public
laughing stock, have no thank for his labour; where other Magisterij, whose
invention is far more exquisite, are content to sit still, and do nothing.
I'll show you what a scurvy Prologue he had made me in an old vain of
similitudes: if you be good fellows, give it the hearing, that you may judge
of him thereafter.

The Prologue.

AT a solemn feast of the Triumuiri in Rome, it was seen and observed, that
the birds ceased to sing, sate solitary on the house tops, by reason of the
sight of a painted Serpet set openly to view. So fares it with us novices, that
here betray our imperfections: we, afraid to look on the imaginary serpent of
Envy, painted in men's affections, have ceased to tune any music of mirth to
your ears this tweluemonth, thinking, that as it is the nature of the serpent
to hiss: so childhood and ignorance would play the goslings, contemning, and
condemning what they understood not. Their censures we wey not, whose senses
are not yet vnswadled. The little minutes will be continually striking, though
no man regard them. Whelps will bark, before they can see, and strive to
byte, before they have teeth. Politianus speaks of a beast, who, while he is
cut on the table, drinks, and represents the motions voices of a living
creature. Such like foolish beasts are we, who, whilst we are cut, mocked,
flouted at, in every mans common talk, will notwithstanding proceed to shame
our selves, to make sport. No man pleases all, we seek to please one. Didymus
wrote four thousand books, or as some say, six thousand, of the art of
Grammar. Our Author hopes, it may be as lawful for him to write a thousand
lines of as light a subject. Socrates (whom the Oracle pronounced the wisest
man of Greece) sometimes danced. Scipio and Lelius by the seaside played at
peeble-stone. Semel insaniuimus omnes. Every man cannot, with Archimedes, make
a heaven of brass, or dig gold out of the iron mines of the law. Such odd
trifles, as Mathematicians experiments be, Artificial flies to hang in the
air by themselves, dancing balls, an egge-shell that shall climb up to the
top of a spear, fiery breathing goares, Poetae noster professes not to make.
Placeat sibi quis{que} heebit. What's a fool but his babble? Deep reaching
wits, here is no deep stream for you to angle in. Moralizers, you that wrest
a never meant meaning, out of every thing, applying all things to the present
time, keep your attention for the common Stage: for here are no quips in
Characters for you to read. Vain glozers, gather what you will. Spite, spell
backwards, what thou can. As the Parthians fight, flying away: so will we
prate and talk, but stand to nothing that we say.

How say you, my masters, do you not laugh at him for a Coxcomb? Why, he hath
made a Prologue longer then his Play: nay, 'tis no Play neither, but a show.
I'll be sworn, the sigge of Rowlands God-sonne, is a Giant in comparison of it.
What can be made of Summers last will Testament? Such another thing, as Cyllian
of Braynfords will, where she bequeathed a score of farts amongst her friends.
Forsooth, because the plague reigns in most places in this latter end of
summer, Summer must come in sick: he must call his officers to account, yield
his throne to Autumn, make Winter his Executour, with tittle tattle Tom boy:
God give you good night in Watling street. I care not what I say now: for I
play no more then you hear; some of that you heard to (by your leave) was
extempore. He were as good have let me had the best part: for I'll be revenged
on him to the uttermost, in this person of Will Summer, which I have put on to
play the Prologue, and mean not to put off, till the play be done. I'll sit as
a Chorus, and flowte the Actors and him at the end of every Scene: I know they
will not interrupt me, for fear of marring of all: but look to your cues, my
masters; for I intend to play the knave in cue, and put you besides all your
parts, if you take not the better heed. Actors, you Rogues, come away, clear
your throats, blow your noses, and wipe your mouths e're you enter, that you
may take no occasion to spit or to cough, when you are non plus. And this I
bar over and besides, That none of you stroke your beards, to make action,
play with your cod-piece points, or stad fumbling on your buttom, when you know
not how to bestow your fingers. Serve God, and act cleanly; a fit of mirth, and
an old song first, if you will.

Fair Summer droops, droop men and beasts therefore:
So fair a summer look for never more.
All good things vanish, less then in a day,
Peace, plenty, pleasure suddenly decay.
Go not yet away bright soul of the sadyeare.
The earth is hell, when thou lean'st to appear.
What, shall those flowers that decked thy garland erst,
Upon thy grave be wastfully dispersed?
O trees, consume your sap in sorrows source.
Streams, turn to tears your tributary course.
Go not yet hence, bright soul of the sadyeare.
The earth is hell, when thou leau'st to appear.

A couple of pratty boys, if they would wash their faces, and were well
breecht an hour or two. The rest of the green men have reasonable voices,
good to sing catches, or the great Iowben by the fires side, in a winters
evening. But let us hear what Summer can say for himself, why he should not
be hist at.


What pleasure always lasts: no joy endures:
Summer I was, I am not as I was:
Harvest and age have whit'ned my green head:
On Autumn now and Winter must I lean.
Needs must he fall, whom none but foes uphold.
Thus must the happiest man have his black day.
Omnibus una manes nox, calcanda semel via laethi.
This month have I lain languishing a bed,
Looking each hour to yield my life, and throne;
And died I had in deed unto the earth,
But that Eliza Englands beauteous Queen,
On whom all seasons prosperously attend,
Forbad the execution of my fate,
Until her joyful progress was expired.
For her doth Summer live, and linger here,
And wishes long to live to her content:
But wishes are not had when they wish well.
I must depart, my death-day is set down:
To these two must I leave my wheaten crown.
So unto unthrifts rich men leave their lands,
Who in an hour consume long labours gains.
True is it that divinest Sidney sung,
O, he is mard, that is for others made.
Come near, my friends, for I am near my end.
In presence of this Honourable train,
Who love me (for I patronize their sports)
Mean I to make my final Testament:
But first I'll call my officers to count,
And of the wealth I gave them to dispose,
Know what is left. I may know what to give
Vertumnus then, that turnst the year about.
Summon them one by one to answer me,
First Ver, the spring, unto whose custody
I have committed more then to the rest:
The choice of all my fragrant meads and flowers,
And what delights so ever nature affords.

I will, my Lord. Ver, lusty Ver, by the name of lusty Ver, come into the
court, lose a mark in issues.

Spring, the sweet spring, is the years pleasant King,
Then bloomes each thing, then maids dance in a ring,
Cold doth not sting, the pretty birds do sing,
Cuckoo, jug, jug, pu we, to witta woo.
The Palm and May make country houses gay.
Lambs frisk and play, the Shep herds pipe all day,
And we hear aye, birds tune this merry lay,
Cuckoo, jug, jug, pu we, to witta woo.
The fields breathe sweet, the daisies kiss our feet,
Young lovers meet, old wives a sunning sit:
In every street, these tunes our ears do greet,
Cuckoo, jug, jug, pu we, to witta woo.
Spring the sweet spring.

By my troth, they have voices as clear as Crystal: this is a pratty thing,
if it be for nothing but to go a begging with.


Believe me, Ver, but thou art pleasant bent,
This humour should import a harmless mind:
Know thou the reason why I sent for thee?

No faith, nor care not, whether I do or no.
If you will dance a Galliard, so it is: if not, Falangtado, Falangtado, to
wear the black and yellow: Falangtado, Falagtado, my mates are gone, I'll
follow.


Nay, stay a while, we must confer and talk.
Ver, call to mind I am thy sovereign Lord,
And what thou hast, of me thou hast, and holdst.
Unto no other end I sent for thee.
But to demand a reckoning at thy hands,
How well or ill thou hast employed my wealth.

If that be all, we will not disagree.
A clean trencher and a napkin you shall have presently.

The truth is, this fellow hath bin a tapster in his days.


How now? is this the reckoning we shall have?

My Lord, he doth abuse you: brooke it not.

Summa totalis I fear will prove him but a fool.

About, about, lively, put your horse to it, reyne him harder, jerk him with
your wand, sit fast, sit fast, man; focle, hold up your ladle there.


O brave hall! O, well said, butcher. Now for the credit of Wostershire. The
finest set of Morris-dauncers that is between this and Stretham: mary, me
thinks there is one of them dauceth like a Clothyers horse, with a wool-pack on
his back. You friend with the Hobby-horse, go not too fast, for fear of
wearing out my Lords tyle-stones with your hob-nayles.


So, so, so, trot the ring twice over, and away. May it please my Lord, this is
the grand capital sum, but there are certain parcels behind, as you shall
see.


Nay, nay, no more; for this is all too much.

Content your self, we will have variety.
Trip and go, heave and hoe,
Up and down to and fro,
From the town, to the grove,
Two, and two, let us rove
A Maying, a playing:
Love hath no gainsaying:
So merrily trip and go.

Beshrew my heart, of a number of ill legs, I never saw worse daunsers: how
blessed are you, that the wenches of the parish do not see you!


Presumptuous Ver, uncivil nurturde boy,
Think I will be derided thus of thee?
Is this th'account and reckoning that thou make?

Troth, my Lord, to tell you plain, I can give you no other account: nam quae
habui, pordidi; what I had, I have spent on good fellows, in these sports you
have seen, which are proper to the Spring, and others of like sort, (as giving
wenches green gowns, making garlands for Fencers, and tricking up children
gay) have I bestowed all my flowery treasure, and flower of my youth.


A small matter. I know one spent in less then a year, eight and fifty pounds
in mustard, and an other that ran in det, in the space of four or sieve
year, above fourteen thousand pound in lute strings and gray paper.


O monstrous unthrift, who e're heard the like?
The seas vast throat in so short tract of time,
Devours nor consumes half so much.
How well might thou have lived within thy bounds?

What talk you to me, of living within my bounds? I tell you, none but Asses
live within their bounds: the silly beasts, if they be put in a pasture, that
is eaten bare to the very earth, where there is nothing to be had but thistles,
will rather fall soberly to those thistles, and be hungerstaru'd, then they
will offer to break their bounds; whereas the lusty courser, if he be in a
barrayne plot, and spy better grass in some pasture near adjoining, breaks
over hedge and ditch, and to go, e're he will be pent in, and not have his
belly full. Peradventure, the horses lately sworn to be stolen, carried that
youthful mind, who, if they had been Asses, would have been yet extant.


Thus we may see, the longer we live, the more we shall learn: I ne'er
thought honesty an ass, till this day.


This world is transitory, it was made of nothing, and it must to nothing:
wherefore, if we will do the will of our high Creator, (whose will it is,
that it pass to nothing) we must help to consume it to nothing. Gold is more
vile then men: Men dye in thousands, and ten thousands, yea, many times in
hundredth thousands in one battle. If then, the best husband be so liberal
of his best handyworke, to what end should we make much of a glittering
excrement, or doubt to spend at a banquet as many pounds, as he spends men at a
battle? Me thinks I honour Geta the Roman Emperor, for a brave minded
fellow: for he commanded a banquet to be made him of all meats under the
Sun; which were served in after the order of the Alphabet; and the Clarke of
the kitchen following the last dish (which was two mile off from the foremost)
brought him an Index of their several names: Neither did he pingle when it was
set on the board, but for the space of three days and three nights, never rose
from the Table.


O intolerable lying villain, that was never begotten without the consent of a
whetstone.


Ungracious man, how fondly he argues!

Tell me, I pray, wherefore was gold laid under our feet in the veins of the
earth, but that we should contemn it, and tread upon it, and so consequently
tread thrift under our feet? It was not known, till the Iron age, donec
facinus inuasit mortales, as the Poet says; and the Scythians always detested
it. I will prove it, that an unthrift, of any, comes nearest a happy man, in so
much as he comes nearest to beggary. Cicero saith, summum bonum consists in
omnium rerum vacatione, that it is the chiefest felicity that may be, to rest
from all labours. Now, who doth so much vacare a rebus, who rests so much? who
hath so little to do, as the beggar? Who can sing so merry a note, as he that
cannot change a groat? Cui nil est, nil deest: he that hath nothing, wants
nothing. On the other side, it is said of the Carl, Omnia habeo, nec quicquam
habeo: I have all things, yet want every thing. Multi mihi vitio vertunt, quia
egeo, saith Marcus Cato in Aulus Gellius, at ego illis, quia nequeunt egere:
Many upbraid me, saith he, because I am poor: but I vpbrayd them, because
they cannot live if they were poor. It is a common proverb, Dines{que}
miser{que}, a rich man, and a miserable: nam natura paucis cotenta, none so
contented as the poor man. Admit that the chiefest happiness were not rest or
ease, but knowledge, as Herillus, Alcidamas, many of Socrates followers
affirm; why, paupertas omnes perdocot arts, poverty instructs a man in all
arts, it makes a man hardy and venturous; and therefore it is called of the
Poets, Paupertas audax, valiant poverty. It is not so much subject to
inordinate desires, as wealth or prosperity. Non habet vnde suum paupertas
pascat amorem: poverty hath not wherewithal to feed lust. All the Poets were
beggars: all Alcumists, and all Philosophers are beggars: Omnia mea mecum
porto, quoth Bias, when he had nothing, but bread and cheese in a leathern
bag, and two or three books in his bosom. Saint Frauncis, a holy Saint,
never had any money. It is madness to dote upon muck. That young man of Athens,
(Aelianus makes mention of) may be an example to us, who doted so extremely on
the image of Fortune, that when he might not enjoy it, he dyed for sorrow. The
earth yields all her fruits together, and why should not we spend them
together? I thank heavens on my knees, that have made me an unthrift.


O vanity it self; O wit ill spent!
So study thousands not to mend their lives,
But to maintain the sin they most affect,
To be hells advocates against their own souls.
Ver, since thou giu'st such praise to beggary,
And hast defended it so valiantly,
This be thy penance; Thou shalt ne'er appear,
Or come abroad, but Lent shall wait on thee:
His scarsity may counteruayle thy waste.
Riot may flourish, but finds want at last.
Take him away, that knows no good way,
And lead him the next way to woe and want.
Thus in the paths of knowledge many stray,
And from the means of life fetch their decay.

Heigh ho. Here is a coil in deed to bring beggars to stocks. I promise you
truly, I was almost asleep; I thought I had been at a Sermon. Well, for this
one nights exhortation, I vow (by Gods grace) never to be good husband while I
live. But what is this to the purpose? Her come to Powl (as the Welshman says)
and her pay an halfepenny for bur seat, and her hear the Preacher talge, and a
talge very well by gis, but yet a cannot make her laugh: go a Theater, and
hear a Queenes Fice, and he make her laugh, and laugh her belly-full. So we
come hither to laugh and be merry, and we hear a filthy beggarly Oration, in
the praise of beggary. It is a beggarly Poet that writ it: and that makes him
so much commend it, because he knows not how to mend himself. Well, rather
then he shall have no employment but like dishes, I will set him a work my
self, to write in praise of the art of stouping, and howe there was never any
famous Thresher, Porter, Brewer, Pioner, or Carpenter, that had straight back.
Repair to my chamber, poor fellow, when the play is done, and thou shalt see
what I will say to thee.


Vertumnus, call Solstitium.

Solstitium, come into the court without: peace there below; make room for
master Solstitium.


All hayle to Summer my dread sovereign Lord.

Welcome, Solstitium, thou art one of them,
To whose good husbandry we have referred
Part of those small revenues that we have.
What hast thou gaynd us? what hast thou brought in?

Alas, my Lord, what gave you me to keep,
But a few days eyes in my prime of youth?
And those I have converted to white hairs:
I never loved ambitiously to climb,
Or thrust my hand too far into the fire.
To be in heaven, sure, is a blessed thing:
But Atlas-like, to prop heaven on ones back,
Cannot but be more labour then delight.
Such is the state of men in honour placed;
They are gold vessels made for servile uses,
High trees that keep the weather from low houses,
But cannot shield the tempest from themselves.
I love to dwell betwixt the hills and dales;
Neither to be so great to be enuide,
Nor yet so poor the world should pity me.
Inter vtrum{que} ten, medio tutissimus ibis.

What doest thou with those balances thou bear?

In them I weigh the day and night alike.
This white glass is the houre-glasse of the day:
This black one the just measure of the night;
One more then other holds not a grain:
Both serve times just proportion to maintain.

I like thy moderation wondrous well:
And this thy balance, wayghing the white glass
And black, with equal poyze and steadfast hand,
A pattern is to Princes and great men,
How to weigh all estates indifferently:
The Spiritualty and Temporalty alike,
Neither to be too prodigal of smyles,
Nor too severe in frowning without cause.
If you be wise, you Monarchs of the earth,
Have two such glasses still before your eyes;
Think as you have a white glass running on,
Good days, friends favour, and all things at beck,
So this white glass run out (as out it will)
The black comes next, your downfall is at hand,
Take this of me, for somewhat I have tried;
A mighty ebb follows a mighty tide.
But say, Solstitium, had thou nought besides?
Nought but days eyes, and fair looks, gave I thee?

Nothing my Lord, nor ought more did I ask.

But had thou always kept thee in my sight,
Thy good deserts, though silent, would have asked.

Deserts, my Lord, of ancient servitors,
Are like old sores, which may not be ripped up:
Such use these times have got, that none must beg,
But those that have young limbs to lavish fast.

I grieve, no more regard was had of thee:
A little sooner had thou spoke to me,
Thou had been heard, but now the time is past:
Death wayteth at the door for thee and me;
Let us go measure out our beds in clay:
Nought but good deeds hence shall we bear away.
Be, as thou were, best steward of my hours,
And so return unto thy country bowers.

Fie, fie of honesty, fie: Solstitium is an ass, perdy, this play is a
gally-maufrey: fetch me some drink, some body. What cheer, what cheer, my
hearts? are not you thirsty with liftening to this dry sport? What have we to
do with scales, and hower-glasses, except we were Bakers, or Clock-keepers? I
cannot tell how other men are addicted, but it is against my profession to use
any scales, but such as we play at with a boule, or keep any hours, but
dinner or supper. It is a pedantic thing, to respect times and seasons: if a
man be drinking with good fellows late, he must come home, for fear the gates
be shut; when I am in my warm bed, I must rise to prayers, because the bell
rings. I like no such foolish customs. Actors, bring now a black Jack, and a
runlet of of Rhenish wine, disputing of the antiquity of red noses; let the
prodigal child come out in his doublet and hose all greasy, his shirt hanging
forth, and ne'er a penny in his purse, and talk what a fine thing it is to
walk summerly, or sit whistling under a hedge and keep hogs. Go forward in
grace and virtue to proceed; but let us have no more of these grave matters.


Vertumnus, will Sol come before us.

Sol, Sol, vt, re, me, fa, sol, come to church while the bell toll.

I marry, here comes majesty in pomp,
Resplendent Sol, chief planet of the heavens,
He is our servant, looks he ne'er so big.

My liege, what crau'st thou at thy vassals hands?

Hypocrisy, how it can change his shape!
How base is pride from his own dunghill put?
How I have raised thee, Sol, I list not tell,
Out of the Ocean of adversity,
To sit in height of honours glorious heaven,
To be the eye-sore of aspiring eyes,
To give the day her life, from thy bright looks,
And let nought thrive upon the face of earth,
From which thou shalt withdraw thy powerful smiles.
What hast thou done deserving such hie grace?
What industry, or meritorious toil,
Can thou produce, to prove my gift well plac'de?
Some service, or some profit I expect:
None is promoted but for some respect.

My Lord, what needs these terms betwixt us two?
Upbraiding, ill beseems your bounteous mind:
I do you honour for advancing me.
Why, it is a credit for your excellence,
To have so great a subject as I am:
This is your glory and magnificence,
That without stouping of your mightiness,
Or taking any whit from your high state,
You can make one as mighty as your self.

O arrogance exceeding all belief!
Summer my Lord, this saucy upstart Jack,
That now doth rule the chariot of the Sun,
And makes all stars derive their light from him,
Is a most base insinuating slave,
The son of parsimony, and disdain,
One that will shine, on friends and foes alike,
That under brightest smiles, hides black showers:
Whose envious breath doth dry up springs and lakes,
And burns the grass, that beasts can get no food.

No dunghill hath so wild an excrement,
But with his beams he will forth with exhale:
The fens and quag-myres tithe to him their filth:
Forth purest mines he sucks a gainful dross:
Green Iuy-bushes at the Vintners doors
He withers, and devours all their sap.

Lascivious and intemperate he is.
The wrong of Daphne is a well known tale:
Each evening he descends to Thetis lap,
The while men think he bathes him in the sea.
O, but when he returns whence he came,
Down to the West, then dawnes his deity,
Then doubled is the swelling of his looks;
He over loads his carre with Orient gems,
And reins his fiery horses with rich pearl:
He terms himself the god of Poetry,
And sets wanton songs unto the Lute.

Let him not talk; for he hath words at will,
And wit to make the baddest matter good.

Bad words, bad wit: oh, where dwells faith or truth?
Ill usury my favours reap from thee,
Usurping Sol, the hate of heaven and earth.

If Envy vnconfuted may accuse,
Then Innocence must vncondemned dye.
The name of Martyrdom offence hath gaynd,
When fury stopped a froward Judges ears.
Much I'll not say (much speech much folly shows)
What I have done, you gave me leave to do.
The excrements you bred, whereon I feed,
To rid the earth of their contagious fumes;
With such gross carriage did I load my beams,
I burnt no grass, I dried no springs and lakes:
I sucked no mines, I withered no green boughs.
But when to ripen harvest I was force,
To make my rays more fervent then I wont,
For Daphnes wrongs and scapes in Thetis lap,
All Gods are subject to the like mishap.
Stars daily fall (it is use is all in all)
And men account the fall but natures course:
Vaunting my jewels, hasting to the West,
Or rising early from the gray ei'de morn.
What do I vaunt but your large bountihood
And show how liberal a Lord I serve.
Musique and poetry, my two last crimes,
Are those two exercises of delight,
Wherewithlong labours I do weary out.
The dying Swan is not forbid to sing.
The waives of Heber played on Orpheus strings,
When he (sweet musiques Trophe) was destroyed.
And as for Poetry, woods eloquence,
(Dead Phaetons three sisters funeral tears
That by the gods were to Electrum turned)
Not flint, or rocks of Icy cinders framed,
Deny the source of siluer-falling streams.
Envy envies not outcries unrest:
In vain I plead, well, is to me a fault,
And these my words seem the flight web of art,
And not to have the taste of sounder truth.
Let none but fools, be cared for of the wise;
Knowledge own children, knowledge most despise.

Thou know too much, to know to keep the mean.
He that sees all things, oft sees not himself.
The Thames is witness of thy tyranny,
Whose waives thou hast exhaust for winter showers.
The naked channel plains her of thy spite,
That laid'st her entrails unto open sight.
Unprofitably borne to man and beast,
Which like to Nilus yet doth hide his head,
Some few years since thou let o'reflow these walks,
And in the horse-race headlong ran at race,
While in a cloud, thou hid'st thy burning face:
Where was thy care to rid contagious filth,
When some men wetshod, (with his waters) droupt?
Others that ate the Eels his heate cast up,
Sickened and died by them impoysoned.
Sleep thou, or keep thou then Admetus sheep,
Thou drive not back these flowings to the deep?

The winds, not I, have floods tides in chase:
Diana, whom our fables call the moon,
Only commands over the raging may no,
She leads his wallowing offspring up and down,
She waning, all streams ebb in the year:
She was eclipsed, when that the Thames was bare.

A bare conjecture, builded on perhaps;
In laying thus the blame upon the moon,
Thou imitat'st subtle Pithagoras,
Who, what he would the people should believe,
The same he wrote with blood upon a glass,
And turned it opposite against the new moon;
Whose beams reflecting on it with full force,
Showed all those lines, to them that stood behind,
Most plainly writ in circle of the moon,
And then he said, Not I, but the new moon
Fair Cynthia persuades you this and that;
With like collusion shalt thou not blind me:
But for abusing both the moon and me,
Long shalt thou be eclipsed by the moon,
And long in darkness live, and see no light.
A way with him, his doom hath no reverse.

What is eclipsed, will one day shine again:
Though winter frowns, the Spring will ease my pain.
Time, from the brow, doth wipe out every stain.

I think the Sun is not so long in passing through the twelve signs, as the
son of a fool hath bin disputing here, about had I wist. Out of doubt, the
Poet is bribed of some that have a mess of cream to eat, before my Lord go
to bed yet, to hold him half the night with riffe, raffe, of the rumming of
Elanor. If I can tell what it means, pray god, I may never get breakfast
more, when I am hungry. Troth, I am of opinion, he is one of those
Hieroglificall writers, that by the figures of beasts, planets, and of stones,
express the mind, as we do in A. B. C. or one that writes under hair, as I
have heard of a certain Notary Histions, who following Darius in the Persian
wars, and desirous to disclose some secrets of import, to his friend
Aristagoras, that dwelt afar off, found out this means: He had a servant
that had been long sick of a payne in his eyes, whom, under pretence of curing
his malady, he shau'd from one side of his head, to the other, and with a soft
pencil wrote upon his scalp, (as on parchment) the discourse of his business,
the fellow all the while imagining, his master had done nothing but noynt his
head with a feather. After this, he kept him secretly in his tent, till his
hair was somewhat grown, and then wild him to go to Aristagoras into the
country, and bid him shave him, as he had done, and he should have perfect
remedy. He did so: Aristagoras shau'd him with his own hands, read his
friends letter; and when he had done, washed it out, that no man should
perceive it else, and sent him home to buy him a nightcap. If I wist there were
any such knavery, or Peter Bales Brachigraphy, under Sols bushy hair, I would
have a Barber, my host of the Murrions head, to be his Interpretour, who would
whet his razor on his Richmond cap, and give him the terrible cut, like
himself, but he would come as near as a quart pot, to the construction of it.
To be sententious, not superfluous, Sol should have been beholding to the
Harbour, and not the beard-master. Is it pride that is shadowed under Dubbers
hill? That pride is not my sin, Slovens Hall, where I was borne, be my
record. As for covetousness, intemperance and exaction, I meet with nothing in a
whole year, but a cup of wine, for such vices to be conversant in. Pergite
porro, my good children, and multiply the sins of your absurdities, till you
come to the full measure of the grand hiss, and you shall hear how we will
purge room with censuring your imperfections.


Vertumnus, call Orion.

Orion, Vrion, Arion; my Lord thou must look upon: Orion, gentleman
dogge-keeper, huntsman, come into the court: look you bring all bounds, and no
bandogs. Peace there, that we may hear their horns blow.


Sir, wast thou that called us from our game?
How durst thou (being but a petty God)
Disturb me in the entrance of my sports?

'Twas I, Orion, caused thee to be called.

'Tis I, dread Lord, that humbly will obey.

How haps't thou left the heavens, to hunt below?
As I remember, thou were Hireus son,
Whom of a huntsman Jove chose for a star,
And thou art called the Dog-starre, art thou not?

Pleases your honour, heavens circumference
Is not enough for him to hunt and range,
But with those venome-breathed cures he leads,
He comes to chase health from our earthly bounds:
Each one of those foule-mouthed mangy dogs
Governs a day, (no dog but hath his day)
And all the days by them so governed,
The Dog-daies hight, infectious fosterers
Of meteors from carrion that arise,
And putrified bodies of dead men,
Are they engendered to that ugly shape,
Being nought else but preserved corruption.
It is these that in the entrance of their reign
The plague and dangerous agues have brought in.
They are and bark at night against the Moon,
For fetching in fresh tides to cleanse the streets.
They vomit flames, and blast the ripened fruits:
They are deaths messengers unto all those,
That sicken while their malice bears sway.

A tedious discourse, built on no ground,
A silly fancy Autumn hast thou told,
Which no Philosophie doth warrantize,
No old received poetry confirms.
I will not grace thee by confuting thee:
Yet in a jest (since thou railest so against dogs)
I'll speak a word or two in their defence:
That creature's best that comes most near to men.
That dogs of all come nearest, thus I prove:
First they excel us in all outward sense,
Which no one of experience will deny,
They hear, they smell, they see better then we,
To come to speech they have it questionless,
Although we understand them not so well:
They bark as good old Saxon as may be,
And that in more variety then we:
For they have one voice when they are in chase,
Another, when they wrangle for their meat,
Another, when we beat them out of doors.
That they have reason, this I will allege,
They choose those things that are most fit for them,
And shun the contrary all that they may,
They know what is for their own diet best,
And seek about for it very carefully.
At sight of any whip they run away,
As runs a thief from noise of hue and cry:
Nor live they on the sweat of others brows,
But have their trades to get their living with,
Hunting and conie-catching, two fine arts:
Yea, there be of them as there be of men,
Of every occupation more or less:
Some cariers, and they fetch, some watermen,
And they will dive and swim when you bid them:
Some butchers, and they worry sheep by night:
Some cooks, and they do nothing but turn spits.
Chrisippus holds, dogs are Logicians,
In that by study and by canuasing,
They can distinguish twixt three several things,
As when he comes where three broad ways meet,
And of those three hath staid at two of them,
By which he guesses that the game went not,
Without more pause he runs on the third,
Which, as Chrisippus saith, infinuates,
As if he reasoned thus within himself:
Either he went this, that, or yonder way,
But neither that, nor yonder, therefore this:
But whether they Logicians be or no,
Cinicks they are, for they will snarle and bite,
Right courtiers to flatter and to fawn,
Valiant to set upon the enemies,
Most faithful and most constant to their friends;
Nay they are wise, as Homer witnesses,
Who talking of Vlisses coming home,
Saith all his household, but Argus his Dog,
Had quite forgot him: I, and his deep insight,
Nor Pallas Art in altering of his shape,
Nor his base weeds, nor absence twenty years,
Could go beyond, or any way delude.
That Dogs Physicians are, thus I infer,
They are ne'er sick, but they know their disease,
And find out means to ease them of their grief,
Special good Surgeons to cure dangerous wounds:
For stricken with a stake into the flesh,
This policy they use to get it out:
They trail one of their feet upon the ground,
And gnaw the flesh about where the wound is,
Till it be clean drawn out: and then, because
Ulcers and sores kept foul, are hardly cur'de,
They like and purify it with their tongue,
And well observe Hipocrates old rule,
The only medicine for the foot, is rest:
For if they have the least hurt in their feet,
They bear them up, and look they be not stirred:
When humours rise, they eat a sovereign herb,
Whereby what cloys their stomachs, they cast up,
And as some writers of experience tell,
They were the first invented vomitting.
Sham'st thou not, Autumn, unadvisedly
To slander such rare creatures as they be?

We called thee not, Orion, to this end,
To tell a story of dogs qualities.
With all thy hunting how are we enrich?
What tribute pay thou us for thy high place?

What tribute should I pay you out of nought?
Hunters do hunt for pleasure, not for gain.
While Dog-dayes last, the harvest safely thrives:
The sun burns hot, to finish up fruits grouth:
There is no bloud-letting to make men weak:
Physicians with their Cataposia,
r. tittle Elinctoria
Masticatorum and Cataplasmata:
Their Gargarismes, Clisters, and pitched clothes,
Their perfumes, sirrups, and their triacles,
Refrain to poison the sick patients,
And dare not minister till I be out.
Then none will bathe, and so are fewer drowned:
All lust is perilsome, therefore less vs'de.
In brief, the year without me cannot stand:
Summer, I am thy staff, and thy right hand.

A broken staff, a lame right hand I had,
If thou were all the stay that held me up.
Nihil violentum perpetuum.
No violence that lives to old age.
Ill-gouern'd star, that never boad'st good luck,
I banish thee a twelue-month and a day,
Forth of my presence, come not in my sight,
Nor show thy head, so much as in the night.

I am content, though hunting be not out,
We will go hunt in hell for better hap.
One parting blow, my hearts, unto our friends,
To bid the fields and huntsmen all farewell:
Toss up your bugle horns unto the stars.
Toil finds ease, peace follows after wars.

Faith, this Scene of Orion, is right prandium caninum, a dogs dinner, which
as it is without wine, so here's a coil about dogs, without wit. If I had
thought the ship of fools would have stay de to take in fresh water at the I'll
of dogs, I would have furnished it with a whole kennel of collections to the
purpose. I have had a dog my self, that would dream, and talk in his
sleep, turn round like Ned fool, and sleep all night in a porridge pot.
Mark but the skirmish between sixpence and the fox, and it is miraculous,
how they overcome one another in honourable courtesy. The fox, though he wears
a chain, runs as though he were free, mocking us (as it is a crafty beast)
because we having a Lord and master to attend on, run about at our pleasures,
like masterles men. Young sixpence, the best page his master hath, plays a
little, and retires. I warrant, he will not be far out of the way, when his
master goes to dinner. Learn of him, you deminitiue urchins, howe to behave
your selves in your vocation, take not up your standings in a nuttree, when you
should be waiting on my Lords trencher. Shoot but a bit at buttes, play but a
span at points. What ever you do, memento mori: remember to rise betimes in
the morning.


Vertumnus, call Harvest.

Harvest, by west, and by north, by south and southeast, show thy self like a
beast. Goodman Harvest yeoman, come in, and say what you can: room for the
sith and the siccles there.

Merry, merry, merry, cheery, cheery, cheery,
Trowel the black bowl to me,
Hey derry, derry, with a poop and a lerry,
I'll trowel it again to thee:
Hooky, hooky, we have shorn,
and we have bound,
And we have brought Harvest
home to town.

Harvest, the Bailey of my husbandry,
What plenty hast thou heaped into our Barnes?
I hope thou hast sped well thou art so blithe.

Sped well, or ill sir, I drink to you on the same:
Is your throat clear to help us to sing, hooky, hooky?
Hooky, hooky, we have shorn,
and we have bound,
And we have brought harvest
home to town.

Thou Coridon, why answer not direct?

Answer? why friend, I am no tapster, to say, Anon, anon, sir: but leave you
to molest me, goodman tawny leaves, for fear (as the proverb says, leave is
light) so I mow off all your leaves with my sith.


Mock not, mow not too long you were best,
For fear we whet not your since upon your pate.

Since thou art so perverse in answering,
Harvest, hear what complaints are brought to me.
Thou art accused by the public voice,
For an ingrosser of the common store,
A Carl, that hast no conscience, nor remorse,
But dost impoverish the fruitful earth,
To make thy garners rise up to the heavens.
To whom gives thou? who feeds at thy board?
No alms, but unreasonable gain,
Disgests what thy huge iron teeth devour:
Small beer, course bread, the hynds and beggars cry,
Whilst thou with hold both the malt and flower,
And giu'st us bran, and water, (fit for dogs.)

Hooky, hooky, if you were not my Lord, I would say you lye. First and foremost
you say I am a Grocer. A Grocer is a citizen: I am no citizen, therefore no
Grocer. A hoorder up of grain: that's false; for not so much but my elbows
eat wheat every time I lean on them. A Carl: that is as much to say, as a
conny-catcher of good fellowship. For that one word, you shall pledge me a
carouse: eat a spoonful of the curd to allay your choler. My mates and
fellows, sing no more, Merry, merry: but weep out a lamentable hooky, hooky,
and let your Sickles cry, Sick, sick, and very sick, sick, and for the
time; for Harvest your master is abused without reason or rime. I have no
conscience I; I'll come nearer to you, and yet I am no scabbe, nor no louse. Can
you make proof where ever I sold away my conscience, or pawnd it? do you know
who would buy it, or lend any money upon it? I think I have given you the
pose; blow your nose, master constable. But to say that I impoverish the earth,
that I rob the man in the moon, that I take a purse on the top of Paules
steeple; by this straw and third I swear, you are no gentleman, no proper man,
no honest man, to make me sing, O man in desperation.


I must give credit unto what I hear;
For other then I hear, attract I nought.

I, I, nought seek, nought have: an ill husband is the first steppe to a
knave. You object I feed none at my board. I am sure, if you were a hog, you
would never say so: for, surreuerence of their worships, they feed at my
stable, table, every day. I keep good hospitality for hens geese; Gleaners
are oppressed with heavy burdens of my bounty. They rake me, and eat me to the
very bones, till there be nothing left but gravel and stones, and yet I give
no alms, but devour all. They say when a man cannot hear well, you hear
with your harvest ears: but if you heard with your harvest ears, that is,
with the ears of corn, which my almescart scatters, they would tell you, that
I am the very poor mans box of pity, that there are more holes of liberality
open in harvests heart, then in a sieve, or a dust-boxe. Suppose you were a
craftsman, or an Artificer, and should come to buy corn of me, you should
have bushels of me, not like the Bakers loaf, that should waygh but six
ounces, but usury for your money, thousands for one: what would you have more?
Eat me out of my apparel, if you will, if you suspect me for a miser.


I credit thee, and think thou were belide.
But tell me, had thou a good crop this year?

Hay, Gods plenty, which was so sweet and so good, that when I ierted my whip,
and said to my horses but Hay, they would go as they were mad.


But hay alone thou say not; but hay-ree.

I sing hay-ree, that is, hay and rye: meaning, that they shall have hay and
rye their belly-fulls, if they will draw hard; So we say, wa, hay, when they
go out of the way: meaning, that they shall want hay, if they will not do as
they should do.


How thrive thy oats, thy barley, and thy wheat?

My oats grew like a cup of beer that makes the brewer rich: my rye like a
Cavalier, that wears a huge feather in his cap, but hath no courage in his
heart; had a long stalk, a goodly husk, but nothing so great a kernel as it
was wont: my barley, even as many a novice is crossebitten, as soon as ever
he peepes out of the shell, so was it frost-bitten in the blade, yet picked up
his crumbs again afterward, and bade, Fill pot, hostess, in spite of a dear
year. As for my Peas and my Fetches, they are famous, and not to be spoken
of.


I, I, such country buttoned caps as you,
Do want no fetches to undo great towns.

Will you make good your words, that we want no fetches?

I, that he shall.

Then fetch us a cloak-bag, to carry away your self in.

Plough-swaynes are blunt, and will taunt bitterly.
Harvest, when all is done, thou art the man,
Thou doest me the best service of them all:
Rest from thy labours till the year renues,
And let the husbandmen sing of thy praise.

Rest from my labours, and let the husbandmen sing of my praise? Nay, we do
not mean to rest so; by your leave, we will have a largess amongst you, e're we
part.


A largess, a largess, a largess.

Is there no man that will give them a hiss for a largess?

No, that there is not, goodman Lundgis: I see, charity waxes cold, and I
think this house be her habitatio, for it is not very hot; we were as good
even put up our pipes, and sing Merry, merry, for we shall get no money.

Merry, merry, merry, cheery, cheery, cheery,
Trowel the black bowl to me:
Hey derry, derry, with a poop and a lerrie,
I'll trowel it again to thee:
Hookie, bookie, we have shorn and we have bound,
And we have brought harvest home to town.

Well, go thy ways, thou bundle of straw; I'll give thee this gift, thou shalt
be a Clown while thou liu'st. As lusty as they are, they run on the score
with Georges wife for their posset, and God knows who shall pay goodman
Yeomans, for his wheat sheaf: they may sing well enough, Trowel the black
bowl to me, trowel the black bowl to me: for, a hundredth to one, but they
will be all drunk, e're they go to bed: yet, of a slavering fool, that
hath no conceit in any thing, but in carrying a wand in his hand, with
commendation when he runs by the high way side, this stripling Harvest hath
done reasonable well. O that some body had had the wit to set his thatched
suite on fire, and so lighted him out: If I had had but a Jet ring on my
finger, I might have done with him what I list; I had spoiled him, I had took
his apparel prisoner; for it being made of straw, the nature of let, to draw
straw unto it, I would have nailde him to the pummel of my chair, till the
play were done, and then have carried him to my chamber door, and laid him at
the threshold as a wisp, or a piece of mat, to wipe my shoes on, every time
I come up dirty.


Vertumnus, call Bacchus.

Bacchus, Baccha, Bacchum, god Bacchus, god fatbacke, Baron of double beer,
and bottle ale, come in show thy nose that is nothing pale: back, back there,
god barrellbellie may enter.

Mounsieur Mingo, for quaeffing doth surpass,
In Cup, in Canne, or glass.
God Bacchus do me right,
And dubbe me knight Domingo.

Wherefore did thou call me, Vertumnus? hast any drink to give me? One of
you hold my Asle while I light: walk him up and down the hall, till I talk a
word or two.


What, Bacchus: still animus in patinis, no mind but on the pot?


Why, Summer, Summer, how would do, but for rain? What is a fair house
without water coming to it? Let me see how a smith can work, if he have not
his trough standing by him. What sets an edge on a knife? the grindstone alone?
no, the moist element powered upon it, which grinds out all gaps, sets a point
upon it, scowres it as bright as the firmament. So, I tell thee, give a soldier
wine before he goes to battle, it grinds out all gaps, it makes him forget
all scars and wounds, and fight in the thickest of his enemies, as though he
were but at foils, amongst his fellows. Give a scholar wine, going to his
book, or being about to invent, it sets a new point on his wit, it glazeth it,
it scowres it, it gives him acumen. Plato saith, vinum esse fomitem quedam, et
incit abilem ingenij virtutisque. Aristotle saith, Nulla est magna scientia
absque mixtura dementiae. There is no excellent knowledge without mixture of
madness. And what makes a man more mad in the head then wine? Qui been vult
poyein, debet axta pinyen, he that will do well, must drink well. Prome,
prome, potum prome: Ho butler, a fresh pot. Nunc est bibedum, nunc pede libero
terra pulsanda: a pox on him that leaves his drink behind him; hey Rendouow.


It is wines custom, to be full of words.
I pray thee, Bacchus, give us vicissitudinem loquendi.

A fiddlestick, ne'er tell me I am full of words. Foecundi calices, quem non
fecere desertum: aut epi, aut abi, either take your drink, or you are an
infidel.


I would about thy vintage question thee:
How thrive thy vines? had thou good store of grapes?

Vinum quasivenenum, wine is poison to a sick body; a sick body is no sound
body; Ergo, wine is a pure thing, is poison to all corruption. Try-lill, the
huters hoop to you: i'll stand to it, Alexander was a brave man, and yet an
arrant drunkard.


Fie, drunken sot, forget thou where thou art?
My Lord asks thee, what vintage thou hast made?

Our vintage, was a vintage, for it did not work upon the advantage, it came in
the vauntgard of Summer, winds and storms met it by the way, and made it cry,
Alas and welladay.


That was not well, but all miscaried not?

Faith, shall I tel you no lye? Because you are my coutryman, so forth, a good
fellow, is a good fellow, though he have never a penny in his purse: We had but
even pot luck, a little to moysten our lips, and no more. That same Sol, is a
Pagan, and a Proselite, he shined so bright all summer, that he burned more
grapes, then his beams were worth, were every beam as big as a weavers beam.
A fabis abstinendum: faith, he should have abstaind: for what is flesh blud
without his liquor?


Thou want no liquor, nor no flesh and blood.
I pray thee may I ask without offence?
How many tons of wine hast in thy paunch?
Me thinks, that, built like a round church,
Should yet have some of Iulius Caesars wine:
I warrant, 'twas not broached this hundred year.

Hear, thou dow-belly, because thou talk, and talk, dare not drink to
me a black Jack, wilt thou give me leave, to broach this little kilderkin of my
corps, against thy back? I know thou art but a mycher, dare not stand me. A
voni, mousieur Winter, a frolic vpsy freeze, cross, ho, super nagulu.


Grammercy, Bacchus, as much as though I did.
For this time thou must pardon me perforce.

What, give me the disgrace? Go to, I say, I am no Pope, to pardon any man.
Ran, ran, tarra, cold beer makes good blood. S. George for Englad: somewhat is
better then nothing. Let me see, hast thou done me justice? why so: thou art a
king, though there were no more kings in the cards but the knave. Summer, wilt
thou have a demi culuering, that shall cry husty tusty, and make thy cup fly
fine meal in the Element?


No, keep thy drink, I pray thee, to thy self.

This Pupillonian in the fools coat, shall have a cast of martins, a whiffe.
To the health of Captain Rinocerotry: look to it, let him have weight and
measure.


What an ass is this? I cannot drink so much, though I should burst.


Fool, do not refuse your moist sustenance; come, come, dogs head in the pot,
do what you are borne to.


If you will needs make me a drunkard against my will, so it is, i'll try what
burden my belly is of.


Crouch, crouch on your knees, fool, when you pledge god Bacchus.


Ho, well shot, a tutcher, a tutcher: for quaffing Toy doth pass, in cup, in
canne, or glass.


God Bacchus do him right, and dubbe him knight.

Rise up Sir Robert Tospot.

No more of this, I hate it to the death.
No such deformer of the soul and sense,
As is this swynish damn'd-borne drunkenness.
Bacchus, for thou abuse so earths fruits,
Impris'ned live in cellars and in vawtes,
Let none commit their counsels unto thee:
Thy wrath be fatal to thy dearest friends,
Unarmed run upon thy foemens swords,
Never fear any plague, before it fall:
Dropsies, and watery tympanies haunt thee,
Thy lungs with surfeting be putrified,
To cause thee have an odious stinking breath,
Slaver and drivel like a child at mouth,
Be poor and beggarly in thy old age,
Let thy own kinsmen laugh, when thou complaynst,
And many tears gain nothing but blind scoffs.
This is the guerdon due to drunkenness;
Shame, sickness, misery, follow excess.

Now on my honour, Sim Summer, thou art a bad member, a Dunse, a mongrel, to
discredit so worshipful an art after this order. Thou hast cursed me, and I
will bless thee: Never cup of Nipitaty in London, come near thy niggardly
habitation. I beseech the gods of good fellowship, thou may fall into a
consumption with drinking small beer. Every day may thou eat fish, and let
it stick in the midst of thy maw, for want of a cup of wine to swim away in.
Venison be Venenum to thee: may that Vintner have the plague in his house, that
sells thee a drop of claret to kill the poison of it. As many wounds may thou
have, as Casar had in the Senate house, and get no white wine to wash them
with: And to conclude, pine away in melancholy and sorrow, before thou hast the
fourth part of a dram of my Juice to cheer up thy spirits.


Hale him away, he barks like a wolf,
It is his drink, not he that rails on us.

Nay soft, brother Summer, back with that foot, here is a snuff in the
bottom of the Jack, enough to light a man to bed withal, wee'le leave no
flocks behind us whatsoever we do.


Go drag him hence I say when I command.

Since we must needs go, let's go merrily.
Farewell, sir Robert Tosse-pot: sing amain, Mounsieur Myngo, whilst I mount
up my Ass.


Of all gods, this Bacchus is the ill-fauourd'st misshapen god that ever I
saw. A pox on him, he hath cristned me with a new nickname of sir Robert
Tosse-pot, that will not part fro me this twelmonth. Ned fools clothes are so
perfumde with the beer he poured on me, that there shall not be a Dutchma
within 20 mile, but he will smell out claim kindred of him. What a beastly thing
is it, to bottle up ale in a mas belly, when a man must set his guts on a gallo
pot last, only to purchase the alehouse title of a boon companion? Carouse,
pledge me and you dare: S'wounds, i'll drink with thee for all that ever thou
art worth. It is eve as 2. men should strive who should run furthest into the
sea for a wager. Me thinks these are good household terms; Will it please you
to be here, sir? I commend me to you: shall I be so bold as trouble you? saving
your tale I drink to you. And if these were put in practise but a year or two
in taverns, wine would soon fall from six and twenty pound a tun, and be
beggars money, a penny a quart, and take up his Inn with wast beer in the
alms tub. I am a sinner as others: I must not say much of this argument.
Every one when he is whole, can give advice to them that are sick. My
masters, you that be good fellows, get you into corners, and soup off your
provender closely: report hath a blister on her tongue: open taverns are
tel-tales. Non peccat, quicun{que} potest peccasse negare.


I'll call my servants to account said I?
A bad account: worse servants no man hath.
Quos credis sides effuge, tutus eris:
The proverb I have proved to be too true,
Totidem domi hostess habemus, quot seruos.
And that wise caution of Democritus,
Seruns necessaria possession, non autem dulcis:
No where fidelity and labour dwells.
Hope, young heads count to build on had I wist.
Conscience but few respect, all hunt for gain:
Except the Cammell have his provender
Hung at his mouth, he will not travel on.
Tyresias to Narcissus promised
Much prosperous hap, and many golden days,
If of his beauty he no knowledge took.
Knowledge breeds pride, pride breeds discontent.
Black discontent, thou vrgest to revenge.
Revenge opes not her ears to poor men's prayers.
That dolt destruction, is she without doubt,
That hales her forth and feeds her with nought.
Simplicity and plainness, you I love:
Hence double diligence, thou mean deceit.
Those that now serpent-like creep on the ground,
And seem to eat the dust, they crouch so low:
If they be disappointed of their pray,
Most traitorously will trace their tails and sting.
Yea, such as like the Lapwing build their nests
In a mans dung, come up by drudgery,
Will be the first, that like that foolish bird,
Will follow him with yelling and false cries.
Well sung a shepherd (that now sleeps in skies)
Dumb swains do love, not vain chattering pies.
In mountains Poets say Echo is hid,
For her deformity and monstrous shape:
Those mountains are the houses of great Lords,
Where Scenter with his hundredth voices sounds
A hundredth trumpes at once with rumour filled:
A woman they imagine her to be,
Because that sex keeps nothing close they hear:
And that's the reason magic writers frame,
There are more witches women then of men;
For women generally for the most part,
Of secrets more desirous of, then men,
Which having got, they have no powerto hold.
In these times had Echoes first fathers lived,
No woman, but a man she had been faind.
(Though women yet will want no news to prate.)
For men (mean men) the skumme dross of all,
Will talk and babble of they know not what,
Upbraid, deprave, and taunt, they care not whom:
Sumises pass for sound approved truths:
Familiarity and conference,
That were the sinews of societies,
Are now for vnderminings only used,
And novel wits, that love none but themselves,
Think wisdoms height as falsehood slily couched,
Seeking each other to o'rethrow his mate.
O friendship, thy old temple is defaced.
Embracing every guileful courtesy,
Hath overgrown fraud-wanting honesty.
Examples live but in the idle schools:
Sinon bears all the sway in princes courts:
Sickness, be thou my souls physician:
Bring the Apothecary death with thee.
In earth is hell, true hell felicity,
Compared with this world the den of wolves.

My Lord, you are too passionate without cause.

Grieve not for that which cannot be recal'd:
Is it your servants carelessness you plain?
Tullie by one of his own slaves was slain.
The husbandman close in his bosom nursed
A subtle snake, that after wrought his bane.

Seruos fideles liberalitaes facit:
Where on the contrary, seruitutem:
Those that attend vponilliberall Lords,
Whose couetize yields nought else but fair looks,
Even of those fair looks make their gainful use.
For as in Ireland and in Denmark both
Witches for gold will sell a man a wind,
Which in the corner of a napkin wrapped,
Shall blow him safe unto what coast he will:
So make ill servants sale of their Lords wind,
Which wrapped up in a piece of parchment,
Blows many a knave forth danger of the law.

Enough of this, let me go make my will.
Ah it is made, although I hold my peace,
These two will share betwixt them what I have.
The surest way to get my will performed,
Is to make my executour my heir:
And he, if all be given him and none else,
Vnfallibly will see it well performed.
Lyons will feed, though none bid them go to.
Ill grows the tree affords ne'er a graft.
Had I some issue to sit in my throne,
My grief would die, death should not hear me groan.
But when perforce these must enjoy my wealth,
Which thank me not, but enter't as a pray,
Bequeathed it is not, but clean cast away.
Autumn, be thou successor of my seat:
Hold, take my crown: look how he graspes for it.
Thou shalt not have it yet: but hold it too;
Why should I keep that needs I must forgo?

Then (duty laid aside) you do me wrong:
I am more worthy of it far then he.
He hath no skill nor courage for to rule,
A weather-beaten banckrout ass it is,
That scatters and consumes all he hath:
Each one do pluck from him without control.
He is nor hot nor cold, a silly soul,
That fain would please each party, if so he might:
He and the spring are schollers favourites.
What schollers are, what thriftles kind of men,
Your self be judge, and judge of him by them.
When Cerberus was headlong drawn from hell,
He voided a black poison from his mouth,
Called Aconitum, whereof ink was made:
That ink with reeds first laid on dried barks,
Served men a while to make rude works withal,
Till Hermes, secretary to the Gods,
Or Hermes Trismegistus as some will,
Weary with graving in blind characters,
And figures of familiar beasts and plants,
Invented letters to write lies withal.
In them he pend the fables of the Gods,
The giants war, and thousand tales besides.
After each nation got these toyesin use,
There grew up certain drunken parasites,
Termed Poets, which for a meals meat or two,
Would promise monarchs immortality:
They vomited in verse all that they knew,
Found causes and beginnings of the world,
Fetched pedigrees of mountains and of floods,
From men and women whom the Gods transformed:
If any town or city, they passed by,
Had in compassion (thinking them mad men)
Forborne to whip them, or imprison them,
That city was not built by humane hands,
T'was raised by musique, like Megara walls,
Apollo, poets patron founded it,
Because they found one fitting favour there:
Musaeus, Lynus, Homer, Orpheus,
Were of this trade, and thereby won their fame.

Famamalum, quo non velocius vllum.

Next them, a company of ragged knaves,
Sun-bathing beggars, lazy hedge-creepers,
Sleeping face upwards in the fields all night,
Dreamed strange devices of the Sun and Moon,
And they like Gipsies wandering up and down,
Told fortunes, juggled, nicknam'd all the stars,
And were of idiots termed Philosophers:
Such was Pithagoras the silencer,
Prometheus, Thales, Milesius,
Who would all things of water should be made:
Anaximander, Anaximenes,
That positively said the air was God;
Zenocrates, that said there were eight Gods:
And Cratoniates, Alcmeon too,
Who thought the Sun and Moon, stars were gods:
The poorer sort of them that could get nought,
Professed, like beggarly Franciscan Friars,
And the strict order of the Caponchins,
A voluntary wretched poverty,
Contempt of gold, thin fare, and lying hard:
Yet he that was most vehement in these,
Diogenes the Cinicke and the Dog,
Was taken coining money in his Cell.

What an old Ass was that? Me thinks, he should have coynde Carret roots
rather: for as for money, he had no use for, except it were to melt, and soder
up holes in his tub withal.


It were a whole Olimpiades work to tell,
How many diuillish, ergo armed arts,
Sprung all as vices, of this Idleness:
For even as soldiers not employed in wars,
But living loosely in a quiet state,
Not having wherewithal to maintain pride,
Nay scarce to find their bellies any food,
Nought but walk melancholy, and devise
How they may cousin Marchats, fleece young heirs,
Creep into favour by betraying men,
Rob churches, beg waste toys, court city dames,
Who shall undo their husbands for their sakes:
The baser rabble how to cheat and steal,
And yet be free from penalty of death.
So those word-warriers, lazy star-gazers,
Used to no labour, but to lowze themselves,
Had their heads filled with coosning fantasies,
They plotted how to make their poverty,
Better esteemed of, then high Sovereignty:
They thought how they might plant a heave on earth,
Whereof they would be principal lowe gods,
That heaven they called Contemplation,
As much to say, as a most pleasant sloth,
Which better I cannot compare then this,
That if a fellow licensed to beg,
Should all his life time go from fair to fair,
And buy gape-seede, having no business else.
That contemplation like an aged weed,
Engendered thousand sects, and all those sects
Were but as these times, cunning shrouded rogues,
Grammarians some: and wherein differ they
From beggars, that profess the Peddlers French?
The Poets next, slouinly tattered slaves,
That wander, and sell Ballets in the streets.
Historiographers others there be,
And the like lazers by the high way side,
That for a penny, or a halfe-penny,
Will call each knave a good faced Gentleman,
Give honour unto Tinkers, for good Ale,
Prefer a Cobbler fore the Black prince far,
If he bestow but blacking of their shoes:
And as it is the Spittle-houses guise,
Over the gate to write their founders names,
Or on the outside of their walls at least,
In hope by their examples others moved.
Will be more bountiful and liberal,
So in the forefront of their Chronicles,
Or Peroratione operis,
They learnings benefactors reckon up,
Who built this college, who gave that Free-schoole,
What King or Queen advanced Schollers most,
And in their times what writers flourished;
Rich men and magistrates whilst yet they live,
They flatter palpably, in hope of gain.
Smooth-tounged Orators, the fourth in place,
Lawyers, our common-wealth entitles them,
Meereswash-bucklers, and ruffianly mates,
That will for twelve pence make a doughty fray,
Set men for straws together by the ears.
Sky measuring Mathematicians;
Golde-breathing Alcumists also we have,
Both which are subtle witted humorists,
That get their meals by telling miracles,
Which they have seen in travailing the skies,
Vain boasters, liars, make-shifts, they are all,
Men that removed from their inkehorne terms,
Bring forth no action worthy of their bread.
What should I speak of pale physicians?
Who as Fismenus non nasatus was,
(Upon a wager that his friends had laid)
Hir'de to live in a privy a whole year:
So are they hir'de for lucre and for gain,
All their whole life to smell on excrements.

Very true, for I have heard it for a proverb many a time and oft, Hunc os
fatidum, fah, he stinks like a phisicion.


Innumerable monstrous practises,
Hath loitering contemplation brought forth more,
Which 'twere too long particular to recite:
Suffice they all conduce unto this end,
To banish labour, nourish slothfulnesse,
Pamper up lust, devise newfangled sins.
Nay I will justify there is no vice,
Which learning and wild knowledge brought not in,
Or in whose praise some learned have not wrote.
The art of murder Machiauel hath pend:
Whoredom hath Ouid to uphold her throne:
And Aretine of late in Italie,
Whose Cortigiana touches bawds their trade.
Gluttony Epicurus doth defend,
And books of th'arte of cookery confirm:
Of which Platina hath not writ the least.
Drunkenness of his good behaviour
Hath testimonial from where he was borne:
That pleasant work de art bibendi,
A drunken Dutchman spued outfew years since:
Nor wants sloth (although sloths plague be want).
His paper pillars for to lean upon,
The praise of nothing pleads his worthiness.
Folly Erasmus sets a flourish on.
For baldness, a bald ass, I have forgot,
Patched up a pamphletarie periwigge.
Slovenry Grobianus magnifieth:
Sodomitrie a Cardinal commends,
And Aristotle necessary deems.
In brief all books, divinity except,
Are nought but tales of the devils laws,
Poison wrapped up in sugared words,
Mans pride, damnations props, the worlds abuse:
Then censure (good my Lord) what bookmen are
If they be pestilent members in a state;
He is unfit to sit at sterne of state,
That favours such as will o'rethrow his state:
Blessed is that government where no art thrives,
Vox populi, vex Dei:
The vulgars voice, it is the voice of God.
Yet Tully saith, Non est consilium in vulgo, non ratio, non discrimen, non
differentia:
The vulgar have no learning, wit, nor sense.
The mistocles having spent all his time
In study of Philosophie and arts,
And noting well the vanity of them,
Wished with repentance, for his folly past,
Some would teach him th'arte of oblivion,
How to forget the arts that he had learned.
And Cicero, whom we alleged before,
(As saith Valerius) stepping into old age,
Despised learning, loathed eloquence.
Naso, that could speak nothing but pure verse,
And had more wit then words to utter it,
And words as choice as ever Poet had,
Cried and exclaimed in bitter agony,
When knowledge had corrupted his chaste mind,
Discite qui sapitis non haec qua scimus inertes,
Sed trepidas acies, fera bella sequi.
You that be wise, and ever mean to thrive,
O study not these toys we sluggards use,
But follow arms, and wait on barbarous wars.
Young men, young boys, beware of Schoolemasters,
They will infect you, mar you, blear your eyes:
They seek to lay the curse of God on you,
Namely confusion of languages,
Wherewith those that the tower of Babel built,
Accursed were in the worlds infancy.
Latin, it was the speech of Infidels.
Logic hath nought to say in a true cause.
Philosophie is curiosity:
And Socrates was therefore put to death,
Only for he was a Philosopher:
Abhor, contemn, despise, these damned snares.

Out upon it, who would be a Scholar? not I, I promise you: my mind always
gave me, this learning was such a filthy thing, which made me hate it so as I
did: when I should have been at school, construing Bat, mi fili, mi fili,
mi Bat, I was close under a hedge, or under a barn wall, playing at span
Counter, or Jack in a box: my master beat me, my father beat me, my mother
gave me bread and butter, ye all this would not make me a squitter-booke. It
was my destiny, I thank her as a most courteous goddess, that she hath not
cast me away upon gibridge. O, in what a mighty vain am I now against
Horne-bookes! Here before all this company, I profess my self on open enemy
to Ink and paper. I'll make it good upon the Accidence body, that In speech is
the devils Pater noster: Nouns and Pronounes, I pronounce you as traitors to
boys buttocks, Syntaxis and Prosody, you are tormenters of wit, good for
nothing but to get a schoolmaster two pence a week. Hang copies, fly out
phrase books, let pens be turned to picktooths: bowles, cards dice, you are
the true liberalscieces, I'll ne'er be Goosequil, gentlemen, while I live.


Winter, with patience unto my grief,
I have attended thy invective tale:
So much vntrueth wit never shadowed:
Against her own bowels thou Arts weapons turn:
Let none believe thee, that will ever thrive:
Words have their course, the wind blows where it lists;
He erres alone, in error that persists.
For thou against Autumn such exceptions take,
I grant, his ouer-seer thou shalt be,
His treasurer, protector, and his staff,
He shall do nothing without thy consent;
Provide thou for his weal, and his content.

Thanks, gracious Lord. so I'll dispose of him,
As it shall not repent you of your gift.

On such conditions no crown will I take.
I challenge Winter for my enemy,
A most insaciate miserable carl,
That, to fill up his garners to the brim,
Cares not how he indammageth the earth:
What poverty he makes it to endure!
He ouer-bars the crystal streams with ye,
That none but he and his may drink of them:
All for a foul Back-winter he lays up;
Hard craggy ways, and uncouth slippery paths
He frames, that passengers may slide and fall:
Who quakes not, that hears but his name?
O, but two sons he hath, worse then himself,
Christmas the one, a pinch-back, cut-throat churl,
That keeps no open house, as he should do,
Delights in no game or fellowship,
Loves no good deeds, and hates talk,
But sits in a corner turning Crabs,
Or coughing over a warmed pot of Ale:
Back-winter the other, that's his none sweet boy,
Who like his father takes in all points,
An elf it is, compact of envious pride,
A miscreant, borne for a plague to men.
A monster, that devours all he meets:
Were but his father dead, so he would reign:
Yea he would go goodneere, to deal by him,
As Nabuchodonozors ungracious son,
Euilmerodach by his father dealt:
Who, when his sire was turned to an Ox,
Full greedily suatcht up his sovereignty,
And thought himself a king without controwle.
So it fell out, seven years expir'de and gone,
Nabuchodonozor came to his shape again,
And dispossessed him of the regiment:
Which my young prince no little grieving at,
When that his father shortly after did,
Fearing lest he should come from death again,
As he came from an Ox to be a man,
Wild that his body spoylde of coverture,
Should be cast forth into the open fields,
For Birds and Ravens, to devour at will,
Thinking if they bare every one of them,
A bill full of his flesh into their nests,
He would not rise, to trouble him in haste.

A virtuous son, and I'll lay my life on it, he was a Cavalier and a good
fellow.


Pleases your honour, all he says, is false.
For my own part I love good husbandry,
But hate dishonourable couetize.
Youth ne'er aspires to virtues perfect growth,
Till his wild oatesbe sown: and so the earth,
Until his weeds be rotted, with my frosts,
Is not for any seed, or tillage fit.
He must be purged that hath surfeited:
The fields have surfeited with Summer fruits,
They must be purged, made poor, oppressed with snow,
Ere they recover their decayed pride,
For ouerbarring of the streams with Ice.
Who locks not poison from his childrens taste?
When Winter reigns, the water is so cold,
That it is poison, present death to those
That wash, or bathe their limbs, in his cold streams.
The slipprier that ways are under us,
The better it makes us to heed our steps,
And look e're we presume too rashly on:
If that my sons have misbehau'd themselves,
A Gods name let them answer't fore my Lord.

Now I beseech your honour it may be so.

With all my heart: Vertumnus, go for them.

This same Harry Baker is such a necessary fellow to go on arrants, as you
shall not find in a country. It is pity but he should have another silver
arrow, if it be but for crossing the stage, with his cap on.


To weary out the time until they come,
Sing me some doleful ditty to the Lute,
That may complain my near approaching death.
Adieu, farewell earths bliss,
This world uncertain is,
Fond are lifes lustful joys,
Death proves them all but toys,
None from his darts can fly,
I am sick, I must dye.
Lord have mercy on us.
Rich men, trust not in wealth,
Gold cannot buy you health,
Physic himself must fade.
All things, to end are made,
The plague full swift goes hye,
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.
Beauty is but a flower,
Which wrinkles will devour,
Brightness falls from the air,
Queenes have died young, and fair,
Dust hath closed Helens eye.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.
Strength stoops unto the grave,
Worms feed on Hector brave,
Swords may not fight with fate,
Earth still holds open her gate,
Come, come, the bells do cry.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.
Wit with his wantonness,
Tastes deaths bitterness,
Hells executioner,
Hath no ears for to hear,
What vain art can reply.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.
Haste therefore each degree,
To welcome destiny:
Heaven is our heritage,
Earth but a players stage,
Mount we unto the sky.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on us.

Beshrew me, but thy song hath moved me.

Lord have mercy on us, how lamentable 'tis*

I have dispatcht, my Lord, I have brought you them you sent me for.


What say thou? hast thou made a good batch?
I pray thee give me a new loaf.

Christmas, how chance thou come not as the rest,
Accompanied with some musique, or some song?
A merry Carroll would have graced thee well,
Thy ancestors have used it heretofore.

I, antiquity was the mother of ignorance: this latter world that sees but with
her spectacles, hath spied a pad in those sports more then they could.


What, is't against thy conscience for to sing?

No nor to say, by my troth, if I may get a good bargain.


Why, thou should spend, thou should not care to get. Christmas is god of
hospitality.


So will he never be of good husbandry. I may say to you, there is many an old
god, that is now grown out of fashion. So is the god of hospitality.


What reason can thou give he should be left?

No other reason, but that Gluttony is a sin, too many dunghills are
infectious. A mans belly was not made for a powdering beef tub: to feed the
poor twelve days, let them starve all the year after, would but stretch out
the guts wider then they should be, so make famine a bigger den in their
bellies, then he had before. I should kill an ox, have some such fellow as
Milo to come and eat it up at a mouth-full. Or like the Sybarites, do nothing
all one year, but bid ghestes against the next year. The scraping of
trenchers you think would put a man to no charges. It is not a hundredth pound
a year would serve the scullions in dishclouts. My house stands upon vaults,
it will fall if it be ouer-loden with a multitude. Besides, have you never read
of a city that was vnderminde and destroyed by Mowles? So, say I keep
hospitality, and a whole fair of beggars bid me to dinner every day, what
with making legs, when they thank me at their going away, and settling their
wallets handsomely on their backs, they would shake as many lice on the ground,
as were able to undermine my house, and undo me utterly: It is their prayers
would build it again, if it were overthrown by this vermin, would it? I
pray, who begun feasting, and gourmandize first, but Sardanapalus, Nero,
Heliogabalus, Commodus, tyrats, whoremasters, unthrifts? Some call them
Emperors, but I respect no crowns, but crowns in the purse. Any ma may wear
a silver crown, that hath made a fray in Smithfield, lost but a piece of his
brain pan. And to tell you plain, your golden crowns are little better in
substance, and many times got after the same sort.


Grosse-headed sot, how light he makes of state!

Who treads not on stars when they are fallen?
Who talks not of states, when they are dead?
A fool conceits no further then he sees,
He hath no sense of ought, but what he feels.

I, I, such wise men as you, come to beg at such fools doors as we be.


Thou shutst thy door, how should we beg of thee?
No alms but thy sink carries from thy house.

And I can tell you, that's as plentiful alms for the plague, as the
sheriffs tub to them of Newgate.


For feasts thou keep none, cankers thou feedst:
The worms will curse thy flesh another day,
Because it yields them no fatter pray.

What worms do another day I care not, but I'll be sworn upon a whole
Kilderkin of single Beer, I will not have a worme-eaten nose like a Pursiuant,
while I live. Feasts ere but puffing up of the flesh, the purueyers for
diseases, travel, cost, time ill spent. O, it were a trim thing to send, as
the Romanes did, round about the world for provision for one banquet. I must
rigge ships to Samos for Peacocks, to Paphos for Pigeons, to Austria for
Oysters, to Phasis for Phesants, to Arabia for Phaenixes, to Meander for Swans,
to the Orcades for Geese, to Phrigia for Woodcocks, to Malta for Cranes, to the
Isle of Man for Puffins, to Ambracia for Goats, to Tartole for Lampreys, to
Egypt for Dates, to Spain for Chestnuts, and all for one feast.


O sir, you need not, you may buy them at London better cheap.


Liberalit as liberalit ate perit, love me a little and love me long: our feet
must have wherewithal to feed the stones, out backs walls of wool to keep
out the cold that besieges our warm blood, our doors must have bars, our
dubblets must have buttons. Item, for an old sword to scrape the stones before
the door with, three halfe-pence for stitching a wooden tanckard that was
burst. These Water-bearers will empty the conduit and a mans coffers at once.
Not a Porter that brings a man a letter, but will have his penny. I am afraid
to keep past one or two servants, least hungry knaves they should rob me: and
those I keep, I warrant I do not pamper up too lusty, I keep them under with
red Herring and poor Iohn all the year long. I have damned up all my chimneys
for fear (though I burn nothing but small cole) my house should be set on
fire with the smoke. I will not deny, but once in a dozen year when there is
a great rot of sheep, and I know not what to do with them, I keep open house
for all the beggars, in some of my out-yardes, marry they must bring bread with
them, I am no Baker.


As good men as you, and have thought no scorn to serve their prentiships on
the pillory.


Winter, is this thy son? hear how he talks?

I am his father, therefore may not speak,
But otherwise I could excuse his fault.

Christmas, I tell thee plain, thou art a snudge.
And were not that we love thy father well,
Thou should have felt, what longs to Avarice.
It is the honour of Nobility,
To keep high days and solemn festivals:
Then, to set their magnificence to view,
To frolic open with their favourites,
And use their neighbours with all courtesy,
When thou in huggar mugger spend thy wealth.
Amend thy manners, breathe thy rusty gold:
Bounty will win thee love, when thou art old.

I, that bounty would I fain meet, to borrow money of, he is fairly blessed
now a days, that scapes blows when he begs. Verba dandi reddendi, go
together in the Grammar rule: there is no giving but with condition of
restoring: ah Benedicite, well is he hath no necessity of gold no of
sustenance; slow good hap comes by chance; flattery best fares; Arts are but
idle wares; fair words want giving hands; the Leto begs that hath no lands; fie
on thee thou scurvy knave, that hast nought, and yet go brave; a prison be
thy death bed, or be hanged all save the head.


Back-winter, stand forth.

Stand forth, stad forth, hold up your head, speak out.

What, should I stand? or whether, should I go?

Autumn accuses thee of sundry crimes,
Which here thou art to clear, or to confess.

With thee, or Autumn, have I nought to do:
I would you were both hanged face to face.

Is this the reverence that thou ow'st to us?

Why not? what art thou?
Shalt thou always live?

It is the veriest Dog in Christendom.

That's for he barks at such a knave as thou.

Would I could bark the sun out of the sky,
Turn Moon and stars to frozen Meteors,
And make the Ocean a dry land of Ice,
With tempest of my breath, turn up high trees,
On mountains heap up second mounts of snow,
Which melted into water, might fall down,
As fell the deluge on the former world.
I hate the air, the fire, the Spring, the year,
And what so e're brings mankind any good.
O that my looks were lightning to blast fruits!
Would I with thunder presently might dye,
So I might speak in thunder, to slay men.
Earth, if I cannot injure thee enough,
I'll bite thee with my teeth, I'll seratch thee thus,
I'll beat down the partition with my heals,
Which as a mud-vault severs hell and thee.
Spirits, come up, 'tis I that knock for you,
One that envies the world, far more then you:
Come up in millions, millions are to few,
To execute the malice I intend.

O scelus inauditum, O vox damnatorum!
Not raging Haecuba, whose hollow eyes
Gave suck to fifty sorrows at one time,
That mid wife to so many murders was,
Used half the execrations that thou dost.

More I will use, if more I may preuaile:
Back-winter comes but seldom forth abroad,
But when he comes, he pinches to the proof;
Winter is mild, his son is rough and sterne.
Ouid could well write of my tyranny,
When he was banished to the frozen Zoane.

And banished be thou fro my fertile bounds.
Winter, imprison him in thy dark Cell,
Or with the winds, in bellowing caves of brass,
Let sterne Hipporlatos locke him up safe,
Ne'er to peep forth, but when thou faint and weak
Want him to aid thee in thy regiment.

I will peep forth, thy kingdom to supplant:
My father I will quickly freeze to death,
And then sole Monarch will I sit and think,
How I may banish thee, as thou dost me.

I see my downfall written in his brows:
Convey him hence, to his assigned hell.
Fathers are given to love their sons too well.

No by my troth, nor mothers neither, I am sure I could never find it. This
Back-winter plays a railing part to no purpose, my small learning finds no
reason for it, except as a Back-winter or an after winter is more raging
tempestuous, and violent then the beginning of Winter, so he brings him in
stamping and raging as if he were mad, when his father is a jolly mild quiet
old man, and stands still and does nothing. The court accepts of your meaning;
you might have writ in the margent of your play-booke, Let there be a few
rushes laid in the place where Back-winter shall tumble, for fear of raying
his clothes: or set down, Enter Back-winter, with his boy, bringing a brush
after him, to take off the dust if need require. But you will ne'er have any
ward-robe wit while you live. I pray you hold the book well, we be not
nonplus in the latter end of the play.


This is the last stroke, my tongues clock must strike,
My last will, which I will that you perform:
My crown I have disposed already of.
Item, I give my withered flowers, and herbs,
Unto dead corses, for to deck them with,
My shady walks to great men's servitors,
Who in their masters shadows walk secure,
My pleasant open air, and fragrant smells,
To Croyden and the grounds abutting round,
My heate and warmth to toiling labourers,
My long days to bondmen, and prisoners,
My short nights to young married souls,
My drought and thirst, to drunkards quenchless throats,
My fruits to Autumn my adopted heir,
My murmuring springs, musicians of sweet sleep,
To murmuring male-contents, with their well tun'de cares,
Channel'd in a sweet falling quaterzaine,
Do lull their ears asleep, listening themselves.
And finally, O words, now cleanse your course,
Unto Eliza that most sacred Dame,
Whom none but Saints and Angels ought to name;
All my fair days remaining, I bequeath
To wait upon her till she be returned.
Autumn, I charge thee, when that I am dead,
Be pressed and serviceable at her beck,
Present her with thy goodliest ripened fruits,
Unclothe no Arbors where she ever sate,
Touch not a tree, thou think she may pass by.
And Winter, with thy wrythen frosty face,
Smooth up thy visage when thou look on her,
Thou never look on such bright majesty:
A charmed circle draw about her court,
Wherein warm days may dance, no cold come,
On seas let winds make war, not vex her rest,
Quiet enclose her bed, thought fly her breast.
Ah gracious Queen, though Summer pine away,
Yet let thy flourishing stand at a stay,
First droop this vniuersals aged frame,
E're any malady thy strength should tame:
Heaven raise up pillars to uphold thy hand,
Peace may have still his temple in thy land.
Lo, I have said, this is the total sum.
Autumn and Winter, on your faithfulness,
For the performance I do firmly build.
Farewell, my friends, Summer bids you farewell,
Archers, and bowlers, all my followers,
A dieu, and dwell with desolation,
Silence must be your masters mansion:
Slow marching thus, descend I to the feends.
Weep heavens, morn earth, here Summer ends.
Autumn hath all the Summers fruitful treasure,
Gone is our sport, fled is poor Croydens pleasure:
Short days, sharpe days, long nights come on a pace,
Ah who shall hide us, from the Winters face?
Cold doth increase, the sickness will not cease,
And here we lye God knows, with little ease:
From winter, plague pestilence, good Lord deliver us.
London doth morn, Lambith is quite forlorn,
Trades cry, Woe worth, that ever they were borne:
The want of Term, is town and Cities harms,
Close chambers we do want, to keep us warm,
Long banished must we live from our friends:
This lowe built bouse, will bring us to our ends.
From winter, plague pestilence, good Lord deliver us.

How is't? how is't? you that be of the graver sort, do you think these youths
worthy of a Plaudit for praying for the Queen, and singing of the Letany?
they are poor fellows I must needs say, and have bestowed great labour in
sowing leaves, and grass, and straw, and moss upon cast suites. You may do
well to warm your hands with clapping, before you go to bed, and send them to
the tavern with merry hearts. Here is a pretty boy comes with an Epilogue, to
get


VLisses a Dwarf, and the prolocutor for the Graecians, gave me leave that am
a Pigmee, to do an Embassage to you from the Cranes: Gentlemen (for Kings are
no better) certain humble Animals, called our Actors, commend them unto you;
who, what offence they have committed, I know not (except it be in purloining
some hours out of times treasury, that might have been better employed; but
by me (the agent for their imperfections) they humbly crave pardon, if happily
some of their terms have trodde awry, or their tongues slumbled unwittingly
on any mans content. In much Corn is some Cockle; in a heap of coin here
and there a piece of Copper; wit hath his dregs as well as wine; words their
waste, Ink his blots, every speech his Parenthesis, Poetical fury, as well
Crabs as Sweetings for his Summer fruits. Nemo sapit omnibus horis. Their
folly is deceased, their fear is yet living. Nothing can kill an Ass but
cold: cold entertainment, discouraging scoffs, authorized disgraces, may
kill a whole litter of young Asses of them here at once, that have travelled
thus far in impudence, only in hope to sit a sunning in your smiles. The
Romanes dedicated a Temple to the fever quartain, thinking it some great God,
because it shook them so: and another, to Ill fortune in Exquilliis a
Mountain in Room, that it should not plague them at Cards and Dice. Your
Graces frowns are to them shaking fevers, your least disfavours, the greatest
ill fortune that may betide them. They can build no Temples, but themselves
and their best endeavours, with all prostrate reverence, they here dedicate and
offer up, wholly to your service. Sis bonus, O faelixque tuis. To make the gods
merry, the celestial clown Vulcan tun'de his polt foot, to the measures of
Apolloes Lute, and danced a limping Gallyard in Ioues starry hall. To make you
merry that are the Gods of Art, and guides unto heaven, a number of rude
Vulcans, unwieldy speakers, hammer-headed clowns (for so it pleases them in
modesty to name themselves) have set their deformities to view, as it were in
a dance here before you. Bear with their wants, lull melancholy asleep with
their absurdities, and expect hereafter better fruits of their industry.
Little creatures often terrify great beasts: the Elephant flies from a Ram,
the Lyon from a Cock and from fire; the Crocodile from all Sea-fish, the Whale
from the noise of parched bones; light toys chase great cares. The greatfoole
Toy hath marde the play: Good night, Gentlemen; I go, let him be carried away.

WilSummer. Is't true Iackanapes, do you serve me so? As sure as this coat is
too short for me, all the Points of your hoase for this are condemnde to my
pocket, if you and I e're play at span Counter more. Valet, spectatores, pay
for this sport with a Plaudit, and the next time the wind blows from this
corner, we will make you ten times as merry.

Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intelligor vlli.


