A subject, of no subject, we present, for No-body, is Nothing:
Who of nothing can something make?
^t is a work beyond the power of wit,
And yet invention is ripe:
A moral meaning you must then expect, grounded on lesser then a shadows
shadow:
Promising nothing where there wants a tongue;
And deeds as few, be done by No-bodie:
Yet something, out of nothing, we will show,
To gain your loves, to whom our selves we owe.

MY Lord Martianus.


My Lord of Cornwell.


Morrow.


Morrow,


You are sad my Lord.


You melancholy.


So,
The state it self mourns in a robe of Wo.

For the decease of Archigalloes virtues,
I understand you Noble minded Cornwell,
What generous spirit draws this British air,
But droops at Archigalloes government.

And reason Martianus, when the Sun
Struggles to be delivered from the womb
Of an obscure Eclipse, doth not the earth
Morn to behold his shine envelloped,
O Corbonon when I did close thine eyes,
I gave release to Britains miseries.

Good morrow to Prince Elydure.


The same to you, and you, you are sad my Lords,
your harts I think are frosty, for your blood
Seems crvsted in your faces, like the dew
In a September morn, how fares the king,
Have you yet bid good morrow to his highness.

The kings not stirring yet.


Yonders old Cornwell, come Vigenius,
We'll have some sport with him:

Brother content.


Good morrow to you brother Elydure.


God morrow to Cornwell.


Morrow old gray-beard.


My beards not so gray as your wits green.


And why so.


We shall ha you come out now with some reason that was borne in my great grand
sires time.


Would you would prove as honest princes as your great grandsire was, or half
so wise as your elder brother was, there's a Couple of you, Sfoote I am ashamed
you should be of the blood royal.


And why father winter.


You do not know your state, there's Elydure
Your elder brother next unto the King,
He plies his book, when shall you see him trace
Lascivious Archigallo through the streets,
And fight with common hacksters hand to hand,
To wrest from them their goods and dignityes.

You are to saucy Cornwell.


Bridle your spirit.


Your words are dangerous, good honest subject
Old reverent states-man, faithful servitor,
Do not traduce the King, hes virtuous
Or say he tread somewhat besides the line
Of virtuous government, his regality
Brookes not taxation, kings greatest royalties
Are that their subjects must aplaud their deeds,
As well as bear them their prerogatives.
Are murall interponents twixt the world,
And their proceedings.

Well, well, I have served four kings,
And none of all those four but would have ventured
Their safeties on old Cornwels constancy,
But that's all one, now I am called a dotard,
Go to, though now my limbs be stark and stiff,
When Cornwels dead Brittayne I know will want
So strong a prop, Alas I needs must weep,
And shed tears in abundance, when I think
How Archigallo wrongs his government.

Nay, now you'll fall into your techy humour.


My Lords, Princes I should have said, and after
Lords, I am the Usher and Harbinger unto the kings most
Excellent person and his Majesty.

Is fourth coming.


Or coming fourth, hard by or at hand, will you Put your gestures of
attendance on, to give his Majesty the Bon-ioure.


Good morrow to our sovereign Archigallo.


Morrow.


Why do you frown upon your servants king,
We love you, and you ought to favour us:
Will you to Counsel. Here's petitions,
Complaints and controversies twixt your subjects,
Appealing all to you.

Lets see those papers. A controversy betwixt the Lord Morgan and the Lord
Malgo, concerning their Tytles to the Southern Island. We know this cause and
what their titles be. You claim it by inheritance.


My liege I do.


You by the marriage of Lord Morgans mother,
To whom it was left jointure.

True gracious Sovereign.


Whose evidence is strongest, to which part
Inclines the censures of our learned Judges.

We come not heer to plead before your grace,
But humbly to entreat your Majesty,
Peruse our evidence and censure it,
According to your wisdom.

What I determine then you'll yield unto.


We will my Sovereign.


Then that Southern I'll
we take to our protection, and make you
Lord governor thereof.

I humbly thank your highness.


I hope your Majesty.


Reply not, I but take it to my self
Because I would not have dissention
betwixt two peers, I love to see you friends,
And now the Islands mine, your quarrel ends.
Whats next. A poor Nothern mans humble petition.
Which is the plaintive?

I if it please your Majesty I was betrothed to this maid.


Is this true my Wench.


Tis very true and like your majesty, but this tempting fellow after that,
most feloniously stole my hart away fro me, carried it into the church, and I
running after him to get my hart again, was there married to this other man.


Tis very true and like your majesty, though Raphe were once look for a
proper man, yet when I came in place it appeared otherwise: if your highness
note his leg and mine, there is ods, and for a foot, I dare compare, I have a
wast to, and though I say it, that should not say it there are faces in place
of Gods making.


Thou art a proper fellow, and this wench is thine by lawful marriage.


Raf you have your answer, you may be gon, your only way to save charges, is
to buy a halpenniwoorth of Hob-nailes for your shoes: Alas you might have
looked into this before, go silly Raf go, away, vanish.


Is not this Lass a pretty Neat browne Wrench?


She is my liege, and mettell I dare warrant.


Fellow, how long hast thou been married?


I was as they say coupled the same day that my country man Raphe begun the
law: for to tell your Majesty the truth, we are yet both virgins, it did never
freeze betwixt us two in a bed I assure your grace.


Did never lie with thy wife?


Never yet, but now your Majesty hath ended the matter I'll be so bold as take
possession.


Hark my wench, wilt leave these rustic fellows stay with me?


What will your highness do with me?


Why I'll make thee a Lady.


And shall I go in fine clothes like a Lady.


Thou shalt.


I'll be a Lady then, that's flat, sweet heart farewell, I must be a Lady, so I
must.


How now, how now, but hear you Si^.


Away you Clown, away.


But will your highness rob me of my spouse.


What we will, we will, away with those slaves.


Zounds, if ever I take you in Yorkshire for this.


Away you slaves.


My Lord, these general wrongs will draw your highness into the common hatred
of your subjects.


Whats that to thee, old doting Lord forbear.
Whats here? complaints against one Nobody,
For overmuch relieving of the poor,
Helping distressed prisoners, entertaining
Extrauagants and vagabonds, what fellows this?

My liedge I know him, he's an honest subject
That hates extortion, usury, and such sins
As are too common in this Land of Britain.

I'll have none such as he within my kingdom,
He shall be banished.

Hear my advise my liedge: I know a fellow
That's opposite to Nobody in all things:
As he affects the poor, this other hates them,
Loves usury and extortion. Send him straight
Into the Country, and upon my life,
Ere many months he will devise some means
To make that Nobody bankrupt, make him fly
His Country, and be never heard of more.

What dost thou call his name.


His name is Sombody my liedge.


Seek out that Sombody, wele send him straight,
What other matters stay to be decided
Determine you, and you, the rest may follow
To give attendance.

Alls nought already, yet these unripe ills
Have not their full growth, and their next degree
Must needs be worse then nought, and by what name
Do you call that?

I know none bad enough:
Base, wild, notorious, ugly monstrous, slavish,
Intolerable, abhorred, damnable;
Tis worse then bad, I'll be no longer vassal
To such a tyrannous rule, nor accessory
To the base sufferance of such out-rages.

You'll not endure it, how can you remedy
A mayme so dangerous and incurable?

There is a way; but walls have ears and eyes,
Your ear my Lord, and counsel.

I have ears
Open to such discourse, and counsel apt:
And to the full recovery of these wounds
Made in the sick state, most effectual,
A word in private.

Come brother, I am tyrde with revelling,
My last Caranta made me almost breathless,
Doth not the Kings last wench foot it with art?

Oh rarely, rarely, and beyond opinion.
I like this state where all are Libertines
But by ambitions pleasure and large will:
See, see, two of our strict lived Counsellors
In secret conference; they cannot endure
This freedom.

Nor the rule of Archigallo,
Because tis subject to his liberty.
Are they not plotting now for some installement
And change of state: old gallants if you be
Twill cost your heads.

Bodies and all for me.
List them, such strict reproouers should not live,
Their austere censures on their kings to give.

He must be then deposd.


Ey, are you there, that word sounds treason.


Nay, but farther hear.


The King deposd, how must it be effected,
What strengths and powers can suddenly be levied,
Who will assist this business, to reduce
The state to better form and government?

Ey mary, more of that.


All Cornwells at my beck, Devonshire our neighbour
Is one with us, you in the North command.
The oppressed, wronged, dejected and suppressed,
Will flock on all sides to this innovation:
The Clergy late despisd, the Nobles scorned,
The Commons trod on, and the Law contemnd,
Will lend a mutual and combined power
Unto this happy change.

Oh monstrous treason!


My Lord, we are betrayed, and ouer-heard
By the two princes.

How, betrayed.


Our plots discovered.


I'll help it all; do you but sooth me up,
Wele catch them in the trap they lay for us.

I'll doot.


Now sir, the king deposd
Who shall succeed?

Some would say Elidure.


Tush, he's too mild to rule.
But there are two young princes, hopeful youths
And of rare expectation in the Land,
Oh would they deign to bear this weighty charge
Betwixt them, and support the regal sceptre
With joint assistance, all our hopes were full.

A Sceptre.


And a Crown.


What if we made the motion? we have wills
To effect it, we have power to compass it.

And if I make refusal, heaven refuse me.


These Counsellors are wise, and see in us
More virtue then we in our selves discern.
Would it were come to such election.

My honoured Lord, wele break it to those princes,
Those hopeful youths, at our convenient leisure.

With all my hart.


You that our footsteps watched,
Shall in the depth of your own wiles be caught.

A King.


And were a crown, a crown imperial.


And sit in state.


Command.


And be obeyed.


Our Nobles kneeling.


Servants homaging, and crying Aue.


Oh brother, shall we through nice folly
Despise the proffered bounty of these Lords?

Not for the world, I long to sit in state,
To purse the bounty of our gracious fate.

To entertain foreign Ambassadors.


And have our names ranckt in the course of kings.


Shadow us State with thy majestic wings.


Now sir, my brother Archigall deposde


Deposd! did you hear that my Lord.


For his licensious rule, and such abuses
As wele pretend against him in parliament.

Oh monstrous brothers.


Oh ambitious youths.


Thus wele divide the Land, all beyond Trent
And Humber, shall suffice one moitie:
The southpart of the Land shall make the the other,
Where we will keep two Courts, and reign divided,
Yet as dear loving brothers.

As wild traitors.


Then Archigall, thou that hast sat in pomp
And seen me vassal, shalt behold me crowned,
Whilst thou with humble knees vail^t to my state.

And when must this be done, when shall my crown
Be parted and divided into halfes.
You reign on this side Humber, you beyond
The river Trent, when do you take your states,
Sit crowned and scepterd to receive our homage,
Our duty, and our humble vassalage.

I know not when.


Nor you?


Nor I.


But I know when you shall repent your pride.
Nor will we use delays in our revenge,
Ambitious boys, we doom you prisonment,
Your Palace royal shall a Jail be made,
Your thrones a dungeon, and your scepters Irons,
In which wele bound your proud aspiring thoughts:
A way with them, we will not mount our chair
Ti^l their best hopes be changed to black despair.

Hear us excuse our selves.


Or lets discover
Who drew us to this hope of sovereignty.

That shall our further leisures arbitrate,
Our ears are deaf to all excusiue pleas,
Come vnambitious brother Elidurus,
Help us to lavish our abundant treasures,
In masks, sports, revels, riots, and strange pleasures.

But is it true the fame of Nobody,
For virtue, almes-deedes, and for charity,
Is so renownd and famous in the Country?

Oh Lord sir ey, hes talked of far and near,
Fills all the boundless country with aplause,
There lives not in all Britain one so spoke of,
For pity, good mind, and true charity.

Which Sombody shall alter ert be long.


You may my Lord being in grace at Court,
And the high favours of King Archigallo
Exile this petty fellow from the Land,
That so obscures the beauty of your deeds.

What doth this Nobody?


You shall hear my Lord,
Come twenty poor men to his gate at once,
Nobody gives them money, meat and drink,
If they be naked, clothes, then come poor soldiers,
Sick, maymd, and shot, from any foreign wars,
Nobody takes them in, provides them harbour,
Maintains their ruined fortunes at his charge,
He gives to orphants, and for widows builds
Almes-houses, Spittles, and large Hospitals,
And when it comes in question, who is apt
For such good deeds, tis answered Nobody.
Now Nobodie hath entertained again
Long banished Hospitality, and at his board
A hundred lusty yeomen daily waits,
Whose long backs bend with weighty chynes of beef,
And choice of cheer, whose fragments at his gate
Suffice the general poor of the whole shire.
Nobodies table's free for travellers,
His buttry and his seller open to all
That starve with drought, or thirst upon the way,

His fame is great, how should we help it?


My Lord, tis past my reach, tis you must do it,
Or't must be left undone.

What deeds of note is he else famous for?


My Lord I'll tell you.
His Barnes are full, and when the Cormorants
And wealthy Farmers hoard up all the grain,
He empties all his Garners to the poor
Under the stretched prise that the Market yields,
Nobody racks no rents, doth not oppress
His tenants with extortions. When the King
Knighted the lusty gallants of the Land,
Nobody then made dainty to be knighted,
And indeed kept him in his known estate.

The slaves ambitious* and his life I hate.


How shall we bring his name in public scandal?


Thus it shall be, use my direction.
In Court and country I am Sombody,
And therefore apt and fit to be employed:
Go thou in secrete being a subtle knave.
And sow seditious slanders through the Land,
Oppress the poor, suppress the fatherless,
Deny the widows food, the starved relief,
And when the wretches shall complain their wrongs,
Being called in question, swear twas Nobody,
Rack rents, raise prises,
Buy up the best and choice commodities
At the best hand, then keep them till their prises
Be lifted to their height, and double rate,
And when the raisers of this dearth are sought
Though Sombody do this, protest and swear
Twas Nobody fore Judge and Magistrate:
Bring scandalls on the rich, raise mutinous lies
Upon the state, and rumours in the Court,
Backbite and sow dissention amongst friends,
Quarrels amongst neighbours, debate amongst strangers,
Set man and wife at ods, kindred at strife,
And when it comes in question, to clear us,
Let every one protest and swear for one,
And so the blame will fall on Nobody.
About it then, if these things well succeed,
You shall preuaile, and we applaud your speed.
See where he comes, I will withdraw and see,
The event and fortunes of our last policy.

Come on mine own seruaunt, some news, some news, what report have I in the
country? how am I talked on in the City, and what fame bear I in the Court?


Oh Master you are half hanged.


Hanged, why man?


Because you have an ill name: a man had as good almost serve no Master as
serve you, I was carried before the Constable but yesterday, and they took me
up for a strauagant; they asked me whom I served, I told them Nobody, they
presently drew me to the post, and there gave me the law of arms.


The law of arms.


Ey, as much law as their arms were able to lay on, they tickled my
Collifodium, I rid post for a quarter of an hour, with switch though not with
spur.


Sure Sombody was the cause of all.


I'll be sworn of that, Sombody tickled me a heate, and that I felt, but
Master, why do you go thus out of fashion; you are even a very hoddy doddy,
all breech,


And no body. But if my breeches had as much cloth in them, as ever was drawn
betwixt Kendall and Canning street, they were scarce great enough to hold all
the wrongs that I must pocke^:

Fie, fie, how I am slaunderd through the world.
Nobody keeps tall fellows at his heals,
Yet if you meet a crew of rogues and beggars,
Ask who they serve, theile answer Nobody.
Your Cavaliers and swaggerers bout the town,
That dominere in Taverns, swear and stare,
Urge them upon some terms, theile turn their malice
To me, and say theile fight with Nobody,
Or if they fight, and Nobody by chance
Come in to part them, I am sure to pay for it,
And Nobody be hurt when they escape scotfree:
And not the dastardst coward in the world
But dares about with me. What shall I do?

Do what thou wilt, before we end this strife,
I'll make thee ten times weary of thy life.

But do you hear Master, when I have served you a year or two, who shall pay
me my wages?


Why Nobody.


Indeed if I serve Nobody, Nobody must pay me my wages, therefore I'll even
seek out Sombody or other, to get me a new service; but the best is Master
if you run away, you are easy to be found again.


Why so sir?


Mary ask a deaf man whom he hears, heel straight say Nobody, ask the
blindest beetle that is whom he sees, and heel answer, Nobodie, he that
never saw in his life can see you, though you were as little as a moat, and
he that never heard, can hear you, though you tread as softly as a Mouse,
therefore I shall be sure never to loose you. Besides, you have one commodity
Master, which none hath besides you, if you should love the most fickle
inconstants wench that is in the world, sheele be true to Nobody, therefore
constant to you.


And thou say true in that my honest seruaunt,
Besides, I am in great especial grace
With the King Archigallo that now reigns
In tyranny, and strange misgouerment,
Nobody loves him, and he loves Nobody.
But that which most torments my troubled soul,
My name is made mere opposite to virtue,
For he is only held peaceful and quiet,
That quarrels, brawls, and fights with Nobody,
He's honest held that lies with Nobodies wife,
And he that hurts and iniures Nobody,
All the world says, ey that's a virtuous man.
And though a man have done a thousand mischiefs,
And come to prove the forfeit made to law,
If he can prove he hath wronged Nobody,
No man can touch his life. This makes me mad,
This makes me leave the place where I was bred,
And thousand times a day to wish me dead.

And I'll pursue thee where so ere thou fliest,
Nor shalt thou rest in England till thou die.

Master, I would wish you to leave the Country, and see what good
entertainment you will have in the City, I do not think but there you will be
most kindly respected, I have been there in my youth, there's Hospitality, you
talk of Hospitality, and they talk of you bomination to see: for there
Master come to them as often as you will, four times a day, and they'll make
Nobody drink, they love to have Nobody trouble them, and without good
security they will lend Nobody money. Come into Birchin Lane, they'll give
Nobody a suit, choose where he list; go into Cheapside, and Nobody may take
up as much plate as he can carry.


Then I'll to London, for the Country tires me
With exclamations, and with open wrongs,
Since in the City they affect me so.

O Master, there I am sure Nobody may have any thing without money, Nobody may
come out of the Tavern without paying his reckoning at his pleasure.


That's better then the Country. Who comes here?


Minion, where have you been all this night?


Why do you ask husband?


Because I would know wife.


I have been with Nobody.


Tis a lie good man, believe her not, she was not with me.


And who hath lain with you to night?


Lye with me, why Nobody.


Oh monstrous, they would make me a whore-maister.


Well, I do not think but Sombody hath been with you.


Sombody was indeed.


Gods life husband, you do me wrong, I lay with Nobody.


Well minion, though Nobody bear the blame,
Use it no more, least Sombody bide the shame.

I will endure no longer in this Climate
It is so full of slanders, I'll to the City,
And there perform the deeds of charity.

Now you rascal, who have you been withal at the ale-house?


Sooth I was with Nobody.


Not with me.


And who was drunk there with you?


Sooth Nobody was drunk with me.


O intolerable! they would make me a drunkard to,
I cannot endure any longer, I must hence,
No patience with such scandals can dispense.

Well sir, if I take you so again, I'll so belabour you:
O neighbour good morrow.

Good morrow,


You are sad me thinks,


Faith sir I have cause, I have lent a friend of mine a hundred pound, and
have Nobodyes word for the payment, bill, nor bond, nor any thing to show.


Have you Nobodies word, I'll assure you that Nobodie is a good man, a good man
I assure you neighbor, Nobodie will keep his word, Nobodies word is as good
as his bond.


Ey, say you so, nay then lets drink down sorrow,
If none would lend, then Nobody should borrow.

Yet there's one keeps a good tongue in his head,
That can give Nobody a good report,
I am beholding to him for his praise:
But since my man so much commends the City,
I'll thither, and to purchase me a name,
Take a large house of infinite receipt,
There keep a table for all good spirits,
And all the chimneyes shall cast smoke at once:
There I'll give schollers pensions, Poets gold,
Arts their deserts, Philosophy due praise,
Learning his merit, and all worth his mead.
There I'll release poor prisoners from their dungeons.
Pay Creditors the debts of other men,
And get my self a name amongst Citizens,
That after times pertakers of all bliss,
May thus record, Nobody did all this.
Country farewell, whose slanderous tongues I sly,
The City now shall lift my name on hie.

Whether I'll follow thee with Swallows wings,
And nimble expedition, there to raise
New brawls and rumours to eclipse thy praise.
Those subtle, sly insinuating fellows
Whom Sombody hath sent into the country,
To rack, transport, extort, and to oppress,
Will I call home, and all their wits employ
Against this public Benefactor, known
Honest, for all the rumours by us sown.
But howsoever, I am sworn his foe,
And opposite to all his meriting deeds,
This way must do, though my divining thoughts
This augury amidsts their changes have,
That Sombody will at length be proved a knave.

Good day to you both fair Ladies,
But fairest of them both my gracious Queen,
Good day to your high Majesty, and madam
The royal Lady of great Elidure,
My Sovereigns brother, unto you I wish
This morning prove as gracious and as good.

Those greetings from the Lady Elidure
Would pleasingly sound in our princely ears.

Such greetings from great Archigalloes queen
Would be most gracious to our princely ear.

What no good morrow and our grace so near.
Reach me my glove.

Whom speaks this woman to?


Why to my subject, to my waiting maid,
Am not I mighty Archigalloes queen?
Is not my Lord the royal English King,
Thy husband and thy self my servitors?

Is my Coach ready, where are all my men
That should attend upon our awful frown,
What not one near?

Minion, my glove.


Madam, her highness glove.


My scarf is fallen, one of you reach it up.


You hear me.


Painted Majesty be gone,
I am not to be countercheckt by any.

Shall I bear this?


Be patient, I will school her.
Your excellence greatly forgets your self
To be so dutilesse unto the Queen,
I have seen the world, I know what tis to obey,
And to command. What if it please the Queen
That you her subject should attend on her,
And take her glove up, is it meet that I
Should stoop for yours? You're proud, fie, fie, you're proud.
This must not be twixt such two royal sisters
As you by marriage are; go to submit,
Her Majesty is easy to forgive.

Saucy Lord forbear, there's for your exhortation.


I cannot bear this, tis insufferable,
I'll to the King, and if he save thy life
He shall have mine: madness and wrath attend,
My thoughts are leveled at a bloody end.

She's shadow,
We the true substance are: follow her those
That to our greatness dare themselves oppose.

Health to your Ladyship, I would say Queen
If I might have my mind, bir lady Lady.

I had a suit unto the King with this Lord
For the great office of high Seneshall,
Because of our good service to the state,
But he in scorn, as he doth every thing,
Hath taken it from us both, and gin't a fool.

To a Sicophant, a courtly parasite.


Bear witness Madam, I'll go tell the King
That they speak treason.

Pass upon our swords,
You old exchecker of all flattery,
I tell thee Archigallo shall be deposd,
And thou disroab'd of all thy dignity.

I hope not so.


See here the Counsels hands,
Subscribed to Archigallos overthrow.
The names of sixteen royal English Peers,
Joined in a league that is inviolate,
And nothing wants but Elidurus grant
To accept the kingdom when the deed is done.

Nay then I'll take your parts, and join with you*


We will not have a Clawbacks hand comixt
With such heroic peers.

I hope my Lady
Is not of their minds. My most gracious Queen,
What I did speak in reprehensiue sort,
Was more because her Majesty was present
Then any offence of yours, and so esteem it,
God knows I love your highness, and these Lords.

Which of you will persuade my Elidure
To take upon him Englands royalty.

Madam, we all have so importund him,
Laying unto his judgment every thing
That might attract his senses to the crown,
But he frost brained will not be obtained
To take upon him this Realms government.

He is the very soul of lenity,
If ever moderation lived in any,
Your Lord with that rich virtue is possessed.

This mildness in him makes me so despisd
By the proud Queen, and by her fauourits.

See madam where he comes reading a book.


My Lord and husband, with your leave this book
Is fitter for an University
Then to be looked on, and the Crown so near:
You know these Lords for tyranny have sworn
To banish Archigallo from the throne,
And to invest you in the royalty:
Will you not thank them, and with bounteous hands
Sprinckle their greatness with the names of Earles,
Dukes, Marquesses, and other higher terms.

My dearest love, the essence of my soul,
And you my honoured Lords, the suit you make,
Though it be just for many wrongs imposd,
Yet unto me it seems an injury.
What is my greatness by my brothers fall,
But like a starved body nourished
With the destruction of the other limbs.
Innumerable are the griefs that wait
On horded treasures, then much more on Crowns:
The middle path, the golden mean for me,
Leave me obedience, take you Majesty.

Why this is worser to my lofty mind,
Then the late checks given by the angry Queen.

If you refuse it, know we are determined
To lay it else where.

On your younger brother,
And then no doubt we shall be awde indeed,
When the ambition of the elders wife,
Can scarcely give our patience any bounds:
England is sick of pride and tirrany,
And in thy goodness only to be curd.
Thou art called forth amongst a thousand men,
To minister this sovereign Ancidote,
To amend thy brothers cruelty with love,
And if thou wilt not from oppression free
Thy native Country, thou art wild as he.

I had rather stay his leisure to amend.


Men, heaven, gods, devils, what power should I invoke,
To fashion him a new: thunder come down,
Crown me with ruin, since not with a Crown.

Long life unto the Kingly Elidure,
Trumpets proclaim it whether he will or no.

For that conceit Lords, you have won my hart,
In his despite let him be straight ways Crowned,
That I may triumph whilst the trumpets sound.

Carry me to my grave, not to a Throne.


Help Lords to seat him, nay help every one:
So should the Majesty of England sit,
Whilst we in like state do associate him.

Never did any less desire to reign
Then I, heaven knows this greatness is my pain.

Pain me in this sort great Lords every day,
Tis sweet to rule.

Tis sweeter to obey.


Live King of England long and happily,
As long and happily your Highness live.

We thank you Lords, now call in the deposd,
Him and his proud Queen, bring unto our sight,
That in her wrongs we may have our delight.

Betrayed, taken prisoner, and by those that owe
To me their duty, and allegiance:
My brother the usurper of the Crown,
Oh this is monstrous, most insufferable.

Good brother grieve not, tis against my will,
That I am made a King, pray take my place,
I had rather be your subject then your Lord.

So had not I, sit still my gracious Lord,
Whilst I look through this Tyrant with a frown,
Minion reach up my glove.

Think thou because
Thy husband can dissemble piety,
And therein hath deposd my royal Lord,
That I am lesser in estate then Queen?
No thine own answer lately given to me,
I thus reuet, stoop thou proud Queen for me.

Nay, then as I did lately to her Highness,
I must admonish you, diected Lady
You do forget your self, and where you are,
Duty is debt, and it is fit since now
You are a subject, to bear humble thoughts:
Follow my counsel Lady and submit,
Her Majesty no doubt will pardon it.

There's for your pains.


Which way so ere I go,
I have it here, whether it ebb or flow.

That pride of thine shall be thy overthrow.
And thus I sentence them.

Leave that to me?


No you are too mild, judgment belongs to me:
Thou Archigallo for thy tirranie,
For ever be excluded from all rule,
And from thy life.

Not from his life I pray.


He unto whom the greatest wrongs are done,
Dispatch him quickly.

That will I.


Or I.


And therein Lords effect my tragedy.


Why strike you not, oh tis a dangerous thing,
To have a living subject of a King:
Much treason may be wrought, when in his death,
Our safety is secured.

Banish him rather, oh sweet spare his life,
He is my brother.

Crowned, and pray thy wife.


Oh brother, if you roughly speak, I know
There is no hope but your sure overthrow,
Pray be not angry with me for my love:
To banishment since it must needs be so,
His life I give him whosoere says no.

What and his Ladies to.


I hers and all.


But I'll not have you banished with the King,
No Minion no, since you must live, be assured
I'll make thee meanest of my waiting Maids.

I scorn thy pride.


Farewell deceiving state,
Pride making Crown, my dearest wife farewell:
I have been a Tyrant, and I'll be so still.

Alas my brother.


Dry up childish tears,
And to these Lords that have invested you,
Give gracious looks, and honourable deeds.

Give them my Crown, oh give them all I have,
Thy Throne I reckon but a glorious grave.

Then from my self these dignities receive,
The Island wrested from you I restore,
See it be given them back Lord Sicophant.
The office of hie Seneschall bereft you,
My Lord of Cornwell to your grace we give.
You Martianus be our Treasurer,
And if we find you faithful, be assured
You shall not want preferment at our hands.
Mean time this office we impose on you,
Be Tutor to this Lady, and her pride
With your learned principles whereof you are full
Turn to humility, or vex her soul,

Torment on torment, tutored by a fool.


Madam, it is her Highness will be pleased.


Young Peridurus and Vigenius, Lords
Release from prison, and because your King,
Is mightily affected unto York,
Thither dismiss the Court incontinent.

Shall it be so my Liedge.


Are not we King.
His silence says it, and what we ordain,
Who dares make question of: this day for ever
Thorough our reign beheld a festival:
And triumph Lords that England is set free,
From a wild tyrant and his cruelty:

On to our funeral, tis no matter where,
I sin I know in suffering pride so near.

Ahem boy, Nobody is sound yet for all his troubles.


And so is Nobodies man for all his whipping, but Master we are now in the
City, wald about from slander, there cannot a lie come in but it must run
thorough brick, or get the goodwill of the warders, whose browne bills look
blew upon all passengers.


O this City, if Nobody live to be as old again, be it spoken in secret, I'll
have fenst about with a wall of brass.


Of Nobodies making, that will be rare.


I'll bring the Tems through the middle of it, empty Moore-ditch at my own
charge, and build up Paules-steple without a collection. I see not what becomes
of these collctions.


Why Nobody receaues them.


I knave?


You knave: or as the world goes, Somebody receives all, and Nobody is blamed
for it.


But is it rumord so thorough out the City.


Do not you know that? there's not an orphants portion lost out of the
Chamber, but Nobody has got it, no Corn transported without warrant, but
Nobody has donne it, no goods stolen but by Nobody, no extortion without
Nobody: and but that truth will come to light, few wenches got with child, but
with Nobody.


Nay that's by Somebody.


I think Somebody had a hand in it, but Nobody sometimes pays for the nursing
of it.


Indeed I have taken into my charge many a poor infant left to the alms of
the wideworld, I have helped many a virtuous maid to a good husband, ne'er
desired her maiden-head: redeemed many Gentlemen's lands, that have thanked Nobody
for it, built Pest-houses, and other places of retirement in the sickness time
for the good of the City, and yet Nobody cannot get a good word for his
labour.


Tis a mad world Master.


Yet this mad world shall not make me mad, I am
All spirit, Nobody let them grieve,
That scrape for wealth I will the poor relieve,
Where are the Masters of the several prisons:
Within and near adjoining to the City,
That I may spread my charity abroad.

Here they be Sir.


Welcome Gentlemen:
You are they that make poor men householders
Against their wills, and yet do them no wrong:
You have the actions, and the cases of your sides,
Whilst your Tenants in common, want money to fill them.
How many Gentlemen of less revenues then Nobody,
Lie in your Knights ward, for want of maintenance.

I am Sir a Keeper of the Counter, and there are in our wards above a hundred
poor prisoners, that are like ne'er to come forth without satisfaction.


But Nobody will be their benefactor. What in yours.


As many as in the other prison.


There's to release them. What in yours.


Double the number, and in the Gail.


Talk not of the Gail, tis full of limetwigs, lifts, and pickpockets.


Is it your pleasure Sir to free them all.


All that he in for debt.


Ten thousand pound, and ten to that will not do it.


Nobody Sir will give a hundred thousand,
Ten hundred thousand, Nobody will not have a prisoner,
Because they all shall pray for Nobody.

Tis great pity my Master has Nobody, and so kind a hart.


What outcries that?


That is the gallant, apprehend him straight,
Tis he that sows sedition in the Land,
Under the colour of being charitable,
When search is made for such in every Inn,
Though I have seen them housd, the Chamberlaine
For gold will answer there is Nobody:
He ^or all bankrouts is a common bail^,
And when the execution should be served
Upon the sureties, they find Nobody:
In private houses who so apt to lie,
As those that have been taught by Nobody,
Servants forgetful of their Masters friends,
Being asked how many were to speak with him
Whilst he was absent, they say Nobody,
Nobody breaks more glasses in a house,
Then all his wealth hath power to satisfy:
If you will free this City then from shame,
Seas Nobody, and let him bear the blame.

Lay hold upon him.


What on Nobody, give me my sword, my morglay,
My friends, you that do know how innocent I am,
Draw in my quarrel, succour Nobody,
What Nobody, but Nobody remaining.

Yes Master, I Nobodies man.


Stand to me nobly then, and fear them not,
Thy Master Nobody, can take no wounds,
Nobody is no coward, Nobody
Dares fight withal the world.

Upon them then.
What has he escaped us.

He is gone my Lord.


It shall be thus, now you have seen his shape,
Let him be straight imprinted to the life:
His picture shall be set on every stall,
And proclamation made, that he that takes him,
Shall have a hundred pounds of Sombody,
Country and City, I shall thus set free,
And have more room to work my villainy.

What are they gone, then City now adieu,
Since I have taken such great injury,
For my good life within thy government:
No more will Nobody be charitable,
No mote will Nobody relieve the poor,
Honour your Lord, and Master Somebody,
For Somebody is he that wrongs you all.
I'll to the Court the changing of the air,
May peradventure change my injuries,
And if I speed no better being there,
Yet say that Nobody lived every where.

I was a King, but now I am slave,
How happy were I in this base estate,
If I had never tasted royalty:
But the remembrance that I was a King,
Vnseasons the Content of poverty,
I hear the hunters music, here I'll lie,
To keep me out of sight till they pass by.

The stag is hearded, come my Lord
Shall we to horse and single him again.

Content, the King will chase, the day is spent
And we have killed no game, to horse, away.

Hearded, go single him, or couple straight,
He will not fall to day, what fellows this.

I am a man.


A banished man I think,
My brother Archigallo, is't not so.

Tis so, I am thy brother Elidure,
All that thou hast is mine, the Crown is mine,
Thy royalty is mine; these hunting pleasures
Thou dost usurp: ambitious Elidure
I was a King.

And I may be a wretch: poor Archigallo,
The sight of thee that were my Sovereign,
In this estate, draws rivers from mine eyes.
Will you be king again? if they agree
I'll redeliver all my royalty,
Save what a second brother and a subject
Keeps in an humble bosom, for I swear
The Crown is yours that Elidure doth wear.

Then give it me; use not the common sleights,
To pity one, and keep away his right.
See thou these rags, do they become my person?
O Elidure, take pity on my state,
Let me not still live thus unfortunate.

Alas, if pity could procure your good,
Instead of water, I'd weep tears of blood
To express both love and pity: say dear brother
I should vncrowne my self, the angry Peers
Will never let me reach the imperial wreathe
To Archigalloes head. There's ancient Cornwell,
Stout Martianus, Morgan, and bold Malgo,
From whom you took the pleasant Southern I'll,
Will never kneel to you: what should I say,
Your tyranny was cause of your decay.

What shall I die then? welcome be that fate
Rather then still live in this wretched state.

Yonders the King; my sovereign you have lost
The fall of a brave stag, he's dead my liedge.
What fellows this?

Know him not Cornwell?


No my liedge not I.


I am thy King.


Tis Archigallo man.


Thou art no king of mine, thou art a traitor,
Thy life is forfeit by thy stay in Britain.
VVert thou not banished?

Noble Cornwell speak
More gently, or my piteous hart will break,
Lord Martianus, Morgan, and the rest,
I am a weary of my government,
And willingly resign it to my brother.

Your brother was a tyrant, and my knee
Shall never bow to wrong and tyranny.

Yet look upon his misery, his tears
Argue repentance; think not honoured Lords
The fear of dangers waiting on my Crown
Makes me so willing to resign the same,
For I am loved I know, but justice bids
I make a resignation, tis his right,
My calls but usurpation.

Elidure,
If you are weary of your government,
Wele set the Crown upon a strangers head
Rather then Archigallo. Hark ye Lords,
Shall we make him our King we did depose,
So might our heads be chopped of, I'll loose mine
Ere my poor Country shall endure such wrongs,
As that injurious tyrant plagues her with,

Keep still your Crown my Liedge, happy is Britain
Under the government of Elidure.

Let it be so,
Death is the happy period of all woe.
The wretch that's torn upon the torturing wrack,
Feels not more de^sh torment then my hart.
When I but call to mind my tyranny,
I record heaven my Lords, my brothers fight,
The pity that he takes of my distress,
Your love and true allegiance unto him,
Hath wrought in me a reconciled spirit,
I do confess my sin, and freely say,
I did deserve to be deposd.

Alas good Prince, my honourable Lords,
Be not flint-harted, pity Archigallo,
I know his penitential words proceed
From a remorcefull spirit, I'll engage
My life upon his righteous government.
Good Cornwell, gentle Martianus, speak,
Shall Archigallo be your king again?

By heaven I not desire it.


See my Lords,
He's not ambitious, as thou love me Cornwell,
As thou did love our Father, let his son
Be righted, give him back the government
You took from him.

What should I say? faith I shall fall a weeping:
Therefore speak you.

Lord Martianus speak.


What say these Lords that have been wronged by him.


Morgan and Malgo, all I have in Britain
Shall be engaged to you, that Archigallo
Will never more oppress you, nor impose
Wrong on the meanest subject in the Land.

Then we'll embrace his government.


Says Malgo so?


I do my Lord.


What says Martianus?


Faith as my Lord of Cornwell.


I say that I am sorry he was bad.
And now am glad he's changed; his wickedness
We punished, and his goodness there's great reason
Should be rewarded; therefore Lords set on
To York then, to his Coronation.

Then happy Elidurus, happy day
That takes from me a kingdoms cares away.

And happy Archigallo that have rangd
From sin, to sin, and now at last am changed.
My Lords and friends, the wrongs that you have seen
In me, my future virtues shall redeem.
Come gentle brother, pity that should rest
In women most, is harbor'd in thy breast.

Come have you done your task, now do you see
What tis to be so proud of Majesty,
We must take up your glove, and not be thought
Worthy the name of Sister, thus you minx
I'll teach you ply your work, and thank me to,
This pains will be your own another day.

Insulting, ouer-proude, ambitious woman*
Queen I disdain to call thee, thou dost wrong
Thy brothers wife, indeed thy Kings espousd,
And manger all thy tyranny I swear,
Rather then still live thus, I'll perrish here.

You are not wise, dejected as you are
To bandy braves against her Majesty,
You must consider you are now her subject,
Your tongue is bounded by the awe of duty,
Fie, fie, I needs must chide you, since I see
You are so saucy with her sovereignty.

Time was base spaniel thou did fawn as much
On me, as now thou strive to flatter her:
O God, that one borne noble should be so base,
His generous blood to scandal all his race.

My Lord, if she continue these proud terms,
I give you liberty to punish her.
I'll not maintain my prisoner and my slave
To rail against any one that honours me.

Health to the Queen, and happiness to her
That must change states with you, and once more reign
Queen of this Land.

Speak that again, o I will bless my fate,
If once more I supply my former state.

Long may your highness live, your banished Lord
Is by his brother Elidurus seated
Once more in Britains throne.

O I could tear my hair, base Elidure
To wrong himself, and make a slave of me.

Now minion, I'll cry quittance with your pride,
And make you stoop at our imperial side*
But tell me Morgan by what accident
You met with my beloved Archigallo?

Even in the woods where we did hunt the stag,
There did the tender hearted Elidure
Meet his distressed Brother, and so wrought
By his importunate speech with all his Peers,
That after much denial, yet at last
They yielded their allegiance to your Lord,
Whom now we must acknowledge our dread King,
And you our princely Queen.

Thou Screchowle, Raven, ugly throated slave*
There's for thy news.

Restrain her good my Lord.


Fie madam fie, fore God you are too blame
In presence of my sovereign lady Queen
To be thus rude, it would become you better
To show more duty to her Majesty.

O monstrous, was not I thy Queen but now.


Yes, when your husband was my King you were.
But now the stream is turned, and the States currant,
Runs all to Archigallo, blame not me,
Wisdom ne'er loved declined Majesty.

Welcome from banishment my loving Lord,
Your kingly presence wraps my soul to heaven.

To heaven, and my kind brother Elidure,
Fair Queen we owe chief thanks for this our greatness,
Next them, these honourable Lords.

Great Queen,
Once more the tribute of our bended knees
We pay to you, and humbly kiss your hand.

So doth Martianus.


And I.


And I.


Our brothers, by how much that name exceeds
The name of Lord, so much the more this duty
Deserves requital, thanks both, and thanks to all.

Set on there.


Madam, you are not wise to grieve at that
Heaven hath decreed, and the state yielded to,
No doubt her Majesty will use you well.

Well says thou: no I look that she should treble
All the disgraces I have laid on her.
I shall turn Laundress now, and learn to starch,
And set and poke, and pocket up such baseness
As never princess did: did you observe
What looks I cast at Elidure my husband?

Your looks declard the passion of your hart,
They were all fire.

Would they had burnt his eyes out
That hath eclipsd our state and Majesty.

Bring hither the proud wife of Elidure,


It shall be done.


Our shoe string is untied, stoop minion, stoop.


I'll rather stoop to death thou moone-like Queen,
New changed, and yet so proud: there's those are made
For flexure, let them stoop, thus much I'll do,
You are my Queen, tis but a debt I owe.

Bring me the work there, I will task you to,
That by the howre spin it, I charge you do.

A distaff and a spindle, so indeed
I told you this, Diana be my speed.

Yet for his Princely worth that made you Queen
Respect her as the wife of Elidure.

VVheres the Queen?


What news with Cornwell, why so sad my Lord?


Your husband on the sudden is fallen sick.


How; sick.


Now if it be thy will, sweet blessed heaven
Take him to mercy.

Do not hear her prayers heaven I beseech thee.


Madam, his highness.


Is he alive, or dead.


Dead madam.


O my hart.


Look to the Queen, let us not loose her to,
She breathes, stand of, where be those women there,
Good Queen that shall be, lends a helping hand,
Help to unlace her.

I'll see her burst first.


Now as you love me let no helping hand
Preserve life in me, I had rather die
Then loose the title of my sovereignty.

Take back your Distaff yet, wele stay our rage,
We will forbear our spleen for charity
And love unto the dead, till you have hearsd
Your husbands bones, conduct her Lords away,
Our pride though eager, yet for food shall stay.

Wilt please your high imperial Majesty
Command my service, I am humbly yours.

We do command what we well know you'll do,
Follow the stronger part, and cleave thereto.

Once more our royal temples are ingirt
With Britains golden wreath, all seeing heaven
Witness I not desire this sovereignty,
But since this kingdoms good, and your Decrees,
Have laid this heaven load of common care
On Elidure, we shall discharge the same
To your content, I hope, and this Lands fame:
Our brother once interd, we will not stay,
But then to Troynovant we'll speed, away.

Come fellow Porter, now the Court is here
Our gains will fly upon us like a tide,
Let us make use of time, and whilst there's plenty
Stirring in Court, still labour to increase
The wealth which by our office we have got.

Out of our large alowance we must save
Of thousands that pass by us, and our office,
we will give entertainment to No-body.

My name is No-body,


You are welcome sir, ere you peruse the court,
Taste the kings beer, here at the Porters lodge,
A dish of beer for master No-body.

I thank you sir.


Here master No-body, withal my hart,
A full Carouse, and welcome to our Office.

I thank you sir, and were your beer tems water,
Yet No-body would pledge you, to you sir.

You are a stranger here, how in the City,
Have you bin long in town.

I sir, too long, unless my entertain
Had bin more pleasing, for my life is sought,
I am a harmless well disposed plain man,
That injure none, yet what so ere is done
Amiss in London, is imposed on me,
Be it lying, secret theft, or any thing
They call abuse, tis done by No-body,
I am pursued by all, and now am come,
To see what safety is within the Court
For a plain fellow.

You are welcome hither sir.
Methinkes you do look wild, as if you wanted sufficient Sleep.

O do not blame me sir,
Being pursued I fled, coming though Poules,
There No-body kneeled down to say his prayers,
And was devout I wis, coming through Fleetstreet,
There at a tavern door two swaggerers
Were fighting, being attacht, twas asked who gave
The first occasion, twas answered nobody,
The guilt was laid on me, which made me fly
To the Thems side, desired a Waterman,
To row me thence away to Charing-crosse,
He asked me for his fare, I answered him
I had no money, whats your name quoth he,
I told him No-body, then he bad me welcome,
Said he would carry No-body for nothing.
From thence I went
To see the law Courts held at Westminster,
There meeting with a friend, I straight was asked
If I had any suit, I answered, yes,
Marry I wanted money, sir quoth he,
For you, because your name is No-body
I will solicit law, and no-body
Assure your self, shall thrive by suits in Law,
I thanked him, and so came to see the court,
Where I am very much beholding to your kindness.

And Master no-body you are very welcome,
Good fellow lead him to the Hall,
Will you vvalke near the court.

I thank you sir.


Fie what a toil it is to find out nobody,
I have dogd him very close, yet he is got into the court before me.
Sir you have sworn to fight with nobody,
Do you stay here, and watch at the court gate,
And when you meet him challenge him the field,
Whilst I set Lime-twigs for him in all Offices,
If either you or I, but prosper right,
He needs must fall by policy or slight.

I would this roundman nobody would come,
I that profess much valor yet have none,
Cannot but be too hard for nobody,
For what can be in nobody, unless
He be so called because he is al spirit,
Or say he be all spirit, wanting limbs,
How can this spirit hurt me, sure he dies,
And by his death, my fame shall mount the skies.

By thy leave my sweet friend,
There's for thy farewell.

Stay.


That's but one word, let two go to the bargain if it please you, why should I
stay.


I challenge thee.


I may choose whither i'll answer your challenge by your leave.


I'll have thee picturd as thy picture, unless thou answer me


For what sir, pray why wold you have me printed.


For cowardice.


Methinkes your picture would do better for the picture of cowardice then
mine sir, but pray whats your will with me.


Thou hast abused one Some-body,


So have my betters abused Som-body in their time


I'll fight with thee for that.


Alas sir I am nobody at fighting, yet thus much let me tell you, nobody
cannot run away, I cannot budge.


Prepare thee then, for I will spit thy body upon this weapon.


nay by faith that you cannot, for I have no body.


Thy bowels then.


They are the fairer mark a great deal, com on sir, come on


Have at thy belly.


You must either hit that or nothing.


I'll kill and quarter thee.


You'll hardly find my joints I think to quarter me,
I am so well fed, come on sir.

now thou art at my mercy.


What are you the better to have nobody at your mercy


I'll kill thee now.


I think you'll sooner kill me then any body,
But let me rise again.

No I will let No-body rise.


Why then let me sir, I am No-body,


How now, O fates, O heavens, is not that my M.
what shall I do, be valiant* and reskue my sweet master,
Avaunt thou Pagan, Pug, what ere thou be,
Behold I come to set thy prisoner free.

Fortune that giddy Goddess hath turned her wheel,
I shall be matched, thus will I gore you both. Hold captains,
not Hercules himself would fight with two, I yield.

Twas yoor best course, down vassal dawn, and kiss
My pump.

Tis base, O base.


Zounds, i'll nail thy lips to limbo unless thou kis.


Tis done.


Thanks honest servant.


Zounds if I say i'll doet, i'll doet indeed.


For this i'll carry thee into the Court,
Where thou shalt see thy Master No-body
Hath friends will bid him welcome, so farewell,

Farewell master Braggart, farewell, farewell.


I'll follow, I shall meet with Some-body,
That will revenge, i'll plot and ert be long
I'll be reuengd on No-body for this wrong.

Your hopes are great fair brothers, and your names, shall if in this you be
advised by us,
Be ranked in scroll of all the British kings,
Oh take upon you this so weighty charge,
To great to be discharged by Elidure.

Dear sister Q. how are we bound to you,
In nearer bonds then a fraternal league,
For this your royal practise to raise us,
Unto the height of honour and estate,
Let me no longer breath a prince on earth,
Or think me worthy of your regal blood,
If we embrace not this high motion.

Embrace it brother, we are all on speed,
My princely thought inflamed with Ardency
Of this imperial state, and Scepterd rule,
My kingly brows, itch for a stately Crown,
This hand to bear a round Monarchal Globe,
This the bright sword of Justice, and stern awe,
Dear sister you have made me all on fire,
My kingly thoughts, beyond their bounds aspire.

How shall we quit your love, when we ascend
The state of Elydure.

All that I crave,
Is but to make the imperious Queen my slave,
That she that above Justice now commands,
May taste new thraldom at our royal hands.

The Queen is yours, the king shall be deposed,
And she disgraded from all Sovereignty.

That I might live to see that happy hour,
To have that sterne commandress in my power.

She's doomed already, and at your dispos^,
And we prepared for speedy execution,
Of any plot that may avail our pomp,
Or throne us in the state of Brittany.

Here comes the Lords of this pretended league,
How goes our hope, speak valiant English Peers,
Are we in way of Sovereignty, or still stand we
Subjects unto the awe of Elidure.

Long live the valiant brothers of the King,
With mutual love to wear the British Crown,
Two thousand Soldiers have I brought from Wales,
to wait upon the princely Perydure.

As many of my bold confederates
Have I drawn from the South to swear allegiance,
to young Vigenius.

Do but call me king,
the charming Spheres so sweetly cannot sing.

To king Vigenius.


Oh but wheres our Crown,
that make knees humble, when their sovereigns frown.

King Eliduras shall his state resign.


Say Morgan so, and Britains rule is mine.


king Peridure shall reign.


And sit in sta^e.


And thousand subjects on his glory wait.


Then they that lifts us to the imperial seat,
Our powers and will shall study to make great.

And thou that raisest us, as our best friend,
Shall as we mount the like degrees ascend.

When will you give the attempt.


Now royal sister.
Before the king have notice of our plot,
Before the Lords that love his government,
Prepare their opposition.

Well determined,
And like a king in Esse, now this night,
Lets make a hostile uproar in the Court,
Surprise the king, make ceazure of the Crown,
Lay hands upon the Counsel, least they escape
to levy forces, those Lords
that serve the king, and with austere reproves,
punish the hateful vices of the Land,
Must not awe us, they shall not reign, we will,
those that applaud us, raise, despise us, kill,

I see a kind of state appear already
In thy maiestick brow, cal in the soldiers,
Man the Court gates, barricade al the streets,
Defend the ways, the lands and passages,
And gi^t the palace with a treble wall
Of armed soldiers, and in dead of night,
When all the peeresly drowned in golden sleep,
Sound out a sudden and a shrill Alarm,
to maze them in the midst of horrid dreams.

The king and Crown is ours.


The Queen I claim.


It shall go hard, but I the shrew will tame,
trumpets and drums, your dreadful clamours sound.

Proclaim me captive, or a king new crowned,


Treason, treason.


thou art mine what ere thou be.


Prince Peridure.


I Cornwell and thy king.


He discords taught, that taught thee so to sing.


Who stops this passage.


Martianus we.


Vigenius.


Vn^o whom thou owe thy knee.


My knee to none* but Elidure shall bend.


Our reign beginning hath when his lines end.


What traitrous hand dares interdict our way?


Why that dare ours, tis we command thee stale.


Are we not Queen?


Is't you, then happily met,
I have owed you long, and now I'll pay that dept.

Wild traitress, dare, thou lay a violent hand on us thy Queen?


We dare command thee stand,
Thou wast a Queen, but now thou art a slave.

Before such bondage, grant me heaven a grave.


What seek ye Lords? What mean these loud
Alarms, in the still silence of this hunnied night?

King we seek thee.


And more we seek thy Crown.


Why Princely brothers is it not our own,
That tis ours we plead the law of kings,
The gift of heaven, and the antiquety on earth,
Election from them both.

We plead our powers strength, we two must reign.


We were borne to rule, and homage we disdain.


Do not resign, good King.


How saucy Lord?


I'll keep still thy Crown.


I say that word shall cost old Cornwels life.


Tush this for care.
Tyrants good subjects kills and traitors spare.

Wilt thou submit thy Crown?


Dread sovereign, no.


He hates his own life that advises so.


I hate all traitors, and had rather die,
Then see such wrong done to his sovereignty.

Give up thy state to these two princely youths, and thy resigment shall
preserve thy life.


Wilt thou so much wrong both thy self and wife?
Hast lived a king, and can thou die a slave,
A royal seat, doth ask a royal grave,
Though thousand swords thy present safety ring,
Thou that hast bin a Monarch, dye a king.

Whether he live or dye, thou sure shalt be no longer Queen, but Vassayle unto
me, I'll make ye now my drudge.


How minion, thine?


Thart no more Queen, thy husband must resign.


Resign, to whom?


I am one.


And I another.


Can be so base to see a younger brother,
Nay two young Boys placed in thy throne of state,
And thou their sudden in their trains to wait,
I'll dye before I endure it.

So shall all,
that do not prostrate to our homage fall.
Shall they not brother king?

They shall by heaven.


Come kill me first.


Nay make the number even,
And kill me to, for I am pleased to dye,
Rather then this endure.

The third am I.


Nay strike her first.


Rage give my fury way.


Strike valiant brother king.


Yet he are me, stay.


Be brief for Gods sake then,


O heaven, that men so much should covet care,
Septers are golden baits, the outsides fair:
But he that swallows this sweet sugared pill,
Twill make him sick with troubles that grow still:
Alas you seek to ease me being wearied
And lay my burden on your able loins,
My vnambitious thoughts have bin long tird,
With this great charge, and now they rest desired,
And see the kind youths coveting my peace,
Bring me of all these turmoils free release.
Here take my Crown.

Wilt thou be made a stale,
Shall this proud Woman, and these boys preuaile?
Shall I for them be made a public scorn,
Oh had thou buried bin, as soon as borne,
How happy had I bin.

Patienc sweet wife,
Think thou I praise my Crown above thy life,
No take it Lords, it hath my trouble bin,
And for this Crown, oh give me back my Queen.

Nay shes bestowed on me.


Then what you please,
Here take my trouble, and resign your ease.

My Lords receive the crown of Elydure,
Fair hopeful blossoms of our future peace,
Happy am I, that I but live to see,
the Land ruled by your double Sovereignty.

Now let the king descend to be disposed of
At our high pleasure, come give me the Crown.

Why you the Crown, good brother more then we.


We'll prove it how it fits our kingly temples,
And how our brow becomes a wreath so fair.

Shall I see you crowned, and my self stand bare,
Rather this wreath maiestick let me try,
And sit inthrond, in pompious Majesty.

And I attend, whilst you ascend the throne,
Where had we right, we should sit crowned alone.

Alone, dare thou usurp upon my right.


I durst do much, had I but power and might,
But wanting that, come let us reign together,
both kings, and yet the rich crown worn by neither.

Content, the king doth on our sentence wait,
To doom him, come lets take our double state,
What shall he live, or dye?

I know not how I should deserve to dye.


Yes to let two such usurpers live.


Nay Madam, now I needs must tell your grace,
You wrong these kings, forget both time and place,
It is not as it was, now you must bow,
Unto this double state i'll show you how.

Base flattering groom slavish parasite,


Shall I pronounce his sentence.


Brother do.


Thy life we grant thee and that Woman's to,
But live divided you within the tower,
You prisoner to that princess.

In her power,
Oh double slavery.

Convey both hence.


My dooms severer then my small offence.


Come Minion, will you go.


To death, to hell,
Rather then in thy base subjection dwell.

Cornwell and Martianus you both see,
We are possessed of this imperial seat,
And you that were sworn liedgemen to the Crown,
Should now submit to us that owe the same,
We know without your grave directions,
We cannot with experience guide the land,
Therefore we'll study to deserve your loves.

Twas not ambition, or the love of state,
that drew us to this business, but the fear,
Of Elidurus weakness whom in zeal,
To the whole land we have deposd this day,
speak, shall we have your loves?

My lords, and Kings,
Tis bootless to contend against heaven and you,
Since without our consent the kings desposd,
And we unable to support his fall,
Rather then the whole land should shrink,
You shall have my assistance in the state.

Cornwell and I will bear the self same state.


We now are Kings indeed and Britain sway,
When Cornwell and his brother Viue say

Receive our grace, keep still your offyces,
Embrace these peers that raised us to the throne,
Britain rejoice, and Crown this happy year,
Two sons at once thine in thy royal sphere.

And that's prodigious, I but wait the time
To see their sudden fall that swiftly clime.

My Lord much honour might you win your land
To give release unto your sister Queen,
Being a Lady in the land beloud.

You have advised us well, it shall be so.


Should you set free the Princess might not she
Make vprors in the land, and raise the Commons.
In the releasement of the Captive King.

Well counseld Cornwell, she shall live in bondage.


Renown your self by being kind to her.


Secure your state by her imprisonment.


We'll have the Queen set free.


We'll have her guarded,
With stricter keeping and severer charge.

Will you be braved by one that's but your equal,
Having no more then party government.

Or you be scorned by one to you inferior,
In general estimation of the land.

Set free the Princess, say the king commands.


Keep her in thraldom still, and captive bands.


We'll not be contermaunded.


Sir nor we.


Before I'll be half a king and contrould
In any regality, i'll hazard all,
I'll be complete or none.

Before i'll stand,
Thus for a Cipher with my half command,
I'll venture all my fortunes, how now pride,
Percht on my vpperhand.

By heaven well spied.


Tis ours by right, and right we will enjoy.


Claimst thou pre-eminence, com down proud boy


Then lets try maistries, and one conquer all,
We climd at once, and we at once will fall.

They that love Peridure divide themselves upon their part.


That am I.


and I.


They that love us on this side.


I.


And I.


Then to the field, to set our sister free.


By all my hopes with her i'll captive thee.


Trumpets and Drums, triumphant music sing.


this day a captive, or a complete king.


Sir you have sworn to manage these affairs,
Even with your best of judgment.

I have provided, you will let me share,
Of the Grand-benefit you get by dice,
Deceitful Cards, and other cozening games
you bring into the Court.

O rare, now shall I find out crab, some notable knavery

You shall have equal share with Somebody,
Provided, you will help to apprehend that Nobody,
On whom the guilt shall lye,
Of all those cheting tricks I have deuisd.

O the fates, treason against my m. person, but I believe
Somb. will pay fort, i'll tickle your long wast for this in faith,

Give me some bales of dice. What are these?


Those are called high Fulloms.


I'll Fullom you for this.


Those low Fulloms*


They may chance bring you as hie as the Gallows.


Those Demi-bars.


Great reason you shovld come to the bar before the gallows.


Those bar Sizeaces.


A couple of Asses indeed.


Those Brisle dice.


Tis like they brisle, for I am sure theile breed anger


Now sir, as you have compassed all the Dice,
So I for cards. These for the game at maw,
All saving one, are Cut next under that,
Lay me the Ace of Harts, then cut the Cards,
O your fellow must needs have it in his first trick.

I'll teach you a trick for this in faith.


these for Premero cut upon the sides,
As thr other on the ends.

Mark the end of all this.


these are for post and pair, these for saunt,
these for new cut.

theile make you cut a feather one day,


Well, these dispersed, and No-body
Attacht for all these crimes, shall be hanged.

I or else you shall hang for him,


Come, shals about our business.


Content, lets straight about it.


O my hart, that it was my fortune to hear all this, but beware a lucky man
whllst you live, Alas if I had not rescued my master, the swaggering fellow
would have made No-body of him. Again if I had not overheard this treason to
his person, these Cunnicatching knaves, would have made less then Nobody of
him. For indeed they wold have hanged him, but here's my master, O sweet
master how cheer you?


O excellent, admirable, and beyond comparison, I think my shape enchants
them.


I think not so, for if I were a Lady, I should never abide you: but Master, I
can tell you rare news you must be apprehended, for a Cheater, a Cozener, a
Libiller, and I know not what.


Not I, I am an innocent, no Cheater, no Cozener, but a simple honest man,
hunted from place to place by some-body.


tis true sir, it is one some. that would attach you, therefore
Look to your self, but My. if you be took never fear,
I heard all their knavery, and I can clear you I warrant.

O have I found you, this is he my friends,
We have long sought, you know when twas inquird,
Who brought the false Dice, and the cheating cards
Into the court, twas answered No-body.

( quoth tha) I am afraid you'll prove the knave some.


Lay hold upon him, bear him to the prison.


To prison, say you well, if I be guilty this fellow is my partner take him to.


Are you confederate in this treason sir?


If I be not sir some-body is, but if I be guilty I must bear
If off with head and shoulders.

To prison with them, now the bird is caught,
For whom so long, through Britane have I sought.

I believe I have a bird in a box, shall caught you for all this.


Away with them I say.


In Arms well met, ambitious Peridure,


Vigenius thou salutes me with a title,
Most proper to thy self,

Art thou not proud.


Only to meet thee on this bed of death,
Wherein the Title to the English Crown,
Shall perish with thy self.

Fair is the end
Of such as die in honourable war,
Oh far more fair, then on a bed of down.

War is the soldiers harvest it cuts down.


The lives of such as hinder our renown.


Such as are apt for tumult.


Such as you,
That to our lawful Sovereign are untrue.

Blushes not Peridure to brave us so.


Blushes Vigenius at thy overthrow,
Who wast that told me he would submit.

Twas I my Lord.


Peace fool thou doest forget,
Tis not an hour since, to our princely ear,
Thou said thou did desire us to forbear.

True my good Lord.


True that I sought to stay.


That I would basely my ritcht hopes betray.


I did it of mine own head to make you friends.


Still playing of the Sicophant.


What still.


A gloss I see to insinuate our good will.


That whosoever conquered, he might gain.


the favour of us both, that was his train.


But henceforth we cashier thee from the filed.


Never hereafter bear a soldiers shield,
A soldiers sword, nor any other grace,
But what is like thine own, a doubble face.

Now I beseech Jove hear my prayer, let them be both slain in the battle.


If there be any other of his hart,
We give them free licence to depart.

Cornwell hates flattery.


So does Martianus.


Malgo is resolute for all affairs.


And so is Morgan, for he scorns delays.


then where the field consists of such a spirit,
He that subdues conquers the Crown by merit.

that's I.


tis I.


Ryuers in blood declare it.


Grass turn to Crimson if vigenius spare it.


Air be made purple with our reeking gore.


Follow my friends.


Conquer or near give ore.


this way I saw vigenius on the spur.


I periduras, this way.


A strange fight, my Lord is breathless.


My dear Lord is dead.


True Brothers in ambition, and in death.


Yet we are enemies, why fight we not
With one another, for our generals loss.

To much blood already hath been spent,
Now therefore since the difference in themselves,
Is reconsiled in eithers overthrow,
Let us be as we were before this Jar,
And joining hands like honourable friends,
Inter their bodies as becomes their state,
And which is rare once more to Elidure,
Who now in prison leads a wearied life,
With true submission offer Englands Crown.
Of all the charges of tumultuous fate,
This is most strange three times to flow in state.

Madam.


You are welcome, what new flatteries,
Are a coining in the mint of that smooth face?

Where is the Lady Elidor I pray.


Amongst my other waiting maids at work.


Tis well, yet Madam with your gracious leave
I wish it better.

What in love with her,
Can thou affect such a dejected wretch,
Then I perceive thy flattery is folly,
Or thought prove honest, loving one so poor.

I know not Madam what your highness gathers
Out of my troubled words, I love you well,
And though the time should alter, as I am sure,
It is impossible, yet I would follow
All your misfortunes with a patient hart.

I have seen too much of thee to credit thee.


Now in your height of glory use your servant,
now Madam, whilst the noble Peridure
That loves you dearer then the British Crown,
Whilst hes conqueror, use me to destroy
Your greatest enemy, and I will do it.

Thou wilt not.


Be it Elidure the king,
The prisoner I should say, I'd murder him,
To show how much I love your majesty.

Thou would not poison for me his base Queen,
Whom I so often have triumphed ore,
That torment now is her beatitude,
And tedious unto me.

no more, shes dead.


See where she comes, dispatch her presently,
For though the Princely Peridure be king,
His brothers death in time will make him odious
Unto his subjects, and they may restore
Mild Elidure again, and then I dye,

Withdraw, shes dead, as surely as you live.


What shall I never from this servitude
Receive releasant evermore be plagud,
With this insulting Queen? Is there no change,
no other alteration in the state
I know there is not, I am borne to be
a slave, to one baser then slavery

I will release you by a speedy death.


By death, alas, what tongue pronounst that word?
What my Lord weather-cocke? nay then I see,
Death in thy mouth is but base flattery.

By heaven I am sent to kill you.


By whose means.


By one that will avouch it when tis done.


not the proud queen.


Yes, but I am determined
in full amends for all my flattery,
to save your life, and kill her instantly.

Oh if a Devil would undertake that deed,
I card not though she heard me, I would say,
He were a star more glorious then the day.

And would you for that good deed pardon me.


And quite all former injury.


But let me tell your highness by the way,
the Queen is not so hasty of your death.

no, for she had rather have my life prolongd.


I do assure your highness on mine honour,
When I did say she sent me to destroy you,
I slaunderd her great mercy towards you,
For she had given me order to release you.

Oh monstrous lie.


believe it, for tis true:
And this moreover, she so much repents
Her former pride and hardness towards you,
that she could wish it never had bin done.

then I repent me of my wrongs towards her,
And in the stead of a reward proposd
to him that should destroy her, I do wish,
Death be his death, that undertakes the deed.

but will you not forget these princely words,
if any alteration should ensue.

not I, I in my oths am true.


Except once more the Lords crown Elydure.


though that should chance, i'll hold my promise sure.


And you too Madam.


So thou muderst her.


Know that Lord periduras and his
brother, are in the battle slain, and by the nobles,
her husband Elidure raised to the state,
setting aside all jesting, Queen believe it.
And truce with her, least she triumph again.

For Gods sake make us friends.


Good Lord how strange this reconciled foes behold each other.


Sister.


Kind sister.


Then make me your brother, say are you friends.


We are.


Then chance what can,
in this I have prooud my self an honest man.

The king your husband, madam new releast,
Desires your presence at his Coronation.

My Elydure a third time to be crowned.


True Madam, and expects your company.


And you knew this before.


No on mine honour.


Neither you Sister.


neither.


If you did My oath is past, and what I have lately sworn i'll hold inviolate,
here all strife ends, thy wit has made two proud shrews perfect friends.


A third time live our gracious sovereign
Monarch of England, crowned by these hands.

A third time Lords, I do return your love,
And wish it with my soul, so heaven were pleased,
My ambitious Brothers had not died for this,
But we have given them honourable graves.
And mournd their most untimely funeral,
My loved Queen, come seat thee by my side,
Partner in all my sorrows and my joys,
And you her reconciled Sister sit,
By her in second place of majesty,
It joys me that you have outworn your pride.

Methinks my gracious husband and my King,
I never took more pleasure in my glass,
Then I receive in her society.

Nor I in all my state as in her love.


My Lord of Cornwell, whose that whispers to you?
Or whats the news?

My liege, he tells me here's a great contention
betwixt two noted persons of the Land
much spoke of by all states, one some-body
Hath brought before your highness and this presence,
An infamous and strange opiniond fellow,
Called No-body, they would entreat your highness,
To hear their matters scand.

We'll sit in person on their controversies,
Admit them Cornwell.

Is that strange monster took, so much renownd,
In City, Court, and Country, for lewd pranks.
Tis well, weel hear how he can purge himself.

now sirrha we have brought you before the king,
Wheres your hart now?

My harts in my hose, but my face was never ashamed to show it self, yet
before king or Keyser.


And wheres your hart sirrha?


My harts lower then my hofe, for mine it at my heel, but whersoeuer it is, it
is a true hart, and so is not somb.


Health to your Majesty, and to the Queen,
With a hart lower then this humble earth
whereon I kneel. I beg against this fellow,
Justice my liege.

Against whom.


Against No-body.


My liege, his words well suit unto his thoughts,
He wishes no man Justice, being composed
Of all deceit, of subtilty and slight,
For mine own part, if in this royal presence,
And before all these true judicial Lords,
I cannot with sincerenes clear my self,
Of all suggestions falsely coynd against me,
Let me be hanged up sunning in the air,
And made a scar-crow.

Lets hear his accusations,
And then how well thou can aquit thy self.

First, when this monster made his residence
Within the country, and dispersed his shape
Through every shire and country of the Land,
Where plenty had before a quiet seat,
And the poor commons of the Land were full,
With rich abundance and saciety,
At his arrive, great dearths and scarsity,
By ingrosing come, and racking poor men's rents.
This makes so many poor and honest Farmers,
to sell their leases, and to beg their bread,
this makes so many beggars in the Land.

I but what proof or lawful evidence
Can you bring forth, that this was done by him.

My Lord I tras't him, and so found him out,
But should your Lordship not believe my proof,
Examine all the rich and wealthy chuffs,
Whose full cramd Garners to the roofs are filled,
In every dearth who makes this scarsitye,
And every man will clearly quit himself,
Then consequently, it must be No-body.
Base copper money is stamped, the mint disgrast,
Make search who doth this, every man clears one,
So consequently it must be No-body.
Besides, whereas the nobles of the land,
And Gentlemen built goodly manner houses,
Fit to receive a King, and all his train,
And there kept royal hospitality,
Since this intestine monster No-body,
Dwells in these goodly houses keeps no train,
A hundred Chimneys, and not one cast smoke,
And now the cause of these, mock-begger Hal,
Is this they, are dwelt in by No-body,
For this out of the country he was chaste.

My royal liedge why am I thus disgrast,
I'll prove that slanderous wretch hath this al done.

Tis good you can acquit you, such abuses,
Grow in the country, and unknown to us:
nay then no marvel that so many poor,
starve in the streets and beg from door, to door.
Then sirha purge you from this country blame,
Or we will make thee the worlds public shame.

now No-body, what can you say to this.


My M. hath good cards, on his side I'll vvarant him.


my Lord, you know that slanders are no proofs,
nor words without their present evidence,
If things were done, they must be done by some-body,
Else could they have no being. Is corn hoarded,
some-body hoards it, else it would be dealt,
In mutual plenty throughout all the land,
Are their rents raised, if No-body should do it,
then should it be undone. Is
Base money stamped, and the kings letters forgd,
Some-body needs must do it, therefore not I,
And where he says, great houses long since built,
Lye destitute, and wast because inhabited,
By No-body my liedge, I answer thus,
If Some-body dwelt therein, I would give place.
Or wold he but allow those chimneys fire,
They would cast clouds to heaven, the Kitchin-foode
It would relieve the poor, the sellers beer,
It would make strangers d^inke, but he commits
These outragies then lays the blame on me,
And for my good deed, I am made a scorn.
I only give the tired a refuge seat,
The vnclothd garments, and the starved meat.

How say you by this master Some-body. I believe
you will be found out by and by.

If this be true my liedge, as true it is,
Some-body will be found an arrant cheater,
Unless he better can acquit himself.

Touch him with the city, since you have taken the foil in the Country.


Sirha, what can you say to this?


What should I say my Lord, see hear complaints,
Made in the city against no-body,
As well as in the country. See their bills,
Here's one complains his wife hath bin abroad,
And asking where she revels night, by night,
She answers she hath bin with no-body.
Hears queens maintained in every suburb street,
Ask who maintains them, and tis no-body.
Watches are, beaten, and Constables are scoft,
In dead of night men are made drunk in taverns,
Girls loose their maiden heads at thirteen years,
Pockets picked, and purses cut in throngs.

Enough, enough, doth no-body all this?
Though he hath cleared himself from country crimes,
He cannot escape the city.

Yes dread Queen,
I must confess these things are daily done,
For which I here accuse this Some-body,
That every where with slanders dogs my steps,
And cunningly assumes my borrowed shape,
Women lie out, if they be took and found
with somebody, then No-body goes clear,
Else the blames mine, he doth these faults unknown,
then slanders my chaste innocence for proof.
somebody doth maintain a common strumpet
ith Garden-allies, and undid himself.
somebody swaggered with the watch last night,
was carried to the counter.
somebody once picked a pocket in this Play-house yard,
Was hoisted on the stage, and shamd about it.

Ha, ha, hath my master met with you.


Alas my liege, your honest No-bodie
Builds Churches in these days, and Hospitals,
Releeues the several prisons in the City,
Redeemes the needy debtor from the hole,
And when this somebody brings infant children,
And leaves them in the night at strangers doors,
Nobody fathers them, provides them nurses,
What should I say, your highness love I crave,
That am all just.

Then somebodies a knave.


If neither city nor country will preuaile to him, with the court ma.
somebody, and there you will match him.


Then touching his abuses in the court.


I marry Nobody what say you to this,
See, here are dangerous Libils against the state,
And no name to them, therefore nobodies.

Besides strange rumours and false buzzing tales,
Of mutinous leesings raised by No-body.

False dice and Cheating brought even to the presence, and who dares be so
impudently knavish,

Unless some fellow of your name and garb.


Cards of advantage with such cheating tricks,
Brought even amongst the noblest of the land,
And when these cosening shifts are once discovered,
There is no cheater found save No-body.

How can thou answer these.


Even as the rest,
Are libels cast, if nobody did make them,
And no-bodies name to them, they are no libels,
For he that sets his name to any slander,
Makes it by that no libel, this aproues
He forgd those slanderous writs to scandal me.
And for false cards, and dice, let my great slops
And his big bellied doublet both be searched,
And see which harbors most hypocrisy.

Let them both be searched.


I'll take my leave of the presence.


nay M. sicophant we'll have the inside of your pockets translated to, we'll
see what stuffyng they have, I'll take a little pains with you.


What have you there in nobodyes pockets.


Here are my liedge bonds forfei^ by poor men,
Which he releast out of the usurers hands,
And canceld. Leases likewise forfeited,
By him repurchast. These petitions,
Of many poor men to prefer their suits.
Unto your highness.

Thou art Just we know,
All great men's pockets should be lined so.

What bombast bears his gorge.


False Cards, false Dice;
The kings hand counterfeit,
Bonds put in suit to gain the forfitures,
forgd deeds to cheat men of their ancient land,
And thousand such like trash.

Nay look you here, hears one that for his bones is prettily stuffed. Hears
fulloms and gourds: here's tall-men low-men Here tray duce ace, passedge comes
a pace.


Mercy great King.


Mercy my Sovereign.


My liedge you cannot to be severe in punishing,
Those monstrous crimes, the only stain and blemish
To the weale-publike.

Villains hear your doom,
Thou that hast bin the oppression of the poor,
Shalt be more poor then penury it s^lfe,
All that thou hast is forfit to the Law,
For thy extortion I will have thee branded,
Upon the forehead with the letter F.
For Cheating whipped, for forging loose thine ears,
Last for a basing of thy Sovereigns Coin,
And traitrous impress of our kingly seal,
Suffer the death of traitors. Bear him hence.

Since I must needs be martird grant me this,
That No-body may whip, or torture me,
Or hang me for a traitor.

Away with him.


Or if needs I must dye a traitors death,
That No-body may see me when I dye.

Hence with the traitor.


I know by your complexion you were ripe for the hangm^n, but now to this lean
Gentleman.


Let me doom him, smooth spaniel, soothing grome
Slick Oily knave, egregious parasite,
Thou turning vane, and changing Weather-cocke,
My sentence is thou shalt be naked stripped,
And by the city beadles soundly whipped.

I'll make bold to see thexecution.


Well hath the King decreed, now by your highness patience let No-body borrow
a word or two of Euery-body.


Heer if you wonder why the king Elidurus bestows nothing on me for all my
good services in his land, if the multitude should say he hath preferred No-body,
Some-body or other would say it were not well done, for in doing good to
No-body he should but get himself an il name. Therefore I will leave my suit
to him, and turn to you. Kind Gentleman if any-body here dislike No-body,
then I hope Euery-body have pleased you, for being offended with no-body, nor
Any-body can find himself aggrieved, Gentlemen they have a cold suit that have
no-body to speak in their cause, and therefore blame us not to fear, yet our
comfort is this, if no-body have offended you cannot blame No-body for it, or
rather we will find Some-body heareafter shall make good the fault that
no-body hath done, and so I crave the general grace of Euery-body.

now forward Lords, long may our glories stand,
Three sundry times Crowned king of this fair land.




