First the Music of Uiolenze began to play, during which came in upon the
s^age six wild men clothed in leaves. Of whom the first bare in his neck a
faggot of small sticks, which they all both severally and together assayed with
all their strengthes to break, but it could not be broken by them. At the
length one of them plucked out one of the sticks and brake it: And the rest
plucking out all the other sticks one after an other did easily break them,
the same being severed: which being conjoined they had before attempted in
vain. After they had this done, they departed the stage, and the Music
ceased. Hereby was signified, that a state knit in unity doth continue strong
against all force. But being divided, is easily destroyed. As befell upon Duke
Gorboduc dividing his land to his two sons which he before held in Monarchy.
And upon the dissention of the brethren to whom it was divided.

The silent night, that brings the quiet pause,
From painful travails of the weary day,
Prolonges my careful thoughts, and makes me blame
The slow Aurore, that so for love or shame
Doth long delay to show her blushing face,
And now the day renews my griefull plaint.

My gracious lady and my mother dear,
Pardon my grief for your so grieved mind,
To ask what cause torments so your hart.

So great a wrong, and so unjust despite,
Without all cause, against all course of kind!

Such causeless wrong and so unjust despite,
May have redress, or at the least, revenge.

Neither, my son: such is the froward will,
The person such, such my mishap and thine.

Mine know I none, but grief for your distress.

Yes: mine for thine my son: A father? no:
In kind a father, not in kindlinesse.

My father? why? I know nothing at all,
Wherein I have misdone unto his grace.

Therefore, the more unkind to thee and me.
For knowing well (my son) the tender love
That I have ever borne and bear to thee,
He grieved thereat, is not content alone,
To spoil thee of my sight my chiefest joy,
But thee, of thy birthright and heritage
Causeless, unkindly, and in wrongful wise,
Against all law and right, he will bereave:
Half of his kingdom he will give away.

To whom?

Even to Porrex his younger son,
Whose growing pride I do so sore suspect,
That being raised to equal rule with thee,
Me thinks I see his envious hart to swell,
Filled with disdain and with ambitious hope,
The end the Gods do know, whose altars I
Full oft have made in vain, of cattle slain
To send the sacred smoke to heavens throne,
For thee my son, if things do so succeed,
As now my jealous mind misdemeth sore.

Madame, leave care careful plaint for me,
Just hath my father been to every wight:
His first unjustice he will not extend
To me I trust, that give no cause thereof:
My brothers pride shall hurt him self, not me.

So grant the Gods: But yet thy father so
Hath firmly fixed his vnmoued mind,
That plaints and prayers can no whit avail,
For those have I assayed, but even this day,
He will endeavour to procure assent
Of all his counsel to his fond devise.

Their ancestors from race to race have borne
True faith to my forefathers and their seed:
I trust they eke will bear the like to me.

There rests all. But if they fail thereof,
And if the end bring forth an ill success:
On them and theirs the mischief shall befall,
And so I pray the Gods requite it them,
And so they will, for so is wont to be.
When lords, and trusted rulers under kings,
To please the present fancy of the prince.
With wrong transpose the course of governance,
Murders, mischief, or civil sword at length,
Or mutual treason, or a just revenge,
When right succeeding line returns again,
By Ioues just judgment and deserved wrath,
Brings them to cruel and reproachful death,
And roots their names and kindredes from the earth.

Mother, content you, you shall see the end.

The end? thy end I fear, Jove end me first.

My lords, whose grave advise faithful aide,
Have long upheld my honour and my realm,
And brought me to this age from tender years,
Guidyng so great estate with great renown:
Now more imports me, than erst, to use
Your faith and wisdom, whereby yet I reign:
That when by death my life and rule shall cease,
The kingdom yet may with vnbroken course,
Have certain prince, by whose undoubted right,
Your wealth and peace may stand in quiet stay,
And eke that they whom nature hath prepared,
In time to take my place in princely seat,
While in their fathers time their pliant youth
Yields to the frame of skilful governance,
May so be taught and trained in noble arts,
As what their fathers which have reigned before
Have with great fame derived down to them,
With honour they may leave unto their seed:
And not be thought for their unworthy life,
And for their lawless swaruynge out of kind,
Worthy to lose what law and kind them gave:
But that they may preserve the common peace,
The cause that first began and still mainteines
The lyne all course of kings inheritance.
For me, for mine, for you, and for the state,
Where of both I and you have charge and care,
Thus do I mean to use your wonted faith
To me and mine, and to your native land.
My lords be plain without all wry respect
Or poisonous craft to speak in pleasing wise,
Lest as the blame of ill succeeding things
Shall light on you, so light the harms also.

Your good acceptance so (most noble king)
Of such our faithfulness as heretofore
We have employed in duties to your grace,
And to this realm whose worthy head you are,
Well proves that neither you mistrust at all,
Nor we shall need in boasting wise to show,
Our truth to you, nor yet our wakeful care
For you, for yours, and for our native land.
Wherefore (O king) I speak as one for all,
Sith all as one do bear you eagle faith:
Doubt not to use our counsels and our aides,
Whose honours, goods and lives are whole avowed
To serve, to aid, and to defend your grace.

My lords, I thank you all. This is the case.
Ye know, the Gods, who have the sovereign care
For kings, for kingdoms, and for common weals,
Gave me two sons in my more lusty age.
Who now in my decayeng years are grown
Well towards typer state of mind and strength,
To take in hand some greater princely charge.
As yet they live and spend hopeful days,
With me and with their mother here in court.
Their age now asks other place and trade,
And mine also doth ask an other change:
Theirs to more travail, mine to greater case.
When fatal death shall end my mortal life,
My purpose is to leave unto them twain
The realm divided into two sondry parts:
The one Ferrex mine elder son shall have,
The other shall the younger Porrex rule.
That both my purpose may more firmly stand,
And eke that they may better rule their charge,
I mean forthwith to place them in the same:
That in my life they may both learn to rule,
And I may joy to see their ruling well.
This is in sum, what I would have ye wey:
First whether ye allow my whole devise,
And think it good for me, for them, for you,
And for our country, mother of us all:
And if ye like it, and allow it well,
Then for their guydinge and their governance,
Show forth such means of circumstance,
As ye think meet to be both known and kept.
Lo, this is all, now tell me your advise.

And this is much, and asks great advise,
But for my part, my sovereign lord and king,
This do I think. Your majesty doth know,
How under you in justice and in peace,
Great wealth and honour, long we have enjoyed.
So as we can not seem with greedy minds
To wish for change of Prince or governance:
But if we like your purpose and devise,
Our liking must be deemed to proceed
Of rightful reason, and of heedful care,
Not for our selves, but for the common state,
Sith our own state doth need no better change:
I think in all as erst your Grace hath said.
First when you shall vnlode your aged mind
Of heavy care and troubles manifold,
And lay the same upon my Lords your sons,
Whose growing years may bear the burden long,
And long I pray the Gods to grant it so,
And in your life while you shall so behold
Their rule, their virtues, and their noble deeds,
Such as their kind behighteth to us all,
Great be the profits that shall grow thereof,
Your age in quiet shall the longer last.
Your lasting age shall be their longer stay,
For cares of kings, that rule as you have ruled,
For public wealth and not for private joy,
Do wast man life, and hasten crooked age,
With furrowed face and with enfcebled lymines,
To draw on creepyng death a swifter pace.
They two yet young shall bear the parted reign
With greater ease, than one, now old, alone,
Can weld the whole, for whom much harder is
With lessened strength the double weight to bear.
Your eye, your counsel, and the grave regard
Of Father, yea of such a fathers name,
Now at beginning of their sondred reign,
When is the hazard of their whole success,
Shall bridle so their force of youthful heates,
And so restreine the rage of insolence,
Which most assails the yonge and noble minds,
And so shall guide and train in tempered stay
Their yet green bending wits with reverent awe,
As now inured with virtues at the first,
Custom (O King) shall bring delightfulness.
By use of virtue, vice shall grow in hate,
But if you so dispose it, that the day,
Which ends your life, shall first begin their reign,
Great is the peril what will be the end,
When such beginning of such liberties
Uoide of such stays as in your life do lye,
Shall leave them free to random of their will,
An open pray to traitorous flattery,
The greatest pestilence of noble youth.
Which peril shall be past, if in your life,
Their tempered youth with aged fathers awe,
Be brought in ur of skilful stayednesse.
And in your life their lives disposed so,
Shall length your noble life in ioyfulnesse.
Thus think I that your grace hath wisely thought,
And that your tender care of common weal,
Hath bred this thought, so to divide your land,
And plant your sons to bear the present rule,
While you yet live to see their rulinge well,
That you may longer live by joy therein.
What further means behooveful are and meet^
At greater leisure may your grace devise,
When all have said, and when we be agreed
If this be best to part the realm in twain,
And place your sons in present government.
Whereof as I have plainly said my mind,
So would I here the rest of all my Lords,

In part I think as hath been said before,
In part again my mind is otherwise,
As for dividing of this realm in twain,
And lotting out the same in eagle parts,
To either of my lords your graces sounes,
That think I best for this your realms behofe,
For profit and advancement of your sons,
And for your comfort and your honour eke.
But so to place them, while your life do last,
To yield to them your royal governance,
To be above them only in the name
Of father, not in kingly state also,
I think not good for you, for them, nor us.
This kingdom since the bloody civil field
Where Morgan slain did yield his conquered part
Unto his cousins sword in Camberland,
Contains all that meanwhile did suffice
Three noble sons of your forefather Brute.
So your two sons, it may suffice also.
The more, the stronger, if they gre in one.
The smaller compass that the realm doth hold,
The easier is the swey thereof to weld,
The nearer Justice to the wronged poor,
The smaller charge, and yet enough for one.
And when the region is divided so,
That brethren be the lords of either part,
Such strength doth nature knit between them both,
In sundry bodies by conjoined love,
That not as two, but one of doubled force,
Each is to other as a sure defence.
The nobleness and glory of the one
Doth sharpe the courage of the others mind,
With virtuous envy to contend for praise.
And such an egaluesse hath nature made,
Between the brethren of one fathers seed,
As an unkindly wrong it seems to be,
To throw the brother subject under fecte
Of him, whose peer he is by course of kind,
And nature that did make this egalnesse,
Oft so repines at so great a wrong,
That oft she raises up a grudginge grief,
In younger brethren at the elders state:
Whereby both towns and kingdoms have ben rased,
And famous stocks of royal blood destroyed:
The brother, that should be the brothers aide,
And have a wakeful care for his defence,
Gapes for his death, and blames the lyngering years
That draw not forth his end with faster course:
And oft impatient of so lunge delays,
With hateful slaughter he preuentes the fates,
And heaps a just reward for brothers blood,
With endless vengeance on his stock for aye.
Such mischiefs here are wisely met withal,
If eagle state may nourish eagle love,
Where none hath cause to grudge at others good.
But now the head to stoup beneth them both,
No kind, no reason, no good ordre bears.
And oft it hath ben seen, where natures course
Hath ben perverted in disordered wise,
When fathers cease to know that they should rule,
The children cease to know they should obey.
And often ouerkindly tenderness
Is mother of unkindly stubbornenesse.
I speak not this in envy or reproach,
As if I grudged the glory of your sons,
Whose honour I beseech the Gods increase:
Nor yet as if I thought there did remain,
So filthy cankers in their noble breasts,
Whom I esteem (which is their greatest praise)
Undoubted children of so good a king,
Only I mean to show by certain rules,
Which kind hath graft within the mind of man,
That nature hath her ordre and her course,
Which (being broken) doth corrupt the state
Of minds and things, even in the best of all.
My lords your sons may learn to rule of you.
Your own example in your noble court
Is fittest guyder of their youthful years.
If you desire to see some present joy
By sight of their well rulynge in your life,
See them obey, so shall you see them rule,
Who so obeys not with humbleness
Will rule with outrage and with insolence.
Lunge may they rule I do beseech the Gods,
But lunge may they learn, ere they begin to rule.
If kind and fates would suffer, I would wish
Them aged princes, and immortal kings.
Wherefore most noble king I well assent,
Between your sons that you divide your realm,
And as in kind, so match them in degree.
But while the Gods prolong your royal life,
Prolong your reign: for thereto live you here,
And therefore have the Gods so long forborne
To join you to them selves, that still you might
Be prince and father of our common weal.
They when they see your children ripe to rule,
Will make them room, and will remove you hence,
That yours in right ensuynge of your life
May rightly honour your immortal name.

Your wonted true regard of faithful hearts,
Makes me (O king) the bolder to presume,
To speak what I conceive within my breast,
Although the same do not agree at all
With that which other here my lords have said.
Nor which your self have seemed best to like.
Pardon I crave, and that my words be de^ed
To flow from hearty zeal unto your grace,
And to the safety of your common weal.
To part your realm unto my lords your sounes,
I think not good for you, no yet for them,
But worst of all for this our native land,
Within one land, one single rule is best:
Divided reigns do make divided hearts.
But peace preserves the country and the prince,
Such is in man the greedy mind to reign,
So great is his desire to climb aloft,
In worldly stage the stateliest parts to bear,
That faith and justice and all kindly love,
Do yield unto desire of sovereignty,
Where eagle state doth raise an eagle hope
To win the thing that either wold attain.
Your grace remembers how in passed years
The mighty Brute, first prince of all this land,
Possessed the same and ruled it well in one,
He thinking that the compass did suffice,
For his three sons three kingdoms eke to make,
Cut it in three, as you would now in twain.
But how much British blood hath since been spilt,
To join again the sondred unity?
What princes slain before their tunely hour?
What wast of towns and people in the land?
What treasons heaped on murders and on spoils?
Whose just revenge even yet is scarcely ceased,
Ruthefull remembrance is yet raw in mind.
The Gods forbid the like to chance again:
And you (O king) give not the cause thereof.
My Lord Ferrex your elder son, perhaps
Whom kind and custom geues a rightful hope
To be your heir and to succeed your reign,
Shall think that he doth suffer greater wrong
Than he perchance will bear, if power serve.
Porrex the younger so vpraised in state,
Perhaps in courage will be raised also.
If flattery then, which fails not to assail
The tender minds of yet unskilful youth,
In one shall kindle and increase disdain,
And envy in the others heart inflame,
This fire shall waste their love, their lives, their land,
And ruthefull ruin shall destroy them both.
I wish not this (O king) so to befall,
But fear the thing, that I do most abhor.
Give no beginning to so dreadful end.
Keep them in order and obedience:
And let them both by now obeying you,
Learn such behaviour as beseems their state,
The elder, myldenesse in his governance,
The younger, a yielding contentednesse.
And keep them near unto your presence still,
That they restrained by the awe of you,
May live in compass of well tempered staye,
And pass the perils of their youthful years.
Your aged life draws on to febler time,
Wherein you shall less able be to bear
The travails that in youth you have sustained,
Both in your persons and your realms defence.
If planting now your sons in further parts,
You send them further from your present reach,
Less shall you know how they them selves demean:
Traitorous corrupters of their pliant youth,
Shall have vnspied a much more free access,
And if ambition and inflamed disdain
Shall arm the one, the other, or them both,
To civil war, or to usurping pride,
Late shall you rue, that you no recked before.
Good is I grant of all to hope the best,
But not to live still dreadlesse of the worst.
So trust the one, that the other be forsene.
Arm not unskilfulness with princely power.
But you that long have wisely ruled the reigns.
Of royalty within your noble realm,
So hold them, while the Gods for our avails
Shall stretch the thread of your prolonged days.
To soon he clambe into the flaming carre,
Whose want of skill did set the earth on fire.
Time and example of your noble grace,
Shall teach your sons both to obey and rule,
When tune hath taught them, time shall make the place,
The place that now is full^ and so I pray
Long it remain, to comfort of us all.

I take your faithful harts in thankful part*
But sith I see no cause to draw my mind,
To fear the nature of my loving sons,
Or to misdeme that envy or disdain,
Can there work hate, where nature plants love:
In one self purpose do I still abide.
My love extends egally to both,
My land suffices for them both also.
Humber shall part the marches of their realms:
The Sotherne part the elder shall possess:
The Notherne shall Porrex the younger rule:
In quiet I will pass mine aged days,
Free from the travail and the painful cares,
That hasten age upon the worthiest kings.
But lest the fraud, that ye do seem to fear,
Of flattering tongues, corrupt their tender youth,
And wrythe them to the ways of youthful lust,
To cl^yng pride, or to revenging hate,
Or to neglecting of their careful charge,
Lewdely to live in wanton recklessnesse,
Or to oppressing of the rightful cause,
Or not to wreke the wrongs done to the poor,
To tread down truth, or favour false deceit:
I mean to join to either of my sons
Some one of those, whose long approved faith
And wisdom tried, may well assure my heart:
That ^ynyng fraud shall find no way to c^epe
Into their ^ensed ears with grave adiuse*
This is the end, and so I pray you all
To bear my sons the love and loyalty
That I have found within your faithful breasts.

You, nor your sons, our sovereign lord shall want,
Our faith and service while our lives do last.

When settled stay doth hold the royal throne
In steadfast place, by known and doubtless right,
And chiefly when descent on one alone
Makes single and vnparted reign to light:
Each change of course vnioynts the whole estate,
And yields it thrall to ruin by debate.
The strength that knit by fast accorde in one,
Against all foreign power of mighty foes,
Could of it self defend it self alone,
Disjoined once, the former force doth lose.
The sticks, that sondred brake so soon in twain,
In faggot bound attempted were in vain.
Oft tender mind that leads the partial eye
Oferring parents in their childrens love,
Destroys the wrongly loved child thereby
This doth the proud son of Apollo prove,
Who rasshely set in chariot of his sire.
Inflamed the parched earth with heavens fire.
And this great king, that doth divide his land,
And change the course of his descending crown,
And yields the reign into his childrens hand,
From blissful state of joy and great renown,
A mirror shall become to Princes all,
To learn to shun the cause of such a fall.

First the Music of Cornettes began to play* during which came in upon the
stage a King accompanied with a nombre of his nobility and gentlemen. And
after he had placed him self in a chair of estate prepared for him: there came
and kneeled before him a grave and aged gentelman and offred up a cup unto him
of wine in a glass, which the the King refused. After him comes a brave and
lusty young gentleman and presents the King with a cup of gold filled with
poison, which the King accepted, and drinking the same, immediately fell down
dead upon the the stage, and so was carried thence away by his Lords and
gentelmen, and then the Music ceased. Hereby was signified, that as glass by
nature holds no poison, but is clear and may easily be seen through, no
bows by any art: So a faithful counsellour holds no treason, but is
plain and open, n^ yields to any indiscreet affection, but gives wholesome
counsel, which the ill advised Prince refuses. The delightful gold filled
with poison betokens flattery, which under fair seeming of pleasant words
bears deadly poison, which destroyed the Prince that receives it. As befell
in the two brethren Ferrex and Porrex, who refusing the wholesome advise of grave
counsellours, credited these young Paracites, and brought to them selves death
and destruction thereby.

I marvel much what reason led the king*
My Father, thus without all my desert,
To reave me half the kingdom, which by course
Of law and nature should remain to me.

If you with stubborn and untamed pride
Had stood against him in rebelling wise,
Or if with grudging mind you had envied
So slow a sliding of his aged years,
Or sought before your time to haste the course
Of fatal death upon his royal head,
Or stained your stock with murder of your kin:
Some face of reason might perhaps have seemed,
To yield some likely cause to spoil ye thus.

The wrekeful Gods power on my cursed head
Eternal plagues and never dying woes,
The hellish prince, adjudge my dampned ghost
To Tantales thirst, or proud Ixions wheel,
Or cruel gripe to gnaw my growing heart,
To during torments and unquenched flames,
If ever I conceived so foul a thought,
To wish his end of life, or yet of reign.

No yet your father (O most noble Prince)
Did ever think so foul a thing of you.
For he, with more than fathers tender love,
While yet the fates do lend him life to rule,
(Who long might live to see your ruling well)
To you my Lord, and to his other son:
Lo he resignes his realm and royalty:
Which never would so wise a Prince have done,
If he had once misdemed that in your heart
There ever lodged so unkind a thought.
But tender love (my Lord) and settled trust
Of your good nature, and your noble mind,
Made him to place you thus in royal throne,
And now to give you half his realm to guide,
Yea and that half which in abounding store
Of things that serve to make a wealthy realm,
In stately cities, and in frutefull soil,
In temperate breathing of the milder heaven,
In things of needful use, which friendly sea,
Transportes by traffike from the foreign parts,
In flowing wealth, in honour and in force,
Doth pass the double value of the part,
That Porrex hath allotted to his reign.
Such is your case, such is your fathers love.

Ah love, my friends? love wrongs not who he loves.

No yet he wrongs you, that gives you
So large a reign, ere that the course of time
Bring you to kingdom by descend right,
Which time perhaps might end your time before.

Is this no wrong, say you, to reeve from me
My native right of half so great a realm?
And thus to match his younger son with me
In eagle power, and in as great degree?
Yea and what son? the son whose swelling pride
Would never yield one poinct of reverence,
When I the elder and apparent heir
Stood in the likelihode to possess the whole,
Yea and that son which from his childish age
Envies mine honour and doth hate my life.
What will he now do, when his pride, his rage,
The mindful malice of his grudging heart,
Is armed with force, with wealth, and kingly state?

Was this not wrong, yea ill advised wrong,
To give so mad a man so sharpe a sword,
To so great peril of so great mishap,
Wide open thus to set so large a way?

Alas my Lord, what griefull thing is this,
That of your brother you can think so ill?
I never saw him utter likely sign,
Whereby a man might see or once misdeme
Such hate of you, no such vnyelding pride.
Ill is their counsel, shameful be their end,
That raising such mistrustful fear in you,
Sowing the seed of such unkindly hate,
Travail by treason to destroy you both.
Wise is your brother, and of noble hope,
Worthy to weld a large and mighty realm.
So much a stronger friend have you thereby,
Whose strength is your strength, if you gre in one.

If nature and the Gods had pinched so
Their flowing bounty, and their noble gifts
Of princely qualities, from you my Lord,
And powrde them all at ones in wasteful wise
Upon your fathers younger son alone:
Perhaps there be that in your prejudice
Would say that birth should yield to worthiness.
But sith in each good gift and princely art
Ye are his match, and in the chief of all
In mildness and in sobre governance
Ye far surmount: And since there is in you
Sufficing skill and hopeful towardness
To weld the whole, and match your elders praise:
I see no cause why ye should loose the half.
No would I wish you yield to such a loss:
Lest your mild sufferance of so great a wrong,
Be deemed cowardishe and simple dread:
Which shall give courage to the fiery head
Of your yonge brother to invade the whole.
While yet therefore sticks in the peoples mind
The loathed wrong of your disheritaunce,
And ere your brother have by settled power,
By guile full cloak of an alluring show,
Got him some force and favour in the realm,
And while the noble Queen your mother lives,
To work and practise all for your avail,
Attempt redress by arms, and wreak your self
Upon his life, that gains by your loss,
Who now to shame of you, and grief of us,
In your own kingdom triumphs over you.
Show now your courage meet for kingly state,
That they which have avowed to spend their goods,
Their lands, their lives and honours in your cause*
May be the bolder to maintain your part,
When they do see that coward fear in you,
Shall not betray no fail their faithful hearts.
If once the death of Porrex end the strife,
And pay the price of his usurped reign,
Your mother shall persuade the angry king,
The Lords your friends eke shall appease his rage.
For they be wise, and well they can foresee,
That ere lunge time your aged fathers death
Will bring a time when you shall well requite
Their friendly favour, or their hateful spite,
Yea, or their slackenesse to advance your cause.
" Wise men do not so hang on passing sta^
" Of present Princes, chiefly in their age,
" But they will further cast their reaching eye,
" To view and weye the times and reigns to come.
No is it likely, though the king be wrath,
That he yet will, or that the realm will bear,
Extreme revenge upon his only son.
Or if he would, what one is he that dare
Be minister to such an enterprise?
And here you be now placed in your own,
Amid your Friends, your vassals and your strength.
We shall defend and keep your person safe,
Till either counsel turn his tender mind,
Or age, or sorrow end his weary days.
But if the fear of Gods, and secrete grudge
Of natures law, repining at the fact,
Withhold your courage from so great attempt:
Know ye, that lust of kingdoms hath no law.
The Gods do bear and well allow in kings,
The things they abhor in rascal routes.
" When kings on slender quarrels run to wars,
" And then in cruel and unkindly wise,
" Command theftes, rapes, murders of innocents,
" The spoil of towns, ruins of mighty realms:
" Think you such princes do suppose them selves
" Subject to laws of kind, and fear of Gods?
Murders and violent theftes in private men,
Are heinous crimes and full of foul reproach,
Yet none offence, but decked with glorious name
Of noble conquests, in the hands of kings.
But if you like not yet so ho^e devise,
No list to take such vauntage of the time,
But though with peril of your own estate,
You will not be the first that shall invade:
Assemble yet your force for your defence,
And for your safety stand upon your guard.

O heaven was there ever heard or known,
So wicked counsel to a noble prince?
Let me (my Lord) disclose unto your grace
This heinous tale, what mischief it contains,
Your fathers death, your brothers and your own,
Your present murder and eternal shame.
Hear me (O King) and suffer not to sink
So high a treason in your princely breast.

The mighty Gods forbid that ever I
Should once conceive such mischief in my hart.
Although my brother hath bereft my realm,
And bear perhaps to me an hateful mind:
Shall I revenge it, with his death therefore?
Or shall I so destroy my fathers life
That gave me life? the Gods forbid, I say.
Cease you to speak so any more to me.
No you my friend with answer once repeat
So foul a tale. In silence let it die.
What lord or subject shall have hope at all,
That under me they safely shall enjoy
Their goods, their honours, lands and liberties,
With whom, neither one only brother dear,
No father dearer, could emoye their lives?
But since, I fear my younger brothers rage,
And since perhaps some other man may give
Some like advise, to move his grudging head
At mine estate, which counsel may perchance
Take greater force with him, than this with me,
I will in secrete so prepare my self,
As if his malice or his lust to reign
Break forth in arms or sudden violence,
I may withstand his rage and keep mine own.

I fear the fatal time now draws on,
When civil hate shall end the noble line
Of famous Brute and of his royal seed.
Great Jove defend the mischiefs now at hand.
O that the Secretaries wise advise
Had erst been heard when he besought the king
Not to divide his land, nor send his sons
To further parts from presence of his court,
No yet to yield to them his governance.
Lo such are they now in the royal throne
As was rash Phaeton in Phebus carre.
No then the fiery stedes did draw the flame
With wilder rando^ through the kindled skies,
Than traitorous counse^ now will whirl abou^
The youthful heads of these unskilful kings.
But I here of their father will inform.
The reverence of him perhaps shall stay
The growing mischiefs, while they yet are green.
If this help not, then woe unto them selves,
The prince, the people, the divided land.

And is it thus? And doth he so prepare,
Against his brother as his mortal foe?
And now while yet his aged father lives?
Neither regards he him? nor fears he me?
War would he have? and he shall have it so.

I saw my self the great prepared store
Of horse, of armour, and of weapon there,
No bring I to my lord reported tales
Without the ground of seen and fearched troth.
Lo secrete quarrels run about his court,
To bring the name of you my lord in hate.
Each man almost can now debate the cause,
And ask a reason of so great a wrong,
Why he so noble and so wise a prince,
Is as unworthy rest his heritage?
And why the king, misseledde by crafty means,
Divided thus his land from course of right?
The wiser sort hold down their griefull heads.
Each man withdraws from talk and company,
Of those that have been known to favour you.
To hide the mischief of their meaning there,
Rumours are spread of your preparing here.
The rascal numbers of unskilful sort
Are filled with monstrous tales of you and yours.
In secrete I was counselled by my friends,
To hast me thence, and brought you as you know
Letters from those, that both can truly tell,
And would not write unless they knew it well.

My lord, yet ere you move unkindly war,
Send to your brother to demand the cause.
Perhaps some traitorous tales have filled his ears
With false reports against your noble grace:
Which once disclosed, shall end the growing strife,
That else not stayed with wise foresight in time
Shall hazard both your kingdoms and your lives.
Send to your father eke, he shall appease
Your kindled minds, and rid you of this fear.

Rid me of fear? I fear him not at all:
No will to him, no to my father send.
If danger were for one to tarry there,
Think ye it safety to return again?
In mischiefs, such as Ferrex now intends,
The wonted courteous laws to messengers
Are not observed, which in just war they use.
Shall I so hazard any one of mine?
Shall I betray my trusty friends to him,
That have disclosed his treason unto me?
Let him entreat that fears, I fear him not.
Or shall I to the king my father send?
Yea and send now, while such a mother lives,
That loves my brother, and that hates me?
Shall I give leisure, by my fond delays,
To Ferrex to oppress me all vnware?
I will not, but I will invade his realm,
And seek the traitor prince within his court.
Mischief for mischief is a due reward.
His wretched head shall pay the worthy price
Of this his treason and his hate to me.
Shall I abide, and treat, and send and pray,
And hold my yelden throat to traitors knife?
While I with valiant mind and conquering force,
Might rid my self of foes: and win a realm?
Yet rather, when I have the wretches head,
Then to the king my father will I send.
The bootless case may yet appease his wrath:
If not, I will defend me as I may.

Lo here the end of these two youthful kings,
The fathers death, the ruin of their realms.
" O most unhappy state of counsellers,
" That light on so unhappy lords and times,
" That neither can their good advise be heard,
" Yet must they bear the blames of ill success.
But I will to the king their father haste,
Ere this mischief come to the likely end,
That if the mindful wrath of wrekefull Gods,
Since mighty Ilions fall not yet appeased
With these poor remnantes of the Trojan name,
Have not determined by vnmoued fate
Out of this realm to race the Brittishe line,
By good advise, by awe of fathers name,
By force of wiser lords, this kindled hate
May yet be quentched, ere it consume us all.

When youth not bridled with a guiding stay
Is left to random of their own delight,
And welds whole realms, by force of sovereign sway,
Great is the danger of vnmaistred might,
Lest skilless rage throw down with headlong fall^
Their lands, their states, their lives, them selves al^
When growing pride doth fill the swelling breast,
And greedy lust doth raise the climbing mind,
Oh hardly may the peril be repressed,
No fear of angry Gods, no laws kind.
No countries care can fired hearts restrain,
When force hath armed envy and disdain.
When kings of fore^ette will neglect the rede
Of best advise, and yield to pleasing tales,
That do their fancies noisome humour feed,
No reason, nor regard of right avails.
Succeeding heaps of plagues shall teach to late,
To learn the mischiefs of misguided state.
Fowie fall the traitor false, that vndermines
The love of brethren to destroy them both.
Wo to the prince, that pliant care ^nclynes,
And yields his mind to poisonous tale, that flows
From flattering mouth. And woe to wretched land
That wastes it self with civil sword in hand.
Lo, thus it is, poison in gold to take,
And wholesome drink in homely cup forsake.

First the music of flutes began to play, during which came in upon the
stage a company of mourners all clad in black betokening death and sorrow to
ensue upon the ill advised misgouernement and dissention of bretherne, as
befell upon the murderer of Ferrex by his younger brother. After the mourners
had passed thryse about the stage, they departed, and than the music ceased.

O cruel fates, O mindful wrath of Gods,
Whose vengeance neither Simois stained streams
Flowing with blood of Trojan princes slain,
Nor Phrygian fields made rank with corpses dead
Of Asian kings and lords, can yet appease,
No slaughter of unhappy Pryams race,
Nor Ilions fall made level with the soil.
Can yet suffice: but still continued rage
Pursues our lines, and from the farthest seas
Doth chase the issues of destroyed Troye.
" Oh no man happy, till his end be seen.
If any flowing wealth and seeming joy
In present years might make a happy wight,
Happy was Hecuba the woefullest wretch
That ever lived to make a mirror of,
And happy Pryam with his noble sons.
And happy I, till now alas I see
And feel my most unhappy wretchedness.
Behold my lords, read ye this letter here.
Lo it conteins the ruin of our realm,
If timely speed provide not hasty help.
Yet (O ye Gods) if ever woeful king
Might move ye kings of kings, wreke it on me
And on my sons, not on this guiltless realm.
Send down your wasting flames fro wrathful skies,
To reave me and my sons the hateful breath.
Read, read my lords: this is the matter why
I called ye now to have your good advise.

MY soneraigne lord, what I am loath to write,
But lothest am to see, that I am forced
By letters now to make you understand.
My lord Ferrex your eldest son misled
By traitorous fraud of young vntempred wits,
Assembleth force against your younger son,
No can my counsel yet withdraw the heate
And furious pangs of his inflamed head.
Disdain (saith he) of his disheritance
Arms him to wreke the great pretended wrong,
With ciuyll sword upon his brothers life.
If present help do not restrain this rage,
This flame will wast your sons, your land, you.
Your majesties faithful and most humble subject Dordan.

O king, appease your grief and stay your plaint.
Great is the matter, and a woeful case.
But timely knowledge may bring timely help.
Send for them both unto your presence here.
The reverence of your honourage, and state,
Your grave advice, the awe of fathers name,
Shall quickly knit again this broken peace.
And if in either of my lords your sons,
Be such untamed and vnyelding pride,
As will not bend unto your noble hestes:
If Ferrex the elder son can bear no peer,
Or Porrex not content, aspires to more
Than you him gave above his native right:
Join with the juster side, so shall you force
Them to agree, and hold the land in stay.

What means this? Lo yonder comes in hast
Philander from my lord your younger son.

The Gods send joyful news.

The mighty Jove
Preserve your majesty, O noble king.

Philander, welcome: but how doth my son?

Your son, sir, lives, and healthy I him left.
But yet (O king) the want of lustful health
Could not be half so griefefull to your grace,
As these most wretched tidings that I bring.

O heavens, yet more? not end of woes to me?

Tyndar, O king, came lately from the court
Of Ferrex, to my lord your younger son,
And made report of great prepared store
For war, and saith that it is wholly meant
Against Porrex, for high disdain that he
Lives now a king and eagle in degree
With him, that claims to succeed the whole,
As by due title of descending right.
Porrex is now so set on flaming fire,
Partly with kindled rage of cruel wrath,
Partly with hope to gain a realm thereby,
That he in hast prepares to invade
His brothers land, and with unkindly war
Threatens the murder of your elder son,
No could I him persuade that first he should
Send to his brother to demand the cause,
Nor yet to you to stay this hateful strife,
Wherefore sith there no more I can be heard,
I come my self now to inform your grace,
And to beseech you, as you love the life
And safety of your children and your realm,
Now to employ your wisdom and your force
To stay this mischief ere it be to late.

Are they in arms? would he not send to me?
Is this the honour of a fathers name?
In vain we travail to assuage their minds,
As if their hearts, whom neither brothers love,
Nor fathers awe, nor kingdoms cares, can move,
Our counsels could withdraw from raging heat.
Jove slay them both, and end the cursed line.
For though perhaps fear of such mighty force
As I my lords, joined with your noble aides,
May yet raise, shall repress their present heate,
The secret grudge and malice will remain,
The fire not quenched, but kept in close restraint,
Fed still within, breaks forth with double flame.
Their death and mine must peaze the angry Gods

Yield not, O king, so much to weak dispeire.
Your sons yet live, and long I trust, they shall.
If fates had taken you from earthly life,
Before beginning of this ciuyll strife:
Perhaps your sounes in their vnmaistered youth,
Loose from regard of any living wight,
Would run on headlong, with unbridled race,
To their own death and ruin of this realm.
But since the Gods, that have the care for kings*
Of things and times dispose the order so,
That in your life this kindled flame breaks forth,
While yet your life, your wisdom, and your power.
May stay the growing mischief, and repress
The fiery blaze of their kindled heate:
It seems, and so ye ought to deem thereof,
That loving Jove hath tempered so the time
Of this debate to happen in your days,
That you yet living may the same appeaze,
And add it to the glory of your latter age,
And they our sons may learn to live in peace.
Beware (O king) the greatest harm of all,
Lest by your wailful plaints your hastened death
Yield larger room unto their growing rage.
Preserve your life, the only hope of stay.
And if your highness herein list to use
Wisdom or force, counsel or knightly aide:
Lo we, our persons, powers and lives are yours,
Use us till death, O king, we are your own.

Lo here the peril that was erst foresene,
When you, (O king) did first divide your land,
And yield your present reign unto your sons,
But now (O noble prince) now is no time
To wail and plain, and wast your woeful life.
Now is the time for present good advise.
Sorrow doth dark the judgment of the wit.
" The hart vnbroken and the courage free
" From feeble faintness of bootless despeire,
" Doth either rise to safety or renown
" By noble valor of vnuanquisht mind,
" Or yet doth perish in more happy sort.
Your grace may send to either of your sons
Some one both wise and noble personage,
Which with good counsel and with weighty name,
Of father, shall present before their eyes
Your hest, your life, your safety and their own,
The present mischief of their deadly strife.
And in the while, assemble you the force
Which your commandment and the spedy hast
Of all my lords here present can prepare.
The terror of your mighty power shall stay
The rage of both, or yet of one at lest.

O king the greatest grief that ever prince did hear,
That ever woeful messenger did tell,
That ever wretched land hath scene before,
I bring to you. Porrex your younger son
With soden force, invaded hath the land
That you to Ferrex did allot to rule,
And with his own most bloody hand he hath
His brother slain, and doth possess his realm.

O heavens send down the flames of your revenge,
Destroy I say with flash of wrekefull fire
The traitor son, and then the wretched sire.
But let us go, that yet perhaps I may
Die with revenge, and peaze the hateful gods.

The lust of kingdom knows no sacred faith,
No rule of reason, no regard of right,
No kindly love, no fear of heavens wrath:
But with contempt of Gods, and mans despite,
Through blodie slaughter, doth prepare the ways
To fatal sceptre and accursed reign.
The son so lothes the fathers lingering days,
No dreads his hand in brothers blode to stain.
O wretched prince, no doest thou yet record
The yet fresh murders done within the land
Of thy forefathers, when the cruel sword
Bereft Morgan his life with cosyns hand?
Thus fatal plagues pursue the guilty race,
Whose murderous hand imbrued with guiltless blood
Asks vengeance still before the heavens face,
With endless mischiefs on the cursed brood.
The wicked child thus brings to woeful sire
The mournful plaints, to wast his very life.
Thus do the cruel flames of ciuyll fire
Destroy the parted reign with hateful strife.
And hence doth spring the well from which doth flow
The dead black streams of mourning, plaints woe.

First the music of Howb^ies began to play, during which there came from under
the stage, as though out of hell three furies. Alecto, Megera, and ^tesiphone,
clad in black garments sprinkled with blood and flames, their bodies girt with
snakes, their heads spread with serpents in ste^d of hear, the one bearing in
her hand a Snake, the other a Whip, and the third a burning Firebrand: each
driving before them a king and a queen, which moved by furies unnaturally had
slain their own children. The names of the kings and queenes were these.
Tantalus, Medea, Athamas, Ino, Cambises, Althea, after that the furies and
these had passed about the s^age thrice, they departed and than the music
ceased: hereby was signified the unnatural murders to follow, that is to say.
Porrex slain by his own mother. And of king Gorboduc and queen Uiden, killed
by their own subjects.

Why should I live, and liuger forth my time
In longer life to double my distress?
O me most woeful wight, whom no mishap
Long ere this day could have bereaved hence.
Mought not these hands by fortune, or by fate,
Have perst this breast, and life with iron rest?
Or in this palace here, where I so long
Have spent my days, could not that happy hour
Once, once have hapt in which these huge frames
With death by fall might have oppressed me?
Or should not this most hard and cruel soil,
So oft where I have pressed my wretched steps,
Sometime had ruth of mine accursed life,
To rend in twain swallow me therein?
So had my bones possessed now in peace
Their happy grave within the closed ground,
And greadie worms had gnawen this pined har^
Without my feeling payne: so should not now
This living breast remain the ruthefull tomb,
Wherein my hart yelden to death is graved:
Nor driery thoughts with pangs of pining grief
My doleful mind had not afflicted thus.
O my beloved son: O my sweet child,
My dear Ferrex, my joy, my lives delight.
Is my beloved son, is my sweet child,
My dear Ferrex, my joy, my lives delight.
Murdered with cruel death? O hateful wretch,
O heinous traitor both to heaven and earth.
Thou Porrex, thou this damned dede hast wrought,
Thou Porrex, thou shalt dearly bye the same.
Traitor to kin and kind, to sire and me,
To thine own flesh, and traitor to thy self.
The Gods on thee in hell shall wreke their wrath,
And here in earth this hand shall take revenge,
On thee Porrex, thou false and caitiff wight.
If after blood, so eigre were thy thirst,
And murderous mind had so possessed thee,
If such hard hart of rock and stony flint
Lived in thy breast, that nothing else could like
Thy cruel tyrants thought but death and blood:
Wild savage beasts, mought not their slaughter seru^
To fed thy greedy will, and in the midst
Of their entrails to stain thy deadly hands
With blood deserved, and drink thereof thy fill?
Or if nought else but death and blood of man
Mought please thy lust, could none in Britain land,
Whose hart betorne out of his panting breast
With thine own hand, or work what death thou would,
Suffice to make a sacrifice to peaze
That deadly mind and murderous thought in thee?
But he who in the self same womb was wrapped,
Where thou in dismal hour received life?
Or if needs, needs, thy hand must slaughter make,
Moughtest thou not have reached a mortal wound,
And with thy sword have pierced this cursed womb,
That the accursed Porrex brought to light,
And given me a just reward therefore?
So Ferrex yet sweet life mought have enjoyed,
And to his aged father comfort brought,
With some young son in whom they both might live.
But whereunto waste I this ruthful speech,
To thee that hast thy brothers blood thus shed?
Shall I still think that fro this womb thou sprung?
That I thee bare? or take thee for my son?
No traitor, no: I thee refuse for mine,
Murderer I thee renounce, thou art not mine.
Never, O wretch, this womb conceived thee,
Nor never bode I painful throws for thee.
Changeling to me thou art, and not my child,
Nor to no wight, that spark of pity knew.
Ruthelesse, unkind, monster of natures work,
Thou never sucked the milk of woman's breast,
But from thy birth the cruel Tigers teates
Have nursed thee, nor yet of flesh and blood
Formed is thy hart, but of hard iron wrought,
And wild and desert woods bred thee to life.
But can thou hope to escape my just revenge?
Or that these hands will not be wrooke on thee?
Doest thou not know that Ferrex mother lives
That loved him more dearly than her self?
And doth she live, and is not venged on thee?

We marvel much where this lingering stay
Falls out so long: Porrex unto our court
By order of our letters is returned*
And Eubulus received from us by hest
At his arrival here to give him charge
Before our presence straight to make repair,
And yet we have no word whereof he stays.

Lo where he comes Eubulus with him.

According to your highness hest to me,
Here have I Porrex brought even in such sort
As from his wearied horse he did alight,
For that your grace did will such hast therein.

We like and praise this spedy will in you,
To work the thing that to your charge we gave.
Porrex, if we so far should swerve from kind,
And from those bounds which law of nature sets,
As thou hast done by vile and wretched deed,
In cruel murder of thy brothers life,
Our present hand could stay no longer time,
But straight should bathe this blade in blood of thee
As just revenge of thy detested crime.
No: we should not offend the law of kind,
If now this sword of ours did slay thee here:
For thou hast murdered him, whose heinous death
Even natures force doth move us to revenge
By blood again: and justice forces us
To measure death for death, thy due desert.
Yet since thou art our child, and since as yet
In this hard case what word thou can allege
For thy defence, by us hath not been heard,
We are content to staye our will for that
Which justice bids us presently to work,
And give thee leave to use thy speech at full
If ought thou have to lay for thine excuse.

Neither O king, I can or will deny
But that this hand from Ferrex life hath reft:
Which fact how much my doleful hart doth wail,
Oh would it mought as full appear to sight
As inward grief doth pour it forth to me.
So yet perhaps if ever ruthefull hart
Melting in tears within a manly breast,
Through deep repentance of his bloody fact,
If ever grief, if ever woeful man
Might move regreite with sorrow of his fault,
I think the torment of my mournful case
Known to your grace, as I do feel the same,
Would force even wrath her self to pity me.
But as the water troubled with the mud
Shows not the face which else the eye should see.
Even so your ireful mind with stirred thought,
Can not so perfectly discern my cause.
But this unhappy, amongst so many heaps,
I must content me with, most wretched man,
That to my self I must reserve my woe
In pining thoughts of mine accursed fact,
Since I may not show here my smallest grief
Such as it is, and as my breast endures,
Which I esteem the greatest misery
Of all misschappes that fortune now can send,
Not that I rest in hope with plaint and tears
To purchase life: for to the Gods I clepe
For true record of this my faithful speech,
Never this hart shall have the thoughtful dread
To die the death that by your graces dome
By just desert, shall be pronounced to me:
Nor never shall this tongue once spend the speech
Pardon to crave, or seek by suit to live.
I mean not this, as though I were not touchde
With care of dreadful death, or that I held
Life in contempt: but that I know, the mind
Stoups to no dread, although the flesh be frail,
And for my gilt, I yield the same so great
As in my self I find a fear to sue
For grant of life.

In vain, O wretch, thou show
A woeful hart, Ferrex now lies in grave,
Slain by thy hand.

Yet this, O father, hear:
And then I end. Your majesty well knows,
That when my brother Ferrex and my self
By your own hest were joined in governance
Of this your graces realm of Britain land,
I never sought nor trauailled for the same,
Nor by my self, nor by no friend I wrought,
But from your highness will alone it sprung,
Of your most gracious goodness bent to me.
But how my brothers hart even then repined
With swollen disdain against mine eagle rule,
Seeing that realm, which by descent should grow
Wholly to him, allotted half to me?
Even in your highness court he now remains,
And with my brother then in nearest place,
Who can record, what proof thereof was shewde,
And how my brothers envious hart appeared.
Yet I that judged it my part to seek
His favour and good will, and loath to make
Your highness know, the thing which should have brought
Brief to your grace, your offence to him,
Hoping my earnest suit should soon have won
A loving hart within a brothers breast,
Wrought in that sort that for a pledge of love
And faithful hart, he gave to me his hand.
This made me think, that he had banished quite
All rancour from his thought and bare to me
Such hearty love, as I did owe to him.
But after once we left your graces court,
And from your highness presence lived apart,
This eagle rule still, still, did grudge him so
That now those enumous sparks which erst lay raked
In living cinders of dissembling breast,
Kindled so far within his hart disdain,
That longer could he not refrain from proof
Of secrete practise to deprive me life
By poisons force, and had berest me so,
If mine own servant hired to this fact
And moved by troth with hate to work the same,
In time had not bewrayed it unto me.
When thus I saw the knot of love vnknitte,
All honest league and faithful promise broke,
The law of kind and troth thus rent in twain,
His hart on mischief set, and in his breast
Black treason hid, then, then did I despeire
That ever time could win him friend to me.
Then saw I how he smiled with slaying knife
Wrapped under cloak, then saw I deep deceit
Lurk in his face and death prepared for me:
Even nature moved me than to hold my life
More dear to me than his, and had this hand,
Since by his life my death must needs ensue,
And by his death my life to be preserved,
To shed his blood, and seek my safety so.
And wisdom willed me without protract
In spedie wise to put the same in ur.
Thus have I told the cause that moved me
To work my brothers death and so I yield
My life, my death, to judgment of your grace.

Oh cruel wight, should any cause preuaile
To make thee stain thy hands with brothers blood:
But what of thee we will resolve to do,
Shall yet remain unknown: Thou in the mean
Shalt from our royal presence banished be,
Until our princely pleasure further shall
To thee be showed. Depart therefore our sight
Accursed child. What cruel desrenie,
What froward fate hath sorted us this chance,
That even in those where we should comfort find,
Where our delight now in our aged days
Sold rest and be, even there our only grief
And depest sorrows to abridge our life,
Most pining cares and deadly thoughts do grow?

Your grace should now in these grave years of yours
Have found ere this y^ price of mortal joys,
How short they be, how fading here in earth,
How full of change, how brittle our estate,
Of nothing sure, save only of the death,
To whom both man and all the world doth owe
Their end at last, neither should natures power
In other sort against your hart preuaile,
Than as the naked hand whose stroke assays
The armed breast where force doth light in vain.

Many can yield right sage and grave advise
Of patient sprite to others wrapped in woe,
And can in speech both rule and conquer kind,
Who if by proof they might feel natures force,
Would show them selves men as they are in dede,
Which now will needs be gods. But what doth mean
The sorry chere of her that here doth come?

Oh where is ruth? or where is pity now?
Whether is gentle hart and mercy fled?
Are they exiled out of our stony breasts,
Never to make return? is all the world
Drowned in blood, and sunk in cruelty?
If not in women mercy may be found,
If not (alas) within the mothers breast,
To her own child, to her own flesh and blood,
If ruth be banished thence, if pity there
May have no place, if there no gentle hart
Do live and dwell, where should we seek it then?

Madame (alas) what means your woeful tale?

O filly woman I, why to this hour
Have kind and fortune thus deferred my breath,
That I should live to see this doleful day?
Will ever wight believe that such hard hart
Could rest within the cruel mothers breast,
With her own hand to slay her only son?
But out (alas) these eyes beheld the same,
They saw the driery sight, and are become
Most ruthful records of the bloody fact.
Porrex (alas) is by his mother slain,
And with her hand, a woeful thing to tell,
While slumbering on his careful bed he rests
His hart stabde in with knife is rest of life.

O Eubulus, oh draw this sword of ours,
And pearce this hart with speed. O hateful light,
O loathsome life, O sweet and welcome death.
Dear Eubulus work this we thee beseech.

Patient your grace, perhaps he lives yet.
With wound received, but not of certain death.

O let us then repair unto the place,
And see if Porrex live, or thus be slain.

Alas he lives not, it is to true,
That with these eyes of him a peerless prince,
Son to a king, and in the flower of youth,
Even with a twinke a senseless stock I saw.

O damned deed.

But hear his ruthefull end.
The noble prince, appears with the sudden wound,
Out of his wretched slumber hastily start,
Whose strength now failing straight he overthrew,
When in the fall his eyes even new unclosed
Beheld the Queen, and cried to her for help.
We then, alas, the ladies which that time
Did there attend, seeing that heinous deed,
And hearing him oft call the wretched name
Of mother, and to cry to her for aide,
Whose direful hand gave him the mortal wound,
Pitying (alas) for nought else could we do)
His ruthefull end, ran to the woeful bed,
Despoiled straight his breast, and all we might
Wiped in vain with napkins next at hand,
The sudden streams of blood that flushed fast
Out of the gaping wound, O what a look,
O what a ruthefull steadfast eye me thought
He fixed upon my face, which to my death
Will never part fro me, when with a braid
A deep fet sigh he gave, and therewithal
Clasping his hands, to heaven he cast his sight.
And straight pale death pressing within his face
The flying ghost his mortal corpse forsook.

Never did age bring forth so vile a fact.

O hard and cruel hap, that thus assigned
Unto so worthy a wight so wretched end:
But most hard cruel hart, that could consent
To lend the hateful destinies that hand,
By which, alas, so heinous crime was wrought.
O Queen of adamant, O marble breast.
If not the favour of his comely face,
If not his princely chere and countenance,
His valiant active arms, his manly breast,
If not his fair and seemly personage,
His noble limnies in such proportion cast
As would have wrapped a silly woman's thought,
If this mought not have moved thy bloody hart.
And that most cruel hand the wretched weapon
Even to let fall, and kiste him in the face,
With tears for ruth to reeve such one by death:
Should nature yet consent to slay her son?
O mother, thou to murder thus thy child?
Even Jove with justice must with lightning flames
Fro heaven send down some strange revenge on thee.
Ah noble prince, how oft have I beheld
Thee mounted on thy fierce and traumpling stead,
Shining in armour bright before the tilt,
And with thy mistress sleue tied on thy helm,
And charge thy staff to please thy ladies eye,
That bowed the head piece of thy friendly foe?
How oft in arms on horse to bend the mace?
How oft in arms on foot to break the sword,
Which never now these eyes may see again.

Madame, alas, in vain these plaints are shed,
Rather with me depart, and help to swag,
The thoughtful griefs that in the aged king
Must needs by nature grow, by death of this
His only son, whom he did hold so dear.

What wight is that which saw y^ I did see,
And could refrain to wail with plaint and tears?
Not I, alas, that hart is not in me.
But let us go, for I am grieved anew,
To call to mind the wretched fathers woe.

When greedy lust in royal seat to reign
Hath re^t all care of Gods and eke of men,
And cruel hart, wrath, treason, and disoaine
Within ambitious breast are lodged, then
Behold how mischief wide her self displays,
And with the brothers hand the brother slays.
When blood thus shed, doth stain the heavens face,
Crying to Jove for vengeance of the deed,
The mightic God even moves from his place,
With wrath to wreke: then sends he forth with speed
The dreadful furies, daughters of the night,
With Serpents girt, carrying the whip of ire,
With hear of stinging Snakes, and shining bright
With flames and blood, and with a brand of fire.
These for revenge of wretched murder done,
Do make the mother kill her only son.
Blood asks blood, and death must death requite.
Jove by his just and everlasting dome
Justly hath ever so requited it.
The times before record, and times to come
Shall find it true, and so doth present proof
Present before our eyes for our behoof.
O happy wight that suffres not the snare
Of murderous mind to tangle him in blood.
And happy he that can in time beware
By others harms and turn it to his good.
But wo to him that fearing not to offend
Doth serve his lust, and will not see the end,

First the drommes sluites, began to sound, during which there came forth upon
the stage a company of Hargabusiers and of Armed men all in order of battle.
These after their pieces discharged, and that the armed men had three times
marched about the stage, departed, and then the drommes and fluits did cease.
Hereby was signified tumults, rebellions. arms and civil wars to follow, as
fell in the realm of great Brittayne, which by the space of fifty years more
continued in civil war between the nobility after the death of king
Gorboduc, and of his issues, for want of certain limitacion in succession of
the crown, till the time of Dunwallo Molmutius, who reduced the land to
monarchy.

Did ever age bring forth such tyrants harts?
The brother hath bereft the brothers life,
The mother she hath died her cruel hands
In blood of her own son, and now at last
The people lo forgetting troth and love,
Contemning quite both law and loyal hart,
Even they have slain their sovereign lord queen.

Shall this their traitorous crime unpunished rest?
Even yet they cease not, carried on with rage,
In their rebellious routes, to threaten still
A new blood shed unto the princes kin,
To slay them all, and to vproote the race
Both of the king and queen, so are they moved
With Porrex death, wherein they falsely charge
The guiltless king without desert at all,
And traitorously have murdered him therefore,
And eke the queen.

Shall subjects dare with force
To work revenge upon their princes fact?
Admit the worst that may, as sure in this
The deed was foul, the queen to slay her son,
Shall yet the subject seek to take the sword,
Arise against his lord, and slay his king?
O wretched state, where those rebellious hearts
Are not rent out even from their living breasts,
And with the body thrown unto the fowls
As carrion food, for terror of the rest.

There can no punishment be thought to great
For this so grievous cryine: let speed therefore
Be used therein for it behooves so.

Ye all my lords, I see, consent in one
And I as one consent with ye in all.
I hold it more than need with sharpest law
To punish this tinnultuous bloody rage.
For nothing more may shake the common state,
Than sufferance of uproars without redress,
Whereby how some kingdoms of mighty power
After great conquests made, and flourishing
In fame and wealth, have ben to ruin brought,
I pray to Jove that we may rather whale
Such hap in them than witness in our selves.
Eke fully with the duke my mind agrees,
Though kings forget to govern as they ought,
Yet subjects must obey as they are bound.
But now my lords, before ye farther wade,
Or spend your speech, what sharpe revenge shall fall
By justice plague on these rebellious wights,
Me thinks ye rather should first search the way,
By which in time the rage of this uproar
Mought be repressed, and these great tumults ceased.
Even yet the life of Brittayne land doth hang
In traitors balance of vnegall weight.
Think not my lords the death of Gorboduc,
Nor yet Videnaes blood will cease their rage:
Even our own lives, our wives and children dear,
Our country dearest of all, in danger stands,
Now to be spoiled, now, now made desolate,
And by our selves a conquest to ensue.
For give once swey unto the peoples lusts,
To rush forth, on, and stay them not in time,
And as the stream that rowleth down the hill,
So will they headlong run with raging thoughts
From blood to blood, from mischief unto ^oe,
To ruin of the realm, them selves and all,
So giddy are the common peoples minds,
So glad of change, more wavering than the sea.
Ye see (my lords) what strength these rebels have,
What huge nombre is assembled still,
For though the traitorous fact, for which they rose
Be wrought and done, yet lodge they still in field
So that how far their furies yet will stretch
Breat cause we have to dread. That we may seek
By present battle to repress their power,
Speed must we use to levy force therefore.
For either they forthwith will mischief work,
Or their rebellious roars forthwith will cease.
These violent things may have no lasting long.
Let us therefore use this for present help,
Persuade by gentle speech, and offer grace
With gift of pardon save unto the chief,
And that upon condition that forthwith
They yield the captains of their euterprise,
To bear such guerdon of their traitorous fact,
As may be both due vengeance to them selves,
And wholesome terror to posterity.
This shall, I think, scatter the greatest part,
That now are holden with desire of home,
Wearied in field with cold of winters nights,
And some (no doubt) stricken with dread of law.
When this is once proclaimed, it shall make
The captains to mistrust the multitude,
Whose safety bids them to betray their heads,
And so much more because the rascal routes,
In things of great and perilous attempts,
Are never trusty to the noble race.
And while we treat and stand on terms of grace,
We shall both stay their furies rage the while,
And eke gain time, whose only help suffices
Withoten war to vanquish rebels power
In the mean while, make you in redynes
Such band of horsemen as ye may prepare.
Horsemen (you know) are not the commons strength,
But are the force and store of noble men,
Whereby the vnchosen and unarmed sort
Of skilless rebels, whom none other power
But nombre makes to be of dreadful force,
With sudden brunt may quickly be oppressed.
And if this gentle mean of proffered grace,
With stubborn hearts cannot so far avail,
As to assuage their desperate courages.
Then do I wish such slaughter to be made,
As present age and eke posterity
May be adrad with horror of revenge,
That justly then shall on these rebels fall.
This is my lord the sum of mine advise.

Neither this case admittes debate at large,
And though it did, this speech that hath ben said
Hath well abridged the tale I would have told.
Fully with Eubulus do I consent
In all that he hath said: and if the same
To you my lords, may seem for best advise,
I wish that it should straight be put in ur.

My lords than let us presently depart,
And follow this that likes us so well.

If ever time to gain a kingdom here
Were offred man, now it is offred me.
The realm is reft both of their king and queen,
The offspring of the prince is slain and dead,
No issue now remains, the heir unknown,
The people are in arms and mutinies,
The nobles they are busied how to cease
These great rebellious tumults and uproars,
And Brittavne land now desert left alone
Amid these broils uncertain where to rest,
Offers her self unto that noble hart
That will or dare pursue to bear her crown.
Shall I that am the duke of Albanye
Descend from that line of noble blood,
Which hath so long flourished in worthy fame,
Of valiant hearts, such as in noble breasts
Of right should rest above the the baser sort,
Refuse to venture life to win a crown?
Whom shall I find enmies that will withstand
My fact herein, if I attempt by arms
To seek the same now in these times of broil?
These dukes power can hardly well appease
The people that already are in arms.
But if perhaps my force be once in field,
Is not my strength in power above the best
Of all these lords now left in Brittayne land?
And though they should match me with power of me,
Yet doubtful is the chance of battailles ioyued,
If victors of the field we may depart,
Ours is the sceptre then of great Brittayne*
If slain amid the plain this body lye,
Mine enemies yet shall not deny me this,
But that I dyed giving the noble charge
To hazard life for conquest of a crown.
Forthwith therefore will I in post depart
To Albanye, and raise in armour there
All power I can: and here my secret friends,
By secret practise shall solicit still,
To seek to win to me the peoples hearts.

O Jove, how are these peoples harts abused*
What blind fury, thus he adlong caries them?
That though so many books, so many rolls
Of ancient time record, what grievous plagues
Light on these rebels aye, and though so oft
Their cares have heard their aged fathers tell,
What just reward these traitors still receive,
Yea though them selves have scene deep death blood,
By strangling cord and slaughter of the sword,
To such assigned, yet can they not beware,
Yet can not stay their lewd rebellious hands,
But suffering lo foul treason to distain
Their wretched minds, forget their loyal hart,
Reject all truth and rise against their prince.
A ruthefull case, that those, whom duties bond,
Whom grafted law by nature, truth, and faith,
Bound to preserve their country and their king,
Borne to defend their common wealth and prince,
Even they should give consent thus to subvert
Thee Britain land, from thy womb should spring
(O native soil) those, that will needs destroy
And tuyne thee and eke them selves in fine.
For lo, when once the dukes had offred grace
Of pardon sweet, the multitude missledde
By traitorous fraud of their ungracious heads,
One sort that saw the dangerous success
Of stubborn standing in rebellious war,
And knew the difference of princes power
From headless nombre of tumultuous routes,
Whom common countreies care, and private fear,
Taught to repent the error of their rage,
Laid hands upon the captains of their band,
And brought them bound unto the mighty dukes.
And other sort not trusting yet so well
The truth of pardon, or mistrusting more
Their own offence than that they could conceive
Such hope of pardon for so foul misdeed,
Or for that they their captains could not yield,
Who fearing to be yielded fled before,
Stale home by silence of the secret night,
The third unhappy and enraged sort
Of desperate hearts, who stained in princes blood
From traitorous furor could not be withdrawn
By love, by law, by grace, no yet by fear,
By proffered life, no yet by threatened death,
With minds hopeless of life, dreadlesse of death,
Careless of country, and aweless of God,
Stood bent to fight, as furies did them move,
With violent death to close their traitorous life.
These all by power of horsemen were oppressed,
And with revenging sword slain in the field,
Or with the strangling cord hanged on the tree,
Where yet their carryen carcases do preach
The fruits that rebels reap of their uproars,
And of the murder of their sacred prince.
But lo, where do approach the noble dukes,
By whom these tumults have ben thus appeasde.

I think the world will now at length beware
And fear to put on arms against their prince.

If not? those traitorous hearts that dare rebel,
Let them behold the wide and huge fields
With blood and bodies spread of rebels slain,
The lofty trees clothed with the corpses dead
That strangled with the corde do hang thereon.

A just reward, such as all times before
Have ever lotted to those wretched folks.

But what means he that comes here so fast?

My lords, as duty and my troth doth move
And of my country work a care in me,
That if the spending of my breath availed
To do the service that my hart desires,
I would not shun to embrace a present death:
So have I now in that wherein I thought
My travail mought perform some good effect,
Uentred my life to bring these tidings here.

the mighty duke of Albanye
Is now in arms and lodges in the field
With twenty thousand men, hither he bends
His spedy marche, and minds to invade the crown,
Daily he gathers strength, and spreads abroad
That to this realm no certain heir remains,
That Brittayne land is left without a guide,
That he the sceptre seeks, for nothing else
But to preserve the people and the land,
Which now remain as ship without a sterne.
Lo this is that which I have here to say.

Is this his faith? and shall he falsely thus
Abuse the vauntage of unhappy times?
O wretched land, if his outrageous pride,
His cruel and vntempred wilfulness,
His deep dissembling shows of false pretence,
Should once attain the crown of Britain land.
Let us my lords, with timely force resist
The new attempt of this our common foe,
As we would quench the flames of common fire.

Though we remain without a certain prince,
To weld the realm or guide the wandering rule,
Yet now the common mother of us all,
Our native land, our country, that conteines
Our wives, children, kindred, our selves and all
That ever is or may be dear to man,
Cries unto us to help our selves and her,
Let us advance our powers to repress
This growing foe of all our liberties.

Yea let us so, my lords, with hasty speed.
And ye (O Gods) send us the welcome death,
To shed our blood in field, and leave us not
In loathsome life to longer out our days,
To see the huge heaps of these vnhappes,
(...) now roll down upon the wretched land,
Where empty place of princely governance,
No certain stay now left of doubtless heir,
Thus leave this guidelesse realm an open pray,
To endless storms and waste of civil war.

That ye (my lords) do so agree in one,
To save your country from the violent reign
And wrongfully usurped tyranny
Of him that threatens conquest of you all,
To save your realm, and in this realm your selves,
From foreign thraldom of so proud a prince,
Much do I praise, and I beseech the Gods,
With happy honour to requite it you.
But (O my lords) since now the heavens wrath
Hath reft this land the issue of their prince,
Since of the body of our late sovereign lord
Remains no more, since the young kings be slain,
And of the title of descend crown
Uncertainly the diverse minds do think
Even of the learned sort, and more uncertainly
Will partial fancy and affection deem:
But most uncertainly will climbing pride
And hope of reign withdraw to sundry parts
The doubtful right and hopeful lust to reign:
When once this noble service is achieved
For Britain land the mother of ye all,
When once ye have with armed force repressed
The proud attempts of this Albanian prince,
That threatens thraldom to your native land,
When ye shall vanquishers return from field,
And find the princely state an open pray
To greedy lust and to usurping power,
Then, then (my lords) if ever kindly care
Of ancient honour of your ancestors,
Of present wealth and noblesse of your stocks,
Yea of the lives and safety yet to come
Of your dear wives, your children, and your selves,
Might move your noble hearts with gentle ruth,
Then, then, have pity on the torn estate,
Then help to salve the well near hopeless sore
Which ye shall do, if ye your selves withhold
The slaying knife from your own mothers throat.
Her shall you save, and you, and yours in her,
If ye shall all with one assent forbear
Once to lay hand or take unto your selves
The crown, by colour of pretended right,
Or by what other means so ever it be,
Till first by common counsel of you all
In Parliament the regal diadem
Be set in certain place of governance,
In which your Parliament and in your choice,
Prefer the right (my lords) with respect
Of streugth or friends, or what soever cause
That may set forward any others part.
For right will last, and wrong can not endure.
Right mean I his or hers, upon whose name
The people rest by mean of native line,
Or by the virtue of some former law,
Already made their title to advance.
Such one (my lords) let be your chosen king,
Such one so borne within your native land,
Such one prefer, and in no wise admit
The heavy yoke of foreign governance,
Let foreign titles yield to public wealth.
And with that hart wherewith ye now prepare
Thus to withstand the proud muading foe,
With that same hart (my lords) keep out also
Unnatural thraldom of strangers reign,
No suffer you against the rules of kind
Your mother land to serve a foreign prince.

Lo here the end of Brutus royal line,
And lo the entry to the woeful wrack,
And utter ruin of this noble realm.
The royal king, and eke his sons are slain,
No ruler rests within the regal seat,
The heir, to whom the sceptre lunges, unknown,
That to each force of foreign princes power,
Whom vauntage of our wretched state may move
By sudden arms to gain so rich a realm,
And to the proud and greedy mind at home,
Whom blinded lust to reign lead to aspire,
Lo Britain realm is left an open pray,
A present spoil by conquest to ensue.
Who sees not now how many rising minds
Do feed their thoughts, with hope to reach a realm?
And who will not by force attempt to win
So great a gain, that hope persuades to have?
A simple colour shall for title serve.
Who wins the royal crown will want no right,
Nor such as shall display by long descent
A lineal race to prove him lawful king.
In the mean while these ciuel arms shall rage,
And thus a thousand mischiefs shall unfold,
And far and near spread thee (O Britain land)
All right and law shall cease, and he that had
Nothing to day, to morrow shall enjoy
Great heaps of gold, and he that flowed in wealth,
Lo he shall be berest of life and all,
And happiest he that then possesses least,
The wives shall suffer rape, the maids deflowered,
And children fatherless shall weep and wane,
With fire and sword thy native folk shall perish,
One kinsman shall bereave an others life,
The father shall unwitting slay the son,
The son shall slay the sire and know it not,
Women and maids the cruel soldiers sword
Shall perse to death, and silly children lo,
That play in the streets and fields are found,
By violent hand shall close their latter day.
Whom shall the fierce and bloody soldier
Reserve to life? Whom shall he spare from death?
Even thou (O wretched mother) half alive,
Thou shalt behold thy dear and only child
Slain with the sword while he yet sucks thy breast.
Lo, guiltless blood shall thus each where be shed.
Thus shall the wasted soil yield forth no fruit,
But dearth and famine shall possess the land.
The towns shall be consumed and burnt with fire,
The peopled cities shall wax desolate,
And thou, O Britain, meanwhile in renown,
Meanwhile in wealth and fame, shalt thus be torn,
Dismembered thus, and thus be rent in twain,
Thus wasted and defaced, spoiled and destroyed,
These be the fruits your civil wars will bring.
Hereto it comes when kings will not consent
To grave advise, but follow wilful will.
This is the end, when in fond princes hearts
Flattery prevails, and sage rede hath no place.
These are the plages, when murder is the mean
To make new heirs unto the royal crown.
Thus wreke the Gods, when that the mothers wrath
Nought but the blood of her own child may swag.
These mischiefs spring when rebels will arise,
To work revenge and judge their princes fact.
This, this ensues, when noble men do fail
In loyal troth, and subjects will be kings.
And this doth grow when lo unto the prince,
Whom death or sudden hap of life bereaves,
No certain heir remains, such certain heir,
As not all only is the rightful heir,
But to the realm is so made known to be,
And troth thereby vested in subjects hearts.
To owe faith there where right is known to rest.
Alas, in Parliament what hope can be,
When is of Parliament no hope at all?
Which, though it be assembled by consent,
Yet is not likely with consent to end,
While each one for him self, or for his friend,
Against his foe, shall travail what he may.
While now the state left open to the man,
That shall with greatest force invade the same,
Shall fill ambitious minds with gaping hope,
When will they once with yielding hearts agree?
Or in the while, how shall the realm be used?
No, no: then Parliament should have been holden,
And certain heirs appointed to the crown,
To stay the title of established right,
And in the people plant obedience,
While yet the prince did live, whose name and power
By lawful sommons and authority
Might make a Parliament to be of force,
And might have set the state in quiet stay.
But now O happy man, whom spedie death
Deprives of life, no is enforced to see
These huge mischiefs and these miseries,
These civil wars, these murders these wrongs.
Of iu^ice, yet must God in fine restore
This noble crown unto the lawful heir:
For right will always live, and rise at length,
But wrong can never take deep root to last*


