THe doubtful Tule (Gentlemen) prefixed
Upon the Argument we have in hand,
May breed suspense, and wrongfully disturb
The peaceful quiet of your settled thoughts:
To stop which scruple, let this brief suffice.
It is no pamperd glutton we present,
Nor aged Councellor to youthful sin,
But one, whose virtue shone above the rest,
A valiant Martyr, and a virtuous peer,
In whose true faith and loyalty expressed
Unto his sovereign, and his countries weal:
We strive to pay that tribute of our Love,
Your favours merit, let fair Truth be grac'te,
Since forg'de invention former time defac'te.

MY Lords, I charge ye in his Highness name,
To keep the peace, you, and your followers.

Good M. Sheriff, look unto your self.


Do so, for we have other business.


Will ye disturb the Judges, and the Assise?
Hear the Kings proclamation ye were best.

Hold then, lets hear it.


But be brief, ye were best.


O yes.


Cossone, make shorter O, or shall mar your Yes.


O yes.


What, has her nothing to say but O yes?


O yes.


O nay, pie Cosse plut down with her, down with her,
A Pawesse a Pawesse.

A Herbert a Herbert, and down with Powesse.


Hold, in the Kings name, hold.


Down e tha call naues name, down.


Powesse, I think thy Welsh and thou do smart.


Herbert, I think my sword came near thy heart.


Thy hearts best blood shall pay the loss of mine.


A Herbert a Herbert.


A Pawesse a Pawesse.


My Lords, as you are liege men to the Crown,
True noblemen, and subjects to the King,
Attend his Highness proclamation,
Commanded by the Judges of Assise,
For keeping peace at this assembly.

Good M. Mayor of Hereford be brief.


Sergeant, without the ceremony of O yes.
Pronoune aloud the proclamation.

The Kings Justices, perceiving what public mischief may ensue this private
quarrel in his majesties name do straightly charge and command all persons, of
what degree soever, to depart this city of Hereford, except such as are bound
to give attendance at this Assise, and that no man presume to wear any weapon,
especially welsh-hookes, forest bills.


Haw, no pill nor wells hoog? ha?


Peace, and hear the proclamation.


And that the Lord Powesse do presently disperse and discharge his retinue, and
depart the city in the Kings peace, he and his followers, on pain of
imprisonment.


Haw? pud her Lord Pawesse in prison, A Paws
A Pawesse, cossone live and tie with her Lord.

A Herbert a Herbert.


Where's the Lord Herbert? is he hurt or slain?


He's here my Lord.


How fares hid Lordship, friends?


Mortally wounded, speechless, he cannot live.


Convey him hence, let not his wounds take air,
And get him dressed with expedition,
M. Mayor of Hereford M Snriue o'th shire,
Commit Lord Powesse to safe custody,
To answer the disturbance of the peace,
Lord Herberts peril, and his high contempt
Of us, and you the Kings commissioners,
See it be done with care and diligence.

Please it your Lordship, my Lord Powesse is gone,
Past all recovery.

Yet let search be made,
To apprehend his followers that are left.

There are some of them, sirs, lay ho^d on them,


Of us, and why? what has her done I pray you?


Disarm them Bailiffs.


Officers assist.


Hear you Lor shudge, what resson is for this?


Cosson pe puse for fighting for our Lord?


Away with them.


Harg you my Lord.


Gough my Lord Herberts man's a shitten call naue,


Ise li^e and ^e in good quarrel.


Pray you do shustice, let awl be preson.


Prison no,
Lord shudge I wool give you pale, good suerty.

What Bale? what suerties?


Her coozin ap Ries, ap Euan, ap Morris, ap Morgan, ap Lluellyn, ap Madoc, ap
Meredith, ap Griffen, ap Dauy, ap Owen ap Shinken Shones.


Two of the most, sufficient are ynow,


And't please your Lordship these are al but one.


To Jail with them, and the Lord Herberts men,
We'll talk with them, when the Assise is done,
Riotous, audacious, and unruly Grooms,
Must we be forced to come from the Bench,
To quiet brawls, which every Constable
In other civil places can suppress?

What was the quarrel that caused all this stir?


About religion (as I heard) my Lord.
Lord Powesse detracted from the power of Rome,
Affirming Wickliffes doctrine to be true,
And Romes erroneous: hot reply was made
By the lord Herbert, they were traitors all
That would maintain it: Powesse answered,
They were as true, as noble, and as wise
As he, that would defend it with their lives,
He named for instance sir Iohn Old-castle
The Lord Cobham: He^bert replied again,
He, thou, and all are traitors that so hold.
The he was given, the several factions drawn,
And so enraged, that we could not appease it.

This case concerns the Kings prerogative,
And^s dangerous to the State and common wealth.
Gentlemen, Justices, master Mayor, and master Shrieue,
It doth behove us all, and each of us
In general and particular, to have care
For the suppressing of all mutinies,
And all assemblies, except soldiers musters
For the Kings preparation into France.
We hear of secret conventicles made,
And there is doubt of some conspiracies,
Which may break out into rebellious arms
When the King's gone, perchance before he go:
Note as an instance, this one perilous fray,
What factions might have grown on either part,
To the destruction of the King and Realm,
Yet, in my conscience, sir Iohn Old-castle
Innocent of it, only his name was used.
We therefore from his Highness give this charge.
You master Mayor, look to your citizens,
You master Sheriff unto your shire, and you
As Justices in every ones precinct
There be no meetings. When the vulgar sort
Sit on their Ale-bench, with their cups and kannes,
Matters of state be not their common talk,
Nor pure religion by their lips prophande.
Let us return unto the Bench again,
And there examine further of this fray.

Sirs, have ye taken the lord Powesse yet?


No, nor heard of him.


No, he's gone far enough.


They that are left behind, shall answer all.


Now my lord Bishop, take free liberty
To speak your mind: what is your suit to us?

My noble Lord, no more than what you know,
And have bin oftentimes invested with:
Grievous complaints have past between the lips
Of envious persons to upbraid the Clergy,
Some carping at the livings which we have,
And others spurning at the ceremonies
That are of ancient custom in the church.
Amongst the which, Lord Cobham is a chief:
What inconvenience may proceed hereof,
Both to the King and to the common wealth,
May easily be discerned, when like a frenzy
This innovation shall possess their minds.
These upstarts will have followers to uphold
Their damned opinion, more than Harry shall
To undergo his quarrel against the French.

What proof is there against them to be had,
That what you say the law may justify?

They give themselves the name of Protestants,
And meet in fields and solitary groves.

Was ever heard (my Lord) the like till now?
That thieves and rebels, s blood heretikes,
Plain heretikes, I'll stand toote to their teeth,
Should have to colour, their vile practises,
A title of such worth, as Protestant?

O but you must not swear, it ill becomes
One of your coat, to rap out bloody oaths.

Pardon him good my Lord, it is his zeal,
An honest country prelate, who laments
To see such foul disorder in the church.

There's one they call him Sir Iohn Old-castle,
He has not his name for nought: for like a castle
Doth he encompass them within his walls,
But till that castle be subverted quite,
We ne'er shall be at quiet in the realm.

That is our suit, my Lord, that he be taken,
And brought in question for his heresy,
Beside, two letters brought me out of Wales,
Wherein my Lord Herford writes to me,
What tumult and sedition was begun,
About the Lord Cobham, at the Sises there,
For they had much ado to calm the rage,
And that the valiant Herbert is there slain.

A fire that must be quenched; well, say no more,
The King anon goes to the counsel chamber,
There to debate of matters touching France:
As he doth pass by, I'll inform his grace
Concerning your petition: Master Butler,
If I forget, do you remember me,

I will my Lord.


Not for a recompense,
But as a token of our love to you,
By me my Lords of the clergy do present
This purse, and in it full a thousand Angels,
Praying your Lordship to accept their gift.

I thank them, my Lord Bishop, for their love,
But will not take their money, if you please
To give it to this gentleman, you may.

Sir, then we crave your furtherance herein.


The best I can my Lord of Rochester.


Nay, pray ye take it, trust me but you shall,


Were ye all three upon New Market heath,
You should not need strain curtsy who should ha'te,
Sir Iohn would quickly rid ye of that care.

The King is coming, fear ye not my Lord,
The very first thing I will break with him,
Shall be about your matter.

My Lord of Suffolke,
Was it not said the Clergy did refuse
To lend us money toward our wars in France?

It was my Lord, but very wrongfully.


I know it was, for Huntington here tells me,
They have bin very bountiful of late.

And still they vow my gracious Lord to be so,
Hoping your majesty will think of them,
As of your loving subjects, and suppress
All such malicious errors as begin
To spot their calling, and disturb the church.

God else forbid: why Suffolke, is there
Any new rupture to disquiet them?

No new my Lord, the old is great enough,
And so increasing as if not cut down,
Will breed a scandal to your royal state,
And set your Kingdom quickly in an uproar,
The Kentish knight Lord Cobham, in despite
Of any law, or spiritual discipline,
Maintains this upstart new religion still,
And diverse great assemblies by his means
And private quarrels, are commenst abroad,
As by this letter more at large my liege,
Is made apparent.

We do find it here,
There was in Wales a certain fray of late,
Between two noblemen, but what of this?
Follows it straight Lord Cobham must be he
Did cause the same? I dare be sworn (good knight)
He never dreamt of any such contention.

But in his name the quarrel did begin,
About the opinion which he held (my hege.)

How if it did? was either he in place,
To take part with them, or abette them in it?
If brabbling fellows, whose in kindled blood,
Seethes in their fiery veins, will needs go fight,
Making their quarrels of some words that passt,
Either of you, or you, amongst their cups,
Is the fault yours, or are they guilty of it?

With pardon of your Highness (my dread lord)
Such little sparks neglected, may in time
Grow to a mighty flame: but that's not all,
He doth beside maintain a strange religion,
And will not be compelled to come to mass.

We do beseech you therefore gracious prince,
Without offence unto your majesty
We may be bold to use authority.

As how?


To summon him unto the Arches,
Where such offences have their punishment.

To answer personally, is that your meaning?


It is, my lord.


How if he appeal?


He cannot (my Lord) in such a case as this.


Not where Religion is the plea, my lord.


I took it always, that our self stood out,
As a sufficient refuge, unto whom
Not any but might lawfully appeal.
But we'll not argue now upon that point:
For sir Iohn Old-castle whom you accuse,
Let me entreat you to dispense awhile
With your high title of pre-eminence.
Report did never yet condemn him so,
But he hath always been reputed loyal:
And in my knowledge I can say thus much,
That he is virtuous, wise, and honourable:
If any way his conscience be seduc'de,
To waver in his faith: I'll send for him,
And school him privately, if that serve not,
Then afterward you may proceed against him.
Butler, be you the messenger for us,
And will him presently repair to court.

How now my lord, why stand you discontent?
In sooth, me thinks the King hath well decreed.

Yea, yea, sir Iohn, if he would keep his word,
But I perceive he favours him so much,
As this will be to small effect, I fear.

Why then I'll tell you what you're best to do:
If you suspect the King will be but cold
In reprehending him, send you a process too
To serve upon him: so you may be sure
To make him answer't, howsoever it fall.

And well remembered, I will have it so,
A Sumner shall be sent about it strait

Yea, do so, in the mean space this remains
For kind sir Iohn of Wrotham honest Jack.
Me thinks the purse of gold the Bishop gave,
Made a good show, it had a tempting look,
Beshrew me, but my fingers ends do itch
To be upon those rudduks: well, tis thus:
I am not as the world does take me for:
If ever woolfe were clothed in sheep coat,
Then I am he, old huddle and twang, in faith,
A priest in show, but in plain terms, a th^efe,
Yet let me tell you too, an honest thief.
One that will take it where it may besp.
And spend it freely in good fellowship.
I have as many shapes as Proteus had,
That still when any villainy is done,
There may be none suspect it was sir Iohn.
Besides, to comfort me, for whats this life,
Except the crabbed bitterness thereof
Be sweetened now and then with lechery?
I have my Doll, my concubine as 'twere,
To frolic with, a lusty bounsing girl.
But whilst I loiter here the gold, may escape,
And that must not be so, it is mine own,
Therefore I'll meet him on his way to court,
And shrive him of it: there will be the sport.

God help, God help, there's law for punishing,
But there's no law for our necessity:
There be more stocks to set poor soldiers in,
Than there be houses to relieve them at.

Faith, housekeeping decays in every place,
Even as Saint Peter writ, still worse and worse

Master mayor of Rochester has given commandment, that none shall go
abroad out of the parish, and they have set an order down forsooth, what
every poor householder must give towards our relief: where there be some
ceased I may say to you, had almost as much need to beg as we.


It is a hard world the while.


If a poor man come to a door to ask for Gods sake, they ask him for a
licence, or a certificate from a Justice.


Faith we have none, but what we bear upon our bodies, our maimed limbs, God
help us.


And yet, as lame as I am, I'll with the king into France, if I can crawl but a
ship-boorde, I had rather be slain in France, than starve in England.


Ha, were I but as lusty as I was at the battle of Shrewsbury, I would not do
as I do: but we are now come to the good lord Cobhams, to the best man to the
poor that is in all Kent.


God bless him, there be but few such.


Thou peevish froward man, what would thou have?


This pride, this pride, brings all to beggarie,
I seru'de your father, and your grandfather,
Show me such two men now: no, no,
Your backs, your backs, the devil and pride,
Has cut the throat of all good housekeeping,
They were the best Yeomens masters, that
Ever were in England.

Yea, except thou have a crew of seely knaves,
And sturdy rogues, still feeding at my gate,
There is no hospitality with thee.

They may sit at the gate well enough, but the devil of any thing you give
them, except they will eat stones.


Tis long then of such hungry knaves as you,
Yea sir, here's your retinue, your guests be come,
They know their hours I warrant you.

God bless your honour, God save the good Lord Cobham, and all his house,


Good your honour, bestow your blessed alms,
Upon poor men.

Now sir, here be your Alms knights.
Now are you as safe as the Emperor.

My Alms knights: nay, they are yours,
It is a shame for you, and I'll stand too't,
Your foolish alms maintains more vagabonds,
Then all the noblemen in Kent beside.
Out you rogues, you knaves, work for your livings,
Alas poor men, O Lord, they may beg their hearts out,
There's no more charity amongst men,
Then amongst so many mastiff dogs,
What make you here, you needy knaves?
Away, away, you villains.

I beseech you sit, be good to us.


Nay, nay, they know thee well enough, I think that all the beggars in this
land are thy acquaintance, go bestow your alms, none will control you sir.


What should I give them? you are grown so beggarly, you have scarce a bit
of bread to give at your door: you talk of your religion so long, that you
have banished charity from amongst you, a man may make a flax shop in your
kitchen chimneys, for any fire there is stirring.


If thou wilt give them nothing, send them hence, let them not stand here
starving in the cold.


Who I drive them hence? if I drive poor men from your door, I'll be hanged, I
know not what I may come to my self: yea, God help you poor knaves, ye see
the world in faith, well, you had a mother: well, God be with thee good Lady, thy
soule's at rest: she gave more in shirts and smocks to poor children, then you
spend in your house, yet you live a beggar too.


Even the worst deed that ere my mother did, was in relieving such a fool as
thou.


Yea, yea, I am a fool still, with all your wit you will die a beggar, go too.


Go you old fool, give the poor people something, go in poor men into the
inner court, and take such alms as there is to be had.


God bless your honour.


Hang you roags, hang you, there's nothing but misery amongst you, you fear no
law you.


God bless you good master Raf, God save your life, you are good to the
poor still.


What fellow's yonder comes along the grove?
Few passengers there be that know this way:
Me thinks he stops as though he stayed for me,
And meant to shroud himself amongst the bushes.
I know the Clergy hate me to the death,
And my religion gets me many foes:
And this may be some desperate rogue,
Subornd to work me mischief: As it
Pleases God, if he come toward me, sure
I'll stay his coming, be he but one man,
What soere he be:
I have been well acquainted with that face.

Well met my honourable lord and friend.


You are welcome sir, what ere you be,
But of this sudden sir, I do not know you.

I am one that wishes well unto your honour,
My name is Powes, an old friend of yours.

My honourable lord, and worthy friend,
What makes your lordship thus alone in Kent,
And thus disguised in this strange attire?

My Lord, an unexpected accident,
Hath at this time inforc'de me to these parts:
And thus it hapt, not yet full five days since,
Now at the last Assise at Hereford,
It chanced that the lord Herbert and my self,
Amongst other things, discoursing at the table,
To fall in speech about some certain points
Of Wickcliffes doctrine, against the papacy,
And the religion catholic, maintained
Through the most part of Europe at this day.
This wilful teasty lord stuck not to say,
That Wickcliffe was a knave, a schismatike,
His doctrine devilish and heretical,
And what soere he was maintained the same,
was traitor both to God and to his country.
Being moved at his peremptory speech,
I told him, some maintained those opinions,
Men, and truer subjects then lord Herbert was:
And he replying in comparisons:
Your name was urged, my lord, against his challenge,
To be a perfect favourer of the truth.
And to be short, from words we fell to blows,
Our servants, and our tenants taking parts,
Many on both sides hurt: and for an hour
The broil by no means could be pacified,
Until the Judges rising from the bench,
Were in their persons forc'de to part the fray.

I hope no man was violently slain.


Faith none I trust, but the lord Herberts self,
Who is in truth so dangerously hurt,
As it is doubted he can hardly escape.

I am sorry, my good lord, of these ill news.


This is the cause that drives me into Kent,
To shroud my self with you so good a friend,
Until I hear how things do speed at home.

Your lordship is most welcome unto Cobham,
But I am very sorry, my good lord,
My name was brought in question in this matter,
Considering I have many enemies,
That threaten malice, and do lie in wait
To take aduantange of the smallest thing.
But you are welcome, and repose your lordship,
And keep your self here secret in my house,
Until we hear how the lord Herbert speeds:
Here comes my man.
Sir, what news?

Yonders one master Butler of the privy chamber, is sent unto you from the
King.


I pray God the lord Herbert be not dead, and the King hearing whither I am
gone, hath sent for me.


Comfort your self my lord, I warrant you.


Fellow, what ails thee? dost thou quake? dost thou shake? dost thou tremble?
ha?


Peace you old fool, sir, convey this gentleman in the back way, and bring
the other into the walk.


Come sir. you are welcome, if you love my lord.


God have mercy gentle friend.


I thought as much, that it would not be long before I heard of something from
the King, about this matter.


Sir, yonder my lord walks, you see him,
I'll have your men into the Cellar the while.

welcome good master Butler.


Thanks, my good lord: his Majesty doth commend his love unto your lordship,
and wills you to repair unto the court.


God bless his Highness, and confound his ennemies, I hope his Majesty is
well.


In health, my lord.


God long continue it: me thinks you look as though you were not well, what
ails you sir?


Faith I have had a foolish odd mischance, that angers me: coming over
Shooters hill, there came a fellow to me like a Sailor, and asked me money, and
whilst I staide my horse to draw my purse, he takes th'aduantage of a little
bank and leaps behind me, whips my purse away, and with a sudden jerk I
know not how, threw me at least three yards out of my saddle. I never was so
robbed in all my life.


I am very sorry sir for your mischance, we will send our warrant forth, to
stay such suspicious persons as shall be found, then master Butler, we will
attend you.


I humbly thank your lordship, I will attend you.


I have the law to warrant what I do, and though the Lord Cobham be a noble
man, that dispenses not with law, I dare serve process were a five noble men,
though we Sumners make sometimes a mad slip in a corner with a pretty wench, a
Sumner must not go always by seeing, a manne may be content to hide his eyes,
where he may feel his profit: well, this is my Lord Cobhams house, if I can
devise to speak with him, if not, I'll clap my citation vpon's door, so my
lord of Rochester bid me, but me thinks here comes one of his men.


Welcome good fellow, welcome, who would thou speak with?


With my lord Cobham, I would speak, if thou be one of his men.


Yes I am one of his men, but thou can not speak with my lord.


May I send to him them?


I'll tel thee that, when I know thy errand.


I will not tel my errand to thee.


Then keep it to thy self, and walk like a knave as thou came.


I tell thee my lord keeps no knaves, sir.


Then thou serve him not, I believe, what lord is thy master?


My lord of Rochester.


In good time, and what would thou have with my lord Cobham?


I come by virtue of a process, to ascite him to appear before my lord, in
the court at Rochester.


Well, God grant me patience, I could eat this conger. My lord is not at home,
therefore it were good Sumner you carried your process back.


Why, if he will not be spoken withal, then will I leave it here, and see you
that he take knowledge of it.


Swounds you slave, do you set up your bills here, go to, take it down again,
doest thou know what thou dost, dost thee know on whom thou serve process?


Yes marry do I, Sir Iohn Old-castle Lord Cobham.


I am glad thou know him yet, and sir dost not thou know, that the lord
Cobham is a brave lord, that keeps good beef and beer in his house, and
every day feeds a hundred poor people at's gate, and keeps a hundred tall
fellows?


Whats that to my process?


Mary this sir, is this process parchment*


Yes mary.


And this seal wax?


It is so.


If this be parchment, this wax, eat you this parchment, and this wax, or I
will make parchment of your skin, and beat your brains into wax: Sir
Sumner dispatch, devour, sir devour.


I am my lord of Rochesters Sumner, I came to do my office, and thou shalt
answer it.


Sir, no railing, but betake you to your teeth, thou shalt eat no worse then
thou bring with thee, thou bring it for my lord, and wilt thou bring my
lord worse then thou wilt eat thy self?


Sir, I brought it not my lord to eat.


O do you sir me now, all's one for that, but i'll make you eat it, for
bringing it.


I cannot eat it.


Can you not? should i'll beat you until you have a stomach.


O hold, hold, good master serving-man, I will eat it.


Be champping, be chawing sir, or I'll chaw you, you rogue, the purest of the
honey.


Tough wax, is the purest of the honey.


O Lord sir, oh oh,
Feed, feed, wholesome rogue, wholesome.
Cannot you like an honest Sumner walk with the devil your brother, to fetch
in your Bailiffs rents, but you must come to a noble mans house with process?
Sbloud if thy seal were as broad as the lead that covers Rochester church,
thou should eat it.


O I am almost choked, I am almost choked.


Who's within there? will you shame my Lord, is there no beer in the house?
Butler I say.


Here, here.


Give him Beer.
There, tough old sheepskins, bare dry meat.

O sir, let me go no further, I'll eat my word.


Yea mary sir, so I mean you shall eat more then your own word, for i'll make
you eat all the words in the process. Why you drab monger, cannot the secrets
of al the wenches in a sheire serve your turn, but you must come hither with a
citation with a pox? I'll cite you.


Here sir here.


Here slave I drink to thee.


I thank you sir.


Now if thou findst thy stomach well, because thou shalt see my Lord keep's
meat in's house, if thou wilt go in thou shalt have a piece of beef to thy
break fast.


No I am very well good M. serving-man, I thank you, very well sir.


I am glad on it, th^n be walking towards Rochester to keep your stomach warm:
and Sumner, if I may know you disturb a good wench within this Diocese, if I
do not make thee eat her petticoat, if there were four yards of Kentish cloth
in it, I am a villain.


God be with you M. seruingmaan.


Farewell Sumner.


God save you M. Harpoole.


Welcome Constable, welcome Constable, what news with thee?


And't please you M. Harpoole, I am to make hue to cry, for a fellow with one
eye that has robbed two Clothiers, and am to crave your hindrance, for to search
all suspected places, and they say there was a woman in the company.


Hast thou bin at the Alehouse, hast thou sought there?


I durst not search sir, in my Lord Cobhams liberty, except I had some of his
servants, which are for my warrant.


An honest Constable, an honest Constable, cal forth him that keeps the
Alehouse there.


Ho, who's within there?


Who calls there, come near a Gods name, oh is't you M. Constable and M.
Harpoole, you are welcome with all my heart, what make you here so early this
morning?


Sir, what strangers do you lodge, there is a robbery done this morning, and
we are to search for all suspected persons.


Gods bores, I am sorry for it, in faith sir I lodge no body but a good honest merry
priest, they call him sir Iohn a Wrootham, and a handsome woman that is his
niece, that he says he has some suit in law for, and as they go up down to
London, sometimes they lie at my house.


What, is he here in thy house now?


She is sir, I promise you sir he is a quiet man, and because he will not
trouble too many rooms, he makes the woman lie every night at his beds feet.


Bring her forth Constable, bring her forth, let's see her, let's see her.


Dorothy, you must come down to M. Constable.


A non forsooth.


Welcome sweet lass, welcome.


I thank you good M. serving-man, and master Constable also.


A plump girl by the mas, a plump girl, ha Dol ha, wilt thou forsake the
priest, and go with me.


A well said M. Harpoole, you are a merry old man in faith, in faith you will never
be old: now by the macke, a pretty wench indeed.


Ye old mad merry Constable, art thou aduis'de of that ha, well said Dol, fill
some ale here.


Oh if I wist this old priest would not stick to me, by Jove I would ingle
this old serving-man.


Oh you o^d mad colt, in faith I'll feak you: fill all the pots in the house there.


Oh well said M. Harpoole, you are heart of oak when all's done.


Ha Dol, thou hast a sweet pair of lips by the mass.


Truly you are a most sweet old man, as ever I saw, by my troth, you have a
face, able to make any woman in love with you.


Fill sweet Doll, I'll drink to thee.


I pledge you sir, and thank you therefore, and I pray you let it come.





I warrant you you will not out of my thoughts this tweluemonth, truly you are
as full of favour, as a man may be. Ah these sweet grey locks, by my troth,
they are most lovely.


Gods boars master Harpoole, I will have one bus too.


No licking for you Constable, hand off, hand off.


Bur lady I love kissing as well as you.


Oh you are an od boy, you have a wanton eye of your own: ah you sweet sugar
lipped wanton, you will win as many women's hearts as come in your company.


Doll, come hither.


Priest, she shall not.


I'll come anon, sweet love.


Hand off, old fornicator.


Vicar, I'll sit here in spite of thee, is this fit stuff for a priest to
carry up and down with him?


Ah sir, dost thou not know, that a good fellow parson may have a chapel of
ease, where his parish Church is far off?


You whooreson stoned Vicar.


You old stale ruffin, you lion of Cotswold.


Swounds Vicar, I'll geld you.


Keep the Kings peace.


Murder, murder, murder.


Hold, as you are men, hold, for Gods sake be quiet: put up your weapons, you
draw not in my house.


You whooreson bawdy priest.


You old mutton monger.


Hold sir Iohn, hold.


I pray thee sweet heart be quiet, I was but sitting to drink a pot of ale
with him, even as kind a man as ever I met with.


Thou art a thief I warrant thee.


Then I am but as thou hast been in thy days, lets not be ashamed of our
trade, the King has been a thief himself.


Come, be quiet, hast thou sped?


I have wench, here be crowns in faith.


Come, lets be all friends then.


Well said mistress Dorothy in faith.


Thou art the madst priest that ever I met with.


Give me thy hand, thou art as good a fellow, I am a singer, a drinker, a
bencher, a wencher, I can say a mass, and kiss a lass: faith I have a
parsonage, and because I would not be at too much charges, this wench serves me
for a sexton.


Well said mad priest, we'll in and be friends,


Now master Murley, I am well assured
You know our arrant, and do like the cause,
Being a man affected as we are?

Mary God dild ye dainty my dear, no master, good ^r Roger Acton Knight,
master Bourne, and master Beuerley esquires, gentlemen, and justices of the
peace, no master I, but plain William Murly the brewer of Dunstable your
honest neighbour, and your friend, if ye be men of my profession.


Professed friends to Wickliffe, foes to Rome.


Hold by me lad, lean upon that staff good master Beuerley, all of a house,
say your mind, say your mind.


You know our faction now is grown so great,
Throughout the realm; that it begins to smoke
Into the Cleargies eyes, and the Kings ears,
High time it is that we were drawn to head,
Our general and officers appointed.
And wars ye wot will ask great store of coin.
Able to strength our action with your purse,
You are elected for a colonel
Over a regiment of fifteen bands.

Few paltry paltry, in and out, to and fro, be it more or less, upon
occasion, Lord have mercy upon us, what a world is this? Sir Roger Acton, I
am but a Dunstable man, a plain brewer, ye know: will lusty Caualiering
captains gentlemen come at my calling, go at my bidding? Dainty my dear,
theile do a dog of wax, a horse of cheese, a prick and a pudding, no, no,
ye must appoint some lord or knight at least to that place.


Why master Murley, you shall be a Knight:
Were you not in election to be shrieue?
Have ye not past all offices but that?
Have ye not wealth to make your wife a lady?
I warrant you, my lord, our General
Bestows that honour on you at first sight.

Mary God dild ye dainty my dear:
But tell me, who shall be our General?
Wheres the lord Cobham, sir Iohn Old-castle,
That noble almes-giuer, housekeeper, virtuous,
Religious gentleman? Come to me there boys,
Come to me there.

Why who but he shall be our General?


And shall he knight me, and make me colonel?


My word for that, sir William Murley knight.


Fellow sir Roger Acton knight, all fellows, I mean in arms, how strong are
we? how many partners? our e^emies beside the King are mighty, be it more or
less upon occasion, reckon our force.


There are of us, our friends, and followers,
Three thousand and three hundred at the least,
Of northern lads four thousand, beside horse,
From Kent there comes with sir Iohn Old-castle
Seven thousand, then from London issue out,
Of masters, servants, strangers, prentices
Forty odd thousands into Ficket field,
Where we appoint our special randeuous.

^ paltry, in and out to and fro, Lord have ^ a world is this, wheres that
Ficket field, sir Roger?


Behind saint Giles in the field near Holbo^ne.


Newgate, up Holborn, S. Giles in the field, and to Tiborne, an old saw: for
the day, for the day?


On friday next the foureteenth day of January.


Tyllie valley, trust me never if I have any liking of that day: few paltry
paltry, friday quoth a, dismal day, Childermasse day this year was friday.


Nay master Murley, if you observe such days,
We make some question of your constancy,
All days are like to men resolu'de in right.

Say Amen, and say no more, but say, and hold master Beuerley, friday next, and
Ficket field, and William Murley, and his merry men shall be al one, I have half
a score jade that draw my beer cartes, and every jade shall bear a knave,
and every knave shall wear a jack, and every jack shall have a scull, and
every scull shall show a spear, and every spear shall kill a foe at Ficket
field, at Ficket field, Iohn and Tom, and Dicke and Hodge, and Raf and Robin,
William George, and all my knaves shall fight like men, at Ficket field on
friday next.


What sum of money mean you to disburse?


It may be modestly, decently, soberly, and handsomely I may bring five
hundredth pound.


Five hundredth man? five thousand's not enough,
A hundredth thousand will not pay our men
Two months together, either come prepared
Like a brave Knight, and martial Colonel,
In glittering gold, and gallant furniture,
Bringing in coin, a cart load at the least,
And all your followers mounted on good horse,
Or never come disgraceful to us all.

Perchance you may be chosen Treasurer,
Ten thousand pounds the least that you can bring.

Paltry paltry, in and (...) and fro, ^ I have ten thousand pound to (...), and
^ rather than the Bishop shall have (...) will of me for my conscience, it
shall out all. Flame and flax, flame and flax, it was got with water and
malt, and it shall fly with fire and gun powder. Sir Roger, a cart load of
money till the axetree crack, my self and my men in Ficket field on friday
next: remember my Knighthood, and my place: there's my hand I'll be there.


See what Ambition may persuade men to,
In hope of honour he will spend himself.

I never thought a Brewer half so ^ich.


Was never bankrupt Brewer yet but one,
With using too much malt, too little water.

That's no fault in Brewers now-adayes:
Come, away about our business.

Tis not enough Lord Cobham to submit.
You must forsake your gross opinion,
The Bishops find themselves much injured,
And though for some good service you have done,
We for our part are pleased to pardon you,
Yet they will not so soon be satisfied,

My gracious Lord unto your Majesty,
Next unto my God, I owe my life,
And what is mine, either by natures gift,
Or fortunes bounty, al is at your service,
But for obedience to the Pope of Rome,
I owe him none, nor shall his shaueling priests
That are in England, alter my belief.
If out of holy Scripture they can prove,
That I am in an error, I will yield,
And gladly take instruction at their hands,
But otherwise, I do beseech your grace,
My conscience may not be incroacht upon.

We would be loath to press our subjects bodies,
Much less their souls, the dear redeemed part,
Of him that is the ruler of us all,
Yet let me counsel ye, that might command,
Do not presume to tempt them with ill words,
Nor suffer any meetings to be had
Within your house, but to the uttermost,
Disperse the flocks of this new gathering sect.

My liege, if any breathe, that dares come forth,
And say, my life in any of these points
Deserves th'attaindor of ignoble thoughts
Here stand I, craving no remorse at all,
But even the utmost rigour may be shown.

Let it suffice we know your loyalty,
What have you there?

A deed of clemency,
Your Highness pardon for Lord Powesse life,
Which I did beg, and you my noble Lord,
Of gracious favour did vouchsafe to grant.

But yet it is not signed with our hand.


Not yet my Liege.


The fact, you say, was done,
Not of prepensed malice, but by chance.

Upon mine honour so, no otherwise.


There is his pardon, bid him make amends,
And cleanse his soul to God for his offence,
What we remit, is but the bodies scourge,
How now Lord Bishop?

Justice dread Sovereign.
As thou art King, so grant I may have justice.

What means this exclamation, let us know?


Ah my good Lord, the state's abused,
And our decrees most shamefully prophande.

How, or by whom?


Even by this heretike,
This Jew, this Traitor to your majesty.

Prelate, thou lie, even in thy greasy maw,
Or whosoever twits me with the name,
Of either traitor, or of heretike.

Forbear I say, and Bishop, show the cause
From whence this late abuse hath bin deriu'de,

Thus mighty King, by general consent,
A messenger was sent to cite this Lord,
To make appearance in the consis^orie,
And coming to his house, a ruffian slave,
One of his daily followers, met the man,
Who knowing him to be a parator,
Assaults him first, and after in contempt
Of us, and our proceedings, makes him eat
The written process, parchment, seal and all:
Whereby his master neither was brought forth,
Nor we but scorned, for our authority.

When was this done?


At six a clock this morning.


And when came you to court?


Last night my Lord.


By this it seems, he is not guilty of it,
And you have done him wrong t'accuse him so.

But it was done my lord by his appointment,
Or else his man durst ne'er have bin so bold.

Or else you durst be bold, to interrupt,
And fill our ears with frivolous complaints,
Is this the duty you do bear to us?
Was't not sufficient we did pass our word
To send for him, but you misdoubting it,
Or which is worse, intending to forestall
Our regal power, must likewise summon him?
This savours of Ambition, not of zeal,
And rather proves, you malice his estate,
Than any way that he offends the law.
Go to, we like it not, and he your officer,
That was employed so much amiss herein,
Had his desert for being insolent:
So Cobham when you please you may depart.

I humbly bid farewell unto my liege.


Farewell, what's the news by Huntington?


Sir Roger Acton, and a crew, my Lord,
Of bold seditious rebels, are in Arms,
Intending reformation of Religion.
And with their Army they intend to pitch,
In Ficket field, unless they be repulsed.

So ne'er our presence? dare they be so bold?
And will proud war, and eager thirst of blood,
Whom we had thought to entertain far off,
Press forth upon us in our native bounds?
Must we be forced to hansell our sharp blades
In England here, which we prepared for France?
Well, a Gods name be it, what's their number? say,
Or who's the chief commander of this rowt?

Their number is not known, as yet (my Lord)
But tis reported Sir Iohn Old-castle
Is the chief man, on whom they do depend.

How, the Lord Cobham?


Yes my gracious Lord.


I could have told your majesty as much
Before he went, but that I saw your Grace
Was too much blinded by his flaterie.

Send post my Lord to fetch him back again.


Traitor unto his country, how he smooth'de,
And seemed as innocent as Truth it self?

I cannot think it yet, he would be false,
But if he be, no matter let him go,
We'll meet both him and them unto their wo.

This falls out well, and at the last I hope
To see this heretike die in a rope.

Once more my Lord of Cambridge make rehearsal,
How you do stand intiteled to the Crown,
The deeper shall we print it in our minds,
And every man the better be resolu'de,
When he perceives his quarrel to be just.

Then thus Lord Scroope, sir Thomas Gray, you
Mounsieur de Cha^tres, agent for the French,
This Lionell Duke of Clarence, as I said,
Third son of Edward (Englands King) the third
H^d issue Phillip his sole daughter and heir,
Which Phillip afterward was given in marriage,
To Edmund Mortimer the Earl of March,
And by him had a son called Roger Mortimer,
Which Roger likewise had of his descent,
Edmund, Roger, Anne, and Elianor,
Two daughters and two sons, but those three
Did without issue, Anne that did survive,
And now was left her fathers only heir,
My fortune was to marry, being too
By my grandfather of King Edwardes line,
So of his surname, I am called you know,
Richard Plantagenet, my father was,
Edward the Duke of York, and son and heir
To Edmund Langley, Edward the third's first son.

So that it seems your claim comes by your wife,
As lawful heir to Roger Mortimer,
The son of Edmund, which did marry Phillip
Daughter and heir to Lyonell Duke of Clarence.

True, for this Harry, and his father both
Harry the first, as plainly doth appear,
Are false intruders, and usurp the Crown.
For when young Richard was at Pomfret slain,
In him the title of prince Edward did,
That was the eldest of king Edwards sons:
William of Hatfield, and their second brother,
Death in his nonage had before bereft:
So that my wife derived from Lionell,
Third son unto king Edward, ought proceed,
And take possession of the Diadem
Before this Harry, or his father king,
Who fetched their title but from Lancaster,
Forth of that royal line. And being thus,
What reason is't but she should have her right?

I am resolu'de our enterprise is just.


Harry shall die, or else resign his crown.


Perform but that, and Charles the king of France
Shall aid you lords, not only with his men,
But send you money to maintain your wars,
Five hundred thousand crowns he bade me proffer,
If you can stop but Harries voyage for France.

We never had a fitter time than now
The realm in such division as it is.

Besides, you must persuade ye there is due,
Vengeance for Richards murder, which although
It be defend, yet will it fall at last,
And now as likely as another time.
Sin hath had many years to ripen in,
And now the harvest cannot be far off,
Wherein the weeds of usurpation,
Are to be cropped, and cast into the fire.

No more earl Cambridge, here I plight my faith,
To set up thee, and thy renowned wife.

Gray will perform the same, as he is knight.


And to assist ye, as I said before,
Charters doth gage the honour of his king.

We lack but now Lord Cobhams fellowship,
And then our plot were absolute indeed.

Doubt not of him, my lord, his life's pursu'de
By th'incensed Clergy, and of late,
^rought in displeasure with the king, assures
He may be quickly won unto our faction.
Who hath the articles were drawn at large
Of our whole purpose?

That have I my Lord.


We should not now be far off from his house,
Our serious conference hath beguiled the way,
See where his castle stands, give me the writing.
When we are come unto the speech of him,
Because we will not stand to make recount,
Of that which hath been said, here he shall read
Our minds at large, and what we crave of him.

A ready way: here comes the man himself
Booted and spurrd, it seems he hath been riding.

Well met lord Cobham.


My lord of Cambridge?
Your honour is most welcome into Kent,
And all the rest of this fair company.
I am new come from London, gentle ^ordes:
But will ye not take Cowling for your host,
And see what entertainment it affords?

We were intended to have been your guests:
But now this lucky mee^ing shall suffice
To end our business, and defer that kindness.

Business my lord? what business should you have
But to be merry? we have no delicates,
But this I'll promise you, a piece of venison,
A cup of wine, and so forth: hunters fare:
And if you please, we'll strike the stag our selves
Shall fill our dishes with his wel-fed flesh.

That is indeed the thing we all desire.


My lords, and you shall have your choice with me.


Nay but the stag which we desire to strike,
Lives not in Cowling: if you will consent,
And go with us, we'll bring you to a forest,
Where runs a lusty hierd: amongst the which
There is a stag superior to the rest,
A stately beast, that when his fellows run,
He leads the race, and beats the sullen earth,
As though he sco^nd it with his trampling hooves,
Aloft he bears his head, and with his breast,
Like a huge bulwark counter-checkes the wind:
And when he stands still, he stretches forth
His proud ambitious neck, as if he meant
To wound the firmament with forked horns.

Tis pity such a goodly beast should die.


Not so, sir Iohn, for he is tyrannous,
And gores the other dear, and will not keep
Within the limits are appointed him.
Of late hes broke into a several,
Which doth belong to me, and there he spoils
Both corn and pasture, two of his wild race
Alike sor stealth, and covetous incroatching,
Already are removed, if he were dead,
I should not only be secure from hurt,
But with his body make a royal feast.

How say you then, will you first hunt with us?


Faith Lords, I like the pastime, wheres the place?


Peruse this writing, it will show you all,
And what occasion we have for the sport.

Call ye this hunting, my lords? Is this the stag
You fain would chase, Harry our dread king?
So we may make a banquet for the devil,
And in the fleede of wholesome meat, prepare
A dish of poison to confound our selves.

Why so lord Cobham? see you not our claim?
And how imperiously he holds the crown?

^esides, you know your self is in disgrace,
Held as a recreant, and pursued to death.
This will defend you from your enemies,
And stablish your religion through the land.

Notorious treason! yet I will conceal
My secret thought^, to sound the depth of it.
My lord of Cambridge, I do see your claim,
And what good may redound unto the land,
By prosecuting of this enterprise.
^ut where are men? where's power and furniture
To order such an action? we are weak,
Harry, you know's a mighty potentate.

Tut, we are strong enough, you are belou'de,
And many will be glad to follow you,
We are the light, and some will follow us:
Besides, there is hope from France: here's an ambassador
That promises both men and money too.
The commons likewise (as we hear) pretend
A sudden tumult, we will join with them.

Some likelihood, I must confess, to speed:
^ut how shall I believe this is plain truth?
You are (my lords) such men as live in Court,
And highly have been favoured of the king,
Especially lord Scroope, whom oftentimes
He m^keth choice of for his bedfellow.
And you lord Gray are of his privy council:
Is not this a train to entrap my life?

Then perish may my soul: wh^t think you so?


VVeele swear to you.


Or take the sacrament.


Nay you are noble men, and I imagine,
As you a^e honourable by birth and blood,
So you will be in heart, in thought, in word.
I crave no other testimony but this.
That you wou^d all subscribe, and set your hands
Unto this writing which you gave to me.

With all our hearts: who hath any pen and ink?


My pocket should have one: yea, here it is.


Give it me lord Scroope: there is my name.


And there is my name.


And mine.


Sir, let me crave,
That you would likewise write your name with theirs,
For confirmation of your masters word,
The king of France.

That will I noble Lord.


So now this action is well knit together,
And I am for you: where`s our meeting, lords?

Here if you please, the tenth of July next.


In Kent? agreed: now let us in to supper,
I hope your honours will not away to night.

Yes present^y, for I have far to ride,
About soliciting of other friends.

And we would not be absent from the court,
Lest thereby grow suspicion in the king.

Yet taste a cup of wine before ye go.


Not now my lord, we thank you: so farewell.


Farewell my noble lords: my noble lords?
My noble villains, base conspirators,
How can they look his Highness in the face,
Whom they so closly study to betray?
But i'll not sleep until I make it known.
This head shall not be burdened with such thoughts,
Nor in this heart will I conceal a deed
Of such impiety against my king.
Madam, how now?

You are welcome home, my Lord,
Why seem ye so disquiet in your looks?
What hath befallen you that disquiets your mind?

Bad news I am afraid touching my husband.


Madam, not so: there is your husbands pardon,
Long may ye live, each joy unto the other.

So great a ki^dnesse as I know not howe to make reply, my sense is quite
confounded.


^et that alone: and madam stay me not,
For I must back unto the court again
With all the speed I can: Harpoole, my horse.

So soon my Lord? what will you ride all night?


All night or day it must be so, sweet wife,
Urge me not why or what my business is,
But get you in: Lord Powesse, bear with me,
And madam, think your welcome ne'er the worse:
My house is at your use. Harpoo^e, away.

Shall I attend your lordship to the court?


Yea sir, your gelding, mount you presently


I prithee Harpoole, look unto thy Lord,
I do not like this sudden posting back.

Some earnest business is a foot belike,
What e're it be, pray God be his good guide.

Amen that hath so highly us bested.


Come madam, and my lord, we'll hope the best,
You shall not into Wales till he return.

Though great occasion be we should depart, yet madam will we stay to be
resolude, of this unlooked for doubtful accident.


Come my hearts of flint, modestly, decently, soberly, and handsomely, no man
before his L^ader, follow your master, your Captain, your Knight that shall be,
for the honour of Meale-men, Millers, and Mault-men dunne is the mouse, Dicke
and Tom for the credit of Dunstable, ding down the enemy to morrow, ye shall
not come into the field like beggars, wh^re be Leonard and Laurence my two
loaders, Lord have mercy upon us, what a world is this? I would give a couple
of shillings for a dozen of good feathers for ye, and forty pence for as many
skarffes to set ye out withal, frost and snow, a man has no heart to fight
till he be brave.


Master I hope we be no babes, for our manhood, our bucklers, and our town
foote-balls can bear witness: and this lite parrell we have shall off, and
we'll fight naked before we run away.


Nay, I am of Laurence mind for that, for he means to leave his life behind
him, he and Leonard your two loaders are making their wills because they have
wives, now we Bachellers bid our friends scramble for our goods if we die: but
master, pray ye let me ride upon Cut.


Meal and salt, wheat and malt, fire and tow, frost and snow, why Tom thou
shalt: let me see, here are you, William and George are with my cart, and Robin
and Hodge holding my own two horses, proper men, handsome men, tall men, true
men.


But master, master, me thinks you are a mad man, to hazard your own person
and a cart load of money too.


Yea, and master there's a worse matter in it, if it be as I heard say, we go to
fight against all the learned Bishops, that should give us their blessing, and
if they curse us, we shall speed ne'er the better.


Nay bir lady, some say the King takes their part, and master, dare you fight
against the King?


Fie paltry, paltry in and out, to and fro upon occasion, if the King be so
unwise to come there, we'll fight with him too.


What if we should kill the King?


Then we'll make another.


Is that all, do ye not speak treason?


If we do, who dare trip us? we come to fight for our conscience, and for
honour, little know you what is in my bosom, look here mad knaves, a pair
of guilt spurs.


A pair of golden spurs? why do you not put them on your heals? your
bosome's no place for spurs.


Be it more or less upon occasion, Lord have mercy us, Tom you are a fool, and
thou speak treason to knighthood, dare any wear golden or silver spurs till
he be a knight? no, I shall be knighted to morrow, and then they shall on:
sirs, was it ever read in the church book of Dunstable, that ever malt man
was made knight?


No but you are more, you are meal-man, maultman, miller, corne-master and all.


Yea, and half a brewer too, and the devil and all for wealth, you b^ing more
money with you, than all the rest.


The more's my honour, I shall be a knight to morrow, let me spose my men, Tom
upon cut, Dicke upon hobbe, Hodge upon Ball, Raph upon Sorrel, and Robin upon
the forehorse.


Stand, who comes there?


Al friends, good fellow.


Friends and fellows indeed sir Roger.


Why thus you show your self a Gentleman,
To keep your day, and come so well prepared,
Your cart stands yonder, guarded by your men,
Who tell me it is laden well with come,
What sum is there?

Ten thousand pound sir Roger, and modestly, decently, soberly, and handsomely,
see what I have here against I be knighted.


Gilt spurs? tis well.


But where's our army sir?


Dispersed in sundry villages about,
Some here with us in Hygate, some at Finchley,
Totnam, Enfield, Edmunton, Newington,
Islington, Hogsdon, Pancredge, Kenzington,
Some nearer Thames, Ratcliffe, Blackwall and Bow,
But our chief strength must be the Londoners,
Which ere the Sun to morrow shin^,
Will be ne'er fifty thousand in the field.

Mary God dild ye dainty my dear, but upon occasion sir Roger Acton, doth not
the King know of it, and gather his power against us.


No, he's secure at Eltham.


What do the Clergy?


Fear extremely, yet prepare no force.


In and out, to and fro, Bullie my boikin, we shall ^arry the world before us, I
vow by my worship, when I am knighted, we'll take the King napping, if he
stand on their part.


This night we few in Higate will repose,
With the first cock we'll rise and arm our selves,
To be in Ficket field by break of day,
And there expect our General.

Sir Iohn Old-cast^e, what if he come not?


Yet our action stands,
Sir Roger Acton may supply his place.

True M. Bourne but who shall make me knight?


He that hath power to be our General.


Talk not of trifles, come lets away,
Our friends of London long till it be day.

By my troth, thou art as jealous a man as lives.


Can thou blame me Doll, thou art my lands, my goods, my jewels, my wealth,
my purse, none walks within xl. miles of London, but a plies thee as truly, as
the parish does the poor mans box.


I am as true to thee, as the stone is in the wall, and thou know well enough
sir Iohn, I was in as good doing, when I came to thee, as any wench need to
be: and therefore thou hast tried me, that thou hast: by Gods body, I will not
be kept as I have bin, that I will not.


Doll, if this blade hold, there's not a peddler walks with a pack, but thou
shalt as boldly choose of his wares, as with thy ready money in a Merchants shop,
we'll have as good silver as the King coins any.


What is al the gold spent you took the last day from the Courtier?


Tis gone Doll, tis flown, merely come, merely gon, he comes a horse back that
must pay for all, we'll have as good meat, as money can get, and as good
gowns, as can be bought for gold, be merry wench, the mault-man comes on
monday.


You might have left me at Cobham, until you had bin better provided for.


No sweet Dol, no, I do not like that, yond old ruffian is not for the priest,
I do not like a new cleark should come in the old bel-frie.


Ah thou art a mad priest in faith.


Come Doll, I'll see thee safe at some alehouse here at Cray, and the next
sheep that comes shall leave his fleece.


My lord of Suffolk, post away for life,
And let our forces of such horse and foot,
As can be gathered up by any means,
Make speedy randeuow in Tuttle fields,
It must be done this evening my Lord,
This night the rebels mean to draw to head
Near Islington, which if your speed prevent not,
If once they should unite their several forces,
Their power is almost thought invincible,
Away my Lord I will be with you soon.

I go my Sovereign with all happy speed.


Make haste my lord of Suffolke as you love us,
Butler, post you to London with all speed.
Command the Mayor, and shrieues, on their alegiance,
The city gates be presently shut up,
And guarded with a strong sufficient watch,
And not a man be suffered to pass,
Without a special warrant from our self.
Command the Postern by the Tower be kept,
And procl^mation on the pain of death,
That not a citizen stir from his doors,
Except such as the Mayor and Shrieues shall choose,
For their own guarde, and safety of their persons,
Butler away, have care unto my charge.

I go my Sovereign.


Butler.


My Lord.


Go down by Greenewich, and command a boat,
At the Friars bridge attend my coming down.

I will my Lord.


It's time I think to look unto rebellion,
When Acton doth expect unto his aid,
No less then fifty thousand Londoners,
Well, I'll to Westminster in this disguise,
To hear what news is stirring in these brawls.

Stand true-man says a thief?


Stand thief, says a true man, how if a thief?


Stand thief too.


Then thief or true-man I see I must stand, I see how soever the world wags,
the trade of theeuing yet will never down, what art thou?


A good fellow.


So am I too, I see thou dost know me.


If thou be a good fellow, play the good fellows part, deliver thy purse
without more ado.


I have no money.


I must make you find some before we part, if you have no money you shall have
ware, as many sound dry blows as your skin can carry.


Is that the plain truth?


Sir no more ado, come, come, give me the money you have, dispatch, I cannot
stand all day.


Well, if thou wilt needs have it, there tis: just the proverb, one thief robs
another, where the devil are all my old thieves, that were wont to keep this
walk? Falstaff the villain is so fat, he cannot get on's horse, but me
thinks Poines and Peto should be stirring here abouts.


How much is there on it of thy word?


A hundred pound in Angels, on my word,
The time has been I would have done as much
For thee, if thou had past this way, as I have now.

Sir, what art thou, thou seem a gentleman?


I am no less, yet a poor one now, for thou hast al^ my money.


From whence came thou?


From the court at Eltham.


Art thou one of the Kings servants?


Yes that I am and one of his chamber.


I am glad thou art no worse, thou may the better spare thy money, think
thou thou might get a poor thief his pardon if he should have need.


Yes that I can.


Wilt thou do so much for me, when I shall have occasion?


Yes faith will I, so it be for no murder.


Nay, I am a pitiful thief, all the hurt I do a man, I take but his purse,
I'll kill no man.


Then of my word I'll do it.


Give me thy hand of the same.


There tis.


Me thinks the King should be good to thieves because he has bin a thief
himself, though I think now he be turned true-man.


Faith I have heard indeed he has had an il name that way in his youth, but how
can thou tell he has been a thief?


How? because he once robde me before I fell to the trade my self, when that
foul villainous guts, that led him to all that rogery, was in's company there,
that Falstaff.


Well if he did rob thee then, thou art but even with him now I'll be sworn:
thou know not the king now, I think, if thou saw him?


Not I in faith.


So it should seem.


Well, if old King Henry had lived, this King that is now, had made theeuing
the best trade in England.


Why so?


Because he was the chief warden of our company, it's pity that ere he
should have bin a King, he was so brave a thief, but sir, wilt remember my
pardon if need be?


Yes faith will I.


Wilt thou? well then because thou shalt go safe, for thou may hap (being so
early) be met with again, before thou come to Southwarke, if any man when he
should bid thee good morrow, bid thee stand, say thou but sir Iohn, and he will
let thee pass.


Is that the word? well then let me alone.


Nay sir, because I think indeed I shall have some occasion to use thee, as
thou come oft this way, I may light on thee another time not knowing thee,
here, i'll break this Angel, take thou half of it, this is a token betwixt
thee and me.


God have mercy, farewell.


O my fine golden slaves, here's for thee wench in faith, now Dol, we will revel in
our beaver, this is a tithe pig of my vicaridge, God have mercy neigbour
Shooters hill, you paid your tithe honestly. Well I hear there is a company of
rebels up against the King, got together in Ficket field near Holborn, and
as it is thought here in Kent, the King will be there to night in's own
person, well i'll to the Kings camp, and it shall go hard, but if there be any
doings, I'll make some good boot amongst them.


My Lords of Suffolke and of Huntington,
Who skouts it now? or who stands Sentinels?
What men of worth? what Lords do walk the round?

May it please your Highness.


Peace, no more of that,
The King's asleep, wake not his majesty,
With terms nor titles, he's at rest in bed,
Kings do not use to watch themselves, they sleep,
And let rebellion and conspiracy,
Revel and havoc in the common wealth,
Is London looked unto?

It is my Lord,
Your noble Uncle Exceter is there,
Your brother Gloucester and my Lord of Warwicke,
Who with the mayor and the Aldermen,
Do guard the gates, and keep good rule within,
The Earl of Cambridge, and sir Thomas Gray,
Do walk the Round, Lord Scroope and Butler skout,
So though it please your majesty to jest,
Were you in bed, well might you take your rest,

I thank ye Lords, but you do know of old,
That I have bin a perfect night-walker,
London you say is safely looked unto,
Alas poor rebels, there your aid must fail,
And the Lord Cobham sir Iohn Old-castle,
He's quiet in Kent, Acton ye are deceived,
Reckon again, you count without your host,
To morrow you shall give account to us,
Till when my friends, this long cold winters night,
How can we spend? King Harry is a sleep,
And al his Lords, these garments tel us so,
Al friends at footebal, fellows all in field,
Harry, and Dicke, and George, bring us a drum,
Give us square dice, we'll keep this court of guard,
For al good fellows companies that come.
Wheres that mad priest ye told me was in Arms,
To fight, as well as pray, if need required?

Hes in the Camp, and if he knew of this,
I undertake he would not be long hence.

Trip Dicke, Trip George.


I must have the dice,
What do we play at?

Passage if ye please.


Set round then, so, at all.


George, you are out.
Give me the dice, I pass for twenty pound,
Here's to our lucky passage into France.

Harry you pass indeed for you sweep all.


A sign king Harry shall sweep al in France.


Edge ye good fellows, take a fresh gamester in.


Master Parson? we play nothing but gold?


And fellow, I tel thee that the priest hath gold, gold? sbloud ye are but
beggarly soldiers to me, I think I have more gold than all you three.


It may be so, but we believe it not.


Set priest set, I pass for all that gold.


Ye pass indeed.


Priest, hast thou any more?


Zounds what a question's that?
I tell thee I have more then all you three,
At these ten Angels.

I wonder how thou come by all this gold,
How many benefices hast thou priest?

In faith but one, dost wonder how I come by gold? I wonder rather how poor
soldiers should have gold, for I'll tell thee good fellow, we have every day
tithes, offerings, christnings, weddings, burialls: and you poor snakes come
seldom to a booty. I'll speak a proud word, I have but one parsonage,
Wrootham, tis better than the Bishopric of Rochester, there's ne'er a hill,
heath, nor down in all Kent, but tis in my parish, Barrham down, Chobham
down, Gads hill, Wrootham hill, Black heath, Cocks heath, Birchen wood, all
pay me tithe, gold quoth a? ye pass not for that.


Harry ye are out, now parson shake the dice.


Set, set I'll cover ye at al: A plague on it I am out, the devil, and dice, and
a wench, who will trust them?


Say thou so priest? set fair, at all for once.


Out sir, pay all.


Sbloud pay me angel gold,
I'll none of your cracked French crowns nor pistolets,
Pay me fair angel gold, as I pay you.

No cracked french crowns? I hope to see more cracked french crowns ere long.


Thou meanest of French men's crowns, when the King is in France.


Set round, at all.


Pay all: this is some luck.


Give me the dice, tis I must shread the priest:
At all sir Iohn.

The devil and all is yours: at that: sdeath, what ^asting is this?


Well thrown Harry in faith.


I'll cast better yet.


Then I'll be hanged. Sir, hast thou not given thy soul to the devil for
casting?


I pass for all.


Thou pass all that ere I played withal:
Sir, dost thou not cog, nor foist, nor slur?

Set parson, set, the dice die in my hand:
When parson, when? what can ye find no more?
Already dry? wast you bragd of your store?

Alls gone but that.


What, half a broken angel?


Why sir, tis gold.


Yea, and I'll cover it.


The devil do ye good on it, I am blind, ye have blown me up.


Nay tarry priest, ye shall not leave us yet,
Do not these pieces fit each other well?

What if they do?


Thereby begins a tale:
There was a thief, in face much like sir Iohn,
But t'was not he, that thief was all in green,
Met me last day on Black Heath, near the park,
With him a woman, I was al alone,
And weaponless, my boy had al my ^oo^s,
And was before providing me a boat:
Short tale to make, sir Iohn, the thief I mean,
Took a just hundredth pound in gold from me.
I stormed at it, and (...) be reueng'de
If ere we met, he like a ^,
Brake with his teeth this (...) ^ust in two,
To be a token at our meeting next,
Provided, I should charge no Officer
To apprehend him, but at weapons point
Recover that, and what he had beside.
Well met sir Iohn, betake ye to your tools
By torch light, for master parson you are he
That had my gold.

Zounds I won't in play, in fair square play of the keeper of Eltham park,
and that I will maintain with this poor whinyard, be you two honest men to
stand and look vpon's, and let's alone, and take neither part.


A greede, I charge ye do not boudge a foot, Sir Iohn have at ye.


Soldier ware your skonce.


Hold villains hold, my Lords, what do ye mean,
To see a traitor draw against the King?

The King! Gods will, I am in a proper pickle.


Butler what news? why dost thou trouble us?


Please it your Highness, it is break of day,
And as I skouted near to Islington,
The gray eyed morning gave me glimmering,
Of armed men coming down Hygate hill,
Who by their course are coasting hitherward.

Let us withdraw, my Lords, prepare our troops,
To charge the rebels, if there be such cause,
For this lawd priest this devilish hypocrite,
That is a thief, a gamester, and what not,
Let him be hanged up for example sake.

Not so my gracious sovereign, I confess I am a frail man, flesh and blood
as other are: but set my imperfections aside, by this light ye have not a
taller man* nor a truer subject to the Crown and State, than sit (...) of
VVrootham.


Will a true subject robb^ his King?


Alas twas ignoran^e and want, my gracious liege.


Twas want of grace: why, you should be as salt
To season others with good document,
Your lives as lamps to give the people light,
As shepherds, not as wolves to spoil the flock,
Go hang hm Butler.

Did thou not rob me?


I must confess I saw some of your gold, but my dread Lord, I am in no humour
for death, therefore save my life, God will that sinners live; do not you cause
me die, once in their lives the best may go astray, and if the world say true,
your self (my liege) have bin a thief.


I confess I have,
But I repent and have reclaimd my self.

So will I do if you will give me time.


Wilt thou? my lords, will you be his suerties?


That when he robs again, he shall be hanged.


I ask no more.


And we will grant thee that,
Live and repent, and prove an honest man,
Which when I hear, and safe return from France,
I'll give thee living, till when take thy gold,
But spend it better then at cards or wine,
For better virtues fit that coat of thine.

La Rex currat lex, my liege, if ye have cause of battle, ye shall see sir
Iohn of Wrootham bestir himself in your quarrel.


Bring in those traitors, whose aspiring minds,
Thought to have triumph in our overthrow,
But now ye see, base villains, what success
Attends ill actions wrongfully attempted.
Sir Roger Acton, thou retainst the name
Of knight, and should be more discreetly tempered,
Than join with peasants, gentry is divine,
But thou hast made it more then popular.

Pardon my Lord, my conscience urged me to it,


Thy conscience? then thy conscience is corrupt,
For in thy conscience thou art bound to us,
And in thy conscience thou should love thy country,
Else what s the difference twixt a Christian,
And the uncivil manners of the Turk?

We meant no hurt unto your majesty,
But reformation of Religion.

Reform Religion? was it that ye sought?
I pray who gave you that authority?
Belike then we do hold the sceptre up,
And sit within the throne but for a cipher,
Time was, good subjects would make known their grief,
And pray amendment, not enforce the same,
Unless their King were tyrant, which I hope
You cannot justly say that Harry is,
What is that other?

A mault-man my Lord,
And dwelling in Dunstable as he says.

Sir what made you leave your barley broth,
To come in armour thus against your King?

Fie paltry, paltry to and fro, in and out upon occasion, what a worlde's this?
knight-hood (my liege) twas knighthood brought me hithe^, they told me I had
wealth enough to make my wife a lady.


And so you brought those horses which we saw,
Trapt all in costly furniture, and meant
To wear these spurs when you were knighted once.

In and out upon occasion I did.


In and out upon occasion, therefore you shall be hanged, and in the sted of
wearing these spurs upon your heals, about your neck they shall bewray your
folly to the world.


In and out upon occasion, that goes hard.


Fic paltry paltry, to and fro, good my liege a pardon, I am sorry for my fault.


That comes too late: but tell me, went there none
Beside sir Roger Acton, upon whom
You did depend to be your governor?

None none my Lord, but sir Iohn Old-castle.


Bears he part in this conspiracy.


We looked my Lord that he would meet us here.


But did he promise you that he would come.


Such letters we received forth of Kent.


Where is my Lord the King? health to your grace,
Examining my Lord some of these caitiue rebels,
It is a general voice amongst them all,
That they had never come unto this place,
But to have met their valiant general,
The good Lord Cobham as they title him,
Whereby, my Lord, your grace may now perceive,
His treason is apparent, which before
He sought to colour by his flattery.

Now by my ro^altie I would have sworn,
But for his conscience, which I bear withal,
There had not lived a more true hearted subject.

It is but counterfeit, my gracious lords,
And therefore may it please your majesty,
To set your hand unto this precept here,
By which weel cause him forthwith to appear,
And answer this by order of the law.

Bishop, not only that, but take commission,
To search, attach, imprison, and condemn,
This most notorious traitor as you please.

It shall be done, my Lord, without delay:
So now I hold Lord Cobham in my hand,
That which shall finish thy disdained life.

I think the iron age begins but now,
(Which learned poets have so often taught)
Wherein there is no credit to be given,
To either words, or looks, or solemn oaths,
For if there were, how often hath he sworn,
How gently tun'de the music of his tongue,
And with what amiable face beheld he me,
When all, God knows, was but hypocrisy.

Long life and prosperous reign unto my Lord.

Ah villain, can thou wish prosperity,
Whose heart includes nought but treachery?
I do arrest thee here my self, false knight,
Of treason capital against the state.

Of treason mighty prince, your grace mistakes,
I hope it is but in the way of mirth.

Thy neck shall feel it is in earnest shortly,
Dare thou intrude into our presence, knowing
How haynously thou hast offended us?
But this is thy accustomed deceit,
Now thou perceiust thy purpose is in vain,
With some excuse or other thou wilt come,
To clear thy self of this rebellion.

Rebellion good my Lord, I know of none.


If you deny it, here is evidence,
See you these men, you never councelled,
Nor offered them assistance in their wars

Speak sirs, not one but all, I crave no favour,
Have ever I been conversant with you,
Or written letters to encourage you,
Or kindled but the least or smallest part,
Of this your late unnatural rebellion?
Speak for I dare the uttermost you can.

In and out upon occasion I know you not.


No, did not say that sir Iohn Old-castle,
Was one with whom you purposde to have met?

True, I did say so, but in what respect?
Because I heard it was reported so.

Was there no other argument but that?


To clear my conscience ere I die my lord,
I must confess, we have no other ground
But only Rumour, to accuse this lord,
Which now I see was merely fabulous.

The more pernicious you to taint him then,
Whom you knew not was faulty yea or no.

Let this my Lord, which I present your grace
Speak for my loyalty, read these articles,
And then give sentence of my life or death.

Earl Cambridge, Scroope, and Gray corrupted
With bribes from Charles of France, either to win
My Crown from me, or secretly contrive
My death by treason? Is this possible?

There is the platform, and their hands, my lord,
Each severally subscribed to the same.

Oh never heard of base ingratitude!
Even those I hug within my bosom most,
Are readiest evermore to sting my heart.
Pardon me Cobham, I have done thee wrong,
Hereafter I will live to make amends.
Is then their time of meeting so near hand?
We'll meet with them, but little for their ease,
If God permit: go take these rebels hence,
Let them have martial law: but as for thee,
Friend to thy king and country, still be free.

Be it more or less, what a world is this?
Would I had continued still of the order of knaves,
And never sought knighthood, since it costs
So dear: sir Roger, I may thank you for all.

Now tis too late to have it remedied,
I prithee Murley do not urge me with it.

Will you away, and make no more to do?


Fie paltry paltry, to and fro, as occasion serves,
If you be so hasty take my place.

No good sir knight, you shall begin in your hand.

I could be glad to give my betters place.


I tell ye Lady, its not possible
But you should know where he conveys himself,
And you have hid him in some secret place.

My Lord, believe me, as I have a soul,
I know not where my lord my husband is.

Go to, go to ye are an heretike,
And will be forc'de by torture to confess,
If fair means will not serve to make ye tell.

My husband is a noble gentleman,
And need not hide himself for any fact
That ere I heard of, therefore wrong him not.

Your husband is a dangerous schismaticke,
Traitor to God, the King, and common wealth,
And therefore master Croamer shrieue of Kent,
I charge you take her to your custody,
And cease the goods of Sir John Old-castle
To the Kings use, let her go in no more,
To fetch so much as her apparel out,
There is your warrant from his majesty.

Good my Lord Bishop pacify your wrath
Against the Lady.

Then let her confess
Where Old-castle her husband is concealed.

I dare engage mine honour and my life,
Poor gentlewoman, she is ignorant,
And innocent of all his practises,
If any evil by him be practised.

If my Lord Warden? nay then I charge you,
That all the cinque Ports whereof you are chief^
Be laid forthwith, that he escape us not,
Show him his highness warrant M. Shrieue.

I am sorry for the noble gentleman,


Peace, he comes here, now do your office.


Harpoole what business have we here in hand?
What makes the Bishop and the Sheriff here,
I fear my coming home is dangerous,
I would I had not made such haste to Cobham.

Be of good cheer my Lord, if they be foes we'll scramble shrewdly with them,
if they be friends they are welcome: one of th^m (my Lord, Warden) is your
friend, but me thinks my lady weeps, I like not that.


Sir Iohn Old-castle Lord Cobham, in the Kings majesties name, I arrest ye of
high treason.


Treason M. Croomes?


Treason M. Shrieue, sbloud what treason?


Harpoole I charge thee stir not, but be quiet still,
Do ye arrest me M. Shrieue for treason?

Yea of high treason, traitor, heretike.


Defiance in his face that calls me so,
I am as true a loyal gentleman
Unto his highness, as my proudest enemy,
The King shall witness my late faithful service,
For safety of his sacred majesty.

What thou art, the kings hand shall testify,
Shewt him Lord Warden.

Iesu defend me,
Is't possible your cunning could so temper
The princely disposition of his mind,
To sign the damage of a royal subject?
Well, the best is, it bears an ancedate,
Procured by my absence, and your malice,
But I, since that, have showed my self as true,
As any churchman that dare challenge me,
Let me be brought before his majesty,
If he acquit me not, then do your worst.

We are not bound to do kind office^
For any traitor, schismatike, nor heretike,
The kings hand is our warrant for our work,
Who is departed on his way for France,
And at Southhampton doth repose this night.

O that it were the blessed will of God, that thou and I were within twenty
mile of it, on Salisbury plain! I would lose my head if ever thou broughtst
thy head hither again.


My Lord Warden o'th cinque Ports, my Lord of Rochester, ye are joint
Commissioners, favour me so much, On my expense to bring me to the king.


What, to Southhampton?


Thither my god Lord,
And if he do not clear me of al guilt,
And all suspicion of conspiracy,
Pawning his princely warrant for my truth:
I ask no favour, but extremest torture.
Bring me, or send me to him, good my Lord,
Good my Lord Warden, M Shrieue, entreat.
Come hither lady, nay, sweet wife forbear,
To heap one sorrow on another neck,
Tis grief enough falsely to be accused,
And not permitted to acquit my self,
Do not thou with thy kind respective tears,
Torment thy husbands heart that bleeds for thee,
But be of comfort, God hath help in store,
For those that put assured trust in him.
Dear wife, if they commit me to the Tower,
Come up to London to your sisters house:
That being near me, you may comfort me.
One solace find I settled in my soul,
That I am free from treasons very thought,
Only my conscience for the Gospels sake,
Is cause of all the troubles I sustain.

O my dear Lord, what shall betide of us?
You to the Tower, and I turned out of doors,
Our substance ceased unto his highness use,
Even to the garments longing to our backs.

Patience good madame, things at worst will mend,
And if they do not, yet our lives may end.

Urge it no more, for if an Angel spake,
I swear by sweet saint Peters blessed keys,
First goes he to the Tower, then to the stake.

But by your leave, this warrant doth not stretch
To imprison her.

No, turn her out of doors,
Even as she is, and lead him to the Tower,
With guard enough for fear of rescuing.

O God requite thee thou bloud-thirsty man.


May it not be my Lord of Rochester?
Wherein have I incurd your hate so far,
That my appeal unto the King's denied?

No hate of mine, but power of holy church,
Fo^bids all favour to false heretikes.

Your private malice more than public power,
Strikes most at me, but with my life it ends.

O that I had the Bishop in that fear,
That once I had his Sumner by our selves.

My Lord yet grant one suit unto us all,
That this same ancient serving man may wait
Upon my lord his master in the Tower.

This old iniquity, this heretike?
That in contempt of our church discipline,
Compelled my Sumner to devour his processet
Old Ruffian past-grace, up start schismatike,
Had not the King prayed us to pardon ye,
Ye had fried for it, ye grizild heretike.

Sbloud my lord Bishop, ye do me wrong, I am neither heretike nor puritan, but
of the old church, i'll swear, drink ale, kiss a wench, go to mass, eat
fish all Lent, and fast fridaies with cakes and wine, fruit and spicery,
shrive me of my old sins before Easter, and begin new before whitsontide.


A merry mad conceited knave my lord.


That knave was simply put upon the Bishop.


Well, God forgive him and I pardon him.
Let him attend his master in the Tower,
For I in charity wish his soul no hurt.

God bless my soul from such cold charity,


Tooth Tower with him, and when my leisure serves,
I will examine him of Articles,
Look my lord Warden as you have in charge,
The Shrive perform his office.

Yes my lord.


What bring thou there? what? books of heresy.


Yea my lord, here's not a latin book,
No not so much as our ladies Psalter,
Here's the Bible, the testament the Psalmes in meter,
The sickemans salve, the treasure of gladness,
And al in English, not so much but the Almanack's English.

Away with them, to'th fire with them Clun,
Now fie upon these upstart heretikes,
Al English, burn them, burn them quickly Clun.

But do not Sumner as voule answer it, for I have there English books my
lord, that i'll not part with for your Bishoppricke, Beuis of Hampton,
Owleglasse, the Friar and the Boy, Ellen of Rumming, Robin hood, and other such
godly stories which if ye burn, by this flesh i'll make ye drink their ashes in
S. Marget's ale.


Is it your honours pleasure we shall stay,
Or come back in the afternoon to fetch you.

Now you have brought me here into the Tower,
You may go back unto the Porters Lodge,
And send for drink or such things as you want,
Where if I have occasion to employ you,
I'll send some officer to cal you to me.
Into the city go not, I command you,
Perhaps I may have present need to use you.

We will attend your worship here without.


Do so I pray you.


Come, we may have a quart of wine at the Rose at Barking, I warrant you, and
come back an hour before he be ready to go.


We must hie us then.


Let's away.


Ho, M. Lieutenant.


Who calls there?


A friend of yours.


My lord of Rochester, your honor's welcome.


Sir here's my warrant from the Counsel,
For conference with sir Iohn Old-castle,
Upon some matter of great consequence.

Ho, sir Iohn.


Who calls there?


Harpoole, tel Sir Iohn, that my lord of Rochester comes from the counsel to
confer with him.


I will sir.


I think you may as safe without suspicion,
As any man in England as I hear,
For it was you most labor'd his commitment.

I did sir, and nothing repent it I assure you.
M. Lieutenant I pray you give us leave,
I must confer here with sir Iohn a little.

With all my heart my lord.


My lord be ruled by me, take this occasion while tis offered, and on my life
your lordship shall escape.


No more I say, peace lest he should suspect it.


Sir Iohn I am come unto you from the lords of his highness most honourable
counsel, to know if yet you do recant your errors, conforming you unto the
holy church.


My lord of Rochester on good advise,
I see my error, but yet understand me,
I mean not error in the faith I hold,
But error in submitting to your pleasure,
Therefore your lordship without more to do.
Must be a means to help me to escape.

What means? thou heretike?
Dare thou but lift thy hand against my calling?

No not to hurt yon for a thousand pound,


Nothing but to borrow your upper garments a little; not a word more, for if
you do, you die: peace, for waking the children, there, put them on, dispatch,
my lord, the window that goes out into the leads, is sure enough, I told you
that before, there, make you ready, i'll convey him after, and bind him surely
in the inner room.


This is well begun, God send us happy speed,
Hard shift you see men make in time of need: Harpoole.

Here my Lord, come come away.


I marvel that my lord should stay so long.


He hath sent to seek us, I dare lay my life.


We come in good time, see where he is coming.


I beseech you good my lord of Rochester, be favourable to my lord and master.


The inner rooms be very hot and close,
I do not like this air here in the Tower.

His case is hard my lord, you shall safely get out of the Tower, but I will
down upon them, in which time get you away.


Fellow thou trouble me.


Hear me my Lord, hard under Islington wait you my coming, I will bring my
Lady ready, with horses to convey you hence.


Fellow, go back again unto thy Lord and counsel him.


Nay my good lord of Rochester, i'll bring you to S. Albons through the woods, I
warrant you.


Villain away.


Nay since I am past the Towers liberty, thou part'st not so.


Clubs clubs, clubs.


Murder, murder murder.


Down with him.


A villain traitor.


You cowardly rogues.


Who is so bold as dare to draw a sword,
So near unto the entrance of the Tower?

This ruffian servant to sir Iohn Old-castle was like to have slain my Lord.


Lay hold on him.


Stand off if you love your puddings.


Help help, help, M. Lieutenant help.


Who's that within? some treason in the Tower upon my life, look in, who's
that which calls?


Without your cloak my lord of Rochester?


There, now it works, then let me speed, for now is the fittest time for me to
escape away.


Why do you look so ghastly and affrighted?


Old-castle that traitor and his man,
When you had left me to confer with him,
Took, bound, and stripped me, as you see,
And left me lying in his inner chamber,
And so departed, and I

And you! ne'er say that the Lord Cobhams man
Did h^re set upon you like to murder you.

And so he did.


It was upon his master then he did,
That in the brawl the traitor might escape.

Where is this Harpoole?


Here he was even now.


Where can you tell? they are both escaped,
Since it so happens that he is escap'de,
I am glad you are a witness of the same,
It might have else been laid unto my charge,
That I had been consenting to the fact.

Come, search shall be made for him with expedition, the havens laid that he
shall not escape, and hue and cry continue thorough England, to find this
damned dangerous heretike.


In mine opinion, Scroope hath well advised,
Poison will be the only aptest mean,
And fittest for our purpose to dispatch him.

But yet there may be doubt in their delivery,
Harry is wise, therefore Earl of Cambridge,
I Judge that way not so convenient.

What think ye then of this? I am his bedfellow,
And unsuspected nightly sleep with him.
What if I venture in those silent hours,
When sleep hath sealed up all mortal eyes,
To murder him in bed? how like ye that?

Herein consists no safety for your self,
And you disclosed, what shall become of us?
But this day (as ye know) he will aboard,
The wind so fair, and set away for France,
If as he goes, or entering in the ship,
It might be done, then it were excellent,

Why any of these, or if you will,
I'll cause a present sitting of the Council,
Wherein I will pretend some matter of such weight,
As needs must have his royal company,
And to dispatch him in the Council chamber.

Tush, yet I hear not any thing to purpose,
I wonder that lord Cobham stays so long,
His counsel in this case would much avail us.

What shall we rise thus, and determine nothing?


That were a shame indeed, no, sit again,
And you shall have my counsel in this case,
If you can find no way to kill this King,
Then you shall see how I can further ye,
Scroopes way by poison was indifferent,
But yet being bed-fellow unto the King,
And unsuspected sleeping in his bosom,
In mine opinion, that's the likelier way,
For such f^lse friends are able to do much,
And silent night is Treason's fittest friend,
Now, Cambridge in his setting hence for France,
Or by the way, or as he goes aboard,
To do the deed, that was indifferent too,
Yet somewhat doubtful; might I speak my mind,
For many reasons needless now to urge.
Mary Lord Gray came something near the point,
To have the King at council, and there murder him,
As Caesar was amongst his dearest friends:
None like to that, if all were of his mind.
Tell me oh tel me you ^right honours staines,
For which of all my kindnesses to you,
Are ye become thus traitors to your king?
And France must have the spoil of Harries life?

Oh pardon us dread lord.


How pardon ye^ that were a sin indeed,
Drag them to death, which justly they deserve,
And France shall dearly buy this villainy,
So soon as we set footing on her breast,
God have the praise for our deliverance,
And next, our thanks (Lord Cobham) is to thee,
True perfect mirror of nobility.

Sir, you are welcome to this house, to such as here is with all my heart, but
by the mass I fear your lodging will be the worst, l have but two beds, and
they are both in a chamber, and the carrier and his daughter lies in the one,
and you and your wife must lie in the other.


In faith sir, for my self I do not greatly pass,
My wife is weary, and would be at rest,
For we have travelled very far to day,
We must be content with such as you have.

But I cannot tell how to do with your man.


What, hast thou never an empty room in thy house for me?


Not a bed by my troth: there came a poor Irish man, and I lodged him in the
barn, where he has fair straw, though he have nothing else.


Well mine host, I pray thee help me to a pair of fair sheets, and I'll go
lodge with him.


By the mass that thou shalt, a good pair of hempen sheets, were never lain
in: Come.


What have you searched the town?


All the town sir, we have not left a house unsearched that uses to lodge.


Surely my lord of Rochester was then deceiude,
Or ill informde of sir Iohn Old-castle,
Or if he came this way, hes past the town,
He could not else have escaped you in the search.

The privy watch hath been abroad all night,
And not a stranger lodges in the town
But he is known, only a lusty priest
We found in bed with a pretty wench,
That says she is his wife, yonder at the shears:
But we have charged the host with his forth coming
To morrow morning.

What think you best to do?


Faith master mayor, here's a few straggling houses beyond the bridge, and a
little Inn where cariers use to lodge, though I think surely he would ne'er
lodge there: but we'll go search, the rather, because there came notice to the
town the last night of an Irish man, that had done a murder, whom we are to
make search for.


Come I pray you, and be circumspect.


First beset the house, before you begin the search.


Content, every man take a several place.
Keep, keep, strike him down there, down with him.

Come you villainous heretic, confess where you^ master is.


Vat master?


Vat master, you counterfeit rebel, this shall no^ serve your turn.


Be sent Patrike I ha no master.


VVheres the lord Cobham sir Iohn Old-castle tha^ lately is escaped out of the
Tower.


Vat lort Cobham?


You counterfeit, this shall not serve you, we'll torture you, we'll make you to
confess where that arch-heretic Lord Cobham is: come bind him fast.


Ahone, ahone, ahone, a C^ee.


Ahone, you crafty rascal?


Harpoole, Harpoole, I hear a marvelous noise about the house, God warrant us,
I fear we are pursued: what Harpoole.


Who calls there?


Tis I, dost thou not hear a noise about the house?


Yes mary do I, zwounds, I can not find my hose, this Irish rascal that was
lodged with me all night, hath stolen my apparel, and has left me nothing but
a lousy mantle, and a pair of broags. Get up, get up, and if the carrier and
his wench be asleep, change you with them as he hath done with me, and see if
we can escape.


Stand close, here comes the Irish man that did the murder, by all tokens,
this is he.


And perceiving the house beset, would get away: stand sir.


What art thou that bid me stand?


I am the Officer, and am come to search for an Irish man, such a villain as
thy self, that hast murdered a man this last night by the hie way.


Sbloud Constable, art thou mad? am I an Irish man?


Sir, we'll find you an Irish man before we part: lay hold upon him.


Make him fast: O thou bloody rogue!


What will these Ostlers sleep all day?
Good morrow, good morrow, Come wench, come,
Saddle, saddle, now before God too foord-dayes, ha?

Who comes there?


Oh tis Lankashire carrier, let him pass.


What, will no body open the gates here?
Come, lets int stable to look to our capons.

Host, why ostler, zwookes, here's such abomination company of boys: a pox of
this pigstie at the house end, it filles all the house full of fleas, ostler,
ostler.


Who calls there, what would you have?


Zwookes, do you rob your guests? do you lodge rogues and slaves, and
scoundrels, ha? they ha stolen our doths here: why ostler?


A murrein choke you, what a bawling you keep.


How now, what would the carrier have? look up there.


They say that the man and woman that lay by them have stolen their clothes.


What, are the strange folks up yet that came in yester night?


What mine host, up so early?


What, master Mayor, and master Constable!


We are come to seek for some suspected persons, and such as here we found,
have apprehended.


Who comes here?


Who comes here? a plague found ome, you bawl quoth a, ods hat, I'll forzweare
your house, you lodged a fellow and his wife by us that ha run away with our
parrel, and lef^ us such gew-gawes here, come Kate, come to me, thowse dizeard
in faith.


Mine host, know you this man?


Yes master Mayor, I'll give my word for him, why neibor Club, how comes this
gear about?


Now a foul ont, I can not make this gew-gaw stand on my head, now the lads
and the lasses won flowt me too too


How came this man and woman thus attired?


Here came a man and woman hither this last night, which I did take for
substantial people, and lodged all in one chamber by these folks: me
thinks, have been so bold to change apparel, and gone away this morning ere
they rose.


That was that villain traitor Old-castle, that thus escaped us: make out ^uy
and cry yet after him, keep fast that traitorous rebel his servant there:
farewell mine host.


Come Kate Owdham, thou and Ise trimly dizard.


I faith name Club, Ise wot ne'er what to do, Ise be so flouted and so shouted
at: but by th mess Ise cry.


Come Dol, come, be merry wench,
Farewell Kent, we are not for thee,
Be lusty my lass, come for Lancashi^e,
We must nip the Boung for these crowns.

Why is all the gold spent already that you had the other day?


Gone Doll, gone, flown, spent, vanished, the devil, drink and the dice, has
devoured all.


You might have left me in Kent, that you might, until you had bin better
provided, I could have sta^ed at Cobham.


No Dol, no, i'll none of that, Kent^s too hot Doll, Kent's too hot: the
weathercock of Wrotham will crow no longer, we have plucked him, he has lost
his feathers, I have pruned him bare, left him thrice, is moulted, is moulted,
wech.


Faith sir Iohn, I might have gone to service again, old master Harpoole told
me he would provide me a mistress.


Peace Doll, peace, come mad wench, I'll make thee an honest woman, we'll into
Lancashire to our friends, the troth is, I'll marry thee, we want but a little
money to buy us a horse, and to spend by the way, the next sheep that comes shall
loose his fleece, we'll have these crowns wench I warrant thee: stay, who
comes here? some Irish villain me thinks that


Stand sir, what art thou?


Be saint Patricke master is pore Irisman, is a leufter.


Sir, sir, you are a damned rogue, you have killed a man here, and rifled
him of all that he has, sbloud you rogue deliver, or i'll not leave you so much
as an Irish hair above your shoulders, you whoreson Irish dog, sir untruss
presently, come off and dispatch, or by this cross i'll fetch your head off as
clean as a bark.


Wees me saint Patricke, Ise kill me master for chain and his ring, and nows
be rob of all, mees undo.


Avaunt you rascal, go sir, be walking, come Doll the devil laughs, when one
thief robs another, come mad wench, we'll to saint Albons, and revel in our
bower, hey my brave girl.


O thou art old sir Iohn, when all's done in faith.


Be me trow master is pore Irisman, is want ludging, is have no money, is starve
and cold, good master give her some meat, is famise and tie.


In faith my fellow I have no lodging, but what I keep for my guess, that I may
not disapoint, as for meat thou shalt have such as there is, if thou wilt lie
in the barn, there's fair straw, and room enough.


Is thank my master heartily, de straw is good bed for me.


Ho Robin?


Who calls?


Show this poor Irishman into the barn, go sir.


Ho, who's within here, who looks to the horses? Gods hat here's fine work,
the hens in the manger, and the hogs in the litter, a bots found you all, here's
a house well looked too yvaith.


Mas goffe Club, Ise very cawd.


Get in Kate, get in to fire and warm thee.


Ho Iohn Hostler.


What gaffer Club, welcome to saint Albons,
How does all our friends in Lancashire?

Well God have mercy Iohn, how does Tom, wheres he?


O Tom is gone from hence, hes at the three horse-loues at Stony-stratford,
how does old Dick Dunne?


Gods hat old Dunne has bin moyerd in a slough in Brickhil-lane, a plague
found it, yonder is such abomination weather as never was seen.


Gods hat thief, have one half peck of peas and oats more for that, as I am
Iohn Ostler, he has been ever as good a jade as ever travelled.


Faith well said old Jack, thou art the old lad still.


Come Gaffer Club, vnlode, vnlode, and get to supper, and I'll rub dunne the
while. Come.


Come Madam, happily escaped, here let us sit,
This place is far remote from any path,
And here awhile our weary limbs may rest,
To take refreshing, free from the pursuit
Of envious Winchester.

But where (my Lord,)
Shall we find rest for our disquiet minds?
There dwell untamed thoughts that hardly stoup,
To such abasemen^ of disdained rags,
We were not wont to travel thus by night,
Especially on foot.

No matter love,
Extremities admit no better choice,
And were it not for thee, say froward time,
Imposde a greater task, I would esteem it
As lightly as the wind that blows upon us,
But in thy sufferance I am doubly taskt,
Thou wast not wont to have the earth thy stool,
Nor the moist dewy grass thy pillow, nor
Thy chamber to be the wide horrison,

How can it seem a trouble, having you
A partner with me, in the worst I feel?
No gentle Lord, your presence would give ease
To death it self, should he now seize upon me,
Behold what my foresight hath vndertane
For fear we faint, they are but homely cates.
Yet sau^de with hunger, they may seem as sweet,
As greater dainties we were wont to taste.

Praise be to him whose plenty sends both this,
And all things else our mortal bodies need,
Nor scorn we this poor feeding, nor the state
We now are in, for what is it on earth,
Nay under heaven, continues at a stay?
Ebbes not the sea, when it hath overflown?
Flows not darkness when the day is gone?
And see we not sometime the eye of heaven,
Dimmd with ouerflying clouds: the^es not that work
Of careful nature, or of cunning art,
(How strong, how beauteous, or how rich it be)
But falls in time to ruin: here gentle Madame,
In this one draught I wash my sorrow down.

And I incoragde with your cheerful speech,
Will do the like.

Pray God poor Harpoole come,
If he should fall into the Bishops hands,
Or not remember where we bade him meet us,
It were the thing of all things else, that now
Could breed revolt in this new peace of mind.

Fear not my Lord, hes witty to devise,
And strong to execute a present shift.

That power be still his guide hath guided us,
My drowsy eyes wax heavy, early rising,
Together with the travel we have had,
Make me that I could gladly take a nap,
Were I persuaded we might be secure.

Let that depend on me, whilst you do sleep,
I'll watch that no misfortune happen us,
Lay then your head upon my lap sweet Lord,
And boldly take your rest.

I shall dear wife,
Be too much trouble to thee.

Urge not that,
My duty binds me, and your love commands.
I would I had the skill with tuned voice,
To draw on sleep with some sweet melody,
But imperfectoin and unaptness too,
Are both repugnant, fear inserts the one,
The other nature hath denied me use.
But what talk I of means to purchase that,
Is freely happened? sleep with gentle hand,
Hath shut his eie-liddes, oh victorious labour,
How soon thy power can charm the bodies sense?
And now thou likewise climbst unto my brain,
Making my heavy temples stoup to thee,
Great God of heaven from danger keep us free.

A murder closely done and in my ground?
Search carefully, if any where it were,
This obscure thicket is the likeliest place.

Sir I have found the body stiff with cold,
And mangled cruelly with many wounds.

Look if thou know him, turn his body up,
A lack it is my son, my son and heir,
Whom two years since, I sent to Ireland,
To practise there the discipline of war,
And coming home (for so he wrote to me)
Some savage hart, some bloody devilish hand,
Either in hate, or thirsting for his coin,
Hath here slucde out his blood, unhappy hour,
Accursed place, but most inconstant fate,
That had reserude him from the bullets fire,
And suffered him to escape the wood-karnes fury,
Did here ordain the treasure of his life,
(Even here within the arms of tender peace,
And where security gate greatest hope)
To be consumed by treasons wasteful hand?
And what is most afflicting to my soul,
That this his death and murder should be wrought,
Wi^hout the ^nowledge by whose means twas done,

Not so sir, I have found the authors of it,
See where they sit, and in their bloody fistes,
The fatal instruments of death and sin.

Just judgment of that power, whose gracious eye,
Loathing the sight of such a heinous fact,
Dazzled their senses with benumming-sleepe,
Till their unhallowed treachery were known:
Awake ye monsters, murderers awake,
Tremble for horror, blush you cannot choose,
Beholding this inhumane deed of yours.

What mean you sir to trouble weary souls,
And interrupt us of our quiet sleep?

Oh devilish! can you boast unto your selves
Of quiet sleep, having within your hearts
The guilt of murder waking, that with cries
Deafes the loud thunder, and sollicites heaven,
With mo^e than Mandrakes shrieks for your offence?

What murder? you upbraid us wrongfully.


Can you deny the fact? see you not here,
The body of my son by you mis-done?
Look on his wounds, look on his purple hew:
Do we not find you where the deed was done?
Were not your knives fast closed in your hands?
Is not this cloth an argument beside,
Thus stained and spotted with his innocent blood?
These speaking characters, were nothing else
To plead against ye, would convict you both.
Bring them away, bereauers of my joy,
At Hartford where the Sises now are kept,
Their lives shall answer for my sons lost life.

As we are innocent, so may we speed.


As I am wronged, so may the law proceed.


What intricate confusion have we here?
Not two hours since we apprehended one,
In habit Irish, but in speech, not so:
And now you bring another, that in speech
Is altogether Irish, but in habit
Seems to be English: yea and more than so,
The servant of that heretike Lord Cobham.

Fait me be no servant of the lord Cobhams,
Me be Mack Chane of Vlster.

Otherwise called Harpoole of Kent, go to sit,
You cannot blind us with your broken Irish.

Trust me, my Lord Bishop, whether Irish,
Or English, Harpoole or not Harpoole, that
I leave to be decided by the trial:
But sure I am this man by face and speech
Is he that murdered young sir Richard Lee:
I met him presently upon the fact,
And that he slew his master for that gold,
Those jewels, and that chain I took from him.

Well, our affairs do call us back to London,
So that we cannot prosecute the cause
As we desire to do, therefore we leave
The charge with you, to see they be conveyed
To Hartford Sis: both this counterfeit
And you sir Iohn of Wrotham, and your wench,
For you are culpable as well as they,
Though not for murder, yet for felony.
But since you are the means to bring to light
This graceless murder, you shall bear with you,
Our letters to the Judges of the bench,
To be your friends in what they lawful may.

I thank your Lordship.


So, away with them.


Bring forth the prisoners, see the court prepared,
The Justices are coming to the bench.
So, let him stand, away, and fetch the rest.

Oh give me patience to endure this scourge,
Thou that art fountain of that virtuous stream,
And though contempt, false witness, and reproach
Hang on these iron gyves, to press my life
As low as earth, yet strengthen me with faith,
That I may mount in spirit above the clouds.
Here comes my lady, sorrow tis for her,
Thy wound is grievous, else I scoff at thee.
What and poor Harpoole! art thou ith briars too?

I faith my Lord, I am in, get out how I can.


Say (gentle Lord) for now we are alone,
And may confer, shall we confess in brief,
Of whence, and what we are, and so prevent
The accusation is commenede against us?

What will that help us? being known, sweet love,
We shall for heresy be put to death,
For so they term the religion we profess.
No, if it be ordained we must die,
And at this instant, this our comfort be,
That of the guilt imposde, our souls are free.

Yea, yea my lord, Harpoole is so resolude,
I wreak of death the less, in that I die
Not by the sentence of that envious priest
The Bishop of Rochester, oh were it he,
Or by his means that I should suffer here,
It would be double torment to my soul.

Well, be it then according as heaven please.


Now M. Mayor, what gentleman is that,
You bring with you, before us and the bench?

The Lord Powes if it like your honour,
And this his Lady, travelling toward Wales,
Who for they lodged last night within my house,
And my Lord Bishop did lay search for such,
Were very willing to come on with me,
Lest for their sakes, suspicion we might wrong.

We cry your honour mercy good my Lord,
Wilt please ye take your place, madame your ladyship,
May here or where you will repose your self,
Until this business now in hand be past.

I will withdraw into some other room,
So that your Lordship, and the rest be pleased.

With all our hearts: attend the Lady there.


Wife, I have eyed yond prisoners all this while,
And my conceit doth tel me, tis our friend,
The noble Cobham, and his virtuous Lady.

I think no less, are they suspected trow ye
For doing of this murder?

What it means,
I cannot tell, but we shall know anon,
Mean space as you pass by them, ask the question,
But do it secretly, you be not seen,
And make some sign that I may know your mind.

My Lord Cobham, madam?


No Cobha now, nor madam as you love us,
But Iohn of Lancashire, and Ione his wife.

Oh tel, what is it that our love can do,
To pleasure you, for we are bound to you.

Nothing but this, that you conceal our names,
So gentle lady pass for being spied.

My heart I leave, to bear part of your grief.


Call the prisoners to the bar: sir Richard Lee,
What evidence can you bring against these people,
To prove them guilty of the murder done?

This bloody towel, and these naked knives,
Beside we found them sitting by the place,
Where the dead body lay within a bush.

What answer you why law should not proceed,
According to this evidence given in,
To tax ye with the penalty of death?

That we are free from murders very thought,
And know not how the gentleman was slain.

How came this linen cloth so boudy then?


My husband hot with travelling my lord,
His nose gushed out a bleeding, that was it.

But wherefore were your sharpe edged knives vnsheathde?


To cut such simple victual as we had.


Say we admit this answer to those articles,
What made ye in so private a dark nook,
So far remote from any common path,
As was the thick where the dead corpse was thrown?

Iournying my lord from London from the term,
Down into Lancashire where we do dwell,
And what with age and travel being faint,
We gladly sought a place where we might rest,
Free from resort of other passengers,
And so we strayed into that secret corner.

These are but ambages to drive of time,
And linger Justice from her purposde end.
But who are these?

Stay Judgment, and release those innocents,
For here is he, whose hand hath done the deed,
For which they stand indicted at the bar,
This savage villain, this rude Irish slave,
His tongue already hath confessed the fact,
And here is witness to confirm as much.

Yes my good Lords, no sooner had he slain
His loving master for dthe wealth he had,
But I upon the instant met with him,
And what he purchacde with the loss of blood,
With strokes I presently bereau'de him of,
Some of the which is spent, the rest remaining,
I willingly surrender to the hands
Of old sir Richard Lee, as being his,
Beside my Lord Judge, I greet your honour,
With letters from my Lord of Winchester.

Is this the wolf whose thirsty throat did drink
My dear sons blood? art thou the snake
He cherished, yet with envious piercing sting,
Assaildst him mortally? foul stigmatike,
Thou venom of the country where thou lived,
And pestilence of this: were it not that law
Stands ready to revenge thy cruelty,
Traitor to God, thy master, and to me,
These hands should be thy executioner.

Patience sir Richard Lee, you shall have justice,
And he the guerdon of his base desert,
The fact is odious, therefore take him hence,
And being hanged until the wretch be dead,
His body after shall be hanged in chains,
Near to the place, where he did act the murder.

Prithee Lord shudge let me have mine own clothes, my strouces there, and let
me be hanged in a with after my country, the Irish fashion.


Go to, away with him, and now sir Iohn,
Although by you, this murder came to light,
And therein you have well deserved, yet upright law,
So will not have you be excusde and quit,
For you did rob the Irishman, by which
You stand attained here of felony,
Beside, you have bin lewd, and many years
Led a lascivious unbeseeming life.

Oh but my Lord, he repents, sir Iohn repents he will mend.


In hope thereof, together with the favour,
My Lord of Winchester entreats for you,
We are content you shall be proved.

I thank your good Lordship.


These other falsely here, accused, and brought
In peril wrongfully, we in like sort
Do set at liberty, paying their fees.

That office if it please ye I will do,
For countries sake, because I know them well,
They are my neighbours, therefore of my cost,
Their charges shall be paid.

And for amends,
Touching the wrong unwittingly I have done,
There are a few crowns more for them to drink.

Your kindness merits praise sir Richard Lee,
So let us hence.

But Powesse still must stay,
There yet remains a part of that true love,
He owes his noble friend vnsatisfide,
And vnperformd which first of all doth bind me,
To gratulate your lordships s^fe delivery,
And then entreat, that since unlooked for thus,
We here are met, your honour would vouchsafe,
To ride with me to Wales, where though my power,
(Though not to quittance those great benefits,
I have receiud of you) yet both my house,
My purse my servants, and what else I have,
Are all at your command, deny me not,
I know the Bishops hate pursues ye so,
As there's no safety in abiding here.

Tis true my Lord, and God forgive him for it.


Then let us hence, you shall be straight provided
Of lusty geldings, and once entered VVales,
Well may the Bishop hunt, but spite his face,
He never more shall have the game in chase.


