HOw now fellow Frantic, what all a mort? Doth this sadness become thy
madness? What though we have lost our way in the woods, yet never hang the
head, as though thou had no hope to live till to morrow: for Fantastic and
I will warrant thy life to night for twenty in the hundred.


Antique and Fantastic, as I am frolic franion, never in all my life was I
so dead slain. What? to loose our way in the wood, without either fire or
candle so uncomfortable? O coelum! O terra! O maria! O Neptune!


Why makes thou it so strange, seeing Cupid hath led our young master to the
fair Lady and she is the only Saint that he hath sworn to serve.


What rests then but we commit him to his wench, and each of us take his
stand up in a Tree, and sing out our ill fortune to the tune of O man in
desperation.


Desperately spoken fellow Frolic in the dark: but seeing it falls out
thus, let us rehearse the old proverb.

Three merry men, and three merry men,
And three merry men be we.
I in the wood, and thou on the ground,
And Jack sleeps in the tree.

Hush a dog in the wood, or a wooden dog, O comfortable hearing! I had even
as live the Chamberlaine of the white Horse had called me up to bed.


Either hath this trotting Cur gone out of his cyrcuit, or else are we ne'er some
village,


What am I? Why I am Clunch the Smith, what are you, what make you in my
territories at this time of the night?


What do we make dost thou ask? why we make faces for fear: such as if thy
mortal eyes could behold, would make thee water the long seames of thy side
slops, Smith.


And in faith Sir unless your hospitality do relieve us, we are like to
wander with a sorrowful hey ho, among the owlets, Hobgoblins of the Forest:
good Vulcan, for Cupids sake that hath cozened us all: befriend us as thou
may, and command us howsoever, wheresoever, whenever, in whatsoever, for
ever and ever.


Well Masters it seems to me you have lost your way in the wood: in
consideration whereof, if you will go with Clunch to his Cottage, you shall
have house room, and a good fire to sit by, although we have no bedding to put
you in.


O blessed Smith, O bountiful Clunch.


For your further entertainment, it shall be as it may be, so and so.

Hark this is Ball my Dog that bids you all welcome in his own language,
come take heed for stumbling on thethreshold, open door Madge take in guests.


Welcome Clunch good fellows al that come with my good ma for my good mans
sake come on sit down here is a piece of cheese a pudding of my own making.


Thanks Gammer a good example for the wives of our town.


Gammer thou and thy good man sit lovingly together, we come to chat and not to
eat.


Well Masters if you will eat nothing take away: Come, what do we to pass
away the time? Lay a crab in the fire to roast for Lambes-wooll; what shall we
have a game at Trump or Ruff to drive away the time, how say you?


This Smith leads a life as merry as a King with Madge his wife; Sirrah
Frolic, I am sure thou art not without some round or other, no doubt but
Clunch can bear his part.


Else think you me ill brought up, so set to it when you will.


WHen as the Rye reach to the chin,
And chopcherrie chopcherrie ripe within,
Strawberries swimming in the cream,
And school boys playing in the stream:
Then O, then O, then O my true love said,
Till that time come again,
She could not live a maid.
This sport dooes well: but me thinks Gammer, a merry winters tale would drive
away the time trimly, come I am sure you are not without a score.


I faith Gammer a tale of an howre long were as good as an hours sleep.


Look you Gammer, of the Giant and the Kings Daughter, and I know not what, I
have seen the day when I was a little one, you might have drawn me a mile
after you with such a discourse.


Well, since you be so importunate, my good man shall fill the pot and get him
to bed, they that ply their work must keep good hours, one of you go lye
with him, he is a clean skinned man I tell you, without either spauin or
windgall, so I am content to drive away the time with an old wives winters
tale.


No better hay in Devonshire, a my word Gammer, I'll be one of of your audience.


And I another that's flat.


Then must I to bed with the good man, Bonanox Gammer, God night Frolic.


Come on my Lad, thou shalt take thy unnatural rest with me.


Yet this vantage shall we have of them in the morning, to be ready at the
sight thereof extempore.


Now this bargain my Masters must I make with you, that you will say hum ha
to my tale, so shall I know you are awake.


Content Gammer that will we do.


Once upon a time there was a King or a Lord, or a Duke that had a fair
daughter, the fairest that ever was; as white as snow, and as red as blood:
and once upon a time his daughter was stolen away, and he sent all his men
to seek out his daughter, and he sent so long, that he sent all his men out
of his Land.


Who dressed his dinner then?


Nay either hear my tale, or kiss my tail.


Well sed, on with your tale Gammer.


O Lord I quite forgot, there was a Conjurer, and this Conjurer could do
anything, and he turned himself into a great Dragon, and carried the Kings
Daughter away in his mouth to a Castle that he made of stone, and there he
kept her I know not how long, till at last all the Kings men went out so long,
that her two Brothers went to seek her. O I forget: she (he I would say)
turned a proper young man to a Bear in the night, and a man in the day, and
keeps by a cross that parts three several ways, he made his Lady run mad:
gods me bones who comes here?


Soft Gammer, here some come to tell your tale for you.


Let them alone, let us hear what they will say.


Upon these chalky Cliffs of Albion
We are arrived now with tedious toil,
And compassing the wide world round about
To seek our sister, to seek fair Delya forth,
Yet cannot we so much as hear of her.

O fortune cruel, cruel unkind,
Unkind in that we cannot find our sister;
Our sister hapless in her cruel chance:
Soft who have we here.

Now father God be your speed, What do you gather there?


Hips and Hawes, and sticks and straws, and things that I gather on the
ground my son.


Hips and Hawes, and sticks and straws, why is that all your food father?


Yea son.


Father, here is an Alms penny for me, and if I speed in that I go for, I
will give thee as good a Gown of gray as ever thou did wear.


And Father here is another alms penny for me, and if I speed in my journey,
I will give thee a Palmers staff of ivory, and a scallop shell of beaten
gold.


Was she fair?


I the fairest for white, and the purest for red, as the blood of the Dear,
or the driven snow:


Then hark well and mark well, my old spell:
Be not afraid of every stranger,
Start not aside at every danger:
Things that seem are not the same,
Blow a blast at every flame:
For when one flame of fire goes out,
Then comes your wishes well about:
If any ask who told you this good,
Say the white Bear of Englands wood.

Brother heard you not what the old man said:
Be not afraid of every stranger,
Start not aside for every danger:
Things that seem are not the same,
Blow a blast at every flame:
If any ask who told you this good,
Say the white Bear of Englands wood.

Well if this do us any good,
Welfare the white Bear of Englands wood.

Now sit thee here tel a heavy tale.
Sad in thy mood, and sober in thy cheer,
Here sit thee now and to thy self relate,
The hard mishap of thy most wretched state.
In Thessalie I lived in sweet content,
Until that Fortune wrought my overthrow;
For there I wedded was unto a dame,
That lived in honour, virtue, love, and fame:
But Sacrapant that cursed sorcerer,
Being besotted with my beauteous love:
My dearest love, my true betrothed wife,
Did seek the means to rid me of my life.
But worse than this, he with his chanting spells,
Did turn me straight unto an ugly Bear;
And when the sun doth settle in the west,
Then I begin to don my ugly hide:
And all the day I sit, as now you see,
And speak in riddles all inspirde with rage,
Seeming an old and miserable man:
And yet I am in April of my age.
See where Venelya my betrothed love,
Runs madding all enraged about the woods;
All by his cursed and enchanting spells.
But here comes Lampriscus my discontented neighbour. How now neighbour, you
look toward the ground as well as I, you muse on something.

Neighbour on nothing, but on the matter I so often moved to you: if you do
any thing for charity, help me; if for neighbourhood or brotherhood, help me:
never was one so combered as is poor Lampryscus: and to begin, I pray receive
this pot of Honny to mend your fare.


Thanks neighbor, set it down,
Honny is always welcome to the Bear.
And now neighbour let me here the cause of your coming.

I am (as you know neighbour) a man unmarried, and lived so unquietly with my
two wives, that I keep every year holy the day wherein I buried the both; the
first was on saint Andrewes day; the other on saint Lukes.


And now neighbour, you of this country say, your custom is out: but on with
your tale neighbour.


By my first wife, whose tongue wearied me alive, and sounded in my ears like
the clapper of a great Bell, whose talk was a continual torment to all that
dwelt by her, or lived nigh her, you have heard me say I had a handsome
daughter.


True neighbour.


She it is that afflictes me with her continual clamoures, and hangs on me
like a Bur: poor she is, and proud she is, as poor as a sheep new
shorn, and as proud of her hopes, as a Peacock of her tail well grown.


Well said Lampryscus, you speak it like an Englishman.


As cursed as a wasp, and as froward as a child new taken from the mothers
teat, she is to my age, as smoke to the eyes, or as vinegar to the teeth.


Holily praised neighbour, as much for the next.


By my other wife I had a daughter, so hard favoured, so foul and ill faced,
that I think a grove full of golden trees; and the leaves of Rubies and
Dyamonds, would not be a dowry answerable to her deformity.


Well neighbour, now you have spoke, here me speak; send them to the Well
for the water of life: there shall they find their fortunes unlooked for;
Neighbour farewell.


Farewell and a thousand, and now goes poor Lampryscus to put in execution
this excellent counsel.


Why this goes round without a fiddling stick; but do you hear Gammer, was
this the man that was a Bear in the night, and a man in the day?


I this is he; and this man that came to him was a beggar, and dwelt upon a
green. But soft, who comes here? O these are the harvest men; ten to one they
sing a song of mowing.


All ye that lovely lovers be, pray you for me,
Lo here we come a sowing, a sowing,
And sow sweet fruits of love:
In your sweet hearts well may it prove.
Gammer, what is he?


O this is one that is going to the conjurer, let him alone, here what he
says.


Now by Mars and Mercury, Iupiter and Ianus, Sol and Saturnus, Venus and Vesta,
Pallas and Proserpina, and by the honour of my house Polimackeroeplacydus, it is
a wonder to see what this love will make silly fellows adventure, even in the
wane of their wits, and infancy of their discretion. Alas my friend what
fortune calls thee forth to seek thy fortune among brazen gates, enchanted
towers, fire and Brimstone, thunder and lightning. Beauty I tell thee is
peerless, and she precious whom thou affectest: do off these desires good
countryman, good friend run away from thy self, and so soon as thou can,
forget her; whom none must inherit but he that can monsters tame, labours
achieve, riddles absolve, loose enchantments, murder magic, and kill
conjuring: and that is the great and mighty Huanebango.


Hark you sir, hark you; First know I have here the flirting feather, and
have given the Parish the start for the long stock: Now sir if it be no more
but running through a little lightning and thunder, and riddle me riddle me
whats this, I'll have the wench from the Conjurer if he were ten Conjurers.


I have abandoned the Court and honourable company, to do my deuoyre against
this sore Sorcerer and mighty Magician: if this Lady be so fair as she is
said to be, she is mine, she is mine, Meus, mea, meum, in contemptum omnium
Grammaticorum.


O falsum Latinum! the fair maid is minum, cum apurtinantibus gibletes and
all.


If she be mine, as I assure my self the heavens will do somewhat to reward
my worthiness; she shall be allied to none of the meanest gods; but be
invested in the most famous stock of Huanebango Polimackeroeplacidus, my
Grandfather: my father Pergopolyneo: my mother, Dyonora de Sardynya: famouslie
descended.


Do you hear sir; had not you a Cousin, that was called Gustecerydis?


Indeed I had a Cousin, that sometime followed the Court infortunately, and his
name Bustegustecerydis.


O Lord I know him well: he is the knight of the neates feet.


O he loved no Capon better, he hath oftentimes deceived his boy of his dinner,
that was his fault good Bustegustecerydis.


Come shall we go along? Soft, here is an old man at the Cross, let us ask
him the way thither. Ho, you Gaffer, I pray you tell where the wise man the
Conjurer dwells?


Where that earthly Goddess keeps her abode; the commander of my thougts,
and fair Mistres of my heart.


Fair enough, and far enough from thy fingering son.


I will follow my Fortune after mine own fancy, and do according to mine
own discretion.


Yet give some thing to an old man before you go.


Father me thinks a piece of this Cake might serve your turn.


Yea son.


Huanabango gives no Cakes for Alms, ask of them that give gifts for poor
Beggars. Fair Lady, if thou were once shrined in this bosom, I would buckler
thee haratantara.


Father do you see this man, you little think heel run a mile or two for such
a Cake, or pass for a pudding, I tell you father he has kept such a begging
of me for a piece of this Cake, whoo he comes upon me with a superfantiall
substance, and the foison of the earth, that I know not what he means: If he
came to me thus, and said, my friend Booby or so, why I could spare him a piece
with all my heart; but when he tells me how God hath enriched me above other
fellows with a Cake: why he makes me blind and deaf at once: Yet father
here is a piece of Cake for you as harde as the world goes.


Thanks son, but list to me,
He shall be deaf when thou shalt not see;
Farewell my son things may so hit,
Thou may have wealth to mend thy wit.

Farewell father, farewell; for I must make hast after my two hand sword that
is gone before.


The day is clear, the Welkin bright and gray,
The Lark is merry, and records her notes;
Each thing rejoices underneath the Sky,
But only I whom heaven hath in hate:
Wretched and miserable Sacrapant,
In Thessalie was I borne and brought up,
My mother Meroe hight a famous Witch,
And by her cunning I of her did learn,
To change and alter shapes of mortal men.
There did I turn my self into a Dragon,
And stole away the Daughter to the King;
Fair Delya, the Mistres of my heart:
And brought her hither to revive the man,
That seems young and pleasant to behold,
And yet is aged, crooked, weak and numb.
Thus by enchanting spells I do deceive,
Those that behold and look upon my face;
But well may I bid youthful years adieu:
See where she coms from whence my sorrows grow,
How now fair Delya where have you bin?

At the foot of the Rock for running water, and gathering roots for your
dinner sir.


Ah Delya, fairer art thou than the running water, yet harder far than steel
or Adamant.


Will it please you to sit down sir.


I Delya, sit ask me what thou wilt, thou shalt have it brought into thy
lap.


Then I pray you sir let me have the best meat from the king of Englands
table, and the best wine in all France, brought in by the veriest knave in all
Spain.


Delya I am glad to see you so pleasant, well sit thee down.


Spread table spread; meat, drink bred
Ever may I have, what I ever crave:
When I am spread, for meat for my black cock,
And meat for my red.

Here Delya, will ye fall to.

Is this the best meat in England?

Yea.

What is it?

A chine of English beef, meat for a king
And a kings followers.

Is this the best wine in France?

Yea.

What Wine is it?

A cup of neat wine of Orleance,
That never came near the brewers in England.

Is this the veriest knave in all Spain?

Yea.

What is he a Fryer?

Yea a Friar indefinit, a knave infinite.

Then I pray ye sir Friar tell me before you go, which is the most greediest
Englishman?


The miserable and most covetous Usurer.


Hold thee there Friar,
But soft who have we here, Delia away begone.
Delya away, for beset are we,
But heaven or hell shall rescue her for me.

Brother, was not that Delya did appear?
Or was it but her shadow that was here?

Sister, where art thou? Delya come again
He calls, that of thy absence doth complain.
Call out Calypha that she may hear,
And cry aloud, for Delya is near.

Near.

Near, O where, hast thou any tidings?

Tidings.

Which way is Delya then, or that, or this?

This.

And may we safely come where Delia is

Yes.

Brother remember you the white
Bear of Englands wood:
Start not a side for every danger,
Be not afraid of every stranger;
Things that seem, are not the same.

Brother, why do we not the coragiously enter.

Then brother draw thy sword follow me.

What brother dost thou fall?

I, and thou to Calypha.

away with them,
Go cary them straight to Sacrapantos cell,
There in despair and torture for to dwell;
These are Thenores sons of Thessaly,
That come to seek Delya their sister forth:
But with a potion, I to her have given,
My arts hath made her to forget her self.
He remooues a turf, and shows a light in a glass.
See here the thing which doth prolong my life
With this enchantment I do any thing.
And till this fade, my skill shall still endure,
And never none shall break this little glass,
But she that's neither wife, widow, nor maid.
Then cheer thy self, this is thy destiny,
Never to die, but by a dead mans hand.

Tell me Time, tell me just Time,
When shall I Delia see?
When shall I see the loadstar of my life?
When shall my wandering course end with her sight?
Or I but view my hope, my hearts delight.
Father God speed, if you tell fortunes, I pray good father tell me mine.

Son I do see in thy face,
Thy blessed fortune work apace;
I do perceive that thou hast wit,
Beg of thy fate to govern it,
For wisdom governed by advise,
Makes many fortunate and wise.
Bestow thy alms, give more than all,
Till dead men's bones come at thy call:
Farewell my son, dream of no rest,
Till thou repent that thou did best.

This man hath left me in a Labyrinth,
He bids me give more than all,
Till dead men's bones come at thy call:
He bids me dream of no rest,
Till I repent that I do best.

You may be ashamed, you whoreson scald Sexton and Churchwarden, if you had any
shame in those shameless faces of yours, to let a poor man lie so long above
ground unburied. A rot on you all, that have no more compassion of a good
fellow when he is gone.


What would you have us to bury him, and to answer it our selves to the
parish?


Parish me no parishes, pay me my fees, and let the rest run on in the
quarters accounts, and put it down for one of your good deeds a Gods name,
for I am not one that curiously stands upon merits.


You whoreson sodden headed sheepes-face, shall a good fellow do less service
and more honesty to the parish, will you not when he is dead let him have
Christmas burial.


Peace Corebus, assure as Jack was Jack, the frollickst frannion amongst you,
and I VViggen his sweet sworn brother, Jack shall have his funerals, or some
of them shall lie on Gods dear earth for it, that's once.


VViggen I hope thou wilt do no more then thou dare answer.


Sir, sir, dare or dare not, more or less, answer or not answer, do this, or
have this.


Help, help, help, VViggen sets upon the parish with a Pike staff.


Hold thy hands good fellow.


Can you blame him sir, if he take Jacks part against this shake rotten parish
that will not bury Jack.


Why what was that Jack?


Who Jack sir, who our Jack sir? as good a fellow as ever troade upon Neats
leather.


Look you sir, he gave four score and nineteen mourning gowns to the parish
when he died, and because he would not make them up a full hundred, they would
not bury him; was not this good dealing?


Oh Lord sir how he lies, he was not worth a half penny, and drunk out every
penny: and now his fellows, his drunken companions, would have us to bury
him at the charge of the parish, and we make many such matches, we may pull
down the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chancel: he shall lie
above ground till he dance a galliard about the churchyard for Steeuen Loache.


Sic argumentaris domine Loache; and we make many such matches, we may pull
down the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chancel: in good time
sir, and hang your selves in the Bell ropes when you have done, Domine oponens
praepono tibi hanc questionem, whether will you have the ground broken, or your
pates broken: first, for one of them shall be done presently, and to begin
mine, i'll seal it upon your cockescome.


Hold thy hands, I pray thee good fellow be not too hasty.


You Capons face, we shall have you turned out of the parish one of these days,
with never a tatter to your arse, then you are in worse taking then Jack.


Faith and he is bad enough: this fellow does but the part of a friend, to
seek to bury his friend; how much will bury him?


Faith, about some fifteen or sixteen shillings will bestow him honestly.


I even there abouts sir.


Here hold it then, and I have left me but one poor three half pence; now
do I remember the words the old man spake at the cross; bestow all thou
hast, and this is all, till dead men's bones comes at thy call, hear hold it,
and so farewell.


God, and all good, be with you sir; nay you cormorants, i'll bestow one
peal of Jack at mine own proper costs and charges.


You may thank God the long staff and the bilbow blade, crossed not your
cockes-combe; well we'll to the church stile, and have a pot, and so tryll
lyll.


Come lets go.


But hark you gammer, me thinks this Jack bore a great sway in the parish.


O this Jack was a marvelous fellow, he was but a poor man, but very well
beloned: you shall see anon what this Jack will come to.


Soft, who have we here? our amorous harvest stars.


I, I, let us sit still and let them alone.

Lo here we come a reaping, a reaping,
To reap our harvest fruit,
And thus we pass the year so long,
And never be we mute.

Soft, who have we here?


O this is a choleric gentleman, all you that love your lives, keep out of
the smell of his two hand sword: now goes he to the conjurer.


Me thinks the Conjurer should put the fool into a Juggling box.


Fee, fa, fum, here is the Englishman,
Conquer him that can, came for his lady bright,
To prove himself a knight,
And win her love in fight.

Who haw master Bango are you here? hear you, you had best sit down here,
and beg an alms with me.


Hence base cullion, here is he that commands ingress and egress with his
weapon, and will enter at his voluntary whosoever saith no.


No.


So with that they kissed, and spoiled the edge of as good a two hand sword, as
ever God put life in; now goes Corebus in, spite of the conjurer.


Away with him into the open fields,
To be a ravening pray to Crows and Kites:
And for this villain let him wander up down
In nought but darkness and eternal night.

Heer hast thou slain Hua a slashing knight
And robbed poor Corebus of his sight.

Hence villain hence.
Now I have unto Delya given a potion of forgetfulness,
That when she comes she shall not know her Brothers:
Lo where they labour like to Country slaves,
With spade and mattock on this enchanted ground.
Now will I call her by another name,
For never shall she know her self again,
Until that Sacrapant hath breathed his last.
See where she comes.
Come hither Delya take this god,
Here hard at hand two slaves do work and dig for gold,
Gore them with this thou shalt have enough.

Good sir I know not what you mean.

She hath forgotten to be Delya,
But not forgot the same she should forget:
But I will change her name.
Fair Berecynthia so this Country calls you,
Go ply these strangers wench they dig for gold

O heavens! how am I beholding to this fair young man.
But I must ply these strangers to their work.
See where they come.

O Brother see where Delya is.

O Delya happy are we to see thee here.

What tell you me of Delya prating swains?
I know no Delya nor know I what you mean,
Ply you your work or else you are like to smart.

Why Delya know thou not thy Brothers here?
We come from Thessalie to seek thee forth,
And thou deceive thy self for thou art Delya.

Yet more of Delya, then take this and smart:
What fain you shifts for to defer your labour?
Work villains work, it is for gold you dig.

Peace brother peace, this wild enchanter
Hath ravished Delya of her senses clean,
And she forgets that she is Delya.

Leave cruel thou to hurt the miserable;
Dig brother dig, for she is hard as steel.
Here they dig descry the light under a little hill.

Stay brother what hast thou descried?

Away touch it not, it is some thing, that my Lord hath hidden there. she
covers it again.


Well sed, thou plyest these Pyoners
well, go get you in you labouring slaves.
Come Berecynthia, let us in likewise,
And hear the Nightingale record her notes.

Now for a husband, house and home, God send a good one or none I pray God: My
father hath sent me to the well for the water of life, and tells me if I give
fair words I shall have a husband. Celanta my sweet sister, I'll stand by and
hear what she says.


My father hath sent me to the well for water, and he tells me if I speak
fair, I shall have a husband and none of the worst: Well though I am black I
am sure all the world will not forsake me, and as the old proverb is though
I am black, I am not the devil.


Marry gup with a murren, I know wherefore thou speak that, but go thy
ways home as wise as thou came, or I'll set thee home with a wanion.


I think this be the curstest queen in the world, you see what she is, a
little fair, but as proud as the devil, and the veriest vixen that lives upon
Gods earth. Well I'll let her alone, and go home and get another Pitcher, and
for all this get me to the well for water.


Once again for a husband, in faith Celanta I have got the start of you;
Belike husbands grow by the Well side; now my father says I must rule my
tongue: why alas what am I then? a woman without a tongue, is as a soldier
without his weapon; but i'll have my water and be gon.


Gently dip, but not too deep,
For fear you make the golden bird to weep,
Fair maiden white and red,
Stroke me smooth, and comb my head,
And thou shalt have some cockell bread.

What is this, fair maiden white red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head:
And thou shalt have some cockell bread.
Cockell call thou it boy, faith i'll give you cockell bread.

Phylyda phylerydos, Pamphylyda floryda flortos,
Dub dud a dub, bounce quoth the guns, with a sulpherous huff snuff:
Wakte with a wench, pretty peat, pretty love, and my sweet pretty pigsny;
Just by thy side shall sit surnamed great Huanebango
Safe in my arms will I keep thee, threat Mars or thunder Olympus.

Foe, what greasy groom have we here? He looks as though he crept out of
the backside of the well; and speaks like a Drum perished at the West end.


O that I might but I may not, wo to my destiny therefore;
Kiss that I clasp but I cannot, tell me my destiny wherefore?

Whoop now I have my dream, did you never hear so great a wonder as this?
Three blue beans in a blue bladder, rattle bladder rattle.


I'll now set my countenance and to her in prose, it may be this rim ram ruff,
is too rude an encounter.

Let me fair Lady if you be at leisure, revel with your sweetness, and rail
upon that cowardly Conjurer, that hath cast me or congealed me rather into an
unkind sleep and polluted my Carcass.


Laugh, laugh Zantyppa, thou hast thy fortune, a fool and a husband under
one.


Truly sweet heart as I seem, about some twenty years, the very April of
mine age.


Why what a prating Ass is this?


Her Coral lips, her crimson chin,
Her silver teeth so white within:
Her golden locks her rolling eye,
Her pretty parts let them go by:
Hey ho hath wounded me,
That I must die this day to see.

By gogs bones thou art a flouting knave, Her Coral lips, her crimson
chin: call wilshaw.


True my own and my own because mine, mine because mine ha ha: Above a
thousand pounds in possibility, and things fitting thy desire in possession.


The Sott thinks I ask of his lands, Lobb be your comfort, and Cuckold be
your destiny: Hear you sir; and if you will have us, you had best say so
betime.


True sweet heart and will royallize thy progeny with my pedigree.


Wretched Eumenides, still unfortunate,
Envied by fortune, and forlorn by Fate;
Here pine and die wretched Eumenides.
Die in the spring, the April of my age?
Here sit thee down, repent what thou hast don
I would to God that it were ne'er begone.

You are well overtaken sir.


Who's that?


You are heartily well met sir.


Forbear I say, who is that which pinches me?


Trusting in God good Master Eumenides, that you are in so good health as all
your friends were at the making hereof: God give you God morrow sir, lack
you not a neat handsome and cleanly young Lad, about the age of fifteen or
sixteen years, that can run by your horse, and for a need make your
Mastershippes shoes as black as ink, howe say you sir.


Alas pretty Lad, I know not how to keep my self, and much less a servant,
my pretty boy, my state is so bad.


Content your self, you shall not be so ill a Master but i'll be as bad a
servant: Tut sir I know you though you know not me; Are not you the man sir,
deny it if you can sir, that came from a strange place in the land of Catita,
where Jack a napes flies with his tail in his mouth, to seek out a Lady as
white as snow, and as red as blood; ha, ha, have I touched you now.


I think this boy be a spirit,
How know thou all this?

Tut are not you the man sir, deny it if you can sir, that gave all the money
you had to the burying of a poor man, and but one three-halfe-pence left in
your purse: Content you sir, I'll serve you that is flat.


Well my Lad since thou art so impornate, I am content to entertain thee, not
as a servant; but a copartner in my journey. But whither shall we go for I
have not any money more than one bare three halfe-pence.


Well Master content your self, for if my divination be not out, that shall
be spent at the next Inn or alehouse we come too: for master I know you are
passing hungry; therefore i'll go before and provide dinner until that you
come, no doubt but you'll come fair and softly after.


I, go before, i'll follow thee.


But do you hear master, do you know my name?


No I promise thee not yet.


Why I am Jack.


Jack, why be it so then.


How say you sir, do you please to sit down?


Hostess I thank you, I have no great stomach.


Pray sir, what is the reason your master is so strange, doth not this meat
please him.


Yes Hostess, but it is my masters fashion to pay before he eats, therefore a
reckoning good hostess.


Marry shall you sir presently.


Why Jack what dost thou mean, thou know I have not any money: therefore
sweet Jack tell me what shall I do.


Well master look in your purse.


Why faith it is a folly, for I have no money.


Why look you master, do so much for me.


Alas Jack my purse is full of money.


Alas, master, does that word belong to this accident? why me thinks I
should have seen you cast away your cloak, and in a bravado danced a
galliard round about the chamber; why master, your man can teach you more wit
than this, come hostis, cheer up my master.


You are heartily welcome: and if it please you to eat of a fat Capon, a
fairer bird, a finer bird, a sweeter bird, a crisper bird, a neater bird,
your worship never eat off.


Thanks my fine eloquent hostess.


But hear you master, one word by the way, are you content I shall be halfes
in all you get in your journey?


I am Jack, here is my hand.


Enough master, I ask no more.


Come Hostess receive your money, and I thank you for my good entertainment.


You are heartily welcome sir.


Come Jack whether go we now?


Mary master to the conjurers presently.


Content Jack: Hostis farewell.


Come my duck come: I have now got a wise, thou art fair, art thou not?


My Corebus the fairest alive, make no doubt of that.


Come wench, are we almost at the well.


I Corebus we are almost at the Well now, i'll go fetch some water: sit down
while I dip my pitcher in.


Gently dip: but not too deep;
For fear you make the goulde beard to weep.
Fair maiden white and red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head:
And thou shalt have some cockell bread.
Gently dip, but not too deep,
For fear thou make the goulde beard to weep.
Fair maid, white, and red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head;
And every hair, a sheaue shall be,
And every sheaue a golden tree.

Oh see Corebus I have combed a great deal of gold into may lap, and a great
deal of corn.


Well said wench, now we shall have just enough, God send us coiners to coin
our gold: but come shall we go home sweet heart?


Nay come Corebus I will lead you.

So Corebus things have well hit,
Thou hast gotten wealth to mend thy wit.

Come away master come,

Go along Jack, i'll follow thee, Jack, they say it is good to go cross legged,
and say his prayers backward: how says thou?


Tut never fear master, let me alone, here sit you still, speak not a word.
And because you shall not be enticed with his enchanting speeches; with this
same wool i'll stop your ears: and so master sit still, for I must to the
Conjurer.


How now, what man art thou that sits so sad
Why dost thou gaze upon these stately trees,
Without the leave and will of Sacrapant?
What not a word but mum,
Then Sacrapant thou art betrayed.

What hand invades the head of Sacrapat?
What hateful fury doth envy my happy state?
Then Sacrapant these are thy latest days,
Alas my veins are numd, my sinews shrink,
My blood is appears, my breath fleeting away,
And now my timeless date is come to end:
He in whose life his actions hath been so soul,
Now in his death to hell defends his soul.

Oh Sir are you gon: now I hope we shall have some other coil. Now master how
like you this; the Conjurer he is dead, and vows never to trouble us more.
Now get you to your fair Lady, and see what you can do with her: Alas he
hears me not all this while; but I will help that.


How now Jack, what news?


Here master, take this sword and dig with it, at the foot of this hill.


How now Jack, what is this?


Master, without this the Conjurer could do nothing, and so long as this light
lasts, so long doth his art endure, and this being out, then doth his art
decay.


Why then Jack I will soon put out this light.


I master, how?


Why with a stone i'll break the glass, and then blow it out.


No master you may as soon break the Smiths Anfill, as this little viol;
nor the biggest blast that ever Boreas blew, cannot blow out this little
light; but she that is neither maid, wife, nor widow. Master, wind this
horne; and see what will happen.


So master, how like you this; this is she that ran madding in the woods,
his betrothed love that keeps the cross, and now this light being out, all
are restored to their former liberty. And now master to the Lady that you
have so long looked for.


God speed fair maid sitting alone there is once.
God speed fair maid; there is twice:
God speed fair maid, that is thrice.

Not so good sir, for you are by.

Enough master, she hath spoke, now I will leave her with you.


Thou fairest flower of these western parts:
Whose beauty so reflects in my sight,
As doth a Crystal mirror in the son:
For thy sweet sake I have crossed the frozen Rhine,
Leaving fair Po, I sailed up Danuby,
As far as Saba whose inhansing streams,
Cuts twixt the Tartars and the Russians,
These have I crossed for thee fair Delia:
Then grant me that which I have sud for long.

Thou gentle knight, whose fortune is so good:
To find me out, and set my brothers free,
My faith, my heart, my hand, I give to thee.

Thanks gentle Madame: but here comes Jack, thank him, for he is the best
friend that we have.


How now Jack, what hast thou there?


Mary master, the head of the conjurer.


Why Jack that is impossible, he was a young man.


Ah master, so he deceived them that beheld him: but he was a miserable, old,
and crooked man; though to each mans eye he seemed young and fresh, for
master; this Conjurer took the shape of the old man that kept the cross:
and that old man was in the likeness of the Conjurer. But now master wind
your horne.


Welcome Erestus, welcome fair Venelia,
Welcome Thelea, and Kalepha both,
Now have I her that I so long have sought,
So saith fair Delia, if we have your consent.

Valiant Eumenides thou well deserve
To have our favours: so let us rejoice,
That by thy means we are at liberty.
Here may we joy each in others sight,
And this fair Lady have her wandering knight.

So master, now ye think you have done: but I must have a saying to you;
you know you and I were partners, I to have half in all you got.


Why so thou shalt Jack.


Why then master draw your sword, part your Lady, let me have half of her
presently.


Why I hope Jack thou dost but jest, I promised thee half I got, but not half
my Lady.


But what else master, have you not gotten her, therefore divide her straight,
for I will have half there is no remedy.


Well ere I will falsify my word unto my friend, take her all, here Jack i'll
give her thee.


Nay neither more nor less Master, but even just half.


Before I will falsify my faith unto my friend, I will divide her, Jack thou
shalt have half.


Be not so cruel unto our sister gentle Knight.


O spare fair Delia she deserves no death.


Content your selves, my word is past to him, therefore prepare thy self Delya
for thou must die.


Then farewell world, adieu Eumenides.


Stay Master, it is sufficient I have tried your constancy: Do you now
remember since you paid for the burying of a poor fellow.


I very well Jack.


Then Master thank that good deed, for this good turn, and so God be with you
all.


Jack what art thou gone?
Then farewell Jack.
Come brothers and my beauteous Delya,
Erestus and thy dear Venelia:
We will to Thessalie with joyful hearts.

Agreed, we follow thee and Delya.

What Gammer, a sleep?

By the Mas son tis almost day, and my windows shuts at the Cocks crow.


Do you hear Gammer, me thinks this Jack bore a great sway amongst them.


O man, this was the ghost of the poor man, that they kept such a coil to
bury, that makes him to help the wandering knight so much: But come let us in,
we will have a cup of ale and a tossed this morning and so depart.


Then you have made an end of your tale Gammer?


Yes faith: When this was done I took a piece of bread and cheese, and came my
way, and so shall you have too before you go, to your breakfast.


Printed at London by Iohn Danter, for Raph Hancocke, and Iohn Hardy, and are
to be sold at the shop over against Saint Giles his Church without Criplegate.

1595.


