FRom where ye Sun doth settle in his wain
And yokes his Horses to his fiery Carte,
And in his way gives life to Ceres Corn,
Even from ye parching Zone behold I come
A stranger strangely mounted as you see,
Seated upon a lusty Luzerns back.
And offer, to your Honour (good my Lord)
This Emblem thus in show significant.
Lo lovely London rich and fortunate,
Famed through the World for peace and happiness:
(...) aduaunc't and set in Highest seat,
^wtified thoroughly as her state requires.
First, over her a Princely Trophy stands,
Of beaten gold: a rich and Royal Arms:
Wher-too this London ever more bequeathes,
Service of Honour and of Loyalty.
Her props are well advised Magistrates,
That carefully attend her person still.
The honest Franklin and the Husband-man,
Lays down his sackes of Corn at Londons feet,
And brings such presents as the Country yields.
The pleasant Thames a sweet and dainty Nymph,
For Londons good conuayes with gentle stream,
And safe and easy passage what she can,
And keeps her leaping Fishes in her lap.
The Soldier and the Sailor frankly both,
For Londons aid are all in readiness,
To Venture and to fight by Land and Sea.
And this thrice reverend honourable Dame,
Science the sap of every common wealth.
Surnam^d Mechanical or Liberal
Is vowed to honour London with her skill,
And London by these friends so happy made:
First thanks her God the Author of her peace,
And next, with humble gesture as becomes,
In meek and lowly manner doth she yield,
Her self her welthe with hart and willingness.
Unto the person of her gracious Queen,
Elizabeth renowned through the world,
Stalled and anointed by the highest power,
The God of Kings that with his holy hand,
Hath long defended her and her England.
This now remains right honourable Lord,
That carefully you do attend and Keep,
This lovely Lady rich and beautiful*
The Ivel wherewithal your sovereign Queen,
Hath put your honour lovingly in trust:
That you may add to Londons dignity,
And Londons dignity may add to yours,
That worthily you may be counted one,
Among the number of a many more:
Careful leeftenaunts, careful Magistrates,
For Londons welfare and her worthiness.
NEw Troye I hight whom Lord my Lord surnam'd*
London the glory of the western side:
Throughout the world is lovely London famed,
So far as any sea comes in with tide.
Whose peace and calm under her Royal Queen:
Hath long bin such as like was never seen.
Then let me live to carol of her name,
that she may ever live and never dye:
Her sacred shrine set in the house of fame,
consecrate to eternal memory.
My peerless mistress sovereign of my peace:
Long may she joy with honours great increase.

THe Country and the Thames affoord their aide,
and careful Magistrates their care attend*
All English harts are glad, and well appaide,
in readiness their London to defend.
Defend them Lord and these fair Nymphs likewise:
that ever they may do this sacrifice.

THe greatest treasure that a Prince can have,
doth lovely London offer to her Queen,
Such loyalty as like was never seen.
and such as any English hart can crave.

FOf Londons aide the Country gives supply,
of needful things, and store of every grain:
London give thanks to him that sits on hie*
had never Town less cause for to complain,
And love and serve the sovereign of thy peace:
Under whose reign thou hast this rich increase.

WIth silver glide my pleasant streams do run,
where leaping fishes play betwixt the shores:
This gracious good hath God and kind begun,
for Londons use with help of Sails and Ores.
London rejoice and give thy God the praise:
For her whose highness lengths thy happy days.

ARmour of safe defence the Soldier hath,
So lovely London carefully attends:
To keep her sacred sovereign from skathe,
That all this english land so well defends.
And so far London bids her soldiers go,
As well may serve to shield this land from woe.

THe Sailor that in cold and quaking tide,
the wrathful storms of Winters rage doth bide
With streamers stretched, prepares his merry bark,
for cuntries wealth to set his men awark.
That Queen and Country eazely may see:
The Sea-man serves his Prince in his degree.

FOr Londons safety and her happiness,
the Soldier and the Sailor may you see:
All well prepared and put in redines,
to do such service as may fitting be,
and Art with them do join and they with me.
London then joy and let all ages know,
What duty to thy sovereign thou do show.

THus with the morning Sun and evening star,
these holy lights shall burn, the cheerful flame
With sweetest odour that perfume as far
as India stands in honour of her name.
Whose Trophy we adore with sacred rights:
With sweetest incense and with endless lights.

SO long as Sun doth lend the world his light,
or any grass doth grow upon the ground:
With holy flame, our Torches shall burn bright,
and fame shall brute with golden trumpets sound
The honour of her sacred regiment:
That claims this honourable monument.

OUr holy lights shall burn continually,
to signify our duties to her state:
Whose excellent and princely majesty,
approoues it self to be most fortunate.

Virtue shall witness of her woorthines,
and fame shall register her princely deeds:
The world shall still pray for her happiness,
from whom our peace and quietness proceeds.

Verses written under the Arms of England.

Gallia victa dedit flores inuicta Leones,
Anglia, ius Belli in flore, Leon suum:
O sic o semper ferat Anglia laeta triumphos,
Inclita gallorum Flore, Leon suo.

