Honour the spur that pricks the princely mind,
To follow rule and climb the stately chair,
With great desire inflames the Portingall,
An honourable and courageous king,
To undertake a dangerous dreadful war,
And aide with christian arms the barbarous Moore,
The Negro Muly Hamet that with-holds
The kingdom from his uncle Abdilmelec,
Whom proud Abdallas wronged,
And in his throne instals his cruel son,
That now usurps upon this prince,
This brave Barbarian Lord Muly Molocco.
The passage to the crown by murder made,
Abdallas dies, and deisnes this tyrant king,
Of whom we treat sprung from the Arabian moore
Black in his look, and bloody in his deeds,
And in his shirt stained with a cloud of gore,
Presents himself with naked sword in hand,
Accompanied as now you may behold,
With devils coted in the shapes of men.

Like those that were by kind of murder mumd,
Sit down and see what heinous stratagems
These damned wits contrive. And lo alas
How like poor lambs prepared for sacrifice;
This traitor king hales to their longest home,
These tender Lords his younger brethren both.

His brethren thus in fatal bed behearst,
His fathers brother of too light belief.
This Negro puts to death by proud command.
Say not these things are faind, for true they are,
And understand how eager to enjoy
His fathers crown this vnbeleeuing Moore
Murthering his uncle and his brethren,
Triumphs in his ambitious tyranny,
Till Nemesis high mistres of revenge,
That with her scourge keeps all the world in awe,
With thundering drums awakes the God of war,
And calls the furies from Auernus crags,
To range and rage and vengeance to inflict
Vengeance on this accursed Moore for sin,
And now behold how Abdelmelec comes,
Uncle to this unhappy traitor king,
Armed with great aide that Amurath had sent,
Great Amurath Emperor of the East,
For service done to Sultan Solimon,
Under whose colours he had served in field,
Flying the fury of this Negroes father,
That wronged his brethren to install his son.
Sit you and see this true and tragic war,
A modern matter full of blood and ruth,
Where three bold kings confounded in their height,
Fell to the earth contending for a crown,
And call this war The battle of Alcazar.

Alhaile Argerd Zareo and ye Moors,
Salute the frontiers of your native home,
Cease rattling drums, and Abdilmelec here
Throw up thy trembling hands to heavens throne
Pay to thy God due thanks and thanks to him
That strengthens thee with mighty gracious arms,
Against the proud usurper of thy right,
The royal seat and crown of Barbary,
Great Amurath great Emperor of the world,
The world bear witness how I do adore
The sacred name of Amurath the great.
Calcepius Bassa, Bassa Calcepius
To thee and to thy trusty band of men
That carefully attend us in our camp,
Picked soldiers comparable to the guard
Of Mermidons, that kept Achilles tent
Such thanks we give to thee and to them all,
As may conserne a poor distressed king
In honour and in princely courtesy.

Courteous and honourable Abdelmelec,
We are not come at Amuratbs command,
As mersenarie men to serve for pay,
But as sure friends by our great master sent
To gratify and to remunerate,
Thy love, thy loyalty, and forwardness,
Thy service in his fathers dangerous war,
And to perform in view of all the world,
The true office of right and royalty,
To see thee in thy kingly chair inthronde,
To settle and to seat thee in the same,
To make thee Emperor of this Barbary,
Are come the viseroies and sturdy Ianisaries
Of Amurath, son to Sultan Solimon.

Long live my Lord the sovereign of my heart,
Lord Abdilmelecke whom the God of kings,
The mighty Amurath hath happy made,
And long live Amurath for this good deed.

Our Moors have seen the silver moons to wane,
In banners bravely spreading over the plain,
And in this semicircles have descried
All in a golden field a star to rise,
A glorious comet that begins to blase,
Promising happy sorting to us all.

Brave man at arms whom Amurath hath sent
To sow the lawful true succeeding seed
In Barbary, that bows and groans withal
Under a proud usurping tyrants m^se,
Right thou the wrongs this rightful king hath borne.

Distressed ladies and ye dames of Fesse,
Sprung from the true Arabian Muly Xarif
The loadstar and the honour of our line,
Now clear your watery eyes, wipe tears away,
And cheerfully give welcome to these arms,
Amurath hath sent scourges by his men,
To whip that tyrant traitor king from hence,
That hath vsurpt from us, and maimd you all.
Soldiers since rightful quarrels aid
Successful are, and men that manage them
Fight not in fear as traitors and their pheres
That you may understand what arms we bear,
What lawful arms against our brothers son,
In sight of heaven, even of mine honours worth,
Truly I will dehuer and discourse
The sum of all. Descended from the line
Of Mahomet, our grandfather Mulizaref
With store of gold and treasure leaves Arabia,
And strongly plants himself in Barbary,
And of the Moors that now with us do wend,
Our grandfather Mulizaref was the first,
From him well woe ye Muly Mahamet Xeque,
Who in his life time made a perfect law,
Confirmed with general voice of all his peers
That in his kingdom should successively
His sons succeed. Abdullas was the first
Eldest of fair Abdelmenen the second,
And we the rest my brother and my self,
Abdullas raignd his time. But see the change,
He labours to invest his son in all,
To disanull the law our father made,
And dis-inherite us his brethren,
And in his life time wrongfully proclaims,
His son for king that now contends with us,
Therefore I crave to reobtaine my right
That Muly Mahamet the traitor holds,
Traitor and bloody tyrant both at once,
That murdered his younger brethren both,
But on this damned wretch, this traitor king,
The Gods shall pour down showers of sharp revenge.
And thus a matter not to you unknown
I have delivered. Yet for no distrust
Of loyalty my well-beloved friend,
But that the occasions fresh in memory
Of these encumbers, so may move your minds,
As for the lawful true succeeding prince,
Ye neither think your lives nor honours dear
Spent in a quarrel just and honourable.

Such and no other we repute the cause,
That forwardly for thee we undertake,
Thrice puissant and renowned Abdilmelec,
And for thine honour, safety and crown,
Our lives and honours frankly to expose,
To all the dangers that our war attends,
As freely and as resolutely all,
As any Moore whom thou command most.

And why is Abdilmelec then so slow
To chastise him with fury of the sword,
Whose pride doth swell to sway beyond his reach,
Follow this pride then with fury of revenge.

Of death, of blood, of wreak, and deep revenge.
Shall Rubin Archis frame her tragic songs,
In blood, in death, in murder and misdeed,
This heavens malice did begin and end.

Rubin these rights to Abdelmunens ghost,
Have appears by this to Plutos grave below,
The bells of Pluto ring revenge amain.
The furies and the fiends conspire with thee,
War bids me draw my weapons for revenge
Of my deep wrongs, and my dear brothers death.

Sheath not your swords you soulders of Amurath,
Sheath not your swords you Mores of Barbary
That fight in right of your anointed king,
But follow to the gates of death and hell,
Pale death and hell to entertain his soul.
Follow I say to burning Phlegiton,
This traitor tyrant and his companies.

Heave up your swords against these stony holds,
Wherein these barbarous rebels are inclosde,
Called for is Abdilmelec by the Gods,
To sit upon the throne of Barbary.

Bassa great thanks the honour of the Turks.
Forward brave Lords unto this rightful war,
How can this battle but successful be,
Where courage meets with a rightful cause?

Go in good time my best beloved Lord,
Successful in thy work thou undertakes.

Pisano, take a cornet of our horse,
As many argolets and armed pikes,
And with our carriage march away before
By Scyras, and those plots of ground
That to Moroccus leads the lower way.
Our enemies keep upon the mountain tops,
And have incampt themselves not far from Fesse,
Madame, gold is the glue, sinews, and strength of war,
And we must see our treasure may go safe,
Away.
Now boy whats the news?

The news my Lord is war, war and revenge.
And if I shall declare the circumstance.
Tis thus.
Rubyn our uncles wife that wrings her hands
For Abdilmunens death, accompanied
With many dames of Fesse in mourning weeds,
Near to Argier encountered Abdilmelec,
That bends his force puffed up with Amuraths aide,
Against your holds and castles of defence.
The younger brother Muly Mahamet Seth,
Greets the great Bassa, that the king of Turks.
Sends to invade your right and royal realm,
And basely beg revenge, arch-rebels all,
To be inflict upon our progeny.

Why boy, is Amuraths Bassa such a bug,
That he is marked to do this doubtie deed?
Then Bassa locke the winds in wards of brass,
Thunder from heaven damn wretched men to death
Bar all the offices of Saturnes sons,
Be Pluto then in hell and bar the fiends,
Take Neptunes force to thee and calm the seas,
And execute Ioues justice on the world,
Convey Tamberlaine into our Affrike here,
To chastise and to menace lawful kings,
Tamberlaine triumph not, for thou must die
As Philip did, Caesar, and Caesars peers.

The Bassa grossly flattered to his face,
And Amuraths praise advanced above the sound
Upon the plains, the soldiers being spread,
And that brave guard of sturdy Ianizaries,
That Amurath to Abdilmelec gave,
And bad him boldly be to them as safe,
As if he slept within a walled town,
Who take them to their weapons threatening revenge.
Bloody revenge, bloody revengeful war.

Away, and let me hear no more of this,
Why boy, are we successors to the great Abdilmelec,
Descended from the Arabian Muly Zarif,
And shall we be afraid of Bassas and of bugs,
Raw head and bloody bone?
Boy, see here this semitarie by my side,
Since they begin to bath in blond,
Blood be the theme whereon our time shall tread,
Such slaughter with my weapon shall I make,
As through the stream and bloody channels deep,
Our Moors shall sail in ships and pinnaces,
From Tanger shore unto the gates of Fesse.

And of those slaughtered bodies shall thy son,
A huge tower erect like Nemrods frame,
To threaten those unjust and partial Gods,
That to Abdallas lawful seed deny,
Along, a happy, and triumphant reign.

Fly king of Fesse, king of Moroccus fly,
Fly with thy friends Emperor of Barbary,
O fly the sword and fury of the foe,
That rages as the ramping lioness,
In rescue of her yonglings from the bear,
Thy towns and holds by numbers basely yield,
Thy land to Abdilmelecs rule resignes,
Thy carriage and thy treasure taken is
By Amuraths soldiers, that have sworn thy death,
Fly Amuraths power, and Abdilmelecs threats,
Or thou and thine look here to breath your last.

Villain, what dreadful sound of death flght
Is this, where with thou doest afflict our ears?
But if there be no safety to abide
The favour, fortune, and success of war.
Away in hast, roll on my chariot wheels
Restless, till I be safely set in shade
Of some unhaunted place, some blasted grove
Of deadly hue, or dismal cyprestree,
Far from the light or comfort of the Sun,
There to curse heaven, and he that heaves me hence,
To seek as Envy at Cecropes gate,
And pine the thought and terror of mishaps,
Away.

Now war begins his rage and ruthless rain,
And Nemesis with bloody whip in hand,
Thunders for vengeance on this Negro moore.
Nor may the silence of the speechlesle night,
Divine Architects of murders and misdeeds.
Of tragedies, and tragic tyrannies,
Hide or contain this barbarous cruelty
Of this usurper to his progeny.
Hark Lords, as in a hollow place a far,
The dreadful shrikes and clamours that resound,
And sound revenge upon this trai^ors soul,
Traitor to kin and kind, to Gods and men.
Now Nemesis upon her doubling drum,
Moude with this ghastly moan, this sad complaint,
Larumes aloud into Alectoseares,
And with her thundering wakes whereas they lie,
In cave as dark as hell, and beds of steel,
The furies just imps of dire revenge,
Revenge cries Abdilmelecs grieved ghost,
And rouses with the terror of this noise
These nymphs of Erybus. Wreak and revenge
Ring out the souls of his unhappy brethren,
And now start up these torments of the world,
Waked with the thunder of Ramusians drum,
And fearful echoes of these grieved ghosts,
Alecto with her brand and bloody torch,
Megaera with her whip and snaky hair,
Tysiphone with her fatal murthering iron,
These three conspire, these three complain moan,
Thus Muly Mahamet is a counsel held,
To wreak the wrongs and murders thou hast done.
By this imagine was this barbarous Moore
Chased from his dignity and his diadem,
And lives forlorn among the mountain shrubs,
And makes his food the flesh of savage beasts.
A mureths soldiers have by this instald
Good Abdelmelec in his royal seat,
The dames of Fesse and ladies of the land,
In honour of the son of Soliman,
Erect a statue made of beaten gold,
And sing to Amurath songs of lasting praise.
Muly Mahamets fury ouer-rulde,
His cruelty controld, and priderebukt,
Now at last when sober thoughts renude,
Care of his kingdom and desired crown,
The aide that once was offered and refused
By messenge^s, he furiously employs,
Sebastians aide brave king of Portugall,
He forward in all arms and chivalry
Hearkens to his Ambassadors, and grants
What they in letters and by words entreat.
Now listen lordings now begins the game,
Sebastians tragedy in this tragic war.

Now hath the Sun displayed his golden beams,
And dusky clouds dispearst, the welkin clears,
Wherein the twenty coloured rainbow shows,
After this fight happy and fortunate,
Wherein our Moors have lost the day,
And victory adorned with fortunes plumes,
Alights on Abdelmelecs glorious creast,
Here find we time to breath, and now begin
To pay thy due and duties thou doest owe,
To heaven and earth, to Gods and Amurath.
And now draw near, and heaven and earth give ear
Give ear and record heaven and earth with me,
Ye Lords of Barbary hearken and attend,
Hark to the words I speak, and vow I make,
To plant the true succession of the crown,
Lo Lords, in our seat royal to succeed,
Our only brother here we do install,
And by the name of Muly Mahamet Seth,
Entitle him true heir unto the crown,
Ye Gods of heaven gratulate this deed,
That men on earth may therewith stand content.
Lo thus my due and duty is done, I pay
To heaven and earth, to Gods and Amurath.

Renowned Bassa, to remunerate
Thy worthiness and magnanimity,
Behold the noblest ladies of the land,
Bring present tokens of their gratitude.

Rubin that breaths but for revenge,
Bassa by this commends her self to thee
Resign the token of her thankfulness
To Amurath the God of earthly kings,
Doth Rubin give and sacrifice her son,
Not with sweet smoke of fire, or sweet perfume,
But with his fathers sword, his mothers thanks
Doth Rubin give her son to Amurath.

As Rubin gives her son, so we our selves
To Amurath give, and fall before his face.
Bassa, wear thou the gold of Barbary,
And glister like the palace of the Sun,
In honour of the deed that thou hast-dun.

Well worthy of the aide of Amurath,
Is Ab dilmelec and these noble dames,
Rubin thy son I shall ere long bestow,
Where thou doest him bequeath in honours fee,
On Amurath, mighty Emperor of the East,
That shall receive the imp of royal race,
With cheerful looks and gleams of princely grace,
This chosen guard of Amuraths Ienizaries,
I leave to honour and attend on thee,
King of Marocco conqueror of thy foes,
True king of Fesse, Emperor of Barbary,
Muly Molocco live and keep thy seat,
In spite of fortunes spite or enemies threats,
Ride Bassa now, bold Bassa homeward ride,
As glorious as great Pompey in his pride.

Welcome to Lisborne valiant Catholikes,
Welcome brave English-men to Portugall,
Most reverent primate of the Irish Church.
And noble Stukeley famous by thy name,
Welcome, thrice welcome to Sebastians town,
And welcome English captains to you all,
It joys us to see his holynes fleet,
Cast ancor happily upon our coast.

These welcomes worthy governor of Lisborne,
Argue an honourable mind in thee,
But treat of our misfortune therewithal,
To Ireland by pope Gregories command,
Were we all bound, and therefore thus imbarkt,
To land our forces there at unawares,
Conquering the land for his holiness,
And so restore it to the Roman faith,
This was the cause of our expedition,
And Ireland long ere this had bin subdued,
Had not foul weather brought us to this bay.

Under correction, are ye not all Englishmen,
And longs not Ireland to that kingdom Lords?
Then may I speak my conscience in the cause,
Sance scandal to the holy sea of Rome,
Vnhonorable is this expedition,
And misbeseeming yoo to meddle in.

Lord governor of Lisborne understand,
As we are Englishmen, so are we men,
And I am Stukley so resolude in all,
To follow rule, honour and Empery,
Not to be bent so strictly to the place,
Wherein at first I blew the fire of life,
But that I may at liberty make choice,
Of all the continents that bounds the world,
For why? I make it not so great desert
To be begot or borne in any place,
Since that's a thing of pleasure and of ease,
That might have bin performed else-where as well.

Follow what your good pleasure will,
Good Captain Stukley be it far from me
To take exceptions beyond my privilege.

Yet captain give me leave to speak,
We must affect our country as our parents,
And if at any time wealianate
Our love or industry from doing it honour,
It must respect effects and touch the soul,
Matter of conscience and religion,
And not desire of rule or benefit.

Well said Bishop, spoken like your self,
The reverent lordly bishop of saint Asses.

The bishop talks according to his coat,
And takes not measure of it by his mind,
You see he hath it made thus large and wide,
Because he may convert it as he list,
To any form may fit the fashion best,

Captain you do me wrong to descant thus,
Upon my coat or double conscience,
And cannot answer it in another place.

Tis but in jest, Lord bishop put it up,
And all as friends deign to be entertained,
As my ability here can make provision,
Shortly shall I conduct you to the king,
Whose welcomes evermore to strangers are,
Princely and honourable as his state becomes.

Thanks worthy governor, come bishop come
Will you show fruits of quarrel and of wrath,
Come let us in with my Lord of Lisborne here,
And put all conscience into one carouse,
Letting it out again, as we may live.
There shall no action pass my hand or sword,
That cannot make a step to gain a crown,
No word shall pass the office of my tong,
That sounds not of affection to a crown,
No thought have being in my lordly breast,
That works not every way to win a crown,
Deeds, words and thoughts shall all be as a kings,
My chiefest company shall be with kings,
And my deserts shall counterpoise a kings,
Why should not I then look to be a king?
I am the marks how of Ireland made,
And will be shortly king of Ireland,
King of a mole-hill had I rather be,
Than the richest subject of a monarchy,
Huff it brave mind, and never cease t'aspire,
Before thou reign sole king of thy desire

Where art thou boy, where is Calypolis?
O deadly wound that passes by mine eye,
The fatal prison of my swelling heart!
O fortune constant in inconstancy!
Fight earth-quakes in the entrails of the earth,
And Eastern whirl-windes in the hellish shades,
Some foulecontagion of the infected heaven,
Blast all the trees, and in their cursed tops,
The dismal night raven and tragike owl
Breed, and become fore-tellers of my fall,
The fatal ruin of my name and me,
Adders and serpents hiss at my disgrace,
And wound the earth with anguish of their stings,
Now Abdelmelee, now triumph in Fesse,
Fortune hath made thee king of Barbary.

Alas my Lord, what boots these huge exclaim
To advantage us in this distressed estate,
Opittie our perplexed estate my Lord;
And turn all curses to submiss complaints,
And those complaints to actions of relief,
I faint my Lord, and nought may cursing plaints
Refresh the fading substance of my life.

Faint all the world, consume and be accursed,
Since my state faints and is accursed.

Yet patience Lord to conquer sorrows so.

What patience is for him that lacks his crown^
There is no patience where the loss is such,
The shame of my disgrace hath put on wings,
And swiftly flies about this earthly ball,
Care thou to live then fond Calypolis,
When he that should give essence to thy soul,
He on whose glory all thy joy should stay,
Is soulelesse, glorylesse, and desperate,
Crying for battle, famine, sword and fire,
Rather then calling for relief or life.
But be content, thy hunger shall have end,
Famine shall pine to death and thou shalt live,
I will go hunt these cursed solitaries,
And make the sword and target here my hound,
To pull down lyons and untamed beasts.

Tush mother, cherish your vnheartie soul,
And feed with hope of happiness and ease,
For if by valor or by policy,
My kingly father can be fortunate,
We shall be Ioues commanders once again,
And flourish in a three-fold happiness.

His majesty hath sent Sebastian
The good and harmless king of Portugall,
A promise to resign the royalty
And kingdom of Marocco to his hands,
But when this haughty offer takes effect,
And works affiance in Sebastian,
My gracious Lord warnd wisely to advise,
I doubt not but will watch occasion,
And take her fore-top by the slenderest hair,
To rid us of this miserable life.

Good madame cheer your self, my Fathers wife,
He can submit himself and live below,
Make show of friendship, promise, vow and swear,
Till by the virtue of his fair pretence,
Sebastian trusting his integrity,
He makes himself possessor of such fruits,
As grow upon such great advantages.

But more dishonour hangs on such misdeeds,
Than all the profit their return can bear,
Such secret judgements hath the heavens imposde
Upon the drooping state of Barbary,
As public merits in such lewd attempts,
Hath drawn with violence upon our heads.

Hold thee Calypolis feed and faint no more,
This flesh I forced from a lioness,
Meat of a princess, for a princess meat,
Learn by her noble stomach to esteem
Penury plenty, in extremest dearth,
Who when she saw her foragement bereft,
Pined not in melancholy or childlish fear,
But as brave minds are strongest in extremes,
So she redoubling her former force
Rangde thorough the woods, and rent the breeding vaults
Of proudest savages to save her self,
Feed then and faint not fair Calypolis,
For rather than fierce famine shall preuaile,
To gnaw thy entrails with her thorny teeth,
The conquering lioness shall attend on thee,
And lay huge heaps of slaughtered carcases
As bulwarks in her way to keep her back.
I will provide thee of a princely ospraie,
That as she flies over fish in pooles,
The fish shall turn their glistering bellies up,
And thou shalt take thy liberal choice ofall,
Ioues stately bird with wide commanding wings
Shall hover still about thy princely head,
And beat down foul by shoal into thy lap,
Feed then and faint not fair Calypolis.

Thanks good my Lord, and though my stomach be
Too queasy to digest such bloody meat,
Yet strength I it with virtue of my mind,
I doubt no whit but I shall live my Lord.

Into the shades then fair Calypolis,
And make thy son and Negros here good cheer,
Feed and be fat that we may meet the foe
With strength and terror to revenge our wrong.

Call forth those Moors, those men of Barbary.
That came with letters from the king of Fesse.
Ye warlike lords and men of chivalry,
Honourable Ambassadors of this high regent,
Hark to Sebastian king of Portugall:
These letters sent from your distressed Lord,
Torn from his throne by Abdilmelecs hand,
Strengthened and raised by furious Amurath,
Imports a kingly favour at our hands,
For aide to reobtaine his royal seat,
And place his fortunes in their former height.
For quitall of which honourable arms,
By these his letters he doth firmly vow,
Wholly to yield and to surrender up
The kingdom of Maroccus to our hands,
And to become to us contributarie,
And to content himself with the realm of Fesse,
These lines my Lords writ in extremity,
Contain therefore but during fortunes date,
How shall Sebastian then believe the same?

Viceroies, and most christian king of Portugall,
To satisfy thy doubtful mind herein,
Command forthwith a blazing brand of fire
Be brought in presence of thy majesty,
Then shalt thou see by our religious vows
And ceremonies most inviolate
How firm our sovereigns protestations are,
Behold my Lord, this binds our faith to thee.
In token that great Muly Mahamets hand
Hath writ no more than his stout heart allows,
And will perform to thee and to thine heirs,
We offer here our hands into this flame,
And as this flame doth fasten on this flesh,
So from our souls we wish it may consume
The heart of our great Lord and sovereign
Muly Mahamet king of Barbary,
If his intent agree not with his words.

These ceremonies and protestations
Suffices us ye Lords of Barbary,
Therefore return this answer to your king,
Assure him by the honour of my crown,
And by Sebastians true unfeigned faith
He shall have aide and succour to recover,
And seat him in his former empery,
Let him rely upon our princely word,
Tell him by August we will come to him,
With such a power of brave impatient minds,
As Abdelmelec and great Amurath
Shall tremble at the strength of Portugall.

Thanks to the renowned king of Portugal
On whose stout promises our state depend.

Barbarians go glad your distressed king,
And say Sebastian lives to right his wrong,
Duke of Auero call in those English-men,
Don Stukley, and those Captains of the fleet
That lately landed in our bay of Lisborne.
Now breath Sebastian, and in breathing blow
Some gentle gale of thy new formed joys,
Duke of Auero, it shall be your charge,
To take the muster of the Portuguese,
And bravest bloods of all our country,
Lewes de Sylua you shall be dispatcht
With letters unto Philip king of Spain,
Tell him we crave his aide in this behalf,
I know our brother Philip nill deny
His furtherance in this holy christian war,
Duke of Barceles as thy ancestors
Have always loyal bin to Portugall,
So now in honour of thy toward youth,
Thy charge shall be to Anwerpe speedily,
To hire us mercenary men at arms,
Promise them princely pay, and be thou sure
Thy word is ours, Sebastian speaks the word.

I beseech your majesty employ me in this war.

Christopher de Tauera, next unto my self
My good Efestian, and my bedfellow,
Thy cares and mine shall be alike in this,
And thou and I will live and die together.
And now brave English-men to you,
Whom angry storms have put into our bay,
Hold not your fortune ere the worse in this,
We hold our strangers honours in our hand,
And for distressed frank and free relief,
Tell me then Stukley, for that's thy name I trow,
Wilt thou in honour of thy countries fame,
Hazard thy person in this brave exploit,
And follow us to fruitful Barbary,
With these six thousand soldiers thou hast brought
And choicely picked through wanton Italy,
Thou art a man of gallant personage,
Proud in thy looks, and famous every way,
Frankly tell me, wilt thou go with me?

Courageous king, the wonder of my thoughts
And yet my Lord, with pardon understand,
My self and these, whom weather hath enforced,
To lie at road upon thy gracious coast,
Did bend our course and made amain for Ireland.

For Ireland Stukley, thou mistakst me wondrous much,
With seven ships, two pinnaces, and six thousand men,
I tell thee Stukley, they are far too weak,
To violate the Queen of Irelands right,
For Irelands Queen commands Englands force,
Were every ship ten thousand on the seas,
Mand with the strength of all the Eastern kings,
Conveying all the monarchs of the world,
To invade the Island where her highness reigns,
Twere all in vain, for heavens and destinies
Attend and wait upon her Majesty,
Sacred, imperial, and holy is her seat,
Shining with wisdom, love and mightiness.
Nature that every thing imperfect made,
Fortune that never yet was constant found,
Time that defaces every golden show,
Dare not decay, remove, or be impure,
Both nature, time and fortune, all agree,
To bless and serve her royal majesty,
The wallowing Ocean hems her round about,
Whose raging floods do swallow up her foes,
And on the rocks their ships in pieces split,
And even in Spain where all the traitors dance,
And play themselves upon a sunny day,
Securely guard the west part of her Isle,
The South the narow Britain sea begirts,
Where Veptune sits in triumph, to direct
Their course to hell that aim at her disgrace,
The Germaine seas along the East do run,
Where Nenus banquets all her water Nymphs,
That with her beauty glansing on the waives,
Disdains the check of fair Proserpina,
Advise thee then proud Stukley ere thou pass,
To wrong the wonder of the highest God,
Since danger, death and hell doth follow thee,
Thee and them all that seek to danger her.
If honour be the mark whereat thou aimst,
Then follow me in holy christian wars,
And leave to seek thy Countries overthrow.

Rather my Lord, let me admire these words,
Than answer to your firm objections,
His holynes Pope Gregorie the seventh,
Hath made us four the leaders of the rest,
Amongst the rest my Lord, I am but one,
If they agree Stukley will be the first
To die with honour for Sebastian.

Tell me Lord Bishop, Captains tell me all,
Are you content to leave this enterprise,
Against your country and your country men,
To aide Mahamet king of Barbary?

To aide Mahamet king of Barbary,
Tis against our vows great king of Portugall.

Then Captains what say you?

I say my Lord as the Bishop said,
We may not turn from conquering Ireland.

Our country and our country-men will condemn
Us worthy of death, if we neglect our vows.

Consider Lords you are now in Portugall,
And I may now dispose of you and yours.
Hath not the wind and weather given you up,
And made you captives to our royal will?

It hath my Lord, and willingly we yield
To be commanded by your majesty,
But if you make us voluntary men,
Our course is then direct for Ireland.

That course will we direct for Barbary,
Follow me Lords, Sebastian leads the way,
To plant the christian fath in Africa.

Saint George for England, and Irelande now adieu,
For here Tom Stukley shapes his course anue.

Lo thus into a lake of blood and gore,
The brave courageous king of Portugall
Hath drenched himself, and now prepares amain
With sails and oars to cross the swelling seas,
With men and ships, courage and canon shot,
To plant this cursed Moore in fatal hour,
And in this Catholic case the king of Spain
Is called upon by sweet Sebastian.
Who surfeiting in prime time of his youth,
Upon ambitious poison dies thereon.
By this time is the Moore to Tangar come,
A city longing to the Portugall,
And now doth Spain promise with holy face,
As favouring the honour of the cause,
His aide of arms, and leuies men apace,
But nothing less than king Sebastians good
He means, yet at Sucor de Tupea.
He met some say in person with the Portugall,
And treats of a marriage with the king,
But ware ambitious wiles and poisned eyes,
There was nor aide of arms nor marriage,
For on his way without those Spaniardes king Sebastian went.

Honourable Lords, Ambassadors of Spain,
The many favours by our meetings done
From our beloved and renowned brother,
Philip the Catholic king of Spain
Say therefore good my Lord Ambassador,
Say how your mighty master minded is,
To propagate the fame of Portugall.

To propagate the fame of Portugall,
And plant religious truth in Africa,
Philip the great and pussant king of Spain,
For love and honour of Sebastians name,
Promises aide of arms and swears by us
To do your majesty all the good he can,
With men, munition, and supply of war,
Of Spaniards proud in king Sebastians aide,
To spend their bloods in honour of their Christ.

And farther to manifest unto your majesty
How much the Catholic king of Spain affects
This war with Moors and men of little faith,
The honour of your everlasting praise,
Behold to honour and enlarge thy name,
He makes offer of his daughter Isabel,
To link in marriage with the brave Sebastian,
And to enrich Sebastians noble wife,
His majesty with promise to resign
The titles of the Islands of Moloccus,
That by his royalty in Iudah he commands
These favours with unfeigned love and zeal,
Vows king Philip to king Sebastian.

And God so deal with king Sebastians soul
As justly he intends to fight for Christ,
Nobles of Spain, since our renowned brother,
Philip the king of honour and of zeal,
By you the chosen Orators of Spain,
The offer of the holds he makes
Are not so precious in our account,
As is the peerless dame whom we adore,
His daughter, in whose loyalty consists
The life and honour of Sebastian.
As for the aide of arms he promises,
We will expect, and thankfully receive
At Cardis, as we sail along the coast.
Sebastian clap thy hands for joy,
Honoured by this meeting and this match,
Go Lords and follow to the famous war
Your king, and be his fortune such in all,
As he intends to manage arms in right.

Sit fast Sebastian, and in this work
God and good men labour for Portugall,
For Spain disguising with a double face,
Flatters thy youth and forwardness good king,
Philip whom some call the catholic king,
I fear me much thy faith will not be firm,
But disagree with thy profession.

What then shall of these men of war become,
Those numbers that do multiply in Spain?

Spain hath a vent for them and their supplies,
The Spaniard ready to embark himself,
Here gathers to a head, but all to sure,
Flanders I fear shall feel the force of Spain,
Let Portugall fare as he may or can,
Spain means to spend no powder on the moors.

If kings do dally so with holy oaths,
The heavens will right the wrongs that they sustain,
Philip if these forgeries be in thee,
Assure thee king, twill light on thee at last,
And when proud Spain hopes soundly to preuaile,
The time may come that thou and thine shall fail.

The Portugall lead with decoining hope,
Hath raised his power, and received our foe
With honourable welcomes and regard,
And left his country bounds, and hither bends,
In hope to help Mahamet to a crown,
And chase us hence, and plant this Negro moore
That clads himself in coat of hammerd steel,
To heave us from the honour we possess,
But for I have my self a soldier bin,
I have in pity to the Portugall
Sent secret messengers to counsel him.
As for the aide of Spain whereof they hoped,
We have dispatcht our letters to their prince,
To crave that in a quarrel so unjust,
He that entitled is the Catholic king,
Would not assist a careless christian prince,
And as by letters we are let to know,
Our offer of the seven holds we made,
He thankfully receines, with all conditions,
Differing in mind far from all his words
And promises to king Sebastian,
As we would wish, or you my Lords desire.

What rests then but Abdelmelec may
Beat back this proud inuading Portugall,
And chastise this ambitious Negro moore
With thousand deaths for thousand damned deeds.

Forward Zareo and ye manly moors,
Sebastian see in time unto thy self,
If thou and thine misled do thrive amiss,
Guiltless is Abdilmelec of thy blood.

Captain, we have received Letters from the king.
That with such signs and arguments of love,
We entertain the king of Barbary,
That marches toward Tangar with his men,
The poor remainders of those that fled from Fesse,
When Abdilmelec got the glorious day,
And stald himself in his imperial throne.

Lord governor, we are in readiness
To welcome and receive this haplesse king,
Chased from his land by angry A murath,
And if the right rest in this lusty Moore,
Bearing a princely heart vnvanquishable,
A noble resolution than it is,
In brave Sebastian our christian king,
To aide this Moore with his victorious arms,
Thereby to propagate religious truth,
And plant his springing praise in Africa.

But when ariues this brave Sebastian,
To knit his forces with this manly Moore,
That both in one, and one in both may join
In this attempt of noble consequence?
Our men of Tangar long to see their king,
Whose princely face that like the summers son,
Glads all these hither parts of Barbary.

Captains, he comes hetherward amain,
Top and top gallant, all in brave array
The 26. day of June he left the bay of Lisborne,
And with all his fleet at Cardis happily he
Ariu'de in Spain the eight of July, tarrying for the aide
That Philip king of Spain had promised,
And fifteen days he there remained aboard,
Expecting when this Spanish force would come,
Nor stepped a shore as he were going still:
But Spain that meant and minded nothing less,
pretends a sudden fear and care to keep
His own from A muraths fierce invasion,
And to excuse his promise to our king,
For which he storms as great A chilles erst.
Lying for want of wind in Aldest gulf,
And hoiseth up his sails and anchors waighs,
And hetherward he comes, and looks to meet
This manly Moore, whose case he undertakes,
Therefore go we to welcome and rescue,
With canon shot, and shouts of young and old,
This fleet of Portuguese and troupe of Moors.

Muly Mahamet king of Barbary
Well met, and welcome to our town of Tanger,
After this sudden shock and haplesse war,
Welcome brave Queen of Moors, repose thee here,
Thou and thy noble son, and soldiers all,
Ropose you here in king Sebastians town.
Thus far in honour of thy name and aide
Lord Mahamet, we have adventured
To win for thee a kingdom, for our selves
Fame, and performance of those promises,
That in thy faith and royalty thou hast
Sworn to Sebastian king of Portugall,
And thrive it so with thee as thou doest mean,
And mean thou so as thou doest wish to thrive,
And if our Christ for whom in chief we fight,
Hereby to enlarge the bounds of christendom,
Favour this war, and as I do not doubt,
Send victory to light upon my crest.
Brave Moore I will advance thy kingly son,
And with a diadem of pearl and gold,
Adorn thy temples and enrich thy head,

O brave Sebastian noble Portugall,
Renowmd and honoured ever may thou be,
Triumpher over those that menace thee.
The hellish prince grim Pluto with his mace
Ding down my soul to hell, and with this soul
This son of mine the honour of my house,
But I perform religiously to thee,
That I have holily erst vndertane,
And that thy Lords and Captains may perceive
My mind in this single and pure to be,
As pure as is the water of the brooke,
My dearest son to thee I do engage,
Receive him Lord in hostage of my vow,
For even my mind presages to my self,
That in some slavish sort I shall behold
Him dragde along this running river shore,
A spectacle to dant the pride of those
That climb aloft by force, and not by right.

Nor can it otherwise befall the man
That keeps his seat and sceptre all in fear,
That wears his crown in eye of all the world,
Reputed theft and not inheritance.
What title then hath Abdilmelec here,
To bar our father or his progeny,
Right royal prince, hereof you make no doubt,
Agreeing with your wholesome christian laws,
Help then courageous Lord with hand and sword,
To clear his way, whose lets are lawless men,
And for this deed ye all shall be renowmd,
Renowmd and chronicled in books of fame,
In books of fame and characters of brass,
Of brass may beaten gold, fight then for fame,
And find the Arabian Muly Hamet here,
Adventurous, bold, and full of rich reward.

Brave boy, how plain this princely mind in thee
Argues the height and honour of thy birth,
And well have I observed thy forwardness,
Which being tendered by your majesty,
No doubt the quarrel opened by the mouth
Of this young prince vnpartially to us,
May animate and hearten all the host,
To fight against the devil for Lord Mahamet.

True Stukley, and so freshly to my mind,
Hath this young prince redus'd his fathers wrong,
That in good time I hope this honours fire,
Kindled already with regard of right,
Bursts into open flames, and calls for wars,
Wars, wars to plant the true succeeding prince.
Lord Mahamet, I take thy noble son
A pledge of honour, and shall use him so.
Lord Lodowicke, and my good Lord of Auero
See this young prince conveyed safe to Messegon,
And there accompanide as him fitteth best,
And to this war prepare ye more and less,
This rightful war, that Christians God will bless.

Now hardened is this haplesse heathen prince,
And strengthened by the arms of Portugall,
This Moore, this murderer of his progeny.
And war and weapons now, and blood and death
Wait on the counsels of this cursed king:
And to a bloody banquet he invites
The brave Sebastian and his noble peers.
In fatal hour arrived this peerless prince,
To loose his life, his life and many lives
Of lusty men, courageous Portuguese,
Drawn by ambitious golden looks,
Let fame of him no wrongful censure sound,
Honour was object of his thoughts, ambition was his ground.

Now tell me Celybin, what doth the enemy?

The enemy dread lord, hath left the town
Of Areil, with a thousand soldiers armed,
To guard his fleet of thirteen hundred sail,
And mustering of his men before the walls,
He found he had two thousand armed horse,
And fourteen thousand men that serve on foot,
Three thousand pioners, and a thousand cochmen,
Besides a number almost numberless
Of drudges, Negroes, slaves and Muliters,
Horse-boies, laundresses and courtesans,
And fifteen hundred waggons full of stuff
For noble men, brought up in delicate.

Alas good king, thy fore-sight hath bin small
To come with women into Barbary,
With laundress, with baggage, and with trash,
Numbers unfit to multiply thy host.

Their payment in the camp is passing slow,
And victuals scarce, that many faint and die.

But whether marches he in all this hast?

Some thinks he marches hetherward,
And means to take this city of Alcazar.

Unto Alcazar, O inconstant chance!

The brave and valiant king of Portugall
Quarters his power in four batalians,
A front the which, to welcome us withal,
Are six and thirty roaring pieces placed,
The first consisting of light armed horse,
And of the garrisons from Tangar brought
Is lead by Alvaro Peers de Tauero,
The left or middle battle of Italians,
And Germane horse-men Stukley doth command,
A warlike Englishman sent by the pope,
That vainly calls himself Marks of Ireland.
Alonjo Aquilaz conducts the third,
That wing of Germaine soldiers most consists.
The fourth legion is none but Portuguese,
Of whom Lodeuico Caesar hath the chiefest charge,
Besides there stand six thousand horse
Bravely attired, pressed where need requires.
Thus have I told your royal majesty,
How he is placed to brave his fight.

But where's out nephew Muly Mahamet?

He marches in the middle, guarded about
With full five hundred hargubuze on foot,
And twice three thousand needless armed pikes.

Great sovereign, vouchsafe to hear me speak,
And let Zareos counsel now preuaile,
Whilst time doth serve, and that these Christians dare
Approach the field with warlike Ensigns spread,
Let us in hast with all our forces meet,
And hem them in, that not a man escape,
So will they be advised another time,
How they do touch the shore of Barbary.

Zareo, hear our resolution,
And thus our forces we will first dispose,
Hamet my brother with a thousand shot
On horse-backe, and choice harguebuziers all,
Having ten thousand with spear and shield,
Shall make the right wing of the battle up,
Zareo you shall have in charge the left,
Two thousand argolets and ten thousand horse,
The maine battle of harguebuze on foot,
And twenty thousand horse-men in their troupes,
My self inuirond with my trustie'gard
Of Ianizaries, fortunate in war,
And toward Arzil will we take our way,
If then our enemy will balke our force,
In Gods name let him, it will be his best,
But if he level at Alcazar walls,
Then beat him back with bullets as thick as hail,
And make him know and rue his oversight,
That rashly seeks the ruin of this land.

Why tell me Lords, why left ye Portugall,
And crossed the seas with us to Barbary,
Was it to see the country and no more,
Or else to slay before ye were assaild?
I am ashamed to think that such as you,
Whose deeds have bin renowned heretofore,
Should slack in such an act of consequence,
We come to fight, and fighting vow to die,
Or else to win the thing for which we came,
Because Abdilmelec as pitying us,
Sends messages to counsel quietness,
You stand amazed and think it sound advise,
As if our enemy would wish us any good,
No, let him know we scorn his courtesy,
And will resist his forces what so ere.
Cast fear aside, my self will lead the way,
And make a passage with my conquering sword
Knee deep in blood of these accursed Moors,
And they that love my honour follow me.
Were you as resolute as is your king,
Alcazar walls should fall before your face,
And all the force of this Barbarian Lord
Should be confounded, were it ten times more.

So well become these words a kingly mouth
That are of force to make a coward fight,
But when advice and prudent fore-sight
Is joined with such magnanimity,
Troupes of victory and kingly spoils
Adorn his crown, his kingdom, and his fame.

We have descried upon the mountain tops
A huge company of inuading Moors,
And they my lord, as thick as winters hail,
Will fall upon our heads at unawares,
Best then betimes t'auoide this gloomy storm,
It is in vain to strive with such a stream.

Behold thrice noble Lord, vncalde I come,
To counsel where necessity commands,
And honour of undoubted victory,
Makes me exclime upon this dastard flight.
Why king Sebastian, wilt thou now fore-slow,
And let so great a glory slip thy hands?
Say you do march unto Tarissa now,
The forces of the foe are come so nigh,
That he will let the passage of the river,
So unawares you will be forced to fight.
But know O king, and you thrice valiant Lords,
Few blows will serve, I ask but only this,
That with your power you march into the field,
For now is all the army resolute,
To leave the traitor helpless in the fight,
And fly to me as to their rightful prince,
Some horse-men have already lead the way,
And vow the like for their companions,
The host is full of tumult and of fear.
Then as you come to plant me in my seat,
And to enlarge your fame in Africa,
Now, now or never bravely execute
Your resolution sound and honourable,
And end this war together with his life,
That doth usurp the crown with tyranny.

Captains, you hear the reasons of the king,
Which so effectually have appears wine ears,
That I am fully resolute to fight,
And who refuses now to follow me,
Let him be ever counted cowardly.

Shame be his share that flies when kings do fight,
Auero lays his life before your feet.

For my part Lords, I cannot sell my blood
Dearer than in the company of kings.

Now have I set these Portuguese a work,
To hew a way for me unto the crown,
Or with your weapons here to dig your graves,
You dastards of the night and Erybus,
Fiends, Fairies, hags that fight in beds of steel,
Range through this army with your iron whips,
Drive forward to this deed this christian crew,
And let me triumph in the tragedy,
Though it be sealed and honoured with my blood,
Both of the Portugall and barbarous Moore,
Ride Nemesis, ride in thy fiery cart,
And sprinkle gore amongst these men of war,
That either party eager of revenge,
May honour thee with sacrifice of death,
And having bathed thy chariot wheels in blood,
Descend and take to thy tormenting hell,
The mangled body of that traitor king,
That scorns the power and force of Portugall.
Then let the earth discover to his ghost,
Such tortures as usurpers feel below,
Racked let him be in proud lxions wheel,
Pined let him be with Tantalus endless thirst,
Pray let him be to Tisons greedy bird,
Wearied with Sisiphus immortal toil,
And lastly for revenge, for deep revenge,
Whereof thou goddess and deuiser art,
Damned let him be, damned and condemned to bear
All torments, tortures, plagues and pains of hell.

Ill be to him that so much ill bethinks,
And ill betide this foul ambitious Moore,
Whose wily trains with smoothest course of speech.
Hath tide and tangled in a dangerous war,
The fierce and manly king of Portugall.
Now throw the heavens forth their lightning flames,
And thunder over Affrickes fatal fields,
Blood will have blood, foul murder escape no scourge.
At last descends fame as Iris,
To finish fainting Didoes dying life,
Fame from her stately bowte doth descend,
And on the tree as fruit new ripe to fall,
Places the crowns of these unhappy kings,
That erst she kept in eye of all the world.
Now sirie stars and streaming comets blaze,
That threat the earth and princes of the same.
Fire, fire about the axiltree of heaven,
Who orles round, and from the foot of Casyopa
In fatal hour consumes these fatal crowns,
Down falls the diadem of Portugall,
The crowns of Barbary and kingdoms fall,
Ay me, that kingdoms may not stable stand,
And now approaching near the dismal day,
The bloody day wherein the battles join,
Mondaie the fourth of August seventy eight,
The sun shines wholly on the parched earth,
The brightest planet in the highest heaven,
The heathens eager bent against their foe,
Give onset with great ordnance to the war.
The christians with great noise of canon shot,
Send angry onsets to the enemy.
Give ear and hear how war begins his song,
With dreadful clamours, noise, and trumpets sound.
Alarms within, let the chambers be discharged, then enter to the battle, and
the Moors fly.
Skirmish still then enter Ab dilmelec in his chair, Zareo and their train.

Say on Zareo, tell me all the news,
Tell me what fury ranges in our camp,
That hath enforced our Moors to turn their backs.
Zareo say, what chance did bode this ill,
What ill enforced this dastard cowardice?

My Lord, such chance as wilful war affords
Such chances and misfortunes as attend
On him, the God of battle and of arms,
My Lord, when with our ordenance fierce we sent
Our Moors with smaller shot as thick as hail,
Follows apace to charge the Portugall,
The valiant Duke the devil of Auero,
The bane of Barbary, fraughted full of ire
Breaks through the ranks, and with five hundred horse
All men at arms, forward and full of might,
Assaults the middle wing, and puts to flight
Eight thousand Harquebush that served on foot,
And twenty thousand Moors with spear shield:
And therewithal the honour of the day.

Ah Abdelmelec dost thou live to hear
This bitter process of this first attempt?
Labour my Lords to renew our force,
Of fainting Moors, and fight it to the last.
My horse Zareo, O the goal is lost,
The goal is lost, thou King of Portugall
Thrice happy chance it is for thee and thine
That heavens abates my strength and calls me hence.
My sight doth fail, my soul, my feeble soul
Shall be releaste from prison on this earth:
Farewell vain world for I have played my part.

Brave Abdelmelec, thou thrice noble Lord,
Not such a wound was given to Barbary,
Had twenty hoasts of men been put to sword
As death, pale death with fatal shaft hath given.
Lo dead is he, my brother and my King
Whom I might have reuiu'd with news I bring.

His honours and his types he hath resignde
Unto the world, and of a manly man
Lo, in a twinkling a senseless stock we see.

You trusty soldiers of this warlike King,
Be counsel de now by us in this advise,
Let not his death be bruited in the camp,
Least with the sudden sorrow of the news,
The army wholly be discomfited.
My Lord Zareo thus I comfort you,
Our Moors have bravely borne themselves in fight
Likely to get the honour of the day
If ought may gotten be where loss is such.
Therefore in this apparel as he dyed
My noble brother will we here advance,
And set him in his chair with cunning props,
That our Barbarians may behold their King
And think he doth repose him in his Tent.

Right politic and good is your advice.
Go then to see it speedily performed.
Brave Lord, if Barbary recover this,
Thy soul with joy will sit and see the sight.

See thou not Stukley, O Stukley see thou not
The great dishonour done to Christendom?
Our cheerful onset crossed in springing hope,
The brave and mighty prince, Duke of Auero
Slain in my sight, now joy betide his ghost,
For like a lyon did he bear himself.
Our battles are all now disordered,
And by our horses strange retiring back,
Our middle wing of foot-men ouer-rod.
Stukley, alas I see my ouer-sight,
False hearted Mahamet, now to my cost,
I see thy treachery, warnd to beware
A face so full of fraud and villainy.

Villain, a horse.

Oh my Lord, if you return you die.

Villain I say, give me a horse to fly,
To swim the river villain, and to fly.
Where shall I find some unfrequented place,
Some uncouth walk where I may curse my fill,
My stars, my dam, my planets and my nurse,
The fire, the air, the water, and the earth,
All causes that have thus conspired in one,
To nourish and preserve me to this shame,
Thou that were at my birth predominate,
Thou fatal star, what planet ere thou be,
Spit out thy poison bad, and all the ill
That fortune, fate or heaven may bode a man.
Thou Nurse unfortunate, guilty of all:
Thou mother of my life that broughtst me forth,
Cursed may thou be for such a cursed son,
Cursed be thy son with every curse thou hast,
Ye Elements of whom consists this clay,
This mass of flesh, this cursed crazed corpse,
Destroy, dissolve, disturb, and dissipate,
What water, earth, and air conieald.

Oh my Lord, these rulthlesse Moors pursue you at the heals,
And come amain to put you to the sword.

A horse, a horse, villain a horse,
That I may take the river straight and fly,

Here is a horse my Lord,
As swiftly paced as Pegasus,
Mount thee thereon, and save thy self by flight.

Mount me I will,
But may I never pass the river till I be
Revenged upon thy soul accursed Abdilmelec,
If not on earth, yet when we meet in hell,
Before grim Minos, Rodamant, and Eocus,
The cumbat will I crave upon thy ghost,
And drag thee thorough the loathsome pooles,
Of Lethes, Stikes, and fiery Phlegiton.

Stand traitor, stand ambitious English-man,
Proud Stukley stand, and stir not erethou die,
Thy forwardness to follow wrongful arms,
And leave our famous expedition erst,
Intended by his holynes for Ireland,
Foully hath here betrayed, and tide us all
To ruthless fury of our heathen foe,
For which as we are sure to die,
Thou shalt pay satisfaction with thy blood.

A uant base villains, twit ye me with shame
Or infamy of this injurious war?
When he that is the judge of right and wrong
Determines battle as him pleases best.
But since my stars bode me this tragic end
That I must perrish by these barbarous Moors,
Whose weapons have made passage for my soul
That breaks from out the prison of my breast,
Ye proud malicious dogs of Italy
Strike on, strike down this body to the earth
Whose mounting mind stoops to no feeble stroke.

Why suffer we this English man to live?
Villain bleed on, thy blood in channels run
And meet with those whom thou to death hast done

Thus Stukley slain with many a deadly stab,
Dyes in these desert fields of Africa.
Hark friends, and with the story of my life
Let me beguile the torment of my death.
In Englands London Lordings was I borne,
On that brave Bridge, the bar that thwarts the Thames.
My golden days, my younger careless years,
Were when I touched the height of Fortunes wheel,
And lived in affluence of wealth and ease.
Thus in my Country carried long aloft,
A discontented humour drove me thence
To cross the Seas to Ireland, then to Spain,
There had I welcome and right royal pay
Of Phillip, whom some call the Catholic King,
There did Tom Stukley glitter all in gold,
Mounted upon his Jennet white as snow,
Shining as Phoebus in King Phillips Court,
There like a Lord, famous Don Stukley lived,
For so they called me in the Court of Spain
Till for a blow I gave a Bishops man,
A strife began rise between his Lord and me,
For which, we both were banished by the King.
From thence, to Rome rides Stukley all a flaunt
Receiud with royal welcomes of the Pope.
There was I graced by Gregorye the great,
That then created me Marquis of Ireland.
Short be my tale, because my life is short,
The coast of Italy and Rome I left.
Then was I made Leiftennant General
Of those small Forces that for Ireland went,
And with my companies embarkt at Austria
My Sails I spread, and with these men of war
In fatal hour at Lishborne we arrived.
From thence to this, to this hard exigent
Was Stukley driven to fight or else to dye,
Dared to the field, that never could endure
To hear God Mars his drum, but he must march.
Ah sweet Sebastian, had thou been well advised
Thou might have managed arms sucsesfully.
But from our Cradles we were marked all
And destinate to dye in Affric here.
Stukley, the story of thy life is told,
Here breath thy last and bid thy friends farewell.
And if thy Countries kindness be so much,
Then let thy Country kindly ring thy knell.
Now go, and in that bed of honour dye
Where brave Sebastians breathless Course doth lye.
Here ends Fortune, rule, and bitter rage:
Here ends Tom Stukleys pilgrimage.

Retreat is sounded through our Camp, now
From battles fury cease our conquering Moors,
Pay thanks to heaven with sacrificing fire,
Alcazar and ye towns of Barbary.
Now hast thou sit as in a trance and seen,
To thy souls joy and honour of thy house,
The trophes and the triumphs of thy men,
Great Abdilmelec and the God of kings,
Hath made thy war successful by thy right,
His friends whom death and fates hath taken from thee,
Lo this was he that was the peoples pride,
And cheerful Sun-shine to his subjects all,
Now have him hence, that roially he may
Be buried and imbalmd, as is meet.
Zareo, have you thorough the camp proclaimed
As erst we gave in charge?

We have my Lord, and rich rewards proposde
For them that find the body of the king,
For by those guard that had him in their charge,
We understand that he was done to death,
And for his search two prisoners Portuguese
Are set at large to find their royal king.

But of the traitrous Moore you hear no news.
That fled the field and sought to swim the ford?

Not yet my Lord, but doubtless God will tell
And with his finger point out where he hants.

So let it rest, and on this earth bestow
This princely coarse, till further for his funerals
We provide.

From him to thee as true succeeding prince,
With all allegiance, and with honours tips,
In name of all thy people and thy land,
We give this kingly crown and diadem.

We thank you all, and as my lawful right,
With Gods defence and yours shall I keep.

As gave your grace in charge, right royal prince,
The fields and sandy plains we have suruaide,
And even among the thickest of his Lords,
The noble king of Portugall we found
Wrapped in his colours coldly on the earth,
And done to death with many a mortal wound.

Lo here my Lords, this is the earth and clay,
Of him that erst was mighty king of Portugall,
There let him lie, and you for this be free,
To make return from hence to christendom.

Long live the mighty king of Barbary.

Welcome my friend, what body hast thou there?

The body of the ambitious enemy,
That squandered all this blood in Africa,
Whose malice sent so many souls to hell,
The traitor Muly Mahamet do I bring,
And for thy slave I throw him at thy feet.

Zareo give this man a rich reward,
And thanked be the God of just revenge,
That he hath given our foe into our hands,
Beastly, unarmed, slavish, full of shame,
But say, how came this traitor to his end?

Seeking to save his life by shameful flight,
He mounts on a hot Barbarian horse,
And so in purpose to have past the stream,
His headstrong stead throws him from out his seat,
Where diving oft for lack of skill to swim,
It was my chance alone to see him drowned.
Whom by the heals I dragd from out the poole,
And hither have him brought thus filed with mud.

A death too good for such a damned wretch,
But since our rage and rigour of revenge,
By violence of his end prevented is,
That all the world may learn by him to avoid,
To hall on princes to injurious war,
His skin we will be parted from his flesh,
And being stifned out and stuffed with straw,
So to deter and fear the lookers on.
From any such soul fact or bad attempt,
Away with him.
And now my Lords, for this christian king,
My Lord Zareo, let it be your charge,
To see the soldiers tread a solemn march.
Trailing their pikes and Ensigns on the ground,
So to perform the princes funerals.


