MY L. lieutenant of Gloucester, and L. Mortim^r,
To do you honour in your Sovereigns eyes,
That as we hear is newly come aland,
From Palestine, with all his men of warre^
The poor remainer of the royal Fleet,
Preserved by miracle in Sicill Road.
Go mount your Coursers, meet him on the way,
Pray him to spur his Steed, minutes and hours,
Until his mother see her princely son,
Shining in glory of his safe return.

Illustrious England, ancient feat of kings,
Whose chivalry hath roiallizd thy fame:
That sounding bravely through terrestrial veil,
Proclaiming conquests, spoils, and victories,
Rings glorious Echoes through the farthelt world.
What warlike nation trained in feats of arms,
What barbarous people, stubborn or vntaimd,
What climate under the Meridian signs,
Or frozen Zone under his brumall stage,
Erst have not quaked and trembled at the name
Of Britain, and her mighty Conqueror,?
Her neighbor realms as Scotland, Denmark, France,
Aude with their deeds, and jealous of her arms,
Have begged defensive and offensive leagues.
Thus Europe rich and mighty in her kings,
Hath feared brave England dreadful in her kings:
And now to eternize Albions Champions,
Equiualent with Trotans ancient fame,
Comes lovely Edward from Jerusalem,
Veering before the wind, plowing the sea,
His stretched sails filled with the breath of men,
That through the world admires his manlines.
And Ioe at last, arrived in Dover road,
Long shank your king, your glory and our son,
With troops of conquering Lords and warlike knights,
Like bloody crested Mars orelookes his hosle,
Higher then all his army by the head,
Marching along as bright as Phoebus eyes,
And we his mother shall behold our son,
And Englands Peers shall see their Sovereign.

Gloucester, Edward, O my sweet sons.

Help Ladies: O ungrateful destiny,
To welcome Edward with this tragedy.

Patient your highness, tis but mothers love,
Received with sight of her thrice valiant sons:
Madam amaze not, see his Majesty
Returned with glory from the holy land.

Brave sons the worthy Champions of our God,
The honourable soldiers of the highest,
Bear with your mother whose abundant love,
With tears of joys salutes your sweet return,
From famous journeys hard and fortunate.
But lords alas how heavy is our loss,
Since your departure to these Christian wars,
The king your Father, and the prince your son,
And your brave Uncle Almaines Emperor,
Aye me are dead.

Take comfort madam, leave these sad laments,
Dear was my uncle, dearer was my son:
And ten times dearer was my noble father,
Yet were their lives valewd at thousand worlds,
They cannot escape the arrest of dreadful death:
Death that doth seize and summon all alike.
Then leaving them to heavenly blessedness,
To join in thrones of glory with the just,
I do salute your royal Majesty.
My gracious mother Queen, and you my lords,
Gilbart de Clare, Sussex, and Mortimer,
And all the princely states of Englands peers,
With health and honour to your harts content,
And welcome wished England on whose ground,
These feet so often have desired to tread,
Welcome sweet Queen my fellow Traveller,
Welcome sweet Nell my fellow mate in arms,
Whose eyes have seen the slaughtered Sarazens,
Pil'de in the ditches of Jerusalem,
And lastly welcome manly followers,
That bears the scars of honour and of arms,
And on your war drums carry crowns as kings,
Crown Murall, Nauall, and triumphant all,
At view of whom the Turks have trembling fled,
And Sarazens like sheep before the walls,
Have made their cottages in walled towns,
But Bulwarks had no ^ence to beat you back,
Lords, these and they will enter brazen gates,
And tear down lime and Mortar with their nailes.
I^brace them Barons these have got the name,
Of English Gentlemen and knights at arms:
Not one of these but in the Champain sield,
Hath won his crown, his collar and his spurs,
Not Caesar ^ading through the streets of Rome,
The cap^ kings of conque^ed nations,
Was in his princely triumphs ^onoured more,
Then English Edward in this martial ^ight.
(...) your li^s are ^ost in service of the Lord,
Which is your glory and your Countries fame,
For li^s, you (...) have ^ing, lordships, l^ds,
And be m^ counsell^rs in wars affairs:
Soldiers sit down, Nell sit thee by my side,
These be pr^ce Edwards pompious treasury.
O glorious Capital, beauteous Senate house,
Triumphant Edward, how like sturdy Oaks,
Do these thy Soldiers circle thee about,
To shield and shelter thee from winters storms?
Display thy cross, old Aims of the Vies,
Dub on your Drums tand with Indiaes sun,
My lusty ^esterne lads, Matreueirs thou,
Sound prowdly here a perfect point of war,
In honour of thy Souereignes safe return.
Thus Long shanks bids his Soldiers Bien vene^.

O God my God, the brightness of my day,
How oft hast thou preserved thy servant safe,
By sea and land, yea in the gates of death,
O God to thee how highly am I bound,
For setting me with these on English ground:
One of my mansion houses will I give,
To be a college for my maimed men,
Where every one shall have an hundred marks
Of yearly pension to his maintenance,
A Soldier that for Christ and country sights,
Shall want no living whilst king Edward lives,
Lords you that love me now be liberal,
And give your larges to these maimed men.

Towards this erection doth thy mother give,
Out of her dowry, five thousand pounds of gold,
To find them Surgeons to recure their wounds,
And whilst this ancient Standard bearer lives,
He shall have forty pound of yearly fee,
And be my Beadsman father if you please.

Madam I tell you England never bred,
A better soldier then your Beadsman is,
And that the Souldan and his Army felt.

Out of the duchy of rich Lancaster,
To find soft bedding for their bruzed bones,
Duke Edmund gives three thousand pounds.

Gramercies brother Edmund,
H^ppie is England under Edwards reign,
When men are had so highly in regard,
That Nobles strive who shall remunerate,
The soldiers resolution with regard.
My Lord of Gloucester what is your benevolence?

A thousand marks and please your Majesty.

And yours my lord of Sussex?

Five hundred pound, and please your majesty.

What say you sir Dauid of Brecknock.

To a soldier sir Dauid cannot be too liberal,
Yet that I may give no more then a poor knight is able
And not presume as a mighty Earl,
I give my Lord four hundred, four score,
And nineteen pounds:
And so my lord of Sussex I am behind you an ace.

And yet sir Dauid ye aumble after apace.

Well said Da. thou could not be a Camber Britain
If thou did not love a soldier with thy hart,
Let me see how is my Arithmetic wilserue,
To total the par^ars.

Why my lord I hope you mean,
I shall be a benefactor to my fellow soldiers.

And well said Nell.
What wilt thou I set down for thee?

Nay, my lord I am of age to set it down for my self.
You will allow what I do, will you not?

That I will Madam,
Were it to the value of my kingdom.

What is the sum my lord?

10000 pounds my Nell.

Then Elinor bethink thee of a gift worthy the king of Englandes wife, and
the king of Spaines daughter, and give such a largis, that the Chronicles of
this land may crake with record of thy liberality.

There my lord, neither one, two, nor three,
But a poor Cipher in Agrum, to enrich good fellows,
And compound their figure in their kind.

Madam I commend your composition,
An argument of your honourable disposition:
Sweet Nell thou should not be thy self,
Did not with thy mounting mind,
Thy gift surmount the rest.

Cal you this Ridiculus mus? mary sir this mouse
Would make a foul hole in a fair Cheese,
Tis but a Cipher in Agrum,
And it hath made of 10000 pounds, 100000 pounds:

A princely gift and worthy memory.

My gracious Lord, as erst I was assigned,
Lieutenant to his Majesty,
Hererender I up the crown left in charge with me,
By your princely father king Menrie,
Who on his death bed still did call for you,
And dying, wild to you the Diadem.

Thanks worthy Lords,
And seeing by doom of heavens it is decreed,
And lawful line of our succession,
Unworthy Edward is become your king,
We take it as a blessing from on hie,
And will our Coronation be solemnised,
Upon the 14. of December next.

Upon the 14. of December next?
Alas my Lord, the time is all too short
And sudden, for so great solemnity:
A year were scarce enough to set a work,
Tailers Imb^oderes, and men of rare device,
For preparation of so great estate.
Trust me sweet Ned, hardly shall I bethink me,
In twenty weeks what fashion robes to wear,
I pray thee then defer it till the spring,
That we may have our garments point device.
I mean to send for Tailers into Spain,
That shall confer of some fantastickt suits,
With those that be our conningst Englishmen,
What? let me brave it now or never Ned.

Madam content ye, would that were greatest car^
You shall have garments to your harts desire,
I never red but Englishmen exceld,
For change of rare devises every way.

Yet pray thee Ned, my love, my lord, and king,
My fellow soldier, and compeere in arms,
Do so much honour to thy Elinor,
To wear a suit that thee shall give thy grace,
Of he on^ cost and workmanship perhaps.

Twi^ come by leasurs daughter then I fear,
You are too fine ^gard to be quick at work.

Twixt v^a greater matter breaks no square,
So it be such my Nell as may be (...),
The ma^stie and greatness of a king.
A^d now my Lords and loving friends,
Follow your General to the court,
After his travels to repose him then,
There to recount with pleasure what is past,
Of wars alarms, showers and sharpest storms.

Now Elinor, now Englands lovely Queen,
Bethink thee of the greatness of thy state:
And how to bear thy self with ro^ltie,
Above the other Q^eenes of Christendom,
That Spain reaping renown by Elinor,
And Elinor adding renown to Spain,
Britain may her magnificence admire,
Ttell thee Ione, what time our ^ighnes sits,
Under our royal Canopy of state,
Glistering with pendants of the purest gold,
Like as our seat were spangled all with stars
The world shall wonder at our majesty,
As if the daughter of eternal Ops,
Turned to the likeness of Vermilion fumes,
Where from her cloudy womb the Centaurs lap^.
Were in her royal seat inthronized.

Madam, if Ione thy daughter may advise,
Let not your honour make your manners chang^
The people of this land are men of war,
The women courteous, mild, and debonair,
Laying the^ (...) at princes feet,
That governs w^h familiar majesty,
But if their sovereigns ^ce gin swell with pride,
Disdaning commons love which is the strength,
And surenes of the richest common wealth:
That Prince were better live a private life,
Then rule with tyranny and discontent.

Indeed we count them headstrong Englishmen
But we shall hold them in a Spanish yoke:
And make them know their Lord and sovereign.
Come daughter let us home for to provide:
For all the cunning work-men of this I'll,
In our great chamber shall be set a work,
And in my hall shall bountifully feed.
My King like Phoebus bridegroom like shall marche
With lovely Xheeis to her g^assie bed,
And all the lookers on shall stand amazed,
To see King Edward and his lovely Queen,
Sit lovely in Englands stately throne.

Come Rice and rouse thee for thy countries good,
Follow the man that means to make you great:
Follow Lluellen rightful prince of VVales.
Sprung from the ^oines of great Cadwallader,
Descend from the ^oines of Trojan Brute,
And though the tari^ous 'Saxons, Normans, Danes,
Have sp^t the true Romans of glorious Troy,
Within the western mountains of this I'll,
Yet have we hope to clime these stony pales,
When Londoners as Romains earstamazde,
Shall tre^bling (...) Lluellens at the gate.
T'accomplish this, thus have I brought you forth,
Disguised to Milford haven, here attend,
The landing of the lady Aeliner.
Her stay doth make me muse, the wind stands fair^
And ten days hence we did expect them here,
Neptune be favourable to my love,
And steer her keele with thy three forked mace,
That from this shore I may behold her sails,
And in mine arms embrace my dearest dear.

Brave prince of Wales, this honourable match,
Cannot but turn to Cambrias common good.
Simon de Momfort, her thrice valiant son,
That in the Barons wars was General,
Was loved and honoured of the Englishmen.
When they shall hear, she's your espoused wife.
Assure your grace we shall have great supply,
To make our roads in England mightily.

What we resolved, must strongly be performed,
Before the king return from Palestine,
Whilst he wins glory at Jerusalem,
Let us win ground upon the Englishmen.

Owen ap Rice, tis that Lluellen fears,
I fear me Edward will be come a shore,
Ere we can make provision for the war.
But be it as it will, within his court
My brother Dauid is, that bears a face,
As if he were my greatest enemy,
He by this craft shall creep into her heart,
And give intelligence from time to time,
Of her intentions, drifts and stratagems.
Here let us rest upon the salt sea shore,
And while our eyes long for our hearts desires,
Let us like friends pastime us on the sands,
Our frolic minds are ominous for good.

Guenthian as I am true man,
So will I do the best I can:
Guenthian as I am true Priest,
So will I be at thy behest:
Guenthian as I am true Friar,
So will I be at thy desire.

My master stands too near the fire,
Trust him not wench, he will prove a liar.

True man, true Friar, true priest, true knave,
These four in one this trull shall have,

Here swear I by my shaven crown,
Wench if I give thee a gay green gown,
I'll take thee up as I laid thee down,
And never bruze nor batter thee.

O swear not master, flesh is frail,
VVenche when the sign is in the tail,
Mighty is love and will preuaile,
This Churchman doth but flatter thee.

A pretty worm, and a lusty friar,
Made for the field, not for the quire.

Mas Friar as I am true maid,
So do I hold me well a paid:
Tis Churchmans lay and verity,
To live in love and charity,
And therefore wean I as my creed,
Your words shall company my deed,
Dauie my dear, I yield in all,
Thine own to go and come at call.

And so far forth begins our brawl.

Then my Guenthian to begin,
Since idleness in love is sin,
Boy to the town I will thee hie,
And so return even by and by,
When thou with cakes and muskadine,
And other ^unkets good and fine,
Hast filled thy bottle and thy bag.

Now master as I am true wag,
I will be neither late nor lag,
But go and come with gossips cheer,
Ere Gib our Cat can lick her care.
For long ago I learned in school,
That lovers desire, and pleasures cool:
Sanct Ceres sweets and Bacchus vine,
Now master for the Cakes and Wine.

Wench to pass away the time in glee,
Guenthian set thee down by me,
And let our lips and voices meet,
In a merry country songe.

Friar, I am at beek and bay,
And a^ thy commandment to sing and say,
And other sports among.

I marry my lord, this is somewhat like a mans'mony,
Here's a wholesome Welsh wench,
Lapped in her Flannel as warm as wool,
And as fit as a pudding for a Friars mouth.
Pax vobis, pax vobis, good fellows fair fall ye.

E^ cum spiritu tuo.
Friends have you any thing else to say to the Friar?

Much good do you, much good you,
My masters heart elie.

And you sir when ye eat:
Ha^y ^ny thing else to say to the Friar?

Nothing, but I wo^d gladly know,
If (...) (...) be your first dish, what shall be your last service.

(...) ^y be s^ I count it physic,
To feed but on one dish at a sitting:
Sir would you any thing else with the Friar?

O nothing sir, but if you had any manners,
You might bid us fall too.

Nay and that be the matter good enough,
Is this all ye have to say to the Friar?

All we have to say to you sir, it may be sir,
We would walk aside with your wench a little.

My masters and friends, I am a poor Friar, a man of Gods making, and a good
fellow as you are, legs, feet, face and hands, hart from top to toe, of my
word, ^ght shape and Christendom: and I love a wench as a wench should be
loved, and if you love your self walk good friends I pray you, let the Friar
alone with his flesh.


O Friar, your holy mother the church teaches you to abstain from these
morsels, therefore my masters tis a deed of charity to remove this stumbling
block, a fair wench, a shrewd temptation to a Friars conscience.


Friend if you knew the Friar half so well as the bailey of Brecknock, you
would think you might as so one move mun^k Dauie into the sea, as Guenth. from
his side.


Mas by your leave, we'll prove.

At your peril if you move his patience.

Brother, brother, and my good Countrymen.

Countrymen? nay I cannot think that an English friar, will come so far into
Wales barefooted.


That's more then you know, and yet my lord he might ride, having a filly so
n^re. (warnings:


Hands off good countryman, at few words fair

Countrymen, not so sir, we renounce thee Friar, and refuse your country.

Then brother and my good friends,
Hands off and if you love your ease.

Ease me no easings, we'll ease you of this carriage.

Fellow be gone quickly, or my pike staff and I will set thee away with a
vengeance.


I am sorry trust me to see the church so vnpatient.

Ye Dogs ounes, do me a shroud turn and mock me too, flesh and blood will
not bear this: then rise up Rob^ and say to Richard, Red rationem
villicationistuae. sir Countryman, kinsman, Englishman, Welshman, you with the
Wench, return your Habeas corpus, here's a Circiorari for your Procedendo.


Hold friar we are thy countrymen.
Rice. Paid, paid, Digone, we are thy countrime, Mundue.

My Countrymen? nay marry sir shall you not be my countrymen, you sir, you,
specially you sir that refuse the Friar, and renounce his country.


Friar, hold thy hands, I swear as I am a Gentleman, I am a Welshman, and so
are the rest of honesty.


Of honesty says thou?
They are neither Gentlemen nor Welshmen,
That will deny their country: Come hither wench,
I'll have about with them once more,
For denying of their Country.

Friar thou wottest not what thou say est,
This is the prince, and we are all his train:
Disposed to be pleasant with thee a little,
But I perceive Friar, thy nose will bide no ^est.

As much as you will with me sir,
But not at any hand with my wench,
I and Richard my man here.
For here, Contra omnes gentes.
But is this Lluellen the great Camber Britain?

It is he Friar, give me thy hand,
And gramercies twenty times,
I promise thee thou hast cudgeld
Two as good lessons into my jacket,
As ever Churchman did at so short warning.
The one is, not to be too busy with another mans cattle,
The other, not in hast to deny my country.

Tis pity my Lord,
But you should have more of this learning
You profit so well by it.

Tis pity Friar but thou should be Lluellens Chaplain, thou edifiest so
well, and so shalt thou be, of mine honour, here I entertain thee, thy boy,
and thy trull, to follow my fortune, in Secula seculorum.


And Richard my man sir and you love me,
He that stands by me, and shrunk not at all weathers,
And then you have me in my colours.

Friars agreed: Rice welcome the Ruffines.

Go too, go too, you Britains all,
And play the men both great and small,
A wondrous matter hath be fall,
That makes the Prophets cry and call,
Tum da et di te de te dum,
That you must marche both all and some,
Against your foes with trump and Drum:
I speak to you from God that you shall overcome.

What now, who have we here?
Tum date dite dote dum.

What have we a fellow dropped out of the element,
Whats he for a man?

Know thou this Goscup?

What? not Morgain Pigot, our good welsh prophet,
O tis a holy Harper.

A Prophet with a moraine,
Good my Lord, lets hear a few of his lines I pray you.

My lords, tis an od fellow I can tell you,
As any is in all Wales:
He can sing rime with reason, and rime without reason,
And without reason or rime.

The devil he can,
Rime with reason, and rime without reason,
And reason without rime:
Then good Morgan Pigot, pluck out thy spigot,
And draw us a fresh pot,
From the kinder kind of thy knowledge.

Knowledge my son, knowledge I warrantye,
How say thou Morgaine, art thou not a very prophet?

Friar, friar, a Prophet verily,
For great Lluellens love,
Sent from above, to bring him victory.

Come then gentle prophet, lets see how thou can salute thy prince, say,
shall we have good success in our enterprise or no?


When the weathercock of Carmarthen steeple
Shall engender young ones in the belferie,
And a heard of Goats leave their pasture,
To be clothed in silver:
Then shall Brute be borne a new,
And VVa^es record their ancient hew,
Ask Friar Dauid if this be not true.

This my Lord a means by you,
O he is a prophet, a prophet.

Soft you now good Morgan Pigot,
And take us with ye a little I pray,
What means your wisdom by all this.

The VVeathercock (my lord) was your father, who by foul weather of waire, was
driven to take Sanctuary in Saint Maries at Carnaruon, where he begat young
ones on your mother in t^e belfrey, viz. your worship, and your brother Dauid


But what did thou mean by the Goats?

The Goats that leave the pasture to be clothed in silver, are the silver
Goats your men wore on their sleeves.


O how I love thee Morgain Pigot our sweet prophet.

Hence rogue with your prophesies, out of my sight.

Nay good my lord, lets have a few more of these meeters, he hath great ^lore
in his head.


Yea, and of the best in the market,
And your Lordship would vouchsafe to hear them.

Villain away, i'll here no more of your prophesies.

When legs shall lose their length,
Returning weary home. from out the holy land:
A VVel^man shall be king,
And govern merry England.

Did I not tell your Lordship he would hit it home anon?

My Lord he comes to your time that's flat.

I master and you mark him, he hit the mark pat.

As how Jack?

Why thus: when legs shall lose their length,
And thanks yield up their strength:
Returning weary home from out the holy land,
A VVel^man shall be king,
And govern merr^e England.
Why my Lord. in this prophecy, is your advancement as plainly seen, as a
three halfepence through a dish of butter in a sunny date.


I think so lack for he that sees three halfepence, must tarry till the
butter be melted in the suune, and so forth apply boy


Nonego master, do you and you dare.

And ^o boy thou meanest, he that tarries this prophecy, may see Long shanks
shorter by the head, and Lluellan wear the crown in the field.


By lady my Lord you go near the matter,
But what saith Morgaine Pigote more?

In the year of our lord God 1272, shall spring from the loins of Brute. o^e
whose wives name being the perfect end of his ground, ^al cosummate the peace
betwixt England and VVales, and be advanced to ride through Cheapside with a
crown on his head, and that's meant by your lordship, for your wives name being
Ellen, and your own Lluellan, bears the perfect end of your own name: so
must it needs be, that for a time Ellen flee from Lluellen, ye being
betrothed in heart each to others, must needs be advanced to be highest of
your kin.


Jack, I make him thy prisoner,
Look what way my fortune inclines,
That way goes he,

Sir, see you run swiftest.

Farewell, be far from the Spigote,

Now sir, if our country Ale, were as good as your Metheglen, I would teach
you to play the knave. or you should teach me to play the Harper.


Ambo, boy, you are too light witted,
As I am light minded.

It seemed to me thou art fittest, and passing well.

What tidings brings Guenther with his haste?
Say man, what bodes thy message good or bad.

Bad my lord, and all in vain I wot,
Thou dare thine eyes upon the wallowing maine,
As erst did Aegen to behold his son,
To welcome and receive thy welcome love,
And sable sails he saw, and so may thou,
For whose mishap the Brackish seas lament,
Edward, o Edward.

And what of him?

Landed he is at Dover with his men,
From Palestine safe by his English Lords,
Received in triumphs like an earthly God,
He lives to wear his fathers Diadem,
And sway the sword of british Albion.
But Elinor, thy Elinor.

And what of her?
Hath amorous Neptune gazd upon my love,
And stopped her passage with his forked mace:
Or that I rather fear, O deadly fear,
Enamoured Nereus doth he withhold my Elinor?

Nor Neptune, Nereus nor other God,
Withholds from my gracious lord his love,
But cruel Edward that injurious king,
Withholds thy liefest lovely Elmor,
Taking in a Pinnasse on the narrow seas,
By four tall ships of Bristowe, and with her,
Lord Emerick her unhappy noble brother,
As from Mont argis hetherward they sailed:
This say in brief these letters tell at large.

Is Longshankes then, so lusty now become,
Is my fair love my beautions Elinor taken?
Villain damnde villains not to guard her safe,
Or fence her sacred person from her foes,
Sun could thou shine and see my love beset,
And did not clothe thy clouds in fiery coats,
Ore all the heavens with winged sulphur flames,
As when the beams like mounted combatants,
Battaild with Pyetion in the fallowed lays,
But if kind Cambria deign me good aspect,
To make me chiefest brute of western Wales,
I'll short that gainlegd Longshanke by the top,
And make his flesh my murthering fawchions food:
To arms true Britains sprung of Troians seed.
And with your swords write in the book of Time,
Your British names in Characters of blood.
Owen ap Rice, while we stay for further force,
Prepare away in post, and take with thee,
A hundred chosen of thy countrymen,
And scour the marches with your Welshmens hooks,
That Englishmen may think the diuellis come.
Rice shall remain with me, make thou thy boade,
In resolution to revenge these wrongs,
With blood of thousands guiltless of this rage,
Fly thou on them amain: Edward, my love
Be thy lives bane. Follow me countrymen,
Words make no way, my Elinor is surprised,
Robbed am I of the comfort of my life,
And know I this and am not veng'd on him?

Come boy we must buckle I see,
The prince is of my profession right:
Rather than he will lose his wench,
He will fight Ab ouo vsque ad mala.

O master doubt you not but your Novice will prove a what shot, with a bottle
of Methegl^.


Nobles of Scotland, we thank you all,
For this days gentle princely service done,
To Edward Englands king and Scotlands lord:
Our Coronations due sollen nitie,
Is ended with applause of all estates.
Now then let us appose and rest us here,
But specially we thank you gentle lords,
That you so well have governed your g^eefes,
As being grown unto a ag^ all ^arre,
You choose king Edward by your Messengers,
To calm, to qualify, and to compound:
Thank Britains strife of Scotlands climbing peers.
I have no doubt fair lords but you well wot,
How factions waste the ritchest Commonwealth,
And discord spoils the seats of mighty kings.
The Barons wars, a tragic wicked war,
Nobles how hath i^ shaken Englands strength?
Industriouslie it seems to me you have,
Loiallie ventured to prevent this shock,
For which since you have chosen me your judge,
My lord, will you stand to what I shall aw^rd?

Victorious Edward, to whom the Scottish kings
Owe ho ^age as their lord and sovereign,
Amongst us nine, is but one lawful king:
But might we all be judges in the case,
Then should in Scotland be nine kings at once,
And this contention never set or limited,
To stay these jars we jointly make appeal,
To thy imperial throne, who knows our claims,
We stand not on our titles before your grace,
But do submit our selves to your award,
And whom your Majesty shall name to be our king,
To him we'll yield obedience as a king,
Thus willingly, and of their own accorde,
Doth Scotland make great Englands king their judge.

Then nobles since you all agree in one,
That for a crown so disagree in all,
Since what I do shall rest inreuocable,
And lovely England to thy lovely Queen,
Lovely Queen Elinor, unto her turn thy eye,
Whose honour cannot but love thee well,
Hold up your hands in sight, with general voice,
That are content to stand to our award.
Deliver me the golden Diadem.
Lo here I hold the goal for which ye strived,
And here behold my worthy men at arms,
For chivalry and worthy wisdoms praise,
Worthy each one to wear a Diadem,
Expect my doom, as erst at I da hills,
The Goddesses divine waited the award,
Of Danaes son: Balioll stand farthest forth,
Baliol behold I give thee the Scottish crown,
Wear it with heart and with thankfulness:
Sound Trumpets, and say all after me,
God save king Baliol the Scottish king.
Thus lords though you require no reason why,
According to the consci^nce in the cause,
I make Iohn Balioll your anointed king:
Honour and love him as behooves him best,
That is in peace of Scotlands crown possessed.

Thanks royal England for thy honour done,
This justice that hath calmd our ciuell strife:
Shall now be ceased with honourable love,
So moved of remorse and pity,
We will erect a college of my name,
In Oxford will I build for memory,
Of Baliols bounty and his gratitude:
And let me happy days no longer see,
Then here to England loyal I shall be.

Now brave Iohn Balioll Lord of Gallaway,
And king of Scots shine with thy golden head,
Shake thy spears in honour of his name,
Under whose royalty thou wearst the same.
The welken spangled through with golden spots,
Reflects no finer in a frosty night,
Then lovely Longshankes in his Elinors eye:
So Ned thy Nell in every part of thee,
Thy person's guarded with a troop of Queenes,
And every Queen as brave as Elinor,
Give glory to these glorious ch^stall quarries,
Where every robe an object entertains,
Of rich device and princely majesty.
Thus like Narcissus diving in the deep,
I die in honour and in Englands arms:
And if I drown, it is in my delight.
Whose company is chiefest life in death,
From forth whose currall lips I suck the sweet,
VVherewith are dainty Cupids candles made,
Then live or die brave Ned, or sink or swim,
An earthly bliss it is to look on him,
On thee sweet Ned, it shall become thy Nell,
By unteous to be unto the beauteous,
Ore pry the palms sweet fountains of my bliss;
And I will stand on tiptoe for a kiss.

He had no thought of any gentle heart,
That would not seize desire for such desert,
If any heavenly joy in women be,
Sweet of ^ll sweets, sweet Nell it is in thee.
Now lords along by this the Earl of Marche,
Lord Mortimor ore Cambriaes mountain tops,
Hath ranged his men, and feels Lluellens mind,
To which con^es that we^ in wasting be,
Our solle^ne service of coronation past,
We (...) amain to back our friends at need,
And (...) to Wales our men at arms shall march,
And we with them in person foot by foot.
Brother of Scotland, you shall to your home,
And live in honour there fair England friend.
And thou sweet Nell Queen of king Edwards heart.
Shall now come (...) at thy dainty love,
And at coron^tion meet thy loving peers,
When storms are past, and we have cooled the rage
Of these rebellious Welshmen that contend,
Against Englands majesty, and Edwards crown.
Sound Trumpets Harolds lead the train along,
This be king Edwards feast and holly day.

Gloucester, who may this be, a bride or what?
I pray ye (...) go see,
And know the reason of the harmony.

Good woman let it not ostend you any whit,
For to deliver unto me the cause,
That in this unusual kind of sort,
You pass the streets with (...) so.

Mistres or Madam what ere you be,
Wot you I am the Mayor of Londons wife,
Who for I have been delivered of a son,
Having not these dozen years had any before,
Now in my husbands year of Ma^oltie,
Bringing him a goodly boy,
I pass unto my house a maiden bride,
Which private pleasure touching godliness,
Shall here no way I hope offend the good.

You hope so gentle mistres, do you indeed!
But do not make it parcel of your creed.

Alas I am undone, it is the Queen,
The proudest Queen that ever England knew.

Come Gloster, lets to the court and revel there.

Soft is it not Meredeth I behold?

All good, all friends: Meredeth see the man,
Must make us great, and raise Lluellens ^ead:
Fight thou Lluellen for thy friend and thee.

Fight maugre fortune strong our battles strong,
And bear thy foes before thy pointed lance

Not too much prowess good my lord at once.
Some talk of policy another w^ile.

How comes my li^s hurt at this assault?

Hurt for our good, Meredeth make account,
Sir Dauids wit is full of good devise,
And kindly will perform what he pretends.

Enough of t^is my Lord at once,
What will you that I hold the king in hand,
Or what shall I especially aduize,
Sitting in counsel with the English lords,
That so my counsel may avail my friends?

Dauid if thou wilt best for me devise,
Advise my love be rendered to my hand:
Tell th^m the Chains that Mul^ber erst made,
To tie Prometheus limbs to Caucasus,
Nor furies phanges shall hold me ^ong from her,
But I will have her from the usurpers tent,
My beauteous Elinor: if ought in this,
(...) in this case thy wit may boot thy friends,
Expres it then in this, in nothing else.

I there's a Card that puts us to our trump,
For might I see the star of Leisters loins,
It were enough to darken and obscure,
This Edwards glory, fortune, and his pride:
First hereof can I put you out of doubt,
Lord Mortimor of the king hath her in charge,
And honourably entreats your Elinor,
Some thinks he prays Lluellen were in heaven,
And thereby hopes to coach his love on earth.

No, where Lluellen mounts, there Ellen flies
Insp^keable are my thoughts for her,
She is not from me in death to be diuorst.

Go to, it shall be so, so shall it be,
Edward is full resolved of thy faith,
So are the English lords and Barons all:
Then what may let thee to intrude on them,
Some new found stratagem to feel their wit,
It is enough: Meredeth take my weapons,
I am your prisoner, say so at the least,
Go hence, and when you parle on the walls,
Make show of monstrous tyranny you intend,
To execute on me, as on the man,
That shamefullie rebels against kin and kind:
And lea^ thou have thy love, and make thy kind:
With such conditions as shall best concern,
Dauid must die say thou a shameful death,
Edward perhaps with ruth and pity moved,
Will in exchange yield Elinor to thee,
And thou by me shalt gain thy hearts desire.

Sweetly aduized Dauid, thou blessest me,
My brother Dauid lengthener of my life,
Friends gratulate to me my joyful hopes.

Why Barons, suffer ye our foes to breathe?
Assault, assault, and charge them all amain,
They fear, they fly, they faint, they fight in vain,
But where is gentle Dauid in his De^?
Loath were lo^ght but good should him betide.

Where is the proud disturber of our state?
Traitor to Wails, and to his Sovereign.

Usurper here I am, what dost thou cra^e.

Welshman alleagance which thou owe thy king.

Traitor, no king, that seeks thy countries sack,
The famous runagate of Christendom.

Ambitious rebel, know thou what I am,
How great. how famous, and how fortunate,
And dare thou carry arms against me here,
Even when thou should do reverence at my feet?
Yea feared and honoured in the farthest parts,
Hath Edward been, thy noble Henries son,
Traitor, this sword vnsheathd hath shined oft,
With reeking in the blood of Sarazens,
When like to Perseus on his winged steed,
Brandishing bright the blood of Ad^t,
That aged Saturne gave s^ire Maias son,
Conflicting tho with Gorgon in the vale,
Setting before the gates of Nazareth,
My horses hooves I stained in Pagaus gore,
Sending whole countries of heathen souls,
To Plutoes house: this sword, this thirllie sword,
Aims at thy head, and shall I hope ere long,
Gage and divide thy bowels and thy bulk,
Disloi^ll villain thou, and what is more.

Why Longshankes, think thou I will be scared with words?
No, did thou speak in thunder like to Io^e,
Or should as Br^areus shake at once,
A hundred bloody swords, with bloody hands,
I tell thee Longshankes here he faces thee,
Whom nought can daunt, no not the stroke of death:
Resolved ye see: but see the chance of war,
Know thou a traitor and thou see his head,
Then Longshankes look this villain in the face:
This Rebel he hath wrought his countries wrack,
Base. rascal, had and hated in his kind,
Object of wrath, and subject of revenge.

Lluellen, call thou this the chance of war?
Bad for us all pardie, but worse for him,
Courage sir Dauid, kings thou know must die,
And noble minds all dastard fear defies.

Renowned England, star of Edwards Globe,
My liefest lord and sweetest Sovereign,
Glorious and happy is this chan^e to me,
To reap this fame and honour in my death,
That I was hewed with soul defiled hands,
For my beloved king and countries good,
And died in grace and favour with my prince:
Seize on me bloody butchers with your paws,
It is but temporal that you can inflict.

Bravely resolved brave soldier by my life.

Hark you sir, I am afraid you will not be so resolved, by that time you know
so much as I can show you, here be hot Dogs I can tell you, means to have
the baiting of you.


Lluellen in the midst of all thy braves,
How wilt thou use thy brother, thou hast taken,
Wilt thou let his master ransom him?

No nor his mistres gallant Mortimor,
With all the gold and silver of the land.

Ransom this Iudas to his fathers line,
Ransom this traitor to his brothers life,
No take that earnest penny of thy death,
This touche my lord comes nothing near the mark.

O damned villain hold thy hands,
Ask and have.

We will nor ask nor have, see thou these tools?
These be the Dogs shall bait him to the death,
And shall by peecemeales tear his cursed flesh,
And in thy sight here shall he hang and pine.

O villains, traitors, how will I be vengd?

What threats thou Edward,
Desperate minds contemn,
That fury menaces, see thy words effects.

O gracious heavens, dissolve me into clay,
This tyranny is more then flesh can bear.

Bear it brave mind, since nothing but thy blood,
May satisfy in this extreme estate.

My lord it is in vain to threaten them,
They are resolved ye see upon his death.

Sussex, his death, they all shall buy it dear,
Offer them any favour for his life,
Pardon, or peace, or ought what is beside:
So love me God, as I regard my friends.
Lluellen let me have thy brothers life,
Even at what rate and ransom thou wilt name.

Edward, king Edward, as thou list be termed,
Thou know thou hast my beauteous Elinor,
Produce her forth, to plead for Dauids life,
She may obtain more then an hoast^ of men.

Wilt thou exchange thy prisoner for thy love?

Talk no more to me, let me see her face.

Why, will your majesty be all so base,
To stoop to his demands in every thing?

Fetch her at once, good Mortimor be gone.

I go, but how unwilling heavens doth know,

A pace Mortimor if thou love thy friend.

I go for dearer then I leave behind.

See Sussex how he bleeds in my eye,
That bears fortunes shock triumphantly.

Saw haw, mai^er; I have found, I have found.

What hast thou found Friar, ha?

News my lord, a Star from out the Sea,
The same is risen, and made a summers day.
What Nell, sweet Nell, do I behold thy face?
Fall heavens, fleet stars, shine Phoebus lamp no more,
This is the Planet lends this world her light,
Starr^ of my fortune, this that shines bright,
Queen of my heart, load star of my delight,
Fair mould of beauty, miracle of fame,
O let me die with Elinor in mine arms:
What honour shall I lend thy loyalty,
Or praise unto thy sacred deity.

Marry this my lord, if I may give you counsel, sacrifice this Tike in her
sight, her friend, which being done, one of your soldiers may dip his foul
shirt in his blood, so shall you be waited with as many crosses as king
Edward.


Good cheer sir Dauid, we shall up anon.

Die Mortimor, thy life is almost gone.

Sweet prince of Wales, were I within thine arms,
Then should I in peace possess my love,
And heavens open fair their crystal gates,
That I may see the palace or my intent.

Lluellen set try brother free,
Let me have him, thou thalt have Elinor.

Sooth Edward I do prize my Elinor,
Dearer then life, but there belongs more
To these affairs, than my content in love:
And to be short, if thou wilt have thy man,
Of whom I swear thou think over well,
The safety of Lluellen and his men,
Must be regarded highly in this match,
Say therefore and be short, wilt thou give peace
And pardon to Lluellen and his men.

I will (...) have time to be aduizd.

King Edward no, we will admit no pause,
For goes this wretch, this wret^h to the pot,
And (...) Lluellen be pursued so near,
May chance to show thee such a tumbling cast,
As er^ our father, when he thought to escape,
And broke his neck from Iulius Casars town.

My lord these rebels all are desperate.

And Mortimor of all most misetable.

How say you Welshmen, will you leave your arms,
And be true liegemen unto Edwards crown?

If Edward pardon surely what is past,
Upon conditions we are all content.

B^ like you will condition with us then.

Special conditions for our safety first,
And for our country Cambrias common good,
T'auoide the fusion of our guilty blood.

Go to, say on.

First for our fo^lowers and our selves and all,
We ask a pardon in the Princes word,
Then for this Lords possession in his love:
But for our Country (...) these boones we beg,
And Englands promise princely to thy Wails,
That none be Cambrias prince to govern us,
B^t he that is a Welshman borne in Wales.
Grant this and swear it on thy knightly sword,
And have thy man, and us, and all in peace.

Why Cambria Britains are you so incensed,
Will you deliver me to Edwards hands?

No lord Lluellen we will back for thee,
Thy life, thy love, and golden liberty.

A tiuce with honourable conditions taken,
VVales happiness, Englands glo^, and my bane.

Command retreat be sounded in our camp,
Soldiers I grant at full what you request,
Dauid good cheer, Lluellen open the gates.

The gates are opened, enter thee and thine.

The sweetest sun that ere I saw to shine.

Madam, a brabble well begun for thee,
Be thou my guest, and sir Lluellens love.
Mortimor, a brable ill began for thee,
A truce with capital conditions taken:
A prisoner saved and raunsomd with thy life,
Edward my king, my Lord and lover dear,
Full little dost thou wot, how this retreat.
As with a sword, hath slain poor Mortimor.
Farewell the flower the gem of beauties blaze,
Sweet Ellen, mir^cle of natures ^and,
Fuellen in thy name, but heaven is in thy looks,
Sweet Venus let me s^ct or devil be,
In that sweet heaven or hell that is in thee,

Give me my pantables.
Fie this hot whether how it makes me sweat,
Hey ho my heart, ah I am passing faint.
Give me my fan that I may cool my face,
Hold, take my mask but see you romple n^t,
This wind and dust see how it smolders me,
Some drink good Gloster or I die for drink,
Ah Ned thou hast forgot thy Nell I see,
That she is thus enforced to follow thee. (majesty

This aires distemperature and please your
Noisome through mountains vapors send thick mist,
Unpleasant needs must be to you and your company,
That never was wont to take the air,
Till Flora have perfumde the earth with sweets,
With lillies, roses, mints and Eglantine,

I tel thee the ground is al to base,
For Elinor to honour with her steps:
Whose footepace when she progrest in the street,
Of Aecon and the fair Jerusalem,
Was nought but costly Arras points:
Fair I land tapestry and Azured silk,
My milk white steed treading on cloth of ray,
And trampling proudly under neath the feet,
Choice of our English woollen drapery.
This climate or clowring with black congealed clouds,
That takes their swelling from the marrish soil,
Fraught with infectious f^ogges and ruistie dampes,
Is far unworthy to be once embalmd:
With redolence of this refreshing breath:
That sweetens where it lights as do the flames,
And holy fires of Vestaes sacrifice. spring,

Whose pleasant fields new planted with the
Make Thamesis to mount above the banks,
And like a wanton walloing up and down:
On Floras beds and Napees silver down.

And wales for me Madame while you are here,
No Climate good unless your grace be ne'er,
Would wales had ought could please you half so well,
Or any precious thing in Glosters gift,
Whereof your ladyship would challenge me.

Well said my lord tis as my mother says,
You men have learned to woe a thousand ways.

O madame had I learned against my need,
Of all those ways to woo one way to speed,
My cunning then had been my fortunes guide.

Faith Ione I think thou must be Glosters bride,
Good Earl how near he steps unto her side,
So soon this eye these younglings had espied,
I'll tel thee girl when I was fair and young:
I found such honny in sweet Edwards tongue,
As I could never spend one idle walk,
But Ned and I would piece it out with talk.
So you my Lord when you have got your Ione,
No matter let Queen mother be alone.
Old Nell is mother now and grandmother may,
The greenest grass doth droop and turn to hay,
Woo one kind Clarke, good Gloster love thy Ione,
Her heart is thine, her eyes is not her own.

This comfort Madam that your grace doth give
Binds me in double duty whilst I live,
Would God King Edward see and say no less.

Gloster I warrant thee upon my life,
My King vouchsafs his daughter for thy wife,
Sweet Ned hath not forgot since he did woo,
The gal of love and al that longs thereto.

Why was your grace so coy to one so kind?

Kind Gloster so me thinks in deed,
It seems he loves his wife no more then needs,
That sends for us in al the speedy hast,
Knowing his Queen to be so great with child,
And make me leave my princely pleasant seats,
To come into his ruder part of wales.

His highness hath some secrete reason why,
He wishes you to move fro Englands pleasant courts
The VVelshmen have of long time suitors been,
That when the war of rebels sorts an end:
None might be prince and ruler over them,
But such a one as was their countryman,
Which sure I think his grace hath granted them.

So then it is king Edwards Policy,
To have his son, for sooth son i^ be,
A VVelshman, well welshman it likes me,
And ^re he comes.

Nell, welcome into VVales,
How fares my Elinor?

Near worse, beshrow their harts tis long on.

Harts sweet Nell, shrow no harts,
Where such sweet saints do dwell

Nay then I see I have my dream, I pray let go,
You will not will you whether I will or no?
You are disposed to move me.

Say any thing but so:
Once Nell thou gau^st me this.

I pray let go, ye are disposed I think.

I madame very well

Let go and be nought I say.

What ails my Nell?

Ay me, what sudden fits is this I prove;
What grief, what pine lung pain, like youngmens love,
That makes me madding tun thus too and fro^?

What, mallencollie Nell?

My lord pray let me go.
Give me sweetwater, why how whote it is?

These be the fits, trouble men's wits.

Ione ask thy beauteous Mistres how she doth.

How fares your majesty?

Ione aggrieved at the hart and angered worse,
Because I came not right in,
I think the King comes purposely to spite me,
My finger itch till I have had my will,
Proud Edward call in thy Elinor be still,
It will not be, nor rest I any where:
Till I have set it soundly on his ear.

Is that the matter then let me alone.

Fie how I fret with grief.

Come hither Ione, know thou what ails my Queen?

Not I my lord, she longs I think to give your gracea box on theare.

Nay wench if that be as we'll ear it well,
What all a mort how doth my dainty Nell?
Look up sweet love, unkind, not kiss me once?
That may not be.

My lord I think you do it for the nonce.

Sweet heart one kiss.

For Gods sake let me go.

Sweet heart a kiss.

What, whether I will or no? you will not leave? let be I say?

I must be better chidde.

No will? take that then lusty lord, Sir leave when you are bid.

Why so this chare is charde.

A good one by the rood,

No force no harm.

No harm that doth my Elinor any good.
Learn lords against you be married men to bow to women's yoke:
And sturdy though you be you may not stur for every stroke:
Now my sweet Nell how doth my Queen?

She vaunts that mighty England hath felt her fist:
Taken a blow basely at Elinors hand,
And vaunt she may good leave being cursed and coy,
Lack nothing Nell whilst thou hast brought thy lord a lovely boy.

I am sick good Katherina I pray thee beat hand.

This sickness I hope will bring King Edward a jolly boy.

And Katherin who brings me that news shall not go empty handed.


Farewell Lluellen with thy loving Nell.

Godamercy Mortimor and so farewell.

Farewell and behangde half Sinons sapons brood

Good words Sir Rice wrongs have best remedy,
So taken with time patience and policy.
But where is the Friar who can tel?
That can I master very well,
And say I faith what hath befell:
Must we at once to heaven or hell?

To heaven Friar, Friar no fie,
Such heavy souls mount not so hie.

Then Friar lie thee down and die.
And if any ask the reason why,
Answer and say thou can not tel,
Unless because thou must to hell.

No Friar because thou did rebel,
Gentle Sir Rice ring out thy knel.

And Maddocke towel thy passing bell. So there lies a straw, and now to the law
masters and friends, naked came we in to the world naked are we turned out of
the good towns into the wilderness, let me say Mass, me thinks we are a
handsome Common-wealth, a hand^ of goodfellowes, set a sunning to dog on our
own dis^tion, what say you Sir? we are enough to keep (...) passage, will you
be ruled by me? we'll get the next day from Brecknocke the book of Robin
Hood, the Friar he shall instruct us in his cause and we'll even here (...) and
well since the king hath put us amongst the discarding cards, and as it were
turned us with deuces and traies out of the deck, every man take his standing
on Ma^nocke deny and wander like irregulers up and down the wilderness, i'll be
master of ^rule, i'll be Robin Hood that once, cousin Rice thou shalt be little
Iohn, and hers Friar Dauid as fit as a die for Friar Tucke, now my sweet Nel if
you will make up the mess with a good heart for Maid marian and do well with
Lluellen under the green wood trees, with as good a will as in the good towns,
why plena est curia.


My sweetest love and this my infracte fortune could never vaunt har
sovereignty, and shouldest thou pass the ford of Phlegeton, or with Leander
win the Hellispont in deserts, Oenophrius ever dwell, or build thy bower on
Aetuas fiery tops, thy Nel would follow thee and keep with thee, thy Nel
would feed with thee and sleep with thee.


O Cupido quantus quantus.

Bravely resolude Madam and t^n what rests my Lord Robin but we will live and
die together like Chamber Britains, Robin Hood, little Iohn, Friar Tucke, and
Maid marrian.


There rests nothing now cousin but that I sell my chain to set us all in
green and we'll al play the Pioners to make us a cave and Cabban for al
weathers.


My sweet Lluellen though this sweet be gal, Patience doth conquer me by out
suffering al.


Now Manmocke deny I hold thee a penny,
Thou shalt have neither sheep nor goat:
But Friar Dauid, Will fleeces his coat,
Where ever lack my Novice jet.
Al is fish with (...) that comes to net,
Dauid this year thou paiest no de^te.

Why F^er is it so plain in deed,
Lluellen art thou flatly so resolude.
To ro^st it out and roust so near the king:
What shall we have a passage kept in wales:
For men at arms and knights aduenturou^?
By cock Sir Rice I see no reason why,
Young Mortimor should make one among:
And play hi, parton (...) dying here,
For love of his beloved Elinor:
His Elinor where (...) (...) I wott,
The bitter Northern wind upon the plains:
The dampes that rise from out the quec^y plots:
Nor influence of contagious air should touch,
But she should court yet with the prondest d^mes,
Rich in attire and sumptuous in her fare.
And take her ease in beds of safest Down,
Why Mort^ may not thy offers move,
And win sweet E^ (...) Lluellens love,
Why pleasant gold and gentle eloquence,
Have ^yset the (...) Nymphs the fairest dames,
And vants of words, delights of wealth and ease,
Have made a Nun 10 yield Lluellens,
Being set to see the last of desp^ate chance,
Why should so fair a slarre stand in a vale?
And not be seen to sparkle in the sky,
It is enough Jove change his glittering robes:
To see Mennosyne and the flies
Masters have alter gentle Robinhood,
You are not so well accompanied I hope:
But if a potter come to p^ic his part,
You'll give him stripes or welcome good or worse:
Go Mortimor and make their love holidaies,
The king will take a common scuse of thee,
And who hath more men to attend then Mortimor.

Why so, I see my mates of old,
All were not lies that Bedlams told:
Of Robin Hood and little Iohn,
Friar Tucke and Maid marian.

I for sooth master.

How well they couched in forest green,
Frolic and lively with oaten teene:
And spent their day in game and glee,
Lluellen do seek if ought please thee,
Nor though thy foot be out of town,
Let thine look black on Edwards Crown.
Nor think this green is not so gay,
A^ was the golden rich array:
And if sweet Nel my Marrian,
Trust me as I am Gentle man:
Thou art as fine in this at tire:
As fine and fit to my desire,
As when of Leisters Hal and bower,
Thou were the rose and sweetest flowers
How say thou Friar say I well?
For any thing becomes my Nell.

Never made man of a woman borne,
A Bullocks tail a blowing horne,
Nor can an Asles hide disguise,
A Lion if he ramp and rise.

My Lord, the Friar is wondrous wise.

Believe him for he tells no lies,
But what doth little Iohn devise?

That Robin Hood beware of spies,
An aged saying and a true,
Black will take no other hue.
He that of old hath been thy toe:
Will die but will continue so.

O masters, whither shall we, doth any living creature know?

Rice and I will walk the round,
Friar see about the ground.
And spoil what pray is to be found,
My love I leave within in trust,
Because I know thy dealing lust:
Come Potter come and welcome to,
Fare as we fare and do as we do.

Nell adieu we go for news,
A little serves the Frier's lust,
When nolens volens fast I must,
Master at al that you refuse.

Such a porter would I choose,
When I mean to blind a skule.
While Robin walk with little Io^,
The Friar will like his marrian.
So will the Porter if he can.

Now Friar since your lord is gone,
And you and I are left alone,
What can the Friar do or say,
To pass the weary time away?
Weary God wot poor wench to thee,
That never thought these days to see.

Bre^ke (...) and split mine eyes in (...).
Never let me hear those words again.

What can the Friar do or sal^
To pass the weary time away:
More dare I do then he dare say,
Because he doubts to have away.

Do somewhat Friar say or sing,
That may to sorrows so lace bring,
And I mean while will Garlands make,

O Mortimor were it for thy sake,
A Garland were the happiest stake:
That ever this hand unhappy drew.

Mistres shall I tel you true,
I have a soug I learned it long ago,
I wot not whether yole like it well or ill,
Tis short and sweet but somewhat brolde before.
Once let me sing it and I ask no more.

What Friar will you so indeed,
Agrees it somewhat with your need?

Why mistres shall I sing my creed,

That's fitter of the two at need.

O wench how may thou hope to speed?

O mistres out it goes.
Look what comes next the Friar throes.

Such a sitting who ever saw,
An Eagles bird of a Jack dawe.

So Sir is this all?

Sweet heart here's no more.

How now good fellow more indeed,
By one then was before.

How now the devil in steed of a ditty.

Friar a ditty come late from the city.
To ask some pity of this lass so pretty:
Some pity sweet mistres I pray you.

How now Friar where are we now and you play not the man?

Friend Copes mate, you that come late from the City,
To ask some pity of this lass so pretty,
In likeness of a doleful ditty,
Hang me if I do not pay ye.

O Friar you grow choleric, well yole
Have no man to Court your mislers but your self,
On my word i'll take you down a botton hole,

Ye talk, ye talk child.

Tis well potter you fight in a good quarrel,

Mas this blade will hold le^ ^ee then Friar.

Mines for mine own turn (...) (...) his Tools, rise and lets to it, b^
(...) (...) you love me, I scorn the odds I can tel you, ^ee fair play and
you be Gentlemen.


Mary shall we Friar, let us see, be their staves of a length good, so now let
us deem of the matter Friar and Potter (...) more clatter I have cast your
water, and see as deep into your desire, as he that had dined every day
into your bosom, O Friar will nothing serve your turn but Larks.

Are such five birds for such course Clarks,
None but my Marian can serve your turn.

Cast water, for the house will burn.

O mistres mistres flesh is frail,
Ware when the sign is in the tail,
Mig^ is love and doth preuaile:

Therefore Friar shalt thou not fail,
But mightily your foe assail:
And thrash this Potter with thy slaile,
And Potter never rave nor rail,
Not ask questions what I ail:
But take this tool and do not quail,
But t^rash this Friars russet cote:
And make him sing a dastards note,
And cry Pecca^ miserere Dauid,
In am^ ama^: Goc to.

Strike, strike.

Strike Potter be thou lief or loath,
And if you'll not strike i'll strike for both.

He must needs go that the devil drives
Then Friar beware of other men's wives.

I wish master proud Potter the Devil have my soul:
But i'll. make my slaile circumscribe your noule.

Why so, now it co^tens, now the game begins.
One knave currieth another for his sins.

O master short en my offences in mine eyes.
If this Crucifige do not suffice,
Send me to Heaven in a hempen sacrifice.

O masters masters let this be warning:
The Friar hath infected me with his learning.

Villains do not touch the forbidden hair now to delude, or to dishonour me.

O master, quae nagata sunt grat^ sunt.

Rice every day thus shall it be, we'll have a thrashing set among the Friars,
and he that of these chalengers lays on slowest load, be thou at hand Rice to
gore him with thy god.


A Potter Potter the Friar may rue,
That ever this day this our quarrel he knew:
My pate adle, mine arms black and blue.

Ah Friar who may his fates force eschew,
I think Friar you are prettily scholde,

And I think the Potter is handsomely coold,

No Martimor here that Eternal (...),
That burns and Ha^s with brands of hot desire^
Why Martimor, why do est thou not discover,
Thy self her knight her liegeman and her lover?
Lords of Albana, and my peers in France.
Since Balioll is invested in his rights,
And wears the (...) Scottish Diadem,
Time is to rouse ^im that the world may wot,
Scotland disdains to carry Englands yoke.
Therefore my frie^d thus put in readiness,
Why slack we time to greet the English king?
Wi^ (...) message to ^et him know our minds,
Lord Versses though thy ^aith and o^th be taken,
To follow Baliols arms for Scotlands right,
Yet is thy heart to Englands honour knit,
Therefore in spite of England and thy self,
Bear thou defiance proudly to thy king,
Tel him (...) finds heart and hope,
To shake o^ Englands tyranny be time,
To reskue Scotlands honour with his sword,
Lord Bru^ see cast about Versses neck,
A strangling halter that he mind his ha^t.
How sa^est thou Versses wilt thou do this message?

Although no common post, yet for my king
I will to England maugre Englands might,
And do mine arrand boldly as becomes,
Albeit I honour English Edwards name,
And hold this s^uish contemnment to scorn.

Then h^e away as swift as swallow ^lies,
And meet ^e on our rodes on Englands ground,
We there ^hinke of thy message and thy (...).

Now have I leisure Lords to bid you welcome into Wales.
Welcome sweet Edmund to christen thy young nephew
And welcome Cressing^, give me thy hand,
But Sussex what became of Mortimor?
We have not seen the man this many a day.

Besore your highness rid fro hence to Northam.
Sir Roger was a suitor to your Grace,
Touching fair Elinor Lluellens love,
And so ^like denied with discontent,
A discontinues from your Royal presence.

Why Sussex said we not ^or Elinor,
So she would leave whom she had loved too long,
She might have f^uour with my Queen and me,
But man, her (...) abou^ her fortune mounts,
And that's a cause she ^ailes in her accounts.
But go with me my lord of Lancaster,
We will go see my bea^ous lovely Queen,
That hath enriched me with a goodly bo^e.
Longsh Ladies by your leave, how doth my Nell, mine own ^ny love, my life, my
heart, my dear, my dove, my Queen, my wife.

(...) N^ (...) thou come, sweet Ned welcome my joy.
Thy Nell presents thee with a lovely boy.
Kiss him, and christen him after thine own name.
Hey ho whom do I see, my lord of Lancaster, welcome heartily.

I thank your grace, sweet Nell well met withal.

Brother Emund hers a kinsman of yours you must need, be acquainted.

A goodly boy God bless him, give me your hand Sir, you are welcome into
Wales.

Brother theirs a fist I warrant you will holde^
Mace as f^t as ever did father or grandfather before him.

But ^el in now lapped in Lilly bands,
How with my Queen, my lovely bo^e it stands:
After thy journey and these child bed pains.

Sick mine own Ned thy Nell for thy company:
That lured her with thy lies all so far,
To follow thee vnweldie in thy war,
But I forgive thee Ned my ^ms delight:
So thy young son thou see be bravely dight,
And in Carnaruan christened royally.
Sweet love let him be lapped most curiously,
He is thine own, as true as he is thine,
Take order then that he be passing fine.

My lovely Lady let that care be less,
For my young son the country will I feast:
And have him borne as bravely to the sunt;
As ever yet Kings son to Christening went.
Lack thou no precious thing to comfort thee,
De rear then Englands Diadem unto me.

Thanks gentle Lord, nurse rock the Cr^dle, fie:
The King so near, and here the boy to cri^?
Ione take him up and sing a Lullaby.

Ti^ well believe me wench godamercie I^,

Sl^e learnes my Lord to ^ull a young one of her own.

Give me some drink.

Drink Nectar my sweet Nell,
Worthy for seat in heaven with Jove to dwell.

Gramercis Ned, now well remembered yet,
I have a suite sweet lord, but you must not deny it,
Whereas my Lord of Gloster, good Cla^e mine host, my guide,
Good Ned let Ione of Acon be his bride,
Assure your self that they are thoroughly wooed.

God send the King be taken in the mood,
Then Niece tis like that you shall have a husband,
Come hither Gloster hold give her thy hand,
Take her, sole daughter to the Queen of England.
For news he brought Nell of my young son,
I promised him as much as I have done.
We humbly thank your majesty.

Much joy may them betide,
A gallant bridegroom and a princely bride.

Now say sweet Queen what doth my Lady crave?
Tell me what name shall this young Welshman have,
Borne Prince of wales by Cambrias full consent.

Edward the name, that doth me well content,

Then Edward of Carnaruan shall he be,
And Prince of Wales christened in royalty.

My Lord I think the Queen would^ take a nap,

Nurse take the child and hold in your lap,

Farewell good Ione be careful of my Queen.
Sleep^ Nell, the fairest Swan mine eyes have seen.

I had forgot-to ask your Majesty.
How do you with the Abbeys here in Wales,

As kings with rebels Mun, our right preuails,
We have good Robin Hood and little Iohn,
The Friar and the good Maid; marrian.
Why our Lluellen is a mighty man.

Trust me my Lord, me thinks twere very good
That some good fellows went and scourd the wood,
And take in hand to cudgel Robin Hood.
I think the Friar for all his lusty looks,
Nor Robin rule with their gleams and hooks,
But would be quickly driven to the nookes.

I can assure your highness what I know,
The false Lluellen will not run nor go
Or give an inch of ground come man for man,
Nor that proud rebel called little Iohn,
To him that welds the massiest sword of England,

Welshman, how wilt thou that we understand,
But for Lluellen, Dauid I deny,
England hathmen will make Lluellen fly,
Maugre his beard and hide him in a hole,
Weary of Englands dints and manly dole.

Gloster, grow not so hot in Englands right,
That paints his honour out in every sight.

By Gis fair Lords ere many days be past,
England shall give this Robin Hood his breakefall.
Dauid, be secrete friend to that I say,
And if I use thy skill thou know the way.
Where this proud Robin and his yeomen rome.

I do my Lord and blindfold thither can I run.

Dauid enough, as I am a Gentleman,
I'll have one merry flirt with little Iohn,
And Robin Hood, and his Maid marrian,
Be thou my counsel and my company,
And thou may Enlands resolution see.

May it please your majesty, here are 4. good Squires of the Cantreds where
they do dwell, come in the name of the whole country to gratulate unto your
highness all your good fortunes, and by me offer their most humble service to
your young son their Prince, whom they most heartily beseech God to bless
with long life and honour.


Well said Sussex I pray bid them come tear,
Sir Dan trust me, this is kindly don of your cuntrey me.

Villains, Traitors to the ancient glory and renown of Cambria, Morris Vaghan
art thou there, and thou proud Lord of Anglesee.


The poor country of Cambria by us unworthy messengers, gratulats to your
majesty the birth of your young son Prince of Wales, and in this poor pressed
express their most zealous duty and affection, which with all humbleness we
present to your highness sweet and sacred hands.


Gramercis Barons for your gifts and good wills, by this means my boy shall
wear a Mantle of cuntries weaving to keep him warm, and live for Englands
honour and Cambrias good, I shall not need I trust courteously to inuit you, I
doubt not Lords but you will be all in readiness to wait on your young Prince
and do him honour at his christening.


The whole country of Cambriaround about all well horsed, and attended on both
men and women in their best array, are come down to do service of love and
honour to our late born Prince, your Majesties son and honey, the men and
women of Sowdone especially have sent in great abundance of cattle corn enough
by computacion for your highness housheld a whole month and more.


We thank them all, and will present our Q with these courtesies and presents
bestowed on her young Son, and greatly account you for our friends.


Who talks there?

A friend Madam.

Madam it is the King.

Welcome my Lord hey ho what have we there?

Madam the country in all kindness and duty recommend their service and good
will to your son and in token of their pure good will, presents him by us
with a mantle of frize richly lined to keep him warm,


A mantle of frize, fie fie for Gods sake let me here no more of it and if you
love me, fie my lord is this the wisdom and kindness of the country? now I
commend me to them all, and if VVales have no more wit or manners, then to
cloth a Kings son in frize I have a mantle in store for my boy, that shall
I trow make him shine like the son, and presume the streets where he comes.


In good time Madam, he is your own, lap him as you list, but I promise thee
Nell I would not for ten thousand pounds the country should take unkindness
at thy words.


Tis no marvel sure, you have been roially received at their hands, no Ned,
but that thy Nell doth want of her will, her boy should glister like the
Summers Sun in robes as rich as Jove when he triumphs.

His pap should be of precious Nectar made,
His food Ambrosia no earthly woman's milk,
Sweet fires of Sinamon to open him by,
The Graces on hi^ cradle should attend,
Venus should make his bed and wait on him,
And Phebus daughter sing him still a sleep.
Thus would I have my boy used as divine,
Because he is king Edwardes son and mine.
And do you mean to make him up in frize,
For God sake lay it up charilie, and perfume it against winter, it will make
him a goodly warm Christemas coat.


Ah Mun my brother, dearer then my life,
How this proud honour slaies my heart with grief.
Sweet Queen how much I pity the effects,
This Spanish pride grees not with Englands prince,
Mild is the mind where honour builds his bower,
And yet is earthly honour but a flower.
Fast to those looks are all my fancies tide,
Pleased with thy sweetness, angry with thy pride.

Fie fie me thinks I am not where I should be,
Or at the least I am not where I would be.

What wants my Queen to perfect her content,
But ask and have the King will not repent.

Thanks gentle Edward, lords have at you then,
Have at you all long bearded Englishmen,
Have at you lords and ladies when I crave,
To give your English pride a Spanish brave.

What means my Queen Gloster, this is a Spanish fit.

Ned thou hast granted and can not revoke it.

Sweet Queen say on my word shall be my deed.

Then shall my words make many a bosom bleed.
Reed Ned thy Queenes request lapped up in rime,
And say thy Nell had skill to choose her time.
The pride of Englishmens long hair,
Is more then Englands Queen can bear:
Women's right breast cut them off al,
And let the great tree pensh with the small.

What means my lovely Elinor by this?

Not be denied for my request it is.
The rime is, that men's beards and women's breasts be cut off c.

Gloster, an old said saying, he that grants all is asked,
Is much ^arder then Hercules task.

Were the King so mad as the Queen is wood,
Here were an end of Englands good.

My word is pall I am well agreed,
Let men's beards milt and women's bosoms bleed.
Call forth my Barbers, Lords we'll first begin.
Come si^ra cut me close unto the chin,
And ^und me even see thou by a dish,
(...) not a lo^ke ^y Qu^ene shall have her wish.

What Ned. those locks that ever pleased thy
Were her desire, where her de^ight doth dwell, (Nel?
Wilt thou deface that silver labyrinth?
More orient then pimpilde Hyancinth,
Sweet Ned, thy sacred person ought not droop,
Though my command m^ke other gallants stoup.

Madam, pardon me and pardon all,
No justice but the great runs with the small.
Tell me good Gloster art thou not afraid?

No my Lord but resolude to lose my beard.

Now Madam if you purpose to proceed,
To make so many guiltles Ladies bleed.
Here must the law begin, sweet Elinor at thy breast,
And strech it self with violence to the rest.
Flse Princes ought no other do,
Fair lady, then they would be done unto.

What logic cal you this, doth Edward mock his love?

No Nell he doth as best in honour doth behove,
And prays thee gentle Queen, and let my prays move,
Leave these ungentle thoughts, put on a milder mind,
Sweet looks, not lofty, civil mood becomes a woman's kind:
And live as being dead, and buried in the ground,
Thou may for affability and honour be renownde.

Nay and you preach, I pray my lord begone,
The child will cry and trouble you anon.

Proud incest in the cradle of disdain,
Bred up in court of pride, brought up in Spain,
Doest thou command him coily from thy sight?
That is the star, the glory of thy sight.

O could I with the riches of my crown,
Buy better thoughts for my renowned Nel,
Thy mind sweet Queen should be as beautiful,
As is thy face, as is thy features all.
Fraught with pure honour, treasure, and enriched,
With virtues and glory incomparable.
Ladies about her Majesty, se that the Queen your mother know not so much, but
at any hand our pleasure is, that our young son be in this Mantle borne to
his Christening, for special reasons is thereto moving, from the Church as
best it please your women's wits to devise, yet sweet Ione see this
faithfully performed, and hear you daughter, look you be not last up when
this day coms, least Gloster find another Bride in your steed, Dauid go with
me..


She rises early Ione, that beguiles thee of a Gloster.

believe him not sweet Niece, women can speak smooth for advantage.


We men do you mean my good uncle?

Well be the accent where it will women are women, I will believe you for as
great a matter as this comes to my lord.


Gramercies sweet lady, habebis fidei mercedem contra.

Come fellows, cast your selves even round in a string, a ring I would say,
come merely on my word for the Queen is most liberal, and if you will please
her well she will pay you roially, so lawful to brave well thy Brittishe
lustilie, to solace our good Queen God save her Grace, and give our young
Prince a carpell in their kind, come on come on set your crowds and beat your
heads together and behave you handsomelie.


I have a budget in my nose this gay morning, and now will I try how clarkly
the Friar can behave him self, tis a common fashion to get gold which stand,
deliver your purses, Friar Dauies will once in his days get money by wit,
there is a rich Farmer should pass this ways to receive a round sum of
money, if he come to me the money is mine, and the law shall take no vantage,
I will cut off the law as the hangman would cut a man down when he hath
shaken his heals half an hour under the gallows, well I must take some pains
for this gold, and have at it.


Tis an old said saying I remember I red it in Catoes Pueriles, that
Cantabit va^nus coram la^rone viator. A mans purse penniless may sing before a
thief, true as I have not one penny, which makes me so peartly pass through
these thickets, but indeed I receive a hundred marks, and al the care is how I
shall pass again, well. I resolved either to ride twenty miles about, or else
to be so well accompanied that I will not care for these ruffelers.


Did ever man play with such vncircumcised hands, sic ace to eleven and lose
the chance.


God speed good fellow, why chafest thou so fast, theirs no body will win thy
money from thee.


Sounds you offer me injury Sir to speak in my cast.


The Friar undoubtedly is lunatic, I pray thee good fellow leave chasting,
and get some warm drink to comfort thy brains.


A las Sir I am not lunatic, tis not so well, for I have lost my money which
is far worse, I have lost five gold Nobles to S Francis, and if I knew where
to meet with his receauer I would pay him presently.


Would thou speak with S. Francis receauer?


O Lord, I Sir full gladly.

Why man I am S. Francis receauer, if you would have any thing with him.


Are you S. Francis receauer, Iesus, Iesus, are you S. Francis receauer, and
how does all?


I am his receauer, and am now going to him, abids S. Thomas a Waterings to
breakfast this morning to a calf^s head and bacon.


Good Lord Sir I beseech you carry him these five Noble, and tell him I deal
honestly with him as if he were here present.


I will of my word and honesty Friar, and so farewell.


Farewell S. Francis receauer even heartily, well now the Friar is out or cash
sieve Nobles, God knows how he shall come into cash again, but I must to it
again, there's nine for your holiness and six for me.


Come on my hearts, bring forth your prisoners and let us see what slore of
(...) is there in their pursenets, Friar why ch^fest t^ou man no body will
offer thee any fou^e pla^e I w^nt thee.


O good master give me leave, my hand is in a little, I trust I (...) recover
my los^es.


The Friar is ^d, but let him alone with ^s devise, and now to you my masters,
Peddler, Priest and Piper, throw down your budgets in the mean while, and when
the Friar is at leisure he ^hal tel you wh^t you shall trust to. (^oe,


Alas sir I have but 3. pence in the corner of my

Never a ^oulder of Mutton Piper in your Taber, but soft here comes ^ompanie.


Alas gentlemen if you love your selves do not venture through this mountain,
here's such a coil with Robin Hood and his ^bell that every cross in my purse
trembles for fear.


Honest man as I said to thee before, conduct us through this wood, and if
thou be robde, or have any violence offered thee, as I am a Gentleman I
will repay it thee again.


How much money hast thou about thee?

Faith Sir a hundred marks, I received it even now at (...), but out alas we
are undone, yonder is Robin Hood and al the strong thieves in the mountain I
have no hope left but your honours assurance


Fear not I will be my words master.

Good master and if you love the Friar, give aim a while I you desire: and as
you like of my devise, so love him that hol^es the dise.


What Friar art thou still laboring so hard, will you have any thing more to S.
Francis?


Go^d lord are you here sweet S. Francis receauer, how doth his holiness and al
his good family?


In good health faith Friar, hast thou any Nobles for ^im?


You know the dice are not partial and Saint Francis were ten S. they will
favour him no more the they would favour the Devil if he play at dice, in very
truth my friend they have favoured the Friar, and I have won a C. marks of S.
Francis, come Sir I pray. (...) draw it over I know sir ^e is a good man and
n^uer deceives none.


Draw it over, what meanest thou by that?

Why in nume^atis pecuniis legem pone, pay me my winnings.


What ass is this, should I pay thee thy winnings?

Why art not thou sir Saint Francis receaue^?

Indeed I do receive for Saint Francis.

Then ^e make you pay for S. Francis that's flat.

Help help I am robde I am robde.

Vill^e you wrong the man, hands off.

Masters I bese^ you leave this braw^ing and give me leave to speak, so it is
I went to dice with S. Francis lost five Nobles, by good fortune his Cashier
came by received it of me in ready cash. I being ver^ des^ous to try my
fortune f^er, plaide sti^l, and as the dice not being bound (...) to him or
any ^an, favoured me, I drew a hand and won a hundred marks, now I reser it
to your judgements whither the Friar is to seek ^is winnings.


M^rie Friar the Farmer must and shall pay thee honestly ere he pass.


Shall I sir, why will you be content to pay half a you promiss me.


I Farmer if you had been robde of it, but if you be agamester i'll take no
charge of you I.


Alas I am undone.

So sir Friar, now you have gathered up your winnings I pray you stand up and
give the messeugers their charge that Robin Hood may receive his Toule.


And shall my Lord. Our thrice renowned Lluellen Prince of Wales and Robin Hood
of the great mountain, doth will and command all passengers at the sight of
Richard seruaunt unto me Friar (...) Tucke to lay down their weapons, and
quietly to yield for cu^m towards the maintenance of his highness wars, the ^se
of al such gold, silver, money, and money worth, a the said messenger hath
then about him, but if he conc^al any part or parcel of the same, then shall
he forfai^e all that he possesses at that present, and this sentence is
irrevocable confirmed by our Lord Lluellen Prince of Wales, and Robin Hood of
the great mo^ntaines.


So va^e your budgettes to Robin of the mountain, but what art thou that
disd^nest to pay thi^ custoe, as if thou scornest the greatness of the prince
of Wales?


Faith Robin thou seem to be a good fellow there's my bag, half is mine
and half is thine, but lets to it if thou dare man for man, to try who ^al
have the whole.


Why thou speak as thou should speak. My masters on pain of my
displeasure depart the place and leave us two to our selves, I must lope his
Longshankes. for i'll ear to a pair of Longshankes.


They are fair marks sir, and I must defend as I may, Dau^ be gone, hold
here my hearts, long legs giue^ you this among^ you to spend blows one with an
other, Dauie now Dauie days are almost come at end.


But Mortimor this sight is strange, staye thou in some corner to see what will
befall in this battle.


Now Robin of the wood, alias Robin Hood, be it known to your worship by these
presents, that the Longshankes which you aim at, have brought the king of
England into these mountains, to use Lluellen, and to crack a (...) (...) his
man that supposes himself Prince of ^ales.


What ^r K^g, wel^ome to Cambrias, what foolish Edward dare ^ou endanger (...)
to tr^l these mountains, (...) thou (...) as to combat with the Prince of
^ales?


What I dare thou see, what I can perform thou shalt shortly know, I
think thee a Gentleman, and therefore hold no scorn to fight with thee.


No Edward I am as good a man as thy self.

That shall I try.

Halloe Edward how are thy senses confounded, what Dauy is it possible thou
shouldest be false to England?


I am true to Wales, and so have been friends since my birth, and that shall
the King of England know to his cost.


What Potter, did not I charge you to begone with your fellows?


No Traitor no Potter I, but Mortimor the Earl of March, whose coming to
these woods, is to deceive thee of thy love, and reserved to save my
sovereigns life.


Upon them brother let them not breath.

Villain thou die, God and my right hath prevailed.


Base Earl now doth Dauid triumph in thine over throw, ay is me Lluellen at
the fe^ of Longshanks.


What Mortimor under the sword of such a Tr^or?

Brave King run thy sword up to the hilts into the blood of the rebel.


O Mortimor thy life is dearer to me then millions of rebels.


Edward relieve my brother and Mortimor lives.

I villain thou know too well how dear I hold my Mortimor, r^e man and
assure thee, and the ^ate I bear to (...) long in respect of the deadly hatred
I bear to that noto^ous rebel.


Away, his sight to me is like the sight of a (...), villain I go to revenge
me on thy treason, and to make thee pattern to the world, of mountains
treason, fal^ood and ingratitude.


Br^er a chafes, but hard was your hap to be overmastered by the coward.


No cow^d Dau^d, hi^ courage is like to the Lion, and were it not that rule and
souerai^tie sets us at (...), I could love and honour the man for his valour.


But t^e Potter, oh the vi^laine will never out of my mind whilst I live, and
I w^ late to be revenged on hi^ vill^e.


Well Dauid what will be shall be, therefore casting these matters out of our
heads, Dauid thou art welcome to Cambria, let us in and be merry after this
cold cooling, and to prep^re to strengthen our selves against the last
threatenings.


Welcome Ione Countess of Gloster, to Gilb^rt de Clare for ever, God give them
io^e, cousin Gloster, let us now go visit the King and Queen, and present t^
Majesties with their young son, Edward Prince of Wal^s.


We represent your highness most humbly, with your young son Edward of
Carnaruan Prince of Wales.


God save Edward of Carnaruan prince of Wales.

Ione countess of Gloster, God bless thee and thine for ever. lords let us
visit my Queen and wife, whom we will at once present with a Son and daughter
honoured to her desire.

We humbly present your Majesty with your young son Edward of Carnaruan
Prince of VVales.


God save Edward of Carnaruan prince of wales:
Gramercis Bishop, hold tak^ that to b^ie thee a Rochell, welcome VVelshman.
here Nurse open him and have him to the fire for God sake, they have touzed
him, and wash th^m throug^e and that be good, and welcome Ione Countess of
Gloster, God bless thee with long life, honour, and hearts ease.

I am now as good as my word Gloster, she is thine make much of her gentle
Earl.


Now my sweet Nell what more commands my Queen that nothing may want to
periect her contentment.


Nothing sweet Ned, but pray my king to feast the Lords and ladies roial^ie,
and thanks a thousand times good men and women, to you all, for this duty
and honour done to your Prince.


Master Bridegroom by old custom this is your waiting day, Sir Dauid you
may command alample welcome in our court, for your cuntreymen: brother Edmund
revel it now or never for honour of your Englands son, Gloster now like a
brave Bridegroom marshall this many, and set these Lords and Ladies to
dancing, so shall you fulfil the old English proverb, us (...) in Hall when
beards wag all.

What tidings brings Versses to our court?

Tidings to make thee tremble English king.


Me tremble b^? must not be news from Scotland, can once make English Edward
s^and agaste.


Baliell hath chosen at this time to stu^e,
To rouse him Lion like and cast the yoke:
That Scots ingloriouslie have borne from thee,
And all the predecessors of thy line:
And make his rods to reobtaine his rights,
And for his homage sends thee al this despite.

Why how now p^cockes prate thou to a king?

I do my message truly from my king,
This sword and targ^t chide in louder terms,
I bring defiance from king Iohn Balioll,
To English Edward and his Barons all.

M^ie so me thinks thou defiest me with a witness.

Balioll my king in Barwicke makes his Court,
His ^pe he spreads upon the sand^e plain,
And d^res thee to the battle in his right.

What Court and Camp in Englishmens despite?

Hold messenger, commend me to thy King,
Wear thou my chain and car^ie this to him,
Greet all his route of Rebels more or less,
Tel them such shameful end will hit them all,
And wend with this as resolutely back,
As thou to England broughst thy Scottish braves,
Tel then disdainefullie Balioll from us,
VVeele rouse him from his hold, and make him soon^
Disloge his Camp, and take his walled town.
Say what I bid thee Versses to his teeth.
And earn this favour and a better thing.

Yes King of England whom my heart beloues,
Think as I promised him to brave thee hear,
So shall I bid Iohn Balioll base from thee.

So shalt thou earn my chain and favour Versses,
And carry him this token that thou sendst:
Why now is Englands harvest ripe,
Barons now may you reap the rich renown,
That under warlike colours springs in field,
And grows where ensigns wan upon the plains.
False Balioll ^arwicke arwicke is no hold of proose,
To shroud thee from the strength of Edwards arm,
No Scot thy Treasons fear shall make th^ breach,
For Englands pure renown to enter one.

Amain amain upon these treacherous Scottes.
Amain say all, upon these treacherous Scots,

While we with Edmund, ^loster, and the rest,
With speedy iourne is gather up our forces,
And beat these braving Scots from Englands bounds,
Mortimor thou shalt take the route in task,
That revel here and spoil fair Cambria,
My Queen when she is strong and well a foot,
Shall post to London and repast her there,
Then God shall send us happily all to meet,
And joy the honours of our victories,
Take vantage of our foes and see the time,
Keep still our hold, our fight yet on the plain,
Balioll I come proud Balioll and ingrate,
Persuaded to chase thy men from Englands gate.

Princes of Scotland and my loving friends.
Whose necks are ouer-wearied with the yoke.
And servile bondage of these Englishmen,
List up your horns, and with your brazen hooves,
Spur at the honour of your Enemies.
Tis not ambitious thoughts of private rule,
Hath fo^st your king to take on him these Arms,
Tis countries cause, it is the commons good,
Of us and of our brave posterity, to arms, to arms.
Versses by this hath told the King our minds,
And he hath braved proud England to the proof,
We will renumerate his resolution,
With gold, with glory, and with kingly gifts.

By sweet Saint Ierem Versses will not spare,
To tell his message to the English King:
And beard the jolly Longshankes to his face,
Were he the greatest Monarch in the world,
And here he comes his halter makes him hast.
Long live my lord the rightful King of Scots.

Welcome Versses, what news from England?
Like to the measure of Scotlands King?

Versses my Lord in terms like to himself,
Like to the messenger of Scottish King,
D^ed the Pears of England and their lords,
That all his Barons trembles at my threats,
And Longsharkes himself as dainted and amassed,
Gazed on my face not witting what to say:
Till rousing up he shook his threating hair,
Versses quoth he take thou King Edwards chain,
Upon condition, thou a message do,
To Balioll false, periurde Balioll.
For in these terms he bad me greet your Grace,
And gave this halter to your excellences,
I took the chain and gave your Grace the rope.

You took the chain and give my Grace the rope,
Lay hold on him, why miscreat recreant,
And dare thou bring a halter to thy King?
But I will quite thy pain, and in that chain,
Upon a silver Gallows shalt thou hang,
That honoured with a golden rope of England,
And a silver Gibbet of Scotland,
Thou may hang in the air for fowls to feed upon,
And men to wonder at, away with him away.

Strike up th^ drum, follow, pursue and chase,
Follow, pursue, spare not the proudest he,
That hauocks Englands sacred roialty.
Now fits the time to purge our melancholy, and be re^enged upon this London
Dame.

Katherina.
At hand Madam.

Bring forth our London Maris here.

I will Madam.

Now Nell be think thee of some tortures for the Dame:
And purge thy choler to the uttermost,
Now mistres Maris you have attendance urged,
And therefore to requite your courtesy,
Our mind is to bestow an office on you straight.

My self, my life, and service mighty Queen, are humbly at your Majesties
command.


Then mistres Maris say whether will you be our Nurse or Landeres.


Then may it please your Majesty, to entertain your handmaid for your
Nurse, she will attend the cradle carefully.


O no Nurse, the Babe needs no great rockeing, it can lull it self, Katherina
bind her in the chair, and let me see how sheele become a Nurse, so now
Katherin draw forth her breast and let the Serpent suck his fill, why so now
she is a Nurse, suck on sweet Babe.


Ah Queen sweet Queen, seek not my blood to spill:
For I shall die before this Adder have his fill.

Die or die not, my mind is fully pleased,
Come Katherina to London now will we,
And leave our Maris with her nursery.

Farewell sweet Maris look unto the Babe.

Farewell proud Queen the Author of my death,
The scourge of England and to English dames:
Ah husband sweet Iohn Bearmber Mayor of London,
Ah did thou know how Mary is perplexed,
Soon would thou come to Wales and rid me of this pain.
But oh I die, my wish is al in vain.

The angry Heavens frowned on Brittains fac^
To Eclipse the glory of fair Cambria,
With sor or aspects the dreadful Planets lower,
Lluellen basely turn thy back and fly,
No Welshmen fight it to the last and die.
For if my men safely have got the Bride,
Careless of chance, i'll reck no sour event,
Englands broad womb hath not that armed band,
That can expel Lluellen from his land.
Fly Lord of Cambria, fly Prince of VVales,
Sweet brother fly the field is won and lost,
Thou art beset with Englands furious troupes,
And cursed Mortimor like a Lion leads,
Our men have got the Bridge but al in vain:
The English men are come upon our backs,
Either flee or die for Edward hath the day:
For me I have my rescue in my hand,
England on me no torments shall inflict,
Farewell Lluellen while we meet in Heaven.
Follow pursue: lie there what ere thou be,
Yet soft my hearts let us his countenance see,
This is the Prince I know him by his face,
O gracious fortune that me happy made,
To spoil the weed that chokes fair Cambria,
Hale him from hence and in this buskie wood,
Bury his corps, but for his head I vowed,
I will present our governor with the same.

Come my gentle Richard my true master servant that in some storms have stood
my master, hang thee I pray thee least I hang for thee, and down on thy mary
bones like a foolish fellow, that have gone far astray and ask forgiveness of
God and king Edward for playing the rachel and the Rebel here in Wales, ah
gentle Richard many a what breakfast have we been at together, now since,
like one of Mars his frozen knights I must hang up my weapon upon this tree
and come per misericordiam to the mad Potter Mortimor, wring thy hands Friar
and sing a pitiful farewell to thy pikestaff at parting.


Bind fast the Traitor and bring him away, that the law may justly pass
upon him and receive the reward of monstrous treasons and villainy, stain to
the name and honour of his noble country for you that slew Lluellen and
presented us with his head, the King shall reward your fortune and chivalry.
Sweet Lady abate not thy looks so heavenly to the earth, God and the King of
England hath honour for thee in store, and Mortimors heart at service and at thy
commandment.


Thanks gentle Lord, but alas who can blame Elinor to accuse her stars, that
in one howre hath lost honour and contentment.


And in one howr may your Ladyship reconer both if you vouchsafero be advised
by your friends, but what makes the Friar here upon his mary bones?


O ^tter Potter the Friar doth sue,
Now his (...) master is slain and gone to have anew.

Ah sweet Lluellen how thy death I rue.

Well said Friar better once then never, give me thy hand, my cunning shall
fail me but we will be fellows yet, and now Robin Hood is gone, it shall cost
me what water but thou shalt be King Edwards man, only I enjoin thee this,
come not too near the Friar but good Friar be at my hand.


O sir no sir not so sir, a was warned too lately none of that flesh I
love.


Come on, and for those that have made their submission, and given their names
in the Kings name, I pronounce their pardones, and so God save K. Edward.


Why Ione, is this the welcome that the clouds affords, how dare these
disturb our thoughts, knowing that I am Edwardes wife and Englands Queen here
thus on Charing green to threaten me?


Ah mother blaspheme not so, your blaspheming and other wicked deeds hath
caused our God to terrify your thoughts, and call to mind your sinful fact
committed against the Maris here of lovely London, and better Maris London
never bread, so full of ruth and pity to the poor, her have you made away,
that London cries for vengeance on your head.


I rid her not, I made her not away, by heaven
I swear, Traitors they are to Edward and to Englandes
Queen that say I made away the Maris.

Take heed sweet Lady mother swear not so, a field of prise corn will not
stop their mouths, that said you have made a way that virtuous woman.


Gape earth and swallow me, and (...) my soul sink down to Hell if I were
Author of (...) women's Tragedy, Oh Ione, help Ione thy mother ^kes.


Oh mother my help is nothing, oh she is sunk, and here the earthis new
closed up again, ah Charinge green for ever change thy hew, and never may th^
^ras grow green again but wither and return to stones, because that
beauteous Elinor sink on thee, well I will send unto the king my fathers
Grace, and satisfy him of this strange mishap.


Now trothles King what fruits have braving boastes,
What end hath Treason but a sudden fall?
Such as have known thy life and bringing up,
Have praised thee for thy learning and thy art,
How comes it then that thou forgetst thy books,
That schoold thee to forgetingratitude,
Unkind, this hand hath no^ted thee a king,
This tongue pronounst the sentence of thy ruth,
If thou in ^ue of mine unfeigned love,
Hast levied arms for to attempt my crown,
Now see thy fruits, thy glories are dispea^st,
And his, for like since thou hast past thy bounds,
Thy slurdie neck must stoop to bear this yoke.

I took this lesson Edward from my book,
To keep a just equality of mind,
Content with every fortune as it comes,
So can^ thou threat no more then I expect.

So sir your moderation is enfor^t,
Your goodly glosses cannot make it good,

Then will I keep insilence what I mean,
Since Edward thinks my meaning is not good.

Nay Balioll speak forth, if there yet remain,
A little remnant of persuading Art.

If cunning have power to win the king,
Let those employ it that can flatter him.
If honoured deed may reconcile the King,
It lies in me to give and him to take.

Why what remains for Balioll now to give?

A^geance as becomes a royal king.

What league of fa^ where league is broken once?

The greater hope in them that once have fallen.

But foolish are those Monarchs that do yield
A conquered Realm upon submissive vows.

There take my crown and so redeem my life.

I sit that was the choicest plea of both,
For who so quels the pomp of haughty winds.
And breaks their s^fe, whereon they build their trust,
(...) wanting power they carry not harm.
(...) shall live, but yet within su^ bounds,
That if his wings grow ^ig, they may be clipped:

Iohn come away, you go as though you slept, a great knave and be afraid of
a little thundering and lightning.


Call you this a little thundering, I am sure my breeches finds it a great
deal, for I am sure they are stu^te with thunder.


They are stufte with a fool, are they not, will it please you to carry the
lantern a little handsommer, and not to carry it with your hands in your
slop^.


Slops quoth you would I had ta^d at ^ome by the fire, and then I should not
have need to put my (...) in my pockets, but (...) l^e my life I know the
reason of this towel we^ther.


Do you know the reason.' I pray thee Ioh^ tel me and let me hear this
reason.


I l^e my life son^e of your Gossipse becros leg^ that we came ^rom, b^t you
are wise mistres for you ^om now aw^ and wil^ no. (...) a go^ping in a dr^e
house all night.


Would it ple^se you to walk and leave of your (...), but st^ (...), whats
that rises out of the ground, Iesus bless us Iohn, look how it rises hig^er
and higher.


Be my troth mistres tis a woman, good Lord do women gr^, I never saw none grow
before.


Hold thy tongue t^ou foolish kn^ue, it is the spirit of some woman


Ha let me see where am I, on C^ring green, I o^ (...) green here h^rd by
Westminster where I was crowned and Edward there made King, I tis true (...),
and therefore Edward ^isse not me unless you will ^raight perfume your ^ps
Edward.


Orapr^ nobis Iohn, I pr^e ^ll to your prayers for my life it is the Queen
that chases thus, who s^cke this da^e on Charing gre^ne, a^ ^ow (...) (...) up
on Potters Hive, and ther^ore tru^e (...) i'll g^ to her.


Welcome good woman, what place is this, sea o^and I pray show to me.


Your Grace need not to fear you are on fi^e gr^und, it is the Potters Hive,
and therfoere cheer your Majesty for I will see you safe conducted to the
Court, if case your highness be therewithal pleased.


I good woman conduct me to the court, that there I may bew^ile my sin^ull
life, and call to God to save my wretched soul, won a what noise is this I
hear?


And like your Grace it is the Watermen that calls for passengers to go
Westward now.


That fits my turn, for I will straight with them to Kings town to the
Court, and there repose me till the king come home: and therefore sweet woman
conceal what thou hast seen, and lead me to those Watermen, for here doth
Elinor droop.


Come come here's a goodly leading of you is there not, first you must ^ake us
afraid, and now I must be troubled in carrying of you, I would you were
honestly l^id in your bed so that I were not troubled with you.


Honour and Fortune wait upon the Crown
Of Prince^e Edward Englands valiant king.

Thanks Messenger, and if my God vouchsaf^
That winged Honour wait upon my throne,
I'll ^ake her (...) her plu^bes upon their heads,
Whose true al^egeance doth confirm the Crown,
What news in Wales how wends our business there?

The false disturber of that was^ed soil,
With hi^ adherents is surprised my King:
And in assuran^ce he shall start no more,
Breathless he lies and headles to my Lords,
The circumstance these lines shall here unfold.

A harmfull w^ede by wisdom rooted out,
C^n never hurt the true ingratted plant,
But whats the news Sir Thomas Spencer brings?

Wonders my Lord, wrapped up in homely words,
And Letters to info^rme your Majesty.

O Heavens, what m^e these miracles portend?
Nobles my Queen is (...) but what is more,
Reed brother Edmund reed a w^drous chanc^

And ^not heard ^or red s^ strange a thing.

Sweet Queen (...) sinking is a (...) taken
Of pride, wherewith thy (...) mans (...) did swell,
A dangerous mal^die in the heart to dwe^l.
Lords march we toward^ London now in ^ast,
I will go see my lou^ lie Elinor,
And co^fort her after this strange ^ffright,
And where she is importune to have talk,
And secret conference with some Friars of France,
Mun thou with me and I with thee will go,
And take the sweet confession of my Nell,
We will h^ue French enough to p^rlee with the Quee^

Might I advise your royal majesty,
I would not go for millions of gold:
What ^nowes your grace disguised if you wend,
What you may hear in secrecy reuealde?
That may appeal and discontent your highness,
A goodly creature is your Elinor,
Brought up in niceness and in delicacy,
Then li^en not to her confession Lord,
To wound t^y heart with some unkind conce^te,
But as for Lancaster he may not go^.

brother I am resolude and go I will^
If God ^iue life, and cheer my dying Queen,
Why Mun, why man, what ere King Edward heates,
It lies in God and him to pardon all.
I'll have no ghos^lie Fathers out of France,
England hath learned Clarks and Confessors,
To comfort and absolve as m^n may do,
And i'll be ghos^lie Father for this once.

Edmund thou m^ist not go although tho^ di^.
And yet how may thou here thy King denie^
Ed^ard is gr^ious, merciful, meek and mild,
But (...) when ^e finds he is beguiled,

Messenger hie thee back to Shrewsbury.
Bid Mortimor thy master speed him fast,
And with his fortune welcome us to London,
I long to see my beauteous lovely Queen.

On before, on before.

Hold up your torches for dropping.

A fair procession, Sir Dauid be of good chea^ you cannot go out of the way
having so many guides at hand.


Be sure of that, for we go all the high way to the Gallows I warrant you.


I go where my star leads me, and die in my countries just cause and
quarrel.


The Star that twinkled at thy birth,
Good brother mine hath mard thy mirth,
An o'de said ^aw Eart^ must to earth,
Next year will be a piteous de^th,
Of Hemp I dare lay a penny:
T^is year is ^angde so many.

Well said Morgan Pigot Harper, and Prophet for the Kings one mouth.


^unda ted^ tedo dote dum, this is the day th^ time is come Morgan Pigots
prophecy and Lord Lluellens Tragedy.


Who saith the Prophet is an Ass, whose prophecies come so to pailc:
Said he not oft a^d sung it to, Lluellen after much ado,
Should i^ spite heave up his ^hin, and be the highest of his kin:
And see aloft Lluellens head,
Empalled with a crown of lead:
My Lord let not this South-^aire lack,
That hath such cunning in his jack.

Dauid hold still your clack.
Least your heals make your ne^ crack.

Gentle Prophet and ye love me for spe^ me' not, (...) the worst ^ke in the
world to stir a wirche or anger a wise man, master ^ffe have we any nast,
best give my horses some more ^aie.


Cal forth those renowned Friars come from France,
And raise me gentle Ladies in my bed,
That while this faltering engine of my speech,
I lean to utter my concealed guilt,
I may respect and so repent my sins

What plague a^cts your ro^ll Majesty?

Ah Ione I perish through a double wars,
First in this painful prison of my soul,
A world of dreadful sins help thee to sight,
And Nature h^uing lost her workin^ power,
Yields up her earthly Fortunes unto death.
Next over War my soul is over preast,
In thee my Conscience laden with misdeeds,
Sits seeing my Cons ience to ensue,
Without especial favour from above.

Your Grace must account it a warriors cross,
To make resist where danger there is none,
Superdewe your Fever by precious Art,
And help you still through hope of heavenly aid^

The c^relesse sleep rule on the mountains tops,
That see the Sea-man floating on the swerge,
The threatening winds comes springing with the floods
To overwhelm and drown his craised keele,
His tackestorne, his sails borne over board.
How pale like Vallowe flowers the mountain standes^
Upon his hatches waiting for his iearke,
Wringing his hands that ought to play the pomp,
May bla^e his fear that laboreth not for life.
So thou poor soul may tell a servile tale,
May council me, but I that prove thy pain.
May he^re thee talk: but not redress my harm,
But ghastly death already is addressed,
To glean the latest blossom of my life,
My spirit fails me, are these Friars come?

Dominus vobiscum.

Et cum spiritu tuo.

Draw near grave Fathers, and approach my bed:
Forbear our presence Ladies for a while,
And leave us to our secret conference.

What cause hath moved your royal Majesty,
To call your servant from their countries bounds?
For to attend your pleasure here in Englands court?

See you not holy Friars mine estate,
My body weak inclining to my grave.

We see and sorrow for thy pain fair Queen.

By this eternal signs of my defects,
Friars consecrate mine ineternall grief,
My soul, ah wretched soul within this breast,
F^nt for to mount the Heavens with wings of grace,
A hundred by flocking troupes of sin,
That stop my passage to my wished hours.

The nearer Elinor, so the greatest hope of health,
And deign to us for to impart your quiet.
Who by our prayers and counsel ought to arm,
Aspiring souls to scale the heavenly grace.

Shame and remorse doth stop my course of speac^.

Madam you need not dread our conference,
Who by the order of the holy Church,
Are all anointed to sacred secrecy.

Did I not thinke^ nay were I not assured,
Your wisdoms would be silent in that cause,
No fear could make me to be wraie my self,
^ue gentle fathers I have thought it good,
Not to rely upon these Englishmen,
But on your trothes, you holy men of France,
Then as you love your life and Englands weal,
Keep secret my Confession from the king,
For why my story nearelie touches him.
Whose love compared with my loss delights.
With many sorrows that my heart affrights.

My heart misgives.

Be silent, follow Friar.

In pride of youth when I was young and fair.
And gracious in the king of Englands sight,
The day before that night his Highness should,
Possess the pleasure of my wedlockes bed,
Caitiff accursed monster as I was,
His brother Edmund beautiful and young,
Upon my bridal couch by my concent,
Enioies the flower and favour of my love.
And I became a Traitress to my Lord.

Madam, through sickness, weakness, and your wits, twere very good to
bethink y^ ^fe before you speak.


Good father not so weak but that I woe,
My heat dothrent to think upon the time,
But why exclaims this holy Friar so^
Oh ^aie then for my faults religious man.

Tis charity in men of my degree,
To sorrow for our neighbours heinous sins:
And Madam, though some promise love to you,
And zeal to Edmund brother to the King,
I pray the Heavens you both may soon repent.
But might it please your Highness to proce^de,
Unto this sin a worser doth succeed.

For Ione of Acon the supposed child,
And daughter of my Lord the English King:
Is baselie borne begotten of a Friar.
Such time as I was their ai^ed in France,
His one lie true and lawful son my friends,
He is my hope, his son that should succeed.
Is Edward of Carnaruan lately borne,
Now all the scruples of my troubled mind,
I sighing sound within your reverent ears,
Oh pra^e for pity, pray for I must die.
Remitte my God the folly of my youth,
My groaned spirits attends thy mercies seat,
Fathers farewell, commend me to my King,
Commend me to my children and my friends,
And close mine eyes for death will have hi^ due.

Blushing I shut theie thine inti^ing lamps,
The wanton baits that make me suck my bane,
(...) hardened slames did never refl^ct,
More hideous slames then from my breast arise,
What fault more wild unto thy dearest Lord?
Our daughter base begotten of a Priest,
And Ned my brother partner of my love,
Oh that those eyes that lightened Cesars brain,
Oh that those looks that mastered Phucebus brand,
Or else those looks that stain Melisaes far,
Should shrine discreet desire and lawles lust,
Unhappy King dishonoured in thy stock,
Hence feigned weeds, unfeigned is my grief.

Dread Prince my brother if my vows avail,
I call to wit^es Heaven in my behalf,
If zealous prayer might drive you from suspect,
I bend my knees and humbly crave this boon,
That you will drive misdeeds out of your mind,
May never good betide my life my Lord,
If once I dreamde upon this damned deed,
But my deceased sister and your Queen,
Afflicted with recurelesse maladies,
Impatient of her pain grew lunatic,
Discovering errors never dreamde upon,
To prove this true the greatest men of all,
Within their learned volumes do discord,
That all extremes, and aland in nought but extremes,
Then think oh King her ago^e in death,
Bereaves her sense and memory at once,
So that she spoke she knew nor how nor what.

Sir fir, fain would your highness hide your faults,
By cunning vows and glossing terms of Art,
And well thou may delude these listening ears,
Yet never allwage by proof this jealous heart,
Traitor thy head shall ransom my disgrace,
Daughter of darkness, whose accursed bower,
The Poet fained to live upon Auernus,
Whereas Cimerians darkness checks the Sun,
Dauids jealousy afflict me not so sore,
Fair Queen Elinor could never be so false,
I but she vowed these treasons at her death,
A time not fit to fashion monstrous lies,
Ah my ungrateful brother as thou art,
Could not my love, nay more could not the law,
Nay further, could not nature thee allure,
For to refrain from this incestuous sin,
Hast from my sight, call Ione of Acon here,
The luke-warme spring distilling from his eyes,
His oaths, his vows, his reasons rested with remorse,
From forth his breast empoisoned with suspect.
Fain would I deem that false I find too true.
I come to know what Englands King commands,
I wonder why your Highness greetes me thus.
With strange regard and unacquainted terms.

Ah Ione this wonder needs must wound thy breast,
For it hath well nigh slain my wretched heart.

What is the Queen my sovereign mother dead
Woes in unhappy Lady we begone?

The Queen is dead, yet Ione lament not thou,
Poor soul guiltles art thou of this deceit,
That ^ath more cause to curse then to complain.

My dreadful soul assailed with doleful speech,
Joins me to bow my knees unto the ground,
Beseeding your most royal Majesty,
To rid your woeful daughter of suspect.

I daughter Ione, poor soul thou art deceived,
The King of England is no scorned Priest.

Was not the Lady Elinor your spouse,
And am not I the offspring of your Ioins?

I but when Ladies list to run as^raie,
The poor supposed father wears the horne,
And pl^ating leave their Liege in Princes laps,
Jone thou art daughter to a lecherous Friar,
A Friar was thy father haplesse Ione,
Thy mother in profession vows no less,
And I wild wretch which sorrowed hard no less,

What am I then a Friars base borne brat?
Presumptuous wretch why preasse I fore my king,
How can I look my husband in the face?
Why should I live since my renown is lost?
Away thou want on weed, hence worlds delight.

O som^o Dio come i gu^dneo humans,
Spesse offuscan son danu membo oscunro,
Haplesse and wretched, lift up thy heavy (...)
Nurse not so much as thi^ unhappy chance,
Inconstant Fortune still will have her course.

My King, my King, let Fortune have her course
Fly thou my soul and take a better corse,
Aies me from royal state I now am fain.
You purple springs that wander in my veins,
And meanwhile wants to feed^ my heavy heart,
Now all at once make hast and pity me,
And stop your powers and change your native course,
Disolue to air your luke-warme blouddie streams,
And cease to be that I may be no more,
Your curled locks draw from this cursed head,
A base her pomp for Ione is baselie borne,
Ah Gloster thou poor Gloster hast the wrong
Die wretch, hate death, for Ione hath lived ^oo long.

Revive thee hapless Lady grieve not thus,
In vain speak I for she revives no more,
Poor haplesse soul thy own espected moans,
Hath wrought her sudden and untimely death.
Lords, Ladies hast, ah Gloster a^t thou come,
Then must I now present a Tragedy,
Thy Ione is dead, yet grieve thou not her fall,
She was too base a spouse for such a Prince.

Conspire you then with Heavens to work my harms?
O sweet aflwagers of our martial miss,
Desired death deprive me of my life,
That I in death may end my life and love.

Gloster thy King is partner of thy heaviness,
Although nor tongue nor eyes bewraie his mean,
For I have lost a flower as fair as thine,
A love more dear, For Elinor is dead,
But since the heaven lie ordinance decrees,
That all things change in their prefixed time,
Be thou content and bear it in thy breast,
Thy swelling grief as needs I must mine,
Thy Ione of Acon and my Queen deceased,
Shall have that Honour as beseems their state.
You peers of England, see in ro^all pomp,
These (...) bodies be entombed straight
With tried colours covered all with black,
Let Spanish steeds as swift as sleeting wind,
Convey these Princes to their sunerall,
Before them let a hundred mourners ride,
In every time of their enforste abode,
Rear up a cross in token of their work,
Whereon fair Elinors picture shall be plaste,
Arrived at London near our Pallas bounds,
Inter my lovely Elinor late deceased,
And in remembrance of her royalty,
Erect a rich and stately carved Cross,
Whereon her stature shall with glory shine,
And hence forth see you call it Charing cross,
For why the chancest and the choicest Queen,
That ever did delight my royal eyes,
Their dwell in darkness whilst I die in grief,
But soft, what tidings with these Purciuants?

Sir Roger Mortimor with all Sussex as earste your Grace by message did
command, is here at hand in purpose to present your Highness with his signs
of victory, and trothles Balioll their accursed King, with fire and sword doth
threat Northumberland.


How one at fliction calls another over,
First death torments me, then I feel disgrace,
Again Lluellen he rebels in VVales,
And false Balioll means to brave me to,
But I will find provision for them all,
My co^ shall conquer death and shame,
And Mortimor tis thou must hast to wales,
And rous^ that Rebel from his starting holes,
And rid thy King of his contentions foe.
Whilst I with Elinor, Gloster, and the rest,
With speedy journey gather up our force,
And beat these braving Scots from out our bounds,
Courage brave Soldiers fates hath done their worst,
Now Virtue let me triumph in (...) (...)

Now (...) of Acon let me morn thy fall,
Sole here alone now set thee down and sigh,
Sig^aples Gloster for thy so deign less,
T^ale death alas hath ba^nished all thy pride,
Thy wedlock vows how ought have I beheld?
Thy eyes thy looks thy lips and every part,
How nature store in them to show their Art,
In shine, in shape, in colour and compare,
But now hath death the enemy of love,
Stained and deformed, the shine, the shape, the reed,
With pale and dimnes, and my love is dead.
Ah dead my love, vile wretch whicam I living?
So wills fates, and I must be contented,
All pomp in time must fade and grow to nothing,
VVept I like Nobe, yet it profits nothing,
Then cease my sighs since I may not regain her,
And woe to wretched death that th^s hath slain her.


