GEntlemen, I come to ye like one that lacks and would borrow, but was loath
to ask least he should be denied: I would ask, but I would ask ^o obtain:
O would I knew that manner of asking: to beg were base, and to cooche low and
to carry an humble show of entreaty, were too Dog-like that fawns on his
master to get a bone from his Trencher: out Curr^ I cannot abide it, to put on
the shape and habit of this new worlds new found beggars, mistermed Soldiers,
as thus: sweet Gentlemen, let a poor Scholar implore and exerate, that you
would make him rich in the possession of amite of your favours, to keep him a
true man in wit, and to pay for his lodging among the Muses: so God him help
he is driven to a most low estate, tis not unknown what service of words ^e
hath been at, he lost his limbs in a late conflict of flout, a brave repulse
and a hot assault it was, he doth protest, as ever he saw since he knew what
the report of a volley of testes were, he shall therefore desire you: A plague
upon it, each Beadle disdained, would whip him from your company. Well
Gentlemen, I cannot tell howe to get your favours better then by desert: then
the worse luck, or the worse wit or some what, for I shall not now deserve it.
Welcome then, I commit my self to my fortunes, your contents, contented to
dye, ^f your severe judgements shall judge me to be stung to death with the
Adders hiss.


GOod master Barnes, this entertain of yours,
So ^ull of courtesy and rich delight,
Makes me misdoubt my poor ability,
In quittance of this friendly courtesy.

O master Goursey, neighbour amity,
Is such ay well of high reckoned worth:
As for the attain of it, what would not I
D^sburse, it is so precious in my thoughts.

Kind sir, near dwelling amity indeed,
Offers the hearts enqui^y better view.
Then love that's seated in a farther soil,
As prospectiues the nearer that they be,
Yield better judgment to the judging eye,
Things seen far off, are lessened in the eye,
When their true shape is seen being hard by.

True sir, tis so, and truly I esteem,
Mere amity familiar neighbourhood,
The cousin germaine unto wedded love.

I sir, theirs surely some alliance twixt them,
For they have both the off-spring from the heart,
Within the hearts blood Ocean still are found,
Jewels of amity, and lemmes of love.

I master Goursey, I have in my time,
Seen many shipwrecks of true honesty,
But incident such dangers ever are,
To them that without compass sail so far,
Why what need men to swim when they may wade?
But leave this talk, enough of this is said,
And Master Goursey, in good faith sir welcome:
And mistress Goursey, I am much in debt,
Unto your kindness that would visit me.

O master Barnes, you put me but in mind,
Of that which I should say: tis we that are
Indebted to your kindness for this cheer:
Which debt that we may repay, I pray lets have,
Sometimes your company, at our homely house.

That mistress Goursey you shall surely have,
Heel be a bold guest I warrant ye,
And boulder too with you then I would have him.

How do ye mean he will be bold with me?

Why he will trouble you at home forsooth,
Often call in, and ask ye how ye do:
And sit and that with you all day till night,
And all night too if he might have his will.

I wife indeed, I thank her for her kindness,
She hath made me much good cheer passing that way.

Passing well done of her, she is a kind wench,
I thank ye mistress Goursey for my husband,
And if it hap your husband come our way
A hunting, or such ordinary sports,
I'll do as much for yours, as you for mine.

Pray do forsooth, Gods Lord what means the woman,
She speaks it scornfully, I faith I care not,
Things are well spoken, if they be well taken,
What mistress Barnes, is it not time to part?

Whats a clock sir?

Tis but new struck one.

I have some business in the town by three.

Till then lets walk into the Orchard sir.
What can you play at Tables?

Yes, I can.

What, shall we have a game?

And if you please.

I faith content, we'll spend an hour so:
Sir fetch the Tables,

I will sir.

Sir Frank, whilst they are playing here,
We'll to the green to Bowles.

Phillip content, Comes come hither sir,
When our Fathers part, call us upon the green,
Phillip come, a rubber and so leave,

Come on.

Sbloud, I do not like the humour of these springa^s, the^l spend all their
fathers good at (...)* But let them trowel the bowles upon the green: He
trowel the bowles in the Buttery, by the leave of God and master Barnes: and
his men be good fellows so it is, if they be not let them go snick up.


So set them down,
Mistress Goursey, how do you like this game?

Well sir.

Can ye play at it?

A little sir.

Faith so can my wife.

Why then master Barnes, and if you please,
Our wives shall try the quarrel twixt us two,
And we'll look on?

I am content, what woman will you play?

I care not greatly.

Nor I, but that I think sheele play me false.

I'll see she shall not.

Nay sir, she will be sure you shall not see.
You of all men shall not mark her hand,
She hath such close conveyance in her play.

Is she so cunning grown, come, come, lets see.

Yea mistress Barnes, will ye not house your jests,
But let them rome abroad so carelessly?
Faith, if your jealous tongue utter another,
I'll cross ye with a jest, and ye were my mother,
Come shall we play?

I, what shall we play a game?

A pound a game.

How wife?

Faith husband not a farthing less.

It is too much, a shilling were good game.

No, weell be ill housewives once,
You have oft been ill husbands, lets alone.

Wife, will you play so much?

I would be loath to be so frank a gai^ster
As mistress Goursey is, and yet for once,
I'll play a pound a game as well as she.

Go to, you'll have your will.

Come, there's my stake.

And there's mine.

Throw for the Dice: Ill luck they are yours.

Master Goursey, who says that gamings bad,
When such good Angels walk twixt every cast?

This is not noble sport, but royal play.

It must be so where royals walk so fast.

Play right I pray.

Why so I do.

Where stands your man?

In his right pl^ce.

Good faith, I think ye play me foul an Ace,

No wife, she plays ye true.

Peace husband, peace, i'll not be judged by you.

Husband master Barnes, pray both go walk.
We cannot play, if standers by do talk.

Well to your game, we will not trouble ye.

Where stands your man now?

Doth he not stand right?

It stands b^tweene the points.

And that's my spite.
But yet me thinks the dice runs much uneven,
That I throw but dews as and you eleven.

And ^et you see that I cast down the hill,

I, I beshrew ye, tis not with my will.

Do ye beshrew me?

No, I beshrew the dice.
That turn you up more at once, then me at twice.

Well, you shall see them turn for you anon.

But I care not for them when your game is done,

My game, what game?

Your game, your game attables.

Well mistress, well, I have red Aesops sables,
And know your morrals meaning well enough.

Lo you'll be angry, now here's good stuff,

How now woman, who hath won the game?

No body yet.

Your wife's the fairest far't.

I in your eye.

How do you mean?

He holds you fairer for it then I.

For what forsooth?

Good gamester, for your game.

Well, try it out, it is all but in the hearing.

Nay if it come to bearing, she'll be best.

Why, you're as good a bearer as the rest.

Nay that's not so, you bear one man too many.

Better do so then bear not any.

B^shrew me, but my wives jests grow too bitter,
Plainer speeches for her were more better,
Malice lies inbowelled in her tongue,
And new hatched hate makes every jest a wrong.

Look ye mistress now I hit ye.

Why I, you never ^se to misle a blot,
Especially when it stands so fair to hit.

How mean ye mistress Barnes?

That mistress Gourse's in the hitting vain.

I hot your man.

I, I, my man, my man, but had I known,
I would have had my man stood nearer home.

Why had ye kept your man in his right place,
I should not then have hit him with an as.

Right by the Lord, a plague upon the bones.

And a hot mischief on the curser too.

How now wife?

Why whats the matter woman?

It is no matter. I am.

I you are.

What am I?

Why that's as you will be ever.

That's every day as good as Barneses wife.

And better too, then what needs all this trouble?
A single horse is worse then that bears double.

Wife go to, have regard to that you say,
Let not your words pass forth the vierge of reason:
But keep within the bounds of modesty,
For ill report doth like a Bailiff stand,
To pound the straying, and the wit-lost tongue,
And makes it forseit into follies hands,
Well wife, you know tis no honest part,
To entertain such guests with jests and wrongs,
What will the neighbring country vulgar say,
When as they hear that you fell out at dinner?
Forsooth they'll call it a pot quar^ell straight,
The best they'll name it, is a woman's jangling,
Go too, be ruled, be ruled.

Gods Lord, be ruled, be ruled
What, think ye I have such a babies wit,
To hane a rods correction for my tongue?
School infancy, I am of age to speak,
And I know when to speak, shall I be child for such a?

What a? nay mistress speak it out,
I scorn your stopped compares, compare not me
To any but your equals, mistress Barnes,

Peace wife be quiet.

O persuade, persuade.
Wife, mistress Goursey, shall I win your thoughts,
To composition of some kind effects?
Wife, if you love your credit leave this st^ife,
And come shake hands, with mistress Goursey here,

Shall I shake hands? let her go shake her heals,
She gets nor hands, nor friendship at my hands,
And so si^ while I live I will take heed,
What guests I bid again unto my house.

Impatient woman, will you be so stiff in this absurdnes?

I am impatient now I speak,
But sir I'll tell you more an other time,
Go too, I will not take it as I have done.

Nay, she might stay, I will not long be here
To trouble her: well master Barnes,
I am sorry that it was our haps to day,
To have our pleasures parted with this fray,
I am sorry too for all that is amiss,
Especially that you are moou'de in this,
But be not so, t's but a woman's jar,
Their tongues are weapons, words their blows of war,
T'was but a while we buffeted you saw,
And each of us was willing to withdraw,
There was no harm nor bloodshed you did see:
Tush, fear us not, for we shall well agree:
I take my leave sir, come kind hearted man,
That speaks his wife so fair, I now and than,
I know you would not for an hundredth pound,
That I should hear your voices churlish sound,
I know you have a far more milder tune
Then peace, be quiet wife, but I have done:
Will ye go home? the door directs the way,
But if you will not, my duty is to stay.

Ha, ha, why here's a right woman, is there not?
They both have din'de, yet see what stomachs they have.

Well master Barnes, we cannot do with all,
Let us be friends still.

O master Goursey, the mettell of our minds,
Having the temper of true reason in them,
Affords a better edge of argument,
For the maintain of our familiar loves,
Then the soft leaden wit of women can,
Wherefore with all the parts of neighbour love,
I impart my self to master Goursey.

And with exchange of love I do receive it,
Then here weel part partners of two cursed wives.

Oh where shall we find a man so blessed that is not,
But come, your business and my home affairs,
Makes me deliver that unfriendly word amongst friends, farewell.

Twenty farewells sir.

But hark ye master Goursey,
Look ye persuade at home as I will do,
What man, we must not always have them soes.

If I can help it.

God help, God help,
Women are even untoward creatures still.

Come on Frank Goursey, you have good luck to win the game.


Why tell me, is't not good, that never played before upon your green.


Tis good, but that it cost me ten good crowns that makes it worse.


Let it not grieve thee man, come ore to us,
We will devise some game to make you win
Your money back again sweet Philip.

And that shall be ere long and if I live, But tell me Francis, what good
Horses have ye to hunt this Summer?


Two or three Jade, or so.

Be they but Jade?

No faith my wag string here
Did founder one the last time that he rid,
The best gray Nag that ever I laid my leg over.

You mean the flea bitten.

Good sir the same.

And was the same the best that ere you rid on?

I was it sir.

I faith it was not sir.

No, where had I one so good?

One of my colour, and a better too.

One of your colour, I ne'er remember him, one of that colour.


Or of that complexion.


Whats that ye call complexion in a horse.


The colour sir.


Set me a colour on your jest, or I will:


Nay good sir hold your hands.


What, shall we have it?


Why sir, I cannot paint.


Well then, I can. and I shall find a pe^sill for ye sir.


Then I must find the table if you do.


A whoreson barren wicked ^rchen.


Look how you chafe, you would be angry more, if I should tell it you.


Go to, I'll anger ye and if you do not.


Why sir, the horse that I do mean,
Hath a leg both straight and clean.
That hath nor spauen, splint nor flaw.
But is the best that ever ye saw,
A pretierising knee, O knee!
It is as round as round may be,
The full flank makes the buttock round,
This palfrey stands on no ground,
When as my maister's on her back,
If that he once do say but, tic,
And if he prick her, you shall see
Her gallop amain, she is so free,
And if he give her but a nod,
She thinks it is a riding rod:
And if he will have her softly go,
Then she trips it like a Do,
She comes so easy with the rain,
A twine thread turns her back again,
And truly I did ne'er see yet;
A horse play proudlier on the bit,
My master with good managing,
Brought her first unto the ring,
He likewise taught herto coruet,
To run and suddenly to set,
She's cunning in the wild goose race,
Nay she's apt to every pace,
And to prove her colour good,
A flea enamourd of her blood,
Digd for channels in her neck,
And there made many a crimson speck,
I think there's none that use to ride,
But can her pleasant trot abide,
She goes ^o even upon the way,
She will not stumble in a day,
And when my ma^ster.

What do I?

Nay nothing sir.

O fie Frank fie,
Nay, nay, your reason hath no justice now,
I must needs say, persuade him first to speak,
Then chide him for it: tell me pretty wag,
Where stands his prawncer, in what Inn or stable?
Or hath thy master put her out to run,
Then in what field, what champion feeds this courser?
This well paste bonnie steed that thou so praise.

Faith sir I think.

Villain, what do ye think?

I think that you sir have been asked by many,
But yet I never heard that ye told any,

Well boy, then I will add one more to many,
A^d ask thy master where this Jennet feeds:
Come Frank tell me, nay prethie tell me Frank,
My good horse-maister tell me, by this light
I will not steal her from thee: if I do,
Let me beheld a selone to thy love.

No Phillip no.

What, wilt thou were a point but with one tag?
Well Francis well, I see you are a wag.

Swounds where he these timber turners, these trowel the bowles, these green
men, these.


What, what sir?


These bowlers sir.


Well sir, what say you to Bowlers?


Why I say they cannot be saved.


Your reason sir?


Because they throw away their souls at every mark


Their souls, how mean ye?


Sir he means the soul of our bowl.


Lord how his wit holds bias like a bowl.


Well, which is the B^as?


This next to you.


Nay turn it this way, then the bowl goes true.


Rub, rub.


Why rub?


Why you overcast the mark and miss the way.


Nay boy Ivse to take the fairest of my play.


Dicke Comes me thinks thou art very pleasant. When gotst thou this mirrie
humour?


In your fathers Seller, the merriest place in th'house.


Then you have been carousing hard,


Yes faith, it is our custom when your fathers men we mere.


Thou art very welcome thither Dicke.


By God I thank ye sir, I thank ye sir, by God I have a quart of Wine for ye
sir in any place of the world, there shall not a serving-man in Barkeshire fight
better for ye then I will do, if you have any quarrel in hand, you shall have
the maidenhead of my new sword: I paid a quarters wages sor't by Iesus.


Oh this meat failure Dicke,
How well t'as made apparel of his wit,
And brought it into fashion of an honour,
Prethe Dicke Comes but tell me how thou dost?

Faith sir like a poor man at service.


Or serving man.


Indeed so called by the vulgar.


Why where the devil had thou that word?


O sir, you have the most eloquenst ale in all ^he world, our blunt soil
affords none such,


Phillip leave talking with this drunken fool, Say sir where's my father?


Marry I thank ye ^or my ve^ good cheer, O Lord it is not so much worth, you
see I am bold with ye, Indeed you are not so bold as welcome, I pray ye come
oftner, Truly I shall trouble ye, all these ceremonies are dispatcht between
them, and they are gone.


Are they so?

I before God are they.

And wherefore came not you to call me then?

Because I was loath to change my game,

What game?

You were at one sort of bowles, as I was at another,

Sir, he means the buttery bowles of beer.

By God sir we tickled it.

Why what a swearing keeps this drunken ass,
Can thou not say but swear at every word?

Peace do not mar his humour prethie Frank.

Let him alone, he's a springall, he knows not what belongs to an oath.


Sir, be quiet, or I do protest.

Come, come, what do you protest?

By heaven to crack your Crown,

To crack my crown, I lay yea crown of that,
Lay it down and ye dare:
Nay sbloud, i'll venture a quarters wages of that,
Crack my crown quoth a?

Wirl ye not be quiet, will ye urge me?

Urge ye with a pox, who urges ye?
You might have said so much to a clown,
O ron that had not been ore the sea to see fashions,
I have I tell ye true, and I know what belongs to a man,
Crack my crown and ye can.

And I can ye rascal. Phi. Hold hair brain hold,
Dost thou not see hes drunk?

Nay let him come,
Though he be my masters son, I am my masters man,
And a man is a man in any ground in England:
Come, and he dare, a comes upon his death,
I will no^ budge an inch: no sbloud will not,

Will ye not?

Stay prithie Frank, Comes dost thou hear?

Hear me no hears
Stand away, I'll trust none of you all,
If I have my back against a Cart wheel,
I would not care, if the devil came.

Why ye fool, I am your friend.

Fool on your face, I have a wife,

She's a whore then.

She's as honest as Nan Lawson.

Whats she?

One of his whores.

Why hath he so many?

I as many as there be Churches in London.

Why that's an hundred and nine.

Faith he lies a hundred.

Then thou art a witness to nine.

No by God, I'll be witness to none:

Now do I stand like the George at Colbrooke:

No thou standst like the Bull at S. Albones.

Boy ye lye the horns.

The Bul's bitten, see how he buts.

Comes, Comes, put up, my friend and thou art friends

I'll hear him say so first.

Frank prethie do, be friends and tell him so,

Go to I am.

Put up sir, and ye be a man put up.

I am easily persuaded boy.

Ah ye mad slave.

Come, come, a couple of whore-masters I found
ye, and so I leave ye.

Lo Frank dost thou not see hes drunk,
That twits me with my disposition?

What disposition?

Nan Lawson, Nan Lawson,

Nay then,

Go to ye wag, tis well,
If ever ye get a wife, I faith I'll tell,
Sir at home we have a Serving-man,
Hes not humord bluntly as Comes is,
Yet his condition makes me often merry,
I'll tell thee sir, hes a fine neat fellow,
A spruce slave, I warrant ye, heel have
His Cruel garters cross about the knee,
His woollen hose, as white as the driven snow,
His shoes dry leather neat, and tied with red ^bbins,
A nose-gay bound with laces in his Hat,
Bridelaces sir his hat, and all green hat.
Green Co^erlet, for such a grass green wit,
The goose that graseth on the green quoth he,
May I eat on, when you shall buried be,
All Proverbs in his speech, he's prouerb^ all.

Why speaks he Proverbs?

Because he would speak truth,
And proverbs you'll confess, are old said sooth.

I like this well, and one day I'll see him,
But shall we part?

Not yet, I'll bring you somewhat on your way,
And as we go, between your boy and you,
I'll know where that Praunser stands at leuery.

Come, come you shall not.

I faith I will.

Wife in my mind, to day you were too blame
Although my patience did not blame ye for it:
Me thought the rules of love and neighbourhood,
Did not direct your thoughts, all indirect
Were your proceedings, in the entertain
Of them that I invited to my house.
Nay stay. I do not chide but counsel wife,
And in the mildest manner that I may,
You need not view me with a servants eye,
Whose vassailes senses tremble at the look
Of his displeased master, O my wife,
You are my self, when self sees fault in self.
Self is sin obstinate, if self amend not,
Indeed I saw a fault in thee my self,
And it hath set a foil upon thy fame,
Not as the foil doth grace the Diamond.

What fault sir did you see in me to day?

O do not set the organ of thy voice,
On such a grunting key of discontent:
Do not deform the beauty of thy tongue,
With such misshapen answers, rough wrathful words
Are bastards got by rashness in the thoughts,
Fair demeanours, are Virtues nuptial babes,
The off-spring of the well instructed soul,
O let them call thee mother, then my wife,
So seem not barren of good courtesy.

So, have ye done?

I, and I had done well.
If you would do, what I advise for well.

Whats that?

Which is, that you would be good friends with mistress Gours^y.

With mistress Goursey.

I sweet wife.

Not so sweet husband.

Could you but show me any grounded cause.

The grounded cause, I ground because I will not

Your will hath little reason then I think.

Yes sir, my reason equalleth my will.

Lets hear your reason, for your will is great.

Why for I will not.

Is all your reason, for I will not wife.
Now by my soul I held ye for more wise,
Discreet, and of more temperature in sense,
Then in a sullen humour to effect,
That woman's will borne common scholar phrase,
Oft have I heard a timely married girl,
That newly left to call her mother mam,
Her father Dad, but yesterday come from,
That's my good girl, God send thee a good husband,
And now being taught to speak the name of husband,
Will when she would be wanton in her will,
If her husband ask her why, say for I will,
Have I chid men for unmanly choice,
That would not sit their years, have I seen thee
Pupell such green young things, and with thy counsel,
Tutor their wits, a^ dart thou now infected,
With this disease of imperfection,
I blush for thee ashamed at thy shame.

A shame on her, that makes thee rate me so,

O black mouth'drage, thy breath is boy^erou^*
And thou makst virtue shake at this high storm,
She's of good report, I know thou know i^.

She is not, nor I know not, but I know
That thou dost love her, there^o^e think her so,
Thou bear with her, because she bears with the^*
Thou may be ashamed to stand in her defence,
She is a strumpet, and thou art no honest man
To stand in her defence against thy wife,
If I catch her in my walk now by C^kes bones,
I'll scratch out both her eyes.

O Godl

Nay never say O God for the matter,
Thou art the cause, thou bad her to my house,
Only to blear the eyes of Goursey, did not?
But I will* send him word I warrant thee,
And ere I sleep to, trust upon it sir.

Methinks this is a mighty fault in her,
I could be angry with her: O if I be so,
I ^hall but put a Link unto a Torch,
And so give greater light to see her fault:
I'll rather smother it in melancholy,
Nay, wisdom bids me shun that passion,
Then I will study for a remedy,
I have a daughter now heaven invoke,
She be not of like spirit as her mother,
(...) she'll be a plague unto her husband,
If that he be no^ patient and discreet,
For that I hold the ease of all such trouble,
Well, well, I would my daughter had a husband,
For I would see how she could demean her self,
^n that estate, it may be ill enough,
And so God shall help me, well remembered now,
Frank Goursey is his fathers some and heir,
A youth that in my heart I have good hope on,
My senses say a match, my soul applauds
The motion: O but his land^ are great,
He will look high why I will strain my self.
To make her dowry equal with his land,
Good faith and twere a match 'twould be a means,
To make their mothers friends: I'll call my daughter,
To see how she^s disposed to marriage:
Mall, where are ye?

Father, here I am

Where is your mother?

I saw her not forsooth, since you and she
Went walking both together to the garden.

Dost thou hear me girl? I must dispute with thee

Father the question then must not be ha^d,
For I am very weak in argument.

Well, this it is, I say tis good to marry.

And this say I, tis not good to marry.

Were it not good, then all men would not marry
But now they do.

Marry not all, but it is good to marry.

It is both good and bad, how can this be?

Why it is good to them that marry well,
To them that marry ill, no greater hell.

If thou might marry well, would thou agree?

I cannot tell, heaven must appoint for me.

Wench I am studying forthy good indeed,

My hopes duty, wish your thoughts good speed

But tell me wench, hast thou a mind to marry:

This question is too hard for bash^ulnes,
And Father, now ye pose my modesty,
I am a maid, and when ye ask me thus,
I like a maid must blush look pale and wan,
And then look pale again, for we change colour,
As our thoughts change, with true faced passion,
Of modest maidenhead, I could adorn me,
And to your question, make a sober curtsy,
And with clo^e clipped civility be silent,
Or else say no forsooth, or I forsooth,
If I said no forsooth, I lied forsooth,
To lye upon my self were deadly sin,
Therefore I will speak truth and shame the devil,
Father, when first I heard you name a husband,
At that same very name, my spirits quickened,
Dispa^e before had killed them, they were dead,
Because it was my hap so long to tarry,
I was persuaded I should never marry.
And sitting sowing thus upon the ground,
I fell in trance of meditation,
But coming to my self, O Lord said I,
Shall it be so, must I unmarried dye?
And being angry Father, farther said,
Now by saint Anne, I will not dye a maid,
Good faith before I came to this ripe groath,
I did accuse the labouring time of sloth,
Me thought the year did run but slow about,
For I thought each year ten I was without,
Being fourteen, and toward the other year:
Good Lord thought I, fifteen will ne'er be here,
For I have heard my mother say, that then
Pretty maids, were fit for handsome men,
Fifteen past, s^xeteene and seventeen too,
What, thought I, will not this husband do?
Will no man marry me, have men forsworn,
Such beauty and such youth? shall youth be worn
As rich men's gowns, more with age then use?
Why the^ I'let restained fancy loose,
And bad it gaze for pleasure: then love swore me
To do what ere my mother did before me,
Yet in good faith, I was very loath,
But now it lies in you to save my oath:
If I shall have a husband, get him quickly,
For m^aides that wears Cork shoes, may step awry.

Believe me wench, I do not apprehend thee,
But for this pleasant answer do commend thee.
I must confess, love doth thee mighty wrong,
But I will see thee have thy right ere long,
I know a young man, whom I hold most fit,
To have thee, both for living and for wit,
I will go write about it presently.

Good father do, O God me thinks I should
Wife it as fine as any woman could:
I could carry a port to he obayde,
Carry a mastering eye upon my maid,
With minion do your business or I'll make ye,
And to all house authority be take me.
O God would I were married, be my troth,
But if I be not, I swear I'll keep my oath.

How now minion, where have you bin gadding

Forsooth my father called me forth to him.

Your Father, and what said he too ye I pray?

Nothing forsooth.

Nothing that cannot be, something he said.

I something, that as good as nothing was.

Come let me hear, that something nothing then

Nothing but of a husband for me mother.

A husband, th^t was something, but what husband

Nay faith I know not mother, would I did.

I would ye did, I faith are ye so hasty?

Hasty mother, why how old am I?

Too young to marry.

Nay by the mass ye lie
Mother, how old were you when you did marry.

How old so ere I was, yet you shall tarry.

Then the worse for me, hark Mother hark,
The Priest forgets that ere he was a Clarke,
When you were at my years, I'll hold my life,
Your mind was to change maidenhead for wife,
Pardon me mother, I am of your mind,
And by my troth I take it but by kind.

Do ye hear daughter, you shall stay my leisure

Do you hear mother, would you stay fro pleasure
When ye have mind to it? go to, there's no wrong
Like this, to let maids lye alone so long
Lying alone they muse but in their beds,
How they might loose their long kept maiden heads,
This is the cause there is so many scapes,
For women that are wise, will ^ot lead Apes
In hell, I tel ye mother I say true,
Therefore come husband, maiden head adieu.

Well lusty guts, I mean to make ye stay,
And set some rubs in your minds smothest way.

Mother.

How now ^rra, where have ye bi^ walking?

Over the meads half way to Milton mother,
To bear my friend Frank Goursey company.

Wher's your blew coat, your sword buckler sir
Get you such like habit for a serving-man,
If you will weight upon the brat of Goursey.

Mother, that you are moved this mak^ me wonder,
When I departed I did leave ye friends,
What vndigested ^arre hath since betided?

Such as almost doth choke thy mother boy.
And sti^es her with the conceit of it,
I am abused my son by Goursey^ wife.

By mistress Goursey?

Mistress flourish, you foul strumpet,
Light aloue, short heals, mistress Goursey,
Call her again and thou were better no.

O my dear more have some patience,

I sir, have patience, and see your father
To rifle up the treasure of my love,
And play the spend-thrift upon such an harlot?
This same will make me have patience, will it not?

This same is women's most impatience,
Yet mother I have often heard ye say,
That you have found my father temperate,
And ever f^ee from such affections.

I, till my too much love did glut his thoughts,
And make him seek for change,

O change your mind
My father bears more cordial love to you.

Thou lie, thou lie, for he loves Gourseys wife, not me.

Now I swear mother you are much too blame,
I durst be sworn he loves you as his soul.

Wilt thou be pampered by affection?
Will nature teach thee such wild perjury?
Wilt thou be sworn, I forlorn, careless boy?
And if thou swearst, I say he loves me not.

He loves ye but too well I swear,
Unless ye knew much better how to use him,

Doth he so sir? thou unnatural boy,
Too well say thou, that word shall cost thee somewhat,
O'monstrous, have I brought thee up to this?
Too well, O unkind, wicked and degenerate,
Hast thou the heart to say so of thy mother?
Well, God will plague thee sort, I warrant thee,
Out on thee villa^ne, fie upon thee wretch,
Out of my sight, out of my sight I say.

This air is pleasant, and doth please me well,
And here I will stay,

Wilt thou stubborn villain?

How now, whats the matter?

Thou set thy son to scoff and mock at me,
Is't not sufficient I am wronged of thee?
But he must be an agent to abuse me?
Must I be subject to my cradle too? O God, o God amed it.

Why how now Phillip, is this true my son?

Dear father she is much impatient:
Ne'er let that hand assist me in my need,
If I more said, then that she thought amiss,
To think that you were so licentious given,
And thus much more, when she inferred it more,
I swore an oath you loved her but too well,
In that as guilty I do hold my self,
Now that I come to more considerate trial,
I know my fault, I should have borne with he^,
Blame me for rashness, then not for want of duty.

I do absolve thee, and come hither Phillip,
I have writ a letter unto master Goursey,
And I will tell thee the contents thereof,
But tell me first, think thou Frank Gours^? loves thee?

If that a man devoted to a man,
Loyal, ^eligious, in loves hallowed vows,
If that a man that is soul laboursome,
To workehis own thoughts to his friends delight,
May purchase good opinion with his friend,
Then I may say* I have done this so well,
That I may think Frank Goursey loves me well.

Tis well, and I am much deceived in him,
And if he be not sober, wise, and valiant.

I hope my father takes me for thus wise,
I will not glue my self in love to one,
That hath not some desert of virtue in him,
What ere you think of him, believe me Father,
He will be answerable to your thoughts,
In any quality commendable.

Thou chearst my hopes in him, and in good faith,
Thoust made my love complete unto thy friend,
Phillip I love him, and I love him so,
I could afford him a good wife I know.

Father, awife?

Phillip a wife.

I lay my life my sister.

I in good faith.

Then father he shall have her he shall I swear.

How can thou say so knowing not his mind?

All is one for that, I will go to him straight,
Father if you would seek this seven years day,
You could not find a (...) match for her,
And he shall have her, I swear he shall,
He were as good be hanged as once deny her, I saith I'll to him

Hairebraine, hairebraine* stay,
As yet we do not know his fathers mind,
Why what will master Gours^y ^ay my son,
If we shou^ld ^otion it without his knowledge?
Go to, hes a wise and discreet Gentleman,
And that respects from me all honest parts,
Nor shall he fail his expectation,
First I do mean to make him privy to it,
Phillip this letter is to that effect.

Father, for Gods sake send it quickly then,
I'll call your man, what Hugh, wheres Hugh, there h^.

Phillip if this would prove a match, it were the only means that could be
found, to make thy mother friends with Mist. You. Phil How a match? I'll warrant
ye a match^

My sister's fair, Frank Goursie he is rich,
His dowry too, will be sufficient,
Franke's young, and youth is apt to love,
And by my troth my sisters maiden head
Stands like a game attennis, if the ball
Hit into the hole or hazard, farewell all.

How now, where's Hugh?

Why what doth this proverbial with us, why where's Hugh?

Peace, peace.

Where's Hugh I say?

Be not so hasty Phillip.

Father let me alone,
I do it but to make my self some sport,
This formal fool your man speaks nought but proverbs,
And speak men what they can to him, he will answer
With some time, rotten sentence, or old saying,
Such spokes as the ancient of the parish use,
With neighbour tis an old proverb and a true,
Goose giblets are good meat, old sack better then new,
Then says another, neighbour that is true,
And when each man hath drunk his gallon round,
A penny pot, for that's the old mans gallon,
Then do^h he like his lips and stroke his beard,
That's glued together with his slavering drops,
Of ye^y ale, and when he scarce can trim,
His gouty fingers, thus he will phillip it,
And with a rotten hem say hey my hearts,
Merry go so^y cock and pie my hearts,
But then their ^auing penny proverb comes,
And that is this: they that will to the wine,
Berlady mistress shall lay their penny to mi^e,
This was one of this penny-fathers bastards,
For on my life he was never begot,
Without the consent of some great prouerb-monger.

O ye are a wag.

Well, now unto my business;
Swounds will that mouth that's made of old sed saws,
And nothing else, say nothing to us now?

O ^ you must not leap over the stile before you come at it, haste makes
waste, soft fire makes sweere mast, no^ too fast for falling, there's no hast
to hang true men.


Father we ha'te, ye see we ha'te, now will I see if my memory will serve for
some proverbs too. O a painted cloth were as well worth a (...), as a these
worth a halten well, after my hearty commend^tions, as I was at the making
hereof* so it is, that I hope as you speed, so you're sure a swift horse will
tire, but he that trottes easily will endure, you have most learnedly
prouerbde it, commending the virtue of patience or forbearance, but yet you
know forbearance is no quittance.


I promise ye maistor Philip you have spoken as true as steel.


Father, there's a proverb well applied.


And it seems unto me, I it seems to me, that you master Phillip mock me,
do you not know qui mocat mo^bitur, mock age and see how it will prosper?


Why ye whoreson proverb book bound up in folio,
Have ye no other sense to answer me,
But every word a proverb, no other English?
Well, I'll fulfil a proverb on thee straight.

What is it sir?

^e fetch my fist from thine (...),

Bear withesse he threatens me.

Father that same is the cowards common proverb:,
But come, come sir, tell me where Hugh is?

I may and I will, I need not except I list, you shall not command me, you
glue me neither meat, drink, nor wages, I am your fathers man, and a man's a
man, and a have but a hose on his head, do not misuse me so, do not, for though
he that is bound must obey, yet he that will not tarry, may run away so he
may.


Peace Nick, I'll see he shall use thee well,
Go to peace sir, here Nick take this let ^r,
Carry it to him to whom it is directed.

To whom is it?

Why read it, can thou read?

Forsooth though none of the best yet meanly:

Why dost thou not use it?

Forsooth as use makes perfectnes, so seldom seen is soon forgotten.


Well said, but go, it is to Master Goursey,


Now sir, what proverb have ye to deliver a letter?


What need you to care? who speaks to you? you may speak when you are spoken
to, and keep your wind to cool your pottage: well, well, you are my masters
son you look for his land, but they that hope for dead men's shoes, may hap
to go barefoot: take heed, as soon goes the young sheep to the pot'as the
old. I pray God save my Masters life, for seldom comes the better.


O he hath given it me: farewell proverbs.

Farewell frost,

Shall I fling an old shoe after ye?

No, you should say God send fair weather after me,

I mean for good luck.

A good luck onye.

Alas poor fool, he uses all his wit,
Phillip in faith this mirth hath cheered thought,
And cussend it of his right play of passion,
Go after Nick, and when thou think hes there,
Go in and urge to that which I have writ,
I'll in these meadows make a cerckling walk,
And in my meditation conjure so,
As that some send of thought selfe^eating anger,
Shall by my spells of treason vanish quite
Away, and let me beat fromthee to night.

To night, yes that you shall, but hark ye father,
Look that you my sister waking keep,
For Frank I swear shall kiss her ere I sleep.

I am very d^y with walking ore the green,
Bu lersome Beer, sir call the Butler.

Nay faith sir, we must have some smith to give the butler
A drench, or cut him in the forehead, for he hath got
A horses disease, namely the staggers, to night hes a good
Huswife, he reeles al that he wrought to day, he were good
Now to play at dice, for he castes excellent well.

How meanst thou, is he drunk?

I cannot tell, but I am sure he hath more liquor in him
Then a whole dicker of hydes, hes sockt thoroughly I faith.

Well go and call him, bid him bring me drink.

I will si^.

My mother powers and will look merrily,
Neither upon my father nor on me,
He says she fell out with mistress Barnes to day,
Then I am sure they'll no: be quickly friends,
Good Lord what kind of creatures women are?
Their love is lightly won and lightly lost,
And then their hate is deadly and extreme.
He that doth take a wife, betakes himself
To all the cares and troubles of the world,
Now her disquietnes doth grieve my father,
Grieves me, and troubles all the house besides,
What, shall I have so no drink? how now a horne?
Belike the drunken slave is fallen a sleep,
And now the boy doth wake him with his horne,
How now sir, wheres the butler?

Mary sir, where he was even now a sleep, but I waked him, and when he waked, he
thought he was in master Barnses buttery, for he stretched himself thus: and
y^uning said, Nick, honest Nick fill a fresh bowl of ale, stand to it Nick
and thou be a man of Gods making, stand to it, and then I winded my horne,
and hes horne mad.


Boy hey, ho boy, and thou be a man draw, O here's a blessed mooneshine God
be thanked, boy is not this goodly weather for barley?


Spoken like a right maulster Hodge, but dost thou heare^ thou art not drunk.


No, I scorn that I faith.


But thy fellow Dicke Comes is mightily drunk.


Drunk, a plague on it, when a man cannot carry his drink well: sbloud I'll
stand to it.


Hold man, see and thou can stand first,


Drunk? hes a beast and he be drunk, there's no man that is a sober man will
be drunk, hes a boy and he be drunk.


No, hes a man as thou art.


Thus tis when a man will not be ruled by his friends, I bad him keep under
the lee, but he kept down the weather two bows, I told him he would be
taken with a planet, but the wisest of us all may fall.


True Hodge.


Whope lend me thy hand Dicke, I am fallen into a Well, lend me thy hand, I shall
be drowned else.


Hold fast by the bucket

Hodge, A rope on it.

I there is a rope on it, but where art thou Hodge?

In a Well, I prethie draw up.

Come give up thy body, wind up, hoist.

I am over head and ears,

In all Hodge, in all.

How loathsome is this beast mans shape to me?
This mould of reason so unreasonable,
Sir, why dost thou trip him down seeing hes drunk?

Because sir I would have drunkards cheap.

How mean ye?

Why they say, that when any thing hath a fall, it is cheap, and so of
drunkards.


Go to help him up, but hark who knocks?


Sir, here's one of Master Barnsies men with a letter to my old master.
Fran. Which of them is it?


They call him Nicholas sir.

Go call him in.

By your leave ho, how now young master how is't?

Look ye sir, where your fellow lies,
Hes in a fine taking, is he not?

Whope Hodge, were art thou man, where art thou?

O in a well.

In a well man, nay then thou art deep in understanding,

I once to day you were almost so sir,

Who I, go to young master, I do not like this humour in ye ^ give every man
his do, and give him no more: say I was in such a case, go to tis the greatest
indigna tion that can be offered to a man: and but a mans more god her given,
you were able to make him swea^e out his hear: blood, what though-that ^ he ere
or as some say, cut a feather: what though he be (...) misled, band, or as it
were tis no consequent to me: you know i have drunk all the A^houses in (...)
dry, and laideth: tappes on the tables when i had done: (...) I'll challenge
all the true rob. pots ^, to leap up to the (...) in a (...) of beer, and if
i can not drink it down to my foot ere i leave, and then set the (...) in
(...) of the house, and then turn a good turn on the toe on it, let me be
counted no bod^e, a^pingler, nay let me be bound to drink nothing but small
beer seven years after, and I had as ^.


Peace sir, I must (...) with one, Nicholas I think your name is,


True as the skin between your brows.

Well, how doth my master?

^orsooth live, and the best doth no better.

Where is the letter he hath sent me?

^

Tis right as Phillip said, tis a fine soole,
This letter is directed to my father.
I'll carry it to him, Dicke Comes make him drink.

I, I'll make him drunk and he will.

Not so Richard, it is good to be ^

Well Nicholas, as thou art Nicholas, welcome, but as thou art Nicholas and a
boon companion, ten times welcome, Nicholas give me thy hand; shall we be
(...)? and we shall, say but we shall, and let the first word stand.


Indeed as long (...) the (...) man ^,
Anownce of debt will not pay a pound of care?

Nay, a pound of care will not pay anownce of debt.

Well, tis a good horse never stumbles but who lies here?

Tis our Hodge, and I ^hinke he lies a sleep, you made him drunk at your house
to (...) ^ut I'll pepper so^ of you fort.


I Richard, I know yo^e put a man over the shoes, if you can, but hes a fool
will take more then will do him good.


Sbloud ye shall take more then will do ye good,
Or I'll make ye clap under the table.

Nay, I hope, as I have temperance to forbear drink so have I patience to
endure ^ company doth, for when a ma doth to Rome come, he must do as there is
done,


Ha my resolved Nick Frol^go^ene, fill the po^e Hostess, swoons you whore,
Harry Hooke's a rascal: help me but carry my fellow Hodge in, and we'll
crushe it I ^ith.


By this I think, the letter is delivered,
And twill be shortly time that I step in,
And woo their favours for my sisters fortune,
And yet I need not, she may do as well,
But yet not better, as the case doth stand,
Between our mothers it may make the^ friends,
Nay I would swear tha^ she would do as well,
Were she a stranger to ^
But they are so acquainted, thei^ ne'er part,
Why she will flout the devil and make blush
The boldest face of man, that ever man saw,
He that hath best opinion ^ wit,
And hath his brain pan fraught with bitter Jests,
Or of his own, or istolne, or how (...),
Let him: stand^e^ so high in his own conceit,
Her wit's a sun, that melts him down like butter,
And makes him sit at table (...) wise,
Flat, flat, ^ a word to say,
Yet sheele not (...) him (...), but like a tyrant,
Sheele persecute the poor wi^-beaten man,
And so be bang hi^ with dry (...) and scoffs,
When he is down, most cowardly good faith,
As I have pit^ed the poor patient.
(...) came a Farmers son a wooing to her,
A proper man, well landed too he was,
A man that for his wit need not to ask,
What time a year twere good to sow his Oats,
Nor yet his Barley, no nor when to reap,
To plow his Fallowes, or to (...) his Trees,
Well experienst thus each kind of way,
After a two months labour at the most,
And yet twas well he held it out so long,
He left his love, she had so last his lips,
He could say nothing to her, but God be with ye,
Why she, when men have dined and call for chee^e,
Will straight ma^netaine jests bitter todisgest,
And then some one will fall to argument,
Who if he over master her with reason,
Then sheele begin to buffe^ him with mocks,
Well I do doubt, Frances hath so much spleen,
Theil ne'er agree, but I will moderate.
By this time, tis time I think to enter,
This is the house, shall I knock? no I will not
Wait while one comes out to answer:
I'll in, and let them be as bold with us.

If that they like her ^owry shall be equal,
To your sons wealth or possibility,
It is a means to make our wines good friends,
And to continue friendsh^p twi^ to two,
Tis so indeed, I like this motion,
And it hath my consent, because my wife, is sore infected and hart sick with
hate: I have sought the G^l^ of advice, which only tells me this same potion,
to be most sovereign for her sickness cure.

Here comes my son, conferring with his friend,
France, how do you like your friends discourse?
I know he is persuading to this motion.

Father, as matter that befits a friend,
But yet not me, that am too young to marry.

Nay, if thy mind be forward with thy years, The time is lost thou t^rriest,
trust me boy, This match is a^swerable to thy birth, Her blood and portion give
each other grace: These indented lines promise a sum, And I do like the value,
if it hapthy liking to accord to my consent, It is a match: wilt thou go see
the maid?


Ne'er trust me Father, the shape of marriage,
Which I do see in others, seem so severe,
I dare not put my youngling liberty,
Under the awe of that instruction,
And yet I grant the limits of free youth
Going astray, are often restrained by that:
But mistress wedlock, to my scholar thoughts,
Will be too cursed I fear, O should she snip,
My pleasure aiming mind, I shall be sad,
And swear, when I did marry I was mad.

But boy, let my experience teach thee this,
Yet in good faith, thou speak not much amiss,
When first thy mothers same to me did come,
Thy grandsire thus, then came to me his son,
And even my words to thee, to me he said,
And as to me thou say, to him I said,
But in a greater huff, and hotter blood,
I tell ye, on youths tip-toes then I stood,
Says he (good faith this was his very say)
When I was young, I was but reasons fool,
And went to wedding, as to wisdoms school:
It taught me much, and much I did forget,
But beaten much by it, I got some wit,
Though I was shackled from an often scout,
Yet I would wanton it when I was out,
Twas comfort, old acquaintance then to meet,
Restrained liberty, at^ainde is sweet,
Thus said my Father to thy Father, son
And thou may do this to, as I have done.

In faith good counsel Frank, what say thou to it?

Phillip, what should I say?

Why, either I or no.

O but which rather?

Why that which was persuaded by thy father.

That's I, then I, O should it fall out ill.
Then I, for I am guilty of that ill.
I'll not be guilty, no.

What backward gone?

Phillip, no whit back-ward, that is on.

On then,

O stay.

Tush, there is no good luck in this delay,
Come, come, late comers man are shent.

Heigh ho, I fear I shall repent,
Well, which way Frank?

Why this way.

Can thou tell?
And take upon thee to be my guide to hell,
But which way Father?

That way.

I, you know,
You found the way to sorrow long ago,
Father God boy ye, you have sent your son,
To seek on earth an earthly day of doom,
Where I shall be judged, alack the ruth,
To pe^nance for the follies of my youth.
Well I must go, but by my troth my mind,
Is not love capable to that kind,
O I have looked upon this mould of men,
As I have done upon a Lyons den,
Praised I have the gallant beast I saw,
Yet wished me no acquaintance with his paw,
And must I now be grated with them, well,
Yet I may hap to prove a Daniell,
And if I do sure it would make me laugh,
To be among wild beasts and yet be safe,
Is there a remedy to abate their rage,
Yes many catch them, and put them in a cage,
I but how catch them, marry in your hand,
Carry me forth a burning fire-brand,
For with his sparkling shine, old rumour says,
A fire-brand the swiftest runner fraies,
This I may do, but if it prove not so,
Then man goes out to seek his adjunct woe,
Phillip away, and Father now adieu,
In quest of sorrow I am sent by you.

Return the messenger of joy my son.

Seldom in this world, such a work is done.

Nay, nay, make hast, it will be quickly night.

Why is it not good to woo by candle light.

But if we make not haste theile be a bed.

The better candles out, and curtans spread

I know, though that my sons years be not many.
Yet he hath wit to woo as well as any,
Here comes my wife, I am glad my boy is gone.
Ereshe came hither, how now wife, how is't?
What are ye yet in charity and love with mistress Barnes?

What mistress Barnes, why mistress Barnes I pray

Because she is your neighbour and

And what?
And a jealous slandering spiteful queen she is,
One that would blur my reputation,
With her approbrious malice if she could,
She wrongs her husband, to abuse my fame,
Tis known that I have lived in honest name,
All my life time, and bin your right true wife,

I entertain no other thought my wife,
And my opinion's sound of your behaviour.

And my behaviour is as sound as it,
But her ill speeches seeks to rot my credit,
And eat it with the worm of hate and malice.

Why then preserve it you by patience.

By patience, would ye have me shame my self,
And cussen my self to bear her injuries:
Not while her eyes be open will I yield,
A word, a letter, a syllables value,
But equal and make even her wrongs to me,
To her again.

Then in good faith wife ye are more to blame.

Am I too blame sir pray what letters this.

There is a dearth of manners in ye wife,
Rudely to snatch it from me, give it me?

You shall not have it, till I have read it.

Give me it then, and I will read it to you?

No, no, it shall not need, I am a scholar
Good enough to read a letter sir,

Gods passion, if she knew but the contents,
Sheele seek to cross this match, she shall not read it.
Wife, give it me, come, come, give it me.

Husband, in very deed you shall not have it.

What will you move me to impatience then?

Tut, tell not me of your impatience,
But since you talk sir of impatience,
You shall not have the letter by this light,
Till I have read it, soul i'll burn it first.

Go to, ye move me wife, give me the letter,
In truth I shall grow angry, if you do not.

Grow to the house top with your anger sir.
Ne'er tell me, I care not thus much for it.

Well, I can bear enough, but not too much,
Come give it me, twere best you be persuaded,
By God ye make me swear, now God forgive me,
Give me I say, and stand not long upon it,
Go to, I am angry at the heart, my very heart,

Hart me no hearts* you shall not have it sir,
No you shall not, ne'er look so big,
I will nor be afraid at your great looks,
You shall not have it, no you shall not have it.

Shall I not have it, in truth I'll try that,
Minion I'll hau'te, shall I not hau'te, I am loath,
Go too, take pausment, be advised,
Infaith I will, and stand not long upon it,
A woman of your years, I am ashamed,
A couple of so long continuance,
Should thus, Gods foot, I cry God heartily mercy,
Go to, ye vex me, and I'll vex ye for it,
Before I leave ye, I will make ye glad,
To tender it on your knees, hear ye, I will I will,
What worse and worse stomach, (...) ye faith,
Shall I be crossed by you in my old age?
And where I should have greatest comfort to,
A (...) of you nursle in the devils name,
Go to mistress, by Gods pre^ious dear,
If ye delay.

Lord* Lord, why in what a fit,
Are you in husband, so enraged, so moved,
And for so slight a cause, to read a letter,
Did this letter love, contain my death,
Should you deny my sight of it, I would not,
Not see my sorrow, not eschew my danger,
But willingly yield me a patient,
Vn^o the doom that your displeasure gave:
Here is the letter, not for that your incensment,
Makes me make offer of it, but your health,
Which anger I do fear hath crasd.
And viper like hath sucked away the blood,
That wont was to be cheerful in this cheek,
How pale ye look.

Pale, can ye blame me for it, I tell you true,
An easy matter could not thus have moved me,
Well this resignement, and so forth, but woman
This fortnight shall I not forget ye for it.
Ha, ha, I see that roughnes can do somewhat,
I did not think good faith, I could have set,
So sower a face upon it, and to her,
My bed embracer, my right bosom friend,
I would not that she should have seen the letter
As poor a man as I am by my troth
For twenty pound: well I am glad I have it.
Ha, here's a do about a thing of nothing,
What stomach, ha, tis happy your come down.

Well crafty Fox, I'll hunt ye by my troth,
Deal ye so closely? well I see his drift.
He would not let me see the letter, least
That I should cross the match, and I will cross it.

Dicke Comes?

Forsooth.

Come hither Dicke, thou art a man I lo^e,
And one whom I have much in my regard,

I thank ye for it mistress, I thank ye for it,

Nay heers my hand, I will do very much for thee
If ere thou standst in need of me,
Thou shall not lack, whilst thou hast a day to l^ue.
Money apparel.

And sword and Bucklers.

And sword and Bucklers too my gallant Dick,
So thou wilt use but this in my defence.

This, no faith I have no mind to this, break my head if this break not if
we come to any tough play, nay mistres I had a sword, I the flower of
smithfield for a sword a right Fox I faith, with that a man had come over with
a smooth and a sharpe stroke, it would have cried twang, then when I had
doubled my point, traste my ground, and had carried my buckler before me like a
garden ^ut, and then come in with a cross blow, over the pick of his buckler
two else long, it would have cried twang, twang, mettle, mettle: but a dog
hath his day, tis gone, and there are few good ones made now, I see by this
dearth of good swords, that dearth of sword and Buckler fight, begins to grow
out, I am sorry for it, I shall never see good manhood again, if it be once
gone, this poking fight of rapier and dagger will come up then* then a man, a
tall man, a good sword and buckler man, will be spitted like a Cat or a cunney,
then a boy will be as good as a man, unless the Lord show mercy unto us,
well, I had as heue be hanged as live to see that day, well mistres, what shall I
do? what shall I do?


Why this brave Dicke,
Thou know that Gourseys wife and I am foes:
Now man me to her house,
And though it be dark Dicke, yet we'll have no light,
Least that thy master should prevent our journey
By seeing our depart: then when we come,
And if that she and I do fall to words,
Set in thy foot and quarrel with her men,
Draw, fight, strike, hurt, but do not kill the slaves,
And make as though thou struckst at a man,
And hit her and thou can, a plague upon her,
She hath misusde me Dicke, wilt thou do this?

Yes mistress I will strike her men, but God forbid,
That ere Dicke Comes should be seen to strike a woman.

Why she is mankind, therefore thou may strike her.

Mankind, nay and she have any part of a man, I'll strike her I warrant.

That's my good Dicke, that's my sweet Dicke,

Swones who would not be a man of valour to have such words of a Gentlewoman,
one of their words are more to me then twenty of these russet coats
Cheesecake; and buttermakers: well, I thank God I am none of these cowards,
well and a man have any virtue in him, I see he shall be regarded.


Art thou resolved Dicke? wilt thou do this for me, and it thou wilt, here is
an earnest penny, of that rich guerdon I do mean to give thee.


An angel mistress let me see, stand you on my left hand, and let the angel
lye on my buckler on my right hand, for fear of losing, now here stand I to
be temp^ed, they say, every man hath two spirits attending on him, either good
or bad, now I say a man hath no other spirits but either his wealth or his
wife, now which is the better of them, why that is as they are used, for use
neither of them well, and they are both nought, but this is a miracle to me,
that gold that is heavy hath the upper, and a woman that is light doth
soonest fall, considering that light things aspire, and heavy things soonest
go down, but lea^e these considerations to sir Iohn, they become a black
coat better then a blew, well mistress I had no mind to day to quarrel,
but a woman is made to be a mans seducer, you say quarrel.


Come. There speaks an angel, is it good?


I.


Then I cannot do amiss, the good angel goes with me.


Come on my harts, I faith it is ill luck,
To hunt all day and not kill any thing,
What say thou Lady, art thou weary yet?

I must not say so sir.

Although thou art.

And can you blame her to be forth so long,
And see no better sport?

Good faith twas very hard.

No twas not ill.
Because you know it is not good to kill.

Yes venson Lady.

No indeed nor them,
Life is as dear in Dear as tis in men.

But they are killed for sport.

But that's bad play,
When they are made to sport their lives away.

Tis fine to see the ^runne.

What out of breath?
They run but ill that run themselves to death,

They might make then less hast keep their wind.

Why then they see the hounds brings death behind.

Then twere as good for them at first to stay,
As to run long and run their lives away.

I but the sto^est of you all that's here,
Would run from death, and nimbly scud for fear,
Now by my troth I pity those poor elfes.

Well, they have made us but bad sport to day.

Yes twas my sport to see them escape away.

I wish that I had been at one Bucks fall.

Out thou wood-tyrant thou art worst of all.

A woodman Lady, but no tyrant I.

Yes tyrant-like thou love to see lives dye.

Lady no more, I do not like this luck,
To hunt all day and yet not kill a Buck,
Well, it is late, but yet I swear I will
Stay here all night, but I a Buck will kill.

All night, nay good sir Raph Smith do not so.

Content ye Lady, Will, go fetch my bow,
A berry of fair Roes I saw to day,
Down by the groves, and there i'll take my stand,
And shoot at one, God send a lucky hand.

Will ye not then sir Raph go home with me?

No, but my men shall bear thee company.
Sirs man her home, Will bid the Huntmen couple,
And bid them well reward their hounds to night.
Lady farewell, Will hast ye with the Bow,
I'll stay for thee here by the grove below.

I will, but twill be dark I shall not see,
How shall I see ye then?

Why hello to me, and I will answer thee.

Enough, I will.

Farewell.

How willingly dost thou co^sent to go,
To fetch thy master that same killing bow.

Guilty of death I willing am in this,
Because twas our ill haps to day to miss,
To hun^ and not to kill is hunters sorrow,
Come Lady, weel have venson ere tomorrow.

Come Frank now are we hard by the house,
But how now, sad?

No, to study how to woe thy sister.

How man, how to woe her? why no matter how,
I am sure thou wi^t not be ashamed to woe,
Thy cheeks not subject to a childish blush,
Thou hast a better warrant by thy wit,
I know thy oratory can unfold,
Quick invention, plausible discourse,
And set such painted beauty on thy tongue,
As it shall ravish every maiden sense,
For Frank, thou art not like the russet youth
I told thee of, that went to woe a wench,
And being full stuffed up with fallow wit,
And meadow matter, asked the pretty maid,
How they sold corn last market day with them.
Saying: indeed twas very dear wit them:
And do ye hear, he had not need do so,
For she will Francis throwly try your wit,
Sir she'll bow the mettle of your wits,
And if they crack she will not hold ye currant,
Nay she will way your wits as men may angels,
And if I lack a grain, she will not chanke with ye,
I cannot speak it but in passion,
She is a wicked wench to make a jest,
Aye me how full of flouts and mocks she is?

Some Aquavitae reason to recover,
This sick dis^ourser, soond not prethy Philip,
Tush, tush, I do not think her as thou says,
Perhaps she's opinions darling Phillip:
Wise in repute, the crows bird o my friend,
Some judgements slave themselves to small desert,
And wondernize the birth of common wit,
When their won strangeness do but make that strange,
And their ill errors do but make that good,
And why should men debase to make that good,
Perhaps such admiration wins her wit.

Well, I am glad to hear this bold prepare,
For this encounter, forward hardy Frank,
Yonders the window, with the candle int,
Belike she's putting on her night attire,
I told ye F rank twas late, well I will call her,
Mary softly that my mother may not hear:
Mall, sister Mall.

How now, whose there?

Tis I,

Tis I, who I? I quoth the dog, or what?
A christ cross rowel?

No sweet pinckanie.

O is't you wild oats?

I forsooth wanton.

Well said scape-thrift.

Philip be these your usual best salutes?

This is the harmless chiding of that Dove,

Dove, one of those that draw the Queen of love?

How now? Whose that brother, whose that with ye?

A Gentleman my friend.

Beladie he hath a pure wit.

How means your holy judgment?

O well put in sir.

Up you would say.

Well climbed Gentleman,
I pray sir tell me, do you carte the queen of love?

Not cart her, but couch her in your eye,
And a fit place for gentle love to lye.

I but me thinks you speak without the book,
To place a sower wheel waggon in my look,
Where will you have room to have the coach-man sit?

Nay, that were but small manners, and not fit,
His duty is before you bare to s^and,
Having a lusty whipstocke in his hand.

The place is void, will you provide me one?

And if you please I will supply the room.

But are ye cunning in the Carmans lash?
And can ye whistle well?

Yes I can well direct the coach of love.

Ah cruel carter, would you whip a dove?

Hark ye sister?

Nay, but hark ye brother?
Whose white boy is that same? know ye his mother?

He is a Gentleman of a good house.

Why is his house of gold, is it not made of lyme andS stone like this?

I mean hes well descended.

God be thanked.
Did he descend some steeple or some ladder?

Well, you will still be cross, I tell ye sister,
This Gentleman by all your friends consent,
Must be your husband.

Nay not all, some sing another note,
My mother will say no, I hold a groat.
But I thought twas somewhat, he would be a carter,
He hath been whipping la^ely some blind bear,
And now he would fe^ke the blind boy here with us.

Well, do you ^eare, you sister, mistress would have
You that do long for somewhat I know what.
My father told me, go too I'll tell all,
If ye be cross, do ye hear me? I hau^ labourd
A years work in this afternoon for ye,
Come from your cloister, votary, chase Nun,
Come down and kiss Frank Gourseys mothers son.

Kiss him I pray?

Go to, stale maidenhead* come down I say,
You seventeen and upward, come come down,
You'll stay till twenty else for yo 'r wedding gown,

Nun, votary, stale maidenhead, seventeen and upward,
Here be names, what nothing else?

Yes, or a fair built steeple without bells,

Steeple good people, nay another cast.

I, or a well made ship without a mast.

Fie not so big sir, by one part of four.

Why then ye are a boat without an oar,

O well rode wit, but whats your fare I pray?

Your fair self must be my fairest pay.

Nay, and you be so dear, I'll choose another.

Why take your first man wench, and go no further.

Peace Francis, hark ye sister, this I say, you know my mind, or answer I or
nay, Wit judgment hath resolude his mind, And he fore^ees what after he shall
find,

If such discretion then shall govern you,
Vow love to him, heel do the like to you.

Vow love? who would not love such a comely feature?
Nor high nor lowe, but of the middle stature,
A middle man that's the best syze indeed,
I like him well, Love grant us well to speed.

And let me see a woman of that tal^esse,
So slender and of such a middle smallness,
So old enough, and in each part so fit,
So fair, so kind, eudued with so much wit,
Of so much wit as it is held a wonder,
Twere pity to keep love and her a sunder,
Therefore go up my joy, call down my bli^e,
Bid her come seal the bargain with a kiss.

Frank, Frank, I come through dangers, death and harms
To make Loves patient with thy seal of arms.

But sister softly, least my mother hear.

Hush then, ^um, mouse in cheese, cat is near.

Now in good faith Philip this makes me smile.
That I have woed and won in so small while.

Francis, indeed my sister I dare say,
Was not determined to say thee nay,
For this same the other thing, called maiden-head,
Hangs by so small a hair or spiders thread,
And worn so too with time, it must needs fall,
And like a well lur'de hawke, she knows her call.

Whist brother whist, my mother heard me tread,
And asked whose there? I would not answer her,
She called a light, and up she's gone to seek me,
There when she finds me not, she'll hither come,
Therefore dispatch, let it be quickly done,
Francis, my l^ues lease I do let to thee,
Date of my life and thine, what say thou to me?
The entering, fine, or income thou must pay,
Are kisses and embrase^ every day,
And quarterly I must receive my rent,
You know my mind.

I guess at thy intent,
Thou shalt not miss a minute of thy time.

Why then sweet Francis I am only thine,
Brother bear witness.

Do ye deliver this as your deed?

I do I do,

God send you both good speed, Gods lord my mother
Stend aside and closely too, least that you be espied,

Whose there?

Mother tis I.

You disobedient ruffen, careless wretch,
That said your Father loud me too well,
I'll think on it when thou think I have forgotten it:
Whose with thee else? how now minion you?
With whom? with him? why what make you here sir?
And thus late too, what hath your mother sent ye
To cut my throat, that here you be in wait?
Come from him mistress, and let go his hand,
Will ye not sir?

Stay mistress Barnes, or mother, what ye will,
She's my wife, and here she shall be still.

How sir your wife? would thou my daugter have
I'll rather have her married to her grave,
Go to be gone, and quickly, or I swear,
I'll have my men beat ye for staying here,

Beat him mother* as I am true man,
They were better beat the devil and his dam.

What wilt thou take his part?

To do him good,
And twere to wade hitherto up in blood.

God a mercy Phil, but mother hear me.

Call thou me mother, no thy mothers name
Carries about with it, reproach and shame:
Give me my daughter, ere that she shall wed,
A strumpets son, and have her fomislead,
I'll marry her to a Carter: come I say,
Give me her from thee.

Mather not to day,
Nor yet to morrow, till my lives last morrow,
Make me leave that, which I with leave did borrow,
Here I have borrowed love, i'll not deny it,
Thy wedding night's my day, then I'll repay it:
Till then sheele trust me, wench is't not so?
And if it be, say I, if nor, say no.

Mother, good mother, hear me O good God,
Now we are even what would you make us odd?
Now I beseech ye for the love of Christ,
To give me leave once to do what I list.
I am as you were when you were a maid,
Guess by your self, how long you would have staide,
Might you have had your will, as good begin,
At first as last, it saves us from much sin,
Lying alone, we muse on things and things,
And in our minds, one thought another brings,
This maids life mother is an idle life,
Therefore I'll be, I, I will be wife,
And mother do not mistrust my age or power,
I am sufficient, I lack ne'er an hou^e,
I had both wit to grant when he did woe me,
And strength to bear what ere he can do to me.

Well bold face, but I mean to make you stay,
Go to, come from him, or i'll make ye come,
Will ye not come?

Mother, I pray forbear,
This match is for my sister.

Villain tis not,
Nor she shall not be so matched now.

In troth she shall, and your unruly hate,
Shall not rule us, we'll end all this debate,
By this begun devise.

I end what you begun, villains thieves
Give me my daughter, will ye rob me of her?
Help, help, theil rob me here, theil rob me here,

How now, what outcry is here? why how now woman?

Why Gourseys son, consederates with this boy,
This wretch unnatural and undutiful.
Seeks hence to steal my daughter, will you suffer it?
Shall he that's son to my arch-enemy,
Enjoy her, have I brought her up to this?
O God he shall not have her, no he shall not.

I am sorry she knows it, hark ye wi^e,
Let reason moderate your rage a little,
If you examine but his birth and living.
His wit and good behaviour, you will say,
Though that ill hate make your opinion bad,
He doth deserve as good a wife as she

Why will you give consent he shall enjoy her?

I, so that thy mind would agree with mine.

My mind shall ne'er agree to this agreement.

And yet it shall go forward, but who's here?
What, Mistress Goursey, how knew she of this?

Frank, thy mother.

Swones where? a plague upon it,
I think the devil is set to cross this match.

This is the house Dick Comes, yonders light,
Let us go near: how now, me thinks I see,
My son stand hand in hand, with Barnes his daughter:
Why how now sir, is this time of night,
For you to be abroad, what have we here?
I hope that love hath not thus coupled you:

Love by my troth mother, Love, she loves me,
And I love her, then we must needs agree.

I but I'll keep her sure enough from thee.

It shall not need, I'll keep him safe enough,
Be sure he shall not graft in such a stock.

What a stock forsooth? as good a stock as thine,
I do not mean that he shall graft in mine.

Nor shall he mistress, hark boy? you are but mad
To love the branch, that hath a root so bad,

Then Mother, i'll graft a Pippin on a Crab.

It will not prove well.

But I'll prove my skill.

Sir but you shall not.

Mothers both I will.

Hark Phillip, send away thy sister straight,
Let Francis meet her where thou shalt appoint,
Let them go several to shun suspicion,
And bid them go to Oxford both this night,
There to morrow say that we will meet them,
And there determine of their marriage.

I will, though it be very late and dark,
My sister will endure it for a husband.

Well then to Carfolkes boy, I mean to meet the.

Enough, would they would begin to chide,
For I would have them brawling, that mean while,
They nay steal hence, to meet where I oppoint it,
What mother, will you let this match go forward:
Or mistress Goursey will you first agree*

Shall I agree first?

I why not, come, come.

Come from her son, if thou love thy mother.

With the like spell, daughter I conjure thee,

Francis, by fair means let me win thee from her,
And I will gild my blessing gentle son,
With store of Angels, I would not have thee,
Check thy good fortune, by this thy cusning choice,
O do not thrall thy happy liberty,
In such a bondage, if thou'lt be needs bound,
Be then to better worth, this worthless choice
Is not fit for thee.

Is't not fit for him, wherefore is't not fit?
Is he too brave a gentleman I pray,
No tis not fit, she shall not fit his turn,
If she were wise, she would be fitter for
Three times his better, minion go in, or i'll make ye,
I'll keep ye safe from him I warrant ye.

Come Francis, come from her.

Mothers, with both hands, shove I hate from love,
That like an ill companion would infect,
The infant mind of our offection,
Within this cradle shall this minutes babe,
Be laid to rest, and thus I'll huge my joy.

Wilt thou be obstinate, thou self wild boy.
Nay then perforce I'll part ye since ye will not.

Do ye hear mistress, pray ye give me leave to talk two or thre^ cold
words with my young Master, hark ye sir, ye are my Masters son, and so
forth, and indeed I bear ye some good will, partly for his sake, and partly
for your own, and I do hope you do the like to me, I should be sorry else: I
must needs say ye are a y^ng man, and for mine own part, I have seen the
world, I know what belongs to causes, the experience that I have, I thank God
I have travelled for it.


Why how far have ye travelled for it?

From my masters house to the Ale-house.

How sir?

So sir.

Go to I pray, correct you boy, twas ne'er a good world, since a boy would
face a man so,

Go to forward man.

Well sir, so it is, I would not wish ye to marry without my mistress consent.


And why?


Nay, there's ne'er a why, but there is a wherefore, I have known some have done
the like, they have danced a Galliard at Beggars bush for it.


At Beggars bush, here him no more master, he doth be dawbe ye with his dirty
speech: do ye hear sir, how far stands Beggars bush from your fathers
house sir? how thou whoreson refuge of a Taylor, that were prentice to a tailor
half an age, because if thou had served ten ages thou would prove but a
botcher, thou leapst fro the shop boa^d to a Blew coat: doth it become thee to
use thy terms so? well, thou degree above a hackney, and ten degrees under a
Page, sow up your lubber lips, or tis not your sword and Buckler, shall keep
my Poniard from your breast.


Do ye hear sir, this is your boy?

How then?

You must breech him for it.

Must I? how if I will not.

Why then tis a fine world, when boys keep boys, and know not how to use
them.


Boy, ye rascal.


Strike him and thou dare.


Strike me, alas he were better strike his father, Sownes go to, put up your
Bodkin.


Mother standby, I'll teach that rascal,


Go to, give me good words, or by Gods dines I'll buckle ye, for all your
bird-spit.


Will ye so sir?

Stay Frank, this pitch of Frenzy will defile thee,
Meddle not with it, thy vnreprooued valour,
Should be high minded: couch it not so low,
Dost hear me? take occasion to slip hence,
But secretly, let not thy mother see thee,
At the backside there is a Cunny green,
Stay there for me, and Mall and I will come to thee.

Enough, I will: mother you do me wrong,
To be so peremptory in your command,
And see that rascal to abuse me so.

Rascal, take that and take all, do ye hear sir, I do not mean to pocket up
this wrong.


I know why that is.


Why?


Because you have ne'er a pocket,


A whip sira, a whip: but sir provide your tools against to morrow morning tis
somewhat dark now indeed, you know Dawsons close, between the hedge the pond,
tis good even ground, I'll meet you there, I do not, call me cut, and you be a
man show your self a man, we'll have a bout or two, and so we'll part for that
present.


Well sir, well.


Boy, have they appointed to fight?


I Nicholas, wilt not thou go see the fray?


No indeed, even as they brew so let them bake. I will not thrust my hand into
the flame and need not, tis not good to have an oar in another mans boat,
little said is soon amended, in little meddling comes great rest, tis good
sleeping in a whole skin, so a man might come home by weeping cross: no by
lady, a friend is not so soon gotten as lost, blessed are the peace-makers,
they that strike with the sword, shall be beaten with the scabberd.


Well said proverbs, ne'er another to that purpose?


Yes I could have said to you sir, take heed is a good reed.


Why to me take heed?


For happy is he whom other men's harms do make to beware.


O beware Frank, slip away Mall, You know what I told ye, i'll hold our mothers
both in talk mean while: Mother and Mistress Barnes, me thinks you should not
stand in hatred so hard one with the other.


Should I not sir' should I not hate a harlot,
That robs me of my right, vide boy?

That title I return unto thy teeth,
And spit the name of ha^ ^t in thy face.

Well tis not time of night to hold out chat,
With such a scold as thou art, therefore now,
Think that I hate thee as I do the devil.

The devil take thee if thou dost not wretch.

Out upon thee strumpet.

Out upon thee harlot.

Well, I will find a time to be revenged:
Mean time I'll keep my daughter from thy son,
Where are you minion? how now are ye gone.

She went in mother.

Francis where are ye?

He is not here* o then they split away both together.

I'll assure ye no, my sister she went in, into the house,

But then sheele out again at the back door,
And meet with him, but I will search about,
All these same fields and paths near to my house,
They are not far I am sure, if I make haste,

O God how went he hence? I did not see him,
It was when Barnes wife did scold with me,
A plague on her, Dick why did not thou look to him?

What should I look for him? no, no, I look not for him while to morrow
morning.


Come go with me to help to look him out,
Alas, I have nor light, nor Link, nor Torch,
Though it be dark, I will take any pains,
To cross this match, I prethy Dick away.

Mistress because I brought ye out, I'll bring ye home but if I should follow, so
he might have the law on his side.


Come tis no matter, prithee go with me.

Philip thy mothers gone to seek thy sister.
And in a rage I faith, but who comes here?

Old master Goursey, as I think tis he.

Tis so indeed.

Whoes there?

A friend of yours.

What master Barnes did ye not see my wife?

Yes sir I saw her, she was here even now.

I doubted that, that made me come unto you:
But whether is she gone?

To seek your son, who slipped away from her,
To meet with Mall my sister in a place
Where I appointed: and my mother too,
Seek for my sister, so they both are gone,
My mother hath a Torch, mary your wife
Goes darkling up and down, and Comes before her.

I thought that knave was with her, but tis well,
I pray God they may come by ne'er a light,
But both be led a dark dance in the night.

Why is my fellow Dick in the dark with my Mistres. I pray God they be honest,
for there may be much knavery in the Dark, faith if I were there, I wold have
some knavery with them, good master will ye carry the torch your self, give me
leave to play the blind man buff with my mistress,


On that condition thou wilt do thy best,
To keep thy Mistress and thy fellow Dick,
Both from my sister, and thy masters son,
I will entreat thy master let thee go.

O I, I warrant ye, i'll have fine tricks to cousin them

Well sir, then go your ways, I give you leave.

O brave, but where about are they?

About our cunny green they surely are, if thou can find them.

O let me alone to grope for cunnies.

Well, now will I to Frank and to my sister,
Stand you two harkening near the cunny green,
But sure your light in you must not b^ seen,
Or else let Nicholas stand a far off with it,
And as his life keep it from mistress Goursey,
Shall this be done?

Phillip it shall,

God be with ye, i'll b^ gone.

Come on master Goursey, this fame is a means,
To make our wives friends, if they resist not.

T^t sir, howsoever it shall go forward.

Come then let^ do, as Philip hath advised.

Here is the place where Philip bid me stay,
Till Francis came, but wherefore did my bother,
Appoint i^ here? why in the Cunny borough?
He had some meaning in it I warrant ye,
Well here i'll set me down under this tree,
And think upon the matter all alone,
Good Lord what pretty things these Cunnies are,
How finely they do feed till they be fat,
And then what a sweet meat a Cunny is,
And what smooth skins they have, both black and gray,
They say they run more in the night then day,
What is the reason? mark, why in the light,
They see more passengers then in the night,
For harmfull men many a hay do set.
And laugh to see them tumble in the net,
And they put ferrets in the holes, fie, fie,
And they go up and down where connies lye,
And they lye still, they have so little wit,
I marvel the Warriner will suffer it,
Nay, nay, they are so bad, that they themselves,
Do give consent to catch these pretty elfes,
How if the Warriner should spy me here?
He would take me for a conny I dare swear,
But when that Francis comes, what will he say?
Look boy there lies a conney in my way:
But soft, a light, whose that? sold my mother,
Nay then all hid, I faith she shall not see me,
I'll play by peep with her behind this tree.

I marvel where this wench doth hide her self
So closely? I have searched in many a bush,

Belike my mother took me for a Thrush,

She's hid in this same Warren I'll lay money.

Close as a rabbit sucker from an old conney.

O God, I would to God that I could find her,
I would keep her from her loves toys yet.

I so you might, if your daughter had no wit.

What a wild gi^le tis, that would hau't so young.

A murren take that dissembling tongue,
Ere your calves teeth were out you thought it long.

But minion, yet I'll keep you from the man.

To save a lye mother, say if you can.

Well, now to look for her.

I there's the spite,
What trick shall I now have to escape her light?

Whose there? what minion is it you?
Beshrew her heart, what a fright she put me to,
But I am glad I found her, though I was afraid,
Come on your ways, you are a handsome maid,
Why you forth a doors so late at night?
Why whether go ye? come stand still I say.

No indeed mother, this is my best way.

Tis not the best way, stand by me I tell ye.

No you would catch me mother, o I smell ye.

Will ye not stand still?

No by Lady no.

But I will make ye.

Nay then trip and go.

Mistress, I'll make ye weary ere I have done.

Faith mother then I'll try how you can run,

Will ye?

Yes faith.

Mal. sweet heart, Mal^? what not a word?

A little further, call again.

Why Mal. I prethie speak, why Mal I say?
I know thou art not far, if thou wilt not speak, why mal,
But now I see she's in her merry vain,
To make me call and put me to more pain,
Well, I must bea^ with her, she'll bear with me,
But I will call, least that it be not so,
What Mall? what Mall I say, boy are we right?
Have we not mist the way this same dark night?

Mass it may be so as I am true man,
I have not seen a cunny since I came,
Yet at the Cunny-borow we should meet,
But hark, I hear the trampling of some feet.

It may be so, then therefore lets lye close.

Where art thou Dicke?

Where am I quoth a, mary I may be where any body will say I am, either in
France or at Rome, or at Jerusalem they may say I am, for I am not able to
disprove them, because I cannot tell where I am.


O what a blindfold walk have we had Dicke,
To seek my son and yet I cannot find him?

Why then Mistress lets go home.

Why tis so dark we shall not find the way.

I pray God ye may not mother till it be day.

Sbloud take heed mistress here's a tree.

Lead thou the way, and let me hold by thee,

Dick Coom^, what difference is there between a blind man, and he that cannot
see?


Peace, a pox on thee.

Swounds some body spake.

Dicke look about,
It may be here we may find them out.

I see the glimpes of some body here,
And ye be a sprite I'll fray the bug bear,
There a goes mistress.

O sir have I spied you?

A plague on the boy, twas he that descried me.

How like a beauteous Lady maskt in black,
Looks that same large circumference of heaven,
The sky that was so fair three hours ago,
Is in three hours become an Ethiope,
And being angry at her beauteous change,
She will not have one of those pearled stars,
To blab her sable metamorphesis,
Tis very dark, I did appoint my sister,
To meet me at the cunny berry below,
And Francis too, but neither can I see,
Belike my mother happened on that place.
And afraid them from it, and they both are now
Wandering about the fields, how shall I find them?
It is so dark, I scarce can see my hand,
Why then I'll hollow for them, no not so,
So will his voice betray him to our mothers,
And if he answer, and bring them where he is.
What shall I then do? it must not be so?
Sbloud it must be so, how else I pray?
Shall I stand gaping here all night till day?
And then ne'er the near, so ho, so ho.

So ho, I come, where are ye? where art thou? h^re.

How now Frank, where hast thou been?

Frank, what Frank? sbloud is sir Raph mad, here's the bow.

I have not been much private with that voice,
Me think Frank Goursy^ talk and his doth tell me,
I am mistaken, especially by his bow,
Frank had no bow, well, I will leave this sellow,
And hollow somewhat farther in the fields,
Dost thou hear fellow, I perceive by thee,
That we are both mistaken, I took thee,
For one thou art not, likewise thou took me,
For sir Raph Smith, but sure I am not he,
And so farewell, I must go seek my friend, so ho:

So ho, so ho, nay then sir Raph so whore,
For a whore she was sure, if you had her here
So late, now you are sir Raphe Smith,
Well do ye counterfeit and change your voice,
But yet I know ye, but what should be that Francis?
Belike that Francis cussend him of his wench,
And he conceals himself to find her ou^,
Tis so upon my life, well I will go
And help him ring his peal o^ so ho, soho,

A plague on Comes, a plague upon the boy*
A plague too, not on my mother for an hundredth bound,
Twas time to run, and yet I had not thought
My mother could have followed me so close,
Her legs with age I thought had foundered,
She made me quite run through a quickset hedge,
Or she had taken me: well I may say,
I have run through the briers for a wench,
And yet I have her not, the worse luck mine,
Me thought I heard one hollow here about,
I judge it Philip, O the slave will laugh
When as he hears how that my mother scared me,
Well, here I'll stand until I hear him hollow,
And then I'll answer him, he is not far.

my man is hollowing for me up and down,
And yet I cannot meet with him, so ho:

So ho.

Why what a pox were thou so near me man,
And would not speak?

Sbloud ye are very hot.

No sir, I am cold enough with staying here
For ^uch a knave as you.

Knave, how now Phillip, art mad, art mad?

Why art not thou my man.
That went to fetch my bow,

Indeed a bow,
Might shoot me ten bows down the weather so,
^ your man.

What art thou then?

A man, but whats thy name?

Some call me Raph.

Well said familiar Will, plain Raph I faith,

There calls my man.

But there goes mine away.
And yet I'll hear what this next call will say,
And here I'll tarry till he call again.

So ho.

So ho, where art thou Phillip,

Sblould Phillip,
But now he clad me Francis, this is fine

Why studiest thou? I prethy tell me Philip.
Where the wench is.

Even now he asked me Francis for the wench,
And now he ask me Phillip for the wench,
Well sir Raph. I must needs tell ye now,
Tis not for your credit to be forth,
So late a w^nching in this order

Whats this, so late a wenching doth he say?
Indeed tis true, I am thus late a wenching,
But I am force to wench without a wench.

Why then you might have taken your bow at first,
And gone and kilde abucke, and not have been
So lo^g a drabbing, and be ne'er the near.

Swounds what a pussell am I in this night,
But yet I'll put this fellow farther,
Dost thou hear man? I am not sir R^ph Smith.
As thou dost think I am, but I did meet him,
Even as thou says in pursuit of a wench.
I met the wench to, and asked for thee,
Saying twas thou that were her love, her dear,
And that sir Raph was not an honest Knight,
To train her thither, and to use her so.

Sbloud my wench, swounds were he ten sir Raphs.

Nay tis (...), look to it, and so farewell.

Indeed I do ^oue Nan our darie maid,
And hath he train her forth to that intent?
Or for another, I carry his crossebow,
And he doth cross me, shooting in my bow,
What shall I do?

So ho?

So ho,

Francies art thou there?

No here's no Francis, art thou Will my man?

Will fool your man, will gose your man,
My back sir scorns to wear your ^uerie.

Nay sir I mooude but such a question to you,
Had it hath not disparegd you I hope,
Twas but mistaking, such a night as this
May well deceive a man, God boy sir.

Gods will tis sir Raph Smith, a virtuous knight,
How gently entertains he my hard answer?
Rude anger made my tongue unmannerly,
I^rie him mercy, well, but all this while,
I cannot find a Francis, Francis ho?

Francis ho* o you call Francis now,
How have ye used my Nan? come tell me how?

Thy Nan, what Nan?

I, what Nan now, say, do you not seek a wench?

Yes I do.

Then sir that is she.

Art not thou I met withal before?

Yes sir, and you did counterfeit before,
And said to me you were not sir Raph Smith,

No more I am not, I met sir Raph Smith,
Even now he asked me if I saw his man.

O fine.

Why sir thou art much deceived in me,
Good faith I am not he thou think I am.

What are ye then?

Why one that se^kes one Francis and a wench.

And Francis seeks one Phillip and a wench:

How can thou t^ll?

I met him seeking Philip and a wench,
As I was seeking sir Raph and a wench.

Why then I know the matter, we met cross,
And so we mist, now here we find our loss,
Well, if thou wilt, we two will keep together,
And so we shall meet right with one or other,

I am content, but do you hear me sir?
Did not sir Raph Smith ask ye for a wench?

No I promise thee, nor did he look for any
But thy self, as I could guess.

Why this is strange, but come sir lets away,
I fear that we shall walk here till it be day.

O God I have run so far into the wind, that I have run my self out of
wind, they say a man is near his end when he lacks breath, and I am at the
end of my race, for I can run no farther then here I be in my breath bed, not
in my death bed.


They say men moyle and toil for a poor living, so I moyle and toil, am
living I thank God, in good time be it spoken, it had been better for me my
mistress angel had been light, for then perhaps it had not lead me into this
darkness, well, the devil never blesses a man better, when he purses up
angels by owlight, I ran through a hedge to take the boy but I stuck in the
ditch, and lost the boy: swounds a plague on that clod, that Mowl-h^l, that
ditch, or what the devil so ere it were, for a man cannot see what it was,
well, I would not for the prize of my sword buck^er, any body should see me in
this taking for it would make me but cut off their legs for laughing at me,
well, down I am, and down I mean to be, because I am weary, but to tumble
down thus, it was no part of my meaning, then since I am down, here i'll rest
me, and no man shall remove me.


O I have sport in coney I faith, I have almost burst my self with laughing at
mistress Barnes, she was following of her daughter, and I hearing her, put on
my fellow Dickes sword and bucklers voice, his swounds sbloud words, and led
her such a dance in the da^ke as it passes, here she is quoth I, where quo^h
she? here quoth I, O it hath been a brave here there night, but O what a soft
natured thing the dirt is? how it would endure my hard t^eading, and kiss my
feet for acquaintance, and how courteous and mannerly were the clods, to make
me stumble only of purpose to entreat me lie down rest me, but now and I
could find my fellow Dicke, I would play the knave with him honestly I faith,
Well, I will grope in the dark for him, or i'll poke with my staff like a
blind man, to prevent a ditch.


Whose that with a pox?


Who art thou with a pestilence.


Why I am Dick Comes?


What have I found thee Dicke? nay then I am for ye Dicke, Where are ye Dicke?


What can I tell where I am?


Can ye not tell, come, come ye weight on your mistreffe well, come on your
ways, I have sought you till I am weary, and called ye till I am hoarse, good
Lord what a iaunt I have had this night, hey ho?


Is't you mistress that came over me, sbloud twere a good deed to come over you
for this nights work, I cannot affoord all this pains for an angel I tell ye
true a kiss were not cast away upon a good fellow, that hath deserved more
that way ^hen a kiss, if your kindness would affoord it him, What shall I
have it mistress?


Fie, fie, I must not kiss my man.


Nay* nay, ne'er stand, shall I, shall I, nobody sees, say but I shall, and i'll
smack ye soundly I faith.


Away bawdy man, in truth lle tell your master.


My master, go to, near tell me of my master, he may pray for them that may,
he is past it, and for mine own part, I can do somewhat that way I thank God,
I am not now to learn, and tis your part to ha^ your whole desire.


Fie, fie, I am ashamed of you, would you tempt your mistress to lewdn^sse.


To lewdness, no by my troth theirs no such matter in it, it is for kindness,
by my tro^h if you like my gentle offer, you shall have what courteously I can
affoord ye.


Shall I indeed Dicke? I faith, if I thought no body would see.


^ush, fe^re not that, swones they must have Cattes eyes then,


Then kiss me Dick.


A kind wench I faith, where are ye mistress?


Here Dick, O I am in the dark, Dick go about,


Nay, i'll grope sure, where are ye. Hodge. Here,


A plague on this post, I would the Carpenter had bin hanged that set it up so,
where are ye now?


Here.


Here, o I come, a plague on it, I am in a pond mistres.


Ha, ha, I have led him into a pond, where art thou Dick?


Up to the middle in a pond.


Make a Boat of thy Buckler then, and swim out, are ye so hot with a pox?
would you kiss my mistress, cool ye there then good Dick Comes, o when he
comes forth the skirts of his blew coat will drop like a paint-house, O that
I could see and not be seen, how he would Spaniel it, and shake himself when
he comes out of the pond, but i'll be gone, for now heel fight with a fly, if
he but buzz in his ear.


Here's so hoing with a plague, so hang and ye will for I have bin almost
drowned, a pox of your lips, and ye call this kissing: ye talk of a drowned
Rat, but twas time to swim like a dog I had bin served like a drowned Cat^els, I
would he h^d^didg his grave that digd the pond, my feet were foul indeed, but
a les^e pale then a pond would have served my turn to wash them: a man shall
be served thus always, when he follows any of these females but tis my kind
heart that makes me thus forward in kindness unto them, well God amend them, and
make them thankful to them that would do the pleasure I am not drunk I would
ye should know it, and yet I have drunk more then will do me good, for I might
have had a Pu^pe set up, w^h as good March Beer as this was, and ne'er set up
an Ale bush' for the matter: well I am somewhat in wroth I must needs say, and
yet I am not more angry then wise, nor more wise then angry, but i'll fight
with the next man I mere, and it be but for luck sake, and if he love to see
him self hurt, let him bring light with him, i'll do it by darkling else by gods
dines, well here will I walk whosoever says nay.


He that worse may must hold the Candle, but my Master is not so wise as God
might have made him, he is gone to seek a Hair in a Hens nest, a Need^e in
a Bottle of Ha^e, which is as seldom seen as a black Swan: he is gone to
seek my young Mistress, and I think she is better lost then found, for who so
ever h^th her, hath but a wet Eel by the tail^, but they may do as they ^st,
the law is in their own hands, but and they would be ruid^y me, they should
set her on the Leland, and b^d the Dwell sp^ her, beshrew her fingers, she hath
made me watch past mine hour, but I'll watch her a good turn for it.


How, whose that Nicholas? so first come first served, I am for him: how now
proverb, proverb, sbloud howe now proverb?


My name is Nicholas, Richard: and I k^owe your meaning, and I hope ye mean no
harm: I thank ye I am the better for your asking.


Where have you been a whoring thus late, ha?


Master Richard the good wife would not seek her daughter in the Oven unless
she had bin there her self, but good Lord you are knuckle deep in dirt, I
warrant when he was in, he swore Walsingham, chaft terrible for the time, look
the water drops from you as fast as hops.


What need thou to care, whipper-Ienny, Tripecheekes, out you fat ass.


Good words cost nought, ill words corrupts good manners Richard, for a hasty
man never wants woe, I had thought you had bin my friend, but I see al is not
gold that glisters, there's falsehood in fellowship, a micus certus in re cer ta
cernitur, time truth tries all, tis an old proverb, not so old as true,
bought wit is best, I can see day at a little hole, I know your mind as well as
though I were within you, tis ill halting before a cripple, go to, you seek to
quarrel but be ware of had I wist: so long goes the pot to the water at length
it comes home broken, I know you are as good a man as ever drew sword, or as
was ere girt ina girdle, or as ere went on Neats leather, or as one sh^l see
upon a summers day, or as ere looked man in the face, or as ere trod on gods
earth, or as ere broke bread, or drunk drink: but he is proper that hath
proper conditions, but be not like the Cow that gives a good soap of milk and
castes it down with her heals, I speak plainly, for plain dealing is a
Jewel, he that uses it shall dye a beggar, well, that happens in an hour, that
happens not in seven years, a man is not so soon whole as hurt you should
kill a man, you would kiss hi^: well, I say little, but I think the more, ye^
I'll give him good words, tis good to hold a candle before the deuell, yet by
Gods me, I'll take no wrong, if he had a head as big as Brass, or looked as high
as Poules steeple.


Sir, thou Grashoper, that shalt skip from my sword as from a Since, I'll cut
thee out in collops eggs, in sleekes, in s^ste beef, and fry thee with the
fire, I shall strike from the pike of they Buckler.


I, brag's a good dog, threatened folks live long.


What say ye sir?


Why I say not so much as how do ye.


Do ye not so sir?


No indeed, what so ere I think, and thought is free.


You whoreson Wafer-cake, by Gods dines i'll crush ye for this.


Give an inch and you'll take an elle, I will not put my finger in a hole I
warrant ye, what man, ne'er crow so fast, for a blind man may kill a Hare, I
have known when ^ plain fellow hath hurt a Fencer, so I have: What, a man may
be as slow as a Snail, but as fierce as a Lyon, and he be moved: Indeed I am
patient I must needs say, for patience in adversity, brings a man to the three
Cranes in the Ventree.


Do ye hear, set down your Torch, draw, fight, I am for ye.


And I am for ye too, though it be from this midnight to the next morn.


Where be your tools?


Within a mile of an oak sir, he's a proud horse will not carry his own
provender, I warrant ye.


Now am I in my quarrelling humour, and now can I say nothing but sownes draw,
but i'll vntrus, the have to it.


Whose there, Boy? honest Boy, well met, where hast thou bin.


O Hodge, Dicke Comes hath bin as good as a cry of Hounds, to make a breathed
Hair of me, but did thou see my master?


I met him even now, and he asked me for thee, and he is gone up and down,
whoing like an Owl for thee.


Owl, ye Ass.


Ass, no nor glass, for then it had been Owleglasse, but whose that boy?


By the mass tis our Comes Nicholas, it seems they are providing to fight.


Then we shall have fine sport, I faith sir, le^s stand close, and when they
have fought about or two, we'll run away with the torch, leave the to fight
darkling, shall we?


Content, I'll get the Torch, stand close.


So now my back hath room to reach, I do not love to be laced in, when I go
to lace a rascal, I pray God Nicholas prove not a fly: it would do me good to
deal with a good man now, that we might have half a dozen good smart
strokes, ha I have seen the day, I could have danced in my fight, on, two,
three four five, ou the head of him six, seven, eight, nine ten, on the sides
of him, if I went so far as fifteen, I warrant I showed him a trick of one and
twenty: but I have not sought th^s four days, I lack a little practise of
my war^e, but I shall make a shift, ha close, are ye desposed sir?


Yes indeed I ^eare no colours, change sides Richard.


Change the gallows, I'll see thee handg first.


Well, I see the fool will not leave his babble for the Tower of London.


Fool ye Rog, nay then fall to it.


Good goose bite not.


Sbloud how pursey I am, well I see exercise is all, I must practise my weapons
oftner, I must have a goal or two at ^oote-ball, before I come to my right
kind, give me thy hand Nicholas, thou art a better man then I took thee for,
and yet thou art not so good a man as I.


You dwell by^ neighbours Richard, that makes ye praise your self.


Why I hope thou wilt say I am a man.


Yes I'll say so if I should see you hanged.


Hanged ye Rog, nay then have at ye, swoons the light is gone.


O Lord, it is as dark as Pitch,


Well here I'll lye with my buckler thus, least striking up and down at
^andall, the rog might hurt me, for I cannot see to save it, and I'll hold my
peace, least my voice should bring th^m where I am.


Tis good. o have a cloak for the rain, a bad shift is better then none at
all, I'll sit here as if I were as dead as a door nail.


Hark, there's one holloes.

And there's another.

And every where we come, I here some hello. And yet it is our haps to meet
with none.

I marvel where your Hodge is, and my man?

I and our wives, we cannot meet with them.
Nor with the boy, nor Mall, nor Frank, nor Phillip:
Nor yet with Comes, and yet we ne'er stood still.
Well I am very angry with my wife,
And she shall find I am not pleased with her,
If we meet ne'er so soon, but tis my hap,
She hath had as blind a journey out as we,
Pray God she have, and worse if worse may be.

This is but short lived envy Master Coursey:
But come, what say ye to my policy?

I faith tis good, and we will practise it,
But sir it must be handled cunningly,
Or all is mard, our wives have subtle heads,
And they will soon perceive a drift devise.

So ho.

So ho.

Whose there?

Heers on or two.

Is Will there?

No, Phillip?

Frank?

No, no.
Was ever man deluded thus like me,
I think some spirit leads me thus amiss:
As I have oft heard, that some have bin thus in the nights.
But yet this amazes me where ere I come,
Some asks me still for Frank or Phillip,
And none of them can tell me where Will is.

So ho?

So ho.

So ho!

So ho?

Sownes now I here four hollow at the least,
One had a little voice, then that's the wench
My man hath lost, well I will answer all, so ho.

VVhope, whope.

Whose there will?

No sir, honest Hodge: but I pray ye sir did ye not meet with a boy with a
Torch, he is run away from me a plague on him.


Hey day, from Frank and Phillip to a Torch,
And to a Boy, nay sownes then hap as twill.

Who goes there?

Guess here.

Phillip.

Phillip, no faith, my names Will, ill will, for I was never worse, I was even
now with him, and might have been still, but that I fell into a ditch and lost
him, and now I am going up and down to seek him.


What would thou do with him.


Why I would have him go with me to my masters.


Whose thy master?


Why sir Raphe Smith, and thither he promised me he would come, if he keep his
word so tis.


What was he a doing wheat^ou first found him.


Why he holloed for one Francis, and Francis hollod for him, I hallod for my
master, and my master for me, but we mist still meeting contrary, Phillip
Francis with me my master, and I my master with Philip and Frank.


Why wherefore is sir Raphe so la^e abroad?


Why he meant to kill a Buck, I'll say so to save his honesty, but my Nan was
his mark, when he sent me for his bow, and when I came, I hollod for him, but
I never saw such luck to miss him, it hath almost made me mad.


Well stay with us, perhap^ sir Raphe and he,
Will come anon, hark I do here one hello.

Is this broad waking in a winters night,
I am broad walking in a winters night:
Broad indeed, because I am abroad,
But these broad fields me thinks are not so broad,
That they may keep me forth of narrow ditches,
Heers a hard world for I can hardly keep my self upright in it,
I am marvelous dutiful, but so ho.

So ho.

Whose there?

Here's will.

What Will, how scapst thou?

What sir?

Nay, not hanging, but drowning,
Were thou in a pond or a ditch?

A pestilence on it, is't you Phillip, no faith, I was but dirty a little, but
here's one or two asked for ye.


Who be they man?

Philip, tis I and master Goursey.

Father, O father I have heard them say.
The days of ignorance are past and done,
But I am sure the nights of ignorance
Are not yet past, for this is one of them,
But wheres my sister?

Why we cannot tell.

VVheres Francis?

Neither saw we him.

Why this is fine.
What neither he, nor I, nor she nor you,
Nor I, nor she, nor you, and I ^ill now,
Can meet, could meet, or ne'er I think shall meet,
Cal ye this ^oing, no tis Christmas sport of Hob ma blind
All blind, all seek to catch, all miss: but who comes here?

O have I caught ye sir, it was your doing,
That m^de me have this pretty dance to night,
Had not you spo^ke, my mother had not scard me,
But I will swinge ye for it.

Keep the Kings peace,

How? art thou become a Constable?
Why Phillip where hast thou bin all this while?

Why where you were not, but I pray whers my sister?

Why man I saw her not, but I have sought her as I should seek.

A needle have ye not?
Why you man are the needle that she seeks
To work withal, well Francis do you here,
You must not answer so, that you have sought her,
But have ye found her, faith and if you have,
God give ye joy of that ye found with her,
Fra I saw her not, how could I find her.

Why, could ye miss form Master Barnses house unto his Cunnyberry?

Whether I could or no, father I did.

Father I did, well Fr^nke wilt thou believe me,
Thou dost not know how much this same doth grieve me
Shall it be said thou mist so plain away,
When as so fair a wench did for thee stay.

Sownes man.

Sownes man, and if thou had bin blind,
The cunny-borow thou need must find:
I tell thee Francis had it bin my case,
And I had bin a woer in thy place,
I would have laid my head unto the ground,
And scented out my wenches way like a Hound:
I would have crept upon my knees all night,
And h^ue made the flint stones Linckes to give me light,
Nay man I would.

Good Lord what you would do,
Well we shall see one day how you can woe.

Come, come, we see that we have all bin crossed.
Therefore lets go, and seek them we have lost.
Am I alone? doth not my mother come?
Her torch I see not, which I well might see,
If any way she were coming toward me,
Why then belike she's gone some other way,
And may she go till I bid her turn,
Far shall her way be then, and little fair,
For she hath hindered me of my good turn,
God send her wet and weary ere the turn,
I had been at Oxenford, and to morrow,
Have been releast from all my maidens sorrow.
And tasted joy, had not my mother bin,
God I beseech thee make it her worst sin,
How many maids this night lies in their beds,
And dream that they have lost their maidenheads,
Such dreams, such slumbers I had to enioyde,
If waking malice had not them destroide,
A starved man with double death doth dye,
To have the meat might save him in his eye,
And may not have it so am I tormented,
To starve for joy I see yet am prevented,
Well Frank, although thou woedst and quickly won,
Yet shall my love to thee be never done,
I'll run through hedge and ditch, through brakes briers
To come to thee, sole Lord of my desires,
Short wooing is the best, an hour, not years,
For long debating love is full of fears,
But hea^ke, I hear one tread, o were my brother,
Or Frank, or any man, but not my mother.

O when will this same year of night have end?
Long looked for days sun, when wilt thou ascend?
Let not this these friend misty vale of night,
Encroach on day, and shadow thy fair light,
Whilst thou come tardy from my Thetes bed,
Blushing forth golden hair and glorious red,
O stay not lo^g bright lantern of the day,
To light my mist way feet to my right way?

It is a man, his big voice tells me so,
Much am I not acquainted with it tho,
And yet mine ear sounds true distinguisher,
Boys that I have been more familiar,
With it then now I am, well, I do judge,
It is not envies felon not of grudge,
Therefore I'll plead acquaintance, hyer his guiding,
And buy of him some place of close abiding,
Till that my mothers malice be expired,
And we may joy in that is long desired, whoses there?

Are ye a maid? no question this is she,
My man doth miss, faith since she lights on me,
I do not mean till day to let her go,
For what she is my mans love I will know,
Hark ye maid, if maid, are ye so light,
That you can see to wander in the night.

Hark ye true man, if true, I tell you no,
I cannot see at all which way I go.

Fair maid is't so, say had ye ne'er a fall,

Fair man not so, no I had none at all.

Could you not stumble on one man I pray?

No, no, such block till now came in my way.

Am I that block sweet tripe, then fall and try.

The grounds too hard, a feather-bed, not I.

Why how and you had met with such a stump?

Why if he had been your height I meant to jump?

Are ye so nimble?

Nimble as a Do.

Backed in a pie.

Of ye.

Good meat ye know.

Ye hunt sometimes.

I do.

What take ye?

Dear.

You'll ne'er strike rascal?

Yes when ye art there.

Will ye strike me.

Yes, will ye strike again?

No sir, it fits not maids to fight with men.

I wonder wench, how I thy name might know.

Why you may find it in the Christcrosse row.

Be my Schoolemistresse, teach me how to spell it.

No faith, I care not greatly if I tell it,
My name is Marie Ba^nes.

How wench, Mall Barnes?

The very same.

Why this is strange.

I pray sir whats o^ure name?

Why sir Raph Smith doth wonder wench at this
Why whats the cause thou art abroad so late?

What sir Raph Smith, nay then I will disclose,
All the hole cause to him, in him repose,
My hopes, my love, God him I hope did send,
Our loves and both our mothers hates to end,
Gentle sir Raph if you my blush might see,
You then would say I am ashamed to be
Found like a wandering stray by such a knight,
So far from home at such a time of night,
But my excuse is good, love first by fate
Is crossed, controlled, and sundered by fell hate,
Frank Goursey is my love, and he loves me,
But both our mothers hate and disagree,
Our fathers like the match, and wish it don,
And so it had, had not our mothers come,
To Oxford we concluded both to go,
Going to me^te, they came, we parted so,
My mother followed me, but I ran fast,
Thinking who went from hate had need make hast,
Take me she cannot though she still pursue,
But now sweet knight, I do repose on you.
Be you my Orator and plead my right,
And get me one good day for this bad night.

Alas good heart, I pity thy hard hap,
And I'll employ all that I may for thee,
Frank Goursey wench, I do commend thy choice,
Now I remember I met one Francis
As I did seek my man, then that was he,
And Philip too, (...) like that was thy brother, why now I
find how I did loose my self, And wander up down, mistaking
so, Give me thy hand Mall, I will never leave.
Till I have made your mothers friends again,
And purchased to ye both your hearts delight,
And for this same one bad, many a good night,
Twill not be long ere that Aurora will.
Decked in the glory o^ a goldon sun,
Open the crystal windows of the East,
To make the earth enamourde of thy face,
When we shall have clear light to see our way,
Come, night being done, expect a happy day.

O what a race this peevish girl hath led me?
How fast I ran and now how weary I am,
I am so out of breath I scarce can speak.
What shall I do? and cannot overtake her,
It is late and dark, and I am far from home.
May there not thieves lye watching here about,
Intending mischief unto them they meet,
There may, and I am much afraid of them,
Being alone without all company,
I do repent me of my coming forth,
And yet I do not, they had else been married,
And that I would not for ten times more labour.
But what a winter of cold fear I stole,
Freecing my heart least danger should betide me,
What shall I do to purchase company?
I hear some hollow here about the fields,
Then here I'll set my Torch upon this hill,
Whose light shall Beacon-like conduct them to it,
They that have lost their way seeing a light,
Will come to it, well, here i'll lye unseen,
For it may be seen far off in the night,
And look who comes, and choose my company,
Perhaps my daughter may first come to it.

Where am I now? nay where was I ever now,
Nor now, nor then, nor where I shall be, know I,
I think I am going home I may as well
Be going from home, tis so very dark,
I cannot see how to direct a step,
I lost my pursuing of my son,
My son escaped me too, now all alone,
I am enforst to wander up and down,
Barnses wife's abroad pray God that she:
May have as good a dance, nay ten times worse,
Oh but I fear she hath not, she hath light
To see her way, O that some bridge would break
That she might fall into some deep digd ditch,
And either break her bones or drown her self,
I would these mischiefs I could wish to her,
Might light on her, but soft I see a light,
I will go near, tis comfortable,
After this nights sad spirits dulling darkness,
How now? What is it set to keep it self?

A plague ont, is she there?

O how it cheers quickens up my thoughts,

O that it were the Besseli^kies fell eye,
To poison thee.

I care not if I take it.
Sure none is here to hinder me,
And light me home.

I had rather she were hanged.
Then I should set it there to do her good.

I faith I will.

I faith you shall not mistress.
I'll venture a burnt finger but I'll have it.

Yet Barnses wife would chafe if that she knew,
That I had this good to get a light.

And so she doth, but praise you luck at parting.

O that it were her light good faith, that she,
Might darkling walk about as well as I.

O how this mads me, that she hath her wish,

How I would laugh to see her tro^ about.

Oh, I could cry for anger and for rage.

But who should set it here I marvel a Gods name?

One that will hau'te from you in the devils name

lle lay my life that it was Barnses son.

No forsooth, it was Barnses wife.

A plague upon her, how she made me start?
Mistress let go the ^orch,

No but I will not.

I'll thrust it in thy face then.

But you shall not.

Let go I say.

Let you go, for tis mine.

But my possession says it is none of thine.

Nay, I have hold too,

Well, let go thy hold, or I will spurn thee.

Do, I can spurn thee too.

Can thou?

I that I can.

Why how now woman, how unlike to women,
Are ye both now? come part, come part I say.

Why what immodesty it this in you?
Come part I say, fie, fie.

Fie, fie, she shall not have my torch,
Give me thy torch boy, I will run a tilt,
And burn out both her eyes in my encounter.

Give room and lets have this hat carerie.

I say ye shall not, wife go to, tame your thoughts,
That are so mad with fury.

And sweet wife,
Temper you rage with patience, do not be
Subject so much to such misgovernment.

Shall I not sir, when such a strumpet wrongs me?

How, strumpet mistress Barnes, nay I pray hark ye,
I oft indeed have heard you call her so,
And I have thought upon it, why ye should
Twither with name of strumpet,
Do you know any hurt by her, that you term her so?

No on my life, rage only makes her say so,

But I would know whence this same rage should come.
Whers smoke there's fire, and my heart misgives.
My wives intemperance hath got that name,
And mistress Barnes, I doubt and shrewdly doubt,
And some great cause begets this doubt in me,
Your husband and my wife doth wrong us both.

How? think ye so, nay master Goursey then
You run indebt to my opinion,
Because you pay not such advised wisdom,
As I think due unto my good conciet.

Then still I fear I shall your debtor prove.
Then I arrest you in the name of love,
Not bale, but present answer to my plea,
And in the Court of reason we will try,
If that good thoughts should believe jealousy,

Why look you mother, this is long of you,
For Gods sake father hark, why these effects
Come still from women's malice, part I pray,
Comes, Will. and Hodge come all and help us part them,
Father, but hear me speak one word no more:

Father, but hear me speak, the use yourwill.

Cry peace between ye for a little while.

Good husband hear him speak.

Good husband hear him*

Master hear him speak, hes a good wise young stripling, for his years I
tel ye, perhaps may speak wiser then an elder body, therefore hear him.


Master hear and make an end, you may kill one another in jest, and be hanged
in earnest.


Come let us hear him, then speak quickly Philip

Thou should have done ere this, speak

Speak

O Lord what haste you make to hurt your selves
Good Phillip use some good persuasions
To make them friends.

Yes, I'll do what I can,
Father and Master Goursey both attend,
It is presumption in so young a man,
To teach where he might learn or be derect,
Where he hath had direction but in duty.
He may persuade as long as his perswase,
Is backed with reason and a rightful suit,
Physics first rule is this, as I have learned,
Kill the effect by cutting of the cause,
The same effects of ruffin outrages,
Comes by the cause of malice in your wines,
Had not they two bin foes, you had bin friends,
And we had bin at home, and this same war,
In peaceful sleep had ne'er bin dreamt upon,
Mother, and mistress Goursey to make them friends,
Is to be friends your selves, you are the cause,
And these effects proceed you know from you,
Your hates give life unto these killing stri^es,
But dye, and if that (...) ^ye in you,
Fathers yet stay, O speak, O stay a while,
Francis persuade thy mother master Goursey,
If that my mother will resolve your minds,
That tis but mere suspect, not common proof,
And if my father swears hes innocent,
As I durst pawn my soul with him he is,
And if your wi^e vow truth and constancy,
Will you be then persuaded?

Phillip, if thy father will remit,
The wounds I gave him, and if these conditions
May be performed, I banish all my wrath.

And if thy mother will but clear me Phillip,
As I am ready to protest I am,
Then master Goursey is my friend again.

Hark mother, now you hear that your desires,
May be accomplished, they ^ill both be friends
If you'll perform these articles.

Shall I be friends with such an enemy?

What say you unto my perswase;

I say she's my deadly enemy.

I but she will be your friend if you revolt.

The words I said, what shall I eat a truth?

Why hark ye mother.

Mother what say you?

Why this I say she slandered my good name.

But if she now deny it, tis no defame.

Wh^ shall I think her hate will yield so much:

Why? (...) it not, her spirit may he such,

why will it be?

Yet stay, I have some hope.
Mother, why mother, why hear ye,
Give me your hand, it is no more but thus,
Tis easy labour to shake hands with her.
A little breath is spent in speaking of fair words,
When wrath hath violent delivered,

What shall we be resolved?

O husband stay,
Stay Master Goursey, though your wife doth hate me,
And bears unto me malice infinite.
And endless, yet I will respect your safeties,
I would not have you perish by our means,
I must confess, that only suspect,
And no proof else, hath fed my hate to her.

And husband I protest by heaven and earth,
That her suspect is causles and unjust,
And that I ne'er had such a wild intent,
Harm she imaginde, where as none was meant.

Lo sir, what would ye more?

Yes Phillip this:
That I confirm him in my Innocence,
By this large vniuerse.

By that I swear, i'll credit none of you, until I here
Friendship concluded straight between them two,
If I see that they willingly will do,
Then i'll imagine all suspicion ends,
I may be then assured they being friends.

Mother, make full my wish, and be it so.

What shall I sue for friendship to my foe?

No, if she yield will you?

It may be I.

Why this is well, the other I will try,
Come Mistress Goursey, do you first agree?

What shall I yield unto mine enemy?

Why if she will, will you?

Perhaps I will.

Nay then I find this goes forward still:
Mother give me your hand, give me yours to,
Be not so loath, some good thing I must do,
But lay your Torches by, I like not them,
Come, come, deliver them unto your men,
Give me your hands, so now sir here I stand,
Holding two angry women in my hand,
And I must please them both, I could please tone,
But it is hard when there is two to one,
Especially of women, but tis so,
They shall be pleased whether they will or no,
Which will come first? what both give back, ha, neither?
Why then yond may help that come both together,
So stand still, stand but a little while,
And see how I your angers will beguile,
Well yet there is no hurt, why then let me,
Join these two hands, and see how theil agree,
Peace, peace, they cry, look how they friendly kiss,
Well all this while there is no harm in this,
Are not these two twins? twins should be both alike,
If tone speaks fair, the the other should not strike,
Iesus these warriors will not offer blows,
Why then tis strange that you two should be foes,
O yes, you'll say your weapons are your tongnes,
Touch lip with lip and they are bound from wrongs,
Go to, embrace, and say if you be friends,
That here the angry women's quarrels ends,

Then here it ends, if mistres Barnes say so.

If you say I, I list not to say no.

If they be friends, by promise we agree.

And may this league of friendship ever be.

What say thou Frank, doth not this fall out well?

Yes if my Mall were here, then all were well.

Yonder they be Mall, stay, stand close and stur not
Until I call: God save ye Gentlemen.

What sir Raph Smith, you are a welcome man,
We wondered when we heard you were abroad.

Why sir, how heard ye that I was abroad?

By your man.

My man, where is he?

Here.

O ye are a trusty squire.

It had bin better and he had said, a sure card.

Why sir? Nic, Because it is the Proverb.

Away ye Ass.

An Ass goes a four legs, I go of two ^hrist cross.

Hold you tongue.

And make no (...)

Go to, no more a do, gentle sir Raphe,
Your man is not in fault for missing you,
For he mistook by us and we by him.

And I by you, which now I well perceive,
But tell me Gentlemen, what made ye all,
Be from your beds this night, and why thus late
Are your wives walking here about the fields?
Tis strange to see such women of account,
Here, but I ges^e some great occasion,

Faith this occasion sir, women will jar.
And jar they did to day, and so they parted,
We knowing women's malice let alone,
Will Canker like ^ate farther in their hearts,
Did seek a sudden cure, and thus it was,
A match between his daughter and my son,
No sooner motioned but twas agreed,
And they no sooner saw but wooed and likte,
They have it sought to crose, and cross it thus.

F^e mistress Barnes and mistress Goursey both,
The greatest sin wherein your souls may sin,
I think is this, in crossing of true love,
Let me persuade ye.

Sir we are persuaded,
And I and mistress Goursey are both friends,
And if my daughter were but found again,
Who now is missing, she had my consent,
To be disposed off to her own content.

I do rejoice, that what I thought to do,
Ere I begin, I find already done,
Why this will please your friends at Abington,
Frank, if thou seekst that way, there thou shalt find
Her, whom I hold the comfort of thy mind.

He shall not seek me, I will seek him out,
Since of my mothers grant I need not doubt.

Thy mother grants my girl, and she doth pray
To send unto you both a ^oyfull day.

Nay mistress Barnes, I wish her better, that those joyful days may be turned
to joyful nights.


Faith tis a pretty wench, and tis pity but she should have him.


And mistress Mary, when ye go to bed, God send you good rest, and a peck of
Fleas in your nest, every one as big as Francis.


Well said wisdom, God send thee wise children,

And you more money.

I, so wish I,

Twill be a good while, ere you wish your skinfull of ^let holes.

Frank, hark ye? brother, now your woings done,
The next thing now you do, is for a son:
I prithe, for I faith I should be glad,
To have my self called Nunckle and thou Dad,
Wel^ ^ister, if that Francis play the man,
My mo^her must be Grandam and you Mam,
To if Francis, to it sister, God send ye joy,
Tis fine to sing dansey my own sweet boy.

Well sini^ston

Nay fie, de you jest on.

Well may she prove a happy wife to him.

And may he prove as happy unto her.

Well Gentlemen, good hap betide them both,
Since twas my hap thus hap thus happily to meet,
To be a witness of this sweet contract,
I do rejoice, wherefore to have this joy
Longer present with me, I do request
That all of you will be my promised guests,
This long nights labour doth desire some rest,
Besides this wished end, therefore I pray,
Let me deteine ^yee but a dinner time,
Tell me I pray, shall I obtain so much.

Gentle sir Raphe, your courtesy is such,
As may impose command unto us all,
We will be thankful bold at your request,

I pray sir Raph, what cheer shall we have?

I faith country fare, mutton and Veale,
Perchance a Duck or Goose.

Oh I am sick.

How now Mall, whats the matter?

Father and mother if you needs would know,
He named a Goose, which is my stomachs foe.

Come, come, she is with child of some odiest,
And now she's sick till that she bring it forth,

Aiest quoth you? well brother if it be,
I fear twill prove an earnest unto me,
Goose said ye sir? oh that same very name,
Hath in it much variety of shame,
Of all the birds that ever yet was seen,
I would not have them graze upon this green,
I hope they will not, for this, crop is poor,
And they may pasture upon greater store.
But yet tis pity that they let them pass,
And like a Common bite the Muses grass,
Yet this I fear if Frank and I should kiss,
Some creeking goose would chide us with a hiss,
I mean not that goose sings it knows not what.
Tis not that hiss when one says hist come hither,
Nor that same hiss that sets dogs together,
Nor that same hiss that by a fire doth stand,
And hisseth T. or F. upon the hand,
But tis a hiss, and I'll unlace my cote,
For I should sound sure if I heard that note,
And then green Ginger for the green goose cries,
Serves not the turn, I turned the white of eyes,
The Rosasolis yet that makes me live,
Is favours that these Gentlemen may give,
But if they be displeased, then pleased am I,
To yield my self a hissing death to dye,
Yet I hope here's none consents to kill,
But kindly take the favour of good will.
If any thing be in the pen to blame,
Then here stand I to blush the writers shame.
If this be bad, he promises a better.
Trust him, and he will prove a right true debtor.


