COllonell


Signior Alerzo.


Here.


Signiors well met:
The lazy morn has scarcely trimmed her self
To entertain the Sun; she still retains
The slimy tincture of the banished night:
I hardly could discern you.

But you appear fresh as a City Bridegroom,
That has signed his wife a warrant for the
Grafting horns; how fares Belinda,
After the weight of so much sin? you lay with her
To night; come, speak, did you take up on trust,
Or have you pawned a Colony of Oaths?
Or an embroidered Belt? or have you taken
The Courtiers trick, to lay your sword at mortgage?
Or perhaps a Feather? 'twill serve in traffic,
To return her Ladyship, a Fan, or so.

Y' are merry.


Come be free,
Leave modesty for women to gild
Their pretty thriving Art of plentitude,
To enrich their Husbands brows with cornucopiaes:
A Soldier and thus bashful!
Pox be open.

Had I the Pox good Colonel, I should stride
Far opener then I do:
But pox of the fashion.

Count Antonio.


Tho he appear fresh as a bloom
That newly kissed the Sun, adorned with pearly
Drops, flung from the hand of the rose fingered morn,
Yet in his heart lives a whole Host of valour.

He appears
A second Mars.

More powerful since he holds Wisdom
And Valour captive.

Let us salute him.


Hallow close they strike,
As if they heard a winged thunder-bolt, threatened his death
And each ambitious were to lose his life;
So it might purchase him a longer being:
Their breath ingenders like two peaceful winds,
That join a friendly league, and fill the air
With silken music.
I may pass by and scarce be spared a look,
Or any else but young Antonio.
Rise from thy scorching Den thou soul of mischief.
My blood boils hotter then the poisoned flesh
Of Hercules clothed in the Centaurs shirts:
Swell me revenge, till I become a hill
High as Olimpus cloud dividing top;
That I might fall, and crush them into air.
He observe.

Commandy the all
This little World I'm Master of contains,
And be assured tis granted; I have a life,
I owe to death; and in my Countries causes I should --

Good sir no more,
This ungrateful Land owes you too much already.

And you still bind it in stronger Bonds.


Your noble deeds, that like to thoughts out-strip
The fleeting clouds, dash all our hopes of payment:
We are poor but in unprofitable thanks;
Nay that cannot rehearse enough your merit.

I dare not hear this; pardon bashful ears
For suffering such a scarlet to o're-spread
Your burning Portals.
Gentlemen your discourses taste of Court,
They have a relish of known flattery;
I must deny to understand their folly:
Your pardon, I must leave you,
Modesty commands.

Your honours vassales.


O good Colonel be more a Soldier,
Leave complements for those that live at ease,
To stuff their Table Books; and over a board,
Made gaudy with some Pageant, beside custards,
Whose quaking strikes a fear into the eaters,
Dispute 'em in a fashionable method.
A Soldiers language should be as his calling,
(Ruff) to declare he is a man of fire.
Farewell without the straining of a sinew,
No superstitious cringe; adieu

I'st not a hopeful Lord?
Nature to him has chained the peoples hearts;
Each to his Saint offers a form of prayer
For young Antonio.

And in that loved name pray for the Kingdoms good.


Count Matchvill.


Let's away.
Heart wilt not burst with rage, to see these slaves
Fawn like to whelps on young Antonio,
And fly from me as from infection? Death,
Confusion, and the list of all deseases, wait upon your lives
Till you be ripe for Hell; which when it gapes
May it devour you all: stay Machvile,
Leave this same idle chat, it becomes woman
That has no strength; but what her tongue
Makes a Monopoly, be more a man,
Think, think; in thy brains mint
Coin all thy thoughts to mischief:
That may act revenge at full.
Plot, plot, tumultious thoughts, incorporate;
Beget a lump how e're deformed, that may at length
Like to a Cub licked by the careful Dam,
Become like to my wishes perfect vengeance.
Antonio, I Antonio; nay all
Rather then loose my will, shall head-long fall
Into eternal ruin; my thoughts are high,
Death sit upon my brow; let every frown,
Banish a soul that stops me of a crown.

The Taylor yet returned Nurse?


Madam not yet.


I wonder why he makes gowns so imperfect
They need so many says.

Truly, insooth, and in good deed law Madam
The stripling is in love deep, deep in love.

Ha,
Does his soul shoot with an equal Dart
From the commanding Bow of loves great God,
Keep passionate time with mine? or has
She spied my error to reflect with eager beams
Of thirsty love upon a Taylor, being my self
Borne high? -- I must know more.
In love good Nurse; with whom?

Hey-hoe, truly madam 'tis a fortune,
Cupid good lad, praised be his god-head for it
Has thrown upon me, and I am proud on it;
O 'tis a youth joccond as sprightly May,
One that will do discreetly with a wife,
Board her without direction from the stars,
Or counsel from the Moon to do for Physic;
No, he's a back; -- O 'tis a back indeed.

Fie this becomes you not.


Besides, he is of all that conquering Calling,
A Taylor madam; O 'tis a taking Trade:
What Chamber-maid, with reverence may
I speak, of those lost Maiden heads,
Could long hold out against a Taylor?

You're uncivil.


What aged Female, for I must confess I am
Worn threed-bare,
would not be turned and live a marriage life
To purchase Heaven?

Heaven --


Yes my dear Madam Heaven, whither
My most sweet Lady but to Heaven? hell's a
Taylors ware-house; he has the Keys, and sits
In triumph cross legged over the mouth:
It is no place of horror.
There's no flames made blew with Brimstone;
But the bravest silks, so fashionable:
O I do long to wear such properties.

Leave your talk,
One knocks, go see.

O 'tis my love. I come.


A Taylor, fie, blush my too tardy soul,
And on my brow place a becoming scorn,
Whose fatal sight may kill his mounting hopes.
Were he but one that when 'twas said he's borne,
Had bin borne noble, high,
Equal in blood to that our House boasts great;
I'd fly into his arms with as much speed,
As an air cutting arrow to the stake.
But O he comes, my fortitude is fled.

Yonder she is and walks, yet in sense strong enough to maintain Argument,
she's under my cloak; for the best part of a Lady as this age goes is her
Clothes; in what reckoning ought we Tailors to be esteemed then, that are the
master workmen to correct nature? You shall have a Lady in a Dialogue with
some gallant, touching his Suite, the better part of man, so suck the breath
that names the skilful Tailor as if it nourished her. Another Dona fly from the
close embraces of her Lord, to be all over measured by her Tailor. One will
be sick forsooth, and bid her maid deny her to this Don, that Earl, the
other Marquess, nay to a Duke; yet let her Taylor lase and unlase her gown,
so round the skirts to fit her to the fashion: here's one has in my sight made
many a noble Don to hang the head, Dukes and Marquesses, three in a morning
break their fasts on her denials; yet I, her Tailor, blessed be the kindness
of my loving stare, am ushered; she smiles and says I have staid too long, and
then finds fault with some slight stitch, that eye-let holes's too close, then
must I use my Bodkin 'twill never please else; all will not do, I must take it
home, for no cause but to bring it her again next morning. We Taylors are the
men spite of the Proverb, Ladies cannot live without. It is we
That please them best, in their commodity:
There's magic in our habits, Taylors can
Prevail 'bove him, honour stiles best of man.



Bid him draw near.


Come hither love, sweet chuck
My Lady calls.

What means this woman? sure she loves me too,
Taylors shall speed had they no tongues to woo:
Women would sue to them.

What have you done it now?


Madam your gown by my industry
Is purged of errors.

Lord what a neat methodical way you have
To vent your Phrases; pray when did you commence?

What mean you Madam?


Doctor I mean, you speak so physical.


Nay Madam 'tis a youth, I praise my stars
For their kind influence, a woman may be proud on,
And I am.
O 'tis a youth in print, a new Adonis,
And I could wish, although my glass tells me
I'm wondrous fair, I were a Venus for him.

O Lady, you are more fairer by far.


La you there Madam.


Where art thou man? art thou transformed?
Or art thou grown so base that
This ridiculous witch should think I love her?

Leave us.


I go
Duck, I'll be here anon,
I will Dove.

At your best leisure.
Protect me man-hood, least my glutted sense
Feeding with such an eager appetite on
Your rare beauty, breaking the sluices,
Burst into a flood of passionate tears;
I must, I will enjoy her, though a
Destroying clap from Ioves Artillery were the reward:
And yet dull-daring fir by your favour no,
He must be more than savage can attempt
To injure so much spotless innocence:
Pardon great Powers the thought of such offence.

When Sabastiano clad in conquering steel,
And in a phrase able to kill, or from a cowards heart
Banish the thought of fear; wo'd me,
Won not so much upon my captive soul
As this youths silence does:
Help me some power out of this tangling maze,
I shall be lost else.

Fear to the breast of women,
Build thy throne on their soft hearts;
Mine must not be thy slave.
Your pleasure Madam.

I have a question must be directly answered
No excuse, but from thy heart a truth.

Command me Madam, were it a secret
On whose hinges hung the casements of my life,
Yet your command shall be obeyed; to the least
Scruple.

I take your word,
My aged Nurse tells me you love her,
Answer; i'st a truth?

She's jealous, I'll try;
As Oracle.

(Ha)


'tis so, i'll further; I love her Madam,
With as rich a flame as Anchorits
Do Saints they offer prayers too:
I hug her memory as I would embrace
The breath of Jove, when it pronounced me
Happy; or Prophet, that should speak my
After life great, even with adoration deified.

My life, like to a bubble in the air,
Dissolved by some uncharitable wind,
Denies my body warmth: your breath
Has made me nothing.

Rather let me lose all external being.
Madam, good Madam.

You say you love her.


Madam, I do.
Can any love the beauty of a stone,
Set by some curious Artist in a Ring,
But he must attribute some to
The File that adds unto the lustre?
You appear like to a Gem, cut by the
Steady hand of careful Nature, into such
Beauteous Tablets, that dull Art,
Famous in skilful flattery, is become
A Novice in what Fame proclaimed him Doctor;
He cannot express one spark of your great lustre.
Madam, 'those Beauties that, but studied on
By their admirers, are deified, serve
But as spots, to make your red and white
Envied of Cloisterd Saints.

Have I ungrateful man, like to the Sun,
That from the Heavens sends down his
Cherishing beams on some religious plant,
That with a bow the worship of the
Thankful, pays the preserver of his life,
And groth: But thou, unthankful man,
In scorn of me, to love a Callender of many
Years.

Madam, upon my knees, a superstitious Rite,
The Heathens used to pay their gods, I offer up.
A life, that until now ne'er knew a price;
Made dear because you love it.

Arise; it is a Ceremony due unto none but heaven.


Here I'll take root, and grow into my grave,
Unless dear god less you forget to be
Cruel to him adores you with a zeal,
Equal to that of Hermits.

I believe you, and thus exchange a devout vow,
Humbly upon my knees, that though the
Thunder of my brothers rage should force divorce,
Yet in my soul to love you; witness all
The winged inhabitants of the highest heaven.

If sudden lightning, such as vengeful Jove
Clears the infectious air with, threatened to
Scorch my daring soul to Cinders, if I
Did love you, Lady, I wo'd love you, spite
Of the dogged Fates, or any power
Those cursed Hags set to oppose me.

Be thy self again.


Madam, your Brother.


Fie, you have done it ill, our brother, say you?
Pray you take it home and mend it.

Madam, it shall be done; I take my leave.
Love I am made thy envy; I am he
This Votresse prays unto, as unto thee:
Tailors are more than men; and here's the odds,
They make fine Ladies; Ladies make them gods:
And so they are not men, but far above them:
This makes the Tailers proud; then Ladies love them.

What's he that past?


My Tailor.


There's something in his face I sure should know.
But sister to your Beads; pray for distressed Scivel;
Whilst I mount some watch tower,
To o're-looke our enemies, religious laws
Commands me fight for my loved Countries cause.

Love bids me pray, and on his Altars make
A Sacrifice, for my loved Tailors sake.

Stand.


Stand.


Stand.


Give the word through the Army, stand there.


Stand, stand, stand, stand hoe.


Bid the Drum cease, whilst we embrace our love:
Come my Philippa, like the twins of war,
Laced in our freely Cornets, we're become
The envy of those brain begotten gods,
Mouldy Antiquity lifted to Heaven:
Thus we exchange our breath;

My honoured Lord,
Duty commands, I pay it back again,
'Twill waste me into smoke else,
Can my body retain that breath, that would
Consume an Army, dressed in a rougher habit.
Play deliver (come I'm a gentle thief)
The breath you stole.

Restore back mine -- So, go pitch our tent, we will
Have a Combat in the field of love, with thee
Philippa, ere we meet the foe: thou art
A friendly enemy. How say my Lords,
Does not my Love appear,
Like to the issue of the brain of Jove,
Governess of Arms and Arts, Minerva?
Or a selected beauty from a troop of Amazons.

She is a Mine of valour.


Lords spare your praises till like Bradament,
The mirror of our Sex, I make the foe.
Of France and us, crouch like a whelp,
Awed by the heaving of his Masters hand;
My heart runs through my arm, and when I deal
A blow, it sinks a soul:
My sword flies nimbler than the bolts of Jove,
And wounds as deep: Spain; thy proud host shall feel
Death has bequeathed his office to my steel.

Ray. Come on brave Lords, upon your Generals word,
Philippa loves no parley, like the sword.

Come bullies, come; we must forsake the use of nimble shears, and now betake
us to our Spanish needles, Stelletto blades, and prove the Proverb lies, lies
in his throat: one Tailor can erect sixteen, nay more, of upstart Gentlemen,
known by their Clothes, and leave enough materials in hell to damn a
broker.


We must to the wars my boys.


How Master, to the wars?


I to the wars Virmine, what say thou to that?


Nothing, but that I had rather stay home: O the good penny bread at breakfasts
that I shall lose! Master, good Master let me alone, to live with honest Iohn,
noble John Black.


Wilt thou disgrace thy worthy calling, Virmine?


No, but I am afraid my calling will disgrace me: I shall be gaping for my
mornings loaf, and dram of Ale; I shall; and now and then look for a Cabbich
leaf, or an odd remnant to cloth my bashful buttocks.


You shall.


Yes marry; why I hope poor Vermin must be fed, and will be fed, or I'll
torment you.


Master I take privilege from your love to hearten on my fellows.


I, I; do, do good boy.


Come my bold fellows, let us eternize,
For our Countries good, some noble act
That may by time be Regestred at full;
And as the year renews, so shall our fame
Be fresh to after times: the Tailors name,
So much trod under, and the scorn of all
Shall by this act be high whilst others fall.

Come Vermin, come.


Nay if virmine slip from the back of a Tailor, spit him with a Spanish
Needle; or torment him in the louses Engine: your two thumb nailes.


The City seig'd, and thou thus chained
In airy fetters of a Ladies love;
It must not be, stay, 'tis Evadne's love;
Her life is with the City ruined, if the
French become victorious:
Evadne must not dye, her Chaster name
That once made cold, now doth my blood inflame.

HEll take their spacious throats, we shall e're long
Be pointed as a prodige;
Antonio is the man they load with praise,
And west and as a Cipher to advance
Him by a number higher*

Now Machvile plot his ruin,
It is not to be borne; are not you our
Masters subsitude? then why should he
Usurp a privilege without your loave,
To preach unto the people a Doctrine
They ought not hear:
He incites 'em not to obey your charge,
Unless it be to knit a friendly league
With the opposing French; laying before 'em
A troop of fained dangers will ensue,
If we do bid 'em battle.

Dares he do this?


'Tis done already;
Smother your anger and you shall see, here
At the Counsel board he will break into a
Passion; -- which i'll provoke him to. --

Never more need, my worthy partners, in
The dangerous brunts of Iron war, had we
Of Counsel: the hot rained French, led by that
Haughty Moore, (upon whose sword sits
Victory enthroned) daily increase;
And like the Army of another Xerxes,
Make the over burdened earth groan at their weight.
We cannot long hold out; nor have we hope
Our Royal Master can raise up their Seige
E're we beforc't to yield:
My Lord your counsel 'tis a desperate grief.

And must my Lord find undelaid release?
Noble Commanders since that wars grim god,
After our sacrifice of many lives,
Neglects our offerings, and repayes our service
With loss; 'tis good to deal with policy.
He's no true Soldier that deals needless blows
With the endangering of his life; and may
Walk in a shade of safety, yet o'rethrow
His towering enemy.
Great Alexander made the then known world
Slave to his powerful will, more by the help
Of politic wit,
Than by the ruff compultion of the sword.
Troy that endured the Grecians ten years Siege,
By policy was fired, and became
Like to a lofty Beacon all on flame.

Hum, hum.


Suppose the French be marked for conquerors:
Stars have bin crossed, when at a natural birth
They dart prodigious beams; their influence
Like to the flame of a new lighted Tapor,
Has with the breath of policy bin blown
Out, even to nothing.

Hum, hum.


This has bin studied.


He's almost out.


Good,
But to the matter;
Your counsel.

'Tis this my Lord;
That straight before the French have pitched their Tents,
Or raised a work before our City walls;
As yet their ships have not over spread the sea,
We send a Regiment that they with speed
Land on the Marshes, and begirt their backs,
Whilst we open our Gates, and with astrong assault
Force 'em retreat into the arches of death
So the revengeful earth shall be their tomb,
That did ere while trample her teeming womb.

Machvile speaks Oracle;
What says Antonio?

Nothing.


How?


Nothing.


It takes: revenge,
I hug thee; young Lord thou' art loft.

Speak, Antonio your counsel.


Nothing.


How?


So;
And could my wish obtain a sudden grant
From you Tribunal, I would crave, my senses
Might be all steeped in Lethe, to forget
What Machvile has spoken.

Ha, it takes unto my wish.
Why Antonio?

Because you speak
Not like a man, that were possessed with a
Mere Soldiers heart; much less a soul guarded
With subtle sinews: O madness, can there be
In nature such a prodegie so senseless,
So much to be wondered at,
As can applaud or lend a willing ear
To that my blushes do betray I've bin
Tardy to hear? your childish policy.

Antonio you're too bold; this usurped liberty
To abuse a man of so much merit, is not
Seemly in you: nay I'll term it sauciness.

Nay then my Lord, I claim the privilege
Of a Counseller, and will object.
This my Prophetic fears, whispered my heart:
When from a watch Tower I beheld the French
Erect their spears; which like a migthy Grove
Denied my eyes any other object:
The tops showd by a stolen reflection from
The Sun like Diamonds, or as the glorious
Guilder of the day, should deign a lower visit,
Then my warm blood; that used to play like
Summer, felt a change; Gray-bearded winter
Froze my very soul, till I became
Like the Pyrenian Hills, rapt in a robe of Ice:
My Atticke fears froze me into a statue.

Cowardly Antonio.


I have lost my faith,
And can behold him now without a wonder.

Antonio, you're too long and wrack our patience;
Your counsel?

I feared, but what? not our proud enemies,
No, did they burden all our Spanish world:
And I, poor I; only survived to threat defiance
In the Mounsiers teeth, and stand Defendant
For my Countries cause; naked, unarmed.
I'd through their bragging Host, and pay my life
A Sacrifice to death, for my loved Countries safety.

Fulgentio thou hast not lost
Thy faith?

No, i'm reformed he's valiant.


Antonio your counsel.


I your counsel.


Our foes increase to an unreckon'd number:
We less then nothing, since we have no hope
To arrive a number, that may cope with
Half their Army.
'Tis my counsel we strike a league:
'Tis wisdom to sue peace, where powerful Fate
Threatens a ruin: least repent too late.

'Tis god-like Counsel.


And becomes the tongue of young Antonio.


Antonio let me tell you, you have lost
Your valiant heart; I can with safety now
Term you a Coward.

Ha.


Nay more,
Since by your Oratory, you strive
To rob your Country of a glorious conquest;
That may to after times beget a fear,
Even with the thought should awe the trembling
World: you are a Traitor.

Ha my Lord, Coward and Traitor, tis a damned lye,
And in the heart of him dares say it again
I'll write his error.

'Tis as I would hav't.


Noble Antonio.


Brave spirited Lord.


The mirror of a Soldier.


O are you moved sir, has the deserved name
Of Traitor pricked you?

Deserved?


Yes.


Yes.


Machvile thou lie; had thou a heart
Of hardened steel, my powerful Arm
Should pierce it.

The Governor
Slain by Antonio's hand?

No, by the hand of Justice; fly, fly my Lord.


Send for a Surgeon to dress Count Machvile,
He must be now our Governor; the King
Signed it in the dead Governors Commission.

Now I repent too late my cash contempt,
The horror of a Murderer will still
Follow my guilty thoughts, fly where I will.

I'm wounded, else Coward Antonio
Thou should not fly from my revengeful Arm:
But may my curses fall upon thy head
Heavy as thunder; may thou dye
Burdened with ulcerous sins, whose very
Weight may sink thee down to Hell:
Beneath the reach of smooth-fac'd mercies arm.
Confusion choke your rash officious throats,
And may that breath that speaks his loathed name
Beget a Plague, whose hot infectious air
May scald you up to blisters, which foretell
A purge of life: up Machvile,
Tho'st thy will, how ere cross Fate
Divert the peoples hearts; they must perforce
Sue to that Shrine our liking shall erect.
The Governor is dead, Antonio's lost
To any thing but death; 'tis out glad fate,
To gripe the staff of what we looked for state.
My bloods ambitious, and runs through my veins
Like nimble water through a Leaden Pipe
Up to some barren Mountain: I must have more,
All wealth in my thoughs to a Crown is poor.

'Tis a near Gown and fashionable
Madam; i'st not love?

Upon my Virginity wonderful handsome:
Dear, when we are married I'll have such a one;
Shall I not chicken? ha.

What else, kind Nurse.


Truly you Tailors are the most sanctified members
Of a Kingdom:
How many crooked and untoward bodies have
You set upright, that they go now so straight in their
Lives and conversation, as the proudest on them all?

That's certain, none prouder.


How mean you sir?


Faith Madam your crooked movables in artificial bodies, that rectify the
deformity of natures over-plus, as bunching backs, or scarcity, as seanty
shoulders, are the proudest creatures; you shall have them jet with it an
undaunted boldness; for the truth is, what they want in substance they have in
air: They will scold the Tailor out of his Art,
And impute the defect of nature to his want
Of skill, though his labour make her appearance
Pride worthy.



Well said my birds eye, stand for the credit of
Tailors whilst thou livest; wilt thou not Chuck?
Ha, say thou my dear?

I were ungrateful else.


Nurse pray leave us, your presence makes your
Sweet heart negligent of what he comes about;
Pray be won to leave us here.

Madam your will's obeyed:
Yet I can hardly pass from thee my love.
At such a sudden warning.

Your eager love may be termed dotage,
For shame confess your self to less expressions:
Leave my Lady.

A kiss and then I go, so; farewell my Duck.


Death she has left a scent to poison me;
Love her said she, is any man so mad, to hug a disease,
Or embrace a colder Image the Pigmalions
Or play with the bird of
Frosty antiquity, not I:
Her gumms stink worse then a Pest-house,
And more danger of infecting.
As I'm a mortal Tailor; and your servant Madam,
Her breath has tainted me I dare not salute
Your Ladyship.

Come you are loath to part with it 'tis so sweet.


Sweet say you Madam, a muster of diseases
Can't smell worse, than her rotten teeth.
Excuse my boldness, to defer your longing;
Thus I am new created with your breath.
My gaping pores will ne'er be satisfied.
Again -- they still are hungry.

My dear friend, let not thy lovely person
March with the scolding peace affrighting Drum:
War is too cruel: come i'll chain
You here, here in my arms; and stiffle you
With kisses; you sha' not go -- by this you sha' not go,

By this I must.


I'll smother that harsh breath.


Again I countercheck it.


O sister, ha!
What killing sight is this! cannot be she.
Sister.

O my dear friend, my brother, we're undone.


Degenerate girl, lighter than wind or air;
Can thou forget thy birth? or because you're fair
Art privileged, dost think with such a zeal
To grasp an under shrub? dare you exchange
Breath with your Tailors, without fear of vengeance
From the desturbed ghosts of our dead Parents,
For their bloods injury? or are your favours
Grown prostitue to all? my unkind Fate
Grieves me not half so much, as thee forgetful.

Sir if on me this language, I must tell you,
You are too rash to censure. My unworthiness that makes
Her seem so ugly in your eyes, perhaps
Hangs in these clothes, and's shifted off with them.
I am as noble, but that I hate to make
Comparisons, as any you can think worthy
To be called her husband.

Shred of a slave thou' lie.


Sir I am hasty too; yet in the presence of my
Mistress can use a temper.

Brave; your mistress.


Lay hold on him,
Ere we presume to meet the enemy
We'll purge the City; lest the wrath of heaven
Fall heavy on us: Antonio I arrest thee
Of Capital treason, against the King and Realm.
To prison with him.

O my lost brother!


'Tis but an error, treason do ye call it; to kill
The Governor in heate of blood, and not intended?
For my Evadne's sake, something I'll do
Shall save his life.

To prison with him.


Farewell Evadne, as thou love the peace
Of our dead Ancestors, cease to love
So loathed a thing; a Tailor,
Why? 'tis the scorn of all; therefore be ruled
By thy departing Brother, do not mix
With so much baseness:
Come Officers, bear me even where you please,
My oppressed conscience no where can have ease.

Lady we here enjoin you to
Your Chamber as a prisoner, to
Wait a further censure; your brothers
Fault has pulled a punishment upon your head,
Which you must suffer.

'Ene what you please, your tyranny can't bear
A shape so bad to make Evadne fear:
Strong innocence shall guard my afflicted soul,
Whose constancy shall tyranny control.

A troop of Tailors by force have taken
Antonio from us, and have borne him (spite
Of the best resistance we could make) unto some
Secret place, we can not find him.

Screech owl dost know what thou hast said?
Death, find him or you dye: O my cross stars,
He must not live to torture our next sense,
But dye; though he had no fault but innocence.

Can this kindness merit your love?
Do I deserve your sister?

My sister! worthy Tailor; 'tis a gift lies not in me to give: ask something
else, 'tis thine, although it be gained with the quite extinguishing of this;
this breath you gave me.


Have not I --


Speak no further, I confess you have bin all unto me, life, and being; I
breath but with your licence: will no price buy out your interest in me, but
her love? I tell thee Tailor, I have blood runs in me, Spain cannot match for
greatness, next her Kings. Yet to requite thy love I'll call thee friend, be
thou Antonio's friend; a favour nobles have thirsted for: will this requite
thee?


Sir this may, but --


My sister thou would say most worthy Tailor, she is not mine to give;
honour spake in my dying Father, 'tis a sentence that's Registered here, in
Antonio's heart, I must not wed her, but to one in blood calls honour Father:
Prithee be my friend, forget I have a sister; in love I'll be more than a
brother; though not to mingle blood.


May I not call her mistress?


As a servant, far from the thoughts of Wedlock.


I'm yours, friend I am proud on it; you shall find,
That though a Tailor, I'ave an honest mind.
Pray Master help my Lord unto a Suite, his life
Lies at your mercy.

I'll warrant you.


But for thy men.


O they are proud in that they rescued you,
And my blood of honour; since you are pleased
To grace the now declining Trade of Tailors,
By being shrouded in their homely clothes,
And deck a Shop-board with your noble person;
The taunting scorns, the foul mouthed
World, can throw upon our needful Calling
Shall be answered:
They injure honour, since your honour is a
Noble practitioner in our Mystery.

Cheer up Antonio, take him in,
The rest will make him merry; I'll go try
The temper of a sword upon some Shield
That guards a foe.
Pray for my good success.

Come, come my Lord leave melancholy
To hired slaves, that murder at a price:
Yours was --

No more, flatter not my sin.


You are too strikt a convertite, let's in.


What means this capering Echo?
Or from whence did this so lively Counterfeit
Of Thunder, break out to liberty?

'Tis from the City.


It cannot be, their voice, should out-roare Jove;
Our Army like a Bassiliske, has struck
Death through their eyes; our number like a wind,
Broke from the Icy prison of the North,
Has froze the Portals to their shivering hearts;
They scarce have breath enough to speake't:
They live.

'Ts certainly from thence.


You're deceived, poor Spaniards fear
Ha's changed their elevated Gate to a dejection
Their Planet struck.

'Tis from our jocund Fleet, my Genius prompts me;
They have already ploughed the unruly seas,
And with their breats, proof against the battering
Waves dashed the big billows into angry froth,
And spite of the contentious full mouthed gods
Of Sea and wind, have reached the City frontiers,
And begirt her Navigable Skirts.
Again: 'tis so.

My Creeds another way;
I have no faith but to the City.

Here's one,
Now we shall know: ha! he appears
Like one composed of horror.

What speaks thy troubled front?


Speak crimson Metor.


Speak Prodigy, or on my sword thou fallst.


The bold Spaniards, setting aside al cold acknowledgment
Of any odds, or notice of the number our Army
Is made proud with, sends from their Walls
More lightning, than great Jove afrights
The trembling world with, when the air
Is turned to mutiny.

Villain thou lie;
'Twere madness to believe thee.
Foolish Spain, may like those Giants, that
Heaped hill on hill, mountain on mountain,
To pluck Jove from heaven, who with
A hand of vengeance flung 'em down beneath
The centaur, and those Cloud contemning Mounts,
Heaved by the strength of their ambitious Arms,
Became their Monuments: so Spaines rash
Folly, from this arm of mine, shall find their
Graves amongst the rubbish of their
Ruined Cities.
What another! thy hasty news?

The daring enemies have through their gates
Made a victorious falley; all our troops
Have jointly like the dust before the wind,
Made a dishonoured flight: Hark
The Conquering foe makes hitherward.

Run to my Tent, fetch my Philippa:
Slave why move thou not?

The enemy's upon us.


Shall I send thy coward soul down the
Vaults of Horror: fly Villain, or thou die.

Let one post to my Castle, and conduct my Lady,
Tell her I have a prisoner would become proud
In her forced captivity to wait upon her beauty:
Fly, let not the tardy clouds out-saile thee.

Can thou proud man think that Philipa's
Heart, is humbled with her fortunes, (no did thou
Bring all the rough tortures
From the worlds Child-hood) to this hour invented,
And on my resolute body, proof against pain,
Practised Scicilian tyranny.
My Giant thoughts should like a cloud of wind,
Contemning smoke, mingle with heaven:
And not a look so base, as to be pitied, shall
Give you cause of triumph.

Before heaven a fiery girl.


A Masculine spirit.


An Amazon.


See my Phillipa, her rich colour's fled and like that foul
The furrow fronted Fates have made an Anvil
To forge diseases on, she's lost her self
With her fled beauty; yet pale as she stands,
She adds more glory to our churlish foe,
Than bashful Tycan to the Eastern world.
Spaniards, she is a Conquest; Rome,
When her two necked Eagles, awed the world
Would have swum through their own blood to purchase:
Nor must you enjoy that gem, the superstitious gods
Would quarrel for, but through my heart.
Courage brave friends, they're valiant that can fly
In the mouth of danger; 'tis they win, though dye.

This Moore speaks truth,
Wrapped in a voice of thunder.

Speak, my Philippa, what untutored slave
Durst lay a rugged have upon thy softness?

'Twas the epitome of Hercules:
No big Colossus, yet for strength far bigger:
A little person great with matchless Valour.

What pains thou take to praise
Thine enemy.

'Twere sin to rob him, that has wasted so
His blood for praise: this noble Soldier, he
'Twas made me captive; nor can he boast
'Twas in an easy combat; for my good
Sword, now ravished from mine arm, forced crimson
Drops, that like a goary sweat, buried
His manly body in oblivion: those that were
Skilled in his Effigies, as drunk with Lethe, had
Forgot 'twas he; till by the drawing of the
Rueful curtain they saw in him their error.

A common Soldier owner of a strength worthy
Such praise? Dares he cope with the
French General single?

My Lord, you must strike quick and sure


Why pause you? my Philippa must not stay,
Ceptivity's infection.

We have the day.


Not till you conquer me: which if my arm
Be not by Witch-craft robbed of his late strength,
Shall spin your labour to an ample length.

Upon him then.


Ods is dishonourable combat: my lads
Lets one to one; I am for the Moore.

Thee.


Tailor, you are too saucy.


Saucy?


Vntutor'd groom, Mechanic slave.


You have protection, by the Governors presence,
Else my plumed Estrages, 'tis not your feathers,
More weighty than your heads, should stop
My vengeance, but I'd text my wrong
In bloody Characters upon your pamperd flesh.

You would?


By Heaven I would.


You'd be advised, and render up your life a Sacrifice to patience.


Musk-Cat, I'do make your Civet worship stink first in your perfumed Buff.


Phlegmaticke slave.


Blood less Commanders.


How.


So.


Let's reward his boldness.


Whence this rashness?


Blessed occasion: lets on 'em.


All the Tail. A Tailor, a Tailor, a Tailor.

Raimond you're now my prisoner:
Blind Chance has favoured where your thoughts,
And hope she meant to ruin
From our discord, which heaven has made victorious,
You meant to strike a harmony should glad you.

'Tis not to be borne: a Tailor!


'Twas an affront gales me to think on it:
Besides his saucy valour might have ruined all
Our forward fortunes, had the French been
Stronger: let him be banished.

It shall be so;
My fears are built on grounds
Stronger than Atlas shoulders: this same Tailor
Retains a spirit like the lost Antonio;
Whose sister we will banish in pretence of
Love to Justice; 'tis a good snare, to trap the
Vulgar hearts: his, and her goods, to guild my
Lawless doings, I'll give the poor, whose tongues
Are i'their bellies: which being full,
Is tipped with heartless prayers; but empty,
A falling Planet is less dangerous; they will down to
Hell for curses. You Tailor.

My Lord.


Deliver up your prisoner.


You're obeyed.


So: now we command on forfeit of thy
Life, you be not seen in any ground our
Masters Title circles, within three days,
Such a factious spirit we must not nourish:
Least like the Fables Serpent, grown warm
In your conceited worth, you sting
Your Countries Breasts, that nursed your valour.

This my reward?


More then thy worth deserves.


Pomander box thou lie.


Go purge your self; your Country vomits you.


Slaves you're not worth my anger.


Go vent your spleen amongst Satyrs, pen a
Pamphlet, and call it the Scourge of greatness.

Or Spaines ingratitude.


Ye are not worth my breath,
Else I should curse you; but I must weep,
Not that I part from thee unthankful Spain,
But my Evadne, well, it must be so:
Heart keep thy still tough temper spite of woe.

My house shall be your prison,
Attend 'em Colonel.

Please you walk?


My servant banished.


Famist master? nay saith and a Tailor
Come to be famished, 'tis a hard World:
No bread in this world here hoe, to save
The renowned Corps of a Tailor from famishing?
'Tis no matter for drink, give me bread.

Thou hast a gut would swallow a peck Loaf.


I marry would it with vantage; I tell truth,
And as the Proverb says: shame the Devil;
If our Hell afford a Devil, but I see none
Unless he appear in a delicious remnant of
Nim'd Satin, and by my faith that's a courteous
Devil, that suffers the Brokers to hang him
In their ragged Ward robe; and used to sell his
Divelship for money: I tell truth, a Tailor
And lye, faith I scorn that.

Leave your discovery.


Master, a Traveller you know is famous for lying,
And having travelled as far as hell;
May not I make description of the unknown Land?

My brain is busy,
Sebastiano must not tread an unknown Land
To find out a Grave; unfortunate Sebastiano,
First to lose thy self in a disguise, unfitting for thy
Birth, and then thy Country for thy too much valour:
There's danger in being virtuous, in this Age
Led by those sinful Actors, the plunged stage,
Of this vice-bearing World, would head-long fall
But charitable virtue bears up all.
I must invent, I have it, so:
As he's a Tailor; he is banished Spain,
As Sebastiano 'tis revokt again.

How subtle are my springes, they take all?
With what swift speed unto my Chaffie bait
Do all Fowls fly, unto their hasty ruin?
Clap, clap your wings, and flutter greedy fools,
Whilst I laugh at your folly; I have a Wier
Set for the Moore, and his ambitious Consort;
Which if my wife wo'd second, they are sure.

What must she second?


Art thou there my love? we're in a path
That leads us to a height, we may confront
The Sun, and with a breath extinguish common
Stars; be but thou ruled, the light
That does create day to this City
Must be derived from us.

You are my soul, and to my airy
Wings, add quicker Feathers: what task
Wo'd not I run, to be called Queen?
Did the life blood of all our Family
Father and Mother, stand as a quick wall
To stop my passage to a Throne,
I'd with a Puniard open their Azure veins,
And squeese their active blood up into Clods,
Till they become as cold as winters snow;
And as a bridge upon their trunks i'd go.

Our souls are twins, and thirst with equal heat
For Deity: Kings are in all things Gods
Saving mortality.

To be a Queen, what danger wo'd I run?
I'd spend my life like to a Bare-foot Nun;
So I might sit above the lesser stars
Of small Nobility, but for a day.

'Tis to be done sweet love an nearer way;
I have already with the suger'd baits
Of Justice, liberality, and all
The Fox like gins, that subtle Statse-men
Set to catch the hearts o'th giddy multitude:
Which if it fail, as cautious policy
Forbids, I build too strongly on their drunk
Uncertain Votes, I'd have thee break with
My great Prisoners Wife, as I will
Do with him; promise the states equal
Divided half himself shall rule:
So that if need compel us to take Arms,
We may have forces from the Realm of France,
To seat us in the Chair of Government.

I never shall endure to walk as equal
With proud Philippa, no; ambitious soul
Boils in a thirsty flame of total glory:
I must be all, without a second flame
To dim our luster.

Still my very soul, think thou I can endure
Compeditor, or let an Ethiope sit by Machvils side,
As partner in his honour? no, as I have seen
In the Common-wealth of Players, one that did act
The Thebane Creon's part; with such a life
I became ravished, and on Raimond mean,
To plot what he did one the caveling boys of Oedipus.
Whilst we grasp the whole dignity.

As how sweet Machvile?


It is not ripe my love,
The King I hear applauds my justice:
Wherefore I have sent order that Count Antonio
Once being taken, be sent to Fill-ford Mill;
There ground to death.

What for his wife?


Thy envy: she I have banished,
And her goods to guard a shower of curses
From my head, I'ave given the poor.

Good policy, let's home to our designs:
I hate to be officious, 'yet my frown
Shall be dissolved to flattery for a Crown.

Attend your Lady -- so her forward spleen, Tickled with thought of greatness
makes the Scene attempts run smooth: the haughty Moore shall be the Leader, on
whose servile back I'll mount to greatness, If calm peace deny me easy way.

Rough War shall force it, which done, Raimond
And his Philippa must go seek an Empire in
Elizium; for to rule, predominance belongs
Alone to me: slaves are unworthy rule,
What state wo'd set a Crown upon a a Mule?
My soul is heavy, and my eye-lids feel
The weighty power of lazy Morpheus:
Each element that breathes a life within me
Runs a contrary course, and conspire
To counterfeit a Chaos: whilst the frame
And weak supporters of my inward man
(Crack) as beneath the weight of Atlas burden:
A sudden change, how my bleared eye-lids strive
To force a sleep against nature. O you Powers
That rule the better thoughts, if you have ought
To act on my frail body, let it be with eagles
Speed; or if your wills so please,
Let my fore past and undejested wrongs
Over wh^lme my thoughts, and sink me to the ground
With their no less then deaths remembrances.
Cease bastard slave, to clog my senses
With the leaden weights of an unwilling sleep; unless
Thy raw-bon'd brother join his force, and make
A separation twixt my aerie soul,
And my all earthly body:
I am over come, heaven work your wills, my breath,
Submits to this us 'twould submit to death.
Sleep entranced man, but be
Wakeful in thy fancy; see
Love hath left his Palace fair,
And beats his wings against the air,
To ease thy panting breasts of ill:
Loves a Physician, our Will
Must be obeyed; therefore with hast
To Flanders fly, the echoing blast
Of Fame shall usher thee along,
And leave thee pestered in a throng
Of searching troubles, which shall be
But Bug-beares to thy constancy.
What this same shadow seems to be,
In Flanders thou shalt real see;
The Maid that seemed to conquer Death,
And give thee longer leaf of breath,
Dotes on thy air; report hath bin
Lavish in praising thee unseen.
Make hast to Flanders, time will be
Accused of slothfulnesse, if she
Be longer tortured: do not stay,
My power shall guide thee on the way.

He is asleep.


See how he struggles, as if some visions
Had assumed a shape fuller of horror
Then his troubled thoughts.

His conscience gripes him to purpose: see he wakes;
Let us observe.

Stay gentle power, leave Hostage that thy promise
Thou'lt perform,
And I will offer to thy Deity
More then my lazy heart has offered yet.
But stay Antonio, can thy easy faith
Give credit to a dream? an aerie vision,
Framed by strangling fancy, to delude weak
Sense with a gay nothing? recollect thy self,
Advise thee by thy fears, it may force hence
This midnights shade of grief;
And guild it with a morn as fall of joy.
As does bright Phoebus to our Eastern World,
When blushing he arises from the lap
Of Sea-greene Thetis to give a new day birth.

Why how now friend, what talking to thy self?


O Giovanno 'tis my unpartiall thoughts,
That rise in war against my guilty conscience;
O it stings me!

Be more a man, shrink not beneath a weight
So light, a child may bear it; for believe me,
If my Prophetic fear deceive me not,
You had done an act, Spain should for ever praise
Had you killed Machvile to.

As how good Master? I must call you so;
This is your Livery.

O you're noble Tailor. But to Machvile
It was my chance, being sent for, by his wife
To take the measure of their noble prisoner;
Who when I came was busy, being placed
Into a room, where I might easily hear
Them talk of Crowns, and Kingdoms;
And of two that should be partners in this
End of Spain.

Who were they?


Machvile and Raimond, at last Machvile laughed
Saying, for this I made the Governor
To cross Antonio at the Counsel board:
Knowing that one must, if not both sho'd dye.

Did he say this?


He did, and added more under a feigned show
Of love to Justice, banished your sister.

Is Evadne banished?


She is, and as I guess to Flanders, her woman too has left her.


Nay droop not friend; Host, pray tell proud
Machvile, I have a sword left to chastise
A Traitor: come, let's go seek Evadne.

O Antonio, the sudden grief almost, distracts
Thy friend; but come, let's go each several1,
And meet at Fill-ford: if thou find Evadne,
Bear her unto the Castle.

Farewell good master.


O you honour me.
Bootless were all persuasions, they will not stay.
I'll to the King; this treason may become
Like a disease, out of the reach of Physic:
And may infect past care if let alone.

Erect thy head my Raymond, be more tall
Then daring Atlas, but more safely wise:
Sustain no burden but the politic care:
Of being great; till thou atcheive the Cities
Axeltree, and wave it as thou list.

Hast thou no skill in Magic, that thou hits
So just upon my thoughts, thy tongue is tipped
Like Natures miracle; that draws the steel
With unresisted violence: I can not keep
A secret to my self, but thy prevailing
Rhetoric ravishes and leaves my breast
Like to an empty Casket, that once was blessed
With keeping of a Jewel I durst, not trust the
Air with, 'twas so precious: pray be careful.

You do not doubt me?


No, were you a woman made of such course ingrediances as the common, which in
our triveall phrase we call mere women; I would not trust thee with a Cause so
weighty, that the discovery did endanger this, this hair; that when 'tis gone
a Linxe cannot miss it: but you are -- I want expressions, 'tis not common
words can speak you truly, you are more than woman.


My Lord you know my temper, and how to
Win upon my heart.

I must be gone, and post a messenger,
France must supply what wants to make thee great;
An Army my Philippa, which these people
Snoring in pride of their last victory,
Do not so much as dream on?
Nor shall, till they be forced to yield their voices
At our election; which will be ere long.

O 'tis an age, I'd rather have it sed,
Philippa then a prisoner were dead.

Captain Petruchio, take this condemned man
Into your charge, it is Antonio once a
Spanish Count, till his rash folly, with his
Life made forfeit of his honour; he
Was found travelling to your Castle,
'Twas Heavens will that his own feet
Should with a willing pace conduct him to his ruin:
For the murder he must be ground to death
In Filford Mill, of which you are the Governor:
Here my Commision in its end give strength to yours,
He's your charge: farewell,
His death must be with speed.

Deceive me not good glasses, your lights
In my esteem never till now was precious,
'Tis the same, I 'tis the very same
I sleeping saw.

Is this the man Fame speaks so nobly of?
O love, Aurelio never until now
Could say he knew thee; I must desemble it.

Come sir to my Castle.


Fie on you sir, to kill a Governor it is a fact
Death cannot appear too horrible to punish.

Can this be truth? O shallow, shallow man
To credit air, believe there can be substance
In a cloud of thickened smoke, as truth hid in a dream;
Yes there is truth, that like a serowle fetched from
An Oracle, betrays the double dealing of the gods;
Dreams that speak all of joy do turn to grief,
And such bad (...)deludes my light belief.

Away with him
Oft have I heard my brother with a tongue
Proud of the Office, praised this lovely Lord;
And my trapt soul old with a eager hast
Draw in the breath, and now: O Aurelia,
Buried with him must all thy joy thou hast
For ever sleep; and with a pale consumption,
Pitying him wit thou thy self be ruined?
He must not dye, if there be any way
Revealed to the distressed, I will find it:
Assist a poor lost Virgin some good power,
And lead her to a path, whose secret tract
May guide both him and me unto our safety.
Be kind good wits, I never until now
Put you to any trouble; 'tis your Office,
To help at need this little world you live by:
Not yet! O dullness! do not make me mad --
I hav't blessed brain; now shall a woman's wit
Wrestle with Fate, and if my plot but hit:
Come off with wreaths, my duty nay may all,
I must forsake lest my Antonio fall.

NOt find Evadne I sure some wanton wind
Has snatched her from the earth into the air;
Smooth Zephers faines the tresses of her hair,
Whilst slick F^venio^s plays the fawning slave;
And hourly dyes, making her breasts his grave:
O false Evadne, is Giovanno's love
That has out-done all merit for thy sake
So light, that wind out-weighs it?
No, no; no; Evadne is all virtue,
Sweet as the breath of Roses; and as chaste,
As Virgin Lillies in their infancy:
Down you deluding Ministers of Air:
Evadne is not light, though she be fair:
Dissolve the counterfeit: ha, ha, ha, ha.
See how they shrink: why so, now I will love you:
Go search into the hollowes of the earth,
And find my love, or I will chain you up
To eternity: see, see; who's this? O I know him now.
So, ho, ho: so, ho, ho, not hear?
'Tis Phoeton: no, 'tis an heir got
Since his fathers death, into a Cloak of gold
Out-shines the Sun; the head-strong horses
Of Licentious youth have broke their Reins
And drawn him through the Signs of all libidinousnes,
See, from the whorish front of Capra,
He's tumbling down as low as beggary.
O, are you come grimm Tartors Radamonte
Go ask of Pluto if he have not taken
Evadne to his smoky Common-wealth,
And ravished her? begone, why stir you not?
Ha, ha, ha, the devil is afraid.
Help, a Rape.


Stop her mouth.


Who calls for help? tis my Evadne; I
It was her voice that gave the Echo life;
That cried a Rape: Devil dost love a wench?
Who was thy Pander, ha? What saucy friend
Durst lay his unpard Fangs on my Evadne?
Come I'll swim unarmed over Acheron,
And sink grimm Charon in his fiery Boat.

Murder: a Rape.


I come, I come.


I cannot find her yet,
The King of Flames protests she
Is not there: but hang him Rogue,
They say he will lye; O how my glutted spleen
Tickles to think how I have paid the slave?
I made him lead me into every hole:
Ha, ha, ha, what crying was there there?
Here on a Wheel, turned by a Furies hand,
Hangs a distracted States-man, that had spent
The little wit Heaven to strange purpose lent him,
To suppress right, make beggars, and get means
To be a Traitor. Ha, ha, ha, and here
A Usurer fat with the curses of so many heirs
His Extortion had undone, sate to the Chin
In a warm bath, made of new melted gold;
And now and then a draught past through his throat:
He fed upon his god; but he being angry
Scalded his Chops. Right against him
Stood a fooled Gallant, chained unto a post,
And lashed by Folly for his want of wit.
The reeling drunkard and plump glutton stood
Making of faces, close by Tantalus:
But drank and fed on Air.
The whore-master tied to a painted Punk,
Was by a Fury termed insatiate Lust,
Whipped with a blade of fire. And here --
What's here! 'tis my Evadnes vale; 'tis hers I know it:
Some slave has ravished my Evadne: Well,
There breaths not such an impious slave in hell:
Nay, it is hers, I know it too too plain:
Your breath is lost, 'tis hers, you speak in vain.

Come, bring her forward, tie her to that tree,
Each man shall have this turn: Come Minion,
You must squench the raging flames of my
Concupisence: what do you weep, you
Puritanicall Punk: I shall tickle mirth
Into you by and by: Trotter, good Trotter post
Unto my Cell, make compound of Muskadine
And eggs; for the truth is, I am a Giant in my
Promises but in the act a Pigmy: I am old, and
Cannot do as I have done; good Trotter
Make all convenient speed.

Faith Master if you cannot, here's them that can ferrit in a Cunny burrow
without a provocative, I'll warrant you: good Master let me begin the health.


No more I say: it is a percell of excellent Mutton:
I'll cut it up my self: come Minion.

Kill me; Oh kill me: Rather let me dye,
Than live to see the jewell that adorns
The souls of virtuous Virgins ravished from me.
Do not add sin to sin, and at a price
That ruiues me, and not enriches you,
Purchase damnation: do not, do not do it:
Sheath here your sword, and my departing soul,
Like your good Angel, shall folicit heaven
To dash out your offences: let my flight
Be pure and spotless: do not injure that,
Man-hood would blush to think on. it is all
A maids Divinity: wanting her life
She's fair Coarse: wanting her chastity,
A spotted soul of living infamy.

Hang Chastity.


A very voice.


O Captain, Captain, yonder's the mad Orlando the furious, and I think he
takes me for -- What do you call him?


What Meder?


1, 1, Meder: the Devil Meder him, he has so nudled me -- O here he comes; I'll
be gone.


Stay Satire; stay; you are too light of foot,
I cannot reach your paces, prithee stay.
What Goddess have you there? sure 'tis Evadne:
Are you the Dragons that ne'er sleep but watch
The golden fruit of the Hisperides:
Ha, then I am Hercules; fly ye?
Sure that face dwelt on Evadnes shoulders.

O thou preserver of near lost Evadne,
What must my weakness pay?

'Tis, 'tis she; she must not know I'm mad.


Assist me some good power, (it is my friend)
Make me but wise enough to resolve my self.

It may be 'tis not she; I'll ask her name.
What are you called sweet goddess?

They that know me mortal, term me Evadne.


Tis she: I, I, tis she.


Pray you sir, unto the bond of what I owe you,
Which is a poor distressed Virgins life, add
This one debt: what are you?

Not worth your knowledge: I am a poor,
A very, very poor despised thing: but say
I pray, are you sure your name's Evadne?

Tis questionless my Tailor. I am she,
(Receive me to your arms) not altered
In my heart, though in my clothes.

I do belelieve you, indeed I do; but stay I don't
Are you a Maid, a Virgin, pray tell me?
For my Evadne could not tell me a lye; speak,
I shall love you, though that Jewell's gone.

I am as spotless, thank your happy self
That saved me from those Robbers, as
The child which yet is but a jelly, 'tis so young.

No more, no more, trust me I do believe you.
So many slaves, whose flaming appetites,
Would in one night ravish a throng of Virgins,
And never feel degression in their heate.
I'll af^er and murder all.

How do you?


Well, very well: be like you think I'm mad.


You look distractedly.


Tis but your thoughts, indeed I me wondrous well.
How fair she looks after so foul a deed?
It cannot be she should be false to me:
No, you're mad to think so. Fool, O fool,
Think thou those slaves, having to fair a mark
Would not be Shooting? yes, they would, they have,
Evadne is flye-blowne, I cannot love her.

What say you sweet?


The innocence that sits upon the face
Says she is chaste, the guilty cannot speak
So evenly as she does: guilty, said, I!
Alas it were not her fault, were she ravished.
O madness, madness, whither wilt thou bear me?

His fences are unsettled; I'll go seek
Some holy man to rectify his wits.
Sweet will you go unto some Hermits Cell?
You look as you lacked rest.

She speaks like to an Angel, she's the same
As when I saw her first, as pure, as chaste.
Did she retain the substance of a sinner,
For she is none, her breath wo'd then be sower,
And betray the rankenesse of the (...) but
Her chaste sighs beget as sweet a (...)
As that of May.
Why weeps Evadne, truly I'm not mad?
See, I am tame, pray lead me where you please.

The drink has done its part effectually,
'Twas a strong powder that could hold his senses
So fast that this removing so full of noise,
Had not the power to wake him.

Good Father let Aurelia, your daughter,
Do this same act of Justice, let me tread the pin:
The fact of his being so foul, so hateful,
Has lent me through a maid such fortitude.

Thou hast thy wish, do it boldly, 'tis a deed
That in the ignorance of elder ages,
Would be thought full of merit:
Be not daunted.

I have a thought tel's me it is religious,
To sacrifice a murderer to death;
Especially one that did act a deed,
So generally accounted odious.

By holy ( Iaques) I'm a governor.
And should my life; (though, by the hand of him
My duty does call King) be stroke in the air;
My injured corps should not forsake the earth
Till I did see it revenged: be resolute; thy foot
Is guided by a power, that though unseen,
Is still a furtherer of good attempt.

Pray sir lend me the Key of the back ward,
For though my conscience tells me 'tis an act
I may hereafter boast off; yet i'll pass unto our
Ladies Chapel whe^ tis done, to be confessed
Ere I am seen of any*

I am proud to see thee so well given.
Take 'em girl, and with 'em take my prayers.

He wakes, pray leave me sir.
So I'll make fast the door,
Goodness bear witness 'tis a potent power
Out-weighs my duty.

Amazement! oh what tentors do you stretch?
O how this alteration wracks my reason, i'm
To find the Axeltree on which it hangs?
Am I asleep*

Shake thy wonder off, and leave that seat,
'Twas set to sink thy body for ever
From the eyes of humane sight;
To tell thee how would be a fatal means
To both our ruins -- briefly my love
Has broke the Bands of nature with my father,
To give your being.

Happy, happy vision, the blessed preparative
To this same hour, my joy wo'd burst me else.

Receive me to thy arms.


I would not wish to live but for thee, life were
A trouble; welcome to my soul.

Stand, I have a Ceremony, to offer to our
Safetryere we go.
Had not my love like a kind branch
Of some over looking tree, caught thee,
You would fallen, never to look upon the world again.

What shall I offer to my life, preserver?


Only thy heart, Crowned with a wreath of love,
Which I will ever keep; and in exchange
Deliver mine.

Thus I deliver, in this kiss receive't.


In the same form Aurelia yields up hers.


What noise is that?


I fear my Father.


What's to be done?


Through the back ward, of which I have
The Key; we'll suddenly make escape,
Then in two Gowns of which I am provided,
We'll cloth our selves till we be past all fear.

Be it as you please, 'tis my good genius will
Thee I obey: command, i'll follow still.

She's gone unto her prayers, may every bead
Draw down a blessing on her; that like seed
May grow into a Harvest: 'tis a girl
My age is proud of, she's indeed the Model
Of her dead Mothers virtues, as of shape.
Bear hence this Banquet.

Thou silent god, that with the leaden Mace
Arresteth all (save those prodigious birds)
That are Fates Heriulds to proclaim all ill;
Deaf Giovanno, let no fancied no^se
Of ominous Screech owls, or night Ravens voice
Affright his quiet senses: let his sleep
Be free from horror, or unruly dreams;
That may beget a tempest in the streams
Of his calm reason: let 'em run as smooth,
And with as great a silence, as those do
That never took an injury; where no wind
Had yet acquaintance: but like a smooth Crystal,
Dissolved into a water that never frowned,
Or knew a voice but music.
Holy Hermits, for such your habits speak you,
Join your prayers with a distressed Virgins;
That the wits of this distracted young man
May be settled.

Sure 'tis my sister, and that sleeping man


She loves him still.


O what a blessedness am I bereft of!
What pleasure has the least part of a minute
Stolen from my eyes: me thought I did embrace
A Brother and a friend; and both Antonio.

Blessed be those gentle powers that --


What Evadne -- have deceived my eyes,
Take heed Evadne, worship not a dream,
'Tis of a smoky substance, and will shrink
Into the compass of report; that 'twas:
And not reward the labour of a word
Were it substantial: Could I know but see
That man, of men; i'd by my practice
Of Religious prayers, add to the Calendar
One Holy-day, and keep it once a year.

Behold Antonio.


Brother.


Brother.


What earth-quake shakes my heart,
With what a speed she flew into his arms!

Some power that hearkens to the prayer of virgins,
Has bin distilled to pity at my Fortunes;
And made Evadne happy.

Now my longing that was grown big,
Is with your sight delivered of a joy,
That will become a Giant; and overcome me.
Welcome, thrice welcome brother.

Ha, her brother! Fortune has bound me
So much in their debts, I must despair to pay 'em:
Twice has my life bin by these twins of goodness
Plucked from the hand of death; that fatal enmity
Between our houses here shall end,
Though my Father at his death commanded me
To eternity of hatred:
What tie binds stronger then Reprieve from death?
Come hither friend; now brother, take her,
Thou hast bin a noble Tailor.

Be moderate my joys, do not over whelm me
Here take Aurelia, may you live happy:
O Antonio this, this was the cause of my disguise;
Sebastine could not win Evadne's love,
But Giovan^o did; come now to our fathers Castle.

Pardon me; there is a bar that does
Concern my life forbids you as a friend,
To think on going to any place
But to, the Tailors house, which is not far:
Come, as we go I will relate the cause.

Do good brother.


Go good Sebastiano.


Sebastine is your Page, and bound to follow,
Lead on.

O noble temper I admire thee! may
The world bring forth such Tailors every day.

Come, come let's work;
For if my guesses point the right, we sha'nt
Work long.

I care not how soon, for I have a notable
Stomach to bread.

Dost hear, I suspect that Courtier my master
Brought in last night, to be the King;
Which if it be bullies, all the bread in the
Town sha'nt satisfy us, for we will eat
Cum Privelegio.

Come let's have a device, a thing, a song Boy


Come an air --


'Tis a merry life we live,
All our work is brought unto us;
Still are getting, never give;
For their Clothes all men do woe us:
Yet unkind they blast our Names,
With aspertions of dishonour:
For which we make bold^ with their Dames,
When we take our measure on her.

For which we, c.


Old Tay. You see the life we live, cease.


O 'tis a merry one.


It is no news to me, I have bin used to it.


Now for discovery, the King as yet
Is ignorant of your names, and shall be
Till your merits beg your pardon.
My Lord you are for Machvile; take this gown.

Pray for ^ecesse:


You in this French disguise for proud Philippa;
This is her garment. I hear the King, be gone:
The French mans folly sit upon your tongue.

Believe me Tailor you have out-stript the Court,
For such perfections lives not every where,
Nature was vexed as she's a very shrew,
She made all others in an angry mood;
These only she can boast for Master-peeces:
The rest want something or in mind or form,
These are precisely made: a Critic Jury,
Of cavelling Arts cannot condemn a scruple.

But that your entrance in this formal speech
Betrayed you are a Courtier; I had bin angry
At your Rank flattery.

Can you say so?


Sir, she has spoke my meaning.


Friend, what are those beauties called?


Your graces pardon.


Are they Oracle, or is the knowledge fatal?
But that I know thy faith, this denial
Would conjure a suspicion in my breast;
Use thy prerogative, 'tis thy own house
In which you are a King; and I your guest.
Come ladies.
This habit will do well, and less suspected;
Rapt i'this cover lives a Kingdoms plague,
They kill with licence; Machviles proud dame
'Tis famed is sick, upon my soul, how ere
Her health may be the Aguesh commons cry;
She's a disease they groan for: this disguise
Shall sift her Ebon soul, and if she be
Infectious, like a Meagrome, or rot limb*
The sword of Justice must divide the joint
That holds her to the States endangered body.
She comes.

Look up my Auristella;
Better the Sun forsake hi^ course to bless,
With his continuing beams the Antipodes,
And we grovell for ever in eternal night,
Then death eclipse thy rich and stronger light.
Seek some physician, horror to my soul, she faints;
I'd rather lose the issue of my hopes, than Auristella.

Issue of his hopes, strange;


The Crowns injoynement can yield no content,
Without the presence of my Auristilla.

Crowns enjoyment, O villain,


Why stir you not? fetch me some skilful man,
My Kingdom shall reward him; if his Art
Chain her depart^g soul unto her flesh,
But for a day, till she be crowned a Queen:
Fly, bring him unto this walk.

Stay,
Most honoured Count, (now for a forged link
Of flattery to chain me to his love;)
Having with studious care gone over the Art
Folly terms Magic, which more sublime souls
Skil'd in the Stars, know is above that mischief;
I find you're borne to be 'bove vulger greatness,
Even to a Throne: but stay, let's fetch this Lady.

All greatness without her is slavery.


Use modest violence.


Oh.


Stand wider, give her air.


God-like Physician, I and all that's mine,
Will at thy feet offer a sacrifice.

Fore send it goodness; I, nay all;
E're many hours makes the now young day
A type of sparkling youth; shall on their knees
Pray for your highness.

Look up my Auristella, and be great;
Rise with the Sun, but never to decline,

What have you done?


Waked thee to be a Queen.


A Queen* O don't dissemble; you have robbed me
Of greater pleasure, than the fancied bliss
Elizium owns: O for a pleasure real, that
Wo'd appear in all unto my dream: that I may
Frown, and then kill; smile, and create again.
Were there a Hell, as doting age wo'd have,
To fright from lawless courses heed less youth:
For such a short lived happiness as that,
I wo'd be lost unto eternity.

The day grows old in hours:
Come Auristella to the Capital;
The Gray-beard Senate shall on humble knees,
Pay a Religious Sacrifice of praise
Unto thy demi Deity: the Stars
Have in a general Senate made thee Queen
Of this our world: Great master of thy Art,
Confirm my love.

Madam --


Nay hear him love, believe me he's a man
That may be Secretary to the gods;
He is alone in Art, 'twere sin to name
A second; all are dunces to him.

How easy is the faith of the ambitious.


Follow me to the Counsel.


Are you the man my husband speaks so high of?
Are you skilled in the Stars?

Yes Madam.


Your habit says, or you abuse the custom,
You're a Physician?

Madam i'm both.


And dee' find no let that stops my rising.


Not any.


Away, your skill is dull, dull to dirision.
There is a Star fixed in the heaven of greatness,
That sparkles with a rich and fresher light,
Than our sick and defective Taper.

It may be so, the horiscope is troubled;


Confusion take your horiscope and you.
Can you with all your Art advise my fears,
How to confound this constellation.

Death how she conjures;
Madam I must search into the Planets.

Planet me no planets; be a Physician,
And from your study of industrious poisons,
Fetch me your best experienced speedy one,
And bring it to me straight: what 'tis to do,
Like unresolved riddles hid from you.

Planet said I; upon my life no planet
Is so swift as her ne'er resting evil,
That's her tongue: well i'll not question
What the poisons for, if for her self,
The common Hangman's eased the labour of a blow,
For if she live her head must certain off;
The poison i'll go get, and give it her,
Then to the King:
If Sebastiano's Frenchified disguise
Purchase the like discovery, our eyes
Will be too scanty; we had need to be
All eye, to watch such haughty villainy.

Begare Madam me make de gown so brave; O, de hole vorle vorke be me patron,
me ha vorke for le grand Duchess le Shevere, le Royne de Francia, Spanea de
Angleter an all d'fine Madamosels.


Nay Monsier to deprive desert of praise, is unknown Language, troth I use it
not* nay it is very well.


Be me trot a Madam ^ever do ill, de English man do ill, de Spanere do, de
Duch, de all do ill, but your Franch man, and begare he do incomparable
brave.


You're too proud on it


Begare me no proud i'd vorle, me speak be me trot de trut, ang me no lye;
metra Madam begare you have de find bode a de vorle, O de fine brave big ting
me have ever measure, me waire fit it so pat.


Welcome my Lord,
Shall I still long, yet lose my longing still?
Is there no Art to mount the lofty seat?
No Engine that may make us ever great?
Must we be still styled Subjects, and for fear
Our closest whispers reach the owing care,
Not trust the wind? Ray. Be calm my love,
Ha, who have we here an eves dropper.

Me Signior, Be povera i^nile homa a Franch
A votre commandment.

My Tailor,


We Monsier de Madam Tailor.


Some happy genius does attend my wishes,
Or spirit like a Page conducts unto me
The Ministers, whose sweet must sent me easy.
Come hither French man, can thou rule thy tongue?
Art not too much a woman?

No begar me show someting for de man.


Or can thou be like a perverse on, profess dogednes?
Be as a dead man dumb, briefly be this:
A friend to France, and with a silent speed,
Post to our now approaching armed friends:
Tell them that Raimond e're the hasty Sand
Of a short hour be spent, shall be impaled,
And on his brow a Deputy for France,
Support a golden wreath of Kingly cares:
Bid 'em make hast to pluck my partner down
Into his Grave; be gone, as thou nurse
In thy breast thoughts that do thirst
For nobleness: be secret and you're made;
If not, you're nothing. Mark, 'tis Raimond says it:
And as I live, I breath not, if my deeds
Appear not in a horror 'bove my words.

Begar me no ne^de threaten; me be as close to your secret, or my Ladies
secrets as de skin to de flesh; de flesh to de bone: if me tell me de -- vat,
de ye call de modero de Dog, de Bich; call me de son o de Bich.


Count Machvile waits your honour in the Hall.


Do it, and be more then common in our favour;
Here take this Ring for thy more credit:
Farewell, be quick and secret.

Folly go from my tongue, the French so nigh,
And thou half ruined Spain, so wretchedly provided;
Strange, yet not, all Countries have bread monsters:
'Tis a Proverb as plain as true, and aged as 'tis both:
One tainted Sheep mares a whole flock.
Machvile that tainted beast, whose spreading ills
Infects all; and by infecting kills.
I'll to the Franch, what he intends to be
Our ruin; shall confound their villainy.

FOr this discovery be still Antonio,
The frowning Law, may with a furrowed face
Hereafter look upon; but ne'er shall touch
They condemned body. Here from a Kings hand,
Take thy Aurelia; our command shall smooth
The rising billows of her Fathers rage,
And charm it to a calm: let one be sent
To certify our pleasure, we wo'd see him.

Your graces Will shall be in all obeyed.


Thy loyal love, makes thy King poor.


Let not your judgement, Royal sir, be questioned,
To term that love, was but a subjects duty.

You sent the poison, did you?


Yes, and it like your grace, the Apothecary
Called it a strong provocative to madness.

Did not he question what you used it for?


O my disguise saved him that labour, sir,
My habit, that was more Physician than my self,
Told him 'twas to dispatch some property
That had been torter'd with five thousand drugs
To try experiment: another man
Sha'nt buy the quantity of so much Rats-bane
Shall kill a Flea, but shall be had forsooth
Before a Justice, be questioned; nay, perhaps
Confined to peep throw an Iron grate:
When your Physician may poison, who
Not, cum privilegio: it is his trade.

O my Sebastine.


Peace my Avadne, the King must not yet know me.


My brother has already made you known.


Will it please your Highness?


What Sabastiano, to be still a King
Of Universal Spain, without a Rival?
Yes, it does please me, and you ministers
Of my still growing greatness, shall e're long
Find I am pleased with you, the boldly durst
Pluck from the fixed arm of sleeping Justice
Her long sheathed sword; and whet the rusty blade
Upon the bones of Machville, and his
Confederate Rebels.

That my Lord is yet to do, let him mount higher.
That his fall may be too deep for a resurrection;
They're gone to the great Hall, whither wilt please your
Grace disguised to go, your person by our care shall be
Secure. Their French troops I have sent as useless into
France, by virtue of Raimonds Ring, which he gave
Me to bid the General by that token
To march to this City.

What say the Colonells will they assist me?


Doubt not my Lord.


Come then, lets go guarded, with such as you
'Twere sin to fear, were all the world untrue.

Now for the credit of Tailors.


Nay, Master and we do not act as they say,
With any Players in the Globe of the world,
Let us be baited like a Bull for a company of
Strutting Coxecombes: nay we can act I can tell you.

Well I must to the King; see you be perfect,
I'll move it to his Highness.

Now my Masters are we to do; d'e mark me, do --


Do; what do? Act, act, you fool you, do said you, what do? you a Player,
you a Plasterer, a mere dirt dawber; and not worthy to be mentioned with
Virmine, that exact Actor: do, I am ashamed on it, fie.


Well said Virmine, thou tieklest him y'faith.


Do, pha.


Well play; we are to play a play.


Play a play a play, ha, ha, ha; O egredious nonsensensicall wigeon, thou shame
to our crosse-legg'd corporation; thou fellow of a sound, play a play; why
forty pound golding of the beggars Theater speaks better, yet has a mark for
the sage audience to exercise their dexterity, in throwing of rotten apples
whilst my stout Actor pockets, and then eats up the injury: play a play, it
makes my worship laugh in faith.


To him Virmine, thou bitst him in faith.


Well, act a Play before the King.


What play shall we act?


To fret the French the more, we will act strange but true, or the straddling
Mounsieur, with the Neopolitan Gentleman between his legs.


That wo'not act well.


O giant of incomparable ignorance: that wo'not act well, ha, ha, that wo'not
do well, you Ass you.


You bit him for saying do: Virmine leave biting you'd best.


What say you to our Spanish Bilbo?


Who Ieronimo?


I.


That he was a mad rascal to stab himself.


But shall we act him?


I let us do him.


Do again, ha.


No, no, let us act him.


I am content.


Who shall act the Ghost.

Why marry that will I, I Virmine.

Thou dost not look like a Ghost.

A little Players deceit: flower will do it; Mark me,
I can rehearse, mark me rehearse some:
When this eternal substance of the soul
Did live imprisoned in my wanton flesh,
I was a Tailor in the Court of Spain.

Courtier Virmine in the Court of Spain.


I, there's a great many Courtiers Virmine indeed:
Those are they beg poor men's livings;
But I say, Tailor Vermin is a Court Tailor.

Who shall act Ieronimo?


That will I:
Mark if I do not gape wider than the widest
Mouthed Fowler of them all, hang me:
"Who calls Ieronimo from his naked bed: haugh!
Now for the passionate part --
"Alas it is my son Horatio.

Very fine: but who shall act Horatio?


I, who shall do your son?


What do, do again: Well I will act Horatio.


Why you are his father.


Pray who is fitter to act the son, than the father
That begot him.

Who shall act Prince Belthazer and the King?


I will do Prince Belthazer too: and for the King
Who but I? which of you all has such a face for a King,
Or such a leg to trip up the heals of a Traitor?

You will do all I think.


Yes marry will I; who but Virmine? yet I will
Leave all to play the King:
Pass by Ieronimo.

Then you are for the King?


I bully I.


Lets go seek our fellows, and to this geere.


Come on then.

Men of our needful profession, that deal in such commodities as men's lives,
had need to look about 'em 're they traffic: I am to kill Raimond, the
Devils cozen german, for he wears the same complexion: but there is a right
Devil that hath hired me, that's Count Machvile. Good Table conceal me, here
will I wait my watch-word: but stay, have I not forgot it (Then) I then is my
arm to enter. I hear them coming.


Pray take your seats.


Not well, prithee retire.


Sick, sick at heart.


Well wrought poison, O how joy swells me.


You see my Lord the poison is boxt up.


Health waste upon this Royal company.


Knows she we are here?


O no my Lord, 'tis to the twins of treason:
Machvile, and Raymond.

Royal there's something in it.


It smells rank o'th Traitor.


Are you in the wind on it?


Will you leave us?


I cannot stay; O I am sick to death.


Or I'll ne'er trust poison more.


Pray seat your selves
Gentlemen, though your deserts have merit
And your worth's have deserved nobly;
But ingratitude, that should be banished
From a Princes breast, is Philips favourite.

Philip Traitor, why not King? I am so.


Patience good my Lord; i'll down.


It lives too near him:
You that have ventured with expense of blood,
And danger of your lives, to rivet him
Unto his Seat with peace: you that in War
He termed his Atlasses, and pressed with praises
Your brawny shoulders; called you his Colossuses,
And said your looks frighted tall war
Out of his territories: now in peace,
The issue of your labour: this bad man,
Philip I mean, made of ingratitude,
Wo'not afford a name, that may distinguish
Your worthy selves from Cowards:
Civet Cats spotted with Rats dung,
Or a face like white Broth, strewed over with Currance
For a stirring Caper, or itching Dance; to
Please my Lady Vanity, shall be made
A smock Knight.

Villain, must our disgrace mount thee?


To what tends this?


What means Count Machvile?


To be your King; fie on this circumstance,
My longing will not brooke it: say,
Will you obey us as your Kings and Queenes.

My Lord Antonio.


Confine your selves, the King is within hearing; therefore make show of liking
Machviles plot: let him Mount high, his fall will be the deeper: my life you
shall be safe.


Say, are you agreed?


If not we'll force you to it:
Speak French man, are our forces in the City?

We Monsieur.


We acknowledge you our King.
King More Traitors.

Why then.


Ha, from whence this sudden Mischief?
Did you not see a hand armed with the fatal
Ruin of my life.

None paw Signior.


Ha, ha, ha; lay hold on those French Soldiers,
Away with them.

Wast thy plot Machvile? go laughing to thy grave.


Alas my Lord is wounded.


Come hither French man, make a dying man
Bound to thy love; go to Philippa,
Sickly as she is bring her unto me;
Or my flying soul will not depart in peace else:
Prithee make hast: yet stay, I have not breath
To pay thy labour.
Shrink ye, you tweene-borne Atlasses, that bear
This my near ruined world; have you not strength
To bear a curse, whose breath may taint the air,
That this Globe may feel a universal plague.
No, yet bear up, till with a vengeful eye
I out-stare day, and from the dogged sky
Pluck my impartial Star: O, my blood
Is frozen in my veins -- farewell revenge -- me -- dyes.

They need no Law.


Nor Hang-man.


They Condemn, and execute without a Jury.


I come, I come; nay fly not, for by Hell
I'll pluck thee by the Beard, and drag thee thus
Out of thy fiery Cave. Ha, on yonder hill
Stand troops of divills waiting for my soul:
But I'll deceive 'em, and instead of mine,
Send this same spotted Tigers.

Oh.


So, whilst they to hell
Are posting with their prize, I'll steal to Heaven:
Wolf dost thou grin? ha, is my Raymond dead?
So ho, so ho: come back
You sutty Fiends that have my Raymonds soul,
And lay it down, or I will force you do it:
No, won't you stir? by Styx I'll bait you for it:
Where is my Crown? Philippa was a Queen,
Was she not ha? Why so, where is my Crown:
O you have hid it -- ha, wa'st thou
That robbed Philippa of her Raymonds life?
Nay I will nip your wings, you shall not fly;
I'll pluck you by the guarded front: and thus
Sink you to hell before me.

Oh, oh.


What down, ho, ho, ho:
Laugh, laugh, you souls that fry in endless flames;
Ha, whence this chillness -- must I dye -- nay then,
I come, I come, nay weep not for I come:
Sleep injured shadow, O death strikes dumb.

Machvile thy hand, I can't repent, farewell:
My burdened conscience sinks me down to hell.

I cannot tarry long, farewell; we'll meet
Where we shall never part: if here be any
My life has injured, let your charity
Forgive declining Machvile: I am sorry.

His penitence works strongly on my temper.
Of disguise, see falling Count: Antonio forgives thee.

Antonio, O my shame,
Can you whom I have injured most pardon my guilt?
Give me thy hand yet nearer, this embrace
Betray's thee to thy death: ha, ha, ha.
So weeps the Egyptian monster when it kills,
Washed in a flood of tears; could ever think
Machviles repentance could come from his heart;
No, down Colossus Author of my sin,
And bear the burden mingled with thine own,
To finish thy damnation.

Accursed villain, thou hast murdered him
That holds not one small drop of loyal blood:
But what is worth thy life.

O my brother.


Give him some air, the wound cannot be mortal.


Alas he faints, O my Antonio:
Cursed Machvile, may thy soul --

Peace, peace Aurelia; be more merciful:
Men are apt to censure, and will condemn
Thy passion, call it madness, and say thou
Want Religion: nay weep not sweet,
For every one must dye: it was thy love,
For to deceive the Law, and give me life:
But death you see has reached me, O, I dye;
Blood must have blood, so speaks the Law of Heaven:
I slew the Governor, for which rash deed;
Heaven, fate, and man, thus make Antonio bleed.

Sleep, sleep great heart, thy virtue made me ill
Authors of vice, 'tis fit the vicious kill:
But yet forgive me, Oh, my great heart
Dissolves like snow, and lessons to a Rheum,
Cold as the envious blasts of Notherne wind:
World how I loved thee, 'twere a sin to boast;
Farewell, I now must leave thee; my life
Grows empty with my veins: I cannot stand, my breath
Is as my strength, weak; and both seized by death:
Farewell ambition catching at a Crown,
Death tripped me up, and head-long threw me down.

So falls an exhalation from the sky,
And's never mist because unnatural;
A birth begotten by incorporate ill:
Whose usher to the gazing World is wonder.
Alas good man, you're come unto a sight
Will try thy temper, whether joy or grief
Shall Conquer most within thee; joy lies here
Scater'd in many heaps: these when they lived,
Threatened to tear this balsam from our brow,
And rob our Majesty of this Elyxar:
I'st not my right? was not I heir to Spain?

You are our Prince, and may you live
Long to enjoy your right.

But now look here, 'tis plain grief has a hand
Harder than joy; it presses out such tears.
Nay rise.

I do beseech your Grace not to think me
Contriver of Antonio's escape from death,
'Twas my disloyal daughters breach of duty.

That's long since pardoned.


You're still merciful.


Antonio was thy son, I sent for thee
For to confirm it, but he is dead:
Be merciful, and do not curse the hand
That gave it him, though it deserve it.

O my griefs, are you not strong enough
To break my heart? pray tell me, tell me true;
Can it be thought a sin? or is it so,
By my own hand to ease my breast of woe?

Alas poor Lady; rise, thy Father's here.


Look up Aurelia, ha, why do you kneel?


For a blessing.


Why she is not Aurelia, do not mock me.


But he is Sebastiano and your son;
Late by our hand made happy by enjoying
The fair Evadne dead Antonio's sister:
For whose sake he became a Tailor,
And so long lived in that mean disguise.

My joy had bin too great if he had lived,
The thrifty heaven's mingle our sweets with gall;
Least being glutted with excess of good,
We should forget the giver. Rise Sebastiano
With thy happy choice, may thou live crowned
With the enjoyment of those benifits,
My prayers shall beg for: rise Aurelio,
And in some place blessed with religious prayers,
Spend thy left Remnant.

You advise well: indeed it was a fault
To break the bonds of duty, and of law;
But love, O Love; thou whose all conquering power,
Builds Castles on the hearts of easy maids,
And makes 'em strong unto attempt those dangers:
That but rehearst before, wo'd fright their souls
Into a Jelly. Brother, I must leave you;
And Father, when I send to you a note, that shall
Desire a yearly stipend to that holy place
My tyred feet has found to rest them in;
Pray confirm it.
And now great King Aurelia begs of you,
To grace Antonio in the mournful March
Unto his grave, which be where you think fit:
We need not be interred both in one Vault.

Blessed Virgin, thy desires I will perform.


Then I leave you, my prayers shall still attend you
As I hope yours shall accompany me.
Father your blessing, and ere long expect
To hear where I am entertained a Nun
Brother, and Sister, to you both adieu;
Antonio dead, Aurelia marries new.

Farewell girl, when I remember thee,
The Beads I drop shall be my tears.

She's to all virgins a true mirror;
They that wo'd behold true love, reflect on her:
There 'tis engrossed.

Great King, our Grace --


The King is sad, you must not act.


How? not act?
Shall not Vermin act?

Yes you shall act, but not now;
The King is indisposed.

Well then, some other time; I Virmine
The King will act before the King.

Very good, pray make your


I'll muster up all the Tailors in the
Town, and so tickle their sides.

Nay you're a right Virmine, go be not
Troublesome.

Upon my truth and loyalty great King,
What they did was but feigned, merely words
Without a heart: 'twas by Antonio's Counsel.

Thou art all truth: rise.


Long live King Philip in the calm of peace,
To exercise his Regal Clemency.

Take up Antonio's body, and let the rest
Find Christian burial: mercy befits a King,
Come trusty Tailor,
And to all Countries let swift Fame report,
King Philip made a Tailors house his Court.

Your grace much honours me.


We can't enough pay thy alone deserts,
Kings may be poor, when Subjects are like thee,
So fruitful in all loyal virtuous deeds:
March with the Body we will perform all Rights,
Of sable Ceremony: that done,
We will to our Court, since all our own is won.


