THE MVSES LOOKING-GLASSE.

By T. R.



OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, for Francis Bowman. 1638.

SEe Brother how the wicked throng and crowd
To works of Vanity! not a nook, or corner
In all this house of sin, this cave of filthiness,
This den of spiritual thieves, but it is stuffed,
Stuffed, and stuffed full as is a cushion
With the lewd Reprobate.

Sister, were there not before Innes,
Yes I will say Inns, for my zeal bids me
Say filthy Innes, enough to harbour such
As travelled to destruction the broad way;
But they (...) more and more, more shops of Satan.

(...) abounds, though pure zeal
Teach, preach, huff, puff and snuff at it, yet still
Still it abounds. Had we seen a Church,
A new built Church erected North and South,
It had been something worth the wondering at.

Good works are done.


I say no works are Good.
Good works are merely Popish and Apocryphal.

But th'bad abound, surround, yea confound us*
No matveile now if Play-howses increase,
For they are all grown so obscene of late
That one begets another.

Flat fornication!
(...) wonder any body takes delight
To hear them prattle.

Nay and I have heard
That in a -- Tragedy, I think they call it,
They make no more of killing one another,
Then you sell pins.

Or you sell feathers brother.
But are they not hanged for it?

Law grows partial,
And finds it but Chance-medly: And their Comedies
Will abuse you, or me, or any body;
We cannot put our monies to increase
By lawful Usury, nor Break in quiet,
Nor put off our false wares, nor keep our wives
Finer then others, but our Ghosts must walk
Upon their stages.

Is not this flat conjureing,
To make our Ghosts to walk ere we be dead?

That's nothing Mrs Flowrdew, they will play
The Knave, the Fool, the Devil and all for money.

Impiety! O that men endued with reason
Should have no more grace in them!

Be there not other
Vocations as thriving, and more honest?
Bailies, Promooters, Jailers, and Apparitours,
Beadles, and Martialls men, the needful instruments
Of the Republique; but to make themselves
Such monsters? for they are monsters, they are monsters,
Base, sinful, shameless, ugly, vile, deformed
Pernicious monsters*

I have heard our Vicar
Call Play-houses the Colledge^ of Transgression,
Wherein the seven deadly sins are studied.

Why then the City will in time be made
An University of Iniquity.
We dwell by Black-Friers College, where I wonder
How that profane nest of pernicious Birds
Dare roost themselves there in the midst of us,
So many good and well disposed persons.
O impudence!

It was a zealous prayer
I heard a Brother make, concerning Play-houses:

For Charity what is it?


That the Globe
Wherein (quoth he) reigns a whole world of vice,
Had been consumed! The Phoenix burnt to Ashes.
The Fortune whipped for a blind whore: Blackfriers
He wonders how it scapd demolishing
In the time of reformation: lastly he wished
The Bull might cross the Thames to the Bear-garden,
And there be soundly baited!

A good prayer.


Indeed it something pricks my Conscience,
I come to sell 'em Pins and Looking-glasses.

I have their custom too for all their feathers:
'Tis fit that we which are sincere Professors
Should gain by Infidels.

Mr Roscius we have brought the things you spake for.

Why tis well.


Pray sir what serve they for?


We use them in our Play.


Are you a Player?


I am Sir, what of that?


And is it lawful?
Good sister lets convert him, will you use
So fond a calling?

And so impious?


So irreligious?


So unwarrantable?


Only to gain by vice?


To live by sin?


My spleen is up: And live not you by sin?
Take away vanity and you both may break.
What serves your lawful trade of selling pins,
But to joint gew-gawes, and to knit together
Gorgets, strips, neck-cloths, laces, ribbands, ruffs,
And many other such like toys as these,
To make the Baby Pride a pretty Puppet?
And you sweet Featherman, whose ware though light
Oreweighs your Conscience, what serves your Trade
But to plume folly, to give Pride her wings,
To deck vain-glory? spoiling the Peacocks tail
T'adorne an Idiots Coxcomb! O dull ignorance!
How ill 'tis understood what we do mean
For good and honest! They abuse our Scene,
And say we live by vice: Indeed tis true
As the Physicians by diseases do,
Only to cure them: They do live we see
Like Cooks by pamp'ring prodigality,
Which are our fond accusers. On the stage
We set an Usurer to tell this age
How ugly looks his soul: A prodigal
Is taught by us how far from liberal
His folly bears him: Boldly I dare say
There has been more by us in some one Play
Laugh't into wit and virtue, then hath been
By twenty tedious Lectures drawn from sin
And foppish humours; Hence the cause doth rise
Men are not won by th'eares so well as eyes.
First see what we present.

The sight is able
To unsanctify our eyes, and make 'em Carnal.

Will you condemn without examination?


No Sister, let us call up all our zeal,
And try the strength of this temptation:
Satan shall see we dare defy his Engines.

I am content.


Then take your places here, I will come to you
And moralize the plot.

That moralizing
I do approve, it may be for instruction.

Roscius, I hear you have a new Play to day.


We want not you to play Mephostopholis.
A pretty natural vizard!

What have you there?


A Looking-glasse, or two.


What things are they?
Pray let me see them. Heaven, what sights are here!
I a've seen a Devil. Looking-glasses call you them?
There is no basilisk but a Looking-glasse.

Tis your own face you saw.


My own? thou lie:
I'd not be such a Monster for the world.

Look in it now with me, what ^eest thou now?


An Angel and a Devil.


Look on that
Thou callst an Angel, mark it well, and tell me,
Is it not like my face?

As twere the same.


Why so is that like thine. Dost thou not see,
'Tis not the glass but thy deformity
That makes this ugly shape; if they be fair
That view the Glass such the reflections are.
This serves the body: The soul sees her face
In Comedy, and has no other Glass.

Nay then farewell, for I had rather see
Hell then a Looking-glasse or Comedy.

And yet me thinks if 'twere not for this Glass,
Wherein the form of man beholds his grace,
We could not find another way to see
How near our shapes approach Divinity.
Ladies, let they who will your glass deride,
And say it is an Instrument of Pride:
I will commend you for it; there you see
If ye be fair, how truly fair yeebee:
Where finding beauteous faces, I do know
You'll have the greater care to keep them so.
A heavenly vision in your beauty lies,
Which nature hath denied to your own eyes;
Were it not pity you alone should be
Debarred of that others are blessed to see?
Then take your glasses, and your selves enjoy
The benefit of your selves; it is no toy,
Though ignorance at slight esteem hath set her,
That will preserve us good or make us better.
A Country slut, (for such she was, though here
Ith City may be some as well as there:)
Kept her hands clean, (for those being always seen
Had told her else how sluttish she had been)
But ^ad her face as nasty as the stall
Of a fishmonger, or a Usurers Hall
Daubed o^e with dirt: One might have dared to say
She was a true peace of Prometheus clay,
Not yet informed: And then her unkemb'd hair
Dressed up with cobwebs, made her hag-like stare.
One day within her pail (for Country Lasses
(Fair Ladies) have no other Looking-glasses:).
She spied her ugliness, and fain she would
Have blushed if through so much dirt she could:
Ashamed, within that water, that I say
Which showed her filth, she washed her filth away.
So Comedies, as Poets do intend them,
Serve first to show our faults and then to mend them*
Upon our Stage two glasses oft there be,
The Comic Mirror and the Tragedy:
The Comic glass is full of merry strife,
The low reflection of a Country life.
Grave Tragedy void of such homely sports
Is the sad glass of Cities and of Courts.
I'll show you both, Thalia come and bring
Thy Buskined sister, that of Blood doth ^ing*

Why do you stop? go on.


I charge him stay.
My robe of state, Buskins, and Crown of Gold
Claim a priority.

Your Crown of Gold
Is but the wreath of wealth; 'Tis mine of Laurel
Is virtues Diadem: This grew green and flourished,
When nature pitying poor mortality,
Hid thine within the bowels of the earth:
Men looking up to heaven found this that's mine,
Digging to find out hell they li't on thine.

I know you'have tongue enough.


Besides my Birth-right
Gives me the first possession.

How, your Birth-right?


Yes sister, Birth-right: and a Crown besides,
Put on before the Altar of Apollo
By his dear Priest Phenomoe, she that first
Full of her God raged in Heroic numbers.

How came it then the magistrate decreed
A public charge to furnish out my Chorus,
When you were fain to appear in rags and tatters,
And at your own expenses?

My reward
Came after, my deserts went before yours.

Deserts? yes! what deserts, when like a gypsy
You took a poor and begga^ly Pilgrimage
From village unto village; when I then
As a fit ceremony of Religion
In my full state contended at the Tomb
Of mighty Theseus.

I before that time
Did chant out Hymns in praise of great Apollo
The shepherds Deity, whom they reverence
Under the name of Nomius, in remembrance
How with them once he kept Admetus sheep.
And because you urge my poverty, what were you?
Till Sophocles laid guilt upon your Buskins
You had no ornaments, no robes of state,
No rich and glorious Scene; your first Benefactors
Who were they, but the reeling Priests of Bacchus;
For which a Goat gave you reward and name?

But sister who were yours, I pray, but such
As chanted forth religious, bawdy sonnets,
In honour of the fine chaste God Priapus?

Let age alone, merit must plead our Title.


And have you then the forehead to contend?
I stalk in Princes Courts, great Kings, and Emperors*
From their close cabinets, and Council Tables
Yield me the fatal matter of my Scene.

Inferior persons, and the lighter vanities,
(Of which this age I fear is grown too fruitful,)
Yield subjects various enough to move
Plentiful laughter.

Laughter! a fit object
For Poetry to aim at.

Yes, Laughter is my object: tis a property
In man essential to his reason.

So;
But I move horror; and that frights the guilty
From his dear sins: he that sees Oedipus
Incestuous, shall behold him blind withal.
Who views Orestes as a Parricide,
Shall see him lashed with Furies too; The Ambitious
Shall fear Prometheus Vulture; Daring Gluttony
Stand frighted at the sight of Tantalus:
And every Family great in sins as Blood
Shake at the memory of Pelops house.
Who will rely on Fortunes giddy smile
That hath seen Priam acted on the stage!

You move with fear, I work as much with shame,
A thing more powerful in a generous breast.
Who sees an eating Parasite abused;
A covetous Bawd laughed at; an ignorant Gull
Cheated; a glorious Soldier knocked, and baflle'd;
A crafty servant whipped; a niggard Churl
Hoarding up dicing-monies for his son;
A spruce fantastic Courtier, a mad roarer,
A jealous Tradesman, an over-weening Lady,
Or corrupt Lawyer rightly personated,
But (if he have a blush), will blush and shame
As well to act those follies as to own them.

The subject of my Scene is in the persons
Greater, as in the vices; Atheists, Tyrants,
O'redaring Favorites, Traitors, Parasites,
The Wolves and Cats of state, which in a language
High as the men, and loud as are their crimes
I thunder forth with terror and amazement
Unto the ghastly wondering Audience.

And as my Lady takes deserved place
Of thy light Mistress, so yield thou to me,
Fantastic Mime.

Fond Satire why to thee?


As the Attendant of the nobler Dame,
And of my self more worthy.

How more worthy?


As one whose whip of steel can with a lash
Imprint the Characters of shame so deep,
Even in the brazen forehead of proud sin,
That not eternity shall wear it out.
When I but frowned in my Lucilius brow,
Each conscious cheek grew red, and a cold trembling
Freezed the chill soul; while every guilty breast
Stood fearful of dissection, as afraid
To be anatomized by that skilful hand,
And have each artery, nerve, and vein of sin
By it laid open to the public scorn.
I have untruss'd the proudest, greatest tyrants
Have quaked below my powerful whip, half dead
With expectation of the smarting jerke,
Whose wound no salve can cure: each blow doth leave
A lasting scar, that with a poison eats
Into the marrow of their fames and lives;
Th'eternall ulcer to their memories!
What can your Apish-fine-gesticulations
My manlike-Munkye Mime, vie down to this?

When men through sins were grown unlike the Gods,
Apes grew to be like men; therefore I think
My Apish imitation, Brother Beadle,
Does as good service to reform bad manners
As your proud whip, with all his ferkes, and jerks.
The Spartans when they strove t'expresse the loathsomeness
Of Drunkenness to their Children, brought a slave,
Some captive, Helot, overcharged with wine
Reeling in thus; -- His eyes shot out with staring,
A fire in his nose, a burning redness
Blazing in either cheek, his hair upright,
His tongue and senses faltering, and his stomach
Oreburden'd ready to discharge her load
In each mans face he met. This made'em se^
And hate that sin of swine, and not of men.
Would I express a complemental youth,
That thinks himself a spruce and expert Courtier,
Bending his supple hams, kissing his hands,
Honouring shoo-strings, s^uing his writhed face
To several postures of affection,
Dancing an entertainment to his friend,
Who would not think it a ridiculous motion?
Yet such there be that very much please themselves
In such like Antique humours. To out own sin^s
We will be Moles, even to the grossest of 'em,
But in another life we can spy forth
The least of faults, with eyes as sharpe as eagles,
Or the Epidaurean serpent: Now in me,
Where selfe-love casts not her Egyptian mists,
They find this mis-becoming ^oppishnesse,
And afterwards apply it to themselves:
This ( Satire) is the use of Mimique Elves.

Sister let's lay this poor contention by,
And friendly live together; if one womb
Could hold us both, why should we think this room
Too narrow to contain us? On this stage
We'll plead a trial; and in one year contend
Which shall do best, that past, she then that shall
By the most sacred and impartial judgment
Of our Apollo, best deserve the Baize,
Shall hold the entire possession of the place.

I were unworthy if I should
Appeal from his tribunal; Be it so:
I doubt not but his censure runs with me:
Never may any thing that's sad and tragical
Dare to approach his Presence; let him be
So happy as to think no man is wretched,
Or that there is a thing called misery.

Such is my prayer, that he may only see.
Not be the subject of a Tragedy!
Sister, a truce till then; that vice may bleed
Let us join whips together.

'Tis agreed.
Mime, let it be your office to prepare
The Masque which we intended:

'Tis my care.


How did she say? a Mass? Brother fly hence,
Fly hence, Idolatry will overtake us.

It was a Masque she spake of, a rude Dance
Presented by the seven deadly sins.

Still 'tis a Mass, sister, away, I tell you
It is a mass, a mass, a mass of vile Idolatry.

'Tis but a simple Dance, brought in to show
The native fowl^esse and deformity
Of our dear finn, and what an ugly guest
He entertains, admits him to his B^est!

Say, in a Dance how shall we go,
That never could a measure know!
How shall we sing to please the Scene
That never yet could keep a mean?
Disorder is the Masque we bring,
And Discords are the Tunes we sing.
No sound in our harsh ears can find a place
But highest Trebles, or the lowest Base.
See Brother, if men's hearts and Consciences
Had not been seared, and cauterized, how could they
Affect these filthy harbingers of hell!
These Procters of Beelzebub, Lucifers Hinch-boyes!

I pray ye stir your selves within a while.


And here, unless your favourable mildness
With hope of mercy do encourage us,
Our Author bids us end: he dares not venture
Neither what's past, nor that which is to come
Upon his Country, 'tis so weak, and impotent
It cannot stand a trial, nor dares hope
The benefit of his Clergy; But if rigour
Sit Judge, must of necessity be condemned
To Vulcan or the Sponge: All he can plead
Is a desire of Pardon; for he brings you
No plot at all, but a mere Olla Podrida,
A medley of ill-plac'd, and worse penned humours.
His desire was in single Scenes to show
How Comedy presents each single vice
Ridiculous, whose number as their Character
He borrows from the man to whom he owes
All the poor skill he has, great Aristotle.
Now if you can endure to hear the rest,
You're welcome; if you cannot, do but tell
Your meaning by some sign, and all farewell.
If you will stay resolve to pardon first;
Our Author will deserve it by offending.
Yet if he miss a Pardon, as in Justice
You cannot grant it, though your mercy may,
Still he hath this left for a comfort to him,
That he picks forth a subject of his Rime
May loose perchance his credit, not his time.
REceive your places. The first that we present are the Extremes of a virtue
necessary in our Conversation, called Comitas or Courtesy, which, as all other
virtues, hath her deviations from the Mean. The one Colax, that to seem over
Courteous falls into a servile flattery, the other (as fools fall into the
contraries which they shun) is Dyscolus, who hating to be a slavish Parasite
grows into peevishness and impertinent distaste.


I thought you taught two vices for one virtue!


So does Philosophy, but the Actors enter.


How far they sin against humanity
That use you thus! Believe me 'tis a Symptom
Of Barbarism, and rudeness so to vex
A gentle, modest nature as yours is.

Why dost thou vex methen?


I? Heaven defend!
My breeding has been better; I vex you?
You that I know so virtuous, just, and wise,
So pious and religious, so admired
So loved of all?

Wilt thou not leave me then
Eternal Torture? could your cruelty find
No back but mine that you thought broad enough
To bear the load of all these Epithets?
Pious? Religious? he takes me for a fool.
Virtuous? and Just? Sir, did I ever cheat you,
Cozen, or gull you; that you call me just
And virtuous? I am grown the common scoff
Of all the world; the scoff of all the world.

The world is grown too vile then.


So art thou.
Heaven! I am ^un'd ridiculous!

You ridiculous?
But 'tis as impious Age; There was a time,
(And pity 'tis so good a time had wings
To fly away,) when reverence was paid
To a gray head; 'twas held a sacrilege
Not expiable to deny respect
To one, Sir, of your years and Gravity.

My years and gravity! Why how ol d am I?
I am not rotten yet, or grown so rank
As I should smell oth'grave: O Times and manners!
Well Colax, well; go on: you may abuse me,
Poor dust, and ashes, worms meat, years gravity:
He takes me for a Carcass! what see you
So crazy in me? I have half my Teeth:
I see with spectacles, do I not? and can walk too
With the benefit of my staff: mark if I cannot! --
But you sir at your pleasure with years and gravity
Think me decrepit.

How? Decrepit sir!
I see young roses bud within your cheeks;
And a quick active blood run free and fresh
Through your veins.

I am turned boy again!
A very stripling schooleboy! have I not
The Itch and kibes? am I not scabb'd and mangy
About the wrists and hams?

Still Dyscolus*


Dyscolus! and why Dyscolus? when were we
Grown so familiar? Dyscolus! by my name
Sure we are Pylades and Orestes! are we not?
Speak good Pylades.

Nay worthy Sir
Pardon my error, 'twas without intent
Of an offence. I'll find some other name
To call you by --

What do you mean to call me?
Fool? Ass? or Knave? my name is not so bad
As that I am ashamed on it.

Still you take all worse then it was meant,
You are too Jealous.

Jealous? I haven't cause for it: my wives honest;
Dost see my horns? Doest? if thou doest,
Write Cuckold in my forehead; do, write Cuckold
With Aqua-fortis, do. Jealous! I am jealous*
Free of the Company! wife, I am jealous.

I mean suspicious.


How, suspicious?
For what? for Treason, Felony, or Murder?
Carry me to the Justice: bind me over
For a suspicious person* hang me too
For a suspicious person* O, O, O
Some courteous plague ceazeme, and free my soul
From this immortal Torment! every thing
I meet with, is vexation, and this, this
Is the vexation of vexations,
The Hell of Hells, and Devil of all Devils.

For pity sake fret not the good old Gentleman.


O! have I not yet torments great enough,
But you must add to my affliction?
Eternal silence cease you!

Sir we strive
To please you, but you still misconstrue us.

I must be pleased! a very babe, an infant!
I must be pleased! give me some pap, or plummes:
Buy me a rattle, or a hobby-horse,
To still me, do! be pleased? would have me get
A Parasite to be flattered?

How? a Parasite?
A cogging, flattering, slavish Parasite?
Things I abhor and hate. Tis not the belly
Shall make my brains a captive. Flatterers!
Souls below reason will not stoop so low
As to give up their Liberty; only flatterers
Move by another wheel. They have no passions
Free to themselves. All their affections,
Qualities, humours, appetites, desires,
Nay wishes, vows, and prayers, discourse thoughts
Are but another Bondsman. Let me tug
At the Turks Galleys; be eternally
Damned to a Quarry: In this state my mind
Is free: A flatterer has nor soul nor body
What shall I say? -- No I applaud your temper,
That in a generous bravenesse take distaste
At such whose servile nature strives to please you.
Tis royal in you Sir.

Ha! Whats that?


A feather stuck upon your cloak.


A feather!
And what have you to do with my feathers?
Why should you hinder me from telling th'world
I do not lye on flockbeds?

Pray be pleased.
I brushed it off for mere respect I bare you.

Respect! a fine respect, Sir, is it not,
To make the world believe I nourish vermin?
O death, death, death, if that our graves hatch worms
Without tongues to torment us, let them have
What teeth they will. I meet not here an object
But adds to my affliction! Sure I am not
A man; I could not then be so ridiculous:
My ears are overgrown, I am an Ass;
It is my ears they gaze at. What strange Harpy
Centaur, or Gorgon am I turned into?
What Circe wrought my Metamorphosis?
If I be beast, she might have made me Lyon,
Or something not ridiculous! O Acteon,
If I do branch like thee, it is my fortune!
Why look they on me else? There is with in
A Glass they say, that has strange qualities in it;
That shall resolve me. I will in to see
Whether or no I man or Monster be.

Who be these? They look like Presumption and Despair.


And such they are. That is Aphobius, one that out of an impious confidence
fears nothing. The other Deilus, that from an Atheistical distrust, shakes at
the motion of a reed. These are the Extremes of Fortitude, that steers an even
course between over much dar^ing, and overmuch fearing.


Why stays this reprobate Colax?


Any vice
Yields work for Flattery.

A good Doctrine mark it.


Is it possible? did you not fear it, say you?
To me the mere relation is anague.
Good Aphobus no more such terrible stories;
I would not for a world lye alone to night:
I shall have such strange dreams!

What can there be
That I should fear? The Gods? If they be good,
Tis sin to fear them; if not good, no Gods,
And then let them fear me. Or are they Devils
That must affright me?

Devils! where good Aphobus?
I thought there was some conjureing abroad.
Tis such a terrible wind! O here it is;
Now it is here again! O still, still, still!

Whats the matter?


Still it follows me!
The thing in black, behind; soon as the Sun
But shines, it haunts me! Gentle spirit leave me!
Cannot you lay him Aphobus? what an ugly looks it has!
With eyes as big as sawcers, nostrills wider
Then Barbers basins!

Tis nothing Deilus
But your weak Fancy, that from every object
Draws arguments of fear. This terrible black thing --

Where is it Aphobus?


-- Is but your shadow Deilus.


And should not we fear shadows?


No! why should we?


Who knows but they come learing after us
To steal away the substance? Watch him Aphobus.

I nothing fear.


I do commend your valour,
That fixes your great soul fast as a Center,
Not to be moved with dangers, let slight cock-boats
Be shaken with a wave, while you stand firm
Like an undaunted rock, whose constant hardness
Rebeats the fury of the raging Sea,
Dashing it into froth. Base fear doth argue
A low degenerate soul.

Now I fear every thing.


Tis your discretion. Every thing has danger,
And therefore every thing is to be feared.
I do applaud this wisdom: Tis a symptom
Of wary providence. His too confident rashness
Argues a stupid ignorance in the soul,
A blind and senseless judgement; give me fear
To man the fort, 'tis such a circumspect
And wary sentinel*

Now shame take thee for
A Luke warm formalist.

-- But daring valour
Incapable of danger sleeps securely,
And leaves an open entrance to his enemies.

What are they landed?


Who?


The enemies.
That Colax talks of.

If they be I care not.
Though they be Giants all, and armed with thunder.

Why do you not fear Thunder?


Thunder? no!
No more then squibs and crackers.

Squibs and crackers?
I hope there be none here! slid, squibs and crackers!
The mere Epitomies of the Gun-powder Treason,
Faux in a lesser volume.

Let fools gaze
At bearded stars, it is all one to me
As if they had been shaved -- thus, thus would I
Out-beard a Meteour, for I might as well
Name it a prodigy when my candle blazes.
Deil. Is there a Comet say you? Nay I saw it,
It reached from Paul's to Charing, and portends
Some certain imminent danger to the inhabitants
Twixt those two places: I'll go get a lodging
Out of its Influence.

Will that serve? -- I fear
It threatens general ruin to the Kingdom.

I'll to some other Country.


There's danger too to cross the Seas.


Is there no way, good Colax,
To cross the Sea by Land? O the situation!
The horrible situation of an Island

You sir are far above such frivolons thoughts.
You fear not death.

Not I.


Not sudden death.


No more then sudden sleeps: Sir I dare dye.


I dare not; Death to me is terrible:
I will not dye.

How can you Sir prevent it?


Why I will kill my self.


A valiant course;
And the right way to prevent death indeed.
Your spirit is true Roman! -- But yours greater
That fear not death, nor yet the manner of it,
Should Heaven fall --

Why then we should have Larks.


I shall never eat Larks again while I breath.


Or should the earth yawn like a sepulcher,
And with an open throat swallow you quick?

'twould save me the expenses of a grave.


I'had rather trouble my Exequutors by the half.


Canons to me are pot-guns.


Potguns to me
Are Canons; the report will strike me dead.

A rapier's but a bodkin.


And a bodkin.
Is a most dangerous weapon; since I read
Of Iulius Cesars death, I durst not venture
Into a Tailors shop for fear of Bodkins.

O that the valiant Giants would again
Rebel against the Gods, and besiege Heaven,
So I might be their leader.

Had Enceladus
Been half so valiant, Jove had been his prisoner.

Why should we think there be such things as dangers?
Scylla, Charybdis, Python are but fables.
Medeas Bull, and Dragon very tales.
Se^ monsters, serpents, all Poetical figments.
Nay Hell it self, and Acheron mere inventions.
Or were they true, as they are false, should I be
So timorous as to fear these Bugbear Harpies,
Medusa's, Centaurs, Gorgons?

O good Aphobus.
Leave conjuring, or take me into the circle.
What shall I do good Colax?

Sir walk in,
There is they say a Looking-glasse, a strange one
Of admirable virtues, that will render you
Free from enchantments.

How a Looking-glasse?
Dost think I can endure it? why there lies
A man within't in ambush to entrap me.
I did but lift my hand up, and he presently
Caught at it.

'Twas the shadow Sir of your self.
Trust me a mere reflection.

I will trust thee.


What Glass is that?


A trick to fright the Idiot
Out of his wits, a glass so full of dread
Rendering unto the eye such horrid spectacles
As would amaze even you. Sir I do think
Your optic nerves would shrink in the beholding*
This if your eye endure, I will confess you
The Prince of Eagles.

Look to it eyes, if ye refuse this sight,
My nails shall damn you to eternal night.

Seeing no hope of gain, I pack them hence,
'Tis gold gives flattery all her Eloquence.

Temperance is the mediocrity of enjoying pleasures, when they are present, and
a moderate desire of them being absent; And these are the extremes of that
virtue. Acolastus a voluptuous Epicure, that out of an immoderate, and untamed
desire seeks after all pleasures promiscuously, without respect of honest or
lawful. The other Anaisthetus a mere Anchorite that delights in nothing, not
in those legitimate recreations allow'd of by God and nature.


O now for an eternity of eating!
Fool was he that wished but a cranes short neck.
Give me one, nature, long as is a Cable,
Or sounding line, and all the way a palate
To ^ast my meat the longer. I would have
My senses feast together, Nature envied us
In giving single pleasures; let me have
My ears, eyes, palate, nose, and touch, at once
Enjoy their happiness; lay me in a bed
Made of a summers cloud; to my embraces
Give me a Venus hardly yet fifteen,
Fresh, plump, and active; she that Mars enjoyed
Is grown too stale: And then at the same instant
My Touch is pleased, I would delight my sight
With Pictures of Diana, and her Nymphs,
Naked, and bathing drawn by some Apelles;
By them some of our fairest Virgins stand;
That I may see whether 'tis Art or nature
Which heightens most my blood and appetite.
Nor cease I here. Give me the seven Orbs
To charm my ears with their celestial lutes,
To which the Angels that do move those spheres
Shall sing some amorous ditty; nor yet here
Fix I my bounds; The sun himself shall fire
The Phoenix nest to make me a perfume,
While I do eat the Bird, and eternally
Quaff of eternal Nectar. These single, are
But torments, but together; O together!
Each is a Paradise. Having got such objects
To please the senses, give me senses too
Fit to receive those objects: Give me therefore
An Eagles eye, a blood-hounds curious smell,
A stags quick hearing, let my feeling be
As subtle as the spiders, and my taste
Sharpe as a Squirrils. Then I'll read the Alcoran,
And what delights that promises in future
I'll practise in the present.

Heathenish Glutton!


Base belly-God, licentious Libertine!


And I do think there is no pleasure at all
But in contemning pleasures; Happy Niobe
And blessed Daphne, and all such as are
Turned stocks and stones: would I were Laurel too,
Or marble, I, or any thing insensible.
It is a toil for me to eat or drink,
Only for natures satisfaction;
Would I could live without it. To my ear
Musique is but a mandrake. To my smell
Nard scents of rue, and wormwood; And I taste
Nectar with as much loathing, and distaste
As Gall, or aloes, or my Doctors potion.
My eye can meet no object but I hate it.

Come Brother Stoique be not so melancholy.


Be not so foolish Brother Epicure.


Come wee'le go see a Comedy, that will raise
Thy heavy spirits up.

A Comedy?
Sure I delight much in those toys; I can
With as much patience hear the Mariners
Chide in a storm.

Then lets go drink a while.


'Tis too much Labour; Happy Tantalus
That never drinks.

A little Venery
Shall recreate thy soul.

Yes like an itch,
For 'tis no better, I could wish an heir;
But that I cannot take the pains to get one.

Why, marry, if your conscience be so tender,
As not to do it otherwise; Then 'tis lawful.

True Matrimony's nothing else indeed
But fornication licensed, lawful Adultery.
O Heavens! how all my senses are wide sluices
To let in discontent and miseries!
How happy are the moles that have no eyes;
How blessed the Adders that they have no ears.
They neither see, nor hear ought that afflicts them.
But happier they that have no sense all;
That neither see, nor hear, taste, smell, nor feel
Any thing to torment them: souls were given
To torture Bodies, man has reason too
To add unto the heap of his distractions.
I can see nothing without sense, and motion,
But I do wish my self transformed into it.

Sir I commend this temperance; your armed soul
Is able to contemn these petty baits,
These slight temptations, which we title pleasures;
That are indeed but names; He'ven it self knows
No such like thing; the stars nor eat, nor drink,
Nor lye with one another; and you imitate
Those glorious bodies, by which noble abstinence
You gain the names of moderate, chaste, and sober;
While this effeminate gets the infamous terms
Of Glutton, Drunkard, and Adulterer;
Pleasures, that are not mans, as man is man,
But as his nature sympathies with beasts.
You shall be the third Cato. This grave look
And rigid eyebrow will become a censor.
But I will fit you with an object Sir,
My noble Anaisthetus that will please you.
It is a Looking-glasse, wherein at once
You may see all the dismal groves and caves,
The horrid vaults, dark cells, and barren deserts,
With what in Hell it self can dismal be.

That is indeed a Prospect fit for me.


He cannot see a stock or stone, but presently
He wishes to be turned to one of those.
I have another humour, I cannot see
A fat voluptuous sow with full delight
Wallow in dirt, but I do wish my self
Transformed into that blessed Epicure.
Or when I view the hot salacious sparrow
Renew his pleasures with fresh appetite,
I wish my self that little bird of Love.

It shows you a man of a soft moving clay,
Not made of flint; Nature has been bountiful
To provide pleasures, and shall we be niggards
At plenteous boards? He's a discourteous guest
That will observe a diet at a feast.
When Nature thought the earth alone too little
To find us meat, and therefore stored the air
With winged creatures, not contented yet
She made the water fruitful to delight us.
Nay I believe the other Element too
Doth nurse some curious dainty for mans food,
If we would use the skill to catch the Salamander:
Did she do this to have us eat with temperance?
Or when she gave so many different Odors
Of spices, unguents, and all sorts of flowers,
She cried not -- stop your noses: would she give us
So sweet a quire of winged Musicians
To have us deaf? or when she placed us here,
Here in a Paradise, where such pleasing prospects
So many ravishing colours entice the eye,
Was it to have us wink? when she bestowed
So powerful faces, such commanding beauties
On many glorious Nymphs, was it to say
Be chaste and continent? Not to enjoy
All pleasures, and at full, were to make nature
Guilty of that she ne'er was guilty of,
A vanity in her works.

A learned Lecture!
Tis fit such grave and solid arguments
Have their reward -- here -- half of my estate
T'invent a pleasure never tasted yet,
That I may be the first shall make it stale.

Within Sir is a Glass, that by reflection
Doth show the image of all sorts of pleasures
That ever yet were acted, more variety
Then Aretines pictures.

I'll see the Jewel;
For though to do, most moves my appetite,
I love to see, as well as act delight.

These are the things indeed the stage doth teach,
Dear heart, what a foul sink of sins run here!

Insooth it is the common shore of lewdness.


These are Aneleutherus an illiberal Niggardly Usurer, that will sell heaven
to purchase Earth. That, his son Asotus, a profuse Prodigal, that will sell
earth to buy Hell. The extremes of Liberality which prescribes a mediocrity in
the Getting and Spending of Riches.


Come boy, go with me to the Scriveners, go,


I was in hope you would have said a Bawdy house.


Thence to th'exchange.


No, to the Tavern Father.


Be a good husband boy, follow my counsel.


Your counsel? No dad, take you mine
And be a good fellow -- shall we go and roar?
Slid Father I shall never live to spend
That you have got already -- Pox of atturneys,
Merchants, and Scriveners, I would hear you talk
Of Drawers, Punks, and Panders.

Prodigal child!
Thou dost not know the sweets of getting wealth.

Nor you the pleasure that I take in spending it.
To feed on Caveare, and eat Anchoves!

Asotus, my dear son, talk not to me
Of your Anchoves, or your Caveare.
No, feed on Widows, have each meal an Orphan
Served to your Table, or a glibbery heir
With all his lands melted into a mortgage.
The Gods themselves feed not on such fine dainties,
Such fatting, thriving diet.

Trust me Sir,
I am ashamed la -- now to call you Father,
Ne'er trust me now I'am, come be a Gentleman:
One of your haveings, and thus cark and care?
Come, I will send for a whole coach or two
Of Bankside Ladies, and we will be Ioviall!
Shall the World say you pine and pinch for nothing?
Well do your pleasure, keep me short of monies,
When you are dead, as dye I hope you must,
I'll make a shift to spend one half at least
Ere you are coffined, and the other half
Ere you are fully laid into your grave.
Were not you better help away with some of it?
But you will starve your self, that when you're rotten,
One -- Have at all of mine may set it flying.
And I will have your bones cut into dice,
And make you guilty of the spending of it:
Or I will get a very handsome bowl
Made of your scull, to drink't away in healths.

That's not the way to thrive! No sit and brood
On thy estate, as yet it is not hatched
Into maturity.

Marry I will brood upon it,
And hatch it into chickens, capons, hens,
Larks, thrushes, quails, wood-cocks, snites phesants
The best that can be got for love or money.
There is no life to drinking!

O yes, yes,
Exaction, usury, and oppression.
Twenty in the hundred is a very Nectar.
And wilt thou, wasteful lad, spend in a supper
What I with sweat and labour, care and industry
Have been an age a scraping up together?
No, no Asotus, trust gray-head experience;
As I have been an ox, a painful ox,
A diligent, toiling, and laborious ox
To plow up Gold for thee; so I would have thee --

Be a fine silly Ass to keep it.


Be a good watchful Dragon to preserve it.


Sir, I overheard your wise instructions,
And wonder at the gravity of your counsel.
This wild unbridled boy is not yet grown
Acquainted with the world; He has not felt
The weight of need, that want is vertue's clog;
Of what necessity, respect and value
Wealth is; how base and how contemptible
Poverty makes us. Liberality
In some circumstances may be allow'd;
As when it has no end but honesty,
With a respect of person, quantity,
Quality, time and place; but this profuse,
Vain, injudicious spending speaks him Idiot.
And yet the best of liberality
Is to be liberal to our selves; and thus
Your wisdom is most liberal, and knows
How fond a thing it is for discreet men
To purchase with the loss of their estate
The name of one poor virtue liberality.
And that too only from the mouth of beggars.
One of your judgment would not I am sure
Buy all the virtues at so dear a rate.
Nor are you sir, I dare presume, so fond
As for to weigh your gains by the strict scale
Of equity, and Justice; Names invented
To keep us beggars! I would counsel now
Your son to tread no steps but yours, for they
Will certainly direct him the broad way
That leads unto the place where Plenty dwells,
And she shall give him honour.

Your tongue is pow'rfull:
Pray read this Lecture to my son; I go
To find my scriv'ner, who is gone I hear
To a strange Glass wherein all things appear.

To see if it can show him his lost ears.
Now to your Lecture.

And to such a one
As you will be a willing Pupil to.
Think you I meant all that I told your father?
No, 'twas to blind the eyes of the old Huncks.
I love a man like you that can make much
Of his blessed Genius: Miracle of Charity!
That open hand becomes thee; Let thy Father
Scrape like the Dunghill cock the dirt, and mire,
To find a precious Gem for thee, the Chicken
Of the white Hen to wear. It is a wonder
How such a generous branch as you, could spring
From that old root of damned avarice!
For every widows house the father swallows,
The son should spue a Tavern. How are we
Richer then others, not in having much,
But in be stowing;
And that shines glorious in you. The chuff^ crowns
Imprisoned in his rusty chest me thinks
I hear groan out, and long till they be thine,
In hope to see the light again. Thou can not
Stand in a flood of Nectar up to the chin,
And yet not dare to sup it; nor can suffer
The Golden Apples dangle at thy lips,
But thou wilt taste the fruit. 'Tis generous this!

Gramercy, thou shalt be Doctor of the chair.
Here -- 'tis too little, but 'tis all my store,
I'll in to pump my dad, and fetch thee more.

How like you now my art? is't not a subtle one?


Now out upon thee thou lewd reprobate!
Thou man of sin, and shame, that sowest cushions
Unto the elbows of iniquity.

I do commend this zeal; you cannot be
Too fervent in a cause so full of goodness.
There is a general frost hath ceased devotion,
And without such like ardent flames as these
There is no hope to thaw it. The word, Puritan,
That I do glorify, and esteem rev'erend,
As the most sanctified, pure, and holiest Sect
Of all professors, is by the profane
Used for a name of infamy, a by-word, a slander,
That I sooth vice I do but flatter them,
As we give children plums to learn their prayers,
To entice them to the truth, and by fair means
Work out their reformation.

'Tis well done,
I hope hee'le become a brother, and make
A Separatist!

You shall have the devotions
Of all the Elders. But this foppinesse
Is weary some, I could at our Saint Antlings,
Sleeping and all, sit twenty times as long,

Go in with me to recreate your spirits,
As Musique theirs, with some refreshing song,
Whose patience our rude Scene hath held too long.

I will no more of this abomination.


The end crowns every action, stay till that.
Just Judges will not be prejudicate.

Pray sir continue still the moralizing.


The next we present are the extremes of Magnificence, who teaches a Decorum in
great expenses, as Liberality in the lesser: One is Banausus, out of a mere
^tent ation vaine-gloriously expensive; the other Microprepes one in glorious
works extremely base and penurious.


Being borne not for our selves but for our friends,
Our country and our glory, it is fit
We do express the majesty of our souls
In deeds of bounty and magnificence.

The world is full of vanity, and fond fools
Promise themselves a name from building Churches
Or any thing that tends to the Republique,
'Tis the Re-private that I study for.

First therefore for the fame of my Republique.
I'll imitate a brave Egyptian King,
And plant such store of onions, and of garlic,
As shall maintain so many thousand workmen,
To the building of a Pyamid at Saint Albons,
Upon whose top I'll set a hand of brass,
With a scroll in it to show the way to London,
For the benefit of Travellers.

Excellent!
'Tis charity to direct the wandering Pilgrim.

I am Church-warden, and we are this year
To build our steeple up, now to save charges
I'll get a high crowned hat with five Low-bels
To make a peal shall serve as well as Bow.

'Tis wisely cast,
And like a careful steward of the Church,
Of which the Steeple is no part, at least
No necessary one.

Verily 'tis true.
They are but wicked Synagogues where those instruments
Of Superstition and Idolatry
Ring warning to sin, and chime all in to the Devil.

And because there is such swarms of heresies rising:
I'll have an Artist frame two wondrous weathercocks
Of Gold, to set on Paul's, and Grantam Steeple,
To show to all the Kingdom what fashion next
The Wind of Humour hither means to blow.

A wicker chair will fit them for a Pulpit.


It is the Doctrine sir that you respect.


In sooth In have heard as wholesome instructions
From a zealous wicker chair, as e're I did
From the carved Idol of wainscoat.

Next, I intend to found an Hospital
For the decayed Professors of the Suburbs,
With a College of Physicians too at Chelsy
Only to study the cure of the French Pox;
That so the sinners may acknowledge me
Their only benefactor, and repent.

You have a care sir of your countrie's health.


Then I will sell the lead to thatch the Chancell.


I have a rare device to set Dutch windmills
Upon New-market Heath, and Salisbury Plain,
To drain the Fens.

The Fens sir are not there.


But who knows but they may be?


Very right:
You aim at the prevention of a danger.

A Porters frock shall serve me for a surplice*


Indeed a Frock is not so Ceremonious.


But the great work in which I mean to glory,
Is in the raising a Cathedral Church:
It shall be at Hoggs-Norton, with a pair
Of stately Organs; more then pity 'twere
The Pigs should loose their skill for want of practice!

Organs! fie on them for Babylonian Bagpipes!


Then for the painting, I bethink my self
That I have seen in mother Red-caps Hall
In painted cloth the story of the Prodigal.

And that will be for very good use and moral.
Sir you are wise; what serve Egyptian Pyramids,
Ephesian Temples, Babylonian Towers,
Carian Coloss'es, Traians water-workes,
Domitians Amphitheaters, the vain cost
Of ignorance and prodigality!
Rome flourished when her Capital was that ch'd,
And all her Gods dwelt but in Cottages.
Since Parian marble and Corinthian brass
Entered her gaudy Temples, soon she fell
To superstition, and from thence to ruin.
You see that in our Churches, glorious Statues
Rich Copes, and other ornaments of state
Draw wandering eyes from their devotion,
Unto a wanton gazing, and that other
Rich edifices, and such gorgeous toys
Do more proclaim our countries wealth then safety,
And serve but like so many gilded baits
T'entice a foreign Foe to our invasion.
Go in, there is a Glass will show you sir,
What sweet simplicity our Grands^res used,
How in the Age of Gold no Church was gilded.

O I have thought on it, I will straight way build
A free school here in London, a free school
Forth'education of young Gentlemen
To study how to drink, and take Tobacco,
To swear, to roar, to dice, to drab, to quarrel:
Twill be the great Gymnasium of the Realm,
The Phrontisterium of great Britayny.
And for their better study I will furnish them
With a large Library of Drapers books.

'Twill put down Bodlies, and the Vatican.
Royal Banausus! how many Spears fly you
Above the earthy dull Microprepes!
I hope to live to see you build a stews
Shall out-brave Venice; To repair old Tiburne
And make it Cedar. This magnificent course
Doth purchase you an immortality.
In them you build your Honour to remain
Th-example and the wonder of Posterity.
While other hidebound Churls do grutch themselves*
The Charges of a Tomb.

But I'll have one
In which I'll lye embalmed with Mirth and Cassia,
And richer unguents then the Egyptian Kings.
And all that this my precious Tomb may furnish
The Land with Mummye.

Yonder is a Glass
Will show you plots and models of all monuments
Formed the old way, you may invent a new
'Twill make for your more glory.

Colax true.


These are the extremes of Magnanimity. Caunus a fellow so highly conceited of
his own parts, that he thinks no honour above him; the other Micropsychus a
base and low spirited fellow* that undervaluing his own qualities, dares not
aspire to those dignities, that otherwise his merits are capable of.


I wonder that I hear no news from Court!


All hail unto the honourable Caunus.


The honourable Caunus? Tis decreed
I am a Privy Counsellor; our new honours
Cannot so alter us as that we can
Forget our Friends, walk with us our familiar.

It puzles me to think what worth I have,
That they should put so great an honour on me.

Sir I do know, and see, and so do all
That have not wilful blindness, what rare skill
Of wisdom, Policy, Judgment and the rest
Of the state-vertues sit within this breast,
As if it were their Parliament; but as yet
I am not Sir the happy Messenger
That tells you you are called unto the Helm;
Or that the Rudder of great Britany
Is put into your Hands, that you may steer
Our floating Delos till she be arrived
At the blessed Port of Happiness, and surnam'd
The Fortunate Ifle from you that are the fortunate.

'Tis strange that I the best experienced
The skilfulst and the rarest of all Carpenters,
Should not be yet a Privy Counsellour!
Surely the State wants eyes, or has drunk opium
And sleeps; but when it wakes it cannot choose
But meet the glorious beams of my deserts
Bright as the rising Sun, and say to England,
England behold thy light!

Make me a constable!
Make me that am the simplest of my neighbours
So great a Magistrate! so powrfull an officer!
I blush at my unworthiness: a Constable!
The very Prince of the parish! you are one Sir
Of an ability to discharge it better,
Let me resign to you.

How? I a Constable?
What might I be in your opinion Sir?

A Carpenter of worship*


Very well;
And yet you would make me a Constable.
I'll evidently demonstrate that of all men
Your Carpentes are best States-men; of all Carpenters
I being the best, am best of Statesmen too:
Imagine Sir the Common-wealth a Log,
Or a rude block of wood; your States-man comes,
(For by that word I mean a Carpenter)
And with the saw of Policy divides it
Into so many boards or several orders,
Of Prince, Nobility, Gentry, and the other
Inferior boards called Vulgar, fit for nothing
But to make styles, or planks to be *trod over,
Or trampled on: This adds unto the Logg
Called Common-wealth at least some small perfection:
But afterwards he plains them, and so makes
The Common-wealth, that was before a board,
A pretty Wainscoat; some he carves with Titles
Of Lord, or Knight, or Gentleman; Some stand plain,
And serve us more for use then Ornament,
We call them Yeomen; (Boards now out of fashion.)
And lest the disproportion break the frame,
He with the peggs of amity and concord,
As with the glew-pot of good Government
Joints 'em together, makes an absolute Edifice
Of the Re-publique: State-skill'd Machiavell
Was certainly a Carpenter; yet you think
A Constable a Giant Dignity.

Pray Heaven that Icarus-like I do not melt
The waxen plumes of my ambition!
Or that from this bright Chariot of the Sun
I fall not headlong down with Phaeton,
I have aspired so high: make me a Constable
That have not yet attained to the Greek tongue!
Why 'tis his office for to keep the peace,
His Majesties Peace: I am not fit to keep
His Majesties Hogs, much less his Peace, the best
Of all his jewels: How dare I presume
To charge a man in the Kings name! I faint
Under the burden of so great a place,
Whose weight might press down Atlas: Magistrates
Are only Sumpter-horses. Nay they threaten me
To make me Warden of the Church.
Am I a Patriot? or have I ability
To present Knights-Recusant, Clergy-Reelers,
Or Gentlemen-Fornicators?

You have worth
Richly enamelled with a modesty.
And though your lofty merit might sit crowned
On Caucasus, or the Pyrenean mountains,
You choose the humbler valley, and had rather
Grow a safe shrub below, then dare the winds,
And be a Cedar: Sir you know there is not
Half so much honour in the Pilots place
As danger in the storm. Poor windy Titles
Of Dignity, and offices that puff up
The bubble pride till it swell big, and burst,
What are they but brave nothings? Toys called Honours
Make them on whom they are bestowed no better
Then glorious slaves, the servants of the Vulgar:
Men sweat at Helm, as much as at the Oar.
There is a Glass within shall show you sir
The vanity of these filke-wormes, that do think
They toil not, because they spin so fine a thread.

I'll see it. Honour is a babies rattle,
And let blind Fortune where she will, bestow her;
Lay me on earth, and I shall fall no lower.

Colax what news?


The Persian Emperor
Is desperately sick.

Heaven take his soul!
When I am the Grand Sophie, as 'tis likely
I may be, Colax thou art made for ever.

The Turk they say prepares again for Poland.


And I no Basshaw yet? Sultan repent it!


The State of Venice too is in distraction.


And can that State be so supinely negligent,
As not to know whom they may choose their Duke?

Our Merchants do report th'inhabitants there
Are now in consultation, for the settling
The Crown upon a more deserving head
Then his that bears it.

Then my fortunes rise
On confident wings, and all my hopes fly certain.
Colax be bold: thou see the Prester Iohn.
Well England, of all Countries in the World
Most blind to thy own good. other Nations
Woo me to take the bridle in my hands
With gifts and presents; had I lived in Rome
Who durst with Caunus stand a candidate?
I might have choice of Aedile, Consul, Tribune,
Or the perpetual Dictators place.
I could discharge 'em all: I know my merits
Are large, and boundless: A Caesar might be hewed
Out of a Carpenter, if a skilful workman
But undertook it.

Tis a worthy confidence.
Let Birds of night and shame, with their owls eyes
Not dare to gaze upon the sun of Honour;
They are no presidents for Eagles: Bats
Like dull Micropsychus; things of earth, and lead,
May love a private safety; men in whom
Prometheus has spent much of his stolen fire,
Mount upwards like a flame, and court bright honour
Hedged in with thousand dangers! Whats a man
Without desert? and what's desert to him
That does not know he has it? Is he rich
That holds within his house some buried chests
Of Gold, or Pearl, knows not where to look the?
What was the Load-stone, till the use was found,
But a foul dotard on a fowler Mistress?
I praise your Argus eyes, that not alone
Shoot their beams forwards, but reflect and turn
Back on themselves, and find an object there
More worthy their intent contemplation.
You are at home no stranger, but are grown
Acquainted with your virtues, and can tell
What use the pearl is of, which Dunghill cocks
Scrape into dirt again. This searching judgement
Was not intended to work wood, but men.
Honour attends you. I shall live to see
A Diadem crown that head. There is within
A Glass that will acquaint you with all places
Of Dignity, authority, and renown,
The State, and carriage of them: Choose the best,
Such as deserve you, and refuse the rest.

I go, that want no worth to merit honour;
'Tis honour that wants worth to merit me.
Fortune, thou arbitresse of humane things
Thy credit is at stake: if I but rise
The Worlds opinion will conceive th'hast eyes.

These are the extremes of Meekness. Orgylus an angry quarrelsome man, moved
with the least shadow, or appearance of Injury. The other in defect, Aorgus, a
fellow so patient, or rather insensible of wrong, that he is not capable of the
grossest abuse.


Persuade me not, he has awaked a fury
That carries steel about him. Daggs, and Pistols!
To bite his thumb at me?

Why should not any man
Bite his own thumb?

At me? wear I a sword
To see men bite their thumbs -- Rapiers and Daggers!-
He is the son of a Whore.

That hurts not you.
Had he bit yours, it had been some pretence
To have moved this anger -- he may bite his own,
And eat it too.

Muskets, and Canons!-eate it?
If he dare eat it in contempt of me,
He shall eat something else too that rides here;
I'll try his estridg stomach.

Sir be patient.


You lye in your throat, and I will not.


To what purpose is this impertinent madness?
Pray be milder.

Your Mother was a whore, I will not put it up.


Why should so slight a toy thus trouble you?


Your Father was hanged, and I will be revenged.


When reason dorh in equal balance poise
The nature of two injuries, yours to me
Lies heavy, when that other would not turn
An even scale; and yet it moves not me;
My Anger is not up.

But I will raise it;
You are a fool!

I know it, and shall I
Be angry for a truth?

You are besides
An arrant knave!

So are my betters sir.


I cannot move him -- O my spleen! -- it rises,
For very anger I could eat my knuckles.

You may, or bite your thumb all's one to me.


You are a horned beast, a very Cuckold!


'Tis my wives fault, not mine, I have no reason
Then to be angry for another finn.

And I did graft your horns, you might have come
And found us glewd together like two goats;
And stood a witness to your transformation.

Why if I had, I am so far from anger
I would have even fallen down upon my knees,
And desired heaven to have forgiven you both.

Your Children are all bastards, not one of them,
Upon my knowledge, of your own begetting.

Why then I am the more beholding to them
That they will call me father; it was lust
Perchance, that did beget them, but I am sure
'Tis charity to keep the Infants.

Not yet stirred?
'Tis done of mere contempt, he will not now
Be angry, to express his scorn of me.
'Tis above patience this, insufferable.
Proclaim me coward, if I put up this!
Dotard you will be angry, will you not?

To see how strange a course fond wrath doth go!
You will be angry because I am not so.

I, can endure no longer, if your spleen
Lye in your breech, thus I will kick it up.-

Alpha. Beta. Gamma. Delta. Epsylon. Zeta. Eta. Theta. Iota. Kappa. Lamda* Mu.
Nu. Xi. Omicron. Pi. To. Sigma. Tau. Vpsilon. Phi. Chi. Psi. Omega.


How? what contempt is this?


An antidote
Against the poison, Anger: 'twas prescribed
A Roman Emperor, that on every injury
Repeated the Greek Alphabet, that being done
His anger too was over. This good rule
I learned from him, and Practise.

Not yet angry?
Still will you vex me? I will practise too?

Aleph. Beth. Gimel.


What new Alphabet
Is this?

The Hebrew Alphabet, that I use
A second remedy.

O my Torment! still?
Are not your Buttocks angry with my toes?

For ought I feel your toes have more occasion
For to be angry with my Buttocks.

Well,
I'll try your Physic for the third assault;
And exercise the patience of your nose.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. W. X. Y. Z.


Are you not angry now?


Now sir, why now?
Now you have done.

O 'tis a mere plot this,
To jeer my tamenesse: will no sense of wrong
Waken the lethargy of a cowards soul?
Will not this rouse her ^rom her dead sleep, nor this?

Why should I sir be angry; if I suffer
An injury, it is no guilt of mine;
No, let it trouble them, that do the wrong;
Nothing but peace approaches innocence.

A bitterness o'reflows me; my eyes flame,
My blood boils in me, all my faculties
Of soul and body move in a disorder;
His patience hath so tortured me: Sir villain
I will dissect thee with my rapiers point;
Rip up each vein, and sinew of my storque,
Anatomize him, searching every entraile,
To see if nature, when she made this ass,
This suffering ass; did not forget to give him
Some gall!

Put it up good Orgylus,
Let him not glory in so brave a death,
As by your hand; it stands not with your honour
To stain your rapier in a cowards blood.
The Lybian Lions in their noble rage
Will prey on Bulls, or mate the Unicorn;
But trouble not the painted butterfly;
Ants crawl securely by him.

'Tis intolerable!
Would thou were worth the killing.

A good wish,
Savouring as well discretion, as bold valour:
Think not of such a baffel'd ass as this,
More stone, then man: Medusa's head has turned him.
There is in ants a choler, every fly
Carries a spleen: Poor worms being trampled on
Turn tail, as bidding battle to the feet
Of their oppref^ors. A dead palsy sure
Hath struck a desperate numnesse through his soul,
Till it be grown insensible: Mere stupidity
Hath ceased him: Your more manly soul I find
Is capable of wrong, and like a flint
Throws forth a fire into the strikers eyes.
You bear about you valours whetstone, anger;
Which sets an edge upon the sword, and makes it
Cut with a ^pirit: you conceive fond patience
Is an injustice to our selves, the suffering
One injury invites a second, that
Calls on a third, till wrongs do multiply
And reputation bleed: How bravely anger
Becomes that martial brow! A glass within
Will show you sir when your great spleen doth rise
How fury darts a lightning from your eyes.

Learn anger sir against you meet me next;
Never was man like me with patience vexed.

I am so far from anger in my self,
That 'tis my grief I can make others so.

It proves a sweetness in your disposition,
A gentle winning carriage -- dear Aorgus
O give me leave to open wide my breast,
And let so rare a friend unto my soul;
Enter, and take possession: such a man
As has no gall, no bitterness, no exceptions,
Whom nature meant a Dove, will keep alive
The ^ame of amity, where all discourse
Flows innocent, and each free jest is taken.
He's a good friend will pardon his friends errors,
But he's a better takes no notice of them.
How like a beast with rude and savage rage
Breathed the distempered soul of Orgylus?
The proneness of this passion is the Nurse
That fosters all confusion, ruins states,
Depopulates Cities, lays great Kingdoms wast;
'Tis that affection of the mind that wants
The strongest bridle; give it rains it runs
A desperate course, and drags down reason with it.
It is the whirlwind of the soul, the storm
And tempest of the mind, that raises up
The billows of disturbed passions
To shipwreck Judgment. O -- a soul like yours
Constant in patience! Let the North wind mee^
The South at sea, and Zephyrus breath opposite
To Eurus; let the two and thirty sons
Of Eolus break forth at once, to plow
The Ocean, and dispeople all the woods,
Yet here could be a calm, it is not danger
Can make this cheek grow pale, nor injury
Call blood into it. Their's a Glass within
Will let you see your self, and tell you now
How sweet a tamenesse dwells upon your brow.

Colax, I must believe, and therefore go;
Who is distrustful will be angry too.

The next are the extremes of Truth, Alazon one that arrogates that to
himself which is not his, and Eiron one that out of an itch to be thought
modest dissembles his qualities; the one erring in defending a falsehood, the
other offending in denying a truth.


I hear you're wondrous valiant.


I! alas,
Who told you I was valiant?

The world speaks it.


She is deceived; but does she speak it truly?


I am indeed the Hector of the age;
But she calls you Achilles.

I Achilles?
No, I am no Achilles: I confess
I am no coward: That the world should think
That I am an Achilles! yet the world may
Call me what she please.

Next to my valour,
Which but for yours could never hope a second,
Yours is reported.

I may have my share;
But the last valour showed in Christendo^e
Was in Lepanto.

Valour in Lepanto?
He might be thought so sir, by them that knew him not;
But I have found him a poor baffel'd snake:
Sir, I have writ him, and proclaimed him coward
On every post in the City.

Who?


Lepanto,
The valour sir that you so much renown.

Lepanto was no man sir, but the place
Made famous by the so-much mentioned battle
Betwixt the Turks and Christians.

Cry you mercy!
Then the Lepanto that I meant, it seems
Was but that Lepanto's name-sake. I can
Find that you are well skilled in History.

Not a whit; A novice, I! I could perchance
Discourse from Adam downward; but what's that
To History? All that I know is only
The original, continuance, height, and alteration
Of every Common wealth. I have read nothing
But Plutarch, Livy, Tacitus, Suetonius,
Appian, Dion, Iunius, P^terculus,
With Florus, Iustine, Salust, and some few
More of the Latin: For the modern, I
Have all without book Gallo-belgicus,
Phillip De-Comino, Machiavele, Guiccardine,
The Turkish and Egyptian Histories,
With those of Spain, France, and the Netherlands.
For England, Polydore Virgil, Camden, Speed,
And a matter of forty more, nothing
Alas to one that's read in Histories.
In the Greek I have a smack or so, at
Zenophon, Herodotus, Thucidides, and
Stowes Cronicle.

Believe me sir, and that
Stowes Cronicle is very good Greek; you little
Think who writ it! Do you not see him? are
You blind? I am the man.

Then I must number
You with my best Authors in my Library.

Sir, the rest too are mine, but that I venture '^m
With other names, to shun the opinion
Of arrogance; so the subt'le Cardinal
Calls one book Bellarmine, 'nother Tostatus,
Yet one mans labour both. You talk of numbering;
You cannot choose but hear how loud fame speaks
Of my experience in Arithmetique:
She says you too grow near perfection.

Far from it I; some in-sight, but no more.
I count the stars, can give the Total sum,
How many sands there be in the sea, but these
Are triflles to the expert, that have studied

keth-mans president. Sir, I have no skill
In any thing, if I have any, 'tis
In languages, but yet insooth I speak
Only my mother Tongue; I have not gained
The Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack, or Arabic;
Nor know the Greek with all her Dialects.
Scaliger and Tom Coriate both excel me.
I have no skill in French, Italian, Spanish,
Turkish, Egyptian, China, Persian Tongues*
Indeed the Latin I was whipped into;
But Ruscian, Slavonian, and Dalmatian
With Saxon, Danish, and Albanian speech,
That of the Cossaches, and Hungarian too,
With Biscays, and the prime of languages,
Dutch, Weltch, and Irish are too hard for me
To be familiar in: and yet some think
(But thought is free) that I do speak all these
As I were borne in each. But they may err
That think so; 'Tis not every Judgment sits
In the infallible chair. To confess truth
All Europe, Asia, and Africa too;
But in America, and the new-found world
I very much fear there be some languages
That would go near to puzzle me.

Very likely.
You have a pretty pittance in the Tongues;
But Eiron, I am now more general;
I can speak all alike, there is no stranger
Of so remote a nation hears me talk
But confidently calls me Country-man-
The witty world giving my worth her due
Surnames me the Confusion* I but want
An Orator like you to speak my praise.

Am I an Orator Alazon? no;
Though it hath pleased the wiser few to say
Demosthenes was not so eloquent;
But friends will flatter, and I am not bound
To believe all Hyperboles: something sir
Perchance I have, but 'tis not worth the naming*
Especially Alazon in your presence.

Your modesty Eiron speaks but truth in this.


I need not flatter these, they will do it themselves,
And cross the Proverb that was wont to say
One Mule doth scrub another, here each Ass
Hath learned to claw himself.

I do ^urpasse
All Orators. How like you my Orations?
Those against Catiline; I account them best,
Except my Philippics; all acknowledge me
Above the three great Orators of Rome.

What three Alazon?


Marcus, Tullius,
And Cicero, the best of all the three.

Why those three names are all the self same mans


Then all is one. Were those three names three men.
I should excel them all. And then for Poetry!

There is no Poetry but Homers Iliads.


Alas twas writith' nonage of my Muses.
You understand th'Italian?

A little sir,
I have read Tasso.

And Torquato too?


Their still the same.


I find you very skilful.
Eiron, I err only to found your judgement.
You are a Poet too.

The world may think so,
But 'tis deceived, and I am sorry for it.
But I will tell you sir some excellent verses
Made by a friend of mine; I have not read
A better Epigram of a Neoterique.

Pray do my eyes the favour sir to let me read them.


Strange sights there late was seen, that did affright
The Multitude; the Moon was seen by night,
And Sun appeared by day: -- is it not good?

Excellent good, proceed.


Without remorse
Each star and planet kept their wonted course.
What here could fright * them? (mark the answer now) O sir ask not that:
The Vulgar know not why they fear, nor what.
But in their humours too inconstant be,
Nothing seems strange to them but constancy.
Has not my friend approved himself a Poet?

The Verses sir are excellent, but your friend
Approves himself a thief.

Why good Alazon?


A Plagiary I mean, the verses sir
Were stolen.

From whom?


From me, believe I made them.


They are alas unworthy sir your owning.
Such Trifles as my muse had stumbled on
This morning.

Nay, they may be yours: I told you
That you come near me sir. Yours they may be.
Good wits may jump: but let me tell you, Eiron,
Your Friend must steal them if he have them.

What pretty Gulls are these? I'll take them off;
Alazon, you are learned.

I know that.


And virtuous.


Tis confessed.


A good Historian.


Who dares deny it?


A rare Arithmetician.


In have heard it often.


I commend your care
That know your virtues! why should modesty
Stop good men's mouths from their own praise? our neighbours
Are envious, and will rather blast our memories
With infamy, then immortalize our names:
When Fame hath taken cold, and lost her voice,
We must be our own trumpets; careful men
Will have an Inventory of their goods,
And why not of their virtues? should you say
You were not wise, it were a sin to truth.
Let Eirons modesty tell bashful lies,
To cloak and masque his parts; he's a fool for it.
Twas heavenly counsel bid us know our selves.
You may be confident, chant your own encomiums,
Ring out a Panegyrique to your self*
And your self write the learned Commentary
Of your own actions.

So I have.


Where is it?


Tis stolen.


I know the thief, they call him Caesar.
Go in good sir; there is within a Glass
That will present you with the Felons face. Exit Alaz.
Eiron, you hear the news!

Not I, what is it?


That you are held the only man of Art.


Is't currant Colax?


Currant as the air,
Every man breaths it for a certainty.

This is the first time I heard on it in truth.
Can it be certain? so much charity left
In men's opinion?

You call it charity
Which is their duty: Virtue sir, like yours
Commands men's praises. Emptiness and folly,
Such as Alazon is, use their own Tongues,
While real worth hears her own praise, not speaks it.
Other men's mouths become your trumpeters,
And winged fame proclaims you loudly forth
From East to West, till either Pole admire you.
Selfe-praise is bragging, and begets the envy
Of them that hear it, while each man therein
Seems undervalued: You are wisely silent
In your own worth, and therefore 'twere a sin
For others to be so: The fish would loose
Their being mute, ere such a modest worth
Should want a speaker: yet sir I would have you
Know your own virtues, be acquainted with them.

Why good sir bring me but acquainted them.


There is a glass within shows you your self
By a reflection; go and speak 'em there.

I should be glad to see 'em any where*


Retire your selves again, for these are sights
Made to revive not burden with delights.

My indignation boils like a pot,
An over-heated pot, still, still it boils,
It boy leth and it bubleth with disdain.

My Spirit within me too fumes, I say
Fumes, and steemeth up, and runs ore
With holy wrath, at these delights of flesh.

The Actors beg your silence -- The next virtue, whose extremes we would
present, wants a name both in the Greek and Latin,


Wants it a name? 'tis an unchristian virtue.


But they describe it such a modesty as directs us in the pursuit, and refusal
of the meaner honours^ and so answers to Magnanimity, as Liberality to
Magnificence: But here, that humour of the persons, being already forestall'd,
and no Pride now so much practised, or countenanced as that of Apparel, let me
present you Philotimia, an overcurious Lady too neat in her attire* and for
Aphilotimus, Luparius a nasty sordid sloven.


Pride is a vanity worthy the correction.
Philotimia* Luparus* Col^.

What mole dressed me to day? O patience*
Who would be troubled with these mop-eyd Chambermaids?
There's a whole hair on this side more then the other,
I am no Lady else! -- come on you sloven!
Was ever Christian Madam so tormented
To wed a swine as I am? make you ready.

I would the Tailor had bin hanged for me
That first invented clothes -- O nature, nature!
More cruel unto man then all thy creatures!
Calves come into the world with dublets on;
And Oxen have no breeches to put off.
The Lamb is borne with her Freeze-coat about her;
Hogs go to bed in rest, and are not troubled
With pulling (...) their hose and shoos i'th'morning,
With gar^ing, ^rdling, trussing, buttoning,
And a (...) that afflict humanity.

To (...)! she hath made this cheek
By much too (...), and hath forgot to whiten
The natural redness of my nose, she knows not
What 'tis wants dealbation! O fine memory!
If she has not set me in the self same teeth
That I wore yesterday, I am a jew.
Does she think that I can eat twice with the same,
Or that my mouth stands as the Vulgar does?
What? are you snorting there? you'll rise, you sluggard
And make you ready?

Rise, and make you ready?
Two works of that, your happy birds make one;
They when they rise are ready. Blessed birds!
They fortunate creatures sleep in their own clothes,
And rise with all their feather beds about them:
Would nakedness were come again in fashion;
I had some hope then when the breasts went bare
Their bodies too would have come to 't in time.

Beshrew her for it, this wrinkle is not filled!
Youll go and wash -- you are a pretty husband*

Our Sow ne'er washes, yet she has a face
Me thinks as cleanly, Madam, as yours is*
If you durst wear your own.

Madame Superbia*
You'are studying the Ladies library,
The Looking-glasse; 'tis well! so great a beauty
Must have her ornaments -- Nature adorns
The Peacocks tail with stars; 'tis she attires
The Bird of Paradise in all her plumes;
She decks the fields with various flowers; 'tis she
Spangled the Heavens with all those glorious lights;
She spotted th'Ermine's skin; and armed the fish
In silver male: But man she sent forth naked
Not that he should remain so, but that he
Endued with reason should adorn himself
With every one of these. The silke-worme is
Only mans spinster, else we might suspect
That she esteemed the painted Butterfly
Above her master-piece: you are the Image
Of that bright Goddess: therefore wear the Jewels
Of all the East; let the red sea be ransacked
To make you glitter, look on Luparus
Your Husband there, and see how in a sloven
All the best characters of Divinity,
Not yet worn out in man, are lost and buried.

I see it to my grief, pray counsel him.


This vanity, in your nice Ladies humours
Of being so curious in her toys, and dresses,
Makes me suspicious of her honesty.
These Cobweb-lawnes catch spiders sir, believe it*
You know that clothes do not commend the man,
But 'tis the living; though this age prefer
A cloak of Plush, before a brain of art.
You understand what misery 'tis to have
No worth but that we owe the dra^er for;
No doubt you spend the time your Lady looses
In tricking up her body, to cloth the soul.

To cloth the soul? must the soul too be clothed?
I protest sir, I had rather have no soul
Then be tormented with the clothing of it.

To these enter the extremes of modesty, a neer^ kinswoman of the virtues,
Anaiskinthia or Impudence, a bawd; and Kataplectus an over bashful Scholar*
where our Author hopes the women will pardon him, if of four and twenty vices
he presents but two (Pride and Impudence) of their sex.


Here comes Anaiskintia too; -- O fates!
Acolastus, and Asotus have sent for me,
And my breath not perfumed yet! Kat. O sweetmother,
Are the Gentlemen there already?

Come away,
Are you not ashamed to be so bashful? well,
If I had thought of this in time, I would
As soon have seen you fairly hanged as sent you
To the University.

What gentleman is that?


A shamefast Scholar Madam* -- look upon her,
Speak to her, or you loose your exhibition:
-- You'll speak I hope, wear not away your buttons*

What should I say?


Why tell her you are glad
To see her Ladyship in health -- nay out with it!
Katap. -- Gaudeo te bone valere --

A pretty Proficient!
What standing is he of in the University?

He dares not answer to that question Madam. --


How long have you bin in the Academy?


Profecto Do -- Domina sum Bac -- Bac -- Bac^halaureus Artium.


What pity 'tis he is not impudent!


Nay all my cost I see is spent in vain;
I having, as your Ladyship knows full well,
Good practice in the Suburbs; and by reason
That our Mortality there, is very subject
To an infection of the French Disease,
I brought my Nephew up 'ith 'Vniversity,
Hoping he might (having attained some knowledge)
Save me the charge of keeping a Physician;
But all in vain: he is so bashful Madam,
He dares not look upon a woman's water.

Sweet Gentleman, proceed in bashfulness!
'Tis virtues best preserver --

Recte dicis, sic inquit Aristoteles.


That being gone
The rest soon follow, and a swarm of vice
Enter the soul, no colour but a blush
Becomes a young mans cheek: pure sha^efastnesse
Is (...) to the ^ps; and ears, that nothing
Might enter, or come out of man, but what
Is good, and modest: Nature strives to hide
The parts or shame, let her, the best of guides,

Natura dux (...).


Teach us to do so too in our discourse.


Gratias tibi ago.


Inure him to speak bawdy.


A very good way; Kataplectus here's a Lady,
would hear you speak obscenely:

Obscen^m est, quod intra scenam agi non ^portuit.


Off goes your Velvet cap! did I maintain you
To have you disobedient? you'll be persuaded?

Liber is operam dare.


What's that in English.


To do an endeavour for children*


Some more of this, it may be something one day.


Communis est omnium animantium coniunctionis appetituus procrea^ causa.


Construe me that.


All creatures have a natural desire or appetite to be joined together in the
lawful bon^s of Matrimony, that they may have sons and daughters.


Your Laundress has bestowed her time but ill*
Why could not this have been in proper terms?
If you should Catechize my head, and say,
What is your name, would it not ^ay, a head?
So would my skin confess it self a skin;
Nor any part about me be ashamed
Of his own name, although I ^atechiz'd
All over. Come good Nephew, let not me
Have any member of my body (...).

Our Stoique, the gravest o^ Philosophers,
Is just of your opinion, and thus argues;
Is any thing obscene, the fil^hinesse*
Is either grounded in the things themselves,
Or in the words that signify those things;
Not in the things, that would make nature guilty,
Who creates nothing filthy, and u^cleane,
But chaste, and honest; if not in the things,
How in the words, (...) shadows of those things?
To ma^re ground, (...) a cha^t honest (...);
Another word that signifies the same,
Unlawful: every man endures to hear,
He got a child; speak plainer, and he blushes,
Yet means the same. The Stoique thus disputes,
That would have men to breath as freely down'ward,
As they do upward.

I commend him Madam,
Unto your Ladyships service, he may me^d
With counsel! let him be your Gentleman-usher;
Madam you may in time bring down his legs
To the just size, now over grown with playing
Too much at foot-ball.

So he will prove a Stoique;
I long to have a Stoique strut before me:
Here kiss my hand. Come what is that in Latin?

Deo^culor manum,


My lip; -- nay sir you must if I command you.


Osculorte, velosculor ate.


His breath smells strong.


'Tis but of Logic Madam.


He will come to it one day -- you shall go with me
To see an exquisite glass to dress me by.
Nay, go! you must go first; you are too mannerly.
It is the office of your place, so -- on*.

Slow Luparus rise, or you'll be metamorphosed;
Acteon's fate is imminent.

Where's my wife:


She's gone with a young Snip, and an old baud.


Then I am cuckolded; if I be my comfort is
She'has put me on a cap, that will not trouble me
With pulling off, yet Madam I'll prevent you.

The next are the extremes of Justice.


Plus!


What says your worship?


Have my tenants
That hold their lease of lust here in the suburbs,
By copy-hold from me, their Lord in chief,
Paid their rent charge?

They have, and't please your worship;
I Receiver general gave 'em my acquittance.

Sir I resign my Pen, and Inkhorn to you,
I shall forget my hand, if I stay here.
I have not made a Mittimus since I served you.
Were I a reverend Justice as you are,
I would not sit a Cipher on the Bench,
But do as Justice Nimis does, and be
The Dominus-fac-totun^ of the Sessions.

But I will be a Dominus fac miserecordian*
Instead of your Totums: People shall not wish
To see my spurs filled off, it does me good
To take a merciful nap upon the Bench,
Where I so sweetly dream of being pitiful,
wake the better for it.

The yearly value
Of my fair manor of Clerken-well^, is pounds
So many -- besides New years capons, the Lordship
Of Turnball so -- which with my Pick-hatch grange --
And Shoreditch farm, and other premises
Adjoining, -- very good, a pretty maintenance
To keep a Justice of Peace, and Coram too:
Besides the fines I take of young beginners, --
With harriots of all such as dye, quatenus whores,
And ruined bawds, with all Amercements due
To such as hunt in Purly; this is something,
With mine own Game reserved.

Besides a pretty pittance too for me,
That am your worships Bailey.

Will it please your worship sir, to hear the Catalogue
Of such offenders, as are brought before you?

It does not please me Sir, to hear of any
That do offend; I would the world were innocent!
Yet to express my mercy you may read them.

First here is one accused for Cutting a purse,


Accused, is that enough? if it be guilt
To be accused, who shall be innocent?
Discharge him Parum.

Here's another brought
For the same fact, taken in the very Action.

Alas it was for need, bid him take warning,
And so discharge him too; 'Tis the first time.

Plus, say, what hopes of gain brings this day's sin?


Anais kyntia Sir was at door
Brought by the Constable.

Set the Constable by the heals.
She's at certain with us.

Then there's Intemperance the baud.


A Tenant too.


With the young Lady, Madam Incontinence.


Search over my Doomes-day book; is not she^ Plus
One of my last compounders?

I remember it.
Then there is jumping Iude, Heroic Doll,
With bouncing Nan, and Cis, your worship's sinner.

All Subsidy women, go free'em all.


Sir, here's a known offender: one that has
Been stocked, and whipped innumerable times,
Has suffered Bridewell often, not a Jail
But he's familiar with, burnt in the hand,
Forehead, and shoulder, both his ears cut off,
With his nose slit, what shall I do with him?

So often punished? nay, if no correction
Will serve his turn; even let him run his course.

Here's Mistress Fraylty too, the waiting woman.


For what offence?


A sin of weakness too.


Let her be strongly whipped,


An't please your worship
She has a noble mans letter.

Tell her, Plus, she must
Have the Kings Picture too.

Besides
She has promised me I should examine her
Above in the garret.

What's all that to me?


And she entreats your worship to accept --


Nay, if she can entreat in English, Plus,
Say she is injured.

Sir here's Snip the Taylor
Charged with a riot.

Parum, let him go,
He is our Neighbour.

Then there is a stranger for quarrelling.


A stranger! o'tis pity
To hurt a stranger, we may be all strangers,
And would be glad to find some mercy Paru.

Sir here's a Gentle-woman of S. Ioanes 'his
Charged with dishonesty.

With dishonesty?
Severity will amend her, and yet Plus
Ask her a question, if she will be honest?

And here's a cobblers wife brought for a scold.


Tell her of cooking-stooles, tell her there be
Oyster queens, with Orange women,
Carts, and coaches store, to make a noise;
Yet i^ she can speak English
We may suppose her silent.

Here's a Bachelor
And a Citizens wife for flatt Adultery;
What will you do with them?

A Citizens wife!
Perchance her husband is grown impotent,
And who can blame her then?

Yet I hope you'll bind over*the Bachelor.


No: enquire
First if he have no wife, for if the Bachelor
Have not a wife of his own, 'twas but frailty;
And Justice counts it venial.

Here's one Adicus,
And Sophron, that do mutually accuse
Each other of flat felony!

Of the two which is the richer?


Adicus is the richer.


Then Sophron is the thief.


Here is with all,
Panourgus come with one called Prodotes,
Lay treason Sir to one another charge;
Panourgus is the richer.

He's the Traitor then.


How Sir the richer?


Thou art ignorant Plus;
We must do some injustice for our credit,
Not all for gain.

Eutrapeles complains Sir,
Bomolochus has abused him.

Send Eutrapeles to th'Iayle.


It is Eutrapeles that complains Sir.


Tell him we are pleased to think 'twas he offended.
Will must be law: were it not for Summum Ius,
How could the land subsist?

I, or the Justices
Maintain themselves -- go on -- The Land wants such
As dare with rigour execute her Laws:
Her festered members must be lanc't and tented.
He's a bad Surgeon, that for pity spares
The part corrupted, 'till the Gangrene spread,
And all the body perish; he that's merciful
Unto the bad, is cruel to the good.
The Pillory must cure the ears disease;
The stocks the foots offences; let the back
Bear her own sin, and her rank blood purge forth
By the Phlebotomy of a whipping post:
And yet the secret, and purse punishment
Is held the wiser course; because at once
It helps the virtuous and corrects the vicious.
Let not the sword of Justice sleep and rust
Within her velvet sheath; preserve her edge,
And keep it sharpe with cutting. Use must whet her,
Tame mercy is the breast that suckles vice,
Till Hydra like she multiply her heads.
Tread you on sin, squeeze out the Serpents brains,
All you can find -- for some have lurking holes
Where they lye hid. But there's within a glass
Will show you every close offenders face.

Come Plus let's go in to find out these concealments;
We will grow rich, and purchase honour thus --
I mean to be a Baron of Snmmum Ius.

You are the strangest man, you will acknowledge
None for offenders, here's one apprehended
For murder.

How!


He killed a man last night.


How cam't to pass.


Upon a falling out.


They shall be friends I'll reconcile'em Parum.


One of them is dead.


Is he not buried yet?


No Sir.


Why then I say they shall shake hands.


As you have done
With Clemency, most Reverend Justice Nihil;
A gentle mildness thrones it self within you.
Your Worship would have justice, use her balance
More then her sword; nor can you endure to dye
The robe she wears, deep scarlet, in the blood
Of poor offenders: How many men hath rigour
By her too hasty, and severe proceedings
Prevented from amendment, that perchance
Might have turned honest and have proved good Christians?
Should Jove not spare his thunder, but as often
Discharge at us, as we dart sins at him,
Earth would want men, and he himself want arms,
And yet tire Vulcan, and Pyracmon too.
You imitate the Gods! and he sins less
Strikes not at all, then he strikes once amiss.
I would not have justice too falcon-eyed;
Sometimes a wilful blindness much becomes her;
As when upon the bench she sleeps and winks
At the transgressions of Mortality:
In which most merciful posture I have seen
Your pitiful Worship snorting out pardons
To the despairing sinner: there's within
A Mirror sir like you! go see your face
How like Astreas 'tis in her own Glass.

And I'll petition Justice Nimi's Clerk
To admit me for his under officer.

This is Agroicus, a rustique clownish fellow, whose discourse is all Country;
An extreme of urbanity, whereby you may observe there is a virtue in jesting.


They talk of witty discourse, and fine conceits, and I ken not what a deal
of prittle prattle would make a Cat peace to hear 'em. Cannot they be content
with their Grannams English? They think they talk learnedly, when I had
rather hear our brindled cur howl, or Sow grunt. They must be breaking of
jests with a murrain, when I had as live hear 'em break wind Sir reverence!
My zonne Dick is a pretty Bookish Scholar of his age, God bless him; he can
write and read, and makes bonds, and bills, and hobligations, God save all. But
by'r lady, if I wotted it would make him such a Iacksauce, as to have more wit
then his vore-vathers, he should have learned nothing for old Agroicus, but to
keep a Tally. There is a new trade lately come up to be a vocation, I wis not
what; they call 'em -- Boets, a new name for Beggars I think, since the statute
against Gypsies. I would not have my zon Dick one of those Boets for the best
Pig in my styeby the mackins: Boets? heaven shield him, and zend him to be a
good Varmer; if he can cry hy, ho, gee, hut, gee, ho, it is better I trow then
being a Poet. Boets? I had rather see him remitted to the jail, and have his
twelve God-vathers, good men and true contemn him to the Gallows; and there
see him vairely persecuted. There is Bomolochus one of these Boets, now a bots
take all the red-nose tribe of 'em for Agroicus! he does so abuse his betters!
well 'twas a good world, when I first held the Plow!


They cared not then so much for speaking well
As to mean honest, and in you still lives
The good simplicity of the former times:
When to do well was Rhetoric, not to talk.
The tongue disease of Court spreads her infections
Through the whole Kingdom, flattery, that was wont
To be confined within the virge, is now
Grown Epidemical, for all our thoughts
Are borne between our lips: The heart is made
A stranger to the tongue; as if it used
A language that she never understood.
What is it to be witty in these days,
But to be bawdy, or profane, at least
Abusive? Wit is grown a petulant wasp,
And stings she knows not whom, nor where, nor why;
Spues vinegar, and gall on all she meets
Without distinction -- buys laughter with the loss
Of reputation, father, kinsman, friend;
Hunts Ord'naries only to deliver
The idle Timpanies of a windy brain,
That beats and throbs above the pain of child-bed,
Till every ear she meets be made a mid wife
To her light Bastard-issue, how many times
Bomolochus sides, and shoulders ache, and groan!
He's so witty -- here he comes -- away --

His wit is dangerous and I dare not stay.


This is the other extreme of Vrbanity; Bomolocus a fellow conceited of his
own wit, though indeed it be nothing but the base dreggs of scandal, and a
lump of most vile and loathsome scurrility.


I, this is he we looked for all the while!
Scurrility! here she hath her impious throne,
Here lies her heathenish dominion,
In this most impious cell of corruption;
For 'tis a Purgatory, a meerc Limbo,
Where the black Devil and her damme Scurrility
Do rule the roast; foul Princes of the air!
Scurrility! that is he that throws scandalls,
Sows, and throws scandalls, as 'twere dirt
Even in the face of holiness, and devotion.
His presence is contagious, like a dragon
He belches poison forth, poison of the pit,
Brimstone, hellish and sulphurous poison:
I will not stay, but fly as far as zeal
Can hurry me -- the roof will fall and brain me,
If I endure to hear his blasphemies,
His graceless blasphemies.

He shall vent none here;
But stay, and see how justly we have used him.

Stay brother, I do find the spirit grow strong.


Hail sacred wit! -- Earth breeds not Bays enough
To crown thy spacious merit.

Oh -- Oh -- Oh.


Cratinus, Eupolis, Aristophanes,
Or whatsoever other wit did give
Old Comedies the rains, and let her loose
To stigmatize what brow she pleased with slander
Of people, Prince, Nobility -- All must yield
To this Triumphant brain!

Oh -- Oh -- Oh.


They say you'll loose a friend before a jest;
'Tis true, there's not a jest that comes from you,
That is the true Minerva of this brain,
But is of greater value then a world
Of friends, were every prayre of men we meet
A Pylades and Orestes.

Oh -- Oh -- Oh.


Some say you will abuse your Father too,
Rather then loose the opinion of your wit;
Who would not that has such a wit as yours?
'Twere better twenty Parents were exposed
To scorn and laughter, then the simplest thought
Or least conceit of yours, should dye abortive,
Or perish a braine-Embrio.

Oh -- oh -- oh. --


How's this? that tongue grown silent that sirens
Stood still to admire?

Oh -- oh -- oh. --


Twere better that the spheres should loose their harmony,
And all the Choristers of the wood grow hoarse!
What wolf hath spied you first?

Oh -- oh -- oh --


Sure Hermes envying that there was on earth
An eloquence more then his, has struck you dumb!
Malicious deity!

Oh -- oh -- oh-oh. --


Go in sir there's a Glass that will restore
That tongue, whose sweetness Angels might adore.

Oh -- oh -- oh -- oh -- oh -- oh --.oh --


Thus Sir you see how we have put a gag
In the licentious mouth of base scurrility;
He shall not Ibis-like purge upward here,
To infect the place with pestilential breath;
Wee'le keep him tongue-tide; you and all I promise
By Phoebus and his daughters, whose chaste zones
Were never yet by impure hands untied
Our language shall flow chaste, nothing sound here
That can give just offence to a strict ear.

This gag hath wrought my good opinion of you


I begin to think 'em lawful recreations.


Now there's none left here, whereon to practise,
I'll flatter my dear self -- o that my skill
Had but a body, that I might embrace it,
Kiss it; and hug it, and beget a brood,
Another brood of pretty skills upon it!
Were I divided I would hate all beauties,
And grow enamoured with my other half!
Selfe-love, Narcissus, had not been a fault,
Had thou, instead of such a beauteous face,
Had but a brain like mine: I can guild vice,
And praise it into Alchemy, till it go
For perfect gold, and cozen almost the touchstone.
I can persuade a toad into an ox,
Till swel'd too big with my Hyperboles
She burst a sunder; and 'tis virtues name
Lends me a mask to scandalize herself.
Vice, if it be no more, can nothing do;
That art is great makes virtue guilty too.
I have such strange varieties of colours,
Such shift of shapes, blew Proteus sure begot me
On a Camelion, and I change so quick
That I suspect my mother did conceive me,
As they say Mares do, on some wind or other.
I'll peep to see how many fools I made
With a report of a miraculous Glass.
-- Heaven bless me, I am ruined! o my brain
Witty to my undoing, I have jested
My self to an eternal misery.
I see le^ne hunger with her meager face
Ride post to overtake me, I do prophecy
A Lent immortal: Phoebus I could curse
Thee and thy brittle gifts, Pandora's box
Compared with this might be esteemed a blessing.
The Glass which I conceived a fabulous humour
Is to the height of wonder proved a truth.
The two Extremes of every Virtue there
Beholding how they either did exceed,
Or want of just proportion, joined together,
And are reduced into a perfect Mean:
As when the skilful and deep learned Physician
Does take two different poisons, one that's cold
The other in the same degree of heate,
And blend's them both to make an Antidote;
Or as the Lutanist takes Flats and Sharpes,
And out of those so dissonant notes, does strike
A ravishing Harmony. Now there is no vice
'Tis a hard world for Colax: What shift now?
Dyscolus doth expect me -- since this age
Is grown too wise to entertain a Parasite,
I'll to the Glass, and there turn virtuous too,
Still strive to please, though not to flatter you.

There is good use indeed-la to be made
From their Conversion.

Very good insooth -- la
And edifying.

Give your eyes some respite.
You know already what our Vices be,
In the next Act you shall our Virtues see.

Now verily I find the devout Be
May suck the honey of good Doctrine thence,
And bear it to the hive of her pure family,
Whence the profane and irreligious spider
Gathers her impious Venom! I have picked
Out of the Garden of this Play, a good
And wholesome salad of instruction!
What do you next present?

The several Virtues.


I hope there be no Cardinal Virtues there!


There be not.


Then I'll stay; I hate a Virtue
That will be made a Cardinal: Cardinal virtues,
Next to Pope-vertues, are most impious;
And Bishop-vertues are unwarrantable:
I will allow of none but Deacon-vertues,
Or Elder-vertues.

These are Moral virtues.


Are they Lay-vertues?


Yes!


Then they are lawful,
Virtues in Orders are unsanctified.

We do present them royal, as they are
In all their state, in a full dance.

What dance?
No wanton Jig I hope, no dance is lawful
But Prinkam Prankam!

Will Virtues dance?
I hate a Virtue in a Morrice-dance!
O vile, absurd, may pole -- maid-marrian virtue

Dancing is lawful.


Who's this?


It is the mother of the Virtues.


Mother of Pearl I think, she is so gaudy


It is the golden Mediocrity.


She looks like the Idol of Cheap-side.


I am that even course that must be kept
To shun two dangerous gulfs; the middle tract
'Twixt Scylla and Charibdis; the small Isthmus
That suffers not the Aegean tide to meet
The violent rage of the Ionian wave.
I am a bridge o'rean Impetuous sea;
Free, and safe passage to the wary step!
But he whose wantonness, or folly dares
Decline to either side falls desperate
Into a cetaine ruin. -- Dwell with me,
Whose mansion is not placed so near the Sun,
As to complain of's neighbourhood, and be scorched
With his directer beams: nor so remote
From his bright rays as to be situate
Under the Icy Pole of the cold Bear;
But in a temperate zone: 'tis I am she,
I am the golden Mediocrity:
The labour of whose womb are all the virtues,
And every passion too commendable:
Sisters so like themselves, as if they were
All but one birth; no difference to distinguish them
But a respect they bear to several objects:
Else had their names been one as are their features.
So when eleven fair Virgins of a blood
All Sisters, and alike grown ripe of years,
Match into several houses, from each family,
Each takes a name distinct, and all are different'd!
They are not of complexion red or pale,
But a sweet mixture of the flesh and blood,
As if both roses were confounded there.
Their stature neither Dwarf nor ^yantish,
But in a comely well disposed proportion!
And all so like their mother, that indeed
They are all mine, and I am each of them.
When in the midst of dangers I stand up
A wary confidence betwixt fear and daring,
Not so ungodly bold as not to be
Fearful of heavens just anger when she speaks
In prodigies, and tremble at the hazard
Of my Religion, shake to see my Country
Threatened with fire and sword, be a stark coward
To any thing may blast my reputation:
But I can scorn the worst of poverty,
Sickness, Captivity, Banishment, Grim death,
If she dare meet me in the bed of honour;
Where, with my Countries cause upon my sword
Not edged with hope or anger, nor made bold
With civil blood, or customary danger;
Nor the fools whetstone, Inexperience;
I can throw valour as a lightning from me,
And then I am the Amazon fortitude!
Give me the moderate cup of lawful pleasures,
And I am Temperance. Take me wealths just steward,
And call me Liberality; with one hand
I'll gather riches home, and with the other
Rightly distribute 'em, and there observe
The persons, quantity, quality, time and place:
And if in great expenses I be set
Chief Arbitresse, I can in glorious works,
As raising Temples, Statues, Altars, shrines
Vestures, and ornaments to Religion, be
Neither too thrifty nor too prodigal.
And to my country the like mean observe,
In building Ships, and Bulwarks, Castles, walls
Conducts, Theaters, and what else may serve her
For use or ornament: And at home be royal
In Buildings, Gardens, costly furniture,
In entertainments free and hospitable,
With a respect to my estate, and means,
And then I may be named Magnificence;
As Magnanimity, when I wisely aim
At greatest honours, if I may deserve'm,
Not for ambition, but for my Countries good,
And in that virtue all the rest do dwell.
In lesser dignities I want a name;
And when I am not over patient,
To put up such gross wrongs as call me coward,
But can be angry, yet in that observe
What cause hath moved my anger, and with whom,
Look that it be not sudden, nor too thirsty
Of a revenge, nor violent, nor greater
Then the offence, know my time when, where
I must be angry, and how long remain so;
Then then you may surname me Mans^ude.
When in my carriage and discourse I keep
The mean that neither flatters nor offends,
I am that virtue the well nurtured Court
Gives name, and should do being -- Courtesy.
Twixt fly dissembling and proud arrogance
I am the virtue time calls daughter, Truth.
Give me my sword and balance rightly swayd,
And Justice is the Title I deserve.
When on this stage I come with innocent wit,
And jests that have more of the sait then gall,
That move the laughter and delight of all,
Without the grief of one, free, chaste conceits,
Not scurrile, base, obscene, ill^berall
Or contumelious slanders, I am then
The virtue they have termed, Vrbanity:
To whom if your least countenance may appear.
She vows to make her constant dwelling here.
My daughters now are come --

You have seen all my daughters, Gentlemen,
Choose you wives hence; you that are Bachelors
Can find no better; And the married too
May wed 'em, yet not wrong their former wives.
Two may have the same wife, and the same man
May wed two Virtues, yet no Bigamy:
He that weds most is chastest; These are all
The daughters of my womb; I have five more,
The happy Issue of my Intellect,
And thence syrnam'd the intellectual Virtues.
They now attend not on their Mothers train,
We hope they Act in each spectators brain!
I have a Necce besides, a beauteous one
My daughters dear companion -- lovely Friendship
A royal Nymph; her we present not to,
It is a virtue we expect from you.

O Sister what a glorious train they be!


They seem to me the Family of Love,
But is there such a Glass; good Roscius?

There is! sent hither by the great Apollo,
Who in the worlds bright eye and every day
Set in his Car of light, survaies the earth
From East to West: who finding every place
Fruitful in nothing but fantastic follies,
And most ridiculous humours, as he is
The God of Physique, thought it appertained
To him to find a cure to purge the earth
Of ignorance and sin, two grand diseases,
And now grown Epidemical: many Receipts
He thought upon, as to have planted Hellebore
In every Garden -- But none pleased like this.
He takes out water from the Muses spring,
And sends it to the North, there to be freezed
Into a Crystal -- That being done, he makes,
A Mirror with it: and instills this virtue,
That it should by reflection show each man
All his deformities both of soul and body.
And cure 'em both --

Good Brother lets go see it!
Saints may want something of perfection.

The Glass is but of one days continuance,
For Pluto, thinking if it should cure all,
His Kingdom would grow empty, (for 'tis sin
That Peoples hell) went to the fates and bid 'em
Spin it too short a thread: (for every thing
As well as man is measured by their spindle.)
They, as they must obey, gave it a thread
No longer then the Beast's of Hyppanis
That in one day is spun, drawn out, and cut.
But Phoebus to require the black Gods envy,
Will when the Glass is broke transfuse her virtue
To live in Comedy -- If you mean to see it
Make hast --

We will go post to reformation.


Nor is the Glass of so short life I fear
As this poor labour -- our distrustful Author
Thinks the same Sun that rose upon her cradle
Will hardly set before her funeral:
Your gracious and kind acceptance may
Keep her alive from death, or when she's dead
Raise her again, and spin her a new thread.

This ignorance even makes religion sin,
Sets zeal upon the rack, and stretches her
Beyond her length -- Most blessed Looking-glass^
That did instruct my blinded eyes to day,
I might have gone to hell the Narrow-way!

Hereafter I will visit Comedies,
And see them oft, they are good exercises! --
I'll teach devotion now a milder temper,
Not that it shall loose any of her heat
Or Purity, but henceforth shall be such
As shall burn bright although not blaze so much.

Y'Have seen The Muses Looking-glasse, Ladies fair,
And Gentle-youths; And others too who ere
Have filled this Orb: it is the end we meant
Your selves unto your selves still to present.
A soldier shall himself in Hector see,
Grave Councellors, Nestor, view themselves in thee.
When Lucrece Part shall on our Stage appear,
Every chaste Lady sees her shadow there.
Nay come who will, for our indifferent Glasses
Will show both fools, and knaves, and all their faces,
To vex and cure them: But we need not fear,
We do not doubt but each one now that's here,
That has a fair soul and a Beauteous face,
Will visit oft the Muses Looking-glasse.

