Generous Gentlemen,

Such is my affection to Phoebus, and the ninety nine Mu^es, that for the
benefit of this royal University, I have strodled over three of the
terrestrial globes with my Geometrical rambling, vid^licet, the Asia of the
Dolphin, the Afrique of the Rose, the America of the Mitre, besides the terra
la, of many an Ale-house. And all for your sakes, whom I know to be the
divine brats of Helicon, the lawful begotten bastards of the thrice three
sisters, the learned, filly-foales to Monsieur Pegasus, Archhackney to the
students of Parnassus: Therefore I charge you by the seven deadly Sciences,
which you more study than the three and four liberal sins, that your ha,
ha, he's may be recompense of my ridiculous endeavours.

I have been long in travel, but if your laughter give my Embryon jests but
safe deliverance, I dare maintain it in the throat of Europ, Iero^imo rising
from his naked bed, was not so good a Midwife.

But I see you have a great desire to know what profession I am of: first,
therefore hear what I am not. I am not a Lawyer, for I hope you see no Buckram
honesty about me, and I swear by these sweet lips, my breath stinks not of any
State actions: I am no soldier, although my heals be better than my hands: by
the whips of Mars and Bellona, I could never endure the smell of salt-Peter
since the last Gunpowder treason: the voice of a Mandrake to me, is sweeter
music than those Maxims of wars, those terrible Cannons; I am no Townsman,
unless there be rutting in Cambridge, for you see my head without horns; I am
no Alderman, for I speak true English; I am no Justice of peace, for I swear
by the honesty of a Mittimus, the venerable Bench never kissed my worshipful
Buttocks; I am no Alchemist, for though I am poor, I have not broke out my
brains against the Philosophers stone; I am no Lord, and yet me thinks I
should, for I have no Lands; I am no Knight, and yet I have as empty pockets as
the proudest of them all; I am no Landlord, but to Tenants at will; I am no
Inns of Court Gentleman, for I have not been stewed thoroughly at the Temple,
though I have been half codled at Cambridg^; Now do you expect that I should
say I am a Scholar, but I thank my stars, I have more wit than so; why, I
am not mad yet? I hope my better Genius will shield me from a thred-bare black
Cloak, it looks like a piece of Beelzebubs Livery. A Scholar? What? I do not
mean my brains should drop through my nose: no; if I was what I wish I could
but hope to be; but I am a noble, generous, understanding, royal, magnificent,
religious, heroical, and thrice illustrious Peddler.

But what is a Peddler? why, what's that to you? yet for the satisfaction of him
whom I most respect, my right honourable self, I will define him.

A Peddler is an I^diu^duum vagum, or the Primum mobile of Tradesmen, a walking
Burse, or moveable Exchange, a Socraticall Citizen of the vast vniuerse, or a
peripateticall Iournyman, that like another Atlas carries his heavenly shop
on's Shoulders.

I am a Peddler, and I s^ll my ware
This brave Saint Barthol* or Sturbridge fair,
I'll sell all for laughter, that's all my gains,
Such Chapm^n should be laughed at for their pains.
Come buy my wits which I have hither brought,
For wit is never good till it be bought;
Let me not bear all back, buy some the while,
If laughter be too dear, tak't for a smile;
My trade is jesting now, or quible speaking,
Strange: trade you'll say, for its set up with breaking;
My shop and I, am all at your command,
For lawful English laughter paid at hand,
Now will I trust no more, it were in vain
To break, and make a Craddock of my brain:
Half have not paid me yet, first there is one
Owes me a quart for his declamation,
Another morning draught, is not yet paid
For four Epistles at the election made,
Nor dare I cross him who does owe as yet
Three elli of jests to line Priorums wit.
But here's a Courtier has so long a bill*
'Twill fright him to behold it, yet I will
Relate the sums: Item, he owes me first,
For a^ Inprimis: but what grieves me worst,
A dain^y Epigram on his Spaniels tail
Cost me an hour, besides five pots of Ale,
Item an Anagram on his mistress name,
Item the speech wherewith he courts his Dame,
And an old blubbered scowling El^gy
Upon his Masters dogs sad exequy,
Nor can I yet the time directly gath^r,
When I was paid for an Epitaph on's father,
Besides he never yet gave me content
For the new coining of's last complement,
Should I speak all? be it spoken to his praise,
The total sums is, what he thinks, or says,
I will not let you run so much o'th score,
Poor Ducke-Lane brains, trust me, I'll trust no more,
Shall's jest for nought, have you all conscience lost?
Or do you think our Sack did nothing cost?
Well, then it must be done as^ I have said,
I needs must be with present laughter paid,
I am a freeman, for by this sweet rhyme,
The fellows know I have secured the time,
Yet if you please to grace my poor adventures,
I'm bound to you in more than ten Indentures.
But a pox on Skeltons ^ury, I'll open my Shop in honester prose, and first,
Gentlemen, I'll show you half a dozen of incomparable points.

I would give you the definition of points, but that I think you have them at
your fingers ends, yet for your better understanding,

A point is no body, a common term, an extreme friend of a good mans
longitude, whose center and circumference join in one diametricall opposition
to your equilateral Doublets, or equicrurall Breeches; but to speak to the
point, though not to the purpose.

1 The first point is a point of honesty, but is almost worn out, and has never
been in request since trunck-Hose and Codpeece^breeches went out of fashion,
it's made of simplicity Ribbon, and tagged with plain dealing; if there be any
knaves among you (^s I hope you are not all fools,) faith buy this point of
honesty, and the best use you can put it to, is to tie the band of affection:
but I fear, this point will find no Chapman, some of you had rather sell,
than with Demosth^nes buy honesty at so dear a rate: oh, I could wish that the
Breeches of Bowsers, Stewards; Taxors, Receivers, and Auditors were trussed
with these honesty points; but some will not be tied to it, but hist To^, it
is dangerous untrussing the time.

2 The next is a point of Knavery, but I have enough of them already, yet because
I am loath to carry mine any longer about me, who gives me most, shall take it,
and the devil give him good on it: this point is cut out of villainous
Sheepeskin parchment in a Scriveners Shop, tagged with the gold of a Ring,
which the Pillory robbed him of, when it borrowed his ears; if he do but
fasten this to the new Doublet of a young Squire, it will make him grow so
corpulent in the middle, that there will be nothing but Waste, this point of
Knavery has bin a man in his days, and the best of the Parish, fourteen of
them go to our Bakers dozen.

The definition of him may be this: a point of Knavery, is an occult quality
tied on a riding knot, the better to play fast and loose, he was borne in
Buckram, he has run through all offices in the Parish, and now stands to be
President of Bridewell, where I leave him, ^oping to see him trussed at
Tiburne.

3 Amongst all my points, a point of ignorance is the very Alderman of the
dozen. This is the richest point in my pack, and is never out of fashion at
Innes of Court: if you buy this point, you are arrant fools, for I'll give you
this gift, that you shall have it in spite of your teeth.

4 The next is a point of good manners, that has been long lost amongst a
crowd of clowns, because it was only in fashion on this side Trent.

This point is almost found in our College, and I thank the heavens for'^, it
begins to be tagged with Latin, it hath been much d^fil'd, but I hope to see
it clean washed away with the soap of good government.

This point, to give you a little inkling of it; begins from the due
observance of a Fresh man to Sophisters, and there it ends with a cede
m^ioribus.

5 Next point is a point of false doctrine, snatched from the codpeece of a
long-winded Puritan, the breath of Arm^nim will rot in him. Tag him with a
piece of Apocripha, and he breaks in sunder, truss him to the Surplice, and
his Breeches will presently fall down with the thought of the whore of
Babylon.

He hates unity and Church-discipline so far; that you cannot tie a true
loves knot on him: cut off his tags, and he will make excellent strings for a
Geneua Bible; I would have these points anathema^ized from all the religious
breeches in the company: 'tis made of a dangerous stubborn Leather, tagged at
one end with selfe-conceit, at the other with wilful opinion, this point is
fit for no service, but Lucifers C^coti^ces: but why talk I so long of this
point, it is pitt^ it is not licensed.

6 If you like my points, why do you not buy? If you would have a more full
point, I can furnish you with a Period; I have a Parenthesis (but that may be
left out) I know not how you affect those points; but I love them so well, that
I grieve at the ignorance of my infancy, when my most audacious Toes durst play
at spurne-point.

Who will not pity points, when each man sees
To begging they are fallen upon their knees?
Though I beg pity, think I do not fear
Censuring Critic whelps, no point Monsieur:
If you ^ate points, and these like merry speeches,
You may want points for to truss up your Breeches.
And from the close-stole may ^e never move,
That hating points, doth clasps and keepers love;
But if my points have ^eere at all offended,
I'll tell you a way how all may be amended:
Speak to the point, and that shall answer friend,
All i^ not worth a point, and there's an end.
The next is a Looking-Glasse, but I'll put it up again; for I dare not be so
bold as to show some of you your own faces; yet I will, because it hath
strange operations, viz.

If a cracked Chamber-maid dress her self by this Looking-Glasse, she shall
dream the next night of kissing her Lord, or making her mistress a she
Cuckold, and shall marry a Chaplin, the next living that falls.

If a stale Court Lady look on this Reflection, she may see her old ^ace,
through her new Complexion.

An Usurer cannot see his conscience in it, nor a Scrivener his ears.

If a Townesman peep into it, his Acteons furniture is no longer invisible:
Co^rupt takers of bribes may read the price of their consciences in it.

Some fellows cannot see the face of a Scholar in it. If one of our
Iewel-nos'd Carbunckl'd rubricke, bonifac't, can venture the danger of seeing
their own faces in it, the poor Basilisks will kill themselves by
reflection.

If a blind man see his face in this, he shall recover his eye-sight.

But I see no pleasure in the contemplation of it; for when I look into it, I
find my self inclined to such a dangerous disease, that I fear, I cannot
live here above four years longer: Howsoever, I hope after my disease, we
shall drink the parting-blow.

If any this Looking-Glasse disgrace,
It is because he dares not see his face:
Then what I am, I will not see (faith) say,
'T was the whores Argument, when she threw't away.
But now considering what a Philosophical vacuum there is in most of our
Cambridge Noddles, I have here to sell a sovereign box of Cerebrum, which by
Lullius his Alchymy* was extracted from the quintessence of Aristotles
Pericranium, sod in the sinciput of Demosthenes. The fire being blown with
the long-winded blast of a C^ceronian sentence, the whole confection boiled
from a pottle to a pint, in the Pipkin of Seneca: we owe the first invention
of it to Sir Iohn Mandeuile, the perfection of it to Tom of Odcombe, who
fetched it from the gray-headed Alps in the Hobsons Waggon of experience; I
swear as Persians use, by this my Coxcomb, this Magazine of immortal
roguery: but for this Box of brains, you had not laughed to night; buy this
box of brains, and the tenure of your wits shall be soccage, when as now it
is but ^ee simple.

These brains have very admirable virtues, and very strange operations: four
drops of it in the ear of a Lawyer, will make him write true Latin: three
grains will fill the Capital of an University Gander; the terrestrial head
of a high-Constable, will be contented with half a dram; three scruples and a
half will fill the braine-panne of a Bambery brother.

Come buy my brains, you ignorant gulls,
And furnish here your empty skulls:
Pay your Laughter as it's fit,
To the learned Peddler of wit.
Quickly come, and quickly buy,
Or I'll shut my shop, and f^oles you'll dye.
If your Coxcombs you would quoddle,
Here buy brains to fill your noddle.
Who buys my brains, learnes quickly here,
To make a Problem in a year:
Shall understand the predictable,
And the predicamentall Rabble.
Who buys them not, shall die a fool,
An exotericke in the School.
Who has not these, shall ever pass
For a great Acromaticall Ass:
Buy then this box of brains, who buys not it,
Shall never surfeit on too much wit.
But leaving my brains, I come to a more profitable Commodity: for considering
how dull half the wits of the University be, I thought it not the worst
traffic to sell Whetstones.

This Whetstone will set such an edge upon your inventions, that it will make
your rusty iron brains, purer mettle, then your brazen faces. Whet but the
knife of your Capacities on this Whetstone, and you may presume to dine at the
Muses Ordinary, or sup at the Oracle of Apollo. If this be not true, I swear
by the Doxies Petricoates, that I'll never hereafter presume of a better
vocation, then to live and dye the miserable factor of Conny-skins.

I have also Gloves of several qualities: the first is a pair of Gloves made
for a Lawyer, made of an entire Loadstone, that has the virtue to draw gold
unto it; they were perfumed with the conscience of an Usurer, and will keep
scent till wrangling have left Westminster Hall; they are seamed with
Indenture, by the needleworke of Mortgage, and fringed with a Nouerint
Vniuersi. I would show you more, but it is against the Statute, because a
Latitat hath been served lately upon them. And few of you need any Gloves, for
you wear Cordouant hands.

My next Commodities, are several Night-caps, but they dare not come abroad by
Candlelight. The first is lined with Fox fur, which I hope to sell to some
of the Sophisters; it hath an admirable faculty for curing the Crapula, above
the virtue of Ivy, or bitter Almonds; nay, the porridge pot's not comparable
unto it.

I have another, fit for an Alderman, which Acteon by his last Will and
Testament bequeathed to the City as a principal Charter, it was of Dianas's
own making; Albumazers Otacousticon was but a Chamber-pot in comparison.

I could fit all heads with Night-caps, except your gran ouerwise Metaphysical
heads: Marry, they are so transcendent, that they will not be comprehended
within the predicant of a Night-cap.

I have also several Roughs; first, a Ruff of pure Holland for a Dutch
drunkard, a Ruff of Cobweb-lawne for the University statutes: I have a Ruff
for the College too: but by this badge of our College (my reverend Lambskins)
our backbiters say, our College Roughs are quite out of stock; ^ have no more
Roughs but one, and that is a Ruff of strong hemp, you may have them who
will, at the Royal Exchange of Tiburne.

As for plain Bands, if you find any in a Scriveners shop, there is good hope
honesty will come in fashion again.

But you will not bestow your money on such trifles: why? I have greater wares.

Will you buy any Parsonages, Vicarages, Deanaries, or Prebendaries?

The price of one is his Lordships cracked Chamber-Maid, the other is the
reserving of his Worships tithes; or you may buy the Knights horse three
hundred pound too dear, who to make you amends in the bargain, will draw you
on fairly to a Vicaridge.

There be many tricks, but the downright way is three years purchase. Come
bring in your Coin; Livings are Maioriinpretio now, then in the days of
Doomsday book, you must give presents for your presentations: there may be
several means for your institution, but this is the only way to induction
that ever I knew: but I see you are not minded to meddle with any my honest
Leuiticall Farmers.

But now expect the treasures of the World, the treasures of the earth dug
from the mines of my more then Indian paunch. Wipe your eyes, that no envious
clouds of musty humours may bar your sight of the happiness of so rare an
object.

Come from thy Palace, beauteous Queen of Greece,
Sweet Hellen of the world, rise like the morn,
Clad in the smock of night, that all the stars
May lose their eyes, and then grow blind,
Run weeping to the man in the Moon,
To borrow his dog to lead the spheres a begging.
Rare Empress of our souls, whose Charcole flames
Burn the poor Colts foot of amazed hearts,
View this dumb Audience thy beauty spies,
And then amazed with grief, laughout their eyes.
Here's now a rare beauty, oh, how all your fingers itch, who should be the
first Chapman? This will be a dainty friend in a corner. And were not better to
embrace this prerty shambles of beauty, this errant Poultry of perfection, than
to tumble your sopy Laundresses? Is this like your daggle-tail'd Bed-makers?
when a man shall lie with Seacole ashes, and commit adultery with the dust of
his chamber?

Me thinks this peerless Paragon of complexion should be better
countenanced. She would set a sharper edge on your appetites, than all the
three-penny Cutlers in Cambridge.

I am a man as you are, and this naughty flesh and blood will never leave
tempting: yet I protest by the sweet sole of this incomparable she, I never
had any acquaintance with the pretty Libraries of flesh, but only this: This
is the subject of my muse; This I adorn with costly Epigrams, and such curious
Encomiums, as may deserve immortality in the Chamberpots of Helicon: and thus
my Furor Poeticus doth accost her.

Fair Madame, thee whose every thing
Deser^es the Close-stoole of a King:
Woes head is fair as any bone,
White and smooth as Pumex stone.
Whose natural baldness scorns to wear
The needless excrements of bayre.
Whose fore-head streakes, our hearts commands,
Like Dover Cliffs, or Goodwyn sands.
While from those dainty Glo-worme eyes,
Cupid shoots plum-pudding pies,
While from the Arches of thy nose,
A Creame-pot of white Nectar flows:
Fair dainty lips, so smooth, so sleek,
And truly Alabaster cheek.
Pure Saffron teeth, happy the meat
That such pretty milnestones eat.
O let me hear some silent song,
Tuned by the Iewes-trumpe of thy tongue.
Oh, how that Chin becomes thee well,
Where never hairy beard shall dwell:
Thy Coral neck doth statelier bow,
Then Ios when she turned a Cow:
O let me, or I shall ne'er rest,
Suck the black bottles of thy breast:
Or lay my head, and rest me still
On that dainty Hogmagog hill.
Oh curious, and vnfathom'd waste,
As slender as the stateliest Mast:
Thy fingers too breed my delight,
Each Wart a natural Margarite,
Oh pity then my dismal mo^ue,
Able to melt thy heart of stone.
Thou know how I lament and howl,
Weep, snort, condole, look sad and scowle.
Each night so great, my passions be,
I cannot wake for thought of thee.
Thy Gown can tell how much I loved,
Thy Petticoat to pity moved.
Then let thy Peddler mercy find,
To kiss theo once, though it be behind.
Sweet kiss, sweet lips, delicious sense,
How sweet a Zephyrus blows from thence?
Blessed Peiticoate, more blessed her Smock,
That daily busseth her Buttock:
For now the Prouer be true I find,
That the best part is still behind.
Sweet dainty soul, deign but to give
The poor Peddler, this hanging Slee^.
And in thine honour, by this kiss,
I'll daily wear my Pack in this,
And quickly so bear thee m^re fame,
Then Quixote the Knight Errants dame:
So farewell sweet, daign^ but to touch,
And once again re-blesse my Pouch.
Is it not pity such ware should not be bought? Well, I perceive the fault is
in the emptiness of your learned pockets: well, I'll to the Court, and see
what I can sell there, and then carry the Relics to Rome.

Some friend must now per^or^,
Make haste, and bid my Boy
To saddle me my wooden Horse:
For I mean to conquer Troy.


