BE not deceived, I have no bended knees,
No supple tongue, nor speeches steeped in Oil,
No candied flattery, nor honied words.
I come an armed Prologue: armed with Arts,
Who by my sacred charms and mystic skill,
By virtue of this all-commanding Wand
Stolen from the sleepy Mercury, will raise
From black Abyss and sutty hell, that mirth
Which fits this learned round. Thou long-dead Show,
Break from thy Marble prison, sleep no more
In miry darkness, henceforth I forbid thee
To bathe in Lethe's muddy waives, ascend
As bright as morning from her Tithons bed,
And red with kisses that have stained thy cheek,
Grow fresh again: What? is my power contemned?
Dost thou not hear my call, whose power extends
To blast the bosom of our mother Earth?
To remove heavens whole frame from off her hinges,
As to reverse all Natures laws? Ascend,
Or I will call a band of Furies forth,
And all the Torments wit of hell can frame
Shall force thee up.

O spare your too officious whips a while,
Give some small respit to my panting limbs,
Let me have leave to speak, and truce to parley,
Whose powerful voice hath forced me to salute
This hated air! are not my pains sufficient,
But you must torture me with the sad remembrance
Of my deserts, the Causes of my exile?

'Tis thy release I seek, I come to file
Those heavy shackels from thy wearied limbs,
And give thee leave to wa^e the Stage again,
As free as virtue: Burn thy withered Baize,
And with fresh Laurel crown thy sacred Temples,
Cast off thy mask of darkness, and appear
As glorious as thy sister Comedy.
But first with tears, wash off that guilty sin,
Purge out those ill-digested dregs of wit,
That use their ink to blot a spotless fame,
Let's have no one particular man traduced,
But like a Noble Eagle seize on vice,
As she flies bold and open! spare the persons:
Let us have simple mirth, and innocent laughter;
Sweet-smiling lips, and such as hide no fangs,
No venomous biting teeth, or forked tongues,
Then shall thy freedom be restored again,
And full applause be wages of thy pain.

Then from the depth of truth I here protest,
I do disclaim all petulant hate and malice,
I will not touch such men as I know vicious,
Much less the good: I will not dare to say
That such a one paid for his fellowship,
And had no learning but in's purse; no Officer
Need fear the sting of my detraction,
I'll give all lcaue to fill their guts in quiet:
I make no dangerous Almanacs, no gulls,
No posts with envious News and biting Packets,
You need not fear this Show, you that are bad,
It is no Parliament: you that nothing have
Like Schollers, but a Beard and Gown, for me
May pass for good grand Sophies: all my skill
Shall beg but honest laughter and such smiles
As might become a Cato: I shall give
No cause to grieve, that once more yet I live.

Go then, and you Beadles of hell avaunt,
Return to your eternal plagues.

Here, take these purer robes, and clad in these,
Be thou all glorious and instruct thy mirth
With thy sweet temper, whilst my self entreat
Thy friends that long lamented thy sad fates,
To sit and taste, and to accept thy Cates.

Sit, see, and hear, and censure he that will,
I come to have my mirth approved, not skill:
Your laughter all I beg, and where you see
No jest worth laughing at, faith laugh at me.

SEcundum gradum compossibilitatis, non secundum gradum incompossibilitatis.
What should this Scotus mean by his possibilities incompossibilities? my
Cooper, Rider, Thomas, and Minshew are as far to seek as my self: not a
word of compossibilitas or incompossibilitas is there. Well, I know what I'll
do. I have heard of a great Philosopher: I'll try what he can do; They call
him Aristippus, Aristippus, Aristippus: sure a Philosophers name. But they say
he lies at the Dolphin, and that me thinks is an ill sign: yet they say too,
the best Philosophers of the town never lye from thence: they say 'tis a
Tavern too; for my part I cannot tell, I know no part of the Town but the
Schools and Aristotles Well: but since I am come thus far, I will enquire:
for this same compossibilitas and incompossibilitas sticks in my stomach.


Anon, Anon Sir.

What Philosophy is this?

Anon, Anon Sir.

Please you see a Room Sir? what would you have Sir?

Nothing but Aristippus.

You shall Sir.

What is this? the Dolphin? now verily it looks like a Green Fish: what's
yonder Greek too? Now surely it is the Philosophers Motto: Hippathi-happathi;
aut disc, aut discede incontinenter, a very good disjunction.


A pint of Aristippus to the Bar.

Here Sir.

Ha? what's this?

Did you not ask for Aristippus Sir?

The great Philosopher lately come hither.

Why, this is Aristippus.

Verily then Aristippus is duplex, Nominalis Realis; or else the Philosopher
lives like Diogenes in dolio: the President of Hogges-head College: but I
mean one Aristippus (...) the great Philosopher.


I know not what you mean by Losopher, but here be Scholars in the house,
I'll send them to you: Anon, anon Sir, I cannot be here and there too. Anon,
anon Sir.


This boy would have put a fallacy upon me, in Interrogatione plurium. This
boy is a mere Animal; ha, ha, he. He has not a jot of Language in him more
then Anon, anon, Sir. O Giggleswicke, thou happy place of education! This poor
wretch knows not what a Philosopher means. To see the simpleness of these
people; They do ever thing (...), and have not a jot, not an inch of (...) in
them. O what had become of me, if I had not gone bare-foot to my Praeceptor,
with a Satchel at my back?

Slaves are they that heap up mountains,
Still desiring more and more,
Still let's carouse in Bacchus fountains,
Never dreaming to be poor,
Give us then a Cup of liquor,
Fill it up unto the brim,
For then me thinks my wits grow quicker,
When my brains in liquor swim.
Ha brave Arstippus.
Pox of Aristotle and Plato, and a company of dry Raskalls:
But hey brave Aristippus.

Certainly, there are Aristippus his Scholiers: Sir, pray can you resolve me
what is Gradus compossibilitatis?


What ails thou, thou musing man?
Diddle diddle do.

Quench thy sorrows in a Canne,
Diddle diddle do.
Compossibilitas? Why, that's nothing man, when you ne'er drink beyond your
poculum necessitatis, you are in gradu incompossibili to all good fellowship:
Come, hang Scotus, we'll lead you to Aristippus, one Epitome of his in quarto,
is worth a volume of these Dunces.


O Gentlemen, you will bind me to thank you in Poculo Gratiarum. But what
Philosophy doth he read, and what hours doth he keep?


None at all precisely, but indistinctly all: Night and day he powers forth his
instructions, and fills you out of measure.


Hee'll make the eyes of your understanding see double, and teach you to speak
fluently, and utter your mind in abundance.


Hath he many Schollers, Sir?

More than all the Philosophers in the Town besides. He never rests but is
still called for. Aristippus says one, Aristippus says another: He is generally
asked for, yea, and by Doctors sometimes.


And as merry a man: There can be no Feast, but he is sent for, and all the
company are the merrier for him.


Did you but once hear him, you would so love his company, you would never
after endure to stand alone.


O pray help me to the sight of him.

We will, brave boy: and when you have seen him, you'll think your self in
another world, and scorn to be your own man any longer.


But I pray you at what price reads he?

Why truly his price hath been raised of late, and his very name makes him the
dearer.


A diligent Lecturer deserves eight pence a Pint tuition: Nay, if you will
learn any thing, Schollerships must be paid for. Academical Simonie is
lawful: Nay did you ever hear of a good Preacher in a fat Benefice, unless
his purse were the leaner for it? Make much of him, for we shall have no more
such in haste.


But who is this?

The University Ramist, a Malt Heretic; alias the Wild man that is grown
mad to see the daily resort to Aristippus: but let us leave him to his frenzi^.

But come you Lads that love Canary,
Let us have a mad fegarie:
Hither, hither, hither, hither,
All good Fellows flock together.
Brains, wits, senses, all sly hence: let fools live limed in Cages: I am
the Wilde-man, and I will be wild: is this an age to be in a mans right wits,
when the lawful use of the throat is so much neglected, and strong drink lies
sick on his death-bed? 'Tis above the patience of a Malt-horse, to see the
contempt of Barley, and not run mad upon it. This is Aristippus, Aristippus, now
a Devil or two take his rednos'd Philosophy: 'Tis he, my beer, that has vowed
thee to the Vinegar-bottle; but I'll be revenged: when next I meet him, I'll
twist and twitch his bush-beard from his Tavern face: 'Tis not his hypathie
happithi can carry him out. Let him look to be sound^er dashed by me, then
ever he was by Dr^wer for his impudence. I'll teach my Spanish Don a French
trick, I'll either plague him with a Pox, or have some Claret whore burn him
for an heretic, and make him challenge acquaintance of M^ld-Sack^: If he was
not either sent hither from the Britch Politic, or be not employed by Spinola
to seduce the Kings lawful Subjects from their allegiance to strong Beer, let
me hold up my hand at the bar, and be hanged at my Signpost, if he had not
a hand in the Powder-treason! Well, I say nothing, but he has blown up good
store of men in his days, house and land and all. If they take no order with
him here in the University, the poor Country were as good have the man in the
Moon for their Pastor, as a Scholar. They are all so infected with Aristippus
his Arminianisme, they can preach no Doctrine but Sack and red Noses. As for
the Wilde-man, they have made him horne-mad already.

Heighday, there goes the Hunts-vp: this is the Mandrakes voice that vndoe's
me: you may hear him in faith. This is the Devil of his that goes up and
down like a roaring-Sheeps-head to gather his Pewter Library. I'll fit him I
faith.

Now you Calf-skin impudence, I'll thresh your Jacket.


What a coyl's here? what fellowe's that? he looks like a mad hogs-head of
March-beere that had run out, and threatened a deluge: what is he?


O'tis the Wilde-man sir! a zealous brother that stands up against the
persecution of Barly-broth, and will maintain it a degree above the reputation
of Aquavitae.


I have heard him swear by his horaoctaua, that Sack and Rosa Solis is but
Water-grewell to it.


O art thou there, Saint Dunstar? thou hast undone me, thou cursed Fryer Bacon,
thou hellish Merlin: but I'll be revenged upon thee. 'Tis not your Mephostopho
is, nor any other spirits of Ruby or Carbuncle, that you can raise, nor your
good father in law Doctor Faustus, that conjures so many of us into your Wives
Circle, that with all their Magique, he shall secure you from my rage, you have
set a Spell for any mans coming into my house now.


Why, none of my credit hath choked up your doors.


But thou hast bewitched my threshold, disturbed my house, and I'll have thee
hanged in Gibbets for murthering my Beer: I'll have thee tried by a Jury of
Tapsters, and hanged in Anon anon Sir, thou dismal and disastrous Conjurer.


Why dost thou call me Conjurer? I send no Fairies to pinch you, or Elves to
molest you: has Robin Good fellow troubled you so much of late? I scarce
believe it, for I am sure, since Sack and I came to town, your house hath not
been so much haunted.


I'll put out thine eyes, Don Canario, I'll scratch thee to atoms, thou
Spanish Guzman.


If he and his Beer will not be quiet, draw um both out.


Yet I'll be revenged, you rascal, I do not fear the Spanish Inquisition,
I'll run to the Council, and betray thy villainy; I'll carry thee bound for a
Traitor: but for you Sir, we had taken Cales, and might afterwards have
conquered Lisbon, and Siuill. You notorious villain, I knew thee for a Rogue
at first, thy Ruff looked so like the Moon Crescent in 88. thy very breath is
invincible, and stinks of an Armado.


Kick him out of the presence, his company will metamorphose us to balderdash.


Well Diogen^s, you were best keep close in your tubbe, I'll be revenged on
you; I'll complain on you for keeping ill hours, I suffer noue after eight,
by Saint Iohus, not I.


Well Domine, though the hora octaua be not come, yet you may be gone.


Come Pupil, have you any mind to study my Philosophy?


Yes Mehercule Sir, for I have always accounted Philosophy to be omnibus rebus
ordine, natura, Tempore, honore prius; and these Schoolmen have so pusled me,
my Dictionaries, that I despair of understanding them either in summo gradu, or
remisso. I lay sick of an Ha^ceitas, a fortnight, and could not sleep a wink
for it; therefore good Sir teach me us (...), as you can, and pray let it be
Conceptis vorbis, and exmente Philosophi.


I warrant thee a good proficient, but ere you can be admitted to my Lectures,
you must be matriculated, and have your name recorded in A^b^ Academic.


With all my heart Sir, and totaliter, for I have as great a mind as materia
pri^ to be informed with your instructions.


Give him the oath.


Lay your hand on the book.


Will tactus virtualis serve the turn Sir?


No* it must be real quid, extra intellectum.


Well Sir, I will do it qu^ad poten^iam obedientialem.


First, you must swear to defend the honour of Aristippus, to the disgrace of
Brewers, Alewiues, Tapsters, and profess your self a foe ^, to Maltmen,
Tapsters, and red Lettices.


Kiss the book.


Next, you shall swear to observe the customs and ordinances instituted and
ordained by an Act of Parliament in the reign of King Sigebert, for the
establishing of good government in the ancient foundation of M^er College.


Kiss the book.


I Sir, Secundum veritatem intrinsecam, non equiu^ce.


That you keep all acts and meetings, tam priuatim, in private houses, quam
public, in the Dolphin Schools: that you dispute in tenebris, yet be not
asleep at reckonings: but always and every where show your self so diligent
in drinking, that the Proctor may have no just cause to suspend you for
negligence.


Kiss the book.


Lastly, that you never walk into the Town, without your habit of drinking,
the Fuddling Cap, and casting Hood; especially when there is a Convocation, and
of all things take heed of running to the Assizes.


Is this the end, I pray you Sir, is this the Finis? (...)


It is vltimum Sir.


How pray you Sir, intention, or executione?


(...), that follows the Assizes.


But me thinks there is one Scrupulum, it seems to be actus illicitus, that
we should drink so much, it being lately forbidden, and therefore Contra
formam statuti.


I but therefore you are sworn to keep customs, Non omnino secundum formam
statuti.


What, have you enrolled him in Albo? have you fully admitted him into the
society, to be a member of the body Academic?


Yes Sir, I am one of your Pupils now, vnitate n^erica, we have made an end of
it, secundum vltimum Complementum, actualitatem.


Well then, give the attendance.

Most grave audience, considering how they thirst after my Philosophie, I am
iuduced to let you taste the benefit of my knowledge, which cannot but please a
judicious palate: for the rest I expel them my Schools, as fitter to hear
Thales, and drink Water.


We will attend Sir, and that bibulis auribus,


The many errors that have crept into the science, to distract the curious
Reader, are sp^ung from no other causes, then small Beer, and sober sleeps;
whereas were the laudable custom of Sack drinking better studied, we should
have fewer Gowns, and more Schollers.


A good note, for we cannot see wood for trees, nor Schollers for Gowns.


Now the whole University is full of your honest Fellows, that breaking loose
from a Yorkshire Belfrey, have walked to Cambridge with Satchels on their
shoulders: these you shall have them study hard for four or five years, to
return home more fools then they came; the reason whereof, is drinking
College taplash, that will let them have no more learning, then they size; nor
a drop of wit more then the Buttler sets on their heads.


'Twere charity in him to sconce'vm soundly, they would have but a poor
Quantum else.


Others there be that spend their whole lives in Athen^, to die as wise as they
were borne; who as they brought no wit into the world, so in honesty they will
carry none out on it. 'Tis Beer that drowns the souls in their bodies: H^sons
Cakes, Paix his Ale hath frothed their brains: hence is the whole tribe
contemned, every Prentice can ieere at their brave Cassocks, and laugh the
Velvet Caps out of countenance.


And would it not anger a man of Art to be the scorn of a what lake you Sir?


'Tis Beer that makes you so ridiculous in all your behaviour: hence comes the
Bridelike simpering at a Justice of Peace his Table, and the not eating
methodically, when being laughed at, you show your teeth, blush, and excuse it
with a Rhetorical Husteron Proteron.


'Tis very true, I have done the like my self, till I have had a disgrace for
my Mittimus.


'Tis Beer that hath putrified our Horsemanship, for that you cannot ride to
Ware, or to Barkway, but your Hackneyes sides must witness your journeys. A
Lawyers Clarke, or an Innes a Court Gentleman that hath been fed with false
Latin, and Pudding Pie, contemn you as if you had not learning enough to
confute a Nou^rint vniuersi.


Per prasentes me Simplicium.


If you discourse but a little while with a Courtier, you presently betray your
learned Ignorance, answering him he concludes not Syllogistically, and asking
him in what Mood and figure he sp^akes in, as if Learning were not as much out
of fashion at Court, as clothes at Cambridge. Nor can you entertain discourse
with a Lady, without endangering the half of your Buttons; all these, and a
thousand such errors, are the friends of Beer, that nurse of Barbarism, and
foe to Philosophy.


Oh I am ravished with this admiral Metaphysicall Lecture, if ever I drink
Beer again, let me turn civil Lawyer, or be powdered up in one of Luthers
barrels, pray lend me the book again, that I may forswear it. Fie upon it, I
could love Sir Gyles for presenting those notorious Alewiues. Oh, Aristippus,
Aristippus, thou art equally divine (...) the only father of Quodlibets, the
Prince of Formalities, I ask my Stars whose influence doth govern this
^rbem sublunarem, that I may live with thee, and die like the royal Duke of
Clarence, who was sowsed up to immortality in a But of Malmesey.


You interrupt him Sir, too much in his Lecture, and prevent your ears of
their hoppinesse.


Oh heavens, I could hear him, ad ^ternitatem, and that ^am a part ante quam
a part post. O proceed, proceed, thy instructions are mere. Orthodoxall, thy
Philosophy canonical, I will study thy scieutiam both speculatiuam practicam.
Pray let me once more forswear the pollution of Beer, for it is an abominable
heretic, I'll be his perfect enemy, till I make him and bottle-Ale fly the
Country.


But Sack is the life, soul, and spirits of a man, the fire which Prometheus
stole, not from Ioues Kitchen, but his Wine-Cellour, to increase the native
heat and radical moisture, without which, we are but drowsy dust, or dead
clay: this is Nectar, the very Nepenthe the gods were drunk with, 'tis this
that gave Ganymede, beauty, Hebe youth, to Jove his heaven and eternity; do
you think Aristotle drank Perry, or Plato Cider? do you think Alexander had
ever conquered the world, if he had bin sober? he knew the force valour of
Sack, that it was the best armour, the best encouragement, and that none could
be a good Commander, that was not double drunk, with Wine and Ambition.


Only here's the difference: Ambition makes them rise, and Wine makes them
fall.


Therefore the Garrisons are all drinking Schools, the Soldiers trained up to
the mustering of pewter pots daily, learning to co^temne death, by accustoming
to be deaddrunke: scars do not so well become a Captain, as Carbuncles. A
red nose is the grace of a Sergeant Mayor, and they unworthy the place of
Ancients that have not good colours, the best shot to be discharged is the
Tavern bill, the best Alarm is the sounding of healths, and the most absolute
March is reeling.


And the best Artillery yard is the Dolphin.


Thus you may easily perceive the profit of Sack in military discipline, for
that it may justly seem to have taken the name of Sack from sacking of Cities.


Oh wonderful, wonderful Philosophie^ If I be a coward any longer, let me
swear a little to drink Sack, for I will be as valiant as any of the Knights
Errant: I perceive it was only culpa ignorantiae, not pra^ae disposition^s
that made me a coward: but O Enthusiastique, rare, Angelical Philosophie, I
will be a Soldier, a Scholar, and every thing, I will hereafter nec peccare
in mat^rid, nec informd. Beer, raskally Beer was the first parent of
Sophisters, and the fallacies: But proceed, my Pythagoras, my ipse dixit of
Philosophy.


Next, it is the only Elixar of Philosophie, the very Philosophers stone, able,
if studied by a young Heir, mu^drererum specus, to change his House, Lands,
Livings, Tenc^ents, and Liveries into aurum potabile: So that though his
Lordships be the f^wer for it, his manners shall be the more; whose L^nds being
dissolved into Sack, must needs make his soul more capable of divine
meditation, he being almost in the state of separation, by being purged, and
freed from so much earth.


Therefore why should a man trouble himself with so much earth? he is the best
Philosopher, that can omnia sua secum portare.


And since it is the nature of light things to ascend, what better way, or more
agreeing to nature can be invented, whereby we might ascend to the height of
knowledge, then a light head? A light head being as it were allied with heaven,
first found out, that the motion of the orbs was circular like to its own,
which motions, teste Arist^tele, first found that intelligence: so that I
conclude all intelligence, intellect, and understanding to be the invention of
Sack, and a light head; what mists of error had cloaded Philosophy, till the
never sufficiently praised Copernicus found out that the earth was moved, which
he could never have done, had he not been instructed by Sack, and a light
head?


Hang me then when I turn grave.


This is the Philosophy, the great Stagirite read to his Pupil, Alexander,
wherein how great a proficient he was, I call the faith of History to witness.


'Tis true, per sidem Historicam, for I have read how when he had vanquished
the whole world in drink, that he wept there was no more to conquer.


Now, to make our demonstration to prove, no wine, no Philosophy, is that
admirable Axiom, in vino veritas, and you know that Sack and truth are the
only Buts which Philosophy aims at.


And the Hogshead is that puteus Democriti, from whence they might both be
drawn.


Sack, Clarret, Malmsey, White-wine and Hipocras are your five Predicables, and
Tobacco your indiuiduum, your Money is your substance, full cups your quantity,
good wine your quality, your Relation is in good company, your action is
beating, which produces another predicament in the Drawers, called passion,
your quando is midnight, your v^i the Dolphin, your situ^ leaning, your habitus
carousing, afterclaps are your post predicaments, your priorums breaking of
jests, your post^riorums of glasses, false bills are your fallacies, the shot is
subtili^ obiectio, and the discharging of it is, verasolutio, several humours
are your moods, and figures, where quarta sigura, or gallons must not be
neglected, your drinking is Syllogismes, where a pottle is the mayor terminus,
and a pint the minor, a quart the medium, beginning of healths are the
premises, and pledging the conclusion, for it must not be divided, Topicks or
common places are the Ta^ernes, and Hamon, Wolf, and Farlowes are the three
best Tutors in Universities.


And if I be not entered, and have my name admitted into some of their books,
let forma misti be beaten out of me.


To persuade the Vintner to trust you, is good Rhetoric, and the best figure
is Synechdoche to pay part for the whole, to drink above measure, is a Science
beyond Geometry, falling back-ward is star-gazing, and no lacobs Staff
comparable to a Tobacco pipe, the sweet harmony of good-fellowship, with now
and then a discord, is your excellent music, Sack it self is your Grammar,
sobriety a mere solecisme, and Latin be it true, or be it false, a very
cudgel to your Priscianus pa^es, the r^ckoning is Arithmetique enough, a
receipt of full cups are the best physic to procure vemit, and forget^ing of
debts an art of memory; and here you have an Encuelopoedia of Sciences, whose
method being circular, can never be so well learned, as when your head runs
round.


If mine have any other motion, it shall be pr^ter naturam, I, and contra too,
if I li^e: I like that art of music wondrous well, life is not life without
it; for what is life but an harmonious lesson, played by the soul upon the
Organs of the body. O witty sentence! I am mad already, I see the immortality,
ha brave Aristippus: but in Poetry, 'tis the sole predominant quality, the sap
and juice of a verse, yea, the spring of the Muses is the fountain of Sack,
for to think Helicon a bartell of Beer, is as great a sin, as to call
Pegasus a Brewers Horse.


I know some of these halfe-penny Almanac makers do not approve of this
philosophy, but give you most abominable counsel in their Beggars Rhymes,
which you are bound to believes as faithfully, as their predictions of foul
and fair weather, you shall hear some of Erra Paters Poetry.

I wish you all carefully,
Drink Sack but sparingly,
Spend your coin t^ifuly,
Keep your health warily,
Take heed of ^,
Wine is an enemy*
Good is sobriety,
Fly baths and Venery.
For your often potations much crudities cause, by hindering the course of
mother Natures laws, therefore he that desires to live till October, ought to
be drunk in July, but I hold it to be a great deal better that he went to
bed sober. And let him alone, thou man in the Moon, yet had thou but read a
leaf in this admired Author, this aureum flumen, this torrens cloquentiae,
thou would have scorned to have bin of the water Poets Tribe, or Skeltons
family, but thou hast never tasted better Nectar than out of Fennors Wassaile
Bowl, which hath so transformed him, that his eyes look like two Tunnels, his
nose like a Fausset with the Spicket out, and therefore continually dropping:
the Almanackemakers, and Physicians are alike grand enemies of Sack, as for
Physicians being fools, I cannot blame them if they neglect Wine, and minister
simples, but if I meet with you, I'll teach you another receipt.


Why meet him Tutor? you may easily meet him. I know him Sir, cognitione
distincta confu^a I warrant you, do you not smell him Tutor? I know who made
this Almanac against drinking Sack? ha Stroffe? have I found you Stroffe? you
will show your self, I see, when all is done, to be but a Brewers Clarke.


But far better speaks the divine Ennius against your Ale, and Barly-broth,
who knew too full well the virtue of Sack, when Nunquam ^isi potus ad arma
prosiluit dicenda; his verses are in Latin, but because the audience are
Schollers, I have translated them into English, that they may be understood.
Here read them.


There is a drink made of the Stygian Lake,
Or else of the waters the suries do make,
No name there is bad enough by which it to call,
But yet as I wist, it is ycleped* Ale;
Men drink it thick, and peace it out thin.
Mickle filth by Saint Loy that it leaves wit^in,
But I of complexion am wondrous sanguine,
And will love by the Morrow a cup of wine,
To live in delight was ever my won,
For I was Epicurus his own son,
That held opinion that plainly delight
Was very felicity perfect:
A Bowl of wine is wondrous boon cheer
To make one blithe, buxom and deboneere,
'Twill give me such valour and so much courage,
As cannot be found 'twixt Hull and Carthage.

But above the wit of humanity, the divine Virgil hath extolled the Encomium of
Sack in these verses.


Fill me a Bowl of Sack with Roses crowned,
Fill't to the brim, I'll have my temples bound
With flowery Chaplets, and this day permit
My Genius to be free, and frolic it;
Let me drink deep, then fully warmed with wine,
Ill' chant Aeneas praise, that every line
Shall prove immortal, till my moistened quill
Melt into verse; and Nectar-like distill;
I'm sad, or dull, till bowles brim filled infuse
New life in me, new spirit in my Muse,
But once reuiu'd with Sack, pleasing desires
In my childhood kindle such Active fires,
That my gray hairs seem fled, my wrinckl'd face,
Grown smooth as Hebes, youth, and beauties grace,
To my shrunk veins, fresh blood and spirits bring,
Warm as the Summer, sprightful as the spring,
Then all the world is mine: Croesus is poor
Compared with me, he is rich that asks no more:
And I in Sack have all, which is to me
My home, my life, health, wealth, and liberty,
Then have I conquered all, I boldly dare
My Trophies with the Pelcan youth compare,
Him I will equal, as his sword, my pen
My conquered world of cares, his world of men,
Do not, Atrides, Nestors ten desire
But ten such drinkers as that aged sire,
His stream of ho^yed words flowed from the Wine,
And Sack^ his Counsel was, as he was thine.
Who ^u^r purchased a rich Indiaen mine,
But Bacchus first, and next the Spanish wine?
Then fill my bowl, that if I dye to morrow,
Killing cares to day, I have out-liu'd my sorrow.

Thus resting in the opinion of that admirable Poet, I make this draught of
Sack, this Lectures period.


Dixi, dost thou say? I, and I'll warrant thee the best Dixi in Cambridge: who
would sit poring on the learned Barbarism of the Scholemen, that by one of thy
Lectures might confute them all, pro con? I begin to ha^e distinction,
actualiter, habitualiter, yet a pox to see, I cannot leave them, nec
principaliter, nec formaliter; yet I begin to love the Fox better than
subtilnesse. Oh Tutor, Tutor, well might Fox be a College Porter, that he
might open the Gates to none but thy Pupils: come fellow Pupils, if I did not
love you, I were (...), and an absurdity in the abstract; Let's practise, let's
practise, for I'll ^ollow the steps of my Tutor night and day: by this Sack, I
shall love this Philosophy: before I heard this Lecture, Banks his Horse was
an Aristotle; in comparison of me: I can laugh to think what a foolish
Simpli^us I was this morning, and how learn^dly I shall sleep to night.


Sleep to night! why? that's no point of our Philosophy; we must sit up late,
and roar till we rattle the Welkin: Sleep! what have we to do with deaths
Cater-cousin? do you think Nature gave stars to sleep by? have you not day
enough to sleep in, but you must sleep in the night too? 'tis an arrant
Paradox.


A Paradox? let me be cramped if I sleep then, but what, must we sleep in the
day then?


Yes, in the morning.


And why in the morning?


Why, a pox of the morning, what have we to do with the sober time of the
day?


'Tis true, I see, we may learn something of our fellow Pupils, and what must
we do now, fellow pupils? What must we do now?


Why? confer our notes.


What is that?


Why? conferring of notes, is drinking off cups, half pots are saying of
parts, and the singing of Catches is our repetition.


Fellow Pupil, I'll confer a note with you.


Gramercy brave lad, and it's a good one, an excellent Criticism; I would not
have lost it for Eustathius and his Bishopricke, it's a general rule, and true
without exception.


Fellow Pupil, I'll confer a note with you too.


Faith, let me have it, let's share and share like boon Rascals.


I'll say my part to you both.


By my troth, and you have a good memory, you have coned it quickly Sir.


But what shall we have for repetitions now?


I, what for repetitions?


Why the Catch against the Schoolmen in praise of our Tutor Aristippus: Can
you sing Simplicius?


How begins it pray you?


Aristippus is better.


O God Sir, when I was in the state of ignorance, I co^'d it without book,
thinking it had been a Position.

Aristippus is better in every letter,
Then Fab^r the Parisiensis,
Then Scotus, Soncinas, and Thomas Aqui^as,
Or Gregory Gandanensis:
Then Cardan and ^amus, then old Paludanus,
Albertus and Gabriella,
Then Pico Mercatus, or Scaliger Natus,
Then Niphus or Zabarella.
Hortado, Trombetus, were fools with Toletus,
Zanardus, and Will de Hales,
With Occham, Ia^ellus, and mad Algazellus,
Philoponus and Natali^,
The Conciliator, was but a mere prater,
And so was Apollinaris:
Iandunus, Plotinus, the Dunc^ Eugubinus,
With Masius, Sauil, and Swarez,
Fonseca, Durandus, Becanus, Holandus,
Pererius, Auienture:
Old Trismigistus, whose volumes have mist us,
Ammonius, Bonauenture,
Mirandula Comes, with Proclus and So^es,
And Guido the Carmelita:
The nominal Schools, and the College of fools,
No longer is my delighta:
Hang Brirewood and Carter, in Crakenthorps garter,
L^t Keckerman too be^oane us,
I'll be no more beaten, for greasy lack Seato^,
Or conning of Sandersonus.
The censure of Cato's, shall never amate us,
Their frosty beards cannot nip us:
Your Ale is too muddy, good Sack is our study,
Our Tutor is Aristippus.

There they be, now for the valour of Brewers, knock um soundly, the old
Rogue, that's he, do you not see him there? soundly, soundly, let him know
what Champions good Beer has.

Now let them know that Beer is too strong for them, and let me be hanged, if
ever I be milder to such Rascals, they shall find these but st^le courtesies,
Bellarmine, the golden Legend, or the Turkish Alcharon. I wonder what virtue is
in this p^w^er-faced Author, that it should make every one fall into love with
it so deeply: I'^l try if I can find any Philiru^, Domine not a drop; O
stultum ingeniur^ hominum, to delight in such vanitie^! Sure these are Comments
upon Tobacco, dry and j^icelesse vanities. I'll try again, by my bonafide,
but this doth relish some learning, still better, an admirable witty rogue, a
very flash. I'll turn another leaf, still better, has he any more Authors like
this? what's here, Aristippus? a most incomparable Author, O Bodly, Bodly,
thou hast not such a book in all thy Library, here's one line worth the whole
Vatican. O Aristippus, would my brains had been broken out when I broached thy
hogs-head: O cursed Brewers, and most accursed am I, to wrong so learned a
Philosopher as Aristippu^? what penance is enough to clear me from this
impardonable offence? twenty purgations are too little; I'll suck up all my
Beer in Toasts to appease him, and afterwards live by my Wife and Hackneyes.
Oh, that I had never undertook this selling of Beer, I might have kept my
house with Fellows Commons, and never have come to this: But now I am a
Wild-man, and my house a Bedlam: Aristippus, Aristippus, Aristippus.


How now neighbour Wild-man?


O Aristippus, Aristippus, what shall I do for thee, Aristippus?


What ecstasy is this?


O Aristippus, Aristippus, what shall I do for thee Aristippus?


Why neighbour Wilde-man, disclose your griefs to me, I am a Surgeon, and
perchance may cure um?


O cry you mercy, you are the welcomes man on earth, Sir Signior Medico de
campo, the welcmomest man living, the only man I could have wished for, O
Aristippus, Aristippus.


Why what's the matter, neighbour? O I hear he has seduced away your
Parishioners, is this the cause of your Lamentation?


O no Sir, a learned Philosopher, one that I love with my soul: but in my rage
I cannot tell you Sir, 'tis a dismal tale, the sharpest Razor in your shop
would turn edge at it.


Never fear it, I have one was sent from a -- faith I cannot think on's name,
a great Emperor, he that I did the great cure on, you have heard on it I am
sure: I fetched his head from China, after it had been there a fortnight
buried, and set it on his shoulders again, and made him as lively, as ever I
saw him in my life; and yet to see I should not think on's name. O I have it
now, Prester Iohn, a pox on it, Prester Iohn, 'twas he, he, I faith, 'twas
Prester Iohn; I might have had his Daughter if I had not been a fool; and have
lived like a Prince all the days of my life; nay, and perchance have inherited
the Crown after his death; but a pox on it, her lips were too thick for me,
and that I should not think on Prester Iohn.


O Aristippus, Aristippus, pox on your Prester Iohn Sir, will you think on
Aristippus?


What should I do with him?


Why? in my rage Sir, I have almost killed him, and now would have you cure him
in sober sadness.


Why call him out Sir.


Sir, yonder comes one of his Pupils.


Salve Mr. Simplicius.


Salve me, 'tis but a Surgeons complement, Signior Medico de Campo; but you are
welcome Sir, my Tutor wants help. Are you there you Vsquebaugh Rascal, with
your Metheglin juice? I'll teach you Sir to break a Philosophers pate; I'll
make you leave your distinctions as well as I have done.


O pardon, pardon me, I repent Sir heartily, O Aristippus, Aristippus, I have
broken thy head, Aristippus, but I'll give thee a plaster, Aristippus,
Aristippus.


I pray Sir bring him out in his Chair, and if the house can furnish you with
Barbers provision, let all be in readiness.


Pray Sir do you think you can cure him?


Him? why neighbour, do you not remember the Thumb?


What of the Thumb? I have not heard of it as yet Sir.


Why the Thumb, the Thumb, do you not know the cure of the Thumb?


No Sir, but I pray tell the cure of the Thumb, do you still remember't Sir.


Remember't? I, and perfectly, I have it at my fingers end, and thus it is. Two
Gentlemen were fighting, one lost his Thumb, I bychance coming by, took it
up, put it in my pocket, some two months after, meeting the Gentleman, I set
on his Thumb again; and if he were now in Cambridge, I could have his hand to
show for it: why did you ne'er hear of the Thumb Sir? 'tis strange you never
heard me speak of the Thumb Sir.


Signior de Medico Campo, if you have any art or skill, show it now, you never
had a more deserving Patient.


Yet I have had many, and royal ones too; I have done Cures beyond Seas, that
will not be believed in England.


Very likely so, and Cures in England, that will not be believed beyond seas,
nor here neither, for in this kind, half the world are infidels.


The great Turk can witness, I am sure, the eyes that he wears, are of my
making.


He was then an eye-witnesse: but I hope he wears spectacles, Signior.


Why, won't you believe it? why I tell you I am able to say it, I saw't, I saw't
my self, I cured the King of Poland of a Wart on's nose, and Bethlem Gaber of
a Ringworme.


The one with raw Beef, and the other with Inkehornes.


Pox of your old Wi^es medicines; the worst of mine Ingredients is an
Unicorns Horne, and a Bezars stone: Raw Beef and Inkehornes! Why, I cured
Sherley in the Grand Sophies Court in Persia, when he had bin twice shot
through with Ordinance, and had two bullets in each thigh, and so quickly, that
he was able at night to lie with his wife the Sophies niece, and beget a whole
Church of Christians; and could this have been done with Raw Beef and
Inkehornes?


No sure, this could not have been done without Eggs and Greene-sauce, or an
Oatmeal Poultice at least.


The King of Russia had dyed of the worms, but for a powder I sent him.


Some of that you mean, that stuck on the bullet which you took out of
Sherleyes legs.


In the siege of Ostend, I gave the Duchess of Austria a receipt to keep her
Smock from being animated, when she had not shifted it of a twelvemonth.


Believe me, and that was a Cure beyond Scoggins Fleas.


I am able by the virtue of one Salve, to heal all the wounds and breaches in
Bohemia.


I, and close up the Bung-hole in the great Tub at Heidlebergh, I warrant you.


I cured the state of Venice of a Dropsy, the Low-Countries of a Lethargy,
and if it had not been treason, I had cured the Fistula, that it should have
dropped no more then your nose. By one Dram on a knifes point, I restored
Mansfield to his full strength and forces, when he had no men left, but was
only skin and bones. I made an Arm for Brunswicke, with so great art and
skill, as nature her self could not have mended it; which had it not come too
late, and after his death, would have done him as much service as that which
was shot off.


I easily believe that I faith.


I could make a Purgation, that should so scour the Seas, that never a
Dunkerke durst show his head.


By my faith, and that would be a good State Glister.


I have done as great wonders as these, when I extracted as much chastity from
a Sanctimony in the English Nunnery, as cured the Pope of his lechery.


And yet had as much left, as served five Cardinals on Fasting-dayes.


And there was no man in the Realm of France, either French or Spanish or
Italian Doctors, but my self, that durst undertake the King of France his
Corns, and afterwards having cured him, I drank a health to him.


Would we had the pledging on it. O happy man that hast conferred a note with
the King of France!


And do you seem to misdoubt my skill, and speak of my Art with ifs and
ands? Do you take me for a Mountebank? and hath mine own tongue been so
silent in my praise, that you have not heard of my skill?


No, pardon us Signior, only the danger our Tutor is in, makes us so
suspicious; we know your skill Sir, we have heard Spain and your own tongue
speak loud on it, we know besides, that you are a Travailer, and therefore give
you leave to relate your words with authority.


Danger? what danger can there be, when I am his Surgeon?


His head Sir is so wondrously bruised, 'tis almost past cure.


Why, what if he had never an head? am not I able to make him one? or if it
were beaten to atoms, I could set it together, as perfectly as in the womb.


Believe me neighbour, but that would be as great a wonder, as the Thumb, or
Prester Iohns head.


Why? I'll tell you Sir, what I did, a far greater wonder then any of these,
I was a Travailer.


There is no such great wonder in that, but what may be believed.


And another friend of mine travailed with me, and to be short, I came into the
Country of Cannibals, where missing my friend, I ran to seek him, and came at
last into a Land where I saw a company feeding on him, they had eaten half of
him, I was very pensive at his misfortune, or rather mine* at last I bethought
me of a powder that I had about me, I put it into their wine, they had no
sooner drank of it, but they presently disgorged their stomachs, and fell
asleep; I Sir, gathered up the miserable morsels of my friend, placed them
together, and restored him to be a perfect man again; and if he were here
still alive, he were able to witness it himself, and do you think I cannot
cure a ten-groates damage, or a cracked Crown.


Good Signior make no such delay, cure him, and have one wonder more to fill up
your Legend.


Here hold the Basin, you the Napkins, and you Mr Simplicius t^e Boxes, how
shall we do to lay his feet upon? By my troth Sir, he is wonderfully hurt, his
piam^ter I perceive is clean out of joint; of the 20. bones of the Cranium
there is but three only whole, the rest are miserably crushed and broken, and
two of his Sutures are clean perished, only the Sagitall remains free from
violence, the four Tunicates of his eyes are thred-bare, the Meninx of his
^are is like a cut Drum, and the hammers lost: there is not a Ca^tilago in his
head worth three pence, the top of his nose is dropped away, there is not a
Muskle left in the Cavities of his Nostrils, his dentes molares are past
grinding, his Pa^et is lost, and with it his gurgulio, yet if he can swallow, I
warrant his drinking safe: help open his mouth. So, so, his throat is sound:
he's well I warrant you; now give him a cup of Sack: so let me chafe his
Temples, put this powder into another glass of Sack, and my life for his, he
is as sound as the best of us all: let down his legs. How do you Sir?


Why as young as the Morning, all life, and soul, not a dra^ of body; I am
newly come back from hell, and have seen so many of my acquaintance there,
that I wonder whose Art hath restored me to life again.


The Catholic Bishop of Barbers, the very Metropolitan of Surgeons, Signior
de Medico Campo.


One that hath engrossed all Arts to himself, as if he had the Monopoly.


The only Hospital of soars.


And Spittle-house of infirmities, Signior de Medico Campo.


One that is able to undo the Company of Barbersurgeons, and College of
Physicians, by making al diseases fly the Country.


Yea, he is able to give his skill to whom he please, by Act of deed, or
bequeath it by Legacy, but he is determined as yet to entail it to his heirs
males for ever.


Sir, death it self dares not anger him, for fear he should beggar the
Sextons by suffering no grave to be made, he can choose whether any shall dye
or no.


And he do's't with such celerity, that a hundred pieces of Ordinance in a
pitched field, could not in a whole day make work enough to employ him an
hour; you owe him your life Sir, I'll assure you.


Sir I do owe you my life, and all that is mine: think of any thing that
lies in the compass of my Philosophy, and 'tis your own.


I have gold enough Sir, and Philosophy enough, for my house is paved with
Philosophers stones, mine only desire is, that you forgive the rage of this
wildeman, who is heartily sorry for his offence to you.


O reverend Philosopher, and Alchemy of understanding, thou very Sack of
Sciences, thou noble Spaniard, thou Catholic Monarch of Wines, Archduke of
Canary, Emperor of the sacred Sherry, pardon me, pardon my rudeness, and I
will forswear that Dutch heresy of English Beer, and the witchcraft of
Middletons water, I'll turn my self into a Gown, and be a professed disciple
of Aristippus.


Give him a Gown then, ere we admit him to our Lecture hereafter. Now noble
Signior Medico de Campo, if you will walk in, let's be very jovial and merry,
'tis my second birth-day, let's in, and drink a health to the company.

We car^ not ^or money, riches, or wealth,
Old Sack is our money, old Sack is our health,
Then let's flock hither
Like Birds of a feather,
To drink, to fling,
To laugh and sing,
Conferring our notes together,
Conferring our notes together.
Come let us laugh, let us drink, let us sing,
The winter with us is as good as the Spring,
We care not a feather
For wind, or for weather,
But night and day
We sport and play,
Conferring our notes together,
Conferring our notes together.

Hark, they are drinking your healths, within, and I must have it too, I am
only left here to offer my supplicat to you, that my grace may pass, and then
if I may but commence in your approbation, I will take a degree in drinking,
and because I am turned a jovial mad rascal, I have a great desire to be a
Midsummer Batch'lor, I was only stayed to ask your leaves to go out.



