Cress cruor sanguinis, satietur sanguine cress,
Quodspero scitio. O scitio, scitio, vendicta.

Truth well met.


Thanks Poetry, what makes thou upon a stage?


Shadows.


Then will I add bodies to the shadows,
Therefore depart and give Truth leave
To show her pageant.

Why will Truth be a Player?


No, but Tragedia like for to present
A Tragedy in England done but late,
That will revive the hearts of drooping minds.

Whereof?


Marry thus.
Richard Plantagenet of the House of York,
Claiming the Crown by wars, not by dissent,
Had as the Chronicles make manifest,
In the two and twentieth year of Henry the sixth,
By act of Parliament entailed to him
The Crown and titles to that dignity,
And to his offspring lawfully begotten,
After the decease of that forenamed King,
Yet not contented for to stay the time,
Made wars upon King Henry then the sixth,
And by outrage suppressed that virtuous King,
And won the Crown of England to himself,
But since at Wakefield in a battle pitched,
Outrageous Richard breathed his latest breath,
Leaving behind three branches of that line,
Three sons: the first was Edward now the King,
George of Clarence, and Richard Glosters Duke,
Then Henry claiming after his decease
His stile, his Crown and former dignity
Was quite suppressed, till this Edward the fourth.

But tell me truth, of Henry what ensued?


Imprisoned he, in the Tower of London lies,
By strict command, from Edward Englands King,
Since cruelly murdered, by Richard Glosters Duke.

Whose Ghost was that did appear to us?


It was the ghost of George the duke of Clarece,
Who was attected in King Edwards reign,
Falsely of Treason to his royalty,
Imprisoned in the Tower was most unnaturally,
By his own brother, shame to parents stock,
By Glosters Duke drowned in a but of wine.

What shield was that he let fall?


A shield containing this, in full effect,
Blood sprinkled, springs: blood spilt, craves due revenge:
Whereupon he writes, Cress cruor,
Sanguis satietur, sanguine cress,
Quod spero scitio: O scitio scitio, vendicta.

What manner of man was this Richard Duke of Gloster?


A man ill shaped, crooked backed, lame armed, withal,
Valiantly minded, but tyrannous in authority,
So during the minority of the young Prince,
He is made Lord Protector over the Realm.
Gentiles suppose that Edward now hath reigned
Full two and twenty years, and now like to die,
Hath summoned all his Nobles to the Court,
To swear allegiance with the Duke his brother,
For truth unto his son the tender Prince,
Whose fathers soul is now near flight to God,
Leaving behind two sons of tender age,
Five daughters to comfort the haplesse Queen,
All under the protection of the Duke of Gloster:
Thus gentles, excuse the length by the matter,
And here begins* Truths Pageant, Poetry
Wend with me.

Long live my sovereign, in all happiness.


An honourable age with Cressus wealth,
Hourly attend the person of the King.

And welcome you Peers of England unto your King.


For our unthankfulness the heavens hath thrown thee down.


I fear for our ingratitude, our angry God doth frown.


Why Nobles, he that lay me here,
Can raise me at his pleasure.
But my dear friends and kinsmen,
In what estate I now lie it is seen to you all,
And I feel my self near the dreadful stroke of death.
And the cause that I have requested you in friendly wise
To meet together is this,
That where malice envy sowing sedition in the harts of men
So would I have that admonished and friendly favours,
Overcome in the heart of yon Lord Marcus and Lord Hastings
Both, for how I have governed these two and twenty years,
I leave it to your discretions.
The malice hath still been an enemy to you both,
That in my life time I could never get any leg of amity betwixt you,
Yet at my death let me entreat you to embrace each other,
That at my last departure you may send my soul
To the joys celestial:
For leaving behind me my young son,
Your lawful King after my decease,
May be by your wise and grave counsel so governed,
Which no doubt may bring comfort
To his famous realm of England.
But (what saith Lord Marcus and Lord Hastings)
What not one word? nay then I see it will not be,
For they are resolute in their ambition.

Ah yield Lord Hastings,
And submit your selves to each other:
And you Lord Marcus, submit your self,
See here the aged King my father,
How he sues for peace betwixt you both:
Consider Lord Marcus, you are son to my mother the Queen,
And therefore let me entreat you to mitigate your wrath,
And in friendly sort, embrace each other.

Nay cease thy speech Elizabeth,
It is but folly to speak to them,
For they are resolute in their ambitious minds,
Therefore Elizabeth, I feel my self at the last instant of death,
And now must die being thus tormented in mind.

May it be that thou Lord Marcus,
That neither by entreaty of the Prince,
curtuous word of Elizabeth his daughter,
May withdraw thy ambition from me.


May it be that thou Lord Hastings,
Can not perceive the mark his grace aims at.

No I am resolute, except thou submit.


If thou be resolute give up the upshot,
And perhaps thy head may pay for the losses

Ah Gods, since at my death you jar,
What will you do to the yoon* Prince after my decease?
For shame I say, depart from my presence, and leave me to my self,
For these words strikes a second dying to my soul:
Ah my Lords, I thought I could have commanded
A greater thing then this at your hands,
But since I cannot, I take my leave of you both,
And so depart and trouble me no more.

With shame and like your Majesty I submit therefore,
Craving humble pardon on my knees,
And would rather that my body shall be a pray to mine enemy,
Rather then I will offend my Lord at the hour
And instance of his death.

Ah thanks Lord Hastings.

Ah yield Lord Marcus, since Lord Hastings
Is contentented to be united.

Ah yield Lord Marcus, thou art too obstinate.


My gracious Lord, I am content,
And humbly crave your graces pardon on my knee,
For my foul offence,
And see my Lord my breast opened to mine adversary,
That he may take revenge, then once it shall be said,
I will offend my gracious suffereigne.

Now let me see you friendly give one an other your hands.


With a good will ant like your grace,
Therefore Lord Marcus take here my hand,
Which was once vowed and sworn to be thy death,
But now through intretie of my Prince,
I knit a league of amity for ever.

Well Lord Hastings, not in show but in deed,
Take thou here my hand, which was once vowed*
To a shivered thy body in peecemeales,
That the fowls of the air should have fed
Their young withal,
But now upon aleageance to my Prince, I vow perfect love*
And live friendship for ever.

Now for confirming of it, here take your oaths.


If I Lord Hastings falcifie my league of friendship
Vowed to Lord Marcus, I crave confusion.

Like oath take I, and crave confusion.(...)


Confusion.
Now my Lords, for your young King, that lies now at Ludlo,
Attended with Earl Rivers, Lord Gray, his two uncles,
And the rest of the Queenes kindred,
I hope you will be unto him as you have been to me,
His years are but young, thirteen at the most,
Unto whose government, I commit to my brother the Protector,
But to thee Elizabeth my daughter,
I leave thee in a world of trouble,
And commend me to thy mother, to all thy sisters,
And especially I give thee this in charge upon at my death,
Be loyal to thy brother during his authority,
As thy self art virtuous, let thy prayers be modest,
Still be bountiful in devotion.
And thus leaving thee with a kiss, I take my last farewell,
For I am so sleepy, that I must now make an end,
And here before you all, I commit my soul to almighty God,
My saviour, and sweet redeemer, my body to the earth,
My Sceptre and Crown to the young Prince my son:
And now Nobles, draw the Curtains and depart.
He that made me save me,
Unto whose hands I commit my spirit.

O Fortune, wherefore were thou called Fortune?
But that thou art fortunate?
Those whom thou fauourest be famous,
Meriting mere mercy,
And fraught with mirrors of magnanimity,
And Fortune I would thou had never favoured me.

Why mistress, if you exclaim against Fortune,
You condemn your self*
For who hath advanced you but Fortune?

I as she hath advanced me,
So may she throw me down:
But Hursly, doest not hear the King is sick?

Yes mistress, but never heard that every sick man died.

Ah Hursly, my mind presages
Some great mishaps unto me,
For last time I saw the King, me thought
Ghastly death approached in his face,
For thou know this Hursly, I have been good to all,
And still ready to prefer my friends,
To what preferment I could,
For what was it his grace would deny Shores wife?
Of any thing, yea were it half his revenues,
I know his grace would not see me want,
And if his grace should die,
As heavens forfend it should be so,
I have left me nothing now to comfort me withal,
And then those that are my foes will triumph at my fall,
But if the King escape, as I hope he will,
Then will I feather my nest,
That blow the stormy winter never so cold,
I will be thoroughly provided for one:
But here comes Lodwicke, servant to Lord Hastings,
How now Lodwicke, what news?

Mistress Shore, my Lord would request you
To come and speak with him.

I will Lodwicke.
But tell me what news, is the King recovered?

I mistress Shore, he hath recovered
That he long looked for.

Lodwicke, how long is it since
He began to mend?

Even when the greatest of his torments had left him.


But are the nobles agreed to the contentment of the Prince?


The Nobles and Peers are agreed as the King would wish them.


Lodwicke thou reuiuest me.


I but few thought that the agreement and his life would have ended together.


Why Lodwicke is he dead.


In brief mistress Shore, he hath changed his life.


His life, ah me unhappy woman,
Now is misery at hand,
Now will my foes triumph at this my fall,
Those whom I have done most good, will now forsake me.
Ah Hursly, when I enterteined thee first,
I was far from change, so was I Lodwicke,
When I restored thee thy lands.
Ah sweet Edward, farewell my gracious Lord and sovereign,
For now shall Shores wife be a mirror and looking glass,
To all her enemies.
Thus shall I find Lodwicke, and have cause to say,
That all men are inconstant.

Why mistress Shore, for the loss of one friend,
Will you abandon the rest that wish you well?

Ah Lodwicke I must, for when the tree decays
Whose fruitful branch have flourished many a year,
Then farewell those joyful days and osspring of my heart,
But say Lodwicke, who hath the King made Protector
During the innormitie of the young Prince.

He hath made his brother Duke of Gloster Protector.


Ah me, then comes my ruin and decay,
For he could never abide me to the death,
No he always hated me whom his brother loved so well,
Thus must I lament and say, all the world is inconstant.

But mistress Shore, comfort your self,
And think well of my Lord,
Who hath always been a helper unto you.

Indeed Lodwicke to condemn his honour I cannot,
For he hath always been my good Lord,
For as the world is fickle, so changes the minds of men.

Why mistress Shore, rather then want should oppress
You, that little land which you begged for me of the King,
Shall be at your dispose.

Thanks good Lodwicke.


O master Morton, you are very welcome met,
I hope you think on me for my money.

I pray sir bear with me, and you shall have it,
With thanks too.

Nay, I pray sir let me have my money,
For I have had thanks and too much more then I looked for.

In faith sir you shall have it,
But you must bear with me a little,
But sir, I marvel how you can be so greedy for your money,
When you see sir, we are so uncertain of our own.

How so uncertain of mine own?
Why doest thou know any body will come to rob me?

Why no.


Wilt thou come in the night and cut my throat?


No.


Wilt thou and the rest of thy companions,
Come and set my house on fire?

Why no, I tell thee.


Why how should I then be uncertain of mine own?


Why sir, by reason the King is dead.


O sir! is the King dead?
I hope he hath given you no quittance for my debt.

No sir, but I pray stay a while, and you shall have it
As soon as I can.

Well I must be content, where nothing is to be had,
The King loses his right they say,
But who is this?

Marry sir it is mistress Shore,
To whom I am more beholding too for my service,
Then the dearest friend that ever I had.

And I for my sons pardon.


Now mistress Shore, how fare you?


Well Morton, but not so well as thou hast known me,
For I think I shall be driven to try my friends one day.

God forfend mistress Shore,
And happy be that Sun shall shine upon thee,
For preserving the life of my son.

Gramercies good father,
But how doth thy son, is he well?

The better that thou lives, doth he.


Thanks father, I am glad of it,
But come master Lodwicke shall we go?
And you Morton, you'll bear us company.

I mistress Shore,
For my Lord thinks long for our coming.

There there, huffer, but by your leave,
The Kings death is a maim to her credit,
But they say, there is my Lord Hastings in the Court,
He is as good as the As of hearts at maw,
Well even as they brew, so let them bake for me:
But I must about the streets, to see and I can meet
With such cold customers as they I met withal even now,
Mass if I meet with no better,
I am like to keep a bad hoshold of it.

My friends depart,
The hour commands your absence.
Leave me, and every man look to his charge.

Renowned and right worthy Protector,
Whose excelency far deserves the name of king then protector,
Sir William Casbie wishes my Lord,
That your grace may so govern the young Prince,
That the Crown of England may flourish in all happiness.

Ah young Prince, and why not I?
Or who shall inherit Plantagines but his son?
And who the King deceased, but the brother?
Shall law bridle nature, or authority hinder inheritance?
No, I say no: Principality brookes no equality,
Much less superiority,
And the title of a King, is next under the degree of a God,
For if he be worthy to be called valiant,
That in his life wins honour, and by his sword wins riches,
Why now I with renown of a soldier, which is never sold but
By weight, nor changed but by loss of life,
I reaped not the gain but the glory, and since it becomes
A son to maintain the honour of his deceased father,
Why should not I hazard his dignity by my brothers sons?
To be baser then* ^ I disdain,
And to be more then Protector, the law deny,
Why my father got the Crown, my brother won the Crown,
And I will wear the Crown,
Or i'll make them hop without their crowns that denies me:
Have I removed such logs out of my sight, as my brother Clarece
And king Henry the sixth, to suffer a child to shadow me,
Nay more, my nephew to disinherit me,
Yet most of all, to be released from the yoke of my brother
As I term it, to become subject to his son,
No death nor hell shall not withhold me, but as I rule I will reign,
And so reign that the proudest enemy shall not abide
The sharpest shower. Why what are the babes but a puff of
Gun-pouder? a mark for the soldiers, food for fishes,
Or lining for beds, devices enough to make them away,
Wherein I am resolute, and determining, needs no counsel,
Ho, whose within?

May it please your Majesty.


Ha villain, Majesty.


I speak but upon that which shall be my good Lord.


But whats he with thee?


A Messenger with a letter from the right honourale
The Duke of Buckingham.

Sir give place.
Ah how this title of Majesty, animates me to my purpose,
Rise man, regard no fall, happily this letter brings good luck,
May it be, or is it possible,
Doth Fortune so much favour my happiness*
That I no sooner devise, but she sets abroach?
Or doth she but to try me, that raising me aloft,
My fall may be the greater, well laugh on sweet change,
Be as be may, I will never fear colours nor regard ruth,
Valour brings fame, and fame conquers death.
Perciuall.

My Lord.


For so thy letter declares thy name,
Thy trust to thy Lord, is a sufficient warrant
That I utter my mind fully unto thee,
And seeing thy Lord and I have been long foes,
And have found now so fit opportunity to join league,
To alaie the proud enemy, tell him thus as a friend,
I do accept of his grace, and will be as ready to put in practise
To the uttermost of my power, what ere he shall be to devise,
But whereas he hath writ that the removing of the young
Prince from the Queenes friends might do well,
Tell him thus, it is the only way to our purpose,
For he shall shortly come up to London to his Coronation,
At which instant, we will be both present,
And where by the help of thy Lord, I will so play my part,
That i'll be more then I am, and not much less then I look for
No nor a hair breadth from that I am,
Aiudge thou what it is Perciual.

God send it my Lord, but my Lord willed me to satisfy you, and to tell you by
word of mouth that he hath in readiness a brave company of men.


What power hath he?


A brave band of his own.


What number?


My Lord, to the number of five hundredth footmen. And horsemen ayders unto him,
is my Lord Chamberlaine, and my Lord Hastings.


Sounes, dares he trust the Lord Hastings.


I my Lord as his own life, he is secret I warrant you.


Well Perciuall, this matter is weighty and must not be slipped, therefore
return this answer to thy Lord, that to morrow I will meet him, for to day I
cannot, for now the funeral is past I must set a screen before the fire for
fear of suspicion: again, I am now to strengthen my self by the controversy
that is betwixt the kindred of the King deceased, and the Queen that's living,
the young Prince is yet in hucsters handling, and they not thoroughly friends,
now must I so work, that that water that drives the mill may drown it. I
climb Perciuall, I regard more the glory then the gain, for the very name of
a King redouble a mans life with fame, when death hath done his worst, and so
commend me to thy Lord, and take thou this for thy pains.


I thank your grace, I humbly take my leave.


Why so, now Fortune make me a King, Fortune give me a kingdom, let the world
report the Duke of Gloster was a King, therefore Fortune make me King, if I be
but King for a year, nay but half a year, nay a month, a week, three
days, one day, or half a day, nay an hour, swoons half an hour, nay sweet
Fortune, clap but the Crown on my head, that the vassals may but once say, God
save King Richards life, it is enough. Sirrha, who is there?


My Lord.


What hear thou about the Court?


Joy my Lord of your Protectorship for the most part,
Some murmure, but my Lord they be of the baser sort.

A mighty arm will sway the baser sort, authority doth terrify.
But what other news hear thou?

This my Lord, they say the young king is coming up to his coronation, attended
on by his two uncles, Earl Rivers Lord Gray, and the rest of the Queenes
kindred.


A parlous bone to ground upon, and a rush stiffly knit, which if I could find
a knot, I would give one half to the dogs and set fire on the other.


It is reported my Lord, but I know not whether it be true or no, that the Duke
of Buckingham is up in the Marches of Wales with a band of men, and as they
say, he aims at the Crown.


Tush a shadow without a substance, and a fear without a cause: but yet if my
neighbours house be on fire, let me seek to save mine own, in trust is
treason, time slippth, it is ill jesting with edge tools, or dallying with
Princes matters, I'll strike whillst the iron is hot, and I'll trust never a
Duke of Buckingham, no never a Duke in the world, further then I see him. And
sirrha, so follow me.


I see my Lord is fully resolved to climb, but how he climbs i'll leave that
to your judgements, but what his fall will be that's hard to say: But I marvel
that the Duke of Buckingham and he are now become such great friends, who had
wont to love one another so well as the spider doth the fly: but this I have
noted, since he hath had the charge of Protector, how many noble men hath fled
the realm, first the Lord Marcus son to the Queen, the Earl of Westmorland
and Northumberland, are secretly fled: how this gear will cotton I know not.
But what do I meddling in such matters, that should meddle with the untying of my
Lords points, faith do even as a great many do beside, meddle with Princes
matters so long, till they prove themselves beggars in the end. Therefore I for
fear I should be taken nipping with any words, I'll set a locke on my lips, for
fear my tongue grow too wide for my mouth.


Right loving uncles, and the rest of this company, my mother hath written,
and thinks it convenient that we dismiss our train, for fear the town of
Northampton is not able to receive us: and again my uncle of Gloster may
rather think we come of malice against him and his blood: therefore my Lords,
let me here your opinions, for my words and her letters are all one: and
besides I my self give consent.


Then thus may it please your grace, I will show my opinion. First note the
two houses of Lancaster and York, the league of friendship is yet but green
betwixt them, and little cause of variance may cause it break, and thereby I
think it not requisite to discharge the copany because of this. The Duke of
Buckingham is up in the Marches of VVales with a great power, and with him is
joined the Protector, for what cause I know not, therefore my Lords, I have
spoken my mind boldly, but do as your honours shall think good.


Why my Lord Rivers, wherefore is he Protector but for the Kings safety?


I sir Thomas Vaughan, and therefore a traitor, because he is Protector.


We have the Prince in charge, therefore we need not care.


We have the Prince, but they the authority.


Why take you not the Duke of Buckingham for the Kings friend?


Yes, and yet we may misdoubt the Duke of Gloster as a foe.


Why then my Lord Rivers, I think it is convenient that we leave you here
behind us at Northamton, for conference with them, and if you hear their
pretence be good towards the King, you may in Gods name make return come with
them, but if not, leave them and come to us with speed. For my sister the
Queen hath willed that we should dismiss our company, and the King himself
hath agreed to it, therefore we must needs obey.


If it please your grace I am content, and humbly take my leave of you all.


Farewell good uncle, ah gods, if I do live my fathers years as God forbid
but I may, I will so root out this malice envy sown among the nobility,
that I will make them weary that were the first beginners of these mischiefs.


Worthily well spoken of your princely Majesty,
Which no doubt shows a king-like resolution.

A toward young Prince, and no doubt forward to all virtue, whose reign God
long prosper among us.


But come uncle, let us forward of our journey towards London.


We will attend upon your Majesty.


Come on mine Ost, what doest thou understand my tale or no?


I faith my guest you have amazed me already, and to hear it again, it will
mad me altogether, but because I may think upon it the better, I pray you let
me hear it once more.


Why then thus, I serve the right honourable the Lord Protector.


I, I know that too well.


Then this is his graces pleasure, that this night he will be lodged in thy
house, thy fare must be sumptuous, thy lodgings cleanly, his men used friendly
and with great courtesy, and that he may have his lodging prepared as near
Lord River ^ ^sible may be


Why sir if this be all, this is done already.


Nay more.


Nay sir, you love me no more, here's too much already.


Nay, my Lords graces pleasure is further, that when all thy guess have taken
their chambers, that thou convey into my Lords hands the keys of every
several chamber, and what my Lords pleasure is further, thou shalt know in the
morning.


How locke in my guess like prisoners, why do you hear my guess? me
thinks there should be little better then treason in these words you have
uttered.


Treason villain, how dare thou have a thought of treason against my Lord,
therefore you were best be brief, and tell me whether you will do it or no?


Alas what shall I do? who were I best to offend? shall I betray that good
old Earl that hath lain at my house this forty years? why and I do he
will hang me: nay then on the other side, if I should not do as my Lord
Protector commands, he will chop off my head, but is there no remedy?


Come sir be brief, there is no remedy, therefore be brief and tell me
straight.


Why then sir here's my hand, tell my Lord Protector he shall have it, I will do
as he commands me, but even against my will, God is my witness.


Why then farewell mine Ost.


Farewell even the worst guest that ever came to my house, A masters,
masters, what a troublesome vocation am I crept into, you think we that be
In-keepers get all the world, but I think I shall get a fair halter to my
neck, but I must go see all things done to my great grief.

Ho mine Ost, Chamberlaine wheres my key?
What pend up like a prisoner? But stay, I fear I am betrayed,
The sudden sight of Glosters Duke, doth make me sore afraid:
I'll speak to him, and gently him salute,
Tho in my heart I envy much the man;
God morrow my Lord Protector to your grace,
And Duke of Buckingham God morrow too,
Thanks noble Dukes for our good cheer, for your copany.

Thou wretched Earl, whose aged head imagines nought
but treachery,
Like Iudas thou admitted wast to sup with us last night,
But heavens prevented thee our ils, and left thee in this plight:
Greeu'st thou that I the Gloster Duke, should as Protector sway?
And were you he was left behind, to make us both away?
Wilt thou be ringleader to wrong, must you guide the realm?
Nay over board al such mates I hurl, whilst I do guide the helm:
I'll weed you out by one and one, I'll burn you up like chafe,
I'll rend your stock up by the roots, that yet in triumphs laffe.

Alas good Dukes for ought I know, I never did offend,
Except unto my Prince vnloyall I have been,
Then show just cause, why you exclaim so rashly in this sort,
So falsely thus me to condemn, upon some false report:
But am I here as prisoner kept, imprisoned here by you?
Then know, I am as true to my Prince, as the proudest in thy crew.

A bravely spoke good old Earl, who tho his limbs be number.
He hath his tongue as much at use, as tho his years were young.

Spekest you the truth, how dare you speak, for justice to apeale?
When as thy packing with thy Prince, thy falsehood do reveal.
A Rivers blush, for shame to speak, like traitor as thou art.

A brayd you me as traitor to your grace:
No although a prisoner, I return defiance in thy face.
The Chronicles I record, talk of my fidelity, of my progeny,
Where, as in a glass you may behold, thy ancestors their treachery.
The wars in France, Irish coflicts, Scotland knows my trust,
When thou hast kept thy skin vnscard, and let thine armour rust*
How thou unjustly here exclaim'st,
Yea far from love or kin,
Was this the oath which at our princes death,
With us thou did combine?
But time permits now, to tell thee all my mind:
For well tis known that but for fear, you never wold have clind.
Let Commons now have it in hand, the matter is begun,
Of whom I fear the lesser sort, upon thy part will run.
My Lords, I cannot breath it out in words like to you: but this,
My honour I will set to sale, let any comman man come in,
And say Earl Rivers faith unto his Prince did quail,
Then will I lose my lands and life, but if none so can do,
Then thou Protector iniur'st me, and thy copartner too:
But since as Judges here you are, and taking no remorse,
Spare me not, let me have law, in justice do your worst.

My Lord, lay down a cooling card, this game is gone too far,
You have him fast, now cut him off, for fear of civil war.
Injurious Earl, I hardly brooke, this portion thou hast given,
Thus with my honour me to touch, but thy ruth shall begin.

But as thou art I leave thee here,
Unto the officers custody,
First bare him to Pomphret Castle,
Charge them to keep him secretly:
And as you hear from me so deal,
Let it be done immediately:
Take from our Garrison one whole band,
To guard him thither safely.

And send thou me to common Jail?
Nay then I know thy mind:
God bless these young and tender babes,
That I do leave behind.
And God above protect them day and night,
Those are the marks thou aim at, to rid them from their right.
Farewell sweet England and my country men,
Earl Rivers leads the way:
Yet would my life might rid you from this thrall,
But for my stock kindred to the Queen, I greatly fear the all.
And thus disloyal Duke farewell, when ever this is known,
The shame and infamy thereof, be sure will be thine own.

So now my Lord of Buckingham, let us hoist up sail while the wind serves,
this hot beginning must have a quick dispatch, therefore I charge and command
straightly, that every high way be laid close, that none may be suffered to
carry this news before we our selves come, for if word come before us, then
is our pretence bewraid, and all we have done to no effect. If any ask the
cause why they may not pass, use my authority, and if he resist shoot him
through. Now my Lord of Buckingham, let us take post horse to Stony Stratford,
where happily i'll say such grace to the Princes dinner, that I will make the
devoutest of them forget what meat they eat and yet all for the best I hope.


Lord Gray, you do discomfort the King by reason of your heaviness.


Alas sir Richard, how can I be merry when we have so great a charge of his
grace: and again this makes me to grieve the more, because we cannot hear
from Earl Rivers, which makes me think the Protector and he have been at some
words.


Why good uncle comfort your self, no doubt my uncle Earl Rivers is well, is
coming no doubt with my uncle of Gloster to meet us, else we should have
heard to the contrary. If any have cause to fear, it is my self, therefore
good uncle comfort your self and be not sad.


The sweet joyce of such a grape would comfort a man were he half dead, and
the sweet words of such a Prince would make men carlesse of mishaps, how
dangerous soever.


Lord Gray, we hear now by all likelihoods the Protector not to be far,
therefore we are to entertain him and the Duke of Buckingham with courtesy,
both for the Princes behalf and for our own.


Sir Richard Hapc, I shall hardly show the Protector or the Duke of Buckingham
any merry countenance, considering how hardly I have been used by them both, but
yet for love to my prince I will bridle my affection, but in good time they come.


Long live my Princely Nephew in all happiness.


Thanks uncle of Gloster for your courtesy, yet you have made hast, for we
looked not for you as yet.


Therein I show my humble duty to your grace, whose life I wish to redouble
your deceased fathers days.


Thanks good uncle.


Long live my gracious Prince.


Thanks Buckingham, but uncle you will bear us company towards London?


For that cause we came.


Gentlemen on before keep your rooms, how now Lord Gray, do you jostle in the
presence of the King? This is more then needs.


My Lord, I scarce touched you, I hope it be no offence.


Sir no great offence, but inward envy will burst out, No Lord Gray, you cannot
hide your malice to us of the Kings blood.


Why good uncle let me know the cause of your sudden quarrel?


Marry thus noble Nephew, the old wound of envy, being rubbed by Lord Grayes
venomous rashness, is grown to such a venomous sore that it is incurable,
without remove of dead flesh.


Lord Gray, I do so much dislike thy abuse, that were it not in presence of the
Prince, I would bid thee combat: but thus and it shall like your grace, I
arest, atache this Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Vaughon, and Richard Hapce, of high
treason to your grace. And that Lord Gray hath conueyed money out of the Tower
to relieve our enemies the Scots, and now by currying favour with your
Majesty, he thinks it to be hid.


Only this I add, you govern the Prince without my authority, allowing me no
more then the bare name of Protector, which I will have in the despite of you,
and therefore as your competitor Earl Rivers is already imprisoned, so shall
you be, till time affoord the law to take place.


But whereas we are atacht as traitors to his grace, and govern him without
your authority, why we have authority from the mother Queen. And for the
delivery of the money to the Scots, it was done by a general consent of you
all, and that I have your hands to show for my discharge, therefore your arest
atachment is not lawful: yet as lawful as your quarrel is right.


Thy presumption condemns thee Lord Gray, thy arest is lawful. Therefore see
them speedily and secretly imprisoned, and after the coronation they shall
answer it by law, mean while, Officers look to your charge.


A Gods, and is it justice without my consent? Am I a King and bear no
authority? My loving kindred committed to prison as traitors in my presence,
and I stand to give aim at them. A Edward, would thou laist by thy fathers
side, or else he had lived till thou had bin better able to rule. If my near
kindred be committed to prison, what remains for me, a crown? A but how? so
beset with sorrows, that the care grief will kill me ere I shall enjoy my
kingdom. Well since I cannot command, I will entreat Good uncle of Gloster, for
all I can say little, but for my uncle Lord Gray, what need he be a thief or
convey money out of the Tower, when he hath sufficient of his own? But good
uncle let me bail them all: If not, I will bail my uncle Lord Gray if I may.


Your grace undertakes you know not what, the matters are perilous, especially
against the Lord Gray.


What perilous matters, considering he is a friend to us?


He may be a friend to win favour, so climb to promotion in respect of his
equals. His equals, nay his betters.


I know my uncle will conceal no treason, or dangerous seeresie from us.


Yes secrets that are too subtle for babes, Alas my Lord you are a child, and
they use you as a child: but they consult and conclude of such matters, as were
we not careful, would prove prejudicial to your Majesties person. Therefore
let not your grace fear any thing by our determination, for as my authority
is only under your grace, so shall my loyalty deserve hereafter the just
recompense of a true subject, therefore I having charge fro my brother your
father, our late deceased king, during the minority of your grace, I will use
my authority as I see good.


Ay me unhappy king.


Nay let not your grace be dismayed for our imprisonmet, but I would we could
warrant your grace from harm, so we humbly take our leaves of your grace,
hoping that ere long we shall answer by law to the shame disgrace of you all.


Go, you shall answer it by law.


But come uncle shall we to Lon. to our untimely cronatio?


What else and please your majesty, where by the way I will appoint trusty
Officers about you.


Sound Trumpet in this parley, God save the King.


Richard.


May it please your grace to show to your children the cause of your heaviness,
that we knowing it, may be copartners of your sorrows.


Ay me poor husbandles queen, you poor fatherless princes.


Good mother expect the living, and forget the dead. What tho our father be
dead, yet behold his children, the image of himself.


Ay poor Princes, my mourning is for you and for your brother, who is gone up
to an untimely crownation.


Why mother he is a Prince, and in hands of our two uncles, Earl Rivers,
Lord Gray, who will no doubt be careful of his estate.


I know they will, but kings have mortal enemies, as well as friends that
esteem and regard them. A sweet children, when I am at rest my nightly dreams
are dreadful. Me thinks as I lie in my bed, I see the league broken which was
sworn at the death of your kingly father, tis this my children and many other
causes of like importance, that makes your aged mother to lament as she doth.


May it please your grace.


A my son, no more grace, for I am so sore disgraced, that without Gods grace,
I fall into despair with my self, but who is this?


What art thou that with thy ghastly looks preaseth into sanctuary, to affright
our mother Queen.


A sweet Princes, doth my countenance bewray me? My news is doubtful and
heavy.


Then utter it to us, that our mother may not hear it.


A yes my friend, speak what ere it be.


Then thus may it please your grace, The young prince coming up to his
coronation, attended on by his two uncles, Earl Rivers, and Lord Gray, and
the rest of your kindred, was by the Duke of Buckingham and the Protector, met
at stony Stratford, where on a sudden grew malice between the Duke of
Buckingham and the Lord Gray, but in the end, the Duke of Buckinghams malice
grew so great, that he arrested and attached all those of your kindred of high
treason, whereupon the Protector being too rash in judgment, hath committed
them all to Pomphret Castle.


Where I fear he will butcher them all, but where is the Prince my son?


He remains at London in the Bishops palace, in the hands of the Protector.


A traitors, will they lay hands on their Prince, and imprison his Peers,
which no doubt means well towards him: But tell me, art not thou servant to
the Arch-Bishop of York?


Yes and it please your grace, for himself is here at hand with Letters from
the Council, and here he comes.


But here my friend, grief had almost made me forget thy reward.

A come my Lord, thou bring the heavy news, come shoot thine arrow, and
hit this heart that is almost dead with grief already.


What ere my news be, have patience, the Duke of Gloster greets your grace.


Draw home my Lord, for now you hit the mark.


The Prince your son doth greet your grace.


A happy gale that blew that arrow by, A let me see the Letter that he sent,
perhaps it may prolong my life a while.


How doth my brother, is he in health my Lord?


In health sweet Prince, but lunges to have thy company.


I am content, if my mother will let me go.


Content or not, sweet Prince it must be so.


Hold, and have they persuaded thee my son to have thy brother too away from
me, nay first I will know what shall become of thee, before I send my other
son to them.


Look on this Letter and advise your self, for thus the Council hath
determined.


And have they chosen thee among the rest; for to persuade me to this
enterprise? No my Lord, and thus persuade your self, I will not send him to be
butchered.


Your grace misdoubts the worst, they send for him only to have him bedfellow
to the King, and there to stay keep him company. And if your son miscary,
then let his blood be laid unto my charge: I know their drifts and what they do
pretend, for they shall both this night sleep in the Tower, and to morrow they
shall come forth to his happy cronation. Upon my honour this is the full
effect, for see the ambusht nobles are at hand to take the Prince away from you
by force, if you will not by fair means let him go.


Why my Lord will you break Sanctuary, and bring in rebels to affright us thus?
No, you shall rather take away my life before you get my boy away from me.


Why Madame have you taken Sanctuary?


I my Lord, and high time too I trow.


A heavy case when Princes fly for aide, where cutthroates, rebels, and
bankerouts should be. But Madame what answer do you return, if I could
persuade you, twere best to let him go.


But for I see you counsel for the best, I am content that you shall have my
son, in hope that you will send him safe to me, here I deliver him into your
hands.

Farewell my boy, commend me to thy brother.


Mother farewell, and farewell sister too, I will but see my brother and
return to you.


Tears stops my speech. Come let us in my Lord.


I will attend upon your grace. Hold take the Prince, the Queen I have done,
I'll take my leave, and after you i'll come.


How now my friend, shall I go to my brother?


What else sweet Prince, and for that cause we are come, to bear you
company.


Why thus by keeping company, am I become like unto those with whom I keep
company. As my Lord hopes to wear the Crown, so I hope by that means to have
preferment, but in steed of the Crown, the blood of the headles light upon his
head: he hath made but a wrong match, for blood is a threatener and will have
revenge. He makes havoc of all to bring his purpose to pass: all those of
the Queens kindred that were committed to Pomphret Castle, he hath caused them
to be secretly put to death without judgement: the like was never seen in
England. He spares none whom he but mistrusts to be a hinderer to his
proceedings, he is straight chopped up in prison The valiant Earl of Oxford
being but mistrusted, is kept close prisoner in Hames Castle. Again, how well
Doctor Shaw hath pleased my Lord, that preached at Paules Cross yesterday,
that proved the two Princes to be bastards, whereupon in the after noone came
down my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen to Baynard Castle, and offered my Lord
the whole estate upon him, and offered to make him King, which he refused so
faintly, that if it had been offered once more, I know he would have taken it,
the Duke of Buckingham is gone about it, and is now in the Guild Hall making
his Oration. But here comes my Lord.


Catesby content thee, I have warned the Lord Hastings to this Court, and since
he is so hard to be won, tis better to cut him off then suffer him, he hath
been all this while partaker to our secrets, and if he should but by some
mislike utter it, then were we all cast away.


Nay my Lord do as you will, yet I have spoken what I can in my friends cause.


Goto no more ado Catesby, they say I have bin a long sleeper to day, but i'll
be awake anon to some of their costs. But sirrha are those men in readiness
that I appointed you to get?


I my Lord, give diligent attendance upon your grace.


Goto, look to it then Catesby, get thee thy weapons ready, for I will enter
the Court.


I will my Lord.


Doth my Lord say he hath been a long sleeper to day? There are those of the
Court that are of another opinion, that thinks his grace lies never log enough
a bed. Now there is court held to day by diverse of the Council, which I fear
me will cost the Lord Hastings and the Lord Standley their best caps: for my
Lord hath willed me to get half a dozen ruffians in readiness, and when he
knocks with his fist upon the board, they to rush in, and to cry, treason,
treason, and to lay hands upon the Lord Hastings, and the Lord Stannley, which
for fear I should let slip, I will give my diligent attendance.


Come bring him away, let this suffice, thou and that accursed sorceress the
mother Queen hath bewitched me, with assistance of that famous strumpet of my
brothers, Shores wife: my withered arm is a sufficient testimony, deny it if
thou can: lay not Shores wife with thee last night?


That she was in my house my Lord I cannot deny, but not for any such matter.
If.


If villain, feed thou me with Ifs ands, go fetch me a Priest, make a short
shrift, and dispatch him quickly For by the blessed Saint Paule I swear, I
will not dine till I see the traitors head, away sir Thomas, suffer him not to
speak, see him executed straight, let his copartner the Lord Standly be carried
to prison also, tis not his broke head I have given him, shall exscues him.

Catesbie go you and see it presently proclaimed throughout the City of
London by a Herald of Arms, that the cause of his death and the rest, were for
conspiring by Witchcraft the death* of me and the Duke of Buckingham, that so
they might govern the King and rule the realm, I think the proclamation be
almost done.


I my good Lord, and finished too.


Well then about it. But hear thou Catesbie, mean while I will listen after
success of the Duke of Buckingham, who is labouring all this while with the
Citizens of London to make me King, which I hope shall be shortly, for thou
see our foes now are fewer, and we nearer the mark then before, and when I
have it, look thou for the place of thy friend the Lord Hastings, mean while
about thy business.


I thank your grace.


Now sirrha to thee, there is one thing more undone, which grieves me more then
all the rest: and to say the truth, it is of more importance then all the rest.


Ah that my Lord would utter it to his Page, then should I count my self a
happy man, if I could ease my Lord of that great doubt.


I commend thy willingness, but it is too mighty and reaches the stars.


The more weighty it is, the sooner shall I by doing it, increase your honours
good liking toward me.


Be assured of that, but the matter is of weight ^reat importance, and doth
concern the state.


Why my Lord, I will choke them with gifts that sha^ perform it, therefore
good my Lord, trust me in this cause.


Indeed thy trust I know to be so true, that I care not to utter it unto thee.
Come hither, yet the matter is too weighty for so mean a man.


Yet good my Lord, utter it.


Why thus it is, I would have my two Nephews the young Prince and his brother
secretly murdered, Sownes villain tis out, wilt thou do it? or wilt thou
betray me?


My Lord you shall see my forwardness herein, I am acquainted with one Iames
Terrell, that lodgeth-hard by your honours chamber, with him my Lord will I so
work, that soon at night you shall speak with him.


Of what reputation or calling is that Terrell, may we trust him with that
which once known, were the utter confusion of me and my friends for ever?


For his trust my Lord, I dare be bound, only this, a poor gentleman he is,
hoping for preferment by your grace, and upon my credit my Lord, he will see it
done.


Well in this be very circumspect and sure with thy diligence, be liberal,
and look for a day to make thee bless thy self, wherein thou seruedst so good
a Lord. And now that Shores wives goods be confiscate, go from me to the
Bishop of London, and see that she receive her open penance, let her be turned
out of prison, but so bare as a wretch that worthily hath deserved that plague:
and let there be straight proclaimation made by my Lord the Mayor, that none
shall relieve her nor pity her, and privy spies set in every corner of the
City, that they may take notice of them that releeues her: for as her
beginning was most famous above all, so will I have her end most infamous above
all. Have care now my boy, and win thy masters heart for ever.


Ah unfortunate Shores wife, dishonour to the King, a shame to thy country,
and the only blot of defame to all thy kindred: Ay why was I made fair that a
King should favour me? But my friends should have preferred discipline before
affection: for they know of my folly, yea my own husband knew of my breach of
disloyalty, and yet suffered me, by reason he knew it bootless to kick
against the prick. A sweet King Edward, little did thou think Shores wife
should have been so hardly used, thy unnatural brother not concent with my
goods which are yet confiscate in his custody, but yet more to add to my
present misery, hath proclaimed upon great penalty, that none whatsoever,
shall either aide or succour me, but here being comfortless to die in the
streets with hunger. I am constrained to beg, but I fear tis in vain, for
none will pity me. Yet here come one to whom I have done good, in restoring
his lands that were lost, now will I try him to see if he will give me
anything.


A time how thou suffrest fortune to alter estates, change the minds of the
good for the worst. How many headless Peers sleep in their graves, whose
places are furnish with thei^ inferiors? Such as are neither nobly borne, nor
virtuously minded. My heart hardly bewails the loss of the young King, by the
outrage of the Protector, who hath proclaimed himself King, by the name of
Richard the third. The Commons murmure at it greatly, that the young King and
his brother should be imprisoned, but to what end tis hard to say, but many
think they shall never come forth again. But God do all for the best and that
the right heirs may not be utterly overthrown.


A gods what a grief is it for me to ask, where I have given.


A my good Lord Hastings, how innocently thou died the heavens bear
witness.


Good sir take pity upon me, and relieve me.


Indeed tis pity to see so fair a face to ask for alms; But tell me, hast
thou no friends?


Yes sir I had many friends, but when my chiefest friend of all died, the rest
then forsook me.


Belike then thy fact was notorious, that thy f^iends leaving thee would let
thee go as a spoil for villains. But hearst thou, I prethie tell me the
truth, and as I am a gentleman, I will pity thee?


A Lodowick, tell thee the truth, why half this entreaty served thee, when
thy lands had been clean gone had it not been for Shores wife, and doest thou
make me so long to beg for a little.


Indeed my lands I had restored me by mistress Shore, but may this be she?


I Lodowicke, I am she that begged thy lands of King Edward the fourth,
therefore I pray thee bestow something on me.


A gods what is this world, and how uncertain are riches? Is this she that was
in such credit with the King? Nay more, that could command a King indeed? I
cannot deny but my lands she restored me, but shall I by relieving of her hurt
my self, no: for straight proclamation is made that none shall succour her,
therefore for fear I should be seen talk with her, I will shun her company
and get me to my chamber, and there set down in heroical verse, the shameful
end of a Kings Concubin, which is no doubt as wonderful as the desolation of a
kingdom.


A Lodowick if thou wilt give me nothing, yet stay and talk with me. A no he
shuns my company, all my friends now forsake me: In prosperity I had many,
but in adversity none. A gods have I this for my good I have done, for when I
was in my chiefest pomp, I thought that day well spent wherein I might pleasure
my friend by suits to the King, for if I had spoken, he would not have said
nay. For tho he was King, yet Shores wife swayd the sword. I where need was,
there was I bountiful, and mindful I was still upon the poor to relieve
them* and now none will know me nor succour me: therefore here shall I die for
want of sustenance. Yet here comes another whom I have done good unto in saving
the life of his son, well I will try him, to see if he will give me any
thing.


No men no laws, no Princes no orders, alls husht neighbour now hes king, but
before he was king how was the tems thwackt with ruffians? what fraies had we
in the streets? Now he hath proclaimed peace between Scotland and England for
six years, to what end I know not, usurpers had need to be wise.


A good sir relieve me, and bestow something upon me.


A neighbour, hedges have eyes, and high-wayes have ears, but who is't a
beggar-woman? the streets are full of them, In faith. But here's thou, hast thou
no friends that thou go a begging so?


Yes sir I had friends, but they are all dead as you are.


Why am I dead neighbour? why thou arrant queen what meanst thou by that?


I mean they are dead in charity. But I pray sir, had not you the life of
your son saved in the time of king Edward* the fourth, by one Shores wife?


Yes mary had I, but art thou a sprig of the same bough? I promise you neighbor
I thought so, that so idle a huswife could not be without the acquaintance of so
noble a strumpet: well for her sake i'll give thee somewhat.


Nay then know, that I am she that saved the life of thy condemned son.


Who art thou Shores wife? Lye still purse, neighbour I would not for twenty
pounds have given her one farthing, the proclamation is so hard by king
Richard. Why minion are you she that was the dishonour to the King? the shame
to her husband, the discredit to the City? Hear you, lay your fingers to
work, and get thereby somewhat to maintain you. O neighbour I grow very
choleric, and thou did save the life of my* son, why if thou had not,
another would: and for my part, I would he had been hanged seven years ago,
it had saved me a great deal of money then. But come let us go in, let the
quean alone.


Alas thus am I become an open shame to the world, here shall I die in the
streets for want of sustenance, alas is my fact so heinous that none will
pity me? Yet here comes another to whom I have done good, who is least able
to pleasure me, yet I will try him, to see if he will give me any thing.


Now sir, who but king Richard bears sway, and hath proclaimed Iohn Earl of
Linclone, heir aparant to the Crown, the young Princes they are in the Tower,
nay some says more, they are murdered. But this makes me to muse, the Duke of
Bucking ham and the King is at such variance, that did all in all to help him
to the Crown, but the Duke of Buckingham is rid down to Breaknock. Castle in
Wales, and there he means to raise up a power to pull down the usurper: but
let them agree as they will, for the next fair wind i'll over seas.


A Shores wife, so near driven, to beg of a serving-man, I, necessity hath no
law, I must needs. Good sir relieve me, and give me something.


Why what art thou?


In brief Morton, I am Shores wife, that have done good to all.


A fool, and ever thy own enemy. In troth mistress Shore, my store is but
small, yet as it is, we'll part stakes, but soft I cannot do what I would, I am
watched.


Good Morton relieve me.


What should I relieve my Kings enemy?


Why thou promised thou would.


I tell thee I will not, so be answered. Sownes I would with all my heart, but
for yonder villain, a plague on him.


An honest fellow I warrant him. How now Shores wife, will none relieve thee?


No none will relieve her, that hath been good to all.


Why twere pity to do thee good, but me thinks she is fulsome and stinks.


If I be fulsome shun my company, for none but thy Lord sought my misery, and
he hath undone me.


Why hath he undone thee? nay thy wicked and naughty life hath undone thee,
but if thou want maintenance, why doest thou not fall to thy old trade
again?


Nay villain, I have done open penance, and am sorry for my sins that are
past.


Sownes is Shores wife become an holy whore, nay then we shall never have
done.


Why hang thee, if thy faults were so written in thy forehead as mine is, it
would be as wrong with thee. But I prethie leave me, and get thee from me.


And cannot you keep the City but you must run gadding to the Court, and
you stay here a little longer, i'll make you be set away, and for my part, would
all whoores were so served, then there would be fewer in England then there be.
And so farewell good mistress Shore.


And all such usurping kings as thy Lord is, may come to a shameful end, which
no doubt I may live yet to see. Therefore sweet God forgive all my foul
offence:

And though I have done wickedly in this world,
Into hell fire, let not my soul be hurled.

Master Terrell, the King hath written, that for one night I should deliver
you the keys, and put you in full possession But good M. Terrell, may I be so
bold to demand a question without offence?


Else God forbid, say on what ere it be.


Then this master Terrell, for your coming I partly* know the cause, for the
king oftentimes hath sent to me to have them both dispatcht, but because I was
a servant to their father being Edvvard the fourth, my heart would never give
me to do the deed.


Why sir Robert you are beside the matter, what need you use such speeches
what matters are between the King and me, I pray you leave it, and deliver me
the keys.


A here with tears I deliver you the keys, and so farewell master Terrell.


Alas good sir Robert, he is kind hearted, but it must not preuaile, what I
have promised the King I must perform. But ho Miles Forest.


Here sir.


Miles Forest, have you got those men I spake of, they must be resolute and
pitiless.


I warrant you sir, they are such pitiless villains, that all London cannot
match them for their villainy, one of their names is Will Sluter, yet the most
part calls him black Will, the other is Jack Denten, two murderous villains
that are resolute.


I prethie call them in that I may see them, and speak with them.


Ho Will and Jack.


Here sir, we are at hand.


These be they that I told you of.


Come hither sirs, to make a long discourse were but a folly, you seem to be
resolute in this cause that Miles Forest hath delivered to you, therefore you
must cast away pity, not so much as think upon favour, for the more stern
that you are, the more shall you please the King.


Zownes sir, ne'er talk to us of favour, tis not the first that Jack and I have
gone about.


Well said, but the Kings pleasure is this, that he will have no blood shed in
the deed doing, therefore let me hear your advises?


Why then I think this master Terrell, that as they sit at supper there
should be two dags ready charged, and so suddenly to shoot them both
through.


No, I like not that so well, what says thou Will, what is thy opinion?


Tush, here's more ado then needs, I pray bring me where they are, and i'll
take them by the heals and beat their brains against the walls.


Nay that I like not, for tis too tyrannous.


Then hear me master Terrell, let Will take one, and i'll take another, and by
the life of Jack Douton we'll cut both their throats.


Nay sirs, then hear me, I will have it it done in this order, when they be
both a bed and at rest, Miles Forest thou shalt bring them up both, and
between two feather beds smother them both.


Why this is very good, but stand aside, for here comes the Princes, i'll bring
you word when the deed is done.


How fares my noble Lord and loving brother?


A worthy brother, Richard Duke of York, my cause of sorrow is not for my
self, but this is it that adds my sorrow more, to see our uncle whom our
father left as our Protector in minority, should so digress from duty, love
and zeal, so unkindly thus to keep us up prisoners, and know no sufficient
cause for it.


Why brother comfort your self, for tho he detain us a while, he will not
keep us long, but at last he will send us to our loving mother again: whither
if it please God to send us, I doubt not but our mother would keep us so safe,
that all the Prelates in the world should not deprive her of us again: so
much I assure my self of. But here comes Miles Forest, I prethy Miles tell my
kingly brother some merry story to pass away the time, for thou see he is
melancholy.


No Miles, tell me no merry story, but answer me to one question, what was
he that walked with thee in the Garden, me thought he had the keys?


My Lord, it was one that was appointed by the King o be an aid to sir
Thomas Brokenbury.


Did the King, why Miles Forest, am not I King?


I would have said my Lord your uncle the Protector.


Nay my kingly uncle I know he is now, but let him enjoy both Crown and
kingdom, so my brother and I may but enjoy our lives and liberty. But tell
me, is sir Robert Brokenbery clean discharged?


No my Lord, he hath but charge for a night or two.


Nay then, new officers, new laws, would we had kept the old still. But who
are they whose ghastly looks doth present a dying fear to my living body. I
prithee tell me Miles what are they?


One my Lord is called Jack Denten, the other is called Will Slawter. But why
starts your grace?


Slawter, I pray God he come not to slaughter my brother and me, for from
murder and slaughter, good Lord deliver us. But tell me Miles is our lodging
prepared?


I my Lord, if it please your brother you to walk up.


Then come brother, we will go to bed.


I will attend upon your grace.


Come Miles Forest bear us company.


Sirs stay you two here, and when they are a sleep i'll call you up.


I promise thee Will, it grieves me to see what moan these young Princes make,
I had rather then forty pounds I had ne'er taken it in hand, tis a dangerous
matter to kill innocent princes, I like it not.


Why you base slave, are you faint hearted, a little thing would make me strike
thee, I promise thee.


Nay go forward, for now I am resolute: but come, lets too it.


I prithee stay, heel call us up anon. But sirrha Jack, did thou mark how
the King started when he heard my name? What will he do when he feels me?


But ho sirs, come softly, for now they are at rest.


Come we are ready, by the mass they are a sleep indeed.


I hear they sleep, and sleep sweet Princes, never wake no more, for you have
seen the last light in this world.


Come press them down, it boots not to cry again, (...) upon them so
lustily. But master Forest now they are dead ^t shall we do with them?


Why go and bury them at the heap of stones at the stair foot^ ^ I go and
tell master Terrell that the deed is done.


Well we will, farewell master Forest.


I (...) now Miles Forest, is this deed dispatcht?


I sir, a bloody deed we have performed.


But tell me, what hast thou done with them?


I have conveyed them to the stairs foot among a heap of stones, and anon i'll
carry them where they shall be no more found again, nor all the cronicles
shall ne'er make mentio what shall become of them: yet good master Terrell,
tell the King my name, that he may but reward me with a kingly thanks.


I will go certify the King with speed, that Miles Forest,
Will Slawter, and Jack Denten, they three have done the deed.
And so farewell.

Ah good my Lord, save my life.


Ah villain, how can thou ask for mercy, when thou hast so unjustly
betrayed me?


I desire your grace but give me leave to speak.


I speak thy last villain, that those that hear it, may see how unjustly thou
hast betrayed me.


Then thus my Lord. First, the proclamation was death to him that harboured
your grace.


Ah villain, and a thousand crowns to him that could betray me.


Ah my Lord, my obeisance to my Prince is more.


Ah villain, thou betraiedst me for lucre, and not for duty to thy Prince, why
Banister, a good servant thinks his life well spent, that spends it in the
quarrel of his master. But villain make thy self ready, and here receive thy
death.


Henry Duke of Buckingham, I arest thee in King Richards name as a traitor.


Well Herald, I will obey thy rest. But am I arrested in King Richardes name,
usurping Richard, that insatiate blood succour, that traitor to God man. Ah
Richard, did I in Guild-Hall plead the Orator for thee, and held thee in all
thy sly and wicked practises, and for my reward doest thou a lot me death? Ah
Buckingham, thou plaidst thy part and made him King, and put the lawful heirs
besides: why then is Buckingham guilty now of his death? yet had not the
Bishop of Ely fled, I had escaped.


Come, the Duke of Buckingham shall not die:
We will take him away by force.

Why villains, will you be Traitors to your Prince?


Nay good* my friends give me leave to speak, and let me entreat you to lay
your weapons by. Then know this country men, the cause I am arrested this, Is
for bringing in your lawful King, which is Henry Earl of Richmond now in
B^ittaine, and means ere long to land at Milford Haven in Wales, where I do
know he shall have aid of the chiefest of the Welch, he is your lawful
King, and this a wrongful usurper. When you shall hear of him landed in that
pl^ce, then take up weapons and amain to him, he is the man must reeve you of
this yoke, and send the usurper headless to his home, and poor Buckingham
prays upon his knees; to bless* good Richmond in his enterprise, and when the
conquest shall be given to him, grant he may match with Lady Elizabeth, as
promise hath to fore by him been past, while then my friends, leave me alone
to death, and let me take this punishment in peace. Ah Buckingham, was not thy
meaning good in displacing the usurper, to raise a lawful king? Ah Buckingham,
it was too late, the lawful heirs were smothered in the Tower, sweet Edward
and thy brother, I ne'er slept quiet thinking of your deaths. But vaunt
Buckingham, thou wast altogether innocent of their deaths. But thou vilain,
whom of a child I nursed thee up, and hast so unjustly betrayed thy Lord? Let
the curse of Buckingham ne'er depart from thee. Let vengeance, mischiefs,
tortures, light on thee and thine. And after death thou may more torture
feel, then when Excon turns the restless wheel. And ban thy soul where
ere thou seem to rest. But come my my friends, let me away.


My Lord we are sorry. But come lay hands on Banister.


The goal is got, and golden Crown is won,
And well deserve thou to wear the same,
That ventured hast thy body and thy soul,
But what boots Richard, now the Diadem
Or kingdom got, by murder of his friends,
My fearful shadow that still follows me,
Hath sommond me before the severe judge,
My conscience witness of the blood I spilt,
Accuses me as guilty of the fact,
The fact, a damned judgment craves,
Whereas impartial justice hath condemned.
Me thinks the Crown which I before did wear,
Inchast with Pearl and costly Diamonds,
Is turned now into a fatal wreathe,
Of fiery flames, and ever burning stars,
And raging fiends hath past there ugly shapes,
In student lakes, addressed to tend on me,
If it be thus, what wilt thou do in this extremity?
Nay what can thou do to purge thee of thy guilt?
Even repent, crave mercy for thy damned fact,
Appeal for mercy to thy righteous God,
Ha repent, not I, crave mercy they that list.
My God, is none of mine. Then Richard be thus resolved,
To pace thy soul in vallence with their blood,
Soul for soul, and body for body, yea mary Richard,
That*s good, Catesbie.

You called my Lord, I think?


It may be so. But what think thou Catesbie?


Of what my Lord?


Why of all these troubles.


Why my Lord, I hope to see them happily ouercom'd.


How villain, doest thou hope to see me happily ouercom'd?


Who you my Lord?


Ay villain, thou points at me, thou hope to see me ouercom'd.


No my good Lord, your enemies or else not.


Ha, ha, good Catesbie, but what hear thou of the Duke of Buckingham?


Why he is dead my Lord, he was executed at Salisbury yesterday.


Why tis impossible, his friends hopes that he shall outline me, to be my head.


Out-liue you, Lord that's strange.


No Catesbie, if a do, it must be in fames,
And since they hope he shall out live me, to be my head,
He hops without his head, rests among his fellow rebels.

Mary no force my Lord.


But Catesbie, what hear thou of Henry Earl of Richmond?


Not a word my Lord.


No: hear thou not he lives in Britain,
In favour with the Duke.
Nay more, Lady Margaret his mother conspires against us,
And persuades him that he is lineally descended from Henry
The fourth, and that he hath right to the Crown,
Therefore tell me what think thou of the Earl?

My Lord, I think of the Earl as he doth deserve, A most famous gentleman.


Villain doest thou praise my foe, and commend him to my face?


Nay my Lord, I wish he were as good a friend as he is a foe, else the due
deserts of a traitor.


Whats that?


Why my Lord, to loose his head.


Yea mary, I would twere off quickly, then
But more to the strengthening of his title,
She goes about to marry him to the Queenes eldest daughter,
Lady Elizabeth.

Indeed my Lord that I heard was concluded,
By all the nobility of Britain.

Why then there it goes,
The great devil of hell go with all.
A marriage begun in mischief, shall end in blood:
I think that accursed sorreresse the mother Queen,
Doth nothing but bewith me, and hatches conspiracies,
And brings out perilous birds to wound
Their Countries weal,
The Earl is up in Arms,
And with him many of the Nobility,
He hath aid in France,
He is rescued in Britain,
And means shortly to arrive in England:
But all this spites me not so much,
As his escape from Landoyse the Dukes Treasuror,
Who if he had been pricked forth for revenge,
He had ended all by apprehending of our foe,
But now he is in disgrace with the Duke,
And we farther off our purpose then to fore,
But the Earl hath not so many biting dogs abroad,
As we have sleeping cures at home here,
Ready for rescue.

But my Lord, I marvel how he should get aide there,
Considering he is no friend to Britain.

Ay so thou may marvel how the Duke of Britain,
Durst wake such a foe as England against him,
But evil fare makes open war.
But who comes there Catsbie?
Ha one of our spurs to revenge:
The Lord Standley, father in law to Lady Margaret,
His coming is to us Catsbie,
Were not that his life might serve,
For apprehension against our foe,
He should have neither Judge nor Jury,
But guilty death without any more ado.
Now Lord Standley, what news?
Have you received any letters of your late embassage into
Britain? What answer have you received of your letters?

Why my Lord, for that I sent, I have received.


And how doth your son then, is he in health?


For his health my Lord, I do not mistrust.


Faith tell us, when means he to arrive in England?
And how many of our Nobility is with him?
And what power is with him?

And please your grace,
His power is unknown to me,
Nor willingly would not I be privy to such causes.

Oh good words Lord Standley, but give me leave to glean out of your golden
field of eloquence, how brave you plead ignorance* as though you knew not of
your sons departure into Britain out of England.


Not I my Lord.


Why is not his mother thy wife, dares he pass over without the blessing of
his mother, whose husband thou art?


I desire your majesty but give me leave to speak?


Yea speak Standley, no doubt some fine coloured tale,


And like your grace, whereas you mistrust that I knew of my sons departure,
out of England into Britain, God I take to record it was unknown to me, nor
know not yet what his pretence is: for at his departure, was I one of the privy
council to your brother King Edward the fourth, and that she was able to
relieve him without my help: I hope her sufficiency is known to your grace.
Therefore I humbly crave pardon.


Well Standley, I fear it will be proved to the contrary, that thou did
furnish him both with money and munition, which if it be, then look for no
favour at my hands, but the due deserts of a traitor: but let this pass. Whats
your repair to our presence?


Only this my Lord, that I may repair from the court, to my house in the
country.


Ay sir, that you might be in Cheshire and Lancashire, then should your Posts
pass invisible into Britain, and you to depart the realm at your pleasure,
or else I to suffer an intolerable foe under me, which I will not. But
Standley to be brief, thou shalt not go. But soft Richard, but that it were
better to be alone then to have noisome company, he shall go, leaving for his
loyalty a sufficient pledge. Come hither Standley, thou shalt go, leaving me
here thy son and heir George Standley for a pledge, that he may perish for
thy fault if need should be, if thou likest this, go, If not, answer me
briefly, and say quickly no.


I am to advise my self upon a secret cause, and of a matter that concerns
me near: say that I leave my son unto the King, and that I should but aide
Earl Richmond, my son George Standley dies, but if my faith be kept unto my
Prince, George Standley lives. Well I will except the Kings proffer. And please
your grace I am content, and will leave my son* to pledge.


Here come hither, and with thee take this lesson.
Thou art set free for our defence,
Thou shalt upon thy pledge make this promise,
Not only to stay the hinderance of the Earl,
But to prevent his purpose with thy power.
Thou shalt not seek by any means to aide or rescue him.
This done, of my life thy son doth live:
But otherwise thy son dies and thou too; if I catch thee:
And it shall go hard but I will catch thee.

And you shall go apace, and yet go without me. But I humbly take my leave of
your grace. Farewell George.


How now, what do you give him letters?


No my Lord, I have done: The second sight is sweet, of such a son.


Carry George Standley to prison.


Alas my Lord, shall I go to prison?


Shall you go to prison, what a questions that?
So prick the lamb, and wound the damme.
How likest thou this Catesbie?

Oh my Lord so excellent, that you have imprisoned his son.


Nay now will we look to the rest,
But I sent the Lord Louell to the mother Queen,
Concerning my suit to her daughter Elizabeth,
But see in good time here he is.
How now Louell, what news?
What saith the mother Queen to my suit?

My Lord very strange she was at the first,
But when I had told her the cause, she gave concent:
Desiring your majesty to make the nobility privy to it.

God have mercy Louell, but what said Lady Elizabeth*


Why my Lord, strange, as women will be at the first* But through entreaty of
her mother, she quickly gave consent* And the Queen wild me to tel your grace,
that she means to leave Sanctuary, and to come to the court with al her
daughters.


I marry Louell let not that opportunity slip, look to it Catesbie, be
careful for it Louell, for thereby hangs such a chance, that may enrich us and
our heirs for ever. But sirs hard ye nothing of the Scottish Nobles that met
at Nottingham, to confer about the marriage of my Niece.


Not a word my Lord.


Gogs wounds who is that? search the villain, has he any dags about him?


No my Lord I have none.


From whence comes thou?


From the Peers at Nottingham and Scotland, they greet your Majesty.


Sirrha is the marriage concluded between the Scottish Earl and the fair
Lady Rosa.


Prethie tell us, is it concluded?


How says thou, is it concluded?


Nay will you give me leave to tell you that? Why you villains will you know
the secrets of my letter by interrupting messengers that are sent to me? Away I
say, begone, it is time to look about: away I say, what here yet villains?


My Lord, I have somewhat to say besides?


Then speak it, what hast thou to say?


This my Lord, when the Peers of England and Scotland met at Nottingham
together, to confer about the marriage of your Neese, it was straight
determined that she should be married with the Scottish Earl. And further my
Lord, the Council commanded me to deliver unto your grace the treasons of
Captain Blunt, who had the Earl of Oxford in charge in Hames castle, now are
they both fled, and purposes to aid the Earl of Richmond against your grace.
Now my Lord I take my leave.


Messenger stay, hath Blunt betrayed, doth Oxford rebel and aide the Earl
Richmond, may this be true, what is our prison so weak, our friends so fickle,
our Ports so ill looked too, that they may pass and repast the seas at their
pleasures, then every one conspires, spoils our Conflex, conquers our
Castles, and Arms themselves with their own weapons unresisted? O villains,
rebels, fugetiues, thieves, how are we betrayed, when our own swoordes shall
beat us, and our own subjects seeks the subuertion of the state, the fall of
their Prince, and sack of their country, of his, nay neither must nor shall,
for I will Army with my friends, and cut off my enemies, beard them to their
face that dares me, and but one, I one, one beyond the seas that troubles me:
well his power is weak, we are strong, therefore I will meet him with such
melody, that the singing of a bullet shall send him merrily to his logest home.
Come follow me.


Welcome dear friends and loving country-men,
Welcome I say to Englands blissful I'll,
Whose forwardness I cannot but commend,
That thus do aide us in our enterprise,
My right it is, and sole inheritance,
And Richard but usurps in my authority,
For in his tyranny he slaughtered those
That would not succour him in his attempts,
Whose guiltless blood craves daily at Gods hands;
Revenge for outrage done to their harmless lives:
Then courage countrymen, and never be dismayed,
Our quarrels good, and God will help the right,
For we may know by dangers we have past,
That God no doubt will give us victory.

If love of gold, or fear of many foes,
Could once have daunted us in our attempts,
Thy foot had never touched the English shore,
And here Earl Oxford plites his faith to thee,
Never to leave in what we have vndertane,
But follow still with resolution,
Till thou be crowned as conqueror in the field,
Or lose thy life in following of thy right:
Thy right brave Richmond, which we will maintain
Maugre the proudest bird of Richards brood.
Then cousin Richmond being resolved thus,
Let us straight to Aarms, God and S. George for us.

As this brave Earl have said, so say we all,
We will not leave thee till the field be won,
Which if with fortunate success we can perform,
Think then Earl Richmond that I followed thee,
And that shall be honour enough for me.

So saith Landoyse that honours Richmond so
With love vnfeined for his valor past,
That if your honour lead the way to death,
Peeter Landoys hath sworn to follow thee.
For if Queen mother do but keep her word,
And what the Peers have promised be performed,
Touching the marriage with Elizabeth,
Daughter to our King Edward the fourth,
And by this marriage join in unity
Those famous Houses Lancashire and York,
Then England shall no doubt have cause to say,
Edwards coronation was a joyful day.
And tis is all Landoys desires to see.

Thanks Landoys, and here Earl Richmonds vows,
If their kind promises take but effect,
That as they have promised I be made King,
I will so deal in governing the state,
Which now lies like a savage shultred grove,
Where brambles, briars, and thorns, ouer-grow those sprigs,
Which if they might but spring to their effect,
And not be crossed so by their contraries,
Making them subject to these outrages,
Would prove such members of the Commonwealth,
That England should in them be honoured,
As much as ever was the Roman state,
When it was governed by the Councels rule,
And I will draw my sword brave country-men,
And never leave to follow my resolve,
Till I have mowed those brambles, briars and thorns
That hinder those that long to do us good.

Why we have escaped the dangeroust brunt of all,
Which was his garrison at Milford Haven,
Shall we dismay, or dant our friends to come?
Because he took the Duke of Buckingham?
No worthy friends, and loving country-men,
Oxford did never bear so base a mind,
He will not wink at murders secretly put up,
Nor suffer upstarts to enjoy our rights,
Nor live in England under an usurping king,
And this is Oxfords resolution.

But Blunt, look whose that knocks.


My Lord, tis a messenger from the mother Queen,
And the Lady Standley your mother, with letters.

Admit him straight, now shall we hear some news.


Long live Earl Richmond.
The mother Queen doth greet your honour.

Welcome my friend, how fares our mother the rest?


In health my Lord, and glad to hear of your ariual safe.


My friend, my mother hath written to me of certain that are coming in our
aide, the report of whose names are referd to thee to deliver.


First, theirs the Lord Talbut, the Earl of Shreuesbury son and heir, with
a brave band of his own.

There is also the Lord Fitz Harbart, the Earl of Pembrookes son and heir.

Of the Gentlemen of the Welch, there is sir Prise up Thomas, and sir Thomas up
Richard, sir Owen Williams, brave gentlemen my Lord. These are the chief.


Are these the full number of all that come?


Only two more my Lord, which I have left unnamed, the one is sir Thomas Denis
a Western gentleman, and joined with him one Arnoll Butler, a great many are
willing, but dares not as yet.


Doth Arnoll Butler come, I can hardly brooke his treachery, for he it was
that wrought my disgrace with the King.


Well my Lord, we are now to strengthen our selves with friends, and not to
reap up old quarrels, say that Arnoll Butler did injury you in the time of
peace, the mends is twice made, if he stand with you in the time of wars.


Well my friend, take this for thy good news,
And commend me to our mother and the rest.
Thus my Lords, you see God still provides for us:
But now my Lords touching the placing of our battle best,
And how we may be least endangered,
Because I will be foremost in this fight,
To encounter with that bloody murderer,
My self will lead the vaward of our troop,
My Lord of Oxford, you as our second self,
Shall hall have the happy leading of the rear,
A place I know which you will well deserve,
And Captain Blunt, Peter Landoyse and you,
Shall by in quarters, as our battles scowtes,
Provided, thus your bow-men Captain Blunt,
Must scatter here and there to gaull their horse,
As also when that our promised friends do come,
Then must you hold hard skirmish with our foes,
Till I by cast of a counter march,
Have joined our power with those that come to us,
Then casting close, as wings on either side,
We will give a new prauado on the foe,
Therefore let us towards Aderstoe amain,
Where we this night God-willing will encamp,
From thence towards Lichfield, we will march next day,
And nearer London, bid King Richard play.

Where shall I find a place to sigh my fill,
And wail the grief of our sore troubled King?
For now he hath obtained the Diadem,
But with such great discomfort to his mind,
That he had better lived a private man, his looks are ghastly,
Hideous to behold, and from the privy sentire of his heart,
There comes such deep fetched sighs and fearful cries,
That being with him in his chamber oft,
He moves me weep and sigh for company,
For if he hear one stir he rises up,
And claps his hand upon his dagger straight,
Ready to stab him, what so ere he be,
But he must think this is the just revenge,
The heavens have powered upon him for his sins,
Those Peers which he unkindly murdered,
Doth cry for justice at the hands of God,
And he in justice sends continual fear,
For to affright him both at bed and board,
But stay, what noise is this, who have we here?

Why to Earl Richmonds Camp to serve with him,
For we have left to serve King Richard now.

Why comes there any more?


A number more.


Why these are the villains my Lord would have put his life into their hands.

A Richard, now do my eyes witness that thy end is at hand, For thy commons
make no more account of thee then of a private man, yet will I as duty binds,
give thee aduertisements of their unjust proceedings. My master hath lifted
out many, and yet hath left one to lift him out of all, not only of his
Crown, but also of his life. But I will in, to tell my Lord of what is
happened.


Good my Lord depart, and leave me to my self.


I pray my Lord, let me go along with you.


My Lord it may not be, for I have promised my father that none shall come but
my self, therefore good my Lord depart.


Good my Lord have a care of your self, I like not these night walks and
scouting abroad in the evenings so disguised, for you must not now that you are
in the usurpers dominions, and you are the only mark he aims at, and your
last nights absence bred such amazement in our soldiers, that they like men
wanting the power to follow Arms, were on a sudden more liker to fly then to
fight: therefore good my Lord, if I may not stand near, let me stand aloof
off.


Content thee good Oxford, and tho I confess my self bound to thee for thy
especial care, yet at this time I pray thee hold me excused. But farewell my
Lord, here comes my Lord and father.


Captain I pray thee bring me word when thou doest descry the enemy. And so
farewell, and leave me for a while.


How fares my gracious Lord and father?


In good health my son, the better to see thee thus foreward in this laudable
enterprise, but omitting vain circumstances, and to come briefly to the
purpose, I am now in few words to deliver much matter. For know this, when I
came to crave leave of the King to depart from the court, the king very
furiously began to charge me that I was both acquainted with thy practises and
drifts, and that I knew of thy landing, and by no means would grant me leave
to go, till as pledge of my loyalty and true dealing with the king, I should
leave my young son George Standley. Thus have I left my son in the hands of a
tyrant, only of purpose to come and speak with thee.


But omitting this, I pray tell me, shall I look for your help in the
battle?


Son I cannot, for as I will not go to the usurper, no more I will not come
to thee.


Why then it is bootless for us to stay, for all we presumed upon, was on
your aide.


Why son, George Standlyes death would do you no pleasure.


Why the time is too troublesome, for him to tend to follow execution.


O son, tyrants expect no time, and George Standley being young and a
grissell, is the more easy to be made away.


This news goes to my heart, but tis in vain for me to look for victory,
when with a mole-hill, we shall encounter with a mountain.


Why son, see how contrary you are, for I assure you, the chiefest of his
company are liker to fly to thee, then to fight against thee: and for me,
think me not so simple but that I can at my pleasure fly to thee, or being
with them, fight so faintly, that the battle shall be won on thy part with
small incountring. And note this besides, that the King is now come to Lester,
and means to morrow to bid thee battle in Bosworth.


Come my Lord, I do descry the enemy.


Why then son farewell, I can stay no longer.


Yet good father, one word more ere you depart,
What number do you think the kings power to be?

Mary some twenty thousand. And so farewell.


And we hardly five thousand, being beset with many enemies, hoping upon a few
friends, yet despair not Richmond, but remember thou fight in right, to
defend thy country from the tyranny of an usurping tyrant, therefore
Richmond go foreward, the more dangerous the battle is in atteining, it
proves the more honourable being obtained. Then forward Richmond, God and
saint George, for me.

Quisquam regna gaudit, o fallex bonum.
The hell of life that hangs upon the Crown,
The daily cares, the nightly dreams,
The wretched crews, the treason of the foe,
And horror of my bloody practise past,
Strikes such a terror to my wounded conscience,
That sleep I, wake I, or whatsoever I do,
Me thinks their ghoasts comes gaping for revenge,
Whom I have slain in reaching for a Crown.
Clarence complains, and cries for revenge.
My Nephues bloods, Revenge, revenge, doth cry.
The headless Peers comes preasing for revenge.
And every one cries, let the tyrant die.
The Sun by day shines hotly for revenge.
The Moon by night eclipses for revenge.
The stars are turned to Comets for revenge.
The Planets change their coursies for revenge.
The birds sing not, but sorrow for revenge.
The silly lambs sits bleating for revenge.
The screeking Raven sits croaking for revenge.
Whole heads of beasts comes bellowing for revenge.
And all, yea all the world I think,
Cries for revenge, and nothing but revenge.
But to conclude, I have deserved revenge.
In company I dare not trust my friend,
Being alone, I dread the secret foe:
I doubt my food, least poison lurk therein.
My bed is uncouth, rest refrains my head.
Then such a life I count far worse to be,
Then thousand deaths unto a damned death:
How wast death I said? who dare attempt my death?
Nay who dare so much as once to think my death?
Though enemies there be that would my body kill,
Yet shall they leave a never dying mind.
But you villains, rebels, traitors as you are,
How came the foe in, preasing so near?
Where, where, slept the garrison that should a beat them back?
Where was our friends to intercept the foe?
All gone, quite fled, his loyalty quite laid a bed?
Then vengeance, mischief, horror, with mischance,
Wilde-fire, with whirl winds, light upon your heads,
That thus betrayed your Prince by your untruth.

Frantic man, what meanst thou by this mood? Now he is come more need to beat
him back.


Sour is his sweet that savours thy delight, great is his power that threats
thy overthrow.


The bad rebellion of my foe is not so much, as for to see my friends do fly
in flocks from me.


May it please your grace to rest your self content, for you have power enough
to defend your land.


Dares Richmond set his foot on land with such a small power of straggling
fugatiues?


May it please your grace to participate the cause that thus doth trouble you?


The cause Buzzard, what cause should I participate to thee? My friends are gone
away, and fled from me, keep silence villain, least I by post do send thy
soul to hell, not one word more, if thou doest love thy life.


My Lord.


Yet again vilaine, o Catesbie is it thou? What comes the Lord Standley or no?


My Lord, he answers no.


Why did not tell him then, I would send his son George Standleys head to
him.


My Lord I did so, he answered, he had another son left to make Lord
Standley.


O vilaine wild, and breaker of his oath, the bastards ghost shall hant him
at the heals, and cry revenge for his wild fathers wrongs, go Louell,
Catsbie, fetch George Standly forth, him with these hands will I butcher for
the dead, and send his headless body to his fire.


Leave off executions now the foe is here that threatens us most cruelly of
our lives.


Zownes, foe me no foes, the fathers fact condemns the son to die.


But guiltless blood will for revengement cry.


Why was not he left for fathers loyalty?


Therein his father greatly injured him.


Did not your selves in presence, see the bonds sealed and assigned?


What tho my Lord, the vardits own, the titles doth resign.


The bond is broke and I will sue the fine, except you will hinder me, what
will you have it so?


In doing true justice, else we answer no.


His treacherous father hath neglect his word and done imparshall past by dint
of sword, therefore sirrha go fetch him, Zownes draw you cuts who shall go, I
bid you go Catesby. A Richard, now may thou see thy end at hand, why sirs why
fear you thus? why we are ten to one, if you seek promotion, I am a King
already in possession, better able to perform then he. Louell, Catesby, lets
join lovingly and devoutly together, and I will divide my whole kingdom
amongst you.


We will my Lord.


We will my Lord, a Catesbie, thou look like a dog, and thou Louell too, but
you will run away with them that be gone, and the devil go with you all, God
I hope, God, what talk I of God, that have served the devil all this while.
No, fortune and courage for me, and join England against me with England,
Join Europe with Europe, come Christendom, and with Christendom the whole
world, and yet I will never yield but by death only. By death, no die, part
not childishly from thy Crown, but come the devil to claim it, strike him
down, tho that Fortune hath decreed, to set revenge with triumphs on my
wretched head, yet death, sweet death, my latest friend, hath sworn to make a
bargain for my lasting fame, and this, I this very day, I hope with this lame
hand of mine, to rake out that hateful heart of Richmond, and when I have it,
to eat it panting hot with salt, and drink his blood luke warm, tho I be
sure twil poison me. Sirs you that be resolute follow me, the rest go hang your
selves.


A horse, a horse, a fresh horse.


A fly my Lord, and save your life.


Fly villain, look I as tho I would fly, no first shall this dull and
senseless ball of earth receive my body cold and void of sense, you watery
heavens roll on my gloomy day, and darksome clouds close up my cheerful
sownde, down is thy sun Richard, never to shine again, the birds whose
feathers should adorn my head, hovers aloft dares not come in sight, yet faint
not man, for this day if Fortune will, shall make thee King possessed with quiet
Crown, if Fates deny, this ground must be my grave, yet golden thoughts that
reached for a Crown, daunted before by Fortunes cruel spite, are come as
comforts to my drooping heart, and bids me keep my Crown and die a King.
These are my last, what more I have to say, i'll make report among the damned
souls.


How may I know the certain true report of this victorious battle fought to
day, my friend what ere thou be, tel unto me the true report, which part
hath won the victory, whether the King or no?


A no, the King is slain and he hath lost the day, and Richmond he hath won
the field, and triumphs like a valiant conqueror.


But who is slain besides our Lord and sovereign?


Slain is the worthy Duke of Northfolke he, with him sir Robart Brokenby,
Lieutenant of the Tower, besides Louell, he made also a partner in this
Tragedy.


But wheres sir William Catsby?


He is this day beheaded on a stage at Lester, because he took part with my
Lord the King. But stay Report, thou shalt hear me tell the brief discourse.
And how the battle fell then know Report, that Richard came to field mounted
on horseback, with as high resolve as fierce Achillis amongst the sturdy
Greekes, whom to encounter worthy Richmond, came accompanied with many
followers, and then my Lord displayed his colours straight, and with the charge
of Trumpet, Drum, and Fyfe, these brave batalians straight encountered, but in
the skirmish which continued long, my Lord began faint, which Richmond straight
perceived, and presently did sound afresh alarm, but worthy Richard that did
never fly, but followed honour to the gates of death, straight spurred his horse
to encounter with the Earl, in which encountry Richmond did preuaile, taking
Richard at advantage, then he threw his horse and him both to the ground, and
there was worthy Richard wounded, so that after that he ne'er recovered
strength. But to be brief, my master would not yield, but with his loss of
life he lost the field. Report farewell.


Now noble Peers and worthy country-men, since God hath given us fortune of
the day, let us first give thanks unto his Deity, next with honours fitting
your deserts, I must be grateful to my country men, and worthy Oxford for
thy service shown in hot encountering of the enemy, Earl Richmond binds
himself in lasting bonds of faithful love perfect unity. Sorry I am for
those that I have lost by our so dangerous encountering with the foe, but sorrow
cannot bring the dead to life: and therefore are my sorrows spent in vain.
Only to those that live, thus much I say, I will maintain them with a manual
pay. And loving father, lastly to your self, tho not the least in our expected
aide, we give more thanks for your unlooked for aide, then we have power on
sudden to declare, but for your thanks I hope it shall suffice that I in
nature love honour you.


Well spoken son, and like a man of worth, whose resolution in this battle
past, hath made thee famous amongst thy enemies. And think my son, I glory more
to hear what praise the common people gave of thee, then if the Peers by
general full consent had set me down to wear the Diadem. Then live my son
thus loved of thy friends, and for thy foes prepare to combat them.


And Oxford vows perpetual love to thee, wishing as many honours to Earl
Richmond, as Caesar had in conquering the world, I doubt not but if fair
fortune follow thee, to see thee honoured amongst thy country men, as Hector was
among the Lords of Troy, or Y^lley amongst the Roman Senators.


How fares our lovely mother Queen?


In health Earl Richmond, glad to hear the news that God hath given thee
fortune of the day. But tell me Lords, where is my son Lord Marquess Dorset,
that he is not here? what was he murdered in this Tragedy?


No lovely Queen your son doth live in France, for being distressed and driven
by force of tempest to that shore, and many of our men being sick and dead, we
were enforced to ask the King for aide, as well for men as for munition, which
then the King did willingly supply, provided, that as hostage for those men,
Lord Marquess Dorset should be pledge with the. But Madame now our troubled
war is done, Lord Marquess Dorset shall come home again.


Richmond, gramercies for thy kind good news, which is no little comfort to
thy friends, to see how God hath been thy happy guide in this late conquest
of our enemies. And Richmond, as thou art returned with victory, so we will
keep our words effectually.


Then Madame for our happy battles victory, first thanks to heaven, next
to my foreward country-men, but Madame pardon me tho I make bold to charge you
with a promise that you made, which was confirmed by diverse of the Peers,
touching the marriage of Elizabeth, and having ended what I promised you,
Madam, I look and hope to have my due.


Then know my son, the Peers by full consent, in that thou hast freed them
from a tyrants yoke, have by election chosen thee as King, first in regard they
account thee virtuous, next, for that they hope all foreign broils shall
cease, and thou wilt guide and govern them in peace, then sit thou down my
son, and here receive the Crown of England as thy proper own, sit down.


Henry the seventh, by the grace of God, King of England, France, and Lord of
Ireland, God save the King.


Long live Henry the seventh, King of England.


Thanks loving friends and my kind country-men, and here I vow in presence of
you all, to root abuses from this common wealth, which now flows faster then
the furious tide that overflows beyond the banks of Nile. And loving father,
and my other friends, whose ready forwardness hath made me fortunate, Richmond
will still in honourable love count himself to be at your dispose, nor do I
wish to enjoy a longer life, then I shall live to think upon your love. But
what saith fair Elizabeth to us? for now we have welcomed our other friends,
I must bid you welcome Lady amongst the rest, and in my welcome crave to be
resolved, how you resolve touching my proffered love unto you, here your mother
and the Peers agree, and all is ended, if you condescend.


Then know my Lord, that if my mother please, I must in duty yield to her
command, for when our aged father left his life, he willed us honour still our
mothers age: and therefore as my duty doth command, I do commit my self to
her dispose.


Then here my Lord, receive thy royal spouse, virtuous Elizabeth, for both the
Peers and Commons do agree, that this fair Princess shall be wife to thee.
And we pray all, that fair Elizabeth may live for aye, and never yield to
death.


And so say I, thanks (...) you all my Lords, that thus have honoured Richmond
with a Crown, and if I live, then make account my Lords I will deserve this
with more then common love.


And now were but my form George Standley here,
How happy were our present meeting then,
But he is dead, nor shall I evermore see my sweet
Boy whom I do love so dear, for well I know the usurper
In his rage hath made a slaughter of my aged joy.

Take comfort gentle father, for I hope my brother George will turn in safe to
us.


A no my son, for he that joys in blood, will work his fury on the
innocent.


But how now what noise is this?


Behold Lord Standley we bring thy son, thy son George Standley, whom with
great danger we have saved from fury of a tyrants doom.


And lives George Standley? Then happy that I am to see him freed thus from a
tyrants rage. Welcome my son, my sweet George welcome home.


Thanks my good father, and George Standley joys to see you joined in this
assembly. And like a lamb kept by a greedy Woolfe within the enclosed sentire
of the earth, expecting death without delivery, even from this danger is
George Standley come, to be a guest to Richmond the rest: for when the bloody
butcher heard your honour did refuse to come to him, he like a savage tiger
then enraged, commanded straight I should be murdered, sent these two to
execute the deed, but they, but they, that knew how innocent I was, did post him
off with many long delays, alleging reasons to alaie his rage, but twas in
vain, for he like to a starved Lioness still called for blood, saying that I
should die. But to be brief, when both the battles joined, these two and
others, shifted me away.


Now seeing that each thing turns to our content,
I will it be proclaimed presently, that traytrous Richard
Be by our command, drawn thr^ugh the streets of Lester,
Stark naked on a Colliers horse let him be laid,
For as of others pains he had no regard,
So let him have a traitors due reward.
Now for our marriage and our nuptial rytes,
Our pleasure is they be solemnised
In our Abbey of Westminster, according to the ancient custom due,
The two and twentieth day of August next,
Set forwards then my Lords towards London straight,
There to take further order for the state.

Thus Gentles may you here behold, the joining of these Houses both in one, by
this brave Prince Henry the seventh, who was for wit compared to Salomon, his
government was virtuous every way, and God did wondrously increase his store,
he did subdue a proud rebellious Lord, that did encounter him upon black
health. He died when he had reigned full three and twenty years eight
months, and some odd days, and lies buried in Westminster. He died left
behind a son.


A son he left, a Harry of that name, a worthy, valiant, and victorious
Prince, for on the fifth year of his happy reign, he entered France, and to
the Frenchmens costs, he won Turwen, and Turney. The Emperor served this
King for common pay, and as a mersonary prince did follow him. Then after Morle
and Morles, conquered he, and still did keep the French men at a bay. And
lastly in this Kings decreasing age, he conquered Bullen, and after when he was
turned home he died, when he had reigned full thirty eight years, nine
months and some odd days, and was buried in Windsore. He died and left three
famous springs behind him.

Edward the sixth, he did restore the Gospel to his light, and finished that
his father left undone. A wise young Prince, given greatly to his book. He
brought the English service first in use, and died when he had reigned six
years, five months, some odd days, and lies buried in Westminster.


Next after him a Mary did succeed, which married Philip King of Spain, she
reigned five years, four months, and some odd days, and is buried in
Westminster. When she was dead, her sister did succeed.


Worthy Elizabeth, a mirror in her age, by whose wise life and civil
government, her country was defended from the cruelty of famine, fire and
sword, wars, fearful messengers.

This is that Queen as writers truly say,
That God had marked down to live for aye.
Then happy England amongst thy neighbor Isles,
For peace and plenty still attends on thee:
And all the favourable Planets smiles
To see thee live, in such prosperity.
She is that lamp that keeps fair Englands light,
And through her faith her country lives in peace:
And she hath put proud Antichrist to flight,
And been the means that civil wars did cease.
Then England kneel upon thy hairy knee,
And thank that God that still provides for thee.
The Turk admires to hear her government,
And babies in ^ury, sound her princely name,
All Christian Princes to that Prince hath sent,
After her rule was rumord forth by fame.
The Turk hath sworn never to lift his hand,
To wrong the Princess of this blessed land.
Twere vain to tell the care this Queen hath had,
In helping those that were oppressed by war:
And how her Majesty hath still been glad,
When she hath heard of peace proclaimed from far.
Ieneua, France, and Flanders hath set down,
The good she hath done, since she came to the Crown.
For which, if ere her life be taken away,
God grant her soul may live in heaven for aye.
For if her Graces days be brought to end,
Your hope is gone, on whom did peace depend.


