GOod morrow Master Tim.


Morrow Sim, my father stirring Sim?


Not yet I think, he heard some ill news of your Brother Alexander last
night, that will make him lye an hour extraordinary.


Hum, I am sorry the old man should lye by the hour, but oh, these wicked
Elder Brothers, that swear refuse them, and drink nothing but wicked Sack,
when we swear nothing but niggers noggers, make a meal of a bloate Herring,
water it with four shillings Beer, and then swear we have dined as well as
my Lord Mayor.


Here was Goody Finn the fish-woman fetched home her Ring last night.


Ye should have put her money by her self, for fear of wronging of the whole
heap.


So I did fir and washed it first in two waters.


All these petty pavvnes sirrah, my Father committs to to my managing, to
instruct me in this craft, that when he dyes, the common-wealth may wanta good
member.


Nay, you are cursed as much as he already.


Oh Brother, 'tis well you are up.


Why, why?


Now you shall see the dainty Widow, the sweet Widow, the delicate Widdovv,
that to morrow morning must be our Mother in Law.


What the Widow Nag.


Yes, yes, she that dwells in Blacke-fryers, next to the sign of the Fool
laughing at a feather.


She, she, good Brother make your self handsome, for my father will bring
her hither presently.


Niggers noggers, I thought he had been sick and had not been up Sim.


Why so did I too, but it seems the Widow took him at a better hand, and
raised him so much the sooner.


While I tie my Band, prithee stroke up my fore-toppe a little, Niggers, and I
had but dreamed of this an hour before I waked, I wood have put on my Sunday
clothes, 'mailes my shoo^s are as pale as the check of a stewed Pander, a
clout, a clout Sim.


More hast, the vvorse speed, here's ne'er a clout now.


Whats that lies by the books?


This 'tis a Sumners coat.


Prithee lends a sleeve of that, had a Noble on it last night, and never paid me
my Bill money.


Look, look upon, and ready, all ready Widow is, he is in some deep
discourse with Sim, concerning monies out to one or another.


Has he said his prayers sit?


Praver before providence, when did ye know any thrive, and swell tha^ uses
it, he's a chip o'th old block, I exercise him in the trade of thrift, by
turning him to all the petty pawnes, If they come to me, I tell 'em I have
given over Brokering, moyling for muck and trash, and that I mean to live a
life Monastic, a praying life, pull out the tail of Cressus from my pocket,
and swear 'tis called Charities looking glass, or an exhortation to forsake
the World.


Dainty Hypocrite.


Peace.


But let a fine fool that's well feathered come, and withal good meat, I
have a friend it may be, that may compassionate his wants, I'll tell ye an old
Saw for it over my chimney yonder, a poor man seem to him that's poor, and
prays thee for to lend, but tell the prodigal (not quite spent) thou woo't
procure a friend.


Trust me a thristy saw.


Many will have virtuous admonitions on their walls, but not a piece in their
coffers, give me these vvittie politic saws, and indeed my house is
furnished with no other.


How happy shall I be to vved such wisdom.


Shall bed it, shall bed it wench, shalt have it by infusion, look, look.


Save ye Master Tim.


Who's this, goodman fyle the black-smith, I thought'had been our old collier:
did you go to bed with that dirty face goodman fyle?


And rise with it too sir.


What have you bumming out there goodman fyle?


A vice sir, that I would fain be furnished with a little money upon it.


Why how will you do to work then goodman fyle?


This is my spare vice, not that I live by.


Hum, ye did not buy this spare vice of a lean Courtier, did ye?


No sir, of a fat Cooke, that strained of a Smith for's rent.


Oh hard hearted man of grease.


Nay, nay, Sim, we must do it sometimes.


Ha thrifty whorsonne.


And what wood serve your turn goodman fyle?


A Noble Sir.


What upon a spare vice to lend a Noble?


Why sir, for ten groats you may make your self drunk, and so buy a vice
outright for half the money.


That is no noble vice I assure ye.


How long wood y^ have it!


But a fortnight, 'tis to buy stuff I protest sir.


Look ye being a neighbour, and borne one for another.


Ha villain, shalt have a^l.


There is five shillings uppon't, which at the fortnights end goodman Fyle you
must make five shillings six pence.


How sir?


Nay and it were not to do you a courtesy --


Ha Boy.


And then I had forgot three pence for my Bill, so there is four pence, and
nine pence, which you are to tender back, five shillings six pence, goodman
Fyle at the end of the fortnight.


Well and it were not for earnest necessity, hay boys, I come, I come, you
black rascals, let the Cans go round.


Sim, because the man's an honest man, I pray lay up his Vice, as safe as it
were your own.


And if he miss his day, and forfeit, it shall be yours and your heirs for
ever.


What, disbursing money boy? here is thy mother in law


Your nose drops, '^will spoil her ruff.


Pray forsooth -- what's a cl^cke.


Oh fie upon him Mistress, I thought he had begun to ask you blessing.


Peace, vveele have more oa't.


I wonnot kiss indeed.


And he wonnot, here are those that will forsooth.


Get ye in you Rogue.


I hope ye will Sir? I was bred in Ireland where the women begin the
salutation.


I wonnot kiss truly.


Indeed you must.


Wood my girdle may break if I do.


I have a mind.


Niggers noggers I wonnot.


Nay nay, now his great oath's past, there's no talk on it, ^ke him ne'er the
worse, there's an old saw sort,

A kiss first, next the feeling sense,
Crack say the purse strings, out fly the penee.
But he can talk though, whose Boy are you Tim?


Your boy forsooth Father.


Can ye turn and wind a penny Tim.


Better then yourself forsooth father.


You have looked in the Church book late, bow old are you Tim?


Two and tvventy years, three moneths', three days, and three quarters of an
hour, forsooth Father.


He has Arithmetic.


And Grammar too, what's Latin for your head Tim?


Caput.


But what for the head of a block?


Caput blockhead.


Do ye hear, your ear.


Aura.


Your eye.


Occules.


That's for one eye, what's Latin for two.


Occulies, occulies.


An admirable accidental Gramarian I protest sir.


This boy shall have all, I have an elder rogue that sucks and dravves me, a
saverne Accademian: one that protests to Whores, and shires with High-vvay
lavvyers; an arrant unclarified Rogue, that drinks nothing but wicked Sack.


Here's a Gentleman would speak with you,


Look, look, now he's come for more money.


A very hopeful house to match into wench, the Father a Knave, one son a
drunkard, and the other a fool.


O monster Father, look if he be not drunk, the very sight of him makes me
long for a cup of six.


Pray Father, pray to God to bless me.


Look, look, takes his brother for his Father.


Alas Sir, when the drink's in, the wit's out, and none but wise children know
their own Fathers.


Why I am none of your Father, brother, I am Tim, do ye know Tim.


Yes, umph -- for a coxcomb.


How wild he looks: good sir we'll take our leaves.


Shalt not go faith Widow: you Cheater Rogue, must I ha my friends frighted
out my house by you, look heel steal nothing to feast his Bawds, get ye out
sirrah, there are Constables, Beadles, whips, and the College of extravaging,
Eclipt Bridewell ye Rogue, ye Rogue there is, there is -- mark that.


Can you send me a Mark upon this Ring sir, and there set it down in your
Book, and vmph -- mark that.


I'll have no stolen Rings, picked out of pockets, or taken upon the way, not I.


I'll give you an old saw for it.


There's a Rogue mocks his Father, sirrah, get 'ye gone, Sim, go let loose the
Mastiff.


Alas sir, heel tear and pull out your sons throat.


Better pul't out, then a halter stretched, away out of my doors rogue, I
defy thee.


Must you be my Mother in Law?


So your father says sir.


You see the worst of your eldest son, I abuse no body.


The Rogue will fall upon her.


I will tell ye an old saw.


Pray let's hear it.


An old man is a bed full of bones,
and who can it deny,
By whom (vmph) a young wench lies and greanes,
for better company.

Did ye ever hear such a Rascal? come come, let's leave him: I'll go buy thy
wedding Ring presently, you're best be gone sirrah: I am going for the
Constable, I and one of the Church-wardens, and now I think on it, he shall
pay five shillings to the poor for being drunk, twelve pence shall go into
the box, and the other four, my partner and we'll share betwixt us, there's a
new path to thrist wench, we must live, we must live girl.


And at last die for altogether.


'Tis a Diamond.


You'll be at the fountain after dinner?


White, twill run boy.


Here's a noble now, and I'll bring you the other as I come by to the Tavern, but
I'll make you swear, I shall drink nothing but small Betre.


Niggers naggers thou shalt not, there's thine own oath for thee, thou shalt
eat nothing and thou woo't, but a poacht spider, and drive it down with
sirrup of Toads.


Ah, prithee Sim bid the maid eat my breakfast her self.


Has turned his stomach, for all the World like a Puritanes, at the sight of a
surplice, but your breakfast shall be devoured by a stomach of a stronger
constitution I warrant you.


No Game abroad this morning, this Coxcomb Park, I think be past the best,
I have known the time the bottom twixt these hills has been better fledged.


Look out Captain, there's matter of employment at foot o'th hill.


A business?


Yes, and hopeful, there's a morning bird, his flight it seems for London,
he hallowes and sings sweetly, prithee let us go and put him out of tune.


Thee and I have Cratchets in our pates, and thou know two Crotchets make
one quaver, he shall shake fort.


Did her not see her true Loves,
As her came from London,
Oh, if her saw not her fine prave Loves,
Randall is quite undone,
Well, was never mortal man in Wales, cooed have wagd praver, finers, and
nimblers, then Randals have done, to get service in Londons: whoop, where
was her now, just upon a pridge of stone, between the legs of a couple of
pretty hills, but no more ne'er mountains in Wales, then Clim of the Cloughes
bow, to her Cozen Davids Harp, and now her prattle of Davie, I think yonder
come prancing down the hills from Kingstone a coupl of her the other cozens Saint
Nicholas Clarks. the morning was so red as an egg, and the place ferry full of
dangers, perils, and bloody businesses by reports: augh her swords was trawne,
God plesse us and her cozen Hercules was not stand against too, which shall her
take if they take Randalls, will rip Randals cutts out, and then Randals
shall see Pawles steeples no more, therefore her will go directly under the
pridge, here was but standing to knees in little fine cool fair waters, and
becat if her have Randalls out, her shall come and fetch Randalls and her will,
were her nineteen Nicholas Clerks.


Which way took he?


On straight I think.


Then we should see him man, he was just in mine eye when we were at foot o'th
hill, and to my thinking stood here looking towards us upon the bridge.


So thought I, but with the cloud of dust we raised about us, with the speed
our horses made: it seems we lost him, how I could stamp and bite my horses
ears off.


Let's spur towards Coomb house, he struck that way, sure he's not upon the
Road.


'Sfoot if we miss him, how shall vvee keep our word with Sander Bloodhound
in Fleetstreete after dinner at the Fountain, he's out of cash, and thou
know by Cutters Law, we are bound to relieve one another.


Let's scour towards Coomb house, but if we miss him.


N^ matter, dost see yonder Barn o'th left hand?


What of that?


At the West end, I tore a piece of board out,
And stuffed in close amongst the straw, a bag
Of a hundred pound at least, all in round shillings:
Which I made my last nights purchase for a Lawyer.

Dost know the place to fetch it again?


The torn board is my land mark, if we miss this,
We make for that, and whilst that lasts -- oh London,
Thou Labyrinth that puzlest strictest search,
Convenient Innes of Court, for highvvay Lavvyers,
How with rich wine, Tobacco, and sweet Wenches,
we will canvas thy dark case.

Away, let's spur.


Spur did her call her, have made Randals stand without pootes, in ferry
pitiful pickles, but her will run as nimbles to Londons, as Creyhound after
Rabbits, and yet now her remember what her Cozens talked, was some wiser and
some too, Randals heard talk of Parne upon left hand, and a prave bag with
hundred pounds in round shillings Cod plesse us, and yonder was Parnes and upon
left hands too, now here was questions, demands to be made, why Randals should
not rob them would rob Randals, her will go to parnes, pluck away pords, pull
out paggs, and show her cozen a round pair of heals, with aule her round
shillings, mark her now.


The Rogue rise right, and has out stripped us this was staying in Kingstone with
our unlucky Hostess, that must be dandled, and made drunk next her heart, she
made us slip the very Cream o'th morning, if any thing stand augward, a
woman's at one end on it.


Come, we have a hundred pieces goodyet in the Barn, they shall last us, and
Saunder a months mirth at least.


Oh these sweet hundred pieces, how I will kiss ye, and hug ye with that
zeal a Usurer does his bastard money, when he comes from Church, were not for
them, where were our hopes, but come, they shall be sure to thunder in the
Taverns, I but now, just now I see pottle pots thrown down the stayres, just
like Sergeants and Yeomen, one in the neck of another.


Delicate vision.


Her have got her page and aule by the hand, and her had ferrily thought in
conscience, had not bin so many round shillings in whole worlds but in Wales,
twas time to supply her store, her had but thirteen pence half penny in awl
the worlds, and that her have left in her little white purse, with a rope her
sound pie the parne, just in the place her had this: Randals will be no serving
mans now, her will buy ^er prave Parrells, prave Swords, prave Taggers, and
praue ^eathers, and go a wooing to prave comely pretty ma^ds, r^b Randalls,
becat and her were ten dozens of coz^ns, Randals rob her, mark her now.


A plague of Friday mornings, the unfortunate day in the whole week.


Was ever the like sate, 'sfoote when I put it in I was so wary, though it were
midnight, that I watched till a cloud had masked the Moon, for fear she
should have seen't.


Oh luck.


A Gale of wind did but creep ore the bottom, and because I heard things
stir, I stayed, 'twas twelvescore past me.


The pottle pots will sleep in peace to night.


And the sweet clinkes.


The clattering of pipes.


The Spanish fumes.


The more wine boy, the nimble a^on, ^non sir.


All to night will be nothing, come we must shift, sfoot what a witty rogue
'tvvas t^ave, this fair thirteen pence halfepenny, and this old halter,
intimating a^tly.

Had the hang-man met us three, by these presages,
Here had bin his work, and here his wages.

Come, come, we must make friends.


There sirrah, there's his bond, run into the Strand, s^xe weeks the ^allow
Chandler fetched my hundred mark^, ^ent him to set him up, and to buy great,
this is his day, I'll have his bones fo^'^ ^se, so pray tell him.


But are a Chandlers ones worth so much Father?


Out Coxcomb.


Worth so much, I know my Master will make dice on them, then 'tis but letting
Master Alexander carry them next Christmas to the Temple, he will make a hundred
marks a night of them.


Mass that's true.


And run to Master Eare-lacks the informer, in Thieving lane, and ask him
what he has done in my business he gets abundance, and if he carry my cause
with one false oath, he shall have Moll, he will take her with a little, are
ye gone Sir?


No forsooth.


As ye come by Temple-barre, make a steppe to'th Devil.


To the Devil father?


My Master means the sign of the Devil.


And he cannot hurt ye fool, there's a Saint holds him by the nose.


Sniggers, what does the Devil and a Saint both in a sign?


What a question's that, what does my Master, and his prayer book a Sunday
both in a pew?


Well, well, ye Gipsy, what do we both in a pew?


Why make a fair show, and the Devil and the Saint does no more.


^'are witty, you're witty, cal to the man o'th house, bid him send in the
bottles of wine to night, they will be at hand in the morning, -- will ye run
sir?


To the devil as fast I can Sir, the world shall know who's son I am.


Let me see now, for a posy for the Ring:
Never an end of an old saw, 'tis a quick Widow Sim,
And wood have a witty posy.

If she be quick, she's with child, vvhosoever got it you must father it, so
that you come o'th nick, forth widdow's quick, there's a witty posy for you
quick Widow*


No, no, I'll have one shall savour of, of a saw.


Why then 'twill smell of the painted cloth.


Let me see, a Widdovv witty.


Is pastime pretty, put in that for the sports sake.


No, no, I can make the sport, then an old man.


Then will she answer, if you cannot a younger can,
And look, look sir, now I ta ke of the younger,
Yonder's Ancient Young come over again, that
M^rgaged sixty pound Per annum before he went,
I am deceived if he come not a day after the Fair.

Mine Alminacke.


A prayer book sir.


A prayer book for devote beggars I hate, look I beseech thee, Fortune now
befriend me, and I will call the plaguy whore in, let me see, six months.


Yes, tis he certain, this is a business must not be slackened sir.


Look I beseech thee, we shall have oat meal in our pottage six weeks
after.


Four days too late Sim, four days too late Sim.


Plummes in our pudding a Sunday, plummes in our pudding.


Master bloodhound as I take it.


You are a stranger Sir, you shall be witness, I shall be rayl'd at else, they
will call me devil, I pray you how many months from the first of May, to
the sixth of November following?


Six months and four days just.


I ask, because the last first of May, a noble gentleman, one Ancient Young.


I am the man sir?


My spectacles Sim, look Sim, is this Ancient Young?


Tvvas Ancient Young sir:


And is't not Ancient Young?


No sir, you have made him a young Ancient


Oh Sim, a Chair, I know him now, but I shall not live to tell him.


How fare ye sir?


The better for you, he thanks you sir.


Sick, sick, exceeding sick,


O'th sudden, strange.


A qualm of threescore years come over his stomach, nothing else.


That you beloved, you, who of all men in the world, my poor heart doted on,
whom I loved better then Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Uncles, Aunts, what
wood ye have, that you should stay four days too late.


I have your money ready,
And sir, I hope your old love to my Father.

Nay, nay, I am Noble, fellow, very Noble, a very rock of friendship, but,
but, I had a house and barn burned down to the ground, since you were here.


How?


How burned ask Sim?


By fire, sir, by fire.


To build up which, for I am a poor man, a poor man, I was forced by course
of Law to enter upon your Land, and so for less money then you had of me, I
was fain to sell it to another, that by four days stay, a man should lose
his blood, our livings, our blood, o my heart, o ny head.


Pray take it not so hamons, we'll go to him. I'll buy it again of him, he
wonnot be too cruel.


A dog, a very dog, there is more mercy in a pair of unbrib'd Bailiffs, to
shun all such solicitings, he's rid to York, a very cut-throat Rogue, but
I'll send to him.


A honest old man, how it mooves him, this was my negligence, good Sim convey
him into some vvarmer room, and I pray, how ever Fortune, she that gives ever
with the dexterity she takes, shall please to fashion out my sufferings, yet
for his sake, my deceased Father, the long friend of your heart, in your
health, keep me happy.


Oh right honest young man Sim.


Sir, Blood. Have I don't well?


The deu'll himself could not have don't better.


I tell thee an old saw sirrah, he that dissembles in wealth shall not want,
they say dooms day is coming, but think you not an't, this will make the pot
sees Sim, good Sir talk no more, my mouth runs over, Sleep, wake, worthy
beggar, worthy indeed to be one, and am one worthily -- how fine it is to
wanton without affliction, I must look out for Fortunes, over again, no, I
have money here, and 'tis the curse of merit^, not to work, when she has
money: there was a handsome Widow, whose wild ma^ j^alous husband died at
Sea, let me see, I am near Black-fryers, I'll have o^e start at her, or else
--


By my troth tis he Captain Yongs soon, I have l^ved him even with
languishings, ever since I was a girl but should I know it, I should run mad
sure, what handsome Gentlemen travaire and manners makes, my Father begun to ye
Sir, in a cup of final Beer.


How does he pray?


Pretty well now Sir.


Mas 'tis small indeed -- you'll pledge me?


Yes sir.


Pray will ye tell me one thing?


What is't.


Which is smaller, this Beer, or your maidenhead?


the Beer a great ^eale Sir.


I in quality.


But not in quantity.


No?


Why?


Let me try, and I'll tell you.


Will you tell me one thing before you try?


Yes.


Which is smaller, this Beer or your wit?


O the Beer, the Beer.


In quality.


Yes, in quantity.


Why then I pray keep your quantity of your wit, from the quality of my
maidenhead, and ye shall find my maidenhead more then your wit.


A witty maidenhead by this hand.


Is my Mistress ready for dinner?


Yes, if dinner be ready for my Mistress.


Half an hour ago man.


But prithe^ sir, is't for certain, for yet it cannot sink into my head, that
she is to be married to morrow.


Troth, she makes little preparation, but it may be she wood be wedded, as sh^
wood be bedded, privately.


Bedded call ye it, and she be bedded no better then heel bed her, she may lie
^antaliz'd and eat wishes.


Pox on him, they say he's the arrantst (...). i er, we shall never live good
day with him.


Well, and she be s^ipt by threescore and ten, may she live sixescore and
eleven, and repent twelve times a that's once an hour.


Set meat o'th board.


Yes.


Why does your fellow grumble so?


I do not know.
They say you're to marry one that will feed us.
With horse-plummes, instead of Beef and Cabbage.

And are you grieved at that?


No, but my friends are.


What friends are grieved?


My guts.


So it seems, you begone Clown?


Yes, and shall conclude Coxcomb, and I be fed with herring bones, 'sfoo^e, I
say no more, but if we d^e want as much bread of our dany allowance, as wood
dine a Sparrow, or as much drink as wood fox a Fly, I know what I know.


And what do ye know sir?


Why, that there goes but a pair of sheets, a promoter, and a knave, if you
know more, take your choice of either.


Tis well sir, set on dinner.

O Mistress, yonder's the mad gallant, Master Alexander Bloodhound entered into
the Hall.


Ye should have kept him out.

Alas, ne'er a wench in town could do it he's so nimble, I had no sooner
opened the door, but he thrust in ere I was aware.


And how does my little handsome dainty, delicate, welfavoured, straight, and
comely delicious bewitching Widow.


'Sfoote here's one runs division before the Fiddlers.

Sir, this is no seasonable time of visit.

Tis pudding time wench, pudding time, and a dainty time, dinner time my
nimble eyd witty one, woot be married to morrovv sirrah.


She will be mad to morrovv sirrah.

What, art thou a fortune teller.

A chip of the same block, a fool Sir.

Good fool, give me a cup of cool Beer.

(...) your Master a cool cup of Beer.

Pish, I spoke to the fool.

I thought you'd brought the fool with you Sir.

Fool, 'tis my man, shalt sit i'faith wench,

For once I be as merry as you are mad, and learn fashions, I am set you see
Sir, but you must pardon Sir our rudeness, Fridayes fare for my self, a dish
of eggs and a Rabbit, I looked for no stranger faces.


Strange, mine's a good face in faith, prithee Bus.

Why here's one comes to the business now.

Sirrah, woot have the old fellow?

Your Father, yes.

I tell thee thou shalt not, no, no, I have such --

There's but one raw bit Sir?

Thy Jester sure shall have a coat.

Let it be of your own cut Sir?

Nay, nay, nay, two to one is extremity -- but as (...) was telling thee, I
have such a husband for thee, so knowing, so discreet, so sprightly, fill a
Cup of Claret, so; Admirably, in desires so excellently, Admirably deserving,
that an old man, fie, fie, prethe -- ha to thee.


The man's mad sure.

Mad, by this hand, a witty Gallant.

Prithee peace, shalt hear a Song.

What copes-mate's this trow, who let him is?

By this light, a fellow of an excellent breeding.
He came unbidden, and brought his stool with him.

Look Mistress, how they stare one at another?

Yes, and swell like a couple of gibed Cats, met both by chance in the dark, in
an old Carret.


Look, look, now there's no fear of the wild beasts, they have forgot their
spleens, and look prettily, they fall to their pasture, I had thought they
had bin angry, and they are hungry.


Are they none of Duke Humsreyes furies, do you think, that they devised this
plot in Paul's to get a dinner?


Time may produce as strange a truth.
Let's note them.

Her loved her once, her loved her no more,
Saint Tauis so well as her loved her then.

Another Bar, this is the Cooke-maids leaving, open the door, and this is the
daintiest dish she has sent in, a Widgia in Welch sauce -- pray lets make a
merry day on it.


What do her keep open house, had her heard her was Widdovves that dwelt
here, are you Widows good wo^ns?


I want a husband Sir.

Augle Randalls comes in very good times, you keep Ordinaries her think, what
have you set a cat before gallants there?


They will eat him for the second course -- these are suitors to my Mistress
sure, things that she sleights, set your fear boldly in, Widows are not
caught as maids kiss, faintly, but as Mastiffs fight, valiantly.


Is her so, I pray bid her Mistress observe Randals for valours, and prave
adventures?


Some Beer.

Let them want nothing.

Here Widow.

I thank you Sir.

Some Wine.

Here is Wine for you Sir.

Randals will not be outprav'd I warrant her.

Here Widow.

I thank you too Sir,

Sounds some Metheglings here.

What does he call for?

Here are some eggs for you Sir.

Eggs man, some Metheglings, the wine of Wales.

Troth sir here's none in the house, pray make a versue of necessity, and drink
to her in this glass of Claret.


Well, because her will make a great deals of necessities of virtues, mark
with what a grace Randals will drink to her Mistress.


He makes at you forsooth.

Let him come, I have ever an English virtue to put by a welch.


O noble Widows, her heart was full of woes.

No noble Welshman, her heart was in her hose.

'Sounds, was that her manners to take away Randalls cups?


No, it showed scurvy.

Tak't you at worst then.

Whelp of the Devil, thou shalt see thy Sire for it.

Gentlemen what mean ye?

Let her come, let her come, Randals will redeem reputations her warrant her.


Redeem your wit sir, first for you Sir, you are a stranger, and see you, --
but you, fie Master Bloodhound.


Ha, Bloodhound, good sir let me speak with you.

Sounds, what do Randals amongst ploodhounds, good Widows lend her an ear.


Ancient Young, how false our memories have plaid through long discontinuance,
but why met here man, is Mars so bad a pay-master, that our Ancients fight
under Cupids Banner?


Faith this was but a sudden start begotten from distraction of some fortunes,
I pursue this Widow but for want of wiser work.


The Welshman labours at it.

A pair of a hundred of seepes, thirty prave Cowes, and twelve dozen of
Runts.


Twelve dozen of Goose.

Give her but another hark?

He has the mortgage still, and I have a handsome sister, do but meet at the
Fountain in Fleetestreete after dinner, o I will read thee a History of
happiness, and thou shalt thank me.


A^, read all's well, or vveapons.

A word Iarvis?

Oh prave VViddowes, her will meet her there, he^ know her times and her
seasons, her warrant her, Randalls will make these prave Gallants hang her
selfes in those garters of willow Garlands apout her pates, mark her now, and
remember.


Adieu sweet widow, for my ordinary --

Twas not so much worth Sir.

You mean, 'tvvas worth more then, and that's another handsomely begged.


You conclude women cunning beggars then.

Yes, and men good benefactors, my best wishes wait on so sweet a Mistress --
will ye walk?


I'll follow ye, woo't think on it soon at night, or not at all?


I wood not have my wishes wronged, if I should bring it about handsomely, you
can be honest?


Can, dost conclude me a'satt in cheat?

No, a smooth Gallant sir, do not you fail to be here soon at nine, still
provided, you will be honest, if I convey you not under her bed, throw me a top
o'th Tester, and say me o^ o'th way like a rusty Bilbo.


Enough, drink that, fare ^el, Widdovv, Fate, the Destinies, and the three ill
favoured Sisters, have concluded the means, and when I am thy Husband?


I shall be your wife.

Do but remember these cross Capers, then ye pitter sweet one?


Till then adieu ye bitter sweet one.

This dinner would have showed better in bed-lane, and she a the other side,
holds her whole nest of suitors play, what Art decks the dark Labyrinth of a
woman's heart.


Marry old Earelacke, is my Father mad?

They are both a concluding on it yonder, to morrow's the day, one vvedding
dinner must serve both marriages.


Oh Sim, the Ancient, the delicate Ancient there's a man, and thou talk of a
man, a good face sparkling eye, a strenght body, a delicate hand, a clean
leg and foot, ah sweet Sim, there's a man worth, Maidenhead.


But I say, Master Eare-lacke the old man, a foot like a Bear, a leg like a
bed-staffe, a hand like a hatchet, an eye like a pig, and a face like a
vv^ter Pigme, there's a man for a Maidenhead.


Oh look, look, oh alas what shall I do with him?


What, why what shall fifteen do vuith sixty and tvvelve, make a screen
of him, stand next the fire, whilst you sit behind him, and keep a friends
lips warm^, many a wench vvod be glad of such a fortune.


Your oath struck it dead then? o my sides.

Five hundred deep of your side itaith father.

Mol, come hither Mol, I hope Sim has discovered the project?


And to morrovv must be the day Mol, both of a day, one dinner shall serve, we
may have store of little ones, we must save for our family.


Good Sir, what rashness was parent to this madness, marry an old man --
Eare-lacke the Informer?


Madness -- you're a vvhore.

Is she a vvhore Sim?

She must be your wise, I tell --

An arrant vhore, to refuse Master Innocent Earelacke of Rogue-land, that for
his dwelling, next that he doth Inform now and then against enormities, and
hath bin blancketted, it may be pump't in's time: yet the world knows, he
dos't not out of need, he's of mighty means, but takes delight now and then
to trot up and down, to avoid Idleness, you vvhore.


Good Sir.

Pray Father.

This wound vvants oil, good sir in al my paths
I will make you my guide, I was only startled,
And with the suddenness of the word marriage
In that I knew, that this deserving Gentleman
And I, had never so much conference,
Whereby this coal of Paph^s, by the Rhetoric
Of his love-stealing heart, Captivating Language,
Might be blovvne into a flame.

Does she take Tobacco Father?

No, no, man, here are out of ballads,
She has all the Garland of good will by heart.

Snails she may sing me asleep a nights then Sim^

Why, right Sir, and then 'tis but tickling you o'th forehead with her
heals, you are avvake again, and ne'er the vvorse man.


Is he but five years older then your self sir?

Nay, I want a week and three days of that too.

I'll tell thee an old saw for it girl, old, say he be, old blad^s are best,
young hearts are never old.


Ah Hay.

Gold is great Glee, gold begets rest, what fault is found in Gold?


I will answer presently Sir, with another Saw.

Let's have it, lets ha'te.

Mark Moll.

Young, say she be young, young Mutton's sweet, content is above Gold, if like
an old Cock he with young Mutton meets, he feeds like a Cuckold.


A very pretty pithy one, I protest, look and Moll dee not laugh, shalt have a
pair of gloves for thee, what leather dost love?


Calfe Sir, sh^p's too simple for me.

Nay, 'tis a witty notable knave, he should never serve me else.


My Mistress remembers her love, and requests you would endure her so much to
your patience, as to read that.


Love letters, love lies, dost mark Sim, these Women are violent, Sim, whilst
I read the lie, do you rail to him upon the Brewer, swear has deceived us,
and save a cup of Beer by it.


I will save you a cup at that rate fir.

I can make thee a hundred a year jointure wench, at the first indeed, I began
with petty businesses wench, and here I picked, and there I picked, but now I
run through none but things of Value.


Sir, many thoughts trouble me, and your words carry such vveight, that I will
choose a time, when I have nothing else to do, to think on 'em.


By my troth, she talks the vvittiliest, and I wood understand her.


Oh nimble, nimble Widow, I am sorry we have no better friends, but pray
commend me, tho in a blunt dry Commendations at the time and place appointed, I
wonnot fail, I know she has a nest of suitors, and wo'd carryit close, because
she fears surprise.


What news Father?

Shalt lie there all night son.

Was that the first news I heard on it.

I must meet a friend in the dark soon, let me see, we lovers are all a little
mad, do you and Moll take a turn or two in the garden, whilst Sim and I go up
into the Garret and device, the guess come.


He's a little mad, and I had best hang him upon the cross beam in the
Garret.


Come Mol, come Molkin, wee'le even to the Camamile bed, and talk of household
stuff, and be sure thou remember a Trade.


Please ye go before Sir?

Nay, an old Ape has an old eye, I shall go before, and thou vvoo't show me
a Love-tricke, and locke me into the Garden, butterflies, I will come
discreetely behind Moll.


Out upon him, what a suitor have I got, I am sorry you are so bad an Archer
sir.


Why Bird, why Bird?

Why, to shoot at Buts, when you should (...) prick-shafts, short shooting
will loose ye the game, I a^ (...) you sir.


Her mind runs sure upon a Fletcher, or a Bowyer, hovvsoeuer, I'll inform
against both the Fletcher, for taking whole money for piec't arrovves, the
Bowyer for horning the head men of his Parish, and taking money for his pains.



Some rich Canary boy.

Anon, anon Sir.

Possible ^us cheated of a hundred pi^ces, A han^some halter, and the Hangmans
wages pop'^ in the place, what an acute witness we have in wickedness.


Tis done, and handsomely you.

Here's a pottle of rich Cannary, and a quart of neat Clarret Gentlemen, and
there's a Gentleman belovv, he says he is your Brother, Master Bloodhound, he
appointed to meet you here.


The expected thing that bought the Bristovv stone.


Send him up prithee, remember how it must be carried?


I am her Grandmother, forg^t not that by any means.


And pray remember that you do not mump^ as if you were ch^vving Bacon, and
spoil all.


I warrant ye.

And hark.

Are these th^ company sir?

Yes, but those I ^k^ not, the^e are not they, I'll stay in the next room till my
company come.


Where you please Sir, pray follow me.

I hear him coming up gingerly.

Oh he tramples upon the bosom of a Tavern with that dexterity, as your
Lavvyers Clerks do to VVestminster Hal upon a dirty day with a pair of
white silk stockings, Brother Tim, why now you're a man of your word I see.


Nay I love to be as good as my say, see brother, look, there's the rest or
your money upon the Ring, I cannot spend a penny, for I have ne'er a penny
left, what are these, what are these?


Gallants of note and quality, he that fits taking
Tobacco is a Captain, Captain Carve-gut.

He will not make a Capon of me, will ^ee.

Are you not my brother?

He that powers out that sparkling sprightly
Claret, is a Lieutenant under him, Lieutenant B^.
He was a S^rg^ant first.

Of the Poultry, or of Woodstreete.

Of the Poultry, of a Woodcock:
A Serg^nt in the Field, a man of blood.

I'll take my leave brother, I am in g^ ha^.

That delicate sweet young Gentlewoman.

Fough this Tobacco.

That bears the b^sh of ^ing upon her cheeks, whoseeyes are like a pair of
^ing Twi^es.


Sh^ looks ^ust upon ^e.

I think you are in hast.

No, no, no pray:

Whose lips are beds of Roses, betwixt which
There steals a breath sweeter th^n Indian Spices.

Sweeter then Ginger.

But then to touch th^se lips -- you stay too long sure.


Pish I tell you, I do no^, I know my time, pray what's her name?


But 'tis descended from the ^cian steeme, the great tributie L^ her ^e, th^
^ci^t ^on is her reverent Granham.


Niggers I have read of her in the Mirr^r of Kaighthood.


Co^ they shall know you.

Nay brother.

I say they shall.

Let me go down and wash my face first.

(...) ^ce is a ^ne face my brother Gentle^.

Sir, you are victoriously welcome.

That word has ^'ne conque^d me.

I desire to ki^ your hand Sir.

Indeed but you shall not Sir, I went out early, and forgot to wash em.


Precious Do^il.

Sir, I shall call it^ ^efie if you shall (...) to vouchsa^e to pledge me.


What is't brother four or six?

^oure or six, 'tis rich Canary, it came from beyond the Sea^.


I wi^ do no courtesy at this time Sir, yet for one cup I care not, because it
comes from b^yond the Seas.

I think 'tis Out-landish win^.

Look how it glides.

Now truly the Gentleman drinks as like one Master Widgen a kinsman of mine.


Pox on ye hei^ding.

I have heard of that Widgin, I have been taken for him, and now I think on it,
A cup of this is better then our four shilling Beer at home.


You must drink another Sir, you drunk to no body.

Is it the law, that if a man drinks to no body, he must drink again.


I, I, I. Fill his glass.

Why, then I will drink to no body once more, because I will drink again.


Did I not tell ye. More wine there Drawer.

This Pageant's worth the seeing by this hand.

Me thinks this glass was better then the to'ther Gentlemen.


Oh Sir, the deeper the sweeter ever.

Do ye think so?

Ever that when ye drink to no body.

Why then I pray give me the other cup that I may drink to some body.


I have not drunk yet sir.

Again ye Witch? drink to the young Gentlewom^n.


Mistress Lindabrides.

Thanks most ingenious sir.

She's a little shame faced, the deeper the sweeter for^ooth.


Pox on ye for a Coxcomb.

In the next room I have seen and heard all. -- Oh noble ^ouldiers.


Here Boys, give us some more wine. There's hundred Marks Gallants. 'Tis your
own. And do but let me bear on Office amongst ye. I know as great a matter
has been done for as small a sum. Pray let me follow the fashion.


Well, for once take up the money, Give me a cup of Sack. And give me your
hand sir, and because our Flemish Corporal was lately choked at Delph with a
Flapdragon. Bear you his name and place, and be henceforth called Corporal
Codshead. Let the health go round.


Round. And this go not round. Some wine there Tapster. Is there ne'er a
Tapster in the house?


My worthy friend, thou art Master of thy word, Gentlemen 'tis Ancient Young,
you're Soldiers, come come, save cap, complement in cup. Prithee sit down.


Are you a Captain sir?

Yes.

And you a Lieutenant.

Yes.

I pray where served you last?

Why, at the battle of Prague.

Under what Colonel. In what Regiment?

Why, l^t me see: but come in company: let's sit sir. True Soldiers scorn
unnecessary discourse, especially in Taverns.


Tis true, true Soldiers do: but you are Tauern-rats.

How?

Prithee.

Foul food that lies all day vndisgested,
Upon the queasy stomach of some Tavern,
And are ^pewed out at midnight.

Corporal Codsheads health sir.

In thy face fool.

This is a cruel Ancient.

^ee are but the worms of worth,
The sons of shame and baseness,
That in a Tavern dares out-sit the Sun,
And rather then a Whore shall part unpledg'd,
You'll pawn your souls for a superfluous cup,
Though ye cast it into the reckoning,
The true soldier, who is all over, a History of man,
Noble, and Valiant, Wisdom is the mould,
In which he casts his Actions, such a discreet temperance
Doth daily deck his doings, that by his modesty,
He is guest the son of merit, and by his mildness
Is believed Valiant, go, and build no more
These ^yrie Castles of hatched fame, which fools
Only admire and fear you for, the wise-man
Derides and jeeres ye puffs really of
Virtue and Valour? (These fair twins
That are borne, breath and die together) then
You'll no more be called butterflies, but men:
Think on it, and pay your reckoning.

Shall we suffer this Saunder?

I must go after him.

Kill him, and there be no more men in Christendom.


I know my Sister loves him, and he swears he loves her, -- and by this
hand, it shall go hard if he have her not, smock and all, brave excellent
man, with what a strength of zeal we admire that goodness in another, which
we cannot call our own.


He's a dead man I warrant him.

But where's our Corporal, Corporal, Corporal?

Well, here's your Corporal, and you


Look and he have not in^const himself in a wooden Castle?


Is he gone that called us butter-flies?

Yes, yes, has taken wing, and your Brother's gone after him, to fight with
him.


That's well, he cannot in conscience but do us the courtesy and kill him for
us, come gallants, what shall we do? I'll never go home to go to bed with my
guts full of (...) shillings beer, when I may replenish them with Sack, --
Hay, now am I as lusty, me thinks we two have blew ^eards, is there ne'er a
wench to be had? Drawer bring us up impossibilities, an honest Whore, and a
conscionable reckoning.


Why here's all fire, wit, where he will or no.

Ah whore, o tempting, handsome Sir, think of a rich Wife rather.


Tempting handsome Sir, she is not married is she Gentlemen?


A woodcock spring'd, let us but keep him in this bachavalian mist till
morning, and 'tis done.


Tempting handsome Sir, I have known a woman of handsome tempting fortunes,
throw her self away upon a handsome tempting Sir.


Hark you sir, if she had, and cooed be tempted too't, have you a mind to
marry: wooed ye marry her?


Oh, and a man were so, worthy tempting Sir.

Give me but a piece from you.

And when will you give it me again?

Pray give me but a piece from you, I'll pay this reckoning intoth' argaine, and
if I have not a trick to make it your own, I'll give you ten for it -- here's
my witness.


There 'tis, send thee good luck with it, and go drunk to bed.


Do not you be too rash, for she observes you, and is infinitely affected to
good breeding.


I wonnot speak I tell you, till you hold up your finger, or fall a
vvhistling.


Come, we'll pay at Bar, and to the Mitre in Bredstreete, we'll make a mad
night on it, please ye sweet Ladies but to walk into Bredstreete, this
gentleman has a foo^ish slight supper, and he most ingenuously professes, it
would appear to him, the Meridian Altitude of his desired happiness, but to
have the table decked with a pair of perfections, so exquisitely refulgent.


He talks all sack, and he will drink no small Beer:

Pray lead, and he shall follow.

Bless mine eyes, my heart is full of changes.

Oh, is it so, I have heard there be more changes in a woman's heart in an
hour, then can be rung up on six bells, seven days, well go thy ways,
little dost thou think how thou shalt be betrayed, within this four and
twenty hours, thou shalt be mine own Wife, flesh and blood, by Father and
Mother, o tempting handsome Sir.


But sirrah, can tell what my Mistress means to do with her suitors?


Nay, nay, I know not, but there is one of them I am sure worth looking after.


Which is he, I prithee?

Oh Iohn, Master Randall, Iohn.

The Welshman.

The witty man, the pretty man, the singing man, he has the dantiest ditty, so
full of pith, so full of spirit, as they say.


Ditties, they are the ends of old Ballets.

Old ends, I am sure they are new beginnings with me.


Here comes my Mistress:

Who was that knokt at the Gate?

Why your welch wooer.

Alas, the sight on's eyes enough to singe my little May denhead, I shall never
be able to endure him.


When high King Henry, second ruled this land,
the couple of her name,
Besides her Queen, was teerely loved,
a fair and Princely -- Widows,
Hark you Widows, Randals was disturbed in cogitatiens, about Lands,
Ploughs, and Cheese presses in Wales, and becat her have forgot where her, and
her meet soon at pright dark Evenings.


Why on the Change, in the Dutch walks.

Oh haw, have her -- but Randals was talk no Ducth, pray meet her in the
Welch walk, was no Welch walk there?


Fie, no, there are no Welch Merchants there.

Mas, was ferry true, was aule Gentlemen in Wales, her never saw her
Shamber-maid, pray where was her Shamber-maid?


Taken up in the Kitchen Sir.

Can her make wedding pedd pravely for Randals, and Widows?


Pray tell him Iarvis where she can or no.

Sir, not to delay, but to debellitate the strength of your Active apprehension
of my Mistress favour.


Was ferry good words.

Hark in your ear, she will have her nest feathered with no British breed.


Zounds, was not Prittish so good as English?


Yes, Where there's Wisdom, Wit, and Valour, but as amongst our English, we
may have one Fool, a Knave, a Coxcomb, and a Coward, she bid me tell ye,
she has seen such wonders come out of Wales in one shirt, you're an Ass, and
sheele have none of you


Augh, S. Tauie, Owen Morgan, and aule her Cousins, was Widow her self ^ay so?


Good sir, let every circumstance make up one answer, take it with you.


And the R^mane answer is, the English goose Sir.


Sounds, her was kill now, gog, and gogmagog, a whole dozen of shiants, make
^oole of Randals, Randalls was vvisht to as prave match as widows was, know
one Mary Bloodhound, was ha aule, when her father kick up heals, and becat
though her never saw her, her will send her Love letters presently, get her
good wills, and go to shurch and marry, and her were eight and thirty, two
hundred and nine and fifty widows, mark her now.


He pelts as he goes pitifully.

Where's Mary?

Mary.

Pray go to Algate, to my Sempstris for my ru^e, I must use it say too morrow,
did ye bid her hollow it just in the French fashion cut?


Yes forsooth.

Twas well, we have no other proof in use, that we are English, if we do not
Zany them, let Iohn go with you.


Yes forsooth:

But pray forsooth, how do you mean to dispose of your suitors?


Shall I tell thee, for this thou hast given him this cure, and he is past
care, for old Bloodbound the Saw-monger, I writ to him, to meet me soon at ten
in the dark, upon the change, and if I come not by ten, he should stay while
twelve, intimating something mystically, that to avoid surprizalls of other
Rivals, I mean to go from thence with him to lye at his house all night, and
go to Church with him in the morning, when my meaning is only kn^very, to make
my self merry, and let him cool his heals there till morning.


And now have I a whimsy, newly jumped into the coll of ingenious apprehensive,
to sauce him daintisy, that for that, what think ye of the Gentleman that
brought a a stool with him out of the Hall, and sate down at dinner with ye
in the parler?


They say he's an Ancient, but I affect not his C^llours.


But what say ye to the mad victorious Alexander?

A wild mad Roarer, a trouble not worth minding.

He will mind you ere morning: troth Mistress There waytes a Gentleman in the
next room, that hath a long time loved you, and has watched for such an hour,
when all was out of doors, to tell you so; and none being within but you and
I, he desires you would hear him speak, and there's an end on it.


What is he?

An honest man.

How know ye?

Why, he told me so.

And why were you such a fool to take his own word?


Because all the wit I had cood get no bodies else.


A Knave will ever tell you he's an honest man.

But an honest man will never tell you he's a knave.


Well sir, your Mistress dares look upon the honest man.


And the honest man dares look upon my Mistress.


'Tis the roughest bluntest Fellow.
Yet when I take young Bloodhound to a retired collection of scattered
judgment, which often lies disioynted, with the confused distraction of so
many: Me thinks he dwells in my opinion, a right ingenious spirit, vailde
merely with the vanity of youth and wildness: he looks me thinks like one
that could retract himself from his mad starts, and when he pleased turn
tame: his handsome wildness me thinks becomes him, could he keep it bounded
in Thrift and Temperance: but down these thoughts, my resolve rests here in
private, -- But from a fool, a Miser, and a man too jealous for a little
sweetness love, Cupid defend me.


And to a Widow wife,
Nobly liberal, and discreetely Credulous,
Cupid hath sent me.

Pray prove as you appear a Gentleman. Why Iaruis?


Look ye here's Iaruis haangs by Geometry, and here's the Gentleman. For
less I am not that afar off taken with the Sainted praises of your wealthy
beauty, your person, wisdom, modesty, and all that can make woman gracious,
in this habit sought and obtained your service.


For heavens sake what's your intent?

I love you.

Pray keep off.

I wood keep from you. Had my desires bodies
How I cood beat them into better fashion,
And teach them Temperance, For I rid to find you;
And at a meeting amongst many Dames,
I saw you first: Oh how your taking eyes,
Those actiues sparkling sweet discovered twins,
In their strong captivating motion, told me
The story of your heart, a 10^0 Cupids
Me thought sate playing on that pair of Christails,
Carrying to the swiftness of conetous Fancy,
The very letters we spell love with.

Fie. Fie.

I have struck her to the heart, through my face
Apparelled with this field of gravity,
The neglected roughness of a Soldiers dart.
These diamond pointed eyes but hither through, and you will see a young spring
on it, but question times fair ones.

They 'le confess, tho with a blush they have often found good wine at an old
bush. My blood is young, and full of amorous heates, which but brancht out into
these lusty veins,

Wood play, and dally, and in wanton Turnings
Wood teach you strange constructions.
Let time and place then with Loves old friend opportunity instruct you to be
wise.


Alas Sir, where learned you to catch occasions thus?


Of a Lawyers Clarke wench, that with six such Catches, leapt in five years
from his Desk to his Coach drawn with four horses.


Do ye mean marriage?

Marriage a cloying meat, marry who thou woot to make a show to shroud thee
from the storms round headed opinion, that sways all the world, may let fall
on thee. Me Cozen? thou shalt call once in a month, or so: I'll read false
Letters from a far distant Uncle, insert his commendations to thee, hug thy
believing husband into a pair of handsome horns. Look upon him with one eye,
and wink upon thee with the other. Woodst have any more?


The return of Servants, or some friendly visit will intercept us now:
reassume your habit, and be but Iaruis till no morrow morning, I now by the
potent truth of friendship, I will give you plenty of cause to confess I love
you truly, and strongly.


^'are in earnest.

On my life serious, let this kiss seal it.

The softest vvax ever sealed bawdy business.
Now for old Bloodbound, I will meet you upon the Change Sir, with a blind
bargain, and then help your son to a good penny-worth: this night shall be
all mirth, a Mistress of delight.


Nay, nay, nay, mark what follows, I must bring her home^'th dark, turn her
up to bed, and here she goes to Church: my Cloak sirrah.


'Tis a very dark night sir, you will not have a cloak for the rain.


I am going to steal the Widow from I know not how many.


Nay, then I let your cloak for the rain alone, and fetch you a cloak for
your knaverie.


To bed, to bed -- good son, what Sim I say.

Sir.

I charge ye let not one be up ith'house, but your self, after the clock
strikes ten, nor a light be stirring, Moll, Trick up the green bed-chamber
very dainti^y.


I shall Sir.

And well remembered Moll, the keys of my Compting house, are in the left
pocket of my hose above in the wicker chair, look to them and have a care of
the black box there I have often told thee of, look to that as to thy
Maidenhead.


I shall sir.

Pray for me all, pray for me all.

Have you left out any thing for supper?

Out Rogue shall not I be at infinite expense to morrow, fast too night, and
pray for me.


An old devil in a greasy Satin doublet, keep you company.


Ha, what's that?

I say, the Satin doublet you will wear too morrow, will be the best in the
company sir.


That's true, that's true, I come Widow, I come Wench.


Oh sweet Sim, what shall I do to morrow, to morrow must be the day, the
doleful day, the dismal day, alas Sim, what dost thou think in thy
con-science I shall do with an old man?


Nay, you're well enough served, you know how your rather not an ho^e ago, lay
at you ^o have the Ancient, one that your ^eeth^e'ne water at, and yet you cry,
I cannot love him, I wonnot have him.


I cooed willingly marry him, if I might do nothing but look on him all day,
where he might not see me, but to he with him, alas I shall be undone the first
night.


That's true, how will you go to bed else, but remember he is a man of War,
an Ancient, you are his colours, now when he has nimbly displayed ye, and
handsomely folded ye up against the next fight, then we shall have you cry, o
sweet Sim, I had been undone, if I had not been undone.


Nay, and then the old fellow would mumble me to bed.


A bed, a Bawd with two teeth would not mumble Bacon, so then he so sparing
you, shall wear nothing, but from the Brokers at second hand, when being an
Ancients wife, you shall be sure to flourish.


Prithee go in and busy the old man with a piece of Reynard the Fox, that he
may not disturb us, for at this hour I expect Ancient Young, and my Brother.


Well, I leave you to the managing of Ancient Young, while I go in and flap
the old man in the mouth with a Fox tail.


Look, look, he have not brought him just upon the minute, o sweet silken
Ancient, my mind givesme^, thee and I shall dance the shaking of the sheets
together.


Now, you Mistress fig-^aile, s^he Wind come about yet, I ha brought the
Gentleman, do not you t^ll him now, you had rather have his room then his
company, and so show your breeding.


Now fie upon you, by this light you're the wicked'st fellow, my Brother but
abuses y^u, pray Sir go over again, yo'ue a handsome spying wi^, you may send
more truth over in one of your w^ll penned pamphlets, then all the vveekely
news we buy for our penny.


Pox on it, I'll stay no lo^ger.

Sfoote thou shalt stay longer, we will stay her heart her guts out.


Ha, ha, how will you do for a sister then?

Prithee Moll do, do but look upon him?

^s, when I ha no better object.

What can thou see in him thou unhansome ^ous thing, that merits not above
thee?


What wooed I give to kiss him?

Has he not a handsome body, straight legged, a good face.


Yes, but his lips look as if they were as hard as his heart.


Foot, shall try that presently.

You're basely sir conditioned, -- Pagh.

Why, do you ^it?

Ye may go by this light, he kisses sweetly.

Do b^t stay a ^i^t^e Moll, prithe Moll, thou know ^y Father has wronged
him; make him amen^s and marry him.


Sweet M. Spe^dall spare your busy breath,
I must have a wise man, or else none.

And is not he a wise man?

No.

Why?

Because he keeps a fool company.

Why, you are now i^'s company.

But birds of a feather will fly together, and you and he are seldom asunder.


Why you young witch, call your elder brother ^oole; but go thy ways, and
keep thy may denhead till it grow more deservedly de^pi^ed, then are the old
base boots of a half stewed Pander: Lead a Welch Morris with the Apes in
hell amongst the little devils, -- or when thou sha^t lye sighing, by the side
of some rich fool, -- remember thou thing of thread and needles, not worth
three pence half penny.


Too late I fear I ha'be^ne too coy, you are to be married then sir?


I am indeed sweet Mistress, to a Maid
Of excellent parentage, breeding, and beauty.

I ha'thought of such Musicians for thee.

But let it not be any way distast^ull unto you, that thus I tried you, for
your brother persuaded me to pretend love to you, that he might perceive how
your mind stood to marriage, in that (as I guess) he has a husband kept in
store for you.


I, I have provided a husband for thee Moll.

But I'^e have no husband of your providing, for alas now shall have the old
man whether I will or no.


I have such a stripling for thee, he wants one eye, and is crooked legged, but
that was broke at Footbale.


Alas, we cannot mould men you know.

He's rich, he's rich Moll.

Ha'him and his riches good sir, you're to be married in earnest.


In earnest; why, do ye think men marry as Fencers sometimes fight, in jest?


Shall I show her Mistress Elizabeths Letter I snatched from thee?


Not, and thou love me.

Goo^ brother let me see it, sweet brother, dai^ty brother, honey broth^.


No in^eed, you shall not s^e't, sweet sister, dainty ^ister, honey sister.


Oh good si^, since so long time I have loved you, let me not dye for your
sake.


The tide turns.

Long time^ ued me?

Long ^re you w^nt to Sea I did.
I have loved you very long with all my heart.

Think of Bess; think of Bess, 'tis the better match.


Ye wicked brother, Indeed I love you better, then all the Besses in the
world, and if to night I shift not into better fortunes, to morrow I am made
the miserablest wi^e marriage and misery can produce.


Is't possible?

Alas Sir, I am to mary an old man, a very old man, trust me, I was strange in
the nice timorous temper of a Ma^, I knovv^'tis against our sex to say we
love, but rather then to match with sixty and ten, threescore and ten times I
wooed tell you so, and tell them ten times over too, truth loves not virtue
with more of virtuous truth, then I do you, and wonnot you love me then?


And lye with thee too by this hand Wench, come let us have fair weather,
thou art mine, I am thine, there's an end of the business, this was but a
trick, there's the projector.


Oh you're a sweet brother.

And now you are my sweet Sister, I know the old man's gone to meet with an
old wench that will meet with him, ^r Iarvis has no juice in's brains, and
while I in the mean time, set another wheel a going at the Widows, do thou
soon about ten, for 'tis to be very conveniently dark, meet this Gentleman
at the Nags head corner, just against Leaden-hill, we lie in Lime-streete,
thither he shall carry thee, Accommodate thee daintily, all night with Mistress
Dorothy, and marry thee in the morning very Methodically.


But I have the charge of my Fathers keys, where all his writings lye.


How all things jumpe in a just equivalencie, to keep thee from the thing of
threescore and ten, did thou not see my Mortgage lately there?


Stay, stay.

A wl^te devil with a red fox tail, in a black box.

But yesterday my father showed it me; swears if I pleased him well, it should
serve to ^mp out my portion.


Prove thine old Dad a Prophet, bring it with thee Wench.


But now at's parting, he charged me to have a care to that, as to my
Maidenhead.


Why, fine have thy Maidenhead and that into the bargain, thy c^arge is
performed, away, get thee in, forget not the hour, and you had better fight
under Ancient Yongs colours, then the old Mans standard of sixty and ten.


Remember this, mad-braine.

Ha, ha, ha, Grandmother, I'll tell thee the best jest.


Prithee chic.

Jest kether, here will be jesting of all sides I think, if Iarvis keep his
word.


Sirrah, whilst thou were sent for into the next room, up came our second
course, amongst others in a dish of blackebirds, there lay one, that I swore
was a Woodcock, you were at Table Captain.


That I was, and our brave mad crew, which for my sake you were pleased to
make welcome.


Pish, vve'le have as many more to morrow night, but still I swore twas a
Woodcock: she swore '^vvas a backe-Bird, ^ovv who shall we be tried by, but
Sergeant Sliceman, Captain Carveguts Cozen here, a trifling vvager, a matter
of the reckoning was laid, the Sergeant svvore tvvas a backe-Bird, I presently
paid the reckoning, and she clapped of the breast presently, and svvore 'tvvas a
Woodcock, as if any other wood pass after the reckoning was paid.


This was a pretty one I protest.

Made sure before such a mad crew of witnesses, sirrah, Granham, al's agreed,
Sue's --.


I you may see, how you men can betray poor maids.


Do you hear Corporal, yonder's Sergeant Sliceman, and the brave crew that
supped with us have called for three or four gallons of wine, and are offering
money.


How, prithee Granham look to Dab, do you two but hold them in a talk,
whilst I steal down and pay the reckoning.


Do it daintily, theyl'e stay all night.

That's it I would have man, we'll make them all drunk, they will never leave us
else, and still as it comes to a crown, I'll steal down and pay it in spite
of their teeth, remember therefore that ye make them all drunk, but be sure
you keep me sober to pay the reckonings.


Agreed, agreed.

Oh Iarvis, Iarvis, how I long till I see thee.

There we must meet soon, and be married to morrow morning, Sim, is't not a
mad brother?


Yes, and I can tell you news of a mad Lover.

What is he in the name of Cupid?

Why one Master Randals, a Welshman, I have had such a fit with him, he says
he was wished to very wealthy Widow, but of you he has heard much Histories,
that he will marry you, though he never saw you, and that the parboyl'd Aetna
of his bosom, might be quenched by the consequent pastime, in the prittish
flames of his prittish blood, he falutes you with that love letter.


This is a mad Lover indeed, prithee read it.

Mas, has writ it in Welch English, we had been spoiled else, for want of an
interpreter, but thus he begins, Mistress Maries.


He makes two Maries serve one Mistress?

Ever while you live, 'tis your first rule in Weleh Grammars, that her forsake
Widows, and take Maids, was no creete wonder, for Sentlemen ever love the
first cut.


But not o'th Coxcomb, he should have put in that.


The Coxcomb follows by consequence, mark else. I Randall crack, of
Carmaerden, do love thee Mary Ploodbounds, of H^ds-ditch, dwelling Aulgate,
and Pishops gate, just as between hawke and buzzard.


He makes an indifferent wooing,

And that her loves Maryes so moustrous, yet never saw her, was because her
hear her in all Societies so ferry fillanously commended, but specially before
one Master pussie Constables of her Parish, who made her self half fo^'^ by
swearing by the Wines, that Maries wooed be monstrous good Marriages for
Randals.


Master busy it seems was not idle.

If Maries can love a Prittaine of the plood of Cadwalader, which Cadwalader,
was Prutes great Crandfather. Randalls was come in proper persons, pring round
shillings in her pockets, get fathers good will, and go to Surch a Sunday, with
a whole dozen of Welch Harps before her, so her rest her constant Lovers,
Randall William, ap Thomas, ap Tavy, ap Robert, ap Rice, ap Sheffery, Crack.


Fie, what shall I do with all them?

Why, he said, these all rest your constant Lovers, whereof, for manners sake,
he puts himself in the first place; he will call here presently, will you
answer him by Letter or word of mouth.


Troth, neither of either, so let him understand.

Will ye not answer the Love-sicke gentleman.

If he be sick with the love of me, prithee tell him, I cannot endure him,
let him make a virtue of necessity, and apply my hate for's health.


I, but I'll have more care of the Gentleman I warrant you, if I do not make my
self merry, and startle your mid-night meeting, say Sim has no more wit then
his Godfathers, and they were both Head-men of this Parish.


Farewell VViddowes prove, her sall no Randals have,
VViddowes was ferry full of wiles,
Mary Ploodhounds now, Randals make a v^,
Was run for Moll a couple of miles.

^are a mad man.

Augh, her was very clad her was mad.

The old man has money enough for her, and if you marry her, as if your project
take, you may, sheele take you more then a man.


More then mans, what the?

Trough cannot you tell that, this is the truth on it, she wood be married to
morrow, to one Ancient Young a fellow she cannot endure, now she says, if you
cooed meet her privately to night, betvven ten eleven, just at the great
Crosse-way, by the Nags head Tavern at Leaden-hall.


Was high, high pump, there as her turn into Graces street.


There's the very place, now because you come the vvelcomest man in the world to
hinder the match against her mind with the Ancient, there she will meet you,
go with you to your lodging, lie there all night, and be married to you in the
morning at the Tower, as soon as you shall please.


Becat her will go and prepare Priests presently, look ye Simkins, there is
a great deal of round shillings for her, her was very lucky shillings, for came
to Randalls shust for all the World as Fortune was come to Fool, tell Maryes,
her will meet her, her warrant her, make many puppy Fools of Ancients, and
love her very monstrously.


Ha, ha, ha, so, so, this midnight match shall be mine, she told me she
was to meet the Ancient there, I'll be sure the Ancient shall meet him
there, so I shall Iye a bed to laugh, to think if he meet her there, how
she will be startled, and if the Ancient meet him there, how he will be
cudgelled, beware your ribbs Master Randall.


I wonder where this young rogue spends the day, I hear he has received my
hundred Marks, and my advantage with it and it may be, he went home since I
went out. ^uis was with me but even now, and bid me watch, and narrowly, for
fear of some of my Rival spies: For I know she has many wealthy Suitours,
all love money. This Iaruis is most neat in a love business; and when we are
married because many mouths much meat, I will requite his courtesy, and turn
him away; the Widdowe's all I look for. -- Nay, let her fling to see I have
her possessions, there's a Saw for it.

There's thriving in Wiving: For when we bury
Wives by halfe-dozens, the Money makes marry.
Oh money, money, money, I will build thee
An Altar on my heart, and offer to thee
My morning longings, and my evening wishes,
And had thou life, kill thee with covetous kisses.

But now and she speak she spoils all, or if he call her by my Mistress his
name, hast thou no: tricks to enjoin them both to silence till they come
sure.


Phaw, that's a stale one, she shall speak to him in her own accent, he
shall call her by her own name leaving out the Bawd, yet she shall violently
believe he loves her, and he shall confidently believe the same which he
requires, and she but presents.

Fall off, she comes.

Iaruis.

Here I have discovered him, 'tis he by his coughs, remember your
instructions, use few words, for though till to night you knew it not, and will
he married early in the morning, to prevent a Vintners Widow, that lays clay
me to him.


Iaruis.

Good old man, I know him by his tongue.

Is she come? is she come Iaruis?

Ask her if she wood live sir, she walks a loose yonder.


We shall cozen all her wooers.

Nay, amongst all of you, we'll cozen one great one, that had laid a pernicious
plot this night, with a cluster of his roaring friends to surprise her, carry
her down to the water side, pop her in at Puddle-dock, and carry her to Graves
end in a pair of Oars.


What, what is his name I prithee.

He's a Knight abounding in deeds of charity, his name Sir Nicholas Name.


And wood he pop her in at Puddle-dock?

And he cood but get her down there.

By my troth we shall pop him fairly, where is she? where is she?


Ha, do you not perceive a fellow walk up and down muffled yonder?


There is something walks.

That fellow has dogd us all the way, and I fear all is frustrate.


Not I hope man.

This tis to be in love, if I do not dwindle.

I know him now.

Tis none of Sir Nicholas spies, is't?

He serves him.

He wonnot murder me, will he?

He shall not touch you, only I remember this afternoon, this Fellow by what
he had gathered by caves dropping, or by frequent observation, asked me
privately if there were no meeting betwixt you and my Mistress to night in this
place, for a Widow he said he knew you were to meet.


Good.

Now I handsomely threw dust in's eyes, and yet kept the plot swift a foot too,
Itold him you were here to meet a Widow too, whom you long loved, but would
not let her know it till this afternoon, naming to him one of my Aunts, a
Widow by Fleete-Ditch, her name is Mistress Gray, and she keeps diverse
Gentlewomen lodgers.


Good again.

To turn the sent then, and to cheat Inquisition the more ingeniously.


And to bob Sir Nicholas most neatly.

Be sure all this night studably in the hearing of any that ye shall but
suspect to be within hearing to call her nothing but Mistress Coote.


Or Widow Coote.

Yes, you may put her in so, but be sure you cohere in every particle, with
the precedent Fallacy, as that you have loved her long, tho till this day, and
so as I did demonstrate.


But how and she wooed say she is not Widdovv Come, and that she knows no such
woman, and so spoil all?


Trust that with her wit, and my instructions vvee suspected a spy, and
therefore she will change her voice.


Thou hast a delicate Mistress of her.

One thing more, and ye meet presently, mine Aunt has had mine husbands, tell
her you'll hazard a limb and make the tenth.


Prithee let me alone, and Sir Nicholas were here himself, he shoo'd swear
'twere thine Aunt.


Go forwards towards him, be not too full of prattle, but make use of your
instructions.


Who's there, Widdovv Coote?

Master Bloodbound as I take it.

She changes her voice bravely, I must tell thee true Widow, I have loved
thee long time, look how the Rogue looks, but had never the wit to let thee
know it till to day.


So I was given to understand Sir.

Is't not a fool finely?

Handsome by this hand.

I like thy dwelling well upon the Fleet ditch.


A pretty vvholesome Air Sir, in the Summer time.


Who would think 'twere she Iarvis?

I told ye she was tutored.

I'll home with her presently, some stays up in the dark.


Fool and he have any private discourse with her, they discover themselves one
to another, and so spoil the plot, no trick, no by no means sir, to hazard
your person with her, the bold rogue may come up close to discover her to be
my Mistress, and recover her with much danger to you.


He has got a dagger.

And a sword six foot in length, I'll carry her home for you, therefore not a
light be stirring; for I know your Rivals will watch your house, Sim shall
show us the chamber, we'll conduct her up ith dark, shut the door to her
above, and presently come down and let you in below.


There was never such a Ieruis heard off, bid Si^ to be careful, by the same
token, I told him he shood feed to morrow for all the week after: good night
Widow, Coote my man stays up, we will bob Sir Nicholas bravely. Good night
sweet vviddow Coote. I do but seem to part, we'll meet at home wench.


Adieu my sweet dear heart.

Go you with me, so, so, I will Cage this Cookow, and then for my young
Madcap, if all hit right, this mornings mirth shall crown the Craft o'th
night, follow me warily.


I warrant thee Iaruis, let me alone to right my self into the garb of a
Lady: Oh strange to see how dreams fall by contraries, I shall be coached to
morrow, and yet last night dreamed I was carted: prithee keep a little state,
go Iaruis.


Was ferry exceeding dark, but here is high pumps, sure here is two co^pie of
cross ways, and there was the street where Grace dwells, one hundred pound in
mornings in round shillings, and wife worth one thousand ere her go to bed.
Randalls fortunes comes tumbling in, like Lawyers Fees, hudole upon huddle.


Oh sweet Ancient, keep thy word, and win my heart, They say, a Moone-shine
night is good to run away with another mans wife, but I am sure a dark night
is best to steal away my Fathers daughter.


Mary.

Oh, are ye come Sir? there's a box of Land and livings, I know not what ye
call it.


Lands, and livings?

Nay, nay, and we talk, we are undone, do ye not see the Watch coming up
Gracious-streete yonder, this Cross way was the worst place we could have met
at, but that is yours, and I am yours, but good Sir do not blame me, that I so
suddenly yielded to your love, alas you know what a match an't I should have to
morrow else.


Her means the scurvy Ancient.

In the morning we shall be Man and Wife, and then, alas I am undone, the Watch
are hard upon us, got you back through Cornehill, I'll run round about the
Change, by the Church corner: down Cat-eaten street, and meet you at
Bartholomew Lane end.


Cats street was call her, sure Randalls was wrapped in mothers smock.


Keep straight towards Bishops-gate, I am deceived and I heard not somebody
run that way.


Stay Sir, here's somebody come from Aldga^e-ward?


Alas, I shall be hanged for staying so long for this Cuffe.


Come before the Constable here.

Let the Constable come before me and he please.


How, how, where ha you bin pray Da^e, ha?

For my Mistress Ruff, at her Sempstris Sir, she must needs use it to
morrow, and that made me stay till 'twas done.


Pray who's your Mistress, where dwell ye?

With one Mistress Wag in Black-Fryers, next to the sign of the Feathers and
the Fool sir.


Oh, I know her very well, make hast home, tis late. Come, come, let's back to
Gracechurch, all's well, all's well.


I escaped the Watch at Bishopsgate with ease, there is some body turning down
the Church corner towards the Exchange, it may be Mistress Mary.


Ancient.

Yes.

Are ye here again, you have nimbly followed me; what said the Watch to
ye?


I past them easily, the gates are but now shut in.

As we go, I'll tell you such a tale of a Welch wooer, and a lamentable
Loue-letter.


Yes, Sim told me of such a Rat, and where he lodges, I thought I should have
met him here.


Here, out upon him: -- But the Watches vvalke their station, and in few words
is safety, I hope you will play fair, and lodge me with the Maid ye told me
of.


She stays up for us Wench, in the word of a Gentleman, all shall be fair and
civil.


I believe you.

Zounes was another Fire Drake walk in Shange, we'll run pack, mas Maryes
have saved her labours, and was come after Randalls, Maryes was Randall that
loves her mightily Maryes.


Master Randall.

How did Watch let her go at Graces street?

They knew me, and let me pass.

Well now, her understands Maryes loves Randalls so mighty deal.


If Iohn have not told him, I'll be hanged.

Maryes shall go with Randalls to lodgings, and that her Father work no
diuorcements, he will lye with her aule t'night, and marry her betimes next
morning, mean time her will make Lands and Livings fast.


How Father? this is a mistake sure, and to fashion it fit for mine own
following, I will both question and answer in ambiguities, that if he snap
me any way, I may make my self good ith the other, and as he shall discover
himself, I'll pursue the conceit accordingly: but will ye not deceive me,
many minds are many men's Almanacs, the dates of your desire's out, we serve
for nothing but to light Tobacco.


If Randall false to Maryes prove,
Then let not Maryes Randalls love:
For Randalls was so true as Io^e,
And Maryes was her joy.
If Randalls was not Pritaine borne,
Let Maryes Randalls prow adorn.
And let her give a foul great horne to Randalls,
Her will love her cret deal of much her warrant her.

And 'tis but venturing a maidenhead, if the worst come to the worst, it may
come back with advantage.


Is not Mary come home yet?

No forsooth.

Tis a fine time of night, I shall thank her for it, 'tis past eleven I am
sure. Fetch, the prayer-booke lies within upon my bed.


Yes forsooth.

I wonder what this Gentleman shood be that caught me so like Iarvis, he
say he has fitted old Blood^ound according to his qualitic -- but I must not
let him da^y too long upon my daily company, Lust is a hand-woolse, who with
daily seeding, one time of other takes a sudden start upon his benefactor.


Oh Mistress, Mistresie.

What's the matter wench?

A man, a man under your bed Mistress.

A man, what man?

A neat man, a proper man, a welfavoured man, a ha^ome man.


Call up Iohn, where's Iarvis?

Alas, I had no power to speak, his very looks are able to make a woman stand
as still as a Millers horse when hes lading, o he comes, he comes.


How came you hither Sir? how got you in?

As Citizens wives do into Masks, whether I wooed or no nay, nay, do not
doubt the discretion of my constitution: I have brought ne'er a groat in my
bosom, and by this hand, I lay under thy ^d, with a heart as houest, and a
blood as cold, as had my sister lay near top -- will ye have me yet?


You are very rude, uncivil fellow.

Vnc^uill, and lay so tame while you set up your foot upon the bed, to u^ie
your shoe, such another word, I will uncivillize that injured civility which
you so scurvily slander, and reward you with an undecencie proportionable to
your understandings, will ye have me, will you marry me?


You, why tomorrow morning I am to be married to your Father.


What, to sixty, and I know not how many, that will lie by your side, and
divide the hours with cou^hes, as Cocks do the night by instinct of Nature.


And provide for his family all day.

And only wish well to a fair wise all night.

And keepe's credit all day in all companies.

And discredit himself al night in your company.

Fie, fie, pray quite my house Sir.

^oars, 'tis my house.

Your house, since when?

Even since I was begotten, I was borne to^, I must have thee, and I will
havethee, and this house is mine, and none of thine.


Oh Mistress, the saddest Accident in the street yonder.


What Accident prithee?

You must pardon my boldness, into your bedde-Chamber, there is a Gentleman
slain in a fray at the door yonder, and the people wonnot be persuaded, but
that he that did it, took this house, there is the Constable, Church-wardens,
and all the Head-men of the Parish, be now searching, and they say they will
come up hither to your bed chamber, but they will find him, I'll keep them down
as long as I can, I can do no more then I can.


Are not you the murderer Sir?

I ha been under thy bed by this hand this three hours.


Pray get you down then, they will all come up, and find you here and all, and
what will the Parish think then? pray get you down.


No, no, no; I will not go down now I think on it.


Why, what do you mean, you will not be so uncivil to unbrace you here?


By these Buckles I will, and what they will think on it --


Alas, you will undo me.

No, no, I will undo my self look ye.

Good Sir, I will off with my doublet to my very shirt.


Pray sir have more care of a Woman's reputation.


Have a care on it thy self Woman, and marry me then.


Shood they come up and see this: what cooed they think, but that some foul
uncivil Act of shame had this night stained my house, and as good marry him as
my name lost for ever.


Will you have me before the other sleeve goes off?


Do, hang your self, I will not have you -- look, look, if he have not
pulled it off quite, why you wonnot pull off your boots too will you?


Breeches and all by this flesh.

What, and stand naked in a Widows Chamber.


As naked as Grantham steeple, or the Strand May-pole by this spur, and what
your grave Parishioners will think on it?


Gentlemen pray keep down.

Alas, they are at the stairs foot, for Heavens sake Sir.


Will you have me?

What shall I do? no.

This is the last time of asking, they come up, and down go my breeches, will
you have me?


I, I, I, alas, and your breeches go down
I am undone for ever.

Why then kiss me upon it, and yet there's no cracking your credit, Iarvis
is come in, Iarvis.


I have kept my promise Sir, you're caught the old one.


How caught, is there no body below then?

No body but Iohn, for sooth, recovering a Tobacco snuff, that departed before
supper.


And did you promise this Sir?

A woman cannot have a hansomer cloud, then a haire-brain'd Husband: I will be
your Cousin, he shall be my Cuckold.


I love ye for your Art.

Come, Come, put on Sir, I have acquainted ye both with your Fathers intended
marriage, ^th morning you shall certify him very early by Letter, the
quality of your fortunes, and return to your cbedience, and that you and your
wife, still concealing the parties, will Attend him to Church, Iohn and I'll
be there early, as commanded by my Mistress, to discharge our attendance:
about goes the plot, out comes the project, and these's a wedding dinner dressed
to your hands.


As pat as a fat Heir to a lean Shark, we shall hunger for it, honest
Iarvis, I am thy bed-fellow to night, and to morrow thy Master.


You're a fine man to use a woman thus?

Pish, Come, come, fine men must use fine Women thus, tis fit, plain truth
takes Maids, VViddovves, are won with wit.


You shall wear horns with wisdom, that is in your pocket.


Come Iohn, carry your hand steadily, the guess drop in a pace, do not let
your wine drop on it.


Tis as I told thee, Master Alexander, thy Mistress eldest son will be here.


Rose, I pray burn some pitch in the Parlour, 'tis good against ill airs,
Master Alexander will be here.


I am up before ye son Earelacke, will Ancient Young be here with a rich
Wife too? thy Mistress is not stirring yet sirrah, I'll hold my life the
Baggage slip to thy Mistress, there they have even locked the door to them,
and are tricking up one another: oh these women! but this Rogue Tim, he lay
out to night too, he received my hundred Mark, and I fear is murdered:
Truss, Truss, good Iarvis.


He has bin a wooing Sir, and has fetched over the delicat'st young Virgin, her
Father died but a week since, and left her to her marriage, five thousand
pound in money, and a parcel of Land, worth three hundred Perannum.


Nay, nay, 'tis like, the boy had ever a captivating tongue to take a woman --
o excellent money, excellent money, Mistress of my devotions, as if my
Widows estate is little less too, and then Sander, he has got a monied woman
too, there will be a bulk of money, Sim is puling sir, I may tell thee, one
that by natures course, cannot live long: ^other, a Mid-night sur^et cuts off,
then have I a trick to cozen both their Widdovves, and make all mine, o
Iarvis, what a monied generation shall I then get upon thy Mistress?


A very virtuous brood.

Has't done?

I have done Sir.

I'll in and get some m^cke for thy Mistress, to quicken her this morning, and
then to Church in earnest, 'tis done, where is Sir Nicholas Nemo and his words
that watch so for her? Ha, ha, ha, al's mixed with honey, I have mirth, a sweet
young Widow and her money, o that sweet Saint, called money.


Joy I, and a 100 pound a year in a black box to the bargain given away in the
dark last night, to we know not who, and to be heard of we know not when.
Sfoote and this be joy, wood we had a handful, some slice of sorrow to season
it.


By this light 'twas strange.

Believe me Sir, I thought I had given it you, he that took it called me by my
name.


Did he speak Welch or English?

Alas, I know not, I enjoined him silence seeing the Watch coming, who parted
us.


If this were not Master Randalls of Randall Hall that I told ye of, I'll be
fleaed.


Be maskt, and with-draw a while, here comes our Dad.


Why Master Busy, asleep as thou standst man?


Some horse taught him that 'tis worth god a mercy.


I watch all night, I protest Sir the Counters pray for me, I send all in Cut
and long tail.


What, what?

I sent twelve Gentlewomen, our own neighbours last night, for being so late
but at a woman's labour.


Alas Sir, a woman in that kind you know must have help.


What's that to me? I am to take no notice of that, they might have let her
alone till morning, or she might have cried out some other time.


Nay, nay, Master Busy knows his place I warrant ye.


Son Alexander welcome, and Ancient Young to, I have heard all.


You must pardon the meritable rudeness of the Gentlewomen Sir, in not
unmasking, they entreated me to inform you: there are some ith house to whom
they wood by no means be laid open.


They are witty, they are witty.

But for my self, I am now your most obedient virtuous Alexander.


Obedience, hang her virtue, let her starve; has she money? hath she money?


Two Chests of silver, and two Vtropian Trunks, full of gold and Jewels.


They are all Alexanders women, do ye mark?

Alexander was the Conquer^ur Sir.

Come, come, we'll to Church presently: Prithee Iaruis whilst the Musicle
plays just upon the delicious close, usher in the Brides, the Widow, and my
Moll.


I tell ye true Gallants, I have seen neither of them to day. Shall I give
him the lye?


They are both locked up itaith, trimming of one another. Oh these women, they
are so secret in their business, they will make very Coxcombs of us men, and
do it at pleasure to, 'tis well said friends, play, play, where's Sim?


How he bestirres him.

Yes, he will sweat by and by.

Here is the sign of Sim Sir.

Have the guests Rosemary without?

They have Rose the Cooke-mayd without, but they say you have Mistress Mary
within.


Well said Rascal.

Marie's above good-man Blockhead. Call my son Earelack, bid him for shame
make hast.


He shall make hast for shame.

I am so busied, you must bear with me Gentlemen, they leave it all to me
here.


But I will go charge some of the inferior guess in the Kings name to fill
some wine.


No, no, good Master Busy, we will first usher the brides.


Oh Gentlemen, where are you? where are you?
Where are you Gentlemen?

What's the matter?

Where's Moll Sim, the Widow Sim, the dainty Widow?


There is no Moll, there is no dainty young Widow, but a damnable Bawd we
found a bed with a face like an Apple half roasted.


How's this?

Why Gentlemen?

Now it works.

Iaruis you're a Rogue, a Cut-purse Iaruis, run Sim, call my son Earelack,
he shall put her into the Spiritual Court for this.


Nay, has put her in there already, for we found him a bed with her.


Possible.

Ha Boys, the Informer and the Bawd, the Bawd and the Informer have got a
devil betwixt them Gentlemen.


Nay Sir, the jest was, that they should fall asleep together, and forget
themselves, for very lovingly we found them together, like the Iemini, or the
two Winter mornings met together: Look, look, look where they come Sir, and
Iaruis between them, just like the picture of knavery, betwixt fraud and
lechery.


Tim is a puling Sirrah, I may tell it thee, a midnight surfeit too may cut off
Sander, I'll cozen their Wives, make all mine own, and then, Oh Iaruis what a
moneyed generation shall I get, upon this vviddow Coote that hath two teeth.


Did we bring you to Music with a mischief Earlack? thou art a Goat, thou
hast abused the best bed in my house, I'll set a Sumner upon thee.


Bloodhound, thou art a Usurer, and take forty in the hundred, ^e inform
against thee.


Are you a Bawd huswife, ha?

Alas Sir, I was merely ^nuied, betrayed by Iaruis, but as I have been Bawd
to the flesh, you have been Bawd to your money; so set the Hare Pie against
the Goose g^ble^s, and you and I are as daintily matched as can be sir.


Sim, run to the widow Wags, tell her we are both abu^'d, this Iaruis is
a ^ugler, say.


I can save Sim that labour Sir, I assure you the widow is married to your
son Alexander, and as a confirmation she is come her self to witness i^.


^our fair young daughter is wife to this Ancient, who is come likewise to
witness it.


The plain truth is Master Bloodhound, I would entreat you to keep the
kennel, the younger dog being of the better sent, has borne the game before
ye.


We have clapped hands on it Sir, and the Priest that shood have married you to
her, is to marry her to me, so sister, talk for your self.


Ha brave tricks and conceits, can ye dance Master Earelack?


Ha, ha: the old man's a little mad: but thou art not married Moll?


Yes indeed Sir, and will lye with this Gentleman soon at night: do you
think I wood chew Ram mutton, when I might swallow Venison, that's none of
Venus documents Monsieur Dottevill?


^ox of that Venus, s^ee is a Whore I warrant her.


And were not you the the other Juggler with Iaruis in this, hey pass and repast.


Good Sir be satisfied, the Widow and my sister sung both one song, and what
was't, but Crabbed age and youth cannot live together. Now we persuaded them,
and they cooed not live together, they wood never endure to lie together, this
consequently descended, there was the Antecedent, we clapped hands, sealed
lips, and so fell unto the relative,


This was your bargain upon the Exchange Sir, and because you have ever been
addicted to old proverbs, and pithy Saws, pray let me seal up the mistake
with one that will appear very seasonably.


And I pray let's hear it sir.

You, a new fangled fowler, came to show your Art in the dark, but take this
truth, you caught in truth a Cookow for it.


Heyday, we are cheated by the rule^ faith, now sirrah, they say you are to be
married too.


Yes indeed Father, I am going to the business, and Gentlemen all, I am come
whether you will or no, to muite ye all to my marriage, to this Gentlewoman,
who though a good face need no Mask; she's maskt to make a man think she has
a scurvy face, when I know (...) has a good face, this is S^cke to them and out
of their Element.


But sirrah, setting aside marriages, where's my hundred Mark you went to
receive?


Hum, upon such a match of mine, talk of a hundred Mark, this is to drink
ignoble ^onre shillings beer, a hundred Mark, why your Lawyer there can
clear such a trifle in a Term, and his Clients ne'er the better.


Such a match, I pray discover her, what is she?

What is she, here's my Brother knows ^hat she is well enough, come hither
Dab, and bee^ known unto you, her name is Lindabrades, descended from the
Emperor Tribatio of Greece, and half Niece, some six and fifty descents to
most unvanquisht Claridiana.


Who's this? pox on it, what


I am very much deceived, and I did not send this Gentlewoman very drunk
the other night to'th Counter.


I tell thee prattling Constable, 'tis a lye, Lindabrades a Drunkard?


Hark ye brother, where lies her living?

Where, why in Greece.

In grease.

She looks as if she had sold Kitchinstuffe.

This is a common whore, and you a cheated Coxcomb, come hither, you rotten
Hospital, hung round with greasy Satin, do not you know this Vermin?


I winckt at ye Sue, and ye cooed have seen me, there's one I^rni^, a rope on
him has juggled me into the sudds t^o.


Now I know her name too, do not you pass under the name of Sue shortheeles,
minion?


Go look Master little wit, will not any woman thrust her self upon a good
fortune, when tis offered her?


Sir Marmaduke, you are a Justice of peace; I charge ye in the Kings name, you
and Master Ambodexter, to assist me with the Whore and the Bawd, to Bridewell.


By my troth and we will, by that time we shall have an excellent stomach by
that time dinners ready.


I, I, away with them, away with them.

Oh this Rogue Iarvis.

Now, now, you look like a melancholy dog, that had lost his dinner, where's
my hundred Marks now you Coxcomb?


Truly father, I have paid some sixeteen reckonings, since I saw you, I was
never sober since you sent me to the Devil yesterday, and for the rest of
your money, I sent it to one Captain Carvegut, he swore to me his Father was
my Lord Majors Cooke, and that by Easter next, you should have the principal,
and eggs for the use indeed sir.


Oh Rogue, Rogue, I shall have eggs for my money, I must hang my self.


Not before dinner pray Sir, the Pies are almost baked.


And Maryes now was won, and all her pusinesse done, and Randalls now was
run, her have made all sure I her warrant her.


Look, look, yonder's the conceit, the mistake happened upon last night.


And the very box at's girdle.

Cot plesse her Father Ploodhounds, Randals have robbed Ancients her warrant
her.


Sir 'tis known how you came by that box.

Augh was her so, will hear an Noble Prittaine, how her gull an English Flag?


And you ought to cry.

Oh noble Randalls, as her meet by Nags-head with Mayres Plood, prave.


Here's another mad-man.

Hark in your ear, you must deliver that box to me.


Hark in her the other ear, her will not deliver her, and her were nine and
forty Ancients, and five and fourscore Flags.


Let my foe write mine Epitaph, and if I tear not my birth-right from thy
bosom?


Gentlemen, there's Alegant in the house, pray set no more abroach.


Nay let her come with her pack of needles, Randalls can pox and bob, as well
as her, her warrant her.


What box is that? I shoo'd know that box.

I will resolve ye sir, keep them asunder.

You will restore that box?

Her will not restore her, 'twas Mary Ploodhounds gave her the box, Randals
have married Mary Ploodhounds and gul'd Ancients, mark her now.


Mark him good Sir, me thinks he says he has married Mary Bloodhound.


Hang him, he's mad!

Zoun's, make Tog of Randalls? come out here Maries.

Look here was Mary Ploodhounds. Enter Maid Hugh. now, I pray tumble down of
her Mary-po^es, and ask her father plessing?


This, why this is your Maid Widow,

This is Mary the Widows Maid man.

And here is Mary Ploo^hound, my choleric shred of Cadwallader, married to
this Gentleman, who has a hundred a year dangling at your girdle there.


I pray Mistress are you married to this Gentleman?


By sixe^'th morning forsooth, he to^ke me for Mary Ploodhound, having it
seems, never seen any on's before, and I being something amorously affected,
as they say to his Welch ditties, answered to her name, lay with him all night,
and married him this morning, so that as he took me for her, I took him as he
was forsooth.


She means for a fool, I am fain to answer for you.


Ha, ha, ha, Cupid this twenty four hours has done nothing but cut cross
capers.


Do ye hear, sir Bartholomew Bayard, that leap before ye look, it will
handsomely become you, to restore the Box to that Gentleman, and the Magnitude
of your desiree, upon this dainty, that is so amoro^slie taken with your
ditties.


Her wail in woe, her plunge in pain.
And yet becat her do not neither, Randalls will prove her self Prittaines
borne, and because her understands Ancients was prave fellows, and great
Travailers, there is her box for her.


I thank ye.

And because was no remedies, before her aule, here will Randals embrace
Maries, and take a pusse --


Save ye gallants, do ye want any guess?
Call me thy Coz, and carry it hansomelie.

Who have we here trow?

Dost thou know the Gentleman that whispered to thee?


Oh wondrous well, he bid me call him Coz, and (...) it handsomely.


Widow, wood I were off again.

Know all, this Gentleman has to obtain his Lust, and loose desires, served me
this seven months, under the shape and name of Iarvis.


Possible?

Look well, do ye not know him?

The very face of Iarvis.

I truly Father, and he were any thing like him,
I would svveare 'tvvere he.

I must cast my skin; and am caught -- why Coz.


Come you're cozened,
And with a Noble craft, he tempted me
In mine own house, and I bid him keep's disguise
But till this morning and he shoo'd perceive,
I loved him truly, intending here before ye,
To let him know it, especially in the presence
Of you Sir, that intend me for your Wife.

What shoo'd this mean?

Some witty trick I warrant thee, prithee dispatch him presently, that we
were at Church.


First, then know ye for truth sir, I mean never to marry.


How Woman?

She has dispatcht you Sir.

And for a truth sir, know you, I never mean to be your Whore.


This is strange.

But true, as she whose chaste immaculate soul,
Retains the Noble stamp of her integrity,
With an undefac't perfection -- perchance as these
Nay Common Fame, hath scattered you, conceive me,
Because pale jealousy (Cupids angry Fool)
Was frequent lodger at that sign of Folly;
My husbands soon suspicious heart, that I
In a close clouded looseness, shoo'd expose him
To that desperate distraction of his fortunes,
That sent him to the Sea, to nourish her,
With your vain hope, that the Fame of frequent suitors,
Was but a Mask of loose scapes, like men at Lotteries:
You thought to put in for one Sir, but believe me,
You have drawn a blank.

Beca^ her look ferry black indeed,

Oh my beloved husband,
However in thy life, thy jealousy
Sent thee so far to find death, I will be
I will be married to nothing but thy memory.

But shall the pies be spoiled then?

Let her alone, if her husband do not know this.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

Her Husband I told you was a madman.

Why her Husbands dead sir.

He is not dead Sir, he had it spread a purpose, he is in England, and in your
house, and look: do ye not see him?


Where, where?

Here, here he is that hath found rash jealousy,
Loves joys, and a wife whose discreet carriage
Can intimate to all men a fair freedom.
And to one be faithful, such a wife I prove,
Her husbands glory worth a wealthy Love.

You are welcome to my soul Sir.

By my troth Master Wag this was a waggs trick indeed, but I knew I know ye,
I remembered you a month ago, but that I had forgotten where I saw you.


I knew you were a crafty Merchant, you helped my Master to such bargains upon
the Exchange last night: here has been the merriest morning after it.


My Pitchers broke just at the Well head, but give me leave to tell you Sir,
that you have a noble Wife, and indeed such a one as wood worthily feast the
very discretion of a wise mans desire, her wit ingeniously waytes upon her
virtue, and her virtue advisedly gives freedom to her wit, but because my
marriage shall seriously proceed, I wed my self Sir to Obedience, and filial
regularity, and vow to redeem in the duty of a son, the affection of a
father.


Becat was as well spoke as Randall her self cood talk.


All is forgotten now my best son Alexander, and that my wedding want no good
company, I inuit you all.


Come my deserving Wife,
Wisdom this day remarries us. And Gentlemen
From all our errors wee'le extract this truth,
Where vicious ends prepose, they stand on wheels,
And the least turn of chance throws up their heals:
But virtues Lovers ever green do last,
Like Laurel which no lightening can blast.


