PHEBVS and His Royal PHEBE, King and Queen of Heaven.

Poetical Names, compounded of Greek words signi^ying Light and Life; Both
which, come from the Sun and Moon.

Most of these Persons are more fully expre^t, page 6.

THE GENERAL SCENE, is the LITTLE WORLD, or Isle of BRITAIN; centred within
the Spears of Heaven. page 1.

The GREAT QUEEN being seated under a Royal State, a Cloud rising, brings up
the First Scene: A Scene of Darkness, Nightwork, Thunder, Lightning, with all
Attendants of Storm and Tempest.

NIGHT enters in a hideous shape, holding a Landscape of Horror, inscribed in a
strange Dialect (to cause more Admiration) SKOTOS Brightness, rising up like a
clear Day, dawning out of blackest Clouds. p. 3, 4.

In this Scene, Two Celestial HEROINS page 4.

These two, re-ascending in a glorious Rain-bow, Sing the first Song to the
GREAT QUEEN: who, rising up in a Rosie coloured Cloud, was presently seen,
Entering among the Masquers, personating PHEBE; and at the end of the Masque,
was again seen with Her Royal PHEBUS under the State; while a Celestial
Cho^us enters singing, and concludes the Masque. page 19.

The Plot of the Masque (presented by ASTRONOMIA and ASTROLOGIA) consists of
two Parts, or Maps: The one Celestial, the other Terrestrial.

The Celestial Map

The Terrestrial Map, is truly to represent, How all Those Motions were
shadowed upon Earth, for all That time. But, this last Map (or History) is not
yet fully perfected, because the exact proportion 'twixt Heaven and Earth, is
not yet concluded on, by the best ASTRONOMERS.

PHEBUS, pleasing to bless the Southern World with his Chiefest Residence,
deputes MERCURY to the Northern THULE This Quarrel is shadowed in the
Antimasque of Night-work, inscribed SKOTOS. page. 3.

Northern Progress toward THULE, to reconcile these Two; yet, lest They
should prove Contumacious, He advances in Warre-like manner; attended with
JUPITER, MARS, and all their Satellites. page. 9.

Peace; which PHEBUS grants to his Dearest PHEBE: and so, SATURN and MERCURY
are again settled by PHEBUS in their proper Places.

Only MARS, is Enemy to This Peace, and by divers assays, Labours to break
it. But, PHEBE still opposes Him; and so prevails, that MARS Falls down as
Thunder-struck; yielding himself Prisoner to PHEBUS.

Southern Residence; to the content and Joy of All. page. 12.13.

At His Return, VENUS petitions for Her old Friend MARS, and begg^th His
Liberty; which at length,

MARS released (being more enraged at His Imprisonment) Plots to incense SATURN
and MERCURY again;

PHEBUS condescends to take a Second Progress toward THULE: gentle Rays of
wonted Goodness, then by Thunderbolts.

But PHEBE again vouchsafes to interpose Her self; prevailing with PHEBUS,
Grand Council of all the Seeming Deities. page. 14.

Who meeting in AREOPAGUS rebelling against PHEBUS; disturbing the Peace
mediated by PHEBE; incensing SATURN, and with him jointly opposing MERCURY.

MARS thus arraigned, was Cast, by joint consent, of all the Deities; and
adjudged to forfeit all His Honours, Dignities, Privileges, c. to His
Sovereign PHEBUS; and for ever to be excluded from the Number of Gods.

PHEBUS Returns again to His wonted Southern Residence, Peace; for which, Her
Royal Goodness p^evaileth with PHEBUS, to continue His Great Council; and to
summon all the CAUSES into JUPITERS HALL, the Great Councell-Place for all the
Gods.

Here, SATURN and MERCURY resign up all Their Possessions, Claims, c. into
PHEBUS Hands, acknowledging Their dependence on His Royal Favour.

PHEBUS receives them with wonted Goodness; Which alone moves Him not only
to re-invest them with all Former Privileges; but also to smile on them with
new addition of Royal Favours; well knowing, that Royal Goodness, is still
wont to Find, or Make, Loyal Subjects of all Noble Spirits. page. 16.

Thus at length, is a most Happy Peace effected through the whole LITTLE WORLD:
at which all the CAUSES jointly petition, for an Eternal Memorial of the
Royal Goodness of PHEBUS and His Royal PHEBE.

Who (after a Bright Cloud of thin Exhalations had opened it self and
disappeared) are Both seen resting under the Royal State; to the greatest
content and Joy of All. Witnessed by a General Applause, first begun among all
the Deities in Heaven; and being thence reflected through the whole Scene, was
again counter-echoed by all the Spears.

Whence issues a Celestial Chorus singing, and congratulating the most Happy
Peace, and Union of the Little World, made by the Royal Goodness of PHEBUS,
and His Royal PHEBE.

THE SCENE was centred within a circle of Magnifique Portico's, supported their
Supporters; Which seemed Silver Pilasters, inter-veyn'd with Streaming Sprigs
of finest Gold. Over these, ran an Architrave Freeze; yet shooting up so far
from the eye, that it lost somewhat of its luster, and seemed but Pearl,
filleted with sparkles of richest Diamonds. The outward Balcon's, for
fenestello's had a continued Crystal Work, backed with a most glorious
prospect, which quickly lost the eye, midst Orient Colours, streamed with
Azure, at greatest distance.

Within These, was a stately Fabric, curiously couched into a Sphere;
intermixtly waved with four Elements; and foiled about with a Perspective of
Clouds; over which, at distance, NATURE hovered, with an aspect that seemed to
admire, rather then view, Arts choice Composure.

On This, a Curious Balestrata, finely raised; seeming a LITTLE WORLD Rising up
from within a Greater: Second Draught; at which She smiled to see her self
grown an Artist, in more complete Limning; For, Her Former lines seemed but as
imperfect Assays, of what she meant to draw in This; Her Master-peece of all,
which with a modest scorn, seemed to disdain all Admiration. Its utmost
Verge, was an Artificial Border, made of a Natural Sea; most lively expressed
flowing into a Circle; whose in-most Area, (seeming an Island of Mosaic Work,
Terrast with antic knots) was the Basis to a Royal State, blessed with the
Presence of the GREAT QUEEN.

Over whom, ran a most glorious Canopy; in which the Graces were seen, each
with her silver needle, Enameling rather then Embroyd'ring: and so neatly were
the Flowers contrived, that with humble reverence they All inclined to the
GREAT QUEEN, (as the Heliotropion to the Sun) seeming to acknowledge their
Colour to Her Lip, their Sweetness to Her Breath.

Toward the Fringe, the Graces met; and with a pleasant smile, all at once
reflected on the last made (but first intended) Flower, finely purled with
BRITTANNOCLEA Soul to This Body, the Motto impres'd on This Device of HEAVEN.

The Colour most in Eye, was the Rosie-Lilly-sweetly-mixt Carnation; yet
changeably inclining toward Crimson, which seemed but a Natural modest Blush,
at the presence of the GREAT QUEEN: Who sate Circled about with a Glory of
Rays; which yet needed not to express Her, Whom all knew the QUEEN of
glorious Brightness: The fairest Idea of perfect Beauty; and among Mortals,
Vertue's choicest Sample^, which She makes a Pattern for Her Fairest Draughts:
One, whom Nature had taught with best grace to adorn Majesty; and with the
Luster of Her least rays, to dazzle Glory Her self, who now stood at distance
Blushing, yet ambitious to attend this GREAT QUEEN, Blessing the State^

On either hand, stood a ROYAL PRINCE; Both which, were Darlings to the same
Nature, which at Their Birth, thought it no Solecisme to cloth Maturity with
^oungest years: Both, with a Youthful, yet graceful blush, seemed to Smile,
as seeing themselves laden with O^hers Hopes, while They stood as Centre to all
the Lines of future Felicity: Over One of them, hovered a Crown, with this
Motto, DON DES CIEUX

Near These, were placed Two Fairest Young Ladies, in Rich attire, Carnation
guarded with silver deluces; Their Hair, knotted with Stars, and powdered
with Golden Atoms, raised up with a Dazzling Ray, darted out from that Sphere
of Brightness, fixed under the Royal State.

At whose beck, a Cloud^ in an instant Rising, discovered THE FIRST SCENE.

A SCENE of DARKNESS; an Impress of Horror: a Chaos f^lt, though not See^e.
NIGHT, not content with her wonted Sables, affects now a more dismal hue;
Enters, presenting Terror in a Lantskip, shadowed with blackest colours; The
Inscription in a strange Dialect (speaking more admiration,) SKOTOS

Scene: Leaving for the nighest part a Solitary Valley, divided with a River;
whose purling Streams (murmuring through broken rocks) taught the Woods,
beyond, to Tremble; Their boughs and leaves being shadowed on the Water by the
glimring MOON: Whose weak Beams (Refracted with frequent flashes of
Lightning, breaking out from blackest Clouds) made up a Faint Light, much more
dismal then Darkness; For 'twas only enough to make Dark Coufusion seem more
Horrid.

These Trembling measures, traced in full time, to the crowing of Cocks (only
echoed in saddest reports, from farthest distance) interrupted with harsh
unpleasing kroaking, and hideous Scritchings of Nights Forlorn Creatures; made
up the Music that best accords with Nights Discord.

This Scene presents the Antimasques, acted by Drowsy MORPHEUS, Pale PASSION,
and Trembling FANCY.

At length (lest Horror yet should seem imperfect;) Nights wonted silence, was
forced to degenerate into a Whispering murmur; Which quickly grew up into a
most violent and confused Tumult: which being re-echoed by many Counter-bounds,
midst hollow rocks, brake out at once, into most terrible Claps of Thunder; at
which, Nature her self, seemed to Startle, as amazed at such unexpected
Commotions

When This had a while detained the Thoughts, rather then Eyes, of the
Trembling Spectators: The Cloud soaring up too near the Royal State, was
instantly dissolved and dis-appeared; while Brightness again unvayl'd
Herself: at which a New Scene Rose up (while the Former vanished) forcing
Black Night to post away her Chariot, mounted on her own Birds

But These (being dazzled with that sudden unexpected Brightness) mistook
their Way; and in sted of falling, soared upwards winking (like Seeled
Lanners:) yet not able to mount to the Spears, began to hover a while in the
Air: at which pause, Night seemed offering to speak; had not some present
Deity struck her down; and so prevented, rather then interrupted, Her Dark
intents

At Her Descent, Dull OBLIVION and Soft SILENCE, not able to hold pace with
their Flying Mistress, were forced to stay behind Her; and so were still
detained, as Foils, to Grace the following Scene of Glorious Brightness

THESE ANTIMASQUES being thus past; from a Clear Heaven, opening on either
side, came Two Chariots, curiously touched with Gold, each borne up with a Cloud
of Aurora Colour; gently gliding down the Air in equal pace, till near the
State they met: Where, in an instant dis-appearing, They left Two Seeming
Deities, or Second Causes, in form of most Beautiful young Virgins; Richly
clothed in Sky Colours, waved with lightest Azure, heightened with silver;
loosely tuckt about with a Starry Girdle, such as Plebeians call a Zodiac;
Their Arms bare, with bracelets of Pearl; Their Fair Hair Dischevald, mixed
with silver: On their Head, a Coronis of Stars; yet of such different Light,
Colour, and Magnitude, that at distance they seemed Roses, sweetly mixed with
Lillies; which jointly refracted their Rays, into a most pure Carnation Iris.

Both These State, with a blushing Startle, as amazd at some unexpected
Majesty (though they expected much) humbly presented a Little Scroll, seeming
a petiti^n: yet some thought it the Plot of the Masque. What ever it was, Her
Majesty received it with a gracious smile, and seemed with much delight to
read it; while They Both, were Rapt up within a glorious Rainbow, mounting up
HEAVEN by degrees, while They sung thus, to the GREAT QUEEN.

Clouded Eyes in darkest Night,
To Thee may glance for Beams of Light:
That Sphere of Brightness in Thine Eye,
Darts Rays enough to make a Sky.
Thy Stock of Beauty hath a power
To dawn a Sun, for every hour.
But Pity yet poor Mortals sight:
With Lawn or Cypress Cloud Thy Light;
Lest Thy Beauty, FAIREST QUEEN,
Dazzle all, and be Unseen:
Celestial Hero's
To See Thy Face, but in a Mask.
With Thee yet PHEBUS
To let Thy Beauty be unvaild:
That in His sted Thy Glorious Ray,
May Condescend to make a Day,
Throughout This Hemisphear; while He
Masked presents a Masque to Thee.
'Tis Heaven's Will,
That We unseen,
Should echo still
Which Echo, was most artificially caught, and continued with most harmonious,
soule-ravishing Music; While the GREAT QUEEN rose up in a Rosie-coloured
Cloud; and was afterwards seen, with the Masquers, ( yet Unveyld) Personating
PHEBE: At which the Music sweetly melted, being heard at, distance, as from
within the Spears of Heaven.

Whence soon issued PHEBUS, Natuall Luster, Glory could add no artificial
complement: Before Him the brightest Rays, blushed themselves into Dusky
Clouds, as ashamed; though 'twas no shame, to be out shonn by such a Deity.

Near This Sun (and yet not near, for so could none) stood Two CAUSES,
Second only; Acted by the Thought, rather then Beck, of This First Moover, in
This Second HEAVE^ The Glory of these Two, seemed somewhat above Mortals,
because only below PHEBUS; Whose broken scattred Rays (above enough to make
Day) being reflected on These Two, were NATURE'S Measures, for the Highest
Beauty, in this Lower WORLD. Their Names were nothing but their Natures, well
contracted into JUPITER and MARS; The one Lightened to the others Thunder, and
held the Bolts the other cast: and yet neither did either; being neither
JUPITER nor MARS (though Both) but PHEBEIDES.

Somewhat Higher, with her VENUS (attended with Corona Borea, Lyra, Coma
Berenices, Cassiopea, Astrea Virgo, Celestial Heroins) was a Seeming Deity,
that might easily have seemed NATURE her self (as the Poets describe Her) but
that Her Age spake her much younger. However, Dame NATURE must now admit her
Equal, (and Grammar make no solecism of Two superlatives;) For sure, no Second
Place was capable of This Primest of Beauties, Blessing This Scene. And yet
with a sweet and graceful blush, She seemed to contract Her Rays; that so
Beauty might keep that distance with Brightness, which PHEBE must with
PHEBUS. For with This Double-Single Name, Those Two Deities pleased to One
themselves: And This was the only way to limit admiration; For, all curious
inquiries were soon answered thus, THIS is PHEBUS, and THIS is PHEBE; None
asked more; for more could not be said, more could not be Thought.

Yet, one thing more there was, at which both Art and Nature stood amazed; each
thinking That, the others Skill, Which it self, durst not presume to own.
This was a most Natural Likeness, Propo^tion, Feature; yea, Identity it
self, between This Fair and Glorious PHEBE, now over the State under it.

Most of the Spectators, ^ot having eyes to see One Sun (much less Two at
once) thought Both Those, but One; yet with several names in several Places:
So, over the State They called Her PHEBE; but under it, The GREAT QUEEN: as of
old to the Poets, The same Deity was (but in several Places) PHEBE, DIANA, and
PROS^PINA.

Yet some few, that saw with Thoughts, as well as eyes, Thought the One, only,
Real, The other Representative; as Reflected on some choicest Crystal, fixed
or moved sooner then Thought, yet still after the Motions of the GREAT QUEEN.

But, some Sublimate Rosie-Crucians (that were present with their Spectacles)
not yet content, would needs dive to the Bottom of their Deepest Chrysiple, to
search out This artificial Mystery of Nature. In discussing of which, They
had almost made another Antimasque, or piece of Night-worke, by profound
Mystical Disputations, whether Art or Nature, Sense or Reason, could best
separate, abstract, a^ least prescind, a Sprightly Genius from its Body (which
they called the Carcer Animae; the Night of Light; the Terrean Hecceity of an
Ethereal Quiddity:) so that the same Suppositum might exist in Two distinct
Individuums: For, such they thought, the Existence of these Masquers, both in
Heaven and Earth, at the same instant.

And these subtle Losophers (which was best of all) thought this Tactulum of
theirs, a fine Grace to this Masque of Heaven: Hoping their Bandore, might
happily do as much for the Bass, at the next Confort, as the Gras-hopper once
did for the broken Treble

In the mean time, not pauzing for this Harmonicall Discord below, the Music
suddenly brake forth above: most melodiously continued with a sweet, though
saddest Ditty; whose Air, was thought to be the same with That, composed at
the Sad parting, of the Grecian Princes, from their Ladies, towards Troy.

While the Music began to pauze with a most pathetic melting Note; PHEBUS
Rises, and with a most Emphaticall aspect, parts from His Dearest PHEBE Eyes
only (and they fainted too) were left able, to breath out a Sighing Vale.

The occasion of This Saddest Parting, was some Important Business of HEAVEN;
at which PHEBUS himself pleased to advance Northward, there to make Two
Enemies One Friend: Condescending thus to interpose Himself (though below
Himself) rather then by a Thunder-bolt to deal with Both, at greater
distance.

THE MATTER WAS THIS:

PHEBUS, pleasing to bless the Southern World, with his chiefest Res^dence,
Deputed MERCURY to the utmost Northern THULE Grudge, ere-since MERCURY so
sorely foiled CUPID, SATURNS grandchild -- Manet alta mente repostum.

Yet at p^esent, SATURN pretends another quarrel; pleading, Those cold North
Climats, subject unto Him, in PHEBUS absence: and, to assert his cause, besides
present Possession (almost the best Point in Law) He produces an Old Charter,
Patent under PHEBUS Broad Seal, on which Nature had stamped the Arms

MERCURY offers Dispute; and doubts not to make his Cause good by force of
Argument. But Saturn could handle his Sith, much better then a Syllogism; yet,
had Logic enough to hold His own Conclusion, and deny MERCURIES Assumption of
ought belonging to Him; yea, confessing He could not Dispute, He thought best
to Moderate; and Himself will Determine MERCURIES Thesi^. And in Conclusion,
Be it Right or Wrong, He Forces MERCURY to go back as he came; and, which
was more, wilily directs That Back-motion into a FALL

MERCURY Falling, Protests against SATURNS Injurious Act; and to Right
Himself, Appeals to PHEBUS Reprotests and Antiprotests; Trusting to the
Goodness of his Cause; not knowing that a New Patent might suspend an Old
Charter, that was never made, or meant, to be Eternal.

To Compose this quarrel, PHEBUS Himself condescended to take a North
progress towards THULE Warlike manner; Sending also MARS before Him, to attend
MERCURY; who, without PHEBU'S special Favour, was like to prove by much too
weak for SATURN.

MARS goes before, toward MERCURY; Yet by the Way lingers a while in VENUS
House, on old acquaintance; But to his Great loss and detriment, for PHEBUS
will anon revenge it

JUPITER follows PHEBUS, with His Thunderbolts, but at distance; and not
without some seeming great Reluctance, going Backward oft, as he seemed to step
forward: For loath he was, to hurt his Old Fa^her, yet much more loath, to be
disloyal to his Sovereign PHEBUS

Both at length, are well prevented by PHEBE'S Wisdom: Whose Royal Goodness
vouchsafes to mediate PEACE: which PHEBUS Grants to His Dearest PHEBE. And
so, being Reconciled, casts His wonted Gracious Aspect upon SATURN: Who was
thus again settled by PHEBUS in His proper Place, to the Great content and Joy
of all

At this, began an Applause through the whole Scene, while the Music suddenly
brake forth again, melodiously continued by all the Spears.

But, while This was blessing the Scene above; there happened an unexpected
Accident below, which in a Plebeian Comedy, might well have made an Interlude,
and have spared Music between the Acts: But Here 'twas much below the Genius
of a Royal Masque. However, it caused some smiles, though only among the crowd
of Lowest Spectators.

Thus it was. A Sp^ist Prognostique that ne'er durst Think of seeing Heavens
Face (but in a Pond, or through a Piece of Cypress) Hearing perchance that
Heaven would now be Masked, Star-gazer, and yet not hurt his neyes. He vows
therefore to make one in the crowd (at this Masque) though it cost him the
Swooning of his last and best Almanac: which he now regards the less; because
he presumes, at this Celestial Vision, to get, at least, a New Edition of his
Old Ephe^rides, now almost at last gasp.

Having crowded at length (with much ado) within ken of the Scene: The First
thing He heard, was a mutter (among some next him) of SATURN and MERCURIES late
Great Variance. At first sound of SATURN and MERCURY, He thought This might
prove a most incomparable good Notion for his next Calender, were it so
Translated, that profane Vulgars also might understand This Sublime Dialect of
Heaven; which He durst think no less then Hebrew, (what ever more) for This,
He had heard, was Heavens Language.

Well, this Tranflation shall be his own work; who yet remembered some had
told him, His First Minority had Surfeited by eating a Construing Book; which
made his queasy Stomach, ever since, to nauseate Minced meat; specially
Tongues, which (with Hartichocks of the Jewish mould) he had heard the Learned
Doctors most forbid, as the hardest to digest: Yet, he resolves to take
Heart-a-grace, for once, and so will venture another Surfeit.

The first Course was soon concocted; For, SATURN and MERCURY coming aboard,
he knew them at first sight, to be pieces of his own Element; and so might
easily come to signify any thing in Heaven or Earth. But as for Variance, This
he only knew in Practise, and not a word of its Theory; Therefore durst not
venture to translate it ex-tempore; but thinks best to Empannell a Jury of his
best Thoughts, to depose Their verdict for its cognisance. And while They step
aside into a By-roome, He was content to leave thinking awhile; and pleased in
much courtesy to condescend so low, as (all the Interim) to Grace the Masque
with the Tips of his ears. Yet, hearing nothing Here, but Dumb Shows (which
he understood no more then Variance:) His Teeth open by instinct, and he
thinks good (being moved) to inure his Docuity, by instructing some next him;
stiching up many reasons, why HEAVEN would come abroad mewd up in a Mask,
since French Hoods went out of fashion.

But here by chance, Over-hearing His Jury wrangle about their Verdict for
Variance: He resolves to make a New Foreman of the next Gown he saw. But, This
Gown happening to be lined with Far, he durst not a great while crowd near it,
lest perchance some Mace should hang loose in its pocket, which slipping out,
might race his Memory with old Obligations. Yet, at length, bethinking
himself, that, of all Vices, Modesty had long been most Odious; he ventures
to accost the Far Gown: and with a Congruous congie, confessing himself
ingramm in all the Oriental Tongues, beseeches his Worship to give him to
understand, what Variance might mean at Court of Heaven.

Mr. Alderman (for so the other called him) either out of depth of Science; or
else willing to horse the Ass, at least to muzzell him, (Himself being intent
on the Masque) cried Peace, Peace; at which the other quickly conjured his lips
into a Gramarcy of your Honour.

Thus having gotten the theory as well as practise of Variance; and presuming
on SATURN and MERCURY'S courtesy; he scorns to spell any longer, but with
most learned confidence, puts all together in one breath; Thus: Saturn and
Mercury, or Heaven and Earth, are at Peace, or Variance.

But, in the next Breath, bethinking himself he could not prove his words, if
any should chance to question him: He resolves to sleep whole, b^ Unsaying all
again; yet, with a gentle qualilification for his credits sake: and so starts
up in a pythick rapture, and swears by the Genius of all the Good Stars in
his Horoscope, that what ere he thought, yet he meant, Saturn and Mercury would
not, long, be at Variance in Arabic, or Peace in English. Which, he spake the
rather, that so he might intimate a most contagious Disease, he lately had,
which the Doctors call the Prophetic Tympany: the least Sent of which, he
hoped, might easily give him more room a^d ease in the Crowd.

Here his memory chancing to stumble on some Heroical Verses, made for his
next Kalend^r; he pleases in much courtesy to perfume Them next him, with a
spice of his Pottery: and so by learned expiration breathes out these
Rythmicall Proses, ushred in, by two or three Antic faces, bare-head.

Now Aquary
Lord Saturn, smiling on Mercury,
In Trine: 'tis well I wot; but Stay,
Till Sirius shall cast his Ray
And Leo frown: Titan and Mercury,
With Saturn Then shall be at Enmity
Enough, no more, yet do not Wonder,
If after Lightning, it do Thunder.
Enough, too much: for speak I dare not now;
But yet I'll Think, and care not How.
All which, and a great deal More, was but a piece of a non-Licet-Booke,
called an All-men-ake: a piece of Felony (what ever more) for 'twas Stolen out
of an old Ephemerids, calculated for another Climate, and not for the Scene of
This Royal Masque of Heaven: Whose Heroic Genius disdains such spurious
Comitragick Interludes: and yet This Pedantic 'Strologer, would fain have
Canted out his old Prosody with new Accents, and acuter Tones; which might
perhaps have at length been over-heard by some of the Masq^ers above; had not
some near him (wiser then Himself) quickly husht him, and sent him packing,
to learn New Calculations in the Old Counter-house.

However, This Discord below, with sweet Cadence, brought in, the Concord
above, with the finer grace; at least to the Lower Specta^tors; For the Ot^er
needed no artificial Foils to Grace their most Natural Harmony, made by
Heaven it self, with all its Spears.

And while this Music melted away by degrees, at the North Horizon PHEBUS Rose
in great Glory; advancing Southward again with his wonted Attendance, sutabl^
to His Majesty: His Triumphant Chariot was drawn by Sparkling Steeds, Four
in Front, as the old Romans were wont to Triumph

Now JUPITER also comes back again with his Satellites, waiting on the
Return of His Sovereign PHEBUS; who, in his Return, exalts JUPITER Noble
Subject, Thought one Gracious smile, one Glance, from his Prince; more then
enough to reward the most faithful and Loyal Service (possible) to His Royal
Sovereign.

MERCURY also, Leaving a while his Northern Station, comes Southward:
Following PHEBUS, till He came to the Royal Palace, and there Rested,
Dismis^ing MERCURY with a gracious smile

Only MARS is Enemy to This Pacification: whether out of Natural Antipathy to
SATURN (ever since He mocked him for Dalliance with VENUS) or else in Sympathy
to MERCURY (in whose House He had been Billeted most of This Time:) what ere
the matter was, He seemed much enraged, that He must, either return and strike
never a blow; or else, stay Freezing in the cold Cronian Ocean, as a lump of
raw metal, glu'd to the North Pole, by its magneticall virtue

While He lingers in MERCURIES House; SATUR^, Threatens him: who quite benumd,
and Frozen into a Dastardly Apoplexy (by the Northern sent of Cold THULE) is
forced to cry mercy: and not able to resist such strong Syllogisms made in
Ferio, he Flies thence; and Flutters Southward again with all his Ice-ickles.
But Coming at length into Southern Heat, He is thawd again into His wonted
Rage (which was Frozen about THULE:) and Raging, Enters PHEBE'S Palace; Hoping
by some means to divert Her mediation, and so disturb the Pacification

But for all his Spurs, His Rage is Bootless: for, PHEBE soon Opposes Him
in greatest displeasure Peace, which Her own Goodness had vouchsafed to
mediate with such happy success.

While He yet Raged, PHEBE so prevailed that with a Ray darted out, MARS was
dazzled; suddenly fell dow^ as Thunder-struck, yielding himself Prisoner to
PHEBUS: And so, being drawn Captive like after the Triumphant Chariot, for
shame grief, He hides himself under it

VENUS, at first, was affrighted at This unexpected Fall of MARS, Fled Thence;
yet seemed Ambitious to attend PHEBUS Triumph; so hastes into His Royal
Palace; there to prepare for His Glorious Return Royal Goodness, to all
Ingenuous No^le Spirits, is a stronger Bond then any Chain, then any Fetter.

MARS, released by PHEBUS, at VENUS Petition; was now no Prisoner, yet MARS
still; and still mindful of Former Chains (such is His Temper still!) soon
hastes into VENUS House, There to renew Former acqaintance. Thence he
plotteth to incense SATURN and MERCURY again: and after divers assays, at
length prevails so far, that SATURN begins again to frown on MERCURY: which
Frowning Disgust, MARS so resents and soments; that ere long, MERCURY is again
Driven out of THULE, and again by SATURN forced to Fall

MERCURY Falling, re-imploreth PHEBUS help (His best refuge:) after which,
PHEBUS condescends to make a Second Progress to^ards THULE: Yet resolves by
Gentle Rays of Royal Goodness, much rather then by Thunder-bolts, to prevail
both with SATURN and MARS, who now jointly opposed MERCURY.

But PHEBE

Who, meeting (according to PHEBUS' Summons) in AREOPAGUS Littl^ World: and so,
with general consent, agree to Arraign MARS, of Rebellion against PHEBUS;
Disturbing the Peace mediated by PHEBE'S Goodness; Incensing SATURN, and with
Him jointly opposing MERCURY. His Indictment being Heard; after all Pleas, They
all conclude Him One General CAUSE of most of the Late Commoti^ns: and jointly
Censure him, to be most justly excluded from the Number of Gods: and deprive
him of all Privileges, Honours, Dignities c. Which are all rendered back
again into PHEBUS Hands, from whose Royal Favour, they first came

PHEBE still continues to mediate a Full Pacification, between SATURN and
MERCURY Great Council; and summon all the CAUSES at once; to conclude and
attest a complete, perfect, and Eternal Peace, through the whole Little World.

This being Concluded on, PHEBUS Finishes His North Progress, and begins, the
Second Time, to Return Southward again, in Great Glory

Here a Bright Glorious Cloud Disappearing, The GREAT QUEEN, was again seen
Seated in Royal Majesty, under the State (as at First.) At which appeared a
Celestial Chorus, (Forerunners to PHEBUS Glorious Return) Rising up at the
North Horizon, like Orient Rays, Sparkling about Phosporus, till Aurora give
place to Phebus' Rising. These mounting Heaven by Degrees, Sing thus to the
GREAT QUEEN: Fair PHEBE, Thou alone hast Eyes,
To see Thy Glorious PHEBVS Rise:
If Rise He can, Who is at Hight
Of Beauty, Glory, and Delight:
He cannot Lose, He cannot Get,
He cannot Rise, He cannot Set.
Or if He Set, 'tis still'ith West,
And still His Rising makes East:
But if in South He Day do make,
Or to the North a Progress Take;
Speak Fairest PHEBE, can we call,
This PHEBVS Setting or His Fall.
When First He pleased to change His Place,
Tis True, a while He veyld His Face
Contracting in, His Southern Rays:
But to the North, He Them displays:
Speak Fairest PHEBE can we call,
This an Eclipse, Setting or Fall?
'Twas Pity kept him veyld a while;
For if He, Pleased, pleased to Smile,
He Pit'ed Them, He smiled on, lest
They should be Dazzled, whom he Blessed:
Or if he Frowned, 'twas Pity still,
That veyld his Frowns, that else would kill.
Like Lightning or like Thunder-claps,
Them whom He Frowned on: Or perhaps
He pit'ed Thee, Himself in Thee;
Lest Thy eye, His Frowns, should see,
And seeing Greive Thy Tender Heart:
And so Himself in Thee should smart.
Yet lest the Southern World should miss,
His wonted Rays, Their wonted Bliss;
He left Thy Beauty in His Place,
While Going North He veyld His Face.
That Veyle was but a Mask, for See
How in a Masque He comes to Thee


Here They entered a Clear Heaven (Full of Twinkling Stars like a Morning
Sky before Sun Rising) singing still; but seeming to speak to some in Heaven.
The Verses not lost by the great distance, were These.

Adieu ye Sparkles, Twinkling in Night;
Who mock us, Counterfeiting Light:
Once called Stars, and Heaven's Eyes;
Now Darkest Atoms of the Skies;
All is so Bright with PHEBUS Rays:
Though through a Mask He them displays.
Come See, and Blush, Blushing be gone,
And Going Cry, we are out-shone.
Thus, while the Song and Music most sweetly melted away by degrees; PHEBUS
leaves the North Horizon Southward again in Greatest Glory: being adorned with
Rays of wonted Goodness and mercy, darted out in a mild and Gracious Aspect;
yet sparkling with Royal Majesty; which seemed as the choicest Diamond,
enshrining it self midst purest metal; or as a Fragrant Rose, longing to
Carnation it self, with the Fair Idea of the whitest Deluce.

Soon after His Return, All the CAUSES (summoned before) attend him in JUPITERS
Hall (which was first made for the Great Conncell-House for all the Gods,)
where they consult with one consent, for settling a Perpetual and Inviolable
Peace through all the Little World.

For this end, at length SATURN and MERCURY jointly resign up all Their
Privileges, Honours, Dignities, Possessions, Claims, c. into PHEBUS Hands.
Acknowledging Their Dependence on His Royal Goodness: professing They had
rather be devoid of all that might speak them Happy: yea rather not to Be, than
be Clouded from His benign Rays, and quickening Influence: or conti^ue
conscious of promeriting His least Frown; whose wonted Smiles, were more then
Light, more then Life.

PHEBUS receives them with wonted Goodness: which, of it self, moved Him to
re-invest Them again; not only with former Possessions, but also with great
addition of New Favours. Which to make firm and inviolable, He Seals, by
smiling on Them with most Gracious Aspects; specially on his reconciled Subject
SATURN Royal Goodness, is still wont either to Find, or else Make, Loyal
Subjects; Whose Freest and greatest Liberty, speaks Their Sovereign, the
Completest Monarch; Ruling (not only Bodies with Fear, but) Souls with Love:
Which still was, still will be, the Surest and the Straightest Bond, to all
Ingenuous Noble Spirits; to Rule Whom, is Truly to be a King, a Royal Prince.

Thus most Happily was a Complete Peace settled through the whole Little World;
mediated by PHEBE; petitioned also and most cordially desired, with one
consent, by all the CAUSES; Granted, Sealed, confirmed by the Royal Goodness
of the GREAT KING: Which to maintain and attest, PHEBUS was graciously pleased
to Decree, and Ordain, Frequent State Meetings, Consultations, of All the
CAUSES

Who, before This First Meeting was disolved (after a most grateful
acknowledgment of the wonted Goodness of PHEBUS and His Royal PHEBE, in
quietting those Sad Commotions, so much disturbing the Little World) did
jointly agree to petition His Majesty, He would be graciously pleased, that
all Remembrance, of MERCURY', and SATURN'S Quarrel, might be wiped out; not
only from His own Breast, (which His own Goodness, of its self, had already
done) but also from the whole Little World; so that, an Act of Staines, and
Spots, that might respectively adhere to any of his Loyal, and Devoted
Subjects.

But, for an Eternal remembrance and Detestation of MARS His Treason; in
Rebelling against PHEBUS; Disturbing the Peace; and Disquieting the whole
Little World; His Majesty was petitioned, the Name of MARS might no longer
endure in the Court of Heaven. Yet, that all His Former Tenures might still
remain; But only as Eternal Memorials of the Goodness of PHEBUS, and His
Royal PHEBE. So, that Heaven should no longer mention the House of MARS or
MARS Joy: But for all These (in Their Places respective) The GLORY of PHEBUS
Captive to His Majesty, should forever, be called in Heaven, The TRIUMPH of
PHEBUS and His ROYAL PHEBE

And because in all the late Commotions; It was much suspected, MARS had been
too much Beckt, and abetted, by His old Friend VENUS (who yet, for some Causes,
was not ^ctually excluded from the Seeming Deities) his Majesty was moved, that
the Place where MARS released, had plotted with Venus to incense SATURN; might
no more be called (as it was before) the House of VENUS; But, the Honour of
SATURN

The First of these Petitions was soon Granted by PHEBUS; But the other, not
without earnest solicitation of all the Petitioners: For such is Royal
Goodness, much more prone to Smile then Frown; yet yielding to Both in
fittest seasons: Knowing, there is a Time when Public Good, calling for
Justice, leaves no Rome, or Place for any Mercy, but That only, which some
miss-call Severity.

Here a Transparent Cloud of thin exhalations op'ned itself, and
disappeared State; to the Greatest content and Joy of All. Witnessed by a
General Applause, first began among the Deities in Heaven, and being thence
reflected through the whole Scene, is again Counter-echoed by all the Spears.

Which, for a while seemed to Stand still Peace through the Little world: Then,
as Rap^ out of a Pauze; broke out at once, into most harmonious soul-ravishing
Music; first heard at distance, as began among the Spears, (melodiously Tuned
like choicest Voices, into sweetest Consort in several Parts) then Waved
nearer and nearer, till it was artificially Caught, and continued by a
Celestial Chorus; which Entered the Scene Singing, to Congratulate PHEBUS most
happy Return, and Rest with His Dearest PHEBE, after the Peace so well
concluded by Their Royal Goodness. The Close of the Song was This: You Sacred
Fires, no less Divine then Bright,
Who Dazzle Heaven When You Rise,
With Luster far more glorious then Its Light,
Which yet doth more then Bless our eyes.
Your Beauty's more Divine, your Light more Pure,
Your Virtue's Purer then your Light:
Eternal Luster! This shall Bright endure,
When other Brightness shall be Night.
When all the Spears at once agree,
To make one Tune, One Harmony;
'Tis not so Good, 'Tis not so Sweet,
As Yours, When You in Consort meet.
What was too Harsh, what was too Loud,
To Concord now is sweetly Bowd:
Such is Your Music, Such your Skill,
All Notes are Tuned to Your Will.
While Jarring Tones did grate our Ears;
We feared a Discord; But our Fears
Are Tuned to Joys: On Their Bass Part,
The Mean and Treble were Your Art.
Strike That again: again: That Note is sweet;
A Melting, not a Dying Tone;
Your Sweetness cannot Dye: then Living meet,
Us, in your Sphere, Your Highest Throne.
Nay, now we wrong the World; All Loyal Souls,
Each moment Kneel, and Vow, and Pray,
Your Long abode on Earth: This, This controls
Our wish; and makes Us wish Your Stay.
Be long expected in your Highest Sphere;
And long give Light to Mortal's eyes:
For, All the Beauty which They Worship Here,
Is but refracted fro^m Yours Rays.
And When You Leaving Earth, shall Heaven choose,
Behind You leave Posterity,
Like Flowers to gemm and sprout with Heavenly Dews,
While You Enjoy Eternity,
Eternity,
Eternity.


Here the Song waved away, Rapt into Loud; yet, most melodious Harmony^ into
which as Melting themselves the Celestial Chorus dis-appeared. Then, as
Animate by some New Genius, began a most Sprightly Dance to the Violins; which
ending in Single Passages, The Ladies Rise to Dance the Revels with the Lords.

NORTH SIGNS.
ARIES, The Sun's Exaltation: Mars' House.
TAURUS, Venus Night House: Mars' Detriment.
GEMINI, Mercuries Day House, c.
CANCER, Moons House: Mars' Fall. Iupiters Exaltation.
LEO, The Suns Royal Palace.
VIRGO, Mercuries Night House, Joy, c.
SOUTH SIGNS.
LIBRA Venus Day House: Saturns Exaltation.
SCORPIO, Mars' House and Joy.
SAGITARIUS, Iupiter's House and Joy.
CAPRICORN, Sa^urn's Night House.
AQUARIUS Saturn's Day House and Joy.
PISCES, Mercury's Detriment, Fall, c.
To This SCHEME, most of the
Masque Unmaskt, referrs.
SATURN and MERCURY, in this Masque of Heaven, are sometime Poetical, sometime
Platonicall, yea Chemical sometime; but usually Celestial; though shadowed
upon Earth also, I suppose, were the Terrestrial or Historical Map to be seen
abroad. Their Quarrel about THULE occasioned PHE^US' First and Second North
Progress Thitherward.

THULE (with Poets, Vltima Thul^) is a cold North Isle; most probably That, now
called SCHETLAND, which the Inhabitants yet call Thyle^sall, if Peucer deceive
us not. If This be not the True THULE, we yet understand not Ptolomy, Pomponeus
Mela, with divers other old Geographers. However, Almost a^l Modern Writers
Thule, meant but SCOTLAND (the Remotest Part of the British Isle) For This, was
to Them, as Theseus to Plutarch, The Utmost Horiz^n in. Their Map of T^rra
Cognita.

Their Quarrel about THULE, is First preshadow'd in an Antimasque of
Night-worke, or Scene of Darkness, inscribed in a strange Dialect, SKOTOS: And
no wonder; For, even among the Ancients, SATURN (for the Dusky colour of That
Planet) was usually an Hyer^gliphick of Darkness Hebrew and Chaldee word
Satar, to Hide and be Hid as in Darkness: which well agrees with the old Poets
Fables of SATURNS Hiding Himself (when JUPITER pursued Him) in Italy; which was
thence, They say Lateo, to be Hid.

This QUARREL, sprung Partly from an Old Anthipathy betwe^n Those Two (among
the Poets) eversince MERCURY, (on his Birth-day,) before all the Gods, So
sorely Foiled CUPID, Plato's Phedrus is the Best Paraphrase on This Fable:)
Partly also from a New Occasion which did anew actuate Their Old Antipathy.
This New Occasion was MERCURI^S New Patent, or Deputation unto THULE; where
SATURN had Prepossession, and Claims much Right from an old Charter patent
under PHEBUS' Broad Seal^, on which NATURE had stamped the Arms of Heaven.

SATURNS Possession of THULE is a Noted' Story among the old Poets and
Poetical Writers: Who had a Tradition that SATURN lay asleep in a Golden
Pumice, in the bottom of the North Sea, about THULE: Which Sea is therefore
called, by many Writers, The Chronian Ocean, or Sea of Saturn. Of this
Poetical Tradition Eusebius speaks Plutarch also in divers Places; in one of
which He tells us of an Island in the North Sea, called Saturns Isle; which
probably may be this THULE.

His Right to THULE (besides Present Possession) He grounds upon an old
Charter: In which The For as ^h, or Considerations moving, seem Such as These;
( For the Charter is not much seen abroad.)

First, as, in Heaven, The Re^est Planet from the SUN; and so fittest Viceroy
in Climats Re^est from the Su^s Residence, now (for the most part) Southern.

2do. As Coldest Planet, and so Lord of Cold Regions; specially Those, which
being Northern, are most distant from the Suns Heat, and so most Cold.

3tio. As Lord of Aquarius (by all Astrologers) and by consequence Lord of all
Islands; which the Poets place under Aquarius; specially Cold Islands, and such
are all Northern, in the Suns Absence

4to. As in special, Lord of the North Sea, or Chromian Ocean (as was said
before) and so Lord of all Islands in That Sea; of which THULE must be one.

MERCURIES New Patent, Deputation to This THULE (notwithstanding SATURNS
Possession and Charter) seems somewhat abstruce; yet wants not some Fair
Considerations moving.

For, of all the Planets, MERCURY hath Greatest Latitude from the Ecliptic,
which is the SUNS constant Residence; and so seems a fit Viceroy for those
Climes, which are most Remote and distant from the SUN; and such is THULE.

Also, Astronomers find MERCURY (of all the Planets) oftenest Septentrionall,
or Northern, in one or other of his Orbs: For his Great Latitude gains him one
Proper Orb, unknown to the rest, which They call Eccentrum Eccentri; which
makes Him most Excentricall, and oftest Septentrionall. Which Great
Eccentricity Latitude make such Spirall Labyrinths in all his Motions; That the
Best Astrononomers ( Ticho, Kepler, Longom^nt and Lansbergius) confess, They
can not be well Salved, Till his former Motions be corrected, with New and more
Exact Calculations.

With Astrologers also, Both His Houses have Northern Declination; and Gemini
is as much Northern as any one Part of all the Zodiac: Under Gemini also, Doth
Schoner, Pitatus, and others, place the Northern Isles; and by Consequent under
MERCURY, Lord of Geminy by all Astrologers.

But the Greatest Consideration in That New Patent or Deputation of MERCURY,
seems His Great Favour with PHEBUS; which All have still observed: Hence with
Astronomers, His stile is Apollinis Sidus, Solis Cancelarius, c. Yea They say,
His Longitude now differs from the Suns, But in some few Punctill^'s, for, he
seems to go His Pace, and step His step: insomuch that He is seldom seen
abroad, But Lies Hid under the Suns Rays (which makes him most Looked after,
but Least seen.) And no Planet is more with the Sun, But the Moon; nor is She
more, but of^ner.

Astrologers also find Him the Greatest Courtier in Heaven, Favourite to Both
the King and Queen, (They mean the Sun and Moon) also so V^NUS: from Whose
three Characters mixed together, He gets His with Them Sun, and Moon's Palaces,
(Leo and Cancer) in the Midst between Mercurie's Houses (Gemini and Virgo) on
either side of which, are Venus Houses, Taurus and Libra.

With Chemists, MERCURY is Cold and Moist; and so fittest to reside, in Cold
Moist Lands; Such as THULE. These also perceive his Great Favours with, and
near approach to, the Sun and Moon, King and Queen of Metals, Gold, and
Silver. Hence they say, Silver comes nearest to Gold, in Form and Purity; but
Mercury (Quicksilver Matter and Gravity: though, of all Metals, He be most
Crude and Indigested.

From this near Approach of Quicksilver to Gold (in Matter and Gravity) Some
Sublimate Rosy-Crucian Alchemists, have made deep Plots with Sulphur, to make
Their Mercury become Sol, of a Subject a King (in Metals) of Quicksilver Gold.
But True Mercu^y cannot harbour Traitorous Inclinations: Hence Their
Sulphurous Devices, vanish like Powder Plots: And by Best Philosophers Elixar
might or could be found ( Arabs, Egyptians also, till Diocletia^ burnt Their
books) yet Mercury could never make Good Gold (King of Metals) because They
say Chemical, sure they mean, and not the old Saxon Ordeire per fire Emma)
Because He hath still had as much Antypathy to VULCAN, as Sympathy to VENUS.

But, because This is a Masque of Heaven, and SATURN and MERCURY, Heavenly
Bodies: It will not be amiss to seek out some place in Heaven, that may
parallel THULE upon Earth. And no Place, in all the Zodiac, seems so fit, as
AQUARIUS; a most Cold, Moist Sign; under which, also, the Poets place all Cold
Lands; and Manilius, in special seems to place THULE Poets make SATURNS
chief Residence, in the Chroniaen Sea, about THUL^; so do all Astrologers make
it, in AQUARIUS: which is, with them, Saturns House and Joy. And This AQUARIUS
(The Celestial THULE) may well be the Celestial Scene of SATURN and MERCURIES
Quarrel, as THULE was the Terrestrial. For, of all Places in the Zodiac,
AQUARIUS seems most Ominou^ to M^RCURY; Who can never stay Long there, but is
either driven Back (becoming Retrograde) or else Forced into PISCES; which,
with all Astrologers, is called MERCURIE'S FALL

Now although This Constant Antipathy, between These Two in Heaven, hath still
been observed by all Astrologers, in all Ages; yet, it was never so strong, or
strongly actuate, as through the Stadium of This Masque, viz, from 1637, c

Again, at his coming Home then, He was in his A^x; being in the Apex or
Apogeum of his Epicycle, and very near the Apex of his Eccentrick; Which (as
still hath been observed) makes him more Swift in his Motions, and more Active
in all his Actions.

Thirdly, for all this Time, He hath been much strengthened by divers good
Aspects from some of the Chief Heavenly Bodies. For, besides many good Fixed
Stars (both in AQUARIUS; and in Trine or Sextile, to AQUARIUS;) He was well
aspected by JUPITER most of all this time: Which is more Prevalent, because
JUPITER hath been much in his own House and Joy SAGITARIUS; which of it self,
also, smiles on AQUARIUS in a friendly Sextile. And all Astrologers say, SATURN
being well aspected by JUPITER (specially from SAGITARIUS) makes great
Councellors. Whence come so many Great events upon JUPITER'S Conjunction with
SATURN. Of which Conjunctions, the greatest and most remarkable, (for Europe)
that yet ever was, will be in February 1643, but in PISCES, as was said before.

Again, He hath of late, been much, and oft, aspected by MARS. in it self no
good aspect, I confess; yet such as (joined with MERCURIE'S Former Irritation)
must needs much enrage SATURN; and so (by a kind of Antiperistasis) must needs
make him much more Vigorous and Active: for Such is Nature still, when provoked
by some Opposite. Hence Astrologers say, MARS with SATURN makes most fierce and
desperate Soldiers.

But, though SATURN hath been very well settled in his own AQUARIUS, or THULE;
and there, hath been very Strong and Active, ever since the end of 1637: Yet
is his Strength never like to appear more, than in the latter half of 1640,
and great part of 1641. For, besides his Constant good Aspect with JUPITER,
(either in a Sextile; or mutual reception, all that Time) He will also be a
great Significator through all the Summer, and Dominus Autumni (as Astrologers
speak) for 1640. in 1641 also, there's scarce a Quarter, or a New Moon, in
which SATURN is not one great Significator, if not Dominus Ascendentis: Which
makes it very probable, he will be very Active, and Prevalent, for that Time
also.

Another Argument of This, is the Good Aspects, which SATURN is like to have
(at least for some of That Time) from the SUN and MOON, King and Queen of
Heaven. For, though the SUN be directly Opposite to SATURN (with MARS) in
August 1640; and continues Frowning most of that year; yet, in the beginning
of December, He begins to Smile on him in a gracious Sextile, (while the MOON
also is very near.) And in February 1641, The SUN and SATURN meet, (The MOON
being also in a Trine with SATURN:) which is like to produce some notable Event
(but 'tis in PISCES) for, such Meetings and Aspects of the SUN and SATURN still
cause Apertiones maximas.

A Third Probability of This, may be the extraordinary great and frequent
Aspects of MARS on SATURN, (never more, than) through that Time. which is more
Prevalent, because MARS is (for the most part) Dominus Anni 1640; Receiving his
Commission from a great Meeting of Heavenly Bodies in SATURN'S Houses, at the
beginning of that year: also, though SATURN be Dominus Autu^ni, yet MARS is
with him in Ascendente. But JUPITER aspecting and tempring MARS, makes him
less Formidable.

Three or Four times in the SUMMER of 1640, MARS being with SATURN, will
jointly oppose the SUN and MERCURY. The last time, is about the Meeting of the
Deities in Areopagus: and this last is like much to hinder the Pacification;
but that MARS is presently despoiled of all power to hurt, as is said before,
page. 14. And though MARS do oft Frown on MERCURY, through 1641; yet, being much
in his Detriment and Fall, and Tempered also by JUPITER; All is like to End
well.

But, setting aside This Present Quarrel: Their Constant Antipathy wants
neither Symptoms nor Causes; as many appear in all their Theory. SATURN'S
Motion very Slow, except in his Aux: His Influence very Cold; melancholy also
and phlegmatic (except tempered with JUPITER or MARS;) Being Remotest from this
Earth, and from the SUN (the King of Heaven) and so of a Cold Temper, and Dusky
Leaden Colour: Whence not only Chemists, but Astrologers, are even forced to
call him Lord of Lead, and such like Dark, Black, Coaly Substances, dugg out of
the Earth: specially in North Climats.

MERCURIE'S Theory, is (of all the Planets) most abstruce, perplexed and
intricat. Though He be Least in Body (but the Moon) yet not so in Influence:
For, in this, He yields to none but the SUN and MOON ( King and Queen of
Heaven:) Aspecting These, His Influence is Good to whom Ho^oscopall; For These
He makes Schollers, Ecclesiastical Men; yea oft They say, Bishops and Prelats^
Yet His Influence is most inconstant; Whence His Epithets not only with Poets,
but Astrologers, are Ancops, Versatilis, Versipellis, c. Yea the Chameleon of
Heaven, at which Plotinus could laugh, when most serious

Aspecting SATURN He uses to Frown; Being as Swift, Active, and usually Hot,
as SATURN is Slow and Cold. Hence Their Aspects raise Great Storms, Wind,
Thunder, c Astrologers deceive us not. For, from his swift motion and sudden
mutations in Site and Place, They use to ascribe to Him, (I know not why) most
of the changes in Wind and Weather; Temper in Mans Body; Policy in each State;
Religion in each Church; c. but specially if Dominus Anni; as he was of late.

Yet Astrologers (though Picus Bacon saith Patronize the Jewish Religion;
Because, forsooth, their Sabbath was on His Day (with us now called Saturday,
or SATURN'S Day, though some derive it otherwise Bacons is of kin to that of
Plutarch Bacchus, who was (saith he) surnamed Sabbazios; But I know not where;
For Aristophanes Sabbazios Banished as a Strange (un-heard-of) God; except he
could find shelter in Athens, no less Superstitious to strange Gods Courteous
to strange Men

SUCH is the Celestial THEORY of SATURN and MERCURY: and such, in part, the
Chemical: the Po^ticall may be next; and then Platonicall. With Poets (and all
Poetical Writters) Each of these Hero's was (...) (tho one more specially)
which I may translate (though others will not) A Man, A Star, A God: But how,
or why, is worth inquiry.

Whether Multiplicity of Gods, came first from old Phoenicians (as Sanchun,
from him Philo Biblius, from Both Eusebius Egypt First, thence to the
Phoenicians by Cadmus to Chaldee by Belus, to Greece by Orpheus, (as Diodorus
oft affirms. first from Chaldeans by Belus, and from him to All other
Colonies, (Belus, omnes a Belo) as some maintain Gods, Idols, and Images.) I
now Dispute not.

THIS the Best of Heathens, Uncompelled confess Men, in the World they knew not
how, (except like the New Sun-borne Mice on Nilus Banks Nature soon wanting,
and by Instinct as soon seeking some God; out of all Entities, chose to Deify
the Best to Sense (in sted of Better:) Heaven first, and Heavenly Bodies: of
which to Males, they suited Femals out of Earth (This Lower World:) coupling
Celestials to Terrestrials, to make complete Generations: the Mother EARTH, and
HEAVEN the Father; whose Influence, in sweet Showers, and Heavenly Dews; They
thought the best Gonorrhea

Thus, the Starry Heaven (The Highest Sphere, then known,) was but Husband to
this Lowest Earth ( Celi^s to Vesta:) the next Sphere of SATURN, to Rhea (for
so they call the Element of Water Air) the SUN was Husband to the MOON, which
they thought but the Best and Highest EARTH, or Earthly World

THESE, were a while so Happy to be Gods alone, (But without Temples, Altars,
Images, till Belus' time Dead lumps of Earth, or Fire, (or any senseless Body,
Heaven or Earth affords;) But, They thought, All these were Animate; at least
Actuate by some Living G^nius; Which they called the Soul, or Intelligence of
HEAVEN, SATURN, JUPITER, c. And to Th^se was given Deity and Worship; Yet under
the Names of the Spheres, Globes, Elements, and Bodies, Which each Genius was
thought either to Inform, as a Soul, or Assist and Actuate, as a Separate
Intelligence

But ^re long, Fond Superstition ( borne long before, but now) Creeping out of
its Cradle, began to View, think Fair, call Good, Admire, Deify and Worship,
each Mortal, which in Virtue (I mean Vice) hath stepped but half a step above,
beyond, the Lowest dregs of Basest Vulgars

This Apotheosis (or Art of Godding Men) grew at length so Rif^, that Embryons
could no sooner Breath (nay, even in their First Grave or Winding sheet of
Womb;) much less be Borne (I mean Buried in this great Tomb, which we call
This World) but they were straight forced to hear (though not to answer) the
Vows and Prayers of some Sottish Priest, ready to proclaim them Gods. Yet, at
first, (while Madness was yet content to be an Infant) Dead Men, were only
made, (as only able) to ^eare that Heavy Name of Deity

Two Ranks of Gods, in all Heathen Divines; Immortal, Mortal; so Biblius:
Natural, Politic; so Tully: Celestial, Terrestrial; so Diodorus (in the
places praised before:) to which Varro adds a third, Poetical; But These were
but Pictures or Shadows of the former Reals.

When Art had thus learned to Make more Gods then Nature could invent: while
Men, Horses, Dogs long to Die, and so be Deified: Lest the World should be
confounded in its Vows to Nameless Gods; (and Distinct Names, would quickly
Fail to so Numberless a Number.) These Second Gods were wisely made to Share
in Name Nature, with the First, which were Natural, Immortal, Celestial
Bodies, as was said before.

Hence start up so many Celii, Saturns, Iupiters, Mercuries, c. as were
Infamous Famous men in Egypt, Greece, or any Country else. Yet usually with
this Decorum, ( first observed in Heaven;) the First Founder of any Family of
Note, was forced a Name-sake upon Celius: The Next Heir on Saturn: the Third,
on Iupiter: and so on, in Order of Heavenly Bodies.

Nay yet more, These Men-Gods were, as the World was taught, at Death
Translated to the Spheres of Those Stars, whose Name they bore, or Nature
most resembled, while here they lived Isis' Epitaph in Diodorus is not the
Thousand instance might be given; yet prove enough. Being Translated to Heaven,
They were thought by some to commence Several Degrees; First Heroes, and then
D^mons Daemons, were properly Natural Intelligences, the True Genii of the
Spears and Stars, never Tainted with Fleshy Bodies: But Hero's, were These
Artificial Deities, Snatched up to Heaven out of Dead Bodies Metamorphiz'd into
Stars and Heavenly Constellations; which are more, then are leaves in Ovids
Metamorphosis.

Yea, so Deeply Rooted in Earth (though their Tops were in Heaven) were These
Deastri; that when Other better Deities, came to be known in the World; Yet
Superstition could not part with so Fair and Numerous an Off-spring: to
detain which, was at length Invented This Plot: that though These might not be
made Termini Cultus: Yet they should still remain as Media: Mediators Men, and
the Great Celestial Gods; that were too High, and Far from any Familiar
converse with Men.

To These DEASTERS were made the First Images, Columns, Temples, and Idol
Altars Traps to catch and hold some Godded-Soule (for more familiar converse on
Earth) Charmed from Heaven Supreme Celestial Gods, neither could nor would, be
so entrapped, as These good Godded-Soules; that once knew how sweet it was, to
play, and roll themselves in Earthly Bodies; and so were kept in Heaven, Much
against their wills: which in their wonted Liberty, much rather would have
chanted to an Organ here below, then be ravished with the Harmony of all the
Spheres above. For (besides the old Sweet Music they were wont to have on
Earth;) They found Heaven at length so crowded; that (though content to Sweat)
yet stay they could not, unless so contract, that a Million might stand on the
point of a Needle. Yea, and so, could scarce any place be left in Heaven, for
Better (I mean Worss) Deasters, which in following Ages, came Thither, Hoping
to find as much Ease and Rome in Heaven, as They had found or made in Earth.

One of the First DEASTERS was MERCURY: Not that Late Grecian Boy of yesterday,
But an Old Egyptian as Diodorus; or a Phenician Philistine, or Chananite, as
Sanchun Palestina, we doubt not but the Mediterranean Stream might with ease
bring him thence, not only down the Ostia Nili, and Ostia Tibridis; but also to
most places of Europe, specially to Lands, whose Seas are continued to the
Mediterranean.

Many Mercuries we find in old Historians; and what was done by All, the Poets
in a Rapsody, ascribe to One: thereby making him a most prodigious Monster, no
Man; much less a God: yet good enough for a Deaster.

Of Five (or more) Mercuries, The most famous was the Egyptian THEUT or THEOT,
commune Name of God, with Greeks (whose Divinity was first Egyptian:) though I
know both Plutarch and Plato too

A Great God to all Egyptians, was this THEOT, whom old Greeks call (...) (and
by this Name often named in Eusebius Pythagoras, who (alluding, as it may be,
to this Great Egyptian God) was wont to call God (...): which name of God,
Plato could well Etymologise, when in the Great God he could find nothing but
(...), Vnum Idem: While in Materials, scarce ought but (...); and in the best
Spirituals else, much (...) and but a little (...). Whence he came to know
Parmenides' meaning (at which he startled so, when young) who was wont to say,
One was all, and all One; meaning there was but One True Entity One, because
Infinite;) All else, were but shadows of This One; but in themselves (...), Not
True Beings, as Plato often speaks.

Most think this Egyptian THEUT, or First Mercury, the First Lawgiver cum
grano salis; For Tutor he was to Isis, who first governed by Written Laws, if
Diodorus deceive us not. Hence is that in Her Epitaph, WHAT I BOUND, NONE COULD
LOOSE

This Mercury (they say) First Founded Schools, Composed an Alphabet, and
taught to speak with Grace, and Accent right; Which Art he prescribed by Rules
of Music; whose several Tones (the Three Best at least Summer with Winter in
a mean proportion of Spring Pythagoras, who found all Musical Proportions, by
weighing the Smiths Hammers, which he heard make sweet consort, by knapping on
the Anvil

From his teaching to speak well, he was called Hermes; because (...): (which
Etymology Plato Homer.) Hence in each Sacrifice, were Tongues sacred to
Mercury; While the Praeco cried, Favete linguis Plato discourses so Divinely.

Hence was Mercury stiled God of Eloquence, and all Learning; Patron of
Schollers, and all Ecclesiastical persons. Yea to make him Eloquence it self,
seemed no Harsh Trope. And because Eloquence can insinuate it self into every
man, and steal his Affections, his Heart, himself: Hence Mercury with all the
Poets hath still Heard, Vafer, Versutus, Callidus, Fur, c. Yea so Notorious a
Thief, that no sooner Borne, but in his Cradle, were found Mars Sword, Venus
Girdle, Vulcans Tongs, Apollo's Harp, Iupiters Sceptre; Only He spared His
Thunderbolts, because so Heavy and Hot, would burn his fingers, (who ever
dreaded Fire, as was said before) and might roar so loud, that all the Gods
might wake, and so descry some of his Knaveries: For all could not be Seen or
Known.

SATURN with Poets, was King of Cre^t; and being ^ranslated into Heaven; There
became One of Their First Deasters. Yet I find a SATURN much Elder, then That
Cretian was, or could be: of whom Sanchu^ at large

There was of old (saith he) in Palestina, One called ELIOWN, Surnamed (...)
Who, of his Wife Berith, be^t Heaven and his Sister Earth; These Two begat
SATURN, surnamed Ilus, and Israell; with many mo, when were all called Elohim,
because Companions to SATURN surnamed Ilus. But This SATURN Rebelling against
his Father; was at length so Straitened, that to make his Peace, He was forced
to Sacrifice His own, and Only Son But after This Sacrifice, being translated
into SATURNS' Sphere, He soon became a God, c.

Yet, it seems He left his Corps behind him, here; to be imb^lmed by the
Poets; who, to preserve it incorrupt, corrupt it themselves, by stuffing it
with Bitt'rest Spices

To English This Poetical Fable; All fly to Allegories: Which indeed are a
Panpharma^n, able to c^re all Diseases; and sure All, if This One, The
Poetical Frenzy. By SATURN, T^lly will understand Time binding) Heaven it
self; Dovouring all his Sons, being Edax Rerum; yet bringing up all again;
for, Corruption Vnius est Generatio alterius.

But, of all Allegories in This, the Plat^ick seems most Divine: Their
General Rule, for Poetical Divinity, is This; in Their scholia's on Plato^s
Cr^tu^us. Poetical Names of Station (such as Vesta) denote a Perman^nce of
Essence in the True God (whom to be One, and One only, They all acknowledge,
When they be serious and not minded to laugh, as Plato Himself speaks M^tion
(as Rea, Fluxus) denote Divine E^lux ad Extra: Names Masculine, Gods Power most
Active. Feminine, His Fecundity to Others.

CELIUS, SATURN, and JUPITER (the Three First Great Gods, with Poets: the Three
Highest Planets in Heaven) are with Platonists, the Three distinct Hypostases
(or kind of Persons) which they find in All (much more the First of all)
Intelligent Entities. Which Three, They express by the Spears of Being (or
CELIUS;) of Knowledge (or SATURN;) of Activity or JUPITER. These three Spears
we find in our own Souls (as in all Intelligent Beings) and call them (to
speak in Modern language, lest some should Understand me) Essence,
Understanding, and Will.

For, Will With us, is with Them but Activity; the same, in Re, with
Understanding ( as shall appear anon) and Both, the same with Essence in each
Intelligent, much more the First, Entity. For, if there be Any Entity, we must
grant there is some, ( at least One) Simple Entity; else there must be
Infinite Compounds actually co-existing (which the Masters dare not yield.)
That Simple Entity must be Infinite; ( for, all Limitation speaks Composition;
Therefore but One; and yet This One, must be All Entity (possible;) else not
Infinite. Ergo, the First Entity must have Knowledge and Activity, ( else He
hath not All Entity) Yet in It, These Two must be the Same; and Both, the same
with Entity it self; else It is not Simple Entity. But of This perhaps more
anon. I proceed:

CELIUS, Their First Hypostasis, is the Sphere of Being; Essence in all Second
Intelligents; but, in the First, They choose to call it Entity, rather then
Essence, (which, in the Schools, hears Entity limited to such or such, a
Species; but the First Being is Entitas Simplex, without any Restringent
Essence One, and yet All; (a kind of Infinite) Containing in it All inferior
Beings, not only Locally, but Virtually (if no more;) So, si licet parvis
--;for, this Sensible World is but a Shadow of That Supreme, Intellectual,
Infinite) That First Sphere of Being is One, yet truly All, because Infinite;
containing in it self All Entities (possible) yet as in One Entire Sphere; and
hence, say They, the Poets called it (...), CELIUS, Heaven. Next within This
Infinite Sphere, are circled (...), as Plotinus speaks Second Gods (sure, he
means) who with us are Intelligentiae. Next (saith He) is circled (...);
consisting o^ Three Lesser Orbs^ (...); of These, the First and Best is still
Concentricall to Celi^; but Reason and Fancy (the two lower Orbs) are, too too
oft Excentricall. This he saw, who yet was but purblind, and at best, but in
Twilight, or Day-Dawning.

This CELIUS must have in himself all Entity; (else not Infinite) all
perfections; Therefore K^owledge, He must be Intelligent. And Having All within
himself, He cannot but know all. For, I suppose there's nothing required to
perfect Knowledge, but Presentia (s^u una) Objecti, ad Potentiam Scibilem, (for
I now will speak in their Dialect:) and because Beings themselves are not in Us
but by their Species; hence our knowledge is so weak, and Imperfect.

This Knowledge of himself, They call Reflectio in s^ipsum, which is the very
Flower and Top of all Knowledge. CELIUS then Reflecting on Himself, Saw within
Himself, His Own Image; Which Image so Begotten, These call SATURN (and is
usually stiled by them (...) was bound and cut by His Son SATURN.

In This SATURN (or Image of himself;) CELIUS Being Infinite (and so all)
Entity; must (T^ey say) needs See all several Ideahs, or Species, which are
possible in the Sphere of Entity: as Intelligens, Volens, Amans, Videns,
Vivens, and the like; which yet were summd up all into four General Ideahs,
Ens nudum, Vivens, Sentiens, and Intelligens

SATURN thus with Them is The Sphere of Knowledge, or the Ideall World: in Whom
Ideahs have Their First place; and come thence, First into the SATURN (or
Understanding) of Created Spirits; Then being Stamped on Several Lumps of
Matter (as on Wax) do there beget the Proles of a Form (answer^ng to ^ts Idea
in SATURN, as the Picture on the wax, to its Seal.) This Form was by
Philosophers, well called a Species or (...), for 'twas but a Second Species,
or Ideah, Resulting out of SATURN'S Ideahs, as the Species results from the
Face to the Crystal Glass.

But before These Ideahs (or Sons of SATURN) came Thus out, on Matter; They
were First (They say) by a Reflex Act of Understanding, as it were swallowed by
SATURN Himself, (who looked on them all, as One entire Ideah in Re, Differing
only Formally in His own Understanding.) Then came out again as divided and
broken Matter, and there made, or begat Forms; of which came This Fabric,
which we call The WORLD.

This is the True Platonic Doctrine about Ideahs: which They never dreamt did
Exist by themselves, seperate from Matter, (as some fondly or ignorantly
wrangle;) Except only in some Intelligent Spirit, which they called SATURN or
Sphere of Understanding; Divine first; and then Angelical; lastly That of Men
Contarenus (though a Learned man) is much deceived, in saying, Plato's First
Ideall World, was the Angelical Understanding. In His Prima Philosophia.

To the Coming out of These Ideahs from SATURN to Matter, Concur Rhea (Divine
^fflux ad Extra) and JUPITER Third Hypostasis, Activity, or Will; coming from
CELIUS ( Entity;) But through SATURN also, who is (...) Understanding. This
JUPITER (Divine Will or Activity) with Them was He that Made the World; by
stamping some of SATURNS Ideahs upon a rude indigested Moles of Matter, (which
most of Them (also) think, He first made out of Nothing.) Hence all the
Platonists use to call This Third Hypostasis, The Spirit or Soul of the World;
That Spirit They mean, That first Made, and now doth Actuate and Govern; and
(as They too grossly thought) inform and Animate, This Created World. So that
SATURN, with Them was the Ideall Cause (the Sampler, or Pattern) according to
which; But JUPITER The Immediate Cause By whom, the World was made Phenicians
Egyptians, Grecians, Thuscans, (all Nations) were taught to call JUPITER (the
Third Hypostasis, Divine Will or Activity) The Spirit, that Made the World. So,
Speaks Philo, and Porphyry, of the Phenicians, and Egyptians Diodorus of
Egyptians and Grecians Th^scans (taught doubtless by Pythagoras) Sencca; They
call JUPITER (saith he) Spiritu^, Animum Mu^di, Ejusque Opific^m, cui proprie
convenit Nomen Esse

Thus All Nations confess, the World was Made by JUPITER (the Third Divine
Hypostasis:) and the Platonists say, 'Twas Made by choosing Some (and but Some)
Ideahs out of SATURN; and stamping These upon the Wax of Matter (as Timeus
speaks.) Some Ideahs, and but Some: For, all could not come forth Infinite:
which I must confess I understand not. For, how could there be Infinite
Ind^viduums in Each Species, and yet also Infinite Species (For, of These only
are the Divine Ideahs, as all confess;) and yet but One Infinite? And how
Infinite Species, differing by Degrees of Entity, can be Producible, I yet
could ne'er conceive: since the Last Species (if I may conceive a Last in
Infinite) must needs, have in it, Infinite degrees of Entity; and so, indeed,
be Infinite: And how Any Infinite may be, or conceived to be, even in Mente
Divina, possible to b^ produced; I yet see not.

But Whether All SATURN'S Ideahs came abroad; or whether only some came out;
and others not: also whether those that yet have not, may come, or might have
come in infinitum; I dispute not. Only, I see 'tis a received Opinion among the
Platonists, that JUPITER did some-how limit or bind SATURN, (so also the Poets
speak:) as if Divine Will, by its Decree, did as it were, limit Divine
Understanding, or Omniscience. So that More Ideahs were, and are, Known by
This, as Possible; which yet Decree hath limited, and made non Futura.

Hence Omniscience, or Simplex Intelligentia, of all Possibles; is with them
called SATURNS Law. But the Fore-sight of Those Things, which Decree hath
chosen, out of that Infinite Sphere of Possibles, and made Futura; is the Law
of JUPITER Platonic Fate, Seneca persuades me (in the Places cited before;)
though some following Stoics, much abused Themselves, and all the world with
This; because They understood it not.

Any Mat^riall Thing of This Plato^ick Discourse (or Paraphrase on P^eticall
Divinity) may clearly be Found in Plotinus of the Three Hypostases: in Proclus
on Parmenid, and Timeus^ also His Theologia Platonica. Marsilius Ficin. on
Plato's Crat^l^s, Mines, Gorgias, Politicus: with Plato's Epis^les. Mirandula
De Ente La. Ficin. De Immortal, Anim. on Plotinus. Rossell. on Pymander, c.

Certainly the Greatest, and the Freest Liberty, may well Consist with the
Greatest, and Straightest Ne^essity: Not Coactive, at least not Violent; but that
Connate, Natural (I had almost said Moral) Necessity, which each Being hath,
to Act and Vent it self. Which Necessity hath not place only in Inanimats,
(Fire, Water, c.) which we call Natural Agents; but in All; in Rational I
mean Intelligent,) even Spiritual Entiti^s. Which will more clearly appear,
by Examining, the Difference, Dependence, or other Relation, between the
Platonic Celius, (or Sphere of Being) SATURN, or Knowl^dg^; and JUPITER Their
Sphere of Activity: or, to speak in School Terms, between Intelligent Ess^nce,
Understanding, and Will; for so I doubt not to translate their Iupiter, or
Active Sphere.

For, Will seems nothing but Activity: A Rational Will (may I so speak?) A
Rational Activity. Action is so necessary a Companion to Entity, that all
things seem to have as much Activity, as Entity. Every Being is Active in its
kind; ^d in Acting seems ambitious to vent and enlarge it self. As the Spring
in a Watch (newly wound up,) cannot but spin it self out, wider and wider,
till it fill its whole Balance: So, every Being hath its Balance, its Sphere,
through which Activity (its Spring) must untwist it self, till the Watch be
quite down, or the String snapped asunder.

Now, That Natural Desire of Action, which we find in all, (and call Instinct
in some, but Natural appetite, or Inclination, in Other Beings) in Rationals,
we call a Will: so that, the Phrase of Will is now restrict to Rationals, and
These only, but not the Thing: for, might the Phrase Commence, I durst say,
Every Being (even a Stone) hath as much Will, as Entity; as much Desire, I
mean, or Will to Act, and Vent it self.

It would then be well discus'd, How or in What, the Will of Rationals, differs
from the Will of other Beings; Since These also Will as, and as much, as
Rationals; except perchance, Having less Entity, they have also less Will, or
Activity: for, different Degrees of Activity, make me much suspect, There are
also Different Degrees of Entity; even in those Individuums, or Species, which,
the Masters teach us, to be Equal.

Is the Difference then in This? That, Rationals, and these only, have
Knowledge also, to Direct and Suspend their Will, or Activity: which else, of
it self is as Blind as a Stones Will, (or Appetite to move downward) and would
perchance stumble as oft on Evil as Good, were it not Directed by some Seeing,
Knowing, Eye: Yea would of it self, I suppose, ever act ad idem, Eodem modo,
ad extremum posse; (even as the Fires Will in Burning) were it not as well
Suspended, as Directed, by some Knowing Principle, or Act. And if so I clearly
see that Rationals are Free; But how their Will, of it self, is Freer then a
Stones Will, Videant alii. Even Those I mean, who make the Will Understanding,
Two Faculties, Distinct in Re.

If They be so; how the Will can follow the Understandings directing, or
suspending Dictate; and yet be Potentia, Libera Caeca, (as the Masters teach,)
I could yet never learn.

Violently Drawn, or Forced, it cannot be; and be it self, Free, at least a
Willing Will. Well then, It must Follow Freely, of it self (I mean) nullo
cogente: and That Either, in a Moral Way; (as the Attentive Auditor to the
persuasive Orator, Rapt with Freest Violence:) or else Natural: either
Instinct (for this is Highest) or some tacit Sympathy, Occult (yet Natural)
appetite; (for, so we use to speak, when we would not understand Our selves.)
Of These, the last leaves the Will, no Freer then the Stone to its Centre, the
Iron to the Load-stone; Goodly Liberty! the Middle, not Freer then the silly
Lamb to its Dam: yea, Instinct too, hath no place, but in Sensitives, at least;
(for, who eversaid, a Stone moves by Instinct?) and so much as Sense, may not
he granted to the Will, if it be Potentia prorsus Caeca, as They teach.

Nor can it follow Morally, except it be more then Sensitive; even a Knowing
Faculty: for el^e it cannot apprehend those Moral arguments (by which the
Understauding sways it;) but would stand Still, as demurely as the Will of a
Stone, when the Orator persuades it to leap up, and become a Star, or Sarr's
Intelligence.

We conclude then, The Will cannot be Compelled or Forced, with a Lucretian
Rape; and be Free at all: Nor be led, or drawn, only by Natural appetite,
Occult Sympathy; and be Freer then a Stone: then a Lamb, a Calf, a Sparrow, if
by bare Instinct: nor by Moral persuasion (which sounds most of a Rational
Agent, or Patient;) but it also must be a Knowing, Understanding Faculty: The
same (I mean) cum Intellectu: Except perchance the Tottering Ship of Mans
Soul, need Two Assisting Understandings, ^o one Mast, (like the Two Di^scuri,

Thus, while we must needs have the Will a Blind Faculty; yet Free; and Free in
Following the Understandings Dictates; in Suspension, and Contradictiou of
Acts; and yet a Faculty really Distinct from Understanding; we must provide
room for two Understandings, (two Candles in One Lanthorn;) or else we sweat in
Vain, we tire our selves; And yet (however) in the int^rim, we lose our Will,
(poor Will!) at least our Liberty.

O Divine Liberty! How abstruce is thy Theory; and yet thy Practise much more
Difficult! How Hard it is to Find thee; yet much more Hard, to Keep, Use, and
Enjoy thee!

What shall we say then? is Will, in all Agents, ( Natural Animal,
Rational,) Equal; at least equally Free? for, in each, in all, 'tis but
Activity; which must needs still be Active, and Vent it self ad summum posse;
even till it fill the whole Area of its Sphere, (or Balance) of Entity. May we
also say, Suspension, (with all Contradiction of Acts, c.) which seems an
Index of more then common Liberty in Rationals; Comes not from Will (strictly
so taken) Which of it self would still Act ad extremum; as well to This as
That, to Evil as well as Good; But from Knowledge, from Understanding, (I
mean the Whole Soul) which by its light, sees what is Good; what
inconvenient; and so guides, quickens, or suspends its Acts: Where as Fire, and
such like Agents, Act still on, forward, without a stop, without breathing;
because they have not, as Rationals, Oculatas Manus.

For shall we say, Our Soul is, but as, a Seeing Hand, or Doing Eye? or like
Plato's Idea of a Good Prince, Philosophus Regnans, or Rex Philosophans? While
it sees, perceives, (so Philosophus) 'tis Intellectus; but while it Doth, or
Commands, (so Rex,) we call it Will. Its Mediat Acts, are Imperat: Immediate,
We call Elicit^. Not that Understanding and Will, are Two Things really
Distinct; but Both make, Both are, but One Soul, under Two Notions. Thus One
and the same Commander, Sees his Enemy's approach; Desires and Plots their
Overthrow; and Commands a Charge. In the First, he is as Intellectus
Speculativus; in the next Practicus, or perhaps Voluntas Eliciens; in the last,
Imperans: In Both, in all, Una eademque Anima, Intelligens, Volens, ( id est,
Agens.)

Yet, may the Names of Understanding and Will, be still retained; if, but to
parallel those Two Noble, and truly Vital Acts; which we find in that Terrean
Soul, that lump of living (I had almost said Spiritual) Flesh, which we call
our Heart Understanding may be fitly called, the Soule's Diastole; by which it
sucks in, that pure blood of Truth; which is concocted in Septo Anim^; till
(being made true Vital Spirits, of Moral Goodness,) it be sent out again, by
the Soule's Systole, called Will: whence come all the Motions, or Pulses, which
we find in our Moral Arteries. Yet, Both These Sines, s^all make up but One
Heart, One Soul.

On this Whole, One, Entire Soul; Rays of Light, darted from the First Light,
(yet now so Refracted, that they only make, the Soul's Galaxta, Reason.)
Compose Those Ideahs; Which being drawn a new, by the Pencell of Sense; and
Flowered with Discurse, (whence Truth results sometimes, like Sparks by knocking
Flints;) Make up Those Animae Sidera, which we call Habits; Moral, if of
Doing; Virtues if Well; but if ill, we call them Vices: But Intellectual, and
Speculative, if of bare Knowing; if of Directing (by Knowledge) towards Action,
then we call them Intellectual Practical. Of These last, Prudence directs the
Moral part of Every Act, (in Object, End and Moral Circumstances:) Art the
Natural. For, Both these Parts, have Place in Every Action (that is Rational,
Human^, as we call it, and not only Hominis:) and Both these, are directed by
Practical Habits. Whence Arts ( Gram. Rhet. Logic Ethics (which is Prudentia
Doctrin^li^,) proceed by Rules and Pr^cepts (Directing to speak well or do
well) not by Definitions, Divisions, c. which belong, to Sciences perse, to
Arts, but per accid.

All Practical Habits, are both Docentes Vtentes; ( Speculative, Docentes
only:) while the Soul Directs by light, 'tis Habitus Docens; while it Acts,
what is directed, Vtens: which last, if in the Moral part of any Act, seems
to me True Moral Virtue.

In This, in All, SATURN directs JUPITER; Knowledge, Action; Understanding,
Will: or to speak more properly, one and the same Soul, directs its own
Activity (its JUPITER) by its own Knowledge, or Sphere of SATURN.

Our Discourse on SATURN hath been slow and tedious: But such is the Motion of
this Planet. This may conclude All. Though SATURN and MERCURY could in re,
never agree in Heaven or Earth; yet, the Platonists found a way to Reconcile
them in Words and Show: For with Them, They Both are (...). But SATURN is
(...), Ratio: MERCURY (...)^ Oration. by which last, They meant much more, then
we by Speech: For, they say, MERCURY to SATURN, is Semen Ideale Vis Prolifica,
by which Ideahs coming out of SATURN, and stamped by JUPITER, on Matter; do
there beget the Embryon of a Form; which mature becomes (...); a Second
Species; or Ideah. Proles to one of SATURNS Sons, which are the first Ideahs,
as was said before. So, that with Them the Understanding (whither Divin or
Humane,) is SATURN; an Ideall World: Concepts, or Ideahs, (drawn in this
Understanding) are SA^URN's Sons: Words, Syllables and Letters, (by which These
Concepts or Ideahs come out, and are expressed abroad;) belong all to MERCURY.

All this, They think stamped on the Genius of the Planet MERCURY; which well
aspected by SATURN, They say, gives Contemplation: by MARS, Action: with
JUPITER, Both: But with VENUS Eloquence and Wit.

Thus from a Man, a Philosopher, a Priest, a God Wandering Star or Planet; from
whom, all Mercuries first came; into whom, They were all Starrifi'd again, When
Dead Men, but Living Deasters.

Innocuos Censura potest permittere Lusus;
-- Lusimus Omnes:
Et semel -- Risit APOLLO.

