OH, that ever I was borne, that ever I was borne!


Nay good Sister, dear sister, sweet sister, be of good comfort, show
yourself a woman, now or never.


Oh, I have lost the dearest man. I have buried the sweetest ^usba^d ^hat ever
lay by woman.


Nay give him his due he was indeed an honest, virtuous, discreet wis^-man, --
he was my Brother, as right, as right.


O, I shall never forget him, never forget him, he was a man so well given to
a woman -- oh:


Nay but kind Sister, I could weep as much as any woman, but alas our ^eares
cannot call him again: me thinks you are well read Sister, and know that
death is as common as Homo a common name to all men; -- a man shall be taken
when he's making water, -- Nay, did not the learned Parson Master Pigman tell
us even now, that all Flesh is frail, we are borne to dye, Man ha's but a
time: with such like deep and profound persuasions, as he is a rare fellow
you know and an excellent Reader: and for example, (as there are examples
abundance,) did not Sir Humfrey Bubble dye the other day there's a lusty Widow,
why she cried no^ above half an houe-for shame, for shame: then followed him
old Master Fulsome the Usurer, there's a wise Widow, why she cried ne'er a
white at all.


O rank no^ me with those wicked women, I had a Husband out-shinde 'e^ all.


I that he ^id I^aith, ^e out-shind 'em all.


Dost thou stand there and see us all weep, and not once shed a tear for thy
fathers death? oh thou ungracious son and heir thou:


Troth Mother I should not weep I'm sure; I am past a child I hope, to make
all my old School fellows laugh at me; I should be mocked, so I should; Pray
let one of my Sisters weep for me, I'll laugh as much for her another time?


Oh thou past-Grace thou, out of my sight, thou graceless imp, thou grieve
me more then the death of thy Father? o^ thou stubborn only son? had
thou such an honest man to thy Father -- that would deceive all the world to
get riches for thee, and can thou not afford a little sa't water? he that so
wisely did quite ouer-throw the right heir of those lands, whi^h now you
respect not up every morning betwixt four and five so duly at Westminster
Hall every Tearme-Time, with all his Cards and writings, for thee thou wicked
Absolon -- oh dear husband!


Weep? quotha? I protest I am glad he's Churched? for now he's gone I shall
spend in quiet?


Dear mother; pray cease, half your Tears suffize,
Tis time for you to take truce with your eyes,
Let me weep now?

Oh such a dear knight! such a sweet husband have I lost, have I lost? -- if
Blessed be the coarse the rain raynes upon, he had it pouring down?


Sister? be of good cheer, we are all mortal our selves, I come upon you
freshly, I near speak without comfort, here me what I shall say; -- my
brother ha's left you wellthy, you're rich.


Oh!


I say you're rich? you are also fair.


Oh!


Go too you're fair you cannot smother it, beauty will come to light; nor are
your years so far entered with you; but that you will be sought after; and
may very well answer another husband; the world is full of fine Gallants,
choice enough Sister, -- for what should we do with all ou^ Knights I pray? but
to mar^y rich widows, wealthy Citizens widows; ^usty fair -- browd
Ladies; go too, be of good comfort I say (...) snobb^g and weeping -- yet my
Brother was a kind he^ed man -- I would not have the Elf see me now? -- come
pluck up a woman's heart -- here stands your Daughters, who be well estated, and
at maturity will also be enq^ir'd after with good husbands, so all these
tears shall be soon d^yed up and a better v^o^ld then ever -- what? Woman?
you must not weep still? he's dead he's buried -- yet I cannot choose but
weep for him!


Marry again! no! let me be buried quick then!
And that same part of Quire whereon I tread
To such intent, O may it be my grave;
And that the Priest may (...) his wedding prayers,
Even with a breath, to (...) all dust and ashes;
Oh, out of a million of millions, I should ne'er find such a husband, he was
unmatchable, -- unmatchable? nothing was ^o hot, nor to dear for me, I could
not speak of that one thing that I had not, beside I had keys of all, kept
all, received all, had money in my purse, spent what I would, went abroad when
I would, came home when I would, and did all what I would? Oh -- my sweet
husband; I shall never have the like?


Sister? ne'er say so; he was an honest brother of mine, and so, and you may
light upon one as honest again, or one, as honest again may light upon you,
that's the properer phrase indeed?


Never? oh if you love me urge it not,
Oh may I be the by-word of the world,
The common talk at Table in the mouth
Of every Groom and Wa^ter, if e're more
I entertain the carnal suite of Man?

I must kn^ele do^ne for fashion too?

And I, whom never man as yet hath scald
Ee'n in this depth of general sorrow, vow
Never to marry, to sustain such loss
As a dear husband seems to be, once dead?

I loved my father well too; but to say,
Nay now, I would not marry for her death?
Sure I should speak false Latin; should I not?
I'd as soon vow never to come in Bed.
Tut? Women must live by the quick, and not by the dead.

Dear Copy of my husband, oh let me kiss thee:
How like him is their Model? their brief Picture
Quickens my tears: my sorrows are renewed
At their fresh sight?

Sister --


Away,
All honesty with him is turned to clay,
Oh my sweet husband, oh --

My dear father?


Here's a puling indeed! I think my Mother weeps for all the women that ever
buried husbands: for if from time to time all the Widowers tears in England
had been bottled up, I do not think all would have filled a three-halfe-penny
Bottle; Alas a small matter bucks a hand-kercher, -- and sometimes the spittle
stands to nie Saint Thomas a Watrings; well, I can morn in good sober sort as
well as another? but where I spend one tear for a dead Father, I could give
twenty kisses for a quick husband.


Well, go thy ways old Sir Godfrey, and thou may be proud on it, thou hast a
kind loving sister-in-lawe; how constant? how passionate? how full of April
the poor souls eyes are; well, I would my Brother knew on it, he should then
know what a kind wife he had left behind him; truth and twere not for shame
that the Neighbours at th next garden should hear me* between joy and
g^iefe, I should even cry out-right!


So, a fair riddance, my fathers ^ayde in dust his Coffin and he is like a
whole-meate-pye, and the worms will cut him up shortly; farewell old Dad,
farewe'l. I'll be curbed in no more, I perceive a some and heir may quickly be
made a fool and he will be one, but I'll take another order; -- Now she would
have me weep for him for-sooth, and why? because he cozn'd the right heir
being a fool, and bestowed those Lands upon me his eldest Son; and therefore
I must weep for him ha, ha; Why al the world knows as long as twas his
pleasure to get me, twas his duty to get for me: I know the law in that point
no Attorney can gull me; Well, my Vncle^ an old Ass, and an (...) Cockscombe,
I'll rule the Roast my self, I'll be kept under ^o more, I know what I may do
well enough by my Fathers Copy: the Lawe's in mine own hands now: nay now I
know my strength, I'll be strong enough for my Mother I warrant you?


What's to be done now? old Lad of War; thou that we^t wont to be as hot as a
turn-spit, as nimble as a fencer, as lowzy as a schoole-maister; now thou art
put to silence like a Sectarie? -- War sitts now like a Justice of peace, and
does nothing, where be your Muskets, Caleiuers and Hotshots? in Long-lane, at
Pawn, at Pawn; -- Now keys, are your only Guns, Key-guns, Key-guns, Bawds
the Gunners, -- who are your centinells in peace, and stand ready charged to
give warning; with hems, hums, pockey-coffs; only your Chambers are licenc'st
to play upon you, and Drabs enough to give fire to 'em.


Well, I cannot tell, but I am sure it goes wrong with me, for since the
cessure of the wars, I have spent above a hundred crowns out a purse: I have
been a soldier any time this forty years, and now I perceive an old
soldier, and an old Courtier have both one destiny, and in the end turn
both into hob-nayles.


Pretty mystery for a beggar, for indeed a hob-naile is the true emblem of a
beggars shoo-soale;


I will not say but that war is a bloud-sucker, and so; but in my conscience,
(as there is no soldier but has a p^ice of one, tho it be full of holes like
a shot Ancient, no matter, twill serve to swear by) in ^y conscience, I think
some kind of Peace, ha's more hidden oppressions, and violent heady sins,
(th^ looking of a gentle nature) then a professed war.


Troth, and for mine own part, I am a poor Gentleman, a Scholar, I have
been matriculated in the University, wore ^ut ^ixe Gowns there, seen some
fools, and some Schollers, some of the City, and some of the Country, kept
order, went bare-headed over the Quadrangle, eat my Commons with a good
stomach, and Battled with Discretion; at last, having done many slights and
tricks to maintain my wit in use (as my brain would never endure me to
be idle,) I was expelled the University, only for stealing a Cheese out of
Iesus College.


Is't possible?


Oh! there was one Welshman (God forgive him) pursued it hard; and never left,
till I rnmde my staff toward London, where when I came, all my friends were
pitt-hold, gone to Graves, (as indeed there was but a few left before) then was
I turned to my wits, to shift in the world, to tower among Sons and Heirs,
and Fools, and Gulls, and Ladies eldest Sons, to work upon nothing, to
feed out of Flint, and ever since has my belly been much beholding to my
brain: But now to return to you old ^kirmish. I say as you say, and for my
part wish a Turbulence in the world, for I have nothing to loose but my wits,
and I think they are as mad as they will be: and to strengthen your Argument
the more, I say an honest wart, is better then a bawdy peace: as touching my
profession; The multiplicity of Schollers, hatched, and nourished, in the idle
Calms of peace, makes 'em like Fishes one devour another; and the community
of Learning ha's so plaide upon affections, and thereby almost Religion is come
about to Fantasy, and discredited by being too much spoken off -- in so many
mean mouths, I my self being a Scholar and a Graduate, have no other comfort
by my learning, but the Affliction of my words, to know how Scholler-like to
name what I want, can call my self a Beggar both in Grecke and Latin, and
therefore not to cog with Peace, I'll not be afraid to say, 'tis a great
Breeder, but a barren Nourisher: a great-getter of Children, which must either
be Thieves or Rich-men, Knaves or Beggars.


Well, would I had been borne a Knave then, when I was borne a Beggar, for if
the truth were known, I think I was begot when my Father had ^euer a penny in
his purse.


^uh, faint not old Skirmish, let this warrant thee, Facilis Descensus Auer^i,
'tis an easy journey to a Knave, thou may be a Knave when thou wilt; and
Peace is a good Madam to all other professions, and an arrant Drab to us, let
us handle her accordingly, and by our wits thrive in despite of her; for
since the law lives by quarrelis, the Courtier by smooth God-morrowes, and
every profession makes it self greater by imperfections, why not we then by
shifts, wiles, and forgeries? and seeing our brains are ou^ only
Patrimonies, let's spe^d with judgment, not like a desperate son and heir,
but like a sober and discreet Templer, -- one that will never marche beyond
the bounds of his allowance, and for our thriving means, thus, I my self will
put on the Deceit of a Fortune-teller, a Fortune-teller.


Very proper.


And you of a figure-caster, or a Conjurer.


A Conjurer.


Let me alone, I'll instruct you, and teach you to deceive all eyes, but the
Devils.


Oh I, for I would not deceive him and I could choose, of all others.


Fear not I warrant you; and so by those means we shall help one another to
Patients, as the condition of the age affords creatures enough for cunning to
work upon.


Oh wondrous new fools and fresh Asses.


Oh, fit, fit, excellent.


What in the name of Conjuring?


My memory greetes me happily with an admirable subject to graze upon. The
Lady-Widdow, who of late I saw weeping in her Garden for the death of her
Husband, sure she as but a waterish soul, and hal^e on it by this time is dropped
out of her Lies: device well managde may do good upon her: it stands firm,
my first practi^e shall be there?


You have my voice George?


Sh'as a gray Gall to her Brother, a fool to her only son, and an Ape to
her youngest Daughter; -- I overheard 'em severally, and from their words I'll
derive my device; and thou old Peter Skirmish shall be my second in all
slights.


Ne'er doubt me George Pye-boord. -- only you must ^each me to conjure.


Push, I'll perfect thee, Peter:
How now? what's he?

Oh George! this sight kills me,
Tis my sworn Brother, Captain Idle.

Captain Idle.


Apprehended for some felonious act or other, he has started out, he has made a
Night on it, lacked silver; I cannot but commend his resolution, he would not
pawn his Buffe-Ierkin, I would either some of us were employde, or might pitch
our Tents at Usurers doors, to kill the slaves as they peep out at the
Wicket.


Indeed those are our ancient Enemies; they keep our money in their hands, and
make us to be hanged for robbing of 'em, but come letts follow after to the
Prison, and know the Nature of his offence, and what we can steed him in, he
shall be sure of; and I'll uphold it still, that a charitable Knave, is better
then a soothing Puritaine.


What Corporal Oath? I am sorry we have met with you ^ext our hearts; you are
the man that we are forbidden to keep company withal, we must not swear I
can tell you, and you have the name for swearing.


I, Corporal Oath, I would you would do so much as forsake us sir, we cannot
abide you, we must not be seen in your company.


There is none of us I can tell you, but shall be soundly whipped for swearing.


Why how now? we three? Putitanicall Scrape-shoes, Flesh a good Fridayes? a
hand.


Oh.


Why Nich^las Saint-Tantlings, Simon Saint Mary Oueries, ha's the De'ele
possessed you, that you swear no better, you halfe-Christned Katomites, you
vngod-motherd Varlets, does the first lesson teach you to be proud, and the
second to be Cocks-combes; proud Cocks-combes? not once to do duty to a man
of Mark.


A man of Mark, quatha, I do not think he can show a Beggars Noble.


A Corporal, a Commander, one of spirit; that is able to blow you up all dry
with your Books at your Girdles.


We are not taught to believe that sir, for we know the breath of man is
weak?


^oh, you lie Nicholas; for here's one strong enough; blow us up quatha, he
may well blow me above twelue-score off an him? I warrant if the wind stood
right, a man might smell him from the top of Newgate, to the Leads of Ludgate?


Sirrah, thou Hollow-Booke of Waxe-candle.


I, you may say what you will, so you swear not.


I swear by the --


Hold, hold, good Corporal Oath; for if you swear once, we shall all fall
down in a sown presently.


I must and will swear: you quivering Cocks-combes, my Captain is imprisoned,
and by Uulcans Leather Cod-piece point --


O Simon, what an oath was there.


If he should chance to break it, the poor mans Breeches would fall down
about his heals, for Venus allows him but one point to his hose?


With these my Bullye-Feete, I will thumpe open the Prison doors, and brain
the Keeper with the begging Box, but I'll set my honest sweet Captain Idle at
liberty.


How, Captain Idle, my old Aunts son, my dear Kinsman in Capadochio.


I, thou Church-peeling, thou Holy-pa^ing, religious outside thou? if thou
had any grace in thee, thou would visit him, releiue him, swear to get
him out?


Assure you Corporal indeed-la, tis the first time I heard on it,


Why do 't now then, Marmaset? bring forth thy yearly-wages, let not a
Commander perish!


But, if he be one of the wicked, he shall perish.


Well Corporal, I'll even along with you, to visit my Kinsman, if I can do him
any good, I will, -- but I have nothing for him, Simon Saint Mary Oueris and
Fraylty, pray make a lie for me to the Knight my Master, old Sit Godfrey.


A lie? may you lie then?


O I, we may lie, but me must not swear.


True, we may lie with our Neighbours wife, but we must not swear we did so;


Oh, an excellent Tag of religion?


Oh Simon, I have thought upon a sound excuse, it will go currant, say that I
am gon to a Fast;


To a Fast, very good?


I, to a Fast say, with Master Ful-bellie the Minister.


Master Ful-bellie? an honest man: he feeds the flock w^ll, for he's an
excellent feeder?


O I, I have seen him eat up a whole Pig, and afterward falls to the
pettitoes?


Pray turn the key.


Turn the key I pray?


Who should those be, I almost know their ^oy^es? O my friends?

Ya're welcome to a smelling Room here? you newly took leave of the air is't
not a strange savour?


'As all prisons have, smells of sundry wretcher;
Who tho departed, leave their scents behind 'em,
By Gold Captain, I am sincerely sorry for thee.

By my troth George I thank thee; but pish, -- what must be, must be.


Captain, what do you lie in for? is't great? what's your offence?


Faith, my offence is ordinary, -- common? A Hie-waye, and I fear me my
penalty will be ordinary and common too, a halter.


Nay prophecy not so ill, it shall go heard'
But I'll shift for thy life.

Whether I live or die, th^ art an honest George (...) tell you -- silver
stou'd not with ^ee, as it had done, (for now the tide runs to Bawds and
flatterers) I had a start out, and by chance set upon a fat steward, thinking
his purse had been as pursey as his body; and the slave had about him but the
poor purchase of ten groats: notwithstanding being descried, pursued, and
taken, I know the Law is so grim: in respect of many desprate-vnsetled
soldiers, that I fear me I shall dance after their pipe for it.


I am twice sorry for you Captain: first that your purchase was so small, and
now that your danger is so great.


Push, the worst is (...) death, -- ha you a pipe of Tobacc^ about you?


I think, I have there abouts about me!


Her's a clean Gentleman too, to receive?


Well, I must cast about, some happy slight,
Work brain, that ever did thy Master right?

Keeper? let the key be turn'dl


I, I pray Master keeper gives a cast of your office?


How now ^ more Visitants? -- what Corporal Oath?


Corporal?


In prison honest Captalne? this must not be?


How do you Captain Kinsman?


Good Cocks-combe? what makes that pure -- starched fool here?


You see Kinsman I am som-what bold to call in, and see how you do, I heard
you were safe enough, and I was very glad on it that it was no worse;


This is a double torture now, -- this fool by the book
Does vex me more then my imprisonment?
What meant you Corporal to hooke him hither?

Who he? he shall releiue thee, and supply thee,
I'll make him do it;

Fie, what vain breath you spend! he supply? I'll sooner expect mercy from a
Usurer when my bonds forfetted, sooner kindness from a Lawyer when my mony's
spent: nay sooner charity from the devil, then good from a Puritaine? I'll
look for relief from him, when I^cifer is restored to his blood, and in
Heaven again!


I warrant my Kinsman's talking of me, for my left ear burns most
tyrannically?


Captain Idle? what's he there? he look; like a Monkey upward; and a Crane
downe-ward.


Pshaw; a foolish Cozen of nine; I must thank God for him.


Why the better subject to work a escape upon; thou shalt even change clothes
with him, and leave him here, and so;


Push, I published him even now to my Corporal, he will be damned, ere he do
me so much good; why I know a more proper, a more handsome device then that, if
the slave would be sociable -- now goodman Fleere-face?


Oh, my Cozen begins to speak to me now, I shall be acquainted with him
again I hope,


Look what ridiculous Raptures take hold of his wrinkles,


Then what say you to this device, a happy one Captain?


Speak lovve George; Prison Rats have vvider ears then those in Malt-lof^s.


Cozen, if it lay in my power, as they say? -- to -- do;


'twould do me a^ exceeding pleasure indeed that, but ^ ere talk fo^der on it,
the fool will be hanged, ere he do it.


Pax, I'll thump 'em to it.


Why do but try the Fopster, and break it to him bluntly.


And so my disgrace will dwell in his Jaws, and the slave slaver out our
purpose to his Master, for would I were but as sure on it as I am sure he will
deny to do it.


I would be heartily glad Cozen, if any of my friendships, as they say, might
-- stand, ah,


Why, you see he offers his friend-ship foolishly to you already?


I, that's the (...) on it, I would he would offer it wisely?


Verily, and indeed la, Cousin? --


I have took note of thy steers a good while, if thou art minded to do me
good? as thou gapst upon me comfortably, and giu'st me charitable faces? which
indeed is but a fashion in you all that are Pu^itaines? wilt soon at night
steal me thy Masters chain?


Oh, I shall sown!


Corporal, he starts already!


I know it to be worth three hundred Crowns, with the half of that, I can buy
my life at a Brokers, at second hand, which now lies in pawn to 'th Law, if
this thou re^suse to do, being easy and nothing dangerous, in that thou art
held in good opinion of thy M^ster, why tis a palpable Argument thou holdst my
life at no price, and these thy broken anointed offers, are but only created
in thy lip, now borne, and now buried, foolish breath only? what; woult do it?
shall I look for happiness in thy answer?


Steal my Masters chane quo the? no, it shall ne'er be said that Nicholas
Saint Tantlings committed Bird-lime!


Nay, I told you as much; did I not; tho he be a Puritaine yet he will be a
true man?


Why Co^zen? you know tis written, thou shalt not steal?


Why, and fool, thou shalt love thy Neighbour, and help him in extremities?


Mass I think it be indeed, in what Chapter's that Cousin?


Why in the first of Charity, the 2. verse.


The first of Charity, qua tha, that's a good jest, there's no such Chapter in
my book!


No, I knew twas torn out of thy Book, that makes so little in thy heart.


Come, let me tell you, ya're too unkind a Kinsman in faith; the Captain loving
you so dearly, I, like the Pomwater of his eye, and you to be so
uncomfortable, fie, fie.


Pray do not wish me to be hanged, any thing else that I can do, had it been
to rob, I would ha don't, but I must not steal, that's the word the literal,
thou shalt not steal, and would you wish me to steal then?


No faith, that were to much, to speak truth: why woult thou nim it from him.


That I will?


Why enough bulhe; he shall be content with that, or he shall ha none; let
me alone with him now! Captain, I ha dealt with your Kins-man in a Corner; a
good -- kind -- naturde fellow, me thinks: go too, you shall not have all
your own asking, you shall bate somewhat on ^he is not contented absolutely as
you would say to steal the chain from him, -- but to do you a pleasure he
will nim it from him.


I, that I will, Cousin.


Well seeing he will do no more, as far as I see I must be contented with
that.


Here's no notable gullery?


Nay I'll come nearer to you Gentleman? because we'll have only but a help and
a mirth on it, the knight shall not loose his chain neither, but be only laid
out of the way some one or two days?


I, that would be good indeed? Kinsman?


For I have a farther reach to profit us better by the missing on it only, then
if we had it out-right, as my discourse shall make it known too you? -- when
thou hast the chain, do but convey it out at backdoor into the Garden, and
there hang it close in the Rosemary bank, but for a small season; and by that
harmless devise, I know how to wind Captain Idle, out of prison, the Knight
thy Master shall get his pardon and release him, he satisfy thy Master with
his own chain wondrous thanks on both hands.


That were rare indeed la^pray let me know how?


Nay tis very necessary thou should know, because thou must be imploide as an
Actor?


An Actor? O no, that's a Plaier? and our Parson rails again Players mightily
I can tell you, because they brought him drunk vpp'oth Stage once, -- as he
will be horribly drunk.


Mass I cannot blame him then, poor Church-spout?


Why as an Intermedler then?


I that, that.


Give me Audience then? when the old Knight thy Master has radge his fill for
the loss of the chain, tell him thou hast a Kinsman in prison, of such
exquisite Art, that the devil himself is french Lackey to him, and runs
bare-headed by his horse -- belly (when he has one) whom he will cause with
most Irish Dexterity to fetch his chain, tho twere hid under a mine of
sea-cole, and ne'er make Spade or Picka^e his instruments, tell him but this
with farther instructions thou shalt receive from me, and thou shoust thy self
a Kinsman indeed.


A dainty Bullie.


An honest -- Booke-keeper.


And my three times thrice hunnie Cousin.


Nay grace of God I'll rob him on it suddenly? and hang it in the Rosemary
bank, but I bear that mind Cousin I would not steal any thing me thinks
for mine own Father.


He bears a good mind in that Captain!


Why well said, he begins to be an honest fellow faith.


In t^oth he does.


You see Cousin, I am willing to do you any kindness, always saving my self
harmless?


Why I thank thee, fare thee well, I shall requite it.


Twill be good for thee Captain, that thou hast such an egregious Ass to thy
Coozen.


I, is he not a fine fool Corporal?
But George thou talk of Art and Coniuting,
How shall that be?

Puh, be it not in your care,
Leave that to me and my directions;
Well Captain doubt not thy delivery now,
E 'en with the vantage man, to gain by prison,
As my thoughts prompt me: hold on brain and plot,
I aim at many cunning far events,
All which I doubt not but to hit at length,
I'll to the Widow with a quaint assault,
Captain be merry.

Who I? Kerrie merry Buffe-Ierkin?


Oh, I am happy in more slights, and one will knit strong in another --
Corporal Oath?


Ho Bully?


And thou old Peter Skirmish, I have a necessary task for you both.


Lay it upon George Pye-boord.


What ere it be, we'll manage it.


I would have you two maintain a quarrel before the
Lady Widows door, and draw your swords in the edge of t^e
Evening: clash a lit^le, clash, clash.

Fuh.
Let us alone to make our Blades (...) noone,
Tho it be after Supper.

Know you can;
And out of that false fire, I doubt not but to raise strange belief -- and
Captain to countenance my device the better, and grace my words to the Widow,
I have a good plain Satin suit, that I had of a young Reveller the other night,
for words pass not regarded now a days unless they come from a good suite of
clothes, which the Fates and my wits have bestowed upon me. Well Captain
Idle, if I did not highly love thee, I would ne'er be seen within twelve score
of a pris^, for I protest at this instant, I walk in great danger of small
debts ^owe money to several Hostisses, and you know such lill^ ^ be upon a
mans Jack.


True George?


Fare thee well Captain. Come Corporal and Ancient? thou shalt hear more
news next time we greet thee?


More news? I; by you Bear at Bridge-Foote in heaven shalt thou.


Enough: my friends farewell,
This prison shows as if Ghosts did part in Hell.

Not Marry: forswear Marriage? why all women know 'tis as honourable a thing as
to lye with a man; and I to spite my Sisters vow the more, have entertained a
suitor already* a fine gallant Knight of the last Feather, he says he will
Coach me too, and well appoint me, allow me money to Dice with-all, and many
such pleasing protestations he sticks upon my lips; indeed his short-winded
Father in the Country is wondrous wealthy, a most abominable Farmer, and
therefore he may doo^e in time: troth I'll venture upon him; women are not
without ways ^now to help them-selues* if he prove wise and good as his word,
why I shall love him, and use him kindly: and if he prove an Ass, why in a
quarter of an hours warning I can transform him into an Ox; -- there comes
in my Relief again.


O Mistress Moll, Mistress Moll.


How now? what's the news?


The Knight your ^uter, sir Iohn Penny-Dub.


Sir Iohn Penny-Dub? where? where?


He's walking in the Gallery.


Ha's my Mother seen him yet.


O no, she's -- spitting in the Kitchen.


Direct him hither softly, good Frailty, -- I'll meet him half way.


That's just like running a Tilt; but I hope heel break nothing this time.


'Tis happiness my Mother saw him not:
O we come good Sir Ioha.

I thank you faith, -- Nay you must stand me, till I kiss you: 'tis the
fashion every where I-faith, and I came from Court enough?


Nay the Fates forsend that I should anger the fashion?


Then not forgetting the sweet of new ceremonies, I first fall back, then
recovering my self; make my honour to your lip thus: and then accost it.


Trust me, very pretty, and moving, you're worthy on it sir, --
O my Mother, my Mother, now she's here,
We'll steal into the Gallery.

Nay Sister, let Reason rule you, do not play the fool, stand not in your
own light, you have wealthy offers, large tendrings, do not with-stand your
good fortune: who comes a wooing to you I pray? no small fool, a rich Knight
ath City, Sir Oliuer Muck-hill, no small fool I can tell you: and furthermore
as I heard late by your Maide-seruants, (as your Maide-seruants will say to me
any thing I thank `em) both your Daughters are not without Suitors, I, and
worthy ones too? one a Brisk Cou^tier, Sir Andrew Tip-staffe; suitor a far
off to your eldest Daughter, and the third a huge-welthie Farmers son, a fine
young Country Knight, they call him Sir Iohn Penny-Dab, a good name marry, he
may have it coynde when he lacks money: what blessings are these Sister?


Tempt me not Satan.


Satan? do I look like Satan? I hope the Deuill's not so old as I, I trow.


You wound my senses Brother, when you name,
A suitor to me, -- oh I cannot abide it,
I take in poison, when I hear one named,
How now Simon? where's my son Edmund?

Ve^ily Madame, he is at vain Exercise, dripping in he Tennis-court.


At Tennis-court? oh, now his father's gon, I shall have no rule with him; oh
wicked Edmond, I might well compare this with the Prophecy in the Chronicle,
tho fart inferior, as Harry of Monmouth won all, and Harry of Windsor lost
all, so Edmund of Brist^ that was the Father, got all, and Edmond of London
that's his son now, will spend all?


Peace Sister, we'll have hem reformd, there's hope on him yet, tho it be but a
little.


Forsooth Madam? there are two or three Archers at door, would very gladly
speak with your Ladyship.


Archers?


Your husbands Fletcher I warrant.


Oh,
Let them come near, they bring home things of his,
Troth I should ha forgot 'em, how now?
Villain, which be those Archers?

Who do you not see 'em before you, are not these Archers, what do you call 'em
Shooters: Shooters and Archers are all one I hope.


Out ignorant slave.


Nay pray be patient Lady,
We come in way of honourable love.

We do.


To you.


And to your Daughters?


O why will you offer me this Gentlemen? indeed I will not look upon you;
when the Tears are scarce out of mine Eyes, not yet washed off from my Cheeks,
and my dear husbands body scars^ so cold as the Coffin, what reason have you
to offer it? I am not like some of your Widows that will bury one in the
Evening, and be sure to another ere morning? pray away, pray, take your
answers good Knights, and you be sweet Knights, I have vowed never to marry;
-- and so have my daughters too!


I two of you have, but the thirds a good wench!


Lady, a shrewd answer many; the best is, tis but the first, and he's a
blunt wooer, that will leave for one sharpe answer.


Where be your daughters Lady, I hope theile give us better encouragements?


Indeed they'll answer you so, tak't a my word theile give you the very same
answer Verbat^m cruelly la;


Mum: Molls a good wench still, I know what she'll do?


Well, Lady, for this time we'll take our leaves, hoping for better comfort.


O never, never? and I live these thousand years; and you be good Knights do
not hope; twiil be all Vain, Vain, -- look you, put off all yours suites,
and you come to me again.


Put off all their suites qua tha? I, that's the best wooing of a Widow
indeed, when a man's Nonsuted, that is, when he's a bed with her.


Sir Godfrey? here's twenty Angels more work hard for me; there's life int
yet.


Fea^e not Sir Oliuer Muckhill, I'll stick close for you, leave all with me.


By your leave Lady Widow.


What another suitor now?


A suitor no I protest Lady? if you^de give me your self
I'd not be troubled with you.

Say you so Sir, then you're the better welcome sir.


Nay Heaven bless me from a Widow, unless I were sure to bury her speedily!


Good bluntness: well your business sit?


Very needful; if you were in private once?


Needful? brother pray leave us; and you sit?


I should laugh now, if this blunt fellow should put 'em all by side the
sti^rop, and vault into the saddle himself, I have seen as mad a trick.


Now Sir? -- here's none but we -- Daughters forbear.


O no, pray let 'em stay, for what I have to speak imports equally to them
as to you?


Then you may stay.


I pray bestow on me a serious ear,
For what I speak is full of weight and fear?

Fear?


I ift pass unregarded, and vneffected,
Else peace and joy: -- I pray Attention?
Widow? I have been a mere stranger for these parts that you live in, nor
did I ever know the Husband of you, and Father of them, but I truly know by
certain spiritual Intelligence, that he is in Putgatorie?


Purgatory? tuh; that word deserves to be spit upon; I wonder that a man of
sober tongue as you seem to be, should have the folly to believe there's such a
place.


Well Lady, in cold blood I speak it, I assure you that there is a Purgatory,
in which place I know your husband to recide and wherein he is like to remain,
till the dissolution of the world, till the last general Bon-fire: when all
the earth shall melt into nothing. And the Seas scald their finny labourers:
so long is his abidance, unless you alter the property of your purpose,
together with each of your Daughters theirs, that is, the purpose of single
life in your self and your eldest Daughter, and the speedy determination of
marriage in your youngest.


How knows he that, what, he has some Devil told him?


Strange he should know our thoughts: --
Why but Daughter have you purposede speedy Marriage?

You see she tells you I, for she says nothing. Nay give me credit as you
please, I am a stranger to you, and and yet you see I know your determinations,
which must come to me Metaphisically, and by a super-naturall intelligence.


This puts Amazement on me?


Know our seacrets.


I'd thought to steal a marriage, would his tongue
Had dropped out when he blabt it.

But sir, my husband, was too hon^st a dealing man to be now in any purgatories
--


O Do not load your conscience with untruths,
Tis but mere folly now to guild hem ore:
That has past but for Copper; Praises here,
Cannot unbind him there? confess but truth,
I know he got his wealth with a hard gripe:
Oh hardly, hardly?

This is most strange of all, how knows he that?


He would eat fools and ignorant heirs clean up;
And had his drink, from many a poor mans brow,
Even as their labour brewde it?
He would scrape riches to him most unjustly;
The very dirt between his ^ailes was Il-got:
And not his own, -- oh
I groan to speak on it, the though't makes me shudder? -- shudder?


It quakes me too, now I think on it -- sir, I am much gr^eu'd, that you a
stranger should so deeply wrong my dead husband!


Oh?


A man that would keep Church so du^y; rise early, before his servants, and
even fo^ Religious hast, go vngarterd, vnb^ttend, nay sir Reverence untrust, to
Morning Prayer?


Oh vff;


Dine quickly upon hie-dayes, and when I had g^eat guess, would even shame me
and rize from the Table, to get a good seat at an afternoon Sermon?


There's the devil, there's the devil, true, he thought it Sanctity enough,
if he had killed a ma^, so^ tad been done in a Pue, or undone his Neighour, so
ta'd been ne'er y^ough to'th Preacher, Oh; -- a Sermon's a fine short cloak of
an hour long, and will hide the vpper-part of a dissembler, -- Church, I, he
seem^d al Church, his conscience was as hard as the Pulpit!


I can no more endure this.


Nor I widow
Endure to flatter.

Is this all your business with me?


No, Lady, tis but the induction too'te,
You may believe my strains, I strike all true?
And if your conscience would leap up to your tongue, your self would affirm
it, and that you shall perceive I know of things to come; as well as I do of
what is present, a Brother of your husbands shall shortly have a loss!


A loss, marry heaven for-fend, Sir Godfrey, my brother!


Nay keep in your wonders, till I have told you the fortunes of you all; which
are more fearful, if not happily prevented -- for your part your daughters,
if there be not once this day some bloud-shed befo^e your door, wheerof the
human creature dies? two of you the elder shall run mad?


Oh.


That's not I yet!


And with most impudent prostitution show your naked bodies to the view of all
beholders!


Our naked bodies? sie for shame:


Attend me: and your younger daughter be s^rocken dumb?


Dumb? out alas: tis the worst pain of all for a Woman, I'd rather be
mad, or run naked, or any thing: dumb?


Give ear? ere the evening fall upon, Hill Bog, and Meadow, this my speech
shall have past probation, and then shall I be believed accordingly.


If this be true, we are all sham'de, all undone?


Dumb? I'll speak as much as ever I can possible before evening?


But if it so come to pass (as for your fair sakes I wish it may) that this
presage of your strange fortues be preueted by that accident of death
bloud-shedding which I before told you off: take heed upon your lives; that two
of you which have vowed ne^er to marry, seek you out husbands with all present
speed and you the third that have such a desire to out-strip chastity, look
you meddle not with a husband.


A double torment.


The breach of this keeps your father in Purgatory, and the punishments that
shall follow you in this world, would with horror kill the Ear should hear
'e^ related.


Marry? why I vowed never to marry.


And so did I.


And I vowed never to be such an Ass, but to marry. what a cross Fortune's
this?


Ladies, tho I be a Fortune-teller, I cannot better Fortunes, you have 'em fro
me as they are reueald to me: I would they were to your tempers, and fellows
with your bloods, that's all the bitterness I would you.


Oh 'tis a just vengeance, for my husbands hard purchases.


I wish you to be-thinke your selves, and leauem.


I'll to Sir Godfrey my Brother, and acquaint him with these fearful presages.


For Mother they portend losses to him.


Oh I, they do, they do,
If any happy issue crown thy words,
I will reward thy cunning.

'Tis enough Lady,
I wish no higher.

Dumb, and not marry, worse,
Neither to speak, nor kiss, a double curse?

So all this comes well about yet, I play the Fortune-teller, as well as if I
had had a Witch to my Grannam: for by good happiness, being in my Hostisses
Garden, which neighbours the Orchard of the Widow, I laid the hole of mine
ear to a hole in the wall, and heard 'em make these vows, speak those words
upon which I wrought these advantages; and to encourage my forgery the more, I
may now perceive in 'em a na^urall simplicity which will easily swallow an
abuse, if any covering be over it: and to confirm my former presage to the
Widow, I have aduizde old Peter Skirmis^ the Soldier, to hurt Corporal Oath
upon the Leg, and in that hurry I'll rush amongst 'em, and in stead of giving
the Corporal some Cordial to comfort him, I'll power into his mouth a potion of
a sleepy Nature, to make him seem as dead; for the which the old soldier
being apprehended, and ready to be borne to execution, I'll step in, take upon
me the cure of the dead man, upon pain of dying the condemneds death: the
Corporal will wake at his minute, when the sleepy force has wrought it self,
and so shall I get my self into a most admired opinion, and under the pretext
of that cunning, beguile as I see oc^asion: and if that foolish Nicholas Saint
Tantlings keep true time with the chain, my plot will be found; the Captain
delivered, and my wits applauded among schollers and soldiers for ever.


Oh I have found an excellent advantage to take a way the chain, my Master put
it off even now to say on a new Doub^et, and I sneak't it away by little little
most Puritanically! we shall have good sport a non when ha's mist it, about my
Cozen the Conjurer* the world shall see I'm an honest man of my word for now
I'm going to hang it between Heaven Earth among the Rosemary branches.


Si^rah (...) Saint? my Mistress sends away a^l her suitors and puts ^eas (...)
ears?


Frailty? she dos like an honest chaste, and virtuous woman? for widows ought
not to wallow in the puddle of iniquity.


Yet Simon, many widows will do it, what so comes on it.


True Frailty, their filthy flesh desires a Conjunction Copulatiue what
strangers a^e within, Frailty?


There's none (...) but Master Pilfer the Tailor: he's above with Sir Godfreie
pra^ing of a Doublet: and I must trudge anon to fetch Master Suds the Barber!


Master Suds, a good man, he washes the sins of the
Beard clean.

How now creatures? whats a clock.


Why do you take us to be Jack at'h Clock-house?


I say again to you what's a clock?


Truly la, we go by the clock of our conscience, all worldly Clocks we know
go false, and are set by drunken Sextons.


Then what's a clock in your conscience? -- oh, I must break off, here comes
the corporal -- hum, hum! -- what's a clock?


A clock? why past seventeen.


Past seventeen? nay ha's met with his match now, Corporal Oath will fit him.


Thou dost not bawke or baffle me, dost thou^ I am a Soldier -- pa^t
seventeen.


I, thou art not angry with the figures art thou? I will prove it unto thee,
12. and 1. is thirteen ^ hope, 2. fourteen, 3. fifteen, 4 sixteen, and 5.
seauenteene, then past seauenteene, I will take the Dyals part in a just cause.


I say 'tis but past five then.


I'll swear 'tis past seauenteene then^ dost thou not know numbers, can thou
not cast?


Cast? dost thou speak of my casting in the street? Dr^.


I, and in the Market place.


Clubs, clubs, clubs.


I, I knew by their shuffling Clubs would be Trump; mass here's the Knave,
and he can do any good upon 'em: Clubs, clubs, clubs?


O villain, thou hast opend a vain in my leg.


How now, for shame, for shame, put up, put up.


By yon blew Welkin, 'twas out of my part George to be hurt on the leg.


Oh peace now -- I have a Cordial here to comfort thee.


Down with 'em, down with em, lay hands upon the villain.


Lay hands on me?.


I'll not be seen among em now.


Ime hurt, and had more need have Surgeons,
Lay hands upon me then rough Officers.

Go carry him to be dressed then:
This mutinous Soldier shall along with me to prison.

To prison, where's George.


Away with hem.


So*
All lights as I would wish, the amazd widow,
Will plant me strongly now in her belief,
And wonder at the virtue of my words:
For the event turns those presages from em
Of being mad and dumb, and begets joy
Mingled with admiration: these empty creatures,
Soldier and Corporal were but ordained,
As instruments for me to work upon,
Now to my patient, here's his potion.

O wondrous happiness, beyond our thoughts:
O lucky fair event, I think our fortunes,
Were blessed even in our Cradles: we are quitted
Of all those shameful violent presages,
By this rash bleeding chance; go Frailty run, and know,
Whether he be yet living* or yet dead,
That here before my door received his hurt.

Madam, he was carried to the superior, but if he had no money when he came
there, I warrant he's dead by this time.


Sure that man is a rare fortune-te^ler, never looked upon our hands, nor upon
any mark about us, a wondrous fellow surly.


I am glad, I have the use of my tongue yet: tho of nothing else, I shall find
the way to marry too, I hope shortly.


O where's my Brother sir Godfrey, I would he were here, that I might relate
to him how prophetically, the cunning Gentleman spoke in all things.


O my Chain, my Chain, I have lost my Chain, where be these Villains,
Varlets?


Oh; has lost his Chain.


My Chain, my chain.


Brother be patient, hear me speak, you know I told you that a cunning man
told me, that you should have a loss, and he has prophicied so true.


Out he's a villain, to prophe^y of the loss of my chain, twas worth above
three hundred C^ownes, -- besides twas my Fathers, my fathers fathers, my
Grand-fathers huge grand-fathers? I had as live ha lost my Neck, as the chain
that hung about it; O my chain, my chain.


Oh brother, who can be against a misfortune, tis happy twas no more.


No, more! O goodly godly sister, would you had me lost more? my best gown
too, with the cloth of gold-lace? my holiday Gascoines, and my Jerkin set with
pearl; no more?


Oh, Brother! you can read. --


But I cannot read where my chain is, -- what strangers have been here? you
let in strangers! The eves, and Catch-poles; how comes it gone? there was none
above with me but my Taylor; and my Taylor will not -- steal I hope?


No he's afraid of a chain!


How now sirrah, the news?


O Mistres, he may well be called a Corporal now, for his corpse are as dead as
a cold Capons?


More happiness.


Sirrah, what's this to my chain? where's my chain knave?


Your chain sir?


My chain is lost villain.


I would he were hanged in chains that has it then for me? Alas sir, I saw
none of your chain, since you were hung with it your self?


Out varlet? it had full three thousand Linck^,
I have oft told it over at my prayers:
Over and over, full three thousand Lincks.

Had it so sir: sure it cannot be lost then; I'll put you in that comfort.


Why why?


Why if your chain had so many Lincks, it cannot choose but come to light.


Delusion? now long Nicholas wheres my chain.


Why about your Neck, is't not sir.


About my neck Varlet. My chain is lost,
Tis stole away, Ime robbed.

Nay Brother show your self a man:


I if it be lost or stole, if he would be patient Mistres I could bring him to
a Cunning Kinsman of mine that would fetched again with a Sesar^ra.


Can thou? I will be patient, say where dwells he?


Marry he dwells now Sir, where he would not dwell and he could choose: in the
Marshalse^ sir; but he's an exlent fellow if he were out, has trauyld all the
world ore, he, and been in the seven and twenty Provinces: why he would make
it be fetched Sir if twere rid a thousand mile out of town.


An admirable fellow what lies he for.


Why he did but rob a Steward of ten groats the other Night, as any man would ha
done, and there he lies fort.


I'll make his peace, a Trifle, I'll get his pardon,
Beside a bountiful reward, I'll about it,
But fee the Clerks, the Justice will do much;
I will about it straight, good sister pardon me,
All will be well I hope, and turn to good,
The name of Coniure^ has laid my blood.

His Hostesses where he lies will trust him no longer, she has feed me to arest
him; and if you will accompany me, because I know not of what Nature the
Scholar is, whether desperate or swift, you shall share with me Seriant
Rauen-shaw, I have the good Angel to arrest him.


Troth I'll take part with thee then, Sariant, not for the sake of the money so
much, as for the hate I bear to a Scholar: why Seriant tis Natural in us you
know to hate Scholars: natural (...), they will publish our imperfections,
Knaveries, and Convey (...) upon Scaffolds and Stages.


I and spitefully to; troth I have wounderd how the slaves could see into our
breasts so much, when our doublers are buttond with Pewter.


I and so close without yielding; oh their parlous fellows, they will search
more with their wits then a Cunstable with all his officers.


Whist, whist, whist, Yeoman Dogson, Yeoman Dogson.


Ha, what says Sariant?


Is he in the Pothecaryes shop still,


I, I.


Have an eye, eye.


The best is Sariant if he be a true Scholar he wears no weapon I think.


No, no, he wears no weapon.


Mass, I am right glad of that: 'tas put me in better heart; nay if I clutch
him once, let me alone to dra^e him if he be stiff-necked; I have been one of
the six my self, that has dragd as tall men of their hands, when their
weapons have bin gone as ever bastinadoed a Sariant -- I have done I can tel
you.


Sariant Puttock, Sariant Puttock.


Ho.


Hes coming out single.


Peace, peace be not to greedy, let him play a little let him play a little,
we'll ^erke him up of a sudden, I ha fished in my time.


I and caught many a fool Seriant.


I parted now from Nicholas: the chains couched,
And the old Knight has spent his rage vpont,
The widow holds me in great Admira ion'
For cunning Art: amongst joys I am 'een lost,
For my device can no way now be crossed,
And now I must to prison to the captain, and there --

I arrest you sir.


Oh -- I spoke truer then I was a ware, I must to prison indeed.


They say your a scholar, nay sir -- Yeoman Dogson, have care to his arms --
you'll rail again Sariants, and stage 'em: you, tickle their vices.


Nay use me like a Gentleman, I'm little less.


You a Gentleman? that's a good Jest in faith; can a Scholar be a Gentleman, --
when a Gentleman will not be a Scholar; -- look upon your wealthy Citizenes
sons, whether they be Scholars or no, that are Gentlemen by their fathers
trades: a Scholar a Gentleman.


Nay let Fortune drive all her stings into me, she cannot hurt that in me, a
Gentleman, is Accidens Inseperabile to my blood.


A rabblement, nay you shall have a bloody rabblement; upon you I warrant you.


Go, Yeoman Dogson before, and Enter the Action 'ith Counter.


Pray do not hand me Cruelly, I'll go,


Oh hes tame let him loose seriant.


Pray at whose suit is this?


Why at your Hostisses suite where you lie, Misters Cunnyburrow for bed and
board, the sum four pound five shillings and five pence.


I know the sum to true, yet I presumde,
Upon a farther day; well tis my stars:
And I must bear it now, tho never harder.
I swear now, my device is crossed indeed.
Captain must lie bite: this is Deceits seed.

Come, come away.


Pray give me so much time as to knit my garter, and I'll a way with you.


Well we must be paid for this waiting upon you, this is no pains to attend
thus.


I am now wretched, and miserable, I shall ne'er recover of this disease: hot
Iron gnaw their fists: they have struck a Fever into my shoulder, which I
shall ne'er shake out again I fear me, till with a true Habeas Corpus the Sexton
remove me, oh if I take prison once I shall be pressed to death with Actions,
but not so happy as speedily; perhaps I may be forty year a pressing till I
be a thin old man, that looking through the grates, men may look through me;
all my means is confounded, what shall I do? has my wit served me so long,
and now give me the slip (like a Trained servant) when I have most need of
'em: no device to keep my poor carcase fro these Puttocks? -- yes, happiness,
have I a paper about me now? yes too, I'll try it, it may hit, Extremity is
Touch-stone unto wit, I, I.


Sfoot how many yards are in thy Gatters, that thou art so long a tying on
them? come away sir.


Troth Seriant I protest, you could never ha took me at a worse time, for now
at this instant, I have no lawful picture about me.


Slid how shall me come by our fees then.


We must have fees Sir.


I could ha wished in faith, that you had took me half an hour hence for your
own sake, for I protest if you had not crossed me, I was going in great joy to
receive five pound of a Gentleman, for the Device of a Mask here, drawn in
this paper* but now, come I must be contented, tis but so much lost, and
answerable to the rest of my fortunes.


Why how far hence dwells that Gentleman?


I, well said seriant, tis good to cast about for money.


Speak, if it be not far --


We are but a little past it, the next street behind us.


Slid we have waited upon you grievously already* if you'll say you'll be
liberal when you ha^e, give us double ^ees, and spend vpon's, why we'll sho^
(...) that kindness, and go along with you to the Gentleman.


I well said still seriant v^ge that.


Troth if it will su^ice, it shall be all among you, for my p^rt i'll not pocket
a penny, my hostis^e shall have her four pound five shillings, and bate me the
five pence, and the other ^fteene shillings I'll spend upon you.


Why now thou art a good Scholar.


An excellent Scholar In faith; has proceeded very well alate; come, we'll along
with you.


Who knocks, whose at door? we had need of a Porter.


A few friends here? -- pray is the Gentleman your master within.


Yes, is your business to him?


I, he knows it, when he see's me:
I pray you have you forgot me.

I by my troth sir, Pray come near, I'll in and tell him of you, please you to
walk here in the Gallery till he comes.


We will attend his worship, -- worship I think, for so much the Posts at his
door should signify, and the fair coming in, and the wicket, else I neither
knew him nor his worship, but 'tis happiness he is within doors, what so ere
he be, if he be not too much a formal Citizen, he may do me good: Seriant
and Yeoman, how do you like this house, is't not most wholsomly plotted?


Troth prisoner, an exceeding fine house.


Yet I wonder how he should forget me, for he ne'er knew me: No matter, what
is forgot in you will be remembered in your Master.

A pretty comfortable room this me thinks:
You have no such rooms in prison now?

Oh dog-holes toote,


Dog-holes indeed -- I can tell you I have great hope to have my Chamber here
shortly, nay and diet too, for he's the most free-hartedst Gentleman where he
takes: you would little think it? and what a fine Gallery were here for me to
walk and study, and make verse^,


O it stand^ very pleasantly for a Scholar.


Look what maps, and pictures, and devices, and things, neatly deli^ately?
mass here he comes, he should be a Gentleman, I like his Beard well; -- All
happiness to your worship.


You're kindly welcome sir.


A simple (...).


Mass it seems the Gentleman makes great account of him.


I have the thing here for you sir.


I beseech you conceal me sir, Ime undone else, -- I have ^he Mask here for
you sir, Look you sir, -- I beseech your worship first to pardon my rudeness,
for my extremes makes me boulder then I would be; I am a poor Gentleman and
a Scholar, and now most unfortunately fallen into the ^angs of unmerciful
officers, arrested for debt, which tho small, I am not able to compass, by
reason Ime destitute of lands, money, and friends, so that i^ I fall into the
hungry swallow of the prison, I am like utterly to perish, and with fees and
extortions be pinched clean to the bone: Now, if ever pity had interest in the
blood of a Gentleman, I beseech you vouchsafe but to favour that means of my
escape, which I have already thought upon.


Go forward.


I warrant he likes it rarely.


In the plundge of my extremities, being giddy, and doubtful what to do; at
last it was put into my labouring thoughts, to make happy use of this paper,
and to blear their unlettered eyes, I told them there was a Device for a Mask
drawn int', and that (but for their interception,) I was going to a Gentleman
to receive my reward for it: they greedy at this word, and hoping to make
purchase of me, offered their attendance, to go along with me, 'my hap was to
make bold with your door Sir, which my thoughts showde me the most fairest
and comfortablest entrance, and I hope I have happened right upon
understanding, and pity: may it please your good Worship then, but to uphold
my Device, which is to let one of your men put me out at back-doore, and I
shall be bound to your worship for ever.


By my troth an excellent device.


An excellent device he says; he likes it wonderfully.


A my faith I never heard a better.


Hark, he swears he never heard a better, Sergeant.


O there's no talk on it, hes an excellent Scholar, and especially for a
Mask.


Give me your Paper, your Device; I was never better pleased in all my life:
good wit, brave wit, finely rought, come in sir, and receive your money
sir.


I'll follow your good Worship, --
You heard how he likte it now?

Puh, we know he could not choose but like it: go thy ways thou art a witty
fine fellow in faith, thou shalt discourse it to us at Tavern anon wilt thou?


I, I, that I will, -- look Seriants here are Maps, and pretty toys, be
doing in the mean time, I shall quickly have told out the money, you know.


Go, go little villain, fetch thy chinck, I begin to love thee, I'll be
drunk to night in thy company.


This ^entlemen I may well call a part
Of my salvation, in these earthly evils,
For he has saved me from three hungry Devils.

Sir^ah Seriant, these Mappes are pretty painted things, but I could ne'er
fancy 'em yet, ^mee thinks they're too busy, and full of Circles and
Conjurations, they say all the world's in one of them, but I could ne'er find
the Counter in the Poultry.


I think so: how could you find it? for you know it stands behind the houses.


Mass that's true, then we must look ath' back-side fort; Sfoote here's
nothing, all's ba^e.


I warrant thee that stands for the Counter, for you know there's a company of
bare fellows there.


Faith like enough Seriant? I never marked so much before? Sirran Seriant, and
Yeoman, I should love these Maps out a cry now, i^ we could see (...) peep
out of door in em, oh we might have em in a morning to our Breake-fast so
finely, and ne'er kn^ke our heals to the ground a whole day for em.


I marry sir, I'd buy one then my self.
But this talk is by the way, where shall's sup to night,
Five pound received, (...) talk of that,
I have a trick worth all, you two shall bear him to 'th Tavern, whilst I go
close with his Hostisse, and work out of her, I know she would be glad of
the sum to finger money; because she knows tis but a desperate debt, and
full of hazard, what will you say if I bring it to pass that the Hostisse
shall be contented with one half for all; and we to share the other;
fift-shillings bullies.


Why I would call thee King of Seriants, and thou should be Chronicled in the
Counter book for ever.


Well put it to me, we'll make a Night on it faith.


Sfoote I think he receives more money he stays so long.


He tarries long indeed, may be I can tell you upon the good liking ont the
Gentleman may prove more bountiful.


That would be rare, we'll search him.


Nay be sure of it we'll search him! and make him light enough.


Oh here comes the Gentleman; by your leave sir.


God you god den sirs, -- would you speak with me;


No, not with your worship sir, only we are bold to stay for a friend of ours
that went in with your worship.


Who? notthe scholar?


Yes even he and it please your worship?


Did he make you stay for him? he did you wrong then why, I can assure you
hes gon above an hour ago.


How? sir?


I paid him his money, and my man told me he went out at backdoor.


Backdoor?


Why, whats the matter.


He was our prisoner sir, we did arrest him.


What he was not? you the Sheriffs Officers -- you were to blame then,
Why did you not make known to me as much:
I could have kept him for you, I protest
He receiude all of me in Britain Gold
Of the last coining;

Vengeance dog him with it.


Sfoote has he gulled us so.


Where shall we sup now Sergeants?


Sup (...) now, ^ate Porridge for a month;
Well, we cannot impute it to any lack of good-will in your Worship, -- you
did but as another would have done, twas our hard fortunes to miss the
purchase, but if ere we clutch him again, the Counter shall charm him.


The hole shall rot him.


Amen.


So,
Vex out your Lungs without doors, I am proud,
It was my hap to help him, it fell fit,
He went not empty neither for his wit*
Alas poor wretch, I could not blame his brain,
To labour his deliu^rie, to be free,
From their v^pittying sangs -- Ime glad it stood,
Within my power to do a Scholar good.

How now, whose that? what are you?


The same that I should be Captain.


George Pye- board, honest George? why came thou i^ half fac^ d. mu^ed so?


Oh Captain, I thought we should ne'er ha laughed again, never spent frolic
hour again.


Why? why?


I coming to prepare thee, and with news
As happy as thy quick delivery,
Was traced out by the sent, arrested Captain.

Arrested George.


Arrested, guess, guess, how many Dogs do you think I'd upon me?


Dogs, I say? I know not.


Almost as many as George Stone the Bea^e,
Three at once, three at once.

How did thou shake 'em of then?


The time is busy, and calls upon our wits, let it suffice,
Here I stand safe, and escaped by miracle,
Some other hour shall tell thee? when we'll steep
Our eyes in laughter: Captain my device
Leanes to thy happiness, for ere the day
Be spent to the G^rdle, thou shalt be set free,
The Corporal's in his first sleep the Chain is mist,
Thy Kinsman has expressed thee, and the old Knight
With Pali^y-hams now labours thy release,
What rests, is all in thee, to Coniu^e Captain.

Conjure: sfoote George you know the devil a conjuring ^ can conjure.


The Devil of conjuring nay by my fay, I'd not have thee do so much Captain
as the Devil a conjuring: look here, I ha brought thee a circle ready
characterd and all.


Sfoote George, art in thy right wits, dost know what thou say? why dost
talk to a Captain, a conjuring, did thou ever hear of a Captain conjure
in thy life, dost call it a Circle, tis too wide a thing my thinks: had it
been a lesser Circle, then I knew what to have done.


Why every fool knows that Captain: nay then I'll not cog with you
Captain, if you'll stay and hang the next Seffions you may.


No by my faith George, come, come, lets to coniurring, lets to coniuing.


But if you look to be releasd, as my wits have took pain to work it, and
all means wrought to farther it, besides to put crowns in your purse, to make
you a man of better hopes, and where as before you were a Captain or poor
Soldier, to make you now a Commander of rich fools, (which is truly the only
best purchase peace can allow you) safer then Hig-wayes, Heath, or
Cunny-groues, and yet a far better booty; for your greatest thieves are
never hanged, never hanged, for why they're wise, and cheat within doors, and
we geld fools of more money in one night, then your false tailde Gelding will
purchase in a twelue-moneths running, which confirms the old Beldams saying,
he's wisest, that keeps himself warmest, that is, he that robs by a good
fire.


Well opened in faith George, thou hast pulled that saying out of the husk.


Captain Idle, tis no time now to delude or delay, the old Knight will be here
suddenly, I'll perfect you, direct you, till you the trick on it: tis nothing.


Sfoote George, I know not what to say toot, conjure? I shall be hanged ere I
coniute.


Nay tell not me of that Captain, you'll ne'er conjure after your hanged, I
warrant you look you ^ir, a parlous matter? sure, first to spread your circle
upon the ground, then with a little conjuring ceremony, as I'll have an
Hackney-mans wand siluerd ore a purpose for you, then a^riuing in the circle,
with a huge word, and a great t^mple as for instance: have you never seen a
stalking-stamping Player, that will raise a tempest with his tongue, and thunder
with his heals?


O yes, yes, yes: often, often.


Why be like such a one, for any thing will blea^e the old Knights eyes, for
you must note that heel ne'er dare to venture into the room, only perhaps
peep fearfully through the Key hole, to see how the Play goes forward.


Well I may go about it when I will, but mark the end o^t, I shall but shame
my self in faith George, speak big words, and stamp and stare and he look in
at Key-hole, why the very thought of that would make me laugh out-right, and
spoil all, nay I'll tell thee George, when I apprehend a thing once, I am of
such a laxative laughter, that if the Devil him-selfe stood by, I should laugh
in his face.


Puh, that's but the babe of a man, and may easily be husht, as to think upon
some disaster, some sad misfortune, as the death of thy Father ithe Country!


Sfoote that would be the more to drive me into such an ecstasy, that I should
ne'er lin laughing.


Why then think upon going to hanging else.


Mass that's well remembered, now i'll do well I warrant thee, ne'er fear me
now: but how shall I do George for boisterous words, and horrible names.


Puh, any fustian invocations Captain will serve as well as the best, so you
rant them out well, or you may go to a Apothecaries shop, and take all the
words from the Boxes.


Troth and you say true George, there's strange words enough to raise a hundred
Quack-saluers; tho they be ne'er so poor when they begin? but here lies the
fear on it, how in this false conjuration a true Devil should pop up indeed.


A true Devil, Captain, why there was ne'er such a one, nay faith he that has
this place, is as false a Knave as our last Church-warden.


Then hes false enough a conscience in faith George.


Good Gentlemen over the way, send your relief,
Good Gentlemen over the way, -- Good s^r Godfrey?

Hes come, hes come.


Master, that's my Kinsman younder in the Buff-Ierkin -- Kinsman, that's my
Master yonder in the Taffeta Hat -- pray salute him entirely?


Now my friend.


May I partake your name sir.


My name is Master ^dm^d.


Master Edmond -- are you not a Welshman sir?


A Welshman, why?


Because Master is your Christen name, and Edmond your sir name?


O no; I have more names at home, Master Edmund Pius, is my full name at
length.


O cry you mercy (...)?


I understand that you are my Kinsmans good Master, and in regard of that, the
best of my skill is at your service: but had you fortunde a ^eere stranger, and
made no means to me by acquaintance, I should have utterly denied to have
been the man; both by reason of the Act past in Parliament against Conjurers
and Witches, as also, because I would not have my Art vulgar, trite, and
common.


I much commend your care therein good Captain Conjurer, and that I will be
sure to have it private enough, you shall doote in my Sisters house, -- mine
own house I may call it, for both our charges therein are proportiond.


Very good sir -- what may I call your loss sir?


O you may call it a great loss sir, a grievous loss sir, as goodly a Chain
of gold, tho I say it, that wore it: how says thou Nichol^s?


O 'twas as delicious a Chain a Gold, Kinsman you know, --


You know? did you know it Captain?


Trust a fool with secrets? -- Sir he may say I know: his meaning is, because
my Art is such, that by it I may gather a knowledge of all things. --


I very true.


A pax of all fools -- the excuse stuck upon my tongue like Ship-pitch upon ^
Mariners gown, not to come off in hast -- ber-lady Knight to loose such a
fair Chain a gold, were a soul loss; Well, I can put you in this good
comfort on it, if it be between Heaven and Earth Knight, I'll have it for you?


A wonderful Coniuter, -- O I, tis between heaven and earth I warrant you, it
cannot go out of the realm, -- I know tis some-where above the earth?


I nigher the earth then thou worst on.


For first my Chain was rich, and no rich thing shall enter into heaven you
know?


And as for the Devil Master, he has no need on it, for you know he ha's a
great chain of his own?


Thou says true Nicholas, but he has put off that now, that lies by him.


Faith Knight in few words, I presume so much upon the power of my Art; that I
could warrant your Chain again.


O da^ntie Captain?


Marry it will cost me much sweat^e, I were better go to sixteen whot-houses.


I good man, I warrant thee.


Beside great vexation of Kidney and Liver.


O twill tickle you here^abouts Coozen, because you have not been used toot.


No, have you not been used too't Captain?


Plague of all ^ -- indeed Knight I have (...) used it a good while, and
therefore twill strai^e me so much the more you know.


On it will, it will.


What plunges he puts me to, were not this Knight a fool, I had been twice
spoiled now; that Captay^es wo^se then accursed that has an ass to his Kinsman
-- Sfoote I fear he will driuell't out before I come toote. -- Now sir -- to
come to the point in deed -- you see I stick here in the jaw of the
Marshalsea, and cannot do it.


Tut tur I now thy meaning, thou would say you're a prisoner, I tell thee
you're none.


How none? why is not this the Marshialsea?


woult hear me speak, I hard of thy rare cuniuring My chain was lost, I
sweat for thy release, As thou shalt do the like at home for me, Keeper.


Sir.


Speak is not this man free?


Yes at his pleasure sir, the fee's discharged;


Go, go, I'll discharge them I.


I thank your worship


Now trust me yar a dear Knight kindness unexpected, oh theirs nothing to a
free Gentle man. -- I will cuniute for you sir till Froth come through my
Buffe-ierkin?


Nay then thou shalt not pass with so little a bounty, for at the first sight
of my chain again, -- Forty fine Angels shall appear unto thee.


Twill be a glorious show, in faith Knight a very fine show, but are all these
of your own house? are you sure of that fir?


I, I, no, no, whats he younder? talking with my wild Nephew, pray heaven, he
give him good counsel;


Who he he's a rare friend of mine, an admirable fellow Knight, the finest
fortune-teller.


Oh tis he indeed that came to my Lady sister, foretold the loss of my chain,
I am not angry with him now, for I see twas my fortune to loose it; by your
leave M. Fortune-teller, I had a glimpse on you at home at my Sisters the
Widows, there you prouisied of the loss of a chain, -- simply tho I stand
here I was he that lost it.


Was it you sir?


A my troth Nunckle, he's the rarest fellow, has told me my fortune so right;
I find it so right to my nature.


What is't? God send it a good one?


O tis a passing good one, Nuncle: for he says I shall prove such an excellent
gamester in my time, that I shall spend al faster then my father got it,


T'here^s a fortune in deed,


Nay it hits my humour so pat.


I that will be the end ont. will the Curse of the beggar preuaile so much,
that the son shall consume that foolishlie, which the father got, craftily,
I, I, I, twill, twill, twill.


Stay, stay, stay


turn over George.


(...) Iutie, here Iulie that's this month, Sunday thirteen, yester day
forteene, to day fifteen.


Look quickly for the fifteen day, -- if within the compass of these two
days there would be some Boisterous storm or other, it would be the best, I'd
defer him off till then, some tempest and it be thy will?


Here's the fifteen day -- hot and fair.


Puh, would t'ad been hot and foul.


The sixteen day, that's to morrow, the morning for the most part fair and
pleasant.


No luck.


But about hye-none-lighning and thunder.


Lighning and thunder, admirable, best of all, I'll conjure to morrow just at
hie none George.


Happen but true to morrow Almanac, and i'll give thee leave to lie all the
year after.


sir I must crave your patience, to bestow this day upon me, that I may
furnish my self strongly, -- I sent a spirit into Lanck^shire the other day, to
fetch back a knave Drouer, and I look for his return this evening -- to
morrow morning my friend here and I will come and breake-fast with you.


Oh you shall be both most welcome.


And about Noone without fail, I purpose to conjure.


Mid noone will be a fine time for you.


Coniuting, do you mean to conjure at our house to morrow sir?


Many do I sir ^t is my intent young Gentleman.


(...) troth, I'll love you while I live sort, o rare, Nicholas we sna^ (...)
conjuring, to morrow,


Puh I, I could ha told you of that.


Law he could ha told him of that, fool, cockscombe could ye.


Do you hear me sir, I desire more acquaintance on you, you shall earn some
money of me, now I know you can coni^re, but can you fetch any that is lost?


Oh any thing that's lost.


Why look you sir, I tel't you as a friend and a Conjurer, I should marry a
Poticaries daughter and twas told me she lost her maiden head at
Stonie-statford; now if you'll do but so much as conure fort, and make all whole
again. --


That I will sir.


By my troth I thank you la,


A little merry with your sisters son sir.


Oh a simple young man, very simple, come Captain, and you sir, we'll even part
with a gallon of wine till to morrow breake-fast.


Troth agreed sir.


kinsman -- Scholar?


Why now thou art a good Knave, worth a hundred Brownists.


Am I indeed la: I thank you truly la.


But I hope you will not serve a Knight so: Gentlewoman will you: to cashier
him, and cast him off at your pleasure; what do you think I was dubbed for
nothing, no by my faith Ladies daughter.


Pray Sir Iohn Pennydub, let it be deferd awhile, I have as big a heart to
marry as you can have; but as the Fortuneteler tolld me.


I ax a'th Fortune-teller, would Derecke had been his fortune seven year
ago, to cross my love them: did he know what case I was in, why this is able
to make a man drown himself in's Fathers fish-pond.


And then he told me more-ouer Sir Iohn, that the breach of it, kept my
Father in Purgatory.


In Purgatory? why let him purge out his heart there, what have we to do with
that? there's Physicians enough there to cast his water, is that any matter to
us: how can he hinder our love, why let him bew changed now he's dead? --
Well, have I rid post day and night, to bring you merry news of my fathers
death, and now --


Thy Fathers death? is the old Farmer dead?


As dead as his Barn door Moll.


And you'll keep your word with me now, Sir Iohn. that I shall have my Coach
and my Coach-man?


I faith.


And two white Horses with black Feathers to draw it?


Too,


A guarded Lackey to run befor't, and pied liveries to come trashing after't.


Thou shalt Moll.


And to let me have money in my purse to go whether I will.


All this.


Then come, what so ere comes on it, we'll be made sure together before the
Maids a'the Kitchen.


How now? where's my Brother Sir Godfrey? went he forth this morning?


O no Madame, he's above at breake-fast, with sir reverence a Conjurer.


A Conjurer? what manner a fellow is he?


Oh, a wondrous ra^e fellow Mistress, very strongly made upward, for he goes in
a Buff-ierkin: he says he will fetch Sir Godfreys Chain again, if it hang
between heaven and earth.


What he will not? then he's an exlent fellow I warrant. how happy were that
woman to be blessed with such a Husband, a man a cunning? how does he look
Frailty: very swartlie I warrant, with black beard, scorched cheeks, and
smoky eyebrowes.


Fooh -- he's neither smoake-dryed, nor scorched, nor black, nor nothing, I
tell you Madame, he looks as fair to see to, as one of us; I do not think
but if you saw him once, you d^ take him to be a Christian.


So fair, and yet so cunning, that's to be wonderd at Mother.


Bless you sweet Lady.


And you fair Mistress.


Coades? what do you mean Gentlemen? fie, did I not give you your answers?


Sweet Lady?


Well, I will not stick with you now for a kiss,
Daughter kiss the Gentleman for once.

Yes for^ooth.


Ime proud of such a favour.


Truly la, sir Oliuer, y are much to blame to come again, when you know my
mind, so well delivered -- as a Widow could deliver a thing.


But I expect a farther comfort Lady.


Why la you now, did I not desire you to put off your suit quite clean, when
you came to me again, how say you did I not*


But the sincere love which my heart bears you,


Go to, i'll cut you off. Sir Oliuer to put you in comfort a far off, my
fortune is read me, I must marry again.


O blessed fortune!


But not as long as I can choose; -- nay I'll hold out, well.


Yet are my hopes now fairer.


O Madam Madam.


How now, what's the hast?


Faith Mistress Francis I'll maintain you gallantly. I'll bring you to Court,
wean you among the fair society of ladies poor Kinswome of mine in cloth of
silver, beside you shall have your Monckie, your Parrot, your Muskat, your
peace, peace, peace.


It will do very well.


What dos he mean to conjure here the? how shall I do to be tid of these
Knights, -- please you Gentlemen to walk a while ith Garden, go gather a
pink, or a Iilly-flower.


With all our hearts Lady, and count us favoured?


Step in Nicholas, look, is the coast clear.


Oh, as clear as a Cattes eye, sir.


Then enter Captain Conisurer? -- now -- how like you your Room su?


O wonderful convenient.


I can tell you Captain, simply tho it lies here, tis the fairest Room in my
Mothers house, as dainty a Room to Coniute in, me thinks, -- why you may
bid, I cannot tell how many diuills welcome in it; my Father has had twenty
here at once!


What diuills?


Diuills, no Deputies, the welthiest men he could get.


Nay put by your chattes now, fall to your business roundly, the seskewe of
the Dial is upon the Chrisse-crosse of Noone, but oh: hear met Captain, a
qualm comes ore my stomach?


Why, what's the matter sir?


Oh, how if the devil should prove a knave, and tear the hangings.


Fuh, I warrant you Sir Godfrey:


I Nuncle, or spit fire vpp'oth feeling!


Very true too, for tis but thin playsterd, and twill quickly take hold a the
laths, and if he chance to spit downeward-too, he will burn all the boards.


My life for yours Sir Godfrey?


My Sister is very curious dainty ore this Room I can tell and therefore if he
must needs spit, I pray desire him to spit ith Chimney.


Why assure you Sir Godfrey, he shall not be brought up, with so little manners
to spit and spaule a'th flower.


Why I thank you good Captai^e, pray have a care I, fall to your Circle, we'll
not trouble you I warrant you, come, we'll in to the next Room, because we^le
be sure to keep him out there, we'll bar up the door with some of the Godlies
zealous works.


That will be a fine device Nuncle, and because the ground shall be as holy as
the door, I'll tear two or three refaires in pieces, and strew the leaves
about the Chamber? oh, the devil already, -- runs in --


Sfoote Captain speak somewhat for shame; it lightens thunders before thou wilt
begin, why when?


Pray peace George, -- thou'lt make me laugh anon; and spoil all.


Oh now it begins again, now, now? now? Captain?


Rumbos-ragdayon, pur, pur, colucundrion, Hois -- Plois.


Oh admirable Conjurer? has fetched Thunder already:


Hark hark again Captain?


Beniamino, -- gaspois -- kay -- gosgothoteron -- umbrois.


Oh, I would the devil would come away quickly, he has no conscience to put a
man to such pain?


Again!


Flowste -- Kakop^pos -- dragone -- Leloomenos -- hodge -- podge.


Well said Captain.


So long a coming? oh would I had ner^ begun't now, for I fear me these
roaring tempests, will destroy all the fruits of the earth, and tread upon my
come -- oh, ith Country.


Gog de gog, hobgoblin, huncks, houseslow, hockley te coome park.


O brother, brother, what a tempests ith, Garden, sure there's some conjuration
abroad.


Tis at home sister!


By and by, I'll step in? Captain?


Nunck -- Nunck -- Rip -- Gascoynes, Ipis, Drip -- Dropite.


He drippes and drops poor man? alas, alas.


Now I come?


O Sulphur Scoteface --


Arch-coniurer, what would thou with me?


O the devil sister, ith dining Chamber, sing Sister,
I warrant you that will keep him out, quickly, quickly, quickly. goes in.

So, so, so, I'll release thee, enough Captain, enough, allow us some time to
laugh a little, they're shuddering and shaking by this time, as if an
Earth-quake were in their kidneyes.


Sirrah George, how wast, how wast, did I do it well enough.


woult believe me Captain, better then any Conjurer, for here was no harm in
this, and yet their horrible expectation satisffied well, you were much
beholding to thunder lightning at this time it gra^st you well I can tell you?


I must needs say so George? sirrah if we could ha conuoide hither cleanly a
cracker or a fire-wheele t'ad been admitable.


Blutt, blutt theirs nothing remains to put thee to pain now Captain.


Pain? I protest George my heals are sorer, then a Whitson Morris-dancer.


All's past now, -- oncly to reveal that the chains ith
Garden where thou know it has lain these two days.

But I fear that fox Nicholas has reueald it already?

Fear not Captain, you must put it to'th venture now
Nay tis time, call upon em, take pity on em, for I believe
some off 'em are in a pitiful case by this time.

Sir Godfrey? Nicholas, Kinsman-Sfoot they are fast at it still George, Sir
Godfrey?


Oh, is that the diuils voice? how comes he to know my name.


Fear not Sir Godfrey all's quieted.


What is he laid?


Laid; and has newly dropped, Your chain ith Garden.


Ith Garden! in our Garden?


Your Garden?


O sweet Conjurer? where abouts there?


Looke-well about a bank of Rosemary.


Sister the Rosemary bank, come, come, there's my chain he says.


Oh happiness, run, run.


Captain Conjurer?


Who? Master Edmond.


I Master Edmond may I come in safely, without danger think you.


I uh long ago, tis all, as twas at first.
Fear nothing, pray come near -- how now? man.

Oh this Rooms mightily hot in faith, slid my shirt sticks to my Belly already,
what a steam the Rogue has left be hind him' foh this room must be ayrd
Gentlemen it sinells horribly of Brimstoone -- lets open the windows.


Faith ma^ster Edmond tis but your conceit,


I would you could make me believe that in faith why do you think I cannot smell
his savour, from another: yet I take it kindly from you, because you would not
put me in a fear in faith, a my troth I shall love you for this the logest day
of my life.


Puh, tis nothing sir, love me when you see more.


Mass now I remember I'll look whether he has singed the hangings or no.


Captain, to entertain a little sport till they come; make him bele^ue, you'll
charm him invisible, hes apt to admire any thing you see let me alone to give
force too'te.


go, retire, to yonder end then.


I protest you are a rare fellow, are you not.


O master Edmond, you know but the least part of me yet, why now at this
instant I could but flourish my wand thrice ore your head, and charm you
inusib'e.


What you could not? make me walk invisible man; I should laugh at that
in faith, troth i'll requite your kindness and you'll do it good Captain conjurer.


Nay I should hardly deny you such a small ^indnesse Master Edmond Plus, why
look you sir tis no more but this and thus and again and now yar invisible!


Am I faith, who would think it.


You see the fortune-teller yonder at farther end ath chamber go toward him, do
what you will with him he shall ne'er find you.


Say you so, i'll try that in faith, --


How now? Captain, whose that iustled me?


Iustled you? I saw no body.


Ha, ha, ha, -- say twas a spirit,


Shall I^ -- may be some spirit that haunts the circle.


O my nose, again, pray coniur^ then Captain.


Troth this is exlent, I may do any knavery now and never be seen, and now I
remember me, Sir Godfrey my Uncle abused me the other day, told tales of me to my
Mother -- Troth now Ime invisible, i'll hit him a sound wherrit ath' ear, when
he comes out ath' garden, -- I may be reuengd on him now finely.


I have my Chain again, my Chaine's found again,
O sweet Captain, O admirable Conjurer. Edm. Strikes him.
Oh what mean you by that Nephew?

Nephew? I hope you do not know me Uncle?


Why did you strike your Uncle sir?


Why Captain am I not invisible?


A goodiest Georg:, -- not now you are not Sir,
Why ^id you not see me when I did un channe you?

Not I by my troth Captain:
Then pray you pardon me Uncle,
I thought I'd been invisible when I struck you.

So. you would do it? go, -- you're a foolish Boy,
And were I not ore-come with greater joy,
I'd make you taste correction.

Correction, push -- no, neither you nor my Mother shall think to whip me as
you have done.


Captain my joy is such, I know not how to thank you, let me embrace you, hug
you, O my sweet Chain, Gladness 'een makes me giddy, rare man: twas as just
in the Rosemarie bauck, as if one should ha laid it there -- oh cunning,
cunning!


Well, seeing my fortune tells me I must marry; let me marry a man of wit a
man of parts, here's a worthy Captain, and 'tis a fine Title truly (...) to
be a Captains Wife, a Captains Wife, it goes very finely. beside all the
world knows that a worthy Captain, is a fit Companion to any Lord, then why
not a sweet bed-fellow for any Lady. -- I'll have it so --


O Mistress, Gentlemen, there's the bravest sight coming along this way.


What brave sight?


Oh, one going to burying, another going to hanging.


A rueful sight.


Sfoot Captain, I'll pawn my life the Corporals coffind, and old Skirmish the
soldier going to execution, 'tis now full about the time of his walking; hold
out a little longer sleepy potion, and we shall have exlent admiration; for
I'll take upon me the cure of him.


Oh here they come, here they come!


Now must I close secretly with the Soldier, prevent his impatience, or else
all's discovered?


O lamentable seeing, these were those Brothers, that sought and bled before
our door.


What they were not Sister?


George, look toote, I'll peach at Tyburne else.


Mum, -- Gentles all, vouchsafe me audience, and you especially Master
S^iffe:

Yon man is bound to (...),
Because he wounded this that now lies coffind?

True, true, he shall have the law, -- and I know the law?


But under ^auour Master Sheriff, if this man had been cured and safe again,
he should have been releasde then?


Why make you question of that Sir?


Then I release him freely, and will take upon me the death that he should
dye, if within a little season, I do not cure him to his proper health again.


How Sir? recover a dead man?
That were most strange of all.

Sweet Sir, I love you dearly, and could wish my best part yours, -- oh do
not undertake such an impossible venture.


Love you me; then for your sweet sake I'll do it:
Let me entreat the corps to be set down.

Bearers set down the Coffln, -- this were wonderful, and worthy Stoes
Chronicle.


I pray bestow the freedom of the air, upon our wholesome Art, -- mass, his
cheeks begin to receive natural warmth: nay good Corporal wake betime, or I
shall have a longer sleep then you, -- Sfoote if he should prove dead indeed
now, he were fully reuengd upon me for making a property on him, yet I had
rather run upon the Ropes, then have the Rope like a Tetter run upon me, oh --
he stirs -- he stirs again -- look Gentlemen, he recovers, he starts, he
rises.


Oh, oh, defend us -- out alas.


Nay pray be still; you'll make him more giddy else, -- he knows no body yet.


Zounes: who am I? covered with Snow? I marvel?


Nay I knew he would swear the first thing he did, as soon as ever he came
to his life again.


Sfoote Hostess -- some hot Porridge, -- oh, oh, lay on a dozen of Faggots in
the Moon parler, there.


Lady, you must needs take a little pity of him in faith, and send him in to
your Kitchen fire.


Oh, with all my heart sir, Nicholas and Frailty, he'pe to bear him in.


Bear him in, qua tha, pray call out the Maids, I shall ne'er have the heart
to do it indeed la.


Not I neither, I cannot abide to handle a Ghost of all me.


Shloud, let me see, where was I drunk last night, heh --


Oh, shall I bid you once again take him away.


Why, we're as fearful as you I warrant you -- oh --


Away villains, bid the Maids make him a Caudle p^esently to settle his
brain, -- or a Posset of Sack, quickly, quickly.


Sir, what so ere you are, I do more then admire you.


O I, if you knew all Master Sheriff, as you shall do, you would say then,
that here were two of the rarest men within the walls of Christendom


Two of'em, O wonderful: Officers I discharge you, set him free all's in tune.


I and a banquet ready by this time Master Sheriff, to which I most
cheerfully enuite you, and your late prisoner there? see you this goodly
chain sir, mun, no more words, twas lost, a dis found again; come my
inestimable bullies, we'll talk of your noble Acts in sparkling Charnico, and
in stead of a Jester, we'll ha the ghost ith white sheet sit at upper end a'th
Table.


Exlent merry man in faith.


Well, seeing I am enioynd to love and marry.
My foolish vow thus I cashier to Air
Which first begot it, -- now love play thy part;
The scholar reads his lecture in my heart.

This is the marriage morning for my mother my sister.


O me Master Edmund we shall ha rare doings.


Nay go Frailty run to the Sexton, you know my mother will be married at Saint
Antlings, hie thee, tis past five, bid them open the Church door, my sister is
almost ready.


What al ready Master Edmond.


Nay go hie thee first run to the Sexton, and run to the Clarke and then run
to Master Pigman the Parson, and then run to the Millanor, and the^ run home
again.


Here's run, run, run --


But hark Frailty:


What more yet?


Has the maids remembered to strew the way to the Church.


Fagh an hour ago I help 'em my self.


Away, away, away, away then.


Away, away, away then


I shall have a simple Father inlawe, a brave Captain able to beat all our
street: Captain Idle, now my Lady Mother will be ^itted for a delicate name,
my Lady Idle, my Lalie Idle, the finest name that can be for a woman, and then
the Scholar Master Pie-boord for my sister Francis, that will be Mistress
Francis Pie-bo^rd, Mistress Francis Pie-boord, theill keep a good table I
warrant you, Now all the knights noses are put out of joint, they may go to a
bone setters now.


Master Edmund, kind, honest, dainty Master Edmond.


Faugh, sweet Captain Father inlaw a rare perfume isayth.


What are the Brides stirring? may we steall upon 'em think thou Master
Edmond.


Faw, there even upon red dines I can assure you? for they were at there Totch
even now, by the same token I tumbled down the stairs.


Alas poor Master Edmond.


O the musicians I prce the Master Edmond call' em in and licquour 'em a
little.


That I will sweet Captain father in law and make each of them as drunk as a
common fiddeler.


Whewh Mistress Mol, Mistress Mol.


Who's there?


Who Sir Iohn Penidub O you're an early cock ifayth, who would have thought you
to be so rare a stirrer.


Pree the Mol let me come up.


No by my faith Sir Iohn, I'll keep you down, for you Knights are very
dangerous if once you get above.


I'll not stay in faith.


In faith you shall stay, for Sir Iohn you must note the nature of the Climates
your Northern wench in her own Country may well hold out till she be
fifteen, but if she touch the South once, and up to London, here the Chimes go
presently after twelve.


O the art a mad wench Moll, but I pree thee make hast, for the Priest is gone
before.


Do you follow him, I'll not be long after.


O monstrous vn-heard of forge^ie.


Knight, I never heard of such villainy in our own country, in my life.


Why 'tis impossible, dare you maintain your words?


Dare we? even to their wezen pipe;, we know all their plots, they cannot
squander with us, they have knavishly abused us, made only properties on's to
advance their selves upon our shoulders, but they shall rue their abuses, this
morning they are to be married.


Tis too true, yet if the Widow be not too much besotted on slights and
forgeries, the reue'ation of their villainies will make 'em loathsome, and to
that end, be it in private to you, I sent late last night to an honourable
personage, to whom I am much indebted in kindness, as he is to me, and
therefore presume upon the payment of his tongue, and that he will lay out
good words for me, and to speak truth, for such needful occasions, I only
preserve him in bond, and some-times he may do me more good here in the
City by a free word of his mouth, then if he had paid one half in hand,
and took Doomsday for to other.


In troth Sir, without soothing be it spoken, you have published much judgment
in these few words.


For you know, what such a man utters will be thought effectual and to weighty
purpose, and therefore into his mouth weel put the approved theme of their
forgeries.


And I'll maintain it Knight, if sheele be true.


How now fellow.


May it please you Sir, my Lord is newly lighted from his Coach.


Is my Lord come already; his honnours early,
You see he loves me well up before seven,
Trust me I have found him night capt at a eleven,
There's good hope yet; come Iee relate all to him.

there meets them a Noble man, Sir Oliuer Muckil, ^d Sir Andrew Tip-staffe.


By your leave Lady.


My Lord your honour is most chastely welcome,


Madam tho I came now from court, I come not to flatter you: upon whom can I
justly cast this blot, but upon your own fore-head, that know not ink from
milk such is the blind besotting in the state of an vnheaded woman that's a
widow. For it is the property of all you that are widows (a hand full
excepted) to hate those that honestly and carefully love you, to the
maintenance of credit state and posterity, and strongly to dote on those, that
only love you to undo you who regard you least are best regarded, who hate you
most are best beloved, And if there be but one man amongst ten thousand
millions of men that is accursed disastrous and evilly planeted whom Fortune
beats most, whom God hates most, and all Societies esteem least, that man is
suere to be a husband -- Such is the peevish Moon that rules you bloods. An
Impudent fellow best woes you, a flattering lip best wins you, or in a mirth
who talks roughliest is most sweetest, nor can you distinguish truth, from
forgeries, mists from Simplisity, witness those two deceitful monsters that
you have entertained for bridegrooms.


Deceitful.


All will out.


Sfoote who has blabbed George? that foolish Nicholas.


For what they have besotted you easy blood withal, wear nought but
forgeries, the fortune telling for husbands, the conjuring for the chain, Sir
Godfrey heard the falshod of al: nothing but mere knavery deceit and
eoozenage.


O wonderful, indeed I wondered that my husband with all his crast could nor
keep himself out of purgatory.


And I more wonder that my chain should be gon and my Taylor had none of it.


And I wondered most of all that I, should be tied from marriage having such a
mind too't, come S. Iohn Pennydub, fair whether on our side the moon has
chaingd since yester night.


The Sting of every evil is with-in me.


And that you may perceive I fain not with you, behold their fellow actor in
those forgeries who full of Spleen and envy at their so sudden advancements
reveled all there plot in anger.


Base Soldier to reueall us.


Is't possible we should be blinded so and our eyes open


Widow will you now believe that false, which to soon you believed true.


O to my shame I do.


But under favour my Lord my chain was truly lost and straingly found again.


Resolve him of that Soldier,


In few words Knight then, thou were the arch-gull of all.


God How Sir.


Nay i'll prove it: for the chain was but hid in the rosemary bank all this
while, and thou gotst him out of prison to Conture for it who did it admirably
fustianly, for indeed what need any others when he knew where it was.


O vilainty of villainies, but how came my chain there


Wheres truly la, in deed la, he that will not swear, but lie, he that will
not steal, But rob: pure Nicholas Saint Antlings.


O Villain one of our society,
Deemed always holy, pure, religious,
A Puritan? a thief, when wast ever hard?
Sooner we'll kill a man then Steal thou know,
Out flane I'll rend my lyon from thy back -- with mine own hands.

Dear Master, oh.

Nay Knight dwell in patience,
And now widow being so near the Church, twer great pity, nay vncharity to
send you home again without a husband, draw nearer you of true worship, state
and credit, that should not stand so far of from a widow, and suffer forged
shapes to come between you, Not that in these, I blemish the trne Title of a
Captain, or blot the fair margent of a Scholar; For I honour worthy and
deserning parts in the one, and cherish fruitful Virtues in the other. Come
Lady, and you Virgin bestow your eyes and your purest affections, upon me of
estimation both in Court and Citry, that hath long woed you, and both with
there hearts and wealth sincearly love you.


Good Sister do: Sweet little Frank, these are men of reputation, you shall be
welcome at Court: a great creddit for a Citizen sweet Sister.


Come her silence doos consent too't.


I know not with what face,


Pah pah why with your own face they desire no other.


Pardon me worthy Sirs, I and my daughter have wronged your lo^es.


Tis easily pardoned Lady,
If you vouch safe it now.

With all my soul,


And I with all my heart,


And I Sir Iohn with soul, heart, lights and all.


They are all mine Moll.

Now Lady?
What honest Spirit but will applaud your choice,
And gladly furnish you with hand and voice,
A happy change which makes even heaven rejoice,
Come enter into your loyes, you shall not want,
For fathers now, I doubt it not believe me,
But that you shall have hands enough to give.


