A Mighty Lion ruler of the woods,
Of wondrous strength and great proportion,
With hideous noise scarring the trembling trees,
With yelling clamours shaking all the earth,
Traversed the groves, and chaste the wandering beasts.
Long did he range amid the shady trees,
And drove the silly beasts before his face,
When suddenly from out a thorny bush,
A dreadful Archer with his bow ybent,
Wounded the Lion with a dismal shaft,
So he him stroke that it drew forth the blood,
And filled his furious heart with fretting ire,
But all in vain he threatens teeth and paws,
And sparkleth fire from forth his flaming eyes,
For the sharpe shaft gave him a mortal wound,
So valiant Brute the terror of the world,
Whose only looks did scarre his enemies,
The Archer death brought to his latest end.
Oh what may long abide above this ground,
In state of bliss and healthful happiness.

Most loyal Lords and faithful followers
That have with me unworthy General,
Passed the greedy gulf of Ocean,
Leaving the confines of fair Italie,
Behold ^our Brutus draws nigh his end,
And I must leave you though against my will,
My sinews shrunk, my numbed senses fail,
A chilling cold possesses all my bones,
Black ugly death with visage pale and wanne,
Presents himself before my dazzled eyes,
And with his dart prepared is to strike,
These arms my Lords, these never daunted arms,
That oft have queld the courage of my foes,
And eke dismayed my neighbours arrogance,
Now yield to death, orelaid with crooked age,
Devoid of strength and of their proper force,
Even as the lusty cedar worn with years,
That far abroad her dainty odor throws,
Amongst all the daughters of proud Lebanon,
This heart my Lords, this near appalled heart,
That was a terror to the bordring lands,
A doleful scourge unto my neighbor Kings,
Now by the weapons of unpartial death,
Is clove asunder and bereft of life,
As when the sacred oak with thunderbolts,
Sent from the fiery circuit of the heavens,
Sliding along the aires celestial valts,
Is rent and cloven to the very roots.
In vain therefore I strangle with this foe,
Then welcome death, since God will have it so.

Alas my Lord, we sorrow at your case,
And grieve to see your person vexed thus,
But what so ere the fates determined have,
It lies not in us to disanull,
And he that would annihillate his mind,
Soaring with Icarus too near the Sun,
May catch a fall with young Bellerophon,
For when the fatal sisters have decreed
To seperate us from this earthly mould,
No mortalll force can countermand their minds:
Then worthy Lord since there's no way but one,
Cease your laments, and leave your grievous moan.

Your highness knows how many victories
How many trophies I erected have,
Tryumphantly in every place we came
The Grecian Monarch warlike Pandrassus,
And all the crew of the Molossians,
^offarius the arm strong King of Gaules,
And all the borders of great Aquitane,
Have felt the force of our victorious arms,
And to their cost beheld our chivalry,
Where ere Ancora handmaid of the Sun,
Where ere the Sun-bright gardiant of the day,
Where ere the joyful day with cheerful light,
Where ere the light illuminates the word,
The Troyans glory flies with golden wings,
Wings that do soar beyond fell envious flight,
The fame of Brutus and his followers
Pierces the skies, and with the skies the throne
Of mighty Jove Commander of the world,
Then worthy Brutus, leave these sad laments,
Comfort your self with this your great renown,
And fear not death though he seem terrible.

Nay Corinus you mistake my mind
In construing wrong the cause of my complaints,
I feared to yield my self to fatal death,
Cod knows it was the least of all my thought,
A greater care torments my very bones,
And makes me tremble at the thought of it,
And in you Lordings doth the substance lie.

Most noble Lord, if ought your loyal peers
Accomplish m^y, to ^ase your lingering grief,
I in the name of all protest to you,
That we will boldly enterprise the same,
Were it to enter to black Tartarus,
Where triple Cerberus with his venomous throat,
Scarreth the ghoasts with high resounding noise,
Wele either rent the bowels of the earth,
Searching the entrails of the brutish earth,
Or with his Ixions overdaring soon,
Be bound in chains of ever during steel.

The harken to your sovereigns latest words,
In which I will unto you all unfold,
Our royal mind and resolute intent,
When golden Hebe daughter to great Jove,
Covered my manly cheeks with youthful down,
Th'vnhappie slaughter of my luckless sire,
Drove me and old Assarachus mine ^ame,
As exiles from the bounds of Italy,
So that perforce we were constrained to fly
To Graecians Monarch noble Pandrassus,
There I alone did undertake your cause,
There I restord your antique liberty,
Though Grecia fround, and all Mollossia stormd,
Though brave Antigonus with martial band,
In pitched field encountered me and mine,
Though Pandrassus and his contributories,
With all the ^out of their confederates,
Sought to deface our glorious memory,
And wipe the name of Troians from the earth,
Him did I captivate with this mine arm,
And by compulsion for^st him to agree
To certain artickles which there we did propound,
From Graecia through the boisterous Hellespont,
We came unto the fields of Lestrigon,
Whereas our brother Corineius was,
Which when we passed the Cicillian gulf,
And so transfretting the Illician sea,
Arrived on the coasts of Aquitane,
Where with an army of his barbarous Gaules
Goffarius and his brother Gathelus
Encountering with our host, sustained the foil,
And for your sakes my Turnus there I lost,
Turnus that slew six hundredth men at arms
All in an hour, with his sharpe battle-axe,
From thence upon the strons of Albion
To Corus haven happily we came,
And queld the giants, comne of Albions race,
With Gogmagog son to Samotheus,
The cursed Captain of that damned crew,
And in that I'll at length I placed you.
Now let me see if my laborious toils,
If all my care, if all my grievous wounds,
If all my diligence were well employed.

When first I followed thee thine (brave king)
I hazarded my life and dearest blood,
To purchase favour at your princely hands,
And for the same in dangerous attempts
In sundry conflicts and in diverse broils,
I showed the courage of my manly mind,
For this I combated with Gathelus,
The brother to Goffarius of Gaul,
For this I fought with furious Gogmagog,
A savage captain of a savage crew,
And for these deeds brave Cornwale I received,
A grateful gift given by a gracious King,
And for this gift, this life and dearest blood,
Will Corineus spend for Brutus good.

And what my friend brave prince hath would to you,
The same will Debon do unto his end.

Then loyal peers ^ince you are all agreed,
And resolute to follow Brutus hoasts,
Favour my sons, favour these Orphans Lords,
And shield them from the dangers of their foes,
Locrine the column of my family,
And only pillar of my weakened age.
Locrine draw near, d^aw near unto thy sire,
And take thy latest blessings at his hands,
And ^or thou art the eldest of my sons,
Be thou a captain to thy brethren,
And imitate thy aged fathers steps,
Which will conduct thee to true honours gate,
For if thou follow sacred ve^tues lore,
Thou shalt be crowned with a laurel branch,
And wear a wreath of sempiternall fame,
Sorted amongst the glorious happy ones.

If Locrine do not follow your advise,
And bear himself in all things like a prince
That seeks to amplify the great renown
Left unto him for an inheritage
By those that were his ancestors,
Let me be flung into the Ocean,
And swallowed in the bowels of the earth.
Or let the ruddy lightning of great Jove,
Descend upon this my deuolted head.
But for I see you all to be in doubt,
who shall be matched with our royal son,
Locrine receive this present at my hand,
A gift more rich then are the wealthy mines
Found in the bowels of America,
Thou shalt be spoused to fair Guendoline,
Love her, and take her, for she is thine own,
If so thy uncle and herself do please.

And herein how your highness honours me
It cannot be in my speech expressed,
For careful parents glory not so much
At their honour and promotion,
As for to see the issue of their blood
Seated in honour and prosperity.

And far be it from my maidens thoughts
To contradict her aged fathers will,
Therefore since he to whom I must obey
Hath given me now unto your royal self,
I will not stand aloof from off the lure,
Like crafty dames that most of all deny
That, which they most desire to possess.
Then now my soon thy part is on the stage,
For thou must bear the person of a King.
Locrine stand up, and wear the regal Crown,
And think upon the state of Majesty,
That thou with honour well may wear the crown,
And if thou tendrest these my latest words,
As thou requirst my soul to be at rest,
As thou desire thine own security,
Cherish and love thy new betrothed wife.

No longer let me well enjoy the crown,
Then I do peerless Guendoline.

C^m^er.

My Lord.

The glory of mine age.
And darling of thy mother Iu^oger,
Take thou the South for thy dominion,
From thee there shall proseed a royal race,
That shall maintain ^he honour of this land,
That sway the regal sceptre with their hands.
And Albanact thy fathers only joy,
Yoongst in years, but not the yoongst in mind,
A perfect pattern of all chivalry,
Take thou the North for thy dominion,
A country full of hills and ragged rocks,
Replenished with fearce untamed beasts,
As correspondent to thy martial thoughts,
Live long my sons with endless happiness,
And bear firm concordance amongst your selves,
Obey the counsels of these fathers grave,
That you may better bear out violence,
But suddenly through weakness of my age,
And the defect of youthful puissance,
My malady increases more and more,
And cruel death hastens his quickened pace,
To dispossess me of my earthly shape,
Mine eyes wax dim, overcast with clouds of age,
The pangs of death compass my crazed bones,
Thus to you all my blessings I bequeath,
And with my blessings, this my fleeting soul.
My glass is run, and all my miseries
Do end with life: death closes up mine eyes,
My soul is haste flies to the Elisian fields.

Accursed stars, damned and accursed stars,
To abreuiate my noble fathers life,
Hard-harted gods, and too envious fates,
Thus to cut off my fathers fatal thread,
Brutus that was a glory to us all,
Brutus that was a terror to his foes,
Alas too soon by Demago^gons knife,
The martial Brutus is bere^t of life.
No sad complaints may move just Lacus.

No dreadful threats can fear judge Rhodomanth,
Were thou as strong as mighty Hercules,
That tamed the huge monsters of the world,
Plaidst thou as sweet, on the sweet sounding lute,
As did the spouse of fair Euridies,
That did enchant the waters with his noise,
And made stones, birds, and beasts, to lead a dance,
Constrained the hilly trees to follow him,
Thou could not move the judge of Crebus,
Nor move compassion in grimm Plutos heart,
For fatal Mors expects all the world,
And every man must tread the way of death,
Brave Tantalus the valiant Pelops sire,
Guest to the gods, suffered untimely death,
And old Fleithonus husband to the morn,
And eke grim Minos whom just Iupiter
Deignd to admit^ unto his sacrifice,
The thundering trumpets of bloodthirsty Mars.
The fearful rage of fell Tisiphone.
The boisterous waives of humid Ocean,
Are instruments and tools of dismal death.
Then noble cousin cease to morn his chance,
Whose age years were signs that he should die.
It rests now that we inter his bones,
That was a terror to his enemies.
Take up the coarse, and princes hold him dead,
Who while he lived, upheld the Troyan state.
Sound drums and trumpets, march to Troinouant,
There to provide our chieftaines funeral.

Either the four elements, the seven planets and all the particular stars of
the pole Antastick, are aduersatiue against me, or else I was begotten and
borne in the wane of the Moon, when every thing is saith Lactantius in his
fourth book of Constultations doth say, goes a^ward. I masters I, you may
laugh, but I must weep; you may joy, but I must sorrow; shedding salt tears
from the watery fountains of my most dainty fair eyes, along my comely and
smooth cheeks, in as great plenty as the water runs from the buckingtubbes,
or red wine out of the hogs heads: for trust me gentlemen and my very good
friends, and so forth: the little god, nay the desperate god Cuprit, with one
of his vengible birdbolts, hath shot me unto the heel: so not only, but also,
oh fine phrase, I burn, I burn, and I burn a, in love, in love, and in love
a, ah Strumbo what has thou seen, not Dina with the Ass Tom? Yea with these
eyes thou hast seen her, and therefore pull ^hem out: for they will work thy
bale. Ah Strumbo hast thou heard, not the voice of the Nightingale, but a voice
sweeter then hers, yea with these ears hast thou heard them, and therefore cut
them off, for they have caused they sorrow. Nay Strumbo kill thy self, drown
thy self, hang thy self, starve thy self. Oh but then I shall leave my sweet
heart. Oh my heart, Now pate for thy master, I will dite an aliquant
loue-pistle to her, and then she hearing the grand verbositie of my scripture,
will love me presently.

So it is mistress Dorothie, and the sole essence of my soul, that the little
sparkles of affection kindled in me towards your sweet self, hath now
increased to a great flame, and will ere it be long consume my poor heart,
except you with the pleasant water of your secret fountain, quench the furious
heate of the same. Alas I am a gentleman of good fame, and name, majestic,
in parrell comely, in gate portlie. Let not therefore your gentle heart be so
hard as to despise a proper tall young man of a handsome life, and by despising
him, not only, but also to kill him. Thus expecting time and tide, I bid you
farewell Your servant, Signior Strumbo.

Oh wit, Oh pate, O memory, O hand, O ink, O paper. Well now I will send it
away. Trompart, Trompart, what a villain is this? Why sir, come when your
master calls you^ Trompart.


Anon sir.


Thou know my pretty boy what a good maister^ I have been to thee ever
since I took thee into my service.


I sir.


And how I have cherished thee always, as if you had been the fruit of my
loins, flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone?


I sir.


Then show thy self herein a trusty servant, and carry this letter to
mistress Dorothie, and tell her.


Nay masters you shall see a marriage by and by. But here she comes. Now must
I frame my amorous passions.


Signior Strumbo, well met, I received your letters by your man here, who told
me a pitiful story of your anguish, and so understanding your passions were
so great, I came hither speedily.


Oh my sweet and pigsney, the fecunditie of my ingenie is not so great, that
may declare unto you the sorrowful sobs and broken sleeps, that I suffered for
your sake; and therefore I desire you to receive me into your familiarity.

For your love doth lie,
As near and as nigh:
Unto my heart within,
As mine eye to my nose,
My leg unto my hose,
And my flesh unto my skin.

Truly M. Strumbo, you speak too learnedly for me to understand the drift of
your mind, and therefore tell your tale in plain terms, and leave off your
dark ridles.


Alas mistress Dorothie this is my luck, that when I most would, I cannot
be understood: so that my great learning is an inconvenience unto me. But to
speak in plain terms, I love you mistress Dorothie, if you like to accept
me into your familiarity.


If this be all I am content.


Say thou so sweet wench, let me lick thy toes. Farewell mistress. If any of
you be in love, provide ye a cap^ase full of new coined words, and then shall
you soon have the succado de labres, and something else.


Uncle and princes of brave Britany,
Since that our noble father is entombed,
As best beseemd so brave a prince as he,
If so you please, this day my love and I,
Within the temple of Concordia,
Will solemnize our royal marriage.

Right noble Lord, your subjects every one,
Must needs obey your highness at command,
Especially in such a cause as this,
That much concerns your highness great content.

Then frolic lordings to fair Concords walls,
Where we will pass the day in knightly sports,
The night in dancing and in figured masks,
And offer to God Risus all our sports.

Regit omnia numen.
When Perseus married fair Andromeda,
The only daughter of king Cepheus,
He thought he had established well his Crown,
And that his kingdom should for ay endure.
But lo proud Phineus with a band of men,
Contrived of sun-burnt Aethiopians:
By force of arms the bride he took from him,
And turned their joy into a flood of tears.
So fares it with young Locrine and his love,
He thinks this marriage tends to his weal,
But this foul day, this foul accursed day,
Is the beginning of his miseries.
Behold where Humber and his Scithians
Approaches nigh with all his warlike train,
I need not I, the sequel shall declare,
What tragic chances fall out in this war.

At length the sna^le doth clime the highest tops,
Asce^ding up the stately castle walls,
At length the water with continual drops,
Doth penetrate the hardest marble stone,
At length we are arrived in Albion,
Nor could the barbarous Dacian sovereign,
Nor yet the ruler of brave Belgia
Stay us from cutting over to this I'll,
Whereas I hear a troop of Phrigians
Under the conduct of Postumi^s son,
Have pitched up lordly pauillions,
And hope to prosper in this lovely I'll:
But I will frustrate all their foolish hope,
And teach them that the Scithian Emperor
Leads fortune tied in a chain of gold,
Constraining her to yield unto his will,
And grace him with their regal diadem:
Which I will have maugre their treble hoasts,
And all the power their petty kings can make.

If she that rules fair Rha^nis golden gate
Grant us the honour of the victory,
As hitherto she always favoured us,
Right noble father, we will rule the land,
Enthronized in seats of Topace stones,
That Locrine and his brethren all may know,
None must be king but Humber and his son.

Courage my son, fortune shall favour us,
And yield to us the coronet of bay,
That decks none but noble conquerours:
But what saith Estrild to these regions?
How likes she the temperature thereof,
Are they not pleasant in her gracious eyes?

The plains my Lord garnished with Floras wealth
And overspread with party coloured flowers,
Do yield sweet contentation to my mind,
The aerie hills enclosd with shady groves,
The groves replenished with sweet chirping birds,
The birds resounding heavenly melody,
Are equal to the groves of Thessaly,
Where Phoebus with the learned Ladies nine,
Delight themselves with music harmony,
And from the moisture of the mountain tops,
The silent springs dance down with murmuring streams,
And water al y^ ground with crystal waives,
The gentle blasts of Eurus modest wind,
Moving the pittering leaves of Siluanes woods,
Do equal it with Tempes paradise,
And thus comforted all to one effect,
Do make me think these are the happy Isles,
Most fortunate, if Humber may them win.

Madam, where resolution leads the way,
And courage follows with emboldened pace,
Fortune can never use her tyranny,
For valiantness is like unto a rock
That stands in the waives of Ocean,
Which though the billows beat on every side,
And Borras fell with his tempestuous storms,
Blows upon it with a hideous clamour,
Yet it remains still unmovable.

Kingly resolved thou glory of thy sire,
But worthy Segar what uncouth novelties
Bring thou unto our royal majesty?

My Lord, the youngest of all Brutus sons,
Stout Alban^ct, with millions of men,
Approaches nigh, and means ere the morn,
To try your force by dint of ^atall sword.

Tut let him come with millions of hostess,
He shall find entertainment good enough,
Yea fit for those that are our enemies:
For weell receive them at the lances points,
And massaker their bodies with our blades:
Yea though they were in number infinite,
More then the mighty Babylonian queen,
Semiramis the ruler of the West,
Brought against the Emperor of the Scithians,
Yet would we not start back one foot from them:
That they might know we are invincible.

Now by great Jove the supreme king of heaven,
And the immortal gods that live therein,
When as the morning shows his cheerful face,
And Lucifer mounted upon his steed,
Brings in the chariot of the golden sun,
I'll meet young Albanact in the open field,
And crack my lance upon his burgane^,
To try the valour of his boyish strength:
There will I show such ruthful spectacles
And cause so great effusion of blood,
That all his boys shall wonder at my strength:
As when the warlike queen of Amazon,
Penthisilea armed with her lance,
Girt with a corslet of bright shining steel,
Coupt up the fainthart Graecians in the camp.

Spoke like a warlike knight my noble son,
Nay like a prince that seeks his fathers joy,
Therefore to morrow ere fair Titan shine,
And bashful Eos messenger of light:
Expells the liquid sleep from out men's eyes,
Thou shalt conduct the right wing of the host,
The left wing shall be under Segars charge,
The reareward shall be under me my self,
And lovely Estrild fair and gracious,
If fortune favour me in mine attempts,
Thou shalt be queen of lovely Albion,
Fortune shall favour me in mine attempts,
And make the Queen of lovely Albion.
Come let us in and muster up our train,
And furnish up our lusty soldiers,
That they may be a bullwarke to our state,
And bring our wished joys to perfect end.

We Cobblers lead a merry life,

Dan, dan, dan, dan:

Void of all ennie and of strife:

Dan diddle dan.

Our ease is great, our labour small:

Dan, dan, dan, dan.

And yet our gains be much withal:

Dan diddle dan.

With this art so fine and fair:

Dan, dan, dan, dan.

No occupation may compare

Dan diddle dan:

For merry pastime and joyful glee:
Dan, dan, dan, dan.

Most happy men we Cobblers be:
Dan diddle dan.

The can stands full of nappie ale,
Dan: dan: dan: dan:

In our shop still withouten fail:
Dan diddle dan.

This is our meat, this is our food:
Dan: dan: dan: dan:

This brings us to a merry mood:
Dan didle dan.

This makes us work for company:
Dan, dan, dan, dan:

To pull the tankards cheerfully:
Dan didle dan.

Drink to thy husband Dorothie,
Dan, dan, dan, dan:

Why then my Strumbo there's to thee:
Dan didle dan:

Drink thou the rest Trumpart amain:
Dan, dan, dan, dan.

When that is gone weell filt again,
Dan didle dan.

The poorest state is farthest from annoy,
How merrily he sits on his stool:
But when he sees that needs he must be pressed,
Heel turn his note and sing another tune,
Ho, by your leave master Cobbler:

You are welcome gentleman, what will you any old shoes or buskins, or will you
have your shoes clouted, I will do them as well as any Cobbler in Cathues
whatsoever?
O master Cobbler you are far deceived in me, for don you see this? I come
not to buy any shoes, but to buy your self; come sir you must be a soldier
in the kings cause.

Why but hear you sir, has your king any commission to take any man against
his will. I promise you I can scant believe it, or did he give you commission?

O sir, ye need not care for that, I need no commission: hold here, I command
you in the name of our king Albanact, to appear to morrow in the towne-house
of Gathnes.

King Nactabell, I cry God mercy, what have we to do with him, or he with us?
but you sir master capo^taile, draw your pastebourd, or else I promise you, I'll
give you a canuasado with a bastinano over your shoulders, and teach you to
come hither with your implements.

I pray thee good fellow be content, I do the kings command.

Put me out of your book then.

I may not.
No will, come sir will your stomach serve you, by gogs blew hood and halidom,
I will have about with you.
How now, what noise, what sudden clamours this?
How now, my captain and the cobbler so hard at it?
Sirs what is your quarrel?

Nothing sir, but that he will not take press money.

Here good fellow take it at my command,
Unless you mean to be stretched.

Truly master gentleman, I lack no money, if you please I will resign it to
one of these poor fellows.

No such matter,
Look you be at the common house to morrow.

O wife I have spun a fair thredde, if I had been quiet, I had not been
pressed, and therefore well may I wayment; But come sirrha shut up, for we must
to the wars.

Brave cauileres, princes of Albany,
Whose trenchant blades with our deceased sire,
Passing the frontiers of brave Graecia,
Were bathed in our enemies lukewarm blood,
Now is the time to manifest your wills,
Your haughty minds and resolutions,
Now opportunity is offred
To try your courage and your earnest zeal,
Which you always protest to Albanact,
For at this time, yea at this present time,
Stout fugitives come from the Scithians bounds
Have pestr^d every place with mutinies:
But trust me Lordings I will never cease
To persecute the rascal runagates,
Till all the rivers stained with their blood,
Shall fully show their fatal overthrow.

So shall your highness merit great renown,
And imitate your aged fathers steppes.

But tell me cousin, came thou through the plains?
And saw thou there the faint heart fugitives
Mustering their weather-beaten soldiers,
What order keep they in their marshalling?

After we past the groves of Caledone,
Where murmuring rivers slide with silent streams
We did behold the straggling Scithians camp,
Replete with men, stored with munition;
There might we see the valiant minded knights
Fetching carriers along the spacious plains,
Humber and Hubba armed in azure blew,
Mounted upon their coursers white as snow,
Went to behold the pleasant flowering fields;
Hector and Troialus, Priamus lovely sons,
Chasing the Graecians over Simoeis,
Were not to be compared to these two knights.

Well hast thou painted out in eloquence
The portraiture of Humber and his son;
As fortunate as was Policrates,
Yet should they not escape our conquering swords,
Or boast of ought but of our clemency.
Wild fire and pitch, wild fire and pitch, c.

What sirs what mean you by these clamours made,
Those outcries raised in our stately court?

Wild fire and pitch, wild fire and pitch.

Villains I say, tell us the cause hereof?

Wild fire and pitch, c.

Tell me you villains, why you make this noise,
Or with my lance I will prick your bowels out.

Where are your houses, wher's your dwelling place?

Place, Ha, ha, ha, laugh, a month and a day at him; place, I cry God mercy,
why do you think that such poor honest me as we be, hold our habitacles in
kings palaces: Ha? ha, ha. But because you seem to be an abominable
chieftain, I will tel you our state.

From the top to the toe,
From the head to the shoe;
From the beginning to the ending,
From the building to the burning.
This honest fellow and I had our mansion cottage in the suburbs of this
city, hard by the temple of Mercury. And by the common soldiers of the
Shitens, the Scithians; what do you call them? with all the suburbs were burnt
to the ground, and the ashes are left there, for the country wives to wash
bucks withal. And that which grieves me most, my loving wife, O cruel
strife; the wicked flames did roast.

And therefore captain crust,
We will continually cry,
Except you seek a remedy
Our houses to redifie
Which now are burnt to dust.

Well we must remedy these outrages,
And throw revenge upon their hateful heads,
And you good fellows for your houses burnt,
We will remunerate you store of gold,
And build your houses by our palace gate.

Gate, O petty treason to my person, no where else but by your backside; gate,
oh how I am vexed in my collar; gate, I cry God mercy, do you hear master
king? If you mean to gratify such poor men as we be, you must build our
houses by the Tavern.

It shall be done sir.

Near the Tavern, I by lady sir it was spoken like a good fellow. Do you
hear sir, when our house is builded, if you do chance to pass or repast that
way, we will bestow a quart of the best wine upon you?

It grieves me lordings that my subjects goods
Should thus be spoiled by the Scithians,
Who as you see with lightfoote forragers
Depopulate the places where they come,
But cursed Humber thou shalt rue the day
That ere thou came unto Cathuesia.

Hubba, go take a coronet of our horse
As many launciers, and light armed knights
As may suffice for such an enterprise,
And place them in the grove of Caledon,
With these, when as the skirmish doth increase
Retire thou from the sheltiers of the wood,
And set upon the weakened Troians backs,
For policy joined with chivalry
Can never be put back from victory.
Thou base borne Hunne, how durst thou be so bold
As once to menace warlike Albanact?
The great commander of these regions,
But thou shalt buy thy rashness with thy death,
And rue too late thy over bold attempts,
For with this sword this instrument of death,
That hath been drenched in my foe-mens blood,
I'll separate thy body from thy head,
And set that coward blood of thine abroach.

Nay with this staff great Strumbos instrument,
I'll crack thy cocks come paltry Scithian.

Nor wreak I of thy threats thou princox boy,
Nor do I fear thy foolish insolency,
And but thou better use thy bragging blade,
Then thou doest rule thy overflowing tongue,
Superbious Britain, thou shalt know too soon
The force of Humber and his Scithians.

O horrible, terrible.

How bravely this young Brittain Albanact
Darts abroad the thunderbolts of war,
Beating down millions with his furious mood;
And in his glory triumphs over all,
Moving the massy squadrants of the ground;
Heap hills on hills, to scale the starry sky,
When Briareus armed with an hundredth hands
Flung forth an hundredth mountains at great Jove,
And when the monstrous giant Monichus
Hurled mount Olimpus at great Mars his targe,
And shot huge caedars at Mineruas shield;
How doth he overlook with haughty front
My fleeting hostess, and lifts his lofty face
Against us all that now do fear his force,
Like as we see the wrathful sea from far
In a great mountain heaped with hideous noise
With thousand billows beat against the ships^
And toss them in the waives like tennis balls.

Ay me, I fear my Hubba is surprisde.

Follow me soldiers, follow Albanact;
Pursue the Scithians flying through the field:
Let none of them escape with victory:
That they may know the Brittains force is more
Then al the power of the trembling Hunnes.

Forward brave soldiers, forward keep the chase,
He that takes captive Humber or his son,
Shall be rewarded with a crown of gold.

Injurious fortune hast thou crossed me thus?
Thus in the morning of my victories,
Thus in the prime of my felicity
To cut me off by such hard overthrow;
Had^t thou no time thy rancor to declare,
But in the spring of all my dignities?
Had thou no place to spit thy venom out
But on the person of young Albanact?
I that ere while did scare mine enemies,
And drove them almost to a shameful flight,
I that ere while full lion-like did fare
Amongst the dangers of the thick thronged pikes,
Must now depart most lamentably slain
By Humbers trecheries and fortunes spights:
Cursed be their charms, damned be her cursed charms
That doth delude the waiward harts of men,
Of men that trust unto her fickle wheel,
Which never leaves turning upside down.
O gods, O heavens, allot me but the place
Where I may find her hateful mansion,
I'll pass the Alps to watery Mer^e,
Where fiery ^hoebus in his chariot
The wheels whereof are dect with Emeralds,
Ca^t such a heate, yea such a scorching heate,
And spoils Flora of her chequered grass,
I'll overrun the mountain Cancusus,
Where fell Chimera in her triple shape
Rolls hot flames from out her monstrous paunch,
Scaring the beasts with issue of her gorge,
I'll pass the frozen Zone where ysie flakes
Stopping the passage of the fleeting ships
Do ^ie, like mountains in the congeald sea,
Where if I find that hateful house of hers,
I'll pull the fickle wheel from out her h^nds,
And tie her self in everlasting bands:
But all in vain I breath these threatenings,
The day is lost, the Hunnes are conquerors,
D^oon is slain, my men are done to death,
The currents swift, swim violently with blood^
And last, O that this last night so long last,
My self with wounds past all recovery,
Must leave my crown for Humber to possess.

Lord have mercy upon us; masters I think this is a holy day, every man lies
sleeping in the fields, but God knows full sore against their wills.

Fly noble Albanact and save thy self,
The Scithians follow with great celerity,
And there's no way but fight, or speedy death,
Fly noble Albanact and save thy self.

Nay let them fly that fear to die the death
That tremble at the name of fatal mors,
Neu^r shall proud Humber boast or brag himself
That he hath put young Albanact to flight,
And least he should triumph at my decay,
This sword shall reeve his master of his life,
That oft hath saved his masters doubtful life:
But oh my brethren if you care for me,
Revenge my d^ath upon his traitorous head.
Et vos queis domus ect nigrantis regia ditis,
Qui regitis rigido stigios moder amin lucos:
Nox caeci r^gina poli furialis Erinnis
D^ique de aeque omnes Albanum ^olliteregem
Tollit^ flumi^ v^dis rigidaque palude
Nunc me fata voca^t, hoc condam pectore ferrum.
O what hath he don, his nose bleeds? but oh I smell a fox,
Look where my master lies, master, master.

Let me alone I tell thee, for I am dead.

Yet one, good, good, master.

I will not speak, for I am dead I tel thee.

And is my master dead?
O sticks and stones, brickbats and bones,
and is my master dead?
O you cock^tri^es and you bablatrices,
that in the woods dwell:
You briers and brambles, you cooks shops and shambles,
come howl and yell.
With howling screeking, with wailing and weeping.
come you to lament.
O Colliers of Croyden, and ru^ticks of Royden,
and fishers of Ke^t.
For Stru^bo the cobbler, the fine merry cobbler
of Cathnes towne^
At this same stoure, at this very hour
lies dead on the ground.
O master, thieves, theeu^s, thieves.

Where be they? cox me ^unny, bobekin let me be rising, be gone, we shall be
robde by and by.

Thus from the dreadful shocks of furious Mars
Thundering alarms, and Rhamnusias drum
We are retired with joyful victory,
The slaughtered Troians squeltring in ^heir blood,
Infect the air with their carcasses,
And are a pray for every ravenous bird.

So perish they that are our enemies.
So perish they that love not Humbers weal.
And mighty Jove commander of th^ world,
Protect my love from all false trecheries.

Thanks lovely Estrild, solace to my soul.
But valiant Hubba for thy chivalry
Declared against the men of Albany,
Lo here a flowering garland wreathed of bay,
As a reward for thy forward mi^de.

This unexpected honour noble sir^,
Will p^ick my courage unto braver deeds,
And cause me to attempt such hard exploits,
That all the world shall sound of Hubbaes name.

And now brave soldiers for this good success,
Carouse whole cups of Amazonian wine,
Sweeter then Nectar or Ambrosia,
And cast away the clods of cursed care,
With goblets crowned with Semeleius gifts,
Now let us march to Abis silver streams
That clearly glide along the Champane fields,
And moist the gra^ie meads with humid drops.
Sound drums trumpets, sound up cheerfully,
Since we return with joy and victory.

Scelera i^ auth^rem cadunt.
High on a bank by Nilus boisterous streams,
Fearfully sat the Egyptian Crocodile,
Dreadfully grinding in her sharpe long teethe,
The broken bowels of a silly fish,
His back was armed against the din^ of spear,
With shields of brass that shined like burnished gold
And as he stretched forth his cruel paws,
A subtle Adder creeping closely near
Thrusting his forked sting into his claws,
Privily shed his poison through his bones
Which made him swell that there his bowels burst,
That did so much in his own greatness trust.
So Humber having conquered Alba^act,
Doth yield his glory unto L^crines sword.
Mark what ensues and you may easily see,
That all our life is but a Tragedy.

And is this true, is Albanactus slain?
Hath cursed Humber with his straggling host
With that his army made of mongrel cures,
Brought our redoubted brother to his end.
O that I had the Thracian Orpheus harp
For to awake out of the infernal shade
Those ugly devils of black Ereb^s,
That might torment the damned traitors soul:
O that I had Amphions instrument
To quicken with his vital notes and tunes
The flinty joints of every stony rock,
By which the Scithians might be punished,
For by the lightening of almighty Jove
The Hunne shall die, had he ten thousand lives:
And would to God he had ten thousand lives,
That I might with the arme-strong Hercules
Crop off so vile an Hidras hissing heads,
But say me cousin, for I long to hear
How Albanact came by untimely death?

After the traitrous host of Scithians,
Entered the field with martial equipage
Young Albanact impatient of delay
Led forth his army against the straggling mates,
Whose multitude did daunt our soldiers minds,
Yet nothing could dismay the forward prince,
But with a courage most heroical
Like to a lion amongst a flock of lambs
Made havoc of the faint heart fugitives,
Hewing a passage through them with his sword,
Yea we had almost given them the repulse
When suddenly from out the silent wood
Hubba with twenty thousand soldiers
Cowardly came upon our weakened backs,
And murdered all with fatal massacre,
Amongst the which old Deb^n martial knight,
With many wounds was brought unto the death.
And Alban^ct oppressed with multitude
Whilst valiantly he field his enemies
Yielded his life and honour to the dust,
He being dead, the soldiers fled amain,
And I alone escaped them by flight,
To bring you tidings o^ these accidents.

Not aged Priam King of stately Troy,
Grand Emperor of barbarous Asia,
When he beheld his noble minded sons
Slain traitorously by all the Mermidons,
Lamented more then I for Albanact.

Not Hec^ba the queen of Ilium
When she beheld the town of Pergamus,
Her palace burnt, with all devouring flames,
Her fifty sons and daughters fresh of hue,
Murdered by wicked Pirrhus bloody sword,
Shed such sad tears as I for Albanact.

The grief of Niobe fair Athens queen,
For her seven sons magnanimous in fi^ld,
For her seven daughters fairer then the fairest,
Is not to be compared with my laments.

In vain you sorrow for the slaughtered prince,
In vain you sorrow for his overthrow,
He loves not most ^hat doth lament the most,
But he that seeks to avenge the injury.
Think you to quell the enemies warlike train,
With childish sobs and womanish laments?
Unsheathe your swords, unsheathe your conquering sword,
And seek revenge, the comfort for this sore,
In Cornwall where I hold my regiment
Even just ten thousand valiant men at arms
Hath Corineus ready at command:
All these and more, if need shall more require,
Hath Corrineus ready at command.

And in the fields of martial Cambria,
Close by the boisterous Iscans silver streams,
Where lightfoote fairs skip from bank to bank,
Full twenty thousand brave courageous knights
Well exercised in feats of chivalry,
In manly manner most invincible,
Young Camber hath with gold and victual,
All these and more, if need shall more require,
I offer up to avenge my brothers death.

Thanks loving uncle and good brother too,
For this revenge, ^or this sweet word revenge
Must ease and cease thy wrongful injuries,
And by the sword of bloody Mars I swear,
Ne'er shall sweet quiet enter this my front,
Till I be venged on his traitorous head
That slew my noble brother Albanact.
Sound drums and trumpets, muster up the camp,
For we will straight march to Albania.

Thus are we come victorious conquerors
Unto the flowing currents silver streams
Which in memorial of our victory,
Shall be agnominated by our name,
And talked of by our posterity:
For sure I hope before the golden sun
Posts his horses to fair Thetis plains,
To see the waters turned into blood,
And change his bluish hue to rueful red,
By reason of the fatal massacre
Which shall be made upon the virent plains.
See how the traitor doth presage his harm,
See how he glories at his own decay,
See how he triumphs at his proper loss,
O fortune wild, unstable, fickle, frail.

Me thinks I see both armies in the field,
The broken lances clime the crystal skies,
Some headless lie, some breathless on the ground,
Anb every place is straw'd with carcasses,
Behold the grass hath lost his pleasant green,
The sweetest sight that ever might be seen.

I traitorous Humber, thou shalt find it so,
Yea to thy cost thou shalt the same behold,
With anguish, sorrow, and with sad laments,
The grassy plains that now do please thine eyes,
Shall ere the night be coloured all with blood,
The shady groves which now enclose thy camp
And yield sweet savours to thy damned corps,
Shall ere the night figured all with blood,
The profound stream that passes by thy tents,
And with his moisture serves all thy camp,
Shall ere the night converted be to blood,
Yea with the blood of those thy straggling boys,
For now revenge shall ease my lingering grief,
And now revenge shall glut my longing soul.

Let come what will, I mean to bear it ou^,
And either live with glorious victory,
Or die with ^ame renowned for chivalry,
He is not worthy of the honey comb
That shuns the hives because the bees have stings,
That likes me best that is not got with ease,
Which thousand dangers do accompany,
For nothing can dismayour regal mind,
Which aims at nothing but a golden crown,
The only upshot of mine enterprises,
Were they enchanted in grimm Plutos court,
And kept for treasure amongst his hellish crew,
I would either quell the triple Cerberus
And all the army of his ha^efull hags,
Or roll the stone with wretched Sisiphon.

Right martial be ^hy thoughts my noble son,
And all thy words savour of chivalry,
But warlike Segar what strange accidents
Makes you to leave the warding of the camp.

To arms my Lord, to honourable arms,
Take helm and targe in hand the Britains come,
With greater multit^de then erst the Greekes
Brought to the ports of Phrigian Tenidos.

But what saith Segar to these accidents?
What counsel gives he in extremities?

Why this my Lord experience teaches us,
That resolution is a sole help at need.
And this my Lord our honour teaches us,
That we be bold in every enterprise,
Then since there is no way but fight or die,
Be resolute my Lord for victory.

And resolute Segar I mean to be,
Perhaps some bli^full star will favour us,
And com^ort bring to our perplexed state:
Come let us in and fortify our camp,
So to withstand their strong invasion.

Nay neighbour Oliuer, if you be so what, come prepare your self, you shall
find two as stout fellows of us, as any in all the North.


No by my dorth neighbor Strumbo, Ich see dat you are a man of small
zideration, dat will zeek to injure your old vreendes, one of your vamiliar
guests, and therefore seeing your pinion is to deal withouten reazon, iche and
my zonne VVilliam will take dat course, dat shall be fardest vrom reason, how
say you, will you have my daughter or no?


A very hard question neighbour, but I will solve it as I may; what reason
have you to demand it of me?


Marry sir, what reason had you when my sister was in the barn to rumble her
upon the haie, and to fish her belly.


Mas thou say true, well, but would you have me marry her therefore? No I
scorn her, and you, and you. I, I scorn you all.


You will not have her then?


No as I am a true gentleman.


Then will we school you, ere you and we part hence.


I you come in pudding time, or else I had dressed them.


You master sausebox, lobcock, cockscomb, you slopsauce, lickfingers, will you
not hear?


Who speak you too, me?


I sir to you, Iohn lackhonestie, little wit, is it you that will have none of
me?


No by my troth, mistressenicebice, how fine you ca nickname me, I think you
were brought up in the university of bridewell, you have your rhetoric so
ready at your toongs end, as if you were never well warned when your were
young.


Why then goodman cods-head, if you will have none of me, farewell.


If you be so plain mistress drigle dragle, fare you well.


Nay master Strumbo, ere you go from hence we must have more words, you will
have none of me?


Oh my head, my head, leave, leave, leave, I will, I will, I will.


Upon that condition I let thee alone.


How now master Strumbo, hath my daughter taught you a new lesson?


I but hear you goodman Oliuer? it will not be for my ease to have my head
broken every day, therefore remedy this and we shall agree.


Well zonne well, for you are my zonne now, all shall be remedied, daughter be
friends with him.


You are a sweet nut; the devil crack you. Masters I think it be my luck, my
first wife was a loving quiet wench, but this I think would weary the devil.
I would she might be burnt as my other wife was. If not, I must run to the
halter for help. O codpeece thou hast done thy master, this it is to be
meddling with warm plackets.


Now am I guarded with an host of men,
Whose haughty courage is invincible,
Now am I hembde with troupes of soldiers,
Such as might force Bellona to retire,
And make her tremble at their puissance,
Now sit I like the mighty god of war,
When armed with his coat of Adament,
Mounted his chariot drawn with mighty bulls,
He drove the Argiues over Xanthus streams.
Now cursed Humber doth thy end draw nie,
Down goes the glory of his victories,
And all his fame, and all his high renown
Shall in a moment yield to Locrines sword,
Thy bragging banners crossed with argent streams,
The ornaments of thy pauillions
Shall all be captivated with this hand,
And thou thy self at Albanactus tomb
Shalt offred be in satisfaction
Of all the wrongs thou did him when he lived.
But can thou tell me brave Thrasimachus,
How far we are distant from Humbers camp?

My Lord, within your foul accursed grove
That bears the tokens of our overthrow,
This Humber hath entrenched his damned camp.
March on my Lord, because I long to see
The treacherous Seithians squeltring in their gore.

Sweet fortune favour Locrine with a smile,
That I may avenge my noble brothers death,
And in the midst of stately Troinonant,
I'll build a temple to thy deity
Of perfect marble and of Iacinthe stones,
That it shall pass the high Pyramides
Which with their top surmount the firmament.

The armestrong offspring of the doubted knight,
Stout Hercules Alcmenas mighty son,
That tamed the monsters of the threefold world,
And rid the oppressed from the tyrants yokes,
Did never show such valiantness in fight,
As I will now for noble Albanact.

Full four score years hath Corineus lived,
Sometime in war, sometime in quiet peace,
And yet I feel my self to be as strong
As erst I was in summer of mine age,
Able to toss this great unwildy club
Which hath bin painted with my foemens brains,
And with this club i'll break the strong array
Of Humber and his straggling soldiers,
Or loose my life amongst the thickest press,
And die with honour in my latest days,
Yet ere I die they all shall understand
What force lies in stout Corineus hand.

And if Thrasimachus detract the fight,
Either for weakness or for cowardice,
Let him not boast that Brutus was his ^ame,
Or that brave Corineus was his sire.

Then courage soldiers, first for your safety,
Next for your peace, last for your victory.

Art thou that Humber prince of fugitives,
That by thy treason slewst young Albanact?

I am his son that slew young Albanact,
And if thou take not heed proud Phrigian,
I'll send thy soul unto the Stigian lake,
There to complain of Humbers injuries.

You triumph sir before the victory,
For Corineus is not so soon slain.
But cursed Scithians you shall rue the day
That ere you came into Albania.
So perish that they envy Britains wealth,
So let them die with endless infamy,
And he that seeks his sovereigns overthrow,
Would this my club might aggrau^te his woe.
Where may I find some desert wilderness,
Where I may breath out curses as I would,
And scare the earth with my condemning voice,
Where every echoes repercussion
May help me to bewail mine overthrow,
And aide me in my sorrowful laments?
Where may I find some hollow uncouth rock,
Where I may damn, condemn and ban my fill,
The heavens, the hell, the earth, the air, the fire,
And utter curses to the concave sky,
Which may infect the aerie regions,
And light upon the Brittain Locrines head?
You ugly sprites that in Cocitus morn,
And gnash your teeth with dolorous laments,
Yea fearful dogs that in black Lathe howl,
And scare the ghoasts with your wide open throats,
You ugly ghoasts that flying from these dogs,
Do plunge your selves in Puryflegiton,
Come all of you, and with your shrieking notes
Accompaie the Britains conquering host.
Come fierce Erinnis horrible with snakes,
Come ugly Furies, armed with your whips,
You threefold judges of black Tartarus,
And all the army of you hellish fiends,
With new found torments rack proud Locrins bones
O gods, and stars, damned be the gods stars
That did not drown me in fair Thetis plains.
Cursed be the sea that with outrageous waives
With surging billows did not rive my ships
Against the rocks of high Cerannia,
Or swallowed me into her watery gulf,
Would God we had arrived upon the shore
Where Poliphlemus and the Cyclops dwell,
Or where the bloody Anthropomphagie
With greedy jaws devours the wandering wights,
But why comes Albanacts bloody ghost,
To bring a cursive to our miseries?
Is't not enough to suffer shameful flight,
But we must be tormented now with ghoasts,
With apparitions fearful to behold.

Revenge, revenge for blood.

So nought will satisfy your wandering ghost
But dire revenge, nothing but Humbers fall,
Because he conquered you in Vlbany.
Now by my soul Humber would be condemned
To Tan^als hunger or Ixions wheel,
Or to the vulture of Prometheus,
Rather then that this murder were undone.
When as I die i'll drag thy cursed ghost
Through all the rivers of foul Erebus,
Through burning sulphur of the Limbo-lake^
To allay the burning fury of that heate
That rages in mine everlasting soul.

Stout Hercules the mirror of the world,
Son to Al^mena and great Iupiter,
After so many conquests won in field,
After so many monsters queld by force,
Yielded his valiant heart to Omphale,
A fearful woman void of manly strength,
She took the club, and ware the lions skin,
He took the wheel, and maidenly began spin.
So martial Locrine cheerd with victory,
Falls in love with Humbers concubine,
And so forgets peerless Guendoline.
His uncle Corin^us storms at this,
And forces Locrine for his grace to sue,
Lo here the sum, the process doth ensue.
Thus from the fury of Bellonas broils,
With sound of drum and trumpets melody,
The Britain king returns triumphanly,
The Scithians slain with great occision,
Do aequalize the grass in multitude,
And with their b^ood have stained the streaming brookes,
Offering their bodies and their dearest blood
As sacrifice to Albanactus ghost,
Now cursed Humber hast thou paid thy due,
For thy deceits and crafty trecheries,
For all thy guises, and damned stratagems,
With loss of life, and ever during shame.
Where are thy horses trapt with burnished gold,
Thy trampling coursers ruled with foaming bits?
Where are thy soldiers strong and numberless,
Thy valiant captains and thy noble peers?
Even as the country clowns with sharpest sithes
Do mow the withered grass from off the earth,
Or as the ploughman with his piercing share
Rents the bowels of the fertile fields,
And rippeth up the roots with razours keen.
So Locrine with his mighty curtleaxe,
Hath cropped off the heads of all thy Hunnes,
So Locrines peers have daunted all thy peers,
And drove thine host unto confusion,
That thou may suffer penance for thy fault,
And die for murdering valiant Albanact.

And thus, yea thus shall all the rest be served
That seek to enter Albion against our wills.
If the brave nation of the Troglodytes,
If all the coalblack Aethiopians,
If all the forces of the Amazons,
If all the hostess of the Barbarian lands,
Should dare to enter this our little world,
Soon should they rue their overbold attempts,
That after us our progeny may say,
There lie the beasts that sought to usurp our land.

I they are beasts that seek to usurp our land,
And like to brutish beasts they shall be served.
For mighty love the supreme king of heaven,
That guides the concourse of the Metiors,
And rules the motion of the azure sky,
Fights always for the Britains safety.
But stay, me thinks I hear some shrieking noise,
That draws near to our pavilion.

What prince so ere adorned with golden
Doth sway the regal sceptler in his hand:
And thinks no chance can ever throw him down,
Or that his state shall everlasting stand,
Let him behold poor Estrild in this plight,
The perfect platform of a troubled wight.
Once was I guarded with manortiall bands,
Compassed with princes of the noble blood,
Now am I fallen into my foemens hands,
And with my death must pacify their mood.
O life the harbour of calamities,
O death the haven of all miseries,
I could compare my sorrows to thy woe,
Thou wretched queen of wretched Pergamus,
But that thou viewdst thy enemies overthrow.
Nigh to the rock of high Caphareus,
Thou saw their death, and then departed thence,
I must abide the victors insolence.
The gods that pitied thy continual grief,
Transformed thy corps, and with thy corps thy care,
Poor Estrild lives despairing of relief,
For friends in trouble are but few and rare.
What said I few? I few or none at all,
For cruel death made havoc of them all.
Thrice happy they whose fortune was so good,
To end their lives, and with their lives their woes,
Thrice haplesse I, whom fortune so withstood,
That cruelly she gave me to my foes.
Oh soldiers is there any misery,
To be compared to fortunes treachery.

Cam^er, this ^ame should be the Scithia queen.

So may we judge by her lamenting words.

So fair a dame mine eyes did never see,
With floods of woes she seems orewhelmed to be

O Locrine hath she not a cause for to be sad?
If she have cause to weep for Humbers death,
And shed fault tears for her overthrow,
Locrine may well bewail his proper grief,
Locrine may move his own peculiar woe,
He being conquered died a speedy death,
And felt not long his lamentable smart,
I being conqueror, live a lingering life,
And feel the force of Cupids sudden stroke.
I gave him cause to die a speedy death,
He left me cause to wish a speedy death.
Oh that sweet face painted with natures dye,
Those ros^all checks mizt with a snowy white,
That decent neck surpassing ivory,
Those comely breasts which Venus well might spite,
Are like to snares which wily fowlers wrought^
Wherein my yielding heart is prisoner caught.
The golden tresses of her dainty hair
Which shine like rubies glittering with the sun,
Have so entrapt poor Locrines lovesick heart,
That from the same no way it can be won.
How true is that which oft I heard declard,
One dram of joy, must have a pound of care.

Hard is their fall who from a golden crown
Are cast into a sea of wretchedness.

Hard is their thrall who by Cupids frown
Are wrapped in waives of endless carefulness.

Oh kingdom object to all miseries.

Oh love, the extreemst of all extremities.
Let him go into his chair.

My Lord, in ransacking the Scithian tents
I found this Lady, and to manifest
That earnest zeal I bear unto your grace,
I here present her to your majesty.

He lies my Lord, I found the Lady first,
And here present her to your majesty.

Presumptuous villain wilt thou take my prize?

Nay rather thou depriuest me of my right.

Resign thy title (catiue) unto me,
Or with my sword i'll pearce thy cowards loins.

Soft words good sir, tis not inogh to speak
A barking dog doth seldom strangers bite.

Irreverent villains, strive you in our sight?
Take them hence Jailer to the dungeon,
There let them lie and try their quarrel out.
But thou fair princess be no whit dismayed,
But rather joy that Locrine favours thee.

How can he favour me that slew my spouse?

The chance of war (my love) took him fro thee

But Locrine was the causer of his death.

He was an enemy to Locrines state,
And slue my noble brother Albanact.

But he was linked to me in marriage bond,
And would you have me love his slaughterer?

Better to live, then not to live at all.

Better to die renownd for chastity,
Then live with shame and endless infamy.
What would the common sort report of me,
If I forget my love, and cleave to thee?

Kings need not fear the vulgar sentences.

But Ladies must regard their honest name.

Is it a shame to live in marriage bonds?

No, but to be a strumpet to a king.

If thou wilt yield to Locrines burning love,
Thou shalt be queen of fair Albania.

But G^endoline will undermine my state.

Upon mine honour thou shalt have no harm.

Then lo br^e Locrine, Estrild yields to thee,
And by the gods whom thou doest invoke,
By the dead ghost of thy deceased sire,
By thy right hand and by thy burning love,
Take pity on poor Estrilds wretched thrall.

Hath Locrine then forgot his Guendoline,
That thus he courts the Scithians paramore?
What are the words of Brute so soon forgot?
Are my deserts so quickly out of mind?
Have I been faithful to thy ^ire now dead,
Have I protected thee from Humbers hands,
And doest thou quite me with ingratitude?
Is this the guerdon for my grievous wounds,
Is this the honour for my labours past?
Now by my sword, Locrine I swear to thee,
This injury of thine shall be repaid.

Uncle, scorn you your royal sovereign,
As if we stood for ciphers in the court?
Upbraid you me with those your benefits?
Why it was a subjects duty so to do.
What you have done for our deceased sire,
We know, and all know you have your reward.

Avaunt proud princoxe, brau'st thou me withal,
Assure thy self though thou be Emperor
Thou ne'er shalt carry this unpunished.

Pardon my brother noble Corineus,
Pardon this once and it shall be amended.

Cousin remember Brutus latest words,
How he desired you to cherish them,
Let not this fault so much incense your mind.
Which is not yet passed all remedy.

Then Locrine, lo I reconcile my self,
But as thou love thy life, so love thy wife:
But if thou violate those promises,
Blood and revenge shall light upon thy head.
Come let us back to stately Troinouant,
Where all these matters shall be settled.
Millions of devils wait upon thy soul.
Legion of spirits vex thy impious ghost.
Ten thousand torments rack thy cursed bones.
Let every thing that hath the use of breath,
Be instruments and workers of thy death.

What basiliskt was hatched in this place,
Where every thing consumed is to nought?
What fearful Fury haunts these cursed groues^
Where not a root is le^t for Humbers meat?
Hath fell Alecto with inuenomed blasts,
Breathed forth poison in these tender plains?
Hath triple Cerberus with contagious some,
Sowde Aconitum amongst these withered herbs?
Hath dreadful F^mes with her charming rods
Brought barreinnesse on every fruitful tree?
What not a root, no fruit, no beast, no bird,
To nourish Humber in this wilderness?
What would you more you fiends of Erebus,
My very intralls burn for want of drink,
My bowels cry, Humber give us some meat,
But wretched Humber can give you no meat,
These foul accursed groves affoord no meat.
This fruitless soil, this ground brings forth no mea^
The gods, hard hearted gods, yield me no meat.
Then how can Humber give you any meat?
How do you masters, how do you? how have you escaped hanging this long time?
in faith I have escaped many a scouring this year, but I thank God I have past
them all with a good couragio, couragio, my wife I are in great love and
charity now, I thank my manhood my strength, for I will tell you masters, upon
a certain day at night I came home, to say the very truth, with my stomach
full of wine, and ran up into the chamber where my wife soberl^ sate rocking my
little baby, leaning her back against the bed, singing lullaby. Now when she
saw me come with my nose foremost, thinking that I bin drunk, as I was indeed,
snatched up a faggot stick in her hand, and came furiously marching towards me
with a big face, ^s though she would have eaten me at a bit; thundering out
these words unto me. Thou drunken knave where hast thou bin so long? I shall
teach thee how to benight me an other time; and so she began to play knaves
trumps. Now although I trembled fearing she would set her ten commandments in
my face, ran within her, and taking her lustily by the middle, I carried her
valiantly to the bed, and flinging her upon it, flung my self upon her, and
there I delighted her so with the sport I made, that ever after she wold call
me sweet husband, and so banished brawling for ever: and to see the good will of
the wench, she bought with her portion a yard of land, and by that I am now
become one of the richest me in our parish. Well masters whats a clock, it is
now breakfast time, you shall see what meat I have here for my breakfast.


Was ever land so fruitless as this land?
Was ever grove so graceless as this grove?
Was ever soil so barrein as this soil?
Oh no: the land where hungry Fames dwelt,
May no wise aequalize this cursed land,
No even the climate of the torrid zone
Brings forth more fruit then this accursed grove.
Ne'er came sweet Ceres, ne'er came Venus here,
Triptolemus the god of husbandmen,
Ne'er sowd his seed in this foul wilderness.
The hunger-bitten dogs of Acheron,
Chaste from the ninefold Puriflegiton,
Have set their footsteps in this damned ground.
The iron hearted Furies armed with snakes,
Scattered huge Hidras over all the plains,
which have cosum'd the grass, the herbs, the trees
which have drunk up the flowing water springs.

Thou great commander of the starry sky,
That guid^st the life of every mortal wight
From the enclosures of the fleeting clouds,
Rain down some food, or else I faint and die.
Power down some drink, or else I faint and die.
O Iupiter hast thou sent Mercury
In clownish shape to minister some food?
Some meat, some meat, some meat.

O alas sir, ye are deceived, I am not Mercury, I am Strumbo.

Give me some meat vilain, giu^ me some meat,
Or against this rock, I'll dash thy cursed brains,
And rent thy bowels with my bloody hands.
Give me some meat villain, give me some meat.

By the faith of my body good fellow, I had rather give an whole ox then that
thou shuldst serve me in that sort. Dash out my brains? O horrible, terrible.
I think I have a quarry of stones in my pocket.

Lo here the gift of fell ambition,
Of usurpation and of treachery.
Lo here the harms that wait upon all those
That do intrude themselves in others lands,
Which are not under their dominion.

Seven years hath aged Corineus lived
To Locrines grief, and fair Estrild^s woe,
And seven years more he hops yet to live,
Oh supreme Jove, annihilate this thought.
Should he enjoy the aires fruition?
Should he enjoy the benefit of life?
Should he contemplate the radiant son,
That makes my life equal to dreadful death?
Venus convey this monster fro the earth,
That disobeieth thus thy sacred hests.
Cupid conu^y this monster to dark hell,
That disanulls thy mothers fugred laws.
Mars with thy target all beset wiih flames,
With murthering blade bereave him of his life,
That hinders Locrine in his sweetest joys.
And yet for all his diligent aspect,
His wrathful eyes piercing like Linces eyes,
Well have I ouermatcht his subtlety.
Nigh Deucolitum by the pleasant Lee,
where brackish Thamis slides with silver streams,
Making a breach into the grassy downs,
A curious arch of costly marble fraught,
Hath Locrine framed underneath the ground,
The walls whereof, garnish with diamonds,
With ophirs, rubies, glistering emeralds,
And interlast with sun-bright carbuncles,
Lighten the room with artificial day,
And from the Lee with water-flowing pipes
The moisture is derived into this arch
Where I have placed fair Estrild secretly,
Thither eftsoones accompanied with my page,
I covertly visit my harts desire,
Without suspicion of the meanest eye,
For love abounds still with policy:
And thither still means Locrine to repair,
Till Atropos cut off mine uncles life.

O vita miserolonga, faelici breuis,
Ehen malorem fames extremum malum.
Long have I lived in this desert cave,
With eating hawes and miserable roots,
Devouring leaves and beastly excrements.
Caves were my beds, and stones my pillow bea^es,
Fear was my sleep, and horror was my dream,
For still me thought at every boisterous blast
Now Locrine comes, now Humber thou must die:
So that for fear and hunger, Humbers mind
Can never rest, but always trembling stands.
O what Danubius now may quench my thirst?
What Euphrates, what lightfoot Euripus,
May now allay the fury of that heat,
Which raging in my entralls eats me up?
You ghastly devils of the ninefold Sticks,
You damned ghoasts of ioylesse Acheron,
You mournfu souls, vexed in Abissus vaults,
You coleblack devils of Auern^s pond,
Come with your fleshhooks, rent my famished arms,
These arms that have sustained their masters life,
Come with your raisours, ^ippe my bowels up,
With your sharp fireforks crack my starved bones,
Use me as you will, so Humber may not live.
Accur^ed gods that rule the starry poles,
Accursed Jove king of the cursed gods,
Cast down your lightning on poor Humbers head,
That I may leave this deathlike life of mine,
What hear you not, and shall not Humber die?
Nay I will die though all the gods say nay.
And gentle Aby take my troubled corps,
Take it and keep it from all mor^all eyes,
That none may say when I have lost my breath,
The very floods conspired against Humbers death.
Encaedem sequitur, caedes in caede quieso^.
Humber is dead, joy heavens, leap earth, dance trees^
Now may thou reach thy apples Tantalus,
And with them feed thy hunger-bitten limbs.
Now Sisiphus leave ^umbling of thy rock,
And rest thy restless bones upon the same.
Unbind Ixion cruel Rhadamanth,
And lay proud Humber on the whirling wheel.
Back will I post to hell mouth Taenarus^
And pass Cocitu^, to the Elysian fields,
And tell my father Brutus of these news.

Nont^m Tincriis excestnat A^tna cauer^is^
Laesae furtino quam cor m^lieris amore.
Medea seeing Iason leave her love,
And choose the daughter of the Thebane king,
Went to her devilish charms to work revenge,
And raising up the triple Hecate,
With all the rout of the condemned fiends,
Framed a garland by her magic skill,
With which she wrought Iason and Creons ill.
So Guendoline seeing her self misvs'd,
And H^mbers paramour possess her place,
Flies to the dukedom of Cornubia,
And with her brother stout Thrasimachus,
Gathering a power of Cornish soldiers,
Gives battle to her husband and his host,
Nigh to the river of great Mertia,
The chances of this dismal massacre,
That which ensues shortly will unfold.

But tell me cousin, died by brother so?
Now who is left to helpless Albion,
That as a pillar might uphold our state,
That might strike terror to our daring foes?
Now who is le^t to haplesse Brittanie,
That might defend her from the barbarous hands
Of those that still desire her ruinous fall,
And seek to work her downfall and decay?

I uncle death is our common enemy,
And none but death can match our matchless power
Witness the fall of Albioneus crewe,
Witness the fall of Humber and his Hunnes,
And this foul death hath now increased our woe,
By taking Corineus from this life,
And in his room leaving us worlds of care.

But none may more bewail his mournful hearse,
Then I that am the issue of his loins,
Now foul befall that cursed Humbers throat,
That was the causer of his lingering wound.

Tears cannot raise him from the dead again,
But wher's my Lady mistress Guendoline?

In Cornwall Locrine is my sister now,
Providing for my fathers ^unerall.

And let her there provide her mourning weeds
And morn for ever her own widdow-hood.
Ner shall she come within our palace gate,
To countercheck brave Locrine in his love.
Go boy to Deucolitum, down the Lee,
Unto the arch where lovely Estrild lies,
Bring her and Sabren strait unto the court,
She shall be queen in G^endolinas room.
Let others wail for Corineus death,
I mean not so to macerate my mind,
For him that bard me from my hearts desire.

Hath Locrine then forsook his Guendoline?
Is Corineus death so soon ^orgot?
If there be gods in heaven, as sure there be,
If there be fiends in hell, as needs there must,
They will revenge this thy notorious wrong,
And power their plagues upon thy cursed head.

What prat'st thou peasant to thy soueraigne^
Or art thou struck in some ecstasy?
Doest thou not tremble at our royal looks?
Dost thou not quake when mighty Locrine frowns?
Thou beardless boy, were not that Locrine scorns
To vex his mind with such a hartlesse child,
With the sharpe point of this my battale-axe,
I would send thy soul to Puri^legiton.

Though I be young and of a tender age,
Yet will I cope with Locrine when he dares.
My noble father with his conquering sword,
Slew the two giants kings of Aquitaine.
Thrasimachus is not so degenerate
That he should fear and tremble at the looks
Or taunting words of a venerian squire.

Menacest thou thy royal sovereign,
Uncivil, not beseeming such as you.
Injurious traitor (for he is no less
That at defiance stands with his king)
Leave these thy taunts, leave these thy bragging words,
Unless thou mean to leave thy wretched life.

If princes stain their glorious dignity
With ugly spots of monstrous infamy,
They leese their former estimation,
And throw themselves into a hell of hate.

Wilt thou abuse my gentle patience,
As though thou did our high displeasure scorn?
Proud boy, y^ thou may know thy prince is moved,
Yea greatly moved at this thy swelling pride,
We banish thee for ever from our court.

Then ^osell Locrine, look unto thy self,
Thrasimachus will avenge this injury.

Farewell proud boy, and learn to use thy tongue.

Alas my Lord, you should have called to mind
The latest words that Brutus spake to you,
How he desired you by the obedience
That children ought to bear unto their sire^
To love and favour Lady Guendoline,
Consider this, that if the injury
Do move her mind, as certainly it will,
War and dissention follows speedely.
What though her power be not so great as yours,
Have you not seen a mighty elephant
Slain by the biting of a ^illy mouse?
Even so the chance of war inconstant is.

Peace uncle peace, and cease to talk hereof,
For he that seeks by whispering this or that,
To trouble Locrine in his sweetest life,
Let him persuade himself to die the death.

O say me Page, tell me where is the king,
Wherefore doth he send for me to the court,
Is it to die, is it to end my life,
Say me sweet boy, tell me and do not fain?

No trust me madame, if you will credit the little honesty that is yet le^t me,
there is no such danger as you fear, but prepare your self, yonders the king.

Then Estrild lift thy dazzled spirits up,
And bless that blessed time, that day, that hour,
That warlike Locrine first did favour thee.
Peace to the king of Brittany my love,
Peace to all those that love and favour him.
Doth Estrild fall with such submission
Before her servant king of Albion?
Arise fair Lady, leave this lowly cheer,
Lift up those looks that cherish L^crines heart,
That I may freely view that ros^all face,
Which so entangled hath my lovesick breast,
Now to the court where we will court it out,
And pass the night and day in Venus sports.
Frolic brave peers, be joyful with your king.

You gentle winds that with your modest blasts,
Pass through the circuit of the heavenly vault,
Enter the clouds unto the throne of Jove,
And bear my prayers to his all hearing ears,
For Locrine hath forsaken Guendoline,
And learn to love proud Humbers concubine.
You happy sprites that in the concave sky
With pleasant joy, enjoy your sweetest love,
Shed forth those tears with me, which then you shed
When first you wood your ladies to your wills,
Those tears are fittest for my woeful case,
Since Locrine shuns my nothing pleasant face.
Blush heavens, blush sun, and hide thy shining beams,
Shadow thy radiat locks in gloomy clouds,
Deny thy cheerful light unto the world,
Where nothing raigns but falsehood and deceit.
What said I, falsehood? I that filthy crime,
For Locrine hath forsaken Guendoline.
Behold the heavens do wail for Guendoline.
The shining sun doth blush for Guendoline.
The liquid air doth weep for Guendoline.
The very ground doth groan for Guendoline.
I they are milder then the Britain king,
For he rejects luckless Guendoline.

Sister, complaints are b^otlesse in this cause,
This open wrong must have an open plague:
This plague must be repaid with grievous war,
This war must finish with Locrinus death,
His death will soon extinguish our complaints.

O no, his death will more augment my woes,
He was my husband brave Thrasimachus,
More dear to me then the apple of mine eye,
Nor can I find in heart to work his scathe.

Madame if not your proper injuries,
Nor my exile, can move you to revenge,
Think on our father Corineus words,
His words to us stands always for a law,
Should Locrine live that caused my fathers death?
Should Locrine live that now diuorceth you?
The heavens, the earth, the air, the fire reclaims,
And then why should all we deny the same?

Then henceforth farewell womanish complaints,
All childish pity henceforth then farewell:
But cursed Locrine look unto thy self,
For Nemesis the mistress of revenge,
Sits armed at all points on our dismal blades,
And cursed Estrild that inflamed his heart,
Shall if I live, die a reproachful death.

Mother, though nature makes me to lament,
My luckless fathers froward lechery,
Yet for he wrongs my Lady mother thus,
I if I could, my self would work his death.

See madame see, the desire of revenge
Is in the children of a tender age.
Forward brave soldiers into Mertia,
Where we shall brave the coward to his face.

Tell me Assarachus, are the Cornish chuffs
In such great number come to Mertia,
And have they pitched there their petty host,
So close unto our royal mansion.

They are my Lord, and mean incontinent
To bid defiance to your majesty.

It makes me laugh, to think that Guendoline
Should have the hart to come in arms against me.

Alas my Lord, the horse will run amain
When as the spur doth gall him to the bone,
Jealousy Locrine hath a wicked sting.

Say thou so Estrild, beauties paragon?
Well we will try her choler to the proof,
And make her know Locrine can brooke no braves.
March on Assarachus, thou must lead the way,
And bring us to their proud pavilion.

Behold the circuit of the azure sky,
Throws forth sad throbs, and grievous suspirs,
Preiudicating Locrines overthrow,
The fire casts forth sharpe darts of flames,
The great foundation of the triple world,
Trembles and quakes with a mighty noise,
Presaging bloody massacres at hand.
The wandering birds that flutter in the dark,
When hellish night in cloudy chariot sea^ed,
Casts her mists on shady Tellus face,
With sable mantels covering all the earth,
Now flies abroad amid the cheerful day,
Foretelling some unwonted misery.
The snarling cures of darkened Tartarus,
Sent from Auernus ponds by Radamanth,
With howling ditties pester every wood,
The watery ladies and the light foot fawns,
And all the rabble of the wooddie Nymphs,
All trembling hide themselves in shady groves,
And shroud themselves in hideous hollow pitts.
The boisterous Boreas thundreth forth revenge.
The stony rocks cry out on sharpe revenge.
The thorny bush pronounces dire revenge.
Now Corineus stay and see revenge,
And feed thy soul with Locrines overthrow.
Behold they come, the trumpets call them forth.
The roaring drums summon the soldiers.
Lo where their army glistere^h on the plains,
Throw forth thy lightning mighty Iupiter,
And power thy plagues on cursed Locrines head.

What is the tiger started from his cave?
Is Guendoline come from Cornubia,
That thus she braueth Locrine to the teeth?
And hast thou found thine armour pretty boy,
Accompanied with these thy straggling mates?
Believe me but this enterprise was bold,
And well deserves commendation.

I Locrine, traitorous Locrine we are come,
With full pretence to seek thine overthrow,
What have I don that thou should scorn me thus?
What have I said that thou should me reject?
Have I been disobedient to thy words?
Have I bewrayd thy Arcane secrecy?
Have I dishonoured thy marriage bed
With filthy crimes, or with lascivious lusts?
Nay it is thou that hast dishonoured it,
Thy filthy mind overcome with filthy lusts,
Yields unto affections filthy darts.
Unkind, thou wrongst thy first and truest feer,
Unkind, thou wrongst thy best and dearest friend^
Unkind, thou scornst all skilful Brutus laws,
Forgetting father, uncle, and thy self.

Believe me Locrine but the girl is wise,
And well would seem to make a vastall Nun,
How finely frames she her oration.

Locrin we came not here to fight with words
Words that can never win the victory,
But for you are so merry in your ^rumpes,
Unsheathe your swords, and try it out by force,
That we may see who hath the better hand.

Think thou to dare me bold Thrasimachus?
Think thou to fear me with thy taunting braves,
Or do we seem too weak to cope with thee?
Soon shall I show thee my fine cutting blade,
And with my sword the messenger of death,
Seal thee an acquitace for thy bold attempts.

O fair Estrilda, we have lost the field,
Thrasimachus hath won the vic^orie,
And we are lest to be a laughing s^ocke,
Scoft at by those that are ou^ enemies,
Ten thousand soldiers armed with sword shield,
Preuaile against an hundredth thousand men,
Thrasimachus incensed with ^uming ire,
Rages amongst the faint heart soldiers
Like to grim Mars, when covered wi^h his ^arge
He fought with Diomedes in the field,
Close by the banks of silver Simois,
O lovely Estrild now the chase begins,
Ner shall we see the stately Traynouant
Mounted on the coursers garnished all with pearl^
Ner shall we view the fair Concordia,
Unless as captives we be thither brought.
Shall Locrine then be taken prisoner,
By such a yoongling as Thrasimachus?
Shall Guendolina captivate my love?
Ner shall mine eyes behold that dismal hour,
Ner will I view that ruthful spectacle,
For with my sword this sharpe curtl^axe,
I'll cut in sunder my accursed heart.
But O you judges of the nine^old Styx,
Which with incessant torments rack the ghoa^s
Within the bottomless Abissus pits,
You gods commanders of the heavenly spheres,
Who^e will and laws irrevocable stands,
Forgive, forgive, this soul accursed sin,
Forget O gods this foul condemned fault:
And now my sword that in so many fights kiss his sword.
Hast saved the life o^ Brutus and his son,
End now his life that wishes still for death,
Work now his death that wishes still for death,
Work now his death that hates still his life.
Farewell fair Estrild, beauties paragon,
Framed in the front of forlorn miseries,
Ner shall mine eyes behold thy sunshine eyes,
But when we meet in the Elysian fields,
Thither I go before with hastenened pace.
Farewell vain world, and thy enticing snares.
Forwell ^oule sin, and thy enticing pleasures.
And welcome death the end of mortal smart,
Welcome to Locri^es overburdened hart.

Break hart with sobs and grievous suspirs,
Stream forth you tears from forth my watery eyes,
Help me to morn for warlike Locrines death,
Power down your tears you watery regions,
For mighty Locrine is bereft of life.
O ^ickle fortune, O unstable world,
What else are all things that this globe contains,
But a confused chaos of mishaps?
Wherein as in a glass we plainly see,
That all our life is but as a Tragedy.
Since mighty kings are subject to mishap^
I mighty kings are subject to mishap,
Since martial Locrine is bereft of life,
Shall Estrild live then after Locrines death?
Shall love of life bar her from Locrines sword?
O no, this sword that hath bereft his life,
Shall now dep^iue me of my fleeting soul:
Strengthen these hands O mighty Iupiter,
That I may end my woeful misery.
Locrine I come, Locrine I follow thee.

What doleful sight, what ruthful^ spectacle
Hath fortune offred to my haplesse hart?
My father slain with such a fatal sword,
My mother murdered by a mortal wound?
What Thracian dog, what barbarous Mirmidon,
Would not relent at such a ruthful case?
What fierce Achilles, what hard stony flint,
Would not bemoan this mournfu Tragedy?
Locrine the map of magnanimiti^,
Lies slaughtered in this foul accursed cave,
Estrild the perfect pattern of renown,
Natures sole wonder, in whose bewteous breasts
All heavenly grace and virtue was inshrinde,
Both massacred are dead within this cave,
And with them dies fair Pallas and sweet love.
Here lies a sword, and Sabren hath a heart,
This blessed sword shall cut my cursed heart,
And bring my soul unto my parents ghoasts,
That they that live and view our Tragedy,
May morn our case with mournfu plaudities.
Ay me, my virgins hands are too too weak,
To penetrate the bullwarke of my breast,
My fingers used to tune the amorous lute,
Are not of force to hold this steely glaine,
So I am lie^t to wail my parents death,
Not able for to work my proper death.
Ah Locrine honoured for thy nobleness.
Ah Estrild, famous for thy constancy.
Il may they fare that wrought your mortal ends.

Search soldiers search, find Locrin and his love,
Find the proud strumpet Humbers concubine,
That I may change those her so pleasing looks,
To pale and ignominious aspect.
Find me the issue of their cursed love,
Find me young Sabren, Locrines only joy,
That I may glut my mind with lukewarm blood,
Swiftly distilling from the bastards breast,
My fathers ghost still haunts me for revenge,
Crying, revenge my ouerhastened death,
My brothers exile, and mine own divorce,
Banish remorse clean from my brazen heart,
All mercy from mine adamin^iue breasts.

Nor doth thy husband lovely Guendoline,
That wonted was to guide our staile^se steps,
Enjoy this light; see where he murdered lies:
By luckless lot and froward frowning fate,
And by him lies his lovely paramour
Fair Estrild goared with a dismal sword,
And as it seems, both murdered by themselves,
Clasping each other in their feebled arms,
With loving zeal, as if for company
Their discontented corpse were yet content
To pass soul Styx in Ch^r^ns ferry-boat.

And hath proud Estrild then prevented me^
Hath she escaped Guend^lin^s wrath,
Violently by cutting off her life?
Would God she had the monstrous Hidr^s lives,
That every hour she might have died a death
VVorse then the swing of old Ixions wheel,
And every hour revive to die again,
As Titius bound to hous^es Caucas^,
Doth feed the substance of his own mishap,
And every day for want of food doth die,
And every night doth live again to die.
But stay, me thinks I hear some fainting voice,
Mournfully weeping for their luckless death.

You mountain nymphs which in these deserts reign,
Cease off your ha^tie chase of savage beasts,
Prepare to see a heart oppressed with care,
Address your ears to hear a mournfu stile,
No humane ^trength, no work can work my weal,
Care in my hart so tyrant like doth deal.
You Driades and lightfoo^e Satiri,
You gracious Faries which at evening tide,
Your closets leave with heavenly beauty stored,
And on your shoulders spread your golden locks,
You savage bears in caves and darkened dens,
Come wail with me, the martial Locrines death.
Come mourn with me, for bea^teous Estrilds det^.
Ah lo^ing parents little do you know,
what sorrow Sabren suffers for your thrall.

But may this be, and is it possible,
Lives Sabren yet to expiat my wrath?
Fortune I t^anke thee for this courtesy,
And let me never see one prosperous hour,
If Sabren die not a reproachful death.

Hard hearted death, that when the wretched call,
Art furthest off, and sildom heer^t at all.
But in the midst of fortunes good success,
Uncalled comes, and shears our life in twain:
When will that hour, that blessed hour draw nie,
When poor distressed Sabren may be gone.
Sweet Atropos cut off my fatal thread,
What art thou death, shall not poor Sabren die?

Yes damsel yes, Sabren shall surely die,
Though all the world should seek to save her life,
And not a common death shall Sabren die,
But after strange and grievous punishments
Shortly inflicted vpo^ thy bastards head,
Thou shalt be cast into the cursed streams,
And feed the fishes with thy tender flesh.

And thin^ thou then thou cruel homicid,
That these thy deeds shall be unpunished?
No traitor no, the gods will avenge these wrongs,
The fiends of hell will mark these injuries.
Never shall these blood-sucking mastie cures,
Bring wretched Sabren to her latest home.
For I my self inspire of thee and thine,
Mean to abridge my former destinies,
And that which Locrines sword could not perform,
This pleasant stream shall present bring to pass.

One mischief follows another ne^ke,
Who would have thought so young a maid as she
With such a courage wold have soug^t her death.
And for because ^his River was the plac^
Where little S^bre^ resolutely died,
Sabren for ever shall this same be called.
And as for Locrine our deceased spouse,
Because he was th^ sonn^ of mighty Brute^
To whom we owe our country, liu^s and goods,
He shall be buried in a stately ^ombe,
Close by his aged father Br^tus bones,
With such great pomp and great solemnitie^
As well beseems so brave a prince as ^e^
Let Estrild lie without the sh^llow (...)
Without the honour due unto the dead^
Because she was the author of this war.
Retire brave followers unto Troyno^^
Where we will celebrate thes^ exequies^
And place young Locri^ in his fathers tomb.

Lo here the end of lawless treachery,
Of usurpation and ambitious pride,
And they that for their private amours dare
Turmoil^ ou^ land, and s^heir brolles abroach,
Let them be warned by these premises,
And as a wom^n was the only cause
That civil discord was then stirred up,
So let us pray for that renowned (...),
That eight and thirty years (...) ^w^yd,
In quiet peace and sweet ^elicitie,
And every wight that seeks her g^es smart,
wold that this sword were pi^ee^ in his hart.


