COme Masters, I think it be past five a clock,
Is it not time we were at work?
My old Master heel be stirring anon.

I cannot tell whether my old master will be
stirring or no: but I am sure I can hardly take my
afternoones nap, for my young master Thomas,
He keeps such a quile in his study,
With the Sun, and the Moon, and the seven stars,
That I do verily think heel read out his wits.

He skill of the stars? there's good-man Car of Fulhum,
He that carried us to the strong Ale, where goody Trundell
Had her maid got with child: O he knows the Stars,
Heel tickle you Charles Wane in nine degrees,
That same man will tell goody Trundell
When her Ale shall miscary, only by the stars.

I that's a great virtue indeed, I think Thomas
Be no body in comparison to him.

Well Masters come, shall we to our hammers?

I content, first lets take our mornings draught,
And then to work roundly.

I agreed, go in Hodge.

Good morrow morn, I do salute thy brightness,
The night seems tedious to my troubled soul:
Whose black obscurity binds in my mind
A thousand sundry cogitations*
And now Aurora with a lively dye,
Adds comfort to my spirit that mounts on high.
Too high indeed, my state being so mean*
My study like a mineral of gold,
Makes my hart proud wherein my hope's inrowld,
My books is all the wealth I do possess,
And unto them I have engaged my hart,
O learning how divine thou seems to me:
Within whose arms is all felicity?
Peace with your hammers, leave your knocking there,
You do disturb my study and my rest,
Leave off I say, you mad me with the noise.

Why how now Master Thomas how now,
Will you not let us work for you?

You fret my hart, with making of this noise.

How fret your hart? I but Thomas, you'll
Fret your fathers purse if you let us from working.

I this tis for him to make him a gentleman.
Shall we leave work for your musing, that's well I faith?
But here comes my old Master now.

You idle knaves, what are you loitering now,
No hammers walking and my work to do?
What not a heate among your work to day?

Marry sir your son Thomas will not let us work at all,

Why knave I say, have I thus carkde and cared
And all to keep thee like a gentleman,
And dost thou let my servants at their work:
That sweat for thee knave? labour thus for thee?

Father their hammers do offend my study.

Out of my doors knave if thou likest it not,
I cry you mercy is your cares so fine?
I tell thee knave these get when I do sleep,
I will not have my Anuill stand for thee.

There's money father, I will pay your men.

Have I thus brought thee up unto my cost,
In hope that one day thou would relieve my age,
And art thee now so lavish of thy coin,
To scatter it among these idle knaves?

Father be patient, and content your self,
The time will come I shall hold gold as trash:
And here I speak with a presaging soul,
To build a palace where now this cottage stands,
As fine as is King Henries, house at Sheen.

You build a house? you knave, you'll be a beggar,
Now before God all is but cast away
That is bestowed upon this thriftless lad;
Well, had I bound him to some honest trade:
This had not been, but it was his mothers doing,
To send him to the University:
How build a house where now this cottage stands,
As fair as that at Sheen? he shall not here me,
A good boy Tom, I con thee thank Tom,
Well said Tom, gramarcies Tom,
Into your work knaves hence you saucy boy.

Why should my birth keep down my mounting spirit?
Are not all creatures subject unto time?
To time, who doth abuse the world,
And filles it full of hodge-podge bastardy,
There's legions now of beggars on the earth,
That their original did spring from Kings:
And many Monarchs now whose fathers were,
The riffe-raffe of their age: for time and Fortune
Wears out a noble train to beggary,
And from the dunghill minions do advance
To state: and mark in this admiring world,
This is but course, which in the name of Fate
Is seen as often as it whirls about:
The River Thames that by our door doth pass,
His first beginning is but small and shallow?
Yet keeping on his course, groves to a sea.
And likewise W^lsay, the wonder of our age,
His birth as mean as mine, a Butchers son
Now who within this land a greaterman?
Then Cromwell cheer thee up, and tell thy soul,
That thou may live to flourish and control.

Tom Cromwell, what Tom I say.

Do you call sir?

Here is Master Bowser come to know, if you have
dispatched his petition, for the Lords of the counsel or no.

Father I have, please you to call him in.

That's well said Tom, a good lad Tom.

Now Master Cromwell, have you dispatched this petition?

I have sir, here it is, please you peruse it.

It shall not need, we'll read it as we go by water:
And Master Cromwell, I have made a motion
May do you good, and of you like of it.
Our Secretary at Antwarpe, sir is dead,
And the Merchants there hath sent to me,
For to provide a man fit for the place:
Now I do know none fitter then your self,
If with your liking it stand Master Cromwell.

With all my hart sir, and I much am bound,
In love and duty for your kindness shown.

Body of me Tom make hast, least some body
Get between thee and home Tom.
I thank you good Master Bowser, I thank you for my boy,
I thank you always, I thank you most heartily sir:
Hoe a cup of Beer there for Master Bowser.

It shall not need sir, Master Cromwell will you go?

I will attend you sir.

Farewell Tom, God bless thee Tom,
God speed thee good Tom.

I hope this day is fatal unto some,
And by their loss must Bagot seek to gain.
This is the lodging of Master Friskiball,
a liberal Merchant, and a Florentine,
To whom Banister owes a thousand pound,
A Merchant Banckrout, whose Father was my Master,
What do I care, for pity or regard?
He once was wealthy, but he now is fallen,
And this morning have I got him arrested,
At the suit of Master Friskiball,
And by this means shall I be sure of coin,
For doing this same good to him unknown:
And in good time, see where the Merchant comes.

Good morrow to kind Master Friskiball.

God morrow to your self good master Bagot,
And whats the news you are so early stirring?
It is for gain, I make no doubt of that.

It is for the love sir that I bear to you,
When did you see your debtor Banister?

I promise you, I have not seen the man
This two months day, his poverty is such,
As I do think he shames to see his friends.

Why then assure your self to see him straight,
For at your suit I have arrested him,
And here they will be with him presently.

Arrest him at my suit? you were to blame,
I know the mans misfortunes to be such,
As he's not able for to pay the debt,
And were it known to some he were undone.

This is your pitiful hart to think it so,
But you are much deceived in Banister,
Why such as he will break for fashion sake,
And unto those they owe a thousand pound,
Pay scarce a hundred: O sir beware of him,
The man is lewdly given, to Dice and Drabs,
Spends all he hath in harlots companies,
It is no mercy for to pity him.
I speak the truth of him, for nothing else,
But for the kindness that I bear to you,

If it be so, he hath deceived me much,
And to deal strictly with such a one as he.
Better severe then too much lenity,
But here is Master Banister himself,
And with him as I take the officers.

O Master Friskiball you have undone me,
My state was well nigh overthrown before,
Now altogether downe-cast by your means.

O master Friskiball, pity my husbands case
He is a man hath lived as well as any,
Till envious fortune and the ravenous Sea
Did rob, disrobe, and spoil us of our own.

Mistress Banister, I envy not your husband,
Nor willingly would I have used him thus:
But that I hear he is so lewdely given,
Haunts wicked company, and hath enough
To pay his debts, yet will not be known thereof.

This is that damned Broker, that same Bagot,
Whom I have often from my Trencherfed,
Ungrateful villain for to use me thus.

What I have said to him is nought but truth.

What thou hast said springs from an envious hart.
A Cannibal that doth eat men alive,
But here upon my knee believe me sir,
And what I speak, so help me God is true*
We scarce have meat to feed our little Babes,
Most of our Plate is in that Broken hand.
Which had we money to defray our debts
O think we would not bide that penury:
Be merciful, kind master Friskiball,
My husband, children, and my self will eat
But one meal a day, the other will we keep and sell,
As part to pay the debt we owe to you:
If ever tears did pierce a tender mind,
Be pitiful, let me some favour find.

Be not you so mad sir, to believe her tears.

Go to, I see thou art an envious man,
Good mistress Banister kneel not to me,
I pray rise up, you shall have your desire.
Hold officers; be gone, there's for your pains,
You know you owe to me a thousand pound,
Here take my hand, if ear God make you able;
And place you in your former state again,
Pay me: but if still your fortune frown,
Upon my faith I'll never ask you crown:
I never yet did wrong to men in thrall.
For God doth know what to my self may fall.

This unexpected favour undeserved,
Doth make my hart bleed inwardly with joy,
Ne'er may ought prosper with me is my own,
If I forget this kindness you have shown.

My children in their prayers both night and day,
For your good fortune and success shall pray.

I thank you both, I pray go dine with me,
Within these three days, if God give me leave,
I will to Florence to my native home,
Bagot hold, there's a Portague to drink,
Although you ill deserved it by your merit,
Give not such cruel scope unto your hart,
Be sure the ill you do will be requited,
Remember what I say, Bagot farewell.
Come Master Banister, you shall with me,
My fare's but simple, but welcome heartily.

A plague go with you, would you had eat your last,
Is this the thanks I have for all my pains:
Confusion light upon you all for me,
Where he had wont to give a score of crown^
Doth he now foist me with a Portague:
Well, I will be revenged upon this Banister.
I'll to his Creditors, buy all the debts he owes,
As seeming that I do it for good-will,
I am sure to have them at an easy rate;
And when tis done, in Christendom he stays not,
But i'll make his hate t'ake with sorrow,
And if that Banister become my debtor
By heaven and earth i'll make his plague the greater.

Now gentlemen imagine, that young Cromwell is
In Antwarpe, Ledger for the English Merchants:
And Banister to shun this Bagots hate,
Hearing that he hath got some of his debts,
Is fled to Antwarpe, with his wife and children,
Which Bagot hearing is gone after them:
And thither sends his bills of debt before,
To be revenged on wretched Banister,
What doth fall out, with patience sit and see,
A just requital of false treachery.

Thus far my reckoning doth go straight and even:
But Cromwell this same plodding fits not thee:
Thy mind is altogether set on travel,
And not to live thus cloistered like a Nun,
It is not this same trash that I regard,
Experience is the jewel of my hart.

I pray sir, are you ready to dispatch me?

Yes here's those sums of money you must cary.
You go so far as Frankford, do you not?

I do sir.

Well prithee make all the hast thou can,
For there be certain English gentlemen
Are bound for Venice, and may happily want
And if that you should linger by the way:
But in hope that you will make good speed,
There's two Angels to buy you spurs and wands.

I thank you sir, this will add wings indeed.

Gold is of power to make an Eagles speed.
What gentlewoman is this that grieves so much?
It seems she doth address her self to me.

God save you sir, pray is your name Master Cromwell.

My name is Thomas Cromwell, gentlewoman.

Know you not one Bagot sir, that's come to Antwarpe?

No trust me, I never saw the man,
But here are bills of debt I have received
Against one Banister a Merchant fallen into decay.

Into decay indeed, long of that wretch,
I am the wife to woeful Banister,
And by that bloody villain am persu'de,
From London here to Antwarpe,
My husband he is in the governors hands:
And God of heaven knows how he'ill deal with him,
Now sir your hart is framed of milder temper,
Be merciful to a distressed soul,
And God no doubt will treble bless your gain.

Good Mistress Banister, what I can, I will,
In any thing that lies within my power.

O speak to Bagot, that same wicked wretch,
An Angels voice may move a damned devil.

Why is he come to Antwarpe as you here?

I hard he landed some two hours since.

Well Mistress Banister assure your self,
I'll speak to Bagot in your own behalf:
And win him t'all the pity that I can,
Mean time, to comfort you in your distress,
Receive these Angels to relieve your need,
And be assured that what I can effect:
To do you good, no way I will neglect.

That mighty God that knows each mortals hart,
Keep you from trouble, sorrow, grief and smart.

Thanks courteous woman,
For thy hearty prayer:
It grieves my soul to see her misery,
But we that live under the work of fate,
May hope the best, yet knows not to what state
Our stars and destinies hath us asignde,
Fickle is Fortune, and her face is blind.

So all goes well, it is as I would have it,
Banister he is with the Governor:
And shortly shall have guiues upon his heals,
It glads my hart to think upon the slave,
I hope to have his body rot in prison:
And after here, his wife to hang her self,
And all his children die for want of food,
The Jewels I have brought to Antwarpe,
Are recon'd to be worth five thousand pound,
Which scarcely stood me in three hundredth pound,
I bought them at an easy kind of rate,
I care not which way they came by them
That sold them me, it comes not near my hart.
And least they should be stolen as sure they are,
I thought it meet to sell them here in Antwarpe,
And so have left them in the Governors hand,
Who offers me within two hundredth pound
Of all my price: but now no more of that,
I must go see and if my bills be safe,
The which I sent to Master Cromwell,
That if the wind should keep me on the sea,
He might arest him here before I came:
And in good time, see where he is: God save you sir.

And you, pray pardon me, I know you not.

It may be so sir, but my name is Bagot,
The man that sent to you the bills of debt.

O the man that pursues Banister,
Here are the bills of debt you sent to me:
As for the man you know best where he is,
It is reported yu'aue a flinty hart,
A mind that will not stoop to any pity;
An eye that knows not how to shed a tear,
A hand that's always open for re^rd,
But Master Bagot would you be ruled by me:
You should turn all these to the contrary,
Your hart should still have feeling of remorse,
Your mind, according to your state, be liberal
To those that stand in need and in distress;
Your hand to help them that do stand in want,
Rather then with your poise to hold them down,
For every ill turn show your self more kind,
Thus should I do, pardon, I speak my mind.

I sir, you speak to here what I would say,
But you must live I know, as well as I:
I know this place to be extortion,
And tis not for a man to keep safe here,
But he must lye, cog, with his dearest friend;
And as for pity, scorn it, hate all conscience,
But yet I do commend your wit in this,
To make a show, of what I hope you are not,
But I commend you and tis well done,
This is the only way to bring your gain.

My gain: I had rather chain me to an ore,
And like a slave there toil out all my life,
Before i'd live so base a slave as thou:
I like an hipocrite to make a show,
Of seeming virtue and a devil within?
No Bagot, if thy conscience were as clear,
Poor Banister, ne'er had been troubled here.

Nay good Master Cromwell be not angry sir,
I know full well that you are no such man,
But if your conscience were as white as Snow,
It will be thought that you are otherwise,

Will it be thought that I am other wise?
Let them that think so know they are deceived;
Shall Cromwell live to have his faith misconsterd,
Antwarpe for all the wealth within thy Town
I will not stay here full two hours longer:
As good luck serves, my accounts are all made even,
Therefore i'll straight unto (...) treasurer,
Bagot, I know you'll to the gournour,
Commend me to him, say I am bound to travail,
To see the fruitful parts of Italy,
And as you ever bore a Christian mind,
Let Banister some favour of you find.

For your sake sir i'll help him all I can,
To starve his hart out ear he gets a groat,
So Master Cromwell do I take my leave,
For I must straight unto the governor.

Farewell sir, pray you remember what I said:
No Cromwell, no, thy hart was ne'er so base
To live by falsehood or by brokery,
But 't falls out well, I little it repent,
Hereafter, time in travel shall be spent.

Your son Thomas, quoth you, I have been Thomast, I had thought it had been
no such matter to a gone by water: for at Putnay i'll go you to Parish-garden
for two pence, sit as still as may be, without any wagging or ioulting in my
guts, in a little boat too: here we were scarce four mile in the great
green water, but I thinking to go to my afternoones vnchines, as twas my
manner at home, but I felt a kind of rising in my guts: at last one a the
Sailers spying of me, be a good cheer says he, set down thy victuals, and
up with it, thou hast nothing but an Ecle in thy belly* Well, too't went I, to
my victuals went the Sailers, thinking me to be a man of better experience then
any in the ship, asked me what Wood the ship was made of: they all swore
I could them as right as if I had been acquainted with the Carpenter that made
it, at last we grew near land, and I grew villainous hungry, went to my bag,
the devil a bit there was, the Sailers had tickled me* yet I cannot blame
them, it was a part of kindness, for I in kindness told them what Wood the
ship was made of, and they in kindness eat up my victuals, as indeed one
good turn asks another: well would I, could I, find my Master Thomas in
this Dutch Town, he might put some English Bear into my belly.


What Hodge my fathers man, by my hand welcome,
How doth my father? whats the news at home?

Master Thomas, O God Master Thomas, your hand. glove and all, this is to
give you to understanding that your father is in health, and Alice Downing here
hath sent you a Nutmeg, and Bess Make water a race of Ginger, my fellow Will
and Tom hath between them sent you a dozen of points, and goodman Toll, of
the Goat, a pair of mittons, my self came in person, and this is all the
news.


Gramarsie good Hodge, and thou art welcome to me,

But in as ill a time thou comes as may be:
For I am travelling into Italy,
What say thou Hodge, wilt thou bear me company?

Will I bear thee company Tom, what tell me of Italy, were it to the
furthest part of Flanders, I would go with thee Tom, I am thine in all weal
and woe, thy own to command. what Tom, I have passed the rigorous waives of
Neptunes blasts, I tell you Thomas I have been in the danger of the floods,
and when I have seen Boreas begin to play the Ruffin with us, then would I
down a my knees and call upon Vulcan.


And why upon him?


Because as this same fellow Neptune is God of the Seas, so Vulcan is LORD over
the Smiths, and therefore I being a Smith, thought his Godhead would have some
care yet of me.


A good conceit, but tell me hast thou dined yet?


Thomas to speak the truth, not a bit yet I.


Come go with me, thou shalt have cheer good store. And farewell Antwarpe if
I come no more.


I follow thee sweet Tom, I follow thee


Is Cromwell gone then, say you Master Bagot,
What dislike, I pray, what was the cause?

To tell you true, a wild brain of his own,
Such youth as they, cannot see when they are well:
He is all bent to travail, that's his reason,
And doth not love to eat his bread at home.

Well, good fortune with him, if the man be gone.
We hardly shall find such a one as he,
To fit our turns, his dealings were so honest:
But now sir, for your Jewels that I have,
What do you say? what, will you take my prise?

O sir, you offer too much vnderfoote.

Tis but two hundred pound between us man,
Whats that in payment of five thousand pound.

Two hundred pound byr'lady sir tis great,
Before I got so much, it made me sweat.

Well Master Bagot I'll proffer you fairly,
You see this Merchant Master Banister,
Is going now to prison at your suit.
His substance all is gone, what would you have?
Yet in regard I knew the man of wealth.
Never dishonest dealing, but such mishaps
Hath fallen on him, may light on me, or you,
There is two hundred pound between us,
We will divide the same, I'll give you one,
On that condition you will set him free:
His state is nothing, that you see your self,
And where nought is the King must lose his right.

Sir* sir, you speak out of your love,
Tis foolish love sir sure to pity him:
Therefore content your self, this is my mind,
To do him good I will not bate a penny.

This is my comfort though thou dost no good,
A mighty ebb follows a mighty flood.

O thou base wretch, whom we have fostered.
Even as a Serpent for to poison us,
If God did ever right a woman's wrong:
To that same God I bend and bow my heart,
To let his heany wrath fall on thy head,
By whom my hopes and joys are butchered.

Alas fond woman, I prithee pray thy worst,
The Fox fares better still when he is cursed.

Master Bowser! your welcome sir from England,
Whats the best news? How doth all our friends?

They are all well and do commend them to you,
There's letters from your brother and your son:
So fair you well sir, I must take my leave.
My hast and business doth require so.

Before you dine sir? what go you out of town?

I faith unless I here some news in town,
I must away, there is no remedy.

Master Bowser what is your business, may I know it?
You may sir, and so shall all the City.

The King of late hath had his treasury robbed,
And of the choicest jewels that he had:
The value of them was seven thousand pounds,
The fellow that did steal these jewels is hanged,
And did confess that for three hundred pound,
He sold them to one Bagor dwelling in London:
Now Bagot's fled, and as we here to Antwarpe,
And hither am I come to seek him out,
And they that first can tell me of his news,
Shall have a hundred pound for their reward.

How just is God to right the innocent?

Master Bowser you come in happy time,
Here is the villain Bagot that you seek.
And all those jewels have I in my hands,
Officers look to him, hold him fast.

The devil ought me a shame, and now hath paid it.

Is this that Bagot? fellows bear him hence,
We will not now stand for his reply;
Lade him with Irons, we will have him tried
In England where his villainies are known.

Mischief, confusion, light upon you all,
O hang me, drown me, let me kill my self,
Let go my arms let me run quick to hell.

Away, bear him away, stop the slaves mouth.

Thy works are infinite, great God of heaven.

I hard this Bagot was a wealthy fellow.

He was indeed, for when his goods were zeased,
Of Jewels, coin, and Plate within his house,
Was found the value of five thousand pound,
His furniture fully worth half so much,
Which being all strained for the King,
He frankly gave it to the Antwarpe Merchants,
And they again, out of their bounteous mind,
Hath to a brother of their company,
A man decaid by fortune of the Seas,
Given Bagots wealth, to set him up again:
And keep it for him, his name is Banister.

Master Bowser, with this happy news,
You have revived two from the gates of death,
This is that Banister, and this his wife.

Sir I am glad my fortune is so good,
To bring such tidings as may comfort you,

You have given life unto a man deemed dead,
For by these news, my life is newly bred.

Thanks to my God, next to my Sovereign King.
And last to you that these good news do bring.

The hundred pound I must receive as due
For finding Bagot, I freely give to you.

And Master Banister, if so you please,
I'll bear you company, when you cross the Seas.

If it please you sir, my company is but mean,
Stands with your liking, I'll wait on you.

I am glad that all things do accorde so well:
Come Master Bowser, let us in to dinner:
And Mistress Banister, be merry woman,
Come after sorrow now, lets cheer your spirit,
Knaves have their due, and you but what you merit.

Call ye this seeing of fashions?
Marry would I had staide at Putney still,
O Master Thomas, we are spoiled, we are gone.

Content thee man, this is but fortune.

Fortune, a plague of this Fortune makes me go wetshod, the rogues would not
leave me a shoe to my feet, for my hoase they scorned them with their heals,
but for my Doublet and Hat, O Lord they embraced me, and vnlased me, and
took away my clothes, and so disgraced me.


Well Hodge, what remedy?
What shift shall we make now?

Nay I know not, for begging I am nought, for stealing worse: by my troth I
must even fall to my old trade, to the Hammer and the Horse heals again: but
now the worst is, I am not acquainted with the humour of the horses in this
country, whether they are not coultish, given much to kicking, or no, for
when I have one leg in my hand, if he should up and lay the other on my chops,
I were gone, there lay I, there lay Hodge.


Hodge I believe thou must work for us both.

O Master Thomas, have not I told you of this, have not I many a time and
often, said Tom, or Master Thomas, learn to make a Horse-shooe, it will be
your own another day: this was not regarded. Hark you Thomas, what do you
call the fellows that robbed us?


The Bandetto.

The Bandetto do you call them, I know not what they are called here, but I am
sure we call them plain thieves in England, O Th^mas that we were now at
Putney, at the ale there*


Content thee man, here set up these two bills,
And let us keep our standing on the bridge:
The fashion of this country is such,
If any stranger be oppressed with want,
To write the manner of his misery,
And such as are disposed to succour him,
Will do it, what hast thou set them up?

I they're up, God send some to read them,
And not only to read them, but also to look on us:
And not altogether to look on us,
But to relieve us, O cold, cold, cold.

Whats here? two Englishmen robbed by the Bandetto,
One of them seems to be a gentleman:
Tis pity that his fortune was so hard,
To fall into the desperate hands of thieves,
I'll question him of what estate he is,
God save you sir, are you an Englishman?

I am sir a distressed Englishman.

And what are you my friend.

Who I sir, by my troth I do not know my self what I am now, but sir, I was a
Smith sir, a poor Farrier of Putney, that's my Master sir yonder, I was robbed
for his sake sir.


I see you have been met by the Bandetto,
And therefore need not ask how you came thus:
But Friskiball, why dost thou question them
Of their estate and not relieve their need?
Sir, the coin I have about me is not much:
There's sixteen Ducats for to cloth your selves,
There's sixteen more to buy your diet with,
And there's sixteen to pay for your horse hier:
Tis all the wealth you see my purse possesses,
But if you please for to enquire me out,
You shall not want for ought that I can do,
My name is Friskiball, a Florence Merchant,
A man that always loved your nation.

This unexpected favour at your hands,
Which God doth know, if ever I shall requi^e it,
Necessity makes me to take your bounty,
And for your gold can yield you nought but thanks,
Your charity hath helped me from despair.
Your name shall still be in my hearty prayer.

It is not worth such thanks come to my house,
Your want shall better be releeu'd then thus.

I pray excuse me, this shall well suffice,
To bear my charges to Bononia,
Whereas a noble Earl is much distressed:
An Englishman, Russel^ the Earl of Bedford
Is by the French King sold unto his death,
It may fall out, that I may do him good:
To save his life, I'll hazard my hart blood:
Therefore kind sir, thanks for your liberal gift,
I must be gone to aide him there's no shift.

I'll be no hinderer to so good an act,
Heaven prosper you, in that you go about:
If Fortune bring you this way back again,
Pray let me see you: so I take my leave*
All good a man can wish, I do bequeath.

All good that God doth send, light on your head,
There's few such men within our climate bred.
How say you now Hodge, is not this good fortune?

How say you, I'll tell you what master Thomas*
If all men be of this Gentleman's mind,
Lets keep our standings upon this Bridge,
We shall get more here with begging in one day,
Then I shall with making Horshoes in a whole year.

No Hodge, we must begone unto Bononia,
There to relieve the noble Earl of Bedford:
Where if I fail not in my policy,
I shall deceive their subtle treachery.

Nay I'll follow you, God bless us from the theeuing
Bandettoes again.

Am I betrayed, was Bedforde borne to die,
By such base slaves in such a place as this?
Have I escaped so many times in France,
So many battles have I over passed,
And made the French stir when they hard my name;
And am I now betrayed unto my death?
Some of their harts blood first shall pay for it.

They do desire my Lord to speak with you.

The traitors do desire to have my blood,
But by my birth, my honour, and my name,
By all my hopes, my life shall cost them dear.
Open the door, i'll venture out upon them,
And if I must die, then i'll die with honour.

Alas my Lord that is a desperate course,
They have begirt you round about the house:
Their meaning is to take you prisoner,
And so to send your body unto France.

First shall the Ocean beas dry as sand,
Before alive they send me unto France:
I'll have my body first bored like a Sieve,
And die as Hector, against the Mermidons,
Ear France shall boast Bedfordes their prisoner,
Treacherous France that against the law of arms:
Hath here betrayed thy enemy to death,
But be assured my blood shall be revenged,
Upon the best lives that remains in France:
Stand back, or else thy run'st upon thy death.

Pardon my Lord, I come to tell your honour
That they have hired a Neopolitan,
Who by his Oratory hath promised them
Without the shedding of one drop of blood,
Into their hands safe to deliver you,
And therefore craves none but himself may enter,
And a poor swain that attends on him.

A Neapolitan, bid him come in,
Were he as cunning in his eloquence
As Cicero the famous man of Rome,
His words would be as chafe against the wind,
Sweet tong'd Vlesses that made Aiaxe mad;
Were he and his tongue in this speakers head,
Alive he wins me not, then tis no conquest dead.

Sir, are you the master of the house?

I am sir.

By this same token you must leave this place,
And leave none but the Earl and I together,
And this my Pessant here to tend on us.

With all my hart, God grant, you do some good.

Now sir whats your will with me?

Intends your honour, not to yield your self:

No good-man goose, not while my sword doth last,
Is this your eloquence for to persuade me.

My Lord my eloquence is for to save you,
I am not as you judge a Neopolitan:
But Cromwell your servant, and an Englishman.

How Cromwell, not my Farriers son?

The same sir, and am come to succour you.

Yes faith sir, and I am Hodge your poor Smith,
Many a time and oft have I shooed your Dapper Gray.

And what avails it me that thou art here?

It may avail if you'll be ruled by me,
My Lord you know the men of Mantua;
And these Bononians are at deadly strife,
And they my Lord, both love and honour you*
Could you but get out of the Mantua port,
Then were you safe despite of all their force.

The man thou talk of things impossible,
Dost thou not see that we are round beset:
How then is it possible, we should escape?

By force we cannot, but by policy,
Put on the apparel here that Hodge doth wear,
And give him yours: the States they know you not,
For as I think they never saw your face,
And at a watch-word must I call them in,
And will desire, that we two safe may pass
To Mantua, where I'll say my business lies,
How doth your Honour like of this devise?

O wondrous good: But wilt thou venture Hodge?

Will I O noble Lord, I do accord? in any thing I can,
And do agree, to set thee free, do fortune what she can.

Come then lets change our apparel straight.

God Hodge make hast least they chance to call.

I warrant you i'll (...) with a (...).

Heavens grant this policy doth take success,
And that the Earl may safely escape ^eay.
And yet it grieves me for this simple wretch,
For fear they should offer him violence.
But of two evils tis best to shun the greatest,
And better is it that he live in thrall,
Then such a Noble Earl as he should fall.
Their stubborn harts, it may be will relent:
Since he is gone, to whom their hate is bent,
My Lord have you dispatched?

How dost thou like us Cromwell, is it well?

O my Lord excellent: Hodge how dost feel thy self?

How do I feel my self? why as a Noble man should do,
O how I feel honour come creeping on,
My Nobility is wonderful melancholy:
Is it not most Gentleman like to be melancholy?

Yes Hodge, now go sit down in the study.
And take state upon thee.

I warrant you my Lord, let me alone to take state upon me: but hark my Lord,
do you feel nothing bite about you?


No trust me Hodge.

I, they know they want their old pasture, tis a strange thing of this vermin,
they dare not meddle with Nobility.


Go take thy place Hodge, I will call them in,
All is done, enter and if you please.

What have you won him? will he yield himself?

I have an't please you, and the quiet Earl,
Doth yield himself to be disposed by you.

Give him the money that we promised him:
So let him go, whether it please himself.

My business sir lies unto Mantua,
Please you to give me safe conduct thither.

Go and conduct him to the Mantua port,
And see him safe delivered presently.
Go draw the curtains, let us see the Earl.
O he is writing, stand apart a while.

Fellow William, I am not as I have been, I went from
you a Smith, I write to you as a Lord: I am at this present writing, among
the Polonyan Casiges. I do commend my Lordship to Raphe
to Roger, to Bridget to Doritie, so to al the youth of Putu^y.

Sure these are the names of English Noblemen.
Some of his special friends, to whom he writes:
But stay he doth address himself to sing.
My Lord I am glad you are so frolic and so blithe,
Believe me noble Lord if you knew all,
Youde change your merry vain to sudden sorrow.

I change my merry vain, no thou Bononian, no,
I am a Lord and therefore let me go,
And do defy thee and thy Sasigis,
Therefore stand off, and come not near my honour.

My Lord this jesting cannot serve your turn.

Dost think thou black Bononian beast,
That I do flower, do gibe, or jest,
No, no, thou Beare-pot, know that I, a noble Earl, a Lord pardy.

What means this Trumpets sound?

One come from the States of Mantua.

What, would you with us speak, thou man of Mantua?

Men of Bononia: this my message is,
To let you know the Noble Earl of Bedford:
Is safe within the town of Mantua,
And wills you send the peasant that you have,
Who hath deceived your expectation,
Or else the States of Mantua have vowed:
They will recall the truce that they have made,
And not a man shall stir from forth your town,
That shall return unless you send him back.

O this misfortune how it mads my hart?
The Neopolitan hath beguiled us all;
Hence with this fool: what shall we do with him,
The Earl being gone? a plague upon it all.

No I'll assure you I am no Earl, but a smith Sir,
One Hodge, a smith at Putney sir:
One that hath gulled you, that hath bored you sir.

Away with him, take hence the fool you came for.

I sir: and i'll leave the greater fool with you.

Farewell Bononians, come friend a long with me.

My friend before, my Lordship will follow thee.

Well Mantua, since by thee the Earl is lost,
Within few days I hope to see thee crossed.

Thus far you see how Cromwells fortune passed.
The Earl of Bedford being safe in Mantua:
Desires Cromwells company into France,
To make requital for his courtesy:
But Cromwell doth deny the Earl his suit,
And tells him that those parts he meant to see,
He had not yet set footing on the land,
And so directly takes his way to Spain:
The Earl to France, and so they both do part,
Now let your thoughts as swift as is the wind,
Skip some few years, that Cromwell spent in travel,
And now imagine him to be in England:
Servant unto the Master of the Roules,
Where in short time he there began to flourish,
An hour shall show you what few years did cherish.

Come sirs, be careful of your Masters credit,
And as our bounty now exceeds the figure
Of common entertainment: so do you
With looks as free as is your Masters soul,
Give formal welcome to the thronged tables,
That shall receive the Cardinals followers,
And the attendants of the great Lord Chancellor.
But all my care Cromwell depends on thee,
Thou art a man, differing from vulgar form,
And by how much thy spirit is ranckt above these,
In rules of Art, by so much it shines brighter by travel,
Whose observance pleads his merit
In a most learned, yet vnaffecting spirit,
Good Cromwell cast an eye of fair regard,
Bout all my house, and what this ruder flesh,
Through ignorance, or wine, do miscreate,
Salve thou with courtesy: if welcome want,
Full bowles, and ample banquets will seem scant.

Sir, whatsoever lies in me,
Assure you I will show my utmost duty.

About it then, the Lords will straight be here:
Cromwell, thou hast those parts would rather suit,
The service of the state, then of my house,
I look upon thee with a loving eye,
That one day will prefer thy destiny.

Sir the Lords be at hand,

They are welcome, bid Cromwell straight attendys,
And look you all things be in perfect readiness.

O sir Christopher you are too liberal, what a banquet to?

My Lords if words could show the ample welcome,
That my free hart affords you, I could then become a prater:
But I now must deal like a feast Politician,
With your Lordships, defer your welcome till the banquet end,
That it may then salve our defect of fair:
Yet Welcome now and all that tend on you,

Thanks to the kind Master of the Roules,
Come and sit down, sit down sir Thomas Moore:
Tis strange, how that we and the Spaniard differ,
Their dinner, is our banquet after dinner,
And they are men of active disposition,
This I gather, that by their sparing meat:
Their body more fitter for the wars,
And if that famine chance to pinch their mawes,
Being used to fast it breeds less pain.

Fill me some Wine: I'll answer Cardinal Wolsay:
My Lord we Englishmen are of more heer souls,
Then hunger starved, and ill complexioned spaniards,
They that are rich in Spain, spare belly food,
To deck their backs with an Italian hood,
And Silks of Civil: And the poorest Snake,
That feeds on Lemmons, Pilchers, and near heated
His pallet with sweet flesh, will bear a case,
More fat and gallant then his starved face,
Pride, the Inquisition, and this belly-euill,
Are in my judgment Spaines three headed devil.

Indeed it is a plague unto their nation.
Who stager after in blind imitation.

My Lords with welcome, I present your Lordships
A solemn health.

I love health well, but when as health^ do bring
Pain to the head, and bodies surfeiting:
Then cease I health^: nay spill not friend,
For though the drops be small,
Yet have they force, to force men to the wall.

Sir Christopher, is that your man?

And like your grace he is a Scholar, and a Li^guest,
One that hath travelled many parts of Christendom my Lord.

My friend come nearer, have you been a traveller?

My Lord I have added to my knowledge, the low countries,
France, Spain, Germanie, and Italie:
And though small gain of profit I did find,
Yet did it please my eye, content my mind.

What do you think of the several states.
And Princes Courts as you have travelled?

My Lord no Court with England may compare,
Neither for state nor civil government:
Lust dwells in France, in Italie, and Spain,
From the poor peasant to the Princes train,
In Germanie, and Holland riot serves,
And he that most can drink, most he deserves:
England I praise not: for I here was borne,
But that she laughs the others unto scorn.

My Lord there dwells within that spirit.
More then can be discerned by outward eye,
Sir Christopher will you part with your man?

I have sought to proffer him to your Lordship,
And now I see he hath preferred himself.

What is thy name?

Cromwell my Lord.

Then Cromwell here we make thee solicitor of our causes,
And nearest next our self:
Gardiner give you kind welcome to the man.

My Lord you are a royal Winer.
Hath got a man besides your bountious dinner,
Well Knight, pray we come no more:
If we come often, thou may shut thy door.

Sir Christopher had thou given me.
Half thy lands, thou could not have pleased me
So much as with this man of thine,
My infant thoughts do spell:
Shortly his fortune shall be lifted higher,
True industry doth kindle honours fire,
And so kind Master of the Roules farewell.

Cromwell farewell.

Cromwell takes his leave of you
That near will leave to love and honour you.

Now Cromwells highest fortunes doth begin.
Wolsay that loved him as he did his life:
Committed all his treasure to his hands,
Wolsay is dead, and Gardiner his man,
Is now created Bishop of Winchester:
Pardon if we omit all Wolsayes life,
Because our play depends on Cromwells death,
Now sit and see his highest state of all;
His height of rising: and his sudden fall,
Pardon the errors is all ready past,
And live in hope the best doth come at last:
My hope upon your favour doth depend*
And look to have your liking ere the end.

Master Cromwell, since Cardinal Wolsayes death,
His Majesty is given to understand,
There's certain bills and writings in your hand,
That much concerns the state of England:
My Lord of Winchester is it not so?

My Lord of Norfolke, we two were meanwhile fellows,
And Master Cromwell, though our Masters love:
Did bind us, while his love was to the King,
It is no boot now to deny those things
Which may be prejudicial to the state:
And though that God hath raised my fortune hyer,
Then any way I looked for, or deseru'de.
Yet my life no longer with me dwell,
Then I prove true unto my Sovereign:
What say you master Cromwell have you those writings, I, or no?

Here are the writings, and upon my knees,
I give them up, unto the worthy Dukes,
Of Suffolke, and of Norfolke: he was my Master,
And each virtuous part
That lived in him, I tendered with my hart,
But what his head complotted against the state.
My countries love commands me that to hate:
His sudden death I grieve for, not his fall,
Because he sought to work my countries thrall.

Cromwell, the King shall here of this thy duty,
Whom I assure my self will well reward thee:
My Lord, lets go unto his Majesty,
And show these writings which he longs to see.

How now, whose this Cromwell?
By my soul, welcome to England:
Thou once did save my life, did not Cromwell?

If I did so, 'tis greater glory for me that you remember it,
Then for my self vainly to report it.

Well Cromwell, now is the time,
I shall commend thee to my Sovereign:
Cheer up thy self, for I will raise thy state,
A Russel yet was never found ingrate.

O how uncertain is the wheel of state,
Who lately greater then the Cardinal,
For fear, and love: and now who lower lies?
Gay honours are but Fortunes flatteries*
And whom this day, pride and promotion swel^,
To morrow, envy and ambition quels.

Who sees the Cob-web entangle the poor Fly,
May boldly say the wretches death is nigh.

I know his state and proud ambition,
Was too too violent to last ouer-long.

Who soars too near the sun with golden wings,
Mealtes them, to ruin his own fortune brings.

Cromwell kneel down in king Henries name,
Arise sir Thomas Cromwell, thus begins thy fame.

Cromwell the Majesty of England,
For the good liking he conceives of thee:
Makes thee Master of the jewel house,
Chief Secretary to himself, and with all,
Creates thee one of his highness priue Counsel.

Where is sir Thoma, Cromwell is he knighted,

He is my Lord.

Then to add honour to his name,
The King creates him Lord keeper of his privy S^ale:
And Master of the Roules,
Which you sir Christopher do now enjoy;
The King determines higher place for you.

My Lords these honours are too high for my desert,

O content thee man, who would not choose it?
Yet thou art wise in seeming to refuse it.

Here's honours, titles and promotions,
I fear this climbing, will have a sudden fall.

Then come my Lords, lets altogether bring,
This new made Counseller to Englands King.

But Gardiner means is glory shall be dim'd:
Shall Cromwell live a greater men then I?
My envy with his honour now is bred,
I hope to shorten Cromwell by the head.

O Friskiball, what shall become so thee?
Where shalt thou go, or which way shalt thou turn?
Fortune that turns her too inconstant wheel,
Hath turned thy wealth and riches in the Sea,
All parts abroad where ever I have been,
Grows weary of me, and denies me succour,
My debtors they, that should reserve my want,
Forsweares my money, says they owe me none:
They know my state too mean, to bear out law,
And here in London where I ^ been,
And have done good to many a w^ched man,
Am now most wretched here, dispisd my self,
In vain it is, more of their hearts to try,
Be patient therefore, lay thee down and die.

Come Ioane, come lets see what heel do for us now? I wis we have done for
him, when many a time and often he might have gone a hungry to bed.


Alas man, now he is made a Lord, heel never look upon us, heel fulfil the
old Proverb: set Beggars a horse-backe, theile ride: a wells day for my cow,
such as he hath made us come behind hand, we had never pawnd our Cow else to
pay our rent.


Well Ioane, heel come this way: and by Gods dickers i'll tell him roundly of
it, and if he were ten LORDS: a shall know that I had not my Chief and my
Bacon for nothing.


Do you remember husband how he would mouch up my Cheese cakes, he hath
forgot this now, but now we'll remember him.


I we shall have now three flappes with a Fox tail: but I faith i'll gibber a
joint, but i'll tell him his own: stay who comes here? O stand up here he
comes, stand up.


Come, away with these beggars here, rise up sir,
Come out good people: run before there no.

I vvee are kicked away now, vvee come for our own, the time hath been he
would a looked more friendly upon us: And you Hodge, we know you well enough
though you are so fine.


Come hither sirrah: stay, what men are these?
My honest Host of Hounslow, and his wife:
I owe thee money father, do I not?

I by the body of me do thou, would thou would pay me, good four
pound it is, I have a the post at home.


I know tis true, sirrah give him ten Angels,
And look your wife, and you do stay to dinner:
And while you live I freely give to you,
Four pound a year, for the sour pound I ought you.

Art not changed, art old Tom still?
Now God bless the good Lord Tom:
Home Ioane, home, i'll dine with my Lord Tom to day,
And thou shalt come next week,
Fetch my Cow, home Ioane, home.

Now God bless thee, my good Lord Tom,
I'll fetch my Cow presently.

Sir, go to yon stranger, tell him I desire him
Stay to dinner: I must speak with him;

My Lord of Norfolke see you this same bubble?
That same puff, but mark the end, my Lord, mark the end.

I promise you, I like not something he hath done,
But let that pass, the King doth love him well.

Good morrow to my Lord of Winchester.
I know you bear me hard, about the Abbey lands.

Have I not reason, when religion is wronged?
You had no colour for what you have done.

Yes the abolishing of Antichrist,
And of his Popish order from our Realm:
I am no enemy to religion,
But what is done, it is for Englands good,
What did they serve for but to feed a sort:
Of lazy Abbots, and of full fed Fryers,
They neither plow, nor sow, and yet they reap
The fat of all the Land, and suck the poor:
Look what was theirs, is in King Henries hands,
His wealth before lay in the Abbey lands.

Indeed these things you have aledg'd my Lord,
When God doth know the infant yet unborn,
Will curse the time, the Abbeys were pulled down,
I pray now where is hospitality?
Where now may poor distressed people go
For to relieve their need, or rest their bones,
When weary travel doth oppress their limbs?
And where religious men should take them in.
Shall now be kept back with a Mastiff dog,
And thousand thousand.

O my Lord no more* things past redress
Tis bootless to complain.

What shall we to the Convocation house.

We'll follow you my Lord pray lead the way.

How, one Cromwell made Lord keeper since I left Putney
And dwelt in Yorkshire? I never hard better news:
I'll see that Cromwell, or it shall go hard.

My aged father: state set aside.
Father on my knee I crave your blessing:
One of my servants go and have him in,
At better leisure will we talk with him.

Now if I die, how happy were the day,
To see this comfort rains forth showers of joy.

This duty in him shows a kind of grace.

Go on before for time draws on apace.

I wonder what this Lord would have with me,
His man so strictly gave me charge to stay:
I never did offend him to my knowledge,
Well, good or bad, I mean to bide it all,
Worse then I am, now never can befall.

Come wi^e I take it be almost dinner time,
For Master Newton, and Master Crosbie sent to me:
Last might, they would come dine with me,
And take their bond in: I pray thee hie thee home,
And see that all things be in readiness.

They shall be welcome, husband I'll go before,
But is not that man Master Friskiball?

O heavens it is kind Master Friskiball:
Say sir, what hap hath brought you to this pass?

The same that brought you to your misery.

Why would you not acquaint me with your state?
Is Banister your poor friend forgot?
Whose goods, whose love, whose life and all is yours.

I thought your usage would be as the rest,
That had more kindness at my hands then you,
Yet looked askance, when as they saw me poor*

If Banister should bear so base a hart,
I never would look my husband in the face,
But hath him as I would a Cockatrise.

And well thou might, should Banister deal so,
Since that I saw you sir, my state is mended:
And for the thousand pound I owe to you,
I have it ready for you sir at home,
And though I grieve your fortune is so bad:
Yet that my hap's to help you, makes me glad,
And now sir will it please you walk with me.

Not yet I cannot, for the Lord Chancelour,
Hath here commanded me to weight on him,
For what I know not* pray God it be for good.

Never make doubt of that, i'll warrant you,
He is as kind a noble gentleman;
As ever did possess the place he hath.

Sir my brother is his steward, if you please,
Weal go along and bear you company:
I know we shall not want for welcome there?

Withal my hart: but whats become of Bagot.

He is hanged, for buying jewels of the Kings.

A just reward for one so impious,
The time draws on, sir will you go along.

I'll follow you kind Master Friskiball.

Now Master Crosbie, I see you have a care
To keep your word, in payment of your money.

By my faith I have reason upon a bond,
Three thousand pound is too much to forfet,
Yet I doubt not Master Banister.

By my faith your sum is more then mine,
And yet I am not much behind you too,
Considering that to day I paid at Court.

Mass and well remembered:
Whats the reason the Lord Cromwels men,
Wear such long skirts upon their coats?
They reach down to their very ham.

I will resolve you sir, and thus it is;
The Bishop of Winchester, that loves not Cromwell,
As great men are envied, as well as less.
A while ago there was a jar between them,
And it was brought to my Lord Cromwels ear,
That Bishop Gardiner would sit on his skirts,
Upon which word, he made his men long Blew coats,
And in the Court wore one of them himself:
And meeting with the Bishop, quoth he, my Lord
Here's skirt enough now for your Grace to sit on.
Which vexed the Bishop to the very hart,
This is the reason why they wear long coats.

Tis always seen, and mark it for a rule,
That one great man will envy still another:
But tis a thing that nothing concerns me:
What, shall we now to Master Banisters?

I come, we'll pay him royally for our dinner.

Uncover there Gentlemen.

My noble Lords of Suffolke and of Bedford,
Your honours welcome to poor Cromwels house:
Where is my father? nay be covered Father,
Although that duty to these noble men doth challenge it
Yet I'll make bold with them.
Your head doth bear the calender of care:
What Cromwell covered, and his Father bare?
It must not be. Now sit to you,
Is not your name Friskiball, and a Florentine.

My name was Friskiball, till cruel fate?
Did rob me of my name and of state.

What fortune brought you to this country now?

All other parts hath left me succourless,
Save only this, because of debts I have
I hope to gain for to relieve my want.

Did you not once upon your Florence bridge,
Help a distressed men, robbed by the Bandetto,
His name was Cromwell?

I never made my brain a calender of any good I did,
I always loved this nation with my heart.

I am that Cromwell that you there releeu'd,
Sixteen Ducats you gave me for to cloth me,
Sixteen to bear my charges by the way,
And sixteen more I had for my horse hier,
There be those several sums justly returned,
Yet it injustice were that serving at thy need,
For to repay them without interest,
Therefore receive of me these four several bag^*
In each of them there is four hundred mark,
And bring to me the names of all your debtors,
And if they will not see you paid, I will:
O God forbid, that I should see him fall,
That help^ me in my greatest need of all*
Here stands my Father that first gave me life,
Alas what duty is too much for him?
This man in time of need did save my life,
And therefore cannot do too much for him.
By this old man I often times was sed,
Else might I have gone supperless to bed.
Such kindness have I had of these three men,
That Cromwell no way can repay again:
Now in to dinner, for we stay too long,
And to good stomachs is no greater wrong

Sir, where be those men I caused to stay?

They do attend your pleasure Sir within,

Bid them come hither, and stay you without,
For by those men the Fox of this same land,
That makes a Goose of better then himself,
Must woried be unto his latest home,
or Gardiner will fail in his intent.
As for the Dukes of Suffolke and of Norfolke,
Whom I have sent for to come speak with me,
Howsoever outwardly they shadow it,
Yet in their harts I know they love him not;
As for the Earl of Bedford he is but one,
And dares not gaine-^ay what we do set down.
Now my friends, you know I saved you lives,
When by the law you had deserved death,
And then you promised me upon your oaths,
To venture both your lives to do me good.

We swore no more then that we will perform.

I take your words, and that which you must do,
Is service for your God, and for your King,
To root a rebel from this flourishing land,
One that's an enemy unto the Church:
And therefore must you take your solemn oaths,
That you heard Cromwell, the Lord Chancellor,
Did wish a dagger at King Henries hart:
Fear not to swear it, for I hard him speak it,
Therefore we'll shield you from ensuing harms,

If you will warrant us the deed is good,
We'll undertake it.

Kneel down, and I will here absolve you both,
This Crucifix I lay upon you heads,
And sprinckle holy-water on your brows,
The deed is meritorious that you do,
And by it shall you purchase grace from heaven.

Now Sir we'll undertake it by our souls.

For Cromwell never loved none of our sort.

I know he doth not, and for both of you,
I will prefer you to some place of worth;
Now get you in, until I call for you,
For presently the Dukes means to be here.
Cromwell sit fast, thy time's not long to reign,
The Abbeys that were pulled down by thy means,
Is now a mean for me to pull thee down:
Thy pride also thy own head lights upon,
For thou art he hath changed religion:
But now no more, for here the Dukes are come.

Good even to my Lord Bishop.

How fares my Lord? what are you all alone?

No not alone my Lords, my mind is troubled:
I know your honours muse wherefore I sent
And in such hast: What came you from the King?

We did, and left none but Lord Cromwell with him.

O what a dangerous time is this we live in?
There's Thomas Wolsay, he's already gone,
And Thomas Moore, he followed after him:
Another Thomas yet there doth remain,
That is far worse then either of those twain,
And if with speed my Lords we not pursue it,
I fear the King and all the land will rue it.

Another Thomas? pray God it be not Cromwell.

My Lord Bedford, it is that traitor Cromwell.

Is Cromwell false? my hart will never think it.

My Lord of Winchester, what likelihood,
Or proof have you of this his treachery.

My Lord too much, call in the men within,
These men my Lord upon their oaths affirm,
That they did here Lord Cromwell in his garden,
Wished a dagger sticking at the hart,
Of our King Henrie, what is this but treason?

If it be so, my hart doth bleed with sorrow.

How say you friends, what, did you here these words?

We did and't like your grace.

In what place was Lord Cromwell when he spake them?

In his Garden, where we did attend a suit,
Which we had waited for two year and more.

How long is't since you heard him speak these words?

Some half year since.

How chance that you concealed it all this time?

His greatness made us fear, that was the cause,

I, I, his greatness that's the cause indeed,
And to make his treason here more mainfest,
He calls his servants to him round about,
Tells them of W^lsayes life, and of his fall,
Says that himself hath many enemies,
And gives to some of them a Park or Manor,
To others Leases, Lands to other some:
What need he do thus in his prime of life,
And if he were not fearful of his death?

My Lord these likelihoods are very great.

Pardon me Lords, for I must needs depart,
Their proofs are great, but greater is my heart.

My friends take heed of that which you have said,
Your souls must answer what your tongues reports:
Therefore take heed, be wary what you do.

My Lord we speak no more but truth.

Let them depart my Lord of Winchester,
Let these men be close kept
Until the day of trial.

They shall my Lord: hoe take in these two men.
My Lords, if Cromwell have a public trial,
That which we do, is void, by his denial:
You know the King will credit none but him.

Tis true, he rules the King even as he pleases.

How shall we do for to attache him then?

Mary my Lords thus, by an Act he made himself,
With an intent to entrap some of our lives,
And this it is: If any Councellor
Be convicted of high treason,
He shall be excecuted without a public trial.
This Act my Lords he caused the King to make.

A did indeed, and I remember it,
And now it is like to fall upon himself.

Let us not slak it, tis for Englands good,
We must be warry, else heel go beyond us.

Well hath your Grace said my Lord of Norfolke
Therefore let us presently to Lambeth,
Thither comes Cromwell from the Court to night,
Let us arest him, send him to the Tower.
And in the morning, cut off the traitors head.

Come then about it, let us guard the town,
This is the day that Cromwell must go down.

Along my Lords, well Cromwell is half dead,
He shook my har^ but I will shave his head,

My soul is like a water troubled,
And Gardiner is the man that makes it so,
O Cromwell, I do fear thy end is near*
Yet I'll prevent their malice if I can,
And in good time, see where the man doth come,
Who little knows how neares his day of dome.

Your well encountered my good Lord of Bedford,
I see your honour is addressed to talk,
Pray pardon me, I am sent for to the King,
And do not know the business yet me self,
So fare you well, for I must needs be gone.

You must, well, what remedy?
I fear too soon you must be gone indeed,
The King hath business, but little doest thou know,
Whose busy for thy life: thou think not so.

The second time well met my Lord of Bedford,
I am very sorry that my hast is such,
Lord Marks Dorset being sick to death,
I must receive of him the privy seal
At Lambeth, soon my Lord we'll talk our fill,

How smooth and easy is the way to death

My Lord, the Dukes of Norfolks and of Suffo^ke,
Accompani^d Bishop of Winchest^ ^
Entreats you to come presently to Lambeth,
On earnest matters that concerns the state*

To Lambeth, so: go fetch me pen and ink
I and Lord Cromwell there shall talk enough,
I and our last, I fear, and if he come,
Here take this letter, and hear it to Lord Cromwell,
Bid him read it, say it concerns him nea^,
Away be gone make all the hast you can,
To Lambeth do I go a woeful man.

Is the Barge ready? I will straight to Lambeth,
And if this one days business once were past,
I'd take me ease to morrow after trouble,
How now my friend would thou speak with me?

Sir here's a letter from my Lord of Bedford.

O good my friend commend me to thy Lord,
Hold take those Angels, drink them for thy pains.

He doth desire your grace to read i^*
Because he says it doth concern you near.

Bid him assure himself of that fare^ell*
To morrow tell him shall he hear from me,
Set on before there, and away to Lambeth*

Halberta stand close unto the waterside*
Sergiant at arms be bold in your office,
Herald deliver your proclamation.

This is to glue notice to all the Kings subjects.
The late Lord Cromwell Lord Chancellor of England,
Vicar general over the realm,
Him to hold and esteem as a traitor,
Against the Crown and dignity of England*
So God save the King.

Amen.

Amen, and root thee from the land,
For whilst thou lives truth cannot stand.

Make a lane there, the traitor is at hand,
Keep back Cromwells men:
Drown them if they come on, Sergiant your office.

What means my Lord of Norfolke by these words?
Sirs come along.

Kill them if they come on.

Lord Cromwell, in King Henries name,
I do arrest your honour of high treason.

Sergiant, me of treason?

Kill them if they draw a sword.

Hold, I charge you, at you love me draw not a sword,
Who dares accuse Cromwell of treason now?

This is no place to reckon up your crime,
Your Doue-like looks were viewed with serpents eyes.

With serpents eyes indeed, by thine they were,
But Gardiner do thy worst, I fear thee not,
My faith compared with thine as much shall pass,
As doth the Diamond excel the glass:
Attached of treason, no accusers by,
Indeed what tongue dares speak so foul a lie?

My Lord, my Lord, matters are too well known,
And it is time the King had note thereof.

The King, let me go to him face to face,
No better trial I desire then that,
Let him but say that Cromwells faith was ^ained,
Then let my honour, and my name be stained:
If ever my hart against my King was set,
O let my soul in Judgment answer it,
Then if my faith's confirmed with his reason,
Against whom hath Cromwell then committed treason?

My Lord your matter shall be tried,
Mean time, with patience content your self.

Perforce I must with patience be content:
O dear friend Bedford doest thou stand so neat?
Cromwell rejoices one friend sheds a tear,
And whether is't? which way must Cromwell now?

My Lord you must unto the tower,
Lieutenant, take him to your charge

Well where you please, yet before I part,
Let me confer a little with my men.

As you go by water so you shall.

I have some business present to impart.

You may not stay, Lieutenant, take your charge.

Well, well my Lord, you second Gardiners text.
Norfolke farewell, thy turn will be the next.

His guilty conscience makes him rave my Lord.

I let him talk his time is short enough.

My Lord of Bedford, come you weep for him,
That would not shed half a tear for you.

It grieves me for to see his sudden fall.

Such success wish I unto traitors all.

Why? can this news be true? is't possible?
The great Lord Cromwell arrested upon treason*
I hardly will believe it can be so,

It is too true sir, would it were otherwise.
Condition I spent half the wealth I have,
I was at Lambeth? s^w him there arrested,
And afterward committed to the Tower.

What wast for treason that he was commit^d?

Kind noble Gentlem^n ^ time,
All that I have, I did in^oy by him,
And if he (...), then all my state is gone.

It may be hoped that he shall not die,
Because the King did favour him so much.

O sir, you are deceived in thinking so,
The grace and favour he had with the King,
Hath caused him have so many enemies:
He that in court secure ill keep himself,
Must not be great, for then he is envied at.
The Shrub is safe, when as the Cedar shakes,
For where the King doth love above compare,
Of others they as much more entiled are.

Tis pity that this noble man should fall,
He did so many charitable deeds.

Tis true, and yet you see in each estate,
There^ none so good, but some one doth him hate,
And they before would smile him in the face,
will be the foremost to do him disgrace:
What will you go along unto the Court?

I care not if I do, and hear the newer,
How men will judge what shall become of him*

Some will speak hardly some will speak in pity*
Go you to the Court, I'll go into the City,
There I am sure to here more news then you.

Why then soon will we meet again.

Now Cromwell hast thou time to meditate,
And think upon thy state, and of the time:
Thy honours came unsought, I, and unlooked for,
Thy fall as sudden, and unlooked for to,
What glory was in England that I had not?
Who in this land commanded more then Cromwell?
Except the King who greater then my self?
But now I see what after ages shall,
The greater man, more sudden is their fall.
And now I do remember the Earl of Bedford
Was very desirous for to speak to me:
And afterward sent unto me a letter,
The which I think I have still in my pocket,
Now may I read it, for I now have leisure,
And this I take it is.
My Lord come not this night to Lambeth,
For if you do, your state is overthrown.
And much I doubt your life, and if you come:
Then if you love your self, stay where you are.
O God had I but read this letter,
Then had I been free from the Lions paw,
Deferring this, to read until to morrow,
I spurnd at joy, and did embrace my sorrow,
Now Master Lieutenant, when's this day of death?

Alas my Lord would I might never see it,
Here are the Dukes of Suffolke and of Norfolke,
Winchester, Bedford, and sir Richard Ratcliffe,
With others, but why they come I know not.

No matter wherefore, Cromwell is prepared,
For Gardiner has my state and life insnard,
Bid them come in, or you shall do them wrong,
For here stands he, whom some thinks lives too long,
Learning kills learning, and instead of Inck
To dip his Pen, Cromwels heart blood doth drink.

Good morrow Cromwell, what alone so sad?

One good among you, none of you are bad,
For my part, it best fits me be alone,
Sadness with me, not I with any one.
What, is the King acquainted with my cause?

We have, and he hath answered us my Lord.

How, shall I come to speak with him my self?

The King is so advertised of your guilt,
He will by no means admit you to his presence.

No way admit me, am I so soon forgot?
Did he but yesterday embrace my neck,
And said that Cromwell was even half himself,
And is his Princely ears so much bewitched
With scandolous ignomy, and slanderous speeches,
That now he doth deny to look on me,
Well, my Lord of Winchester, no doubt but you,
Are much in favour with his Majesty,
Will you bear a letter from me to his grace?

Pardon me, i'll bear no traitors letters,

Ha, will you do this kindness then?
Tell him by word of mouth, what I shall say to you.

That will I.

But on your honour will you?

I on my honour.

Bear witness Lords,
Tell him when he hath known you,
And tried your faith but half so much as mine.
Heel find you to be the falsest hearted man
In England: Pray tell him this.

Be patient good my Lord in these extremes.

My kind and honourable Lord of Bedford,
I know your honour always loved me well,
But pardon me, this still shall be my theme,
Gardiner is the cause makes Cromwell so extreme,
Sir Ralph Sadler, pray a word with you,
You were my man, and all that you possess
Came by my means, to requite all this,
Will you take this letter here of me,
And give it with your own hands to the King.

I kiss your hand, and never will I rest,
Ear to the King this be delivered.

Why yet Cromwell hath one friend in store.

But all the ^ast he makes shall be but vain;
Here's a discharge for your prisoner,
To see him executed presently:
My Lord, you here the tenor of your life.

I do embrace it, welcome my last date,
And of this glistering world I take last leave,
And noble Lords, I take my leave of you,
As willingly I go to meet with death,
As Gardiner did pronounce in with his breath,
From treason is my hart as white as Snow,
My death only procured by my foe:
I pray commend me to my Sovereign King,
And tell him in what sort his Cromwell died,
To loose his head before his cause were tried:
But let his Grace, when he shall here my name,
Say only this, Gardiner procured the same.

Here is your son come to take his leave.

To take his leave,
Come hither Harry Cromwell,
Mark boy the last words that I speak to thee,
Flatter not Fortune, neither fawn upon her,
Gape not for state, yet loose no spark of honour,
Ambition, like the plague see thou eschew it,
I die for treason boy, and never knew it,
Yet let thy faith as spotless be as mine,
And Cromwels virtues in thy face shall shine,
Come go along and see me leave my breath,
And I'll leave thee upon the flower of death.

O father I shall die to see this wound,
Your blood being spilt will make my hart to sound.

How boy, not look upon the Axe*
How shall I do then to have my head stroke off*
Come on my child and see the end of all,
And after say that Gardiner was my fall.

My Lord you speak it of an envious hart,
I have done no more then law and equity.

O good my Lord of Winchester for bear,
It would better seemed you to been absent,
Then with your words disturb a dying man.

Who me my Lord? no: he disturbs not me,
My mind he stirs not, though his mighty shock
Hath brought mo peers heads down to the block*
Farewell my boy, all Cromwell can bequeath,
My hearty blessing, so I take my leave.

I am your death^ man, pray my Lord forgive me.

Even with my soul, why man thou art my Doctor,
And brings me Precious physic for my soul,
My Lord of Bedford I desire of you,
Before my death a corporal embrace.
Farewell great Lord, my love I do commend.
My hart to you, my soul to lieauen I send,
This is my joy that ere my body fleet,
Your honoured arms is my true winding sheet,
Farewell dear Bedford, my p^ce is made in heaven,
Thus falls great Cromwell a poor ell in length,
To rise to unmeasured height (...) with new strength.
The land of Wormea, which dying men discover.
My soul is shrinde with heavens (...) cover.

Well, farewell Cromwe^ the (...) friend,
That ever Bedford shall possess again,
Well Lords I fear when this man is dead,
You'll wish in vain that Cromwell had a head.

Here is the head of the deceased Cromwell.

Pray thee go hence, and bear his head away,
Unto his body, inter them both in clay.

Ho now my Lords, what is Lord Cromwell dead?

Lord Cromwels body now doth want a head,

O God a little speed had saved his life,
Here is a kind reprive come from the King,
To bring him straight unto his Majesty.

I, I sir Raulph, reprieves comes now too late.

My conscience now tells me this deed was ill,
Would Christ that Cromwell were alive again.

Come let us to the King whom well I know,
Will grieve for Cromwell, that his death was so.


